Microsoft Word - GRADUATION THESIS.doc
The association between dietary fibre intakes and
incidence of type 2 diabetes mellitus
Maryam A. O. D. Aldwairji
Submitted in accordance with the requirements for the degree
of Doctor of Philosophy
The University of Leeds
School of Food Science and Nutrition
December 2013
Intellectual property and Publication Statements
The candidate confirms that the work submitted is her own, except where
work which has formed part of jointly-authored publications has been included. The
contribution of the candidate and the other authors to this work has been explicitly
indicated below. The candidate confirms that appropriate credit has been given
within the thesis where reference has been made to the work of others. Part of
chapter 6 is based on work from jointly authored publications as follow:
 Dietary fibre intake and risk of fatal coronary heart disease in a cohort of British
women. Threapleton, D. E., Burley, V. J., Greenwood, D. C., Aldwairji, M., &
Cade, J. E. (2012). Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 71 (OCE3), E224.
 Dietary fibre and cardiovascular disease mortality in the UK Womens Cohort
Study. Threapleton, D. E., Greenwood, D. C., Burley, V. J., Aldwairji, M., &
Cade, J. E. (2013). European Journal of Epidemiology, 28, 335-346.
In both publications, AOAC-fibre intake of the UKWCS obtained from added
AOAC-fibre values in the baseline FFQ dataset that is directly attributed to my work
and covered in chapter 6 and 7. Diane Threapleton was the paper lead author.
Victoria Burley, Diane Threapleton, Darren Greenwood, Janet Cade conceived the
study idea. Statistical analysis was undertaken by Diane Threapleton. Diane
Threapleton wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript and
contributed to manuscript revisions.
This copy has been supplied on the understanding that it is copyright material and
that no quotation from the thesis may be published without proper acknowledgement
 2013 The University of Leeds and Maryam Aldwairji
The right of Maryam Aldwairji to be identified as Author of this work has been
asserted by her in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
Acknowledgments
Thank you God for giving me the strength to complete my thesis, despite the
hardships I encountered, still I manage to complete my thesis. It would not have
been possible to write this doctoral thesis without the help and support of the people
around me. So this is the best time to say thank you to all people were around me
during my PhD journey.
Special thanks to my wonderful girl, Loulwa for her love and patient and for giving
me the courage to make it. She is my best friend, my lovely daughter and everything
in this life, thank you for sharing all challenges with me.
I would like to thank Dr Victoria Burley and Dr Caroline Orfila for their
enthusiasm, their encouragement, and their guidance in all the time of research and
writing of this thesis.
I have been fortunate to be blessed with loving and supporting family
 Thanks to my parents (Loulwa and Abdullah)
 Thanks to my sisters (Ghadeer, Ashwaq and Rabaa) and my brother (Othman)
I would also like to thank all of my friends for encouraging me to continue on.
Wafa, thanks for listening and letting me get my anxieties out. Fatima, Khulood and
Khawla, thanks for being my family in UK.
I would like to thanks my colleagues from the Nutrition Epidemiology group in
University of Leeds, Diane Threapleton and Neil Hancock for their help in
managing the dataset.
I would also like to thanks the principle investigators of the UKWCS for allowing
me to use the dataset for my thesis and also many thanks to all women who
participate in the UKWCS.
Last, but by no means least, I would like to convey thanks to the Kuwait
Government particularly, Ministry of Health for providing the financial means.
Abstract
The incidence of diabetes is increasing alarmingly indicating a need for preventive
strategies. Prospective evidence is inconclusive regarding the protective effect of
high fibre intake on the risk of Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Differences in
fibre measuring methodologies may have contributed some of these inconsistencies.
For the first time, this thesis employed both laboratory and epidemiological
approaches to explore different aspects of dietary fibre.
Firstly, 14 commonly consumed legumes were analysed for fibre content using
the Association of Official Analytical Chemists (AOAC) method, and the values
were significantly higher than published non-starch polysaccharide (NSP) values,
with a mean AOAC-fibre: NSP ratio of 1:1.43. The UK Womens Cohort Study
(UKWCS) data was used to compare AOAC-fibre intakes with NSP intakes. Good
agreement (Kappa = 0.9) was observed between intakes of AOAC-fibre and NSP
with a resulting AOAC-fibre: NSP ratio being generated of 1:1.43.
Following this, the links between risk of incident T2DM and intakes of
AOAC-fibre and NSP were investigated. There was no evidence of dose-response
relationships between T2DM risk and total fibre intake (AOAC-fibre and NSP) or
from key fibre sources, except an age-adjusted lower risk of T2DM with every
5g/day increment in cereal fibre (OR=0.86; 95%CI: 0.75, 0.99).
As an important fibre provider; the relationship between the risk of T2DM and
legume consumption was also explored. Women in the highest dried legumes intake
category experienced significantly lower odds of incident T2DM (OR=0.85;
95%:0.52, 0.89, p =0.03) compared to women in the lowest category. Agreement of
fibre intake obtained using different dietary assessments approaches suggested fair
agreement of diary derived NSP vs. FFQ derived NSP and poor agreement for
vegetable fibre.
Overall, results do not support an increase in fibre intake to prevent diabetes in
the studied population, although there may be a benefit of increased dried legume
intake.
List of publications and presentations
Publications
1. Aldwairji, M., Burley, V., & Orfila, C. (2011). Are current fibre
recommendations using NSP adequate? A comparison of Englyst and
Association of Official Analytical Chemists fibre values. Proceedings of the
Nutrition Society, 70 (OCE4).This is covered in chapter 5.
2. Aldwairji, M., Orfila, C., & Burley, V. J. (2012). Degree of agreement between
AOAC-based dietary fibre intake and Englyst-based dietary fibre intake in the
UK Women's Cohort Study (UKWCS). Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 71
(OCE2). This is covered in chapter 7.
3. Threapleton, D. E., Burley, V. J., Greenwood, D. C., Aldwairji, M., & Cade, J.
E. (2012). Dietary fibre intake and risk of fatal coronary heart disease in a
cohort of British women. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 71 (OCE3),
E224. My contribution in this abstract: obtained AOAC-fibre intake of the
UKWCS by added AOAC-fibre values for food items listed in the baseline
FFQ. This is covered in chapter 6.
4. Aldwairji., M, Orfila, C. Orfila & Burley, V.J. (2013). Dietary fibre intake and
risk of type 2 diabetes in British women. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society,
72 (OCE4), E204. This is covered in chapter 8.
5. Aldwairji., M, Orfila, C. Orfila & Burley, V.J. (2013). Legume intake and risk
of type 2 diabetes in British women. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society
(2013), 72 (OCE4), E275. This is covered in Chapter 9.
6. Threapleton, D. E., Greenwood, D. C., Burley, V. J., Aldwairji, M., & Cade, J.
E. (2013). Dietary fibre and cardiovascular disease mortality in the UK
Womens Cohort Study. European Journal of Epidemiology, 28, 335-346. My
contribution in this paper: obtained AOAC-fibre intake of the UKWCS by
added AOAC-fibre values for food items listed in the baseline FFQ. This data is
covered in chapter 6).
Conference presentation
Towards a predictive NSP: TDF ratio for cooked legumes: a comparison between
non-starch polysaccharides and total dietary fibre. M. Aldwairji, V. Burley, C.
Orfila, School of Food Science and Nutrition, University of Leeds, UK. 5th
International dietary fibre conference in Rome, Italy, 7-9 May 2012.
In review
Analysis of dietary fibre of boiled and canned legumes commonly consumed in the
United Kingdom. Maryam A. Aldwairji, Victoria J. Burley and Caroline Orfila. This
paper submitted to the Journal of Food Composition and Analysis. This is covered
in chapter 5.
In preparation
Intake and sources of dietary fibre and non-starch polysaccharides in the UK
Womens Cohort Study. Does method of dietary fibre analysis matter? Maryam A.
Aldwairji, Caroline Orfila, Janet E. Cade and Victoria J. Burley.
List of abbreviations
AOAC Association of Official Analytical Chemist
AOAC-fibre Total dietary fibre measured by AOAC analytical method only
AACC American Association of Cereal Chemists
CV Coefficient of variation
DP Degree of polymerization
EuroFIR European food information resources
FFQ Food frequency questionnaire
FSA Food Standards Agency
FOS Fructo-oligosaccharides
HbA1C Glycosylated haemoglobin
HDL High density lipoprotein
IDF Insoluble dietary fibre
LDL Low density lipoprotein
MAFF Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
DANTE Diet and Nutrition Tool for Evaluation
NDNS National Diet and Nutrition Survey
NDO Non-digestible oligosaccharides
NSP Non starch polysaccharides
OGTT Oral glucose tolerance test
RCT Randomized controlled trial
RS Resistant starch
SACN Scientific Advisory Committee of Nutrition
SDF Soluble dietary fibre
TDF Total dietary fibre measured by any analytical method
T2DM Type 2 diabetes mellitus
UKWCS UK Womens Cohort Study
USDA National Nutrient database for Standards Reference in USA
WHO /FAO World Health Organization/ Food and Agriculture Organization
Table of contents
3.3.2 Development of type 2 diabetes and insulin resistance measurement .. 35
3.6.4 The relationship between food groups and risk of type 2 diabetes
Chapter 4: Comprehensive review of dietary fibre intake and risk of type 2
4.4.5 Potential mechanisms of the dietary fibre effect on the development of
Chapter 5: Dietary fibre analysis in commonly consumed legumes in UK:
5.4.2 Insoluble and soluble dietary fibre contents in boiled and canned
5.4.3 Comparison between measured AOAC-fibre, IDF values and available
6.4.1 Generation of non-starch polysaccharides (NSP), and other dietary
6.8.2 Protocol 2: Search strategy for insoluble dietary fibre (IDF) and soluble
Chapter 7: Comparison between dietary AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes in the
7.4.2 Agreement between AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes in the UKWCS... 134
7.4.3 Food groups in relation to AOAC-fibre, NSP intakes and types of fibres
7.4.5 Characteristics of highest versus lowest AOAC-fibre and NSP
8.4.5 Dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM among women based on BMI181
8.4.6 UKWCS findings added in the Forest plot of the comprehensive review
8.5.1 Intakes of total dietary fibre, key fibre sources and types of fibre in
Chapter 10: Dietary fibre intake obtained from different dietary methods in the
10.4.2 Comparisons between baseline FFQ-fibre, repeated FFQ-fibre and
10.4.3 Comparisons between main fibre sources and fibre fractions obtained
10.5.1 Correlations and differences in NSP intake obtained from two dietary
10.5.2 Agreement between NSP intakes derived from food diaries and FFQs
10.5.3 Classification of women based on their NSP intakes obtained from
10.5.4 Main fibre sources: Contributions, correlations and agreements
Appendix A: Description of the main dietary fibre fractions captured by current
Appendix C: Forest plots of dietary fibre intake, insoluble fibre intake and fibre
Appendix E: Baseline semi-quantitative FFQ completed by UKWCS participants277
Appendix F: Distribution of information resources to extract AOAC-fibre values
Appendix H: Degree of agreement express as Kappa (K) and weight Kappa (Kw)
with percentage between NSP and AOAC-fibre intake in different fibre sources . 290
Appendix I: Distributions of NSP intake by box plots and histograms with and
List of Tables
Table 2.3 Types of resistant starch, their common food sources and processing
Table 2.8 Classifications of dietary fibre based on their solubility, viscosity and
Table 3.1 Classification of diabetes mellitus (World Health Organization, 1999)... 32
Table 3.3 Criteria for diagnosing diabetes mellitus (World Health Organization,
Table 4.4 Cohort studies linking intake of total dietary fibre (TDF) to the risk of
Table 4.5 Cohort studies of insoluble dietary fibre (IDF) and soluble dietary fibre
Table 5.4 Characteristics of enzymes used in AOAC method for dietary fibre
Table 5.5 Means and standard deviations of AOAC-fibre for cooked legumes
Table 5.6 Means and standard deviations of IDF and SDF of boiled legumes
Table 5.7 Means and standard deviations of IDF and SDF of canned legumes
Table 5.8 AOAC-fibre and NSP values for boiled and canned legumes. Values are
Table 5.9 Comparison between means of IDF for cooked legumes. Values of the
IDF measured by AOAC method are triplicate analyses from pooled samples.
Table 6.1: Example of food item listed in the baseline FFQ with subtypes of food
Table 6.3 Percentage of derived TDF values based on the top five food groups rich
Table 6.5 Number of participants in the UKWCS who completed baseline and phase
Table 7.1 Dietary AOAC-fibre, IDF and IDF intakes in the UKWCS (n=34,454) 131
Table 7.2 Mean (95%CI) of dietary fibre intakes expressed in g/day and
Table 7.3 Number of participants across dietary fibre intake quintiles estimated from
Table 7.4 Percentage of contribution of food types to average total daily AOAC-
Table 7.5 Dietary NSP and AOAC-fibre intakes (mean (SD), mean difference g/d
Table 7.6 Correlation between dietary fibre intakes expressed as NSP and AOAC-
Table 7.7 Energy adjusted Beta coefficients (95%CI) of dietary fibre intake
expressed as NSP and AOAC-fibre with every 10 grams consumed from
Table 7.8 the portion of food that equivalent to 80g/day based on some food groups
Table 7.9 Energy adjusted regression coefficients (95%CI) of dietary fibre intake
expressed as NSP and AOAC-fibre with every 80 grams consumed from
Table 7.10 Predictors of high fibre intake calculated by AOAC-fibre and NSP
Table 7.11 Baseline characteristics and nutrient intakes across AOAC-fibre and NSP
Table 8.1 list of food items from the baseline FFQ based on main food grouping in
8.2 Univariate and age-adjusted odds ratios (95% CIs) of potential risk factors for
Table 8.4 Evidence and justification for selected covariates in the model
Table 8.6 Baseline characteristics with increasing AOAC-fibre intake, values are
Table 8.7 Odds ratios (95%CI) for incidence of T2DM risk with every increment of
dietary fibre intake derived by two analytical methods among UKWCS... 176
Table 8.8 Odds ratios (95%CI) for incidence of T2DM by quintile of intakes of
dietary AOAC-fibre, NSP, AOAC-fibre density and NSP density among
Table 8.9 Odds ratios (95%CI) for incidence of T2DM with every increment of
intakes of dietary fibre from cereal, vegetables, fruits, legumes and nuts
Table 8.10 Odds ratios (95%CI) for incidence of T2DM by quintile of intakes of
Table 8.11 Odds ratios (95%CI) for incidence of T2DM with every increment of
Table 8.12 Odds ratios (95%CI) for incidence of T2DM by quintile of intakes of
Table 8.14 Odds ratios (95%CI) for incidence of T2DM by quintile of intakes of
dietary AOAC-fibre intakes (expressed as g/day and g/1000kcal/day) among
Table9.4 Characteristics of women by tertiles of intake of total legumes, dried
Table 9.5 Association between the incidence of T2DM and intake of total legumes,
Table 9.6 Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals of T2DM according to tertiles
Table 10.1 Food items in main fibre sources (categories based on food grouping
used by the UK food composition tables (Food Standards Agency, 2002))207
Table 10.3 Baseline characteristics of women who completed different dietary
Table 10.4 Comparison between dietary intakes of women who completed different
Table 10.5 Pearsons correlation coefficients (95%CI) of dietary fibre intake
Table 10.6 Comparison between dietary assessment methods using Kappa and
Table 10.7 Number of participants across dietary fibre intake quintiles obtained by
Table 10.8 Number of participants across dietary fibre intake quintiles obtained by
Table 10.9 Number of participants across dietary fibre intake quintiles obtained by
Table 10.10 Cumulative percentage agreement between diary fibre intakes derived
Table 10.11 Intakes of main fibre sources derived by baseline FFQ and food diary in
Table 10.12 Pearsons correlation coefficients (r) and 95%CI between total NSP,
dietary fibre fractions and fibre sources determined by baseline FFQ and
Table 10.13 Kappa and weighed Kappa agreement between main fibre sources
Table 10.14 Cumulative percentage of agreement in intake from main fibre sources
Table 10.15 Degree of agreement and Pearsons correlations between different
List of Figures
Figure.3.1 The relationship between adipose tissue, insulin resistance and T2DM . 43
Figure 4.1 Flowchart demonstrating the results of the systematic review with
Figure 4.2 Estimated effect and 95% confidence intervals for dietary fibre intake
Figure 5.1 Example of some legumes description from vegetable section in
Figure 5.2 Modified AOAC method for AOAC-fibre measurement in selected
Figure 5.3 Modified AOAC method for IDF measurement in selected legumes. .. 102
Figure 5.5 Mean AOAC-fibre values of the analysed cooked legumes compared to
NSP values of equivalent legumes from UK food tables. Values are triplicate
Figure 6.1Number of women who participated in the UKWCS at different levels 113
Figure 6.2 Time scale of the women who completed different dietary assessment
Figure 6.5 Search strategy for identifying the AOAC-fibre values for food items
Figure 6.6 Distribution of information sources used to extract AOAC-fibre values
Figure 6.7 Search strategy steps for identifying the soluble and insoluble fibre values
Figure 8.1 Schematic of study design, including timing of exposure and outcome
Figure 8.3 Predicted risk of T2DM with dietary fibre intake expressed as AOAC-
Figure 8.4 Predicted risk of T2DM with dietary fibre intake expressed as AOAC-
Figure 8.5 Estimate risk for the association between total dietary fiber consumption
and risk of T2DM for individual cohort studies and all cohort studies
Figure.8.6 Estimate risk with every unit increment in TDF including the UKWCS
Figure 9.2 Suggested mechanisms through which high intake of legumes could
Figure 10.1 time range between each dietary assessment method used in the
Figure 10.2 Baseline FFQ-fibre, repeated FFQ-fibre and diary-fibre in the UKWCS
Figure 10.3 Scatter plot between energy adjusted NSP intakes (g/1000kcal/day)
Figure 10.4 Bland-Altman plot between FFQ-fibre and diary-fibre intake in the
Figure 10.5 Bland-Altman plot between FFQ-fibre and diary-fibre intake in the
Figure 10.6 Bland-Altman plot between FFQ-fibre and diary-fibre intake in the
Figure 10.7 Percentage of the main dietary fibre intake contributors using baseline
Chapter 1: Aims and Objectives
The aim of this thesis is to examine the association between dietary fibre
intake and incidence of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). This aim will be addressed
through the following objectives:
Chapter 2:
 To extend knowledge about the definitions of dietary fibre, and discuss the
main analytical methods.
 To provide background on the structure of dietary fibre and physiochemical
properties of the main sources of dietary fibre and key physiological and
health benefits. Also to describe dietary fibre intakes particularly in the UK,
and dietary fibre recommendations across Europe as well as in other parts of
the world.
Chapter 3:
 To provide background on diabetes definition, aetiology, case ascertainment in
prospective studies and trend of incidence, prevalence in UK.
 To describes prospective evidence on dietary and lifestyle practices in
relationship to T2DM.
 Chapter 4:
 To carry out a comprehensive review using a systematic approach aimed to
assess whether or not the prospective evidence supports the presence of a
relation between total dietary fibre (TDF) consumption and T2DM incidence
by comparing extreme intake groups.
 To explore the association between fibre sources and fibre types (soluble and
insoluble) on the risk of the developing T2DM from cohort studies.
Chapter 5:
 To adapt AOAC methodology to measure TDF of legumes and to compare the
measured dietary fibre values obtained by AOAC (AOAC-fibre) with the
published NSP values.
 To assess the effect of cooking methods (boiling and canning) on the TDF
content of commonly consumed legumes.
 To predict the relationship between AOAC-fibre and NSP by generating
AOAC-fibre: NSP ratio for the legume group.
Chapter 6
 To describe the UKWCS in terms of its initiation and follow-up.
 To describe the methodology of adding AOAC-fibre to baseline FFQ of the
UKWCS.
Chapter 7
Within UKWCS:
 To describe women in the highest AOAC-fibre quintile in the UKWCS by
determining food, dietary and other lifestyle predictors.
 To identify the characteristics of women in the highest AOAC-fibre quintile.
 To compare between AOAC-fibre and NSP intake values using Kappa
statistics.
 To determine whether subjects are classified consistently using both methods.
Chapter 8
 To examine the association between risk of T2DM and intakes of AOAC-fibre
and NSP in the UKWCS using logistic regression method.
 To incorporate the findings from the UKWCS in the meta-analysis generated
in chapter 4 for TDF intake and risk of T2DM.
 To assess, through meta-analysis, the magnitude of the relation between TDF
intake and the risk of T2DM.
 To examine the association between risk of T2DM and fibre source and fibre
types in the UKWCS.
Chapter 9
 To examine specifically whether high legume intake lowers the risk of T2DM
among the UKWCS using logistic regression methods.
 To examine the relationship between types of legume consumed and the risk
of T2DM in the UKWCS.
Chapter 10
 To determine the degree of agreement between NSP obtained from food
diaries and NSP obtained from baseline FFQ in the UKWCS
 To determine the degree of agreement between NSP sources obtained from
food diary and NSP obtained from baseline FFQ in the UKWCS.
 To assess the repeatability of dietary fibre intakes obtained from baseline FFQ
and repeated FFQ in the UKWCS.
Chapter 2: Literature review of dietary fibre
2.1 Introduction
The aim of this chapter is to extend knowledge about the definitions of dietary
fibre, and discuss the most commonly used analytical methods. The structure of
dietary fibre and physiochemical properties of the main sources of dietary fibre as
well as key physiological and health benefits will be discussed. Also, this chapter
describes dietary fibre intakes particularly in the UK, and dietary fibre
recommendations across Europe as well as in other parts of the world.
2.2 Dietary fibre definition
Dietary fibre is a term first used 58 years ago by Hipsley (1953) to describe
non-digestible plant cell wall components. The term was later used by Trowell to
mean skeletal remains of plant cells that are resistant to hydrolysis by the enzymes
of man
(Trowell, 1972, p.926)
This definition was limited to the cellular walls of plants. A few years later,
Trowell (1976) expanded upon the definition of dietary fibre to include all digestion-
resistant polysaccharides (plant storage polysaccharides) such as gums, modified
cellulose, mucilages, oligosaccharides, and pectin, in addition to cellulose,
hemicelluloses, lignin, and associated minor substances such as waxes, cutin, and
suberin. The on-going debate about the definition of dietary fibre and the dietary
fibre analytical methods are challenges facing nutritional epidemiologists who
evaluate the effect of dietary fibre intake on the risk of nutrition related chronic
diseases (Deharveng et al., 1999). The definition of dietary fibre has been updated
several times. Current dietary fibre definitions can be broadly based on chemical
structure or/and physiological function (Slavin, 2003a).
In recent years, the argument has mainly centred on physiological aspects of
dietary fibre and inclusion of different dietary fibre components within the definition
(Camire et al., 2001). The main sources of scientific advice which define dietary
fibre are the American Association of Cereal Chemists, the European Commission,
Department of Health in the UK, the Food and Nutrition Board, and Codex
Alimentarius Commission (Table 2.1).
Table2.1 Dietary fibre definitions from different organizations
Organization dietary fibre definition
The American
Association of
Cereal Chemists
(AACC)
(Camire et al.,
2001, p.112)
Defines dietary fibre as the remnants of the edible part of plants or
analogous carbohydrates that are resistant to digestion and
absorption in the human small intestine, with complete or partial
fermentation in the large intestine. Dietary fibre includes
polysaccharides, oligosaccharides, lignin, and associated plant
substances. Dietary fibres promote beneficial physiological effects,
including laxation, and/or blood cholesterol attenuation, and/or blood
glucose attenuation
The Commission
of the European
Communities
(European
Commission, 2008,
p.L285)
stated fibre means carbohydrate polymers with three or more
monomeric units, which are neither digested nor absorbed in the
human small intestine and belong to the following categories: edible
carbohydrate polymers naturally occurring in the food as consumed;
edible carbohydrate polymers which have been obtained from food
raw material by physical, enzymatic or chemical means and which
have a beneficial physiological effect demonstrated by generally
accepted scientific evidence; edible synthetic carbohydrate polymers
which have a beneficial physiological effect demonstrated by
generally accepted scientific evidence.
Department of
Health in the
UK(1991)
intrinsic plant cell wall polysaccharides
Food and Nutrition
Board(Food and
Nutrition Board,
2001, p.3)
1. Dietary Fiber consists of nondigestible carbohydrates and lignin
that are intrinsic and intact in plants.
2. Added Fiber consists of isolated, nondigestible carbohydrates that
have beneficial physiological effects in humans.
3. Total Fiber is the sum of Dietary Fiber and Added Fiber
WHO/FAO
(Codex
Alimentarius
Commission, 2008,
p.46)
Dietary fibre means carbohydrate polymers
with 10 or more
monomeric units
, which are not hydrolysed by the endogenous
enzymes in the small intestine of humans, and thus belong to the
following categories: edible carbohydrate polymers naturally
occurring in food as it is consumed; carbohydrate polymers obtained
from raw food material by physical, enzymatic, or chemical means,
and which have been shown to have a physiological effect of being
beneficial to health as demonstrated by generally accepted scientific
evidence from competent authorities; and synthetic carbohydrate
polymers that have been shown to have a physiological effect of being
beneficial to health as demonstrated by generally accepted scientific
evidence from competent authorities.
When derived from a plant origin, dietary fibre may include fractions of lignin and/or other
compounds when associated with polysaccharides in the plant cell walls, and if these compounds are
quantified by the AOAC gravimetric analytical method for dietary fibre analysis. Fractions of lignin
and the other compounds (proteic fractions, phenolic compounds, waxes, saponins, phytates, cutin,
phytosterols, etc.) intimately "associated" with plant polysaccharides are often extracted with the
polysaccharides in the AOAC 991.43 method. These substances are included in the definition of fibre
insofar as they are actually associated with the poly- or oligo-saccharidic fraction of fibre. However,
when extracted or even re-introduced into a food containing non-digestible polysaccharides, they
cannot be defined as dietary fibre. When combined with polysaccharides, these associated substances
may provide additional beneficial effects (pending the adoption of the Section on Methods of
Analysis and Sampling).
The decision on whether to include carbohydrates from three to nine monomeric units should be left
to national authorities.
The UK remained unconvinced of the EU definition as the Department of
Health in the UK (1991) defined dietary fibre based on its chemical identity as non-
starch polysaccharides (NSP) that referred to non-alpha-glucans substances as
measured by the Englyst method (Englyst et al., 1983, Englyst and Cummings,
1988). Englyst, a dietary fibre leader, with other scientists, reported a definition for
dietary fibre in a comprehensive review as follows:
Dietary fibre should be considered as a public health term supporting
cell wall polysaccharides provides the only consistent link with the scientific
evidence on which these guidelines are based.
(Englyst et al., 2007, p.S36)
A year later a broader definition was suggested by the Scientific Advisory
Committee of Nutrition (SACN) (2008) which was based on evidence that
concluded that NSP and soluble fibres from oats, psyllium, pectin and guar gum
were considered to be components of dietary fibre because they were proven to have
a beneficial effects on health. Strong evidence was demonstrated regarding the
beneficial effect of NSP on large intestine function and the beneficial effect of the
soluble component of NSP on the blood lipid profile (Scientific Advisory
Committee of Nutrition, 2008). A recent FAO/WHO scientific report (Mann et al.,
2007) agreed with the UK definition which defined dietary fibre as intrinsic plant
cell wall polysaccharides, p.S132 (Department of Health, 1991). The advantage of
the chemical classification is that it offers useful information for labelling purposes
(Scientific Advisory Committee of Nutrition, 2008). While, the nutritional
importance of dietary fibre can be achieved when both chemical and food matrices
are considered. The committee on the Scientific Evaluation of Dietary Reference
Intakes in Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine of the United State,
proposed dietary fibre definition as in Table 2.1.
After several years of debate and discussion, global agreement on dietary fibre
definition was finally reached by WHO/FAO Codex Alimentarius Commission
(Table 2.1) (Betteridge, 2009).
Global agreement on dietary fibre definition will provide clear boundaries on
what to examine in research and will facilitate a consistent, well defined message for
food labelling and health claims, especially if the analytical method is standardized.
From the above dietary fibre definitions, the main arguments were focused on
whether short chain polysaccharides (DP 3-9)
should be included within the dietary
fibre definition, however this decision was left for national governments in the final
global definition by WHO/FAO (Codex Alimentarius Commission, 2008).
Furthermore, the concern about low molecular weight carbohydrates (3  9
monomer units) was reported by Betteridge (2009) mainly because this group of
carbohydrates are not necessarily consumed from fruit, vegetables and wholegrain
cereals and can be found in liquid products. Therefore, it would not consistently help
in promoting plant-rich food as the unique source of fibre especially as production
of non-digestible oligosaccharides (NDO) is increasing and they are added as
functional foods in different food products (Mussatto and Mancilha, 2007).
However, others agreed on including carbohydrate polymers containing 3  9 sugar
units such as fructo-oligosaccharides (FOS), polydextrose and resistant dextrins
(European Food Safety Authority, 2010) in the definition because of evidence which
supports physiological properties of such non-digestible materials such as stool
bulking and softening, and colonic fermentation (Tungland and Meyer, 2002).
A recent report on the dietary fibre definition from the Ninth Vahouny Fiber
Symposium demonstrate the reasons for including carbohydrate polymers between 3
 9 units as there is a lack of evidence that distinguish between the physiological
effects of oligosaccharides and physiological effects of polysaccharides (Howlett et
al., 2010). Also, it has been emphasized that the cut-off point of 10 units cannot be
determined through current analytical methods.
The definition proposed by Codex Alimentarius Commission (2008) was
explored further by Mann and Cummings (2009) and they supported the three points
in the footnotes. The first point is the definition of intrinsic plant carbohydrates
where positive health effects were obtained from high quality studies that examined
diets rich in fibre (fruit, vegetables and wholegrain) on health outcomes. The last
two points defined the extrinsic sources (either synthesized or extracted types of
carbohydrates) which can only be accepted as fibre if scientific evidence
demonstrates their beneficial effects.
With the new definition, as NDO and resistant starch were part of total dietary
fibre, the demands of a method which includes all dietary components resulted in an
updating of analytical methods. The integrated dietary fibre method which
  Carbohydrates with 3-9 DP include Non--glucans oligosaccharides such as galato and fructo-
oligosacchrides, inulin, polydextrose, raffinose and stachyose. (Cummings and Stephen, 2007)
determines the complete range of dietary fibre components was established by
McCleary (McCleary, 2007) and a collaborative study recently by McCleary with
other scientists (McCleary et al., 2010) from 16 laboratories showed high
repeatability and reproducibility of the new method with previous AOAC (991.43)
method. This procedure aimed to standardize dietary fibre labelling across Europe,
since the EU definition included resistant materials. However this method is quite
new and more studies should be carried out in a wide range of food and food
products before considering its use in nutrient databases.
In the latest Food and Nutrition Board definition, the dietary fibre category
mainly included plant non-digestible carbohydrates which are largely intact with a
plant matrix and integrated in to the plant cell wall, whereas added fibre referred
to chemically or enzymatically isolated or extracted compounds and manufactured
materials. This categorization also aimed to add animal origin polysaccharides in the
added fibre category only when these are recognized as beneficial to human health
(Food and Nutrition Board, 2001).
2.3 Dietary fibre components and structure
Researchers classify dietary fibre based on several factors such as chemical
structure and physical properties that result in variable physiological effects in
human. The following categorization is intended to provide information on cell wall
derived dietary fibre components in the form of NSP and other non-NSP
components. A wide range of dietary fibre components were included in the
definition (Codex Alimentarius Commission, 2008) summarized in Appendix A.
2.3.1Cell wall derived components
Plant cell walls are the principle dietary fibre component derived from all
plant foods (Selvendran, 1984). Plant cell walls contain two main compartments.
First, cellulose microfibrils account for 30-40% of NSP (McDougall et al., 1996).
Secondly, the matrix of carbohydrates also called non-cellulosic polysaccharides
that are embedded in cellulose microfibrils, which are made of hemicelluloses and
pectin that varied widely in different food groups. Table 2.1 illustrates the different
NSP components in the two main compartments with their main food sources.
2.3.1.1 Cellulose
Cellulose is a linear polymer of glucose units linked by  1-4 glycosidic bonds 
which form crystalline microfibrils. Materials derived from cellulose are insoluble,
non-digestible and hardly fermented in the large intestine (Buttriss and Stokes,
2008).
2.3.1.2 Non-cellulosic polysaccharides
Non-cellulosic polysaccharides (the carbohydrate matrix) cover a wide range
of substances (British Nutrition Foundation, 1990). As shown in Table 2.2, pectins
are neutral polysaccharides rich in galacturonic acids, arabinose and galactose.
Arabinogalactans are mainly found in the cell walls of most fruits and vegetables,
which are solubilised by solutions that contain chelating agents such as Ca
(British Nutrition Foundation, 1990). The second component of the
carbohydrate matrix are the hemicelluloses that are solubilised by strong alkaline
solutions, include -glucans, xylo-glucans, arabinoxylans and glucurono-xylans 
(British Nutrition Foundation, 1990). More information on the non-cellulosic
polysaccharides will be illustrated in the dietary fibre sources in a later section (2.4).
Glucuronoxylans and xyloglucans are insoluble in water and are part of the
hemicelluloses fraction. Both can be found in fruits and vegetables.
Within pectic and hemicellulosic components, the water soluble components
include arabinogalactans that are mostly found in fruits and vegetables, mixed linked
(1-3 and 1-4) -glucans that are found in many cereals such as barley and oat, and 
arabinoxylans that are found in cereals.
Table 2.2 Non-starch polysaccharides components in plant foods
Major group Components Structure Food sources
Cellulose  long chain -glucan  All food groups  
Pectic
substances
Galacturonans Fruit and vegetables
including legumesArabinogalactans
Arabinoxylans Cereals
Glucuronoarabino-xylans Cereals
Glucurono-xylans Fruits, vegetables
Xylo-glucans Fruits, vegetables
-glucans  Cereals  
Gums and mucilages Wide range of hetero-polysaccharides Seeds and fruits
1NCP = non-cellulosic polysaccharides 2 HC = Hemicellulose adapted from British Nutrition Foundation (1990)
2.3.2Non-cell wall derived components
2.3.2.1 Mucilages and gums
Mucilages and gums are NSP that are mainly added to processed food. Gums
are obtained from plant exudates such as gum arabic or from seeds such as guar and
locust beans or seaweed extract such as agar. Mucilages such as psyllium, act as a
gelling agent and have been found to reduce blood total cholesterol and low density
lipoprotein (LDL) levels of hypercholesterolemic adults in clinical trials (Olson et
al., 1997). Gums are thickening agent used by food industry (Food and Nutrition
Board, 2005). Both, gums and mucilages have a high water-binding capacity to form
viscous solutions, and they are found in the outer layer of seeds. They are
extensively used in food industries as gel formers and thickeners and have bulk
laxative characteristics (Asp, 1987).Variation in physiological consequences appears
to vary depending on subtle differences in physiochemical properties, in particular,
rheological properties (Eastwood and Morris, 1992).
2.3.2.2 Lignin
Lignin is considered to be integrated within parts of the cell wall (Cosgrove,
2005). Differences in cell wall components have been observed with the maturity of
the plant (British Nutrition Foundation, 1990). With complete maturity of cell walls,
these walls become rigid because of the presence of the woody tissue (lignin) in the
secondary wall (Smith, 2001). Lignin is a non-carbohydrate component formed by
condensation of aromatic alcohol that links tightly to cellulose and hemicelluloses
and infiltrates the polysaccharides matrix of the cell walls (British Nutrition
Foundation, 1990). Therefore, lignin provides mechanical support (DeMan, 1999).
Lignin is not included within NSP values in UK food composition tables (Food
Standards Agency, 2002), although it is provided in a separate column of the tables.
It is included in dietary fibre values derived by other analytical methods (Prosky et
al., 1985, Lee et al., 1992), and this will be discussed later on in the dietary fibre
analytical methods section 2.5.
2.3.2.3 Indigestible carbohydrates
Other components which have recently been included in the dietary fibre
definition are indigestible carbohydrates such as resistant oligosaccharides, resistant
starch and synthetic carbohydrates. The non-digestible oligosaccharides (NDO) also
referred to as resistant oligosaccharides, occur naturally as 2-20 monosaccharide
units (British Nutrition Foundation, 1990). This type of carbohydrate is not digested
or absorbed in the small intestine (Buttriss and Stokes, 2008). It is identified that the
cut-off point between oligosaccharides and polysaccharides is 10 sugar units
(Cummings and Stephen, 2007). However, this is an arbitrary set point (Roberfroid
and Salvin, 2001). Resistant oligosaccharides can be made enzymatically or
chemically from simple carbohydrates such as mono or disaccharides or by
enzymatic hydrolysis of polysaccharides (Buttriss and Stokes, 2008). Resistant
oligosaccharide in the form of inulin can be obtained naturally from Jerusalem
artichoke and chicory root. Also, fructo-oligosaccharides can be synthesized from
sucrose and galacto-oligosaccharides, or can be synthesized from lactose. It has been
reported that inulin-type fructans were recovered in 86-88% of the ingested dose in
the ileostomy study (Knudsen and Hessov, 1995) which indicates the high
indigestibility of the substance.
Scientific evidence showed potential health benefits of non digestible
oligosaccharides (NDO) such as promoting the growth of intestinal microflora
(Mussatto and Mancilha, 2007). Other properties of NDO for example, inulin use to
replace fat and fructo-oligosaccharides have used as sweetening sugars (Roberfroid
and Salvin, 2001).
Starch that is resistant to digestion and absorption in small intestine is also
included in several dietary fibre definitions. A human study by Stephen (1991)
reported that 2-20% of ingested starch escapes the small intestinal absorption step
when aspirated samples from the terminal ileum were analysed which reflects that a
substantial proportion of starch eaten daily may reach the large intestine. Another
experimental evidence by Cummings and Englyst (1991) suggested 10% of starch
consumed was resistant starch. Resistant starch (RS) has been recognized to be
resistant to digestive enzymes and is considered as one of dietary fibre component
according to the recent definition (Codex Alimentarius Commission, 2008). There
are 4 types of RS which are presented in Table 2.3.
A review by Sajilata et al. (2006) reported that colonic health is mediated by
the production of short chain fatty acids from resistant starch fermentation in the
large intestine. Improvement of blood glucose and insulin responses as well as
improvement in blood lipid profile were also reported as a physiological effect of
RS consumption (Nugent, 2005).
Table 2.3 Types of resistant starch, their common food sources and processing methods that
minimize the resistance
Type of RS RS1 RS2 RS3 RS4
Description Physically
protected
Ungelatinized
resistant starch
granules
Retrograded starch Chemically
modified starches
Common food
source
Wholegrain and
seeds, legumes
Raw potatoes,
green bananas,
some legumes,
high amylose corn
Cooked and cooled
potatoes, bread,
cornflakes
Foods in which
modified starches
been used (for
example, breads,
cakes)
Resistance
minimized by
Milling,
chewing
Processing and
cooking
Processing
conditions
Less affected to
digestibility in
vitro
Adapted from Nugent (2005)
2.3.2.4 Other minor components
Glycoproteins are a proteins found in the cell wall structure which form up to
10% of the immature cell wall, but decrease as the wall matures (British Nutrition
Foundation, 1990). Glycoproteins were found to be linked to neutral polysaccharides
which are also present in the matrix (Selvendran, 1984). Cell wall proteins are
included in the dietary fibre definition because they are less digestible than other
proteins (British Nutrition Foundation, 1990). Other minor food components of
plant cell wall structures are non-carbohydrate compounds including cutin, suberin,
and plant waxes which are lipid compounds (Southgate, 2001).These minor
components that are closely associated with cell walls are on the exterior surface of
the food.
Cutin is a hydrophobic material that forms a waxy layer located in the external
surfaces of some fruits and leaves. Cutin resists hydrolysis in the intestine and can
be recovered in faeces (Southgate, 2001). Suberin is an indigestible component
composed of insoluble aromatic and polyester components attached to the cell walls
of plants that highly hydrophobic (Kolattukudy, 1981). It can be found in roots and
tubular vegetables.
Inorganic constituents such as calcium, potassium and magnesium salts,
phosphate and silica were found to be involved in plant cell wall structure and have
an important integral role in the cell wall (British Nutrition Foundation, 1990).
Another minor components that have been reported previously to be part of the cell
wall are polyphenolic compounds, a plant material that can also be found bound to
dietary fibre (Bravo et al., 1994).
2.4 Main dietary fibre sources in the human diet
2.4.1Cereal fibre
Cereals and cereal products are the main sources of dietary fibre intake in the
UK (Buttriss and Stokes, 2008). Wheat, rice, maize, oat, rye, and barley are the main
foods in the cereal group. Cereal grain is composed of three compartments; germ,
starchy endosperm and peripheral layers (Slavin, 2004). Bran cell walls (most outer
layers in cereal grains) mainly contain cellulose, arabinoxylans, lignin and phenolic
acids substances. Cellulose, hemicelluloses and lignin form a strong matrix of cell
wall which is highly insoluble. NSP content of cereals and cereals products varies
widely and ranges between 0.12  41.5% (Englyst et al., 1983). Content depends on
the processing methods and the extent to which the cereal has been refined
(Southgate, 1978).
The cereal cell wall contains mainly arabinoxylans and -glucans. Variation in 
the proportion of these polysaccharides in the cell wall was reported previously
(Selvendran, 1984) and each types of polysaccharides has been recognised to have
different properties. For example, arabinoxylans are mostly soluble in water but
have an insoluble part linked to phenolic acids that may related to resistant and
partial fermentability in large intestine (British Nutrition Foundation, 1990). While
-glucan is highly viscous and suggested to have benefit health effects (Wood, 
2007).  -glucan content and solubility varies between different cereal foods. The 
wheat endosperm cell wall is rich in arabinoxylans (88%) but poor in -glucans 
(3%): however, barley contains the opposite proportion of cell wall polysaccharides
(19% and 80% respectively). The aleurone layer of barley is rich in -glucans and 
arabinoxylan with a small amount of cellulose and phenolics (Selvendran, 1984). In
oat and barley, as the richest sources of soluble fibre, three-quarter of -glucan in oat 
is solubilised in hot water whereas only 10% of -glucan in rye is soluble (Wood, 
2010). The -glucans content of cereal grains are important, as they have been 
associated with key health benefits in human. Meta-analysis of 11 RCT showed
intake of barley and -glucan isolated from barley improve blood lipid profile 
significantly (AbuMweis et al., 2010).
2.4.2Fruit and vegetable fibre
Generally, the amount of total NSP in fruit and vegetables is higher than in
cereal and cereal products as g/100g (Englyst and Englyst, 2005). Soluble NSP
accounts for 32% of total dietary fibre in vegetables and 38% in fruits (Anderson
and Bridges, 1988). However, the proportion of soluble and insoluble fractions
varies between different types of fruit and vegetables. For example, insoluble fibre is
particularly high in berries, avocado, apple, and others listed by Englyst (1988), and
this reflects the higher cellulose in these fruits, while other type of fruit contain more
soluble fibre such as fresh apricot, fig and mango. Vegetables such as cauliflowers,
tomatoes and onions contain significant high amount of insoluble fibres (O'Shea et
al., 2012).
Fruit and vegetables fibres are rich in pectin, and these are recognised to have
important physiological effects in the human body such as decreasing gastric
emptying, shortening transit time in the small intestine and lowering serum
cholesterol level (Chawla and Patil, 2010). Englyst (2005) demonstrated that cereals
are the major contributor for total NSP as eaten but, fruit and vegetables have higher
proportions of NSP in dry matter, and this contributes to the low energy density
characteristics of these food groups.
2.4.3 Legume fibre
Legumes may be eaten either as fresh pod of seed fruit from plants of the
Fabiaceae (or Leguminosae) family. Englyst with his colleagues (1988) determined
the NSP content in 173 foods items from different food groups and found that
legumes contain very high NSP compared to leafy vegetables (range between 4.9 to
17% of fresh weight). Legume seeds contain two dietary fibre components, the inner
fibre which is cell wall of cotyledon and outer fibre referred to as coat seed or hull.
The main variation between inner and outer fibres is in the proportion of cellulose
and non-cellulosic polysaccharides. The outer layer is rich in cellulose, whilst, the
inner fibre layer of legumes mostly contains pectin, and a small amount of cellulose.
For example, a review by Guillon and Champ (2002) reported that dietary fibre
composition in peas and lupin differ in the outer layer and inner layer. The inner
layer of mainly contains 55% pectic substances and 9% cellulose, while outer layer
contains 35-57% cellulose and a low amount of hemicelluloses and pectin. The inner
layer of lupin characterized by high water holding capacity which gives a
physiologically beneficial effect in terms of faecal bulking property (McCleary and
Prosky, 2001). This helps in the prevention of constipation (Tiwari and Cummins,
2011) and has the potential to lower blood cholesterol level (McCleary and Prosky,
2001).
It was reported that several studies showed the proportion of insoluble dietary
fibre is higher than soluble dietary fibre in different legumes such as chickpeas,
beans and peas (Oomah et al., 2011). However, this does not rule out that legumes
are a good source of soluble fibre (Englyst et al., 1988). Processing methods related
to legume fibre were demonstrated in a previous review, methods such as milling,
grinding, soaking, cooking, canning, and boiling were found to affect dietary fibre
content and composition. For example, milling results in removal of the hull, which
then results in a decrease in total dietary fibre particularly the insoluble fibre; an
increase in soaking time affects the water-holding capacity of coat seeds, and
canning reduces soluble fibre content in common beans (Tiwari and Cummins,
2011).
2.4.4 Fibre from nuts and seeds
Nuts are also rich in dietary fibre. Analysis of eight types of nuts and seeds
showed that amount of NSP range from 2.43% for pecans to 5.56% for peanuts (Li
et al., 1997). Ten types of nuts were analysed for NSP content range between 3.5%
to 13.7% and it was found that insoluble fibre is the predominant component which
was mainly cellulose (Englyst et al., 1988). Almonds, peanuts, peanuts butter and
English walnuts were analysed chemically and found that cellulose and
hemicelluloses contributed to 31% and 35% respectively while pectin accounted for
18% of total dietary fibre measured. Soluble dietary fibre was only 3% of the total
fibre content which was mainly hemicelluloses (Marlett, 1992).
Heterogeneity in dietary fibre components can be appreciated from the above
fibre sources. In addition to analytical method used to determine dietary fibre, the
variety and portion of plant food analysed were also possible explanations of dietary
fibre differences within dietary fibre source.
2.5 Dietary fibre analysis
A number of different analytical methods have been established to measure
dietary fibre contents and components in different type of foods. Analytical methods
were categorized into enzymatic chemical methods and enzymatic gravimetric
methods, based on the approach and aim achieved with each method (Englyst et al.,
2007). The two most used analytical methods are the Englyst method and
Association of Official Analytical Chemists (AOAC) method. Another earlier
analytical method, the crude fibre method (Furda, 2001) was carried out previously
and because of error related to underestimation of dietary fibre, it is not used
nowadays to measure total dietary fibre. In earlier days, the Southgate method,
developed in the late 1950s by Southgate (1969), was used to measure unavailable
carbohydrates. However, because more accurate and precise methods were
established, this method became obsolete. None the less, dietary fibre values derived
from the Southgate method are still found in the sixth edition of the UK food
composition tables (Food Standards Agency, 2002).
2.5.1Southgate method
The Southgate method (1969) is basically an enzymatic chemical method
where digestive enzymes are used for starch hydrolysis, then acid hydrolysis was
used to yield components of hemicelluloses, cellulose, and lignin which are
measured chemically. The disadvantage of this colorimetric method is the non-
specific colour reactions of analyzed reducing sugars (Lee and Prosky, 1992) as well
as multiple steps which requires longer time. This method has been largely replaced
by the Englyst method.
2.5.2Englyst method
The Englyst method identifies the different monomers that make up total NSP.
In essence, the method involves measurement of sugar monomers following starch
hydrolysis using digestive enzymes (Englyst et al., 1988). Limitations in the Englyst
method were reported in a previous study (Wolters et al., 1992). The acid hydrolysis
step which aims to breakdown the bonds between monosaccharides can cause some
loss of NSP monosaccharides (Wolters et al., 1992). Whole wheat and dried apple
fibre measured directly by Englyst method showed lower NSP amount than the sum
of soluble and insoluble NSP that may be due to presence of glucose because of
oligosaccharides contaminated in the soluble fibre residue or cellulose loss from the
direct measure (Wolters et al., 1992).
2.5.3Enzymatic gravimetric (AOAC) methods
Having a published definition to work with, there was an effort by many
researchers to develop a method for dietary fibre analysis to meet the definition
(DeVries, 2004). A general consensus had been reached on the official method of
analysis referred to as the AOAC method 985.29 for measuring total dietary fibre in
foods. This method was established by scientists led by Prosky (1985), and aimed to
measure dietary fibre as defined by Trowell (1972). A further modification in the
methodology was developed and collaboratively studied, aiming to improve the
method and to measure dietary fibre components based on their solubility (soluble
and insoluble dietary fibre) in foods and food products (Prosky et al., 1992).
The AOAC method measures the sum of non-digestible carbohydrates and
lignin using enzymatic digestion to eliminate non-fibre components and quantify the
residue by weighing (McCleary and Prosky, 2001).
AOAC (985.29) was the first version of the enzymatic gravimetric method
adopted by Prosky and his colleagues (1985) that measures total dietary fibre in
foods and foods products and later on was modified by using a different buffer (4-
morpholine-ethanesulfonic acid-TRIS buffer). This was labelled as the AOAC
(991.43) method (Lee et al., 1992) which was used to measure soluble and
insoluble fibre in addition to total dietary fibre in foods. The above methods are used
to determine total dietary fibre in food and food products for labelling purposes and
nutrients databases (DeVries, 2004). Table 2.4 presents the main steps in the three
common methods described above.
A collaborative study (Prosky et al., 1985) represented 5 countries where 9
collaborators tested mainly cereal and cereal products using the AOAC (991.43)
method. In this study, coefficient of variation (CV%), which gave an estimate of
precision by evaluating the ability of an AOAC method to be reproduced in different
laboratories, showed, CV% ranged between 1.56% - 9.80%. Later on Prosky and his
colleagues (1992) reported insoluble and soluble dietary fibre CV% for 22 foods
from different sources (carrots, kidney beans, barley, figs and others) analyzed in 39
collaborators and found that reproducibility of insoluble fibre of almost half of
analyzed foods was less than 10%. However, the soluble fibre reproducibility was
much higher at 10-20% which may be due to filtration problems or because of low
fibre content in the tested samples. Again, because of the high soluble fibre CV%
reproducibility results found in the previous study, another collaborative study
(Prosky et al., 1994) carried out in ten laboratories, testing the same samples. The
averaged CV% was 14.1% for soluble fibre, 8.0% for insoluble fibre and 4.9% for
total dietary fibre after overcoming filtration problems.
AOAC methods 985.29 and 991.43 have the same principle. The main steps of
AOAC methods include sample digestion, precipitation with 4 volumes of alcohol,
filtration then drying and weighing the total dietary fibre residue. To obtain the
dietary fibre value, the sample will first be digested by enzymes then the digested
sample will be filtered, dried and weighed to yield the insoluble dietary fibre value.
The soluble fibre values will then be obtained from the filtrate that is participated in
4 volumes of ethanol, which is then again filtered, dried and weighed to yield the
soluble fraction value. All fibre residues are corrected for ash and protein (Lee and
Prosky, 1992).
Modifications were performed in the AOAC method including the use of
organic buffers (MES/TRIS) instead of phosphate buffers to limit the formation of
co-precipitations with dietary fibre and omitting pH adjustment steps to reduce time
spent in analyses (Lee and Prosky, 1992) as illustrated in Table 2.4. Lee and Prosky
(1992) demonstrated that the overall precision of soluble, insoluble and total dietary
fibre values was acceptable in all mentioned methods when they compared between
them and advised the generation of dietary fibre values for a database for food
composition and food labelling purposes.
Table 2.4 Main steps in three dietary fibre analytical methods
Enzymatic gravimetric methods
Enzymatic chemical
methods
Method step
Prosky et al, 1988
AOAC modified
Lee et al., 1992
Englyst method
Sample 1g 1g 50-300mg
Buffer Na-phosphate pH 6 MES/TRIS pH 8.2 no buffer
Starch and
protein hydrolysis
Termamyl
100C, 15-30min,
Amyloglucosidase
60C, 30 min
Protease
60C, 30 min
Termamyl
100C, 30 min
Amyloglucosidase
60C, 30 min
Protease
60C, 30 min
(0.5h, boiling water
bath)
Termamyl
, 10min, boiling
water bath
Pancreatin and pullulanse
,0.5h and 50C + 10 min
boiling
pH adjustment 1
To pH 7.5 before
Protease
No pH adjustment No pH adjustment
pH adjustment 2
To pH 4.0-4.6 before
Amyloglucosidase
To pH 4.0-4.6 before
Amyloglucosidase
No pH adjustment
Alcohol
precipitation
280ml 225ml No precipitation
Acid hydrolysis
and sugars
determination
no no
Analysis of sugars:
12 M H2SO4 (1h, 35C)
2 M H2SO4 (1h, 100C) and
sugar determine chemically
lignin included included Not determined
Filtration aid Celite 545 Celite 545 No
Protein and ash
correction
yes yes No
1 DMSO = Dimethylsulphoxide for starch solubilisation, 2Termamyl is thermostable -amylase from Novo 
Nordisk, Denmark. Table adapted from McCleary and Prosky (2001) p.81.
Errors measuring dietary fibre by the AOAC method have been reported in
previous study (Maas and Saura-Calixto, 1993). The precipitation step was found
to be subject to two errors when measuring soluble dietary fibre. Firstly, incomplete
precipitation of pectin was proven from analyzed citrus pectin. Secondly, co-
precipitation of substances other than fibre such as organic acids (Englyst et al.,
1996) have resulted in overestimation of what should be considered as dietary fibre
because of the presence of artefacts (Maas and Saura-Calixto, 1993).
Incomplete precipitation of soluble fibre may affect the measured distribution
of soluble and insoluble fractions (Maas et al., 1994). Another possible error was
reported such as errors related to weighed sample (Mertens, 2003).
2.5.4The use of dietary fibre analytical method
AOAC 985.29 method was approved as the official method for determining
total dietary fibre in all foods while AOAC 991.43 method is applicable to measure
the total, soluble and insoluble dietary fibre in all foods (Joint FAO/WHO Food
Standards Programme, 2011). As demonstrated in Table 2.5, Both methods are used
to determine dietary fibre contents in foods in the USA and in most of the European
countries nutrients databases (DeVries and Rader, 2005).
In the United Kingdom, the Englyst method is used to determine NSP in
foods. Dietary fibre values reported in McCance and Widdowsons food
composition was accepted by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, and Food
(MAFF) and remained the recommended method for nutrition and food labelling
until 1999. In the same year, the Food Standards Agency accepted the role of
resistant starch and lignin as a dietary fibre and they adapted AOAC method to
measure dietary fibre in foods (Food Standards Agency, 2002).
Table 2.5 Global acceptance of the AOAC official method
Country Type of AOAC official Method used
USA AOAC 985.29 and 991.43 method
Australia AOAC 985.29 method
Canada AOAC 985.29 method
Japan AOAC 985.29 and 991.43 methods
Mexico AOAC 985.29 method
UK Englyst method and 6
edition of UK food composition reported some values
by AOAC 985.29 method.
Other countires
AOAC 985.29 methods
1Denmark, Finland, Italy, and Sweden; Table adapted from (DeVries and Rader, 2005)
2.5.5Differences in dietary fibre analytical methods
Regarding the measured dietary fibre constituents, the Englyst method
measures non-starch polysaccharides, which fit the definition of plant-rich diet
intrinsic plant cell wall polysaccharides (Englyst et al., 2007, p.S27) based on
their chemical components rather than the sum of indigestible materials as in the
AOAC method (Englyst et al., 2007). The higher dietary fibre values are measured
by the AOAC method as compared with the Englyst method relate to the presence of
resistant starch, lignin and other indigestible materials measured by the AOAC
method. Resistant starch is measured by the AOAC method; in particular, retrograde
resistant starch (RS3) and inaccessible starch granules (RS2) (Lunn and Buttriss,
2007).
Table 2.6 Dietary fibre components measured by selected analytical methods
Method Lignin NSP
Resistant
starch
Resistant
Polysaccharides
Oligosaccharides
Other
Englyst method X Yes X X X
Southgate method Yes Yes Some X X
Lee method (AOAC 991.43) Yes Yes Some X Some
Prosky method (AOAC 985.29) Yes Yes Some X some
1Such as polydextrose, resistant maltodextrin and oligosaccharides, 2Non-carbohydrates defined as other non-
lignin non-carbohydrates products such as tannins, cutin, and protienaceous products. Selected methods adapted
from Lunn and Buttriss (2007)
Table 2.6 summaries dietary fibre constituents measured by selected analytical
methods that are used to determine the dietary fibre in foods and food products
which are then used in nutrients databases. All the methods in the Table 2.6 agree in
measuring NSP as a major component in the dietary fibre definition. Lignin and
resistant starch, mainly measured by enzymatic gravimetric methods, are not
counted in the values obtained from the Englyst method. Resistant starch are
resistant to human enzymes but mostly fermented in the large intestine (Sajilata et
al., 2006) partly measured by the Southgate (1969) and Prosky (1985) methods.
Recently, an integrated procedure for total dietary fibre measurement which
includes total resistant starch and low molecular weight non-digestible
oligosaccharides was established (McCleary, 2007). The latest AOAC Method
2009.01 was validated and adopted by the Codex Commission as the official method
for measurement of total dietary fibre (McCleary et al., 2010).
The variation in the dietary fibre values between analytical methods become a
concern in comparative epidemiological studies and it has been reported that dietary
fibre values are highly dependent on the analytical method used which should be
considered (Deharveng et al., 1999).
The food composition of nine European countries of the EPIC study suggested
that dietary fibre method comparability depends on food groups (Deharveng et al.,
1999). This finding is in agreement with recent review findings (Slimani et al.,
2007) which showed dietary fibre values obtained from the AOAC method were
comparable to values obtained by the Englyst method for fruit and vegetables
(excluding potato). While fibre from cereal, legumes and potatoes contain
significant amounts of fibre other than non-starch polysaccharides components that
are measured by the AOAC method but not with the Englyst method, which needs to
be considered. It was reported by DeVries (2004) that most of the updated food
composition databases include fibre values obtained from the AOAC method. In
addition to analytical method, portion of food analyzed and variety of food samples
tested were all other possible explanation of differences in dietary fibre values
(Marlett, 1992).
2.6 Dietary fibre recommendations and intakes
2.6.1Dietary fibre recommendations
Generally, the aims of dietary recommendations are to prevent overt
deficiencies of essential nutrients. However for fibre, the approach was from
evidence of bowel habits that linked to the lowest risk of bowel disease. The aim
was to set a fibre intake associated with stool weight of greater than 100g/day. As
stool weight of less than 100g/day is associated with increased risk of bowel
diseases, which occurs when the NSP intake is less than 12g/day and intakes above
32g/day of NSP will not further increase stool weight. Furthermore, it is expected
that an increase of NSP intake from 13 to 18g/day would give an increase in average
stool weight of 25% (Department of Health, 1991). The Dietary Reference Value
(DRV) for NSP measured by Englyst in the UK is 18g/day (individual range 12-
24g/d), applicable for adults only, based on quantitative evidence related to bowel
habit (Department of Health, 1991).
In other countries, the recommendations were established based on disease
prevention. For healthy American and Canadian populations, dietary fibre
recommendations were published by the Food Nutrition Board (2005) which was
based on coronary heart disease protective intake levels obtained from prospective
and clinical data. An adequate intake of dietary fibre for people aged between 19 -50
years old was set at 25g/day for women. European dietary fibre recommendations in
the scientific opinion of the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) (2010)
recently reported the DRVs for dietary fibre. This was set at 25g/day to ensure
normal laxation in adults. Additionally, this value was set considering lowering risk
of chronic diseases such as coronary heart disease and diabetes.
Table 2.7 demonstrates the dietary fibre recommendations in different
countries. It has been noticed that the amount of dietary fibre recommendations are
highest for Americans and Canadians, while the lowest amount is found for the UK
recommendation, which could be explained by the variation in dietary analytical
methods used to measure dietary fibre. Lunn and Buttriss (2007) demonstrated the
variation in the recommended amount of dietary fibre intake across countries may
also be due to whether the recommended amount was based on physiological
function as in the UK recommendation or other health benefits as in the France,
Germany and USA recommendations or both beneficial effects as in the
Netherlands.
Table 2.7 Dietary fibre recommendations in different countries
Country Dietary fibre recommendation
Worldwide (FAO/WHO) >20g
; 25g
Denmark 20-30g
Finland/Sweden/Norway 25-35g
France 25-30g
Germany 30g
Netherlands 30-40g
Spain 30g
UK 18g
USA/Canada 25g (women 19-50years); 21g (women +50years)
Australia/New Zealand 30g (men); 25g (women)
Japan 20-30g
South Africa 30-40g
1 based on Englyst method 2 based on AOAC method 3 analytical method not specified. Table Adapted from
Lunn and Buttriss (2007)
2.6.2Dietary fibre intakes
Complexities are still present in determining dietary fibre consumption
especially for researchers interested in international comparison. This is partly
because of analytical methods used to measure dietary fibre content. In term of
dietary fibre intake among different populations, a recent National Diet Nutrition
Survey (NDNS) (Department of Health, 2012) reported that for NSP, the average
intake for adults over 19 years old was 13.8g/day (the upper 2.5 percentile was
25.9g/day and the lower 2.5 percentile was 5.5g/day). Based on gender, average
dietary fibre intake for men was 14.8g/d and for women equal to 12.8g/day.
The main dietary fibre source among the UK population is cereal and cereal
products which represent 37% of total non-starch polysaccharides intake. Potato and
vegetables as groups are the second biggest contributors of NSP intake (34%) for
adults. This outcome was the same as the previous report in 2004 (Department of
Health, 2011).
A European Food Standard Agency panel reported that the average daily
intake of dietary fibre across European countries ranges between 18 -29.7 g for men
and 15.7-23g for women. In addition, three quarters of people aged over 65 years
have dietary fibre intake ranging between 19 and 25g/day (European Food Safety
Authority, 2010). Green (2001) summarized that the typical daily fibre intake of
adults consuming a Western diet as 11.8-16.4g of total NSP where 50% was from
cereals, 40% from vegetables and 10% from fruits. Estimated daily fibre
components were also reported by Green (2001) as the insoluble NSP intake ranged
between 6.5  7.0g/day and soluble NSP was 5.3-8.7g/day.
Total dietary fibre intake across European countries was obtained from the
EPIC study (Cust et al., 2009) and showed that mean dietary fibre intake adjusted
for age, total energy, weight, height, season and days of recall was the highest
among the health conscious UK population (26.8g/day) and lowest in Sweden
(15.1g/day) and in the UK general population (17.4g/day). In general, fruit and
vegetables groups were the major contributor to total dietary fibre intake. Thus
evidence indicates that dietary fibre intake for the UK general population is still
below the recommended value.
The third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III)
(198894) (Bialostosky et al., 2002) which provides information on the health and
nutritional status of the U.S population reported that the mean total dietary fibre
intake which includes unavailable carbohydrates was 17.9g for people aged between
20 -59 years whereas for women the mean fibre intake was 14g/day and for men the
mean fibre intake was 20g/day. Insoluble dietary fibre intake was 11.2g/day while
soluble dietary fibre intake was 6g/day for those aged between 20-59 years old. The
daily fibre intake among US population was still under the desirable level as the
recommended amount is 25g/day for women and 38g/day for men. In general, the
daily dietary fibre intake globally across different countries still does not reach the
equivalent recommended intake which reflects the importance of a more
comprehensive health promotion strategy that tackles dietary fibre intake.
2.7 Dietary fibre related effects: physiological and health effects
A wide range of substances are included in the dietary fibre term which results
in a wide range in physiochemical properties. Guillon and Champ (2000) concluded
in their review that properties such as viscosity of dietary fibre are key contributors
to health related effects on glucose and lipid metabolism while water holding
capacity and fermentation
are more related to colonic function. This indicates the
The fermentation process that occurs in the large intestine includes digestion and absorption of
carbohydrates that escape the small intestine which results in formation of gases and short chain fatty
usefulness of nutritionally related characteristics which help in understanding the
potential mechanisms related to the beneficial effects of dietary fibre intake. The
main areas of research investigated the dietary fibre beneficial effects were
gastrointestinal health, glucose and insulin responses, risk factors of coronary heart
disease, some cancers, and satiety were summarized in a review by Lunn and
Buttriss (2007).
Englyst (2005) classified carbohydrates based on gastrointestinal handling into
glycaemic and non-glycaemic carbohydrates. Non-glycaemic carbohydrates were
defined as carbohydrates which enter the large bowel for fermentation. Indigestible
carbohydrates are resistant to digestion and absorption partly due to the presence of
specific glucosidic linkage that cannot be hydrolysed by human digestive enzymes.
Other factors which may influence digestion and absorption were illustrated by
Englyst and Englyst (2005). For example, meal macronutrient components, subject
biological variation, food matrix and chemical structure all affect gastrointestinal
digestion and absorption. The presence of NSP in the stomach and small intestine
results in a slow rate of carbohydrate digestion and absorption which is related to the
viscosity property of soluble fibre. When non-glycemic carbohydrates enter the
large intestine, fermentation occurs but with varying degrees of fermentation which
then leads to the production of short chain fatty acids (SCFA) as an important source
of energy for the intestinal cells (Englyst and Englyst, 2005). The physiological
effects of dietary fibre were determined based on three main factors, solubility,
viscosity and fermentability as suggested by Li and Uppal (2010). Classifications of
dietary fibre are illustrated in Table 2.8.
acids by gut microflora and substrates which will be absorbed and metabolized by the human body.
(FAO, 1998).
Table 2.8 Classifications of dietary fibre based on their solubility, viscosity and
fermentability properties.
Physiochemical
properties
Sub-classes Chemical structure and food sources
Solubility
Soluble  Glucans (oats and barley)
 Pentoses (rye)
 Oligosaccharides (pulses, onion, Jerusalem
artichoke, garlic)
Insoluble  Cellulose, hemicelluloses and lignin (cereal: wheat
and rice)
 Resistant starch (wholegrains and pulses)
Viscosity
Viscous  Gum
 Psyllium
 Pectin
 Cellulose (oat bran)
Non-viscous  Inulin
 Resistant starch
 Polydextrose
 Cellulose (e.g. wheat and rice bran)
Fermentability
Partially
fermented
 Cellulose (vegetables, sugar beets, brans)
 Hemicelluloses (cereal)
 Lignin
 Cutin/suberin/ other plant waxes in plant fibres
 Chitin and chitosan, collagen (fungi, yeasts)
 Resistant starches (corn, potatoes, grains, legumes,
bananas)
Highly
fermented
 Beta-glucans (oat, barley and rye)
 Pectins (fruits, vegetables, legumes, sugar beets and
potatoes)
 Gums (legumes, seaweed extracts, plant extracts)
 Inulin (chicory, Jerusalem artichoke, onions, wheat)
 Oligosaccharides
Adapted from Li and Uppal (2010)
2.7.1Solubility
Dietary fibre is divided into soluble and insoluble dietary fibre where each
group has its physiological characteristics. Insoluble fibre properties include
shortened transit time, laxation by attracting water, softened stool and increased
stool bulk which is more likely to be un-fermentable in the large intestine (Buttriss
and Stokes, 2008). Whereas soluble fibre is characterized by forming a gel-like
solution and is more likely to be fermented in the large intestine (Buttriss and
Stokes, 2008). Cellulose, hemicelluloses and lignin were categorized into insoluble
dietary fibre while non-cellulosic polysaccharides such as pectin, gums and
mucilages were all under the soluble fibre category (Oakenfull, 2001). Most grain
products such as wheat and rye are rich sources of insoluble fibres while soluble
fibre is mostly found in fruit and vegetables including legumes (Lunn and Buttriss,
2007).
Resistant starch and oligosaccharides were also allocated into the insoluble
and soluble groups as they have physiological consequences (Lunn and Buttriss,
2007). Resistant starch was included in the insoluble component of non-digestible
carbohydrates where other components such as cellulose, hemicelluloses and lignin
were present while oligosaccharides were categorized under the soluble component
which suggested that this is a useful approach especially with regard to the new
dietary fibre definitions.
Solubility of dietary fibre is a key factor for its physiological effect. The type
of linkage between sugar units in the chemical structure of dietary fibre is one of the
main determinants of this physical property of dietary fibre (Oakenfull, 2001). For
example, -glucan is a soluble polysaccharide but cellulose is an insoluble 
polysaccharide. This because of the ordered structure of the polysaccharides chain
with  1-4 linkage which prevent cellulose from being solubilised while, the 
irregular type of polysaccharides structure in -glucans allows solubilisation  in 
water (Oakenfull, 2001). Another reason for being soluble is the presence of a
charged group in the polysaccharides which prevents molecules grouping together in
an ordered structure (like cellulose) in pectin.
The challenges in solubility property were demonstrated by some researchers.
The extraction of oligosaccharides from polysaccharides is achieved by 80% ethanol
however the separation depends on the chemical structure and degree of
polymerization (DP). However, high branched polymers with more than ten DP
were found to be solubilised in ethanol solutions such as arabinan in sugar beet fibre
(McCleary and Prosky, 2001) which indicates that analytical separation is arbitrary
(FAO, 1998). Also difficulties can be appreciated especially when categorization is
not totally based on solubility as some insoluble fibre is fermentable (Lunn and
Buttriss, 2007). It had been suggested earlier by WHO/FAO (1997) that
carbohydrate categories based on solubility are less useful for nutritional research.
However, based on the new definition by WHO/FAO, resistant oligosaccharides and
resistant starch were part of total dietary fibre and the categorization was recently
addressed by Lunn and Buttriss (2007).
2.7.2Fermentability
It has been demonstrated previously by Stephen (1991) that insoluble fibre has
a great effect on stool weight because it is hardly fermented and is thus more
effective as a bulking agent. Cumming and Stephen (2007) support a physiologically
based carbohydrate classification as this is useful for evaluating potential health
benefits as well as helping to determine foods linked to a healthy diet. It is important
to consider other components which are associated with dietary fibre such as
phenolic substances, waxes, phytates and cutin which are also indigestible and may
have potentially beneficial effects (Lunn and Buttriss, 2007). An in vivo study
reported that pectin is highly digestible by microbial flora, with a faecal recovery of
3% of the amount ingested (Bravo et al., 1994).
2.7.3Viscosity
Viscosity characteristics refer to the physical interaction of the
polysaccharides molecule in solution (Oakenfull, 2001). Viscosity characteristics of
some polysaccharides have shown a beneficial role in the human body such as
reduction in glucose absorption and lowering of plasma cholesterol level by the
inhibition of cholesterol and bile acid absorption. Increasing viscosity, delays gastric
emptying, interferes with food mixing process by reducing muscle contraction
activity of the gastrointestinal tract and this slows the rate of glucose absorption
(British Nutrition Foundation, 1990). This is a suggested mechanism of viscosity to
explain the reduction of blood glucose response with certain fibre intake (Jenkins et
al., 1978). However, the long term effect of viscous fibre on chronic disease such as
coronary heart disease uncertain (Jenkins et al., 2000).
A water holding ability is found in both soluble and insoluble fibres. Soluble
fibres form a gel-like compound while insoluble fibre acts as a sponge by entrapping
water in the matrix (Cho and Dreher, 2001). It has been reported that laxation
depends on water holding capacity and bacterial cell mass so the faecal bulking
property of different types of fibres depends on the chemical, physical and bacterial
mass in the large intestine (Cho and Dreher, 2001).
The most recent dietary fibre definition includes a wide range of materials
with overlapping physiological properties resulting in variation in the classification
of dietary fibre that makes it more complicated for researchers. As shown in Table
1.8, viscous fibres are mostly soluble and fermentable like pectin. On the other hand,
inulin is soluble but not viscous and well fermented in the large intestine. While,
poorly fermentable fibres are generally insoluble fibres (Li and Uppal, 2010).
2.7.4Dietary fibre and health
The health benefits and physiological effects of dietary fibre have been
reported by many researchers (Brown et al., 1999 , Jenkins et al., 2002). This has
led to emphasise on the physiological and health benefits in the dietary fibre
definitions (Codex Alimentarius Commission, 2008, AOAC, 2001, European
Commission, 2008). When Trowell (1972) suggested a dietary fibre hypothesis
which assumed an inverse relationship between dietary fibre consumption and the
incidence of diseases, it stimulated research investigating the relationship between
dietary fibre intake and risk of chronic illnesses.
Pooled data from 10 European and US cohort studies reported an inverse
relationship between dietary fibre intake and the risk of coronary heart diseases with
a 14% decrease risk (RR=0.86; 95%CI: 0.78, 0.96) with every 10g increase in
energy adjusted fibre intake (Pereira et al., 2004). Cancer-related beneficial effects
have been evaluated by other prospective studies. A meta-analysis from 16
prospective studies reported a significant risk reduction of colonic cancer by 10%
(RR=0.90; 95%CI: 0.86, 0.94) with every 10g daily increment of total dietary fibre
(Aune et al., 2011). The relationship between the risk of breast cancer and intake of
dietary fibre was examined prospectively. The UK Womens Cohort Study reported
a significant protective effect of high dietary fibre intake on the risk of breast cancer
in pre-menopausal women (Cade et al., 2007). Other beneficial effects of dietary
fibre such as lowering blood pressure and the protective effect from weight gain
were summarized in a recent European scientific opinion report (European Food
Safety Authority, 2010)
Further evaluation was carried out by several studies to determine the effects
of fibre fractions (soluble and insoluble fibres) on health outcomes and aimed to
identify the potential fibre component that may explain the beneficial effects of high
fibre intake on the risk of chronic disease. A large cohort study showed that a high
intake of insoluble fibre did show significant beneficial effects against the risk of
myocardial infarction among women (Liu et al., 2002). A meta-analysis pooled
result from 6 prospective studies and found that with every 10g increment in soluble
fibre, the risk was significantly reduced by 28% for all coronary events and by 54%
for coronary death whilst the effect size of insoluble fibre was smaller. Thus, with
every 10g increment in insoluble fibre, the risk was reduced significantly by 10% for
all coronary events and by 20% for coronary death (Pereira et al., 2004).
In terms of the risk factors for cardiovascular disease, the effects of soluble
fibre intake in the form of pectin, oat bran, guar gum and psyllium were pooled from
67 controlled trials (Brown et al., 1999 ). With every 2-10g/day increase in soluble
fibre, a small but significant decrease in total blood cholesterol level by 0.054mmol/l
and lower LDL-cholesterol level by 0.057mmol/l was reported. However, the effect
on blood HDL cholesterol and triglyceride levels were not significant.
2.8 Conclusion
The on-going argument about defining dietary fibre centres mainly on the
non-NSP compounds. Growing evidence of the beneficial effect of indigestible
compounds drives towards including such compounds in the definition but deviation
from the great benefit of plant-based food to other sources is of great concern to
many researchers. Dietary fibre classification is based on several factors such as
chemical structure, solubility and fermentability which will provide information to
understand the health beneficial effects of dietary fibre. It has to be appreciated that
not all foods have similar plant cell wall composition: however, NSP was the basic
component on which all definitions agree. Adding a wide range of other indigestible
materials into the dietary fibre definition that have physiological properties similar
to dietary fibres makes it complicated in terms of analytical methods, and in
nutrition epidemiological research. Nevertheless, the updated analytical AOAC
method by McCleary (2007) established to include all indigestible materials
considered as fibre in the recent dietary fibre definition. Dietary fibre
recommendations varied across countries due to variation in the intended aims and
analytical methods whereas the intake of dietary fibre in most countries was still
under the recommended amount. Dietary fibre intake based on AOAC fibre value in
UK prospective study is lacking and comparison between dietary fibre intake
estimated from NSP and AOAC values will provide a clear picture on ranking
participants in observational studies. This part will be demonstrated in chapter 7.
Chapter 3: Literature review of type 2 diabetes mellitus
3.1 Introduction
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is one of the common public health
problems that require more focus on the primary prevention strategies as this will
have a great benefit on individual and population levels. Environmental and genetic
factors play an important role in developing T2DM. Environmental factors mainly
focus on lifestyle and dietary factors. Modifications in some health related
behaviours were advocated by several health organizations, aiming to delay or
prevent the development of diabetes. Some researchers were focused on the genetic
factors in the development of T2DM which may help in identifying people who are
at higher risk of developing diabetes which then can target the population for future
interventional trials. Diagnosis and classifications of diabetes will be provided in
this chapter, alongside incidence, trends and complications of T2DM among adults.
In attempting to investigate the effect of dietary fibre intake on the risk of diabetes,
it is important to first explore other diabetes related risk factors. The current chapter
describes epidemiological evidences on dietary and lifestyle practices in relationship
to T2DM. Specifically, dietary and non-dietary risk factors such as body fatness,
physical activity, macronutrient intake, intakes of the main micronutrients and main
food groups that are related to T2DM as well as the common dietary patterns
examined in relation to risk of diabetes will be included in this literature review.
3.2 Trends in incidence, prevalence, mortality and morbidity
Globally, evidence shows an increase in the prevalence and incidence of
diabetes among adults (World Health Organization, 2003). In the UK, a slow rate of
increase in prevalence as well as incidence of diabetes has been observed between
year 1996-2005 (Gonzlez et al., 2009). It was estimated in a 2012 report that 1 in
20 people in the UK have diabetes (Diabetes UK, 2012). The total number of people
with diabetes in the UK Diabetes 2012 report was 2.9 million (Diabetes UK, 2012)
and this number is estimated to increase by 2025 to five million. A previous UK
report showed that the average prevalence of diabetes increased from 3.86% in 2008
to 4.45% in 2011 (Figure 3.1) and found that more men than women have diagnosed
diabetes, as the prevalence of diabetes was 4.3% in men and 3.4% in women.
It has been concluded that the overall prevalence of diabetes increased by 54%
and incidence increased by 63% in the UK between 1996 and 2005, an increase
mainly attributed toT2DM, as the incidence of type 1 remained constant over the
same period time (Gonzlez et al., 2009). Suggested reasons for the number of
T2DM include an increase in the number of overweight and obese people as well as
the aging factor.
Figure 3.1 Trend of prevalence of T2DM in UK
Data obtained from (Department of Health, 2001).
Rates of morbidity and mortality are still high in people with diabetes. The
WHO Multinational Study of Vascular Diseases in Diabetes reported that people
with T2DM are at particularly high risk for developing cardiovascular diseases; 52%
of deaths were attributed to cardiovascular diseases (Morrish et al., 2001). The risk
of ischemic stroke was higher by 60% for diabetic people in comparison to the
general population (HR=1.56; 95%CI: 1.19, 2.05) which lead to a varied degree of
disability and substantial financial cost (Sarwar et al., 2010). In the same study
where 102 prospective studies were included in the analyses, diabetic women had a
hazard ratio of coronary heart disease significantly higher than diabetic men (women
HR=2.59; 95%CI: 2.29, 2.93; men HR= 1.89; 95%CI: 1.73, 2.06). Ischemic stroke
was also significantly higher among women with diabetes aged between 40  59
years in comparison to men with diabetes (women HR=2.83; 95%CI: 2.45, 3.40 and
men HR=2.16; 95%CI: 1.84, 2.52). No explanation for the higher risk in women
than men was reported.
Renal diseases account for 11% of deaths among T2DM, while women have a
higher percentage of renal disease death than men (14% and 8% respectively)
(Morrish et al., 2001). Retinopathy is one of the main microvascular complications
of diabetes; 60% of T2DM patients have been diagnosed with different stages of
retinopathy (Scanlon, 2008). It has been summarized that diabetes is the most
prevalent cause of blindness among people of working age in the UK (Diabetes UK,
2012).
As mentioned before, diabetes complications have a tremendous impact on
quality of life, financial costs and life expectancy. Diabetes accounts for 10% of
hospital inpatient resources (Diabetes UK 2012b) and cost was estimated by Hex et
al. (2012) to be about 23.7 billion. On average, ten years reduction in life
expectancy was reported for patients with T2DM.
As T2DM is one of the main public health challenges with great health and
cost burdens facing the whole world and in particular the UK, an increased
awareness of the risk factors of type 2 is required to address this challenge. Thus, the
next section will focus on the non-dietary and dietary related risk factors of T2DM.
3.3 Diagnosis and classification of type 2 diabetes mellitus
The term diabetes mellitus has been described by the World Health
Organization (1999, p.2) as a metabolic disorder of multiple etiology,
characterized by chronic hyperglycaemia with disturbances of carbohydrate, fat and
protein metabolism resulting from defects in insulin secretion, insulin action, or
both . In general, -cells in the pancreas are responsible for insulin secretion which 
regulates blood glucose. Dysfunction or/and destruction of pancreatic cells results in
chronic hyperglycaemia that is linked to short term and long term organ damage
resulting in failure and dysfunction (Figure 3.2).
Figure 3.2 Figure Pathogenesis process of type 2 diabetes mellitus
From the definition, as a result of insulin deficiency or/ and resistance,
abnormalities in carbohydrate, protein and fat metabolism occur. Diabetes was
categorized based on aetiology into three main groups, T2DM, type 1 diabetes
mellitus (T1DM) and gestational diabetes. In addition to, other minor types of
diabetes listed in Table 3.1.
-cell 
Dysfunction
Insulin
Resistance &
Hyperglycaemia
Macrovascular &
microvascular
complications
Table 3.1 Classification of diabetes mellitus (World Health Organization, 1999)
1 Genetic defects of betacell function (maturityonset diabetes of the young (MODY)
and genetic defects in insulin action.
2 Diseases of the exocrine pancreas (Acquired processes include pancreatitis, trauma,
infection, pancreatic carcinoma, and pancreatectomy).
3 Endocrinopathies (Acromegaly, Cushings Syndrome).
4 Drug or chemicalinduced diabetes (glucocorticoids).
5 Infections (congenital rubella, Coxsackie B, cytomegalovirus).
6 Specific forms of immunemediated diabetes mellitus (Antiinsulin receptor antibodies
due to systemic lupus erythematosus and other autoimmune diseases).
7 Genetic syndromes sometimes associated with diabetes (Downs syndrome).
In terms of public health impact, T2DM is the commonest type of diabetes
where evidence found a close link between T2DM and diet. Therefore, the current
literature review will focus on T2DM.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus is also known as non-insulin dependent diabetes
mellitus (NIDDM) which accounts for 90% of diabetes in the UK (Diabetes UK,
2012). Diagnostic values of fasting blood glucose and 2 hours post oral glucose load
ingestion have been updated four times over the past 40 years as shown by WHO
report (2006). Table 3.2 presents the changes in blood glucose cut-off values as
reported by WHO/FAO (World Health Organization, 1999, World Health
Organization, 2006).
Table 3.2 History of diagnostic criteria for diabetes mellitus
year of Publication Fasting blood glucose 2-h blood glucose
1965 Not specified >7.2 mmol/l
1980 >8.0 mmol/l and/or >11.0 mmol/l
1985 >7.8 mmol/l or >11.1 mmol/l
1999/2006 >7.0 mmol/l or >11.1 mmol/l
1After ingestion of 75g oral glucose load
The decision to lower the values of fasting plasma glucose in the criteria for
diagnosis of diabetes was based on the association of >7.0mmol/l of fasting plasma
glucose level with a significantly higher risk of microvascular complications, mainly
retinopathy (McCane et al., 1994). The risk of coronary heart disease death rate is
significantly doubled with a fasting plasma glucose level above 6.9mmol/l in
comparison to a fasting blood glucose of less than 5.8mmol/l even though 2-h blood
glucose is normal (RR=2.63; 95%CI: 172, 403) (Charles et al., 1996).
Diabetes mellitus is a disease that develops over time and progress from norm-
glycaemia; through pre-diabetes stage where higher blood glucose levels can be
determine which then result into clear picture of diabetes. Several pre-diabetes
stages were identified by blood glucose levels such as impaired glucose tolerance
and impaired fasting glycaemia (World Health Organization, 2006).
Epidemiological studies use values from measured fasting blood glucose
concentrations and or 2-hours post 75g glucose load for diagnosis of diabetes.
However to avoid the difficulties with fasting status and because of a strong
correlation between 2-hour values and fasting blood glucose, 2-hour values are still
used. High cost of OGTT had led to the use of fasting blood glucose in
epidemiological research (World Health Organization, 1999). Diabetes UK
recommended that all healthcare professionals adopt the new criteria in Table 3.3 for
diabetes diagnosis from 1 June 2000.
Table 3.3 Criteria for diagnosing diabetes mellitus (World Health Organization, 2006)
1. Diabetes symptoms (i.e. polyuria
, polydipsia
and unexplained weight loss) plus a
random venous plasma glucose concentration > 11.1 mmol/l.
2. Fasting plasma glucose concentration > 7.0 mmol/l (whole blood >6.1mmol/l).
3. Two hour plasma glucose concentration > 11.1 mmol/l two hours after 75g glucose in
an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT).
Polyuria and polydypsia are common symptoms that occur with
hyperglycaemia. Asymptomatic patients may remain undiagnosed for many years
(Beck et al., 1995). However, diagnosis of individuals with asymptomatic
hyperglycaemia can be made after individual trigger by infections, stress and acute
illness. Other patients will be diagnosed when macrovascular complications such as
coronary heart disease appear (World Health Organization, 1999).
An updated report on the diagnosis of T2DM was compiled by WHO (2011)
which suggested that glycated haemoglobin form (HbA1C), which explains extent of
blood glucose control in the past 12 weeks (National Institute of Health and Care
Excellence, 2012). HbA1C can be used as a diagnostic test for T2DM with cut-off
point of 6.5%. However, less than 6.5% does not exclude a diagnosis of diabetes
because there is still not enough evidence available to have a formal
recommendation for HbA1C below this point (World Health Organization, 2006). In
addition, NICE guidelines (National Institute of Health and Care Excellence, 2012)
reported that an individual with HbA1C of 6.0-6.5% should be categorized as being at
Polyuria: excessive secretion of urine
Poydipsia: increasing fluid intake due to increase in thirst (National Institutes of Health)
high risk of diabetes. The utility of HbA1C level in predicting incidence of diabetes
has been investigated in a prospective study recently (Choi et al., 2011). Women
with HbA1C of more than 5.6% had a three times increased risk of T2DM over the 6-
year follow-up (RR= 3.06; 95%CI: 2.46, 3.81; p<0.01) in comparison to less than
5.6% in the fully adjusted model. The advantage of HbA1C is that it can be performed
anytime and does not need fasting status. However, it is not readily available
worldwide in comparison to glucose assays (World Health Organization, 2011).
3.3.1Case ascertainment in T2DM in prospective studies
Identification of new cases of diabetes usually is a challenging aspect in large
prospective studies. Several sources were reported on how T2DM incidents were
collected. General practitioners, drug prescription and hospital records were some of
the resources. Self-reporting diabetes mellitus, and/or current dietary treatment for
diabetes in questionnaires is commonly used to identify new onset of diabetes in
large prospective studies. Confirmation of diabetes diagnosis by primary care
physician or medical records was reported in some prospective studies before
considering subject as a case (Hopping et al., 2010, Stevens et al., 2002, Schulze et
al., 2004a). A few cohort studies reported using fasting blood glucose as another
approach to identify new cases with or without the self-reports (Weng et al., 2012,
Barclay et al., 2007). Only recently, one Swedish prospective study used HbA1C
registry records to diagnosis some of the participants with new onset of diabetes
(Hindy et al., 2012). As mentioned before, this an expensive method for large
sample sizes. Often, the validity of the subsample of cases only is checked, which
leaves potential misclassification within the non-cases. Because of the lack of
centralized databases for diabetes in UK, it is quite difficult to identify new onset
cases, and this has a great impact on epidemiological research.
There is no national registry of diabetes in the UK that similar to the unique
centralized system across the UK for cancer (Office of National Statistics;
http://www.ons.gov.uk). However, there are two databases where medical
information on diabetes and other diseases can be obtained for research purposes.
The General Practice Research Database (GPRD) is an earlier database which
provides medical data from 400 primary care practices in the UK for medical
research purposes (Walley and Mantgani, 1997). Second database is the Health
Improvement Network (THIN) database that contains medical information entered
by primary care physicians under the terms of the UKs National Health Service
(www.epic.gov.uk) (Gonzlez et al., 2009). These databases may cover large
proportion of UK population however, they do not cover the whole UK. Other
variables that may be of interest such as ethnicity and/or socio-economic status are
not available at patient level data.
3.3.2Development of type 2 diabetes and insulin resistance
measurement
Progression from normal blood glucose to impaired glucose tolerance due to
insulin resistance which then ends with development of diabetes is well-established
pathway for T2DM. Insulin resistance measurement can help in exploring the
pathophysiological in the development of diabetes.
Several insulin assessment methods were reported in a recent review, and
these are listed in Table 3.4 (Singh and Saxena, 2010). Quantitative assessment of
insulin sensitivity helps in evaluating the pathogenesis and the causes of several
diseases. Insulinogenic index and HOMA were both used in some of
epidemiological studies to determine insulin resistance, however the
hyperinsulinemic euglycemic glucose clamp is the gold standard. Different studies
use different methods in measuring insulin making it difficult to look across studies.
Table 3.4 Insulin resistance measurements used for researches
Method Description
Hyperinsulinemic
euglycemic glucose clamp
The gold standard method for determining insulin resistance
however it is difficult to apply for large epidemiological studies
Fasting insulin Most practical method to measure IR
Glucose/insulin ratio (G/I
ratio)
Index of insulin resistance
Insulinogenic index (IGI) Index of insulin secretion after OGTT
HOMA Reflects the relationship between glucose and insulin by
measuring insulin and glucose concentration
Fasting insulin resistance
index
Measure fasting glucose and insulin and apply values in equation
which estimate IR
Adapted from (Singh and Saxena, 2010)
3.4 Metabolic syndrome
A review by Eckel et al. (2005) reported that metabolic syndrome is a
metabolic disorder which has been diagnosed with different criteria by several
organizations. However insulin resistance and fatty acids dysfunction were the main
aspects in pathophysiology process. Metabolic syndrome found to be a predictor for
T2DM. The suggested underlying mechanism was increasing the release of fatty
acids derived from adipose tissue which accompanied with insulin resistance.
Insulin resistance refers to the inability of body organs such as liver and muscles to
respond to insulin, resulting in an inability to increase glucose uptake by these
organs and inability to decrease hepatic gluconeogensis (Chaplin, 2005). Impairment
of insulin sensitivity with hypertension and dyslipidemia were all present in
metabolic syndrome.
3.5 Non-dietary related T2DM risk factors
Some of the following risk factors were considered to be non-modifiable risk
factors as they cannot be changed by behavioural modifications. These are family
history of diabetes, ethnicity, age and gender. However, other factors which also
important in the development of T2DM are smoking and physical activity that can
be modified.
3.5.1 Family history and genetic factors
One evidence-based review suggested that people with genetic predisposing
factors were more likely to progress to T2DM (National Institute of Health and Care
Excellence, 2012). A study on twins showed that genes play a great role in the
development of T2DM, where chance of T2DM in the second twin reached 83%
(Japan Diabetes Society, 1988). A positive family history of diabetes could reflect a
genetic liability of an individual. Genes that have been associated with T2DM were
demonstrated in previous review (Adeghate et al., 2006) . For example, IAPP gene
defect (islet amyloid polypeptide), which is expressed in -cell that lead to 
impairment of the pancreatic tissue function and glucose intolerance. Second
example is the insulin receptors and insulin-regulated glucose transporter (GLUT4)
genes defect, which results in abnormal expression of receptors in insulin tissue and
decreased number of insulin transporters leading to insulin resistance (Bell, 1991).
Evidence suggests the important role of environmental factors modifications despite
the presence of genetic susceptibility in the individual can prevent the progression of
the disease (Lindstrm et al., 2003).
Data from five prospective studies reported that the risk of diabetes increased
with a positive family history of diabetes among first degree relatives and reported
about two to six times increased risk of T2DM among participants with a positive
family history in comparison to those with a negative family history (Harrison et al.,
2003). Some of those studies in that review found that participants with a positive
parental history of diabetes engaged in some healthy behaviours and were more
likely to be screened for diabetes than control people, which may partly explain the
higher number of cases with a positive family history other than for genetic reasons.
It also may point towards the strong effect of genetic factors on developing diabetes.
A recent UK Diabetes statistical report showed that parental history of diabetes has a
strong link with the development of T2DM. There was a 15 % risk of T2DM when a
single parent has a history of diabetes, while if both parents have a history of
diabetes then the risk of diabetes is much greater (75%). In addition, the highest
probability of diabetes was reported among identical twin (90%) (Diabetes UK,
2009). This indicates the strong influence of genetic factors on the development of
diabetes.
3.5.2 Age and gender
A well-established positive association between age and the risk of diabetes
has been reported in a previous study (Wild et al., 2004). The UK Office for
National Statistics recently reported that numbers of older people continue to
increase in the UK. A particularly fast increase in number was noticed among
population segment aged over 85 years. In addition the median age of the UK
population increased from 1985 to 2010 (from 35.4 years to 39.7years; respectively)
(Office for National Statistics, 2012). It was reported that one in twenty people have
diabetes among those aged above 65 years while one in five people have diabetes
among those people aged above 85 years (Department of Health, 2001). During the
last decade the onset of diabetes has moved to younger age groups, which suggests a
change in environmental risk factors (Rosenbloom et al., 1999).
Worldwide, the increase in prevalence of diabetes with age was found to be
similar for both genders, however the prevalence was much higher among women
aged above 65 years than men (Wild et al., 2004). In addition, the risks of death and
morbidity were higher among diabetic women in comparison to diabetic men
(Sarwar et al., 2010). This suggested the effect of hormonal changes which may
link to higher prevalence of T2DM via substantial weight gain in women after the
menopause. Evidence suggests changes in body composition include increased body
fat mass and decreased lean body mass in postmenopausal women in comparison to
premenopausal women possibly linked to impairment in insulin sensitivity
(Szmuilowicz et al., 2009). In addition, evidence showed association between
hormonal therapy use and improvement of insulin sensitivity (Lobo, 2008).
3.5.3 Ethnicity
Globally, the prevalence of T2DM differs among populations of different
ethnic origin (Adeghate et al., 2006). The Department of Health (2001) reported
that in the UK, T2DM is six fold higher in the South Asian population and three fold
higher among African and African-Caribbean population in comparison to the white
population. Ethnicity was considered in recent National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence guidelines (National Institute of Health and Care Excellence, 2012) to
identify populations at risk of developing T2DM as particular ethnic populations are
affected by T2DM at a younger age than white European population.
3.5.4Smoking
Recent data from prospective studies suggest a positive association between
smoking and diabetes (Willi et al., 2007). Heavy smokers (>20 cigarettes/day) have
a 61% increased risk of diabetes compared with light smokers (<20 cigarettes/day)
and the risk among active smokers is 44% higher in comparison to non-smokers
(RR= 1.44; 95%CI: 1.31, 1.58). Risk remain elevated, even after stopping smoking,
ex-smokers have a 23% higher risk of diabetes in comparison to never smokers
(RR=1.23; 95%CI: 1.14, 1.33). The explanation of the higher risk of diabetes after a
short term smoking cessation is still unclear (Yeh et al., 2010). There are limited
data on long term smoking cessation effects on the development of T2DM (Tonstad,
2009). Tobacco smoke contains many toxins that may directly damage pancreatic
tissue (Rimm et al., 1993). Additionally, other behavioural factors such as physical
inactivity accompanying smoking were suggested to be the underlining reason of
association between diabetes and smoking (Will et al., 2001).
3.5.5Physical activity
In general, sufficient evidence indicates that physical activity has a protective
effect against T2DM (World Health Organization, 2003, National Institute of Health
and Care Excellence, 2012). A metaanalysis including 10 prospective studies from
the USA, Japan, the UK and other European countries reported an overall significant
risk reduction of T2DM by 31% (RR= 0.69; 95% CI: 0.58, 0.83) among those who
regularly exercised with moderate intensity in comparison to those leading a
sedentary life. Also, the risk of diabetes is reduced by 30% (95%CI: 16%, 42%)
among those who reported regular walking (>2.5hours/week) in comparison to those
with no or minimal walking (Jeon et al., 2007).
Prospective studies have evaluated potential sex differences in relation to the
effect of physical activity and risk of diabetes (Meisinger et al., 2005, Jeon et al.,
2007). An inverse relationship between physical activity (>2 h per week vs. no
activity) and the risk of diabetes was significant in women who participated in the
MONICA/ KORA Augsburg Cohort study (women: 0.24; 95%CI: 0.06, 0.98 vs.
men:0.83; 95%CI: 0.50, 1.36) however the risk of reduction was varied, there were
strong gender differences (Meisinger et al., 2005). Differences in intensity of
physical activity and a threshold protective effect may partly explain the difference
in gender. On the other hand, no significance difference between males and females
(p=0.17) was reported in recent pooled data from 10 cohort studies (Jeon et al.,
2007).
Researchers has explored whether exercise is particularly beneficial in obese
rather than lean women in limited number of cohort studies. Among U.S nurses who
reported vigorous exercise, the risk of diabetes was reduced significantly by 21% in
women with a BMI of more than 27kg/m
and 27% in women with a BMI of less
than 27kg/m
in comparison to those who did not report regular exercise (Manson et
al., 1991). In another cohort study, women with a BMI of less than 30kg/m
exercised at least once a week showed a substantial risk reduction of 76%
(HR=0.24; 95%CI: 0.09, 0.65) in comparison to inactive women. However the
beneficial effect of one hour/week of moderate to high level of physical activity
among obese women was not observed (Meisinger et al., 2005).
There are a number of potential mechanisms discussed in the previous studies
which may explain the beneficial effect of physical activity in reducing the risk of
T2DM. Improvements in insulin sensitivity and glycemic control among non-
diabetic and diabetic populations who regularly exercise was reported in the Insulin
Resistance Atherosclerosis Study (Mayer-Davis et al., 1998). An increase in
vigorous exercise (metabolic equivalent level >6) as well as non-vigorous exercise
(metabolic equivalent level <6) both showed similar increases in insulin sensitivity
after adjusting for BMI and WHR. For every one unit decrease in BMI, a 3.2%
increase in insulin sensitivity was reported. It was suggested that body fatness may
partly mediate the effect of physical activity on insulin sensitivity thus reducing the
risk of diabetes.
Many trials have examined the effectiveness of physical activity on delay or
prevention of the development of diabetes among participants at greater risk, such as
the obese, those with impaired glucose tolerance or a history of gestational diabetes.
A recently published Cochrane review including eight trials, found that exercise was
vs. Standard was not beneficial (Pooled estimate =0.69; 95%CI: 0.29, 1.65) and diet
vs. exercise was also not beneficial (pooled estimate = 0.69; 95%CI: 0.37, 1.29), but
when exercise combined with diet reduced the risk of diabetes by 37% (RR 0.63;
95%CI: 0.49, 0.79) compared with standard recommendations (Orozco et al., 2008).
Many trials have investigated the frequency of physical activity and intensity
of physical activity in relation to development of T2DM, as summarized by NICE
guidelines (National Institute of Health and Care Excellence, 2012). Increase level
of physical activity of at least 150 minutes of moderate intensity per week is needed
to reduce the risk of T2DM. Participants who increased their level of physical
activity reduced their risk of diabetes by 51% independently of weight loss. Thus
evidence is consistent on the beneficial effect of physical activity on the
development of diabetes.
3.6 Diet related T2DM risk factors
Many factors are attributed to the development of T2DM. It is important to
consider the environmental factors that have an important role in diabetes
development. Modifiable diabetic risk factors are mainly dietary-related factors.
3.6.1Obesity and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus
3.6.1.1 BMI versus other measurement of adiposity
Epidemiological studies use body mass index (BMI), waist circumference
(WC), and waist hip ratio (WHR) to reflect body fatness among studied populations.
All are useful assessment tools for both sexes and for all ages of adults (Vazquez et
al., 2007). Abnormal or excessive fat accumulation that may impair health is the
WHO definition of overweight status and obesity (World Health Organization,
2013). Body mass index is a simple index of weight-for-height that is widely used to
classify adults into underweight, normal, overweight and obesity (World Health
Organization, 2003), however it is argued that the association between body
fatness % and BMI is not considered to be strong especially with BMI between 20-
25kg/m
and such association is affected by age (Meeuwsen et al., 2010). Another
study found changes in BMI in adults strongly predicts changes in fat mass rather
than lean mass and suggested it could be used for monitoring purposes in elderly
black and white women (Arngrmsson et al., 2009).
A meta-analysis compared between BMI which reflects general obesity and
WC and WHR which reflect central obesity in relation to risk of diabetes (Vazquez
et al., 2007). All three parameters have similar associations with incident diabetes
from pooled data from 32 cohort studies, for every one standard deviation increment
of obesity markers, for BMI, the relative risk =1.87(95%CI: 1.67, 2.10), for WC
relative risk =1.87 (95%CI: 1.58, 2.20) and for WHR relative risk =1.88(95%CI:
1.61, 2.19). An earlier cohort of US middle-aged women followed for 14 years
reported that body mass index (BMI) was the dominant predictor of T2DM and BMI
between 23-25kg/m
was associated with four times higher risk for T2DM compared
to women with BMI less than 22kg/m
(Colditz et al., 1995). It is probable therefore
that the BMI range of 18.5  24.9kg/m
is not appropriate for all population. From
all of this, categorizing people into groups based on BMI is false setting of
boundaries. The risk of T2DM is likely to be linear with the increase in body fat
parameters. Therefore, when people are categorized into groups, the potential of
losing linearity is high.
In a meta-analysis of 18 prospective studies reported by Abdullah et al. (2010)
that the risk of diabetes is 7 times higher among obese participants (RR=7.19, 95%
CI: 5.74, 9.00) and almost 3 times higher among overweight participants (RR=2.99,
95% CI: 2.42, 3.72) in comparison to normal weight. They also found some
evidence of gender difference in relation to obesity (Abdullah et al., 2010).
On the other hand, WC is also a measure of excess central fat and considered
as a stronger predictor of diabetes than BMI among older women in the British
Regional Heart Study and the British Womens Heart and Health study
(Wannamethee et al., 2010). In addition, comparison between highest vs. lowest
quartile, the adjusted risk of diabetes was higher for WC (RR=12.18; 95% CI 4.83,
30.74) than BMI (RR= 4.10; 95% CI 2.16, 7.79). No clear explanation was reported
in this study which requires further research.
A recent study among a white European population with mean BMI=
25(4)kg/m
showed that for every 1 kg/m
increase in BMI, the risk of T2DM
increased by 8.4% (RR= 1.08; 95%CI: 1.03, 1.14; p<0.01) and with every 1 cm
increased in WC, the risk of T2DM increased by 3.2% (RR= 1.03; 95%CI: 1.01,
1.05; p<0.01) (Bombelli et al., 2011) after adjustment for potential confounders. The
authors conclude that BMI and WC were independently predicting incidence of
T2DM.
3.6.1.2 Weight changes and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus
The European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)-
Potsdam Study (Schienkiewitz et al., 2006) assessed weight changes over lifetime in
relation to the risk of T2DM among women. With every unit increment of BMI, the
risk of T2DM was higher if the weight gain occurred in early life (25-40 years) than
later life (40-55 years) (24% and 11% respectively). The risk of T2DM was 4 times
higher among women who gain weight (above 4kg/m2) in early life as compared to
women who had stable weight in early life but gained weight in later life. It has been
suggested that longer accumulative effect of excess weight at early adulthood is a
critical, where parity and obesity may both play a role in development of diabetes.
Another cohort study (Oguma et al., 2005) investigated weight changes over
time in comparison to initial BMI in relation to the risk of T2DM. This cohort,
limited to men with a mean age of 46 years, found that both initial BMI and weight
change from university entry to baseline showed positive associations with the risk
of T2DM (p for trend <0.01). Among men with BMI at university between 21 to
23kg/m
, those with severe weight gain have 9 times higher risk of T2DM
(RR=9.57; 95%CI:5.90, 15.53) in comparison to men with stable weight in the same
group. While, among men with initial BMI of less 21kg/m
, the risk of diabetes was
7 times higher among men with severe weight gain (RR=7.68; 95%CI: 4.72, 12.5) in
comparison to those with stable weight in the same group. It was suggested that
overweight men also are likely to have health problems and more likely to be
screened for diabetes.
Overall, obesity is strongly linked to development of diabetes. BMI found to
be independent risk factor of diabetes and weight changes in another strong useful
predictor of diabetes.
3.6.1.3 Weight loss effect on risk of diabetes
Effectiveness of weight loss by diet and physical activity on preventing risk of
T2DM has been examined in trials. The Diabetes Prevention Program study that
showed lifestyle intervention (weight loss, reduction in total fat and saturated fat
intakes, increase in dietary fibre and an increase in physical activity) over an average
of 2.8 years is superior to pharmaceutical approaches in reducing the incidence of
diabetes (by 58% and 31%) in comparison to control group (Knowler et al., 2002).
This may suggest potential for reversing the epidemic of diabetes. Convincing
evidence from randomized clinical trials showed weight loss of 5-7% from initial
weight after lifestyle intervention (physical activity and diet) in overweight and
obese people has reduced the risk of T2DM by 58% (Tuomilehto et al., 2001) and
even four years post intervention, the results showed a sustained risk reduction of
T2DM by 36% (Lindstrom et al., 2006).
It was reported in a human study, that energy restriction (less than
1,000kcal/day with 45% carbohydrates, 20% fat, 35% protein) resulted into weight
loss (about 3 kg) and low fat mass after 3 weeks of intervention and this was found
to be associated with lowered inflammatory markers that may lead to improvement
of insulin sensitivity (Bastard et al., 2000).
3.6.1.4 Underlying mechanism linking adiposity and type 2 diabetes mellitus
The possible underlying mechanisms linking obesity to T2DM were
demonstrated in a review (Kahn et al., 2006). The increases in the release of
different substances which adversely affect insulin action have a crucial role in
pathogenesis of T2DM. In simple way, it was found that adipose tissue increases the
release of substances such as non-esterified fatty acids (NEFA) resulting insulin
resistance and impairment of -cell function (Figure 3.3). The increase in NEFA 
release modulates insulin sensitivity leading to defects in insulin release and
resulting in dysregulation of glucose. It was found that when fasting hyperglycaemia
manifested, pancreatic cell function has decreased by three quarters (Kahn et al.,
2006).
Figure.3.1 The relationship between adipose tissue, insulin resistance and T2DM
In conclusion, there is robust evidence of a strong relation between obesity and
risk of diabetes and effectiveness of weight loss on reducing or delaying the risk of
T2DM. From public health prospective, the above evidence shows that it is
important to emphasize three main aspects of obesity and risk of T2DM. Prevention
or delaying the progression to T2DM may possibly be achieved by avoiding excess
weight gain during life; maintaining healthy weight and the loss excess weight.
3.6.2Macronutrient intakes and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus
3.6.2.1 Carbohydrate intake and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus
The majority of energy in human diets comes from carbohydrates (FAO,
1998).
Adipose tissue
Insulin resistance
-cell dysfunction 
Substance
Blood glucose
impairment
3.6.2.1.1 Structure definition of carbohydrates
3.6.2.1.1.1 Total carbohydrates and type 2 diabetes mellitus
Several studies have looked at total carbohydrates and risk of T2DM. It was
reported earlier (Colditz et al., 1992) that total carbohydrates was not related to the
risk of T2DM among female nurses aged 30-55 years living in U.S over a period of
6 years. A later prospective study examined the risk of T2DM among nurses
between (1986-1992) from a more extended FFQ in 1986 (134 food items was 61
food items) and found no clear relationship between the risk of diabetes and total
carbohydrate intake among these women (Salmeron et al., 1997b). This finding did
not differ among male health professionals (Salmeron et al., 1997a). Similarly no
association was reported among postmenopausal Iowa women and middle aged US
women after adjustment for potential confounders (Meyer et al., 2000, Schulze et
al., 2004a). Even with total carbohydrate intake obtained from 7 days diary, the
association with risk of T2DM is not apparent (Ahmadi-Abhari et al., 2013).
Prospective studies which examined the percentage of energy from carbohydrates in
relation to risk of T2DM reported no significant association after adjustment of
potential confounders comparing extreme quintiles (Schulze et al., 2004a, Schulze et
al., 2008).
In conclusion, there is no clear association between total carbohydrates intake
and risk of T2DM, possibly because the term covers a wide range of different
components which could be meaningless, except that dietary recommendation
suggest carbohydrates intake as a percentage of energy. This leaves unclear answer
for the recommended carbohydrates as energy percentage in relation to risk of
T2DM.
3.6.2.1.1.2 Monosaccharides and disaccharides intakes with risk of type 2
diabetes mellitus
Total sugars intake was examined in relation to risk of T2DM in a few
prospective studies (Barclay et al., 2007, Hodge et al., 2004). Among Australian
participants, no relation was seen between risks of T2DM with every 100g/day of
sugar consumed (Barclay et al., 2007). While in Melbourne Collaborative Cohort
Study, the same increment of total sugar (100g/day) intake was found to have
significant risk reduction of T2DM (OR=0.61, 0.47 0.79) (Hodge et al., 2004).
After 12 years of follow up in Finnish study, the risk of T2DM was not associated
with intake of sugar estimated from dietary history interview (p for trend =0.1)
(Montonen et al., 2007). In conclusion, the few studies that assessed intake of sugars
and risk of T2DM showed inconsistent results and no conclusion can be drawn.
In terms of specific sugars, few cohort studies have reported the relationship
between dietary glucose or fructose or sucrose intakes and risk of T2DM. Two
prospective studies reported the risk of T2DM was significantly increased (30% and
68%) with high intake of glucose in comparison to lower intakes group (Meyer et
al., 2000, Montonen et al., 2007) while, the European Prospective Investigation into
Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)-Potsdam did not show any association (Schulze et al.,
2008). For fructose intake, the risk of T2DM was significantly higher in the highest
group in comparison to lowest group among Iowa women (Meyer et al., 2000) and
men and women participating in the Finnish Mobile Clinic Health Examination
survey (Montonen et al., 2007) but not among participants in EPIC-Potsdam
(Schulze et al., 2008). Among Iowan postmenopausal women, the highest sucrose
consumers had lower risk of T2DM (RR=0.81; 95%CI: 0.67, 0.99) in comparison to
the lowest sucrose intake group (Meyer et al., 2000). However, other cohorts did not
find any association between sucrose and T2DM (Montonen et al., 2007, Schulze et
al., 2008).
From the above cohort studies, the role of glucose, fructose and sucrose
intakes in the development of T2DM is therefore inconclusive. A recent systematic
review (Sonestedt et al., 2012) showed inconsistency in the results and a limited no
conclusion grade was given by the authors.
3.6.2.1.1.3 Starch intake and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus
Similar to simple sugars, dietary starch intake was investigated in relatively
few cohort studies. Melbourne Collaborative Cohort Study reported that with every
100 g/day of starch, the risk of T2DM significantly increased (multivariate adjusted
OR=1.47 (95%CI: 1.06, 2.05) and OR=1.52 (95%CI: 1.09, 2.11) with further
adjustment for BMI and WHR (Hodge et al., 2004). Other cohort studies did not
find any significant association between starch intake and risk of T2DM (Schulze et
al., 2008, Meyer et al., 2000). A limited number of epidemiological studies have
investigated the intakes of starch with risk of diabetes and are inconsistent in their
findings.
From the carbohydrate structure definition, it can be appreciated that from the
few prospective studies that examined the relationship between risk of T2DM and
simple sugars or starch did not reach into clear conclusion because of inconsistency
in their findings. The fibre intake and type 2 diabetes mellitus will be discussed in
more detail in chapter 4 as this is one of the objective of the current thesis.
3.6.2.1.2 Physiological definition of carbohydrates and risk of type 2 diabetes
mellitus
3.6.2.1.2.1 Glycaemic index and glycaemic load
The concept of Glycemic index (GI) was introduced by Jenkins and his
colleagues (Jenkins et al., 1981) to measure the change in blood glucose following
ingestion of carbohydrate containing foods. Glycemic load (GL) was also introduced
and used (Salmeron et al., 1997a) as an indicator of the glucose response and insulin
demand produced by a total amount of carbohydrates. Many cohort studies have
evaluated the association between GI, GL and chronic disease risk. A meta-analysis
summarized seven prospective studies, most of them involving American females
(Barclay et al., 2008). Pooled data from fully adjusted models showed an overall
significant positive association between GI and risk of T2DM (RR=1.40; 95%CI:
1.23, 1.59) and a significant positive association between GL and risk of T2DM
(RR= 1.27; 1.12, 1.45) when comparing highest with lowest groups. This showed
the adverse effect of diet with high GI and/or high GL as the risk of T2DM
increased by 40% and 27% respectively independent of cereal fibre intake. Another
meta-analysis (Livesey et al., 2013) found that healthy people who consumed diets
with high GL seemed to have a 45% increased risk of T2DM with every 100g
increment in GL.
3.6.2.1.2.2 Whole grain versus not: refinement
Whole grain may be defined as whole grain foods contain intact, flaked or
broken grain kernels, coarsely ground kernels or flour that made from whole
gains(Priebe et al., 2008, p.3). Whole grains have become a focus of attention
where earlier hypothesis by Burkitt (1975) on replacing whole grain with refined
gains is related to the development of non-communicable diseases such as diabetes.
Many epidemiological studies reported the beneficial effect of whole grain
intake on the prevention of T2DM. A recent review by Priebe et al. (2008) showed
risk reduction of T2DM for high intake of wholegrain by 27% to 30% in comparison
to low wholegrain intake. A recent meta-analysis (Ye et al., 2012) reported that
intake of 3-5 servings of wholegrain equivalent to 48-50g was associated with a
lower risk of diabetes by 26% (RR=0.74, 95%CI: 0.69, 0.80) in comparison to never
or rare consumers. In the same meta-analysis, data from randomized controlled trials
showed that wholegrain consumption for 4-16 weeks duration, reduced fasting blood
glucose concentration among healthy participants and participants who had one or
more major risk factors for T2DM or cardiovascular disease in comparison to
control groups (mean difference -0.93mmol/l; 95%CI: -1.65, -0.21).
Possible explanation of the findings can be that refined cereals have a
difference composition than whole grain due to processing methods that lead to
removal of important nutrients from the cereal such as bran where phenolic
compounds are rich (Slavin et al., 1999).
In conclusion, evidence is consistent regarding the beneficial effect of
wholegrain foods on the prevention of T2DM. It has been suggested that the health
related beneficial effect of wholegrain cereals may be related to the presence of
bioactive compounds such as minerals, vitamins, lignin and phenolic compounds in
addition to fibre (Slavin, 2003b).
3.6.2.1.2.3 Liquid versus solid: Does it matter
Evidence showed a great increase in consumption of sugar and sweetened
beverages (SSB) worldwide among different age groups (Malik et al., 2010a).
Beverages such as soft drinks, fruit drinks, energy and vitamins water drinks, are a
source of added sugar, contain sucrose, high fructose syrup or fruit juice
concentrates.
Meta-analysis of 9 cohort studies showed a significant high risk of T2DM by
26% (RR=1.26; 95%CI: 1.12, 1.41) with high intake of SSB in comparison to the
lowest quintile. Further analysis showed that with every 1 severing of SSB (12-oz)
per day, the risk of T2DM significantly increased by 25% (95%CI: 1.10, 1.42)
(Malik et al., 2010b). At the same time another review by Malik et al. (2010a)
reported a significant positive association between weight gain and risk of T2DM in
prospective studies. Hence, it was suggested that positive association between SSB
intake and risk of T2DM may be partly attributed to high energy intake and obesity.
In Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis study, when the relationship between
diet soda and risk of diabetes assessed, the risk of T2DM was positively associated
with diet soda even after BMI adjustment. However, the high intake of diet soda was
not significantly associated with metabolic syndrome after BMI adjustment
(Nettleton et al., 2009). The pooled estimate from dose-response meta-analysis
before and after excluding coefficients with energy and obesity adjustment showed a
raised effect size if BMI and energy were not adjusted in comparison to estimate
adjusted for BMI and energy (RR=1.35 and 1.18 respectively) (Malik et al., 2010b).
Cohort studies are liable for reverse causation, where false association
between T2DM and intake of diet soda after BMI adjustment occurs because of
possibility of having overweight subject who may end with cutting down calories by
drinking beverages with artificial sweeteners which may result into a positive
association between diet soda and T2DM. Artificial sweeteners contained SSB seem
to be linked with obesity even if it contains zero calories (artificial sweeteners) as
reported in recent EPIC-InterAct study (Romaguera et al., 2013). It was suggested
earlier by Hu and Malik (2010) that artificial sweeteners may tend to increase the
desire for overconsumption of food. Earlier study by Schulze et al. (2004b) reported
significant positive associations between drinking beverages and both weight gain as
well as risk of T2DM among young and middle-aged women. Another possible
explanation is that consumption of SSB tends to be grouped with other unhealthy
dietary factors such as high fat and low fibre intakes, therefore overestimation of
effect could possibly occurred from residual confounders.
From the carbohydrates section, the most evidence points toward the important
of carbohydrate form. This due to the presence of strong evidence which suggest a
positive association between sweet beverages and risk of T2DM while, evidence on
the effect of carbohydrates from food on T2DM varies. This does not rule out the
importance of other aspects as stated by UK Diabetes guidelines (Diabetes UK,
2011) that diets of low glycaemic index or low in glycaemic load and higher in
dietary fibre and wholegrain reduce the risk of T2DM. Carbohydrate classifications
based on chemical characteristics have the advantage of appropriate measurements
of the nutrient. However, the complexity occurs when this needs to be translated into
nutritional effects and health effects. This because of the wide variation in
physiological properties found in each class of carbohydrates (Cummings and
Stephen, 2007). Therefore pooled data on observational studies that evaluate
carbohydrates components and the risk of T2DM is quite challenging in term of
terminology used to define the exposure. Dietary guideline recommend
carbohydrates as percentage of energy, however this is not very clear regards risk of
3.6.2.2 Dietary fat intake
Many organizations agree that maintaining a low intake of total fat,
saturated fat may be beneficial to reduce the risk of T2DM (National Institute of
Health and Care Excellence, 2012, American Diabetes Association (ADA), 2008).
This is mainly based on the strength of evidence
in a WHO report (World Health
Organization, 2003) which showed that saturated fat intake probably
increases the
risk of T2DM while total fat and trans-fatty acids may possibly
increase the risk of
T2DM.
3.6.2.2.1 Total fat intake
Prospective studies of women have found the association between the risk of
diabetes and total fat and saturated fat was not statistically significant after
adjustment for age, BMI, WHR, physical activity, alcohol intake, and smoking
(Meyer et al., 2001, Salmern et al., 2001). The Health Professionals Follow-Up
Study prospectively found significant positive associations where relative risk for
extreme quintiles for total fat intake was 1.27 (95% CI: 1.04 ,1.55, P trend= 0.02)
and relative risk of diabetes for saturated fat was 1.34 (95%CI: 1.09, 1.66, P
trend=0.01) but when the risk was adjusted further for BMI, the association of total
fat and saturated fat intakes with the risk of diabetes was not significant (Van Dam
et al., 2002).
3.6.2.2.2 Fat types intake
Many observational studies have reported an inverse association between
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) with the development of T2DM and four studies
in the systematic review found a significant positive association between trans-fatty
acids and the risk of T2DM (Murakami et al., 2005).
Strength of evidence is based on modified criteria used by the World Cancer Research Fund (World
Health Organization, 2003) as listed below:
Probable evidence is based on epidemiological studies showing fairly consistent associations
between exposure and disease, but where there are perceived shortcomings in the available evidence
or some evidence to the contrary, which precludes a more definite judgement. Shortcomings in the
evidence may be any of the following: insufficient duration of trials (or studies); insufficient trials (or
studies) available; inadequate sample sizes; incomplete follow-up. Laboratory evidence is usually
supportive. The association should be biologically plausiblepage.55.
Possible evidence is based mainly on findings from case-control and cross-sectional studies.
Insufficient randomized controlled trials, observational studies or non-randomized controlled trials
are available. Evidence based on non-epidemiological studies, such as clinical and laboratory
investigations, is supportive. More trials are required to support the tentative associations, which
should also be biologically plausiblepage.55.
The ratio of polyunsaturated fatty acids to saturated fat has been used a marker
of fat quality (Harding et al., 2004). In the European Prospective study, the diet of
men and women aged 4078 years was estimated by semi-quantitative FFQ. After 3-
7 years of follow up, an increase in the ratio expressed as per standard deviation
change (0.22) was associated with a reduced risk of diabetes by 12% after
adjustment for age, sex, family history of diabetes, smoking, physical activity, total
fat, protein, and alcohol (Harding et al., 2004). The association become not
statistically significant (OR = 0.91, 95% CI: 0.81, 1.03) after further adjustment of
BMI and WHR.
3.6.2.2.3 Is the effect of fat mediated by obesity
Prospective studies suggested that obesity may mediate the effect of fat and
saturated fat and the development of diabetes in the causal pathway (Meyer et al.,
2001, Van Dam et al., 2002).
A cross-sectional study found that habitual dietary fat intake inversely and
significantly associated with insulin sensitivity; however, no significant results were
found after BMI adjustment. A significant inverse association was found only
among obese participants (p=0.03) and not for non-obese participants (p=0.16)
(Mayer-Davis et al., 1997). This may support the assumption of obesity as an
intermediate stage in the possible causal pathway that links quality of fat to the risk
of diabetes. On the other hand, recent European interventional study on 417
participants with metabolic syndrome reported that isoenergetic diet with reduced
saturated fat showed no effect on fasting insulin, insulin sensitivity and glucose
concentration after 12 weeks (Tierney et al., 2011). However, biological variation
and short interventional period were some of the suggested explanation.
Overall, observational studies were relatively consistent in replacing saturated
fat with PUFA to reduce the risk of diabetes. As demonstrated in a recent review,
the underlying link between dietary fatty acids and incidence of diabetes is unclear
(Risrus et al., 2009). It was suggested in many of the studies that obesity may act as
an intermediate step in the possible causal pathway between dietary fat intake and
the risk of diabetes.
Review from experimental studies reported fat types have direct effect on
insulin action and indirect effects mediated by obesity (Storlien et al., 2000).
Changes in cell membrane fatty acids composition resulted into changes in insulin
action. If more saturated fatty acids found in cell membrane, then adverse effect on
insulin binding and action was reported, while if unsaturated fatty acids were the
predominant in the cell membranes, this suggested being beneficial to insulin.
Another potential mechanism is indirect effect of fat on insulin action through
obesity where PUFA intake more likely to be utilized by human body for energy
while saturated fat intake is more likely to be stored in the adipose tissues.
3.6.2.3 Protein intake
The prospective evidence based is minimal discussing the relationship
between protein intake and risk of T2DM (Halton et al., 2008, Sluijs et al., 2010a).
This is inappropriate to draw a conclusion on the effect on dietary protein intake and
risk of T2DM.
3.6.2.4 Alcohol intake
Consumption of a moderate amount of alcohol is recommended by many
nutritionally based organizations which aim to prevent T2DM (American Diabetes
Association (ADA), 2008, National Institute of Health and Care Excellence, 2012).
On the other hand, the WHO (World Health Organization, 2003) reported
insufficient evidence
on the relationship between excess alcohol intake and
increased risk of T2DM. An earlier cohort study (Stampfer et al., 1988) reported that
85,051 female nurses aged 34 to 59 years who consumed more than 15g/day (more
than 10 drinks/week) of alcohol had a significant risk reduction of 40% (RR=0.6;
95%CI: 0.3, 0.9) in comparison to non-consumers.
Whether the association between alcohol intake and risk of diabetes is
modified by gender was examined in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities
Study (Kao et al., 2001). Middle aged men and women 12,261 followed between 3
to 6 years showed a significantly increased risk of diabetes among men who
consumed more than 21 drinks per week in comparison to men who consumed less
than one drink per week but not for women. Differences in beverage preferences
could partly explain the differences in the results between men and women as this
evidence showed that intake of wine was associated with healthier lifestyle which
was more likely to be consumed by women. However, spirits and beer intake which
were more likely to be consumed by men, were likely to have unhealthy lifestyle
characteristics.
Insufficient evidence referred to evidence based on findings of a few studies which are
suggestive, but are insufficient to establish an association between exposure and disease. Limited or
no evidence is available from randomized controlled trials. More well designed research is required
to support the tentative associations. Page 55.
The most recent meta-analysis (Baliunas et al., 2009) that included 20 cohort
studies in the pooled analysis, supports the U-shaped relationship between alcohol
consumption and the risk of diabetes. Compared with women who exhibited lifelong
abstinence from alcohol, risk was reduced by 40% among those who consumed
24g/day of alcohol while a protective effect was not seen among those with 50g/day
alcohol consumption.
The underlying mechanisms of protective effect of moderate alcohol
consumption on diabetes was reported in a recent review (Rehm et al., 2010).
Ethanol was found to improve insulin sensitivity and lower plasma insulin level.
Additionally, the anti-inflammatory effect of ethanol is another plausible
mechanism. Still not very clear, as moderate amount of alcohol intake can be
protective, higher intake found to be link to increased body weight.
Overall, the evidence on the beneficial effect of moderate alcohol consumption
on the risk of T2DM supported by prospective studies and a concern on the margins
between sufficient and limited consumption requires further research. There is still
an issue regarding the extreme consumption of alcohol, whether this clusters with
other unhealthy behaviours or is a high in itself.
3.6.3Micronutrient intakes and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus
In 2003 the World Health Organization regarded the evidence that
micronutrients might be implicated in development of T2DM to be inconclusive.
However, since that time, further summaries of the epidemiological literature have
suggested links with some micronutrient in particular, magnesium and vitamin D.
3.6.3.1 Magnesium intake and risk of type 2 diabetes
Recent evidence on magnesium intake and the risk of T2DM was reported in a
meta-analysis (Larsson and Wolk, 2007). Pooled data from seven cohort studies
where four studies included only women, found that overall diabetes risk was
significantly reduced by 14% (RR=0.86; 95%CI: 0.77, 0.95) for a 100 mg/day
increase in magnesium intake after adjustment for age, sex, BMI, physical activity
and alcohol intake However heterogeneity between the studies was significant with
= 72.3% (p=0.003). An inverse relationship between magnesium intake and the
development of diabetes persisted even after adjustment of cereal fibre intake or/and
wholegrain intake in three cohort studies (RR=0.81; 95%CI: 0.77, 0.86). Later on,
six cohort studies included in another recent meta-analysis (Dong et al., 2011) found
a similar risk reduction of T2DM by 14% for every 100mg/day increase in
magnesium intake. Additionally, a significant inverse association was found only
among overweight and obese participants but not in those with BMI< 25kg/m
Overall, consistent evidence on inverse association between risk of T2DM and
magnesium intake was observed. Plausible mechanisms such as low intracellular
magnesium level which was found in diabetes participants may interfere with
enzymes activity in insulin mediated glucose uptake pathway and showed decrease
cellular glucose utilization and increase insulin resistance (Barbagallo et al., 2003).
Observational studies showed low serum magnesium and intracellular magnesium in
pre-diabetic-patients in comparison to healthy individuals (Lima et al., 2009) as well
as in T2DM participants (Resnick et al., 1993).
3.6.3.2 Vitamin D and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus
As vitamin D intake is of interest for many researchers, recent prospective
studies have examined the role of vitamin D in the prevention of T2DM. The role of
vitamin D on insulin action and insulin sensitivity was examined previously in
relation to T2DM (Alvarez and Ashraf, 2009). However, the findings are
inconsistent. In 2011, Mitri et al, summarised the results of 8 cohort studies and
found that the risk reduction of T2DM was 13% among people with vitamin D
intake above 500 international units (IU)/day in comparison to people with intake of
less than 200IU/day. In addition, participants in the highest group of vitamin D
status had a lower risk of diabetes (43%) in comparison to participants in the lowest
vitamin D status group. However, Mitri and his colleagues (2011) concluded in the
systematic literature review from randomized controlled trials, that vitamin D
supplementation have no effect on participants with normal glucose tolerance
however people with insulin resistance and vitamin D deficiency showed
improvement of insulin resistance with daily vitamin D and calcium
supplementation.
Therefore, protective effect reported in cohort studies was not supported by
trials. The possibility that dietary vitamin D intake and vitamin D supplementation
may have different effects on the risk of diabetes should be considered.
A meta-analysis (Afzal et al., 2013) of 16 studies (10 cohorts and 6 nested case-
control studies) examined whether low plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D as an indicator
of vitamin D status was associated with an increased risk of T2DM. The odds ratio
of T2DM was 1.50 (95%CI: 1.33, 1.67) among participants in the lowest
concentration of 25 hydroxyvitamin D in comparison to those with the highest
concentrations of 25 hydroxyvitamin D. The results from epidemiological studies
support the beneficial effect of dietary vitamin D intake on the risk of diabetes.
However vitamin D status is not just determined by diet. Research that examines the
long term effect of dietary vitamin D or/and vitamin D supplements on populations
free from diabetes as well as on diabetes markers are needed.
Overall, effects of micronutrient intakes on the risk of diabetes are still under
investigation and high quality trials to determine the role of micronutrients in the
prevention of T2DM are still needed (Wyness, 2009).
3.6.4The relationship between food groups and risk of type 2 diabetes
mellitus
3.6.4.1 Fruit and vegetables
Data on fruits and vegetables intakes were pooled in a meta-analysis of five
cohorts: the results did not show a significant association between five or more
servings of fruits and vegetables with the risk of diabetes (RR=0.96; 95%CI: 0.79,
1.17) nor with three or more servings of fruit (RR=1.01; 95%CI: 0.88, 1.15) or
three or more servings of vegetables intake (RR=0.97; 95%CI:0.86, 1.10) (Hamer
and Chida, 2007). The authors reported that most of the cohort studies in the review
were from the U.S and as obesity incidence is dramatically increasing that may
overcome the intakes effects. In addition, obesity-related underreporting of usual
dietary intake is considered as estimated bias in prospective studies which may also
partly contribute to the findings. A recent meta-analysis (Cooper et al., 2012) where
two more cohort studies (European and Chinese) were included in the analyses
found that the highest (4-11 portions per day) versus the lowest (0-2.5 portions per
day) quintile of intakes of fruit and vegetables was weakly associated with a lower
relative risk of diabetes (HR=0.90; 95%CI: 0.80, 1.01) independent of potential
confounders. Also no relationship was found with the risk of diabetes when each
food intake was examined separately. A significant inverse association was only
noticed between green leafy vegetables intake and the risk of diabetes where the risk
was reduced by 16% among those who consumed 9 portions of leafy vegetables per
week (RR=0.84; 95%CI: 0.74, 0.94) in comparison to one portion per week.
A critical review (Boeing et al., 2012) explained the lack of association
between fruits and vegetables and the risk of diabetes may partly be explained by
measurement error of the dietary assessment method used to estimate the intake.
Also, it was assumed that increased intakes of fruits and vegetables may indirectly
decrease the development of T2DM by preventing body weight gain. Prospectively,
fruits and vegetables intake still have no clear association with the risk of T2DM.
However, leafy vegetables may have a potential benefit to the risk of diabetes.
3.6.4.2 Tea and coffee intakes and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus
Consumption of tea and coffee in relation to the risk of diabetes has also been
investigated in cohort studies. Pooled data from nine prospective studies that
examined tea consumption and the risk of T2DM (Jing et al., 2009), showed lack of
association between less than 3 cups a day and never consumed. However, when
pooled estimate from studies which included high tea consumption (more than four
cups of tea) a reduction of the risk of diabetes by 20% (RR=0.80; 95%CI: 0.70,
0.93) in comparison to never consumers was observed. Also recent cohort study of
African American women found no effect of tea consumption on the risk of T2DM
(p trend=0.17) (Boggs et al., 2010). Type of tea was not reported in majority of
studies which may be relevant to risk of T2DM.
With regard to coffee consumption, pooled data from nine cohort studies
reported a significant risk reduction of T2DM. Risk was reduced by 28% with
consumption of 4-6 cups of coffee per day and further risk reduction by 35% with
consumption of more than 6-7cups per day in comparison to participants who
consumed less than 2 cups a day. Results were not altered by gender, BMI and
regional adjustment (Van Dam and Hu, 2005). Another recent meta-analysis found
similar results when data were pooled from 13 cohort studies (Muley et al., 2012). It
has been suggested that antioxidants in coffee may have the beneficial effect on
insulin sensitivity. Also chlorogenic acid is one of the suggested coffee component
that may lower hepatic glucose output and reduce glucose level (van Dam, 2006).
Further investigation on the effect of coffee and tea intake on metabolic intermediate
factors such as insulin action and glucose concentration are needed.
3.6.4.3 Legumes and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus
Legumes are another important food group suggested to have a link to
diabetes. The beneficial effect of non-oil seed pulses such as chickpeas, peas, lentils
and beans on fasting blood glucose and insulin level in pooled analysis of
interventional trials was seen (Sievenpiper et al., 2009). Very few prospective
studies have examined the intake of legumes and the risk of diabetes. In the Nurses
Health Study, no association was found between legumes intake and the risk of
diabetes among women aged 38-63 years followed for 18 years (Bazzano et al.,
2008). Data on middle-aged Chinese women followed for an average of 4.6 years,
yielded 64,227 participants who completed validated FFQ and reported a lower
relative risk of T2DM (RR=0.62; 95%CI: 0.51, 0.74) among women in the highest
consumption quintile in comparison to the lowest legumes quintile (p for trend
<0.01). Women in the highest intake of legumes other than soybeans and peanuts
had a reduced risk of T2DM by 24% (RR=0.74; 95%CI: 0.64, 0.90; p for
trend<0.01) in comparison to the lowest quintile (Villegas et al., 2008). Overall,
interventional trials reported the beneficial effect of legumes intake among diabetic
and non-diabetic participants whilst an unclear association has been found in the few
prospective studies which have been carried out. Legume intake is low in Western
populations (Schneider, 2002) which may explain the lack of epidemiological
studies in this area. Further research is needed to determine the association between
intake of legumes and the risk of diabetes prospectively. Detail on legumes
consumption and risk of T2DM will be discussed in chapter 9.
3.6.5Dietary patterns
Dietary pattern analysis such as data driven and hypothetical driven
approaches have been used in many prospective studies to examine the relationship
of diet to the risk of diseases. Approach based on indices tended to be easily being
translated into public health message but with respect to dataset driven method
arent. Nine dietary components were included in the Alternate Healthy Eating
Index (AHEI) score to measure quality of diet where the highest score indicates that
the dietary intake of participants met the American recommendations (i.e rich in
fruits and vegetables and wholegrain with lower consumption of red and processed
meat). The lowest score reflects the dietary intake of participants with the least
healthy dietary intake (McCullough et al., 2002). In a prospective cohort study
including 80,029 women who were followed for 18 years, the risk of diabetes was
significantly reduced by 36% among women in the highest quintile of AHEI (where
AHEI was mainly rich in fruits and vegetables and wholegrain) in comparison with
women in the lowest AHEI quintile (Fung et al., 2007). On the other hand, an earlier
study found the risk of diabetes was positively associated with an intake of meat and
processed meat among U.S women followed for 14 years prospectively (Fung et al.,
2004). Women allocated to the highest Western dietary pattern quintile (which is
characterized by high intakes of red meat and processed meat, sweet and desserts,
French fries, and refined gains) had a significantly increased risk of T2DM by 51%
in comparison to the lowest quintile.
The Mediterranean diet has been a focus of much research interest. Data
from ten large prospective studies pooled in a systematic review which included
190,000 participants free from diabetes followed for at least 2 years, reported 8,932
cases of diabetes (Esposito et al., 2010a). They found a dietary pattern which is rich
in fruits and vegetables, wholegrain, fish and poultry and is low in red meat,
processed foods, sweetened beverages and starchy foods, reduces the risk of T2DM
from 15% to 83%. Furthermore, people adherent to the Mediterranean diet which is
mainly a plant based diet, were less likely to develop diabetes derived from
prospective studies (Esposito et al., 2010b).
A recent comprehensive meta-analysis of 15 prospective studies
(Nettleton et al., 2013) also supported the inverse association between diet score and
metabolic markers of diabetes. The diet score categorized nine food groups intakes
into quartiles and assigned values for favourable (wholegrain, fruits, vegetables, fish
and nuts/seeds) and unfavourable foods (red/processed meats, sweets, sugared
beverages and fried potatoes) with the highest score being healthier diet. Significant
inverse associations were seen between diet score and fasting blood glucose as well
as diet score and fasting insulin concentration after adjustment for BMI, lifestyle and
demographic factors.
Overall, observational studies consistently support the protective effect
of diet rich in fruit and vegetables, whole grains, with less red meat and processed
foods on the development of diabetes. However the total intake of fruits and
vegetables as a suggested food group was found to have a weak inverse association
with the risk of T2DM; evidence suggests the importance of the role of green leafy
vegetables in the prevention of diabetes. Several dietary patterns have been
suggested in epidemiological studies that are favourably associated with the
prevention of T2DM. A diet rich in plant food was the main characteristic dietary
pattern. On the other hand, a diet rich in red and processed meats may contribute to a
high risk of T2DM.
3.7 Conclusion
Criteria of diabetes diagnosis have been updated over the past 30 years which
need to be considered when comparison between epidemiological prospective
studies that investigate the risk of diabetes and diet is carried out. As demonstrated
that T2DM is public health problem that have great health and economic burden
which can be reduced by primary prevention. Evidence points to genetic and
environmental factors that have promote development of diabetes. However, factors
which effectively reduce the risk of T2DM were mainly dietary factors and few
others such as physical activity and smoking.
Considering the importance of other factors such as age, gender and ethnicity
which showed a strong association with T2DM is mainly to identify the target
population at risk of T2DM in prevention plan strategies. Several epidemiological
studies and trials reported the direct and indirect effect of dietary factors in
development of T2DM. The association between diet, food intake and nutrients
intakes with the risk of diabetes have been reported prospectively.
Evidence reported the potential benefit effect of diet which is a rich in
wholegrain, but evidence really weak in supporting fruit and vegetable intakes.
Prospective studies showed the potential beneficial effect of nutrient intake such as
magnesium on risk of diabetes. It is difficult to separate the effect of carbohydrates
on the risk of T2DM in research because if carbohydrates examined are based on
structure then it will depend on whether it is liquid or solid and if assessing total
carbohydrates, will then it depend whether it is low or high GI.
Literature on the recent studies particularly prospective studies that have
examined the association between effect of dietary and non-dietary factors with the
risk of T2DM helps in building the best models for examining the association
between dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM which will be discussed in chapter 8
and 9.
Chapter 4: Comprehensive review of dietary fibre intake
and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus
4.1 Introduction
As discussed in chapter 2, T2DM prevalence is growing nationally and
internationally and is resulting in an enormous health and economic burden at both
individual and population level. Both environmental and genetic factors interact in
the development of T2DM; however, lifestyle and obesity are suggested reversible
factors that may play an important role in delaying the development of T2DM
(Knowler et al., 2002). Evidence suggests that some dietary nutrients and dietary
fibre have a potential influence on the risk of T2DM; to play a role in primary
prevention or delay in the development of T2DM (World Health Organization,
2003). Contradictory knowledge on the association between dietary fibre intake and
risk of T2DM in prospective studies had led to further exploration of existing
prospective evidence in this chapter.
A systematic review is a comprehensive review of the literature addressing a
research question especially when many researchers focus on the same topic.
Systematic review methodology aims to select all relevant studies reaching
conclusions that answer similar questions of interest. After that, statistical analysis,
also referred to as meta-analysis, may be used apply to statistically summarise the
results of all selected studies. The aim of the present review is to summarise results
from existing cohort studies published in the last 22 years which have evaluated the
effect of total dietary fibre (TDF)
intake and risk of T2DM, and to present further
evaluation on the selected prospective studies on the effect of the main food sources
of fibre intakes, insoluble dietary fibre (IDF) and soluble dietary fibre (SDF) intakes
on the development of T2DM. The current comprehensive review was undertaken
using a systematic approach, and aimed to generate pooled estimate of risk by
examining highest versus lowest dietary fibre intake groups in relation to risk of
T2DM. Also Forest plots were draw from included cohort studies, aiming to
illustrate the overall effect of intakes of TDF, fibre sources, and types of fibres on
the risk of T2DM. In addition to, it would be possible to explore whether the effect
of dietary fibre intake on the risk of diabetes may vary in subgroup analysis.
In this chapter, TDF abbreviation referred to total dietary fibre measured by any analytical method.
While in the following chapters, AOAC-fibre referred to total dietary fibre intake obtained from
AOAC analytical method only.
4.2 Methodology
4.2.1Study strategy
Original cohort studies that were published in English between Jan 1991 and
March 2013 were collected mainly through two computer-based databases. Also
articles were retrieved from examined references of published meta-analyses and
reviews where additional studies were identified. The search started from 1
February 2011 until 1
February 2013. The search was carried out on MEDLINE(R)
1948 to January Week 4 2013 and on EMBASE using Ovid resources, EMBASE
Classic + EMBASE 1947, to February, 2013. Studies were identified using a
combination of key words related to the disease (T2DM) and dietary exposure
(dietary fibre intake) as shown in appendix B. The search strategy included both
exploded MeSH (Medical Subject Headings) terms and truncated free text, aiming to
include all the relevant articles.
4.2.2Study selection
According to the inclusion criteria in Table 4.1, identification of the
prospective studies that report the estimated effect of dietary fibre intake on
incidence of T2DM. The studies included were limited to English language studies.
Studies that were excluded from the review were not prospectively evaluating the
association between dietary fibre intake and the risk of diabetes, such as cross-
sectional studies and interventional studies. Other exclusion criteria are listed in
Table 4.2. The coding strategy used in the Endnote software program (a web-based
reference organizer) aimed for data extraction according to established criteria. The
primary search gave 1,554 articles that were checked to ensure that they met the
search criteria; 884 articles were from Embase database and 670 articles were from
Medline. Out of all the articles only 16 papers were relevant and others were
excluded for different reasons as listed in Table 4.2. Figure 4.1 represents the results
of the search strategy in the databases for the review with exclusion criteria. Articles
were assessed based on title, abstract and the full manuscript. Quality of the studies
was evaluated based on the number of studied participants, the follow up period and
potential confounders that were included in the adjusted model. All the studies
included in the results tables (4.5, 4.6 and 4.8) were published between1997  2013.
Results were reported from the selected cohort studies aiming to evaluate the
association of TDF, IDF and SDF intakes as well as fibre intakes from cereal,
vegetables, fruit, and legumes and the risk of T2DM from prospective evidence.
Meta-analysis was carried out aim to summarize the existing evidence from eligible
prospective studies and to pool estimate risk of T2DM by Forest plot graphs via
assessing highest dietary fibre intake group versus lowest dietary fibre group.
Table 4.1 Inclusion criteria used to select relevant studies
1 Cohort and prospective studies
2 Articles investigating population/s in UK, Europe, USA, Canada, worldwide.
3 Studies that describe the TDF intake or/and types of fibres or/and soluble and insoluble fibre
intake
4 Publication date between Jan 1990 and March 2013
5 Human studies
6 English language published articles
7 Original research article
8 Provide estimates of T2DM risk
Table 4.2 Coding of exclusion criteria for primary identified articles
code Comments
0 Not relevant (reports or comments , further duplication )
1 Experimental, animal
2 Recommendations, guidelines
3 Management, diagnosis
4 Not adult diabetes (children, pregnancy)
5 Not prospective, cohort study (other study designs e.g. RCT, cross-sectional study)
6 Reviews
8 Potentially relevant  met inclusion criteria
4.2.3Data extraction
Data that were collected included the authors name, year of publication,
country of origin, duration of follow-up, number of participants, mean or range of
age, proportion of women if available, number of events, the amount of fibre
consumption (g/d, g/1000kcal and g/MJ), methods for measurement of dietary fibre
intake, analytical method of dietary fibre values, adjusted covariates, as well as
estimated risks and 95% CIs of T2DM. Data extracted are in Tables 4.5, 4.6, 4.8.
4.2.4Statistical analysis
Meta-analysis was conducted if three or more studies were identified. The
estimated effect of TDF, IDF and SDF intakes as well as for key fibre sources
(cereal fibre, fruit fibre and vegetable fibre) intakes on the risk of T2DM was pooled
from the selected cohort studies performed using the metan meta-analysis
command in the Stata software statistical program (Corp-Stata, 2010). A Forest plot
was created to summarize quantitative findings of and to illustrate the direction of
the effect.
4.2.4.1 Total dietary fibre intake
Figure 4.1 demonstrates 16 papers were relevant, two papers included same
study population (Nurses Health Study) which reported by Colditz et al. (1992) and
Salmeron et al. (1997b). Thus, the latest was included in the current review because
of the larger sample size (914 cases vs. 702 cases). The second study that also
excluded is because of the studied population were pre-diabetes participants rather
than from general population (Lindstrom et al., 2006). In total, ten cohorts reported
the intake of dietary fibre as g/day and risk of T2DM obtained from comparing
extreme categories, while the remaining four, either reported dietary fibre intake as
g/MJ (Ericson et al., 2013) or fibre density (Hopping et al., 2010) or reported risk of
T2DM per unit increment of dietary fibre intake (continuous variable) (Sluijs et al.,
2010b, Barclay et al., 2007). Thus, the Forest plot using meta-analysis was carried
out on the ten studies that provided 11 risk results as Stevens et al. (2002) reported
risk of T2DM based on ethnicity (White and African American population) (Table
4.3). Further subgroup analyses based on follow-up period, origin of study and
gender were carried out to help explain the potential sources of heterogeneity in the
pooled estimate
Table 4.3 Number of studies identified and included in the meta-analysis
TDF Insoluble
fibre
Soluble
fibre
Cereal
fibre
Vegetable
fibre
Fruit
fibre
Total publications 16 4 4 13 11 11
Cohort studies in meta-
analysis
10 4 4 9 8 7
Excluded from meta-
analysis
5 - - 4 3 4
Risk results in forest plot 11 6 4 11 8 7
4.2.4.2 Types of fibre intakes
A pooled risk estimate was obtained for insoluble dietary fibre intake (IDF)
from four cohort studies that provided 6 risk estimate results. Montonen et al. (2003)
reported separate risk of T2DM with intakes of insoluble fibre subtypes (insoluble
non-cellulosic polysaccharides, cellulose and lignin). Forest plots were created for
pooled risk of T2DM and main fibre sources and for insoluble fibre intake (Figure
5.c in appendix C) and risk of T2DM from number of prospective studies as shows
in Table 4.3. Soluble dietary fibre was reported in four studies and meta-analysis
was performed and Forest plot was created in Appendix C, Figure 9.c.
4.2.4.3 Fibre sources intakes
Cereal fibre intake was reported in 13 cohort studies, eight of them were
eligible for meta-analysis. Four studies were excluded from the meta-analysis
because of either dietary fibre intake expressed as fibre density (Hopping et al.,
2010) or no reported risk result for dietary fibre categories (Barclay et al., 2007,
Hodge et al., 2004, Stevens et al., 2002). Another meta-analysis was carried out
aimed for estimate the risk of T2DM with intake of cereal fibre intake as continuous
variable (g/day). Three cohort studies were identified (Stevens et al., 2002, Hodge et
al., 2004, Barclay et al., 2007) for meta-analysis. For vegetable fibre intake, eight
studies were eligible for pooled analysis. Three were either fibre intake expressed as
fibre density or risk estimate for each unit increment in dietary fibre (Hopping et al.,
2010, Hodge et al., 2004, Barclay et al., 2007). For fruit fibre intake, seven studies
were eligible for meta-analysis. Four were either fibre intake expressed as fibre
density or risk estimate for each increment (Hopping et al., 2010, Hodge et al.,
2004, Barclay et al., 2007, Stevens et al., 2002). Meta-analysis was not carried out
for legumes fibre because one study met the criteria for meta-analysis (Meyer et al.,
2000).
Regards reported risk results, it was noticed that all cohorts studies reported
the highest fibre intake effect on the risk of T2DM in comparison to lowest fibre
intake group except in two studies (Weng et al., 2012, Wannamethee et al., 2009)
which reported risk of T2DM aim to show the effect of low fibre intake on the risk
of T2DM in comparison to high fibre intake. Therefore, reciprocal odd ratio that
equal one divided by the odd ratio or risk ratio was calculated (Bewick et al., 2004).
Figure 4.1 Flowchart demonstrating the results of the systematic review with exclusion
criteria
4.3 Results
Figure 4.1 demonstrates that sixteen publications that equals 15 cohorts studies
where study by Colditz et al. (1992) was excluded from the review because of
another study by Salmeron et al. (1997b) examined the risk of T2DM on the same
population using modified FFQ. Within the 14 cohorts, ten of them report risk
estimate for the whole studied population while three cohorts provided separate risks
based on sex (Hopping et al., 2010, Ericson et al., 2013) and ethnicity (Stevens et
al., 2002). The 14 cohort studies eligible for inclusion in this review are summarised
Medline search
Embase search
Medline search
Medline search
Duplicates
Duplicates
Pooled articles from Embase and Medline
databases
Pooled unique
articles
Duplicate articles
Study population
(Children, pregnancy)
Not relevant
Reviews
Other study designs
Management,
diagnosis
Recommendations,
guidelines
Experimental, animal
Potentially relevant
publications
14 papers included
(14 separate cohort studies)
2 Paper excluded
in Table 4.3. Generally, thirteen cohorts provided data on fibre source/s and four
cohorts provided data on types of fibre. Additionally, one study reported cereal fibre
intake but not the TDF in relation to the risk of diabetes (Krishnan et al., 2007)
which was included in the dietary fibre sources.
4.3.1Description of the evidence based publications
4.3.1.1 Exposure measures
The Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ) was found to be the most used
dietary assessment tool; one cohorts used dietary records (Ericson et al., 2013) or
interview (Montonen et al., 2003). The number of food items listed in the FFQ range
from 49 to 148. Dietary fibre intake in ten cohort studies was reported as AOAC
obtained values (Official Methods of Analytical Chemists, 1995). This was either
reported in methodology or through cross checking food composition database.
Three studies did not specify clearly the analytical method that determined the
dietary fibre values in foods (Sluijs et al., 2010b, Meyer et al., 2000, Weng et al.,
2012). Only one study (Wannamethee et al., 2009) reported the NSP intake which
was derived by the Englyst method (Englyst et al., 1982). Another study reported
NSP components (lignin, cellulose, soluble and insoluble non-cellulosic
polysaccharides) that usually measured by Englyst method (Montonen et al., 2003).
Detail on different types of dietary fibre analysis was demonstrated in the chapter 1.
4.3.1.2 Case ascertainment
The number of cases of T2DM ranged from 114 to 8,587 within each study.
Percentages of diabetic cases out of total studied population were calculated and
ranging from 0.8% (Schulze et al., 2004a) to 12% (Stevens et al., 2002).
Supplementary questionnaires were most often used for self-reported incidents of
diabetes. Confirmed self-reported diabetes by hospital registry department in some
of the cohorts were recorded in the article (Sluijs et al., 2010b, Ericson et al., 2013,
Weng et al., 2012, Hodge et al., 2004). Other studies reported measured fasting
blood glucose was used to identify the incidence of diabetes with or without the self-
reported cases (Barclay et al., 2007, Hopping et al., 2010, Weng et al., 2012).
4.3.1.3 Origin of study/size of cohort
This evidence based was mainly dominated by developed world studies. Six
studies were from USA, one from Finland, one from Germany, one from UK, two
from Australia, one from Netherland, one from Sweden and one from Taiwan. The
number of subjects ranged from 1,604 (Weng et al., 2012) to 91,249 (Schulze et al.,
2004a).
4.3.1.4 Duration of follow-up
The follow-up period ranged from 4 to 14 years. As shown in Table 4.5.
One cohort was followed for four years (Hodge et al., 2004). One study reported an
average of 5 years of follow up duration. Three studies reported duration of six years
(Salmeron et al., 1997b, Salmeron et al., 1997a, Meyer et al., 2000), five studies
reported follow up period range between 7 and 10 years and four studies reported
follow up of more or equal 10 years.
4.3.1.5 Other aspects
All cohorts were run on adult participants. Most studies included both gender
but some were specifically on women and few were specifically on men. Six cohort
studies reported estimate risk among women participants (Ericson et al., 2013,
Hopping et al., 2010, Schulze et al., 2004a, Meyer et al., 2000, Salmeron et al.,
1997b) and four cohorts reported estimate risk among men participants alone
(Ericson et al., 2013, Hopping et al., 2010, Wannamethee et al., 2009, Salmeron et
al., 1997a). While, eight studies could not be separated as estimated effect was
reported for both genders.
4.3.2Characteristics of high fibre consumers in the cohort studies
The cohort studies in this review reported the characteristics of high fibre consumers
(Weng et al., 2012, Schulze et al., 2007, Montonen et al., 2003, Stevens et al., 2002,
Meyer et al., 2000). High dietary fibre consumers are less likely to be men, smoke
and consume alcohol in comparison to lower fibre consumers groups with a
statistically significant trend. On the other hand, high fibre consumers were more
likely to be older, educated, engaged in physical activity and have lower BMI and
WC. Regarding the main dietary characteristics, participants in the high fibre group
were found to have significantly higher energy intake, higher carbohydrate intake
but lower protein and total fat intake in comparison to the lowest fibre intake group.
In terms of fat constituents, participants in the high fibre category were more likely
to consume polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fat and less saturated fat.
Table 4.4 Cohort studies linking intake of total dietary fibre (TDF) to the risk of T2DM
N Author No of
participants
years
Follow-up
years
DM cases
Dietary
assessment
Dietary fibre
categories
Estimated risk (95%CI) P-trend Variables adjusted**
1 Ericson et al.
(2013)
Malmo Diet
and Cancer
Study
(MDCS)
(Sweden)
27,140
Women &
45-74 12 1709
Self-report
7 days
menu book,
168-itmes
FFQ &
45min
interview
method
TDF (g/MJ)
Women
Q5 >2.9
Q1 <1.8
Q5 >2.5
Q1<1.6
Q5 vs. Q1
Women
M(1) 0.98(0.78,1.24)
M(2) 0.97(0.77,1.22)
M(1)0.85(0.68,1.05)
M(2)0.84(0.68,1.04)
M(1) age, season
, method
version
M(1) age, method version,
EI, education, PA,
smoking, alcohol, BMI.
2 Weng et al.
(2012)
Cardiovascular
Disease risk
Factor Two-
Township
Study
(CVDFACTS)
(Taiwan)
1,604
Women
DM (52.7+
10.5)
Non DM
(49.8+12.2)
4.6 141
FBG>7mmol/l
or self-report
49-items
Fibre
analysis not
specified
Q1 <24.1 g/d
Q5>38.6g/d
Q1 vs. Q5
M(1) 1.91(1.11,3.28)
M(2) 2.08(1.21,3.60)
M(3) 2.04(1.17,3.53)
0.005
0.004
M(1) age, sex, age-sex
interaction, EI, residential
M(2) M1 plus FH, BMI,
central obesity.
M(3) M2 plus education,
smoking, alcohol, PA,
HTN, high cholesterol,
high TG, low HDL.
3 Sluijs et al.
(2010b)
EPIC-NL
(Netherland)
37,844
Women
51yrs
21-70
10 915
Self-report
and hospital
records cases
79-item
Fibre
analysis not
specified
Per 4.8g/d
increment
M(1) 0.98(0.91,1.05)
M(2) 0.81(0.92,1.06)
M(3) 0.89(0.82,0.98) <0.05
M(1) Age, sex
M(2) 1 plus energy
adjusted alcohol, PA,
smoking, BMI, WC, SBP,
Education, FH.
M(3) 2 plus EI, energy
adjusted intakes of GL,
vitamin C, E, protein,
SFA, PUFA,
** abbreviations used in column : EI= energy intake; PA= physical activity; FH= family history of diabetes; WC= waist circumference; BMI= body mass index; WHR=waist hip
ratio; SFA= saturated fatty acid; PUFA=polyunsaturated fatty acids, GL=glycaemic load; SBP= systolic blood pressure; AOAC= Association of Official Analytical Chemist; (S)=
significant; (NS)= not significant, NA=not available;
Q1 vs. Q5 estimated risk among lowest fibre group in comparison to highest fibre group;
Season (summer, winter,
autumn and spring);
Method (2 categories of coding dietary data before and after September 1994),
Q5 vs. Q1 estimated risk among highest fibre group in comparison to lowest
fibre group;
Q4 vs. Q1 estimated risk among lowest fibre group in comparison to highest fibre group.
Continue
N Author No of
participants
years
Follow-up
years
DM cases
Dietary
assessment
categories
Estimated risk (95%CI) P-trend Variables adjusted**
4 Hopping et al.
(2010)
Multi ethnic
Cohort in
Hawaii
(USA)
75,512
Women
Caucasians
Japanese
American
native
Hawaiian
45-75 14 8,587
Self-report
cases
method
(g/4184 kJ.d)
Q1 <7.4
Q5 >14.2
Women
Q1<8.9
Q5>16.2
Q5 vs. Q1
All men 0.75(0.67,0.84)
Caucasian 0.66(0.53,0.82)
Japanese 0.84(0.72,0.97)
Native Hawaiian
0.70(0.52,0.96)
All women 0.95(0.85,1.06)
Caucasian 0.80(0.62,1.02)
Japanese 1.04(0.90,1.20)
Native Hawaiian
0.85(0.66,1.10)
<0.01
<0.01
M (1) ethnicity, BMI,
PA, education, and EI.
5 Wannamethee
et al. (2009)
British regional
Heart Study
3,428
60  79 7 162
Self-report
cases
Englyst-
Q1 <20g/d
Q4 > 31 g/d
Q4 vs. Q1
M(1) 0.63(0.42,0.96)
M(2) 0.82(0.51,1.32)
M(3) 0.83(0.52,1.13)
M(4) 0.86(0.50,1.20)
M(5) 0.95(0.59,1.53)
NA M(1) age
M(2) age, WC, smoking,
PA, social class, alcohol,
preexisting MI, stroke,
use statin, EI.
M(3) M1 plus IL-6
M(4) M2 plus t-PA.
M(5) M3 plus GGT
6 Barclay et al.
(2007)
(Australia)
1,833
Women
& men
+49 10 138
Self-report
cases or
FBG>126mg/dl
145-item
method
Per 5g/day
increment
M(1) 0.90(0.81,1.01)
M(2) 0.90(0.79,1.02)
M(1) age, sex.
M(2) 1 plus FH,
smoking, TG, HDL,
METs.
** Abbreviations used in column: EI= energy intake; PA= physical activity; FH= family history of diabetes; WC= waist circumference; BMI= body mass index; WHR=waist hip
ratio; IL-6 = initerleukin-6; t-PA = tissue plasminogen activator; GGT = Gamma-glutamyl transferase; AOAC= Association of Official Analytical Chemist; NSP= non-starch
polysaccharides; PA = physical activity; MET= Metabolic Equivalent Task;
Q1 vs. Q5 estimated risk among lowest fibre group in comparison to highest fibre group;
Q5 vs.
Q1 estimated risk among highest fibre group in comparison to lowest fibre group;
Q4 vs. Q1 estimated risk among lowest fibre group in comparison to highest fibre group.
** Abbreviations used in column: EI= energy intake; PA= physical activity; FH= family history of diabetes; WC= waist circumference; BMI= body mass index; WHR=waist hip ratio;
CHO=carbohydrates; SFA= saturated fatty acid; GL=glycemic load; AOAC= Association of Official Analytical Chemist; NSP= non-starch polysaccharides; PA = physical activity; MET=
Metabolic Equivalent Task; 1 Q1 vs. Q5 estimated risk among lowest fibre group in comparison to highest fibre group; 4Q5 vs. Q1 estimated risk among highest fibre group in comparison to lowest
fibre group; 5Q4 vs. Q1 estimated risk among lowest fibre group in comparison to highest fibre group.
Continue
N Author No of people
(%) women
years
Follow-
years
DM cases
Dietary fibre
assessment
Dietary fibre
intake
categories
Estimated risk
(95%CI)
trend
Variables adjusted**
7 Schulze et al.
(2007)
EPIC-Potsdam
study
(Germany)
25,067
Women
35  65
Women
40-65
7 844
Self-reported
cases
148-items
method
Median TDF
Q1 15.8 g/d
Q5 27.9 g/d
Q5 vs. Q1
M(1)0.86(0.68,1.09)
M(2)0.86(0.65,1.14) 0.11
M(1) age, sex, education,
sport activity, cycling,
occupational activity,
smoking, Mg alcohol, EI,
BMI, WC.
M(2)1 plus PUFA:SFA &
MUPA:SFA ratio, CHO.
8 (Schulze et al.,
2004a)
Nurses Health
Study II
(USA)
91,249
Women
24-44 8 741
Self-reported
cases
133-item
method
Q1<14.2g/d
Q5 >22 g/d
Q5 vs. Q1
M(1) 0.53(0.42, 0.67)
M(2) 0.78(0.62,0.98)
M(3) 1.00(0.75,1.34)
<0.01
0.008
M(1) age
M(2) age, BMI
M(3) M2 plus EI, alcohol,
PA, FH, HTN Smoking, high
blood cholesterol,
postmenopausal hormonal
use, O/C use, GL, Mg and
caffeine intakes
9 Hodge et al. (2004)
Melbourne
Collaborative
Cohort Study
(Australia)
31,641
Women
27-75 4 365
Self-reported
cases
121-items
method
TDF= 20g/d.
percentiles
M(1) 0.93(0.73,1.18)
M(2) 1.02 (0.81,1.30)
M(1) Age country of birth,
PA, FH, weight change, EI.
education, alcohol, FH,
M (2) 1 plus BMI, WHR
10 Montonen et al.
(2003)
Finnish Mobile
Clinic Health
Survey
(Finland)
4,316
Women
40-69 10 156
Self-reported
cases
Diet history
interview
(>100 food
items)
Fibre
analysis not
specified
Q1<19.2 g/d
Q4 >33.2g/d
Q4 vs. Q1
M(1) 0.57(0.30,1.08)
M(2) 0.51(0.26,1.00)
M(1) age, sex, geographic
area, and EI.
M(2) M 1 plus smoking,
BMI, intake of fruit and
berries, and vegetables
Continue
N Author No of people
(%) women
years
Follow-
years
DM cases
Dietary fibre
assessment
Dietary fibre
intake categories
Estimated risk
(95%CI)
P-trend Variables adjusted**
11 Stevens et al.
(2002)
(ARIC) study
(USA)
12,251
Women
& men
White
African
American
45-64
(44.8)m
(55.2)w
9 1,447
Self-report drug
use or
measured blood
glucose
FBG>7mmol/l
RBG>11.1mmol/l
66-items
method
White
Q1 11.2
Q5 27.5
African
American
Q1 10.2
Q5 26.1
Q5 vs. Q1
White
M(1) 0.99(0.98,1.01)
M(2) 0.99(0.98,1.01)
African American
M(1) 0.97(0.92,1.03)
M(2) 0.99(0.98,1.01)
M(1) age, BMI, sex,
field Centre
M (2) M 1 plus
education, smoking, PA.
12 Meyer et al. (2000)
Iowa Womens
Health Study
(USA)
35,988
Women
55-69 6 1141
Self-reported
cases
127-items
method
Q1 <15.3 g/d
Q5 >23.6g/d
Q5 vs.Q1
M(1) 0.78(0.64,0.96) 0.005 M (1) EI, age, BMI,
WHR, education,
smoking, alcohol, PA.
13 Salmeron et al.
(1997b) Nurses
Health Study
(USA)
65,173
Women
40-65 6 915
Self-reported
cases
134-items
method
Median
Q1 11.8g/d
Q5 24.1g/d
Q5 vs.Q1
M(1) 0.78(0.62,0.98) 0.02 M(1) age, BMI, alcohol,
smoking, PA, FH.
14 Salmeron et al.
(1997a)
Heath Professionals
Study
(USA)
42,759
40-75 6 523
Self-reported
cases
131-items
method
Median
Q1 13.4g/d
Q5 29.7g/d
Q5 vs.Q1
M(1) 0.98(0.73,1.33) 0.70 M(1)Age, BMI, alcohol,
smoking, PA, FH
** Abbreviations used in column: EI= energy intake; PA= physical activity; FH= family history of diabetes; WC= waist circumference; BMI= body mass index; WHR=waist hip
ratio; CHO=carbohydrates; SFA= saturated fatty acid; GL=glycemic load; AOAC= Association of Official Analytical Chemist; NSP= non-starch polysaccharides; PA = physical
activity; MET= Metabolic Equivalent Task;
Q1 vs. Q5 estimated risk among lowest fibre group in comparison to highest fibre group;
Season (summer, winter, autumn and
spring);
Method (2 categories of coding dietary data before and after September 1994),
Q5 vs. Q1 estimated risk among highest fibre group in comparison to lowest fibre group;
Q4 vs. Q1 estimated risk among lowest fibre group in comparison to highest fibre group.
Table 4.5 Cohort studies of insoluble dietary fibre (IDF) and soluble dietary fibre (SDF) intakes with the risk of T2DM
N Author No participants Age
(years)
follow
(years)
cases
Dietary fibre
assessment
SDF/IDF intake Estimated risk results P-trend Variables adjusted**
1 Schulze et al.
(2007)
Germany
25,067
Women
3565
Women
40-65
7 844
self -
report
148-FFQ
method
SDF (g/d)
Q1 5.3
Q5 9.6
IDF (g/d)
Q1 10.3
Q5 18.4
Q5 vs. Q1
M(1) 0.79(0.63,0.98)
M(2) 0.78(0.6,1.01)
M(3) 0.83(0.57,1.22)
M(1) 0.83 (0.65,1.05)
M(3) 0.82(0.61,1.08)
M(3) 0.93(0.62,1.40)
M(1) age, sex, education,
PA, smoking, alcohol, TE,
BMI, WC
M(2)1 plus PUFA:SFA and
MUPF:SFA ratios and
M(3)2 plus IDF or SDF
intake.
2 Montonen et al.
(2003)
Finland
Women
40-69 10 156
self -
report
Dietary
history
interview
(>100 food
items)
method
SDF (g/d)
Q1 (0.53-4.5)
Q4 (7.4-22.7)
Inso-NCP (g/d)
Q1 (1.1-8.7)
Q4 (16.6- 69.3)
Cellulose (g/d)
Q1 (0.48-3.2)
Q4 (5.4-15.2)
Lignin (g/d)
Q1 (0.48-2.3)
Q4 (4.2-14.5)
Q4 vs. Q1
M(1) 0.80(0.44,1.45)
M(2) 0.57(0.29,1.12)
Insoluble NCP
M(1) 0.48(0.25,0.91)
M(2) 0.47(0.25,0.91)
Cellulose
M(1) 0.84(0.47,1.50)
M(2) 0.6(0.29,1.21)
Lignin
M(1) 0.68(0.36,1.28)
M(2) 0.68(0.36,1.30)
M(1) age, BMI, sex, field
centre
M (2) M 1 + education,
smoking, PA.
** Abbreviations used in column: EI= energy intake; PA= physical activity; FH= family history of diabetes; WC= waist circumference; BMI= body mass index; WHR=waist hip
ratio; CHO=carbohydrates; SFA= saturated fatty acid; PUFA=polyunsaturated fatty acids, MUPA= monounsaturated fatty acids; AOAC= Association of Official Analytical
Chemist; MET= Metabolic Equivalent Task; Inso-NCP = insoluble non-cellulosic polysaccharides;
Q5 vs. Q1 estimated risk among highest fibre group in comparison to lowest
fibre group;
Q4 vs. Q1 estimated risk among lowest fibre group in comparison to highest fibre group.
Continue
N Author No
participants
(years)
follow -
(years)
DM cases
( Dg)
Dietary fibre
assessment
SDF/IDF intake Estimated risk results P-trend Variables
adjusted**
3 Meyer et al.
(2000)
35,988
Women
55-69 6 1141
Self-
report
127-items
method
SDF (g/d):
Q1 <4.8
Q5 >7.2
IDF(g/d):
Q1 <11.4
Q5 >17.7
Q5 vs. Q1
0.89(0.73,1.08)
0.75(0.61,0.91)
0.001
M(1) Age, BMI,
alcohol, smoking, PA,
4 Salmeron et al.
(1997b)
Nurses Health
Study
65,173
Women
40-65 6 915
Self-
report
134-items
method
amount not
reported
1.07(0.86-1.33)
0.77(0.61-0.95)
Energy adjusted and
other factors were not
reported.
** Abbreviations used in column: EI= energy intake; PA= physical activity; FH= family history of diabetes; WC= waist circumference; BMI= body mass index; WHR=waist hip
ratio; CHO=carbohydrates; SFA= saturated fatty acid; PUFA=polyunsaturated fatty acids, MUPA= monounsaturated fatty acids; AOAC= Association of Official Analytical
Chemist; MET= Metabolic Equivalent Task; Inso-NCP = insoluble non-cellulosic polysaccharides;
Q5 vs. Q1 estimated risk among highest fibre group in comparison to lowest
fibre group.
NOTE: Weights are from random effects analysis
Overall
Weng LC. et al., 2012
Stevens J. et al., 2002 (White population)
Salmeron J. et al., 1997 (Health Professionals)
Schulze MB. et al., 2007
Montonen J. et al., 2003
Hodge AM. et al., 2004
Stevens J. et al., 2002 (African American population)
Salmeron J. et al., 1997 (Nurses Health Study I)
Meyer KA, et al., 2000
Schulze MB. et al., 2004
Wannamethee SG. et al., 2009
Author and year
Taiwan
Germany
Finland
Australia
Country
0.97 (0.93, 1.01)
0.49 (0.28, 0.85)
0.99 (0.98, 1.01)
0.98 (0.73, 1.33)
0.86 (0.65, 1.14)
0.51 (0.26, 1.00)
1.02 (0.81, 1.30)
Estimated
0.99 (0.98, 1.02)
0.78 (0.62, 0.98)
0.78 (0.64, 0.96)
1.00 (0.75, 1.34)
0.95 (0.59, 1.53)
risk (95% CI)
0.97 (0.93, 1.01)
0.49 (0.28, 0.85)
0.99 (0.98, 1.01)
0.98 (0.73, 1.33)
0.86 (0.65, 1.14)
0.51 (0.26, 1.00)
1.02 (0.81, 1.30)
Estimated
0.99 (0.98, 1.02)
0.78 (0.62, 0.98)
0.78 (0.64, 0.96)
1.00 (0.75, 1.34)
0.95 (0.59, 1.53)
risk (95% CI)
1.25 .5 1 1.25 1.5
4.3.3Total dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM
Generally, six cohorts reported a significant inverse associations between TDF
and risk of T2DM (Salmeron et al., 1997b, Meyer et al., 2000, Montonen et al.,
2003, Hopping et al., 2010, Sluijs et al., 2010b, Weng et al., 2012). Eight cohorts
reported no effect of TDF on the risk of T2DM. The overlap in the number of cohort
studies relate to multi-ethnic cohort in Hawaii (Hopping et al., 2010) study which
showed significant effect in men but not in women.
Two of the 14 cohorts that reported a dose-response relationship and could not
be included in the pooled estimate were inconsistent in their results. Barclay et al.
(2007) showed for every 5g/day increment in dietary fibre, the risk of diabetes was
significantly reduced by 10% but was not statistically significant. However, the
second study reported that for every 4.8g/day increase in dietary fibre, the risk of
diabetes reduced significantly by 11% (Sluijs et al., 2010b) after adjustment for
dietary and lifestyle factors (Details of the estimate risk and 95%CI provided in
Table 4.5). A pooled estimate was obtained from 10 cohorts that gave 11 results
where Stevens et al. (2002) study reported two estimate risk based on ethnicity.
Figure 4.2 presents the estimated risks of T2DM of each prospective study for the
highest dietary fibre intake group compared with the lowest dietary fibre intake
group. The pooled results show highest fibre consumers have non-significant 3%
lower risk than lowest fibre consumers (risk estimates=0.97; 95% CI: 0.92 to 1.01).
Figure 4.2 Estimated effect and 95% confidence intervals for dietary fibre
intake (Highest vs. Lowest) and incidence of T2DM from all selected
studies
4.3.3.1 Potential sources of heterogeneity
The lack of significant association between greater dietary fibre intake and risk
of T2DM in compared with lowest fibre consumer showed heterogeneity test (I
equal to 49%. Higgins et al. (2003) describes the heterogeneity test as the
percentage of total variation across studies that is due to heterogeneity rather than
chance.. Moderate heterogeneity according to Higgins et al. (2003) was observed in
the current analyses. Heterogeneity may reflect the diversity in studied population,
gender; follow up period, origin of study, exposures and outcome measures.
Therefore variation was explored by subgroup analyses. It have been suggested
previously that study design and how outcome was measured were potential sources
of heterogeneity (Higgins et al., 2003) however, the current meta-analyses included
single study design which may rule out the possibility of design related variation.
Furthermore, different population structures and variation in covariates adjusted in
each study may also contribute to high heterogeneity in this analysis (Tu and
Greenwood, 2012). In most of the studies, the cases were identified mainly by self-
report with subsample verified by reference to medical records. This may have an
element of variation related to undiagnosed cases as confirmation was carried out
only on people with diabetes.
Also, heterogeneity may possibly be explained by study location, gender and
follow up period (Higgins et al., 2003). Therefore, studies were categorized into
groups based on origin (USA, European and others), gender (men and women) and
duration of follow-up (more than 7 years and equal or less than 7 years).
Table 4.6 Exploration of key sources of heterogeneity using subgroup analysis
Classification No.
studies
Pooled estimate(95%CI) Results I
P value
Gender Women 3 0.82(0.71, 0.92) +
10% 0.31
Men 2 - ND
USA 6 0.98(0.95, 1.01) -
47% 0.09
Origin European 3 0.82(0.63, 1.07) -
16% 0.31
Others 2 - ND
Follow-up
duration
< 7 years 7 0.85(0.75, 0.96) +
24% 0.24
>7 years 4 0.99(0.97, 1.01) -
20% 0.29
1Significant association; 2non-significant association; 3Not done (two or less cohort); 4P for heterogeneity within
each subgroup.
As illustrated in Table 4.4, pooled estimate effects based on gender using
subgroup analysis showed that the risk of T2DM was reduced by 18% in high fibre
consumers compared with low fibre consumers among women. Table 4.4 shows low
heterogeneity within the subgroups, which suggest that estimates were consistent
and evidence was homogenous. Two cohort studies reported risk of T2DM in men
and both showed lack of association between TDF intake and the risk of T2DM
(Salmeron et al., 1997a, Wannamethee et al., 2009). Pooled estimate risk in women
should be consider with caution as some eligible cohort studies (Stevens et al., 2002,
Hodge et al., 2004, Montonen et al., 2003) could not be included in the analysis due
to lack of separate risk estimate among women (Appendix C Figure 10.c).
Additionally, two cohort studies were not included in pooled estimate
(Hopping et al., 2010, Ericson et al., 2013) reported non-significant association with
fibre intake expressed in g/1000kcal/day and g/MJ in comparison with low
consumers among women. Further subgroup analysis of five studies (with six
results) from USA populations showed people with high fibre intakes did not
experience lower risk of diabetes as in Table 4.4. Also, pooled estimate from three
European studies reported non-significant risk reduction among participants with
high fibre consumption. Low heterogeneity was seen in European group. Forest
plots for subgroup analyses are provided in appendix C (Figure 1c-4c). However, the
three international studies were inconsistent in their findings (Hodge et al., 2004,
Weng et al., 2012, Barclay et al., 2007).
Four cohort studies with a longer follow up period, more than 7 years, found
non-significant estimate risk, while seven studies with follow-up of less than 7 years
had a pooled estimate of 0.85 (95%CI: 0.75, 0.96; I
=24%).
Out of the 10 cohorts, seven studies estimated TDF intake from dietary fibre
values measured by AOAC method and pooled risk did not differ from the overall
risk estimate (risk=0.98; 95%CI: 0.96, 1.01; I
=21%). The remaining three studies
either did not specify or reported other types of methods.
4.3.4Soluble and insoluble dietary fibre intakes and risk of T2DM
From the 16 papers, soluble and insoluble dietary fibre intakes were reported
in only four studies (Table 4.6) (Salmeron et al., 1997b, Meyer et al., 2000,
Montonen et al., 2003, Schulze et al., 2007). None of the studies documented any
significant association between soluble fibre intake and the risk of T2DM, while
three studies showed a significant reduction in diabetes risk with a high daily intake
of insoluble fibre (Salmeron et al., 1997b, Meyer et al., 2000, Montonen et al.,
2003). Pooled estimate from 4 cohorts showed significant risk reduction in people
with high insoluble fibre consumption (risk = 0.75; 95%CI: 0.66, 0.86) in compared
to lowest intake group (Forest plot provided in Figure 5c in appendix C). From
pooled meta-analysis, no significant association between SDF intake and risk of
T2DM compared extreme quintiles was observed (risk estimate=0.92; 95%CI: 0.77,
1.09; I
=27% and p=0.24).
4.3.5Dietary fibre sources intakes and risk of T2DM
Table 4.7 demonstrates number of prospective evidence on fruit fibre and
vegetable fibre intakes and legumes fibre with incidence of T2DM.
Table 4.7 Pooled estimate of key fibre sources and risk of T2DM
Fibre source Total no of
cohorts
Significant
inverse
association
no of studies in
meta-analysis
Pooled estimate
(95%CI; I
Cereal fibre (High vs. low) 12 9 9 0.75(0.69, 0.81; 0.0%)
Cereal fibre (continuous) 3 1 3 0.96(0.93, 0.99; 0.0%)
vegetable fibre 11 3 7 1.02(0.89, 1.18; 41%)
Fruit fibre 11 1 6 0.98(0.83, 1.54; 51%)
Legume fibre 3 0 - -
4.3.5.1 Cereal fibre intake
Risk of T2DM was significantly lower by 25% among participants in the
highest cereal fibre intake in comparison to lowest intake (risk=0.75; 95%CI: 0.69,
0.81) as shown in Figure 4.3. Pooled estimate from other three cohorts showed
significant 4% risk reduction of T2DM with increased intake of cereal fibre as
shows in Table 4.7 (Figure 6.c in appendix C shows cereal fibre forest plot) (Stevens
et al., 2002, Hodge et al., 2004, Barclay et al., 2007). The remained cohort reported
significant risk reduction of T2DM with high intake of cereal fibre among men and
women (Hopping et al., 2010). From Table 4.7, nine out of 12 cohorts reported
significant effect of cereal fibre on the risk of T2DM.
NOTE: Weights are from random effects analysis
Overall
Schulze MB. et al., 2004
Salmeron J. et al., 1997 (Nurses Health Study I)
Schulze MB. et al., 2007
Stevens J. et al., 2002 (White population)
Author and year
Montonen J. et al., 2003
Wannamethee SG. et al., 2009
Stevens J. et al., (African American)
Meyer KA. et al., 2000
Kishnan S. et al., 2007
Salmeron J. et al., 1997 (Health Professionals)
Germany
Country
Finland
0.75 (0.69, 0.81)
0.64 (0.48, 0.86)
0.72 (0.58, 0.90)
0.72 (0.56, 0.93)
0.75 (0.60, 0.92)
risk (95% CI)
0.75 (0.52, 1.09)
0.76 (0.47, 1.22)
0.86 (0.65, 1.15)
0.71 (0.56, 0.89)
0.82 (0.70, 0.96)
0.70 (0.51, 0.96)
Estimate
0.75 (0.69, 0.81)
0.64 (0.48, 0.86)
0.72 (0.58, 0.90)
0.72 (0.56, 0.93)
0.75 (0.60, 0.92)
risk (95% CI)
0.75 (0.52, 1.09)
0.76 (0.47, 1.22)
0.86 (0.65, 1.15)
0.71 (0.56, 0.89)
0.82 (0.70, 0.96)
0.70 (0.51, 0.96)
Estimate
1.25 .5 1 1.25 1.5
Figure 4.3 Forest plot of estimated effect and 95%CI for highest vs. lowest
cereal fibre intake and risk of T2DM
4.3.5.2 Other dietary fibre sources
Details of eligible cohort studies were provided in Table 4.8. The pooled risk
estimate showed no association between risk of T2DM and people who consume
high vegetable fibre compared with lower vegetable fibre consumers (Figure 7.c in
appendix C). One of the eight studies reported significant results (Weng et al.,
2012). From the excluded studies, two reported significant inverse associations
between the risk of T2DM and vegetable fibre intake (Hopping et al., 2010, Barclay
et al., 2007). Risk reduction was 22% among men with high vegetable consumption
but not among women and second cohort reported 24% risk reduction with every 5g
increment in vegetable fibre among both gender.
Pooled estimate from seven cohorts showed no significant association between
fruit fibre intake and risk of T2DM among high consumers in comparison to lowest
consumers (Table 4.8 and appendix C provided forest plots in Figure 7.c and 8.c).
Only one eligible cohort reported high risk of T2DM among lowest fruit fibre intake
in comparison to highest group (Weng et al., 2012) and none of the excluded cohorts
showed an effect of high fruit fibre on the risk of T2DM (Hopping et al., 2010,
Barclay et al., 2007, Hodge et al., 2004, Stevens et al., 2002). Moderate
heterogeneity was seen in both meta-analysis, thus caution in interpretation is
recommended (Higgins et al., 2003).
Three cohort studies reported the associations between legume fibre intake
and risk of T2DM, only two provided risk comparing highest versus lowest intake
thus meta-analysis was not conducted. None of these were found to be statistically
significant (Hodge et al., 2004, Meyer et al., 2000, Stevens et al., 2002).
Key findings from the systematic review in this chapter
 No association between risk of T2DM and fibre consumption, comparing
highest and lowest consumers.
 Potential sources of moderate heterogeneity in pooled estimate of TDF may
relate to gender, duration of follow up, country of origin and other possible
sources not explored.
 Significant risk reduction of T2DM by 18% (95%CI: 0.71, 0.90) was observed
among women with total high fibre intake in comparison to women in the
lowest fibre intake group.
 People in the high intake of insoluble fibre group experienced lower risk of
T2DM (risk estimate = 0.75; 95%CI: 0.66, 0.86) in compared to people with
lower intake.
 People with greater cereal fibre intake have significantly lower risk of T2DM in
comparison with lowest consumers.
 No associations were observed with the intakes of the remaining fibre sources
and risk of T2DM comparing extreme groups.
Table 4.8 Cohort studies of dietary fibre sources intakes and risk of T2DM
Participants
(years)
Follow-
(Years)
DM cases
Dietary fibre
assessment
Dietary fibre
intake
Estimated risk P-
trend
Adjusted variables**
1 Weng et al.
(2012)
Taiwan
1,604
Women
52.7+10
Non DM
49.8+12
4.6 141
>7mmol/l
or self-
report
64-items FFQ
DF Not specified
Vegetable fibre
Q1 <5.15g/d
Q4 >12.9g/d
Fruit fibre
Q1 <5.6g/d
Q4 >16.5g/d
Q1 vs. Q4
Vegetable fibre
M(1)1.81(1.01,3.22)
M(2)1.91(1.06,3.44)
M(3) 2.23(1.22,4.08)
Fruit fibre
M(1)1.63 (0.95,2.81)
M(2)1.74 (1.02,2.98)
M(3)1.81 (1.05,3.13)
<0.01
M(1) age, sex, age-sex
interaction, EI residential
area.
M(2) M1 plus FH, BMI,
central obesity.
M(3) M2 plus education,
smoking, alcohol, PA,
HTN, high cholesterol,
hypertriglyceridemia, low
HDL-cholesterol
2 Hopping et
al. (2010)
75,512
Women
45-75 14 8587
Self-report
cases
method
Grain fibre
g/(4184kJ.d)
Q1 <3.8
Q5 >9.6
Vegetable fibre
g/(4184kJ.d)
Q1 <4.4
Q5 >10.6
Fruit fibre
g/(4184kJ.d)
Q1 <1.6
Q5 >7.8
Q5 vs. Q1
Grain fibre
All 0.91(0.82,1.00)
0.81(0.67,0.99)
0.98(0.87,1.11)
0.83(0.64,1.07)
Vegetables fibre
All 0.78(0.68, 0.88)
0.65(0.52,0.82)
0.79(0.67,0.93)
0.99(0.75,1.32)
Fruit fibre
All 0.93(0.84,1.02)
0.88(0.71,1.08)
0.97(0.85,1.11)
0.93(0.72,1.19)
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
M(1) ethnicity, BMI, PA,
education, and EI.
** Abbreviations used in column: EI= energy intake; PA= physical activity; FH= family history of diabetes; HTN =hypertension; BMI= body mass index; acids;
AOAC=
Association of Official Analytical Chemist; MET= Metabolic Equivalent Task; Inso-NCP = insoluble non-cellulosic polysaccharides;
Q1 vs. Q4 estimated risk among
lowest fibre group in comparison to highest fibre group;
Caucasian,
Japanese American,
Native Hawaiian;
Q5 vs. Q1 estimated risk among highest fibre group in
comparison to lowest fibre group;.
Continue
N Author No
Participants
(years)
Follow-up
(Years)
DM cases
Dietary fibre
assessment
Dietary fibre
intake
Estimated risk P-
trend
Adjusted variables**
Continue
Hopping et
al. (2010)
75,512
Women
45-75 14 8587
Self-report
cases
method
Women
Grain fibre
g/(4184kJ.d)
Q1 <4.2
Q5 >10.2
Vegetable fibre
g/(4184kJ.d)
Q1 <2.6
Q5 >10.4
Fruit fibre
g/(4184kJ.d)
Q1 4.2
Q5 >10.2
Q5 vs. Q1
Grain fibre
All 0.88(0.79,0.97)
0.79(0.62,1.01)
0.91(0.79,1.04)
0.87(0.69,1.09)
Vegetables fibre
All 0.96(0.87-1.08)
0.94(0.73,1.22)
1.00(0.86,1.16)
0.92(0.73,1.16)
Fruit fibre
All 0.0.95(0.85,1.06)
0.85(0.65,1.11)
0.98(0.85,1.12)
0.99(0.79,1.24)
M(1) ethnicity, BMI,
PA, education, and
3 Wannamethee
et al. (2009)
7 162
Self-report
cases
Englyst
method
Cereal fibre
< 6.9
vs. rest
Vegetable fibre
<11.3g/d
vs. rest
Q5 vs. Q1
Cereal fibre
M(1)1.61(1.16,2.23)
M(2)1.43(1.00,2.06)
M(3)1.32(0.91,1.91)
Vegetable fibre
M(1)1.64(1.18,2.29)
M(2)1.40(0.98,1.98)
M(3)1.28(0.89,1.82)
M(1) age
M(2) age, WC,
smoking, PA, social
class, alcohol,
preexisting MI,
stroke, use statin, EI.
M(3) M2 plus IL-6,
t-PA, and GGT
4 Krishnan et
al. (2007)
40,078
Women
21-69 8 1938
Self-report
cases
method
Cereal fibre g/d:
Q1 <2.3
Q5 >5.9
Q5 vs. Q1
Cereal fibre
M(1)0.67(0.58,0.77)
M(2)0.81(0.69,0.96)
M(3)0.82(0.70,0.96)
BMI < 25: 0.41(0.24,0.72)
BMI> 25: 0.88(0.75,1.04)
<0.01
0.003
M(1) age
M(2) age, BMI,EI,
FH, PA, smoking.
M(3) 2 plus GI,
protein, fat intake.
** Abbreviations used in column: EI= energy intake; PA= physical activity; FH= family history of diabetes; HTN =hypertension; BMI= body mass index; acids;; IL-6 =
initerleukin-6; t-PA = tissue plasminogen activator; GGT = Gamma-glutamyl transferase;
AOAC= Association of Official Analytical Chemist;
Caucasian,
Japanese American,
Native Hawaiian;
Q5 vs. Q1 estimated risk among highest fibre group in comparison to lowest fibre group.
Continue
N Author No
Participants
(years)
Follow-
(Years)
cases
Dietary
fibre
assessment
Dietary fibre intake Estimated risk P-trend Adjusted variables**
5 Barclay et al.
(2007)
Australia
Men &
women
+49 10 138
self-
report
cases
method
Per 5g/d increment:
Cereal fibre
Vegetable fibre
Fruit fibre
Cereal fibre
M(1) 0.96(0.80,1.16)
M(2)0.96(0.78,1.20)
Vegetable fibre
M(1) 0.72(0.57,0.93)
M(2) 0.76(0.57,0.99)
Fruit fibre
M(1)0.95(0.79,1.13)
M(2)0.94(0.78,1.15)
M(1) age, sex.
M(2) M1 plus FH, smoking, TG,
HDL, PA.
6 Schulze et al.
(2007)
Germany
25,067
Women
35  65
Women
40-65
7 844
Self-
report
cases
method
Cereal fibre g/d
Q1 6.6
Q5 16.6
Vegetable fibre g/d
Q1 0.7
Q5 3.4
Fruit fibre g/d
Q1 0.2
Q5 4.7
Q5 vs. Q1
Cereal fibre
M(1)0.73(0.57,0.94)
M(2) 0.72(0.56,0.93)
Vegetable fibre
M(1)0.93(0.75,1.17)
M(2)0.93(0.74,1.17)
Fruit fibre
M(1)0.89(0.71,1.13)
M(2)0.89(0.70,1.13)
M(1) age, sex, education, PA,
cycling, occupational activity,
smoking, alcohol, EI, BMI, WC,
Mg, PUFA:SFA, MUPA:SFA
ratio, CHO.
M(2) M1other fibres
7 Schulze et al.
(2004a)
91,249
Women
24-44 8 741
Self-
report
cases
method
Cereal fibre g/d
Q1 <3.8
Q5 >7.3
Vegetable fibre g/d
Q1 <4.2
Q5 >8.6
Fruit fibre g/d
Q1 <1.6
Q5 >4.8
Q5 vs. Q1
Cereal fibre
M(1)0.54(0.42,0.70)
M(2)0.64(0.48,0.86)
Vegetable fibre
M(1)0.87(0.69,1.09)
M(2)1.12(0.87,1.46)
Fruit fibre
M(1)0.70(0.56,0.88)
M(2)0.79(0.6,1.02)
<0.01
0.004
<0.01
M(1) age, BMI
M(2) M1 plus EI, alcohol, PA,
FH, Smoking, HTN, high blood
cholesterol, postmenopausal
hormonal use, oral contraceptive
use, GL, Mg intake, caffeine
intake, other fibre types
** Abbreviations used in column: EI= energy intake; PA= physical activity; FH= family history of diabetes; HTN =hypertension; BMI= body mass index; CHO=carbohydrates; SFA= saturated
fatty acid; PUFA=polyunsaturated fatty acids, MUPA= monounsaturated fatty acids; HDL= high density lipoprotein; 1AOAC= Association of Official Analytical Chemist; 2Q5 vs. Q1 estimated risk
among highest fibre group in comparison to lowest fibre group.
Continue
N Author No
Participants
(years)
Follow-
(Years)
DM cases
Dietary fibre
assessment
Dietary fibre
intake
Estimated risk P-
trend
Adjusted variables**
8 Hodge et al.
(2004)
Australia
31,641
Women
27-75 4 365
Self-report
cases
method
Per 10g/d
increment
Cereal fibre
Fruit fibre
Per 5g/d increment
Vegetable fibre
Per 1g/d increment
Potato fibre
Legumes fibre
Cereal fibre
M(1)0.97(0.79,1.20)
M(2)1.08(0.88,1.32)
Fruit fibre
M(1)0.93(0.77,1.11)
M(2)0.97(0.81,1.16)
Vegetable fibre
M(1) 1.01(0.87,1.18)
M(2)1.00(0.86,1.17)
Potato fibre
M(1)1.04(0.92,1.17)
M(2)1.03(0.91,1.16)
Legumes fibre
M(1)1.01(0.97,1.06)
M(2)1.01(0.96,1.06)
M(1) Age country of
birth, PA, FH,
weight change last 5
yrs, education,
alcohol, FH, EI.
M (2) M1 plus BMI,
9 Montonen et
al. (2003)
Finland
Women
40-69 10 156
Self-report
cases
Dietary history
and interview
method
Cereal fibre g/d
Q1 (0.47-12)
Q4 (24.5-111)
Fruit fibre g/d
Q1 (0-0.99)
Q4 (3.4-36.8)
Vegetable fibre g/d
Q1 (0.11-3.7)
Q4 (6.8-26.5)
Q4 vs. Q1
Cereal fibre
M(1)0.36(0.18,0.70)
M(2)0.39(0.20,0.77)
Vegetable fibre
M(1)1.33(0.81,2.18)
M(2)1.19(0.46,3.04)
Fruit fibre
M(1)0.98(0.63,1.53)
M(2)0.92(0.4,2.13)
0.005
M(1) age, sex,
geographic area, and
M(2) M 1 plus
smoking, BMI,
intake of fruit and
berries, and
vegetables
** Abbreviations used in column: EI= energy intake; PA= physical activity; FH= family history of diabetes; HTN =hypertension; BMI= body mass index; CHO=carbohydrates;
SFA= saturated fatty acid; PUFA=polyunsaturated fatty acids, MUPA= monounsaturated fatty acids; HDL= high density lipoprotein;
AOAC= Association of Official Analytical
Chemist;
Q4 vs. Q1 estimated risk among highest fibre group in comparison to lowest fibre group.
Continue
N Author No
Participants
(years)
Follow-
(Years)
DM cases
Dietary
fibre
assessment
Dietary fibre intake Estimated risk P-
trend
Adjusted variables**
10 Stevens et al.
(2002)
12,251
Women
White
African
American
45-64 9 1,447
Self-report
cases
method
Per 1g/d increment
of cereal fibre, fruit
fibre and legumes
fibre
Cereal fibre
M(1)0.94(0.91,0.97)
M(2)0.95(0.92,0.98)
M(1)0.97(0.92,1.03)
M(2)0.98(0.92,1.03)
Fruit fibre
M(1)0.99(0.97,1.01)
M(2) 1.00(0.98,1.02)
M(1)1.00(0.98,1.03)
M(2)1.00(0.98,1.33)
Legume fibre
M(1)1,00(0.95,1.05)
M(2)1.00(0.95,1.05)
M(1)0.95(0.87,1.04)
M(2)0.96(0.88,1.04)
<0.01
0.006
M(1) age, BMI, sex,
field centre
M (2) 1 plus
education, smoking,
11 Meyer et al.
(2000)
35,988
Women
55-69 6 1141
Self-report
cases
method
Cereal fibre g/d
Q1 <3.4
Q5 >7.5
Vegetable fibre g/d
Q1 <5.75
Q5 >10.14
Legume fibre g/d
Q1 <0.31
Q5 >1.21
Fruit fibre g/d
Q1 <2.55
Q5 >7.02
Q5 vs. Q1
Cereal fibre
M(1)0.64(0.53,0.79)
M(3)0.78(0.62,0.99)
M(5)0.71(0.56,0.89)
Vegetables fibre
M(1)0.97(0.80,1.18)
Legumes fibre
M(1)1.10(0.91,1.33)
Fruit fibre
M(1)1.17(0.96,1.42)
0.0001
0.025
0.0017
0.081
M(1) Age, EI,WHR,
BMI education,
smoking, alcohol,
M(3) M1 plus Mg
and total grain
M(5) M1 plus Mg
and whole grain
** Abbreviations used in column: EI= energy intake; PA= physical activity; FH= family history of diabetes; HTN =hypertension; BMI= body mass index; CHO=carbohydrates;
WHR= waist hip ratio;
AOAC= Association of Official Analytical Chemist;
White population;
African American population;
Q5 vs. Q1 estimated risk among highest fibre
group in comparison to lowest fibre group.
Continue
N Author No
Participants
(years)
Follow-
(Years)
DM cases
Dietary fibre
assessment
Dietary fibre
intake
Estimated risk P-
trend
Adjusted variables**
12 Salmeron et
al. (1997b)
65,173
Women
40-65 6 915
Self-report
method
Cereal fibre g/d
Q1 2.0
Q5 7.5
Vegetable fibre g/d
Q1 3.4
Q5 9.6
Fruit fibre g/d
Q1 1.4
Q5 7.6
Q5 vs. Q1
Cereal fibre
0.72(0.58,0.90)
Vegetable fibre
1.17(0.93,1.46)
Fruit fibre
0.87(0.70,1.08)
0.001
M (1) age, BMI,
alcohol, FH, prior
weight change, and
time period.
13 Salmeron et
al. (1997a)
42,759
40-75 6 523
Self-report
cases
method
Cereal fibre g/d
Q1 2.5
Q5 10.2
Fruit fibre g/d
Q1 1.2
Q5 8.3
Vegetable fibre g/d
Q1 3.5
Q5 11.3
(Q5 vs. Q1)
Cereal fibre
0.70(0.51,0.96)
Vegetable fibre
1.12(0.84,1.49)
Fruit fibre
1.01(0.76,1.36)
0.007
Adjusted for age,
BMI, alcohol,
smoking, FH
** Abbreviations used in column: EI= energy intake; PA= physical activity; FH= family history of diabetes; HTN =hypertension; BMI= body mass indexo;
AOAC=
Association of Official Analytical Chemist;
Q5 vs. Q1 estimated risk among highest fibre group in comparison to lowest fibre group.
4.4 Discussion
This comprehensive review showed that among high fibre consumers, lifestyle
and dietary factors in general were in the line with dietary guidelines (Food
Standards Agency, 2007).
4.4.1Total dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM
Pooled estimate comparing highest versus lowest dietary fibre intake showed a
lack of association between TDF and risk of T2DM with moderate heterogeneity
that may possibly be explained by variation in gender and follow-up period and
geographic location as demonstrated in the subgroup analysis. The current evidence
suggests protective effect of TDF on risk of DM in women. Additionally, it showed
significant inverse association between TDF and risk of T2DM among participants
who were followed for less than 7 years duration but not from studies with a longer
duration. Change in diet over time may have an influence on the risk of diabetes. On
the other hand, exploring the degree of stability in dietary intake over a longer
follow-up duration cannot be achieved by single dietary assessment which may
possible partly contribute to heterogeneity.
From the total number of cohorts, half of the prospective studies reported non-
significant effect of high intake of TDF on the risk of diabetes. One of the studies
that not included in the pooled estimate showed gender variation in the dietary fibre
and risk of T2DM and suggested that type of diet may differ between women and
men, where women more likely to misreport their dietary intake (Hopping et al.,
2010). Even for the two studies that examine dose-response relationship, the results
differ with almost similar increment in TDF (5g/day and 4.8g/day) (Barclay et al.,
2007, Sluijs et al., 2010b). This reflects a considerable inconsistency between the
studies and even within the study (Hopping et al., 2010).
Second half of the cohorts that showed significant inverse association, high
dietary fibre consumers in seven cohort studies showed a wide range of significant
risk reductions of T2DM ranging from 11% to 49%. However, three out of them
reported approximately a 25% significant risk reduction (Hopping et al., 2010,
Meyer et al., 2000, Salmeron et al., 1997b) in comparison to the lowest categories.
Another potential source of heterogeneity could be explained by the varied
amount of daily dietary fibre consumed across the cohorts (Higgins et al., 2003). In
this review, the significant protective effects of dietary fibre on the risk of T2DM
observed with daily dietary fibre intakes were more than 23.6g, 24.1g, and 33.2g in
comparison to less than 15.3g, 11.8g and 19.2g respectively (Meyer et al., 2000,
Salmeron et al., 2001, Montonen et al., 2003). On the other hand, non-significant
risk reductions were reported with relatively similar amounts of daily fibre (more
than 22g, 26g, 27g, 29.7g and 31g) (Schulze et al., 2004a, Stevens et al., 2002,
Schulze et al., 2007, Salmeron et al., 1997a, Wannamethee et al., 2009) in
comparison to lowest fibre intake group (14.2g, 10.2g, 15.1g, 17.1g and 20g
respectively).
Variation in characteristics of studied population also may contribute to
diversity between and within cohort studies (Higgins et al., 2003). Genetic
background and ethnicity were associated with diabetes incidence as discussed in
chapter 1. Significance difference in dietary fibre intake was reported across
different ethnic background in England (South Asian, black African and white
European) (Goff et al., 2013). In a multi-ethnic cohort study (Hopping et al., 2010)
Caucasians showed an inverse association which was significant, but this relation
was not statistically significant among the Japanese American group. Swedish study
by Ericson et al. (2013) was further examined the risk of diabetes based on genetic
background (Hindy et al., 2012); a protective effect of high fibre intake on the risk
of T2DM was reported among participants with CC genotype of TCF7L2 rs7903146
but not with other genotypes.
Another possible source of variation across cohort studies is the different
sources of fibre which may have different effect of fibre on the development of
diabetes. In vitro starch digestibility study demonstrated that incorporated psyllium
or oat bran into ready to eat snack resulted in significant reduction of glucose
response by 15% and 5.4% respectively compared to control groups after 120
minutes of consumption, while in vivo study showed that only psyllium snack
reduced postprandial glucose concentration at 20 and 60 minutes in comparison with
oat bran snack and control (Brennan et al., 2012)
Hopping et al. (2010) suggested that variation based on ethnic background
may be because wheat was the commonly consumed fibre-rich food among
Caucasians in comparison to rice, which was the commonly consumed fibre rich
food in the other group.
The majority of studies used the AOAC analytical method and one UK study
reported the NSP. More detail on the dietary fibre analysis is in Chapter 2. However,
it is hard to explore the fibre analysis method as a potential source of variation in the
subgroup analysis. Chapter 7 aims to examine whether high AOAC-fibre consumers
similar to high NSP consumers in the UKWCS which can be useful to explore the
impact of fibre analysis method in epidemiological aspect.
Also some of the heterogeneity may be attributed to variation in dietary
assessment methods. The common dietary assessment tool used in prospective
studies is the FFQ as most cost-effective way to estimate dietary intake of large
studied populations (Cade et al., 2004b). The FFQ is not without problems, as
estimated dietary intake is subject to bias in term of estimated portion size, the
influence of the number of food items included in the FFQ and misreporting by
participants. Food item numbers of the FFQ in cohorts included in the current meta-
analysis varied between 66 (Stevens et al., 2002) and 162 (Wannamethee et al.,
2009). The Melbourne Collaborative Cohort Study (Hodge et al., 2004) argued that
non-significant findings may relate to the lack of details for some fibre-rich food
such as breakfast cereal and type of pasta and rice which may resulted in
underestimation of dietary fibre intake.
Another potential source of heterogeneity could be that the variation in the
sources of cereal fibre may have a different impact. It was reported by Cummings
and Stephen (2007) that specific grain types contributing to whole grain intake can
vary between countries. Wheat was the main contributor of whole grain intake in the
UK, while high percentage of oat contributed to whole grain intake in the USA. This
suggests the impact of type of food that provided dietary fibre may be differ.
However, in this meta-analysis, the pooled estimate on cereal fibre intake on the risk
of diabetes was highly consistent and no heterogeneity was seen.
Methods of case ascertainment can also have an impact on risk estimate in
prospective studies. Undiagnosed cases may mask the true association since people
with asymptomatic diabetes are more likely to be undiagnosed (Salmeron et al.,
1997a, Stevens et al., 2002). Most of confirmation on diabetes diagnosis in cohorts
(Schulze et al., 2004a) aimed to rule out non-cases in self-reported diabetes group
but not to identify cases in diabetes free group.
Small sample size is another aspect that may partly explain the results in some
studies (Wannamethee et al., 2009, Barclay et al., 2007).
However, lack of association between total dietary fibre intake and risk of
T2DM was noticed even in cohort studies with a large sample size (741 and 844
diabetic cases) (Schulze et al., 2007, Schulze et al., 2004a). On the other hand,
prospective studies that included much smaller sample size reported significant
inverse association between dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM (156 and 141
diabetic cases) (Weng et al., 2012, Montonen et al., 2003).
Experimental evidence examined the association between fibre intake and
diabetes status markers. Interventional study with high fibre intake from food
(cereals and apples) over 3 month duration in healthy adults compared with control
group with similar nutrient composition except for fibre showed significant decrease
in fasting blood glucose level with high fibre group (Aller et al., 2004). Another trial
among overweight adult with intake of wholegrain that provide (30g/day of fibre )
for 6 weeks in compared to refined grain group (provide 17g/day of fibre) did not
show significant changes in the fasting blood glucose levels between the groups
(Andersson et al., 2007). Variation in studied population and duration of
intervention may explain these results.
4.4.2Insoluble and soluble dietary fibre intakes and risk of T2DM
Further analysis in this review on the effect of types of dietary fibre on the risk
of T2DM showed significant inverse association between the intake of insoluble
dietary fibre but not with soluble fibre on the risk of T2DM comparing extreme fibre
groups. The protective effect may be related to the higher amount consumed in
comparison to SDF intake which may possibly be adequate to show a significant
effect. In most of the studies, insoluble fibre consumption was double the amount of
soluble fibre, which may indicate that the amount of soluble fibre intake may be
insufficient to show significant protective results. Further research is needed on
dietary fibre fractions in relation to chronic diseases such as diabetes. Overall, this
demonstrates less clarity regards type of dietary fibre that effectively reduce the risk
of T2DM thus, there is a need for further prospective studies to examine the effect of
insoluble and soluble fibre intakes on the development of diabetes.
4.4.3Intakes of main fibre sources and risk of T2DM
Pooled cereal estimate showed significant risk reduction by 25% among
people who consume high cereal fibre in comparison to lower consumers. Also
pooled estimate from cohorts that reported dietary fibre intake as continuous showed
significant risk reduction by 4% among highest cereal fibre intake in comparison to
lowest cereal consumers. Some of the possible reasons for negative findings in the
few identified studies were reported. For example, Atherosclerosis Risk in
Community (ARIC) study showed non-significant association among the African
American population but not the white population which also may be because of
small sample size as incidence of diabetes is higher in African-Americans (17.5% in
comparison to whites (10.2%) (Stevens et al., 2002). Also underestimation of
dietary fibre intake due to lack of some fibre rich food in the FFQ such as breakfast
cereal (Hodge et al., 2004).
From the current review, the pooled estimate showed no relationship between
risk of T2DM and intake of vegetable fibre. Also for the fruit fibre intake no
significant link to risk of T2DM in pooled analysis. None of the few prospective
studies found an effect of legumes fibre on the risk of T2DM. This may suggest that
specific fibre types/sources are more or less potent in terms of influencing glycaemia
and insulinemia. However, pectin consumption in interventional study showed
significant reduction in blood glucose (Jenkins et al., 1977). Zulphen study reported
significant inverse association between habitual pectin intake and incremental area
under the curve for glucose among middle aged participants (Feskens and
Kromhout 1990). So there is conflict in these results.
Generally, current meta-analysis showed lack of significant associations
between T2DM and main fibre sources (vegetables, fruit and legumes) except for
cereal fibre. This could be explained by inadequate intake of fruit, vegetable and
legumes fibres in comparison to cereal fibre intake.
Recent review suggested the presence of aleurone cell walls in cereal foods
which are rich in phenolic acids and cross-linked with other bioactive substances but
absent in fruit fibre (Lillioja et al., 2013) possibly explain the beneficial effect of
cereal fibre. It was also reported that cereal fibre could be a marker of other vital
micronutrients which are present in wholegrain (Willett, 2012).
Another aspect which needs to be considered is the measurement error with
estimating fruit and vegetable fibre intakes, especially as these types of food are
usually consumed in composite dishes such as green salad and fruit salad which are
hard for participants to estimate the actual amount consumed. More exploration on
the measurement errors from FFQ by comparing two dietary assessment methods
will be in chapter 10.
On the other hand, recent review by PalafoxCarlos et al. (2011)
demonstrated that dietary fibre from fruit and vegetables interferes with the
bioavailability of phenolic compounds and carotenoids by trapping micronutrients in
the fibre matrix which decreases absorption of these bioactive compounds.
One of the issues that emerges from these findings, the British Regional Heart
study (Wannamethee et al., 2009) which reported an intake of less than 20g/day of
NSP in comparison to higher than 20g/day increased the risk of diabetes by 47%
among adult men after adjustment for potential confounders listed in Table 4.5. This
is higher than the recommended NSP value (18g/d) among adult (Department of
Health, 1991) however, this study was only on men and may not represent the
general UK population, which restrict the generalization of their results in addition
to overestimation bias should be considered with the use of FFQ dietary
information.
4.4.4Strength and limitations
The main advantages of meta-analysis are to increase the chance of detecting
a more reliable pooled estimated effect from existing relevant studies, to improve
the estimation of the dietary fibre effect when it is based on more evidence and to
allow investigation of the consistency of effect where studies characteristics differ
(Deeks et al., 2008).
On the other hand, some disadvantages such as the presence of bias in
individual studies may be combined in the meta-analysis, and diversity in the
exposure and outcome measures of the studies should be considered when selecting
primary studies otherwise the meta-analysis will be irrelevant and misleading
(Ioannidis and Lau, 1999). Deeks et al. (2008) says random effect meta-analysis is
the most appropriate approach for looking at cohort studies rather than fixed effect.
This allows each of the studies to estimate a different effect size and thus to obtain
strong assumptions.
A number of limitations need to be considered in the current chapter. First the
gender subgroup analysis did not show significant heterogeneity within women
studies. However, this was subject to bias as the presence of the small number of
studies among women group may lower the statistical power for detecting variation
within each group. Also some cohort studies were not included in pooled estimate
because of unavailable separate estimated risk by gender which may have a potential
effect on the pooled estimate. Studies from European countries were found to be
more consistent than the USA. However, the subgroup analysis based on country of
origin showed lack of association between fibre intake and risk of T2DM in both
European and USA groups.
Secondly, analysis was undertaken for only fully-adjusted models, but this
may not rule out the potential effect of residual confounders. On the other hand,
some studies adjusted for large numbers of confounders have the disadvantage of
estimation bias due to over-adjustment (Schulze et al., 2007, Hodge et al., 2004).
Thirdly, the majority of cohort studies used the FFQ to assess the dietary fibre
intake among studied populations and although several studies reported a reasonable
validity and reproducibility of the FFQ used, measurement errors cannot be avoided
(Cade et al., 2004b). Finally, comparing highest to lowest categories has its own
limitations. For example, there is variation in the number of categories as studies
populations may subdivide into 4 quartiles or 5 quintiles, depending on exposure
distribution, and there is always a concern regard loss of information with
categorization. This issue may have contributed to heterogeneity in the current
pooled analyses (Tu and Greenwood, 2012). It was noticed that dietary fibre
categories were overlapped across studies, where highest group in one study
(Q5>23g/day) (Meyer et al., 2000) could be lowest in another study (Q1<24.1g/day)
(Weng et al., 2012). Also variation within the categorical fibre groups in the cohort
may not be so great to show significant lower risk (Schulze et al., 2004a).
The differences across studies should be considered and this was addressed
partly in this review by using random effect method. This review included
prospective studies which have the advantage of eliminating the chance of dietary
intake recall bias since the history of dietary intake is taken before the diagnosis of
diabetes.
Further research in this field regarding the effect of different dietary fibre
sources and types of dietary fibre on the development of diabetes would be of great
help in optimizing potential health benefits. Also, more studies are needed to
examine the amount of increment of dietary fibre intake in relation to the risk of
diabetes giving more quantitative data in term of dose-response relationship to
support dietary guidelines aiming for primary prevention of disease. Interventional
trials focusing on dietary fibre intake could generate information on the optimal
amount of fibre that may protect from T2DM.
4.4.5Potential mechanisms of the dietary fibre effect on the
development of diabetes
In general, delayed gastric emptying, slow rate of intestine digestion and
absorption, and fibre fermentation, that results in short chain fatty acid production in
the large intestine, were all demonstrated by Jenkins and his colleagues (1987) as
physiological beneficial effects of dietary fibre. Early studies by Jenkins reported
that intake of soluble fibres reduced the postprandial glucose response (Jenkins et
al., 1978) which may related to its viscosity properties. In the current review,
insoluble fibre rather than soluble fibre has a clearer protective effect on the risk of
T2DM. Although, the potential mechanisms involved are still not very clear.
However, a review by Weickert and Pfeiffer (2008) demonstrated that studies on
increased satiety via high fibre diets may explain the protective insoluble fibre effect
that is found in prospective studies acting through body weight reduction or limit
weight gain. Furthermore, improvement in insulin sensitivity with high fibre diets
intake was also suggested as a potential mechanism (Weickert and Pfeiffer, 2008).
Another possible mechanism that has been investigated in a previous study was the
inflammatory markers which were reported as strong predictors of diabetes (Sattar et
al., 2008).
Evidence of the beneficial effect of magnesium intake on the risk of diabetes
was demonstrated in two meta-analyses (Larsson and Wolk, 2007, Dong et al.,
2011). As significant beneficial effect of high cereal fibre intake on the risk of
diabetes was demonstrated in a cohort study after adjustment for confounders
including magnesium intake (Schulze et al., 2007). However because of the high
correlation between the intake of fibre and magnesium, it was hard to separate the
effect of each so this was subject to estimation bias. A study showed that
intracellular magnesium has a key role in insulin action where insufficient
magnesium suggested an underlying reason for insulin resistance (Barbagallo et al.,
2003).
A number of mechanisms are suggested through which dietary fibre might
prevent T2DM. Jenkins et al. (1978) showed significant reduction in blood glucose
post fibre consumption which highly correlated with dietary fibre viscosity. But
importantly Jenkins et al. (2002) studies of lente carbohydrates, all tended to suggest
that water soluble fibres where most potent leading to a smaller glucose Area under
the curve (AUC) not insoluble fibre. This believed to slow the rate of intestinal
starch digestion and absorption through delay gastric emptying that led to improve
glucose response (Jenkins et al., 1987). On the other hand, recall that some cohorts
have found insoluble fibre or cereal fibre to reduce risk of T2DM, but soluble fibre
less so (Salmeron et al., 1997b, Meyer et al., 2000, Montonen et al., 2003).
In recent years, the attention on the bioactive compounds (polyphenols) that
found attached to the plant cell walls was suggested to have the beneficial effect on
human health (Saura-Calixto, 2010) where dietary fibre believed to be a carrier for
these antioxidants substances.
4.5 Conclusion
Meta-analysis provides a useful summary of the extent of variations between
the studies on the existing evidence by pooling risk that compare highest versus
lowest, however the pattern in the relationship is less clear. Estimated risk was
pooled from studies performed in different countries which allow investigation of
the effect of dietary fibre based on a wide spectrum of dietary fibre intake.
Considerable variations between the studies may possibly be explained by
difference in gender, origin of the study and follow-up duration which was explored
in the meta-analysis. Method used to assess diet and publication bias were other
potential reasons for heterogeneity that could not explore in the current meta-
analysis. Low level of consistency of evidence on total dietary fibre intake and risk
of T2DM may suggest further meta-analysis for dose-response relationship.
The findings discussed in this chapter support the hypothesis that diets with
cereal fibre decrease the risk of T2DM. Total dietary fibre and the remaining fibre
sources showed no significant association among high fibre consumers compared to
lower consumers.
Current meta-analysis suggested a significant protective effect of insoluble
rather than soluble fibre on the development of diabetes. No protective effect of high
vegetables, fruit and legumes fibres intake on the risk of T2DM in compared to
people with lower intakes. It has been suggested that the presence of other
components such as magnesium associated with cereal fibre may partly explain the
strong inverse association with the risk of T2DM. However, the dose-response
relationship between intake of dietary fibre sources and the risk of T2DM needs
exploration in future work.
Chapter 5: Dietary fibre analysis in commonly consumed
legumes in UK: AOAC-fibre: NSP ratio for legumes group
5.1 Introduction
Legumes are a rich source of dietary fibre as well as providing energy from
starch and protein content (Dilis and Trichopoulou, 2009). The beneficial
therapeutic effects of legumes have been reported in a pooled analysis on
participants with and without a history of diabetes which showed improvement in
markers of glycaemic control with consumption of beans (Sievenpiper et al., 2009).
This result may be explained by the characteristic low glycaemic response generated
by legumes (Jenkins, 1980). Some types of dietary fibre have been shown to slow
rate of digestion and absorption which may be due to its viscosity characteristics
(Jenkins et al., 1987). It is this slow digestibility characteristic of legume starch is
thought to be contribute to the low glucose response (Jenkins, 1980).
To date various methods have been developed and introduced to measure
dietary fibre content in food and food products. The two analytical methods that are
commonly used for dietary fibre analysis are the enzymatic gravimetric method and
the enzymatic chemical method (Englyst et al., 2007). The influence of dietary fibre
analytical methods upon dietary fibre measurement have been extensively reviewed
(Englyst et al., 2007).
The Englyst method is based on chemical analysis of NSP which represent the
intrinsic plant cell walls provided in a plant rich food. The enzymatic gravimetric
method endorsed by the Association Of Analytical Chemists (AOAC) (Prosky et al.,
1985) is based on gravimetric measurement after removing enzymatic digestion of
starch and protein. Details on the analytical methods were demonstrated in chapter
From dietary fibre definitions included components other than NSP include,
lignin, enzymatic resistant starch and other non-digestible material. This may more
closely covered by AOAC method which used worldwide to provide fibre content
for nutrient databases and food labelling purposes (DeVries, 2004). In the UK, the
Englyst method was used to determine NSP in food composition tables and for
labelling purposes and remained the recommended method for nutrition and food
labelling until 1999. After that, the Food Standards Agency accepted the role of
resistant starch and lignin as being part of dietary fibre and adapted the AOAC
method to measure dietary fibre in food for labelling purposes (Food Standards
Agency, 2002)
The AOAC (991.43) method (Association of Official Analytical Chemist,
1995) was adopted for the current study because this method had been
recommended by the WHO and the FAO as a method to determine total soluble and
insoluble fibre in foods and food products and they advised that it be used for
nutritional labeling in the UK (Food Standards Agency, 2002). The sixth edition of
the UK food composition tables provide a list of AOAC measured AOAC-fibre
values for 47 food items however no values for legumes were listed, despite being
one of the best sources of dietary fibre. Therefore the aim of this study was to
determine the AOAC-fibre and insoluble dietary fibre (IDF) in selected legumes that
are commonly consumed in the UK using the AOAC method with simple
modifications. This study also set out with the aim of assessing the importance of
effect of common cooking methods (boiling and canning) on the AOAC-fibre
content of legumes.
Most UK epidemiological studies use NSP values, therefore a potential bias
should be considered when comparing with other studies which estimate dietary
intake from AOAC-fibre values. One way to tackle this issue is to use AOAC-fibre:
NSP ratio. A mean ratio of NSP: AOAC-fibre of 1: 1.33 was generated for different
types of food groups (Lunn and Buttriss, 2007). However, the legumes group was
not well represented in this ratio (Peattie et al., 1983). An early experiment by
Reistad and Frolich (1984) reported a ratio of 1: 1.1 to 1: 1.4 for vegetables not
including legumes. Therefore the next aim was to generate a ratio for legumes which
may be useful to convert NSP values to AOAC-fibre values for some of the
nutritional epidemiologists who investigate the dietary fibre intake in population
characterized by high consumption of legumes such as ethnic minorities and
vegetarians.
5.2 Materials and methods
5.2.1Materials
The samples for testing were selected based on commonly used legume
products in the NDNS (Henderson et al., 2002) and the UK Womens Cohort Study
(UKWCS) (Cade et al., 2004a) more detail on the UKWCS is in chapter 6. Briefly,
the UKWCS is one of the largest population based prospective study in the UK
AOAC-fibre referred to total dietary fibre obtained from AOAC analytical method only.
which has the advantage of including women with a wide range of dietary exposures
including a high proportion of vegetarians or vegan.
A descriptive analysis was carried out to determine types of legumes
consuming and usual cooking method used among the cohort. Data were obtained
from the baseline FFQ for 35,372 participants showed that 88% of women reported
consumed legumes. The most consumed legumes by mean (SD) among cohort
women are baked beans, green beans, peas, lentils, mung and red kidney beans,
butter beans and chickpeas (Table 5.1). In terms of cooking methods used for
legumes; 64% of women used boiling and pressure cooking as their usual method
for cooking. Half of legumes were eaten from cans compared to other forms of
legumes (dried, frozen, and fresh). The National Diet and Nutrition Survey reported
that green beans were eaten by 22% of all women while a higher percentage of all
women consumed baked beans (41%) (Henderson et al., 2002).
Table 5.1 Mean (SD) of legume intake (g/day) by cohort women
Food item Dietary intake (g/d)
Mean (SD)
Baked beans 23.8 (28.3)
Green beans 18.6 (20.2)
Green peas 11.8 (12.1)
Lentils 4.5 (8.3)
Mung beans and red kidney beans 3.3 (5.4)
Butter beans 3.1 (5.2)
Chickpeas 2.8 (6.2)
5.2.2Sample preparation
From the above findings, eight types of legumes were included in the dietary
fibre analysis, namely yellow chickpeas (Cicer arietinum L), red kidney beans
(Phaseolus vulgaris), red lentils and green and brown lentil (Lens culinaris), butter
beans (Phaseolus lunatus L), green peas (Pisum sativum), and green beans
(Phaseolus vulgaris), baked bean in tomato sauce (haricot or navy beans; Phaseolus
vulgaris) and mung beans (Vigna mungo). For lentils, three subtypes were included
in the analysis.
The sampling technique for the selected types of legumes was adopted from
McCance and Widdowsons The Composition of Foods (2002) as in Figure 5.1 to
allow future comparability with NSP values published in the UK composition foods
tables (Food Standards Agency, 2002). The selected types of legumes were
purchased in form of dried legumes (8 types) and canned legumes (6 types). A
number of brands were purchased from various UK supermarkets for each type of
legumes. Table 5.2 shows all brands for each type of canned legumes (baked beans,
chickpeas, red kidney beans, butter beans, green peas and green beans). Table 5.3
shows all brands for each type of dried legume (yellow chickpeas, red kidney beans,
mung beans, red lentil, butter beans, green beans and peas) were pooled before
analysis. Eight pooled samples (composite sample) of dried legumes were processed
prior to analysis. Processing included soaking overnight in tap water (1:5 w/v) at
room temperature followed by draining and then cooking in tap water at boiling
temperature described in the UK food composition tables (description section as in
Figure 5.1) in McCance and Widdowsons The Composition of Foods (2002). When
cooking instructions were not available in the aforementioned book, packet
instructions were followed as per normal domestic practice. Canned legumes were
drained. Then, all composite samples were drained and homogenised prior to
analysis. In total, fourteen pooled samples of legumes were for dried and frozen
legumes, and canned legumes.
Figure 5.1 Example of some legumes description from vegetable section in McCance and
Widdowsons The Composition of Foods (2002)
Table 5.2 List of canned legumes purchased from local supermarkets
Canned legumes N
Brands Mean
NSP*g/100g
Code*
Baked beans in
tomato sauce
1 Sainsburys baked beans
3.7 13-044
2 Heinz baked beans
3 Tesco light baked beans
4 ASDA Baked Beans in tomato sauce
5 Organic baked beans
Yellow chickpeas
1 Sainsburys chickpeas
4.1 13-078
2 Tesco chickpeas
3 Waitrose chickpeas
4 Morrison chickpeas
5 Morrison organic chickpeas
Red kidney beans
1 Tesco red kidney beans
6.2 13-111
2 Waitrose red kidney beans
3 Tesco whole food red kidney beans
4 Morrison red kidney beans
5 Sainsburys red kidney beans
6 Organic Tesco red kidney beans
Butter beans
1 Morrison butter beans
4.6 13-722 Essential Waitrose butter beans
3 Sainsburys butter beans
Green peas
1 Sainsburys green peas in water
5.1 13-135
2 Co-operative green peas
3 ASDA green peas
4 Daucy garden peas
5 Morrison green peas
6 Tesco garden peas
Green beans
1 Bandwelle green beans in water
2.6 13-85
2 Sainsburys whole French green beans
3 Morrison cut green beans
4 Morrison whole green beans
5 Tesco whole green beans
6 Batchelors cut green beans
* (Food Standards Agency, 2002)
Table 5.3 List of dried legumes purchased from local supermarkets
Dried legumes N
Brands Mean
g/100g
Yellow Chickpeas 1 Sainsbury chickpeas dried
4.3 13-077
2 Tesco chickpeas dried
3 Waitrose chickpeas dried
4 Chanadal chickpeas dried
Red kidney beans 1 Morrisons whole food red kidney beans
6.7 13-110
2 Great scot red kidney beans
3 Natco red kidney beans
Mung beans 1 Moong whole heeva
3.0 13-097
2 Natco mung beans
3 Tesco mung beans
Red lentil 1 East End red lentil
1.9 13-092
2 Indus red lentil
3 Tesco red lentil
4 Great Scot red lentil
Butter beans 1 Whitworths butter beans
5.2 13-071
Whole food butter beans
Great Scot butter beans
Green brown lentil 1 East End Green lentil
3.8 13-090
2 Brown lentil Heera
3 Waitrose green lentil
Green peas frozen 1 Morrison green peas
5.1 13-134
2 Sainsburys basic British garden peas
3 Birds Eye field fresh garden peas
4 British garden peas by Sainsburys
5 Cooperative farm British garden peas
Green beans Frozen 1 Tesco sliced green beans
4.1 13-0842 Sainsburys very fine whole green beans
3 ASDA sliced green beans
* (Food Standards Agency, 2002)
5.2.3Dietary fibre analysis: modified AOAC method
All necessary enzymes and chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(Dorset, UK) unless otherwise stated. A fibre assay kit (K-TDFR 03/2009) obtained
from Megazyme International Ireland Ltd was used. AOAC-fibre was determined in
triplicate number of sample of 1.000g.
5.2.3.1 Total dietary fibre analysis
Samples were analysed for AOAC-fibre and IDF following a modified AOAC
official method (991.43) (Association of Official Analytical Chemist, 1995). Figure
5.2 demonstrates all the steps of the AOAC method. The sample was suspended in
MES/TRIS buffer. The starch gelatinization step
was performed by placing the
sample in a boiling bath for 60 minutes as a first modification step. Evidence shows
that the gelatinization temperature of legume starch ranges between 70C  95C and
Gelatinization is an irreversible process which occurs when starch placed in large amount of water
and heated, the starch granules gradually swells and the crystalline structure of the starch will be
disrupted and starch will be dissolve. (Bogracheva et al., 1998)
in most legume starches, no measurable granule swelling occurs at temperatures
below 60C (Hoover et al., 2010). Therefore, a high temperature is suggested to
break down the strong interactions between amylose chains within the granules. A
review by Guillon and Champ (2002) stated that the temperature for gelatinization
of a range of legume starch can reach up to 125C (temperature of gelatinization
range 55  125C) compared with cereal starch (55  90 C).
From Figure 5.2, enzyme hydrolysis was performed by incubating the sample
with heat stable -amylase (for starch digestion) with manual shaking for 35 
minutes, followed by incubation with protease (for protein digestion) for 30 minutes
with shaking, followed by pH adjustment to 4.5 and incubation with
amyloglucosidase for 30 minutes in a shaking water bath for further starch and
maltodextrin hydrolysis. Table 5.4 illustrates the characteristics of the digestive
enzymes used for AOAC-fibre analysis.
After step 3, the digested mixture was precipitated with four volumes of 95%
ethanol that had been preheated to 60C. The precipitated sample was centrifuged
using a Beckman Coulter J2 Centrifuge using 250ml Beckman tubes at 3840 g for
30 minutes at 20C. Centrifugation aimed to facilitate separation and reduce the
filtration time (Oh and Grundleger, 1990). In step 6, the supernatant was removed
from the centrifuged sample, and the residue filtered through 3 layers of Miracloth.
Filtration with Miracloth was the second modification step that was carried out in
the AOAC method. The residue was washed with ethanol, then acetone and dried in
an oven at 103C until constant weight was achieved in step 7. Step 8, residue was
analysed for nitrogen content by the Kjeldahl method (Jones Jr, 1991). Appendix D
illustrates the steps for Kjeldahl procedure. Nitrogen content was multiplied by a
conversion factor of 6.25 to calculate protein content. Finally step 9, another residue
was used for ash analysis by combustion in a furnace at 550C until a constant
weight was achieved. AOAC-fibre values were recorded after subtracting protein
and ash. Figure 5.2 presents the AOAC procedure with simple modification steps.
Table 5.4 Characteristics of enzymes used in AOAC method for dietary fibre analysis
Enzyme  Heat stable -amylase Protease  Amyloglucosidase  
E-BLAAM
(3,000 Ceralpha U/ml)
E-BSPRT
(50mg/ml)
E-AMGDF
(3200 U/ml)
Source Bacillus licheniformis Bacillus licheniformis Aspergillus niger
Substrate p-nitrophenyle
maltoheptaoside
Tyrosine Soluble starch
Specific activity
IU/volume
150 IU/50l
35 IU/100l 640 IU/200l
Optimum pH 6 -6.5 7.0-7.5 4.0
PH stability 4.58.0 5.5-10 4.0  5.5
Optimum stability 75C 60C 70C
Temperature stability <80C <60C <60C
1One international unit (IU) of activity is defined as the amount of enzyme required to release one micro mol of
glucose reducing sugar equivalent per minute under defined conditions of temperature and pH.
Figure 5.2 Modified AOAC method for AOAC-fibre measurement in selected legumes
Modified from (Association of Official Analytical Chemist, 1995)
Gelatinization step (heating to boiling, temperature, 100C, 1hr)
Enzyme digestion:
. 150IU heat stable amylase (100C, pH=6, 35min) (E-BLAAM; 3,000 Ceralpha U/ml)
. 35IU protease (60C, pH=7.5, 30min) (E-BSPRT; 50mg/ml)
. 640IU amyloglucosidase (60C, pH=4.5, 30min) (E-AMGDF; 3200 U/ml)
Precipitation in 95% ethanol, 60C, 1hr
Centrifugation at 3840g, 20C, 30min
Protein analysis (Kejldahl method) (~3-4hr) (Jones Jr, 1991)
Homogenized sample weight=1.00+0.005g in MES/TRIS buffer (pH=8.2 at 24C, 40ml
Residual drying in oven 103C until constant weight (~2-4hr)
Step1
Filtration step through 3 layers of miracloth (Calbiochem, La Jolla, California, USA)
(15-45min) then residue washed
Ash analysis furnace at 525C (~5 hours) (Marshall, 2010)
Step 6
Step 5
Step 7
Step 8
Step 9
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
5.2.3.2 Insoluble dietary fibre analysis
The IDF from the same legumes samples was determined using the same kit.
The procedure is similar apart from precipitation in ethanol. Triplicate samples of
boiled and canned legumes were gelatinized and treated with the same digestive
enzymes used to determine AOAC-fibre values. Figure 5.3 illustrates the steps for
the modified AOAC method (991.43) (Association of Official Analytical Chemist,
1995). The SDF content was determined by the difference between AOAC-fibre and
IDF values.
Figure 5.3 Modified AOAC method for IDF measurement in selected legumes.
Modified from (Association of Official Analytical Chemist, 1995)
Gelatinization step (heating to boiling, temperature, 100C, 1hr)
Enzyme digestion:
. 150IU heat stable amylase (100C, pH=6, 35min) (E-BLAAM; 3,000 Ceralpha U/ml)
. 35IU protease (60C, pH=7.5, 30min) (E-BSPRT; 50mg/ml)
. 640IU amyloglucosidase (60C, pH=4.5, 30min) (E-AMGDF; 3200 U/ml)
Centrifugation at 3840g, 20C, 30min
Protein analysis (Kejldahl method) (~3-4hr) (Jones Jr, 1991)
Homogenized sample weight=1.00+0.005g in MES/TRIS buffer (pH=8.2 at 24C,
Residual drying in oven 103C until constant weight (~2-4hr)
Step 1
Filtration step through 3 layers of miracloth (Calbiochem, La Jolla, California, USA)
(15-45min) then residue washed
Ash analysis furnace at 525C (~5 hours) (Marshall, 2010)
Step 6
Step 5
Step 7
Step 8
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
5.2.3.3 Kjeldahl method and Ash analysis
Kjeldahl and ash methods were both part of the AOAC method used in this
chapter. Values were used to correct the measured AOAC-fibre residues. Kejldahl
method (appendix D) determines the total nitrogen in food. The fibre residue sample
was hydrolysed by heating with concentrated acid (sulphuric acid). This reaction
produces carbon dioxide, water and ammonium sulphate. Sodium hydroxide is then
added to react with ammonium sulphate producing ammonia (gas). Distillation step
carried out using boric acid to produce ammonium borate. This is then titrated
against hydrochloric acid to determine the level of nitrogen present. Obtained
nitrogen content was then converted into protein content by multiplying by 6.25
(conversion factor for food). Protein content was expressed as grams
protein/100gram of food (%). The method of Kjeldahl was adopted from (Jones Jr,
1991). Ashing is a procedure to measure total mineral content in food. Dry fibre
residues were analyzed to obtain ash content in the AOAC-fibre value. The sample
was placed in silica crucible and in oven at temperature of 550C (on average 4-
5hours). Water is vaporized and organic compounds are burn in presence of oxygen
to carbon dioxide of N2. Minerals remained on the crucible are transferred into
dessictor to cool then weigh the sample and crucible to obtain the weight of the ash.
Finally ash was expressed in g/100g of food (Marshall, 2010).
5.3 Statistical analysis
Coefficient of variation (CV%) was calculated to compare the degree of
analysis variation from one batch to another for each legume type. The differences
between AOAC-fibre and IDF in canned and dried legumes were examined using
Students t-test and analysis of variance (ANOVA) as appropriate to analyse the
effect of cooking method on total fibre values.
5.4 Results
5.4.1AOAC-fibre contents in boiled and canned legumes
Means and standard deviations of AOAC-fibre for canned and boiled legumes
that are most commonly consumed in the UK were presented in Table 5.5. AOAC-
fibre values were expressed as g per 100 g of legumes (wet weight as eaten). In total,
14 legume samples (8 boiled and 6 canned) were studied. The AOAC-fibre content
in 8 boiled legumes ranged between 3.6 (0.1) g/100g in green beans to 11.2 (0.14)
g/100g in red kidney bean, with an overall mean AOAC-fibre of 7.3 (0.34) g/100g.
The coefficient of variation for the boiled legumes ranged from 2.1% to 6.4%.
The canned legumes showed a range of AOAC-fibre values from 2.7g/100g in
canned green beans to 7.4g/100g for canned chickpeas, with a mean AOAC-fibre of
5.2g/100g. The CV% for canned legumes ranged between 1.4% to 5.7%. A report by
AOAC Official Methods of Analytical Chemists (1995) showed a CV% of method
991.43 range between 0.89  6.26% for fibre rich food from different food groups.
This reflects that measured total dietary fibre values were within an acceptable
range. The AOAC-fibre values for boiled legumes were on average 47% higher than
for the equivalent canned legume, and statistical analysis showed that boiled legume
values were significantly higher than canned legumes by 1.95 g/100g (p<0.01). The
greatest difference was found in red kidney beans, with AOAC-fibre values in
canned samples (5.5 g/100 g) being half of the boiled equivalent (11.2 g/100 g). It
seems that dietary fibre in legumes measured by AOAC method varied with
different cooking method.
Table 5.5 Means and standard deviations of AOAC-fibre for cooked legumes (g/100g).
Values are triplicate analyses from pooled samples.
Cooking method Legume AOAC-fibre g/100g
Mean (SD)
Boiled legumes Red kidney beans 11.2(0.14)
Butter beans 8.4(0.35)
Yellow chickpeas 9.2(0.46)
Green beans 3.7(0.10)
Green peas 5.9(0.16)
Red lentil 9.2(0.21)
Green brown lentil 5.2(0.11)
Mung beans 4.4(0.07)
Canned legumes Red kidney beans 5.5(0.44)
Butter beans 4.5(0.14)
Yellow chickpeas 7.4(0.34)
Green beans 2.7(0.10)
Green peas 5.2(0.13)
Baked beans in tomato sauce 5.9(0.17)
Total legumes 6.3(2.43)
The insoluble protein and insoluble ash were measured in the AOAC-fibre
residue and the mean insoluble protein was 0.19 (0.07) g/100g in the analysed
legumes. Ash was found to be very low in amount in the dietary fibre residue with
mean of 0.13 (0.1) g/100g. Indigestible protein and ash contributed slightly to the
total dietary fibre residue (2% and 2.3% receptively).
5.4.2Insoluble and soluble dietary fibre contents in boiled and canned
legumes
The means and standard deviations of measured insoluble and calculated
soluble dietary fibre (SDF) for boiled and canned legumes are presented in Table 5.6
and 5.7. The results of this investigation show that IDF values in boiled legumes
ranged from 2.6 (0.3) g/100g for green beans to 8.9 (0.67) g/100g for red kidney
beans. Insoluble fibre for canned legumes ranged from 1.9 (0.36) g/100g green
beans to 6.4(0.15) g/100g for yellow chickpeas. It can be noticed that insoluble fibre
represents high proportion of AOAC-fibre (59%  83% for boiled legumes and 70%
 87% for canned legumes) from all analyzed legumes.
One way analysis of variance showed that IDF values were significantly
higher in boiled legumes by 1.7g/100g compared to their canned equivalents (F (1,
28) = 5.97, p= 0.02). The results of this research support previous study which
reported that IDF in boiled soaked beans was higher than in canned beans with a
difference of 1g/100g (Kutos et al., 2003).
Table 5.6 Means and standard deviations of IDF and SDF of boiled legumes
(g/100g).Values are triplicate analyses from pooled samples.
Boiled legumes IDF g/100g
Mean (SD)
SDF g/100g
Mean (SD)
IDF%: SDF%
Red kidney beans 8.9(0.67) 2.3(0.70) 79:21
Butter beans 6.9(0.48) 1.5(0.68) 83:17
Yellow chickpeas 5.5(0.55) 3.7(0.67) 59:41
Green beans 2.6(0.30) 1.0(0.31) 73:27
Green peas 4.5(0.51) 1.4(0.61) 77:23
Red lentil 8.2(0.03) 1.1(0.23) 89:11
Green brown lentil 4.9(0.26) 0.4(0.14) 93:7
Mung beans 3.6(0.57) 0.8(0.56) 82:18
Total boiled legumes 5.6(1.76) 1.5(0.76) 79:21
Table 5.7 Means and standard deviations of IDF and SDF of canned legumes (g/100g).
Values are triplicate analyses from pooled samples.
In terms of proportion of dietary fractions, Figure 5.4 shows that the ratio
between IDF and SDF did not differ with different cooking methods used (canned
and boiled legumes) which reflect reduction in both fractions in canned and boiled
legumes that did not greatly affect the proportions of fibre fraction in the measured
total dietary fibre.
Canned legumes IDF g/100g
Mean (SD)
SDF g/100g
Mean (SD)
IDF%: SDF%
Red kidney beans 3.8(0.73) 1.7(0.36) 70:30
Butter beans 3.5(0.28) 0.9(0.14) 78:22
Yellow chickpeas 6.4(0.15) 1.0(0.23) 87:13
Green beans 1.9(0.36) 0.8(0.30) 72:28
Green peas 4.3(0.22) 0.9(0.27) 82:18
Baked beans in tomato sauce 3.3(0.60) 2.6(0.43) 56:44
Total canned legumes 3.8(0.970 1.3(0.54) 74:26
Figure 5.4 Percentage of IDF and SDF in boiled and canned legumes
5.4.3Comparison between measured AOAC-fibre, IDF values and
available NSP values from UK food tables for selected cooked
legumes
Table 5.8 presents the mean of total dietary fibre measured by modified AOAC
method which was 6.3g/100g for all legumes, 5.2g/100g for canned legumes and
7.2g/100g for boiled legumes. Total legumes and boiled legumes values were
significantly higher than mean NSP values (4.31g/100g and 4.23; respectively) from
the UK food composition tables. However, there was no significant mean difference
between AOAC-fibre and NSP content of canned legumes as shown in Figure 5.5.
Table 5.8 AOAC-fibre and NSP values for boiled and canned legumes. Values are triplicate
analyses from pooled samples.
Cooking
method
Legume AOAC-fibre
g/100g
g/100g
Mean difference
(g/100g)
Boiled
legumes
Red kidney beans 11.2(0.14) 6.7 4.5
Butter beans 8.4(0.35) 5.2 3.2
Yellow chickpeas 9.2(0.46) 4.3 4.9
Green beans 3.6(0.05) 4.1 -0.5
Green peas 5.9(0.16) 5.1 0.8
Red lentil 9.2(0.21) 1.9 7.3
Green brown lentil 5.2(0.11) 3.8 1.4
Mung beans 4.4(0.07) 3.0 1.4
Boiled legumes mean ratio 1.68 (95%CI: 1.10, 2.25)
Canned
legumes
Red kidney beans 5.5(0.44) 6.2 -0.7
Butter beans 4.5(0.14) 4.6 -0.1
Yellow chickpeas 7.4(0.34) 4.1 3.3
Green beans 2.7(0.07) 2.6 0.1
Green peas 5.3(0.13) 5.1 0.2
Baked beans in tomato sauce 5.9(0.17) 3.7 2.2
Canned legumes mean ratio 1.19 (95%CI: 0.78, 1.59)
Total legumes 6.3 4.3 2.0
Total legumes mean ratio 1.43 (95%CI: 1.11, 1.81)
*NSP values are from McCance and Widdowsons The Composition of Foods (2002)
Figure 5.5 Mean AOAC-fibre values of the analysed cooked legumes compared to NSP
values of equivalent legumes from UK food tables. Values are triplicate analyses from
pooled samples.
1P value of <0.05 is significant.
AOAC-fibre values for all legumes were found to be on average 43% higher
than published NSP values (Food Standards Agency, 2002). A previous analysis of
ten food groups showed that AOAC-fibre fibre was higher than NSP by 20% for
green vegetables to 77% for other vegetables (Englyst et al., 1996). The results
presented in Figure 5.5 also show that mean AOAC-fibre values of boiled legumes
were higher than NSP values by 68% and the total dietary fibre value for canned
legumes was also higher than NSP values by 19%. The difference may be partly
explained by the presence of indigestible materials other than NSP which are mainly
resistant starch and lignin (Wolters et al., 1992). Among canned legumes, yellow
chickpeas were found to be the richest source of fibre, and red kidney beans were
the richest source of fibre among boiled legumes. Only three legume samples, boiled
green beans, canned butter beans and canned kidney beans, showed slightly lower
AOAC-fibre values compared to NSP. These observations were also found in some
food items listed in the UK food composition table (Food Standards Agency, 2002)
where unexpectedly, 5 of out of 47 food items had slightly lower AOAC-fibre
values compared with NSP values within the range determined. This observation
remained unexplained.
With regard to IDF values in legumes, a comparison between AOAC and
Englyst method was carried out and showed that insoluble fibre measured by AOAC
method was significantly higher than calculated IDF of NSP (p<0.01) for total,
canned and boiled legumes (Table 5.9).
= 0.01 P
= 0.01P
= 0.33
Table 5.9 Comparison between means of IDF for cooked legumes. Values of the IDF
measured by AOAC method are triplicate analyses from pooled samples.
Legumes IDF values
Englyst
p values
Boiled legumes g/100g g/100g
Red kidney beans 8.8 3.5
Butter beans 6.9 3.0
Yellow chickpeas 5.5 2.9
Green beans 2.6 2.3
Green peas 4.5 3.7
Red lentil 8.2 1.3
Green brown lentil 4.9 2.9
Mung beans 3.6 2.3
Mean of boiled legumes 5.6 2.7 <0.01
Canned legumes
Red kidney beans 3.8 3.3
Butter beans 3.5 2.6
Yellow chickpeas 6.4 2.8
Green beans 1.9 1.2
Green peas 4.3 3.7
Baked beans in tomato sauce 3.3 1.4
Mean of canned legumes 3.8 2.5 0.04
Mean of total legumes 4.9 2.6 <0.01
1 IDF measured by AOAC method 2 IDF of NSP value from (Holland et al., 1991a)
On average an AOAC-fibre: NSP ratio of 1:1.43 was calculated for the whole
legume group (n=14). For the whole group, the AOAC-fibre content of legumes was
significantly correlated with NSP (r= 0.6, 95% CI: 0.10 to 0.87; p= 0.02). The ratio
for the boiled legumes (1:1.68) was higher than for the canned legumes (1:1.19).
5.5 Discussion
Legumes are a rich source of dietary fibre and are considered an important part
of a healthy diet (Leterme, 2002). The physiological and health benefits of dietary
fibre have been reported consistently in many studies (Dilis and Trichopoulou,
2009). Some experimental studies have previously compared AOAC-fibre values
and NSP values in few types of legumes (Englyst et al., 1996, Mongeau and
Brassard, 1989). In the sixth edition of the UK food composition tables (Food
Standards Agency, 2002), there is lack of AOAC-fibre data for legumes. Therefore,
this study was designed to measure total dietary fibre and IDF using the AOAC
method with simple modifications in legumes consumed frequently in the UK. The
current study explored the effect of usual cooking methods on dietary fibre content
measured by AOAC method in legumes. The AOAC-fibre content in legumes
ranged between 2.7g/100g and 11.2g/100g (w/w). Insoluble dietary fibre was found
to be the major component in all legumes which represents at least 60% of total
dietary fibre. That is supported by many previous studies (Veena et al., 1995, Kutos
et al., 2003, Li et al., 2002).
It was observed that AOAC-fibre values for canned legumes were lower than
for equivalent boiled legumes, suggesting an effect from food processing on AOAC-
fibre. It was reported in previous studies that usual cooking method and autoclaving
did not generate appreciable changes in the composition of non-cellulosic
polysaccharides, cellulose and lignin (Apata, 2008). Another study reported little
effect of cooking on the dietary fibre content of cooked vegetables when compared
to raw vegetables without including legumes (Reistad and Frolich, 1984). The effect
of cooking methods on dietary fibre content might be partly explained by the
variation in stability of cell walls under different heating conditions (Chang and
Morris, 1990).
The findings suggest that the fibre content of legumes is affected by
processing methods. In particular, canned legumes were found to be significantly
lower in fibre than boiled legumes. Previous study reported a higher total dietary
fibre content measured by the AOAC method in boiled legumes (13.1  17.7g/100g)
in comparison to the autoclaved legumes (7.1  9.29g/100g w/w) (Li and Cardozo,
1993). While, other studies showed that boiling and microwaving did not affect the
NSP content of legumes (Marconi et al., 2000). This suggests that canning affects
compounds other than non-starch polysaccharides, most likely resistant starch.
Enzyme-resistant starch is one of the components of dietary fibre that is included in
the AOAC-fibre gravimetric measurement.
The unique structure of legume starch in comparison with cereal starch
(Sandhu and Lim, 2008) as well as the fact that there is a high amount of resistant
starch in cooked legumes are thought to be explanatory factors impeding its
digestibility (Perera et al., 2010). An in vivo study using rats showed that up to 35%
of the starch from canned peas was undigested, a much higher percentage when
compared to cereal starch (0.3% - 2.2%) (Marlett and Longacre, 1996). In addition,
an in vitro study found that rapidly digestible starch accounts for 4.2  10.9% of
total starch content, while resistant starch account for at least 50% of the total
legume starch (Sandhu and Lim, 2008). Legume starch is relatively high in amylose
(28-33%) which requires higher temperatures and longer heating times to gelatinise
and shows higher propensity to retrogradation (Sandhu and Lim, 2008). That
indicates that there is a positive correlation between amylose and resistant starch
content as reported in earlier review (Eerlingen and Delcour, 1995). An in vitro
study showed that legume starch digestibility increased to 91% by heating at 121C
(Rehman and Shah, 2005), suggesting that heating to high temperatures (e.g.
canning) increases the availability of legume starch to amylase degradation, and
therefore will reduce the amount of resistant starch residual in the fibre fractions. It
was demonstrated in a previous study that exposure to high temperatures led to a
breakdown of pectic substances (Anderson and Clydesdale, 1980). Preservation
methods as in canning found to be attributed to increase softening and degradation
of the cell wall in fruits/vegetables (McDougall et al., 1996). This may partly
explain the differences in NSP values between boiled and canned legumes.
The amount of IDF and SDF were significantly lower in canned legumes
compared with boiled. Further research that focuses on determining the constituents
of soluble and insoluble fibre in canned and boiled legumes may help in
understanding the main components that contribute to the variability when a
comparison between two cooking methods is needed. On the other hand, canning did
not significantly change the proportion of IDF to SDF compared to boiled legumes.
The content of IDF was consistently around 60-80% of AOAC-fibre values,
suggesting that canning affects both fibre subgroups. IDF is insoluble in buffer, and
is thought to consist mainly of cellulosic and hemicellulosic cell wall
polysaccharides, lignin, resistant starch (Saura-Calixto et al., 2000) and
polyphenolic compounds (Goi et al., 1996). It is likely that canning affects resistant
starch, making it available for amylase digestion. Hemicellulosic polysaccharides
may become soluble and recovered in the SDF fraction. Other components of IDF
are likely to be unaffected. An in vivo study found that 98% of lignin and condensed
tannins were recovered in faeces (Bravo et al., 1994). It has been reported that
insoluble polyphenols have a similar physiological effect to IDF in terms of low
chemical degradation and high resistance to digestion (Bravo et al., 1994). Canning
may lead to the breakdown or solubilisation of pectic polysaccharides (Kutos et al.,
2003).
A ratio of 1:1.43 was obtained for the legume group, which is slightly higher
than the published ratio of 1:1.33 for ten major food groups (Lunn & Buttriss, 2007).
This ratio could be used to calculate AOAC-fibre values from NSP values,
providing an opportunity to estimate AOAC-fibre intake and use the values to
compare cohort studies in populations with high legume consumption. Moreover,
the ratio for boiled legumes (1:1.68) was dramatically higher than the ratio for
canned legumes (1:1.19). Therefore, caution must be taken when applying the ratio
without knowledge of the types of legume (boiled/canned) consumed.
Characteristics of the studied population should be evaluated before considering the
AOAC-fibre: NSP ratio. For example, boiled legume ratio may be more suitable for
studies which focus on minority ethnic group in UK where boiled legumes are
mostly consumed, compared to the rest of the UK general population which is more
likely to consume canned legumes. More research on the AOAC-fibre: NSP ratio
derived from a wide range of food items needs to be undertaken to understand the
association between AOAC-fibre and NSP more clearly. Further research on
generating ratio for a wider range of food items of legumes according to cooking
method is also useful for epidemiological studies.
5.6 Conclusion
This is the first report of AOAC-fibre data for legumes commonly consumed
in the UK. Insoluble dietary fibre is a major component in legumes. The result
showed processing generated variation in AOAC measured fibre content in legumes.
Cooking methods have a great effect on dietary fibre content in legumes and this
result in variation in the generated ratio AOAC-fibre: NSP for canned and boiled
legumes. Therefore, this need to be considered with the use of conversion factor in
estimating dietary AOAC-fibre value from NSP value for future epidemiological
studies. As legumes are not eaten raw, data on comparison between canned and
boiled legumes are much more relevant than comparisons with raw food. Hence,
such information is more relevant for nutritional research that investigates the
impact of legume fibre intake on health outcomes. Dietary fibre analysis increases
the researcher understanding of the complexity and heterogeneity of dietary fibre in
legumes and possible error from analysis that may partly contribute to bias in
estimated fibre intake in epidemiological research.
Chapter 6: UK Womens Cohort Study: Methodology
6.1 Introduction
The main objective of this chapter is to describe the UK Womens Cohort
Study (UKWCS). A secondary objective is to describe how AOAC-fibre values
were incorporated into the UKWCS dietary FFQ dataset.
6.2 The UK Womens Cohort Study
The UKWCS was funded by the World Cancer Research Fund (WCRF).
Women in the UKWCS were identified from a half million responders in Wales,
England and Scotland in the WCRF through a direct mail survey (Cade et al.,
2004a) . Recruitment was aimed to have a similar number of women with different
diet where the selected vegetarian was matched for age to the next meat eater to
ensure enough power for comparison between nutrients intakes and diet with health
outcomes (Greenwood et al., 2000). Further recruitment was also achieved by
asking eligible women to volunteer friends and relatives of a similar age group
(Greenwood et al., 2000). All women participated between 1995 and 1998 through a
postal questionnaire.
From 61,000 women who were sent the baseline food frequency questionnaire
(FFQ), 58% replied and were considered form the baseline of the UKWCS
(n=35,372) (Cade et al., 2007, Greenwood et al., 2000). The women, who were aged
between 35-69 years at the baseline, were asked about their diet and lifestyle. The
original aim of the UKWCS was to investigate the relationship between diet and
chronic disease (mainly cancer). Figure 6.1 demonstrates the flow of participants in
the UKWCS. All original responders to the FFQ were sent a follow-up pack, 4.1
years, on average later (Cade et al., 2004a). This was completed by 40% (14,244).
Eighty seven percent of them (n=12,453) completed a 4 day semi-weighed food
diary. At the time of this thesis, full dietary information was available electronically
for only 1,883 women (15%) whose diaries were fully coded by the DANTE
program and whose data were available for analysis. Figure 6.2 shows the time scale
of women who completed different dietary assessment methods in the UKWCS.
Subsample was carried out in another study by Greenwood et al. (2003) were FFQ
repeated between 2000 to 2001 as shown in Figure 6.2 (Details discussed in section
6.6).
58% of invited completed baseline FFQ
1995-1998
35,372
Baseline UKWCS
12,453 (35%) women completed 4 days food diaries
Data available at phase II
14,172 (40%) women completed health and lifestyle Q
~500,000 responders to direct mail WCRF
17% response rate
75% willing to participate
61% mailed
1,883 (15%) diaries were coded into DANTE system developed by
Leeds University (NEG)
1918 (78%) from 2200 invited women completed repeated FFQ
Figure 6.2 Time scale of the women who completed different dietary assessment methods
in the UKWCS
1995 96 97 98 99 2000 01 02 03 04
Baseline FFQ
(1995, 1998)
Repeated FFQ
(2000, 2001)
4 days food diary and follow-up questionnaire
(1999, 2002)
6.2.1Outliers
Extreme dietary nutrient intake values in the dataset can greatly affect the
findings especially when assessing continuous variables. These extreme intakes may
not reflect the main body of data, and may indicate improper completion of the FFQ.
This may be addressed with energy intake restriction (Willett, 2012). Outliers are
unusual data that may be called error or noise in the dataset (Ben-Gal, 2005).
Figure 6.1Number of women who participated in the UKWCS at different levels
Outliers can occur due to measurement error or inaccurate data entry or can be due
to natural variation within the studied population (Willett, 1998).
Statistical analyses were carried out after excluding women with unfeasible
total energy intakes (more than 4,000 kcal/d) and less than 500 kcal/d) as suggested
by Willett (1998) to address over and under-reporters. Adapting this approach, 918
women accounting for 2.6% of participants were excluded.
UKWCS data was obtained from women aged 3569 years at baseline and were
living in England, Wales and Scotland. In the mid 1990s, over 61,000 women were
mailed and 58 % replied. At baseline, participants completed FFQ and also provided
further dietary, lifestyle and health information after an average of 4 years.
6.3 Ethical consideration
Ethical approval was obtained from 174 local research ethics committees
throughout the UK (Cade et al., 2004a) (copies of two local ethical approval letters
from two committees are in appendix M). All participants gave informed consent
before they were included in the study. No new information was needed; therefore
no additional ethical issues were related to this study. Participant identity was
maintained confidentially and remained unidentified throughout the analyses.
6.4 Food-frequency questionnaire
The self-administered Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ) (Appendix E)
which had been adapted from the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer
(EPIC) study (Cade et al., 2007) was used at the baseline of the study to assess the
participants habitual diet over the past 12 months as well as health and lifestyle
characteristics. Through inclusion of additional vegetable dishes, this FFQ had been
modified to fit the studied population based on a pilot study using a subsample of
vegetarian women (Cade et al., 2004a). The pilot study also helped to generate
portion sizes for use in nutrient intake calculation.
The self-administered food frequency questionnaire (FFQ) consists of
frequency of consumption of 217 food items asked as How often have you eaten
those foods in the last 12 months? and the answer is by ticking one box with the
frequency ranging from never to 6 or more times per day. Figure 6.3 provides
an example of the baseline question for some food items in the legumes section. A
validation study was performed on a subgroup with 303 women and nutrient values
from the FFQ were compared with nutrient values from 4 days of food diary
(Spence et al., 2002). The results showed significant correlation between diary
intakes and baseline FFQ for selected micronutrients with a tendency to
overestimate with FFQ compared to 4 days diaries. Details on food diary
demonstrated in section 6.5.
6.4.1Generation of non-starch polysaccharides (NSP), and other
dietary variables at the baseline
Non-starch polysaccharide intakes in the UKWCS dataset (Cade et al., 2004a)
were based on the UK Food Composition Tables (Holland et al., 1992a, Holland et
al., 1988, Holland et al., 1989, Holland et al., 1991a, Holland et al., 1992b, Holland
et al., 1993). Several types of possible food and cooking methods were used to
represent each food item listed in the FFQ. The 217 food items listed in the baseline
FFQ were derived from 545 individual food items. Number of items grouped
together to represent one of the 217 FFQ items by calculating the estimated
weighted proportion of food being eaten that contribute to the FFQ main items. For
example, porridge was included in the breakfast cereal group. The NSP content of
porridge (g/100g) was derived from proportions of NSP value (g/100g) of the four
food items as shown in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Example of food item listed in the baseline FFQ with subtypes of food items
obtained
Food item Code1 NSP value g/day Proportion
10 Porridge 0.9
10.1 Porridge with water 50-076 0.8 25
10.2 Porridge with whole milk 50-077 0.8 25
10.3 Porridge with water and milk 11-142 0.8 25
10.4 Readybrek 50-080 1.2 25
1Food code in the UK food composition tables
Values were assigned to each FFQ food item, and each participants daily NSP
intake from each food item was calculated by multiplying the frequency of food
Figure 6.3 A section of the baseline FFQ related to the intake of legumes
consumption by an average portion size, and the product multiplied by grams of
NSP fibre contained in 100g of the food item. The following equation in Figure 6.4
was used to calculate the NSP intake for the cohort participants. NSP with other
nutrient intakes were created originally using SPSS, then computation from SPSS
into a Microsoft Access program was developed by the University of Leeds -
Nutrition Epidemiology Group to facilitate generation of dietary intakes from food
groups. The estimated portions (Calvert et al., 1997) were derived from an average
of three sources: portion size derived from the pilot study of the weighed food
diaries of vegetarians; from published 1993 and 1994 womens food portion sizes
from national survey values (NDNS) and published values by Crawley (1993).
Dietary NSP intake (g/day) per person = Estimated portion size
NSP content (g/100g)
Frequency of consumption per day
Other dietary variables examined were also from baseline FFQ dataset. For
example, total energy intake which was expressed in kcal per day derived for all
cohort women. Macronutrient intakes (carbohydrates, protein and total fat) were
obtained from all food items listed in FFQ and expressed as percentage contribution
to total energy intake. Vitamins such as vitamin C was assumed as a potential
measures for overall diet quality (Drewnowski et al., 1997) and was expressed in mg
per day. Minerals such as calcium, iron and folate were also evaluated in relation to
dietary fibre intake as evidence suggests these may also be a good reflection of diet
quality (Aggarwal et al., 2012). All macronutrient and micronutrients variables in
the dataset were generated previously from baseline FFQ using nutrient values from
McCance & Widdowsons The Composition of Foods (5
edition) (Holland et al.,
1991b) for each food item listed in FFQ. Derived nutrient values were expressed in
milligrams or micrograms per day and calculated similarly to equation in Figure 6.4.
Total nutrient intake was derived from adding all food items consumed by the
participant.
The use of dietary supplement was also reported in FFQ and women
categorized into supplement users and non-users, through type of supplement taken
was available only as a free text, so was not categorised for this study.
Figure 6.4 Equation used to calculate the NSP intake in the UKWCS database
Percentages of self-reported vegetarians or vegans were calculated from the
question Would you describe yourself as a vegetarian? And Would you describe
yourself as vegan? answered as yes or no. However, using food intakes data,
Cade et al. (2004a) defined meat eaters as women who ate meat at least once a
week, vegetarians were defined as women who ate meat or fish less than once a
week and fish eaters were women who ate fish but not meat at least once a week,
Finally, oily fish-eaters were women who ate meat less than once a week and oily
fish 24 times per week. So vegetarians are described into two ways, by absence of
meat in diet, and by their self-report status.
6.4.2Other measured variables
Information on socio-demographic, anthropometrics, lifestyle and dietary
characteristics were also determined for the studied population to have a general
overview on the characteristics of participants. Socioeconomic status was based on
the National Statistics Socio-economic Classification (Rose and Pevalin, 2003)
where women are categorized into professional and managerial occupations,
intermediate occupations and routine and manual occupations. Education level
comprised four categories, namely no educational records; O-level, A-level and
degree achievement was also assessed. Marital status was categorized into married,
divorced, widowed, single, and separated. The majority of the UKWCS participants
(99%) are white, however 0.46% of women were from India and 0.59% from other
ethnic group. Because of the very few numbers of other than white population,
therefore ethnicity was not explored in subgroup analysis in chapter 8.
The physical activity variable was derived from a question in the baseline
questionnaire: In a typical week during the last 12 months, how many hours did
you spend on the following activity? On housework, Do it yourself, gardening,
walking, cycling, other physical exercise which is expressed as metabolic
equivalents tasks (METs). A MET is defined as the ratio of work metabolic rate to
standard resting metabolic rate of 1.0 (4.184kJ) kg
, 1 MET is considered a
resting metabolic rate obtained during quiet sitting. Time that was spent in each
activity mentioned in the questionnaire was multiplied by the MET intensity level
listed in the published Compendium of Physical Activities (Ainsworth et al., 1993).
Physical activity was expressed as METs. This is a useful measure of physical
activity to quantify the total amount of activity and to compare it across individuals.
Women provided detailed information about smoking status, but for these analyses,
they were grouped into two categories as smoker and non-smoker. Body mass index
(BMI) was calculated as weight (kg) divided by the square of height (m), and waist
circumference (WC) were both self-reported in the baseline FFQ.
6.5 Four day food diary
Four day semi-weighed food diaries (n=12,453) were collected from cohort
women between 1999 and 2002. The food diary booklet included instructions on
how to complete the diary with one example. Women recorded food eaten in term of
time of food or drink, description of food or drink consumed (including brand name
where possible) and amount. In addition, recipes/description of food eaten away
from home/any other comments and daily dose of any supplements used were all
included in the diary. Some general questions about diet during the recorded days,
for example Which type of bread did you eat most often in the four days that you
filled in the diary? were also asked at the end of the booklet. A copy of the diary is
provided in appendix K. All physical activities for one full day were recorded in the
third day in the form of an activity diary. Diaries were coded mainly by nutrition
students over the past 10 years. Nutrient intakes were obtained after completion of
coding using a Microsoft Access-based food diary analysis program named the
DANTE for 1,883 women (15%). This program was designed by the Nutrition
Epidemiology Group at the University of Leeds. The program has the ability to
manage the data and output (Cade et al., 2006). The nutrient intakes were calculated
as the average of over 3 or 4 days recordings depending on completion.
6.6 Repeated Food frequency questionnaire
Second data collection was carried out to obtain dietary information by the
same FFQ in a subsample from the baseline UKWCS as demonstrated in Figure
6.1and 6.2. After an average of 3.2 years from the baseline FFQ, 2,200 (6%) women
were invited to complete a repeated FFQ, and 78% (n=1,918) did this (Greenwood
et al., 2003).
6.7 Baseline characteristics of the UKWCS
Table 6.1 provides the socio-demographic, lifestyle and dietary characteristics
of 34,454 participants in the UKWCS expressed as mean (SD) for continuous
variables and frequency (percentage) for categorical variables. The majority of
participants are white (98.7%), the mean age was 52 years (9.3), two thirds of
women were from the professional and managerial social classes, and most women
were well educated, as 51% at least achieve the A-level, and 27% had a degree.
Three quarters of the women were married. Regarding the lifestyle characteristics,
physical activity expressed as METs which reflect the energy cost of activities
performed by the individual was 13.6 (12.9). Majority of women did not smoke at
baseline or never smoked before. The mean (SD) body mass index (BMI) of the
women was 24.4(4.3) kg/m
, and mean waist circumference was 73cm (9.2). More
than half (57.8%) of the women reported using dietary supplements. Data on
medical histories are not shown in the Table 6.2 because of small number of women
who reported the medical histories of chronic illnesses in the FFQ with 17.2% of
participants complaining of high blood pressure, only 7.6% had a history of high
cholesterol level, 7.5% reported a positive medical history of cancer and very few
(2%) reported a history of diabetes mellitus.
In term of dietary habits, a relatively high carbohydrate, low fat diet was the
average. Table 6.2, lifestyle and dietary characteristics are summarised, for example
looking at the macronutrients, it clear that the women are following a healthy dietary
pattern on average. However, there are wide variations in dietary patterns because of
the high proportion of vegetarians in the UKWCS. On the other hand, there were
women with unhealthy eating pattern in the UKWCS. However on average, the
UKWCS participants were more health conscious in compared to women from the
recent NDNS report (Department of Health, 2012). In total, 70% of women were
meat eaters, while vegetarians accounted for 18%, 9% of women were in other fish
eaters group and only 2.3% of the studied population were in the oily fish eaters. On
the other hand, 28% of cohort participants were self-reported vegetarians or vegan.
Dietary fatty acids profile was generated from the FFQ as a percentage of
energy. These are approximate because no information available on the fat used for
cooking in addition to difficulties in reporting type of fat from ready food or meals.
Therefore, these types of fat were not used further in analyses.
Table 6.2 Baseline characteristics for 34,454 women in the UKWCS
Baseline characteristics Mean (SD) or %
No of participants 34,454
Socio-demographic factors
Age (year) 52.3 (9.3)
White population 98.7%
Socio-economic Status (%)
Professional 63.3
Intermediate 27.5
Routine 9.2
Educational level (%)
No education 16.9
O-level 31.1
A-level 24.7
Degree 27.3
Marital status (%)
Married 75.0
Divorced 8.8
Widowed 6.3
Single 7.6
Separated 2.2
Postmenopausal (%) 52.6
Lifestyle characteristics
Physical activity (METs) 13.6(12.9)
Smoker at baseline (%) No 89.3%
Yes 10.7%
Anthropometric
BMI (kg/m
) 24.4(4.3)
WC (cm) 73.5(9.2)
Dietary characteristics
Energy intake (kcal) 2202(607)
NSP intake (g/d) 25.6(9.8)
Carbohydrates (% E) 54.6(6.4)
Protein intake(%E) 15.9(5.9)
Fat intake (% E) 33.1(5.8)
Sat fat intake (% E) 11.5(3.2)
PUFA intake (%E)
15.8(6.2)
MUFA intake (%E)
26.9(9.9)
Alcohol (units/d)
0.54(1.2)
Vitamin C (mg/d) 166.0(85.2)
Folate (g/d) 388.6(115.8)
Iron (mg/d) 17.4(6.3)
Calcium (mg/d) 1117.8(354)
Vegetable portion (80g/d) 5.0(2.5)
Fruit portion (80g/ d) 4.9(3.4)
Common dietary patterns
Meat group 70.3
Fish group 9.2
Oily fish group 2.3
Vegetarians 18.1
Self-reported vegetarians % 27.7
Dietary supplement users (%) 57.8
1PUFA is polyunsaturated fatty acids expressed as percentage contributed from total
energy intake. 2MUFA is monounsaturated fatty acids expressed as percentage
contributed from total energy intake. 3Alcohol intake express asmedian and IQR.
6.8 Adding AOAC-fibre values to the UKWCS dataset
This section provides the approach of adding AOAC-fibre values into the
UKWCS as previously done for NSP values (g/day).
6.8.1Protocol 1: Search strategy for AOAC-fibre values
Since there is no single source of information concerning the AOAC-fibre
content of UK foods, AOAC-fibre values were identified based on a search of
several reference sources in order of priority, such as the recent UK food
composition tables (Food Standards Agency, 2002), British Nutrition Foundation
(BNF) review (Lunn and Buttriss, 2007), EuroFIR databases (European Food
Information Resource e-search, 2010), USDA database (U.S Department of
Agriculture, 2010), and commercial food labels. Recipe calculations according to
McCance and Widdowson (Food Standards Agency, 2002) were also undertaken for
a small number of food items. Figure 6.5 provides a guide for steps considered when
obtaining the AOAC-fibre values from different sources. This protocol aimed to link
AOAC-fibre values for food items listed in the baseline FFQ from a number of
equivalent foods available in the UK food composition tables as previously done for
NSP values.
The first reference was the sixth edition of the McCance and Widdowsons,
the composition of foods book (Food Standards Agency, 2002). AOAC-fibre values
were found for a few foods items (n= 47) in this latest edition. If the AOAC-fibre
value was not found for the wanted item then the search progressed to the next
reference, a review by Lunn and Buttriss (2007). In the Lunn and Buttriss review, a
table contains a list of foods (n=95) with dietary AOAC-fibre values. Third
reference is the European Food Information Resource AISBL which is abbreviated
as EuroFIR AISBL was used (European Food Information Resource e-search, 2010)
to extract AOAC-fibre values. It is a European Network of Excellence on Food
Composition Databank Systems (http://www.eurofir.net) which aims to provide
nutrients data from different European countries (Church, 2006). The EuroFIR e-
Search facility is a network that can be accessed online through a registration
procedure. It allows its users to search more than 20 standardised and specialized
food composition databases.
EuroFIR databases provide a wide range of European data linking foods and
nutrients through standardized data descriptions and associated nutrient value
information. Information on the type of analytical dietary fibre methods is available
for a large number of food items which facilitates the identification of the analytical
method needed for each food item chosen. For the matched food item, exploration of
the cooking methods, ingredients, and recipes in case of mixed dishes food item was
carried out. In the database, the code number (MI307) in the EuroFIR e-search
referred to the enzymatic gravimetric method (AOAC).
If the AOAC-fibre values were not found in the above reference, then the
fourth reference, the National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference in the
U.S.A (U.S Department of Agriculture, 2010) was used to obtain AOAC-fibre
values. This nutrient databank has an online search function, which gives free access
to information on the nutrient content of around 7,538 different foods. All food has
AOAC-fibre values. Matched food items with similarity in the cooking method,
ingredients and recipe were considered.
The AOAC method was adopted by the Food Standards Agency as an official
UK method for dietary fibre analysis and to be used for food labelling purposes (The
Institute of Food Science & Technology, 2007). Therefore, food labelling was the
fifth reference chosen for the remaining unmatched food items listed in the baseline
FFQ. AOAC-fibre values were derived from food labels on the food items that can
be purchased in common supermarkets in UK such as ASDA, Sainsburys, Tesco,
Ocado, and Morrisons. An average AOAC-fibre value was obtained from different
brands aiming to have more representative dietary AOAC-fibre values (g/100g). The
recipe calculation according to McCance and Widdowsons food composition book
was used for a few food items. Calculated dietary AOAC-fibre values were derived
from recipes in UK food composition and using the equation below (Food Standards
Agency, 2002). Appendix J provides a list of food items (22) for which AOAC-fibre
values were calculated in this way
After obtaining all AOAC-fibre values from different sources, each AOAC-
fibre value was assigned to an FFQ food item expressed in g/100g. Overall, 545
AOAC-fibre values were obtained to generate 217 food items in the FFQ. The pie
chart in Figure 6.6 shows that around half of AOAC-fibre values were derived from
the USDA databank, 19% were derived from food labelling, 12% were derived from
a national dietary fibre review, 11% were derived from EuroFIR and 6 % were
derived from UK food composition tables and calculated proportion. Table 6.3
illustrates the percentage of AOAC-fibre values from different resources based on
the main fibre-rich food groups. AOAC-fibre for the cereal group was mainly
derived from USDA and UK food composition tables (29% and 24%, respectively),
while AOAC-fibre values for the vegetables group were mainly derived from the
USDA and the national review (36%, 26%). AOAC-fibre values for the legume
group were derived mainly from the USDA (84%), and finally, AOAC-fibre values
for the fruit group and nuts and seeds group were mainly derived from the national
review (60% for the fruit group, 37% for nuts and seeds group) and EuroFIR
databases (24% for the fruit group, 20% for the nuts and seeds group).
Figure 6.5 Search strategy for identifying the AOAC-fibre values for food items listed in
the baseline FFQ
Table 6.3 Percentage of derived TDF values based on the top five food groups rich in fibre
groups
No. of
food items
National
review
EuroFIR USDA nutrient
database
label
Recipe
calculation
Cereal 35 24% 15% 15% 29% 13% 3%
Fruit 24 . 37% 24% 35% 4% .
Vegetable 38 2% 28% 16% 36% 13% 5%
Legumes 9 . . 5% 84% 5% 5%
Nuts and seeds 9 . 60% 20% 20% . .
6.8.2Protocol 2: Search strategy for insoluble dietary fibre (IDF) and
soluble dietary fibre (SDF) values
Similar to the search strategy used to obtain AOAC-fibre values, insoluble and
soluble values were obtained from two resources. The majority (90%) of insoluble
and soluble fibre values were identified in the UK food composition tables (Holland
et al., 1992a, Holland et al., 1988, Holland et al., 1989, Holland et al., 1991a,
Holland et al., 1992b, Holland et al., 1993). Values were assigned to each FFQ food
item.
For the remaining 10% of food items in the baseline FFQ for which data were
missing in UK food composition tables, an estimated proportion of soluble and
insoluble fibre was made either by mapping to similar food items from available
sources or estimating fraction proportions from food ingredients (of the food item)
that rich in fibre then applied it to the available NSP value. Figure 6.7 presents the
search strategy for insoluble and soluble fibre values. Similar to estimated AOAC-
fibre intake within the UKWCS, daily dietary soluble and insoluble fibre intakes
expressed as g/day were calculated for all cohort members by multiplying the
Figure 6.6 Distribution of information sources used to extract AOAC-fibre values
frequency of consumption of each FFQ item by the item portion size and the product
was multiplied by the fibre content of each FFQ item.
Figure 6.7 Search strategy steps for identifying the soluble and insoluble fibre values for
FFQ food items
6.9 Allocation of FFQ intakes to food groups
In the baseline FFQ, 217 food items were grouped into 18 food groups as
presented in Table 6.4 mainly based on National Diet Nutrition Survey food groups
categories (Department of Health, 2012). From the 18 food groups, the cereal group
was subdivided into three main groups based on fibre content g per 100g of food
(The Institute of Food Science & Technology, 2007). Cereal foods which contained
3-6g of dietary fibre per 100g were grouped into the cereals source of fibre group,
food items that contained more than 6g of dietary fibre per 100g were categorized
into cereals high in fibre group and the remaining cereal foods that contained less
than 3 g/100g of food were put into other cereals group.
Search for SDF and IDF values for food s listed in FFQ using McCance and
Widdowsons The Composition of Foods
Search for similar food item in the McCance and Widdowsons the composition of foods
Select the relevant food item with similar ingredients
SDF and IDF values
not found
Record calculated SDF and IDF values found
(SDF=SNCP
and IDF = INCP
+ cellulose + lignin)
Calculate proportion of SDF and IDF from matched food item
1SNCP = soluble non-cellulosic polysaccharides
2INCP = insoluble non-cellulosic polysaccharides
Table 6.4 List of food groups from 217 food items in the baseline FFQ
No Food groups The FFQ food items numbers No of food items
1 Cereals high in fibre 3,5,8,13,14,15,68,70 8
2 Cereals source of fibre 2,4,6,9,10,11,22,69,173,204,206 11
3 Other cereals 1,7,12,21,23-26, 67,71,203,205,207,208,211 14
4 Potatoes 16-20 5
5 Fruit 53, 149-172 174 25
6 Vegetables 55, 90-96, 123-134, 136-148 33
7 Legumes 78-85, 135,142 10
8 Nuts 51, 56, 74-77,181-183 10
9 Milk and milk products 27-42 , 212-218 20
10 Meat and meat products 97-115 18
11 Fish and fish dishes 116-122 7
12 Non-alcoholic beverages 184-197 14
13 Alcoholic beverages 198-202 5
14 Eggs and eggs dishes 86-89 4
15 Fat spread 43-49 7
16 Savoury snacks 178-180 3
17 miscellaneous foods 57-66 10
18 Sugar and confectionary 50, 52-54, 175, 176, 177,219 8
6.10 Case ascertainment of T2DM as measure of outcome
Incident cases of T2DM were identified from a self-reported question
completed at baseline and at phase II questionnaire (Figure 6.8). Phase II
questionnaire was filled in after on average 4.2 (0.9) years from the baseline FFQ.
(range 2-7 years). Question about year of diagnosis in phase II was used as a cross-
check question to confirm incident cases in addition to data available from the
baseline.
Figure 6.8 Questions to derive case ascertainment
From Table 6.5, out of 291 women who reported a diagnosis of diabetes in
phase II, 152 women also reported diabetes at baseline. These women were excluded
from the current study as well as 17 women who reported having diabetes at
baseline and reported not having diabetes at phase II and 1,927 women who miss the
question at baseline or phase II or both. 114 incident cases were therefore identified
for the current study. Prevalence of diabetes from baseline is 1.8% (n=464)
however, only 169 women who reported diabetes completed phase II questionnaire.
Table 6.5 Number of participants in the UKWCS who completed baseline and phase II.
T2DM at phase II
Yes No Missing Total
Yes 152 17 14 183
No 114 12,035 860 13,009
missing 25 821 207 1,053
Total 291 12,873 1,081 14,245
From 12,035, only 11,982 women were included as non-cases after excluding
participants who reported unfeasible total energy intake (<500kcal/day and >5000
kcal/day) (n=53) Overall, the total number of women included in the analyses in
chapter 8 and 9 was 12,096.
6.11 Conclusion
The UKWCS is one of the largest population based prospective studies in UK.
This cohort is characterised by wide range of dietary pattern exposure that give the
chance to examine diet and disease relationship. The baseline characteristics
suggested that women were health conscious with high proportion of vegetarians.
Chapter 7: Comparison between dietary AOAC-fibre and
NSP intakes in the UKWCS: Does method of dietary fibre
analysis matter?
7.1 Introduction
Global nutrition guidelines are in general agreement that diets composed of
foods rich in dietary fibre are beneficial with regard to the prevention of a wide
range of nutrition-related chronic diseases (World Health Organization, 2003).
However, a number of different analytical methods have been employed historically
to estimate the proportion of food that is resistant to degradation by the human
intestinal enzymes and that may therefore be classified as dietary fibre (DeVries and
Rader, 2005). Currently, the two most commonly used analytical methods for
measurement of dietary fibre for use in food composition tables and food labelling
are the Englyst method (Englyst et al., 1982), which estimates non-starch
polysaccharide (NSP) and the methods of the Association of Official Analytical
Chemists (AOAC) (Official Methods of Analytical Chemists, 1995) which provides
an estimate of total dietary fibre that includes NSP, resistant starch and lignin. The
latter method has been adopted by most European countries for the determination of
total dietary fibre (TDF) for food composition tables, food labelling purposes
(DeVries, 2004), and dietary fibre recommendations (Lunn and Buttriss, 2007).
In the UK, dietary fibre values reported in food composition tables and
reference nutrient intakes set by the Committee on Medical Aspects of Food Policy
are expressed as NSP (Food Standards Agency, 2002, Department of Health, 1991).
More recently, resistant starch which by definition is not included in NSP, has been
found to confer beneficial physiological effects (Nugent, 2005) and was added to the
dietary fibre definition proposed by WHO/FAO (DeVries and Rader, 2005). As a
result, the AOAC method has been recommended for the purposes of food labelling
in the UK (Food Standards Agency, 2002). Buttriss and Stokes (2008) described
how differences in methodology and analysis of dietary fibre have led to the
confusing situation in the UK in which foods are labelled using AOAC fibre
estimates, but dietary reference values, guidelines for consumption and food
composition tables generally provide only NSP values. This is potentially confusing
for the consumer, but also has impact for research concerning the impact of dietary
fibre on health. Most surveys of UK participants report dietary fibre as NSP,
whereas other European and US studies use AOAC databases to determine
consumption statistics. This makes cross-country comparisons of intake challenging,
since it is not clear whether the highest NSP consumers in the UK would be
similarly categorized as such using AOAC-fibre values. It is theoretically possible,
that depending on the dietary pattern of an individual, a very high intake of foods
rich in resistant starch may make a disproportionate contribution to AOAC-fibre
intake, and may mean the highest AOAC-fibre consumer would not be similarly
categorized as a high NSP consumer. Food groups which are particularly high in
resistant starch include potatoes and potato products, bread, legumes and certain
breakfast cereals such as cornflakes (Sajilata et al., 2006).
A further challenge in nutrition epidemiology is the agreement of analytical
methods for dietary fibre when pooling the results of studies that employed the
different dietary fibre analysis methods. The relationship between AOAC-fibre and
NSP values will determine whether conversion between the two analytical methods
generates misclassification in studies using pooled data. A previous analytical
approach (Englyst et al., 1996) based on a small range of foods for ten major food
groups (Peattie et al., 1983, Food Standards Agency, 2002) suggested a mean ratio
of AOAC-fibre to NSP of 1:1.33 (Lunn and Buttriss, 2007) may be employed to
convert NSP fibre values to AOAC fibre values. However, it is unclear whether
this conversion approach may be equally valid when comparing dietary intakes
within populations. The objectives for this chapter include the following.
 To examine the degree of agreement between AOAC-fibre and NSP intake in
the UKWCS.
 To describe high fibre consumers as NSP or AOAC-fibre consumers in the
UKWCS and to assess whether the characteristics of the high NSP consumers,
are similar to high AOAC-fibre consumers.
 To determine the main food sources contributing to the NSP and AOAC-fibre
intakes among cohort women
 To determine the dietary and non-dietary predictors for high fibre consumers.
7.2 Methodology
UKWCS data was used for this chapter as previously described in chapter 6.
7.3 Statistical analyses
A total of 34,454 participants were available for analysis after exclusion of
women who reported consuming less than 500 kcal or more than 4,000 kcal per day.
Initially, graphical normality tests such as histograms, graph boxes and k-densities
were carried out before using any hypothetical tests (Appendix I). Descriptive
analyses were performed using mean (SD), median (IQR) of AOAC-fibre intake,
NSP intake, and food groups that contributes to AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes.
Dietary AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes were expressed as g/day and expressed in g
per 1000 kcal per day which represents the proportion of NSP in the diet whilst
holding total energy intake constant and so reduces variation related to energy
intake. Statistical significance between the two measures was determined with P
value < 0.05. Parametric and non-parametric tests were used as appropriate to
examine the dietary NSP and AOAC-fibre intakes according to socioeconomic
status, demographic, lifestyle and dietary variables.
Pearsons correlation between NSP and AOAC-fibre intakes was calculated to
assess the strength of association between them. In order to determine the extent of
agreement in the classification of the women into fibre intake quintiles, the subjects
were divided into intake quintiles on the basis of both NSP and AOAC-fibre intakes.
Quintile includes participants with the lowest fibre intakes and 5
quintile
includes participants with the highest fibre intakes. Demographic characteristics
(age, ethnicity, education, and marital status), lifestyle characteristics (smoking
status, alcohol intake, use of dietary supplements, and physical activity),
anthropometric status (weight, BMI) for all participants were explored across the
fibre quintiles. One-way analysis of variance and chi-squared tests were used to test
for differences between the quintiles. The associations between dietary fibre and
food groups were determined using Pearson correlation coefficients.
Both un-weighted and weighted Kappa analyses (Cook, 1998) were used to
determine the extent of agreement of participant categorization into the same or
adjacent quintiles respectively beyond the level expected by chance.
Food items listed in the baseline FFQ were grouped into 18 groups according
to the National Diet Nutrition Survey food categories (Department of Health, 2012)
as described in chapter 6. Further subgrouping was carried out for cereal group into
three groups based on fibre content g per 100g (The Institute of Food Science &
Technology, 2007) (appendix G provide the list of food items in each food group).
Intake of NSP and AOAC-fibre from different sources were obtained and expressed
in percentage. Fibre sources of insoluble and soluble fibre are presented in Table
Analysis to explore dietary and non-dietary factors that predict high dietary
AOAC-fibre and NSP consumption was carried out using multiple linear regression
approach. Regression coefficients, beta (), which denotes the increase in the 
dependent variable (intake of AOAC-fibre or NSP) for each unit increase in the
explanatory variable (food groups or other womens characteristics), are presented
with accompanying 95% confidence intervals. R
values denoting the variation in
the outcome variable explained by the variable included in the regression model are
also presented.
First multiple regression analysis was carried out to identify dietary
determinants of high AOAC-fibre intake in cohort women. This help in identifying
food groups consumed by women that result into a greater AOAC-fibre and NSP
consumption. The second multiple regression analysis was carried out to predict
lifestyle characteristics of participants with high AOAC-fibre and NSP consumption
which may provide information about the target population (low fibre consumers)
that may be the target for future health promotion and dietary intervention plans.
The above analyses were designed to explore whether there are similarities
and differences in the characteristics of high fibre consumers when dietary fibre is
estimated from different analytical methods. Mean (95%CI) NSP and AOAC-fibre
intakes were obtained based on socioeconomic status, marital status, BMI, lifestyle
and dietary factors. All statistical analysis was undertaken using STATA statistical
software version 12 (Corp-Stata, 2010).
7.4 Results
7.4.1Dietary fibre intake in the UKWCS
As may be seen in Table 7.1, mean intake of AOAC-fibre among cohort women was
38.3g/day while mean dietary NSP intake was 25.6g/day. Mean intake of insoluble
and soluble NSP were respectively 16.0 (6.0) g/day, and 10.8 (3.9) g/day. The
AOAC-fibre intake is higher than NSP intake by 33% which in actual terms equal to
12.7g/day.
Table 7.1 Dietary AOAC-fibre, IDF and IDF intakes in the UKWCS (n=34,454)
Dietary intake Mean (SD) g/day Median (IQR) g/day
AOAC-fibre (g/d) 38.3(14.4) 36.4(18.3)
AOAC-fibre density (g/1000kcal/d) 17.3(4.7) 16.9(6.2)
NSP (g/d) 25.6(9.8) 24.2(12.5)
NSP density (g/1000kcal/d) 11.6(3.3) 11.3(4.4)
Insoluble fibre (g/d) 16.0(6.0) 15.1(8.6)
Soluble fibre (g/d) 10.8(3.9) 10.3(4.8)
Table 7.2 demonstrates the mean (95%CI) of dietary fibre intake (AOAC-
fibre and NSP) consumed by the UKWCS participants based on major baseline
characteristics. Variations in amount consumed from NSP and AOAC-fibre were
observed across different factors. For example smoking status, BMI categories,
socioeconomic status, self-reported vegetarian, dietary supplement consumption,
UK fruit and vegetable recommendations, self-reported legumes intake and
menopausal status. With fruit and vegetables intake, women who consumed less
than 400g/day of fruit and vegetables (which is less than the UK recommendations)
reported dietary AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes of 25.9g/day and 17.1g/day
respectively. However, overestimation of dietary AOAC-fibre intake using FFQ as
dietary assessment method should be considered. Mean intakes were 37.1g/day from
AOAC-fibre and 24.9g/day from NSP for overweight and obese women, which is
slightly but statistically significantly lower than women with BMI of less than
25kg/m
(39.1g/day and 26.1g/day respectively. Women who did not report being
vegetarian or vegan consumed 36.4g/day from AOAC-fibre intake and 24.3g/day
from NSP intake.
Table 7.2 Mean (95%CI) of dietary fibre intakes expressed in g/day and g/1000kcal/day for UKWCS participants by major characteristics
Variable AOAC-fibre g/day NSP g/day P value AOAC-fibre g/1000kcal/day NSP g/1000kcal/day P value
Smoking status
No 38.9(38.7, 39.1) 25.9(25.8, 26.1) <0.01 17.0(17.0, 17.1) 11.5(11.5, 11.6) <0.01
Yes 33.6(33.2, 34.1) 22.5(22.2, 22.7) 15.1(14.9, 15.3) 10.1(10.0, 10.2)
BMI <25 39.1(38.8, 39.3)
26.1(25.9, 26.2) <0.01 17.1(17.0, 17.2)
11.4(11.4, 11.4) <0.01
BMI >25 37.1(36.9, 37.4) 24.8(24.6, 24.9) 16.5(16.4, 16.6) 11.0(10.9, 11.1)
Socio-economic class
Professional 38.8(38.6, 39.1) 25.9(25.8, 26.1) <0.01 17.0(16.9, 17.1) 11.4(11.3, 11.4) <0.01
Intermediate 37.6(37.3, 37.9) 25.2(24.9, 25.4) 16.6(16.5, 16.7) 11.1(11.1, 11.2)
Manual 37.1(36.7, 37.6) 24.7(24.4, 25.1) 16.4(16.2, 16.5) 10.9(10.8, 11.0)
Self-report vegetarian or vegan status
No 36.4(36.3, 36.6) 24.3(24.2, 24.5) <0.01 16.0(15.9, 16.0) 10.7(10.6, 10.7) <0.01
Yes 43.4(43.1, 43.7) 28.9(28.7, 29.1) 19.2(19.1, 19.3) 12.8(12.7, 12.8)
Fruit and vegetables intake g/day
<400g/d 25.9(25.7, 26.1) 17.1(17.0, 17.2) <0.01 13.5(13.3, 13.5) 8.9(8.8, 8.9) <0.01
>400g/d 42.9(42.4, 42.7) 28.5(28.4, 28.6) 18.1(17.9, 18.1) 12.1(12.1, 12.1)
Legumes consumer
Yes 39.6(39.5, 39.8) 26.4(26.3, 26.6) <0.01 17.2(17.1, 17.3) 11.5(11.4, 11.6) <0.01
No 32.1(31.7, 32.5) 21.5(21.2, 21.7) 15.1(14.9, 15.2) 10.1(9.9, 10.2)
Dietary supplement use
No 36.5(36.2, 36.7) 24.4(24.2, 24.6) <0.01 16.2(16.1, 16.2) 10.8(10.7, 10.8) <0.01
Yes 39.5(39.3, 39.7) 26.4(26.2, 26.5) 17.3(17.2, 17.3) 11.5(11.5,11.6)
Menopausal status at baseline
Pre 38.1(37.9, 38.4) 25.4(25.3, 25.6) <0.05 16.7(16.6, 16.7) 11.1(11.0, 11.2) <0.01
Post 38.4(38.1, 38.7) 25.7(25.5, 25.8) 17.0(16.9, 17.1) 11.4(11.3, 11.5)
7.4.2Agreement between AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes in the UKWCS
A strong positive correlation coefficient was observed between the AOAC-
fibre and NSP intake estimates (r = 0.9; P < 0.01). A scatter diagram of dietary fibre
intake using two methods is presented in Figure 7.1 showing a clear positive
relationship. To assess the magnitude of agreement between the two analytical
methods the Kappa analysis method was applied (Viera and Garrett, 2005). The
agreement concerning the classification of women into the same quintile on the basis
of AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes was 84% ( = 0.8). A weighed Kappa analysis was 
used to compare adjacent quintiles as a measure of partial agreement. Among the
34,454 women, the agreement between the two analytical methods in estimating
total dietary fibre intakes was seen with a weighed Kappa value of 0.9. This is
considered almost perfect agreement (Viera and Garrett, 2005) and indicates that a
majority of the women were allocated to the same quintile by both analytical
methods. This result suggests that the majority of high AOAC-fibre consumers
(women who consumed more than or equal 50g/day) were also high NSP-fibre
consumers (women who consumed more than 39g/day), and the majority of low
AOAC-fibre consumers (women who consumed less than 21g/day) were also low
NSP-fibre consumers (women who consumed less than 13g/day). No subjects were
misclassified into quintiles at the opposite extremes, confirming the strong
agreement of the dietary fibre intake values derived by these two analytical methods
(as shows in Table 7.3). Percentages of women in the adjacent quintiles of AOAC-
fibre and NSP intakes were only 8-11%.
Analysis of main fibre sources also showed high degree of agreement with
Kappa value ranging between 0.5 (for potato group) and 0.9 (for cereal high in fibre,
fruits and nuts) , and weighted kappa ranging between 0.7 (potato group) to 0.9
(cereal, fruit, vegetables, legumes and nuts). Ranges of Kappa were seen for food
groups that contain lesser amount of fibre (Appendix H).
0 20 40 60 80 100
Dietary NSP intake (g/day)
Table 7.3 Number of participants across dietary fibre intake quintiles estimated from
AOAC-fibre and NSP values
NSP intake
Lowest NSP 2
Highest NSP Total(n)
Lowest AOAC-fibre 6,489 570 2 0 0 (0%)
7,061
574 5,730 748 5 1 7,058
1 762 5,519 742 7 7,031
0 2 773 5,707 499 6,981
Highest AOAC-fibre 0 (0%)
0 1 536 5,786 6,323
Total (n) 7,064 7,064 7,043 6,990 6,293 34,454
1 n (%) of women who were misclassified into extreme quintiles in comparison to total number of participant
A regression analysis of dietary fibre intakes was used to predict the AOAC
derived dietary fibre intake if the NSP dietary fibre value was known. This analysis
showed that 98% of variability can be explained by the AOAC method. For every 1
g increase in NSP value, a 1.43 g/day increase in AOAC dietary fibre value
(p<0.001) was estimated.
7.4.3Food groups in relation to AOAC-fibre, NSP intakes and types of
fibres in the UKWCS.
As shown in Table 7.4, the five main sources of dietary fibre (both AOAC-
fibre and NSP), accounting for more than three quarters of intake, were cereals,
fruit, vegetables, legumes and potatoes. Within the cereal group, wholemeal bread
contributed 7.4% and 6.1% respectively. Muesli and porridge account for 2.2% and
Figure 7.1 Relationship between AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes in women
r = 0.9 (p<0.01)
1.7% of total AOAC-fibre intake and 1.4% and 0.5% of total NSP intake. Fruits and
vegetables contributed equally to total AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes and accounted
for almost 40% of total AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes (39.3% and 39.6%;
respectively). The legume group contributed to 8.9% and 9.5% of total AOAC-fibre
and NSP intakes which is higher than cereal source of fibre group. Nuts were
small contributor to fibre intake generally, providing 1.7% and 1.8% of total AOAC-
fibre and NSP intakes.
Main five sources of IDF, contributing the majority of the intake, were cereals
(18.8%), vegetables (12.9%), fruits (10.1%), legumes (5.2%) and potatoes (4.7%).
Main food sources of SDF, were cereal (9.8%), vegetables (9.9%), potatoes (6.3%)
and legumes (4.3%). Within the cereal foods, the main food group that contributed
to total IDF and SDF were wholemeal bread (6.6% and 1.1%) and bran-based
breakfast cereals (4.8% and 1.3%).
Table 7.4 Percentage of contribution of food types to average total daily AOAC-fibre, NSP, SDF and IDF intakes among cohort women (out of 100%)
Type of food AOAC-fibre intake
% (95%CI)
NSP intake
% (95%CI)
SDF intake%(95%CI) IDF intake
%(95%CI)
Cereals high in fibre 17.9(17.7,18.0) 19.9(19.6, 19.9) 4.3(4.2, 4.4) 16.0(15.9, 16.1)
Wholemeal bread 7.4(7.4, 7.6) 6.1(6.0, 6.2) 1.1(1.0, 1.2) 6.6(6.4, 6.7)
All Bran and bran flakes 5.2(5.1, 5.2) 3.5(3.5, 3.5) 1.3(1.3, 1.4) 4.8(4.7, 4.8)
Muesli 2.2(2.1, 2.3) 1.4(1.4, 1.5) 0.8(0.7, 0.8) 2.0(2.0, 2.1)
Cereals source of fibre 7.8(7.4, 7.8) 6.6(6.6, 6.7) 3.0(3.0, 3.1) 4.9(4.8, 4.9)
Brown bread 2.7(2.5, 2.7) 1.9(1.6, 1.9) 0.9(0.8, 0.9) 1.9(1.8, 1.9)
Porridge 1.7(1.6, 1.8) 0.5(0.4, 0.5) 0.9(0.8, 1.0) 1.1(1.0, 1.1)
Spaghetti wholemeal pasta 1.3(1.2, 1.3) 0.9(0.7, 0.9) 0.3(0.2, 0.4) 1.1(1.0, 1.2)
Other cereals 5.4(5.4, 5.5) 4.9(4.8, 4.9) 2.5(2.5, 2.6) 2.6(2.6, 2.7)
White pasta 1.1(1.0, 1.2) 0.9(0.8, 0.9) 0.7(0.6, 0.8) 0.6(0.5, 0.6)
Non-sugar cereals 0.4(0.3, 0.4) 0.2(0.0, 0.2) 0.1(0.08, 0.2) 0.1(0.09, 0.1)
Buns/pastries 0.4(0.2, 0.5) 0.1(0.09, 0.1) 0.1(0.09, 0.1) 0.1(0.08, 0.1)
Potatoes 10.3(10.2, 10.4) 10.9(10.7, 10.9) 6.3(6.2, 6.4) 4.7(4.6, 4.8)
Fruit 19.8(19.7, 19.9) 18.9(18.7, 18.9) 8.9(8.9, 8.9) 10.1(10.0, 10.2)
Vegetables 19.5(19.4, 19.6) 20.7(20.6, 20.8) 9.9(9.9, 10.0) 12.9(12.8, 13.0)
Legumes 8.9 (8.8, 9.0) 9.5(9.5, 9.6) 4.3(4.2, 4.3) 5.2(5.1, 5.3)
Nuts 1.7 (1.7, 1.8) 1.8(1.8, 1.9) 0.6(0.5, 0.6) 1.2(1.1, 1.2)
Milk and milk products 0.6(0.5, 0.6) 0.1(0.09, 0.1) 0.05(0.05, 0.08) 0.1(0.08, 0.1)
Meat and meat products 1.9 (1.9, 2.0) 1.3(1.2, 1.3) 0.8(0.8, 0.9) 0.9(0.8, 0.9)
Fish and fish dishes 0.5 (0.4, 0.5) 0.2(0.2, 0.3) 0.1(0.1, 0.2) 0.1(0.1, 0.2)
Beverages 0.4(0.3, 0.4) 0.7(0.6, 0.7) 0.1(0.08, 0.1) 0.6(0.5, 0.6)
Alcoholic beverages 0(0) 0(0) 0(0) 0(0)
Eggs and eggs dishes 0.3 (0.2, 0.3) 0.3(0.2, 0.3) 0.08(0.08, 0.09) 0.2(0.1, 0.2)
Fat spread 0(0) 0(0) 0(0) 0(0)
Savoury snacks 0.9 (0.8, 0.9) 0.5(0.4, 0.5) 0.6(0.6, 0.7) 0.9(0.5, 0.6)
Miscellaneous foods 0.8 (0.7, 0.8) 0.9(0.8, 0.9) 0.5(0.4, 0.5) 0.1 0.1, 0.2)
Sugar and confectionary 1.0(0.9, 1.0) 0.5(0.4, 0.5) 0.1(0.08, 0.1) 0.4(0.3, 0.5)
Table 7.5 Dietary NSP and AOAC-fibre intakes (mean (SD), mean difference g/d and %)
from all food groups included in the baseline FFQ
No Fibre intake from food groups AOAC-fibre intake
g/day
NSP intake
g/day
Mean difference
Mean SD Mean SD g/day %
1 Cereals and cereals products 12.5 7.3 8.2 4.9 4.3 34
1.a Cereal high in fibre 7.4 6.6 5.5 4.8 1.9 25
1.b Cereal source of fibre 3.0 2.9 1.8 1.7 1.2 40
1.c Other cereal 1.8 1.3 1.1 0.8 0.7 44
2 Vegetables 7.5 4.5 5.2 2.8 2.3 31
3 Fruit 7.9 6.0 4.7 3.3 3.2 37
4 Potatoes 3.6 2.2 2.8 1.6 0.8 22
5 Legumes 3.4 2.6 2.3 1.6 1.1 32
6 Nuts 0.7 1.1 0.45 0.77 0.25 36
7 Sugars, preserves and snacks 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.4 0 0
8 Sauces, soups and miscellaneous 0.4 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.3 75
9 Meat and meat products 0.6 0.7 0.3 0.3 0.3 50
10 Milk and milk products 0.2 0.3 0 0 0.2 100
11 Non-alcoholic beverages 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 0 0
12 Fish and fish dishes 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 50
13 Eggs and eggs dishes 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.1 0 0
14 Fat and oils 0 0 0 0 0 0
15 Alcoholic beverages 0 0 0 0 0 0
The mean difference between the dietary fibre intakes calculated using the
AOAC and Englyst methods ranged from 0.24.3 g/day (presented in Table 7.5).
The greatest differences between the AOAC-fibre and NSP-fibre intakes were
observed in the cereals group, where a high amount of other non-digestible
substances content was anticipated. This reflects a considerable amount of
indigestible materials other than NSP in the cereal group that needs to be considered
when estimating the total dietary fibre intake.
Also high variations between AOAC-fibre and NSP from vegetables, fruit and
legume groups were observed in comparing to the remaining food groups that
contain lesser amount of fibre. Generally, this indicates a great amount of
indigestible materials other than NSP in the main fibre sources. A small variation
observed in the nuts group in term of quantity may suggest a negligible amount of
indigestible material other than NSP in the AOAC-fibre intake.
As shown in Table 7.6 correlations were generated between intakes of
food groups in g/day against NSP or AOAC-fibre to explore how different food
groups contribute to fibre intake overall. Pearsons correlations coefficients (r;
95%CI) between total dietary fibre intake and different food groups were found to
be highly significant. Stronger correlations were found between dietary fibre intake
(AOAC-fibre and NSP) and intakes of cereals, vegetables, fruit, legumes (r = 0.61,
0.67, 0.62, 0.55 and r = 0.58, 0.67, 0.61, 0.55; respectively). Within the cereal
group, cereals high in fibre group were found to be strongly correlation with AOAC-
fibre and NSP intake (r=0.55 and 0.59; respectively). While, other cereal group
weakly correlated with NSP (r=0.13) and AOAC-fibre intakes (r=0.16). Within
legumes group, dried legumes, which included chickpeas, lentils, baked beans, red
kidney beans, have a slightly stronger correlation with dietary fibre intakes
compared to fresh legumes including peas and green beans (r = 0.45 and 0.38 with
AOAC-fibre and r = 0.43 and 0.41 with NSP intake). Intakes of other food groups
were weakly correlated with dietary fibre intakes.
Table 7.6 Correlation between dietary fibre intakes expressed as NSP and AOAC-fibre
within food groups among cohort women (n=34,454)
Type of food group Pearsons correlation r (95%CI)
AOAC-fibre intake NSP intake
Cereals and cereals products 0.61(0.60, 0.61) 0.58(0.57, 0.58)
Cereals high in fibre 0.55(054, 0.56) 0.59(0.58, 0.60)
Cereals source of fibre 0.40(0.39, 0.42) 0.35(0.34, 0.36)
Other cereals 0.16(0.15, 0.17) 0.13(0.12, 0.14)
Potatoes 0.28(0.27, 0.29) 0.27(0.26, 0.28)
Fruit 0.62 (0.61, 0.63) 0.61(0.60, 0.62)
Vegetables 0.67(0.66, 0.67) 0.67(0.66, 0.67)
Legumes 0.55(0.54, 0.56) 0.55(0.54, 0.56)
Dried legumes 0.45(0.43, 0.46) 0.43(0.41, 0.43)
Fresh legumes 0.38(0.37, 0.39) 0.41(0.39, 0.42)
Nuts 0.29(0.28, 0.30) 0.28(0.27, 0.29)
Milk and milk products 0.13(0.12, 0.14) 0.12(0.11, 0.13)
Meat and meat products -0.08(-0.09, -0.07) -0.09(-0.10, -0.08)
Fish and fish dishes 0.14(0.13, 0.15) 0.14(0.13, 0.15)
Non-alcoholic beverages 0.14(0.12, 0.14) 0.14(0.12, 0.15)
Alcoholic beverages -0.06(-0.07, -0.05) -0.05(-0.06, -0.04)
Eggs and eggs dishes 0.11(0.10, 0.12) 0.10(0.09, 0.11)
Fat spread 0.06(0.05, 0.07) 0.06(0.05, 0.07)
Savoury snacks 0.02(0.01, 0.03) 0.02(0.01, 0.03)
Miscellaneous foods 0.20(0.19, 0.21) 0.20(0.19, 0.21)
Sugar and confectionary 0.06(0.05, 0.07) 0.04(0.03, 0.06)
7.4.4Predictors of AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes in the UKWCS
The number of women who participated in the UKWCS is large which makes
small effects statistically significant due to high statistical power. The highly
significant levels may not be relevant; however our results assess the size of the
effect. Dietary predictors of high AOAC-fibre intake are provided in Table 7.7.
Increment unit was chosen as 10 grams for all food groups to compare across
different sources of fibre. With every 10g increment in consumption of food from
cereal, potatoes, nuts, legumes, fruit and vegetables groups, the NSP and AOAC-
fibre intake is increased significantly. While with every 10 gram increment of dairy,
fat spread, sugar and alcoholic beverages consumption, the intake of NSP and
AOAC-fibre decreases significantly. No association was observed between food
such as meat and non-alcoholic beverages and NSP and no association between non-
alcoholic beverages and greater intake of AOAC-fibre.
Table 7.7 Energy adjusted Beta coefficients (95%CI) of dietary fibre intake expressed as
NSP and AOAC-fibre with every 10 grams consumed from food groups
Food intake AOAC-fibre (g/day) NSP intake (g/day)
Regression coefficient
(95%CI)
P Regression coefficient
(95%CI)
Cereals high in fibre 0.76(0.76, 0.78) <0.01 0.60(0.60, 0.61) <0.01
Cereals source of fibre 0.31(0.30, 0.32) <0.01 0.14(0.13, 0.15) <0.01
Other cereals 0.07(0.06, 0.08) <0.01 0.03(0.02, 0.04) <0.01
Potatoes 0.19(0.18, 0.19) <0.01 0.13(0.12, 0.13) <0.01
Nuts and seeds 0.54(0.51, 0.57) <0.01 0.34(0.32, 0.37) <0.01
Legumes 0.55(0.54, 0.56) <0.01 0.39(0.38, 0.39) <0.01
Fruits 0.22(0.21,0.22) <0.01 0.15(0.14, 0.15) <0.01
Vegetables 0.22(0.22, 0.23) <0.01 0.16(0.15, 0.16) <0.01
Dairy and dairy products -0.014(-0.166, -0.011) <0.01 -0.01(-0.12, -0.008) <0.01
Fat spreads -0.424(-0.465, -0.384) <0.01 -0.23(-0.26, -0.20) <0.01
Meat and meat alternatives -0.014(-0.019, -0.008) <0.01 -0.0008(-0.004, 0.003) 0.65
Sugars and confectionary -0.113(-0.128, -0.098) <0.01 -0.08(-0.09, -0.07) <0.01
Non-alcoholic beverages -0.0003(-0.0011, 0.0004) 0.30 0.0005(-0.0006, 0.001) 0.07
Alcohol beverages -5.0(-5.4, -4.6) <0.01 -2.4(-2.7, -2.16) <0.01
Miscellaneous 0.03(0.23, 0.03) <0.01 0.02(0.01, 0.03) <0.01
As shown in Table 7.7, the strongest dietary predictors of the high AOAC-
fibre intake were: cereals high in fibre, pulses, nuts and seeds, cereals source of
fibre and lastly vegetables and fruit groups. With every 10g increment of fibre rich
the cereals group, dietary AOAC-fibre and dietary NSP intakes increased by
0.76g/day and 0.60g/day respectively.
Similar dietary predictors were found with NSP intake however the vegetables
and fruits groups were stronger predictors than the cereals sources of fibre group.
This can be explained by the variation in the different ways of measuring dietary
fibre in foods. The strongest dietary predictors of low dietary fibre intake were
found to be: alcoholic beverages group; fat spreads group; sugars and confectionary
group; and lastly the meat and meat alternatives group. With every 1 unit (10ml)
increase in alcohol consumption, the daily AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes reduced
greatly by 5g and 2.4g respectively among cohort women.
Multiple regressions were carried out again with higher increment in the food
group to predict the amount of NSP and AOAC-fibre consumed from main food
sources. The multivariable regression model included total energy intake and main
fibre sources of AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes. Every unit increment of food group
consumed was 80g/day which is equivalent to a standard portion of food. Table 7.8
shows an example of food intake in each food group that is equivalent to 80g/day.
However, nuts and seed group was expressed for each 10g/day increment
(equivalent to 10 whole pistachio or cashew nuts).
Table 7.8 the portion of food that equivalent to 80g/day based on some food groups
Fibre source 80g/day equivalent to
Fruit group one recommended portion
Vegetable group one recommended portion
Legumes group one recommended portion
High fibre cereal group two large thick slices of wholemeal bread
Other cereal group two thick large slice of white bread
Cereals source of fibre two crumpets
Potatoes group small jacket potato without skin
1(National Health Services)
Table 7.9 shows that the greatest increment of AOAC-fibre intake was seen
with cereals high in fibre ( = 6.04), legumes ( = 4.40) and cereals source of fibre 
( = 2.41). While, greatest increment of NSP intake was seen from cereals high in 
fibre ( = 4.78), legumes ( = 3.09) and vegetables ( = 1.27). Within the cereals 
group, the increment of AOAC-fibre and NSP is greatest with consumption of cereal
high in fibre and smallest increment was with other cereal group. This reflects that
consumption of dietary fibre from different subtypes of cereal was not greatly
affected by analytical method.
Overall, similarity in the NSP and AOAC-fibre dietary predictors were
observed. This indicates that analytical aspects may play a minor role when fibre
intake is predicted from different food groups. However, effect size may vary
slightly.
Table 7.9 Energy adjusted regression coefficients (95%CI) of dietary fibre intake expressed
as NSP and AOAC-fibre with every 80 grams consumed from food groups except nut and
seeds (10g/day)
Food intake AOAC-fibre (g/day) NSP intake (g/day)
Regression
coefficient
(95%CI)
p value Regression
coefficient
(95%CI)
value
Cereals high in fibre 6.04(5.98, 6.11) <0.01 4.78(4.74, 4.83) <0.01
Cereals source of fibre 2.41(2.36, 2.46) <0.01 1.10(1.07, 1.14) <0.01
Other cereals 0.49(0.43, 0.54) <0.01 0.15(0.11, 0.19) <0.01
Potatoes 1.45(1.41, 1.49) <0.01 1.02(0.99, 1.05) <0.01
Nuts and seeds 0.51 (0.48, 0.55) <0.01 0.32(0.29, 0.34) <0.01
Legumes 4.40(4.32, 4.48) <0.01 3.08(3.02, 3.13) <0.01
Fruits 1.78(1.75, 1.80) <0.01 1.15(1.13, 1.16) <0.01
Vegetables 1.73(1.71, 1.75) <0.01 1.27(1.25, 1.29) <0.01
1 multivariate regression model adjusted for food groups listed above and other food groups (dairy and dairy
products, fat spreads, meat and meat dishes, eggs and egg dishes, fish and fish dishes, sugars and confectionary,
non-alcoholic beverages, alcohol beverages and miscellaneous).
Non-dietary related factors were also examined to predict high dietary fibre
intake as a continuous variable. Factors such as, BMI, physical activity, smoking,
age, dietary supplement consumption, self-reported vegetarian status and
socioeconomic class were examined. Coefficients of regression of dietary fibre
intake were predicted for each factor accounting for other factors listed in Table
7.10.
As reported previously, 28% defined themselves as vegetarians. Overall,
vegetarians status was strongest predictor of fibre intake. Women who described
themselves as vegetarian or vegan consumed 7 g/day more AOAC-fibre than non-
vegetarians (95% CI: 7.92, 7.45; P < 0.01), while NSP intake was 4.75 g/day higher
among vegetarians than non-vegetarians (95% CI: 4.56, 4.94; P < 0.01). Lower daily
AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes were observed among smokers compared to non-
smokers by 3.79g/day and 2.54g/day respectively. Compared with the women in the
professional social class, consumption of AOAC-fibre and NSP among the
intermediate social class was less by 0.7 g and 0.5g respectively. While, women in
the routine and manual social class consumed 1 gram less and 0.75g less of AOAC-
fibre and NSP intakes in comparison to the highest social class. Obese women
consumed almost 1 g/day of AOAC-fibre and approximately half a gram of NSP
less than women with low BMI (less than 25kg/m
). The findings identified that
women who were younger, smoke, non-vegetarian, from a low social class, high
BMI were more likely to have a lower fibre intake.
Table 7.10 Predictors of high fibre intake calculated by AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes
Coefficient regression (95% CI)
Variable AOAC-fibre intake (g/d) NSP-fibre intake (g/d)
Age (5 year) 0.59(0.52, 0.66) 0.41(0.36, 0.45)
BMI (kg/m
) < 25 1 1
25-30 -0.52(-0.80, -0.25) -0.37(-0.56, -0.17)
> 30 -0.97(-1.33, -0.62) -0.68(-0.93, -0.42)
Physical activity (15min/d) 0.43(0.37, 0.49) 0.31(0.26, 0.35)
Smoker at baseline -3.79(-4.17, -3.42) -2.54(-2.81, -2.27)
Vegetarian 7.19(6.92, 7.45) 4.75(4.56, 4.94)
Dietary supplement users -1.85(-2.09, -1.62) -1.20(-1.37, -1.03)
Socio-
economic
class
Professionals* 1 1
Intermediate -0.69(-0.96, -0.43) -0.45(-0.63, -0.26)
Routine and manual -1.11(-1.52, -0.69) -0.75(-1.05, -0.46)
* Reference group;
adjusted for each other variables.
7.4.5Characteristics of highest versus lowest AOAC-fibre and NSP
consumers in the UKWCS
Women were assigned to five equal quintiles according to AOAC-fibre intake
and NSP, where the mean daily dietary fibre intake was 21g and 13.7g in 1st
quintile, 30g and 19.9g in 2nd quintile, 36.9g and 24.5g in 3rd quintile, 45g and
30.2g in 4th quintile and 61.3g and 39.5 in 5th quintile respectively. Comparing the
highest versus lowest fibre consumers across the AOAC-fibre quintiles, high
AOAC-fibre consumers were more likely to be non-smokers (93%) as compared
with the low AOAC-fibre consumers (82%), and were also more likely to be older,
vegetarian, and have higher socioeconomic status (professional and managerial
class).
In terms of dietary characteristics, women in the highest AOAC-fibre quintile
consumed approximately five more vegetable portions per day than women in the
lowest quintile (8 versus 3 servings, respectively; P < 0.01) and triple the number of
fruit portions per day as compared with the lowest consumers (9 versus 3 portions,
respectively; P < 0.01). High AOAC-fibre consumers reported lower intakes of
protein (15%), fat (31%), saturated fat (9.6%), and alcohol, but higher carbohydrate
intakes (58%) as compared to low AOAC-fibre consumers (p<0.01). Table 7.11 and
7.12 show similar pattern in the characteristics across AOAC-fibre and NSP
quintiles
Generally, dietary fibre intakes expressed in g/day and g/1000kcal/day and
obtained as NSP or AOAC-fibre were all have similar characteristics across the fibre
quintiles.
Table 7.11 Baseline characteristics and nutrient intakes across AOAC-fibre and NSP quintiles
AOAC-fibre intake NSP intake
Dietary fibre quintile 1
P value 1
P value
Mean (SD) intake g/day 21.0 (4.1) 36.9 (2.0) 61.3 (10.9) <0.01 13.7(2.8) 24.5(1.4 39.5(4.3) <0.01
Range g/day 26.4 >33.4 -< 40.5 >50.3 0.01 <17.4 >22.2-<27.1 >33.8
No. of participants 7060 7043 6293 7057 7031 5722
Lifestyle and socio-demographic characteristics
Age (year) 51.9 (9.2) 52.5 (9.3) 52.4 (9.3) 0.8 51.9(9.3) 52.3(9.2) 52.4(9.3) <0.01
BMI (kg/m
) 24.9 (4.5) 24.4 (4.3) 23.9(4.3) 0.01 24.9(4.5) 24.3(4.3) 23.9(4.0) <0.01
Physical activity (MET/Week) 17.8(11.1) 16.8 (11.1) 19.2 (12.3) 0.01 11.7(12.3) 13.8(12.4) 19.1(12.4) <0.01
Self-reported vegetarian (%) 16 26 42 0.01 16 26 41
Socio-economic
status (%)
Professional 61 63 67 0.01
61 62 66 <0.01
Intermediate 29 28 25 29 28 25
Routine and manual 10 9 8 10 9 8
No education record 20 16 16 <0.01 20 16 16 <0.01
Educational level
O-level 33 30 29 33 31 29
A-level 22 25 26 22 25 25
Degree 24 27 29 24 27 29
Smoking status (%) 18 9 7 0.01 18 9 8 <0.01
Dietary supplement users (%) 50 58 65 0.01 50 58.1 65 <0.01
Dietary characteristics
Energy intake (kcal) 1643 (431) 2221(466) 2864 (516) 0.01 1672(452) 2219(483) 2799(509) <0.01
Carbohydrates (% E) 51.7 54.5 58 0.01 51.7 54.4 57.8 <0.01
Protein intake (%E) 16.7 15.9 15.2 0.01 16.6 15.9 15.1 <0.01
Fat intake (% E) 35 33.1 30.9 0.01 35.1 33.2 30.7 <0.01
Sat fat intake (% E) 12.9 11.5 9.6 0.01 13 11.4 9.7 <0.01
Alcohol (units/day) 0.9 (1.1) 0.8 (0.9) 0.7 (0.9) 0.01 0.55(1.3) 0.58(1.2) 0.49(1.1) <0.01
Vitamin C (mg/day) 105.3 (45.8) 164.7 (56.0) 255(94) 0.01 104.3(44.5) 164.8(55.4) 242.6(79.5) <0.01
Iron (mg/day) 10.8 (2.7) 17.4 (3.8) 26.3 (7.3) 0.01 10.9(2.8) 17.4(3.9) 25.4(5.8) <0.01
Calcium (mg/day) 874 (289) 1128 (308) 1400 (357) 0.01 883.4(295) 1129(315) 1373.5(347) <0.01
Vegetable portions/day 3.0 (1.5) 4.9 (2.3) 7.9 (3.6) 0.01 2.9(1.4) 4.9(1.9) 7.5(2.9) <0.01
Fruit portions/day 2.6(1.6) 4.7(2.4) 9.1(6.2) 0.01 2.6(1.6) 4.8(2.4) 8.1(4.7) <0.01
1overall p value
7.5 Discussion
The objective of this study was to examine the relationship between dietary
fibre intakes derived using the AOAC and Englyst methods in participants of the
UKWCS. A high degree of correlation was expected since NSP is the dominant fibre
type measured by both methods of analysis. AOAC-fibre values were consistently
significantly higher than NSP-fibre values for all food items included in the dietary
fibre intake calculation because resistant starch and lignin were included in the
AOAC-derived dietary fibre as compared to the Englyst method (Wolters et al.,
1992).
High daily dietary fibre intake was observed in the studied population
compared to the data from the NDNS (Food Standards Agency, 2010). However,
there is still an argument around how much of this additional fibre is due to FFQ
methodology and how much is due to health consciousness, or underreporting by
NDNS participants. These results suggest that the studied population includes
primarily women with healthy lifestyles. Daily AOAC-fibre intake in the UKWCS
averaged 38.3 g, this is higher than the recommendation proposed by the WHO/FAO
(World Health Organization, 2003). The average daily intake of NSP was 25 g,
which also exceeds current UK dietary recommendations (Department of Health,
1991). Mean daily AOAC-fibre intake was significantly higher, by 32%, than daily
NSP-fibre intake. This is reflected in WHO/FAO recommended daily intake, which
for adults are respectively 25g and 20g (Lunn and Buttriss, 2007). The significant
higher values of AOAC-fibre is due to the presence of components other than NSP
(Englyst et al., 2007).
The high level of NSP intake found in the cohort is perhaps not so surprising
when we consider that sample was chosen to include a large proportion of
vegetarians who consume high amounts of dietary fibre in compared to meat eaters
(Cade et al., 2004a). The advantage of UKWCS is to have a wide range of dietary
exposure to investigate the protective effect of diet on health outcomes. Another
probable reason for having high NSP estimates may partly be due to overestimation
of dietary intake using FFQ data (Calvert et al., 1997). Considering these limitations
and appreciating that the data are not providing us with actual intakes, but rather
indications of levels of dietary fibre intake. When cohort women classified into five
equal groups based on their dietary NSP and AOAC-fibre intake expressed in g/day
and g/1000kcal/day, similarity in the trends were observed with the socio-
demographic, lifestyle and dietary characteristics. Due to the large sample size of the
UKWCS (high statistical power) a small effect of fibre intake examined was
statistically significant.
This is the first epidemiological study to examine the influence of analytical
methods on estimated dietary fibre intake by exploring the degree of agreement and
correlation between the AOAC and Englyst methods with respect to subject
classification using individual food items. The broad range of dietary fibre intakes in
the studied population, with a large proportion of vegetarians, facilitates evaluation
of fibre rich food sources using both analytical methods. Conversely, the studied
population appears to be more health conscious than average, and may not reflect
dietary fibre intakes among the general population.
More recent adaptations to the AOAC fibre analysis method, which now
incorporates greater levels of resistant starch and non-digestible oligosaccharides,
would have generated potentially greater differences in categorization of the women
into fibre intake quintiles.
It was reported in a review by Englyst (Englyst et al., 2007), that the AOAC
method is highly dependent on food processing and therefore variability is expected
from one product to another. This variability can affect the dietary fibre intake
estimation in the present study where each of the 217 food items in the FFQ may
represent several types of food with different preparation methods such as canned,
boiled, grilled, or fresh while evidence showed that cooking methods have no effect
on the NSP content (Reistad and Frolich, 1984).
A significant result of this study is the strong agreement between the AOAC
and Englyst methods in classifying high and low dietary fibre consumers, which is
supported by the absence of subjects misclassified into extreme opposite quintiles.
This suggests that classifications of high or low dietary fibre intakes are comparable
when calculated using these two different analytical methods. High fibre consumers
are classified similarly using each fibre analysis method.
A potential limitation of the study was the restricted number of AOAC-fibre
values in the UK Food Composition Tables, resulting in half of the matched food
items being derived from the USDA nutrient database (U.S Department of
Agriculture, 2010). This may have affected the precision with which food items
were identified and, subsequently, the mean difference between the AOAC- and
NSP-fibre values. Although half of the AOAC-fibre values were derived from
USDA which may have an impact on the precision of AOAC-fibre intake
estimation, the results showed a strong agreement between the two analytical
methods.
One-third of the total dietary fibre intake calculated using both analytical methods
was contributed by cereals and cereal products, while two-thirds came from fruits
and vegetables, including legumes and potatoes.
The FFQ is frequently used in epidemiological research because it is
considered to be a cost-effective dietary assessment tool (Willett, 1998). Dietary
fibre conversion factor may provide a basis for calculation of AOAC-fibre intake
from NSP-fibre intake, which may help in improving the comparability between the
UK studies with other studies that used AOAC-fibre estimation when pooled
evidence is examined for dose-response relationship.
A conversion factor of 1.33 has been suggested for derivation of AOAC fibre
intake using NSP values (Lunn and Buttriss, 2007) Another study by Reistad and
Frolich (1984) found a range between 1.1 to 1.4 from measured four vegetables.
The current analysis showed a conversion factor of 1.43 which is slightly higher
than previously established ratio (Lunn and Buttriss, 2007). Our results were derived
from the intakes of 217 food items, whereas the previously reported ratio of 1.33
was derived from analysis of only 115 food items (Peattie et al., 1983). However,
with half of the values for AOAC-fibre content in foods derived from non-UK
resources, this finding may restrict the use of current conversion factor.
Because the present study is the first to examine the relationship between these
calculation methods in an epidemiological application, additional investigation is
needed to establish whether or not this ratio is applicable across a broad range of
population groups. The estimated ratios for each food group may vary, which may
be explained by differences in the amounts of indigestible materials mainly resistant
starch (RS) measured by the AOAC-fibre values for each food group (Englyst et al.,
2007). Specifically, certain food groups may be a richer source of resistant starch. It
had been reported by Englyst et al. (2007) that up to 5% of starch in most of cereal
products is RS while other types of food such as legumes are richer in RS (10-20%
of total starch). The amount of RS is highly dependent on food processing (cooking
methods..etc). It should be recognized that current AOAC methods (985.29 and
991.43) capture only part of the spectrum of total RS that may be better quantified
by newer AOAC method described by McCleary (2007). Resistant starch health
benefits have been reported (Buttriss and Stokes, 2008). The great benefits of
resistant starch was seen on colonic function mediated by production of short chain
fatty acids while seem to have smaller beneficial effect on lipid and glucose markers
(Nugent, 2005). More robust evidence has been found supporting the impact of NSP
consumption such as promoting a regular bowel habit (Buttriss and Stokes, 2008). It
has been argued that not all resistant substances included in the dietary fibre
definition could demonstrate each physiological effect with a similar magnitude
(Buttriss and Stokes, 2008). Therefore, Englyst suggested that for nutrition research,
detail information on specific food component will be more helpful for future
epidemiology studies to establish the intakes and health effects of fibre substances
other than NSP (Englyst et al., 2007). But without adequate databases, it is not
possible to do this.
In the UK, womens diets generally were found to be low in fibre (Ruxton and
Derbyshire, 2010) with a mean intake of 12.6g/day that was significantly lower than
men and even lower that the recommended dietary intake (Henderson et al., 2002) .
The mean dietary intake of NSP reported in the most recent NDNS rolling
programme remained the same (12.8g/day) (Department of Health, 2012).
In addition to determine the fibre rich sources, this can be useful for
implementation of dietary guidelines. Dietary and non-dietary factors that
significantly predict high fibre consumers were identified in this chapter, and may
help to identify best approaches to increase fibre intake from different food groups.
Non-dietary factors identification may help to identify target populations that need
health promotion to encourage high fibre intake in future interventional plans. It is
theoretically possible, that depending on the dietary pattern of an individual, a very
high intake of foods rich in resistant starch may make a disproportionate
contribution to AOAC fibre intake, and may mean the highest AOAC fibre
consumer would not be similarly categorized as a high NSP consumer. Food groups
which are particularly high in resistant starch include potatoes and potato products,
bread, legumes and certain breakfast cereals such as cornflakes (Sajilata et al.,
2006). The current findings showed similar positive associations between different
food intakes and dietary fibre intakes expressed as NSP and AOAC-fibre.
7.6 Conclusion
As anticipated, mean AOAC-derived dietary fibre intake was significantly
higher than the NSP intake. The weighed kappa () analysis found a strong 
agreement in terms of allocation to quintiles using the two fibre analysis methods.
This indicates that the majority of the cohort participants were placed in the same
fibre quintile, regardless of the method of fibre analysis used. None of the
consumers were misclassified in the opposite extreme quintiles. Each 1g increase in
NSP was associated with a 1.43g increase in AOAC dietary fibre. This is somewhat
higher than a previously published ratio of 1.3. These analyses suggest that for the
conduct of a meta-analysis that compares risk of disease in the highest versus the
lowest quintiles of dietary fibre intake the method of fibre analysis employed is of
minor importance. Women in the highest dietary fibre intake group (above 51g/day
of AOAC-fibre and above 39g/d of NSP) will be categorized as such regardless of
the method used. However, for a dose-response meta-analysis, pooling of results
using different fibre analysis methods would be inappropriate. Dietary and dietary
related predictors of high AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes were found to be overall
similar. However, the different types of food consumed may have varied effect on
magnitude of NSP and AOAC-fibre intakes. Younger women, who smoke, have
high BMI, from low social class, are non-vegetarians were lower fibre consumer,
and thus should be considered for forthcoming health promotion that encourages
high fibre consumption.
Chapter 8: Dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM among
British women
8.1 Introduction
As described in the literature review (Chapter 2), the tremendous burden of
high prevalence and incidence of T2DM on health status, economy and quality of
life over time resulted in the establishment of guidelines for prevention (World
Health Organization, 2003). Growing evidence on health benefits of dietary fibre
and the importance of the primary prevention of the chronic diseases suggested the
need for a re-assessment of the dietary fibre goal in the UK (Lunn and Buttriss,
2007). This may help in gaining the benefit of the optimum effect of dietary fibre
intake in the prevention action plan. On the other hand, dietary fibre is a
heterogeneous combination of compounds and evidence on physiochemical
properties of dietary fibre may partly explain the variation in the physiological effect
on human health (Jenkins et al., 2002). Several potential mechanisms suggested the
link between dietary fibre intake and glucose response was described in section
4.4.2.
Inconsistency was observed in prospective studies that examined the effect of
dietary fibre intake on the risk of T2DM among women (Hopping et al., 2010,
Salmeron et al., 1997b). Where, recent cohort showed significant effect of dietary
fibre intake on men than women (Hopping et al., 2010). This suggests possible
differential effect of dietary fibre on risk of diabetes by gender. In addition, lack of
prospective studies that examine the effect of dietary fibre intake on T2DM on
women particularly in UK suggests the needs for further exploration. Also, a limited
number of cohort studies have examined the effect of soluble and insoluble dietary
fibre intakes on risk of T2DM. Thus, further research is required to investigate the
effect of dietary fibre fractions on the risk of T2DM in women.
As discussed in chapter 4, very few studies have looked at NSP intake in
relation to T2DM and as UK food composition tables provide only NSP values thus
UK studies usually use NSP values rather than AOAC-fibre values. This study
considers one of the first studies that looked at the effect of dietary fibre intake
estimated by AOAC method and risk of T2DM among women in the UK. Therefore,
this chapter aims to examine the association between total dietary fibre intake and
risk of T2DM in the UKWCS. The examined dietary fibre intake was obtained from
two different measurement methods (AOAC-fibre intake and NSP intake). Another
aim of the current chapter is to determine whether intakes of soluble and insoluble
fibre can protect from developing T2DM among cohort women. Another main focus
of the current study is to examine the association between the intakes of dietary fibre
from specific food sources and the risk of T2DM.
8.2 Method
8.2.1Study population
As described in chapter 6, the UKWCS (Cade et al., 2004a) is a population
based prospective study that includes mainly white women, aged 35-69, with a wide
range of dietary patterns. This gives an optimal opportunity to determine risk of
nutrition related chronic diseases in a population with varied degree of dietary
exposure.
8.2.2Outcome measure
Selection of cases of diabetes was undertaken as demonstrated in chapter 6.
From 12,149, only 11,982 women were included as non-cases after excluding
participants who reported unfeasible total energy intake (<500kcal/day and >5000
kcal/day) (n=53). In addition to 114 incidents were identified for the current chapter.
Figure 8.1 summarises the timescale of baseline and phase II data capture used for
the current analyses. Dietary variables were obtained from the baseline FFQ and
outcome (T2DM status) was obtained from baseline and phase II. Overall, the total
number of women included in the analysis was 12,096.
Figure 8.1 Schematic of study design, including timing of exposure and outcome assessment
8.2.3Exposure measures
8.2.3.1 Total dietary fibre intake
From Figure 8.1, total dietary fibre intake was estimated from baseline FFQ
and expressed as AOAC-fibre and NSP (g/day). AOAC-fibre values were obtained
as described in chapter 6. Dietary fibre intake was expressed as estimated intakes in
g/day and fibre density in g/1000kcal/day.
8.2.3.2 Insoluble and soluble fibre intake
Estimated dietary insoluble and soluble fibre intakes were calculated from the
baseline FFQ. The fibre values were obtained from 5
edition of the UK
composition tables was used as more relevant time-frame of baseline than 6
edition
(Holland et al., 1991b). Insoluble fibre values of foods and food products were
composed of cellulose, insoluble non-cellulosic polysaccharides and lignin while
soluble fibre values included the soluble non-cellulosic polysaccharides. Details on
the recently obtained data for AOAC-fibre intake are available in chapter 6.
Exposures
Dietary fibre intake
Self-reported
Incident T2DM
group
Free from
group
Dietary AOAC-fibre
intake
Dietary NSP intake
Daily dietary fibre intake (g/d) =
Frequency of consumption of FFQ food item X Item portion size X
Estimated fibre content
Outcome
Dietary IDF and SDF
intake
1995  1998 1999  2002
Baseline FFQ phase II questionnaire
8.2.3.3 Dietary fibre sources by main food groups
FFQ food items were allocated to food groups along the lines used in the UK
food composition tables (Food Standards Agency, 2002) and are shown in Table 8.1.
Selected 118 foods and food products from the baseline FFQ were assigned to five
food groups as being the highest contributors to total dietary fibre intake. Fibre
intakes from cereals, fruit, vegetables, legumes, and nuts groups were expressed in
grams per day.
Table 8.1 list of food items from the baseline FFQ based on main food grouping in
McCance and Widdowsons (2002)
groups
items
List of FFQ food item
1 Cereals 37
wholemeal bread average, papadums, crispbread, muesli, all
bran, Weetabix, oat, wheat germ, brown bread average, chapattis,
tortillas, cream crackers, porridge, sugar coated cereals ,
wholemeal pasta, burgar, cereal bar, chocolate biscuits, fruitcake,
buns, scones, fruit pie, white bread, pitta, white pasta, white rice,
brown rice, macaroni cheese, couscous, non-sugar cereal, wild
rice, plain biscuits, sandwich biscuits sponge cakes, sponge
puddings,
2 Fruit 24
apple, avocado, bananas, grapes, kiwi, mango, orange, papaya,
pears, pineapple, apricot, melon, nectarines, peaches, plums,
raspberries, currants, rhubarb, strawberries, dates, fig, prunes,
mixed dried fruits, currants & sultanas
3 Vegetables 38
quron, textured vegetable protein, veg chilli, mixed beans
casserole, stir fry veg, veg dishes, veg pizza, beetroot, broccoli,
Brussels, cabbage, carrots, cauliflower, celery, coleslaw, low cal
coleslaw, courgettes, cucumber, garlic, lettuce, leeks mushrooms,
olives, peppers, swede, sweet corn, tomatoes, turnip, watercress
boiled potato, jacket potato, potato salad chips, roasted potato
barley
4 Legumes 10
lentils, chickpeas, hummus, baked beans, red kidney beans, bean
sprout, blacked eyed beans, butter beans, green beans, peas
Nuts and
seeds
Peanut butter, nut pate, peanuts, cashews, pecans, sunflower
seeds, Bombay mix, peanuts/pistachio, mix nuts
8.2.4Other variables
The baseline FFQ included questions on socio-demographic factors such as
age, ethnicity, socioeconomic status and educational level. Diabetes related risk
factors such as smoking status and physical activity and anthropometric factors such
as calculated BMI (kg/m
) from self-reported weight and height, waist
circumference (cm) and calculated weight change (different between weight at age
of 20 years and present weight) and expressed in % and Kg that were generated
from information provided by women were also obtained from the baseline
questionnaire. Family history of diabetes was also obtained from the baseline FFQ.
Magnesium intake (mg/day) was obtained from the baseline FFQ. Details on
variables of interest will be demonstrated later in section.8.3.3.
8.3 Statistical analyses considerations
8.3.1Outlier detection in the UKWCS
Distribution of each variable of interest was checked for any possible errors
such as typing error. Continuous variables were checked by box plots and
histograms to look for any potential outliers while frequency was checked for the
categorical variables. Scatter plots were also useful to detect potential outliers by
evaluating the consistency of the continuous variables for dietary fibre and other
variables. After data checking, characteristics of cases and non-cases were examined
separately, aiming to gain an understanding of the studied population. It has been
advised by Willett (2012) that exclusion of extreme energy intake values will
counteract for the under and over-reporters.
Detection of outliers is an important issue aiming to avoid bias in estimation of
dietary exposure and to have estimates reflecting the main body of data. Outliers can
occur due to measurement error or inaccurate data entry or can be due to natural
variation within the studied population (Willett, 1998). Evidence shows that
potential over reporting and under reporting lies with total energy intakes of more
than 3500 kcal/day and below 500 kcal/day for women (Willett, 1998). The purpose
of limiting studied participants on the basis of their energy intakes was to minimize
the measurement error that can affect the relationship between the disease outcome
and nutrient intake. This is because energy intake is the best measure that has
narrow physiological predictable range (Willett, 1998).
Statistical methods were used for outliers detection. Univariate statistical
methods basically examine data distribution through minimum and maximum values
and scatter plots may be used for normally distributed data. Box plots were also used
as another exploratory approach as they may help in identifying potential outliers.
The cut-off point for maximum amount of dietary AOAC-fibre was calculated as
follow. The inter-quartile range (IQR) equals the 75
quartile (Q3) minus the 25
quartile (Q1) and assumes that potential outliers are at any data point below the
lower threshold = Q1  1.5IQR or above the upper threshold = Q3 + 1.5IQR.
Outliers were identified using the following steps:
25% percentile = 28.3g/day
75% percentile = 47.4g/day
Inter-quartile range = 19.1g/day
1.5 X IQR = 28.6g/day
Upper threshold = 47.4 + 28.6 = 76.0g/day
When women with AOAC-fibre consumption above 76g/day were assumed to be
potential outliers, this accounted for 2.5% (n=303) of the total cohort. The box plot
of dietary AOAC-fibre values as shown in Figure 8.2 illustrates dietary AOAC-fibre
values present above the upper threshold considered as potential outliers. Potential
outliers were then used in the subgroup statistical analyses as a way to examine the
relationship between dietary fibre intake and risk of diabetes among women with
AOAC-fibre intake below 76g/day as well as examine the relationship among all
women (including women with AOAC-fibre intake above 76g/day) and compared
the results. The findings confirm that conclusion is not sensitive when AOAC-fibre
intake above 76 included in the analysis. This indicates that including women who
consumed very high AOAC-fibre intake in the analysis have no effect on the studied
relationship. From this, it have been recommended to not exclude participants
(Willett, 2012).
Another reason for retaining women with AOAC-fibre intake above 76g/day
was that this resulted in elimination of three women with incident diabetes which
can greatly affect the number of cases in the T2DM group and therefore affect the
relationship between dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM. It have been reported
previously that outliers may result from natural variation (Laurikkala et al., 2000).
Therefore energy restriction (500  5000 kcal/day) was the only exclusion criteria
applied.
Figure 8.2 Distribution of dietary AOAC-fibre intake among all participants
0 50 100 150 200
Dietary AOAC-fibre intake (g/day)
8.3.2 Model development
In the current study, logistic regression method was carried out to investigate
the effect of baseline dietary fibre intake on risk of incident T2DM. So, logistic
models with T2DM incidence as the dependent variable and dietary fibre intake as a
primary predictor variable were constructed. Covariates were also included in the
logistic model. To address the question of whether the observed association between
specific nutrient intake and a disease outcome is reliable, adjustment for
confounders is an important step to obtain valid estimates of the exposure-outcome
relationship (Kleinbaum and Klein, 2010). A confounder is a variable that is
associated with the exposure and is also an independent risk factor of the disease
outcome (Willett, 1998). Several approaches have been used in nutritional
epidemiological research to identify potential confounders (Willett, 1998).
Confounders identified from previous robust evidence, an approach which is
also referred to as a priori confounders, is suggested as being an important approach
(Willett, 1998). Previous studies provide information on the independent variables
being a predictor of disease occurrence and also linked to the exposure (Kirkwood
and Sterne, 2003). Further potential confounders may be a possible concern because
argument regarding their link to exposure and outcome was also considered. Effect
modifiers are variables that maybe assumed to modify the estimate effect size or
direction of the association and were also evaluated in this chapter (Kirkwood and
Sterne, 2003).
Another approach helping to detect potential confounders which can be used
with the previous approach is the univariate and multivariate linear regression
analysis. This aims to examine the relationship of the outcome (T2DM) with each
independent variable (exposure of interest) in the studied population (Kirkwood and
Sterne, 2003). The purpose is to explore whether the independent variable was
significantly associated with T2DM and on the other hand whether this variable
shows changes in the estimated effect size of dietary fibre intake.
Initially, an unadjusted logistic model was used out to explore the relationship
between dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM in the UKWCS. This is useful as
later on covariates may be added to the model and results can reflect the influence of
the adjusted confounders on the relationship in term of direction and effect size.
Confounders included in the logistic model reduce the contribution of variation to
other than dietary exposure of interest which is the aim of the study. The number of
covariates included in the model was considered carefully because if high number of
covariate included then it may reduce variation in the dietary exposure of interest
and lead to estimation bias which, can be seen by wide confidence intervals (Willett,
1998). On the other hand, if some potential confounders were not included in the
model then estimation bias from residual confounders is more likely to occur.
Age may be considered as an example to illustrate the selection of potential
confounders by statistical approaches and background scientific knowledge.
Evidence has shown that age is a strong risk factor for T2DM, and evidence has
shown an association between dietary fibre intake and age. A linear regression
model was carried out with T2DM as the outcome measure and age as an
independent variable to determine whether age is associated with T2DM
independent of dietary fibre intake. On the other hand, linear regression analyses
were also carried out to examine the relationship between age (independent variable)
and dietary fibre intake. Age was considered as a confounder, as analyses showed a
significant association with T2DM independent to dietary fibre and significant
association between age and dietary fibre intake in separate regression analysis.
Overall, the examined dietary variable (age) was independently associated
with dietary fibre intake and with T2DM, this variable was considered as cofounder
in the model with the respect to previous evidence. However, an independent
variable should not considered as a confounder if it is assumed to be on the causal
pathway (Kirkwood and Sterne, 2003) because adjustment of a suspected
intermediate variable will result in estimate bias.
8.3.2.1 Rationale of modelling strategy
This strategy aimed to provide information on how variables were chosen for
the logistic regression models. Steps were followed to select the most appropriate
variables which aimed to obtain a valid effect estimate and at the same time avoid
over adjustment. All variables of interest were derived from the baseline FFQ.
8.3.3Identification of potential confounders
As explained before, one must control for confounders when building a
regression model which examines the association between the exposure (dietary
fibre intake) and the outcome of interest (risk of T2DM) (Willett, 1998). A Priori
confounders and regression analyses approaches were considered for building the
current models with other important considerations aiming to have best model with
reliable estimated effect.
Three types of variables were considered for regression models, a priori
confounders, evidence based confounders, and effect modifiers. A priori
confounders are variables believed to confound the relationship between dietary
fibre intake and risk of diabetes such as ethnicity (Hopping et al., 2010, Stevens et
al., 2002) and gender (Stevens et al., 2002, Schulze et al., 2007, Montonen et al.,
2003). The population in the current study were women and 98% were white
therefore those variables were not considered as covariates in the analyses. Only
BMI was considered to be effect modifier, since it was to modify the estimated
effect size of dietary fibre intake with the risk of diabetes in previous study (Colditz
et al., 1992, Krishnan et al., 2007). Variables of interest explored in the present
study were divided into dietary and non-dietary measures.
8.3.3.1 Non dietary measures
8.3.3.1.1 Age
Age was considered as a confounder from previous cohort studies that have
examined the association between risk of T2DM and dietary fibre intake. From
literature review in chapter 2, evidence suggests a positive association between age
and risk of T2DM. On the other hand, prospective evidence in chapter 4 showed
participants with high dietary fibre intake were more likely to be older. In addition,
the regression analysis of the UKWCS data showed age (OR=1.06; 95%CI 1.04,
1.08) was positively associated with the risk of T2DM (see Table 8.2). Also, for
every 10 year increase in age, dietary fibre increased by 0.5g/day (95%CI: 0.2, 0.8;
p<0.01). Therefore age was considered as a covariate in all adjusted models.
8.2 Univariate and age-adjusted odds ratios (95% CIs) of potential risk factors for T2DM in
the UKWCS
8.3.3.1.2 Socioeconomic status and educational level
Socioeconomic status was investigated in terms of educational level, income
and occupational status in 6147 participants involved in the Alameda Country Study
(Maty et al., 2005). This study showed that incidence of diabetes was inversely
associated with socioeconomic status based on income, occupation and education
among the US studied population in unadjusted models. However, the hazard ratio
was significantly higher with a lower education level but not with income or
occupation in a demographic (age, gender, ethnicity) adjusted model (Maty et al.,
2005). The non-significant association between occupation and risk of diabetes was
explained by the possibility of having high proportion of younger age in the studied
population who may not achieve the occupational abilities. Another study including
national health surveys from eight European countries reported that diabetes was
more prevalent in the lower education group (OR = 1.60 (95%CI: 1.45,1.80) among
Characteristics Unadjusted OR
(95%CI)
P Age adjusted
OR (95%CI)
Age (per year) 1.06(1.04 -1.08) <0.01 - -
Waist circumference (cm) 1.07(1.05 -1.08) <0.01 1.07(1.05 -1.08) <0.01
Weight change from age of 20 years (%) 1.06(1.05 -1.08) <0.01 1.06(1.04 -1.07) <0.01
Weight change from age of 20 years (Kg) 1.07(1.06 -1.08) <0.01 1.07(1.05 -1.08) <0.01
Baseline BMI 1.12(1.09 -1.15) <0.01 1.11(1.07 -1.15) <0.01
categories
Normal weight (>18 - <25) 1 <0.01 1 <0.01
Overweight (>25 - <30) 3.83(2.31 -6.36) 3.37(2.01 -5.6)
Obese (>30) 13.4(8.37 -21.32) 11.9(7.3 -19.1)
Socio-
economic
status
Professional/managerial 1 0.53 1 0.5
Intermediate 0.95(0.60 -1.49) 0.87(0.55 -1.37)
Routine/manual 1.40(0.73- 2.65) 1.32(0.70 -2.52)
Education
level
No education 1 <0.01 1 0.03
O-level 0.58 (0.34 -0.97) 0.83(0.48 -1.41)
A-level 0.34 (0.19 -0.63) 0.46(0.25 -0.85)
Degree 0.36 (0.20 -0.64) 0.53(0.29 -0.96)
Marital status Married 1 0.01 1 0.52
Divorced 0.96(0.46 -2.00) 0.93(0.45 -1.94)
Widowed 2.54(1.40 -4.60) 1.39(0.74 -2.61)
Single 1.46(0.79 -2.70) 1.42(0.77 -2.63)
Common
dietary pattern
Meat group 1 <0.01 1 0.1
Fish group 0.46(0.23 -0.92) 0.55(0.27 -1.11)
Vegetarian group 0.49(0.26 -0.90) 0.62(0.33 -1.15)
Self-reported vegetarian or vegan 0.51(0.32 -0.81) <0.01 0.63(0.39 -1.00) 0.05
Smoking 1.52(0.86 -2.67) 0.14 1.70(0.94 -3.06) 0.07
Physical activity (MET) 0.98(0.96 -1.00) 0.16 0.98(0.96 -1.00) 0.1
Alcohol intake (g/d) 0.98(0.95 -1.00) 0.08 0.98(0.96 -1.01) 0.29
Energy intake 0.99(0.99 -1.00) 0.8 0.99(0.99 -1.00) 0.6
Magnesium intake (mg/day) 0.99(0.99 -1.00) 0.07 0.99(0.99 -1.00) 0.052
Dietary supplement use 0.63(0.43 -0.93) 0.02 0.63(0.43 -0.93) 0.02
Family history of diabetes 4.15(2.65 -6.52) <0.01 4.50(2.86 -7.01) <0.01
men and women in comparison to the higher education group. The odds ratio for
diabetes in women was 2.19 (95%CI: 1.82, 2.63) and in men was 1.30 (95%CI:
1.11, 1.51), and therefore the influence of education level may be stronger in women
than men. On the other hand, the odds ratio for DM (OR= 1.26, 95%CI: 0.981.62)
in the UK was not statistically significant comparing lowest vs. highest education
levels (Dalstra et al., 2005). An earlier UK observational study concluded that the
prevalence of diabetes was significantly inversely related to socioeconomic status
which was based on a deprivation score (including employment and income
parameters) (Connolly et al., 2000).
In the current study, socioeconomic status variable was based on the
employment status as in the National Statistics Socio-economic Classification. The
Wald test was used to assess the main overall effect of socioeconomic status on the
risk of diabetes. This showed that there was no significant main effect of
socioeconomic status on the risk of diabetes (p=0.5) even after age adjustment.
However, the educational level variable did show a significant effect on the risk of
diabetes in the age adjusted model (p<0.03). Table 8.3 shows that women with a
degree have an odds ratio of 0.36 (95%CI: 0.2, 0.64) in comparison to non-educated
women. On the other hand, current analyses showed a significant overall effect of
educational level and socioeconomic status on dietary fibre intake among the
UKWCS (p<0.01). Women with a degree consume 1.4g of dietary fibre daily more
than non-educated women (p<0.01). A significant moderate correlation was seen
between socioeconomic status and educational level with a Spearman rank
correlation of 0.41 (p<0.01). If its assumed that both educational level and
socioeconomic status represent similar information then an unreliable effect estimate
is suspected if both were included in the model (this may also be considered as
potential over-adjustment) (Kleinbaum and Klein, 2010).
Another important point to consider when selecting covariates is the amount of
missing data. A high number of missing values in the variable will more likely result
in bias because of low statistical power therefore, variables with a large number of
missing values was eliminated. In this case, the educational level variable had 675
missing values more than socioeconomic status where 5 of them were from diabetic
cases. Finally, socioeconomic status was modelled.
8.3.3.1.3 Lifestyle variables
Prospective evidence had found a significant relationship between smoking
and risk of T2DM (see chapter 2). A temporal relationship has been reported as
smoking precedes diabetes incidence. Also dose-response association have been
reported as the relationship was stronger for heavy smokers in comparison to light
smokers which suggests an element of causation. However, this is not yet well
established (Willi et al., 2007). On the other hand, low dietary fibre intake is often
associated with other unhealthy behaviours that favour diabetes, such as, smoking,
lack of physical activity and high alcohol consumption as shown in chapter 4.
From Table 8.3, self-reported smoking was found to have no significant
association with risk of T2DM after adjustment for age (OR= 1.70; 95%CI: 0.94,
3.06) in comparison to non-smokers. The insignificance results probably related to
small number of both cases and smokers in the UKWCS. On the other hand, the age-
adjusted analysis showed that women who smoked at baseline consumed 5.5g/day
less dietary fibre than non-smokers (95%CI: -6.5,-4.5; p<0.01). Therefore, smoking
was modelled, as evidence showed an association between smoking and risk of
diabetes as well as with dietary fibre.
The metabolic equivalents tasks (METs) variable, which represents physical
activity level, was analysed in relation to diabetes and dietary fibre intake as it is one
of the important risk factors for diabetes that needs to be considered. Physical
activity level was included in the model as convincing evidence is available that low
levels of physical activity increase the risk of T2DM (from chapter 2). Cohort
studies from chapter 4, showed that participants with high fibre intake were more
likely to engage in physical activity in comparison to participants with low dietary
fibre intake, which supports considering physical activity as a covariate in the
model.
Linear regression analyses in the current study showed that physical activity
(per 1 unit increase in MET) was not statistically significant in reducing the risk of
T2DM (OR=0.98; 95%CI: 0.96, 1.00) however a significant positive association
was found between dietary fibre intake and physical activity (p<0.01) even with age
adjustment. As physical activity increased, dietary fibre intake also increased (p-
trend<0.01). Smoking status and physical activity variables were included in the
logistic models.
8.3.3.1.4 Other variables
Previous evidence consistently supports an association between family history
of diabetes (especially amongst first degree relatives) and the risk of developing
diabetes, because of underlying genetic susceptibility. Indeed it has been suggested
as a public health tool for screening (Harrison et al., 2003). Few studies have looked
at the relationship between family history of diabetes and dietary behaviours. A
cross-sectional study from a DIRECT project showed that participants free from
diabetes with a positive family history of diabetes were more likely to consume 5 or
more servings of fruits and vegetables per day than those with no family history
(Baptiste-Roberts et al., 2007). This reflects high dietary fibre intake among those
with a positive family history of diabetes may be due to a high level of awareness
relating to healthy behaviours in comparison to those with a negative family history.
On the other hand, a previous study reported that participants with a family
history of diabetes were more likely to have health protective behaviours (such as
weight reduction, diet, engaging in exercise) in addition to which they were more
likely to report being screened for diabetes (Forsyth and Goetsch, 1997).
Recent evidence reported a differential effect of dietary fibre intake on the risk
of T2DM based on genetic background, as dietary fibre intake was positively
associated with risk of diabetes among participants who were a specific type of gene
(TCF7L2 rs7903146 gene) carrier while an inverse association was found between
dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM among participants who were CC genotype
carriers but not among CT or TT genotype carriers (Hindy et al., 2012). It may be
assumed that a positive family history is a proxy for increased genetic susceptibility,
but also could be shared environment factors such as diet.
The current analysis in the UKWCS showed that women with a positive
family history of diabetes were at four times higher risk of diabetes than women
with no family history (OR=4.15; 95%CI: 2.65, 6.52) (see Table 8.3). The
relationship was clearer after age adjustment; the risk of diabetes was 4.5 times
higher among women with a positive family history than other women with no
family history of diabetes (95%CI: 2.86, 7.01; p<0.0). Cohort women with a positive
family history of diabetes consumed less dietary AOAC-fibre (~1g/day) in
comparison with women with a negative family history which was marginally
significant (p=0.06). Only 22% of women who had diabetes reported a positive
family history of it; 76% of diabetic cases reported a negative family history. In
another words, a small number of diabetic women who reported positive family
history in comparison to diabetic women with negative family history of diabetes
(25 vs. 89) may affect the estimated association between dietary fibre intake and
family history of diabetes. Finally, family history of diabetes variable was included
in model 4.
8.3.3.2 Dietary measures
8.3.3.2.1 Energy intake
The total energy intake variable was expressed as kcal per day, and was
derived from the baseline FFQ. The aim for the current study is to investigate the
importance of nutrient intake in relation to the risk of the disease therefore energy
adjustment was usually considered. Variation in the total energy intake between
people creates variation in the intakes of nutrients that are unrelated to dietary
composition for the reason that positive associations were found between most
nutrients and the total energy intake. In another words, people may have high fibre
intake just because they eat more. In addition to this, if assumed that energy intake
indirectly affects health outcome (Willett, 2012) then in this case, the association
between nutrient of interest (dietary fibre) and risk of diabetes may be confounded
by energy intake. Therefore, energy intake was considered as a potential confounder.
It has been assumed that dietary fibre intake has a biological influence on
T2DM risk therefore avoiding high variation in nutrient intake as a result of
variation in energy intake. Thus energy adjustment would eliminate the influence of
variation in energy related factors. For example, as an individual with a large body
size is assumed to consume a high energy intake, thus a certain amount of dietary
fibre intake will have less effect than on an individual with a small body size. In
another situation, assumption regards an individual with a small body size who is
physically active most probably consumes high total energy. Thus it was suggested
that adjustment of physical activity, BMI and energy intake would be appropriate in
this case (Willett, 1998). Different statistical methods for energy adjustment were
reported by Willett (1998). Nutrient density method and absolute dietary fibre intake
adjusted for total energy intake were concluded for the logistic regression analyses
in this study.
Dietary fibre density as AOAC-fibre density and as NSP density were
calculated by dividing total dietary fibre intake (total AOAC-fibre or NSP dietary
intake) by total energy intake. The nutrient density method is also used in the current
study as another way to adjust for energy intake.
8.3.3.2.2 Anthropometric variables
From chapter 2, obesity is one of the main independent risk factors for the
development of T2DM. In terms of BMI as a measurement of obesity, a combined
risk of T2DM was 7.19 (95%CI: 5.74, 9.00) for obese participants and overweight
participants had a relative risk of 2.99 (95%CI: 2.42, 3.72) compared to participants
with a healthy BMI (Abdullah et al., 2010). Additionally, other evidence found
weight gain from early adulthood increased risk of T2DM in compared to weight
gain as later life as demonstrated in chapter 2.
Evidence from chapter 4 suggested that high fibre consumers were likely to
have lower BMI. An earlier cross-sectional study found that fibre intake was
inversely associated with body mass index after adjusting for sex, age, education
level and income (p<0.01) (Alfieri et al., 1995). When this relationship was
examined in the Seven Countries Study that included men aged 40  59, it was
found that dietary fibre was inversely associated with skin fold thickness and BMI
(Kromhout et al., 2001). Over 12 years of follow up, a prospective study including
74,000 US female nurses, aged 3863 years, found those with the highest increase in
the dietary fibre intake gained less weight (1.5 kg less) than those with the smallest
increase (the median change in fibre intake over period of time= 8.90 vs. -3.40g/day;
p<0.01). Increase in dietary fibre intake over a period of time was significantly
associated with less weight gain and risk of weight gain was lower among those with
increased dietary fibre intake in relation to least change of dietary fibre intake (OR =
0.66 95%CI: 0.58, 0.74; p<0.01) (Liu et al., 2003). A large cohort study of
European men and women reported total dietary fibre was inversely associated with
weight and waist circumference (Du et al., 2010). Overall, BMI, weight changes and
waist circumference (WC) were preliminarily considered as a priori confounders.
In the UKWCS dataset, BMI, WC and weight change variables were derived
from the following questions. Approximately how much do you weigh at present?
In stones, pounds or kg or dont know, What is your present height? In ft, inches
or centimetres or dont know, What is your present waist size? In inches or
centimetres or dont know and Approximately how much did you weigh when you
were 20 years old? In stones, pounds or kg or dont know. BMI was calculated by
the formula:
BMI (kg/m
) = weight /height
The weight change variable was expressed in kg and as the percentage which
was generated from the difference between self-reported weight at the age of 20
years and weight when completing the baseline FFQ from the above questions.
Table 8.3 demonstrates the odds ratios of T2DM with BMI, WC and weight
changes (%) by logistic univariate regression analyses. Waist circumference (OR=
1.07, 95%CI, 1.05, 1.08), BMI (OR=1.06; 95%CI 1.05, 1.08) and weight change
(OR=1.07; 95%CI 1.06, 1.08) were all positively associated with risk of diabetes.
All variables showed significant results even after age adjustment (OR=1.07;
95%CI: 1.05, 1.09), (OR=1.06; 95%CI: 1.04, 1.07) and (OR=1.11; 95%CI: 1.07,
1.14) respectively. A review by Slavin (2005) reported inverse associations between
dietary fibre intake and obesity in the interventional studies and high fibre intake
helped to prevent obesity.
Obesity variables were assessed for high correlation using Pearsons
correlation as shown in Table 8.3 as all reflect body fatness. Results showed a
moderate to high positive significant correlation between BMI and weight changes
(r = 0.57; 95%CI: 0.56, 0.58), BMI and waist circumference (WC) (r = 0.63; 95%
CI: 0.62 to 0.64), and WC with weight changes (r = 0.48; 95%CI: 0.47, 0.49).
8.3 Pearsons correlation between obesity variables in the UKWCS
(Kg/m
Weight changes (%)
WC (cm)
BMI (Kg/m
) 1.0 - -
Weight
change
<0.01
1.0 -
<0.01
<0.01
The extent of missing data was also considered before including the variable
in the model. The WC variable was excluded because of the high number of missing
values in diabetic cases (missing values n=34) and in non-diabetic cases (missing
values n= 2085). BMI and weight changes were left for further evaluation.
From a recent cohort study of 20,187 participants, it was reported that weight
gain (of more than 3 units of BMI) during adulthood even with acceptable BMI
(<21) at the baseline increased the risk of diabetes by almost 8-fold RR=7.68;
95%CI: 4.72, 12.50) in comparison with those who gained 0.5 units (Oguma et al.,
2005). This suggests that weight change is a strong predictor of the risk of diabetes.
In the UKWCS dataset, women with diabetes at phase II reported an adulthood
mean weight gain of 17 kg (SD =15.1) while women free of diabetes had an average
weight gain of 7 kg from age of 20 until the phase II questionnaire. Decision was
made regards weight changes variable to be included in the model.
8.3.3.2.3 Alcohol intake variable
Evidence from chapter 2 found a U-shaped relationship between alcohol
intake and the risk of T2DM and greater intake found to have no significant increase
in risk of T2DM in comparison to non-consumers. This relationship was also
significant in studies that included women.
Prospective evidence from chapter 4 reported an inverse association between intake
of dietary fibre and alcohol intake. In the UKWCS data, regression analysis showed
that risk of diabetes was not associated with alcohol intake even with age adjustment
(p=0.29) (see Table 8.3). Overall, alcohol intake is still a potential confounder as
literature evidence showed the association between T2DM and alcohol intake and
suggested an association of dietary fibre intake with alcohol intake.
8.3.3.2.4 Fat intake variable
US prospective evidence in chapter 2 showed total fat intake was associated
with increased risk of diabetes; however, after BMI adjustment, the association was
no longer statistically significant. This may suggest that fat intake acts through
obesity in the causal pathway towards the development of T2DM.
Regression analysis of the UKWCS data showed that the risk of diabetes was
not significantly associated with fat intake (OR=0.98, 95%CI: 0.95, 1.01; p=0.3)
even after age adjustment. On the other hand, for every 1% increase in energy from
fat intake, there was a 0.6g decrease in dietary fibre intake (95%CI: -0.67, - 0.62;
p<0.01). In addition to adjustment of weight changes, the total energy intake was
also considered in the model which is highly correlated with fat intake (r= 0.9,
p<0.01) thus fat intake was not modelled.
8.3.3.2.5 Other dietary variables
The two meta-analyses from chapter 2 drew similar conclusions, that
magnesium intake was inversely associated with T2DM.
In the current study, a strong positive correlation between dietary fibre intake
and dietary magnesium intake was seen (r=0.90; p<0.01). No significant
associations were seen between magnesium intake and risk of T2DM among cohort
women. However, the magnesium variable was not considered for further
adjustment. This is because magnesium intake is highly correlated with dietary fibre
intake, thus to show a separate effect is hard as it will be subjected to estimation
bias. High fibre foods (cereal, fruit, vegetables and legumes) are primary source of
magnesium then, adjustment of magnesium may result into adjustment of fibre.
Characteristics of dietary supplementation users were demonstrated in
previous studies and reported that participants who uses dietary supplementations
were more likely to be female, non-smokers, highly educated and light drinkers (De
Jong et al., 2003). This indicates that supplement use is in the line with other healthy
behaviours. Data from the US Department of Agriculture and Diet and Health
knowledge survey (Sebastian et al., 2007) reported that smoking and vegetarian
status were significant predictors of supplement use among women. In an addition, a
healthier diet was more likely to be present among supplement users than non-users
and this finding was also reported previously in the UKWCS (Kirk et al., 1999).
Current analysis showed a significant T2DM risk reduction with the use of
dietary supplements (OR=0.63; 95%CI: 0.43, 0.93) even with age adjustment. There
is limited evidence that evaluates the relationship between the use of dietary
supplement and risk of diabetes (Xu et al., 2011) and because of the great variation
in the amount and type of supplement use, evidence may not be comparable. Dietary
supplements use was eliminated from the model.
Other variables of interest are the self-reported vegetarian or vegan variable
and the common dietary pattern variable. The self-reported vegetarian or vegan
variable was derived from the questions Would you describe yourself as a
vegetarian? and Would you describe yourself as vegan?. The common dietary
pattern variable was defined in previous study (Cade et al., 2004a) and classified
women into four main dietary groups (meat, oily fish, fish and vegetarian). In the
current study almost one third of women defined themselves as vegetarian or vegan,
while in the dietary pattern categories, 18% of women were in the vegetarian group.
From the logistic regression, women who reported being vegetarian or vegan had a
significant 49% risk reduction of T2DM (OR=0.51; 95%CI: 0.32, 0.81) and
marginally significant risk reduction was seen with age adjustment in comparison to
non-vegetarians (OR=0.63; 95%CI: 0.39, 1.00). Common dietary patterns were a
significant predictor of the risk of T2DM, however this relationship was not
significant after age adjustment which may be explained by the younger mean age
for vegetarians (49 years) than the meat-eating group (53 years). As expected,
dietary fibre intake was significantly higher among vegetarian than non-vegetarians.
Vegetarian status was not considered in the model because of two main reasons.
Adjustment of vegetarian status may result in adjustment of dietary exposure of
interest (dietary fibre) as women who reported being vegetarian consume higher
amount of dietary fibre in comparison with non-vegetarians. It is interesting to
examine whether the association between dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM
among women differ among different dietary pattern groups? However, number of
participants in each group was small which limits any further analysis (non-
cases/cases: non-vegetarian group 8009/91 and vegetarians 3974/23)
Overall, dietary supplement use, vegetarian status and magnesium intake were
not included in the logistic regression models. A concern regarding over adjustment
that may leave small variation in the exposure (dietary fibre) while other covariates
may account for almost all variation, which results in a wide uninformative 95%
confident interval (Willett, 1998) was also considered.
8.3.4Investigating linearity in the regression model
Fang with his colleagues (2009) encourage running linearity assessment for
continuous variables before running any logistic regression for binary outcomes. In
linear regression analysis, the null hypothesis assumes the relationship is linear. In
case if the relationship is not linear then categorization of the predictors is
recommended (Peacock and Kerry, 2007). Another study illustrated one of the
disadvantages of categorization is the presence of residual confounders after
categorizing the predictor variables which may result in incomplete control of
covariates in the model and may lead to biased estimation (Becher, 1992). Linearity
was assessed for continuous variables such as age and alcohol intake before they
were included in the adjusted logistic regression analysis. This aimed to avoid an
incorrect conclusion because there is in fact a non-linear association (Kirkwood and
Sterne, 2003). After categorization of non-linear relationship, a likelihood ratio test
was performed to compare between the log likelihood for the model that included
continuous variables such as age and the likelihood ratio of categorised variable
such as age quintiles. Significant results reject the null hypothesis of having a linear
relationship between exposure and outcome and indicate non-linear relationship.
Age and risk of diabetes association appeared linear with non-significant likelihood
ratio test (p=1.0) therefore age was included in the model as a continuous variable.
The likelihood ratio test showed a significant result for alcohol intake (<0.01),
indicating a nonlinear relationship with the risk of diabetes. Therefore alcohol intake
was split into tertiles and included in the final model as a categorical variable.
To avoid the influence of over adjustment on the estimated effect, the number
of covariates added in the model was estimated roughly by the number of
observations in the dataset as suggested previously (Kirkwood and Sterne, 2003).
For example, if ten variables were modelled, then at least 100 observations should
be present in each variable considering each group as a separate variable. Thus only
alcohol intake was split into three equal groups as evidence pointed towards a
nonlinear relationship with the risk of T2DM.
There is no specific rule on the maximum number of covariates that can be
included in the model; however this depends largely on the studied population as
more covariates can be included in a large study than a small one (Kirkwood and
Sterne, 2003). The number of participants in each group was considered in the
current analyses were considering covariate selection. Thus model 1 was adjusted
for age and model 2 was adjusted for age, weight change, and total energy intake.
Model 3 was adjusted for model 2 covariates plus: smoking, physical activity
(METs), alcohol intake (g/day), and socioeconomic status (professional,
intermediate and routine classes). Model 4 was adjusted for all the above covariates
plus family history of diabetes. Table 8.4 summarises reasons for inclusion or
exclusion of variables to fit the best model to examine the effect of dietary fibre on
the risk of T2DM.
In summary, regression analyses were carried out to examine the association
of each potential confounder with the risk of T2DM and with dietary fibre intake.
Variables that showed a significant association with dietary fibre intake and risk of
diabetes in the UKWCS database were considered for adjustment. Age, weight
changes and socioeconomic status were considered for adjustment. Other variables
such as smoking, physical activity, total energy intake and alcohol intake that were
not found to have a significant relation with the dietary fibre and risk of diabetes in
the UKWCS data but were well-established via prior knowledge as discussed above
were also considered as covariates in the fully adjusted model.
Table 8.4 Evidence and justification for selected covariates in the model development
Variable Prior confounder Association in
UKWCS data
Other
reasons
model
age Wild (2004) Schulze(2007)
Schulze(2004)
Steven(2002)
Meyer(2000)
Krishnan(2007)
(+) (+) No Yes
socio-
economic
status
Connolly (2000) (-) (+) Highly
correlated
education
Educational
level
Dastra (2005)
Maty (2005)
Schulze(2007)
Steven(2002)
Hopping(2010)
Meyer(2000)
(+) (+) High
missing
values
Smoking Tonstad (2009)
Willi (2007)
Steven(2002)
Montonen(2003)
Krishnan(2007)
Meyer(2000)
Schulze(2004)
Schulze(2007)
(-) (+) No Yes
Physical
activity
Jeon (2007) Meyer(2002)
Steven(2002)
Schulze(2004)
Schulze(2007)
(-) (-) No Yes
BMI Abdullah (2010) Salvin(2004)
Krombout(2001)
(+) (+) High
correlation
Weight
change
Oguma (2005)
Schienkiewtz
(2006)
Vazquez (2007)
Schienkiewitz(2006)
Koh-Banerjeel(2004)
(+) (+) Strong
predictor
WC Vazquez (2007)
Wannamettee
(2010)
Krishnan(2007)
Schulze(2004)
Schulze(2007)
(+) (+) Missing
values
Alcohol
intake
Baliumas (2009) Krishnan(2007)
Schulze(2004)
Schulze(2007)
(-) (+) Yes
Family
history
diabetes
Harrison (2003) Schulze(2004)
Krishnan(2007)
(+) (-) Yes
1 Regression analyses carried out in the UKWCS ( p value = (+) indicate significant and ( )indicate not
significant), 2Reasons for exclusion such as missing values in variable and suspected Multicollinearity between
variables, 3type 2 diabetes mellitus, 4Dietary fibre, 5weight change is the difference between 20 years of age and
completion of baseline FFQ. 6Missing data: DM cases = 34 and non-cases= 2,085.
8.3.5Current study in the systematic review
The final result from the multivariate model in the current study was included
in the meta-analysis which was carried out in chapter 4. The odds ratio and 95%CI
of comparing the lowest versus highest dietary AOAC-fibre intake was included.
8.3.6Statistical analysis
Characteristics of women are presented in Table 8.5 as median or geometric
means (interquartile ranges) or means (SD) for continuous variables and frequencies
(percentages) for categorical variables. Normality tests were carried out before using
parametric tests (t-test) and non-parametric tests (Mann-Whitney test) aiming to
examine significant differences between cases and non-cases as appropriate.
Significant differences between categorical variables were examined using chi
squared tests and the analysis of covariance test. Womens characteristics in Table
8.4 were examined for potential trends across dietary AOAC-fibre quintiles using
one-way analysis of variance and chi-squared tests where appropriate.
Logistic regression analysis was used to estimate the odds ratios (OR) and
95% confidence intervals of incident T2DM associated with the dietary fibre intake
in the UKWCS. Logistic models were created for each of the four primary exposures
NSP (g/d), AOAC-fibre (g/d), AOAC-fibre density (g/1000kcal/day) and NSP-
density (g/1000kcal/day) intakes.
Dietary fibre intake quintiles were built into logistic regression analysis
models which were adjusted for a range of potential confounders. The lowest
quintile is presented as a reference.
All potential confounders were derived from the baseline questionnaire. These
were: age (years), weight change (%), METs (kcal/kg/hr), alcohol intake
(categorical variable (tertiles); g/day), total energy intake, self-reported smoking
status (yes, no), socioeconomic status (professional and managerial social class,
intermediate social class, routine and manual social class based on UK national
socioeconomic status classification) and family history of diabetes (yes, no).
The relationship between dietary fibre intake as a continuous variable with risk
of T2DM was examined after adjustment of potential confounders aiming to avoid
the potential of losing information through categorization (Kirkwood and Sterne,
2003) and to ensure the greatest statistical power provided by the continuous
variable (Willett, 1998). However, because categorization has advantages in
visualizing the variation in the number of cases and non-cases by amount of dietary
intake and can limit the influence of possible outlying data, dietary fibre intakes
were divided into five quintiles to facilitate comparison between the risk of T2DM
in the highest dietary fibre quintile and lowest dietary fibre quintile. The first
quintile represents women with lowest dietary AOAC-fibre intake and the fifth
quintile represents women with highest dietary AOAC-fibre intake.
Odds ratios estimated by logistic regression analyses were used to the estimate
risk of T2DM relating to insoluble and soluble dietary fibre intakes (g/d). The
intakes of dietary fibre sources which included cereal fibre, vegetable fibre, fruit
fibre, legumes fibre and fibre from nuts and seeds were also examined in relation to
the risk of T2DM. All statistical analyses were carried out using STATA version 12
(Corp-Stata, 2010). All statistically significant results were based on 2 sided tests.
8.3.7Sensitivity analyses
Sensitivity analyses were performed on the UKWCS data to explore the
relationship between dietary fibre intake and the risk of T2DM within subgroups in
the categorical variables. Subgroup analysis was carried out to estimate the effect of
dietary fibre intake on the risk of diabetes among overweight and obese women.
BMI as an effect modifier was investigated previously (Colditz et al., 1992,
Krishnan et al., 2007) because a suspected modification effect on the relationship
between dietary fibre on the risk of diabetes was assumed. In the current study,
because of small number of diabetic cases, BMI was divided into two groups
(BMI<25kg/m
and BMI>25kg/m
). This aimed to evaluate whether dietary fibre
intake effect on risk of T2DM might be different among women with normal BMI
compared to those who are overweight and obese. Therefore the assumption that
BMI may modify the effect of dietary fibre intake on the risk of diabetes was made.
Magnitude of association between risk of T2DM and obesity was reported in meta-
analysis of prospective studies, the risk of T2DM was 7 times higher (95% CI: 6.47,
8.28) among obese participants and almost 3 times higher (95% CI: 2.57, 3.32)
among overweight participants in comparison to participants with normal BMI
independent to age, family history of diabetes and physical activity (Abdullah et al.,
2010).
8.4 Results:
8.4.1Characteristics of the studied population
Out of 12,096 UKWCS participants with a mean age of 52.4 (9.1) years, 114
incident cases of self-reported T2DM were identified. Table 8.5 provides detailed
description of cases and non-cases. There were non-significant differences between
cases and non-cases for socio-demographic, lifestyle and dietary characteristics
except for age, BMI, weight change, alcohol intake, vegetarian status, educational
level and family history of diabetes mellitus. In Table 8.5, age was significantly
higher among diabetic cases than non-diabetic cases (57.4 years vs. 50.4,
respectively). Diabetic cases had significantly higher BMI (28.5 vs. 23.6,
respectively) and weight change (17.2kg vs. 6.3kg, respectively) than non-diabetic
cases. A higher percentage of diabetic women were found in the non-vegetarians
group (80% vs. 66%) and a smaller number of diabetic women had a degree in
comparison to number of women in the non-cases group (23% vs. 32%).
Diabetic participants were less likely to consume alcohol (mean intake
1.6g/day vs. 5.3g/day respectively) in comparison to non-cases. The mean difference
of alcohol consumption was 3.7g/day less among diabetic cases in comparison to
non-diabetic women. A larger number of diabetic women reported a positive family
history of diabetes in comparison to non-diabetic women (22% vs. 6% respectively).
A higher number of smokers was found among diabetic participants in comparison
to participants free from diabetes (12% vs. 8% respectively). However, the overall
difference was not statistically significant (p=0.14).
Lower total energy intake and dietary fibre intake were found among diabetic
cases. In addition, insoluble and soluble fibre intake was also lower among diabetic
women in comparison to non-diabetic women however the differences were not
statistically significant.
Diabetic and non-diabetic women tended to consume similar proportions of
macronutrients in their diet (54% from carbohydrates, 16% from protein, 33% from
fat). Even for fruit consumption, diabetic women consumed an equal number of
portions per day as non-diabetic women while a slightly but not significantly lower
number of portions of vegetables per day were consumed in comparison to non-
diabetic women (4.3 vs. 4.6; p=0.1). No significant differences were observed
between prevalent (n= 152) and incident diabetic (n=114) women in term of dietary
fibre intake, alcohol intake, total energy intake, self-reported vegetarianism,
smoking status, macronutrient intake however prevalent cases tended to have
statistically significant lower BMI in comparison to incident of cases (27.8kg/m
29.2kg/m
). However, some prevalent cases may be type 1 diabetes mellitus.
Table 8.5 Baseline characteristics of T2DM cases and non-cases
All values were mean (SD)
unless indicated
T2DM p
Non cases cases Total
Number of cases/ non-cases 11,982 114 12,096
Age (years)
50.4(13.5) 57.4(12.1) 51.1(14.1) <0.01
BMI (kg/m
23.6(4.3) 28.5(8.2) 23.8(4.4) <0.01
Weight change (kg)
6.3(10.4) 17.2(16.3) 6.3(10.8) <0.01
Total energy intake (kcal) 2281(662) 2265.9(655) 2264(683) 0.68
Carbohydrate intake (E%) 54.8(6.3) 54.7(6.5) 54.8(6.4) 0.85
Protein intake (E%) 15.6(2.6) 16.1(2.9) 15.9(2.7) 0.04
Fat intake (E%) 33.2(5.8) 32.6(6.3) 33.1(5.8) 0.34
Saturated fat intake (E%) 11.3(3.2) 11.6(3.4) 11.4(3.2) 0.31
Fruit intake (portion per day)
4.3(3.8) 4.3(4.1) 4.3(3.8) 0.97
Vegetable intake (portion per day)
4.6(3.3) 4.3(4.3) 4.6(3.4) 0.10
AOAC-fibre g/day 38.7(15.2) 40.1(15.1) 39.0(15.4) 0.36
AOAC-fibre density (g/1000kcal) 17.7(4.6) 17.0(4.4) 17.3(4.7) 0.25
NSP (g/day) 26.8(10.4) 26.1(10.3) 26.0(10.5) 0.54
NSP density (g/1000kcal) 11.8(3.3) 11.4(3.1) 11.5(3.3) 0.42
NSP-Soluble fibre (g/d) 11.2(4.1) 11.0(4.2) 11.0(4.2) 0.61
NSP-insoluble fibre (g/d) 16.9(6.9) 16.1(6.8) 16.3(7.1) 0.27
Magnesium intake (mg/day) 456 (140) 433 (133) 445(141) 0.05
Ethanol (g/d)
5.3(11.2) 1.6(9.4) 5.1(11.1) 0.03
Physical activity (MET)
14.0(12.6) 12.3(15.4) 13.7(13.1) 0.05
Smoking status
Smoker 8.4 12.3 8.5 0.14
Non smoker 91.6 87.7 91.5
Self-reported
Vegetarian (%)
Yes 33 20 33 <0.01
No 66 80 67
Socio-economic
status (%)
Professional/ managerial 67 66 67 0.53
Intermediate 26 24 25
Routine and manual 7 10 7
Educational
achievement
No educational records 12 24 12 <0.01
O-level 30 35 30
A-level 26 18 26
Degree 32 23 32
median (IQR),
Weight changes (kg) is the difference between self-reported weight at age of 20
years  weight at baseline FFQ values reported,
values are geometric mean (IQR)
All dietary fibre intakes in UKWCS participants were high and similar in
cases and non-cases (see Table 8.3). As may be seen in Table 8.6, women with high
dietary AOAC-fibre intake were more likely to be older, vegetarian, non-smoker,
well educated, from high social class, have lower BMI, and engage in physical
activity and less likely to have gained weight and to have a positive family history of
diabetes. Energy intake from protein, fat and saturated fat intakes decreased with
increasing intake of AOAC-fibre, whereas energy intake from carbohydrates was
positively associated with dietary fibre intake. Fruit consumption expressed as
portions per day was three times higher among women in the highest dietary
AOAC-fibre quintile in comparison to women in the lowest quintile. A similar
pattern was observed with vegetable intake which was positively associated with
dietary AOAC-fibre intake. Briefly, this indicates as dietary fibre intake increases,
lifestyle behaviours and dietary factors tend to be healthier.
Table 8.6 Baseline characteristics with increasing AOAC-fibre intake, values are mean (SD)
or frequency (%)
Variables Dietary AOAC-fibre quintiles P
trend1
Number of participants (n) 2057 2370 2502 2573 2594
Diabetes cases (n) 22 30 16 23 23 0.22
AOAC fibre (g/day) 21.8(6.0) 30.1(3.4) 36.8(3.5) 44.8(4.8) 58.9(12.9) <0.01
NSP (g/day) 14.3(4.1) 19.9(2.6) 24.5(2.7) 30.0(3.5) 39.6(8.9) <0.01
AOAC-fibre (g/1000kcal/d) 11.6(2.1) 14.6(1.2) 16.9(1.1) 19.4(1.4) 23.4(3.5) <0.01
NSP (g/1000kcal/day) 8.5(3.1) 10.2(3.2) 11.3(3.4) 12.4(3,5) 14.2(4.0) <0.01
Age (years) 50.4(13) 50.8(14) 51.4(14) 51.3(14) 52.5(13) <0.01
BMI (kg/m
) 23.7(4.6) 23.4(4.1) 23.3(4.1) 23.2(4.3) 22.9(4.3) <0.01
Weight change (kg) 7.2(10.4) 6.3(10.7) 6.3(10.4) 6.3(9.9) 5.8(10.4) <0.01
Soluble fibre (g/day) 6.4(1.8) 8.7(1.4) 10.4(1.6) 12.5(1.9) 16.3(3.9) <0.01
Insoluble fibre (g/day) 8.4(2.7) 12.2(2.0) 15.4(2.3) 19.1(2.8) 25.6(6.0) <0.01
Alcohol intake (g/day) 5.7(13.2) 5.1(11.7) 5.3(10.7) 5.1(10.7) 4.3(10.0) <0.01
Magnesium intake (mg/day) 290(62) 371(55) 431(60) 499(67) 640(121) <0.01
Energy intake (kcal/day) 1614(554) 1950(565) 2173(623) 2434(657) 2899(859) <0.01
Carbohydrate intake (%E) 51.7(6.7) 53.5(5.9) 54.5(5.9) 55.7(5.8) 57.8(6.1) <0.01
Protein intake (%E) 16.7(3.0) 16.1(2.7) 15.9(2.6) 15.5(2.5) 15.1(2.4) <0.01
Fat intake (%E) 35.1(5.9) 33.8(5.5) 33.2(5.5) 32.4(5.5) 30.9(5.7) <0.01
Saturated fat intake (%E) 12.9(3.4) 12.0(3.1) 11.5(3.0) 10.8(2.9) 9.7(2.8) <0.01
Fruit intake (portion/d) 2.7(1.6) 3.9(2.1) 4.8(2.4) 5.9(3.0) 9.1(6.1) <0.01
Vegetable intake(portion/d) 3.0(1.5) 4.1(1.7) 4.9(1.9) 5.9(2.1) 8.0(3.5) <0.01
Physical activity (MET) 12.2(12.2) 13.3(12.2) 14.5(12.4) 15.1(13.0) 16.9(14.4) <0.01
Vegetarian (%) 19 25 28 38 46 <0.01
F/H of diabetes
(%) 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.7 2.9 0.35
Smoking
status (%)
non smoker 85 90 93 94.3 94.4 <0.01
smoker 15 9.9 6.6 5.7 5.6
Socio-
economic
status (%)
Professional 62.6 64.6 65 67.9 69.1 <0.01
Intermediate 28.4 26 26.9 24.8 23.9
Routine 8.6 9.4 8 7.1 6.9
Educational
level (%)
No record 15.6 13.8 14 11.9 13 <0.01
O-level 33.1 30.6 30.3 27.8 27.8
A-level 23.8 25.7 24.8 26.8 28
Degree 27.4 29.7 30.6 33.3 31
1 Positive family history of diabetes. MET is metabolic equivalent task is defined as the ratio of work metabolic
rate to a standard resting metabolic rate of 1.0.(4.184 kJ) kg .h , I MET is considered a resting metabolic rate
obtained during quiet sitting.
8.4.2Total dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM
Initial unadjusted logistic models were carried out to determine the effect of
AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes expressed as (g/day) and energy adjusted logistic
models to determine effect of AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes (expressed as
g/1000kcal/day) on the risk of T2DM shown in Figure 8.3 and 8.4. This suggested
that the probability of having T2DM decreased with increased dietary fibre intake
among UKWCS. Table 8.7 presents the logistic regression analyses which examined
the effect of a daily increment of 5 grams of dietary fibre, which is equivalent to
AOAC-fibre content of 2 medium slices of wholemeal bread or 80grams of baked
beans or a portion of boiled peas (85g) with the risk of T2DM and daily 5grams
increment in NSP which is equivalent to NSP content of 2.5 slices of wholemeal
bread. In all the models, odds ratios were less than one for dietary intakes from both
the AOAC-fibre and NSP derived values however these associations did not reach
statistically significant levels. A marginally significant protective effect on the
development of T2DM was observed with every 2.5g/1000kcal/day increment of
AOAC-fibre (OR=0.91; 95%CI: 0.82, 1.00; p=0.07) independent of age.
This suggests the potential of a lower risk of developing T2DM with higher
AOAC-fibre intake independent of age, however this association was attenuated
with further adjustment for weight change and smoking. This suggests that other
factors may have a greater influence on risk of T2DM than dietary fibre.
Table 8.7 Odds ratios (95%CI) for incidence of T2DM risk with every increment of dietary
fibre intake derived by two analytical methods among UKWCS
Nutrient OR (95%CI) P value
AOAC-fibre intake 5g/day
Model 1
0.96(0.90, 1.02) 0.21
Model 2
0.98(0.92, 1.04) 0.59
Model 3
0.99(0.92, 1.05) 0.78
Model 4
0.99(0.92, 1.06) 0.83
AOAC-fibre density intake 2.5 g/1000kcal/day
Model 1
0.91 (0.82, 1.00) 0.07
Model 2
0.96(0.86, 1.07) 0.50
Model 3
0.96(0.87, 1.07) 0.51
Model 4
0.96(0.86, 1.07) 0.50
NSP intake 5 g/day
Model 1
0.95 (0.86, 1.04) 0.29
Model 2
0.98(0.89, 1.07) 0.69
Model 3
0.99(0.90, 1.09) 0.92
Model 4
0.99(0.90, 1.09) 0.95
NSP density intake 2.5 g/1000kcal/day
Model 1
0.89(0.77, 1.03) 0.14
Model 2
0.96(0.82, 1.12) 0.63
Model 3
0.96(0.83, 1.12) 0.65
Model 4
0.96(0.83, 1.15) 0.67
1M1 = age; 2M2 = M1 plus total energy intake, weight changes (%) and smoke (yes/no); 3M3 = M2 plus socioeconomic status,
alcohol intake and METs, 4M4 = M3 plus family history of diabetes.
0 20 40 60
AOAC-fibre intake (g/1000 kcal/day)
0 50 100 150 200
AOAC-fibre (g/d)
0 50 100 150
NSP intake (g/d)
0 10 20 30 40
NSP intake (g/1000 kcal/day)
Figure 8.3 Predicted risk of T2DM with dietary fibre intake expressed as AOAC-fibre and
NSP intakes (g/day)
(A) (B)
Figure 8.4 Predicted risk of T2DM with dietary fibre intake expressed as AOAC-fibre and
NSP intakes (g/1000kcal/ day)
(C) (D)
The risks of T2DM tend to decrease with increasing intakes of AOAC-fibre
expressed in g/day and g/1000kcal/day in the age-adjusted models. Similarly, lower
probability of developing T2DM across NSP quintiles in comparison to lowest NSP
group with a p for trend=0.55 were observed. Inconsistency in odds ratios across
NSP density quintiles in Table 8.8 was observed in age-adjusted and multivariate
models. Overall, the effect of total dietary fibres intake estimated from the two
analytical methods on the risk of T2DM is inconclusive. Logistic regression
analyses were also carried out with tertile rather than quintile categorization and the
results were similar.
Weight variable was created previously for vegetarian status (Cade et al.,
2010). In this variable, the weighting was based on the probability of being sampled
to account for high percentage of vegetarians in the cohort and to obtain results that
representative to the general population. The results from weighted logistic
regression analyses for total dietary fibre effect (continuous and categorical) on the
risk of T2DM were similar to the original results in all logistic models.
Table 8.8 Odds ratios (95%CI) for incidence of T2DM by quintile of intakes of dietary AOAC-fibre, NSP, AOAC-fibre density and NSP density among
UKWCS
Fibre intake Median
(IQR)
Range T2DM OR (95%CI)
(g/d) Cases
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
AOAC-fibre
(g/day)
Q1 21.8(6.0) <26.4 22 1 1 1
Q2 20.1(3.4) 26.4-33.4 30 1.14(0.65, 1.98) 1.35(0.76, 2.49) 1.49(0.80, 2.76) 1.57(0.84, 2.93)
Q3 36.8(3.5) 33.5-40.5 16 0.55(0.29, 1.06) 0.66(0.31, 1.38) 0.76(0.36, 1.62) 0.77(0.36, 1.64)
Q4 44.8(4.8) 40.5-50.3 23 0.77(0.43, 1.40) 0.97(0.48, 1.96) 1.04(0.50, 2.16) 1.10(0.53, 2.29)
Q5 58.9(12.9) >50.5 23 0.76(0.42, 1.37) 0.96(0.42, 2.17) 0.99(0.43, 2.29) 1.03(0.44, 2.39)
P value 114 0.21 0.59 0.78 0.83
AOAC-fibre
density (g/1000
kcal /day)
Q1 11.6(2.1) <13.3 22 1 1 1 1
Q2 14.6(1.2) 13.3-15.7 24 0.93(0.52, 1.67) 1.09(0.60, 2.00) 1.19(0.64, 2.20) 1.22(0.66, 2.26)
Q3 16.9(1.1) 15.8-18.1 23 0.83(0.46, 1.50) 1.06(0.58, 1.96) 1.03(0.54, 1.94) 1.03(0.54, 1.95)
Q4 19.4(1.4) 18.2-21.0 22 0.75(0.41, 1.36) 0.90(0.48, 1.71) 0.92(0.48, 1.78) 0.96(0.49, 1.85)
Q5 23.4(3.5) >21.0 23 0.77(0.42, 1.39) 1.03(0.55, 1.94) 1.03(0.54, 1.96) 1.06(0.55, 2.02)
P value 0.07 0.50 0.51 0.50
(g/day)
Q1 14.3(4.0) <17.4 22 1 1 1 1
Q2 19.9(2.3) 17.4-22.2 26 0.98(0.55, 1.74) 1.25(0.68, 2.29) 1.35(0.72, 2.53) 1.40(0.74, 2.65)
Q3 24.5(2.4) 22.3-27.1 18 0.62(0.33, 1.17) 0.72(0.35, 1.48) 0.84(0.40, 1.74) 0.86(0.41, 1.79)
Q4 30.0(3.2) 27.2-33.8 25 0.84(0.47, 1.49) 1.11(0.56, 2.19) 1.19(0.59, 2.41) 1.24(0.61, 2.52)
Q5 39.6(8.8) >33.8 23 0.76(0.42, 1.37) 1.06(0.48, 2.33) 1.11(0.49, 2.49) 1.15(0.51, 2.61)
P value 0.29 0.69 0.92 0.95
NSP density
(g/1000 kcal/day)
Q1 7.5 (1.5) <8.7 19 1 1 1 1
Q2 9.6 (0.8) 8.7-10.5 22 1.03(0.55,1.92) 1.22(0.64, 2.31) 1.30(0.68, 2.50) 1.28(0.66, 2.47)
Q3 11.3(0.8) 10.5-12.1 27 1.16(0.65, 2.09) 1.56(0.85, 2.87) 1.56(0.83, 2.92) 1.59(0.84, 2.99)
Q4 13.0(1.0) 12.1-14.2 26 1.00(0.55, 1.83) 1.30(0.69, 2.44) 1.35(0.70, 2.58) 1.37(0.71, 2.63)
Q5 15.9(2.4) >14.2 20 0.78(0.41, 1.47) 0.98(0.49, 1.95) 0.98(0.48, 1.98) 0.98(0.49, 1.99)
P value 0.0.14 0.0.63 0.65 0.67
Diabetic cases
M 1 = age
M 2 = M 1 plus total energy intake, weight changes (%) and smoke (yes/no),
M3 = M2 plus socioeconomic status, alcohol intake and METs,
= M3 plus family history of diabetes. Note: adjustment for energy intake was not included in fibre density models.
8.4.3Sources of fibre and risk of T2DM
With respect to dietary fibre sources, the risk of T2DM is reported in Table
8.9. High cereal fibre intake was significantly associated with a lower incidence of
diabetes in the age-adjusted model (OR = 0.86; 95%CI: 0.75, 0.99, p=0.03). In other
words, for every 5 grams increase in cereal AOAC-fibre that is equivalent to two
slices of wholemeal bread, the risk of T2DM was reduced by 14%. In the further
adjusted models, the increase in cereal fibre intake did not significantly decrease the
risk of T2DM among women. A lower risk of diabetes was also observed with
increased intakes of legumes fibre (OR=0.90; 95%CI: 0.61, 1.31; p=0.59) and
vegetable fibre (OR=0.93; 95%CI: 0.76, 1.15) in the age-adjusted model and (OR=
0.93; 95%CI: 0.62, 1.38; p=072; OR= 1.04; 95%CI: 0.84, 1.28) for legumes fibre
and vegetable fibre respectively in the full-adjusted model but these values were not
statistically significant. Dietary fibre intakes from fruit and from nuts and seeds did
not show any significant association with the risk of T2DM in any of the logistic
models. In conclusion, all odds ratios for cereal fibre are less than one however; the
other fibre sources tend to show less consistent direction of association.
Table 8.9 Odds ratios (95%CI) for incidence of T2DM with every increment of intakes of
dietary fibre from cereal, vegetables, fruits, legumes and nuts among UKWCS
Dietary fibre sources OR (95%CI) P value
Cereal fibre intake (5g/day)
Model 1
0.86(0.75, 0.99) 0.03
Model 2
0.90(0.76, 1.06) 0.22
Model 3
0.87(0.74, 1.04) 0.13
Model4
0.88(0.74, 1.04) 0.16
Vegetable fibre intake (5g/day)
Model 1
0.93(0.76, 1.15) 0.55
Model 2
1.00(0.81, 1.24) 0.95
Model 3
1.03(0.84, 1.27) 0.73
Model 4
1.04(0.84, 1.28) 0.70
Fruit fibre intake (5g/day)
Model 1
1.01(0.88, 1.17) 0.78
Model 2
1.07(0.92, 1.25) 0.33
Model 3
1.07(0.91, 1.25) 0.38
Model 4
1.08(0.92, 1.26) 0.33
Legumes fibre intake (5g/day)
Model 1
0.90(0.61, 1.31) 0.59
Model 2
0.92(0.61, 1.38) 0.69
Model 3
0.92(0.62, 1.37) 0.69
Model 4
0.93(0.62, 1.38) 0.72
Fibre from nuts and seeds intake (5g/day)
Model 1
0.89(0.74, 1.08) 0.27
Model 2
1.00(0.85, 1.19) 0.92
Model 3
1.00(0.84, 1.18) 0.97
Model 4
0.99(0.83, 1.17) 0.91
1M 1 = age; 2M 2 = M 1 plus total energy intake, weight changes (%) and smoke (yes/no); 3M3 = M2 plus
socioeconomic status, alcohol intake and METs; 4M4 = M3 plus family history of diabetes. Note: adjustment
for energy intake was not included in fibre density models
During a 4 year follow-up, inverse associations between the intakes of dietary
fibre sources and the risk of T2DM were observed generally across the dietary fibre
sources quintiles. However, p values for trends did not reach statistically significant
levels in the logistic models reported in Table 8.10. Across all sources no evidence
of a trend can be seen. In multivariate adjusted models, the point estimates are rather
inconsistent across quintiles with possible exception of cereal fibre. Overall, dietary
fibres from main fibre sources were not associated with the risk of T2DM in the age
and fully-adjusted models.
Table 8.10 Odds ratios (95%CI) for incidence of T2DM by quintile of intakes of dietary
fibre sources among UKWCS
Fibre intake Median
(IQR)
T2DM OR (95%CI)
Range Cases
Model 1
Model 2
Cereal fibre
Q1 4.4 (2.2) <6.3 29 1 1
Q2 8.0 (1.7) 6.3-9.8 20 0.59(0.33, 1.04) 0.75(0.40, 1.39)
Q3 11.5(1.8) 9.9-13.5 21 0.56(0.32,1.00) 0.66(0.35, 1.25)
Q4 15.8(2.4) 13.6-18.5 23 0.59(0.34, 1.02) 0.62(0.31, 1.22)
Q5 22.7(6.2) >18.5 21 0.52(0.30, 0.93) 0.67(0.33, 1.37)
p value 114 0.14 0.66
Vegetable
fibre
Q1 1.1(1.8) <3.9 28 1 1
Q2 8.6(1.0) 3.9-5.8 22 0.59(0.33, 1.04) 0.67(0.36, 1.26)
Q3 10.8(1.2) 5.9-7.9 16 0.44(0.24, 0.82) 0.67(0.35, 1.28)
Q4 13.5(1.6) 7.9-10.9 19 0.52(0.29, 0.92) 0.80(0.42, 1.53)
Q5 18.6(5.1) >10.9 29 0.77(0.46, 1.29) 1.05(0.57, 1.95)
p value 114 0.05 0.48
Fruit fibre
Q1 2.2(1.5) <3.5 23 1 1
Q2 4.6(1.5) 3.5-5.6 17 0.56(0.30, 1.06) 0.71(0.36, 1.40)
Q3 6.6(1.1) 5.7-7.8 18 0.55(0.29, 1.03) 0.66(0.33, 1.33)
Q4 9.3(1.6) 7.8-11.3 29 0.82(0.47, 1.43) 1.18(0.63, 2.19)
Q5 14.7(6.0) >11.3 27 0.78(0.44, 1.37) 1.02(0.52, 1.99)
p value 114 0.28 0.34
Legumes
fibre
Q1 1.0(0.6) <1.5 27 1 1
Q2 1.9(0.4) 1.5-2.3 21 0.75(0.42, 1.33) 0.73(0.38, 1.38)
Q3 2.6(0.4) 2.4-3.3 19 0.67(0.37, 1.21) 0.73(0.38, 1.41)
Q4 3.9(0.8) 3.4-5.1 26 0.91(0.52, 1.57) 1.06(0.58, 1.95)
Q5 6.9(2.6) >5.2 21 0.85(0.47, 1.51) 0.90(0.46, 1.74)
p value 114 0.70 0.69
Fibre from
nuts and
seeds
Q1 0.08(0.06) <0.12 27 1 1
Q2 0.1(0.05) 0.13-0.23 15 0.56(0.29, 1.05) 0.61(0.30, 1.23)
Q3 0.3(0.1) 0.24-0.50 23 0.90(0.51, 1.59) 1.09(0.58, 2.04)
Q4 0.6(0.2) 0.51-1.0 15 0.58(0.30, 1.10) 0.81(0.40, 1.63)
Q5 1.8(1.6) >1.0 19 0.65(0.36, 1.17) 0.98(0.49, 1.93)
p value 114 0.23 0.54
diabetic cases
M1 = age;
M 2 = M1 plus total energy intake, weight changes (%) and smoking
(yes/no), socioeconomic status, alcohol intake and METs, family history of diabetes.
8.4.4Dietary soluble and insoluble fibres and risk of T2DM
The odds of incident T2DM in association with insoluble and soluble fibre
intake are shown in Table 8.11. The risk of T2DM tended to be lower with higher
insoluble fibre intake; however this did not reached the significance level. No
significant association was found between increase in soluble dietary fibre intake
and risk of T2DM in any of the models. Furthermore, the odds ratios across
insoluble and soluble dietary fibre quintiles were inconsistent (Table 8.12).
Table 8.11 Odds ratios (95%CI) for incidence of T2DM with every increment of intakes of
insoluble and soluble dietary fibre among UKWCS
Types of dietary fibre OR (95%CI) P value
Insoluble fibre intake g/day
Model 1
0.89(0.77,1.03) 0.13
Model 2
0.94(0.82, 1.15) 0.47
Model 3
0.96(0.83, 1.11) 0.63
Model 4
0.95(0.78, 1.15) 0.63
Soluble fibre intake g/day
Model 1
0.91(0.72,1.15) 0.46
Model 2
0.96(0.76, 1.22) 0.76
Model 3
1.00(0.79, 1.27) 0.95
Model 4
1.01(0.80,1.29) 0.89
1M1 = age; 2M2 = M 1 plus total energy intake, weight changes (%) and smoke (yes/no); 3M3 = M2 plus socioeconomic status,
alcohol intake and METs; 4M4 = M3 plus family history of diabetes. Note: adjustment for energy intake was not included in
fibre density models
Table 8.12 Odds ratios (95%CI) for incidence of T2DM by quintile of intakes of soluble and
insoluble dietary fibre among UKWCS
Dietary intake Median
(IQR)
Range Diabetes mellitus OR (95%CI)
Cases
Model 1
Model 2
Insoluble fibre
Q1 8.4(2.6) <10.4 26 1 1
Q2 12.1(1.6) 10.5-13.7 21 0.66(0.37, 1.52) 0.72(0.39,1.32)
Q3 15.3(1.6) 13.8-17.1 18 0.53(0.29, 0.98) 0.58(0.29,1.12)
Q4 19.1(2.2) 17.2-21.6 26 0.72(0.42, 1.25) 0.82(0.43,1.54)
Q5 25.6(5.7) >21.6 23 0.63(0.36, 1.11) 0.74(0.35,1.55)
p for trend 114 0.31 0.58
Soluble fibre
Q1 8.5(3.5) <7.6 22 1 1
Q2 12.2(3.7) 7.6-9.5 30 1.22(0.70, 2.13) 1.38(0.70,2.51)
Q3 15.1(4.1) 9.5-11.4 13 0.48(0.24, 0.96) 0.57(0.27,1.22)
Q4 18.7(4.6) 11.5-14.0 22 0.80(0.44, 1.46) 1.00(0.49,2.00)
Q5 25.0(7.3) >14.0 27 0.99(0.56, 1.75) 1.29(0.59,2.81)
p for trend 114 0.07 0.12
diabetic cases
M 1 = age
M 2 = M 1 plus total energy intake, weight changes (%) and METs.
8.4.5Dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM among women based on
Sensitivity analysis was carried out to examine whether we can visualize a
trend in the association between dietary AOAC-fibre and risk of diabetes among
women with BMI<25kg/m
and women with BMI>25kg/m
. Table 8.13 provides the
number of diabetic and non-diabetic cases in each group where chi square test
showed a significance difference between the groups (p<0.01). Two thirds of
diabetic cases were either overweight or obese and only 25% had a BMI of less than
25kg/m
while 68% of women free from diabetes had a BMI of less than 25kg/m
and only third of them were either overweight or obese.
Table 8.13 Distribution of women (N, %) based on DM and BMI categories
Group BMI
<25kg/m
>25kg/m
T2DM incident group (n, %) 29 (25) 85 (75)
Non-T2DM group (n, %) 8,122 (68) 2,860 (32)
Table 8.14 presents the odds ratios of T2DM among overweight and obese
women, with every 5g increment in total dietary AOAC-fibre intake. The risk of
T2DM was non-significantly reduced with increasing dietary fibre intake. However,
the small number of diabetic cases in each group limits the interpretation of the
current findings. In the current study the interaction term was not considered in the
logistic models mainly because of the possibility of losing statistical power with
stratification due to the small number of cases. In addition, no significant
modification effect of BMI on the relationship between dietary fibre and risk of
diabetes (p=0.64) was seen in the current study. However, sensitivity analysis was
carried out to examine whether the association between dietary AOAC-fibre and risk
of diabetes among women with BMI<25kg/m
and women with BMI>25kg/m
differ, as evidence showed significant different between obese and non-obese.
Table 8.14 Odds ratios (95%CI) for incidence of T2DM by quintile of intakes of dietary
AOAC-fibre intakes (expressed as g/day and g/1000kcal/day) among UKWCS
BMI<25kg/m
BMI>25kg/m
cases/non
cases
OR (95%CI)
cases/non
cases
OR(95%CI)
AOAC-fibre intake
(g/day)
Q1 5/1,278 1 17/757 1
Q2 6/1,560 1.11(0.32, 3.81) 24/780 1.37(0.69, 2.69)
Q3 5/1,682 0.96(0.25, 3.64) 11/804 0.59(0.26, 1.36)
Q4 8/1,757 1.27(0.32, 5.04) 15/793 0.78(0.34, 1.74)
Q5 5/1,757 1.25(0.24, 6.36) 18/726 0.84(0.33, 2.13)
p for trend 0.99 0.23
per 5g/day
1.02(0.85, 1.22) 0.96(0.87, 1.07)
p value 0.81 0.52
AOAC-fibre intake
(g/1000kcal/day)
Q1 4/1,267 1 18/755 1
Q2 5/1,510 1.14(0.30, 4.30) 19/798 1.05(0.54, 2.05)
Q3 6/1,689 1.06(0.28, 4.02) 17/781 0.88(0.44, 1.77)
Q4 6/1,785 1.03(0.27, 3.96) 16/788 0.76(0.37, 1.57)
Q5 8/1,871 1.52(0.44, 5.20) 15/738 0.91(0.44, 1.85)
p for trend 0.94 0.91
per 2.5 g/day
1.02(0.84, 1.25) 0.91(0.81, 1.05)
p value 0.79 0.24
a Adjusted to age, total energy intake, smoking status, socioeconomic status, alcohol intake, physical activity
(MET). b5 grams of AOAC-fibre equivalent to two slices of wholemeal breads c equivalent to one slice of
wholemeal bread
8.4.6UKWCS findings added in the Forest plot of the comprehensive
review
Original meta-analysis in the comprehensive review (chapter 4) was used.
Pooled estimate that examined risk of T2DM with the intake of total dietary fibre
was 0.97 (95%CI: 0.93, 1.02). The current findings in this chapter particularly
AOAC-fibre intake (g/day) and risk of T2DM comparing extreme quintiles from
model 4 was included with the other studies in the meta-analysis. This resulted in a
total of 11 cohort studies that examined the relationship between TDF intake and
risk of T2DM. Estimated risks were obtained from the fully adjusted models for all
cohort studies. Figure 8.5 demonstrates similar findings in chapter 4 where lack of
association between TDF intake and risk of T2DM comparing highest versus lowest
consumers independent of potential confounders (combined risk = 0.97; 95%CI:
0.93, 1.01) with moderate heterogeneity was seen. Another pooled estimate from the
current findings of the UKWCS and other two cohorts (Sluijs et al., 2010b, Barclay
et al., 2007) that reported dietary fibre intake as continuous variable showed
estimate risk= 0.93 (95%CI; 0.87, 1.01; I
=49%; p=0.13).
Figure 8.5 Estimate risk for the association between total dietary fiber consumption and
risk of T2DM for individual cohort studies and all cohort studies combined.
NOTE: Weights are from random effects analysis
Overall
Salmeron J. et al., 1997 (Nurses Health Study I)
Hodge AM. et al., 2004
Schulze MB. et al., 2007
Schulze MB. et al., 2004
Weng LC. et al., 2012
Author and year
Current study
Stevens J. et al., 2002 (African American population)
Meyer KA, et al., 2000
Wannamethee SG. et al., 2009
Stevens J. et al., 2002 (White population)
Salmeron J. et al., 1997 (Health Professionals)
Montonen J. et al., 2003
Australia
Germany
Taiwan
Country
Finland
0.97 (0.94, 1.01)
0.78 (0.62, 0.98)
1.02 (0.81, 1.30)
Estimated
0.86 (0.65, 1.14)
1.00 (0.75, 1.34)
0.49 (0.28, 0.85)
risk (95% CI)
1.03 (0.44, 2.39)
0.99 (0.98, 1.02)
0.78 (0.64, 0.96)
0.95 (0.59, 1.53)
0.99 (0.98, 1.01)
0.98 (0.73, 1.33)
0.51 (0.26, 1.00)
0.97 (0.94, 1.01)
0.78 (0.62, 0.98)
1.02 (0.81, 1.30)
Estimated
0.86 (0.65, 1.14)
1.00 (0.75, 1.34)
0.49 (0.28, 0.85)
risk (95% CI)
1.03 (0.44, 2.39)
0.99 (0.98, 1.02)
0.78 (0.64, 0.96)
0.95 (0.59, 1.53)
0.99 (0.98, 1.01)
0.98 (0.73, 1.33)
0.51 (0.26, 1.00)
1.25 .5 1 1.25 1.5
NOTE: Weights are from random effects analysis
Overall
authoryear
Current study
Barclay AW. et al., 2007
Slujis I. et al., 2010
country
Australia
Netherland
0.93 (0.87, 1.01)
risk (95% CI)
0.99 (0.92, 1.06)
Estimated
0.90 (0.79, 1.02)
0.89 (0.82, 0.98)
0.93 (0.87, 1.01)
risk (95% CI)
0.99 (0.92, 1.06)
Estimated
0.90 (0.79, 1.02)
0.89 (0.82, 0.98)
1.25 .5 1 1.25 1.5
Figure.8.6 Estimate risk with every unit increment in TDF including the UKWCS
8.5 Discussion
The current results are pointing towards a lower risk of developing T2DM in
UKWCS participants who consume diets high in fibre particularly cereal fibre. This
study was carried out because of two main reasons. Few studies have examined the
AOAC-fibre intake in relation to risk of T2DM prospectively in the UK among
women. Also inconclusive findings regarding the role of dietary fibre sources on
risk of T2DM led to the current analysis. Prior studies have noted the importance of
high dietary fibre intake on reducing the risk of T2DM (Sluijs et al., 2010b, Meyer
et al., 2000, Salmeron et al., 1997b). Prospective evidence reported the beneficial
effect of insoluble rather than soluble fibre on development of T2DM.
8.5.1Intakes of total dietary fibre, key fibre sources and types of fibre
in relation to the risk of T2DM
For the first time, current study examined the relationship between risk of
T2DM and dietary fibre intake expressed as AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes. The
results of this study did not show any significant association between the risk of
T2DM with dietary intake of AOAC-fibre or NSP.
. The present study showed high cereal AOAC-fibre intake was associated
with decreased incidence of T2DM independent of age however this relationship
was attenuated with additional adjustment for weight change, physical activity, total
energy, smoking, socioeconomic status and alcohol intake. In another words, with
every 5 grams increases in cereal fibre, the risk of diabetes reduced by 14%
independent of age. A similar effect size was reported in a previous cohort study
among the white US population (Stevens et al., 2002). Most cohort studies showed a
protective effect of cereal fibre on the risk of diabetes, while for those few studies
which did not find a significant association between cereal intake and risk of
diabetes, this may be due to small sample sizes (Colditz et al., 1992, Barclay et al.,
2007) or underestimation of cereal fibre intake from a small number of food items
in the FFQ (Hodge et al., 2004). In our study the 37 food items which were assigned
to the cereals group rule out the possibility of the latter explanation.
Six out of seven previous prospective studies among women participants have
demonstrated significant associations between high cereal fibre intake (more than
5.9g/d; more than 7.3g/day; more than 7.5g/day in 2 studies; and more than
10.2g/4184J/day) and the low risk of T2DM by 18%, 36%, 28%, and 12% (Krishnan
et al., 2007, Meyer et al., 2000, Hopping et al., 2010, Schulze et al., 2004a). In our
study women in the 5th quintile who consumed more than 18.5g/day of cereal fibre,
had a 48% risk reduction (OR= 0.52; 95%CI: 0.30, 0.93) compared to women who
consumed less than 6.3g/day in the 1st quintile. However our data showed that the
trend with increase in cereal fibre intake was not statistical significant (p=0.14).
-glucans are soluble cereal fibres that are naturally present in foods and 
added to foods. It was demonstrated in a previous review that intervention with high
intake of -glucans from oat and barley showed significant reductions in post-
prandial blood glucose response compared to control in healthy participants
(European Food Safety Authority, 2011 ). That may be explained by high viscosity
of fibre which slows the rate of digestion and absorption of glucose (Wrsch and Pi-
Sunyer, 1997, Battilana et al., 2001). However epidemiological studies observed the
protective effect of insoluble fibre rather than soluble fibre.
A recent randomized controlled trial examined the short term effect of purified
insoluble cereal fibre consumption of (31.2g/day) for three days among overweight
and obese women and found an improvement in whole body insulin sensitivity
(Weickert et al., 2006). Despite the lower intake of insoluble fibre in prospective
studies, the results suggest beneficial effects of insoluble fibre on the development
of T2DM.
In the current study, fibre from vegetables, fruits, legumes and from nuts and
seeds was not associated with diabetes risk in UKWCS participants. However the
lack of evidence for a linear relationship may less likely to be due to insufficient
amount of fibre intakes from legumes, nuts and seeds sources. This because the
amount of fibre consumed from the above sources is higher than average UK
women and higher than cohorts who reported significant associations (Schulze et al.,
2004a). In contrast, the findings of the current study are similar to prospective
evidence demonstrated in chapter 4. Where none of the studies showed an effect of
high legumes consumption on the risk of T2DM, nine out of 11 studies reported no
effect of vegetables fibre and 10 of the 11 cohorts reported no effect of fruit fibre on
the risk of T2DM.
After including current study into other cohort in the meta-analysis, findings
remained similar and protective effect of total dietary fibre on risk of T2DM was
seen. However, high heterogeneity should be considered.
Cohort women have health conscious characteristics where the average dietary
AOAC-fibre intake exceeded the recommended intake (Lunn and Buttriss, 2007).
This may suggest that there are no further benefits of dietary fibre regarding the risk
of diabetes above the recommended intake.
Another possible reason is the overestimation of dietary intake by FFQs which
has been previously reported (Willett, 2012). Participants may tend to over-report
food consumption with FFQ (Calvert et al., 1997) . The small number of incident
cases of diabetes may also result in less power and failing to reject the null
hypothesis of no significant difference between diabetic and non-diabetic groups.
This may be because women with diabetes cases were self-reported or time frame
too short. This allows the possibility of including undiagnosed diabetic cases in the
non-cases group.
8.5.2 Strengths and limitations
This study had several important strengths; it is a prospective study that
addressed the issue of recall bias. The UKWCS was designed to have a broad
variation in dietary patterns to allow investigation of disease in relation to diet. The
baseline FFQ had been validated previously in a subsample of women (Spence et
al., 2002). Moderate stability of dietary patterns in the UKWCS was reported in a
previous analysis (Greenwood et al., 2003). This limits the possibility of estimated
bias relating to great changes in diet consumed by the studied population.
On the other hand, unavoidable measurement errors are expected when
assessing diet by FFQ which is a common dietary assessment tool used in cohort
studies (Cade et al., 2004b).
Adjustment of covariates was limited in the current analyses to those with
existing strong evidence on the relationship with the variables of interest aiming to
avoid over adjustment that may lead to estimation bias (Kirkwood and Sterne,
2003). In our studied population, the risk of T2DM was four times higher among
overweight women and the risk raised progressively with higher BMI. This reflects
the powerful relationship between T2DM and obesity. Previous pooled estimate
from prospective evidence reported that the risk of T2DM is higher among
overweight and highest among obese women in comparison to normal weight. The
strong association between obesity and T2DM may reflect that obesity is such a
dominant cause that effect of fibre may be relatively weak in comparison, and fibre
may act to decrease the risk by reducing weight gain. So fibre effect could be
adjusted out when the weight change variable was included in the multivariate
model.
The influence of residual confounders in the current study and in any cohort
study may lead to a smaller difference than actually exists in the risk estimation.
Pooled data from a recent meta-analysis reported significant positive associations
between glycaemic index (GI) and glycaemic load (GL) with the risk of T2DM (GI
RR=1.40, 95% CI: 1.23, 1.59; GL RR= 1.27, 95% CI: 1.12, 1.45) (Barclay et al.,
2008). Unfortunately, these variables were not adjusted in the current models
because of unavailability of data.
It appears that observed non-significant inverse associations between total
dietary AOAC-fibre intake and risk of T2DM in current study may be partly explain
by type II error. Type II error may be explained by the measurement errors related to
the dietary assessment method used. overestimation of dietary fibre intake was
suspected as participants tended to overestimate dietary intake by FFQ (Spence et
al., 2002). Misreporting of vegetables and fruit using the FFQ was reported in
previous study (Calvert et al., 1997). This is because FFQ may not consider the
exact portion eaten as some food items eaten by less than an estimated average
portion.
A possible reason for the observed high amount of dietary AOAC-fibre intake
in the UKWCS could be attributed to the high proportion of vegetarians in the
studied population or may be because women in the current cohort were more likely
to have healthier lifestyles (majority of women were non-smokers and more likely to
engage in physical activity) where, their mean BMIs lower in comparison to the
average mean BMI for UK women of similar age (Henderson et al., 2002).
The small number of identified cases may possibly relate to asymptomatic
undiagnosed diabetes which could underestimate the true association or if we
assume women with healthier behaviours were more likely to be screened and
participate in the study then the pattern of low diabetes risk with healthier food or
nutrients tended to be underestimated.
Possible explanations for some of the results were misclassification and
selection bias. Diagnosis of diabetes was obtained from self-reported question in the
phase II questionnaire. Previous evidence showed a high level of confirmation
(95%) was reported when medical records were checked for sampled participants
(Krishnan et al., 2007). However this does not rule out misclassification as
rechecking usually done for diabetic cases and not for other participants
In the current study, the mean dietary AOAC-fibre difference of 1.4 (95%CI: -
1.3, 4.2; p=0.32) was observed between diabetic and non-diabetic groups. A post
hoc test was carried out aiming to estimate the minimum important effect size that
should be present to detect a significant association which can be useful in planning
future study (Walters, 2009). The calculated minimum important effect of 4.1g/day
at power of 80% and at a significance level of 0.05 in a two-sided test was found for
the UKWCS. Confidence intervals are useful for interpreting results in situations
where no significant associations are observed (Levine and Ensom, 2001). From the
current study, the odds ratio of diabetes was 0.99 (95%CI: 0.92, 1.06) with every
5g/day increment of AOAC-fibre in the fully adjusted model. The value 1 included
in the confidence interval indicates that the possibility of no difference between the
two groups cannot be ruled out. As discussed before, the lack of association may be
attributed to many aspects (no relationship, misclassification or inadequate power).
Failure to differentiate between single nutrient end point effects from other
highly correlated nutrients is another limitation of the cohort study. Future research
on causal associations between fibre intake and the risk of T2DM from
interventional trials can be helpful with more emphasis on different dietary fibre
sources and type of dietary fibre consumed. One possible way that may help to
increase the number of cases is by identify participants with a preclinical condition,
in this case, pre-diabetes. This also may provide useful evidence of causal
relationship (Willett, 2012). However, diagnosis of pre-diabetes condition which
also referred to metabolic syndrome needs data on blood pressure, blood
triglycerides concentration, blood high-density lipoprotein cholesterol concentration,
fasting glucose concentration, and WC measurement to meet the criteria of diagnosis
of metabolic syndrome (Alberti et al., 2009). Unfortunately, these data were not
available in the current cohort study.
Future prospective studies should be carried out to evaluate the effect of
dietary fibre fractions and fibre sources on the development of T2DM. Further
evaluation on whether the relationship between risk of T2DM and dietary fibre
varied among obese and normal individuals will be useful for future interventional
trials. Future work should focus on the long term clinical trials with dietary fibre
fractions intervention among high risk population. This will provide evidence on the
effectiveness of the dietary fibre intake on measured blood glucose, insulin and even
HA1C levels.
8.6 Conclusion
Inverse associations between dietary fibre and risk of T2DM among UKWCS
did not reach the significance level and only greater cereal fibre intake was
associated with reduced risk of diabetes over an average period of 4 years
independent of age. No association between insoluble fibre intake or soluble fibre
and the risk of T2DM was observed. As the studied population was found to have
healthier characteristics, this may suggest there is no further beneficial effect of
dietary fibre against risk of diabetes in health conscious individuals who are high
fibre consumers compared to general population but this does not rule out the
beneficial effect of dietary fibre per se.
Chapter 9: Legumes intake and the risk of T2DM in the
UKWCS
9.1 Introduction
A number of different dietary components have been explored in connection
with prevention of T2DM (as shown in chapter 2). Different food intake and risk of
T2DM have been explored in previous studies also demonstrated in chapter 2. The
association between risk of T2DM and wholegrain intake where extensively
evaluated in previous prospective studies and reported consistent significant
beneficial effect of wholegrain intake on the risk of T2DM as discussed in chapter 2.
Studies exploring fruit and vegetable intake in relation to risk of T2DM have been
inconclusive, although a recent meta-analysis reported a potential of leafy green
vegetables benefit effect on risk of T2DM (Cooper et al., 2012). Few prospective
studies which have examined the association between legumes intake and the risk of
T2DM (Villegas et al., 2008). Lack of data on legume consumption among British
women as well as lack of prospective studies that examine the effect of legume
consumption and risk of T2DM in British women had led to the current study.
The health benefits of legumes intake have been demonstrated previously
(Venn and Mann, 2004). Legumes are one of the recommended foods in the UK
healthy eating guidelines (Food Standards Agency, 2007). Eating more plant-based
foods is advised by several dietary guidelines and legumes were offered as one of
the main sources (Leterme, 2002).
Legume consumption varies among European countries and is generally lower
than in Asian populations (Schneider, 2002) . Dried legumes such as chickpeas, faba
beans and lentils are considered to be a small UK market that targets minority
groups such as African or Asian immigrants (Schneider, 2002). However, it has
been reported in a review that demands for peas in the UK was 61,000 tons in 1999.
On the other hand, because people may favour healthy and balanced diets, it had
been suggested that the trend in increasing legume consumption may improve over
time (Schneider, 2002). UK dietary surveys have a limited data on legume
consumption (Henderson et al., 2002) and there is a need to quantify the amount
consumed in the UK to investigate the relation with health outcome (Derbyshire,
2011).
One of the challenges in the epidemiological studies is the difficulties in
separating the effect of nutrients because of high correlation between nutrients
consumed. As people eat food, not nutrients and different components of food may
have different function this support the investigation between the food intake and
risk of disease in prospective studies. Therefore, the aim of this study is to examine
whether a high intake of legumes lowers the risk of T2DM among UK women. As
there is a high proportion of vegetarians in the UKWCS who are likely to consume
more fruit, vegetables and legumes, this gives the advantage of exploring legumes
intakes in relation to health outcomes. In addition, the presence of a wide range of
dietary patterns in the UKWCS facilitates the comparison between women with
different amount of legumes consumption. Exploring the socio-demographic, dietary
and lifestyle characteristics of high legumes consumers in the UKWCS may help to
identify the characteristics of target populations for future randomized controlled
trials. Also this chapter may help in generating further hypothesis regards potential
compounds in food that may protect from disease outcome (Willett, 2012) for future
research.
9.2 Method
9.2.1Studied population
The UKWCS population explored were described in previous chapter 6 (Cade
et al., 2004a). Data analyses were carried out among women who completed
baseline FFQ and phase II questionnaires after an average of 4.1 years of follow-up.
Women with unfeasible total energy intake excluded. This left 12,096 women from
the UKWCS for the present analyses (114 women developed T2DM and 11,982
women remained free from diabetes).
9.2.2Incidence of T2DM
Selection of cases was demonstrated in chapter 6. Incidence of T2DM was
self-reported in the phase II questionnaire.
9.2.3Non-dietary measures
Socio-demographic, anthropometric measures, lifestyle characteristics and
other factors (family history of diabetes and self-reported vegetarians) were obtained
from baseline FFQs. Details on the measured variables reported in chapter 6.
9.2.4Estimating intakes of legumes in the UKWCS
Average daily legume intakes expressed in g/day were calculated from ten
food items listed in the baseline FFQ as shown in Figure 9.1. Daily legume intake
(g/day) was estimated by multiplying frequency data for the 10 legume FFQ intakes
by standards portion sizes as described in chapter 6.
Intakes were divided into dried and fresh legumes based on the usual cooking
methods of consumption. Dried legumes were those that were generally stored in a
dried state, and then consumed after long boiling or canning such as lentils,
chickpeas, baked beans and red kidney beans, whereas the fresh group was mostly
consumed as fresh or frozen vegetables and sometimes canned, such as peas and
green beans. As shown in Table 9.1, 8 dried and 2 fresh legumes were studied. A list
of food items can be seen in Table 9.1. Women were classified into tertiles on the
basis of total legumes consumption: low legumes intake group; medium legumes
intake and high legumes intake group.
Figure.9.1 Frequency of consumption of selected legumes from baseline FFQ
Table.9.1 list of legumes considered for analyses
Types of legumes Food items
Dried legumes Lentils
Blacked eyed beans
Chickpeas
Hummus
Baked beans
Mung beans and red kidney beans
Bean sprouts
Butter beans and broad beans
Fresh legumes Peas
Green beans
9.2.5Statistical analyses
Logistic regression analysis was used to determine the relationship of baseline
legume intake to risk of incident T2DM. As described in chapter 8 (model
development section), three models were run, unadjusted, age-adjusted logistic
model, finally a multivariable-adjusted model, which additionally included, smoking
status, socioeconomic status (professional, intermediate and manual), alcohol intake
(g/day), physical activity level, weight change and family history of diabetes.
Logistic regression analyses were expressed in odds ratios and 95% confident
intervals (95%CI) were carried out. The aim was to examine the odds ratios of
T2DM with the dietary intakes of total, dried and fresh legumes in the UKWCS. An
estimated effect was calculated with every 40g increment of dietary legumes which
is equivalent to a half portion of the UK five a day dietary recommendation
(National Health Services).
Descriptive analysis of legumes consumption was carried out for diabetic and
non-diabetic women. Comparisons of dietary, lifestyle, socio-demographic and other
relevant characteristics among women with low, medium and high legume intakes
were presented using analysis of variance (ANOVA) for continuous variables and
the chi-square test for categorical characteristics after normality tests were
undertaken. Odds ratios of T2DM were determined for dried, fresh and total
legumes intakes across tertiles and women in low legumes consumption group
considered as the reference.
9.3 Results
9.3.1Dietary legumes intakes among British women
The median intake of dried legumes was 31g/day and the median fresh legume
intake was 21g/day. The overall daily median total legume intake was 60.7g among
the studied population (Table 9.2). Intake of dried legumes was significantly higher
among women free from diabetes compared with women that developed diabetes,
while fresh legume and subsequently total legume intakes did not differ significantly
between both groups (Table 9.3).
Table 9.2 Legumes intake (g/d) of cohort women
Food intakes Legumes intake (g/day)
Mean (SD) Median (IQR)
Dried legume 41.8(39.6) 31(34.1)
Fresh legumes 30.8(26.7) 21(31.6)
Total legumes 72.6(50.7) 60.7(55.3)
Table 9.3 Mean legume intakes among diabetes and non-diabetes women
Food intakes g/day Diabetic cases non-diabetes cases P
Dried legumes 23.2(35.3) 30.2(34.8) 0.02
Fresh legumes 26.8(40.9) 23.2(30.3) 0.08
Total legumes 58.1(58.9) 60.6(55.0) 0.50
All values were geometric means (IQR)
Characteristics of 12,096 cohort participants by total legumes, dried legumes
and fresh legumes intakes are shown in Table 9.4.
Overall, women with high dried legume intakes tended to be younger, less
likely to gain weight, more likely to have lower BMI, more likely to report being
vegetarian, more likely to be from the highest social class and more likely to be
supplement users. Mixed picture of women characteristics in the high fresh legume
consumption group can be seen. Women who consumed high fresh legumes tended
to be older, with slightly higher BMI, more likely to gain weight but more likely to
be non-smokers and engage in physical activity.
Table9.4 Characteristics of women by tertiles of intake of total legumes, dried legumes and fresh legumes
Variables Dried legumes intake Fresh legumes Total legumes
Number of participants (no.) 3,747 4,017 4,218 3,927 4,234 3,821 3,710 4,173 4,099
Number of T2DM cases (no.) 55 22 37 30 42 42 38 33 43
Legumes intake
Range (g/d) <21 21-42 >42 <15 15-37 >37 <46 46-80 >80
Median (IQR) intake 12.5(10.4) 31.2(9.4) 67.6(47.1) 10.5(7.4) 21.0(14.2) 60.0(18.0) 31.7(17.0) 61.5(16.7) 113.1(47.7)
Age (years) 53.6(9.0) 51.7(8.7) 50.0(8.5)
51.2(8.9) 51.2(8.6) 52.7(8.9)
52.6 (9.0) 51.7(8.7) 50.0(8.5)
BMI (kg/m
) 24.2(4.4) 23.9(3.8) 23.9(4.5)
23.8(4.3) 24.1(4.0) 24.1(4.5)
23.9(4.3) 24.0(3.9) 24.1(4.5)
Weight change (kg)
7.2(9.4) 7.1(9.4) 6.7(9.6) 6.6(9.5) 7.2(9.2) 7.1(9.6)
6.8(9.3) 7.1(9.4) 6.9(9.7)
Self-reported vegetarian (%) 16 28 53
34 32 33 21 31 46
Smoker (%) 9 8 9 10 8 8
10 8 8
Socio-economic
status (%)
Professional 65 67 69
68 67 66 67 68 67
Intermediate 27 26 23 25 26 26 26 25 25
Routine 7 7 8 7 8 8 7 6 8
Educational
level (%)
No education 14 12 12 12 12 13
13 11 13
O-level 31 29 29 28 30 31 29 29 31
A-level 26 27 25 25 26 27 26 27 26
Degree 28 31 34 34 31 29 32 33 30
Dietary supplement use % 58 60 64
59 59 62
57 59 63
AOAC- fibre (g/day) 33.1(12.1) 38.2(13.1) 48.3(15.7)
34.3(13.1) 39.2(13.3) 47.1(16.3)* 31.4 (11.3) 38.4 (12.0) 49.7 (15.7)
Legumes AOAC-fibre (g/d) 1.5(0.9) 2.8(0.9) 6.2(2.9)
2.4(2.3) 3.4(2.3) 4.8(3.0)
1.4(0.6) 2.8(0.6) 5.6 (2.9)
Carbohydrate intake (%E) 53.8(6.5) 54.4(6.0) 56.0(6.2)
55.0(6.5) 54.5(6.1) 54.9(6.4)
54.2(6.2) 54.4(6.1) 55.8(6.3)
Protein intake (%E) 16.1(2.7) 15.7(2.6) 15.1(2.5)
15.4(2.6) 15.6(2.6) 15.7(2.6)
15.8(2.7) 15.6(2.6) 15.3(2.6)
Fat intake (%E) 33.6(5.9) 33.4(5.6) 32.5(5.7)
33.1(6.0) 33.3(5.6) 33.0(5.7)
33.5(5.9) 33.5(5.5) 32.5(5.8)
Saturated fat intake (%E) 12.1(3.4) 11.5(3.1) 10.4(2.9)
11.5(3.3) 11.4(3.1) 11.0(3.1)
12.0(3.4) 11.5(3.0) 10.5(3.0)
Energy intake (kcal/d) 2067(597) 2245(623) 2506(684)
2081(606) 2286(630) 2479(691)
2012(585) 2252(588) 2553(693)
Alcohol intake (unit/d)
0.45(1.13) 0.49(1.16) 0.49(1.12)
0.43(1.08) 0.49(1.15) 0.50(1.20)
0.45(1.12) 0.51(1.17) 0.47(1.11)
Family history of diabetes (%) 6.6 6.6 6.2 6.0 6.7 6.6 6.4 6.6 6.5
Physical activity (METs) 16.1(10.6) 16.7(11.0) 18.1(11.5
15.4(10.4) 16.9(11.0) 18.8(11.5)
15.4 (10.2) 16.8 (10.9) 18.7 (11.7)
Dietary patterns meat group 84 70 46
65 66 66
78 68 53
fish group 8 14 22 16 15 15 11 14 20
vegetarian 8 16 32 20 20 19 11 18 27
All values mean (SD) unless stated otherwise * ANOVA p<0.01, 1 log transformation preformed and values expressed as geometric mean (IQR). 2Weight changes was
calculated by subtracting weight (Kg) at age of 20 years from the present weight (Kg).
9.3.2Legumes intake and the risk of T2DM
From Table 9.5, Odds ratios of T2DM (95%CI) were determined for the
intakes of total, dried and fresh legumes. With every 40 g/day increase in dried
legumes, the risk of T2DM reduced by 23% (OR=0.77, 95%CI: 0.61, 0.99) in the
unadjusted model. However, this inverse association was attenuated after adjustment
for age, total energy intake, smoking status, weight changes in percentage,
socioeconomic status, alcohol intake, physical activity and family history of
diabetes. No significant associations were found between intakes of total legumes
intake or fresh legumes with the risk of T2DM in age and fully adjusted models.
Table 9.5 Association between the incidence of T2DM and intake of total legumes, dried
and fresh legumes (g/d) for 12,096 women
Across the dried legumes intake tertiles (Table 9.6), significant inverse
associations were observed between the risk of T2DM and dried legumes intake
independent of age, total energy intakes, weight changes, smoking, socioeconomic
status, alcohol intakes and family history of diabetes with OR = 0.85(95%CI: 0.52,
0.84, p for trend= 0.03). Intakes of fresh legumes and total legumes showed no
significant association with the risk of T2DM in all models. Further adjustment of
total dietary fibre and magnesium intake did not alter the association between the
risk of diabetes and legumes intake.
Nutrient Unadjusted
OR 95%CI
P Age adjusted
OR 95%CI
P Fully adjusted
95%CI
Dried legumes
40 g/day
0.77(0.61, 0.99) 0.04 0.83(0.65, 1.06) 0.14 0.86(0.67, 1.10) 0.24
Fresh legumes
40 g/day
1.22(1.00, 1.12) 0.04 1.16(0.94, 1.42) 0.14 1.11(0.90, 1.38) 0.29
Total legumes
40g/day
0.95(0.82, 1.12) 0.60 0.60(0.83, 1.14) 0.76 0.98(0.83, 1.15) 0.85
Adjusted of age, total energy intake, smoking status, weight changes in percentage, socioeconomic status,
alcohol intake, physical activity and family history of diabetes. 240grams per day equivalent to half portion of 5 a
day fruit and vegetables(National Health Services).
Table 9.6 Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals of T2DM according to tertiles of total,
dried and fresh legumes intakes among 12,096 British women
1adjusted for age, total energy intake, weight change %, smoking status, socioeconomic status, alcohol intake,
METs and family history of diabetes. 2Overall P-value.
9.4 Discussion
The current study is one of the first studies to examine the effect of different
types of legumes on the risk of T2DM in the UK women. This adds to the
knowledge base regarding the estimated effect of different types of legumes on the
risk of T2DM. In general, the mean intake of legumes among the studied population
was relatively high compared with mean intake among women from the NDNS
report (Henderson et al., 2002). This gives a good opportunity to explore the effect
of legume intakes in relation to the risk of T2DM. However this may limit the
generalization of the results, as the percentage of vegetarians in the UKWCS is
higher than UK population (28% vs. 2%) (Bates et al., 2011).
The results point to a potentially protective effect of high legumes intake on
the development of T2DM, mainly through consumption of dried type of legumes
but not the high fresh legumes intake. Women who consumed at least a half portion
per day of dried legumes based on the UK recommendation (National Health
Services) have a significantly lower risk of T2DM (15%) independent of potential
confounders. non-significant estimated effect of total legumes intake on the risk of
T2DM was observed in the current analysis.
Current study has shown an non-significant dose-response relationship
between intake of dried legumes and risk of T2DM while significance protective
effect when the comparison was made between extreme quintiles. This may relate to
wide variation of dried legumes consumption between women across quintiles. It
was found that high proportion (40%) of women who consume 1-2 portions per day
of dried legumes in the 3
tertile in addition to 40% of the women in the 1
tertile
Legume intake T2DM
Cases
OR (95%CI)
Type Tertile Range g/day Age adjusted model Fully adjusted model
Dried legumes 1 < 21 55 1 1
2 21 - 42 22 0.41 (0.25, 0.68) 0.49 (0.29, 0.84)
3 > 42 37 0.72 (0.47, 1.12) 0.85 (0.52, 0.89)
P value
114 <0.01 0.03
Fresh legumes 1 < 15 30 1 1
2 15 37 42 1.31 (0.82, 2.1) 1.41 (0.84, 2.37)
3 > 37 42 1.29 (0.80, 2.1) 1.51 (0.89, 2.59)
P value
114 0.46 0.27
Total legumes 1 < 46 38 1 1
2 46  80 33 0.82 (0.51, 1.31) 0.89 (0.53, 1.49)
3 > 80 43 1.12 (0.71, 1.74) 1.33 (0.80, 2.22)
P value
114 0.41 0.25
consume less than a quarter of portion per day (0-10g/day) and 5% of women in 1
tertile were non-consumers.
These findings are supported by two previous epidemiological studies
(Feskens et al., 1991, Villegas et al., 2008). Among men (n=338), in a 20-year
follow up of the Finnish and Dutch cohorts of the Seven Countries study, legume
and vegetable intakes were inversely associated with 2-h glucose level after
adjustment for age, BMI and energy intake (Feskens et al., 1995) and this was
supported by an earlier study (Feskens et al., 1991) of 175 men and women which
showed that increased legume intake was associated significantly with lower
incidence of glucose intolerance measured by using oral glucose tolerance tests after
4 year of follow up (OR=0.4, 95%CI: 0.18, 0.90).
The Shanghai Womens Health Study, also examined the association between
total legumes intake and risk of diabetes among Chinese women and found a
protective effect of total legumes intake with a multivariate adjusted relative risk of
0.62 (95%CI: 0.51, 0.74). These authors also reported that intake of other legumes
(other than soybeans) of mean 37.1g/day in comparison to mean 5.6g/day intake
associated with a relative risk of 0.76 (95%CI: 0.64, 0.90) independent to age, total
energy intake, WHR, BMI, smoking, alcohol intake, vegetable intake, dietary fibre,
physical activity, income level, educational level, occupation, and hypertension
(Villegas et al., 2008). In contrast, in the Nurses Health Study (Bazzano et al.,
2008), no association was found between legume intake and the risk of diabetes
among women aged 38-63 years followed for 18 years. However, the median intake
of legume was reported as 0.17 servings/day (median intake in Q1=0.07 and
Q5=0.45 servings/day).
A possible explanation for the current findings might be that women who
consume high dried legumes were more likely to adhere to a healthier lifestyle as
they were more likely to be vegetarians and more likely to have lower BMI. In
addition to this, they tended to be younger and from the highest social class. These
factors were previously shown to be linked to lower risk of T2DM. Thus the
potential influence of factors that link with women who consumed high amounts of
dried legumes may still be possible because of residual confounders effects that are
unavoidable despite inclusion of these variables in the model.
One of the main strength in the UKWCS is the presence of high proportion of
self-reported vegetarians that allows assessing the risk of disease (T2DM). The
amount of dried legumes consumed was higher than the amount of fresh legume
consumed (41.8g/day vs. 30.8g/day; respectively), this may be adequate to show the
beneficial effect of dried legumes on the risk of T2DM. The mean intake of total
legumes in the current study is even higher than mean intake of total legumes for the
Chinese women in the previous study (35.9g/day) which also showed a significant
protective effect among high legumes consumers (Villegas et al., 2008).
Legume may have an impact on diabetes through number of potential
mechanisms. These include acting or via fibre content, starch and type of starch,
impact of weight management via mechanisms associated with satiety and
polyphenols contents. Flow chart 9.2 illustrates potential plausible mechanisms
through which high intake of dried legumes could reduce markers of diabetes status.
There is a good biological plausibility from trials data with legume
consumption manipulated with clear effect on measured blood glucose levels.
Jenkins (1980) demonstrated that dried legumes among normal participants have the
lowest postprandial glucose level in comparison to other types of food (e.g. grains).
The presence of dietary fibre and types of starch, that is highly resistant to human
enzymes digestion were suggested compounds that may result into a slow rate of
intestinal digestion and absorption. Therefore, may have a role in regulate blood
glucose. The low glycemic index characteristics of legumes was also suggested to
have a role in improving glucose response (Jenkins et al., 1981). It was reported that
diet rich in grain, fruit, vegetables and legumes has an anti-inflammatory effect.
Observational evidences summarized by Galland (2010) showed that C-reactive
protein, a biomarker of inflammation, was significantly reduced by greater intake of
dietary fibre. Also impact of dietary fibre on satiety was reported in previous review,
where the plausible mechanism related to its viscosity and bulking properties (Slavin
and Green, 2007). In addition to, dietary fibre effect on satiety through gut hormones
was reported. Ghrelin
and glucagon-like peptide
hormonal levels were altered
with greater consumption of dietary fibre, which showed to affect subsequent meal
consumption (Weickert and Pfeiffer, 2008).
Ghrelin is peptide hormone which stimulate hunger and produced by gastric mucosal cells and
pancreatic cells (Shintani et al., 2001).
Glucagon like peptide is secreted by intestinal epithelial cells dependents on the presence of food
in the lumen of the small intestine which has antihyperglycemic effect, enhanced satiety and reduced
energy intake (Flint et al., 1998).
Figure 9.2 Suggested mechanisms through which high intake of legumes could reduce
T2DM status markers
Pooled results from 10 randomized controlled trials showed that intake of
legumes ranging between 90  377g/day for a period of at least 1 week up to four
months resulted in significant reduction in fasting blood glucose (0.82, 95% CI 
1.36 to 0.27) and fasting blood insulin (0.49, 95% CI 0.93 to 0.04) among 
normoglycemic and diabetic participants (Sievenpiper et al., 2009). This evidence
strongly supports the beneficial effect of dried legumes such as chickpeas on fasting
blood glucose levels.
Dried legumes contain higher amount of starch in comparison to fresh legumes
(Food Standards Agency, 2002). For example, cooked red kidney beans contain 12-
14% starch while boiled green beans contain 3% of starch. Type of starch structure
and other characteristics in legumes compared with cereal starch was demonstrated
in previous review (Guillon and Champ, 2002). It was reported that the low
digestibility of legume starch in compared to cereal starch is likely due to the high
amylose content in legumes which have high capacity to retrograde than starch with
low amylose content. Experimental studies measuring starch in lentils and corn
reported a higher proportion of slow digestible starch and resistant starch in cooked
lentil compared to corn, while higher proportion of rapid digestible starch was found
in corn than lentil (Chung et al., 2009).
Legume fibre contains heterogeneous dietary fibre with varied chemical
structures (cellulose, hemicelluloses, pectin, gums, mucilage, resistant starch and
lignin). In general, delayed gastric emptying, prolongation in small intestine
absorption and production of short chain fatty acids post fibre fermentation are all
physiological effect of fibre that have a positive effect on glycemic response
Legumes
intake
T2DM status
markers
Starch (structure/ content)
Dietary
fibre
Micronutrients (Magnesium)
Glycaemic index
Polyphenols
Satiety
/weight
(Jenkins et al., 1987). This is supported by some epidemiological studies showing an
inverse association between total dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM (Schulze et
al., 2007). However, findings from the systematic review in chapter 4, demonstrate
that prospective studies which examined legumes fibre on the risk of diabetes did
not support the beneficial effect of legumes fibre intake on the risk of diabetes which
was explained by authors due to low intake of legumes fibre among the studied
populations. Similarly, the findings in chapter 8, where no effect of legumes fibre on
the risk of T2DM in the UKWCS was seen even though the large proportion were
vegetarians and consumption of legumes was high.
Indirect effect of dietary fibre on the risk of diabetes is one of the possible
explanations. The risk reduction of T2DM with dried legumes intake can also be
explain by the relationship between the beneficial effect of high fibre diet on
decreasing satiety which may act through body weight reduction and consequently
be linked to a lower risk of T2DM (Weickert and Pfeiffer, 2008). However evidence
on legumes fibre is still lacking.
Dried legumes also contain variable amounts of polyphenolic compounds
(1.53  6.56 mg gallic acid equivalents g
. For example, red kidney beans where
dark pigmentation is because of the presence of high polyphenolic substances)
(Oomah et al., 2011). Negative correlation between polyphenols in legumes and
blood glucose response was reported previously (Thompson et al., 1984). This may
have a role in diabetes prevention.
A recent comprehensive review on bioactive compounds hypothesized a
potential health-related protective mechanism in whole grain cereal other than fibre
components (Fardet, 2010). Dried legumes are a rich source of micronutrients such
as magnesium which was found to have an inverse association with T2DM risk in
prospective studies (Dong et al., 2011). Intracellular magnesium has a key role in
insulin action and found to be low in concentration among T2DM which suggested
to be possible mechanism that may explain the inverse association between risk of
T2DM and dietary Magnesium (Barbagallo et al., 2003). Some cross-sectional
studies have reported serum magnesium and intracellular magnesium were
significantly lower in pre-diabetic-patients in comparison to healthy individuals
(Lima et al., 2009) as well as in T2DM participants (Resnick et al., 1993). This is
also supported by evidence from interventional studies which observed a significant
reduction in fasting blood glucose post high magnesium supplementation (Song et
al., 2006). Additionally, magnesium supplementation for 3 months reduced insulin
resistance significantly in non-diabetic participants (Guerrero-Romero et al., 2004).
However, prospective studies on the dietary magnesium intake in different sources
particularly legumes in relation to the risk of T2DM is still limited and required
further research.
Evidence from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey for
American adults aged > 19 years found that consumption of dry beans and peas such
as kidney beans, black beans, chickpeas, lentils and other types resulted in a nutrient
profile that was higher in fibre, protein, folate, zinc, iron, and magnesium and lower
in saturated fat and total fat in comparison to non-consumers (Mitchell et al., 2009).
This may reflect the underlying reason of high quality diet with high intake of dry
legumes.
In the current study the mean (SD) intakes of dietary fibre, zinc, iron and
vitamins from dried legumes were higher in comparison to fresh legumes intake.
These compounds may have a link to T2DM directly or indirectly. However this is
quite complicated and need further research to examine the association between
dietary bioactive compounds from legumes on health related outcomes prospectively
in populations with high legumes consumption.
Further research is required to evaluate whether different types of legumes
have health beneficial effects which may help in supporting the current dietary
recommendations. It have been reported in earlier UK survey that baked beans more
likely be eaten by men than women (48% and 41% respectively) (NDNS, 2002).
This may suggest whether the association between legumes intake and risk of T2DM
differ between men and women which required further research on men. Another
potential future research in the UKWCS data is to split vegetable intake and to
examine different types of vegetable intake and polyphenols contents in vegetables
and legumes that may have an impact on the risk of T2DM. Further prospective
evidence on the dose-response relationship between legumes intake and risk of
diabetes will help in identify the potential amount of legumes that has beneficial
effect on developing T2DM.
9.5 Conclusion
Due to limited prospective evidence in legumes intake area, the main purpose
of the current study was to determine the effect of legumes intake on the risk of
T2DM among women. The above findings indicate that diets with high intakes of
dried legumes may be associated with a decreased risk of T2DM which is supported
by previous prospective studies. This suggests that dried legumes have potential
beneficial nutritional properties (e.g. higher fibre, magnesium and polyphenols) in
relation to diabetes prevention. Because dried legumes represent a small market in
the UK, this information could be used to develop targeted interventions aimed at
increasing dried legumes intake and to examine health related outcomes.
Chapter 10: Dietary fibre intake obtained from
different dietary methods in the UKWCS.
10.1 Introduction
Chapter 4 showed non-significant association between total dietary fibre
intake and main fibre sources intakes with the risk of T2DM after adjustment for
potential confounders. Whether these non-significant findings were partly related to
biases inherent within the dietary assessment methods used described in this chapter.
Measurement of diet is usually subjected to misreporting (Willett, 2012). The FFQ
approach is a common dietary assessment method used in studies with a large
sample sizes such as cohort studies because it is cheap, easy to deliver and simple to
process and analyse in comparison to other methods such as food diaries. On the
other hand, FFQs depend on individual memory and thus poor recall is likely to
happen. Other sources of bias of FFQs are the composition of the fixed food item list
and the portion size selected (Willett, 2012). An earlier comparison study carried
out on 160 women aged 50-65 years who provided dietary information using 16
days of weighed diary records and other different methods such as FFQ, 24hrs recall
and 7 days diary, reported that mean dietary fibre intake from 4 day food diary was
similar to weighed record (Bingham et al., 1994). This gives the advantage of
considering the food diary as the most appropriate reference method for validation
studies in nutritional epidemiology research.
Furthermore, food diaries have been recommended as one of the reference
methods that can be used when a validation study with FFQ is required because of
the source of bias is highly independent (Cade et al., 2004b). Comparison between
different dietary methods is important in epidemiological studies, particularly
studies which focus on diet-disease relationships. This is because the risk estimate of
the disease outcome in relation to nutrient intake should consider FFQs ability to
rank participants rather than provide estimation of absolute dietary intake (Willett,
2012). An earlier UKWCS preliminary validation study reported reasonable
correlations between FFQ and 4 day diaries for selected micronutrient intakes
(Spence et al., 2002).
Stability of dietary pattern obtained from baseline FFQ was previously assessed
by a second FFQ in the UKWCS; half of the studied women maintained the same
dietary pattern. However, for nutrient intakes, the kappa statistic ranged between
0.18 to 0.21 for total energy, vitamin C and energy from fat. This suggested poor
stability for the selected nutrients (Greenwood et al., 2003). However repeatability
of FFQ based on fibre intake was not reported in the study. The current chapter
compares daily dietary fibre intake recorded by 4 days diary with dietary fibre intake
estimated by baseline and repeated FFQ. To tackle the issue of measurement error
that may explain the non-significant findings in chapter 8, comparisons between
NSP intakes obtained from different dietary assessment methods permits assessment
whether high NSP consumers based on FFQs were similar to high NSP consumers
based on food diaries.
10.2 Aims and objectives
 Compare between baseline FFQs and repeated FFQs to describe the extent of
reproducibility of baseline FFQs in terms of consistency of measuring dietary
fibre by the same person at different times.
 Compare between food diaries and FFQs to examine the relative validity of
the FFQ. Evaluate how well the dietary assessment methods agree on
determining dietary fibre intake by examining the association between dietary
fibre intake obtained from diary and FFQ in the UKWCS. This was done
through two main approaches:
 Assessing the reproducibility of FFQ-fibre intake by comparing the total
dietary fibre intakes obtained from food diary and FFQ (either baseline or
repeated) in the UKWCS.
 Comparing main fibre sources intakes obtained from baseline FFQ and
food diary.
 Evaluate the ability of the FFQ used in the UKWCS to rank individuals based
on dietary fibre intake by examining whether women were allocated similarly
into categories based on dietary fibre intakes derived by these different
methods.
 Finally, identify the percentage of women who were misclassified into
extreme NSP quintiles.
10.3 Methodology
10.3.1Studied population
Description of the UKWCS is in chapter 6. The time scale of women who
completed different dietary assessment methods in the UKWCS is also demonstrated
in Figure 6.2 in chapter 6. Figure 10.1 represents the average differences in time
between the completed FFQ at baseline, repeated FFQ and food diary. Time periods
were obtained from the mean difference in womens age when completed forms
were received. Of the 1,918 women who completed a repeated FFQ, only 20% (384)
of them completed a food diary (which had subsequently been fully coded). Food
diaries were completed 1.6 years before the repeat FFQ. After 4.8 (SD = 0.4) years
on average from the baseline FFQ, food diaries were received. This indicates that
the time gap between repeated FFQs and food diaries was shorter than the time gap
between baseline FFQs and food diaries.
Figure 10.1 time range between each dietary assessment method used in the UKWCS
Women who did not complete at least 3 days of diary records were excluded
from the analysis (9 women). Therefore, the comparison between food diary and
repeated FFQ was carried out on 382 women. Finally, the comparison between food
diary and baseline FFQ was carried out on 1870 women.
10.3.2Dietary fibre intake
The daily intake of NSP was derived from 3 dietary assessment sources. The
daily NSP intake from the baseline FFQ is referred to as baseline FFQ-fibre intake.
Daily NSP intake derived from 4 days semi-weighed food diary is referred to as
diary-fibre intake. Finally dietary NSP intake recorded by repeated FFQ is referred
to as repeated FFQ-fibre.
10.3.2.1 Food frequency questionnaire
The self-administered FFQ at baseline which was repeated between the year
2000 and the year 2001. Details on baseline and repeated FFQ as well as the dietary
NSP intake calculation were demonstrated in chapter 6.
Fibre from cereal, vegetables, fruit and nuts contributed to 95% of total dietary
fibre intake in the UKWCS (chapter 7). The main food sources of fibre were
obtained based on McCance and Widdowsons food grouping as listed in the
Baseline FFQ Food diary
1.6 years3.2 years
Repeated FFQ
baseline FFQ (Food Standards Agency, 2002) (Table 10.1). Intakes of four fibre
sources from baseline FFQ were calculated for each participant (g/day).
Table 10.1 Food items in main fibre sources (categories based on food grouping used by the
UK food composition tables (Food Standards Agency, 2002))
Food group Food item
Cereal and
cereal
products
White bread average, brown bread average, wholemeal bread average, chapatis,
papadums, tortillas, pitta, crispbread, crackers average, breakfast cereals, porridge,
sugar cereals, non-sugar cereals, muesli, all bran, branflakes, cream crackers/ biscuit
cereals, rice & pasta, white pasta, spaghatti wholemeal pasta, white rice, brown rice,
wild rice, macaroni cheese, barley, oats, bulgar wheat, wheat germ, couscous,
biscuits, sweets and puddings, plain biscuits, chocolate biscuits, full coated sandwich,
cream biscuits, fruitcake, sponge cake, buns/pastries, scones/pancakes/muffins/
croissants, fruit pies, tarts, crumbles, sponge puddings
Vegetables
Beetroot, broccoli/greens, brussels, cabbage, carrots, cauliflower, celery, coleslaw,
courgettes, cucumber, garlic, green/runner beans, leeks, lettuce, mushrooms,
aubergine, olives, parsnips, peas, peppers, swede, sweetcorn, tomatoes, turnip,
watercress, potatoes, jacket potatoes, old potatoes roasted, potato salad, Quorn,
Textured Vegetable Protein, veg chilli, mixed bean casserole/ratatouille, stir fry veg,
veg dishes, veg pizza, vegetable pate, lentils, chickpeas, hummaus, baked beans, red
kidney beans, beansprouts, black eyed beans, butter beans
Fruit
Apple, avocado, bananas, grapes, kiwi, mango, oranges, satsumas, grapefruit, papaya,
pears, pineapple, apricot, melon, average nectarines, peaches, plums, raspberries,
currants - red/white /black, rhubarb, strawberries, dates, dried, figs, prunes, mixed
dried fruit, currants/raisins/sultanas
Nuts and
seeds
peanuts/pistachios, cashews, pecans, sunflower seeds, peanut butter, mixed
nuts/raisins, nut pate
10.3.2.2 Four days food diary
Food diaries were completed by (n=12,453) cohort women between 1999 and
2002. Details of the food diary format, mailing and coding are in chapter 6. Nutrient
intakes were obtained for 15% of women who completed food diary. Full dietary
information was available electronically for only 1,883 women that had been fully
coded in DANTE program and whose data were available for analysis. Nutrient
intakes were calculated as the average of intakes over 3 or 4 days recordings
depending on completion. Fibre from cereal, vegetables, fruit and nuts were also
derived from the diary similar to the main food sources identified by the baseline
10.3.3Statistical analyses
10.3.3.1 Total dietary fibre intake
Characteristics of women who completed different dietary methods were
explored and these are illustrated in Table 10.3. Distributions of all relevant
variables were examined by histograms. Paired t-tests were used to examine whether
the mean differences in dietary intakes for selected nutrients and NSP intake
(expressed in g/day and g/1000kcal) reported in FFQs and food diaries were
statistically significant.
Initially, correlation coefficients were obtained between FFQs and 4 day food
diaries. Pearsons correlation was performed for normally distributed data while
Spearman rank correlation was used for not normally distributed data. Because
correlation only measures the strength of association, the Bland-Altman method was
also used to measure the extent of agreement between two dietary assessment
methods. The Bland-Altman plot is a graphical approach to compare FFQ-fibre
intake and diary-fibre intake by plotting the difference of two measurements against
the mean of both measures for each subject (Bland and Altman, 1986). This method
permits assessment of the agreement between two measurements, where the mean
difference between then is the estimated bias and the 95% limits of agreement are
the mean difference + 2 SD.
The ability of the FFQ to rank cohort women was assessed by determining the
percentage of women who were correctly classified into the same group and the
percentage of women who were grossly misclassified. Therefore, women were
categorized into 5 quintiles based on dietary fibre consumption derived from FFQs
and diaries, with the first dietary fibre quintile referring to women with the lowest
dietary fibre intake and the fifth quintile those with the highest intake. Cross-
tabulation with percentages of women classified into same or adjacent and extreme
groups of dietary fibre quintiles were obtained for the three comparisons using the
Kappa statistic (K) (Landis and Koch, 1977). The aim of this statistical approach is
to determine how well the examined dietary methods agreed on allocating women to
the same quintile based on dietary fibre intake beyond the probability of chance.
Furthermore, the weighed Kappa statistic (Kw) was also obtained to reduce the
chance of misclassification by counting adjacent categories as partial agreement
(Viera and Garrett, 2005). Kappa values range between 0 to 1 where the value of 0
means no agreement between the tested methods and the value of 1 means that the
agreement between the two methods is perfect (by implication therefore, both
methods measure exactly the same thing). Specifically, this statistical approach
helped to determine whether the women who were categorized in to the high NSP
group by FFQs are similar to women who were categorized in to the high NSP
group by 4 days diaries records in the UKWCS.
Pearsons correlations and Kappa statistics analysis was carried out to examine
whether the agreement between dietary fibre assessment methods differ based on
self-reported vegetarian status.
10.3.3.2 Intakes from main dietary fibre sources
Main fibre sources were also of interest, therefore fibre from cereal, vegetables,
fruit and nuts were derived from baseline FFQs and food diaries. For fibre sources
analysis, 1,879 women who completed both the food diary and FFQ were available.
Comparisons between the four main sources as well as insoluble and soluble fibre
intakes derived from baseline FFQs and food diaries were carried out.
Total dietary fibre variables were normally distributed (as shown by the
histograms in Figure 10.2), however for distributions that were positively skewed
(vitamin C, iron, calcium and folate) the log transformation was carried out before
the two samples t-test. If normal distribution was not achieved with log
transformation, then a non-parametric test (Wilcoxon sign-rank test) was performed
and medians and interquartile ranges (IQR) were stated. Spearmans rank
correlations were also carried out when data were not normally distributed. This
aimed to measure the strength of association between fibre sources obtained by the
two dietary assessment methods. Bland-Altman plots were also performed after log
transformation to assess the extent of the agreement between the FFQ-fibre and
diary-fibre intakes for different food sources. Women were split into 5 quintiles
based on their dietary fibre sources and the degree of agreement between womens
categories using two dietary methods was calculated using Kappa statistics. Un-
weighed Kappa and weighted Kappa were both calculated. Table 10.2 presents the
interpretations of agreement for Kappa as described by Landis and Koch (1977).
Table 10.2 Kappa statistic interpretation
Kappa statistic Strength of agreement
 0.00 Poor (no agreement)
 0.00-0.20 Slight
 0.21-0.40 Fair
 0.41-0.60 Moderate
 0.61-0.80 Substantial
 0.81-1.00 Almost Perfect
0 20 40 60 80 100
Baseline FFQ-fibre (g/day)
0 20 40 60 80
Repeated FFQ-fibre (g/day)
0 20 40 60
Diary-fibre intake (g/day)
0 10 20 30 40
Baseline FFQ-fibre (g/1000kcal/day)
0 10 20 30
Repeated FFQ-fibre (g/1000kcal/day)
0 10 20 30 40
Dairy-fibre intake (g/1000kcal/day)
10.4 Results
10.4.1Studied population
The characteristics of the women were explored and showed that, the
percentage of women in BMI categories, smoking status, social class, educational
achievement and the dietary supplement use did not differ greatly among women
who completed different dietary assessments methods, however women who
completed repeated FFQ actually have a lower percentage of vegetarians in
compared with women in other dietary methods. This indicates similarity in most of
womens characteristics therefore studied samples were relatively comparable
(Table 10.3).
Table 10.3 Baseline characteristics of women who completed different dietary assessment
methods in the UKWCS
Characteristics of women Baseline FFQ Repeated
Semi-weighed food
diary
Number of participants 35,372 1,918 1,883
Age (years) 52(9) 56(9) 54(9)
BMI categories
Underweight 1 2 2
Normal 62 52 63
Overweight 24 28 22
Obese 13 17 13
Smoker (%) 10 7 9
Vegetarian (%) 72 47 70
Professional socio-economic status (%) 66 67 65
Degree achievement (%) 27 36 28
History of any medical illnesses (%) 27 23 31
Dietary supplementation use (%) 58 69 62
Figure 10.2 Baseline FFQ-fibre, repeated FFQ-fibre and diary-fibre in the
UKWCS expressed in g/day and g/1000kcal/day, showing normal distributions
10.4.2Comparisons between baseline FFQ-fibre, repeated FFQ-fibre
and diary-fibre intakes in the UKWCS
Mean daily dietary intake of fibre from FFQs were significantly higher by
36% (baseline) and by 28% (repeated) than food diaries with a mean difference of
9.7 and 7.3g/day respectively. The majority of nutrient intakes were also
significantly higher in FFQs than diaries. In comparison to baseline FFQs, dietary
nutrient intakes from repeated FFQs tended to be statistically significantly lower
than baseline FFQs except for total energy intake, vitamin C and iron; however the
mean difference was relatively small. From Table 10.4, whilst differences in intakes
(due to large sample size) by method were often statistically significant, actual
differences were not generally clinically meaningful, particularly comparing the 2
FFQ databases.
Table 10.4 Comparison between dietary intakes of women who completed different dietary assessment methods
p value<0.01;
log transformation carried out and value listed is geometric mean (IQR)
Dietary variables
All values were mean (SD) unless stated
otherwise
Baseline
Repeated
Difference Food diary Baseline
Difference Food diary Repeated FFQ Difference
No of participants 1918 1918 - 1870 1870 - 384 384 -
NSP (g/d) 28.4(11.4) 26.3(9.7) 2.1
17.3(6.3) 27(10.8) -9.7
19.0(6.8) 26.4(8.4) -7.3
NSP density (g/1000kcal/d) 12.6(3.3) 11.6(2.9) 1.0
9.7(3.3) 11.9(3.3) -2.1
10.7(3.5) 11.7(2.9) -1.0
Energy intake include alcohol (kcal/d) 2277(736) 2280(664) -2.5 1873(448) 2339(721) -465
1812(409) 2286(626) -473
Carbohydrate intake (E%) 56(6.3) 55(6.8) 1.0
51(7.9) 55(6.4) -4.0
52(7.8) 55(6.7) -2.2
Protein intake (E%) 15(2.7) 14(2.5) 0.6
16(3.5) 16(2.7) -0.06 15(3.4) 14(2.4) 0.6
Fat intake (E%) 33(6.0) 32(5.9) 1.2
33(6.8) 33(5.8) -0.07 33(7.1) 32(6.2) 0.8
Saturated fat intake (E%) 11(3.2) 10(3.2) 0.48
12(3.7) 11(3.2) -0.53
11(3.8) 10(3.3) 0.9
MUPA (E%) 11(2.4) 10(2.3) 0.36
10(2.7) 11(2.3) -0.4
10(2.7) 10.3(2.3) -0.3
PUFA (E%) 7(1.8) 6(1.3) 0.3
5(2.2) 6(1.8) -0.8
5(2.3) 6(1.8) -0.6
Vitamin C
159.4(99.7) 158.7(96.3) 0.7 108.3(81) 160(92) -51.7
114(82) 159(96) -45
16.6(9.1) 17.2(8.8) -0.6 12.5(4.8) 17.3(8.4) -4.8
12.3(4.8) 17.4(8.8) -5.1
Folate
413(139) 391(122) 21.2
294(111) 408(139) -114.3
304(125) 398(114) -93.7
Calcium
1163(406) 1089(385) 73.9
874(295) 1170(393) -296.2
883(319) 1094(371) -211.0
The baseline FFQ was moderately correlated with the repeated FFQ in
unadjusted fibre intake (r=0.62, p<0.01) and in energy adjusted fibre intake (r=0.63,
p<0.01). Significant correlations were also seen between diary-fibre intake
expressed as g/1000kcal/day and FFQs (r= 0.51for baseline FFQ-fibre and r= 0.47
for repeated FFQ-fibre) as shown in Table 10.5. Figure 10.3 demonstrates
graphically the positive trend of association between diary-fibre and baseline FFQ-
fibre.
Table 10.5 Pearsons correlation coefficients (95%CI) of dietary fibre intake obtained by
FFQ and food diary
Diary-fibre Baseline FFQ-fibre
Unadjusted correlation (r)
Diary-fibre 1
Baseline FFQ-fibre 0.36 (0.32, 40) 1
Repeated FFQ-fibre 0.37(0.28, 0.45) 0.62(0.59, 0.64)
Energy adjusted
correlation (r)
Diary-fibre 1
Baseline FFQ-fibre 0.51(0.47, 54) 1
Repeated FFQ-fibre 0.47(0.39, 0.54) 0.64(0.61, 0.66)
Figure 10.3 Scatter plot between energy adjusted NSP intakes (g/1000kcal/day) estimated
by FFQ and food diary
0 10 20 30 40
Baseline FFQ-fibre density intake (g/1000kcal/day)
Bland-Altman plots Figure 10.4 and 10.5 show that the differences between
FFQ-fibre and diary-fibre increased as the mean of dietary fibre intake from the two
methods increased. This illustrates visually there were more large positive
differences than large negative ones. Furthermore, there was a tendency for greater
positive mean differences with greater mean dietary fibre intake. There was a clear
tendency for women to overestimate their dietary fibre intake by FFQ by an average
of 9.7g/day in the baseline FFQ and by 7.3g/day in the repeated FFQ with 95% limit
of agreement -11.1 to 30.4 g/day and -9.9 to 24.6 g/day respectively in comparison
to food diaries. In Figure 10.6 the Bland-Altman plot comparing baseline and repeat
r = 0.51 (p<0.01)
FFQ, shows a smaller average difference (-2.1g/day). However, the 95% limit of
agreement was wide ranging between -20.7 to 16.4g/day.
Figure 10.4 Bland-Altman plot between FFQ-fibre and diary-fibre intake in the UKWCS (n=1870)
Mean (FFQ+Diary/2)
1 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Bland-Altman comparison of baseline FFQ-fibre and diary-fibre intake (g/day)
95% limits of agreement = -11.052 to 30.390
Mean difference: 9.669 (95%CI: 9.19, - 10.139)
Figure 10.5 Bland-Altman plot between FFQ-fibre and diary-fibre intake in the UKWCS (n=382)
Mean of two measures(FFQ+Diary/2
1 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Bland-Altman comparison of repeated FFQ-fibre and diary-fibre (g/day)
95% limits of agreement = -9.932 to 24.621
Mean difference: 7.345 (95%CI: 6.475 to 8.214)
Figure 10.6 Bland-Altman plot between FFQ-fibre and diary-fibre intake in the UKWCS (n=1918)
Mean of FFQs
1 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Bland-Altman comparison of baseline FFQ-fibre and repeated FFQ-fibre (g/day)
95% limits of agreement =-20.793 to 16.488
Mean difference: -2.153 (CI -2.570 to -1.735)
Furthermore, women were divided into 5 equal sized categories based on their
dietary fibre intake (from high to low dietary fibre intake) obtained from FFQs and
food diaries and the Kappa statistic was used to assess the extent of agreement
between dietary fibre groups. Table10.6 presents the percentages of the agreements
and Kappa values obtained for diary-fibre intakes and repeated-fibre intakes, diary-
fibre and baseline fibre intakes as well as baseline-fibre and repeated-fibre intakes.
The agreement tended to be fair between the different methods of recording dietary
fibre intakes.
The weighed Kappa value (K=0.45) between baseline-fibre and repeated-
fibre (Classified as moderate agreement by Viera and Garrett (2005)) reflects the
high repeatability of FFQ despite the average 3 years gap in completion.
On the other hand, the degrees of agreement were found to be fair between
diary-fibre and FFQ-fibre intake (with baseline-fibre, Kw= 0.25 and with repeated-
fibre, Kw=0.22). Dietary fibre density showed slight improvement in Kappa values
as well as in percentage of agreement. It has been reported that Kappa values are
affected by the number of categories (Willett, 1998). However, in the same
population, with a lesser number of dietary fibre groups (3 and 4 groups), kappa
values remained similar to values for 5 fibre groups, as shown in Table 10.6.
Table 10.6 Comparison between dietary assessment methods using Kappa and weighed
Kappa statistics
Comparisons Dietary fibre
(g/day)
Dietary fibre density
(g/100kcal/day)
Agreement K (%)
Agreement
Diary-fibre vs.
BL-FFQ-fibre
(29%)
(70%)
Slight to fair 0.16
(33%)
(74%)
Slight to fair
Diary-fibre vs.
R- FFQ-fibre
(29%)
(69%)
Slight to fair 0.15
(33%)
(73%)
Slight to fair
BL-FFQ-fibre
vs.R-FFQ-fibre
(40%)
(78%)
Fair to
moderate
(38%)
(77%)
Fair to
moderate
1kappa statistic (% women classified into same quintile), 2weighed Kappa statistics (percentage of women
classified into same or adjacent quintile), 3BL-FFQ-fibre is fibre intake from baseline FFQ, 4R-FFQ-fibre is fibre
intake from repeated FFQ
Similar findings (Table 10.6) were seen when Kappa statistic was carried out
after excluding women who changed their diet at the baseline.
One of the main aims of this chapter was to assess whether the FFQ was
reasonably able to rank women in similar groups in comparison to the reference
method (food diary). Tables 10.7, 10.8 and 10.9 showed low percentages of women
who were grossly misclassified. Baseline and repeated FFQs classified 82% and
84% of women into the same or across 2 adjacent quintiles of dietary fibre intake
and only 2% of women were misclassified into extreme quintiles in comparison with
the food diary method. Around one third of women were allocated to the same
quintile in the diary and FFQ comparisons. As expected, higher percentage of
women (40%) were correctly classified in the same quintile with the FFQ
comparisons (Table 10.10).
Table 10.7 Number of participants across dietary fibre intake quintiles obtained by food
diary and repeated FFQ
4 food diary
Lowest NSP 2
Highest NSP Total(n)
Lowest NSP 21 20 7 11 5(1.3%)
11 14 16 24 18 83
8 17 12 12 20 69
5 12 18 30 29 94
Highest NSP 3(0.7%)
13 8 17 33 74
Total (n) 48 76 61 94 105 384
1 n (%) of women who were misclassified into extreme quintiles in comparison to total number of participants
Table 10.8 Number of participants across dietary fibre intake quintiles obtained by the
baseline FFQ and food diary
4 food diary
Lowest NSP 2
Highest NSP Total(n)
Lowest NSP 115 91 60 48 20(1.1%)
84 91 83 71 46 375
66 83 83 87 56 375
46 57 71 89 109 372
Highest NSP 24(1.3%)
52 78 78 142 374
Total (n) 375 374 375 373 373 1870
1 n (%) of women who were misclassified into extreme quintiles in comparison to total number of participants
Table 10.9 Number of participants across dietary fibre intake quintiles obtained by the
baseline and repeated FFQ
Repeated FFQ
Lowest NSP 2
Highest NSP Total(n)
Lowest NSP 158 58 18 9 6(0.3%)
121 126 62 37 11 357
60 104 110 83 29 386
30 69 114 120 83 416
Highest NSP 15(0.78%)
27 78 135 254 510
Total (n) 384 284 383 384 383 1,918
2 n (%) of women who were misclassified into extreme quintiles in comparison to total number of participants
Table 10.10 Cumulative percentage agreement between diary fibre intakes derived from
FFQ at baseline and repeated, and 4 days food diary
Percentage of agreement Baseline-fibre
Repeated-fibre
Diary-fibre
Repeated-fibre
Diary-fibre
Baseline-fibre
Exact 40% 28% 29%
Within 1 adjacent quintile 80% 65% 66%
Within 2 adjacent quintile 97% 85% 84%
10.4.3Comparisons between main fibre sources and fibre fractions
obtained from baseline FFQ and food diary
Cereal, fruit, vegetables and nuts were found to be the main contributors of
dietary fibre intake in chapter 7. The main sources of fibre as well as the soluble and
insoluble fibre derived by FFQ and food diary are shown in Table 10.11. Four food
groups contributed to 95% and 94% of the total dietary fibre intake obtained by
baseline FFQs and food diaries. As demonstrated in Figure 10.7, the main food
source of diary-fibre was the cereal group, while the main fibre source of FFQ-fibre
was the vegetables group in the studied population. For all sources, dietary fibre
intake obtained from the baseline FFQ was significantly higher than diary-fibre
intake (p<0.01) as shown in Table 10.11. Fibre from vegetables and fruit showed the
second highest percentage of differences between the FFQ and diary methods (50%
and 38%) after fibre from nuts and seeds (100%). The lowest percentage of
difference was fibre from cereal (25%).
Table 10.11 Intakes of main fibre sources derived by baseline FFQ and food diary in the
UKWCS (n=1870)
Fibre source Dietary fibre intake (g/day)
FFQ baseline 4 day diary % of difference p value
Cereal fibre 7.2(6.8) 5.4(4.6) 25% <0.01
Vegetables fibre
9.8(6.0) 5.2(3.7) 50% <0.01
Fruit fibre 4.2(4.1) 2.6(2.8) 38% <0.01
Fibre from nut and seeds
0.2(0.45) 0 (0.35) 100% <0.01
Soluble dietary fibre
11.3(4.3) 6.4(2.4) 44% <0.01
Insoluble dietary fibre
17.0(7.3) 8.3(3.5) 52% <0.01
All values are geometric mean (IQR) unless stated otherwise,
Vegetables include legumes and
potatoes;
median (IQR);
mean (SD)
Figure 10.7 Percentage of the main dietary fibre intake contributors using baseline FFQ and
food diary
All correlation coefficients between fibre sources and types of fibre
estimated by food diaries and both FFQs were found to be statistically significant
(p<0.1). The highest correlations were observed between baseline FFQ and diary
methods for cereal fibre, fruit fibre and fibre from nuts and seeds while vegetable
fibre showed a weak but significant correlation between both dietary assessment
methods.
High number of missing values in the UK food composition tables for
soluble and insoluble fibre which mainly affects diary-fibre intake, while for
baseline FFQ fibre fractions were generated for missing values in the baseline FFQ
data as shown in chapter 6, therefore, further analysis of insoluble and soluble fibre
intakes between baseline FFQ and diary fibre intakes was not performed.
Table 10.12 Pearsons correlation coefficients (r) and 95%CI between total NSP, dietary
fibre fractions and fibre sources determined by baseline FFQ and food diary among 1870
women
Dietary fibre intake Correlation coefficient (95%CI) Description
Total NSP 0.36(0.32, 0.40) Moderate correlation
NSP density 0.50(0.47, 0.54) Moderate correlation
Cereal fibre
0.42(0.38, 0.46) Moderate correlation
Vegetables fibre
0.26(0.23, 0.31) Weak correlation
Fruit fibre
0.44(0.46, 0.48) Moderate correlation
Fibre from nuts
0.37(0.33, 0.41) Moderate correlation
Spearman rank correlation coefficient and 95%CI
The Kappa method was used to measure the strength of agreement for fibre
sources. For cereal fibre categories, 31% of women were classified in the same fifths
giving a Kappa of 0.14, a slight agreement. However, 71% of women were
classified in the same or adjacent fifths giving a weighed Kappa of 0.28, a fair
agreement. Similarly, fruit fibre and fibre from nuts and seeds all showed a slight
agreement in Kappa and fair agreement in weighed Kappa as illustrated in Table
10.12. But the strength of agreement for vegetable fibre remained slight with the
weighed kappa according to the interpretation provided by Landis and Koch (1977).
Table 10.13 Kappa and weighed Kappa agreement between main fibre sources groups
derived from baseline FFQ and food diary
Fibre source
Kappa Weighed Kappa
Women
K Description
Women
K Description
Cereal 31 0.14 Slight agreement 71 0.28 Fair agreement
Vegetables 26 0.08 Slight agreement 67 0.17 Slight agreement
Fruit 34 0.18 Slight agreement 72 0.31 Fair agreement
Nuts and seeds 31 0.13 Slight agreement 64 0.24 Fair agreement
1Percentage of women classified in the same quintile, 2 Percentage of women classified into the same or
adjacent quintile.
From Tables 10.13, the percentages of women classified into the same or
adjacent quintile in cereal fibre and fruit fibre were the highest. The number of
women who were allocated in the same or adjacent quintile based on vegetable fibre
intake was slightly less in comparison to groupings based on cereal and fruit. The
lowest percentage of agreement was seen when women were classified based on
intake of fibre from nuts and seeds. Two to four percent of women were grossly
misclassified into the extreme fibre quintiles in cereal, fruit and vegetables groups,
while a slightly higher percentage of misclassification in opposite categories was
observed in the nuts fibre quintiles (9%). This indicates that women who were
classified into the highest cereal, vegetables and fruit fibre quintile by the FFQ
method were more likely to be in the highest cereal, vegetables and fruit fibre
quintile by the diary method. However for nuts, it seems that infrequent
consumption of nuts by women results in relatively lower percentages of women
allocated in the same and adjacent quintiles.
Table 10.14 Cumulative percentage of agreement in intake from main fibre sources between
baseline FFQ and food diary
Percentage of agreement Cereal fibre Vegetables fibre Fruit fibre Fibre from nuts
and seeds
Exact 32% 27% 35% 27%
Within 1 adjacent quintile 68% 62% 69% 55%
Within 2 adjacent quintile 89% 84% 89% 74%
Grossly misclassified 3% 4% 2% 9%
From the above observations, the weak agreement between FFQ-fibre and
diary-fibre from vegetables may be attributed to the great difference in estimating
vegetables intake by FFQ. Women were split into two main categories based on self-
reported vegetarian status at the baseline. The aim was to assess whether the degree
of agreement between dietary fibre measured by different methods will differ among
vegetarians and non-vegetarians. Table 10.15 shows that higher weighed Kappa
values were calculated among non-vegetarians in comparison to vegetarians as well
as correlations between different dietary methods being slightly stronger among
non-vegetarians than vegetarians, however women allocated in the opposite quintile
were relatively similar.
Table 10.15 Degree of agreement and Pearsons correlations between different dietary
methods in the UKWCS
Vegetarian
status
Dietary
methods
Dietary fibre intake
(g/day)
Dietary fibre intake
(g/1000kcal/day)
Vegetarian
BL-FFQ
vs. Diary
(29%)
(70%)
(563)
(34%)
(75%)
(563)
R-FFQ
vs. Diary
(28%)
(69%)
(194)
(36%)
(73%)
(194)
7 0.21
(37%)
(77%)
(968)
(38%)
(77%)
(968)
vegetarian
BL-FFQ
vs. Diary
(29%)
(70%)
(1307)
(33%)
(74%)
(1307)
R-FFQ
vs. Diary
(29%)
(69%)
(188)
(29%)
(73%)
(188)
7 0.28
(42%)
(79%)
(950)
(38%)
(77%)
(950)
1Kappa value (% of agreement) 2 weighed Kappa value (% of agreement) 3Gross-misclassification 4correlation
coefficient (no of participants) 5baseline FFQ-fibre 6repeated FFQ-fibre 7baseline and repeated FFQs
10.5 Discussion
A significant overestimation of dietary fibre intake by the FFQ method in
comparison to the food diary method was observed. This is supported by previous
studies which reported higher dietary fibre intake by FFQ in comparison to other
dietary methods such as diet history and weighed records (Grootenhuis et al., 1995,
Bingham et al., 1994). Bingham et al. (1994) suggested that for many nutrients this
was attributed to inappropriate frequency, rather than portion size selection by the
researchers. Comparisons between dietary fibre intakes derived from different
dietary methods provided useful information on the ability of an FFQ to rank
subjects based on their dietary fibre intake in comparison to the reference method.
The observed overestimated dietary fibre intakes in FFQs in comparison to food
diaries suggest the presence of systematic bias in reporting of dietary fibre intake in
questionnaires in relation to food diaries. However the FFQ is still the best approach
for prospective studies especially with large sample sizes (Cade et al., 2004b); this is
because of several advantages of the FFQ. For example, the FFQ is cheap, less time
consuming and easy to process which leads to superior preference over inviting
participants to record their dietary intake in detail in a more accurate way. No
dietary assessment method is without limitations. However, the food record is an
appropriate method to be a reference method (Cade et al., 2004b) to assess FFQ
validity because its bias is largely independent of the FFQ method.
10.5.1Correlations and differences in NSP intake obtained from two
dietary assessment methods
In this analysis, the overall correlation between repeated dietary assessment
methods usually ranged between 0.5 to 0.7 as reported previously (Cade et al., 2002).
Similarly the current study showed a correlation coefficient of 0.62 between the
baseline FFQ and repeated FFQ. The energy adjusted correlation between diary-
fibre and baseline-fibre was similar to the diary-fibre and repeated-fibre correlation
which was also within the expected range. Similar to current results, a preliminary
validation study showed other nutrient intakes (carbohydrates, protein, fat, calcium,
iron, vitamin A and vitamin C) recorded in food diaries in the UKWCS have higher
correlations with the repeated FFQ than baseline FFQ (Spence et al., 2002). This
may relate to the shorter time interval between repeat FFQ and food diary in
comparison to baseline FFQ and diary.
A small mean difference between baseline FFQs and repeated FFQs was seen
(2g/day). This may be explained by either under-estimation or a true change in diet
over time (3.1 years period). In the current chapter, participants reported higher
dietary fibre intake from the baseline FFQ (mean difference of 36%) and from the
repeated FFQ (mean difference of 28%) in comparison to the food diary. Low mean
difference (3g/day) was reported in a previous study when FFQs were compared to
diet history(Grootenhuis et al., 1995). This may relate to a shorter time period
between the two methods (4 weeks interval) however, it may not be ideal to
compare with the current study because of different reference method used. Another
validation study showed a higher relative difference between NSP intake measured
by FFQ and weighed records (53%) among women aged between 19-58 years
(Masson et al., 2003). Also, an overestimation of NSP intake in FFQ was reported
by Bingham et al. (1994) in comparison to weighed records among British women
aged between 50-65 years.
In general, the overestimation of nutrient intakes reported by Bingham et al.
(1994) was thought more likely due to selection of higher frequency categories in
Cambridge FFQ in compared to weighed records. In particular, mean intake of
vegetables was higher in Cambridge FFQ than 7 days diary and 16 days weighted
records (386g/day vs. 246g/day and 272g/d respectively). The portion sizes in the
Cambridge FFQ were obtained from the weighed records. This reflects that
overestimation may relate to the higher frequency of vegetable consumption rather
than portion size. On the other hand, mean vegetable intakes reported by the Oxford
FFQ was 406g/day which is almost double the amount reported by 7 days dairy
(246g/day). The portion sizes in the Oxford FFQ were obtained from an average of
several resources (dietary surveys and Crawley 1988) and reported portions were
larger than Cambridge FFQ. This suggests the influence of the frequency of
consumption and portion size on estimated highest vegetable consumption in Oxford
FFQ in compared to food diary.
In the UKWCS, the vegetable intake was on average 334 g/day by baseline
FFQ and 218 (115) g/day by diaries. This indicates that vegetable intake was
overestimated by 35% in baseline FFQ compared to diaries among UKWCS while
overestimation in Oxford FFQ was 40% and 30% in Cambridge FFQ compared to
diaries. Consumption of fruit was on average 307g/day from FFQ and 228 g/day
from diaries in the UKWCS. Overestimation of fruit consumption among women in
the UKWCS was higher by 25% in FFQ than diaries. While estimated fruit
consumption by Oxford FFQ (average = 219g/day) higher by 9% and by Cambridge
FFQ ( average = 231g/day) by 6% than diaries (average = 198g/day).
Compared to weighed records (274g/day), the Oxford FFQ underestimated
cereal consumption (199 g/day), while 7 days diary overestimated cereal
consumption (246 g/day) significantly. However, comparing cereal consumption
reported by food diary, the Oxford FFQ underestimated cereal consumption while
Cambridge FFQ reported almost similar cereal consumption. This may suggest that
portion size may have a greater impact rather than frequency of consumption in
estimated cereal intake. The frequency of consumption and portion size are
important factors relate to the overestimation in the FFQs.
10.5.2 Agreement between NSP intakes derived from food diaries and
The 95% limits of agreement of fibre intake illustrated by Bland-Altman plots
were wide (-11.1 to 30.3g/day between baseline FFQ-fibre and diary-fibre; and -9.9
to 24.6 g/day between repeated FFQ-fibre and diary-fibre). It may suggest that the
observed differences in NSP measurements may relate to the food composition
tables used for analysis. For example, some loss of vegetable fibres in food diaries
may be due to non-inclusion of mixed dishes, containing vegetables in vegetable
group in the food tables used to analyse the diaries and there are relatively few
vegetables dishes in the FFQ. An earlier study reported a mean difference of 0.07g
when dietary fibre intake was determined by questionnaire and dietary history, 4
weeks apart for healthy women and men (Cantwell et al., 2005) however this study
was not intended to assess dietary fibre intake and no further details on the FFQ
used was provided. The high mean difference from the current chapter may partly
relate to the longer time interval between the two dietary fibre assessment methods
(more than a year).
A perfect agreement should not be expected between any two different dietary
assessment methods such as between diary and FFQ due to the impact of several
factors. Measurement errors may occur with each method as the diary method may
not represent the long term dietary intake. Other factors such as the effect of a time
gap between completed FFQs and food diaries and within-individual variations
should also be considered.
The agreement between diary-fibre is similar with baseline-fibre and repeated-
fibre even though the average time gap between baseline and diary was 4.8 years
while the time gap between diary-fibre and repeated FFQ-fibre was 1.6 years. This
may reflect that the time gaps in the studied population may have a minor role
especially as the studied population included a high proportions of vegetarians
which have previously been shown to have a more stable diet (Greenwood et al.,
2003).
In the current chapter, after excluding women who reported a change in diet at
baseline, the association between diary-fibre and FFQ-fibre did not alter. This may
be explained by high missing answers and when women who answered this question
are compared, it can be seen that there is no great difference in the dietary fibre
intake between women who reported yes or no to the diet change question and this
may not have substantially affected the overall dietary intakes.
10.5.3Classification of women based on their NSP intakes obtained
from diaries and FFQs
The high percentage of women who were similarly classified by the FFQ in
comparison to the food diary (as reference method) and the low percentage of
women who were misclassified in the current study were supported by previous
studies (Brunner et al., 2001, Grootenhuis et al., 1995). In the Whitehall II
longitudinal study of British men and women, 32-44% of women were classified in
the same categories and gross misclassification was only 3% (Brunner et al., 2001).
In another validation study between fibre estimated by FFQ and dietary history
reported among the elderly, more than half of participants were in the same dietary
fibre category and only 2.7% were classified into the opposite group (Grootenhuis et
al., 1995). This may indicate the acceptable ranking of UKWCS participants with
dietary fibre intake obtained by FFQs which may mean that women were allocated
into same or adjacent quintiles by different method and a valid risk estimate was
more likely to be obtained.
Misclassification of women was reported previously and it was found that in
comparison to weighed records, the percentage of women who were misclassified
into extreme groups was less or equal to 10% for most nutrients intakes (Bingham et
al., 1994). In particular, 1-6% of women were misclassified into extreme dietary
NSP intake when comparisons were made between FFQs and 7 days food diaries
(Bingham et al., 1994). In addition, 39% and 51% of women were allocated to the
same quartile using the FFQ method and 7 days diary method respectively in
comparison to 16 days weighed record method.
Ward et al. (2011) reported an inconsistency in associations between
dietary fibre and coronary heart disease in the prospective EPIC-Norfolk study,
which was possibly due to the use of different dietary assessment methods to derive
dietary fibre intake. In an age adjusted logistic model, the risk of CHD was
significantly associated with dietary fibre intake derived from the 7 days diary
method but not with dietary fibre intake derived from FFQs among men.
Furthermore, there was an argument by Bingham and Day (2006) on the great
impact of measurement errors related to the use of FFQ in estimating dietary intake
which may explain the non-significant findings in risk estimates of breast cancer
with fat intake.
Food diaries provide detail of dietary data including portions eaten which
minimize errors from the researcher estimating portion size while FFQ are
potentially subjected to bias related to portion size. On the other hand, diaries reflect
a shorter period of time in comparison to FFQs which measure long term diet and
diary may also fail to consider seasonal variation (Willett, 2012).
10.5.4 Main fibre sources: Contributions, correlations and agreements
between food diaries and baseline FFQs
Cereal, vegetables, fruit and nuts were the main fibre contributors in both
dietary assessment methods (baseline FFQ and food diary). These findings are in
line with Bingham et al study who also reported similar NSP contributors of by FFQ,
food diary and 24 hours recall methods.
However the percentage of fibre attributed to vegetables was higher using
FFQs than food diaries and the percentage of fibre attributed to cereal was higher
using food diaries than FFQs. This may reflect the overestimation of vegetables by
FFQs as vegetable portion size consumed cannot be determined accurately or due to
multiple vegetable items on the list, encouraging women to over-report consumption.
However, cereal foods may be easier to count in frequency, and portion sizes are
usually easier to predict than vegetables which may explain the poor correlations
between FFQs and diaries in estimating vegetable fibre in relation to cereal fibre.
The majority of fibre sources showed moderate correlations when estimated
by FFQ and diary methods. Fair agreements were seen between FFQ and diary
methods for all fibre sources. The percentages of women who were classified into
the same or adjacent categories based on fibre sources were higher in cereal, fruit
and vegetables fibre based groupings than nuts. On the other hand, the percentage of
women who were misclassified into extreme groups based on cereal, vegetables and
fruit did not exceed 4% but reached 9% in fibre from nuts and seeds. This may be
because some women who reported nut intake in FFQs did not record the same in
the diaries possibly due to infrequent consumption. This resulted in a high number
of women allocated in the lowest quintile by the diary method which led to high
misclassification.
The comparisons between FFQs and food diaries were carried out on a
subsample of the UKWCS, so that only 5% of the initial population and 15% of
diary-completers were used. Hence, the average data reported may not represent the
true mean dietary fibre intake. However, the aim of this chapter is to assess whether
FFQ able to rank women by fibre intake.
A recent nested case-control study, using seven UK cohort studies, including
UKWCS data, reported inverse association between dietary fibre intake obtained
from food diaries and risk of colorectal cancer (OR=0.61; 95%CI: 0.42, 0.90) but
non-significant association between dietary fibre intake obtained from FFQ and risk
of colorectal cancer (OR= 0.88; 95%CI: 0.56, 1.38) comparing extreme quintiles
(Dahm et al., 2010). The findings in the current chapter show fair agreement
between baseline FFQs and food diaries. This may partly explain the non-significant
association between dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM in chapter 8.
Future comparison studies to explore the relationship between physiological
measurement and estimated dietary fibre intake are required. Faecal weight
measurement has been suggested as a potential marker of dietary fibre intake (Bates
et al., 1997). This is because of the positive linear relationship between faecal
weight and dietary fibre consumption (one gram of pectin intake, increases stool
output by 1.3g and intake from fibre-rich sources such as fruit, vegetables and bran
increases the stool output by 4.9 - 5.7 g/day) which was reported in a previous
comprehensive review by Cummings (2001). However, to obtain a valid estimation,
it has been suggested researchers should measure the faecal weight for at least 5
days for each subject due to wide day to day variation. Biological variation in term
of transit time, stool size, frequency and weight were other factors suggested to have
a role in the relationship between dietary fibre intake and faecal weight
measurement (Bates et al., 1997).
10.6 Conclusion
Studies investigating whether diet in terms of nutrient intakes has an effect on
disease risk require a large number of participants, which had led to the use of more
feasible dietary assessment method (FFQ). FFQ is the most convenient dietary
method that usually provides habitual dietary intakes over a long period of time in
prospective studies, whereas the food diary method requires great resources such as
funds, time and trained staff. It is important to know the relationship between what
is measured and what is expected to be the best measure that is closest to the truth,
even though no measure of diet is without error. Measurement error related to the
dietary assessment tool used is more of a concern as prospective evidence showed
differences in the risk estimate when dietary fibre intake obtained from food diary
and FFQ. The results of this investigation show large difference between diary-fibre
and FFQ-fibre with fair agreement. In general, therefore, it seems that non-
significant association between incidence of T2DM and intake of dietary fibre in the
UKWCS may more likely to be differ when dietary fibre obtained from diaries. The
present findings provide additional evidence with respect to lower level of
agreement for vegetable fibre which supported by improvement in the degree of
agreement among non-vegetarians population compared with vegetarians. These
findings provide a potential future research to explore validity of FFQ-fibre intake
using bowel habits data from the UKWCS.
Chapter 11: Final discussion
Most studies in the field of dietary fibre have focussed on either dietary fibre
analysis or dietary fibre intake in relation to diseases; this thesis for the first time
explored the analytical aspect of dietary fibre in food, particularly legumes, and then
focused on the epidemiological aspects of dietary fibre through analyses of the
UKWCS data. Working with dietary data, particularly dietary fibre intake demands
knowledge of the analytical methodology and definition. Chapter 5 dealt with
dietary fibre analysis in legumes commonly consumed in the UK using the
Association of Official Analytical Chemists (AOAC) analytical method. The
findings in chapter 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 were obtained from analyses of the UKWCS
data. The UKWCS is one of the largest population-based prospective studies in the
UK that was designed to assess relationships between diet and chronic disease. The
majority of the analyses on the UKWCS data presented in this thesis has not been
done before.
This thesis contributes to the evidence base on the relationship between dietary
fibre intake and risk of T2DM in middle-aged women by examining the risk of
T2DM in UKWCS participants in relation to:
 Intake of total dietary fibre obtained from existing NSP values and added data
that were obtained to estimate AOAC-fibre intake in the UKWCS.
 Key sources and types (insoluble and soluble) fibre
For the first time, chapter 9 examined the relationship between legume
consumption and risk of T2DM in the UKWCS which contribute to the evidence
base on the association between legume intake and risk of T2DM. Chapter 10
provided an opportunity for determine the degree of agreement between FFQ-fibre
intake and diary-fibre intake as a way to explore potential bias related to dietary
assessment method (FFQ).
11.1 Dietary fibre analysis
The results indicate that AOAC-fibre values are dependent on the cooking
method as the results showed that AOAC-fibre content for canned legumes were
significantly lower by 31% compared to AOAC-fibre content in boiled legumes.
Additionally, the determined ratio of 1:1.43 for AOAC-fibre: NSP could be used as
a tool for NSP to AAOC-fibre approximation for the legume group in future studies.
The variation in dietary fibre analysis methods as demonstrated in chapter 5 gives an
example of some challenges focused by epidemiologists as described recently
(Westenbrink et al., 2013). Therefore, a new way of investigation was undertaken in
the second part of this thesis, which focused on examining the relationship between
the two analytical methods in estimating dietary fibre in the UKWCS with a view to
facilitate analyses of the relationship between dietary fibre intake and the risk of
T2DM. This provides a good example of the impact of applying dietary fibre values
obtained from different dietary fibre analytical methods on the relationship between
dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM using a large population based prospective
study.
11.2 Impact of dietary fibre measurement methods on prospective
study
The impact of dietary fibre analysis on estimated dietary fibre intake was of
concern especially for epidemiologists interested in ecological studies. Therefore,
chapter 7 added new prospective evidence focused on the correlation and degree of
agreement between the AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes based on categorization and
characteristics of women as well as the main fibre contributors.
As expected, AOAC-fibre intake was significantly higher than the NSP
intake by an average of one third. The strong agreement between the two fibre
analysis methods shows that the majority of the cohort women were located in the
same fibre group, irrespective of the analytical fibre method used. None of the
participants was grossly misclassified. With each 1g/day increment in the NSP
intake, the AOAC-fibre intake increased by 1.43g/day. This is slightly higher than a
previously published ratio of 1.3, which may relate to higher number of food items
in the current data. One-third of the AOAC-fibre and one third of NSP intakes were
from cereals and cereal products, while two-thirds came from fruits and vegetables,
including legumes and potatoes.
Women in the highest fibre categories were most likely to be older, active,
have a low BMI, to be vegetarians, educated and non-smokers irrespective of the
analytical method used. This is in line with other previous studies (Schulze et al.,
2007, Montonen et al., 2003, Stevens et al., 2002, Meyer et al., 2000, Weng et al.,
2012). Generally, the lifestyle characteristics of studied cohort women were
following the UK recommendations.
The main findings in chapter 7 showed that for carrying out a meta-analysis
that compares risk of disease between extreme quintiles of dietary fibre intake, the
laboratory method of fibre analysis used has a minimal role. High fibre consumers
will be classified as such irrespective of the fibre method applied. However, for a
dose-response meta-analysis, combined risk estimates using different fibre analysis
methods would be unacceptable because of significant variation in the amount of
dietary fibre consumed.
A new dietary fibre AOAC method was carried recently by McCleary et al.
(2010). However, the future concern regards the complexity in applying the latest
AOAC fibre analysis method, which now includes a greater level of resistant starch
and non-digestible oligosaccharides which would have created theoretically major
differences in categorization of the women into fibre intake quintiles. This method
will add greater financial and labour burdens from re-analysing all food in the food
composition data across countries, aiming to improve and standardize the nutrients
databank and facilitate future comparisons between studies.
One source of weakness in the obtained AOAC-fibre values which could
affect the measurements of dietary fibre intake relate to lack of AOAC-fibre values
in the UK food composition tables. Half of the matched food items were obtained
from the USDA nutrient database. This may have affected the accuracy with which
food items were identified. Even then, the results showed a strong agreement
between the two analytical methods.
The findings of UKWCS analyses showed neither AOAC-fibre, or NSP
intakes were significantly associated with T2DM incidence. This is in the line with
previous studies (Hopping et al., 2010, Schulze et al., 2004a) and with the current
meta-analysis in chapter 4. Only high cereal fibre intake (5g/day equivalent to 2
slices of wholemeal bread) was associated with a reduced risk of T2DM (14%) over
an average period of 4.1 years independent of age.
Since 1999, the Food Standard Agency in UK recommended the use of
AOAC-fibre values for food labelling purposes and this may add a concern as no
clear link between the food label and the guideline (Food Standards Agency, 2002).
The use of AOAC method to measure dietary fibre content in food products partly
aim to be in line with majority of the countries. This may derives to consider
updating UK food composition database and dietary fibre recommendation.
Additionally, the new AOAC (2009.01) method include greater amount of dietary
fibre components (resistant starch and resistant oligosaccharides) in their values
(McCleary, 2007). Resistant starch is considerably affected by different influential
factors that may contribute to a variation in the nutrient content. Whether to include
dietary fibre values measured by AOAC method or to have a new column in the
table with values for other than NSP content is possible.
11.3 Dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM
The main advantages of the UKWCS data are that their prospective nature
limited recall bias and the wide range of dietary pattern provided an opportunity to
examine disease risk. T2DM is a chronic disease characterized by slow, gradual
progression from normal glucose levels to persistent hyperglycaemia. This process
is mainly due to insulin action dysfunction. Critically, findings from the literature
review were inconclusive regarding the effect of carbohydrate intake on the risk of
T2DM. This was partly because of the complexity in determining nutrient intake.
The association was more relate to nature of the food (liquid vs. solid) and to
digestible carbohydrate content (whether it is low or high GI food) rather than total
intake.
In relation to the risk of T2DM, results of the comprehensive cohort review
(Chapter 4) showed no overall effect of diets high in fibre intake on the risk of
T2DM comparing extreme quintiles. Gender, follow-up duration and possibly study
origin were some of the potential sources of heterogeneity. Only people with the
highest cereal fibre intake experienced an 25% risk reduction in T2DM in
comparison to the lowest consumers in addition to significant dose-response
relationship (combined risk =0.96; 95%CI: 0.93, 0.99). Recently, it was suggested
that aleurone cell walls present in cereal food which are rich in phenolic acids but
not present in fruit fibre may be the active compound and may be one of the
plausible mechanisms that might explain the strong association between cereal fibre
and the risk of T2DM (S. Lillioja et al. 2013).
Specifically, insoluble fibre intake was significantly associated with a
reduction in the risk of T2DM but not with SDF intake. The lack of association
between non-cereal fibre sources and the risk of T2DM may suggest that specific
fibre types/sources are more or less effective in terms of influencing diabetes status
markers. However, other bioactive compounds may be of more benefit than dietary
fibre in health conscious women. This potential hypothesis was derived after the
results presented in chapter 9 which showed evidence of a preventive effect with a
greater consumption of dried legumes. Women who consumed at least a half portion
per day of dried legumes had a 15% risk reduction independent of known risk
factors of diabetes in comparison to women who consumed less than a quarter
portion per day. This is in line with other studies (E. Feskens, Bowles, C.H. and
Kromhout, D. 1991; R. Villegas et al. 2008). D. Jenkins et al. (1983) demonstrated a
significant reduction of postprandial glucose concentrations after legumes
consumption in comparison to cereal food among diabetic participants and this may
possibly be attributed to specific properties of legumes such as a high content of
viscous soluble dietary fibre and high amounts of slow digestible starch (U.
Lehmann and Robin, F. 2007), C-type of legume starch structure (K.S. Sandhu and
Lim, S.T. 2008) and polyphenol content (L. Thompson et al. 1984) may explain the
protective effect of legumes
The lack of associations between dietary fibre intake, fibre from main food
sources and fibre fraction with the risk of T2DM independent of potential
confounders may have to several explanations. Generally, women in the UKWCS
were quite health conscious as baseline recruitment aimed for one third of the
studied population to be vegetarian, thus it was expected that they would exhibit
healthy dietary patterns. From the review in chapter 4, evidence suggested that
dietary fibre intake could be an indicator of healthy characteristics. For example
women who were non-smokers, vegetarians, had low BMI and were more physically
active were more likely to be in a high fibre quintile group as demonstrated in
chapter 4 and 7. These health conscious characteristics were also seen when analysis
was carried out in chapter 10 for dietary fibre estimated from food diaries. From
food diaries, NSP intake on average was found to be 17.3 (6.3) g/day. This may
suggests that those women probably consumed enough dietary fibre to protect them
from diabetes or may be that voluntary participants tend to be healthier so it may
take them longer to develop diabetes which refereed to health worker effect. But this
does not exclude the other beneficial effects of dietary fibre per se.
A broader picture on prospective evidence that focused on the relationship
between dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM was examined. The final conclusion
from pooled analysis in chapter 8 remained as non-significant association between
the risk of T2DM in people with high fibre intake. Additionally, a lack of
association between dietary fibre intake and the risk of T2DM was found in pooled
cohorts reported a dose-response relationship.
Lack of significant associations of dietary fibre intake on the risk of T2DM in
the UKWCS does not rule out other beneficial effect of diet in particular, fibre
intake in the studied population. The hypothesis-oriented approach for dietary
pattern generated by Ashton et al. (2013) referred to as the T2DM prevention index
score was examined in relation to the risk of T2DM. The main results showed a
healthy dietary pattern including high intakes of fruit, vegetables, wholegrain,
legumes and nuts with a low intake of meat, sugar, alcohol and poultry, was
associated with significant decreased risk of T2DM in the UKWCS. Another
analysis carried out by Alrefaai et al. (2013) showed the odds of being constipated
after an average of 4 years was significantly reduced (12%-16%) among women in
the highest dietary fibre quintile in comparison to women in the lowest dietary fibre
quintile independent of potential confounders.
The findings in chapter 8 were not meant to represent the UK population but
generally the UKWCS was meant to include participants with a wide range of
dietary exposures to help in studying the relationship between diet and disease. A
previously generated variable (Taylor et al., 2007) was used in the logistic
regression analysis where the large proportion of vegetarians in the UKWCS was
considered in the analysis to show results representative to UK population however,
the non-significant association between total dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM
remained the same. Also this variable was used in chapter 9 and the results showed
lack of associations between legume intake (total, fresh legume and dried) and risk
of T2DM.
Despite the wide variation in dietary fibre intake across the UKWCS
participants, the women were well-nourished, this means that there may be an
inadequate number of women with very low dietary fibre intake (only 3% from the
total population of women consumed less than 18g/day of NSP) to show a decreased
risk of T2DM in such women.
Another possible explanation of no significant effect is may be due to type II
errors which occur once the null hypothesis fails to be rejected and the result likely
to be a false negative. Type II errors can be minimized by increasing the power and
increasing the precision of dietary measurement (Kirkwood and Sterne 2003). The
small number of self-reported diabetes cases may be attributed to under reporting
due to undiagnosed diabetes cases that were misclassified in the diabetes free group.
Identifying new cases and undergoing the confirmation process could have been
undertaken by contacting local GPs in subsample if time and money had been
available. The small number of cases may also be attributed to the small percentage
of minority ethnic groups in the UKWCS who are more vulnerable to T2DM than
the white population.
Additionally women who are believed to have healthier lifestyle probably are
more likely to be screened in medical clinics. This may result in underestimating the
number of women with diabetes who also voluntarily participate in a study this
called health worker effect (Li and Sung, 1999). Another potential bias may be due
to the lack of diet monitoring over the studied period which leaves the possibility of
true change or fluctuation in the dietary pattern that may also affect the risk of
T2DM in the studied population. However, the moderate stability of dietary pattern
reported in a subsample from the UKWCS (Greenwood et al., 2003) may lessen the
possibility of great influence of dietary changes over time.
The possibility of residual confounders also may hide the true association
between dietary fibre intake and the risk of T2DM. The effect of dietary fibre on the
T2DM incidence was also subject to measurement errors related to the FFQ.
However, the wide variation in the dietary exposure is one of the advantages of the
UKWCS population. How much weight women gained may have a greater impact
on the risk of T2DM, where the dietary fibre effect size is relatively small. The
massive over riding relationship between obesity and T2DM may hide the effect of
dietary fibre on the risk of T2DM.
Multiple testing is one of the limitations that can lead to the production of
false significant associations due to chance (Bland and Altman, 1995). The
suggested solution for this problem is to lower the significance level (P-value) for in
the subgroup analyses. However, if an assumption was made to test the main
exposure of interest which is the total dietary fibre intake in relation to T2DM, and
other analyses explored type of fibre and source of fibre, then this possibly may not
refer to multiple testing.
Incompleteness of data because of either loss of follow up or death of
participants or both were suggested difficulties in identifying incidence of disease in
cohort studies (Kelsey, 1996). From the baseline, only 40% of women completed
phase II. In general, despite the large number of drop outs, there was a considerable
number of participants who completed phase II because of the large number
recruited at baseline. However, this did not help in identifying a large number of
diabetic cases. High number of women left the question of diabetes diagnosis blank
(1,081 (8% of total women 14,172) of women missed the question in phase II and
19% (207) of them missed the question at baseline and phase II) which also could
affect the final number of incident of diabetes included in chapter 8 and 9 analyses.
Sample size calculations should be performed prior to data collection, as type I
and type II errors can happen when statistical tests are performed to examine the null
hypothesis (Kirkwood and Sterne, 2003). Data processing bias such as coding errors,
data entry and calculating mistakes are factors which can affect the precision of the
measured variable. However, the UKWCS data entry was validated through double
data entry by separate professional staff.
As discussed in chapter 2, the lack of a national registry for diabetes in the UK
may restrict the availability of data on the new onset of diabetes. In the UK,
diagnosis of diabetes is usually carried out by the local general practitioner (GP). In
the UKWCS, a large number of women completed phase II, thus tracing participants
through contacting the local GP is impossible and impractical for single researcher.
One of the main strengths of this study is that recall bias is not of great
concern in prospective studies as dietary data is collected before the onset of the
disease.
Another important finding in this thesis was the fair agreement between
dietary FFQ-fibre intake and diary-fibre intake. This is may be due to a poor
agreement of fibre intake from vegetable and nuts which was demonstrated in
chapter 10. Measurement bias related to the use of FFQs was suggested as a
potential source of heterogeneity in the meta-analysis and possible explanation of
non-significant findings between total dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM in
chapter 8. The validation study in chapter 10 showed weak correlation and low
agreement between vegetable fibre intake obtained by baseline FFQs and diaries. In
addition, the overestimation of vegetable fibre was high with a mean difference of
50% when comparing FFQs to diaries. This indicates relatively low validity of FFQ
particularly for vegetable intake.
11.4 Impact of dietary fibre assessment methods in prospective
study
The findings from chapter 10 showed fair agreement between FFQ-fibre and
diary-fibre intakes with a very small number of women were grossly misclassified
which is similar to previous studies. It can be appreciated that FFQ reasonably rank
women as it should be when compared with reference method (Food diary) and FFQ
still remain the most convenient method to study large population. However further
modifications in the FFQ may help in improving level of accuracy of the method.
The main fibre source by diary was the cereal group, while the main fibre
source by FFQ was the vegetables group. The highest difference between FFQ-fibre
and diary-fibre was observed in nuts and vegetables (100% and 50% respectively).
This may be attributed to infrequent nuts consumption which was shown by having
zero nut intakes in diaries. Further analysis showed that vegetable fibre intakes
estimated by diaries and FFQs were in poor agreement which could be attributed to
over reporting in the FFQ. As slight improvement in the agreement between FFQ-
fibre and diary-fibre was observed when the agreement was determined among non-
vegetarians only.
The lack of association between fibre sources such as vegetable fibre and fruit
fibre and legumes in prospective studies may be due to poor dietary assessment
method applied (FFQ). An earlier study by Jenkins et al. (1977) reported that intake
of pectin reduced post-prandial glucose response significantly. So there is conflict in
the results from epidemiological and experimental studies. The strong evidence on
the protective effect of cereal fibre in cohort studies could be because cereal fibre is
easier to measure than fruit and vegetables by dietary assessment methods (mostly
FFQ). It could also be that participants can provide intake of cereal food more
accurately with respect to the portion consumed than fruit and vegetable
consumption. In the UKWCS, women consumed a high amount of vegetables, but
still no effect was found on the risk of T2DM which may be due to poor dietary
vegetable fibre estimation. Or it may be that there is no effect of dietary vegetable
fibre on low risk people who already consume high level of fibre.
Weak correlations and agreement between the FFQ and diary methods may
relate to vegetable fibre which was largely overestimated by FFQs and this can
possibly be attributed to the high proportion of vegetarians in the studied population.
This may suggested that the findings in chapter 8 regarding the non-significant
effect of dietary fibre on the risk of T2DM may remain the same with estimated
dietary fibre obtain from food diary.
Whilst discussion of the ratio of AOAC-fibre: NSP may seem rather academic,
there is some evidence that research groups are employing ratios to convert between
fibre methods. For example, Parkin (2011) estimated the attributable proportion of
colorectal cancer of 12.2% that could be prevented by increasing NSP intake to
18g/day. This was based on the effect estimated by Dahm et al. (2010): a relative
risk = 0.84 (0.71 to 1.00) and the WCRF relative risk of 0.9 per 10g/day increment
in dietary fibre. Calculated equivalent was reported as a reduction in risk of 2.9%
per 1g of fibre. A measure of 18g/day of NSP was assumed to be equivalent to
23g/day, of total fibre which was made based on an ambiguous ratio of 1:1.28
(AOAC-fibre: NSP). It was unclear how the authors had arrived at this value. This
reflects the importance of the ratio used to convert NSP values into AOAC-fibre
values for further calculations in epidemiological studies.
11.5 Future research
11.5.1Laboratory future research
The AOAC method has been modified several times, the latest modification
labelled as 2009.01 (McCleary et al., 2010), which combines AOAC 895.29 (Prosky
et al., 1985) measured fibre value and low molecular weight dietary fibre value
(resistant starch and non-digestible oligosaccharides) to meet the approved
definition by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (2008). Further experimental
investigations are needed to compare and assess the variation in the dietary fibre
values in a range of foods that are commonly consumed in the UK particularly those
foods which have high amounts of resistant starch and non-digestible
oligosaccharides such as legumes using the new AOAC method (2009.01), classical
AOAC (985.29) and Englyst method. The findings in chapter 5 provide insights for
future research in Kuwait. Dietary fibre values were obtained by the AOAC method
for 32 Kuwaiti dishes in a previous study (Dashti et al., 2003). However, a wider
range of traditional food requires dietary fibre measurement and re-analysis of
common Kuwaiti dishes using the new method will provide fibre values that can be
used for future epidemiological studies in Kuwait (my country of origin). Also,
incorporating new dietary fibre values into national food composition data will be an
interesting area of research in the future.
The findings in chapter 5 suggest that the AOAC-fibre: NSP ratio is dependent
on the cooking method. This means that the boiled legume ratio may be more
suitable for studies which focus on minority ethnic groups in the UK (Church et al.,
2006) where boiled legumes are mostly consumed, compared to the rest of the UK
general population which is more likely to consume canned legumes (Schneider,
2002). It is useful to understand the importance of the impact of cooking methods on
dietary fibre analysis as the AOAC procedure is dependent on these. The
preliminary analysis of legumes may raise an interest on whether a ratio between the
two analytical methods is an appropriate tool for epidemiological studies. However,
more research on the AOAC-fibre: NSP ratio derived from a wide range of food
items needs to be undertaken to explore the association between AOAC-fibre and
NSP more clearly.
11.5.2Epidemiological future research
11.5.2.1 UKWCS future research
The validation study from chapter 10 provides useful data to be incorporated
into the regression calibration method which can correct for nutrient-based
measurement error as suggested by Rosner and Gore (2001). The regression
calibration approach is commonly used to predict nutrient record intake as a function
of FFQ intake and to model the risk of disease with the predicted values obtained
aiming for a corrected risk estimate. It would be interesting to examine whether risk
estimates differ after applying the regression calibration approach.
Stratified analyses of the data used for chapter 10 could be undertaken in the
future to assess the impact of different lifestyle factors on the agreement between
FFQ-fibre and diary-fibre intake.
Initially when the cohorts were conceived in early 1990s, individual ethical
approval was obtained from 174 local ethic committees in the UK because there was
no central system. Women who completed the baseline questionnaire and provided
accurate NHS or GP information could be traced to identify more diabetes events in
the UKWCS after obtaining another ethical approval as individual consent from
participants is impractical. The potential of two datasets referred to as the UK
General Practice Research Database (GPRD) (Walley and Mantgani, 1997) and
Health Improvement Network (THIN) (Ruigmez et al., 2010) can be explored and
used to link diabetes events. These databases provide medical information for
chronic disease for research purposes.
Future meta-analysis aiming for dose-response relationship between dietary
fibre intake and the risk of T2DM, can provide more robust evidence for dietary
guidelines aiming for primary prevention of T2DM.
11.5.2.2 Other future research
More broadly, research is needed to determine the effect of dietary fibre intake
on the risk of T2DM among young populations. Since evidence shows that T2DM is
diagnosed at a younger age (Rosenbloom et al., 1999), then cohort studies in young
populations with a long follow up period could be useful in examining the early
dietary fibre intake in relation to pre-diabetes and diabetes in later life. This will
help in assessing the temporal relation if repeated dietary measurement over time is
considered.
Recently, a high prevalence of diabetes (21%) in Kuwait (20-79 years) was
reported in a 2011 International Diabetes Federation report (Whiting et al., 2011).
This indicates the huge future economic and health impact of diabetes. One of the
main objectives of the department of Food Science and Nutrition in the Ministry of
Health of Kuwait is to tackle public health problems such as obesity and diabetes
from dietary and lifestyle aspects. An early randomized control trial, the Diabetes
Prevention Study in Finland, showed a successful dietary and lifestyle intervention,
that resulted in significant weight loss over the first year on high risk population
(Eriksson et al., 1999) and reduction in diabetes incidence after a median of 4 years
(Lindstrom et al., 2006). If this is an example for future study in Kuwait then this
idea could be applied with some considerations regarding the target population, the
most suitable dietary assessment method, recruitment and sample size in the study
design stage.
There is a need for dietary assessment methods characterized by high
accuracy in measuring dietary intake in order to examine associations between diet
and disease outcomes. The use of internet-based dietary data collection such as
using online 24-hour recall and FFQs or using mobile applications for future cohort
studies may be possible, especially for targeting younger populations. This new
technology may decrease the time spend for data collection and coding by the
researcher.
The biomarkers of nutrient intake can be used to validate the accuracy of
estimated dietary intake and can reflect the consumption of nutrient intake. However
for dietary fibre, no such biomarker has been reported in previous prospective
studies. However, stool samples as an NSP marker, were suggested previously
(Bates et al., 1997). Stool collection for at least 5 days could yield a valid estimate.
This was suggested as a marker for NSP, as for every 1 gram increment of NSP, the
stool weight increased by 5 grams. However, this method has several limitations: for
example, it may be seen as unacceptable by subjects; it has high biological variation
in term of transit time and faecal weight, and also cannot be used in a large number
of participants.
Another potential future research using bowel habits data from the UKWCS
dataset to explore validity of fibre intake using FFQ. This may achieve by using
questions on the frequency of bowel habits captured at the baseline in relation to
dietary fibre intake. Evidence from the UKWCS data suggest with every 5g
increment in dietary NSP intake, the risk of constipation (defined by frequency of
bowel) reduced by 16 % (Alrefaai et al., 2013).
It would be interesting to assess the effects of dietary fibre intake on the risk
of T2DM prospectively in Kuwait, as a high prevalence of diabetes has been
reported (Whiting et al., 2011) and because no cohort study has been carried out in
Kuwait. It would be a good opportunity to start a prospective study using self-
reported diabetes to identify new onsets of cases. However, the use of biochemical
tests such as blood glucose samples and HbA1C measurements would be more robust
in establishing a greater degree of accuracy of diabetes diagnosis minimising the
bias from misclassification. On the other hand, the high cost and practicality should
be evaluated carefully during the study design step.
FFQ is the commonly used dietary assessment method in prospective studies
however modification of existing FFQ should be considered to cover traditional
food consumed in Kuwait. A validation study for subsample using another method
such as food records can help in assessing the reliability and validity of FFQs.
Dietary assessment method can be improved in several ways. More food items
especially fibre rich sources such as legumes may need to be included in the FFQ
particularly for participants with relatively high legume consumption. The results
from chapter 5 suggest that cooking methods can be used as a guide for the
researcher when fibre values from food tables are assigned to a food item, although
cooking methods may play a minor role in NSP values in comparison to AOAC-
fibre values as demonstrated in chapter 5.
In summary, it is useful to incorporate food laboratory analysis into the
epidemiological studies in a way that will measure dietary fibre content in the food
consumed by participants. However this has a high cost and time burden especially
if the sample size is quite large. The result from chapter 5 suggested the effect of
cooking methods on the dietary fibre content using the AOAC method. This
observation can be incorporated into epidemiological research by obtaining dietary
information on the cooking methods which may help in minimizing the estimation
error in the epidemiological research particularly among vegetarians and high
legumes consumers.
11.5.3Public health implications
Dietary fibre found to have several beneficial effects on the risk of diseases.
Consistent evidence showed only high intake of cereal fibre reduced the risk of
T2DM. Despite the evidence in chapter 4, and chapter 8, that neither greater intakes
of total dietary fibre, or fruit, vegetables and legumes fibre, appear to reduce the risk
of T2DM, the public health message to encourage high dietary fibre intake through
consumption of fruit and vegetables needs to be maintained. The lack of association
between a single nutrient in fruit, vegetables and legumes such as dietary fibre
doesnt mean other potential compounds have no role with regard to glycaemia.
Recent evidence suggested a possible beneficial role of other bioactive components
(such as polyphenols) present in most plants including fruit and vegetables on
glycaemia (Williamson, 2013).
Since evidence suggests a high intake of dietary fibre reduces the risk of other
chronic diseases such as heart disease (Pereira et al., 2004), stroke (Threapleton et
al., 2012) and colorectal cancer (Aune et al., 2011), encouraging high dietary fibre
consumption needs to be maintained for other health benefits.
The results from chapter 5 showed that significant effect of cooking methods
on dietary fibre content which can be used as a guide for consumers and
practitioners, since most of legumes consumed in the UK are canned, may be more
dried legume intake could be encouraged.
11.6 In summary
Type 2 diabetes mellitus is a common public health problem that requires
primary prevention. Potential mechanism for dietary fibre action on diabetes
markers was reported previously. For the first time this thesis investigated different
aspects of dietary fibre using laboratory and epidemiological approaches. Dietary
fibre analysis of legumes commonly consumed in UK indicate that AOAC-fibre
values are highly dependent on the cooking method as the results showed that
AOAC-fibre content for canned legumes were significantly lower by one third
compared to boiled legumes. A non-significant lower risk of developing T2DM was
seen in British women who consume diets high in fibre, this was significant for age
adjusted cereal fibre. However, the lack of statistical significance overall, suggests
either a weak relationship with fibre, nutrient related measurement error or may be a
reflection of a relatively small number of cases.
In a sample of health-conscious women, greater dietary fibre intake may
indicate no additional benefit in term of diabetes prevention. Although greater
consumption of dried legumes contributed to lower diabetes risk.
References
Abdullah, A., Peeters, A., de Courten, M. & Stoelwinder, J., 2010. The magnitude of
association between overweight and obesity and the risk of diabetes: a meta-
analysis of prospective cohort studies. Diabetes Research of Clinical
Practice, 89, 309-19.
AbuMweis, S., Jew, S. & Ames, N., 2010. -glucan from barley and its lipid-
lowering capacity: a meta-analysis of randomized, controlled trials.
European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 64, 1472-1480.
Adeghate, E., Schattner, P. & Dunn, E., 2006. An update on the etiology and
epidemiology of diabetes mellitus. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 1084, 1-29.
Afzal, S., Bojesen, S.E. & Nordestgaard, B.G., 2013. Low 25-Hydroxyvitamin D
and risk of type 2 diabetes: A prospective cohort study and meta-analysis.
Clinical Chemistry, 59, 381-391.
Aggarwal, A., Monsivais, P. & Drewnowski, A., 2012. Nutrient intakes linked to
better health outcomes are associated with higher diet costs in the US. PLoS
One, 7, e37533.
Ahmadi-Abhari, S., Luben, R.N., Powell, N., Bhaniani, A., Chowdhury, R.,
Wareham, N.J., Forouhi, N.G. & Khaw, K.-T., 2013. Dietary intake of
carbohydrates and risk of type 2 diabetes: the European Prospective
Investigation into Cancer-Norfolk study. British Journal of Nutrition, 1-11.
Ainsworth, B.E., Haskell, W.L., Leon, A.S., Jacobs, D.R., Montoye, H.J., Sallis, J.F.
& Paffenbarger, R.S., 1993. Compendium of physical activities:
classification of energy costs of human physical activities. Medicine and
Science in Sports and Exercise, 25, 71-80.
Alberti, K., Eckel, R.H., Grundy, S.M., Zimmet, P.Z., Cleeman, J.I., Donato, K.A.,
Fruchart, J.-C., James, W.P.T., Loria, C.M. & Smith, S.C., 2009.
Harmonizing the Metabolic Syndrome A Joint Interim Statement of the
International Diabetes Federation Task Force on Epidemiology and
Prevention; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; American Heart
Association; World Heart Federation; International Atherosclerosis Society;
and International Association for the Study of Obesity. Circulation, 120,
1640-1645.
Alfieri, M.A.H., Pomerleau, J., Grace, D.M. & Anderson, L., 1995. Fiber intake of
normal weight, moderately obese and severely obese subjects. Obesity
Research, 3, 541-547.
Aller, R., de Luis, D.A., Izaola, O., La Calle, F., del Olmo, L., Fernandez, L.,
Arranz, T. & Hernandez, J.M.G., 2004. Effect of soluble fiber intake in lipid
and glucose levels in healthy subjects: a randomized clinical trial. Diabetes
Research and Clinical Practice, 65, 7-11.
Alrefaai, L., Cade, J. & Burley, V., 2013. Dietary fibre intake and constipation in the
UK Women's Cohort Study. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 72, E287.
Alvarez, J.A. & Ashraf, A., 2009. Role of vitamin D in insulin secretion and insulin
sensitivity for glucose homeostasis. International Journal of Endocrinology,
2010.
American Diabetes Association (ADA). 2008. Nutrition recommendations and
interventions for diabetes. Diabetes Care, 31, S61-78.
Anderson, J. & Bridges, S., 1988. Dietary fiber content of selected foods. American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 47, 440-447.
Anderson, N. & Clydesdale, F., 1980. Effects of processing on the dietary fiber
content of wheat bran, pureed green beans, and carrots. Journal of Food
Science, 45, 1533-1537.
Andersson, A., Tengblad, S., Karlstrm, B., Kamal-Eldin, A., Landberg, R., Basu,
S., man, P. & Vessby, B., 2007. Whole-grain foods do not affect insulin
sensitivity or markers of lipid peroxidation and inflammation in healthy,
moderately overweight subjects. The Journal of Nutrition, 137, 1401-1407.
AOAC. 2001. Report of the Dietary Fiber Definition Committee to the Board of
Directors of AACC International [Online]. Available:
http://www.aaccnet.org/grainbin/definitiondietaryfiber.asp [Accessed 6 May
2011].
Apata, D.F., 2008. Effect of cooking methods on available and unavailable
carbohydrates of some tropical grain legumes. African Journal of
Biotechnology, 7, 2940-2945.
Arngrmsson, S.., McAuley, E. & Evans, E.M., 2009. Change in body mass index
is a stronger predictor of change in fat mass than lean mass in elderly black
and white women. American Journal of Human Biology, 21, 124-126.
Ashton, L., Cade, J.E. & Burley, V.J., 2013. A type 2 diabetes mellitus prevention
index predicts incident diabetes in the UK Women's Cohort Study.
Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 72, E257
Asp, N.G., 1987. Dietary fibre-Definition, chemistry and analytical determination
Molecular Aspects of Medicine, 9, 17-29.
Association of Official Analytical Chemist. 1995. Official Methods of Analysis,
991.43 Arlington VA, : AOAC.
Aune, D., Chan, D.S., Lau, R., Vieira, R., Greenwood, D.C., Kampman, E. & Norat,
T., 2011. Dietary fibre, whole grains, and risk of colorectal cancer:
systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis of prospective studies.
BMJ: British Medical Journal, 343.
Baliunas, D.O., Taylor, B.J., Irving, H., Roerecke, M., Patra, J., Mohapatra, S. &
Rehm, J., 2009. Alcohol as a Risk Factor for Type 2 Diabetes A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Care, 32, 2123-2132.
Baptiste-Roberts, K., Gary, T.L., Beckles, G.L., Gregg, E.W., Owens, M.,
Porterfield, D. & Engelgau, M.M., 2007. Family history of diabetes,
awareness of risk factors, and health behaviors among African Americans.
Journal Information, 97.
Barbagallo, M., Dominguez, L.J., Galioto, A., Ferlisi, A., Cani, C., Malfa, L., Pineo,
A., Busardo, A. & Paolisso, G., 2003. Role of magnesium in insulin action,
diabetes and cardio-metabolic syndrome X. Molecular Aspects of Medicine,
24, 39-52.
Barclay, A.W., Flood, V.M., Rochtchina, E., Mitchell, P. & Brand-Miller, J.C.,
2007. Glycemic index, dietary fiber, and risk of type 2 diabetes in a cohort of
older Australians. Diabetes Care, 30, 2811-2813.
Barclay, A.W., Petocz, P., McMillan-Price, J., Flood, V.M., Prvan, T., Mitchell, P.
& Brand-Miller, J.C., 2008. Glycemic index, glycemic load, and chronic
disease riska meta-analysis of observational studies. American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 87, 627-637.
Bastard, J.-P., Jardel, C., Bruckert, E., Blondy, P., Capeau, J., Laville, M., Vidal, H.
& Hainque, B., 2000. Elevated levels of interleukin 6 are reduced in serum
and subcutaneous adipose tissue of obese women after weight loss. Journal
of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism, 85, 3338-3342.
Bates, B., Lennox, A., Bates, C. & Swan, G., 2011. National Diet and Nutrition
Survey. Headline Results from Years 1 and 2 (Combined) of the Rolling
Programme (2008/20092009/2010). Department of Health and Food
Standards Agency: London.
Bates, C.J., Margetts, B.M. & Nelson, M., 1997. Biochemical markers of nutrient
intake. Design Concepts in Nutritional Epidemiology.
Battilana, P., Ornstein, K., Minehira, K., Schwarz, J., Acheson, K., Schneiter, P.,
Burri, J., Jequier, E. & Tappy, L., 2001. Original Communication
Mechanisms of action of -glucan in postprandial glucose metabolism in 
healthy men. European journal of clinical nutrition, 55, 327-333.
Bazzano, L.A., Li, T.Y., Joshipura, K.J. & Hu, F.B., 2008. Intake of fruit,
vegetables, and fruit juices and risk of diabetes in women. Diabetes Care,
31, 1311-1317.
Becher, H., 1992. The concept of residual confounding in regression models and
some applications. Statistics in Medicine, 11, 1747-1758.
Beck, N.H., Henriksen, J.E., Vaag, A. & Hother, N.O., 1995. Pathophysiology of
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM). Diabetes Research and
Clinical Practice, 28, Supplement, S13-S25.
Bell, G.I., 1991. Molecular defects in diabetes mellitus. Diabetes, 40, 413-422.
Ben-Gal, I., 2005. Outlier detection. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery
Handbook. Springer.
Betteridge, V., 2009. Dietary fibre: An evolving definition? Nutrition Bulletin, 34,
122-125.
Bewick, V., Cheek, L. & Ball, J., 2004. Statistics review 11: Assessing risk. Critical
Care, 8, 287.
Bialostosky, K., Wright, J.D., Kennedy-Stephenson, J., McDowell, M. & Johnson,
C.L., 2002. Dietary intake of macronutrients, micronutrients, and other
dietary constituents: United States 1988-94. Vital and Health Statistics.
Series 11, Data from the national health survey, 1.
Bingham, S., Gill, C., Welch, A., Day, K., Cassidy, A., Khaw, K., Sneyd, M., Key,
T., Roe, L. & Day, N., 1994. Comparison of dietary assessment methods in
nutritional epidemiology: weighed records v. 24 h recalls, food frequency
questionnaires and estimated diet records. British Journal of Nutrition, 72,
619-644.
Bingham, S.A. & Day, N., 2006. Commentary: Fat and breast cancer: time to re-
evaluate both methods and results? International Journal of Epidemiology,
35, 1022-1024.
Bland, J.M. & Altman, D.G., 1995. Multiple significance tests: the Bonferroni
method. BMJ: British Medical Journal, 310, 170.
Bland, M.J. & Altman, D.G., 1986. Statistical methods for assessing agreement
between two methods of clinical measurement. Lancet, 327, 307-310.
Boeing, H., Bechthold, A., Bub, A., Ellinger, S., Haller, D., Kroke, A., Leschik-
Bonnet, E., Mller, M.J., Oberritter, H. & Schulze, M., 2012. Critical review:
vegetables and fruit in the prevention of chronic diseases. European Journal
of Nutrition, 1-27.
Boggs, D.A., Rosenberg, L., Ruiz-Narvaez, E.A. & Palmer, J.R., 2010. Coffee, tea,
and alcohol intake in relation to risk of type 2 diabetes in African American
women. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 92, 960-966.
Bogracheva, T.Y., Morris, V., Ring, S. & Hedley, C., 1998. The granular structure
of Ctype pea starch and its role in gelatinization. Biopolymers, 45, 323-
Bombelli, M., Facchetti, R., Sega, R., Carugo, S., Fodri, D., Brambilla, G.,
Giannattasio, C., Grassi, G. & Mancia, G., 2011. Impact of body mass index
and waist circumference on the long-term risk of diabetes mellitus,
hypertension, and cardiac organ damage. Hypertension, 58, 1029-1035.
Bravo, L., Abia, R. & Sauracalixto, F., 1994. Polyphenols as dietary fiber associated
compounds - Comparative-study on in-vivo and in-vitro properties. Journal
of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 42, 1481-1487.
Brennan, M.A., Derbyshire, E.J., Brennan, C.S. & Tiwari, B.K., 2012. Impact of
dietary fibreenriched readytoeat extruded snacks on the postprandial
glycaemic response of nondiabetic patients. Molecular nutrition & food
research, 56, 834-837.
British Nutrition Foundation. 1990. Complex carbohydrates in foods: The report of
the British Nutrition Foundations Task Force, UK, Chapman and Hall for
British Nutrition Foundation.
Brown, L., Rosner, B., Willett, W.W. & Sack, F.M., 1999 Cholesterol-lowering
effects of dietary fiber: a meta-analysis. American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 69, 30-42.
Brunner, E., Juneja, M. & Marmot, M., 2001. Dietary assessment in Whitehall II:
comparison of 7 day diet diary and food-frequency questionnaire and validity
against biomarkers. British Journal of Nutrition, 86, 405-414.
Burkitt, D., 1975. Refined carbohydrate foods and disease, Academic Press.
Buttriss, J. & Stokes, C., 2008. Dietary fibre and health: an overview. Nutrition
Bulletin, 33, 186-200.
Cade, J., Burley, V. & Greenwood, D., 2004a. The UK Women's Cohort Study:
comparison of vegetarians, fish-eaters and meat-eaters. Public Health
Nutrition, 7, 871-878.
Cade, J., Burley, V., Warm, D., Thompson, R. & Margetts, B., 2004b. Food-
frequency questionnaires: a review of their design, validation and utilisation.
Nutrition Research Reviews, 17, 5-22.
Cade, J., Frear, L. & Greenwood, D., 2006. Assessment of diet in young children
with an emphasis on fruit and vegetable intake: using CADETChild and
Diet Evaluation Tool. Public Health Nutrition, 9, 501-508.
Cade, J., Thompson, R., Burley, V. & Warm, D., 2002. Development, validation and
utilisation of food-frequency questionnaires: A review. Public Health
Nutrition, 5, 567-588.
Cade, J.E., Burley, V.J. & Greenwood, D.C., 2007. Dietary fibre and risk of breast
cancer in the UK Women's Cohort Study. International Journal of
Epidemiology, 36, 431-438.
Cade, J.E., Taylor, E.F., Burley, V.J. & Greenwood, D.C., 2010. Common Dietary
Patterns and Risk of Breast Cancer: Analysis From the United Kingdom
Women's Cohort Study. Nutrition and Cancer-an International Journal, 62,
300-306.
Calvert, C., Cade, J., Barrett, J. & Woodhouse, A., 1997. Using cross-check
questions to address the problem of mis-reporting of specific food groups on
Food Frequency Questionnaires. UKWCS Steering Group. United Kingdom
Women's Cohort Study Steering Group. European Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 51, 708.
Camire, M., Cho, S., Craig, S., Devrie, J., Gordon, D., Jones, J., Li, B., Lineback,
D., Prosky, L. & Tungland, B., 2001. The definition of dietary fiber. Cereal
Foods World, 46, 112-124.
Cantwell, M.M., Gibney, M.J., Cronin, D., Younger, K.M., O'Neill, J.P., Hogan, L.
& Flynn, M., 2005. Development and validation of a food-frequency
questionnaire for the determination of detailed fatty acid intakes. Public
Health Nutrition, 8, 97-107.
Chang, M.C. & Morris, W.C., 1990. Effect of Heat-treatment on chemical-analysis
of dietary fiber Journal of Food Science, 55, 1647-&.
Chaplin, S., 2005. Type 2 diabetes: prevention and management, ILSI Europe.
Charles, M.A., Balkau, B., Vauzelle-Kervredan, F., Thibult, N. & Eschwege, E.,
1996. Revision of diagnostic criteria for diabetes. Lancet, 348, 1657-1658.
Chawla, R. & Patil, G., 2010. Soluble dietary fiber. Comprehensive Reviews in Food
Science and Food Safety, 9, 178-196.
Cho, S. & Dreher, M.L., 2001. Handbook of dietary fiber, CRC Press.
Choi, S.H., Kim, T.H., Lim, S., Park, K.S., Jang, H.C. & Cho, N.H., 2011.
Hemoglobin A1c as a Diagnostic Tool for Diabetes Screening and New-
Onset Diabetes Prediction A 6-year community-based prospective study.
Diabetes Care, 34, 944-949.
Chung, H.-J., Liu, Q. & Hoover, R., 2009. Impact of annealing and heat-moisture
treatment on rapidly digestible, slowly digestible and resistant starch levels
in native and gelatinized corn, pea and lentil starches. Carbohydrate
Polymers, 75, 436-447.
Church, S., Gilbert, P. & Khokhar, S., 2006. Ethnic groups and foods in Europe.
Synthesis Report.
Church, S.M., 2006. The history of food composition databases. Nutrition Bulletin,
31, 15-20.
Codex Alimentarius Commission. 2008. Report of the 30th session of the codex
committee on nutrition and foods for special dietary uses, Cape Town, South
Africa, 37 November 2008. ALINORM 09/32/26.
Colditz, G.A., Manson, J.E., Stampfer, M.J., Rosner, B., Willett, W.C. & Speizer,
F.E., 1992. Diet and risk of clinical diabetes in women American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 55, 1018-1023.
Colditz, G.A., Willett, W.C., Rotnitzky, A. & Manson, J.E., 1995. Weight gain as a
risk factor for clinical diabetes mellitus in women. Annals of Internal
Medicine, 122, 481-486.
Connolly, V., Unwin, N., Sherriff, P., Bilous, R. & Kelly, W., 2000. Diabetes
prevalence and socioeconomic status: a population based study showing
increased prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus in deprived areas. Journal of
Epidemiology and Community Health, 54, 173-177.
Cook, R.J., 1998. Kappa. Encyclopedia of biostatistics.
Cooper, A., Forouhi, N., Ye, Z., Buijsse, B., Arriola, L., Balkau, B., Barricarte, A.,
Beulens, J., Boeing, H. & Bchner, F., 2012. Fruit and vegetable intake and
type 2 diabetes: EPIC-InterAct prospective study and meta-analysis.
European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 66, 1082-1092.
Corp-Stata. 2010. Statitsitcal software:Release 11. 12 ed.: College Station, TX.
Cosgrove, D.J., 2005. Growth of the plant cell wall. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell
Biology, 6, 850-861.
Crawley, H., 1993. Food Portion Sizes, London HMSO.
Cummings, J. & Englyst, H., 1991. Measurement of starch fermentation in the
human large intestine. Canadian journal of physiology and pharmacology,
69, 121-129.
Cummings, J. & Stephen, A., 2007. Carbohydrate terminology and classification.
European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 61, S5-S18.
Cummings, J.H., 2001. The effect of dietary fiber on fecal weight and composition.
CRC Handbook of Dietary Fiber in Human Nutrition, 3, 183-252.
Cust, A., Skilton, M., Van Bakel, M., Halkjaer, J., Olsen, A., Agnoli, C.,
Psaltopoulou, T., Buurma, E., Sonestedt, E. & Chirlaque, M., 2009. Total
dietary carbohydrate, sugar, starch and fibre intakes in the European
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition. European Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 63, S37-S60.
Dahm, C.C., Keogh, R.H., Spencer, E.A., Greenwood, D.C., Key, T.J., Fentiman,
I.S., Shipley, M.J., Brunner, E.J., Cade, J.E. & Burley, V.J., 2010. Dietary
fiber and colorectal cancer risk: a nested casecontrol study using food
diaries. Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 102, 614-626.
Dalstra, J.A., Kunst, A.E., Borrell, C., Breeze, E., Cambois, E., Costa, G., Geurts, J.,
Lahelma, E., Van Oyen, H. & Rasmussen, N., 2005. Socioeconomic
differences in the prevalence of common chronic diseases: an overview of
eight European countries. International Journal of Epidemiology, 34, 316-
Dashti, B., Al-Awadi, F., Khalafawi, M.S., Sawaya, W. & Al-Amiri, H., 2003.
Soluble and insoluble dietary fibre in thirty-two Kuwaiti dishes. Food
Chemistry, 83, 557-561.
De Jong, N., Ocke, M.C., Branderhorst, H.A. & Friele, R., 2003. Demographic and
lifestyle characteristics of functional food consumers and dietary supplement
users. British Journal of Nutrition, 89, 273-282.
Deeks, J.J., Higgins, J. & Altman, D.G., 2008. Analysing Data and Undertaking
MetaAnalyses. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of
Interventions: Cochrane Book Series, 243-296.
Deharveng, G., Charrondiere, U.R., Slimani, N., Southgate, D.A.T. & Riboli, E.,
1999. Comparison of nutrients in the food composition tables available in the
nine European countries participating in EPIC. European Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 53, 60-79.
DeMan, J.M., 1999. Principles of food chemistry 3
edition, USA, Library of
Congree Cataloging in -Publication data.
Department of Health. 1991. Dietary Reference Values for Food and Energy and
Nutrients for the United Kingdom: Report of the Panel on Dietary Reference
Values of the Committee on Medical Aspects of Food Policy., London, The
Stationary Office
Department of Health. 2001. National sevice framework for diabetes: standards.
Department of Health. 2012. National Diet and Nutrition Survey: Headline Results
from Years 1, 2 and 3 (combined) of the Rolling Programme 2008/09 
2010/11. Department of Health and Food Standard Agency.
Department of Health, D., 2011. National Diet and Nutrition Survey: Headline
results from year 1 and 2 (combined) of the rolling programmed 2008/9-
2009/10. UK: Department of Health and Food Standard Agency.
Derbyshire, E., 2011. The nutritional value of whole pulses and pulse fractions.
Pulse Foods: Processing, Quality and Nutraceutical Applications, 363.
DeVries, J.W., 2004. Dietary fiber: The influence of definition on analysis and
regulation. Journal of AOAC International, 87, 682-706.
DeVries, J.W. & Rader, J.I., 2005. Historical perspective as a guide for identifying
and developing applicable methods for dietary fiber. Journal of AOAC
International, 88, 1349-1366.
Diabetes UK. 2009. Diabetes in the UK 2009: Key statistics on diabetes.
Diabetes UK. 2011. Evidence-based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and
management of diabetes.
Diabetes UK. 2012. Diabetes in the UK 2012: Key statistics on diabetes [Online].
Available: www.diabetes.org.uk/Professionals/Publications-reports-and-
resources/Reports-statistics-and-case-studies/Reports/Diabetes-in-the-UK-
Dilis, V. & Trichopoulou, A., 2009. Nutritional and health properties of pulses.
Mediterranean Journal of Nutrition and Metabolism, 1, 149-157.
Dong, J.-Y., Xun, P., He, K. & Qin, L.-Q., 2011. Magnesium Intake and Risk of
Type 2 Diabetes Meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Diabetes Care,
34, 2116-2122.
Drewnowski, A., Renderson, S.A., Driscoll, A. & Rolls, B.J., 1997. The Dietary
Variety Score: Assessing Diet Quality in Healthy Young and Older Adults.
Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 97, 266-271.
Du, H., Boshuizen, H.C., Forouhi, N.G., Wareham, N.J., Halkjr, J., Tjnneland,
A., Overvad, K., Jakobsen, M.U., Boeing, H. & Buijsse, B., 2010. Dietary
fiber and subsequent changes in body weight and waist circumference in
European men and women. American journal of clinical nutrition, 91, 329-
Eastwood, M.A. & Morris, E.R., 1992. Physical properties of dietary fiber that
influence physiological function: a model for polymers along the
gastrointestinal tract. The American journal of clinical nutrition, 55, 436-
Eckel, R.H., Grundy, S.M. & Zimmet, P.Z., 2005. The metabolic syndrome. Lancet,
365, 1415-1428.
Eerlingen, R.C. & Delcour, J.A., 1995. Formation, analysis, structure an properties
of type-III enzyme resistant starch. Journal of Cereal Science, 22, 129-138.
Englyst, H., Bingham, S., Runswick, S., Collinson, E. & Cummings, J., 1988.
Dietary fibre (nonstarch polysaccharides) in fruit, vegetables and nuts.
Journal of Human Nutrition and Dietetics, 1, 247-286.
Englyst, H., Wiggins, H.S. & Cummings, J.H., 1982. Determination of the Non-
Starch Polysaccharides in plant foods by Gas-liquid-Chromotography of
constituent sugars as alditol acetates. Analyst, 107, 307-318.
Englyst, H.N., Anderson, V. & Cummings, J.H., 1983. Starch and nonstarch
polysaccharides in some cereal foods. Journal of the Science of Food and
Agriculture, 34, 1434-1440.
Englyst, H.N. & Cummings, J.H., 1988. Improved method for measurement of
dietary fiber as non-starch polysaccharides in plant foods. Journal of AOAC
International, 71 808-814.
Englyst, H.N., Quigley, M.E., Englyst, K.N., Bravo, L. & and Hudson, G.J., 1996.
'Dietary fibre' Measurement by the Englyst NSP procedure Measurement by
the AOAC Prosky Procedure Explanation of the differences; Report of a
Study Commossioned by the Ministry of Agriculture, FIsheries and Food
Journal of Association Public Analysts, 32, 1-38.
Englyst, K.N. & Englyst, H.N., 2005. Carbohydrate bioavailability. British Journal
of Nutrition, 94, 1-11.
Englyst, K.N., Liu, S. & Englyst, H.N., 2007. Nutritional characterization and
measurement of dietary carbohydrates. European Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 61, S19-S39.
Ericson, U., Sonestedt, E., Gullberg, B., Hellstrand, S., Hindy, G., Wirfalt, E. &
Orho-Melander, M., 2013. High intakes of protein and processed meat
associate with increased incidence of type 2 diabetes. British Journal of
Nutrition, 109, 1143-1153.
Eriksson, J., Lindstrm, J., Valle, T., Aunola, S., Hmlinen, H., Ilanne-Parikka, P.,
Keinnen-Kiukaanniemi, S., Laakso, M., Lauhkonen, M. & Lehto, P., 1999.
Prevention of Type II diabetes in subjects with impaired glucose tolerance:
the Diabetes Prevention Study (DPS) in Finland Study design and 1-year
interim report on the feasibility of the lifestyle intervention programme.
Diabetologia, 42, 793-801.
Esposito, K., Kastorini, C.M., Panagiotakos, D.B. & Giugliano, D., 2010a.
Prevention of type 2 diabetes by dietary patterns: a systematic review of
prospective studies and meta-analysis. Metabolic Syndrome and Related
Disorders, 8, 471-476.
Esposito, K., Maiorino, M.I., Ceriello, A. & Giugliano, D., 2010b. Prevention and
control of type 2 diabetes by Mediterranean diet: a systematic review.
Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice, 89, 97-102.
European Commission. 2008. Commission Directive 2008/100/EC of 28 October
2008 amending Council Directive 90/496/EEC on nutrition labelling for
foodstuffs as regards recommended daily allowances, energy conversion
factors and definitions. Official Journal of the European Union, 51, L285.
European Food Information Resource e-search. 2010. EuroFIR eSearch Prototype
[Online]. Available: http://esearch.eurofir.org/ [Accessed 11 May 2011].
European Food Safety Authority. 2010. Scientific Opinion on Dietary Reference
Values for carbohydrates and dietary fibre. EFSA Journal, 8, 1462.
European Food Safety Authority, E., 2011 Scientific Opinion on the substantiation
of health claims related to beta-glucans from oats and barley and
maintenance of normal blood LDL-cholesterol concentrations (ID 1236,
1299), increase in satiety leading to a reduction in energy intake (ID 851,
852), reduction of post-prandial glycaemic responses (ID 821, 824), and
digestive function (ID 850) pursuant to Article 13(1) of Regulation (EC)
No 1924/2006. European Food Standard Agency Journal, 9 2207-2228.
Fang, J., Austin, P.C. & Tu, J.V., Test for linearity between continuous confounder
and binary outcome first, run a multivariate regression analysis second.
Proceedings of the SAS Global Forum, 2009. Citeseer, 22-25.
FAO. 1998. Carbohydrates in human nutrition. Rome, Italy
Fardet, A., 2010. New hypotheses for the health-protective mechanisms of whole-
grain cereals: what is beyond fibre? Nutrition Research Reviews, 23, 65-134.
Feskens, E., Bowles, C.H. & Kromhout, D., 1991. Carbohydrate intake and body
mass index in relation to the risk of glucose intolerance in an elderly
population. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 54, 136-140.
Feskens, E.J., Virtanen, S.M., Rsnen, L., Tuomilehto, J., Stengrd, J., Pekkanen,
J., Nissinen, A. & Kromhout, D., 1995. Dietary factors determining diabetes
and impaired glucose tolerance: a 20-year follow-up of the Finnish and
Dutch cohorts of the Seven Countries Study. Diabetes Care, 18, 1104-1112.
Feskens , E.J.M. & Kromhout , D., 1990. Habitual dietary intake and glucose
tolerance in euglycaemic men: the Zutphen Study. International Journal of
Epidemiology, 19, 953-959.
Flint, A., Raben, A., Astrup, A. & Holst, J.J., 1998. Glucagon-like peptide 1
promotes satiety and suppresses energy intake in humans. Journal of Clinical
Investigation, 101, 515.
Food and Nutrition Board. 2001. Dietary Reference Intakes: Proposed Definition of
Dietary Fiber, The National Academies Press.
Food and Nutrition Board. 2005. Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy,
Carbohydrate, Fiber, Fat, Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein, and Amino
Acids (Macronutrients). Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Food Standards Agency. 2002. McCance and Widdowsons The Composition of
Foods, Sixth summary Edition, Cambridge: Royal Society of Chemistry.
Food Standards Agency. 2007. FSA nutrient and food based guidelines for UK.
Food Standard Agency
Food Standards Agency, F., 2010. National Diet Nutrition Survey: headline results
from year 1 (2008/2009) [Online]. Available:
http://tna.europarchive.org/20110116113217/http://www.food.gov.uk/scienc
e/dietarysurveys/ndnsdocuments/ndns0809year1 [Accessed 22 May 2011].
Forsyth, L.H. & Goetsch, V.L., 1997. Perceived threat of illness and health
protective behaviors in offspring of adults with non-insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus. Behavioral Medicine, 23, 112-121.
Fung, T.T., McCullough, M., van Dam, R.M. & Hu, F.B., 2007. A prospective study
of overall diet quality and risk of type 2 diabetes in women. Diabetes Care,
30, 1753-1757.
Fung, T.T., Schulze, M., Manson, J.E., Willett, W.C. & Hu, F.B., 2004. Dietary
patterns, meat intake, and the risk of type 2 diabetes in women. Archives of
Internal Medicine, 164, 2235-2240.
Furda, I., 2001. The Crude Fiber Method. CRC handbook of dietary fiber in human
nutrition. CRC PressI Llc.
Galland, L., 2010. Diet and inflammation. Nutrition in Clinical Practice, 25, 634-
Goff, L.M., Griffin, B.A., Lovegrove, J.A., Sanders, T.A., Jebb, S.A., Bluck, L.J. &
Frost, G.S., 2013. Ethnic differences in beta-cell function, dietary intake and
expression of the metabolic syndrome among UK adults of South Asian,
black African-Caribbean and white-European origin at high risk of metabolic
syndrome. Diabetes and Vascular Disease Research.
Goi, I., Garca-Diz, L., Maas, E. & Saura-Calixto, F., 1996. Analysis of resistant
starch: a method for foods and food products. Food Chemistry, 56, 445-449.
Gonzlez, E.M., Johansson, S., Wallander, M.A. & Rodrguez, L.G., 2009. Trends
in the prevalence and incidence of diabetes in the UK: 19962005. Journal
of Epidemiology and Community Health, 63, 332-336.
Green, C., 2001. Fibre in enteral nutrition. Clinical Nutrition, 20, 23-39.
Greenwood, D., Cade, J., Draper, A., Barrett, J., Calvert, C. & Greenhalgh, A.,
2000. Seven unique food consumption patterns identified among women in
the UK Women's Cohort Study. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 54,
314-320.
Greenwood, D., Gilthorpe, M., Golding, C. & Cade, J., Stability over time of dietary
patterns in the UK Women's Cohort Study. Proceedings-Nutrition Society of
London, 2003. CABI Publishing; 1999, 89A-89A.
Grootenhuis, P.A., Westenbrink, S., Sie, C.M., De Neeling, J.N.D., Kok, F.J. &
Bouter, L.M., 1995. A semiquantitative food frequency questionnaire for use
in epidemiologic research among the elderly: Validation by comparison with
dietary history. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, 48, 859-868.
Guerrero-Romero, F., Tamez-Perez, H.E., Gonzlez-Gonzlez, G., Salinas-
Martnez, A.M., Montes-Villarreal, J., Trevio-Ortiz, J.H. & Rodrguez-
Morn, M., 2004. Oral Magnesium supplementation improves insulin
sensitivity in non-diabetic subjects with insulin resistance. A double-blind
placebo-controlled randomized trial. Diabetes & Metabolism, 30, 253-258.
Guillon, F. & Champ, M., 2000. Structural and physical properties of dietary fibres,
and consequences of processing on human physiology. Food Research
International, 33, 233-245.
Guillon, F. & Champ, M.M.J., 2002. Carbohydrate fractions of legumes: uses in
human nutrition and potential for health. British Journal of Nutrition, 88,
S293-S306.
Halton, T.L., Liu, S., Manson, J.E. & Hu, F.B., 2008. Low-carbohydrate-diet score
and risk of type 2 diabetes in women. The American journal of clinical
nutrition, 87, 339-346.
Hamer, M. & Chida, Y., 2007. Intake of fruit, vegetables, and antioxidants and risk
of type 2 diabetes: systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of
Hypertension, 25, 2361-2369.
Harding, A.-H., Day, N.E., Khaw, K.-T., Bingham, S., Luben, R., Welsh, A. &
Wareham, N.J., 2004. Dietary Fat and the Risk of Clinical Type 2 Diabetes
The European Prospective Investigation of Cancer-Norfolk Study. American
Journal of Epidemiology, 159, 73-82.
Harrison, T.A., Hindorff, L.A., Kim, H., Wines, R., Bowen, D.J., McGrath, B.B. &
Edwards, K.L., 2003. Family history of diabetes as a potential public health
tool. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 24, 152-159.
Henderson, L., Gregory J & G, a.S., 2002. The National Diet and Nutrition Survey:
adults aged 19 to 64 years Volume 1: Types and quantities of foods
consumed. In: TSO (ed.). London
Hex, N., Bartlett, C., Wright, D., Taylor, M. & Varley, D., 2012. Estimating the
current and future costs of Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes in the UK, including
direct health costs and indirect societal and productivity costs. Diabetic
Medicine, 29, 855-862.
Higgins, J.P., Thompson, S.G., Deeks, J.J. & Altman, D.G., 2003. Measuring
inconsistency in meta-analyses. BMJ: British Medical Journal, 327, 557.
Hindy, G., Sonestedt, E., Ericson, U., Jing, X.-J., Zhou, Y., Hansson, O., Renstrm,
E., Wirflt, E. & Orho-Melander, M., 2012. Role of TCF7L2 risk variant and
dietary fibre intake on incident type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia, 55, 2646-2654.
Hipsley, E.H., 1953. Dietary fibre and pregnancy toxaemia. British Medical Journal,
2, 420-422.
Hodge, A.M., English, D.R., O'Dea, K. & Giles, G.G., 2004. Glycemic index and
dietary fiber and the risk of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care, 27, 2701-2706.
Holland, B., Brown, J. & Buss, D.H., 1993. Fish and fish products: The third
supplement to McCance & Widdowson's: the Composition of Foods (5th
Edition), Roylal Society of Chemistry.
Holland, B., Unmin, I.D. & Buss, D.H., 1991a. Vegetables, Herbs and Spices: The
fifith supplement to McCance & Widdowson's: The Composition of Foods
(4th edition), Royal Society of Chemisty.
Holland, B., Unmin, I.D. & Buss, D.H., 1992a. Fruit and Nuts: the first supplement
to McCance & Widdowson's: The composition of Foods (5th Edition), Royal
Society of Chemisty.
Holland, B., Unwin, I.D. & Buss, D.H., 1988. Cereals and Cereal products: The
third supplement to McCance & Widdowson's The Composition of Foods
(4th Edition), Royal Society of Chemistry.
Holland, B., Unwin, I.D. & Buss, D.H., 1989. Milk products and eggs: The fourth
supplement to McCance & Widdowson's: the Composition of Foods (4th
Edition), Royal Society of Chemistry
Holland, B., Welch, A.A. & Buss, D.H., 1992b. Vegetable Dishes: The Second
supplement to McCance & Widdowson's: The Composition of Food (5th
Edition), Royal Society of Chemistry.
Holland, B., Welch, A.A., Unwin, I.D., Buss, H.D., Paul, A.A. & Southgate, D.A.T.,
1991b. McCance and Widdowson's the Composition of Foods Cambridge ,
UK, Royal Society of Chemistry
Hoover, R., Hughes, T., Chung, H.J. & Liu, Q., 2010. Composition, molecular
structure, properties, and modification of pulse starches: A review. Food
Research International, 43, 399-413.
Hopping, B.N., Etber, E., Grandinetti, A., Verheus, M., Kolonel, L.N. &
Maskarinec, G., 2010. Dietary Fiber, Magnesium, and Glycemic Load Alter
Risk of Type 2 Diabetes in a Multiethnic Cohort in Hawaii. Journal of
Nutrition, 140, 68-74.
Howlett, J.F., Betteridge, V.A., Champ, M., Craig, S.A., Meheust, A. & Jones, J.M.,
2010. The definition of dietary fiberdiscussions at the Ninth Vahouny Fiber
Symposium: building scientific agreement. Food & Nutrition Research, 54.
Hu, F.B. & Malik, V.S., 2010. Sugar-sweetened beverages and risk of obesity and
type 2 diabetes: epidemiologic evidence. Physiology & Behavior, 100, 47-
Ioannidis, J. & Lau, J., 1999. Pooling research results: benefits and limitations of
meta-analysis. The Joint Commission Journal on Quality Improvement, 25,
Japan Diabetes Society. 1988. Diabetes mellitus in twins: a cooperative study in
Japan. Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice, 5, 271-280.
Jenkins, D., Wolever, T., Taylor, R.H., Barker, H., Fielden, H., Baldwin, J.M.,
Bowling, A.C., Newman, H.C., Jenkins, A.L. & Goff, D.V., 1981. Glycemic
index of foods: a physiological basis for carbohydrate exchange. American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 34, 362-366.
Jenkins, D.J., Jenkins, A.L., Wolever, T.M., Collier, G.R., Rao, A.V. & Thompson,
L.U., 1987. Starchy foods and fiber: reduced rate of digestion and improved
carbohydrate metabolism. Scandinavian Journal of Gastroenterology, 22,
132-141.
Jenkins, D.J., Kendall, C.W., Axelsen, M., Augustin, L.S. & Vuksan, V., 2000.
Viscous and nonviscous fibres, nonabsorbable and low glycaemic index
carbohydrates, blood lipids and coronary heart disease. Current Opinion in
Lipidology, 11, 49-56.
Jenkins, D.J., Wolever, T.M., Leeds, A.R., Gassull, M.A., Haisman, P., Dilawari, J.,
Goff, D.V., Metz, G.L. & Alberti, K.G., 1978. Dietary fibres, fibre
analogues, and glucose tolerance: importance of viscosity. British Medical
Journal, 1, 1392-1394.
Jenkins, D.J.A., Kendall, C.W.C., Vuksan, V., Vidgen, E., Parker, T., Faulkner, D.,
Mehling, C.C., Garsetti, M., Testolin, G., Cunnane, S.C., Ryan, M.A. &
Corey, P.N., 2002. Soluble fiber intake at a dose approved by the US Food
and Drug Administration for a claim of health benefits: serum lipid risk
factors for cardiovascular disease assessed in a randomized controlled
crossover trial. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 75, 834-839.
Jenkins, D.J.A., Leeds, A.R., Gassull, M.A., Cochet, B. & Alberti, K.G.M.M., 1977.
Decrease in Postprandial Insulin and Glucose Concentrations by Guar and
Pectin. Annals of Internal Medicine, 86, 20-23.
Jenkins, D.J.A.W., T. M. S.; Taylor, R. H.; Barker, H. M.; Fielden, H. 1980.
Exceptionally low blood glucose response to dried beans: comparison with
other carbohydrate foods. British Medical Journal 281 578-580
Jeon, C.Y., Lokken, R.P., Hu, F.B. & Van Dam, R.M., 2007. Physical Activity of
Moderate Intensity and Risk of Type 2 Diabetes A systematic review.
Diabetes Care, 30, 744-752.
Jing, Y., Han, G., Hu, Y., Bi, Y., Li, L. & Zhu, D., 2009. Tea consumption and risk
of type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis of cohort studies. Journal of General
Internal Medicine, 24, 557-562.
Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme. 2011. Report of the thirty second
session of the Codex committee on nutrition and foods for special dietary
uses Available:
http://www.cclac.org/documentos/CCNFSDU/2011/1%20Alinorm/REP11_
NFe.pdf.
Jones Jr, J., 1991. Kjeldahl method for nitrogen determination.
Kahn, S.E., Hull, R.L. & Utzschneider, K.M., 2006. Mechanisms linking obesity to
insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes. Nature, 444, 840-846.
Kao, W., Puddey, I.B., Boland, L.L., Watson, R.L. & Brancati, F.L., 2001. Alcohol
consumption and the risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus: atherosclerosis risk in
communities study. American Journal of Epidemiology, 154, 748-757.
Kelsey, J.L., 1996. Methods in observational epidemiology 2 nd, Oxford University
Press.
Kirk, S.F.L., Cade, J.E., Barrett, J.H. & Conner, M., 1999. Diet and lifestyle
characteristics associated with dietary supplement use in women. Public
health nutrition, 2, 69-73.
Kirkwood, B.R. & Sterne, J.A.C., 2003. Essential medical statistics: measurement
error: assessment and implication. Massachusetts: Blackwell Science Ltd.
2nd ed.
Kleinbaum, D. & Klein, M., 2010. Logistic regression: A Self Learning Text.
Springer.
Knowler, W.C., Barrett-Connor, E., Fowler, S.E., Hamman, R.F., Lachin, J.M.,
Walker, E.A., Nathan, D.M. & null. 2002. Reduction in the incidence of type
2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin. New England Journal of
Medicine, 346, 393-403.
Knudsen, K.E.B. & Hessov, I., 1995. Recovery of Inulin from Jerusalem artichoke
(Helianthus-Tuberosus L) in the small intestine of man. British Journal of
Nutrition, 74, 101-113.
Kolattukudy, P.E., 1981. Structure, Biosynthesis, and Biodegradation of cutin and
suberin. Annual Review of Plant Physiology and Plant Molecular Biology,
32, 539-567.
Krishnan, S., Rosenberg, L., Singer, M., Hu, F.B., Djousse, L., Cupples, L.A. &
Palmer, J.R., 2007. Glycemie index, glycemie load, and cereal fiber intake
and risk of type 2 diabetes in US black women. Archives of Internal
Medicine, 167, 2304-2309.
Kromhout, D., Bloemberg, B., Seidell, J., Nissinen, A. & Menotti, A., 2001.
Physical activity and dietary fiber determine population body fat levels: the
Seven Countries Study. International Journal of Obesity, 25, 301-306.
Kutos, T., Golob, T., Kac, M. & Plestenjak, A., 2003. Dietary fibre content of dry
and processed beans. Food Chemistry, 80, 231-235.
Landis, J.R. & Koch, G.G., 1977. The measurement of observer agreement for
categorical data. Biometrics, 159-174.
Larsson, S. & Wolk, A., 2007. Magnesium intake and risk of type 2 diabetes: a meta
analysis. Journal of Internal Medicine, 262, 208-214.
Laurikkala, J., Juhola, M., Kentala, E., Lavrac, N., Miksch, S. & Kavsek, B.,
Informal identification of outliers in medical data. Proceedings of the 5th
International Workshop on Intelligent Data Analysis in Medicine and
Pharmacology, 2000. Citeseer, 20-24.
Lee, S.C. & Prosky, L., 1992. Dietary fiber analysis. Cereal Foods World, 37, 765.
Lee, S.C., Prosky, L. & Devries, J.W., 1992. Determination of total, soluble, and
insoluble dietary fiber in foods - Enzymatic Gravimetric Method, MES-TRIS
buffer - Collaborative study. Journal of AOAC International, 75, 395-416.
Leterme, P., 2002. Recommendations by health organizations for pulse
consumption. British Journal of Nutrition, 88, 239-242.
Levine, M. & Ensom, M.H., 2001. Post hoc power analysis: an idea whose time has
passed? Pharmacotherapy: The Journal of Human Pharmacology and Drug
Therapy, 21, 405-409.
Li, B.W., Andrews, K.W. & Pehrsson, P.R., 2002. Individual sugars, soluble, and
insoluble dietary fiber contents of 70 high consumption foods. Journal of
Food Composition and Analysis, 15, 715-723.
Li, B.W. & Cardozo, M.S., 1993. Simplified enzymatic-gravimetric method for total
dietary fiber in legumes compared with a modified AOAC method. Journal
of Food Science, 58, 929-932.
Li, B.W., ZhenKun, Z. & Jekot, J.J., 1997. Effect of lipid extraction methods on
total dietary fiber and nonstarch polysaccharide contents of selected nuts and
seeds. Journal of AOAC International, 80, 98-101.
Li, C.-Y. & Sung, F.-C., 1999. A review of the healthy worker effect in occupational
epidemiology. Occupational Medicine, 49, 225-229.
Li, C. & Uppal, M., 2010. Canadian Diabetes Association National Nutrition
Committee Clinical Update on Dietary Fibre in Diabetes: Food Sources to
Physiological Effects. Canadian Journal of Diabetes, 34, 355-361.
Lillioja, S., Neal, A.L., Tapsell, L. & Jacobs, D.R., 2013. Whole grains, type 2
diabetes, coronary heart disease, and hypertension: Links to the aleurone
preferred over indigestible fiber. BioFactors, 39, 242.
Lima, M.d., L, Cruz, T., Rodrigues, L.E., Bomfim, O.v., Melo, J., Correia, R., Porto,
M., Cedro, A. & Vicente, E.z., 2009. Serum and intracellular magnesium
deficiency in patients with metabolic syndrome--evidences for its relation to
insulin resistance. Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice, 83, 257.
Lindstrom, J., Ilanne-Parikka, P., Peltonen, M., Aunola, S., Eriksson, J.G., Hemio,
K., Hamalainen, H., Harkonen, P., Keinanen-Kiukaanniemi, S., Laakso, M.,
Louheranta, A., Mannelin, M., Paturi, M., Sundvall, J., Valle, T.T., Uusitupa,
M., Tuomilehto, J. & Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study, G., 2006.
Sustained reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes by lifestyle
intervention: follow-up of the Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study. Lancet,
368, 1673-1679.
Lindstrm, J., Louheranta, A., Mannelin, M., Rastas, M., Salminen, V., Eriksson, J.,
Uusitupa, M. & Tuomilehto, J., 2003. The Finnish Diabetes Prevention
Study (DPS) Lifestyle intervention and 3-year results on diet and physical
activity. Diabetes care, 26, 3230-3236.
Liu, S., Willett, W.C., Manson, J.E., Hu, F.B., Rosner, B. & Colditz, G., 2003.
Relation between changes in intakes of dietary fiber and grain products and
changes in weight and development of obesity among middle-aged women.
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 78, 920-927.
Liu, S.M., Buring, J.E., Sesso, H.D., Rimm, E.B., Willett, W.C. & Manson, J.E.,
2002. A prospective study of dietary fiber intake and risk of cardiovascular
disease among women. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 39,
49-56.
Livesey, G., Taylor, R., Livesey, H. & Liu, S., 2013. Is there a dose-response
relation of dietary glycemic load to risk of type 2 diabetes? Meta-analysis of
prospective cohort studies. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 97, 584-
Lobo, R.A., 2008. Metabolic syndrome after menopause and the role of hormones.
Maturitas, 60, 10-18.
Lunn, J. & Buttriss, J.L., 2007. Carbohydrates and dietary fibre. Nutrition Bulletin,
32, 21-64.
Malik, V.S., Popkin, B.M., Bray, G.A., Desprs, J.-P. & Hu, F.B., 2010a. Sugar-
sweetened beverages, obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and cardiovascular
disease risk. Circulation, 121, 1356-1364.
Malik, V.S., Popkin, B.M., Bray, G.A., Desprs, J.-P., Willett, W.C. & Hu, F.B.,
2010b. Sugar-Sweetened Beverages and Risk of Metabolic Syndrome and
Type 2 Diabetes A meta-analysis. Diabetes Care, 33, 2477-2483.
Maas, E., Bravo, L. & Saura-Calixto, F., 1994. Sources of error in dietary fibre
analysis. Food Chemistry, 50, 331-342.
Maas, E. & Saura-Calixto, F., 1993. Ethanolic precipitation: A source of error in
dietary fibre determination. Food Chemistry, 47, 351-355.
Mann, J. & Cummings, J., 2009. Possible implications for health of the different
definitions of dietary fibre. Nutrition, Metabolism and Cardiovascular
Diseases, 19, 226-229.
Mann, J., Cummings, J., Englyst, H., Key, T., Liu, S., Riccardi, G., Summerbell, C.,
Uauy, R., Van Dam, R. & Venn, B., 2007. FAO/WHO scientific update on
carbohydrates in human nutrition: conclusions. European Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 61, S132-S137.
Manson, J.E., Stampfer, M.J., Colditz, G.A., Willett, W.C., Rosner, B., Hennekens,
C.H., Speizer, F.E., Rimm, E.B. & Krolewski, A.S., 1991. Physical activity
and incidence of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in women. Lancet,
338, 774-778.
Marconi, E., Ruggeri, S., Cappelloni, M., Leonardi, D. & Carnovale, E., 2000.
Physicochemical, nutritional, and microstructural characteristics of chickpeas
(Cicer arietinum L.) and common beans (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) following
microwave cooking. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 48, 5986-
5994.
Marlett, J.A., 1992. Content and composition of dietary fiber in 117 frequently
consumed foods. Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 92, 175-186.
Marlett, J.A. & Longacre, M.J., 1996. Comparison of in vitro and in vivo measures
of resistant starch in selected grain products. Cereal Chemistry, 73, 63-68.
Marshall, M., 2010. Ash Analysis. In: Nielsen (ed.) Food Analysis. Springer US.
Masson, L., McNeill, G., Tomany, J., Simpson, J., Peace, H., Wei, L., Grubb, D. &
Bolton-Smith, C., 2003. Statistical approaches for assessing the relative
validity of a food-frequency questionnaire: use of correlation coefficients
and the kappa statistic. Public Health Nutrition, 6, 313-321.
Maty, S.C., Everson-Rose, S.A., Haan, M.N., Raghunathan, T.E. & Kaplan, G.A.,
2005. Education, income, occupation, and the 34-year incidence (196599)
of type 2 diabetes in the Alameda County Study. International Journal of
Epidemiology, 34, 1274-1281.
Mayer-Davis, E.J., D'Agostino Jr, R., Karter, A.J., Haffner, S.M., Rewers, M.J.,
Saad, M. & Bergman, R.N., 1998. Intensity and amount of physical activity
in relation to insulin sensitivity. JAMA: Journal of the American Medical
Association, 279, 669-674.
Mayer-Davis, E.J., Monaco, J.H., Hoen, H.M., Carmichael, S., Vitolins, M.Z.,
Rewers, M.J., Haffner, S.M., Ayad, M.F., Bergman, R.N. & Karter, A.J.,
1997. Dietary fat and insulin sensitivity in a triethnic population: the role of
obesity. The Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Study (IRAS). American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 65, 79-87.
McCane, D., Hanson, R.L., Charles, M.-A., Jacobsson, L.T., Pettitt, D.D., Bennett,
P.H. & Knowler, W.C., 1994. Comparison of tests for glycated haemoglobin
and fasting and two hour plasma glucose concentrations as diagnostic
methods for diabetes. British Medical Journal, 308, 1323-1328.
McCleary, B. & Prosky, L., 2001. Advanced dietary fibre technology, Blackwell
Science Ltd.
McCleary, B.V., 2007. An integrated procedure for the measurement of total dietary
fibre (including resistant starch), non-digestible oligosaccharides and
available carbohydrates. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 389, 291-
McCleary, B.V., De Vries, J.W., Rader, J.I., Cohen, G., Prosky, L., Mugford, D.C.,
Champ, M. & Okuma, K., 2010. Determination of total dietary fiber
(CODEX definition) by enzymatic-gravimetric method and liquid
chromatography: Collaborative study. Journal of AOAC International, 93,
221-233.
McCullough, M.L., Feskanich, D., Stampfer, M.J., Giovannucci, E.L., Rimm, E.B.,
Hu, F.B., Spiegelman, D., Hunter, D.J., Colditz, G.A. & Willett, W.C., 2002.
Diet quality and major chronic disease risk in men and women: moving
toward improved dietary guidance. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition,
76, 1261-1271.
McDougall, G.J., Morrison, I.M., Stewart, D. & Hillman, J.R., 1996. Plant cell walls
as dietary fibre: Range, structure, processing and function. Journal of the
Science of Food and Agriculture, 70, 133-150.
Meeuwsen, S., Horgan, G. & Elia, M., 2010. The relationship between BMI and
percent body fat, measured by bioelectrical impedance, in a large adult
sample is curvilinear and influenced by age and sex. Clinical Nutrition, 29,
560-566.
Meisinger, C., Lwel, H., Thorand, B. & Dring, A., 2005. Leisure time physical
activity and the risk of type 2 diabetes in men and women from the general
population. Diabetologia, 48, 27-34.
Mertens, D., 2003. Challenges in measuring insoluble dietary fiber. Journal of
Animal Science, 81, 3233-3249.
Meyer, K.A., Kushi, L.H., Jacobs, D.R. & Folsom, A.R., 2001. Dietary fat and
incidence of type 2 diabetes in older Iowa women. Diabetes Care, 24, 1528-
1535.
Meyer, K.A., Kushi, L.H., Jacobs, D.R., Slavin, J., Sellers, T.A. & Folsom, A.R.,
2000. Carbohydrates, dietary fiber, and incident type 2 diabetes in older
women. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 71, 921-930.
Mitchell, D.C., Lawrence, F.R., Hartman, T.J. & Curran, J.M., 2009. Consumption
of dry beans, peas, and lentils could improve diet quality in the US
population. Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 109, 909-913.
Mitri, J., Muraru, M.D. & Pittas, A.G., 2011. Vitamin D and type 2 diabetes: a
systematic review. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 65, 1005-1015.
Mongeau, R. & Brassard, R., 1989. A comparison of three methods for analyzing
dietary fibre in 38 foods Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 2, 189-
Montonen, J., Jrvinen, R., Knekt, P., Helivaara, M. & Reunanen, A., 2007.
Consumption of sweetened beverages and intakes of fructose and glucose
predict type 2 diabetes occurrence. Journal of Nutrition, 137, 1447-1454.
Montonen, J., Knekt, P., Jarvinen, R., Aromaa, A. & Reunanen, A., 2003. Whole-
grain and fiber intake and the incidence of type 2 diabetes. American Journal
of Clinical Nutrition, 77, 622-629.
Morrish, N.J., Wang, S.L., Stevens, L.K., Fuller, J.H. & Keen, H., 2001. Mortality
and causes of death in the WHO multinational study of vascular disease in
diabetes. Diabetologia, 44, S14-S21.
Muley, A., Muley, P. & Shah, M., 2012. Coffee to reduce risk of type 2 diabetes? A
systematic review. Current Diabetes Reviews, 8, 162-168.
Murakami, K., Okubo, H. & Sasaki, S., 2005. Effect of dietary factors on incidence
of type 2 diabetes: a systematic review of cohort studies. Journal of
Nutritional Science and Vitaminology, 51, 292.
Mussatto, S.I. & Mancilha, I.M., 2007. Non-digestible oligosaccharides: A review.
Carbohydrate Polymers, 68, 587-597.
National Health Services. Five a Day [Online]. Available:
http://www.nhs.uk/LiveWell/5ADAY/Pages/5ADAYhome.aspx [Accessed
16.06 2013].
National Institute of Health and Care Excellence. 2012. Preventing type 2 diabetes:
risk identification and interventions for individuals at high risk.
National Institutes of Health. Medline Plus [Online]. U.S.A. Available:
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ [Accessed 20th March 2013].
NDNS. 2002. The National Diet & Nutrition Survey: adults aged 19 to 64 years. Her
Majestys Stationery Office (HMSO).
Nettleton, J.A., Hivert, M.-F., Lemaitre, R.N., McKeown, N.M., Mozaffarian, D.,
Tanaka, T., Wojczynski, M.K., Hruby, A., Djouss, L. & Ngwa, J.S., 2013.
Meta-Analysis Investigating Associations Between Healthy Diet and Fasting
Glucose and Insulin Levels and Modification by Loci Associated With
Glucose Homeostasis in Data From 15 Cohorts. American Journal of
Epidemiology, 177, 103-115.
Nettleton, J.A., Lutsey, P.L., Wang, Y., Lima, J.A., Michos, E.D. & Jacobs, D.R.,
2009. Diet soda intake and risk of incident metabolic syndrome and type 2
diabetes in the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA). Diabetes
Care, 32, 688-694.
Nugent, A.P., 2005. Health properties of resistant starch. Nutrition Bulletin, 30, 27-
O'Shea, N., Arendt, E.K. & Gallagher, E., 2012. Dietary fibre and phytochemical
characteristics of fruit and vegetable by-products and their recent
applications as novel ingredients in food products. Innovative Food Science
& Emerging Technologies, 16, 1-10.
Oakenfull, D., 2001. Physical chemistry of dietary fiber. CRC handbook of dietary
fiber in human nutrition, 33-44.
Office for National Statistics. 2012. Population Ageing in the United Kingdom, its
Constituent Countries and the European Union. UK.
Official Methods of Analytical Chemists, A., 1995. AOAC Official Method 991.43
Total, Soluble, and Insoluble Dietary Fibre in Foods. AOAC Official
Methods of Analysis.
Oguma, Y., Sesso, H.D., Paffenbarger, R.S. & Lee, I.M., 2005. Weight change and
risk of developing type 2 diabetes. Obesity Research, 13, 945-951.
Oh, Y.N. & Grundleger, M.L., 1990. Improvement in soluble fiber content of wheat
fiber through enzymic modification. Journal of Agricultural and Food
Chemistry, 38, 1142-1145.
Olson, B.H., Anderson, S.M., Becker, M.P., Anderson, J.W., Hunninghake, D.B.,
Jenkins, D.J., LaRosa, J.C., Rippe, J.M., Roberts, D.C. & Stoy, D.B., 1997.
Psyllium-enriched cereals lower blood total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol,
but not HDL cholesterol, in hypercholesterolemic adults: results of a meta-
analysis. Journal of Nutrition, 127, 1973-1980.
Oomah, B., Patras, A., Rawson, A., Singh, N. & Compos-Vega, R., 2011. Chemistry
of pulses. Pulse Foods: Processing, Quality and Nutraceutical Applications,
9-55.
Orozco, L.J., Buchleitner, A.M., Gimenez-Perez, G., Roqu, I.F.M., Richter, B. &
Mauricio, D., 2008. Exercise or exercise and diet for preventing type 2
diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Systematic Review, 3.
PalafoxCarlos, H., AyalaZavala, J.F. & GonzlezAguilar, G.A., 2011. The
role of dietary fiber in the bioaccessibility and bioavailability of fruit and
vegetable antioxidants. Journal of Food Science, 76, R6-R15.
Parkin, D.M., 2011. Cancers attributable to consumption of alcohol in the UK in
2010. Br J Cancer, 105, S14-S18.
Peacock, J.L. & Kerry, S., 2007. Presenting medical statistics from proposal to
publication: a step-by-step guide, Oxford University Press.
Peattie, M.E., Buss, D.H., Lindsay, D.G. & Smart, G.A., 1983. Reorganization of
the British total diet study for monitoring food constituents from 1981. Food
and Chemical Toxicology, 21, 503-507.
Pereira, M.A., O'Reilly, E., Augustsson, K., Fraser, G.E., Goldbourt, U., Heitmann,
B.L., Hallmans, G., Knekt, P., Liu, S.M., Pietinen, P., Spiegelman, D.,
Stevens, J., Virtamo, J., Willett, W.C. & Ascherio, A., 2004. Dietary fiber
and risk of coronary heart disease - A pooled analysis of cohort studies.
Archives of Internal Medicine, 164, 370-376.
Perera, A., Meda, V. & Tyler, R.T., 2010. Resistant starch A review of analytical
protocols for determining resistant starch and of factors affecting the
resistant starch content of foods. Food Research International, 43, 1959-
1974.
Priebe, M., van Binsbergen, J., de Vos, R. & Vonk, R., 2008. Whole grain foods for
the prevention of type 2 diabetes mellitus (Review).
Prosky, L., Asp, N.-G., Schweizer, T.F., DeVries, J.W., Furda, I. & Lee, S.C., 1994.
Determination of soluble dietary fiber in foods and food products:
collaborative study. Journal of AOAC International, 77, 690.
Prosky, L., Asp, N.G., Furda, I., Devries, J.W., Schweizer, T.F. & Harland, B.F.,
1985. Determination of total dietary fiber in foods and food-products -
Collaborative study. Journal of the Association of Official Analytical
Chemists, 68, 677-679.
Prosky, L., Asp, N.G., Schweizer, T.F., Devries, J.W. & Furda, I., 1992.
Determination of insoluble and soluble dietary fiber in foods and food-
products-Collebrative study. Journal of AOAC International, 75, 360-367.
Rehm, J., Baliunas, D., Borges, G.L., Graham, K., Irving, H., Kehoe, T., Parry,
C.D., Patra, J., Popova, S. & Poznyak, V., 2010. The relation between
different dimensions of alcohol consumption and burden of disease: an
overview. Addiction, 105, 817-843.
Rehman, Z.U. & Shah, W.H., 2005. Thermal heat processing effects on
antinutrients, protein and starch digestibility of food legumes. Food
Chemistry, 91, 327-331.
Reistad, R. & Frolich, W., 1984. Content and composition of dietary fiber in some
fresh and cooked norwegian vegetables. Food Chemistry, 13, 209-224.
Resnick, L., Altura, B., Gupta, R., Laragh, J., Alderman, M. & Altura, B., 1993.
Intracellular and extracellular magnesium depletion in type 2 (non-insulin-
dependent) diabetes mellitus. Diabetologia, 36, 767-770.
Rimm, E.B., Manson, J.E., Stampfer, M.J., Colditz, G.A., Willett, W.C., Rosner, B.,
Hennekens, C.H. & Speizer, F.E., 1993. Cigarette smoking and the risk of
diabetes in women. American Journal of Public Health, 83, 211-214.
Risrus, U., Willett, W.C. & Hu, F.B., 2009. Dietary fats and prevention of type 2
diabetes. Progress in Lipid Research, 48, 44.
Roberfroid, M. & Salvin, L.J., 2001. Resistant Oligosaccharides. In: Cho & Dreher
(eds.) Handbook of Dietary fibre Switzerland.
Romaguera, D., Norat, T., Wark, P., Vergnaud, A., Schulze, M., van Woudenbergh,
G., Drogan, D., Amiano, P., Molina-Montes, E. & Sanchez, M., 2013.
Consumption of sweet beverages and type 2 diabetes incidence in European
adults: results from EPIC-InterAct. Diabetologia, 56, 1520-1530.
Rose, D. & Pevalin, D.J., 2003. A researcher's guide to the national statistics socio-
economic classification, SAGE Publications Ltd.
Rosenbloom, A.L., Joe, J.R., Young, R.S. & Winter, W.E., 1999. Emerging
epidemic of type 2 diabetes in youth. Diabetes Care, 22, 345-354.
Rosner, B. & Gore, R., 2001. Measurement error correction in nutritional
epidemiology based on individual foods, with application to the relation of
diet to breast cancer. American Journal of Epidemiology, 154, 827-835.
Ruigmez, A., MartnMerino, E. & Rodrguez, L.A.G., 2010. Validation of
ischemic cerebrovascular diagnoses in the health improvement network
(THIN). Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety, 19, 579-585.
Ruxton, C. & Derbyshire, E., 2010. Women's diet quality in the UK. Nutrition
Bulletin, 35, 126-137.
Sajilata, M.G., Singhal, R.S. & Kulkarni, P.R., 2006. Resistant starch - A review.
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 5, 1-17.
Salmeron, J., Ascherio, A., Rimm, E.B., Colditz, G.A., Spiegelman, D., Jenkins,
D.J., Stampfer, M.J., Wing, A.L. & Willett, W.C., 1997a. Dietary fiber,
glycemic load, and risk of NIDDM in men. Diabetes Care, 20, 545-550.
Salmeron, J., Hu, F.B., Manson, J.E., Stampfer, M.J., Colditz, G.A., Rimm, E.B. &
Willett, W.C., 2001. Dietary fat intake and risk of type 2 diabetes in women.
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 73, 1019-1026.
Salmeron, J., Manson, J.E., Stampfer, M.J., Colditz, G.A., Wing, A.L. & Willett,
W.C., 1997b. Dietary fiber, glycemic load, and risk of non-insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus in women. JAMA: Journal of the American Medical
Association, 277, 472-477.
Salmern, J.H., Frank, B., Manson, J.E., StampferMeir, J., A., C., RimmEric, B. &
Willett, W.C., 2001. Dietary fat intake and risk of type 2 diabetes in women.
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 73, 1019-1026.
Sandhu, K.S. & Lim, S.T., 2008. Digestibility of legume starches as influenced by
their physical and structural properties. Carbohydrate Polymers, 71, 245-
Sarwar, N., Gao, P., Seshasai, S., Gobin, R., Kaptoge, S., Di Angelantonio, E.,
Ingelsson, E., Lawlor, D., Selvin, E. & Stampfer, M., 2010. Diabetes
mellitus, fasting blood glucose concentration, and risk of vascular disease: a
collaborative meta-analysis of 102 prospective studies. Lancet, 375, 2215-22.
Sattar, N., Wannamethee, S. & Forouhi, N., 2008. Novel biochemical risk factors for
type 2 diabetes: pathogenic insights or prediction possibilities? Diabetologia,
51, 926-940.
Saura-Calixto, F., 2010. Dietary fiber as a carrier of dietary antioxidants: an
essential physiological function. Journal of Agricultural and Food
Chemistry, 59, 43-49.
Saura-Calixto, F., Garca-Alonso, A., Goni, I. & Bravo, L., 2000. In vitro
determination of the indigestible fraction in foods: an alternative to dietary
fiber analysis. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 48, 3342-3347.
Scanlon, P., 2008. The English national screening programme for sight-threatening
diabetic retinopathy. Journal of Medical Screening, 15, 1-4.
Schienkiewitz, A., Schulze, M.B., Hoffmann, K., Kroke, A. & Boeing, H., 2006.
Body mass index history and risk of type 2 diabetes: results from the
European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)
Potsdam Study. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 84, 427-433.
Schneider, A.V., 2002. Overview of the market and consumption of pulses in
Europe. British Journal of Nutrition, 88, 243-250.
Schulze, M.B., Liu, S.M., Rimm, E.B., Manson, J.E., Willett, W.C. & Hu, F.B.,
2004a. Glycemic index, glycemic load, and dietary fiber intake and
incidence of type 2 diabetes in younger and middle-aged women. American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 80, 348-356.
Schulze, M.B., Manson, J.E., Ludwig, D.S., Colditz, G.A., Stampfer, M.J., Willett,
W.C. & Hu, F.B., 2004b. Sugar-sweetened beverages, weight gain, and
incidence of type 2 diabetes in young and middle-aged women. JAMA:
Journal of the American Medical Association, 292, 927-934.
Schulze, M.B., Schulz, M., Heidemann, C., Schienkiewitz, A., Hoffmann, K. &
Boeing, H., 2007. Fiber and magnesium intake and incidence of type 2
diabetes - A prospective study and meta-analysis. Archives of Internal
Medicine, 167, 956-965.
Schulze, M.B., Schulz, M., Heidemann, C., Schienkiewitz, A., Hoffmann, K. &
Boeing, H., 2008. Carbohydrate intake and incidence of type 2 diabetes in
the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)-
Potsdam Study. British Journal of Nutrition, 99, 1107-1116.
Scientific Advisory Committee of Nutrition, S., 2008. SACN statement on dietary
fibre [Online]. Available:
http://www.sacn.gov.uk/pdfs/final_draft_sacnstatement_on_dietary_fibre_fo
r_website.pdf [Accessed 20th March 2013 ].
Sebastian, R.S., Cleveland, L.E., Goldman, J.D. & Moshfegh, A.J., 2007. Older
adults who use vitamin/mineral supplements differ from nonusers in nutrient
intake adequacy and dietary attitudes. Journal of the American Dietetic
Association, 107, 1322-1332.
Selvendran, R.R., 1984. The plant cell wall as a source of dietary fiber: chemistry
and structure. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 39.
Shintani, M., Ogawa, Y., Ebihara, K., Aizawa-Abe, M., Miyanaga, F., Takaya, K.,
Hayashi, T., Inoue, G., Hosoda, K. & Kojima, M., 2001. Ghrelin, an
endogenous growth hormone secretagogue, is a novel orexigenic peptide that
antagonizes leptin action through the activation of hypothalamic
neuropeptide Y/Y1 receptor pathway. Diabetes, 50, 227-232.
Sievenpiper, J.L., Kendall, C.W.C., Esfahani, A., Wong, J.M.W., Carleton, A.J.,
Jiang, H.Y., Bazinet, R.P., Vidgen, E. & Jenkins, D.J.A., 2009. Effect of
non-oil-seed pulses on glycaemic control: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomised controlled experimental trials in people with and
without diabetes. Diabetologia, 52, 1479-1495.
Singh, B. & Saxena, A., 2010. Surrogate markers of insulin resistance: A review.
World Journal of Diabetes, 1, 36.
Slavin, J., 2003a. Impact of the proposed definition of dietary fiber on nutrient
databases. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 16, 287-291.
Slavin, J., 2003b. Why whole grains are protective: biological mechanisms.
Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 62, 129-134.
Slavin, J., 2004. Whole grains and human health. Nutrition Research Reviews, 17,
99-110.
Slavin, J. & Green, H., 2007. Dietary fibre and satiety. Nutrition Bulletin, 32, 32-42.
Slavin, J.L., 2005. Dietary fiber and body weight. Nutrition, 21, 411-418.
Slavin, J.L., Martini, M.C., Jacobs, D.R. & Marquart, L., 1999. Plausible
mechanisms for the protectiveness of whole grains. American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 70, 459s-463s.
Slimani, N., Deharveng, G., Unwin, I., Southgate, D., Vignat, J., Skeie, G., Salvini,
S., Parpinel, M., Mller, A. & Ireland, J., 2007. The EPIC nutrient database
project (ENDB): a first attempt to standardize nutrient databases across the
10 European countries participating in the EPIC study. European Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 61, 1037-1056.
Sluijs, I., Beulens, J.W., Spijkerman, A.M., Grobbee, D.E. & van der Schouw, Y.T.,
2010a. Dietary intake of total, animal, and vegetable protein and risk of type
2 diabetes in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and
Nutrition (EPIC)-NL study. Diabetes Care, 33, 43-48.
Sluijs, I., van der Schouw, Y.T., van der A, D.L., Spijkerman, A.M., Hu, F.B.,
Grobbee, D.E. & Beulens, J.W., 2010b. Carbohydrate quantity and quality
and risk of type 2 diabetes in the European Prospective Investigation into
Cancer and Nutrition-Netherlands (EPIC-NL) study. American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 92, 905-911.
Smith, L.G., 2001. Plant cell division: Building walls in the right places. Nature
Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 2, 33-39.
Sonestedt, E., verby, N.C., Laaksonen, D.E. & Birgisdottir, B.E., 2012. Does high
sugar consumption exacerbate cardiometabolic risk factors and increase the
risk of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease? Food & Nutrition
Research, 56.
Song, Y., He, K., Levitan, E., Manson, J. & Liu, S., 2006. Effects of oral magnesium
supplementation on glycaemic control in Type 2 diabetes: a metaanalysis
of randomized doubleblind controlled trials. Diabetic Medicine, 23, 1050-
1056.
Southgate, D., 1978. Dietary fiber: analysis and food sources. American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 31, S107-S110.
Southgate, D.A.T., 1969. Determination of Carbohydrates in Foods II._Unavailable
carbohydrates Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 20, 331-335.
Southgate, D.A.T., 2001. Food Components associated with dietary fiber In: Spiller
(ed.) CRC Handbook of Dietary Fibre in Human Nutrition. third edition ed.
USA: CRC PressI Llc.
Spence, M., Cade, J.E., Burley, V.J. & Greenwood, D.C., Ability of the UK
Women's Cohort Study food frequency questionnaire to rank dietary intakes:
a preliminary validation study. Proceedings-Nutrition Society of London
2002. CABI Publishing; 1999, 117A.
Stampfer, M.J., Colditz, G.A., Willett, W.C., Manson, J.E., Arky, R.A., Hennekens,
C.H. & Speizer, F.E., 1988. A prospective study of moderate alcohol
drinking and risk of diabetes in women. American Journal of Epidemiology,
128, 549-558.
Stephen, A.M., 1991. Starch and dietary fibre: their physiological and
epidemiological interrelationships. Canadian Journal of Physiology and
Pharmacology, 69, 116-120.
Stevens, J., Ahn, K., Juhaeri, Houston, D., Steffan, L. & Couper, D., 2002. Dietary
fiber intake and glycemic index and incidence of diabetes in African-
American and white adults. Diabetes Care, 25, 1715-1721.
Storlien, L.H., Higgins, J., Thomas, T., Brown, M.A., Wang, H., Huang, X.-F. &
Else, P., 2000. Diet composition and insulin action in animal models. British
Journal of Nutrition, 83, S85-S90.
Szmuilowicz, E.D., Stuenkel, C.A. & Seely, E.W., 2009. Influence of menopause on
diabetes and diabetes risk. Nature Reviews Endocrinology, 5, 553-558.
Taylor, E., Burley, V., Greenwood, D. & Cade, J., 2007. Meat consumption and risk
of breast cancer in the UK Women's Cohort Study. British Journal of
Cancer, 96, 1139-1146.
The Institute of Food Science & Technology. 2007. Institute of Food Science and
Technology Information Statement: Dietary Fibre.
Thompson, L., Yoon, J., Jenkins, D., Wolever, T. & Jenkins, A., 1984. Relationship
between polyphenol intake and blood glucose response of normal and
diabetic individuals. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 39, 745-751.
Threapleton, D., Greenwood, D., Evans, C., Cleghorn, C., Nykjaer, C., Woodhead,
C., Cade, J., Gale, C. & Burley, V., 2012. Dietary fibre intake and risk of
stroke: A systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies.
Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 71, E248.
Tierney, A., McMonagle, J., Shaw, D., Gulseth, H., Helal, O., Saris, W., JA
Paniagua, I.G. & lstrok. 2011. Effects of dietary fat modification on insulin
sensitivity and on other risk factors of the metabolic syndromeLIPGENE:
a European randomized dietary intervention study. International Journal of
Obesity, 35, 800-809.
Tiwari, U. & Cummins, E., 2011. 5 - Functional and physicochemical properties of
legume fibers. In: Brijesh, Aoife, Brian McKennaA2 - Brijesh K. Tiwari &
Brian (eds.) Pulse Foods. San Diego: Academic Press.
Tonstad, S., 2009. Cigarette smoking, smoking cessation, and diabetes. Diabetes
Research and Clinical Practice, 85, 4-13.
Trowell, H., 1972. Ischemic-disease and dietary fiber American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 25, 926-932.
Trowell, H., Southgate, D., Wolever, T., Leeds, A., Gassull, M. & DJ., J., 1976.
Letter: Dietary fibre redefined. Lancet, 1, 967.
Tu, Y.K. & Greenwood, D.C., 2012. Modern methods for epidemiology, Springer.
Tungland, B.C. & Meyer, D., 2002. Nondigestible Oligo- and Polysaccharides
(Dietary Fiber): Their Physiology and Role in Human Health and Food.
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 1, 90-109.
Tuomilehto, J., Lindstrom, J., Eriksson, J.G., Valle, T.T., Hamalainen, H., Ilanne-
Parikka, P., Keinanen-Kiukaanniemi, S., Laakso, M., Louheranta, A., Rastas,
M., Salminen, V., Uusitupa, M., Aunola, S., Cepaitis, Z., Moltchanov, V.,
Hakumaki, M., Mannelin, M., Martikkala, V., Sundvall, J. & Finnish Diabet
Prevention Study, G., 2001. Prevention of type 2 diabetes mellitus by
changes in lifestyle among subjects with impaired glucose tolerance. New
England Journal of Medicine, 344, 1343-1350.
U.S Department of Agriculture, A.R.S., 2010. USDA National Nutritent Database
for Standard Reference, Release 23. 2010 ed.
van Dam, R.M., 2006. Coffee and type 2 diabetes: From beans to beta-cells.
Nutrition, Metabolism and Cardiovascular Diseases, 16, 69-77.
Van Dam, R.M. & Hu, F.B., 2005. Coffee consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes.
JAMA: Journal of the American Medical Association, 294, 97-104.
Van Dam, R.M., Stampfer, M., Willett, W.C., Hu, F.B. & Rimm, E.B., 2002.
Dietary fat and meat intake in relation to risk of type 2 diabetes in men.
Diabetes Care, 25, 417-424.
Vazquez, G., Duval, S., Jacobs, D.R. & Silventoinen, K., 2007. Comparison of body
mass index, waist circumference, and waist/hip ratio in predicting incident
diabetes: a meta-analysis. Epidemiologic Reviews, 29, 115-128.
Veena, A., Urooj, A. & Puttaraj, S., 1995. Effect of processing on the composition
of dietary fiber and starch in some legumes Nahrung-Food, 39, 132-138.
Venn, B.J. & Mann, J.I., 2004. Cereal grains, legumes and diabetes. European
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 58, 1443-1461.
Viera, A.J. & Garrett, J.M., 2005. Understanding interobserver agreement: the kappa
statistic. Family Medicine 37, 360-363.
Villegas, R., Gao, Y.T., Yang, G., Li, H.L., Elasy, T.A., Zheng, W. & Shu, X.O.,
2008. Legume and soy food intake and the incidence of type 2 diabetes in the
Shanghai Women's Health Study. JAMA: Journal of the American Medical
Association, 87, 162-167.
Walley, T. & Mantgani, A., 1997. The UK General Practice Research Database.
Lancet, 350, 1097-1099.
Walters, S.J., 2009. Consultants' forum: should post hoc sample size calculations be
done? Pharmaceutical Statistics, 8, 163-169.
Wannamethee, S., Papacosta, O., Whincup, P., Carson, C., Thomas, M., Lawlor, D.,
Ebrahim, S. & Sattar, N., 2010. Assessing prediction of diabetes in older
adults using different adiposity measures: a 7 year prospective study in 6,923
older men and women. Diabetologia, 53, 890-898.
Wannamethee, S.G., Thomas, M.C., Whincup, P.H. & Sattar, N., 2009. Associations
Between Dietary Fiber and Inflammation, Hepatic Function, and Risk of
Type 2 Diabetes in Older Men Potential mechanisms for the benefits of fiber
on diabetes risk. Diabetes Care, 32, 1823-1825.
Ward, H., Keogh, R., Lentjes, M., Luben, R., Wareham, N. & Khaw, K., 2011. Fibre
intake in relation to serum total cholesterol levels and CHD risk: a
comparison of dietary assessment methods. European Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 66, 296-304.
Weickert, M.O., Mhlig, M., Schfl, C., Arafat, A.M., Otto, B., Viehoff, H.,
Koebnick, C., Kohl, A., Spranger, J. & Pfeiffer, A.F.H., 2006. Cereal Fiber
Improves Whole-Body Insulin Sensitivity in Overweight and Obese Women.
Diabetes Care, 29, 775-780.
Weickert, M.O. & Pfeiffer, A.F., 2008. Metabolic effects of dietary fiber
consumption and prevention of diabetes. Journal of Nutrition, 138, 439-442.
Weng, L.C., Lee, N.J., Yeh, W.T., Ho, L.T. & Pan, W.H., 2012. Lower intake of
magnesium and dietary fiber increases the incidence of type 2 diabetes in
Taiwanese. Journal of the Formosan Medical Association, 111, 651-659.
Westenbrink, S., Brunt, K. & van der Kamp, J.-W., 2013. Dietary fibre: Challenges
in production and use of food composition data. Food Chemistry, 140, 562-
Whiting, D.R., Guariguata, L., Weil, C. & Shaw, J., 2011. IDF Diabetes Atlas:
Global estimates of the prevalence of diabetes for 2011 and 2030. Diabetes
Research and Clinical Practice, 94, 311-321.
WHO/FAO, F.a.A.O.W.H.O., 1997. Carbohydrates in human nutrition: Report of a
Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consiltation, Rome, 14-18 April 1997. FAO.
Wild, S., Roglic, G., Green, A., Sicree, R. & King, H., 2004. Global prevalence of
diabetes - Estimates for the year 2000 and projections for 2030. Diabetes
Care, 27, 1047-1053.
Will, J.C., Galuska, D.A., Ford, E.S., Mokdad, A. & Calle, E.E., 2001. Cigarette
smoking and diabetes mellitus: evidence of a positive association from a
large prospective cohort study. International Journal of Epidemiology, 30,
540-546.
Willett, W., 1998. Nutritional Epidemiology, New York, Oxford Univeristy Press
Willett, W., 2012. Nutritional epidemiology, Oxford University Press.
Willi, C., Bodenmann, P., Ghali, W.A., Faris, P.D. & Cornuz, J., 2007. Active
smoking and the risk of type 2 diabetes: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. JAMA: Journal of the American Medical Association, 298, 2654-
2664.
Williamson, G., 2013. Possible effects of dietary polyphenols on sugar absorption
and digestion. Molecular Nutrition & Food Research, 57, 48-57.
Wolters, M.G.E., Verbeek, C., Vanwesterop, J.J.M., Hermus, R.J.J. & Voragen,
A.G.J., 1992. Comparison of different methods for determination of dietary
fiber. Journal of AOAC International, 75, 626-634.
Wood, P.J., 2007. Cereal -glucans in diet and health. Journal of Cereal Science, 46,
230-238.
Wood, P.J., 2010. Review: Oat and rye -glucan: properties and function. Cereal
Chemistry, 87, 315-330.
World Health Organization. 1999. Definition, diagnosis, and classification of
diabetes mellitus and its complications. Report of a WHO consultation
[Online]. Available:
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/1999/who_ncd_ncs_99.2.pdf [Accessed 5 May
2011].
World Health Organization. 2003. Diet, Nutrition and the Prevention of Chronic
Diseases. Joint WHO/FAO Expert Consultation. Geneva, Switzerland.
World Health Organization. 2006. Definition and diagnosis of diabetes mellitus and
intermediate hyperglycaemia: report of a WHO/IDF consultation [Online].
Available:
http://www.who.int/diabetes/publications/Definition%20and%20diagnosis%
20of%20diabetes_new.pdf [Accessed 5 May 2011].
World Health Organization. 2011. Use of glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) in the
diagnosis of diabetes mellitus. Geneva (Switzerland): The Organization.
World Health Organization. 2013. Obesity and overweight [Online]. Available:
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/ [Accessed 5 March
2013 2013].
Wrsch, P. & Pi-Sunyer, F.X., 1997. The role of viscous soluble fiber in the
metabolic control of diabetes: a review with special emphasis on cereals rich
in -glucan. Diabetes Care, 20, 1774-1780.
Wyness, L., 2009. Understanding the role of diet in type 2 diabetes prevention.
British Journal of Community Nursing, 14, 374-379.
Xu, Q., Park, Y., Hollenbeck, A., Schatzkin, A., Chen, H. & Song, Y., 2011.
Multivitamins, Individual Vitamin and Mineral Supplements, and Risk of
Diabetes Among Older US Adults.
Ye, E.Q., Chacko, S.A., Chou, E.L., Kugizaki, M. & Liu, S., 2012. Greater whole
grain intake is associated with lower risk of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular
disease, and weight gain. Journal of Nutrition, 142, 1304-1313.
Yeh, H.-C., Duncan, B.B., Schmidt MIs, W.N. & Brancati, F., 2010. Smoking,
smoking cessation, and risk for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Annals of Internal
Medicine, 152, 10-17.
Appendix A: Description of the main dietary fibre fractions captured by current
definitions
Fibre
component
Description
Cellulose Polysaccharides comprising up to 10,000 closely packed glucose units, arranged
linearly, making cellulose very insoluble
Hemicelluloses Polysaccharides containing sugars other than glucose. Present in both water soluble
and insoluble forms
Pectins Polysaccharides comprising galacturonic acid and a variety of sugars; soluble in hot
water and forms gels on cooling.
B-glucan Glucose polymers that, unlike cellulose, have a branched structure enabling them to
form viscous solutions.
Resistant starch Starch and starch degradation products that are not absorbed in the small intestine.
Four classes have been identified: physically inaccessible starch, RS1; native starch
granules, RS2; retrograded starch, RS3; and chemically modified starch, RS4.
Non-digestible
oligosaccharides
(NDOs)
NDOs comprising 3-9 sugar units occur naturally in plants. also be made chemically
or enzymatically from mono- or disaccharides or by enzyme hydrolysis of
polysaccharides. Fermentable and have prebiotic properties
Other synthetic
carbohydrate
compounds
Synthetic derivatives of cellulose (for example, methyl cellulose and
hydroxypropylmethyl cellulose) are non-digestible and are soluble. But hardly
fermented by microflora. Polydextrose has an average degree of polymerisation of
12 and is synthesised from glucose and sorbitol. It is partially fermented in the
colon (~50% in humans) and has bulking and prebiotic properties.
Gums and
mucilages
Gums are hydrocolloids derived from plant exudates. Mucilages are present in the
cells of the outer layers of seeds of the plantain family, for example pysillium. Both
are used as gelling agents, thickeners, stabilisers and emulsifying agents.
Lignin Not a polysaccharide but chemically bound to hemicelluloses in plant cell walls.
Other minor
components
Phytic acid (inositol hexaphosphate) is associated with fibre in some foods,
especially cereal grains. May reduce mineral absorption in the small intestine as it
binds strongly. Other compounds associated with fibre include tannins, cutins and
phytosterols.
adopted from (Buttriss and Stokes, 2008)
Appendix B: Search key words for dietary fibre and type 2 diabetes mellitus
1. exp dietary fib$/
2. exp pectin/
3. non-starch polysaccharides.tw
4. dietary fibre.tw
5. dietary fiber.tw
6. non-starch polysaccharides.mp
7. complex carbohydrates.tw
8. dietary carbohydrates.tw
9. NSP.mp
10. or/1-9
11. limit 10 to (yr=1990  Current)
12. diabetes mellitus.tw
13. diabetes.tw
14. diabetes mellitus/or exp insulin dependent diabetes mellitus/ or exp maturity onset
diabetes mellitus/ or exp non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus/
15. NIDDM.mp
16. exp diabetes prevention/
17. exp diabetes mellitus, Type 2/
18. diabetes mellitus type 2.mp
19. or/12-18
20. limit 19 to (yr=1990-Current)
21. cohort stud$.mp
22. exp prospective stud$.mp
23. incidence.mp or exp incidence/
24. relative risk.mp.
25. risk.mp
26. epidemiological stud$.mp
27. hazard ratio.mp
28. odds.ratio.mp
29. or/21-28 28
30. limit 19 to (yr=1990-Current)
Appendix C: Forest plots of dietary fibre intake, insoluble fibre intake and fibre
sources with the risk of T2DM
In all forest plots, the size of square is proportional to the weight of each study in the overall effect
estimate and horizontal lines represent the 95%CI. Pooled estimate and its 95%CI are indicated by
diamond figure.
NOTE: Weights are from random effects analysis
Overall
Salmeron J. et al., 1997 (Nurses Health Study I)
Schulze MB. et al., 2004
Author and year
Meyer KA, et al., 2000
Stevens J. et al., 2002 (White population)
Stevens J. et al., 2002 (African American population)
Salmeron J. et al., 1997 (Health Professionals)
0.98 (0.96, 1.01)
0.78 (0.62, 0.98)
1.00 (0.75, 1.34)
risk (95% CI)
0.78 (0.64, 0.96)
0.99 (0.98, 1.01)
0.99 (0.98, 1.02)
0.98 (0.73, 1.33)
Estimated
0.98 (0.96, 1.01)
0.78 (0.62, 0.98)
1.00 (0.75, 1.34)
risk (95% CI)
0.78 (0.64, 0.96)
0.99 (0.98, 1.01)
0.99 (0.98, 1.02)
0.98 (0.73, 1.33)
Estimated
1.25 .5 1 1.25 1.5
Figure 1.c Forest plot of total dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM in USA
studies
NOTE: Weights are from random effects analysis
Overall
Wannamethee SG. et al., 2009
Author and year
Schulze MB. et al., 2007
Montonen J. et al., 2003
0.82 (0.63, 1.07)
0.95 (0.59, 1.53)
risk (95% CI)
0.86 (0.65, 1.14)
0.51 (0.26, 1.00)
Estimated
0.82 (0.63, 1.07)
0.95 (0.59, 1.53)
risk (95% CI)
0.86 (0.65, 1.14)
0.51 (0.26, 1.00)
Estimated
1.25 .5 1 1.25 1.5
Figure 2.c Forest plot of total dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM in
European studies
NOTE: Weights are from random effects analysis
Overall
Hodge AM. et al., 2004
Author and year
Weng LC. et al., 2012
Wannamethee SG. et al., 2009
Meyer KA, et al., 2000
Salmeron J. et al., 1997 (Health Professionals)
Schulze MB. et al., 2007
Salmeron J. et al., 1997 (Nurses Health Study I)
0.85 (0.75, 0.97)
1.02 (0.81, 1.30)
risk (95% CI)
0.49 (0.28, 0.85)
Estimated
0.95 (0.59, 1.53)
0.78 (0.64, 0.96)
0.98 (0.73, 1.33)
0.86 (0.65, 1.14)
0.78 (0.62, 0.98)
0.85 (0.75, 0.97)
1.02 (0.81, 1.30)
risk (95% CI)
0.49 (0.28, 0.85)
Estimated
0.95 (0.59, 1.53)
0.78 (0.64, 0.96)
0.98 (0.73, 1.33)
0.86 (0.65, 1.14)
0.78 (0.62, 0.98)
1.25 .5 1 1.25 1.5
Figure 3.c Forest plot of total dietary fibre and risk of T2DM of cohort
studies with less than 7 years follow-up duration
NOTE: Weights are from random effects analysis
Overall
Author and year
Montonen J. et al., 2003
Stevens J. et al., 2002 (African American population)
Schulze MB. et al., 2004
Stevens J. et al., 2002 (White population)
0.99 (0.97, 1.01)
risk (95% CI)
Estimated
0.51 (0.26, 1.00)
0.99 (0.98, 1.02)
1.00 (0.75, 1.34)
0.99 (0.98, 1.01)
0.99 (0.97, 1.01)
risk (95% CI)
Estimated
0.51 (0.26, 1.00)
0.99 (0.98, 1.02)
1.00 (0.75, 1.34)
0.99 (0.98, 1.01)
1.25 .5 1 1.25 1.5
Figure 4.c Forest plot of total dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM of
studies with more than 7 years follow-up duration
NOTE: Weights are from random effects analysis
Overall
Author and year
Montonen J. et al., 2003
Meyer KA. et al., 2000
Montonen J. et al., 2003
Schulze MB. et al., 2007
Salmeron J. et al, 1997 (Nureses Health Study I)
Montonen J. et al., 2003
0.75 (0.66, 0.86)
risk (95% CI)
0.68 (0.36, 1.30)
0.75 (0.61, 0.91)
0.47 (0.25, 0.91)
Estimated
0.93 (0.62, 1.40)
0.77 (0.61, 0.95)
0.60 (0.29, 1.21)
0.75 (0.66, 0.86)
risk (95% CI)
0.68 (0.36, 1.30)
0.75 (0.61, 0.91)
0.47 (0.25, 0.91)
Estimated
0.93 (0.62, 1.40)
0.77 (0.61, 0.95)
0.60 (0.29, 1.21)
1.25 .5 1 1.25 1.5
Figure 5.c Forest plot of insoluble dietary fibre intake and risk of T2DM
NOTE: Weights are from random effects analysis
Overall
Stevens J. et al., 2002 (African American)
Barclay AW. et al., 2007
Hodge AM. et al., 2004
Stevens J. et al., 2002 (White population)
Author and year
0.96 (0.93, 0.99)
Estimate
0.98 (0.92, 1.03)
0.96 (0.76, 1.20)
1.08 (0.88, 1.32)
0.95 (0.92, 0.98)
risk (95% CI)
0.96 (0.93, 0.99)
Estimate
0.98 (0.92, 1.03)
0.96 (0.76, 1.20)
1.08 (0.88, 1.32)
0.95 (0.92, 0.98)
risk (95% CI)
1.25 .5 1 1.25 1.5
Figure 6.c Forest plot of cereal fibre intake (expressed as continuous
variable) and risk of T2DM
NOTE: Weights are from random effects analysis
Overall
Wannamethee SG. et al., 2009
Salmeron J. et al., 1997 (Nurses Health Study I)
Meyer KA. et al., 2000
Salmeron J. et al., 1997 (Health Proffesionals)
Weng LC. et al., 2012
Schulze MB. et al., 2004
Author and year
Schulze MB. et al., 2007
Montonen J. et al., 2003
1.03 (0.90, 1.18)
1.28 (0.89, 1.82)
1.17 (0.93, 1.46)
0.97 (0.80, 1.18)
1.12 (0.84, 1.49)
0.44 (0.24, 0.82)
1.12 (0.87, 1.46)
risk (95% CI)
0.93 (0.74, 1.17)
0.92 (0.40, 2.13)
Estimate
1.03 (0.90, 1.18)
1.28 (0.89, 1.82)
1.17 (0.93, 1.46)
0.97 (0.80, 1.18)
1.12 (0.84, 1.49)
0.44 (0.24, 0.82)
1.12 (0.87, 1.46)
risk (95% CI)
0.93 (0.74, 1.17)
0.92 (0.40, 2.13)
Estimate
1.25 .5 1 1.25 1.5
Figure 7.c Forest plot of vegetable fibre intake and risk of T2DM
NOTE: Weights are from random effects analysis
Overall
Author and year
Montonen J. et al., 2003
Schulze MB. et al., 2004
Weng LC. et al., 2012
Schulze MB. et al., 2007
Meyer KA. et al., 2000
Salmeron J. et al., 1997 (Health Professionals)
Salmeron J. et al., 1997 (Nurses Health Study I)
0.98 (0.84, 1.15)
risk (95% CI)
0.92 (0.40, 2.13)
0.79 (0.60, 1.02)
1.81 (1.05, 3.13)
0.89 (0.70, 1.13)
1.17 (0.96, 1.42)
Estimate
1.01 (0.76, 1.36)
0.87 (0.70, 1.08)
0.98 (0.84, 1.15)
risk (95% CI)
0.92 (0.40, 2.13)
0.79 (0.60, 1.02)
1.81 (1.05, 3.13)
0.89 (0.70, 1.13)
1.17 (0.96, 1.42)
Estimate
1.01 (0.76, 1.36)
0.87 (0.70, 1.08)
1.25 .5 1 1.25 1.5
Figure 8.c Forest plot of fruit fibre intake and risk of T2DM
Figure 9.c Forest plot of estimated risk and 95% confidence interval for greater
intake of soluble dietary fibre and incidence of T2DM
NOTE: Weights are from random effects analysis
Overall
Meyer KA. et al., 2000
Schulze MB. et al., 2007
Montonen J. et al., 2003
Salmeron J. et al, 1997 (Nureses Health Study I)
Author and year
0.92 (0.77, 1.09)
Estimated
0.89 (0.73, 1.08)
0.83 (0.57, 1.22)
0.57 (0.29, 1.12)
1.07 (0.86, 1.33)
risk (95% CI)
0.92 (0.77, 1.09)
Estimated
0.89 (0.73, 1.08)
0.83 (0.57, 1.22)
0.57 (0.29, 1.12)
1.07 (0.86, 1.33)
risk (95% CI)
1.25 .5 1 1.25 1.5
NOTE: Weights are from random effects analysis
Overall
Author and year
Montonen J. et al., 2003
Schulze MB. et al., 2007
Salmeron J. et al, 1997 (Nureses Health Study I)
Meyer KA. et al., 2000
0.92 (0.77, 1.09)
risk (95% CI)
0.57 (0.29, 1.12)
0.83 (0.57, 1.22)
Estimated
1.07 (0.86, 1.33)
0.89 (0.73, 1.08)
0.92 (0.77, 1.09)
risk (95% CI)
0.57 (0.29, 1.12)
0.83 (0.57, 1.22)
Estimated
1.07 (0.86, 1.33)
0.89 (0.73, 1.08)
1.25 .5 1 1.25 1.5
Figure 10.c Forest plot of estimated risk and 95% confidence interval for greater
intake of dietary fibre and incidence of T2DM in women
Appendix D: Kjeldahl method
(Jones Jr, 1991)
Appendix E: Baseline semi-quantitative FFQ completed by UKWCS participants
Appendix F: Distribution of information resources to extract AOAC-fibre values (g/100g) based on food groups in the
No Food groups FSA
review
EuroFIR
databases
database
labelling
Recipe
calculation
Total number of
food items
1 Bread-savoury biscuits 9 1 3 0 2 0 15
2 Breakfast cereals 11 5 2 2 4 0 24
3 Potatoes, rice and pasta 1 5 10 15 3 0 34
8 Grains 0 3 2 2 0 0 7
23 Biscuits , sweets and pudding 6 4 1 16 7 4 38
15 Vegetables 1 25 9 27 5 0 67
12 Vegetable dishes 1 2 6 8 7 5 29
16 Fruit 0 8 2 5 0 0 15
17 Seasonal fruit 0 6 6 4 0 0 16
18 Dried fruit 0 3 3 7 2 0 15
9 Nuts and seeds 0 6 2 2 0 0 10
10 Pulses 0 0 1 16 1 1 19
4 Dairy and non dairy products 2 0 1 37 7 2 49
13 Meat 3 0 4 39 25 4 75
14 Fish 0 0 1 23 8 3 35
11 Egg/egg dishes 0 0 1 5 1 4 11
Margarines/butters and
spreads 0 0 0 10 0 0 10
6 Spread 0 0 2 4 6 1 13
19 Sweet snacks 0 0 3 5 7 0 15
20 Savoury snacks 0 0 1 8 1 1 11
7 Sauces and soups 0 0 0 7 13 0 20
21 Beverages 0 0 2 10 2 0 14
22 Alcohol 0 0 0 5 0 0 5
24 Other 0 0 0 1 0 0 1
Total number of food items 36 68 62 258 101 25 545
Appendix G: Baseline FFQ food items list in each food group
Food groups FFQ food
items numbers
Food items
Cereals high
in fibre
3,5,8,13,14,15,
68,70
wholemeal bread average, papadums, crispbread, muesli, all bran,
Weetabix, oat, wheat germ
Cereals
source of fibre
2,4,6,9,10,11,2
2,69,173,204,2
brown bread average, chapattis, tortillas, cream crackers, porridge,
sugar coated cereals , wholemeal pasta ,burger, cereal bar, chocolate
biscuits, fruitcake, buns, scones, fruit pie
Other cereals
1,7,12,21,2 ,26
, 67, 71,
203,205,
207,208,211
white bread, pitta, white pasta, white rice, brown rice, macaroni cheese,
couscous, non-sugar cereal, wild rice, plain biscuits, sandwich biscuits
sponge cakes, sponge puddings
Potatoes 16-20 boiled potato, jacket potato, potato salad chips, roasted potato barley
Fruit
53, 149-172
apple, avocado, bananas, grapes, kiwi, mango, orange, papaya, pears,
pineapple, apricot, melon, nectarines, peaches, plums, raspberries,
currants, rhubarb, strawberries, dates, fig, prunes, mixed dried fruits,
currants & sultanas
Vegetables
55, 90-96,
123-134, 136-
Quron, Textured vegetable protein, veg chilli, mixed beans casserole,
stir fry veg, veg dishes, veg pizza, beetroot, broccoli, Brussels,
cabbage, carrots, cauliflower, celery, coleslaw, low cal coleslaw,
courgettes, cucumber, garlic, lettuce, leeks mushrooms, olives,
peppers, Swede, sweet corn, tomatoes, turnip, watercress
Legumes
78-85,
135,142
lentils, chickpeas, hummus, baked beans, red kidney beans, bean
sprout, blacked eyed beans, butter beans, green beans, peas
51, 56, 74-
77,181-183
Peanut butter, nut pate, peanuts, cashews, pecans, sunflower seeds,
Bombay mix, peanuts/pistachio, mix nuts
Milk and milk
products
27-42 , 212-
thick & creamy yogurt, Greek yogurt, fromage frais, dairy desserts,
sour cream, soya yogurt, double cream, ice cream, milk pudding,
cheese, cottage cheese, cheese and onion, soya cheese, milk whole,
milk channel island, soy milk, sterilized milk
Meat and
meat products
97-115
beef, beef stew, pork, pork dishes, lamb, lamb stew, pies, pastries,
offal, pate, meat dishes, meat pizza beef burger, bacon, ham, canned
meat, sausages chicken & turkey roast, breaded chicken, chicken &
turkey sauce
Fish and fish
dishes
116-122
Fish fingers, battered fish, white fish, oily fish, shellfish, fish Roe, fish
Non-alcoholic
beverages
184-197
tea, herb tea, coffee, decaf coffee, coffee substitute, coffee whitener,
coca, Horlicks, low calorie hot chocolate, orange juice, other fruit
juice, fruit squash, fizzy soft drinks, low diet soft drinks
Alcoholic
beverages
198-202 wines, beer, cider, port, spirits
Eggs and eggs
dishes
86-89
boiled egg, omelettes scrambled, fried egg, quiche
Fat spread 43-49
Butter, block margarine, polyunsaturated margarine, other soft
margarine, low fat spreads, very low fat spread, monounsaturated
margarine
Savoury
snacks
178-180
crisps, fried snacks, low fat crisps
miscellaneous
foods
57-66
Low calorie salad cream, mayonnaise, French dressing, white sauces,
tomato ketchup, pickles, packet soup, vegetable soup, meat soup low
calorie soup.
Sugar and
confectionary
50, 52-54,
175, 176,
177,219
Marmite, chocolate spread, jam, honey, chocolate bars(Mars), mini
chocolate bars, boiled sweets, table sugar
Appendix H: Degree of agreement express as Kappa (K) and weight Kappa (Kw)
with percentage between NSP and AOAC-fibre intake in different fibre sources
No Dietary fibre intake from food groups Degree of agreement
K (%) Kw(%)
1 Cereals and cereals products 0.8(83%) 0.9(95%)
1.a Cereals high in fibre 0.9(90%) 0.9(97%)
1.b Cereals source of fibre 0.7(76%) 0.8(94%)
1.c Other cereal products 0.8(80%) 0.9(95%)
2 Vegetables 0.8(80%) 0.9(94%)
3 Fruit 0.9(90%) 0.9(97%)
4 Potatoes 0.5(61%) 0.8(90%)
5 Legumes 0.8(84%) 0.9(95%)
6 Nuts 0.9(96%) 0.9(99%)
7 Sugars, preserves and snacks confectionary 0.9(98%) 0.9(99%)
8 Sauces, soups and miscellaneous foods 0.5(58%) 0.7(86%)
9 Meat and meat products 0.8(90%) 0.9(97%)
10 Milk and milk products 0.7(76%) 0.8(94%)
12 Fish and fish dishes 0.8(81%) 0.9(95%)
Appendix I: Distributions of NSP intake by box plots and histograms with and without energy restriction
All figures shows dietary fibre intake (g/day). Fig.1A & 1B Box plot and histogram for all participants, Fig. 2A & 2B Box plot and histogram for
participants with total energy intake restricted between 500  4000 kcal/day.
0 100 200 300
Dietary NSP intake (g/day)
Figure 1B
Figure 1A
0 10 20 30 40 50
DIetary NSP intake (g/day)
Figure 3B
Figure 3A
Appendix J: List of food items for TDF calculated from recipies
No Food item name TDF content g/100g
1 Pizza, tomato, whole meal 3.5
2 Fish pie 0.9
3 Fish cake, cod, homemade 1.0
4 Fish cakes, salmon, homemade 1.0
5 Moussaka 1.5
6 Beef stew 0.8
7 Pork and apple casserole 0.7
8 Quiche, cheese, egg, wholemeal 2.9
9 Quiche lorraine, wholemeal 3.2
10 Quiche cheese and egg 0.7
11 Quiche, cheese, egg, mushroom, wholemeal 2.9
12 Scone, wholemeal, sultana 7.2
13 Pork, stir-fried with vegetables 1.1
14 Apple pie, wholemeal, pastry top and bottom 5.0
15 Crumble, fruit, wholemeal 3.3
16 Apple pie, wholemeal, one crust 3.6
17 Quorn Korma 5.2
18 Lasagne, vegetable 3.5
19 Chilli, vegetable , retail 3.1
20 Dal Dhokari 3.8
21 Fruit cake, wholemeal 3
22 Nut and vegetable roast, with egg 4.8
Appendix K: Food diary completed by participants in the UKWCS
Appendix L of Stata code
Chapter 4: Pooled estimate and forest plot of the meta-analysis
metan lnrror1 lnlci1 lnuci1, lcols(authornameyear country) boxsca (100) null(1) effect
(Estimated risk) xlabel (0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 1.25,1.50) force eform randomi nohet nowt texts(180)
/* Subgroup analysis for potential sources of heterogeneity*/
/* gender*/
metan lnrror1 lnlci1 lnuci1 if gender==1, lcols(authornameyear country) boxsca (100) null(1)
effect (Estimated risk) xlabel (0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 1.25,1.50) force eform randomi nohet nowt
texts(180)
metan lnrror1 lnlci1 lnuci1 if gender==2, lcols(authornameyear country) boxsca (100) null(1)
effect (Estimated risk) xlabel (0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 1.25,1.50) force eform randomi nohet nowt
texts(180)
/* Origin of study*/
metan lnrror1 lnlci1 lnuci1 if origin==1, lcols(authornameyear ) boxsca (100) null(1) effect
(Estimated risk) xlabel (0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 1.25,1.50) force eform randomi nohet nowt texts(180)
metan lnrror1 lnlci1 lnuci1 if origin==2, lcols(authornameyear ) boxsca (100) null(1) effect
(Estimated risk) xlabel (0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 1.25,1.50) force eform randomi nohet nowt texts(180)
/* Duration of follow-up*/
metan lnrror1 lnlci1 lnuci1 if period==0, lcols(authornameyear) boxsca (100) null(1) effect
(Estimated risk) xlabel (0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 1.25,1.50) force eform randomi nohet nowt texts(180)
metan lnrror1 lnlci1 lnuci1 if period==1, lcols(authornameyear ) boxsca (100) null(1) effect
(Estimated risk) xlabel (0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 1.25,1.50) force eform randomi nohet nowt texts(250)
Chapter 7: Kappa statistics [AOAC-fibre and NSP intakes]
/*check normality of DF variables by graphs*/
histogram aoacout if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000, normal
histogram engfibout if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000, normal
graph box aoacout if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000
sum engfibout aoacout if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000 , detail
xtile aoacoutq = aoacout , n(5)
xtile engfiboutq = engfibout , n(5)
gen NSP1000kcal = (engfibout*1000)/kcal
gen DF1000kcal = (aoacout*1000)/kcal
xtile DFg1000kcalq = DFg1000kcal , n(5)
xtile NSPg1000kcalq = NSPg1000kcal , n(5)
by aoacoutq, sort : summarize aoacout if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000, normal
by DFg1000kcalq , sort : summarize DFg1000kcal if kcal>=500 & kcal <=4000
by engfiboutq, sort : summarize engfibout if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000, normal
by NSPg1000kcalq , sort : summarize NSPg1000kcal if kcal>=500 & kcal <=4000
summarize NSPg1000kcal if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000, detail
summarize DFg1000kcal if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000, detail
tabulate aoacoutq engfiboutq if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000, row col
/* assess degree of agreement*/
kap engfiboutq aoacoutq if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000, tab
kap engfiboutq aoacoutq if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000, tab w(w)
kap DFg1000kcalq NSPg1000kcalq if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000, tab w(w)
tabulate DFg1000kcalq NSPg1000kcalq if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000, row
regress aoacout engfibout if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000/*regression equation*/
predict resids, residuals/* the residuals are the diff between the observed value and fitted value
or the estimated expected value*/
histogram resids, normal/* distribution to meet condition*/
predict fitted, xb
scatter resids fitted
scatter aoacout engfibout if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000
/*high NSP and AOAC-fibre consumers*/
/*testing normality of baseline variables [age as example] */
by engfiboutq, sort : summarize age if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000
hist age if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000, by (engfiboutq) normal
oneway age engfiboutq if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000, tabulate
by engfiboutq, sort : summarize NSP1000kcal if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000
hist NSP1000kcal if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000, by (engfiboutq) normal
/* chi square test used for categorical variables of interest for descriptive tables */
tab newclass engfiboutq if kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000, row col chi
testparm i.newclass /* overall p value is recorded in the table*/
regress engfibout age bmi vitamin smoke vitc alkcal iron i.newclass pamins i.foodgrp3 if
kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000
predict r3, rstudent
hist r3, normal
predict f3, xb
rvfplot
regress aoacout age bmi vitamin smoke vitc alkcal iron i.newclass pamins i.foodgrp3 if
kcal>=500 & kcal<=4000
predict r4, rstudent
hist r4, normal
predict f4, xb
rvfplot
Chapter 8: Stata Code for logistic regression analyses [AOAC-fibre intake as
example]
/*For continuous OR*/
/*unadjusted OR model*/
xi: logistic DM aoacout if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000, or
/*model 1 age adjustment */
xi: logistic DM aoacout age if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000, or
/*model 2 adjust age(con) weight change(con) kcal(con) smoke(2cat)*/
xi: logistic DM aoacout age wtchangep smoke if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
xtile ethanol3 = ethanol2007, n(3)
/*model 3 adjust age(con), kcal(cont), SES(3cat) weight change(con) alcohol intake(3
groups) smoke(2cat) METs(con)*/
xi: logistic DM aoacout age i.newclass wtchangep i.ethanol3 smoke total_mets if kcal>=500 &
kcal<=5000
/* Model 4 add family history of diabetes*/
xi: logistic DM aoacout age MG i.newclass wtchangep ethanol2 kcal smoke total_mets
famhisdiab if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000, or
/* categorical OR*/
xtile aoacoutq = aoacout, n(5)
/* age adjusted model*/
xi: logistic DM i.aoacoutq age if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000, or
test _Iaoacoutq_2 _Iaoacoutq_3 _Iaoacoutq_4 _Iaoacoutq_5
/*model 2 adjust age(con) weight change(con) kcal(con) smoke(2cat)*/
xi: logistic DM i.aoacoutq age kcal smoke wtchangep if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000, or
test _Iaoacoutq_2 _Iaoacoutq_3 _Iaoacoutq_4 _Iaoacoutq_5
/*model 3 adjust age(con), kcal(cont), SES(3cat) weight change(con) alcohol intake(3
groups) smoke(2cat) METs(con)*/
xi: logistic DM aoacoutq age i.newclass wtchangep i.ethanol3 smoke total_mets if kcal>=500
& kcal<=5000
test _Iaoacoutq_2 _Iaoacoutq_3 _Iaoacoutq_4 _Iaoacoutq_5
/* Model 4 add family history of diabetes*/
xi: logistic DM aoacoutq age MG i.newclass wtchangep ethanol2 kcal smoke total_mets
famhisdiab if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000, or
test _Iaoacoutq_2 _Iaoacoutq_3 _Iaoacoutq_4 _Iaoacoutq_5
/*subgroup analysis*/
gen BMI2 = .
replace BMI2=0 if bmi<25
replace BMI2=1 if bmi>=25
label define BMI2 0 "Normal BMI " 1 "Overweight and obese"
label values BMI2 BMI2
tab DM BMI2
sort BMI2
by BMI2: logit DM aoacout age if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000, or
sort BMI2
by BMI2: logit DM i.aoacoutq age if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000, or
sort BMI2
by BMI2: logit DM engfibout age if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000, or
sort BMI2
by BMI2: logit DM i.engfiboutq age if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000, or
Chapter 9: Stata code for logistic regression analysis [legumes intake and risk of
T2DM]
/* legumes intake UKWCS dataset */
gen DL = gpd78+ gpd79+ gpd80+ gpd81+ gpd82+ gpd83+ gpd84+ gpd85
label variable DL "dried legumes g per day"
gen FL = gpd135+ gpd142
label variable DL "fresh legumes g per day"
gen legumes = DL+FL
label variable legumes " total legumes intake g/day"
sum legumes DL FL, if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
tabstat legumes DL FL, statistics( mean sd iqr p50 max min p25 p75 p99 ), if kcal>=500 &
kcal<=5000
/*unadjusted model dose response relationship*/
logistic DM DL if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
logistic DM FL if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
logistic DM legumes if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
/*age adjusted model */
logistic DM DL age if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
logistic DM FL age if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
logistic DM legumes age if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
/*fully adjusted model */
xi: logistic DM DL age kcal i.smoke wtchangep i.newclass i.ethanol3 total_mets if kcal>=500
& kcal<=5000, or
xi: logistic DM FL age kcal i.smoke wtchangep i.newclass i.ethanol3 total_mets if kcal>=500
& kcal<=5000, or
xi: logistic DM legumes age kcal i.smoke wtchangep i.newclass i.ethanol3 total_mets if
kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000, or
/* increment per half portion daily with risk of diabetes */
gen DL40 = DL/40
label variable DL40 "dried legumes 40g intake per day equivalent to 1/2 recommanded
portion"
gen FL40 = FL/40
label variable FL40 "fresh legumes 40g per day 30g equivalent to 1/2 recommanded portion"
gen legumes40 = legumes/40
label variable FL40 "total legumes 40g per day 30g equivalent to 1/2 recommanded portion "
/*unadjusted model*/
logistic DM DL40 if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
logistic DM FL40 if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
logistic DM legumes40 if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
/*age adjusted model*/
logistic DM DL40 age if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
logistic DM FL40 age if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
logistic DM legumes40 age if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
/*fully adjusted model */
xi: logistic DM DL40 age kcal i.smoke wtchangep i.newclass i.ethanol3 total_mets if
kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000, or
xi: logistic DM FL40 age kcal i.smoke wtchangep i.newclass i.ethanol3 total_mets if
kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000, or
xi: logistic DM age kcal i.smoke wtchangep i.newclass i.ethanol3 total_mets if kcal>=500 &
kcal<=5000, or
/* legumes intake is categorized into quartiles to examine the trend of increasing intake
with risk of diabetes*/
xtile DLq = DL , n(3)
xtile FLq = FL , n(3)
xtile legumesq = legumes , n(3)
/*unadjusted model */
xi:logistic DM i.DLq if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
test _IDLq_2 _IDLq_3
xi:logistic DM i.FLq if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
test _IFLq_2 _IFLq_3
xi:logistic DM i.legumesq if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
test _Ilegumesq_2 _Ilegumesq_3
/* age model 1*/
xi:logistic DM i.DLq age if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
test _IDLq_2 _IDLq_3
xi:logistic DM i.FLq age if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
test _IFLq_2 _IFLq_3
xi:logistic DM i.legumesq age if kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000
test _Ilegumesq_2 _Ilegumesq_3
/*fully adjusted model*/
xi: logistic DM i.DLq age kcal i.smoke wtchangep i.newclass i.ethanol3 total_mets if
kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000, or
test _IDLq_2 _IDLq_3
xi: logistic DM i.FLq age kcal i.smoke wtchangep i.newclass i.ethanol3 total_mets if
kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000, or
test _IFLq_2 _IFLq_3
xi: logistic DM i.legumesq age kcal i.smoke wtchangep i.newclass i.ethanol3 total_mets if
kcal>=500 & kcal<=5000, or
test _Ilegumesq_2 _Ilegumesq_3
Chapter 10 Comparison between baseline FFQ-fibre, repeated FFQ-fibre and
diary-fibre
xtile engfiboutq = engfibout, n(5)
xtile rfibreq = rfibre, n(5)
xtile nsp4ddq = nsp4dd, n(5)
kap engfiboutq rfibreq if rfibre=.
kap engfiboutq rfibreq if rfibre=., w(w)
kap engfiboutq nsp4ddq if nsp4dd=. & MaxOfDay>=3
kap engfiboutq nsp4ddq if nsp4dd=. & MaxOfDay>=3, w(w)
kap rfibreq nsp4ddq if rfibre=.
kap rfibreq nsp4ddq if rfibre=., w(w)
tabulate engfiboutq rfibreq , chi row col
tabulate engfiboutq nsp4ddq if MaxOfDay>=3 , chi row col
tabulate rfibreq nsp4ddq if rfibre=., chi row col
/* fibre density intake*/
xtile dd4q = dd4, n(5)
xtile ffqq = ffq, n(5)
xtile rffqq = rffq, n(5)
kap ffqq rffqq if rfibre=.
kap ffqq rffqq if rfibre=., w(w)
kap ffqq dd4q if nsp4dd=. & MaxOfDay>=3
kap ffqq dd4q if nsp4dd=. & MaxOfDay>=3, w(w)
kap rffqq dd4q if rfibre=.
kap rffqq dd4q if rfibre=., w(w)
tabulate ffqq rffqq , chi row col
tabulate ffqq dd4q if MaxOfDay>=3 , chi row col
tabulate rffqq dd4q if rfibre=., chi row col
/* normal distributed Pearson correlation used and if not normally distributed then spearman
correlation used */
pwcorr nsp4dddensity nsp4dd _Englyst IDF4dd SDF4dd engfibout NSPdensity insolfibout
solfibout if MaxOfDay>=3, sig
/*not normal distributed*/
spearman Cereal4dd Fruit4dd Vegetables4dd Nut4dd cnspffqbl fnsoffqbl vnspffqbl nnspffqbl if
MaxOfDay>=3
ci2 Cereal4dd cnspffqbl if MaxOfDay>=3, spearman
ci2 Fruit4dd fnsoffqbl if MaxOfDay>=3, spearman
ci2 Vegetables4dd vnspffqbl if MaxOfDay>=3, spearman
ci2 Nut4dd nnspffqbl if MaxOfDay>=3, spearman
/* Bland-Altman method for continuous variables between 2 methods [diary-fibre and
baseline FFQ-fibre as example]*/
baplot nsp4dd engfibout if nsp4dd=. & MaxOfDay>=3
baplot nsp4dddensity NSPdensity if nsp4dd=. & MaxOfDay>=3
/* Bland-Altman method for main fibre sources [ cereal fibre as example]*/
baplot cnspffqbl Cereal4dd if nsp4dd=. & MaxOfDay>=3
/* Bland-Altman method for main fibre sources [fibre density]*/
gen cffqk = cnspffqbl*1000/kcal
baplot cffqk c4ddk if nsp4dd=. & MaxOfDay>=3
/*Kappa Statistic [diary-fibre and baseline FFQ-fibre as example]*/
xtile nsp4ddq = nsp4dd, n(5)
xtile engfiboutq = engfibout, n(5)
kap engfiboutq nsp4ddq if nsp4dd=. & MaxOfDay>=3
kap engfiboutq nsp4ddq if nsp4dd=. & MaxOfDay>=3 , w(w)
tabulate engfiboutq nsp4ddq if nsp4dd=. & MaxOfDay>=3 , chi row col
Appendix M: Copies of ethical approval letters from two local committee
