Microsoft Word - Final corrected thesis_printing version.docx
Diet, menopause and risk of hormone-
related cancers 
Yashvee Dunneram 
Submitted in accordance with the requirements for 
the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
The University of Leeds 
School of Food Science and Nutrition 
April 2019
Intellectual Property and Publication Statements 
I hereby confirm that the work submitted is my own, except where work which has 
formed part of jointly-authored publications has been included. My contribution and the 
other authors to this work has been explicitly indicated below. I confirm that appropriate 
credit has been given within the thesis where reference has been made to the work of 
others. 
Chapter 1 entitled Background of study incorporates the majority of a journal article: 
Dunneram YD, Greenwood DC, Cade JE. Diet, menopause and the risk of 
ovarian, endometrial and breast cancer. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society. 
2019; 78(3): 438-448. 
YD designed and conducted literature search, critically evaluated the literature, 
interpreted results, won award for postgraduate competition, presented the paper at 
international conference, and wrote the manuscript. JEC and DCG critically revised the 
manuscript for important intellectual content. 
Chapter 3 entitled Comparison between diets of pre- and post-menopausal women from 
the UK Womens Cohort Study incorporates a small portion that has been published in 
the conference proceeding for the Nutrition Society Summer Meeting (1114 July 2016, 
New technology in nutrition research and practice): 
Dunneram YD, Burley VJ, Cade JE, Greenwood DC. Dietary pattern by 
menopausal status in the UK Women's Cohort Study. Proceedings of the Nutrition 
Society. 2016; 75(OCE3).  
YD did the data analysis and wrote the manuscript. All authors were involved in the study 
design, interpretation of findings, editing and approving the final draft. 
Chapter 4 entitled Dietary intake and age at natural menopause: results from the UK 
Womens Cohort Study is an exact copy of the journal article: 
Dunneram YD, Greenwood DC, Burley VJ, Cade JE. Dietary intake and age at 
natural menopause: results from the UK Womens Cohort Study. Journal of 
Epidemiology and Community Health. 2018. 72(8): 733-740.  
YD did the data analysis and wrote the manuscript. All authors were involved in the study 
design, interpretation of findings, editing and approving the final draft. 
Chapter 5 entitled Dietary patterns and age at natural menopause in the UK Womens 
Cohort Study: A comparison between principal component analysis and reduced rank 
regression incorporates a small portion that has been published in the conference 
proceeding for the Nutrition Society Summer Meeting (1012 July 2018, Getting energy 
balance right) and the Society for Social Medicine: 
Dunneram YD, Greenwood DC, Cade JE. Associations between dietary patterns 
and age at natural menopause in the UK Women's Cohort Study. Proceedings of 
the Nutrition Society. 2018; 77(OCE4).  
Dunneram YD, Greenwood DC, Cade JE. Dietary pattern associations with age at 
natural menopause in the UK Womens Cohort Study. Journal of Epidemiology 
and Community Health. 2018, 72(Suppl 1) A19. 
YD designed the study, conducted data analysis, interpreted results, and wrote the 
manuscript. JEC and DCG were also involved in the study design, interpretation of 
findings, editing and approving the final draft. 
Chapter 6 entitled Soy intake and vasomotor menopausal symptoms among midlife 
women: a pooled analysis of five studies from the InterLACE consortium is an exact 
copy of the journal article: 
Dunneram Y, Chung HF, Cade JE, Greenwood DC, Dobson AJ, Mitchell ES, 
Woods NF, Brunner EJ, Yoshizawa T, Anderson D, Mishra GD. Soy intake and 
vasomotor menopausal symptoms among midlife women: a pooled analysis of 
five studies from the InterLACE consortium. European Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. 2019. Epub ahead of print 
YD, HFC and GDM designed the research and had primary responsibility for the final 
content. YD performed the statistical analysis, interpreted results and wrote the 
manuscript. JEC, DCG, ESM, NFW, EJB, TY, and DA contributed to the data. HFC, 
DCG, JEC, AJD and GDM also provided statistical input, helped with interpretation of 
the results and reviewed the manuscript for important intellectual content. 
Chapter 7 entitled Diet and risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer: UK Womens 
Cohort Study is an exact copy of the journal article: 
Dunneram YD, Greenwood DC, Cade JE. Diet and risk of breast, endometrial and 
ovarian cancer: UK Womens Cohort Study. British Journal of Nutrition. 2018; 
122(5): 564-574. 
YD was responsible for data analysis and writing the manuscript. All authors were 
involved in the study design, interpretation of findings, editing and approving the final 
article. 
This copy has been supplied on the understanding that it is copyright material and that no 
quotation from the thesis may be published without proper acknowledgement. 
The right of Yashvee Dunneram to be identified as Author of this work has been 
asserted by her in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
 2019 The University of Leeds and Yashvee Dunneram 
Rationale for submitting the thesis in an alternative format 
I currently have four published journal articles as outlined previously which are 
part of my doctoral degree at the University of Leeds. In addition, I have two papers in 
preparation. Thus, with the approval and encouragement of my supervisory team and as 
I fulfil the criteria for the alternative format under the guidelines of the School of Food 
Science and Nutrition, I have opted for submitting my thesis in the alternative format.  
The thesis includes a background of the study area, which is followed by a review 
of literature. The next chapters include results section presented in a suitable format as in 
a peer-reviewed journal. The last section consists of an overall discussion section which 
provides a summary of the findings from the individual results chapters, drawing together 
the various outcomes of the work into a coherent synthesis, evaluation of the methods 
used and indicating directions for future work. Appendices have also been included to 
attach supplementary materials from the various publications as well as for the other 
chapters in order to provide additional details. 
Thesis Structure 
Chapter 1: Background of study, 
motivation of study, aims & objectives
 Age at natural menopause
 Ovarian cancer
 Endometrial cancer
 Breast cancer
Exposure
Study outcomes
 Presence of vasomotor 
symptoms
Chapter 2: Literature 
review
Chapter 3: Comparison between diets 
of pre and post-menopausal women
Chapter 4a: Dietary intake and age at 
natural menopause
Chapter 5: Dietary patterns and age at 
natural menopause
Chapter 7b: Diet and risk of breast, 
endometrial & ovarian cancers
Chapter 6c: Soy intake and 
vasomotor symptoms among 
midlife women: a pooled 
analysis of five studies 
Chapter 8: Overall discussion, recommendations and conclusion
InterLACE UKWCS
a Dunneram YD, Greenwood DC, Burley VJ, Cade JE. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health. 2018;72(8):733-740.  
b Dunneram YD, Greenwood DC, Cade JE. British Journal of Nutrition. 2018; 122(5): 564-574. 
c Dunneram YD, Chung HF, Cade JE, et al. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2019. 
Acknowledgements 
 I would first and foremost like to thank God for helping me throughout to complete my 
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisory panel Prof Janet Cade and 
Dr Darren Greenwood for their support and guidance whenever needed. It is their par 
excellence knowledge in the subject area, constant motivation, and patience which has 
kept my spirit and confidence high for conducting my research, publishing papers, 
participating in various competitions, as well as conferences. I also feel very privileged 
to have such wonderful supervisors who have allowed me to take independent decisions 
for my research. They have not only contributed to my overall academic growth but also 
helped me to be a more confident person. I am also thankful for the career advice they 
have given me. 
My gratitude also goes to Dr Victoria Burley who was on the supervisory panel at the 
beginning of my research journey. Dr Victoria has been very helpful in providing crucial 
guidance in the first year of my research. Most importantly, along with Prof Janet, 
Victoria was also the key person to have had the confidence in me and accepting me on 
board as their PhD student.  
I am also grateful to Neil Hancock who has previously been involved in updating the 
cancer dataset. My thanks go to both Neil and Diane Threapleton who have shared their 
know-how for helping me update the cancer dataset with more recent data from the 
National Health Services Digital. Moreover, I am thankful to all the women who 
contributed to the UK Women's Cohort Study and all the people who have been involved 
in initiating the cohort, collected, managed and processed all the data. I would also like 
to thank Dr Nigel A. Simpson for his valuable feedback for the Chapter 1 of this thesis. 
My most profound appreciation goes to Prof Gita Mishra from the University of 
Queensland and pioneer of the InterLACE consortium who has allowed to access to use 
the data for my research. I am also grateful to Hsin-Fang Chung for being both a friend 
and a mentor during my time in Brisbane. I acknowledge the constructive comments of 
Prof Annette Dobson for the part of my research. Special mention also goes to all the 
study teams who formed part of the InterLACE consortium and the participants who 
volunteered for the respective studies. 
I am grateful to my sponsor, the Commonwealth Scholarships, without which this PhD 
would not have been possible. I extend my appreciation to my program officer and all the 
staff who have helped me throughout. I have enjoyed all the workshops organised by the 
commission which I have had the opportunity to attend.  
I would always remember my fellow PhD colleagues from the Nutritional Epidemiology 
group with whom I have shared some amazing time. I owe my thanks to them for all the 
moments of laugh we had together during catch-up times in the office and also during our 
outdoor get-togethers. In particular, I owe my gratitude to my dear friend Essra Noorwali 
for always supporting me and giving me good word of advice. My appreciation goes to 
all the research staff members at the School of Food Science and Nutrition for always 
providing me with help and advice whenever required. Additionally, I would like to thank 
the staff and research students in the School of Public Health at the University of 
Queensland for sharing lovely time over lunch which helped me during my hectic days 
in Brisbane.  
Finally, I owe huge thanks to my family for their utmost support, constant 
encouragements and prayers which have helped me achieve all my targets.  
Abstract 
Background: The timing of menopause can predict the duration of vasomotor 
menopausal symptoms (VMS), as well as the risk of hormone-related cancers such as 
ovarian, endometrial and breast cancer. Although evidence suggest an association 
between diet and the timing of menopause and its associated sequelae, current evidence 
are limited and conflicting. Thus, this thesis studied the associations between diet and age 
at natural menopause, the presence of VMS and the risk of hormone-related cancers. 
Methods: Two of the largest and most complete datasets in the world were used to 
explore this topic: the UK Womens Cohort Study (UKWCS) and the International 
collaboration for a Life course Approach to reproductive health and Chronic disease 
Events (InterLACE).  
Results: In the UKWCS, prospective analyses demonstrated that high intakes of oily fish 
and fresh legumes were associated with a delayed onset of menopause. Conversely, 
refined pasta and rice was associated with an earlier menopause. Specific dietary patterns 
were also linked to the onset of natural menopause. Furthermore, survival analyses 
demonstrated that intakes of processed meat and total meat were associated with a higher 
risk of breast and endometrial cancer. Higher intakes of tomatoes and dried fruits were 
inversely associated with breast and endometrial cancer respectively.  
Using InterLACE consortium, a pooled analysis of three studies showed that soy product 
consumption was protective against the incidence of VMS.  
Conclusion: This work has demonstrated, for the first time, how diet can play a role in 
influencing age at natural menopause in the UK. Further evidence for an association 
between diet and the presence of VMS and the risk of hormone-related cancers was 
provided. The complexity and cultural variations in diet suggest the need for further 
observational studies as well as randomized control trials to confirm whether specific 
dietary changes could modify the timing of natural menopause.
Table of Contents 
1.6.4 Other protective effect of diet against the risk of hormone-dependent 
1.7 Diet  a determinant of the timing of menopause and its associated sequelae
Chapter 3  Comparison between diets of pre- and post-menopausal women from 
3.3.2 Association between diet, nutrient intakes and menopausal status 115 
Chapter 4  Dietary intake and age at natural menopause: results from the UK 
4.3.2 Association between food groups and age at natural menopause .. 136 
Chapter 5   Dietary patterns and age at natural menopause in the UK Womens 
Cohort Study: A comparison between principal component analysis and 
5.3.3 Correlation between dietary patterns derived from principal 
Chapter 6  Soy intake and vasomotor menopausal symptoms among midlife 
women: a pooled analysis of five studies from the InterLACE consortium
Chapter 7  Diet and risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer:  UK 
8.2.4 Assessment of potential confounders by Directed Acyclic Graphs237 
List of Figures 
Figure 1.1 The Stages of Reproductive Aging Workshop + 10 staging system for 
Figure 1.2 Potential mechanistic pathways though which diet can influence onset of 
Figure 1.3 (A) Age-standardised rates for the incidence of ovarian, corpus uteri and 
breast cancer by region, (B) Age-standardised rates for the mortality of ovarian, 
Figure 1.5 Research objectives and summarised methodology mapped onto result 
Figure 2.1 Flow diagram of selection process relating to diet and age at natural 
Figure 2.2 Flow diagram of selection process relating to diet and vasomotor 
Figure 2.3 Flow diagram of selection process relating to diet and the risk of ovarian 
Figure 2.4 Flow diagram of selection process relating to diet and the risk of 
Figure 2.5 Flow diagram of selection process relating to diet and the risk of breast 
Figure 6.1 Forest plot of study-specific effect estimates of the cross-sectional 
association between consumption frequency of soy products and the presence of 
Figure 6.2 Forest plot of study-specific effect estimates of the cross-sectional 
association between consumption frequency of soy milk and the presence of 
Figure D.1 Flow diagram of sample for cross-sectional analyses (included five studies) 
Figure E.1 Directed acyclic graph to determine potential confounders for the association 
xviii 
Figure E.2 Directed acyclic graph to determine potential confounders for the association 
List of Tables 
Table 2.3 Evidence for the associations between diet and vasomotor menopausal 
Table 2.4 Use of menopausal status in the included studies for the associations between 
Table 2.6 Evidence for the relationship between diet and the risk of endometrial cancer
Table 3.4 Comparison between diet of premenopausal and postmenopausal women
Table 4.2 Estimates (overall and stratified on age at baseline) for the association 
between daily intake of the food groups/portion size (g) and age at natural 
Table 4.3 Estimates (overall and stratified on age at baseline) for the association 
Table 5.1 Factor loadings for food groups with a value > 0.2 in varimax rotated 
Table 5.4 Adjusted and unadjusted hazard ratios (HR) for age at natural menopause 
Table 5.5 Correlation between dietary patterns derived from principal component 
Table 6.2 Cross-sectional association of soy products and soy milk consumption 
frequency with the frequency/severity of vasomotor menopausal symptoms at 
Table 6.3 Prospective association of soy product and soy milk consumption frequency 
with the presence of vasomotor menopausal symptoms at the follow-up survey
Table 6.4 Sensitivity analysis for the prospective association between soy 
consumption and likelihood of reporting vasomotor symptoms at follow-up 188 
Table 7.2 Hazard ratios (99% confidence intervals) of breast, endometrial and ovarian 
Table 7.3 Associations between various food groups and risk of breast, endometrial 
and ovarian cancer by incidence of premenopausal and postmenopausal cancer 
Table A.1 Study Quality assessment using Newcastle-Ottawa scale for cohort studies
Table A.2 Study Quality assessment using Newcastle-Ottawa scale for case-control 
Table A.3 Study Quality assessment using adapted Newcastle-Ottawa scale for cross-
Table B.2 Sensitivity analysis of daily food groups intake/portion size and age at natural 
Table B.3 Sensitivity analysis of daily food groups intake/portion size and age at natural 
Table B.4 Sensitivity analysis of daily food groups intake/portion size and age at natural 
Table D.1 Baseline characteristics of individual studies in the interlace consortium 
Table D.2 Baseline characteristics of participants included and excluded for the 
Table E.1 Hazard ratios for the association between diet and risk of breast, endometrial 
and ovarian cancer further adjusted for family history of cancer in first-degree 
Table E.2 Hazard ratios for the association between diet and risk of breast, endometrial 
and ovarian cancer further adjusted for total energy intake and reproductive factors
Table E.3 Hazard ratios for the association between age at natural menopause and risk of 
Table E.4 Subgroup analysis by age at last natural menopause for the association between 
List of Abbreviations 
AICR American Institute for Cancer Research 
ALA Alpha-linolenic acid 
ALSWH Australian Longitudinal Study on Womens Health 
AMH Anti-mllerian hormone 
BMI Body mass index 
CI Confidence interval 
CUP Continuous Update Project 
CVD Cardiovascular diseases 
DAG Directed acyclic graph 
DHA Docosahexaenoic acid 
DNA Deoxyribonucleic Acid 
DVS Dietary variety score 
EPA Eicosapentaenoic acid 
EPIC European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition 
ER Oestrogen receptor 
FA Fatty acid 
FAS Fatty acid synthase 
FFQ Food frequency questionnaire 
FMP Final menstrual period 
FSH Follicle-stimulating hormone 
GnRH Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
GPAT Glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase 
HC Hydroxycholestrol 
Her2 Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 
HOW Healthy Ageing of Women Study 
HR Hazard ratios 
HRT Hormone replacement therapy 
HT Hormone therapy 
ICD International Classification of Diseases 
IGF Insulin-like growth factor 
InterLACE International Collaboration for a Life course Approach to 
reproductive health and Chronic disease Events 
JMWHS Japanese Midlife Womens Health Study 
LH Luteinising hormone 
MET Metabolic equivalent 
NHANES National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
NHS Nurses Health Study 
NHSIC National Health Service Information Centre 
NIH-AARP National Institutes of HealthAmerican Association of Retired 
Persons  
NLCS Netherlands Cohort Study 
NOS NewcastleOttawa scale 
OC Oral contraceptive 
PGE2 Prostaglandin E2 
PLCO Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian cancer screening trial 
PPAR Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
PR Progesterone receptor 
PCA Principal component analysis 
PUFA Polyunsaturated fatty acid 
RCTs Randomised controlled trials 
ROS Reactive oxygen species 
RRR Reduced ranked regression & Relative risk ratio 
SHBG Sex-hormone binding globulin 
SMWHS Seattle Midlife Womens Health Study 
SREBP-1c Sterol regulatory element binding protein-1c 
SSB Sugar-sweetened beverage 
TAG Triacylglycerol 
UK United Kingdom 
UKWCS UK Womens Cohort Study 
US United States 
VMS Vasomotor menopausal symptoms 
WCRF World Cancer Research Fund 
WHITEHALL Whitehall II study 
WHO World Health Organisation 
Chapter 1  
Background of Study 
Abstract 
Menopause, the permanent cessation of the menstrual cycle, marks the end of a 
womans reproductive lifespan. In addition to changes in sex hormone levels associated 
with menopause, its timing is another predictor of future health outcomes such as duration 
of the presence of vasomotor menopausal symptoms (VMS) and the risk of hormone-
related cancers. With aging of the population, it is estimated that worldwide 1.2 billion 
women will be menopausal by the year 2030. Previously the effects of reproductive 
factors (e.g., parity, age at menarche, pregnancy) and socio-demographic factors on 
intermediate and long-term health outcomes of menopause have been widely 
documented. However, little is known about whether diet could have an impact on these. 
Therefore, we review current evidence on the associations of diet with age at menopause, 
the presence of VMS and the risk of hormone-related cancers such as ovarian, 
endometrial and breast cancer. Dietary factors could influence the lifespan of the ovaries 
and sex-hormones levels, hence the timing of natural menopause. Few studies reported 
an association between diet, in particular, soy consumption and a reduced risk of VMS. 
Sustained oestrogen exposure has been associated with a higher risk of hormone-related 
cancers, and thus high fat and meat diets have been linked with an increased risk of these 
cancers. However, to better understand the mechanistic pathways involved and to make 
stronger conclusions for these relationships, further studies investigating the associations 
of dietary intakes with menopause, the presence of VMS and the risk of hormone-related 
cancers are required. 
1.1 Introduction  
Menopause, the last menstrual period, marks the end of reproductive life in 
women. With aging of the population, it is estimated that worldwide 1.2 billion women 
will be menopausal by the year 2030 [1]. While menopause is inevitable, the age at which 
women reach menopause may vary depending on several factors such as geography and 
ethnicity. According to a meta-analysis of 36 studies (which included data from 35 
countries), the overall mean age of natural menopause was 48.8 years (95% CI 48.3 to 
49.2) with substantial geographic variation. For example, while the mean age of 
menopause in the United States (49.1y) and Asia (48.8y) were closest to the overall mean, 
it was higher in Europe (50.5y) and Australia (51.3y) and lower in Africa (48.4y), Latin 
America (47.2y) and the Middle East (47.4y) [2, 3].  
Although heredity [4] may be a determinant of the timing of onset of natural 
menopause, several demographic, reproductive, and lifestyle factors seem to be important 
determinants of the timing of natural menopause [5]. Findings from a systematic review 
suggested ambiguous evidence for the association between educational level and age at 
menopause [6]. However, according to another systematic review and meta-analyses of 
studies across six continents which explored the effect of socioeconomic position and 
lifestyle factors on age at natural menopause, higher education and occupation level were 
associated with a later onset of natural menopause. In addition, smoking was associated 
with an earlier onset of menopause by approximately one year whereas relationships with 
physical activity and body mass index (BMI) were inconclusive [2]. Parity and oral 
contraceptive use have been associated with a later onset of natural menopause. Menstrual 
cycle characteristics such as cycle length and regularity are also strong predictors of onset 
[7-9]. As reported by Gold [10], along with BMI and physical activity, the relationship 
between diet and age at menopause is also inconclusive.  
The menopausal transition is marked by alterations in bleeding patterns, hormone 
patterns, and physical and psychosocial characteristics. These hormonal fluctuations as a 
result of the neuroendocrine and reproductive endocrine interactions influence the risk of 
both intermediate and long term health outcomes associated with menopause [3]. One of 
the most common intermediate sequelae of the menopause transition, VMS, is defined as 
either the presence of hot flushes and/or night sweats. VMS is reported by 40-60% 
perimenopausal women and 8-80% postmenopausal women around the world [11]. The 
timing of onset of menopause can influence the length of the menopausal transition and 
hence the duration for the presence of VMS. Interestingly, the presence of VMS has also 
been associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease (CVDs) [12]. Evidence 
also shows a link between an early onset of menopause and an increased risk of 
osteoporosis, CVDs, depression and mortality [10, 13]. On the other hand, a later age at 
menopause has been associated with a higher prevalence of hormone-related cancers such 
as breast, endometrial and ovarian cancers [10]. Previous studies have demonstrated a 
link between reproductive factors, socio-demographic factors and the presence of VMS 
as well as risk of hormone-related cancers [14-16]. However, its relationship with diet, a 
modifiable risk factor, has received less attention and current evidence of association is 
conflicting.  
Therefore, this chapter gives an overview of the mechanistic pathway relating diet 
with age at natural menopause as well as elucidates the relationship between diet and 
VMS (an intermediate sequelae of menopause) in addition to the risk of hormone-
dependent cancers such as breast, endometrial and ovarian cancers (long-term outcomes 
of menopause) supported by evidence from animal and human studies. In the next 
Chapter, a literature search is also conducted to include studies on the relationship 
between diet and onset of menopause and the presence of VMS as well as the risk of 
ovarian, endometrial and breast cancer.   
1.2 Underlying physiology of menopause  
At birth, the human ovaries contain approximately 1,000,000 primordial follicles 
[17]. This un-replenishable pool of follicles is further reduced to around 100,000 per 
ovary by the time of menarche. The fate of the remaining follicles is either to develop, 
reach maturity and then ovulate or degenerate by the process known as atresia [18]. At 
the perimenopausal transition stage, only about 100 to 1,000 follicles are left in each 
ovary and exhaustion of the follicle pool is accompanied by permanently elevated levels 
of pituitary gonadotropins and the progressive reduction in anti-mllerian hormone 
(AMH) which confirms ovarian senescence [19]. The hypoestrogenic changes taking 
place during the perimenopause (menopausal transition) are a result of the interactions 
taking place between the hypothalamic-pituitary axis and the reproductive endocrine axis 
marking this irreversible decline in ovarian responsiveness [3].  
The menopausal transition is the shift from normal reproductive life to the last 
menstrual period and can last for up to 1015 years [20]. According to the Staging of 
Reproductive Aging Workshop [21], it is divided into two stages: early and late (Figure 
1.1). The early menopausal transition is marked by changes in menstrual cycle length and 
is characterised by an increase in follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) level, a decrease in 
AMH and inhibin B levels, while oestrogen level remains stable. The late transition is 
marked by oligomenorrhea (infrequent periods) and can last for 13 years on average. 
This stage is accompanied by an increase in anovulatory cycles and also significant 
fluctuations in hormonal levels. FSH level remains elevated while there is a consequent 
decrease in AMH and inhibin levels as well as oestrogen level. After the final menstrual 
period, ovarian ageing is marked by a decrease in the antral follicular count, and 
termination of ovulation and menstruation. In addition, there are further declines in AMH, 
inhibin, and oestradiol levels [22, 23]. Ovarian ageing is also accompanied by loss of 
responsiveness to FSH and luteinising hormone (LH), hence disrupting the negative 
feedback mechanism owing to the almost negligible inhibin level and the decline in 
oestrogen level. Consequently, the production of gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
(GnRH) is upregulated, stimulating the release of FSH and LH. Thus, during the initial 
years after menopause, the level of FSH peaks and gradually declines in the last 
postmenopausal stage [3]. These hormonal fluctuations as a result of the neuroendocrine 
and reproductive endocrine interactions consequently influence the risk of both 
intermediate (VMS) and long term health outcomes associated with menopause (risk of 
ovarian, endometrial and breast cancer) [3]. 
Figure 1.1 The Stages of Reproductive Aging Workshop + 10 staging system for reproductive aging in women 
( permission obtained to reuse figure [21]) 
1.3 Age at natural menopause  
Natural menopause refers to the cessation of the menstrual cycle without any 
surgical procedures such as oophorectomy or ovarian failure as a result of chemotherapy 
or radiotherapy [3]. A premature menopause is one which is reached before the age of 40 
years, an early menopause between 40-45 years and a late menopause is one after the age 
of 55 years [24, 25]. Depletion of the ovarian reserve and its responsiveness to pituitary 
gonadotropins governs the lifespan of the ovary and thus influence the onset of the timing 
of natural menopause [26]. Dietary factors and diet-related disorders can either enhance 
the lifetime of the ovaries by delaying follicular atresia or by maintaining sex-hormone 
levels involved in the feedback mechanisms of the menstrual cycle (Figure 1.2). However, 
the exact mechanisms still need to be elucidated. The association of age at natural 
menopause with chronic disease, ageing, and general health makes it an important subject 
of clinical and public interest [10].  
Metabolic disorders such as diabetes could accelerate reproductive ageing by 
causing premature ovarian failure through several mechanisms. A recent study conducted 
in the Southern part of India demonstrated that an early menopause was more likely to be 
reported by diabetic women, 44.65 years in diabetic women while 48.2 years in non-
diabetic women [27]. A similar relationship has been demonstrated in a study including 
women from 11 Latin American countries [28]. However, this association was only found 
in diabetic women under the age of 45 years. Furthermore, findings from the prospective 
Nurses Health Study II demonstrated that a high vitamin D intake was associated with a 
lower risk of an early onset of menopause [29] which could be due to the fact that a high 
serum 25-dihydroxyvitamin D concentration could reduce the risk of diabetes as well as 
metabolic syndrome [30]. These findings thus indicate that the presence of type II 
diabetes, a diet-related disease could lead to an earlier onset of menopause. 
Vegetarianism has also been linked to an earlier age at natural menopause [31]. 
Vegetarian diets are usually characterised by a high dietary fibre and low fat content 
particularly saturated fats. They tend to include more whole grains, vegetable protein 
sources such as legumes, nuts, and soy protein and exclude red meat. Dietary fibre may 
potentially interfere in the enterohepatic circulation of sex hormones, by modifying the 
metabolic pathway of oestrogens, leading to a decrease in oestrogen bioavailability [10, 
32]. Karelis et al. [33] demonstrated that vegetarians had higher levels of sex-hormone 
binding globulin (SHBG), higher total fibre intake as well as lower levels of free 
oestradiol, free testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate, and a lower BMI. An 
intervention study also reported that an increase in fibre intake (20g/d) was significantly 
and independently associated with a decrease in serum bioavailable oestradiol and total 
oestradiol concentrations while no association was found between a reduced in fat intake 
and the hormone concentrations [34].  
As opposed to the above findings which supported the association between 
vegetarianism and an earlier onset of menopause, intakes of green and yellow vegetables 
have been associated with a delayed onset of menopause [35]. Ovarian ageing is closely 
associated with increased levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) which arises mainly 
due to an imbalance between ROS production and non-enzymatic antioxidant defences 
[36]. Oocyte maturation, ovulation, luteolysis, and follicle atresia are all affected by ROS 
[37]. Antioxidant properties of foods have been found to be positively associated with a 
reduced rate of follicular atresia. A recent in vivo study demonstrated a reduced atretic 
follicle count with use of resveratrol (a polyphenol found in the skin of red grapes and 
berries) [38]. These contradictory findings for the relationship between vegetarianism and 
intake of green and yellow vegetables with the onset of menopause could be because 
while one study investigated the associations with dietary patterns, the other considered 
the associations with individual food items. Moreover, differences in the participants 
characteristics and distribution of age at natural menopause could further influence the 
findings. The confounders used in the analyses and large sample sizes could also explain 
the differences.   
High consumptions of meat, fat, and protein have been positively associated with 
a delayed onset of menopause (please refer to Chapter 2, Table 2.2). Cholesterol, the 
starting product of steroidogenesis can be synthesised by de novo synthesis in the 
endocrine tissue (e.g., granulosa-lutein cells in the ovaries) from acetate, the end-product 
of fat oxidation [39]. Therefore, an excessive dietary fat intake can result in higher serum 
oestradiol levels. In addition, during the menopausal transition, significant changes occur 
in body composition. For instance, redistribution of body fat takes place such that there 
is an increase of total and central body fat, and also a redistribution of fat from lower body 
subcutaneous fat toward the abdominal region. This increase in adipose tissue becomes 
the main site for oestrogen production along with other hormones such as leptin, 
adiponectin, and resistin [40, 41]. Therefore, these endocrine changes taking place during 
the menopausal transition together with a high fat diet predisposes the woman to a later 
onset of menopause. 
Cholesterol Oestrogen
Ovaries
Cholesterol Oestrogen
Adipose tissue
Aromatase
Obesity
Insulin resistance
High fat diet/ meat High vitamin D intake Fibre
Delayed onset of 
menopause
Earlier onset of 
menopause
High risk
Increased 
circulating 
cholesterol 
level
Increased 
oestrogen
level
Increased 
oestrogen
level
High intake of 
green & yellow 
vegetables
Reduced rate 
of follicular 
atresia
Premature 
ovarian failure
Decrease  
oestrogen
bioavailability 
Figure 1.2 Potential mechanistic pathways though which diet can influence onset of natural menopause 
1.4 Menopause and its associated sequelae 
The timing of menopause could determine the duration of the presence of VMS 
which is mostly prevalent during the perimenopausal years as a consequence of lowered 
oestrogen levels. Previous randomised controlled trials (RCTs) have mainly focused on 
the study of phytoestrogen extracts and their influence on the presence of VMS. However, 
the study of foods consumed as part of the regular diet in relation to the presence of VMS 
has received less attention. The decline in oestrogen levels during the menopausal 
transition is postulated to be one of the causes for the presence of VMS. A low oestrogen 
level has been associated with narrowing of the thermoneutral zone between the core 
body temperatures, resulting in a lowered sweating threshold and hence a higher 
likelihood to experience hot flushes and night sweats. However, given that around 20% 
of premenopausal women also report hot flushes suggests that the decline in oestrogen 
levels is not the sole endocrine change causing VMS [42]. Dhanoya et al. [43] 
demonstrated that both AMH and FSH were associated with the presence of hot flushes 
while the level of oestradiol was not related with hot flushes. 
Prolonged exposure to oestrogens as a consequence of a delayed menopause 
increases the risk of hormone-dependent cancers such as ovarian, endometrial and breast 
cancer as demonstrated previously by several epidemiological studies [44-46]. Other 
hormones such as progesterone may also be important. These hypotheses have been 
investigated in earlier published reviews [47-49]. Other factors such as diet, a modifiable 
risk factor may also explain the variation in oestrogen and other sex hormones levels [50-
52]. Diet-related pathologies may also promote tumorigenesis while some components of 
the diet may be protective against these cancers. Therefore, the next sections explore the 
evidence for the hypothesis that diet is a major determinant for the presence of VMS and 
the risk of hormone-related cancers. 
1.5 Presence of vasomotor symptoms 
VMS such as hot flushes and night sweats are one of the most common symptoms 
experienced by women during the menopausal transition in particular during the 
premenopausal and early postmenopausal years. 54% of women reported experiencing 
hot flushes and night sweats in a cohort of 10,418 postmenopausal women in the UK [53]. 
According to a review of 66 papers across North America, Europe, East Asia, Southeast 
Asia, Australia, Latin America, South Asia, Middle East, and Africa, the prevalence of 
hot flushes ranged from 40-60% among perimenopausal women and 8-80% (median: 
41.5%) among postmenopausal women. Regional patterns demonstrated a lower 
prevalence of hot flushes for postmenopausal East Asian women (16%) compared to 
Latin American (47%) and European (55%) women [11]. The median duration of these 
symptoms is 4 years but may persist as long as 15 years for some women [42]. Therefore, 
the presence of VMS influences the quality of life of menopausal women in terms of 
affecting their sleep quality, mood changes and cognitive function. The frequency and 
severity of VMS depend on several factors such as race/ethnicity, climate, obesity, health 
behaviours, lifestyle, social and demographic factors as well as diet [11, 54].  
Evidence for a link between diet and presence of VMS arises from studies which 
have previously explored the associations between phytoestrogen extracts or 
phytoestrogen-rich foods and frequency or severity of VMS. A Cochrane review of 43 
RCTs did not support the beneficial effects of phytoestrogen supplements for the 
reduction of the frequency or severity of VMS mainly due to the small size of the trials 
and also the high risk of bias while the same review stated the promising effect of 
genistein, a phytoestrogen found in soy [55]. A recent review further indicated the 
beneficial effect of isoflavones against hot flushes [56]. 
As mentioned previously, women tend to accumulate subcutaneous fat in the 
abdominal region during the menopausal transition which leads to endocrine changes in 
terms of higher circulating oestradiol level [40]. A prospective study of 6,040 women 
demonstrated that a Mediterranean-style diet and a fruit rich diet were both inversely 
associated with VMS. On the other hand, diets with high fat and sugar contents increased 
the risk of VMS [57]. This could imply that a healthier diet which prevents obesity could 
also be protective against VMS. The same study reported that even after adjusting for 
BMI, the same associations were observed. Therefore, the mechanism involved between 
diet and the presence of VMS remains unclear.  
1.6 Hormone-related cancers: ovarian, endometrial and breast cancer 
In this section, an overview of the epidemiology and the plausible mechanism of 
action of diet in relation to the ovarian, endometrial and breast cancer is provided.  
1.6.1 Ovarian cancer 
1.6.1.1 Incidence and mortality 
Ovarian cancer is the sixth most common cancer among British women and the 
eighth most common cancer among women worldwide accounting to around 300,000 new 
cases in 2018 [58, 59]. It is also ranked as the eighth cause of death from cancer among 
females. The highest incidence rates of ovarian cancer can be observed in the more 
developed regions, in particular, in Northern, Eastern and Central Europe while lower 
rates can be seen in Asian and African countries (Figure 1.3) [60, 61]. Variations in rates 
can also be observed by ethnicity within countries. For instance, in the United States 
incidence of ovarian cancer was reported to be higher among Non-Hispanic Whites, 
followed by Hispanics, Non-Hispanic Blacks, and lowest rates among Asian/Pacific 
Islanders [62].  
1.6.1.2 Pathologic classification of ovarian cancer 
Ovarian tumour, benign or malignant, may arise from one of three cell types 
namely epithelial cells, stromal cells, and germ cells, of which 90% of the malignant 
cancer are of epithelial origin [60]. The epithelial type is the most common among 
postmenopausal women while malignant tumours originating from the germ cells are 
more prevalent among younger women [63]. The epithelial ovarian cancer can further be 
classified into subtypes: serous, mucinous, endometrioid, clear cell and transitional cell 
[64]. 
1.6.1.3 Risk factors 
It is well known that women with a family history of ovarian cancer are at a higher 
risk of the disease as compared to women without a family history [65, 66]. In addition, 
evidence shows that ovarian cancer in first-degree relatives increases the risk and an even 
higher risk among women with a first-degree relative who was diagnosed with ovarian 
cancer before the age of 50 years [67]. Mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA 2 genes have 
been associated with familial ovarian cancer [65]. Jervis et al. [67] reported that 24% of 
epithelial ovarian cancer among women who had a first-degree relative diagnosed with 
ovarian cancer was due to the BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations. Although mutations in 
these genes have been touted as the main risk factor for hereditary ovarian cancer, Adaniel 
and Kirchhoff [68] suggested that 10%-20% of this cancer is attributed to family history, 
and moreover only about 10% of the familial ovarian cancer is caused by mutations in 
the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. 
In addition to a family history and genetic predisposition, risk factors of ovarian 
cancer include reproductive factors (Table 1.1) [69]. A higher risk of ovarian cancer with 
an early onset of menarche, later onset of menopause and nulliparity can be explained by 
the incessant ovulation hypothesis which postulates that a higher number of ovulatory 
cycles, increases the rate of cellular division which is consequently associated with a 
higher rate of repair of the surface epithelium after each ovulation, thus increasing the 
risk of spontaneous mutation [60].  While there is stronger evidence for the relationship 
between parity and reduced risk of ovarian cancer, the associations with age at menarche 
and age at menopause are less consistent [60]. According to a pooled analysis of 10 
population-based case-control studies encompassing 906 ovarian cancer cases and 1,220 
controls, the use of oestrogen-therapy only has been associated with an increased risk of 
serous and endometrioid ovarian cancer [70]. Ovarian cancer risk increases in an 
oestrogenic environment and this may further be enhanced by the use of oestrogen-
therapy. The oestrogen-therapy could stimulate the growth of malignant cells and also 
increase the risk of transformation and proliferation of these cells [71]. On the other hand, 
a meta-analysis of oestrogen replacement therapy and risk of epithelial ovarian cancer did 
not report a significant association [72]. Unlike the use of hormone replacement therapy 
(HRT), the benefits of using oral contraceptives (OCs) on a reduced risk of ovarian cancer 
are well established [73-75].  
Smoking, obesity, diet and other lifestyle factors have also been associated with 
the risk of ovarian cancer [69]. The association between smoking and risk of ovarian 
cancer differs by the histological subtype and also by smoking status. For instance, 
findings from a meta-analysis of 51 epidemiological studies concluded that current 
smokers had an increased risk of mucinous cancer as opposed to women who never 
smoked [76]. Moreover, current smoking was associated with a reduced risk of 
endometrioid and clear-cell ovarian cancer while no association was found with the 
serous type. Another meta-analysis also demonstrated an increased risk of mucinous 
ovarian cancer among current smokers, in addition to an increased risk of the serous type 
among former smokers [77]. Ovarian cancer risk has also been found to be higher among 
obese women, in particular, a significant association has been reported among obese 
premenopausal women [78]. Study of the association between BMI and different 
histologic subtypes demonstrated that a high BMI increased the risk of borderline serous, 
invasive endometrioid and invasive mucinous ovarian cancer [79]. While in a large 
pooled analysis including 8,309 cases and 12,612 controls demonstrated an increased risk 
of all epithelial ovarian cancer subtypes with physical inactivity [80], a review of 
epidemiological studies found an inconclusive association between physical activity and 
ovarian cancer risk [81].  Given that this cancer is usually diagnosed at the late stage when 
the survival rate is only 29%, reducing the risk through modifiable risk factors is 
recommended. One such risk factor is diet. However, the role of diet in the pathology of 
ovarian cancer is not clearly understood [60]. In the next section (1.6.1.4), an attempt has 
been made to elucidate possible mechanisms between diet and the pathophysiology of 
ovarian cancer based on humans and animal studies. 
Table 1.1 Risk factors for ovarian, endometrial and breast cancers 
Factor Ovarian Endometrial Breast 
Family history Increase [66] Increase [82] Increase [83] 
Genetic alterations Increase [67] Increase [84] Increase [85] 
Reproductive and menstrual 
factors 
Late age at menarche Decrease [69] Decrease [69] Decrease [83] 
Late age at menopause Increase [69] Increase [69] Increase [83] 
Parity Decrease [60] Decrease [86] Decrease [83] 
Breastfeeding Decrease [87] Decrease [88] Decrease [89] 
Oral contraceptive use Increase [70] Decrease [90] Increase [90] 
Hormonal replacement 
therapy 
Increase [91] Increase [92] Increase [93] 
Lifestyle factors    
Smoking Increase [76] Decrease [94] Increase [95] 
Alcohol consumption Increase [96] Increase [97] Increase [98] 
Physical inactivity Increase [80] Increase [99] Increase [100] 
High BMI Increase [78] Increase [101] Increase [102] 
Socio-demographic factors    
High social class/ 
education/occupation level 
Decrease [103] Decrease [104] Increase [105, 106] 
ica As
Ovary (C56) Corpus uteri (C54) Breast (C50)
ica As
Ovary (C56) Corpus Uteri (C54) Breast (C50)
Figure 1.3 (A) Age-standardised rates for the incidence of ovarian, corpus uteri and breast cancer by region, (B) Age-standardised rates for the 
mortality of ovarian, corpus uteri and breast cancer by region, *Results are presented for these cancers as defined by the 10th edition of the International 
Classification of Diseases [Drawn from [61]] 
* * * 
1.6.1.4 Mechanism  diet and ovarian carcinogenesis 
Women of reproductive age undergo cyclical cellular changes in their genital tract 
during the menstrual cycle [107]. During each cycle, several follicles containing an ovum 
undergo a maturation and selection process where ordinarily one of them is selected and 
released from the ovary during ovulation on or around the 14th day of the cycle [108]. 
The menstrual cycle is under the influence of various hormones namely GnRH, LH, FSH, 
oestrogen, and progesterone [109]. During ovulation, the surface of the ovary ruptures to 
release the ovum, following which the cells on the surface of the ovary, known as the 
epithelial cells, proliferate to close the breach under the influence of oestrogen. The 
improper proliferation of those cells can result in the formation of cysts or even cancers 
like surface epithelial tumours which are a subgroup among the diverse types of ovarian 
tumours [110]. 
Oestrogen and progesterone are steroid hormones synthesised from cholesterol 
[39]; individuals having a high-fat diet provide the substrate for excessive oestrogen 
synthesis which stimulates cell proliferation in the female genital tract. This can be 
supported by pooled estimates from a meta-analysis of 13 dietary fat intervention studies 
which showed that dietary fat reduction was related to a lowered serum oestradiol level 
[111]. Diets high in animal protein also contain xeno-oestrogens which have carcinogenic 
potential [112]. Leptin, another hormone secreted by the adipose tissue under the 
influence of factors like high lipid levels in the blood, has several effects on the body like 
producing a feeling of satiety, as well as stimulating the release of GnRH which in turn 
stimulates the release of LH and FSH [113]. High levels of LH may result in the immature 
release of the ovum and high levels of oestrogen secondary to high circulating cholesterol 
levels in the body (as a result of high saturated fat and energy intake). Consequently, this 
may result in improper re-epithelialisation of the ovaries. Chronic stimulation of ovaries 
in this way may predispose to development of abnormal growths which subsequently can 
undergo malignant transformation. Therefore, diets high in energy, animal fats or protein 
may promote the development of ovarian cancer.  
According to the National Institutes of HealthAmerican Association of Retired 
Persons (NIH-AARP) Diet and Health Study [114] which included 695 ovarian cancer 
cases recorded during an average of 9 years of follow-up, fat intake from animal sources 
was associated with an increased ovarian cancer risk. This can be further supported by a 
meta-analysis of 25 epidemiological studies (16 case-control studies and 9 cohort studies) 
[115]. An RCT including a total of 48,835 postmenopausal women followed up for an 
average period of 8.1 years also demonstrated that a low-fat dietary pattern could 
potentially decrease ovarian cancer risk [116]. For the effect of dietary protein on risk of 
ovarian cancer, this has been demonstrated in a mice study [117]. A diet high plant protein 
was found to reduce the growth of the ovarian cancer cell line as compared to an animal-
rich diet. However, evidence for the association between dietary protein types is 
inconclusive as demonstrated in a meta-analysis of observational studies [118] and a mice 
study. This could be because most of the included studies were among the North 
American population, thus restricting the findings to a specific population. In addition, 
the meta-analysis out of the 10 included studies, 8 were case-control studies which imply 
that potential recall bias of diet.  
Omega-3 fatty acid, a polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) can be obtained through 
dietary sources (flaxseeds, walnuts, canola oil, and oily fish) only. The n-3 family of 
PUFAs comprises alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), and 
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). According to in vivo studies, EPA and DHA are precursors 
for anti-inflammatory lipid mediators [119]. Oestrogen has proliferative effects on 
oestrogen-sensitive tissues and thus could be involved in the pathogenesis of some 
hormone-dependent cancers such as ovarian cancer. Dietary n-3 PUFAs deter the 
promotion and progression stages of carcinogenesis through several mechanistic 
pathways. One of the mechanisms involves changes in oestrogen metabolism which could 
result in reduced oestrogen-stimulated cell growth [120, 121]. In addition, n-3 PUFAs 
can influence the regulation of two transcription factors; sterol regulatory element binding 
protein-1c (SREBP-1c) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPAR 
alpha). SREBP-1c is involved in inducing a set of lipogenic enzymes in the liver and n-3 
PUFAs can potentially inhibit the expression and processing of SREBP-1c and thus 
inhibits the de novo lipogenesis of fatty acids, making it an important consideration for 
the carcinogenesis. For instance, Merritt et al. [122] in a case-control study including 
1,872 cases demonstrated that a higher intake of omega-3 might be protective for ovarian 
cancer, while a higher consumption of trans-fat was associated with an increased risk of 
ovarian cancer. However, the clinical effects of n-3 PUFAs do not solely rely on its 
concentration alone, but most importantly on the ratio of n-3 PUFAs to n-6 PUFAs in the 
cells [123]. This has been demonstrated in a study using a knockout mouse model 
whereby a dietary ratio of omega-6/omega-3 PUFA lower than five was effective in 
suppressing tumour growth and prolonging animal lifespan [124]. Findings from 
knockout mouse studies can be extrapolated to humans as humans and mice share many 
genes [125]. Thus, a high intake of n-3 PUFAs relative to that of n-6 PUFAs may decrease 
endogenous oestrogen production and reduce the risk of ovarian cancer. 
Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), an arachidonic acid-derived eicosanoid (an n-6 PUFA 
found in meat and fish) stimulates the activity of aromatase P450, which converts 19-
carbon steroids to oestrogens while on the other hand, PGE3 (derived from EPA 
metabolism), does not activate aromatase P450. Hence, an increased intake of EPA, 
which leads to increased production of PGE3 and decreased production of PGE2, is 
expected to decrease oestrogen production and thus reduce oestrogen-stimulated cell 
growth [120]. Thus, this further supports the mechanism that while n-3 PUFAs decrease 
the risk, intake of diet high in n-6 PUFAs such as a Western diet (rich in processed foods, 
high-fat foods, refined grains, high-sugar foods) could elevate the risk of ovarian cancer 
[126]. 
Along with hormonal control, diet can also interfere at the level of fatty acid (FA) 
and cholesterol biosynthesis and eventually affect sex steroid metabolism and thus the 
risk of ovarian cancer [127]. For instance, it has been found that feeding previously fasted 
animals a diet high in carbohydrate and low in fat content causes a dramatic induction of 
enzymes such as fatty acid synthase (FAS) and mitochondrial glycerol-3-phosphate 
acyltransferase (GPAT) which are the two critical enzymes involved in FA and 
triacylglycerol (TAG) synthesis. FAS catalyses the synthesis of long-chain fatty acids, 
primarily palmitate, using acetyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA as substrates and NADPH as the 
reducing equivalent while GPAT catalyses the first committed as well as the rate-limiting 
step in TAG and phospholipid biosynthesis [128].  
Dietary variations are responsible for fluctuations in nutrient intake which can 
result in changes in circulating glucose, which in turn signal the secretion of hormones. 
For example, ingestion of a high-carbohydrate diet leads to a high circulating insulin level 
which consequently induces enzymes involved in FA and TAG synthesis, thus providing 
FA for membrane phospholipid biosynthesis in cancer cells [127-129]. The possible role 
of insulin resistance/hyperinsulinaemia has further been underpinned by an Italian case-
control study including 1,031 women with incident epithelial ovarian cancer. The study 
showed that high dietary glycaemic index and glycaemic load were both associated with 
an increased ovarian cancer risk.  
1.6.2 Endometrial cancer 
1.6.2.1 Incidence and mortality 
Endometrial cancer is the most common cancer of the uterine corpus. It is the most 
commonly diagnosed reproductive cancer especially in developed countries and its 
prevalence is on the rise mainly as a result of high obesity and metabolic syndrome rates 
in these countries [130]. Worldwide endometrial cancer is ranked as the sixth most 
common cancer among women with the highest prevalence in North America, and 
Europe, and the lowest rates observed in Africa [131]. In 2012, 320,000 new cases were 
diagnosed (4.8% of cancers among females) and 76,000 deaths were recorded (2.1% of 
deaths in women) around the world (Figure 1.3) [61]. Though only a small number of 
women are diagnosed with an advanced stage disease, death at this stage is more common. 
For instance, 5-year survival for the early stage of endometrial cancer is around 95% 
while for the advanced stage survival rate fluctuates between 25 to 79% [132]. In the UK, 
endometrial cancer stands fourth among the most common cancer in women [58]. 
Although endometrial cancer is more commonly prevalent among postmenopausal 
women (4 to 20 times higher in women aged 50 years or more), 14% of the cases are 
reportedly diagnosed among premenopausal women [133, 134].  
1.6.2.2 Pathologic classification of endometrial cancer 
Traditionally endometrial cancer has been classified as type I and type II tumours. 
Type I tumour is known as oestrogen-dependent cancer and is more prevalent among 
obese, hypertensive, diabetic, nulliparous or women who had a delayed onset of 
menopause (accounts for 80 to 85% of cases). On the other hand, the type II tumour is 
non-oestrogen dependent and is common among non-obese women (accounts for 10 to 
15% of cases) [84]. According to the World Health Organisation (WHO) classification, 
endometrial cancer has several histological types namely, epithelial carcinomas 
(endometrioid, serous, clear cell, mucinous, squamous cell, transitional cell, small cell, 
and undifferentiated), mixed epithelial and mesenchymal tumours, or mesenchymal 
tumours, gestational trophoblastic diseases, and other malignant tumours [84, 135]. Out 
of these, the epithelial carcinoma is the most common with endometrioid subtype being 
the most prevalent, followed by the serous, and clear cell histological subtypes [135].  
1.6.2.3 Risk factors 
A family history of endometrial cancer among first- or second-degree relatives 
increases the risk of endometrial cancer [136, 137]. A family history of other cancers 
including hormone-related cancers has been less consistently associated with the risk of 
developing endometrial cancer [82, 138]. Familial endometrial cancer is related to 
germline mutations. For instance, type I endometrial cancer is attributed to mutations in 
PTEN, PIK3CA, KRAS, ARID1A, CTNNB1 as well as microsatellite instability; type 2 
carcinomas are characterised by mutations in PIK3CA, P53, and PPP2R1A along with 
amplification in HER2 [84]. Moreover, epidemiological studies within multi-ethnic 
populations have demonstrated that Whites had a higher risk of endometrial cancer and 
African Americans and Latinas were at greater risk of developing the aggressive subtypes 
[139, 140]. 
The epidemiology of endometrial cancer and ovarian cancer overlaps in many 
ways [69]. Similar to ovarian cancer, established non-genetic risk factors for endometrial 
cancer encompass exposure to exogenous or endogenous oestrogens associated with 
nulliparity, early age at menarche, late-onset menopause as well as obesity (Table 1.1) 
[137]. Further supporting the unopposed oestrogen hypothesis, breastfeeding in 
particular duration of breastfeeding has also been associated with a reduced risk of 
endometrial cancer. The suggested mechanisms include low oestrogen level during 
breastfeeding and reduced GnRH level which suppresses ovarian follicular growth [88, 
141]. OC use has also been found to reduce endometrial cancer risk [90].  
Furthermore, risk factors of endometrial cancer include diabetes (refer to section 
1.6.2.4) and hypertension [142]. Although a recent systematic review and meta-analysis 
of case-control and cohort studies reported a strong association between hypertension and 
the risk of endometrial cancer [143], the plausible mechanism for this association remains 
unclear. It is speculated that cellular ageing and inhibition of apoptosis-related to 
hypertension [144] as well as medications used for the treatment of hypertension may 
increase the risk of endometrial cancer [145]. Factors such as smoking [94] and high 
physical activity level  [99, 146] have been associated with a reduced endometrial cancer 
risk.  
1.6.2.4 Mechanism  diet and endometrial carcinogenesis 
As mentioned previously, the cells in the endometrium undergo cyclical cellular 
changes during the menstrual cycle. Hormones like oestrogen have a mitogenic effect on 
the cells of the endometrium [147, 148]. Excessive exposure to oestrogen either 
exogenous or endogenous secondary to high-fat diet may cause increased proliferation of 
the endometrial cells. Cells proliferating at a faster rate are more prone to errors during 
DNA replication and the mutated cells can subsequently undergo malignant 
transformation, most commonly adenocarcinomas. 
Endometrial cancer is a hormone-driven cancer, with approximately 80% of 
endometrial cancers potentially arising due to either an excess of oestrogen or a lack of 
progesterone. In the normal endometrium, the proliferative effects of oestrogen are 
normally countered by progesterone, but the absence of progesterone allows oestrogen to 
induce oncogenesis, an effect that is amplified in situations of excess oestrogen. One of 
the major emerging causes of the oestrogen/progesterone imbalance is obesity which is 
known to influence hormonal balance and level of growth factors [149, 150]. Evidence 
shows a positive link between increased dietary fat intake and obesity, thus associating 
fat intake to an increased risk of endometrial cancer [151].  
Central obesity, characterised by high abdominal fatness is commonly observed 
among women during the menopausal years and is responsible for the increase in 
circulating free fatty acids and consequently promotes an increase in insulin resistance 
[152]. In addition, long-term consumption of high glycaemic index diet is another risk 
factor for obesity and insulin resistance and is also hypothesised to be involved in the 
pathogenesis of endometrial cancer [153]. Hyperinsulinaemia increases the risk of 
endometrial cancers mainly by the binding of insulin to insulin receptors on endometrial 
cells to stimulate the growth of endometrial stromal cells [147]. Hyperinsulinaemia may 
also increase the level of insulin-like growth factor (IGF) I and both may lead to an 
increased circulating level of oestrogen level and a decrease circulating level of sex 
hormone-binding globulin [154]. For instance, findings from the Womens Health 
Initiative study which included 88,107 postmenopausal women who were followed for 
over a mean of 11 years, reported that independently diabetes was modestly associated 
with an increased endometrial cancer risk. After adjusting for BMI, the risk of 
endometrial cancer was attenuated suggesting that this relationship could be explained by 
body weight [155]. Moreover, a similar association has been demonstrated in the Swedish 
Mammography Cohort, a prospective cohort of 36,773 women whereby diabetes was 
found to double the risk of endometrial cancer and diabetes in combination with obesity 
further increased the risk [156]. This mechanistic pathway is also backed by a recent 
systematic review and meta-analysis of 25 epidemiological studies [157].  
1.6.3 Breast cancer 
1.6.3.1 Incidence and mortality 
Breast cancer is the most common cancer among women around the world 
(approximately 1.7 million cases diagnosed in 2012). It was also ranked as the fifth cause 
of death from cancer overall among women in 2012 [61].  In 2015, 31% of breast cancer 
cases were recorded among British women [58]. Similar to endometrial cancer, the 
prevalence of breast cancer is also increasing. The increasing rates have been seen in areas 
with previously low prevalence such Japan, China and eastern Europe due to obesity, 
diabetes and metabolic syndrome which suggest the nutritional link in the pathogenesis 
of breast cancer [158].  
1.6.3.2 Pathologic classification of breast cancer 
Histologically, breast cancer can be classified as in situ or invasive carcinoma. 
Invasive breast carcinoma which is the most common form is further classified as 
infiltrating ductal, invasive lobular, ductal/lobular, mucinous (colloid), tubular, medullary 
and papillary carcinomas [159]. Among these subtypes, the infiltrating ductal carcinoma 
is the most prevalent type of invasive breast carcinoma. The subtypes further incorporate 
molecular markers such as oestrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and 
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (Her2) [160].  
Molecular subtypes of breast cancer have also been identified using microarray-
based gene expression analysis and unbiased hierarchical clustering. These include [160, 
161]: 
 Luminal subtype A (ER+ and/or PR+, HER2) 
 Luminal subtype B (ER+ and/or PR+, HER2+) 
 Normal breast  
 Her2-enriched (Her2+, ER) 
 Basal-like (ER, PR, Her2) 
 Claudin-low 
1.6.3.3 Risk factors 
Similar to ovarian and endometrial cancer, the aetiology of breast cancer is 
multifactorial. Breast cancer risk among women also has a link to family history such that 
having a first- or second-degree relative with breast cancer doubles the risk of a woman. 
However, a family history accounts for only 10% of breast cancer in women who have a 
first-degree relative with this cancer. Similar to ovarian cancer, only around 5-10% of 
breast cancer cases are due to gene mutation [68, 83]. Germline mutations have been 
identified which include mutations in the genes BRCA1, BRCA2, PTEN, TP53, CDH1, 
and STK11, which are high penetrant genes [85]. 
More prolonged exposure to oestrogen, regular ovulatory cycles and a high 
circulating oestrogen level have been associated with an increased breast cancer risk. 
Thus, an early age at menarche, late onset of menopause, and nulliparity are associated 
with a higher risk of breast cancer [83]. In addition, the use of exogenous hormones such 
as HRT and OC has also been linked to an increased risk of breast tumours [90, 93]. As 
reported by a systematic review of epidemiological studies [89], a higher cumulative 
duration of breastfeeding was protective against breast cancer risk as breastfeeding is 
associated with suppressed ovulation and thus a lower total number of ovulatory cycles. 
The protective effect has been found to be stronger among premenopausal women.   
Other risk factors of breast cancer include lifestyle factors, for example, alcohol 
consumption, smoking, physical inactivity and a high BMI have been associated with an 
increased breast cancer risk (Table 1.1) [93]. As demonstrated in a large Norwegian 
prospective cohort study including 130,053 women aged 34-70 years, ever smokers 
(former or current) had a higher breast cancer risk as compared to never or passive 
smokers [95]. This is further supported by a review which suggests that long-term 
smoking was a risk factor for breast tumour and even worsens the disease [162]. Findings 
from the Womens Health Study which included 1,484 cases of breast cancer over an 
average of 10 years of follow-up showed that moderate alcohol consumption was related 
to an increased risk of the cancer, in particular, the ER+/PR+ subtypes [98]. Moreover, 
results from the E3N-EPIC cohort study demonstrated that total alcohol consumption was 
associated with an increased risk during the postmenopausal period and for the ER+/PR+ 
breast cancer subtypes [163].  
1.6.3.4 Mechanism  diet and breast carcinogenesis 
The pathogenesis of breast cancer is intricate and multifactorial. The aetiology of 
breast cancer could involve a similar hormonal pathogenesis as ovarian cancer [164]. 
Importantly, oestrogen influences the growth, differentiation, and functioning of the 
breast tissue. Aromatase, an enzyme found in the adipose tissues helps convert circulating 
cholesterol to oestradiol [165]. Due to the higher proportion of fat cells in breasts of older 
women, their level of oestradiol in the breast tissues mainly post menopause is likely to 
be higher than the circulating plasma level. The high oestradiol level in the breast tissues 
can trigger differential effects on the oestrogen receptor expression which are found in 
those tissues, thus influencing the behaviour of cancer cells [166]. Stromal cells in the 
breast tissues can also support metastatic activity as they control not only the growth of 
normal breast epithelial cells but also that of neoplastic epithelial cells by secreting 
growth factors in response to the levels of endogenous hormones [167]. 
High cholesterol level, as a result of a high-fat diet has also been stated as a risk 
factor for breast cancer among women during the late peri-menopausal and post-
menopausal state [168]. According to studies in mice [169, 170], oxysterol 27-
hydroxycholestrol (27-HC), a metabolite of cholesterol synthesis has been identified in 
the pathogenesis of breast cancer. 27-HC could stimulate the growth of breast cancer cell 
lines by binding and activating ER in a similar way as oestradiol. There is also evidence 
that postmenopausal women experience an increase in their cholesterol level and thus its 
metabolite 27-HC which could help explain the increase in breast cancer risk among 
obese and hypercholesterolaemic women [171]. However, according to a recent nested 
case-control study from the EPIC-Heidelberg Cohort, including 530 invasive incident 
cases of breast cancer, a high level of 27-HC was associated with a reduced risk of breast 
cancer among postmenopausal women and no association was found among 
premenopausal women [172]. A reduced breast cancer risk was, in particular, observed 
among postmenopausal women not using hormone therapy (HT) as opposed to those 
using HT suggesting that this association may only be relevant in the case of low 
circulating oestrogen level. This disparity between the findings from animal studies and 
the nested case-control study could be explained by the fact that animal studies do not 
always translate to findings in epidemiological studies [173] as in this case it may be that 
the effect of 27-HC in conditions of varying oestrogen level have not been studied.  
Moreover, a fat-rich diet and a high glycaemic index are positively correlated with 
insulin resistance [174, 175]. Insulin resistance, a significant factor in the pathogenesis of 
premenopausal breast cancer, is also involved in the aetiology of postmenopausal breast 
cancer. Insulin can bind to insulin receptors found on the epithelial cells of the breast. 
This insulin signalling can contribute to cancer through mitogenic activity mediated by 
the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase and mitogen-activated protein kinase/Akt signalling 
pathways [176]. Insulin also has anti-apoptotic characteristics and thus promotes invasive 
tumour activity. Insulin resistance is also accompanied by high levels of proinflammatory 
cytokines and leptin as well as a decreased level of adiponectin which concomitantly lead 
to both ER+ and ER breast cancer [177]. Moreover, insulin resistance is associated with 
an increased oestrogen level as a result of enhanced aromatase activity and decreased 
production of SHBG [178, 179]. This mechanistic pathway has been supported by an 
Italian-nested case-control study which demonstrated that both pre- and post-menopausal 
women with hyperglycaemia had an increased risk of breast cancer [180]. 
In addition to the high circulating level of oestrogen as a result of obesity, the 
associated high levels of inflammatory markers, insulin-like growth factors and 
adipokines from the visceral fat also increase the risk of breast cancer among 
postmenopausal women [181]. While high circulating oestrogen level among 
premenopausal women can be a risk factor for breast cancer [182], some studies have 
demonstrated that obesity can be protective among premenopausal women. Obesity can 
lead to irregular ovarian cycles and hence lower circulating oestrogen levels. As 
demonstrated by a meta-analysis of prospective studies, waist circumference was 
associated with ER+ and PR+ breast cancers in postmenopausal women while in 
premenopausal women waist circumference was positively associated with ER-breast 
cancer [183]. This would suggest a lower likelihood of a hormonal pathogenesis for breast 
cancer among premenopausal women. Chronic inflammation, abnormally high levels of 
IGF and insulin resistance could instead explain premenopausal breast cancer [184]. 
1.6.4 Other protective effect of diet against the risk of hormone-dependent 
cancers  
1.6.4.1 Vitamins 
Vitamins like B6, B12, and folate are required for normal DNA repair 
mechanisms and proper DNA replication. Folate receptor alpha expression is correlated 
with stage and grade of ovarian cancer, suggesting this pathway may be relevant to 
ovarian carcinogenesis and progression [185]. Ascorbic acid, vitamin E and other trace 
elements like selenium having antioxidant properties help to protect from free radical 
injury and maintain normal cellular function. Vitamin C is recognised for its beneficial 
effect in cancer chemoprevention mainly as it has the potential to stimulate immune 
function, impede nitrosamine formation, minimise DNA damage and block the metabolic 
activation of carcinogens [186]. Vitamin A helps to control epithelisation of tissues and 
also has antioxidant properties to help protect from DNA damage [187]. Although these 
current theories support the likely role of these micronutrients in hormone-dependent 
cancers, prospective cohort studies as well as a meta-analysis of epidemiological studies, 
reported no association between dietary vitamins A, C or E and the risk of ovarian and 
endometrial cancers [186, 188-190]. In addition, the World Cancer Research Fund/ 
American Institute for Cancer Research (WCRF/AICR) [152] reported an inconclusive 
association between nutrients such as vitamin A, C, E as well as folate and the incidence 
of ovarian, endometrial, breast cancers.  
Moreover, a recent meta-analysis of cohort and case-control studies suggested that 
vitamin D intake was protective against premenopausal breast cancer [191]. A large 
cohort study including 68,567 postmenopausal women further demonstrated that women 
with a high intake of calcium, and vitamin D had a reduced risk of postmenopausal breast 
cancer [192]. Experimental studies have also suggested that vitamin D intake could 
reduce the stimulatory effect of androgen in human ovarian cancer cell lines and also 
reduce obesity-induced endometrial cancer [193, 194]. However, systematic reviews 
concluded that the evidence to support the association between vitamin D intake and 
endometrial and ovarian cancers are not consistent and robust, thus calling for further 
prospective studies. One of the limitations was that since most of the studies included in 
this systematic review were case-control studies, diet was thus measured only at 1-time 
period and was very prone to misreporting due to recall bias, therefore not accounting for 
diet change over time and vitamin D production through the skin [195, 196].  
1.6.4.2 Flavonoids 
Flavonoids, a group of heterogeneous polyphenols, have multiple health benefits. 
The main sources of flavonoids include fruits, vegetables, tea, and wine [197]. Flavonoids 
reportedly have several properties which contribute to the various health benefits 
including antioxidant, anti-mutagenic, and anti-proliferative properties. Among them, 
isoflavones and some flavones, flavanones, and flavanols also have oestrogenic or anti-
oestrogenic activity, which makes these compounds of particular interest for modulation 
of reproductive cancer risks [198]. According to a large prospective cohort study 
including 171,940 US women, 723 of whom developed ovarian cancer over a period of 
1622y of follow-up, demonstrated inverse associations between flavonol and flavanone 
intakes and ovarian cancer risk [199]. Further supporting the chemoprotective role of the 
flavonol in ovarian cancer risk, two in vitro studies demonstrated that kaempferol induces 
apoptosis in ovarian cancer cells by regulating pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic protein 
expressions and by preventing angiogenesis in ovarian cancer cells [200, 201]. 
Furthermore, a meta-analysis of six cohorts and six case-control studies demonstrated that 
intakes of flavonols and flavones are protective against breast cancer, especially among 
postmenopausal women [202], thus supporting the chemo-preventive role of fruits and 
vegetables in hormone-related cancers. 
1.7 Diet  a determinant of the timing of menopause and its associated 
sequelae 
Diet, the main exposure of this study, can broadly be defined as the consumption 
pattern of foods [203]. This thesis will specifically look at individual food group and 
nutrient intakes from the diet as well as consider dietary patterns (please refer to Chapter 
8 for details on dietary patterns). Diet is a major modifiable risk factor of non-
communicable diseases such as cardiovascular diseases and various cancers [204]. As 
explained in the sections above, diet can be linked with life-course experiences such as 
timing of the onset of menopause as well as with its associated immediate and longer-
term health outcomes, for example, the presence of VMS and the risk of hormone-related 
cancers.  
The National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellences (NICE) conceptual 
framework which was developed for public health provide an account of its determinants 
and the interactions between them. It is based on six main principles as listed below [205]. 
This conceptual framework is also relevant to this thesis and has thus been adapted to 
demonstrate the link between various determinants and the timing of menopause as well 
as its associated sequalae (Figure 1.4). As elaborated in the previous sections of this 
chapter, alongside diet, smoking, high alcohol consumption and physical inactivity are 
also major risk factors of age at menopause and its associated sequelae (please refer to 
sections 1.1, 1.6.1.3, 1.6.2.3, 1.6.3.3). The timing of menopause and its associated 
sequalae, involves  complex causal associations that link together diet and the physiology 
of obesity, environmental factors as well as individual behaviours.  
Principles of the NICE conceptual framework: 
1. Determinants of health and disease include social, economic, psychological and 
biomedical factors 
2. The determinants causes individual-level diseases which lead to disease 
patterns in populations reflecting societal inequalities  
3. The determinants work through distinguishable causal pathways 
4. The causal pathways help both disease prevention and improvement 
5. The causal pathways can also help in health promotion 
6. The positive and negative causal pathways cross physical, biological, social, 
economic, political and psychological discipline boundaries 
Figure 1.4 NICEs conceptual framework for public health guidance 
According to the concept of this framework, the onset of menopause and its 
associated sequalae are dependent on causal mechanisms. These involve interactions 
between various determinants which are termed as vectors. There are four vectors of 
causation under this framework: population, environmental, organisational and the social 
vector. These vectors interact in different ways to influence life-course and life 
experiences (life worlds) leading to the health and disease outcomes [205]. The 
population vectors explain that elements such as the state, government, corporations, and 
the economy of the country  influences health outcomes both positively and negatively. 
For instance, legislations and taxations such as the sugar levy on the soft drinks industry 
introduced in 2016 as part of a preventive strategy to reduce free sugars consumption and 
obesity in the UK [206], can directly affect food choices and hence the likelihood for 
obesity and consequently the timing of menopause, presence of VMS and hormone-
related cancers. Secondly, the environmental vector suggests that microbiological agents, 
meteorological and geophysical hazards are also risk factors of health and diseases. The 
organisational vector which includes elements such as available health services could 
Organisational
vector
Population-
wide vector
Socio-cultural 
Society vector
Environmental 
vector
Life-course 
experience
Individual agency 
life worlds  capacity 
for action and 
behaviour
State
Government
Corporations
Economy
Meteorological 
hazards
Geophysical 
hazards
Social organisations
Microbiological 
agents
Physical activity
Disability
Biological 
stressors
Health services
Religious 
organisations
Gender
Ethnicity/caste
Social class
Age at menstruation
Pregnancy
Age at menopause
Parity
Breastfeeding
Smoking
Alcohol consumption
Obesity
Diabetes
Cancers
interact with the environmental vector to also influence the timing of menopause [207].  
Finally, the social vector consist of elements such as social class, gender, age, 
ethnicity/race, as well as lifestyle factors such as diet, alcohol consumption, smoking, 
physical activity. The social vector can influence life-course and life experiences both 
individually and synergistically [205]. This vector can also interact with the other vectors 
within the framework to influence the timing of menopause and the associated hormone-
related cancers.  
In addition, obesity has been strongly associated with insulin resistance and 
diabetes [208]. Both obesity and insulin resistance are also associated with the timing of 
menopause (please refer to section 1.3). As elaborated in section 1.4, the timing of 
menopause which is a life-course experience can consequently influence the presence of 
VMS as well as the risk of hormone-related cancers. Studies have also demonstrated that 
both obesity and diabetes are independently associated with the risk of cancers [209, 210]. 
According to the recent findings of the Global Burden of Disease study [211], type II 
diabetes and cancers are among the main diet-related causes of death across 195 countries. 
The authors reported that regardless of the socio-demographic characteristics (e.g. age, 
gender, area of residence) of people, diet is a major risk factor of non-communicable 
diseases as compared to other risk factors. Additionally, it was found that the number of 
deaths due to suboptimal diet was higher globally in comparison to the number of deaths 
associated with other risk factors such as smoking [211]. Therefore, this thesis focuses on 
the relationship between diet as the main exposure and the timing of the onset of natural 
menopause and its associated sequelae.  
As shown in Figure 1.4, there are various factors which can be linked with the 
exposure (diet) and outcomes of interest (age at natural menopause, presence of VMS, 
risk of breast, ovarian and endometrial cancers) in this study. This is termed as 
confounding. It is crucial to control for these confounders in order to avoid spurious 
results [212]. Thus, using this conceptual framework, directed acyclic graphs (DAG) were 
constructed to identify potential confounders for each result chapter of this thesis 
(Chapters 3-7). The DAG will further be discussed in Chapter 8. 
1.8 Research aims  
1.8.1 Research Questions 
o Is there an association between diet and age at natural menopause? 
o Is there a relationship between diet and vasomotor menopausal symptoms? 
o Is diet related to breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer risks?  
1.8.2 Aims 
o To elucidate the relationship between diet and onset of natural menopause  
o To study the relationship between diet and the sequelae of menopause (VMS as 
well as hormone-related such as ovarian, endometrial and breast cancers) 
1.8.3 Objectives 
To address the aims of this study, the following objectives are proposed (Figure 
1.5): 
o To compare the diet of pre and post-menopausal women in the UK Womens 
Cohort Study (UKWCS) 
o To investigate the relationship between diet (food groups and nutrient intake) and 
age at natural menopause in the UKWCS 
o To investigate the relationship between dietary patterns and the age at onset of 
natural menopause in the UKWCS 
o To examine the association between soy consumption and VMS in the 
International Collaboration for a Life course Approach to reproductive health and 
Chronic disease Events (InterLACE) consortium 
o To explore diet in relation to risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancers in the 
UKWCS 
o To explore the interplay between diet, the risk of breast, endometrial, ovarian 
cancer and age at natural menopause in the UKWCS 
1.8.4 Hypotheses 
o An unhealthy diet (e.g., high fat, high meat consumption and low fruits and 
vegetables consumption) increases the risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian 
cancers. 
o Diet is associated with the timing of onset of natural menopause. A healthy diet is 
associated with an earlier age at menopause while an unhealthy diet is associated 
with a later menopause. 
o Frequent consumption of foods with high phytoestrogen content such as soy might 
be protective against VMS 
Figure 1.5 Research objectives and summarised methodology mapped onto result 
chapters
Using the UKWCS to compare the diet of pre and post-menopausal women
Using the UKWCS to investigate the relationship between diet (food groups 
and nutrient intake) and age at natural menopause        
Using the InterLACE consortium to examine the association between soy 
consumption and VMS
Using the UKWCS to explore diet in relation to risk of breast, endometrial 
and ovarian cancers
Collapse 217 food items to 46 food groups
Generate diet quality scores using WHO guidelines
Generate variable for menopausal status
Identify confounders using directed acyclic graph
Compare diet quality, food group and nutrient intake using multivariate linear 
regression
Collapse 217 food items to 64 food groups 
Generate dietary patterns using PCA and RRR (Chapter 5 only)
Generate variable for age at natural menopause using data from baseline and phase
2 surveys
Identify confounders using directed acyclic graph
Explore associations between food group and nutrient intakes and age at onset of 
natural menopause using multivariate linear regression (Chapter 4 only)
Investigate relationship between dietary patterns derived from PCA and RRR and
onset of natural menopause using survival analysis (Chapter 5 only)
Conduct sensitivity analysis to explore relationship between food group intake and 
onset of natural menopause by vegetarianism, parity and diabetes status (Chapter 4 
only)
Identify studies having the exposures and outcome of interest
Pooled data from the five identified studies
Identify confounders using directed acyclic graph
Explore the cross-sectional association between soy consumption and VMS 
using multinomial and binary logistic regression
Investigate the prospective association between soy consumption and VMS
using binary logistic regression
Update ovarian, endometrial and breast cancer cases in the UKWCS using 
cancer incidence data provided by the NHS digital on a quarterly basis
Generate variable for endometrial cancer cases (since this was integrated in 
uterine cancer cases category)
Identify confounders using directed acyclic graphs
Investigate the association between diet (using 64 food groups) and 
incidence of the hormone-related cancers using survival analysis
Explore the association by menopausal status
Explore the age at natural menopause as an effect-modifier for the
relationship between food groups and risk of the cancers
Chapter 3
Chapter 4-5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
1.9 Summary 
In summary, evidence shows that diets predisposing to obesity and insulin 
resistance are the main drivers of sex hormone fluctuations among both pre- and post-
menopausal women. Fluctuations in oestrogen levels have been associated with the 
timing of the onset of natural menopause, the presence of VMS, and longer-term sequelae 
such as ovarian, endometrial and breast cancer. Studies have demonstrated that both the 
consumption of diets which are rich in fibre, fruits, and vegetables and, the consumption 
of less healthy diets, for example, those containing processed meats and rich in saturated 
fats can alter circulating levels of oestrogen and other sex hormones. Diet could 
consequently influence the timing of natural menopause and hence affect its associated 
sequelae. However, further evidence around the hypothesis that diet might influence the 
timing of menopause and the presence of VMS are required in observational trials, and 
use of metabolomics may be valuable in revealing mechanistic pathways. Additional 
observational studies may also clarify the association between diet and hormone-related 
cancers. 
References 
1. Hill, K. The demography of menopause. Maturitas. 1996, 23(2), pp.113-127. 
2. Schoenaker, D. et al. Socioeconomic position, lifestyle factors and age at natural 
menopause: a systematic review and meta-analyses of studies across six 
continents. International Journal of Epidemiology. 2014, 43(5), pp.1542-1562. 
3. Davis, S.R. et al. Menopause. Nature Reviews Disease Primers. 2015, p.15004. 
4. Voorhuis, M. et al. Human studies on genetics of the age at natural menopause: a 
systematic review. Human Reproduction Update. 2010, 16(4), pp.364-377. 
5. Gold, E.B. and Greendale, G.A. Chapter 6 - Epidemiology of Menopause: 
Demographics, Environmental Influences, and Ethnic and International 
Differences in the Menopausal Experience. In: Lobo, R.A. ed. Treatment of the 
Postmenopausal Woman (Third Edition). St. Louis: Academic Press, 2007, pp.77-
6. Canavez, F.S. et al. The association between educational level and age at the 
menopause: a systematic review. Archives of Gynecology and Obstetrics. 2011, 
283(1), pp.83-90. 
7. Gold, E.B. et al. Factors associated with age at natural menopause in a multiethnic 
sample of midlife women. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2001, 153(9), 
pp.865-874. 
8. Weinstein, M. et al. Timing of Menopause and Patterns of Menstrual Bleeding. 
American Journal of Epidemiology. 2003, 158(8), pp.782-791. 
9. Henderson, K.D. et al. Predictors of the Timing of Natural Menopause in the 
Multiethnic Cohort Study. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2008, 167(11), 
pp.1287-1294. 
10. Gold, E.B. The timing of the age at which natural menopause occurs. Obstetrics 
and Gynecology Clinics of North America. 2011, 38(3), pp.425-440. 
11. Freeman, E.W. and Sherif, K. Prevalence of hot flushes and night sweats around 
the world: a systematic review. Climacteric. 2007, 10(3), pp.197-214. 
12. Pines, A. Vasomotor symptoms and cardiovascular disease risk. Climacteric. 
2011, 14(5), pp.535-536. 
13. Schuit, E. et al. Association of menopausal characteristics and risk of coronary 
heart disease: a pan-European casecohort analysis. International Journal of 
Epidemiology. 2019; dyz016. 
14. Kaczmarek, M. The timing of natural menopause in Poland and associated factors. 
Maturitas. 2007, 57(2), pp.139-153. 
15. Kato, I. et al. Prospective Study of Factors Influencing the Onset of Natural 
Menopause. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 1998, 51(12), pp.1271-1276. 
16. Lawlor, D.A. et al. The association of socio-economic position across the life 
course and age at menopause: the British Women's Heart and Health Study. BJOG 
: An International Journal of Obstetrics And Gynaecology. 2003, 110(12), 
pp.1078-1087. 
17. Edmonds, D.K. and Dewhurst, J.S. Dewhurst's textbook of obstetrics and 
gynaecology. Malden, Mass: Blackwell Pub, 2006. 
18. Sherwood, L. Human physiology: from cells to systems. St. Paul: West Publishing 
Company, 1993. 
19. O'Connor, K.A. et al. Menstrual cycle variability and the perimenopause. 
American Journal of Human Biology. 2001, 13(4), pp.465-478. 
20. Morrison, J.H. et al. Estrogen, menopause, and the aging brain: how basic 
neuroscience can inform hormone therapy in women. The Journal of 
Neuroscience. 2006, 26(41), pp.10332-10348. 
21. Harlow, S.D. et al. Executive summary of the Stages of Reproductive Aging 
Workshop + 10: addressing the unfinished agenda of staging reproductive aging. 
Menopause. 2012, 19(4), pp.387-395. 
22. Burger, H.G. et al. Cycle and hormone changes during perimenopause: the key 
role of ovarian function. Menopause. 2008, 15(4 Pt 1), pp.603-612. 
23. Su, H.I. and Freeman, E.W. Hormone changes associated with the menopausal 
transition. Minerva Ginecologica. 2009, 61(6), p.483. 
24. Okeke, T.C. et al. Premature Menopause. Annals of Medical and Health Sciences 
Research. 2013, 3(1), pp.90-95. 
25. Faubion, S.S. et al. Long-term health consequences of premature or early 
menopause and considerations for management. Climacteric. 2015, 18(4), 
pp.483-491. 
26. Sherman, S. Defining the menopausal transition. American Journal of Medicine. 
2005, 118(Suppl 12B), pp.3-7. 
27. Sekhar, T.V.D.S. et al. Early Menopause in Type 2 Diabetes - A Study from a 
South Indian Tertiary Care Centre. Journal of Clinical and Diagnostic Research. 
2015, 9(10), p.OC08. 
28. Monterrosa-Castro, A. et al. Type II diabetes mellitus and menopause: a 
multinational study. Climacteric. 2013, 16(6), pp.663-672. 
29. Purdue-Smithe, A.C. et al. Vitamin D and calcium intake and risk of early 
menopause. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2017, 105(6), pp.1493-
1501. 
30. Parker, J. et al. Levels of vitamin D and cardiometabolic disorders: systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Maturitas. 2010, 65(3), pp.225-236. 
31. Biela, U. [Determinants of the age at natural menopause]. Przeglad Lekarski. 
2002, 59(3), pp.165-169. 
32. Bagga, D. et al. Effects of a very-low fat, high-fiber diet on serum hormones and 
menstrual function - implications for breast-cancer prevention. Cancer. 1995, 
76(12), pp.2491-2496. 
33. Karelis, A.D. et al. Comparison of sex hormonal and metabolic profiles between 
omnivores and vegetarians in pre- and post-menopausal women. British Journal 
of Nutrition. 2010, 104(2), pp.222-226. 
34. Rock, C.L. et al. Effects of a high-fiber, low-fat diet intervention on serum 
concentrations of reproductive steroid hormones in women with a history of breast 
cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2004, 22(12), pp.2379-2387. 
35. Nagata, C. et al. Association of diet with the onset of menopause in Japanese 
women. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2000, 152(9), pp.863-867. 
36. Agarwal, A. et al. Role of oxidative stress in female reproduction. Reproductive 
Biology and Endocrinology. 2005, 3, pp.28-28. 
37. Ruder, E.H. et al. Oxidative stress and antioxidants: exposure and impact on 
female fertility. Human Reproduction Update. 2008, 14(4), pp.345-357. 
38. Ozcan, P. et al. Protective effect of resveratrol against oxidative damage to ovarian 
reserve in female Sprague-Dawley rats. Reproductive Biomedicine Online. 2015, 
31(3), pp.404-410. 
39. Berg, J. et al. Important Derivatives of Cholesterol Include Bile Salts and Steroid 
Hormones. In: Biochemistry. 5th ed. New York: W H Freeman, 2002. 
40. Zsakai, A. et al. Body fatness and endogenous sex hormones in the menopausal 
transition. Maturitas. 2016, 87, pp.18-26. 
41. Ho, S.C. et al. Menopausal transition and changes of body composition: a 
prospective study in Chinese perimenopausal women. International Journal of 
Obesity. 2010, 34(8), pp.1265-1274. 
42. O'Neill, S. and Eden, J. The pathophysiology of menopausal symptoms. 
Obstetrics, Gynaecology & Reproductive Medicine. 2017, 27(10), pp.303-310. 
43. Dhanoya, T. et al. Hot flushes and reproductive hormone levels during the 
menopausal transition. Maturitas. 2016, 89, pp.43-51. 
44. Menarche, menopause, and breast cancer risk: individual participant meta-
analysis, including 118 964 women with breast cancer from 117 epidemiological 
studies. The Lancet Oncology 2012, 13(11), pp.1141-1151. 
45. Tavani, A. et al. Influence of menstrual and reproductive factors on ovarian cancer 
risk in women with and without family history of breast or ovarian cancer. 
International Journal of Epidemiology. 2000, 29(5), pp.799-802. 
46. Xu, W.H. et al. Menstrual and reproductive factors and endometrial cancer risk: 
Results from a population-based case-control study in urban Shanghai. 
International Journal of Cancer. 2004, 108(4), pp.613-619. 
47. Travis, R.C. and Key, T.J. Oestrogen exposure and breast cancer risk. Breast 
Cancer Research. 2003, 5(5), pp.239-247. 
48. Clemons, M. and Goss, P. Estrogen and the risk of breast cancer. New England 
Journal of Medicine. 2001, 344(4), pp.276-285. 
49. Mungenast, F. and Thalhammer, T. Estrogen biosynthesis and action in ovarian 
cancer. Frontiers in Endocrinology. 2014, 5, p.192. 
50. Wu, A.H. et al. Meta-analysis: Dietary fat intake, serum estrogen levels, and the 
risk of breast cancer. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 1999, 91(6), 
pp.529-534. 
51. Nagata, C. et al. Fat Intake Is Associated with Serum Estrogen and Androgen 
Concentrations in Postmenopausal Japanese Women. The Journal of Nutrition. 
2005, 135(12), pp.2862-2865. 
52. Gaskins, A.J. et al. Effect of daily fiber intake on reproductive function: the 
BioCycle Study. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2009, 90(4), 
pp.1061-1069. 
53. Hunter, M.S. et al. Prevalence, frequency and problem rating of hot flushes persist 
in older postmenopausal women: impact of age, body mass index, hysterectomy, 
hormone therapy use, lifestyle and mood in a cross-sectional cohort study of 
10,418 British women aged 54-65. BJOG : An International Journal of Obstetrics 
and Gynaecology. 2012, 119(1), pp.40-50. 
54. Thurston, R.C. and Joffe, H. Vasomotor symptoms and menopause: findings from 
the Study of Women's Health across the Nation. Obstetrics and Gynecology 
Clinics of North America. 2011, 38(3), pp.489-501. 
55. Lethaby, A. et al. Phytoestrogens for menopausal vasomotor symptoms. The 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2013, (12), p.Cd001395. 
56. Schmidt, M. et al. Consensus: soy isoflavones as a first-line approach to the 
treatment of menopausal vasomotor complaints. Gynecological Endocrinology. 
2016, 32(6), pp.427-430. 
57. Herber-Gast, G.C. and Mishra, G.D. Fruit, Mediterranean-style, and high-fat and 
-sugar diets are associated with the risk of night sweats and hot flushes in midlife: 
results from a prospective cohort study. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
2013, 97(5), pp.1092-1099. 
58. Cancer Research UK. Cancer statistics by type. Available from:  
http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/health-professional/cancer-statistics/statistics-
by-cancer-type (accessed May 2018) 
59. World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research. Diet, 
Nutrition, Physical Activity and Cancer: a Global Perspective. Continuous 
Update Project Expert Report 2018. Available from: dietandcancerreport.org 
60. Reid, B.M. et al. Epidemiology of ovarian cancer: a review. Cancer Biology & 
Medicine. 2017, 14(1), pp.9-32. 
61. Ferlay, J. et al. Cancer incidence and mortality worldwide: Sources, methods and 
major patterns in GLOBOCAN 2012. International Journal of Cancer. 2015, 
136(5), pp.E359-E386. 
62. Torre, L.A. et al. Ovarian cancer statistics, 2018. CA: A Cancer Journal for 
Clinicians. 2018, 68(4), pp.284-296. 
63. Ana Fernndez Montes, J.G.G., Miguel Nuez Viejo, Miguel Alonso Bermejo, 
Susana Alonso Urrutia and Jess Garca Mata. Epidemiology and Etiology of 
Ovarian Cancer. In: Farghaly, S.A. ed. Ovarian Cancer - Basic Science 
Perspective.   IntechOpen, 2012, pp.1-16. 
64. Chen, V.W. et al. Pathology and classification of ovarian tumors. Cancer. 2003, 
97(S10), pp.2631-2642. 
65. Stratton, J.F. et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis of family history and 
risk of ovarian cancer. British Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology. 1998, 
105(5), pp.493-499. 
66. Negri, E. et al. Family history of cancer and risk of ovarian cancer. European 
Journal of Cancer. 2003, 39(4), pp.505-510. 
67. Jervis, S. et al. Ovarian cancer familial relative risks by tumour subtypes and by 
known ovarian cancer genetic susceptibility variants. Journal of Medical 
Genetics. 2014, 51(2), pp.108-113. 
68. Adaniel, C. and Kirchhoff, T. Introduction to epidemiology of breast and ovarian 
cancers. Annals of Oncology. 2013, 24(suppl_8), pp.viii61-viii62. 
69. Cramer, D.W. The epidemiology of endometrial and ovarian cancer. 
Hematology/Oncology Clinics of North America. 2012, 26(1), pp.1-12. 
70. Lee, A.W. et al. Association Between Menopausal Estrogen-Only Therapy and 
Ovarian Carcinoma Risk. Obstetetrics & Gynecology. 2016, 127(5), pp.828-836. 
71. Zhou, B. et al. Hormone replacement therapy and ovarian cancer risk: a meta-
analysis. Obstetetrics & Gynecology. 2008, 108(3), pp.641-651. 
72. Coughlin, S.S. et al. A meta-analysis of estrogen replacement therapy and risk of 
epithelial ovarian cancer. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 2000, 53(4), pp.367-
73. Iversen, L. et al. Lifetime cancer risk and combined oral contraceptives: the Royal 
College of General Practitioners' Oral Contraception Study. American Journal of 
Obstetrics & Gynecology. 2017, 216(6), pp.580.e581-580.e589. 
74. Cibula, D. et al. Hormonal contraception and risk of cancer. Human Reproduction 
Update. 2010, 16(6), pp.631-650. 
75. Iversen, L. et al. Association between contemporary hormonal contraception and 
ovarian cancer in women of reproductive age in Denmark: prospective, 
nationwide cohort study. British Medical Journal. 2018, 362, p.k3609. 
76. Collaborative Group on Epidemiological Studies of Ovarian, C. et al. Ovarian 
cancer and smoking: individual participant meta-analysis including 28,114 
women with ovarian cancer from 51 epidemiological studies. The Lancet 
Oncology. 2012, 13(9), pp.946-956. 
77. Faber, M.T. et al. Cigarette smoking and risk of ovarian cancer: a pooled analysis 
of 21 case-control studies. Cancer Causes & Control. 2013, 24(5), pp.989-1004. 
78. Liu, D.-W. et al. The association between overweight, obesity and ovarian cancer: 
a meta-analysis. Japanese Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2015, 45(12), pp.1107-
1115. 
79. Olsen, C.M. et al. Obesity and risk of ovarian cancer subtypes: evidence from the 
Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium. Endocrine-Related Cancer. 2013, 
20(2), p.251. 
80. Cannioto, R. et al. Chronic Recreational Physical Inactivity and Epithelial 
Ovarian Cancer Risk: Evidence from the Ovarian Cancer Association 
Consortium. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2016, 25(7), pp.1114-1124. 
81. Cannioto, R.A. and Moysich, K.B. Epithelial ovarian cancer and recreational 
physical activity: A review of the epidemiological literature and implications for 
exercise prescription. Gynecologic Oncology. 2015, 137(3), pp.559-573. 
82. Kazerouni, N. et al. Family history of breast cancer as a determinant of the risk of 
developing endometrial cancer: a nationwide cohort study. Journal of Medical 
Genetics. 2002, 39(11), pp.826-832. 
83. Henderson, I.C. Breast Cancer: Fundamentals of Evidence-Based Disease 
Management US: Oxford University Press, 2015. 
84. Murali, R. et al. Classification of endometrial carcinoma: more than two types. 
The Lancet Oncology. 2014, 15(7), pp.e268-e278. 
85. Shiovitz, S. and Korde, L.A. Genetics of breast cancer: a topic in evolution. 
Annals of Oncology. 2015, 26(7), pp.1291-1299. 
86. Wu, Q.J. et al. Parity and endometrial cancer risk: a meta-analysis of 
epidemiological studies. Scientific Reports. 2015, 5, p.14243. 
87. Li, D.P. et al. Breastfeeding and ovarian cancer risk: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis of 40 epidemiological studies. Asian Pacific Journal of Cancer 
Prevention. 2014, 15(12), pp.4829-4837. 
88. Wang, L. et al. Association between Breastfeeding and Endometrial Cancer Risk: 
Evidence from a Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Nutrients. 2015, 7(7), 
pp.5697-5711. 
89. Lipworth, L. et al. History of breast-feeding in relation to breast cancer risk: a 
review of the epidemiologic literature. Journal of National Cancer Institute. 2000, 
92(4), pp.302-312. 
90. Gierisch, J.M. et al. Oral Contraceptive Use and Risk of Breast, Cervical, 
Colorectal, and Endometrial Cancers: A Systematic Review. Cancer 
Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention. 2013, 22(11), pp.1931-1943. 
91. Pearce, C.L. et al. Increased ovarian cancer risk associated with menopausal 
estrogen therapy is reduced by adding a progestin. Cancer. 2009, 115(3), pp.531-
92. Beral, V. et al. Endometrial cancer and hormone-replacement therapy in the 
Million Women Study. The Lancet. 2005, 365(9470), pp.1543-1551. 
93. Key, T.J. et al. Epidemiology of breast cancer. The Lancet Oncology. 2001, 2(3), 
pp.133-140. 
94. Zhou, B. et al. Cigarette smoking and the risk of endometrial cancer: a meta-
analysis. American Journal of Medicine. 2008, 121(6), pp.501-508.e503. 
95. Gram, I.T. et al. The fraction of breast cancer attributable to smoking: The 
Norwegian women and cancer study 1991-2012. British Journal of Cancer. 2016, 
115(5), pp.616-623. 
96. La Vecchia, C. et al. Alcohol and epithelial ovarian cancer. Journal of Clinical 
Epidemiology. 1992, 45(9), pp.1025-1030. 
97. Setiawan, V.W. et al. Alcohol consumption and endometrial cancer risk: the 
multiethnic cohort. International Journal of Cancer. 2008, 122(3), pp.634-638. 
98. Zhang, S.M. et al. Alcohol Consumption and Breast Cancer Risk in the Women's 
Health Study. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2007, 165(6), pp.667-676. 
99. Voskuil, D.W. et al. Physical Activity and Endometrial Cancer Risk, a Systematic 
Review of Current Evidence. Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention. 
2007, 16(4), pp.639-648. 
100. Loprinzi, P.D. et al. Physical activity and breast cancer risk. Journal of Exercise 
Science & Fitness. 2012, 10(1), pp.1-7. 
101. Onstad, M.A. et al. Addressing the Role of Obesity in Endometrial Cancer Risk, 
Prevention, and Treatment. Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2016, 34(35), pp.4225-
4230. 
102. Nattenmller, C.J. et al. Obesity as risk factor for subtypes of breast cancer: results 
from a prospective cohort study. BMC Cancer. 2018, 18(1), p.616. 
103. Alberg, A.J. et al. Socioeconomic Status in Relation to the Risk of Ovarian Cancer 
in African-American Women: A Population-Based Case-Control Study. 
American Journal of Epidemiology. 2016, 184(4), pp.274-283. 
104. Madison, T. et al. Endometrial cancer: socioeconomic status and racial/ethnic 
differences in stage at diagnosis, treatment, and survival. American Journal of 
Public Health. 2004, 94(12), pp.2104-2111. 
105. Hussain, S.K. et al. Influence of education level on breast cancer risk and survival 
in Sweden between 1990 and 2004. International Journal of Cancer. 2008, 
122(1), pp.165-169. 
106. Akinyemiju, T.F. et al. Socioeconomic status and incidence of breast cancer by 
hormone receptor subtype. SpringerPlus. 2015, 4, pp.1-8. 
107. Begum, S. and S, A. Study of immune profile during different phases of menstrual 
cycle. International Journal of Biological and Medical Research. 2012, 3(1), 
pp.1407-1409. 
108. Nair, A.R. and Taylor, H.S. The Mechanism of Menstruation. In: Santoro, N.F. 
and Neal-Perry, G. eds. Amenorrhea: A Case-Based, Clinical Guide.  New York: 
Humana Press, 2010, pp.21-34. 
109. Beshay, V.E. and Carr, B.R. Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Ovarian Axis and Control of 
the Menstrual Cycle. In: Falcone, T. and Hurd, W.W. eds. Clinical Reproductive 
Medicine and Surgery: A Practical Guide. 2 ed. New York: Springer, 2013, 
pp.31-42. 
110. Lengyel, E. Ovarian cancer development and metastasis. American Journal of 
Pathology. 2010, 177(3), pp.1053-1064. 
111. Wu, A.H. et al. Meta-analysis: Dietary Fat Intake, Serum Estrogen Levels, and 
the Risk of Breast Cancer. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 1999, 91(6), 
pp.529-534. 
112. Fucic, A. et al. Environmental exposure to xenoestrogens and oestrogen related 
cancers: Reproductive system, breast, lung, kidney, pancreas, and brain. 
Environmental Health: A Global Access Science Source. 2012, 11(1), pp.S8-S8. 
113. Ogura, K. et al. Effects of leptin on secretion of LH and FSH from primary 
cultured female rat pituitary cells. European Journal of Endocrinology  2001, 
144(6), pp.653-658. 
114. Blank, M.M. et al. Dietary fat intake and risk of ovarian cancer in the NIH-AARP 
Diet and Health Study. British Journal of Cancer. 2012, 106(3), pp.596-602. 
115. Qiu, W. et al. Dietary fat intake and ovarian cancer risk: a meta-analysis of 
epidemiological studies. Oncotarget. 2016, 7(24), pp.37390-37406. 
116. Prentice, R.L. et al. Low-fat dietary pattern and cancer incidence in the Women's 
Health Initiative Dietary Modification Randomized Controlled Trial. Journal of 
the National Cancer Institute. 2007, 99(20), pp.1534-1543. 
117. Taha, A.A.A. et al. The effect of the type of dietary protein on the development 
of ovarian cancer. Oncotarget. 2018, 9(35), pp.23987-23999. 
118. Pang, Y. and Wang, W. Dietary protein intake and risk of ovarian cancer: evidence 
from a meta-analysis of observational studies. Bioscience reports. 2018, 38(6), 
pp.1-7. 
119. Azrad, M. et al. Current evidence linking polyunsaturated Fatty acids with cancer 
risk and progression. Frontiers in Oncology. 2013, 3, p.224. 
120. Larsson, S.C. et al. Dietary long-chain n 3 fatty acids for the prevention of 
cancer: a review of potential mechanisms. The American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. 2004, 79(6), pp.935-945. 
121. Calder, P.C. Omega3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and inflammatory processes: 
nutrition or pharmacology? British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology. 2013, 
75(3), pp.645-662. 
122. Merritt, M.A. et al. Dietary fat intake and risk of epithelial ovarian cancer by 
tumour histology. British Journal of Cancer. 2014, 110(5), pp.1392-1401. 
123. Hu, F. et al. Lipid metabolism, metabolic syndrome, and cancer.  INTECH Open 
Access Publisher, 2013. 
124. Berquin, I.M. et al. Modulation of prostate cancer genetic risk by omega-3 and 
omega-6 fatty acids. Journal of Clinical Investigation. 2007, 117(7), pp.1866-
1875. 
125. Perlman, R.L. Mouse models of human disease: An evolutionary perspective. 
Evolution, Medicine, and Public Health. 2016, 2016(1), pp.170-176. 
126. Huerta-Ypez, S. et al. Role of diets rich in omega-3 and omega-6 in the 
development of cancer. Boletn Mdico del Hospital Infantil de Mxico. 2016, 
73(6), pp.446-456. 
127. Wong, R.H.F. and Sul, H.S. Insulin signaling in fatty acid and fat synthesis: a 
transcriptional perspective. Current Opinion in Pharmacology. 2010, 10(6), 
pp.684-691. 
128. Sul, H.S. and Wang, D. Nutritional and hormonal regulation of enzymes in fat 
synthesis: Studies of fatty acid synthase and mitochondrial glycerol-3-phosphate 
acyltransferase gene transcription. Annual Review of Nutrition. 1998, 18(1), 
pp.331-351. 
129. Currie, E. et al. Cellular Fatty Acid Metabolism and Cancer. Cell Metabolism. 
2013, 18(2), pp.153-161. 
130. Saso, S. et al. Endometrial cancer. British Medical Journal. 2011, 343, p.d3954. 
131. World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research. 
Continuous Update Project Report. Food, Nutrition, Physical Activity, and the 
Prevention of Endometrial Cancer. 2013. Available from: 
https://www.wcrf.org/sites/default/files/Endometrial-Cancer-2013-Report.pdf 
132. Weiss, J.M. et al. Risk Factors for the Incidence of Endometrial Cancer according 
to the Aggressiveness of Disease. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2006, 
164(1), pp.56-62. 
133. I National Cancer Institute. Endometrial Cancer Incidence Rising in the US and 
Worldwide. 2017. Available from: https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/cancer-
currents-blog/2017/endometrial-cancer-incidence-rising. [accessed October 
2018] 
134. Pellerin, G.P. and Finan, M.A. Endometrial cancer in women 45 years of age or 
younger: A clinicopathological analysis. American Journal of Obstetrics & 
Gynecology. 2005, 193(5), pp.1640-1644. 
135. Silverberg SG, K.R., Nogales F, Mutter GL, Kubik-Huch RA, Tavassoli FA. 
Epithelial tumours and related lesions. In: Tavassoli FA, D.P. ed. World Health 
Organization classification of tumours: pathology and geneticstumours of the 
breast and female genital organs.  Lyon: IARC Press, 2003, pp.217-232. 
136. Win, A.K. et al. Family history and risk of endometrial cancer: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Obstetrics and Gynecology. 2015, 125(1), pp.89-98. 
137. Johnatty, S.E. et al. Family history of cancer predicts endometrial cancer risk 
independently of Lynch Syndrome: Implications for genetic counselling. 
Gynecologic Oncology 2017, 147(2), pp.381-387. 
138. Cook, L.S. et al. Endometrial cancer and a family history of cancer. Gynecologic 
Oncology. 2013, 130(2), pp.334-339. 
139. Cote, M.L. et al. The Growing Burden of Endometrial Cancer: A Major Racial 
Disparity Affecting Black Women. Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & 
Prevention. 2015, 24(9), pp.1407-1415. 
140. Setiawan, V.W. et al. Racial/Ethnic Differences in Endometrial Cancer Risk: The 
Multiethnic Cohort Study. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2006, 165(3), 
pp.262-270. 
141. Jordan, S.J. et al. Breastfeeding and Endometrial Cancer Risk: An Analysis From 
the Epidemiology of Endometrial Cancer Consortium. Gynecologic Oncology. 
2017, 129(6), pp.1059-1067. 
142. Morice, P. et al. Endometrial cancer. The Lancet. 2016, 387(10023), pp.1094-
1108. 
143. Aune, D. et al. Hypertension and the risk of endometrial cancer: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of case-control and cohort studies. Scientific Reports. 
2017, 7, p.44808. 
144. Hamet, P. Cancer and hypertension: a potential for crosstalk? Journal of 
Hypertension. 1997, 15(12 Pt 2), pp.1573-1577. 
145. Bangalore, S. et al. Antihypertensive drugs and risk of cancer: network meta-
analyses and trial sequential analyses of 324,168 participants from randomised 
trials. The Lancet Oncology. 2011, 12(1), pp.65-82. 
146. Du, M. et al. Physical activity and risk of endometrial adenocarcinoma in the 
Nurses' Health Study. International Journal of Cancer. 2014, 134(11), pp.2707-
2716. 
147. Kaaks, R. et al. Obesity, endogenous hormones, and endometrial cancer risk: A 
synthetic review. Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention. 2002, 11(12), 
pp.1531-1543. 
148. Losordo, D.W. and Isner, J.M. Estrogen and Angiogenesis: A Review. 
Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology: Journal of the American 
Heart Association. 2001, 21(1), pp.6-12. 
149. Xu, W.H. et al. Effect of adiposity and fat distribution on endometrial cancer risk 
in Shanghai women. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2005, 161(10), pp.939-
150. Carlson, M.J. et al. Catch it before it kills: progesterone, obesity, and the 
prevention of endometrial cancer. Discovery Medicine. 2012, 14(76), pp.215-222. 
151. Goodman, M.T. et al. Association of soy and fiber consumption with the risk of 
endometrial cancer. American Journal of Epidemiology. 1997, 146(4), pp.294-
152. World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research. Food, 
Nutrition, Physical Activity, and the Prevention of Cancer: a Global Perspective. 
2007. Available at: https://www.wcrf.org/sites/default/files/english.pdf 
153. Mulholland, H.G. et al. Dietary glycaemic index, glycaemic load and endometrial 
and ovarian cancer risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis. British Journal of 
Cancer. 2008, 99(3), pp.434-441. 
154. Bosetti, C. et al. Metabolic syndrome and endometrial cancer risk. Annals of 
Oncology. 2010, 22(4), pp.884-889. 
155. Luo, J. et al. Association between diabetes, diabetes treatment and risk of 
developing endometrial cancer. British Journal of Cancer. 2014, 111, p.1432. 
156. Friberg, E. et al. Diabetes and Risk of Endometrial Cancer: A Population-Based 
Prospective Cohort Study. Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention. 2007, 
16(2), pp.276-280. 
157. Hernandez, A.V. et al. Insulin resistance and endometrial cancer risk: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. European Journal of Cancer. 2015, 
51(18), pp.2747-2758. 
158. Shapira, N. The potential contribution of dietary factors to breast cancer 
prevention. European Journal of Cancer Prevention. 2017, 26(5), pp.385-395. 
159. Ellis IO, S.S., Sastre-Garau X, Bussolati G, Tavassoli FA, Eusebi V, Peterse JL, 
Mukai K, Tabr L, Jacquemier J, Cornelisse CJ, Sasco AJ, Kaaks R, Pisani P, 
Goldgar DE, Devilee P, Cleton-Jansen MJ, Brresen-Dale AL, vant Veer L, 
Sapino A. Invasive breast carcinoma. In: Tavassoli FA, D.P. ed. Pathology and 
Genetics of Tumours of the Breast and Female Genital Organs.  Lyon: IARC 
Press, 2003, pp.9-41. 
160. Malhotra, G.K. et al. Histological, molecular and functional subtypes of breast 
cancers. Cancer Biology & Therapy. 2010, 10(10), pp.955-960. 
161. Anderson, K.N. et al. Reproductive risk factors and breast cancer subtypes: a 
review of the literature. Breast Cancer Research and Treatment. 2014, 144(1), 
pp.1-10. 
162. Kispert, S. and McHowat, J. Recent insights into cigarette smoking as a lifestyle 
risk factor for breast cancer. Breast Cancer. 2017, 9, pp.127-132. 
163. Fagherazzi, G. et al. Alcohol consumption and breast cancer risk subtypes in the 
E3N-EPIC cohort. European Journal of Cancer Prevention. 2015, 24(3), pp.209-
164. Yoneda, A. et al. Breast and Ovarian Cancers: A Survey and Possible Roles for 
the Cell Surface Heparan Sulfate Proteoglycans. Journal of Histochemistry and 
Cytochemistry. 2012, 60(1), pp.9-21. 
165. Cleary, M.P. and Grossmann, M.E. Obesity and Breast Cancer: The Estrogen 
Connection. Endocrinology. 2009, 150(6), pp.2537-2542. 
166. Malara, N.M. et al. Ageing, hormonal behaviour and cyclin D1 in ductal breast 
carcinomas. The Breast. 2006, 15(1), pp.81-89. 
167. Bussard, K.M. et al. Tumor-associated stromal cells as key contributors to the 
tumor microenvironment. Breast Cancer Research. 2016, 18(1), p.84. 
168. Llaverias, G. et al. Role of Cholesterol in the Development and Progression of 
Breast Cancer. The American Journal of Pathology. 2011, 178(1), pp.402-412. 
169. Wu, Q. et al. 27-Hydroxycholesterol Promotes Cell-autonomous ER-positive 
Breast Cancer Growth. Cell reports. 2013, 5(3), pp.637-645. 
170. Baek, A.E. et al. The cholesterol metabolite 27 hydroxycholesterol facilitates 
breast cancer metastasis through its actions on immune cells. Nature 
Communications. 2017, 8, p.864. 
171. Derby, C.A. et al. Lipid Changes During the Menopause Transition in Relation to 
Age and WeightThe Study of Women's Health Across the Nation. American 
Journal of Epidemiology. 2009, 169(11), pp.1352-1361. 
172. Lu, D.-L. et al. Circulating 27-Hydroxycholesterol and Breast Cancer Risk: 
Results From the EPIC-Heidelberg Cohort. Journal of the National Cancer 
Institute. 2018, pp.djy115-djy115. 
173. Bracken, M.B. Why animal studies are often poor predictors of human reactions 
to exposure. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine. 2009, 102(3), pp.120-122. 
174. De Souza, C.T. et al. Consumption of a fat-rich diet activates a proinflammatory 
response and induces insulin resistance in the hypothalamus. Endocrinology. 
2005, 146(10), pp.4192-4199. 
175. Willett, W. et al. Glycemic index, glycemic load, and risk of type 2 diabetes. 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2002, 76(1), pp.274s-280s. 
176. Orgel, E. and Mittelman, S.D. The Links Between Insulin Resistance, Diabetes, 
and Cancer. Current Diabetes Reports. 2013, 13(2), pp.213-222. 
177. Rose, D.P. et al. The Interactions of Obesity, Inflammation and Insulin Resistance 
in Breast Cancer. Cancers. 2015, 7(4), pp.2147-2168. 
178. Mukhopadhyay, K.D. et al. Aromatase Expression Increases the Survival and 
Malignancy of Estrogen Receptor Positive Breast Cancer Cells. PLoS ONE. 2015, 
10(4), p.e0121136. 
179. Daka, B. et al. Inverse association between serum insulin and sex hormone-
binding globulin in a population survey in Sweden. Endocrine Connections. 2013, 
2(1), pp.18-22. 
180. Sieri, S. et al. Prospective study on the role of glucose metabolism in breast cancer 
occurrence. International Journal of Cancer. 2012, 130(4), pp.921-929. 
181. Howe, L.R. et al. Molecular pathways: adipose inflammation as a mediator of 
obesity-associated cancer. Clinical Cancer Research. 2013, 19(22), pp.6074-
6083. 
182. Key, T.J. et al. Sex hormones and risk of breast cancer in premenopausal women: 
a collaborative reanalysis of individual participant data from seven prospective 
studies. The Lancet Oncology. 2013, 14(10), pp.1009-1019. 
183. Chen, G.-C. et al. Central obesity and risks of pre- and postmenopausal breast 
cancer: a doseresponse meta-analysis of prospective studies. Obesity Reviews. 
2016, 17(11), pp.1167-1177. 
184. Luque, R.M. et al. Breast cancer is associated to impaired glucose/insulin 
homeostasis in premenopausal obese/overweight patients. Oncotarget. 2017, 
8(46), pp.81462-81474. 
185. Harris, H.R. et al. Folate, vitamin B 6, vitamin B 12, methionine and alcohol 
intake in relation to ovarian cancer risk. International Journal of Cancer. 2012, 
131(4), pp.E518-E529. 
186. Bandera, E.V. et al. Antioxidant Vitamins and the Risk of Endometrial Cancer: A 
DoseResponse Meta-Analysis. Cancer Causes & Control. 2009, 20(5), pp.699-
187. Donaldson, M.S. Nutrition and cancer: a review of the evidence for an anti-cancer 
diet. Nutrition Journal. 2004, 3, p.19. 
188. Navarro Silvera, S.A. et al. Carotenoid, vitamin A, vitamin C, and vitamin E 
intake and risk of ovarian cancer: A prospective cohort study. Cancer 
Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention. 2006, 15(2), pp.395-397. 
189. Thomson, C.A. et al. The Role of Antioxidants and Vitamin A in Ovarian Cancer: 
Results From the Women's Health Initiative. Nutrition and Cancer. 2008, 60(6), 
pp.710-719. 
190. Koushik, A. et al. Intake of vitamins A, C, and E and folate and the risk of ovarian 
cancer in a pooled analysis of 10 cohort studies. Cancer Causes and Control. 
2015, 26(9), pp.1315-1327. 
191. Estbanez, N. et al. Vitamin D exposure and Risk of Breast Cancer: a meta-
analysis. Scientific Reports. 2018, 8(1), p.9039. 
192. McCullough, M.L. et al. Dairy, Calcium, and Vitamin D Intake and 
Postmenopausal Breast Cancer Risk in the Cancer Prevention Study II Nutrition 
Cohort. Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention. 2005, 14(12), pp.2898-
2904. 
193. Ahonen, M.H. et al. Androgen receptor and vitamin D receptor in human ovarian 
cancer: Growth stimulation and inhibition by ligands. International Journal of 
Cancer. 2000, 86(1), pp.40-46. 
194. Yu, W. et al. Dietary vitamin D exposure prevents obesity-induced increase in 
endometrial cancer in Pten+/- mice. Cancer Prevention Research. 2010, 3(10), 
pp.1246-1258. 
195. Cook, L.S. A systematic literature review of vitamin D and ovarian cancer. 
American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology. 2010, 203(1), pp.70.e71-70.e78. 
196. McCullough, M.L. et al. Vitamin D and calcium intake in relation to risk of 
endometrial cancer: A systematic review of the literature. Preventive Medicine. 
2008, 46(4), pp.298-302. 
197. Romagnolo, D.F. and Selmin, O.I. Flavonoids and Cancer Prevention: A Review 
of the Evidence. Journal of Nutrition in Gerontology and Geriatrics. 2012, 31(3), 
p.206. 
198. Rossi, M. and La Vecchia, C. Flavonoids and the risk of ovarian cancer. American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2014, 100(5), pp.1217-1219. 
199. Cassidy, A. et al. Intake of dietary flavonoids and risk of epithelial ovarian cancer. 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2014, 100(5), pp.1344-1351. 
200. Luo, H. et al. Kaempferol induces apoptosis in ovarian cancer cells through 
activating p53 in the intrinsic pathway. Food Chemistry. 2011, 128(2), pp.513-
201. Luo, H. et al. Kaempferol inhibits VEGF expression and in vitro angiogenesis 
through a novel ERK-NF kappa B-cMyc-p21 pathway. Food Chemistry. 2012, 
130(2), pp.321-328. 
202. Hui, C. et al. Flavonoids, Flavonoid Subclasses and Breast Cancer Risk: A Meta-
Analysis of Epidemiologic Studies. PLoS ONE. 2013, 8(1), p.e54318. 
203. Marijn Stok, F. et al. Dietary Behavior: An Interdisciplinary Conceptual Analysis 
and Taxonomy. Frontiers in Psychology. 2018, 9(1689). 
204. Hunter, D.J. and Reddy, K.S. Noncommunicable Diseases. New England Journal 
of Medicine. 2013, 369(14), pp.1336-1343. 
205. Kelly, M.P. et al. A conceptual framework for public health: NICE's emerging 
approach. Public Health. 2009, 123(1), pp.e14-e20. 
206. HM Revenue and Customs. Soft drinks industry levey: policy paper, 2016. 
207. Golden, S.D. and Earp, J.A. Social ecological approaches to individuals and their 
contexts: twenty years of health education & behavior health promotion 
interventions. Health Education & Behavior. 2012, 39(3), pp.364-372. 
208. Al-Goblan, A.S. et al. Mechanism linking diabetes mellitus and obesity. Diabetes, 
metabolic syndrome and obesity : targets and therapy. 2014, 7, pp.587-591. 
209. Garg, S.K. et al. Diabetes and cancer: two diseases with obesity as a common risk 
factor. Diabetes, Obesity & Metabolism. 2014, 16(2), pp.97-110. 
210. Simone, V. et al. Obesity and Breast Cancer: Molecular Interconnections and 
Potential Clinical Applications. The Oncologist. 2016, 21(4), pp.404-417. 
211. Afshin, A. et al. Health effects of dietary risks in 195 countries, 1990-2017: a 
systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017. The Lancet. 
2019, 393(10184), pp.1958-1972. 
212. Pourhoseingholi, M.A. et al. How to control confounding effects by statistical 
analysis. Gastroenterology and hepatology from bed to bench. 2012, 5(2), pp.79-
Chapter 2  
Literature review 
Abstract 
Previously, one systematic review has been carried out which included studies 
having information on the associations between diet and the timing of menopause while 
no systematic review has been conducted in relation to the regular diet and the presence 
of VMS. Recently, the updated Continuous Update Project (CUP) report has been 
published, which systematically reviewed the relationships between diet and the risk of 
ovarian, endometrial and breast cancers. Therefore, in this chapter using PubMed, a 
search was conducted using relevant search strategies and inclusion criteria to update the 
current available literature. The search resulted to 13 pertinent studies for the association 
between diet and the onset of menopause, and 9 for diet and the presence of VMS. 
Moreover, 8 studies were considered for the relationship between diet and the risk of 
ovarian cancer, 13 for endometrial cancer risk and 28 for breast cancer risk. This literature 
search demonstrated that due to the methodological problems in the assessment tools used 
such as inconsistent adjustment of confounders across the studies, and the use of self-
reported diet using food frequency questionnaires as well as insufficient follow-up time 
in each study, the findings for the associations between diet and the timing of menopause, 
presence of VMS as well as the risk of the hormone-related cancers remain inconclusive. 
The only exception was the relationship between alcohol intake and an increased risk of 
breast cancer which is in line with the CUP report. Thus, further observational studies are 
warranted to clarify these relationships. 
2.1 Introduction  
This section aims to provide a summary of key literature findings for the 
association between natural dietary components and age at menopause, the presence of 
VMS, as well as the risk of ovarian, endometrial and breast cancers. Given that only one 
systematic review has been conducted for the association between natural diet and age at 
menopause [1] and no systematic review was found which assessed the relationship 
between diet and the presence of VMS, this search included studies from 1946 until 
December 2018. Relevant studies have been summarised in Table 2.2 and Table 2.3. 
As recently, the updated report of the Continuous Update Project (CUP) has been 
published [2] for the relationship between diet and risk of ovarian, endometrial and breast 
cancers, this search included studies post the end-point date of that systematic review as 
detailed in the section below. The report suggested limited/inconclusive results for the 
associations between a range of food items (e.g., vegetables, fruits, eggs, meat, poultry, 
cereals, etc.) and the risk of both ovarian and endometrial cancer. As for breast cancer, 
there was strong evidence that alcoholic drinks increase the risk. Consumption of non-
starchy vegetables, dairy products, foods containing carotenoids and diet loaded with 
calcium are suggested to decrease breast cancer risk. However, association with other 
food items remain unresolved. Relevant studies identified through this search have been 
summarised in Table 2.5, Table 2.6 and Table 2.7. Given that these cancers have a strong 
hormonal pathogenesis; Table 2.4 summarises how menopausal status was used in the 
included studies. The aim of this literature review was to report primary research, that is, 
original research articles, relating to the main exposure (diet) and outcomes of interest for 
this thesis. 
2.2 Methods 
2.2.1 Search strategies 
PubMed was the main search engine used to report evidence in this section, using 
the keywords or medical subject headings age natural menopause, vasomotor 
symptoms, ovarian neoplasms, endometrial neoplasms, breast neoplasms 
combined with diet (Appendix A). The papers were firstly screened by title and abstract 
to include the most relevant studies.  
For evidence on the association between diet and onset of menopause as well as 
VMS, limits were set to include only humans, English, adult, female, and full texts to 
update the earlier review. Systematic reviews and meta-analyses were excluded to avoid 
the likelihood of having duplicate original research findings [3]. For evidence on diet and 
the hormone-related cancers, limits were also set to include only humans, English, adult, 
female, and full texts (Table 2.1). As the aim of this section was to report data post the 
latest systematic review recently published by the WCRF/AICR, studies with publication 
dates between January 1, 2013 to December 31, 2018 was included for ovarian and 
endometrial cancers, and May 1, 2015 to December 31, 2018 for studies on diet and breast 
cancer. To focus the findings on studies reporting evidence on the above outcomes and 
dietary exposures (natural diet), non-food containing exposures (e.g., acrylamide) and 
pharmacological exposures (e.g., supplements) were excluded. In addition, to include 
studies with less bias, such as recall of diet after the event, prospective studies and nested-
case control studies were considered. Due to the limited number of studies on the 
association between natural diet and the onset of menopause as well as the presence of 
VMS, clinical trials, RCTs, case-control studies, and cross-sectional studies were also 
included. For the cancers, 200 cases were considered as having enough statistical power 
to observe any association [4]. However, given the small number of studies which 
explored the relationships between diet and the risks of breast, endometrial and ovarian 
cancers post the CUP report, studies with less than 200 cases were also considered. 
Table 2.1 Search strategy - adapted from WCRF PubMed search strategy [5, 6] 
Inclusion criteria 
 Have to present results from an epidemiologic study of one of the following types: 
v Randomized controlled trial 
v Group randomized controlled trial (Community trial) 
v Prospective cohort study 
v Nested case-control study 
v Case-cohort study 
 Must have as outcome of interest breast cancer (invasive) incidence or mortality in women 
 Have to present results on the relevant exposures 
 Published in English language 
 Included in Medline 
Exclusion criteria 
The articles to be excluded from the review: 
 Are out of the research topic 
 Do not report measure of relationship 
 The measure of relationship is only the mean difference of exposure 
 Are supplement to the main manuscript (e.g. Authors Reply) 
 Are in-press 
 Are not in English language 
2.2.2 Evaluation of study quality 
The NewcastleOttawa scale (NOS) was used to assess the quality of the selected 
studies. The NOS is primarily used to determine the quality of casecontrol and cohort 
studies based on three parameters of quality: selection, comparability and 
exposure/outcome assessment [7]. The NOS allocates a maximum of four points for 
selection process, two points for comparability and three points for exposure or outcome 
of the study. The following scores was given to evaluate the quality of the studies:  03, 
46, and 79 for low, moderate, and high quality studies, respectively (Appendix A). For 
cross-sectional studies, the NOS was adapted to assess the risk of bias [8]. Additionally, 
an adapted form of the Centre for Reviews and Dissemination (University of York) [9] 
was used to evaluate the risk of bias for RCTs [10]. 
2.3 Diet and timing of the onset of menopause  
Thirteen publications that met the inclusion criteria were reviewed for this section. 
(Figure 2.1). These studies included analysis from eight prospective cohort studies, three 
cross-sectional studies, and one RCT (Table 2.2). Two big cohort studies were the Nurses 
Health Study II and the Shanghai Women's Health Study. All studies had the onset of 
natural menopause as the outcome while two studies [11, 12] provided no information on 
the type of menopause (Table 2.2). 
Figure 2.1 Flow diagram of selection process relating to diet and age at natural 
menopause 
Records identified through database searching
(n=2793)
Records screened
(n=2793)
Full-text articles assessed for eligibility
(n=23)
Studies included in qualitative synthesis
(n=13)
Records excluded on basis of content of title 
and abstract
(n=2771)
Full-text articles excluded (n=10):
Review/meta-analysis (n=2)
Out of research topic (n=8)
According to nine studies, foods such as meat, alcohol, dairy products, protein, 
and fat appeared to be associated with a delayed onset of menopause. On the other hand, 
few studies demonstrated no association between meat and alcohol consumption with the 
onset of natural menopause. For instance, in the cross-sectional study by Togerson et al. 
[11], meat was positively associated with the onset of menopause, but this could not be 
confirmed in their follow-up study. Findings on the association with carbohydrates, fruits 
and vegetables are conflicting. While Nagel et al. [13] and Wang et al. [14] demonstrated 
that consumption of fruits, and vegetables were related to an earlier onset of menopause, 
two prospective studies showed that these food items were associated with a later onset 
of menopause [15, 16]. In the EPIC-Heidelberg study [13], consumption of carbohydrates 
was associated with an earlier onset of menopause while in the Shanghai cohort [16], 
intake of carbohydrates was related with a later natural menopause. The only RCT [17] 
which investigated the influence of a dietary intervention on the timing of menopause 
demonstrated that this dietary intervention did not have any effect on the onset of 
menopause. This finding could be attributed to the selective nature of the study population 
such that the women included were at an increased risk of breast cancer and also had a 
median age at natural menopause of 54 years which is higher than that in prospective 
studies.  
2.3.1 Discussion 
These findings show that the relationship between diet and the onset of menopause 
remains unclear. Overall, the included prospective cohort studies were mostly of high 
quality based on the criteria of the NOS. On the other hand, the three included cross-
sectional studies and the RCT were of poor methodological quality (Appendix A). The 
limited number of studies investigating this association and the quality of the included 
studies makes it difficult to confirm any relationship. In addition, the various definition 
of age at menopause used in the studies could also explain the differences in findings. For 
example, while some used the WHOs definition of menopause, that is, at least 12 
consecutive months of amenorrhea [13, 16], and one study considered six months or more 
of amenorrhea [17]. Few studies relied on questions such as Have you had your 
menopause and age of completion of menopause [14, 18]. Two cross-sectional studies 
[11, 14] and one prospective study [12] did not adjust for potential confounders or no 
information was provided on the adjusted confounders, which may have introduced bias 
in an unpredictable direction. Most of the studies adjusted for key confounders such as 
social class, physical activity, and smoking, as identified in Chapter 4. However, alcohol 
consumption which has also been associated with both diet [19] and onset of natural 
menopause [20] has not been controlled in some of the included studies.  
Limitations of all the studies included potential recall bias for the dietary factors 
as these were assessed using self-reported FFQ in most studies except for the RCT which 
used a 3-day food diary to measure dietary intake of the participants. Weaknesses of FFQs 
has been elaborated in Chapter 8. In the Shanghai study [16], dietary intake was assessed 
at the start of the study which was after menopause had occurred, which questions the 
reliability of these findings. Furthermore, three of the studies were cross-sectional [11, 
14, 21], thus are unable to understand dietary factors which precede the timing of 
menopause. However, the strengths of the studies include mainly the large sample sizes. 
The study in the Nurses Health Study II also had a long follow-up time of 20 years 
whereby intakes of vitamin D and calcium were assessed five times. These studies also 
provide evidence from different populations such as Chinese, Japanese, Americans, 
Canadians, and Scottish. Yet, more studies investigating this relationship are required in 
particular in different countries. Thus, this will be explored in Chapters 4 and 5 of this 
thesis.  
2.4 Diet and presence of vasomotor menopausal symptoms 
The search from PubMed resulted to nine relevant studies (Figure 2.2), which 
included four RCTs, three prospective cohort studies, one case-control, and one 
surveillance study (Table 2.3). The cohort studies involved analysis from the Takayama 
Study (Japan), the Womens Health Across the Nation (US) and the Australian 
Longitudinal Study on Womens Health. The search also resulted to 15 RCTs which 
explored the influence of mainly soy isoflavones extracts on the presence of hot flushes. 
While some of the studies reported clinically significant associations, others found no 
evidence of an association. 
Figure 2.2 Flow diagram of selection process relating to diet and vasomotor 
menopausal symptoms 
The dietary exposures considered across the studies were mainly soy products 
which are the most abundant source of isoflavones. According to the RCT among 
Australian postmenopausal women, a daily diet supplemented with soy flour significantly 
reduced hot flushes as compared to women who were consuming wheat flour [22]. 
Similarly, the prospective study among Japanese women demonstrated that a diet high in 
soy products, measured by both soy product intake and isoflavones content was inversely 
associated with hot flushes [23]. However, according to a more recent study among 
American women, none of the phytoestrogens (isoflavones, coumestrol, and lignans) 
intake appeared to be associated with hot flushes [24]. Another study among Japanese 
women enrolled at a hospital also did not suggest any association between dietary 
isoflavone intake from soy products and hot flushes [25].  
Furthermore, flaxseed is the richest source of lignans. Three of the studies 
explored the effect of flaxseed on the presence of hot flushes [26-28]. All three RCTs 
found a reduction in the frequency of hot flushes among the intervention group, but the 
observed results were not significantly different from the placebo groups. Therefore, the 
effect of flaxseeds on hot flushes could not be demonstrated in these studies. Only one of 
the studies investigated the association between dietary patterns and VMS [29]. This 
prospective study among postmenopausal Australian women showed that consumption 
of a fruit rich diet or a Mediterranean diet was related to a decreased risk of reporting 
Records identified through database searching
(n=1350)
Records screened
(n=1350)
Full-text articles assessed for eligibility
(n=58)
Studies included in qualitative synthesis
(n=9)
Records excluded on basis of content of title 
and abstract
(n=1292)
Full-text articles excluded (n=49):
Review/meta-analysis (n=28)
Out of research topic (n=7)
Non-food/pharmacological exposures (n=14)
2.4.1 Discussion 
Overall, this search demonstrated that different study methods had been used to 
find the association between phytoestrogens and the presence of VMS. There were a 
limited number of studies considering the effect of natural dietary intake of 
phytoestrogens, in particular, the consumption of soy and soy products, one of the 
primarily sources of phytoestrogens has been explored in relation to the presence of VMS 
in only two prospective studies, indicating a gap in the literature. Therefore, this 
association will be further investigated in Chapter 6 using the InterLACE consortium.  
The quality of the studies included were generally good. The three prospective 
studies and the case-control study yielded a score of 7 out of 9. Moreover, the 
methodological quality of two [26, 28] of the four RCTs was also satisfactory as they 
provided adequate amount of details on randomisation with suitable concealment of 
allocation. The inclusion criteria used were also reported as well as blinding of 
participants along with assessors were considered in these two studies which reduced the 
risk of bias. Moreover, strengths of the prospective studies were the use of validated FFQ 
for self-reported intakes and the quite long follow-up time. All three studies included 
premenopausal women at baseline and were followed through the menopausal transition, 
a period when the presence of VMS increases. Gold et al. [24] also included midlife 
women from four different racial/ethnic groups while the two other prospective studies 
were restricted to only one racial/ethnic group.   
These studies also had limitations. One of the main weaknesses was that both the main 
exposure and outcome were self-reported which could have introduced potential bias in 
the studies. Yet, in the Australian Longitudinal Study [29] diet was measured at multiple 
time points which were an attempt to reduce this potential for bias. This was also the only 
study which examined the association between dietary patterns and the risk of VMS 
among middle-aged Australian women. Therefore, further studies in different populations 
are needed to confirm the observed findings. Furthermore, the RCT by Dodin et al. [26] 
did not include women with moderate and severe VMS due to the unwillingness of those 
participants and thus making the studys findings only relevant to women with mild 
symptoms. Three of the nine included studies did not report the confounders controlled 
for in the statistical analyses. The confounders adjusted for in the remaining studies were 
inconsistent which could explain the disparity in findings. Moreover, smoking status, an 
important confounder was considered in only two of the studies [29, 30]. 
Table 2.2 Evidence for the associations between diet and onset of menopause 
Author, year 
Study Design, 
sample size, 
duration 
Intervention/exposure 
Dietary 
assessment 
method 
Adjusted confounders Findings 
     Early Late 
Torgerson et al.  
1994 [11] 
Cross-sectional, 
n=2,074 Meat, alcohol - - - 
Alcohol 
Torgerson et al.  
1997 [12] 
Prospective, 
n=1,227 Meat, alcohol - - - Alcohol 
Nagata et al. 
1998 [21] 
Cross-sectional, 
n=3,704 
Total energy; macronutrients; cholesterol; 
calcium; crude fibre; vitamins A, C, D, E; 
carotene; soy product; retinol, coffee; 
alcohol 
FFQ Age, total energy intake Soy products Coffee 
Cholesterol 
Nagata et al.  
2000 [15] 
Prospective, 
n=1,130, 6 years 
Energy, macronutrients, animal protein/fat, 
vegetable protein/fat, fat from fish, 
cholesterol, calcium, crude fibre, vitamin A, 
retinol, vitamin C, vitamin E, green and 
yellow vegetables, other vegetables, soy 
products 
FFQ Age, BMI, smoking, age at menarche - Green & yellow vegetable 
Nagel et al. 
2005 [13] 
Prospective, 
n=5,568, 5.8 years 
Macronutrients, alcohol, meat, dairy 
products, fish, vegetables, fruit, cereal 
products, fibre, soy products, sweets, added 
animal fat, added vegetable fat 
Age, education, OC use, HRT use, 
parity, BMI, breastfeeding, age at first 
pregnancy, smoking, alcohol intake, 
physical activity, total energy 
Carbohydrate 
Vegetable 
Fibre 
Cereal products 
Total fat 
Protein 
Martin et al. 
2006 [17] 
n=2,611 Low-fat high-carbohydrate diet 
3-day food 
diary 
Age, number of births, age at 
menarche, age at first child - - 
Dorjgochoo et 
al. 2008 [16] 
Prospective, 
n=33,054 
Energy, macronutrients, vegetables, fruit, 
red meat, saturated fat, total soy, total fibre, 
tea, alcohol 
Age, education, occupation, age at 
menarche, number of live births, OC 
use, weight gain, smoking, physical 
activity, energy intake 
Energy 
Fruits 
Protein 
Carbohydrate 
Nagata et al. 
2012 [31] 
Prospective, 
n=3,115, 10 years 
Energy, total fat, SFAs, PUFAs, MUFAs, 
long omega-3 FAs, dietary fibre, soy 
isoflavones, alcohol 
Age, BMI, smoking, parity, years of 
education, age at menarche, lifelong 
irregular menstrual cycle, physical 
activity 
PUFA - 
Table 2.2 Continued 
Author, year Study Design, sample size Intervention/exposure 
  Findings 
Dietary 
assessment 
method 
Adjusted confounders Early Late 
Carwile et al.  
2013 [18] 
Prospective, 
n=46,059, 20 years 
High-fat dairy, total low-fat dairy, skim 
milk, whole milk, dairy fat, dairy protein, 
calcium, vitamin D, lactose 
Energy, age at menarche, age 
at first birth, parity, physical 
activity, OC use, BMI, 
smoking, marital status, red 
meat and egg consumption 
- Low fat dairy Skim milk 
Purdue-Smithe et 
al. 2017 [32] 
Prospective, 
n=116,430, 20 years 
Vitamin D, calcium intake from dairy and 
non-dairy sources FFQ 
age, smoking, BMI, age at 
menarche, parity, breast-
feeding, physical activity, 
calories from vegetable 
protein, alcohol intake 
Vitamin D from 
dairy sources 
Calcium from 
dairy sources 
Boutot et al. 
2017 [33] 
Prospective, 
n=85,682, 20 years 
Vegetable protein, animal protein, total 
protein, all meat, red meat, processed meat, 
chicken/turkey, seafood, eggs, soy/tofu, 
beans/lentils, peanuts, peas/lima beans, 
other nuts, peanut butter, pasta, dark bread, 
cold cereal 
smoking, BMI, age at 
menarche, breastfeeding, OC 
use, number of pregnancies 
6 months, dairy protein, 
physical activity 
Vegetable protein 
Pasta 
Dark bread 
Cold cereal 
Wang et al. 
2018 [14] 
Cross-sectional, 
n=17,076 
Meat, seafood, fresh eggs, soybean 
products, fresh fruits, dairy products, 
vitamins, minerals 
FFQ - 
Seafood 
Fresh eggs 
Fresh fruits 
Vitamins 
Purdue-Smithe et 
al. 2018 [34] 
Prospective, 
n=116,429, 20 years 
Low-fat dairy foods, high-fat dairy foods, 
total dairy FFQ 
age, smoking, BMI, age at 
menarche, parity, breast-
feeding, kcal from vegetable 
protein, alcohol intake, 
current multivitamin use, 
vitamin D and calcium intake 
Total dairy 
Low-fat dairy 
foods 
Table 2.3 Evidence for the associations between diet and vasomotor menopausal symptoms 
Author, 
Study design, 
sample size, 
duration 
Age, menopausal 
status at baseline Intervention/exposure 
Dietary 
assessment 
method 
Adjusted confounders Findings 
Murkies et 
al. 1995 [22] 
RCT, n=58, 12 
weeks 
30-70 yrs, 
postmenopausal 
Soy flour vs wheat 
flour - - 
Soy flour: 40% reduction of hot flushes 
(p=<0.001) 
Wheat flour: 25% reduction of hot 
flushes (p=<0.001) 
Nagata et al. 
2001 [23] 
Prospective, 
n=1,106, 6 years 
35-54 yrs, 
premenopausal Soy products FFQ Age, menopausal status 
High vs low intake 
Soy products 0.47 (0.280.79) 
Ptrend=0.005 
Somekawa et 
al. 2001 [25] 
Surveillance, 
n=478  
44-80 yrs, 
postmenopausal 
Dietary isoflavones in 
soy products FFQ - 
No significant difference in hot flushes 
score between different isoflavones 
intake groups 
Dodin et al. 
2005 [26] 
RCT, n=199, 12 
months 
45-65 yrs, peri- 
and post-
menopausal  
Flaxseed vs wheat 
germ placebo 
3-day food 
diary Age, weight, BMI 
Significant reduction in hot flushes and 
night sweats with both flaxseed and 
wheat germ but no significant difference 
between groups 
Schiling et 
al. 2005 [30] 
Case-control, 
n=362 cases 
45-54 years, pre- 
and peri-
menopausal 
Current alcohol 
consumer 
Frequency 
questions Age, smoking 
Current alcohol use was associated with 
reduced risk of experiencing hot flushes 
(RR: 0.80, 95% CI: 0.710.91) 
Lewis et al. 
2006 [28] 
RCT, n=87, 16 
weeks 
47-62 yrs, 
postmenopausal 
Ground flaxseed 
muffins, soy flour 
muffins, wheat flour 
muffins 
3-day food 
diary BMI 
No significant effect of hot flushes 
observed with neither dietary flaxseed or 
soy flour 
Pruthi et al. 
2012 [27] 
RCT, n=188, 6 
weeks 
>18 yrs, 
postmenopausal 
Flaxseed bar vs 
placebo - - 
29% reduction in frequency of hot 
flushes in the flaxseed group vs 28% 
decrease in the placebo group. No 
significant difference between the groups 
Gold et al. 
2013 [24] 
Prospective, 
n=3,303, 10 years  
42-52 yrs, pre- 
and peri-
menopausal 
Dietary intakes of 
isoflavones, 
coumestrol, lignans, 
fibres 
Time varying oestrogen, day blood 
was drawn, age, menopause status, 
perceived stress, BMI, physical 
activity, education, marital status, 
number of premenstrual symptoms 
High vs low intake 
Isoflavone 0.94 (0.691.27) Ptrend=0.66 
Coumestrol 0.93 (0.681.26) Ptrend=0.67 
Lignans 0.95 (0.701.29) Ptrend=0.89 
Fibre 1.40 (1.021.91) Ptrend=0.08 
Table 2.3 Continued 
Author, 
Study design, 
sample size, 
duration 
Age, menopausal 
status at baseline Intervention/exposure 
Dietary 
assessment 
method 
Adjusted confounders Findings 
Herber-Gast 
et al. 2013 
Prospective, 
n=6,040, 9 years 
45-50 yrs, 
postmenopausal 
Dietary patterns: 1) 
cooked vegetables, 2) 
fruit, 3) Mediterranean 
style, 4) meat and 
processed meat, 5) 
dairy, 6) high fat and 
sugar 
Time, age, education, occupation, 
marital status, BMI, physical 
activity, smoking, alcohol 
consumption, HT use, OC use, 
menopausal status, complementary 
and alternative medicine 
practitioners use, use of self-
prescribed complementary and 
alternative medicine, total energy 
High vs low intake 
Cooked vegetables 0.88 (0.771.01) 
Ptrend=0.008 
Fruit 0.81 (0.710.93) Ptrend=0.001 
Mediterranean style 0.80 (0.690.92) 
Ptrend=<0.001 
Meat and processed meat 1.03 (0.89
1.18) Ptrend=1.00 
Dairy 1.04 (0.921.19) Ptrend=0.51 
High fat and sugar 1.23 (1.051.44) 
Ptrend=0.02 
 RCT: Randomised controlled trial
2.5 Diet and risk of ovarian cancer 
This search resulted in eight studies which met the inclusion criteria (Figure 2.3). 
These included four prospective cohort studies, two nested case-control studies, one RCT 
and one pooled analysis of cohort studies (Table 2.5). The cohort studies included were 
the Nurses Health Study (NHS), NHS II, Norwegian Women and Cancer Study, and the 
European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition study (EPIC)/Netherlands 
Cohort Study (NLCS). The RCT was conducted among participants from the Prostate, 
Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian cancer screening trial (PLCO). The two nested case-
control studies involved participants from the Ovarian Cancer in Alberta and British 
Columbia Study and the African American Cancer Epidemiology Study. 
Figure 2.3 Flow diagram of selection process relating to diet and the risk of ovarian 
cancer 
2.5.1 Dietary fat 
Two studies evaluated the relationship between dietary fat intake and the risk of 
ovarian cancer. In the EPIC study [35] including 1,095 ovarian cancer cases demonstrated 
that in the multivariate model only PUFA was associated with an increased risk of cancer. 
No evidence of an association was found with consumption of total fat, animal or plant 
fat, saturated fat, cholesterol, monounsaturated fat, or fatty fish, and the risk of ovarian 
cancer. This study reported no significant associations between risk of serous and 
Records identified through database searching
(n=1568)
Records screened
(n=1564)
Full-text articles assessed for eligibility
(n=38)
Studies included in qualitative synthesis
(n=8)
Records excluded on basis of content of title 
and abstract
(n=1526)
Full-text articles excluded (n=30):
Review/meta-analysis (n=10)
Out of research topic (n=13)
Non-food/pharmacological exposures (n=7)
Records after duplicates removed
(n=1564)
endometrioid tumours in relation to the intake of total fat, fat subtypes and fat sources. In 
the pooled analysis including participants from the EPIC cohort as well as the NLCS, no 
association between intake of cholesterol and PUFA and ovarian cancer risk was reported 
[36]. However, the pooled estimate showed an increased risk of cancer with a high intake 
of saturated fat. Individual findings across the EPIC study population demonstrated that 
participants with a high intake of cholesterol, polyunsaturated fat, and saturated fat had a 
higher risk of epithelial ovarian cancer compared to those with a lower intake. In contrast, 
none of these four dietary components were found to be associated with the risk of ovarian 
cancer in the NLCS [36]. The differences observed between the individual findings from 
the EPIC and NLCS could be because the EPIC contributed to 1,095 cases while the 
NLCS contributed to only 383 cases. Differences in participants characteristics could 
also be a determinant for the differences, given that women from the NLCS cohort were 
older and were all postmenopausal at enrolment. 
2.5.2 Dairy products 
Only two studies addressed the association between dairy consumption and the 
risk of ovarian cancer. Merritt et al. [37] demonstrated no evidence of an association 
between intake of total milk, dairy calcium, dairy fat, low-fat milk, and whole milk and 
ovarian cancer risk among all cancer cases, premenopausal cases or postmenopausal cases 
in the NHS. On the other hand, in a nested case-control study among AfricanAmerican 
descent recruited into the African American Cancer Epidemiology Study, whole milk 
consumption was related to an increased risk while calcium intake was associated with a 
decreased risk of ovarian cancer [38]. This difference in results could mainly be because 
while the first study considered the cumulative average intake of the dairy products 
implying that dietary assessment was conducted at multiple time points, in the latter study 
diet was assessed only once. The case-control study was also prone to selection bias as 
compared to the prospective cohort study. Although these advantages of the NHS makes 
the studys findings more reliable, the generalisability of the results is debatable since the 
participants do not represent a random sample of U.S. women. Thus, the dietary and other 
lifestyle characteristics of the included women may not be compatible with the general 
population. Moreover, there could be racial/ethnic variations in the results since an 
association was observed in the African American Cancer Epidemiology Study as 
compared to the prospective study.  
2.5.3 Coffee 
Two studies also investigated the association between coffee consumption and the 
risk of ovarian cancer. In the Norwegian Women and Cancer Study which included 446 
cancer cases reported no association between total coffee consumption and the risk of 
ovarian cancer when comparing the highest versus the lowest consumption group. Further 
analysis among never smokers also demonstrated no evidence of an association [39]. 
Similarly, according to the RCT including 162 postmenopausal cases of ovarian cancer 
no influence of coffee was found on the risk of ovarian cancer [40]. These findings are in 
line with a prospective cohort study and meta-analysis by Braem et al. [41] which also 
did not found any association between high coffee consumption and the risk of ovarian 
cancer.  
2.5.4 Vitamins and wine 
Only the study by Koushik et al. [42] reported the association between intake of 
vitamins A, C, and E and folate and the risk of ovarian cancer. This study pooled data 
from ten prospective cohort studies from North America and Europe accounting to a study 
population of 501,857 participants aged 27 to 93 years and included 1,973 ovarian cancer 
cases. The findings demonstrated no evidence of an association between dietary intake of 
these nutrients and ovarian cancer risk. However, higher vitamin intakes were associated 
with modestly higher risks of endometrioid tumours, but not with other histological types. 
Furthermore, the only study [43] reporting the relationship between wine intake and risk 
ovarian cancer found that total wine intake and red wine were both associated with a 
lowered risk of the overall cancer as well as with the serous histotype. 
2.5.5 Discussion 
Overall, most of the studies had sufficient cancer cases to explore the relationship 
between diet and ovarian cancer risk except for the RCT [40]. However, there was a 
limited number investigating this association of interest. While some of the studies 
considered the histological type of ovarian cancer, only one study presented the findings 
by menopausal status [37]. This search demonstrates the need for more observational 
studies to evaluate the role of diet in relation to ovarian cancer risk. Moreover, 
observational studies and pooled studies to assess associations by tumour subtype as well 
as RCTs of dietary exposures are warranted.  
Overall, the included prospective cohort and case-control studies were of good 
quality as demonstrated by the NOS (Appendix A). However, the included RCT in this 
literature review was of poor methodological quality. The study provided insufficient 
information regarding randomisation, baseline characteristics of the intervention and 
control group, as well as details about reasons for withdrawal from the study were not 
given.  Across all the included studies, important confounders such as education, smoking 
status, alcohol intake, age, menopausal status, and physical activity were included in the 
analyses but not all adjusted for the potentially important confounders. For instance, in 
the EPIC study [35], the authors argued that they excluded potential confounders such as 
smoking status, education level, duration of breastfeeding and physical activity as they 
did not modify the relative risk estimates by 10%. As demonstrated by previous studies, 
menopausal status can be independently associated with the risk of ovarian cancer, in 
particular, the risk increases post menopause [44, 45]. Although seven studies included 
both pre- and post-menopausal women at study entry (Table 2.4), only Merritt et al. [37] 
reported their findings stratified by menopausal status (pre vs post menopause). 
Therefore, observational studies exploring the risk of ovarian cancer in relation to diet by 
menopausal status are needed to confirm the findings. This association will be examined 
in Chapter 7 of this thesis.  
The included studies had several limitations which  led to no definite conclusions 
for the association between dietary factors and the risk of ovarian cancer. Firstly, most of 
the studies relied on self-reported FFQ for estimating dietary intake, leading to potential 
dietary misclassification and thus increasing the risk of misclassification bias.   
Interestingly in the EPIC study [35, 36], various dietary assessment methods such as 
FFQs, and food diaries were used as this cohort include participants from different 
European countries which could have led to a degree of systematic bias in the 
measurement of diet. However to counter the risk of distortions in the dietary 
measurement, standardised methods to calibrate the in-between country variations were 
applied [46]. Strengths of the included studies should also be acknowledged. These 
include the large sample sizes and thus greater statistical power to examine the 
associations with histological subtypes in some of the studies [35, 42, 43]. Yet they had 
limited power to examine the non-serous histologic subtypes such as the mucinous  
histotype. The studies also used various sources (e.g. participant self-report, medical 
records, cancer registry)  to confirm  the cancer diagnosis as well as the tumour stage and 
histological subtypes.  
Table 2.4 Use of menopausal status in the included studies for the associations between diet and risk of ovarian, endometrial and breast cancers 
Author, year Cohort name 
Dietary assessment 
method 
Menopausal status at baseline 
Results 
stratified by 
menopausal 
status 
Menopausal 
status as a 
confounder 
   Premenopausal Postmenopausal   
Ovarian cancer       
Merritt et al. 2014 [37] Nurses Health Study (NHS) and NHSII FFQ X X X X 
Merritt et al. 2014 [35] European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition study 
Dietary questionnaire, 
FFQ, food-diary  X X  X 
Hashibe et al. 2015 
Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian cancer 
screening trial 
Diet history 
questionnaire  X   
Koushik et al. 2015 
BCDDP, CPS II, IWHS, NLCS, NYSC, NYU, WHS, 
NHS (a), NHS (b), NHS II  X X  X 
Cook et al. 2016 [43] Ovarian Cancer in Alberta and British Columbia Study 
Frequency 
questionnaire X X  X 
Lukic et al. 2016 [39] Norwegian Women and Cancer Study FFQ X X  X 
Meritt et al. 2016 [36] European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition study/Netherlands Cohort Study 
Dietary questionnaire, 
FFQ, food-diary X X  X 
Qin et al. 2016 [38] African American Cancer Epidemiology Study FFQ X X  X 
Endometrial cancer       
Arem et al. 2013 [47] National Institutes of Health-AARP Diet and Health Study FFQ  X   
Fedirko et al. 2013 [48] European Prospective Investigation into Cancer Dietary questionnaire X X X X 
Inoue-Choi et al. 2013 
[49] Iowa Womens Health Study FFQ  X   
Uccella et al. 2013 [50] Iowa Women's Health Study FFQ  X   
Brasky et al. 2014 [51] Womens Health Initiative Observational Study and Clinical Trials FFQ  X   
Coleman et al. 2014 
Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian cancer 
screening trial 
Diet history 
questionnaire  X   
Gavrilyuk et al. 2014 
[53] Norwegian Women and Cancer Study FFQ  X   
Je et al. 2014 [54] Nurses' Health Study FFQ X X X X 
Table 2.4 Continued 
Author, year Cohort name 
Dietary assessment 
method 
Menopausal status at baseline 
Results 
stratified by 
menopausal 
status 
Menopausal 
status as a 
confounder 
   Premenopausal Postmenopausal   
Budhathoki et al. 2015 
[55] Japan Public Health Centre-based Prospective Study FFQ X X  X 
Canchola et al. 2015 
[56] California Teachers Study Cohort FFQ X X  X 
Yang et al. 2015 [57] UK Million Women Study FFQ X X  X 
Hashibe et al. 2015 
Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian cancer screening 
trial 
Diet history 
questionnaire  X   
Brasky et al. 2016 [58] Black Womens Health Study FFQ X X   
Breast cancer       
Farvid et al. 2015 [59] Nurses Health Study II FFQ X X X X 
Harris et al. 2015 [60] Swedish Mammography Cohort FFQ X X  X 
Kiyabu et al. 2015 [61] Japan Public Health Centre-based prospective study FFQ X X  X 
Romieu et al. 2015 [62] European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition FFQ X X  X 
Shin et al. 2015 [63] Swedish Womens Lifestyle and Health study FFQ X X   
Emaus et al. 2016 [64] European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition 
Dietary 
questionnaire, FFQ, 
food-diary 
X X  X 
Farvid et al. 2016 [65] Nurses Health Study II FFQ X X X X 
Farvid et al. 2016 [66] Nurses Health Study II FFQ X X X X 
Farvid et al. 2016 [67] Nurses Health Study II FFQ X X X X 
Gilsing et al. 2016 [68] Netherlands Cohort StudyMeat Investigation Cohort FFQ  X   
Harris et al. 2016 [69] Nurses Health Study II FFQ X X X X 
Hirko et al. 2016 [70] Nurses Health Study FFQ X X   
Inoue-Choi et al. 2016 
[71] NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study FFQ  X   
Jung et al. 2016 [72] Pooled analysis of 20 cohort studies  - - - - 
Lukic et al. 2016 [39] Norwegian Women and Cancer Study FFQ X X  X 
Table 2.4 Continued 
Author, year Cohort name 
Dietary assessment 
method 
Menopausal status at baseline 
Results 
stratified by 
menopausal 
status 
Menopausal 
status as a 
confounder 
   Premenopausal Postmenopausal   
Penniecook-Sawyers et al. 2016 
[73] Adventist Health Study-2 FFQ X X X X 
Shin et al. 2016 [74] Japan Public Health Centre-based Prospective Study FFQ X X X X 
Zhang et al. 2016 [75] Nurses Health Study, Nurses Health Study II  X X   
Ellingjord-Dale et al. 2017 [76] Norwegian Breast Cancer Screening Program Questionnaire X X  X 
Kim et al. 2017 [77] Nurses Health Study II FFQ X X  X 
Kim et al. 2017 [78] National Cancer Center, South Korea FFQ X X X X 
Kojima et al. 2017 [79] Japan Collaborative Cohort Study FFQ X X X  
Makarem et al. 2017 [80] Framingham Offspring cohort FFQ X X  X 
Narita et al. 2017 [81] Japan Public Health Centre-based Prospective Study FFQ X X X X 
van den Brandt & Schulpen, 
2017 [82] Netherlands Cohort Study FFQ  X   
Diallo et al. 2018 [83] NutriNet-Sant cohort study Webbased 24 hdietary records X X X X 
Fiolet et al. 2018 [84] NutriNet-Sant cohort study Webbased 24 hdietary records X X X X 
X=reported in the paper, BCDDP=Breast Cancer Detection Demonstration Project Follow-up Cohort, CPS II=Cancer Prevention Study II Nutrition Cohort, IWHS=Iowa Women's 
Health Study, NLCS =Netherland Cohort Study, NYSC = New York State Cohort, NYUWHS=New York University Women's Health Study, NHSa=Nurses Health Study (a), 
NHSb=Nurses Health Study (b), NHS II=Nurses Health Study II
Table 2.5 Evidence for the relationship between diet and risk of ovarian cancer 
Author, 
Study name 
Study Design, 
sample size, Age 
Follow-up 
& cancer 
incidence 
Adjusted confounders Relative risk/Hazards ratio/Odds ratio (95% CI) 
Merritt et al. 
2014 [26] 
Nurses Health 
Study (NHS) and 
NHSII 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=164,599 
Age: 2555 
28 yrs 
764 cases 
(invasive & 
borderline) 
Total caloric intake, number of 
pregnancies, parity, oral contraceptive pill 
use, menopausal status, tubal ligation, 
family history of ovarian cancer 
>1 8oz glass/day vs <4 8oz glass/month 
Total milk 0.80 (0.571.13) Ptrend=0.09 
Low fat milk 0.76 (0.541.06) Ptrend=0.05 
                     0.74 (0.491.12) Ptrend=0.13 
                      0.77 (0.531.12) Ptrend=0.14 
Whole milk 1.29 (0.602.76) Ptrend=0.33 
                    1.06 (0.542.11) Ptrend=0.93 
                    0.83 (0.431.61) Ptrend=0.43 
Merritt et al. 
2014 [27] EPIC 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=325,007 
Age: 2570 
Mean 11 yrs 
1,095 cases 
Ever use and duration of use of oral 
contraceptives, number of children, 
menopausal status at enrolment, total 
energy intake 
High vs low intake 
Total fat 1.16 (0.961.40) Ptrend=0.05 
Plant fat 1.22 (0.981.52) Ptrend=0.09 
Animal fat 0.96 (0.801.15) Ptrend=0.86 
Saturated fat 1.17 (0.971.40) Ptrend=0.15 
Cholesterol 1.24 (0.971.58) Ptrend=0.12 
Monounsaturated fat 1.16 (0.931.44) Ptrend=0.17 
Polyunsaturated fat 1.22 (1.021.48) Ptrend=0.02 
Fatty fish 1.08 (0.891.31) Ptrend=0.98 
Hashibe et 
al. 2015 [31] 
Prostate, Lung, 
Colorectal, and 
Ovarian cancer 
screening trial 
Randomized 
control trial 
N=50,563 
Age: 5574 
10 yrs 
162 cases 
Age, sex, race, education, cigarette pack-
years, alcohol drinking frequency 
High vs low intake 
Coffee 1.17 (0.821.67) Ptrend=0.398 
Tea 0.87 (0.601.26)  
Koushik et 
al. 2015 [32] 
BCDDP, CPS II, 
IWHS, NLCS, 
NYSC, NYU, 
WHS, NHS (a), 
NHS (b), NHS II 
Pooled analysis 
of cohort studies 
N=501,857 
Age: 27-93 
7-22 yrs 
1,973 cases 
Parity, oral contraceptive use, menopausal 
status, postmenopausal hormone use, age 
at menarche, BMI, physical activity, 
smoking status, total energy intake  
High vs low intake 
Dietary vitamin A 1.03 (0.891.19) Ptrend=0.51 
Dietary vitamin C 0.97 (0.841.13) Ptrend=0.40 
Dietary vitamin E 0.95 (0.801.12) Ptrend=0.24 
Dietary folate 0.90 (0.71.05) Ptrend=0.36 
Cook et al. 
2016 [33] 
Ovarian Cancer in 
Alberta and 
British Columbia 
Study 
Nested case-
control study 
N=3,657 
Age: 40->70 
1,144 cases 
Study site, age, oral contraceptive use, 
parity, current smoking, family history of 
ovarian or breast cancer 
>2 times per month of wine 
All wine 0.72 (0.590.89) 
Red wine 0.59 (0.440.79) 
Table 2.5 Continued 
Author, 
Study name 
Study Design, 
sample size, Age 
Follow-up 
& cancer 
incidence 
Adjusted confounders Relative risk/Hazards ratio/Odds ratio (95% CI) 
Lukic et al. 
2016 [30] 
Norwegian 
Women and 
Cancer Study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=104,080 
Age: 30-70 
6-8 yrs 
762 cases 
Smoking status, duration of education, 
BMI, physical activity level, alcohol 
consumption, area of residence, original 
hair color, number of moles larger than 5 
mm, average number of sunburns per year, 
consumption of coffee brewed with two 
other methods 
High vs low intake 
Total coffee 0.88 (0.671.14) Ptrend=0.20 
Filtered coffee 0.74 (0.531.02) Ptrend=0.02 
Instant coffee 1.45 (0.722.92) Ptrend=0.39 
Boiled coffee 0.87 (0.491.55) Ptrend=0.72 
Meritt et al. 
2016 [28] 
EPIC/Netherlands 
Cohort Study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=327,220 
Age: 25-70 
Mean 11 yrs 
1,478 cases 
Total energy intake, oral contraceptive 
use, menopausal status, parity 
Cholesterol 1.16 (0.81.51) 
PUFAs 0.97 (0.51.60) 
SFAs 1.21 (1.01.41) 
Bananas 0.94 (0.651.35) 
Qin et al. 
2016 [29] 
African American 
Cancer 
Epidemiology 
Study 
Nested case-
control study 
N=1,146 
Age: 20-79 
490 cases 
Age, region, total energy intake, 
education, parity, oral contraceptive use, 
menopausal status, tubal ligation, family 
history of breast/ovarian cancer, daylight 
hours spent outdoors in summer months, 
pigmentation, BMI, recreational physical 
activity 
High vs low intake 
Total dairy 1.48 (0.952.28) Ptrend=0.25 
Milk 1.34 (0.872.05) Ptrend=0.30 
Whole milk 1.85 (1.053.27) Ptrend=0.02 
Low-fat milk 1.06 (0.661.70) Ptrend=0.98 
Cheese 1.25 (0.811.92) Ptrend=0.34 
Yoghurt 0.93 (0.671.28) Ptrend=0.88 
BCDDP=Breast Cancer Detection Demonstration Project Follow-up Cohort, CPS II=Cancer Prevention Study II Nutrition Cohort, IWHS=Iowa Women's Health Study, NLCS 
=Netherland Cohort Study, NYSC = New York State Cohort, NYUWHS=New York University Women's Health Study, NHSa=Nurses Health Study (a), NHSb=Nurses Health 
Study (b), NHS II=Nurses Health Study II, EPIC = European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition
2.6 Diet and risk endometrial cancer 
Thirteen studies were identified through this search (Figure 2.4) after the latest 
CUP Report [2], 12 of which were prospective cohort studies and one RCT (Table 2.6). 
All the studies had over 200 endometrial cancer cases except for the Japanese study with 
112 cases [55]. Six studies included both pre- and postmenopausal at the study entry while 
seven of the studies excluded premenopausal women (Table 2.4). 
Figure 2.4 Flow diagram of selection process relating to diet and the risk of endometrial 
cancer 
2.6.1 Fish 
Three studies reported the association between consumption of fish and 
endometrial cancer risk. In a prospective study involving 111,356 participants aged 50-
71 years and 1,486 endometrial cancer cases, no evidence of an association was found 
with high fish consumption [47]. Furthermore, Brasky et al. [58] demonstrated no effect 
on cancer risk with total fish, baked/boiled fish, tuna or fried fish consumption. On the 
other hand, findings from the Womens Health Initiative Observational Study and 
Clinical Trials which included 263 cancer cases, reported an increased risk of endometrial 
cancer with high consumption of total fish and baked/boiled fish as compared to women 
with low consumption [51]. No significant association was demonstrated with canned 
tuna, white fish, dark/oily fish, shellfish or fried fish. All three studies included US 
Records identified through database searching
(n=368)
Records screened
(n=366)
Full-text articles assessed for eligibility
(n=53)
Studies included in qualitative synthesis
(n=13)
Records excluded on basis of content of title 
and abstract
(n=328)
Full-text articles excluded (n=40):
Review/meta-analysis (n=15)
Out of research topic (n=23)
Non-food/pharmacological exposures (n=2)
Records after duplicates removed
(n=366)
women, but, one considered only African-American women [58] which could account for 
the observed differences in findings. In addition to other characteristic differences, the 
low number of cancer cases could also contribute to the differences in outcomes and the 
wide confidence intervals. 
2.6.2 Alcohol 
The relationship between alcohol consumption and the risk of endometrial cancer 
was explored in the EPIC study [48] and the NHS [54]. Findings from the EPIC study 
[48] showed no evidence of an association between alcohol consumption and the risk of 
endometrial cancer among all cancer cases, pre- or post-menopausal women. In contrast, 
the NHS [54] demonstrated that women who had light alcohol intake (approximately half 
drink per day) had a 22% reduced risk of cancer as compared to non-drinkers. However, 
when comparing high alcohol intake to light alcohol intake, the inverse association was 
attenuated after adjusting for potential confounders. The authors argued that although 
light alcohol consumption may have potential benefits against endometrial cancer, heavy 
intake may increase the risk. Moreover, consumption of beer, wine and liquor were not 
related to the risk of cancer in this study suggesting that the probable reduced risk cannot 
be ascribed to specific alcohol types. Limitations of this study were that drinkers were 
more likely to smoke and have a lower BMI. Although the authors adjusted for these 
factors, residual confounding could have still affected the estimates. 
2.6.3 Coffee 
The association between coffee consumption and the risk of endometrial cancer 
was evaluated in three prospective studies and one RCT. One of the prospective studies 
including 471 type I and 71 type II endometrial cancer cases among postmenopausal 
women demonstrated that caffeinated coffee was inversely associated with type I 
endometrial cancer [50]. Further analysis demonstrated that this reduced risk was 
observed only among obese postmenopausal women. The Norwegian Cancer Study also 
conducted among postmenopausal women, found that total coffee consumption decreased 
endometrial cancer risk among high coffee consumers as compared to low coffee 
consumers [53]. Similarly, in the RCT coffee consumption was associated with a 31% 
reduced risk of cancer (95% CI: 0.52, 0.91) [40]. However, findings from the UK Million 
Women Study which included 4,067 cases developed over an average follow-up of 9.3 
years, showed no significant association between both tea and coffee consumption and 
the risk of endometrial cancer [57]. The number of cancer cases in the other three studies 
as opposed to the UK Million Women Study could explain the differences in the observed 
findings. In addition, the study by Uccella et al. [50] stratified the outcomes by the type 
of endometrial cancer while the in the Norwegian study the risk of all cancer cases were 
explored in relation to coffee consumption [53].   
2.6.4 Sugar-sweetened beverage 
In a prospective study among postmenopausal women, Inoue-Choi [49] explored 
the relationship between sugar-sweetened beverage (SSB) and the risk of type I and II 
endometrial cancer. After 24 years of follow-up period, 506 type I and 89 type II incident 
endometrial cancer cases were identified. Consumption of SSB was associated with a 
72% increased risk of type I cancer among high consumers in comparison to non-
consumers. When consumption of SSB along with fruit juice was considered, there was 
a 38% higher risk of type I cancer among women in the highest quintile versus women in 
the lowest quintile. No association was observed for type II tumours given the small 
number of cases which reduced the statistical power for observing any possible 
association. In contrast, in the PLCO study Coleman et al. [52] reported that total sugar 
intake was protective against endometrial cancer risk. Likewise, total carbohydrate 
consumption and glycaemic load were inversely related to the cancer risk. These opposing 
findings could be due to the different and vast food sources (124 food items) that 
contributed to total sugar intake in the PLCO study while in the former study endometrial 
cancer risk was studied only in terms of SSB.  
2.6.5 Others 
Soy product consumption, given its high phytoestrogen content has also been 
explored in relation to endometrial cancer risk in a Japanese prospective study among 
postmenopausal women [55]. After an average follow-up time of 12.1 years, 112 women 
developed endometrial cancer. The findings of this study demonstrated no evidence of an 
association between soy product consumption and the risk of endometrial cancer. 
Furthermore, only one study investigated the relationship between dietary patterns and 
cancer risk. In this Californian teachers cohort [56], no association was reported between 
plant-based, high protein/fat, high carbohydrates, ethnic or salad and wine patterns and 
risk of endometrial cancer. 
2.6.6 Discussion 
The studies included in this literature review explored the relationship between 
various food items, beverages and the risk of endometrial cancer. Two studies also 
considered the types of endometrial cancers and specific types of food sources (e.g. types 
of fish vs total fish) [51, 58]. Additional strengths of the studies include the prospective 
design, long duration of follow-up and most of the participants were retained at follow-
up. The cancer cases were also unlikely to be biased as they were ascertained using 
primarily cancer registries as well as through medical records. Tumour stages and 
histological subtypes were confirmed by area hospitals, offices of pathologists, 
oncologists, and radiotherapists in relevant studies. Furthermore, most of the studies were 
also representative of the exposed cohort, thus increasing the generalisability of the 
findings. Using the NOS, out of the 14 prospective and case-control studies, nine were of 
high quality while four were of moderate quality and one was at high risk of bias 
(Appendix A).  
However, limitations of these studies and the contrasting findings make any 
conclusion for the association between dietary factors and the risk of endometrial cancer 
difficult. Firstly, the small number of the types of endometrial cancer cases led to wide 
confidence intervals and also reduced statistical power to observe any association. Study 
of all cases versus the types of endometrial cancers could have also contributed to the 
observed disparities in findings. Moreover, dietary intake was assessed only at study 
entry, thus were unable to take into account changes in diet, in particular, over the long 
follow-up period. Additionally, only one study investigated the risk of endometrial cancer 
in relation to dietary patterns which indicates a gap in literature. The majority of included 
studies relied on self-reported FFQs for dietary assessment which is prone to dietary 
recall, as well as measurement errors. In particular, FFQ-derived nutrient data can be 
erratic. Moreover, none of the studies controlled for measurement errors in the analyses. 
Most of the studies controlled for key potential confounders such age, ethanol intake, 
duration of breastfeeding, physical activity, smoking, social class, menopausal status, 
history of diabetes. However, the studies also adjusted for intermediate variables, that is, 
one which is found on the causal pathway between the exposure and the outcome, which 
could have led to biased estimates [85]. Thus, these findings should be interpreted 
cautiously. 
Table 2.6 Evidence for the relationship between diet and the risk of endometrial cancer 
Author, year Cohort name 
Study Design, 
sample size, 
Follow-up & 
cancer 
incidence 
Adjusted confounders Relative risk/Hazards ratio/Odds ratio (95% CI) 
Arem et al. 
2013 [34] 
National 
Institutes of 
Health-AARP 
Diet and 
Health Study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=111,356 
Age: 5071  
Mean 9.3 yrs 
1,486 cases 
Age, BMI, smoking status, total 
energy intake, other meat intake, 
age at menarche, age at first 
childs birth, parity, age at 
menopause, HT use, oral 
contraceptive use, diabetes, 
physical activity 
High vs low intake 
Red meat 0.91 (0.771.08) Ptrend=0.450 
White meat 0.98 (0.831.17) Ptrend=0.660 
Processed meat 1.02 (0.861.21) Ptrend=0.695 
Fish 1.10 (0.931.29) Ptrend=0.095 
Fedirko et al. 
2013 [35] 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=301,051 
Age: 2085 
Avg. 11 yrs 
1,382 cases 
Age at recruitment, physical 
activity level, smoking status and 
intensity, age at menopause and 
menopausal status, age at first 
menses, number of full-term 
pregnancies, BMI, hormone 
replacement therapy use, oral 
contraceptive use 
High vs low intake 
Total alcohol 0.85 (0.611.18) Ptrend=0.77* 
                      0.82 (0.501.36) Ptrend=0.09** 
                      0.70 (0.401.22) Ptrend=0.55*** 
Wine 1.05 (0.821.35) Ptrend=0.93* 
Beer 0.95 (0.721.24) Ptrend=0.88* 
Liquor and spirits 1.11 (0.871.41) Ptrend=0.71* 
Inoue-Choi et 
al. 2013 [36] 
Womens 
Health Study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=23,039 
Age: 5569 
24 yrs 
592 cases 
Age, smoking, physical activity, 
alcohol use, oestrogen use, age at 
menarche, age at menopause, 
number of live births, coffee 
intake 
High vs low intake (Type I & Type II) 
Sugar-sweetened beverages 1.74 (1.272.38) Ptrend=0.001 
                                             1.47 (0.693.12) Ptrend=0.63 
Fruit juice 1.18 (0.871.61) Ptrend=0.09  
                 1.06 (0.542.07) Ptrend=0.73 
Sugar-sweetened beverages + fruit juice 1.54 (1.122.12) Ptrend=0.008;  
                                                                 1.17 (0.592.34) Ptrend=0.62 
Sugar-free beverages 0.80 (0.601.06) Ptrend=0.35  
                                   0.87 (0.451.69) Ptrend=0.97 
Sweets/baked goods 1.08 (0.791.48) Ptrend=0.40  
                                  0.58 (0.291.13) Ptrend=0.19 
Table 2.6 Continued 
Author, year Cohort name 
Study Design, 
sample size, 
Follow-up & 
cancer 
incidence 
Adjusted confounders Relative risk/Hazards ratio/Odds ratio (95% CI) 
Uccella et al. 
2013 [37] 
Iowa Women's 
Health Study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=23,356 
Age: 5569 
20 yrs 
542 cases 
Age, diabetes, duration of HT use, 
hypertension, age at menarche, 
age at menopause, quartiles of 
body mass index, waist-to-hip 
ratio, smoking status, pack years 
of smoking, total energy, alcohol 
High vs low intake (Type I & Type II) 
Total coffee 0.71 (0.510.99) Ptrend=0.11  
                     0.84 (0.332.12) Ptrend=0.64 
Caffeinated coffee 0.65 (0.470.89) Ptrend=0.033  
                               0.85 (0.371.93) Ptrend=0.58 
Decaffeinated coffee 0.76 (0.501.15) Ptrend=0.53  
                                  1.08 (0.412.80) Ptrend=0.93 
Tea 0.95 (0.741.22) Ptrend=0.55  
       1.26 (0.652.43) Ptrend=0.46 
Cola 1.08 (0.861.36) Ptrend=0.55 
         1.42 (0.792.56) Ptrend=0.16 
Chocolate 0.94 (0.731.21) Ptrend=0.47  
                  1.79 (0.983.26) Ptrend=0.085 
Candy bars 0.96 (0.711.29) Ptrend=0.76  
                   1.71 (0.843.48) Ptrend=0.087 
Brownies 0.98 (0.681.40) Ptrend=1.00  
                1.00 (0.382.58) Ptrend=0.84  
Brasky et al. 
2014 [38] 
Womens 
Health 
Initiative 
Observational 
Study and 
Clinical Trials 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=22,494 
Age: 5076 
9 yrs 
263 cases 
Age, race, education, BMI, pack-
years of smoking, physical 
activity, alcohol consumption, age 
at menarche, age at first birth, age 
at menopause, parity, years of 
combined hormone therapy, years 
of oestrogen-only therapy, years 
of oral contraceptive use, 
oophoerectomy, family history of 
uterine cancer, family history of 
ovarian cancer, history of 
diabetes, total energy 
High vs low intake 
Total Fish 2.28 (1.074.87) Ptrend=0.010 
Baked/boiled fish 1.72 (0.973.04) Ptrend=0.015 
Canned tuna/tuna casserole 1.26 (0.831.91) Ptrend=0.195 
White fish 1.33 (0.911.95) Ptrend=0.109 
Dark/oily fish 1.44 (0.962.17) Ptrend=0.093 
Shellfish, not fried 1.36 (0.862.15) Ptrend=0.069 
Fried fish/shellfish 0.89 (0.531.51) Ptrend=0.890 
Table 2.6 Continued 
Author, year Cohort name 
Study Design, 
sample size, 
Follow-up & 
cancer 
incidence 
Adjusted confounders Relative risk/Hazards ratio/Odds ratio (95% CI) 
Coleman et al. 
2014 [39] 
Prostate, 
Lung, 
Colorectal, 
and Ovarian 
cancer 
screening trial 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=36,115 
Age: 5575 
Median 9 yrs 
386 cases 
Age, BMI, age at menarche, age 
at menopause, race/ethnicity, oral 
contraceptive use, energy intake 
High vs low intake 
Total carbohydrates 0.66 (0.490.90) Ptrend=0.01 
Starches 0.90 (0.671.19) Ptrend=0.46 
Total sugars 0.71 (0.520.96) Ptrend=0.02 
Fibre 1.13 (0.851.51) Ptrend=0.53 
Gavrilyuk et 
al. 2014 [40] 
Norwegian 
Women and 
Cancer Study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=97,926 
Age: 3070 
Avg. 10.9 yrs 
462 cases 
Parity, smoking status, BMI, 
duration of OC and HRT use 
High vs low intake 
Total coffee 0.52 (0.340.79) Ptrend=0.003 
Boiled coffee 0.45 (0.211.01) Ptrend=0.07 
Filtered coffee 0.55 (0.320.94) Ptrend=0.07 
Je et al. 2014 
Nurses' Health 
Study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=68,067 
Age: 3459 
>30 yrs 
794 cases 
BMI, age at menopause, age at 
menarche, parity, age at last birth, 
duration of oral contraceptive use, 
postmenopausal hormone use, 
smoking status, physical activity, 
history of hypertension, total 
energy intake, coffee intake, other 
type of alcoholic beverages 
High vs low intake 
Total alcohol intake 0.78 (0.491.25) Ptrend=0.66* 
                                 0.64 (0.251.67) Ptrend=0.45** 
                                 0.79 (0.581.08) Ptrend=0.54*** 
Beer 0.35 (0.111.09) Ptrend=0.08* 
Wine 1.00 (0.621.61) Ptrend=0.49* 
Liquor 0.98 (0.641.51) Ptrend=0.51* 
Budhathoki et 
al. 2015 [42] 
Japan Public 
Health Centre-
based 
Prospective 
Study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=49,121 
Age: 4574 
Avg. 12.1 yrs 
112 cases 
Age, centre-area, BMI, physical 
activity, smoking, alcohol 
consumption, age at menarche, 
exogenous hormone use, number 
of deliveries, menopausal status 
and age at menopause, coffee 
intake, past history of diabetes 
mellitus and cancer 
High vs low intake 
Soy food 1.11 (0.651.92) Ptrend=0.63 
Tofu 1.13 (0.651.93) Ptrend=0.66 
Miso soup 0.89 (0.501.60) Ptrend=0.63 
Table 2.6 Continued 
Author, year Cohort name 
Study Design, 
sample size, 
Follow-up & 
cancer 
incidence 
Adjusted confounders Relative risk/Hazards ratio/Odds ratio (95% CI) 
Canchola et al. 
2015 [43] 
California 
Teachers 
Study Cohort 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=75,093 
Age: <85 
Median 16.1 yrs 
937 cases 
Race and its interaction with 
time-dependent age, age at 
menarche, gravidity and age at 
last pregnancy and its interaction 
with time-dependent age, oral 
contraceptive use, physical 
activity, smoking status, height, 
caloric intake, the other four 
dietary patterns, BMI, 
menopausal status/hormone 
therapy use 
High vs low score for dietary patterns 
Plant-based 0.91 (0.721.15) Ptrend=0.68 
High protein/fat 1.09 (0.841.42) Ptrend=0.49 
High carbohydrates 0.94 (0.691.28) Ptrend=0.54 
Ethnic 1.00 (0.811.23) Ptrend=0.64 
Salad and wine 1.23 (0.961.56) Ptrend=0.23 
Yang et al. 
2015 [44] 
UK Million 
Women Study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=560,356 
Age: 59  5 
Avg. 9.3 yrs 
4,067 cases 
Region, socioeconomic status, 
height, age at menarche, parity, 
duration of oral contraceptive use, 
age, menopausal status, duration 
of hormone therapy for 
menopause, BMI, smoking, 
alcohol consumption, strenuous 
exercise, tea consumption, other 
non-alcoholic fluid intake 
High vs low intake 
Tea 1.01 (0.951.08) Pheterogeneity=0.6 
Coffee 0.92 (0.821.03) Pheterogeneity=0.4 
Hashibe et al. 
2015 [31] 
Prostate, 
Lung, 
Colorectal, 
and Ovarian 
cancer 
screening trial 
Randomized 
control trial 
N=32,392 
Age: 5574 
10 yrs 
254 cases 
Age, sex, race, education, 
cigarette pack-years, alcohol 
drinking frequency 
High vs low intake 
Coffee 0.69 (0.520.91) Ptrend=0.009 
Tea 1.24 (0.951.63) 
Table 2.6 Continued 
Author, year Cohort name 
Study Design, 
sample size, 
Follow-up & 
cancer 
incidence 
Adjusted confounders Relative risk/Hazards ratio/Odds ratio (95% CI) 
Brasky et al. 
2016 [45] 
Black 
Womens 
Health Study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=47,602 
Age: 2169 
Median 18 yrs 
282 cases 
Age, time period, total energy 
intake, US region, education, 
BMI, physical activity, alcohol 
consumption, smoking, fruit 
consumption, vegetable 
consumption, age at menarche, 
age at menopause, parity, age at 
first birth, duration of combined 
hormone therapy, duration of 
oestrogen-alone hormone therapy, 
duration of oral contraceptive use, 
and diabetes 
High vs low intake 
Total Fish 0.86 (0.561.31) Ptrend=0.905 
Baked/boiled fish 0.88 (0.581.34) Ptrend=0.638 
Tuna salad/tuna casserole 0.93 (0.611.40) Ptrend=0.584 
Fried fish/shellfish 1.08 (0.701.65) Ptrend=0.436 
* All cases, ** Premenopausal cases, *** Post-menopausal cases
2.7 Diet and risk of breast cancer 
This search resulted to 28 prospective cohort studies (Figure 2.5, Table 2.7). All 
of the studies included both pre- and post-menopausal women at study baseline, except 
for one study which involved only postmenopausal women [82]. 
Figure 2.5 Flow diagram of selection process relating to diet and the risk of breast 
cancer 
2.7.1 Alcohol 
Six studies investigated the relationship between alcohol consumption and breast 
cancer risk. Findings from four studies reported an increased risk of breast cancer among 
high alcohol consumers. For instance, in a large EPIC study including 11,576 cases, 
alcohol intake was significantly associated with overall cancer cases [62]. Moreover, 
significant positive associations between alcohol intake and ER+/PR+, ER/PR, HER 
and ER/PRHER tumours were reported. Analysis of 2,760 cancer cases from the 
Nurses Health Study [70] demonstrated that alcohol intake in particular increased the 
risk of luminal-A breast cancer. A similar association was reported by Ellingjord-Dale et 
al. [76]. These findings can further be supported by a pooled analysis of 20 prospective 
cohort studies which reported that alcohol intake was associated with all cancer cases as 
well as ER+ and ER breast cancers [72]. On the other hand, findings from the Swedish 
study with 1,385 incident breast cancer demonstrated no association between alcohol 
intake and overall cancer cases as well as with the different tumour types [63]. Similarly, 
Kim et al. [77] reported no association between alcohol and breast cancer risk among high 
Records identified through database searching
(n=4780)
Records screened
(n=4780)
Full-text articles assessed for eligibility
(n=75)
Studies included in qualitative synthesis
(n=28)
Records excluded on basis of content of title 
and abstract
(n=1292)
Full-text articles excluded (n=47):
Review/meta-analysis (n=17)
Out of research topic (n=27)
Non-food/pharmacological exposures (n=3)
alcohol consumers as compared to low consumers. These findings show clear evidence 
that high alcohol consumption could increase the risk for all breast cancer subtypes, 
supporting the CUP report findings [2].   
2.7.2 Meat 
In relation to meat intake, the NLCS with 312 breast cancer cases reported no 
relationship between intakes of red meat, beef, pork, chicken, processed meat and fish 
and the risk of breast cancer among postmenopausal women [68]. However, findings from 
the NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study [71] showed a 14% higher risk for localised breast 
cancer cases with higher intake of total processed meat. Moreover, total red meat 
consumption was associated with a 25% increased risk of the regional/distant types. The 
authors also reported a positive association between processed red meat intake and the 
risk of all breast cancer cases and in particular an increased risk of localised breast cancer. 
In a French prospective cohort study with 544 cases diagnosed over a median follow-up 
period of 4.1 years, an increased risk of breast cancer was demonstrated among high red 
meat consumers as well as red and processed meat consumers as compared to low 
consumers [83]. While two of the studies reported that red meat and processed meat were 
positively linked to breast cancer risk [71, 83], the NLCS reported a null association [68]. 
This is mainly due to the small number of cancer cases at the study end-point of the NLCS 
contributing to a reduced statistical power as compared to the two other prospective 
cohort studies which included a greater number of breast cancer cases. An additional 
strength of the French Cohort Study was the use of repeated 24hdietary records based on 
a recent food composition database with over 3,300 food items. However, given that the 
study involved voluntary participants, this led to an overrepresentation of more health-
conscious participants. Thus, caution should be taken when extrapolating these results.  
2.7.3 Dietary patterns 
Six studies were included that addressed the relationship between breast cancer 
risk and dietary patterns. In the NLCSMeat Investigation Cohort [68] and the Adventist 
Health Study-2 [73], a vegetarian diet or low meat consumption did not reduce breast 
cancer risk when compared to meat eaters. Supporting these findings, two Japanese cohort 
studies also did not suggest an association between prudent diet (high in vegetables, 
fruits, legumes, fish and poultry intakes) [74] or a vegetable pattern [81] and breast 
cancer risk. On the other hand, according to the NHS which included 863 premenopausal 
and 614 postmenopausal breast cancer cases, a prudent diet had a marginal inverse 
(16%) association with premenopausal breast cancer and also lowered the risk of overall 
breast cancer [69]. In another cohort study including postmenopausal Dutch women [82], 
a 40% reduced risk of ER was found with adherence to a Mediterranean diet. 
In a Japanese centre-based prospective study which included 718 breast cancer 
cases, a Western dietary pattern (high intake of bread, meat, processed meats, dairy 
products, soup, coffee, soft drinks, black tea, sauces, mayonnaise and dressing) was 
associated with an increased breast cancer risk among postmenopausal women [74]. An 
increased risk was also observed with ER+/PR+ tumours. In contrast, in another cohort 
study of Japanese pre- and post-menopausal women, an animal food pattern which was 
highly loaded in meat, deep-fried foods, fried vegetables, fish paste, and salt-preserved 
fish, seemed to reduce the risk of breast cancer among premenopausal women [79]. While 
the former study used principal component analysis to derive dietary patterns, the latter 
study used factor analysis. Although these are different varieties of the same analysis, and 
thus have several similarities, they also have several differences [86]. Moreover, as both 
these analyses involve subjective decisions to determine dietary patterns; this could also 
explain the difference in findings. The animal pattern was also highly loaded with fish 
and vegetables as compared to the Western pattern.  
2.7.4 Fruits, vegetables and fibre intake 
In a study by Emaus et al. [64], compared to the lowest quintile, the highest 
quintile of total vegetable intake was associated with a 13% lower risk of breast cancer. 
There was no apparent association with fruits intake and also by hormone-receptor status. 
This study included 335,554 pre- and post-menopausal women and 10,197 cancer cases 
over a median 11.5-year period of follow-up. In another study by Farvid et al. [65], no 
association was found between breast cancer risk and total vegetable intake in either 
adolescence or early adulthood as well as with total fruit intake in early adulthood. 
However, total fruit intake during adolescence was significantly associated with a 25% 
lower risk of breast cancer among the highest intake compared to the lowest intake. Early 
adulthood consumption of fruits and vegetables rich in alpha-carotene was related with 
an 18% lower risk premenopausal breast cancer.  
In the NHS [67] which involved 2,833 invasive breast cancer cases, total dietary 
fibre intake during both adolescence and early adulthood were associated with a lower 
risk of breast cancer among all women, and in particular among premenopausal women. 
Moreover, intakes of soluble and insoluble fibres were both associated with a lower 
cancer risk. No evidence of an association was observed with the risk of breast cancer by 
hormone-receptor status. On the other hand, according to a Japanese centre-based 
prospective study, no associations were apparent between fibre intake and the risk of 
breast cancer [81]. Differences in the results were mainly because in the NHS fibre intake 
was determined from lifetime grain consumption and thus intake was assessed at multiple 
time-points while in the Japanese study diet was assessed only once. Moreover, in the 
Japanese study, the null association could be due to the small number of cases in the 
subtertile analysis.  
2.7.5 Carbohydrates and glycaemic index 
Farvid et al. [59] also examined the relationship between carbohydrate intake and 
breast cancer risk in the NHS. This study included 2,890 invasive cases diagnosed over a 
follow-up period of 20 years. The findings showed no evidence of an association between 
carbohydrate intake during both adolescence and early adulthood, and breast cancer risk. 
In addition, the authors reported no significant association between glycaemic index, 
glycaemic load, insulin load and insulin index scores, and breast cancer risk. 
Alternatively, findings from the Framingham Offspring Cohort Study [80] demonstrated 
that carbohydrate consumption in the highest compared to the lowest quintile was 
associated with a 41% lower breast cancer risk. Low glycaemic index foods were further 
associated with a lower risk. However, after adjustment for BMI and waist circumference, 
the relationship between total carbohydrates and breast cancer risk was mitigated, 
suggesting that these factors could explain the observation. In this Framingham Offspring 
cohort, participants with high carbohydrate intake also had lower BMI and waist 
circumference which could explain this inverse association while in the NHS, BMI was 
quite similar across the quintiles. 
2.7.6 Soy products 
The relationship between soy intake and breast cancer risk was investigated in two 
studies. According to findings from the Shanghai Womens Health Study [87] which 
involved 1,034 breast cancer cases, dietary soy protein intake in the highest versus the 
lowest quintile was significantly associated with a reduced risk for all breast cancer cases 
(22%) and also among premenopausal women (54%). Narita et al. [81] in contrast 
reported no association between fermented soy consumption and the risk of breast cancer. 
2.7.7 Discussion 
According to this search, except for alcohol, the relationship between other dietary 
factors and breast cancer risk remains unresolved given that some studies examined total 
intake while some considered specific foods (e.g., total vegetables vs green and yellow 
vegetables). Limitations of the included studies such as inconsistent adjustment for 
confounders could have also led to the differences in findings between the studies. In 
addition similar to the findings looking at the associations between diet and the risk of 
ovarian and endometrial cancers, in the included studies, only single time-point 
measurements of diet were evaluated, and thus were unable to account for changes in diet 
over time. Dietary changes over the life course may in particular be significant to cancer 
pathogenesis. For example, dietary habits during early years may lead to an earlier age at 
menarche while later diet in later life may be associated with a later onset of menopause 
which are both important risk factors of breast cancer. In addition to dietary changes 
during follow-up, measurement errors related to dietary assessment might have mitigated 
the association between diet and the risk of breast cancer. As explained in section 2.6.6, 
inconsistent adjustment of confounders across the different studies could have also led to 
contradictory findings.  
Although the weaknesses of the included studies led to the inconsistent findings, 
strengths of the studies should also be acknowledged. These were the large sample size 
for most studies, a variety of dietary sources as the main exposure was explored and breast 
cancer risk was also stratified by menopausal status, intrinsic subtypes, and hormone-
receptor status. However, three studies had less than 200 breast cancer cases which 
reduced the statistical power for observing any possible relationships [78-80]. 
Furthermore, the studies also lacked statistical power when breast cancer cases were 
stratified by menopausal or hormone-receptor status, which accounted for the wide 
confidence intervals. Another strength of the included studies was the use of validated 
FFQs for dietary assessment. The studies also had sufficient follow-up duration, retained 
the majority of participants at follow-up and were also representative of the exposed 
cohort which makes the results generalisable (Appendix A). 
Table 2.7 Evidence for the association between diet and risk of breast cancer 
Author, 
year Cohort name 
Study Design, 
sample size, 
Follow-up & 
cancer incidence Adjusted confounders Relative risk/Hazards ratio/Odds ratio (95% CI) 
Farvid et al. 
2015 [46] 
Nurses Health 
Study II 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=90,488 
Age: 2075 
20 yrs 
2,890 cases 
Smoking, race, parity and age at 
first birth, height, BMI at age 18 
years, weight gain since age 18, age 
at menarche, family history of 
breast cancer, history of benign 
breast disease, oral contraceptive 
use, menopausal status, hormone 
use, age at menopause, adolescent 
alcohol intake, adult alcohol intake, 
adolescent energy intake  
High vs low intake 
Carbohydrates 0.89 (0.791.00) Ptrend=0.07* 
                        0.87 (0.741.03) Ptrend=0.15** 
                        0.88 (0.721.09) Ptrend=0.56*** 
Harris et al. 
2015 [47] 
Swedish 
Mammography 
Cohort 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=37,004 
Age: 3976 
15 yrs 
1,603 cases 
Age, energy intake, height, BMI, 
education, oral contraceptive use, 
hormone replacement therapy use, 
age at menarche, age at menopause, 
family history of breast cancer, 
history of benign breast disease, 
smoking status, physical activity, 
alcohol intake 
High vs low intake 
Red meat 1.09 (0.911.31) Ptrend=0.76* 
Legumes 0.96 (0.791.18) Ptrend=0.96* 
Coffee 0.86 (0.721.04) Ptrend=0.16* 
Whole grains 0.83 (0.691.00) Ptrend=0.04* 
Hashibe et 
al. 2015 [31] 
Prostate, Lung, 
Colorectal, and 
Ovarian cancer 
screening trial 
Randomized 
control trial 
N=50,563 
Age: 5574 
10 yrs 
1,703 cases 
Age, sex, race, education, cigarette 
pack-years, alcohol drinking 
frequency 
High vs low intake 
Coffee 0.97 (0.871.08) Ptrend=0.638 
Tea 1.06 (0.951.18) 
Kiyabu et al. 
2015 [48] 
Japan Public 
Health Centre-
based 
prospective 
study 
Centre-based 
prospective 
Study 
N= 38,234 
Age: 4574 
Avg. 14.1 yrs 
556 cases 
Area, BMI, age at menarche, age at 
first birth, parity, menopausal age, 
menopausal status, use of 
exogenous female hormones, 
leisure-time physical activity, 
smoking status, alcohol intake, total 
energy-adjusted intake of 
isoflavones 
High vs low intake 
Total fish 0.99 (0.771.28) Ptrend=0.79* 
PUFA-rich fish 1.14 (0.881.48) Ptrend=0.50* 
Table 2.7 Continued 
Author, 
year Cohort name 
Study Design, 
sample size, 
Follow-up & 
cancer incidence Adjusted confounders Relative risk/Hazards ratio/Odds ratio (95% CI) 
Romieu et 
al. 2015 [49] 
European 
Prospective 
Investigation 
into Cancer and 
Nutrition 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=334,850 
Age: 3570 
Avg. 11 yrs 
11,576 cases 
Menopausal status, oral 
contraceptive, hormone 
replacement therapy, height, weight, 
interaction menopause and weight, 
smoking status, educational level, 
physical activity, age at first 
menses, age at first full term 
pregnancy, age at menopause, 
energy intake without alcohol intake 
High vs low intake  
Alcohol 1.25 (1.171.35) Ptrend= <0.001* 
              1.30 (1.151.48) Ptrend=0.001 (ER+/PR+) 
              1.13 (0.881.43) Ptrend=0.41 (ER+/PR) 
              1.03 (0.571.86) Ptrend=0.26 (ER/PR+) 
              1.28 (1.011.61) Ptrend=0.06 (ER/PR) 
              1.41 (1.171.68) Ptrend=0.007 (HER2) 
              0.97 (0.681.39) Ptrend=0.83 (HER2+) 
              1.97 (1.233.16) Ptrend=0.03 (ER/PR/HER2) 
Shin et al. 
2015 [50] 
Swedish 
Womens 
Lifestyle and 
Health study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=45,233 
Age: 3049 
1,385 cases 
Educational attainment, history of 
breast cancer in mother and/or 
sister, smoking habits, age at 
menarche, parity, age at the first 
child birth, total breast feeding 
duration, oral contraceptive use 
High vs low intake  
Alcohol 1.17 (0.901.53)* 
              1.11 (0.761.63) (ER+/PR+) 
              1.09 (0.532.25) (ER+/PR) 
              1.04 (0.522.08) (ER/PR) 
Baglia et al. 
2016 [73] 
Shanghai 
Womens 
Health Study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=70,578 
Age: 4070 
Median 13.2 yrs 
1,034 cases 
Age, body mass index, age at first 
live birth, physical activity, 
education, family history of breast 
cancer, season of recruitment, 
menopause (time-varying), total 
energy intake 
High vs low intake 
Soy protein 0.78 (0.630.97) Ptrend=0.007* 
                    0.46 (0.290.74) Ptrend=0.004** 
                    0.90 (0.711.16) Ptrend=0.15*** 
Emaus et al. 
2016 [51] 
European 
Prospective 
Investigation 
into Cancer and 
Nutrition 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=335,554 
Age: 2570 
Median 11.5 yrs 
10,197 cases 
Energy intake, age at menarche, 
oral contraceptive use, age at first 
full-term pregnancy, menopausal 
status, hormone replacement 
therapy use, BMI, physical activity, 
smoking status and intensity, 
alcohol user, alcohol consumption, 
educational level 
High vs low intake 
Total vegetables 0.87 (0.800.94) Ptrend=<0.01* 
                           0.90 (0.791.04) Ptrend=0.13 (ER+/PR+) 
                           0.81 (0.631.05) Ptrend=0.07(ER+/PR) 
                           0.76 (0.580.98) Ptrend=0.05 (ER/PR) 
Total fruit 0.99 (0.931.07) Ptrend=0.86* 
                 0.98 (0.861.10) Ptrend=0.70 (ER+/PR+) 
                 0.91 (0.731.14) Ptrend=0.50 (ER+/PR) 
                 0.92 (0.731.16) Ptrend=0.35 (ER/PR) 
Table 2.7 Continued 
Author, 
year Cohort name 
Study Design, 
sample size, 
Follow-up & 
cancer incidence Adjusted confounders Relative risk/Hazards ratio/Odds ratio (95% CI) 
Farvid et al. 
2016 [52] 
Nurses Health 
Study II 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=97,813 
Age: 2744 
22 yrs 
3,235 cases 
Race, family history of breast 
cancer, history of benign breast 
disease, smoking, height, BMI, 
weight change since age 18, age at 
menarche, parity, age at first birth, 
oral contraceptive use, alcohol 
intake, energy, hormone use, age at 
menopause, menopausal status 
High vs low intake 
Fruit 0.96 (0.851.09) Ptrend=0.46* 
         0.99 (0.841.17) Ptrend=0.94** 
         0.91 (0.741.11) Ptrend=0.46*** 
Vegetables 0.97 (0.861.09) Ptrend=0.62* 
                   0.90 (0.761.06) Ptrend=0.67** 
                   0.97 (0.801.19) Ptrend=0.64*** 
Total fruit & vegetables 0.93 (0.82 1.06) Ptrend=0.33* 
                                        0.95 (0.801.12) Ptrend=0.87** 
                                        0.97 (0.791.19) Ptrend=0.71*** 
Fruit juice 1.11 (0.99 .25) Ptrend=0.13* 
                  1.12 (0.951.32) Ptrend=0.21** 
                  1.08 (0.891.30) Ptrend=0.68*** 
Farvid et al. 
2016 [53] 
Nurses Health 
Study II 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=90,516 
Age: 2744 
22 yrs 
3,235 cases 
Race, family history of breast 
cancer, history of benign breast 
disease, smoking, height, BMI, 
weight change since age 18, age at 
menarche, parity, age at first birth, 
oral contraceptive use, alcohol 
intake, energy, hormone use, age at 
menopause, menopausal status 
High vs low intake 
Total whole-grain food 0.91 (0.811.02) Ptrend=0.11* 
                                      0.88 (0.751.03) Ptrend=0.19** 
                                      0.95 (0.781.16) Ptrend=0.45*** 
Total refined-grain food 0.89 (0.771.02) Ptrend=0.10* 
                                        0.94 (0.781.14) Ptrend=0.57** 
                                        0.86 (0.681.08) Ptrend=0.14*** 
Farvid et al. 
2016 [54] 
Nurses Health 
Study II 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=90,534 
Age: 2744 
20 yrs 
2,833 cases 
Race, family history of breast 
cancer, history of benign breast 
disease, smoking, height, BMI, 
weight change since age 18, age at 
menarche, 
Parity, age at first birth, oral 
contraceptive use, alcohol intake, 
energy, hormone use, age at 
menopause, menopausal status 
High vs low intake 
Total fibre (early adulthood) 0.81 (0.720.91) Ptrend=0.002* 
                                               0.77 (0.660.90) Ptrend=0.008** 
                                               0.87 (0.701.07) Ptrend=0.29*** 
Total fibre (adolescence) 0.84 (0.701.01) Ptrend=0.04* 
                                         0.76 (0.581.00) Ptrend=0.04**  
                                         0.85 (0.641.13) Ptrend=0.16***                                                      
Table 2.7 Continued 
Author, 
year Cohort name 
Study Design, 
sample size, 
Follow-up & 
cancer incidence Adjusted confounders Relative risk/Hazards ratio/Odds ratio (95% CI) 
Gilsing et al. 
2016 [55] 
Netherlands 
Cohort Study
Investigation 
Cohort 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=11,082 
Age: 5569 
Avg. 20.3 yrs 
312 cases 
Age,  total energy intake, cigarette 
smoking, alcohol consumption, 
BMI, physical activity, level of 
education, family history of breast 
cancer, age menarche, age 
menopause, age first child, hormone 
replacement therapy, use of oral 
contraceptives, number of children 
High vs low intake 
Total fresh meat 0.99 (0.741.34) Ptrend=0.76*** 
Fresh red meat 1.10 (0.821.48) Ptrend=0.97*** 
Beef 1.12 (0.821.51) Ptrend=0.15*** 
Pork 1.16 (0.851.58) Ptrend=0.77*** 
Minced meat 1.12 (0.811.54) Ptrend=0.59*** 
Chicken 0.93 (0.651.33) Ptrend=0.20*** 
Processed meat 1.31 (0.941.82) Ptrend=0.34*** 
Fish 1.18 (0.821.67) Ptrend=0.70*** 
Harris et al. 
2016 [56] 
Nurses Health 
Study II 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=5,218 
Age: 3547 
22 yrs 
1,477 cases 
Age, high-school total calories, 
height at age 18, age at menarche, 
BMI at age 18, physical activity in 
adolescence, family history of 
breast cancer, first birth/parity, oral 
contraceptive use, physical activity 
in adulthood, alcohol consumption, 
weight change since age 18, history 
of benign breast disease, 
menopausal status/age at 
menopause, hormone use 
High vs low intake 
All cases 
Prudent 0.86 (0.731.02) Ptrend=0.04*  
              0.86 (0.691.07) Ptrend=0.07 (ER+/PR+) 
              0.85 (0.581.24) Ptrend=0.38 (ER/PR) 
Western 0.99 (0.831.18) Ptrend=0.88* 
              0.93 (0.741.18) Ptrend=0.73(ER+/PR+) 
              0.94 (0.601.45) Ptrend=0.95 (ER/PR) 
Fast food 0.99 (0.841.17) Ptrend=0.69*                 
                1.08 (0.871.35) Ptrend=0.80 (ER+/PR+) 
                0.88 (0.571.35) Ptrend=0.48 (ER/PR) 
Premenopausal cases 
Prudent 0.84 (0.671.04) Ptrend=0.07* 
              0.84 (0.631.13) Ptrend=0.14 (ER+/PR+) 
              0.82 (0.501.35) Ptrend=0.37 (ER/PR) 
Western 1.03 (0.821.29) Ptrend=o.49* 
              0.97 (0.711.32) Ptrend=0.85 (ER+/PR+) 
              1.02 (0.571.81) Ptrend=0.60 (ER/PR) 
Fast food 1.03 (0.831.29) Ptrend=0.71* 
                1.17 (0.871.56) Ptrend=0.42 (ER+/PR+) 
                0.85 (0.491.48) Ptrend=0.65 (ER/PR) 
Table 2.7 Continued 
Author, 
year Cohort name 
Study Design, 
sample size, 
Follow-up & 
cancer incidence Adjusted confounders Relative risk/Hazards ratio/Odds ratio (95% CI) 
Hirko et al. 
2016 [57] 
Nurses Health 
Study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=105,972 
Age: 3055 
2,760 cases 
BMI, weight change since age 18, 
physical activity, parity/age at first 
birth, HRT, OC use, age at 
menarche, family history of breast 
cancer, benign breast disease 
diagnosis 
High vs low intake 
Alcohol 1.24 (1.031.50) Ptrend=0.001 (Luminal A) 
              1.08 (0.791.47) Ptrend=0.21 (Luminal B) 
              1.63 (0.912.91) Ptrend=0.20 (Her2) 
              0.66 (0.371.18) Ptrend=0.08 (Basal-like) 
              0.54 (0.221.32) Ptrend=0.45 (Unclassified) 
Inoue-Choi 
et al. 2016 
NIH-AARP 
Diet and Health 
Study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=193,742 
Age: 5071 
Avg. 9.4 yrs 
9,305 cases 
Age, race, BMI, height, education 
level, cigarette smoking, alcohol 
intake, physical activity, familial 
history of breast cancer, age at 
menarche, age at menopause, age at 
first live birth, number of live 
births, hormone use, oral 
contraceptive use, numbers of 
previous breast biopsy, total calorie 
intake, total fat intake, fibre intake, 
intake of other types of meat 
High vs low intake 
Total meat 1.06 (0.991.13) Ptrend=0.10* 
                  1.00 (0.991.13) Ptrend=0.83 (ER+/PR+) 
                  0.87 (0.68 1.11) Ptrend=0.35 (ER/PR) 
Total processed meat 1.04 (0.971.12) Ptrend=0.09* 
                                   0.96 (0.851.09) Ptrend=0.94 (ER+/PR+) 
                                   1.01 (0.791.29) Ptrend=0.91 (ER/PR) 
Total red meat 1.04 (0.971.13) Ptrend=0.27* 
                        0.97 (0.851.11) Ptrend=0.59 (ER+/PR+) 
                        0.95 (0.731.24) Ptrend=0.47 (ER/PR) 
Fresh red meat 1.03 (0.961.11) Ptrend=0.19* 
                         1.04 (0.921.19) Ptrend=0.50 (ER+/PR+) 
                         1.03 (0.801.34) Ptrend=0.93 (ER/PR) 
Processed red meat 1.09 (1.011.17) Ptrend=0.05* 
                                0.99 (0.871.13) Ptrend=0.67 (ER+/PR+) 
                                0.83 (0.641.09) Ptrend=0.05 (ER/PR) 
Jung et al. 
2016 [59] 
Pooled analysis 
of 20 cohort 
studies 
Pooled analysis 
of cohort 
studies 
N=1,089273 
Age: 18104 
6-18 yrs 
37,191 cases 
Ethnicity, education, BMI, height, 
physical activity, smoking, age at 
menarche, menopausal status, HRT, 
OC use, parity, age at first birth, 
family history, personal history of 
benign breast disease 
High vs low intake 
Alcohol 1.32 (1.231.41) Ptrend=<0.001* 
              1.35 (1.231.48) Ptrend=<0.001 (ER+) 
              1.28 (1.101.49) Ptrend=<0.001 (ER) 
              1.36 (1.211.54) Ptrend=<0.001 (PR+) 
              1.30 (1.161.46) Ptrend=<0.001 (PR) 
Table 2.7 Continued 
Author, 
year Cohort name 
Study Design, 
sample size, 
Follow-up & 
cancer incidence Adjusted confounders Relative risk/Hazards ratio/Odds ratio (95% CI) 
Lukic et al. 
2016 [30] 
Norwegian 
Women and 
Cancer Study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=91,767 
Age: 3070 
Avg. 13.1 yrs 
9,675 cases 
Menopausal status, smoking status, 
duration of education, BMI, 
physical activity level, alcohol 
consumption, parity, age at first 
birth, HRT, maternal history of 
breast cancer 
High vs low intake 
Total coffee 0.87 (0.711.06) Ptrend=0.06* 
Penniecook-
Sawyers et 
al. 2016 [60] 
Adventist 
Health Study-2 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=50,404 
Age: 30112 
Mean 7.8 yrs 
892 cases 
Race, height, physical activity, 
family history of cancer, 
mammography in the last 2 years 
after age 42 years, age at 
menopause, age at menarche, birth 
control pills, hormone replacement 
therapy, age at first child, number 
of children, breastfeeding, 
educational level, smoking, alcohol, 
With reference to non-vegetarians 
Vegan 0.78 (0.581.05) Ptrend=0.09* 
           0.77 (0.551.06) Ptrend=0.11*** 
           0.81 (0.381.70) Ptrend=0.58** 
Lacto 1.05 (0.891.23) Ptrend=0.57* 
          1.06 (0.891.26) Ptrend=0.53*** 
          0.96 (0.631.45) Ptrend=0.84** 
Pesco 0.91 (0.711.17) Ptrend=0.48* 
          0.85 (0.641.13) Ptrend=0.25*** 
          1.25 (0.752.10) Ptrend=0.40** 
Semi 0.91 (0.671.23) Ptrend=0.52* 
         0.73 (0.531.06) Ptrend=0.10*** 
         1.96 (1.123.43) Ptrend=0.019** 
All vegetarians 0.97 (0.841.11) Ptrend=0.64* 
                         0.94 (0.801.09) Ptrend=0.40*** 
                         1.12 (0.801.57) Ptrend=0.52** 
Shin et al. 
2016 [61] 
Japan Public 
Health Centre-
based 
Prospective 
Study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=49,552 
Age: 4069 
Avg. 14.6 yrs 
718 cases 
Age, public healthcare centre area, 
energy intake, BMI, smoking status, 
leisure-time physical activity, total 
physical activity, age at menarche, 
parity, menopause status, use of 
exogenous female 
hormones 
High vs low intake 
Prudent 0.96 (0.751.23) Ptrend=0.93* 
             0.83 (0.511.36) Ptrend=0.87** 
             1.01 (0771.34) Ptrend=0.70*** 
Westernised 1.32 (1.031.70) Ptrend=0.04* 
                     1.26 (0.811.96) Ptrend=0.59** 
                     1.29 (0.991.76) Ptrend=0.04*** 
Traditional 1.03 (0.801.32) Ptrend=0.69* 
                   1.22 (0.751.98) Ptrend=0.50** 
                   0.92 (0.691.23) Ptrend=0.24*** 
Table 2.7 Continued 
Author, 
year Cohort name 
Study Design, 
sample size, 
Follow-up & 
cancer incidence Adjusted confounders Relative risk/Hazards ratio/Odds ratio (95% CI) 
Zhang et al. 
2016 [62] 
Nurses Health 
Study, Nurses 
Health Study II 
Pooled analysis 
of cohort 
studies 
N=135,495 
Age: 2555 
18-26 yrs 
8,115 cases 
Age, ethnicity, BMI, smoking 
status, physical activity, family 
history of cancer, multivitamin 
supplementation, total energy 
intake, consumption of fruit, 
vegetables, red meat, fish, nuts, 
whole grain, sugar-sweetened 
beverage, postmenopausal hormone 
High vs low intake 
Total rice 0.90 (0.701.16) Ptrend=0.48* 
Ellingjord-
Dale et al. 
2017 [63] 
Norwegian 
Breast Cancer 
Screening 
Program 
Nested case-
control study 
N=344,348 
Age: 5069 
4,402 cases 
BMI, education, age at menarche, 
number of pregnancies, menopausal 
status, physical activity, smoking 
High vs low intake 
Alcohol 1.14 (1.041.26) Ptrend=0.01 (Luminal A-like) 
              1.05 (0.871.28) Ptrend=0.46 (Luminal B-like HER2) 
              1.23 (0.941.62) Ptrend=0.14 (Luminal B-like HER2+) 
              0.68 (0.470.97) Ptrend=0.03 (HER2+) 
              1.20 (0.931.57) Ptrend=0.24 (Triple) 
Kim et al. 
2017 [64] 
Nurses Health 
Study II 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=93,835 
Age: 2744 
20 yrs 
2,866 cases 
Oral contraceptive use, the 
combination of parity and age at 
first birth, age at menarche, 
menopausal status, use of hormone 
therapy, BMI, personal history of 
benign breast disease, height, 
smoking status, red meat intake, 
folate intake 
High vs low intake 
Alcohol 1.07(0.941.22) Ptrend=0.39* 
Table 2.7 Continued 
Author, 
year Cohort name 
Study Design, 
sample size, 
Follow-up & 
cancer incidence Adjusted confounders Relative risk/Hazards ratio/Odds ratio (95% CI) 
Kim et al. 
2017 [65] 
National Cancer 
Center, South 
Korea 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=5,046 
Age: >30 
Mean 9.5 yrs 
72 cases 
Age, smoking status, education 
group, breast benign tumour 
history, BMI, family history of 
breast cancer, alcohol consumption, 
physical activity, age at menarche, 
parity, oral contraceptive use, 
hormone use and menopausal 
status, age at menopause 
High vs low intake 
Cereals 0.95 (0.581.57)*; 1.15 (0.612.17)**; 0.53 (0.221.25)*** 
Salted vegetables & seafood 0.98 (0.611.58)*; 1.17 (0.65
2.09)**; 0.45 (0.181.14)*** 
Light-coloured vegetables 0.87 (0.541.38)*; 0.61 (0.351.09)**; 
1.37 (0.553.39)*** 
Green-yellow vegetables 1.46 (0.912.33)*; 1.33 (0.752.36)**; 
1.42 (0.623.30)*** 
Seaweed 1.06 (0.651.73)*; 0.76 (0.421.38)**; 1.73 (0.67
4.50)*** 
Fruit 1.22 (0.761.97)*; 1.23 (0.692.20)**; 1.22 (0.512.92)*** 
Grilled meat 1.77 (1.092.85)*; 1.36 (0.772.43**; 3.06 (1.31
7.15)*** 
Healthy protein foods 1.46 (0.912.34)*; 1.12 (0.632.00**; 2.28 
(0.945.52)*** 
Dairy foods 1.32 (0.832.11)*; 1.20 (0.672.13)**; 1.56 (0.67
3.65)*** 
Bony fish 1.14 (0.711.83)*; 0.95 (0.531.69)**; 1.38 (0.55
3.46)*** 
Fried foods 1.19 (0.741.92)*; 1.00 (0.561.79)**; 1.78 (0.75
4.21)*** 
High-cholesterol foods 1.69 (1.012.82)*; 1.42 (0.752.67)**; 
1.97 (0.814.80)*** 
Animal fat-rich foods 1.05 (0.641.71)*; 0.93 (0.521.67)**; 1.18 
(0.472.99)*** 
Sweet foods 0.90 (0.561.45)*; 1.02 (0.561.86)**; 0.66 (0.27
1.57)*** 
Fast-foods 1.16 (0.70-1.90)*; 1.05 (0.581.89)**; 1.47 (0.58
3.71)*** 
Caffeinated drinks 0.90 (0.55-1.46)*; 1.07 (0.581.96)**; 0.56 
(0.231.35)*** 
Table 2.7 Continued 
Author, 
year Cohort name 
Study Design, 
sample size, 
Follow-up & 
cancer incidence Adjusted confounders Relative risk/Hazards ratio/Odds ratio (95% CI) 
Kojima et al. 
2017 [66] 
Japan 
Collaborative 
Cohort Study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=23,172 
Age: 4079 
Median 16.9 yrs 
119 cases 
Age, area, tobacco smoking status, 
drinking status, family history of 
breast cancer, age at menarche, age 
at first birth, parity, energy intake, 
hormone therapy, daily walking, 
education, BMI 
High vs low score 
Vegetable pattern 0.81 (0.351.89) Ptrend=0.61** 
                             0.93 (0.481.78) Ptrend=0.83*** 
Animal food pattern 0.42 (0.180.93) Ptrend=0.04** 
                                 0.98 (0.481.99) Ptrend=0.83*** 
Dairy product pattern 1.20 (0.522.80) Ptrend=0.80** 
                                   1.32 (0.702.49) Ptrend=0.19*** 
Makarem et 
al. 2017 [67] 
Framingham 
Offspring 
cohort 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=3,184 
Age: mean 54.4 
Median 13.1 yrs 
124 cases 
Age, smoking, alcohol, energy, 
menopausal status, HRT, age at 
menopause, number of live births, 
BMI, waist circumference, height, 
pre-existing diabetes and CVD, 
antioxidant supplement use, 
education, physical activity 
High vs low intake 
Carbohydrate 0.59 (0.360.97)* 
Narita et al. 
2017 [68] 
Japan Public 
Health Centre-
based 
Prospective 
Study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=44,444 
Age: 4574 
Avg. 14 yrs 
681 cases 
Age, area, BMI, age at menarche, 
age at first birth, parity, age at 
menopause, use of exogenous 
female hormones, smoking status, 
leisure-time physical activity, 
alcohol intake, and total energy-
adjusted intakes of fat, isoflavones, 
vitamin C, and carbohydrate 
High vs low intake 
Total fibre 0.78 (0.551.09) Ptrend=0.15* 
                  0.62 (0.321.20) Ptrend=0.11** 
                  0.82 (0.561.22) Ptrend=0.48*** 
Soluble fibre 0.77 (0.551.06) Ptrend=0.20* 
                      0.82 (0.431.55) Ptrend=0.47** 
                      0.74 (0.501.08) Ptrend=0.29*** 
Insoluble fibre 0.89 (0.641.24) Ptrend=0.47* 
                         1.02 (0.551.89) Ptrend=0.75** 
                         0.84 (0.571.24) Ptrend=0.51*** 
Fermented soybean 0.87 (0.691.10) Ptrend=0.68* 
                                0.84 (0.551.29) Ptrend=0.54** 
                                0.88 (0.661.16) Ptrend=0.92*** 
Rice 1.01 (0.781.31) Ptrend=0.75* 
         1.44 (0.922.26) Ptrend=0.32** 
         0.86 (0.631.17) Ptrend=0.34*** 
Table 2.7 Continued 
Author, 
year Cohort name 
Study Design, 
sample size, 
Follow-up & 
cancer incidence Adjusted confounders Relative risk/Hazards ratio/Odds ratio (95% CI) 
van den 
Brandt & 
Schulpen, 
2017 [69] 
Netherlands 
Cohort Study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=3,986 
Age: 5569 
20.3 yrs 
2,321 cases 
Age, cigarette smoking, frequency, 
duration, height, BMI, physical 
activity, education level, family 
history of breast cancer in mother 
or sisters, history of benign breast 
disease, age at menarche, parity, 
age at first birth, age at menopause, 
oral contraceptive use, HRT, energy 
intake, alcohol intake 
High vs low score 
Mediterranean diet 0.87 (0.721.06) Ptrend=0.066* 
                               0.87 (0.691.10) Ptrend=0.101 (ER+) 
                               0.60 (0.390.93) Ptrend=0.032 (ER) 
                               0.90 (0.691.19) Ptrend=0.378 (PR+) 
                               0.72 (0.521.05) Ptrend=0.047 (PR) 
                               0.91 (0.691.21) Ptrend=0.400 (ER+PR+) 
                               0.61 (0.361.01) Ptrend=0.047 (ERPR) 
Diallo et al. 
2018 [70] 
NutriNet-Sant 
cohort study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=45,930 
Age: 5569 
Median 4.1 yrs 
544 cases 
Age, sex, energy intake without 
alcohol, number of 24 h-dietary 
records, smoking status, educational 
level, physical activity, height, 
BMI, alcohol intake, family history 
of cancers, lipids intake, fruits, 
vegetables, menopausal status, 
number of children 
High vs low score 
Red meat 1.83 (1.332.51) Ptrend=0.002* 
                2.04 (1.034.06) Ptrend=0.4** 
                1.79 (1.262.55) Ptrend=0.002*** 
Processed meat 1.05 (0.801.38) Ptrend=0.4* 
                          1.30 (0.792.15) Ptrend=0.5** 
                          0.95 (0.691.32) Ptrend=0.7*** 
Red and processed meat 1.26 (0.931.71) Ptrend=0.05* 
                                        1.05 (0.591.86) Ptrend=0.8** 
                                        1.41 (0.992.01) Ptrend=0.02*** 
Fiolet et al. 
2018 [71] 
NutriNet-Sant 
cohort study 
Prospective 
cohort study 
N=81,420 
Age: 1873 
Median 5 yrs 
739 cases 
Age, sex, energy intake without 
alcohol, number of 24 hour dietary 
records, smoking status, educational 
level, physical activity, height, 
BMI, alcohol intake, family history 
of cancers, menopausal status, 
hormonal treatment for menopause, 
oral contraception, number of 
children, intakes of lipids, sodium, 
carbohydrates and Western dietary 
pattern 
High vs low intake 
Ultra-processed food 1.13 (0.891.42) Ptrend=0.2* 
                                   1.27 (0.881.83) Ptrend=0.4** 
                                   1.38 (1.051.81) Ptrend=0.02*** 
*All cases, **Premenopausal cases, ***Postmenopausal cases
2.8 Motivation for the research 
Menopause is a natural phenomenon in a womans life course and impacts the 
lives of women around the world. The current life expectancy of females in the UK is 
estimated to be 82.9 years [88], and the average age of menopause is 51 years [89]. British 
women are thus expected to spend around one-third of their life in the menopausal state. 
The timing for the onset of natural menopause is not the same for every woman. Several 
factors can influence its timing.  
Genetic, behavioural, and environmental causes have been previously linked to 
the onset of natural menopause. Evidence shows that diet can also be linked to the timing 
of natural menopause (Table 2.2). However, very few studies have explored this 
association and have shown conflicting results, justifying the need for more prospective 
studies to elucidate the relationship between diet and the onset of natural menopause. 
Possible causes for these inconsistent results comprise disparities in methodology and 
socio-cultural differences among study populations. For instance, as mentioned in section 
2.3, some studies have focussed on the analysis of individual foods and nutrients while 
others have considered food groups or total nutrient intake which makes drawing any 
conclusion impossible at present. As the study of single foods and nutrients are crucial in 
the understanding of the exact dietary factor associated with the onset of natural 
menopause, more observational studies looking these associations are warranted. This 
will be looked into in Chapter 4 of this thesis. Additionally, these inconsistent results, 
could also indicate that the relationship between all food groups referred in section 2.3 
and the timing of onset of natural menopause deserves further research, especially 
oriented towards the analysis of dietary patterns rather than specific foods or nutrients. 
This is mainly because a group of different foods are eaten simultaneously rather than 
individually. Dietary patterns also account for the inter-relations as well as characterise 
the cumulative exposure to various food items [90]. Thus, the study of dietary patterns in 
addition to individual foods and nutrients in relation to the onset of menopause is equally 
essential. This will be explored in Chapter 5.  
Furthermore, the age at which women reach menopause could also be a 
determinant for the duration of VMS. This subsequently has an impact on the quality of 
life of women which makes the study of possible ways to manage VMS important. As 
shown by this literature search, there is an indication that diet could modulate the 
frequency/severity of VMS. However, the limited number of observational study 
investigating the relationship between the natural diet and the presence of VMS (Table 
2.3), give ground to explore this association further. Therefore, the associations between 
diet and the presence of VMS will be investigated in Chapter 6.  
The link between diet and cancer has been the interest of many during the recent 
years. However, many contradictory results have been published which explains the need 
for substantial evidence to show any association between diet and the risk of hormone-
related cancers (ovarian, endometrial and breast cancer). According to previous studies, 
an association between timing of the onset of natural menopause and risk of the hormone-
related cancers have also been reported. For instance, while an earlier menopause is 
linked to a higher risk of CVDs, osteoporosis and depression, it is also protective against 
some cancers such as breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer. Therefore, influencing the 
timing of natural menopause could potentially affect the risk of these cancers among mid-
age women. Hence, these relationships will be further explored in Chapter 7 of this thesis.  
Most of the studies (Table 2.5, Table 2.6, Table 2.7) investigating the association 
between diet and risk of ovarian, endometrial and breast cancer have adjusted for 
reproductive indicators but none have considered reproductive indicators as an effect 
modifier, that is, potentially having an effect on the causal pathway, between diet and risk 
of the gynaecological cancers. Even though studying the effect of age at natural 
menopause as a potential effect modifier would lead to loss of statistical power (as a result 
of sub-group analysis) [91], this could lead to some interesting findings. While some 
previous studies have stratified their findings by menopausal status, very few have 
considered a pre- or post-menopausal cancer. Given that premenopausal women have 
higher oestrogen levels than postmenopausal women; analyses will also be conducted by 
pre- and post-menopausal cancers to examine whether diet has a similar association 
between these two types of cancers (please refer to Chapter 7). As per our knowledge, 
this will be the first study to consider the influence of the relationship between diet and 
age at natural menopause on the incidence of ovarian, endometrial and breast cancer. This 
will also be the first study looking at the age of natural menopause and diet among women 
in the UK.  
As explained in Chapter 1 using the NICEs conceptual framework (Figure 1.4, 
please refer to section 1.7), other than diet factors such as greater physical activity level 
and low or never smoking can be independently associated with the timing of natural 
menopause, the presence of VMS as well as the risks of ovarian, endometrial and breast 
cancers. Given that it is difficult to evaluate the extent to which other behaviours are 
accurately controlled for in statistical models, it is impractical to attribute causality to the 
associations from observational studies. As demonstrated through this literature review, 
very few RCTs have investigated the outcome of interests of this thesis and the natural 
diet, which  indicates the need for additional RCT evidence to determine causality as this 
study design is less prone to confounding bias. However, given the lengthy pathogenesis 
of the hormone-related cancers, as well as the prolonged process of menopause, trials of 
adequate follow-up time and sample sizes to observe any association, along with 
compliance of the participants, render RCTs costly and practically impossible to conduct. 
Thus, prospective studies become the most appropriate alternative to fill in the gap given 
that appropriate and consistent methodologies are used. 
References 
1. Moslehi, N. et al. Current Evidence on Associations of Nutritional Factors with 
Ovarian Reserve and Timing of Menopause: A Systematic Review. Advances in 
Nutrition. 2017, 8(4), pp.597-612. 
2. World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research. Diet, 
Nutrition, Physical Activity and Cancer: a Global Perspective. 2018. Available 
from: https://www.wcrf.org/sites/default/files/Summary-third-expert-report.pdf. 
3. Daldrup-Link, H.E. Writing a review article - Are you making these mistakes? 
Nanotheranostics. 2018, 2(2), pp.197-200. 
4. Crane, T.E. et al. Dietary intake and ovarian cancer risk: A systematic review. 
Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers and Prevention. 2014, 23(2), pp.255-273. 
5. Imperial College Team. Continuous update of the epidemiological evidence on 
food, nutrition, physical activity and the risk of breast cancer.  Available from: 
https://www.wcrf.org/sites/default/files/breast-cancer-protocol.pdf 
6. CUP Team and Imperial College London. Continuous Update Project: 
epidemiological evidence on food, nutrition, physical activity and the risk of 
endometrial and ovarian cancers. Available from: 
https://www.wcrf.org/sites/default/files/ovarian-cancer-protocol.pdf 
7. GA Wells, B.S., D O'Connell, J Peterson, V Welch, M Losos, P Tugwell. The 
Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) for assessing the quality of nonrandomised 
studies in meta-analyses. 2011. Available from: 
http://www.ohri.ca/programs/clinical_epidemiology/oxford.asp  [Accessed 12 
August].  
8. Hernandez, A.V. et al. Insulin resistance and endometrial cancer risk: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. European Journal of Cancer. 2015, 
51(18), pp.2747-2758. 
9. Tacconelli, E. Systematic reviews: CRD's guidance for undertaking reviews in 
health care. The Lancet Infectious Diseases. 2010, 10(4), pp.1-281. 
10. Greenhalgh J. and Brown T. Quality assessment: Where do I begin? In: Boland 
A., Cherry M.G., Dickson R. (ed.) Doing a systematic review - a students guide. 
2nd ed. London: SAGE publications Ltd., 2017. 
11. Torgerson, D.J. et al. Factors associated with onset of menopause in women aged 
4549. Maturitas. 1994, 19(2), pp.83-92. 
12. Torgerson, D.J. et al. Alcohol consumption and age of maternal menopause are 
associated with menopause onset. Maturitas. 1997, 26(1), pp.21-25. 
13. Nagel, G. et al. Reproductive and dietary determinants of the age at menopause in 
EPIC-Heidelberg. Maturitas. 2005, 52(3-4), pp.337-347. 
14. Wang, M. et al. Age at natural menopause and associated factors in adult women: 
Findings from the China Kadoorie Biobank study in Zhejiang rural area. PLoS 
ONE. 2018, 13(4), p.e0195658. 
15. Nagata, C. et al. Association of diet with the onset of menopause in Japanese 
women. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2000, 152(9), pp.863-867. 
16. Dorjgochoo, T. et al. Dietary and lifestyle predictors of age at natural menopause 
and reproductive span in the Shanghai Women's Health Study. Menopause. 2008, 
15(5), pp.924-933. 
17. Martin, L.J. et al. Intervention with a low-fat, high-carbohydrate diet does not 
influence the timing of menopause. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
2006, 84(4), pp.920-928. 
18. Carwile, J.L. et al. Consumption of low-fat dairy products may delay natural 
menopause. The Journal of Nutrition. 2013, 143(10), pp.1642-1650. 
19. Kesse, E. et al. Do eating habits differ according to alcohol consumption? Results 
of a study of the French cohort of the European Prospective Investigation into 
Cancer and Nutrition (E3N-EPIC). The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
2001, 74(3), pp.322-327. 
20. Taneri, P.E. et al. Association of alcohol consumption with the onset of natural 
menopause: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Human Reproduction 
Update. 2016, 22(4), pp.516-528. 
21. Nagata, C. et al. Association of diet and other lifestyle with onset of menopause 
in Japanese women. Maturitas. 1998, 29(2), pp.105-113. 
22. Murkies, A.L. et al. Dietary flour supplementation decreases post-menopausal hot 
flushes: effect of soy and wheat. Maturitas. 1995, 21(3), pp.189-195. 
23. Nagata, C. et al. Soy product intake and hot flashes in Japanese women: results 
from a community-based prospective study. American Journal of Epidemiology. 
2001, 153(8), pp.790-793. 
24. Gold, E.B. et al. Phytoestrogen and fiber intakes in relation to incident vasomotor 
symptoms: results from the Study of Women's Health Across the Nation. 
Menopause. 2013, 20(3), pp.305-314. 
25. Somekawa, Y. et al. Soy intake related to menopausal symptoms, serum lipids, 
and bone mineral density in postmenopausal Japanese women. Obstetrics and 
Gynecology. 2001, 97(1), pp.109-115. 
26. Dodin, S. et al. The effects of flaxseed dietary supplement on lipid profile, bone 
mineral density, and symptoms in menopausal women: a randomized, double-
blind, wheat germ placebo-controlled clinical trial. Journal of Clinical 
Endocrinology & Metabolism. 2005, 90(3), pp.1390-1397. 
27. Pruthi, S. et al. A phase III, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial of 
flaxseed for the treatment of hot flashes: North Central Cancer Treatment Group 
N08C7. Menopause. 2012, 19(1), pp.48-53. 
28. Lewis, J.E. et al. A randomized controlled trial of the effect of dietary soy and 
flaxseed muffins on quality of life and hot flashes during menopause. Menopause. 
2006, 13(4), pp.631-642. 
29. Herber-Gast, G.C. and Mishra, G.D. Fruit, Mediterranean-style, and high-fat and 
-sugar diets are associated with the risk of night sweats and hot flushes in midlife: 
results from a prospective cohort study. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
2013, 97(5), pp.1092-1099. 
30. Schilling, C. et al. Current alcohol use is associated with a reduced risk of hot 
flashes in midlife women. Alcohol and Alcoholism. 2005, 40(6), pp.563-568. 
31. Nagata, C. et al. Associations of physical activity and diet with the onset of 
menopause in Japanese women. Menopause. 2012, 19(1), pp.75-81. 
32. Purdue-Smithe, A.C. et al. Vitamin D and calcium intake and risk of early 
menopause. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2017, 105(6), pp.1493-
1501. 
33. Boutot, M.E. et al. Dietary Protein Intake and Early Menopause in the Nurses 
Health Study II. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2017, pp.270-277. 
34. Purdue-Smithe, A.C. et al. A Prospective Study of Dairy Food Intake and Early 
Menopause. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2018, pp.188-196. 
35. Merritt, M.A. et al. Dietary fat intake and risk of epithelial ovarian cancer in the 
European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition. Cancer 
Epidemiology. 2014, 38(5), pp.528-537. 
36. Merritt, M.A. et al. Nutrient-wide association study of 57 foods/nutrients and 
epithelial ovarian cancer in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer 
and Nutrition study and the Netherlands Cohort Study. The American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition. 2016, 103(1), pp.161-167. 
37. Merritt, M.A. et al. Dairy food and nutrient intake in different life periods in 
relation to risk of ovarian cancer. Cancer Causes and Control. 2014, 25(7), 
pp.795-808. 
38. Qin, B. et al. Dairy, calcium, vitamin D and ovarian cancer risk in African-
American women. British Journal of Cancer. 2016, 115(9), pp.1122-1130. 
39. Lukic, M. et al. Coffee consumption and the risk of cancer in the Norwegian 
Women and Cancer (NOWAC) Study. European Journal of Epidemiology. 2016, 
31(9), pp.905-916. 
40. Hashibe, M. et al. Coffee, tea, caffeine intake, and the risk of cancer in the PLCO 
cohort. British Journal of Cancer. 2015, 113(5), pp.809-816. 
41. Braem, M.G. et al. Coffee and tea consumption and the risk of ovarian cancer: a 
prospective cohort study and updated meta-analysis. American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. 2012, 95(5), pp.1172-1181. 
42. Koushik, A. et al. Intake of vitamins A, C, and E and folate and the risk of ovarian 
cancer in a pooled analysis of 10 cohort studies. Cancer Causes and Control. 
2015, 26(9), pp.1315-1327. 
43. Cook, L.S. et al. Adult lifetime alcohol consumption and invasive epithelial 
ovarian cancer risk in a population-based case-control study. Gynecologic 
Oncology. 2016, 140(2), pp.277-284. 
44. Beehler, G.P. et al. Risk of ovarian cancer associated with BMI varies by 
menopausal status. Journal of Nutrition. 2006, 136(11), pp.2881-2886. 
45. Shen, F. et al. The prevalence of malignant and borderline ovarian cancer in pre- 
and post-menopausal Chinese women. Oncotarget. 2017, 8(46), pp.80589-80594. 
46. Riboli, E. Nutrition and cancer: background and rationale of the European 
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC). Annals of Oncology. 
1992, 3(10), pp.783-791. 
47. Arem, H. et al. A prospective investigation of fish, meat and cooking-related 
carcinogens with endometrial cancer incidence. British Journal of Cancer. 2013, 
109(3), pp.756-760. 
48. Fedirko, V. et al. Alcohol drinking and endometrial cancer risk in the European 
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) study. Annals of 
Epidemiology. 2013, 23(2), pp.93-98. 
49. Inoue-Choi, M. et al. Sugar-sweetened beverage intake and the risk of type I and 
type II endometrial cancer among postmenopausal women. Cancer Epidemiology, 
Biomarkers & Prevention. 2013, 22(12), pp.2384-2394. 
50. Uccella, S. et al. Intake of coffee, caffeine and other methylxanthines and risk of 
Type I vs Type II endometrial cancer. British Journal of Cancer. 2013, 109(7), 
pp.1908-1913. 
51. Brasky, T.M. et al. Associations of long-chain -3 fatty acids and fish intake with 
endometrial cancer risk in the VITamins And Lifestyle cohort. The American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2014, 99(3), pp.599-608. 
52. Coleman, H.G. et al. Dietary carbohydrate intake, glycemic index, and glycemic 
load and endometrial cancer risk: A prospective cohort study. American Journal 
of Epidemiology. 2014, 179(1), pp.75-84. 
53. Gavrilyuk, O. et al. High coffee consumption and different brewing methods in 
relation to postmenopausal endometrial cancer risk in the Norwegian women and 
cancer study: a population-based prospective study. BMC Women's Health. 2014, 
14, pp.1-10. 
54. Je, Y. et al. Long-term alcohol intake and risk of endometrial cancer in the Nurses' 
Health Study, 1980-2010. British Journal of Cancer. 2014, 111(1), pp.186-194. 
55. Budhathoki, S. et al. Soy food and isoflavone intake and endometrial cancer risk: 
the Japan Public Health Center-based prospective study. BJOG: An International 
Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology. 2015, 122(3), pp.304-311. 
56. Canchola, A.J. et al. Dietary patterns and endometrial cancer risk in the California 
Teachers Study cohort. Cancer Causes & Control. 2015, 26(4), pp.627-634. 
57. Yang, T.O. et al. Tea and coffee and risk of endometrial cancer: cohort study and 
meta-analysis. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2015, 101(3), pp.570-578. 
58. Brasky, T.M. et al. Associations of Dietary Long-Chain omega-3 Polyunsaturated 
Fatty Acids and Fish Consumption With Endometrial Cancer Risk in the Black 
Women's Health Study. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2016, 183(3), 
pp.199-209. 
59. Farvid, M.S. et al. Adolescent and Early Adulthood Dietary Carbohydrate 
Quantity and Quality in Relation to Breast Cancer Risk. Cancer Epidemiology, 
Biomarkers & Prevention. 2015, 24(7), pp.1111-1120. 
60. Harris, H.R. et al. An estrogen-associated dietary pattern and breast cancer risk in 
the Swedish Mammography Cohort. International Journal of Cancer. 2015, 
137(9), pp.2149-2154. 
61. Kiyabu, G.Y. et al. Fish, n - 3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and n - 6 polyunsaturated 
fatty acids intake and breast cancer risk: The Japan Public Health Center-based 
prospective study. International Journal of Cancer. 2015, 137(12), pp.2915-2926. 
62. Romieu, I. et al. Alcohol intake and breast cancer in the European prospective 
investigation into cancer and nutrition. International Journal of Cancer. 2015, 
137(8), pp.1921-1930. 
63. Shin, A. et al. Alcohol consumption, body mass index and breast cancer risk by 
hormone receptor status: Women' Lifestyle and Health Study. BMC Cancer. 
2015, 15, p.881. 
64. Emaus, M.J. et al. Vegetable and fruit consumption and the risk of hormone 
receptor-defined breast cancer in the EPIC cohort. American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. 2016, 103(1), pp.168-177. 
65. Farvid, M.S. et al. Fruit and vegetable consumption in adolescence and early 
adulthood and risk of breast cancer: population based cohort study. British 
Medical Journal. 2016, 353, p.i2343. 
66. Farvid, M.S. et al. Lifetime grain consumption and breast cancer risk. Breast 
Cancer Research and Treatment. 2016, 159(2), pp.335-345. 
67. Farvid, M.S. et al. Dietary Fiber Intake in Young Adults and Breast Cancer Risk. 
Pediatrics. 2016, 137(3), p.e20151226. 
68. Gilsing, A.M. et al. Vegetarianism, low meat consumption and the risk of lung, 
postmenopausal breast and prostate cancer in a population-based cohort study. 
European Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2016, 70(6), pp.723-729. 
69. Harris, H.R. et al. Adolescent dietary patterns and premenopausal breast cancer 
incidence. Carcinogenesis. 2016, 37(4), pp.376-384. 
70. Hirko, K.A. et al. Alcohol consumption and risk of breast cancer by molecular 
subtype: Prospective analysis of the nurses' health study after 26 years of follow-
up. International Journal of Cancer. 2016, 138(5), pp.1094-1101. 
71. Inoue-Choi, M. et al. Red and processed meat, nitrite, and heme iron intakes and 
postmenopausal breast cancer risk in the NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study. 
International Journal of Cancer. 2016, 138(7), pp.1609-1618. 
72. Jung, S. et al. Alcohol consumption and breast cancer risk by estrogen receptor 
status: in a pooled analysis of 20 studies. International Journal of Epidemiology. 
2016, 45(3), pp.916-928. 
73. Penniecook-Sawyers, J.A. et al. Vegetarian dietary patterns and the risk of breast 
cancer in a low-risk population. British Journal of Nutrition. 2016, 115(10), 
pp.1790-1797. 
74. Shin, S. et al. Dietary pattern and breast cancer risk in Japanese women: the Japan 
Public Health Center-based Prospective Study (JPHC Study). British Journal of 
Nutrition. 2016, 115(10), pp.1769-1779. 
75. Zhang, R. et al. Rice consumption and cancer incidence in US men and women. 
International Journal of Cancer. 2016, 138(3), pp.555-564. 
76. Ellingjord-Dale, M. et al. Alcohol, Physical Activity, Smoking, and Breast Cancer 
Subtypes in a Large, Nested Case-Control Study from the Norwegian Breast 
Cancer Screening Program. Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention. 
2017, 26(12), pp.1736-1744. 
77. Kim, H.J. et al. Alcohol Consumption and Breast Cancer Risk in Younger Women 
According to Family History of Breast Cancer and Folate Intake. American 
Journal of Epidemiology. 2017, 186(5), pp.524-531. 
78. Kim, J.H. et al. Dietary Factors and Female Breast Cancer Risk: A Prospective 
Cohort Study. Nutrients. 2017, 9(12). 
79. Kojima, R. et al. Dietary patterns and breast cancer risk in a prospective Japanese 
study. Breast Cancer. 2017, 24(1), pp.152-160. 
80. Makarem, N. et al. Carbohydrate nutrition and risk of adiposity-related cancers: 
results from the Framingham Offspring cohort (1991-2013). British Journal of 
Nutrition. 2017, 117(11), pp.1603-1614. 
81. Narita, S. et al. Dietary fiber intake and risk of breast cancer defined by estrogen 
and progesterone receptor status: the Japan Public Health Center-based 
Prospective Study. Cancer Causes & Control. 2017, 28(6), pp.569-578. 
82. van den Brandt, P.A. and Schulpen, M. Mediterranean diet adherence and risk of 
postmenopausal breast cancer: results of a cohort study and meta-analysis. 
International Journal of Cancer. 2017, 140(10), pp.2220-2231. 
83. Diallo, A. et al. Red and processed meat intake and cancer risk: Results from the 
prospective NutriNet-Sante cohort study. International Journal of Cancer. 2018, 
142(2), pp.230-237. 
84. Fiolet, T. et al. Consumption of ultra-processed foods and cancer risk: results from 
NutriNet-Sante prospective cohort. British Medical Journal. 2018, 360, p.k322. 
85. Schisterman, E.F. et al. Overadjustment bias and unnecessary adjustment in 
epidemiologic studies. Epidemiology (Cambridge, Mass.). 2009, 20(4), pp.488-
86. de Winter, J.C.F. and Dodou, D. Common Factor Analysis versus Principal 
Component Analysis: A Comparison of Loadings by Means of Simulations. 
Communications in Statistics - Simulation and Computation. 2016, 45(1), pp.299-
87. Baglia, M.L. et al. The association of soy food consumption with the risk of 
subtype of breast cancers defined by hormone receptor and HER2 status. 
International Journal of Cancer. 2016, 139(4), pp.742-748. 
88. Office for National Statistics. Statistical bulletin: Adult smoking habits in Great 
Britain: 2014. 2016. Available from: 
http://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/hea
lthandlifeexpectancies/bulletins/adultsmokinghabitsingreatbritain/2014 
[accessed October 2018] 
89. Sarri, G. et al. Diagnosis and management of menopause: summary of NICE 
guidance. British Medical Journal. 2015, 351, pp.1-6. 
90. Schulze, M.B. et al. Food based dietary patterns and chronic disease prevention. 
British Medial Journal. 2018, 361, pp.1-6. 
91. Glasser, S.P. Essentials of clinical research. Berlin: Springer, 2014.
Chapter 3  
Comparison between diets of pre- and post-menopausal women 
from the UK Womens Cohort Study 
YASHVEE DUNNERAM1*, DARREN C. GREENWOOD2, JANET E. CADE1 
1 Nutritional Epidemiology Group, School of Food Science & Nutrition, University of 
Leeds, Leeds, UK 
2 Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK 
This Chapter is a manuscript in preparation for submission in a scientific journal. 
Abstract 
Background: It is hypothesised that diet varies considerably according to menopausal 
status (pre or post). However, there is limited evidence describing the diet variability by 
menopausal status. This study thus aims to describe the diet of women in the UK Women's 
Cohort Study (UKWCS) at baseline by menopausal status.  
Methods: Diet was measured using a 217-item food frequency questionnaire. Individual 
foods were collapsed into 64 food groups (g/day) according to culinary use, fat and fibre 
content. Overall dietary quality was assessed using the WHO Healthy Diet Index (HDI). 
Women were classified as premenopausal (1 menstrual period/year, using pills, 
pregnant; n=14,645) or naturally postmenopausal (no menstrual period during the last 12 
months; n=17,813). Using data from 32,458 women, regression models adjusted for 
potential confounders were used to differentiate diet by menopausal status.  
Results: In the adjusted model, postmenopausal women had higher intakes of protein, 
and fibre and lower intakes of saturated, polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fats than 
premenopausal women which were statistically significant. Postmenopausal women had 
a significantly higher consumption of low-fat dairy products, fish, meat, fruits, 
vegetables, soft drinks, and low-calorie soft drinks. Postmenopausal women also had 
significantly lower intakes of tea, alcohol, biscuits, refined pasta/rice compared to 
premenopausal women. Moreover, postmenopausal women had a higher HDI in 
comparison to premenopausal women (difference in mean=0.11, 99% CI: 0.02 to 0.20) 
after adjusting for age, total energy intake, smoking status, alcohol consumption, physical 
activity and social class. 
Conclusion: These findings suggest that the diet of premenopausal women differs from 
that of postmenopausal women taking into account age and total energy intake. These 
differences suggest that pre-menopausal women may need to improve the quality of the 
diet, particularly regarding fruit and vegetable intake, to support maintenance of longer 
term health. 
3.1 Introduction 
Natural menopause is defined as the permanent cessation of menstruation as a 
result of ovarian ageing and signals the end of the reproductive potential. Several dynamic 
biological changes take place in the womans body during the menopausal transition 
which can predict future health status [1]. Most commonly, intermediate effects of the 
menopausal transition which include a range of symptoms such as hot flushes, night 
sweats, mood changes, sleep disturbances, urogenital problems and sexual dysfunction 
affect several menopausal women [2, 3]. Further impacting the quality of life, menopause, 
in particular, the timing of menopause also contributes to later health outcomes in the 
postmenopausal years [4]. For instance, a later onset of menopause increases the risk of 
hormone-related cancers such as ovarian, endometrial and breast cancers. On the other 
hand, an earlier menopause is associated with a higher risk of cardiovascular diseases, 
osteoporosis and all-cause mortality [5].  
The menopause transition period could thus be an opportunity for lifestyle 
changes among menopausal women. According to a 12-month intervention study which 
included 76 women, weight loss through a fat-reduced diet and a guided exercise program 
contributed to improved blood pressure, levels of triglycerides, total cholesterol, HDL-
cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, and glucose [6]. As previously evidenced, factors such as 
diet, physical inactivity [6], smoking [7] and alcohol consumption [8, 9] could increase 
the risk of certain health outcomes among postmenopausal women. Diet, in particular, 
may delay the appearance of risk factors and consequently predict a better overall health 
in this population group [6]. Having a healthy diet during the premenopausal years is 
equally crucial. As demonstrated in the Nurses Health Study II which followed 88,804 
women for 20 years, higher intake of animal fat during the premenopausal years was 
positively associated with incident breast cancer risk [10].  
Therefore, this study aims to explore diet by menopausal status (pre vs post) 
among women who have experienced a natural menopause in the UK Womens Cohort 
Study (UKWCS).  
3.2 Methods 
3.2.1 Data collection  
The UKWCS is a 20-year prospective study which aims to explore links between 
diet and chronic diseases, in particular, cancer [11, 12]. This study consists of 35,372 
women (a 58% response rate) aged between 35 to 69 years, with a mean age of 52.3y 
(SD=9.4) at recruitment. The recruited participants were mainly from England, Scotland 
and Wales [13, 14]. Baseline data were collected between the years 1995 and 1998 via a 
postal questionnaire. Dietary assessment involved a detailed 217-item food frequency 
questionnaire (FFQ) which was derived from the FFQ based on the European Prospective 
Investigation into Cancer (EPIC) study [11, 12, 15]. Phase 2 data were collected on 
average 4 years later, between the years 1999 and 2002. Participants were required to 
complete a 4-day food diary as well as a 1-day activity and lifestyle questionnaire [12]. 
The UKWCS design allows the study of a range of dietary habits which is possible due 
to the large number of vegetarian participants (28% of the whole sample) as compared to 
other UK cohort studies [16-18].  
For this cross-sectional analysis, the baseline dataset of the UKWCS was used 
whereby the mean age of the women was 48.8y (SD=5.8). The women were classified as 
being either premenopausal or postmenopausal (defined as no period in the last 12 
months). To ensure that only participants who have had a natural menopause were 
considered as post-menopausal, the inclusion criteria were as follow: no period in the last 
12 months; no hysterectomy; no bilateral oophorectomy; and excluded participants who 
were currently using pills and HRT. Women 40 and 65years were considered to ensure 
that women who may have no menstruation due to other factors such as chemotherapy 
were excluded from the analysis. Women who were currently pregnant were excluded 
from the overall study. A sample of 32,458 participants was thus included for the final 
analyses. 
3.2.2 Ethical approval 
Ethical approval was obtained from 174 local ethics committees for this study 
[19]. Participants had consented to the use of information gathered at baseline, future 
phases, and cancer registries for research purposes provided that confidentiality was 
maintained. Moreover, the National Research Ethics Committee for Yorkshire and the 
Humber, Leeds East has recently taken on responsibility for the ongoing cohort [12]. 
3.2.3 Dietary assessment 
Dietary assessment for the UKWCS involved a detailed 217-item food frequency 
questionnaire (FFQ) [12]. The 217 food items had 10 pre-coded classifications for the 
consumption frequency of the food items, ranging from never to 6 or more times per 
day [11]. Participants were asked to tick in the box to indicate the frequency of 
consumption for each food over the last 12 months. Any single missing items were 
assumed to have not been consumed [14].   
In this study, the individual food items were initially collapsed into 64 food groups 
as shown in Table 3.1. These groupings were created based on the culinary uses, dietary 
fibre content or fat content. For example, starchy food items such as breads and breakfast 
cereals were grouped based on their fibre content, dairy products based on their fat 
content while fruits and vegetables were combined based on their culinary uses. Some 
individual food items were considered as it was inapt to integrate them into a specific 
food group (e.g., sauces, offal, oily fish, shellfish, bananas, tea, herbal tea, wines). 
Furthermore, all the vegetables were grouped under total vegetables, all fruits under total 
fruits and alcoholic drinks under alcohol. The individual food items were collapsed into 
food groups as it is unlikely that the participants consumed all the listed food items in the 
FFQ regularly but rather they may be likely to consume one or two food items from each 
food groups. 
3.2.3.1 Nutrient intake 
At baseline, the mean daily intake of vitamins such as vitamins C (mg), B1 (mg), 
B2 (mg), B6 (mg), B12 (g), A (g), D (g) and E (mg) as well as minerals such as folate 
(g), calcium (mg), non-haem iron (mg) and zinc (mg) had been previously estimated 
from the list of foods in the FFQ (described in 3.2.3) using SPSS syntax (SPSS Inc, 
Chicago, IL), which included nutrient values based on The Royal Society of Chemistry 
Food tables (version 5) [20]. Intake of haem iron was estimated using the percentage of 
haem iron present in meats, fish, and poultry available from the literature [21].
Table 3.1 Grouping of food items 
Food Group  Food Items 
Wholegrain products  Crispbread,  Brown bread & rolls,  Wholemeal 
bread & rolls ,  
Refined grain 
products 
 White bread & rolls, Chapattis, Nan, paratha, 
Papadums, Tortillas, Pitta Bread, Cream crackers, 
cheese biscuits 
Low fibre breakfast 
cereals 
 Cream crackers, cheese biscuits, Sugar coated 
cereals, Non-sugar coated cereals 
High fibre breakfast 
cereals 
 Porridge, Readybrek , Muesli, All bran, bran flakes, 
Weetabix, shredded wheat 
Plain Potatoes  Potatoes, Jacket potato 
Potatoes with added 
 Chips, Roast potatoes, Potato salad 
Refined pasta and 
 White pasta, Macaroni cheese, White rice 
Wholegrain pasta and 
 Wholemeal pasta, Brown rice, Wild rice 
Low fat dairy 
products 
 Low fat yoghurt, Diet yoghurt, Dairy desserts, 
Low-fat cheese, Cottage cheese, Milk puddings, 
Half fat milk, Fat free milk 
High fat dairy 
products 
 Thick & creamy yoghurt, Greek yoghurt, Fromage 
frais/Crme fraiche, Single/sour cream, 
Double/clotted cream, Ice cream, Cheese, Cheese 
and onion pastie, Whole milk, Channel island milk, 
Dried milk 
Butter and hard 
margarine 
 Butter,  Block margarine 
Margarine  Other soft margarine, Polyunsaturated margarine, 
Monounsaturated margarine 
Low fat spreads  Low fat spread, Very low fat spread 
High fat dressing  Mayonnaise, French type dressing 
Low fat dressing  Low calorie salad cream 
Soybean products  Soya cheese,  Soya yoghurt, Soy milk 
Textured vegetable 
protein 
 Textured vegetable protein 
Pulses  Lentils, dals, Chick peas, chanas, Hummus, Baked 
beans, Mung beans & red kidney beans, Black eyed 
beans, Butter beans/broad beans 
Eggs/eggs dishes  Boiled/poached egg, Omelette, scrambled egg, 
Fried egg, Quiche 
Fish and fish dishes  Fish fingers/cakes, Fried fish in batter, White fish, 
Fish pie/fish lasagne, Fish roe 
Oily fish  Oily fish 
Shellfish  Shellfish 
Red meat  Beef, Beef stew, Pork, Pork stew/casserole, Lamb, 
Lamb stew/casserole, Meat  
lasagne/moussaka/ravioli 
Poultry  Chicken/turkey, Breadcrumbed, Chicken/turkey in 
creamy sauce, curry 
Processed meat  Bacon, Beefburger/hamburger, Ham, Corned beef, 
Sausages, Meat pizza, Pies/pasties/sausage rolls, 
Liver pate/sausage, salami 
Offal  Offal 
Total meat  Read meat, poultry, processed meat, offal 
Table 3.1 Continued 
Total vegetables Vegetable dishes Quorn, Vegetarian chilli, Mixed bean casserole, 
Stir-fry vegetables, Vegetablelasagne/ moussaka/ 
ravioli, Vegetable pate, Vegetable pizza 
Allium Leeks, Garlic 
Fresh legumes Peas, mushy peas, mange-tout, Green beans 
Mediterranean 
vegetables 
Sweetcorn, Courgettes, Olive, Aubergine, 
okra/ladies finger, Peppers 
Salad vegetables Avocado, Lettuce, Cucumber, Celery, Coleslaw, 
Low calorie coleslaw 
Cruciferous 
vegetables 
Broccoli, spring greens, kale, Cabbage, 
Cauliflower, Watercress, mustard & cress, Brussel 
sprouts 
Tomatoes Tomatoes  raw/canned/sauce 
Mushrooms Mushrooms 
Roots and tubers Carrots, Parsnips, Turnip, Swedes, Beetroot 
Total fruits Stone fruits Peaches, Plum, Mangoes, Nectarines, Apricots 
Deep orange/yellow 
fruits 
Pineapple, Papaya, Melon 
Grapes Grapes 
Citrus family fruits Oranges, satsumas, grapefruit 
Rhubarb Rhubarb 
Berries Strawberries, Raspberries, Red currants/black 
currants, Kiwi fruit 
Bananas Bananas 
Pomes Apples, Pears 
Dried Fruits Dates, Figs, Prunes, Mixed dried fruits, Currants, 
raisins, sultanas 
Sauces  Sauces 
Pickles/chutneys  Tomato ketchup, Pickles/chutney/pesto sauce 
Soups  Packet soups, Other-vegetable soups, Other-Meat 
soups, Low calorie soups 
Confectionery & 
spreads 
 Fruit bars, Chocolate snack bars, Mini chocolate 
snack bars, Boiled sweets, toffees, mints, 
Chocolate/chocolate & nut spread, Jam/marmalade, 
Honey 
Nuts & Seeds  Peanuts/Pistachio nuts, Cashew nuts & almonds, 
Pecan nuts/ Walnuts, Sunflower seeds/ sesame 
seeds, Nut Pt, Peanut butter, Peanuts/pistachio 
nuts, Mixed nuts and raisins 
Savoury snacks  Crisps, Other fried snacks, Low fat or baked 
snacks, Bombay mix 
Biscuits  Plain biscuits, Chocolate biscuits, Sandwich/cream 
biscuits 
Cakes  Fruitcake, Sponge cake 
Pastries and Puddings  Buns/pastries, Scones/pancakes/muffins/crumpets, 
Fruit pies, Sponge puddings 
Tea  Tea 
Herbal tea  Herbal tea 
Coffee  Coffee  instant/ground, Coffee  decaffeinated 
Other hot beverages  Cocoa, Horlicks, Ovaltine, Low calorie hot 
chocolate 
Juices  Orange juice, Other  pure juices 
Soft drinks  Fruit squash, Fizzy soft drinks 
Low calorie/diet soft 
drinks 
 Low calorie/diet soft drinks 
Alcohol  Wines 
Beer, Cider 
Port, sherry, liqueurs 
Spirits 
3.2.3.2 Dietary quality  
Dietary quality of pre and post-menopausal women were measured using the 
World Health Organisation (WHO) healthy diet indicator (HDI) scores which are based 
on the adherence of the WHO nutrition guidelines for the prevention of chronic diseases 
[22]. This dietary quality index has previously been used to assess the dietary quality of 
women in relation to their risk of breast cancer in the UKWCS, whereby the scoring 
method has been explicitly elaborated [23]. The HDI consist of 10 components: total fat, 
saturated fatty acids, polyunsaturated fatty acids, total carbohydrates, non-milk extrinsic 
sugars, non-starch polysaccharides, fruit and vegetables, protein, cholesterol, and salt 
[23]. A score of 1 was assigned if the recommended range for a component was met and 
a score of 0 was given if otherwise which tallied to a maximum score of 10 reflecting that 
the dietary recommendations/guidelines was met and a minimum score of 0 was assigned 
if the recommendations are not met (Table 3.2). 
Table 3.2 Derivation of WHO Healthy Diet index [23] 
 Indicator value 
Total fat (% total E) 15-30 <15 or >30 
Saturated fatty acids (% total E) 0-10 >10 
Polyunsaturated fatty acids (% total E) 6-10 <6 or >10 
Total carbohydrate (% total E) 55-75 <55 or >75 
Non-milk extrinsic sugars (% total E) 0-10 >10 
Non-starch polysaccharides (g) >20 <20 
Fruit and vegetables (g) 400 <400 
Protein (% total E) 10-15 <10 or >15 
Cholesterol (g) <300 300 
Salt (g) <5 5 
3.2.4 Statistical analysis 
Descriptive statistics were used to explore the socio-demographic and 
reproductive history of the study population. Linear regression models were used to 
determine the relationships between menopausal status and the overall dietary quality, 
the food groups as well as nutrient intakes, first adjusting for  age (years) and total energy 
intake (kcal/day) as a basic model (model 1). Total energy intake was included in the 
model in order to control for under and over-reporters. A directed acyclic graph (DAG) 
with menopausal status as the exposure (binary) and diet (continuous) as the outcome was 
used to establish the confounders (Figure 3.1). According to the minimally sufficient set 
of adjustments, a full model (model 2) adjusting for the confounders: smoking status 
(current vs not current smoker), alcohol consumption (g/day), physical activity (MET-
hours/week), and social class (routine and manual, intermediate, professional and 
managerial) in addition to model 1 was used. Ethnicity was also identified as a potential 
confounder, however, as the majority of participants in the UKWCS are White, ethnicity 
was not included in the model. For the associations between menopausal status and 
nutrient intakes, total energy intake was adjusted for the non-energy-containing nutrients 
such as the vitamins and minerals. Women were excluded if they had extremely high 
(>6000kcal/day) or low (<500kcal/day) energy intake) and energy from other 
macronutrients was adjusted for specific macronutrients. Assumptions for linear 
regression were checked by plotting the residuals against fitted values which showed a 
constant variance and a histogram demonstrated a normal distribution of the residuals. 
Stata version 15 was used for the analyses. A p value less than 0.01 was considered as 
statistically significant, to take account of multiple testing. 
Figure 3.1 Directed Acyclic Graph to determine potential confounders 
Menopausal 
status
Smoking
Alcohol 
consumptionTotal energy 
intake
Physical activity
Social class Food 
environment
Ethnicity
3.3 Results 
3.3.1 Characteristics of participants 
Pre-menopausal and post-menopausal women in this study had a mean age of 44.6 
years (n = 14,645) and 59.1 years (n = 17,813) respectively (Table 3.3). The mean BMI 
of pre-menopausal women was at the borderline of the BMI cut-off value for normal 
weight (<25.0 kg/m2) while the mean BMI for post-menopausal women was in the 
overweight category (25.030.0 kg/m2). Compared to postmenopausal women, 
premenopausal women reported physical activity for a longer duration (14.3 mins/day vs 
16.2 mins/day). Alcohol consumption was reportedly higher among premenopausal 
women (9.6 g/day) as compared to postmenopausal women (7.8 g/day). Overall, the 
majority of women in this study never smoked; 11.4% premenopausal and 10.3% 
postmenopausal women reported that they were current smokers. Furthermore, in this 
study population, the majority of women were married, educated and  were mainly from 
the professional and managerial class. 
Table 3.3 Characteristics of participants 
Characteristics (mean/%, 95% CI) 
Premenopausal  
(n=14, 645) 
Postmenopausal  
(n=17, 813) 
Age, years 44.6 (44.6 to 44.7) 59.1 (59.0 to 59.3) 
BMI, kg/m 23.8 (23.8 to 23.9) 25.0 (24.9 to 25.0) 
Total energy intake, kcal 2293 (2281 to 2305) 2294 (2281 to 2306) 
Physical activity, min/day 16.2 (15.7 to 16.6) 14.3 (13.8 to 14.8) 
Alcohol consumption, g/day 9.6 (9.5 to 9.8) 7.8 (7.6 to 7.9) 
Marital status (%)   
Married or living as married 78.1 (77.4 to 78.7) 71.8 (71.1 to 72.4) 
Divorced 9.0 (8.5 to 9.4) 8.6 (8.2 to 9.0) 
Widowed 1.3 (1.2 to 1.5) 11.1 (10.6 to 11.6) 
Single 9.0 (8.6 to 9.5) 6.8 (6.4 to 7.2 ) 
Separated 2.6 (2.4 to 2.9) 1.8 (1.6 to 2.0) 
Education level (%)   
No formal record 7.6 (7.2 to 8.0) 26.0 (25.4 to 26.7) 
O-level 31.7 (30.9 to 32.5) 29.6 (28.9 to 30.3) 
A-level 25.7 (25.0 to 26.4) 23.7 (23.0 to 24.3) 
Degree 35.0 (59.5 to 61.6) 39.5 (38.4 to 40.5) 
Socioeconomic status (%)   
Professional/managerial 68.4 (67.6 to 69.2) 59.2 (58.4 to 59.9) 
Intermediate 23.8 (23.1 to 24.5) 30.5 (29.8 to 31.2) 
Routine and manual 7.8 (7.4 to 8.2) 10.3 (9.9 to 10.8) 
Smoking status (%)   
Current 11.4 (10.9 to 11.9) 10.3 (9.9 to 10.8) 
Former 29.3 (28.5 to 30.0) 31.8 (31.1 to 32.5) 
Never smoked 59.3 (58.5 to 60.1) 57.9 (57.1 to 58.6) 
3.3.2 Association between diet, nutrient intakes and menopausal status 
The differences in food group and nutrient intakes comparing postmenopausal 
women against premenopausal women are shown in Table 3.3 and Table 3.4. After 
adjusting for all the potential confounders [age (years) and total energy intake (kcal/day), 
smoking status (current vs not current smoker), alcohol consumption (g/day), physical 
activity (MET-hours/week), and social class (routine and manual, intermediate, 
professional and managerial)], postmenopausal women had a significantly higher 
consumption of a range of foods including low-fat dairy products, oily fish, shellfish, fish 
and fish dishes, red meat, poultry, offal, total meat, total fruits, total vegetables, juices, 
soft drinks, and low-calorie soft drinks. Postmenopausal women also had significantly 
lower intakes of refined pasta and rice, margarine, high-fat salad dressings, sauces, 
textured vegetable protein, tea, alcohol, and biscuits compared to pre-menopausal 
women.  
Furthermore, postmenopausal women had higher intakes of energy from protein, and 
fibre while lower intakes of saturated, polyunsaturated, and monounsaturated fats  than 
pre-menopausal women which were statistically significant. Postmenopausal women also 
had higher intakes of the following vitamins: C, B2, B6, B12, A and D as well as folate, 
calcium, zinc, and iron. On the other hand, postmenopausal women reported a lower 
intake of vitamin E as compared to pre-menopausal women (Table 3.5).
Table 3.4 Comparison between diet of premenopausal and postmenopausal women 
 Crude model Model 1 Model 2* 
 Post vs pre-menopausal|| Post vs pre-menopausal|| Post vs pre-menopausal|| 
Daily intake of food groups (g) Difference 
in mean 
99% CI Difference 
in mean 
99% CI Difference 
in mean 
99% CI 
Total HDI score (out of 10) -0.24 -0.30 to -0.19  0.06 -0.02 to 0.15  0.11  0.02 to 0.20 
Starchy food sources       
Wholegrain products  2.94  1.02 to 4.85 -2.45 -5.23 to 0.33 -0.90 -3.84 to 2.05 
Refined grain products -5.45 -6.72 to -4.18  0.38 -1.50 to 2.26 -0.86 -2.82 to 1.11 
Low fibre breakfast cereals  0.24 -0.15 to 0.63  0.28 -0.30 to 0.86  0.24 -0.37 to 0.86 
High fibre breakfast cereals  9.77  7.98 to 11.6  0.01 -2.61 to 2.62  0.94 -1.82 to 3.69 
Plain Potatoes  21.0  18.2 to 23.9  4.09 -0.00 to 8.19  3.79 -0.43 to 8.00 
Potatoes with added fat -1.83 -2.30 to -0.95  0.69 -0.59 to 1.96 -0.58 -1.77 to 0.61 
Refined pasta and rice -20.9 -22.6 to -19.3 -3.41 -5.81 to -1.02 -2.71 -5.21 to -0.22 
Wholegrain pasta and rice -8.17 -9.41 to -6.93 -0.26 -2.11 to 1.59  0.44 -1.44 to 2.33 
Protein and fat food sources       
Low fat dairy products  9.17  7.03 to 11.3  7.77  4.63 to 10.9  7.18  3.87 to 10.5 
High fat dairy products  1.61  0.03 to 3.19  2.57  0.32 to 4.81  2.13 -0.17 to 4.44 
Butter and hard margarine  0.68  0.40 to 0.95 -0.36 -0.77 to 0.04 -0.38 -0.81 to 0.06 
Margarine -0.31 -0.57 to -0.56 -0.57 -0.95 to -0.19 -0.47 -0.88 to -0.06 
Low fat spreads -0.10 -0.29 to 0.09  0.05 -0.24 to 0.34  0.00 -0.31 to 0.31 
High fat dressing -0.82 -1.02 to -0.63 -0.56 -0.85 to -0.28 -0.47 -0.78 to -0.17 
Low fat dressing  0.57  0.41 to 0.72  0.28  0.04 to 0.52  0.11 -0.15 to 0.36 
Soybean products -0.15 -0.48 to 0.18 -0.17 -0.68 to 0.33 -0.13 -0.62 to 0.35 
Textured vegetable protein -0.63 -0.72 to -0.54 -0.20 -0.34 to -0.07 -0.22 -0.36 to -0.08 
Pulses   -7.89 -9.07 to -6.71  0.32 -1.36 to 2.00 -0.20 -1.98 to 1.59 
Eggs/eggs dishes  3.08  2.48 to 3.68  0.57 -0.28 to 1.42  0.05 -0.80 to 0.91 
Oily fish  1.54  1.18 to 1.91  0.72  0.17 to 1.26  0.88  0.29 to 1.47 
Shellfish -0.00 -0.15 to 0.14  0.28  0.07 to 0.49  0.26  0.08 to 0.44 
Table 3.4 Continued       
 Crude model Model 1 Model 2* 
 Post vs pre-menopausal|| Post vs pre-menopausal|| Post vs pre-menopausal|| 
Daily intake of food groups (g) Difference 
in mean 
99% CI Difference 
in mean 
99% CI Difference 
in mean 
99% CI 
Fish and fish dishes  6.36  5.56 to 7.16  1.56  0.41 to 2.71  1.27  0.25 to 2.28 
Red meat  10.9  9.70 to 12.2  3.86  2.08 to 5.64  2.73  0.97 to 4.49 
Processed meat  3.15  2.71 to 3.58  1.12  0.48 to 1.76  0.59 -0.06 to 1.24 
Poultry  2.33  1.73 to 2.93  1.55  0.66 to 2.44  1.01  0.08 to 1.93 
Offal  0.92  0.82 to 1.03  0.25  0.09 to 0.40  0.19  0.03 to 0.36 
Total meat  17.3  15.2 to 19.2  6.78  4.05 to 9.51  4.51  1.81 to 7.22 
Fruits       
Stone fruits -0.37 -0.92 to 0.18  0.58 -0.24 to 1.39  0.60 -0.16 to 1.37 
Deep orange & yellow fruits  2.50 1.12 to 3.88  2.61  0.58 to 4.64  2.37  0.37 to 4.36 
Grapes  5.91 4.44 to 7.38  2.57  0.38 to 4.76  2.61  0.36 to 4.85 
Citrus family fruits  4.07 2.51 to 5.63  1.86 -0.46 to 4.18  2.50  0.06 to 4.93 
Rhubarb  3.94 2.93 to 4.94  0.57 -0.91 to 2.05  0.73 -0.79 to 2.25 
Berries  3.18 2.24 to 4.11  1.82  0.44 to 3.20  2.20  0.77 to 3.62 
Bananas  2.19 0.58 to 3.81  0.80 -1.59 to 3.19  1.11 -1.38 to 3.60 
Pomes  7.82 4.93 to 10.7  5.47  1.15 to 9.79  5.44  0.93 to 9.94 
Dried Fruits  2.03 1.40 to 2.67  0.04 -0.87 to 0.95  0.45 -0.46 to 1.36 
Total fruits  31.2  24.2 to 38.3  16.0   6.15 to 25.9  18.2  8.17 to 28.3 
Vegetables       
Vegetable dishes -26.7 -29.0 to -24.3 -3.41 -6.78 to -0.04 -2.61 -5.95 to 0.73 
Allium  0.92  0.53 to 1.30  0.39 -0.18 to 0.96  0.50 -0.10 to 1.10 
Fresh legumes  2.64  1.84 to 3.45  0.81 -0.36 to 1.98  0.81 -0.40 to 2.02 
Mediterranean vegetables -8.71 -9.63 to -7.79 -0.62 -1.95 to 0.71 -0.40 -1.78 to 0.97 
Salad vegetables -0.74 -1.47 to -0.02  0.47 -0.59 to 1.53  0.49 -0.62 to 1.60 
Cruciferous vegetables  15.5  13.5 to 17.5  6.84  3.90 to 9.78  6.87  3.92 to 9.81 
Tomatoes  1.02 -0.20 to 2.25  1.00 -0.82 to 2.82  0.92 -0.99 to 2.83 
Mushrooms -1.33 -1.61 to -1.06  0.10 -0.31 to 0.51  0.19 -0.24 to 0.61 
Table 3.4 Continued     
 Crude model Model 1 Model 2* 
 Post vs pre-menopausal|| Post vs pre-menopausal|| Post vs pre-menopausal|| 
Daily intake of food groups (g) Difference 
in mean 
99% CI Difference 
in mean 
99% CI Difference 
in mean 
99% CI 
Roots and tubers  7.23  6.10 to 8.37  3.65  2.01 to 5.28  3.63  1.92 to 5.34 
Total vegetables  4.58  0.98 to 10.1  11.7  4.14 to 19.3  13.9  6.01 to 21.7 
Other food groups       
Sauces -1.00 -1.29 to -0.72 -0.47 -0.88 to -0.05 -0.49 -0.92 to -0.06 
Pickles/ chutneys -0.87 -1.12 to -0.61  0.08 -0.29 to 0.46 -0.04 -0.43 to 0.35 
Soups  11.9  10.1 to 13.6  2.07 -0.44 to 4.58  1.92 -0.31 to 4.14 
Confectionary & spreads -1.26 -2.52 to 0.00 -0.92 -2.62 to 0.79 -0.67 -2.49 to 1.16 
Nuts & Seeds -1.27 -1.77 to -0.77 -0.82 -1.54 to -0.10 -0.63 -1.33 to 0.08 
Savoury snacks -2.82 -3.07 to -2.58 -0.35 -0.71 to 0.00 -0.47 -0.85 to -0.09 
Drinks and beverages       
Tea  30.3  15.6 to 45.0 -28.7 -50.88 to -6.52 -32.3 -56.3 to -8.34 
Herbal tea -26.2 -32.9 to -19.6  7.66 -2.38 to 17.7  9.60 -1.24 to 20.4 
Coffee -12.2 -22.3 to -2.19  8.47 -6.76 to 23.7  3.18 -13.3 to 19.6 
Other hot beverages  1.10  0.68 to 1.52  0.72  0.09 to 1.34  0.60 -0.05 to 1.25 
Juices  1.55 -2.04 to 5.13  6.06  0.75 to 11.4  7.47  1.78 to 13.2 
Soft drinks -0.56 -2.53 to 1.41  7.68  4.72 to 10.6  6.95  3.89 to 10.0 
Low calorie/diet soft drinks -10.2  -13.0 to -7.39  11.4  7.10 to 15.6  8.43  3.93 to 12.9 
Alcohol -1.88 -2.17 to -1.58 -0.59 -1.03 to -0.14 -0.57 -1.05 to -0.10 
Biscuits -0.14 -0.57 to 0.30 -0.91 -1.54 to -0.29 -1.18 -1.84 to -0.51 
Cakes  2.90  2.43 to 3.37 -0.08 -0.74 to 0.58 -0.13 -0.80 to 0.54 
Pastries and Puddings  1.29  0.47 to 2.11 -0.76 -1.89 to 0.38 -0.85 -1.96 to 0.27 
||Pre-menopausal as reference group; Model adjusted for age and total energy; *Model adjusted for model 1 in addition to smoking status, alcohol consumption, physical activity, and 
social class; Not adjusted for alcohol consumption
Table 3.5 Comparison of nutrient intakes by menopausal status 
 Unadjusted model Model 1 Model 2 
 Post vs pre-menopausal|| Post vs pre-menopausal|| Post vs pre-menopausal|| 
Nutrients Difference in nutrient intake 99% CI 
Difference in 
nutrient intake 99% CI 
Difference in 
nutrient intake 99% CI 
Fibre (g)  0.45  0.13 to 0.76  0.30 -0.03 to 0.63  0.49  0.14 to 0.84 
% energy from protein  0.85  0.77 to 0.93  0.03  0.00 to 0.07  0.04  0.00 to 0.08 
% energy from carbohydrate  0.08 -0.10 to 0.25  0.01 -0.03 to 0.04  0.02 -0.02 to 0.05 
% energy from fat -0.81 -0.97 to -0.64 -0.01 -0.04 to 0.03  0.00 -0.04 to 0.04 
Saturated fat (g)  0.02 -0.40 to 0.43 -0.66 -1.05 to -0.28 -0.76 -1.17 to -0.36 
Polyunsaturated fat (g) -1.10 -1.32 to -0.88 -0.39 -0.60 to -0.18 -0.36 -0.57 to -0.14 
Monounsaturated fat (g) -0.79 -1.15 to -0.43 -0.71 -0.99 to -0.44 -0.73 -1.01 to -0.45 
Vitamin C (mg)  10.0 7.34 to 12.7  8.67  5.22 to 12.1  9.90  6.35 to 13.4 
Vitamin B1 (mg) -0.35 -0.43 to -0.28  0.01 -0.10 to 0.12  0.03 -0.08 to 0.15 
Vitamin B2 (mg)  0.14 0.11 to 0.16  0.05  0.02 to 0.07  0.04  0.01 to 0.07 
Vitamin B6 (mg)  0.14 0.11 to 0.17  0.07  0.04 to 0.09  0.07  0.04 to 0.09 
Vitamin B12 (g)  1.02  0.92 to 1.11  0.35  0.23 to 0.48  0.29  0.16 to 0.41 
Folate (g)  15.5  11.3 to 19.8  7.56  3.43 to 11.7  8.29  3.95 to 12.6 
Vitamin A (g)  153.7  136.8 to 171.5  37.7  15.5 to 60.0  34.9  11.4 to 58.4 
Vitamin D (g)  0.35  0.30 to 0.40  0.08  0.02 to 0.15  0.08  0.01 to 0.15 
Vitamin E (mg)  10.5  10.3 to 10.8 -0.29 -0.42 to -0.15 -0.21 -0.35 to -0.07 
Calcium (mg)  21.6  9.62 to 33.6  14.5  3.22 to 25.8  14.1  2.09 to 26.0 
Iron (mg)  0.48  0.26 to 0.71  0.18 -0.06 to 0.43  0.33  0.07 to 0.59 
Zinc (mg)  0.61  0.49 to 0.73  0.20  0.10 to 0.30  0.18  0.08 to 0.27 
Haem iron (mg)  0.18  0.16 to 0.19  0.07  0.04 to 0.09  0.05  0.02 to 0.07 
Non-haem iron (mg)  0.52  0.29 to 0.75  0.15 -0.11 to 0.40  0.32  0.05 to 0.59 
|| Pre-menopausal as reference group; Model adjusted for age and total energy; *Model adjusted for model 1 in addition to smoking status, alcohol consumption, physical activity, and 
social class
3.3.3 WHO Healthy Diet Index in relation to menopausal status 
Table 3.6 demonstrates the percentage of women who met the recommended 
guidelines for the individual HDI components. Overall, a high number of women met the 
recommended guidelines for only 3 components: non-starch polysaccharides, fruit and 
vegetables and cholesterol. Interestingly, when comparing the component scores by 
menopausal status, a higher number of premenopausal women consumed the 
recommended percentage of energy intake from polyunsaturated fatty acids (45.5% vs 
57.0%), protein (33.0% vs 46.3%) and cholesterol intake (68.8% vs 78.5%) as compared 
to postmenopausal women. Postmenopausal women were more likely to meet the 
recommended guidelines for the percentage of energy from total fat in comparison to 
premenopausal women (31.2% vs 25.2%). Furthermore, the association between 
menopausal status and the WHO HDI score is presented in Table 3.4. According to the 
crude model, postmenopausal women had a lower dietary quality score as compared to 
premenopausal women (difference in mean=-0.24, 99% CI: -0.30 to -0.19). However 
after adjusting for age and total energy intake (model 1), postmenopausal women 
demonstrated a higher dietary quality score as compared to premenopausal women. 
Additionally, after adjusting for all the potential confounders (model 2), a similar 
association was found (difference in mean=0.11, 99% CI: 0.02 to 0.20). 
Table 3.6 HDI component scores (%) by menopausal status 
 % cohort meeting guideline 
 Pre-menopausal Post-menopausal Total 
Total fat (% total E) 25.2 31.2 28.5 
Saturated fatty acids (% total E) 33.4 35.0 34.3 
Polyunsaturated fatty acids (% total E) 57.0 45.5 50.7 
Total carbohydrate (% total E) 24.3 26.5 25.5 
Non-milk extrinsic sugars (% total E) 23.8 21.2 22.4 
Non-starch polysaccharides (g) 67.1 68.2 67.7 
Fruit and vegetables (g) 73.2 76.5 75.0 
Protein (% total E) 46.3 33.0 39.0 
Cholesterol (g) 78.5 68.8 73.2 
Salt (g) 11.9 11.2 11.5 
3.4 Discussion 
3.4.1 Main findings 
Findings from this study demonstrated that postmenopausal women had a slightly 
higher HDI score as compared to premenopausal women. In particular, postmenopausal 
women had a significantly higher consumption of a healthier range of food items (e.g., 
fruits, vegetables, low-fat salad dressings, and fish) compared to premenopausal women 
accounting for the high fibre intake observed among postmenopausal women. In addition, 
postmenopausal women had a higher intake of the energy from protein a lower intake of 
fat (saturated, polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fats). Postmenopausal women also 
had higher intakes of vitamins C, B2, B6, B12, A and D as well as folate, calcium, zinc, 
and iron. The higher intake of fruits and vegetables by postmenopausal women (76.5% 
meeting the recommended guidelines) could explain the higher intake of the water soluble 
and fat soluble vitamins. Similarly, previous studies have demonstrated that compared to 
younger adults, older adults have more servings of fruits and vegetables [24, 25]. In 
particular, older women have been found to be more health conscious [26]. These findings 
suggest that in general postmenopausal women have a healthier dietary pattern compared 
to premenopausal women.  
3.4.2 Comparison with previous studies  
Comparisons with other studies are limited, as no studies have investigated the 
differences between the diets of pre- and post-menopausal women. The results of this 
study are in line with a prospective cohort study comparing the dietary pattern of young 
(25-30 years) and middle-aged women (50-55 years). Mishra et al. [27] reported that 
middle-aged women scored higher on cooked vegetables, fruit, reduced fat dairy and 
high-fat and sugar food patterns while they had a lower score on the Mediterranean-style 
and processed meat, meat and takeaway patterns. Furthermore, the comparison between 
dietary variety score (DVS) of young and older adults, showed that older adults had a 
higher DVS associated with higher vitamin C intake and lower consumption of saturated 
fats [28]. According to a review, the percentage of calories from total fat was found to 
decrease over time while percentage calories from protein was relatively stable (15% to 
16%) and that from carbohydrates increased (38.4% to 44.5%) in the Baltimore 
Longitudinal Study of Aging study whereby nutrient intake of the study population was 
evaluated over three time point [26]. In line with our findings, results from the first phase 
of NHANES III study (19881991) demonstrated that even though the percentage of 
calories from fat dropped with age, the proportion of calories from protein was likely to 
be higher among older adults (>60y) than that of the younger age group [29]. In a cross-
sectional study including both Spanish men and women aged 25-74 years, the authors 
likewise reported that intake of nutrients such as vitamin B1, vitamin B12, vitamin C, 
vitamin E, folate, potassium, iron, magnesium, copper, as well as dietary fibre intake and 
healthy dietary habits (determined using a composite dietary score) were positively 
associated with age [30]. Additionally in a review study, Ruxton and Derbyshire [31] 
suggested that women in the age range of 5064 years had a superior dietary quality as 
compared to women in other life phases, in particular, they consumed higher amount of 
fruit and vegetables, oily fish, fibre, and a lower amount of salt and alcohol which are in 
agreement with our study findings. 
Interestingly, postmenopausal women were also found to have a higher 
consumption of meat, low- and high-fat dairy products as well as soft drinks and low-
calorie soft drinks in comparison to premenopausal women. On the other hand, Bezerra 
et al. [32] reported that younger adults had a higher consumption of these food groups as 
compared to older adults. However, it must be noted that these results included food 
intake of men as well. Our findings showed that postmenopausal women had a traditional 
food pattern with higher intakes of fruits, vegetables, meat, and dairy products. This can 
be supported by the fact that views and perceptions associated with food culture, 
traditions and eating habits are established during early life and do not change to any great 
extent throughout life [33]. For instance, according to an intervention study, elderly 
Swedish participants requested traditional meals consisting of fish, meat, and vegetables 
[33]. 
3.4.3 Strengths and limitations 
This is also to our knowledge the first study exploring the differences in the diet 
of pre- and post-menopausal women. Previously studies have mainly focused on the diet 
of women across individual life stages rather than comparing them [34, 35]. Others 
studies as reported in a systematic review by Wakimoto and Block [26], followed women 
from baseline until a specific period of time and demonstrated dietary changes over the 
course of time. However, these studies did not look at diet in relation to menopausal 
status.  
Other strengths of this study include the large sample of women from the different 
parts of the UK, as well as the use of a validated FFQ designed for this study population. 
The 217-item FFQ had been previously validated on a sub-sample of 303 cohort subjects 
against a 4-day food diary as well as fasting blood measures of specific nutrients [12].The 
FFQ was additionally adapted for the high number of vegetarians included in the cohort 
[12]. Moreover in this study, 64 food group and nutrient intakes were explored in relation 
to menopausal status. Dietary quality of pre- and post-menopausal women was also 
explored using the WHO HDI. A major advantage of the HDI is that as compared to other 
dietary quality indices, the HDI is appropriate for worldwide use and can be adapted for 
different cultures [36, 37]. 
Furthermore, a DAG was used to determine potential confounders. The DAG is 
based on a theoretical framework constructed using theoretical evidence to identify 
minimal sets of variables to be included in a statistical model to eliminate confounding 
bias as compared to other methods of identifying confounders are based on p-values [38]. 
Adjusting for potential confounders is to prevent biased estimates of exposure. Inclusion 
of variables that are associated with menopausal status (exposure), but unrelated to diet 
(outcome), can also lead to biased estimates as well as increase the variance when 
included in the statistical model [38]. Therefore, the use of the DAG helps to avoid under 
and over-adjustment, thus increasing the validity of our study. Yet, there might be 
possibility of residual confounding due to factors not measured in the study (e.g. food 
environment) which could lead to potential bias. The DAG can also be used to identify 
effect modifiers, that is, one which influences the magnitude of the association between 
menopausal status and diet. For example in this study, BMI could modify this association. 
However, this was not explored in this study.  
Limitations of this study should also be acknowledged. Random measurement 
errors may be present which could mask the true relationships between menopausal status 
and diet [39]. For instance, there are several weaknesses of using FFQs for dietary 
assessment such as measurement errors due to unavailable foods in the list and 
imprecisions in consumption frequency and portion size estimations [40]. There is also a 
tendency to under and over-estimate consumption of certain food like fruits and vegetable 
intake [41]. Yet the use of an FFQ allows a better picture of diet over a long period of 
time as compared to other dietary assessment tools such as the 24-h recall and food diaries 
which record diet over a shorter period of time. The use of the FFQ is also an inexpensive 
method to assess diet of the thousands of women in the UKWCS and causes lower subject 
burden than the 24-h recall [40]. Some degree of random error could also have been 
included in the definition of menopausal status as this was determined using self-reported 
questions on the number of menstrual cycles in the last 12 months, which could be prone 
to recall bias and thus lead to potential misclassification of the menopausal status. 
Furthermore, systematic measurement error could be present as recruitment of 
participants for the UKWCS was based on a volunteer basis from a World Cancer 
Research Fund mailing list of previous questionnaire participants, which could to some 
extent be prone to volunteer bias. Yet, an advantage of the UKWCS is that a wide range 
of dietary components have been explored which ensures adequate power and also 
reduces the effects of measurement error because of the number of dietary exposures 
considered for this study [42, 43].  
Another weakness of this study is the cross-sectional nature of the study, 
suggesting that the observed relationships cannot imply causation. However, given that 
the findings from this study are consistent with previous longitudinal studies, shows the 
reliability of the study results. A better alternative to investigate the relationships between 
menopausal status and diet would have been to follow premenopausal women until they 
reach menopause and explore their dietary changes over that particular time frame.  
3.4.4 Public health implications 
It is well known that a healthy diet, in terms of adequate fibre, polyunsaturated 
fats, micronutrients intakes are primordial for women at all stages to maintain good health 
and to prevent future adverse health outcomes [31]. For instance, menopause causes 
redistribution of adipose tissue to the central area, increasing the risk of central obesity 
among postmenopausal women. Endocrine changes occurring during menopause also put 
women at a higher risk of hypertension [44], type II diabetes [45], cardiovascular diseases 
[46] and osteoporosis [47]. Findings from this study suggest that the diet of 
premenopausal women differs from that of postmenopausal women taking into account a 
range of potential confounders. Some of the differences observed may be due to an age 
cohort effect, but may also reflect improved adherence to dietary guidelines in 
postmenopausal women.  Thus our findings suggest that pre-menopausal women may 
need to improve the quality of the diet, particularly regarding fruits, vegetables and 
micronutrient intakes, to support maintenance of longer term health.
References 
1. Sherman, S. Defining the menopausal transition. The American Journal of 
Medicine. 2005, 118(12), pp.3-7. 
2. Grady, D. Management of Menopausal Symptoms. New England Journal of 
Medicine. 2006, 355(22), pp.2338-2347. 
3. Santoro, N. et al. Menopausal Symptoms and Their Management. Endocrinology 
and Metabolism Clinics of North America. 2015, 44(3), pp.497-515. 
4. Gold, E.B. The timing of the age at which natural menopause occurs. Obstetrics 
and Gynecology Clinics of North America. 2011, 38(3), pp.425-440. 
5. Gold, E.B. et al. Factors associated with age at natural menopause in a multiethnic 
sample of midlife women. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2001, 153(9), 
pp.865-874. 
6. Deibert, P. et al. Effect of a weight loss intervention on anthropometric measures 
and metabolic risk factors in pre- versus postmenopausal women. Nutrition 
Journal. 2007, 6(1), pp.1-7. 
7. Sternfeld, B. et al. Relation of Demographic and Lifestyle Factors to Symptoms 
in a Multi-Racial/Ethnic Population of Women 4055 Years of Age. American 
Journal of Epidemiology. 2000, 152(5), pp.463-473. 
8. Dam, M.K. et al. Five year change in alcohol intake and risk of breast cancer and 
coronary heart disease among postmenopausal women: prospective cohort study. 
British Medical Journal. 2016, 353, pp.1-10. 
9. Chen, W.Y. et al. Moderate Alcohol Consumption During Adult Life, Drinking 
Patterns, and Breast Cancer Risk. JAMA. 2011, 306(17), pp.1884-1890. 
10. Farvid, M.S. et al. Premenopausal dietary fat in relation to pre- and post-
menopausal breast cancer. Breast Cancer Research and Treatment. 2014, 145(1), 
pp.255-265. 
11. Cade, J.E. et al. The UK Women's Cohort Study: comparison of vegetarians, fish-
eaters and meat-eaters. Public Health Nutrition. 2004, 7(7), pp.871-878. 
12. Cade, J.E. et al. Cohort Profile: The UK Womens Cohort Study (UKWCS). 
International Journal of Epidemiology. 2015, 0(0), pp.1-11. 
13. Greenwood, D.C. et al. Seven unique food consumption patterns identified among 
women in the UK Women's Cohort Study. European Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. 2000, 54(4), pp.314-320. 
14. Cade, J.E. et al. Common dietary patterns and risk of breast cancer: analysis from 
the United Kingdom Women's Cohort Study. Nutrition and Cancer. 2010, 62(3), 
pp.300-306. 
15. Cade, J.E. et al. Dietary fibre and risk of breast cancer in the UK Women's Cohort 
Study. International Journal of Epidemiology. 2007, 36(2), pp.431-438. 
16. Key, T.J. et al. Vitamins, minerals, essential fatty acids and colorectal cancer risk 
in the United Kingdom Dietary Cohort Consortium. International Journal of 
Cancer. 2012, 131(3), pp.E320-E325. 
17. Threapleton, D.E. et al. Dietary fibre intake and risk of ischaemic and 
haemorrhagic stroke in the UK Women's Cohort Study. European Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition. 2015, 69(4), pp.467-474. 
18. Taylor, E.F. et al. Meat consumption and risk of breast cancer in the UK Women's 
Cohort Study. British Journal of Cancer. 2007, 96, pp.1139-1146. 
19. Woodhouse, A. et al. The UK Womens Cohort Study: background and obtaining 
local ethical approval. Proceedings of The Nutrition Society. 1997, 56(1A), p.64A. 
20. Holland B, W.A., Unwin ID, Buss DH, Paul AA, Southgate DAT. The 
composition of foods. Cambridge, United Kingdom: The Royal Society of 
Chemistry and Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food, 1991. 
21. Cade, J.E. et al. Diet and genetic factors associated with iron status in middle-
aged women. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2005, 82(4), pp.813-820. 
22. WHO Technical Report Series (2003). Diet, Nutrition and the Prevention of 
Chronic Diseases. Report of a Joint WHO/FAO Expert Consultation. World 
Health Organization: Geneva. 
23. Cade, J.E. et al. Does the Mediterranean dietary pattern or the Healthy Diet Index 
influence the risk of breast cancer in a large British cohort of women? European 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2011, 65, pp.920. 
24. Nicklett, E.J. and Kadell, A.R. Fruit and vegetable intake among older adults: a 
scoping review. Maturitas. 2013, 75(4), pp.305-312. 
25. Lichtenstein, A.H. et al. Modified MyPyramid for older adults. Journal of 
Nutrition. 2008, 138(1), pp.5-11. 
26. Wakimoto, P. and Block, G. Dietary intake, dietary patterns, and changes with 
age: An epidemiological perspective. Journals of Gerontology Series A-
Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences. 2001, 56(Supplement 2), pp.65-80. 
27. Mishra, G.D. et al. Major dietary patterns of young and middle aged women: 
results from a prospective Australian cohort study. European Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. 2010, 64(10), pp.1125-1133. 
28. Drewnowski, A. et al. The dietary variety score: Assessing diet quality in healthy 
young and older adults. Journal of the American Dietetic Association. 1997, 
97(3), pp.266-271. 
29. Alaimo, K. et al. Dietary intake of vitamins, minerals, and fiber of persons ages 2 
months and over in the United States: Third National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey, Phase 1, 1988-91. Advance Data. 1994, (258), pp.1-28. 
30. Schrder, H. et al. Population dietary habits and physical activity modification 
with age. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2004, 58, pp.302. 
31. Ruxton, C.H.S. and Derbyshire, E. Women's diet quality in the UK. Nutrition 
Bulletin. 2010, 35(2), pp.126-137. 
32. Bezerra, I.N. et al. Difference in adult food group intake by sex and age groups 
comparing Brazil and United States nationwide surveys. Nutrition Journal. 2014, 
13, pp.1-10. 
33. Edfors, E. and Westergren, A. Home-Living Elderly People's Views on Food and 
Meals. Journal of Aging Research. 2012, 2012, pp.1-9. 
34. Derbyshire, E. et al. Habitual micronutrient intake during and after pregnancy in 
Caucasian Londoners. Maternal & Child Nutrition. 2009, 5(1), pp.1-9. 
35. Adamson, A.J. et al. Nutrition in advanced age: dietary assessment in the 
Newcastle 85+ study. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2009, 63 Suppl 1, 
pp.S6-18. 
36. Jankovic, N. et al. Adherence to a healthy diet according to the World Health 
Organization guidelines and all-cause mortality in elderly adults from Europe and 
the United States. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2014, 180(10), pp.978-988. 
37. Jankovic, N. et al. WHO guidelines for a healthy diet and mortality from 
cardiovascular disease in European and American elderly: the CHANCES project. 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2015, 102(4), pp.745-756. 
38. Brookhart, M.A. et al. Confounding control in healthcare database research: 
challenges and potential approaches. Medical care. 2010, 48(6 Suppl), pp.S114-
S120. 
39. Brakenhoff, T.B. et al. Random measurement error: Why worry? An example of 
cardiovascular risk factors. PLoS ONE. 2018, 13(2), pp.e0192298-e0192298. 
40. Ishihara, J. Challenges in Dietary Exposure Assessment in Epidemiology: 
Research Trends. Journal of Nutritional Science and Vitaminology (Tokyo). 2015, 
61 Suppl, pp.S33-35. 
41. Cade, J. et al. Development, validation and utilisation of food-frequency 
questionnaires  a review. Public Health Nutrition. 2002, 5(4), pp.567-587. 
42. Schatzkin, A. et al. Design and serendipity in establishing a large cohort with wide 
dietary intake distributions : the National Institutes of Health-American 
Association of Retired Persons Diet and Health Study. American Journal of 
Epidemiology. 2001, 154(12), pp.1119-1125. 
43. White, E. et al. The effect of exposure variance and exposure measurement error 
on study sample size: implications for the design of epidemiologic studies. J Clin 
Epidemiol. 1994, 47(8), pp.873-880. 
44. Coylewright, M. et al. Menopause and Hypertension. Hypertension. 2008, 51(4), 
pp.952-959. 
45. Ren, Y. et al. Association of menopause and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Menopause. 
2019, 26(3), pp.325-330. 
46. Dosi, R. et al. Cardiovascular disease and menopause. Journal of clinical and 
diagnostic research : JCDR. 2014, 8(2), pp.62-64. 
47. Ji, M.-X. and Yu, Q. Primary osteoporosis in postmenopausal women. Chronic 
diseases and translational medicine. 2015, 1(1), pp.9-13.
Chapter 4  
Dietary intake and age at natural menopause: results from the UK 
Womens Cohort Study 
YASHVEE DUNNERAM1*, DARREN C GREENWOOD2, VICTORIA J BURLEY1, 
JANET E CADE1 
1 Nutritional Epidemiology Group, School of Food Science & Nutrition, University of 
Leeds, Leeds, UK  
2 Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK 
Published: Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health (2018); 72(8): 733-40. 
This Chapter is an exact copy of the journal paper referred to above. 
*Erratum: Menopause is an important phase in a womans life indicating the end of the 
reproductive life span and is accompanied with a reduction in oestrogen level. 
[Introduction, line 2] 
Abstract 
Background: Age at natural menopause is a matter of concern for women of reproductive 
age as both an early or late menopause may have implications for health outcomes. 
Methods: Study participants were women aged 4065 years who had experienced a 
natural menopause from the UK Womens Cohort Study between baseline and first 
follow-up. Natural menopause was defined as the permanent cessation of menstrual 
periods for at least 12 consecutive months. A food frequency questionnaire was used to 
estimate diet at baseline. Reproductive history of participants was also recorded. 
Regression modelling, adjusting for confounders, was used to assess associations between 
diet and age at natural menopause. 
Results: During the 4-year follow-up period, 914 women experienced a natural 
menopause. A high intake of oily fish and fresh legumes were associated with delayed 
onset of natural menopause by 3.3 years per portion/day (99% CI0.8 to 5.8) and 0.9 years 
per portion/day (99%CI 0.0 to 1.8), respectively. Refined pasta and rice was associated 
with earlier menopause (per portion/day: 1.5 years, 99%CI 2.8 to 0.2). A higher 
intake of vitamin B6 (per mg/day: 0.6 years, 99%CI 0.1 to 1.2) and zinc (per mg/day: 0.3 
years, 99%CI 0.0 to 0.6) was also associated with later age at menopause. Stratification 
by age at baseline led to attenuated results. 
Conclusion: Our results suggest that some food groups (oily fish, fresh legumes, refined 
pasta and rice) and specific nutrients are individually predictive of age at natural 
menopause.
4.1 Introduction 
The average age of menopause in the UK is reported to be 51years [1]. 
Menopause is an important phase in a womans life indicating the end of the reproductive 
life span with reduction in oestrogen and increased progesterone levels [2, 3]. Several 
studies have documented an association between earlier age at natural menopause and 
lower bone density, osteoporosis, depression and premature death [4, 5]. Other studies 
have shown increased risk of cardiovascular and coronary diseases [[6, 7]. In contrast, a 
late menopause has been associated with a higher risk for breast, ovarian and endometrial 
cancers [8]. 
A number of causes have been postulated for the relationship between age at 
menopause and these health outcomes, such as genetic factors, behavioural and 
environmental exposures, socio-demographic factors, hormonal mechanisms and health-
related factors [9]. Diet can also be an underlying factor [9]. Two large cohort studies 
have also hypothesised an association [10, 11] but reported conflicting findings. 
The limited number of studies and contradictory results [10-12] in this area 
suggests the need for further cohort studies with detailed dietary intake measures to clarify 
this association. The aim of this analysis was to explore the associations between food 
groups and nutrient intake in a large cohort of British women with age at incident natural 
menopause. We hypothesised that intake of healthier food groups such as fruits and 
vegetables would be associated with an earlier menopause while a high consumption of 
meat and processed meat would delay the onset of menopause. 
4.2 Methods 
4.2.1 Study population 
The UK Womens Cohort Study (UKWCS) is a large prospective study consisting 
of 35372 women aged between 35 and 69 years. Recruited participants were from 
England, Scotland and Wales [13]. Baseline data were collected between the years 1995 
and 1998 via postal questionnaire. Follow-up data were collected on average 4 years later, 
between the years 1999 and 2002 [13]. 
4.2.2 Study design and data collection 
In total, 14172 women who participated at both baseline and follow-up were 
considered for this study. Information was collected on demographic details, weight 
history, physical activity, reproductive history (age at last period; number of periods in 
last 12months; use of hormone replacement therapy (HRT)), anthropometric and other 
health-related factors at baseline as well as at follow-up. Participants who experienced a 
natural menopause at follow-up were identified through comparison of baseline and 
follow-up data. Natural menopause was defined as the permanent cessation of the 
menstrual periods for at least 12 consecutive months [2]. Menstruating women, that is, 
those having one or more menstrual period in the last 12months at baseline and who 
became naturally postmenopausal at follow-up were included in the final analysis. 
Inclusion criteria also comprised never used HRT at baseline and currently not using HRT 
at follow-up (as HRT use may influence the bleeding pattern among premenopausal 
women [14]). Women who ever used HRT after reaching menopause at phase II were 
also included. Women who had bilateral oophorectomy and hysterectomy at baseline as 
well as pregnant women at baseline were excluded from the study. In addition, only 
women with an age at natural menopause between 40and 65years were included (as 
no menstruation before the age of 40 might be chemically induced or due to surgical 
procedures). In addition, participants with missing data on the main study outcome, age 
at natural menopause and confounders were also excluded from the study (Figure 4.1). 
1999/2002: 14,172 women 
participated at follow-up  
21,200 lost to follow-up 
after ~4 years 
Exclusions 
5,942 postmenopausal at baseline 
1,336 used HRT at baseline 
238 had either hysterectomy/bilateral 
oophorectomy at baseline 
11 pregnant at baseline 
570 using HRT at follow-up 
16 women reached menopause before 40y 
9,027 women had self-reported age 
at menopause at follow-up 
914 women reached a natural 
menopause  
5,145 missing self-reported age at 
natural menopause at follow-up 
1995/98: 35,372 women at baseline 
in the UKWCS 
Figure 4.1 Flow diagram for participants selection 
4.2.3 Dietary assessment 
Dietary assessment at baseline involved a detailed 217-item food frequency 
questionnaire (FFQ) derived from the FFQ which was validated on a subsample of 303 
cohort subjects against a 4-day food diary as well as fasting blood measures of specific 
nutrients [13, 15, 16]. Using the different frequency categories of the FFQ, the number of 
daily portions for the 217 food items was defined. These were consequently converted 
into weight of each food consumed per day based on the Food Standards Agency portion 
sizes book [17]. For the current study, the individual food items were collated into food 
groups according to their culinary uses (e.g., Mediterranean vegetables, cruciferous 
vegetables, citrus family fruits) and nutrient profile (e.g., fat or fibre content) (Table B.1). 
In total, 15 food items were considered individually. Seven food items were considered 
individually due to their specific nutrient profile such as textured vegetable proteins, oily 
fish, shellfish, grapes, herbal tea, tea and wines, which have antioxidant properties and 
might separately affect age at natural menopause. The remaining eight food items (e.g., 
tomatoes, sauces, low calorie salad cream, etc.) were considered individually because 
they could not be collated under any of the other food groups. Furthermore, in order to 
have a better estimate for the difference in mean age at natural menopause across the 
different food groups, results were presented per portion size. 
4.2.4 Covariate assessment 
A directed acyclic graph (DAG) (Figure B.1) with diet (food groups) as the main 
exposure and age at natural menopause (continuous) as the outcome was generated to 
determine confounding variables. Based on available literature and data collected, 
potential confounding variables (age, parity, energy intake, body mass index (BMI), 
social class, age at first full-term pregnancy, age at menarche, smoking, alcohol 
consumption and physical activity) were included in the DAG. According to the minimal 
sufficiency set of adjustments, physical activity (MET-hours/week), smoking status 
(current vs not current smoker), alcohol consumption (g/day) and social class (routine and 
manual, intermediate, professional and managerial) were identified as confounders and 
were thus adjusted for in the regression models. For the associations between nutrient 
intake and age at natural menopause, total energy intake was also adjusted for the non-
energy-containing nutrients (women were excluded if they had extremely high 
(>6000kcal/day) or low (<500kcal/day) energy intake) and energy from other 
macronutrients was adjusted for specific macronutrients. 
4.2.5 Statistical analysis 
Descriptive statistics were used to explore the socio-demographic and obstetric 
history of the women. Linear regression models were used to determine the relationships 
between the various food groups (continuous exposure in g/day) as well as nutrients 
(continuous exposure) and age at natural menopause (continuous outcome in years). In 
addition, because younger women at baseline have less chance of a later menopause we 
evaluated the associations by stratifying on age at baseline (50vs >50years). An 
estimate >0 was considered as a later age at natural menopause. Assumptions for linear 
regression were checked by plotting the residuals against fitted values which showed a 
constant variance and a histogram demonstrated a normal distribution of the residuals. 
Due to the differences in age at natural menopause by vegetarian status and parity as 
evidenced by previous studies [10, 18], sensitivity analysis exploring that relationship 
was undertaken stratified by vegetarian status and parity (nulliparous vs multiparous). 
Moreover, since presence of diabetes might influence both diet and age at natural 
menopause, we also adjusted for diabetes. To take account of multiple testing, the 
significance level was set at 1% with 99% CIs. All analyses were conducted using Stata 
V. 14.0 (StataCorp). 
4.3 Results 
4.3.1 Socio-demographic characteristics 
Of the 1874 women who were premenopausal at baseline survey (and had self-
reported age at natural menopause at follow-up), 914 had become postmenopausal at 4-
year follow-up. Baseline characteristics of the participants are outlined in Table 4.1. The 
mean age at natural menopause at follow-up was 50.5years (95%CI 50.3 to 50.8). 
Participants had a mean BMI of 23.9kg/m2 (95%CI 23.6 to 24.1) and 9.6% were 
categorised as obese. Physical activity level was quite low among the participants with a 
mean of 15min/day. This study also included 38% vegetarian participants. Most of the 
women were married, parous and of professional and managerial class. In this study, only 
8% of women smoked and the mean alcohol consumption was 9g/day (around one unit).
Table 4.1 Baseline characteristics of participants 
Characteristics (mean/ %, 95% CI) Age at natural menopause 
40-48 years 
n=226 
49-51 years 
n=319 
 52 years 
n=369 
Total 
n=914 
Age at baseline, y  45.4 (45.0 to 45.8) 49.0 (48.8 to 49.2) 52.1 (51.9 to 52.4) 49.4 (49.2 to 49.6) 
Birth year, y  1950 (1950 to 1951) 1947 (1946 to 1947) 1944 (1943 to 1944) 1946 (1946 to 1946) 
Body mass index, kg/m  23.6 (23.0 to 24.1) 23.5 (23.1 to 23.9) 24.3 (23.8 to 24.7) 23.8 (23.6 to 24.1) 
Obese, >30 kg/m (%) 8.4 (5.4 to 12.8) 6.9 (4.6 to 10.3) 12.6 (9.5 to 16.4) 9.6 (7.8 to 11.7) 
Physical activity, min/day  12.8 (10.2 to 15.4) 16.5 (13.6 to 19.4) 14.1 (11.8 to 16.3) 14.6 (13.1 to 16.1) 
Vegetarian, (%) 45.7 (39.2 to 52.4) 44.2 (38.8 to 49.8) 33.0 (28.3 to 38.0) 40.0 (36.9 to 43.3) 
Alcohol consumption, g/day  10.1 (8.4  to 11.8) 8.6 (7.5 to 9.7) 8.4 (7.4 to 9.4) 9.0 (8.2 to 9.6) 
Smoking, (%) 10.2 (6.9 to 14.9) 8.0 (5.4 to 11.5) 5.0 (3.1 to 7.7) 7.3 (5.8 to 9.2) 
Age at menarche, y  12.6 (12.4 to 12.8) 12.7 (12.5 to 12.8) 12.9 (12.7 to 13.1) 12.7 (12.6 to 12.8) 
Age at first full term pregnancy, y  26.6 (25.8 to 27.5) 26.0 (25.4 to 26.5) 25.6 (25.1 to 26.0) 25.9 (25.6 to 26.3 
Parous, (%) 68.6 (62.0 to 74.5) 77.1 (72.1 to 81.5) 84.3 (80.1 to 87.8) 78.0 (75.1 to 80.4) 
Ever married, (%) 76.3 (70.3 to 81.5) 78.6 (73.7 to 82.8) 78.1 (73.5 to 82.0) 77.8 (75.0 to 81.1) 
Degree level, (%) 36.7 (30.5 to 43.4) 37.5 (32.2 to 43.1) 26.1 (21.7 to 31.0) 32.8 (29.7 to 36.0) 
Professional and managerial class, (%) 70.0 (63.6 to 75.6) 63.8 (58.3 to 68.9) 60.3 (55.1 to 65.2) 63.9 (60.7 to 67.0) 
4.3.2 Association between food groups and age at natural menopause 
An increase in portion size of refined pasta and rice as well as savoury snacks was 
associated with an earlier age at natural menopause by 1.8 years (99%CI 3.0 to 0.5) 
and 0.9 years (99%CI 1.7 to 0.1), respectively in the unadjusted model (Table 4.2). In 
the adjusted model, for each additional portion of oily fish and fresh legumes, age at 
menopause was increased by 3.3 years (99%CI 0.8 to 5.8) and 0.9 years (99%CI 0.0 to 
1.8), respectively. On the other hand, a higher intake of refined pasta and rice (per 
portion/day: 1.5 years; 99%CI 2.8 to 0.2) was associated with an earlier menopause. 
Stratification by age at baseline led to reduced associations between the various food 
groups and age at natural menopause. The CIs were wider because of the smaller samples 
in these subgroups. 
For the association between nutrients and age at natural menopause, a later age at 
natural menopause by approximately 0.6 years was found with a higher intake of vitamin 
B6 per mg (99%CI 0.1 to 1.2). Similarly, a higher intake of zinc was associated with a 
delayed age at natural menopause by 0.3 years per mg (99%CI 0.0 to 0.6) (Table 4.3). 
Stratification by age at baseline further demonstrated that a higher intake of carbohydrates 
was associated with an earlier age at natural menopause by 0.2 years (99%CI 0.4 to 
0.0) among women 50 years or below. 
Table 4.2 Estimates (overall and stratified on age at baseline) for the association between daily intake of the food groups/portion size (g) and age at 
natural menopause (years) 
Age at baseline       50 years  >50 years  
Daily intake/ portion size Estimatea 99% CI P  Estimateb 99% CI P  Estimatec 99% CI P  Estimated 99% CI P  
Starchy food sources             
Wholegrain products/ 33g  0.0 -0.1 to 0.2 0.491  0.0 -0.1 to 0.2 0.443  0.0 -0.2 to 0.1 0.559  0.1 -0.0 to 0.3 0.034 
Refined grain products/ 51g -0.0 -0.5 to 0.3 0.488 -0.2 -0.5 to 0.2 0.267 -0.1 -0.6 to 0.3 0.495 -0.3 -0.7 to 0.0 0.017 
Low fibre breakfast cereals/ 40g  0.0 -1.0 to 1.0 0.920 -0.1 -1.1 to 1.0 0.888 -0.7 -1.8 to 0.4 0.109  0.5 -0.5 to 1.5 0.163 
High fibre breakfast cereals/ 85g  0.2 -0.2 to 0.6 0.136  0.2 -0.3 to 0.7 0.273  0.1 -0.4 to 0.6 0.621  0.0 -0.4 to 0.5 0.915 
Plain Potatoes/ 210g  0.4 -0.4 to 1.1 0.213  0.5 -0.3 to 1.2 0.114 -0.1 -1.0 to 0.9 0.868 -0.2 -0.8 to 0.5 0.516 
Potatoes with added fat/ 127g  0.3 -1.1 to 1.8 0.566  0.1 -1.4 to 0.2 0.829 -0.1 -1.8 to 1.7 0.929  0.1 -1.4 to 1.6 0.843 
Refined pasta and rice/ 210g -1.8 -3.0 to -0.5 <0.001 -1.5 -2.8 to -0.2 0.003 -0.9 -2.3 to 0.5 0.101  0.8 -0.7 to 2.2 0.166 
Wholegrain pasta and rice/ 197 g  0.4 -1.0 to 1.7 0.492   0.5 -0.9 to 2.0 0.309  0.0 -1.7 to 1.6 0.958  0.6 -0.7 to 1.9 0.243 
Protein and fat food sources             
Low fat dairy products/ 80g  0.0 -0.1 to 0.1 0.043   0.0 -0.1 to 0.1 0.700 -0.1 -0.2 to 0.0 0.053  0.0 -0.1 to 0.1 0.835 
High fat dairy products/ 75g -0.1 -0.2 to 0.1 0.279  -0.2 -0.2 to 0.1 0.323 -0.1 -0.3 to 0.1 0.493 -0.1 -0.3 to 0.1 0.118 
Butter and hard margarine/ 10g  0.1 -0.2 to 0.4 0.350   0.2 -0.2 to 0.5 0.228  0.1 -0.3 to 0.5 0.475  0.0 -0.3 to 0.3 0.838 
Margarine/ 9g -0.2 -0.4 to 0.1 0.103  -0.2 -0.5 to 0.1 0.101 -0.1 -0.4 to 0.2 0.636  0.0 -0.3 to 0.3 0.958 
Low fat spreads/ 7g  0.1 -0.2 to 0.4 0.264   0.1 -0.2 to 0.4 0.538  0.1 -0.3 to 0.5 0.628 -0.1 -0.4 to 0.2 0.357 
High fat dressing/ 23g -0.1 -1.2 to 0.9 0.717  -0.0 -1.0 to 1.0 0.993  0.2 -1.0 to 1.3 0.708  0.0 1.0 to 1.1 0.932 
Low fat dressing/ 30g  1.3 -0.8 to 3.4 0.116   0.8 -1.3 to 2.9 0.309  0.8 -1.6 to 3.1 0.401 -0.4 -2.5 to 1.7 0.596 
Soybean products/ 62g -0.0 -0.1 to 0.1 0.978  -0.0 -0.2 to 0.1 0.812  0.0 -0.1 to 0.2 0.392 -0.1 -0.3 to 0.1 0.136 
Textured vegetable protein/ 130g -4.2 -13.1 to 4.7 0.226  -3.6 -12.6 to 5.4 0.300 -2.9 -12.1 to 6.3 0.414 -2.7 -13.0 to 7.7 0.506 
Pulses/ 91g -0.4 -1.1 to 0.2 0.087  -0.3 -1.0 to 0.4 0.230  0.1 -0.7 to 0.8 0.760 -0.5 -1.1 to 0.2 0.065 
Eggs/eggs dishes/ 88g  1.0 -0.4 to 2.4 0.070   0.6 -0.9 to 2.0 0.301 -0.4 -2.0 to 1.2 0.536 -0.5 1.9 to 0.9 0.358 
Fish and fish dishes/ 140g  1.4 -0.6 to 3.4 0.068   1.2 -0.9 to 3.3 0.130 -1.0 -3.2 to 1.3 0.264  1.4 -0.7 to 3.6 0.085 
Oily fish/ 90g  3.2 0.8 to 5.6 0.001   3.3  0.8 to 5.8 0.001  1.9 -1.2 to 4.9 0.118  0.9 -1.3 to 3.1 0.311 
Shell fish/ 60g  1.7 -4.4 to 7.8 0.462   2.2 -4.1 to 8.5 0.361 -4.0 -11.5 to 3.5 0.165  1.7 4.1 to 7.6 0.438 
Red meat/ 189g 1.9  0.3 to 3.5 0.003   1.5 -0.2 to 3.2 0.021 -0.2 -2.2 to 1.8 0.830  0.9 -0.6 to 2.5 0.123 
Processed meat/ 74g 1.3 -0.4 to 3.0 0.042  1.0 -0.8 to 2.7 0.150  0.2 -1.8 to 2.2 0.830  0.4 -1.2 to 2.1 0.495 
Poultry/ 143g 1.6 -0.6 to 3.8 0.063  1.4 -0.9 to 3.6 0.109  0.0 -2.4 to 2.4 0.993  1.2 -1.2 to 3.6 0.186 
Offal/ 100g 6.9 -2.2 to 16.1 0.051  5.9 -3.5 to 15.2 0.104 -2.0 -14.4 to 10.4 0.675 -0.2 -8.1 to 7.7 0.948 
Table 4.2 Continued 
Age at baseline       50 years  >50 years 
Daily intake/ portion size Estimatea 99% CI P  Estimateb 99% CI P  Estimatec 99% CI P  Estimated 99% CI P  
Vegetables             
Vegetable dishes/ 214g -0.6 -1.3 to 0.2 0.069  -0.5 -1.3 to 0.3 0.102 -0.7 -1.7 to 0.2 0.055 -0.3 -1.0 to 0.5 0.341 
Allium/ 39g  0.3 -0.5 to 1.2 0.322   0.5 -0.4 to 1.4 0.125  0.1 -1.0 to 1.1 0.814 -0.2 -1.1 to 0.6 0.478 
Fresh legumes/ 75g  1.0  0.1 to 1.8 0.003   0.9  0.0 to 1.8 0.007  0.0 -0.9 to 1.0 0.896  0.4 -0.4 to 1.2 0.205 
Mediterranean vegetables/ 60g -0.0 -0.6 to 0.6 1.000   0.1 -0.5 to 0.6 0.730  0.1 -0.5 to 0.7 0.597  0.2 -0.4 to 0.8 0.363 
Salad vegetables/ 43g  0.4 -0.0 to 0.8 0.021   0.4 -0.0 to 0.9 0.018  0.4 -0.1 to 0.8 0.036  0.2 -0.4 to 0.7 0.441 
Cruciferous vegetables/ 75g  0.3 -0.0 to 0.6 0.017   0.3 -0.0 to 0.7 0.024  0.0 -0.3 to 0.4 0.845  0.0 -0.4 to 0.4 0.969 
Tomatoes/ 83g  0.2 -0.4 to 0.8 0.352   0.0 -0.6 to 0.7 0.855  0.1 -0.6 to 0.8 0.765  0.0 -0.6 to 0.5 0.822 
Mushrooms/ 34g  0.3 -0.8 to 1.5 0.431   0.3 -0.9 to 1.4 0.581 -0.3 -1.7 to 1.0 0.543  0.1 -1.1 to 1.2 0.860 
Roots and tubers/ 66g  0.4 -0.1 to 1.0 0.032   0.4 -0.1 to 0.9 0.057  0.1 -0.5 to 0.7 0.715  0.4 -0.2 to 1.0 0.102 
Fruits             
Stone fruits/ 49g  0.5 -0.2 to 1.3 0.058   0.4 -0.3 to 1.2 0.155  0.0 -0.7 to 0.8 0.884  0.3 -0.6 to 1.1 0.442 
Deep orange & yellow fruits/ 118g  0.6 -0.1 to 1.3 0.036   0.5 -0.2 to 1.3 0.051  0.1 -0.6 to 0.9 0.669  0.5 -0.2 to 1.3 0.079 
Grapes/ 100g  0.8 -0.1 to 1.6 0.022   0.7 -0.2 to 1.6 0.039 -0.3 -1.5 to 0.9 0.546  0.2 -0.5 to 0.9 0.428 
Citrus family fruits/ 92g  0.3 -0.2 to 0.9 0.149   0.2 -0.3 to 0.8 0.316 -0.2 -0.8 to 0.5 0.542 -0.1 -0.6 to 0.5 0.799 
Rhubarb/ 130g  0.8 -0.6 to 2.2 0.143   0.7 -0.7 to 2.1 0.181  0.7 -0.8 to 2.2 0.233  0.0 -1.4 to 1.3 0.937 
Berries/ 48g  0.3 -0.2 to 0.8 0.151   0.2 -0.3 to 0.7 0.233 -0.1 -0.7 to 0.5 0.733  0.0 -0.5 to 0.4 0.839 
Bananas/ 100g  0.1 -0.4 to 0.6 0.718   0.0 -0.5 to 0.6 0.893 -0.1 -0.8 to 0.6 0.668 -0.4 -0.9 to 0.2 0.073 
Pomes/ 116g  0.1 -0.3 to 0.4 0.670   0.0 -0.3 to 0.4 0.805  0.0 -0.4 to 0.4 0.867 -0.1 -0.4 to 0.3 0.586 
Dried Fruits/ 28g  0.4 -0.0 to 0.9 0.016   0.4 -0.0 to 0.9 0.017  0.4 -0.2 to 0.9 0.072 -0.1 -0.5 to 0.6 0.734 
Other food groups             
Sauces/ 83g  0.4 -2.0 to 2.7 0.691   0.1 -2.3 to 2.5 0.910 -1.0 -4.0 to 1.9 0.357 -0.7 -2.9 to 1.6 0.441 
Pickles/Chutneys/ 35g -0.1 -1.4 to 1.2 0.822  -0.2 -1.5 to 1.1 0.743  0.0 -1.5 to 1.4 0.957  0.3 -1.1 to 1.6 0.601 
Soups/ 163g  0.9 -0.2 to 2.0 0.035   0.9 -0.2 to 2.0 0.038  0.3 -1.1 to 1.7 0.587  0.4 -0.6 to 1.4 0.301 
Confectionary & spreads/ 44g  0.0 -0.3 to 0.3 0.950  -0.0 -0.3 to 0.3 0.867 -0.1 -0.5 to 0.3 0.484  0.0 -0.3 to 0.3 0.891 
Nuts and seeds/ 24g  0.1 -0.3 to 0.5 0.449   0.1 -0.2 to 0.5 0.421  0.1 -0.2 to 0.5 0.368 -0.1 -0.5 to 0.3 0.376 
Savoury snacks/ 26g -0.9 -1.7 to -0.1 0.006  -0.9 -1.8 to 0.1 0.017 -0.5 -1.5 to 0.5 0.196 -0.7 -1.6 to 0.3 0.075 
Biscuits/ 15g -0.1 -0.5 to 0.2 0.297 -0.2 -0.5 to 0.2 0.155 -0.2 -0.6 to 0.2 0.232 -0.2 -0.5 to 0.2 0.211 
Cakes/ 66g  0.3 -1.1 to 1.6 0.592 -0.0 -1.6 to 1.5 0.934 -0.8 2.5 to 0.9 0.220  0.7 -0.8 to 2.3 0.226 
Table 4.2 Continued 
Age at baseline       50 years  >50 years 
Daily intake/ portion size Estimatea 99% CI P  Estimateb 99% CI P  Estimatec 99% CI P  Estimated 99% CI P  
Pastries and Puddings/ 84g -0.3 -1.4 to 0.7 0.402 -0.3 -1.5 to 0.8 0.413 -0.8 -2.1 to 0.5 0.121 -0.5 -1.6 to 0.5 0.182 
Drinks and beverages             
Tea/ 260g -0.1 -0.2 to 0.1 0.148  -0.1 -0.3 to 0.0 0.042 -0.1 -0.3 to 0.1 0.103  0.0 0.2 to 0.1 0.450 
Herbal tea/ 260g  0.1 -0.3 to 0.4 0.648  0.1 -0.2 to 0.4 0.415  0.1 -0.2 to 0.5 0.298  0.0 -0.3 to 0.3 0.967 
Coffee/ 190g  0.0 -0.1 to 0.2 0.470  0.1 -0.1 to 0.2 0.249  0.0 -0.2 to 0.2 0.842  0.0 -0.2 to 0.1 0.641 
Other hot beverages/ 23g  0.1 -0.4 to 0.5 0.742  0.1 -0.4 to 0.6 0.650  0.0 -0.6 to 0.6 0.995 -0.2 -0.7 to 0.3 0.299 
Juices/ 145g  0.2 -0.2 to 0.6 0.243  0.1 -0.3 to 0.6 0.400  0.0 -0.5 to 0.5 0.896  0.1 -0.3 to 0.5 0.448 
Soft drinks/ 111g -0.7 -1.5 to 0.1 0.022 -0.8 -1.6 to 0.1 0.016 -0.5 -1.3 to 0.3 0.085  0.0 -1.1 to 1.1 0.988 
Low calorie/diet soft drinks/ 161g -0.1 -0.7 to 0.4 0.516 -0.1 -0.7 to 0.5 0.566 -0.2 -1.0 to 0.5 0.431 -0.2 -0.7 to 0.3 0.333 
Wines/ 1g -0.2 -0.6 to 0.3 0.275  0.1 -0.5 to 0.8 0.563  0.1 -0.6 to 0.7 0.768 -0.3 -1.1 to 0.5 0.325 
Beer and cider/ 1g -0.5 -1.1 to 0.2 0.053 -0.5 -1.3 to 0.3 0.093  0.0 -0.7 to 0.7 0.871 -0.2 -1.7 to 1.3 0.690 
Port, sherry, liqueurs/ 1g  0.9 -0.6 to 2.5 0.112  1.1 -0.5 to 2.7 0.068  1.1 -0.8 to 3.1 0.139  0.4 -1.0 to 1.8 0.420 
Spirits/ 1g -0.3 -1.1 to 0.4 0.215 -0.1 -1.0 to 0.7 0.686 -0.1 -0.9 to 0.7 0.668  0.4 -0.7 to 1.5 0.368 
a Difference in age at natural menopause, unadjusted model (n=914) 
b Difference in age at natural menopause, model adjusted for the following factors: Physical activity level, alcohol consumption, smoking, social class (n=838) 
c Difference in age at natural menopause for those aged 50y or below in the fully adjusted model (n=477) 
d Difference in age at natural menopause for those aged above 50y in the fully adjusted model (n=361)
Table 4.3 Estimates (overall and stratified on age at baseline) for the association between daily nutrient intake and age at natural menopause (years) 
Age at baseline       50 years  >50 years 
Daily nutrient intake Estimatea 99% CI P value Estimateb 99% CI P value Estimatec 99% CI P value Estimate
d 99% CI P value 
Fibre (g)  0.0 -0.0 to 0.1 0.111 -0.0 -0.1 to 0.0 0.087  0.0 -0.0 to 0.1 0.161  0.0 -0.0 to 0.0 0.641 
% energy from fats  0.0 -0.1 to 0.0 0.140 -0.1 -0.4 to 0.1 0.144 -0.2 -0.4 to 0.0 0.010 -0.1 -0.4 to 0.2 0.356 
% energy from proteins  0.1 0.0 to 0.2 0.005 -0.0 -0.3 to 0.2 0.713 -0.3 -0.5 to 0.0 0.011 -0.0 -0.3 to 0.3 0.995 
% energy from  
carbohydrates  0.0 -0.0 to 0.1 0.416 -0.1 -0.3 to 0.1 0.227 -0.2 -0.4 to -0.0 0.009 -0.1 -0.3 to 0.2 0.508 
% energy from  
saturated fats -0.1 -0.2 to 0.0 0.094 -0.1 -0.2 to 0.1 0.171 -0.1 -0.3 to 0.1 0.155 -0.0 -0.2 to 0.1 0.443 
% energy from  
polyunsaturated fats -0.1 -0.2 to 0.1 0.243 -0.0 -0.2 to 0.2 0.941  0.1 -0.2 to 0.3 0.485  0.0 -0.2 to 0.2 0.936 
% energy from  
monounsaturated fats  0.0 -0.2 to 0.1 0.324 -0.1 -0.2 to 0.4 0.488  0.0 -0.3 to 0.4 0.795  0.0 -0.3 to 0.3 0.855 
Vitamin C (mg)  0.0 0.0 to 0.1 0.010  0.0 -0.0 to 0.1 0.031  0.0 -0.0 to 0.1 0.329  0.0 -0.0 to 0.1 0.585 
Vitamin B1 (mg)  0.0 -0.2 to 0.1 0.271 -0.1 -0.2 to 0.0 0.110 -0.0 -0.2 to 0.1 0.396 -0.1 -0.2 to 0.0 0.130 
Vitamin B2 (mg)  0.3 -0.1 to 0.6 0.060  0.3 -0.2 to 0.9 0.105 -0.2 -0.9 to 0.4 0.306  0.0 -0.5 to 0.5 0.987 
Vitamin B6 (mg)  0.4 -0.0 to 0.7 0.014  0.6  0.1 to 1.2 0.005  0.0 -0.6 to 0.7 0.900  0.2 -0.4 to 0.8 0.508 
Vitamin B12 (g)  0.0 -0.0 to 0.0 0.198  0.0 -0.0 to 0.0 0.440  0.0 -0.0 to 0.0 0.848  0.0 -0.0 to 0.0 0.536 
Folate (g)  0.1 -0.0 to 0.2 0.038  0.2 -0.0 to 0.3 0.029  0.0 -0.2 to 0.2 0.805  0.1 -0.1 to 0.2 0.408 
Vitamin D (g)  0.4 -0.0 to 0.7 0.011  0.4 -0.0 to 0.8 0.017  0.2 -0.3 to 0.7 0.281  0.1 -0.3 to 0.5 0.519 
Vitamin A (g)  0.1 0.0 to 0.2 0.008  0.1 -0.0 to 0.2 0.020  0.0 -0.1 to 0.1 0.795  0.0 -0.1 to 0.1 0.675 
Vitamin E (mg)  0.0 -0.1 to 0.1 0.516 -0.1 -0.1 to 0.0 0.145  0.0 -0.1 to 0.1 0.377 -0.0 -0.1 to 0.1 0.391 
Calcium (mg)  0.0 -0.1 to 0.2 0.564 -0.0 -0.2 to 0.2 0.791 -0.2 -0.5 to 0.1 0.042 -0.1 -0.3 to 0.1 0.423 
Iron (mg)  0.1 -0.0 to 0.2 0.085  0.1 -0.0 to 0.2 0.044  0.1 -0.1 to 0.2 0.244  0.0 -0.1 to 0.1 0.705 
Zinc (mg)  0.2 -0.0 to 0.3 0.012  0.3 -0.0 to 0.6 0.007 -0.0 -0.4 to 0.3 0.725  0.2 -0.1 to 0.5 0.081 
a  Difference in age at natural menopause, unadjusted model (n=910) 
b Difference in age at natural menopause, model adjusted for the following factors: Physical activity level, alcohol consumption, smoking, social class, total energy intake (n=838) 
c Difference in age at natural menopause for those aged 50y or below in the fully adjusted model (n=477) 
d Difference in age at natural menopause for those aged above 50y in the fully adjusted model (n=361)
4.3.3 Sensitivity analysis 
Our findings demonstrated that non-vegetarians reach a natural menopause 
0.8years later compared with vegetarians (99%CI 0.2 to 1.4). Exploring associations for 
non-vegetarians alone showed they had an earlier age at natural menopause associated 
with an increased consumption of savoury snacks (per portion/day: 1.7years, 99%CI 
3.1 to 0.4) and soft drinks (per portion/day: 1.3years, 99%CI 2.5 to 0.2) while an 
increase in intake of oily fish (per portion/day: 3.4years, 99%CI 0.2 to 6.5) and fresh 
legumes (per portion/day: 1.4years, 99%CI 0.2 to 2.7) were associated with a later onset 
of menopause (Table B.2). 
Sensitivity analysis by parity demonstrated a difference for the association 
between the various food groups and age at natural menopause for nulliparous against the 
multiparous participants. In multiparous women, a later onset of age at natural menopause 
was found to be associated with an increased intake of oily fish (per portion/day: 
3.3years, 99%CI 0.3 to 6.3) and fresh legumes (per portion/day: 1.1years, 99%CI 0.1 
to 2.01) while an increase in intake of refined pasta and rice (per portion/day: 1.9years, 
99%CI 3.3 to 0.4) as well as savoury snacks (per portion/day: 1.0years, 99%CI 2.1 
to 0.0) was associated with an earlier age at natural menopause. For nulliparous women, 
a higher consumption of grapes (per portion/day: 2.5years, 99%CI 0.0 to 4.9) and poultry 
(per portion/day: 5.2years, 99% CI 0.1 to 10.3) was found to be significantly associated 
with a later age at natural menopause (Table B.3). 
Further adjusting the model by presence of diabetes demonstrated no changes in 
our results (Table B.4). 
4.4 Discussion 
This is the first study of women in the UK to report on food and nutrient intake in 
relation to age at incidence of natural menopause. Of 14 172 women who were followed 
up for approximately 4 years, 914 women went through a natural menopause. The mean 
age at natural menopause was 50.5 years with a median age of 51 years. We found that 
intakes of oily fish and fresh legumes were associated with later age at menopause and 
intake of refined pasta/rice was associated with an earlier menopause. Only a few 
previous studies have reported diet in relation to age at natural menopause with a limited 
number of food items/groups included [10, 12]. Previous research has mainly been 
focused on the relationship between socio-demographic as well as lifestyle factors 
(education status, marital status, parity, etc.) and age at natural menopause [18-21]. 
Our results demonstrate that each additional increment in fresh legumes 
portion/day was associated with a later age at natural menopause by 0.9years. Fresh 
legumes are a good source of antioxidants, which can partly explain this association. This 
has been supported by the biochemical and molecular analyses undertaken by Matamoros 
et al. [22]. Similarly, in a Japanese prospective study the antioxidant properties of green 
and yellow vegetables were postulated for the association between a higher intake of the 
green and yellow vegetables and a later age at natural menopause [12]. Oocyte 
maturation, ovulation, luteolysis and follicle atresia are affected by reactive oxygen 
species (ROS). Phenolic compounds, vitamins and carotenoids in vegetables counteract 
the ROS and may thus decrease the proportion of follicles undergoing follicular atresia 
[23, 24]. Further support of this theory from our findings was a later age at natural 
menopause with a high intake of vitamin B6 and zinc as both of these have antioxidant 
properties [23, 25]. Likewise, Stepaniack et al. [26] demonstrated an association between 
use of vitamin and mineral supplements and a later menopause. 
Our findings demonstrate a later age at natural menopause by approximately 
3years for each additional portion/day of oily fish. However, in contrast to our findings, 
a recent review article as well as a 10-year follow-up study reported an earlier onset of 
menopause with high intake of polyunsaturated fats [27, 28]. Nagel et al. [10] reported 
no association between fish intake and age at natural menopause but it was not clear if 
oily fish was considered separately. Oily fish is a rich source of the omega-3 fatty acid 
which can potentially improve antioxidant capacity [29]. Therefore, in a similar way to 
the fresh legumes and vitamins described above, the antioxidant properties exerted by the 
oily fish intake could possibly offset ROS, therefore decreasing the proportion of follicles 
undergoing follicular atresia and delaying onset of natural menopause. 
In the present study, increasing refined pasta and rice consumption was associated 
with an earlier age at natural menopause. The EPIC-Heidelberg study also reported a 
similar association [10]. High consumption of refined carbohydrates (classified as high 
glycaemic index foods) increases the risk of insulin resistance. Insulin resistance can lead 
to decreased sex hormone binding globulin levels (SHBG) as a result of the inhibitory 
effect of insulin on the SHBG production in the liver [30] as well as increased oestrogen 
levels [31]. High oestrogen levels cause release of the luteinising hormones which 
triggers ovulation, which might imply more cycles and rapid depletion of oocytes, 
consequently leading to an earlier menopause [32]. This can be supported by a recent 
review study which reported that women with type II diabetes mellitus tend to have an 
earlier menopause although additional evidence is required to clarify this association [33]. 
Although we found that fresh legumes are associated with a later menopause, our 
study further demonstrated that women who were vegetarian had an earlier age at natural 
menopause compared with non-vegetarians. This finding is in line with other studies 
which also reported an earlier age at natural menopause among vegetarians [34, 35]. The 
vegetarian diet, which normally consists of high fibre and no animal fat-containing foods, 
may affect the levels of the luteinising hormone, follicle stimulating hormone and the 
length of the menstrual cycle [36]. Previous studies have demonstrated that high fibre and 
decreased fat intakes were both associated with a lower oestrogen level, which may 
account for the earlier age at natural menopause among vegetarians [37, 38]. However, 
caution should be taken in interpreting this finding as vegetarian status was self-reported 
in this study. 
It is possible that results for younger women may differ from those for older 
women. This could result from different diets between younger and older women [39], 
and that younger women have less opportunity to report a later menopause. To explore 
this, stratifying on age at baseline showed reduced associations within each subgroup. 
This is the first study looking prospectively at the relationship between diet and 
age at natural menopause in the UK. Strengths of this study include the investigation of 
the association between individual nutrients and a wide variety of food groups and age at 
natural menopause compared with similar few previous studies. Careful adjustment for 
likely confounders was also carried out in the regression modelling using the DAG. A 
limitation of this prospective cohort study is that diet was reported by the participants 
using an FFQ and may thus be subjected to recall bias. However, FFQ enables recording 
of a long-term diet, thus showing its cumulative influence on the outcome while food 
diaries/24-hour recall give only a snapshot of the diet. Our sample was also more health 
conscious given the high number of vegetarians in our sample population and more well-
off participants than the general population as shown in the descriptive table (Table 4.1). 
However, our study still includes women from a range of different background which 
implies that findings of this study may be extrapolated to other countries. 
Women with an earlier menopause spend more years deprived from the benefits 
of oestrogen compared with women who become menopausal around the normal 
menopausal age range, which puts them at a greater risk of some future poor health 
outcomes such as osteoporosis and heart disease. On the other hand, women with a later 
onset of menopause are at greater risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancers. Our 
findings confirm that diet may be associated with the age at natural menopause. This may 
be relevant at a public health level since age at natural menopause may have implications 
on future health outcomes. Health practitioners might thus also need to take into account 
the diet of women when dealing with menopause-related issues. 
In summary, our study is the first to demonstrate that diet is associated with age 
at natural menopause in a large cohort of British women. Intakes of oily fish and fresh 
legumes were found to be associated with a later onset of natural menopause while higher 
intake of refined pasta and rice was associated with younger age at natural menopause. 
The nutrients vitamin B6 and zinc were also found to be associated with a later age at 
natural menopause. Women who were vegetarian had an earlier age at natural menopause 
compared to non-vegetarians. 
What is already known on this subject 
Several factors including socio-demographic and reproductive factors are associated 
with age at natural menopause. Limited existing studies present conflicting evidence 
between diet and age at natural menopause. 
What this study adds 
This is the first study to our knowledge which demonstrated that dietary intake affected 
age at natural menopause in a prospective cohort of British women. This study shows 
that high intakes of oily fish, fresh legumes as well as vitamin B6 and zinc are 
associated with a later onset of natural menopause while a high consumption of refined 
pasta and rice is associated with an earlier age at natural menopause. 
References 
1. Sarri, G. et al. Guidelines Diagnosis and management of menopause: summary of 
NICE guidance. British Medical Journal. 2015, 351, pp.1-6. 
2. Schoenaker, D.A. et al. Socioeconomic position, lifestyle factors and age at 
natural menopause: a systematic review and meta-analyses of studies across six 
continents. International Journal of Epidemiology. 2014, 43(5), pp.1542-1562. 
3. Pokoradi, A.J. et al. Factors associated with age of onset and type of menopause 
in a cohort of UK women. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology. 2011, 
205(1), pp.34 e31-13. 
4. Jung, S.J. et al. Menarche age, menopause age and other reproductive factors in 
association with post-menopausal onset depression: Results from Health 
Examinees Study (HEXA). Journal of Affective Disorders. 2015, 187, pp.127-
5. Svejme, O. et al. Early menopause and risk of osteoporosis, fracture and mortality: 
a 34-year prospective observational study in 390 women. BJOG : An 
International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology. 2012, 119(7), pp.810-816. 
6. Wellons, M. et al. Early menopause predicts future coronary heart disease and 
stroke: the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis. Menopause. 2012, 19(10), 
pp.1081-1087. 
7. Appiah, D. et al. Association of Age at Menopause With Incident Heart Failure: 
A Prospective Cohort Study and Meta-Analysis. Journal of the American Heart 
Association. 2016, 5(8). 
8. Gold, E.B. The timing of the age at which natural menopause occurs. Obstetrics 
and Gynecology Clinics of North America. 2011, 38(3), pp.425-440. 
9. Gold, E.B. et al. Factors associated with age at natural menopause in a multiethnic 
sample of midlife women. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2001, 153(9), 
pp.865-874. 
10. Nagel, G. et al. Reproductive and dietary determinants of the age at menopause in 
EPIC-Heidelberg. Maturitas. 2005, 52(3-4), pp.337-347. 
11. Dorjgochoo, T. et al. Dietary and lifestyle predictors of age at natural menopause 
and reproductive span in the Shanghai Women's Health Study. Menopause. 2008, 
15(5), pp.924-933. 
12. Nagata, C. et al. Association of diet with the onset of menopause in Japanese 
women. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2000, 152(9), pp.863-867. 
13. Cade, J.E. et al. Cohort Profile: The UK Womens Cohort Study (UKWCS). 
International Journal of Epidemiology. 2015, 0(0), pp.1-11. 
14. Feeley, K.M. and Wells, M. Hormone replacement therapy and the endometrium. 
Journal of Clinical Pathology. 2001, 54(6), pp.435-440. 
15. Cade, J.E. et al. The UK Women's Cohort Study: comparison of vegetarians, fish-
eaters and meat-eaters. Public Health Nutrition. 2004, 7(7), pp.871-878. 
16. Cade, J.E. et al. Dietary fibre and risk of breast cancer in the UK Women's Cohort 
Study. International Journal of Epidemiology. 2007, 36(2), pp.431-438. 
17. Food Standards Agency. Food Portion Sizes. London: The Stationary office; 
2002. 
18. Kato, I. et al. Prospective Study of Factors Influencing the Onset of Natural 
Menopause. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 1998, 51(12), pp.1271-1276. 
19. Brambilla, D.J. and McKinlay, S.M. A prospective study of factors affecting age 
at menopause. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 1989, 42(11), pp.1031-1039. 
20. van Noord, P.A.H. et al. Age at Natural Menopause in a Population-Based 
Screening Cohort: The Role of Menarche, Fecundity, and Lifestyle Factors. 
Fertility and Sterility. 1997, 68(1), pp.95-102. 
21. Li, S. et al. Age at natural menopause in relation to all-cause and cause-specific 
mortality in a follow-up study of US black women. Maturitas. 2013, 75(3), 
pp.246-252. 
22. Matamoros, M.A. et al. Function of antioxidant enzymes and metabolites during 
maturation of pea fruits. Journal of Experimental Botany. 2010, 61(1), pp.87-97. 
23. Ebisch, I.M.W. et al. The importance of folate, zinc and antioxidants in the 
pathogenesis and prevention of subfertility. Human Reproduction Update. 2007, 
13(2), pp.163-174. 
24. Ruder, E.H. et al. Oxidative stress and antioxidants: exposure and impact on 
female fertility. Human Reproduction Update. 2008, 14(4), pp.345-357. 
25. Cheng, S.B. et al. Vitamin B-6 Supplementation Could Mediate Antioxidant 
Capacity by Reducing Plasma Homocysteine Concentration in Patients with 
Hepatocellular Carcinoma after Tumor Resection. BioMed Research 
International. 2016, 2016, pp.1-7. 
26. Stepaniak, U. et al. Age at natural menopause in three Central and Eastern 
European urban populations: The HAPIEE study. Maturitas. 2013, 75(1), pp.87-
27. Nagata, C. et al. Associations of physical activity and diet with the onset of 
menopause in Japanese women. Menopause. 2012, 19(1), pp.75-81. 
28. Sapre, S. and Thakur, R. Lifestyle and dietary factors determine age at natural 
menopause. Journal of Midlife Health. 2014, 5(1), pp.3-5. 
29. Kesavulu, M.M. et al. Effect of omega-3 fatty acids on lipid peroxidation and 
antioxidant enzyme status in type 2 diabetic patients. Diabetes & Metabolism. 
2002, 28(1), pp.20-26. 
30. Daka, B. et al. Inverse association between serum insulin and sex hormone-
binding globulin in a population survey in Sweden. Endocrine Connections. 2013, 
2(1), pp.18-22. 
31. Yeung, E.H. et al. Longitudinal Study of Insulin Resistance and Sex Hormones 
over the Menstrual Cycle: The BioCycle Study. The Journal of Clinical 
Endocrinology & Metabolism. 2010, 95(12), pp.5435-5442. 
32. Woodard, T.L. and Bolcun-Filas, E. Prolonging Reproductive Life after Cancer: 
The Need for Fertoprotective Therapies. Trends in Cancer. 2016, 2(5), pp.222-
33. Wellons, M.F. et al. Ovarian aging in women with diabetes: An overview. 
Maturitas. 2017, 96, pp.109-113. 
34. Biela, U. [Determinants of the age at natural menopause]. Przeglad Lekarski. 
2001, 59(3), pp.165-169. 
35. Morris, D.H. et al. Body Mass Index, Exercise, and Other Lifestyle Factors in 
Relation to Age at Natural Menopause: Analyses From the Breakthrough 
Generations Study. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2012, 175(10), pp.998-
1005. 
36. Hill, P.B. et al. Gonadotrophin release and meat consumption in vegetarian 
women. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1986, 43(1), p.37. 
37. Bagga, D. et al. Effects of a very-low fat, high-fiber diet on serum hormones and 
menstrual function - implications for breast-cancer prevention. Cancer. 1995, 
76(12), pp.2491-2496. 
38. Wu, A.H. et al. Meta-analysis: Dietary fat intake, serum estrogen levels, and the 
risk of breast cancer. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 1999, 91(6), 
pp.529-534. 
39. Mishra, G.D. et al. Major dietary patterns of young and middle aged women: 
results from a prospective Australian cohort study. European Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. 2010, 64(10), pp.1125-1133.
Chapter 5   
Dietary patterns and age at natural menopause in the UK 
Womens Cohort Study: A comparison between principal 
component analysis and reduced rank regression 
YASHVEE DUNNERAM1*, DARREN C. GREENWOOD2, JANET E. CADE1 
1 Nutritional Epidemiology Group, School of Food Science & Nutrition, University of 
Leeds, Leeds, UK 
2 Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK 
This Chapter is a manuscript in preparation for submission in a scientific journal. 
Abstract 
Background: Evidence linking diet and age at natural menopause is still sparse and 
inconsistent. This study aimed to investigate the prospective associations between dietary 
patterns derived from two different methods and age at natural menopause. 
Methods: Menopausal status was reported at two time points 4 years apart in the UK 
Womens Cohort Study. Diet of participants was measured using a 217-item food 
frequency questionnaire at baseline. Principal component analysis (PCA) and reduced 
ranked regression (RRR) were used to derive dietary patterns for 13,916 women. Cox 
proportional hazards regressions were used to estimate hazard ratios (HR) and 95% 
confidence intervals (CIs) for each pattern in relation to age at natural menopause, 
adjusting for potential confounders.  
Results: Five patterns were identified from the PCA, which we labelled: vegetables and 
legumes, animal proteins, fruits, fats and sweets and low-fat products. Three 
patterns were derived from RRR: sweets, pastries and puddings, low-fat dairy and 
meat, and red meat and processed meat. Women who scored higher on the animal 
proteins pattern were 6% less likely to have gone through a natural menopause (HR: 
0.94, 95% CI: 0.90 to 0.97) compared to those who scored lower. The red meat and 
processed meat pattern also predicted a 7% higher risk for a later natural menopause 
(HR: 0.93, 95% CI: 0.87 to 1.00).  
Conclusions: This is the first study investigating dietary patterns and age at natural 
menopause. Both PCA and RRR are useful in deriving dietary patterns which can 
influence the onset of natural menopause. 
5.1 Introduction 
The current life expectancy of females in the United Kingdom is estimated to be 
82.9 years [1], and the average age of menopause is 51 years [2]. Women in the UK are 
therefore expected to spend around one-third of their life in the menopausal state. The 
timing of menopause influences future health outcomes of women, such that an early age 
at menopause increases the risk of bone fractures and cardiovascular diseases while an 
increased risk of breast, ovarian and endometrial cancer have been associated with a late 
onset of menopause [3]. Moreover, the type and severity of menopausal symptoms may 
also be influenced by the timing of menopause [4]. The onset of menopause is under the 
influence of several factors, potentially including diet. Contradictory results have been 
reported, and there is limited evidence on the link between diet and age at menopause [3, 
Lately, more emphasis has been placed on exploring dietary patterns rather than 
studying individual food or food groups in examining diet and disease relationships. The 
complex mechanisms, by which individual food items form part of the diet may influence 
a disease or a health outcome, make the study of dietary patterns important [6, 7]. Rather 
than eating foods and nutrients in isolation, individuals eat foods in various quantities, 
combinations, proportions and varieties. The study of dietary patterns thus take into 
account the cumulative effects of different aspects of the diet and also considers the 
interactions and synergies of the different food components which could influence health 
outcomes [8]. Additionally, the effects of single foods and nutrients could be too small to 
spot, but given that dietary patterns consider the cumulative effect of several foods and 
nutrients, this might be larger and easier to detect. Several different methods have been 
used to define dietary patterns including theoretical, empirical and hybrid methods [9].  
Principal component analysis (PCA), one of the empirical methods, uses the 
correlation matrix of food intake variables to identify common patterns of food 
consumption within the data by accounting for the largest amount of variation in the diet 
[9, 10]. More recently, reduced rank regression (RRR), a hybrid method has been used to 
generate dietary patterns [11]. This technique identifies dietary patterns based on several 
nutrients or biomarkers that have been linked to the disease of interest [10]. The strength 
of PCA can be the limitation of RRR and vice versa. Principally, both methods use data 
reduction techniques to generate dietary patterns. PCA derived dietary patterns tend to 
reflect the actual dietary behaviours of the population while RRR dietary patterns could 
be behaviourally irrelevant as the food components forming part of the patterns may not 
be consumed together [12]. As the definition suggests, dietary patterns derived from RRR 
are rather based on biologically relevant factors. Thus, comparing findings using both 
methods could provide useful insights for this study.  
To date, mostly individual foods and food groups have been studied in relation to 
age at menopause [5, 13, 14]. Therefore, this study aims to compare dietary patterns 
derived by PCA and RRR and to investigate their associations prospectively with age at 
natural menopause. For RRR, selected response variables represent important risk factors 
of the timing of natural menopause. Factors such as age at menarche, body mass index 
(BMI) and total energy intake [3, 5, 13, 15] have all been associated with the timing of 
menopause. However, the conflicting findings make a definitive conclusion on the risk 
factors difficult. Therefore, the RRR derived dietary patterns should be considered as an 
initial hypothesis, rather than patterns with a confirmed association. 
5.2 Methods 
5.2.1 Study design and participants 
14,172 women from the UKWCS [16] who participated at both baseline and 
follow-up were considered for this study. Women aged 35 years or more responded to 
self-administered questionnaires which asked about demographic details, weight history, 
physical activity, reproductive history, anthropometric, and other health-related factors. 
Age at natural menopause was defined as the age at the last menstrual period prior to 
permanent cessation of menstruation for 12 consecutive months [17]. To be considered 
naturally postmenopausal at follow-up, women had to be pre or peri-menopausal, that is, 
having one or more menstrual periods in the last 12 months, not pregnant and never used 
HRT at baseline as well as not using HRT at follow-up since these endogenous hormones 
may influence the bleeding pattern.  
5.2.2 Dietary assessment 
Diet was assessed using a validated 217-item food frequency questionnaire (FFQ) 
which was developed from the FFQ used in the European Prospective Investigation into 
Cancer (EPIC) study. Participants were asked to report their consumption frequency 
based on 10 pre-coded classifications of the frequency of consumption ranging from 
never to 6 or more times per day over the last 12 months. The reported frequency for 
each food item was then converted to daily intake [16].  
Figure 5.1 Flow diagram for participants selection 
5.2.3 Statistical analyses 
Principal component analysis (PCA) and reduced rank regression (RRR) were 
used to derive dietary patterns. While the rank of the covariance matrix used for PCA 
corresponds to the number of foods/food groups, in the RRR method, the rank 
corresponds to the number of selected response variables. To ensure compatibility of the 
results from PCA and RRR, it is recommended to choose the minimum foods/food groups 
and response variables for both methods respectively [10]. Therefore, to simplify the 
complexity of our data, the 217 individual food items (in grams/day) were manually 
classified into 64 food groups according to the similarity of nutrient profiles or culinary 
usage of the foods. All 64 food groups were subsequently used to identify dietary patterns. 
1995/98: 35,372 women at baseline in 
the UKWCS 
1999/2002: 14,172 women participated 
at follow-up  
21,200 lost to follow-up 
after ~4 years 
5,694 women included in the model  
Exclusions 
16 had their last period before 40y at 
follow-up 
6,521 were postmenopausal at baseline 
383 had a hysterectomy and/or 
oophorectomy at baseline 
1,379 using HRT at baseline 
179 using HRT at follow-up when still 
menstruating 
5,312 women included in the final 
analysis 
318 missing data on age at menopause 
64 missing data on dietary pattern 
scores 
The number of factors retained was according to the combination of food group 
components with an eigenvalue >1.0 and examination of the breakpoint in the scree plot 
(Figure C.1), resulting in five factors retained for further analyses. The factors were 
rotated by an orthogonal transformation (Varimax option) to achieve a simpler structure 
with greater interpretability. Food groups with a factor loading 0.2 on a component were 
considered informative for interpretation of the dietary patterns. The KaiserMeyer
Olkin measure verified the sampling adequacy for the PCA, KMO = 0.82, which is 
considered as meritorious.  
RRR was applied to derive dietary patterns predictive of age at natural menopause 
using Stata (StataCorp, version 14.0) in combination with the PLS option in SAS (version 
9.3; SAS Institute). A directed acyclic graph (DAG) was used as the conceptual 
framework for the RRR (Figure C.2). Briefly, RRR determines linear combinations of 
predictor variables (e.g., food group intake) that explain as much as possible of the 
variation in the response variables (e.g., nutrients, biomarkers or risk factors), that are 
presumed to affect disease risk, in this case, age at natural menopause [10, 18]. The 64 
food groups were entered as the predictor variables and the variables BMI, total energy 
intake and age at menarche were treated as response variables. The number of dietary 
patterns extracted using RRR analysis is determined by the number of response variables 
given that RRR aims to explain a high proportion of response variation [10], hence three 
dietary patterns were extracted. Factor scores were calculated for each of the derived 
patterns by summing the products of the observed consumption frequency and the factor 
loading for each of the significant food groups [9]. The groups that had a negative factor 
loading were also retained to maintain the complexity of eating habits.  
Coxs proportional hazard models were fitted for each dietary pattern separately 
to identify the predictors of age at natural menopause using Stata (StataCorp, version 
14.0). At follow-up, if the event was not a natural menopause, this was considered as 
censored. Age at phase 2 was considered as the time-scale variable for women who were 
still menstruating at follow-up while for those who were naturally postmenopausal at 
phase 2, their age of last natural period was used as the time variable [19]. Therefore, 
women who were postmenopausal, using HRT, had a hysterectomy or oophorectomy at 
baseline; using HRT at follow-up when still menstruating and those for whom age at 
natural menopause was either before the age of 40y (as this could be chemically induced) 
or after 65y were all excluded from the Coxs proportional hazard models (Figure 5.1). 
Moreover, in this time-to-event model, women who were already postmenopausal 
at baseline were excluded as no information were available to infer whether they had a 
natural menopause. The proportional hazards assumption was tested graphically for all 
exposures and covariates in the model as well as using Schoenfeld residuals. The 
regression models were adjusted for potential confounding factors: physical activity 
(MET-hours/week), smoking status (current vs not current smoker), alcohol consumption 
(g/day) and social class (routine and manual, intermediate, professional and managerial) 
as identified by the DAG. Results of the regression models are expressed as hazard ratios 
(HR) and 95% CIs. A HR >1.00 represented a positive association with the incidence of 
a natural menopause with reference to the dietary pattern score per standard deviation.   
5.3 Results 
5.3.1 Principal component analysis  
Using PCA, five dietary patterns were identified that together explained 16% of 
the variance in dietary intake as measured by the FFQ (Table 5.1). Factor 1 was 
characterised by high factor loadings for refined pasta and rice, pulses, and vegetables 
and was labelled vegetables and legumes. Factor 2 was highly loaded for fish, shellfish, 
meat, poultry, and offal was labelled animal proteins. Factor 3 which had high loadings 
of various fruits (e.g. stone fruits, citrus, etc.) was labelled fruits. Factor 4 was labelled 
as fats and sweets as it was characterised by high loadings for margarine, 
confectionaries and spreads, biscuits, cakes, pastries and puddings. Factor 5 (described as 
low-fat products) had positive factor loadings for low-fat dairy products, spreads, and 
dressings. Whilst these labels are subjective, they do describe the over-riding 
characteristics of the components, which form quite distinct components after rotation. 
5.3.1.1 Participants characteristics 
Participants from the highest quintiles of the vegetables and legumes, animal 
proteins, and fats and sweets dietary patterns were older at baseline compared to 
participants in the lowest quintiles. On the other hand, participants from the highest 
quintiles of the fruits and low-fat products dietary patterns were younger at baseline 
(Table 5.2). BMI of women from the highest quintile of the animal proteins (25.5  5.2 
vs. 22.9  3.6) and the low-calorie fats (25.3  5.6 vs 23.2  3.7) patterns was higher as 
compared to women from the lowest quintile (Table 5.2).  
Table 5.1 Factor loadings for food groups with a value >0.2 in varimax rotated principal 
components and for reduced rank regression* 
 Principal component analysis (PCA) Reduced rank 
regression (RRR) 
Factor 
Factor 
Factor 
Factor 
Factor 
Factor 
Factor  
Factor 
Potatoes with added fat  -  - -  0.21  - -  -  - 
Refined pasta and rice  0.23  - -  -  - -  -  - 
Wholegrain pasta and rice  -  - -  -  - -  - -0.24 
Low fat dairy products  -  - -  -   0.45 -  0.20  - 
High fat dairy products  -  - -  - -0.36 -  -  - 
Butter and hard margarine  -  - -  - -0.33 -  -  - 
Margarine  -  - -  0.23  - -  -  - 
Low fat spreads  -  - -  -  0.30 -  -  - 
Low fat dressing  -  - -  -  0.29 -  0.21  - 
Fish and fish dishes  -  0.30 -  -  - -  -  - 
Shell fish  -  0.26 -  -  - -  -  - 
Pulses  0.22  - -  -  - -  -  - 
Vegetable dishes  0.37  - -  -  - -  - -0.31 
Textured vegetable protein  0.21 -0.23 -  -  - -  -  - 
Allium  0.22  - -  -  - -  -  - 
Fresh legumes  0.22  - -  -  - -  -  - 
Mediterranean vegetables  0.36  - -  -  - -  -  - 
Salad vegetables  0.23  - -  -  - -  -  - 
Mushrooms  0.31  - -  -  - -  -  - 
Stone fruits  -  -  0.36  -  - -  -  - 
Deep orange & yellow 
fruits 
 -  - 0.33  -  - -  -  - 
Grapes  -   - 0.22  -  - -  -  - 
Citrus family fruits  -  - 0.24  -  - -  -  - 
Rhubarb  -  - 0.24  -  - -  -  - 
Berries  -  - 0.35  -  - -  -  - 
Pomes  -  - 0.28  -  - -  -  - 
Confectionary & spreads  -  - -  0.31  -  0.25  -  - 
Nuts and seeds  -  - -  - -0.21 - -0.24  - 
Tea  -  - -  0.21  - -  -  - 
Low calorie/diet soft drinks  -  - -  -  - -  0.34  - 
Wines  -  - - -0.22  - -  -  - 
Biscuits  -    - -  0.32  - -  -  - 
Cakes  -  - -  0.37  - -  -  - 
Pastries and Puddings  -  - -  0.37  - 0.22  -  - 
Red meat  -  0.41 -  -  - -  0.31  0.22 
Processed meat  -  0.35 -  -  - -  0.35  0.25 
Poultry  -  0.37 -  -  - -  0.27  - 
Offal  -  0.25 -  -  - -  -  - 
Prop. VAR explained (%) 4.1 3.8 3.7 2.4 2.0 6.0 9.6 13.2 
Cumul. VAR explained 
0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.3 32.3 36.1 36.5 
*Only food groups with factor loadings | 0.2| are displayed and listed in order for simplicity and ease of 
interpretation; PCA scores  Factor 1: Vegetables and legumes, Factor 2: Animal proteins, Factor 3: Fruits, 
Factor 4: Fats and sweets, Factor 5: Low-fat products; RRR score  Factor 1: Sweets, pastries and puddings, 
Factor 2: Low-fat dairy and meat, Factor 3: Red meat and processed meat
5.3.1.2 Association between dietary patterns and age at natural menopause 
For dietary patterns derived by PCA, the unadjusted model demonstrated a 5% 
higher risk for a later natural menopause with the animal proteins (95% CI: 0.91 to 
0.98). On the other hand, the fruits pattern was associated with a 5% higher risk for an 
earlier menopause (95% CI: 1.01 to 1.09). No evidence of an association was found 
between the vegetables and legumes, fats and sweets, and low-fat products and age 
at natural menopause (Table 5.4). After adjusting for the potential confounders, the 
animal proteins dietary pattern was still associated with a higher likelihood for a later 
age at natural menopause (HR: 0.94, 95% CI: 0.90 to 0.97).   
5.3.2 Reduced ranked regression 
For the RRR method, three dietary patterns were identified and allocated a 
subjective label. The three dietary patterns explained about 29% of the total variance in 
dietary intake. Factor 1: sweets, pastries and puddings, Factor 2: low-fat dairy and 
meat, Factor 3: red meat and processed meat (Table 5.1). The first dietary pattern was 
characterised by high loadings for confectionaries and spreads as well as pastries and 
puddings. Low-fat dairy and meat pattern had a high factor loading for low-fat dairy 
products, low-fat dressings, low calorie/diet soft drinks, red meat, processed meat, and 
poultry. Red meat and processed meat pattern was characterised by high loadings for 
red meat and processed meat while negative loadings for wholegrain pasta and rice as 
well as vegetable dishes. Factor 3 explained the highest variation with 13.6% of the 
variation in the responses, and collectively they explain 36.5% of the variation in the 
responses. 
5.3.2.1 Participants characteristics 
Participants from the highest quintiles of the three dietary patterns derived by 
RRR were older at baseline compared to women in the lowest quintiles of the dietary 
patterns scores. In addition, these women were more likely to be parous and married as 
well as less likely to have a degree level and be in the professional and managerial class 
(Table 5.3). Women in the highest quintiles for the low-fat dairy and meat (37% vs. 
11%) and red meat and processed meat (26% vs. 17%) patterns were more likely to be 
categorised as obese as compared to women in the lowest quintiles of these patterns.  
Table 5.2 Characteristics of study participants 
Characteristics of 13,916 women participating in the UK Womens cohort study for the lowest (Q1) and highest (Q5) quintiles of dietary patterns 
identified using principle component analysis at baseline  
 Vegetables and legumes Animal proteins Fruits Fats and sweets Low-calorie fats 
Sample characteristics Q1 Q5 Q1 Q5 Q1 Q5 Q1 Q5 Q1 Q5 
Age at baseline, ya 51.2  9.1 52.6  8.9 49.9  8.5 54.0  9.2 55.0  8.9 49.4  8.8 50.5  8.4 55.3  9.5 53.0  9.5 52.0  8.9 
Body mass index, kg/m  24.4  4.3 24.0  4.8 22.9  3.6 25.5  5.2 24.5  5.4 23.7  4.0 24.1  4.6 24.1  4.1 23.2  3.7 25.3  5.6 
Obese, 30 kg/m [n (%)] 264 (24) 212 (20) 117 (11) 360(33) 252 (23) 194 (18) 213 (20) 227 (21) 134 (12) 348 (32) 
Physical activity, min/day  0.2  0.5 0.3  0.6 0.3  0.5 0.2 0.5 0.3  0.5 0.3  0.5 0.3  0.5 0.3  0.5 0.2  0.4 0.3  0.6 
Alcohol consumption, g/day  7.8  10.6 8.6  11.4 7.1  9.5 9.0  11.0 7.6  9.8 9.1  12.6 19.0  15.4 3.1  4.5 7.8  9.6 8.3  12.0 
Smoking, [n (%)] 339 (29) 190 (16) 201 (17) 286 (25) 182 (16) 292 (25) 448 (39) 103 (9) 251 (22) 230 (20) 
Parous, [n (%)] 1995 (19) 2069 (20) 1854 (18) 2230 (22) 1969 (19) 2099 (20) 1968 (19) 2075 (20) 2007 (19) 2110 (20) 
Ever married, [n (%)] 1984 (19) 2137 (20) 1904 (18) 2283 (22) 2002 (19) 2173 (21) 2131 (20) 2054 (20) 2000 (19) 2187 (21) 
Degree level, [n (%)] 631 (16) 828 (21) 1079 (27) 544 (14) 706 (18) 905 (23) 1010 (26) 548 (14) 978 (25) 542 (14) 
Professional and managerial 
class, [n (%)] 1633 (18) 1914 (21) 2012 (22) 1570 (17) 1813 (20) 1830 (20) 1991 (22) 1644 (18) 1887 (21) 1701 (19) 
Nutrient intake           
Fibre (g) 16.3  5.2 39.0  12.6 30.6  11.9 26.1  12.0 27.0  12.2 30.0  12.3 22.9  11.5 32.4  11.9 27.0  12.5 29.4  12.1 
% energy from fats 32.7  5.8 31.5  5.9 30.7  6.3 34.6  4.7 28.1  5.4 35.5  5.0 34.1  5.8 30.6  5.5 36.0  5.6 29.4  5.1 
% energy from proteins 15.6  2.7 14.7  2.5 13.7  2.0 16.3  2.6 16.6  3.0 13.6  1.9 15.2  2.7 14.8  2.3 13.6  2.2 16.9  2.6 
% energy from carbohydrates 48.9  6.6 51.8  6.5 53.3  6.6 47.0  5.5 52.7  7.1 48.9  5.4 44.6  5.9 54.1  5.3 48.2  6.8 51.4  5.9 
Vitamin C (mg) 97.4  35.9 281.4  121.1 
191.9  
101.5 
181.6  
112.5 
209.5  
120.6 
176.7  
170.2  
110.6 
195.5  
99.8 186.9  118.3 186.9  95.5 
Vitamin B1 (mg) 2.0  1.2 4.6  3.6 4.5  4.0 2.7  1.3 2.5  1.6 4.6  3.8 2.8  2.7 3.7  2.7 3.0  2.3 3.9  3.3 
Vitamin B2 (mg) 2.0  0.7 3.1  1.1 2.4  0.9 3.0  1.0 2.4  0.9 2.8  1.0 2.2  0.9 3.1  0.9 2.5  0.9 3.0  0.9 
Vitamin B6 (mg) 2.1  0.6 3.7  1.2 2.6  1.0 3.3  1.2 2.8  1.1 3.1  1.1 2.6  1.3 3.3  1.0 2.7  1.1 3.2  1.1 
Vitamin B12 (g) 117.0  300.1 
289.6  
566.6 
237.2  
475.9 
172.6  
356.4 
231.4  
481.3 
186.4  
416.5 86.6  226.1 
370.5  
651.9 183.7  409.1 
269.4  
560.2 
Folate (g) 288.9  77.5 
564.7  
181.7 
424.5  
156.9 
454.3  
172.5 
395.4  
158.4 
478.0  
172.2 
375.1  
167.4 
483.9  
155.9 411.4  157.7 
465.5  
166.7 
Vitamin D (g) 2.6  1.3 3.8  2.6 2.1  1.3 4.4  2.1 3.0  2.1 3.7  2.1 2.9  2.1 4.0  2.0 2.9  1.7 4.0  2.5 
Table 5.2 Continued 
 Vegetables and legumes Animal proteins Fruits Fats and sweets Low-calorie fats 
Sample characteristics Q1 Q5 Q1 Q5 Q1 Q5 Q1 Q5 Q1 Q5 
Vitamin A (g) 901.1  427.9 
1684.0  
754.8 
1091.4  
512.3 
1700.4  
785.8 
1237.8  
704.8 
1416.5  
641.2 
1292.0  
717.9 
1380.0  
630.1 
1367.4  
657.2 
1371.1  
685.1 
Vitamin E (mg) 6.8  2.9 14.1  5.5 11.4  5.2 10.8  5.0 8.4  4.1 13.5  5.5 9.5  4.9 12.0  5.1 11.2  5.2 10.0  4.8 
Calcium (mg) 945.4  307.3 
1421.0  
498.3 
1074.4  
428.9 
1324.7  
436.2 
1084.3  
399.5 
1367.2  
465.7 
1014.8  
417.6 
1411.3  
418.9 
1133.6  
424.4 
1359.4  
432.0 
Iron (mg) 13.4  5.4 24.8  8.9 19.3  7.9 20.6  8.5 18.1  8.2 21.3  8.3 17.1  7.6 22.4  9.0 18.9  8.3 20.7  8.6 
Zinc (mg) 8.9  2.7 14.3  5.7 10.5  3.8 14.5  5.4 10.8  4.9 13.1  4.6 10.8  5.4 13.3  3.9 11.6  5.3 12.9  4.3 
amean  SD (all such values)
Table 5.3 Characteristics of study participants 
Characteristics of 13,916 women participating in the UK Womens cohort study for the lowest (Q1) and highest (Q5) quintiles of dietary patterns 
identified using reduced ranked regression at baseline 
 Sweets, pastries and puddings Low-fat dairy and meat Red meat and processed meat 
Sample characteristics Q1 Q5 Q1 Q5 Q1 Q5 
Age at baseline, y a 51.3  8.8 53.1  9.2 51.3  9.2 52.8  8.8 50.7  8.4 53.7  9.4 
Body mass index, kg/m  24.0  4.2 24.4  4.9 22.9  3.6 25.7  5.7 23.8  4.6 24.5  4.4 
Obese, 30 kg/m [n (%)] 221 (20) 256 (23) 115 (11) 403 (37) 188 (17) 278 (26) 
Physical activity, min/day  0.2  0.5 0.3  0.6 0.3  0.4 0.3  0.6 0.3  0.5 0.2  0.5 
Alcohol consumption, g/day  9.7  12.5 7.4  8.6 7.4  9.7 7.8  9.7 7.7  11.1 8.6  11.2 
Smoking, [n (%)] 354 (31) 177 (15) 186 (16) 314 (27) 165 (14) 339 (29) 
Parous, [n (%)] 1854 (18) 2135 (21) 1890 (18) 2195 (21) 1988 (19.3) 2105 (20) 
Ever married, [n (%)] 1900 (18) 2177 (21) 1903 (18) 2212 (21) 2044 (20) 2125 (20) 
Degree level, [n (%)] 820 (21) 735 (19) 1078 (27) 520 (13) 957 (24) 605 (15) 
Professional and managerial 
class, [n (%)] 1797 (20) 1830 (20) 1966 (22) 1647 (18) 1987 (22) 1618 (18) 
Nutrient intake       
Fibre (g) 17.1  5.5 38.4  13.1 29.1  12.6 25.5  11.3 36.3  13.4 19.8  7.7 
% energy from fats 32.4  6.2 31.5  5.5 33.2  6.1 31.2  5.2 30.1  5.7 35.4  5.1 
% energy from proteins 15.2  2.8 15.1  2.5 13.4  2.0 16.9  2.6 14.6  2.4 15.3  2.6 
% energy from carbohydrates 48.5  7.3 52.0  5.9 51.2  6.7 49.8  5.9 53.4  6.0 46.7  6.2 
Vitamin C (mg) 109.7  43.7 267.8  126.8 188.6  105.0 176.2  107.2 246.7  127.7 134.4  67.3 
Vitamin B1 (mg) 2.0  1.5 4.7  3.6 3.7  3.4 2.9  2.0 4.9  4.1 2.2  1.1 
Vitamin B2 (mg) 1.7  0.5 3.4  1.0 2.3  0.9 3.0  0.9 3.0  1.0 2.3  0.8 
Vitamin B6 (mg) 1.9  0.5 3.9  1.2 2.6  1.0 3.1  1.1 3.3  1.2 2.6  0.9 
Vitamin B12 (g) 102.5  284.0 323.4  606.0 251.4  504.8 189.6  394.9 278.8  522.9 139.3  325.1 
Folate (g) 273.0  68.8 582.3  173.2 417.1  164.3 433.3  161.6 517.0  185.9 350.8  126.0 
Vitamin D (g) 2.2  1.2 4.2  2.5 2.7  2.0 3.8  2.0 3.2  2.5 3.3  1.6 
Table 5.3 Continued 
 Sweets, pastries and puddings Low-fat dairy and meat Red meat and processed meat 
Sample characteristics Q1 Q5 Q1 Q5 Q1 Q5 
Vitamin A (g) 864.7  404.7 1731.3  763.8 1205.4  597.6 1367.7  699.7 1431.2  713.4 1274.6  643.4 
Vitamin E (mg) 6.9  3.0 13.9  5.5 11.7  5.5 9.5  4.4 12.8  5.6 8.6  3.9 
Calcium (mg) 785.9  234.3 1594.0  437.9 1016.3  436.3 1378.2  404.5 1372.3  495.8 1031.5  370.6 
Iron (mg) 13.0  4.8 25.6  9.1 19.0  8.2 19.3  8.2 23.0  8.7 15.9  6.5 
Zinc (mg) 7.9  2.2 15.6  5.4 10.6  4.1 13.0  5.3 13.0  5.4 11.0  3.9 
                                                 amean  SD (all such values)
5.3.2.2 Association between dietary patterns and age at natural menopause 
In the unadjusted model, no evidence of an association was found between the 
dietary patterns derived from the RRR and age at menopause (Table 5.4). After adjusting 
for the potential confounders, smoking status, education level, social class, and physical 
activity level, the red meat and processed meat pattern was associated with a 7% higher 
risk for a later menopause (95% CI: 0.87 to 1.00), while no evidence of an association 
was found with the sweets, pastries and puddings and low-fat dairy and meat patterns 
and age of natural menopause.  
Table 5.4 Adjusted and unadjusted hazard ratios (HR) for age at natural menopause and 
corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CI) 
 Crudea   Model 1b   
Dietary patterns HR 95% CI P  HR 95% CI P 
Principal component analysis        
   Vegetables and legumes  0.99 0.96 to 1.01 0.34  1.00 0.97 to 1.03 0.92 
   Animal proteins 0.95 0.91 to 0.98 <0.01  0.94 0.90 to 0.97 <0.01 
 Fruits 1.05 1.01 to 1.09 0.02  1.04 0.99 to 1.08 0.12 
 Fats and sweets 1.00 0.95 to 1.05 0.94  1.00 0.94 to 1.07 0.98 
 Low-calorie fats 0.99 0.95 to 1.04 0.77  0.97 0.92 to 1.03 0.30 
Reduced ranked regression        
   Sweets, pastries and puddings 0.95 0.89 to 1.01 0.12  0.96 0.88 to 1.04 0.28 
 Low-fat dairy and meat 0.96 0.89 to 1.02 0.17  0.97 0.90 to 1.04 0.38 
 Red meat and processed meat 0.95 0.89 to 1.01 0.11  0.93 0.87 to 1.00 0.05 
a Unadjusted model (n=5,312) 
b Model adjusted for covariates: smoking status, education level, social class, physical activity level 
(n=4,920) 
5.3.3 Correlation between dietary patterns derived from principal 
component analysis and reduced rank regression 
The vegetables and legumes dietary pattern was strongly and positively 
correlated with the sweets, pastries and puddings dietary pattern while it was negatively 
correlated with the red meat and processed meat dietary pattern (Table 5.5).  The animal 
proteins dietary pattern derived from PCA was positively correlated with the low-fat 
dairy and meat and red meat and processed meat dietary patterns. The low-fat products 
had a strong positive correlation with the low-fat dairy and meat dietary pattern. It 
conversely had a weak negative correlation with the red meat and processed meat.  
Table 5.5 Correlation between dietary patterns derived from principal component 
analysis and reduced rank regression (n=13,916) 
Reduced ranked 
regression 
Sweets, pastries and 
puddings 
Low-fat dairy and 
Red meat and 
processed meat 
 r 95% CI r 95% CI r 95% CI 
Principal component 
analysis       
   Vegetables and legumes    0.79 0.78 to 0.79 -0.13 -0.15 to -0.11 -0.66 -0.67 to -0.66 
   Animal proteins 0.27 0.26 to 0.29  0.59  0.58 to 0.60  0.46  0.45 to 0.48 
   Fruits 0.19 0.18 to 0.21 -0.13 -0.14 to -0.11  0.03  0.02 to 0.05 
   Fats and sweets 0.31 0.29 to 0.32  0.08  0.06 to 0.09 -0.10 -0.12 to -0.09 
   Low-calorie fats 0.08 0.06 to 0.09  0.51  0.50 to 0.52 -0.28 -0.29 to -0.26 
5.4 Discussion 
The objective of this study was to find the associations between dietary patterns 
derived from PCA and RRR and the likelihood of becoming menopausal during the 
follow-up period of the UKWCS. We identified five dietary patterns using PCA while 
three patterns were derived using RRR. Dietary patterns generated from this study are in 
line with studies that looked at dietary patterns and health outcomes among 
postmenopausal women [6, 20].   
Given that the aims of the two methods differ such that PCA derived patterns 
usually reflect the dietary behaviours in the population while RRR derived patterns are 
based on the risk factors of the health outcome, different dietary patterns can be expected 
in the same study sample. Nevertheless, in this study dietary patterns generated from the 
two methods were quite similar and were correlated. In line with this study, Sauvageot et 
al. [21] also reported similar findings. For instance, we found that the animal proteins 
pattern was moderately correlated with the RRR-patterns low-fat dairy and meat and 
the red meat and processed meat. The PCA-pattern fats and sweets was moderately 
correlated with the sweets, pastries and puddings pattern derived from RRR. Moreover, 
the vegetables and legumes pattern was positively correlated with the sweets, pastries 
and puddings pattern and negatively correlated with the red meat and processed meat 
pattern both derived from RRR.  
Comparing the relationship between dietary patterns and the chance of 
experiencing a menopause, we found that the animal proteins derived from PCA and 
the red meat and processed meat derived from RRR patterns were found to be associated 
with a higher chance of experiencing a later menopause. As no previous study has 
specifically investigated dietary patterns in relation to the timing of natural menopause 
direct comparison with other studies is impossible. Our recent findings for the association 
between food groups and the timing of onset of natural menopause demonstrated that a 
higher consumption of oily fish and fresh legumes were both associated with a later onset 
of menopause while a higher intake of refined pasta and rice was linked to an earlier onset 
of menopause [22]. Interestingly,  these food items did not form part of any of the dietary 
patterns as they contributed to eigenvalues below 0.2 implying that they did not explain 
as large an amount of variance as compared to the other food items [23]. Yet our previous 
findings [22] are in line with the current results such that the intake of an extra portion of 
fish, red meat and processed meat resulted in a positive estimate, indicating a later onset 
of menopause. The use of different analytical methods, multiple linear regression and 
survival analysis, could have accounted for the observed disparities. While the previous 
analysis was restricted to 914 women who experienced a natural menopause at follow-
up, this study was rather based on the whole cohort. The fact that not all of them will have 
achieved menopause at the time of follow-up was considered here as these participants 
contribute to crucial data that they quitted at a certain amount of time without having 
reached a menopause is itself informative.   
In line with the few studies which have evaluated the association between food 
groups or individual food items and age at natural menopause, a later onset of menopause 
has been demonstrated with the consumption of meat [13, 24, 25]. On the other hand, 
according to a recent study including women from the Nurses Health Study II, a higher 
risk of an earlier menopause was reported with each 1 serving per day of red meat and no 
evidence of an association was demonstrated between animal protein intake and an early 
menopause [26]. The main disparity in findings is because meat consumption was 
explored individually rather than as part of a dietary pattern. Additionally, the Nurses 
Health Study II consisted of much younger women at the study entry (25-42 years) to 
investigate the risk of an early menopause, while women in the UKWCS were older at 
baseline and we explored the association between overall risk of menopause and diet 
rather than the early menopause. 
Some components in red meat such as haem iron, heterocyclic amines in cooked 
meat and exogenous hormone residues are potentially oestrogenic [27]. Thus, the 
consumption of red and processed meats could lead to a higher circulating oestrogen level 
and contribute to the feedback mechanisms of the menstrual cycle. Supporting this 
hypothesis, a randomised controlled trial among 272 premenopausal women 
demonstrated that serum levels of oestrone and oestradiol were higher among non-
vegetarians as compared to with minimal meat intake (vegetarians and pescatarians) [28]. 
Moreover, according to a cross-sectional study among women in the Nurses Health 
Study, a Western dietary pattern which was highly loaded with intakes of red and 
processed meats, refined grains, sweets, and desserts was associated with a higher level 
of oestradiol [29]. On the other hand, a traditional Mediterranean diet, that is, a low intake 
of animal fats and proteins and higher intake of vegetables and fruits was associated with 
a reduced endogenous level of oestrogen [30]. Furthermore, in our study, the animal 
proteins pattern was positively correlated with the RRR-derived red meat and processed 
meat pattern. The red meat and processed meat pattern was also negatively correlated 
with the vegetables and legumes pattern generated from PCA.  
According to a systematic review, premature ovarian failure is characterised by 
amenorrhea, hypergonadotropinaemia as well as oestrogen deficiency [31]. Moreover, 
studies have indicated that an increased level of follicle stimulating hormones (FSH) at 
the start of the menstrual cycle could mean an earlier reproductive ageing. Oestrogen and 
FSH levels are related; higher oestrogen levels have been associated with a reduced level 
of FSH which possibly led to delayed or skipped ovulations [32-34]. Consequently, it is 
plausible that by sustaining the hormonal feedback loop and by preventing or delaying 
the ovum from undergoing ovulation, a higher oestrogen level could put off the onset of 
menopause. However, the exact mechanism for the association between oestrogen level 
and the timing of menopause still need to be elucidated. 
Our study has some potential limitations. These include the use of an FFQ to 
estimate dietary intake, and self-reported age at natural menopause which are both prone 
to recall bias and measurement errors. However, the FFQ used in this study has been 
previously validated against biomarkers [16]. Moreover, some volunteer bias may be 
likely as recruitment of participants for the UKWCS was based on a volunteer basis from 
a World Cancer Research Fund mailing list of previous questionnaire participants. The 
RRR method is limited due to the data-driven approaches, including that the identified 
dietary patterns are specific to the population under study. This issue can be partly sorted 
by validating the method in other populations [35]. Therefore, caution should be applied 
when extrapolating these findings in different study populations. In addition, both RRR 
and PCA have several weaknesses owing to the subjective choices for determining the 
variable scale, the number of variables and factors as well as interpretation of the dietary 
patterns [36]. Although an explicit method was used to determine the potential 
confounders in this study, residual confounding due to unmeasured factors (e.g. 
environmental factors such as the location of habitation) in the UKWCS may still be 
present. Another limitation is the applicability of the findings to the general UK 
population and other countries, as the UKWCS consisted of a larger number of 
vegetarians which could refers to a more health-conscious sample. Yet this cohort in 
addition to being able to explore healthy diets, also included women with other dietary 
habits such as meat-eaters and fish-eaters and participants who were came from different 
socio-demographic backgrounds.  
The main strength of our study is that it is the first ever study prospectively 
investigating dietary patterns with age at natural menopause in a large cohort. This study 
also benefits from including two different methods, PCA and RRR, to study dietary 
patterns in relation to the incidence of being naturally menopausal by providing a broader 
overview of this association in this cohort of postmenopausal British women. 
Additionally, in this study age at phase 2 was considered as the time-scale variable for 
women who were still menstruating at follow-up instead of time on study. Thibaut and 
Bnichou [19], for instance, demonstrated that the use of time-on-study instead of age as 
the time-scale for Coxs regression analysis of epidemiological cohort studies could lead 
to bias. Using age as the time-scale led to flexible control of the effects of age and avoid 
the need to include age as a confounder in the regression model. Moreover, this method 
provides a more meaningful basis to explore the risk of becoming menopausal fluctuates 
over time [37].  
5.5 Public health implications 
This study demonstrated that a diet rich in animal proteins as well as red and 
processed meats could delay the onset of menopause. These dietary patterns were 
negatively correlated with the vegetables and legumes pattern. To our knowledge, this 
is the first study demonstrating a link between dietary patterns and age at natural 
menopause. Both PCA and RRR are useful in deriving dietary patterns which can 
influence the onset of natural menopause. However further observational studies, 
especially, in different populations must be conducted to confirmed these results. As such 
it may be too premature to base public health messages on our findings. Yet, these results 
will contribute to an improved understanding of the timing of natural menopause in 
relation to diet, which may also have implications associated with longer-term health 
outcomes in post-menopausal women. As demonstrated by our recent study [38] and 
previous studies [3], a late menopause increases the risk of ovarian, endometrial and 
breast cancers. Therefore, as part of preventive strategies, women with a family history 
of late menopause or these hormone-related cancers should be advised to limit or avoid 
the consumption of animal proteins, in particular, red meats and processed meats. It would 
not be advisable for women who are at a high risk of an early menopause such as those 
with a family history of early menopause [39], those who are nulliparous or have had an 
early menarche to consume these meats to delay their onset of menopause given the 
adverse health risks associated with consumption of red and processed meats. This is also 
in line with the latest Lancet EAT report [40] which supports the need to reduce the 
consumption of red meat and highly processed foods and to increase the consumption of 
fruits, vegetables and legumes as part of the aim to achieve dietary changes from current 
diets to healthy diets which would enhance human health and lead to a reduction in the 
number of yearly deaths. 
References 
1. Office for National Statistics. Statistical bulletin - National life tables, UK: 2014 
to 2016. 2017. Available from: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/national-life-tables-uk-2014-to-2016 
[accessed 18 January 2018]. 
2. Sarri, G. et al. Diagnosis and management of menopause: summary of NICE 
guidance. BMJ : British Medical Journal. 2015, 351, pp.1-6. 
3. Gold, E.B. The timing of the age at which natural menopause occurs. Obstetrics 
and Gynecology Clinics of North America. 2011, 38(3), pp.425-440. 
4. Pokoradi, A.J. et al. Factors associated with age of onset and type of menopause 
in a cohort of UK women. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology. 2011, 
205(1), pp. 34.e1-34.e13. 
5. Dorjgochoo, T. et al. Dietary and lifestyle predictors of age at natural menopause 
and reproductive span in the Shanghai Women's Health Study. Menopause. 2008, 
15(5), pp.924-933. 
6. de Franca, N.A. et al. Dietary patterns and bone mineral density in Brazilian 
postmenopausal women with osteoporosis: a cross-sectional study. European 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2016, 70(1), pp.85-90. 
7. Waijers, P.M. et al. A critical review of predefined diet quality scores. British 
Journal of Nutrition. 2007, 97(2), pp.219-231. 
8. Schulze, M.B. et al. Food based dietary patterns and chronic disease prevention. 
British Medical Journal. 2018, 361, pp.1-6. 
9. Thorpe, M.G. et al. A comparison of the dietary patterns derived by principal 
component analysis and cluster analysis in older Australians. International 
Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity. 2016, 13(1), pp.1-14. 
10. Hoffmann, K. et al. Application of a new statistical method to derive dietary 
patterns in nutritional epidemiology. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2004, 
159(10), pp.935-944. 
11. Michels, K.B. and Schulze, M.B. Can dietary patterns help us detect diet-disease 
associations? Nutrition Research Reviews. 2005, 18(2), pp.241-248. 
12. Batis, C. et al. Using both principal component analysis and reduced rank 
regression to study dietary patterns and diabetes in Chinese adults. Public Health 
Nutrition. 2016, 19(2), pp.195-203. 
13. Nagel, G. et al. Reproductive and dietary determinants of the age at menopause in 
EPIC-Heidelberg. Maturitas. 2005, 52(3-4), pp.337-347. 
14. Sapre, S. and Thakur, R. Lifestyle and dietary factors determine age at natural 
menopause. Journal of Midlife Health. 2014, 5(1), pp.3-5. 
15. Ceylan, B. and zerdoan, N. Factors affecting age of onset of menopause and 
determination of quality of life in menopause. Turkish Journal of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology. 2015, 12(1), pp.43-49. 
16. Cade, J.E. et al. Cohort Profile: The UK Women's Cohort Study (UKWCS). 
International Journal of Epidemiology. 2017, 46(2), pp.1-11. 
17. Nagata, C. et al. Association of diet with the onset of menopause in Japanese 
women. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2000, 152(9), pp.863-867. 
18. Jankovic, N. et al. Stability of dietary patterns assessed with reduced rank 
regression; the Zutphen Elderly Study. Nutrition Journal. 2014, 13, p.30. 
19. Thiebaut, A.C. and Benichou, J. Choice of time-scale in Cox's model analysis of 
epidemiologic cohort data: a simulation study. Statistics in Medicine. 2004, 
23(24), pp.3803-3820. 
20. Vrieling, A. et al. Dietary patterns and survival in German postmenopausal breast 
cancer survivors. British Journal of Cancer. 2013, 108(1), pp.188-192. 
21. Sauvageot, N. et al. Association of Empirically Derived Dietary Patterns with 
Cardiovascular Risk Factors: A Comparison of PCA and RRR Methods. PLoS 
ONE. 2016, 11(8), pp.1-6. 
22. Dunneram, Y. et al. Dietary intake and age at natural menopause: results from the 
UK Womens Cohort Study. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health. 
2018, 72(8), pp.733-740. 
23. Bakolis, I. The use of dietary patterns empirically derived from Principal 
Components Analysis and alternative strategies to identify associations between 
diet and disease. Doctor of Philosophy thesis, Imperial College London, 2013. 
24. Torgerson, D.J. et al. Factors associated with onset of menopause in women aged 
4549. Maturitas. 1994, 19(2), pp.83-92. 
25. Wang, M. et al. Age at natural menopause and associated factors in adult women: 
Findings from the China Kadoorie Biobank study in Zhejiang rural area. PLoS 
ONE. 2018, 13(4), pp.1-13. 
26. Boutot, M.E. et al. Dietary Protein Intake and Early Menopause in the Nurses 
Health Study II. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2018, 187(2), pp.270-277. 
27. Cho, E. et al. Red Meat Intake and Risk of Breast Cancer Among Premenopausal 
Women. Archives of Internal Medicine. 2006, 166(20), pp.2253-2259. 
28. Harmon, B.E. et al. Oestrogen levels in serum and urine of premenopausal women 
eating low and high amounts of meat. Public Health Nutrition. 2014, 17(9), 
pp.2087-2093. 
29. Fung, T.T. et al. Dietary patterns, the Alternate Healthy Eating Index and plasma 
sex hormone concentrations in postmenopausal women. International Journal of 
Cancer. 2007, 121(4), pp.803-809. 
30. Carruba, G. et al. A traditional Mediterranean diet decreases endogenous 
estrogens in healthy postmenopausal women. Nutrition and Cancer. 2006, 56(2), 
pp.253-259. 
31. Nippita, T.A. and Baber, R.J. Premature ovarian failure: a review. Climacteric. 
2007, 10(1), pp.11-22. 
32. Ahmed Ebbiary, N.A. et al. Hypothalamic-pituitary ageing: progressive increase 
in FSH and LH concentrations throughout the reproductive life in regularly 
menstruating women. Clinical Endocrinology. 1994, 41(2), pp.199-206. 
33. Sherman, B.M. et al. The menopausal transition: analysis of LH, FSH, estradiol, 
and progesterone concentrations during menstrual cycles of older women. Journal 
of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism. 1976, 42(4), pp.629-636. 
34. Klein, N.A. et al. Reproductive aging: accelerated ovarian follicular development 
associated with a monotropic follicle-stimulating hormone rise in normal older 
women. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism. 1996, 81(3), pp.1038-
1045. 
35. Jacobs, S. et al. Dietary Patterns Derived by Reduced Rank Regression Are 
Inversely Associated with Type 2 Diabetes Risk across 5 Ethnic Groups in the 
Multiethnic Cohort. Current Developments in Nutrition. 2017, 1(5). 
36. Newby, P.K. and Tucker, K.L. Empirically derived eating patterns using factor or 
cluster analysis: A review. Nutrition Reviews. 2004, 62(5), pp.177-203. 
37. Griffin, B.A. et al. Use of alternative time scales in Cox proportional hazard 
models: implications for time-varying environmental exposures. Statistics in 
Medicine. 2012, 31(27), pp.3320-3327. 
38. Dunneram, Y. et al. Diet and risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer: UK 
Women's Cohort Study. British Journal of Nutrition. 2018, pp.1-24. 
39. Mishra, G.D. et al. EMAS position statement: Predictors of premature and early 
natural menopause. Maturitas. 2019, 123, pp.82-88. 
40. Willett, W. et al. Food in the Anthropocene: the EAT-Lancet Commission on 
healthy diets from sustainable food systems. Lancet. 2019, 393(10170), pp.447-
Chapter 6  
Soy intake and vasomotor menopausal symptoms among midlife 
women: a pooled analysis of five studies from the InterLACE 
consortium 
YASHVEE DUNNERAM1*, HSIN-FANG CHUNG2, JANET E. CADE1, DARREN C. 
GREENWOOD1, ANNETTE J. DOBSON2, ELLEN S. MITCHELL3, NANCY F. 
WOODS4, ERIC J. BRUNNER5, TOYOKO YOSHIZAWA6, DEBRA ANDERSON7, 
GITA D. MISHRA2 
1 Nutritional Epidemiology Group, School of Food Science and Nutrition, University of 
Leeds, Leeds, UK 
2 School of Public Health, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia 
3 Family and Child Nursing, School of Nursing, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 
4 Biobehavioral Nursing and Health Systems, School of Nursing, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA 
5 Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, London, 
6 Department of Womens Health Nursing, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sendai, Japan 
7 Menzies Health Institute Queensland, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Queensland, 
Australia 
Published: European Journal of Clinical Nutrition (2019) Epub ahead of print 
This Chapter is an exact copy of the journal paper referred to above. 
Abstract 
Background/Objectives: Phytoestrogen rich-foods such as soy may be associated with 
less frequent/severe vasomotor menopausal symptoms (VMS), although evidence is 
limited. We thus investigated the associations between the consumption of soy products 
and soy milk and the frequency/severity of VMS. 
Subjects/Methods: We pooled data from 19,351 middle-aged women from five 
observational studies in Australia, UK, USA, and Japan that contribute to the 
International Collaboration for a Life course Approach to reproductive health and 
Chronic disease Events (InterLACE). Information on soy consumption, VMS and 
covariates were collected by self-report. We included 11,006 women who had complete 
data on soy consumption, VMS and covariates at baseline for the cross-sectional analysis. 
For the prospective analysis, 4522 women who were free of VMS at baseline and had 
complete data on VMS at follow-up were considered. Multinomial logistic regression and 
binary logistic regression models were used. 
Results: No statistically significant evidence of an association was found between soy 
products (relative risk ratio (RRR): 0.92, 95% CI: 0.761.11) or soy milk (RRR: 1.24, 
95% CI: 0.931.65) and the likelihood of reporting frequent or severe VMS cross-
sectionally. Prospective results indicated that frequent consumption of soy products (odds 
ratio (OR): 0.63, 95% CI: 0.450.89) but not soy milk (OR: 1.11, 95% CI: 0.851.45) 
was associated with lower likelihood of reporting subsequent VMS, after adjustment for 
socio-demographic and reproductive factors. 
Conclusions: These are the first ever findings from pooled observational data of 
association between consumption of soy products and VMS.  
6.1 Introduction 
Menopause, a natural event marking the end of the reproductive life of women, is 
often accompanied by menopausal symptoms. Vasomotor menopausal symptoms (VMS), 
including hot flushes and night sweats, are the most common symptoms which arise as a 
consequence of a decline in endogenous oestrogen levels, in particular during the 
perimenopausal and early postmenopausal phases [1, 2]. The frequency and severity of 
VMS usually, decrease over time, but this varies by individual with symptoms subsiding 
after a year for some or persisting for over 30 years in others [3]. The frequency/severity 
of VMS has been linked to various chronic diseases, including cardiovascular disease, 
osteoporosis and cognitive decline [4, 5]. 
Phytoestrogen rich-foods such as soy have been associated with less frequent and 
less severe menopausal symptoms, although evidence is limited [6, 7]. Epidemiological 
studies which investigated the association between soy intake and the frequency/severity 
of VMS also demonstrated conflicting results [8, 9]. Moreover, according to a review of 
43 randomised controlled trials (RCTs) [1], the positive effect of phytoestrogen 
supplements on the frequency/severity of hot flushes and night sweats in peri- or 
postmenopausal women is still inconclusive given the small sample size and potential 
high risk of bias of the included trials. However, the same review suggested that the effect 
of genistein (a soy derived isoflavone) was promising [1]. 
While dietary intake of phytoestrogens is usually, in the form of soy bean, soy 
bean curd, tofu, tempeh, soy milk and other soy products, most studies have investigated 
the effects of soy supplements and extracts [10-12]. This study thus sought to elucidate 
the cross-sectional and prospective associations between soy intake and VMS among peri 
and postmenopausal women across five studies contributing to the International 
Collaboration for a Life course Approach to reproductive health and Chronic disease 
Events (InterLACE) consortium.  
6.2 Subjects and methods 
6.2.1 Ethical approval 
Written consent was obtained from all participants. All the cohort studies included 
in the InterLACE consortium have been previously granted ethical approval by the 
respective ethical committees [13]. 
6.2.2 Study participants 
The InterLACE consortium includes individual data from ten countries. It 
involves around 230,000 participants from 20 observational studies with data on womens 
health (12 of which provided longitudinal data). Further detailed information on 
InterLACE has been published elsewhere [13, 14]. For the current study, five studies that 
had information on soy intake (the exposure) and hot flushes and/or night sweats (the 
outcome) were included: Australian Longitudinal Study on Womens Health (ALSWH) 
[15], Healthy Ageing of Women Study (HOW)Australia, Whitehall II study 
(WHITEHALL)UK [16], Seattle Midlife Womens Health Study (SMWHS) [17] and 
Japanese Midlife Womens Health Study (JMWHS) [18] (Table D.1). For the cross-
sectional analysis, data from 11,006 women who reported VMS (either frequency or 
severity), consumption frequency of soy products and soy milk and had complete 
information on confounders (listed below) were included in the analysis. The prospective 
analysis included data from three studies (ALSWH, HOW and WHITEHALL) 
(n=10,082). Excluding 5560 women who reported VMS at baseline and those with 
missing data on VMS, menopausal status and use of hormone therapy at follow-up, 4522 
women were considered for the prospective analysis (Figure D.1). 
6.2.3 Main outcome and exposure variables 
VMS was defined as the presence of hot flushes and/ or night sweats. Response 
options for the frequency of hot flushes and night sweats (over the last 12 months) were 
never, rarely, sometimes, and often in ALSWH. For the other four studies, the severity 
of VMS over a shorter period was recorded; HOW, WHITEHALL and JMWHS 
considered the current severity of VMS, while SMWHS considered the severity of VMS 
in the last 13 months. For example, in HOW and JMWHS the response options for the 
extent of symptoms were not at all, a little, quite a bit, and extremely and for 
WHITEHALL the response options were not at all, a little, somewhat, and a lot. The 
degree of severity was harmonised as never, mild, moderate and severe over a shorter 
period of time. Since the frequency of VMS was assessed in ALSWH and severity in the 
remaining four studies, results were presented separately. VMS were further coded 
dichotomously as absent (never and rarely if reporting frequency; never and mild if 
reporting severity) and present (sometimes and often if reporting frequency; moderate 
and severe if reporting severity) for the study-specific and prospective analysis. 
Soy products such as tofu, soy beans, tempeh, and soy milk were commonly 
reported in the five studies. The soy products were combined based on their phytoestrogen 
contents. Thus, tofu, soy beans, tempeh and soy flour having a high phytoestrogen content 
were grouped under the soy products category, while soy milk was considered separately 
[19, 20] 
In ALSWH, there were ten consumption frequency options: never, less than once 
per month, 13 times per month, 1 time per week, 2 times per week, 34 times per week, 
56 times per week, 1 time per day, 2 times per day and 3 or more times per day. In the 
WHITEHALL study, nine consumption frequency options were provided; five in 
SMWHS and four response categories in HOW and JMWHS. Therefore, for this study, 
studies having more than four categories were collapsed into four frequency categories: 
never/rarely, monthly, weekly and daily. They were further coded dichotomously 
as less frequent (never/rarely and monthly) and frequent (weekly and daily) given the 
small number of observations for weekly and daily intake for the prospective analysis. 
6.2.4 Covariates  
Categorical variables in the InterLACE study were collapsed into the simplest 
categories possible so as to include data from as many studies as possible [13]. For 
example, education level was collated into three categories as 10 years, 1112 years 
and >12 years. Smoking status was grouped as never smokers, past smokers and current 
smokers. Based on gynaecological surgery and menstrual bleeding patterns, menopausal 
status was collated into five categories to include (1) hysterectomy/oophorectomy, (2) 
unknown due to hormone use (menopausal hormone therapy or oral contraceptive 
hormones before reaching menopause), (3) premenopause (regular menstruation in the 
last 3 and 12 months), (4) perimenopause (menses in the past 3 months and 
changes/irregularity in menstrual patterns in the past 12 months; or no menses in the 
previous 3 months but menses in the preceding 11 months) and (5) natural postmenopause 
(amenorrhoea for at least 12 months). Current use of menopausal hormone therapy (e.g., 
oestrogen) was categorised as yes and no.  
Table 6.1 Baseline characteristics of participants 
Characteristics Overall ALSWH HOW WHITEHALL SMWHS JMWHS 
n 11,006 7,373 563 2,146 174 750 
Race/ethnicity       
  Caucasian-Australian/New Zealand 6323 (57.5) 5853 (79.4) 470 (83.5) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 
  Caucasian-European 3163 (28.7) 1207 (16.4) 65 (11.6) 1891 (88.1) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 
  Caucasian-American/Canadian 202 (1.8) 54 (0.7) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 148 (85.1) 0 (0.0) 
  Japanese 756 (6.9) 6 (0.1) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 750 (100.0) 
  Chinese & other Asians 166 (1.5) 144 (2.0) 7 (1.2) 0 (0.0) 15 (8.6) 0 (0.0) 
  Others 396 (3.6) 109 (1.5) 21 (3.7) 255 (11.9) 11 (6.3) 0 (0.0) 
Birth year (n=11,002)       
  <1940 856 (7.8) N/A N/A 855 (39.8) 1 (0.6) N/A 
  1940-1949 7354 (66.8) 5410 (73.4) 475 (85.0) 1034 (48.2) 81 (46.6) 354 (47.2) 
  1950 2792 (25.4) 1963 (26.6) 84 (15.0) 257 (12.0) 92 (52.9) 396 (52.8) 
Education level       
  10 years 5096 (46.3) 3568 (48.4) 286 (50.8) 1171 (54.6) 0 (0.0) 71 (9.5) 
  11-12 years 2177 (19.8) 1269 (17.2) 92 (16.3) 345 (16.1) 24 (13.8) 447 (59.6) 
  >12 years 3733 (33.9) 2536 (34.4) 185 (32.9) 630 (29.4) 150 (86.2) 232 (30.9) 
Marital status  (n=10,225)       
  Married 7927 (77.5) 6028 (82.0) 427 (76.3) 1357 (63.3) 115 (66.1) N/A 
  Separated/divorced/widowed 1597 (15.6) 1099 (15.0) 106 (18.9) 340 (15.9) 52 (29.9) N/A 
  Single 701 (6.9) 221 (3.0) 27 (4.8) 446 (20.8) 7 (4.0) N/A 
Table 6.1 Continued      
Characteristics Overall ALSWH HOW WHITEHALL SMWHS JMWHS 
n 11,006 7,373 563 2,146 174 750 
Body mass index (n=10,425)       
  Normal weight (<25 kg/m) 5071 (48.6) 3048 (43.9) 233 (43.3) 1068 (52.7) 90 (51.7) 632 (85.8) 
  Overweight (25-29.9 kg/m) 3259 (31.3) 2297 (33.1) 165 (30.7) 654 (32.3) 47 (27.0) 96 (13.0) 
  Obese (30 kg/m) 2095 (20.1) 1604 (23.1) 140 (26.0) 305 (15.1) 37 (21.3) 9 (1.2) 
Smoking status       
  Never 6707 (60.9) 4505 (61.1) 356 (63.2) 1108 (51.6) 89 (51.2) 649 (86.5) 
  Past smoker 2704 (24.6) 1782 (24.2) 158 (28.1) 667 (31.1) 67 (38.5) 30 (4.0) 
  Current smoker 1595 (14.5) 1086 (14.7) 49 (8.7) 371 (17.3) 18 (10.3) 71 (9.5) 
Menopausal status       
  Hysterectomy/oophorectomy 2598 (23.6) 2001 (27.1) 165 (29.3) 344 (16.0) 6 (3.5) 82 (10.9) 
  Unknown due to hormone use 1721 (15.6) 1346 (18.3) 46 (8.2) 265 (12.4) 47 (27.0) 17 (2.3) 
  Premenopause 1315 (12.0) 636 (8.6) 22 (3.9) 463 (21.6) 44 (25.3) 150 (20.0) 
  Perimenopause 2090 (19.0) 1484 (20.1) 76 (13.5) 390 (18.2) 53 (30.5) 87 (11.6) 
  Natural menopause 3282 (29.8) 1906 (25.9) 254 (45.1) 684 (31.9) 24 (13.8) 414 (55.2) 
Current use of menopausal hormone therapy       
  No  8085 (73.5) 5043 (68.4) 369 (65.5) 1813 (84.5) 134 (77.0) 726 (96.8) 
  Yes 2921 (26.5) 2330 (31.6) 194 (34.50 333 (15.5) 40 (23.0) 24 (3.2) 
Frequency or severity of hot flushes        
  Never 4443 (40.4) 2249 (30.5) 323 (57.4) 1344 (62.6) 118 (67.8) 409 (54.5) 
  Rarely or mild 2009 (18.3) 1183 (16.1) 160 (28.4) 388 (18.1) 29 (16.7) 249 (33.2) 
  Sometimes or moderate 2608 (23.7) 2241 (30.4) 59 (10.5) 233 (10.9) 15 (8.6) 60 (8.0) 
  Often or severe 1946 (17.7) 1700 (23.1) 21 (3.73) 181 (8.4) 12 (6.9) 32 (4.3) 
Table 6.1 Continued 
Characteristics Overall ALSWH HOW WHITEHALL SMWHS JMWHS 
n 11,006 7,373 563 2,146 174 750 
Frequency or severity of night sweats        
  Never 5510 (50.1) 2996 (40.6) 358 (63.6) 1458 (67.9) 137 (78.7) 561 (74.8) 
  Rarely or mild 1813 (16.5) 1157 (15.7) 136 (24.2) 339 (15.8) 22 (12.6) 159 (21.2) 
  Sometimes or moderate 2183 (19.8) 1914 (26.0) 52 (9.2) 190 (8.9) 5 (2.9) 22 (2.9) 
  Often or severe 1500 (13.6) 1306 (17.7) 17 (3.0) 159 (7.4) 10 (5.8) 8 (1.1) 
Frequency or severity of vasomotor symptomsa        
  Never 4049 (36.8) 2034 (27.6) 285 (50.6) 1251 (58.3) 112 (64.4) 367 (48.9) 
  Rarely or mild 2099 (19.1) 1212 (16.4) 184 (32.7) 388 (18.1) 31 (17.8) 284 (37.9) 
  Sometimes or moderate 2728 (24.8) 2312 (31.4) 66 (11.7) 269 (12.5) 15 (8.6) 66 (8.8) 
  Often or severe 2130 (19.4) 1815 (24.6) 28 (5.0) 238 (11.1) 16 (9.2) 33 (4.4) 
Consumption frequency of soy products       
  Never/rarely 9239 (84.0) 6590 (89.4) 475 (84.4) 2047 (95.4) 127 (73.0) 0 (0.0) 
  Monthly 491 (4.5) 357 (4.8) 50 (8.9) 62 (2.9) 0 (0.0) 22 (2.9) 
  Weekly 820 (7.5) 357 (4.8) 34 (6.0) 35 (1.6) 36 (20.7) 358 (47.7) 
  Daily 456 (4.1) 69 (0.9) 4 (0.7) 2 (0.1) 11 (6.3) 370 (49.3) 
Consumption frequency of soy milk (n=10,954)       
  Never/rarely 9860 (90.0) 6634 (90.0) 460 (85.2) 2103 (98.2) 147 (84.5) 516 (70.8) 
  Monthly 156 (1.4) 29 (0.4) 21 (3.9) 17 (0.8) 0 (0.0) 89 (12.2) 
  Weekly 237 (2.2) 110 (1.5) 11 (2.0) 19 (0.9) 13 (7.5) 84 (11.5) 
  Daily 701 (6.4) 596 (8.1) 48 (8.9) 3 (0.1) 14 (8.1) 40 (5.5) 
                                  Data are presented as n (%); N/A  not applicable 
                                                    a Vasomotor menopausal symptoms were defined as having hot flushes, night sweats, or both
6.2.5 Statistical analysis 
As the result of different assessments (frequency or severity) and different recall 
periods (in the past 12 months or in a more recent period) for VMS, studies were grouped 
as: (1) frequency of VMS in the past 12 months (ALSWH) and (2) severity of VMS over 
a shorter time period (HOW, WHITEHALL, SMWHS and JMWHS). The associations 
between soy consumption and VMS were first examined separately for the two different 
designs, followed by the overall estimates. 
Multinomial logistic regression models with four categories of outcome for VMS 
(never, rarely/mild, sometimes/moderate and often/severe) were used to investigate the 
cross-sectional associations between frequency of consumption of soy products and soy 
milk with frequency/severity of VMS at baseline. The VMS category never was used 
as the reference group for the outcome, and the soy consumption category never was 
used as the reference group for the exposure. Relative risk ratios (RRR) and 95% 
confidence intervals (CI) were estimated. According to the minimally sufficient set of 
adjustments, smoking status, education level, menopausal status and race/ethnicity were 
identified as confounders using a directed acyclic graph (DAG) (Figure D.2) and were 
adjusted for in the regression models. However, race/ethnicity was not included in the 
model as participants from ALSWH (96.5%), HOW (95.1%), WHITEHALL (88.1%) and 
SMWHS (88.1%) were mainly Caucasians, and in JMWHS all the participants were 
Japanese. Concurrent menopausal hormone therapy use was included in the model given 
its potential effect on the frequency/severity of VMS [21]. The models were thus adjusted 
for menopausal status and concurrent menopausal hormone therapy use (model 1) and 
additionally adjusted for other potential covariates including education level and smoking 
status (model 2). Study was included as a fixed effect to account for differences in levels 
of VMS between studies and as a stratification variable to account for correlation of 
individuals within studies. 
Due to small numbers of participants in the four categories of exposure and 
outcome in individual studies, dichotomised soy consumption (frequent and less frequent) 
and dichotomised VMS (presence and absence) were used for the study-specific and 
prospective analyses. To examine between-study heterogeneity in the effect size 
estimates, study-specific logistic regression and random-effects meta-analysis were used 
with the estimates adjusted for all the covariates in model 2. 
For the prospective analysis based on three studies (ALSWH, HOW and 
WHITEHALL), logistic regression models with the binary outcome for VMS (presence 
and absence) were fitted, adjusted for all the covariates in model 2. In addition, a 
sensitivity analysis was conducted to investigate the association between soy 
consumption and subsequent risk of VMS at follow-up with all the women included 
(n=10,082), but adjusting for their baseline VMS, given that a large proportion of women 
were excluded in the prospective analysis due to the presence of VMS at baseline. 
Analyses were performed using STATA 14 (StataCorp LP, College Station, TX). All 
statistical tests were two sided. 
6.3 Results 
A total of 11,006 women reported their consumption frequency of soy and VMS, 
and also had complete data on the covariates. The median age of the women at baseline 
was 52 years (interquartile range: 5154) (Table D.1). Table 6.1 shows the baseline 
characteristics of the participants in each study. The majority of the participants were 
Caucasians-Australians/New-Zealanders (57.5%), had 10 years or less of education 
(46.3%), and never smoked (60.9%). Nearly, 30% of the women were naturally 
postmenopausal, and 26.5% were currently using menopausal hormone therapy. Across 
HOW, WHITEHALL, SMWHS and JMWHS which measured the severity of VMS, 
WHITEHALL had the highest percentage of women who reported severe VMS 
(11.1%), while JMWHS (Japanese) had the lowest percentage (4.4%). In the ALSWH 
study, 24.6% reported often for the frequency of VMS. In this predominantly Caucasian 
population, 8090% of the women reported that they never consumed soy products or soy 
milk. Across the individual studies, JMWHS had the largest percentage of women who 
reported daily and weekly soy product consumption (49.3% and 47.7%, respectively) 
(Table 6.1). Comparing baseline characteristics of women included in the prospective 
analysis and those excluded due to loss to follow-up, the excluded women were less 
educated and more likely to be obese and current smokers at baseline. They were more 
likely to be postmenopausal and less likely to report frequent/severe VMS compared to 
women with complete follow-up data (Table D.2). 
Table 6.2 Cross-sectional association of soy products and soy milk consumption frequency with the frequency/severity of vasomotor menopausal 
symptoms at baseline 
 VMS (hot flushes and night sweats) (%) Model 1
RRR (95% CI) 
Model 2b 
RRR (95% CI) 
 n Never 
Rarely/ 
Sometimes/ 
moderate 
Often/ 
severe 
Never 
Rarely/ 
Sometimes/ 
moderate 
Often/ 
severe 
Rarely/ 
Sometimes/ 
moderate 
Often/ 
severe 
Soy consumption 
frequency             
Soy products              
ALSWHc  (n=7,373)             
  Never/rarely 6590 27.3 16.6 31.4 24.8 Reference Reference Reference Reference Reference Reference Reference 
  Monthly 357 29.1 14.9 29.4 26.6 Reference 0.81  
(0.58 to 1.14) 
(0.63 to 1.11) 
(0.71 to 1.29) 
(0.57 to 1.13) 
(0.64 to 1.13) 
(0.76 to 1.38) 
  Weekly 357 31.9 14.6 33.1 20.5 Reference 0.72  
(0.52 to 1.02) 
(0.65 to 1.11) 
(0.49 to 0.90) 
(0.51 to 1.00) 
(0.66 to 1.13) 
(0.53 to 0.99) 
  Daily 69 29.0 20.3 33.3 17.4 Reference 1.13  
(0.57 to 2.26) 
(0.52 to 1.79) 
(0.31 to 1.33) 
(0.56 to 2.21) 
(0.53 to 1.81) 
(0.33 to 1.43) 
HOW, WHITEHALL, 
SMWHS, JMWHSc  
(n=3,633) 
  Never/rarely 2649 57.3 20.7 12.1 9.9 Reference Reference Reference Reference Reference Reference Reference 
  Monthly 134 53.0 24.6 11.9 10.5 Reference 0.97  
(0.63 to 1.51) 
(0.60 to 1.93) 
(0.76 to 2.70) 
(0.65 to 1.59) 
(0.68 to 2.21) 
(0.90 to 3.21) 
  Weekly 463 52.3 31.3 11.5 5.0 Reference 1.01  
(0.65 to 1.56) 
(0.71 to 2.09) 
(0.42 to 1.75) 
(0.68 to 1.63) 
(0.79 to 2.31) 
(0.46 to 1.95) 
  Daily 387 47.3 41.6 6.7 4.4 Reference 1.33  
(0.81 to 2.19) 
(0.38 to 1.55) 
(0.37 to 2.02) 
(0.86 to 2.32) 
(0.44 to 1.80) 
(0.43 to 2.34) 
OVERALL (n=11,006)             
  Never/rarely 9239 35.9 17.8 25.8 20.5 Reference Reference Reference Reference Reference Reference Reference 
  Monthly 491 35.6 17.5 24.6 22.2 Reference 
(0.65 to 1.12) 
(0.69 to 1.14) 
(0.79 to 1.35) 
(0.66 to 1.13) 
(0.72 to 1.20) 
(0.88 to 1.49) 
  Weekly 820 43.4 24.0 20.9 11.7 Reference 
(0.63 to 1.05) 
(0.75 to 1.20) 
(0.53 to 0.93) 
(0.66 to 1.09) 
(0.81 to 1.30) 
(0.62 to 1.09) 
  Daily 456 44.5 38.4 10.8 6.4 Reference 
(0.79 to 1.56) 
(0.51 to 1.16) 
(0.40 to 1.05) 
(0.85 to 1.65) 
(0.57 to 1.28) 
(0.49 to 1.24) 
Table 6.2 Continued 
 VMS (hot flushes and night sweats) (%)  Model 1
RRR (95% CI) 
Model 2b 
RRR (95% CI) 
 n Never Rarely/ 
Sometimes/ 
moderate 
Often/ 
severe 
Never 
Rarely/ 
Sometimes/ 
moderate 
Often/ 
severe 
Rarely/ 
Sometimes/ 
moderate 
Often/ 
severe 
Soy consumption 
frequency             
Soy milk             
ALSWH  (n=7,369)             
  Never/rarely 6634 27.9 16.5 31.3 24.3 Reference Reference Reference Reference Reference Reference Reference 
  Monthly 29 34.5 13.8 41.4 10.3 Reference 0.68  
(0.21 to 2.17) 
(0.45 to 2.48) 
(0.09 to 1.25) 
(0.21 to 2.20) 
(0.46 to 2.54) 
(0.10 to 1.38) 
  Weekly 110 22.7 19.1 35.5 22.7 Reference 1.41  
(0.79 to 2.54) 
(0.83 to 2.32) 
(0.66 to 2.08) 
(0.79 to 2.56) 
(0.84 to 2.36) 
(0.71 to 2.26) 
  Daily 596 24.7 15.3 30.7 29.4 Reference 1.02  
(0.78 to 1.34) 
(0.86 to 1.36) 
(1.05 to 1.68) 
(0.78 to 1.35) 
(0.87 to 1.37) 
(1.10 to 1.77) 
HOW, WHITEHALL, SMWHS, JMWHSc 
 (n=3,585)             
  Never/rarely 3226 56.9 22.6 11.6 8.8 Reference Reference Reference Reference Reference Reference Reference 
  Monthly 127 40.9 40.9 11.8 6.3 Reference 
(1.14 to 2.66) 
(0.92 to 3.25) 
(0.80 to 4.06) 
(1.17 to 2.72) 
(0.98 to 3.45) 
(0.82 to 4.34) 
  Weekly 127 50.4 35.4 7.9 6.3 Reference 1.21  
(0.79 to 1.83) 
(0.43 to 1.77) 
(0.57 to 2.82) 
(0.80 to 1.86) 
(0.44 to 1.82) 
(0.60 to 2.94) 
  Daily 105 39.1 39.1 11.4 10.5 Reference 1.76  
(1.10 to 2.82) 
(0.77 to 3.01) 
(1.35 to 6.03) 
(1.13 to 2.87) 
(0.83 to 3.23) 
(1.47 to 6.50) 
OVERALL (n=10,954)             
  Never/rarely 9860 37.4 18.5 24.9 19.2 Reference Reference Reference Reference Reference Reference Reference 
  Monthly 156 39.7 35.9 17.3 7.1 Reference 
(1.02 to 2.20) 
(0.99 to 2.73) 
(0.50 to 2.13) 
(1.03 to 2.22) 
(1.01 to 2.77) 
(0.53 to 2.25) 
  Weekly 237 37.6 27.9 20.7 13.9 Reference 
(0.90 to 1.76) 
(0.80 to 1.72) 
(0.70 to 1.70) 
(0.91 to 1.79) 
(0.82 to 1.76) 
(0.76 to 0.84) 
  Daily 701 26.8 18.8 27.8 26.5 Reference 
(0.93 to 1.49) 
(0.93 to 1.45) 
(1.16 to 1.84) 
(0.95 to 1.51) 
(0.96 to 1.50) 
(1.24 to 1.96) 
Multinomial logistic regression models were used to estimate relative risk ratios (RRR) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI);  a Model 1 was adjusted for menopausal status and 
current use of menopausal hormone therapy; b Model 2 was adjusted model 1 along with other covariates including smoking status, and education level; c Results for ALSWH and other 
four studies were presented separately due to the different assessments (frequency or severity) and different recall periods (in the past 12 months for ALSWH and in a shorter period 
for the other four studies) for VMS used across the studies
Figure 6.1 Forest plot of study-specific effect estimates of the cross-sectional association between consumption frequency of soy products and 
the presence of vasomotor menopausal symptoms at baseline. 
Soy product consumption was coded dichotomously as frequent (weekly and daily) and less frequent (never/rarely and monthly) and vasomotor symptoms as present 
(sometimes and often if reporting frequency; moderate and severe if reporting severity) and absent (never and rarely if reporting frequency; never and mild if reporting severity) 
given the small number of observations in each study. Odds ratios (ORs) a presented on a log scale. Effect estimates were adjusted for menopausal status, current use of 
menopausal hormone therapy, education level, and smoking status. VMS: Vasomotor menopausal symptoms 
Figure 6.2 Forest plot of study-specific effect estimates of the cross-sectional association between consumption frequency of soy milk and the 
presence of vasomotor menopausal symptoms at baseline. 
Soy milk consumption was coded dichotomously as frequent (weekly and daily) and less frequent (never/rarely and monthly) and vasomotor symptoms as present (sometimes 
and often if reporting frequency; moderate and severe if reporting severity) and absent (never and rarely if reporting frequency; never and mild if reporting severity) given the small 
number of observations in each study. Odds ratios (ORs) a presented on a log scale. Effect estimates were adjusted for menopausal status, current use of menopausal hormone therapy, 
education level, and smoking status. VMS: Vasomotor menopausal symptoms. 
For the cross-sectional analysis, women with weekly and daily consumption 
of soy products were less likely to report frequent/severe VMS compared to those with 
never/rarely consumption (11.7% vs. 20.5% and 6.4% vs. 20.5%, respectively) (Table 
6.2). However, after adjusting for covariates and study differences, no clear evidence of 
an association was found between soy product consumption and the degree of VMS. 
Similarly, there was no clear evidence of an association observed for ALSWH or the other 
four studies. For soy milk consumption, women with a daily consumption were more 
likely to report frequent/severe VMS compared to women who reported never/rarely 
consumption (RRR: 1.56, 95% CI: 1.241.96). A similar pattern for daily consumption 
and risk of frequent/severe VMS was observed in ALSWH (RRR: 1.39, 95% CI: 1.10
1.77) and the other four studies (RRR: 3.09, 95% CI: 1.476.50). 
When using dichotomised exposure and outcome variables for the study-specific 
analysis, the pooled estimate of association between frequent soy product consumption 
and the presence of VMS was 0.92 (95% CI: 0.761.11), with no statistically significant 
heterogeneity between studies, test for heterogeneity: P=0.49, I2=0% (Figure 6.1). For 
the association between frequent consumption of soy milk and the presence of VMS, the 
pooled OR estimate was 1.24 (95% CI: 0.931.65) with no statistically significant 
heterogeneity between the studies (test for heterogeneity: P=0.24, I2=26.6%) (Figure 
6.2). 
For the prospective analysis, the overall estimates suggest that women who had 
frequent soy product consumption were less likely to report the incidence of VMS at 
follow-up (OR: 0.63, 95% CI: 0.450.89) (Table 6.3). A consistent pattern was observed 
in ALSWH (OR: 0.63, 95% CI: 0.440.90) and the other four studies (OR: 0.60, 95% CI: 
0.181.97). There was no clear evidence of an association between frequent consumption 
of soy milk and incident VMS at follow-up (OR: 1.11, 95% CI: 0.851.45). The 
sensitivity analysis with all the women included demonstrated a similar or weaker 
association between soy consumption and subsequent VMS, even after adjusting for 
baseline VMS (Table 6.4). 
Table 6.3 Prospective association of soy product and soy milk consumption frequency 
with the presence of vasomotor menopausal symptoms at the follow-up survey 
   Crude Model 1b Model 2c 
Soy consumption  n VMS
(%) OR (95% CI) OR (95% CI) OR (95% CI) 
Soy products      
ALSWH 
(n=2,852)      
  Less frequentd 2688 35.5 Reference Reference Reference 
  Frequent 164 26.2 0.65 (0.45 to 0.92) 0.63 (0.44 to 0.91) 0.63 (0.44 to 0.90) 
WHITEHALL 
(n=,1670) 
  Less frequent 1625 12.4 Reference Reference Reference 
  Frequent 45 6.7 0.56 (0.17 to 1.85) 0.58 (0.18 to 1.91) 0.60 (0.18 to 1.97) 
OVERALL 
(n=4,522)      
  Less frequent 4313 26.8 Reference Reference Reference 
  Frequent 209 22.0 0.64 (0.45 to 0.90) 0.63 (0.45 to 1.88) 0.63 (0.45 to 0.89) 
Soy milk       
ALSWH 
(n=2,849)      
  Less frequent 2608 34.9 Reference Reference Reference 
  Frequent 241 35.7 1.04 (0.79 to 1.37) 1.05 (0.79 to 1.38) 1.04 (0.79 to 1.38) 
WHITEHALL 
(n=1,655) 
  Less frequent 1614 12.2 Reference Reference Reference 
  Frequent 41 17.1 2.01 (0.85 to 4.78) 2.08 (0.86 to 4.99) 2.18 (0.91 to 5.23) 
OVERALL 
(n=4,504)      
  Less frequent 4222 26.2 Reference Reference Reference 
  Frequent 282 33.0 1.09 (0.84 to 1.43) 1.10 (0.84 to 1.43) 1.11 (0.85 to 1.45) 
Logistic regression models were used to estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI).  
a VMS was defined as presence of VMS for never and rarely/mild VMS and absence of VMS for 
sometimes/moderate and often/severe VMS 
b Model 1 was adjusted for menopausal status and current use of menopausal hormone therapy at follow-up 
c Model 2 was adjusted for model 1 along with other covariates including smoking status, and education 
level 
d Soy consumption frequency was defined as frequent for daily and weekly consumption and less 
frequent for monthly and never/rarely consumption
Table 6.4 Sensitivity analysis for the prospective association between soy consumption and likelihood of reporting vasomotor symptoms at follow-up 
      Crude Model 1b Model 2c Model 3d 
Soy consumption  n VMSa (%) OR (95% CI) OR (95% CI) OR (95% CI) OR (95% CI) 
Soy products       
ALSWH (n=6,603)       
  Less frequente 6235 54.8 Reference Reference Reference Reference 
  Frequent 368 48.6 0.78 (0.63 to 0.96) 0.76 (0.62 to 0.94) 0.79 (0.64 to 0.98) 0.79 (0.63 to 1.00) 
HOW, WHITEHALL 
(n=2,251)       
  Less frequent 2194 21.4 Reference Reference Reference Reference 
  Frequent 57 19.3 1.05 (0.54 to 2.07) 0.99 (0.50 to 1.97) 1.05 (0.53 to 2.08) 1.04 (0.54 to 1.99) 
OVERALL (n=8,854)       
  Less frequent 8429 46.1 Reference Reference Reference Reference 
  Frequent 425 44.7 0.80 (0.65 to 0.98) 0.78 (0.63 to 0.96) 0.81 (0.66 to 1.00) 0.81 (0.65 to 1.01) 
Soy milk        
ALSWH (n=6,599)       
  Less frequent 5970 54.1 Reference Reference Reference Reference 
  Frequent 629 57.6 1.15 (0.97 to 1.36) 1.15 (0.97 to 1.36) 1.17 (0.99 to 1.38) 1.06 (0.89 to 1.27) 
HOW, WHITEHALL 
(n=2,233)       
  Less frequent 2175 21.2 Reference Reference Reference Reference 
  Frequent 58 31.0 2.63 (1.43 to 4.84) 2.44 (1.29 to 4.60) 2.65 (1.40 to 5.00) 2.10 (1.07 to 4.13) 
OVERALL (n=8,832)       
  Less frequent 8145 45.3 Reference Reference Reference Reference 
  Frequent  687 55.3 1.21 (1.03 to 1.43) 1.20 (1.01 to 1.41) 1.22 (1.04 to 1.44) 1.10 (0.92 to 1.32) 
Logistic regression models were used to estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI);  a VMS was defined as presence of VMS for never and rarely/mild 
VMS and absence of VMS for sometimes/moderate and often/severe VMS;  b Model 1 was adjusted for menopausal status and current use of menopausal hormone therapy at 
follow-up;  c Model 2 was adjusted for model 1 along with other covariates including smoking status and education level; d Model 3 was adjusted for model 2 along with baseline VMS; 
e Soy consumption frequency was defined as frequent for daily and weekly consumption and less frequent for monthly and never/rarely consumption
6.4 Discussion 
This pooled study demonstrated no clear evidence of an association between 
consumption frequency of soy products and VMS in the cross-sectional analysis. 
However, in the prospective analysis, women with frequent consumption of soy products 
were less likely to report subsequent VMS. Furthermore, there was no evidence of an 
association between consumption of soy milk and frequency/severity of VMS both cross-
sectionally (Figure 6.1 and Figure 6.2) and prospectively (Table 6.3). 
Our prospective analysis showed an association between frequent consumption of 
soy products and decreased odds of VMS at follow-up, though this was attenuated when 
baseline VMS was taken into account. Similarly, a Japanese community-based study in 
which women were followed for 6 years found that soy products intake alleviated hot 
flushes [9]. Several RCTs have investigated the association between some type of 
substance containing dietary soy (e.g., soy extract in capsule or tablet form, soy powder 
or soy protein added to diets) and its effect on hot flushes. While some demonstrated a 
reduction in the frequency/severity of hot flushes [10, 22-24], others have shown 
contradictory findings [25, 26]. According to a review study, the dose of genistein, in 
particular, was associated with a reduction of the symptoms rather than total isoflavone 
[27]. The oestrogen-like properties of soy food due to the isoflavones content have been 
linked to the protective effect on VMS. A decrease in the number of ovarian follicles and 
consequent fall in oestrogen level could be the underlying hormonal aetiology of VMS 
[28, 29]. However, the effect of phytoestrogens in reducing VMS remains unclear [30]. 
One of the possible mechanisms of action is the structural similarity of isoflavones to that 
of oestradiol could confer oestrogenic or anti-oestrogenic effects depending on the 
circulating oestrogen level by binding to oestrogen receptors [31, 32]. The relative decline 
in oestrogen level leads to higher circulating norepinephrine levels and an upregulation 
of serotonin receptors which mediate hot flushes in menopausal women. By binding to 
oestrogen receptors, isoflavones help to restore the oestrogen level, and causes 
subsequent changes in norepinephrine and serotonin levels, thus reducing the propensity 
of hot flushes [33]. 
Our pooled data did not show a clear association between soy milk consumption 
and frequency/severity of VMS. The source of dietary isoflavones may also contribute to 
the observed effect since processing methods tend to alter the phytoestrogen contents of 
soy products [34]. For instance, the total isoflavone content in soy beans (103mg per 
100g), tempeh (18mg per 100g) and tofu (27mg per 100g) is much higher than that in 
soy milk (3mg per 100g) [20]. The overall low-consumption frequency of soy milk 
among the participants and its low isoflavone content could possibly explain this finding. 
The main drawback of our study is the variation in assessments used by the 
different studies. Soy consumption was measured as frequency, with no information on 
quantities. Moreover, for the consumption of soy milk, the cross-sectional nature of some 
of the studies and lack of evidence of a significant association from the prospective 
analysis, mean that we cannot confirm a temporal relationship between soy milk 
consumption and VMS. There also might be possibility of residual confounding, e.g., by 
factors not measured in the studies. One weakness of data harmonisation is the collapsing 
of the variables of interest into the simplest level of detail in order to incorporate 
information from as many studies as possible, leading to loss of statistical power as well 
as potential misclassification of the degree of VMS and frequency of soy consumption. 
For instance, studies like ALSWH and WHITEHALL had ten and nine frequency options 
respectively for consumption of soy that were collapsed to four categories for this 
analysis. In addition, the frequency of VMS was reported in ALSWH over a longer period 
of time (12 months), and the other four studies recorded the severity of VMS over a 
shorter period that limited our ability to pool data. Despite these limitations the pooled 
results showed considerable homogeneity as shown in the forest plots and the low values 
for the statistic I2. 
Furthermore, our study had several strengths that ranged from the inclusion of a 
large number of women across different geographic regions and cultures that allowed 
greater generalisability of the results. This is also, to our knowledge, the first pooled study 
consisting of womens health studies from four different countries examining an 
association between soy products and soy milk with frequency/severity of VMS. We also 
included women who had a hysterectomy, oophorectomy, and/or were currently using 
hormones that could provide a better estimate of the prevalence of VMS. In addition, the 
individual data available in the InterLACE enabled harmonisation of the variables of 
interest using common definitions, coding and cut points not normally possible with 
meta-analyses of published results. Harmonisation of the data further reduces the 
between-study heterogeneity. A consistent approach to confounder adjustment was used 
for the regression models along with careful selection of the confounders using a DAG, 
thus reducing the probability of the results being affected by uncontrolled confounders. 
While menopause is an inevitable phenomenon in a womans life cycle, the 
frequency and severity of VMS show marked variations [35]. VMS are reported by 
around 75% of postmenopausal women globally, with a minority reporting severe 
symptoms [36, 37]. Findings from this study provide some evidence that frequent 
consumption of soy products (e.g., soy beans, tofu and tempeh) as part of the usual diet 
may be associated with a reduced risk of subsequent VMS. However, frequent 
consumption of soy milk did not appear to be associated with subsequent VMS. As 
justified by potential mechanisms in previous studies, our findings could prompt RCTs 
testing the effects of dietary soy intake in particular on VMS as opposed to earlier RCTs 
which have mainly considered the effects of soy extracts and supplements. 
References 
1. Lethaby, A. et al. Phytoestrogens for menopausal vasomotor symptoms. The 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2013, (12), p.Cd001395. 
2. Gold, E.B. et al. Longitudinal analysis of the association between vasomotor 
symptoms and race/ethnicity across the menopausal transition: study of women's 
health across the nation. American Journal of Public Health. 2006, 96(7), 
pp.1226-1235. 
3. Rapkin, A.J. Vasomotor symptoms in menopause: physiologic condition and 
central nervous system approaches to treatment. American Journal of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology. 2007, 196(2), pp.97-106. 
4. Pines, A. Vasomotor symptoms and cardiovascular disease risk. Climacteric. 
2011, 14(5), pp.535-536. 
5. Biglia, N. et al. Vasomotor symptoms in menopause: a biomarker of 
cardiovascular disease risk and other chronic diseases? Climacteric. 2017, 20(4), 
pp.306-312. 
6. Levis, S. and Griebeler, M.L. The role of soy foods in the treatment of menopausal 
symptoms. Journal of Nutrition. 2010, 140(12), pp.2318s-2321s. 
7. Baber, R. Phytoestrogens and post reproductive health. Maturitas. 2010, 66(4), 
pp.344-349. 
8. Sievert, L.L. et al. Vasomotor symptoms among Japanese-American and 
European-American women living in Hilo, Hawaii. Menopause. 2007, 14(2), 
pp.261-269. 
9. Nagata, C. et al. Soy product intake and hot flashes in Japanese women: results 
from a community-based prospective study. American Journal of Epidemiology. 
2001, 153(8), pp.790-793. 
10. Carmignani, L.O. et al. The effect of dietary soy supplementation compared to 
estrogen and placebo on menopausal symptoms: a randomized controlled trial. 
Maturitas. 2010, 67(3), pp.262-269. 
11. Khaodhiar, L. et al. Daidzein-rich isoflavone aglycones are potentially effective 
in reducing hot flashes in menopausal women. Menopause. 2008, 15(1), pp.125-
12. Ye, Y.B. et al. Soy germ isoflavones improve menopausal symptoms but have no 
effect on blood lipids in early postmenopausal Chinese women: a randomized 
placebo-controlled trial. Menopause. 2012, 19(7), pp.791-798. 
13. Mishra, G.D. et al. The InterLACE study: Design, data harmonization and 
characteristics across 20 studies on women's health. Maturitas. 2016, 92, pp.176-
14. Mishra, G.D. et al. InterLACE: A New International Collaboration for a Life 
Course Approach to Women's Reproductive Health and Chronic Disease Events. 
Maturitas. 2013, 74(3), pp.235-240. 
15. Lee, C. et al. Cohort Profile: the Australian Longitudinal Study on Women's 
Health. International Journal of Epidemiology. 2005, 34(5), pp.987-991. 
16. Marmot, M. and Brunner, E. Cohort Profile: the Whitehall II study. International 
Journal of Epidemiology. 2005, 34(2), pp.251-256. 
17. Mitchell, E.S. and Woods, N.F. Cognitive symptoms during the menopausal 
transition and early postmenopause. Climacteric. 2011, 14(2), pp.252-261. 
18. Anderson, D. et al. Menopause in Australia and Japan: effects of country of 
residence on menopausal status and menopausal symptoms. Climacteric. 2004, 
7(2), pp.165-174. 
19. Bhagwat S, Haytowitz DB, Holden JM. USDA Database for the Isoflavone 
Content of Selected Foods, Release 2.0. U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Agricultural Research Service, Nutrient Data Laboratory, 2008. 
20. Thompson, L.U. et al. Phytoestrogen content of foods consumed in Canada, 
including isoflavones, lignans, and coumestan. Nutrition and Cancer. 2006, 54(2), 
pp.184-201. 
21. Stuenkel, C.A. et al. Treatment of Symptoms of the Menopause: An Endocrine 
Society Clinical Practice Guideline. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & 
Metabolism. 2015, 100(11), pp.3975-4011. 
22. Welty, F.K. et al. The association between soy nut consumption and decreased 
menopausal symptoms. Journal of Women's Health. 2007, 16(3), pp.361-369. 
23. Cheng, G. et al. Isoflavone treatment for acute menopausal symptoms. 
Menopause. 2007, 14(3 Pt 1), pp.468-473. 
24. Nahas, E.A. et al. Efficacy and safety of a soy isoflavone extract in 
postmenopausal women: a randomized, double-blind, and placebo-controlled 
study. Maturitas. 2007, 58(3), pp.249-258. 
25. Burke, G.L. et al. Soy protein and isoflavone effects on vasomotor symptoms in 
peri- and postmenopausal women: the Soy Estrogen Alternative Study. 
Menopause. 2003, 10(2), pp.147-153. 
26. Penotti, M. et al. Effect of soy-derived isoflavones on hot flushes, endometrial 
thickness, and the pulsatility index of the uterine and cerebral arteries. Fertility 
and Sterility. 2003, 79(5), pp.1112-1117. 
27. Williamson-Hughes, P.S. et al. Isoflavone supplements containing predominantly 
genistein reduce hot flash symptoms: a critical review of published studies. 
Menopause-The Journal of The North American Menopause Society. 2006, 13(5), 
pp.831-839. 
28. Sturdee, D.W. The menopausal hot flushAnything new? Maturitas. 2008, 
60(1), pp.42-49. 
29. Pachman, D.R. et al. Management of menopause-associated vasomotor 
symptoms: Current treatment options, challenges and future directions. 
International Journal of Women's Health. 2010, 2, pp.123-135. 
30. Moreira, A.C. et al. Phytoestrogens as alternative hormone replacement therapy 
in menopause: What is real, what is unknown. The Journal of Steroid 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. 2014, 143, pp.61-71. 
31. Rietjens, I. et al. The potential health effects of dietary phytoestrogens. British 
Journal of Pharmacology. 2017, 174(11), pp.1263-1280. 
32. Kuiper, G.G. et al. Interaction of estrogenic chemicals and phytoestrogens with 
estrogen receptor beta. Endocrinology. 1998, 139(10), pp.4252-4263. 
33. Morrow, P.K.H. et al. Hot Flashes: A Review of Pathophysiology and Treatment 
Modalities. Oncologist. 2011, 16(11), pp.1658-1664. 
34. Setchell, K.D.R. and Cole, S.J. Variations in Isoflavone Levels in Soy Foods and 
Soy Protein Isolates and Issues Related to Isoflavone Databases and Food 
Labeling. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 2003, 51(14), pp.4146-
4155. 
35. Luoto, R. Hot flushes and quality of life during menopause. BMC Women's 
Health. 2009, 9(1), p.13. 
36. Monteleone, P. et al. Symptoms of menopause - global prevalence, physiology 
and implications. Nature Reviews Endocrinology. 2018, 14(4), pp.199-215. 
37. Woods, N.F. and Mitchell, E.S. Symptoms during the perimenopause: prevalence, 
severity, trajectory, and significance in women's lives. The American Journal of 
Medicine. 2005, 118(Suppl 12B), pp.14-24.
Chapter 7  
Diet and risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer:  
UK Womens Cohort Study  
YASHVEE DUNNERAM1*, DARREN C. GREENWOOD2, JANET E. CADE1 
1 Nutritional Epidemiology Group, School of Food Science & Nutrition, University of 
Leeds, Leeds, UK 
2 Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK 
Published: British Journal of Nutrition (2018); 122(5): 564-74. 
This Chapter is an exact copy of the journal paper referred to above. 
Abstract 
Objectives: This study aimed to investigate the association between diet and the risk of 
breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer in the UK Womens Cohort Study. 
Methods: A total of 35 372 women aged 3569 years were enrolled between 1995 and 
1998 and completed a validated 217-item FFQ. The individual foods were collapsed into 
sixty-four main food groups and compared using Cox proportional models, adjusting for 
potential confounders. Hazard ratio (HR) estimates are presented per portion increase in 
food items. 
Results: After approximately 18 years of follow-up, there were 1822, 294 and 285 cases 
of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer, respectively. A high consumption of processed 
meat and total meat was associated with an increased risk of breast and endometrial 
cancer. High intake of tomatoes (HR 0.87, 99% CI 0.75 to 1.00) and dried fruits (HR 
0.60, 99% CI 0.37 to 0.97) was associated with a reduced risk of breast and endometrial 
cancer, respectively. Mushroom intake was associated with a higher risk of ovarian cancer 
(HR 1.57, 99% CI 1.09 to 2.26). Subgroup analysis by pre- or postmenopausal cancer 
further demonstrated an association between processed meat intake and both 
postmenopausal breast cancer and endometrial cancer. Intake of dried fruits was 
associated with a reduced risk of postmenopausal endometrial cancer (HR 0.55, 99% CI 
0.31 to 0.98). 
Conclusion: Our findings suggest that while some foods may trigger the risk of these 
cancers, some foods may also be protective; supporting the call for further randomised 
controlled trials of dietary interventions to reduce the risk of cancer among pre- and 
postmenopausal women. 
7.1 Introduction 
In the UK, breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer among women 
accounting for almost one-third of all female cancers. Endometrial and ovarian cancers 
are the next most frequently diagnosed hormone-related cancers among British women 
[1]. These cancers are all age dependent and commonly diagnosed postmenopausally [2]. 
The mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of these cancers are not completely 
elucidated. Reproductive and hormonal risk factors such as an early age at menarche, late 
age at menopause, lack of oral contraceptive use, lack of tubal ligation, postmenopausal 
hormone therapy, nulliparity, all contribute to the lifetime oestrogen exposure [3, 4] as 
well as a family history have been consistently associated with these reproductive cancers 
[5]. Moreover, smoking has also been associated with an increased risk of breast and 
ovarian cancers while it reduces the risk of endometrial cancer [6, 7]. In addition, 
evidence from observational studies has indicated that obesity-related metabolic disorders 
such as diabetes and the metabolic syndrome can be linked to the aetiology of these 
cancers [8]. These metabolic disorders are partly outcomes of poor dietary quality [9]. 
In addition to being one of the triggering factors in the development of obesity, 
diet also potentially influences the endogenous hormonal milieu, thereby increasing the 
risk of these hormone-related cancers [10]. As demonstrated in previous studies, dietary 
changes have been linked to changes in menstrual cycle length, circulating sex hormone-
binding globulin levels and also oestradiol levels [11-14]. Even though studies have 
shown that diet may be related to the risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer, the 
specific dietary components involved in the aetiology of these cancers remain unclear. 
For instance, according to the recent World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for 
Cancer Research report [15], there was strong evidence that alcohol consumption 
increases both the risk of pre- and postmenopausal breast cancers. In addition, there was 
suggestive evidence demonstrating that a high consumption of non-starchy vegetables, 
foods sources of carotenoids, dairy products and Ca-rich diets were associated with a 
decreased risk of breast cancer. On the other hand, the link between other foods and risk 
of breast cancer remains limited and inconclusive. Likewise, the relationship between diet 
and endometrial as well as ovarian cancer was sparse and conflicting. Therefore, using 
data from the UK Womens Cohort Study (UKWCS), this study aims to investigate the 
associations between food intake and the risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer. 
The aetiology of these cancers also differs by whether the cancer is pre- or 
postmenopausal. While evidence suggests a link between endogenous oestrogens and risk 
of these cancers among postmenopausal women, there is only weak evidence supporting 
this relationship among premenopausal women [16, 17]. In addition, the menstrual cycle 
variations in circulating sex hormone levels make deciphering the aetiology behind 
premenopausal breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer risk a challenge [18]. This study 
thus also seeks to look into the relationship between diet and risk of the hormone-
dependent cancers by menopausal status. 
7.2 Methods 
7.2.1 Study design, study population and ethical approval 
At baseline, the UKWCS involved 35 372 women across England, Wales and 
Scotland who responded to a postal questionnaire between 1995 and 1998. The 
recruitment process has been detailed elsewhere [19]. Recruited women were aged 
between 35 and 69 years. Dietary data, lifestyle as well as health-related data were 
collected at baseline. Approximately 4 years later, further diet, lifestyle and health-related 
data were collected between the years 1999 and 2002 (40.1% response), which formed 
the follow-up cohort. Reproductive history including menopausal status was also 
collected at study baseline and follow-up. At its initiation in 1993, ethical approval was 
obtained from 174 local research ethics committees (Research Ethics Committee 
reference number: 15/YH/0027). 
7.2.2 Dietary assessment 
A detailed validated [20] 217-food item FFQ was used to assess the dietary intake 
of the participants over a period of 12 months. Daily intake of each food item (g/d) was 
determined using the frequency categories to estimate the portion size. Using a standard 
portion size, these were then converted into weights. According to the recent World 
Cancer Research Fund report, one of the identified critical areas of research included 
better characterisation of diet [15] and their cancer prevention recommendations [21] 
suggests consumption of a fibre-rich diet, limiting consumption of foods high in fat, 
starches or sugars as well as limiting consumption of red and processed meat. Therefore, 
in this study, the individual food items were collapsed into sixty-four food groups based 
on their fibre and fat contents, the type of meat or according to their culinary uses. Details 
on grouping of the foods have been described previously [22]. The standard portion sizes 
were estimated by calculating the average portion size of the individual food items within 
the food group as per the Food Standards Agency [23].  
7.2.3 Case definition 
Incident cases of invasive breast carcinomas, endometrial and ovarian cancers 
were identified through linkage to the National Health Service Central Register [24]. The 
International Classification of Diseases 9 and 10 were used to code incident cancer cases. 
Participants were followed from study entry till diagnosis of the breast cancer 
(International Classification of Diseases (ICD)-9 code 174 or ICD-10 code C50), 
endometrial cancer (ICD-9 code 182 or ICD-10 code C54.1 or C54.9), ovarian cancer 
(ICD-9 code 183 or ICD-10 code C56), date of death or until the censor date (1 April 
2016) whichever came first.  
7.2.4 Statistical analysis 
Descriptive statistics were used to describe lifestyle characteristics of participants 
for breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer separately as well as for women without any 
incident case of a malignant cancer. Cox proportional hazards regression was used to 
provide hazard ratios (HR) and 99% CI to account for potential multiple testing of breast, 
endometrial and ovarian cancers in relation to diet. For ease of interpretation, the HRs 
were presented per standard portion size of the food group per day. The proportional 
hazards assumption was tested graphically as well as using the CoxSnell residuals for 
all terms in the model. Time in the study was used as the time variable calculated from 
the date of questionnaire receipt until either death or censor date. 
Risk factors for cancer previously identified in the literature were considered to 
build a directed acyclic graph. A parsimonious age-adjusted model was firstly used to 
estimate the association between each individual food groups and risk of the cancers in 
separate models (model 1). According to the minimal sufficiency set of adjustments, the 
final models for risk of breast and ovarian cancer were adjusted for age (years), physical 
activity (h/d) [25], ethanol intake (g/d) [26], smoking status (never, current or former 
smoker) [27], cumulative duration of breast-feeding (weeks) [28-30], menopausal status 
(pre- or post-menopausal) [2], and socio-economic status (professional/managerial, 
intermediate or routine and manual) [31] (model 2). For risk of endometrial cancer, 
history of diabetes [32] and hypertension [33] were also included in model 2. Participants 
with incomplete data on these variables were excluded. 
Subgroup analyses by pre-menopausal cancer and postmenopausal cancer were 
also performed. A premenopausal cancer was defined as an incident case diagnosed 
before the last menstrual period, while a postmenopausal cancer case was one diagnosed 
either at or after the last menstrual period. For premenopausal cancer, cases contributed 
to person-time from age at baseline until the diagnosis of the event. If the participant did 
not have a premenopausal cancer, the age until last menstrual period was considered as 
the time variable instead. Women who were already postmenopausal at study entry were 
excluded from the model (adjusted for model 2). For postmenopausal cancer, cases 
contributed to person-time from age at last menstrual period until the diagnosis of the 
event. Women who were incident cases of premenopausal cancer and those who were still 
premenopausal at censor date were excluded from the model (adjusted for model 2). 
Age at natural menopause was further explored as an effect modifier for the foods 
that were significantly associated with the risk of the cancers. Previous studies have also 
demonstrated an increased risk of these cancers with a later age at natural menopause due 
to longer exposure to oestrogen [34]. Age at last period was self-reported at both baseline 
and phase 2. This variable was grouped as having a menopause either between 40 and 49 
years (n=10 505) or 50 and 65 years (n=6295). To include only postmenopausal women 
with a natural menopause, those who had a hysterectomy or bilateral oophorectomy as 
well as those who reported current or ever use of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) 
before their last period were excluded from the analyses. In addition, women who had 
their last period before the age of 40 years were also excluded as this could be due to 
other treatments or surgical procedures that could not be ascertained in this study. All 
statistical analyses were conducted using Stata version 15 statistical software. 
Sensitivity analysis was also conducted using model 2, further adjusting for both 
family history of any cancer and family history of breast cancer in the first-degree 
relatives to estimate the association between food groups and the risk of breast cancer. To 
estimate the association of the risk of endometrial cancer, family history of endometrial 
cancer was included in the model, and for the risk of ovarian cancer, a family history of 
ovarian cancer and breast cancer was adjusted for in addition to model 2. Sensitivity 
analyses also involved adjusting for total energy intake (kJ/d) to account for under- and 
over-reporters (model 3). Adjustments were also made for current HRT use [35, 36], use 
of oral contraceptive pills and parity [37, 38] (model 4) in addition to model 3 as these 
are known risk factors for breast, endometrial and ovarian cancers.  
7.3 Results 
7.3.1 Baseline characteristics according to cancer type  
Of the 35 372 women at baseline, 695 women who were not flagged on the 
National Health Services (NHS) digital, 2340 women reporting history of any previous 
malignant cancer at baseline (except for non-melanoma of the skin) and women who were 
diagnosed with breast (n=68), endometrial (n=7) and ovarian (n=12) cancer within 1 year 
of baseline were excluded. After the exclusions, 32 228 women were eligible for the 
breast cancer analysis, 32 289 for the endometrial cancer analysis and 32 284 for the 
ovarian cancer analysis. 
Baseline characteristics of the participants according to cancer type are 
summarised in Table 7.1. After approximately 18 years of follow-up, there were 1822 
incident cases of breast cancer, 294 and 285 incident cases of endometrial and ovarian 
cancer, respectively. Women with endometrial and ovarian cancer were on average 
overweight at baseline with a BMI of 27.3 and 25.1 kg/m2, respectively, while women 
with breast cancer were borderline overweight (24.8 kg/m2) and women without any 
cancer had a normal weight (24.4 kg/m2). Women with endometrial cancer were less 
likely to be current smokers and had lower ethanol intake in comparison to those with 
breast and ovarian cancer as well as those without any cancer. A majority of women with 
incident breast cancer were current users of HRT at baseline (58.3%). Women without 
any cancer had an earlier natural menopause (mean=47.5 years) as compared with women 
with breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer. Around 42-46% of women with breast, 
endometrial and ovarian cancer had a family history of any cancer at baseline as compared 
with 38.4% for the non-cancer cases. Total energy intake and fibre intake was quite 
similar between the cancer cases and non-cancer cases. 
Table 7.1 Baseline characteristics according to cancer type from the UKWCS 
Characteristics Breast cancer cases Endometrial cancer cases Ovarian cancer cases No cancer 
 n= 1,822 n= 294 n=285 n=28,929 
Demographic characteristics     
Age (years), mean (SD) 53.2 (9.0) 54.1 (8.3) 55.7 (9.0) 51.7 (9.3) 
BMI (kg/m2), mean (SD) 24.8 (4.3) 27.3 (6.3) 25.1 (4.5) 24.4 (4.2) 
Professional/managerial SES, n (%) 1,105 (62.1) 182 (63.4) 171 (61.3) 18262 (63.6) 
Medical history     
Family history of any cancer, n (%) 755 (43.7) 127 (46.0) 112 (42.6) 10577 (38.4) 
Family history of breast cancer, n (%) 172 (10.0) 23 (8.3) 25 (9.5) 2145 (7.8) 
Family history of endometrial cancer, n (%) 17 (1.0) 6 (2.2) 1 (0.4) 274 (1.00) 
Family history of ovarian cancer, n (%) 15 (0.9) 6 (2.2) 6 (2.3) 284 (1.0) 
Lifestyle characteristics     
Current smoker, n (%) 185 (10.4) 24 (8.4) 40 (14.3) 3093 (10.9) 
Physical activity, mean (SD) 0.25 (0.55) 0.24 (0.44) 0.19 (0.34) 0.26 (0.49) 
Reproductive history     
Current hormone replacement therapy use, n (%) 433 (58.3) 61 (51.7) 69 (53.1) 5309 (53.2) 
Parous, n (%) 1370 (78.1) 227 (79.9) 214 (78.7) 21443 (79.3) 
Postmenopausal, n (%) 1,003 (55.5) 160 (54.6) 189 (66.3) 13892 (50.1) 
Age last natural menopause, mean (SD) 48.1 (4.5) 50.0 (4.4) 49.1 (3.4) 47.3 (4.5) 
Energy and food intake     
Total energy intake (kcal/day), mean (SD) 2291 (783) 2222 (715) 2260 (694) 2291 (793) 
Fibre intake (g/day), mean(SD) 25.5 (11.2) 24.2 (10.3) 25.4 (10.1) 25.6 (10.9) 
Ethanol (g/day), mean(SD) 9.1 (10.1) 7.5 (8.7) 9.3 (11.4) 8.7 (10.4) 
Total vegetable intake (g/day), mean(SD) 314.7 (208.7) 305.0 (174.7) 322.8 (190.6) 317.7 (191.6) 
Total fruit intake (g/day), mean(SD) 319.1 (225.5) 292.4 (198.3) 307.2 (207.7) 316.1 (243.3) 
Total meat intake (g/day), mean(SD) 69.1 (61.2) 72.5 (59.5) 66.3 (69.3) 64.5 (63.5) 
7.3.2 Diet and risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer 
For the association between food intake and risk of breast cancer, in both the age-
adjusted model and fully adjusted model, a standard portion of 83 g of tomato 
consumption was associated with a significant risk reduction (HR 0.87, 99% CI 0.75 to 
0.999). In the fully adjusted model, a standard portion of both processed meat and total 
meat intake was associated with higher risk of breast cancer, 36 and 17%, respectively 
(HR 1.36, 99% CI 1.02 to 1.81; HR 1.17, 99% CI 1.00 to 1.36) (Table 7.2). According to 
the subgroup analysis by pre- and postmenopausal breast cancer, consumption of 
tomatoes reduced the risk of postmenopausal breast cancer but not premenopausal breast 
cancer. Consumption of processed meat and total meat were both associated with a 
significant higher risk of postmenopausal breast cancer only. In addition, intake of 15 g 
of biscuits per day was associated with a 17% higher risk of premenopausal breast cancer 
(Table 7.3). 
Similarly, an increased risk of endometrial cancer was observed in the fully 
adjusted model with consumption of a standard portion of processed and total meat per d 
(HR 2.19, 99% CI 1.34 to 3.60; HR 1.53, 99% CI 1.04 to 2.24). Consumptions of 28 g of 
dried fruits per day and 85 g of high breakfast cereals were associated with a 40 and 26% 
reduced risk of endometrial cancer, respectively (HR 0.60, 99% CI 0.37 to 0.97; HR 0.74, 
99% CI 0.55 to 0.998) (Table 7.2). In the subgroup analysis, a standard portion of 
processed meat per d was associated with a higher risk of postmenopausal endometrial 
cancer. Consumption of dried fruits was associated with a significant reduced risk of only 
postmenopausal endometrial cancer (HR 0.55, 99% CI 0.31 to0.98), while a higher intake 
of low-energy/-diet soft drinks was positively associated with the risk of postmenopausal 
endometrial cancer (HR 1.27; 99% CI 1.00 to 1.61). For ovarian cancer, 34 g of 
mushroom intake per day was associated with a significantly higher risk (HR 1.57, 99% 
1.09 to 2.26). Furthermore, it was found that a higher mushroom intake was associated 
with an increased risk of postmenopausal ovarian cancer. A higher consumption of citrus 
fruits and total fruits was associated with an 87 and 37% reduced risk of premenopausal 
ovarian cancer, respectively. 
Table 7.2 Hazard ratios (99% confidence intervals) of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer by food groups 
 Breast Cancer Cases Endometrial cancer cases Ovarian cancer cases 
Daily intake/  
standard portion size 
Model 1 
n=1796/32,228 a 
Model 2 
n=1625/29,183 b 
Model 1 
n=285/32,289 a 
Model 2 
n=238/27,338 c 
Model 1 
n=274/32,284 a 
Model 2 
n=251/29,229 b 
HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI 
Starchy food sources             
Wholegrain products/ 33g 0.99 0.96 to 1.02 0.99 0.96 to 1.03 0.95 0.88 to 1.03 0.92 0.84 to 1.01 1.02 0.94 to 1.10 1.00 0.93 to 1.09 
Refined grain products/ 51g 1.03 0.96 to 1.10 1.03 0.95 to 1.11 1.11 0.95 to 1.30 1.15 0.98 to 1.35 1.04 0.87 to 1.24 1.02 0.84 to 1.24 
Low fibre breakfast cereals/ 40g 1.00 0.83 to 1.20 1.04 0.85 to 1.26 0.83 0.50 to 1.37 0.76 0.43 to 1.37 1.16 0.76 to 1.75 1.08 0.67 to 1.74 
High fibre breakfast cereals/ 85g 1.00 0.92 to 1.08 1.01 0.92 to 1.10 0.82 0.64 to 1.06 0.74 0.55 to 0.998 0.89 0.70 to 1.13 0.89 0.69 to 1.15 
Plain Potatoes/ 210g 0.93 0.81 to 1.06 0.94 0.81 to 1.09 0.92 0.66 to 1.30 0.94 0.64 to 1.38 0.79 0.54 to 1.15 0.83 0.56 to 1.23 
Potatoes with added fat/ 127g 1.13 0.94 to 1.37 1.28 0.96 to 1.71 1.28 0.97 to 1.68 1.90 1.00 to 3.60 0.78 0.35 to 1.70 0.80 0.35 to 1.84 
Refined pasta and rice/ 210g 0.99 0.78 to 1.25 0.94 0.72 to 1.22 0.99 0.55 to 1.78 1.05 0.54 to 2.05 0.69 0.34 to 1.42 0.73 0.34 to 1.54 
Wholegrain pasta and rice/ 197 g 1.07 0.82 to 1.40 1.14 0.84 to 1.55 0.72 0.31 to 1.67 0.60 0.23 to 1.60 0.58 0.23 to 1.49 0.70 0.27 to 1.83 
Protein and fat food sources             
Low fat dairy products/ 118g 1.01 0.98 to 1.03 1.01 0.98 to 1.03 1.04 0.98 to 1.10 1.03 0.97 to 1.10 0.95 0.90 to 1.02 0.95 0.89 to 1.02 
High fat dairy products/ 93g 1.00 0.97 to 1.03 1.00 0.97 to 1.04 0.96 0.88 to 1.04 0.98 0.90 to 1.07 1.05 0.98 to 1.12 1.06 0.99 to 1.13 
Butter and hard margarine/ 10g 0.99 0.93 to 1.06 0.98 0.92 to 1.05 0.98 0.83 to 1.16 1.00 0.83 to 1.20 0.92 0.76 to 1.10 0.86 0.69 to 1.06 
Margarine/ 9g 0.97 0.91 to 1.03 0.99 0.92 to 1.05 0.95 0.81 to 1.12 0.93 0.77 to 1.11 1.06 0.91 to 1.22 1.03 0.88 to 1.21 
Low fat spreads/ 7g 1.03 0.96 to 1.09 1.03 0.96 to 1.10 1.02 0.87 to 1.19 0.98 0.82 to 1.17 0.94 0.79 to 1.13 0.95 0.78 to 1.15 
High fat dressing/ 23g 1.00 0.81 to 1.23 0.98 0.78 to 1.22 0.72 0.39 to 1.32 0.77 0.40 to 1.50 0.92 0.53 to 1.61 0.72 0.38 to 1.38 
Low fat dressing/ 30g 0.98 0.70 to 1.36 1.02 0.72 to 1.45 0.88 0.37 to 2.08 0.86 0.32 to 2.29 1.02 0.46 to 2.30 1.09 0.47 to 2.54 
Soybean products/ 62g 0.97 0.90 to 1.04 0.97 0.90 to 1.05 0.98 0.82 to 1.17 0.98 0.81 to 1.19 0.94 0.75 to 1.16 0.93 0.73 to 1.19 
Textured vegetable protein/ 130g 0.44 0.03 to 6.93 0.16 0.01 to 3.50 - - - - - - - - 
Pulses/ 91g 1.00 0.87 to 1.14 1.03 0.89 to 1.19 0.87 0.60 to 1.28 0.81 0.52 to 1.25 1.08 0.79 to 1.48 1.17 0.83 to 1.64 
Eggs/eggs dishes/ 88g 0.99 0.76 to 1.27 0.98 0.73 to 1.31 1.29 0.82 to 2.02 1.63 0.88 to 2.99 1.21 0.74 to 1.96 1.21 0.62 to 2.37 
Fish and fish dishes/ 140g 1.04 0.76 to 1.43 1.01 0.68 to 1.51 0.90 0.36 to 2.24 0.96 0.34 to 2.71 0.99 0.43 to 2.24 0.86 0.30 to 2.43 
Oily fish/ 90g 0.98 0.64 to 1.50 0.98 0.62 to 1.54 0.45 0.12 to 1.68 0.52 0.13 to 2.13 1.06 0.39 to 2.89 1.06 0.36 to 3.14 
Shell fish/ 60g 1.17 0.66 to 2.07 1.44 0.56 to 3.70 0.52 0.04 to 6.83 0.72 0.04 to 11.69 0.85 0.11 to 6.65 0.65 0.04 to 10.06 
Red meat/ 189g 1.20 0.97 to 1.49 1.28 0.95 to 1.72 1.33 0.87 to 2.02 1.90 0.92 to 3.94 0.91 0.45 to 1.88 0.85 0.38 to 1.92 
Table 7.2 Continued 
 Breast Cancer Cases Endometrial cancer cases Ovarian cancer cases 
Daily intake/  
standard portion size 
Model 1 
n=1796/32,228 a 
Model 2 
n=1625/29,183 b 
Model 1 
n=285/32,289 a 
Model 2 
n=238/27,338 c 
Model 1 
n=274/32,284 a 
Model 2 
n=251/29,229 b 
HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI 
Processed meat/ 74g 1.34 1.03 to 1.73 1.36 1.02 to 1.81 1.81 1.16 to 2.83 2.19 1.34 to 3.60 1.22 0.62 to 2.42 1.27 0.60 to 2.69 
Poultry/ 143g 1.30 0.90 to 1.87 1.32 0.86 to 2.03 1.35 0.55 to 3.32 1.76 0.60 to 5.18 0.63 0.19 to 2.07 0.62 0.17 to 2.21 
Offal/ 100g 2.19 0.44 to 10.89 2.27 0.41 to 12.55 2.70 0.05 to 138.5 - - 0.10 0.00 to 12.00 0.07 0.00 to 12.00 
Total meat/ 150g 1.12 1.01 to 1.24 1.17 1.00 to 1.36 1.19 0.98 to 1.45 1.53 1.04 to 2.24 0.94 0.65 to 1.37 0.92 0.61 to 1.39 
Vegetables             
Vegetable dishes/ 214g 0.97 0.82 to 1.14 0.91 0.75 to 1.10 0.74 0.45 to 1.22 0.67 0.38 to 1.19 1.02 0.70 to 1.49 1.03 0.64 to 1.67 
Allium/ 39g 0.98 0.82 to 1.17 0.99 0.82 to 1.20 1.02 0.67 to 1.57 0.97 0.58 to 1.61 0.81 0.49 to 1.33 0.77 0.44 to 1.33 
Fresh legumes/ 75g 1.01 0.86 to 1.18 0.96 0.80 to 1.15 1.12 0.80 to 1.56 1.14 0.75 to 1.72 1.03 0.71 to 1.51 1.08 0.73 to 1.60 
Mediterranean vegetables/ 60g 0.98 0.87 to 1.10 0.96 0.84 to 1.09 0.98 0.73 to 1.32 0.85 0.58 to 1.23 1.17 0.93 to 1.47 1.18 0.90 to 1.56 
Salad vegetables/ 43g 0.97 0.87 to 1.08 0.97 0.87 to 1.09 0.84 0.62 to 1.12 0.84 0.61 to 1.17 0.98 0.76 to 1.28 0.99 0.74 to 1.32 
Cruciferous vegetables/ 75g 1.01 0.95 to 1.07 0.99 0.91 to 1.06 0.94 0.78 to 1.14 0.94 0.76 to 1.16 1.01 0.87 to 1.18 1.04 0.88 to 1.24 
Tomatoes/ 83g 0.88 0.77 to 1.00 0.87 0.75 to 0.999 0.81 0.57 to 1.15 0.77 0.52 to 1.16 0.94 0.69 to 1.29 0.97 0.70 to 1.35 
Mushrooms/ 34g 0.98 0.79 to 1.22 0.96 0.76 to 1.22 1.19 0.77 to 1.85 1.29 0.78 to 2.12 1.40 0.98 to 1.99 1.57 1.09 to 2.26 
Roots and tubers/ 66g 0.94 0.83 to 1.05 0.94 0.83 to 1.06 0.96 0.74 to 1.25 0.90 0.66 to 1.25 1.06 0.83 to 1.34 1.12 0.88 to 1.43 
Total vegetables/150g 0.98 0.94 to 1.03 0.97 0.91 to 1.02 0.95 0.84 to 1.09 0.93 0.80 to 1.08 1.02 0.91 to 1.14 1.04 0.92 to 1.18 
Fruits             
Stone fruits/ 49g 1.00 0.96 to 1.04 1.03 0.86 to 1.23 0.84 0.49 to 1.42 0.94 0.55 to 1.62 0.63 0.32 to 1.22 0.66 0.32 to 1.33 
Deep orange & yellow fruits/ 118g 1.03 0.90 to 1.18 1.08 0.92 to 1.26 0.67 0.39 to 1.15 0.75 0.42 to 1.32 0.97 0.65 to 1.44 0.98 0.62 to 1.54 
Grapes/ 100g 0.98 0.86 to 1.11 0.96 0.84 to 1.10 0.92 0.66 to 1.29 0.91 0.61 to 1.34 0.84 0.57 to 1.23 0.91 0.62 to 1.32 
Citrus family fruits/ 92g 1.03 0.93 to 1.14 1.02 0.92 to 1.14 0.81 0.60 to 1.11 0.77 0.54 to 1.10 0.85 0.63 to 1.15 0.88 0.64 to 1.21 
Rhubarb/ 130g 0.96 0.76 to 1.22 0.93 0.71 to 1.24 0.59 0.24 to 1.45 0.74 0.30 to 1.82 1.04 0.61 to 1.77 1.07 0.57 to 2.00 
Berries/ 48g 1.02 0.93 to 1.11 1.03 0.94 to 1.14 0.85 0.62 to 1.15 0.85 0.60 to 1.21 0.84 0.61 to 1.15 0.82 0.57 to 1.17 
Bananas/ 100g 1.04 0.94 to 1.158 1.07 0.95 to 1.19 0.87 0.65 to 1.18 0.88 0.63 to 1.22 1.10 0.85 to 1.42 1.21 0.92 to 1.59 
Pomes/ 116g 0.97 0.90 to 1.04 0.98 0.91 to 1.06 0.97 0.80 to 1.16 0.92 0.75 to 1.15 0.91 0.74 to 1.11 0.97 0.79 to 1.19 
Total fruits/150g 1.00 0.96 to 1.04 1.01 0.97 to 1.05 0.91 0.81 to 1.02 0.90 0.79 to 1.03 0.95 0.85 to 1.06 0.98 0.88 to 1.10 
Dried Fruits/ 28g 1.03 0.96 to 1.11 1.04 0.98 to 1.13 0.67 0.46 to 0.99 0.60 0.37 to 0.97 1.02 0.86 to 1.22 1.06 0.89 to 1.26 
Table 7.2 Continued 
 Breast Cancer Cases Endometrial cancer cases Ovarian cancer cases 
Daily intake/  
standard portion size 
Model 1 
n=1796/32,228 a 
Model 2 
n=1625/29,183 b 
Model 1 
n=285/32,289 a 
Model 2 
n=238/27,338 c 
Model 1 
n=274/32,284 a 
Model 2 
n=251/29,229 b 
HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI 
Other food groups             
Sauces/ 83g 1.05 0.63 to 1.74 1.07 0.62 to 1.87 1.46 0.48 to 3.40 1.29 0.31 to 5.37 1.48 0.49 to 4.49 1.78 0.48 to 6.65 
Pickles/Chutneys/ 35g 0.90 0.70 to 1.17 0.89 0.68 to 1.18 1.16 0.68 to 1.97 0.96 0.49 to 1.91 0.72 0.35 to 1.48 0.65 0.29 to 1.44 
Soups/ 163g 0.98 0.82 to 1.18 0.98 0.79 to 1.22 0.93 0.57 to 1.51 0.90 0.50 to 1.61 0.95 0.60 to 1.50 1.03 0.62 to 1.70 
Confectionary & spreads/ 44g 0.98 0.92 to 1.04 0.99 0.92 to 1.05 0.94 0.79 to 1.12 0.88 0.71 to 1.09 0.98 0.83 to 1.15 0.96 0.81 to 1.15 
Nuts and seeds/ 24g 1.01 0.93 to 1.10 1.03 0.94 to 1.13 1.03 0.85 to 1.25 0.77 0.53 to 1.13 1.02 0.83 to 1.25 1.02 0.80 to 1.30 
Savoury snacks/ 26g 1.05 0.87 to 1.26 1.06 0.87 to 1.29 1.21 0.79 to 1.85 1.12 0.68 to 1.86 1.05 0.63 to 1.73 1.06 0.63 to 1.81 
Biscuits/ 15g 1.00 0.94 to 1.06 1.01 0.94 to 1.08 0.97 0.83 to 1.14 0.97 0.81 to 1.17 0.95 0.80 to 1.13 0.95 0.80 to 1.15 
Cakes/ 66g 0.89 0.68 to 1.16 0.88 0.65 to 1.19 0.85 0.43 to 1.68 0.84 0.38 to 1.87 1.01 0.55 to 1.83 0.95 0.47 to 1.92 
Pastries and Puddings/ 84g 1.05 0.89 to 1.24 1.12 0.92 to 1.36 0.85 0.51 to 1.43 1.00 0.58 to 1.73 0.78 0.45 to 1.35 0.71 0.37 to 1.34 
Drinks and beverages             
Tea/ 260g 0.98 0.95 to 1.02 0.98 0.95 to 1.02 1.04 0.96 to 1.12 1.02 0.93 to 1.11 0.98 0.91 to 1.07 0.98 0.90 to 1.07 
Herbal tea/ 260g 0.97 0.90 to 1.04 0.99 0.91 to 1.06 0.96 0.80 to 1.16 0.89 0.71 to 1.12 0.94 0.77 to 1.15 0.93 0.75 to 1.16 
Coffee/ 190g 1.01 0.98 to 1.04 1.01 0.97 to 1.04 1.03 0.95 to 1.12 1.03 0.94 to 1.13 1.04 0.96 to 1.13 1.04 0.95 to 1.13 
Other hot beverages/ 23g 1.02 0.92 to 1.12 1.03 0.93 to 1.14 1.03 0.81 to 1.31 1.01 0.77 to 1.33 0.99 0.77 to 1.28 1.04 0.80 to 1.35 
Juices/ 145g 1.00 0.93 to 1.07 1.01 0.93 to 1.08 0.97 0.80 to 1.16 0.95 0.76 to 1.17 0.95 0.78 to 1.15 0.97 0.79 to 1.18 
Soft drinks/ 111g 1.00 0.89 to 1.10 1.00 0.90 to 1.12 1.05 0.83 to 1.33 1.00 0.74 to 1.34 1.03 0.80 to 1.33 1.02 0.78 to 1.33 
Low calorie/diet soft drinks/ 161g 1.01 0.91 to 1.12 1.03 0.93 to 1.14 1.10 0.87 to 1.38 1.03 0.79 to 1.35 0.96 0.72 to 1.28 0.98 0.73 to 1.31 
Wines/ glass* 1.03 0.94 to 1.12 1.03 0.94 to 1.13 0.90 0.70 to 1.14 0.90 0.69 to1.17 1.06 0.86 to 1.32 1.06 0.85 to 1.32 
Beer and cider/ half pint* 1.09 0.93 to 1.28 1.10 0.93 to 1.29 1.13 0.77 to 1.68 0.81 0.42 to 1.56 1.11 0.71 to 1.72 1.10 0.72 to 1.69 
Port, sherry, liqueurs/ glass* 0.97 0.75 to 1.26 0.98 0.74 to 1.29 0.93 0.47 to 1.82 1.11 0.57 to 2.17 1.17 0.72 to 1.92 1.20 0.74 to 1.95 
Spirits/ measure* 1.11 0.97 to 1.27 1.10 0.95 to 1.27 0.51 0.25 to 1.02 0.54 0.26 to 1.12 1.27 0.97 to 1.67 1.26 0.96 to 1.66 
a Model 1: adjusted for age; b Model 2: adjusted for age, ethanol intake, duration of breastfeeding, physical activity, smoking, social class, menopausal status; c Model 2 (endometrial 
cancer): adjusted for age, ethanol intake, duration of breastfeeding, physical activity, smoking, social class, menopausal status, history of diabetes and history of hypertension; * not 
adjusted for ethanol intake 
Table 7.3 Associations between various food groups and risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer by incidence of premenopausal and 
postmenopausal cancer cases 
 Breast Cancer Casesa Endometrial Cancer Casesb Ovarian Cancer Casesa 
Daily intake/  
standard portion size 
Premenopausal 
n=291/3,178 
Postmenopausal 
n=1,030/23,806 
Premenopausal 
n=35/3,024 
Postmenopausal 
n=175/24,118 
Premenopausal 
n=44/3,030 
Postmenopausal 
n=163/24,115 
HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI 
Starchy food sources             
Wholegrain products/ 33g 1.01 0.93 to 1.10 0.98 0.94 to 1.02 1.21 0.84 to 1.76 0.91 0.81 to 1.01 1.21 0.94 to 1.56 1.01 0.91 to 1.12 
Refined grain products/ 51g 0.99 0.83 to 1.18 1.06 0.97 to 1.16 1.06 0.55 to 2.03 1.16 0.95 to 1.42 1.31 0.90 to 1.91 0.84 0.63 to 1.13 
Low fibre breakfast cereals/ 40g 0.90 0.60 to 1.34 1.02 0.80 to 1.30 0.29 0.06 to 1.50 0.75 0.38 to 1.50 0.68 0.17 to 2.80 1.02 0.55 to 1.86 
High fibre breakfast cereals/ 85g 1.06 0.87 to 1.29 1.00 0.90 to 1.12 1.34 0.41 to 4.42 0.86 0.62 to 1.17 1.28 0.63 to 2.58 0.86 0.62 to 1.19 
Plain Potatoes/ 210g 0.98 0.61 to 1.56 0.95 0.79 to 1.14 0.58 0.09 to 3.69 0.98 0.63 to 1.51 0.97 0.27 to 3.47 0.86 0.53 to 1.40 
Potatoes with added fat/ 127g 1.05 0.49 to 2.27 1.31 0.90 to 1.91 0.33 0.03 to 3.29 1.96 0.89 to 4.31 9.87 0.87 to 111.5 0.54 0.17 to 1.70 
Refined pasta and rice/ 210g 1.10 0.60 to 2.01 1.00 0.71 to 1.40 1.04 0.13 to 8.14 1.28 0.62 to 2.63 2.91 0.37 to 22.9 0.72 0.28 to 1.88 
Wholegrain pasta and rice/ 197 g 1.15 0.49 to 2.70 1.29 0.88 to 1.88 4.90 0.51 to 47.3 0.44 0.12 to 1.56 0.06 0.00 to 3.08 1.32 0.51 to 3.42 
Protein and fat food sources             
Low fat dairy products/ 118g 1.03 0.97 to 1.10 1.02 0.99 to 1.05 0.96 0.81 to 1.14 1.04 0.97 to 1.12 1.02 0.85 to 1.22 0.96 0.89 to 1.04 
High fat dairy products/ 93g 1.00 0.93 to 1.08 1.00 0.96 to 1.04 0.94 0.73 to 1.20 0.93 0.82 to 1.05 1.05 0.89 to 1.23 1.04 0.95 to 1.13 
Butter and hard margarine/ 10g 1.00 0.82 to 1.21 0.99 0.91 to 1.09 1.04 0.50 to 2.17 1.02 0.83 to 1.26 0.90 0.57 to 1.43 0.76 0.57 to 1.03 
Margarine/ 9g 1.08 0.91 to 1.28 0.98 0.90 to 1.06 0.75 0.42 to 1.33 0.93 0.75 to 1.15 1.06 0.67 to 1.68 1.08 0.90 to 1.31 
Low fat spreads/ 7g 1.03 0.90 to 1.18 0.98 0.90 to 1.07 1.15 0.64 to 2.06 0.98 0.80 to 1.21 1.46 0.84 to 2.55 0.94 0.74 to 1.19 
High fat dressing/ 23g 1.39 0.69 to 2.82 1.00 0.76 to 1.33 0.25 0.01 to 4.55 0.84 0.40 to 1.78 0.34 0.05 to 2.49 0.99 0.48 to 2.02 
Low fat dressing/ 30g 1.06 0.41 to 2.71 0.99 0.64 to 1.53 0.64 0.02 to 24.3 0.87 0.29 to 2.62 3.31 0.06 to 175.2 1.26 0.49 to 3.23 
Soybean products/ 62g 0.90 0.69 to 1.17 0.99 0.90 to 1.08 0.84 0.42 to 1.65 1.02 0.84 to 1.25 - - 0.91 0.66 to 1.25 
Textured vegetable protein/ 130g - - 0.04 0.00 to 2.55 - - - - - - - - 
Pulses/ 91g 1.04 0.71 to 1.53 1.06 0.88 to 1.27 0.82 0.23 to 2.90 0.90 0.55 to 1.48 1.31 0.44 to 3.89 1.28 0.84 to 1.94 
Eggs/eggs dishes/ 88g 0.92 0.44 to 1.95 0.94 0.65 to 1.37 1.18 0.07 to 18.4 1.64 0.84 to 3.21 0.70 0.14 to 3.64 0.86 0.33 to 2.22 
Fish and fish dishes/ 140g 0.84 0.29 to 2.38 1.01 0.61 to 1.67 1.88 0.07 to 51.3 0.81 0.23 to 2.91 0.56 0.01 to 31.7 1.04 0.30 to 3.58 
Oily fish/ 90g 0.46 0.11 to 1.81 0.93 0.52 to 1.63 0.46 0.00 to 104.8 0.27 0.04 to 1.64 0.21 0.01 to 6.52 0.95 0.24 to 3.82 
Shell fish/ 60g 0.83 0.04 to 17.7 2.06 0.64 to 6.61 - - 0.25 0.01 to 11.5 - - 1.39 0.06 to 33.7 
Red meat/ 189g 0.91 0.40 to 2.05 1.37 0.94 to 1.98 0.44 0.04 to 5.37 1.86 0.80 to 4.30 2.55 0.66 to 9.77 0.62 0.21 to 1.80 
Table 7.3 Continued 
 Breast Cancer Casesa Endometrial Cancer Casesb Ovarian Cancer Casesa 
Daily intake/  
standard portion size 
Premenopausal 
n=291/3,178 
Postmenopausal 
n=1,030/23,806 
Premenopausal 
n=35/3,024 
Postmenopausal 
n=175/24,118 
Premenopausal 
n=44/3,030 
Postmenopausal 
n=163/24,115 
HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI 
Processed meat/ 74g 1.36 0.66 to 2.80 1.50 1.01 to 2.22 0.65 0.03 to 12.1 3.05 1.34 to 6.91 2.13 0.84 to 5.40 0.71 0.23 to 2.18 
Poultry/ 143g 1.08 0.33 to 3.55 1.33 0.78 to 2.28 - - 1.29 0.35 to 4.81 - - 0.54 0.11 to 2.66 
Offal/ 100g - - 3.67 0.49 to 27.2 - - - - - - 0.05 0.00 to 30.6 
Total meat/ 150g 1.03 0.69 to 1.56 1.22 1.00 to 1.47 0.94 0.27 to 3.26 1.50 0.95 to 2.35 1.67 0.89 to 3.13 0.75 0.44 to 1.29 
Vegetables             
Vegetable dishes/ 214g 1.00 0.60 to 1.67 1.00 0.79 to 1.27 1.73 0.39 to 7.72 0.77 0.40 to 1.48 0.36 0.08 to 1.70 1.23 0.72 to 2.10 
Allium/ 39g 0.81 0.46 to 1.42 1.12 0.91 to 1.37 1.28 0.33 to 5.03 0.95 0.53 to 1.72 0.32 0.08 to 1.33 0.96 0.53 to 1.74 
Fresh legumes/ 75g 0.87 0.49 to 1.56 1.09 0.89 to 1.33 1.91 0.39 to 9.24 1.23 0.79 to 1.90 0.54 0.12 to 2.40 1.21 0.78 to 1.87 
Mediterranean vegetables/ 60g 0.98 0.65 to 1.50 1.04 0.89 to 1.22 1.24 0.51 to 3.00 0.93 0.61 to 1.42 0.54 0.21 to 1.35 1.23 0.88 to 1.72 
Salad vegetables/ 43g 0.99 0.68 to 1.44 1.04 0.91 to 1.20 1.34 0.37 to 4.87 0.88 0.61 to 1.28 0.61 0.28 to 1.31 1.00 0.70 to 1.43 
Cruciferous vegetables/ 75g 0.94 0.74 to 1.20 1.03 0.94 to 1.12 1.09 0.46 to 2.60 0.97 0.77 to 1.23 1.06 0.58 to 1.93 1.10 0.93 to 1.30 
Tomatoes/ 83g 0.96 0.62 to 1.48 0.88 0.74 to 1.04 1.85 0.61 to 5.62 0.76 0.48 to 1.22 1.16 0.54 to 2.49 0.91 0.59 to 1.39 
Mushrooms/ 34g 0.94 0.51 to 1.75 1.03 0.77 to 1.38 2.13 0.26 to 14.7 1.24 0.66 to 2.31 0.29 0.06 to 1.43 1.84 1.21 to 2.79 
Roots and tubers/ 66g 0.86 0.60 to 1.22 0.98 0.85 to 1.12 0.69 0.20 to 2.38 0.97 0.69 to 1.37 0.64 0.26 to 1.60 1.20 0.94 to 1.53 
Total vegetables/150g 0.94 0.79 to 1.13 1.01 0.94 to 1.08 1.18 0.71 to 1.96 0.96 0.81 to 1.14 0.82 0.58 to 1.18 1.09 0.95 to 1.25 
Fruits             
Stone fruits/ 49g 0.60 0.31 to 1.16 1.13 0.97 to 1.33 8.93 0.38 to 207.5 1.11 0.72 to 1.70 0.14 0.01 to 3.50 0.98 0.52 to 1.87 
Deep orange & yellow fruits/ 118g 0.70 0.44 to 1.11 1.12 0.93 to 1.35 0.65 0.15 to 2.90 0.78 0.41 to 1.49 0.09 0.01 to 1.07 1.20 0.79 to 1.81 
Grapes/ 100g 0.91 0.64 to 1.29 0.95 0.80 to 1.13 1.11 0.20 to 6.05 0.93 0.60 to 1.42 1.08 0.21 to 5.62 1.04 0.73 to 1.49 
Citrus family fruits/ 92g 1.02 0.76 to 1.37 1.06 0.93 to 1.21 0.89 0.16 to 4.97 0.85 0.58 to 1.25 0.13 0.02 to 0.81 1.06 0.76 to 1.48 
Rhubarb/ 130g 0.80 0.29 to 2.17 0.93 0.64 to 1.33 0.26 0.01 to 11.2 0.83 0.31 to 2.21 0.47 0.06 to 3.88 1.19 0.59 to 2.38 
Berries/ 48g 0.87 0.68 to 1.14 1.06 0.95 to 1.18 1.46 0.30 to 7.13 0.89 0.61 to 1.29 0.71 0.37 to 1.36 0.88 0.59 to 1.31 
Bananas/ 100g 0.94 0.72 to 1.24 1.09 0.94 to 1.25 0.65 0.24 to 1.81 0.96 0.67 to 1.39 0.44 0.15 to 1.31 1.32 0.97 to 1.80 
Pomes/ 116g 0.90 0.71 to 1.14 0.99 0.90 to 1.09 1.25 0.60 to 2.61 0.93 0.73 to 1.19 0.62 0.24 to 1.61 1.03 0.82 to 1.30 
Total fruits/150g 0.94 0.84 to 1.05 1.02 0.97 to 1.07 0.97 0.64 to 1.47 0.93 0.80 to 1.08 0.63 0.40 to 0.99 1.06 0.94 to 1.19 
Dried Fruits/ 28g 1.06 0.96 to 1.16 1.04 0.94 to 1.15 0.99 0.25 to 3.93 0.55 0.31 to 0.98 0.35 0.04 to 2.86 1.14 0.99 to 1.31 
Table 7.3 Continued 
 Breast Cancer Casesa Endometrial Cancer Casesb Ovarian Cancer Casesa 
Daily intake/  
standard portion size 
Premenopausal 
n=291/3,178 
Postmenopausal 
n=1,030/23,806 
Premenopausal 
n=35/3,024 
Postmenopausal 
n=175/24,118 
Premenopausal 
n=44/3,030 
Postmenopausal 
n=163/24,115 
HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI 
Other food groups             
Sauces/ 83g 2.52 0.38 to 16.7 1.30 0.66 to 2.58 - - 1.91 0.40 to 9.12 8.89 0.37 to 215.9 1.28 0.22 to 7.49 
Pickles/Chutneys/ 35g 1.35 0.79 to 2.30 0.85 0.60 to 1.22 2.31 0.23 to 22.9 1.01 0.46 to 2.21 2.35 0.18 to 30.5 0.68 0.25 to 1.82 
Soups/ 163g 0.87 0.41 to 1.83 1.08 0.84 to 1.38 - - 1.00 0.54 to 1.85 1.01 0.32 to 3.17 1.05 0.57 to 1.91 
Confectionary & spreads/ 44g 0.95 0.84 to 1.08 1.00 0.92 to 1.09 0.89 0.51 to 1.55 0.93 0.74 to 1.17 0.89 0.55 to 1.45 0.99 0.80 to 1.23 
Nuts and seeds/ 24g 1.03 0.90 to 1.18 1.04 0.92 to 1.16 1.13 0.54 to 2.36 0.70 0.43 to 1.14 0.39 0.10 to 1.51 1.02 0.76 to 1.38 
Savoury snacks/ 26g 0.85 0.47 to 1.52 1.06 0.82 to 1.38 1.64 0.25 to 10.8 1.31 0.75 to 2.27 1.01 0.19 to 5.34 1.24 0.67 to 2.28 
Biscuits/ 15g 1.17 1.00 to 1.38 1.00 0.93 to 1.09 0.93 0.45 to 1.93 1.01 0.84 to 1.23 1.40 0.75 to 2.60 0.93 0.74 to 1.18 
Cakes/ 66g 0.83 0.45 to 1.52 0.84 0.57 to 1.22 0.06 0.00 to 1.82 0.95 0.41 to 2.21 0.24 0.01 to 5.17 1.06 0.48 to 2.37 
Pastries and Puddings/ 84g 1.47 0.98 to 2.19 1.08 0.83 to 1.39 0.26 0.01 to 4.75 1.16 0.64 to 2.11 1.12 0.06 to 22.0 0.76 0.35 to 1.61 
Drinks and beverages             
Tea/ 260g 0.98 0.90 to 1.06 0.99 0.95 to 1.03 1.14 0.84 to 1.55 1.02 0.92 to 1.13 0.98 0.77 to 1.24 0.94 0.84 to 1.04 
Herbal tea/ 260g 1.06 0.87 to 1.29 1.00 0.91 to 1.09 1.49 0.71 to 3.11 0.89 0.68 to 1.16 0.76 0.34 to 1.72 0.96 0.74 to 1.25 
Coffee/ 190g 1.03 0.95 to 1.11 1.01 0.97 to 1.06 1.03 0.76 to 1.39 1.01 0.91 to 1.13 1.16 0.87 to 1.54 1.07 0.96 to 1.19 
Other hot beverages/ 23g 1.02 0.79 to 1.31 1.01 0.89 to 1.15 0.25 0.04 to 1.47 1.05 0.79 to 1.42 1.18 0.54 to 2.58 1.08 0.80 to 1.46 
Juices/ 145g 0.89 0.72 to 1.10 0.99 0.90 to 1.09 1.09 0.51 to 2.33 0.96 0.76 to 1.23 0.65 0.31 to 1.35 1.02 0.81 to 1.29 
Soft drinks/ 111g 1.04 0.87 to 1.23 1.03 0.90 to 1.19 0.98 0.36 to 2.67 1.15 0.88 to 1.50 1.52 0.80 to 2.88 1.09 0.80 to 1.48 
Low calorie/diet soft drinks/ 161g 1.00 0.78 to 1.29 1.03 0.90 to 1.18 0.34 0.05 to 2.18 1.27 1.00 to 1.61 1.70 0.64 to 4.50 1.01 0.70 to 1.45 
Wines/ glass* 0.98 0.81 to 1.18 1.03 0.92 to 1.15 1.24 0.40 to 3.79 0.85 0.61 to 1.18 0.89 0.50 to 1.59 1.01 0.75 to 1.36 
Beer and cider/ half pint* 1.09 0.65 to 1.83 1.15 0.94 to 1.42 4.11 0.44 to 38.4 1.26 0.81 to 1.97 1.81 0.93 to 3.53 1.05 0.56 to 1.97 
Port, sherry, liqueurs/ glass* 1.23 0.59 to 2.60 1.01 0.73 to 1.39 - - 0.95 0.42 to 2.15 0.58 0.16 to 2.14 1.31 0.77 to 2.21 
Spirits/ measure* 1.07 0.80 to 1.43 1.05 0.87 to 1.28 0.76 0.01 to 76.3 0.49 0.20 to 1.21 1.21 0.51 to 2.86 1.12 0.74 to 1.71 
a Fully adjusted for age, ethanol intake, duration of breastfeeding, physical activity, smoking, social class, menopausal status; b Fully adjusted for age, ethanol intake, duration of 
breastfeeding, physical activity, smoking, social class, menopausal status, history of diabetes and history of hypertension; * not adjusted for ethanol intake
After further adjustment for family history of the respective cancers, similar 
results were obtained to those reported above (Table E.1). In addition, a significantly 
higher risk of breast and endometrial cancer was observed with frequent consumption of 
a standard portion of potatoes with added fat (i.e. chips/roast potatoes). The associations 
between diet and the risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer after further 
adjustments for total energy intake and current HRT use, oral contraceptive use and parity 
were also in agreement with the studys main associations (Table E.2). We also found 
that the risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer significantly increased with an 
increase in age at natural menopause (Table E.3). Subgroup analysis by age at natural 
menopause demonstrated that the diet of women with either an earlier or later age at 
natural menopause did not change the risk of the cancers (Table E.4). 
7.4 Discussion 
In this prospective investigation of the consumption of food groups in relation to 
the risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancers, we consistently found that 
consumption of processed meat and total meat was associated with a significantly higher 
risk of breast and endometrial cancer. In addition, frequent consumption of a standard 
portion of tomatoes and dried fruits were associated with a reduced risk of breast and 
endometrial cancer, respectively. A higher consumption of mushrooms was found to be 
weakly associated with a higher risk of ovarian cancer. Subgroup analysis showed similar 
associations between these food items and cancer risk, when differentiating between a 
pre- and postmenopausal cancer as well as when further adjustments for family history of 
cancer, total energy intake, current HRT use, oral contraceptive use and parity were 
accounted for in the different models. 
Previous studies have also reported an increased risk of breast and endometrial 
cancer with a higher consumption of processed meat and total meat. According to the 
recent UK Biobank cohort study [39], a 6% higher risk of breast cancer was reported in 
relation to processed meat consumption. Similar to our results, they also found only a 
significant increased risk of postmenopausal breast cancer. The European Prospective 
Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) [40] and NutriNet-Sant [41] prospective 
cohort studies have also reported an increased risk of breast cancer associated with the 
consumption of processed meat. Our findings are further supported by a prospective 
randomised control trial conducted over a period of 8 years [42]. Studies investigating the 
association between processed meat and the risk of endometrial cancer are limited and 
conflicting. While a casecontrol study [43] including 274 participants with endometrial 
cancer found that intake of processed meats such as boiled ham, salami and sausages and 
canned meat was associated with an increased risk of endometrial cancer, findings from 
a cohort study, the National Institutes of Health  American Association of Retired 
Persons (NIH-AARP) Diet and Health Study [44] including 1486 incident cases reported 
no evidence of an association. Another cancer multi-site study from the NIH-AARP Diet 
and Health Study also reported no association between processed meat consumption and 
risk of both breast and endometrial cancer [45]. 
The underlying mechanisms for the pathogenesis of breast cancer are 
heterogeneous. High levels of nitrates, nitrites and amines, which are precursors of N-
nitroso compounds, added in processed meat to enhance its colour and flavour have been 
consistently reported to be one of the causes of carcinogenicity [46]. In addition, cooking 
especially at high temperatures (e.g. frying, grilling or barbecuing) can lead to the 
formation of heterocyclic aromatic amines, which are also potent mutagens and 
carcinogens [47]. The N-nitro compounds, heterocyclic amines along with other 
compounds (haem Fe, saturated fat and oestradiol), present in meats can directly cause 
DNA damage and have been associated with mammary tumour development as 
demonstrated in both animal and human studies [46, 48]. We also found that processed 
meat consumption was positively associated with postmenopausal breast cancer though 
not for premenopausal breast cancer. Disparities could be due to differing oestrogen 
metabolism pathways between the two groups. These results could suggest that processed 
meat influences breast cancer risk by interacting with oestrogen metabolism in scenarios 
where the levels of circulating oestrogens are lower [20]. 
Endometrial cancer is a hormone-driven cancer, with approximately 80% 
potentially arising due to either an excess of oestrogen or a lack of progesterone. In the 
normal endometrium, the proliferative effects of oestrogen are normally countered by 
progesterone but in the absence of progesterone, oestrogen can induce oncogenesis, an 
effect that is amplified in situations of excess oestrogen [49]. In addition to being a source 
of N-nitroso compounds, processed meat is also rich in cholesterol, which can be 
converted into androgens and oestrogens through varying metabolic pathways [50]. 
Our study further demonstrated that consumption of a standard portion of 
tomatoes per d was associated with a reduced risk of breast cancer. The protective 
association was mainly observed among women with postmenopausal breast cancer. 
Lycopene, a carotenoid widely available in tomatoes, has a very high antioxidant potential 
and can thus protect the DNA from damage. In a large pooled analysis which included 
more than 3000 breast cancer cases, Eliassen et al. [51] also found an inverse association 
between lycopene and risk of breast cancer. The anti-proliferative effect of lycopene has 
also been demonstrated in mammary cancer cell lines by its inhibitory effect on insulin-
like growth factor-I-stimulated cell multiplying [52, 53]. The observed inverse 
association could also be due to the high flavonol content of tomatoes which also confers 
enhanced antioxidant capacity. 
Consumption of dried fruits and high-fibre breakfast cereals such as porridge, 
muesli and bran flakes were inversely associated with risk of endometrial cancer, in 
particularly among women who were incident cases of postmenopausal endometrial 
cancer. Dried fruits reportedly have a higher total phenolic content, flavonoids and total 
antioxidant capacity compared with fresh fruits, making dried fruits a potential candidate 
of a chemopreventive food [54, 55]. Previous studies have similarly reported an inverse 
association between wholegrain cereal consumption and endometrial cancer [56, 57]. 
Dietary fibre has been found to interact with the metabolism of oestrogen, causing a 
reduced bioavailability of the hormone [58]. High-fibre cereals and dried fruits are also 
good sources of dietary lignans. Lignans, a type of phyto-oestrogens are plant compounds 
having structural similarity to 17-oestrodiol. They can lower endogenous oestrogen levels 
by potentially binding to oestrogen receptors [59], hence reducing the risk of endometrial 
cancer. 
Contrary to a previous casecontrol study undertaken in Chinese women, which 
demonstrated an inverse association between white button mushrooms and risk of ovarian 
cancer [60], our findings showed weak evidence of an increased risk in relation to the 
consumption of a standard portion of mushrooms per day. Furthermore according to a 
study among Korean women, high mushroom intake was reportedly associated with a 
lower risk of breast cancer among premenopausal women and a stronger association was 
reported among premenopausal women with oestrogen-receptor-positive and 
progesterone-receptor-positive tumours [61]. However, in this study we do not have this 
level of detail in terms of types of mushroom consumption and breast cancer by hormone 
receptor type. This difference could also be attributed to the fact that Chinese cohorts 
most commonly consume fresh mushrooms, while in Europe the use of canned 
mushrooms is more widespread. In addition, in the UK, there is no other evidence 
suggesting that mushrooms can increase or decrease the risk of cancer [62]. 
Strengths of this study include the prospective study design, a long follow-up time 
and large sample size. This is also the first study in the UK looking at multiple food 
groups in relation to the risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancers. We were also 
able to study the associations with specific types of meat, cereal products (wholegrain or 
refined) and dairy products (high fat or low fat). We adjusted for a wide range of 
confounders including sociodemographic and lifestyle using a consistent method 
(directed acyclic graph). However, as in any observational study, residual confounding is 
still possible. A limitation of our study was the inability to determine whether the 
associations varied according to the hormone receptor status of tumours, due to the lack 
of these data at present in this cohort. The UKWCS will soon be expanding to include 
additional details on the tumour types. Moreover, the use of an FFQ for dietary 
assessment could also be prone to low accuracy due to recall bias. However, the FFQ is 
a useful tool in providing a snapshot of the dietary habit over a longer period of time. 
Regression dilution might also be an issue, given participants diets may have changed 
over time, potentially introducing further measurement error. This study also does not 
take into account the use of pesticides which is also a potential carcinogen influencing 
cancer risk in women. Our sample was also more health conscious, given the high number 
of vegetarians in our sample population and more well-off participants than the general 
population. However, our study still included women from a range of different 
backgrounds, which implies that findings of this study may be extrapolated to other 
countries. 
Primary prevention of cancer is important and a matter of consideration in public 
health. While factors such as parity, age at onset of natural menopause and family history 
are well established to have a link with the risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer, 
they are non-modifiable risk factors. However, diet which has been shown to either 
increase or decrease the risk of carcinogenesis makes focus on diet an interesting 
opportunity in cancer prevention. 
To summarise, this study suggests a link between specific foods: processed meat, 
total meat, tomatoes, dried fruits and wholegrain products and the risk of breast as well 
as endometrial cancer while a relationship between diet and risk of ovarian cancer is less 
evident. These findings support the call for further randomised controlled trials of dietary 
interventions to reduce the risk of these hormone-related cancers among pre- and 
postmenopausal women. 
References 
1. Office for National Statistics. Statistical bulletin: Cancer registration statistics, 
England: 2016. 2018. Available from:  
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/co
nditionsanddiseases/bulletins/cancerregistrationstatisticsengland/final2016 
(accessed May 2018) 
2. Cancer Research UK. Cancer statistics by type. Available from:  
http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/health-professional/cancer-statistics/statistics-
by-cancer-type (accessed May 2018) 
3. Kelsey, J.L. et al. Reproductive factors and breast cancer. Epidemiologic Reviews. 
1993, 15(1), pp.36-47. 
4. McPherson, C.P. et al. Reproductive factors and risk of endometrial cancer: The 
Iowa Women's Health study. American Journal of Epidemiology. 1996, 143(12), 
pp.1195-1202. 
5. Hunn, J. and Rodriguez, G.C. Ovarian cancer: etiology, risk factors, and 
epidemiology. Clinical Obstetrics and Gynecology. 2012, 55(1), pp.3-23. 
6. Cramer, D.W. The epidemiology of endometrial and ovarian cancer. 
Hematology/Oncology Clinics of North America. 2012, 26(1), pp.1-12. 
7. Jones, M.E. et al. Smoking and risk of breast cancer in the Generations Study 
cohort. Breast Cancer Research. 2017, 19(1), p.118. 
8. Gallagher, E.J. and LeRoith, D. Epidemiology and molecular mechanisms tying 
obesity, diabetes, and the metabolic syndrome with cancer. Diabetes Care. 2013, 
36(Suppl 2), pp.S233-239. 
9. de Oliveira, E.P. et al. Dietary factors associated with metabolic syndrome in 
Brazilian adults. Nutrition Journal. 2012, 11(1), p.13. 
10. Henderson, B.E. and Feigelson, H.S. Hormonal carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis. 
2000, 21(3), pp.427-433. 
11. Thomas, H.V. et al. Oestradiol and sex hormone-binding globulin in 
premenopausal and post-menopausal meat-eaters, vegetarians and vegans. British 
Journal of Cancer. 1999, 80, p.1470. 
12. Barnard, N.D. et al. Diet and sex-hormone binding globulin, dysmenorrhea, and 
premenstrual symptoms. Obstetrics and Gynecology. 2000, 95(2), pp.245-250. 
13. Gann, P.H. et al. The effects of a low-fat/high-fiber diet on sex hormone levels 
and menstrual cycling in premenopausal women: a 12-month randomized trial 
(the diet and hormone study). Cancer. 2003, 98(9), pp.1870-1879. 
14. Boyd, N.F. et al. Effects of a low-fat high-carbohydrate diet on plasma sex 
hormones in premenopausal women: results from a randomized controlled trial. 
Canadian Diet and Breast Cancer Prevention Study Group. British Journal of 
Cancer. 1997, 76(1), pp.127-135. 
15. World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research. Diet, 
Nutrition, Physical Activity and Cancer: a Global Perspective. Continuous 
Update Project Expert Report 2018. Available from: dietandcancerreport.org 
16. Samavat, H. and Kurzer, M.S. Estrogen metabolism and breast cancer. Cancer 
Letters. 2015, 356(2, Part A), pp.231-243. 
17. Allen, N.E. et al. Endogenous sex hormones and endometrial cancer risk in 
women in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition 
(EPIC). Endocrine-Related Cancer. 2008, 15(2), pp.485-497. 
18. Lukanova, A. and Kaaks, R. Endogenous Hormones and Ovarian Cancer: 
Epidemiology and Current Hypotheses. Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & 
Prevention. 2005, 14(1), pp.98-107. 
19. Cade, J.E. et al. Cohort Profile: The UK Womens Cohort Study (UKWCS). 
International Journal of Epidemiology. 2015, 0(0), pp.1-11. 
20. Taylor, E.F. et al. Meat consumption and risk of breast cancer in the UK Women's 
Cohort Study. British Journal of Cancer. 2007, 96, pp.1139-1146. 
21. World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research. Changes 
since the 2007 Second Expert Report: Important shifts in emphasis. 2018. 
Available from:  https://www.wcrf.org/dietandcancer/changes-since-2007-
second-expert-report (accessed June 2018). 
22. Dunneram, Y. et al. Dietary intake and age at natural menopause: results from the 
UK Womens Cohort Study. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health. 
2018, 72(8), pp.733-740. 
23. Food Standards Agency. Food Portion Sizes. London: The Stationary office. 
2002. 
24. Cade, J.E. et al. Does the Mediterranean dietary pattern or the Healthy Diet Index 
influence the risk of breast cancer in a large British cohort of women? European 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2011, 65(8), pp.920-928. 
25. Clague, J. and Bernstein, L. Physical activity and cancer. Current Oncology 
Reports. 2012, 14(6), pp.550-558. 
26. Bagnardi, V. et al. Alcohol consumption and site-specific cancer risk: a 
comprehensive doseresponse meta-analysis. British Journal of Cancer. 2015, 
112(3), pp.580-593. 
27. Stockwell, H.G. and Lyman, G.H. Cigarette smoking and the risk of female 
reproductive cancer. American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology. 1987, 
157(1), pp.35-40. 
28. Wang, L. et al. Association between Breastfeeding and Endometrial Cancer Risk: 
Evidence from a Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Nutrients. 2015, 7(7), 
pp.5697-5711. 
29. Zhan, B. et al. Breastfeeding and the incidence of endometrial cancer: A meta-
analysis. Oncotarget. 2015, 6(35), pp.38398-38409. 
30. Su, D. et al. Ovarian cancer risk is reduced by prolonged lactation: a case-control 
study in southern China. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2013, 97(2), 
pp.354-359. 
31. Liu, L. et al. Socioeconomic status and cancers of the female breast and 
reproductive organs: a comparison across racial/ethnic populations in Los 
Angeles County, California (United States). Cancer Causes & Control. 1998, 
9(4), pp.369-380. 
32. Friberg, E. et al. Diabetes and Risk of Endometrial Cancer: A Population-Based 
Prospective Cohort Study. Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention. 2007, 
16(2), pp.276-280. 
33. Aune, D. et al. Hypertension and the risk of endometrial cancer: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of case-control and cohort studies. Scientific Reports. 
2017, 7, p.44808. 
34. Persson, I. Estrogens in the causation of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancers 
- evidence and hypotheses from epidemiological findings. The Journal of Steroid 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. 2000, 74(5), pp.357-364. 
35. Simin, J. et al. Menopausal hormone therapy and cancer risk: An overestimated 
risk? European Journal of Cancer. 2017, 84, pp.60-68. 
36. Beral, V. Breast cancer and hormone-replacement therapy in the Million Women 
Study. Lancet. 2003, 362(9382), pp.419-427. 
37. Salazar-Martinez, E. et al. Reproductive Factors of Ovarian and Endometrial 
Cancer Risk in a High Fertility Population in Mexico. Cancer Research. 1999, 
59(15), pp.3658-3662. 
38. Tsilidis, K.K. et al. Oral contraceptive use and reproductive factors and risk of 
ovarian cancer in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and 
Nutrition. British Journal of Cancer. 2011, 105(9), pp.1436-1442. 
39. Anderson, J.J. et al. Red and processed meat consumption and breast cancer: UK 
Biobank cohort study and meta-analysis. European Journal of Cancer. 2018, 90, 
pp.73-82. 
40. Pala, V. et al. Meat, eggs, dairy products, and risk of breast cancer in the European 
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) cohort. The American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2009, 90(3), pp.602-612. 
41. Fiolet, T. et al. Consumption of ultra-processed foods and cancer risk: results from 
NutriNet-Sant prospective cohort. British Medical Journal. 2018, 360, pp.1-11. 
42. Pouchieu, C. et al. Prospective association between red and processed meat 
intakes and breast cancer risk: modulation by an antioxidant supplementation in 
the SU.VI.MAX randomized controlled trial. International Journal of 
Epidemiology. 2014, 43(5), pp.1583-1592. 
43. Fabio, L. et al. Dietary factors and the risk of endometrial cancer. Cancer. 1993, 
71(11), pp.3575-3581. 
44. Arem, H. et al. A prospective investigation of fish, meat and cooking-related 
carcinogens with endometrial cancer incidence. British Journal of Cancer. 2013, 
109(3), pp.756-760. 
45. Cross, A.J. et al. A prospective study of red and processed meat intake in relation 
to cancer risk. PLoS Medicine. 2007, 4(12), p.e325. 
46. Inoue-Choi, M. et al. Red and processed meat, nitrite, and heme iron intakes and 
postmenopausal breast cancer risk in the NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study. 
International Journal of Cancer. 2016, 138(7), pp.1609-1618. 
47. Zheng, W. et al. Well-Done Meat Intake and the Risk of Breast Cancer. JNCI: 
Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 1998, 90(22), pp.1724-1729. 
48. Nagao, M. et al. Dietary carcinogens and mammary carcinogenesis. Induction of 
rat mammary carcinomas by administration of heterocyclic amines in cooked 
foods. Cancer. 1994, 74(3 Suppl), pp.1063-1069. 
49. Carlson, M.J. et al. Catch it before it kills: progesterone, obesity, and the 
prevention of endometrial cancer. Discovery Medicine. 2012, 14(76), pp.215-222. 
50. Bremer, A.A. and Miller, W.L. Chapter 13 - Regulation of Steroidogenesis A2 - 
Ulloa-Aguirre, Alfredo. In: Conn, P.M. ed. Cellular Endocrinology in Health and 
Disease.  Boston: Academic Press, 2014, pp.207-227. 
51. Eliassen, A.H. et al. Circulating Carotenoids and Risk of Breast Cancer: Pooled 
Analysis of Eight Prospective Studies. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 
2012, 104(24), pp.1905-1916. 
52. Levy, J. et al. Lycopene is a more potent inhibitor of human cancer cell 
proliferation than either alpha-carotene or beta-carotene. Nutrition and Cancer. 
1995, 24(3), pp.257-266. 
53. Karas, M. et al. Lycopene interferes with cell cycle progression and insulin-like 
growth factor I signaling in mammary cancer cells. Nutrition and Cancer. 2000, 
36(1), pp.101-111. 
54. Lutz, M. et al. Phenolic content and antioxidant capacity in fresh and dry fruits 
and vegetables grown in Chile. CyTA - Journal of Food. 2015, 13(4), pp.541-547. 
55. Capanoglu, E. Investigating the Antioxidant Potential of Turkish Dried Fruits. 
International Journal of Food Properties. 2014, 17(3), pp.690-702. 
56. Goodman, M.T. et al. Association of soy and fiber consumption with the risk of 
endometrial cancer. American Journal of Epidemiology. 1997, 146(4), pp.294-
57. Bidoli, E. et al. Fiber intake and endometrial cancer risk. Acta Oncologica. 2010, 
49(4), pp.441-446. 
58. Sowers, M.R. et al. Selected Diet and Lifestyle Factors Are Associated with 
Estrogen Metabolites in a Multiracial/Ethnic Population of Women. The Journal 
of Nutrition. 2006, 136(6), pp.1588-1595. 
59. Kuiper, G.G.J.M. et al. Interaction of Estrogenic Chemicals and Phytoestrogens 
with Estrogen Receptor . Endocrinology. 1998, 139(10), pp.4252-4263. 
60. Lee, A.H. et al. Mushroom intake and risk of epithelial ovarian cancer in southern 
Chinese women. International Journal of Gynecological Cancer. 2013, 23(8), 
pp.1400-1405. 
61. Shin, A. et al. Dietary mushroom intake and the risk of breast cancer based on 
hormone receptor status. Nutrition and Cancer. 2010, 62(4), pp.476-483. 
62. Cancer Research UK. Mushrooms in cancer treatment. 2015 [Online].  
Available from: http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-cancer/cancer-in-
general/treatment/complementary-alternative-therapies/individual-
therapies/mushrooms-in-cancer-treatment [accessed 20 June 2018] 
Chapter 8  
Overall discussion 
Diet is one of the major modifiable factors that may influence sex hormone levels, 
the risk of obesity and insulin resistance which subsequently may affect the timing of 
onset of natural menopause. Eventually, the timing of menopause may also influence the 
duration of the presence of VMS and also the risk of hormone-related cancers such as 
breast, ovarian and endometrial cancers. However, as documented in Chapter 1 and 
Chapter 2, there are several gaps in the literature regarding the inter-relationship between 
diet, age at menopause and its associated sequelae. For instance, only a limited number 
of studies have explored the association between diet and the onset of natural menopause. 
The evidence is also inconsistent across the observational studies, thus leading to 
inconclusive findings. In addition, as concluded by a systematic review [1], intake of the 
phytoestrogen genistein which is found in soy products could influence the presence of 
VMS. However, very few studies have investigated the association between the natural 
diet and the presence of VMS. Chapter 1 summarises the effect of dietary components on 
the risk of breast, ovarian and endometrial cancers; while some dietary factors may be 
protective against these hormone-related cancers, some increase the risk. Yet, the 
relationship between diet and these cancers is also inconsistent within observational 
studies except for the strong link between alcohol consumption and the high possibility 
of breast cancer (Chapter 2).  
Therefore, in this thesis, the relationships between diet and the timing of onset of 
natural menopause as well as the relationships between diet and sequelae of menopause 
such as the presence of VMS and the risk of ovarian, endometrial and breast cancers have 
been thoroughly examined. The analyses presented in this thesis have used data from the 
UKWCS and the InterLACE consortium. The research questions and objectives of this 
thesis, outlined in Chapter 2 have been met. In this chapter, a summary of the findings 
from this thesis has been presented. The results have also been compared and contrasted 
with findings across the different chapters of this thesis as well as with previous studies. 
Moreover, a critique of the methods used has also been included while summarising the 
findings. Furthermore, an evaluation of the strengths and limitations of the thesis, 
followed by recommendations for future studies, public health messages and finally a 
conclusion have been provided. 
8.1 Novel findings from this thesis 
v The first study to compare the diet of premenopausal and naturally postmenopausal 
women in the UK (Chapter 3). 
v The first study in the UK to explore the association between various dietary 
components as well as dietary patterns and the timing of the onset of natural 
menopause (Chapter 4 and Chapter 5). 
v Provided novel information by pooling data from five different observational 
studies across countries on the relationship between soy consumption and 
frequency/severity of VMS (Chapter 6). 
v Provided additional evidence for the association between diet and the risk of 
ovarian, endometrial and breast cancers in the UK (Chapter 7). 
8.2 Summary discussion 
8.2.1 Diet and age at natural menopause 
The first research question of this thesis, the association between diet and timing 
of the onset of natural menopause was estimated using linear regression as well as 
survival analysis which are presented in Chapter 4 and Chapter 5 respectively.  
In a sample of 914 women who experienced a natural menopause after 4 years of 
follow-up, intake of an additional portion of oily fish was associated with a delayed onset 
of menopause by 3.3 years (at 1% level). Similarly, an extra portion of fresh legumes 
(e.g., peas, mushy peas, mange-tout, and green beans) was associated with a later 
menopause by approximately a year. On the other hand, our findings showed that a higher 
intake of refined pasta and rice was related to an earlier onset of menopause. Moreover, 
being vegetarian was also associated with an earlier onset of menopause. No evidence of 
an association was found between the other food groups and timing of the onset of natural 
menopause. Furthermore, when stratification by age at baseline was conducted, this led 
to reduced associations and wider confidence intervals due to the smaller samples in the 
subgroups. Only the consumption of refined grain products was found to be associated 
with an earlier onset of menopause by 0.3 years per portion among women who were 
aged above 50 years at study recruitment period which was borderline significant. 
Traditionally, the relationship between diet and the event (e.g., health outcomes) 
have explored the effect of single foods. However, the study of dietary patterns has been 
recommended by several authors given that foods are less commonly consumed 
individually or as isolated foods, they rather form part of a more elaborate meal. Although 
the study of individual food components is useful in identifying the single foods 
associated with the timing of onset of natural menopause, this approach does not consider 
the fact that the foods eaten may be highly correlated [2]. Therefore, it is equally crucial 
to investigate the relationship between dietary patterns and age at menopause. The work 
in Chapter 4 is thus extended in Chapter 5 to derive dietary patterns from the 64 food 
groups using two methods namely PCA and RRR. Five dietary patterns were derived 
from the PCA method while three patterns were generated using the RRR method. 
Interestingly, food items such as oily fish, fresh legumes and refined grains and cereals 
which were found to be significantly associated with age at natural menopause in Chapter 
4, did not form part of any of the dietary patterns as they contributed to eigenvalues below 
0.2 implying that they did not explain as large an amount of variance as compared to the 
other food items [3].  
In the analyses including 5,312 participants, after adjusting for the potential 
confounders, women who scored higher on the animal proteins pattern (derived from 
PCA; highly loaded with fish, shellfish, meat, poultry and offal) were 6% less likely to 
have gone through the menopause compared to those who scored lower. The red meat 
and processed meat pattern (derived from RRR) predicted a 7% higher risk for a later 
menopause. Findings from Chapter 4 are in line with these results which demonstrated 
that intake of individual food items such as an extra portion of fish, red meat and 
processed meat resulted in a positive estimate, indicating a later onset of menopause.  
8.2.1.1 Findings in context of previous research 
As shown by the literature search in Chapter 2 (Table 2.2), only 13 studies have 
explored the relationship between diet and the timing of menopause. The exposure of 
interest across the observational studies includes various types of single foods while one 
RCT explored the effect of a dietary intervention (low-fat, high-carbohydrate diet) [4] on 
age at menopause.  
In contrast to our findings, no study reported an association between the intake of 
oily fish and a delayed onset of menopause. Out of two studies which investigated the 
association between seafood and age at menopause, a cross-sectional study reported an 
early onset of menopause [5] while a prospective study of 85,682 premenopausal women 
at baseline demonstrated no evidence of an association [6]. Similarly, Nagel et al. [7] 
reported that consumption of fish was not related with the timing of onset of menopause. 
The main disparity between our findings and previous evidence is that the authors did not 
consider specific types of fish. One probable mechanism for the observed finding in our 
study is that oily fish being a rich source of omega-3 fatty acid could exert antioxidant 
properties and potentially offset ROS. Subsequently, the ovarian follicles are protected 
against atresia, thus delaying the onset of menopause. This can be supported by an 
intervention study whereby 37 women (15 obese and 12 normal-weight) with regular 
menses were given omega-3 fatty acid supplementation for one month. The omega-3 
supplementation resulted in an improvement in the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines 
among obese women while a reduction in FSH level was observed among normal-weight 
women, implying the possibility that omega-3 fatty acids could delay ovarian aging [8]. 
However, in a prospective study including 3,115 premenopausal Japanese women 
followed up for 10 years, intake of omega-3 fatty acids was not found to be associated 
with the onset of menopause [9].  The main reason for the disparity between the findings 
of these two studies is the study design. While the exposure diet was measured 
retrospectively using an FFQ in the Japanese study, omega-3 fatty acid supplementation 
was given to the women in the intervention study. In addition, study participants in the 
prospective study were substantially older at baseline with a mean age of 43.0 years while 
in the intervention study the women were aged between 28 to 34 years.  
Nagata et al. [10] prospectively assessed the relationship between specific foods 
and the likelihood of menopause over 6 years among 1,130 Japanese women. Although 
the authors did not directly look at the consumption of fresh legumes, they reported a 
relationship between a later onset of menopause and the intake of green and yellow 
vegetables. These findings can be supported by biological mechanisms as described in 
Chapter 1 (section 1.3), suggesting that high antioxidant potential of these food items 
could help prevent degradation of ovarian follicles and hence delay the onset of 
menopause. In addition, our study also found that a higher intake of vitamin B6 and zinc, 
both of which have antioxidant properties, were also linked with a delayed onset of 
menopause (Chapter 4). 
On the other hand, our findings showed that a higher intake of refined pasta and 
rice was related to an earlier onset of menopause, in line with the EPIC-Heidelberg study 
[7]. Previous evidence has suggested that a high consumption of refined carbohydrates 
may be associated with a higher risk of insulin resistance [11-13]. In a longitudinal cohort 
study, Sowers et al. [14] reported that insulin resistance was associated with an earlier 
onset of menopause irrespective of a link between insulin resistance and levels of AMH 
and inhibin B. In line with this study, Isik et al. [15] demonstrated that in comparison to 
healthy women, women with type II diabetes had a lower ovarian reserve. These findings 
could be explained by observations in animal models which showed that in a 
hyperglycaemic-hyperinsulinaemic condition, there was a reduction in ovarian steroid 
hormone production and release, anovulation, and also accelerated follicular atresia [16, 
17]. Although evidence suggests that insulin resistance (section 1.3) could lead to 
premature ovarian failure and thus an earlier natural menopause, findings from this thesis 
further demonstrated that irrespective of being diabetic at the study baseline, an additional 
portion of refined pasta and rice was still associated with an earlier menopause.  
With regard to dietary patterns, as evidenced in Chapter 2 (Table 2.2) there are no 
previous studies which have explored their association with the onset of natural 
menopause, thus making comparison impossible. Our findings can be supported by a few 
previous studies which also reported a later onset of menopause with the consumption of 
meat, although meat consumption was explored individually rather than as part of a 
dietary pattern [5, 7, 18].  On the other hand, Boutot et al. [6] reported a higher risk of an 
earlier menopause with each 1 serving per day of red meat among women in the Nurses 
Health Study II. The authors also did not found an association between high levels of 
animal protein intake and an early menopause. The Nurses Health Study II consisted of 
much younger women at the study entry (25-42 years) to investigate the risk of an early 
menopause, while women in the UKWCS and the previous studies were older at baseline, 
and these studies also considered the association between overall risk of menopause and 
diet rather than the early menopause as the outcome. 
8.2.1.2 Evaluation of methods used 
8.2.1.2.1 Study design 
The UKWCS data has been used in Chapters 3, 4, and 5 of this thesis. The aim of 
the  UKWCS is to investigate links between diet and health, in particular, cancer. Women 
recruited from a WCRF mailing list of approximately 500,000 responders formed part of 
the UKWCS. In order to be able to explore differences in health due to diet, this cohort 
selected participants from three main groups of dietary patterns: vegetarian, eating fish 
(not meat) and meat-eaters [19]. This cohort consisted of 35,372 women (a 58% response 
rate) aged between 35 to 69 years at study baseline. Baseline data was collected between 
the years 1995 to 1998 via postal questionnaire. This included an extensive lifestyle 
questionnaire and a 217-item FFQ (please refer to section 8.2.1.2.3). Phase 2 data was 
collected four years later, and included 14,172 women (40.1% response rate). In addition 
to a further lifestyle questionnaire, the participants had to complete a 4-day food diary, 
and 1-day activity diary [20]. Using participants details such as their National Health 
Service (NHS) number, full name and date of birth where possible, all the women were 
flagged to the National Health Service Information Centre (NHSIC) to have updates on 
cancer incidence and death, to which all women agreed to [19].  
8.2.1.2.2 Assessment of age at natural menopause 
As discussed in Chapter 2, various definitions of age at menopause have been used 
in previous studies which have looked at the association between diet and the timing of 
natural menopause. In this thesis, age at natural menopause was assigned based on the 
WHO definition which states that the last menstrual bleeding followed by at least 12 
months of amenorrhea as some women may have regular bleeding still after 6 months of 
amenorrhea. Based on answers to the question: If no natural menstrual periods in the last 
12 months, how old were you when you had your last natural menstrual period? age at 
menopause was defined as the age at the final menstrual period. In order to ensure that 
premenopausal women at baseline became postmenopausal at follow-up, the baseline 
question: How many natural menstrual periods have you had in the last 12 months? was 
used (Please refer to Chapter 4 for more details on the inclusion and exclusion criteria 
used to ensure a natural menopause). If data on age at last natural period was missing, the 
year of last menstruation (if provided) and birth year were used to estimate the age at 
menopause.    
8.2.1.2.3 Dietary assessment: Food Frequency Questionnaire 
As described in Chapters 3-5, the 217-item FFQ was adapted from the EPIC-
Oxford Cohort [21] and tailored for the large number of vegetarians in the UKWCS.  
These alterations were based on a pilot study conducted in a sample of vegetarian women 
whereby they had to complete food diaries. Further vegetable composite dishes and 
portion size estimates were included in the FFQ based on the results of this pilot study. 
The FFQ required participants to report their dietary intake over the last 12 months, using 
one of ten response categories ranging from Never to More than 6+ portions a day. 
Using the different frequency categories, the number of daily portions for the 217 food 
items was defined. These were consequently converted into weight of each food 
consumed per day based on the Food Standards Agency portion sizes book [22]. For the 
purpose of this study, the 217 food items were collapsed into 64 food groups (refer to 
Chapters 3 and 4).  
The mean daily intake of vitamins such as vitamins C (mg), B1 (mg), B2 (mg), 
B6 (mg), B12 (g), A (g), D (g) and E (mg) as well as minerals such as folate (g), 
calcium (mg), non-haem iron (mg) and zinc (mg) had been previously estimated from the 
217 food items based on The Royal Society of Chemistry Food tables (version 5) [23]. 
Average energy, macronutrient and micronutrient intakes were computed by multiplying 
the consumption frequency for each food with the estimated portion size.  
8.2.1.2.4 Dietary patterns 
Various methods exist that can be used to derive dietary patterns. A priori methods 
based on dietary guideline knowledge can be used to generate diet quality scores or 
statistical methods based on data-reduction techniques which are known as the a 
posteriori methods can also be used [24]. Data driven dietary patterns are used in Chapter 
5 of this thesis. Using the 64 food groups derived from the FFQ (refer to Chapters 3 and 
4 for more details),  dietary patterns were generated using two methods: PCA and RRR.  
PCA is the most commonly used dimension-reduction technique to generate 
dietary patterns [25] and has good reproducibility across studies as demonstrated in a 
review of 65 studies [26]. PCA was conducted using Stata. Firstly, the data were reduced 
by forming linear combinations of the original observed variables. The correlated 
variables are then grouped together which identifies any underlying dimensions in the 
data. Factor loadings are generated which are coefficients defining these linear 
combination and the correlations of each food item with that component [27]. Secondly, 
a scree plot [28] was used which plots the eigenvalues against each component (in order 
of highest to lowest). The number of factors retained was according to the combination 
of food group components with an eigenvalue >1.0 and examination of the breakpoint in 
the scree plot, resulting in five factors retained for further analyses. The eigenvalue is 
defined as the amount of variance that is explained by a given component [29]. Thirdly, 
varimax rotation [30] was applied which redistributes the explained variance for the 
individual components, so as to obtain the simplest factor structure. This helps to increase 
the number of larger and smaller loadings. Finally, factor scores were produced for each 
participants for each of the dietary patterns identified. A higher score reflected closer 
adherence to the particular dietary pattern. As PCA mainly aims to construct uncorrelated 
linear combinations of food intakes to provide as many variations in food intake as 
possible, it is usually helpful in reproducing dietary patterns which reflect dietary 
behaviours of a population. However, these may not be linked to the outcome of interest.  
The more recently introduced RRR by Hoffman et al. [31], is also an a posteriori 
method which generates dietary patterns based on biological risk factors or nutrients 
relevant to the health outcome. RRR determines linear combinations of predictor 
variables (e.g., food group intake) that explain as much as possible of the variation in the 
response variables (e.g., nutrients, biomarkers or risk factors), that are presumed to affect 
disease risk [31, 32]. The DAG used in Chapter 5 describes the conceptual framework for 
RRR in this thesis. In this analysis similar to PCA, the 64 food items were used as 
predictor variables and age at menarche, BMI and total energy intake were the response 
variables. RRR was applied to derive dietary patterns predictive of age at natural 
menopause using Stata  in combination with the PLS option in SAS. Dietary patterns that 
accounted for the maximum variation in the response variables were identified. Factor 
loadings are generated which were used to identify food items which formed part of the 
dietary patterns. Eventually, a factor score for the identified dietary pattern was produced 
for each participant similar to PCA. But unlike PCA, RRR derived dietary patterns may 
not reflect the patterns observed in the population. Interestingly though, findings from 
Chapter 5 demonstrated that the animal proteins pattern derived from PCA was 
positively and moderately correlated with the red meat and processed meat pattern 
derived from RRR, suggesting that the RRR derived dietary patterns were also 
behaviourally meaningful. Thus, findings from this thesis provide quite strong evidence 
that a higher consumption of a diet highly loaded with red meat and processed meat are 
associated with a delayed onset of natural menopause. 
8.2.1.2.5 Statistical analyses 
The use of different analytical methods to investigate the association between age 
at natural menopause and food groups as well as dietary patterns, multiple linear 
regression and survival analysis respectively could have accounted for the differences in 
results found in Chapter 4 and Chapter 5. The aim of using multiple linear regression was 
to explore the age of natural menopause as a continuous variable in relation to the 
consumption of a standard portion of the various food groups. The analyses were 
restricted to just 914 women who experienced a natural menopause at follow-up. This 
ensured that women who may be too young to have gone through a menopause were 
excluded, thus preventing under-estimation of the age at natural menopause. A limitation 
of this analysis could be multiple testing of the food groups which could have led to 
spurious significant associations by chance. However, this was accounted for by setting 
the significance level at 99%. Although the pros of multiple regression models include 
better prediction from multiple predictors and can avoid picking a specific single 
predictor, results should be interpreted with caution as the significant associations do not 
necessarily indicate causal effects [33].  
In order to include more information and observations, in subsequent research 
based on the whole cohort, survival analysis approach was used, with age at menopause 
right censored to take into account the fact that not all of them will have achieved 
menopause at the time of follow-up. While these may appear to be cases of missing data 
as the time-to-event is not actually observed, these participants contribute to crucial 
information that they quitted at a certain amount of time without having reached a 
menopause is itself informative. This ability to handle censored observations is an 
advantage of survival analysis over linear regression analysis which ignores this aspect 
[34]. The use of the time-to-event analytic approach has also been suggested as a better 
way to explore the risk of being naturally postmenopausal [35]. While the multiple 
regression model gave mean estimates of age at natural menopause, the survival analysis 
provided the risk estimates of being naturally postmenopausal.  
8.2.2 Diet and vasomotor menopausal symptoms 
In relation to the presence of VMS, the pooled analysis of five studies forming 
part of the InterLACE consortium resulted in a null observation with the consumption of 
soy products (soy bean, soy bean curd, tofu, tempeh) cross-sectionally. Similarly, no 
evidence of an association was found with the intake of soy milk. Across the individual 
studies, no evidence of an association was found between soy products and presence of 
VMS for the cross-sectional analysis (Chapter 6). The odds ratio for the ALSWH, 
WHITEHALL and SMWHS studies were prone to a negative estimate, as opposed to the 
HOW and JMWHS studies. The opposing direction for the odds ratio obtained for 
JMWHS could reflect the frequent consumption of soy products and lower 
frequency/severity of VMS in this Japanese cohort. The exposure, that is, soy 
consumption and the outcome which was the severity of VMS were measured in a similar 
way in both HOW and JMWHS. In addition, HOW included only 5% of women reporting 
severe VMS which is comparable to JMWHS (4.4%). Although the Japanese data is quite 
different from the other studies, this study did not affect the overall analysis to a large 
extent as demonstrated through the pooled-analysis; JMWHS contributed to only 0.84% 
of the overall analysis.  
When assessed prospectively, the pooled analysis demonstrated that soy product 
consumption was protective against the incidence of VMS. Comparing frequent 
consumption of soy products versus less frequent consumption, lower odds for reporting 
the presence of VMS was observed across ALSWH, HOW and WHITEHALL studies. 
On the other hand, for the relationship between soy milk consumption and presence of 
VMS at follow-up, across all three studies, higher odds for reporting the presence of VMS 
were observed. As elaborated in Chapter 6, this could be due to reverse causality. As 
women in these studies were mainly Caucasians, soy milk consumption could be the most 
commonly consumed dietary phytoestrogen source and used by the women to try to 
prevent VMS (Chapter 6).  
8.2.2.1 Findings in context of previous research 
Our findings regarding the inverse association between soy product consumption 
and incidence of VMS are in line with a Japanese community-based study also reported 
a negative association between total soy product consumption and hot flushes after a 
follow-up period of 6 years [36]. According to a systematic review of 43 RCTs, there was 
no conclusive evidence for an association between dietary soy or soy extracts and the 
frequency or severity of hot flushes. However, genistein extract, a phytoestrogen found 
in soy products appeared to reduce the number of hot flushes among postmenopausal 
women reporting these symptoms [1].  
Isoflavones, abundantly found in soy and soy products are the most common 
phytoestrogen with the effects of genistein and daidzein being mainly investigated. Due 
to a similarity in the molecular structure of phytoestrogens to that of oestradiol, they can 
as well bind to ERs to produce either oestrogenic or anti-oestrogenic activities depending 
on the circulating level of oestrogen. The reduced oestrogen level during the menopausal 
transition causes a decrease in endorphin concentration in the hypothalamus which leads 
to an increased level of the neurotransmitters norepinephrine and serotonin [37, 38]. 
Consequently, the thermoregulatory threshold is lowered which produce excessive heat 
loss. Thus in this condition of low circulating oestrogen level, by binding to ERs 
phytoestrogens could offset those biologic effects and reduce the frequency or severity of 
8.2.2.2 Evaluation of methods used 
8.2.2.2.1 Study design 
The InterLACE study was established in 2012 with the aim to understand 
womens reproductive health in relation to chronic disease risk, specifically diabetes and 
cardiovascular diseases [39]. It includes data from 20 studies, more specifically from nine 
national cohorts namely Denmark, Japan, Sweden, Norway, UK, USA, Lebanon, Spain 
and Australia. In addition, it comprises of state-based studies from specific places such 
as San Francisco, Seattle, Hawaii, among others which make up the remaining 11 studies. 
In particular, the InterLACE dataset pooled data from approximately 230,000 participants 
mainly from existing observational studies having data on womens health [40]. Ethical 
clearance for each study had been approved at initiation of the individual studies.  
The individual studies were thus requested for the relevant data in the form of a 
list of variables, survey questionnaires, data dictionaries/formats, and protocols, 
according to the studys aim. Data regarding socio-demographic and lifestyle factors (e.g. 
age, marital status, BMI, etc.), female reproductive characteristics (e.g. number of 
pregnancies, menopausal status, VMS, etc.), and chronic disease outcomes were provided 
[40].  
Twelve of the observational studies were longitudinal and some had data collected 
at different waves. In this thesis, one of the objective was to investigate the association 
between soy consumption and the presence of VMS (Chapter 1). Therefore, five studies 
which had information on the exposure and outcome of interest were used. The 
appropriate waves had to be identified as the baseline and follow-up cohort for the 
ALSWH, HOW, WHITEHALL, and JMWHS studies (Table D.1). Prior to data 
harmonisation, the individual datasets were checked for outliers and discrepancies, and if 
required, the data providers were probed in order to resolve the issue. Using specific 
coding instructions developed by the interlace team, the variables were harmonised to 
generate new variables. Data harmonisation for the whole dataset has been described 
elsewhere. Please refer to Chapter 6 (sections 6.2.3 and 6.2.4) for more details on data 
harmonisation for the exposure and outcome of interest as well as covariates used in this 
thesis. 
8.2.2.2.2 Assessment of exposure and outcome  
Please refer to Chapter 6, section 6.2.3 whereby the assessments of soy 
consumption and the presence of VMS have been detailed.  
8.2.2.2.3 Data harmonisation and statistical analysis 
The pooled analysis allowed the investigation of soy consumption in relation to 
the presence of VMS in this thesis which would not be otherwise possible in the single 
studies due to the low sample size. The pooled analysis, in addition, enabled examination 
of the consistency across the studies. Availability of raw data from the individual studies 
also made re-analysis feasible by considering specific inclusion criteria for all the studies 
and a standardised definition of the variables of interest.  
In order to make findings across the five individual studies comparable, data 
harmonisation was conducted prior to the pooling analyses. Details on harmonisation of 
the variables of interests and the covariates are provided in Chapter 6. Data harmonisation 
is the collapsing of the variables of interest into the simplest level of detail in order to 
incorporate information from as many studies as possible. However, this can potentially 
lead to loss of statistical power as well as potential misclassification of the degree of VMS 
and frequency of soy consumption. For instance, studies like ALSWH and WHITEHALL 
had ten and nine frequency options respectively for consumption frequency of soy that 
were collapsed to four categories for this analysis. Similarly, for the frequency/severity 
of VMS, the variable was collapsed to include four categories. To include as much 
information as possible for both the consumption frequency of soy products and 
frequency/severity of VMS across the five individual studies, for the cross-sectional 
analyses, multiple logistic regression was used. However, to make the pooled analysis of 
the cross-sectional data more interpretable, the variables were further dichotomised as 
consumption of soy products: yes or no, and presence of VMS: presence or absence.  
Likewise, for the prospective analysis across the three individual studies 
(ALSWH, HOW, WHITEHALL) as well as for the pooled estimate, as the frequency of 
soy consumption was still quite low across the different categories of frequency/severity 
of VMS, the dichotomised variables had to be used. Although harmonising the variables 
led to a reduced number of categories (the smallest common denominator) implying that 
the amount of information is also diminished, it is a simple way to maximise the number 
of studies being analysed [41].  
Various sources of heterogeneity such as differences in study populations, 
information available on the potential confounders, data collection, and validation 
methods as well as dietary assessment methods are possible when pooling data from the 
five observational studies of the InterLACE consortium [42]. To account for the different 
levels of VMS in different populations, study was included in the model as a 
stratification variable to account for correlation of individuals within studies. This 
ensured that the modelling results of the five individual studies for the cross-sectional 
analyses align with the forest plots that are also based on estimates from the individual 
studies. Furthermore, the Stata svy command was used to identify strata defined by 
study in order to improve standard error estimates.  
For the pooled analysis, the random effect model was used. This model includes 
variation between the five studies, thus accounting for heterogeneity between the effects 
of the studies. The model assumes that the different studies have their own true effects 
and that these effects are randomly positioned about a central value [43]. With this model, 
the confidence intervals tend to be wider implying that caution needs to be taken when 
interpreting the summary effects [44]. Additionally, to reduce heterogeneity and allow 
for more precise estimation of effect, covariates such as smoking status, education level, 
menopausal status, representing individual features of the studies were also included in 
the random effects model [44].  
8.2.3 Diet and the risk of ovarian, endometrial and breast cancer 
As stated in Chapter 1, a later onset of menopause has been linked to an increased 
risk of hormone-related cancers such as ovarian, endometrial and breast cancer. Similar 
findings have been demonstrated in Chapter 7. Longer exposure to the hormone oestrogen 
has been postulated as one of the pathways through which a delayed onset of menopause 
increases the risk of these cancers. After around 18 years of follow-up in the UKWCS, 
the overall results from individual food items demonstrated that a high intake of processed 
meat and total meat (which included red meat, poultry, offal, and processed meat) were 
associated with an increased risk of both breast and endometrial cancer. Moreover, 
unexpectedly a higher consumption of mushroom was linked to an increased risk of 
ovarian cancer. On the other hand, a higher intake of tomatoes and dried fruits were 
protective against breast and endometrial cancer risk respectively. To investigate whether 
age at natural menopause could influence the observed associations, subgroup analysis 
by age at menopause was conducted. However, the diet of women with either an earlier 
or a later natural menopause did not seem to change the risk of cancers.  
The aetiology and pathogenesis of these hormone-related cancers when diagnosed 
premenopausally and when diagnosed postmenopausally are not the same (section 
1.6.3.4). For instance, additional findings from Chapter 7 demonstrated that an increased 
risk of postmenopausal breast cancer was associated with processed meat and total meat 
consumption while postmenopausal breast cancer risk was reduced with consumption of 
tomatoes. As for postmenopausal endometrial cancer, intakes of processed meat and low 
calorie/diet soft drinks were related with a higher risk. Consumption of dried fruits was 
in particular protective against postmenopausal endometrial cancer. Furthermore, an 
increased risk of ovarian cancer was linked with high mushroom consumption. However, 
the findings for endometrial and ovarian cancer risk by menopausal status in this thesis 
are less reliable given the relatively small number of cases which contributed to the wide 
confidence intervals.  
8.2.3.1 Findings in context of previous research 
As demonstrated by the literature search in Chapter 2, no study explored the 
association between diet and ovarian cancer risk by menopausal status; two studies 
stratified their findings by menopausal status for endometrial cancer risk [45, 46]; and for 
breast cancer risk, out of 28 studies, 12 studies conducted analyses by menopausal status. 
Yet out of the 12 studies, only three studies [47-49] stratified the cancer analyses by 
menopausal status by conducting survival models defined as women contributing person-
time from baseline until their age at menopause or the event for the premenopausal model 
and the postmenopausal model from their age at menopause until the event. On the other 
hand, in the remaining nine studies [50-58], menopausal status was instead evaluated as 
an effect modifier by stratifying the outcomes by menopausal status. Stratification 
analysis is based on a non-parametric approach. It not only leads to fewer participants in 
the individual strata but also makes estimation of the main association less precise and 
less reliable [59]. Therefore, the way stratification by menopausal status has been 
conducted could additionally account for the disparities in findings between the studies 
included in Chapter 2.  
In line with these outcomes, previous findings from the UKWCS which 
investigated the association between meat consumption and risk of breast cancer also 
reported positive associations between total meat and processed meat intake and 
postmenopausal breast cancer risk. That analysis also found a positive association 
between total meat and non-processed meat and incident risk of premenopausal breast 
cancer [60] whereas in this thesis no such relationships with premenopausal breast cancer 
risk were demonstrated. The main disparity for the findings could be due to the fact that 
in the previous study, pre- and post-menopausal breast cancer risk were not treated as a 
time-to-event variable as compared to analyses in this thesis. Instead, the survival model 
was stratified by menopausal status at baseline.  
Although the recent CUP findings [61] and four out of six studies published since 
the WCRF/AICR systematic review (Chapter 2) have reported a strong evidence for the 
association between the consumption of alcoholic drinks and an increased risk of breast 
cancer, findings from this thesis did not provide any evidence of an association between 
alcohol consumption and breast cancer risk. Differences in findings could mainly be due 
to the larger number of breast cancer cases in those studies. Another potential explanation 
is that alcohol consumption in this study population was quite low (9.1g/day among 
women with breast cancer). Thus, in this thesis, the relationship with high alcohol 
consumption could not be investigated due to low study power. As demonstrated in a 
recent pooled analysis of 20 prospective studies, although a positive linear trend was 
observed with any amount of alcohol consumption, for <30g/day of alcohol intake the 
association was modest [62]. In addition, according to the large EPIC study which 
included 11,576 breast cancer cases, the risk of breast cancer was found to increase by 
6%, 12% and 25% with the consumption of 5-15 g/day, 15-30 g/day and >30 g/day of 
alcohol, respectively [63]. Furthermore, the relationship between alcohol and risk of 
breast cancer could also vary by hormone receptor status [62-65]. However, this could 
not be investigated in this thesis due to the lack of this data. The UKWCS will soon be 
expanding to include additional details on the tumour types through linkage to Public 
Health England data. 
8.2.3.2 Evaluation of methods used 
8.2.3.2.1 Updating Breast, Endometrial and Ovarian Cancer Cases in the UKWCS 
As mentioned in section 8.2.1.2.1, at baseline women in the UKWCS agreed to 
provide their NHS details which was flagged to the NHSIC. The NHSIC could thus 
provide updates on cancer incidence and death data on a quarterly basis. These data are 
subsequently applied to the UKWCS Microsoft Access database by the Nutritional 
Epidemiology Group (NEG) Database Manager. These information are then updated into 
Stata by linking the data to the UKWCS participants identification codes. This process 
is conducted through a series of steps which had been developed previously (Appendix 
F). As the latest cancer database included data until September 2015, that is, lagging 
behind by approximately three years, the database was updated by me so as to increase 
the sample size for cancer incidence.   
8.2.3.2.2 Study design and dietary assessment 
Please refer to sections 8.2.1.2.1 and 8.2.1.2.3 for description of the study design 
and dietary assessment.  
A post hoc sample size calculation demonstrated that after nearly 18 years of 
follow-up, for ovarian cancer cases, there was approximately 80% power to detect a 
relative risk of around 1.4 (two-tailed p<0.05) comparing early versus late age at 
menopause, dichotomising age at natural menopause at the median age, or more than 90% 
power for a relative risk of 1.5. A similar power was found for endometrial cancer. This 
represents reasonable power for what are rare outcomes. Analysing the exposure as a 
continuous variable provided even more power. For breast cancer, there was 95% power 
to detect a relative risk of 1.2, which represents excellent power for this outcome. 
8.2.3.2.3 Time-to-event analysis 
Time-to-event analysis also known as survival analysis is one which rely on fixed 
time periods in comparison to other forms of analysis. The Kaplan-Meier plot which 
involves the use of life tables and drawing of survival curves to make comparison between 
two or more groups, and the log-rank test which is used to test for any significant 
differences between the groups are the commonly used techniques [66]. However, these 
are nonparametric methods, that is, distributions are estimated directly from the data 
without any model assumptions.  
On the other hand, the Cox proportional hazard model is a semiparametric method 
whereby distributions are modelled as a function of an unspecified baseline distribution 
and a set of unknown parameters. Additionally in comparison to the two other methods, 
the Cox proportional hazard model makes it possible to adjust for confounding [67]. 
Therefore, this survival analysis method was used to explore the associations between 
diet and the risk of ovarian, endometrial and breast cancers in the UKWCS (Chapter 7). 
The analyses measured the time from FFQ completion date at study baseline to the 
incidence of hormone-related cancers or the date the participant was lost to follow-up or, 
for women who did not develop breast cancer, which was the censor date (as described 
in section 7.2.3). The time-to-event analysis is also able to deal with recruitment which 
occurred at different time points in the study.  
 In the Cox proportional hazard regression model, it is imperative to check the 
assumption of proportional hazards [66]. The cumulative survivor functions were plotted 
to ensure that they do not cross which indicated that the assumptions of proportional 
hazards have been met. [68]. In addition to the graphical method, the Cox-Snell residuals 
test was used as an objective approach to evaluate the goodness of fit of the model. An 
important criterion for a good model fit is that the residuals should have a standard 
exponential distribution with hazard function equal to one [69].  
8.2.4 Assessment of potential confounders by Directed Acyclic Graphs 
Systematic errors are reduced through randomisation of participants in 
intervention or control groups in RCTs. However, in observational studies, no such 
allocation of participants is conducted [70]. It is important to control for confounders in 
such studies to reduce bias and make valid causal inferences from observational studies 
as confounders tend to mask the real effect of the exposure [71]. The most common 
method to address this issue is to adjust for the confounders in statistical models. Data-
driven methods such as forward or backward stepwise regression are commonly used to 
identify potential confounders. The criteria used to identify the confounders is usually 
based on the magnitude of p-values. However, the causal relations between the exposure 
and outcome are not often accounted for through these methods [70].  
Recently, directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) which are visual representations of 
causal assumptions have been increasingly used to identify confounders [72]. The DAG 
is called a directed graph as variables in the graph are connected through a series of arrows 
illustrating causal relationships between them along a timeline. It is termed as acyclic as 
the causes always precede their effects, thus, none of the paths in the graph would form a 
closed loop. Covariates included in the DAG and the direction of the arrows are based on 
a priori knowledge [71]. As explained in Chapter 1 (section 1.7), covariates included in 
the DAGs used Chapters 3-7 are based on a conceptual framework constructed using 
theoretical evidence to identify minimal sets of variables to be included in the statistical 
models [38] (Figures B.1, C.2, D.2, E.1, E.2).  
The casual relationship is termed as the causal path in the DAG and is the assumed 
association between the exposure and outcome. A backdoor path is an alternative path 
through which the exposure can lead to the outcome. The presence of at least one open 
backdoor path between exposure and outcome is known as confounding [73]. For 
example, smoking is a confounder for the association between diet (exposure) and age at 
natural menopause (outcome) as it leaves the backdoor path open, that is, there is an arrow 
starting with an arrowhead towards the exposure and the outcome (dietsmokingage 
at menopause). In order to control for confounding, the confounder has to be removed 
from the pathway such that the backdoor path blocked. The DAG provides an illustration 
of the potential causal mechanisms under study, as such when the graph includes all 
appropriate variables and their causal relationships, confounding can be identified 
through explicit assumptions [71]. Confounders that had a considerable proportion of 
missing observations were not considered when constructing the DAG (e.g. education 
level and occupational status), mainly if other closely related variables were available 
(e.g. socio-economic status).  
In addition to confounding, the DAG also helps to identify mediation and collider 
bias. Mediators and colliders may also appear as causal relationships in the DAG. For 
instance, the mediator (dietBMIage at menopause) leave the indirect causal path 
open. However, adjusting for mediators (e.g. BMI) would attenuate the effect of diet as 
this is not a true confounder, thus will restrict the ability to observe any relationship 
between the exposure and outcome [71]. As mediators lie on the causal pathway and could 
be involved in the mechanism of the outcome, in Chapter 7, age at menopause identified 
as a mediator has been further explored using effect modification analysis. Furthermore, 
adjusting for colliders could introduce collider bias in the analysis. A collider is also found 
on the causal pathway but is caused by both the exposure and the outcome. It naturally 
closes backdoor path, therefore adjusting for the collider would introduce bias by opening 
the backdoor path [73]. This further demonstrates the advantages of using a DAG.  
Therefore, the use of the DAG does not only help to ascertain confounding but is 
also valuable to avoid under and over-adjustment, thus increasing the validity of our 
study. Since these criteria could be prone to subjective decisions, and using the DAG 
could be cumbersome in particular in epidemiological studies which involves a large 
number of variables, in this thesis, the web application DAGitty which offers a simple 
interface has been used to identify the minimum sets of confounders [74].  
8.3 Critical evaluation of study strengths 
8.3.1 Prospective design 
Prospective cohort studies are valuable in determining associations between 
exposures and health outcomes in the field of epidemiology. However, compared to 
RCTs, these studies are considered to provide weaker evidence. Yet, prospective cohort 
studies can postulate direct information on the sequence of events, which can eventually 
be used in RCTs to explain causality. Thus, these studies play a key role in evidence-
based medicine [75]. The UKWCS dietary data was collected prior to development of 
any of the outcomes of interest of this thesis, thus, the possibility of recall bias and reverse 
causality are unlikely as compared to case control study designs. Since participants were 
not recruited based on this researchs outcomes, the probability of selection bias is also 
eliminated.  
8.3.2 Novel findings 
Firstly, this thesis provides an overview of the diet of pre- and post-menopausal 
women in the UKWCS which to our knowledge is the first to explore this association. 
The study investigating the association between various food and nutrient intakes and the 
timing of natural menopause is also the first among British women. As mentioned in 
Chapter 1, previously several studies have looked into the association between socio-
demographic factors such as smoking, socioeconomic status, ethnicity as well as 
reproductive factors (e.g. parity, age at first pregnancy) and the onset of natural 
menopause. Although evidence indicated a link between diet and the timing of natural 
menopause, very few studies have investigated this association and existing findings are 
also contradictory. There have been only few studies in the past exploring this association 
possibly because diet is difficult to measure, and also there are few large enough follow 
up studies on women of the right age which could look at this. It was thus interesting to 
observe that specific foods and nutrients were linked with the timing of natural 
menopause in this study (Chapter 4). 
Given that these foods are eaten as part of a diet, the effect of other food items 
may either counteract or enhance the individual associations observed in this study [76]. 
For example, although fresh legumes appeared to delay menopause, a self-reported 
vegetarian diet was associated with an earlier onset of natural menopause (Chapter 4). As 
a 217-item FFQ was used in the UKWCS to assess diet, this also allowed the generation 
of dietary patterns derived from a variety of food items. Therefore, the association 
between dietary patterns and the timing of natural menopause was also explored. This is 
in addition the first prospective cohort study looking at this relationship.  
Another uniqueness of this thesis involves the pooled analysis from five different 
studies of the InterLACE consortium which demonstrated an association between 
frequent soy product consumption and reduced odds of reporting incident VMS (Chapter 
6). To our knowledge, this is the first pooled study which investigated both the cross-
sectional and prospective associations between soy consumption and presence of VMS. 
This study described the presence of VMS, consumption of soy products from the natural 
diet and further explored their association which has the advantage to represent this 
pattern for participants from five different studies, in particular from four different 
countries (Australia, UK, USA, and Japan). Given that a protective effect of soy product 
consumption was demonstrated with the incidence of VMS among women from two 
countries namely Australia and UK, this studys finding can be generalised to the 
Caucasian women from other countries as well. 
8.3.3 Dietary patterns 
Traditionally, nutritional epidemiology involved the study of nutrients and single 
food components in relation to health. However, the study of these isolated single 
components may not provide a realistic picture of the actual diet of people [77]. 
Moreover, the disease burden associated to nutrition has now shifted. Instead of 
undernutrition and nutrient related deficiencies which used to be prevalent, nowadays 
non-communicable diseases have taken the lead in high income countries as well as low 
and middle income countries [78]. These are associated with the multiple interactions of 
various food items rather than single components, which make the study of dietary 
patterns of utmost importance. Dietary patterns are able to represent the cumulative and 
interactive effects of various components of the diet. Thus, public health 
recommendations based on dietary patterns are more easily translated. Nevertheless, it is 
quite likely that any observed associations between dietary patterns and the onset of 
menopause in this study could be due to the single components rather than the overall 
dietary pattern [79]. Therefore, the strength of this thesis is that both single components 
and dietary patterns were considered which allowed a better understanding of the 
influence of diet on the timing of menopause.  
Another forte of this study was the application and the comparison of two a 
posteriori techniques to generate dietary patterns, PCA and RRR. In comparison to a 
priori techniques which are based on dietary recommendations, these a posteriori 
methods are not based on prior knowledge but instead they are based only on the data, 
making them more easily reproducible and comparable [79]. Although the aims of PCA 
and RRR vary, findings from this thesis demonstrated that their results complement each 
other and thus both methods provided important insights for predicting the risk of being 
naturally menopausal in relation to dietary patterns. Moreover, as demonstrated by 
Jankovic et al. [80], another strength of the dietary patterns as measured by RRR is that 
they are reasonably stable over a period of five years and in this thesis, the age at natural 
menopause was assessed approximately 4 years at follow-up after diet was evaluated. 
Thus, RRR is suitable to derive dietary patterns based on long-term dietary exposure for 
nutritional epidemiological studies, with one dietary assessment at baseline.  
8.3.4 Assessment of age at menopause  
As elaborated by Cramer [35], several methodological concerns may arise when 
predicting the outcome of interest, age at natural menopause. This study has assigned a 
natural menopause based on the WHO definition which states that the last menstrual 
bleeding followed by at least 12 months of amenorrhea as some women may have regular 
bleeding still after 6 months of amenorrhea. In addition, as HRT may cause the return of 
regular menstrual bleeding, in this study women who reported using HRT prior to 
menopause were excluded. The memory of the age at last menstruation may be prone to 
recall bias. However in this thesis, as the included premenopausal participants were aged 
between 45 to 53 years at baseline (Chapter 4) and the average age at natural menopause 
was 50.5 years (95% CI: 50.3 to 50.8), the recall period has been shorter and thus the 
variable age at menopause may have been more accurately provided by the women at the 
follow-up and may be less prone to bias. Additionally, both the primary exposure (diet) 
and age at natural menopause were used as continuous data which helped to retain as 
much information and providing enough statistical power to observe any possible 
associations [81].  
8.3.5 Assessment of confounding 
A further strength of this thesis was the use of DAGs to determine potential 
confounders for the analyses. If not identified and adjusted for, a confounder could lead 
to distortion of the interpretation by masking the true relationship between two variables 
[82]. The use of DAG can be considered superior to logistic regression techniques 
including all likely confounders which have been used in previous studies as the latter is 
based on significant p-values while the former is based on stronger theoretical evidence. 
In addition as suggested by Shrier and Platt [83], other advantages of the DAG are that 
only a subset of confounders are used which are associated with both the exposure and 
health outcome of interest and because this led to the use of fewer confounders in the 
model, the statistical efficiency of the analysis is increased. Yet, the use of the DAG may 
be limited by the absence of unmeasured confounders when constructing the graph. 
However, as the UKWCS included a wide range of factors which have been assessed such 
as socio-economic, family history, medical history, and reproductive history, an attempt 
to include all likely confounders when composing the DAGs have been made. Moreover, 
the inclusion of participants with a wide range of exposure to different diet in the UKWCS 
also decreased bias related to measurement error.  
8.3.6 Cancer data 
As mentioned in section 8.2.3.2.1, incident cases of invasive breast carcinomas, 
endometrial and ovarian cancers were identified through linkage to the NHSIC to which 
all women consented at the start of the study. Thus loss to follow was minimal.  However, 
if any woman was no longer a resident of the UK and had not communicated this to the 
Nutritional Epidemiology Group, this would be interpreted as having not developed 
breast cancer. 
Other strengths of using the cancer linkage were greater reliability of the data as 
compared to self-reported data, lower participant burden and the use of ICD codes for the 
diagnoses of the hormone-related cancers improves the consistency of the data. Yet, it 
should be acknowledged that despite quarterly updates from the NHSIC, there is some 
lag time in receiving notification of cancer incidence. 
Additionally in the cancer analysis (refer to Chapter 7), in order to ensure that 
dietary information was collected before diagnosis of the cancers, women reporting 
history of any previous malignant cancer at baseline (except for non-melanoma of the 
skin) and women who were diagnosed with breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer within 
1 year of baseline were excluded. Thus, any potential measurement error associated with 
dietary assessment would have been non-differential between the cases and non-cases and 
would led to weakening of the true relationships instead of causing any overestimation. 
8.4 Critical evaluation of potential limitations 
8.4.1 Dietary data 
There are several weaknesses of using FFQs for dietary assessment. These include 
potential recall bias leading to low accuracy of dietary information, restricted to 
information on only the food items listed in the FFQ and reporting can also be subjective 
[86, 87]. Measurement errors associated with the FFQ are also likely in this research due 
to unavailable foods in the list and imprecisions in consumption frequency and portion 
size estimations [84]. The under and over-estimate consumption of certain food like fruits 
and vegetable intake are also likely [85]. The FFQ also does not account for variability 
of portion sizes over different eating occasions. Additionally, nutrient estimation might 
be biased by imprecision in the portion sizes used and errors inherent to the FFQ [86]. 
Yet it must be acknowledged that the use of an FFQ allows a better picture of diet over a 
long period of time as compared to other dietary assessment tools such as the 24-h recall 
and food diaries which record diet over a shorter period of time. Moreover, the use of the 
FFQ in an inexpensive method to assess diet of the thousands of women in the UKWCS 
and causes lower subject burden as compared to the 24-h recall [84]. The FFQ used in the 
UKWCS was also validated on a subsample of 303 cohort subjects against a 4-day food 
diary as well as fasting blood measures of specific nutrients. It was also tailored for the 
large number of vegetarians [19].  
The UKWCS dietary data was collected in between 1995-1998. It is very likely 
that the diet of women today are different as compared to women in the 90s. Therefore, 
another weakness of the dietary assessment was that only a single-point evaluation was 
conducted rather that repeated measures which would have accounted for the dietary 
changes over time.  
8.4.2 Dietary patterns 
Although a quite elaborate FFQ was used in the UKWCS to assess womens diet, 
it was still a closed list of foods and, therefore, cannot fully capture in detail an 
individuals diet. The dietary patterns derived using the FFQ in Chapter 5 might not give 
an accurate picture of the participants dietary patterns.  
Furthermore, the two empirically-based dietary pattern methods, PCA and RRR 
used for the analyses in Chapter 5, have their own set of limitations for dietary pattern 
analysis. Several subjective decisions are required for both methods that can influence 
the final interpretation such as collapsing of the various food items into food groups, the 
format of the input variable, the factor loading cut-off value, and the labelling of the 
dietary patterns. In an attempt to reduce subjectivity, the food items from the FFQ were 
grouped based on WCRF recommendations for cancer prevention [61]. Dietary patterns 
may also be a proxy measure for other variables which can be associated with age at 
natural menopause as they may be a constituent of a larger pattern of healthy or unhealthy 
habits. However, after controlling for potential confounders, both dietary patterns derived 
from PCA and RRR were still significantly associated with the onset of natural 
menopause.  
In this thesis, RRR explained less variability as compared to PCA. This is because 
the RRR derived dietary patterns are based on the variation of the response variables. As 
the RRR technique is contingent on the a priori hypothesis through the set of response 
variables, this method thus allows the generation of dietary patterns based on biologically 
important intermediate variables. However, the key consideration is to include response 
variables that are likely predictive or important risk factors of the health outcome of 
interest, though this may not always be possible as in the case of this thesis [87]. This is 
because only a limited number of studies has previously explored age at natural 
menopause and its risk factors, thus, there are no strong evidence regarding its risk factors 
yet. In this study an attempt has been made to consider risk factors which have quite 
consistently been associated with the timing of menopause. Therefore, the RRR derived 
dietary patterns should be considered as an initial hypothesis, rather than patterns with a 
confirmed association. Another concern is that RRR is unlikely to generate dietary 
patterns that are linked to most or all potential pathways through which diet can influence 
the age at onset of natural menopause. In addition, it is important that the response 
variables have been investigated in relation to the health outcome in the same population 
[88].  
8.4.3 Generalisability 
A common limitation of the UKWCS results is that as there was a larger sample 
of vegetarians and thus more health conscious women in the cohort, as compared to the 
general UK population. Moreover, the under-representation of unhealthy dietary 
behaviours could have led to weakened observed relationships or may have caused null 
observations. Sensitivity analyses involving weighting of the results to the proportion of 
vegetarians in the UK population could have been conducted in this thesis to overcome 
this [19]. However, as demonstrated by a previous study using the UKWCS, the results 
remained unchanged after weighting for vegetarians [60]. Given that participants in the 
UKWCS came from a range of different backgrounds as demonstrated in Chapters 3,4 
and 7, findings of this study could be extrapolated to the general population.  
In addition, as the derived dietary patterns were based on the available data, the 
findings of this thesis cannot be extrapolated to other countries.  In particular, findings 
for dietary patterns derived using RRR have rarely been replicated across other 
populations [79]. 
8.4.4 Data pooling 
Whilst pooling data from individual studies are beneficial in terms of increasing 
the study power, especially if the sample size is not big enough to explore the relationship 
between the exposure and outcome in the individual studies, weaknesses of pooling data 
should be acknowledged. One drawback could be that errors attributed to the study design 
of the single studies are multiplied [43]. Furthermore, as mentioned in section 6.4, there 
are several sources of heterogeneity when pooling data from the five observational studies 
of the InterLACE consortium [42]. However, in this study, heterogeneity between the 
studies was not significant (please refer to Chapter 6). In addition, the I2 values for both 
the pooled estimates for the cross-sectional association between the presence of VMS and 
frequent consumption of soy products (0%) as well as soy milk (26.6%) were quite low. 
As suggested by Higgins et al. [64], the I2 which describes the percentage of total variation 
across studies that is due to heterogeneity rather than chance is a better approach of 
quantifying heterogeneity [42, 89]. Moreover, the use of the random effect model for the 
pooled analysis has a disadvantage in terms of potential undue weight given to the studies 
with small sample size, thereby highlighting evidence that may be weak [44]. In addition 
to the limitations discussed in Chapter 6, as with all longitudinal studies retention of 
participants is an issue [40]. However, in order to account for this, a sensitivity analysis 
was carried out to investigate the association between soy consumption and subsequent 
risk of VMS at follow-up with all the women included adjusting for their baseline 
presence/absence of VMS.  
8.4.5 Potential for biases 
Although adjustments were made for potential confounders which were identified 
using an explicit method, the possibility of residual confounding due to unmeasured 
covariates or imprecision in the measure of included covariates as in any other 
observational study is still likely in this thesis. As demonstrated using the conceptual 
framework (Figure 1.4) in Chapter 1, other than dietary components, there are various 
other factors which could influence the pathophysiology of the onset of menopause, and 
consequently the presence of VMS and the risk of the hormone-related cancers. However, 
not all the factors were not available in the UKWCS dataset. For instance, models used 
in this thesis did not control for environmental factors such as area of residence and 
genetic factors which could have contributed to residual confounding.  
Moreover as mentioned previously, measurement errors arising due to inaccuracy 
or imprecision of the FFQ, single measurement of diet over a long period of time in 
particular when investigated in relation to cancer incidence could have led to substantial 
for potential biases in this research. However, the inclusion of participants with a wide 
range of dietary exposure in the UKWCS (e.g. vegetarians, fish-eaters and meat-eaters) 
[19] and the adequate sample sizes (please refer to section 8.2.3.2.2) decreased the risk 
of bias related to measurement error. 
8.4.6 Others 
Finally, as dietary data was measured prior to the assessment of age at menopause, 
the analyses from Chapter 4 and Chapter 5 could not be repeated in the InterLACE 
consortium. Racial/ethnic variation for the association between soy products and VMS 
could also not be analysed in this thesis given that the included studies had a quite high 
distribution of Caucasians and only one study had data on Japanese women. 
8.5 Recommendations for future work 
8.5.1 In the UKWCS 
Besides dietary factors, endocrine disruptors such as bisphenol A, phthalates, 
parabens, pesticides among others have also been suggested to influence the onset of 
natural menopause, in particular, they can lead to ovarian senescence and thus an earlier 
menopause [90]. Therefore, as canned foods could be a source of bisphenol A [91], the 
link between the proportion of canned foods consumed could also be investigated among 
women in the UKWCS. Furthermore, in order to include more participants in the analyses 
survival regression models could also be used when studying the association between 
individual foods and age at menopause.  
Using the UKWCS, interesting extensions could be exploring the relationship 
between specific nutrients, dietary patterns and the risk of ovarian, endometrial and breast 
cancers. Dietary patterns generated through different techniques both a priori and a 
posteriori to make comparisons between the findings. Given the limitations of FFQs, the 
use of other self-reported instruments such as food diaries and 24-hour recall have been 
preferred over FFQs [92]. At Phase 2 of UKWCS, 12, 453 participants also completed a 
4-day food diary [19] which could be ideal for studying the association between portion 
sizes of various foods and the risk of the hormone-related cancers. In addition, given that 
previous studies indicate that cooking methods could be linked to the risk of hormone-
related cancers [93, 94], this aspect could also be investigated in the future. 
8.5.2 In the InterLACE consortium 
The InterLACE consortium is currently trying to accrue by including more cohort 
studies which have womens health data especially from countries which are not part of 
the consortium yet. As evidenced by Melby et al. [95], both biological and cultural 
differences contribute to the symptoms experienced by women during the menopausal 
transition. Previously, a high prevalence of VMS has been reported in Western countries 
while a lower prevalence rate has been recorded in Asian countries and in India, no VMS 
was reported by some groups [96]. Given that cross-cultural factors may influence the 
way frequency and severity of VMS are reported in Asian countries, additional data from 
other countries would allow consideration of this cross-cultural variation and also the 
interaction between culture and biology of VMS. The inclusion of more dietary data in 
particular assessed prior to the evaluation of reproductive health and chronic diseases 
would be a further asset of the consortium. This would allow the study of other food items 
besides soy products in relation to VMS. For instance, as demonstrated by Herber-Gast 
[97], the consumption of diets highly loaded with cooked vegetables and fruits were 
protective against VMS while a diet rich in fat and sugars increased the risk of VMS. 
Therefore, the study of such dietary aspects using the InterLACE consortium would lead 
to a better understanding of VMS in relation to diet. In addition, phytoestrogen contents 
from the soy products could be estimated to explore whether total phytoestrogen or 
specific phytoestrogens such as isoflavones, lignans, daidzein, genistein or coumestrol 
may have any association with the frequency or severity of VMS. Earlier studies have 
mainly investigated the influence of specific phytoestrogens in relation to the frequency 
or severity of VMS (Chapter 2, Table 2.3) but a pooled analysis is yet to be explored. 
Previous studies using data from the InterLACE consortium have investigated the 
associations between several exposures such as early menarche, nulliparity [98], BMI 
[99], smoking [100], and age at natural menopause. However, age at natural menopause 
in relation to diet has not yet been explored. Therefore, the acquisition of more dietary 
data would allow pooled analysis of this association, leading to results that may prompt 
interventions to study the same further and consequently lead to clinically relevant 
outcomes. Using the InterLACE consortium would also allow the study of the cross-
cultural variation in the association between diet and age at natural menopause.   
8.5.3 Other studies 
As discussed in this chapter, further prospective cohort studies are required for 
exploring the association between diet and age at onset of natural menopause. Similar to 
the distribution of VMS, age at menopause may also be influenced by cross-cultural 
differences. Previously, most studies investigating this association have been conducted 
among Japanese and American women. However, more studies are warranted to observe 
the pattern in other Asian, European and African countries. More studies are also required 
in racially diverse populations. As explained in Chapter 2, due to the numerous 
methodological concerns for predicting age at menopause, comparing findings for the 
association between dietary aspects and age at menopause is quite difficult. Therefore, 
using a standard definition of age at menopause in future studies could help resolve this 
issue. Moreover, as there are no pathological tests which can be carried out to determine 
the age at natural menopause, researchers would have to rely on participants memory. 
As suggested by Cramer [35], ideally following premenopausal women in their late 30s 
for 15 to 20 years whereby menopausal status is queried at several points might be helpful 
to determine their age at last menstrual bleeding. As the menopausal transition is 
associated with several hormonal changes, weight gain, menopausal symptoms, changing 
menstrual patterns, women tend to alter their diet (Chapter 3) and other lifestyle 
behaviours. Thus, assessing dietary habits at various time points would also be beneficial 
to study diet at which age point reflects the age at natural menopause. However, as this 
would be a quite time consuming and costly process, studying perimenopausal women 
aged between 45 to 54 years might be an alternative [35]. Another approach could be 
using new technology to contact people (e.g., email, social media), and measure diet 
which are much cheaper than it used to be. Furthermore, considering age at natural 
menopause as a continuous variable would help provide more information as compared 
to dichotomising the variable into early and late menopause. Future prospective studies 
including more premenopausal women at the study baseline may lead to more women 
undergoing menopause at follow-up, thus providing greater statistical power to study this 
association. The compilation of studies scrutinising this relationship would subsequently 
lead to more meta-analyses and systematic reviews on this subject.  
Besides racial and ethnic differences, future studies might also consider the role 
of genetic factors which would help throw light on the possible mechanisms behind any 
observed associations between diet and age at natural menopause. As elaborated in 
Chapter 1, a high oestrogen level could delay the onset of menopause while premature 
ovarian aging may be associated with an earlier onset of menopause. However, to confirm 
these proposed mechanisms, clinical trials, especially with long follow-up period 
examining the effect of dietary interventions on markers of ovarian ageing such AMH 
and follicle count and subsequently the timing of menopause, would also be meaningful. 
The association between dietary changes and plasma level of oestrogen would be equally 
of relevance to understand the underlying endocrinology.  
Kroenke et al. [101] demonstrated that weight loss which was achieved through a 
dietary intervention which consisted of reducing fat and increasing fruit, vegetable and 
fibre intake led to a reduction or elimination of VMS over a period of one year. This study 
indicates the possible influence of dietary intervention of the presence of VMS. Thus, 
other than RCTs investigating the effect of phytoestrogens from specific phytoestrogen-
rich food sources, the effect of additional dietary intervention on the presence of VMS 
should be investigated. Furthermore, as reporting of VMS may also be subjective among 
overweight or obese women due to social or psychological factors [102], dietary 
interventions targeting women with different BMI ranges can be conducted. Interventions 
in these specific groups of women may support health practitioners when counselling 
menopausal women. The RCTs may also be beneficial in detecting the time point when 
any dietary change might influence the timing of menopause and also the amount of the 
food required to observe any change.  
Evidence from population-based studies of women as well as findings from this 
thesis increasingly points to the inter-related nature of reproductive health (age at natural 
menopause and VMS), lifestyle (diet), and chronic disease risk (ovarian, endometrial and 
breast cancers). Previous studies have also demonstrated a link between diet and the onset 
of the timing of menarche [103] and also a higher risk of hormone-related cancers have 
been found with an earlier onset of menarche [104-106]. Thus, future cohort studies which 
have dietary data measured before both age at menarche and age at natural menopause as 
well as have cancer-related data, can explore this inter-relationship by developing life 
course models. Future work in this area will highlight the importance of examining the 
timing of exposures, such as during critical periods in early life, and the temporal order 
of exposures. These models will help policymakers in terms of identifying the appropriate 
type of intervention and the time point at which an intervention is required [107].  
8.6 Public health messages and implications  
Age at natural menopause varies according to regions, countries and ethnic groups 
[108, 109] in addition to other factors as explained in Chapter 1 (section 1.1). The age at 
which women go through the menopause is of public health concern as an earlier 
menopause is linked to a higher risk of cardiovascular diseases, osteoporosis, and 
fracture, and depression, while a delayed onset of menopause is associated with a higher 
likelihood of hormone-related cancers such breast, endometrial and ovarian cancers 
[110]. In addition to the health concerns, an earlier menopause can also have a detrimental 
impact on the quality of life of a woman, influence fertility and consequently have an 
influence on society. The timing of menopause can determine the duration a woman is in 
the perimenopausal state and thus affect the duration of VMS. Therefore, influencing the 
timing of natural menopause could potentially modify the risk of health outcomes among 
middle-aged women. Given that both an early and a late menopause are related to adverse 
health effects, targeting the mean age of menopause which ranges between 46 to 52 years 
would be ideal [111]. Diet is one of the modifiable behavioural risk factors for both the 
timing of menopause and its associated sequelae as demonstrated in this thesis. 
At present, the British Nutrition Foundation [112] recommends a healthy balanced 
diet which includes high intakes fruits and vegetables, starchy foods, and is low in sugar, 
salt and saturated fats for women of all ages. As menopausal women are at risk of 
menopausal symptoms and other health risks such as osteoporosis and cardiovascular 
diseases (CVD), based on recommendations by the National Health Services UK for the 
prevention of CVD, osteoporosis, and guidelines for a healthy lifestyle, the British 
Nutrition Foundation in addition has put forward the following guidelines for this group 
of women [112]. These include intake of: 
 700 mg of calcium per day 
 10 g of vitamin D per day  
 unsaturated fats rather than saturated fats 
 fish especially oily fish once or twice per week 
 less than 6 g of salt per day 
 wholegrain and high fibre foods 
 dietary sources of isoflavones and lignans 
 < 14 units of alcohol per week 
Findings from this thesis are in line with these recommended guidelines. 
Additionally, the results of this thesis suggest that it can be regarded as safe to encourage 
women to consume oily fish and fresh legumes to avoid an early onset of menopause as 
these food items have not been found to be associated with the ovarian, endometrial and 
breast cancer risks (please refer to Chapters 4 and 7). As showed in Chapter 6, the 
consumption of soy products such as tofu, tempeh, soy beans, and soy flour are protective 
against the incidence of VMS and thus women are recommended to also consume these 
sources of isoflavones.  
As mentioned before, a late menopause is associated with a higher risk of 
hormone-related cancers such as breast, ovarian and endometrial cancers (Chapter 7). 
Furthermore as demonstrated in Chapter 7, high intakes of red and processed meats were 
associated with a higher risk of breast and endometrial cancers, in particular, 
postmenopausal breast and endometrial cancer risks. Therefore, as part of preventive 
strategies, women with a family history of late menopause or these hormone-related 
cancers should be advised to limit or avoid the consumption of animal proteins, in 
particular, red meats and processed meats. It would not be advisable for women who are 
at a high risk of an early menopause such as those with a family history of early 
menopause [113], those who are nulliparous or have had an early menarche to consume 
these meats to delay their onset of menopause given the adverse health risks associated 
with consumption of red and processed meats. This is also in line with the 
recommendations by the WCRF for cancer prevention [61] and the latest Lancet EAT 
report [114] which supports the need to reduce the consumption of red meat and highly 
processed foods and to increase the consumption of fruits, vegetables and legumes as part 
of the aim to achieve dietary changes from current diets to healthy diets and improve 
human health as well as reduce the number of mortality. Alternatively it is recommended 
to consume other protein sources such as from plants, including soy foods, other legumes, 
and nuts, fish and modest consumption of poultry and eggs [114]. According to the report, 
unhealthy diets poses a greater risk to non-communicable diseases and hence mortality 
and morbidity as compared to alcohol, drug and tobacco use combined. The commission 
advocates for healthy diets as food production also has adverse impacts on environmental 
changes by contributing at various levels (e.g. climate change, biodiversity loss, etc.). 
Therefore adoption of a plant-based diet, which would imply significantly cutting down 
on the intake of particularly red meat rather consuming a vegan diet would help towards 
achieving this goal. The report also recommends cutting down the intake of refined 
starches which conforms with the findings of this thesis. 
However, given that more studies are required in this area, and that both an early 
or a late menopause are associated with adverse health outcomes it would be premature 
at this stage to make universal dietary recommendations based on our findings alone. This 
study could yet be beneficial for health practitioners when counselling women who are in 
their late 30s or early 40s, in particular, those who may already be at risk or have a family 
history of certain complications related to menopause. As more evidence unfolds in the 
future, health practitioners might also need to consider the specific disease risk of the 
women in addition to her unique family history to stipulate dietary advice regarding the 
timing of menopause. At this point, a balanced diet based on the consumption of oily fish, 
high fibre foods, and reduced consumption of refined cereals and grain products can be 
suggested. As for the amount of these food items and at what point they should be 
consumed, would have to be investigated in the future.  
8.7 Conclusions 
8.7.1 What was already known on this topic 
Diet is associated with the timing of onset of natural menopause. However, 
previously a limited number of studies have investigated this association and findings are 
also conflicting. Diet is also linked to immediate and longer-term sequelae of menopause 
such as the presence of VMS and risk of hormone-related cancers (e.g. ovarian, 
endometrial and breast cancer). A later onset of menopause is associated with an 
increased risk of ovarian, endometrial and breast cancers. Except for the high risk of 
breast cancer associated with consumption of high amounts of alcohol, there is 
inconclusive and limited findings for the relationship between diet and ovarian, 
endometrial and breast cancers.  
There is evidence that multiple and complex factors determine the timing of 
natural menopause as well as the presence of VMS and the risk of breast, ovarian and 
endometrial cancers. According to the NICEs conceptual framework (Figure 1.4), diet is 
one of the determinants in the social vector category which influences the timing of 
menopause and its associated sequalae. Various factors can shape dietary choices and 
patterns, hence influencing the timing of menopause and the associated health outcomes 
as well as they can have both synergistic and independent effects on the health sequels. 
However, as per a recent report [115], diet is a major risk factor of cancers as compared 
to other risk factors. Therefore, diet was studied in relation to the timing of the onset of 
natural menopause and its associated sequalae using the UKWCS and the InterLACE 
consortium. 
8.7.2 What this work adds 
There are various factors which can be linked with the exposure (diet) and 
outcomes of interest (age at natural menopause, presence of VMS, risk of breast, ovarian 
and endometrial cancers) of this thesis (Figure 1.4). Thus, in order to avoid spurious 
results, DAGs were constructed based on the conceptual framework to identify potential 
confounders for each result chapter in this thesis (Chapters 3-7).  
In particular, it was demonstrated that high intakes of individual foods such as 
oily fish, fresh legumes and nutrients such as vitamin B6 and zinc are associated with a 
later onset of menopause while a high consumption of refined pasta and rice is linked to 
an earlier onset of menopause in the UKWCS. To complement the findings on the 
association between individual foods and the onset of natural menopause and to take into 
account that people consume meals which are complex interactions between various 
foods and nutrients which may be interactive, dietary patterns using PCA and RRR 
techniques were further investigated in relation to this outcome. It was showed that diets 
which are highly loaded with red meat and processed meat may also increase the risk of 
a later natural menopause.  
Furthermore, this study conducted the first pooled analysis which included five 
observational studies from the InterLACE consortium to assess the associations between 
intake of soy products and the presence of VMS. Frequent consumption of soy products 
(e.g., soy beans, tofu, tempeh) as part of the usual diet may be associated with a reduced 
risk of subsequent VMS as opposed to soy milk consumption. Additionally in the 
UKWCS, it was also demonstrated that high intakes of red meats and processed meats 
are associated with a higher risk of breast and endometrial cancers. These associations 
are especially significant for postmenopausal breast and endometrial cancer risks as 
determined using time-to-event analyses. Tomato and dried fruits consumption were 
related with a reduced risk of breast and endometrial cancer respectively. In this thesis, 
no significant associations were found in the case of the risk of ovarian cancer. Although 
timing of natural menopause has been found to increase the risk of hormone-related 
cancers, effect modification analyses showed that it did not influence the association 
between diet and risk of the cancers. 
Given that the study of the timing of natural menopause in relation to dietary 
factors is still fledgling, findings from this thesis makes a significant contribution to this 
field. This thesis also adds to the existing evidence for the associations between diet and 
the presence of VMS as well as the risk of breast, ovarian and endometrial cancers. Thus, 
diet remains an important factor which is related to the female reproductive health. 
Further observational studies among different populations as well as clinical trials are 
mandated to contribute to this area of womens health. Yet, even though additional 
evidence on the relationships between diet and the timing of menopause were known, it 
would be complicated to make collective recommendations as each woman has a unique 
family history and particular health risks. Health practitioners would therefore need to 
consider these criteria prior to making dietary recommendations.
References  
1. Lethaby, A. et al. Phytoestrogens for menopausal vasomotor symptoms. The 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2013, (12), p.Cd001395. 
2. Sauvageot, N. et al. Association of Empirically Derived Dietary Patterns with 
Cardiovascular Risk Factors: A Comparison of PCA and RRR Methods. PLoS 
ONE. 2016, 11(8), p.e0161298. 
3. Bakolis, I. The use of dietary patterns empirically derived from Principal 
Components Analysis and alternative strategies to identify associations between 
diet and disease. Doctor of Philosophy thesis, Imperial College London, 2013. 
4. Martin, L.J. et al. Intervention with a low-fat, high-carbohydrate diet does not 
influence the timing of menopause. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
2006, 84(4), pp.920-928. 
5. Wang, M. et al. Age at natural menopause and associated factors in adult women: 
Findings from the China Kadoorie Biobank study in Zhejiang rural area. PLoS 
ONE. 2018, 13(4), p.e0195658. 
6. Boutot, M.E. et al. Dietary Protein Intake and Early Menopause in the Nurses 
Health Study II. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2018, 187(2), pp.270-277. 
7. Nagel, G. et al. Reproductive and dietary determinants of the age at menopause in 
EPIC-Heidelberg. Maturitas. 2005, 52(3-4), pp.337-347. 
8. Al-Safi, Z.A. et al. Omega-3 Fatty Acid Supplementation Lowers Serum FSH in 
Normal Weight But Not Obese Women. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology 
and Metabolism. 2016, 101(1), pp.324-333. 
9. Nagata, C. et al. Associations of physical activity and diet with the onset of 
menopause in Japanese women. Menopause. 2012, 19(1), pp.75-81. 
10. Nagata, C. et al. Association of diet with the onset of menopause in Japanese 
women. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2000, 152(9), pp.863-867. 
11. Ford, E.S. et al. Increased consumption of refined carbohydrates and the epidemic 
of type 2 diabetes in the United States: an ecologic assessment. The American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2004, 79(5), pp.774-779. 
12. Jenkins, D.J. et al. Glycemic index of foods: a physiological basis for 
carbohydrate exchange. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1981, 34(3), 
pp.362-366. 
13. Miller, J.C. Importance of glycemic index in diabetes. The American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition. 1994, 59(3 Suppl), pp.747s-752s. 
14. Sowers, M.R. et al. Relating smoking, obesity, insulin resistance, and ovarian 
biomarker changes to the final menstrual period. Annals of the New York Academy 
of Sciences. 2010, 1204, pp.95-103. 
15. Isik, S. et al. Evaluation of ovarian reserve based on hormonal parameters, ovarian 
volume, and antral follicle count in women with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Journal 
of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism. 2012, 97(1), pp.261-269. 
16. Garris, D.R. Effects of progressive hyperglycemia on ovarian structure and 
function in the spontaneously diabetic Chinese hamster. The Anatomical Record.. 
1984, 210(3), pp.485-489. 
17. Garris, D.R. and Garris, B.L. Diabetes (db/db) mutation-induced ovarian 
involution: progressive hypercytolipidemia. Experimental Biology and Medicine. 
2003, 228(9), pp.1040-1050. 
18. Torgerson, D.J. et al. Factors associated with onset of menopause in women aged 
4549. Maturitas. 1994, 19(2), pp.83-92. 
19. Cade, J.E. et al. Cohort Profile: The UK Women's Cohort Study (UKWCS). 
International Journal of Epidemiology. 2017, 46(2), pp.e11-e11. 
20. Cade, J.E. et al. The UK Women's Cohort Study: comparison of vegetarians, fish-
eaters and meat-eaters. Public Health Nutrition. 2004, 7(7), pp.871-878. 
21. Riboli, E. and Kaaks, R. The EPIC Project: rationale and study design. European 
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition. International Journal of 
Epidemiology. 1997, 26 (Suppl 1), pp.S6-14. 
22. Food Standards Agency. Food Portion Sizes. London: The Stationary office; 
2002. 
23. Holland B, W.A., Unwin ID, Buss DH, Paul AA, Southgate DAT. The 
composition of foods. Cambridge, United Kingdom: The Royal Society of 
Chemistry and Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food, 1991. 
24. Kant, A.K. Dietary patterns and health outcomes. Journal of the American 
Dietetic Association. 2004, 104(4), pp.615-635. 
25. Ocke, M.C. Evaluation of methodologies for assessing the overall diet: dietary 
quality scores and dietary pattern analysis. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society. 
2013, 72(2), pp.191-199. 
26. Newby, P.K. and Tucker, K.L. Empirically derived eating patterns using factor or 
cluster analysis: a review. Nutrition Reviews. 2004, 62(5), pp.177-203. 
27. Northstone, K. et al. Dietary patterns in pregnancy and associations with socio-
demographic and lifestyle factors. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2008, 
62(4), pp.471-479. 
28. Cattell, R.B. The Scree Test For The Number Of Factors. Multivariate Behavioral 
Research. 1966, 1(2), pp.245-276. 
29. Julie Armstrong, A.S., Wendy L Wrieden, Yvonne Brogan, Karen L Barton. 
Deriving and interpreting dietary patterns in the Scottish diet: Further analysis 
of the Scottish health survey and expenditure and food survey. Scotland: Food 
Standards, 2009. 
30. Kline, P. An easy guide to factor analysis.  Routledge, 2014. 
31. Hoffmann, K. et al. Application of a new statistical method to derive dietary 
patterns in nutritional epidemiology. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2004, 
159(10), pp.935-944. 
32. Jankovic, N. et al. Stability of dietary patterns assessed with reduced rank 
regression; the Zutphen Elderly Study. Nutrition Journal. 2014, 13, p.30. 
33. Bender, R. Introduction to the use of regression models in epidemiology. Methods 
in Molecular Biology. 2009, 471, pp.179-195. 
34. George, B. et al. Survival analysis and regression models. Journal of Nuclear 
Cardiology. 2014, 21(4), pp.686-694. 
35. Cramer, D.W. and Xu, H. Predicting age at menopause. Maturitas. 1996, 23(3), 
pp.319-326. 
36. Nagata, C. et al. Soy product intake and hot flashes in Japanese women: results 
from a community-based prospective study. American Journal of Epidemiology. 
2001, 153(8), pp.790-793. 
37. Freedman, R.R. Physiology of hot flashes. American Journal of Human Biology. 
2001, 13(4), pp.453-464. 
38. Moreira, A.C. et al. Phytoestrogens as alternative hormone replacement therapy 
in menopause: What is real, what is unknown. The Journal of Steroid 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. 2014, 143, pp.61-71. 
39. Mishra, G.D. et al. InterLACE: A new international collaboration for a life course 
approach to women's reproductive health and chronic disease events. Maturitas. 
2013, 74(3), pp.235-240. 
40. Mishra, G.D. et al. The InterLACE study: Design, data harmonization and 
characteristics across 20 studies on women's health. Maturitas. 2016, 92, pp.176-
41. Qi, W. et al. Application of data pooling to longitudinal studies of early post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD): the International Consortium to Predict PTSD 
(ICPP) project. European Journal of Psychotraumatology. 2018, 9(1), p.1476442. 
42. Friedenreich, C.M. Commentary: Improving pooled analyses in epidemiology. 
International Journal of Epidemiology. 2002, 31(1), pp.86-87. 
43. Blettner, M. et al. Traditional reviews, meta-analyses and pooled analyses in 
epidemiology. International Journal of Epidemiology. 1999, 28(1), pp.1-9. 
44. Friedenreich, C.M. Methods for Pooled Analyses of Epidemiologic Studies. 
Epidemiology. 1993, 4(4), pp.295-302. 
45. Fedirko, V. et al. Alcohol drinking and endometrial cancer risk in the European 
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) study. Annals of 
Epidemiology. 2013, 23(2), pp.93-98. 
46. Je, Y. et al. Long-term alcohol intake and risk of endometrial cancer in the Nurses' 
Health Study, 1980-2010. British Journal of Cancer. 2014, 111(1), pp.186-194. 
47. Farvid, M.S. et al. Adolescent and Early Adulthood Dietary Carbohydrate 
Quantity and Quality in Relation to Breast Cancer Risk. Cancer Epidemiology, 
Biomarkers & Prevention. 2015, 24(7), pp.1111-1120. 
48. Diallo, A. et al. Red and processed meat intake and cancer risk: Results from the 
prospective NutriNet-Sante cohort study. International Journal of Cancer. 2018, 
142(2), pp.230-237. 
49. Fiolet, T. et al. Consumption of ultra-processed foods and cancer risk: results from 
NutriNet-Sante prospective cohort. British Medical Journal. 2018, 360, p.k322. 
50. Baglia, M.L. et al. The association of soy food consumption with the risk of 
subtype of breast cancers defined by hormone receptor and HER2 status. 
International Journal of Cancer. 2016, 139(4), pp.742-748. 
51. Farvid, M.S. et al. Fruit and vegetable consumption in adolescence and early 
adulthood and risk of breast cancer: population based cohort study. British 
Medical Journal. 2016, 353, p.i2343. 
52. Farvid, M.S. et al. Lifetime grain consumption and breast cancer risk. Breast 
Cancer Research and Treatment. 2016, 159(2), pp.335-345. 
53. Farvid, M.S. et al. Dietary Fiber Intake in Young Adults and Breast Cancer Risk. 
Pediatrics. 2016, 137(3), p.e20151226. 
54. Kim, J.H. et al. Dietary Factors and Female Breast Cancer Risk: A Prospective 
Cohort Study. Nutrients. 2017, 9(12). 
55. Kojima, R. et al. Dietary patterns and breast cancer risk in a prospective Japanese 
study. Breast Cancer. 2017, 24(1), pp.152-160. 
56. Narita, S. et al. Dietary fiber intake and risk of breast cancer defined by estrogen 
and progesterone receptor status: the Japan Public Health Center-based 
Prospective Study. Cancer Causes & Control. 2017, 28(6), pp.569-578. 
57. Penniecook-Sawyers, J.A. et al. Vegetarian dietary patterns and the risk of breast 
cancer in a low-risk population. British Journal of Nutrition. 2016, 115(10), 
pp.1790-1797. 
58. Shin, S. et al. Dietary pattern and breast cancer risk in Japanese women: the Japan 
Public Health Center-based Prospective Study (JPHC Study). British Journal of 
Nutrition. 2016, 115(10), pp.1769-1779. 
59. Ughade, S. Statistical modeling in epidemiologic research: Some basic concepts. 
Clinical Epidemiology and Global Health. 2013, 1(1), pp.32-36. 
60. Taylor, E.F. et al. Meat consumption and risk of breast cancer in the UK Women's 
Cohort Study. British Journal of Cancer. 2007, 96, pp.1139-1146. 
61. World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research. Diet, 
Nutrition, Physical Activity and Cancer: a Global Perspective. 2018. Available 
from: https://www.wcrf.org/sites/default/files/Summary-third-expert-report.pdf 
62. Jung, S. et al. Alcohol consumption and breast cancer risk by estrogen receptor 
status: in a pooled analysis of 20 studies. International Journal of Epidemiology. 
2016, 45(3), pp.916-928. 
63. Romieu, I. et al. Alcohol intake and breast cancer in the European prospective 
investigation into cancer and nutrition. International Journal of Cancer. 2015, 
137(8), pp.1921-1930. 
64. Hirko, K.A. et al. Alcohol consumption and risk of breast cancer by molecular 
subtype: Prospective analysis of the nurses' health study after 26 years of follow-
up. International Journal of Cancer. 2016, 138(5), pp.1094-1101. 
65. Ellingjord-Dale, M. et al. Alcohol, Physical Activity, Smoking, and Breast Cancer 
Subtypes in a Large, Nested Case-Control Study from the Norwegian Breast 
Cancer Screening Program. Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention. 2017, 
26(12), pp.1736-1744. 
66. Flynn, R. Survival analysis. Journal of Clinical Nursing. 2012, 21(19pt20), 
pp.2789-2797. 
67. Korn, E.L. et al. Time-to-event analysis of longitudinal follow-up of a survey: 
choice of the time-scale. American Journal of Epidemiology. 1997, 145(1), pp.72-
68. Bland, M. An introduction to medical statistics.  Oxford University Press (UK), 
2015. 
69. Ansin, E. An evaluation of the Cox-Snell residuals. Master thesis, Uppsala 
Universitet, 2015.  
70. Cook, J.A. and Ranstam, J. Statistical models and confounding adjustment. The 
British Journal of Surgery. 2017, 104(6), pp.786-787. 
71. Suttorp, M.M. et al. Graphical presentation of confounding in directed acyclic 
graphs. Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation. 2014, 30(9), pp.1418-1423. 
72. Greenland, S. et al. Causal diagrams for epidemiologic research. Epidemiology. 
1999, 10(1), pp.37-48. 
73. Lederer, D.J. et al. Control of Confounding and Reporting of Results in Causal 
Inference Studies. Guidance for Authors from Editors of Respiratory, Sleep, and 
Critical Care Journals. Annals of the American Thoracic Society. 2019, 16(1), 
pp.22-28. 
74. Textor, J. et al. Robust causal inference using directed acyclic graphs: the R 
package 'dagitty'. International Journal of Epidemiology. 2016, 45(6), pp.1887-
1894. 
75. Bennett, D.A. Review of analytical methods for prospective cohort studies using 
time to event data: single studies and implications for meta-analysis. Statistical 
Methods in Medical Research. 2003, 12(4), pp.297-319. 
76. Tapsell, L.C. et al. Foods, Nutrients, and Dietary Patterns: Interconnections and 
Implications for Dietary Guidelines. Advances in nutrition. 2016, 7(3), pp.445-
77. Cespedes, E.M. and Hu, F.B. Dietary patterns: from nutritional epidemiologic 
analysis to national guidelines. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2015, 
101(5), pp.899-900. 
78. Tapsell, L.C. et al. Foods, Nutrients, and Dietary Patterns: Interconnections and 
Implications for Dietary Guidelines. Advances in Nutrition. 2016, 7(3), pp.445-
79. Schulze, M.B. et al. Food based dietary patterns and chronic disease prevention. 
British Medical Journal. 2018, 361, p.k2396. 
80. Jankovic, N. et al. Stability of dietary patterns assessed with reduced rank 
regression; the Zutphen Elderly Study. Nutrition Journal. 2014, 13(1), p.30. 
81. Altman, D.G. and Royston, P. The cost of dichotomising continuous variables. 
British Medical Journal. 2006, 332(7549), pp.1080-1080. 
82. Williams, T.C. et al. Directed acyclic graphs: a tool for causal studies in 
paediatrics. Pediatric Research. 2018, 84(4), pp.487-493. 
83. Shrier, I. and Platt, R.W. Reducing bias through directed acyclic graphs. BMC 
Medical Research Methodology. 2008, 8(1), p.70. 
84. Ishihara, J. Challenges in Dietary Exposure Assessment in Epidemiology: 
Research Trends. Journal of Nutritional Sciences and Vitaminology. 2015, 61 
Suppl, pp.S33-35. 
85. Cade, J. et al. Development, validation and utilisation of food-frequency 
questionnaires  a review. Public Health Nutrition. 2002, 5(4), pp.567-587. 
86. Gazan, R. et al. Structural Validation of a French Food Frequency Questionnaire 
of 94 Items. Frontiers in Nutrition. 2017, 4(62). 
87. Michels, K.B. and Schulze, M.B. Can dietary patterns help us detect diet-disease 
associations? Nutrition Research Reviews. 2005, 18(2), pp.241-248. 
88. Schulze, M.B. and Hoffmann, K. Methodological approaches to study dietary 
patterns in relation to risk of coronary heart disease and stroke. British Journal of 
Nutrition. 2006, 95(5), pp.860-869. 
89. Higgins, J.P.T. et al. Measuring inconsistency in meta-analyses. British Medical 
Journal. 2003, 327(7414), pp.557-560. 
90. Rattan, S. et al. Exposure to endocrine disruptors during adulthood: consequences 
for female fertility. The Journal of Endocrinology. 2017, 233(3), pp.R109-R129. 
91. Hartle, J.C. et al. The consumption of canned food and beverages and urinary 
Bisphenol A concentrations in NHANES 2003-2008. Environmental Research. 
2016, 150, pp.375-382. 
92. Freedman, L.S. et al. Dealing with dietary measurement error in nutritional cohort 
studies. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 2011, 103(14), pp.1086-1092. 
93. Boldo, E. et al. Meat intake, methods and degrees of cooking and breast cancer 
risk in the MCC-Spain study. Maturitas. 2018, 110, pp.62-70. 
94. Xu, W.H. et al. Animal food intake and cooking methods in relation to 
endometrial cancer risk in Shanghai. British Journal of Cancer. 2006, 95(11), 
pp.1586-1592. 
95. Lock, M. et al. Culture and symptom reporting at menopause. Human 
Reproduction Update. 2005, 11(5), pp.495-512. 
96. Obermeyer, C.M. Menopause across cultures: a review of the evidence. 
Menopause. 2000, 7(3), pp.184-192. 
97. Herber-Gast, G.-C.M. and Mishra, G.D. Fruit, Mediterranean-style, and high-fat 
and -sugar diets are associated with the risk of night sweats and hot flushes in 
midlife: results from a prospective cohort study. The American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. 2013, 97(5), pp.1092-1099. 
98. Mishra, G.D. et al. Early menarche, nulliparity and the risk for premature and 
early natural menopause. Human Reproduction. 2017, 32(3), pp.679-686. 
99. Zhu, D. et al. Body mass index and age at natural menopause: an international 
pooled analysis of 11 prospective studies. European Journal of Epidemiology. 
2018, 33(8), pp.699-710. 
100. Zhu, D. et al. Relationships between intensity, duration, cumulative dose, and 
timing of smoking with age at menopause: A pooled analysis of individual data 
from 17 observational studies. PLoS Medicine. 2018, 15(11), p.e1002704. 
101. Kroenke, C.H. et al. Effects of a dietary intervention and weight change on 
vasomotor symptoms in the Women's Health Initiative. Menopause. 2012, 19(9), 
pp.980-988. 
102. Li, C. et al. Background factors influencing somatic and psychological symptoms 
in middle-age women with different hormonal status. A population-based study 
of Swedish women. Maturitas. 2005, 52(3-4), pp.306-318. 
103. Yermachenko, A. and Dvornyk, V. Nongenetic Determinants of Age at 
Menarche: A Systematic Review. BioMed Research International. 2014, 2014, 
p.14. 
104. Gong, T.T. et al. Age at menarche and risk of ovarian cancer: a meta-analysis of 
epidemiological studies. International Journal of Cancer. 2013, 132(12), 
pp.2894-2900. 
105. Gong, T.T. et al. Age at menarche and endometrial cancer risk: a dose-response 
meta-analysis of prospective studies. Scientific Reports. 2015, 5, pp.14051-14051. 
106. Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast, C. Menarche, menopause, 
and breast cancer risk: individual participant meta-analysis, including 118 964 
women with breast cancer from 117 epidemiological studies. The Lancet 
Oncology. 2012, 13(11), pp.1141-1151. 
107. Mishra, G.D. et al. A life course approach to reproductive health: Theory and 
methods. Maturitas. 2010, 65(2), pp.92-97. 
108. Morabia, A. et al. International Variability in Ages at Menarche, First Livebirth, 
and Menopause. American Journal of Epidemiology. 1998, 148(12), pp.1195-
1205. 
109. Thomas, F. et al. International variability of ages at menarche and menopause: 
patterns and main determinants. Human Biology. 2001, 73(2), pp.271-290. 
110. Gold, E.B. The timing of the age at which natural menopause occurs. Obstetrics 
and Gynecology Clinics of North America. 2011, 38(3), pp.425-440. 
111. Schoenaker, D. et al. Socioeconomic position, lifestyle factors and age at natural 
menopause: a systematic review and meta-analyses of studies across six 
continents. International Journal of Epidemiology. 2014, 43(5), pp.1542-1562. 
112. British Nutrition Foundation. Healthy eating and the menopause. 2016. Available 
from: https://www.nutrition.org.uk/healthyliving/lifestages/menopause.html 
[accessed February 2019] 
113. Mishra, G.D. et al. EMAS position statement: Predictors of premature and early 
natural menopause. Maturitas. 2019, 123, pp.82-88. 
114. Willett, W. et al. Food in the Anthropocene: the EAT-Lancet Commission on 
healthy diets from sustainable food systems. The Lancet. 2019, 393(10170), 
pp.447-492. 
115. Afshin, A. et al. Health effects of dietary risks in 195 countries, 1990-2017: a 
systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017. The Lancet. 
2019, 393(10184), pp.1958-1972.
Appendix A 
Chapter 2 supplementary materials 
Search strategy - adapted from the WCRF PubMed search strategy  
Research question 1: Is diet related to the risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian 
cancer? 
a) Searching for all studies relating to breast cancer (1st May 2015  current): 
#1 Breast Neoplasms [MeSH Terms] 
#2 Breast AND (cancer* OR neoplasm* OR tumour* OR tumor* OR carcinoma* OR 
adenocarcinoma*) 
#3 mammary AND (cancer* OR neoplasm* OR tumour* OR tumor* OR carcinoma* OR 
adenocarcinoma*) 
#4 #1 OR #2 OR #3 
b) Searching for all studies relating to food: 
#5 vitamin*[tiab] OR retinol[tiab] OR carotenoid*[tiab] OR tocopherol[tiab] OR 
folate*[tiab] OR folic acid[tiab] OR methionine[tiab] OR riboflavin[tiab] OR 
thiamine[tiab] OR niacin[tiab] OR pyridoxine[tiab] OR cobalamin[tiab] OR 
mineral*[tiab] OR sodium[tiab] OR iron[tiab] OR calcium[tiab] OR selenium[tiab] OR 
iodine[tiab] OR magnesium[tiab] OR potassium[tiab] OR zinc[tiab] OR copper[tiab] OR 
phosphorus[tiab] OR manganese[tiab] OR chromium[tiab] OR phytochemical[tiab] OR 
allium[tiab] OR isothiocyanate*[tiab] OR glucosinolate*[tiab] OR indoles[tiab] OR 
polyphenol*[tiab] OR phytoestrogen*[tiab] OR genistein[tiab] OR saponin*[tiab] OR 
coumarin*[tiab] 
#6 vitamins[MeSH Terms] 
#7 fibre[tiab] OR fibre[tiab] OR polysaccharide*[tiab] OR starch[tiab] OR starchy[tiab] 
OR carbohydrate*[tiab] OR lipid*[tiab] OR linoleic acid*[tiab] OR sterols[tiab] OR 
stanols[tiab] OR sugar*[tiab] OR cholesterol[tiab] OR diet*protein*[tiab] OR 
hydrogenated dietary oils[tiab] OR hydrogenated lard[tiab] OR hydrogenated oils[tiab] 
#8 dietary carbohydrates[MeSH Terms] OR dietary proteins[MeSH Terms] OR dietary 
fats [MeSH Terms] OR dietary lipids [MeSH Terms] 
#9 diet therapy[MeSH Terms] OR nutrition[MeSH Terms] OR Food Habits[MeSH 
Terms] OR Micronutrients[MeSH Terms] 
#10 fluid intake[tiab] OR water[tiab] OR drinks[tiab] OR drinking[tiab] OR tea[tiab] OR 
coffee[tiab] OR caffeine[tiab] OR juice[tiab] OR beer[tiab] OR spirits[tiab] OR 
liquor[tiab] OR wine[tiab] OR alcohol[tiab] OR alcoholic[tiab] OR beverage*[tiab] OR 
ethanol[tiab] OR yerba mate[tiab] OR ilex paraguariensis[tiab] 
#11 food*[tiab] OR cereal*[tiab] OR grain*[tiab] OR granary[tiab] OR wholegrain[tiab] 
OR wholewheat[tiab] OR roots[tiab] OR plantain*[tiab] OR tuber[tiab] OR tubers[tiab] 
OR vegetable*[tiab] OR fruit*[tiab] OR pulses[tiab] OR beans[tiab] OR lentils[tiab] OR 
chickpeas[tiab] OR legume*[tiab] OR soy[tiab] OR soya[tiab] OR nut[tiab] OR nuts[tiab] 
OR peanut*[tiab] OR groundnut*[tiab] OR seeds[tiab] OR meat[tiab] OR beef[tiab] OR 
pork[tiab] OR lamb[tiab] OR poultry[tiab] OR chicken[tiab] OR turkey[tiab] OR 
duck[tiab] OR fish[tiab] OR fat[tiab] OR fats[tiab] OR fatty[tiab] OR egg[tiab] OR 
eggs[tiab] OR bread[tiab] OR oils[tiab] OR shellfish[tiab] OR seafood[tiab] OR 
sugar[tiab] OR syrup[tiab] OR dairy[tiab] OR milk[tiab] OR herbs[tiab] OR spices[tiab] 
OR chilli[tiab] OR chillis[tiab] OR pepper*[tiab] OR condiments[tiab] OR Potato*[tiab] 
OR Cabbage*[tiab] OR Brassica[tiab] OR Cruciferous[tiab] OR Radish[tiab] OR 
Carrot*[tiab] OR Lettuce*[tiab] OR Spinach[tiab] OR Onion*[tiab] OR Tomato*[tiab] 
OR Soybean[tiab] 
#12 food and beverages[MeSH Terms] 
#13 diet[tiab] OR diets[tiab] OR dietetic[tiab] OR dietary[tiab] OR eating[tiab] OR 
intake[tiab] OR nutrient*[tiab] OR nutrition[tiab] OR vegetarian*[tiab] OR vegan*[tiab] 
OR "seventh day adventist"[tiab] OR Lactose[tiab] OR Galactose[tiab] OR Cheese[tiab] 
OR Sausage[tiab] OR Ham[tiab] 
#14 diet therapy [MeSH Terms] OR nutrition[MeSH Terms] 
#15 #5 OR #6 OR #7 OR #8 OR #9 OR #10 OR #11 OR #12 OR #13 OR #14 
b) Combining searches on breast cancer and searches on all studies relating to food: 
#16 #4 AND #15 
c) Searching for all studies relating to endometrial cancer (1st January 2013  
current): 
#17 endometrial neoplasm [MeSH] 
#18 malign* [tiab] OR cancer*[tiab] OR carcinoma*[tiab] OR tumor*[tiab] OR 
tumour*[tiab] 
#19 endometr* [tiab] OR corpus uteri [tiab] OR uterine [tiab] 
#20 #18 AND #19 
#21 #17 AND #20 
d) Combining searches on endometrial cancer and searches on all studies relating to 
food: 
#22 #21 AND #15 
e) Searching for all studies relating to ovarian cancer (1st January 2013  current): 
#23 Ovarian Neoplasms [MeSH] 
#24 Ovar* AND (cancer* OR carcinoma* OR neoplasm* OR tumor* OR tumour* OR 
adenocarcinoma* Or Endometrioid carcinoma* OR cystoadenoma* OR 
cystoadenocarcinoma* OR adenoma*) 
#25 Androblastom* OR arrhenoblastoma* OR sertoli leydig OR Brenner OR granulosa 
cell tumor* OR granulosa cell tumour* OR luteoma* OR luteinoma* 
#26 #23 OR #24 OR #25 
f) Combining searches on ovarian cancer and searches on all studies relating to food: 
#27 #26 AND #15 
Research question 2: Is diet related to the timing of natural menopause? 
a) Searching for all studies relating to age at natural menopause (1946 to current): 
#25 Age natural menopause [MeSH term] 
#26 Natural menopause AND (age OR onset OR timing OR occurrence) 
#27 Menopause AND (early OR earlier OR late OR later OR premature) 
#28 Menstrual period AND (final OR last) 
#29 #25 OR #26 OR #27 OR #28 
b) Combining searches on natural menopause and searches on all studies relating to 
food: 
#29 AND #15 
Research question 3: Is soy consumption related to the presence of vasomotor 
menopausal symptoms? 
a) Searching for all studies relating to vasomotor symptoms (1946 to current): 
#30 Vasomotor symptoms [MeSH term] 
#31 Vasomotor symptoms AND (hot flushes OR hot flashes OR night sweats OR 
climacteric symptoms OR menopausal symptoms) 
#32 #30 AND #31 
b) Searching for all studies relating to diet (1946 to current): 
#33 AND #15
Table A.1 Study Quality assessment using Newcastle-Ottawa scale for cohort studies* 
Study, Year 
Selection 
Comparability of cohorts  
(matched for) 
Outcome 
Total 
score Representativeness of exposed cohort 
Selection of 
nonexposed 
cohort 
Ascertainment 
of exposure 
Outcome 
present at 
baseline 
Assessment of 
outcome 
Sufficient follow-
up duration 
Adequate 
follow-up 
Diet and age at natural menopause        
Torgerson et al. 1997 [12] - - -  -  -   3 
Nagata et al.  2000 [15]   -   (social class, smoking) -   7 
Nagel et al. 2005 [13]   -   (smoking, alcohol intake) -   7 
Dorjgochoo et al. 2008 16] - -    (education, smoking) - - - 4 
Nagata et al. 2012 [31]      (smoking, education) -   8 
Carwile et al.  2013 [18]   - -  (smoking, physical activity) -   6 
Purdue-Smithe et al. 2017 
[32]   -   (smoking, physical activity) -   7 
Boutot et al. 2017 [33]   -   (smoking, physical activity) -   7 
Purdue-Smithe et al. 2018 
[34]   -   (smoking, alcohol intake) -   7 
Diet and presence of VMS        
Nagata et al. 2001 [23]   -   (age, menopausal status) -   7 
Gold et al. 2013 [24]   -   (age, menopausal status) -   7 
Herber-Gast et al. 2013 [29]   -   (age, menopausal status) -   7 
Diet and the risk of ovarian cancer        
Merritt et al. 2014 [37]   -   (menopausal status)    7 
Merritt et al. 2014 [35]      (menopausal status)    8 
Lukic et al. 2016 [39]   -  (smoking, alcohol consumption)  -  7 
Meritt et al. 2016 [36]      (menopausal status)    8 
Diet and the risk of endometrial cancer        
Arem et al. 2013 [47]   -   (smoking, diabetes)  -  7 
Fedirko et al. 2013 [48]      (smoking, physical activity)    9 
Inoue-Choi et al. 2013 [49]   -   (smoking, alcohol intake)    8 
Uccella et al. 2013 [50]   -   (smoking, diabetes)    7 
Brasky et al. 2014 [51]   -   (education, smoking)  - - 6 
Coleman et al. 2014 [52] - - -   (age, ethnicity) - - - 3 
Table A.1 Continued  
Study, Year 
Selection  Outcome  
Representativeness 
of exposed cohort 
Selection of 
nonexposed 
cohort 
Ascertainment 
of exposure 
Outcome 
present at 
baseline 
Comparability of cohorts  
(matched for) 
Assessment of 
outcome 
Sufficient follow-
up duration 
Adequate 
follow-up 
Total 
score 
Gavrilyuk et al. 2014 [53]   -   (smoking)  -  6 
Je et al. 2014 [54]   -   (smoking, physical activity)   - 7 
Budhathoki et al. 2015 [55]  - -   (smoking, alcohol intake)  -  6 
Canchola et al. 2015 [56]  - -   (smoking, ethnicity)    7 
Yang et al. 2015 [57] - - -   (smoking, alcohol intake)  -  5 
Brasky et al. 2016 [58]   -   (smoking, alcohol intake)   - 7 
Diet and the risk of breast cancer        
Farvid et al. 2015 [59]   -   (smoking, menopausal status)   - 7 
Harris et al. 2015 [60]   -   (smoking, alcohol intake)    8 
Kiyabu et al. 2015 [61]  - -   (smoking, physical activity)    7 
Romieu et al. 2015 [62]   -   (smoking, physical activity)    8 
Shin et al. 2015 [63]  - -   (smoking, breastfeeding)  -  6 
Baglia et al. 2016 [87]  - -   (physical activity, menopause status)   - 6 
Emaus et al. 2016 [64]      (smoking, menopause status)    9 
Farvid et al. 2016 [65]   -   (smoking, alcohol intake)    8 
Farvid et al. 2016 [66]   -   (smoking, alcohol intake)    8 
Farvid et al. 2016 [67]   -   (smoking, menopause status)    8 
Gilsing et al. 2016 [68]   -   (physical activity, alcohol intake)   - 7 
Harris et al. 2016 [69]   -   (physical activity, alcohol intake)   - 7 
Hirko et al. 2016 [70]   -   (physical activity)    7 
Inoue-Choi et al. 2016 [71]   -   (smoking, alcohol intake)  -  7 
Penniecook-Sawyers et al. 
2016 [73] 
  -   (physical activity, smoking)  -  7 
Shin et al. 2016 [74]  - -   (physical activity, smoking)    7 
Kim et al. 2017 [77]   -   (menopausal status, smoking)    8 
Kim et al. 2017 [78]  - -   (menopausal status, smoking)  - - 5 
Kojima et al. 2017 [79]   -   (age, smoking)    8 
Makarem et al. 2017 [80]  - -   (age, smoking)  -  6 
*Please refer to Chapter 2 for the references 
Table A.2 Study Quality assessment using Newcastle-Ottawa scale for case-control studies* 
Study, Year 
Selection 
Comparability of cases 
and controls (matched for) 
Exposure 
Total 
Score 
Adequate 
definition of 
cases 
Representativeness 
of cases 
Selection of 
controls 
Definition of 
controls 
Ascertainment 
of exposure 
Same method of 
ascertainment for 
cases and controls 
response 
Diet and presence of VMS          
Schiling et al. 2005 [30]   -   (age, smoking)   - 7 
Diet and the risk of ovarian cancer        
Cook et al. 2016 [43] 
     (smoking, alcohol consumption)   - 8 
Qin et al. 2016 [38] 
     (menopausal status, education)   - 8 
Diet and risk of breast cancer      
Ellingjord-Dale et al. 2017 [76]      (education, smoking)   - 8 
*Please refer to Chapter 2 for the references 
Table A.1 Continued  
Study, Year 
Selection  Outcome  
Representativeness 
of exposed cohort 
Selection of 
nonexposed 
cohort 
Ascertainment 
of exposure 
Outcome 
present at 
baseline 
Comparability of cohorts  
(matched for) 
Assessment of 
outcome 
Sufficient follow-
up duration 
Adequate 
follow-up 
Total 
score 
Narita et al. 2017 [81]   -   (smoking, alcohol consumption)  -  7 
van den Brandt & Schulpen, 
2017 [82]   -   (age, alcohol intake)    8 
Diallo et al. 2018 [83]   -   (age, alcohol intake)  -  7 
Fiolet et al. 2018 [84]   -   (age, alcohol intake)  -  7 
Table A.3 Study Quality assessment using adapted Newcastle-Ottawa scale for cross-sectional studies* 
 Selection Comparability of 
outcome groups 
(matched for) 
Outcome Total 
score Study, Year Representativeness of the sample Sample size 
respondents 
Ascertainment of 
the exposure 
Assessment of 
outcome 
Appropriate statistical 
Diet and age at natural menopause       
Torgerson et al. 1994 [11] -  - -  -  2 
Nagata et al. 1998 [21]  - -  -   4 
Wang et al. 2018 [14]  - -  -   4 
Diet and the presence of VMS       
Somekawa et al. 2001 [25] - - -  -   3 
*Please refer to Chapter 2 for the references 
Table A.4 Quality assessment for randomised controlled trials* 
 Randomisation Baseline 
comparability 
Eligibility Blinding Withdrawals  
Study, Year T
Diet and age at natural menopause             
Martin et al. 2006 [17] P P P P P P NS NS NS NS NS  NS   
Diet and the presence of VMS             
Murkies et al. 1995 [22] NS P P NS NS P NS P P P NS P    
Dodin et al. 2005 [26] P P P P P P NS P P P NS P P P  
Lewis et al. 2006 [28] P P P P P P NS P P P NS P P P  
Pruthi et al. 2012 [27] P NS P P P P NS   P P P NS   
Diet and the risk of ovarian, endometrial and breast cancers 
Hashibe et al. 2015 [40] P NS P  NA P NS   P NS NS NS   
P Yes (item adequately addressed);  no (item not adequately assessed); P partially (item partially addressed); NS (not stated); NA (not applicable); *Please refer to Chapter 2 for 
the references 
Appendix B 
Chapter 4 supplementary materials 
Table B.1 Grouping of individual food items into 64 food groups 
Food Group Food Items 
Wholegrain products Crispbread,  Brown bread & rolls,  Wholemeal bread & rolls ,  
Refined grain products White bread & rolls, Chapattis, Nan, paratha, Papadums, Tortillas, 
Pitta Bread, Cream crackers, cheese biscuits 
Low fibre breakfast cereals Cream crackers, cheese biscuits, Sugar coated cereals, Non-sugar 
coated cereals 
High fibre breakfast cereals Porridge, Readybrek , Muesli, All bran, bran flakes, Weetabix, 
shredded wheat 
Plain Potatoes Potatoes, Jacket potato 
Potatoes with added fat Chips, Roast potatoes, Potato salad 
Refined pasta and rice White pasta, Macaroni cheese, White rice 
Wholegrain pasta and rice Wholemeal pasta, Brown rice, Wild rice 
Low fat dairy products Low fat yoghurt, Diet yoghurt, Dairy desserts, Low-fat cheese, 
Cottage cheese, Milk puddings, Half fat milk, Fat free milk 
High fat dairy products Thick & creamy yoghurt, Greek yoghurt, Fromage frais/Crme 
fraiche, Single/sour cream, Double/clotted cream, Ice cream, Cheese, 
Cheese and onion pastie, Whole milk, Channel island milk, Dried milk 
Butter and hard margarine Butter,  Block margarine 
Margarine Other soft margarine, Polyunsaturated margarine, Monounsaturated 
margarine 
Low fat spreads Low fat spread, Very low fat spread 
High fat dressing Mayonnaise, French type dressing 
Low fat dressing Low calorie salad cream 
Soybean products Soya cheese,  Soya yoghurt, Soy milk 
Textured vegetable protein Textured vegetable protein 
Pulses Lentils, dals, Chick peas, chanas, Hummus, Baked beans, Mung beans 
& red kidney beans, Black eyed beans, Butter beans/broad beans 
Eggs/eggs dishes Boiled/poached egg, Omelette, scrambled egg, Fried egg, Quiche 
Fish and fish dishes Fish fingers/cakes, Fried fish in batter, White fish, Fish pie/fish 
lasagne, Fish roe 
Oily fish Oily fish 
Shellfish Shellfish 
Red meat Beef, Beef stew, Pork, Pork stew/casserole, Lamb, Lamb 
stew/casserole, Meat  lasagne/moussaka/ravioli 
Poultry Chicken/turkey, Breadcrumbed, Chicken/turkey in creamy sauce, 
curry 
Processed meat Bacon, Beefburger/hamburger, Ham, Corned beef, Sausages, Meat 
pizza, Pies/pasties/sausage rolls, Liver pate/sausage, salami 
Offal Offal 
Vegetable dishes Quorn, Vegetarian chilli, Mixed bean casserole, Stir-fry vegetables, 
Vegetable  lasagne/moussaka/ravioli, Vegetable pate, Vegetable 
pizza 
Allium Leeks, Garlic 
Fresh legumes Peas, mushy peas, mange-tout, Green beans 
Mediterranean vegetables Sweetcorn, Courgettes, Olive, Aubergine, okra/ladies finger, Peppers 
Salad vegetables Avocado, Lettuce, Cucumber, Celery, Coleslaw, Low calorie coleslaw 
Table B.1 Continued 
Food Group Food Items 
Cruciferous vegetables Broccoli, spring greens, kale, Cabbage, Cauliflower, Watercress, 
mustard & cress, Brussel sprouts 
Tomatoes Tomatoes  raw/canned/sauce 
Mushrooms Mushrooms 
Roots and tubers Carrots, Parsnips, Turnip, Swedes, Beetroot 
Stone fruits Peaches, Plum, Mangoes, Nectarines, Apricots 
Deep orange/yellow fruits Pineapple, Papaya, Melon 
Grapes Grapes 
Citrus family fruits Oranges, satsumas, grapefruit 
Rhubarb Rhubarb 
Berries Strawberries, Raspberries, Red currants/black currants, Kiwi fruit 
Bananas Bananas 
Pomes Apples, Pears 
Dried Fruits Dates, Figs, Prunes, Mixed dried fruits, Currants, raisins, sultanas 
Sauces Sauces 
Pickles/chutneys Tomato ketchup, Pickles/chutney/pesto sauce 
Soups Packet soups, Other-vegetable soups, Other-Meat soups, Low calorie 
soups 
Confectionery & spreads Fruit bars, Chocolate snack bars, Mini chocolate snack bars, Boiled 
sweets, toffees, mints, Chocolate/chocolate & nut spread, 
Jam/marmalade, Honey 
Nuts & Seeds Peanuts/Pistachio nuts, Cashew nuts & almonds, Pecan nuts/ Walnuts, 
Sunflower seeds/ sesame seeds, Nut Pt, Peanut butter, 
Peanuts/pistachio nuts, Mixed nuts and raisins 
Savoury snacks Crisps, Other fried snacks, Low fat or baked snacks, Bombay mix 
Biscuits Plain biscuits, Chocolate biscuits, Sandwich/cream biscuits 
Cakes Fruitcake, Sponge cake 
Pastries and Puddings Buns/pastries, Scones/pancakes/muffins/crumpets, Fruit pies, Sponge 
puddings 
Tea Tea 
Herbal tea Herbal tea 
Coffee Coffee  instant/ground, Coffee  decaffeinated 
Other hot beverages Cocoa, Horlicks, Ovaltine, Low calorie hot chocolate 
Juices Orange juice, Other  pure juices 
Soft drinks Fruit squash, Fizzy soft drinks 
Low calorie/diet soft drinks Low calorie/diet soft drinks 
Wines Wines 
Beer and cider Beer, Cider 
Port, sherry, liqueurs Port, sherry, liqueurs 
Spirits Spirits 
Figure B.1 Directed acrylic graph  for assessment of covariates 
Table B.2 Sensitivity analysis of daily food groups intake/portion size and age at natural menopause by vegetarian status, fully adjusted model 
 Vegetarians (n=323) Non-vegetarians (n=501) 
Daily intake/ portion size Difference in age at 
natural menopause (y) 
99% CI P value Difference in age at 
natural menopause (y) 
99% CI P value 
Starchy foods       
Wholegrain products/ 33g  0.0 -0.2 to 0.3 0.589  0.1 -0.0 to 0.3 0.219 
Refined grain products/ 51g -0.1 -0.7 to 0.5 0.665 -0.2 -0.7 to 0.3 0.300 
Low fibre breakfast cereals/ 40g  0.0 -1.7 to 1.8 0.945 -0.1 -1.3 to 1.1 0.829 
High fibre breakfast cereals/ 85g  0.1 -0.6 to 0.8 0.755  0.4 -0.2 to 1.0 0.108 
Plain Potatoes/ 210g  0.5 -0.6 to 1.6 0.260  0.6 -0.4 to 1.6 0.140 
Potatoes with added fat/ 127g -0.2 -3.0 to 2.6 0.828 -0.3 -2.3 to 1.6 0.651 
Refined pasta and rice/ 210g -1.4 -3.3 to 0.5 0.057 -1.6 -3.4 to 0.3 0.031 
Wholegrain pasta and rice/ 197 g  0.9 -1.1 to 2.8 0.237  0.9 -1.2 to 3.0 0.256 
Protein and fat food sources       
Low fat dairy products/ 80g -0.1 -0.2 to 0.1 0.171  0.1 -0.0 to 0.2 0.228 
High fat dairy products/ 75g  0.0 -0.2 to 0.3 0.656 -0.2 -0.4 to 0.1 0.074 
Butter and hard margarine/ 10g  0.0 -0.6 to 0.5 0.852  0.3 -0.2 to 0.7 0.103 
Margarine/ 9g -0.1 -0.5 to 0.3 0.379 -0.1 -0.5 to 0.3 0.675 
Low fat spreads/ 7g  0.2 -0.4 to 0.8 0.320  0.0 -0.4 to 0.3 0.749 
High fat dressing/ 23g  0.0 -1.5 to 1.5 0.979  0.1 -1.4 to 1.6 0.870 
Low fat dressing/ 30g  0.9 -2.5 to 4.3 0.475  1.2 -1.5 to 3.9 0.262 
Soybean products/ 62g  0.0 -0.1 to 0.2 0.436 -0.1 -0.4 to 0.3 0.630 
Textured vegetable protein/ 130g  1.1 -8.8 to 10.9 0.782 -9.9 -43.0 to 23.2 0.440 
Pulses/ 91g  0.1 -0.9 to 1.0 0.885 -0.2 -1.3 to 0.9 0.653 
Eggs/eggs dishes/ 88g  0.1 -1.8 to 2.1 0.865  1.1 -1.0 to 3.1 0.187 
Fish and fish dishes/ 140g -1.5 -4.7 to 1.7 0.227  1.8 -1.3 to 5.0 0.132 
Oily fish/ 90g  0.7 -4.0 to 5.3 0.713  3.4 0.2 to 6.5 0.005 
Shell fish/ 60g -1.8 -12.7 to 9.0 0.663  2.3 -5.9 to 10.4 0.476 
Red meat/ 189g   12.5 -136.4 to 161.4 0.828   0.7 -1.5 to 2.9 0.400 
Processed meat/ 74g -4.2 -23.1 to 14.7 0.566 -0.3 -2.5 to 2.0 0.743 
Poultry/ 143g  7.4 -3.1 to 17.8 0.069 -0.6 -3.4 to 2.3 0.607 
Table B.2 Continued 
 Vegetarians (n=323) Non-vegetarians (n=501) 
Daily intake/ portion size Difference in age at 
natural menopause (y) 
99% CI P value Difference in age at 
natural menopause (y) 
99% CI P value 
Offal/ 100g . . .   1.8 -8.5 to 12.1 0.647 
Vegetables       
Vegetable dishes/ 214g  0.0 -1.2 to 1.1 0.924 -0.3 -1.7 to 1.1 0.593 
Allium/ 39g  0.6 -0.7 to 1.9 0.219 0.5 -0.8 to 1.8 0.282 
Fresh legumes/ 75g  0.3 -1.0 to 1.5 0.556 1.4 0.2 to 2.7 0.003 
Mediterranean vegetables/ 60g  0.0 -0.8 to 0.8 0.904 0.4 -0.6 to 1.3 0.314 
Salad vegetables/ 43g  0.3 -0.3 to 1.0 0.210  0.7 0.0 to 1.3 0.009 
Cruciferous vegetables/ 75g  0.3 -0.2 to 0.8 0.143  0.4 -0.1 to 0.9 0.051 
Tomatoes/ 83g -0.3 -1.1 to 0.5 0.313  0.8 -0.2 to 1.8 0.043 
Mushrooms/ 34g  0.1 -1.5 to 1.8 0.831  0.5 -1.2 to 2.2 0.424 
Roots and tubers/ 66g  0.2 -0.5 to 0.9 0.550  0.8 -0.1 to 1.7 0.016 
Fruits       
Stone fruits/ 49g  0.2 -0.7 to 1.1 0.604  1.0 0.5 to 2.5 0.083 
Deep orange & yellow fruits/ 118g  0.5 -0.4 to 1.4 0.139  0.7 -0.6 to 2.0 0.189 
Grapes/ 100g  0.6 -0.5 to 1.7 0.175  0.9 -0.6 to 2.3 0.117 
Citrus family fruits/ 92g  0.3 -0.5 to 1.1 0.363  0.1 -0.7 to 1.0 0.651 
Rhubarb/ 130g -0.1 -2.0 to 1.8 0.862  1.5 -0.5 to 3.5 0.056 
Berries/ 48g  0.2 -0.5 to 0.8 0.514  0.5 -0.4 to 1.3 0.157 
Bananas/ 100g  0.0 -0.8 to 0.8 0.980  0.1 -0.6 to 0.9 0.662 
Pomes/ 116g  0.0 -0.5 to 0.5 0.865  0.1 -0.3 to 0.6 0.451 
Dried Fruits/ 28g  0.2 -0.5 to 0.9 0.371  0.5 -0.1 to 1.2 0.025 
Other food groups       
Sauces/ 83g  0.1 -3.6 to 3.8 0.936 0.2 -3.1 to 3.5 0.888 
Pickles/Chutneys/ 35g -0.6 -2.4 to 1.3 0.429 0.2 -1.7 to 2.1 0.827 
Soups/ 163g  1.3 -0.5 to 3.2 0.065 0.7 -0.7 to 2.1 0.222 
Confectionary & spreads/ 44g -0.1 -0.6 to 0.3 0.455  0.1 -0.4 to 0.6 0.690 
Nuts and seeds/ 24g  0.2 -0.26 to 0.6 0.279  0.2 -0.5 to 0.9 0.476 
Table B.2 Continued 
 Vegetarians (n=323) Non-vegetarians (n=501) 
Daily intake/ portion size Difference in age at 
natural menopause (y) 
99% CI P value Difference in age at 
natural menopause (y) 
99% CI P value 
Savoury snacks/ 26g  0.1 -1.2 to 1.4 0.863 -1.7 -3.1 to -0.4 0.001 
Biscuits/ 15g -0.1 -0.7 to 0.5 0.567 -0.3 -0.7 to 0.2 0.130 
Cakes/ 66g -1.2 -3.4 to 1.1 0.183  0.7 -1.4 to 2.8 0.389 
Pastries and Puddings/ 84g -0.1 -1.7 to 1.5 0.912 -0.8 -2.3 to 0.8 0.190 
Drinks and beverages       
Tea/ 260g -0.1 -0.3 to 0.2 0.567 -0.2 -0.4 to 0.0 0.045 
Herbal tea/ 260g  0.1 -0.4 to 5.8 0.533  0.3 -0.2 to 0.7 0.151 
Coffee/ 190g  0.0 -0.3 to 0.2 0.767  0.1 -0.1 to 0.3 0.162 
Other hot beverages/ 23g  0.0 -0.6 to 0.6 0.975  0.4 -0.5 to 1.2 0.272 
Juices/ 145g -0.2 -0.9 to 0.5 0.489  0.3 -0.3 to 0.8 0.219 
Soft drinks/ 111g -0.2 -1.4 to 0.1 0.674 -1.3 -2.5 to -0.2 0.003 
Low calorie/diet soft drinks/ 161g  0.1 -0.8 to 0.9 0.812 -0.4 -1.3 to 0.6 0.301 
Wines/ 1g  0.4 -0.6 to 1.3 0.360  0.0 -0.9 to 0.8 0.882 
Beer and cider/ 1g -0.6 -1.8 to 0.6 0.191 -0.3 -1.4 to 0.8 0.449 
Port, sherry, liqueurs/ 1g  1.6 -1.0 to 4.3 0.112  0.7 -1.2 to 2.7 0.346 
Spirits/ 1g  0.1 -1.1 to 1.2 0.887 -0.4 -1.6 to 0.7 0.345 
Table B.3 Sensitivity analysis of daily food groups intake/portion size and age at natural menopause by parity, fully adjusted model 
 Nulliparous (n=179) Multiparous (n=645) 
Daily intake/ portion size Difference in age at natural menopause (y) 99% CI P value 
Difference in age at 
natural menopause (y)  99% CI P value 
Starchy foods       
Wholegrain products/ 33g  0.0 -0.3 to 0.3 0.899  0.1 -0.1 to 0.2 0.344 
Refined grain products/ 51g  0.0 -0.9 to 0.9 0.939 -0.3 -0.7 to 0.2 0.119 
Low fibre breakfast cereals/ 40g -0.4 -2.8 to 2.0 0.643 -0.1 -1.3 to 1.0 0.769 
High fibre breakfast cereals/ 85g  0.1 -0.9 to 1.0 0.890 0.2 -0.4 to 0.7 0.366 
Plain Potatoes/ 210g  0.4 -1.0 to 1.7 0.501  0.4 -0.5 to 1.3 0.202 
Potatoes with added fat/ 127g  0.1 -3.9 to 4.1 0.948 -0.3 -2.1 to 1.4 0.637 
Refined pasta and rice/ 210g -2.0 -5.6 to 1.6 0.157 -1.9  -3.3 to -0.4 0.001 
Wholegrain pasta and rice/ 197 g  1.0 -2.0 to 4.0 0.388  0.5 -1.1 to 2.1 0.448 
Protein and fat food sources       
Low fat dairy products/ 80g  0.0 -0.3 to 0.2 0.575  0.0 -0.1 to 0.1 0.722 
High fat dairy products/ 75g  0.1 -0.3 to 0.5 0.654 -0.1 -0.3 to 0.1 0.227 
Butter and hard margarine/ 10g  0.0 -0.7 to 0.6 0.862  0.2 -0.2 to 0.6 0.120 
Margarine/ 9g -0.1 -0.7 to 0.5 0.677 -0.2 -0.6 to 0.1 0.061 
Low fat spreads/ 7g  0.2 -0.8 to 1.2 0.682  0.0 -0.3 to 0.4 0.969 
High fat dressing/ 23g -0.1 -2.1 to 1.8 0.862 -0.1 -1.4 to 1.2 0.830 
Low fat dressing/ 30g -0.2 -4.4 to 4.0 0.900  1.1 -1.4 to 3.5 0.266 
Soybean products/ 62g  0.0 -0.3 to 0.2 0.690  0.0 -0.2 to 0.2 0.900 
Textured vegetable protein/ 130g -12.6 -39.7 to 14.6 0.230 -3.1 -12.8 to 6.5 0.400 
Pulses/ 91g -0.6 -1.9 to 0.8 0.290 -0.3 -1.1 to 0.5 0.298 
Eggs/eggs dishes/ 88g  1.8 -1.5 to 5.1 0.167  0.1 -1.5 to 1.7 0.829 
Fish and fish dishes/ 140g  3.9 -1.5 to 9.3 0.064  0.4 -1.9 to 2.7 0.628 
Oily fish/ 90g  3.2 -1.0 to 7.4 0.046  3.3  0.3 to 6.3 0.005 
Shell fish/ 60g  7.6 -10.0 to 25.1 0.262  0.5 -6.4 to 7.4 0.847 
Red meat/ 189g  3.0 -1.3 to 7.3 0.073  1.1 -0.8 to 3.0 0.150 
Processed meat/ 74g  1.6 -2.8 to 6.1 0.341  0.6 -1.4 to 2.5 0.435 
Poultry/ 143g  5.2  0.1 to 10.3 0.008  0.2 -2.4 to 2.7 0.869 
Table B.3 Continued 
 Nulliparous (n=179) Multiparous (n=645) 
Daily intake/ portion size Difference in age at natural menopause (y) 99% CI P value 
Difference in age at 
natural menopause (y)  99% CI P value 
Offal/ 100g   13.3 -10.5 to 37.0 0.148  4.7 -5.6 to 14.9 0.242 
Vegetables       
Vegetable dishes/ 214g -1.4 -3.1 to 0.4 0.047 -0.4 -1.4 to 0.5 0.236 
Allium/ 39g -0.1 -2.0 to 1.9 0.942  0.6 -0.5 to 1.7 0.135 
Fresh legumes/ 75g -0.1 -1.9 to 1.7 0.872  1.1  0.1 to 2.1 0.006 
Mediterranean vegetables/ 60g -0.3 -1.5 to 0.9 0.501  0.0 -0.7 to 0.7 0.938 
Salad vegetables/ 43g  0.2 -0.7 to 1.1 0.522  0.4 -0.1 to 1.0 0.032 
Cruciferous vegetables/ 75g  0.1 -0.9 to 1.0 0.874  0.4 -0.1 to 0.8 0.023 
Tomatoes/ 83g -0.4 -1.7 to 0.8 0.351  0.2 -0.5 to 0.9 0.507 
Mushrooms/ 34g -1.4 -4.5 to 1.7 0.234  0.4 -0.9 to 1.7 0.471 
Roots and tubers/ 66g  0.3 -1.0 to 1.6 0.567  0.4 -0.2 to 1.1 0.086 
Fruits       
Stone fruits/ 49g  0.4 -2.0 to 2.7 0.695  0.3 -0.5 to 1.1 0.316 
Deep orange & yellow fruits/ 118g  0.0 -2.0 to 1.9 0.978  0.6 -0.2 to 1.4 0.057 
Grapes/ 100g  2.5  0.1 to 4.9 0.008  0.4 -0.5 to 1.4 0.248 
Citrus family fruits/ 92g  0.0 -1.1 to 1.1 0.976  0.2 -0.5 to 0.9 0.481 
Rhubarb/ 130g  1.0 -2.6 to 4.5 0.475  0.7 -0.9 to 2.2 0.256 
Berries/ 48g  0.4 -1.2 to 1.9 0.538  0.2 -0.4 to 0.7 0.404 
Bananas/ 100g  0.0 -1.0 to 1.0 0.989  0.0 -0.6 to 0.7 0.890 
Pomes/ 116g  0.2 -0.5 to 0.9 0.456  0.0 -0.4 to 0.4 0.856 
Dried Fruits/ 28g  0.2 -0.7 to 1.2 0.478  0.4 -0.1 to 1.0 0.029 
Other food groups       
Sauces/ 83g -0.9 -6.3 to 4.5 0.673  0.1 -2.7 to 2.8 0.963 
Pickles/Chutneys/ 35g -1.0 -3.6 to 1.6 0.324 -0.1 -1.6 to 1.4 0.869 
Soups/ 163g  1.0 -1.6 to 3.5 0.316  0.8 -0.5 to 2.1 0.108 
Confectionary & spreads/ 44g  0.1 -0.5 to 0.7 0.684 -0.1 -0.4 to 0.3 0.716 
Nuts and seeds/ 24g  0.2 -0.9 to 1.3 0.580  0.1 -0.3 to 0.5 0.499 
Table B.3 Continued 
 Nulliparous (n=179) Multiparous (n=645) 
Daily intake/ portion size Difference in age at natural menopause (y) 99% CI P value 
Difference in age at 
natural menopause (y)  99% CI P value 
Savoury snacks/ 26g  0.0 -2.1 to 2.2 0.964 -1.1 -2.1 to -0.0 0.009 
Biscuits/ 15g -0.2 -0.9 to 0.5 0.491 -0.2 -0.6 to 0.2 0.141 
Cakes/ 66g -0.7 -3.5 to 2.2 0.533 0.2 -1.7 to 2.0 0.793 
Pastries and Puddings/ 84g -0.5 -3.7 to 2.6 0.650 -0.5 -1.7 to 0.7 0.271 
Drinks and beverages       
Tea/ 260g -0.2 -0.5 to 0.1 0.052 -0.1 -0.3 to 0.1 0.161 
Herbal tea/ 260g  0.4 -0.2 to 0.9 0.066  0.0 -0.4 to 0.4 0.868 
Coffee/ 190g  0.0 -0.4 to 0.3 0.800  0.1 -0.1 to 0.3 0.214 
Other hot beverages/ 23g -0.3 -1.4 to 0.7 0.393  0.3 -0.3 to 0.9 0.145 
Juices/ 145g  0.0 -1.0 to 1.0 0.992  0.1 -0.4 to 0.6 0.522 
Soft drinks/ 111g -1.2 -2.7 to 0.3 0.032 -0.6 -1.6 to 0.4 0.098 
Low calorie/diet soft drinks/ 161g -0.6 -2.1 to 0.9 0.273 -0.1 -0.8 to 0.6 0.759 
Wines/ 1g  0.7 -0.2 to 1.7 0.033 -0.3 -1.2 to 0.5 0.332 
Beer and cider/ 1g -0.5 -1.6 to 0.6 0.274 -0.4 -1.5 to 0.6 0.277 
Port, sherry, liqueurs/ 1g  2.3 -0.8 to 5.3 0.052  0.6 -1.3 to 2.4 0.408 
Spirits/ 1g  0.3 -1.8 to 2.4 0.722 -0.3 -1.2 to 0.6 0.399 
Table B.4 Sensitivity analysis of daily food groups intake/portion size and age at natural 
menopause by presence of diabetes at baseline, fully adjusted model 
Daily intake/ portion size Difference in age at 
natural menopausea 
99% CI P value 
Starchy food sources    
Wholegrain products/ 33g  0.1 -0.1 to 0.2 0.272 
Refined grain products/ 51g -0.1 -0.5 to 0.2 0.347 
Low fibre breakfast cereals/ 40g  0.0 -1.0 to 1.0 0.944 
High fibre breakfast cereals/ 85g 0.2 -0.3 to 0.6 0.338 
Plain Potatoes/ 210g  0.6 -0.2 to 1.3 0.046 
Potatoes with added fat/ 127g -0.1 -1.7 to 1.6 0.923 
Refined pasta and rice/ 210g -1.6 -2.9 to -0.2 0.003 
Wholegrain pasta and rice/ 197 g               0.4 -1.0 to 1.8 0.483 
Protein and fat food sources    
Low fat dairy products/ 80g  0.0 -0.1 to 0.1 0.642 
High fat dairy products/ 75g -0.1 -0.3 to 0.1 0.212 
Butter and hard margarine/ 10g  0.1 0.2 to 0.5 0.283 
Margarine/ 9g -0.1 -0.4 to 0.1 0.196 
Low fat spreads/ 7g  0.1 -0.2 to 0.4 0.320 
High fat dressing/ 23g -0.1 -1.2 to 0.9 0.724 
Low fat dressing/ 30g  1.0 -1.2 to 3.2 0.255 
Soybean products/ 62g  0.0 -0.2 to 0.1 0.791 
Textured vegetable protein/ 130g -4.2 -13.2 to 4.7 0.225 
Pulses/ 91g -0.3 -1.0 to 0.3 0.192 
Eggs/eggs dishes/ 88g  0.5 -0.9 to 2.0 0.338 
Fish and fish dishes/ 140g  1.2 -0.9 to 3.3 0.148 
Oily fish/ 90g  3.0  0.5 to 5.5 0.002 
Shell fish/ 60g  0.6  6.0 to 7.2 0.818 
Red meat/ 189g  1.3 -0.4 to 3.1 0.044 
Processed meat/ 74g  1.2 -0.6 to 3.0 0.093 
Poultry/ 143g  1.9 -0.6 to 4.4 0.047 
Offal/ 100g  6.6 -2.8 to 16.0 0.071 
Vegetables    
Vegetable dishes/ 214g -0.6 -1.4 to 0.2 0.054 
Allium/ 39g  0.5  0.5 to 1.4 0.196 
Fresh legumes/ 75g  0.9  0.0 to 1.8 0.007 
Mediterranean vegetables/ 60g  0.0 -0.6 to 0.6 0.991 
Salad vegetables/ 43g  0.3 -0.1 to 0.8 0.057 
Cruciferous vegetables/ 75g  0.3 -0.1 to 0.6 0.047 
Tomatoes/ 83g  0.0 -0.6 to 0.6 0.985 
Mushrooms/ 34g  0.2 -1.0 to 1.4 0.672 
Roots and tubers/ 66g  0.3 -0.2 to 0.9 0.111 
Fruits    
Stone fruits/ 49g  0.2 -0.5 to 1.0 0.425 
Deep orange & yellow fruits/ 118g  0.5 -0.2 to 1.2 0.088 
Grapes/ 100g  0.6 -0.2 to 1.5 0.065 
Citrus family fruits/ 92g  0.2 -0.4 to 0.7 0.443 
Rhubarb/ 130g  0.8 -0.6 to 2.1 0.149 
Berries/ 48g  0.2 -0.3 to 0.7 0.293 
Bananas/ 100g  0.1 -0.5 to 0.6 0.736 
Pomes/ 116g  0.0 -0.3 to 0.4 0.846 
Dried Fruits/ 28g  0.3 -0.1 to 0.8 0.051 
Other food groups    
Sauces/ 83g -0.2 -2.7 to 2.2 0.831 
Table B.4 Continued    
Daily intake/ portion size Difference in age at 
natural menopausea 
99% CI P value 
Pickles/Chutneys/ 35g -0.3 -1.6 to 1.1 0.622 
Soups/ 163g  0.7 -0.4 to 1.9 0.096 
Confectionary & spreads/ 44g  0.0 -0.3 to 0.3 0.889 
Nuts and seeds/ 24g  0.1 -0.3 to 0.4 0.643 
Savoury snacks/ 26g -0.8 -1.8 to 0.1 0.020 
Biscuits/ 15g -0.2 -0.5 to 0.2 0.214 
Cakes/ 66g -0.3 -2.0 to 1.2 0.569 
Pastries and Puddings/ 84g -0.5 -1.6 to 0.6 0.263 
Drinks and beverages    
Tea/ 260g -0.1 -0.3 to 0.1 0.100 
Herbal tea/ 260g  0.1 -0.2 to 0.5 0.243 
Coffee/ 190g  0.1 -0.1 to 0.2 0.301 
Other hot beverages/ 23g  0.1 -0.4 to 0.6 0.763 
Juices/ 145g  0.1 -0.3 to 0.5 0.547 
Soft drinks/ 111g -0.8 -1.6 to 0.0 0.015 
Low calorie/diet soft drinks/ 161g -0.1 -0.7 to 0.5 0.760 
Wines/ 1g  0.1 -0.5 to 0.8 0.573 
Beer and cider/ 1g -0.4 -1.2 to 0.3 0.126 
Port, sherry, liqueurs/ 1g  1.0 -0.5 to 2.6 0.086 
Spirits/ 1g -0.1 -1.0 to 0.7 0.673 
        a Model adjusted for the following factors: physical activity level, alcohol consumption, smoking, social 
class, presence of diabetes at baseline
Appendix C 
Chapter 5 supplementary materials 
Figure C.1 Scree plot of eigenvalues after principal component analysis 
Figure C.2 Directed Acyclic Graph 
Appendix D 
Chapter 6 supplementary materials 
Table D.1 Baseline characteristics of individual studies in the InterLACE consortium included in this study 
Study Country 
Survey (year) selected 
for baseline n 
Age at baseline 
Median (Q1, Q3) 
Survey (year) selected 
for follow-up 
Australian Longitudinal Study on Women's Health (ALSWH) Australia Survey 3 (2001) 7,373 52 (51, 54) Survey 4 (2004) 
Healthy Ageing of Women Study (HOW) Australia Survey 1 (2001) 563 54 (52, 56) Survey 2 (2006) 
Whitehall II study (WHITEHALL) UK Survey 3 (1991-94) 2,146 50 (45, 56) Survey 4 (1995-96) 
Seattle Midlife Women's Health Study (SMWHS) USA Survey in year 2000 174 50 (46, 53) N/A 
Japanese Midlife Women's Health Study (JMWHS) Japan Survey 1 (2002) 750 N/A* N/A 
Overall   11,006 52 (51, 54)  
Abbreviations: N/A  not applicable; Q1  25th percentile; Q3  75th percentile 
*JMWHS provided age by category only (55 and >55 years), and 47% of women were aged more than 55 years (age range: 45-60 years) 
Median age at baseline was based on four studies (ALSWH, HOW, WHITEHALL, SMWHS) with data on age as a continuous variable
Table D.2 Baseline characteristics of participants included and excluded for the 
prospective analysis 
 Participants with 
complete data on 
VMS at follow-
up (n=8,854) 
 Participants 
lost to follow-
up (n=1,228) 
 n %  n % p 
Race/ethnicity       
  Caucasian-Australian/New Zealand 5571 62.9  752 61.2 <0.01 
  Caucasian-European 2812 31.8  351 28.6 
  Caucasian-American/Canadian 46 0.5  8 0.7 
  Japanese 5 0.1  1 0.1 
  Chinese & other Asians 112 1.3  39 3.2 
  Others 308 3.5  77 6.3 
Birth year        
  <1940 763 8.6  92 7.5 0.22 
  1940-1949 6054 68.4  865 70.7 
  1950 2037 23.0  267 21.8 
Education level       
  10 years 4369 49.3  656 53.4 <0.01 
  11-12 years 1484 16.8  222 18.1 
  >12 years 3001 33.9  350 28.5 
Marital status         
  Married 6917 78.3  895 73.4 <0.01 
  Separated/divorced/widowed 1299 14.7  246 20.2 
  Single 616 7.0  78 6.4 
Body mass index        
  Normal weight (<25 kg/m) 3860 46.1  489 42.8 0.02 
  Overweight (25-29.9 kg/m) 2742 32.8  374 32.8 
  Obese (30 kg/m) 1770 21.1  279 24.4 
Smoking status       
  Never 5299 59.9  670 54.6 <0.01 
  Past smoker 2303 26.0  304 24.8 
  Current smoker 1252 14.1  254 20.7 
Menopausal status        
  Hysterectomy/oophorectomy 2183 24.7  327 26.6 <0.01 
  Unknown due to hormone use 1475 16.7  182 14.8 
  Premenopause 996 11.3  125 10.2 
  Perimenopause 1759 19.9  191 15.6 
  Natural menopause 2441 27.6  403 32.8 
Current use of menopausal hormone 
therapy  
  No  6371 72.0  854 69.5 0.08 
  Yes 2483 28.0  374 30.5 
Table D.2 Continued 
 Participants with 
complete data on 
VMS at follow-up 
(n=8,854) 
 Participants lost to 
follow-up (n=1,228) 
 n %  n % p 
Frequency or severity of hot flushes        
  Never 3407 38.5  509 41.5 <0.01 
  Rarely or mild 1484 16.8  247 20.1 
  Sometimes or moderate 2265 25.6  268 21.8 
  Often or severe 1698 19.2  204 16.6 
Frequency or severity of night 
sweats  
  Never 4194 47.4  618 50.3 0.05 
  Rarely or mild 1421 16.1  211 17.2 
  Sometimes or moderate 1922 21.7  234 19.1 
  Often or severe 1317 14.9  165 13.4 
Frequency or severity of vasomotor 
symptomsa  
  Never 3108 35.1  462 37.6 <0.01 
  Rarely or mild 1525 17.2  259 21.1 
  Sometimes or moderate 2369 26.8  278 22.6 
  Often or severe 1852 20.9  229 18.7 
Consumption frequency of soy 
products 
  Never/rarely 8031 90.7  1081 88.0 0.01 
  Monthly 398 4.5  71 5.8 
  Weekly 357 4.0  69 5.6 
  Daily 68 0.8  7 0.6 
Consumption frequency of soy milk        
  Never/rarely 8094 91.6  1103 90.5 0.01 
  Monthly 51 0.6  16 1.3 
  Weekly 117 1.3  23 1.9 
  Daily 570 6.5  77 6.3 
a Vasomotor menopausal symptoms were defined as having either hot flushes and/or night sweats
13,291 complete data on VMS 
11,006 complete data on VMS and     soy 
product consumption  
10,954 complete data on VMS and soy 
milk consumption 
2,285 missing data on soy 
products and covariates 
2, 337 missing data on soy 
milk and covariates 
6,060 missing data on VMS 
10,082 complete baseline data from three studies 
5,334 free of VMS at baseline 
3,520 excluded with presence of VMS at baseline 
4,522 complete data on incident VMS and baseline 
soy product consumption 
4,504 complete data on incident VMS and baseline 
soy milk consumption 
812 missing data on menopausal status and use of 
menopausal hormone therapy at follow-up for soy 
product consumption 
830 missing data on menopausal status and use of 
menopausal hormone therapy at follow-up for soy milk 
consumption 
1,228 missing data on follow-up VMS 
Cross-sectional analysis at baseline 
(ALSWH, HOW, WHITEHALL, 
SMWHS & JMWHS) 
Prospective analysis 
(ALSWH, HOW & WHITEHALL) 
8,854 complete follow-up data on VMS 
19,351 participants across five studies 
Figure D.1 Flow diagram of sample for cross-sectional analyses 
(included five studies) and prospective analyses (included three studies) 
ALSWH: Australian Longitudinal Study on Women's Health; JMWHS: Japanese 
Midlife Womens Health Study; HOW: Healthy Ageing of Women Study; SMWHS: 
Seattle Midlife Womens Health Study; VMS: Vasomotor menopausal symptoms; 
WHITEHALL: Whitehall II study 
Figure D.2 Directed Acyclic Graph 
Appendix E 
Chapter 7 supplementary materials 
Figure E.1 Directed acyclic graph to determine potential confounders for the 
association between diet and the risk of endometrial cancer
Social 
class
Ethanol intake
Endometrial
cancer
Age at first full 
term pregnancy
Parity
Menopausal 
status
HT use
Smoking
Energy intake
Breastfeeding
Age at 
menarche
Physical 
activity
History of 
diabetes
History of 
hypertension
Figure E.2  Directed acyclic graph to determine potential confounders for the 
association between diet and the risk of breast and ovarian cancers
Social 
class
Ethanol intake
Breast/
Ovarian
cancer
Age at first full 
term pregnancy
Parity
Menopausal 
status
HT use
Smoking
Energy intake
Breastfeeding
Age at 
menarche
Physical 
activity
History of 
diabetes
History of 
hypertension
Table E.1 Hazard ratios for the association between diet and risk of breast, endometrial 
and ovarian cancer further adjusted for family history of cancer in first-degree relatives 
 Breast cancera Endometrial cancerb Ovarian cancerc 
Cancer cases 1,535/27,427 223/25,755 231/27,490 
Daily intake/ standard portion size HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI 
Starchy food sources       
Wholegrain products/ 33g 1.00 0.97 to 1.03 0.94 0.85 to 1.03 1.01 0.93 to 1.10 
Refined grain products/ 51g 1.03 0.96 to 1.12 1.13 0.94 to 1.34 1.04 0.85 to 1.26 
Low fibre breakfast cereals/ 40g 1.07 0.88 to 1.30 0.80 0.44 to 1.45 1.16 0.71 to 1.90 
High fibre breakfast cereals/ 85g 1.00 0.91 to 1.09 0.74 0.54 to 1.01 0.85 0.64 to 1.13 
Plain Potatoes/ 210g 0.95 0.82 to 1.11 0.97 0.66 to 1.43 0.80 0.52 to 1.22 
Potatoes with added fat/ 127g 1.33 1.00 to 1.78 1.93 1.00 to 3.72 0.85 0.36 to 1.99 
Refined pasta and rice/ 210g 0.93 0.71 to 1.23 1.07 0.53 to 2.15 0.81 0.38 to 1.73 
Wholegrain pasta and rice/ 197 g 1.16 0.84 to 1.59 0.53 0.18 to 1.53 0.68 0.25 to 1.88 
Protein and fat food sources       
Low fat dairy products/ 118g 1.01 0.98 to 1.04 1.02 0.96 to 1.09 0.95 0.89 to 1.02 
High fat dairy products/ 93g 1.01 0.97 to 1.04 0.99 0.90 to 1.08 1.06 0.99 to 1.14 
Butter and hard margarine/ 10g 0.99 0.92 to 1.06 0.99 0.82 to 1.20 0.87 0.70 to 1.07 
Margarine/ 9g 0.99 0.92 to 1.06 0.92 0.76 to 1.11 1.02 0.86 to 1.21 
Low fat spreads/ 7g 1.04 0.97 to 1.11 0.99 0.83 to 1.19 0.98 0.81 to 1.19 
High fat dressing/ 23g 0.99 0.79 to 1.24 0.80 0.41 to 1.57 0.77 0.40 to 1.50 
Low fat dressing/ 30g 1.03 0.72 to 1.48 0.93 0.35 to 2.50 0.98 0.38 to 2.47 
Soybean products/ 62g 0.97 0.89 to 1.05 0.99 0.82 to 1.21 0.95 0.75 to 1.20 
Textured vegetable protein/ 130g 0.14 0.01 to 3.42 - - - - 
Pulses/ 91g 1.03 0.89 to 1.20 0.83 0.53 to 1.30 1.15 0.80 to 1.66 
Eggs/eggs dishes/ 88g 1.00 0.74 to 1.36 1.83 0.97 to 3.45 1.22 0.60 to 2.48 
Fish and fish dishes/ 140g 1.01 0.67 to 1.52 0.92 0.32 to 2.63 0.63 0.20 to 2.01 
Oily fish/ 90g 1.01 0.64 to 1.60 0.53 0.12 to 2.27 1.01 0.31 to 3.26 
Shell fish/ 60g 1.47 0.56 to 3.86 0.86 0.05 to 14.19 0.60 0.03 to 10.73 
Red meat/ 189g 1.28 0.94 to 1.74 1.88 0.88 to 3.99 0.90 0.39 to 2.08 
Processed meat/ 74g 1.42 1.07 to 1.88 2.18 1.29 to 3.70 1.34 0.63 to 2.86 
Poultry/ 143g 1.36 0.88 to 2.12 1.66 0.54 to 5.10 0.50 0.13 to 1.93 
Offal/ 100g 2.07 0.36 to 12.0 - - 0.16 0.00 to 25.9 
Total meat/ 150g 1.18 1.00 to 1.38 1.51 1.01 to 2.24 0.92 0.60 to 1.42 
Vegetables       
Vegetable dishes/ 214g 0.90 0.73 to 1.10 0.72 0.40 to 1.29 0.99 0.59 to 1.66 
Allium/ 39g 0.99 0.81 to 1.20 1.00 0.60 to 1.67 0.67 0.37 to 1.23 
Fresh legumes/ 75g 0.97 0.80 to 1.16 1.14 0.74 to 1.75 1.10 0.73 to 1.64 
Mediterranean vegetables/ 60g 0.95 0.83 to 1.09 0.83 0.56 to 1.22 1.22 0.93 to 1.60 
Salad vegetables/ 43g 0.98 0.87 to 1.10 0.85 0.60 to 1.19 0.97 0.71 to 1.31 
Cruciferous vegetables/ 75g 0.99 0.91 to 1.07 0.96 0.77 to 1.19 1.03 0.86 to 1.24 
Tomatoes/ 83g 0.85 0.73 to 0.99 0.79 0.52 to 1.19 0.98 0.70 to 1.37 
Mushrooms/ 34g 0.97 0.77 to 1.24 1.34 0.81 to 2.19 1.60 1.09 to 2.34 
Roots and tubers/ 66g 0.95 0.84 to 1.07 0.93 0.68 to 1.29 1.13 0.88 to 1.44 
Total vegetables/150g 0.97 0.91 to 1.02 0.94 0.81 to 1.10 1.04 0.92 to 1.19 
Fruits       
Stone fruits/ 49g 1.03 0.86 to 1.24 0.98 0.57 to 1.68 0.65 0.31 to 1.37 
Deep orange & yellow fruits/ 118g 1.11 0.95 to 1.30 0.80 0.45 to 1.42 0.93 0.56 to 1.54 
Grapes/ 100g 0.97 0.85 to 1.12 0.89 0.59 to 1.34 0.93 0.63 to 1.36 
Table E.1 Continued    
 Breast cancera Endometrial cancerb Ovarian cancerc 
Cancer cases 1,535/27,427 223/25,755 231/27,490 
Daily intake/ standard portion size HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI 
Citrus family fruits/ 92g 1.03 0.92 to 1.15 0.76 0.53 to 1.11 0.87 0.62 to 1.21 
Rhubarb/ 130g 0.92 0.69 to 1.23 0.67 0.25 to 1.79 1.07 0.57 to 2.02 
Berries/ 48g 1.03 0.93 to 1.13 0.86 0.61 to 1.23 0.84 0.59 to 1.20 
Bananas/ 100g 1.08 0.96 to 1.21 0.84 0.60 to 1.19 1.17 0.87 to 1.56 
Pomes/ 116g 0.98 0.91 to 1.06 0.90 0.72 to 1.13 0.94 0.76 to 1.17 
Total fruits/150g 1.01 0.97 to 1.06 0.89 0.77 to 1.02 0.97 0.86 to 1.10 
Dried Fruits/ 28g 1.05 0.97 to 1.14 0.58 0.35 to 0.97 1.05 0.87 to 1.27 
Other food groups       
Sauces/ 83g 1.09 0.62 to 1.92 1.22 0.28 to 5.35 1.48 0.36 to 6.13 
Pickles/Chutneys/ 35g 0.91 0.68 to 1.20 0.93 0.45 to 1.91 0.71 0.32 to 1.60 
Soups/ 163g 1.00 0.80 to 1.25 0.86 0.46 to 1.59 1.00 0.59 to 1.73 
Confectionary & spreads/ 44g 0.98 0.92 to 1.06 0.90 0.73 to 1.11 0.95 0.78 to 1.15 
Nuts and seeds/ 24g 1.04 0.94 to 1.14 0.79 0.54 to 1.16 1.05 0.83 to 1.33 
Savoury snacks/ 26g 1.07 0.87 to 1.31 1.17 0.70 to 1.94 1.06 0.61 to 1.84 
Biscuits/ 15g 1.00 0.93 to 1.07 0.99 0.83 to 1.19 0.92 0.75 to 1.13 
Cakes/ 66g 0.86 0.63 to 1.17 0.81 0.35 to 1.87 0.97 0.47 to 1.98 
Pastries and Puddings/ 84g 1.14 0.94 to 1.39 1.01 0.57 to 1.77 0.75 0.39 to 1.44 
Drinks and beverages       
Tea/ 260g 0.98 0.95 to 1.02 1.02 0.94 to 1.12 0.99 0.91 to 1.09 
Herbal tea/ 260g 0.99 0.92 to 1.07 0.86 0.67 to 1.10 0.96 0.77 to 1.19 
Coffee/ 190g 1.01 0.97 to 1.05 1.02 0.93 to 1.12 1.03 0.94 to 1.13 
Other hot beverages/ 23g 1.02 0.92 to 1.14 1.06 0.81 to 1.38 1.05 0.81 to 1.37 
Juices/ 145g 1.01 0.93 to 1.09 0.97 0.78 to 1.20 0.96 0.78 to 1.19 
Soft drinks/ 111g 1.00 0.89 to 1.12 1.02 0.77 to 1.37 1.04 0.80 to 1.36 
Low calorie/diet soft drinks/ 161g 1.02 0.91 to 1.13 1.03 0.78 to 1.36 0.97 0.71 to 1.31 
Wines/ glass* 1.03 0.94 to 1.13 0.93 0.71 to 1.22 1.04 0.83 to 1.32 
Beer and cider/ half pint* 1.11 0.95 to 1.31 0.87 0.47 to 1.63 1.13 0.74 to 1.72 
Port, sherry, liqueurs/ glass* 0.99 0.75 to 1.31 1.14 0.58 to 2.23 1.22 0.75 to 1.99 
Spirits/ measure* 1.10 0.95 to 1.28 0.55 0.26 to 1.16 1.23 0.91 to 1.65 
 Model adjusted for age, ethanol intake, duration of breastfeeding, physical activity, smoking, social class, 
menopausal status, family history of any cancer and family history of breast cancer; a Model adjusted for 
age, ethanol intake, duration of breastfeeding, physical activity, smoking, social class, menopausal status, 
diabetes, hypertension, and family history of endometrial cancer; a Model adjusted for age, ethanol intake, 
duration of breastfeeding, physical activity, smoking, social class, menopausal status, family history of 
breast cancer and family history of ovarian cancer; 
 not adjusted for ethanol intake
Table E.2 Hazard ratios for the association between diet and risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer further adjusted for total energy intake and 
reproductive factors 
 Breast cancer cases Endometrial cancer cases Ovarian cancer cases 
Daily intake/  
standard portion size 
n=1796/32,228a n=1625/29,183b n=238/27,335c n=86/9,227d n=251/29,226a n=251/29,229b 
HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI 
Starchy food sources             
Wholegrain products/ 33g 0.99 0.96 to 1.02 0.95 0.90 to 1.01 0.93 0.84 to 1.03 0.94 0.80 to 1.11 1.01 0.93 to 1.11 1.01 0.88 to 1.15 
Refined grain products/ 51g 1.02 0.95 to 1.11 1.03 0.91 to 1.17 1.19 1.01 to 1.41 1.16 0.84 to 1.59 1.04 0.85 to 1.27 1.02 0.75 to 1.39 
Low fibre breakfast cereals/ 40g 1.03 0.84 to 1.25 0.92 0.66 to 1.29 0.80 0.45 to 1.44 0.80 0.30 to 2.14 1.11 0.68 to 1.80 1.02 0.48 to 2.14 
High fibre breakfast cereals/ 85g 1.00 0.91 to 1.10 1.05 0.93 to 1.18 0.76 0.56 to 1.04 0.91 0.59 to 1.41 0.90 0.69 to 1.18 0.99 0.71 to 1.38 
Plain Potatoes/ 210g 0.92 0.79 to 1.08 0.95 0.75 to 1.20 1.03 0.69 to 1.53 1.15 0.65 to 2.06 0.85 0.56 to 1.29 0.98 0.56 to 1.71 
Potatoes with added fat/ 127g 1.27 0.95 to 1.72 1.18 0.73 to 1.90 2.21 1.16 to 4.20 2.27 0.89 to 5.80 0.84 0.36 to 1.98 0.67 0.17 to 2.64 
Refined pasta and rice/ 210g 0.92 0.70 to 1.20 1.08 0.72 to 1.64 1.18 0.61 to 2.31 0.56 0.13 to 2.42 0.76 0.35 to 1.64 0.95 0.31 to 2.92 
Wholegrain pasta and rice/ 197 g 1.13 0.82 to 1.55 1.15 0.70 to 1.92 0.66 0.25 to 1.79 0.78 0.16 to 3.92 0.73 0.28 to 1.93 0.75 0.17 to 3.21 
Protein and fat food sources             
Low fat dairy products/ 118g 1.01 0.98 to 1.03 0.99 0.95 to 1.03 1.05 0.98 to 1.12 1.05 0.94 to 1.17 0.96 0.89 to 1.02 0.92 0.83 to 1.02 
High fat dairy products/ 93g 1.00 0.97 to 1.04 1.01 0.96 to 1.07 0.99 0.91 to 1.09 1.00 0.86 to 1.16 1.07 1.00 to 1.14 1.09 0.98 to 1.21 
Butter and hard margarine/ 10g 0.98 0.91 to 1.05 0.96 0.85 to 1.08 1.03 0.85 to 1.24 1.11 0.83 to 1.49 0.87 0.70 to 1.07 0.83 0.59 to 1.16 
Margarine/ 9g 0.98 0.92 to 1.05 0.96 0.85 to 1.07 0.95 0.79 to 1.15 0.98 0.71 to 1.35 1.05 0.89 to 1.24 1.06 0.82 to 1.38 
Low fat spreads/ 7g 1.02 0.96 to 1.09 0.99 0.88 to 1.10 0.99 0.82 to 1.19 0.94 0.67 to 1.31 0.95 0.79 to 1.16 0.96 0.72 to 1.29 
High fat dressing/ 23g 0.96 0.77 to 1.21 1.00 0.69 to 1.45 0.84 0.43 to 1.65 0.53 0.14 to 2.04 0.74 0.38 to 1.44 0.95 0.37 to 2.44 
Low fat dressing/ 30g 1.01 0.71 to 1.44 0.60 0.31 to 1.16 0.92 0.34 to 2.46 0.48 0.07 to 3.38 1.12 0.48 to 2.63 0.94 0.23 to 3.86 
Soybean products/ 62g 0.97 0.90 to 1.05 0.98 0.85 to 1.14 0.98 0.81 to 1.19 1.04 0.75 to 1.45 0.93 0.73 to 1.19 0.90 0.56 to 1.45 
Textured vegetable protein/ 130g 0.14 0.01 to 3.19 0.02 0.00 to 8.20 0.00 0.00 to 45.3 - - - - - - 
Pulses/ 91g 1.02 0.87 to 1.18 1.11 0.87 to 1.41 0.87 0.55 to 1.36 1.06 0.52 to 2.17 1.23 0.86 to 1.75 1.72 1.07 to 2.77 
Eggs/eggs dishes/ 88g 0.95 0.69 to 1.30 1.27 0.82 to 1.98 2.00 1.08 to 3.69 2.17 0.86 to 5.43 1.34 0.67 to 2.69 1.28 0.46 to 3.60 
Fish and fish dishes/ 140g 0.99 0.65 to 1.49 1.07 0.55 to 2.08 1.13 0.41 to 3.16 0.73 0.10 to 5.18 0.92 0.32 to 2.67 2.64 0.73 to 9.57 
Oily fish/ 90g 0.97 0.61 to 1.53 1.18 0.66 to 2.11 0.59 0.14 to 2.42 0.77 0.09 to 6.37 1.11 0.38 to 3.24 1.09 0.26 to 4.57 
Shell fish/ 60g 1.41 0.55 to 3.64 1.42 0.34 to 5.97 0.85 0.05 to 13.9 0.11 0.00 to 40.4 0.71 0.05 to 10.95 0.63 0.01 to 34.0 
Red meat/ 189g 1.27 0.93 to 1.73 1.22 0.76 to 1.97 2.28 1.07 to 4.87 2.00 0.56 to 7.12 0.90 0.39 to 2.07 1.21 0.38 to 3.86 
Processed meat/ 74g 1.36 1.01 to 1.82 1.45 0.87 to 2.43 2.47 1.53 to 3.98 5.01 1.50 to 16.7 1.37 0.64 to 2.93 1.42 0.40 to 5.10 
Table E.2 Continued 
 Breast cancer cases Endometrial cancer cases Ovarian cancer cases 
Daily intake/  
standard portion size 
n=1796/32,228a n=1625/29,183b n=238/27,335c n=86/9,227d n=251/29,226a n=251/29,229b 
HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI 
Poultry/ 143g 1.30 0.84 to 2.02 1.07 0.53 to 2.16 2.04 0.69 to 6.02 0.73 0.09 to 6.13 0.66 0.18 to 2.37 0.35 0.04 to 2.77 
Offal/ 100g 2.18 0.39 to 12.2 2.79 0.22 to 35.2 - - - - 0.08 0.00 to 14.05 - - 
Total meat/ 150g 1.17 1.00 to 1.37 1.14 0.88 to 1.47 1.74 1.16 to 2.62 1.57 0.77 to 3.20 0.95 0.61 to 1.46 0.98 0.51 to 1.88 
Vegetables             
Vegetable dishes/ 214g 0.89 0.73 to 1.09 0.86 0.62 to 1.19 0.72 0.40 to 1.31 0.77 0.28 to 2.07 1.08 0.66 to 1.78 0.82 0.35 to 1.91 
Allium/ 39g 0.98 0.81 to 1.20 0.95 0.69 to 1.31 1.04 0.62 to 1.72 0.86 0.34 to 2.17 0.78 0.45 to 1.37 0.87 0.39 to 1.92 
Fresh legumes/ 75g 0.94 0.78 to 1.14 0.87 0.64 to 1.19 1.23 0.82 to 1.85 1.04 0.48 to 2.28 1.12 0.75 to 1.67 1.52 1.02 to 2.24 
Mediterranean vegetables/ 60g 0.95 0.83 to 1.09 1.00 0.81 to 1.24 0.89 0.61 to 1.31 0.79 0.39 to 1.57 1.23 0.92 to 1.63 1.12 0.68 to 1.86 
Salad vegetables/ 43g 0.96 0.86 to 1.08 0.93 0.76 to 1.13 0.88 0.63 to 1.24 0.83 0.46 to 1.48 1.01 0.75 to 1.36 1.22 0.82 to 1.82 
Cruciferous vegetables/ 75g 0.98 0.91 to 1.06 1.01 0.90 to 1.14 0.97 0.78 to 1.20 0.93 0.65 to 1.34 1.06 0.89 to 1.26 1.16 0.92 to 1.46 
Tomatoes/ 83g 0.86 0.74 to 0.99 0.86 0.69 to 1.08 0.81 0.54 to 1.21 0.63 0.30 to 1.34 0.99 0.71 to 1.38 1.05 0.65 to 1.68 
Mushrooms/ 34g 0.95 0.75 to 1.21 0.98 0.68 to 1.42 1.39 0.86 to 2.25 1.29 0.54 to 3.08 1.62 1.13 to 2.32 1.66 0.99 to 2.79 
Roots and tubers/ 66g 0.93 0.82 to 1.05 0.88 0.72 to 1.09 0.96 0.69 to 1.32 1.09 0.72 to 1.66 1.15 0.91 to 1.47 1.30 1.06 to 1.59 
Total vegetables/150g 0.95 0.90 to 1.01 0.96 0.87 to 1.05 0.96 0.81 to 1.13 0.93 0.70 to 1.23 1.07 0.94 to 1.22 1.14 0.97 to 1.34 
Fruits             
Stone fruits/ 49g 1.02 0.85 to 1.23 1.02 0.75 to 1.40 1.00 0.59 to 1.70 1.30 0.61 to 2.74 0.67 0.33 to 1.37 0.57 0.18 to 1.74 
Deep orange & yellow fruits/ 118g 1.07 0.92 to 1.26 1.07 0.83 to 1.37 0.79 0.45 to 1.40 0.97 0.43 to 2.19 1.00 0.64 to 1.59 0.85 0.39 to 1.84 
Grapes/ 100g 0.95 0.83 to 1.10 0.96 0.77 to 1.19 0.96 0.64 to 1.39 0.67 0.28 to 1.64 0.93 0.63 to 1.35 0.73 0.35 to 1.50 
Citrus family fruits/ 92g 1.02 0.91 to 1.14 0.97 0.81 to 1.17 0.79 0.55 to 1.13 0.94 0.56 to 1.60 0.89 0.65 to 1.23 0.84 0.50 to 1.40 
Rhubarb/ 130g 0.92 0.69 to 1.23 0.87 0.54 to 1.40 0.82 0.34 to 1.99 0.76 0.17 to 3.49 1.11 0.60 to 2.05 0.95 0.31 to 2.88 
Berries/ 48g 1.03 0.94 to 1.13 1.00 0.85 to 1.18 0.88 0.62 to 1.25 0.78 0.40 to 1.52 0.83 0.58 to 1.19 0.78 0.44 to 1.39 
Bananas/ 100g 1.06 0.95 to 1.19 0.99 0.82 to 1.21 0.92 0.66 to 1.28 0.84 0.47 to 1.52 1.25 0.95 to 1.64 1.39 0.95 to 2.02 
Pomes/ 116g 0.97 0.90 to 1.06 0.97 0.85 to 1.10 0.95 0.76 to 1.17 0.83 0.55 to 1.25 0.98 0.80 to 1.21 0.98 0.71 to 1.35 
Total fruits/150g 1.01 0.96 to 1.05 0.99 0.92 to 1.07 0.92 0.80 to 1.05 0.88 0.69 to 1.13 1.00 0.88 to 1.12 0.97 0.80 to 1.17 
Dried Fruits/ 28g 1.05 0.96 to 1.13 1.11 0.98 to 1.26 0.62 0.39 to 1.01 0.78 0.40 to 1.49 1.07 0.90 to 1.28 0.97 0.65 to 1.46 
Other food groups             
Sauces/ 83g 1.04 0.59 to 1.84 1.81 0.79 to 4.16 1.65 0.39 to 6.97 0.79 0.05 to 12.8 2.03 0.53 to 7.77 6.23 1.33 to 29.2 
Table E.2 Continued 
 Breast cancer cases Endometrial cancer cases Ovarian cancer cases 
Daily intake/  
standard portion size 
n=1796/32,228a n=1625/29,183b n=238/27,335c n=86/9,227d n=251/29,226a n=251/29,229b 
HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI HR 99% CI 
Pickles/Chutneys/ 35g 0.87 0.65 to 1.16 0.85 0.52 to 1.40 1.09 0.55 to 2.17 0.70 0.16 to 3.15 0.67 0.30 to 1.53 0.73 0.20 to 2.60 
Soups/ 163g 0.97 0.78 to 1.21 0.98 0.71 to 1.36 0.98 0.54 to 1.76 1.11 0.49 to 2.53 1.07 0.64 to 1.78 0.89 0.39 to 2.00 
Confectionary & spreads/ 44g 0.97 0.90 to 1.05 0.98 0.87 to 1.12 0.92 0.73 to 1.16 0.94 0.63 to 1.39 0.99 0.81 to 1.20 0.83 0.58 to 1.21 
Nuts and seeds/ 24g 1.03 0.93 to 1.13 1.02 0.86 to 1.21 0.81 0.55 to 1.19 0.89 0.48 to 1.66 1.05 0.82 to 1.34 1.10 0.77 to 1.58 
Savoury snacks/ 26g 1.05 0.85 to 1.29 1.06 0.74 to 1.51 1.23 0.74 to 2.04 1.18 0.44 to 3.18 1.11 0.65 to 1.90 0.97 0.39 to 2.46 
Biscuits/ 15g 1.00 0.94 to 1.08 1.04 0.93 to 1.16 1.02 0.84 to 1.23 1.16 0.89 to 1.53 0.97 0.80 to 1.18 0.99 0.75 to 1.32 
Cakes/ 66g 0.84 0.61 to 1.16 1.03 0.64 to 1.66 1.00 0.44 to 2.28 1.34 0.43 to 4.14 1.03 0.50 to 2.14 0.95 0.30 to 3.02 
Pastries and Puddings/ 84g 1.12 0.90 to 1.38 1.27 0.90 to 1.80 1.18 0.67 to 2.11 1.21 0.43 to 3.39 0.73 0.37 to 1.44 0.78 0.28 to 2.18 
Tea/ 260g 0.98 0.95 to 1.01 1.01 0.96 to 1.07 1.02 0.94 to 1.12 0.99 0.86 to 1.14 0.99 0.91 to 1.07 0.98 0.86 to 1.11 
Herbal tea/ 260g 0.98 0.91 to 1.06 0.97 0.86 to 1.11 0.90 0.72 to 1.12 0.80 0.51 to 1.26 0.94 0.75 to 1.16 0.92 0.65 to 1.30 
Coffee/ 190g 1.01 0.97 to 1.04 1.00 0.94 to 1.05 1.03 0.95 to 1.13 1.05 0.90 to 1.21 1.04 0.96 to 1.14 1.02 0.90 to 1.17 
Other hot beverages/ 23g 1.03 0.93 to 1.14 0.96 0.80 to 1.14 1.04 0.79 to 1.36 1.00 0.62 to 1.61 1.05 0.81 to 1.37 1.02 0.68 to 1.52 
Juices/ 145g 1.00 0.93 to 1.08 0.94 0.83 to 1.08 0.98 0.78 to 1.21 0.89 0.60 to 1.33 0.98 0.80 to 1.20 0.94 0.68 to 1.31 
Soft drinks/ 111g 1.00 0.89 to 1.12 1.00 0.84 to 1.19 1.03 0.77 to 1.37 0.76 0.36 to 1.60 1.03 0.79 to 1.35 1.07 0.74 to 1.54 
Low calorie/diet soft drinks/ 161g 1.03 0.93 to 1.14 1.03 0.88 to 1.21 1.04 0.79 to 1.36 1.00 0.60 to 1.66 0.98 0.73 to 1.31 1.01 0.65 to 1.56 
Wines/ glass* 0.95 0.83 to 1.09 1.06 0.92 to 1.21 0.90 0.69 to 1.17 0.83 0.51 to 1.34 1.06 0.85 to 1.32 1.10 0.80 to 1.50 
Beer and cider/ half pint* 1.04 0.87 to 1.25 1.13 0.85 to 1.51 0.83 0.44 to 1.60 1.34 0.67 to 2.71 1.12 0.73 to 1.71 1.11 0.53 to 2.31 
Port, sherry, liqueurs/ glass* 0.92 0.69 to 1.23 1.09 0.76 to 1.54 1.14 0.59 to 2.20 1.02 0.33 to 3.16 1.21 0.75 to 1.96 0.74 0.23 to 2.43 
Spirits/ measure* 1.06 0.90 to 1.24 1.18 0.98 to 1.43 0.54 0.26 to 1.13 0.57 0.19 to 1.73 1.26 0.96 to 1.65 1.24 0.85 to 1.82 
a Model adjusted for age, ethanol intake, duration of breastfeeding, physical activity, smoking, social class, menopausal status and total energy intake (excluding participants with a 
total energy intake below 500 kcal and above 6000 kcal); b Model adjusted for age, ethanol intake, duration of breastfeeding, physical activity, smoking, social class, menopausal status, 
total energy intake, current use of HRT, oral contraceptive use, and parity; c Model adjusted for age, ethanol intake, duration of breastfeeding, physical activity, smoking, social class, 
menopausal status, history of diabetes, history of hypertension, and total energy intake (excluding participants with a total energy intake below 500 kcal and above 6000 kcal); d Model 
adjusted for age, ethanol intake, duration of breastfeeding, physical activity, smoking, social class, menopausal status, history of diabetes, history of hypertension, total energy intake, 
current use of HRT, oral contraceptive use, and parity; * not adjusted for ethanol intake
Table E.3 Hazard ratios for the association between age at natural menopause and risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer 
 Breast cancer Endometrial cancer Ovarian cancer 
 Unadjusted Adjusted* Unadjusted Adjusted* Unadjusted Adjusted* 
 HR 95% CI HR 95% CI HR 95% CI HR 95% CI HR 95% CI HR 95% CI 
Age at natural 
menopause 1.04 1.03 to 1.06 1.03 1.01 to 1.06 1.15 1.11 to 1.19 1.15 1.09 to 1.22 1.08 1.04 to 1.13 1.09 1.02 to 1.16 
*Model adjusted for age, BMI, physical activity, smoking, ethanol intake, total energy intake, social class, parity, age at menarche, and age at first full term pregnancy 
 Excluded women who had a hysterectomy or bilateral oophorectomy, those who reported current or ever use of HRT prior to their last period as well as women who had 
their last period before the age of 40 years and after 65 years 
Table E.4 Subgroup analysis by age at last natural menopause for the association between 
diet and risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer 
  Age at last natural menopause*  
  40-49 years 50-65 years  
Daily intake/ 
standard portion 
Breast cancera HR 99% CI HR 99% CI Overall P-value 
Tomatoes/ 83g 766/14,058 0.96 0.75 to 1.24 0.82 0.59 to 1.15 0.327 
Processed meat/ 
74g 716/13,239 1.31 0.72 to 2.40 1.56 0.77 to 3.14 0.632 
Total meat/ 150g 766/14,058 1.06 0.79 to 1.42 1.37 0.97 to 1.94 0.135 
 Endometrial cancerb     
Dried Fruits/ 28g 134/14,083 0.50 0.16 to 1.52 0.52 0.21 to 1.27 0.938 
Processed meat/ 
74g 134/13,262 2.79 0.70 to 11.1 3.16 0.91 to 11.0 0.859 
Total meat/ 150g 134/14,083 2.12 1.09 to 4.12 1.41 0.69 to 2.88 0.276 
 Ovarian cancera     
Mushrooms/ 34g 112/14,081 1.98 1.03 to 3.85 1.85 0.99 to 3.45 0.834 
a Model adjusted for age, ethanol intake, duration of breastfeeding, physical activity, smoking, social class, 
menopausal status; b Model adjusted for age, ethanol intake, duration of breastfeeding, physical activity, 
smoking, social class, menopausal status, history of diabetes and history of hypertension; * Excluded 
women who had a hysterectomy or bilateral oophorectomy, those who reported current or ever use of HRT 
prior to their last period as well as women who had their last period before the age of 40 years and after 65 
years;  P-value for the difference between the two age group
Appendix F 
 Chapter 8 supplementary materials 
Protocol & log file to import death and cancer registry data to the cohort Access 
database 
Template document, red areas mark where document should be filled in. 
Date data received/ data period:    [__________________________]                
Note: there are a couple of duplicate ids : 
                36145 and 22248 (same name, address , NHS number and dob) 
                36215 and 24855 (same name, address and dob (NHS number fields blank))          
(The ones to keep are 22248 (has a cancer incident) and 24855 (has a 4 day diary)). 
If a cancer or mortality incident occurs for 36145 or 36215 then they should be 
recorded against their duplicate.  36145 and  36215 have been put in a duplicate table 
COHORT  duplicates. There are others in this table, but shouldnt be an issue since 
they dont have any completed questionnaires/diary data. 
*** ensure all ICD codes are input with capital letters (the Stata script used in the survival calcs 
will not pick them up otherwise) *** 
1) Open database 
Use database:  S:\Faculty-of-Medicine-and-Health\Research-Projects\UK womens 
cohort study\UKWCS\Access database\Cohort97_new.mdb 
Press [Database window] to open table and query list 
2) Check MR511 files (English and Welsh): 
a. Save csv files as xls files. 
b. Remove Cancelled cancer (usually indicated in column H) entries out of 
cancer and deaths and create a separate file of cancelled cancers. 
c. Delete deaths out of cancer and deaths.xls file. 
d. Add in headings for both cancer and death files and cancelled cancers 
from cen data\ MR511 headings.xlsx. Headings are based on document 
: MRIS File Formats 01Dec2011.pdf. 
e. In both cancer and death files, ensure event date is in format 
dd/mm/yyyy (ensures when Access table created the field is created as 
a date field). Can use formula: 
=MID(E2,7,2)&"/"&MID(E2,5,2)&"/"&MID(E2,1,4) 
f. check in excel MR number is populated and numeric  
g. Inspect for cancer type being blank  it will fail to import. (set it to say 0, 
then import and when on cancer table set back to blank. (Next time this 
happens need to see why it fails to import)) 
3) IMPORT DATA (English and Welsh):  
a. Open [frmUpdateDeathsCancer] 
b. Click Import Excel data from ONS 
c. Select the file MR511date.xls (from cen data folder ) [import deaths first 
(more columns)]. Process deaths to step j) below, then repeat from this 
step, but append cancers. 
d. Ensure header row selected [NEXT], select no primary key, [NEXT]... 
e. Import to table: call the file same name as from cen data 
MR511_MM_YYYY 
f. [Finish] The English death and cancer info is now in a table you just 
created called MR511_MM_YYYY. Check for import errors. 
g. Change format of Event date to Date/Time with a format of short 
date. 
h. Open your new file MR511date to check import numbers 
Type of data Number of 
rows from 
original check 
of excel file 
Number of 
rows in this 
imported file 
Notes if 
numbers dont 
match up- 
explain 
discrepancy 
action 
Deaths      
Misc deaths      
Cancers      
i. Check your new file for duplicate records (a single record for each 
occurrence of) :- 
Member Number  (MR Member Number) 
Death or Cancer  (Ev Type) 
Cancer Date   (Event date) 
Cancer Site   (Registration Number or Cancer 
Site) 
Cancer Type   (Entry number or Cancer type) 
Cancerfields   (Cancerfields) 
Type of 
Number 
duplicates 
IDs Duplicate 
data deleted 
from import 
file? 
Number to 
import after 
removal of 
dups/ errors 
action 
Deaths       
Cancers       
4) UPDATE DATA (English and Welsh):  
a. Open the Cancer Details table and Death_flagging table.  Record the 
row count in both,  
Cancer Details   : [_______________________]  
Death_flagging : [_______________________] 
b. Open [frmUpdateDeathsCancer] 
c. Select the table you just imported and checked, which is free of any 
duplicates 
d. Click update cancer information (note #of records appending to check 
they all imported-fill in below table 3) 
e. Click update death information (note how many records it will append-
fill in below table 3) 
f. Click update multiple underlying causes (click ok to the many messages 
that pop up) 
g. The deaths go to death_flagging table. Open this table up, sort by date 
added. Check: are the new ones there are all the important fields 
occupied in the same way as the records previously added? fill in below 
table 3 
h. Cancers go to cancer details table. Open table, check has import 
worked? Fill in table 3 
Table 3: Check that the numbers imported match expected 
 Number 
expected 
to import 
table 
above 
Number 
append 
would be 
added 
Notes to 
explain 
missing 
Look in 
death_ 
flagging 
table for 
# added 
in this 
period 
Look in 
cancer 
details 
table 
for # 
added 
in this 
period 
Notes 
explain 
missing 
& date 
Death     /   
Cancer    /    
5) Scottish registry deaths (paper format) 
a. Open up COHORT table to identify participant ID number using date of 
birth and name.  
Paper format: 
Update word document of Scottish deaths with Case numbers 
(highlighted to stand out). 
  Excel format: 
   Combine all Scottish Excel death files into one Excel file  
Add in headings from cen data\ MR511 headings.xlsx. 
Create a new column and update with Case numbers. 
Process as below, but using column heading to identify correct 
ICD codes 
b. Open death_flagging_form 
c. Press add new record : 
i. Type Case number into Subject ID and fill in date of death. 
Then select pending pencil icon so that the record is updated 
and the name and DOB appear. Ensure name and DOB match 
the certificate [if ICD codes appear already check if this 
certificate is just a duplicate] 
ii. Select yourself from the enter id dropdown list on the left and 
check ICD version says 10 
iii. Fill in NHS number (found at the bottom of the form) if this is 
absent in our records (new format is a 9 digit all numerical code, 
old format includes letters and numbers) 
iv. ICD10 code for underlying cause (often in bold) must be entered 
into original underlying cause blue box 
v. If nothing is listed as a secondary underlying cause (II) then copy 
all remaining ICD10 cause of death codes into the green box, 
remembering to enter numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, etc into the first 
column of this green table for each code you enter 
vi. If there are conditions under primary and secondary underlying 
causes (I(a, b, c, d) and II) then use the ICD10 code book (or 
http://apps.who.int/classifications/icd10/browse/2010/en#/C80 
- if 4 digits may need to insert a full stop before last digit) to 
identify those that are secondary and these must be entered 
into the red box, put the rest into the green. Again, remember to 
manually add numbers in the first column for each ICD code you 
enter.  
vii. Note that the primary original code (often in bold) may also 
appear as a primary underlying cause-it is ok to enter this twice 
if that is how it is presented on the form. 
viii. Enter location of file containing death certificate info in the field 
: Death certificate doc. 
Death certificates entered? Your name Date Notes- were any 
duplicates 
found? 
6) Fixing secondary underlying cause ICD codes for deaths & multiples (English 
and Welsh) 
[During the automated import, the secondary codes cannot be separated from 
multiple underlying cause codes (the ICD codes come mixed and the 
description for the secondary code is free text). You must view the text in the 
secondary field and column to the right from the excel doc and identify the 
correct ICD codes to match to this]:  
a. Open the excel file of English and Welsh deaths. Copy the data onto a 
new tab and cut out the cancer data and all records where there is no 
text in the columns labelled Cause of Death text II and the one to the 
right of this. So you just have the data for the IDs where there is some 
text in these columns. 
b. Open death_flagging_form: On  this form the ICD10 codes from the 
multiples list are matched to their proper description at the bottom of 
the form. Note that the codes with three characters dont appear in the 
grey box at the bottom-use the ICD10 codebook to look these up. 
c. Using the free text descriptions from the excel doc identify those 
multiple codes to move into the red box-as they actually relate to 
secondary underlying causes and not multiples. Add them to the red 
box, remembering to number the lines 1, 2, 3 etc and then cut the lines 
from the green box. 
 Your name Date 
Secondary underlying 
codes sorted out? 
7) Scottish registry cancers (paper format)/electronic 
New format text files 
a. Open the text files in notepad. 
b. Merge into one text document (one line may have more than one entry  
these need separating onto separate line) 
c. Replace tabs with a single space, then make align by inserting further spaces 
d. Paste the information into Excel (use fixed length delimiting)  Excel allows 
you to pick where the field delimiters are. 
e. In Excel format the information so that it matches the layout on the Cancer 
details table. 
f. Check that the UKWCS id provided in the files matches to the correct woman 
using the COHORT table . 
g. Open the Cancer Details table in the Cohort97New database 
h. Check that the new cancer does not already exist (ID, Cancer site, cancer data 
and cancer type all match) 
i. If the Cancer Type is blank, use the literal unknown 
j. On a new line, populate the ID, Cancer site, cancer date and cancer type field 
with the new cancer details (by pasting from Excel) 
k. Add a note to include the month of the Scottish Cancer update provided and 
that this was manually added and by whom. E.g. Dec 2009 Scottish cancer 
manually added MM 
Old format text files 
a. Print the cancer records 
b. Some of the women in these files will need to be matched to obtain their ID 
number, using the COHORT table from COHORTtbl database. 
c. Check that the new cancer does not already exist (ID, Cancer site, cancer date 
and cancer type all match) 
d. On a new line, populate the ID, Cancer site, cancer data and cancer type field 
with the new cancer details. 
e. Add a note to include the month of the Scottish Cancer update provided and 
that this was manually added and by whom. E.g. Dec 2009_Scottish 
cancer_Manually added MM 
8) Cancelled cancers: 
a. Note : if receive a cancelled cancer before we receive the cancer 
notification, still put the cancelled details on the Cancer details table in 
Access (that way we will not later add in the cancer when we receive it 
and miss out the fact it has been cancelled). 
b. Open the new cancelled cancer file. 
c. Copy the cancelled cancers into the Cancelled cancers tab in the log file 
<N:\Faculty-of-Medicine-and-Health\LIGHT\Nutr-
Epi\FOOD\COHORT\cen data\LOG FILE Death and cancer import to 
access.xlsx> 
d. Open the Cancer details table in Access. 
e. Locate the cancer entry to be cancelled (match on Member No., Cancer 
date, Cancer site, Cancer type) 
f. Populate the cancelled date field with the 1st day of the month that 
the update relates to. 
g. Update the notes field to record when the cancer was cancelled and 
who performed the cancellation e.g. MR511_09_2014 would be - 
cancelled NH 07.01.2014 
9) Other documents to process ? 
a. Other documents may be present in the folder eg a pdf document 
containing surname change or a flag status change sheet or an event 
sheet. These need reviewing and actioning. If there has been a name 
change, this can be recorded in the notes field in the Cohort table. Also 
Exit to NI, Embark, Re-entry are also recorded in the comments 
field. 
10) Complete the LOG file 
11) EXPORT DATA [Export] on frmUpdateDeathsCancer 
a. Output death and cancers in excel format to send to Darren Greenwood 
Export done? Sent to Darren? Your name and date 
Cancers    
Deaths    
12) To finish: 
Once have added deaths, cancers, cancelled cancers and Scottish data from the 
data folder- update the LOG FILE <N:\Faculty-of-Medicine-and-
Health\LIGHT\Nutr-Epi\FOOD\COHORT\cen data\LOG FILE Death and cancer 
import to access.xlsx> in the cohort/cen data file 
13) CHECKS  
Table 1: Numbers log file (initial count and final check of the import) 
BEFORE AFTER 
List all files 
located within 
this cen data 
time period 
[___________] 
Row count/ 
record# 
using 
summary 
page info 
counting 
Notes Name of 
person 
doing 
count 
initially 
& date 
Number 
of rows 
from this 
file now 
in access 
Notes 
for any 
for any 
IDs not 
access 
person 
doing 
count  
check 
import 
