PhD Thesis: The Disappearance of Robin Melling
By Andrew A. Eck
Submitted to Swansea University in fulfilment of the requirements for the Degree of:
Doctor of Philosophy
Swansea University, 2020
Thesis Summary
Synopsis of Novel
A small town in Maine is plagued with a rash of missing persons after a mysterious tremor, termed
the Earthquake, shakes the whole world. Years later, after being severely injured in a car accident
caused  by  the  Earthquake,  teenage  Nathan  Alexander  is  still  adjusting-  dealing  with  reduced
mobility,  overbearing  parents,  and a  crush on  Robin,  a  girl  who works  with  him in  an  occult
bookstore. Over coffee he senses a dark shadow- which pulls Robin into the dream world. Robin is
kidnapped and gradually loses herself to the monster. Nathan must find a way to save her with only
a dream swallow, a bookmark, and a small town cop to help him.
Summary of Essay
The  essay  explores  the  themes  of  the  novel,  including  trauma  and  The  Hero's  Journey.  Each
character  experiences  trauma,  and  how  they  deal  with  this  trauma  informs  their  actions  and
personalities. The framework of the story is explored and named, and an argument is formulated
towards a story framework that underpins all stories, from myths to films. The religious precepts of
Shamanism, mentioned in the novel, are used as an example of the ubiquity of this framework.
These elements are brought together to paint a complete picture of  The Disappearance of Robin
Melling. 
Declaration and Statements
Declaration
This work has not previously been accepted in substance for any degree and is not being 
concurrently submitted in candidature for any degree.
Signed___Andrew Eck_____________ Date_25/06/2019
Statement 1
This work is the result of my own independent study/investigation, except where otherwise stated. 
Other sources are acknowledged by footnotes giving explicit references. A bibliography is 
appended.
Signed___Andrew Eck______________ Date_25/06/2019
Statement 2
I hereby give consent for my work, if relevant and accepted, to be available for photocopying and 
for inter-library loan, and for the title and summary to be made available to outside organizations.
Signed___Andrew Eck______________ Date_25/06/2019
Contents Page
1 Title Page
2 Summary
3 Declaration and Statements
4 Contents Page
5 Acknowledgments
6-7 Prologue
8-14 Chapter 1
15-23 Chapter 2
24-31 Chapter 3
32-38 Chapter 4
39-48 The Dreaming of Robin Melling
49-57 Chapter 5
58-66 Chapter 6
67-76 Chapter 7
77-82 The Resistance of Robin Melling
83-94 Chapter 8
95-105 Chapter 9
106-116 Chapter 10
117-125 The Memories of Robin Melling
126-139 Chapter 11
140-144 The Truth of Robin Melling
145-152 Chapter 12
153-161 Chapter 13
162-171 Chapter 14
172-176 Chapter 15
177-181 Chapter 16
182-185 Robin, Nathan, and Peter
186-210 Essay: Journeys and Healing
211-215 Bibliography
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my PhD supervisor, Anne Lauppe-Dunbar, a wonderful writer and mentor,
who's tireless efforts on my behalf rescued this project from utter disaster more times than can be
counted. Pass or fail, I'm proud of the work we achieved together.
I would also like to thank my friend Jacob O.. His emotional support saw me through the moments
of low self-esteem, imposter syndrome, and other overreactions to the stumbles along the way. 
Thank you both.
The Disappearance of Robin Melling
Prologue
I'm having a strange dream.
Hovering on the border between life and death, I'd dreaming something really strange. I 
clearly remember getting hit by the car, the pain of it, the crunch of bone, the- But I feel fine No 
need to worry about it. I have plenty to distract me from reality. Usually when someone pictures 
unconsciousness it's black. Pure, unending blackness. You drift noiselessly, caught on some current 
you can't feel. Time flexes, minutes can't be counted. Hours slip by unnoticed. Then one second 
might as well last a thousand years for what it feels like.
That's not my experience. My unconsciousness is pure white. So bright that I have to quickly
shut my eyes after opening them. I have to do that a few times before my eyes adjust. Then I can 
see there are chairs every ten feet or so. Lots of doors with numbers on them. Some have little 
windows, and others are blank. An apartment building? No, too clean and white for that. And it'd be
stupid to have windows on the front door of an apartment. An STD poster on the wall makes me 
wince. Okay, a hospital, then.
I can't be dead. The thought is silly. I mean, the afterlife is a hospital? A bit on the nose, 
don't you think? But I still can't bring myself to laugh; I can't even smile. I can't be dead. That car 
barely nicked me
A pang in my heart and a sharp twinge in my side, the one that had been struck. I can feel 
my brow moisten, I wipe my palms on my jeans, but they stay slick. I'm about to start praying, 
because hey, why not- when I hear voices. Where? I get dizzy spinning around to look for the 
source. It's just mumbles. I close my eyes and concentrate. Behind me. I walk slowly, listening 
carefully. Anything's better than waiting. The mumbles grow louder as I make my way down the 
hallway. It doesn't feel fuzzy the way dreams usually do. It feels like I'm awake.
I come to a door and stop. Room 404. I can practically feel blood draining from my face, my
knees wobble. In Japanese folklore the number four symbolizes death. What would Mom have 
called it?  Inauspicious That's it. A bad omen, to say the least. Okay, they're definitely coming 
from in there. It's muffled yelling. The room must have some solid soundproofing because I can 
only make out half a word every now and then. Should I go in? I peek in through the window. 
I woke up screaming, a nurse was trying to hold me down until someone could give me 
something for the pain. Something had happened in that gap, when I looked through the door. I 
knew it wasn't a dream. No matter how many times my therapist tried to convince me otherwise and
divert me towards talking about the accident, my body, no matter how many times Dad raised a 
skeptical eyebrow, I knew. It had been real. But in the months and, eventually, years after the 
Earthquake and my accident, it didn't look like I'd ever get the answers to my questions. So I forgot 
about it. Or, at least I did until the day Robin Disappeared.
Chapter 1
On the morning of the day Robin Disappeared, I had another nightmare. The same one I'd 
been having on and off for two years. Well, almost the same- a gray street, a screech of burning 
tires, a weightless feeling as my body flies through the air- sensations that were all too familiar. I'd 
become used to those clips of memory seeping into my dreams; but the sludge on the ground? That 
was new. As I fell I landed inside a black puddle, not deep, but wide enough that my whole body 
got wet. The sludge felt sticky, like tar. I could only stare as it crawled up my broken body, and a 
strange sensation washed over me; similar to that time at Grandpa Shiro's funeral, staring at him in 
that casket, way too pale and quiet, not like him at all. Id felt recognition and disgust with a desire 
to kiss his cheek goodbye, and then vomit. 
I was wheezing hard, and sweating. My breath filled the otherwise silent room. The 
wheezing was from fear. But the sweat was just because it was hot. The height of summer and Dad 
still refused to turn the AC on before lunch. I'd sprawled myself out across the bed in a starfish 
shape, covers having been kicked to the ground again. Thrashing around was fine, at least I hadn't 
screamed again. Dad, ever a light sleeper, would have come in to check on me, which was pretty 
humiliating at sixteen. The nightmare, visceral and terrifying in the moment, had already started 
fading from memory. I headed to the bathroom. It was technically against the rules to walk around 
the house in just my boxers, but it was too damn hot for clothes. And the only person that cared 
(Dad) wouldn't see me if I was quick and quiet. 
The bathroom tiles were gloriously cool on my sweat slicked feet. I might have curled up on
the floor and pressed my head into the ground if, y'know, it hadn't been a bathroom. I stepped into 
the shower, noting the yellowing fiberglass. Dad must not have cleaned it. Well, it's not like I had 
cleaned it either. If Mom were here... I shook my head, pushing the thought away. After the shower 
I wrapped my towel around my waist, a purple one. Dad liked blue and Mom had been a fan of red 
things, so of course their child should have purple stuff. A cute idea for your toddler, but try having 
a bright purple backpack in high school. The bullying had been unreal. 
After brushing my teeth, I traced a finger along my scars. Around the edges, the skin was 
sensitive, a mottled forest of marks on high alert; even the light touch of my fingertip was intense, 
like when something brushes your neck unexpectedly. I pretended it was bearable, as if I was just 
poking a bruise, but I knew the pain was deceiving. The smallest spark of discomfort could spread 
like a wildfire and send me to the ground, writhing in pain. It had happened more than a few times, 
back in the early days when I was more stubborn about what I could and couldn't do. Maybe I 
should have covered up after all. I hated looking at my scars. I turned my attention to my forearm. It
still had a pretty nice curve, despite my lack of gym time. I flexed. A very nice curve. Good to know
not all my muscles had atrophied. I looked okay, as long as I had my shirt on. Not that Robin 
seemed to notice. Speaking of, couldn't forget to shave. The last thing I needed was Robin making 
some smart aleck comment about my peach fuzz. 
That done, I stared into the mirror, thinking. The nightmares had been more frequent, three 
last week. There were some pretty serious bags under my eyes. Detective Dad would notice soon, if 
he hadn't already. I hooked my fingertips underneath the mirror and pulled. Behind it three neat 
little shelves were stacked with band-aids, mouthwashes, q-tips, and a few pill bottles. Aspirin, 
mostly, but also a half filled orange and white one. My sleeping pills. I hadn't used them in half a 
year. They made me super groggy, but... I stifled a yawn; sleep disrupting nightmares were making 
me groggy anyway. I shook the bottle twice, absently listening to the rattle of pills. Well, I could 
leave them on my desk and decide whether to take one later tonight. Pill bottle in hand and boxers 
slung across my shoulder, I went back to my room.
I floated the towel to the bed and set the pills on my desk. I made a mental note to tell Dad 
about them. His detective vision would clock them instantly the next time he went into my room 
and he'd be mad I hadn't told him I was taking them again. I went through my morning stretches; a 
sort of tai-chi meets calisthenics routine my physical therapist had prescribed me. I liked to feel the 
air on my skin as I stretched, even though usually I felt uncomfortable naked, I hadn't even been 
swimming since the accident, but with no one to see, I didn't mind as much. Just as I was finishing 
up, my eyes landed on my tennis racket, propped against a drawer. A bright orange, well worn, 
Wilson K Factor. I'd been avoiding looking at it whilst simultaneously delaying throwing it out. 
Gathering dust inside the drawer were my various tennis awards: ribbons and trophies from another 
life. It would be stupid to dwell on it. But still...
The strings were a little loose. I plucked one, laughing when it sounded like an out-of-tune 
banjo. A swing, slow and jerky. I'd gotten rusty. Knees bent at the familiar position, stood on the 
balls of my feet, I replayed the moment I'd won my first tournament - the game winning overhead 
hit, coming down too fast for my opponent to catch it. I raised my hand and-
Electricity crackled down my left side. A hiss as I sucked in air was followed by a clatter as 
the racket slipped out of my hand. It stung, a lot. But I'd known it would. Someone famous once 
said that the definition of insanity was trying the same thing over and over and expecting a different
result. That's me. Eventually, the pain passed and I kicked the stupid useless piece of garbage under 
my bed. Whatever. I threw clothes on in a fume. 
A sizzle meant Dad was frying something. Shouldn't he be at the station? I sucked air past 
my teeth. Whatever the reason he was still here, the frying was dicey. He was better at grilling. I 
padded down the stairs, legs already feeling slick under my black pants. Stupid work dress code. 
Salt and something tangy. Fish? Poking my head past the doorway into the kitchen, I saw Dad 
beyond our small four person dining table, at the grill, way over-drizzling something with soy 
sauce. Though there was some thinning on top, he still had the majority of his hair. I was hopeful 
that implied good things for me in the future. Even though those gray streaks were getting bigger. 
He was wearing, as always, that horrible apron I'd bought him three Christmases ago. It was an ugly
red and gold monstrosity that was way too long, draping over his shoes. It'd been a last minute 
panic purchase. I'd begged him to let me return it for something nicer, but he'd refused. It looked 
ridiculous over his uniform. Weird sense of style, my dad.
Instead of just standing there- I jumped, -could you grab some plates and silverware? 
He turned to me, an eyebrow raised.
How do you do that? I asked as I went to the cabinet. 
My finely honed senses, he said, refocusing on the skillet. I've trained for years to be able
to pick up the slightest vibration, note the smallest detail, interpret the vaguest of sensory data.  
That is to say, I heard you coming down the stairs. 
I snorted and dutifully set the table. He poked what I saw were two salmon steaks with the 
spatula. They were done, golden crust starting to darken. I watched it with worry. He knew I liked 
the skin a little crispy, but often went to far and burned it. He transferred the steaks to a nearby 
serving platter without difficulty. He'd gotten pretty good at that. It'd have taken me three tries to get
just one of them to the platter. Then, scoop by scoop, he filled a bowl with rice from our decade old 
rice cooker, not spilling a single grain. It was like sorcery.
So, I take it you did your exercises? You're sweating a little, he asked, sitting down across 
from me.
Had he heard the racket clatter? He might have just been asking, he often did. He frowned as
the silence before my response dragged on too long.
They went okay. I did a little extra today. Why aren't you at work?
He shrugged. Don't know. They told me to come in after lunch. Guess they didn't need me.
Troubling. Were they planning to get rid of him? Hadn't they done enough to him? I reached 
for the soy sauce, but-
Not yet.
My hand froze. Dad closed his eyes and moved his hands into the prayer position. Open 
hands, fingertips touching, bowed outwards from the center. Thumbs brought in and flat, resting on 
the pointer finger knuckles. The shaman's blessing. It always looked so strange coming from him. I 
still wasn't sure if he was doing it because he believed or if it was just to honor Mom. It had been 
her religion not his, after all. Either way, I clasped my hands in a similar configuration. Her belief 
system had been... patchwork, to say the least. Raised both Shinto and Buddhist, she'd grown up 
knowing different religions weren't necessarily incompatible. Shamanism was the hot new fad 
around the world after the Earthquake. Mom would have loved it, I could almost picture her at the 
table, reading the latest book on it, wearing her glasses, eyes crinkled so tight you'd almost think 
she was sleeping.
What was that thing we used to say, at the start of meals?
Oh, Dad said, his eyes softening. I thought you'd forgotten about that. Er, 'Itadakimasu', if
I'm not mistaken. Don't quote me on the pronunciation. It's a Japanese phrase. Do you remember 
what it means?
'Thanks for the food' or something like that? I said.
Yeah. Your mother used to say that it encourages thankfulness towards the fact that you 
have food to feed yourself, or to the animals for giving up their lives so you can eat. She... she 
really liked to believe in things, your mom.
I wasn't sure what to say to that, so I started eating. Dad had the barest hint of a smile, gaze 
far away, maybe remembering some conversation the two of them had a long time ago. He'd started 
smiling more lately. That was good. Having to debate religion seemed like a small price to pay if it 
meant his too few smiles would come back. I mean, it wasn't that I thought religion was dumb or 
wrong, and I liked most of the basics. 'Be kind', 'Don't murder'. Yeah, I could get on board. But I 
just had a hard time believing in any one particular religion. As for Shamanism... I liked the idea of 
giving thanks for what you receive out of genuine gratitude rather than out of fear that the gods will 
get mad that you didn't praise them enough. And it was a nice way to start the day. 
Nathan?
I sighed and glanced at the clock. 11:32.
I need to leave soon or I'll be late for work.
What time will you be back?
My shift ends at five, but I have to help close, I said, scarfing the food. 
Help who?
Robin.
Oh, he said, face so carefully neutral it gave away what he really thought about me and 
her working late together. Hadn't he been the one to teach me that a constructed calm was just as 
revealing as any other emotion? Smug jerk.  And you're coming straight home after?
I guess.
He frowned and cocked his head, debating whether to say anything.
Okay, okay I'll come home as soon as I'm done, happy?
God, he couldn't ever just let me leave the house without knowing every little detail about 
my schedule
Nathan...
Look, it doesn't matter. 
We've lost a lot over the years, haven't we? 
I froze; my fork hovered in place, just in front of my mouth.
I mean even just these last few years there's been-
Stop I was there for it too, remember? I said, taking a bite. I'd been afraid. Afraid of him 
and afraid for him; they'd mixed together. 
No, I know. But... can you understand how I feel about you? Can you at least try?
How did he want me to answer that? What could I possibly say in response? He wanted me 
to accept his helicopter parenting without protest. And he was, subtly, using Mom's death to get me 
to do it. Unfair. Totally freaking unfair. I let myself miss her, just a little. The food in my stomach 
soured. 
I-I have to go. I'll see you later.
Nathan
But I was already placing my dish in the sink. I climbed up the stairs as fast as my damaged 
body would allow and tried to understand, I did. He'd wanted GPS tracking enabled on my cell 
phone so he could monitor where I was. I'd only finally gotten him to back down by threatening to 
just never bring it with me anywhere. He preferred me to have it than not. 
A wave of nausea hit as I walked into my room. Food poisoning? The fish hadn't seemed 
under cooked. My hand found its way to the desk chair as my knees started to wobble like I was at 
sea. Dammit. It wasn't food poisoning. My eyesight kaleidoscoped, and when it snapped back to 
normal colors were saturated. The orange pill bottle shone like a light, my blue walls seemed to 
pulse and flex, sending radiant showers of color outwards. Something icy crawled its way up my 
body, covering my feet and inching upwards, stopping around my waist. The urge to sleep was 
overpowering. Another attack. What if I had one in front of someone? It was the third one in a 
week. Dad would rush me to the hospital if he saw. No, it was just a delightful new side effect of the
accident. It had to be. 
With each breath, nausea faded and colors stopped moving. My legs felt stronger. Time to 
go. I fumbled for my jacket, hauled over the desk chair I'd been clinging to. Dad was still in the 
kitchen, faucet running. Must be washing the dishes. I snuck past the door frame.
Hey 
I froze, not wanting to talk. 
Say goodbye to your mother before you go.
Oh... Yeah, okay. I should. Instead of heading outside through the door in front of me, I 
turned left. Our family room, with two chairs and a shelf, plus several bookcases. In the back 
corner, almost tucked away was a small wooden table. It was dark, but had been treated to almost 
shine under the light. On it, was a picture of my mother and me from a year or two before she'd 
died. How old was I in the photo? I looked idiotic, missing one front tooth from both my upper and 
lower jaw, but on opposite sides. Must have been around seven. She was probably sick by then, but 
hadn't yet been diagnosed. The picture frame itself was adorned with a black ribbon. Next to it was 
a bowl of rice with incense sticks speared into it. Vanilla, her favorite scent. We usually only lit 
them on her birthday, but sometimes I'd seen Dad light them and pray over the little shrine at 
seemingly random times. Next to that was an urn, which held her ashes and had a rosary draped 
over the lid. We had thought she'd have liked the eclectic mix of religions in her shrine-thing.
Well... bye, Mom. See you later, I said. No matter how many times I did it, talking to her 
picture was awkward. Like, was I supposed to think she could hear me? Should I be imagining a 
conversation? Not sure I believed that.
 I turned and hobbled out the front door as fast as possible, eager to avoid Dad. The path to 
town led through a nearby park. It had an old school playground with one of those metal spider web
dome things for climbing and a cylindrical plastic slide that would probably burn your skin if you 
tried to ride it when it was as hot as today. A sand pit, littered with garbage and missing half the 
sand, had been built underneath the dome. At the base of the metal fence that encircled it, was a 
flower memorial. Oh yeah, the anniversary of the Earthquake was coming up. There was a wreath 
big enough to hold with two hands, made out of round, pink, pom-pom flowers. What were they 
called? It was on the tip of my tongue One pom-pom had come loose and lay on the ground. I 
picked it up. Maybe Robin would know if I showed her. I turned away, then turned back.
The Earthquake. That's where everything had gone wrong. Don't get me misunderstand, life 
hadn't exactly been a set of crystal stairs before that, what with Mom... you know, but boy did 
things down turn hard after that. Not even just for me, but for Dad and a lot of people. Thanks to it 
being the start of the Disappearances. Right after it, people started vanishing. It was rumors at first. 
Stories of parents abandoning their families in the middle of the night, Robin's father included. 
Affairs, people thought. Abuse, or drugs, said the unkind. But when that 8 year old Keisha Williams
vanished, all hell broke loose. The police drowned in angry demands for answers. A vigil for the 
Disappeared turned rancorous, nearly riotous. The lead detective was kicked off the case and 
demoted. I knew the details better than most, since that lead detective was my dad. But kicking him 
off the case hadn't stopped the Disappearances.
Screw the Earthquake. 
I kicked the wreath. It crumpled, some more flowers came loose, but it looked more or less 
the same. That hadn't made me feel any better. And, crap, I'd wasted too much time. Robin would be
furious if I was late. Normally, my limp was barely noticeable. You might think I'd tweaked a 
muscle. Any sort of speed, though, and it really showed. Jogging would just lead to another trip to 
the hospital after someone found me collapsed on the ground. Even the loping half-jog I settled on 
was pushing it. I hurried, as best I was able, on to work.
Chapter 2
Talisman was a one stop specialty bookstore for occult reading. Witchcraft, demonology, 
horoscopes, Shamanism. I rested my head on the front door, panting. Cool glass, a slight relief. 
Sweat dripped from my nose onto the sidewalk. My side ached. A wave of nausea surged up, but 
passed almost as quickly. I used my sleeve to dab away the sweat. Small miracles: my black shirt 
wouldn't show any stains; my face didn't look too flushed in the window's reflection. Hair? A quick 
paw through it. Maybe she'd think it was gelled instead of wet?
The bell chime wasnt an electric one like supermarkets have, but a real bell hung so the 
door swing hit it. I checked my phone. On time That was something. Where was Robin? Her thin 
black jacket was hung on the chair behind the register, and Talisman looked neat-ish, so she was 
definitely around somewhere. We fought a losing battle to find and re-sort books misplaced by 
careless customers. Robin was a one woman Dewey Decimal System. She knew exactly where each
book's home was. Me, I was more of a customer service guy. Reading's not really my thing, but the 
smell of paper was nice. It reminded me of Mom's bedtime stories. She'd read me fairy tales in a 
slow, hesitant voice as she translated the Japanese to English and then switched back to Japanese as 
I drifted off and the plot became less important than the soft cadence of her voice.
Tall old metal library shelves loomed and lined corridors that were divided by subject. One 
of the lights at the back flickered. It always did that, no matter how many times we changed the 
bulb and, no matter how many time I'd told myself it was faulty wiring, it always felt ominous. 
Something shifted in between the flickering. Not a person. A presence. A cold shadow that sent a 
chill down my spine, like a vaguely unpleasant scent I couldn't place, that wafted down the hallway,
up my nose, into my dreams, a seeping corruption that-
Hey.
I blinked. Robin
Are you okay?
Y-yeah. Fine.
Her glasses had slipped to the edge of her thin nose, but an armful of books prevented her 
from adjusting them. 
You're late.
Uh, no I'm not, I said digging into my pocket, ignoring the needles of pain at the 
movement, and showing her my phone, On time. See?
You were supposed to come in early and help me with the display.
Are you sure you asked me?
Yes, she said, Now, get out of my way, these are heavy.
I tipped to the side, leaning on the front desk which held the register and ancient desktop 
computer. She scooted by, jostling me as she moved past. She jabbed my scars, right under the ribs. 
That hurt Had she done that on purpose? She didn't apologize when she heard me hiss, so maybe. 
She stepped to the right, into the tiny window display alcove and went about placing the books here 
and there. Psychic Earthquakes and other Supernatural/Natural Phenomena. Right, the anniversary
always drew in people looking to read up on the Earthquake. Robin was hunched over in the display
window, trying to fan out a book's pages so it would stay standing. It fell over. She continued to 
ignore me.
C'mon, I'm sorry, but we both know you already have a job for me to do to make it up to 
you, so out with it.
It's pricing day, she said with a frown. I like to think she was resisting a smile. I groaned. 
She actually did smile at that, You get a head start on that and I'll come help when I'm done.
Alright.
Or so I said, but I wasn't moving, my brain said go, but my jelly legs said stop. The scars 
itched where Robin had hit them, but I fought the urge to scratch, I didn't want her noticing; just 
needed a moment to catch my breath, that's all. I felt flat, a two dimensional person in a 3D world. 
When I opened my eyes, she was staring at me, eyebrows furrowed. 
Are you- she began, before noticing my hand. What is that?
What? I followed her gaze- the flower, I was still holding it. Oh. How's your botany? I 
can't remember what this is called.
She held her hand out, and I dropped the flower. A few of its thin petals clung to my sweaty 
hand. Squinting, Robin adjusted her glasses as she examined it and looked at me with pity, like I 
was stupid for not knowing.
It's a chrysanthemum. It's a pretty common flower, Nathan. Where'd you get it?
I plead the fifth.
She raised an eyebrow. Like I was going to tell her I stole it from a memorial I'd nearly 
destroyed. She made to give it back.
Uh, no, you keep it, I said, heart suddenly pounding, palm sweat doubling, tripling.
Thanks, she said, not really sounding thankful. Her brown eyes bored into me. Her stare 
was relentless. It's one of the things I liked about her, Are you okay? You don't look so great. 
Thank you, I said breezily.
No, I mean you have bags under your eyes. You're pale as hell and you're sweating like you
just ran a marathon. You seem worn out. Have you been sleeping?
Barely at all. I took comfort in the fact that she was noticing me, even if it was how gaunt I 
looked. Okay, that settled it. I was taking those sleeping pills.
And I don't know how to put this, but... you seem brighter, like you're glowing.
Glowing?
Yeah, like a shimmer, or a cat's eye at night. I'm not explaining it very well, but it kind of 
reminds me of... she trailed off. 
I'd just looked in the mirror that morning and hadn't noticed any shimmer. Robin, on the 
other hand, always looked great. She was wearing one of those white shirts with ruffles on them 
with a black bow tied to the collar. Victorian chic. She'd undone two of the buttons, two more than 
usual. A bead of sweat dripped from her neck down the slope of the revealed skin. I love summer. 
She was kinda tall, a little rounded, with a pencil skirt and tights; she totally had a sexy librarian 
thing going on. And she even had brown eyes All librarians should have brown eyes. She flipped 
some hair back. 
Well, if you say you're fine, she said with a shrug. Better get started on pricing before the
afternoon rush comes in.
I gave her a mock salute, appreciating the tinkling laughter that followed. I headed behind 
the counter, finally letting myself grimace and scratch my scars. Ooh that felt satisfying. Through 
the staff break room, the door to the basement creaked open with the subtlety of a horror movie. I 
shivered. The steps creaked; I knew it was just the sound of wood fibers snapping. At the bottom, I 
pulled the metal beaded cord for the light. It flickered twice, then came on. A naked bulb hung in 
the center of the room. There was a squeak; I whipped around, hurting my neck. Just the stairs 
settling. Got me every time. The first time I'd ventured down there, I'd nearly knocked Robin over 
in my haste to leave. She'd teased me for a week and half seriously offered to do the job herself. 
Books were scattered in piles everywhere. About three hundred, I guessed, in stacks knee 
high. I'd never seen so many books on pricing day. We usually got around a third as many. The 
Earthquake was really driving foot traffic. I sighed, already feeling utterly worn out at the prospect 
of so much work ahead of me. Thanks to the state of the basement they were already dusty. The 
pages, though, had been yellowed by age, not dust. We only dealt in used rare books. I took five, 
careful to balance them on my non-scarred side. It still hurt. I growled. Not too long ago, I could 
have taken twenty at a time. Hell, my arms were still more than strong enough, but my useless core 
couldn't handle it. I bit my cheek, drew blood, and forced myself to stay within my limits. It 
wouldn't prove anything to take more. I set them on the front desk, next to the register. Underneath 
the register, lying on a shelf built into the desk was the pricing guide. It was thick and badly bound, 
clearly a custom job. I lugged it up to the desk with some difficulty. Pick up a book, assess the 
condition: Like New, Very Good, Good, Fair, or Poor, find it in the pricing guide, and assign the 
correct price. Easy peasy. And dull.
Shamanism's really weird.
What, you don't believe in it? Robin said, suddenly at my back, making me flinch.
Oh Hey. I'm spiritually indecisive at the moment, but that's not my point. I don't have a 
problem with the general principles, I just mean, this new version of Shamanism is getting built 
right before our eyes Like, how can you believe in a religion that didn't exist for the first 2,000,000
years of human history? Wouldn't it have shown up before now? Seems like one of the older 
religions is more likely to be the right one.
We've only been around for, like, 200,000 years. Again, not the point. I heard her sigh as 
she flipped through the already priced books, checking my work. It wasn't worth being offended. 
She'd caught a lot of my mistakes. Her breath caressed the skin on my neck. Heat fizzed down my 
spine. Did she know how close she was? 
Well to directly answer your question, wasn't Shamanism the very first religion ever? There
wasn't any organized religion, so it was all wise men and women guiding their people through 
interaction with the spirits. Or something like that. And anyway, isn't 'right' and 'wrong' a pretty 
limited view of religion? It's not like stories have no value if they aren't describing real events. Like,
I'm Catholic, but I don't believe the story of Genesis literally happened.
I guess. I could argue that believing in those stories had caused a lot of harm too, but 
maybe that was a bit of an intense topic for coworkers. Especially when I didn't have a firm opinion
on it yet.
strangely. 
Another flinch. Dammit. Don't react, don't give her any clue, she'll pick up on it 
You take, like, what? Four or five at a time, six max. I'm sure you could handle ten or
twelve. It'd mean less trips to the basement.
A nudge in the back. I turned to her wry smile. She'd done that a few times. Asked a 
question indirectly about my physical abilities. Maybe trying to give me an opportunity to talk 
about it. I felt the words bubble up and push against my throat, but... I couldn't do it. Something 
equally strong pushed them back down, begging me not to say anything. Fear. It shouldn't have 
mattered. She already knew something was up. I mean, we'd met when I'd only just recovered. I'd 
had a limp and she'd definitely clocked it, though she'd never asked about it directly. I'm not sure 
what I was so afraid of. But as I turned away I heard her sigh and felt the warm air hit my ears. I 
closed my eyes. Her breath smelled like peppermint toothpaste.
You're a puzzle, Nathan Alexander.
Well, uh, we should schedule some time together after work one day so you can figure me 
out.
That just slipped out I hadn't meant to say it. I wasn't brave enough to look at her reaction. 
Was she smiling? Frowning? Was she disgusted? Or maybe blushing? Only a second had passed, 
but it dragged on into an eternity. I'd never heard a silence so loud. 
Yeah, maybe. 
Was I okay to take that as a good sign? Too late, I already had. It was sort of a polite non-
answer but it made my heart soar, patter furiously. My skin felt heated, and a kaleidoscope of 
butterflies took flight in my stomach. A polite non-answer was NOT a rejection. 
Anyway, you priced these two wrong.
What? No, I didn't, I said before sighing. Okay, which two?
A book appeared in front of my face.
There's some damage on the spine.
That's hardly a scratch. I'm not bumping it from Very Good, sorry. Next?
Fine, she said, leafing through a stack of books and picking up the one on water spirits 
colored a deep scarlet. I recognized it because I remembered thinking it was stupid to publish a 
book about water spirits in red. It's, um, this one.
The Dunham, yeah, what about it?
She died last week.
Oh... That was kind of depressing, actually. 
Yeah, the store got an email about it today. So what do we do in the first month after the 
author dies?
Raise the price by 20%. I know, I know. I hadn't checked the email. Don't forget who got 
you this job.
She laughed and finally I felt the tension from her question and our little half date agreement
break. Yes Nathan, but I'm better than you at pricing. Admit it.
I'll admit it if you admit that I'm better with customers.
I'll never admit that.
Come on, you know it's true.
I don't know anything, pal, she said, laughing again. Pal? Even that got my heart 
thumping. I didn't have many friends. Oh, who was I kidding? I didn't have ANY friends. She 
probably didn't know what that offhand word meant to me. Or, wait, was it a bad thing? Did it mean
she was rejecting me romantically? Putting me in the dreaded friend-zone? But... well, I think I 
could live with her thinking of us as friends, at least it meant she liked me a little. I smiled. 
Whatever, whichever. I'd take what I could get. Robin's head was cocked to the side, probably 
observing my fluctuating facial expressions. 
I'm going on lunch break. Are you okay on your own for a little bit? she said as the front 
door chimed.
Sure, I said. Enjoy your rabbit food.
It's called a salad.
As she left, a young guy walked through the door. He had long blonde hair drawn into a 
ponytail. An earthy scent accompanied him. He had piercing green eyes. Well, eye. That was new. 
He had a black patch covering his left eye, it had been embroidered in gold thread with the image of
a butterfly. 
Nath, just the man I wanted to see My supervisor's really breathing down my neck. She 
says I have good ideas, but they aren't well researched, can you believe that? I say a good idea is a 
good idea, you know? Anyway, I need some research materials to get her off my back. Think you 
can help me out?
Don't call me that. I mean- I just- Forget all that, Jesus, what happened to your eye? I was
nearly yelling.
Oh this? he said, brushing the patch a little with his thumb. It's just a sty. Nothing to 
worry about, but a little gross. The doctor gave me a patch to wear-
His doctor gave him that, really?
-and then I went online and found a way better one.
There it was. Much more Teddy. He'd been coming in to Talisman for awhile. I'd hated him 
nearly instantly. The jerk had made Robin giggle the first time they'd spoken Robin NEVER 
giggled... not to me anyway. But I had to admit, he was pretty funny. The guy was so damn chipper 
and nice I'd started to feel bad not liking him back. Anyway, we'd gotten sort of friendly, the three 
of us. Even though I liked it better when he and Robin didn't interact. But our rapport is how I knew
something wasn't right. I mean, beyond just the eye thing. 
Sooooo... He said, startling me, do you want the titles or what?
Oh Yeah, give 'em here.
He dug through his pockets one by one, finally finding a crumpled slip of paper in his back 
left one and waving it at me. I took it and laid it flat on the table, trying with the palm of my hand to
smooth it out.
Spirit Callings, Death of the Rain Dance, and Modern Shamanism: A Guide. 
Hm. The anniversary of the Earthquake was definitely coming up. Shaman stuff always 
sold like crazy when it did. Like how a Christian might buy a really nice bible around Easter. What 
was Teddy's thesis even supposed to be on? He bought Shamanism one week, demonology the next,
an out of print medical textbook that was more fantasy than science after that. 
Something wrong? You need the authors?
Oh, no. It's just that we don't carry Modern Shamanism. It's too new for us to have a used 
copy. You should try a chain store, they'll probably have it. 
That's fine, he said, I'll grab it on my way out of town.
Out of town... where? The stuff he wanted was always super rare and therefore super 
expensive. I'd wondered a dozen times what he did for a living that meant he could afford our 
books. Death of the Rain Dance was a self published translation out of print for half a century. Hell,
Callings was the book that was as close to a first edition Bible that modern shamans had. You'd only
even know about books like these if you were really knowledgeable about modern Shamanism. I'd 
sort of picked it up through osmosis by working at Talisman.  
You're not secretly some sort of Shaman high priest, are you? I joked.
His smile tightened. He took a step back, his relaxed posture tensing up. Wait, what? I'd 
offended him? The guy who'd called religion the opiate of the masses? Actually, now that I really 
looked at him beyond the eye patch, I realized why he seemed off. I mean, between is bright green 
eyes and shimmering golden hair he always gave off a kinda supernatural vibe, like an elf, but that 
wasn't it. He was thin, and pale. I could see his veins. The whites of his eyes were red and dark 
circles underlined his eyes. He hadn't been sleeping. And his smile. Even before I'd asked the 
shaman question it had felt forced. An awkward silence seemed to crawl around us.
Um, well, I'll go find these, if you don't mind waiting?
Take your time, he said, turning to a nearby shelf. It took me only a minute to find them. 
You don't forget where the pricey stuff is. When I came back he was leaning over the counter, 
fiddling with something. He turned to me, but didn't explain himself. That was weird. My wallet 
was still there, and Robin's jacket, so he hadn't stolen anything. What was with the guilty look? I 
rang up the books and winced.
$714.14, I said.
Here. 
The check he handed me was a custom design, the kind you had to pay a little extra for. A 
bright blue butterfly sat on the edge of a blade of grass. He'd written the exact number, down to the 
cent. Again. It couldn't have just been looking up the prices (not that he even could have for the 
incredibly rare books) because he'd wanted to buy Modern Shamanism on top of these two, but we 
hadn't carried it. Somehow, Teddy always knew exactly what the books he bought would cost.
How do you always do that?
That's classified by orders of the Shaman high priest, he said with an incredibly forced 
wink and grin. But whatever, that was fine, I took it to mean he wasn't mad about earlier.
I began to look over the books. Cover, spine, binding, back cover, pages. Teddy seemed 
interested. 
It's just to double check we gave it the right condition rating, I said. You've seen me do 
this a bunch of times.
I know, but it's still kind of cool He said, You're like some professional appraiser, 
y'know?
 Did you need anything else?
Can I have a bag?
Sure. The small shelf underneath the register had large paper bags resting on it. I grabbed 
one and shook it out, and placed his two books inside. Teddy was staring at me. The smile that 
hardly ever left him was gone. The air around me suddenly felt colder, or, like something cold was 
approaching from behind. I noticed he wasn't staring at me, per se, more like my outline. My 
muscles? Not sure how to feel about that.
Your friend, Teddy said, making me jump. Third time in a day Is she here?
You mean Robin? He nodded. She's eating lunch. Uh, want me to get her?
His face scrunched up, considering, but in the end he shook his head. See ya He called 
behind his back as he took his books and left.
I nodded as the door chimed. Goodbye, weirdo.
With his departure I was alone. One customer buying two books in a specialty bookstore in a
small town qualified as a sales rush. How was Talisman staying open? Meh- as long as I was getting
paid, right? My stomach gurgled. Maybe I could afford to take my lunch break too. No sign of 
Robin in the break room. She wouldn't have gone into the basement to eat, there wasn't even a table.
Maybe the manager's office? We weren't explicitly told not to use it, but I'd thought Robin was too 
much of a goody two shoes to break a rule, even if it was only implied. 
I tiptoed to the door. Why was I being subtle? I flung the door open, slamming it against the 
opposite wall. 
Eek
...Insanely cute. A fork full of lettuce hovered inches from her mouth. Her face flushed.
You nearly gave me a heart attack she said.
I wanted to take my break and couldn't find you. Do you always eat in here?
 No. And I was done anyway.
I stared pointedly at the still uneaten third of the salad. She placed it back in its wrapping, 
overly slow, overtly casual like she was trying to show she'd always meant to leave it uneaten. Into 
her satchel it went, along with the rest of the debris. A packet of chips, a cookie with a bite taken out
of it, an empty soda can. No judgment, but it seemed gross to take a bite of a cookie in-between 
forkfuls of salad. Then I noticed her body movements were stiff and she had red rimmed eyes. Oh. 
She'd been distracted.
Hey, are you okay?
Sure, she replied, too fast.
My lips tightened as I debated whether to press further. 
The anniversary is in a few days.
The Earthquake. She'd lost her dad right after. Of course she'd be upset. Stupid, I should 
have remembered. I wanted to say something, but what do you say to a person whose dad 
Disappeared? They don't exactly print greeting cards for it. If it had been my dad... No, not worth 
getting upset about, it didn't happen to him. It wouldn't. 
She sighed. It doesn't matter. Look, take your break. Someone needs to watch the store 
since I'm sure you didn't use the 'back in five minutes' sign.
Lips quirking upward at my shrug, she slung the bag over her shoulders and slammed the 
door.
Wait I called, finally finding my voice. You forgot your lap... top. Too late. 
Her plain, white ceramic mug sat on the desk... and her laptop. Behind the desk, a bamboo 
plant that Robin sporadically watered clung to life. It was impossible to tell if the carpet was brown 
because it had been made that way or because it was old. Her laptop was open, still logged in and 
everything. It kind of reminded me of the police precinct. Cluttered and run-down, everything 
looking second hand under bright fluorescent lighting and laptops sitting on desks-
Okay A little peek wouldn't hurt. 'Investigation- Victims'. A list of names, vital stats next to 
them, age, gender, a few had height and, gross, blood type? Grisly. It looked like the police reports 
Dad would bring home when he was dealing with a tough case, but less professional. Some names 
were vaguely familiar, others obscure. David Melling. Melling? That's Robin's last name. I scrolled 
down. Keisha Williams- The first child to Disappear. It was a list of people who'd Disappeared, with
notes on each, including her dad. That explained the crying. How long had Robin been tracking this 
stuff? And at the end was a name with a question mark next to it. Nathan Alexander. Me. 
Chapter 3
Our town has stray cats. Abandoned or escaped pets and their offspring wander around 
scrounging for food. They're emaciated, desperate. If you take a shortcut through an alley, you 
might see one. It doesn't know you're just walking from one place to another. To it, you're an 
invader. It'll hug the wall, protecting its flank. It'll preen upwards, hissing and spitting. Fur will 
splay outward, exaggerating its size. 
That's how Robin looked when she opened the door and saw me staring at her computer. 
Feline and cornered, spoiling for a fight, she darted forward and stretched herself across the desk, 
slapping the screen down. Ouch. Couldn't have been good for the hardware. 
What did you see? she demanded.
Like... everything? Height, weight, birthday, star sign. At least the medications box was 
blank; she didn't know what I was taking. But why have me there at all? A quick glance at my body 
told me, I was, in fact, not Disappeared at all. I was extremely... Appeared. 
I-nothing. The victim list, I said.
You had no right.
You left it on and open, it's not like I hacked into it
Oh, so that gives the right to invade my privacy?
That's not what I'm saying, I just-
No dice, Robin wasn't having any of it; she pulled the computer to her side, stormed out of 
the room and once again slammed the door behind her. Hard. I felt the wind blow some hair out of 
my face. When I was brave enough to leave, I could practically feel a cold draft coming off her. She
stalked around the bookstore, an angry cloud hanging over her. What few customers we had bought 
their books and left as fast as possible. No one, least of all me, wanted to get caught up in a Robin 
tornado. Okay, I shouldn't have looked, but it wasn't like I'd read her diary, I'd glanced, glanced, at a
file she'd left open and in front of me. About me 
By the time Robin was locking up the store, I'd come to a decision. A buzzing from my 
pocket distracted me. Dad, checking in with 'Are you on your way home?' I could hear him in my 
head, stern, already a little worried. He'd live if I didn't respond right away. 
Want to get coffee?
Robin gave me a look that made me feel lower than a worm. No.
We need to talk.
She folded her arms; I mirrored her and raised an eyebrow. Come on, mad as she was, she 
knew she couldn't pretend she didn't have to explain why my name was on that list. She exhaled 
loudly, staring up into the sky. Good enough. I pointed to one of three coffee shops on the opposite 
side of the street. Robin fell into step ahead of me, not unusual, most people walked faster. Despite 
the earlier tension, the silence wasn't uncomfortable. She was a rare person that didn't feel 
compelled to fill every little silence, like me. With her, I felt like I could just enjoy moments, no 
commentary needed. I glanced her way. She had an angular face which felt at odds with her round 
glasses frames and overall figure. As tall as me in her heels, so she was maybe 5'9''? Perfect hug 
height. I'd only have to crane my neck a little for her to slot right in. And she had a curvy enough 
figure that I'd probably feel everything if she pressed up against me. 
We crossed the town's original old brick road. It was uneven, easy to trip over and badly in 
need of repair. Mom used to be afraid to drive over it in case it blew one of her tires. And Dad told 
me every local election devolved into a fight over whether to spend the money to repair it. Costs 
and historical relevance vs safety. The lion's share of the budget was probably sunk into the ongoing
police searches for the people who'd vanished. The road was just about the only thing left from 
when the town was first built. 
I paid for Robin's drink, trying to earn a few points. She practically ripped the cup out of my 
hand as I gave it to her. Soon we were sitting on the patio overlooking the street. A latte for Robin 
and a sugar filled caramel something-or-other for me.
If you want something sweet, just get a cake.
Cakes don't have caffeine. 
We watched cars pass by. The air was thick with the roast smell of coffee. A hot drink on a 
hot day. Time flowed slowly. It felt like I could identify each individual moment as it passed us by. 
It wasn't quite the alone time with Robin I'd hoped for, since it was a prelude to a difficult 
conversation, but it was kind of nice. Quiet moments had become rare with the paranoia oppressing 
the town. Anyone might Disappear for no reason, at any time. From your bed, from the street, your 
car, and so people talked, to keep themselves busy on anything other than thinking.
Teddy came in today, I said, searching for a neutral topic to diffuse the tension.
Oh? She said.
Yeah, he had an eye patch. He has a sty, apparently, but I think he had his custom made. It 
had an embroidered gold thread- 
She sent me a withering glare. Okay, she didn't want to lead in with small talk. 
I'm sorry, I said. She didn't turn to me, but I could tell I had her attention, her head tilted 
slightly to better catch my words. I shouldn't have looked at your private notes. It was a dick 
move.
She huffed.
But... I said, I did see them. So it's kind of hard to pretend you don't have a file with the 
Disappearance victims' personal information in it. And mine. The question hung in the air.
I don't have to tell you anything. she said, a cold front moving in from the north. 
Hey, for someone who's so concerned about her privacy, you sure don't seem to be losing 
any sleep for violating two dozen other people's.
I didn't do anything illegal, she said. 
It was something a nine year old would say.
And I'm sure that'll be a good argument if you happen to end up in law school, I said as 
she flipped her hair, refusing to make eye contact. I could feel a headache coming on and a cold 
tingling in my feet. C'mon, shake it off I tapped my feet, trying to warm them up. It'd be the worst 
possible time to have an attack. It looks like you're spending a lot of time thinking about the 
Disappearances, and it makes me worry about you. It's not healthy.
You're worried about my health? You look like you're about to drop dead.
 Did I really look that bad? She'd said I'd been glowing earlier. Was I sweating a lot or 
something? Just the heat of the day, the stress, that was all. A gulp of hot coffee did nothing to 
suppress a shiver. 
This isn't about me, I said, trying to gain control of the conversation, this is about you 
and your file.
It came out forcefully. Good. Then, a pulse, a familiar chill, worked up from my feet to my 
waist, not stopping, rising and swirling around my heart and into my thoughts. Anger. Coldness. My
vision blurred then darkened. The world dipped itself in florescent paint, then twisted. Robin's eyes 
became a swirling saturated mess, hypnotic. I was so tired. No, no. I didn't want to sleep. The 
iciness pulled at me. I was being pulled into sleep. A sharp pain broke through the noise. I gasped.
Ah, ow I said. What the hell are you doing?
Everything snapped back. I was breathless. Had I not been breathing? Robin was gripping 
my arm, holding tight enough that I could feel my bones flexing. The bruises would probably lead 
to yet another father-son talk about my health. Fantastic. Thanks Robin.  
I'm sorry, Robins grip loosened before she pulled away entirely, you looked just like- no,
never mind. Sorry.
Her hand trembled. So did mine.
Is- Is that why my name's on your list? Because I remind you of your dad?
She flinched. Her dad. That had to have been the person she was talking about. My pocket 
was buzzing from another attempt to reach me by my father. I'd pay for not answering later. Robin 
refused to meet my eyes; she fidgeted in her seat, crossing a leg over the other.  Her skirt hitched up
and I mostly avoided staring at the exposed skin.
You look a little like he did, just before. Tired. And, like, kind of bright. It reminds me of 
him, okay? And I always miss him around the anniversary of the Earthquake. I got ahead of myself 
writing your name. I'm sorry.
So your dad was ruggedly handsome too?
She laughed hard, almost mockingly. Your features and personality are totally different. My
dad's kind and sweet and really really smart, and, like, tall. Super tall. You've just had the same air 
about you as he did. It's hard to define.
She was crushing my heart as casually as you'd throw away a piece of garbage. She made a 
noise between a cough and a laugh and turned red, looking away. Oh, okay. So, she realized it, but 
wasn't going to take it back.
But it's the same as him right before... he left. You were pretty tan when I met you, but 
you're awfully pale now. He looked kind of drained too.
Yeah, I'd lost my tan because I can barely walk without risking aggravating lingering 
injuries from the accident, so I no longer felt particularly outdoorsy. She started tapping her finger 
against her cup. A nervous habit? She stared into the street.
 I, uh, I did interviews with the families of the victims, and they confirmed their loved ones 
had looked the same way.
Wait, what do you mean, 'interviews'? Like with a camera?
No. Maybe 'interviews' is too formal a word. I was looking for my dad, and they'd all been 
through the same thing as me, so they were willing to talk to me, she said. I was looking for any 
kind of connection between the victims. Something the police had missed. 
Police like my dad. I bristled, not liking her implication. I mean, a couple of people who 
kind of looked paler than normal isn't exactly a smoking gun, I know. But it felt like maybe it wasn't
a coincidence.
Couldn't it be? It was happening again. The heart pounding. It'd been a stressful day for 
the organ.  
I mean, probably. She sighed. But equally, maybe not. It's not like I had anything else to 
go on.
My stomach felt like it was trying to crawl up my throat. I'm next. I'm going to disappear 
next. That's all I could think. Robin's eyebrows rose. She'd made the connection too. 'Brightness' 
and 'drained'. Two things I had in common with her dad. Had he had attacks like mine? I was afraid 
to ask.
Nathan, would you quit freaking out? she said. We're talking about, like, four people who
said their Disappeared relatives were 'Yeah, maybe a little pale' months and months after the fact
Wha-? Come on, you have to lead with that  But she was right. It wasn't the time to 
panic. Interviews could only take her so far, and it's not like hospitals would just give her patient 
information. But I knew another way.
I can fill in the gaps in your data.
What? How?
She stood up and leaned across the table. The air she breathed flowed with coffee and mint. I
leaned in slightly. Her shirt still had two buttons undone.
My dad was the detective in charge of the Disappearances when they first started. I mean, 
he got taken off the case but he'll still have copies of the files. Things like victim stats.
She tapped her fingers on the table: pinkie, ring, middle, pointer, in order like that. They 
made a cascade of taps. She stared up and to the side, eyes squinting, puzzling something out. 
Afterwards she slumped back into her seat like she'd expended a lot of energy.
Your dad wouldn't give you something like that.
Yeah, I'm not sure 'give' is the word I'd use.
Nathan-
It's okay. I'm offering because I need to know too. It'll be like twenty seconds of 
rummaging through his desk, no big deal.
Okay, his desk in a police station, but Robin didn't need to know that. Stealing on its own 
was bad, sure, but the fact that it would be from Dad made me queasy. Not sure the crippled kid 
card would carry me very far if I stole from the police. But, still, I bit my lip, hoping against hope 
she'd agree. I wanted her to need my help, and I wanted to prove I didn't belong on that list.
Look, don't do anything crazy, she said. Just let me handle the research. You don't need to
get involved.
I'm not asking for your permission.  Wait, what? Robin looked as shocked as I felt. I'd 
never challenged her like that. I stumbled for something to say, to explain myself, I'm... next, aren't
I? I can't just sit on my butt and do nothing while I Disappear.
A stinging heat pooled in my eyes. My saliva thickened, became difficult to swallow. Dad 
would shatter. He was already cracked, barely getting by since Mom had died. But losing me too? 
He'd never recover. But maybe that'd be better than having me slowly drag him down emotionally 
and financially. Get it over with. Would you rather get cut a thousand times with a pocket knife or 
speared through the gut with a javelin?
Robin passed me her napkin, Nathan, I'm sorry. I didn't mean to- I don't know anything. 
That's half the problem.
I took the napkin and laughed. At what? Who knows? At least I wasn't bawling, but the 
napkin still got a little wet. Robin shifted in her seat, angling her body away from mine as I got 
myself under control. Her phone buzzed, giving her and me a distraction. 
I'm sorry, Nathan, I have to go, Mom and Sophie'll be worried. Well, Mom will, Robin 
said. Just... don't do anything yet. We can always decide to go after the police records later if we 
need them, but we can't un-steal them. I'm pretty sure they'll bust out the forensics team when they 
realize they've been robbed. We'll talk about this later. 
I'd caught the 'we'. Maybe I'd been accepted into the team.
Yeah, I get you. Go on, I'm fine.
She faltered for a moment, not really believing my flat tone, but she stood up anyway. There 
was a sharp tearing as she hoisted her black messenger bag over her shoulders. A strap broke and 
the bag went tumbling to the ground, spilling out its contents around the table's legs. It was no 
wonder the bag had broken. I counted no less than three massive reference books in the mix. Hey 
Those were Talisman books. One on Shamanism, another on dreams and a third whose title I 
couldn't read. No way Robin could afford them, unless she was getting paid twice as much as me. 
She didn't do that much more work. She saw me staring.
I'm just borrowing them.
Uh huh. Do you think the Disappearances are supernatural?
I'm casting a wide net.
We knelt and started picking things up. Robin took the books and laptop while I went for the
smaller items. Pens, pencils, a pack of gum. Small bits of paper.
Thanks, she said. I'll see you at work tomorrow?
I jutted my chin out. She picked up her cup and chugged the remaining liquid. Gross, it had 
to be cold. Then she walked off, taking care to look right, left, then right again before crossing. Her 
brown hair swayed back and forth with her steps. As she walked away the sunset seemed to crawl 
up her, like some terrible orange sludge.
I wasn't sure where the two of us stood after that. It was the most 'real' conversation we'd 
ever had. Were we friends? Partners in crime? Friends sounded good, but I wanted... God, I didn't 
know what I wanted. A slip of white paper was on the ground. No, not paper, plastic. Laminate? A 
bookmark. It was dark blue, but some parts had been left white in the shape of the moon and stars. 
The back had writing on it: 
To my beautiful daughter, 
So you'll never lose your place. 
Love, 
The corners were peeling. Obviously careworn. There was something strange about it. It 
looked almost like the stars were twinkling. On the reverse side the 'Dad' was definitely moving, it 
bounced off the edge. The bookmark seemed to pulse, like a single heartbeat. It felt warm. A 
coldness seeped back into my toes, icy, stronger than before.
Dammit, not now.
I hesitated. It felt familiar. This iciness, mixed with warmth. Where had I felt it? It was 
almost there, on the edge of my mind, I- the coldness advanced, reaching it's fingers up my shins. I 
stuffed the bookmark into my back pocket, and loped across the street, barely dodging a car. Robin. 
My gait was uneven, jerky, as my right leg tried to adjust for the weakness in my left. I burst into 
the alley, she was there, just about to exit on the other side.
Robin
She turned. Relief blossomed in my chest before an explosion of pain knocked me flat. An 
instinctual arm flail saved my face from kissing asphalt. I tried to stand up but the pain only 
increased. It was radiating from my scars through my entire body. No, don't pass out, not in front of 
her Vision blurred, sounds thickened. A slap slap slap slap. A face appeared. Robin. Her hair 
cascaded over me, the edges of it tickling my cheeks. Are you okay? I saw her lips move, but 
couldn't hear the question. I shook my head to clear my ears. I could feel it. The iciness taking me. 
Calling me to sleep. 
Nathan
That I heard. My head lolled, couldn't keep it upright. I was stuck staring at graffiti on the 
nearby wall. My neck was too stiff to move. It was an ambitious design of a rainbow swallow. It 
was just an outline, but each foot or so it bled into another color. Crimson at the head, moving to 
orange, vermilion, emerald, the sky, the sea, night, and then amethyst for its head. Someone had 
added a dick at some point, of course. It all blended together, giving it the impression of movement.
It turned to look at me. 
Robin floated right above my head, an angel. Her cell phone was to her ear, but I couldn't 
make out the words. Could she hear it? A bubbling darkness surrounded us, slurching across the 
ground, ice cold wherever it went. I shook. Could she feel it? She had to be able to smell it; the 
scent of burnt sugar was suffocating. I tried to move my hand, tried to grab hers, but I could only 
reach the top of her knee. 
Robin, I don't want to go.
Did I say that, or only think it? She took my hand in hers, lacing our fingers together, her 
eyes were clear, but soft, trying to keep me calm. It suited her, action in a crisis. If the roles were 
reversed I probably wouldn't have thought to call an ambulance yet. The darkness gathered under 
us. Darting between her and me. Choosing. I heard her scream. Her hand was ripped from mine. 
Robin
I closed my eyes and followed.
Chapter 4
It's just me, the rainbow swallow, and the wall it's painted on. The night sky is bright with 
the sparkling trails of comets. Isn't it daytime? I could have sworn- 
I'm in a dream.
This feeling... My body feels wrong. I look down at my hands and wiggle my fingers. The 
movement is slow, like they're being dragged through a viscous fluid. The fingers leave afterimages 
like a sparkler, trails of color that slowly click back into place when I keep my hands still. I know 
this feeling. The odd sensation of lucidity mixed with the mindless hum of a dream. That's what had
happened right after the accident. I'd gone into a dream, but I was conscious. I moved across the 
hall... to the door... and I saw... I saw... A flash of red? No, as soon as I grasp for the memory, it's 
gone.
Dammit, I say.
The swallow and I make eye contact. Well, it feels like eye contact. The artist didn't give the 
bird eyes, but it's staring at me all the same. Not threatening. Appraising. Intelligent, purpose guides
its movements as it stretches, brushes its head against a wing. Its wings expand, spreading upwards 
across the wall, before folding them back into a resting position. My body feels wrong, somehow. 
Like I don't fit my own skin. It doesn't feel painful, but uncomfortable. Something's missing. I'm 
standing. The alleyway is gone, but the rainbow swallow is not.
 It's waiting. For what?
Hello?
Robin I feel as much as hear her echoing voice, coming from right behind my head and a 
hundred miles to the east and underground and in the air itself.
Can you help me? I ask the swallow.
It nods. Then it just sits there. My fists clench.
Something digs into my palm. My fingers unfurl. Robin's bookmark. It shimmers. On the 
bottom edge, a droplet begins to form, like the last drip from a shower head after you turn the water 
off. It's also glowing, a shining white light. Instead of splashing onto the ground, it glides down 
smoothly, as if it were a strand of a spider's web, leaving a shining line connecting the bookmark to 
the ground. The droplet twitches left, then right, before shooting between my legs, faster than I can 
track, the glowing line showing its path. The line disappears into the horizon. A guide? Is that where
Robin is? 
As if it had been waiting for that, the swallow stirs. With shuddering flaps, it attempts to 
extricate itself. Its beak opens in a noiseless cry. Gooey tendrils of color slough off, leaving sticky 
puddles. Blood? Ink? Rainbow liquid froths around my feet. Thick, sticky putty of webbing, all 
colors of the rainbow, holds the swallow down. The webbing flexes as the bird's wings flap 
furiously, attempting to lift off from the wall. Finally, it dislodges a wing tip. The rest begins to 
follow. A piece of the gluey web snaps. It strains, beak open wide, much too wide. A chirp? It's 
really deep, more of a crow caw. Is it crying out in pain? Another snap. Then all at once- CRACK. 
It's not enough to hold it down, all the chains binding the bird to the wall snap at once. It's free. It 
flies straight into my chest. My hands grasp at my heart and I stagger and fall into warm liquid. It's 
sticky and hot. I scramble up, panicking as the paint-like substance sticks and almost holds me 
down. Whatever the stuff is made of, I'm stronger. I manage to stand and look around. The hell? It's 
nowhere. Did it- It couldn't have gone inside me, right? I don't want a bird messing around inside 
my body No time to think about it because my feet are moving on their own, sprinting after that 
golden trail, too fast to see the scenery pass around me. I haven't run in two years. The feeling, it's...
indescribable. It's like scratching an itch you haven't been able to reach for months, remembering 
the name of a song that's been in your head for ages. Like good sex after a long dry spell. Well, I'm 
assuming on that one. And it hits me. Why my body felt wrong, still feels wrong, is because I'm 
normal here. Injuries, my physical limitations, they don't exist. It's the most happiness I've felt, well,
since before the accident. I finally-
We're here. My legs know where to stop. Or maybe the swallow inside me does.
It's a house. A kind of shabby one, wood painted light-blue, but with lots of flakes coming 
off it and the white accent beams on the porch. It's small, at least for where I live, it probably only 
has three bedrooms max. Is this where Robin lives? I mean, I shouldn't judge My house is the same
size, maybe smaller I just... I dunno. I kind of always pictured her living in a mansion with a huge 
library and a princess style canopy bed. At least there's a big porch.
The front door creaks as I open it, but this isn't a horror movie so I'm not scared. I know it's 
just the rusty hinges. I'm not scared at all.
R-Robin? I call so quietly she might not have heard me if she was standing next to me.
The foyer is dark. There's a switch nearby and I'm pleasantly surprised when the lights turn 
on. It's way less frightening without all the shadows. Not that I was scared. Anyway, there's a thin 
rug leading from a small tiled area for guests to take their shoes off I'm standing in. I do. Seems 
polite. There's a stairwell to my right and a thin walkway to my left, probably leading to the kitchen.
In my house the stairs are on the other side.
Robin? I try again, louder.
There's a series of thumps upstairs, each one sending a shiver down my spine, then, muffled-
Nathan?
It's her I run up the stairs, taking them three at a time, nearly tripping over myself. At the 
top I turn left and sprint down the hallway. I'm sure that's where I heard her voice coming from. By 
the time I get there a door is opening and a beautiful, wonderful, smart girl is walking through the 
opening. I throw myself on her, hugging her ferociously enough that she's forced to take a few steps
backwards. 
Whoa She says, hugging back, probably more to keep from falling than excitement, I'm 
happy to see you too, but get a hold of yourself
I let go and step back, taking deep, calming breaths. She's okay. She's okay I thought 
something terrible had happened. I'm so relieved to see I was wrong. I can't stop grinning at her. 
She's smirking back at me, the usual picture of poise and confidence. She flips some hair that's 
hanging over her shoulder to behind it.
Last thing I remember, I was calling an ambulance for you in an alleyway in broad daylight
and next thing I know, I wake up in my bed. What the heck happened?
Whoa. I actually know something she doesn't I think we're in- The door slams. The one 
downstairs. Oh, sorry, I think I left the door open.
Robin nods and I'm about to continue when I'm interrupted again.
Thump. 
That wasn't the door. It sounded more like...
Thump. 
Something coming up the stairs I feel cold. A cold that starts at my toes moves upward. The
thumps shudder on, getting louder and louder, Robin flinches at each one.
Nathan, what-
I don't know, but I don't think we want to meet it, I say, tiptoeing quietly to her bedroom 
door and closing it as noiselessly as possible. Whatever it is knows someone's here, thanks to my 
stupidity of leaving the light on and door open, but that doesn't mean it knows where exactly. 
Maybe if it searches the wrong room we can make a break for it. A particularly loud thump signals 
the whatever-this-thing-is' arrival on the second floor. We're both listening intently, barely 
breathing. I'm not breathing at all, I don't think. The knob jiggles. I step back, Robin's already 
standing on the far side of her bed, as defensive a position as she can manage under the 
circumstances. The knob turns, slowly, unbearably slowly. The door begins to open...
Jesus, maybe this is a horror movie after all. Screw that I rush forward and throw my 
shoulder into the door, jamming it closed. If we're going to get found anyway, we may as well go 
down fighting. There's a cry from the other side. Surprise? Pain? It doesn't take long before there's 
pounding and pushing at the door. It's strong, stronger than me. I flex and grunt, feet slipping on the 
ground. If the circumstances were different, I might be happy to finally be able to use the full 
strength of my body like this. I chance a look back at Robin. She's staring, wide-eyed and 
frightened. It looks terrible on her, the cocky self-assurance was way better. 
Little help? I ask, trying to sound in control.
That snaps her out of it, I think I almost see her smirk before she starts forward to help, but 
it's way too late. With a thunderous crack, a huge amount of pressure takes me by surprise and 
flings me backwards coming to a stop only when I roll into the bedframe. Owowow. My head's 
spinning, but I know I have to face this thing, whatever it is. I have to protect her. She gasps. I 
manage to turn my body to face it, but I can't force myself to stand. 
It's a man.
I mean, he's like the same height as me, maybe shorter. Not so scary, all things considered. A
letdown, even. I'd been expecting some sort of nightmare monster. Like my mom back from the 
grave and trying to murder us. Or maybe something a little more classic, like a werewolf. I'm 
almost relieved until it steps forward and I realize the reason I can't see the man's features isn't 
because he's in a shadow, it's because he IS a shadow. No face, just smooth black. I can see slight 
protrusions of what must be a nose and ears. And hair, it's long, going past his shoulders. No mouth.
At first. 
He smiles. It's pure, black fangs. Glistening wet, dripping the same black shadow he's made 
out of. I can see my breath. It's cold in here, so cold. It's looking at Robin. It doesn't have eyes but 
just like with the swallow, I can feel it. The malice directed at her fills the room.
No... I say, weak. I struggle to stand, fail, have to lean myself over the bed. The shadow 
takes a step towards her. No
A light shines in my hands, forcing the shadow man backwards. It holds its hands over its 
face, hissing in pain. What? What the heck was that? I look down. Robin's bookmark. I'd been 
carrying it when we'd been knocked into the dreamworld. Had I been holding it the whole time or 
did it just appear? Doesn't matter It lunges towards her, but I hold the bookmark out and force it 
back again. I raise it high, washing all of us in a prismatic spray of light. It's warm, and gentle. It 
beats back the iciness of the shadow man. This is the monster I've been feeling for weeks now, 
clawing at my feet.
Nathan what the hell is going on? Robin cries, anger covering an undercurrent of fear, 
panic. She's great at a lot of things, but flexibility's not one of them. No way she can adapt to a 
situation like this on the fly.
Just stay away from that thing Come here, I say extending the hand holding the 
bookmark towards her. She looks from the shadow to me, nods and darts forward. I'm not paying 
attention; I should be paying attention I don't see the man move, I only see Robin's eyes widen and 
her attempt to shield herself with her arms. The dark man expands, turning into an ink blot, a wave 
of darkness and envelops her. Robin
I'm running forward, grabbing her hand, even as the rest of her body is being swallowed by 
darkness. It's trying to, what? Posses her? Desperate, I force the bookmark into her hand and 
squeeze her fingers around it. There's a frustrated growl and suddenly I'm sent flying again by a 
black tendril striking me in the chest. At least this time I land on the bed. The shadow man is 
sluicing off Robin like water, driven away by the bright light of the bookmark. She crumples to the 
ground, landing hard on her knees. There's a distant, vacant expression in her eyes that I don't like 
the look of. But there's no time. The shadow man is regrouped, formed back into a person, glaring at
me with that same perceptible cold malice I felt earlier. He's been staring at me for awhile, he had 
earlier that day in my bedroom. He wants me. I blink and he's got me by the throat.
Wh-? I gurgle out, hands scrabbling to loosen his fingers even as his grip tightens. Fast 
I'd barely even seen him. And I'm no weakling, but I can't tear his hand away from my neck. 
Without the bookmark, I'm nothing to this thing. It smirks when I resort to scratching, clawing at 
the arm. No visible effect.
Laaater, he says, syllable drawn out like how you'd imagine a snake's 's' would be. I'll 
have you later, little Nathan.
It throws me, hard. I expect to hit the bedroom wall, but instead I'm launched out past the 
doorway, flung down the stairs, the front door opens and I'm expelled from the house, door 
slamming behind me. How...?
R...Robin...
And then I black out.
I wake to a gentle rocking. The sound of waves and the smell of salt. Different from the 
sticky puddles I keep encountering in dreams. Like the black one from my recurring nightmare, or 
the paint from the rainbow swallow's escape into my heart or whatever the hell it was doing. I prefer
to think of it as paint and not blood. No, this is the gentle lapping of the water of a calm sea. I know 
it because Dad had taken me to the small fishing village where he'd grown up a bunch of times. I 
half expect to hear a seagull cry. 
You're up.
A woman's voice. It's night; I can see the stars and smell a musty kind of smoke. Different 
than cigarettes. Marijuana? I turn to her voice. My vision's blurry, I can't make her out. Or maybe 
it's just the haze of smoke surrounding her. I look around. Nope, definitely my vision. I can just 
about see handrails and some sort of large pole. I'm on a boat. A big wooden one, not at all like the 
tiny metal speedboats Dad liked to rent.
Where am I?
You're in a dream. My dream. 
I don't know what that means. I don't care. It's not important right now.
Did you see that thing? What was it?
The woman inhales deeply, I can hear the tiny crackle of paper being burned. She rolls her 
own joints. She exhales equally deeply.
A... spirit. An elemental. A shade gone completely out of control.
A spirit? That seems like a timid categorization of the slinking shadow man that had nearly 
killed me.
Wait, what about Robin? I'm afraid to ask, What'll the... spirit do to her? To my friend?
Well, the same as it did all the rest, in time.
The rest?
The Disappearance victims, she says, tone exaggerated, making it clear what she thinks of 
my intelligence.
The Disappearance- I shoot up, bracing an elbow against the ground. The sudden 
movement coupled with blurry vision exacerbates a growing headache, but I don't care. I knew it. 
That's the thing that's been making people Disappear. It was after me first.
If it had been after me, why grab Robin too? Because we'd been close? Because I'd had the 
bookmark? And if we're adding questions to the pile, what the heck was that bookmark, anyway? 
It'd appeared out of nowhere and saved the day. Sort of. 
My chest feels light, all of a sudden. I'm being lifted up. Something's moving, I can feel it on
my abdomen, tickling my stomach, nipples, everywhere. I can hear a sound, at first I think- paper 
fluttering in the wind, and then I think the woman is rolling another joint, but I don't smell any 
weed, and now small wisps of a breeze caress my face and body. I strain to look down. Dozens of 
gigantic butterflies have appeared on my chest and are flapping their wings, trying to lift me off the 
ground. The bright orange and yellow of a Monarch and a Tiger Swallowtail stick out, but only 
because those are the only two kinds I know. A long time ago Mom had wanted to spend a summer 
going to parks and looking for butterflies but I'd passed. It'd sounded dumb. I wish I had Well, I'm 
not sure how identifying a light blue butterfly without stripes from a black one with little protruding
extensions from its wings would have helped in this situation anyway. 
What the heck? I say, raising my hand to swat them away.
Don't hurt them she says. They're helping, trust me. She points to a brown and white 
one. This one's called a Purple Emperor. Strange name, isn't it? And this pale blue ones an 
Amanda's Blue. Did you know that butterflies can fly even if they lose the dust on their wings? It 
just weakens the wing and makes it more prone to injury.
Her speaking has a way of calming me. I don't even panic when the butterflies start to flap 
their wings much faster, pulling at my shirt. 
Among the shamans, butterflies are symbols of change and rebirth. They're a little bit 
magic, spinning us off into new paths and stories we'd never imagined. And yet they're my spirit 
animal. It's a pretty mean cosmic joke. I mean, I can't change anything about my life or 
circumstances. I can't move or leave or do anything I really want to.
Me too, I think. Spirits, shades, bookmarks, rainbow swallows, spirit animals. It's all getting 
a bit much. My eyelids feel heavy. Her voice trails from an almost breathless excitement to 
bitterness. I want to comfort her, but my chest lifts off the ground. That's alarming. And it only 
grows as my shoulders and butt join my chest in leaving the surface of the boat.
Hey, what? No way, stop
They also serve as guides down esoteric unseen paths. I wish you all the best on your 
journey, short or long, happy or sad.
I thought you meant, like, figurative guides and paths This is a too literal for me I yell, 
already well up into the air. The fact that I'm being lifted by my shirt means I lose sight of her, I can 
only see the starry sky and seemingly endless ocean, but with the ocean on top and the sky on 
bottom because my head is lolling backwards. Oh god, I feel sick. 
There's no answer.
Wait No, please, I have so many questions.
We'll meet again, if you follow the butterfly.
Follow what butterfly? You're not making any sense
Just follow the butterfly, she says again, distant.
Waaaaait I wail. Seriously? Follow a butterfly?
The Dreaming of Robin Melling
The name slips from my lips. Nathan Its instinctive, enough of a surprise that my fingers
drift over to touch them as I sit up. I'm covered in a layer of sweat. I'll have to wash my linens 
today. But for now, I cling to them, soft fabric absorbing the traces of my fear. They're fuchsia pink. 
I thought I'd replaced them for light blue years ago? I'd read a study that said blue is a calming color
that helps you sleep. Hadn't helped. Strange. Mom must be washing my normal ones... even though 
she knows I do my own laundry. My panting breaths echo in the room even as they slowly return to 
a natural rhythm. A thudding heart has already settled to a gentler pitter-patter. I can recall the 
nightmare in flashes: coffee with Nathan. Him collapsing in the alley. Teleporting to my bedroom. 
This bedroom. Nathan's fear. A shadow monster attacking me and, I shiver, wrapping itself around 
me. I try not to think of what Sigmund Freud would have made of it. He's been widely discredited 
as a psychotherapist anyway. In any case, my body knows how to handle nightmares; it's used to 
having to live them out in the real world. The world where Dad vanished. A soon forgotten 
nightmare is nothing compared to the horror of reality. Great, now I'm sounding like Freud.
Nathan. That kid is a problem. He's technically older than me, but he certainly doesn't act 
like it. He has feelings for me, it's painfully obvious. He's nice enough, but kind of dumb and just... 
goofy I've been trying to turn him down subtly, talking about us as friends. He's not taking the hint.
Maybe I should drop subtlety and lie about having a boyfriend? I hate lying but I also really don't 
want to deal with his crushed puppy moping around the bookstore. He's always got something to be 
sad about. 
The darkness of my room has softened; outlines appear and spread across the room, first 
from the blanket I still cling to, then moving outward to the bed frame. I can make out the low, wide
chair that's a resting place for far too many stuffed animals, mostly snakes and frogs. I've always 
found them cuter than dogs and cats for some reason. Strictly the stuffed versions, though. One time
I'd seen a garden snake slithering through Mom's tomatoes and I'd screamed so loud a neighbor had 
called the police. I can see my jacket has, as usual, slipped off the doorknob and fallen to the floor. 
There's an earthy scent in the air. It's the smell of rain. It'll happen soon, within a day; take it from 
the daughter of a gardener.
My hand hurts. Now that I'm calm I finally notice it. I'm gripping something, hard. It's 
laminated plastic. A bookmark. The bookmark Nathan forced into my hand just before... Why am I 
holding this? I mean, he gave it to me in a dream and I'm not dreaming... right? 
A knocking, then: Robin?
Yes, Mom? I say in a voice thats unexpectedly wavery. 
Are you okay? 
I had a nightmare. I'm scared and sweaty. Can you sit on the side of my bed and stroke my 
hair until I fall asleep, like you used to? That's what I want to say, what I might have said, if the 
bookmark didn't flash. A low glow, like a firefly. A phosphorescent bookmark? Yeah, um, yes I'm 
okay.
There's a long pause, but no steps to indicate she's stepped away from the door. 
It sounded like you were calling out for someone.
 I'm probably awake. That whole thing with Nathan was probably just a nightmare, albeit a 
long and oddly detailed one. Add it to the pile. I almost smile. I'd only ever go out for coffee with 
him if it was a dream. There's a creaking, Mom shifting her weight, waiting for an answer. I should 
put the bookmark down, forget about the dream. But I don't. When I try, daring my fingers to 
expand, to let go, something stops me. An... uneasiness. It's not rational. It's just some paper 
encased in plastic. It's not good for anything except keeping a page, no need to cling to it. But I 
clutch it tightly to my chest anyway. 
No, I'm fine. Really. Just a weird dream. What time is it? I ask.
Just after eight. Why don't you sleep in a little? 
Her voice sounds... I can't put my finger on it. Different. For a moment I doubt it's her before
discarding the thought. Who else could it be?
I'm up anyway. Can you put some coffee on, though?
Sure.
There are soft steps away from the door. She's wearing socks, not her work shoes. Her day 
off? I can't remember what day it is. That's unusual. I sit in darkness, legs covered in the too-pink-
for-my-age blanket. It's not fading, the dark. Instead it seems to spread wherever my eye rests, a 
lingering corruption. It inks across my vision, reaching forward to try to caress my eyes, to cover 
my nose and mouth, to gently whisper lullabies in my ear. The man, the shadow man- I turn on my 
bedside lamp. Nothing's there. No duh, that monster man is just a nightmare. It can't exist in reality. 
Those bizarre proportions and the ability to turn into some sort of liquid is obviously a biological 
impossibility.
What am I doing? I say to myself.
I step off the bed, feet finding the slippers Sophie had bought me two Christmases ago. The 
faux fur inside is somewhat matted. They feel real, just like I remember them. I make a note to 
throw them in with the linens. Some disgusting foot fungus is the last thing I need. The linoleum of 
the bathroom's cold, even through my slippers. The bathroom has an odd sweet smell. Perfume, 
maybe. Sophie, always an early riser, is obviously already up, the shower curtain she's left hanging 
on the wrong side of the tub drips water on the floor, a smear of toothpaste and blood from too hard 
brushed gums has not quite rinsed away in the sink. She knows I hate when things are unclean, but 
doesn't care. I grab a hand towel and soak up the water. Then I use it to wipe the sink. Another item 
for the growing laundry list. I might have to do two loads. Only after the bathroom is clean do I 
brush my teeth. I break them down into quadrants. I brush for exactly forty seconds each, twenty on
the front, twenty on the back. Then four, exactly four, swishes of mouthwash and I'm done. I make 
sure to leave the sink spotless.
It's all so... mundane. I'm sure it's real. It's nothing like my normal dreams, no desperate 
searches for my dad, always hearing his voice but never finding him, no visions of my hair and 
teeth falling out. This is real; I have no evidence to suggest otherwise. Except- I'm still clutching 
this bookmark like it's one of the protection charms I've read about in the books I'd 'borrowed' from 
Talisman. It had glowed a little or maybe I'm seeing things. Well, at worst it's like Pascal's Wager. 
The price of believing this is a dream and being wrong is very small- perhaps feeling a little silly. 
The price for being wrong? I'm not sure. Maybe death. Maybe worse. That... thing, that shadow 
man, is he lurking around here somewhere, watching? I slip the bookmark into the waistband of my 
pajamas and head downstairs.
When I walk into the kitchen Mom's watching a yet to boil pot of water. She's wearing a 
ratty robe I haven't seen her in in years. In fact, I can't remember the last time I hadn't seen her 
dashing around the kitchen, nearly colliding with the island, or banging her head against a copper 
pan hanging on a row of wooden pegs next to the oven, shouting the first two letters of a curse 
before catching herself, and trying to make it to work on time.
Mom, I didn't know it was your day off.
She laughs, doesn't reply. Have I said something funny? She's different, even her laugh. It's 
lighter. Like all the sadness has been sucked out of her. 
Sophie's sprawled herself across the island, reading a book, no doubt trying to finish it last 
minute for AP English. Her hair twists under her head and cascades off the edge in a way that makes
me think of a Renaissance painting, Venus of Urbino. Her top's loose, a strap hangs off her shoulder,
her shorts are tight and only reach her mid-thigh. Venus, by contrast, is laying upright, with no 
clothes on at all. In one hand, a rose. The other is lazily covering her nudity. Sophie's meeting a boy 
later, I can tell. I sit down on one of the high top red chairs, coming about even with Sophie's knees.
What are you reading?
High Rise.
By J.G. Ballard?
She flips the book to the spine, Yep, she says, flipping it back. 
Do you like it?
I- she hesitates. It's not terrible.
Her reluctance makes sense, it's an odd book to say you like, but, like Mom, she's oddly 
different. Missing an edge. Typically, every interaction we have feels like the run up to a fight. But 
this... this feels weird. She's not sighing and rolling her eyes every time I speak like she usually 
does. The water finally boils and Mom pours in the instant and walks over to me with a mug, but 
Sophie twists her body and plucks it out of her hands, managing not to spill a single drop. She 
immediately takes a small sip in a show of ownership. I hope it burns her tongue, the spoiled brat 
Maybe she's not as different as I'd thought. 
Sophie, that's not very nice, Mom says, but does nothing. Instead she pours another mug 
and passes it to me without further comment. Typical. 
But now I KNOW something's up. I have a cup of coffee, Sophie has one, but Mom has two.
She's holding one and the other sits, forlorn, on the counter. I look around. There's no one else, not 
that there should be. Mom's smiling, wide and pure. Her smile hasn't been that unguarded since...
Then, steps from upstairs. I look at Mom and Sophie in a panic, but they don't seem to 
recognize the peril. Down the stairs whatever it is comes tumbling down, too fast. It thuds and 
pounds its way closer. A monster is coming to breakfast. The world slows. I knew it. This is a 
nightmare. Wake up, wake up I pinch myself. No effect.
It's for extra credit, Sophie's saying. The reading list says you can take the test any time 
during the first month back during a free period.
She's talking about the book. Mom's still smiling that stupid smile Can't they see the 
danger?
We didn't have extra credit when I went to school. You had to do a good job the first time, 
she says in a teasing tone.
Sophie rolls her eyes, but there isn't much teenage angst in it, she's just playing her part. The 
monster is getting closer. They should be panicking. I am, thumbing the bookmark over and over. 
It's glowing, a little hard to tell, under my shirt and all, but it's there. I'm staring, transfixed, at the 
doorway, sure that it's the shadow from my nightmare. Its come to life, come to finish what it 
started. 
Good morning, ladies His voice sings.
Good morning, dear, Mother says, handing It the remaining mug.
G'morning, Dad, Sophie calls. 
'Dad?' The spell is broken. I scream. My mug tumbles to the ground, shattering violently. 
Shards of ceramic scatter in all directions, followed by the still hot coffee. I barely notice. I can feel 
my shoulders hunch and the hair on my neck flare. He's not here, he can't be here. This isn't the 
hazy, blurred feeling you get when you have a dream normally. But it's him Standing right in front 
of me, calm, relaxed. The bookmark warms on my skin. The last time I'd seen him, his eyes had 
been tired, red from stress. He hadn't had a good night's sleep in a week. He'd seemed to shine, like 
he'd been polished. He'd had a little stubble, which went well with his ratty blue robe. This man, 
whoever he is, is clean shaven, with the kind brown eyes that I'd missed so much. But he's dull. He 
doesn't glow at all. It's not him.
 His easy smile fades into a look of fatherly concern, a steaming mug in hand. This man, 
dressed in Dad's blazer and suit pants, ready for his job as chief administrator of the local library, is 
not my father. Dad died a long time ago. I've accepted that. It's the only reason he wouldn't have 
come back to us. I absolutely know that those years without him weren't a dream. I know it with all 
my heart, because I'd prayed and prayed to God for it to be a dream. This... thing, whatever it is, 
confirms my suspicion. I know where I am, even if I don't know what's at stake yet. I want to glare 
at him, hiss and tell him I know the game, but I don't. I keep calm and try to look as surprised as 
everyone else that my mug has hit the ground. I have to play the game. 
Robin, what the hell? Sophie yells, right next to my ear. I barely hear it. I'm trying to look
at 'Dad' without staring at him.
Sophie, language, he says. Robin, what happened? are you okay?
His voice. The feelings his voice triggers in me are intense. My memory of it had almost 
faded. The corners of my eyes burn. I want to cry so badly I can hardly stand it. We'd talked about 
school. He'd been about to send me to bed, keep me from studying too late. I'd buried that memory 
deep, but now I can't push it away, because every moment plays back. The green glow of the digital 
oven clock, the bubbling tea, the smell of cinnamon. I can't speak, I can barely see. The grief, the 
rage, just as raw as the day he vanished, comes crashing back.
Poor thing, I think she didn't sleep very well, Mom says. True, but that's not it. I school 
my expression. I have to stay calm; I don't know what they'll do to me if I don't play along. 
Especially the man who is definitely not Dad. Mom has a soft, sympathetic smile on her face, and 
that's when I realize what's different. She looks light. Like she hasn't had to become a secretary at a 
crappy local PR firm to pick up the financial slack of Dad's Disappearance. She has fewer wrinkles. 
Her smile is wider, easier. She's not real either. Everything here is fake, fake, fake. Don't fall for it. 
'Dad' takes a step forward.
Stay back My fingers go to my side where I can still feel the bookmark. His eyes flick 
there, then back to mine, eyebrow raised. Should I take it as a good or bad sign that he backs off? I 
shake my head. I need to do better, act more convincing. I need space. Immediately. I hop off the 
chair.
Robin, the glass
I'm wearing slippers, I'm okay. Just, I need a minute, okay? I try for a reassuring smile, but
I don't think I pull it off very well. Lying is not a core part of my skill set. Usually I've a vested 
interest in the truth. Before anyone can stop me, I walk off.
Wait, Robin
I ignore Mom's calls. I can't think about them right now. I need ten seconds to breathe. A 
warm sensation on my shoulder tingles, stings, then needles. What is that? It hurts. The bathroom 
first, then, it has a mirror. I take off my shirt and twist to survey it. There's an angry red splotch on 
my shoulder, and brown liquid running down my back. My shirt has a definite brown stain. The 
coffee must have splashed up. Yet more laundry to do. It hurts a lot, just a touch and I wince. I need 
to hide this. I think I can pass it off as a sunburn, but only if it doesn't blister. I pull the bookmark 
out, ready to examine it when Sophie interrupts.
That looks pretty bad.
She's standing in the doorway, hands in pockets, thumbs purposely caught on the lining. Her 
posture is one of mock indifference, but the tapping of her big toe on the ground sells her out. The 
oh-so-perfect Sophie is nervous. That's unusual.
I try to match her mock indifference and force myself to slowly look through the medicine 
cabinet for the Aloe. The key question I need answered about Mom and Sophie is- How dangerous 
are they? They could simply be products of this dreamscape, threads of my subconscious. Or they 
could be constructs of that shadow monster. Calling it a shadow 'man' seems inaccurate; it definitely
isn't human from what I can tell. I need to break things down logically. Devise an experiment to test
out my hypothesis. Which is... what, exactly? If I have to name one, I'd suppose that Mom and 
Sophie are not under the direct control of the monster. They don't give me the same uncomfortable 
feeling as Dad. It's not exactly scientific data, but I have a feeling I'm going to have to be flexible 
here. Sophie's still watching me. 
Do you need something?
Mom wanted to come check on you. I convinced her to let me instead. She's cleaning up 
your mess.
I gulp, turning my head away from her, And... Dad?
She raises an eyebrow. He had to go to work.
Good. Can't deal with him yet. Need to figure him out, need to make a list. Don't tell her 
about this. 
Hm, she says noncommittally, passing a hand through her chestnut hair. She looks as I 
remember her. Her hair's getting long. Almost as long as mine. I don't want people to confuse us. If 
I leave fashion magazines open to pages with pixie cuts, could that psychologically influence her to 
get a haircut? Actually, this is the perfect opportunity to test my hypothesis. If she's part of the 
monster, she'll react to the bookmark, in theory. I don't know all the rules yet, but the bookmark had
a definite repelling effect on the monster. She's still talking. I turn to face her. Remember when we 
were little and we watched that National Geographic special on wolves? There was a scene at night 
where they killed a deer-
It was a caribou, I correct her.
Whatever. They were snarling and biting and eating the thing and it scared me so badly I 
had nightmares for a week. Do you remember?
What's your point? I know what her point is going to be. I shuffle closer to her, making 
little adjustments in my posture that slowly glide me towards her.
That's what you looked like. Like a blood crazed wolf.
'Blood crazed', indeed. I'm almost sure that's an exaggeration. 
I don't know what to say to that. And I really don't. I almost always have some retort or 
comment ready, but not this time. I'm too busy trying to thrust my hip in her direction without 
making it look obvious.
Are you on drugs?
No. I'm trapped in a dream and I can't trust you, or Mom, or especially Dad. Maybe 
myself too. How can I determine what's real and what's not? Why?
Because you're, like, dancing towards me in slow-mo. It's creepy, Robs.
I'm not sure if she's teasing or being serious. Either way it doesn't merit a response. She 
doesn't seem to be reacting to the bookmark. Nathan had been further away when he'd used the 
bookmark to keep the monster at bay. Okay, there Hypothesis tested and proved, in a manner of 
speaking. Sophie is not the shadow monster. Though she might still be working for it, or under its 
control somehow. I finally find some aloe vera and spread it over the burn. The cool helps instantly.
Can I ask you something? I say, then without waiting for her to answer- Did Dad ever- 
no, never mind. Can't trust her response anyway. 
This... is lasting awhile. I feel fully lucid, although it's difficult to gauge your own lucidity,  
and time seems to passing normally. Maybe it's not a dream. Maybe it's a parallel timeline where 
Dad never Disappeared. Wait, the Disappearances I can check my laptop, see if my research is still 
there. If the research is still there, then that would be a strong indicator against a parallel timeline.
Hey. Sophie's still standing there. What's up with you? I'm seriously worried.
I almost believe her. This is the version of her that would have existed if Dad hadn't 
Disappeared. She doesn't remember the first month, when we prayed for Dad to come back safely. 
Fervently at dinner and when going to bed and when waking up and at most times in between. She 
doesn't remember the spark slowly going out of Mom as she was forced to take up more and more 
of Dad's responsibilities, a kind of forced acknowledgment of his absence. She doesn't remember 
her depression and self-medication, approaching us in tears because things had gone out of control, 
and she couldn't stop. And that's how I know she's not really my sister. I squeeze past even as she 
makes a weak attempt to physically block the door.
Come on, talk to me Robin. I know something's going on. 
Yeah, a blind owl could figure that out. I haven't exactly been acting normal. She follows me
to the bedroom, pestering me with questions, but I wave her off. She gives up when I close the door 
in her face. With 'Dad' gone to work, I have a window with which to investigate and not worry 
about what he might do to interfere. My laptop's in my bag, which lay nearly forgotten at the foot of
my bed. I grab the computer and lean back against my headboard. The wake screen's background is 
still the same periodic table of elements drawn on a chalkboard that I remember. I click to Recent 
Documents. It's there. My research. The pointer hovers over the 'Victims' file. I'm a little nervous, I 
admit; I almost don't want to know the answers to my questions. 
Still. Hadn't Dad always taught me to value the truth? Dad had never let me believe in Santa 
Claus. He hadn't gone out of his way to tear down the illusion, but every time I asked a question, he 
would give a truthful answer. It didn't take me long to figure out that he was fictional. I heard my 
classmates discussing their Christmas lists, getting excited about visits to mall Santas, and baking 
cookies to leave out for him. It sounded like fun and I got jealous.
Why did you tell me Santa was a lie? I'd asked. Everyone else gets to do exciting things, 
but I know it's all fake.
He kneeled down and placed a hand on my shoulder. His hands seemed so big back then, his
fingertips reached far down my back.
Robin, sweetie, he'd said, You won't understand this yet, but the truth is so important. So 
much of the world is lies. Some are bad lies, some are good lies. But you can only decide which are 
which if you see them for what they are.
I didn't understand it then, but I understand it now. Whoever said ignorance is bliss was a 
fool. I want the truth. I open the file. 
Weird. It had been corrupted. I'm not a tech person at all. I've often worried about it because 
computers are so enmeshed with science, and my skills are limited. But even I can see this glitch is 
pretty strange. It's only affecting, like, two thirds of the file. Some things I remember about the list 
are clear as day. I remember Keisha Williams' stats by heart. How could I not? The poor girl had 
been so young. And they there all were, typed up into neat little columns. But an older woman, 
Marjory. I'd been lucky with her. Her daughter had given me everything. Marjory's height, weight, 
blood type, medications- her daughter had even told me what she was wearing on the day And it 
looks like that information is filled in, but blurred. Like there's a filter over the screen, but only over
some parts. I can't remember what exactly the daughter had said, but she'd definitely given me all 
the details I'd asked for. I know it's in the file, but I can't see it. The whole document is like that. If I 
can remember exactly what I wrote for a person, it's there, no blur filter. If I can't, then it's obscured 
by some kind of fog. Doesn't seem like a computer error. Is it me? I look around the room. Nope, all
clear. It's not my eyes.
David Melling. Dad. He's there. His height, his prescriptions, Disappearance date, all of it. 
This is cold water on the alternate universe theory. Surely physical evidence of the original world 
would have been erased if I'd somehow changed timelines. So... my computer notes can only reflect
what I already remember? That seems to jive with the dream theory, after all dreams were based on 
your subconscious. So the question becomes- what do I do now? I've got a working hypothesis 
about where I am (i.e. a dream). The preliminary data appears to support this. Hm. Well, surely I 
have to wake up at some point. A bit of an assumption. This is an unusually long, coherent, and 
detailed dream, after all. Clearly something's changed, perhaps because of the influence of that 
shadow. But even still, perhaps I can simply wait it out? It's both low risk and low effort. Anything 
else would probably require exploring the house and interacting with my 'family'. Avoiding that 
seems prudent. So, I find a comfortable position on my bed, hunker down, and wait.
I wait. 
And toss.
And turn.
My alarm clock has to be malfunctioning. It's been hours. I haven't woken up, I've not even 
slept. Indignant, I turn and try yet another sleeping position. I know it won't work, but why won't it?
I've figured it out, more or less. I'm dreaming. If this were a narrative, I would have woken up the 
when I realized I was dreaming. Or something would have changed, at least. Of course, life doesn't 
follow a clean narrative structure, so I shouldn't be surprised that didn't happen. But even 
physically, I have to wake up eventually. This is without a doubt the longest dream I've ever had. 
Maybe it means something external is keeping me unconscious in the real world. Could I be in a 
coma?
No, I'm thinking like a movie plot again. I have to reason this out rationally. If there's 
something physically preventing me from waking up, there really isn't much I can do to change my 
circumstances. And... if it's a dream, nothing can really hurt me, right? That's the obvious 
conclusion, but... I don't agree with my own reasoning. Or I at least don't trust it. If Nathan were 
here, he'd be bouncing off the walls, investigating every corner, mangling Holmes' catchphrase into 
'Elementary, my dear Robin', putting on a terrible English accent and not realizing that he's the 
Watson in our relationship. I know because he'd done it while we looked for a valuable book on 
demonology a customer had misplaced at Talisman. It had been kind of... fun, actually. I hadn't 
laughed that much in awhile. 
Oh brother, I've been infected by his nonsense. The clock says it's been several hours, but 
that's dream time, so who knows. It's possible that only a few minutes have passed in the real world.
My hip hurts. I twist around, trying to get comfortable. Something sharp digs into my skin.
Ow What the-? Oh...
It's the bookmark. That's another important piece of this puzzle, I can't believe I haven't 
looked at it more closely I sigh, cutting myself some slack. I probably hadn't wanted to HAVE to 
look at it. It seems to be the same one I have in the real world. I've had it for ages. Dad's inscription 
is the same, as is his drawing. I'm mature enough to admit it's a little comforting to see it here, like a
security blanket. It bends as you'd expect laminated paper to. It feels smooth and plastic, nothing 
out of ordinary. It isn't glowing anymore. Because the shadow monster isn't near? Perhaps it's 
recharging. It's a reminder of how much Dad loves- loved me. A totem, the books on Shamanism 
I've been reading would say. I always carry it with me, even if I'm not reading anything.
I groan in frustration. This is stupid. If I'm supposed to be looking for something in 
particular, I need a hint. Nathan probably would have found a hint by now. That or he would have 
confronted the shadow and gotten himself killed. I should probably try to find a middle ground. 
Nathan, you have to help me-
The bookmark shines bright. I drop it, and it flutters to the ground.
Chapter 5
The man sat in front of me scribbling into his notepad. Mr. Alexander?
Huh?
Are you listening?
His phone was on stopwatch and made a constant ticking sound- more than one per second. 
It made me anxious, like I was being rushed. Was he keeping track of time, or recording me? The 
table was shabby and worn. A piece of plywood slapped on top of four legs. Graffiti- 'To get rich 
quick, just suck d-' the rest had been carved out. Cute. A dark window. Two way mirror. Police 
station? Was I under arrest? No handcuffs. A good sign, but not conclusive. That woman was 
nowhere to be seen. Robin either.
Mr. Alexander Could you pay attention, please? He hit the desk slightly. Did I have a 
headache before his yelling or because of it? The guy was a ginger. A 'redhead'. Even though his 
hair was more of a red-orange. The English language's really dumb. We were sitting down, but he 
was taller than me; about as tall as Dad, maybe? That'd be 6'3''. He was unusually clean shaven for a
police officer. Most of Dad's friends at least had some stubble and usually a mustache. It made the 
officer in front of me look young, early twenties. He looked familiar. Really, I knew I knew him 
from somewhere. Maybe when I'd visited Dad at work? He was wearing a dark blue dress shirt. 
Hang on. A nameplate. 'Daniels'. And he had muscles. Chest and arms, vanity muscles. Clearly a 
gym goer, not an athlete like me. Well, like I'd been. I slumped a little and looked at his lower half 
under the table. Couldn't tell if he had chicken leg syndrome from skipping those leg days, but the 
arms and chest were definitely conceited areas to work on. I felt faintly superior to him. I could 
outrun him any day of the week, I'd stake money on it. Okay, these days I struggled to outrun a 
determined sloth. Still, he looked like a more muscled, red headed version of Dad. Cops tended to 
be fat or all muscle. There weren't many elfin, willowy types in my dads small town force. Give 
Officer Daniels a coffee and a doughnut and he'd win a generic cop contest  except, again, he was 
in extremely good shape instead of being fat. He ran a hand through his hair bringing my attention 
to it again. That. That was the familiar part. The hair. And maybe the sparkling blue eyes?
Have... My voice came out scratchy. I cleared my throat and try again. Have we met?
The already impatient cop leaned back in his chair, looked up, and rolled his eyes. Rude
This is the third time you've asked me that.
Oh... Really? He had no reason to lie, but the last thing I remembered before the him 
telling me to pay attention was the lady on the boat. Technically he hadn't answered my question. 
So, what did you say the last two times?
No he yelled, exasperated. Okay, okay, message received, no need to be a jerk about it. 
Sorry. I have a head... thing. What was the word? Migraine.
Let's just go over the details one more time, and then you can go. His blue eyes flicked 
down to his notes. So, you went for coffee with Ms. Melling. And then-?
How long had we been talking? Had we somehow had a conversation while I was dreaming?
I remembered the dream clearly enough, even if none of it made any sense. He hadn't been there. 
And he wasn't someone I knew from the station. I hadn't made as many trips to the precinct since 
Dad's demotion, but I knew the 'lifers' as Dad fondly called the people who'd been there for five 
years or more. Maybe he'd been the one to pick me up in the alley? Maybe I'd regained 
consciousness in his arms. I imagined being carried by him. He looked like he could lift three of 
me, no problem. He was superficially handsome, I could grudgingly give him that. And just, like, 
really familiar It was like recognizing a celebrity but stumbling with the name. 
 I pinched my temples. I ran after her.
Why?
Because I felt it coming, the frost shadow. The ice spirit. 
She forgot something.
What?
A bookmark.
And did you give it back to her?
 It didn't matter, it was a pointless detail. Unless my story changed. Dad told me. They have 
to make sure a witness' story stays consistent. Which meant they thought I'd witnessed something. 
Now if only I could remember the story I'd originally told him. 
Yes. No- I don't know. Maybe. I blacked out.
I ask because we didn't recover a bookmark at the scene.
No? I HAD given her the bookmark. Or, well, given it to her in a dream. It had protected me
from the spirit; I'd have to hope it did the same for her. But it was obvious why the police were 
interviewing me. Robin had Disappeared and I'd been the last one to see her. I should have let it 
take me instead. It'd been hunting me at first. And- I shifted in my chair and felt something in my 
back pocket. Something flat, bendy. I reached behind me, subtly and felt it. Ow, sharp edges 
Plastic, it had to be the bookmark, right? Okay, so did I have it, or did Robin? Did it stop protecting 
her and pop into my pocket when I woke up?
Officer Exasperated saw the flurry of emotions pass through me and raised an eyebrow. 
Whatever. He could suffer not knowing, for all I cared. He didn't know what real suffering was. My 
Dad, staring out the window, not drinking the tea I'd made him, looking lost and defeated during his
sudden post demotion 'vacation time'- that was suffering.
And why did you black out?
My Dad took some time off a few years ago. 
He nodded once; he knew that much at least.
I can't- I'm not supposed to run. Walking's okay, if I take my time. But I... overestimated 
myself.
He picked up his pen and chewed the cap. Disgusting.
So why'd you run?
Huh? Oh, it was important.
Was it? He was after something.
To her. It was a gift from her dad. He Disappeared.
He jotted a note down.
And that's it? You just wanted to return her bookmark? It couldn't wait until tomorrow? He
kept digging, for what, I wasn't sure. It's not like he would believe me if I told the truth. 'Ya got me. 
The spirit that's been causing the Disappearances was starting to make ME Disappear too, so I ran
for help'. I barely believed it myself.
It didn't seem like it could wait at the time.
It sounded curt, but what did this guy expect? My temples were throbbing and my heart was 
banging a drum inside my head. And it felt like he was dancing in circles around what he really 
wanted to ask. Dad would have been more direct. I wondered if the two had ever worked together.
Are you and Ms. Melling close? He asked.
No. Not as much as I'd like to be. I mean, yeah, we're friendly, but we don't hang out or 
anything.
So how do you know?
Know what?
That her father... Disappeared?
A tapping sound. The detective's foot. The tap tap tap bounced in time with the beating drum
in my head. The air felt stale. A ventilation shaft was there in the ceiling, but no air. I was sweating. 
He was too. He ran a hand through his hair and, again, I was struck by a sense of deja vu. I kinda 
wanted to run my own hand through his hair to see if that would jog my memory.  
I- Click click click went his stupid stop watch. I paused. I should keep her investigation to 
myself, I thought. She told me today, actually. She'd been off all day and I asked her what was 
wrong. It's close to the anniversary of the Earthquake. 
The detective scowled. Not at me, though. At his paper as he made some notes. He ticked 
something off. 
So she told you today, that's a coincidence. He tried to gauge my reaction, but all I gave 
him was a shrug. Coincidences happen, he couldn't prove otherwise. I'd survived the much more 
intense scrutiny of my dad. Officer Daniels had nothing on him. You know it's important to tell me
everything you remember exactly as you remember it, right? Even really small things. So if you're 
forgetting to mention something because you forgot earlier or because you think it's not important, 
now's a good time to say.
Dude, if you want to call me a liar then just get it out in the open 
Well... I said, thinking, Robin screamed.
We know. Her voice got cut off when she was calling for help for you.
So the scream had happened while we were both awake. But by that point that I'd seen the 
swallow moving, staring at me, colors flowing in and out of each other like a kaleidoscope and the 
black ink of the spirit, which Robin hadn't seemed able to see, had started surrounding us, chilling 
me deep into my core. If that hadn't been part of the dream how could it have happened in real life? 
Had the dream somehow bled over into the real world? I'd normally say that was impossible, but 
with the day I'd had... Maybe it was better to keep most of the weird stuff to myself and leave the 
detective in the dark.
Is your migraine really that bad? Officer Daniels asked. For the first time he looked 
concerned. For a moment he saw me as a person, not just a witness. I unclenched the scowl I hadn't 
known was making my jaw ache. Tension on my brow melted away.
It's alright. Comes and goes.
He tilted his head, his eyes and hair were still bright. 
If you're sure. You're free to go. Your Dad has my number if you remember anything. You 
remember how to get to the lobby?
Sure, I said, standing. I felt a little giddy with relief; my legs were a little shaky, though 
that could just be the after effects of fainting and being attacked by a demon. And that butterfly 
lady? What should I make of her? I mean- a swarm of butterflies?
Don't forget your bag.
A messenger bag sat on the floor. Strap broken. Hers.
Uh, right. My bag.
Officer Daniels frowned and took out a pen light. He came over and stuck a hand under my 
chin, shining a light in my eyes. His fingers were warm.
What are you doing?
You seem a little off, so I'm giving you a concussion test. Follow my finger without moving
your neck. He moved his finger smoothly, professionally. I followed it, too surprised to resist. His 
hand was on my shoulder, warm. He patted it twice when he finished. Must have passed. 
Do all cops have first aid training?
Just me, far as I know.
Was he not going to elaborate? We stared each other down. Guess not. He put away the light 
and handed me Robin's messenger bag. The bag was heavy; I'd forgotten how many books were in 
there. Not to mention her laptop. My hand was on the doorknob, just about to escape, when-
You seem okay, but if you feel nauseous, you should probably see a doctor, alright? I 
nodded. 
Oh, last question before I forget, the redhead said airily, lying through his teeth. Another 
interrogation technique Dad had taught me about. Surprise 'em with a sudden final question. Get 
them off balance and maybe they'll make a mistake. This was the real question. He'd been saving it 
since the moment we'd met, How long have you had it?
Had what? The bookmark? Robin's bag? Don't panic. That's what he wanted. 
That aura. That feeling in the pit of your stomach when you just know something's about to
happen. Like when you've seen a lightning bolt and you're just waiting for the thunder. That telltale 
brightness, hovering over you like the sword of Damocles. 
Brightness? Sword of-? I felt the blood drain from my face. I could feel my body engage 
fight or flight mode. My muscles quivered ready for... something. Pain flared across the damaged 
skin covering my ribs as I took deeper breaths. Robin had described it as a 'glow' and 'bright'. But 
here, this guy who didn't even know me had put it more eloquently, like he had firsthand 
experience. His hair. His eyes. Even his pale white skin, now that I thought about it. They're 
glowing. I'd thought he was just super ginger
I-I don't know what you're talking about.
No? He raised an eyebrow, a favorite expression of his. Crap. He'd got me. No clue how 
he knew, but he did. Maybe he knew more about Robin's Disappearance than I did. He wanted 
something. But in the moment, I slunk out of the room hastily and he let me. Once outside, I leaned 
against a wall, shell-shocked. It was solid, but I was not. My whole body felt like it was burning, 
but most of all my scars. Every square inch of damaged skin, the small patch that started just below 
my nipple, which expanded outward into a huge field covering most of my left set of ribs before 
narrowing again just in time to stop at my hip, radiated pain. Bad reaction to the salt, my doctor told
me. Yet another reason to never run, as if I needed another. I took a deep breath. What now? Robin 
had been taken by that thing, and I had no clue where to start on getting her back. Her bag, her 
laptop. She'd been researching the supernatural. 'Casting a wide net' she'd said. She'd been dead 
right. Dead. Dead, dead, dead. The word echoed in my head. The spirit hadn't taken more than a 
dozen people and then just kindly returned them when it was done with whatever the hell it was 
doing to them. Those people had probably been... killed. The word sent a shiver down my spine. 
Did they die immediately or was it a process? Maybe Robin was already- Focus. I was probably the 
only person in the entire world who had seen that thing and not been Disappeared like Robin had. 
Maybe excluding the butterfly woman? Or Officer Daniels. Neither were reliable.
Okay. So I was essentially on my own. I'd assume Robin was alive and keep going based on 
that. What other option did I have? Robin had warned me against stealing from Dad, but I had no 
idea what the right thing to do was because I had no idea what was going on. More information was
crucial. The waiting room was... down the hall, to the left. Dad would be there, probably ready to 
put a LoJack on me. I went right.
The bullpen was shabby and white. It had dumb motivational posters hung everywhere on 
the walls. Stuff like a kitten, paw clinging to a clothesline, with the caption 'Keep Hanging On 
written under it. The chairs were a calming blue, made of frayed fabric. Budget cuts. Dad 
complained about them every tax season. When my dad had been on active duty, it'd looked so slick
and cool. Now? It looked like badly maintained classroom. An empty classroom. Where the hell 
was everyone? I'd never seen it that empty. Normally you can't go three steps without crashing into 
someone. Which reminded me that I hadn't really thought through how I was actually going to steal 
something from my dad's desk when there were usually five armed officers milling about. But no 
one was there... strange.
Nathan? Nathan Alexander, is that you?
In a back corner sat an older man. Definitely towards the fat end of the muscular/fat cop 
spectrum. I recognized him, an old friend of Dad's. They went way back. We'd met a dozen times, 
but it must have been two years since I'd seen him. Since the accident.
Oh, hey... I struggled for name. He'd made me call him by his first name. What was it? 
Bill
He laughed good naturedly, See, it's been too long since you visited You should come by 
more often.
Uh, yeah, maybe. Not a chance. Where is everyone? I've never seen the bullpen this 
empty.
You should know, Bill said. Should I? Another Disappearance means they need all 
available hands. The higher ups like to get everyone patrolling at least, make people feel safe.
I'd never thought of patrolling as PR for the police department, though I guess it kind of 
made sense. I didn't ask why he wasn't with them. It was obvious. If they needed all hands and Bill 
wasn't with them then it could only be because he'd suffered the same fate as Dad. No 
Disappearance related work of any kind. They'd been close at the time the public had turned on 
Dad. Bill must have gotten caught in the blast radius. There was an awkward silence.
Anyway, Bill said, what are you doing here? I know it's been awhile, but you should at 
least remember the way back to the lobby.
Oh, Dad said he left his wallet here. I offered to get it, wanted to clear my head.
Greg left his wallet? That's rare for him, I'll have to tease him about it later. 
I laughed nervously. Please don't. Why had I made up such a lame lie? Well, while 
everyone else is out there looking busy, I'm going to make some photocopies. You gonna be okay 
on your own?
He stood up.
Sure. It was nice running into you, I said, fake smile plastered over my face. He didn't 
know me well enough to spot it, right? He left through a different door than the one I'd used. It led 
upstairs to the printers, if I was remembering the layout right.
I'd need to be fast. I'd already burned too much time. Where was Dad's desk? That was the 
easy part and I couldn't even manage it. Dad was essentially an administrator now and I knew they 
had their own set of desks in another room, but surely Bill would have mentioned it if his desk 
wasn't still in the bullpen. It probably hadn't been worth the hassle to move him. The room was 
covered in a sea of waist high desks. On my wobbly legs, it almost looked as if they were being 
carried up and down on the crests of waves. Well, that was an exaggeration. I was only thinking in 
vaguely nautical terms because of my recent boat trip. 
There A picture of me and Mom from years ago. She looked so happy... She had been really
into all this spiritualism stuff. I wonder what she would have made of everything... Never-mind that 
now There was another photo of me from just after the Earthquake. God, I looked terrible. Pale, 
almost green. I was sat up against the bed headboard, but my head was tilted forward. Must have 
been taken when I was in the hospital. Why would Dad want to see me like that every day?
An ancient late 90's desktop. It had one of those glass screens that protruded outward from 
the plastic frame. It was tan, as was the tower under the desk. Both it and the monitor sported a 
thick layer of gray dust on top. Maybe they hadn't even been used since the late 90's. Dad used his 
laptop for work. That hulking thing would take way too long to boot up. Two drawers. No locks. 
Kind of lax for a police department. Pens, unused Post-it notes, and- cigarettes? He'd started 
smoking again? Oh, no, candy cigarettes. Made sense, I would have teased him mercilessly if he'd 
had them around the house. I'd have to be careful not to mention it and give myself away. A flash 
drive. I pocketed it. The second drawer was filled with folders. Case files. I was a slow reader and 
time was running out. Someone would come looking for me soon. Maybe Dad had arranged them in
chronological order, newest at the top? He'd been a detective for a long long time, from before I was
born for sure, so the stuff on the bottom must have been really old. And he'd been demoted two 
years ago. I figured the Disappearance file must be near the top. I flicked through the top ten or so 
folders. One was thick, more than twice the size of the others. That had to be it. I ripped out a few 
pages and stuffed them into the messenger bag.
Time to go. I barreled through the double doors, nearly slapping-
Dad
He didn't say anything. Dad was always one to choose his words carefully. In that moment, 
just before he spoke, I thought I saw something. A flicker of suspicion?
You were taking a long time, he said, somewhere between a comment and an 
admonishment.
I, uh, got a little turned around.
Yeah, this place is a bit of a maze, he said, but his eyes were locked firmly on the 
messenger bag. The one that wasn't mine. That flicker of suspicion passed through his eyes once 
again before it passed. Not worth interrogating me over.
I stared at the paintings that lined the wall, eager not to make eye contact. Dull watercolors 
of landscapes and birds. A pack of swallows resting on the branches of trees. Not colorful like the 
one that had led me to Robin. I had no idea where it had disappeared to. I kept a lookout for the 
butterfly I was supposedly meant to follow in the paintings, but there weren't any. 
Why do you have that photo of me at your desk? I asked.
You saw that? He sighed. It's a reminder. To appreciate things.
He slung an arm around my shoulder and squeezed. It felt like he was directly squeezing my
guilty conscience. I could literally feel the weight of the paper and flash drive pulling me down, as 
if they were creating a gravitational pull around me. He shouldn't bother sacrificing for me, toiling 
away at a job that doesn't appreciate him. I wasn't worth it. I was a bad, crippled, useless son. But... 
his hand felt good. In my childhood, he hadn't been cold or mean, but he wasn't particularly 
physical either. When I woke up at the hospital after the accident, the first thing I felt were his 
fingers closed around my hand, squeezing tight, almost painful. My mother had always been a 
hugger, I could remember that much. But after I was well enough, Dad started hugging me like he 
was afraid he'd lose me if he ever let go. 
Are you okay? he asked, arm wrapping tighter around my shoulder.
I- I- I'm fine. It was all my fault and if I hadn't stuck my damn nose in and it should have 
been me and I was so scared and it was a monster a ghost a demon a spirit and I don't know what to 
do Just hug me tighter. I was so not fine. 
Even without words, he understood the essential part. His grip around me strengthened. His 
arm formed a protective circle. It had been awhile time since I'd let him show that much affection 
for me. Well, a long time since I'd reached out for it, really needed it. 
'I'll find you, Robin. Just wait for me.' 
Chapter 6
Dad sort of hovered around me when we got home. Maybe waiting for me to talk about my 
feelings. I might have, if anything I had to say would have made any sense. I gave him a polite five 
minutes then said I was tired and went upstairs.
I closed the door to my room more gently than I wanted to. As if that would help calm me 
down. I took three steps and flopped backwards onto my bed, eyes wide open. The pill bottle was 
on my bed. Dad. Just a note to let me know he'd seen it. That's another talk we'd have to have. I put 
it on the end table. I thought about buying a lock. I could already hear the fun argument that would 
spark.
My muscles quivered, felt drained of energy, like at the end of a tennis tournament. The 
adrenaline had finally worn off. My soft breathing sounded loud in the quiet. It had been... quite a 
day. That thing, the spirit, if it hadn't taken Robin, if I hadn't had the bookmark, then- my hands 
were shaking. Death. What would happen to me after I died? Would I get to see Mom again? 
According to her belief system, her soul, her spirit, still existed somewhere. I clenched my hands 
tight, staring up at the ceiling. No, I couldn't show weakness. It could have gotten me, but it didn't. I
was fine. If I had an ounce of sense I'd forget the whole thing and just be glad it hadn't gotten me. 
Nathan
She'd been so afraid. Her voice seemed to haunt the air, hiding in the silence of my bedroom.
Could the monster be hiding inside the shadows? I crouched beside my bed and looked under it. 
Darkness. I gulped, then stuck my hand in it, waving it back and forth, retreating the second I felt 
I'd covered most of the space I couldn't see. I opened my closet door, hands trembling. There were 
shadows, but they didn't move. My breaths were shaky, nervous. I kept looking over my shoulder, I 
tried to keep my blinks short, limit the amount of time I couldn't see. Maybe I should have stayed 
downstairs with Dad. I could have pretended everything was normal. That I was only worried about 
Robin because she was 'missing'. 
Except I couldn't. I couldn't leave Robin in the clutches of that creature, suffering. I couldn't 
let more and more Disappearances happen, now that I knew what was causing them. And I wouldn't
be flying blind. I had leads. Dad's flash drive and the papers I'd stolen. Robin's bag. Oh, and that 
cryptic butterfly woman. Easy things first. I sat down at my desk and plugged in the flash drive. 
Then I dug out the stolen notes from Robin's bag and the bookmark from my back pocket, flipped it
over, then back, then squinted at the thin side. It was crisp and mostly undamaged. It wasn't glowing
like it had in the dream. C'mon, stupid thing, take me to Robin I waggled it back and forth, but 
nothing happened. I sighed. It smelled faintly sweet. Caramel? No, like crme brulee. I hesitated a 
moment before giving it a quick lick. Pocket lint. Gross. Dusty gray- if gray was a taste. If I didn't 
know better, I'd say it was an ordinary bookmark. But I did know better, and not just because of 
what I'd seen it do in dreams. There was something else that was strange. I noticed Robin. What 
clothes she wore, music she liked, books she read. And she read a lot. I figured the thing had to be 
at least two years old for her Dad to have given it to her before he'd Disappeared. But I'd never seen
it before that day. I'm almost positive I would have noticed it sooner. 
The computer had booted up and registered the flash drive. Double click, aaaaaaand- 
Password protected. Jeez, Dad Paranoid, much? I ripped the drive out and tossed it onto the bed. 
Useless. Fine. The police report. First page was a table of contents, blank on the back side. Then a 
case summary. Hmm, the Disappearances from earlier than a year ago were labeled 'inactive'. They 
weren't investigating them. At least, not directly. Reason cited... not enough manpower. If you didn't
have enough manpower, then un-demote my dad, you brain dead morons And last, Victim Data. 
Like I'd thought, it was a lot more thorough than Robin's list. It had her dad, of course. David 
Melling. I wondered if what had happened to Robin had happened to him. To all of them. To be 
honest, if there was a connection between the victims, I sure wasn't seeing it. Damn, a dead end.
 A buzzing broke through the silence. A text. My phone. Robin It had to be No one else 
would bother to message me. I picked it up. An unknown number. Please, please, please...
Buy one get one free pizzas all night at Frederick's Pizza Palace Choose pickup and get a 
side free
...Stupid me. But a guy's gotta eat, right? Buy one get one free really sounded good. I hadn't 
eaten since Talisman. Dad wasn't a fan of pizza, but he'd probably let it slide given the day I'd had. 
Fainting and my friend Disappearing and the police interview. I dug my wallet out and opened it. A 
slip of paper fluttered out. A business card. It landed, elegantly, face side up on my thigh. Reverie 
Psychoanalyst Iris: Sweet Dreams Achieved.
Iris, like an eye? And 'Reverie' didn't that mean 'Memory'? So all put together it was 
'Memory Therapist Eye'. That made no sense whatsoever, and I hadn't even started on the 
nonsensical subtitle. The card was emblazoned with a gothic butterfly. Loopy and extravagant, like 
it was drawn in cursive. A butterfly design...
Follow the butterfly.
There was an address, not far from the house, in a residential area. I thought therapists only 
had at-home practices on TV. I wondered if that meant something. Still, I was going, obviously. It 
was practically an invitation, if an over-complicated one. Why couldn't the woman have told me the
address when we'd met? As for who placed the card in my wallet, I had a good idea. There was only
one time during the day it could have been done, but why had he done it? I suppose I'd only get 
answers once I got there.
I grabbed my phone, wallet, and the card and stuffed them into the back pockets of my jeans.
I looked out the window. A summer evening, a tinge of red lingered at the edge of the horizon, 
feeding that last little bit of light to the sky. But it wouldn't last long; soon night would be out in 
force. A knot of fear clenched in my stomach. Let's also take Robin's bookmark, shall we? I should 
be taking it wherever I go in case of evil spirit attacks, which is apparently a thing that happens in 
the real world now. I took a detour to the kitchen and grabbed an apple, a bagel and filled a bag to 
the brim with wasabi peas. Dad was in the living room, sizing me up over a newspaper. He'd put his
glasses on, thin square frames, kept immaculately clean both from the general care he provided all 
his things and a stubborn desire to wear them as little as possible. Dad had said they made him look 
like an old man. I'd replied that it was the gray sideburns that did that and he'd sent me to my room 
for an hour. 
Where are you going? he asked.
For a walk.
He stared at me.
Am I allowed to take a walk unsupervised, or do I need a chaperone?
Watch it. We've both had a rough day, I'm just worried about you, he said, then resumed to
cut off my incoming protest. So, a short walk. I call, you answer. I text, you respond. Don't make 
me ground you for the rest of the summer, okay?
I grinned. Okay.
Love you, his eyes softened just that little bit, enough to know he meant it, he wasn't 
saying the words out of habit. When I was a kid, he showed his love via actions rather than words. 
Even the accident hadn't changed that. It was after. When he saw me on the ground, staring at- I 
didn't want to think about it. I hadn't done it, and I'd moved past feeling that way. But it'd shocked 
him enough that he felt the need to say the words as well as show the feeling from then on. 
I lingered. He didn't need to make that much effort. Hadn't I caused him enough grief? 
You too, I said.
Outside, the sun had only just set. The sky had been orangey when Robin and I had coffee, 
when it had seemed to crawl up her body, an omen of what was to come. The streetlamps helped 
push back the darkness, but I still kept my hand firmly wrapped around the bookmark. I kept 
imagining the darkness pushing out, following me. I was trying to stay calm, eating my snacks and 
looking up at the bright half moon, the first hint of stars, lamps, porch lights, any point of light at 
all, but nothing worked. I was sweating. It could have been the balmy night air or my brisk pace. 
But I knew it wasn't.
The more I thought about it, the more I couldn't help but think that this was a really stupid 
idea. Like, what was I even expecting to find? A magic spell to save Robin? It's only ever that easy 
in children's stories. More, it felt like a trap. A witch luring children into her gingerbread house with
false promises and a sinister smile. The risk to reward ratio seemed really bad. So why was I still 
walking towards the address on the business card? Maybe because I had few other options. If the 
police department, Dad included, and Robin couldn't figure it out, then what chance did I have with 
around one percent of the resources and brain power? I knew that good or bad, that woman had 
answers. She'd known things about the monster. A spirit, she'd called it. If she knew a way to save 
Robin, it was worth the risk. I'd make it worth it. 
 I came up to a large house and checked the business card. This was it. Nice place. Dark 
blue-gray, the door right in the middle, with big bay windows on either side, and a straight path 
leading from the door to the sidewalk. A dream catcher hung from a hook drilled into a wooden 
support beam. It was homemade, curved sticks had been bound together with floss, and the spiral, 
web-like center patterns had been created from floss as well. Jade colored beads were sewn in, 
seemingly at random, throughout the pattern. But it wasn't random; the beads were hung in specific 
places to ward against corresponding threats. You picked up that kind of thing working at Talisman. 
A skilled shaman had made this dream catcher. I breathed a little easier, calmed down a bit. No need
to ward against evil if you yourself are evil, right? As I knocked on the door, I smelled something. 
Earthy. Woven in the strands of the dreamcatcher were herbs. Thyme, basil, others I didn't 
recognize. Nothing floral, though. More protection against the sweet-smelling spirit?
The front door opened. Teddy, grinning. It wasn't a surprise. Sorry, I meant it was absolutely 
a surprise. Why in the world would he have left that business card in my wallet? He was just some 
guy I was a little friendly with He shouldn't be involved with this. But on the other hand, I'd 
figured it was him. I'd caught him leaning over the front desk at Talisman, after all. That's probably 
when he'd placed the business card. Maybe that's why he wanted the rare books in the first place, to 
force me to look for them as a distraction.
Nathan, what are you doing here? Could it be our destinies have been linked? He was still 
smiling, playing some stupid game. It wasn't a game to me.
Stop messing around What do you have to do with the butterfly woman?
His smirk fell.
Sorry. I got carried away. I'm her assistant, he said. Slash nurse, he added, after 
hesitating a moment. 
Okay. I'd follow up on that later. And you left the business card? 
Yeah. Come on in, I'm sure you have a lot of questions, He held the door open. If it was a 
trap, then this would be the last chance I had to dodge it. It boiled down to one question. Did I trust 
Teddy? No. That's wrong. The question should be- Was the risk of trusting Teddy worth the risk to 
save Robin?
'Robin, what would you do?' I sent her a message, a prayer. Tell me what to do, because I'm 
flying blind. My heart sank when she didn't respond. But it didn't really matter. I'd sacrifice myself 
to help her. Hell, the decision wasn't even hard. Robin or me? Easiest choice of my life.
I walked through that threshold, holding my breath.
It was... normal? There's something about entering another person's home that makes you 
super polite. Letting someone into the space where you sleep, eat, have sex is... intimate. Like, I 
didn't even want to bring friends over to my place, let alone a girlfriend or whatever. Given Teddy's 
taste in literature and the dream catcher, I'd expected the house to be a shrine to the occult. Strong 
incense stick odors clashing with the light garden scents of homegrown herbs. Maybe a few 
pentagrams lying around? Blood smears from sacrifices? But, no, it was neat, and though there were
flower vases peppered on end tables down the foyer, they didn't seem to stink quite like incense 
candles did. Sunflowers, weird choice.
Hey, gimme your coat, he said as he grabbed it. Jesus, wait one second. The house was 
warm. Air from a vent brushed past my face. Hot. A broken AC, maybe. But that'd be no reason to 
have the heat on instead. But it was pleasant, if I'm honest. It felt like a blanket of warmth covering 
your body. It made me sleepy, thinking about all those winter mornings after I'd woken up, but 
before I had to leave the heat of my blankets to get ready for school. Even the accident couldn't ruin
that simple pleasure.
Teddy ushered me into a side room before disappearing to ditch my coat and make his 
'world famous' herbal tea. When had I asked for tea? I'd rather skip it and get to the point. Every 
second I wasted was a second not used finding a way to bring Robin back. As he left, I noticed how 
thin he was. All bone and height. Or maybe it was his thinness that made him look tall. With his 
pale blond hair, thin frame, and pale skin, you might think he was a ghost. Maybe it was the ornate 
eye patch that gave him a supernatural vibe. Not my type, at all. He compared unfavorably to 
Robin's soft femininity or even Officer Daniels' musculature. 
And then I was alone. The room he'd stuffed me into, an old fashioned library, complete 
with a grandfather clock, was lined with bookshelves which extended all the way to the ceiling. 
Books were stuffed into perfect rows, none so much as slanted. They were mostly used books. I 
picked one up. A Talisman book. Creatures of the Night? That wasn't either of the one's I'd sold him 
before. There was another- On Demons. And a third- Elementals of Asia. It went on and on like that;
a shelf dedicated to non-fiction texts on ghosts, demons, spirits, vampires, and most of it was from 
Talisman. I hadn't sold them. Or I didn't remember doing so. Damn, did he read anything else? Like,
Teddy must have bought half our catalog. I'd definitely come to the right place. The woman from 
my dream had called the black shadow a spirit. He and the butterfly woman must have been doing 
research on the Disappearances like Robin had. But unlike her, they seemed focused exclusively on 
the supernatural. I wandered over to the couch and let myself drop. I could hear steps on the floor 
above me. Where the hell was Teddy putting my jacket, Narnia? 
Bzz bzz
My phone.
Nathan, where are you?
Dad. I texted that I was at a friend's. It'd make him suspicious, seeing as I didn't really have 
any, but it'd slow down his inevitable request for me to come home. Teddy padded into the room 
holding a tray, one porcelain teacup with a saucer and a plate with three shortbread cookies 
balanced on it, in his other hand, he held a teapot. Just one cup? It was way more of a domestic 
image than I'd have thought Teddy was capable of producing. He always struck me as a carefree, 
careless kind of guy.
It's sage. You'll love it. But don't drink it yet, he said.
Sage? Strange, but I guess I knew next to nothing about tea.
Okay... My stomach growled. I'd gone through all my snacks on the walk over, but I was 
still hungry.
Teddy laughed, loud and forced. He had this way of laughing that made you feel like he'd 
infused his response with a little too much energy. Like he was trying to make you feel good about 
yourself by laughing extra hard at your jokes. You can have a cookie if you're hungry.
I helped myself to all three. I remembered to hold the plate under my mouth as I ate.
Sage promotes good dreams, he said. You've been having some not so good dreams, 
yeah?
Well, since he brought it up. What do you know about Robin?
Hm. Be a little more specific. He sat down in one of the ancient leathery armchairs. Spider
web cracks had appeared where bits of the leather had flaked off. Taking the teapot, he carefully 
poured the brown-gold liquid into the cup and handed it to me. After I took it, he sank back into his 
chair; the massive back made him look tiny, even more so as he began to sink, slowly disappearing 
into red cushions. I set the cup down, not interested.
Specifics, huh? Then start with the most important question. Is Robin still alive? 
Everything else was secondary.
He tapped his lips with his finger a few times. Again, it felt off. Like he was forcing casual 
affectations for me. I believe she is, yes.
You're sure?
Well, after it kills her, I'm pretty sure its next target will be you. So as long as you're not 
getting attacked by it, you're golden, dude. Your crush is still alive and kicking. Probably, anyway. 
I couldn't decide on a reaction between relief and terror. 
What should I do? I was genuinely asking. I would have taken advice from anyone at that 
point. I had no clue what I was doing.
I think you should meet with my boss. She can give you more information, maybe a path to
follow, he said. The woman from my dream. Sure. Made sense.  
Okay, and how do I meet her? Is she, like, waiting in another room or something?
Weeeeell, he meandered, scratching his head, sort of. You need drink that tea.
I looked at the cup with suspicion. Like, what, as some sort of hazing ritual? Maybe it 
actually tasted really bad. I lifted the cup and sniffed. Smelled fine.
It's only possible if you drink the tea. He was getting serious. Not playing around 
anymore. It didn't seem plastic, like the rest of his happy sing-song comments. But really, did his 
shift in attitude matter? Robin had to be my only concern. The steam hung in front of my eyes, 
giving everything a smoky look. Like a gentleman's club from the 1800's. The library had old 
fashioned enough dcor for it. 
Why?
There's more kick to it than just sage, he explained. Iris is... a one of a kind existence. 
You can't meet her when you're awake. She can only meet you in dreams. The tea will put you in 
the right frame of mind to get the answers you're looking for.
I probably should have been freaking out, sputtering that no way was I going to drink his 
sage and sleeping pill tea. But all I was really thinking was that that explained the stupid business 
card. Reverie Psychoanalyst Iris. Her NAME was Iris.
Why can't I meet her when I'm awake?
Teddy looked backwards and up over his chair. At another room in the house? Is that where 
Iris was? He turned back to me, guilt all over his face, cheeks red. If that's what he looked like 
every time he was uncomfortable, I could rest easy about his motives. I would have been able to tell
he was lying instantly if his face had suddenly turned into a tomato. 
Look, you'll have to ask Iris for the why but what I can tell you is that what's in the tea is 
safe. I AM a nurse after all. Literally I have a certificate and everything.
That sounded... dubious. What if I don't want to drink it?
Um, well, I can't predict the future, but most likely Robin will die and then you'd probably 
be next. He said it like it our lives were nothing. Being cheerful had a dark side, I was learning. 
Robin...
The wheels in my head whirred to life. Here I was considering drugging myself, falling 
unconscious in a near stranger's house, on the slim shred of a chance that it would help Robin. I 
guess if he'd wanted to drug me, he could have given me the tea without saying anything. Seriously,
it smelled fine. But was it really the right thing to do? I sighed. I was acting like I was actually 
considering this. I wasn't 'considering' anything. I'd already decided to do it.
I just have to text my dad, I said.
Well... fine, but don't tell him where you are. If he comes over I could debate the ethics and 
justify the morality of the situation no problem, but he'd probably still arrest me.
'Arrest' not 'have me arrested'. I'd never told Teddy that Dad was a police officer. He 
shrugged, like it was natural he'd know that about me. I guess it didn't matter. The only thing that 
mattered was... Robin. That's all that was on my mind. Even if the mystery of who Teddy is hadn't 
been remotely solved.
I need to work through some things about Robin 
I'm safe, but I'm putting my phone away now
love you
I grimaced. It looked like a formal letter. Not like me at all. And I mean no matter what I 
sent it would alarm him, but didn't that message sound a little... last words-y? He wouldn't think 
Would he? No way. Eyes clenched shut, I hit send. I held the teacup, staring into the amber liquid as
if glaring at it would tell me what Teddy had put in it. God. Bottoms up, I guess. It went down in 
one gulp. Actually didn't taste bad. Very earthy. 
Teddy clapped. Oh bravo Very brave, I wish my ex had been decisive like you. I'll take 
care of you while you're asleep. You should feeeeeellll theeee eeeefecccctsssss aaaaaalmooost 
iiiinnnsssttttaaaannnttttlllyyy.
I blinked once, twice. Surely he hadn't been that blurry a minute ago. My legs shook. I could
hear my own heart beating. Slow. Much too slow. 
Thump.
The ticking hand of the grandfather clock sounded, slow and deep, like a gong.
My head slumped. I could only see the bottom of the empty teacup, a butterfly painted into 
the china. Not a gothic version like the one on the business card. Nah, it was a more realistic image 
of a monarch. The red-orange coloring with black patterns were unmistakable. My eyes closed.
Follow the butterfl-
Chapter 7
It's the creaking that wakes me; a flexing of wood before it releases with a flat squeak. The 
floor is rocking like a cradle, water splashes all around. A boat. For years Dad's had been promising 
(more like threatening) to teach me to sail. Before swimming became impossible for me. Dad, is he 
here? It's dark; I can barely tell the difference between eyes open or closed. Need to get my 
bearings. I stumble to my feet. Clear, cool air pours into my lungs. I wonder if this is the harbor 
town Dad grew up in? I'd only visited once; the fried crab legs and creamy fudge sundaes had been 
beyond description. Half the taste was in the atmosphere. Like, how could crab legs and sundaes not
taste great in the bright sunlight with your legs dangling over the side of a pier? I'd vomited riding 
the carousel afterwards. A few weeks after that the whole pier collapsed during a hurricane. A 
homeless man who'd been living there had been killed. Dad hadn't gone back since, he'd waved me 
off when I mentioned it'd been awhile since we'd visited. He wouldn't say why, but I knew it was 
the feeling of not wanting a broken version of the present reminding you of a lost past. Happens to 
me every time I look in a mirror.
It's probably not Dad's harbor, since the scent of salt is missing. There's only the gentle 
refreshing smell of water. So, a lake? I take each step carefully, hands outstretched. The last thing I 
want is to tip over a handrail and drown. But, I feel... good. So good it's weird. I twist from my hips 
back and forth. Nothing. No pain Lifting my shirt confirms it- no scars. I'm in a dream for sure. 
The hair at the back of my neck stands on end and I'm failing to fight off a grin. Robin, I know, 
Robin But I really just want to run up and down the boat, with my hands outstretched, feel the 
wind blow through my hair and past my body, until I'm exhausted, collapsed on the floor panting, 
feeling my lungs burn with the satisfaction of a good workout; I want to imagine I can still play 
tennis and Dad can take me sailing in his hometown without worrying because I can swim and 
Mom's alive and she's laughing and beautiful and we're happy. Hey. It's just a dream, Nathan, not a 
miracle. Focus on the task in front of you. 
 Alright, so where exactly am I? I didn't think I'd have to go looking for Iris. Last time she'd 
just kinda showed up. But at least I can make stuff out now. I'm definitely on a boat. A big, old, 
sailing vessel, really old, like from the age of discovery. No sails, though, not even a mast, as far as 
I can tell. Metal lanterns are arranged in two neat rows at the starboard and port sides. Hey, look at 
me knowing what the sides of a boat are called. Dad must have said it enough times for it to sink in.
In each of the lanterns is a candle, there's maybe ten on each side. Just enough to cast the boat in 
dim light. It seems like a dangerous lighting system for a wood boat, but whatever. The wood has 
been carved into, haphazardly, like a toddler took a chisel to it. 
I say toddler because most of the drawings are childish. There's one of a flower with six 
petals, a house that's basically a square with a triangle roof on top of it. One is just the word 
'BORED' in big block capitals. Every wood surface is littered with designs. It must have taken 
forever to carve the whole ship. Hey wait, here's a drawing of a butterfly, near the center of the 
deck. A whole flock of them actually. They've been given a bit more care. The artist has attempted 
shading and more delicate swirls and patterns. Whelp, butterflies mean I'm definitely in the right 
place. The boat's moving. Maybe it's heading to where Iris is? Well, as long as I'm waiting, might as
well take the opportunity to take my undamaged body for a spin
I sprint from one end of the boat to the other. Faster and faster, the gentle breeze feeling like 
a fierce gale. It feels so good I collapse into a pile of exhausted limbs onto the deck, the night air 
drifts across my body.
Ha haa I yell into the sky. I never want to wake up
You should be careful what you wish for.
Jesus
A woman is sitting next to me, staring into the sky.
You nearly gave me a heart attack I say. How long have you been here?
She can't have been there the whole time. I would have seen her. She has absurdly long hair, 
drawn into a ponytail, which loops around her on the ground, tapering off in front of her bare feet, 
nails painted red. Her dress is like a short sleeved kimono, also red, patterned in butterflies and 
flowers. A sash is pulled tight around her waist, like a corset. Her legs are drawn together, knees 
bent. Skin pale enough that she wouldn't look out of place in an old Japanese painting. A pipe 
dangles loosely from her hand. It's hand carved, no glossy lacquer covering it- homemade. She 
takes a deep drag and blows it out, over the water. It drifts outwards, dissipating slowly. I sniff. 
That's... definitely not tobacco. I remember that smell. It's Iris. She's ethereal. She looks kinda 
exactly like you'd expect a woman who lives in dreams to look like. It's almost clich. And 
butterflies again. Seriously what is it with this woman and butterflies? They aren't all that great. 
Dragonflies are way cooler. 
I turn to face her more directly. The sweat cooling on my body makes me shiver a little. She 
hands me a blanket with a scowl that sort of negates the kind gesture. Have I done something to 
offend her? That'd be a new record for me. I wrap it around my shoulders. She takes another drag 
from her pipe, offers it to me, and shrugs when I wave her off. We seem stuck, she's unwilling to 
start the conversation and I don't know which of the seven million questions bouncing around my 
head I should ask. I have so many important things I need to know, which is why I nearly slap 
myself in the face when the first thing I ask is:
So what's with all the woodwork? 
Of all the stupid- That is NOT the question I should lead with, I should be asking about 
Robin
I was bored, she says.
Yeah, I got that sense from the gigantic 'BORED' you'd carved into the deck.
How long did it take?
A year, year and a half.
But-
She takes a drag from her pipe and passes it to me. This time I accept. Dreams don't have 
continuity, do they? Has she been dreaming continuously for a year and a half? I didn't know that 
was possible. I suck in, but I don't know how to smoke properly, hot vapor rushes into the back of 
my throat, burning it. It sets off a coughing fit. She has enough grace to ignore it.
I know your nurse, Teddy, I say when I get control of my lungs. Kind of a weird 
coincidence, huh?
She scowls when I say his name. Yes. How strange. It's almost refreshing how nakedly 
hostile she's being. Like, the amount of venom in those three worlds could probably poison me, 
Teddy, and pretty much the whole world. So I have no idea how, but it seems like I've blown my 
chance at a good first impression.
Here.
She hands me a teacup. Like the blanket, it's appeared seemingly out of thin air. Right, it's a 
dream. Stuff like this happens all the time. Like when the bookmark traveled with me and Robin 
into dreams. Inside the cup is another strange liquid, this one dark brown and sweet-smelling. The 
last drink I'd taken from someone had literally knocked me unconscious. What if this did something
worse?
Quit being so negative, she says, annoyed. It's a dream, Nathan. It can't harm you if you 
don't let it. It's hot chocolate to help keep you warm. Change it to soda, if you like.
 I'm getting whiplash. Is she kind or mean? Hot chocolate's fine. I take a sip. It's amazing. 
She's added a shot of vanilla and cinnamon. I feel guilty enjoying it while Robin's out there alone, 
and probably terrified. But alive. Like Teddy said- until it, the spirit, came after me, I knew she was 
alive. Probably.
That thing. You called it a spirit. And, like, an elemental. What does that mean? Do you 
know how to stop it?
Hm. Well, those terms seemed like the closest analogues to that monster. According to mine
and Teddy's research, anyway, she says. So I'd been right that the books I'd seen at her house were 
for research. As for how to fight it... we have...  a plan, her confidence wanes, of sorts.
 There's a rumble of thunder in the distance, towards the stern of the ship. The night's clear. 
She snaps towards the sound, frowning. Iris departs from the railing and takes a few steps towards 
the sound. She squints, trying to see... I don't know what. Should I be worried? Bad weather doesn't 
interest me. Saving Robin does. There's a plan. An actual plan 
Okay. Okay How can I help?
We lock eyes for a long moment. There's something difficult to read there. Guilt? She turns 
away, saying nothing. She's saying something without saying it, but I'm too dumb to read between 
the lines. That makes me frustrated. That frustration turns to anger.
You- You're supposed to help me My friend could be dying because of me and you aren't 
doing anything
She ignores me and looks up into the sky, smiling faintly. She's mumbling something under 
her breath, I only just catch it, I'm sorry, Teddy. I can't do it.
Before I can ask what she means she turns and roars right back at me. I AM helping you 
Your self-pity makes me sick- his too You've had some bad luck, a rough life? Suck it up You 
think you're so important-
No I don't- I say, interrupting, but she literally waves a hand in front of my face to cut me 
Shut up, I'm not done. Your self-importance is so strong you take on all the suffering you 
come across and somehow make it about you. Your friend Robin, your dad, whenever they're sad or 
upset, you take the blame. When they aren't, you imagine they are, with yourself as the cause. And I
bet you never take credit for their joy, the times you make them laugh or smile, and when they're 
nice to you, showing their love, you reject it, saying it's pity or obligation or that the happiness you 
give them isn't worth the suffering you cause. As if they have no choice in how they feel, only you. 
You think your scars run deep? Pain from that car slamming into you? Imagine how Robin will feel 
when she learns that you died trying to save her. She'll feel that anything that happened to you while
you were 'saving' her is her responsibility That'll leave a scar. Just imagine the reverse, how much 
pain that would cause you, how deeply you'd be scarred by her dying for you.
Her voice is so bitter, angry. She's not really yelling at me. Well, not only me. It's like she's 
yelling at the world. Scars, huh? I thumb my side, even though I know they aren't there in the 
dream. She knows about my scars. How? She's kind of making sense; it's true Id be devastated if 
Robin harmed herself trying to help me. But that's only because she's got so much more to live for 
than me And I do feel guilty for causing my dad financial worries, emotional pain, for not being the
son he signed up for, and maybe I do tend to interpret Robin's bad moods as my fault, and- holy 
hell, is Iris right about everything? Am I the selfish jerk she described? If that's true... No. I can't get
distracted by that now. Maybe she's right, maybe she isn't. It doesn't change what has to be done, 
because Robin will die if I don't help her, no one else even knows what's happened I can't take it on
faith that Iris and Teddy's extremely vague plan will work. Having her alive and 'scarred', or 
whatever, is better than not having her at all.
Iris, you might be right. About me, about everything. But I'm not gonna let her die just 
because she might resent me for it later. That'd be idotic. So how do I help her? On this point, I'm 
sure. Everything else? Not so much.
Iris sighs and smiles a little. It's tight, pained. Her eyes don't crinkle with genuine happiness.
You're a good kid, aren't you? She doesn't know me very well. Fine. I'll tell you a little. You have
the physical copy of the bookmark and Robin has the dream version. They're connected... you 
should be able to contact her with it.
 Thunder sounds again. Closer, more threatening.
Iris snaps her fingers. There's a mechanical churning as the boat shakes. Thank god I'm 
sitting because a particularly violent shake pitches me forward onto the deck. I cringe, waiting for 
stinging knives of pain, like thin pieces of metal forming deep in the muscles of my hips up through
my chest then thrusting outwards, trying to break the surface of my skin, to emanate from the scars. 
No knives come. It's a dream, stupid That's a relief. I unclench my hands. Wood panels open up 
towards the rear of the ship and out pops a wheel. Even amidst the chaos, Iris has gone to stand 
away from the railings. I follow her lead. We're standing on the butterfly designs, the ones drawn 
more intricately than the rest. She stamps her foot three time, each stamp an echoing boom, cutting 
through the wind which is now whipping about unpredictably. Giant poles, unadorned with sails, 
rise from the ground, like fast growing plants. They're tall. Thirty feet? Fifty feet? At last all the 
shaking stops. I struggle to keep my feet. She pulls out a whistle from her sash. Oh great.
PHWEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEET
Ow. No time to cover my ears. There's a gentle gust of wind.  I look up to see an army of 
monstrous, gigantic butterflies. Twenty or more, Monarchs, Swallowtails, the one Iris had called a 
Purple Emperor- only giant sized, as big as cars, in all colors, periwinkle, green, black, flying high 
above the sails. They start dive bombing towards us. 
Now, I feel similarly to butterflies as I do to flowers. They're pretty and all, but they're more 
or less non-factors in my life. Still, giant sized, the insects are absolutely terrifying. It makes all 
their creepy features way easier to see Their giant, furry torsos with way too many legs attached, 
the huge curled sucker thing they drink nectar with, and of course the hideous compound eyes as 
big as a house's windows.
I can't hit the deck fast enough. I knock my chin on the ground and bite my tongue, drawing 
blood. I'm waiting for them to lift me into the air, like they did last time. But instead they simply 
land on the sail-less poles. There's a slight tapping as the insects adjust their footing, but otherwise, 
it's just the wind howling. I liked it better when they were flying. Less creepy. Iris raises a hand. 
The tapping stops.
Do you like them? she asks, a little bashful. 
Your legion of super butterflies? No, of course I don't Why do you have them?
They're more fun than sails.
This woman is unhinged. Pick a personality and stick with it, okay?
That's it?
She hesitates, unsure. It's a strange look on her. I... met them about a year and a half ago. 
When I fought the spirit.
Wait, what? I should probably be asking follow up questions, but I'm kinda stuck with my 
mouth hanging open, doing a manual reset of my brain. Had she tried to save someone too? And 
self evidently failed, since the spirit's still out there. Rain is coming down in fierce lashings, it 
almost feels like ocean waves, cresting and breaking over us. 
Goddammit Iris yells over the storm. Fine, I'll tell him. You'll have met something too. 
I- I haven't met any butterflies lately.
It doesn't have to be a butterfly, she says, gesturing upwards. It can be anything. Just, 
something that helped you, and maybe seemed smarter than it should be?
No, I- The swallow, the rainbow swallow. When I asked it for help it flew into me and I 
could run faster than I thought possible, and I ended up right where Robin was. Iris, what's 
happening to me? Is someone doing something to me?
Ah, pity. I can read this look. Is she crying or is it just the rain? 
I'm sorry, there's no time to explain. 
Flash in the distance. Thunder growls three seconds later. Louder. Iris snaps her fingers. The 
butterflies shift, there's a pitter patter of thin legs tapping on wood. Then, with a great heave, in 
sync, they flap their wings. Again, and again in rhythm. The boat jerks, nearly sending me to the 
ground. Awake, with my injuries, I'd have been sent sprawling. I know we're going through a dire 
situation, but I still allow myself a tiny smile. For so long I've been trapped in my own body. I've 
had the musculature of an athlete mixed with the capabilities of an invalid. Knowing I can access so
much power, speed, agility, but that my body will flat out shut down in protest if I do has been 
torture. But in a dream... The boat sails over a wave crest horizontally, then pitches downwards to 
meet its trough. A spray of water kicks up and splashes me and Iris. I splutter, but Iris' grim 
expression is unchanged.
 Where are we going? I'm so confused. My mind's racing. It's too much to process all at once
with a storm bearing down on us too. I want to talk to Robin She's the smart one; she'd know what 
the heck's going on. The wind cuts in, blowing so strongly I have to hold my hands over my eyes. 
They tear up anyway. We push against the gusting wind, and the butterflies struggle to keep us on 
course, cutting through the waves. In this weather, Dad would've recommended pulling the sails 
down so the wind can't bat us around as easily. Iris keeps us steady. Clouds on the horizon roll 
towards us, lightning zigzags through them, getting ever closer. She whistles, the butterflies change 
course. I can see teeth as she bites her lip. We're being chased. By what? We're in a dream, so 
maybe a nightmare. Iris' nightmare. It sure is scaring her.
What else can you tell me? What should I do next? I strain to be heard over the roar.
Now's not a good time, Nathan She yells over the wind, eyes trained on the butterflies 
and the approaching clouds.
Now might be the only time
She clenches her teeth; I can almost hear her growling with annoyance.
Fine You've been seeing the world differently haven't you? Colors and brightness and 
outlines shifting, things like that. Those are things connected to dreams. Pay attention to them And 
then stay the hell away This isn't your fight.
Yeah, colors have saturated and spun. And people kept telling me I was shining. And I'd 
noticed it in others. Robin and the cop. And Teddy. And Iris. Not Dad though. Which is a good 
thing. I don't want him dragged into this mess. Plus I'd seen the graffiti swallow move while me and
Robin were still awake. So had her bookmark. I don't answer Iris. But we both know I'm not going 
to listen to her warnings. How can I?
Iris, how do you know so much? Not just about the this spirit, but also about me. She 
knows about me from my real life, and I'm one hundred percent positive we've never met before.
She doesn't answer. There's something else going on here. Something more than a spirit that 
kidnaps people to feed off them in dreams. Iris has answers and she's refusing to share. The water 
that drips down my arm is brackish black.
C'mon Iris, together we-
She shakes her head. No Just... walk away. You can still walk away Don't end up like 
me. Her voice is weak. I can barely hear her through the wind and rain, which is picking up in 
intensity. 
What do you mean, 'end up like you'? I don't want to do this alone. Iris knows more about 
this, I know she does She's the only person who's ever fought the spirit, even if she lost. I'm 
completely oblivious, I need her. I don't understand why she can't just come with me. She walks 
over to the railing and leans over. Didn't she hear me? Further she leans and further still. Whoa, Iris,
too far What- she slips off the side of the boat. In a flash, she's lost to the darkness. I- I don't hear a 
splash.
Iris? I shout. Iris
Yes? she says, coolly, standing beside me, completely dry. 
You- But- I say, before realizing. You can't leave the boat.
The carvings, her bitterness. For a year and a half, she's been trapped on the boat. Ever since
she went after the spirit? Suddenly her warnings and threats have a little more impact. That could be
me. It's different when the danger is vague, compared to seeing it in front of me.
Welcome to my home. she says, her bitterness clear. A strong wind is sending the rain 
horizontally into our faces. There's another bolt of lightning followed in half a second by thunder. 
I've not seen a squall like this in... ever. Definitely not been outside during one.
What about your house and Teddy?
That's where my body lives. Teddy is... my nurse. Is that all? That hesitation is suspicious. 
Just how much does he know? She's clutching her chest, looking away, vulnerable. She's taller than 
me, I notice suddenly. My consciousness is stuck here. Price I paid for losing against the 
elemental. Something's wrong with me, with my soul. It's disconnected from my body.
The butterflies skitter, make short nervous chitters, similar to cicadas. Their wings flap 
double time, they sound like bed sheets being flapped out quickly again and again. I stumble as the 
boat lurches forward.
We're out of time. You need to leave.
A sickly sweet smell begins to fill the air. I remember it well. Cotton candy. Robin, almost 
killed, the bookmark protecting her, getting flung out of her dream house. THAT'S what's been after
But, wait, Teddy said it would only come after me if Robin was dead
Well, Teddy's an idiot Robin's being protected by the bookmark. It's the first time that's 
happened. Who knows how the spirit is reacting? Alright, no more answers. You have to wake up 
before you're killed
Okay, but how? A lightning bolt strikes the mast, a deafening boom and shockwave sends 
several gigantic butterflies plummeting to the ground. There's a splintering crack as the wood gives 
way and crumbles. The top third of the mast is falling down Charred butterfly bodies slam into the 
ship, but they're so light, they only make a wet slap sound as their broken, oozing fluid bodies hit 
the deck. The mast plunges into the water on our starboard side, sending up a huge geyser of water, 
which soaks the deck. Wake up, wake up, wake up C'mon stupid body, wake me up before I die 
Thunder crashes all around us. Iris' mouth is wide open, she's screaming, rain pouring down her 
face. Or are they tears? I can smell the blackened flesh and see the smoldering of flash fried bits of 
butterfly sizzling on the deck. Some of the insects survived the bolt, but not enough of them are left 
to move the boat. We come to a stop. Iris is hunched, shuddering and kneeling on the deck, holding 
a broken piece of wing, half burned black, to her chest. The others flutter down from the mast, 
forming a protective circle around her. They're chittering. They're afraid. So am I. Iris looks up and 
stands, placing both of her hands on my shoulders. She's gripping them hard, I can feel her nails 
digging into my skin even through my shirt. 
The bird, Nathan. You have to call for it.
She knows about the rainbow swallow, too? How the hell does she know so much about me?
How?
Just call it Now, go. Be safe.
Iris places a hand on my chest and shoves me off the side of the boat, up into the air and 
overboard. 'That's gonna bruise' is my last coherent thought before I plummet into the water. I take a
quick panicked breath before I slam into the rough surf, then I'm sinking into blackness. Pressure 
builds up in my lungs, they feel like they're expanding, trying to burst out of my chest. I try to find 
the surface but I don't know which way to go. It's all dark, churning water. My arms flail and legs 
kick in a crude breast stroke, but I might be swimming down for all I know I can feel bubbles 
forming around my nostrils as my last scraps of air escape.
Please, spirit bird, help me
A warm sensation burns my chest, from the inside of my heart. At first I think lack of 
oxygen has triggered a heart attack, but instead a glowing circle appears on my chest, shooting out 
beams of rainbow light. Out pops the rainbow swallow. It starts small, but quickly grows large, 
larger than should be possible. I can feel wind whipping at my face, tossing my hair everywhere. 
Wait, wind? I'm falling So instead of drowning, I'm going to crash into the ground. Is this supposed
to be an improvement? I can see clouds, I've lost track of the swallow and- forget that, I can 
breathe again I land in something soft, the wind getting knocked out of me. I take rapid gasping 
breaths, coughing as the speed of my fall is suddenly reduced to zero. The swallow is below me, the
size of a pickup, flapping its wings gently. It's beautiful. Colors shifting with each change of the 
light. So dazzling I almost can't look. 
Thank you.
I say it without sound. I feel that the swallow hears and somehow understands. A feeling that
gets confirmed when its wings pop up in what I can only describe as a bird shrug. Its way of saying 
'No problem, man'. 
Can you help me get home? Can you help me save Robin?
It glances at me. It's a reassuring look. It'll do what it can. Our pace doubles. Is Iris going to 
be okay? I'd just left her there with... whatever that thing is. Iris is right, 'elemental' feels like a 
pretty good description, considering the massive storm it had just caused. But she knows it and what
it's capable of. She'll hide or fight it off or the butterflies would protect her. I have to hope so, 
anyway. It's Robin who needs my help the most. I have the bookmark, that's a start. And tons of 
resources at Talisman. If her and Teddy can come up with a plan, then I'm sure I can too. I'll pull 
everything we have, all the rare stuff that never sells because it's too expensive. Figure out exactly 
what I'm dealing with. After that, I'm not sure. Banish a spirit, hopefully.
The swallow knows how to get me home, it looks like. It's flying pretty confidently in a 
straight line. I leave the piloting to it. I'll do the usual shotgun seat duties of keeping the 
conversation going and picking the music. That's just car ride etiquette. Dad and I have a system for
long car rides. I get to pick the radio station provided I help keep him awake. 
Do you have a name?
It doesn't respond, which I interpret as a 'no'. It's going to be awkward referring to it as just 
'the bird' all the time. It needs a name. A good one that doesn't provoke eye rolls. I hate it when 
people name their pets something stupid. I can't see the ground below us. I wonder if I would have 
just kept falling forever? We're flying through an endless sky, an ocean of clouds stretches out 
before us.  An ocean of clouds...
How do you feel about Amelia?
I don't know, put ocean and clouds and flying together and my mind goes to Amelia Earhart. 
She crash landed on an island, or maybe was captured by a Japanese warship, or faked her own 
death, or was abducted by aliens. I'd gone through a phase, read a couple of books, looked through a
few conspiracy theory websites. Mysteries are meant to be solved. I let that spark of hope that 
everything would turn out alright, that Robin will be okay, that I won't mess this up, glow. I have no
idea how close I am to finding you, Robin. But I'm closer than I was.
Amelia chirps, agreeing to the name as we approach a bright light in the distance. 
The Resistance of Robin Melling
Look, clearly I'm attempting to detach myself from a frightening situation by affecting the 
demeanor of a cold, distant scientist. But that doesn't mean I'm not smart. I'm certainly not 
paralyzed with fear. I'm a woman of action. A sort of methodical, step-by-step kind of action, but 
action nonetheless. I can't stand waiting around for problems to fix themselves. It's my preference to
attack them head on. So I can't bear to just wait around hoping this dream will end anymore. I need 
to figure out how to end it myself. ASAP. I slowly open my bedroom door, cringing at the creaking, 
because determined as I am, I want to minimize run-ins with my fake family members. The versions
of them that exist in this dream don't seem quite right. Too happy. Too whole. I can't relate. 
No one's there and it's still daylight, the sunshine streams through the windows in the 
hallway. It's been bright as midday the whole time I've been here. Surely it should be night by now, 
unless this dream version of my house has been transported to Alaska or Norway in the summer, 
where there's barely a night at all. My small town home in Maine isn't exactly southern hemisphere, 
but the sun should be setting soon. Should have already. 
I only just remember to skip that third step from the bottom. Loose, always squeaks. Okay, 
I've reached the bottom of the stairs, now what? Explore the house? But there'd be no point. It'd 
look just like it does in my memories. I'd be playing one of those idiotic 'spot the difference' games. 
No, I need to leave, find someplace different. So, the front door. It's time to see what's going on 
outside these walls.
I open the door, and-
Sweetie?
Who? I whirl. It's Mom. Stay calm. It's just a dream. 
Are you alright? I was just looking for you.
Why? She has a dazed expression, like she's not really focusing on the conversation. She's
staring outside, through the open door. She steps forward and grips the doorknob but doesn't close it
or open it further. It's strange. What's she thinking? If she's created by my memories, then surely I 
should be able to guess what she's thinking. I can't. 
I was listening to the radio and apparently there's a summer squall coming. It's supposed to 
touch down soon.
Just as I'm about to leave she gives me a reason to stay. 'Sudden squall'. Convenient. 
Though, looking outside, clouds do seem to be rolling in. That's almost a relief I'd worried that I'd 
been trapped in a perpetual sunny day. Poison for a night owl like me.  
Are you going to try to stop me from leaving?
She turns to me, frowning. Something in her shifts and she's back. It's 'Mom' again. Honey, 
you're in your pajamas.
Oops, I'd been so focused on the mystery of the world that I'd never changed. Not that it 
matters what I'm wearing in a dream. She sees I'm holding my ground and sighs.
Do you remember the time we gardened together? I gave you a plot and some seeds and 
you made a big mess, flinging dirt everywhere and planting the seeds in pairs because you 'didn't 
want them to be lonely'. You were always concerned about things like that. You hated to leave 
things on their own. Always sorting things together, you were. You'd sort stuffed animals by color, 
then type, then size, she stared at me, Do you remember? The gardening, I mean.
I don't remember my planting eccentricities, but I remember gardening. Yes, I say, we did
that lots of times in my childhood.
Mom held her hand to her cheek and crossed her other arm under her elbow, thinking. 
That's true. Those days have all blended into one bright collage of sunshine and flowers. I think 
my memory took the best parts of everything and mixed it all together. It's one of my fondest 
memories, even if it's not technically 'true'. You and your father, the two of you have always been 
driven to pursue the truth.
And her and Sophie are a lot more flexible with things like that. They both loved keeping up
the illusion of Santa Claus. 
What are you getting at? I ask, impatient.
 I guess I want to know if you really think the most important thing is having all the 
answers? It doesn't have to be. You could make your happiness more important.
Is she telling me I can stay here, if I want? That it'd be better to give up and accept the 
fantasy? I know having answers doesn't necessarily make you happy. It's probably not healthy to 
never lie. But not knowing what happened to Dad had been the single worst part of his 
Disappearance. Assuming he's dead isn't the same as knowing. Your heart isn't logical. It'll hold 
onto hope forever, if you let it. It'll wait. My family, the real one, is still stuck waiting. For Dad, yes,
but now for me as well. I can't let their hearts keep holding on just because the dream I'm having is 
a nice one. Mom and Sophie would never recover. It might actually kill Sophie, in a manner of 
speaking. I clench my jaw, defiant. Mom sees and sighs, like she's disappointed, but does nothing as
I step backwards out the door, watching for any sign she might change her mind. Aside from an 
eyebrow raised in confusion, she does nothing other than to shift to hold the door open for me. I 
turn around, but I can feel her watching me. Motherly concern has never felt so menacing. There's a
rumble of thunder. Of course. Nothing's easy. Droplets start to fall. Wait. Wait just a second. Rain 
doesn't smell like pink bubblegum. It's supposed to be more earthy, like dirt or a leaf. I turn towards 
town, and Talisman. The rain is dark, almost black. A drop hits my hand. Ah, ow It burns a little. 
Heavier now. Each drop stings. The stuff is nasty, it isn't rain. Rain can't smell this sweet; it can't 
burn your skin. Acid rain is a misnomer, it's not actual acid. What the heck is this rain made of? 
There's no reasonable way for rain to burn your skin, not like this But the pain overtakes my 
curiosity fast; my neck is on fire, then my scalp. Any skin the rain touches feels like it's being stuck 
with the end of a cigarette.
Turn back to Mom? Okay, wait, don't panic. This is a dream. I have control. I don't need her. 
Umbrella I say, holding my hand out. Nothing happens. Umbrella?
Okay, so its not the kind of dream where you can make stuff happen with your mind. I 
probably should have tried that out before now. With no other options, I run back through the door, 
slamming it closed and sliding down the frame to the floor. This is bad. Really, really bad. I can't 
think of a more scientific way to say that at the moment. I can practically feel my nerve endings 
sparking. It's the sort of thing that normally wakes you up from a dream. If I can feel pain here, then
I can suffer, too. Get tortured. Like I said- bad. Really, really bad. 
Now I've been driven inside. With my 'family'. Something IS trying to keep me here It's 
stopping me from leaving. Okay so I'm- I don't know Where the hell am I? This has gone beyond 
a lucid dream. Clearly, I'm caught up in something... more. My butt feels cold. I haven't changed out
of my pajamas yet, and apparently I can't just magic myself into some new clothes. This dream 
sucks. Someone taps my shoulder. It's Mom, she's holding a towel. I take it gingerly and begin to 
dry myself off. The stinging lessens as more of the strange rain is absorbed into the towel, which 
doesn't seem to be affected by the water. Mom holds out her hand when I'm done, but I shake my 
head. I should keep it, observe if there are any delayed effects of the rain on the towel. Mom sighs 
again and extends a hand to help me up. I take it, reluctantly. She's surprisingly strong, I'm nearly 
lifted off the ground. Or maybe I'm just surprisingly light. Ha As if, I'm no twig-thin supermodel, 
thanks to pasta. Mom's expression is thoughtful. A perfect replication of my mother, every detail 
just as I remember it. Every laugh line and forehead ridge frown line, the way she wears her hair in 
a bun, the way she stands fully upright, a keen observer of good posture. It's her. It should be 
comforting, but instead it makes me shiver. Because it's not her. Something's missing in the eyes- 
the sadness. I know that's not very scientific. The same air of tragedy doesn't surround this woman 
like a cloud, as it does my mother. My real mother is probably worrying herself sick, about ready to 
keel over from distress. If only she were really here. If only I could let her know that I'm alright. 
Trapped, but okay. This version of her raises both arms towards my face. I flinch, but don't back 
away. She makes me uncomfortable, but I'm not afraid of her. She rests her hands on my cheeks, 
like she always used to when I was a child. Gentle. 
That's my girl. You find your way back home and don't let anyone lead you in the wrong 
direction, okay?
Mom?
Her eyes are shimmering. Or maybe that's just because mine are watery. At least... this 
proves she's like Sophie, not affected by the bookmark, which is still in my waistband. 
I love you, Robin. Good luck.
She's wearing a white sundress, the hem coming in below her ankles, thick white straps over
her shoulders. It's the most revealing thing I've ever seen her wear. She'll usually wear a sweater and
jeans to the beach. It's strange, because isn't this is my dream? Shouldn't she only wear clothes I've 
seen her in? Maybe once... a long time ago, I saw her in something like this. She opens the door and
walks right outside, not bothering to close the door behind her. Her feet are bare. They get wet and 
her dress turns see-through where the water touches it. Wait. Oh God, the rain
Wait, Mom, come back. Please. Come back inside. It's not my real mother, but that doesn't
mean I want to see a copy of her dissolved in acid rain She's not reacting. Should I care? 'Should' 
doesn't matter, because I do care. My heart is burning and don't know how to put out the fire. I'm 
frozen, too scared to venture into the pouring rain and grab her, squirrel her away safely inside. 
Mom walks across the street and I lose track of her in the thick downpour. I let her go and 
something in my heart chips, another piece breaks off and dissolves. It feels like I don't have much 
of a heart left, like it can't withstand much more pain. Dammit
I run out into the rain. It's coming down heavy, my whole body is on fire, but I can't just let 
my mom walk off into an acid downpour. I chase after her, she's only made it to the end of the 
sidewalk. I grab at her wrist, but it's slippery with water and I lose my grip. She doesn't exactly fight
me off, but she basically ignores my attempt to stop her. I try again and this time manage to hold on 
to her wrist. She stops, but doesn't turn around.
Sweetie, stop.
What?
You have to let me go. It's not safe for you out here. She's fighting back tears. That's easily
recognizable, I've seen her try, and usually fail, to hold back tears a hundred times over the last few 
years. But what she's saying doesn't make any sense. She turns. She is crying, and shaking her head.
She pulls me into a hug. She's soaked in that burning rain, so the hug is physically painful. Which 
makes it doubly surprising that I hug back, despite the pain. Her lips are close to my ear, but I still 
miss the first word -isn't your dream. It may be built from your memories right now, but it isn't 
yours. It could change it at any moment.
It? You mean Dad? I say, pulling away. There's a crackle of lightning. She glances at the 
sky, afraid, but something in her steels and she grips my shoulders tight. It hurts.
Sorry, Robin. Be strong. Don't be fooled. Keep the charm close. 
She brings me in towards her and then shoves me with all her might. Her strength is 
supernatural and I go flying through the air, impossibly fast and far. Lightning arcs across the sky. 
She holds her arms out, like Jesus on the cross, her eyes are defiant, open, staring into mine. I fly 
through door as she's struck by a bolt of jagged electricity. It's wide and thick, more like the cartoon 
version sent from Zeus than the ones you see in nature. 
I land on the floor just in front of the door and tumble. I have no idea where I end up, I'm in 
too much pain. It's... too... much...
I drift.
Awash in an empty blackness. True black cannot be perceived by the human eye. It's why we
can't 'see' black holes, only their effects. But we interpret it as 'black', the absence of color. Of light. 
I drift through that ambiance. It lasts... as long as it lasts, I guess. I have no way to gauge. But my 
eyes must have closed at some point, because I open them.
A shimmering light disturbs me, and a growing warmth on my hip. Not wholly unpleasant, 
just uneven, as if I'm being hit by sunlight in one specific location. I think I'm in my bedroom and 
that I must have left the curtains open. Eyes mostly closed, I stumble to my curtains, but they're 
closed. Then what? The warmth is still there. Oh, the bookmark Immediately, I pull it out. It's 
different now. Dad's drawing is gone. In its place is a bird. A swallow, if I'm not mistaken. Its 
rainbow plumage is shining. Hm, I've seen this somewhere before, but I can't place it. Another 
dream, perhaps? I flip it over. Dad's inscription is gone too. Instead there's a message:
Robin, it's Nathan. Where are you?
Nathan's awful handwriting I never thought I'd be glad to see it. Oh please let Nathan get 
me out of here, get me home. I want to see my real mom and sister, the sad, but familiar ones. My 
mother must be so worried. If Nathan doesn't know where I am, then she definitely doesn't either.  
Oh Oh my God That's where I've seen the bird. It was from the alleyway. Okay, this is definitely 
Nathan. Only he would adopt a symbol from a piece of graffiti that I distinctly recall had also 
featured a set of male genitalia. Maybe he'd done it so I'd know it was him. 
Did you deliver this message from Nathan? I ask the bird. It doesn't answer, of course. 
Even if it had been a parrot, I wouldn't expect an explanation. But, and I'm probably just tired and 
stressed out, but is the bird moving? I swear I can see it flapping its wings. I fall back against my 
bed and leave aside the psychedelic dream swallow for the moment. So, maybe this bookmark can 
carry messages between me and Nathan. Given that the bookmark appears to be anathema to the 
monster, it seems unlikely it would be able to exert any direct influence over the bookmark, let 
alone use it to send an innocuous message like this. I should stay ready for anything, but in all 
likelihood, this is indeed a message from Nathan. Which raises the question of how in the world 
he's sent it. Again, I'm not really a scientist, but he's awake, right? I'm pretty sure it's impossible to 
send a written message to a sleeping person. Maybe it's just how my coma-ridden brain is 
interpreting something? But if that were the case he'd probably know where I am. It'd be obvious, 
because I would be lying there in front of him, muscles slowly atrophying. It's not clear what I 
should tell him. I wish I knew where I was, but I don't.
What should I tell him? 
I'm asking the empty air. I might be going crazy, I think. I know it's unkind, but I wish the 
two of us were switched. I think he'd get a kick out of all this craziness. I'm not saying he'd enjoy it 
exactly. But he'd probably appreciate it in a different way than I'm able to. All dopey and cheerful 
and, well, let's face it, a little stupid, but nice. I bet if that's bird's his symbol or something, he's 
already named it. Something inane, probably. Like... Captain Magellan or something. He loves 
history, after all. I lean in and whisper a message. The shimmer dies down and the bookmark's ink 
shifts. Nathan's message vanishes and so does Captain Magellan. As I watch, the bookmark's 
original text and images come back. Okay good. That's progress right there. I try sending more, but 
nothing changes in the bookmark that might indicate what I'm saying is getting passed on to 
Nathan. Maybe it's like call waiting. The line's still in use transferring my original message. 
Hopefully that first message gets to him and Nathan can figure something out. Because I as much as
I hate to admit it, I need help. Even Nathan's help is better than nothing.
Next thing to tick off the damn checklist is to figure out what exactly happened with Mom 
earlier. I had no rational explanation to explain... any of it. To be honest, the image, still burned into 
my retinas, of my mom getting struck by lighting, eyes wide open and staring at me, had been 
deeply disturbing. Who cares if it wasn't really her? It looked and sounded like her. I'm not a robot, 
I can't help but feel uncomfortable about it. My eyelids are drooping, my body swaying. Wait, 
what? I thought I couldn't fall asleep Well, if the dream suddenly wants me to sleep, then I don't 
want to But like a drug, the scent of cotton candy fills every nook and cranny of my bedroom, 
every breath adds more weight to my body, encouraging me to sleep. I'm cold, all of sudden. So 
cold I can see my breath. No, fight it Fight Nathan, help
Chapter 8
I woke gently, slowly floating up to awareness. A tiny slit of light cut through the drawn 
curtains. Someone had laid a blanket on me. Morning, with birds squawking loud and aggressive, 
not at all chirpy and sweet like Amelia. Amelia? Iris I shot up. An involuntary hiss as my side lit up
in pain. Great. The scars were back. Of course they'd be back. 
Sleep well? Teddy appeared in the doorway, holding my coat and grinning.
I rubbed my eyes, wiping the crust out of the corners. Every blink woke me up a little, but I 
felt pretty sluggish. I'd slept on my arm. It was totally numb. I picked it up and let it drop. No 
feeling, just tingles as blood started to find its way back into the limb. Ugh, I think my mind was 
still a little numb from whatever drug cocktail Teddy had given me. 
So, Teddy drawled, how did it go with Iris?
It didn't.
Excuse me?
Well, I mean she told me some stuff, but she said she'd only called me out to tell me I 
shouldn't help. Why call me out at all?
Teddy's cheeks were burning red; I've never seen him clench his fists, close his eyes, and 
shake while taking deep breaths in and out before. It was terrifying. Like watching your sweet, 
kindly grandma threaten to murder someone.
 Here. He said eventually, shoving a thermos at me. It's coffee. You- He cut himself off, 
mouth still open, like he had something to say. You should go. Don't worry about returning the 
bottle I have, like, thirty. Not to rush you, but your phone rang almost non-stop while you were 
asleep. I think your Dad's panicking.
Right.
He didn't ask any more questions, which was helpful, because I don't think I'd have had any 
more answers. Okay, I needed to get to Talisman pronto. It would be the best place for research. If 
Robin could be saved, that's where I'd find out how. And Iris said I could use the bookmark to 
contact Robin... somehow. Needed to try that too. But first, I needed to stop Dad from getting the 
entire police department looking for me. No point in checking the messages. My hasty 'I need to 
work things out' text would not have cut it for Dad. Hm. Maybe I should write down what I wanted 
written on my tombstone.
The second I walked through the front door:
You're grounded, and that's just for starters, Dad said, visibly struggling not to yell. We 
were not a yelling household. Aah, he didn't seem very sympathetic to my 'working things out'. Not 
that I'd expected him to be. The punishment didn't technically matter, I was going to go to Talisman 
whether I was grounded or not, but I didn't like disobeying. Where were you?
At a friend's house, like I said.
Who's?
... Teddy's? That was only partially a lie. I mean, Teddy's a friend, sort of. Kinda. Come 
on, let it go so I can duck out and go to Talisman as soon as you leave.
His eyes were narrowed in suspicion, like he thought it was unlikely I'd been at a friend's 
house. I felt weirdly defensive that he hadn't believed my lie. I could have been at a friend's house 
To my surprise, though, he did let it go. Dad closed his bloodshot eyes and pinched the bridge of his
nose- oh, yikes, he only did that when he was seriously trying to keep his cool. We are not done 
talking about this. But I have to go to work and you have an appointment to keep.
Appointment?
With the interviewer from yesterday, Officer Daniels. He'd like to ask you a few more 
questions.
Oh. Is that normal? I asked.
Not if the witness is cooperative the first time. Dad was really not happy. Everything 
about him, from his tense posture, to his slightly crooked tie, to the way his hand was shaking (a 
sure sign he'd gotten little sleep and was drinking too much coffee to make up for it) said he was on 
the verge of blowing his stack. I'd only seen him truly angry once, when he'd found a cigarette in 
my room when I was nine. A friend had given it to me, but I'd been too scared to smoke it. Dad had 
turned red and yelled so loud that the picture frames on the end tables had rattled. 
Okay. What time?
I told him you'd text him as soon as you woke up. I sent you his number. This does not 
happen again. If it does there will be serious, long term consequences. Are we clear?
We're clear, I said, looking down. Sorry.
Strange, that threat would have scared me a week ago. I'd have been afraid to leave a dirty 
dish in the sink, in fear of causing Dad to lose it. Not anymore. I'd seen real horror. Robin and 
myself nearly killed, just to start. Rainbow swallows and butterflies and bursts of rainbow light. I'd 
been attacked, almost drowned, and struck by lightning. I wasn't afraid of being sent to my room 
without dinner or losing my TV privileges. 
Okay, Dad said, his voice softening a little, Then I'm going to work. Call Officer Daniels.
You can spend any spare time you have thinking of ways to make it up to your mom. She probably 
worried about you the whole night, up in heaven.
Dad did that sometimes. Hid his concern inside Mom's. 
He tried to sidle past me through the open door, so I stepped aside and held it open. Be 
good. A grounding and a police interview. Of the two, the second was more worrying. Iris had told 
me people who seemed more colorful or brighter were connected to dreams. Officer Daniels had 
looked like that. Not just that, he'd noticed my 'shine' as well. Did he know something about Robin?
Or the spirit? I could try to feel him out for information. Iris had begged me to avoid people with 
that glow. But I couldn't, could I? Not knowing what I did. Alright, shower first, then message the 
good officer. After toweling off I found Officer Daniels' number, and sent him a quick message. 
My phone buzzed immediately. It was him. That was fast. He suggested Graham's and that 
suited me fine, it was close to Talisman. I planned to head to the bookshop straight afterwards. 
Banana papaya with a shot of ginger, please. My exact order. Officer Daniels had stolen it.
I couldn't help the frown. I'd been looking forward to that. I'd barely eaten since... since lunch 
yesterday. Only snacks since then. I'd really wanted my order, but didn't want the officer to think I 
was copying him.
And for you, hon?
Uh, cherry and peach, with vanilla, I said, adding a delayed, Please.
I'll have those right out for you.
She walked away with what had to be an affected bounce. No one could be that naturally 
chipper waitressing at a smoothie bar. Especially not in garish lime green polyester t-shirts and 
booty shorts. The walls were pink and the tables a bright yellow plastic, like something a clown 
might vomit. The clientele were mostly high school girls and moms. A high school boy and an adult
man too young to be his father? Everyone was staring. I could feel their eyes, judging. I got enough 
of that just walking down the street. People turning to gawp at the boy with a limp. A girl at a 
nearby table stared. I smiled, and she smiled back. Good. Smiles were better than frowns. Frowns 
invited questions. Seriously, no one ever asks a person why they're smiling. Everyone wants to 
know why you're frowning. I'd learned that, post-accident. 
The officer hadn't said a word beyond his order yet. Not even a 'hello' as I'd sat down, 
slinging my backpack over the chair and tapping my back pocket, making sure the bookmark was 
still there. He'd been staring at his phone with a furrowed brow, but stuffed it into his coat pocket as 
I'd approached. He wasn't in uniform. Instead he had on blue jeans, color faded from use, fraying at 
the ends. He wore a plaid shirt, the classic red and black. I'd have thought it would clash with his 
bright orange hair, but it didn't. There were bags under his eyes. That I could relate to. I often rolled 
onto my scars in the night and got jolted awake. He cut a much less intimidating figure without the 
uniform, but he still retained that brightness I remembered from our first encounter. His orange hair 
burned brightest in the sunlight, his pale skin, too. Made me squint. He was handsome, I could 
admit, if you were into the square jawed all-American type. Young, more like a college student than
a real adult. But that could have been the hipster lumberjack getup. And I still got the weirdest 
feeling we'd met before. It was driving me crazy
There were straws in a cup on the side of the table, next to the napkins. He'd grabbed one 
and pulled off the paper covering. He ripped the paper, tiny pieces at a time, making a pile of 
confetti. Even when I'd ordered, he'd just continued ripping paper and grimacing. Was he okay?
Robin. It hadn't even been a full day since I'd sat down across from her at a coffee shop, just 
this same distance apart. It already felt like a lifetime ago. I mean, this was my second police 
interview since then. I'd drank tea drugged with... something. And that was just stuff that had 
happened in reality. There'd probably be a vigil soon. They'd started after Keisha had Disappeared. 
Some remembrance group organized them a few days after every Disappearance. At some point, 
after the hope had died that anyone was coming back, they'd become informal funeral services. As 
lead detective, Dad had brought me to a few. I hated it. I felt like I was intruding, trying to force 
myself to grieve for people I'd never met while their family members cried and gave shuddering 
speeches, sending out prayers for their loved one's safe return. Should I go to Robin's? Lay down 
some flowers? Maybe after... I failed, if I failed. Iris was wrong about one thing; it really was my 
fault Robin got taken by the spirit. It had been after me, I wasn't making that up out of some 
imagined guilt. If she'd never met me, Robin wouldn't have been taken. I shook my head lightly. 
Don't think about things you can't change. Remember the plan. As soon as I was done being 
questioned, I'd read every single scrap of paper that existed on demons, spirits, spiritualism, 
elementals, Shamanism, anything that looked remotely relevant. It was my only hope of saving 
Robin. How long did I have? I'd felt the coldness of the spirit creeping up on me for weeks before it
had taken Robin. How many victims had there been? Too many. Dozens. I did some quick math, 
trying to figure out the timeline. Under normal circumstances, she'd probably already be dead, but I 
had to hope that the bookmark would protect her until I could figure something out.
The redhead officer had a snowstorm's worth of torn white dots piled up on his side of the 
table. He seemed dazed. Not the easily annoyed and focused questioner from yesterday. Some sort 
of new interview strategy? I wasn't familiar with it.
Have you ever had a dream and everything's normal in the dream, and then when you wake
up, you realize the dream was actually a nightmare? He finally spoke.
That... was an odd question to start with. I thought for a moment. Maybe it's not in the way 
he meant, but every time I had a dream where my body is healed, where I can run and play there 
comes a point where I wake up. The joy from those moments sours when I lie in bed and slowly 
realize that I'm still crippled. Even when I have a happy dream, a rarity, it's still torture. Yes.
His eyes were glazed over. I had a dream about an old friend. Had he even heard me?
He didn't seem to care that I hadn't asked. Was this even the same guy? He was all over the 
place, like he was still dreaming. He drummed his fingers on the table and finally looked at me.
Thanks for coming.
Sure. Not that I had a choice.
First, here, he said, reaching into his jacket pocket. Not the one I'd seen him stuff 
something into earlier. He handed me a folded-up piece of paper. These started going up around 
town today. I thought you might want to see it.
I raised an eyebrow and unfolded the paper. 
MISSING
Can you help find me?
Robin's picture was underneath the title. She looked immaculate, not a hair out of place. 
Skin airbrushed totally clear. Her glasses were perfectly balanced on her nose, not falling crooked 
like they often did at work. She wore her smile awkwardly, not used to showing it off. It was her 
most recent school picture. Next to it was her age, last known whereabouts, and distinguishing 
characteristics. She looked so happy... I wanted to memorize the picture, every detail, so I could 
hold it in my mind. Hold onto her a little. I felt the corners of my eyes sting.
Did you think of anything I might need to know?
Huh? Officer Daniels was staring at me. Gauging my reaction. Was that really all he'd 
brought me here to ask? No.
No?
I shrugged. The waitress came over with our smoothies. The pleasant fruit aroma was mixed 
with the smell of additives and Styrofoam cups. Daniels looked at his straw and seemed surprised at
how much scrap paper he'd created. He blew on the flakes, sending time onto my side. He stared at 
me. His eyebrow rose ever so slightly. Was he challenging me? I bit the end of my straw, flattening 
the plastic. I wasn't going to rise to his bait.
We can't find Ms. Melling's laptop. Robin's laptop, the one in my bag back home. There'd 
been a mix-up at the police station. Officer Daniels had given me her bag, thinking it was mine. I 
hadn't corrected him. I hadn't even looked at it yet- I'd been too caught up in chasing butterflies and 
blunting Dad's anger. Stupid. It should've been the first thing I checked. I'd have to go back home 
and get it before continuing to Talisman. Her mother swears she left the house with it. We checked 
the alleyway, the bookstore, and, just to be sure, her room, but no luck.
Weird. You must have missed it.
I didn't. Any idea where it might have ended up?
He obviously had a hunch I had it. Thanks to Dad, I knew all about interrogation techniques,
the things he said and did to get people to tell the truth. He'd used them on me. So I wasn't about to 
get rolled by some amateur pretending to be my friend. This wasn't about the laptop, not really. 
During our interview, he'd seemed to know something about dreams, about me.
Look officer-
Call me Peter.
Yup, right on schedule. In movies, cops browbeat suspects into submission, employing a 
little classic good cop, bad cop. That's not a thing in the real world. In the real world, cops do 
everything they can to make it seem like they're your friend. They might interview you in pairs, but 
more often it's one on one. And they usually take you to a more comfortable location, maybe to get 
a coffee (or, y'know, a smoothie) and coax you to talk. No yelling. No slamming a perp's head into a
desk.
Well, Peter, maybe you should get to the point? Since we're such good friends now.
Alright, I'll drop the act. I know you have the laptop. I'm the one that gave it to you. Do you
really think I didn't check the contents of the bag before I gave it to you? It was obviously Ms. 
Melling's, he said, gesturing at me with his cup. He's been using 'I', not 'we', when he's referring to 
police stuff. Usually detectives try to present a united front and use the royal 'we'. 
You gave me Robin's bag on purpose? Why would you do that?
Officer Daniels- Peter, rather, smirked, his foggy persona dissipated, and stared at me, 
waiting for me to do some- Wait, dammit I'd fallen for the oldest trick in the book. Dad would be 
disappointed in me, and Robin would have smacked me in the back of the head. 
 Now, you're a good kid, or, well, your dad thinks you are. He's always talking about you at 
work. Really? Dad's... bragging about me to his colleagues? I wasn't anything worth being proud 
of. The cop was probably lying to get me to let my guard down. I don't think you'd withhold 
evidence that could get your friend found unless you had a really good reason. Like, for example, if 
you knew how and why she Disappeared and that the police wouldn't take you seriously if you told 
them. So, Nathan, let's talk about the dreams you've been having.
Smug jerk. He took a sip of his smoothie which reminded me I'd barely touched mine. He'd 
mentioned my aura. Robin had called it a brightness. Peter had somewhat melodramatically called it
the sword of Damocles. Maybe that was just what people targeted by the spirit looked like. Which 
was interesting. Because Pete had that glow-y look as well. His hair and skin were so bright I 
wanted to put on sunglasses. Iris had said to avoid things with that glow, maybe because the spirit 
was attracted to them.
Okay. Let's talk. 
He nodded, almost thankful.
Great. In the spirit of cooperation, I'd like to tell you about a dream I had last night. It was 
about a... friend I hadn't seen in a long time. I was told something very interesting. About a girl who
didn't die when she was attacked by the shadow. And about the boy who saved her with a 
bookmark. Temporarily. 
Friend? He had to be talking about Iris. If I was looking for someone related to dreams who 
knew what was going on, then she fit the bill.
I'm sorry, what?
Can you show it to me?
I jerked my hand, ready to pull out the bookmark from my back pocket, but stopped. Could I
trust him? I really shouldn't, I knew that. But Iris had refused to help me and Officer Peter Daniels 
knew things. I could tell he was holding something back. Reluctantly, I laid the bookmark out on 
the table. He stared, wide eyed. What? It was just a bookmark-
Hey. Is it supposed to say that?
'Nathan. Help me.'
Black ink, in her florid cursive. A message in a bottle washing ashore. Maybe I could almost
hear Robin call my name, her voice somewhere between a memory and an echo. No way. Where 
was the original inscription? I flipped it over. Instead of the moon and stars, there was an eye. 
Drawn just, way too vividly. I could see the veins and everything. It was really freaking creepy. 
How...? My heart raced. I flipped it over again. Iris had said that there were two bookmarks, and 
that they could communicate. Maybe Robin was trying to tell me something.
Robin...
The paper vibrated. I dropped it and it fluttered to the ground and landed on the side with the
eye. It blinked. The heck-? Almost as disturbing as the shadow man. It's not possible for a drawing 
to move Yet I was looking at it- blinking, looking around, pupil dilating as it focused on me. 
Should I... do something? I stood up in my seat, spilling my full smoothie all over the bookmark as 
I did. No If the bookmark was some sort of lifeline to Robin and I ruined it, then I might lose her 
for good. The contents sludged out of the cup and covered the bookmark. Such an idiot I lunged for
it, but Peter got there first. He fished the thing out and shook it. He ran his hand up and down the 
surface, checking for damage. Was it okay? Please let it be okay. I'd never forgive myself if-
Peter wasn't saying anything, just frowning. Bad sign. I ruined it, didn't I? God, that's just-
No, it's fine, he cut me off.  It's just...
Okay, before, when I said I felt like everyone was watching and judging us? That was 
paranoia. Because now they were staring like we were aliens. He gestured for me to sit back down. 
A uselessly defiant part of me balked, not wanting to follow orders, but the stares of judgment from 
the other patrons were too strong. I sat.
He leaned in close. It's different, he said, and showed it to me. 
Blank. Both sides were completely empty, just white. No inscription from Robin's dad, no 
creepy-as-all-get-out eye. Nothing. I didn't get it. No matter what I did, more and more questions 
got thrown at me. First Iris tells me like one tenth of the story, then the bookmark is in two places at
once and transforming and is this cop a friend or a foe and- It's too much; it's all just way too 
much.
I held my head in my hand, elbows on the table, palms over my eyes and fingers grasping 
and scratching through my hair, like I just had to touch the right part of my head and suddenly 
everything would make sense. I just wanted Robin back. Why was that so complicated? Spirits and
dreams and magic bookmarks, none of this makes any goddamn sense. I feel dizzy.
Hey, you're actually really pale. Here, give me your arm. Too tired to fight him, I 
complied. He placed two fingers on my wrist. It was quiet for a moment. Still. It's like his touch was
grounding me, keeping my thoughts from spiraling off in a thousand different directions. I focused 
on his face, etched with concern. Your pulse is a little thready. When was the last time you ate?
Does the half of smoothie I didn't spill count?
No.
Then I had a few cookies like twelve hours ago.
I'd been too stressed to feel hungry. I'd lost a lot of weight right after the accident, too. 
Stress. That and the lack of working out meant I lost a lot of muscle mass. 
You should eat something. Was that professional medical advice? Gee, thanks. Spirit, 
huh? Is that what you're calling it?
I hadn't wanted to share that with him. He'd think I was crazy. On the other hand, what did I 
have to lose? It was basically doing exactly what Iris warned me NOT to do, but I didn't feel like I 
had a choice.  I was in over my head.
Yeah. The thing that took Robin. It's been causing the Disappearances.
I know. The shadow? I've... seen it.  I could sense a lot of missing detail in that pause. His 
face fell, maybe remembering something- a regret. We might have been more similar than I was 
willing to admit. I had regrets too. Saving Robin would prevent me from having yet another.
His grip on my wrist loosened, then slackened entirely. The bookmark, though, was still held
by Peter. It'd protected me from the spirit, and it had been able to deliver Robin's message, so it 
might be able to find Robin somehow. I snatched at it. Peter jerked his hand back. I'd only managed 
to graze his skin.
I need that bookmark. I said. I'd figured it out. That bookmark was the key to everything. 
It could hurt the spirit because... well, I was still working on the 'why', but the 'what' mattered more.
It fought off the shadow. Maybe the bookmark had absorbed a part of her dad or something. The 
bookmark was a symbol of Robin's father's love for her and that's why it was toxic to the shadow. 
Right? The power of love? That kind of made sense. I didn't have a better idea.
So do I, it's my first real clue.
His first clue? Again, I noted his repeated use of the word 'I'. Whatever he thought the 
bookmark was a clue for, he was investigating it outside his work at the police department. Well, 
duh. It's not like the police department was going to start investigating dreams. I couldn't just let the
bookmark go, and he needed the truth about what I'd witnessed happen to Robin. We were both 
connected to dreams. I couldn't just part ways with him, especially if he was going to keep the 
bookmark.
So, what, we team up?
He nodded. Tell me what happened, exactly as you remember it.
Alright, fine. It started a week or two ago. I had these... episodes.
Episodes?
Flashes of cold, starting in my feet, but traveling further up my body each time I had one. 
Colors would blend together, seem brighter. I'd get dizzy, and shaky. I'd feel a foreboding sense. 
Like something was wrong. Then it would pass and I'd be totally fine, I said. I know I should 
have done something, spoken to my dad or a doctor, but, it just seemed like another side effect of...
Peter nodded. I didn't want to worry anyone I figured it'd go away in time.
Makes sense, Officer Daniels said, leaning in, putting his hands under his chin. I got the 
impression he only said that to make me feel better, but it did make me feel better so I didn't mind.
Anyway, cut to yesterday. I saw that Robin had been researching the Disappearances. I 
think trying to make sense of them after her dad was taken. I was on the list as a potential victim. 
Then after work Robin and I were drinking coffee and I got a really bad feeling. As she left her bag 
broke and she accidentally left her bookmark, the one you have, and I used it as an excuse to chase 
after her.
She was carrying around a totally blank laminated bookmark?
Right. He hadn't seen it originally. No, at first it had a picture of the night sky on one side 
and an inscription from her dad on the other. Anyway, like I told you last time, I'm not supposed to 
run, or do much exercise at all, so I wasn't surprised when it aggravated my scars. The pain knocked
me to the ground in the alleyway where you found me. That cold feeling came back, the world 
seemed to swirl and shift. I saw a shadow building up underneath us. It... it's hard to describe. I felt 
cold. And I felt its malice. Then I blacked out. That part was true.
So after that you woke up alone in the alley?
No, I shook my head, not exactly. I dreamt. A lucid dream. I saw the graffiti swallow 
from the alleyway. It moved, freed itself and flew into my heart. Peter raised an eyebrow. Jerk, I 
knew he wouldn't believe me. Look, I'm just telling you what happened
He held up his hands in apology. 
It guided me to where Robin was. She was in a dream version of her room. We tried to 
leave, but couldn't. The shadow I saw earlier showed up. I- I tried to help her, I really did It wanted
me, it tried to take me, but the bookmark glowed and fought it off So it went after Robin instead. 
A hand settled on my arm. Peter's face was calm, kind, his hand, gentle. He had a knack for 
calming me down. Maybe it was the first aid training he'd had. I took a breath and continued.
This happened in like a dream version of her house, I think. I managed to give her the 
bookmark just in time, but the spirit kicked me out of the house. I woke up after that.
I wonder why it didn't attack you, Daniels said.
What do you mean?
Well, you said the bookmark was pretty much your only defense, and you gave it to her, 
so... why didn't it kill you, now that you were defenseless?
Oh. Good question. I swallowed, feeling cold and dizzy. I really could have died.
 I dunno. The next thing I remember is you interviewing me.
Not waking up in the alley? Or the ride to the station? He shifted his hand back over to his
side of the table.
I don't remember any of that. Look, this next part, you can't tell anyone, okay? Seriously, 
you have to promise you won't say anything.
What, because the rest of what you've said is so normal? He asked.
I'll just say that I never said it and then it'd be your word against mine. Do you promise?
Okay, fine, I promise. What'd you do? 
I stole a flash drive and papers on the Disappearance from a case file at my dad's desk.
You what Ole Pete seemed surprised at that. I felt a little proud. It WAS pretty audacious. 
Your dad isn't supposed to have files from his old cases. He's going to be in a lot of trouble when 
the chief finds out.
Well, he's not going to, right?
Not from me, Peter agreed. Still, though. I like your dad. I hope he doesn't get fired.
He won't, I said, full of the brash confidence of youth. Anyway, next I- Next I met Iris. 
She'd told me to avoid people like Officer Daniels, people who had that bright look. And I 
suspected she was the friend he'd mentioned earlier, the one that had visited him in a dream. What 
game was she playing? Maybe it was best to keep the Iris card close to my chest for now.
What's with the hesitation?  You're not holding anything back, are you? Peter asked. Damn
detectives. They never let anything slide. Like he was being completely honest with me anyway. 
It's nothing. Next I basically researched until I came to meet you. I mean, if shadow 
monsters that kidnap people are real, then why not one of the spells for banishing shadow monsters?
Plus there's Robin's notes and the stuff I borrowed from the police station.
I let him chew on that for a moment.
So, I said, brightly, I can tell when people are connected to dreams. They look different. 
Brighter. Like you do. And you can tell too, huh?
Yeah.
Like that was going to satisfy me. Okay, so are you going to tell me how you're connected 
to dreams?
He scratched his smooth chin, thinking. So, we know that the Disappearances are 
connected to the Earthquake, right? The Disappearances started right after, so it stands to reason. 
Okay, sure, that made sense. So working backwards we can guess that the Earthquake had some 
effect on the dream world. Something about it triggered the Disappearances and since they're 
happening mostly through dreams-
I'm following you, I said. What does that have to do with why you seem connected to 
dreams?
When the Earthquake happened, I was dead.
What? I must have misheard.
I was dead. 
Nope, hadn't misheard. 
I was resuscitated,. He continued. But I think something happened when I was on the 
border between life and death that connected me to dreams. I knew something was up with the 
Disappearances, that they weren't natural. I could just feel it. So I started investigating. I'd hit a wall
before you, though.
He wiped his hand over his mouth. Huh. When I was kid I'd wanted to be a body language 
expert so I could be a super cool detective like my dad. Covering your mouth was a sign of 
dishonesty. Was he lying? He'd seemed sincere to me. 
Well, what now? I asked.
What were you going to do before we met?
Go back home, get Robin's laptop, then go to Talisman and read literally everything I can. 
If whatever's happening to her can be stopped I think I'll find the way there.
Okay, I'm coming too, obviously. I'll drive.
Chapter 9
Dad 'happened' to be in the front hallway when I came home. Officer Daniels was waiting 
out front.
I'm on my lunch break, he said. How did it go?
An inquisitorial tone, spine ramrod straight. His 'cop' pose. Perfect for interrogating 
criminals and wayward sons.
You can relax, I said. I'm not going to jail or anything.
Because you haven't done anything wrong or because you haven't been caught?
A little from column A, a little from column B.
It turns out there was a miscommunication and I accidentally held onto some evidence they
need. I'm here to get it, I said, stepping towards the stairs, only to stop. What do you think of Pe- 
Officer Daniels?
Pete? He's a good cop. Takes the job seriously. Why? Did he say something to you? 
I raised an eyebrow. What would he have said to me? 
He's- no. If you want to know anything else, you should ask him, not me.
O-okay?
Well, that was weird. I already knew Peter was holding something back, and I hadn't been 
able to force it out of him. But now it seemed like there was something else. Something my dad 
knew. What? 
Do you, um, have a particular reason for asking?
A simple question. But, though his pose was casual, more slouched, his shoulders were still 
tensed. That 'um' was unusual. He was normally more self assured when he spoke. Never 
uncomfortable or hesitant when speaking to me. Officer Peter Daniels seemed like any other cop to 
me, but something about this conversation was getting to Dad. Sure, he might be younger and more 
built, but that was it. If things had been different, maybe I'd have ended up looking like him around 
his age. I might have looked up to him; transferred my ideal image of a man from my dad to him. 
After all, what kind of teenager thought their dad was cool? That hero worship had to go 
somewhere. Even if it became more subtle. More adult. What my dad was really asking was- no. I 
couldn't deal with that, I didn't have time.
Just curious.
I brushed past him and started up the stairs, and I felt him turn and watch me trudge 
upwards.
You got hurt when you were fourteen, he said. I stopped, but didn't turn around. Right 
when kids start pushing boundaries. And then suddenly you were more reliant on me than ever 
before. Even for simple stuff like walking or going to the bathroom. And now that you're better I'm 
so proud of how self-sufficient you are, I love you. You get yourself to school, you help out around 
the house without asking, you have a summer job. But I wouldn't mind it if you talked to me a little 
more. You can, you know. Talk to me, if you want.
I- My throat seemed to thicken; the weight of air seemed to make speech impossible. 
Thanks. I love you too.
Jesus, why now? That was a dirty tactic. Dad didn't have to be so damn nice. I wish he 
would just stop spending so much effort on me Just because I'd needed babying two years ago, 
didn't mean I needed it still. 
Dad had hovered non-stop from the moment I'd left the hospital, even though he hadn't been 
able to take much time off work, what with the Disappearances starting and all. He poked his head 
in whenever he could: Need to go to the bathroom? Some lunch? Cup of coffee? Fluff your pillow? 
No, no, no, and once was plenty, thanks. But eventually, he'd left. Had to do at least a half day at 
work. They needed him and although he never said it aloud, I'm pretty sure we needed the money, 
what with my hospital bills and all.
I remembered the careless tossing of linens had pulled at my left side, stitches straining 
against the cuts, sutures nearly bursting; then settling, tapering off to a throb in time with my 
heartbeat. Anger made me ignore it. Pretend not to see an angry, swollen wound, oozing blood and 
pus all the way from hip to nipple. 'Healing' into lifelong mottled scars.
They didn't matter at that moment. I'd decided I was going to go to the bathroom by my 
goddamn self. 
I'd tested the stitches the day before in preparation, playing a hardcore game of chicken with 
my own body. How far could I stretch before passing out or re-opening my wounds? Turned out, 
not very. Dad had noticed the redder than usual bandages when he'd changed them that night. But 
he'd let it go. I think he had a sense of just how deep my pain went and knew there was nothing he 
could say.
So- I'd taken a deep breath and swung my legs over the side of the bed.
 My vision blurred, the pill bottle and alarm clock on the bedside table became an orange-
black smear. A few blinks and the objects clipped back into place. The pill bottle's disclaimer note 
thing had glowed, sort of legible on the far corner of the stand. May cause: Drowsiness, headaches, 
blurred vision, vivid dreams, heart palpitations/heart attack, and death. Pleasant. 
The wheelchair could generously be described as a second hand piece of junk, but it was the 
best we could afford. I decided that if I could activate the handbrake, it'd make a decent brace. 
Leaning over, slowly as possible, my fingers strained for the lever. The farther I pushed, the more 
the stitches pulled. And- There. With the mechanism flicked halfway the chair still moved easily, 
but there was some resistance. Good enough. Here had been an opportunity to prove all that gym 
time was more than vanity. I could keep myself up with arm strength alone. Probably. Maybe. 
Deeeeeep breath. Teeth clenched. Deeeeeep breath. Muscles tensed.
The chair's handle ridges had dug into my palms. 
Ggkh A wet grunt had forced its way out as I stood, the cuts on my back screaming, the 
grip on the handles growing slick with sweat. Don't fall, don't let go. A step forward with the 
uninjured side. Easy. No problems, barely felt it. The left-
No, it didn't. The foot, the leg, had refused to obey. Instead it shook, rose meekly, then 
trembled its way back down, paralyzed in fear.  
Come on
I'd hopped forward with my right foot. Arms straining, pushing off against the handles. The 
wheelchair groaned. Blood trickled down my hip, wetting my pajamas. I closed my eyes and 
thought about puppies. And with that I'd sailed through the hallway, out-maneuvering the average 
tortoise. The cold hardwood had chilled my toes. Feeling solid ground under my feet after weeks in 
a bed had nearly driven me to tears. Lots of things did, back then. I'd leaned against the handles for 
a rest, but the chair had started to slip out from under me. A reflexive shove at the handles had done 
nothing for my balance. The force sent the chair flying forward where it crashed into a wall. The 
ground rushed to meet me.
I'd woken to Dad's shout. Nathan Something warm and wet on my ass. I'd really hoped it
was more blood.
So, yeah. Independent to my own detriment. That's what Dad was referring to. I'd never 
really shaken that attitude. Because he'd treated me like glass ever since, afraid the slightest 
pressure would shatter me. I needed to prove him wrong. Show him that I could take care of myself.
A conversation with Dad lay lurking in the near future. But the future was, well, the future 
No point obsessing about it. I needed Robin's laptop. It was in her bag, along with the books she'd 
been reading. I grabbed it, added my own laptop. When I left, Dad was leaning against the car door, 
speaking to Peter. When had he-? Damn his detective curiosity Hopefully Officer Idiot there hadn't 
said anything stupid. 
 Peter Daniels. There it was again, that intense feeling of familiarity. I was so sure we'd 
met, just where? I knew I was harping on it, getting obsessed, but seriously every time I looked 
away from him for more than five minutes, it suddenly struck me all over again. A feeling of deja 
vu. I got the sense that I shouldn't ignore it.
Is that hers? Dad said, pointing at the messenger bag.
Y-yeah. Right, he'd stared right at it when we'd met in the police station.
I thought it was strange. You never carry a bag if you can avoid it. But, then, I don't usually 
see you leave for work so I didn't mention it, he said.
Like I said, there was a misunderstanding.
Uh huh. He stared at me, like he could will a different answer out of me.
I was disoriented, they handed me a bag so I took it. Stupid, don't offer more detail unless 
you have to. Well, it was pretty much the truth anyway. Dad kept his cards close to his chest, 
betraying nothing in his reaction. Can I go now?
He gave Peter a look, Sure. Don't forget you're still grounded. Come home as soon as 
you're done. Alright?
Did he absolutely HAVE to say that in front of his colleague? It made me look like a child
Will do, I said as I clambered into the passenger seat.
He's intimidating, Peter said when Dad was out of earshot. He came out and started 
asking me question after question. How do you get away with breaking the rules?
I don't. He'll figure out what we're doing eventually, not looking forward to it, I said. Try 
not to think about it. I have her things, so let's go to Talisman. Without me or Robin working, no 
one will be there.
What about the manager?
Never met him. Or her. They send us emails with tasks to complete. There's a handbook for
figuring out how the run the store too. Peter raised an eyebrow. I shrugged. I'd thought it was weird
too, but it made my work environment pretty relaxed so it was fine with me. I figured the bookstore 
was a side project and the owner lived far away.
He started to drive. Cars still made me a little anxious, especially if the driver was bad, but 
he drove smooth, if a little over the speed limit. So cops broke those laws too, good to know. He 
parked the car behind Talisman. I stared out the window at one of the police's missing person 
posters. Robin's face seemed so still and plastic in the photo, not like her at all. A wisp of hair hung 
across her face. She would have hated the photo chosen. It really hit me that she was gone. Not just 
for me, but other people too- her family. Her mother had suffered the loss of her husband and now 
her child. Even if I knew where she was, what had happened, that wasn't any closure for her. It must
be like an aching black hole in the pit of your stomach, to have your child Disappear. I wondered if 
that's how Dad had felt when I'd been in my accident.
Hurry up. I don't want anyone we know to see us go in, he said. I was torn between 
agreeing and moving slowly on purpose just to spite him for ordering me around. In the end, I 
hurried under the awning in front of the bookstore.
I held the door open for him then led us to the break room, the only room aside from the 
basement that didn't have any windows. He brushed past me to sit at the table. His arms were rock 
hard. It takes real intense training to get physically fit like that. It hadn't been that long since I'd had 
wiry muscle and the ability to outrun any small town cop. I dragged a chair next to his.
So, I have a question, I said as we waited for her laptop to boot up. Why do you believe 
me? I told you some crazy stuff and you barely blinked. 
The real question, the question underneath my question, was- What do you know about all 
this?
He hesitated, then- What do you know about the Earthquake?
 I knew about it. I knew every single last detail. It had caused my accident, distracted both 
me and the driver that hit me enough that neither of us were able to move out of the way in time. It 
was a random and inexplicable phenomenon that had completely altered the course of my life. I 
wanted to understand it, unlock the mysteries of what had happened to me and why. Wouldn't 
anyone?
About two years ago there was an Earthquake. It struck all parts of the world 
simultaneously. It was small, not even enough to tip over a glass of water. But what was even 
stranger was that all the world's seismographs hadn't picked up the slightest trace of a tremor. 
Nothing. Even today, no one really knows what happened. So people just called it 'The Earthquake' 
and kind of moved on with their lives, I said. Except me. I hadn't moved on.
Peter nodded, Yeah, that's about it. Except I know why it wasn't detected by machines. It 
wasn't a physical earthquake; it was a spiritual one.
Huh? That kind of sounded like the pseudo-religious nonsense we sell at Talisman. I 
mean, a spiritual earthquake seemed ridiculous. The words 'earth' and 'spirit' were near antonyms 
Still, with everything that had happened, maybe I shouldn't be so skeptical. 
An earthquake in dreams that spilled out into reality. It tore the veil between dreams in the 
real world. Ever since, people have begun slipping through to dreams, and something else has been 
trying to pass through dreams to the waking world...
The spirit. That's where you're leading me?
He turned to me and sort of made a sweeping gesture with both hands across the table, as if 
to say 'Basically'. I considered his theory, trying to keep an open mind.
Okay, so is this like a theory or something you know for a fact?
He licked his lips and bit the lower one, worrying it between his teeth. Let's say it's a theory
for now. But it fits, doesn't it?
Sort of. It fit in the sense of a toddler coming up with an outlandish story of what they did 
while you were gone and then saying 'Well, you can't prove it DIDN'T happen' when you called 
them out on it. Okay- I was being unfairly critical. It explained why the Disappearances had started 
happening when they did. And how they were even possible in the first place. And it was better than
anything I could come up with.
So, the reason the Disappearances are happening here is because the epicenter of the 
Earthquake is here? It's where the 'veil', as you put it, was torn. Peter nodded. I knew I was putting 
up a disbelieving front, but in truth, I'd already decided to believe him. And you came to this 
theory... how?
I- he hesitated. That. That's why I believed him. His scrunched shoulders and nervous 
glances at me, not quite meeting my eye line. Those small moments of vulnerability would last just 
moments before he'd collect himself and force an aloof, confident, loose posture, but they were 
enough to convince me. Like me, he'd been hurt deeply by something. If he didn't want to talk about
it, I could understand that. Look, I can't tell you.
Yeah? I said and he nodded. Well, it's fine for now. I'll believe you. Can't tell? More like
won't.
He blinked, surprised. I almost laughed. A 'bing' came from the laptop. It was loaded onto a 
sign in screen.
Any idea what her password is? he asked.
Her login screen was set to an image of a blackboard where someone had written the entire 
periodic table of elements in chalk. She's such a nerd. A nerd who I knew had a really poor sense of 
security. Using the touchpad, I glided the mouse over the white password entry bar and hit enter. It 
loaded us through instantly. 
You're kidding.
Don't get me started. I've told her a thousand times to password protect her stuff, but she 
never listens. She says it's a hassle.
Peter shook his head. Here, he said, taking control of the laptop. Let me look around her 
files.
Okay, sure, I said. Can I have the bookmark? And a pen?
He fished the bookmark out of his packet and tipped over a cup of assorted writing utensils 
and handed a pen to me. I could take it and run, but not only would he probably catch me pretty 
fast, we were actually working well together. His calm logical thinking reminded me of Robin. 
Neither of them laughed very much. Not around me, at least. It was like their personalities balanced 
out mine. I felt like between the two of us we might actually come up with a way to save her.
Er, Robin? I asked the bookmark. Nothing. Here, hand me a marker.
Peter fished one out of a pencil cup and threw it to me. What are you doing?
Putting a message in a bottle.
I bit the pen cap off and held it in my mouth. I scribbled a quick message onto the surface of 
the bookmark, Robin's totem.
Robin, it's Nathan. Where are you?
The words, barely legible in my sloppy cursive, indented themselves into the laminate of the
bookmark.  Nothing. Dummy. It was stupid to think it would work. I felt silly, and childish.
Kid.
The officer was gesturing at the bookmark. The writing, all of it, including the inscription, 
was fading. Consumed by a black stain that spread, growing larger. It took the shape of an eye.
That eye again Peter exclaimed.
Do you think it's Robin's eye? Can she see us? I tried waving and the eye tracked my hand
movement, but nothing else happened. Robin's eye, if it was Robin's eye, was already fading, 
bringing back the blankness from before. My message was gone. I flipped it over again and again, 
but nothing. That settled it. The bookmark must somehow be transmitting our messages to each 
other. That first message had been from her, and now my reply must have been making it's way over
to her somehow. The slip of paper's design had once again settled into its blank state. It seemed 
unlikely that this was just a bookmark that Robin's father had given her. Maybe I shouldn't trust it so
readily. But at least it meant that wherever that creature had put Robin, she could still be reached. 
We could find her. 
I took my seat next to Peter who was browsing through Robin's Word documents. There was
a bunch of stuff for her classes, broken down into folders. We clicked through them all, checking 
every one, going alphabetically. Her 'Essay Writing' folder had like thirty sub-folders, identified by 
different dates. 
Huh, I said, as he clicked on the first one. Empty. Weird. The next one was too. And the 
one after that. Maybe the files got corrupted?
No, it's here, Peter said, pointing to a date at the end of the list.
How do you know?
There's no November 31st.
'Victims', 'Research', and 'Notes/Conclusions'. I'd already seen the 'Victims' page. Instead of 
looking through any one file, Peter was browsing through the files' properties.
What are you doing?
I want to see when she started this. When she created these files, Peter said, scanning the 
file's creation data, then scowling.
What? What is it?
She created the first document about four days after her dad disappeared.
To know that, he'd have to know Mr. Melling's Disappearance date by heart. That surprised 
me. It wasn't surprising he'd know most, if not all the victims names and the general time they'd 
Disappeared, but to know it so precisely off the cuff, he must have cared deeply about the 
investigation. We wouldn't have been working together if he didn't care, but maybe it ran deeper for 
him than he let on. It probably connected to his Earthquake theory. 
I guess she thought she could help find him, I said.
Yeah. But her dad was probably already dead by the time she started looking for him.
He... He could still be alive. For all we know.
Oh grow up, he said, with venom. My heart skipped. People never got mad at me, like 
ever. My limp usually made them pretty sympathetic. So even though it might sound a little weird, 
even masochistic, it felt surprisingly good to hear him snap at me. Even if I hated what he was 
saying, everyone was usually so damn careful around me, like I'd break if they spoke above a gentle
coo. He closed his eyes and took a deep breath. I'm sorry. It's just, it's been years. With all these 
people having vanished because of an evil shadow man, I don't think there's much hope.
Yeah, no worries, I understand. Did it make me a masochist if I kind of liked when he got 
mad at me? It was a little thrilling. 
But still, he might be wrong. If it was a normal kidnapper, then sure, all the victims would 
probably be dead, but the fact that a supernatural creature had caused the Disappearances changed 
the rules. Maybe some had been dragged into dreams and had escaped or fought it, only to become 
trapped there, like Iris. 
I want it on record that I'm a little uncomfortable invading Robin's privacy, I said, 
remembering how angry she'd gotten the last time I'd snuck a look at her laptop.
You get used to it, as a police officer. Barely notice it now.
That's kind of sad, I said.
How? 
I shrugged. Just was. Getting used to something like that seemed sad.
Peter clicked on her 'Notes' file. Robin hadn't reached any concrete conclusions. She'd 
grown more open to the idea of a supernatural cause as the Disappearance count kept rising while 
the clue count stayed at zero. But she couldn't prove anything. There wasn't even enough 
information for her to speculate. Instead, she had used the space to come to terms with her father's 
Disappearance and then later, accept his probable death. At the end of the document, on a single line
by itself, she'd written:
I know that even if I find him, he's not coming back
There's not much here, Peter said, unable to keep the disappointment out of his voice.
You know what? Let's divide and conquer. You keep trawling through Robin's laptop and 
I'll look at her books, I said.
Books?
Robin borrowed a bunch of Talisman books right before we were attacked. They were in 
her bag when it happened. Normally, I'd discount anything you learned while reading one of our 
books, but they might actually be helpful in this situation. We've got a whole section on exorcisms, 
banishments. Maybe there's something in there that can get Robin out of this mess.
Don't forget yourself, he said.
Yeah, me too. I had kinda wanted to forget that part, but thanks Peter. I could be next on the 
list after Robin if the shadow spirit had its way. I looked through her bag. It still felt weird going 
through her things without permission, but since it was for the greater good'n all, oh well. I pulled 
the three hulking books: the one on Shamanism, one on dreams, and the third, which turned out to 
just be a mystery novel she'd been reading. 
I almost decided to read that instead because I estimated that there were about five hundred 
million rituals cleansing spirits in Robin's book on Shamanism. Burn sage, walk three times 
counterclockwise around the afflicted's home to cure heart trouble? If a spirit is causing seizures, 
the cure is to have your assistant beat a drum in a rhythmic, repetitive pattern until the shaman falls 
into a trance. Then chant a spell, tie a red ribbon to their pinkie finger to connect your souls. Find 
the spirit by following the ribbon. Engage in a battle with the spirit, calling upon your animals and 
protective spirits. That was one of the simpler ones Although... hm. Amelia had carried me when 
I'd left Iris' boat. Maybe we could adapt some of this ritual so we could guide ourselves to Robin 
when we needed to? I made a few notes. The problem was, I didn't know what we were dealing 
with. If Peter was right, then the spirit was a one of a kind thing, a totally new creature created, or at
least enabled, by the Earthquake. If no one had come across it, no one will have devised a ritual to 
counter it.
For his part, Peter had begun taking a forest's worth of notes; they'd slowly eclipsed the 
surface of the table. I'd eventually moved to the ratty beanbag chair Robin had found in a thrift store
and brought in. To cheer the place up, she'd said. It hadn't worked. I groaned and rubbed my eyes 
and moved to the next section. 
You got anything? Peter called.
To treat a physical imperfection: an injury, birth defect, or other malady:
This... It could cure me. Make me normal again. I could run and play and not have to worry 
about a brisk jog sending me to the emergency room... No, not now. Robin first. 
I might have a way to find Robin once we're in dreams. But I have no idea how to free her 
once we're there. I can't find anything resembling our shadow man in these books. What about 
you?
Well, she hadn't discovered much of anything that the police also hadn't, but it's still 
impressive work. She should join the force How old is she?
Uh, seventeen, I think.
When's her birthday?
Er, January. I don't remember the day.
Well in six months, she should look us up.  
I was pretty sure Robin was going to go to college and end up curing cancer or something, 
not be stuck walking the streets of a small town as a police woman, but I let Peter dream. There was
a buzzing, a low rumble. A phone vibrating on the table. Neither of us moved.
Aren't you gonna answer that? Peter asked.
My phone's in my pocket.
Our eyes slid to the table. There, half-buried underneath Peter's chicken scratch notes, was 
the bookmark. Shaking just like it had been at the smoothie place. Peter was fast, but I was faster 
this time. Former tennis player reaction speed > Cop reaction speed. 
Again, the shape of an eye had taken over the back. Ignoring it for a moment, I flipped it 
over. 
What's it say? 
I'm at my house, but it's a dream. It won't let me leave. I read aloud. Nathan, please, you 
have to help me.
Her writing was rough. As if she'd written it in a hurry, or maybe while her hand was 
shaking. Neither me nor Peter said anything. I quickly scribbled a reply. Hopefully it would calm 
her down. Let her know I was coming. She'd hold on till then. I knew she would. It was Robin, after
What'd you say? Peter asked.
My eyes snapped to his. Again. Again An itching at the back of my mind. Screaming that 
we've met before.
I sighed, figuring once more couldn't hurt. Look, I know this is getting repetitive at this 
point, but are you absolutely one hundred percent sure that you and I have never met?
He blinked, before a flicker of annoyance passed through his features. Yeah, that was fair, I'd
asked him like five times already. I didn't think he was lying, so why was did I insist on asking over 
and over? He controlled his irritation and forced a grin.
I don't know, maybe we met in a dream and forgot?
A joke? A bad one, considering the circumstances, but I appreciated the effort. If we had met
in... a... dream... A dream The images came flooding back, almost too fast to make sense of.
Nathan, what is it? I stared at him, and took a step back. He stood up. What? He said 
again.
I remembered it all.
Chapter 10
The dream I had, the one right before I woke up in the hospital, screaming in pain. It's 
happening again, like I'm experiencing it all over. I'd almost forgotten. I'm walking down the 
hospital hallway, following the buzzing of a conversation I can't quite hear. One is frantic, speaking 
quickly, desperately. The other is accommodating, soft, probably trying to calm the other down. It's 
two men, I can tell that much. I'm back in front of Room 404. The number is as chilling as ever. A 
four in Japan is like a thirteen in America. But that's where the voices were coming from. Should I 
go in? No, assess the scene, look through window.
-you've done this, one voice is saying. What were you expecting?
That voice comes from a young man with bright eyes and flaming red hair. Peter Daniels, I 
recognize him now. He looks exactly the same as he does now. There's another man, the one he's 
arguing with, I can't see his face, but he's shorter and thinner. Pale blonde hair, almost white. It's cut 
short. Over Peter's shoulder is something... I'm not sure how to describe it. It's like a burn, a scorch 
mark, but deep, empty, endless. I can see an infinite nothing swirling behind him. Where there 
should be a wall, instead there's just this- nothing. Although it's clearly something. I just have no 
earthly idea what. And it's leaking. Not a lot, just a small trickle of black fluid.
I don't know, a thank you? The blonde one is saying, petulant. I... I know that voice. I've 
heard it recently Peter doesn't like that answer. He turns and gestures at the scar. 
Oh sure, thanks a lot. I'm sure this is nothing to worry abou- He loses his train of thought 
as he stares at his arm. He touches his sizable bicep. Then the one on the other arm. He brings his 
hands to his face and sort of feels them around, touching various features. Then he brings his hands 
to his chest and squeezes. Weird time for vanity, but okay. What did you do to me?
I have no idea what you're talking about, the blonde guy says, tilting his head. He really 
does sound confused. I'm waiting for a chance to knock and ask what the hell is going on, but I feel 
like I should wait until this argument plateaus. 
Peter growls and grabs the guy by the arm, pushing him back. Make a mirror. Now.
The force of the push turns him a little... I knew it. Teddy. What the hell is Teddy doing 
here?
Okay, okay, no need to manhandle me, he says. He does... something. Kind of waves one 
hand over the other, and a mirror appears. Like with Iris and her drinks that seemed to come from 
nowhere. It's a small mirror, it has a handle, which Peter grabs and stares into. His eyes harden. He 
combs over his body with it, not liking what he sees. What? He looks fine Good, even. Handsome. 
It turns out that's the problem.
I don't look like this.
What do you mean? Of course you do
Peter shakes his head, eyes glassy. No. I'm not this muscular. I barely ever go to the gym 
and now I look like I have three protein shakes for lunch. My hair, my eyes, they weren't this bright.
And, And Even my features are sharper. My jawline is more distinct. Even- he glances down and 
flushes, then shakes his head, Everything's different
Oh, Petey, I'm so sorry. This is all so confusing and everything's happening at once, I know.
It must be really upsetting to find out your body's been changed. It sounds... kinda patronizing. 
Teddy should know better, he sounds really superior right now. Are they friends? I still have no clue
what they're discussing. How could Teddy have altered Peter's body? But to me, you look the same
as you always did.
How could you possibly think I look the same? You of all people, Peter says, disgust 
creeping into his voice.
Because, it was my power that brought you back, right? And I was just doing it from 
memory. This... this is always how I've seen you, Petey.
What power? Teddy brings a hand up, slowly, like he's afraid Peter will slap it away, and 
cups his cheek. When Peter doesn't react he tries his luck with the second hand and lightly rests it 
against Peter's hip. Oh. Teddy's...? And Peter too The conversation makes a little more sense now. 
Peter starts laughing; it's a desperate, slightly unhinged laugh. He shakes off the gentle hands and 
whips the mirror at a wall, shattering it. It's super bad luck, but I don't think he's worried about that. 
Fingers trembling, Peter slowly lifts his hands. At first Teddy relaxes, maybe thinking that Peter's 
going to reciprocate his romantic gestures from a moment ago. That probably lasts right up until the
moment those trembling fingers wrap around his throat, thumbs on his windpipe.
What- What are you doing? The voice comes out strained. I'm panicking. What do I do? I 
can't just let Peter kill him
I haven't decided yet, Peter says. I'm not sure if he's really going to. I don't know him, his 
personality, what he's feeling, nothing. I don't even really understand what's going on. But I see his 
muscles tense and I yell out an instinctive No
Confused, Peter looks around to find the source of the noise, his grip loosening. Teddy takes 
his chance and braces his shoulder into Peter's chest and starts forcing him backwards, towards the 
scorch mark behind them. Peter's confused, then panicked. He might be stronger, but he's surprised 
and off balance. If the blonde man's goal is to get him into that darkness, he doesn't have far to go.
No Peter shouts, You can't do this I don't want this
The blonde man has no response that I can hear, and then they're gone. Like one moment 
they're tussling in front of the void, the next they're through it. I'd figured I'd still be able to see 
them, but no. The darkness churns, seems to swirl. I can hear a gurgling sound, even through the 
door. A black liquid pours out of the void. I don't know why, but I think it's blood. For some reason, 
I get the impression that the world is bleeding. At least, until I see the black sludge moving, 
slithering across the ground like a shadow, forming into... something. I don't get to see. My hip 
splits open and I scream in pain, finally waking back up at the hospital.
Nathan? Hello, mission control to space cadet? Peter was saying, Hey, are you okay?
His face was etched with worry. I wanted to believe in it, I needed to believe in someone 
who wasn't my dad or trapped in the world of dreams, but I'd literally just seen him seriously 
contemplate murder. Well, not 'seen' so much as 'remembered'. And that black thing. Even I could 
connect the dots easily enough.
You were there, I said. When the spirit was created. You and your boyfriend were there.
His eyes widened, It was you You were the one who called out that time. How long were 
you there?
Long enough to see your freak-out. He looked away in shame. Good. At least he felt bad 
about it. Tell me everything, Peter. Every detail. If I think for even a second you're holding 
something back, I'll walk out right now, you got it?
I wasn't sure how effective the threat would be. It depended on whether Peter considered me 
a help or a hindrance. Most people thought I was the second one. Robin came to mind. But I wasn't 
joking about walking away. I needed to know everything about him and Teddy, from the beginning. 
To my surprise, Peter took me seriously.
I understand. His eyes were clear and bright. I used to be a nurse. Two years ago.
I didn't miss the catch in his voice. But, a fully trained nurse AND cop? And two years ago...
that was right when the Earthquake hit. When this all started. Maybe I'd finally get some hint about 
how to save Robin. He sat, gearing up for what I figured was going to be a long story, then froze, 
looking unsure of how to continue. That was fine because I already had a question. Well, I had like 
a million.
How old are you? I asked. Because both a cop and a nurse? That meant he'd gone to 
college, a full four years, plus more for an internship or whatever nurses do for training. And then 
he must have gone to the police academy. He really didn't look a day over twenty five, so the math 
wasn't working in my head.
The answer's more complicated than you might think, Peter started, suddenly enthralled 
by the pile of notes on the desk. How could it be complicated? But I was born thirty one years 
ago.
Thirty one? Right off the bat and his story was already impossible No wrinkles or gray 
hairs, no thinning either. And his face, it just looked youthful, less weathered, maybe softer? Had 
Teddy also de-aged him? No way he was more than a decade older than me. No way. How did 
Teddy and his so-called 'power' figure into this? I was bursting with questions, but I forced myself 
to be patient.
Even then, I had a young face, he supplied, as if that explained anything. Wasn't there a 
limit to how far that sort of thing carried you? Dad was in pretty good shape, didn't seem old, but he
still looked like he was on the wrong side of his forties.
I hadn't gotten a decent night's sleep in weeks, Peter said, as he started tearing at the sheet 
of paper in front of him. He'd done that at the juice bar too. Must have been a nervous habit. I was 
in the middle of my RN residency. Kind of like an internship. It was exhausting. I kept getting put 
on the night shift. I'd drive after work, squinting through the sunlight, finally getting home and hang
blankets over the windows, stuff cracks under doors with towels, anything to simulate night. So, 
one time, I'm working a day shift for once, filling in for someone. It's long. It's difficult. There's a 
lot more going on than at night. I can barely move when I get off. I figure I'm not safe to drive, so I 
decide to take a nap in one of the spare beds they have for doctors and nurses to catch some shut 
eye if they have to work a double.
Makes sense, I said, trying to make it sound like we were having a normal conversation, 
instead of an explanation of how a spirit came to be able devour people. Although in his defense, 
this part had been pretty normal.
So, after some tossing and turning, I finally fall asleep. But of course, I start having a 
nightmare. It's been years now; I kind of forget what it was about. I think some puppet had come to 
life, chasing me through the hospital. Eventually, it corners me and it's about to stab me or 
whatever, when this guy, wearing a tight, bright yellow onesie jumpsuit thing with a cape, jumps in 
between me and the puppet. He shouts something like, 'Foul mannequin You'll go no further' and 
then he does this stupid pose-
Peter suddenly burst from his chair and took two steps back. He put one hand out in front of 
him like he was signaling 'stop' and one hand rose above and behind his head. His feet were planted 
wide. It looked like a bad kung-fu stance, and I couldn't help but laugh. Peter didn't join me, but the 
oppressive mood lightened up a little. I'd had weird dreams like that after watching that old Jackie 
Chan movie: Rush Hour. Peter sat back down.
-and the guy in the onesie literally shoots a fireball out of his hand. The puppet thing is 
vaporized, there's just a pile of ash left on the floor. And this guy says 'Have no fear, citizen The 
Crimson Flame will keep your nightmares at bay.' and then he flies off. I'm sitting there stunned, but
a weird dream is a weird dream, right? Nothing to freak out about. But what's strange is that when I 
wake up, Im more rested than I've been in weeks. Completely refreshed, the best I've felt in 
months. I'm in a good enough mood that I agree to do a double to cover a nurse I barely know. 
Imagine my surprise when I see the costumed adventurer responsible for the best sleep I've had in 
weeks and weeks admitted as a patient at our hospital. He'd collapsed studying for a nursing exam, 
of all things. Exhaustion.
I wasn't surprised, it kinda seemed like that's where the story had been going. What I didn't 
know was how it tied into the Earthquake or Robin. But I didn't rush him.
Peter's voice took on an uncharacteristic softness. Must have been nostalgic. There was a 
strange smell in his room. Like cooked meat. I was stunned. He asked for a cup of water and I got it
for him. I told him we'd like to keep him one more night for observation, but that he could leave if 
he wanted. He elected to stay. Odd choice. Most people hightail it out of there as soon as they can, 
but he called it an 'impromptu study trip', with a goofy smile on his face. He kept staring at me, and 
I stared back. I mean, it was the guy from my dreams.
Soooo, this... guy, he was your friend? I asked, probing into his wistful tone. I also 
decided to keep the fact that I knew it was Teddy a secret. I wanted to keep it hidden until I figured 
out just what part he was playing here. Peter noticed the question buried under the question.
Well, it got complicated, but at that point I barely knew him, Peter said, rubbing a hand 
behind his head, embarrassed that half a grin had appeared on his lips. It was crazy that talking 
about a hospital could make him act like that. Hospital references only reminded me of pain. I told 
him that he bore a striking resemblance to this new superhero, The Crimson Flame, but that must 
just be a coincidence because he's only a mild mannered student. He laughed. A whole body laugh, 
that started with grin, then spread all the way down to his toes. Literally, he started waggling his 
feet like a kid. He asked if I could keep a secret. Told him I could. Nurses keep secrets all the time.
He told me about how ever since he was a young boy, he'd been able to control his dreams, 
and his sleep. Fall into a dream whenever then manifest his will on the fabric of his dream. He 
launched into this incomprehensible speech about lucid dreaming phenomenon and the 'morphic 
resonance in dreams'. Real highbrow stuff, not my thing. He was a philosophy geek and it was 
impossible to get him to shut up about it. Should have don't that as a degree instead of nursing.
Yup, that sounded like Teddy all right. The guy could talk your ear off about almost 
anything, but philosophy was his passion. My side was starting to hurt. It didn't like supporting my 
weight for any extended period of time. I wish I'd sat down earlier, but now it felt like I'd be 
interrupting the flow of the story. I hobbled over to a wall and leaned on it, trying to look casual. I 
don't think it came off, but Peter continued like he hadn't noticed.
Basically, he'd started experimenting with trying to bring dream objects into the real world. 
He'd been studying for a final, and instead of just ordering takeout like a normal person, he decided 
to dream of fried chicken and bring it back with him. In his own words: 'It wasn't exactly an 
overwhelming success My soul was totally exhausted' And that's how he'd ended up in the 
hospital. But he was smiling a piano key smile. 'What's up with the grin?' I remember asking. He 
threw his covers off and there it was. A plate of fried chicken. That had been the smell I'd noticed 
when walking in.
So, he really brought it from a dream? 
The mood in the room darkened. Ah. So that was what Teddy had done when he'd conjured 
the mirror. 'Manifested his will on the dream world'. Iris had as well. Did she have the same power? 
I bit my tongue. I had so many questions, but I had faith that Peter would answer them. He acted 
cool, but I could tell he was struggling to get the words out. He hadn't looked me in eye once since 
he'd started talking.
That's what he said, but I didn't believe him. I figured he'd snuck it in- until he started 
bringing other stuff. Things from my dreams, or replicas of stuff at my apartment. And after every 
time, his heart rate and blood pressure would spike, or plummet, or both and he'd faint. It was hard 
to deny it after that. No matter how much I told him to stop, that next time he was going to have a 
heart attack or a stroke, he kept doing it. And getting better at it. He started bringing bigger, more 
complicated things with fewer side effects. Even when the girl I'd filled in for had come back, I kept
stopping by. It was barely a surprise that he stopped by my dreams.
'Why are you here?' I asked. 'Why not?' was his reply. I remember scoffing, even though I 
was glad to see him. He grabbed my arm and took me flying. First I was on his back, riding 
piggyback, then he showed me how to fly solo. We flew over mountains, the ocean, everywhere. 
Eventually some smart aleck comment from him got us bickering and we crash landed into a 
meadow, dissolving into a puddle of laughter. The way he looked at me...
You were falling for him, I finished for him. Peter looked away, but I could see his ears 
were red. It was obvious; I hoped he realized that. I could kinda see it, though. Peter and Teddy. 
Peter didn't seem like the kind of guy who fell for people easy. It must have been hard for him to 
deal with. Peter recovered and pressed on.
He liked tea, we'd drink it all the time in dreams. He gave a set to me, as he was finally 
getting discharged. Said it was a memento of our time together. I, Peter swallowed, thought that 
was going to be it. But he stopped at the door. He scribbled something on a piece of paper and 
kissed me on the cheek. It was his phone number.
Peter stopped talking. I recognized that look. He wanted to DO something. Not just walk 
and talk. That's the kind of restlessness I saw every time I looked in the mirror. I shifted on the wall 
to make some noise, snap him out of it.
And then? The story didn't end there. I mean, that was obvious, even to an idiot like me. 
He sat down at the table and put his head in his hands. What was up with him? Was it that painful to
talk about?
I died.
I'm sorry? I must have misheard. No way could that happen. No way.
I died. I fell down some stairs at work, apparently. Hit my head pretty bad. An intracranial 
hemorrhage. Didn't even make it to surgery.
But wait, I said remembering he'd said earlier, I thought you said your, like, heart stopped
or something and were resuscitated right when the Earthquake hit
Sorry, that was a lie. I died for real. For anyone else, that would have been the end, but not 
him. The next thing I remember, he was standing in front of me. In a dream. And you pretty much 
saw the rest.
But, but, you were dead 
Yes. I was. He's that powerful. He made that burn mark when he brought me back. That's 
what the Earthquake was. When the scar over the dream world was made. And he used the damage 
he'd caused, the thinness of the border between the dream world and reality, to drag me through it. 
And then the spirit-
I saw, I said, too harshly. Peter closed his eyes and breathed deeply.
At first, I think he was doing it so he could say goodbye. There was so much left unfinished
between us, you know? Even he must have known it was a horrible idea to try to bring me back, but
when he saw me, when I first saw him in that dream, his easy smile wobbled. He started crying. I 
told him not to cry, that it wouldn't do for The Crimson Flame to be seen crying. And then I leaned 
down and kissed him. I thought it was a dream. Well, it was. I mean I thought it was a normal 
dream. I didn't understand anything at all, until I noticed the scar and we started arguing. That kiss...
I think that convinced him to bring me back. I shouldn't have done it. All of this, the 
Disappearances, the Earthquake, Robin, all of it's my fault. 
Peter's eyes were glassy, like the surface of a disturbed pond. They wobbled wildly, but no 
tears fell. He looked for something in me. Forgiveness? Like me, he'd taken on a deep burden of 
responsibility. I could blame him, if I wanted to. He was giving me an opportunity to shove my guilt
for all the pain I'd caused Dad because of the accident onto him. It would be so easy. I won't lie. I 
considered it. Not in a 'should I or shouldn't I' sort of way. It was more like the guilt I felt was a 
living creature, sniffing Peter, sussing him out, seeing if he might make a more suitable host.
But I couldn't do it.
I mean look at the guy His shoulders were trembling and everything. I couldn't put the 
weight of my accident on him, let alone the deaths of over a dozen Disappearance victims, he'd 
collapse. It hadn't been his fault anyway. It really had been an accident. I smiled and shook my 
head.
It wasn't your fault. Maybe... Maybe it hadn't been my fault either. Maybe I could be a 
little gentler on myself. Peter's relief was palpable. He accepted my answer, but I could tell he 
hadn't really absorbed it. He knew I didn't blame him, but I hadn't knocked out the guilt he felt. 
Still, the room felt brighter. So, what was the afterlife like? I'm hoping for something like an 
amusement park, parade, and magical fantasy kingdom rolled into one.
The corner of Peter's mouth twitched- as close to a guffaw as I was going to get. I don't 
know. I'm not- it's complicated. I'm both Peter and his doppelganger simultaneously. I was created 
from the very fabric of dreams, made to resemble the original Peter in every way. I have all his 
memories. But I don't have his soul or his body. His body is rotting in a coffin. I should know, I've 
visited the gravestone. I'm probably not even human anymore.
Peter... I didn't know where to start. That's just about the saddest thing I'd ever heard. To 
question your humanity. To have good reason to question it What was I supposed to say to that? I 
don't think they meet greeting cards for existential crises. Look, I'm no good at spiritual stuff. That 
was always my mom's area of expertise. But for what it's worth, I think you have a soul.
Thanks.
No, seriously, think about it. Just because you were born in an unusual way doesn't mean 
you weren't born. No one really has a choice about being born. You might not have the original 
Peter's soul, but... yeah. I think you definitely have one, I said, sounding more confident than I felt.
Peter looked unsure, but that was okay. He could take his time and think about it. In the meantime, I
had more questions. We're getting sidetracked. What happened next? He brought you from dreams 
into the real world. You were a nurse then and now you're a cop, so there's gotta be more to the 
story, right?
Peter nodded. You're right. After he tackled me through the portal we were in the real 
world, in his bedroom. We stood there, his hands tight around my waist and head buried in my 
chest, for I don't know how long. I mean, what could either of us say? Eventually he shifted, or I 
did, and we made eye contact. He leaned in, I think to kiss me. I raised an eyebrow. Bold move, 
considering Peter had been nearly angry enough to strangle him not long before. I shoved him 
down and ran out of the room. Haven't seen him since.
And what about you? I asked.
Peter sighed. When I sleep my whole body goes to the dream world, I think because I'm 
made of dreams. I was unstable, back then. The reality of my existence was at odds with the laws of
physics. I slipped from dream to reality, flickering in and out of existence. The next two months, I 
was lost. I barely remember them, my savings were running low, but I didn't care. I ate enough to 
live and watched TV.  Which was how I heard of the Disappearances. It pulled at me, somehow. It 
sparked something in me. If I could get pulled out of dreams, out of death, could something else 
pull people in? I sniffed around dreams and saw some of that black liquid. The same kind from the 
scar. I followed it. Saw the man, the shadow man, but it got away. I'm not sure if it noticed me or 
was just ignoring me. To investigate the human side of things, I became a police officer.
Silence hung like a blanket, expanding, filling up more of the room, taking up more space. It
was oppressive. Deafening. Neither of us could find a way to break it. Peter coughed, lightly. Yeah, 
no surprise. Research in Talisman was dusty work. I used to randomly break off into coughing fits 
when I first started.
Look, I said, we need to shake this off and get back to work. I'm not mad or upset, but 
that was a lot to take in, you know? Peter nodded. Okay, good. I'm going to take a walk. When I 
get back, let's strategize, okay?
Without waiting, I turned and left. I tried to walk slowly so Peter wouldn't think I was 
desperate to get away, even though I kinda was. Not because of him Well, yes because of him, but 
not in a bad way. It's a little bit shocking to learn that someone has supernatural powers and can use 
them to bring the dead back to life. I think I deserved five minutes of deep breathing. 
MISSING
Robin's eyes followed me from her missing persons poster as I walked out the door. They 
tracked me, accusing. Selfish, they seemed to whisper. Shut up I knew I should just put what Peter 
had said to the side for now and go back inside and keep working on a way to save her. But I 
couldn't. A short walk to clear my head. Surely I could allow myself that much? Robin's expression 
on the poster didn't change, unconvinced. 
I wasn't sure where to go. There wasn't anywhere I could go. I started walking towards the 
coffee shop me and Robin had visited yesterday (it seemed way longer ago than that), but I didn't 
want to risk being seen by someone I knew. Or Dad knew. Eventually I found myself in the 
alleyway, the one where Robin and I had fallen into dreams and this whole mess had started. I 
examined the graffiti of a swallow, the one that had become Amelia. I'd nearly forgotten about her. I
wondered what she was doing. It took up the space of maybe a garage door. It was definitely wider 
than both my arms outstretched. I was avoiding the issue, and I probably looked stupid with my 
hands stretched wide, measuring rainbow street art with a white dick added by some hilarious idiot. 
With a sigh I turned around and sank to a sitting position, back against Amelia, and closed my eyes. 
I drew my knees up to my chest and rested my face on them. What should I do about Peter? He 
hadn't wanted any of this, he'd just been caught up in it by his dream wizard friend. Then again, I 
hadn't wanted any of it either. There was still hope. If Robin had been dragged into dreams because 
some guy had weakened the barrier between dreams and reality, then she could probably dragged 
back out.
 I pictured Robin. Black leggings, a gray and white patterned skirt, sensible dress shirt, her 
pale skin and long dark hair, down to her hips. Shed dramatically flip it to punctuate comments, an 
unconscious gesture. Her glasses hiding bright, intelligent eyes. Her laugh, a bit quiet, a bit strained,
like she didnt do it often, but bell-like and clear. How patient she'd been, when we'd first met. 
It started at a tennis house party hosted by the captain of the women's team, Felicity: strong 
net play, but a bit weak on the backhand. It was after the accident and recovery, my limp was more 
pronounced back then and bouts of random pain more frequent. The scars hadn't settled into the 
soon to be familiar patterns. I was fifteen or nearly so. The boys were charming and predatory, and 
the girls, comfortable on familiar territory, were unguarded. They'd invited friends. Robin.
She sat on the arm of a couch, chatting with a small group of other outsiders. She stood out, 
partially because of her body type. Not fat, not at all, but with a softness that tennis girls lose in 
their first year of the sport, if they train hard enough. An academic beauty. For the first time since 
entering the house, I felt moved to, well, move. I remember her clocking me as I limped over. She 
had to have seen it, but didn't comment when I sat down. She was dominating the discussion, 
talking about her essay on Agatha Christie's 'And Then There Were None' with such a blunt passion 
it was almost embarrassing. Young people aren't supposed to care about things so much. A break in 
the conversation led to introductions after which she began questioning me.
She liked books and asked what interested me. I'd been struck by her eyes. She looked at me
differently than everyone else. They all saw 'disabled kid'. She saw 'Nathan'. That's what it felt like. 
Like an idiot, I blurted out 'Amelia Earhart'. The group laughed. She didn't. She asked questions, 
intelligent ones. And when I spoke, she listened. Actually listened, y'know? When I told her that I 
thought maybe the Japanese had intercepted her downed plane, she nodded, like I'd said something 
very wise. For a brief moment, just the length of a conversation, I forgot that I was crippled. I forgot
that I would never play tennis again. I forgot rehab, the hospital, seeing my dad cry. It would 
happen more and more often as the memory faded and the scars etched themselves into my skin, but
that night was the first time. 
She mentioned she was looking for a job and I leapt at the chance. I had a summer job and 
they were looking for a part timer during the school year. A bookstore, right up her alley. I'd ask my 
manager. I had no clue if the bookstore was hiring, all I was thinking is that this is someone I want 
in my life. She asked for my number and I gave it. She left soon after. Guys came up to me, clapped
me on the back. 'Good job getting back in the game, man An awkward pause. The dating game. 
Sorry, man. I ignored their dumb, insensitive comments. That wasn't what it was. Robin at the 
bookstore, Robin drinking coffee, Robin gasping in fear as she's attacked by a spirit man right in 
front of me 
My head snapped up. I was leaning against the wall, just as I had been a few minutes ago. 
Whoa. Had I fallen asleep? The light hadn't changed, so it hadn't been hours, at least. My hand 
clutched against my side, it hurt, likely from the awkward leaned over position compressing my 
torso. I'd bet Peter was worrying. He worried a lot, I think. I'd said I needed a walk to clear my 
head, but it didn't feel particularly clear. I didn't know how I was supposed to feel about him, but, 
like it or not, we were working to save Robin together. He'd tried to get me to understand him by 
telling me the truth. I was grateful, even if he had been at the epicenter of the cause of my injuries. 
We had to be on the same page to work together. It was time to save Robin.
The Memories of Robin Melling
I'm dreaming of my mother. Well, not dreaming exactly. It's more solid than that. It's more as
if I'm reliving a memory. The moment is so peaceful I just watch, an observer in my own body. 
We're in the back garden. I'm impressed by Mom's knowledge; my thumb is decidedly not green. 
There's a section for flowers, baby's breath and tulips and daisies, even some wild honeysuckle that 
had found their way to her plot naturally. She has an edible section, with her usual zucchini and 
tomatoes. This year, she's trying for watermelon too, but they aren't faring so well. The whole thing 
is framed by a wood lattice, ivy growing all over it. And it's the first year she's carved out a space 
for me. I'm planting some of her leftover daisy seeds, a perennial easy enough for a six-year-old. 
Dream or memory? They feel blurred into one. The sun warms my neck as Mom kneels behind me, 
each knee on either side of mine. The soft sweetness of honeysuckle drifts on the air; I can feel the 
dampness of the earth, the watery, black stickiness of it as it sticks to my hand, then dries as a 
brown crust over my palm. She scoops out a small divot of earth and a single seed is dropped 
inside. She presses it down with her thumb and scoops earth on top of it. She grabs my hands and 
has me mimic the same actions. Then she lets me do it myself. It's clumsy, the dirt is displaced in 
big chunks, but I'm at least careful not to throw it. Instead, I make a pile between my knees. My 
smile is wide and bright, shared by my mother's, even though her face is covered in shadow.
That's great, Robin.
I'm lying down on the couch in the reading room, thumbing through a worn book of Greek 
myths. Orpheus and Eurydice. It's probably my favorite, even though the ending's a little sad. 
Maybe because of that; I've always liked love stories that are a little sad. Life's a little sad too, 
sometimes. I've been there awhile, if the crick in my neck means anything. Mom comes into the 
room, holding a mug. She sets it down on the weird lamp stand that's shaped like a man's foot. 
Typically, Mom decorated the house, but sometimes a weird object like this catches Dad's eye and it
becomes impossible to persuade him that it doesn't go with anything. Mom's saying something. 
What? I can't make it out. Black water pours out of her mouth. All the sounds she makes come out 
as gurgles. She steps back into shadow, the whole of her covered in blackness. Then even the 
outline disappears. Where she stood is only a silhouette of her form, an alien malevolence that slips 
and dances out of my perception. 
Mom, wait
I'm sick, home from school. The rag on my head is almost dry, I need a new one. I remember
catching mononucleosis my freshman year. The whole time I'd been afraid that someone would find
out I had the 'kissing disease'. Sophie was still sweet back then, and not in high school, so she 
wouldn't be spreading rumors, but still I was terrified. I'd never so much as kissed a boy on the 
cheek. But to be honest, it was the fever held my attention most of the time. It was thick and hot, 
like hot cotton had been stuffed in the gaps in my head. Everything hurt, except sleeping. My eyes 
are closed, heavy. A hand pats me gently, running fingers through my hair, sometimes stopping to 
smooth this strand or that. Mom. Dad likes to ruffle my hair and mess it up. My eyes want to stay 
closed, but I force them open anyway, fighting against what feels like invisible lead weights on top 
of them. Next to my bed, an empty chair. The floor glistens, soaking wet. My breath hitches, but the
gentle comfortable patting doesn't stop. 
I close my eyes and when I open them, I'm awake and she's gone. Except for a warmth on 
my cheek. A tiny hint of dampness lingers. A kiss? Maybe from Mom coming to check up on me 
while I slept. There's a constant tapping against the windows. It's still raining out...side... Wait 
what'd happened? I'd fallen asleep? It'd felt a little stronger than that. Unconsciousness. Putting 
being trapped aside, it's sinister, more sinister than anything that's happened to me. It can't have 
been random. But awake or not, as long as I had the bookmark, the shadow man couldn't attack me. 
So maybe its goal had been to keep me asleep while it accomplished some other task. Perhaps it had
slipped out of this dream world into another one...
I'd gotten caught up in the craziness of... 'yesterday' and had forgotten to change out of my 
pajamas. Not this time. If I need to flee the house or fight something, I want to be wearing better 
clothes for the task. I'll wear my leggings with the usual skirt. To be honest, workout clothes would 
probably be better, in case I do have to run, but I can't deny it's a little comforting to wear what I 
usually do. I feel secure in them, like they're a uniform. It's annoying when Nathan pretends not to 
stare, but I've been wearing stuff like this from way before I met him and, with God as my witness, 
I'm not going to change my clothes just to make some dumb boy stop looking at me. Speaking of 
God, maybe I should send Him a prayer. I hadn't felt in the praying mood, but that probably means 
it's the perfect time. I tell myself I'm sure it'll reach Him, but I feel doubt. This dream is a long way 
from heaven. Maybe I can ask Nathan to send one for me, if we find a more reliable method of 
communication. Anyway, I clasp my hands together.
 Please, protect me. See me through this ordeal you have placed before me. Please protect 
my family. And Nathan too, I guess. Thank you. Amen.
 My prayers are always an odd mix of casual and formal. I'm not sure which tone God 
prefers. I don't want to treat Him like a genie or a pen-pal, but I also don't want to talk like someone
I'm not. That's probably item one thousand on my list of things to worry about right now. In what's 
quickly becoming a reassuring physical tic, I tap my side, making sure I have the bookmark on me. 
I'm becoming more and more certain that the only reason something terrible hasn't happened to me 
is because I have it. Although I'm still no closer to answering why. Maybe I don't need the why right
this second. As I finish buttoning the last button on my shirt, three sharp knocks sound from my 
door. 
Who's there?
So are you awake or what? 
'Awake' is an interesting choice of word. 
I'm up, Sophie. What do you want?
A pause. Caaaan you open the door, maybe?
I can, but I certainly don't want to. It's not really her. The real her is out there somewhere, 
awake, probably trying and failing not to be worried about me. Even during our worst fights, we 
check in with each other a lot. We've done it ever since Dad... Interacting with her is painful. It 
reminds me too much of the real version of her at home. And what if... what if interacting with me 
is what got my mom- I don't finish that thought. She wasn't even real. Stop obsessing. She's a 
dream, I'm sure she's fine. Probably downstairs again playing the role of domestic hero. 
Knock knock Sophie says, punctuating her onomatopoeia with actual knocks. C'mon, 
anyone home?
I open the door.
Wow, you look terrible, Sophie says with her usual candidness. I'm never sure if she 
doesn't know her comments hurt my feelings or if she doesn't care. Did you sleep at all last night?
She looks perfect, as always. I don't answer, partially because I don't know if I really slept or
We can't all get up two hours before dawn to put our faces on.
Whatever. I made a pot of coffee, but I'm guessing you don't need any if you're already 
acting like your usual charming self.
It's counterproductive to keep arguing with her. She'll be in a mood all day if I do. 
Doesn't Mom usually make the coffee?
She cocks her head. Mom?
Yeah, short for 'mother', matriarch of the household, 'mater' in Latin, ever heard of it? In 
some cultures the mother is considered-
She scowls and flicks my left breast. 
Ow I say bringing both arms to my chest. Hey What's your problem, your math teacher 
reject your advances again?
I never- I'm trying to wake you up Mom died more than a decade ago. It's been the three of
us for as long as I can remember. Look, coffee's getting cold and I gotta get some reading done.
She can't be dead. We'd spoken yesterday Sophie was there. Bony fingers curl around my
heart and squeeze. I hear myself sputter, fail to say anything. Sophie just rolls her eyes and walks 
towards her room. A new wrinkle in the story. Okay, what does this mean? Well, it could be 
evidence of multiple timelines- no I've already discounted that. This is definitely a dream. It's just as
Mom said. This world is modeled after my memories, but something else is in control. The monster.
Which means it isn't a monster. Not in the traditional sense. It has intelligence, a guiding will 
beyond mayhem. I'm not sure if that's good or bad. It's pointless reasoning with a wolf, a monster. It
feels nothing but base instincts. A being with intelligence, though, they could be persuaded, made to
feel sympathy. Not really my area of expertise, but it's something. And even if it's just a shadow, 
that monster has a physical form. It has to be somewhere. And, really, there's only one place left to 
look.
W-where's Dad? I call after her.
Dunno, asleep? Oh, and don't use the shower, it's backed up again.
She vanishes from sight. Backed up again? Has it ever been before? No, that's not what I 
need to focus on I'm looking down the hallway when I notice something seems off. The wallpaper 
is muted, less bright than I remember it. So in addition to erasing my mother, the monster has also 
done some redecorating? Unlikely. And the family photos They're different too. My feet slap down 
hard on the wood floor. The pictures are there, frames hung exactly as I remember, in an 
asymmetric pattern. But instead of idyllic family photos, like the professional one we'd had done 
last year when Mom had the flu but insisted we go anyway, or the one from our camping trip where 
I'd caught my first fish, there's only black nothing. Like someone had carefully and deliberately 
covered those memories in black ink. I've seen them so many times they normally barely even 
register; they're part of the scenery. Covering them up, blackening them. It feels... vindictive. Like it
was done specifically to get at me. This thing knows I love my family, that's why it picked this echo
of my home life to... what? Lower my guard, perhaps. If so, that had been a spectacular failure. I 
can't imagine my guard being higher than it is right now. It's after something, but what? WHAT? 
My hand hurts. I've slammed it against the wall. Ah, actually, it really stings. Wait, stings? That's 
not blunt force pain, it's- my hand is wet. The wall is soaked. The rain. The rain from outside is 
tearing through the walls No, I have to- I've gotta-
Okay. Okay. Calm down. I'm taking control of this situation. I can't lose my grip. I'll make a 
list of what I know. Lists make everything clearer. Despite my inner appeals to calm, I all but sprint 
to my room to grab pen and paper.
What I know
1. Mom's gone and no one Sophie doesn't remember her.
2. This is related to the Disappearances. It has to be. Is this what happens when someone Disappears?
3. Nathan- Where the hell is he?
a. Options- The real world, a dream of his own, he never existed/he's a dream, he's my split personality
b. We can communicate through my bookmark. 
4. I can't leave the house
5. Dad's here. He's suspicious. Mom and Sophie weren't affected by the bookmark.
6. My bookmark is protecting me. Find out how. 
The last one's a bit of a leap. I haven't seen it do anything a cell phone with a flashlight 
function can't do since before we got here. If it had visibly repelled the monster, I'm pretty sure I 
would have noticed that. Dad's a problem too. The one time I saw him, I was filled with fear, 
paralyzed. I'm scared of what he might do to me. I might fight with Sophie but at least she doesn't 
make my stomach turn every time I see her. The dead can't come back to life and yet there he is- 
standing in front of me with that loving smile on his face, the one that makes you feel drawn in, like
he's about to tell you a big secret. The smile that's gone from the world. The whole thing is making 
me feel nauseous. Which should be impossible because I've not eaten in what has felt like days. But,
yup, its exactly the same as when I have a big test coming up. It's coming, no way to stop it. I 
stumble to the bathroom, just making it to the toilet. Hot stomach acid surges and pours out of my 
mouth, black. The color makes me heave again. It's the same as the wall, the rain. Is that sludge... 
inside me? The monster did have a pretty firm hold on me before Nathan managed to send it away. I
flick the sink on, eager to wash the bitter taste out of my mouth. After swishing some water, I spit it 
down the drain.  The reflection in the mirror is haggard and pale. I don't tan well at the best of 
times, but I look like a vampire. Gross, individual forehead veins. My eyes are bloodshot, hair a 
frazzled mess. Sophie's right. I do look terrible.
Are you alright, Robin?
Dad. He's blocking the doorway. I can't escape. My fight or flight response pumps 
adrenaline into my body. But I don't try to run or attack him. Instead, I'm frozen. Because there's a 
sad look on his face. Regret. My heart pushes out, beating towards him, wanting to be wrapped in 
his arms. I've missed him so much. I'm afraid of him, yes, but I'm also afraid to feel happy to see 
him, knowing he's not real. That I'll have to wake up to a world without him in it.
If you're gonna puke again, close the door I don't want to hear it Sophie calls from down 
the stairs. We're staring at each other, waiting for the first move to be made. I break first.
You're not my dad, I say. My dad is dead.
There. It's out in the open. Will he turn into a monster and attack me? I'm tense, twitchy, like
a cornered mouse. He's a snake. He doesn't react to my accusation. It's such a non-reaction that it's 
suspicious. I put both hands on my waist, trying to project confidence, but what I'm really doing is 
making sure the bookmark is still close at hand. It is, thank God. Even in my vomit panic I'd taken it
with me. His eyes flick towards the bookmark, which he shouldn't be able to see, since it's under my
shirt. That's... telling. He's able to sense it in a way that Mom and Sophie can't. Neither of them paid
any special attention to my hip. He scowls.
Had... Had he intended for me to forget the bookmark? Obviously it was nothing more than 
conjecture, but it's possible he sent the rain and tried to stress me out as much as possible in order to
induce my anxiety reaction. It's obvious the shadow has access to my memories. It'd be easy enough
to sift through them and find that weakness. I shiver as I realize how close I came to dying. He was 
going to kill me if I hadn't brought my bookmark. My own father would have murdered me. It's 
awful, I nearly puke a third time.
 He sighs, disappointed, no doubt. Yeah, sorry your scheme failed. I want to say something 
cocky like that, but I can't. I'm too afraid, my throat's closed up. Nathan probably would say 
something. Again, I really, really wish we were in opposite positions. 
I hope you feel better. I'll make some lunch and put it in the fridge for you. Eat it when you 
feel up to it, okay? he says with sincerity. He's a good enough facsimile that it really sounds like he
cares. It's not soon enough when leaves. My arms and legs shake. Okay, things are really starting to 
spiral. I need a game plan, an escape or battle strategy. This situation only ends one way. Eventually
I forget my bookmark or it gets damaged and I... lose. I sit down on the edge of the tub, face in 
hands. I'm not... I'm not going to cry. I can't be that weak. I wipe the wet beginnings of tears away 
from my eyes. But as long as they don't fall, it doesn't count as crying. I sniff, trying to regain 
control. Maybe I should stop wishing Nathan were here instead of me. This is horrible, and I don't 
wish it on anyone. I doubt he'd easily adapt to a monster torturing him with his worst memories. 
He's disabled. We met soon after he was well enough to be done with bed rest. Everyone was 
talking about his injuries. I didn't, and still don't, care, but I have ears. You can't help but hear. I 
assumed he'd fully recover. It wasn't until I started working at Talisman that I realized he wasn't 
going to. I'm sure the pain and terror and rage of that was immensely difficult. And very exploitable 
by the shadow. Maybe I should count my blessings that my traumas were confined to emotional 
ones.
My butt aches and my shoulders are stiff from being held hunched. A sloshing sound from 
behind breaks me from my thoughts. The tub's more than halfway full of black water. Sophie had 
said there was a clog. She'd failed to mention that the clog is producing that same black fluid I've 
seen everywhere, from the rain to my own vomit. It's sweet smelling, like cotton candy. Not even 
Sophie is oblivious enough to let black water just pour out of the faucet, so it's weird it's this full. Is 
it coming up through the drain? I roll up my sleeves and start to reach my hand down towards it. It's
an awkward angle. Our tub is one of those free standing ones, the kind that's vaulted off the ground 
by brass lion's paw legs. If I touch the water, it might burn my skin again. I'll test it out with my 
pinkie first. Before I can the bookmark starts glowing again. I quickly pull it out. That bird again 
It's a message from Nathan.
We're coming to get you, Robin. We're trying to fight the thing that did this. You have to fight
too. Stay strong. See you soon.
The words from Nathan quickly give way to the original pattern. I thumb my finger over the 
lamination, almost reverent. It's my charm against misfortune. Not that I believe in that stuff. Or 
that it's done me any good. I sniffle.
This was a birthday present from my dad. He took me berry picking and gave it to me. It 
was pretty hot out, so we ended up eating more than we took home
I know I'm talking to the empty air, but I trust it more than anything else in the house.
I've Disappeared, its become obvious. I feel like I've compiled enough data to make that 
conclusion. That thing is dragging people's consciousness from the real world into a nightmare. It's 
doubtful anyone had someone like Nathan on the outside helping them. They were probably killed 
right after they first encountered the shadow. They wouldn't have had defenses like the bookmark. 
My little bookmark totem really is protecting me, and apparently no one else had been protected by 
one before this. Or maybe they'd died anyway, and it just took longer. The time between 
Disappearances was variable, after all. It might already be too late for me. Maybe my body has been
erased. All that's left is my soul, or spirit. If I die here, destroyed by the monster, will that somehow 
prevent me from going to heaven? I don't know, I can't bear to contemplate the answer. I hug myself
tighter, clenching my eyes shut. I don't want to die. I don't want to die like this, alone and scared 
and confused. Is this how Dad felt? Did he as soon as the monster pulled him into dreams or did he 
die seeing fake copies of Mom, Sophie, and me, praying he'd find a way back to us and failing? 
A drip. An echoing droplet of water. I look at the sink. Nothing. Then- that horrible cotton 
candy stench, and underneath it something else. Something earthier. Jasmine. Sophie's favorite 
scent, coming from behind me. Right behind where I'm sitting on the tub. I want to ignore it. I'm 
afraid of what I'll see. 
Two Christmases ago Mom and I had been shopping. We were in a mall and there was a 
perfume kiosk. The bottles were so pretty, clear blues and lavenders carved into elaborate flower 
shapes. But a dark green one caught my eye, the simple design standing out among the 
extravagance. It was expensive, very expensive. I looked up at Mom.
Well, you'll have to pay me back.
Sophie had screamed when she'd unwrapped it. It'd been her first bottle of perfume ever. 
Jumping up and down, she'd wrapped her hands around my stomach and thanked me again and 
again and had practically attacked the packaging to get it open. Spritz. Spritz.  Spritz. Mom 
winced, but didn't say anything. The jasmine smell overpowered everything and the air around 
Sophie had a bitter, chemical taste all day. But no one said anything. How could we when she 
looked so happy? It was heaven. The happiest we'd been since Dad had left.
I turn around.
Sophie's sitting in the tub, naked. It's filled now, overflowing actually, my skirt gets soaked 
with that black sludge water. It doesn't burn like the rain did, but I stand up anyway, surprised. Why 
doesn't the black water burn like the rain? What's different? She's popped in from nowhere. I was 
sitting right on the edge, it's not like she could have slipped past me. She stares forward, knees to 
her chest.
This isn't real, she says. You know it. I know it. There's no use pretending anymore.
She'd known the whole time. After Mom's warning, I'd suspected as much, but this is 
confirmation. I wonder if she felt guilty pretending. She looks like she feels guilty, all hunched 
together like that. 
What is that liquid?
She looks down at the black water and swishes her hand through it. It must not be burning 
her like it does me. That explains why our mother was able to tolerate it as well. Perhaps because 
they're dreams and I'm not. I should examine that theory more thoroughly when I get a chance.
Blood, she says.
The monster's? I'm pretty sure no animals that have black blood, though I can't be certain. 
Take horseshoe crabs, they have blue blood. 
She tilts her head back and forth, weighing my question. Sort of. It's more complicated than
that.
What does it want? I ask. It wants something. It's smart, manipulative. It has to have a 
goal beyond simple survival. She turns to me.
To live, Robin, she says, That's why it takes people. To experience the things they do. To 
inhabit their flesh. When the flesh corrodes, it finds a new victim. Meaning the acid, the blood, 
destroys a person from the inside out. I have more questions, a thousand more questions, but Sophie
interrupts right before I can get another out.
Don't forget about me, okay, Robin? Even though I'm not real, I don't want to be forgotten.
I try to say something reassuring. 'I'll never forget you', perhaps. I can feel pity for this poor 
girl who is not my sister. She's just a dream, a notoriously ephemeral phenomenon, but she can 
think and feel. I wonder if Dad would encourage me to utilize a 'good lie' in this situation.
It's okay, you don't have to say anything. I'd rather you didn't. It's almost time for me to go 
anyway. The shadow man's pretty much done with me. See, look. She holds up her arm and the 
black water doesn't drip away, not completely. A large patch of her arm is purplish black, like she's 
gotten frostbite. She finally turns to look at me. Her irises are gone, instead there are just black 
spheres, starting to expand outward to her eyelids. Nausea sweeps over me. My sister, my baby 
sister. Everything is collapsing around me. The black water is crawling up the walls in spatters, like 
bloodstains. It's all over the ceiling too, each black splotch spreading outwards. I can feel a thin 
layer of it under my feet. My feet are getting wet, but it doesn't burn. It's gotta be the bookmark. It's 
glowing, a bright ward against evil. Dad... even now he's looking out for me. But I'm weak, I can't 
do this alone. Faced with the prospect of my false father and I alone? It's hard. Too hard.
Sophie, I'm so scared, please don't-
And then, before I can do anything, she's gone. Like the bottom of the tub dropped out from 
under her and she sank through. But that's impossible. Water still pours over the lip, but the water's 
calm.
Sophie 
 I thrust my arm into the tub. It keeps going and going, well past the base of it. I lean over 
the side and push farther. My hand should be grazing the floor by now. It just keeps going. A 
familiar sting starts to build over my whole arm. The bookmark can't protect me if it's light can't 
shine on my arm? I don't care, I'm not losing her I reach and reach, flailing, desperate for anything 
that might be my sister. But I don't feel her. All I feel is an intense burning, getting worse and 
worse. I'm forced to retract it. It's red all over. My skin's always been sensitive and this looks like a 
giant sunburn. I want to try the other arm, but I know it's no use. The only reason she didn't just 
disappear as soon as the monster had no more use for her is to cause me pain. It's still after 
something, or maybe this is just fun for it. Please, please Nathan or God or anyone- hear my prayer. 
Release me from this nightmare. I can't keep going through this. I'm not strong enough.
Chapter 11
Peter acknowledged me with a hard stare when I walked through the door. I tilted my head 
back and forth, trying to tease out tension, trying to feign some air of casualness. The message 
seemed to translate; the clack clack clack of Peter's lightning fast typing resumed. I'd almost gotten 
around to asking what we should do when my phone rang. Crap. Dad. 
Uh, hey Dad, what's up? Easy, breezy, casual.
You're lucky corporal punishment is out of fashion, young man, Dad tone was terrifyingly 
flat. Where. Are. You? 
Er- Okay, so obviously I needed to lie, but what could I say that would get him to believe 
me? Maybe I should tell the truth, but act like I'm lying to throw him off the scent No, that'd be 
dumb, he'd know exactly where to look when he did figure it out. And he would.
Pete's taken the day off too... he said.Is he with you?
Ah, who was that again?  Well, I had to try. Silence. Dad?
Nathan, staying out late is one thing, but all this lying... it's not like you. You know you can
tell me anything, right son? Is this really about your friend?
Incoming Unexpected guilt trip from Dad It's a major hit Man, his voice even quavered a 
bit. Hadn't heard that since the incident with the knife, when he'd seen me at my lowest point. If my 
problem was in any way comprehensible, if I could have explained it in simple terms, I would have 
broken and told him everything right there. I almost wished it were a drug addiction. At least then I 
could have told him. 
Please. 
His voice held a tinge of desperation. I bit down, grinding my teeth against each other. I 
couldn't. 
I'm sorry, I said.
He sighed; it came out in patches, like he was shaking.
Can you put Pete on the phone?
Yeah, let me grab him.
 No point pretending. He knew Peter was there. He'd just call his phone next if I tried to lie. 
Either 'Pete' would sell me out or he wouldn't. Peter caught the phone as I stared at my toes. That 
conversation had probably hurt Dad a lot. He worried about me all the time, my well being was 
almost constantly in his thoughts. Probably since Mom died, definitely since my accident. This was 
probably killing him. 
Sir? Peter stood up, spine ramrod straight. Since this morning. Well sir, I'm ashamed to 
admit he convinced me. 
Hey That rat really was selling me out. 
It turned out we have a lot in common. One very important thing in particular.
What the heck could he be referencing? Exposure to supernatural monsters? Peter had just 
seen me avoid telling him anything about Robin, so that couldn't be it.
Yes. Well, with all due respect, that's an incredibly offensive thing to say to me.  Of 
course not, he's sixteen. Sir, if that's bothering you, I can tell you that my parents were wonderful 
people, and I still didn't want to talk to them about it. Uh huh. Okay, sure.
Peter passed the phone back over to me. I could hear Dad's breathing, but he didn't say 
anything.
H-Hello?
You never told me.
I'm... sorry? I had no clue what was going on. Peter's conversation hadn't given me 
anything to work with. Peter's face was as red as his damn hair and had found an apparently 
fascinating stain on the wall, so no help from him. 
That you and Pete have a... shared interest? There was a pause and a sigh on the other line.
In men?
No. No, no, no. He hadn't. Peter wouldn't have. He refused to meet my frantic stare.
Um...Yeah? I grit out. Anyone with eyes could see I had a crush on Robin. And I'd never 
expressed an interest in guys, least of all to my dad. Though he'd been hinting for awhile that he 
thought I might. How had he known? Peter too. It pissed me off that they weren't wrong. Instead of 
going after Robin, saving her, I was dealing with stupid nonsense. If we were too late to save her, 
I'd never forgive myself.
Look, Dad I'll try not to lie any more, but this is a big deal and I need time.
Another pause. 
Only for as long, he said, low and tight, like he was saying them through clenched teeth, 
as I can stand it. Remember to apologize and to thank Peter for taking the day off to help you talk 
things through.
Don't worry, I was already planning on thanking him, I said, glaring pointedly at Peter. I 
hung up. The dial tone droned. My heart pounded, full of conflicting emotions. Anger, at Peter, the 
rush of panic at coming out, and relief that it had gone well, all things considered. Peter was too 
cowardly to say anything. I wasn't ready.
I'm sorry, Peter said. I couldn't think of anything else that was reasonable.
How did you even know?
He turned redder. He was embarrassed at least. I... noticed you staring a few times. I just 
assumed.
As much as I wanted to throttle him, we'd already wasted enough time. 
Whatever. We don't have time for me to be mad about it, do we? Lucky you. Let's talk 
strategy. What's our next move?
I was thinking about that while you were... out. For now, how about we grab what we can 
and change locations? Wouldn't want your dad to catch us.
He told me he'd give me some leeway, though.
Peter laughed a single 'Ha' and said, Isn't that what he'd say if he wanted you to stay put so
he could find you?
Good point. Great point, actually. That sounded exactly like something Dad would do, 
especially if he was desperate.
Yeah, it is. So where to?
My place, Peter said with an uncertainty that made me guess he didn't entertain much. He 
pulled the car around while I gathered up everything we were using. Some of Peter's notes had been
crumpled or folded a few times. I wasn't sure what was still useful, so I just took them all, laptop 
too. I did a quick search of Talisman, sweeping the super rares we keep behind the counter, and 
grabbed a few books that I'd missed on my first sweep. Did it count as stealing if I worked there and
intended to bring everything back? Oh well, Robin had done the same thing and she's a goody two 
shoes, so it was probably fine.
Peter came back inside to help me carry stuff once he'd parked his car out in front. We 
started driving away from the central hub of the town and into the east suburbs, the rich ones. He 
stopped in front of a house. A nice house. How in the hell had a nurse/cop afforded it? It looked old,
Victorian maybe. A light shade of yellow with lots of windows, framed with bright white wood 
paneling. It almost looked like a castle. A small bit of the house kind of jutted out and was 
cylindrical, roof pointed into a peak. It had a wraparound porch. They're called verandas. I only 
knew because Mom used to go on and on about them when she saw them; she'd always wanted one.
I really doubted Peter could afford it.
It's my parents', he said. Okay, then where were they? I got the sense I shouldn't ask. With 
furtive glances at the neighboring houses, he ushered me in and sat me down on a white couch. I'll 
be right back.
He left me alone. He'd carried all our research stuff into the room. It was cozy in his living 
room, there was a small fire place and a white carpet that seemed like it'd be really hard to clean. In 
front of me was a small glass table with several ceramic coasters. Hung over the mantle above the 
fire place was a deer head, though someone had placed googly eyes over its glass ones. I laughed at 
the image of a young Peter running around the house affixing the eyes everywhere with glue. Must 
have been pretty cute. You could see a crack where an antler had fallen off and been glued back in 
place. The atmosphere was homey enough, but it didn't give off an 'a child lived here' vibe. There 
were few family pictures. All the ones I saw had the same couple in them. A woman, pale and short 
with short curled hair. She wore dresses in dark colors. She had pearls around her neck. Classic 
New England style. His dad was also pretty short surprisingly, still taller than his wife, but 
definitely not up to Peter's height. He had dark hair and a tan complexion. Stark contrast to Peter's 
orange hair and pale skin. Maybe he'd been adopted? Okay, enough of the family history. Orange 
sunset poured through the bay windows. We were losing the light.
It was hard to believe it'd only been a day since Robin and I had been separated. So much 
had happened. I'd met Peter and Iris, and learned more than I ever thought I would about Teddy. 
That thing, the spirit. If we didn't stop it, no one else would. It'd just keep rampaging on. But how 
do you fight a dream? If it just wanted me, if Robin and I could somehow trade, then I'd do it - me 
for Robin, more than fair - she was never meant to get taken in the first place. But I knew the spirit 
wouldn't stop with just me. Peter started unpacking the materials we'd brought. He started with 
Robin's laptop, waking it from sleep mode. She'd gone for the basic silver color, and hadn't dressed 
it up with stickers or anything. But the thing was in good shape. No obvious wear or scratches. 
She'd left it sleek and elegant, just like the owner.
How long do you think she has? I wished she'd just be there. That I could just call her and 
then, just like that, her voice would be on the phone, probably annoyed that I was bothering her, and
everything would be alright.
Peter didn't look up from the laptop, but he frowned. I noticed that the lines weren't etched 
very deeply into his skin. He'd gone from a full nurse to a cop. That had to have taken some time. 
He seemed really young. Freakishly so. Maybe after he'd been brought back, Peter had stopped 
aging. Forever the way his friend/boyfriend pictured him.  
I've been thinking about that, and I just don't know, I don't think we CAN know. The time 
between Disappearances is variable. How long does it take to find a victim, and how long from 
there to drag them into dreams? You said you'd been feeling strange for about a week, so it takes at 
least that long. But as for what happens after that... we just don't know.
It was my fault she'd been caught up in all this. If I'd been the one taken, so many people 
would have been better off.
In our best case scenario, we may have months to figure this out. At our worst case-
Robin might already be dead.
We worked through the night, researching into the early morning hours. Well, Peter did. I 
catnapped here and there. I remembered resting my eyes for just a moment. I must have fallen 
asleep a few times, but never long enough to dream, thank goodness. I wasn't prepared for another 
dream adventure. Not that staying awake would have been more productive. I'd been over 
everything Talisman had on shamans, spirits, demons, all that junk. Peter's story had been helpful in
one respect, it ruled out a lot of stuff the spirit could be. Like, it clearly wasn't a wind djinn, right? 
That was the good news. Because even if what I was reading wasn't a load of bull, it was still 
something entirely new, created by Peter and Teddy. We weren't going to find a cleansing ritual in a 
book, not directly, anyway. Peter had mined Robin's laptop for everything he could and, as far as I 
knew, gotten nowhere.
You're awake, Peter said, sounding relieved. It was the first time I'd heard that tone of 
voice from someone other than Dad in years.
Did you stay awake the whole night? I asked.
I don't need sleep, he said, and at first I thought he was bragging, but then he added- 
Anymore.
He was sat on the ground cross legged with the laptop in front of him and a huge torrent of 
papers and notes sprawled as far as the fireplace. The books Robin had taken from Talisman were 
out and open on top of them. He'd torn paper to act as small page holders all throughout them. He 
was glancing at me every now and then, but mostly still busily tapping away, not even looking tired.
I frowned, a powerful itch building right where the scars were thickest. I resisted.
What's wrong? Peter asked.
Ah, it's nothing, I said.
Peter began to press the issue, nurse instincts likely kicking in, when there was a rumble. My
butt was vibrating. Like, enough that it itched. The bookmark 
Everything's dissolving. Can't fight. Don't know how. Please, Nathan, come get me.
I turned it to the other side and, yup, the eye was there. What the heck was that thing? It's 
been watching us every time Robin- Ah It finally clicked. It was his eye He'd been watching us the
whole time Peter leaned over my shoulder as we watched the image fade away. Robin was running 
out of time. But crucially, we hadn't run out of it yet. Huge difference. Still, it was probably the last 
message she'd be able to send. I had to do something, anything. I stood up.
Let's go see Iris. And Teddy, I tacked on mentally, still not sure how Peter was going to 
react to his involvement. Involvement? More like puppeteering of the events.
Iris? The dream therapist woman? I felt something brewing inside me. Like a prairie fire, 
it started small, but quickly grew into a determined blaze. Hope. Finally, I had some hope. Don't 
worry Robin. We're going to come for you. Hold on. 
No more vague riddles. I'm going to force her to tell me what she knows, and then we're 
going to save Robin, I said, an awful lot more confidently than I felt. I was going to force both of 
them to talk.
Here, this address, I said, suddenly feeling tingly as adrenaline surged through my system.
I handed Peter the card Teddy had snuck into my wallet.
Neither of us spoke as the car pulled out of the driveway. We both knew we were heading 
down the final stretch. Either we'd save Robin, or we wouldn't. And there were a lot of shades of 
gray between those two outcomes. We could die or end up like Iris. Or Peter. Or Robin. There were 
a lot of bad outcomes. And Iris had said that Robin might even be hurt by my actions to save her. 
But Robin's life meant so much to me; I thought her life was worth so much more than mine that I 
barely considered all that. She had so much going for her. Not like dumb idiot me. It... it might be 
okay if I didn't make it. I decided to call my dad. Just in case.
Nathan? He'd picked up halfway through the first ring. His voice sounded thin, watery. 
Like when I'd woken up in the hospital after the accident and he'd explained what had happened to 
Hey Dad, my voice wasn't exactly strong either.
I have no idea what's going on with you.
Sorry? My voice soft because I was afraid speaking louder will give him a reason to ask 
what's wrong. And I might have told him if he'd asked. He took a deep, shuddering sigh.
I got fired today.
That was an abrupt shift in subject, Wait, what? Why?
They caught you on surveillance stealing from my desk. I covered for you and said I'd 
asked you to grab the flash drive and notes, but one thing led to another and they found the 
Disappearance file. I was supposed to have turned over all the case materials, even copies, when I 
stopped working the case. So they fired me.
Dad, thank you so much for not telling on me. And I'm- I'm so sorry. I didn't, I never 
thought-
I know. That's my point. I don't think you're thinking through the consequences of your 
actions. The things you do ripple outward and affect those closest to you.
Just like Iris had said about my efforts to save Robin. It wasn't only my actions in the dream 
world that could have downstream consequences.
I'm sorry.
You're looking for Robin, right? And you convinced Pete to help you?
How did you know? He'd already figured it out, so there was no point in lying.
You left some things at the book store. Smart move to change locations. I'm guessing that 
was Pete's idea? He said. 
Yeah, I replied. Wow, close call, Peter had been right.
I figured. The kid's got good instincts. He'll probably make detective sooner rather than 
later, he said, almost wistful. Look, I can't pretend to understand why you need to do this so 
badly, badly enough that you'd lie to me and steal. But I wanted to say... I don't know what I wanted
to say. Just that I love you and to be careful. Come home safe.
He loved me. I knew it. And I loved him too, of course. He was my dad. But it kind of rang a
bell inside me. Made me realize I was being too cavalier, almost like I was hoping to trade my life 
for Robin's. And that was wrong. Yes, Robin had people that cared about her and a bright future and
people that loved her. But so did I.
I love you too. I... will. I'll come home.
The dial tone carried an extra dose of finality. My limbs felt loose, drained. I leaned my head
back against the headrest. Peter rolled up the window. He gave no indication that he'd overheard our
conversation, even though he must have. It was quiet inside the car, and hot. Dad had loved that job,
and had put in the work to show it. From patrolman, to detective, to sergeant. After his last 
promotion, we'd gone out to the nicest Italian place in town. Dad and I loved Italian but were 
lackluster chefs, so it was our go-to celebration place. He'd gotten a bottle of wine, I'd felt mature 
ordering a steak. Teased him the whole time, calling him 'Sarge'. I'd kept it up for a whole month 
because he would have this tiny involuntary smile every time I did. Probably all I'd done for him 
lately was give him deeper wrinkles and more gray hairs. He'd aged so much in the past few years, 
because he was always worrying about me. 
We're here.
Peter parked in front of the house that was still clad in dream catchers. Fat lot of good they 
were doing. We needed to hurry, but something kept us in the car. The fear of taking that next step? 
Maybe. A little nervous about Peter's reaction to seeing... him?
Are you okay? He asked. There it was again. Concern. Just like my parents. 
Yeah. Thanks. Let's just go.
Taking me at my word, he nodded and opened the car door and started walking towards the 
house, leaving me behind. Rushing in and out of cars aggravated my scars, too much squishing and 
bending for their liking. On the telephone pole, a single word caught my eye- MISSING. Too far 
away to make out the other details, but I knew they were hers. The posters were spreading like plant
tendrils, blooming out from where she'd been taken. Not long now, just wait for us, I thought before
turning back to the house. It looked different in the daylight. Less mystical. The homemade dream-
catchers lost their charm without a moonlit night. They looked tacky, to be honest. An arts and 
crafts project. Peter was already knocking on the door when I caught up, my fastest speed a half-jog
and even that was pushing it. There was a thump from upstairs, a shuffling, a brief silence, then the 
door opened.
You're late. Well, to be fair, that's Iris' fault, not yours.
Teddy. He had a smirk on his lips before he'd even fully opened the door. But it was still 
kind of good to see him, all things considered. Peter was basically the only person I'd seen in the 
last day and a half. I'd almost say it felt like the longest thirty six hours of my life, but no, waking 
up in pain in a hospital had been a much worse day, when every slightest twitch made me wince and
brought tears to my eyes. Teddy stared, eyes shiny, directly at Peter, seemingly unprepared, even 
though I knew he had to have been the one to engineer this 'chance' meeting. The detective had been
looking away when the door had opened, playing aloof as always, but when he heard the familiar 
voice, he turned to look. He took a step back, like the surprise had driven him away. They recovered
at the same time.
So good to see you again. 
What the heck are you doing here? They said it at the same time. I'm pretty sure Teddy 
said the former and Peter the latter.
I live here, Teddy said with a smile that even I found infuriating. What a non-answer. 
I knew it, I said.
They blinked. Well, Teddy might have winked, I couldn't tell. He was still wearing the eye 
patch, so it might have been a blink. He turned to look at me. Teddy was still grinning. All 
according to plan, huh? But I did catch a tenseness that might mean he was uncomfortable, or 
nervous. Peter was so tense it'd be hard not to catch.
Teddy. You were the other guy in the dream. The, I paused, friend.
So you told him about that, huh? Teddy said, I figured you would. You're too kind for 
your own good. Or his.
Peter's eyes narrowed, as his gaze darted from me to him. He'd caught onto the fact that I'd 
known about Teddy for awhile now. Teddy dug into his pocket and pulled out a carton of cigarettes. 
Tapping one out, he also then produced a lighter and proceeded to light it and take a deep drag, 
blowing smoke upwards with a practiced quirk of his lips.
Y-You're smoking. Yeah, wasn't he supposed to be a nurse? Teddy quirked an eyebrow- a 
challenge. I thought you quit.
Yeah, well, Teddy said, taking another drag and breathing out, I unquit.
W- Peter cut himself off. The unasked question hung in the air. 'When?'. Yeah. Their past 
intimacy almost demanded the question, but their current alienation also made the question too 
personal. The answer too frightening. What if it was right after they 'broke up'? What if it wasn't? 
Peter's eyes narrowed again as he made some internal calculation. What happened to your eye? 
Oh, finally A question I knew the answer to. 
It's the bookmark, I said. Teddy's eye widened. He hadn't expected me to figure it out? No 
one gave me any credit. It was obvious if you just stopped to connect the dots. A bookmark with 
power over dreams, Teddy's power, a missing eye, an extra eye appearing where it shouldn't. He 
sighed and undid the ridiculous eye patch he was wearing. It slid off as the tie came lose. The eye 
was closed, but it opened slowly when the light fell on it. And-
Peter gasped. I think I did too. It was milky white, totally clouded over. Advanced 
glaucoma? No clue, but there was no way he was seeing out of that.
Earlier, you acted like the bookmark-
I lied. He said it casually. Like it was so easy. A person like that was dangerous. Teddy's 
agenda might not have been our agenda. I needed a way to communicate that to Peter secretly. 
Although, with the way he was staring, I probably didn't need to. Peter looked like the world had 
been pulled out from under him, like a little kid learning that Santa is your parents. C'mon, I'll tell 
you about it inside.
Peter stepped forward, then hesitated. It was more uncomfortable than Talisman when Robin
was mad at me. But we needed Iris; I wasn't about to be scared away by social etiquette. Teddy 
quirked an eyebrow and stood aside. I looked over my shoulder and saw Teddy ash the cigarette and
flick it into a bush. Real nice. We were led to the same sitting room as last time. Peter appeared 
distracted, deep in thought. No shock there, he was probably barely able to process his emotions, let
alone the new facts he'd learned. The way Teddy had grabbed him in the dream had sure been 
intimate. If things had been different, would they have been a couple? Given his self loathing and 
guilt, I doubted Peter had dated anyone since the incident. Not sure about Teddy. If Robin started 
dating some other guy, I'd be pretty upset. With both men taller than me, I felt shorter than ever. I'm 
no shrimp I'm 6'. Okay, 5'11''. I was getting a complex. Probably because I'd been with Peter for so 
long, who had to be pushing 6'3 and Teddy was just a hair under that. All three of us sat in silence, 
waiting for someone else to start. Fine then.
Okay, are we really not going to say the 'M' word? That's what I finally chose to burst out
with. Childish, as usual. In my head I'm calm and mature, but that's not how it comes out when I say
stuff.
Peter looked confused, What 'M' word?
'Magic' Your ex-boyfriend has actual freaking magic powers How are you not telling 
everyone you meet? I'd be screaming it from the rooftops if I had superpowers.
Teddy laughed. 
We aren't ex-boyfriends, Peter spat.
That shut him up quick. The two of them shared a look. Teddy leaned forward, like he 
wanted to stand up and go over to him, but just as quickly, he leaned back. Neither of them 
answered the question. I wondered if they were consciously avoiding the word 'magical'. I mean, 
that's what Teddy's powers were, right? But I guess they probably hadn't felt all that magical since 
they'd ruined the world and caused the deaths of more than a dozen people. More like a curse than a
blessing. Peter broke the silence next.
So what's the deal with the bookmark?
Teddy let out a 'hf', a half laugh. Sure, we can start there. It's easier if I just show you. 
Nathan, may I borrow the bookmark, please?
Teddy held it over his cloudy eye. Slowly, a black slit appeared on the bookmark's surface. It
widened and rounded until it formed an oval with three circles inside it. One white, one gray, and 
the center one black. Little lines appeared in the outer circle. Veins. It was an eye It exactly 
matched Teddy's other eye, except in grayscale and flat. It even started to move in sync with the real
eye. Could Teddy actually see out of that bookmark?
The eye... Peter said, tapping me on the shoulder, So it was yours.
Yeah, Peter had put it together as well. 
So you were spying on us the whole time? I asked.
Oh no, Teddy said, waving his hands in front of him, It's pretty tiring for me to sync up 
with the bookmark. I was only checking in on you.
That raised way more questions than it answered, but Peter got the next one in.
You- What have you done to yourself? Peter asked. Teddy waggled his eyebrows 
suggestively. Suggestive of what, exactly? Even when Teddy was just a customer at Talisman I 
didn't really get him. He was always playing around. No change in a situation like this, then. He 
flicked the bookmark back and forth, showing us his blind eye, then the one on the bookmark.
Hmm, what? It's just another extension of my power. I am my power, after all. To answer 
your next question 'Why?', well, I knew we needed a weapon to beat that thing, I'd been looking for 
one for ages, but I only recently came to a certain conclusion. That creature only got made because 
of me, right? Right? he said again, looking at me. I nodded. He was being way, way too chipper 
about disfiguring himself. I figured I'd make the best weapon to fight it.
Then why not go fight it yourself? Peter asked.
Teddy handed the bookmark back to me. He pointed his two pinkies at each other and play-
acted like he was trying to get them to touch, but couldn't. Well, it's kind of the same as magnets. 
Spiritual magnets. Like, me and the spirit have the same polarity, you know? Both positively 
charged, Peter snorted, earning a glare from Teddy. Or negatively charged, Mr. Smart Alec. We 
repel each other, strongly. My magnetism is too strong, in other words. I needed a way to tone it 
down. Didn't find one until recently.
Why did it affect Robin like it did? Peter asked, She thought it was hers, right? But it 
wasn't. Wow, good point. I hadn't thought of that.
Well, in a dream, your mind sort of... fills in the gaps. Like when you're in an unfamiliar 
room, but in the dream you 'know' it's your living room. Like that. Same with the bookmark. It's 
mostly dreams, so it has that effect on you. You have something, so you must own it, right? Her 
mind just took the shortest possible route to explain why she might have it.
But not me and Nathan? It doesn't have that effect on us.
Teddy turned serious, How could it? You, Peter, are made of dreams. You are built out of 
the world of sleep. I imagine it's very difficult for you to be fooled by a dream. And you, Nathan, 
you were there. I saw you, as me and Peter dove through the portal. At the border between life and 
death, you saw everything. You touched it, indirectly. And it touched you back. Well, in a 
philosophical sense I don't mean literally.
The way he was talking it almost sounded... intentional. Like because I was there, that's why
he chose me to be the one to team up with Peter. If that was true then it meant there was more to it.
It sounds like you have a plan? I said, allowing a smidgen of hopefulness to creep into my 
voice. Peter probably wouldn't approve but I couldn't help it.
We do. 
'We' meaning him and Iris, I assumed.
What is it?
Iris will tell you more about it when you see her.
Oh come on Peter said, rising to his feet. That's the most ominous thing I've ever heard 
Just explain it now Right, Nathan?
Nathan, Robin's running out of time. We have to move quickly. Time flows differently in 
the dream world. You'll have a better chance of reaching her in time if you go into dreams as fast as 
possible.
I don't know what Peter expected, but his face fell. Was he surprised? Of course I was doing 
it What other choice did I have? Let Robin die and then pray the spirit didn't try to kill me next? 
That was beyond foolish. Teddy was careless, duplicitous, sure. Playing dumb when we all knew he
was anything but. But I also knew he was desperate to stop the shadow man, maybe more desperate 
than anyone. Because he'd sacrificed his own eye. And Peter knew it too, he just didn't want to 
know it. It complicated things for him, knowing Teddy was willing to go so far. Peter sighed and 
looked upwards, maybe praying for strength.
Oh, Peter's given up? Nathan, he must really like you. It always took me aaaages to 
convince him to do stuff he didn't want to, Teddy said, his smile suddenly wide and overbearing. 
Fake. Maybe he was jealous. Okay Let's knock you guys unconscious. Is that okay?
Yeah, I'd expected that. It sucked, but it was better than waking up mid-rescue.
That's fine, Peter said.
 It wasn't fine. You could hear it in his defeated tone, see it in his sagging shoulders. I almost
reached out, to pat his leg. Would Teddy find that strange? I chickened out, though my hand 
twitched, wanting to move.
Oh, but I think I only have enough equipment to keep one of you under, Teddy said.
I won't need any equipment, or drugs, Peter said, looking uncomfortable. I've been able 
to sleep whenever and for as long as I want, since that day.
Teddy closed his eyes, holding them shut for just a moment longer than a blink, like the 
memory had caused him pain. Even his cheerful mask couldn't conceal that. I knew how he felt. I 
sometimes thumbed over my scars when thinking about the accident. He shook out of it. Well... 
good. You can use my bed. It's on the second floor. Let's go.
He led us upstairs. The hallways branched, a set of double doors stood at the end of one 
corridor. The master bedroom?
That's Iris' room, Teddy said. Mine's third door on the left. I'll meet you there once I've 
gathered what I need.
So Iris' body was in there. Her soul and physical form unable to reconnect. She was very 
beautiful in dreams- ethereal. But I wondered how much of that was constructed. Maybe she was 
actually really short or her hair was blonde. A gentle hand set on my shoulder. Peter? No, it was 
Teddy.
The real Iris isn't in there.  The real one is in dreams. Not that. That's just a shell, waiting 
for her to come back.
He'd read my thoughts? Could he do that? No, as I glanced over my shoulder and saw his 
faraway gaze, it was clear he'd said it to himself as much as to me. Huh. Another question for Iris. 
One more for the pile. Peter tapped my shoulder and gestured towards the opposite corridor. Teddy 
moved to the double doors, sparing Peter a glance, which he failed to return. Peter followed right 
behind me, deliberately using his body to prevent me from peeking into Iris' room. I really really 
wanted to see what she looked like, but no luck. 
Teddy had said he lived there, but he hadn't seemed to have taken many liberties with the 
decoration, unless he really liked dull grays and whites. The curtains were hung low, blocking 
sunlight. A crime thriller's cover, folded to a page towards the end on a bed table, was the only 
splash of red. A dull landscape of a mountain hung over the bed. Everest? All jagged mountaintops 
with snow looked like Everest to me. The house wasn't Teddy's, but it wasn't like his coma stricken 
boss was around to complain about the decoration, so I'd expected something brighter. I sat on the 
bed. It was poofy. If it were my bed, I'd have trouble sleeping on it. Teddy would be back soon to 
drug me unconscious for the second time in like three days. I was placing an awful lot of faith in 
someone I knew for a fact was a huge liar.
Hey, is this a bad idea?
Peter had lain down, eyes closed. It was unusual to see him relaxed, unguarded. If he didn't 
need sleep, did that mean he didn't get tired? What about regular exhaustion? 
No matter what I say, you're still going to do it, right? he said, So there's no point in 
getting you all worked up and nervous about it. 
Aw, that was kind of sweet. 
But for the record this is a terrible idea and you're an idiot for going through with it. 
Never mind.
Teddy hefted in a ton of supplies. There were vials of drugs, IV bags along with the actual 
IV, some bandages, and needles. All that to care for Iris? He started prepping a needle, carefully 
drawing from one of the vials. That'd be going in me soon. It made me shiver a little. Anything for 
Robin, of course, but... needles weren't a favorite of mine. Peter examined each of the chemical 
bottles and nodded at me. Phew. They were safe. I'd almost forgotten he'd been a nurse. Still, I was 
nervous. I couldn't very well hold Peter's hand through it, even though I wanted to. Teddy produced 
a cup from somewhere and poured about two inches of a milky liquid into it. 
Drink this, he said, handing me the cup.
Okay, I said, not bothering to ask what was in it. I didn't want to know. If it would knock 
me out long enough to save Robin, then I didn't really care. He cleaned a spot just above my elbow 
joint and stuck the needle in without much preamble. Ow I said, more from surprise than pain. 
Okay. The final trip into dreams. Was I ready? We hadn't worked out a lot of the details. The last 
time I'd fallen asleep here, I'd woken up on Iris' boat, but she'd been attacked by the spirit after I'd 
left, so who knows what had happened. And we really didn't have a way to kill the spirit yet. Me 
and Peter would have to find a way on the way. In the end, it didn't matter if we were ready. Robin 
was out of time, so we were going. Teddy finished cleaning and bandaging the prick.
Okay, when you're under, I'll set up the IV to keep you there. I'll check your heart rate 
every hour or so, just to make sure nothing's going wrong.
Already his voice was getting fuzzy. I clutched the bookmark, held it to my chest, the only 
weapon we had. I tried to think of how we could use it to kill the spirit, but I was already flying 
away...
Peter? It barely buzzed through.
What? His voice was much clearer. Well, he was lying right next to me, after all. There 
was a pause. For second I didn't think Teddy would answer back, then-
I don't regret it. Even if I knew all this would happen in advance, I'd still bring you back. I'd
sacrifice those people to save you. If it's for you, I'd become a monster. 
Silence. 
I guess I've made you hate me even more, huh? Teddy laughed, but there wasn't much joy 
in it. I'm just going to check on Iris, I'll be right back. 
I heard a door open and close. And then just a whisper, but still I heard it.
Things would be a lot easier if I could hate you.
The Truth of Robin Melling
It's awhile before I'm coherent enough to feel something. Time is probably irrelevant here. I 
bet the monster could make a day feel like a minute and vice versa. But I do feel a chill wafting its 
way down the hall, a dry, cold breeze. It's a bitter winter cold. In the house, somehow.
I guess my Hell has frozen over. The breeze is likely part of some sort of trap. I sigh, 
knowing that springing the trap is probably the only way to move forward. Well, I feel in the mood 
for battle anyway. I'd like to get some revenge on the monster that's done this to me. I'm going to 
figure out a way to weaponize the bookmark. Wreak some real havoc on the monster. Surely if I 
shove it down its black, heartless throat, it can't survive, right? Let's go find out. 
I follow the wind to my own bedroom, think. I say 'I think' because what's beyond the open 
door is blatantly not my bedroom. Or a bedroom at all. It's some kind of wintry meadow. There's a 
thick sheet of snow one the ground, maybe a foot high. I can see a clearing surrounded by trees, 
most without any leaves left, but a few evergreens that have retained them. There's thick green 
bushes with red berries. I think they might be poisonous, which Freud would probably say is 
symbolic of something, since this whole place is built from my memories. It's vaguely familiar. I've 
been here before. There, in the center of the clearing, there's a figure. Dad. It can only be him. He's 
the only one left. Of course, it's not really my dad, never was.
The somewhat deep snow makes it slow going. I'm not wearing the right clothes. My closet 
has a wide selection of winter clothes, as you'd expect for a woman who's grown up through Maine 
winters. Of course, my room, including the closet with my winter gear, is now this meadow, so 
that's a bit of a catch-22. I try to think of something to say for when I get closer to 'Dad', but nothing
comes to mind. Just rage and foul language I feel guilty just thinking about. 
Are you okay, honey?
It's said mockingly. I narrow my eyes into slits. I haven't trusted anyone since I figured out 
where I am, but him least of all. The last thing I want from this shadow of my father is false 
sympathy.
What do you want? You can't touch me or you'd have killed me already.
He kicks at the snow, like he's annoyed I've figured that out. So sorry to disappoint you. I'm 
cautious, but confident. Like I said, he'd have killed me if he could.
You humans lead such interesting lives. So much love, and hate, and good food, and pain, 
Get to the point, I say.
He smiles, way too wide, full of teeth, like a shark is smiling at me. I saw something in 
your memory that I've never seen anywhere else before. A... stitching. A contradiction. I want to 
figure out the source of it. I'm... curious.
 You mean you're curious to know if that apparent inconsistency is why you can't hurt me, 
I say, surmising why he's actually interested. His lips curl into another smile, less frightening, 
almost gracious. He tilts his head in my direction, perhaps impressed with my deduction. So what's 
the play here? The smart path is probably to just ignore him. It's more or less admitted that it's 
trying to figure out how to kill me. Probably shouldn't help him puzzle it out. On the other hand, I 
could leverage his answers for some of my own.
A question for a question, I propose, Sound fair?
It uses Dad's hands to clasp them together in a prayer formation and look skyward. His 
thinking about it.
Yes, fair, if I go first. You may be able to stave off death, but I can certainly make things a 
lot more unpleasant for you, if I so choose. So I get first question. That's... true. My memory is 
fertile ground for psychological torture. I've gotten off relatively lightly so far. I nod, agreeing to his
terms. Good. Then, my first question to you, is where are we? This is a place from your memories, 
so you must know it. Please be specific.
I raise an eyebrow. If this is trawled from my memories, then surely the monster would 
already know where we are. But, yes, it had seemed familiar when I walked in. The winter 
landscape... it's not the sort of place I'd go in the winter. You could charitably describe me as 
'indoorsy'. The only way I'd ever go to a forest was if it was in summer and someone else dragged 
me there. I try to imagine it in summer. This meadow, same clearing, but with leaves on trees 
besides the just pines and with dragonflies. The cries of cicadas? I almost remember, but- no, it 
flashes away too fast for me to grasp hold of. Bushes? Fruit bearing, filled with raspberries, 
blackberries and the less edible nightshade. Dad had taught me their names when I was little...
Oh I remember now. You brought me here for my birthday that one time. We picked 
berries for the whole afternoon and then you gave me my bookmark as a present. This one.
I pull the mark from my pocket. No new communication from Nathan. But it looks darker, 
dirtied. Maybe the water in the tub had damaged it? But the splotches are uneven, if it was from the 
water, the whole thing should be waterlogged. 'Dad' winces when he sees it, but you can tell he's 
pleased. Why? Ah I've given away a lot of information with that statement I could have milked it 
for more questions from him. This is a game of duplicity. Normally it's not something I'd get into, 
but now that I am I need to be more evasive. Put that brain to use
Okay, my turn, monster. What are you, exactly?
It pauses, head tilting. It doesn't know the answer? Doesn't know how? Blood, it says 
eventually in a tone I've never heard from my dad. It's vicious. I wait for him to elaborate. Now, 
how old were you when you got the bookmark?
Hey You didn't answer my question
He wags his finger back and forth. What am I, a child? You simply don't like the answer I 
gave. That's not the same as not answering it.
Yeah, little wonder the evil shadow bent on killing me is better at deception than I am. Also, 
there's something strange. His voice it's... echoes? That's not right, but it's the only thing I can think 
Fine, I spit, ten or thirteen. Around then.
You must be specific.
Okay, whatever, I say, losing patience, it must have been when I was ten. You- Dad 
would have taken me somewhere nicer for my 13th birthday. What's your point?
He smiles, patronizingly. Smug that he's realized something I haven't. This is not my dad. I 
knew that already, but knowing something and seeing it in front of your eyes is different. Dad 
would never look at me like this. 
Ah, excellent question I shall answer that, however, I need some leeway as it would 
interfere with my questions. 
This- This has to be cheating I don't actually want to use one of my questions for that. 
Please explain to me why your bookmark is still in perfect condition, despite the fact that 
you've had it for seven or eight years. It has no fraying at the edges, no pen marks or scratches, not 
even dust or dirt. I can rephrase this as a question if you'd like to be pedantic. 
That won't be necessary, I say as venomously as possible through clenched teeth. He's 
kind of got a point. Why is it in such good shape? It might be a magical (until I figure out how it 
works) item, but if it's based on my memories it should be in worse shape than this.
I-I take care of it. It was a birthday gift, so-
Robin, when's your birthday?
What a waste of question I'll hold him to two of my own after I answer, I swear. I almost 
laugh at his random flailing query. Janua-
I don't feel like laughing any more. The meadow stills. Even the gentle cold breeze falls flat. 
January 11th.
Almost a whisper, but it might as well have been a shout. I can see my breath, the 
temperature drops. The ground freezes under my feet. My heart and lungs and kidneys and toes 
freeze. I hadn't felt cold at all before, now it's the only thing I can feel.
Your father didn't bring you here in the middle of winter to pick berries, Robin.
So what? I confused a birthday for some other time he took me berry picking What does 
it matter?
No. No, Robin, your father never gave you that bookmark or any bookmark. And you know
If I had been crying the tears would have frozen on my cheeks.
I-I-
I sputter, trying to say something, but nothing comes out. He's right.
It's a false memory, sweetie. The 'sweetie' sounds hollow and patronizing. It's not even 
making an effort to sound like him. Someone implanted it in your head. That bookmark wasn't 
made by your father, someone else shaped it. I can smell them all over it. A noxious smell, like 
some sort of fried meat. When did you first notice you had it?
I-I don't know. I remember eight years worth of having it It... feels so real. I have clear, 
distinct memories of using the bookmark. Are they all fake? Communicating with Nathan, that had 
definitely been real. No monster influence there; I'd deduced that much and I still believe in my 
own rationality, even as my world is starting to fall apart around me. Although... aside from the 
memory of Dad giving it to me in the first place, I can't seem to recall other people interacting with 
it. Not Mom or Sophie. No one. No one except-
Nathan, I say. He asked about it just before I woke up here. He even held it. It must have 
been real at that point.
Him again? Sounds like he's the one to blame for all of this.
He's smiling. A horrible, awful smile. Way too wide.
Think about it. You were feeling fine, but what about him? He looked sickly and pale, just 
like your father did before he Disappeared. 
In an act of cruelty, Dad's skin suddenly pales, his frame thins. Even his hair seems waxy, 
less real. That was how he looked... just before. I can't look. 
You even thought Nathan might be next. Instead, you Disappeared and he's fine. I wonder 
why you're here and he's not.
Everything hurts. I hold my hands to my head. My skull is pulsing to get free of my skin. A 
migraine.
No, no, no. It's not- shut... up...
There are three crunches in the snow and then Dad's standing over me. His presence 
radiating comfort and menace all at once. I want to hug him and I want to run away as fast as I can. 
He's close. Has he always been able to get this close? The bookmark's protection extended farther 
than this when I first got it, didn't it?
Poor, poor Robin. You've been through so much. You've fought so hard, figured a lot out. 
But it's all been for nothing, hasn't it? It's all been a lie. 
He's the liar. It hasn't been for nothing. Nathan's coming. He's coming to get me. He's 
determined. He's not the type to quit before something's finished. Though I freely admit he might do
a haphazard job. 
Isn't time to rest, to let your grip loose and let go? Just relax, Robin and all this pain can be 
over in a heartbeat.
I stand, holding the bookmark between us. He grimaces, but isn't pushed back. Get out. GET
OUT I shove him backwards, screaming as loud as I can. His form ripples, like my push slapped 
the surface of a pond. A brilliant flash of light emanates from my- the bookmark. He screeches. It's 
monstrous, like a number of animal screams being layered through a voice modulator. It's changing,
turning purple, shorter, growing watery strands of black hair. I don't know what to do It's my height
now, staring me in the face with familiar eyes. My eyes. It lunges at me.
No I hold my hands out futilely, hoping to, I don't know, slow it down maybe. But I know
it won't work. So imagine my surprise when it does. The monster screams as an even brighter 
bright, warm light pours out of my hands, like a super powered blast of energy. The creature's form 
collapses into shadow and it flees, dark spot on the ground slithering towards the door which slams 
behind it. I follow, sprinting, and slap the bookmark on the door. Fantasy meadow or bedroom, 
there's only one way in, and I'm officially locking the door. My knees give out and I sink to the 
ground. 
Chapter 12
The gentle rocking of  Iris' boat is a pleasant surprise. I'd half expected something to go 
horribly wrong, for Teddy to get the dosages wrong or maybe simply put me so deep to sleep that I 
didn't dream.
Hey.
Peter, he must have followed right after me. I heard him, talking to Teddy. Should I say 
something? Butterflies in my stomach titter. I'm not jealous, exactly. But I'm... disappointed? Peter 
mooning over some guy that betrayed him seems contrary to my impression of him. He's in 
uniform, and I gotta say- his police outfit does make him look pretty heroic. Does our subconscious 
control how we appear in dreams? If so, then Peter has totally divorced himself from his former life.
I mean, I'd thought he'd only become a police officer out of convenience, so he could investigate the
Disappearances, but here he is, rocking the whole badge and gun getup. I guess that means he's 
thrown his identity as a nurse away. I shouldn't read so much into it, because if I do, I'll start 
painting a messed up picture of myself. White polo shirt, white mesh shorts, a visor, and tennis 
racket. The ol' reliable Wilson K Factor. Oh yeah, I'm totally over the accident.
You okay?
Peachy, I say.
You look... good?
I think he meant to tease me but lost his nerve halfway through. Peter shouldn't joke, he's 
bad at it. Thanks. You look like a workaholic. Dreams should be an escape from work, don't you 
think?
He looks down and feels his clothes, like he's just noticed what he's wearing, and smiles 
wryly.
Is this the right place? Peter asks, skeptical for good reason. The boat looks like a 
battlefield. Huge scratch marks are torn through the deck. Most of the carvings have been so 
damaged, they're virtually gone. The rail has completely shattered in places, like multiple 
cannonballs had ripped through it. There's no sign of the butterfly sails. Had the lightning bolt killed
them all? Iris had been distraught when that'd happened. The giant masts have been recalled into the
deck. The boat's been... what's the word? Becalmed. I think Dad taught me that one. Or maybe it 
was The Pirates of the Caribbean. Of the torches, only a couple of them still burn. They'd probably 
gone out when the spirit's hurricane hit, but why hadn't Iris re-lit them? It's like a ghost ship. It- It 
can't be that- No. Iris isn't dead. She can't be. We'd know, Teddy would have known, there'd have 
been some sign. Right?
It wasn't like this last time, I say. Iris?
I can feel a faint edge of panic creep into my call. We NEED her. We wait, me with my 
tennis racket, Peter with his badge of honor, hearing only the breeze and gentle waves spraying 
against the prow of the boat. There's a little forward momentum, maybe from a current. A creaking 
of a hatch opening echoes in the wind. In front of us wood panels slide away, revealing a set of 
wooden stairs leading down, into darkness. A small swallowtail butterfly, bright yellow, floats up 
from the yawning opening and lands on a plank right next to the maw. All the tension I'd been 
holding in my legs suddenly releases, I nearly stumble to the ground. She's alive. Thank goodness.
That's Iris' symbol, I say. I guess we should go down, huh?
After you, Nancy Drew.
There's a time and place, Peter, I say, without enough energy to actually sound offended.
I know he's just trying to keep my spirits up, but I need to focus on Robin. Sensing my 
hesitation, he decides to take the lead, descending slowly down the steps. One step at a time he 
disappears from sight. I stand alone on the deck, a cold breeze triggers a shiver. Yup, just the cold. 
Coming? he asks, head popping back up.
Obviously. C'mon, deep breath. It's just a little darkness and this is for Robin. I follow Peter. 
When the last of the light disappears and darkness closes over my head I feel the sudden urge to 
grab onto his shirt. Pride won't let me, though. 
The steps end here.
He grabs my arm and guides me down. There's a faint line of light maybe ten yards in front 
of us. Light shining under the crack of a door? Peter starts to shuffle towards it. I can hear his hand 
against the wall as he uses it for balance and to feel the way forward. His breathing is soft as we 
creep in silence towards the dim glow. I'm holding my breath. I can hear the thrum of blood pulsing 
in my ears. I want to say something, make a joke, but the darkness swallows up any attempts to 
break it with noise. What are we going to find beyond the door? Slowly, eyes adjusting, we 
approach it. There's something else, increasing in volume as we get closer. A beeping? Something I 
recognize. Peter hesitates at the door, but I don't. 
Iris?
The door opens to white, pure shiny white. Bright enough to hurt my eyes. There's a bed 
with a metal foot guard, and a metal headboard. It stinks. There's a chemical soap smell mixing 
badly with a faint scent of flowers. I suddenly notice a bouquet of red roses sitting on the counter, 
where there's a stainless steel tap and sink. I should have noticed that right when I walked in, eye 
drawn to the only splash of color in the room. It's like we're in a video game and the room is still 
loading, with objects popping in as they finish rendering. I can't think of a reason why, except that 
maybe your subconscious mind is better at interpreting dreams and if you're conscious in a dream it 
can take a little longer for things to fill in? That'd happened when I'd first met Iris, actually. She'd 
appeared out of nowhere. Maybe she'd been there the whole time.
The room looks a lot like Teddy's room actually, if a bit more medical. It makes sense, if Iris 
had been the one to decorate them both. 
You're here, a scratchy female voice says.
Iris is lying in bed, what's left of her. Her head rests on the pillow, but it's not connected to 
anything. Her neck and body are gone. No, not entirely. There's a wrist, there. And a small scrap of 
her kimono hovering above the sheets. Her smile is weak. 
What- what happened to you? I say, feeling the color drain out from my face.
Got into a fight. Lost. That's all. I'm used to it.
I swallow, deeply, trying to put how disturbed I feel looking at her aside. This is Peter.
Peter's first instinct is to shake her hand, since he's kind of formal, but he realizes that she's 
not able to and instead gives a weak wave. Iris tilts her head in acknowledgment. 
Have- Peter stops, seems to reconsider the question, then carries on. Have we met 
before?
That's an odd question. It's the same one I'd asked him over and over when we'd first met. 
She laughs. It's a hacking awful sound. As if she's been smoking for years. No, I've heard a lot 
about you, but I don't think we've formally met.
Something passes between them. Some look I can't decode. What is it? Whatever it is, we 
need to move along. Peter's told me everything. I know what the spirit is.
I see. You ignored my warning.
I did, I say, not sure if I should be apologetic or defiant. Never hurts to be nice, I guess. 
I'm sorry.
She shakes her head. 
It's okay. I didn't think it would work anyway, Iris smiles faintly. Even though she's 
bedridden and missing literally half her body, she seems more at ease than last time. Less abrasive. 
It's an abrupt change in personality that only makes me more suspicious. I know she's holding back 
something. I've known that basically since I met her. Iris told me herself that she'd fought the spirit 
and failed, but she has to be more involved than she's letting on. I'm just sorry I couldn't protect 
you.
Protect him from what? Peter asks. I think he's actually more concerned about my safety 
than I am. No wonder him and Dad get along. For my point, I'm getting a little annoyed. Every 
adult in my life is practically throwing themselves onto grenades to protect me 1. I'm really not 
worth it, and 2. I can handle myself. Kind of. 
Iris raises an eyebrow at Peter, From what you're about to do, obviously.
So she already knows why we're here.
How do you know so much?
I'm pretty sure of the answer already. Because... there's only one way for her to know. As far 
as I'm aware, there are only three people who know exactly what's going on with Robin, excluding 
Iris. Two of them are standing right here. Neither of us could have given her any details. I didn't 
know any details when we met. And Peter literally just met her. So only one person could have 
given her any information on the situation. Teddy. I wonder how Peter's going to react. I never told 
him my suspicions. I hadn't been sure, true, but also it'd hurt him to know Teddy had caused Iris' 
condition.
You figured it out, guess you're not as dumb as I thought. 
She sighs before flashing me a smile to show she's only teasing. Fine. About a year and a 
half ago I was contacted by a man who exists between dreams and what you call reality. Back then 
Disappearance hysteria was raging through town. I'd had an influx of patients showing symptoms of
PTSD at my psychiatry practice. And I wasn't doing too great myself... A friend of mine was among
those who Disappeared. So when that man came to me, in a dream, and explained what was really 
causing the Disappearances and that he wanted my help in bringing them to an end, I accepted. I 
barely asked questions. After all, it was only a dream. What harm could it do? If it could help my 
friend, then I wanted to do it.
She pauses, reflecting. She'd tried to dissuade me from pursuing Robin. Because trying to 
save her friend is what caused her condition. She doesn't want the same thing to happen to me. 
That... man- Peter says, putting the pieces together. He's covering his mouth with one 
hand, thinking. The color drains out of his face, not that he had much color to lose in the first place. 
He looks to me. I can't hold eye contact for long and end up staring at my shoes. I'm sorry, Peter. 
Forgive me. 
Yes. Teddy. He said he couldn't help directly, but he'd guide me to the spirit and I was to do 
battle with it. He taught me a little about lucid dreaming; he figured if I could control dreams then I 
could fight it somehow. He called it a battle of philosophical will. He got the details pretty wrong.
Of course he did, Peter says with disgust. 
Yeah, tell me about it, Iris agrees. But we both knew it was risky. I regret what happened,
but not that I tried. And he's stayed close ever since. He signed on as my nurse to watch over me. To
see if he could bring my soul back to my body, so I know he's not a bad person. Hating him is 
difficult. 
Peter wants to interrupt but holds himself back. He turns pale. 
What happened after that?
I- We knew that the spirit wasn't just going to stop on its own. I don't think it can. So we 
started doing research, trying to figure out how it might be destroyed. And then... 
Her eyes lock on mine, as she waits. Huh? I don't get it. She rolls her eyes, but there's a hint 
of fondness in the gesture. He recognized you, Nathan.
Oh He'd gone in to Talisman for research and bumped into me, recognized me from the 
dream And then he, what, recruited me? Why me?
Iris pauses, taking time to phrase things the way she wants, I'd found my spirit animals, the 
butterflies by that point, so we knew there was something to Shamanism. He thought that you were 
a perfect candidate. You'd been exposed to his power and you were there at the spirit's creation. Plus
you'd experienced a sort of death and rebirth. That stuff's really important.
Important to what? I'm still not getting it.
Shamans, Nathan, Peter says, placing a hand on my shoulder. She's saying they think 
you're a modern day shaman. Why did it have to be him, though? Teddy told us why he couldn't do 
it, but why not you? Or me.
Iris tries to sit up, but fails. Not surprising, since she's missing more than a few joints. 
There's a button on her bedside that adjusts the headboard, I flick it so she's sitting up. She sniffs, 
haughty, trying to let me know she could have done it herself. She might be nicer, but she's still 
prideful, I guess.
I don't have a body. Believe it or not, you need a body to fight spirits. For starters, I can't 
explore or move about freely without a body tethering me to reality. I'm stuck here. Secondly... It's 
kind of hard to explain, but fighting a spirit with just your soul is kind of like trying to win a 
gunfight with just the bullets and no gun. They function together.
And why not me? Peter asks.
Iris sighs like she doesn't want to divulge the information. Maybe she's trying to protect 
Peter too. Your existence is uncertain. You're a muddle of many different things. Human, physical, 
spirit, ethereal, whatever the heck Teddy's power is, all of it mixed together. It's not that I'm sure 
you couldn't, but it's not clear you could, either. Plus your heart isn't clear. You don't know what you
want. I'm not saying you need a pure heart- no one has that. I just mean you need clarity of purpose.
Nathan has that. Do you?
Peter doesn't answer. For me, I definitely want to save Robin. But I don't know how to react 
to all that. Two days ago? It would have sounded impossibly silly I might have laughed her off. 
Now I feel uncomfortable, the expectations of me are really high. Since the accident I've been used 
to having the bar lowered for me. God, I've gotten used to everyone letting me off easy, haven't I? 
All that time complaining about my situation and I'm still taking advantage of it I'm pathetic. If 
Teddy and Iris have chosen me as their 'shaman' or whatever, what did that make Peter? My 
bodyguard? Teddy had admitted he'd drawn the two of us together. Pretty cruel of Teddy. It's 
obvious Peter still loves him. I can't shake the thought. It rings around my head like a bell. 'He still 
loves him' echoing, mocking me.
Enough I don't care about the specifics, if it gives me the power to save Robin, then I'll do 
it. Even if I don't know what 'it' is. I'd already been prepared for that. I should feel upset, but they'd 
basically 'manipulated' me into doing something I would have wanted to do anyway. If anything, I 
feel grateful for the opportunity.
Okay, I say.
That's the last straw for Peter. He grabs my shoulders tight and shakes me back and forth, 
saying, Okay? Okay? How is any of this okay? Nathan, they used you and now they're sending 
you to your death and you're acting like it's nothing He... he...
Peter eyes turn glassy, his arms drop to his sides. No wonder he's upset, this hits pretty close 
to home for him. I touch his cheek.
I'm sorry.
I'm sorry for what happened to you. I'm sorry for all your suffering, and mine. I'm sorry I'm 
going to keep going and make you worry about me. I'm sorry if it doesn't work and I get hurt. I'm 
trying to apologize for all of that at once. He starts crying, I want to cup his cheek a little more 
firmly, but Iris clears her throat. Peter takes a step back and we wait for him to compose himself.
What do we need to do next?
Call for your spirit animal.
You mean Amelia?
My chest glows, a white circle opening up right over my heart, brightening the room, 
making the harsh medical whites even harsher. I close my eyes until I feel her. I feel her flapping 
her wings inside me. It's strange, it's not a physical feeling. It's like an intrusive thought, an image 
of wings and motion. I hold my hands cupped under the circle and out pops my beautiful, iridescent,
rainbow swallow. 
Hi, Amelia, I say, a little breathless. She preens, leans into my chest as the glowing light 
fades away. Okay, that had been pretty cool. Maybe this shaman stuff isn't all evil spirits and 
nightmares. Even Peter looks a little impressed, though he's still squinting. 
What now? Peter asks.
I know. I'd been reading about it all this time. She'll guide us to Robin. If I ask her.
That's it? That's all you have to do?
He can do a dance and chant in Cherokee if it'll make you feel better, but I figure time is of 
the essence, Iris just laughs at my glare. Peter's reaction is totally fair, because you'd really think 
there'd be more to it. But I guess they're called spirit guides for a reason. It's a snap for them.
Um, can you guide me to Robin? I say. Please.
There's an agreeable peep before a bright glowing line emerges from Amelia's back. I grab 
hold of it and she immediately flies backwards out the room and down the hallway without so much
as a glance back. The cord attached to her seems to expand the further she flies away. Looks like 
she's going on ahead and we're supposed to follow the line to catch up to her. I can see jagged 
glowing lines where light crawls up the stairs.
What do we do when we get there? I ask.
Iris shrugs, looking guilty, I don't know.
You don't know? I yell. Peter snorts. He's barely surprised.
This isn't science, Nathan You have the bird, you have Peter, and Robin has the bookmark,
I'm sure there's something you can do. This is dangerous, are you just realizing it now?
No, I- 
There's no plan? No real plan. 'Send the shaman kid in' is not a plan. Crap, I'm still going to 
go, aren't I? I must be the dumbest person to ever live.
I can't change your mind? Peter asks. I can only look at him and kind of shrug. He can't. 
Then we should go quickly. We're on a clock. He's right. Teddy can only keep us under for so 
long. It's probably unhealthy as it is. 
Are you-? I say to Iris.
I'm fine. I'll recover. Go get the girl already If she can crack jokes then I'll believe her.
Um, Peter? she calls just as he's almost out the door. He stops but doesn't turn, I don't 
know if you want this, maybe you'll find it insulting, but... I forgive you. I forgave you a long time 
ago.
He hesitates, then leaves. My heart hurts. I don't get why at first, but then I make the 
connection. That must be how Dad feels about me. It doesn't matter how much I put him through 
he'll always love me, always forgive me. It makes me want to forgive Dad for caring too much, for 
protecting me a little too well. I shake my head. Time to go.
He's nearly up the stairs by the time I catch him, gaze directed studiously downward, 
following the trail of light. Faced with the slightly brighter night sky and clear air, I take a breath. I 
hadn't realized how still and stale the air was down there. The cop's silent. He's walking over to the 
bow, where the thread dips down straight into the water. 
Are you okay? I say, lobbing the tennis racket, which I'd left on the deck, into the water. It 
doesn't splash, just vanishes, like it wasn't there to begin with. 
I'm fine. Is that what I sound like when I say 'I'm fine'? No wonder no one ever believes 
me. We should get going.
He's really pale. As he speaks, he clambers on top of the rail and stands on it, ready to jump. 
He's looking outward, across the sea. The light of the stars is reflected onto the water. I hurry to 
follow him, making sure not the accidentally jostle him off the boat. The sea itself is pitch black.
Ready? I ask. And I'm scared. Really scared. Not just nervous, but terrified. Pride had 
stopped me before, but... I grab his wrist and just as quickly let go. Crap, now he knows I'm afraid.
I'm a little nervous too. I'm not great with heights. And I never thought I'd be comforted by 
a high schooler. He's lying, I think, about the heights. He's shaking, but it isn't from a fear of 
falling. He's literally shaking and he's still trying to make me feel better. Peter is the greatest friend 
anyone could ever have, no wonder Teddy's so hung up on him.
Me too, I say. A little I add, downplaying how deeply frightened I am about the next 
leg of our journey.
He smiles just a bit and I'm... happy. Scared, and happy, and embarrassed at being happy to 
have made him happy and-
Okay- 3, 2, 1, jump I yell.
We jump together into that murky abyss, sinking like stones. Our bodies don't even make a 
splash, not the slightest of sounds. Iris' boat disappears. Bubbles swirl around us, I can hear them 
churn. I'm forced to close my eyes as they envelop us. Then, air? What? We're on dry ground.
Land? I say, before slapping my free hand to my mouth, trying to prevent the water from 
rushing in. Only there's no water. We're standing on asphalt. I can't have fallen asleep outside again, 
right? No, that's not it. We're in front of a building. A big, familiar one. There's a red cross on the 
front, but no name. But it doesn't need one, because it's obviously a hospital. Peter's breath 
quickens. Mercy South. Peter had worked there and it's where I was treated after the accident. And 
it's where Teddy inflicted a bleeding wound on the world of dreams. Is this the same place as back 
then? Did 'places' exist in dreams? Maybe it's just been built from mine and Peter's subconscious. 
Or it's a trap by the shadow. The golden thread points us forward.
Chapter 13
The corridors of the old hospital twist and turn in a pattern that makes no sense. I mean, I 
hadn't expected them to; it's a dream after all. But it's still disconcerting to walk around a place 
you're familiar with and have the directions all jumbled up. I'm sure that first was the reception desk
and osteopaths. I'd walked by them both dozens of times for physical therapy. But where they 
should be there's just a long hallway straight forward that leads to a staircase, which then leads to a 
hallway which doubles back the way we came I mean, we can't get lost, I'm still holding onto the 
golden cord attached to Amelia, but it's unsettling. More so for Peter, who actually used to work 
here. It doesn't seem to be bothering him, but we haven't spoken in awhile. I try a couple of doors 
that line the second hallway, even though the thread doesn't lead to them. They're unlocked but 
uselessly inconsistent. One's an office. Another has a surgery prep room; a third has those bunk beds
that hospital staff sleep in. When we reach the end of the hallway the path branches in three 
directions, and I am so grateful to Amelia. If we didn't have her we'd have to pick one at random 
We'd never find Robin like that. 
Where the heck are we going? I swear we're losing ground; we've looped back against 
ourselves more than once, but the golden line never wavers. Some parts of the hospital, the nurses 
station or some patient rooms, are lit, others are completely dark. In places thick with dark, I try to 
hold out the glowing thread like a lantern. Doesn't really help. Peter doesn't answer. He's lost in 
thought, barely registering our twisting path. Not that I'm surprised. He'd been emotionally charged 
as it was and now we're literally walking through his past. Peter stops and stares at wall. 
I think I know where it's leading us, Peter says, running his fingers across a black splotch. 
At first I think it's a shadow, but his fingers come back black and oily. I've seen black liquid like 
that before. The further we walk the more the walls darken, getting wetter and more damaged; they 
twist like the knotted whorls of tree bark. We're heading to the scar, where Peter and Teddy started 
this whole thing. It makes sense that that's the spirit's home base. 
Are you ready? I ask.
More or less. Are you? 
I shrug. Not really, but it doesn't matter. How can I be ready for this? We don't have a plan of
attack, even a clue of how Robin might be saved. His expression is tight. He's in pain. I don't want 
Peter to suffer anymore. Peter or Robin. The thread leads us around a corner and we're there. The 
hallway from my dream. It's not exactly as I remember it. The lights are flickering for one. The 
black tendrils of corruption are the most severe yet. The posters have totally dissolved away. And 
the smell is totally off. It's supposed to smell like bleach, maybe lemon if you're lucky. But all I can 
sniff out is, like, some kind of burned sugar smell, like a bakery. A bakery that's just had a fire. But 
still, I get a sense of nostalgia. It would've been a piece of cake to find the right door at this point, 
even if we didn't have a guide line. The 404 door is just about midnight black and dripping wet. 
Black droplets are falling off the knob in a hypnotic beat. Drip, one, two, three, drip, one, two, 
three. I go to grab the knob, but Peter puts an arm out in front of me.
Let me do it, he says. We don't know if it's toxic or not, and I've already touched it.
I'm not sure that's a good argument. If it's toxic shouldn't we spread out the exposure instead 
of heaping it onto one person? But he's got that 'I dare you' look in his eyes that means even if I 
argue I'll just lose eventually. Whatever, let him martyr himself if he wants to. He pulls his sleeve 
over his hand and turns the knob. It's wet, so he slips once, but after that the door is open. Sparing a 
glance at each other, we push through.
There's tall grass, up to my shins. I can see the tiny flashes of lightning bugs on the tips of 
grass and in the air. They mirror the twinkling stars in the sky. Wait, what? I look behind me. I can 
still see into the hospital through the door behind us. The door's just standing free in the elements, 
apparently unaffected by things like architectural stability and common sense. Before I can react, it 
slams shut. Oh, that's kind of ominous. I'm hoping it doesn't mean the spirit's on to us. The element 
of surprise would be handy to have. But anyway, where the heck are we?
Where's the scar? I ask Peter, like he'd know. He scans the horizon, shading his eyes with 
his hand, even though it's not sunny. He points, into the distance. It's the same direction the golden 
string is leading us. Where is he- Oh There in the distance, a house. Not a house, the house The 
one I'd found Robin in last time
Let's go, Peter says.
Hey wait
I stumble to catch up. Damn Peter, he's always like that, so abrupt when he wants to do 
something He could give me a second to mentally prepare myself. We could have, like, a team 
huddle, or something, even if that's not his style. The house is totally dark- or, wait, is it? I think I 
can see a glimmer of something on a banister on the porch. A flashlight, maybe? A twittering 
followed by a gentle weight landing on my shoulder.
Amelia Are you alright? I gently rub her head. She leans into it and pecks my neck. It's a 
light, barely there, tap, just letting me know she's fine. It makes me smile for the first time in a long 
while.
Hey birdbrain, we've got a job to do, Peter says. His tone is hard, verging on mean. 
Amelia takes off from my shoulder and starts flying around Peter, pestering him. She flaps in front 
of his face and sounds off loud chirps in his ear, making him jump. Even he has to laugh eventually,
Okay, okay He holds his hands out for Amelia to land in, which she does. This is a serious 
situation, you know that, right? 
Amelia does that bird shrug thing I'd seen her do back when she'd saved me from Iris' ship. 
Peter wants to get mad but can't. Instead he walks up onto the house's porch and sets her down on a 
railing. Standing in front of the door, he turns to me and says, Coming?
Of course. I'm next to him in a flash. We both reach for the door handle at the same time. I
can tell we're about to have another argument about who should open what door, but then there's a 
loud click, and the door slowly opens of its own accord. It's a terrible sign, because the spirit is in 
control of the house, isn't it? It's probably a trap. Peter and I hesitate at the door.
You know in horror movies where scary stuff is starting to happen and one guy goes off 
alone to investigate the strange noises coming from the inexplicably unlit basement and you want to
yell at him for being such an idiot and you swear if you're ever in the same situation you'll do the 
smart thing and just leave? Peter puffs out a breath and I can't tell whether he's laughing or 
scoffing at me, but he walks right in, getting swallowed in darkness.
In my haste to follow, I tumble through the door, falling, and landing in a heap on soggy 
ground. Slime covers my shirt. The ground's wet, but seems solid enough. Hardwood floor. The air 
is stale and cold, with a sickening cotton candy scent. Peter grabs my shoulder and hoists me up like
I'm a bag of feathers. Whatever, I'm not impressed. Not even a little bit.
Are you alright? he asks.
I brush myself off, trying to reduce the amount of slime on my clothes. If it is hazardous, I'm
in trouble, but other than a slight burn, it doesn't hurt or anything. I guess so. Thanks.
Amelia peeps in my ear. She must have followed us in. I hadn't even noticed her land on my 
shoulder. Neither of us have closed the door, but I'm not surprised when I glance back and it's mid-
swing. It shuts with a deafening click that rings in my ears. It's less frightening then when it opened.
Let's go, Peter says, picking a direction. It's pitch black. Amelia's giving off a little light, 
but it's basically only enough to see the floor. Peter seems confident, but I know him well enough to
know he's faking it. He's got that nervous twitch he gets and he's paler than usual. That's his tell. 
He's probably putting on an act for me, so I don't get nervous too. Whelp, too late. I'm not good 
with the dark under the best circumstances, so having to fight a shadow man in absolute ink black is
kind of a literal nightmare for me. We shuffle along, using the wall and Amelia's thin light as a 
guide. It's a bit damp, squishy even, but we manage. The two of us eventually come into some sort 
of room. That's all I can say with confidence. I run my hand against the wall, rolling my eyes 
because I know that even if I find the light switch it isn't- CLICK. Bright light floods the room. Oh. 
Well, better than darkness, I guess. We're in the kitchen. This is where Robin prepares her meals, 
drinks her coffee. No surprise there's an espresso machine next to the standard coffee maker. She's a
coffee fiend through and through. I'll bet the whole family is; it's probably genetic. 
In that bright kitchen, a girl suddenly appears. She's a few years younger than me. She's 
peeking inside the breadbox. She has familiar black hair and build. Robin's younger sister? The girl 
picks out the two crusts, even though there's perfectly good middle pieces left, pops them in the 
toaster, then gets out butter, sugar, and cinnamon. She hasn't noticed us, which is odd, because a 
tennis player, a policeman, and a glowing bird are pretty noticeable, you'd think.
Robin? She jumps. We jump. It's a man in the door frame, right behind Peter and me. He's 
got weathered skin and salt and pepper hair except for at the temples, it's whiter there. He's wearing 
glasses in unstylish wire frames. He has the same kind of round physique as her. Then that girl is 
Robin? Robin from a few years ago. We're watching her memory. Some sort of echo of her 
consciousness? What are you doing?
He's staring right through me and Peter like we aren't even there. Robin's doing the same. 
I'm stupid enough to try waving a hand in front of the dad's face, but Peter's there to grab my wrist 
and pull me out of the way before I get too far. He shakes his head and hits me lightly on the chest, 
admonishing me. Yeah, okay, that's fair. Do I even want to get their attention? Robin's father steps 
through the empty space I'd just vacated.
Taking a study break. What about you?
I was tossing and turning so much your mother kicked me out of bed, he jokes. Actually, 
now that he mentions it, he doesn't look so good. Red eyes that had been obscured by the glasses 
and sagged shoulders, the usual signs of tiredness, conceal something deeper. A haunted look. Like 
something has been eating away at him. He's kind of shimmering, eye-catching. I want to look at 
him more than I want to look at Robin, which is saying something. He's got the glow. This must be 
right before he Disappeared. 
The toast pops up. Robin retrieves two small plates, placing one slice on each, buttering 
them up, then dusting them with the sugar and cinnamon, coughing a little when a cloud of 
cinnamon kicks up towards her nostrils. She hands one of the plates to her dad.
Cinnamon toast? I haven't had this since you and Sophie were little girls. 
He munches on it slowly, turning something over in his head. 
You know, your mother and I are very proud of you.
I- I know that She sputters. It's incredibly cute in a kid sister kind of way. Why are you 
saying that?
It's... he glances over at the oven clock, 11:12 and you're still up, studying. And I know 
you have a student council meeting tomorrow morning. What time did you set your alarm for?
6:00. She's lying, it's obvious. He raises an eyebrow. She stares back, holding her ground. 
And how long were you planning on staying up?
Awhile?
Robin.
Midnight. 12:30 at the latest.
Sweetheart, it's not going to kill you to get a 92 instead of a 96 on your Biology test. Lack 
of sleep might actually kill you. Trust me, I know. So go to bed.
But I- She seems to realize the futility of arguing. Fine. Let me make you some tea to 
help you fall asleep first, though.
Sure.
She opens a cabinet. There's a wicker basket. 
Chamomile, or Green, or Earl Grey, wait, that one has caffeine, never mind, or Lemon, or 
Ginger? You like Ginger, right?
Sure. All tea tastes the same.
That's not true.
They're all mostly water, aren't they?
She sighs dramatically and picks up a packet of Ginger. Mr. Melling crosses his arms over 
each other and lays his head down on them. Poor guy, he really does look tired. Robin's busy with 
the microwave, heating up water. Her dad suddenly jerks up, back ramrod straight. He stands, the 
motion is careful. Robin doesn't hear it over the hum of the microwave. She's putting away her dish.
No, I say. No
I dash forward to- I don't know Do something, grab Mr. Melling by the hand, warn Robin, 
anything. Peter's arm clamps around my wrist. I know I shouldn't, but I can't just let it happen in 
front of me again I pry his fingers off my wrist, only for Peter's other arm to swing around and pull 
at my waist. I'm not gonna make it It all happens so fast, but it feels like it takes forever. It's worse, 
everything is heightened, knowing what's coming. My whole body is numb. I stop fighting. I can't 
look away. The alertness fades and his eyes close. He falls to the floor, through it. A patch of 
darkness a little too dark to be just a shadow the only sign anything is amiss. Robin turns. 
Dad?
Robin
She turns and I swear she's looking at me, staring at me, even though she's just a memory. 
She smirks and disappears. Wait, what? Should she be able to do that? Was that the real Robin? 
Peter's tugging at my arm.
Nathan, come on, we should go. She's not here, Peter's saying. I can only hear him 
vaguely. I'm still staring at the spot where Robin used to be.
Oh? Going so soon? A watery voice echoes across the kitchen. It fills the room. I twist and
turn, but can't find the source. Peter's doing the same, he even checks under the table and behind the
kitchen island, even as it's still talking, but no luck. But I had more to show you, if you're 
interested?
N-No way to go but forward, right? You can't hurt me with memories I shout at nothing, 
the stutter betraying my nervousness. It's needlessly combative; I really shouldn't be trying to piss 
this... thing off. It's a little reckless, but something happening is better than nothing happening, 
right? It means we're getting closer. Peter's scowling at me, so he probably doesn't agree, but what's 
done is done. Well? Show me what you got
There's a loud, mocking laughter. Huh, I almost recognize that laugh. It's not Robin's, I'd 
know that instantly, voice modulation be damned. It doesn't give me another opportunity, instead 
the kitchen dissolves, changes shape. It's- I recognize it. The same four person table, that stupid 
apron hung on the refrigerator handle
I see Dad. Peter gasps. He's sitting at the table staring at me. Well, not me. Younger Nathan.  
I know exactly when in my memories we are. I don't want to see it. I don't want Peter to see it It's 
the first time I'd seen Dad cry- the only time. It had been after dinner one night, months after the 
accident and I'd come home from the hospital. We'd had meatloaf, a perennial un-favorite of mine. 
He'd bought it from the supermarket. It was dense and the texture uneven. Chalky in some places, 
moist in others. But I'd tolerated it, wolfed it down, even. He'd finally made something I hated. It'd 
been nothing but a string of my personal favorites and comfort food for weeks. One of a million 
infuriating ways he was coddling me. And because he was doing it for me, I couldn't even 
complain Yeah, between that and the constant, gnawing pain and knowledge that I'd never play 
tennis again, I was not what you'd call happy. You might have called me depressed. Severely 
depressed. I offered, insisted to be honest, on putting away the dishes. 'Let me have at least this', I 
remember thinking. Dad had smiled, then frowned, torn between happiness at my offer and concern 
over my injuries.
Well, thank you, Nathan. That's certainly thoughtful of you.
I'd turned and started washing the dishes. His eyes had burned holes in my back. I'd glanced 
backwards a few times, but Dad was fast and sneaky. Each time, he pretended to be engaged with 
his phone or adjusting his badge. But we had both known he was watching. I wanted so badly to be 
better. To go back to normal. I hadn't realized how different I was. Am. It happened as I was 
carrying the silverware to the dishwasher. My knee trembled. That was the only warning I got.
Ah A shooting pain had torn up and down my side, I'd collapsed and fumbled the 
silverware as I did, scattering it around me.
Nathan Dad's yell had been immediate. Are you alright, son? 
They'd been right. My dad, my doctors. I wasn't the same. I'dfelt my cheeks burning. So 
stupid. Stupid, stupid, stupid. Just don't cry, he'd never let me out of his sight again. Dad had 
touched my shoulder gingerly, but I'd thrown him off. I'd shut my eyes tight, feeling them line with 
tears. Don't cry, don't cry, don't cry.
I'm fine, I'd ground out. I wasn't fine. I was humiliated.
You're bleeding, Dad had said. Ah, looks nasty. You might need stitches. Here, wait a 
second. He'd stood up to grab a towel. Somewhere in the chaos, I'd nicked my arm, probably with 
the big carving knife we'd used to cut the meatloaf. I'd clasped a hand over the wound. It had barely 
tickled, not that you'd guess that from all the blood. Adrenaline rush, probably. The knife lay right 
in front of me. I'd stared at it thinking, 'Wow, that didn't hurt at all. It's so much less painful than my
injuries.' It'd be so easy. Just a quick slash across each wrist and it'd be done. No more pain, no 
more humiliation. I'd barely even thought it, let alone seriously considered following through.
I'd heard something. A sniffle, and the towel had dropped down in front of my face.
Dad?
Tears had poured down his face. He'd made no effort to stop them. He silently begged me, 
pleaded. Don't. Please, don't. He was white, ghostly. Terrified. He'd seen. He'd seen and understood 
and the magnitude of that horrified him. He'd felt powerless and weak. I knew it, that's how I felt 
too. He'd looked away, shoulders shaking, hand over his mouth, eyes squeezed closed tight, tears 
still flowing, dripping onto his fingers. I didn't make eye contact with him for weeks, afraid of what 
I'd see. 
That's what happened. And now Peter's seen it too. I look away, jaw locked in fury and 
shame. That's- that's not me That's not who I am... anymore. I can't meet Peter's eyes, the 
overwhelming pity makes me want to cry and punch something.
I can't- I can't make this about me. This is about Robin. She's in here somewhere, at the 
mercy of this sadistic thing, hiding somewhere out of sight
Robin? Robin where are you?
There's that laugh, that familiar, cruel laugh again. 
Oh ho? No insults or comebacks? Seems like I've struck a nerve. And you think you're so 
strong. But we both know you're weak, don't we?
I take one-two-three giant gulping breaths in rapid succession. It's taunting us, but I won't be
distracted. We're close, so close, almost found her. Gotta keep her safe, I have to find her, doesn't 
matter about me or Peter, nothing matters, gotta-
 Nathan. Nathan, look at me. You're having a panic attack. Try to breathe slow and deep. 
Peter, he saw and now he knows what I am. This is all his fault but I can't, can't, can't breathe and 
everyone thinks I'm a failure, and I know Dad resents me and Robin's never liked me very much, 
and if it wasn't for the Disappearances Peter and I would have never met-
Pete- Peter I, ah I can't I'm sucking in gasps of air, everything's so intense It's all so 
bright and loud and at the same time, I'm floating above my body watching it all happen as he grabs
my arm (Hot Way too hot) and sets me down at the kitchen table and placing his arm over my 
eyes. What? I thrash, but he holds firm.
Nathan, focus on my voice. Can you do that? Can I? It's so loud I can't hear my own 
thoughts, but that can't be true because I'm thinking so fast that even Robin would be impressed. I 
try. I try for him.
'K, I say. Even that letter is a monstrous effort.
Good, good, he says, all gentle. He's always gentle when it counts. What else can you 
hear?
Nothing It's all black emptiness, an endless humming that- Wait, I think that's actually the 
refrigerator.
F-F-Fridge. It's hum-humming, I sputter, coming back into myself.
His grip loosens when he notices I'm not fighting and I'm less tense. Anything else?
There is something else. It's faraway, or maybe just quiet. You can kind of hear it all around 
us. How hadn't we noticed it before? It's a sloshing, a winding kind of slosh. Water. Running water. 
It's flowing from somewhere.
W-Water, I say, annoyed at the stutter. We're both quiet for a moment. My breathing's 
slowed down. It's calm. We're okay. I'm okay. I touch Peter's arm and he lifts it. I know I should 
thank him, say something.
That's never happened to me before. I think it comes out a little sheepish, like a sitcom 
character apologizing to their lover. 
Peter shrugs. Yes, well, you've probably never been literally forced to relive a trauma and 
then taunted about it before either. I've seen less cause worse.
Oh yeah, nurse training. I bet he's seen all kinds of crazy stuff. I should ask about it 
sometime. When we're not in the middle of a rescue attempt. I stand, he even offers me a hand up, 
but I shake my head. If I can do something myself, I always try to do it myself. Trying not to let 
what little autonomy I have left slip away.
Still, Peter starts, thoughtful, I'm a little worried.
Yeah, join the club, I say, forcing a laugh that Peter, jerk, doesn't reciprocate. What's on 
your mind?
Well, if the spirit wanted to hurt us, that would have been the perfect opportunity. You were
extremely vulnerable, and I wasn't paying attention to anything else.
That's a good point, actually. Nurse and detective, he's the full package. I dunno. Should we
really be upset that it didn't attack us? Maybe it was just enjoying watching and the chance slipped 
Could... be.
His brow is furrowed. If this were a mystery story, he'd be scratching his chin, lost in 
thought. I guess that makes me Watson. A sidekick in my own life, great.
Well, as long as we're not going to be attacked we might as well press on, right? We'd do it 
regardless of whether we expected a fight or not.
That's true, Peter concedes. Where to next? I'd like to avoid any more unpleasant 
memories if we can.
Upstairs, I think, I say. That's where Robin was when I last saw her. Good as place as any
to start. And, earlier, when you were telling me to listen and I heard water? I think the sound is 
coming from upstairs. We should check it out.
Peter nods and points to the hallway, Let's go.
Chapter 14
The hallway wallpaper used to be green. You can still see uncorrupted patches here and 
there. But most of it's covered in black lines, like water droplets that have been smeared with ink. 
It's even dripped over the family photos, ones that must have contained images of Robin's smiling 
happy family. I wonder if they had any from after her dad Disappeared? Dad and I haven't hung one
up since Mom died. Maybe we should. The stairs are even wetter than the wall. You can see a flow 
of liquid running down them, right down the center. It's pooling at the bottom and the pool branches
off in every direction, through every doorway. Maybe... nah. It can't be that the water has been 
dripping up the walls. Can it? The shiver travels down my back involuntarily. Let's not think about 
that.
Robin? I call up the stairs. Peter shushes me. I roll my eyes. It's overcautious. It's not like
the spirit doesn't know where we are, Peter.
There's no answer from Peter. Or Robin or the spirit, for that matter. No other option left, we
head up the stairs, trying our best to avoid the still flowing river of black sludge. Peter's slyly taken 
the lead again. He hasn't let me go through a door first since we'd entered the hospital. I'm a little 
surprised he hasn't tried to leave me behind and forge on by himself. Just then Amelia makes a peep 
from on my shoulder. She's been unusually quiet, I'd nearly forgotten about her. Wait, she doesn't 
look so good Her colors are less vivid, almost pale, and she's not giving off nearly as much light as 
before. Maybe she's sick. I mean, the air in here is pretty awful, it has this terrible deadness to it. 
The smell isn't so bad, kinda sweet, but it just feels... wrong.
Amelia why don't you wait outside? She peeps and nuzzles against my neck. Doesn't want
to go. Aw, she's so cute. Come on, you've done enough. Go on and rest.
She's still for a moment, but before long she takes off, leaving a shimmering trail behind her.
Peter's waiting for me at the top of the stairs. Well, not 'waiting for me' exactly, he's scouting the 
area. He flicks a switch and the upstairs hallway is illuminated. There's a white door in front of us. 
The stream of black is pretty clearly flowing out of it. I mean, there's no way Robin's in there, right?
Any person in their right mind would stay as far away from this stuff as possible, not hang out 
around its source. But we can't discount the possibility she's in there. Maybe in trouble. She hadn't 
answered my call, after all. Peter's scowling. He's probably thinking along the same lines. He looks 
back at me and I nod. He grips the doorknob. I swallow. He thrusts it open and takes a step back, 
defensive, ready for anything. But there's nothing. Nothing immediately threatening, anyway. That 
was a lot easier than anticipated. I'd thought that at least the door would be locked. It looks like a 
normal bathroom. There's a small, square mirror over a sink that has a cup with two toothbrushes, 
bright pink and black. The black's Robin's, I'm sure. She wouldn't be caught dead with something as
flashy as fluorescent pink. The tub's old, one of those free standing one with four legs that have 
been designed to look like lions paws. No lion's head faucet, though. Guess that would have been a 
little much. Water sloshes out over the side. It's black. Yup, this is definitely the source of all that 
black that's all over the house. 
What the heck is this? I ask. Weird black sludge coming from a bathtub? What are w 
supposed to make of that? Peter swallows thickly, biting his lip.
I think- he hesitates, I think this is the scar.
The scar? The one from your... the dream? I ask. I thought that was in the hospital.
This is the hospital, did you forget? Oh yeah. I kinda did forget. And anyway, I don't 
think it matters what it looks like. It's a dream, so it's probably influenced by whatever's nearby. The
spirit and Robin, in this case.
So it's not water. It's blood. The blood of a world. Man, Teddy really shouldn't have messed 
with dreams like he did. I mean, I'm happy Peter's alive But, still...
Well, should we like, patch it up?
Peter raises an eyebrow, How?
Stitches? A big band-aid? Or maybe we should just bring in a plumber, now that the scar is a
bathtub. I don't know, I'm forced to admit.
Well, Robin's not in here, obviously, Peter says. Let's deal with her before we start 
working on a project to fix the whole world.
I'm feeling... petulant? Like we've seen a homeless man on the side of the road in winter and
our excuse for not helping him is 'Well, he'll probably be here tomorrow'. I know it's more 
complicated than that, but even so. Yeah... I guess.
Let's check out her room next, Peter says. Yeah, that's a good idea. You've been here 
before. Where is it?
Er, left at the top the stairs. So right from here, I say. Here, I'll show you.
Nathan, wait
Really, he's a lot like my dad. Super protective. Sometimes it's cute, but usually it's 
annoying. I'm not some ancient treasure that needs to be handled carefully. I can do things on my 
own Look Peter, I get where you're coming from but, come on Give me some space to freaking 
breathe, okay?
I stalk off before he has a chance to reply. He isn't far behind, but he makes sure to keep 
some distance this time. Whatever, forget about him. There, the door. I jog up and grab the handle, 
looking forward to seeing Robin again after what feels like an eternity. The handle jiggles, but 
doesn't give.
The door's locked, I say to Peter, futilely messing with the handle to get it to open. I give 
up and start banging on the door instead. Robin? Robin are you in there? If you can hear me, say 
something There's a muffle of sound. A voice? Robin Robin, open the door
GO AWAY 
Ow, my ears.
What? Why? I've come to rescue you. We were talking through the bookmark, I thought 
you knew it was me I call through the door.
But how do I know you're you? 
Huh? Oh, the spirit's been messing with her too, apparently. And for a long time. I suddenly 
feel a little nauseous thinking about what she must have gone through. If it was anything like what 
had happened to me downstairs, it would make sense that she's on edge. It's not fair on her, but I 
need to get in that room and she's not letting me. If I have to trick her, then so be it.
Oh, okay, I guess I'll leave, then, I say, stomping my feet loudly and then slowly softening 
my steps so it sounds like I'm walking away from the door. I wait, holding my breath. There's a 
pause. Is she coming to the do-
How stupid do you think I am You're definitely as dumb as the real Nathan. 
Okay, ouch, I say, Even if I was a figment of your imagination, I'd still have feelings.
There's a tap on my shoulder. Peter. He looks... unimpressed with my negotiating skills. 
May I? He asks with practiced neutrality. Alright, fine Mr. Hotshot, let's see you do better. He 
raps twice on the door. Ms. Melling?
Who's that?
My name is Peter Daniels. I'm a police officer.
But- but we've never met before, have we? she says, her voice much softer. I thought the 
monster could only mimic people from my memories... she sounds thoughtful, No I'm not going 
to be fooled. Maybe we met somewhere and I just don't remember. Or, or, maybe it can take the 
form of the people it made Disappear
Oh. She's figured out what's happening to her. That's impressive, considering she's been 
trapped in this house the whole time. Well, it's not all that surprising. It is Robin, after all. 
Peter's nodding, That's true. You shouldn't open the door until you feel certain you can trust
us. What Don't say that Robin is like the least trusting person in the world, she'll never let us in 
now. Now, can I ask how you've managed to keep yourself safe from the spirit? The, ah, monster? 
And before you say no, may I point out that the monster would already know how you've done it? 
Telling me won't impact your situation negatively.
He's speaking awfully formally all of a sudden. That's how he spoke during our interviews, 
now that I think about it. Dad always went for a warmer sort of vibe. I wonder if they teach you 
interrogation personas at the academy. We wait a few moments for Robin's response.
It's my bookmark, the one my dad made for me. Nathan handed it to me before we got 
separated. It repels the shadow, but I'm not sure why, yet. Her voice is much closer, she's standing 
in front of the door now, I can tell. It's a little muffled, but we can basically speak normally. It 
couldn't touch me while I had it. Eventually I just stuck it to the door and it hasn't been able to 
bother me since.
Whoa, smart. That's, like, barrier magic. Teddy had said that his soul or whatever repelled 
the spirit like a magnet. I hadn't figured that out until he'd mentioned it and Robin had managed to 
do it with considerably less resources. If she hadn't, then- no, don't think about that. She's here. We 
can still save her. Assuming Peter gets us through that door.
Okay, okay, good. In other words, the spirit can't mess with the bookmark, right? Peter 
says. I need you to send a message. The same way you did with Nathan.
Send a message? To who?
Me and Nathan are asleep. There's someone watching over us. He has the bookmark, the 
physical one, I mean. There's one for each plane of existence. She's quiet for a long while. Ms. 
Melling, you've sent a couple of messages already. Nothing about your safety or anything else will 
change if you send another, right? They didn't last time.
There's a clunk. Robin? I say. She sighs. Oh, I recognize that one. She's exasperated. Not 
surprising, she hates changing her mind.
What's the message.
Show me your eye. An actual eye will appear on the surface of the bookmark, Peter says. 
Oh So that's what he's up to. That's clever; I never would have thought to do that. Not that I'll say 
so in front of these two, they'd just tease me.
'Show me your eye', she says, slowly, making sure to get the words right. Another silence. 
She gasps, then- Ugh, that's so gross.
You can see it, right? Peter's saying. There's no way the monster could have known about
our contact in the real world or that that phrase would make an eye appear. So we have to be telling 
the truth It really is Nathan and a friend.
I shiver, feel the weight of something on my back. I turn around.
Um, Peter...? 
It's there. The shadow man. Or, a man cloaked in darkness. Because even though the hallway
is bright, we've definitely turned on the lights, I can't make him out. That side of the hallway is 
completely black. I can only see a man-like silhouette. Peter curses.
Ms. Melling, decisive action would be appreciated Peter says, banging on the door. When
it doesn't open immediately, he shoves me behind him, slamming me into the door, leaning on me 
hard, making sure to stand between me and it. It's laughing; I can hear the cruelty in its tone. This is 
it. It's going to kill us
Robin, please I scream, even as both Peter and I lean harder against the door, trying to 
phase through the wood. It's nearly on us, about to kill us both. That's what I'm thinking, when the 
door clicks, every bit as joyful a sound as an angel's trumpet. It's a little less joyful when we both 
fall through the door and straight backwards as soon as it's open. Something soft cushions my fall, 
but I don't have time to wonder what. Peter's literally falling on top of me. We'd been pressed 
together pretty tight, putting a lot of momentum into the no longer closed door. With it gone we'd 
both flown through. It's like some strong force launched us into Robin. Peter's elbow cracks into my
stomach, knocking the wind out of me. I think I knee Robin in the thigh. I'm coughing so much I 
can barely think. Luckily, even though she's also lost her balance and is tangled up with me, she 
hasn't been hit too hard. She still has her wits.
The door she cries.
Peter's on it, up in a flash, slamming it and immediately getting blasted backwards, like the 
spirit's pushed him. I hadn't seen it, but it must have been there, there's no other reason for Peter to 
go flying like that. My vision must be messed up from the tumble, but it's unsettling. The shadow 
man had been right behind us, I'm sure of it, but I hadn't seen it in the instant before the door closed.
I want to check on Robin, but I can't do much more than cough. There's a hand on my back, rubbing
gently. I want it to be Robin, but I'm pretty sure it's Peter. The nurse can't help himself, after all. I 
stand. We're not where I'd expected.
We're on the edge of a clearing, on all sides of us is a forest. Thick pine trees form a ring 
around the clearing, with smaller bushes laden with red berries filling the gaps between the trees. 
There's juniper, yes, but nightshade and raspberries too. Do raspberries even grow in the winter? 
Better not eat anything, just in case. My stomach growls, displeased. I haven't eaten anything 
substantial for practically a whole day. No time. The smell of pine is thick. The clearing is probably 
a meadow in the spring and summer, but it's barren now. There's a sense of emotion here too, like 
the other memories. Joy, so much that it feels unnatural, synthetic. Kind of like the memories in the 
kitchen. But no little vignette is playing in front of me. Memory or not? It feels like a halfway point 
between memory and dream. In the center is the door we'd just collapsed through. It's standing free, 
just like the one from the hospital to Robin's house. And there, taped to the center is the bookmark, 
just like she'd said. It's glowing faintly, like Amelia when she was sick. A gentle snowfall is slowly 
building on what's already on the ground. Judging from how deep it is, up past my ankles, it's 
probably been falling for awhile. Ah. That's what broke my fall. Robin's a couple of yards away, 
having backed away from the door. I trip and fall face first into the snow. It's all over my hair and 
face. I don't care. I get closer, I have to see her, how she is. She crosses her arms over her chest, 
defensive. Okay, no hug, then.
 One of her glasses lenses is cracked, that's the first thing I notice. Her hair is somehow both 
frayed and wet. She's in her usual librarian style clothes, but they've seen better days. Huge patches 
are covered in mud, some parts are dissolved. She's wearing tights, or she was. They're pretty much 
just one big run now. Her skin is pale, no, a worse word, pallid. Peter is pale. This is sickly. Poor 
Robin, it must have been hell. But I can see puffs of white air coming from her mouth as she 
breathes. She's alive. I can barely keep the smile off my face. Has it really only been a few days? It 
feels like it's been weeks since I've seen her. I want to crush her into me, hold her tight and reassure 
myself that she's really here. That same warm feeling in my chest, the same need to impress her that
makes me act like a fool against my better judgment, is still there. There's so much I want to say. I 
missed you. Did you miss me? 
I'm Peter Daniels, Peter interrupts. Oh. I'd almost forgotten he was there. He's smiling, but
it's tight, professional. It's nice to meet you after hearing so much about you.
Robin raises an eyebrow at me and I shrug. It's not like I said anything bad. She lets out one 
of her classic sighs and shakes Peter's outstretched hand. He shakes her hand once, then lets go. He 
seems unfocused, dazed even. It's not like him. He's staring at the ground like he can't bear to meet 
our eyes. What's his problem? I'm so relieved to see her, I forget to be annoyed. 
Robin Melling. Okay, so what's the plan? She asks. There's a pause. She pinches the 
bridge of her nose. This time it does annoy me a little. You idiots don't have one. Of course you 
don't.
Look, I'm not expecting you to throw a party for me or anything, but I did sort of put my 
life at risk to save you so maybe you could stop calling me stupid to my face
Well you are stupid Instead of just me being trapped here, it's all three of us. 
Her scream echoes across the empty, frozen meadow. She starts pacing. 
I knew you liked me. I should have discouraged you, turned you down, but I didn't. I didn't 
hate the attention. And it would've been too much trouble to deal with your hurt puppy dog eyes. 
And now, because I didn't- Oh God. You're going to Disappear with me. I've killed you.
Her shoulders shake as she turns away. She's trying to stay quiet, but it's pretty hard to hide 
crying in the complete silence of the meadow. I've been blaming myself for getting her into this, and
now she's doing the exact same thing. But she's wrong, it's not her fault at all It's... mine... isn't it? 
Robin's being really self-absorbed and unreasonable, putting all the blame on herself when it's not 
even remotely her fault. Face to face with her, it's hard not to see the parallels to myself. I blame 
myself for the spirit taking her, sure, but I still think the accident's my fault too. Even though I'd 
heard the story about Teddy and Peter. And I'd blamed myself for every little bad thing that had 
happened to my family ever since. Even when it's pretty obvious that Dad isn't holding any grudges.
He loves me. If Robin's words hurt this much, then I must be hurting the people around me twice as 
much as I'm hurting myself.
Iris had said that I should be careful with my attempts to save Robin. That trying to help 
doesn't always end positively. I mean, she's living proof of that herself. I didn't get it then, didn't 
care to get it. There's a burning, prickly sensation in my nose that spreads to my eyes. Who have I 
been kidding? I'd done everything for her, just to impress her, in the hope that she'd come to like me
as much as I like her. A small couple of tears sink from my face into the snow. I'm so uncool. So 
lame I've been so selfish. Who- I mean who thinks like that? It's borderline psychotic. And I'm 
going to die for it. I'll deserve it. I-I- 
Who says we don't have a plan? Peter says. The meadow feels like it stops. Me and Robin 
turn to stare at him. What- What's that look on his face? He's- he's smiling so gently. He's always 
been gentle, but every time he's smiled it's been, like, a smirk, or a grin. I've never seen him like 
this. But even still, it's a horrible face. Absolutely terrible. Because he's got Mona Lisa eyes. Eyes 
that you think might burst into tears the second you look away.
Do you really? Robin says, suspicious but with an undercurrent of hope. 
Peter nods. I'm not buying it, Peter. You're hiding something. Robin's buying it, though. 
She's desperate to buy it. 
But I'm worried about something.
What's that? Robin asks, perking up at the thought of something she can worry about. The 
girl loves a good worry.
Why we made it here in the first place. It could have attacked us at any point while we 
were looking for you. In the hallway, for example, it waited until Nathan saw it to attack. And it 
only attacked us psychologically in the kitchen. Why?
I'm stumped, but at least I'm not alone because Robin looks puzzled too. I'm guessing you 
have a theory? Robin asks.
Peter's face scrunches, Well, I could be wrong, but it felt like it was herding us. Driving us 
here, you know, like it wanted us to find Robin. I think it expects us to try to leave and take Robin 
with us. As a way of breaking their deadlock. It thinks the bookmark can't protect all of us. And it 
might be right.
Is it? I stare at the bookmark, taped to the door. Looking at it... it's different from the one in 
the real world. Ours doesn't glow, obviously. But- something nags at me. Something's changed since
the last time I saw it; I take a few steps towards it. Peter's watching the two of us, observing. He's 
holding himself tight, like he expects to have to run at any minute.
Well, that's a little unsettling, but it doesn't really change anything, does it? Robin's 
saying. Both groups achieved their short term goals. We still need to leave and it still doesn't want 
us to, whether it was planned or not.
That's true, Peter replies. I'm barely listening. I'm no good at that kind of analysis anyway. 
But noticing little details; I can do that. Okay, mostly about people close to me, like Dad or Robin 
or Peter, but still. Once I notice something I'm not the kind of person who can ignore it. Our 
bookmark is crisp white, shiny, though not shining. This one's dull. Kinda grey-ish. Why?
Oh, while we're on the subject. What the heck are these bookmarks? I have a super clear 
memory of my dad giving it to me, but the shadow pointed out some inconsistencies that I can't 
figure out. I- I had kind of thought he was protecting me. Watching over me, you know? She 
laughs, the tone is just a little too high pitched, I guess that was silly.
Peter sighs, on the hook for Teddy's meddling yet again. He'd explained how the bookmarks 
work, but it's hard to explain. At the moment, I'm more interested in the bookmark in front of me.
I don't think it's silly. Anyone would have thought something similar. I had some questions 
for you too, actually, Peter says, neatly sidestepping Robin's question about the nature of the 
bookmark. Yeah. Don't know how we're going to explain that one. Isn't this supposed to be your 
bedroom?
Oh, Robin says, the monster can change the architecture in the house how it wants. It 
used this clearing to try to trick me. I used to come here with my dad when I was little... Um, 
Nathan, what are you doing?
I'm touching the bookmark, rubbing it between my fingers. It's wet, the ink looks stained. 
Look at this. I think the bookmark's weakening.
What? Robin and Peter say in unison. Robin rushes over, but Peter keeps his distance 
from us. He's being weird, but it's not like I have time to hassle him about it. Robin shoulder barges 
me to get a better view. She touches it.
See? I say. Isn't it less bright than when I first gave it to you? It's definitely fading, like 
Amelia was earlier.
Who's Amelia?
My spirit animal. She's a rainbow swallow. Robin stares at me, thinking. What?
You used to go on and on about Amelia Earhart.
That was one time I mean, she vanished into- Never mind. The point is, I don't think we 
have a lot of time. I'm guessing something about this place or the spirit, is inherently corrupting. 
Peter, what should we do? His hand is over his mouth and he's staring at the ground again. It's not 
like him. He's supposed to be assured, take situations by the horns and figure out what to do. His 
behavior's starting to scare me. Peter, what's wrong? 
Huh? Oh Nothing, Nathan. Sorry. 
He's not very convincing. 
Given that our barrier is breaking down, we should make use of it while we can. Let's use it
to make a run for it.
That's your plan? Robin scoffs. I might have scoffed myself if she hadn't gotten there first.
It's not a very elaborate tactic.
Hey, just because it's simple, doesn't make it a bad plan, Peter says. This isn't Scooby-
Doo; the ghost isn't just a guy in a costume we can capture with a trap. Call it a tactical retreat if 
that makes you feel better. 
Okay but, assuming that we make it out of here alive and back to the real world, what's to 
stop the shadow from just coming after us again? Robin asks. It's a good point.
I have an idea about that, but we'll need to coordinate with Teddy.
Why would we need to- Oh I see. That's... an idea.
Are you sure that'll work? The bookmarks exist in two different worlds. Is there even a 
physical space between them?
That's one thing I want to ask Teddy. He'll know best.
What the heck are you guys talking about? Who's this Teddy? And 'bookmarks'? As in 
plural? Ah, right. Robin doesn't have the same information of us. She's normally so far ahead of 
me that it's kind of sad, but she's been basically fighting for her life this whole time. It's no wonder 
theoretical concepts we'd had explained to us aren't making sense to her.
Well, I'm simplifying here, but there's a bookmark here and in the real world. Peter's saying
that both bookmarks create barriers that repel the spirit. They're basically movable walls. He wants 
to smash the two walls together with the spirit in-between. If I have that right, Peter?
Yes, exactly, Peter confirms.
Robin looks between the two of us. She's probably wildly uncomfortable with being the least
knowledgeable person in the room. 
Just... trust us. Please.
We lock eyes. I try to communicate something to her. Sincerity or maybe faith. If Peter says 
something's the best plan, it usually is. This is what's best for now. She finally nods, a tiny motion, 
after a minute of tense silence. 
Okay, then, Peter says, taking charge. I'm happy to let him, but Robin's clearly 
uncomfortable relinquishing control, if the spirit's after Robin, I think Nathan should take the 
bookmark and lead, followed by Robin, then me. Keep her protected, yeah?
Peter wants me to go through the door first? After he spent the whole first half of this little 
expedition acting like a nervous parent, checking every door before I walked through? No. This is 
ridiculous He's definitely hiding something. But I don't know what it is and I can't call him out 
after I just told Robin to trust us. She's quirked her eyebrows, sensing my hesitancy. I grab the 
bookmark and rip it off the door. Neither Robin or Peter are looking at me. They're both lost in 
thought. I guess the both of them are thinkers at heart. They like to take their time and consider 
every possible angle. I'm a do-er. Well, before the accident I was. Not sure now.
Are you guys ready?
Peter's head snaps up and he nods.
Oh, yeah, Robin says, just figuring some things out. Let's go.
She turns the door handle slowly. There's a series of impossibly loud clicks as its 
mechanisms go into motion. They weren't always this loud, were they? She pushes the door. 
Chapter 15
The door doesn't open too far, but it's enough to see into the hallway. There's nothing there. 
Well, no spirit. It's a little dark, but I can just make out the end. It's not here for the moment. 
What are you figuring out? I ask as the three of us tread carefully through the door. It goes
me, holding the bookmark out like a totem, which I guess it is, then followed closely by Robin, who
would probably be holding on to my shirt or something if she had less pride, and finally Peter. He's 
some distance away. A couple of feet. Seems risky. We don't know how far the barrier extends. It's 
probably not very far at all. 
The spirit's goal. Like, why is it bothering to make people Disappear and play with their 
minds and all that?
I thought for moment. That's a good question. Well, I thought it was its nature. Like it had 
always messed with people but it'd gotten way more effective recently... for some reason. Me and 
Peter know the reason but we haven't told Robin yet. Now's really not the time.
I think it's a means to an end. I think it wants to come to the real world.
What makes you think that? I ask.
She hums, taking a moment to arrange her thoughts. We're moving at a snail's pace. This 
isn't how I imagined we'd be 'making a run for it' but it's dark and creepy in this house and I don't 
want to run into any traps. But we've encountered very little resistance the whole time we've been 
here, mind games aside. It's putting me on edge.
Some things that were said to me while it was trying to trick me; I think when it takes 
people it experiences life like humans do. Emotions, hunger, pain, pleasure. Things like that. But 
obviously the connection doesn't last long. You've seen what that black stuff does, imagine what it 
does to your heart or kidneys. 
Robin and I reach the staircase and start down, Peter's straggling, staring at something 
behind us. The spirit? No, he'd raise the alarm.
What are you saying Robin?
I'm just theorizing, but maybe it doesn't want to hurt us, it wants to come with us.
Before I can answer, a door creaks open. Robin and I turn, slowly. Peter's standing in front 
of the bathroom; the door is swaying slightly, opening wider. He's leaning forward, like he'd like to 
take a step towards it, but he's not. He's just... leaning. 
Dammit, he says. Dammit
Officer Daniels? Robin calls, clearly afraid to go up to him. I don't blame her. It's really, 
really ominous. He doesn't answer. I'm too afraid to ask anything. This is related to what he's been 
acting weird about. I don't think I want to know. She tries again. What's wrong?
His shoulders are shaking, he draws in a deep, steadying breath, and then breathes out, 
sounding shuddery. Robin gasps and elbows me in the shoulder, pointing to his feet. It's only 
noticeable because we're on the stairs and he's not, but there's ink on his shoes. A black oily looking 
substance that- It's moving. It's moving up his leg, fast. That can only mean one thing.
How long have you known? I ask.
He glances over his shoulder at me. His face is red, straining with effort. It's not that he 
won't turn around, it's that he can't. Or is desperately fighting not to.
I, he winces as the sludge touches the skin of his ankles, figured it out pretty soon after 
the door sent me flying when I closed it.
Robin adjusts her glasses. Because the bookmark repels the monster and the monster had 
attached itself to you.
Yes. That's right, Ms. Melling. Nathan's right to credit your intelligence. 
In any other situation I'd probably blush, but I can feel the blood draining from my face. 
And then I noticed I had two shadows. And that one was darker than the other. Not hard to 
put it together after that. So I thought of a plan to kill it, but it noticed what I was doing when I 
opened the bathroom door. It won't be long until it takes me over. I can't feel my legs. I'm sorry, 
Nathan. I'm so sorry
Is- he's not crying, right? His sorries come out so watery. Peter's like the stoic, all-American 
hero type. He can't be crying because if he's crying, then-
I-It's okay, it's not your fault. We just gotta figure this out. I mean we can figure it out, can't 
we? Robin puts her hand on my shoulder. Her eyes are shining. No, I don't want that I shake her 
hand off. The bookmark If we use the bookmark we can-
Nathan, Robin says, shaking her head. The bookmark's weak. Unless I'm mistaken it'll 
just push Officer Daniels away from it, like when it blew him away from the door.
I think you're right again, Ms. Melling.
Stop acting like you aren't scared Then- then- I don't know This is usually the part 
where one of them would have an idea.
What was your real plan? The one to destroy the monster?
There's a silence. Robin's question hangs in the air, gathering power with every second it's 
not answered. All answers are like that. The longer between question and answer, the more 
magnitude it has. I wish he'd answer quickly. I wish he was able to answer quickly. His eventual 
answer is hesitant, unlike him.
I need you, Nathan. Something's odd about his voice. It's echoing. 
Of course. Anything Just tell me.
Robin winces. Can't meet my eyes anymore. What? What am I missing?
I... need you to use the bookmark to push me, us, into the scar. Back where we both came 
from. 
No. The response is instant. I've never processed anything so quickly, but you don't need a
lot of thinking time when the answer's so obvious. Obviously I'm not doing that.
Nathan-
I said no That could kill you
Yes. He admits, saying it like it's nothing. It's not nothing to me. But I already died, 
Nathan. I shouldn't be here, you know that. Both me and the spirit are like an infection. We're 
corrosive to the world. We're breaking both dreams and reality down.
That's the spirit That has nothing to do with you
If that was true before, it's definitely not true now, he says, finally turning to us. It's my 
turn to gasp. His clothes are soaking wet, covered in the black ink of the spirit. Droplets fall from 
his fingertips like they can make rain. One eye is black and soulless, alien. The other is quickly 
darkening. And his voice is definitely echoing. His is still there but it's sounding weaker, while the 
deeper, darker voice gains strength. He doesn't have long.
Please, Nathan. I don't want to die like the Disappeared did. It must be an awful way to go. 
Already I can't see very well. And I'm in a lot of pain and it's getting worse. 
My hand shakes and my eyes burn. I hold the bookmark forward and step onto the landing, 
Robin right behind me. This pushes him back into the bathroom. The spirit fights every step. Its 
movement is jerky, Peter's steps backwards unnatural. He's close to the tub. He's smiling; the freak 
is smiling How can he smile in a situation like this? I'm about to kill him It won't take much to... 
to end it. If he gets possessed, he'll live for awhile, won't he? Me and Robin, Teddy, and Iris can 
regroup, figure this out, get back to dreams and save him, right? We don't have to kill him. He can 
sense me hesitating. 
Nathan I know you want to believe there's another way, but there isn't. I should never have
come back. This is the way it was always meant to go. Do it now 
Peter, I can't 
He probably thinks I mean 'won't' instead of 'can't', but I really can't, my arm is shaking and 
my knees are locked ramrod straight. Please. Please don't make me do this
He smiles, a genuine smile. He's grateful. That I can't kill him, like he didn't expect that to 
be the case. How could he think otherwise? How dare he think I'd feel any other way about him A 
hand closes around my wrist. Robin. Her face is set, grimly. Determined. She looks at me, clear-
eyed, steeled, like an incarnation of Artemis, the Huntress. She lends me her strength, her 
determination to do what we have to. I draw something up from deep inside me. Courage, the self-
preservation instinct, or love, I don't know what. But it gives me the strength to nod at her. She grips
my wrist tighter. And together we thrust the bookmark forward, even as the black tries to move 
Peter's body towards us. We step forward, forcing him back. Robin had been right; the bookmark's 
light isn't strong enough to banish the spirit from his body. Peter must have realized that when I 
figured out the bookmark had lost strength. That's when he came up with his 'tactical retreat' plan. 
He was planning on throwing himself into the scar. He'd have killed himself to save the world. 
Maybe he did it for me and Robin. Or maybe he did it out of guilt for his role in the 
Disappearances. I'll never have the chance to ask. 
Peter... I'm crying and can't say anything more. Hell, I can barely see through my tears. 
Robin's trembling. He nods. I think he heard what I was trying to say. I hope so. 
Together, we take that final step and Peter mirrors us, legs hitting the lip of the tub, hard. He 
winces. His balance is off kilter. Instinctively, he tries to right himself, but he can't. The bookmark's 
basically a wall, like we said. There's nowhere for him to go but backwards. He falls in. It's... anti-
climactic. There isn't a big splash. There's no thrashing. No tortured cries from Peter or the spirit. 
He just... slips away with a small sploosh. And then it's quiet, like he never existed in the first place.
We wait there for awhile, me sitting on the toilet seat and Robin standing in the doorway. 
She clearly wants to say something but doesn't know what. I'm not sure if we're waiting for me to 
get over my shock or on the slim chance that Peter comes back. But he doesn't, the tub doesn't make
so much as a gurgle. Except that it's stopped overflowing. Bleeding. Like it's finally getting a 
chance to heal. Maybe Peter had been right after all. Forgive me if I can't be happy about it. Time 
breathes. Are we there for an hour or five minutes? I don't know, but eventually I feel a tugging. A 
brightness in my chest. My hand goes to it automatically.
Nathan? What's wrong? It's the first I've moved since I sat down, no wonder she's 
concerned. I'm not sure how to answer her, I don't really know what's going on- Ah The tugging 
gets stronger and the room starts to melt away. 
I think I'm waking up.
You are? What about me
Here, I say, standing up and grabbing her hands and putting them around my waist, hold 
tight. Hopefully we'll go together. No promises, though.
It's all mechanical, forced. Very little emotion seeps into my voice. An hour ago, nothing 
would have thrilled me more than this. But it all feels empty without Peter. Her arms might as well 
be lead, not warm flesh and it feels like there's a thick sheet of it between her heart and mine. The 
tugging gets stronger and stronger and I press her into my chest. After all this, it's not like I can risk 
leaving her behind. But, yeah, I'm definitely going through the motions. I'm not really feeling it. 
Her. She grips me tight and presses her face in close. The colors swirl together more and more, 
blending into a bright white light that envelops us.
Chapter 16
I woke staring at a white ceiling, arms curved, folded over themselves in an empty hug. The 
dull pain that my scars always sent through my body had come back. It was bright, stingingly so. 
The curtains were drawn. What kinds of birds were those chirping in the distance? I wasn't sure. 
Definitely not swallows, I would have recognized Amelia-like squawks. I threw my arms over my 
eyes, trying to shut out the world. I wanted to turn over and have Peter lying there next to me. I 
turned, then chanced opening my eyes. Nothing. A sniffle came from behind me, making me jump. 
It was Teddy. He was sitting in a chair, the eye that was uncovered by the patch was red and both 
cheeks were wet. Snot was dribbling down his nose which he was trying to stem with his sleeve. 
I felt him go, Teddy said.I brought him back. I can always tell where he is, if I reach out 
for him. Always. And now he's... nowhere. He's gone, isn't he?
I nodded stiffly. He went through the scar with the spirit. There was an aching emptiness 
in my heart, sucking away at everything, making the world gray and flat. Just recently it had felt 
like I'd seen colors brighter and more vibrant than any rainbow, flaming red hair, glowing swallows,
Teddy's eye. That was all gone. It was all... normal, I guess, but it felt like being color-blind. Maybe 
it was a side-effect of the scar healing. But who cares? Peter won't come back. Maybe I managed to 
save Robin, but- Wait Had I even saved her? If I failed at that too-
Where's Robin? I was trying to bring her with me.
He looked confused, like he couldn't remember who she was for a moment. The person we'd
done all this for. Well, the person I'd done it for. I was pretty sure Teddy had done it for Peter. To 
make up for the Disappearances? To look heroic in front of him? Then he frowned, closed his eye as
if listening for something.
Ms. Melling... isn't in dreams. I don't think so at least, Teddy said. If I had to guess, she 
probably woke up where she Disappeared. Why don't you call her? I bet she's confused... yeah, you 
call her and I'll- I guess I'll get you something to eat. You've been asleep for more than twelve 
hours, after all. What was it about his commitment to domesticity that suddenly seemed so 
horrifying?
I got through half a ring before- Nathan? Thank the spirits of heaven and earth or 
whatever it is shamans pray to. At least she'd made it. At least her. It didn't matter if she'd never like 
me back. I couldn't even begin to care about that. 
Yeah, it's me. Are you okay? Where are you?
I'm fine. Famished, though. I'm in the alleyway, the one with the graffiti. I think I startled a 
cat.
You what?
When I woke up there was this yowling. I must have just materialized suddenly and 
surprised it. I wonder if I made a sound? That's like Robin, try to analyze the event, break it down. 
She'd be fine. What about you, are you okay?
I'm fine. The tone was disastrously flat, so I tried again, I'm fine
It sounded like I was practicing in a mirror. Not convincing. Peter was- He's- Teddy couldn't 
even sense him. 'Dead' or 'gone' at the end of the day, they meant the same thing. I wanted to see 
him, talk to him, have him tease me. I know Peter had thought he was an idealized copy of the real 
Peter, but the Peter I met was real, he was my friend and I never even told him that. My head hurt 
and I felt tired. Sleeping too long in a drug-induced coma will do that to you. I missed something 
Robin was saying.
I'm sorry, say that again?
I asked what you're going to do.
Oh. The thought hadn't crossed my mind. It was hard enough getting through each 
moment, like being stuck in an iron maiden, let alone planning the future. Well, what are you going
to do?
I'm going home. My mom's probably attempting to mobilize the army to aid the search 
effort as we speak. A joke. I was supposed to laugh, but I didn't. It created an uncomfortable 
moment between us. She could still joke because she hadn't known him. There was very little 
connecting them and it wasn't surprising she couldn't hold him in her heart the way I could. But it 
was still hard not to hold it against her. He'd gone to save her, after all. A little gratitude wouldn't 
hurt. I turned to the window. The sunlight hurt my eyes, so I leaned back on the pillow and closed 
them. Anyway, I'm trying to come up with a good excuse for why I've been gone.
Whatcha got so far? I asked.
I'm thinking I'll tell my mom I ran away from home. Too much pressure from college 
applications. Pretty good, right? she said, sounding pleased with herself.
Honestly, it's pretty bad, Robin. Unusually harsh for me in general, but especially towards 
Is...it? She said, trying to navigate my tone. I felt a flicker of guilt, so I softened my reply. 
Yeah, cause you were a Disappearance victim. You don't have to convince your mom, 
you've got to convince the police department. If you say you ran away from home they'll want to 
know where, for how long, who saw you, what you did, everything. You'll slip up somewhere and 
then it'll just blow up into this huge thing.
I suppose you're right. Any advice, Mr. Experienced Liar?
I was. To Dad, myself, just about everyone now. I didn't feel like lying to Peter. Well, not by 
the end. I wanted him to know the truth of me and I wanted to know him in turn.
Just tell them you can't remember anything. You were there one minute then next thing you 
know, a few days later, you're back. It's basically just a heavily cut down version of the truth. No 
details to get tripped up on.
I guess that works.
I thought about offering to go with her. Walk her through everything, keeping the story on 
track, but my presence would just raise questions, it'd be too coincidental that we were together. 
Anyway, she was smart, she'd be fine as long as she stuck to the story and didn't pull anyone for the 
interview like Peter- like Dad, who could smell a liar a mile off. A loud thump came from outside 
the room. Instinctively I looked, but the door was shut.
Look, Robin I've gotta go. I need to face my own parental firing squad.
She laughed, just a little. Sure. See you at Talisman?
I frowned. Right, work. Peter's presence would linger there for me. I wasn't sure I was ready 
to go back to where we'd spent such an intense time together. I'm no doctor, but even I could tell my
emotions were muted. I think most people would expect me to be wailing and tearing at my clothes 
like an ancient Greek widow, given I could be emotional at the best of times. It was shock, 
obviously. It was pretty lucky it hadn't triggered a second panic attack. 
Yeah, probably. There was another thump. I hung up, letting that last comment serve as a 
'goodbye'. Me and Robin. Not sure where we stood, but I could hardly think about that. There 
again Another thump. Curiosity had not been my friend lately, but I couldn't help it. I shivered at 
seeing the hallway. It was built in the same style as Robin's dream house. The stairs cut through the 
middle of the floor and divided it into wings. At least this one was brightly lit. And wasn't the home 
of an insane spirit. Teddy?
No reply. But nothing seemed amiss. I mean, if Teddy hadn't made the sound then there's 
only one place it could have come from. Iris' room. I took two steps towards the door to her 
bedroom and- Bang That had been loud, something falling. If it wasn't her, then something was in 
there causing a heck of a racket. Okay, no time for hesitation. It wasn't a dream, it was the real 
world. Peter would have already leapt into action; I could honor his memory by doing at least that 
much I ran for the door and opened it, proud of my barely trembling fingers. The courage was 
weak and temporary, I was already regretting my haste as I turned the knob, but it was too late to 
back down.
Nathan? Teddy's voice floated from downstairs. He sounded concerned, but I ignored him.
There she was, gaunt and emaciated, gray skin and waxy black hair, pale lips with very little color 
left in them. Her eyes narrowed and unfocused. It had been some medical equipment that had fallen 
over. She must have disturbed it somehow when she woke up. Iris had been in her dream coma for a
long time and hadn't woken up. But all of a sudden- Peter. His sacrifice. He'd been right, it really 
was starting to heal the world. Finally Iris' soul and her body could reunite.
Iris?
Her eyes snapped to me. Her head lolled a little. No surprise, her muscles must have been 
incredibly weak, even with great physical therapy. Trust me, I knew.
Nat-? Ship-? She gurgled. It wasn't much, but it was something. People don't just suddenly
wake up from comas and then everything's fine. It can take weeks to get on a normal sleep/wake 
cycle, and then months or years of speech or physical therapy on top of that to fully recover. Some 
never did, especially in severe cases like Iris'. She laid back down and closed her eyes. I called to 
her and her eyes fluttered but didn't open. 
Iris I had no idea if that was normal. Could she be having a seizure or something? 
Teddy Teddy, up here, in Iris' room
There was a crash and a series of thumps as Teddy raced up the stairs and down the hall. He 
all but shoved me out of the way in order to get to her side as quickly as possible. He righted the 
equipment that had fallen and began checking her vitals, asking me questions. What happened? 
Well, what did she say? You called out to her? How did she react? It went on like that for 
awhile. Eventually he said that he needed to call an ambulance and get her to a real hospital, which 
I agreed was probably the best thing for her. Hopefully she'd come all the way back. Teddy strongly 
hinted that it would be better if I wasn't here when the paramedics arrived. I mean, he was right, it 
was true I'd only add to the confusion, but... first Robin in the alleyway, and then Iris' house. It 
seemed like there was no shortage of places where it'd be better if I wasn't. Were there any places 
that would be better if I was there? I couldn't think of any. Maybe home, if only to delay Dad's 
impending coronary. When Robin resurfaced, he was going to hear about it pretty fast. If she came 
back and he didn't know where I was, he'd go into panic mode for sure. I probably should have 
called him, let him know I was okay. But... I don't know. He would have come picked me up. 
Insisted. And I wanted the walk to myself.
We'd done it. We'd saved Robin. I could see her frowning and spouting off interesting facts 
and smiling (rarely) anytime I wanted (within reason). Not only that, but Peter had taken the spirit 
down with him, so he'd prevented who knows how many deaths. Countless. And on top of all that, 
it'd brought Iris back from her half-death. All things considered, I'd gotten more than what I'd set 
out for. And the only price that had been paid was Peter. A man who shouldn't have even been alive;
who himself believed didn't have a right to exist.
The weather was still hot. I bet some lazy reporter had called it heatwave to add some drama
to the forecast, even though it was just normal summer sun. I tried to empty my mind, focus on my 
steps, putting one foot in front of the other, trying it ignore the sweat as it started to pour out form 
my skin and irritate my scars. The dream world had been scary, sure, but at least there weren't scars 
there. It worked a little too well. It was a surprise when I almost bumped headfirst into my own 
house. Muscle memory, I guessed. 
My hand hesitated over my front doorknob. Dad would be waiting inside. Probably should 
have spent some of that walk thinking of an explanation. An excuse, at least. I wondered for a 
second if Dad would slap handcuffs on me and toss me into jail so he'd be able to keep track of me. 
I let myself smile, just a little. I'd made things tough on him in the last few days. The last few years. 
I'd have to apologize. A lot. And maybe tell him about Peter. In vague terms, obviously.
Hello? I called, the door creaking.
Nathan?
Dad rounded the corner from the kitchen, still holding a drying towel, which he promptly 
dropped when he saw me.
Dad... the voice came out watery. Dad practically sprinted at me, instantly wrapping me in
his arms. I hugged back. Lightly at first, so hard my side started protesting the pressure. I ignored it.
If it knocked me to the ground, so be it. I was having this. He was shaking. Just enough for it to be 
perceptible. Dad.
Nathan, he said with a deep relief, like he was Atlas finally having the world lifted off his 
shoulders. Oh son. You know I love you, right?
I'd always known that. I wanted to tell him that I'd always known, that it was blindingly 
obvious. This was just the first time since the accident I'd let myself FEEL it. The words stuck in 
my throat, though, so I just nodded. 
I cried. I cried for Mom, Teddy, Iris, Robin, myself, and Peter. It lasted a long time. I think I 
might have tried to tell Dad about Peter, but it came out unintelligible. I got frustrated, which just 
made me cry harder, but he just shushed me and patted my head, tightening his grip a little, which I 
hadn't thought possible.
Man, what a crybaby, definitely got that from Mom; Dad had been the stoic one. I tried 
really hard to accept what he was giving me, his sad smile, his unconditional love, without 
expectation. And when that didn't feel bad, when it actually felt incredible, I tried, a little bit, just 
for a moment, to believe that I deserved it. 
Robin, Nathan, and Peter
Two weeks after everything happened, the bell chimed and like Pavlov's dog, my head 
snapped from the book I was appraising to the door. I was already chastising myself when my brain 
registered who it was.
Hey Robin, he said, shifting his feet, looking uncomfortable.
Nathan looked okay, actually. Better than I expected. Maybe a little paler than usual, but it 
didn't seem like he'd stopped eating or anything. But I recognized the cloud that hung over him. It's 
the same one my family had. An afterimage of death. Happened when you lose someone close to 
you. Something shifts and those with it recognize others of their kind. He was wearing an orange t-
shirt, brown shorts and sandals. I'd never seen him wear sandals before. He caught me staring and 
tried to hide one foot behind the other. It was cute. My heart started beating. Fast. Was I anxious 
because I hadn't seen him in awhile and we had a lot to talk about?
My muscle coordination on my left side isn't so good, so sandals are kind of hard to wear. 
But it's too hot for anything else today, he explained.
Okay, big revelation. Well, not revelation. But big step forward for Nathan to share that so 
openly. He'd like me to pass over it naturally, right? Like it wasn't a big deal? I hoped so, because 
that's what I did. In his hand he held two bouquets. Both were lovely, one was the classic white 
lilies you see at a grave or funeral. The others were yellow roses. For a moment I wondered if the 
roses were for me and my heart soared. Like with the sandals, he noticed me staring, but unlike last 
time, chose not to explain them.
Do you have some time? he asked. I want to show you something.
Sure.
Where had that come from? Even if it wasn't exactly jam packed I couldn't just leave, could 
I? He raised his eyebrows, clearly expecting me to say 'no'. 
Are you sure? Aren't you working?
Something was happening between us. There was something in his seriousness, his slightly 
cold demeanor, that told me if I said 'no' here that something important would pass me by. The two 
of us would drift apart. I was surprised to realize that I didn't want our relationship to end, so I 
shrugged and stepped out from behind the counter. I asked if I could at least turn the lights out and 
he agreed. It would have gone faster if he'd helped, but he just stood there, staring at the flowers. I 
was beginning to figure out their purpose, as well as why he'd sought me out. 
As soon as I swung the sign from 'OPEN' to 'CLOSED' and locked the door, Nathan took 
off, barely sparing me a glance. What he did glance at was the alley where we'd both first 
encountered the spirit. Nathan's face was steel. I was rather impressed by it. It was hard for me to 
walk past that alley every day. We took a meandering path through the suburbs, through areas I 
didn't really frequent. Our one conversation was brief.
I wanted say thank you. For everything you and him did for me. I wasn't grateful at the 
time, but I am now. You risked a lot to save me. Thank you, I said.
He closed his eyes, as if in great pain, breathed in and out and in the end simply said, 
You're welcome.
That was fine though. For all his usual chatty talkative nonsense, Nathan was a great 
walking partner. He could get surprisingly quiet when we were walking. It worked well for me, 
because I preferred to use walks to order my thoughts. And boy did I have a lot of them to order 
right then. Seeing him was bringing up a great deal of emotion. Gratitude, relief, and something I 
didn't recognize. Well, if I'm honest it was something I didn't want to recognize. Because that 
ephemeral, hard to define feeling that sent butterflies cascading through my whole body could have 
been one thing and one thing only. I liked Nathan. Romantically. He'd been after me all that time 
and it'd finally worked. I wasn't sure how or when. Had I liked him back before I'd Disappeared and
simply never realized? I certainly spent more time thinking about him than I wanted to, even back 
then. But I wasn't sure. It definitely hadn't felt romantic at the time. Still, Nathan had always liked 
me, maybe since we'd met Now that I liked him back we-
We're here, he said.
It was a graveyard. Without further explanation, he entered, following a path he was already 
familiar with. We wound our way through row after row of deceased people. I wondered if any 
other Disappearance victims had been interred here. I wouldn't have been. I'd have been cremated 
like Dad, most likely. I shuddered thinking about it. That had almost happened. I read the 
headstones as we walked past them, looking for one name in particular. There was only one person's
grave Nathan would take me to see.
How did you find it? I asked.
He shrugged. He lived in this town. I found all the graveyards in the area. It took awhile, 
but I knew I'd find him eventually.
He stopped suddenly. There it was.
Peter August Daniels
Beloved Son,
Resting Peacefully
The grave was poorly maintained, the dates of his birth and death were obscured by plant 
life. I suppose it hardly mattered to Mr. Daniels, who hadn't seemed the type to care about things 
like that, but it seemed disrespectful nonetheless. This was the site of his first death before his 
resurrection. Although we hadn't spoken much, I did manage to wring out the details of what had 
happened from Nathan over  series of phone calls. Had I been alone I would have cleaned the 
headstone a little, but I wasn't sure how Nathan would react. He probably felt a sense of ownership 
over this place, especially since he seemed to be the only one who had visited in awhile. Even the 
caretaker hadn't been by lately. Perhaps I should have come by myself already. Pay respects to the 
man who'd helped save my life. Nathan knelt and placed both bouquets down in front of the grave. 
He made no effort to clear the plants away. When he rose after several long moments, tears were 
falling down his face. He made little effort to hide or stop them. He wept openly, staring at the 
grave. Yes, I'd experienced sadness myself. But from him, the image had a striking quality- to see 
him in so much despair was hard to watch, but even harder to look away. I had a tissue in my pocket
which I offered to him. He took it without comment and dried his face. His eyes were red, but he 
calmed down after a minute or two. I felt brave enough to ask a question. 
Why two bouquets?
He sniffed.
One's from Iris. She's not strong enough to leave the hospital yet. She's lucid, can hold a 
conversation when she's awake, but she slips back asleep at a moment's notice. Apparently that's 
normal with coma patients. It takes awhile for them to come out of it. A doctor told me it's like a 
see-saw. She asked me to bring the lilies.
I'm glad to hear she's doing better.
Yeah.
So the roses are from you?
Yes. I think for a moment that's all he's going to say, but then he starts up again, I read 
that yellow roses represent friendship. And I wanted to bring something bright. I'm hoping the 
caretaker notices and weeds the area. I'd do it myself, but I don't want to disturb anything. 
I had a thought then. Nathan wasn't just mourning a friend. His flowers may mean 
'friendship', but it had been more than that. For Nathan, anyway. Feeling brave, I voiced the 
thought.
Maybe you should have brought red ones.
He turned to me with a total poker face. It scared me. A person with a face like that could 
move to any emotion in an instant. The one Nathan settled on was resignation and the ghost of a 
smile. Yeah, maybe I should have. I'm not sure. Guess I'll never know now.  Should have known
you'd pick up on that.
Fast as they'd appeared, I gave up on my newly discovered feelings for Nathan. Maybe, just 
maybe, if Peter had still been here I could have competed with him, at least put up a fight. But how 
can you fight a ghost? You can't. Pointless to try. And anyway, my feelings hardly mattered. It was 
Nathan's that counted.
So why exactly are we here?
I doubted he simply wanted a companion to lay down some flowers. 
I- he paused, I've been going through his things. I went to his house, when we were 
looking for you. Photo albums, he kept a journal, little notes to himself, and trophies in his room. 
He played soccer. He won a school spelling bee in his grade when he was eight. I just... I feel like I 
might be the only person in the whole world who knows his whole story, now that Teddy's dropped 
off the face of the Earth. I wanted to tell someone else. I thought it was sad to be the only person 
who knew him. And you're the only other person besides Iris who'd give me the time of day about 
supernatural stuff. So...
Nathan, of course. Tell me about him. Tell me everything.
We sat down in the shade of a nearby tree. He spoke. I listened. 
And we remembered. 
The End
Journeys and Healing: The Hero, Trauma, Healing Dreams, and
Shamanism
Introduction
Although rarely acknowledged, many periods of our lives are related through the lens of a 
journey. Sometimes it is the vague sense that we're starting on a series of tasks that will help us 
achieve our goals, such as a 'pathway to success'. While others are more analogous, such as 
Alcoholics Anonymous' twelve step program, where sobriety from any addiction is framed as an 
ongoing process, the main goal being to keep moving forward on the same path. The process of a 
young person's maturation and entering into society is often referred to as a 'road to adulthood', and 
indeed, the idea of life's journeys can be seen as central to Western narrative culture. 
If life can be seen as a series of interconnected journeys, then The Disappearance of Robin 
Melling should be read as a fantastical examination of those journeys. This essay examines these 
journeys in detail, linking them to Shamanism, another kind of spiritual journey, which provides the
mythological underpinning of my novel. Beginning with Joseph Campbells seminal work on The 
Heros Journey in The Hero With a Thousand Faces, the essay explores the idea of the journey as a 
healing ritual for psychological trauma, linking the novel to dreams, guilt, and therapeutic practice. 
The aim throughout is to illuminate the themes, ideas and motifs of my novel.
The Disappearance of Robin Melling is a fantasy novel where a young boy, Nathan 
Alexander, must travel through the world of dreams to rescue the titular girl, Robin Melling. The 
journey he, and other characters, undertake is as much an emotional one as a physical one. This 
essay will explore both these key modes of journey in greater detail.
Part 1- The Hero's Journey 
 The Hero's Journey is a cataloging of myth and story that gives voice to the instinctive 
structure of a journey- from setting out all the way to returning home- that exists in a great deal of 
narratives worldwide, both contemporary and ancient. The journey laid out by The Hero's Journey 
will be familiar to those well versed in created narratives, be they novels, films, or even video 
games. Direct awareness of it is rare, however. As such, I will explain one by one the steps of The 
Hero's Journey and how they were used in my novel. In this way, the way my novel uses the 
structure laid out will become clear.
The Disappearance of Robin Melling is a realistic fantastical narration centered on a 
teenager teetering on the precipice of adulthood. A Bildungsroman: a class of novel that deals with 
the maturation process, with how and why the protagonist develops as he does, both morally and 
psychologically1. It is an adventure story, a story of change and self discovery and trauma and 
guilt. A classic tale where a young knight tries to rescue a kidnapped princess. The skeletal frame of
the narrative is The Hero's Journey, which posits that stories, particularly myths, occur over a series
of steps, or tropes, and that many of our greatest narrative works have used it, wittingly or not, as a 
form of particular resonance. These narrative steps need not occur in a particular order or be read 
literally. For example, the hero may not speak with an actual deity; as the step titled 'The Meeting 
with the Goddess' might imply, only confer with a figure that fills that symbolic role. Additionally, 
the framework is flexible enough to accommodate modest deviations; few narratives will contain 
clear examples of all steps and many, including mine, switch up their order. However, when a good 
number of the following tropes appear in the same novel, that novel is echoing The Hero's Journey. 
The first narrative step is 'The Call to Adventure'. Joseph Campbell, the one who discovered,
articulated, and named these archetypes, explains it thusly:
The first stage of the mythological journey- which we have designated the 'call to 
adventure'- signifies that destiny has summoned the hero and transferred his spiritual center 
of gravity from within the pale of his society to a zone unknown. 2
The dream world of my novel serves as the unknown zone referenced. 'The Call to 
Adventure' is delivered through Nathan's fainting spells and his moments of seeing the world in 
hyper-vivid color. More directly, his discovery of Robin's research and her subsequent 
disappearance triggers his active involvement in the narrative. Closely following this first step is the
second 'The Refusal of the Call'. In Nathan's case there is no direct refusal; he's eager to help Robin.
But, as mentioned, these stages are not always to be read literally. Instead, his refusal is his failure 
in recognizing the call in the first place. He ignores his feelings and symptoms of an iciness 
crawling up his body and vivid flashes of color.
Supernatural Aid, Campbell's third stage of the journey, comes in the guise of a bookmark. A
seemingly innocuous object at first, it protects Nathan and later Robin from the spirit and in the real
Thinley Kalsang Bhutia, Bildungsroman (2017), https://www.britannica.com/art/bildungsroman [accessed 22 June 
2019] (para. 1 of 4)
2 Joseph Campbell, The Hero With a Thousand Faces, (Novato, California: Pantheon Books, 1949), p. 48.
https://www.britannica.com/art/bildungsroman
world, it is his only link to Robin while she's confined to the realm of dreams. And though she has a
more direct connection to Shamanism, discussed later, the helpful rainbow swallow Amelia also 
qualifies as 'Supernatural Aid'. In Nathan's journey, this step is intertwined with 'The Crossing of the
First Threshold', the fourth narrative stage, which Campbell describes in terms of destiny. With the 
personifications of his destiny to guide and aid him, the hero goes forward in his adventure until he 
comes to the 'threshold guardian' at the entrance of a zone of magnified power.3 Nathan passes this 
threshold, a subtle point of no return, by inadvertently following Robin into dreams and stands at 
the entrance of Campbell's ' zone of magnified power' before attaining his 'Supernatural Aid', both 
events occurring in tandem. Next, 'The Belly of the Whale' supposes that:
The idea that the passage of the magical threshold is a transit into a sphere of rebirth is 
symbolized in the worldwide womb image of the belly of the whale. The hero, instead of 
conquering or conciliating the power of the threshold, is swallowed into the unknown and 
would have appeared to have died.4
This is Nathan's first encounter with the dream world. He feels exhilaration, yes, but he is 
primarily driven by his desire to find Robin. Racing through a land he doesn't understand or 
recognize, his body lies on the ground, unconscious in the 'real' world. His 'death', which 
necessitates his rebirth, a common theme in both my novel and journeys generally. This in addition 
applies to Robin. The world believes the Disappearance victims are dead. Once she joins their 
number, her death must be presumed by the larger community. After passing the trial of the 
'Threshold Guardian', in this narrative's case a confrontation with the spirit, and being blasted 
through the 'Belly of the Whale' he comes face to face with Iris. This is 'The Meeting with the 
Goddess'. In an earlier draft of my novel Nathan described Iris with particular language: 
Her dress is ornate. It's like a short sleeved kimono, red, patterned in butterflies and 
flowers. A sash is pulled around her waist, like a corset. She's not sexy, though. Nah, she 
looks more like a Renaissance painting come to life. Actually, most of the women in those 
are nobles or queens. Should I kneel?5
Nathan senses he is in the presence of someone of high standing, of advanced knowledge. 
Crucially, he does not kneel. Joseph Campbell describes the role of the goddess, and women in 
3 Campbell, The Hero With a Thousand Faces, p. 64.
4 Campbell, The Hero With a Thousand Faces, p. 74.
5 Andrew A. Eck, The Disappearance of Robin Melling, (unpublished thesis draft, Swansea University, 2003).
general, as follows:
Woman, in the picture language of mythology, represents the totality of what can be known.
The hero is the one who comes to know. As he progresses in the slow initiation which is life,
the form of the goddess undergoes for him a series of transfigurations: she can never be 
greater than himself, though she can always promise more than he is yet capable of 
understanding.6
Iris, shown to be a goddess of sorts, is one of the most powerful allies a hero can have. A 
woman can also present herself as a temptress, seeking to thwart or delay the hero's progress. In 
truth, though there are moments in my novel that could be construed as depicting 'Woman as 
Temptress', it would be reaching to say there was an easy, direct comparison. Campbell's 
understanding of women may be outdated, however the term is not necessarily gender specific, and 
could therefore apply to Peter, in that Nathan is often distracted from his goal of saving Robin by 
thoughts of Peter. Still, the Temptress figure is an intentional, sinister one, and Peter isn't trying to 
distract Nathan, his existence is the distraction. This unused narrative step instead illustrates that the
structure laid out here is not one that needs to be rigidly adhered to.
After 'The Meeting with the Goddess', the hero must seek 'Atonement with the Father'. 
It is in this ordeal that the hero may derive hope and assurance from the helpful female 
figure by whose magic he is protected, through all the frightening experiences of his father's 
ego-shattering initiation. For if it is impossible to trust the terrifying father-face, then one's 
faith must be centered elsewhere[...]; and with that reliance for support, one endures the 
crisis- only to find, in the end, that the father and mother reflect each other, and are in 
essence the same.7
For Nathan, atonement plays out in both the domestic world of home and the fantastical 
world of dreams. Nathan must disobey his father to continue his quest, and he must even steal secret
knowledge from him, an act of defiance that results in his father being fired. Nathan's father, 
magnanimous, forgives all transgressions. As a quasi dream father figure, Peter is initially an 
ambiguous presence, a complicating factor to Nathan's journey. At first eager to be rid of him, 
Nathan and Peter reach an understanding. This is again through the transmission of secret 
6 Campbell, The Hero With a Thousand Faces, p. 97.
7 Campbell, The Hero With a Thousand Faces, p. 110.
knowledge. They share secrets and forgive one another. It is 'Atonement', which precedes 
'Apotheosis', a kind of 'spiritual enlightenment'. Narratively, it need not be as dramatic as ascending 
to Nirvana or receiving a divine revelation, only resonate metaphorically as such. For Nathan, his 
moment of 'Apotheosis' comes when he begins to take charge of his life, particularly with regards to
his accident and resulting trauma, as well as Robin's. Instead of merely reacting to the flow of the 
narrative he is caught in, he begins to exert direct influence in it with a plan to rescue Robin. That is
not to say he doesn't need help- he seeks out the guidance of the 'Goddess', Iris, and relies on Peter's
assistance. However, it is vitally important that Nathan be the one who takes control of his own 
destiny. 
For suffering through these trials, Nathan is gifted Campbell's conception of a final reward, 
'The Ultimate Boon'. His quest is completed and goal achieved- the saving of Robin's life. However,
'The Boon' is more than physical, it is the embodiment of knowledge, power and the grace of the 
immortals. It is a state of being as much as an end result. Campbell elaborates:
The gods and goddesses then are to be understood as embodiments and custodians of the 
elixir of Imperishable Being [Immortality], but not themselves the Ultimate Boon in its 
primary state. What the hero seeks through his intercourse with them is therefore not finally 
themselves, but their grace i.e, the power of their sustaining substance. This miraculous 
energy-substance and this alone is Imperishable; the names and forms of deities who 
everywhere embody, disperse and represent it come and go. This is the miraculous energy of
the thunderbolts of Zeus, Yawheh, and the Supreme Buddha, the fertility of the rain of 
Virococha, the virtue announced by the bell rung in the Mass at consecration, and the light 
of the ultimate illumination of the saint and sage.8
Having completed his quest and received his reward, Nathan must leave the hidden world 
and return, boon in hand, to the mundane world. However, sometimes the hero, pleased beyond 
belief with his reward or the magical world or the opposite, so disillusioned that he no longer 
harbors a desire to return, declines to journey home. This is called 'Refusal of the Return' and 
Campbell states:
When the hero-quest has been accomplished, through penetration to the source, or through 
the grace of some male or female, human or animal personification, the adventurer still must
return with his life transmuting trophy. [] But the responsibility has been frequently 
8 Campbell, The Hero With a Thousand Faces, p. 155.
refused. Even the Buddha, after his triumph, doubted whether the message of realization 
could be communicated, and saints are reported to have passed away while in the 
supernatural ecstasy.9
Nathan is of course gripped by a despondency at his journey's end. For him, the price for 
Robin's life has been too high. Peter may have been a willing sacrifice, but Nathan is deeply upset 
to trade one life for another, particularly his life, as a recurring psychological fault of his is the way 
he undervalues himself. Unsatisfied with the terms, he attempts to fight inevitability, to struggle 
against a world he sees as unfair. In his final moments, Peter changes his mind, their journey 
together having forged Nathan into a person who is psychologically strong enough to make a hard 
sacrifice.
'The Magic Flight' is the ultimate trial of the hero, the one that facilitates his return home, 
the truly final journey. The hero is harassed along the way, most often by a final effort from forces 
who all along steadfastly opposed him. In my novel, this stage is inextricably linked to 'Refusal of 
the Return'. As Nathan, Peter, and Robin are attempting a magical flight but are delayed when it 
becomes clear something has gone wrong. Peter will not be returning with them. This leads to an 
intense moment of internal crisis for Nathan. Sometimes, as in this case, the hero fails to get away 
during 'The Magic Flight' and the mundane world must marshal its forces to drag a hero across the 
finish line. This is called 'Rescue from Without'. In my narrative it is the simple act of waking up 
that pulls a defeated and listless Nathan out of the world of dreams. What could be more mundane 
than the simple act of waking up? In doing this, Nathan 'Crosses the Return Threshold', the final 
border between the mundane and fantastical world and completes his journey. He's despondent, 
crying and saying that dream or not, Peter had been real. What he's feeling, but is not able to name, 
is the truth that the mundane and fantastic worlds are intertwined so thoroughly with each other as 
to be indistinguishable from each other. Campbell states that:
The two worlds, the divine and the human, can be pictured only as distinct from each other-
different as life and death, as day and night. The hero adventures out of the land we know 
into darkness; there accomplishes his adventure, or gain is simply lost to us, imprisoned, or 
in danger; and his return is described as coming back out of that yonder zone. Nevertheless- 
and here is a great key to the understanding of myth and symbol- the two kingdoms are 
actually one. The realm of the gods is a forgotten dimension of the world we know.10
9 Campbell, The Hero With a Thousand Faces, p. 167.
10 Campbell, The Hero With a Thousand Faces, p. 188.
Having endured all manner of hardship and in the process saving Robin's life, but failing to 
save Peter's, Nathan finally becomes the 'Master of the Two Worlds' and is given 'Freedom to Live'. 
Or, more accurately, he gives it to himself. He comes to terms with Peter's death, as well as his own 
unspoken feelings for Peter, in the epilogue, where he and Robin talk in front of Peter's grave.
One of Cambell's other works The Hero With a Thousand Faces evokes a method to 
understand all ancient tales, whether they be Greek myths or parables from the Bible. In truth, all 
narratives, including contemporary constructions, are a part of a larger singular mythology, which 
The Disappearance of Robin Melling now joins company.
And whether it was Finnegans Wake or the Navaho material or the Hindu material, or 
Heinrich Zimmer's, it was all the same material. That was when I realized- and no one can 
tell me anything differently- that there's one mythology in the world. It has been inflected in 
various cultures in terms of their historical and social circumstances and need and particular 
local ethic systems, but it's one mythology.11
As such, it should come as no surprise that The Hero's Journey bears several parallels to 
Shamanism, a set of religious beliefs referenced frequently in my novel. These similarities will be 
examined in the final section of this essay. For now, however, we'll move on to discuss another no 
less elemental journey, one which encompasses the major theme of my novel: Trauma. 
Part 2- Trauma in The Disappearance of Robin Melling
The theme underpinning The Disappearance of Robin Melling is trauma, particularly how 
the aftermath of trauma affects guilt directed towards the self, preventing self-forgiveness. In terms 
of journeys, trauma in and of itself is not a journey, but the process by which we overcome trauma, 
as briefly touched on in my introduction. Simply put, the road to recovery from trauma is a journey. 
The primary characters in The Disappearance of Robin Melling struggle to overcome various forms 
of trauma throughout the novel, both mental and physical. In this section I shall primarily focus on 
their mental traumas. All have been dealt serious mental traumas and the novel invites readers to 
watch as they finally recover from their traumas them as such, overcoming neurotic guilt, and 
forgiving themselves. The topic first drew my eye a few years ago, when I bore witness to a 
traumatic event.
11 Joseph Campbell, The Hero's Journey, (New York: Harper & Row, 2003), p. 150.
The Swansea University Ultimate Frisbee Club, of which I am a member, meets every 
Monday in the Singleton sports hall. We were having our usual training session when one of our 
players began to feel faint. I saw him stumble before collapsing. The room was oppressively hot; 
forty university students gathered in one place can make the air thick and humid. I thought he might
have overexerted himself, or had mild dehydration. In fact, he had an underlying heart condition 
that had been triggered by exertion. Essentially, he had a heart attack. We were quickly cleared from
the room as a player trained in CPR, began to follow the instructions bellowed out by the sports 
hall's defibrillator. His heart stopped for three minutes. But our collapsed friend was revived and he 
fully recovered, much to everyone's relief. But certain elements of the event still lingered in my 
subconscious, even after my friend's recovery. The way he fell, the sound of the machine's robotic 
instructions, the silence as we sat in the upstairs lounge, not making eye contact. A brief stint in 
therapy helped me to recognize that the incident had had a traumatic effect on me. Once I saw this 
as trauma, I began to notice that my writing had absorbed this trauma, specifically in the principle 
characters of Nathan, Robin, and Peter, all of whom experienced deep psychic trauma. This 
realization became the spine of the novel; these traumas shaped and informed their character 
motivations, driving both plot and dialogue. Often I manifested these narrative devices through the 
character's self-guilt. 
Dreams are an especially potent battleground when trying to deal with a trauma, be it 
physical or mental. Nader says in her essay 'Children's Traumatic Dreams' that:
The severity of the incident, including the degree of a sense of threat or horror, may 
increase traumatic dreaming 
Bad or trauma related dreams and sleep disturbances were associated with difficulty 
concentrating and memory difficulties. as well as reduced enjoyment of activities.12
The mental toll of a trauma, whether it was directly experienced or merely witnessed, has a 
profound impact on a person's mental and emotional stability. In children, psychological 
development is often impaired, such as in the case of a young male burn victim:
-a dream of himself and his brother riding in the red sports car that was on a poster in his 
hospital room. He spoke of feeling of freedom, excitement, and the sense of being in control.
A month later he described a different type of dream. This involved romantic fantasies 
12 Kathleen Nader, 'Children's Traumatic Dreams', in Trauma and Dreams, ed. by Deirdre Barrett (London: Harvard 
University Press 1996), pp. 9-24 (pp. 10-11).
about a female occupational therapist and the nurses caring for him. He and his therapist 
were able to talk about how such a dream is not unusual when a close relationship develops 
between a patient and caregiver. The dream also related to his being able to begin again to 
acknowledge age-appropriate emotions.13
Though sixteen, Nathan behavior and thoughts are often intentionally portrayed as more 
immature than might be expected for his numerical age. The accident which has left him crippled 
and unable to pursue a genuine physical talent for tennis has also crippled him emotionally. His 
nascent crush on Robin is notably immature, his thoughts do not often drift beyond vague 
fetishization, of her. -she totally had a sexy librarian thing going on. And she even had brown eyes
All librarians should have brown eyes.14 Nathan's body is on the cusp of adulthood, but his 
mentality remains underdeveloped. This is consistent with children who experience significant 
trauma. Similarly to the young burn victim noted in Trauma and Dreams, Nathan experiences an 
advancement in his ability to 'acknowledge age-appropriate emotions' through experience and 
dreams. Instead of this growth being achieved through therapy, it is instead gained through his 
experiences with Peter. This growth metastasizes in the final chapter of the novel when he 
acknowledges his feelings towards Peter to Robin: 
I had a thought then. Nathan wasn't just mourning a friend. His flowers may mean 
'friendship', but it had been more than that. For Nathan, anyway. Feeling brave, I voiced the 
thought.
Maybe you should have brought red ones.
He turned to me with a total poker face. It scared me. A person with a face like that 
could move to any emotion in an instant. The one Nathan settled on was resignation and the 
ghost of a smile. Yeah, maybe I should have. I'm not sure. Guess I'll never know now.  
Should have known you'd pick up on that.15 
This soft acknowledgment of his feelings is a deceptively large psychological step forward 
for Nathan. His initial reaction to Peter (as a person, not an authority figure) is touched with 
attraction, which Nathan declines to acknowledge, instead framing it as simple description:
13 Frederick J. Stoddard, David S. Chedekal, and Laura Shakun, 'Dreams and Nightmares of Burned Children', in 
Trauma and Dreams, ed. by Deirdre Barrett (London: Harvard University Press, 1996), pp. 25-45 (p.38).
14 Andrew A. Eck, 'The Disappearance of Robin Melling' (unpublished doctoral thesis Swansea University, 2019), p. 
15 Eck, p. 238
He cut a much less intimidating figure without the uniform, but he still retained that 
brightness I remembered from our first encounter. His orange hair burned brightest in the 
sunlight, his pale skin, too. Made me squint. He was handsome, I could admit, if you were 
into the square jawed all-American type. Young, more like a college student than a real 
adult.16
It's an larger jump than it seems because of who he's admitting to having feelings for. 
Though he is not ready to do so directly, he has tacitly accepted his bisexuality. His view of sex and 
sexuality remain vague, the internal shift within him is significant enough to allow him to 
internalize emotions and physical feelings more appropriate for his age. 
Nathan's sexual development isn't all that's been impaired, however. His relationship with 
his father has also become strained. Nathan has a neurotic guilt over his accident, he repeatedly 
discounts his own worth, especially when his father is attempting to dote on him. Nader's essay 
'Children's Traumatic Dreams' she writes how:
A seven year old boy described how during a tornado he had a painful moment of 
indecision when a wall collapsed. He did not know whether to freeze or run. He froze, and 
the bricks landed on top of the area where he would have been if he had run. He was 
very angry with his parents for not preparing him for this moment.17
The sentiment is not exactly the same, Nathan's father brushes up against the heart of 
Nathan's psychological issues, albeit from the parental side:
You got hurt when you were fourteen, he said. I stopped, but didn't turn around. Right 
when kids start pushing boundaries. And then suddenly you were more reliant on me than 
ever before. Even for simple stuff like walking or going to the bathroom. [] But I wouldn't
mind it if you talked to me a little more. You can, you know. Talk to me, if you want.18
Nathan's father recognizes that Nathan's emotional development has been stunted by his 
accident, leading to suppressed emotions. Though Nathan loves his dad and is aware that his father 
loves him back, this passage illustrates a deep fault line of tension between them, fueled by 
16 Eck, pp. 107-108
17 Nader, Trauma and Dreams, p. 22. 
18 Eck, p. 120
Nathan's guilty feelings. 
The novel is partially metaphor for Nathan's attempts to deal with and rationalize his trauma.
It is another form of journey; a figurative journey happening in parallel with the actual physical 
journey to rescue Robin. He dreams or fantasizes about Robin many times, often accompanied by 
repetitive symbols, such as that of his spirit animal, the swallow Amelia, or consistent saturations of
color. This repetition is also recurrent among the dreams of the traumatized, as is suggested by 
Nader:
Over the course of recovery, a focus on traumatic issues or a refocus on the deeper meaning
of aspects of the event may be reflected in dreams. Dreams may serve as one of the 
guideposts to the need for therapeutic attention on some aspect of traumatic experience. 
Moreover, the themes in repetitive dreams may become replicated in later actions (for 
example, enactment of revenge or rescue fantasies) or emotional experiences (such as a 
sense of being overwhelmed and/or of isolation).19
Although in the context of my novel Nathan's dreams are not mere images playing in his 
mind, but are a distinct reality separate from the waking world, they can be read metaphorically as 
an attempt by his subconscious mind to vocalize with his left over anxiety and fear from his 
accident. However, Nathan's nightmares do not involve cars or accidents; they instead feature 
unrelated horror-filled adventures. This seemingly indirect link to his initial trauma is consistent 
with the dreams of trauma survivors. Belicki and Cuddy explain an intruiging commonality found 
during their survey of the dreaming of sexual trauma survivors:
Overall, what is perhaps most interesting in these findings was that the nightmares typically
did not replay the actual abusive event. This is consistent with Finkelhor's (1978) theory that
many survivors of sexual abuse do not fit a typical PTSD profile. What these nightmares 
seemed to portray was the emotional reality of the event, for example, that for many women 
the trauma did not feel like a sexual event, but an act of profound violence.20
The three primary protagonists, Nathan, Robin, and Peter each suffered an intense personal 
trauma. Along with Nathan's accident, there was the Disappearance of Robin's father and for Peter it
was experiencing his own death and rebirth, as well as his role in the Disappearances. Peter, a few 
19 Nader, Trauma and Dreams, p. 24.
20 Kathryn Belicki and Marion Cuddy, 'Identifying Sexual Trauma Histories from Patterns of Sleep and Dreams', in 
Trauma and Dreams, ed. by Deirdre Barrett (London: Harvard University Press, 1996), pp. 46-55 (p.53). 
years into his twenties, was the oldest at the time, however, all three were young. This is significant 
because young people are far more susceptible to psychological damage:
Another point not often appreciated is that the soldiers who developed PTSD were very 
young when the serious traumatic event occurred. In our sample, we calculated as closely as 
possible the age of the soldiers at the time when their buddy had been killed, the results 
showed a mean age of 17.4 years. [] This is consistent with the work of others showing 
that trauma has a greater effect on younger persons.21
 Robin, for example, shows that her feelings of grief at her father's 'Disappearance' are 
complex, her coping mechanisms insufficient and exacerbated by constant research into the subject:
...she had used the space to come to terms with her father's Disappearance and then 
later, accept his probable death. At the end of the document, on a single line by itself, she'd 
written:
I know that even if I find him, he's not coming back22
The three are given an opportunity to begin the healing journey through the attack, and 
eventual defeat, of the dream spirit. Through the confrontation with physical and emotional danger, 
Nathan finds himself able, at last, to move forward, to step forward on the journey to becoming an 
adult. Robin finds closure in learning what really happened to her father. Peter appears to be at 
peace with his second death, sanguine to have found a purpose to his sudden resurrection. However,
the closure of their individual traumas is only one piece of the puzzle. They must also resolve their 
deep senses of guilt, which prevent them from true recovery.
The contradictory responses that occur in Stavrogin's Confession by Fyodor Dostoyevsky 
outline a number of ideas I attempted to weave into my narrative. Dostoyevsky writes:
Immediately I felt that I had done something vile. At the same time I experienced a 
pleasurable sensation because suddenly a certain desire pierced me like a blade, and I began 
to busy myself with it.23
21 Ernest Hartman, 'Who Develops PTSD Nightmares and Who Doesn't', in Trauma and Dreams, ed. by Deirdre Barrett 
(London: Harvard University Press, 1996), pp. 100-113 (pp.110-111). 
22 Eck, p. 129
23 Fyodor Dostoyevsky, 'Stavrogin's Confession', in Guilt and Shame, ed. by Herbert Morris, trans. by Avraham 
Yarmolinsky, (Belmont, California: Wadsworth Publishing Company, Inc., 1971), pp. 6-39 (p. 17). 
In this story Stavrogin has committed vague, but serious, non-sexual intentional harm to a 
young girl. He experiences glee at the thought of the act, but simultaneously a deep sense of shame, 
especially after the girl commits suicide. In the story he seeks forgiveness, all while insisting his 
actions were not so very bad. He delivers his written confession to a priest, and then claims:
I want to forgive myself. That's my chief object, that's my whole aim [] That is why I 
seek measureless suffering, I seek it myself.24
He later claims his only absolution will come from the publication of the sheets of paper he 
has shown the priest. To which the priest counters:
No, not after the publication, but even before it, a day, an hour perhaps, before the great 
step, you will plunge into a new crime as a way out, and you will commit it solely to avoid 
publication of these sheets, upon which you now insist.25
Much as Stavrogin has an erratic and contradictory response to his guilt, so too do the 
protagonists of The Disappearance of Robin Melling. Guilt is more complex than popularly 
imagined. Freud suggests:
If we ask how a person comes to have a sense of guilt, we arrive at an answer which cannot
be disputed: a person feels guilty when he has done something which he knows to be 'bad'. 
But then we notice how little this answer tells us. Perhaps, after some hesitation, we shall 
add that even when a person has not actually done a bad thing but has only recognized in 
himself an intention to do it, he may regard himself as guilty.26
On the surface, this may seem relatively simple. If you have a desire to do something bad, 
whether you do it or not, you may feel guilt. However, this doesn't account for the kind of guilt 
Peter, Robin, and Nathan experience. Theirs is a less rational form of guilt. It is a form of survivor's 
guilt, where lone survivors of tragedies feel guilty to have been the only one to live, as if their life 
had come at the cost of the others. Nathan's guilt over his accident is apparent in his interactions 
with his father; he feels he are too kind, too understanding.  Dad didn't have to be so damn nice. I 
24 Dostoyevsky, Guilt and Shame, p. 36.
25 Dostoyevsky, Guilt and Shame, p. 39.
26 Sigmund Freud, 'Origin of the Sense of Guilt', in Guilt and Shame, ed. by Herbert Morris, trans. by James Strachey, 
(Belmont, California: Wadsworth Publishing Company, Inc., 1971), pp. 54-57 (pp. 54-55). 
wish he would just stop spending so much effort on me27 
He also experiences self doubt when it comes to believing people like him. Robin also has 
her share of misplaced guilt. She spoke to her father in the moments moments before he 
Disappeared. She had noticed his odd behavior which felt off, but failed to alert anyone. In time, 
she came to blame herself for not preventing it. This is what triggered her obsessive investigation 
into the Disappearances, which is a clear manifestation of her guilt. And although the reader sees 
comparatively less of Peter's thinking, it's clear from his sudden career change from nurse to police 
officer and his sacrifice that he too is working out his guilt and feels responsible for far the events 
that led to the Earthquake and, by extension, the Disappearances.
It's clear these are not rational emotions of guilt. With my novel I wanted to deliver a 
creative narrative process that fully explored these guilty feelings in an empathetic and deeply 
human way. My intent was to show how their individual journeys towards healing had been arrested
by feelings of guilt. Nathan, Robin, and Peter's guilt does not fit the Freudian definition. None of 
my characters have done, or even thought, anything inherently 'bad' and yet they still feel terrible 
guilt. 
The writer and philosopher Herbert Fingarette, describing Martin Buber's ontological 
expansion of the definition of guilt and so called 'guilty feelings', fleshes out Freud's definition of 
guilt:
On the one hand, he speaks of authentic, real, ontic, and in its most intense form, 
existential guilt. On the other hand, there are neurotic, psychological guilt feelings: 
the anxiety induced bugbears that are generated in the cavern of the unconscious. Neurotic
and real guilt, says Buber, are fundamentally different.28
The guilt my three protagonists feel is akin to the 'neurotic guilt' described by Buber and 
Fingarette. Nathan, Robin, and Peter's ownership of responsibility for the tragedies that have 
affected those close to them was an essential element of their characterization. The three of them are
good people, but do not believe that about themselves. Freud suggests:
For the more virtuous a man is, the more severe and distrustful is its behavior, so that 
ultimately it is precisely those people who have carried saintliness furthest who reproach 
27 Eck, p. 120
28 Herbert Fingarette, 'Real Guilt and Neurotic Guilt', in Guilt and Shame, ed. by Herbert Morris, (Belmont, California: 
Wadsworth Publishing Company, Inc., 1971), pp. 82-94 (p. 82). 
themselves with the worst sinfulness.29
We see shades of what we might call a martyr complex in each of them. However, it is 
Nathan who is particularly adept at playing the martyr. His inability to contextualize, to reconcile 
the loss physical sporting virility after the accident, is exacerbated by an excessive guilt over the 
aftermath of that same accident. The black shadow it casts over his heart causes him to blame 
himself for every other little thing that goes wrong: 
It was all my fault and if I hadn't stuck my damn nose in-30
-it really was my fault Robin got taken by the demon.31
I blame myself-32
Nathan begins beating himself up over not only the accident, but all subsequent setbacks. He
feels guilty of a great crime: changes to his family life. Gripped by his neurotic guilt, he 
subconsciously feels that he has yet to be properly punished for this. Martin Buber explains how 
this is a common syndrome for the neurotically guilty, as Martin Buber explains:
The feeling of guilt was now to be understood as essentially only the consequence of dread 
of punishment and censure by this tribunal, as the consequence of the child's fear of loss of 
love or, at times when it was a question of imaginary guilt, as a need for punishment of a 
libidinal nature, as moral masochism which is complemented by the sadism of the 
superego.33
Destructive guilt is a common theme in literature. The most famous work which narrates a 
descending spiral of guilt is likely Shakespeare's Macbeth. Both Macbeth and his wife commit 
terrible deeds for power. Their guilt eventually causes both of their downfalls, most notably with 
Lady Macbeth, who commits suicide to escape her guilty conscience. However, there are few clear 
cut instances of misplaced 'neurotic' guilt leading to a similar spiral in literature. Robin and Peter, 
29 Freud, Guilt and Shame, p. 56.
30 Eck, p. 69
31 Eck, p. 108
32 Eck, p. 217
33 Martin Buber, 'Guilt and Guilt Feelings', in Guilt and Shame, ed. by Herbert Morris, (Belmont, California: Wadsworth
Publishing House, Inc., 1971), pp. 58-81 (pp. 60-61).
both more emotionally mature at the time of their traumas, channel their trauma outwards into 
investigative projects. Nathan, however, is different. The Earthquake cripples him, forever 
destroying his athleticism. Yet searching for answers, like the others, is not in his nature. He mirrors
the feelings of real world children who absorb what happens to them and turn inwards, creating 
alternate realities that have dark meanings, then tending and feeding this pain so it fires back on 
themselves. Nader states:
Throughout the phases of trauma recovery, children often incorporate traumatic imagery 
into their dreams. Dreams may replicate visual, auditory, and/or kinesthetic 
experiences.34
In a sense, the principle characters' journeys from the onset of their trauma to the resolution 
of those traumas through the course of the novel is essentially a successful intensive therapy 
session. Nathan has been told over and over by his father and others that he need not blame himself,
but while he hears the words, he does not take them to heart. He's so wrapped up in his neurotic 
guilt that he can't see how his attitude towards himself might be flawed and how he might be 
harming others. The successor to Freud, Carl Jung, spoke about this problem:
The patient, that is to say, does not need to have a truth inculcated to him- if we do that, we 
only reach his head; he needs far more to grow up to this truth, and in that way we reach his 
heart and the appeal goes deeper and works more powerfully.35
Nathan's recovery adheres to this supposition. He initially cannot recover because words 
only reach his head. Nathan's journey through adolescence is stunted by his inability to understand 
or resolve his trauma; he can only begin moving forward again once he faces his nightmares, once 
the truth reaches his heart. In the denouement, his emotional blockage fractures. He cries, in his 
father's arms, and forgives himself. He can finally heal from his trauma. 
Part 3- The Disappearance of Robin Melling as Healing Dream
This journey and the one previous are highly interrelated. While trauma and the recovery 
from trauma can be applied to either mental or physical trauma, I primarily used this term in the 
34 Nader, Trauma and Dreams, p. 16.
35 C.G. Jung, 'The Practical Use of Dream Analysis', in Collected Works of C.G. Jung Volume 16: The Practice of 
Psychotherapy, trans. by R.F.C. Hull, (London, England, Routledge and Kegan Paul, Ltd., 1954), pp. 141-162 (pp. 
previous section to describe the healing of Robin, Nathan, and Peter on a mental level. This is 
because I want to examine Robin's physical Disappearance and subsequent 'recovery' from that state
with another lens: the healing dream.
The symbolic resonance of Nathan defeating a nightmare and then being freed from a 
mental weight should be obvious. However, we need not be so metaphorical. Dreams have long 
been held by ancient cultures to have an impact on the real world. They were often consulted or 
elicited for practical medical advice in addition to portents from the future or missives from a 
supernatural being.
The study of dreams is called oneirology. It comes to us from the Greek word for dream 
Oneiro. To be clear, the oneirology is not the study of sleep or the mechanisms of such; it isn't 
concerned with REM cycles or the chemicals released in the brain during sleep. Instead, 
www.yourdefinition.com warns us in the notes that Oneirology is more concerned with dreams as 
personal experiences and their interpretation.36
In ancient medicine dreams functioned as tools for a medical diagnosis. This was 
commonplace for medical personnel we might today refer to as medicine men or shamans who 
utilize a more magical framework. However, specialized physicians who today we would call 
doctors who utilize a (for the time) scientific framework also found use for dreams. Holowchak 
elaborates:
On the magical side, healing deities at religious sanctuaries were believed to offer a type of 
medical assistance that centered on dreams. The ill traveled to a religious sanctuary, gave a 
votive offering, and then retreated to a sleeping parlour where a healing god was believed to 
visit them in a dream and administer or suggest a cure for what ailed them. 
On the secular side, medical practice was sometimes guided by the conviction that 
certain dreams were indicative of bodily health []. A person's soul, ancient physicians 
argued, surveyed one's bodily functions during sleep and brought about dreams that 
indicated, by a scrutiny of their content, bodily health.37
In ancient times, the domains of science and magic were not very far removed from each 
other. This mixing of fantastical and realistic is important because The Disappearance of Robin 
Melling also features a mixture of scientific and supernatural approaches. Most obvious is the spirit 
36 Oneirology,  YourDictionary. (n.d.), https://www.yourdictionary.com/Oneirology [accessed 13th March 2020] (para. 2 
of 3)
37 M. Andrew Holowchak, 'Oneirology in Ancient Medicine' in Ancient Science and Dreams: Oneirology in Greco-
Roman Antiquity, (Lanham, Maryland: University Press of America, 2002), pp. 127.
and its kidnap of Robin. Iris or Teddy might be considered a sort of 'medicine man/woman', 
attacking the problem from a supernatural angle. Teddy's powers are certainly of a supernatural 
origin. We then have the side grounded in reality, represented by Nathan's father and the police 
force he is a part of. And though she may in her own words be casting a wide net38, Robin is also 
thoroughly entrenched in a realistic conception of the Disappearances. Neither side experiences 
much success in figuring out what's going on or administering a solution. Peter, however, exists in 
the liminal space between this two modes of thought. First, he is a police officer and former nurse 
and thus fully invested in the physical world and the importance of the Disappearances as a physical
act. Second, though, his close association with Teddy and subsequent resurrection place him firmly 
on the more magical, metaphorical side of the fence as well. He is in tune with the both physical 
and magical nature of the Disappearances in a way the other characters are not. He is privileged 
with knowledge gained from being brought back from the dead. This special knowledge is shared 
by the spirit. Peter himself says as much in his final moments when he says But I already died, 
Nathan. I shouldn't be here, you know that. Both me and the spirit are like an infection. We're 
corrosive to the world. We're breaking both dreams and reality down.39  
Nathan too is a blending of the physical world and dream world, at least with regards to the 
Disappearances. When the Earthquake occurred, he was struck down by a distracted driver, leaving 
him with a lifelong physical impairment. However, in his dream state after that event, he witnessed 
the start point for the Disappearances- Peter's resurrection. Nathan was there at the beginning of this
story, both physically and spiritually. Together, Nathan and Peter are able to 'heal' Robin and, 
implicitly, the scar and therefore world. Note how this neatly dovetails with Joseph Campbell's 
Hero's Journey, where the hero returns from his journey with an 'Ultimate Boon' that ends up 
bringing sacred knowledge to the whole world.
Nathan achieves this by following a process known as 'incubation'. In the context of dreams 
and Ancient Greece, the word held a very different meaning to the ones that readily spring to mind. 
It was a form of religious ceremony that involved seeking a cure from a god. It was a complex 
religious practice, as Gil H. Renberg notes: 
Nor was incubation undertaken simply by showing up at a sanctuary, and bedding down for 
the night, since in general it involved preparatory rituals and offerings that normally required
the involvement of priests or other cult officials, and, as at other oracles, the worshipper 
often had to pay a fee.40
38 Eck, pp. 32
39 Eck, pp. 225
40 Gil H. Renberg, 'Incubation Terminology', in Where Dreams May Come: Incubation Ceremonies in the Greco-
 Of course, Nathan experiences a number of dreams throughout the novel. However, no 
direct aid is received. No one is cured from their ailment, nor is a solution prescribed by a deity or 
otherwise. Nathan's dreams instead serve as the other type of healing dreams in Greek medicine, 
that of a diagnostic dream. Greek physicians analyzed the contents of dreams dreams to determine a
patient's health and, if unwell, where their medical trouble might reside.
It is likely that physicians who used dreams as diagnostic tools looked at all dreams of 
patients as potential diagnostic tools, though they only focused attention on particularly 
striking elements or on certain key episodes. Most of these concerned natural phenomena 
that were taken as indications of underlying bodily conditions.41
They even had criteria with which to measure the dream's severity and measure how severe 
the problem plaguing the patient was.
Dreams in accordance with the way things generally turn out in waking reality indicate 
health; those contrary to waking events indicate incipient or existing illness due to humoral 
imbalance. The greater the discord that the dream exhibits with waking reality, the greater 
the underlying humoral imbalance.42
Following that logic, and given Nathan's dreams are filled with an abundance dire imagery, 
it's little wonder the situation was so unfavorable. Of course in Greek Antiquity his troubles would 
have been reduced to a simple imbalance of the humors. Although not a major consideration for my 
novel, the four humors are blood, phlegm, black bile, and yellow bile. Nathan lacks in blood due to 
his accident, an imbalance that can be read as the underlying cause of his problems- physical and 
mental. However, the important element here is that Nathan's, and Robin's, dreams are quite out of 
the ordinary and indicate severe health dysfunction.
Robin's case presents interesting dichotomy. While her dreams initially appear normal, with 
few extraneous elements, as the novel wears on, and, crucially, the protection from her bookmark 
fades, the dreams become more sinister, more at odds with reality. As her prognosis worsens, so too 
does the content of her 'diagnostic' dreams. 
One dream, however, does follow the criteria of the healing dream I initially highlighted. 
Roman World Volume 1, (Leiden, The Netherlands, Koninklijke Brill NV, 2016), pp. 7-18 (pp. 13)
41 Holowchak, Ancient Science and Dreams: Oneirology in Greco-Roman Antiquity, pp. 134
42 Holowchak, Ancient Science and Dreams: Oneirology in Greco-Roman Antiquity, pp. 147
This is the final dream where Nathan and Peter venture into dreams with the help of Teddy. It 
features a ceremony common in ritual incubation conducted at designated sanctuaries. Nathan and 
Peter travel to a metaphorical place of worship and encounter a priest, Teddy. They are then induced
into a medical sleep and watched over by said priest. In dreams they meet a goddess figure, Iris 
(another connection to the Hero's Journey), and she offers them answers and a potential course of 
treatment, though vague, for Robin's malady. And of course a heavy price is extracted when Peter is 
forced to sacrifice himself to heal her. Though none realize it at the time, these five characters are 
conducting an incubation ritual, which succeeds. This mixed result was common, even expected, at 
the time of ancient Greece. Perfection was not expected from the god of healing.
-there were two sides to Asklepios the healer: an omnipotent god who performed 
superhuman healing miracles, and a medical practitioner who issued prescriptions and 
assigned dietary or physical regimens, and even- like mortal practitioners- sometimes 
experienced failures.43
However, there is also a hint of the healer as an all-powerful practitioner in the apparent 
recovery of Iris. As soon as the spirit is banished, Peter along with it, her soul is able to return to her
body and she regains consciousness. The journey of healing is complete, from onset of illness, to 
diagnostic dream, to incubation ceremony, and recovery.
Conclusion- The Shaman Ties The Threads
Though these various modes of journey, from a narrative/metaphorical Hero's Journey, to the
journey of recovering from mental and physical trauma, may at first seem to have only passing 
commonalities, there is a philosophy of thought that encompasses all three. Shamanism. Shamanism
is an umbrella term used to refer to the varied belief systems of a number of often tribal peoples 
around the world. Getting more specific than that can prove difficult. One of the first religions of 
the world may very well have been Shamanistic in nature; this mythological framework that reflects
and refracts throughout the world began to develop in the Upper Paleolithic and Mesozoic eras. 
Practices concerning the resurrection of animals and the preservation of species evidently 
played an important part and were closely tied to animalistic conceptions. [...] Although 
shamanism may have been initiated earlier, it was now somewhat evident, at least in some of
43 Renberg, Where Dreams May Come: Incubation Ceremonies in the Greco-Roman World, pp. 218
its aspects.44 
So from the beginning of mankind's development, shamanism has been present. The trial of 
the shaman is seminal to the core of humanity. It is a deeply spiritual practice, a 'wholing' of human 
experience. The shaman unites areas such as religion, psychology, medicine, and theology which 
in Western life have become separate.45 There's no doubt that the echoes of shamanistic ways of 
thought are deeply engraved on the collective human consciousness. Csordas speculates that Given
the prevalence of religious healing and the global interrelation of religion and healing, the category 
of the holy man in its own way may be fundamental to our understanding of health and health 
problems.46 The shaman is one such holy man. However, not every religious practitioner is a 
shaman. Eliade elaborates: Hence any ecstatic cannot be considered a shaman; the shaman 
specializes in a trance during which his soul is believed to leave his body and ascend to the sky or 
descend to the underworld.47
The journeys to zones of significance that the shaman takes bear a striking, not coincidental, 
similarity to the ones of The Hero's Journey. 
The role of trance and journeying is taken by dreaming or a 'vision quest', especially in the 
Plains area. Young men, and sometimes women, go into the wilderness and fast for some 
days to seek a vision from the spirits.
The shaman is chosen by the spirits and in the central experience of initiation is often 
symbolically killed by the spirits and reborn.
Shamans cannot function unaided and are dependent for their achievements on helpers, so 
that their feats are not so much super human as super-assisted.
Often they provide the shaman with magical abilities or strengths which correspond to their
own properties.48
The immediate comparisons to The Hero's Journey continue in that symbolic resurrection 
44 Karl J. Narr, Prehistoric Religion (2018), https://www.britannica.com/topic/prehistoric-religion [accessed 23 January 
2019] (para. 27 of 32).
45 Piers Vitebsky, Shamanism, (London: Duncan Baird Publishers, 1995), p. 154.
46 Tomas J. Csordas, 'The Rhetoric of Transformation in Ritual Healing', in Body/Meaning/Healing, (Hampshire, 
England, Pargrave Macmillan 2002) pp. 11-57 (pp. 11)
47 Mircea Eliade, General Considerations, Recruiting Methods, Shamanism and Mystical Vocation Approaches in 
Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy, trans. by Willard R. Trask, (London, England, Routledge & Keegan 
1964) pp. 3-32 (pp. 5)
48 Vitebsky, pp. 42-43, 52, and 66.
https://www.britannica.com/topic/prehistoric-religion
and themes of initiation exist in both, as do Campbell's ideas of of gathering powerful allies and 
gaining supernatural assistance. Of course, in The Hero's Journey the supernatural quality of the 
allies can be, and often are, symbolic, while for shamanic persona supernaturalism is a real vital 
force. In a sense, the shaman's initiation and the daily rites they perform are a precursor to the 
modern myth construction of The Hero's Journey. The fundamental similarities between the two 
show that the shamanistic practice of religion may be the root ancestor of all myths, all stories. 
Nathan's story is littered with references to shamanism:
Callings was the book that was as close to a Bible that modern shamans had.49
There are also more oblique references to shamanic practices:
I bit the pen cap off and held it in my mouth. I scribbled a quick message onto the surface 
of the bookmark, Robin's totem.50
Among the shamans, butterflies are symbols of change and rebirth. They're a little bit 
magic, spinning us off into new paths and stories we'd never imagined. And yet they're my 
spirit animal.51
What of Robin? The roles of Peter, Iris, and Nathan's spirit animal, Amelia are clearly 
delineated in both The Hero's Journey and serve a function in his shamanic trial. But Robin seems 
to fit cleanly only in the former, as Nathan's 'Ultimate Boon' (in a figurative sense). However, 
shamans are fundamentally healers, and a healer without a patient is of little use. She is laid low by 
a spirit, one of considerable power and malevolent intent. It is up to Nathan to cleanse her soul by 
engaging the spirit in combat, often lethal combat: The main part of my job is killing witches and 
sorcerers. I am terrified every time before I perform a big ritual because I know that each time, one 
of us has to die.52 This notion of healing is important. And for Csordas, it is not only physical 
healing that is important:
The tripartite concept of the person is the basis for three distinct but interrelated types of 
healing: physical healing of bodily illness, inner healing of emotional illness or distress, and 
deliverance from the adverse effects of demons or evil spirits. [] Inner healing may be 
aimed at removing the effects of a particular life trauma.53
49 Eck, p. 20
50 Eck, p. 127
51 Eck, p. 43
52 Vitebsky, p.74.
53 Csordas, Body/Meaning/Healing, pp. 14
These are the elements of healing I went through in the previous sections. Shamans are 
responsible for all kinds of healing. We see Robin experience physical healing and 'recover' from 
her non-corporeal state of kidnap as well as Iris' miraculous reawakening. Though in the case of my 
novel it overlaps with physical healing, Robin also experiences deliverance from an evil spirit. And 
of course in the previous section on trauma I detailed how Peter, Nathan, and Robin complete or 
begin inner healing of emotional traumas. 
Who, then, is our shaman, the person administering this 'tripartite' healing? Peter is a 
possible candidate as he undergoes the death and rebirth necessary for shamans.
Like the sick man, the religious man is projected onto a vital plane that shows him the 
fundamental data of human existence, that is, solitude, danger, hostility of the surrounding 
world. But the primitive magician, the medicine man, or the shaman is not only a sick man; 
he is, above all, a sick man who has been cured, who has succeeded in curing himself. Often
the shaman's or medicine man's vocation is revealed through an illness or an epileptoid 
attack, the initiation of the candidate is equivalent to a cure.54
This is a similar circumstance to Peter's rebirth at the hands of Teddy. Also, The pre-
eminently shamanic technique is the passage from one cosmic region to another- from earth to sky, 
or from earth to Underworld.55 Peter displays complete mastery of this ability. He is able to slip in 
and out of the dream world without the aid of Teddy's drugs. 'I won't need any equipment, or 
drugs,' Peter said, looking uncomfortable. 'I've been able to sleep whenever and for as long as I 
want, since that day.'56 
Teddy, Iris, Robin, perhaps even Nathan's father also display various shamanic traits, but of 
course it is Nathan who is the primary shaman, though he is unaware of it. The two points presented
as evidence of Peter's shamanic abilities also apply to Nathan. The young man also experienced a 
sort of death and resurrection when he was struck by a car at the onset of the Earthquake. Though it 
was more of a metaphorical 'death', it is common for these elements to be symbolic for real life 
shamans as well. Eliade once again elaborates on this- We have several times observed the 
initiatory essence of the candidates 'death' followed by his 'resurrection' in whatever form this takes 
place- ecstatic dreams, sickness, unusual events, or ritual proper.57 And though his control is not as 
refined as Peter's, Nathan drifts in and out of dreams frequently. 
54 Eliade, Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy, pp. 27
55 Eliade, Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy, pp. 259
56 Eck, pp. 175
57 Eliade, Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy, pp. 64
However Nathan has many traits beyond though that make him a fit for the shaman 
archetype. For example, when shamans are recruited it happens in one of two ways: (1) hereditary 
transmission of the shamanic profession and (2) spontaneous vocation ('call' or 'election') Nathan 
falls into the second category, the calling more or less pressed onto him by Teddy and, to a lesser 
extent, Iris. Next: However selected, a shaman is not recognized as such until after he has received 
two kinds of teaching: (1) ecstatic (dreams, trances, etc.) and (2) traditional (shamanic techniques, 
names and functions of spirits, mythology and genealogy of the clan, secret language, etc.)58 
Nathan receives both kinds of training. He gets what we might glibly call 'on the job' training by 
being thrust several times into dreamscapes, where he also receives tutelage from Iris. Through the 
course of the novel, while doing research on the spirit in the occult bookstore Talisman, he receives 
a 'traditional' shamanic education, as well as from interactions with Teddy and Peter.
Nathan also gains the aid of helping spirits frequently associated with Shamans. 
Meanwhile, we must note that the majority of these familiar and helping spirits have animal forms.
[] they can appear in the form of bears, wolves, stags, hares, all kinds of birds.59
It is Nathan who experiences a shamanic initiation and subsequent teaching. Nathan receives
the helping spirit animal. Nathan travels through other planes of existence in order to bring about 
healing, in both Robin's physical trauma and his own mental trauma, succeeding in healing himself. 
How does all this tie together with the concepts laid out in the other sections of this essay?
 As previously stated, the concept of traveling through dreams is deeply connected to 
shamanism, as Piers Vitebsky notes: Shamanic logic starts from the idea that the soul can leave the
body. This happens to everyone at death, but the experience of dreaming is taken to show that the 
soul can also wander independently and return without causing death.60 Nathan is going through a 
'vision quest' of sorts, his soul leaving his body in sleep, but without causing death. This is yet 
another kind of journey, one that envelops all the others.
For his part, Nathan is not a strong believer in shamanic precepts, but that doesn't matter. 
Just like it doesn't matter that a story doesn't closely hew to The Hero's Journey guidelines. Both 
Campbell's framework and Shamanism are symbols of something greater. 
People say they believe in God. God is a metaphor for a mystery that absolutely transcends 
all categories of human thought. Even the categories of being and nonbeing. Those are 
categories of thought. I mean it's as simple as that. It depends on how much you want to 
think about it. Whether it's putting you in touch with the mystery that is the ground of your 
58 Eliade, Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy, pp. 13
59 Eliade, Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy, pp. 89
60 Vitebsky, p. 12.
own being. If it isn't, well, it's a lie. 
So half the people in the world are religious people who think that their metaphors are facts. 
Those are what we call theists. The other half are people who know that metaphors are not 
facts and so they're lies. Those are the atheists.61
Nathan's journey is the journey all shamans and heroes take. The story of Nathan, Robin, 
and Peter is an echoing of an ancient form. The trial of the shaman. A Hero's Journey, a trial of 
trauma and recovery and healing. The Hero's Journey may be the narrative framework of the novel, 
the bones of how it works, trauma, guilt, and self-forgiveness are the three interrelated themes 
wound throughout the meat of The Disappearance of Robin Melling, and the notion of the healing 
power of dreams may be a recurring motif throughout the story, but shamanism is the underlying 
mythology which binds them, and the novel itself, together. 
And, of course, the practice of writing a novel itself is a kind of healing, a therapy for the 
mind. Art has always been therapeutic, going back to those same peoples who first developed 
shamans- they also painted on cave walls. And why do you suppose they were moved to create 
them? The answer, of course, is healing. As Vogler says, I'm retelling the hero myth in my own 
way, and you should feel free to do the same. Every storyteller bends the mythic pattern to his or 
her how purpose or needs of a particular culture. That's why the hero has a thousand faces62
61 Campbell, The Hero's Journey, p. 161.
62 Vogler, p. 7.
Bibliography
Works Cited
Belicki, Kathryn, and Cuddy, Marion, 'Identifying Sexual Trauma Histories from Patterns of Sleep and 
Dreams', in Trauma and Dreams, ed. by Deirdre Barrett (London, United Kingdom: Harvard 
University Press), pp. 46-55 
Buber, Marin, 'Guilt and Guilt Feelings', in Guilt and Shame, ed. by Herbert Morris, (Belmont, California:
Wadsworth Publishing House, Inc., 1971), pp. 58-81
Campbell, Joseph, The Hero With a Thousand Faces, (Novato, California: Pantheon Books 1949)
Campbell, Joseph, The Hero's Journey, (New York, New York: Harper & Row, 2003)
Csordas, Tomas J., 'The Rhetoric of Transformation in Ritual Healing', in Body/Meaning/Healing, 
(Hampshire, England, Pargrave Macmillan 2002) pp. 11-57
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor, 'Stavrogin's Confession', in Guilt and Shame, ed. by Herbert Morris, trans. by 
Avraham Yarmolinsky, (Belmont, California: Wadsworth Publishing Company, Inc., 1971), pp. 6-39
Eck, Andrew A., 'The Disappearance of Robin Melling', (unpublished doctoral thesis Swansea University, 
2019)
Eck, Andrew A., The Disappearance of Robin Melling, (unpublished thesis draft, Swansea University, 2017)
Eliade, Mircea, General Considerations, Recruiting Methods, Shamanism and Mystical Vocation 
Approaches in Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy, trans. by Willard R. Trask, (London, 
England, Routledge & Keegan 1964) 
Fingarette, Herbert, 'Real Guilt and Neurotic Guilt', in Guilt and Shame, ed. by Herbert Morris, (Belmont, 
California: Wadsworth Publishing Company, Inc., 1971), pp. 82-94
Freud, Sigmund, 'Origin of the Sense of Guilt', in Guilt and Shame, ed. by Herbert Morris, trans. by James 
Strachey, (Belmont, California: Wadsworth Publishing Company, Inc., 1971), pp. 54-57
Hartman, Ernest, 'Who Develops PTSD Nightmares and Who Doesn't', in Trauma and Dreams, ed. by 
Deirdre Barrett (London, United Kingdom: Harvard University Press), pp. 100-113 
Holowchak, M. Andrew, 'Oneirology in Ancient Medicine' in Ancient Science and Dreams: Oneirology in 
Greco-Roman Antiquity, (Lanham, Maryland: University Press of America, 2002)
Jung, C.G., 'The Practical Use of Dream Analysis', in Collected Works of C.G. Jung Volume 16: The Practice
of Psychotherapy, trans. by R.F.C. Hull, (London, England, Routledge and Kegan Paul, Ltd., 1954), 
pp. 141-162
Karl J. Narr, Prehistoric Religion (2018), https://www.britannica.com/topic/prehistoric-religion [accessed 23 
January 2019] (para. 27 of 32)
Nader, Kathleen, 'Children's Traumatic Dreams', in Trauma and Dreams, ed. by Deirdre Barrett (London, 
United Kingdom: Harvard University Press 1996), pp. 9-24
Oneirology,  YourDictionary. (n.d.), https://www.yourdictionary.com/Oneirology [accessed 13th March 2020] 
(para. 2 of 3)
Renberg, Gil H., 'Incubation Terminology', in Where Dreams May Come: Incubation Ceremonies in the 
Greco-Roman World Volume 1, (Leiden, The Netherlands, Koninklijke Brill NV, 2016), pp. 7-18
Schallegger, Rene, 'The Nightmares of Politicians: on the Rise of Fantasy Literature', in Collisions of 
Realities: Establishing Research on the Fantastic in Europe, ed. by Lars Schmeink and Astrid 
Boger (Berlin, Germany: De Gruyter, inc. 2012), pp. 29-48
Stoddard, Frederick J., Chedekal, David S., and Shakun, Laura, 'Dreams and Nightmares of Burned 
Children', in Trauma and Dreams, ed. by Deirdre Barrett (London, United Kingdom: Harvard 
University Press), pp. 25-45
Thinley Kalsang Bhutia, Bildungsroman (2017), https://www.britannica.com/art/bildungsroman [accessed 22
June 2019] (para. 1 of 4)
Vitebsky, Piers, Shamanism, (London, United Kingdom: Duncan Baird Publishers, 1995)
Vogler, Christopher, The Writer's Journey: Mythic Structure for Writers, (Ann Arbor, Michigan: Sheridan 
Books, 1998) pp. 65-66
Works Consulted
Atwood, M., Murder in the Dark, (Toronto, Canada: Coach House Books, 1983)
Ball, J., Silence Once Begun, (Melbourne, Australia: Griffin Press, 2014)
Ballard, J.G., The Drowned World, (London, United Kingdom: Fourth Estate, 1962)
Barnes, A., Nod, (London, United Kingdom: Titan Books, 2015)
Barnes, J., The Sense of an Ending, (London, United Kingdom: Jonathan Cape, 2011)
Barry, P., Beginning Theory, (Manchester, United Kingdom: Manchester University Press, 2009)
Borges, J. L., Labyrinths: Selected Stores and Other Writings, (New York, New York: New Directions, 
1962)
Boyle, M., Selected Unpublished Blog Posts of a Mexican Panda Express Employee,  (muumuu house, 2011)
Calvino, I., Invisible Cities, (San Diego, California: Harcourt, 1972)
Cantacuzino, M., The Forgiveness Project, (London, United Kingdom: Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 2016)
Cantero, E., Meddling Kids, (London, United Kingdom: Titan Books, 2018)
Carshore, K., Graceling, (San Diego, California: Harcourt, 2008)
Chainani, S., The School for Good and Evil, (London, United Kingdom: HarperCollins, 2013)
Chiang, T., Arrival, (London, United Kingdom: Picador, 2002)
Ciurara, C., ed, Beat Poets, (United Kingdom: Everyman's Library, 2002)
Cohen, R., How To Write Like Tolstoy, (New York, New York: Random House, 2016)
Cryer, J., Breathing on Glass, (London, United Kingdom: Little, Brown and Company, 2012)
Dafydd, F., The White Trail, (Brigend, Wales: Seren, 2011)
Danielewski, M. Z., House of Leaves, (New York, New York: Pantheon, 2000)
De Saint-Exupery, A., The Little Prince, trans. by Jung Sung-ja, (Seoul, South Korea: Indigo, 1943)
Dimitri, F., The Book of Hidden Things, (London, United Kingdom: Titan Books, 2018)
Dunthorne, J., Submarine, (London, United Kingdom: Hamish Hamilton, 2008)
Fernando, R., Homesick, (London, United Kingdom: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2010) 
Gaiman, N., The Graveyard Book, (London, United Kingdom: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2009)
Gaiman, N., The Ocean At The End Of The Lane, (London, United Kingdom: Headline Publishing, 2013) 
Gaiman, N., Trigger Warning, (London, United Kingdom: Headline Publishing, 2015)
Glass, L., Blue, (London, United Kingdom: Quercus, 2014)
Horwood, W., Skallagrigg, (London, United Kingdom: Viking, 1987)
Ishiguro, K., A Pale View of Hills, (London, United Kingdom: Faber and Faber, 1982)
Ishiguro, K., The Unconsolled, (London, United Kingdom: Faber and Faber, 1995)
Jones, S., Light Boxes, (Atlanta, Georgia: Publishing Genius Press, 2009)
Juster, N., The Phantom Tollbooth, (New York, New York: Epstein and Carroll, 1961)
Kafka, F., The Trial, trans. by Breon Mitchell, (New York, United States: Oxford University Press, 
1925)
Keevil, Tyler, The Drive, (Brighton, United Kingdom: Myriad Editions, 2013)
Keevil, T., Fireball, (Cardigan, Wales: Parthian, 2010) 
Keevil, T., No Good Brother, (London, United Kingdom: Harper Collins Publishers, 2018)
Lauppe-Dunbar, A., Dark Mermaids, (Brigend, Wales: Seren, 2015)
Maguire, G., After Alice, (London, United Kingdom: Headline Publishing, 2015)
Marquez, G., Collected Stories, trans. by Gregory Rabassa and J. S. Bernstein, (London, United Kingdom: 
Penguin Books, 1991)
Morriston, T., Beloved, (New York, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1987)
Murad, Mahvesh, and Shurin, Jared, eds, The Djinn Falls In Love & Other Stories, (Oxford, United 
Kingdom: Solaris, 2017)
Murakami, H., Kafka on the Shore, (London, United Kingdom: The Harvill Press, 2002)
Murakami, H., Norwegian Wood, ed. by Jay Rubin, (Tokyo, Japan: Kodansha Ltd., 1981)
Murakami, H., The Elephant Vanishes, trans. by Alfred Brinbaum and Jay Rubin, (New York, New York: 
Alfred A. Knopf, 1993)
Ness, P., A Monster Calls, (London, United Kingdom: Walker Books, 2011)
Osbourne, L., The Ballad of a Small Player, (London, United Kingdom: Vintage, 2014)
Ozeki, R., A Tale for the Time Being, (New York, New York: Viking, 2013)
Pierre, D.B.C., Vernon God Little, (London, United Kingdom: Faber and Faber, 2003)
Plascencia, S., The People of Paper, (San Francisco, California: McSweeney's, 2005)
Polansky, D., A City Dreaming, (London, United Kingdom: Hodder & Stoughton, 2016)
Saporta, M., Composition No. 1, (London, United Kingdom: Visual Editions, 2011)
Saramago, J., Death With Interruptions, (San Diego, California: Harcourt, 2008)
Sheers, O., I Saw A Man, (London, United Kingdom: Faber and Faber, 2015)
Smith, A., The Accidental, (London, United Kingdom: Hamish Hamilton, 2005)
Tepper, S., Grass, (London, United Kingdom: Gollancz, 1989)
Vandermeer, J.,  Annihilation, (London, United Kingdom: Fourth Estate, 2014)
Vandermeer, J., Acceptance, (London, United Kingdom: Fourth Estate, 2014)
Vandermeer, J., Authority, (London, United Kingdom: Fourth Estate, 2014)
Vandermeer, J., City of Saints and Madmen, (Gaithersburg, Maryland: Prime Books, 2002)
Wong, D., John Dies at the End, (London, United Kingdom: Titan Books, 2011)
Wong, D., This Book is Full of Spiders, (New York, New York: Thomas Dunne Books, 2012)
Zafron, C. R., The Shadow of the Wind, trans. by Lucia Graves, (London, United Kingdom: Weidenfeld & 
Nicholson, 2001)
