ORBIT - Online Repository of Birkbeck Institutional Theses
Enabling Open Access to Birkbecks Research Degree output
A Compass in the Sea of Life: Soviet Journalism, the
Public, and the Limits of Reform After Stalin, 1953-
https://eprints.bbk.ac.uk/id/eprint/40022/
Version: Full Version
Citation: Huxtable, Simon (2013) A Compass in the Sea of Life: Soviet
Journalism, the Public, and the Limits of Reform After Stalin, 1953-1968.
[Thesis] (Unpublished)
c 2020 The Author(s)
All material available through ORBIT is protected by intellectual property law, including copy-
right law.
Any use made of the contents should comply with the relevant law.
Deposit Guide
Contact: email
https://eprints.bbk.ac.uk/id/eprint/40022/
https://eprints.bbk.ac.uk/theses.html
mailto:lib-eprints@bbk.ac.uk
A Compass in the Sea of Life 
Soviet Journalism, the Public, and the Limits of 
Reform After Stalin, 1953-1968 
Simon Huxtable 
Thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements 
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
University of London 
I confirm that the work presented in this thesis is my own, and the work of 
other persons is appropriately acknowledged. 
Simon Huxtable 
The copyright of this thesis rests with the author, who asserts his right to be 
known as such according to the Copyright Designs and Patents Act 1988. No 
dealing with the thesis contrary to the copyright or moral rights of the author is 
permitted.  
ABSTRACT 
This thesis examines the development of Soviet journalism between 1953 and 
1968 through a case study of the youth newspaper Komsomolskaia pravda. 
Stalins death removed the climate of fear and caution that had hitherto 
characterised Soviet journalism, and allowed for many values to be debated and 
renegotiated. This study examines these debates within their wider 
professional, social, and political contexts, and thus illuminates the possibilities 
and limits of reform in the post-Stalin era. In a period of rising educational 
levels, a widely-perceived crisis of youth values, and growing mass media 
saturation both from within the Soviet Union and from outside, Komsomolskaia 
pravda journalists understanding of themselves as protectors and educators of 
the public came into conflict with the belief that the press should be 
entertaining and informative. Moreover, there were continued tensions 
between the requirement for the press to be a beacon of social change, which 
journalists enthusiastically embraced, and the need for it to ensure social 
stability. This led to the collapse of the Stalinist propaganda state model.  
The thesis comprises five short thematic histories, each discussing 
different facets of the newspapers work. It arrays a wide range of sources, from 
memoirs to Agit-Prop documents, but its main sources are the newspapers 
themselves and the transcripts of editorial discussions and Party meetings, 
which together explain not only what was published, but why. By examining the 
press from the point of view of its producers, this study challenges previous 
interpretations of Soviet propaganda. It shows that Soviet journalists were not 
wholly subservient to Party dictates, but were not dissidents either. Instead, the 
thesis suggests that the professionalization of journalism and relaxation of 
political controls allowed journalists to develop shared norms and establish 
priorities that borrowed from, but differed from those of the Party, leading to 
frequent conflict and confusion. 
CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION | Party Assistants or Professionals? Rethinking Soviet 
CHAPTER 1 | Shortcomings: The Limits of Press Criticism Before and After 
CHAPTER 2 | Making News Soviet: Changing Attitudes to Information after 
2.1 The Bread of the Paper: Debates about Information under Khrushchev
CHAPTER 3 | Edited Subjects: Letters, Diaries and Notebooks of Our 
CHAPTER 4 | This number says a lot: The Institute of Public Opinion and the 
CHAPTER 5 | The reader is not an icon: from the Reader-citizen to the Reader-
CONCLUSION | A Compass in the Sea of Life: Journalists and their Public Before 
LIST OF FIGURES 
FIGURE 1: Komsomolskaia pravda Editorial Structure, 1957 55 
FIGURE 2: Column Space Devoted to Different Geographical Locations, 1951 187 
FIGURE 3: Column Space Devoted to Different Geographical Locations, 1961 188 
FIGURE 4: List of Surveys Undertaken by the IOM 233 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This dissertation has benefited from the generous support of the Arts and 
Humanities Research Council.  Funding for research at the Hoover Institution 
was provided by the Royal Historical Society, who also, along with the British 
Association for Slavonic and East European Studies, awarded funds to attend 
the ASEEES conference in Washington DC in 2011.   
The process of completing this PhD has been made incomparably easier by a 
number of people who went out of their way to offer assistance.  Anna 
Pilkington and Olga Makarova were kind enough to allow me to audit their 
Russian language courses at Queen Mary, University of London at the start of 
my studies, without which none of what followed would have been possible.  My 
thanks also to the administrative and library staff at Birkbeck College, who have 
provided help throughout help throughout my MA and PhD. 
Galina Mikhailovna Tokareva in the Komsomol archive provided no end of 
helpful advice and assistance, and made it a priority to ensure that I did not 
become any thinner by insisting that I eat lunch in the stolovaia.  Her 
remarkable anecdotes, pride in her work, and goodwill towards all those 
interested in the history of Soviet youth have provided some of the most 
enduring memories of this project.  Kapitolina Kozhevnikova generously took 
the time to share with me her memories of her work at Komsomolka and 
Literaturnaia gazeta. 
I am extremely grateful to both Dr Jessica Reinisch and Dr Polly Jones, who 
stepped in to supervise the project at a difficult time, provided invaluable 
feedback and advice, and set my neurotic mind at ease.  I would also like to 
thank Dr Nik Wachsmann for agreeing to supervise the project in its closing 
stages and reading the final draft.  Professor Orlando Figes also read early drafts 
of the introduction and Chapter 4. 
I would also like to thank a number of people whom I met during my time 
writing the thesis.  Dina Fainberg reminded me that I was not ploughing a lone 
furrow with my work on Soviet journalism.  Michel Abesser, who made my 
research in Moscow incomparably more enjoyable, has been a beacon of the 
Thaw ideal of international friendship.  Josh Clayton, Daniel Levitsky, and Anna 
Toropova have provided support, good conversation, infectious enthusiasm for 
all things Soviet and a willingness to meet for a restorative beer.  I owe all of 
them a drink. 
My family have supported me through thick and thin, even when the usefulness 
of a degree in History must have seemed difficult to discern.  Hopefully this 
thesis can go some way to showing that it has not been in vain. 
Chrysi Papaioannou has kept my spirits up, put up with my jokes, and made 
sure no participle was left hanging.  It is a clich to say I couldnt have done it 
without you, but here it is unavoidable.  It is to her that I dedicate this thesis. 
A	NOTE	ON	ARCHIVAL	REFERENCES 
The main archives used in this thesis and their abbreviations are: 
Gosudarstvennyi arkhiv Rossiiskoi Federatsii GARF 
Rossiiskii gosudarstvennyi arkhiv noveishei istorii RGANI 
Rossiiskii gosudarstvennyi arkhiv sotsial'no-politicheskoi istorii  
(Dokumenty Komsomola i molodezhnykh organizatsii) 
RGASPI 
Tsentral'nyi arkhiv obshchestvenno-politicheskoi istorii Moskvy TsAOPIM 
Hoover Institution Archives HIA 
Russian archives use the following subdivisions, which are employed in this 
thesis: 
Fond f. 
Opis op. 
Delo d. 
List l. 
Where possible, archival references contain a description of the source, a date, 
and archival details.  For example: 
Kraminov to TsK KPSS, 26/10/54, RGANI, f.5, op.16, d.671, ll.34-35 
Description of source Date Archive Document Location 
For reasons of space, there is one key exception: the editorial letuchki and Party 
Organization meetings of Komsomolskaia pravda.  These are referred to in the 
following manner: 
Komsomolskaia pravda Party Meetings 
Closed Party Meeting, 23/1/50, d.25, l.2 
Type of party meeting 
Open or closed, if stated 
in original source 
Date Document location   
All Party Meetings for KP are in 
TsAOPIM, f.1968, op.1. In 
references, only the delo and list 
are provided. 
Komsomolskaia pravda letuchki 
All archival references beginning with a date refer to Komsomolskaia pravda 
letuchki transcripts.  Thus: 
13/9/54, d.131, ll.38-39 
Date Document location 
 All letuchki for KP are in RGASPI, 
f.98M, op.1.  In references, only 
the delo and list are provided. 
INTRODUCTION | 11 
INTRODUCTION | Party Assistants or Professionals? Rethinking 
Soviet Journalism after Stalin 
In August 1956, a short story entitled Editor-in-Chief appeared in the literary 
journal Novyi mir, written by Tatiana Tess, a sketch writer at the government 
newspaper Izvestiia.1  Tess recounts the story of Klavdiia Leonidovna 
Kramskaia, a corrector at an unnamed Leningrad-based newspaper.  In the 
storys opening paragraphs, Klavdiia visits various editorial departments to 
point out the fact that, for instance, the lawn-and-garden tractor KhTZ-7 was 
mistakenly called the KhMZ-6.  Colleagues fear her, and call her Nemesis 
behind her back.  But one day, Klavdiia is accused of making an error in a report 
about a medical conference because of which publication of the new edition is 
delayed.  Klavdiia is plunged into turmoil, suffering a dark night of the soul, 
before coming to a realisation: 
All her life, she had fostered [] in herself a strict internal discipline.  
This discipline demanded merciless captiousness [ 
], tireless, brazen exactingness [ 
].  It wasnt so easy to get rid of them.  Humanly [-
], she understood that perfectly.  How many times had she suffered 
offensive reproaches for pettiness, for intolerance, for dry pedantry  She heard 
out these reproaches, without justifying herself.  There was something that only 
she knew about.  In the depths of her heart there lived a great, tender love for a 
person [ ], to whom she had been devoted and unselfishly served all 
her life  a simple and wonderful person called the reader.2 
At the end of the story, Klavdiia suspects that her mistake was, in reality, an 
error made by the Head of the Department of Information, a certain Shmelev.  In 
the storys final set piece, she accuses him of a lack of attentiveness in failing to 
check the proofs.  He denies it, before adding: And what if its true?  Big deal  
Think about it, a trifling story about some second-class conference.  In the 
redaktsiia everybodys forgotten about such rubbish.  Klavdiia is outraged: A 
trifling story  A second-class conference.  In a newspaper there cannot be a 
1 Tatiana Tess, Glavnyi redaktor Novyi mir 8 (1956), 183-196. 
2	Ibid.,	193.	Unless	stated,	all	translations	from	Russian	sources	in	this	thesis	are	my	own. 
INTRODUCTION | 12 
trifling story.  In science there are no second-class conferences.  Dont you 
understand? (195)  Shmelev replies that Klavdiia is taking the whole thing too 
seriously  Anyone would think that youre the Editor-in-Chief. (196)  
Everybody has one Editor-in-Chief  and thats the reader she cries out, later 
adding:  
Yes, Im an insignificant worker, youre right.  And its true that I havent written 
two lines in my whole life.  But I know very well that every reader, whether he 
can write or not, has only one heart. It cant be saved, like a pocket battery, but 
has to be used in everything you do.   A person who doesnt respect the reader 
has no place at the paper (196) 
Tesss story delivers an insight into the changing social values of Soviet 
journalists after the Twentieth Party Congress and is in many ways a manifesto 
for post-Stalinist journalism.  The corrector was an archetypal Stalinist 
occupation, representing the pedantic desire for accuracy over inspiration that 
characterised the press during that period, which was filled with banal 
materials about second class conferences in out-of-the-way places.  Klavdiias 
internal discipline represented the dominant attitude to policing the self, and 
society as a whole.  Her sudden realisation that the journalist was primarily 
responsible to the reader was indicative of a shift in journalistic attitudes, and 
suggested that, in order to throw off the fear of error sown by Stalinism, 
journalists needed to overcome their negligent approach to their audience. 
This thesis, a case study of the youth newspaper Komsomolskaia pravda (KP) 
from the death of Stalin to the Prague Spring, examines the change in 
orientation implied by Tesss short story.  It shows how journalists renegotiated 
their competing commitments to the Party, to the profession, and to the public, 
and illustrates how the parameters of this relationship developed over time.  By 
looking at the Soviet press from the point of view of its producers, this thesis 
suggests that Soviet propaganda was less top-down than is often thought.  
INTRODUCTION | 13 
Rather than mute processors of party orders or cynical resisters3, journalists of 
the post-Stalin period emerge as mediators between politicians and public  as 
the group most responsible for giving a human face to the regimes ideas and 
making them appeal to the public.  Soviet ideology was thus the end product of a 
negotiation  albeit unequal  between different parties, rather than a set of 
commandments. 
The study covers a pivotal period in which outright terror was 
renounced as a method of social control.  Khrushchevs Secret Speech at the 
Twentieth Party Congress in 1956 was one of the main vehicles of this change.  
His attack on Stalins cult of personality fostered a less restrictive social 
atmosphere, but also created a number of historical lacunae that proved difficult 
to explain, and even more difficult to fashion into a useable past.  It cast doubt 
on the actions of party leaders during the period of Terror in the 1930s, and 
destroyed the idea of Soviet history as a story of linear progress.  The speech 
also created a sense of crisis amongst Soviet journalists.  It was the press, after 
all, which had played such a central role in burnishing the image of the leader in 
print.   An editorial in Pravda later that year called for a serious reconstruction 
of the press, and demanded that journalists eliminate the presss dull and 
superficial approach to reporting on life and clichs, vague judgements and 
political blather.4  
Komsomolskaia pravda was at the heart of the process of overturning 
these ingrained Stalinist habits, providing many of the forms that would 
animate the Thaw press elsewhere.5  As a youth newspaper, it needed to find 
popular forms to engage young readers, who were thought to be intolerant of 
3 Ivan Zassoursky has suggested that Sergei Dovlatovs cynical satire Compromise is an accurate 
description of how the Soviet press functioned behind the scenes: Media and Power in Post-
Soviet Russia (Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 2004), p.231. 
4	Bolshie	i	pochetnye	zadachi	sovetskoi	pechati	Pravda	5/5/56,	1. 
5	Because	of	 the	historical	equation	of	 the	 term	 Thaw	with	 liberalism	(see	Stephen	F.	Cohen,	
The	Friends	and	Foes	of	Change:	Reformism	and	Conservatism	in	the	Soviet	Union,	in	The	Soviet	
Union	 Since	 Stalin,	 ed.	 by	 Stephen	 F.	 Cohen,	 Alexander	 Rabinowitch	 and	 Robert	 Sharlet	
(Basingstoke:	 Macmillan,	 1980),	 pp.1131),	 this	 thesis	 generally	 avoids	 the	 term,	 despite	 its	
rhetorical	convenience,	and	the	spirited	defence	of	the	term	in	Steven	Bittners	The	Many	Lives	of	
Khrushchev's	 Thaw:	 Experience	 and	Memory	 in	Moscow's	 Arbat	 (Ithaca,	NY:	 Cornell	 University	
Press,	2008). 
INTRODUCTION | 14 
falsehood and the dull material that often passed for journalism.6  In 1956, a 
young reader spoke of her sceptical relationship to lifes questions, as a result 
of the Soviet medias varnishing of life.7  Young people were thought to be 
especially susceptible to the vicissitudes of the political climate.  As Elena 
Bruskova commented at an editorial meeting: 
 we must remember that todays twenty-year old studied in the First Grade and 
read dictionaries in which the name of Stalin appeared on almost every page, and 
then disappeared; Stalingrad was renamed as Volgograd and then Stalingrad 
again.  Then there was the time when we took our children by the hand to the see 
Our Dear Nikita Sergeevich.  And then it turned out that it was a time of 
voluntarism.  All of that cannot but leave an imprint on a young twenty-year 
old.8 
Soviet youth needed to be guided, or else they would become confused and 
disillusioned.  Journalists at the paper tried to find a new voice with which to 
talk sincerely about moral and ethical issues, truthfully about the world around 
them, and critically about shortcomings in everyday life.  The bulging postbags 
of reader correspondence would seem to suggest that the change in the content 
of KP was successful, while subscription levels rose to previously unattained 
heights: rising 300 per cent from 1.5 million in 1955, to 7.7 million in 1970.9 
This study crosses the boundary between the Khrushchev and Brezhnev 
periods, and challenges dominant periodisations of the 1950s and 1960s.  
Historical accounts paint the shift from Khrushchev to Brezhnev as a turn from 
liberalisation to restriction.10  In contrast to the noise of the Khrushchev-era 
press, the hallmark of the period under Brezhnev was silence, claimed John 
Murray.11  There is some truth to this: from the late 1960s the press became 
6 Natalia Roudakova, Comparing Transitions: Media, 'Transitions,' and Historical Change, in 
Comparing Media Systems Beyond the Western World, ed. by Daniel C. Hallin and Paolo Mancini 
(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2012), p.258.  
7 11/6/56, d.173, ll.8-10. 
8 17/10/67, d.455, l.52. 
9	Goriunov	to	Shelepin,	31/8/55,	RGASPI	f.98M,	op.1,	d.155,	l.84;	Letopis'	periodicheskikh	izdanii	
SSSR	1966-1970.	Chast	II	(Moscow:	Kniga,	1967),	p.9. 
10	See	Thomas	C.	Wolfe,	Governing	Soviet	Journalism:	The	Press	and	the	Soviet	Person	after	Stalin	
(Bloomington,	IN:	Indiana	University	Press,	2004),	pp.104-142. 
11	John	Murray,	The	Russian	Press	from	Brezhnev	to	Yeltsin:	Behind	the	Paper	Curtain	(Aldershot:	
INTRODUCTION | 15 
more formulaic, and right from the beginning of Brezhnevs leadership there 
was increasing intolerance of criticism and dissidence.  However, this thesis 
shows that there is another story to be told of the early Brezhnev period.  Far 
from being the endpoint of Khrushchev-era reforms, the Brezhnev-Kosygin 
leadership promoted a modernising impulse which changed the way journalists 
viewed themselves and their public role.  They were encouraged to reject the 
voluntarism of the Khrushchev era, and instead become the cheerleaders for 
rational discussion of economic issues, mirroring the regimes technocratic 
goals.  At the same time, they sought to forge closer links with readers by 
commissioning sociological studies of their audience.  This became especially 
urgent after market principles were applied to press distribution.  This thesis 
suggests that the early Brezhnev era, rather than marking the death of the 
Thaw, represented an intensification of some of its ideals. 
On a more profound level, there was a continuity between Khrushchev 
and Brezhnev-era journalism.  Khrushchevs speech forced a change in methods 
of propaganda.  Mirroring the move from coercion to persuasion, journalists 
were now expected not just to promote stability, but to encourage social change 
through public discussion and debate.  This change gave propagandists, with 
journalists at the forefront, a far wider role in administering the public than 
they had previously enjoyed.  But, unlike the 1920s and 1930s, when a parade of 
heroes and explorers captured the imagination of the public, the journalists of 
the post-Stalin period struggled to find convincing forms of mass journalism to 
drive social change.  KP journalists frequently referred to their readers as 
having grown up, meaning that young readers would no longer be swayed by 
mere assertions of truth, but needed more intelligent forms of agitation.  But in 
an age of greater media literacy and increased education, the papers journalists 
expressed frequent disquiet about unhealthy moods amongst Soviet youth and 
concern that their influence over young people was waning.  Indeed, the story of 
Komsomolskaia pravda in the 1950s and 1960s is partly a story of journalists in 
their thirties trying to catch up with the tastes and habits of readers in their 
Edward	Elgar,	1994),	p.31. 
INTRODUCTION | 16 
teens: trends which included an increasing lack of interest in the Partys 
messages, and a nasty habit of listening to Western radio.  This thesis thus 
suggests that in the Khrushchev and Brezhnev era alike, KPs journalists were 
dealing with a similar question: how could the Soviet press educate readers in 
an age where the old ideological certainties were becoming increasingly 
fractured? 
1 From Lenin to Khrushchev 
Newspapers were always close to the thoughts of the Soviet elite.  The press 
was the flag-bearer for the regimes ideals and provided an ideal and ever-
expanding tool for delivering the Partys message to the masses.  Many of the 
revolutions leading figures had worked for the press; Lenin gave his occupation 
as journalist on his Party card.  In Where to Begin? he wrote that The 
newspaper is not only a collective propagandist and a collective agitator, but 
also a collective organiser.12  This phrase was repeated ad infinitum by 
subsequent generations of Soviet journalists, leading some Western 
commentators to mistakenly suppose that the Soviet press flowed directly from 
the Leninist model.13 
Yet the forms of the Bolshevik press were never set in stone, even if their 
relentless pro-government stance made them seem so.  In the early post-
revolutionary period, the newspaper was a significant concern for a generation 
of intellectuals, who saw in the revolution a means for remaking the press.  
Some promoted the worker-peasant correspondent movement, seeing in the 
words of amateur journalists something more authentic than the material 
12	 V.I.	 Lenin,	 Where	 to	 Begin?	 (1901),	 in	 Lenin	 About	 the	 Press	 (Prague:	 International	
Organisation	of	Journalists,	1972),	pp.67-72	(71). 
13 Brian McNair, Glasnost, Perestroika and the Soviet Media (London: Routledge, 1991), pp.7-42; 
Frank Ellis, The Media as Social Engineer, in Russian Cultural Studies: An Introduction, ed. by 
Catriona Kelly and David Shepherd (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998), pp.192222; 
Wilbur Schramm, The Soviet Communist Theory of the Press in Four Theories of the Press: The 
Authoritarian, Libertarian, Social Responsibility, and Soviet Communist Concepts of What the Press 
should Be and Do ed. by Fred S. Siebert (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1956), pp.105-
INTRODUCTION | 17 
produced by professionals.14   Others experimented with the newspaper form: 
in the early 1920s, the Blue Blouse Living Newspaper theatrical troupe 
performed the news in satirical skits and pantomimes to workers.15  One of its 
writers was Sergei Tretiakov, who called the newspaper the central cultural 
form of the epoch: We have our epic literature, he wrote, Our epic literature is 
the newspaper.16  
 Early Soviet newspapers were largely ineffective, however.  A lack of 
trained specialists meant that editors were often forced to rely on pre-
revolutionary bourgeois journalists, whose commitment to the Communist 
cause was constantly in doubt.17  Frequent shortages of newsprint, problems of 
distribution, and financial constraints limited the ability of the Bolshevik 
leadership to disseminate its message.18  Newspapers seemed unable to speak 
the language of the masses, with readers frequently confused by their mixture of 
new terminology and bureaucratic language.19  When its language was 
genuinely popular, as was the case with many of the urban evening newspapers, 
they contained the sort of society gossip that was considered inimical to 
Bolshevik ideals.20   
 In the mid-1920s, as free newspapers were abolished, a severe regime of 
cost accounting was launched, with tighter controls imposed on content, leading 
to a fall in circulations, but a rise in profits.21  A new kind of agitational mass 
journalism, centred around the countrys production tasks, was inaugurated, 
whose tone was exhortative and agitational.  At the forefront of these 
14	 Jeremy	 Hicks,	 From	 Conduits	 to	 Commanders:	 Shifting	 Views	 of	 Worker	 Correspondents,	
1924-1926	Revolutionary	Russia	19/2	(December	2006),	131-149. 
15	 Lynn	 Mally,	 The	 Americanization	 of	 the	 Soviet	 Living	 Newspaper	 Carl	 Beck	 Papers	 1903	
(February	2008),	4-9. 
16 Sergei Tretiakov, The New Leo Tolstoy October 118 (Fall 2006), 49. 
17 Julie Kay Mueller, Staffing Newspapers and Training Journalists in Early Soviet Russia Journal 
of Social History 31/4 (Summer 1998), 851-873; Peter Kenez, The Birth of the Propaganda State: 
Soviet Methods of Mass Mobilization, 1917-1929 (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 
1985), p.46. 
18	Kenez,	pp.45-49. 
19	Michael	S.	Gorham,	Speaking	 in	Soviet	Tongues:	Language	Culture	and	 the	Politics	of	Voice	 in	
Revolutionary	Russia	(De	Kalb,	IL:	Northern	Illinois	University	Press,	2003). 
20	Matthew	Lenoe,	Closer	to	the	Masses:	Stalinist	Culture,	Social	Revolution,	and	Soviet	Newspapers	
(Cambridge,	MA:	Harvard	University	Press,	2004),	pp.108-118.	 
21	Ibid.,	pp.46-69. 
INTRODUCTION | 18 
developments was a new title, Komsomolskaia pravda, which emerged in May 
1925 as the official newspaper of the Komsomol Central Committee and the 
Moscow Komsomol organisation.22  The resolution authorising the papers 
creation stated that Komsomolskaia pravda should be a leading and at the same 
time a mass newspaper.23   
KPs early years were characterised by a lively pursuit of readers, with 
the paper featuring striking designs and a wide range of attention-grabbing 
materials, which were sometimes a little too extreme for the authorities 
liking.24  KP increased its circulation from just over 90,000 in 1925 to almost 
600,000 six years later, making it, alongside Pravda and Izvestiia, one of the 
countrys largest newspapers.25  Many readers were well beyond Komsomol 
age, but KPs success relied on its youthful appeal.  During the countrys Great 
Break, KP was the most innovative of all the papers covering the nations 
industrialisation.  Leading journalists were sent on location to report on the 
progress of mass construction tasks, and these articles enjoyed considerable 
enthusiasm amongst readers and the Party.26  
However, there were darker sides to the papers work.  KP inveighed 
against kulaks and reported with anger with the trials of so-called wreckers 
(though journalists are unlikely to have exerted much choice over the material 
they printed).27  Over the course of that decade, the forces of terror consumed 
journalists and editors.  In June 1937, a purge of the papers staff was carried 
out.  Of 187 staff, 78 (more than two fifths) were repressed, including Editor-in-
22 The Komsomol, or Vsesoiuznyi Leninskii Kommunisticheskii soiuz molodezhi (All-Union 
Leninist Communist Union of Youth), was a youth organization for 14-28 year olds, 
subordinated to the Party, set up in 1918.  Membership was not compulsory, but it nevertheless 
reached around 35 per cent of possible members by 1959, at which time its membership was 18 
million (Steven E. Solnick, Stealing the State: Control and Collapse in Soviet Institutions (Harvard, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1998), pp.64, 99). 
23	Stanislav	Goldfarb,	Komsomolskaia	pravda,	1925-2005	gg.	Ocherki	istorii	(Irkutsk:	Irkutskaia	
oblastnaia	tipografiia	No.1,	2008),	p.36. 
24	Lenoe,	pp.190-195. 
25	Tsifry	pobed	KP,	5/5/31. 
26	 David	Brandenberger,	Propaganda	 State	 in	 Crisis:	 Soviet	 Ideology,	 Indoctrination,	 and	Terror	
under	Stalin,	1927-1941	(New	Haven:	Yale	University	Press,	2011),	p.70;	Goldfarb,	pp.103-120. 
27	Lenoe,	pp.78-100. 
INTRODUCTION | 19 
Chief Vladimir Bubekin, and his deputy Anton Vysotskii.28  On some days there 
was panic because no senior staff remained to approve printing: everyone had 
been arrested.29   
Meanwhile, glorification of the leader was continuing apace.  The 1930s 
saw the apotheosis of the Stalin cult in the press: enormous portraits of the 
Soviet leader adorned the paper's front page, while articles resembled a 
massive storehouse of citations, attesting to the genius of the vozhd'.30  The 
paper's famed satirist Il'ia Shatunovskii recalled that the paper's 
propaganda department possessed a card index of Stalin quotations which 
could be referred to for such prestigious occasions as the fourteenth 
anniversary of Comrade Stalin's speech at the Kremlin Palace at the 
graduation of academics of the Red Army.31 
 All of this took place against the backdrop of a steady but significant rise 
in newspaper circulations.  In 1940, the newspaper press had a total circulation 
of 8.8 million, compared to only 1.7 million in 1918.32  This rise was abruptly 
ended by the Nazi invasion of June 1941, which had a profound effect on the 
tone of the Soviet press.  Newspapers began to speak in a different voice, and 
Stalin largely disappeared into the shadows, with ordinary Soviet citizens taking 
centre stage.  Led by a series of talented war correspondents, such as Vasilii 
Grossman, Ilia Erenburg, and Konstantin Simonov, Soviet newspapers sought to 
spur the Soviet public to action through a shared sense of revulsion.33  No longer 
motivated solely by Communist ideals or by Stalin, this public was moved by 
loyalty to nation, family, and home.34  
28	Goldfarb,	pp.135-136,	144. 
29	Aleksei	Adzhubei,	Te	desiat	let	(Moscow:	Sovetskaia	Rossiia,	1989),	p.93. 
30 Jeffrey Brooks, Thank You Comrade Stalin: Soviet Public Culture from Revolution to Cold War 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000). 
31 Ilia Shatunovskii, Zapiski strelianogo vorob'ia (Moscow: Voskresen'e, 2003), pp.31-33. 
32	Mark	W.	Hopkins,	Mass	Media	in	the	Soviet	Union	(New	York:	Pegasus,	1970),	p.93. 
33	Louise	McReynolds,	Dateline	Stalingrad:	Newspaper	Correspondents	at	the	Front,	in	Culture	
and	Entertainment	in	Wartime	Russia,	ed.	by	Richard	Stites	(Bloomington,	IN:	Indiana	University	
Press,	1995),	pp.2843. 
34	Jeffrey	Brooks,	Pravda	Goes	to	War,	in	Stites,	pp.927	and	Thank	You,	pp.180-184. 
INTRODUCTION | 20 
 After the war, however, those who sought to write in the same vein were 
looked on suspiciously, and war journalism was criticised in official texts.35  
Thomas C. Wolfe calls the late Stalin period the nadir of the Soviet press, and it 
is difficult to disagree with his assessment.36  The lack of spaces for professional 
issues to be discussed led to a decline in the quality of Soviet journalism.  The 
professional journal Bolshevistskaia pechat, which ceased printing after the 
outbreak of war, had provided an important forum for discussing journalistic 
craft and delivered valuable information on international trends  even during 
the Terror.  Its disappearance meant that journalists were only rarely addressed 
as a true collective.  The Stalinist press became a repository of resolutions, 
official reports and speeches, and by the late 1940s, the Stalin cult was 
resurgent.37  While the crowds who wept at Stalins death testify to the cults 
effectiveness, its ubiquity did little to improve press content.   Newspapers were 
further enfeebled by a 1946 Resolution on Leningrad and Zvezda, which 
presaged a tightening of restrictions on artistic production, while a subsequent 
campaign against cosmopolitanism targeted a number of journalists at the 
paper.38  Even after Stalins death, memories of such events were not easily 
forgotten, contributing to a fear of innovation that lasted until 1956.  However, 
the influence of the war had not worn off completely: the post-war KP printed a 
far greater amount of material on the personal lives of young people, reflecting 
the wartime shift towards everyday life.39  Valentin Ovechkins cycle of sketches, 
beginning with District Routine, published in Novyi mir in 1952, and continuing 
in Pravda between 1953 and 1956, showed signs of the critical literary 
journalism that would become prominent under Khrushchev.40  
Although Soviet journalism to a large extent regressed after the war, 
there were indications of change on an institutional level.  Steps were taken to 
35	McReynolds,	p.40. 
36 Wolfe, p.32. 
37	 Jan	 Plamper,	The	 Stalin	 Cult:	 A	 Study	 in	 the	Alchemy	 of	 Power	 (New	Haven:	 Yale	University	
Press,	2012),	p.229;	Brooks,	Thank	You,	pp.195-232. 
38	Goldfarb,	pp.104-105. 
39	 Juliane	 Furst,	 Stalins	 Last	 Generation:	 Soviet	 Post-War	 Youth	 and	 the	 Emergence	 of	Mature	
Socialism	(Oxford:	Oxford	University	Press,	2010),	pp.250-291. 
40	Valentin	Ovechkin,	Raionnye	budni	Novyi	mir	9	(1952). 
INTRODUCTION | 21 
improve the press by opening journalism departments in universities, including 
Moscow State Universitys prestigious journalism faculty, which opened its 
doors in 1947 and trained many of Komsomolskaia pravdas leading staff.  Such 
faculties represented a vast improvement over the system of Party and 
Komsomol schools where journalists learned to write only in the official 
language of protocols.41  While these new departments continued to deliver an 
ideologically charged curriculum, they also provided practical experience and a 
space for discussion.42  KPs famed columnist and zhurfak graduate Inna 
Rudenko recalled how a literature professor at MGU in the early 1950s taught 
her the value of independent thought.  When he was fired there were protests 
from students, to which the authorities replied: The Party knows better who is 
worthy of teaching in the ideological faculty and who is not.43 
The graduates of such faculties were to become the leading lights of post-
Stalinist journalism.  In addition to Rudenko (1954) were figures like Aleksei 
Adzhubei and Boris Pankin (both MGU, 1952), Iurii Voronov (LGU, 1952), Boris 
Grushin (Philosophy, MGU, 1952), and Ilia Shatunovskii (Philology, MGU, 1950) 
all of whom would become stars in their own right.  If we compare the statistics 
from 1957 with those from 1950, a remarkable change is evident: while only 
38.1 per cent of cadres had experience of higher education in 1950, that figure 
almost doubled to 75.2 per cent by 1957.44  This represents a truly remarkable 
change, and suggests another reason for the raising of journalistic standards 
after Stalins death.  Not only were journalists better educated, they also tended 
to be younger.  1953 saw a changing of the guard, as many older journalists left 
the paper.  While in 1950 54.7 per cent of workers on the editorial staff were 
41 Quote from former Izvestiia journalist N.M. Ivanovskaia in Tatiana Volkova, A.I. Adzhubei - 
Redaktor i publitsist Unpublished PhD Dissertation, MGU, 2010, pp.63-64. 
42 On Soviet universities in the late Stalin period see Benjamin K. Tromley, Re-Imagining the 
Soviet Intelligentsia: Student Politics and University Life, 1948-1964 Unpublished PhD 
Dissertation, Harvard University, 2007. 
43 Inna Rudenko, V Moskve i daleko ot Moskvy in Polveka na Mokhovoi (1947-1997) (Moscow: 
MGU, 1997), p.130. 
44 Svedeniia o komsomol'skikh gazetakh, 1957, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.847, ll.48, 61-63; 
Goldfarb, pp.266-267. 
INTRODUCTION | 22 
over the age of 36, by 1957, the figure had fallen to 39.5 per cent.45  According to 
Ilia Shatunovskii, young journalists brought a new mood to the paper: 
There were not yet thousands of already-written feuilletons on our shoulders, not 
yet problems where we had expressed everything we thought, that for years had 
ached inside us, had seethed in our hearts.  Then, we had only just started our 
newspaper life and felt ourselves to be almost pioneers.  Every theme was new 
for us, it gripped us deeply, seemed immensely important, and any delay was 
intolerable.46 
This suggests that, although change was visible only to those who looked 
closely, structures were in place for transformation given the right impetus. 
Yet after Stalins death, journalists appeared uncertain about how to 
proceed in the absence of clear guidance from the regime, and it was only after 
the Secret Speech that journalists were able to carry out systematic change.  
Journalists and the regime often disagreed about the direction of the post-1956 
press, but there was agreement on one point: Stalinist forms of propaganda, 
based on ritual incantations of loyalty to the leader, and an abundance of official 
information, were unsuitable for an era in which conformity was no longer the 
highest social value.  Newspapers now needed to appeal to readers.  There is 
still much dull stuff in our papers, said Khrushchev Sometimes you take a 
paper, finger it through and put it aside. Afterward you cannot even recall what 
it said.47 
This led to radical change.  Journalists began to preach the virtues of 
truth-telling and sincerity, assuming a socially transformative role that owed a 
debt both to the discussions of the wider artistic intelligentsia and to ideas of 
official ideologists.  New horizons opened up for creative journalists, who began 
to promote socially activist forms of journalism that encouraged readers to 
think about their relationship to socialism, rather than feeding them pre-
digested formulae.48  Journalists began to encourage initiative from below, and 
45 Ibid. 
46 Ilia Shatunovskii, Tretii in Zhurnalisty XX veka: liudi i sudby (Moscow: Olma press, 2003), 
p.579. 
47	Quoted	in	William	J.	Eaton,	Red	Editor:	Aleksei	Adzhubei,	Nieman	Reports	16/2	(June	1963),	
48	See	Wolfe,	Governing;	Roudakova,	Comparing	Transitions,	pp.24677.	 
INTRODUCTION | 23 
urged its readers to think and act independently  the latter very much in line 
with the voluntaristic spirit of the epoch.  They attempted to protect citizens 
against bureaucracy, uncover industrial abuses, and expose corruption  a role 
that was officially mandated in the lore of the Soviet press, but which had 
largely fallen by the wayside under Stalin.   
In 1961, the regime proclaimed that Communism would be built in the 
main within two decades, and propagated the Moral Code of the Builder of 
Communism, which provided a series of behavioural commandments for 
citizens.  This intertwining of individual morality with the construction of the 
good society meant that late Stalinist attempts to secure consent through 
repetition were out-dated: the media once again needed to help create a new 
kind of individual as it had in the early Stalin period.  There was a huge increase 
 and not just in the youth press  of material concentrating on so-called moral 
and ethical themes.  Thus, the Soviet press performed the role of an organ of 
enlightenment, seeking to modify behaviours in order to create the good 
citizen.49  Such a vision of normative citizenship was also on show in the papers 
anti-religious campaigning, while sensationalistic articles on so-called stiliagi 
and tuneiadtsy were restrictive attempts to maintain social order against non-
conformist youth.50  Although the Soviet press never attained the levels of 
righteous fervour that it employed against enemies in the 1930s (indeed, the 
term enemy largely disappeared from Soviet discourse), there were enough 
similarities in its division of the world into exemplary heroes and incorrigible 
outsiders, to suggest that there were still two camps in the world: us and 
them.51 
These apparent contradictions between the progressive and repressive 
functions of the Soviet press are indicative of the wider contradictions of the 
49	Wolfe,	p.18. 
50	Miriam	Dobson,	Anti-religious	Campaigns	in	the	Russian	Press,	1953-1964	Slovo	13	(2001),	
139-152;	 Kristin	 Roth-Ey,	 Mass	 Media	 and	 the	 Remaking	 of	 Soviet	 Culture,	 1950s-1960s	
Unpublished	PhD	Dissertation.	Princeton	University,	2003,	pp.46-98. 
51	See,	for	example,	Miriam	Dobson,	Khrushchevs	Cold	Summer:	Gulag	Returnees,	Crime,	and	the	
Fate	of	Reform	After	Stalin	(Ithaca,	NY:	Cornell	University	Press,	2008),	pp.44-46,	136-141,	179-
INTRODUCTION | 24 
period that earlier scholars have called the Thaw.  This was a period of grand, 
sometimes utopian, plans, driven by a fundamentally optimistic view of human 
nature and a belief in the malleability of individuals, ordered by a leader who, at 
times, seemed guided by the conviction that it was possible to will a policy into 
existence, without the need to dabble in practicalities.  This allowed for the 
revelation of Stalin's crimes and the release of innocent convicts from the Gulag, 
greater freedoms for intellectuals, and a policy of 'peaceful coexistence' that 
opened the Soviet Union to the rest of the world.  But the same optimism led to a 
Virgin Lands policy that prized optimism over science, a series of rash 
agricultural reforms, and a set of laws that criminalised vast swathes of the 
population.   
 Rather than a prolonging of Stalinist policies52, schemes such as the 
house committees, the druzhina  even the criminalisation of so-called 'petty 
criminals' and 'parasites'  were all cut from the same cloth as more 'liberal' 
reforms.  They were predicated on the belief that human nature was malleable, 
and that the careful attentions of the collective, or the short, sharp shock of a 
spell in jail would mean that troublemakers could be safely reintroduced into 
society.53  These fundamentally illiberal measures increased surveillance of 
citizens on the micro-level, but the impulse behind them was the same one that 
had brought to Soviet society a degree of freedom.   
 Only by understanding this can we begin to comprehend the apparent 
contradictions of the Thaw-era Komsomol'skaia pravda.  Eager to adopt the 
tone of the reader's friend, on the side of the Soviet little man, but at the same 
time, quick to denounce and ridicule those who deviated from the norm; prone 
to bouts of lachrymose emotionalism, but equally to scaremongering, 
52	 Eleonory	 Gilburd	 and	 Larisa	 Zakharova,	 Avant-propos,	 Cahiers	 du	 Monde	 russe	 47/1-2	
(January-June	2006),	12-13. 
53	Oleg	Kharkhordin,	The	Collective	and	 the	 Individual	 in	Russia:	A	Study	of	Practices	 (Berkeley,	
CA:	University	of	California	Press,	1999);	Brian	Lapierre,	Private	Matters	or	Public	Crimes:	The	
Emergence	 of	Domestic	Hooliganism	 in	 the	 Soviet	Union,	 1939-1966,	 in	Borders	 of	 Socialism:	
Private	 Spheres	 of	 Soviet	 Russia,	 ed.	 by	 Lewis	 Siegelbaum	 (Basingstoke:	 Macmillan,	 2006),	
pp.191-207;	 Sheila	 Fitzpatrick,	 Social	 parasites:	 How	 Tramps,	 Idle	 Youth,	 and	 Busy	
Entrepreneurs	 Impeded	 the	 Soviet	 March	 to	 Communism	 Cahiers	 du	 Monde	 russe	 47/1-2	
(January-June	2006),	377-408. 
INTRODUCTION | 25 
Komsomol'skaia pravda was not as liberal as Thomas Wolfe has suggested, but it 
was not conservative, either.54  It was simply  for better or worse  a product 
of the times.   
2 Journalists as Professionals 
A nagging question that arose when reading scholarly studies of Soviet society 
provided the genesis for this project.  These studies employed press articles as a 
source, but viewed their content as a more-or-less reliable mirror of the 
regimes views.55  There was certainly a large overlap between the regimes 
policies and the content of the press, but did Soviet newspapers really provide 
such an unproblematic window into the beliefs of the political elite?  To answer 
this question, it is necessary to put the journalist back into Soviet press history  
and into the history of Soviet society.  Only by analysing the social milieu of 
Soviet journalists, both in terms of their professional relationships and their 
relationships with the regime, can we better understand the changes that took 
place after Stalins death. 
The relationship between the journalist and the regime had advantages 
and disadvantages for both parties.  Association with the regime allowed 
journalists at central newspapers to speak with the authoritative voice of the 
Party, guaranteeing publicity for their viewpoints and, for their voice to be 
heard in the corridors of power.  They were valued intermediaries between the 
corridors of power and the Soviet everyday, between reality and representation.  
They possessed leeway to write imaginatively, and were entrusted with the task 
of producing an authoritative, day-to-day picture of reality and turning bland 
ideology into readable copy  with a print run that most authors could only 
dream of.  Working in the press had other perks: it gave journalists a generous 
(while not lavish) salary, housing, decent canteen food, and paid holidays in 
54	Wolfe,	Ch.1. 
55	 E.g.	 Lynne	 Attwood,	 Creating	 the	 New	 Soviet	 Woman:	 Women's	 Magazines	 As	 Engineers	 of	
Female	 Identity,	1922-53	 (Basingstoke:	Macmillan,	1999),	which	analyses	 the	womens	 journal	
Rabotnitsa	without	once	attending	to	its	journalistic	context. 
INTRODUCTION | 26 
resorts.    However, it was also the source of many difficulties: journalists were 
forced to censor themselves, and lived under constant peril of censure.  Under 
Stalin, this was backed up by the threat of state violence, but even after his 
death, journalists were confronted with their political dependency on a daily 
basis  the masthead of their papers told them as much  and expected to 
produce a statement of orthodoxy that met with Party approval, all the while 
promoting the countrys march towards Communism, which could sometimes 
spill over into unwarranted excess. 
This was one of the reasons that, seen from the regimes point of view, 
journalists were a necessary evil.  Journalists alone were capable, on a daily 
basis, of turning dry ideology into life-like prose and promoting the cause of 
Communist construction.  Khrushchev argued in a Kremlin speech at the First 
All-Union Congress of Journalists in 1959, that journalists were the partys 
assistants: 
Why	 assistants?	 	 Because	 you	 are	 indeed	 always	 on	 hand	 [	 ]	 for	 the	
party.  As soon as any decision needs to be explained and carried out, we appeal 
to you, and you, as the most faithful transmission belt	[	],	take	
the decision of the party and bring it into the very heart of our people. 56 
But journalists had other ideas about their profession, seeing themselves, not 
just as mouthpieces for the Party, but also as creative intellectuals.  This meant 
that journalists and politicians had subtly different ideas about the role of the 
Soviet newspaper, and, because of this, entrusting to journalists the Partys 
propaganda tasks entailed a certain loss of control over the Partys messages, 
leading to clashes.   
Despite the thousands of Party workers charged with maintaining 
ideological orthodoxy under Stalin, the regime was incapable of policing every 
word.  A talented and obedient group of gazetchiki was necessary to ensure that 
the press sent out the right messages.  Then, violence and the appointment of 
bureaucrats to key positions meant that compliance was relatively easy to 
secure.  But after Stalins death, the renunciation of terror allowed journalists 
56	Pervyi	 vsesoiuznyi	 sezd	zhurnalistov.	 Stenograficheskii	otchet	 (Moscow:	Gospolitizdat,	1960),	
pp.11-12. 
INTRODUCTION | 27 
greater leeway.  Though the Party continued to play the leading role in setting 
priorities, it relaxed the prescriptive approach to content that had characterised 
the Stalin era, allowing journalists to act with a greater degree of freedom.57  
Journalists were still subject to administrative sanction, but only in rare 
instances did they receive anything worse than a reprimand.   
This process of relaxation was, to some extent, a development that began 
before the Secret Speech  and perhaps before 1953.  In a number of spheres, 
the late Stalin period saw opportunities, however circumscribed, for groups to 
act in ways that were not entirely dictated by the regime.  Informal groups of 
environmental activists congregated around issues of concern and received 
support from the public58; scientists carved out spaces for independent 
activity59; creative unions became a means both for discussing creative issues 
and also for distributing benefits (sometimes in ways that were reminiscent of 
the corrupt local power structures of the Brezhnev era)60; and the phenomenon 
of the kompaniia, small intellectual circles for debate and discussion, seemed to 
suggest that within post-war society there existed spaces that had not been 
penetrated by the state.61  It might therefore seem to make sense to see the 
Khrushchev period as marking the continuation of social processes that were 
inaugurated under the conditions of post-war Stalinism.62   
The late Stalin period created structures that bore fruit after Stalins 
death, the opening of journalism faculties in several Soviet cities in the late 
57	Karl	Aimermakher	[Eimermacher],	Partiinoe	upravlenie	kulturoi	i	formy	ee	samoorganizatsii	
(1953-1964/67),	 in	 Ideologicheskie	 Komissii	 TsK	 KPSS,	 1958-1964.	 	 Dokumenty.	 ed.	 by	
Aimermakher	et	al.	(Moscow:	Rosspen,	1998),	p.7. 
58	Douglas	Weiner,	A	Little	Corner	of	Freedom:	Russian	Nature	Protection	from	Stalin	to	Gorbachv	
(Berkeley,	CA:	University	of	California	Press,	2002). 
59 Nikolai Krementsov, Stalinist Science (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997). 
60	 Kirill	 Tomov,	Creative	Union:	 The	 Professional	Organization	 of	 Soviet	 Composers	 (Ithaca,	NY:	
Cornell	 University	 Press,	 2006);	 Vera	 Tolz,	 Cultural	 Bosses	 as	 Patrons	 and	 Clients:	 the	
Functioning	of	the	Soviet	Creative	Unions	in	the	Postwar	Period	Contemporary	European	History	
11	(2002),	87-105. 
61	Juliane	Furst,	Friends	in	Private,	Friends	in	Public:	The	Phenomenon	of	the	Kompaniia	Among	
Soviet	 Youth	 in	 the	 1950s	 and	1960s,	 in	Borders	 of	 Socialism:	 Private	 Spheres	 of	 Soviet	 Russia	
(Basingstoke:	Palgrave	Macmillan,	2006),	pp.229-249;	Tromley,	pp.94-150. 
62	 Juliane	 Furst,	 The	Arrival	 of	 Spring?	 Changes	 and	Continuities	 in	 Soviet	 Youth	Culture	 and	
Policy	between	Stalin	and	Khrushchev,	in	The	Dilemmas	of	De-Stalinization:	Negotiating	Cultural	
and	Social	Change	in	the	Khrushchev	Era	ed.	by	Polly	Jones	(London:	Routledge,	2006),	pp.135-
INTRODUCTION | 28 
1940s being one example.  However, some fields were more heavily policed 
than others, and journalism was one of them.  One reason was that journalisms 
centrality to the functions of governance made supervision vital.  But another 
explanation might be that, while Soviet culture privileged the linguistic over the 
non-linguistic,63 this greater legibility led to tighter controls.  Fields which 
required expert interpretation to be read, such as music or dance, generally 
had an easier time than primarily textual media, such as literature, poetry, or 
journalism, where Party authorities assumed that their laymans knowledge was 
sufficient for comprehension (indeed for a layman to comprehend it was 
precisely the point).   
So, despite the opening of journalism faculties, journalists still possessed 
no Union, no Dom zhurnalista in which to meet, and no publications through 
which journalistic priorities could be discussed.  The absence of such structures 
not only diminished journalists status, but their abilities, too.  It is no 
coincidence that students, like the ones who entered MGUs new journalism 
faculty in the late 1940s, who were able to discuss such priorities, were the 
driving force behind the changes of post-Stalin period.  Such divergence 
between various intelligentsia groups suggests that there was no uniform 
direction to intelligentsia-regime relations within post-war Soviet society, and 
that a particular intellectual groupings social function dictated its trajectory.   
After Stalins death, Soviet journalism began to move in a different 
direction.  In 1954, D. Kraminov, Pravdas foreign editor, wrote to the Central 
Committee about his embarrassment that the Soviet Unions journalists, unlike 
their counterparts in other fraternal states, lacked a union, meaning that they 
were unable to lead the global progressive journalism movement.64  The 
Central Committee soon acted to grant Kraminov his wish and avoid further 
embarrassment on the international stage.65  For Dmitrii Goriunov, Editor-in-
Chief of Komsomolskaia pravda and one of the Unions administrators, the 
63	Nancy	Condee,	The	Cultural	Codes	of	the	Thaw	in	Nikita	Khrushchev,	ed.	by	William	Taubman,	
Sergei	Khrushchev,	Abbot	Gleason	(New	Haven:	Yale	University	Press,	2000),	p.161. 
64 Kraminov to TsK KPSS, 26/10/54, RGANI, f.5, op.16, d.671, ll.34-35. 
65 Proekt postanovleniia TsK KPSS: O sozdanii soiuza sovetskikh zhurnalistov, undated, 1954, 
RGANI, f.5, op.16, d.671, ll.45-45 ob. 
INTRODUCTION | 29 
Unions tasks were to improve ties with foreign journalists, but also to raise the 
ideological and creative level of journalists, to train new journalists, to discuss 
creative issues, and to provide links with the worker-peasant correspondent 
movement.66  In the coming years, the Union would provide an important forum 
for creative discussion, though it appears that its largest impact was as symbol 
of journalists growing social stature and as a means for building a collective 
identity.   
Indeed, the notion of the collective is crucial.  This thesis seeks to go 
beyond the idea put forward by Oleg Kharkhordin that collective structures 
under Khrushchev were inherently totalising and controlling.67  While there was 
a disciplinary function to the Komsomolka kollektiv, which judged misbehaviour 
and condemned creative missteps, there was also a sense in which it protected 
and insulated its members from the attacks of the authorities.  Memoirs and 
interviews with former staff at Komsomolskaia pravda hint at the emergence of 
a close-knit community, bound by shared values, a sense of camaraderie, and a 
common language: journalists worked together, drank together, and stuck 
together when attacked.68  Indeed, the KP redaktsiia had some of the qualities of 
a kruzhok: a community of like-minded creative intellectuals who debated social 
issues.     
Journalists editorial debates suggest that existing analytical frameworks 
for understanding the dynamics of state-society interactions in the Soviet Union 
are inadequate.  If the relationship between Party authorities and journalists 
cannot be understood as a form of resistance, neither can the current emphasis 
on subjectivity, with its emphasis on the complex interlacing of political 
discourse and individual striving, fully explain the existence of economies of 
action that functioned outside the posited binary of state and individual.69  
66 D. Goriunov, Kakim budet Soiuz sovetskikh zhurnalistov, Pravda 5/5/56, 2. 
67	Kharkhordin,	Collective. 
68	See	the	interviews	collected	in	Bolshe,	chem	gazeta	,ed.	by	Liudmila	Semina	(Moscow:	PoRog,	
2006);	 Aleksei	 Adzhubei	 v	 koridorakh	 chetvertoi	 vlasti,	 ed.	 by	 Dmitrii	 Mamleev	 (Moscow:	
Izvestiia,	2003). 
69	 For	 a	 paper	 that	 argues	 that	 journalists	 did	 resist	 Soviet	 power,	 see	 Epp	 Lauk,	 and	 Tiiu	
Kreegipuu,	 Was	 It	 All	 Pure	 Propaganda?:	 Journalistic	 Practices	 of	 'Silent	Resistance'	 in	 Soviet	
Estonian	Journalism,	Acta	Historica	Tallinnensia,	15	(2010),	16790. 
INTRODUCTION | 30 
Recent scholarship on intelligentsia groups, such as the lite students discussed 
in Benjamin Tromleys dissertation on university students and the artistic 
collectives arrayed in Steven Bittners monograph on the Arbat intelligentsia, 
The Many Lives of Khrushchevs Thaw, show how these groups were mini-
communities, possessing their own values, and their own ways of interacting  
both with each other and with representatives of the authorities.70  
The case of Soviet journalists similarly suggests that group interactions, 
like those that existed between members of the Komsomolskaia pravda 
collective, formed a fundamental part of the fabric of Khrushchev-era society 
and beyond.  A decline in terror was coupled with an expansion of higher and 
practical education, and an intensification of activity in professional unions.  The 
creation of spaces for discussion created shared values, and increasing 
homogenisation of training led to shared processes of socialisation, which 
meant that this highly educated population began to lose its sense of primary 
identification with the Party.  But their aim was not so much to resist the Party, 
as to maintain social status and uphold independence.   
In this respect, it might be said that intelligentsia groups were 
undergoing a process of professionalisation.  Literature on the concept suggests 
that number of conditions need to be met for a group of institutional actors to 
call themselves professionals.71  One crucial factor is autonomy, roughly 
defined as the ability to lay claim to a particular body of knowledge, and to 
resist the intrusions of outsiders though the ability to define the priorities of the 
profession in ones own terms.72   
But, whether through political or economic pressures, journalists have 
typically possessed neither freedom of the means of production, nor expert 
70	Tromley,	Re-Imagining;	Bittner,	Many	Lives.		See	also	Richard	Schmelz,	Such	Freedom,	If	Only	
Musical:	 Unofiicial	 Music	 During	 the	 Thaw	 (Oxford:	 Oxford	 University	 Press,	 2009);	 Paul	
Josephson,	New	 Atlantis	 Revisited:	 Akademgorodok,	 the	 Siberian	 City	 of	 Science	 (Princeton,	NJ:	
Princeton	University	Press,	1997). 
71	See	Harold	L.	Wilensky,	 The	Professionalization	of	Everyone?,	American	Sociological	Review	
70/2	(September	1964),	137-158;	Talcott	Parsons,	Professions,	in	International	Encyclopedia	of	
the	Social	Sciences.	Vol.	8,	ed.	by	David	L.	Sills	(New	York:	Macmillan,	1968),	pp.536-547.	 	 	 	On	
journalists	and	professionalism	more	generally,	see	William	E.	Porter,	Journalism	in	Ibid.	Vol.	8,	
p.265. 
72	Wilensky,	138. 
INTRODUCTION | 31 
knowledge.73  These problems were compounded in authoritarian countries, 
where the autonomy of journalists was eroded by the clearly stated 
requirement for the press to act as a telegraph of state policy.  For political 
scientist Thomas F. Remington, professionalism requires the ability to exercise 
independence from political constraints  something which Soviet journalists 
could not demonstrate.74  On a reading of Soviet sociological studies, he 
concluded that, particularly on a local level, the pressure for journalists to turn 
out copy was so great that they did not have time to exercise their own 
judgement, but rather saw fulfilling orders as a goal in itself.75  Overwork led 
journalists to the easiest (official) sources of information, and led to identikit 
stories.  For these reasons, Remington argued that Soviet journalism could not 
be termed a profession.   
Yet these were not uniquely Soviet problems: pressure to produce copy, 
rushed writing around deadlines, a tendency to write for superiors, a reliance 
on official forms of information, and a lack of knowledge about the audience 
have been observed in studies of the field in the United States.76  Moreover, as 
the authors of a comparative study of world media systems have pointed out, a 
high level of political interference in journalists work (political parallelism) 
can often coexist with a high level of professionalism.77  Jane Leftwich Currys 
study of Polish journalists under Communism has shown that proximity to the 
corridors of power was not regarded as a sign of surrender, but as a token of 
73	 Though	 some	 countries,	 such	 as	 Italy	 and	 the	 United	 Kingdom,	 require	 journalists	 to	 sit	
entrance	 exams	 before	 beginning	 their	 careers,	 this	 has	 little	 to	 no	 bearing	 on	 their	 level	 of	
professionalism,	 as	 the	 differing	 levels	 of	 professionalism	 in	 these	 two	 countries	 shows.	 See	
Daniel	C.	Hallin,	 Paolo	Mancini,	Comparing	Media	 Systems:	 Three	Models	 of	Media	 and	 Politics	
(Cambridge,	UK:	Cambridge	University	Press,	2004),	p.33. 
74	Thomas	F.	Remington,	The	Truth	of	Authority:	Ideology	and	Communication	in	the	Soviet	Union	
(Pittsburgh,	PA:	University	of	Pittsburgh	Press,	1988),	Ch.6. 
75	 Remingtons	 conclusions	 suggest	 that	 further	 study	 on	 regional	 variations	 in	 journalism	 is	
necessary	 to	understand	 fully	 the	nature	of	 the	profession.	 	 	 In	 this	 thesis,	 as	well	as	Currys,	
journalists	 situated	 in	 urban	 centres	 were	 studied.	 	 These	 were	 typically	 the	 most	 talented	
journalists,	who	are	likely	to	have	identified	with	the	profession	most	strongly. 
76	 Gaye	 Tuchman,	Making	 News: A Study	 in	 the	 Construction	 of	 Reality	 (New	 York:	 Free	 Press,	
1978);	 Herbert	 Gans,	Deciding	What's	 News:	 A Study	 of	 CBS Evening	 News,	 NBC Nightly	 News,	
Newsweek	 and	 Time	 (London:	 Constance,	 1980);	 Ien	 Ang,	 Desperately	 Seeking	 The	 Audience	
(London;	New	York:	Routledge,	1991). 
77	Hallin/Mancini	2004,	pp.33-34. 
INTRODUCTION | 32 
prestige; comments made by Soviet journalists at both public and private 
meetings seem to suggest that the same situation existed in the USSR.78  While 
Curry conceded that the Polish context was very different to the western 
context, she argued that only an ethic of professionalism within the field could 
explain the actions of Polish journalists.  Though journalists did not enjoy 
autonomy from the regime, they nevertheless found prestige in the fact that 
their work was valued by the authorities.  Yet, at the same time, these groups 
sought, within the constraints of a Party state, to put into practice their own 
version of the partys priorities. 
The case of Komsomolskaia pravda illustrates how journalists developed 
a system of professional norms and methods for judging excellence and 
distributing prestige  two criteria often considered to be markers of 
professionalism.79  For Hallin and Mancini, professionalism is usually 
manifested in common standards of newsworthiness and the ability to define 
their standing in the field in terms of the opinions of fellow journalists, rather 
than those of outsiders.80  Soviet journalists gave out awards for outstanding 
articles, while honoraria for the best material were decided in-house.  At 
Komsomolskaia pravda, staff members routinely criticised the work of 
outsiders, be they non-staff authors such as workers and peasants, or 
politicians, whose dry style and pompous tone was seen as exemplifying 
everything journalists were trying to avoid.  Hallin and Mancini further claim 
that journalists have typically compensated for their lack of expert knowledge 
by intensifying their service to the public, something that was clearly the case in 
the Soviet context.81   
All in all, the Soviet, Polish, and Chinese cases all suggest that a tendency 
towards journalistic professionalism existed in Communist societies, but in a 
78	 Jane	 Leftwich	 Curry,	 Poland's	 Journalists:	 Professionalism	 and	 Politics	 (Cambridge,	 UK:	
Cambridge	University	Press,	1990).	 	A	recent	study	of	Chinese	media	has	corroborated	Currys	
findings.	 Yuezhi	 Zhao,	 Understanding	 Chinas	Media	 System	 in	 a	World	 Historical	 Context	 in	
Hallin/Mancini	2012,	pp.143-173. 
79	Hallin/Mancini	2004,	pp.35-36. 
80	Ibid.,	p.36. 
81	Ibid.,	pp.36-37.		See	also	Porter,	Journalism. 
INTRODUCTION | 33 
different guise to other countries.  Rather than viewing professionalism 
normatively, we need to view it functionally, in relation both to society and to 
politics.  Therefore, that the best way to understand the specificities of Soviet 
journalism is not to cordon it off from the rest of the world, but to analyse it 
alongside examples from other nations.  The western model of the press, with 
its predominant focus on news and information, has too often been taken as 
normative.  This project is not stricto sensu a comparative project: its examples 
are all drawn from the USSR, and its intention is to shed light on the history of 
the post-Stalin Soviet Union.  Nevertheless, the thesis compares the Soviet 
Union and western countries to highlight differences and similarities  both in 
terms of journalistic practice, and also in terms of the relationship between 
socio-political context and the forms that journalism has taken.  Moreover, it 
stresses the interlinking of domestic and Western conceptions of journalism 
within the Soviet press corps, showing that Soviet journalists were part of a 
world where knowledge about journalistic innovations were becoming 
increasingly available as models to be discussed, if not always adopted. 
3 The Death of the Propaganda State? 
The word propaganda figures prominently in much western research on Soviet 
mass media.  This research relied on the negative connotations of the word in 
the western imagination to fulminate against the dangers of Soviet 
propaganda.82  Some suggested that the regime was engaged in a systematic 
campaign, driven by Soviet advances in psychiatry, to indoctrinate its 
population, while others urged action to counter it.83 
Despite being a dread word in the western imagination, the term tripped 
off the Soviet tongue more easily. In works such as Where to Begin and What 
is to Be Done, Lenin openly discussed the requirements of propaganda and 
82		Stefan	T.	Possony,	A	Century	of	Conflict:	Communist	Techniques	of	World	Revolution	(Chicago:	
Henry	 Regnery,	 1953);	 John	 C.	 Clews,	 Communist	 Propaganda	 Techniques	 (London:	 Meuthen,	
1964).	 Frederick	 Barghoorn,	 Soviet	 Foreign	 Propaganda	 (Princeton,	 NJ:	 Princeton	 University	
Press,	1964)	is	less	bellicose. 
83	See	Alan	M.G.	Little,	Pavlov	and	Propaganda,	Problems	of	Communism	2	(1953),	14-21. 
INTRODUCTION | 34 
agitation.84  Once the Bolsheviks came to power, propaganda came to be woven 
into the very fabric of Soviet public life.  The press worked in tandem with radio 
and television, posters and banners, literature and the arts, schools and lecture 
networks in a mutually reinforcing meshwork of enlightenment and education: 
a propaganda state.85   
The term propaganda state has been employed as a description of the 
Soviet Union in the years that followed the revolution, when some of the 
fundamental principles of Bolshevism were enshrined, and also for the Stalin 
period, where these principles were put to work in the service of public 
mobilisation and public quiescence.86  Scholars have not used the term for the 
post-1953 period, even though the states ideological apparatus remained 
geared towards the party line, and all areas of official life were penetrated by 
politics.  However, fundamental changes in the style and form of propaganda, 
and in the context for that propaganda, meant that the Soviet propaganda state 
was imperilled. 
The preconditions for the efficacy of Stalinist propaganda were constant 
repetition, information rationing, and a Party monopoly on the means of 
distribution.  This system was effective until the Terror, when the rapid 
transformation of heroes into enemies of the people led to widespread 
confusion and disbelief.87  After the war, the return of veterans who had 
travelled beyond Soviet borders, often returning with forbidden cultural 
treasures as well as stories of foreign lands, threatened the regimes rationing of 
information, while the leaderships decision to allow ideologically incorrect 
trophy films to circulate in Soviet cinemas can only be explained by a desire to 
fill the countrys coffers.88  Yet propaganda became ever more defensive and 
84 V.I. Lenin, Where to Begin? (1901), What is To Be Done? (1902) in Lenin About the Press, 
pp.67-72, 72-106. 
85	 Gayle	 Durham	 Hollander,	 Soviet	 Political	 Indoctrination:	 Developments	 in	 Mass	 Media	 and	
Propaganda	Since	Stalin	(New	York:	Praeger,	1972);	Alex	Inkeles,	Public	Opinion	in	Soviet	Russia:	
A	Study	in	Mass	Persuasion	(Cambridge,	MA:	Harvard	University	Press,	1951). 
86	Kenez,	Propaganda	State;	Brandenberger,	Propaganda	State. 
87 Brandenberger, pp.181-197. 
88	 Furst,	 Stalins	 Last	 Generation,	 206;	 Roth-Ey,	 Mass	 Media,	 106-122;	 Mark	 Edele,	 Strange	
Young	 Men	 in	 Stalins	 Moscow:	 The	 Birth	 and	 Life	 of	 the	 Stiliagi,	 1945-1953,	 Jahrbcher	 fr	
INTRODUCTION | 35 
insular in an attempt to maintain and inculcate an orthodox line, with the anti-
cosmopolitanism campaign a clear example.  The late Stalin period thus 
displayed the same tension between entertainment and enlightenment that 
emerged under Khrushchev.  This tension was exacerbated by contradictory 
policies, leading to heightened anxiety about the perceived threat posed by 
foreign nations and an intense need for cultural orthodoxy in the face of this 
threat.89 
In Crisis of the Propaganda State, David Brandenberger refers to Ron 
Sunys division of ideology into a discursive, or cultural pole, and a dogmatic, or 
doctrinal pole.90  In the Stalinist context, the former encompassed a range of 
innovative forms, which sought to bring out the essence of Bolshevik ideology, 
leading by the early 1930s to a surprisingly inclusive ideological culture which 
had the ability to mobilise the masses.91  Around the time of the Great Terror, 
this gave way to doctrinal orthodoxy, at which point stabilisation became more 
important than transformation.92  The doctrinal version of ideology remained 
dominant for the next half century, claims Brandenberger, paralysing the 
evocative nature of the propaganda state.93   
Does this ring true for the Khrushchev era?  After all, Khrushchev 
overturned one of the fundamental orthodoxies of Soviet ideology: the positive 
role of Stalin in Soviet history.  Indeed, one of the most pressing tasks for Soviet 
journalists (and not just for them) was to redraft a useable past by privileging 
the heady mobilising experiences of the Civil War and first Five-Year plan, and 
attempting to pass over the crimes of the Stalin period in silence.  The 
Khrushchev period thus witnessed an attempt, however halting, to create a new 
kind of mass journalism, grouped around a new set of Leninist norms, which 
would mobilise the public for a new set of construction tasks.  Journalists at KP 
Geschichte	 Osteuropas	 50/1	 (2002),	 37-61.	 Peter	 Kenez,	 Cinema	 and	 Soviet	 Society:	 From	 the	
Revolution	to	the	Death	of	Stalin	(London:	I.B.	Tauris,	2001),	pp.191-193. 
89	Kristin	Roth-Ey,	Moscow	Prime	Time:	How	the	Soviet	Union	Built	the	Media	Empire	That	Lost	the	
Cultural	Cold	War	(Ithaca,	NY:	Cornell	University	Press,	2010). 
90	See	also	Matthew	Lenoes	distinction	between	agitation	and	propaganda,	see	Lenoe,	pp.26-29. 
91	Brandenberger,	p.257. 
92	Quoted	in	Ibid.,	pp.256-57. 
93	Ibid.,	p.257. 
INTRODUCTION | 36 
sought to involve their readers in public-oriented activities and discussion.  To 
put it in Leninist terms, they began to explore their role as a collective 
organisers in addition to their role as propagandists and agitators. 
Kristin Roth Eys Moscow Prime Time deals explicitly with the fate of 
Soviet mass mobilisation after Stalins death.94  Although the press is relegated 
to the margins of her account, her history of post-Stalinist mass culture clearly 
illustrates how Soviet cultural authorities were unable to strike a balance 
between entertainment and enlightenment.  Instead, cultural leaders were 
caught in a highly contradictory situation where profits clashed with the needs 
of propaganda.  Her account attests to the fact that social changes had rendered 
the 1930s model of Soviet propaganda largely inoperative.  Soviet citizens now 
enjoyed choices  between different Soviet media products, but also products 
from other countries.  The Soviet Union began to cautiously open out to the 
world, hosting Picasso and Lger exhibitions, allowing thousands of foreigners 
to flood the capital during the Youth Festival of 1957, and Soviet tourists to 
travel the world.95  Journalists, too, were able to journey outside the country to 
visit colleagues abroad, and figures like Adzhubei learned much from the 
experience.   
Increased cultural contact was a sign of the Soviet lites growing 
confidence in the stability of Soviet society, but was also a sign of its weakening 
global prestige.  For example, the 1957 Youth Festival was planned as an 
attempt to dampen down global outrage over the invasion of Hungary the year 
before.96  Increased international exchange threatened Soviet identity by 
bringing it into direct contact with popular cultural forms which were anathema 
94	Roth-Ey,	Moscow. 
95	 See	 Vladimir	 Zubok,	 Zhivago's	 Children:	 The	 Last	 Russian	 Intelligentsia	 (Cambridge,	 MA:	
Harvard	University	Press,	2009),	pp.88-120;	Eleonory	Gilburd,	 To	See	Paris	and	Die:	Western	
Culture	 in	 the	 Soviet	 Union,	 1950s	 and	 1960s	 Unpublished	 PhD	 Dissertation.	 University	 of	
California,	Berkeley,	2010;	Susan	E.	Reid,	 Who	Will	Beat	Whom?	Soviet	Popular	Reception	of	
the	American	National	Exhibition	 in	Moscow,	1959	Kritika	9/4	 (Fall	2008),	855-904;	Anne	E.	
Gorsuch,	All	This	is	Your	World:	Soviet	Tourism	at	Home	and	Abroad	After	Stalin	(Oxford:	Oxford	
University	Press,	2011). 
96	Gilburd,	To	See	Paris. 
INTRODUCTION | 37 
to the nations highbrow cultural values.97  Worse, still, were unwanted flows of 
information, including the broadcasts of Western radio stations such as the 
Voice of America, Radio Liberty, the BBC, and Deutsche Welle.  These stations 
broadcast music that impeded the Partys ability to dictate popular taste, and 
reported on events that challenged the Partys news monopoly.  This begged the 
question: was it possible for an vanguard project of social and individual 
transformation to thrive in a climate of globalised communications, with an 
increasingly educated population as its object of transformation?   
As a newspaper aimed at youth, Komsomolskaia pravda provides a 
particularly interesting case study, since youth was central to the process of 
reconstruction, both literally and symbolically.  The moral reconstruction of the 
nation after the excesses of Stalinism, and the physical reconstruction of the 
nations infrastructure were rhetorically linked.  Soviet youth now became a 
barometer of the nations wellbeing: healthy youth meant healthy social body.  
Yet the press suggested that Soviet youth was not in such good shape, 
frequently printing articles on so-called stiliagi, tuneiadtsy, and bezdelniki, or 
else lamenting the nihilist moods of the student population.  The papers 
coverage of these figures was designed to mock, disgrace and discourage, but, 
inadvertently, it created a sense of moral panic, revealed cracks in the social 
edifice and created an alluring outlaw stereotype.  Although the story of the 
Soviet press after Stalins death is the story of a new beginning, it may well be 
that it was the beginning of the end.  The case of Komsomolskaia pravda raises 
fundamental questions about the viability of the traditional Soviet mobilisatory 
model to achieve the regimes stated aims as the Soviet Union entered its sixth 
decade. 
Implicitly or explicitly, the propaganda state model was the driving force 
behind much of the western research on the Soviet press in the post-World War 
97	Roth-Ey,	 Mass	Media,	Moscow,	Sudha	Rajagopalan,	Leave	Disco	Dancer	Alone:	 Indian	Cinema	
and	Soviet	Movie-Going	After	Stalin	(New	Delhi:	Yoda	Press,	2008);	Sergei	Zhuk,	Rock	and	Roll	in	
the	Rocket	City:	The	West,	 Identity,	and	Ideology	in	Soviet	Dneprpetrovsk,	1960-1985	(Baltimore,	
MD:	The	John	Hopkins	University	Press,	2010). 
INTRODUCTION | 38 
II period.  Such research tended to treat the press as part of a total system of 
propaganda, and sometimes as a strategic threat.  Within that scholarship, the 
main trend was towards a systematic description of the Soviet press network, 
including the structure of the Soviet media, the nature of journalism training, 
the framework of control and censorship, and the presss connection with 
readers  in short, the dynamic interrelations between the structure and 
functioning of the media of communication and the social system in which those 
media operate.98   
That quotation comes from the first study of Soviet mass 
communications  one that influenced practically all subsequent analyses: Alex 
Inkeless Public Opinion in Soviet Russia (1950).99  Based on a meticulous 
reading of Soviet sources, Public Opinions insightful analysis of source material 
and scholarly neutrality set it apart from many subsequent studies.  What 
interested Inkeles was not just the formal characteristics of the Soviet mass 
media system (censorship, ideological oversight, etc.), but also the ways in 
which propaganda messages reached their audience, something he expanded 
upon in his subsequent work.100  
However, most experts failed to expand on his findings, smoothing over 
the rough edges suggested by Inkeles, and proposing a far more homogeneous 
view of the Soviet media.  Exemplifying this trend was Wilbur Schramms 
tendentious Soviet Communist Theory of the Press, which contained many of 
the tropes that would sustain writing about the Soviet press in the future: its 
theoretical debt to Marx and Lenin, its negative understanding of freedom, its 
similarities to Nazism, and the lack of news contained within it.101  What comes 
out most strongly from Schramms chapter is the idea of Soviet media as other: 
a prevalent trope in the wider literature. Antony Buzek wrote in 1964 that 
98	Inkeles,	p.7. 
99	 Hopkins	 openly	 states	 his	 debt	 to	 Public	 Opinion	 in	 Mass	 Media,	 ix,	 and	 Gayle	 Durham	
Hollanders,	Soviet	Political	Indoctrination	also	bears	a	certain	similarity. 
100 Raymond A. Bauer, Alex Inkeles, Clyde Kluckhorn, How the Soviet System Works (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1956). 
101	Schramm,	pp.105-146.		For	a	discussion	of	Schramms	work	see	Natalia	Roudakova,	From	the	
Fourth	Estate	to	the	Second	Oldest	Profession: Russia's	Journalists	in	Search	of	their	Public	after	
Socialism.		Unpublished	PhD	Dissertation.	Stanford	University,	2008,	pp.31-40. 
INTRODUCTION | 39 
studies of the communist press should not compare it with the media in a free 
society.  To do so would be to  
fail to understand the essence of the communist press, its transformation into a 
fully subordinated tool of propaganda, its place and functions within the larger 
framework of communist society.  Communist society is based upon different 
philosophical conceptions of social development, of the role of individuals and 
political or public organisations and institutions within it. It interprets differently 
such values as truth, freedom, objectivity, and so on.102 
Other studies cited the Marquis de Custine and made generalisations about 
Russian susceptibility and adherence to doctrine and dogma.103  Soviet mass 
media was seen as the child of the Russians perverse passion for authority.  In 
these studies, one gets the distinct sense that within the media sphere, just like 
the Soviet Union as a whole, nothing ever changed.  Authors gave the impression 
of a press proceeding through an empty, homogeneous time, where 1917 was 
identical to 1957.104   Where change was observed, it was explained away as 
merely cosmetic: the media may have become superficially more lively or more 
critical, but it was still above all Communist.105  
 Within this scholarship, the role of the journalist was almost invisible.  
Antony Buzek concluded that the journalists education had indoctrinated him 
with the idea that he must express, not his own views, but only the party 
policy.  He admitted that there were attempts in the 1950s and 1960s under 
Khrushchev to change this situation, but he found no sign of changed attitudes, 
adding that Soviet journalists are no rebels yet, only faithful servants of the 
102	Antony	Buzek,	How	the	Communist	Press	Works	(London:	Pall	Mall	Press,	1964),	p.9. 
103	James	W.	Markham,	Voices	of	the	Red	Giants:	Communications	in	Russia	and	China	(Ames,	IA:	
Iowa	 State	 University	 Press,	 1967),	 p.23.	 See	 also	 Schramm,	 Soviet	 Communist;	 Hopkins,	
pp.115-122. 
104	Roudakova,	Fourth	Estate,	pp.38-39. 
105	These	missteps	lasted	beyond	the	1950s	and	1960s:	they	are	visible,	for	example,	in	the	work	
of	the	Kremlinologist	Franoise	Thom,	who	in	1989	called	the	language	of	mass	media	a	weird	
product	 of	 the	 human	 mind,	 something	 that	 conveys	 no	 new	 ideas	 and	 describes	 nothing	
whatever	 in	 Newspeak:	 The	 Language	 of	 Soviet	 Communism,	 Trans.	 Ken	 Connelly	 (London;	
Lexington:	The	Claridge	Press,	1989),	pp.209,	74. 
INTRODUCTION | 40 
party.106  For Paul Lendvai, they were victims of a system that often treats 
them as cogs in the vast propaganda machine.107   
It was not such a great leap to assume that the content of the press was 
entirely congruent with the will of the Party.  Failing to investigate how 
journalism worked in practice, scholars saw journalists work as being squeezed 
into an ideological mangle which began with self-censorship, and, via Agit-Prop 
and Glavlit, ended with an editor-in-chief who deal[t] a final blow to any 
shadows of ideas that may have seeped through in one way or another and 
penetrated the newspaper.108  Such works accurately described the formal 
structures of control, but tended to animate theoretical concepts into real life 
monsters.  Lacking an understanding of the unwritten rules and the ways in 
which gazetchiki could manipulate the formal system to achieve desired 
outcomes, there emerged a widespread belief that instructions translated into 
reality.109   
Such ideas were challenged by Mark Hopkins in Mass Media in Soviet 
Russia (1970).  As Soviet affairs specialist for the Milwaukee Journal, Hopkins 
spent time in Soviet newsrooms and observed in practice how journalists 
worked.  Such experience, claimed Hopkins, can help in understanding how 
the Soviet mass media actually work, in contrast to how they should work.  The 
second is frequently what is offered by official Soviet documents on the press; a 
reading of those alone as an accurate description of what exists can  be 
deceptive.110  Hopkins confirmed that journalists were subject to a barrage of 
rules and regulations, but also that the interpretation and the enforcement of 
these rules varied.  As a journalist, Hopkins was able to draw parallels between 
the Soviet and US mass media, insisting that Americans and Soviets had 
something to learn from each other.  He claimed that It is not  unreasonable 
106	Buzek,	p.254. 
107	Paul	Lendvai,	Bureaucracy	of	Truth:	How	Communist	Governments	Manage	the	News	(London:	
Burnett	Books,	1981),	p.103. 
108	 Ilia	Suslov,	 Censoring	 the	 Journalist	 in	The	Red	 Pencil:	Artists,	 Scholars,	and	Censors	 in	 the	
USSR,	 ed.	 by	Marianna	Tax	Childin	 and	Maurice	 Friedberg	 (Boston	MA:	Unwin	Hyman,	 1989),	
p.152. 
109	On	this	point	see	Roudakova,	Fourth	Estate,	p.39. 
110	Hopkins,	ix. 
INTRODUCTION | 41 
for American journalists to consider the Soviet experience in managing a state-
owned press.  We may learn from Soviet mistakes as well as from 
accomplishments.111  This was a marked change from the tone of us and 
them that had hitherto existed in studies of Soviet mass media. 
The aim of social science research was to understand the mass media network 
in the present moment, and thus researchers in the 1980s were examining at a 
very different press from the one analysed in this thesis.112  Only when 
historians began to enter the fray was it possible to ask a new set of questions, 
at first related to the birth of Soviet propaganda, but subsequently the post-war 
period, too.  One of the main virtues of historical studies has been to overturn 
the static picture of Soviet journalism characteristic of social science work, by 
suggesting that change was the rule, rather than the exception.   
Peter Kenez criticised historians for their rejection of evolution, and for 
assuming that Lenin had the last word to say on all topics and that the system 
that he created is in existence today.113  Kenezs Birth of the Propaganda State 
(1985), was the first published historical monograph on Soviet mass media.  
Drawing on a range of Soviet primary sources, from pamphlets to documents 
from the Central Party archive, the book showed that the emergence of the 
propaganda state was far from a  smooth process, but a series of wrong turns 
and roads not travelled.  However effortless the process of Bolshevising mass 
media may have seemed, Kenez showed that the reality was far messier.  The 
monograph contained a familiar flaw, however: its erasing of the journalist from 
history. In the developing system there could be no such profession as 
journalism but simply a party function for publishing newspapers, and further 
argued that the Party wanted no mediators between its policies and the 
publicizing of those policies.114 
111	Ibid.,	viii. 
112	Moreover,	there	was	an	increased	interest	in	television,	rather	than	the	press	by	this	point,	as	
exemplified	by	the	work	of	Ellen	P.	Mickiewicz,	Media	and	the	Russian	Public	(New	York:	Praeger,	
1981). 
113	Kenez,	p.14. 
114	Ibid.,	p.48. 
INTRODUCTION | 42 
 It was only with the fall of the Soviet Union and freer access to archives 
that historians were able to challenge old conclusions and pose new questions.  
Julie Kay Muellers research on Soviet journalism in the 1920s called into 
question Kenezs conclusions by showing how the new Soviet leadership, 
lacking trained cadres, was forced into alliances with the old pre-revolutionary 
journalistic elite.115  Crucially, she showed that early Soviet journalists 
possessed concepts of professionalism that the new elite found difficult to erase.  
Other scholars looked at the opposite tendency: the attempt by political and 
cultural elites to deprofessionalise Soviet journalism through the use of worker-
peasant correspondents.116  Such studies can be connected with the work of 
Michael Gorham and Hugh Hudson, Jr., who analysed the effects of the early 
Soviet press in creating a truly Bolshevik language.117 
However, a study that avoided the newly-opened archives arguably 
exerted the most influence on the wider scholarship.  Closely analysing the 
content of Pravda over the course of more than three decades, Jeffrey Brooks 
Thank You Comrade Stalin (2000) set out to reveal the underlying mechanisms 
of Soviet public culture.118  As the relative freedoms of NEP gave way to the 
Stalin cult, a certain rhetoric of obligation to the leader became dominant, he 
argued.  Thanking Comrade Stalin for the states munificence was one 
manifestation of an economy of the gift, a transaction that entwined the Soviet 
population in a state of eternal debt that could never be repaid.119 
 Brooks expanded scholarly understanding of the language of Stalinist 
citizenship, but failed to achieve his stated aim of describing Soviet public 
culture.  For Brooks, Pravda, as the Soviet Unions newspaper of record, was at 
the heart of public discourse: The press presented a normative standard for 
115	Mueller,	851-873. 
116	 Stephen	 Coe,	 Peasants,	 the	 State	 and	 the	 Languages	 of	 NEP:	 The	 Rural	 Correspondents	
Movement	in	the	Soviet	Union,	1924-28.		Unpublished	PhD	dissertation.	University	of	Michigan,	
1993;	Jennifer	Clibbon,	The	Soviet	Press	and	Grass-Roots	Organization:	The	Rabkor	Movement,	
NEP	to	the	First	Five	Year	Plan	Unpublished	PhD	dissertation.	University	of	Toronto,	1993. 
117	Michael	Gorham,	Speaking;	Hugh	D.	Hudson,	 Jr.	 Shaping	Peasant	Political	Discourse	during	
the	New	Economic	Policy:	The	Newspaper	"Krest'ianskaia	Gazeta"	and	the	Case	of	Vladimir	Ia.	
Journal	of	Social	History	36/2	(Winter	2002),	303-317. 
118	Brooks,	Thank	You. 
119	Ibid.,	pp.83-105. 
INTRODUCTION | 43 
society as a whole and a practical guide to public behaviour for all citizens.  It 
was a hierarchical system in which Pravdas editorials constituted the last 
word.120  However, recent studies have suggested that this discourse spread far 
wider than the press, and was especially prominent in Soviet visual culture.121  
Even if we accept that public culture was primarily disseminated through the 
written word, there is little acknowledgement of the specificities of Pravda, the 
most authoritative and most official of Soviet newspapers. 
 It is hard to escape the conclusion that Brookss monograph evoked 
Stalinist discourse so successfully because it remained so hermetically sealed 
within it.  His narrow focus evaded the question of the relationship of the press 
to society, while the word journalism was used only in relation to Britain and 
the United States; the sole reference to it as a profession in Russia referred to 
the pre-revolutionary press.122  Brooks implicitly suggested that the true author 
of the Soviet press was the Party, but without discussing the production context 
of Soviet newspapers, his analysis stood on shaky ground.  As an explanation of 
Soviet public culture, Thank You Comrade Stalin offered only a piece of the 
puzzle; it was more successful as a recreation of the other-worldliness of 
Stalinist discourse than as an analysis of Stalinist society.  
Matthew Lenoes Closer to the Masses (2004), approached similar 
questions in a different way.  Lenoe analysed the transition from the journalism 
of the early Soviet period to a new form of mass journalism at the start of the 
first five-year plan.  He posited that the Soviet press abandoned its commitment 
to enlightenment goals of transforming the individual, and instead sought to 
ration information for an audience of party insiders, material which focused 
heavily on promoting the regimes construction tasks.  He thus suggested that a 
utopian commitment to individual transformation gave way to the goal of 
industrial transformation by the end of the 1920s.   
120	Ibid.,	xiv,	xviii. 
121	 Victoria	 Bonell,	 Iconography	 of	 Power:	 Soviet	 Political	 Posters	 Under	 Lenin	 and	 Stalin	
(Berkeley,	CA:	University	of	California	Press,	1999);	Plamper,	Stalin	Cult. 
122	Brooks,	Thank	You,	xiii,	p.9. 
INTRODUCTION | 44 
Lenoes argument may be criticised, both for making conclusions that 
would be untenable if the time frame were expanded, and also for his 
unconvincing ministrations on behalf of the neo-traditionalist school of Soviet 
history.   
Nevertheless, his meticulous research methods are worthy of emulation.  
Alongside close analysis of the content of Soviet newspapers, Lenoe looked 
beyond the newspaper page and into the world outside.  Borrowing his 
methodology from the sociology of cultural production, Lenoe analysed the 
newspaper as a cultural phenomenon by considering a cultural diamond, 
which included the object itself, its creator(s), its audience, and its social 
context.123  Thus Lenoe, while broadly agreeing with Brookss main arguments, 
actually delivered a far more well-rounded account of changes in press content.  
By employing a new range of sources, from journals to archival documents, 
Lenoe, like Mueller and Gorham, provided a new set of questions for scholars to 
ask of the Soviet press, and a new set of tools with which to analyse them.   
While the first half of the Soviet Unions existence has been amply 
covered, few studies have been devoted to the post-Stalin period  perhaps 
reflective of a discipline which has only started to engage with the post-Stalin 
period in the last decade.  Thomas C. Wolfes Governing Soviet Journalism (2005) 
was the first Anglophone work to do so, covering the broad sweep of history 
from 1953 until the 1990s.  Employing what he self-deprecatingly called a 
schizo-disciplinary approach between history and anthropology, Wolfe 
examined the rise and fall of the journalist as educator, or rather, to use Wolfes 
preferred term, as governor.124 
Governing, he claimed, was a question of enlightenment.  Drawing on 
Michel Foucault, Wolfe suggested that power in the Soviet Union did not just 
reside with the political elite, but also with figures like journalists, who used 
their social position to transmit a vision of the Soviet individual to the public.  
This model of governance began to break down after Khrushchevs ouster.  The 
123	Lenoe,	p.3. 
124	Wolfe,	p.18. 
INTRODUCTION | 45 
Brezhnev leaderships desire for control over the form and content of 
journalistic expression meant that journalists governing role was curbed.  
When it returned under Gorbachev, journalists were no longer interested in 
furthering the cause of socialism, but rather in burying it.  However, in market 
conditions, journalists were expected to become purveyors of sensationalism 
rather than moral guides, leading to the mutation of their governing role. 
In recasting the thorny problematic of the relationship between 
journalists and authorities as a question of governing, Wolfe suggested that 
binary distinctions between ruler and ruled did not always reflect reality, 
insofar as journalists identified with the Partys requirements, and disseminated 
them to the public.  This study endorses Wolfes key finding that journalists 
played a key role in setting the moral co-ordinates of the Khrushchev era.  Yet it 
seeks to add historical meat to the anthropological bones of Wolfes argument 
by examining journalists in their wider social context, seeing them less as 
governors and, somewhat more prosaically, more as a part of the partys 
propaganda apparatus in a changing ideological climate, with all the 
contradictions that this entailed.  Wolfe dealt almost exclusively in the plans and 
goals of Soviet journalism, and much less in the question of how successfully 
they were carried out.  By contrast, this study, through its focus on the day-to-
day work of the press shows how the narrative that former Soviet journalists 
present today  one of ethical principles and the promotion of thought  is not 
always borne out by close examination of their debates.   
The thesis also seeks to challenge Wolfes back-door canonisation of the 
greats of Soviet journalism, such as KP and Izvestiia editor Aleksei Adzhubei 
and sketch-writer Anatolii Agranovskii.  Wolfe appears to have all-too-readily 
swallowed the dominant individual-led narrative of Soviet journalism put 
forward in interviews and canonised in todays Russian journalism textbooks.  
This study, by examining journalists own thoughts about the profession, uttered 
in the papers weekly editorial letuchki, shows that Soviet journalism was a far 
more collective endeavour than Wolfe suggests.   
INTRODUCTION | 46 
The fall of the Soviet Union also allowed Russian researchers to reassess the 
subject outside constricting Marxist-Leninist paradigms.  A number of 
important volumes of interview and primary source material have been 
published, greatly enhancing our understanding of the way the Soviet press 
functioned.125  However, aside from studies of censorship, very few analyses of 
Soviet journalism  and those mostly produced in journalism faculties as 
textbooks  have been published.126  These studies have generally posited a 
rigid binary distinction pitting heroic journalist against repressive regime.   
Stanislav Goldfarbs 2008 history of Komsomolskaia pravda provides a 
case in point.127  The book provides a wealth of invaluable information, 
including memoir material from the papers own archive, which was destroyed 
in a fire in 2006.  However, his narrative too often chooses facts over analysis.  
As the story moves into the 1950s and 1960s, the veil of scholarly objectivity 
disappears almost entirely, with page upon page of quotations from journalists 
memoirs without commentary, meaning that Goldfarbs narrative overlaps with 
journalists own, becoming a celebration of the special spirit of the sixth floor 
rather than a sustained historical analysis (hardly surprising, given that the 
book appears to have been commissioned as an official history).128 
This parade of the great and the good is an ailment afflicting much 
Russian-language scholarship.  In proclaiming a veritable kult lichnostei, such 
studies obfuscate the real social and cultural processes at work in Soviet 
journalism.  However, given the widespread lack of attention devoted in the 
West to the creative aspects of Soviet journalism, such studies perform a useful 
125	Amongst	them	Semina,	Bolshe;	Mamleev,	Adzhubei	v	koridorakh;	Pressa	v	obshchestve	(1959-
2000).	 Otsenki	 zhurnalistov	 i	 sotsiologov.	 Dokumenty,	 ed.	 by	 A.I.	 Volkov	 et	 al.	 (Moscow:	
Moskovskaia	 shkola	 politicheskikh	 issledovanii,	 2000);	 Zhurnalisty	 XX	 veka:	 Liudi	 i	 sudby	
(Moscow:	Olma-Press,	2003). 
126	 N.L.	 Volkovskii,	 Otechestvennaia	 zhurnalistika,	 1950-2000.	 Uchebnoe	 posobie.	 Chast	 1	
(St.Petersburg:	 Izd.	Sankt-Peterburgskogo	universiteta,	2006);	R.	P.	Ovsepian,	 Istoriia	noveishei	
otechestvennoi	zhurnalistiki	(Moscow:	MGU	/	Nauka,	2005).		On	censorship:	Arlen	Blium,	Kak	eto	
delalos	 v	 Leningrade:	 tzenzura	 v	 gody	 ottepeli,	 zastoia	 i	 perestroiki	 (St.	 Petersburg:	
Akademicheskii	proekt,	2005);	Tatiana	Goriaeva,	Politicheskaia	tsenzura	v	SSSR:	1917-1991	gg.	
2-e	izd.	(Moscow:	Rosspen,	2009). 
127	Goldfarb,	Istoriia	KP. 
128	 Goldfarb,	 pp.309,	 317.	 	 When	 working	 in	 the	 archives,	 Goldfarb	 listed	 his	 institutional	
affiliation	as	KP. 
INTRODUCTION | 47 
function.  By drawing readers attention to the golden pens of Soviet 
journalism, such as Boris Gorbatov, Mikhail Koltsov, and Valentin Ovechkin, 
these studies remind us that, while the creative aspects of the profession 
suffered greatly, something called journalism nevertheless remained. 
4.1 The Press and the Party 
According to one journalism textbook of the period, the Soviet press was a Party 
press because, in reflecting the idea of the Party, it reflects the interests of the 
people.129  The many thousands of newspapers and journals in the Soviet Union 
represented a particular branch of the Party apparatus.  Komsomolskaia pravda, 
the official organ of the Central Committee of the Communist Youth League, or 
Komsomol, joined other central newspapers like Pravda (the organ of the 
Central Committee of the Communist Party) and Izvestiia (the Council of 
Workers Deputies) in representing branches of the main party apparatus.  
Beneath them existed a network of smaller newspapers, representing the Soviet 
republics, towns or regions, right down to the so-called mnogotirazhniki, which 
represented factories, farms, or enterprises. 
Soviet journalists were expected to follow the interests of their particular 
organisation, and take instructions from them.  Newspapers produced long-
term perspective plans for the authorities weeks and months in advance, 
listing articles that would be published on certain key themes or campaigns, 
such as industry and agriculture, moral and ethical themes, Marxist-Leninist 
ideology, or a Party drive against drunkenness.130  KPs editors gave frequent 
account to the Komsomol of how their work was satisfying its concerns, and 
failure to fulfil its requirements could be grounds for disciplinary action.  This 
thesis makes use of documents from the Agitation and Propaganda Departments 
129 N. Bogdanov, B. Viazemskii, Spravochnik zhurnalista. 2-e izd. (Leningrad: Lenizdat, 1965), 
p.30. 
130 Although I did not find any monthly plans in the KP archive, they were probably still 
produced.  These plans are contained in Sovetskaia Rossiia's archive, however, e.g. Svodnyi plan 
redaktsii gazety Sovetskaia Rossiia na fevral'-mart 1960 g., RGANI, f.96, op.1, d.22, ll.59-76.  For 
a KP weekly plan see RGASPI, f.98M, op.1, d.267, ll.8-17. 
INTRODUCTION | 48 
of both the Komsomol (contained in RGASPI-M) and the Party, contained in the 
Russian State Archive of Contemporary History (RGANI), which illustrate the 
significant pressures that were placed on journalists to conform to the Partys 
instructions. 
General instructions, describing the overall priorities and principles of 
the Soviet press might be aired at Party Congresses, in Central Committee 
resolutions, or in editorials in prominent newspapers, especially Pravda.  Since 
journalists and editors were part of the Party apparatus (the Editor-in-Chief was 
a member of the Komsomols Central Committee, too) regular meetings of the 
Party Organisation were held at the paper to discuss these goals.131  The 
transcripts of these wide-ranging discussions, at KP and at other major 
newspapers, are employed in this thesis.  More specific instructions were 
provided by press reviews, in which journalists examined the work of 
newspapers that represented ministries or committees below them in the Party 
hierarchy, or by articles printed in Sovetskaia pechat, the official organ of the 
Union of Journalists.   
The Komsomol took the lead in transmitting instructions to 
Komsomolskaia pravda.  It kept tabs on the everyday work of the paper, and 
was the main contact for issues as minor as sanatorium provision for editorial 
staff or as major as the appointment of senior staff (though officials increasingly 
sought to involve the paper's collective in such decisions).132  When David 
Novoplianskii wanted permission to write about hooliganism, it was Shelepin, 
the Komsomol's general secretary, whom editor Dmitrii Goriunov called.133  
When the paper prepared an article on US Secretary of State John Foster 
Dulles's refusal to allow Americans to travel to the 1957 Youth Festival, it was 
Shelepin himself who got out the red pencil to edit the article.134 
131 In 1957, of 111 of 129 staff members (86 per cent) were members or candidate members of 
the Party or Komsomol. Svedeniia o komsomol'skikh gazetakh, 1957, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, 
d.847, ll.48, 61-63. 
132 Il'ia Shatunovskii, Sdelal bol'she, chem mog, no men'she, chem khotel in Adzhubei v 
koridorakh, p.44. 
133 Goriunov to Shelepin, 5/7/55, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.155, ll.60-64. 
134 KP to Shelepin, 12/3/57, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.847, ll.147-149. 
INTRODUCTION | 49 
But, reflecting the Central Committees control over the Komsomol, KP 
was also subject to direct supervision from the Party.  Official events, such as 
anniversaries, Plenums, or May Day, were directed by Agit-Prop, which 
specified how much material should be printed and when.135  The Party also 
directed the flow of material for certain news events (for example, when US spy 
pilot Gary Powers was tried in 1960).136  Direct instructions were received from 
Agit-Prop curators, who checked the content of the newspapers under their 
purview, and passed on instructions from politicians.  There was also regular 
contact between regime and editor through the private Kremlin telephone 
system, or vertushka.137 
However, while the regimes instructions provided a framework for press 
content, only in cases with a bearing on high politics (like the article on Dulles 
cited above) did the regime directly specify what should be written, though 
editors might sometimes seek approval for controversial items.  And though the 
censorship organ Glavlit retained considerable power, after Stalins death it 
mainly functioned as a means for maintaining military secrecy rather than 
policing areas of ideological uncertainty.138  Journalists and editors were now 
expected to exercise their own judgement over the suitability of an article.  This 
was a move from pre-publication prescription of content to post-publication 
verification, where editors knew that if the vertushka didnt ring before 11am, 
the paper had passed muster with the Politburo.139  As the former Head of Agit-
Prop, Aleksandr Iakovlev, said in an interview:  
Don't think that heads of newspapers were constantly asking higher organs 
something. Newspapers simply came out. Moreover, there was a secret rule: 
don't try to ask.  Much was established on personal relationships. If I had a good 
relationship with the Editor-in-Chief, I agreed with him that he didn't have to 
constantly wait for instructions: you could publish most things at your own 
discretion.140 
135See RGANI, f.5, op.33, d.138, ll.70, 75, 143, 145, 146, 149. 
136 Ibid., l.135. 
137 Lilita Dzirkals, Thane Gustafson, A. Ross Johnson, The Media and Intra-Elite Communication 
in the USSR Rand Corporation Report R-2869 (Santa Monica, CA, 1982), pp.14-18. 
138 9/11/59, d.253, ll.7-8, 26-27; Hopkins, pp.128-129. 
139 Lev Korneshov, Ia ee liubil. A ona menia? in Bolshe, p.154. 
140 Volkova, p.354.  See also Korneshov, p.157. 
INTRODUCTION | 50 
Editors had to answer for their actions, as we will see, but the difference 
between this flexibility and the overcautiousness that reigned under Stalin is 
striking.  
4.2 Structure of the Komsomolskaia pravda redaktsiia 
The editorial office [] was one of three main administrative divisions 
of Komsomolskaia pravda.	 	Alongside	it	were	the	printing	plant	[],	
which was run through Pravda, and the publishing	 house	 [],	
which	liaised	with	the	Soviet	distributor,	Union	Press	[]	 to	deliver 
the paper to readers.  At the heart of the redaktsiia were the editors office and 
the secretariat (see Figure 1, page 55).  The Editor-in-Chief fulfilled a range of 
functions, from liaison with Party authorities to approving controversial stories 
and looking after staff welfare.  The Responsible Secretary also played a 
significant role at the paper, particularly in dealing with everyday liaison with 
the Party.  Beneath this level, there were a number of departments responsible 
for editorial content, headed by Editors or Heads of Department.  Beneath 
them were their deputies, and a number of correspondents.  Departmental 
Editors joined the Editor-in-Chief, Deputy Editor, and Responsible Secretaries 
on	 the	 Editorial	 Board	 [],	 which	 held	 a	 daily planning meeting 
[],	in	which	the	material	for	the	next	days	paper	was	decided.141  
On Mondays, this planerka was preceded by an editorial letuchka, held 
in the papers Blue Hall and open to all staff, where the previous weeks 
published material was discussed by a designated reviewer, before the floor was 
opened.  These meetings contained frank exchanges of views about the papers 
priorities, frequently turning into wide-ranging discussions on the future 
direction of the paper, or the nation as a whole.  Recordings of these meetings 
were typed up by one of the papers stenographers, before being placed in the 
141 Sadly for researchers, only protocols, rather than transcripts, of these meetings were 
produced. 
INTRODUCTION | 51 
papers archive; a copy also went to the Komsomols Central Committee.142  
These latter transcripts are held in the Russian State Archive of Socio-Political 
History in Moscow.  They enable us to understand how journalists viewed their 
profession in their own words, in the language they were using at the time; this 
thesis is the first to use them systematically.143   
To be sure, these sources do not offer us transparent access to 
journalists thoughts and cannot be used uncritically.  Letuchki are best thought 
of as publicly private spaces, where opinions could be exchanged, identities 
formed, and priorities outlined.  The fact that journalists comments could 
eventually reach Komsomol officials illustrates the semi-public nature of these 
meetings.  However, the range of views expressed in such meetings shows that 
many journalists did not hold back in expressing their thoughts and there is 
evidence to suggest that journalists nevertheless considered such meetings to 
be a private space, an editorial secret.144  For this reason, they provide a 
window onto the professional world of the Soviet journalist in the 1950s and 
1960s  one that allows us to hear journalists speak about their profession in 
their own words. 
5 Overview 
The thesis comprises five thematic chapters, each of which provides a history of 
a particular aspect of the papers work.  By essaying a thematic focus, this thesis 
forgoes an attempt to provide a comprehensive history of the paper, and instead 
uses a new set of sources to make a sustained argument about Soviet 
journalists, their relationship with the public, and their attempts to find new 
forms of journalism for a post-Stalinist age.  While the thesis analyses 
journalists relationship with readers, comprehensive study of how audiences 
142 Vera Benderova, Sol' chuzhikh slez, in Soldaty slova: Rasskazyvaiut veterany Sovetskoi 
zhurnalistiki. Tom 5, ed. by B. S. Burkov and V. A. Miakushkov (Moscow: Politizdat, 1985), p.335. 
143 Susan Costanzo employed transcripts from late 1959 for her article The 1959 Liriki-Fiziki 
Debate: Going Public With the Private?, in Borders of Socialism: Private Spheres of Soviet Russia, 
ed. by Lewis H. Siegelbaum (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 2006), pp.25168. 
144 RGASPI, f.98M, op.1, d.107, l.22; Iurii A. Poliakov, Istoricheskaia nauka: liudi i problemy 
(Moscow: Rosspen, 1999), pp.307-308. 
INTRODUCTION | 52 
viewed the press has not been possible because of a lack of sources.  It is also 
important to note that this is a case study of a single Moscow-based newspaper 
 one where journalists were well-trained and highly motivated  and is thus 
not reflective of the full range of experiences of Soviet journalists after Stalins 
death.145  Nevertheless, what the thesis lacks in breadth, it gains in depth: by 
focusing on a single newspaper it has been possible to examine the changing 
values and beliefs of journalists, and the contradictions of their work, in far 
greater empirical detail than any previous study. 
Chapter One examines the concept of criticism and self-criticism from late 
Stalinism until the late-1960s.  The chapter shows how the Twentieth Party 
Congress prompted journalists to reassess their social role by placing the 
protection of Soviet citizens from bureaucracy and lawlessness at the heart of 
their work.  However, in the face of worrying social developments and a 
strained international situation, the regime became increasingly concerned 
about the divisive effects of journalistic muckraking, and began to criticise KPs 
apparently dangerous articles.  This was a demonstration of the long-lasting 
tension between the transformative role of press criticism and its perceived 
erosive effects.  Under Brezhnev, these tensions were exacerbated.  Journalists 
once again attempted to condemn social shortcomings in the name of progress, 
but came up against a regime keen to maintain a positive faade. 
Chapter Two looks at Soviet journalists changing concepts of news.  It shows 
how the development of Soviet news was dictated by two competing factors as 
the demand that the press describe the positive in Soviet life conflicted with 
the audiences demand for objective, up-to-date news.  In a climate of escalating 
145	On	the	minority-language	press	see	Kathryn	Graber,	Public	Information:	The	Shifting	Roles	of	
Minority-Language	 News	 Media	 in	 the	 Buryat	 Territories	 of	 Russia	 Language	 and	
Communication	32	(2012),	124-136.		On	regional	press	see	R.V.	Dautova,	Rol	sredstv	massovoi	
informatsii	 v	 kulturnom	 vzaimoobmene	 v	 period	 Khrushchevskoi	 ottepeli	Uchebnye	 zapiski	
Kazanskogo	 universiteta.	 Seriia:	 Gumanitarnye	 nauki	 152/5	 (2010),	 91-100;	 Steven	 Kotkin,	
Steeltown	USSR:	Soviet	Society	in	the	Gorbachev	Era	(Berkeley,	CA:	University	of	California	Press,	
1992),	pp.39-75. 
INTRODUCTION | 53 
propaganda competition  and especially the increased accessibility of foreign 
radio stations like Voice of America and the BBC  the regime demanded that 
journalists rival the timeliness of western information.  However, with the 
regime unwilling to loosen restrictions on reporting, the Prague Spring 
persuaded the regime that jamming provided an easier solution than 
eliminating political constraints.  
Chapter Three discusses the rhetoric of the Soviet positive hero after the Secret 
Speech.  Focusing on a single rubric, Letters, Notebooks, and Diaries of Our 
Contemporaries, a feature in which readers own personal documents were 
printed as examples to be emulated, the chapter examines the way in which 
journalists attempted to mould the figure of the contemporary hero.  Editorial 
discussions show that, despite its popularity, the rubric exposed disagreements 
over the meaning of the Communism that Khrushchev hoped to build by 1980.  
As Khrushchev-era romantika gave way to the sobriety of the Brezhnev era, the 
figure of the contemporary hero reached crisis point, with journalists beginning 
to view the ascetic heroes of the past as dangerously primitive for a technocratic 
Chapter Four discusses one of the papers most ambitious initiatives of the 
period: the founding of a sociological research institute, called the Institute of 
Public Opinion.  Founded in May 1960 by the head of the papers Propaganda 
Department, Boris Grushin, the Institute initially suggested that citizens 
attitude towards social reality was as positive as propaganda had always 
painted it.  For that reason, early polls were met rapturously by the papers 
journalists.  But as soon as Grushin reoriented the Institute towards scientific 
investigation of social problems, the papers journalists turned against it.  
Despite the patronage of the regime, journalists were unwilling to indulge the 
work of an Institute whose surveys were increasingly difficult to utilise for 
propaganda purposes, suggesting that the adherence of KP journalists to the 
Brezhnev leaderships technocratic agenda had limits. 
INTRODUCTION | 54 
Chapter Five looks at journalistic discourses surrounding the reader.  By 
examining two main initiatives to which the paper gave its support, the chapter 
shows how journalists sought to mould model citizens.  Firstly, the paper 
provided support for discussion clubs, which extolled the virtues of 
independent thought, and secondly, it provided support to the Communard 
movement, a grassroots pedagogical initiative which sought to overcome the 
staidness of official Komsomol and Pioneer meetings by promoting youth 
creativity.  However, the introduction of market principles in 1965 prompted 
decisive changes.  Newspapers were now judged on their popularity with 
readers, and sought to learn about their audience by commissioning sociological 
studies and convening reader conferences.  As a result, the relationship between 
journalist and reader changed decisively: no longer was the reader simply a 
potential citizen to be moulded and educated, but also a consumer to be won 
over. 
INTRODUCTION | 55 
FIGURE 1: KOMSOMOLSKAIA PRAVDA EDITORIAL STRUCTURE, 1957 
EDITORS OFFICE 
Editor-in-Chief * 
Deputy Editor * 
4 other staff 
SECRETARIAT 
Responsible Secretaries x 2 * * 
Deputy Responsible Secretary 
Feuilletonist 
Roving Correspondents x 6 
10 other staff 
EDITORIAL DEPARTMENTS 
Military and Physical Culture (4 staff) 
Komsomol Life * (6 staff) 
Propaganda * (4 staff) 
Working Youth (5 staff) 
Rural Youth (4 staff) 
Student Youth * (7 staff) 
Science and Technology (2 staff) 
International Affairs * (10 staff) 
Literature and the Arts * (7 staff) 
Internal Information (7 staff) 
Illustrations (8 staff) 
Youth Press (2 staff) 
Letters (22 staff) 
Corrections (20 staff) 
CORRESPONDENT NETWORK 
Head of Department 
Deputy Head of Department 
Technical Secretary 
Local correspondents x 35 
OTHER DEPARTMENTS 
Press bureau (4 staff) 
Library and Archive (4 staff) 
Stenography (5 staff) 
Manuscripts (9 staff) 
Technical (23 staff) 
Asterisks denote staff members who were 
part of the redkollegkia.  
N.B. This table is a reconstruction of the 
structure of the paper from the 1957 
salary list. Unfortunately, staff names are 
not included.  See Shtatnoe raspisanie i 
smeta raskhodov redaktsii gazety 
Komsomol'skaia pravda na 1957 god. 
(RGASPI, f.98M, op.1, d.218, ll.1-6) 
SHORTCOMINGS | 56 
CHAPTER 1 | Shortcomings: The Limits of Press Criticism Before 
and After Stalin 
For journalists, nothing and everything changed after the Twentieth Party 
Congress.  Nothing changed because their work was still supposed to bolster the 
Partys standing, and expected to remain within the parameters of the 
prevailing ideology.  Journalists were still subject to sanction should these goals 
not be met.  They remained the partys assistants, as Khrushchev would 
famously tell them a few years later.  But everything changed, too.  Newspapers 
became more lively and thoughtful, and more challenging to social ills.  
Journalists began to speak more freely, criticising negative tendencies within 
society on the basis of their understanding of the public good.  
The role of the Twentieth Party Congress on Soviet journalism has been 
much discussed in the literature, but a more exact formulation of its impact is 
lacking.  Thomas C. Wolfe quotes journalists who suggest that the defence of the 
little man was one of the periods defining characteristics.1  However, he does 
not delve deeper into the nature of this defence of the individual, or investigate 
how commitment to the public this played out in a nation where democratic 
checks and balances on power were lacking, and journalists were under severe 
pressure, not only to speak out on violations of discipline, but also to maintain a 
sense of social stability.  This chapter, which spans the period from late 
Stalinism to the Prague Spring, focuses on the role of the Secret Speech in 
establishing a new set of norms for so-called criticism and self-criticism, 
examining in particular two pivotal periods: the year following the Secret 
Speech and the aftermath of Khrushchevs ouster.  Drawing on a number of case 
studies, the chapter shows how criticism became central to journalists 
understanding of their social role, but also how the regime recoiled from its 
erosive consequences.  Thus, this chapter suggests that there was a tension 
between the newspapers role as an organ of stability, and as an organ of 
1 Thomas C. Wolfe, Governing Soviet Journalism: The Press and the Soviet Person After Stalin 
(Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2004), xvii-xix; pp.34-35. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 57 
transformation.   Both were considered to be essential functions of the Soviet 
press, but they often acted in discordance, leading to frequent conflicts between 
journalists and Party organs.   
The third edition of the Great Soviet Encyclopaedia (1973) contains the 
following definition of the term: 
Criticism and Self-Criticism is a method for uncovering the contradictions of 
social development, a necessary side of material and spiritual action; one of the 
basic principles of revolutionary transformational activity of Marxist-Leninist 
parties  and, in a socialist society, of the whole people  one of the motivating 
forces of the development of a socialist society; a principle of moral education, 
self-education, and spiritual development of people.  The essence of criticism and 
self-criticism consists in cognition and discovery of a given form of contradiction, 
error and shortcomings, arising for objective or subjective reasons in the course 
of social practice, with the goal of overcoming it.2 
Exposs of the behaviour of errant factory bosses and lampooning of corrupt 
bureaucrats ostensibly helped to ensure that no-one was above the law, and 
ensured the revolutionary transformation of Soviet society.  After 1956 
criticism  both within the press and in wider society  was seen as a means for 
rooting out the remnants of the cult of personality.3  It was made possible by the 
renunciation of terror, as well as a growing uncertainty amongst the political 
elite about the direction of the press, which left the door open for journalists to 
interpret the significance of the Congress for themselves.   
However, it rapidly became clear that public exposure of officials 
misdemeanours threatened public trust in governmental institutions.  1956 was 
witness not only to the Twentieth Party Congress, but also unrest in Hungary 
and Poland, discontent within the student body, and a long-standing problem 
with hooliganism.  By the end of the year, the combination of these elements 
seemed to endanger Soviet power, with the papers critical articles coming to be 
seen as dangerously iconoclastic.  Despite the regimes ostensible commitment 
2 Kritika i samokritika, Bolshaia Sovetskaia entsiklopediia. 3-e izd. Tom 13 (Moscow: Bolshaia 
Sovetskaia entsiklopediia, 1973), p.452. 
3 On criticism within a factory setting see Susanne Schattenberg, Democracy or despotism? 
How the Secret Speech was Translated into Everyday Life in Dilemmas of De-Stalinization: 
Negotiating Cultural and Social Change in the Khrushchev Era, ed. by Polly Jones (Abingdon: 
Routledge, 2006), pp.64-79. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 58 
to exposing bureaucratic misdeeds, the exposure of shortcomings was forced to 
take a back-seat to the politically expedient.  This was illustrated even more 
starkly under Brezhnev, at which point the punishments for overstepping 
acceptable boundaries became harsher.4   
1 The Press under Late Stalinism 
From the very beginning of Soviet power, criticism and self-criticism was seen 
as essential to the smooth running of the social order.    Lenin is said to have 
seen it as the mark of a serious political party while Stalin believed that 
without self-criticism there is no correct education of the party, of the class, of 
the masses; without correct education of the party, the class, of the masses, 
there is no Bolshevism.5  According to the second edition of the Great Soviet 
Encyclopaedia, published in 1953,  
Daily principled criticism and self-criticism strengthens the proletarian party, 
raises the vigilance of party members, protects the party from bourgeois 
influences, and helps to cleanse it of enemies in its ranks, and also from 
opportunistic and unstable elements.6   
A press day editorial in 1952 proclaimed that Newspapers make wide use of a 
tried-and-tested method of Communist education of workers: criticism and self-
criticism, they castigate all that is sluggish and obsolete, helping to fight the 
survivals of capitalism in peoples consciousness.7 
 Yet, judged by their content, it is difficult to imagine that the newspapers 
of the late-Stalin era played any substantial role in surmounting shortcomings.  
4 A note on sources: in this chapter, much of the material comes from archival sources, including 
editorial letuchki, Party Organisation meetings, and the documents of Agit-Prop within the 
Komsomol and Party.  However, in places it has proved difficult to follow the archival paper trail 
into the various ministries and Party organisations scattered around the country.  For this 
reason, this chapter relies on eye-witness accounts of events by journalists and political figures.  
Although these cannot be considered to be as accurate as archival records, they nevertheless 
allow us to reconstruct the consequences of journalists critical articles, as well as revealing 
behind-the-scenes insights absent in archival documents. 
5 S. Dudel', 'Kritika i samokritika, in Filosofskaia entsiklopediia. Tom 3 , ed. by F.V. Konstantinov 
(Moscow: Izd. Sovetskaia entsiklopediia, 1964), pp.94-95; Kritika i samokritika, in Bolshaia 
Sovetskaia entsiklopediia. 2-e izd. Tom 23 (Moscow: Bolshaia Sovetskaia entsiklopediia, 1953), 
p.515. 
6 Kritika i samokritika in BSE. 2-e izd., p.515. 
7 Glashatai partii Ogonek 4/5/52, 4. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 59 
While barely a week went by without commemoration of some seemingly 
momentous anniversary, such as Stalins seventieth birthday in 1949, or 
ceremonial events like Stalins nomination to be elected to the Supreme Soviet, 
there was little room for critical materials.  What materials existed tended to 
concentrate on a narrow circle of tried-and-tested themes.  If we consider 
consolidation and transformation to be the two poles of the Soviet press, then it 
would seem that its role under Stalin  despite the officially stated values  was 
heavily biased towards the former.  Newspapers were less concerned with 
changing Soviet society (though they paid lip service to the ideal), as with 
ensuring the regimes continued survival against perceived threats both internal 
and external.8 
However, in their editorial meetings, journalists expressed a belief that the 
press should condemn negative social tendencies.  In an editorial letuchka in 
1950, Izvestiia journalist Kudrevatykh argued: 
We know of a number of facts from the life of certain town which speak of the 
presence of bureaucratism, a detachment from the masses, etc.  If the necessity of 
a struggle against bureaucratism, against detachment from the masses, and in 
favour of self-criticism in our Soviet organs, was more clearly underlined in our 
editorials it would be more valuable and, moreover, it would show how we raise 
in the paper the question of the implementation of self-criticism.9 
KP journalists expressed their approval of the newspaper when it printed 
articles that bravely criticised, without taking account of rank.10  These ideas 
were entirely within the framework of the regimes official values, as we have 
seen.  But there was also frustration that journalists critical articles were not 
supported by the authorities.   
At  a speech commemorating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the paper, 
Editor-in-Chief Dmitrii Goriunov argued: 
The reader does not want to put up with a lack of ideas, bureaucratism, over-
administration, poor work of all types. If we have in mind that criticism and 
self-criticism is not a fashion, not a campaign, but a permanently acting weapon 
8 Leonid T. Trofimov, The Soviet Media at the Onset of the Cold War, 1945-50. Unpublished PhD 
Dissertation. University of Illinois at Chicago, 2004; A.V. Fateev, Obraz vraga v sovetskoi 
propaganda, 1945-1954 gg. (Moscow: RAN, 1999). 
9 Izvestiia letuchka, 2/1/50, GARF, f.1244R, op.1, d.96, ll.1-2. 
10 2/1/50, d.87, ll.106-107, 129. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 60 
of Bolshevism, a vitally necessary condition for our development, then one must 
recognise that we still print too few critical materials.  Some of the papers critical 
materials are superficial; they are insufficient to penetrate deeply into the 
essence of the matter.  Sometimes a trenchant phrase replaces thoughtful 
analysis, convincing argumentation, proof, the incontestable logic of facts.11 
The papers well-known satirical writer Semen Nariniani argued that the 
Central Committee of the Komsomol was to blame for failing to support 
criticism, complaining that were always afraid of the Central Committee, that 
theyll scold us instead of praising us adding that there are many cases in 
which the Central Committee calls in the Secretary and takes a decision 
regardless of the facts, however trivial they are.  In certain trivial facts the 
Central Committee even sees anti-governmental tendencies 12  Thus, although 
the official line was to support criticism and self-criticism, in reality, the 
authorities sought to stamp it out.  Journalists, meanwhile, had an expectation 
that criticism would be supported, and condemned the authorities if they did 
not do so.   
While criticism and self-criticism were enshrined as official goals in 
theory, in practice, these were overwritten by other, more conservative values.  
Constant supervision through day-to-day contacts between editors and 
journalists and representatives of the state were combined with a series of 
formal mechanisms of control, such as censorship, regular verification through 
state bodies such as Agit-Prop, and ideological meetings to ensure conformity.  
However, though this suggests regularity in state-press relations, the period 
was actually characterised by a high level of uncertainty insofar as regular and 
unpredictable changes in the political climate could lead to negative 
consequences for journalists.  Journalists main role in this period was not to 
agitate for change, but to relate the Party line accurately and faithfully. One 
journalist writing in the early 1960s recalled publishing an article about a new 
industrial technique, but was accused of kow-towing before the bourgeois 
order and nationalism for deviating from the established script.13  The 
11 Tekst vystupleniia glavnogo redaktora gazety Komsomolskaia pravda tov. D. Goriunov v 
sviazi s 25-letiem gazety May 1950, RGASPI, f.98M, op.1, d.98, l.9. 
12 Closed Party Meeting, 23/1/50, d.25, l.2. 
13 G. Zimanas, Printsipial'nost', pravdivost', nastupatel'nost' Sovetskaia pechat (SP) 2 (1962), 8. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 61 
newspaper was a vehicle through which readers received information that they 
needed to know, rather than the information that they were interested in.  
Journalists adopted an ultra-cautious attitude, seeking above all to avoid the 
slightest ambiguity, rather than to innovate.14  In 1985, Dmitrii Goriunov, KPs 
Editor-in-Chief between 1950 and 1957, recalled it as a time when any 
independent thought was considered almost as dangerous ad-libbing 
[], when all efforts were directed towards retelling what had 
already been said, as far as possible without retreating from what had already 
been said one little bit.15  Staff members were forced to attend conferences 
with titles like On exactitude and correctness, and minor errors were 
routinely discussed in editorial meetings.16  It is telling that the largest editorial 
department at Komsomolskaia pravda was the Department of Corrections, 
which numbered twenty workers.17  Any significant change would have to wait 
until after Stalins death. 
2 1956 and the Creation of a New Model 
To understand the importance of criticism to the post-1956 KP, it is necessary 
to briefly sketch out the atmosphere after 1953.  The period between the death 
of Stalin and the Secret Speech did not lead to any great shift in content, as this 
1954 quotation from Vasilii Khomuskov, the Head of KPs Military Department 
suggests:   
Every week it becomes harder and harder to speak here  Harder and harder 
because our newspaper columns look worse and worse; at times trivial, content-
less material finds itself in columns, so the role of the responsible critic, 
especially recently, is extremely ignoble.  Some responsible critics speak with 
14 Jan Plamper, Abolishing Ambiguity: Soviet Censorship Practices in the 1930s Russian Review  
60/4 (October 2001), pp.526-544; Ilia Shatunovskii, Zapiski strelianogo vorob'ia (Moscow: 
Voskresen'e, 2003), p.44. 
15 Dmitrii Goriunov, Delo vsei zhizni, in Soldaty slova: Rasskazyvaiut veterany Sovetskoi 
zhurnalistiki. Tom 5, ed. by B. S. Burkov and V. A. Miakushkov (Moscow: Politizdat, 1985), p.56. 
16 For example: 2/1/50, d.87, ll.132-133; 4/6/51, d.107, l.16; Otchetnyi doklad partbiuro 
redaktsii Komsomol'skaia pravda o rabote, prodelannoi s ianvaria 1951 g. po mart 1952 g., 10 
March 1952, TsAOPIM, f.1968, op.1, d.27, l.16. 
17 Shtatnoe raspisanii redaktsii gazety KP na 1950 g., 27 April 1950, RGASPI, f.98M, op.1, d.99, 
SHORTCOMINGS | 62 
suggestions  But the problem is that these good thoughts, these good 
suggestions are very weakly reflected in our newspaper columns.18 
Khomuskovs comments point to two contradictory elements in this period: 
green shoots of recovery in the guise of debates and initiatives; clear signs of 
inertia when it came to their implementation.  While the cult had been 
jettisoned, journalists remained unable to produce a compelling vision of the 
post-Stalin newspaper.  As Nikolai Koroteev, the papers former front line 
correspondent, argued: every edition is to some extent always a repetition of 
the thoughts which we expressed in previous editions, but in terms of 
development  we havent gone any further.19  The fact that the late Stalin era 
had not bequeathed attractive models for emulation was one factor.  A second 
significant hurdle was fear.  Journalists had historically been unwilling to act 
without the say-so of the regime, leading them to mimic the tried-and-tested 
forms that had been rewarded under Stalin.   
However, there were signs of change.  The Leninist demand that the 
press should go closer to life was frequently invoked as an argument for 
moving away from the dream-like world of the Stalin cult, and towards the day-
to-day issues that concerned readers.20  A critical review of the papers work 
published in Pravda in May 1953 demanded that the paper widen its appeal to 
readers and become closer to life by printing more material about ordinary 
Soviet citizens.21  That same year, an account of the papers work produced by 
the papers Party organisation suggested that A connection with life is the 
obligation of the journalist.22  Almost anything, no matter what the subject, 
seemed to imply that the paper needed to go closer to life, and to the public: 
Berias arrest suggested to Semen Garbuzov, the papers Responsible Secretary, 
that for improving the work of the editorial team it is necessary to strengthen 
links with readers, with the masses.23 
18 13/9/54, d.131, ll.38-39. 
19 6/9/54, d.131, l.1,2. 
20 V.I. Lenin, O kharaktere nashikh gazet Pravda 20/9/18, 1. 
21 Byt' drugom i nastavnikom molodezhi, Pravda, 22/5/53, 2. 
22 Otchetnyi doklad partiinogo biuro za period s marta 1953 goda po avgust 1953 g., 1953, 
TsAOPIM, f.1968, op.1, d.28, l.59. 
23 Closed Party Meeting, 13/7/53, d.28, l.36. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 63 
 Readers letters played an important role in this process.  They allowed 
journalists to maintain contact with readers, answer their queries, and deal with 
their cries for help.24  Though the newspaper was somewhat overwhelmed by 
the responsibility of reading, recording, and responding to this mountain of 
letters, it was through the papers postbag that the idea of the protection of the 
individual against all manner of corruption, bureaucratism and arbitrariness 
took shape after Khrushchevs speech.    
The attack on Stalins cult of personality at the Twentieth Party 
Congress marks the boundary between Stalinist and post-Stalinist journalism.  
It was the moment when the reformist possibilities of the previous few years 
crystallised.  For this reason, before beginning our discussion of the 
development of criticism and self-criticism after the Congress, it is necessary to 
examine the context into which this critical line emerged.   
Although newspapers had made vague references to the kult lichnosti 
between 1953 and early 1956, Stalins position within Soviet mythology was 
officially unchallenged.25  His fall from the Party pantheon was therefore an 
enormous shock for Soviet citizens and damaged the myth of Party infallibility, 
connected to the notion that it embodied some eternal, scientific truth. 26  The 
speech was an act of explicit criticism, and implicit self-criticism.  The very fact 
that it admitted Party errors suggested the possibility that discussion of other 
errors, other problems, was now possible.  And by revealing Stalins violence 
towards its cadres, the speech suggested that the era of reprisals was over.  One 
journalist at Izvestiia admitted how he kept quiet about his doubts over the 
arrests of colleagues, and said of the cult: We felt that Stalin was being deified, 
24 The newspaper received 18,340 complaints about various aspects of Soviet life in 1955. 
Spravka o kharaktere pochty gazety, 1956, RGASPI, f.98M, op.1, d.178, l.56. 
25 D.M Feldman, Terminologiia vlasti: Sovetskie politicheskie terminy v istoriko-kulturnom	
kontekste (Moscow: Rosiiskii gosudarstvennyi gumanitarnyi universitet, 2006), pp.54-66; J. 
Shapiro, The Soviet Press and the Problem of Stalin Studies in Comparative Communism 4/3-4 
(1971), 179-209. 
26 On reactions see Polly Jones, Ive Held, and I Still Hold, Stalin in the Highest Esteem: 
Discourses and Strategies of Resistance to De-Stalinisation in the USSR, 195362, in The Leader 
Cult in Communist Dictatorships: Stalin and the Eastern Bloc, ed. by Balzs Apor et al. 
(Basingstoke: Macmillan, 2004), pp.22745; Miriam Dobson, Khrushchev's Cold Summer: Gulag 
Returnees, Crime, and the Fate of Reform After Stalin (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2009), 
pp.79-105; Vladimir A. Kozlov, Mass Uprisings in the USSR: Protest and Rebellion in the Post-
Stalin Years. Trans., Ed. by Elaine McClarnand MacKinnon (Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 2002), 
pp.112-135. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 64 
but we stayed silent, we were afraid to say so.  We were on bended knee before 
one man.27  Another journalist at the paper claimed that the Congresss 
decisions meant that the Soviet people were freed from fear.28  Journalists and 
editors were now allowed breathing space in which to rethink the Soviet presss 
future.  Mistakes did not go unpunished, but they no longer attracted as severe a 
sanction as they had in the past.  Moreover, the regimes demands  at least until 
the end of 1956  were frequently ambiguous. 
 Although the Speech did not name the press directly, the attack on the 
Stalin cult placed the spotlight firmly on its purveyors, which of course included 
journalists.  The immediate post-Congress period was thus a time for self-
criticism, for reassessing priorities, and for settling old scores.  At Izvestiia in 
particular, Editor-in-Chief Konstantin Gubins high-handed style was roundly 
condemned by colleagues, who clearly relished the opportunity to voice what 
they had previously stayed silent about.  One journalist mentioned colleagues 
complaints about Gubins lack of interest in their work, a criticism that the 
editor brushed off, before warning that it would be unwise to completely 
negate the achievements of I.V. Stalin.  He added: If we completely negated his 
positive role, then it would be impossible to understand how the cult of 
personality was created.29  His staff reacted badly to this, asserting that Gubins 
unhealthy attitude to criticism is one manifestation of the consequences of the 
cult of personality.30  Others followed up, complaining that any ideas for change 
were never put into practice because of his leadership.31  Even at Pravda, 
Shepilov was subject to criticism, albeit milder, for his lack of attention to the 
papers work.32 
The atmosphere at Komsomolskaia pravda was comparatively calmer, 
perhaps because an atmosphere of creative discussion already existed there.  
Nevertheless, the sense of shock was no less palpable.  I have a very difficult 
task.  I don't know how I'll manage it, said Garbuzov at Komsomol'skaia 
27 Izvestiia Closed Party Meeting, 29-30/3/56, TsAOPIM, f.453, op.2, d.27, ll.16-17. 
28 Ibid., l.16. 
29 Izvestiia Closed Party Meeting, 29-30/3/56, TsAOPIM, f.453, op.2, d.27, ll.23-24. 
30 Ibid., l.30. 
31 Ibid., ll.31, 33. 
32 Pravda Closed Party Meeting, 27-28/4/1956, TsAOPIM, f.3226, op.1, d.54, l.14. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 65 
pravda's first post-Congress meeting, before adding that there was a great deal 
to reconsider, many values to reappraise, and that the paper needed to reject 
many certainties and habitual forms and find new ones.  To think that the 
paper could do so quickly would be ludicrous, he added.33  It is telling that 
after this meeting, when comments were invited, the transcript indicates an 
unusual period of silence.34   
If journalists were confused as to how to proceed, so were readers who, 
in the absence of an editorial on Stalin, were left confused by cryptic references 
to the cult of personality.  What was the kult lichnosti, asked the workers of one 
factory shop, and provided their own interpretation: A prominent person 
comes along, i.e. a manager, and he never says hello, even though hes obliged 
to say hello; people who want to show themselves to be better and more 
cultured than everyone else, and have suits and dresses made to order, etc.  
They asked journalists: If you can, then please answer this question in 
Komsomolskaia pravda or by letter whether we understood correctly or not.35  
But the paper was ill-placed to provide such answers, with Adzhubei admitting 
that finding a line on the cult of personality was a very important task, but not a 
very simple one.36  Complaints about a lack of direct engagement with the 
Twentieth Party Congress and its consequences were a familiar refrain in the 
months that followed. 
 But while journalists at the paper were unable to tackle the 
consequences of the Congress head on, its effects were nevertheless visible in 
terms of a significant shift in tone.  It may be argued that, with the press still 
under Party supervision, such changes merely represented a sideshow to the 
main feature: the continued adherence of Soviet journalism to Party norms.37  
However, this is to miss the point: journalists did not see the Party as the 
problem.  Rather, they sought to infuse Party resolutions with meaning.   
33 5/3/56, d.170, ll.107-108. 
34 Ibid., l.116. 
35 5/3/56, d.170, ll.124-126. 
36 Ibid., l.138.  See also 21/5/56, d.172, l.65. 
37 As both Kristin Roth-Ey and Frank Ellis contend in their respective reviews of Wolfes 
Governing Soviet Journalism: see Kristin Roth-Ey, Review of Governing Soviet Journalism, Cahiers 
du Monde russe, 47/4 (2006), 894-898; Frank Ellis, Review of Governing Soviet Journalism, 
Slavonic and East European Review, 85/1 (2007), 16567. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 66 
Nowhere was this clearer than in changing attitudes to criticism and self-
criticism.  As we have seen, the idea of the Soviet press as a campaigning press 
had always existed  and not only in theory.  Even under Stalin when the presss 
critical role was diminished, journalists still believed that the papers role in 
overcoming shortcomings was of major significance.  After Stalins death, there 
were attempts to create a more conducive atmosphere for criticism in the press.  
An important and much cited resolution of 1954 attacked the regional 
newspaper Sovetskaia Chuvashiia for its lack of criticism of the local Party, 
Soviet and council organs and its failure to pay attention to the signals of 
worker and peasant correspondents.38  That same year, a second resolution 
reprimanded Party organs in Orlov oblast for suppressing criticism.39  In 1955, 
Khrushchev said of the press that: 
A newspaper worker does not have the right to avoid posing acute [] 
political questions.  If one of the paper's workers is going to meet with mistakes 
which distort the party line and then, having discovered the real culprit, ignore 
them and change course [], that means newspaper work is not within 
his power, because such a line of work is not for cowards.40 
Despite this encouragement, it was not until after Khrushchevs speech at the 
Twentieth Party Congress and the emergence of a spirit of socialist legality that 
the spirit of criticism took centre stage.  Around two months after the end of the 
Twentieth Congress, Pravda Editor-in-Chief Dmitrii Shepilov found fault with 
many aspects of the papers work.41  Journalist I.S. Pustovalov admitted that his 
department had failed to take on bureaucracy within ministries, central 
authorities, and administration.  We still dont have articles which would 
criticise a whole system of work of a certain ministry and its leaders  We dont 
go further with criticism of raikoms and gorkoms.  This is our great mistake.  We 
need to subject high-level organisations to criticism, too.42  In Pustovalovs 
account, criticism appeared to be necessary in order to ensure the smoother 
38 O rabote gazety Sovetskaia Chuvashiia, March 1954 in Sovetskaia pechat v dokumentakh, ed. 
by N. Kaminskaia (Moscow: Gospolitizdat, 1961), pp.199-200. 
39 O faktakh zazhima kritiki v Kromskoi raionnoi partiinoi organizatsii Orlovskoi oblasti, 
January 1954 in Ibid., pp.283-284. 
40 N. Bogdanov, B. Viazemskii, Spravochnik zhurnalista (Leningrad: Lenizdat, 1960), pp.41-42. 
41 Pravda Closed Party Meeting, 27-28/4/56, TsAOPIM, f.3226, op.1, d.56, ll.13-24. 
42 Ibid., l.14.  See also l.18. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 67 
running of Soviet bureaucracy, and to eliminate the remnants of the cult of 
personality. 
At Izvestiia, there were similar calls for an end to the cult in industry: 
My factory, says the Director; My oblast, says the Secretary of the obkom.  In 
these words we hear the belittling of the role of the masses, and an attempt to 
attribute successes to one person. We need to dethrone vozhd-ism in the regions. 
[] We still have much bureaucratism.  One of the reasons for that is the cult of 
personality.  Bureaucratism appears in many forms, including a negligent attitude 
to the needs of individuals.  For example, weve had our offices decorated, but the 
archive has a leaking from the ceiling, and the Soviet Department has a 
permanent noise from the ventilators.  And how many letters reach the editorial 
offices with complaints about bureaucrats?  We dont do a good job of struggling 
against bureaucrats through the newspaper.43 
However, editorial debates suggest that such demands were not put into 
practice.  Gubin eventually regained the upper hand, leading to a situation in 
which meetings were long and wordy but devoid of inspiration, let alone any 
iconoclastic energies.  Suffice it to recall that in journalistic circles, the paper 
was described having been Gubin-ed.44 
At KP, there were similar calls for criticism, but they focused less on 
industry, and more closely on everyday injustices.  Immediately after the 
Congress, Vladimir Babanov, who was to emerge as one of the champions of a 
more critical line, claimed that the twin tasks of the paper were to observe 
socialist legality and to protect the rights of youth.  He read out a letter about a 
worker who had been injured in an accident but, because of bureaucratic 
indifference, had been unable to obtain the benefits to which he was entitled.  
Babanov urged the paper to investigate and to stand up for young people, to 
fight for the preservation of their rights.45 
T. Iakovlevs The Case of the Urn, published in Komsomolskaia pravda 
on March 21, provides an example of the sort of article for which journalists 
were clamouring.46  The article told the story of a student in Burnar in 
Chuvashiia, who was sentenced to two years in jail for extinguishing a cigarette 
43 Izvestiia Closed Party Meeting, 29-30/3/56, TsAOPIM, f.453, op.2, d.27, l.15. 
44 Stanislav Sergeev, Do i posle slavy in Polveka na Mokhovoi (1947-1997) (Moscow: MGU, 
1997), p.106. 
45 19/3/56, d.170, ll.64-68. 
46 T. Iakovlev, Delo ob okurke KP 21/3/56, 2. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 68 
in a mug.  The article was an indictment, not just of the arbitrariness of the head 
of the school who reported the matter to the police, but also the entire system of 
justice, which circumvented due legal process in order to secure a verdict.  The 
paper condemned the legal process as judicial wilfulness and called the 
evidence a doctoring of the facts, and criticised the judicial apparatus for 
failing to see behind the protocols and conclusions [in the court report] a living, 
suffering boy.  When the judge, confronted by the paper, suggested that in any 
line of work there are always defects, the paper replied: Where we are 
concerned with the fate of a person, such reasoning cannot be taken into 
account.  Lawlessness can never be justified.   
The article was, claimed Akhiiar Kireev, the papers correspondent for 
Bashkiriia, a defence of the Soviet person, and he urged more attention to be 
paid to canvassing judicial organs in order to ensure that there are fewer 
people who still breach the rights of the Soviet individual.47  The newspaper 
was therefore to be used to right social wrongs, and to influence the decisions of 
judicial and other organs.  That this line emerged after the Secret Speech is no 
coincidence: it provided journalists with a means of atoning for the sins of the 
past by becoming public servants.  The press exercised considerable influence 
over the judiciary.  It was heavily involved with writing to political authorities to 
secure the reversal of judicial decisions ranging from a case of bribery, to an 
allegation of rape, to police corruption.48   
The weight of the papers authority often surprised the journalists 
themselves.  In 1958, Babanov told the story of a visitor to the paper's reception 
who accused a man of beating his own mother, driving her out of the house and 
contributing to her death; the visitor also alleged that the man had a 
suspiciously large amount of savings.  The complaint was passed on to the 
procurator; the man was arrested, spending six months in prison before his case 
went to court.  However, it emerged that the complaint was unfounded: more 
than a dozen witnesses testified on behalf of the defendant, while the 
47 26/3/56, d.170, l.14. 
48 Adzhubei to Kudriavtsev, 6/6/57, RGASPI f.98M, op.1, d.199, ll.21-26; Adzhubei to Otdel 
upraveleniia delami, 26/9/57, RGASPI, f.98M, op.1, d.199, ll.48-54; Adzhubei to Otdel 
upraveleniia delami, before 23/5/59, RGASPI f.98M, op.1, d. 258, ll.13-16. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 69 
prosecution could only muster one, unconvincing, witness.  But despite all 
evidence to the contrary, the defendant still received six months in jail  and it 
was the power of the press that had put him there.  Upon learning of the 
presence of a journalist from Komsomolskaia pravda, the court session was 
adjourned so that he could be brought up to speed with the case.  Worse still, 
Babanov suggested that the authority of KP was such that the procurator 
automatically believed in the guilt of the accused.   
The fact is that, having received a letter from as authoritative a paper as 
Komsomolskaia pravda, some unwise procurators or judges overdo it 
[], and convict a person for nothing.  In this case, Im sure that the 
boy is not guilty of anything. And the judge gave him a year in prison just 
because hed been in custody for six months, and for that the procurator who 
acted so thoughtlessly would have had to take responsibility. 
Luckily, the papers authority worked both ways: it was able to make sure that 
the Moscow city court reassessed the case, with Babanov expressing his 
certainty that the verdict would soon be overturned.49 
 Another example of the tangled relationship between newspaper and 
courts is provided by a well-known article published in 1956.  A follow up to a 
1953 article entitled Mould, Allan Starodub and Ilia Shatunovskiis Once 
More on Mould told the story of a group of young girls, from high-ranking 
families, who had robbed a family to fuel their easy-living lifestyle.50 
Born in 1923 in Turkmenistan, Shatunovskii, was the latest in a long line 
of prominent satirists at the paper which included Semen Nariniani and Boris 
Protopopov.  A trained pilot and frontovik, he graduated from the History 
Faculty of MGU in 1950, working his way up from trainee to Responsible 
Secretary and becoming one of the papers most prominent writers until his 
departure for Pravda in 1963.51  Shatunovskii was in many ways a contradictory 
figure.  At one time the Secretary of the Party Organisation, he was heavily 
involved in enforcing ideological orthodoxy within the redaktsiia.  He had a 
habit of changing his views at the drop of a hat if it served the Partys current 
49 28/4/58, d.225, ll.70-77. 
50 A. Starodub, I. Shatunovskii, Eshche raz o pleseni KP 15/8/56, 2. 
51 Ilia Shatunovskii, Tretii in Zhurnalisty XX veka: liudi i sud'by  (Moscow: "Olma-press", 2003), 
p.577. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 70 
line.  For all that, he was clearly a capable writer  and one with an eye for the 
sensational, as the cases of Mould and Once More on Mould show. 
Once More on Mould was one of a number of articles which appeared in 
the press railing against youth who preferred a life of entertainment and leisure 
to honest toil.  Such articles connected a number of disparate phenomena 
amongst Soviet youth: youth culture, youth crime, and changing social norms.  
Young people were growing up in an increasingly mediatised world, where 
foreign cultural products were increasingly available.  In a climate of cultural 
Cold War, leisure choices became a political issue.52  To choose Western cultural 
products, and to consume them in an altogether uncultured fashion was 
interpreted as a rejection of Western norms, and those who did so were seen as 
lying outside a Soviet community which relied on assertions of unity, rather 
than difference, and tarred with the brush of stiliachestvo.53  The fact that the 
criminals in Once More  were female challenged traditional gender 
stereotypes, tapping into fears that the natural order was being subverted.   
The articles preoccupation with the lifestyles of the so-called golden 
youth centred in Moscow and Leningrad spoke of disquiet over the privileges 
of the ministerial elite and the growing distance between this elite and the rest 
of the public.  Journalists saw the article not just as an intervention in the debate 
over cultural interests, but also as an attack on parenting and privilege amongst 
the Party hierarchy.  The glue that held these fears together was the widespread 
rise in youth criminality and heroic discourses surrounding it, which the 
political elite found extremely difficult to combat.54  The article, written in 
Shatunovskiis characteristically hectoring tone, was a clear attempt to rouse 
public opinion in outrage against these phenomena. 
Once More  illustrates the complex relationship between press, public 
opinion, and authorities, as well as shedding light on journalists understanding 
of their social role.  For while the article had a wide resonance with the public, 
52 On this see Gleb Tsipursky, Pleasure, Power, and the Pursuit of Communism: Soviet Youth 
and State-Sponsored Popular Culture During the Early Cold War, 1945-1968. Unpublished PhD 
Dissertation, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2011. 
53 Kristin Joy Roth-Ey, Mass Media and the Remaking of Soviet Culture, 1950s-1960s 
Unpublished PhD Dissertation. Princeton University, 2003. 
54 Dobson, pp.122-128; Kozlov, Mass Uprisings, pp.136-162. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 71 
receiving 500 letters in reply (with many urging the paper to deal with the 
issues raised by the article more forcefully), there was a feeling that the article 
was excessive.55  Kireev saw in the article a hint of a certain sensationalism, 
and added that, in the search for this sensationalism, the paper was not 
thinking through the seriousness of the tendency we are writing about: the 
tendency towards hooliganism amongst working youth in cities.56  Figures 
within the Komsomol, too, were discomfited by the article, in particular its 
iconoclasm in going after a minister.  Boris Pankin told colleagues: A ridiculous 
situation began.  Twice I was with Goriunov  he read material by telephone to 
Shelepin, and it turned out as if it was some counterrevolutionary article  
Goriunov had decided to go after the parents of one of the accused parties, 
including a Minister, but this was struck out on the orders of Shelepin, causing 
readers to call in to ask Why didnt you take things to the end? [  
  ?] Pankin commented tartly that Shelepin and the Central 
Committee of the Komsomol frequently impede us in our bravery [  
  ].57   
As a result, the follow-up article to Once More On Mould was 
considerably tamer than it might have been.  Nevertheless, the paper criticised 
the fact that the prosecution only focused on those who committed the crime, 
rather than those who enjoyed the fruits of the theft and concluded: The Soviet 
courts are strict but just and objective [].  It makes no 
differentiation between individuals: all are equal before the law.  That is why 
our public opinion [] has reacted so strongly to the decisions 
of any judicial organ that provokes idle talk.58  This appeal to public opinion 
over and above the authority of the judiciary, and the suggestion of double 
standards, illustrates the fact that journalists possessed their own vision of 
justice, and used the press as a means for transmitting it  even if it clashed with 
55 Spravka o pis'makh, otklikakh, kriticheskikh zamechaniakh i predlozheniakh, poluchennykh 
redaktsiei Komsomol'skoi pravdy ot chitatelei v avguste 1956 goda, 14/9/56, RGASPI, f.1M, 
op.32, d.821, l.40. 
56 3/9/56, d.176, ll.13-14. See also Nina Aleksandrovas comments on the article: 27/8/56, 
d.175, l.133. 
57 5/11/56, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.821, ll.56-57. 
58 Po sledam vystuplenii Komsomolskoi pravdy: Eshche raz o pleseni KP 26/10/56, 2. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 72 
Party authorities.  The fact that taking things to their logical conclusion was 
described as boldness illustrates the degree to which risking censure from the 
regime to ensure results was seen as an essential trait of the true journalist.  As 
Sokolov said of the article: If we have enough boldness to say a, then we need 
to say b.  If we have enough boldness to print an article, then let us have the 
boldness to ask Comrade Bulganin about the relationship of the Council of 
Ministers to the Minister.  If we dont have that boldness, then we shouldnt 
print the article in order not to inflame passions.59 
 The mixed reaction towards Shatunovskii and Starodubs article was 
indicative of a growing tension between critique and consolidation, with some 
believing that journalists needed to take their articles to the end, but others 
believing that this risked disorder.  This fear was connected to a series of 
worrying trends within Soviet society, which began in March with unexpectedly 
hostile attitudes to the Secret Speech, included ferment within the student body, 
continued problems with hooliganism, and an increasingly volatile situation in 
Poland and Hungary.   
Sokolov continued his comments on Shatunovskii and Starodubs article 
by talking about the uprising in Hungary.  One of its leaders, he claimed, was a 
young man aged around 23-25 under the influence of Horthy and his 
henchmen.  In a somewhat far-fetched argument, he argued that the paper was 
partly to blame for events there, because the Komsomolskaia pravda set the 
standard for the press in the peoples democracies, and had failed to speak out 
critically against such individuals.  The paper, he said, had only commented on 
the positive sides of life in Hungary, but entirely passed over the negative.60  He 
then moved on to talking about unhealthy moods amongst Soviet youth in 
universities and the tasks of the press in overcoming this: 
Our newspaper today needs to be distinguished, not only by the strength of its 
criticism of ministers and their deputies  but also be distinguished by its ability 
to fight for the mood and the mind of youth in a well-qualified, sharp, and 
thorough manner, to unite them around the Central Committee of the Party, 
around the Central Committee of the Komsomol, to fight for a real unity, not just 
for show, to fight against indifference, and manifestations of apolitical moods 
59 5/11/56, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.821, l.70. 
60 Ibid., ll.70-71. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 73 
amongst youth, and to fight not just with scanty zametki, but war-like articles 
[applause, noise, commotion in the room].61 
But it was just as easy to make the opposite argument: that too many 
war-like articles sowed the seeds of disquiet amongst the public.  Journalists 
at lowly wall newspapers were now seeking to emulate their Moscow peers, and 
began to criticise their superiors unjustifiably, and this proved worrying to the 
authorities.62  The regime began to place increased pressure on journalists to 
emphasise the stabilising functions of the press, rather than promoting change. 
Hungary was the pivotal moment in this process.  It dictated the direction 
that the Soviet Union would take in the years to come, and curbed many 
liberalising instincts within the political leadership.  It was a huge 
embarrassment to the countrys international image, and the regime would 
expend much energy in following years attempting to rebuild its reputation.  As 
we will see in Chapter 2, the press was slow to react to the tensions, hamstrung 
by its own uncertainty as to the political significance of the events.  But events in 
Hungary brought to the fore a tension within the post-Congress press: namely, 
the question of what the right balance was between the presss watchdog 
function and its propaganda function.   
In such an international atmosphere, critical articles of any stripe were 
eagerly seized upon by the Western press.  At the first post-Hungary letuchka, 
Vasilii Khomuskov told colleagues of an unfortunate incident at a press 
conference at the end of October, involving the Chairman of the All-Union 
Committee of Physical Culture, a certain Comrade Romanov.  The Soviet 
leadership had put out feelers about hosting the 1964 Olympics in Moscow, and 
an American correspondent asked him about the possibility.  Romanov replied 
that the Soviet Union had capacity to do so, and a range of high-quality sporting 
facilities.  However, an article had recently appeared in Komsomolskaia pravda, 
entitled At the Luzhniki Everything Should be Excellent about poor drainage at 
the newly-built Luzhniki stadium in Moscow, which had almost caused the 
61 Ibid., ll.71-72. 
62 RGANI, f.5, op.34, d.4, ll.41-47. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 74 
postponement of a football match, turned the running track to sludge in wet 
weather, and seriously endangered the safety of spectators.63   
Asked about the article, Romanov tied himself in knots, first asserting that 
everything was fine, and then, when asked whether the paper had printed 
something untrue, meekly replying that Komsomolskaia pravda merely wanted 
everything to be perfect, and, resurrecting a Stalinist slogan, claiming that this 
was merely a conflict between the good and the excellent.64  After the 
conference, Romanov spoke to Khomuskov and his colleagues for forty minutes, 
asking: Why did you publish the article?  I wish youd have come to me and 
talked about it.  We know that there are a lot of faults at the Luzhniki.  After 
that, Romanov complained to Adzhubei with many unflattering remarks, and 
asking why the paper had fouled its own nest [   ] by 
publishing the article.65   
Khomuskov drew his own conclusions from the affair, pointing out that 
this was not an isolated incident, and that many other bureaucrats, both in high 
and low positions dealt with criticism in the same way.  They were concerned 
not with the essence of the question, not by a desire to make everything as 
good as it can be, but for a quiet life.  He pointed out that the Committee still 
hadnt replied to the paper, suggesting that it needed to sharply and seriously 
speak out with material, and ensure decisive measures from those people that 
we criticise.66 
 However, in the conditions of a diplomatic Cold War, where every 
problem was to be seized upon by the other side, critical articles could appear to 
give the enemy a vital advantage, to be fouling ones own nest.  The incident 
thus revealed the inferiority complex at the heart of Soviet superiority, and 
showed how criticism could also be interpreted, not as eliminating 
shortcomings, but as airing dirty washing in public. From here, it was a short 
step to the idea that any criticism was potentially subversive, and should 
therefore be voiced in private.  Articles on the problems of Soviet youth were 
63 I. Melnikov, E. Cheronov, V Luzhnikakh vse dolzno byt prekrasno KP 23/10/56, 4. 
64 5/11/56, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.821, ll.67-68. 
65 Ibid., l.68. 
66 Ibid. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 75 
appearing with greater frequency in the Western press, and collections of 
articles were pored over by Agit-Prop officials.67  In a climate of heightened 
tensions about the role of the mass media in stirring up tensions in Hungary and 
Poland, the capacity for negative materials to do likewise in the Soviet Union 
was acutely felt, and at the beginning of 1957, a Komsomol report on KP 
suggested that negative articles were giving rise to troublesome stories in the 
foreign media.68 
Some at the paper were disquieted by the implications of the papers 
current, critical line.  In November of that year, Komolov spotted amongst his 
colleagues a certain leftist tendency towards demagoguery.  He condemned 
the article Once More on Mould as an example of a worrying trend at the paper: 
the inner fire of the journalist to take aim at bureaucrats and ministers, and 
the desire to take everything to the end, so that, ultimately, journalists articles 
ended up in the drawer rather than the newspaper.69  Thus, in attempting to 
force through the goals of the Twentieth Party Congress, colleagues had gone 
too far in their critical line, to the detriment of the effectiveness of the 
criticism, and with the associated danger of encouraging hostile voices: 
 this line and comrades desire [to criticise] I subjectively fully support, because 
it reflects, albeit in a distorted form, peoples logical  and to a large extent 
progressive  desire to begin to speak sharply and to begin to act sharply.  This 
line is, in its spirit, absolutely correct, but, in actual fact, it is pseudo-
revolutionary, because it is superficial, and satisfies only vulgar and philistine 
critics and not genuine critics of all our shortcomings.70 
Komolov continued that the papers real task would be to ensure that it spoke 
up for the public having marked off from them all those who are demagogues.  
If the paper did otherwise, Komolov claimed, these demagogues would become 
heroes of the leftist crowd and then we would do real damage to our cause.71 
67 On the Western presss interest in the Soviet youth problem, see Roth-Ey, Mass Media, Ch.1.  
On Soviet interest in what Westerners were saying about Soviet youth, see RGANI, f.5, op.33, 
d.31, ll.82-94.  On Soviet reaction to the appearance of Soviet press articles in the West, see 
RGANI, f.5, op.55, d.57. 
68 O kriticheskikh vystupleniiakh gazety Komsomolskoi pravdy, 1957, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, 
d.847, ll.133-134, 137-138. 
69 19/11/56, d.177, l.46. 
70 Ibid., ll.46-47. 
71 Ibid., ll.49-50. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 76 
 Condemnation of the papers critical line dovetailed with concerns about 
demagogic moods within the student population, on which journalists 
frequently commented in letuchki.72  Former KP journalist Vladimir Dudintsevs 
story Not By Bread Alone, serialised in Novyi mir between August and October, 
played an important part in this process.  A novella about interference and fear 
of innovation amongst the industrial elite, Dudintsevs story provided a fictional 
means for the discussion of many of the social ills that journalists at KP were 
seeking to expose, and led to public attacks on the state bureaucracy in 
discussions.73  By the end of the year, a perfect storm was brewing, 
encompassing continued concerns about hooliganism and crime amongst youth, 
international tensions, and fears about intellectual dissent.  In December, two 
important letters were released: on the use of social forces in overcoming 
delinquency on unhealthy moods amongst students.74  The latter of these 
contained reference to events in Hungary, intellectuals responses to 
Dudintsevs novella, foreign radio broadcasts, and articles in the press which 
showed Soviet reality in an incorrect light.75  Journalists now began to talk of 
the necessity of combatting demagoguery within the student body.  
Shatunovskii, who had by now been thoroughly slated for Once More on Mould, 
now trod a more conciliatory line at a Party Organisation meeting in December, 
which was convened to discuss the letter:  
With a series of poorly-qualified critical articles, we have created a clamorous 
atmosphere	 [	 ]	 and	 given	 nourishment	 to	 demagogues	
and enemies.  Im not in favour of cutting down on criticism.  We cannot move 
away from the tradition of a brave, sharp-toothed newspaper.  But if we speak 
against an unfit director, then we need to make it so that he is removed. One 
founded, efficient article is better than a constant screeching tone.76 
72 E.g. 21/5/56, d.172, ll.62-64.  See also Sovetskaia pechat Party meeting, 29/12/56, TsAOPIM, 
f.1799, op.1, d.1, l.27. 
73 See Denis Kozlov, Naming the Social Evil: the Readers of Novyi mir and Vladimir Dudintsevs 
Not By Bread Alone, 1956-59 and Beyond in Dilemmas, pp.80-98; Volfram Eggeling, Politika i 
kultura pri Khrushcheve i Brezhneve, 1953-1970 gg. (Moscow: Airo-XX, 1999), pp.74-76. 
74 Ob usilenii politicheskoi raboty partiinykh organizatsii v massakh i presechenii vylazok 
antisovetskikh vrazdebnykh elementov, 19/12/56, in Reabilitatsiia: kak eto bylo. Fevral 1956  
nachalo 80-x godov. Tom 2 (Moscow: Mezhdunarodnyi fond Demokratiia, 2003), p.210; Juliane 
Frst, The Arrival of Spring? Changes and Continuities in Soviet Youth Culture and Policy 
Between Stalin and Khrushchev in Dilemmas, p.148. 
75 Ob usilenii, pp.211-212. 
76 Party Meeting, 25/12/56, d.30, l.170. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 77 
Ilia Kotenko, a distinguished figure at the paper, considered the problem, not as 
a clash between two viewpoints, but as a case of demagogues, who preyed 
upon ordinary, run-of-the-mill students, in the main newcomers.  He argued 
that the paper needed to print more on the positive hero as a means for 
educating young people (see Chapter 3), and argued that the paper needed to 
take a tougher line on Novyi mir for breaching the tenets of Socialist Realism.77   
 By this time, the relationship between the paper and the authorities had 
deteriorated significantly, following the publication at the beginning of the 
month of a critical article on the suppression of criticism in Kaluga oblast, near 
Moscow.  The articles author was Boris Pankin, a young MGU graduate in the 
Department of Komsomol Life.  Pankin was considered to be an adept journalist, 
and climbed the ladder at the paper from special correspondent to Head of 
Department to Deputy Editor to Editor-in-Chief in only thirteen years. 
 It was his front-page article on this affair, How the Torch was 
Extinguished, that put him on the journalistic map.78  Pankin's article told the 
story of  the Kaluga Torch: a youth initiative club organised by the editors of the 
local newspaper which challenged problems with leisure provision in the area 
by arranging a discussion club, excursions, photography lessons, winter 
sports, and creating a flying brigade, a rerun of an pre-war Komsomol 
initiative.79  It differed from type by being a club run by young people, for young 
people  something to which the paper had previously given its support.80  
However, under pressure from the Party gorkom, the Komsomol's obkom 
stepped in to close the club down.81  Secretary Viktor Kruglov accused the 
founders of the club of show[ing] too much initiative by failing to consult the 
gorkom in advance.82   
77 Ibid., ll.168-169. 
78 B. Pankin, Kak pogasili Fakel KP 9/12/56, 1-2. 
79 Pankin, Fakel; Dmitrii Bykov, Bulat Okudzhava (Moscow: Molodaia gvardiia, 2009), p.252. 
80 Gleb Tsipursky, Having Fun in the Thaw: Youth Initiative Clubs in the Post-Stalin Years Carl 
Beck Papers 2201 (2012), 17. 
81 In order to avoid complicated circumlocutions, when I refer to 'obkom' and 'gorkom' I have in 
mind the Komsomol versions, unless the Party version is explicitly referred to. 
82 On the conflicts surrounding the Kaluga Torch see Tsipursky, Having Fun, 32-34. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 78 
At the heart of the article was a conflict between the volunteer-initiators 
of the club, variously described as lively, cheerful [], and 
smiling affably, and grey bureaucrats who were more interested in the 
minutiae of Komsomol rules than in supporting a much-needed initiative.  In 
doing so, they extinguished the initiative of young people.  As Pankin concluded: 
The overcautious do not love but fear the new.  But without searches for the 
new, there can be no interesting Komsomol life. 
 The article met with a positive response at the paper.  Natella 
Lordkipanidze cited Pankin an example for other journalists to follow  
someone who was not afraid to take things to their conclusion: 
It happens that a person goes to a place, sees some shortcomings, everything is 
clear, but when they sit down to write it, they dont use their power to generalise 
things, their ability to think and analyse  Either authors are afraid, or they talk 
so that there is less generalisation, or they dont have enough talent.  Thats what 
happened with these articles.  Only Boris Pankin decided to criticise even the 
Secretary of the raikom of the Party and to reveal what was going on, to dot the i.  
Theres not any sharpness, or depth in many critical materials.83 
Here, we see how Pankins ability to criticise even the Secretary of the raikom 
of the Party without fear of the consequences was cause for praise (it was not 
established practice for a Komsomol newspaper to attack Party organs).  
Moreover, Lordkipanidzes words on generalising hinted at a challenge to the 
informal rule of criticism: Generalise, but dont criticise  in other words, she 
implied that criticism might turn into a wider social critique.84 
Initially, it seemed that the newspapers article had hit its target.  The 
Kaluga obkom admitted its errors, promising support for the initiative.85  But at 
around the same time, the Ministry of Culture wrote to the Komsomol to 
complain about the excessive autonomy of clubs like the Kaluga Torch, and 
criticised KP for defending it.86  Slowly but surely, the tables were turned, 
leading to the moment in January 1957 when Goriunov reported back to his 
83 17/12/56, d.177, ll.204-205. 
84 Hedrick Smith, The Russians, (New York: Quadrangle), p.370. 
85 Sazonova to Shelepin, 9/3/57, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.846, ll.142-144. 
86 Tsipursky, Having Fun, 33. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 79 
colleagues about his appearance at the Bureau of the Komsomol Central 
Committee on Ideological Questions.87   
Those present at the meeting raised dozens of critical issues about the 
papers work: among others, its work with youth correspondents, its distance 
from the Central Committee of the Komsomol and lack of material on Komsomol 
business, its lack of counter-propaganda and ideological material, a lack of 
coverage of material on the heroic past of the nation, the poverty of its local 
correspondent network, its poor leadership on questions in the arts and 
literature.88  But the most weighty criticism of the paper was the fact that the 
paper had written about negative aspects of Soviet life more vividly than the 
positive and, connected with this, that it had failed to print sufficient material 
on positive heroes.89  Pankin, meanwhile, was hauled over the coals for his 
earlier criticisms of Shelepin.90  Even from the transcript, it is clear that the 
attacks had shocked Goriunov: 
I repeat that the discussion was quite sharp and I recognise that, when I left the 
Central Committee, for a few minutes afterwards I could not inwardly accept all 
the criticism that was levelled at the paper.  But when I calmed down and once 
again considered everything from the position of the interests of the paper, I have 
to recognise that the criticism of the Central Committee Bureau was, in general, 
wholly correct.  We need to put it bluntly: in general, the paper was sharply 
criticised, and rarely praised.  Both in the collective and in the editorial board, 
and on the part of the Editor in Chief elements of conceit have appeared.91 
Goriunovs words were hardly a wholehearted acceptance of the Komsomols 
attack, but he did recognise that the paper could not do anything but accept 
them. 
 The papers position soon unravelled.  At the Seventh Komsomol Plenum 
at the end of February, Sazonova, the obkom's First Secretary, attacked the 
paper for articles such as Once More on Mould, doubting whether the papers 
sensations	 had	 delivered	 real	 results:	 they	 took	 a	 big	 swing	 [	
87 28/1/57, d.189, l.122. 
88 Ibid., ll.122-128. 
89 Ibid., l.122, 124.  See O kriticheskikh vystupleniiakh on this point. 
90 Boris Pankin, Preslovutaia epokha. V litsakh i maskakh, sobytiiakh i kazusakh (Moscow: 
Voskresene, 2002), p.74. 
91 Ibid., l.129. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 80 
	],	but	without	result.92  She conceded that the article was 
partially true, but nevertheless argued that it had vulgarised the papers name. 
She cited the strained international context as justification for her attack: Who 
is this criticism from Komsomol'skaia pravda educating? It's no accident that 
responses to this article have appeared in the bourgeois press about how in the 
Soviet Union they are flouting the rights of youth.93 
On March 5, 1957, Komsomol'skaia pravda printed a follow-up to the 
article, relating the happy news that the club was now up and running, and that 
the obkom of the Komsomol had recognised its mistakes.94  However, the last 
sentence of the short article read: Having noted that Komsomol'skaia pravda's 
article How The Torch was Extinguished was both timely and correct, at the 
same time, the bureau of the obkom considers that a number of positions stated 
in the article are inaccurate.  Sazonova now fired off a further complaint to 
Shelepin, the Head of the Komsomol, complaining that Pankin had distorted 
Kruglov's words as well as the words of the obkom, that he had failed to 
interview members of the obkom and gorkom, and been inaccurate about 
Sazonova's style of working.  She argued that the paper had been too slow to 
print a follow-up to Pankin's original article and accused Goriunov of 
protecting his own back [  ].95 
Had the article been published earlier in the year, when the rules were 
less clear cut, it is likely that Pankins assault would have succeeded.  But now 
that the political elite was worried about the centrifugal forces threatening the 
stability of the nation, Pankins article was considered to be a gross error.  The 
press was now expected to serve as an agent of stabilisation, rather than 
revolutionary iconoclasm.  As Goriunov was told at the Komsomol: The 
redaktsiia doesnt always take into account the situation when publishing 
critical materials, including our article on Kaluga How The Torch Was 
Extinguished.  Comrades said that with this article we were adding fuel to the 
92 Stenogramma VII-go plenuma TsK VLKSM ob uluchshenii ideino-voispitatel'noi raboty 
Komsomol'skikh organizatsii sredi Komsomol'tsev i molodezhi, 26-27/2/57, RGASPI, f.1M, op.2, 
d.356, l.198. 
93 Ibid., l.199. 
94 Po sledam vystuplenii Komsomol'skoi pravdy: Kak pogasili Fakel, 5/3/57, 2. 
95 Sazonova to Shelepin, 9/3/57, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.846, ll.142-144. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 81 
fire [ ], at a time when demagogues are speaking out in many 
educational establishments.  We need to think about this.96  The events of 1956 
had thus shown that there were limits even to Party-minded criticism, but also 
illustrated the difficulties of discerning where they lay.  In this case, the criticism 
of KP was partly caused by external events, and partly by the Komsomols 
annoyance at the general tenor of the papers line over the course of the year, 
which, in its opinion, was giving rise to unhealthy tendencies. 
In many ways, the rules of journalistic criticism were laid down in late 1956: a 
critical article would be written; officials would accept its conclusions, before 
arguing that certain conclusions were inaccurate, or overstated.  Enlisting the 
support of the local Party organs, the criticised would focus on these problems 
to discredit the article and the journalists who wrote it.  Almost exactly three 
years after Pankins article on the Kaluga Flame, an article published in 
December 1959 alleged that Komsomol officials had stifled the initiative of 
another youth brigade, this time in Gorkii.97  Once again, the Gorkii obkom of 
the Komsomol initially recognised the criticism, before two weeks later writing 
to Voronov and Sergei Pavlov, the Head of the Komsomol, to complain about 
unjust criticisms of certain comrades, and inaccuracies.98  Though the articles 
authors attempted to justify their position, the complaints were upheld, and one 
of the authors was disciplined.  Similar processes took place at other 
newspapers.99  
Not all critical articles met with the same reaction, of course. The 
majority of criticism targeted more lowly officials, and was simply accepted and 
acted upon.100  Criticism might be requested by the regime, in order to discredit 
local officials, or highlight shortcomings in the work of a certain enterprise.101  It 
could also be the case that an investigation would eventually find in the papers 
favour, as was the case with two articles published in 1960 and 1961, Where 
96 28/1/57, d.189, l.127. 
97 V. Ilin, A. Skrypnik, Ugasaiushchie ogonki KP 13/12/59, 3. 
98 RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.1002, ll.79-87. 
99 E.g. RGANI, f.96, op.1, d.22, ll.118-153; RGANI, f.5, op.33, d.202, ll.47-117. 
100 E.g. Selivanov to KP, 22/6/57, RGASPI, f.98M, op.1, d.201, ll.42-43. 
101 Olessia Koltsova, News Media and Power in Russia (London: Routledge, 2006), p.26. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 82 
are They Tired? and The Eparchy in Retirement.  But even those articles 
required numerous reports and investigations to verify the papers findings  
and one suspects that its ultimate success was because the ministry making the 
complaint, the Central Committee of Soviet Trades Unions, did not enjoy much 
political clout.102  Successful or not, journalists could have been forgiven for 
wanting an easier life.   
The unsurprising consequence of the papers catastrophic end to 1956 
was increased caution on the part of editors.  After Goriunovs departure from 
the paper in May 1957, Aleksei Adzhubei took over the reins.103  Under his 
leadership, criticism was not extinguished entirely, but it became less 
prominent.  This may seem surprising, given Adzhubeis reputation as the 
saviour of Soviet journalism.104  However, Adzhubeis talent was less for 
creating a campaigning journalism, and more for creating new forms of mass 
agitational journalism.  During his years as editor of Komsomolskaia pravda 
between 1957 and 1959 he pursued a romantic, rather than an analytical 
vision of Soviet reality.  As Chapter 3 shows, his tenure witnessed a prodigious 
increase in the sort of positive materials that the regime was demanding: 
rousing stories of industrial progress accompanied by a parade of heroes.105   
It was only under Adzhubeis successor, Iurii Voronov, who took over in 
September 1959, that the paper began to print criticism in greater quantities.  
At the Twenty-Second Party Congress in 1961, Aleksandr Tvardovskii called on 
journalists and writers to publicise the difficulties of everyday life, for to do 
otherwise would be to cause irreparable damage to their relationship with 
102 RGANI, f.5, op.33, d.173, ll.46-56, 135-150. 
103 It is unclear whether Goriunovs departure was linked to the events of December 1956.  
Pankin suggests that Goriunov came under heavy attack from the Komsomol, but survived the 
onslaught.  He also notes that Goriunov was happy to approve an honorarium for best article of 
the month for Pankin.  See Pankin, Preslovutaia epokha, p.75.  Whatever the case may be, 
Goriunov soon found himself in a more prestigious position: Director of the Soviet news agency 
TASS (see Chapter 2). 
104 Tatiana Volkova, A.I. Adzhubei  redaktor i publitsist Unpublished PhD Dissertation, MGU, 
2010; Wolfe, Governing; Ninel Izmailova, Adzhubei: talant  eto pozitsiia Chitaiushchaia 
Rossiia 1/1 (1994): 13-15; Aleksei Adzhubei v koridorakh chetvertoi vlasti, ed. by Dmitrii 
Mamleev (Moscow: Izvestiia, 2003); Sergeev, Do i posle. 
105 Volkova, p.65. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 83 
readers.106  A year later, a far-reaching Central Committee resolution called for 
criticism to become more effective.  It censured newspapers for failing to follow 
up their critical articles and called on journalists to engage in brave and 
demanding criticism, without regard for position.  However, the resolution 
also warned that what was required was not cavilling, not provocation 
[], and not intellectual digs [], adding that, while the printing of 
criticism was permitted, to do so with philistine relish, aiming at a sensation 
was not.107  
However, journalists discussions were less far-reaching than in 1956, 
most likely because they better understood the ideological limits.  Nevertheless, 
there were still journalists who were willing to take risks.  In October 1963, an 
article by Donetsk correspondent Kim Kostenko, entitled Will there be a city of 
Bratsk?, compared the heroic myth of Bratsk GES with the rather more 
worrying reality.108  But, once again, that article met with a negative reaction 
from the Komsomol, showing once again how uncomfortable a fit criticism and 
self-criticism were within the context of a Soviet state that perceived itself as 
being under constant threat from within and without.109 
Within the profession, however, criticism was still seen as an essential task 
of the true journalist.  In 1962, an article in Sovetskaia pechat told of the 
authors quest to uncover misdeeds in Chechnya, despite political interference.  
For him, taking criticism to its conclusion was absolutely necessary: We didnt 
stand aside. We didnt have the right to, he wrote.110  Criticism was absolutely 
vital for retaining readers trust: The people of our raion looked to the 
newspaper: they hadnt lost their belief in the power of the Soviet press.  And it 
depended on us, workers of the paper, to justify that belief.111  Having the 
bravery to bear the blows of the local authorities was a matter of honour:  
106 Current Soviet Policies IV: The Documentary Record of the 22nd Congress of the Communist 
Party of the Soviet Union, ed. by Charlotte Saikowski and Leo Gruliow (New York; London: 
Columbia University Press, 1962), p.188. 
107 O povyshenii deistvennosti vystuplenii Sovetskoi pechati, 18/9/62 in Spravochnik 
partiinogo rabotnika. Vyp. 4 (Moscow: Gospolitizdat, 1963), p.452. 
108 A. Glazov, K. Kostenko, Byt li gorodu Bratsku KP 16/10/63, 2. 
109 Pankin, Preslovutaia epokha, pp.86-91. 
110 Magomet Khunkaev, Sovest' i muzhestvo korrespondenta, SP 12 (1962), 25. 
111 Ibid. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 84 
What does the honour of the Soviet journalist mean?  It means that you, if you call 
yourself a journalist, must be a fighter for our glorious Party, a pure person, 
principled, upright, and persistent.  To bear the name Soviet journalist is a high 
honour, and we need to value this honour.  Otherwise you are not a journalist, 
otherwise you have no place in the Soviet press.112 
As anthropologist Natalia Roudakova has shown, this moral aspect of journalism 
was fundamental.  Criticism provided a way for journalists to justify their role in 
society  particularly when a large part of their role was still to fulfil tasks from 
above.  For Roudakova, notions of journalistic responsibility cut across the 
boundaries of personal and professional, forcing the journalist to answer not 
only to the authorities and to the readers and viewers, but to the journalists 
private conscience as well.113  And, as the relationship between journalists and 
regime threatened to unravel in the late 1960s, staying true to ones conscience 
became ever more important. 
3 Criticise, but Dont Make A Fuss Criticism under Brezhnev 
Iurii Voronov edited Komsomolskaia pravda between 1959 and 1965, having 
arrived at the paper in 1955 from the second most important youth publication 
in the country, Leningrads Smena.  Born in 1929 in Leningrad, Voronov saw his 
brother and younger sister killed during the war when shrapnel fell on their 
house.  He was awarded a medal For the Defence of Leningrad when he was 
only 14, and for the rest of his life he wrote poetry about his wartime 
experiences.114  Voronov rarely wrote as a journalist, which for many years 
made some figures at the paper wary of him, considering him unworthy of the 
role.115 However, Voronov was a more collegial presence at the paper than the 
more authoritarian Adzhubei, and gradually won over his colleagues, becoming 
a popular figure on the sixth floor.  His continued presence at the paper after 
112 Ibid., 26. 
113 Natalia Roudakova, From the Fourth Estate to the Second Oldest Profession: Russia's 
Journalists in Search of Their Public after Socialism Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Stanford, CA, 
2009, p.125. 
114 O.N. Shetinskii, Iurii Petrovich Voronov. Vospominanie o druge in Zhurnalisty XX veka: liudi i 
sudby (Moscow: Olma-press, 2003), pp.350-351.  
115 Pankin, Preslovutaia epokha, p.98. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 85 
Khrushchevs ouster is perhaps surprising, given that the editors of both Pravda 
and Izvestiia were immediately fired for their ties to Khrushchev.  Voronov was 
the only member of Adzhubeis informal Press Group to survive the purge of 
October 1964.116  
According to Pankin, the papers First Deputy Editor, Khrushchevs ouster 
energised Voronov, who took at face value the regimes claims to be fighting 
against bureaucratism and voluntarism.117  This was part of a new ideological 
climate in the Soviet Union, brought about by Brezhnev and Kosygins 
technocratic leadership.  Debates within the Union of Journalists became more 
substantive and, under the editorship of Egor Iakovlev, Sovetskaia pechat (later 
Zhurnalist), which had previously attracted little interest amongst readers, 
began to print more hard-hitting, far-reaching materials on the world of 
journalism.118  These articles cited the need for a journalistic code of honour, 
and saw criticism above all as a service to readers.   
An 1966 editorial cited the October 1964 plenum as a new dawn for Soviet 
journalists.119  The article twice cited the hypothetical situation of a journalist 
asked to write a positive story about a factory who, instead of positive data, 
actually uncovers a scandal: 
What to do?  By all statistical indicators the factory is a leading one.  How can it 
be subjected to criticism?  After  agonising wavering the article sees the light of 
day.  Naturally, it isnt easy for the editors of the paper: there are unpleasant 
explanations at the obkom, at the sovnnarkhoz, and the author and editor have to 
fight off attacks from the leaders of the factory.  But nothing can compare with 
the wonderful feeling of satisfaction that the journalists of that paper experiences 
in connection with the fact that they have not acted against their conscience 
before readers120  
An article printed a year later was even more explicit about the need for the 
press to be more forthright in criticism: It seems that to overpraise is better 
116 Ibid., p.100. 
117 Ibid. 
118 See Egor Iakovlev, Pressa ravna obshchestvennomu sostoianiiu, in Pressa v obshchestve 
(1959-2000): Otsenki zhurnalistov i sotsiologov. Dokumenty., ed. by A. I. Volkov, M. G. Pugacheva 
and S. F. Iarmoliuk (Moscow: Moskovskaia shkola politicheskikh issledovanii, 2000), pp. 258-
119 Otvetstvennost pered chitatelem SP 7 (1966), 1-2.  See also G. Zimanas, Sovetskii obraz 
zhizni SP 12 (1966), 3-4. 
120 Ibid., 1. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 86 
than to go overboard with criticism.  But [the newspaper] is not a collection of 
legends.  One really cannot know todays readers to believe that they require 
rose-tinted optimism.121 
  However, by the time of the Second Congress of Journalists in 1966, it 
already seemed as though the political climate was changing.  In February of 
that year, newspapers, including Komsomolskaia pravda, were heavily involved 
in the orchestration of a show trial of writers Siniavskii and Daniel, whose 
apparently anti-Soviet works had been published abroad. By that time, 
Komsomolskaia pravda had also seen the limits of reform, with Voronov 
outlasting Adzhubei by scarcely twelve months, as the papers iconoclasm 
caused ructions within the political elite.  The firing of Voronov suggests that 
journalists hope for a new, more professional attitude to criticism on the part of 
the Party elite was misplaced. 
On July 21 1965, the paper published an article by one of the papers most 
popular publicists, Arkadii Sakhnin.  Entitled At Sea and After, it told the story 
of the captain of an Odessan whaling fleet, Solianik, under whose command 
many members of the fleet had died, while others committed suicide.122  The 
article was discussed all over the Soviet Union, and, according to one account, 
cited as an example of the freedom of the Soviet press to a party of visiting 
British trade unionists.123  Within the paper, too, the article was considered to 
be a radical step forward, a crystallisation of everything they had sought to 
achieve since the ouster of Khrushchev, giving rise to a festival atmosphere at 
the paper: 
Goliakov: [I]t so rarely happens that some problem touches on the essence of 
our life like the ones to which we are turning our attention today: bad 
management, indifference, bureaucratism, a lack of principle.  And if we conquer 
all these enemies, we will triple our riches, multiply them by ten. 
Many, if not most, of these problems are difficult and complex.  But there can be 
no question about the following: by resolving them our people will benefit, and 
the cause for which we fight, for which we live on this earth, will also benefit.  
121 Irina Dementeva, Ot chernogo k rozovomu Zhurnalist 2 (1967), 22. 
122 Arkadii Sakhnin, V reise i posle KP 21/7/65, 2, 4. 
123  Ilya Gerol, Geoffrey Molyneux, The Manipulators: Inside the Soviet Media (Toronto: Stoddart, 
1988), pp.89-90. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 87 
There is not one obligation that is more important for us than the obligation to 
enable the resolution of these problems.  In order to prevent this, sometimes 
people use all kinds of subterfuge [ ] that only human ingenuity is 
capable of. Our duty in such cases should not give rise to any doubts: after all, 
we gave a vow to be true to Lenins principles.  And we must remain true to this 
vow.  The main thing is that we have far more like-minded people than enemies 
[ ,  ], and that should give us new 
strength.  The things that we write about with a heavy heart will become the 
object of concern for a large number of people.  And that means that every one of 
us will become more interested in what is happening in our own surroundings, 
and be more intent on looking in our hearts and more decisive in uprooting the 
shoots of injustice.124 
In Sergei Goliakovs words we see a continued belief in the purifying value of 
criticism, and a nod to the power of Soviet public opinion (see Chapter 4).  
Journalists at the paper listed the article as the best of the month, and, as late as 
September 1965, the papers Party Organisation listed the article as a positive 
achievement.125  But the paper had already stepped into the middle of a political 
battlefield, and found itself in the sights of prominent party figures, for Solianik 
was based in Ukraine, the power-base of Petr Shelest and Nikolai Podgornyi.  An 
attack on Sakhnin was an attack on them and on the entire Ukrainian 
leadership, including Brezhnev.126 
 The case took a now-familiar course.  While the (largely powerless) local 
Party committee upheld the findings of Sakhnins article, Solianik and members 
of the obkom conspired to produce a refutation.  Meeting after meeting was 
held; report after report was produced, some in favour of the article, some 
against.  It was a testament to the democratic structures of the party, but also to 
its fundamental incoherence: criticism and self-criticism were designed to 
overcome bureaucracy, but instead produced more of it.  According to Sakhnins 
reminiscences, the article was discussed at the Bureau of the Zhovtnevyi Party 
raikom, the obkom in Odessa, the State Fisheries Committee, the Commission of 
Party Control, the Agit-Prop Section of the Party, and the Secretariat of the 
Central Committee.127   
124 21/7/65, d.384, l. 25. 
125 Reshenie redaktsionnoi kollegii o luchshikh materialakh za iul' mesiats, after July 1965, 
RGASPI, f.98M, op.1, d.390, l.1; Otchetnyi doklad rabote partbiuro, 29/9/65, TsAOPIM, f.1968, 
op.1, d.40, ll.41-42. 
126 Viacheslav Ogryzko, Zhertva apparatnykh intrig Literaturnaia Rossiia 15 (16 April 2010). 
127 Arkadii Saknin, No eto bylo tolko nachalo Izvestiia, 23-24/9/88.  
SHORTCOMINGS | 88 
The Odessa obkom complained of a lack of objectivity, and charged that 
the article was aimed at the lachrymose and sentimental tastes of a philistine.  
They admitted that Solianik deserved severe criticism, but claimed that the 
article was  unnecessary and harmful, and that it has led to the misinforming 
of public opinion both within the country and abroad.128  However, an Agit-
Prop committee, led by Aleksandr Iakovlev, came to the opposite conclusion, 
stating that the paper had been right to attack a high-handed leader who has 
lost his feeling of Party responsibility and who, by his actions, has caused 
enormous harm to the question of indoctrinating the fleet.  The report 
censured local party and economic bodies, as well as the fisheries Committee for 
not taking action, and noted Solianiks patronage of the Odessa obkom and 
figures within the Fisheries Committee.129  As a result of this report, the case 
was sent to the Secretariat of the Central Committee for discussion in October of 
that year. 
 Archival records of the meeting are absent, but we do have a number of 
eyewitness accounts.  They suggest that for the very first time since becoming 
General Secretary of the Party, Brezhnev was in attendance (this was unusual, 
as his level was the Politburo, not the Secretariat).  Those present, including 
Podgornyi and Shelest, interpreted Brezhnevs presence as a sign of support for 
Solianik, and as a result, Komsomolskaia pravda was subjected to sharp attacks: 
 the discussion came down to the fact that the article discredited a well-
known figure in the party and state, and that it was not Solianik who was to 
blame, but those who printed the article and supported it.130  It seemed that the 
paper was about to suffer defeat.   
 However, they had reckoned without Aleksandr Shelepin who, at the 
time, was still a Secretary in the Central Committee and a member of the 
Politburo.  Shelepin had always been a powerful supporter of Voronov, after 
being impressed by a speech given by the latter at a meeting.  He brought 
Voronov to the paper in 1954 from Smena and immediately gave him a position 
128 Leonid Mlechin, Zheleznyi Shurik (Moscow: Iauza, 2004), p.409. 
129 Sakhnin, No eto bylo; A.N. Iakovlev, Sumerki. 2-e izd. (Moscow: Materik, 2005), p.323. 
130 Iakovlev, p.324. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 89 
as Deputy Editor, much to the chagrin of many within the collective.131  Despite 
Shelepins departure from the Komsomol, he remained a powerful protector, 
and ensured that his charge would ascend to the Editors chair after Adzhubei.  
Shelepin continued to support Voronov at the Secretariat, arguing that 
everybody had missed the point: either the facts in the article were either true 
or false.  If they were false, then both the editor of the paper and those within 
the Agit-Prop committee should be punished.  If they were true, then Solianik 
had questions to answer.132  This changed the entire mood of the meeting.  
Suslov was forced into a compromise: Solianik would be fired from his post, but 
not excluded from the Party.133  But Suslov ultimately supported the paper: Of 
course, the paper could have asked for advice before publication, but, judging by 
the results of the inspection, everything was laid out correctly.134  
It seemed that the paper had won a hard-fought victory.  But Brezhnev, 
who had sat impassively through the meeting, was to have the last word.135  
Calling both Voronov and Iakovlev over, he barked at them: Criticise all you 
like, but dont make a fuss [ ,   
].136  The paper may have secured the removal of Solianik, 
but soon found itself under fire for certain deviations from the truth and the 
distortion of certain facts.137   
This time, Voronovs miscalculation had serious consequences.  He was 
offered a promotion to the position of Deputy Editor of Pravda  the proverbial 
offer that could not be refused  but, having been accepted, the offer was 
amended to the lower position of Responsible Secretary.  Voronov occupied this 
role until 1968, at which point he was summarily dispatched to the role of 
correspondent in Berlin, where he languished unhappily for fourteen years, 
131 Pankin, Preslovutaia epokha, pp.97-98. 
132 Iakovlev, Mlechin and Pankin have accounts of Shelepins address, slightly differently 
worded, but similar in content: Iakovlev, p.324; Mlechin, p.411; Pankin, Preslovutaia epokha, 
p.107. 
133 Iakovlev, p.325; Mlechin, pp.411-412; Ogryzko, Zhertva. 
134 Iakovlev, pp.324-325. 
135 Sakhnins account has a far more verbose Brezhnev, but, on the evidence of other accounts, 
he seems to have mixed Brezhnev up with Suslov.  Iakovlev, Mlechin, and Ogryzko all have him 
staying silent. 
136 Mlechin, p.412; Iakovlev, p.325; Pankin, Preslovutaia epokha, p.107. 
137 Pankin, Preslovutaia epokha, pp.106-107. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 90 
refusing to learn German out of unhappy memories of the Blockade.138  The 
reasons for such punishment are obscure, but some suspect that it was a way of 
punishing Voronov for his links to the man who was once one of Brezhnevs 
main rivals  especially as Voronovs demotion only took place once Shelepin 
had been removed from the leadership of the Commission of Party Control in 
December 1965.139  Yet heavy-hitting criticism did not disappear after 
Voronovs departure in December 1965.  New Editor-in-Chief Boris Pankin, who 
had been heavily involved in the decision to publish Sakhnins muckraking 
expos, proved to be no less enthusiastic about the campaigning role of the 
press.  The centrepiece campaign of his seven-year tenure at the paper was his 
campaign for the protection of Lake Baikal.   
The papers concern for the Soviet natural environment was something 
that linked the Khrushchev and Brezhnev eras.  After the Twentieth Party 
Congress, journalists like Vasilii Peskov began to condemn the regimes 
rapacious attitude to the environment, while Adzhubei argued that Soviet 
agriculture, including the Virgin Lands campaign, threatened to lead to far 
worse yields down the line.  The paper published a number of articles on the 
subject of Russias woodlands, and in 1958 introduced a regular rubric on 
nature preservation.   Under  Voronovs leadership the paper began a campaign 
to support a number of students from Leningrad in their attempt to create a 
sustainable Cedar forest [Kedrograd] in the Altai Mountains, which would be 
more efficient and less environmentally destructive than the intensive methods 
hitherto favoured.140  The campaign came up against the opposition of local 
bureaucrats, who resented the schemes inability to fulfil the plan, and before 
long the most valuable resources of the Kedrogradtsy were handed over to local 
authorities, and the Kedrograd experiment moved to less fertile land.  The 
articles were written by Vladimir Chivilikhin, a Russophile writer whose 
historical essay Pamiat (1978-84) enjoyed wide popularity.  By 1966, 
bureaucrats had derailed the project, and Chivilikhin spoke at the Fifteenth 
138 Shetinskii, Voronov, p.350. 
139 Ogryzko, Zhertva. 
140 On Chivilikhin and the Kedrograd experiment see Douglas R. Weiner, A Little Corner of 
Freedom: Russian Nature Protection from Stalin to Gorbachv (Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press, 1999), pp.312-339. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 91 
Komsomol Congress on the problem of institutional narrowness and 
bureaucratism and the spinners of red tape.  He argued presciently that the 
scientific and economic problem is fused with a social one.141  After 
Khrushchevs ouster, the papers agenda was furthered by Fatherland, an 
article by Peskov published during the final months of Voronovs editorship.142   
Peskov was one of the papers most prominent journalists of the 1960s 
and 1970s.  Born in 1930 in a small village in the Black Earth region of Russia, 
he came to the paper from a small regional paper, Molodoi kommunar in 1956, 
and was soon praised for the quality of his writing and his photography.  Seven 
short years after his arrival at the paper, Peskov was awarded a Lenin Prize for 
his	collection	of	articles,	Stride	Across	the	Dew	[		].  He brought to 
the paper the voice of the Russian provinces, and a concern for the preservation 
of the natural environment: he can be considered as one of the unsung Village 
Prose writers.  In Fatherland, Peskov spoke of the urgent need to preserve the 
nations historical, cultural, and national landmarks, in some ways anticipating 
the Russophile turn that KP would make in the late 1970s.143  Kapitolina 
Kozhevnikova, one of the papers correspondents in Moldova, said that 
Fatherland illustrated the need for a concerted campaign on nature 
preservation.  She spoke of the exploitation of nature under Stalin, and then 
discussed the negative impact of the Virgin Lands campaign on the waters of the 
Don.  Calling for the paper to begin a concerted campaign on the protection of 
nature, she added that Literaturnaia gazeta had beaten them to the punch too 
many times, showing how criticism was not just a matter of disinterested social 
activism, but also a professional question of getting one over on ones rivals.144   
Events on Lake Baikal, where an enormous cord-cellulose factory was 
projected, allowed KP to make the environment a priority, and led some within 
the paper to suggest that it had outdone even Literaturka by clearly expressing 
its own point of view, rather than being forced to represent both sides of the 
141 Ibid., p.333. 
142 Vasilii Peskov, Otechestvo, KP 4/6/65, 4. 
143 On KPs Russophile turn, see Stanislav Goldfarb, Komsomol'skaia pravda' 1925-2005 gg.: 
Ocherki istorii (Irkutsk: Irkutskaia oblastnaia tipografiia No.1, 2008), pp.361-366. 
144 8/6/65, d.383, l.12. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 92 
argument. 145  There was immense pride at the papers socially valuable 
campaigning on the topic.  Anatolii Iurkov, an editorial board member in the 
Department of Working Youth, said that the question was the honour and pride 
of our country.146  In an editorial comment to one of these articles, the editors 
wrote that The reader is right to ask: what is happening, why do the powerful 
voice of protest and the well-reasoned position of science remain merely a 
matter for the honour of concerned public opinion?147  This appeal to public 
opinion against the decision was a hallmark of the papers campaign.  Articles 
met with a huge response from Soviet obshchestvennost, including 
distinguished academics and even Dmitrii Shostakovich, who called the paper to 
offer his support.148 
After the Prague Spring, the tasks of the Soviet press moved from 
technocratic transformation to bureaucratic consolidation. But, however 
paradoxical it may seem, the more conformist Soviet journalists were expected 
to be, the more heavily they pressed on with their social critique.149  For Pankin, 
critical articles were important because they stood out against the backdrop of 
recent (and, Pankin implied, unreasonable) attacks on the paper:  
Such articles are an event in society, they set the tone in the press.  Such things 
dont appear often.  The article  shows the possibilities and the authority of the 
paper.  These two weeks have been filled with humdrum days [], with a 
critique of our shortcomings.  If we look only at that side, it could seem that there 
are nothing other than humdrum days at our paper.  But then serious things like 
this come out of our humdrum days, that show that what we are doing is not in 
vain.150 
The humdrum was provided by an endless cycle of more-or-less 
interchangeable articles on patriotic themes and anniversaries, but the serious 
was what journalists lived for.  Pavel Gutiontov, a journalist who worked at 
Komsomolskaia pravda from the late 1970s said in a 2005 article:  
145 Ibid., l.2. 
146 1/6/66, d.430, l.13. 
147 Baikal zhdet 
148 Anatolii Iurkov, V Baikale voda, u Baikala beda in Bolshe, chem gazeta, ed. by Liudmila 
Semina (Moscow: PoRog, 2006), p.134. 
149 More research is required to ascertain if this applied outside the confines of central, liberal-
minded newspapers like Komsomolskaia pravda and Literaturnaia gazeta. 
150 12/8/70, d.505, l.86. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 93 
The words "social responsibility of journalism" were never heard back then. They 
didnt exist, but the responsibility itself did  you cant deny that.  And, amongst 
other things, that is what determined the social status of the journalist  an 
exceptionally high status, like nowhere else in the world.151 
 A curious process unfolded: in a time when criticism was being suppressed, it 
became more, not less central to their identity  one of the few things that made 
their work worthwhile.  Most journalists have a story or two about a critical 
article they published, and, perhaps, about the abuse they suffered from the 
authorities for doing so.  Such stories may be an exaggeration, as journalists are 
wont to do, and reflect the desire of many to be on the right side of history by 
emphasising their own bravery in the face of intimidation, but, as we have seen, 
the danger was real enough.  A low-level battle emerged, with journalists 
attempting to sneak critical materials into the paper and censors trying to keep 
them out  sometimes successfully, sometimes not and, most of the time, 
somewhere in between.152 
 Pankins comments were made in response to an article of August 1970, 
which intensified criticism of the authorities.  At Baikal, written by an 
unknown V. Goncharov and Anatolii Iurkov, a correspondent in the 
Department of Working Youth, was an expos of continued violations of a 1969 
resolution on Baikal.153  As far as possible, the paper, well aware of the many 
ruses used by the authorities to deflect criticism, tried to avoid the pitfalls.  
Every fact in the article needed to have a written equivalent with a signature 
and a stamp.  A figure from the Komsomol was to accompany Iurkov on his 
investigations so that he could verify everything.154  It seems that much of 
Iurkovs investigation was an attempt to secure documents that would save the 
paper from harm when the article was examined professionally [ 
 ], in order to refute and thereby end the 
151 Quoted in Roudakova, p.124 (translation modified). 
152 Roudakova, pp.91-95; Koltsova, pp.25-28. 
153 V. Goncharov, A. Iurkov, U Baikala KP 11/8/70. 
154 Iurkov, V Baikale voda, p.135. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 94 
growing scandal of the public flogging of the author and the paper. After all, 
Pankin wasnt the only one whose career was under threat.155 
 However, it was not quite enough: one day a man from nowhere 
arrived at the paper to demand of Iurkov where he got hold of his documents, 
which were for official use only.  The paper was also under fire for using the 
name of the Komsomol official (V. Goncharov) as an author, despite an explicit 
promise not to do so.156  According to Iurkov, these problems threatened his 
career, as he already had a black mark against his name for a critical article that 
displeased Evgenii Tiazhelnikov, First Secretary of the Komsomol.157  In that 
case, the intervention of Kosygin saved him from further punishment; in this 
case, it was Brezhnev, to whom Pankin had written to inform him of the issues 
surrounding Baikal.158  The letter was passed to Brezhnevs assistant, 
Samoteikin, a supporter of the paper, and he ensured that the scandal died 
down.159  However, though the facts behind the case are not known, Iurkovs 
departure in 1974 to the central-but-lowly Party newspaper Sotsialisticheskaia 
industriia looked suspiciously like a demotion. 
 The story of Baikal, just like the case of Solianik, illustrate how a critical 
article succeeded or failed not so much because of its content, as because of the 
ideological context into which it was published, an author or editors ability to 
count on protectors within the Party or Komsomol apparatus, and the 
newspapers cunning in ensuring that the usual ruses would be circumvented.  
The Baikal affair was not a disaster insofar as those involved escaped 
punishment.  Yet this minor victory meant little, given that the factory was 
allowed to violate regulations on an almost daily basis.  Nevertheless, journalists 
at KP and beyond had succeeded in bringing together critically-minded public 
opinion, both from within the intelligentsia and outside.  Even if these issue-
based groupings failed to achieve their wider goals, they were significant in 
shaping the social landscape of late socialism.  Their very presence suggested 
155 Ibid., p.138. 
156 The paper did so to circumvent its kurator, since any item written by an official did not 
require vetting. 
157 Ibid., pp.139-142. 
158 Ibid., pp.135-136. 
159 Ibid., p.142. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 95 
that society was fragmenting, and that formerly loyal intelligentsia groups were 
no longer looking to the regime as a progressive hope for the future, but as a 
barrier to change that needed to be constantly pressurised.  In this case, it 
seems that the desire of the regime to save face, to maintain a faade of 
infallibility despite all evidence to the contrary, outdid the desire to correct an 
obvious error (by 1970 even Gosstroi admitted that the factorys location was a 
mistake).160  But this came at the price of alienating public opinion, leading to an 
ever-widening impasse between the values of the intelligentsia and those of the 
regime. 
Conclusion 
Criticism and self-criticism were a fixture in the Soviet press from Stalin to 
Brezhnev.  But the compass of criticism and the context in which it was carried 
out had changed.  Under Stalin, journalists criticised individual factory 
managers and workers in pursuit of a more efficient system.  Such criticism was 
routine, and suggested that problems in Soviet society were the fault of petty 
individuals in the lower reaches of the Party ranks.  After Stalins death, 
journalists widened their focus. Empowered by the elimination of violence as a 
control strategy, they began to set their sights higher, and suggested that 
problems went beyond the lower levels of the system, and into the Party 
hierarchy.  These attacks took on not only the clichd devils of the past, 
bureaucracy and corruption, but also fought the values that underpinned them.   
Of particular importance was the attempt to appeal to a Soviet educated 
public as a means for awakening social initiative.  Journalists increasingly 
sought to speak for this public, rather than the Party, and this became central to 
their identity as public servants.  Over the course of this period, criticism shifted 
from a means for highlighting social problems to a means for placing pressure 
on the authorities to eliminate them.  But, despite the authorities publicly-
stated support, journalists did not receive the same backing in reality.  By the 
mid-1950s, the practice of criticism had settled into a war of words between 
160 Paul R. Josephson, New Atlantis Revisited: Akademgorodok, the Siberian City of Science 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997), p.184. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 96 
journalists and bureaucrats, with the end result resembling less a battle of 
evidence, and more a battle of connections.   
We might thus see the regimes commitment to criticism as a cynical 
charade  a right, like Soviet democracy, much talked about in print, but absent 
in reality.  But perhaps it was not that officials did not believe in the importance 
of criticism, but more that, in the cold light of day, the desire to eliminate these 
shortcomings in general did not translate into wanting to eradicate them in 
particular, in ones own back yard, especially if that would mean breaking the 
delicate web of connections that sustained regional and national power 
structures.  It might be added that criticism was always an uncomfortable fit for 
a regime that was so obsessed with image management.  Part of the problem, 
perhaps, was the propensity of Soviet citizens to read between the lines.  
Though journalists took pains to suggest that the shortcomings they publicised 
were out of the ordinary, by dint of being printed in the paper, they were 
nevertheless interpreted as typical occurrences.161  As a result, the regime 
worried about the capacity of criticism to destroy the good name of the Soviet 
Union internationally, and damage the Partys reputation nationally.  Boris 
Pankin put it this way in his memoirs: 
Under Yeltsin the government made the discovery that the most reliable way of 
responding to criticism and accusations in the media, even if they directly 
touched on the honesty and merits of high-ranking figures in the government, 
was to pay no attention to them. 
But at that time, the party and Soviet big cheeses suffered from another illness: 
every word of criticism touching on their sphere of responsibility  be it a factory, 
institute, kolkhoz, raion or the whole of Ukraine  they took as a personal insult 
and plunged headlong into denying the criticism and pursing those who 
criticised. 
We were used to this  it was a condition of the game of cat-and-mouse which 
we unceasingly played with our high-ranking readers  collective and 
individual.162 
The description of the practice of criticism as a game of cat-and-mouse is 
telling.163  It suggests that the collegial relationship between journalists and  the 
161 Smith, p.370. 
162 Pankin, Preslovutaia epokha, pp.102-103. 
163 The same metaphor is used in Alfred Kokh, Igor Svinarenko, A Crate of Vodka. An Insider View 
of the 20 Years that Shaped Modern Russia (New York: Enigma Books, 2009), pp.92-93. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 97 
regime was in the process of breaking down, and that journalists were 
increasingly forced to act against the regime, rather than as part of it.  
Journalists may have seen themselves as a force for progress within the Soviet 
Union, but viewed the regime as impeding it.  This is clearly shown by the many 
ruses to which they resorted, ranging from misleadingly labelling material, 
ensuring that articles went to a progressive censor, to sending two critical 
articles to print to guarantee that the lesser evil would be printed.164  These 
were not the actions of individuals who believed that the regime knew best, but 
neither were they the actions of dissidents.  Rather, they embodied what the 
former editor of the monthly professional journal Zhurnalist, Egor Iakovlev, 
called a process of  fighting for [the systems] improvement, to uphold its ideals 
and understandings of ethical decency, of moral rectitude, of social equality.165  
In this sense, criticism provided a sphere in which journalists could exercise the 
power of the press to its fullest extent, however dangerous that sometimes 
turned out to be. 
Perhaps the key difference between the Stalin, Khrushchev and Brezhnev 
periods in terms of attitudes to criticism and self-criticism lies in the changing 
consequences for those who overstepped the mark.  Under Stalin, campaigns 
were largely directed from above, and refusal to participate could lead to 
judicial sanction.  Under Khrushchev, journalists were able to exercise their 
initiative in putting forward their own version of the party line.  The events of 
1956 at KP showed that there were limits, but even a catastrophic failure, such 
as when KP printed a lurid-but-inaccurate expos of a local Komsomol leader, 
did not lead to a sacking for the journalist in question (though his career 
undoubtedly suffered).166  The two cases from the Brezhnev era, meanwhile, 
were both typical and atypical.  Only a very few cases involved the intervention 
of the very highest echelons of power.  But, in a way, these cases reveal how the 
system of mutual protection [ ] and ministerial back-
scratching that affected criticism at lower levels was also in place at the top.  
Despite being lauded as an essential part of Party democracy, the Kremlin 
164 Roudakova, pp.91-95. 
165 Ibid., p.87. 
166 1/2/60, d.269, ll.33-34; Protokol No. 5 (KP Planerka), 30/1/60, d.266, ll.25-26. 
SHORTCOMINGS | 98 
leadership acted in much the same way as the Chairman of a kolkhoz, a factory 
manager, or the Secretary of a raikom: they ignored, or tried to suppress, 
inexpedient criticism, and sought to punish those who did the criticising.   
Under Khrushchev editors might be given a roasting by Agit-Prop or 
Komsomol officials, but rarely felt themselves to be in any real danger.167  
Between 1953 and October 1964, not one editor of the main three papers was 
sacked.  But between October 1964 and December 1965, five separate editors 
were dismissed from their posts for various misdemeanours.  For Brezhnev and 
Suslov, the newspaper provided a means for consolidating power not for 
achieving radical social transformation  and they were prepared to take strong 
measures to ensure that they got their way. 
167 Pankin, Presolvutaia epokha, pp.75, 106. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 99 
CHAPTER 2 | Making News Soviet: Changing Attitudes to 
Information after Stalins Death 
Theres no news in Pravda and theres no truth in Izvestiia.  This popular saying, 
playing on the titles of the leading Soviet dailies, Pravda [Truth] and Izvestiia 
[News], captures Soviet readers attitude to the lack of information in their 
newspapers.  Indeed, it seemed to many Western observers that news was 
unimportant to Soviet journalists: New York Times journalist Hedrick Smith, 
illustrating the us and them logic of Cold War reporting, suggested that news 
in our sense was not their primary concern.1  Under Stalin, information was 
limited to ceremonial and official news, leaving large gaps in readers 
knowledge of the world.  In this chapter, I show how, following the Secret 
Speech, journalists began to feel that the information they were providing was 
inadequate and set about changing the role of news in the press.  However, 
change was hamstrung by a conception of news that emphasised the need for 
positive information within the framework of Socialist Realism.  Attempts to 
widen the remit of news reporters met with widespread mistrust, since they 
threatened to eliminate the link between news and typical events, and risked 
opening the floodgates to so-called bourgeois sensationalism.  Although 
journalists increasingly recognised the importance of news, this foundational 
understanding of news as agitation with facts remained operative throughout 
the period, putting Soviet news at a disadvantage when it came up against the 
speed and efficiency of Western news sources. 
 The question of what was Soviet and what was foreign is at the heart of 
this chapter.  Audiences were now able to obtain news from western sources in 
greater numbers, breaking the Soviet news monopoly.  The ability of western 
radio to transmit information quicker than domestic journalists became a 
source of some anxiety, and served to make timely news an urgent priority.  
Across this period  and in particular after Khrushchevs ouster  journalists 
1 Hedrick Smith, The Russians (New York: Quadrangle, 1976), p.367. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 100 
and media officials discussed the need for better and more timely information, 
with some considering the provision of such news as an act of fundamental civic 
importance as well as an antidote to western propaganda.  Some journalists 
revelled in the westernisation of media practices, and expressed pride in 
becoming part of a worldwide community of journalists.  But for others this 
development was dangerous, for it threatened to introduce alien values and 
damage the role of the journalist as a researcher of reality.  For this reason, the 
idea of news as a narrative of progress showed remarkable resilience.  Though 
some journalists sought to debate the role of information in the press, others 
remained wedded to traditional hierarchies of quality, which placed literary 
information at the top, and news (as the least creative of all genres) at the 
bottom.  At the same time, the regime continued to place limits on the reporting 
of certain events; this desire to disseminate correct messages interfered with 
the demands of timely information.  Thus, as the Prague Spring approached, the 
development of Soviet news was hampered by forces from within the 
journalistic profession, and from outside it.  
1 Facts and Factlets: The Epistemology of Soviet Information 
In much of the scholarship on the Soviet press there has been a tendency to 
posit a norm to which Soviet news failed to correspond.2  Yet, as scholars have 
shown, news is not a universal: concepts of news in the US have constantly 
fluctuated in response to changing political, economic, and professional 
circumstances, while news in other nations, such as Germany, has always been 
more focused on commentary and educational materials.3  Speaking in 1969, 
Aleksandr Pumpianskii, who was well acquainted with international journalism 
in his role as Deputy Editor of the International Department, pertinently 
2 E.g. Wilbur Schramm, The Soviet Communist Theory of the Press in Four Theories of the Press, 
ed. by Fred S. Siebert (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1956), pp.105-146; Frank Ellis, 
The Media as Social Engineer in Russian Cultural Studies: An Introduction, ed. Catriona Kelly, 
David Shepherd (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998), pp.192-222. 
3 Kevin G. Barnhurst, John Nerone, The Form of News: A History (New York: Guildford Press, 
2001); Corey Ross, Media and the Making of Modern Germany: Mass Communications, Society, 
and Politics from the Empire to the Third Reich (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), pp.21-
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 101 
differentiated between two different types of newspaper: the information 
newspaper, and the magazine-newspaper.  Pumpianskii claimed that KP was a 
newspaper of the latter kind, meaning that it printed human-interest items 
which in the West were usually printed in magazines.4   It is therefore not 
difficult to find differences between the news values of the Soviet Union and the 
United States.  Take, for example, the simple news story which, in the United 
States, was typically understood as an essentially fact-led medium, in which so-
called fine writing had no place.5  In the Soviet newspaper, by contrast, news 
could be disseminated in a variety of genres, some of which had a claim to be 
literary writing as well as news.6   
 Definitions of news itself also differed.  Nikolai Palgunov, the former 
Director of TASS, defined information as new data on the facts of present-day 
[] life of contemporary society, which it is necessary or important, 
useful or interesting for every member of society to know in order to live in 
society.7  The Associated Presss William Pinkerton gave a less socially 
purposeful definition: it was anything published in a newspaper which 
interests a large number of people.8  The most pertinent difference for this 
chapter lies in the Soviet emphasis on news as agitation with facts.9  
Responding to American author Theodore Kruglak, who contended that 
information served no master, Aleksei Adzhubei retorted that to agree with 
Kruglak would be to stop being a Soviet journalist.10  That is not to say that 
Soviet journalism was not considered to be objective  it was the most truthful 
and the most objective in the world  but this objectivity did not mean that the 
4 15/12/69, d.488, l.77. 
5 Quoted in Rilla Dean Mills, The Soviet Journalist: A Cultural Analysis Unpublished PhD 
Dissertation. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1981, p.115. 
6 There is no single genre that translates to the English news story: the closest would probably 
be the zametka, which refers to a short item of information, the korrespondentsiia, which 
signifies a more lengthy treatment of an event or occurrence, and the reportage, though these 
latter two were considered to be literary forms.  See Zhanry sovetskoi pechati, ed. by M.S. 
Cherpakhov (Moscow: MGU, 1959). 
7 N.G. Palgunov, Zametki ob informatsii (Moscow: MGU, 1967), p.17. 
8 William M. Pinkerton, The Newspaperman in Reporting the News: Selections from Nieman 
Reports, ed. by Louis M. Lyons (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 1965), p.185. 
9 Theodore Kruglak, Two Faces of TASS (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1962), 
10 A. Adzhubei, Boevoe oruzhie partii SP 5 (1963), 7. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 102 
newspaper should be a mirror of reality: it needed to actively analyse and 
commentate on that reality, too.11 
In an article of 1960, the Deputy Editor of Trud argued that simple 
reflectiveness [] was alien to journalism.  He claimed that in 
Soviet journalism: Facts, no matter how striking [] they are, are not set out 
for the sake of facts, and added that only goal-oriented facts with social 
significance had a right to be in the newspaper.12  Similar questions of the 
relationship between fact and representation were frequently raised by 
journalists.13  The vision of social reality that they were expected to put forward 
was not one of simple correspondence to what their senses told them was out 
there.  Rather, spontaneous sensory impressions had to be subordinated to 
conscious analysis before an image of reality could be arrived at.  Izvestiias 
Tatiana Tess argued that the gazetchik should resist the temptations of mere 
photographicality [], arguing instead that journalists 
should produce real, life-like truth [ ], thus drawing a 
crucial distinction between appearance and essence.14  Journalists were 
constantly directed to penetrate the surface of reality to find this hidden 
essence: in the words of one article, journalists need to be able to reflect 
[], to interpret [] occurrences, and not accept what lies 
on the surface.15 
 There was a dialectical logic to this, but there was also a cruder, political 
logic.  Journalists needed to be able to uncover the typical, but the officially 
mandated optimism of Soviet public culture meant that, in practice, typicality 
was synonymous with positivity and progress.  Not all facts were really facts.  
One journalist, paraphrasing Lenin, spoke of the existence of facts and 
11 Ia Baranov, and V. Kol'tsov. Sred' bela dnia SP 11 (1962), 35; N. G. Pal'gunov, Tridtsat' let: 
Vospominaniia zhurnalista i diplomata (Moscow: Izdatel'stvo Politicheskoi Literatury, 1964), 
p.267; V.D. Pelt, Korrespondentsiia in Cherepakhov, p.62. 
12 I. Tiurin, Fakty i vyvody SP 4 (1960), 45. 
13 See Ibid.; M. Baisman, Korrespondentsiia  osnovnoi gazetnyi zhanr: Osmysliat i analizirovat 
fakty SP 3 (1957), 10-12; M. Burenkov, Korrespondentsiia - osnovnoi gazetnyi zhanr SP 1 
(1957), 10-12; Aleksandr Latsis, O sushchestvennom i sluchainom SP 6 (1958), 46-47; G. 
Kozlov, Sem raz otmer SP 8 (August 1960), 36-37; E. Temchin, O faktakh, kotorye na 
poverkhnosti SP 9 (1960), 18-20.   
14 Tat'iana Tess, Vstrecha s geroem SP 10 (1957), 1820. 
15 E. Temchin, Pero? Malo SP 11 (1963), 24. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 103 
factlets [], the latter being merely trivial carping at individual 
blunders.  Instead, a news story needed to reflect that which is characteristic 
for many people, adding that [i]t is not possible  to construct a news story on 
some private [] occurrence, on an isolated fact.16  The boundaries of 
genre were to some extent malleable, but, as the previous chapter showed, 
when the question came to negative occurrences, they became far more rigid: 
the negative was not news.17  One author recalled having written a news article 
on a policeman who got drunk and fell into a well: In itself the fact was, as they 
say, outrageous [], but one ought not to have written a news article 
on it: here, another newspaper genre was required.18 
The extent to which Soviet journalism continued to bear the imprimatur 
of Socialist Realism is striking.  Socialist Realism should therefore be considered 
not only as an aesthetic doctrine, but also as a means for speaking about, 
interpreting, and creating everyday reality.19  In its most basic definition, taken 
from the First Congress of Soviet Writers in 1934, Socialist Realism was the 
representation of reality in its revolutionary development, which was taken to 
mean that writers should depict the present in light of the future.20  Despite 
challenges from critics like Vladimir Pomerantsev, who argued in 1953 that 
writers had too often strived to deliver the desirable in place of the already-
existing, it was not possible to overthrow existing stylistic norms: attempts to 
do so were criticised as a distortion and perversion [  
] of reality, thus sending a message that Socialist Realism would 
not be easily overthrown in the arts and journalism alike.21  The Soviet 
16 Burenkov, 10. 
17 E.g. K. Kovalevskii, Feleton ili korrespondentsiia SP 2 (1955); Iurii Chaplygin. Ne suzhat 
granits zhanra SP 3 (1956), 3033. 
18 A. Kurlovich, Osmysliat fakty SP 8 (1958), 17. 
19 Sheila Fitzpatrick. Becoming Cultured: Socialist Realism and the Representation of Taste and 
Privilege in The Cultural Front: Power and Culture in Revolutionary Russia (Ithaca, NY; 
London: Cornell University Press, 1992), p.217; Evgeny Dobrenko, The Political Economy of 
Socialist Realism (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007). 
20 A.A. Zhdanov, Soviet Literature  The Richest in Ideas, the Most Advanced Literature.  Speech 
at the First Congress of Soviet Writers, Moscow, August 1934.  Online at:  
<http://www.marxists.org/subject/art/lit_crit/sovietwritercongress/zdhanov.htm> [Accessed: 
22/12/11] 
21 Vladimir Pomerantsev, Ob iskrennosti v literature NM 12 (1953), 220; K voprosu o 
tipicheskom v literature i iskusstve Kommunist 18 (1955), 22. KP initially supported 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 104 
newspaper aimed to show the typical in society.  As we have seen, the press 
frequently found itself under attack for its alleged overemphasis on the negative 
aspects of society, and praised for its dispatches on positive exemplars, such as 
the contemporaries of the next chapter, or heroic portraits of sportsmen and 
sportswomen and cosmonauts.  While under Stalin journalists were not even 
allowed to choose where to print an article, let alone to alter it, his death gave 
them a more authoritative, more interpretative role.22  The notion of typicality 
was not just an epithet with which to exclude inconvenient  material could be 
conveniently labelled: it also encapsulated an optimistic view of a world in 
which workers selflessly and tirelessly constructed; scientists made new 
discoveries; and artists created new masterworks.23  It was a view of news that 
many journalists would passionately defend in the years to come. 
In 1958, at an All-Union Seminar on Questions of Newspaper 
Information, held in Leningrad under the auspices of the Union of Journalists, 
the Deputy Head of the leading Soviet news agency, TASS, spoke this romantic 
language of progress: 
[H]ere is a pile of telegrams with reviews of the newspapers for October 26  its 
a genuine chronicle of the life of the country on one day, a tale [] of 
thousands and thousands of Soviet people, their labour and feats.  Its a tale of 
those who live and labour in Ukraine, in Belarus, in Siberia, on the shores of the 
Pacific Ocean and in the Arctic, who are performing flights over the South Pole 
and undertaking scientific work on the ice of the Antarctic.24 
Information was to serve the goals of the Party, but it needed to do more than 
that: as the invocation of the tale of thousands suggested, it had to do so in a 
Pomerantsev (see S. Bocharov, V. Zaitsev et al. Zamalchivaia ostrye voprosy: Pismo k redaktsii 
KP 17/3/54, 3), but was forced to back down after criticism.  See O publikatsii v gazete 
Komsomolskaia pravda pisma v zashchitu stati V.M. Pomerantseva Ob iskrennosti v literature, 
24/3/54 in Apparat TsK KPSS i kultura, 1953-1957. Dokumenty, ed. by V. Iu. Afiani (Moscow: 
Rosspen, 2001), p.211, and the papers reaction to this criticism 7/6/54, d.129, ll.128-142. 
22 On journalism under Stalinism, see A. Kotlyar, Newspapers in the USSR: Recollections and 
Observations of a Soviet Journalist (New York: Research Program on the USSR, 1955).  On the 
authority of interpretation see, for example, F. Krutov, and V. Sitov. Ob avtoritete i dostoinstve 
zhurnalista SP 6 (1957), 1214. 
23 On the optimism of the period see Petr Vail', Aleksandr Genis, 60-e: Mir sovetskogo cheloveka. 
2-e izd. (Moscow: Novoe literaturnoe obozrenie, 1998).  See also 24/4/61, d.299, ll.127-132; 
8/5/61 d.300, ll.3-5. 
24 B. Afanasev, Sostoianie i zadachi gazetnoi informatsii SP 12 (1958), 9. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 105 
way that expressed the pathos of progress, and gave drama to the narrative of 
Soviet construction.25  
 In this regard, the Soviet press was following a model of news that dated 
back to the First Five Year plan, and was associated most of all with Maksim 
Gorkii, who envisioned the Soviet newspaper as a chronicle of positive events.  
He likened the ideal reader of his Nashi dostizheniia [Our Achievements] to a 
stonecutter working on a construction site without seeing the overall blueprint.  
That worker might feel their work to be trivial and worthless if they were not 
able to see the achievements that had already been accomplished, and therefore 
fail to feel him/herself to be one of those living forces that are building the new 
state.  Thus, Nashi dostizheniia was to be a mirror of the peoples 
achievements, which would show our trivial everyday work  in general, all 
the trivial work in the factories and fields which, albeit little by little, do renew 
life.26   
This model of news was thus Stalinist but, although it never entirely 
disappeared from the press in the late Stalin period, it became far less 
prominent, which is why, at the papers first Party meeting after the Twentieth 
Party Congress, KP journalists were urged to refer to the papers archive of 
issues from the 1920s and 1930s for inspiration.27  Evidence of Gorkiis 
influence on Soviet journalism is also provided by Adzhubeis 1960 revival of 
Gorkiis Den mira initiative (see below), which used the prism of a single day to 
highlight the onward march of Soviet life.  Adzhubeis prominent position at KP 
may also have inspired a series of special editions that ran throughout 1956, 
which used the background of a single day to highlight progress being made in 
Soviet industry and agriculture.  On the front page of June 14, in an edition 
entitled One Day on the Construction Sites of the Arctic and the East, this 
editorial introduction appeared: 
On the page of the calendar, a number 12, Tuesday.  An ordinary working day.  
But open up this edition of the newspaper.  Read the letters, articles and 
25 See also Kruglak, pp.170-186. 
26 Quoted in Elizabeth Papazian, Manufacturing Truth: The Documentary Moment in Early Soviet 
Culture (DeKalb, IL: Northern Illinois University Press, 2009), p.137. 
27 Closed Party Meeting, 14/3/56, d.30, l.96. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 106 
telegrams received by the editors on Tuesday 12 June from the East and the 
Arctic, where the attention of our whole people is focused.  How much was done 
on just one day, how many changes occurred on construction sites  And how 
many new heroes appeared, how many names, glorified by labour, have we 
discovered?28 
Almost all the stories printed were from the previous day (something of a 
novelty in the less-than-timely Soviet press) and in their grandiloquent tone and 
romantic sense of discovery, they put forward a romantic vision of news 
reporting.  These editions displayed a fruitful tension between the temporality 
of the everyday and the temporality of Communism.  They suggest that June 12 
1956, an ordinary working day, was at the same time an exceptional day, 
where new feats transformed the countrys landscape, and the nation advanced 
another step towards Communism.  Absent, here, was an understanding of 
budni as humdrum or routine.  Instead, the routine was transformed into the 
heroic, with the present day containing within itself the nucleus of the future, 
nourished by the lessons of the past.   In this way, the twenty-four news cycle 
was contrasted with the romantic temporality of communism in a way that 
connected past, present and future in a chain of heroic deeds. 
 This was a land where labour never ceased: At the very same minute 
when, in Moscow, the metro was closing and the last trams had left for the 
depot, the factory whistles of Vladivostok announced the start of a new working 
day, the leap day of February 29.29  This labour was, the editions contended, 
creating a modern, prosperous society.  In the March 1 edition, readers learned 
of industrial progress, but also about technical advances in everyday life: new 
models of television, washing machines and watches were all mentioned, as was 
a plan for the building of new, ultra-modern suburbs of Moscow, which would 
be fully equipped with transport connections, workplaces, shops and cultural 
facilities.  The special editions therefore illustrated how consumption was 
becoming a part of everyday life.   
 Yet despite its pathos and emotion, this vision of news was accused of 
lacking drama and variety.  The one and only story in Soviet domestic news was 
28 Odin den' na novostroikakh Vostoka i Severa KP, 14/6/56. 
29 Na trassakh Tikhogo okeana, KP 1/3/56, 4. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 107 
that Communism is being built, or some variation.  Life was becoming better, 
more joyous, but, strangely, it was also becoming more repetitive, more 
monotonous.30  In 1958, experienced staff member Andrei Davidiants 
expressed exasperation at this model of reporting: Its either a new electric 
locomotive, a new combine harvester, a plough, a new book written by a worker 
or a book written by a cattle breeder.31  These special editions may have 
proclaimed This was yesterday, but the stories contained in them could as 
well have been last week or last month, or last year  and, for all readers knew, 
the news would be the same next week, next month, and next year, too.32  There 
thus emerged a tension between the political demand for journalists to describe 
the typical, and the professional demand for information to be fresh and 
attention-grabbing.  This was perhaps one of the reasons that, despite the 
fanfare and pomp, journalists remained unmoved by these editions.   
 Journalists lack of enthusiasm may also have stemmed from the fact that 
special editions were generally made up of materials in the genre which was 
considered the most simple newspaper genre, the zametka  one that lacked 
the interpretation and analysis which was thought to be an inherent quality of 
the best material.33  The lowly reporter who returned from a factory and filed a 
report about the new Riga-55 model of washing machine was not in the same 
league as a publitsist: this was underlined by the fact that most of the articles in 
these editions were not signed by their authors, following the conventions of 
Soviet newspaper news.  Few of those discussing the editions in Moscow would 
have written any of the material, most of which was penned by staff writers in 
the regions.  The list of indignities was long: reporters were paid less; their 
stories ran without authorial credit; the head of the Department of Internal 
Information, unlike the heads of other departments, was not a member of the 
30 See Christine Evans, From Truth to Time: A History of Soviet Television, 1957-1982. 
Unpublished PhD Dissertation.  University of California, Berkeley, 2010, p.126 and the 
conclusion to this chapter. 
31 12/1/58, d.242, ll.55-56.  See also 12/1/59, d.242, l.73. 
32 KP, 1/3/56, 1. 
33 Cherepakhov, p.3. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 108 
redaktsiia, and therefore had no say in the everyday running of the paper.34  The 
role of news reporter was seen as merely as a stepping-stone to a more 
prestigious role as a publitsist.  Indeed, in the journalistic lexicon it was a 
synonym for  failure: Im no more than a reporter; Im thirty years old and 
still a reporter; The editor told me: youll have to stay a reporter.35  Even 
those who argued against the continued denigration of the role merely 
described it as a school for the young journalist.36  
A further problem was that the extremely positive nature of the material 
came to seem out of date in the febrile aftermath of the Twentieth Party 
Congress, after which the press required a new relationship to facts.37   Soon 
afterwards, Konstantin Taradankin argued that the boundary between what 
must and must not [] be written in the press should be liquidated 
and even advocated the reporting of disasters, citing the example of a recent 
incident at the under-construction Luzhniki stadium, about which the media 
had remained silent.38  Though others did not go so far, journalists frequently 
connected the cult of personality with the distortion of facts: journalists and 
editors, it was said, had lost their connection with life, and acquired the bad 
habit of juggling citations, using pre-prepared formulations, adjusting them to 
fit isolated facts.39 
 It is in this context of changing journalistic values that we should 
understand the frequent injunction to journalists to report on the world using 
typical examples: as attempts to bolster a flagging orthodox line on 
information.  As we will see in the next section, the counter models of news 
reporting that were beginning to enter the scene challenged the idea that the 
purpose of Soviet news was to talk about processes over events, and that the 
reporters own observations were unimportant.  Journalists became aware of a 
need to be more timely in their reports and to broaden their appeal to readers, 
34 Iu Kuznetsov. Fakt - svidetel', agitator, boets: Dvadtsat' strok na podverstku. SP 8 (1961), 21; 
Shtatnoe raspisanie redaktsii gazety Komsomol'saia pravda na 1958 god, 31/1/58, d.236, ll.3-8. 
35 Reporter, Zhurnalist 6 (1968), 5-6. 
36 G. Aleksandrov, Poisk geroia: Rasskazyvaet S. S. Smirnov SP 5 (1964), 35. 
37 5/3/56, d.170, l.111. 
38 Closed Party Meeting, 14/3/56, d.30, ll.101-102. 
39 Ego odnoobrazie Shtamp: Pis'ma o serosti i shablone v gazetakh SP 6 (1956), 8. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 109 
and also began to see the provision of information as an essential part of a 
modern media system.  Two visions of news co-existed, sometimes 
uncomfortably, as the Soviet Union entered a media-saturated age. 
2.1 The Bread of the Paper: Debates about Information under 
Khrushchev 
It might seem that the on-going problems of Soviet news were a natural 
consequence of its philosophical principles.  But there also existed long-
standing issues with the wider institutional structures through which news was 
collected.  The Soviet news net was wide  wider than in the West, claimed 
Soviet sources  because it included reader signals and worker-peasant 
correspondents.40  However, existing structures for gathering information were 
unsatisfactory: the surfeit of official notices, problems with the papers national 
network of correspondents, and on-going issues at TASS meant that the Soviet 
news net possessed as many holes as the ubiquitous avoska. 
 This crisis of information can in many ways be attributed to the regimes 
determination to monopolise the newspaper for the diffusion of various kinds of 
official information.  Under Stalin, news pages resembled a kind of court 
circular, full of the comings and goings of statesmen and meetings of various 
bureaucrats  something about which journalists expressed their dissatisfaction 
even at the time.41  This state of affairs persisted for over a year after Stalins 
death, before the Supreme Soviet submitted a resolution in June 1954 that 
reduced the amount of official material that the paper was forced to print.42  
This was understood as a liberation by the papers editor, Dmitrii Goriunov, 
who commented with relief that the paper would no longer have to print items 
on cotton farming in Tajikistan.43  Despite this improvement, obligatory 
official material such as lengthy transcripts of speeches from Soviet leaders, and 
the texts of important resolutions could sometimes occupy the whole of the 
40 Adzhubei, Boevoe, 5-6. The term news net comes from Gaye Tuchman, Making News: A 
Study in the Construction of Reality (New York: Free Press, 1978), pp.15-38. 
41 30/1/50, d.87, l.143; 3/4/50, d.90, ll.6-7; 12/11/51, d.112, ll.64-65, 69, 79, 83, 85. 
42 21/6/54, d.129, ll.204-206. 
43 Ibid. l.205. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 110 
newspaper, sometimes even extending the papers length from its usual four 
pages to six or an unprecedented eight pages (which gives us a good idea of the 
priorities of the regime in a time of severe paper shortages).  Adzhubeis 
attempt to make such material more reader friendly by printing photographs 
alongside official announcements were condemned by the Central Committee as 
an illustration of the harmful influence of the bourgeois press.44  The 
continued belief that some items were too important to be covered in anything 
other than sacred tones therefore meant that journalists freedom from official 
material was far from total: five years later, the Deputy Editor of Izvestiia, A. 
Baulin was still able to complain that on the pages of newspapers there are at 
times so many articles and news stories reflecting internal, clerical matters that 
any press organ is in fact turned into some sort of departmental bulletin.45  
Even in 1965 when things were beginning to change, readers in Belarus 
demanded that the paper should cease from printing didactic material where 
everything is pre-chewed [], such as general directives and 
resolutions.  Readers have already outgrown such material suggested the 
papers correspondent in Belarus, A. Shcherbakov.46 
 All of this attests to the fact that journalists were not in control of the 
information they disseminated to the public: there was always a notice, a 
resolution, or a speech that needed to be printed; conversely, there were 
forbidden subjects, like crime levels, and some events, like the situation in 
Hungary in 1956, or the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962, where the message was 
considered to be so important that journalists were entirely side-lined, with the 
upper echelons of the party dictating the message instead.47  When the papers 
correspondent for Voronezh, Klara Skopina stumbled upon a scoop about the 
US spy pilot, Gary Powers, shot down on May Day 1960, her fresh exclusive 
rapidly turned stale as the combined forces of the new Chairman of the Supreme 
44 O nepravilnoi praktike chrezmernogo illiustrirovaniia nekotorykh gazet, 11/2/58 in 
Sovetskaia pechat v dokumentakh, ed. by N. Kaminskaia (Moscow: Gospolitizdat, 1961), pp.286-
45 A. Baulin, Na bolshom rubezhe SP 3 (1959), 2. 
46 Shcherbakov to KP redkollegiia, 15/11/65, RGASPI f.98M, op.1, d.390, l.63. 
47 Robert Kaiser, Russia: The People and the Power (London: Secker & Warburg, 1976), pp.224-
225 (partial list of banned subjects). 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 111 
Soviet, Leonid Brezhnev, and the military censor forced the paper to wait until 
the official version of the story had been released.48  Journalists ability to 
report on current affairs was thus doubly circumscribed: once, by the obligation 
to describe typical events, and a second time by the regimes refusal to entrust 
them with the description of those atypical events on which it was necessary to 
report. 
 Such problems were exacerbated by the continued shortcomings of 
TASS, which provided around half of the papers information, but whose 
material remained, as American scholar Theodore Kruglak described it, as 
bland as an ulcer patients diet.49  Amongst journalists at KP, there was 
widespread exasperation about the dullness of the end product, its lack of 
speed, and its ineffectiveness as counterpropaganda.50  In May 1956, Editor 
Dmitrii Goriunov was moved to draft a report on the work of TASS.  He argued 
that the material provided by TASS was uniform and covered the same themes 
and written in dry, boring language.  He also charged the organisation with 
failing to take into account the needs of different publications, and different 
kinds of readers.  He further denounced the lack of timeliness of TASS reports 
and its abundance of errors.51  These complaints echoed almost exactly 
complaints made by journalists twenty years earlier.52  At a seminar on 
information in the Soviet Press, held in Moscow in October 1958, TASSs Deputy 
Director was moved to recognise his organisations shortcomings and a year 
later, at the First All-Union Congress of Journalists, the editors of both Pravda 
and Izvestiia criticised its work. 53  Whether this criticism made a difference is 
open to debate: just over half a year after the Congress, a KP journalist could 
48 Klara Skopina, Pauers  43 goda posle provokatsii Nash Sovremennik 12 (2003), 222; Oleg 
Ignatev, Kak sbili sensatsiiu. URL: <http://only-paper.ru/forum/24-5071-203038-16-
1300528850>. [Acessed: 10/11/11] 
49 Kruglak, p.37. 
50 Nekotorye zamechaniia o rabote TASS (po inostrannoi informatsii), 1954, RGASPI, f.98M, 
op.1, d.136, ll.11-13; 28/5/56, d.172, l.118. 
51 D.P. Goriunov, O rabote TASS, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.821, ll.8-13. 
52 S. Zhdanov, Redaktsii gazet o TASS Bol'shevistskaia pechat' (2) 1936, 2729. 
53 B. Afanasev, Sostoianie i zadachi gazetnoi informatsii SP 12 (1958), 11.  See also A. Blatin, 
Proizvodstvennaia informatsiia SP 12 (1958), 13; Pervyi vsesoiuznyi sezd zhurnalistov. 
Stenograficheskii otchet (Moscow: Gospolitizdat, 1960), pp.68, 110. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 112 
still complain that  as a rule we receive [material that is] barely readable, 
uninteresting for information, nothing makes it into the edition.54  
 At Komsomolskaia pravda, these problems were compounded by on-
going problems with the papers network of regional correspondents or sobkor.  
Comprising around a third of the papers permanent staff, the journalists who 
comprised the network were generally younger, more inexperienced, and less 
well educated than their Moscow-based colleagues.55  As early as 1954 one 
could discern murmurs of disapproval about the sobkors work, and criticism 
continued throughout the period.56  By 1955, the Central Committee of the 
Komsomol had joined the dissenting voices, noting in particular that the 
network cost over a million roubles a year, which prompted KPs editors to cut 
the network by half, establishing in its place a network of roving 
correspondents.  Despite this, a year later it continued to be said that some 
sobkory were unable to collect facts, let along write.57  This was an issue, since, 
at the same time, journalists sought to improve the papers geographical reach 
through information  small notices, which inform the reader about those 
events which happened in a small town, in an oblast capital, in a village.58  Yet 
the poor literary level of some correspondents meant that the paper was unable 
to ameliorate the situation: as late as 1960, transcripts of letuchki still contain 
the comments of exasperated staff members, either requesting that their 
colleagues take sobkor in hand and help them to improve their writing, or else 
remove their certification.59 
All of these factors, coupled with the philosophical principle of the typical 
on which Soviet news was founded, represented a formidable barrier to 
improving Soviet information.  Nevertheless, the need for better information 
was a constant issue at KP editorial meetings, and a fixture in the specialist 
press.  While there had been discussions of information before the Twentieth 
54 18/4/60, d.271, l.83. 
55 Stanislav Goldfarb, Komsomolskaia pravda 1925-2005 gg. Ocherk istorii (Irkutsk: Irkutsk 
oblastnaia tipografiia no. 1 im. V.M. Posokhina), pp.265-266. 
56 Ibid., pp.267-68. 
57 16/4/56, d.171, ll.96-97.  See also 11/6/56, d.173, l.6 ff.. 
58 2/6/58, d.227, ll.20-30, here 20.  See also E.g. 20/8/56, d.175, ll.100-101; 2/12/57, d.198, 
ll.17-18; 16/12/57, d.198, l.60. 
59 8/2/60, d.269, ll.55-57; 15/2/60, d.369, l.131. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 113 
Party Congress, 1956 was, once again, the decisive year in changing journalistic 
attitudes to news.60  The Secret Speech, which foregrounded questions of truth, 
naturally led journalists to ask questions about what information the press 
could and should report.  Ilia Shatunovskii, the papers satirist, told his 
colleagues that they mustn't allow in even the smallest falsehood [] and 
that they should educate [] youth in the spirit of truthfulness 
[].61  Shatunovskii was among those who complained about a lack 
of information, with Valentin Kitain asserting that a newspaper without 
information is, in the end, not a newspaper 62 
Events in Hungary and Poland that year brought home the importance of 
news reporting.  KPs reporting on the uprising in Hungary illustrated the 
problem, with the papers coverage restricted to a few short TASS reports with 
all the urgency (and brevity) of a zametka on the opening of a new cannery in 
Omsk; Pankin denounced these articles as being intended only for stupid little 
children.63  Vasilii Khomuskov argued that TASSs misleading material on the 
crisis, which was printed in KP before being contradicted by Pravda, had placed 
the paper in an uncomfortable position before readers, later adding that the 
paper did not have the right, during such an interesting and complex time, to 
mislead readers  to inform them incorrectly.64  Liubov Ivanova agreed, saying 
that this was a question of journalistic honour:  
None of us go to work just for the money.  We are used to considering ourselves 
to be party workers, propagandists, who are obliged to respond to topical 
questions.  In this case, we can call our situation unpleasant, to say the least.65 
The language of public service, the idea that information was the readers right, 
and a sense of responsibility towards readers was explicit in these comments.  
But there was another consideration. Allan Starodub, the Head of the papers 
newly-created Department of the Youth Festival, told colleagues of a recent trip 
to Novosibirsk, where people could easily pick up the broadcasts of the Voice of 
60 For pre-1956 discussions see Vera Benderovas comments: 21/11/55, d.153, ll.52, 56-58. 
61 19/3/56, d.170, ll.43-44. 
62 18/6/56, d. ll.60, 65-66, 68, 77, here 65. 
63 5/11/56, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.821, l.75. 
64 Ibid., ll.63-65. 
65 Ibid., l.89. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 114 
America and the so-called objective coverage of the BBC.66  Starodub called for 
the Partys Central Committee to act, and asked why the paper didnt attempt to 
counter such broadcasts, which, he pointed out, were listened to by youth in 
particular.67  Indeed, evidence shows that media sources from both West and 
East were pieced together by Soviet citizens, who used them to challenge the 
accounts of events in Poland and Hungary put forward by Soviet sources.68 
 Many at the paper suggested that the inability to counter these voices 
was not just a question of prohibitions from above.  Ivanova had spent time in 
Poland, noting that it was not appropriate for the paper to criticise the affairs 
of a fraternal country.  Nevertheless, she added that If theyd asked me to 
speak out, I wouldnt have been able to do that, because we have been badly 
educated in the spirit of defending our ideas.69  Iurii Voronov, picking up on 
Ivanovas remarks, said that it was less a matter of journalistic honour, and 
more to do with the fact that journalists were often not able to go to war with 
[their] ideological opponents, with polemics, with facts, and total erudition.70 
Pankin, while agreeing that higher Party organs should act, suggested that the 
problem was more fundamental: There is another matter, where nothing is 
interfering with us speaking, and we put up barriers ourselves.  We have an 
editor or a censor standing in our heads, who says you cant do that; they wont 
print that.71  Whether prohibition from above or self-censorship was the cause, 
the case remains that it was only in December, six weeks after the uprising, and 
more than five weeks after the meeting, that the paper responded with a 
definitive account of events in Hungary, which charged sensationalistically, but 
66 Ibid., l.73. 
67 Ibid., ll.73-74. 
68 Tatiana Kosinova, Sobytiia 1956 g. v Polshe glazami sovetskikh dissidentov in Korni travli: 
Sbornik statei molodykh istorikov. L.S. Eremina, E.B. Zhemkova, eds. (Moscow: Zvenia, 1996), 
pp.193-215; Amir Weiner, Foreign Media, the Soviet Western Frontier, and the Hungarian and 
Czechoslovak Crises in Cold War Broadcasting: Impact on the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, 
ed. by A. R. Johnson and R. E. Parta (Budapest; New York: Central European University Press, 
2010),p.304; Benjamin Tromley, Re-Imagining the Soviet Intelligentsia: Student Politics and 
University Life, 1948-1964. Unpublished PhD Dissertation. Harvard University, 2007, pp.279-
280, 285. 
69 5/11/56, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.821, l.89. 
70 Ibid., l.91. 
71 Ibid., l.75. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 115 
unconvincingly, that the uprising was an outbreak of fascism.72  This was not to 
be the last time that the Partys desire to be correct conflicted with the need to 
be timely. 
Media competition did not just come from outside, however: the sources of 
change could also be domestic.  First published on July 1, 1956 the new daily 
Sovetskaia Rossiia was the official newspaper of the Central Committee Bureau 
and the Soviet of Ministers of the RSFSR, and instantly met with the approval of 
readers.73   In a climate where newspapers were being encouraged to compete 
with each other  partly for prestige, and partly for resources  the neophytes 
success caused a stir at Komsomolskaia pravda, who saw that a rival publication 
had stolen a march on them  and, indeed, stolen one of their best information 
enthusiasts in Andrei Davidiants.  Journalists at KP had very little doubt that 
superior information was the reason for its rivals success.74  Sovetskaia Rossiia 
prided itself on printing a range of interesting, punchy stories: in one edition, 
taken at random, one could read the travel notes of one member of the State 
Circus, who had travelled around Belgium, France and Britain; a story about a 
Soviet expedition to the Antarctic; a zametka about the provision of clothing for 
children; a news item about a parachuting competition; and the story of a 
swindler who had spent eight years in jail for theft of state funds, who managed 
to swindle another enterprise within months of his release.75  (Just to show the 
limits of change, one could also read an editorial entitled Improve the 
Production of Agricultural Produce which took up almost the entire front 
page.76)  Though Sovetskaia Rossiia was criticised for the tendentiousness of 
some of its information  in particular its predilection for that perennial 
72 V vengrii podnimal golovu fashizm. Chto proizoshlo v vengrii? KP 11/12/56, 4. 
73 Anatolii Blatin U zhivotvornogo istochnika in Soldaty slova: Rasskazyvaiut veterany sovetskoi 
zhurnalistiki, Tom 2. ed. by V. A. Miakushkov and N. P. Stor (Moscow: Politizdat, 1980), p.256. 
74 6/5/57, d.193, ll.20-21.  See also Blatin, p.256; Egor Iakovlev, Pressa ravna 
obshchestvennomu sostoianiiu in Pressa v obshchestve (1959-2000): Otsenki zhurnalistov i 
sotsiologov. Dokumenty, ed. by A.I. Volkov, M.G. Pugacheva, S.F. Iarmoliuk (Moscow: Moskovskaia 
shkola politicheskikh issledovanii, 2000), p.262. 
75 All items from Sovetskaia Rossiia, 21/7/56, 4. 
76 Uvelichit proizvodstvo produktov selskogo khoziaistva, Ibid., 1. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 116 
favourite, court reports  it was nevertheless widely imitated.77  Its influence on 
KP could be glimpsed in its reports on the apparent sighting of the Abominable 
Snowman in the Pamir Mountains of Central Asia.78  The story attracted 
considerable interest amongst the public, and even resulted in a lengthy 
investigation into the sightings, conducted through the Academy of Sciences. 79  
The results were inconclusive.   
The brevity of Sovetskaia Rossiias stories, in particular, challenged the 
more is more philosophy that was widespread in journalistic circles.  Allan 
Starodub admonished his colleagues for continuing to favour wordy articles 
over short ones, claiming that it was far more difficult and more boring for our 
readers than short and catchy material.80  However, this diagnosis was not 
accepted by all.  Shatunovskii, shortly to depart for Pravda, said approvingly of 
one story: The Sovetskaia Rossiia correspondent wrote a fifteen-line 
information article.  Here, Sakhnin wrote a whole page.81  Implicitly, 
Shatunovskiis comments concerned not just length, but genre: for him, the 
ocherk outranked the zametka.  This suggests an important point about the 
inability of journalists to improve the provision of information in the press: the 
high prestige of the word-heavy publicists (which boosted the literary culture of 
the newspaper) meant that there was literally no space in the newspaper for 
information.82  Many literary (and therefore respected) journalists refused to 
see their material cut, since doing so reduced the authorial aroma  and also, 
charged some, their pay packet, since honoraria were paid by the word.83  So 
while information was seen as the bread of the newspaper, KP remained on 
starvation rations.84  Indeed, given continued problems with the papers 
77 Afanasev, Sostoianie, 10; Blatin, Proizvodstvennaia, 13. 
78 Vstrecha so snezhnym chelovekom, KP 14/1/58, 4; B. Porshnev, Legendy? No, mozhet, oni 
dostoverny KP 11/7/58, 3. 
79 Prezidium AN SSSR: Postanovlenie O resultatakh raboty Komissii po izucheniiu voprosa o 
snezhnom cheloveke 23/1/59, RGANI, f.5, op.34, d.53, ll.78, 79-94. 
80 6/5/57, d.193, ll.21-22; 12/3/56, d.170, l.101. 
81 Party Meeting, 13/12/61, d.35, l.167. 
82 18/6/56, d.173, ll.65-66; 2/6/58, d.227, l.28; Kuznetsov, 20-21. Research at Trud in the late 
1960s showed that the average length of an information piece was 21 lines, while the average 
length of a sketch was 330. Iurii Skvortsov, Trud glazami chitatelia Zhurnalist 7 (1968), 47. 
83 30/5/55, d.129, ll.77-78; 16/11/67, d.458, l.174. 
84 6/1/58, d.223, l.74. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 117 
sobkor network, continued inadequacies at TASS, and the regimes desire to 
control information, it is difficult to disagree with Adzhubeis comment to his KP 
colleagues that the Soviet press had not yet found a place for information.85 
 But it could be argued that the failure to provide adequate news 
coverage was as much cultural as it was institutional.  It is telling that, by and 
large, news [] was not an established part of the journalistic lexicon 
under Khrushchev; instead, Komsomolskaia pravda had a Department of 
Information.86  One book on American newspapers considered American yellow 
journalisms concept of news to be so alien that he refused to dignify it with the 
term novosti, instead translating it with the foreign-sounding .87  Even 
when journalists returned from the apparently fraternal states such as Poland 
and praised their provision of information, there remained unease over how 
this led to information that was not particularly correct and led to 
demagoguery.88     
 Could news ever be made Soviet when there existed a reflex association 
of information with sensationalism?  M. Baisman, a journalist from Estonia, 
argued that data, concrete circumstances, and the broadcasting of information 
were essential qualities but nevertheless maintained that an Izvestiia story on a 
kidnapping should not have been published, since it was an out-of-the-ordinary 
event under the conditions of Soviet reality.89  At KP even senior journalists at 
the paper who accepted the need for improved information nevertheless 
expressed unease at the implications.  Speaking in 1961, Shatunovskii told 
colleagues at a Party-Komsomol meeting that: At times you can pick up the 
paper and not know what happened yesterday, what was the main, stirring 
event of yesterday that the country lived through.  Telling is the lack, not just of 
trivial information, but, in the main, of vivid, indicative facts from our life.90  
Taken in isolation, it might seem that Shatunovskii was endorsing an 
85 12/1/59, d.242, l.73. 
86 For this reason, the renaming of Sovinformbiuro as News (APN: Agentstvo pechati Novosti) 
in 1961 can be seen as a statement of intent (Kruglak, pp.219-220). 
87 Nikolai Zhiveinov, Kapitalisticheskaia pressa SShA (Moscow: Gospolitizdat, 1956). 
88 27/8/56, d.155, ll.140, 158. The fact that the visit was in 1956, sandwiched between the 
Poznan crisis and the unrest of October, may have something to do with these conclusions. 
89 Baisman, 11-12. 
90 Party-Komsomol Meeting. 13/12/61, d.35, l.163. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 118 
information-led newspaper  and in some ways, he was.  Yet his subsequent 
criticism of colleagues for what he regarded as a search for the sensational 
illustrates his awkwardness at the implications of such a development.  
Comrades are simply delighted when they find out that someone somewhere 
hanged themselves, or some other fearful thing, charged Shatunovskii, adding 
in some of our journalists has appeared a tendency to search for rotten facts 
[  ], for defects [ ].  The newspaper must 
observe the proportion of good and bad that one meets with in life.  The 
attraction to defective facts [ ] violates this proportion, 
creates one-sidedness [], and a grey, lacklustre background the 
newspaper, against which it is difficult for flowers to bloom [ 
 ].91 
What was at stake was not simply the threat of deviation from the typical 
ideological parameters of the Soviet newspaper, but its very identity.  Deputy 
Editor Boris Pankin displayed a similar vacillation between recognition of the 
need for better information:  
We need different material.  Which?  If we take the news of the bourgeois press, 
there they have murders, accidents, and disasters.  We are deliberately 
renouncing that.  We are against bad [] sensationalism, but also against 
dry material.  We need to find a third line.92 
Journalists recognised the need for information, but only seemed able to define 
its meaning apophatically.  Thus, journalists were torn between their desire to 
maintain the traditionally understood boundaries between positive and 
negative while, at the same time, making information more interesting for 
readers.  Was there a third line? 
2.2 Adzhubeis Dialectics: Den mira 
For Aleksei Adzhubei, it was possible to plot a course between the newspaper as 
chronicle of positive news and the press as a modern collection of interesting 
information.  An enthusiastic moderniser and passionate believer in Soviet 
superiority, Adzhubei carried these beliefs into his views on information: he 
91 Ibid., ll.163-164. 
92 Ibid., l.63. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 119 
was keen to improve the quality of information in the paper, and to update 
forms of news gathering, sometimes borrowing from the West to do it, but he 
also believed that information needed to be partial to be truly Soviet.93  
Indicative of this attempt to plot a course between two different forms of 
information was Adzhubeis grandiose attempt to remake one of the last 
projects to be initiated by Maksim Gorkii before his death, Den mira [Day of the 
World].  The first edition in 1937 aimed to make sense of the world at that time, 
and analyse the Soviet Unions place in it through the prism of a single day, 
September 27, 1935.94  Similarly, its 1961 successor aimed to provide a multi-
coloured panorama of the world, and give an account of the progress the Soviet 
Union had made in the quarter of a century since the first edition.95  The project 
involved all Soviet media outlets in contributing stories on the events of 
September 27, 1960, from personal milestones, such as the birth of a child, to 
national triumphs, such as a new landmark in the construction of a factory  
first of all for publication on September 28, 1960, and later for what would 
become a glossy 800-page book.96  Den mira would describe the state of the 
world, country by country, by reprinting stories from the world press on the 
events of September 28, as well stories Soviet foreign correspondents.  Beset by 
delays over the lavish nature of the production (the book had to be printed in 
Austria because its complexity was too much for Soviet printing technology to 
cope with), the book made its untimely appearance in late 1961  albeit in an 
edition of only 700 copies.97 
The book  and the initiative as a whole  could easily be dismissed as a 
vanity project.  Adzhubei was by this time the most powerful figure in Soviet 
journalism, whose connections to Khrushchev (he was married to Khrushchevs 
daughter, Rada) helped him to get almost any project off the ground  despite 
93 William J. Eaton, Red Editor: Aleksei Adzhubei Nieman Reports 16/2 (June 1963), 12. 
94 Maksim Gorkii, Mikhail Koltsov, Den mira (Moscow: Zhurnalno-gazetnoe obedinenie, 1937) 
95 O nashei knige in Den mira (DM), ed. by Aleksei Adzhubei (Moscow: Izvestiia, 1961), p.796. 
96 See KP 28/9/60, 4; Vozmuzhali serdtsa, okrepli ruki, Izvestiia 26/9/60, 3 and 27/9/60, 1-3. 
97 Iurii Filonovich, Istoriia odnoi knigi in Soldaty Slova: Rasskazyvaiut veterany sovetskoi 
zhurnalistiki. Tom 1. ed. by A. A. Mandrugin and V. A. Miakushkov (Moscow: Politizdat, 1976), 
pp.314316. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 120 
the frequent opposition of Mikhail Suslov.98  A glossy 800-page colour book in 
an edition of only 700 copies would surely have been a non-starter without his 
backing.  Yet the book itself demands that we read it as something other than 
mere hubris.  As Thomas C. Wolfe has argued, Den mira was a statement of what 
Soviet journalism could and should be as it entered a critical stage in its 
development.99  Indeed, the book presents us with the Adzhubei vision writ 
large.  It was entertaining and dynamic, both in terms of visual and textual 
content, and was as little scared of sensationalism (witness how it pruriently 
borrowed from the Western press in the name of exposing its foibles) as it was 
of blowing its own trumpet.   
These dualities were carried over into the books vision of time.100  The 
book put forward what Stephen Hanson has called a charismatic vision of 
Soviet time, which saw the successes of the present as a sign of the future, just 
as the special editions had done in 1956.101  However, it also emphasised what 
Hanson calls a rational conception of time as the progression of the hours and 
minutes on the clock face: life, like the sun in a drop of dew, is reflected in lived 
twenty-four hour periods with a whole mass of events, actions and the hubbub 
of humanity [ ].102  The job of the journalist was to take 
readers by the hand and lead them through the hubbub of an information-
saturated world:  
The world is in constant motion.  Time flows from the future to the past, it is 
eternally new, and can never happen twice, just as one cannot step into the same 
river twice...  But each fact and each event, as if paused for a moment in the 
readers field of vision, acquires a special significance and suggests to them: look, 
think  we are just one link in a chain, judge the previous one, search for the next 
one.103 
98 T.Volkova, A.I. Adzhubei  retaktor i publitsist Unpublished PhD Dissertation. MGU, 2010, 
pp.354-355.  On the antipathy between Adzhubei and Suslov, see Rada Adzhubei, Reshaiushchii 
shag byl sdelan in Press v obshchestve, p.30. 
99 Thomas C. Wolfe, Governing Soviet Journalism: The Press and the Soviet Person after Stalin 
(Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2005), pp.49-67 [49]. 
100 Ibid., p.52. 
101 Stephen E. Hanson, Time and Revolution: Marxism and the Design of Soviet Institutions (Chapel 
Hill, NC; London: North Carolina University Press, 1997), pp.174-177. 
102 Nikolai Gribachev, Novyi oblik planety DM, p.12. 
103 Ibid. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 121 
Den mira therefore provided a description of the journalist as an essential guide 
to a world in constant Heraclitan flux.  And they were able to do so, the book 
suggested, because of the growing technical know-how of the Soviet media.  Of 
particular pride was its ability to cover Khrushchevs speech to the UN, which 
provided proof of the globetrotting status of the Soviet journalist.104  Indeed, 
Soviet media figures were becoming more and more confident about their 
abilities to meet the requirements of modern mass communications.  In former 
TASS Chief Nikolai Palgunovs memoir, Thirty Years, the author recalled a 
meeting with an American newspaper tycoon, who bragged about the technical 
abilities of US media: 
[Tycoon:] Do you have any radio stations? 
[Palgunov:] Yes, of course 
How many? One? Two? 
Significantly more 
But how many? Five? Ten? 
TASS possesses more than twenty-five radio stations 
Oh, thats worthy of attention. But why do you have so many radio stations? 
TASS has more than four thousand clients 
You must be richer than me 
You want to say that TASS is richer than you?  It probably is105 
And so the conversation continued, through teletypes, telephotos, cables, and 
other technologies, until his interlocutor sloped away despondently.  The 
question of technology was an important one for Soviet media figures who 
sought to eulogise their own prowess in instantly transmitting world events to 
the people, and paint a vivid picture of a media that was able to compete with 
the rest of the world in conditions of Cold War technological rivalry. 
 But Den mira did more than simply claim that Soviet journalists were 
able to compete with the West: it placed the Soviet Union at the centre of the 
media universe.  As Thomas Wolfe has pointed out, the book described a clear 
spatial hierarchy in terms of politics, with Soviet life shining the brightest; the 
satellite states following its example; Latin America, Africa and Asia throwing 
104 Iurii Filonovich, U samogo istoka DM, pp.788-790; Viacheslav Chernyshev, Planeta u nas 
doma DM, pp.790-791.  This visit to the UN was the occasion for Khrushchevs alleged shoe-
banging protest. 
105 N.G. Palgunov, Tridtsat' let: Vospominaniia zhurnalista i diplomata (Moscow: Izdatel'stvo 
Politicheskoi Literatury, 1964), pp.294-295. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 122 
off the chains of oppression; and Western Europe and the United States in 
terminal decline.106  This spatial hierarchy extended to the books interpretation 
of journalism.  While the Soviet Union, as described by its journalists was 
moving towards Communism, the capitalist press showed how the bourgeois 
world was drowning in its own vulgarity: 
Perhaps in reading some of the material from the bourgeois press such as, for 
example, a chronicle of high society, marriage announcements, horoscopes, 
clearly fraudulent advertisements, etc. a question might form in the mind of 
Soviet readers with their natural seriousness, and deferential relationship to the 
press: is it worth putting in the book such trifling rubbish?  In our opinion, it is.  
These things are an unavoidable component of any bourgeois newspaper; by 
using them, even minimally, the book gives the reader an idea of the character 
and outlook of that press.107 
The book was to ultimately stand as proof of the superiority of Soviet 
journalism over its bourgeois counterpart, to capture it at the moment of its 
inevitable triumph.  One section claimed that the book exposes the nature and 
character of the press of two opposing social systems: the new, victoriously 
strengthening socialist system, and the old capitalist system, categorically 
doomed by history itself.108  Given these bold assertions, it is fitting that the 
book was dedicated to the moment in Soviet history at which romantic hopes 
would be tested against unyielding reality: the Twenty-Second Party Congress, 
and Khrushchevs promise that Communism would be built by 1980.109  Den 
mira therefore looked to the past and future, and provided an image of an 
increasingly self-confident media. 
Den mira stood at the crossroads of two different visions of Soviet news.  On the 
surface, it remained faithful to Gorkiis model of journalism, giving a picture of 
relentless positivity, of achievement unconstrained, and suggesting 
Communisms inevitable triumph.  But it also presented a normative picture of 
journalism throughout the world which suggested similarities, not differences.  
106 Wolfe, pp.61-67.  On the spatio-temporal co-ordinates of Soviet news, see Christine Evans, A 
Panorama of Time: The Chronotopics of Programma Vremia Ab Imperio 2 (2010), 121-146. 
107 O nashei knige DM, p.796. 
108 Ibid. 
109 DM, p.1. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 123 
It suggested that there existed a worldwide community of journalists 
performing their duty of collecting facts and reporting on their respective 
societies.  Indeed, the generally negative picture that the book painted of many 
countries would not have been possible without the work of non-Soviet 
journalists, whose stories were taken as objective and honest.  Moreover, by 
focusing intensely on the Day of the World as the horizon of journalistic 
activity, the project described the proper object of reporters attentions in a 
manner that was strikingly similar to their ideological opponents.  The intense 
focus on the day as a twenty-four hour news cycle, and the whole world as the 
stage upon which that news unfolded, implied that the true job of Soviet 
journalists was to report back on the world around them in a timely fashion.  In 
this regard, Den mira dialectically mediated between the old and new in Soviet 
media practices, in much the same way as a news story was supposed to 
reconcile past and future.   
 Den mira was an ideal, however.  Its picture of September 27, 1960 was 
the end product of dozens of meetings and only saw the light of day almost a 
year after the events.  But in the real world, events were unpredictable, and the 
vagaries of the news cycle gave journalists little time to produce a workable 
picture of the world.  In the real world, journalists still had to keep within the 
restrictive boundaries of the typical.  In the real world, western news sources 
were broadcasting their image of the world to Soviet citizens within minutes, 
while Soviet journalists response had to wait for Glavlit approval, not for 
minutes, not for hours, but sometimes for weeks.110  In this sense, the relation of 
Den mira to everyday journalistic practice was somewhat like the relationship 
of a Soviet news story to everyday life under Khrushchev: it bore some 
relationship to everyday reality, but omitted many of the difficulties that were at 
its heart.  It is for this reason that journalists returned to the question of news 
with renewed force after Khrushchevs ouster in October 1964. 
110 Kristin Roth-Ey, Moscow Prime Time: How the Soviet Union Built the Media Empire that Lost 
the Cultural Cold War (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2011), p.162; Michael Nelson, War of 
the Black Heavens: The Battles of Western Broadcasting in the Cold War (Syracuse, NY: Syracuse 
University Press, 1997), p.119. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 124 
3.1 Trespassers welcome? 
In June 1963, the Soviet leadership took a decision that was to have profound 
consequences on the practice of Soviet news and, consequently, on the way the 
country was ruled.  The reasons for the termination of jamming are unclear, but 
it seems that there were both diplomatic and pragmatic reasons for the policy.  
On the diplomatic side, the Soviet authorities used the possibility of ceasing 
jamming as an incentive for foreign broadcasters to tone down their broadcasts, 
and as a means for leaking to the Soviet public news that they could not 
broadcast themselves, but wanted people to hear through selective breaks in 
the jamming signal.111  From the pragmatic point of view, it was increasingly 
recognised that jamming of signals was not only expensive and unreliable (by 
1958, expenditure on jamming exceeded that spent on domestic and foreign 
radio put together), but also a blunt instrument to tackle what was also a 
problem with Soviet media itself: its lack of speed.112  Foreign radio presented 
its rival with a challenge: outlets like Voice of America proved themselves to be 
simply faster in getting their bulletins out and forced Soviet media to adapt. 
 The increase in listeners to the voices was made possible by two 
parallel tendencies. A lack of consistency between the economic requirements 
of industrial planners and the Partys overriding ideological objectives meant 
that profitable shortwave radios were produced in increasing numbers, despite 
the fact that only Western stations broadcast on shortwave frequencies.113  At 
the same time, Soviet citizens  and especially young people who had grown up 
without trepidation of Stalinist reprisal  no longer saw anything wrong with 
listening to Western stations.114  The abandonment of jamming caused 
confusion, with some Party members taking the Partys decision as proof that 
foreign radio listening was now ideologically acceptable  despite attacks in the 
111 Maury Lisann, Broadcasting to the Soviet Union: International Politics and Radio (New York: 
Praeger, 1975), pp.8-19; Nelson, pp.93-94. 
112 Roth-Ey, pp.131-132; See also the spravka from the Committee for State Security: On the 
State of Jamming Anti-Soviet Radio Programs of Foreign Radio Stations, 19/5/59 in 
Johnson/Parta, pp.533-536. 
113 Roth-Ey, p.145. 
114 Donald J. Raleigh, Soviet Baby Boomers: An Oral History of Russia's Cold War Generation 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012), pp.146-150. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 125 
Soviet press.115  Khrushchev was unconcerned, however, telling his Presidium 
colleagues just before the adoption of the policy: There will be a few listeners  
let them listen.116  However, research undertaken after his ouster suggests that 
he was wrong to be so sanguine: two years after his ouster it was revealed that 
in Lithuania a third of students were listening to foreign radio, while up to 
seventy per cent of the Estonian population were watching Finnish television.117   
 The 1963 policy capped a longer-term process through which print 
journalism lost its pre-eminent role in delivering information.  Resolutions of 
1960 and 1962 had already established a clear hierarchy of news provision, 
placing radio in first place in the queue for TASS reports, and only then followed 
by the press.118  Audiences were getting their information elsewhere: according 
to a survey conducted in 1963, eighty per cent of individuals now got their news 
primarily from the radio.119  This presented a dilemma for print journalists, for 
if timeliness was now to be the overriding value of a news story, then broadcast 
journalism would always have the edge. This led print news in two, somewhat 
contradictory, directions.  On the one hand, there was thought to be a need for 
print news to differentiate itself by moving towards commentary over the 
reporting of mere facts.  In an interview, the author and editor of Iunost, 
Valentin Kataev, spoke of the need for the press to publish more information 
that could stand up to competition with the information services of radio 
stations, which there and then broadcast fresh news which has just been 
received and demanded more of an appeal to the mind [lit.   
] in print news.120  The increasingly prominent role of the eye-witness 
115 Lisann, p.24. 
116 Zasedaniia Prezidiuma TsK KPSS (25/4/63) in Presidium TsK KPSS. Tom 1: Chernovye 
protokolnye zapisi zasedanii. Stenogrammy, ed. by A.A. Fursenko et al. (Moscow: Rosspen, 2004), 
p.715.  See also Lisann, pp.25-26. 
117 Roth-Ey, p.143. 
118 Ibid., pp.159-60.  That said, radio remained wedded to the rhythms of the press, see the 
Central Committee Secretariat Decree Measures to Vigorously Counteract Hostile Radio 
Propaganda, 21/7/60 in Johnson/Parta, p.543, which mandated the creation of a 25-minute 
news programme to be broadcast hourly, but which demands that the content should be news 
commentary and a digest of the evening edition of Izvestiia. 
119 Adzhubei, Boevoe, 6.  These findings are borne out by surveys of migr sources, which 
found a preference for radio over the press.  Rosemarie Straussnigg Rogers, The Soviet 
Audience: How it Uses the Mass Media. Unpublished PhD Dissertation. MIT, 1967, pp.131-140. 
120 S. Grigor'ev, Dalekoe, blizkoe: Rasskazyvaet Valentin Kataev, SP 3 (1964), 34.  
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 126 
reporter, exemplified by writers like Vasilli Peskov, and the figure of the 
political reviewer who would provide an authoritative spin on current events 
can be seen as attempts to combine the need for fresh, new, information and the 
need for analysis. 
But it was most of all the form of radio news that presented a challenge, 
and this pulled print news in a different direction.  It had long been recognised 
that the rapidity of foreign news presented a challenge to Soviet practices.  As 
early as 1960, an Agitprop report admitted that the brevity and speed of 
American news reporting presented a powerful alternative to domestic news.121  
The regimes response to this was to privilege stations like the international 
flagship Radio Moscow and, in 1964, to create a new news source: Maiak, which 
placed news at the centre of their operations, broadcasting five minutes of news, 
which largely favoured new facts over commentary, followed by twenty-five 
minutes of music.122   
The opening of Maiak and rivalry from the west had important 
consequences for the practice of Soviet news reporting.  At a meeting of the 
Union of Journalists in 1964, the ideological challenges of western news were a 
central theme.  Genrikas Zimanas, editor of the Latvian newspaper Tiesa, argued 
that, the greater flexibility of western news would require the removal of the 
taboo over information in the press, for there are things that become known 
sooner or later and we need to say something about it.  The failure to do so, he 
argued, was driving audiences into the arms of foreign radio, after which stories 
became far more difficult to rebut.123  Many others at the meeting echoed his 
thoughts.  Khrushchevs departure from the scene in October 1964 does not 
appear to have made a profound difference to the processes opened up by the 
abandonment of jamming the year before.  Indeed, from 1965 onwards, the end 
121 Weiner, 310. 
122 Maiaks broadcasts were to contain timely information  on the most important events of 
economic, political, and cultural life in the USSR and in western countries .  See the Central 
Committee Resolution Ob uluchshenii informatsii po radio in KPSS o sredstvakh massovoi 
informatsii i propagandy. 2-e izd. (Moscow: Politizdat, 1987), pp.551-552.  For more on Maiak 
see Roth-Ey, pp.167-174. 
123 Stenogramma vsesoiuznogo tvorcheskogo soveshchaniia publitsistov. Tom II 4/6/64, GARF, 
f.10124, op.1, d.301, ll. 1920.  My thanks to Mary-Catherine French for helping me to locate 
this, and many other references from the Union of Journalists fond at GARF. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 127 
of jamming was confirmed, while a Kommunist editorial suggested that Soviet 
journalists were now in out-and-out competition with their western 
counterparts.124 
However, Soviet journalists were not able to enter into that competition 
on a level playing field.  While a number of articles spoke of the need for greater 
timeliness in news reporting, in 1965 an official in the Partys Ideological 
Department argued that the speed of news was not a technical, but a political 
question.  The task is not simply to be quick, but to be sure that information 
fulfils a determined educational function.125  In other words, Soviet journalists 
should be aware of other considerations apart from the need to compete with 
western news.  For this reason, Soviet media was slower out of the blocks than 
its rivals, the inevitable consequence of the regimes desire to get its version of 
events correct, over getting it out quickly.   
This gave rise to a chorus of voices arguing that Soviet media 
sluggishness was giving succour to the countrys enemies.  In 1966, the Deputy 
Editor-in-Chief of Maiak warned journalists at the Second Congress of 
Journalists: We cannot forget that the airwaves are open, not just for our radio 
broadcasts, but also for those of our ideological opponents  And if the 
broadcast of the Latest News is late with broadcasting news  then we not 
only lose radio listeners, but also cede ground to our ideological opponents.126  
Izvestiia editor Lev Tolkunov commented: Where we are silent, others speak; 
where we are late with our truthful words, the disinformation and lies of our 
enemies resound.  And it is far more difficult to change someones mind than it 
is to convince them in the first place.127   
An unsigned article printed in Zhurnalist in 1968 demanded that Soviet 
news reporters satisfy their readers inquisitiveness, no matter what the 
subject: 
124 See the unofficial announcement of the policy: Antisovietizm  odno iz glavnykh napravlenii 
v ideologii sovremennogo imperializma Kommunist 10 (1965), 64-77. 
125 Lisann, p.42. 
126 II sezd soiuza zhurnalistov SSSR. Stenograficheskii otchet 28/9/66, GARF, f.10124, op.1, 
d.301, l.218.  See also the comments of Dmitrii Goriunov, ll.49-51. 
127 Lev Tolkunov, Slovo est delo Zhurnalist 7 (1967), 5. See also Roth-Ey, pp.160-61; Bonch-
Bruevich, 100 stranits. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 128 
Reporters, more than anyone, must have a sense of their readers.  Is this or that 
fact of interest to them?  If it is, then the reporter does not have the right to pass 
it over, even if at first glance it seems insignificant.  There is no such thing as an 
information desert, and the readers will satisfy their curiosity somehow, but in 
that case news may come to them from dishonest sources.  It has been shown 
time and again that a lack of openness in the periodical press is one of the 
reasons for rumours and idle talk.128 
This advice, suggesting that reporters did not have the right to stay silent 
on matters of interest to readers suggests that the language of public service 
was becoming linked to greater provision of information, rather than the moral 
and ethical guidance that it had usually been associated with.  Indeed, news was 
understood as one of the ways to build a better, more progressive society.  As 
we see from the quotes above, information was frequently spoken of as the 
readers right, and as a civic necessity.  An article printed in 1968 claimed that 
by printing a column of information on political affairs, Taganrogskaia pravda 
had broken down the door from which a sign saying No trespassing had 
previously hung: 
But now, every time the editors of Taganrogskaia pravda print such a chronicle, it 
is as if they are appealing to the reader: No, trespassing is not forbidden in your 
town.  And we are not going to decide what you should know and what you 
should not; you have the right to know everything  to take everyday control over 
the work of people to whom you have entrusted your affairs.129 
Openness, comprehensive and prompt information, the article continued, is 
an indispensible condition for the further democratisation of the life of our 
society [ ].  Only a well-informed person, well-oriented in 
all problems, is capable of taking fruitfully playing a part and taking initiative in 
social matters.130  Here, news was seen as an inherent part of a flourishing civil 
society.   
 A reading of Sovetskaia pechat and Zhurnalist after Khrushchevs ouster 
illustrates the fact that journalists were increasingly integrating information 
into their understanding of quality journalism.  One might have expected Soviet 
128 Reporter, Zhurnalist 6 (1968), 6. 
129 Shirota informatsii - doverie chitatelei Zhurnalist 4 (1968), 4. 
130 Ibid.  See also Tolkunov, Slovo, 4. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 129 
journalists to condemn the intrusion of dishonest sources into the Soviet 
airwaves  and they regularly did.131  But, as Rilla Dean Mills has shown, there 
was also grudging praise.132  An article on the BBCs broadcasts to the USSR  
printed in the spirit of never losing contact with your opponent  was, despite 
criticism of the organisations propaganda, remarkably positive about its 
professionalism, its stature, and grudgingly admiring of the resourcefulness of 
the organisations methods.133  In the same publication, Grigorii Ratiani praised 
Le Monde for being a newspaper for the bourgeois who opposes Communism 
but does not want to deceive him/herself and demands that there be at least 
one press organ from which one can find out what is really happening in the 
world and in France.  Whether bourgeois or communist, [a] journalist, 
claimed Ratiani, must be a patriot of his/her newspaper.134   
 One article even quoted from a poem by Rudyard Kipling, written while 
he was working as a correspondent for a newspaper in colonial Lahore.  The 
articles author stated that, while he wholly and completely rejects and 
deplores the adventurism and brigandage of British Colonialism, he cannot 
but value the professional exactitude of Kiplings definition of the essence of the 
reporter: 
To be next to, to be at the epicentre of those events and concerns that your 
people and nation are living through  to share its bitter sorrow and heady 
successes is to live as a real reporter. then, when others have allowed 
themselves to fall asleep, he finds the strength to continue to work, in order to 
share the news and his thoughts on events with those who cannot be with him 
today, but who tomorrow have the right to know about events.135 
The reporter was an individual who contributed to the public good, granting the 
public their right to information in difficult  and sometimes dangerous  
circumstances.  It was not just KPs Vasilli Peskov who would seize on a UNESCO 
report that had recently been published that asserted that journalism was one 
of the worlds most dangerous occupations: But its unlikely that one of our 
131 For example, Sergei Goliakov, Zdes, u nas v Amerike Zhurnalist 7 (1968), 62-63. 
132 Mills, pp.105-109. 
133 Vladimir Osipov. Kliuchi Bi-Bi-Si. Zhurnalist 5 (1968), 5659. 
134 Anri Per [Henri Pierre], Le Monde Zhurnalist 3 (1968), 43.  See also G. Sagal, Samoe trudnoe 
 vodit peryshkom po bumage SP 10 (1966), 39-41. 
135 Pavel Barashev, Polstroki o reportazhe, Zhurnalist 12 (1967), 26, cited in Mills, pp.105-106. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 130 
brothers, learning of such a statistic, would decide to change profession.136  For 
all that it was condemned ideologically, the Western media world was painted 
as exciting, fast, and glamorous: Fleet Street is ceaseless telephone calls from 
New York, Moscow, Cape Town, Hong Kong  Fleet Street is the round-the-clock 
machine gun fire of hundreds of teletypes, it is the sound of a thousand 
typewriters.137  Such articles suggested that journalism was a special calling, 
which transcend[ed] even national and ideological lines and in some ways 
suggested a trans-national community of journalists, united by their 
commitment to news.138  By connecting the formerly alien role of the reporter 
with a dangerous, fast-paced, and internationally connected profession, as well 
as a potentially socially progressive one, these articles suggested that the 
reporter had gained a certain stature within a Soviet journalistic milieu that had 
initially rejected it. 
At Komsomolskaia pravda, changes in attitudes to information after 
Khrushchevs ouster were instantly visible to readers.  In 1965, a large portion 
of its front page was given over to a new daily section entitled simply Novosti, 
featuring short notices from the USSR and the world.  The section was produced 
by the newly renamed Department of News.  These changes were the result of 
a number of wide-ranging discussions over the role of news at the paper.  A 
number of creative-production meetings discussed the KPs future direction, 
including questions of style, creativity  and, most frequently, information.  
These meetings were frequently the cause of heated debates amongst staff at 
the paper, which showed that the prestige of being part of a world community 
of reporters might not quite have displaced more commentary-based 
understandings of news.   
 At a creative meeting in 1966, Ervant Grigoriants, who worked for the 
papers Institute of Public Opinion (see Chapter 4), ruffled feathers by claiming 
that journalists had violated the nature of the fact in trying to turn facts inside 
136 Vasilli Peskov, Shelest stranits, kak shelest znamen Zhurnalist 10 (1967), 7 (emphasis 
added). See also Barashev, Polstroki. 
137 Lev Nosov. Ulitsa novostei. Zhurnalist 1 (1968), 42. 
138 Mills, p.109. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 131 
out [] depending on [their] conceptual schemata 
[ ].  He claimed that the facts printed by the newspaper 
should be free of gibberish [  ] which interferes with 
perception [].139  Instead, he spoke in favour of the American 
models of information, speaking knowledgeably about the inverted pyramid, 
the lead and other imported news concepts.  
 Unsurprisingly, many at the paper resisted Grigoriants conclusions, 
which seemed to challenge the interpretative foundations upon which Soviet 
news was based.  According to the Head of the Department of Sport and Military 
Education, Valentin Liashchenko, his ideas would mean that: we dont need the 
sketch as an artistic whole, we dont need subtext.  Liashchenko added: I 
would support his program if our newspaper was like a Western information 
bulletin.  Happily, our press is not going down that path: we have both the fact 
and the interpretation of the fact, and emotion, and intellectualism.140  Another 
correspondent, a certain Privanov, argued that Grigoriants programme was 
unsuitable for a Soviet press that was, in comparison to the American press, 
significant for its facts and thoughts, and not so lightweight.141  Marina 
Cherednichenko, meanwhile, claimed bluntly that Grigoriants wanted to 
eradicate intellectualism.142   
 Grigoriants claimed his words had been misinterpreted, agreeing that 
the Soviet newspaper was different to its American cousin, but argued we still 
need to learn  both from our friends and even from our enemies.  The delivery 
is not the goal, but the means for achieving the goal.143  But to learn from ones 
enemies was to completely change the nature of the Soviet newspaper  and its 
intellectual status.  By sidelining interpretation in favour of raw facts, 
Grigoriants had threatened Soviet journalists claims to embody a superior form 
of knowledge.  Interpretation of facts [ ] was not merely a 
restrictive practice, but also a means for maintaining the claims of the Soviet 
139 18/10/66, d.438, l.24.  Similar criticisms continued to be made in later years: Reporter, 6. 
140 Ibid., ll.35-36. 
141 Ibid., l.40.  See also ll.36-37, l.42. 
142 Ibid., l.42. 
143 Ibid., l.44. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 132 
journalist to be part of what Benjamin Tromley has called the cultured 
intelligentsia against anti-intellectual and foreign conceptions of news.144 
 One anecdote is illustrative.  In the late-1960s, a student in MGUs 
journalism factory was given a brochure by his tutor, an unnamed 
Komsomolskaia pravda journalist.  It had been secretly translated from a foreign 
news agency and the student, Leonid Skakunov, was particularly struck by this 
wonderful textbook, written not in a scientific-sounding fashion, but in normal 
language with examples.145  The book contained valuable information on craft 
of writing a news story and, for a class assignment, Skakunov illustrated how 
Soviet journalists were less interested in satisfying the readers demand for a 
clear description of events, and more in displaying how beautifully [they were] 
able to write.  Unfortunately for Skakunov, he had not done what was asked of 
him, which was to use the brochure to write a critique of the bourgeois news 
story, which was not needed in Soviet journalism.  As a result he was awarded 
a fail.  Only when fellow students explained that this would mean the loss of his 
stipend, did the tutor agree to grant him a pass.146 
 Two competing conceptions of the journalists social role were in 
conflict.  Many at KP retained the idea that a reporter should analyse reality and 
give commentary.  For them, the true task of the journalist was to search out the 
essence of Soviet everyday life and transmit that reality to readers: this vision of 
the world would be their service to the public.  For others, like Grigoriants, the 
reporters mission was also to serve the public  only in this case, timely and 
informative factual material was considered to be of more importance than 
authoritative commentary.  It is difficult to discern the exact balance of opinions 
about news within the redaktsiia.  It should be pointed out, for example, that 
even Grigoriants critics generally agreed that news was a priority  indeed, the 
paper was devoting far more attention, and far more column space to the 
question of news than ever before.  Yet, in the absence of an alternative vision of 
Soviet news, the majority of the information that was printed cleaved to the 
144 Tromley, Re-Imagining, pp.57-63. 
145 Leonid Skakunov, Zhurfak 65-70 (Vladimir, 1999), p.39. 
146 Ibid., pp.39-40. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 133 
slow and cautious analytical model of the press that had previously existed, 
showing that there were limits to how far Western influence and its reflected 
prestige could extend. 
3.2 Tashkent 1966 
On 25 April, 1966, an earthquake measuring 7.5 on the Richter Scale struck 
Tashkent, killing ten people, injuring 1000 and, according to official statistics, 
leaving 300,000 homeless.147  The quake and its aftershocks eventually caused 
the slow demise of the citys buildings and infrastructure, leading to the 
spread of infectious diseases due to inadequate sanitary conditions in stifling 
conditions.148  The Soviet medias response to the tragedy provides an 
interesting example of the possibilities and the limits of Soviet news in the early 
years of the Brezhnev era.  While it is often asserted that the Soviet press did 
not cover accidents and disasters, this is a misapprehension.149  Soviet coverage 
of disasters was typically directed from above, and, by comparison with 
Western media, received less column space, while its articles sought to reassure 
readers and co-ordinate relief efforts, rather than dwelling on negative images 
of devastation.  All the same, coverage was certainly not absent: an earthquake 
in Armenia in 1931 was a fixture in the paper for almost two weeks following 
the tragedy, as was the earthquake in Ashgabat, Turkmenistan in 1948.150 
 Nevertheless, such coverage was increasingly felt to be inadequate.  At a 
1964 meeting of Soviet publicists at the Union of Journalists, Dmitrii Priliuk 
spoke of the presss failure to satisfy reader curiosity by dealing with disasters: 
Something unpleasant happens; something sad but important.  Readers are 
concerned about it; they listen to the radio, search for a message in the paper.  
147 Paul Stronski, Tashkent: Forging a Soviet City, 1930-1966 (Pittsburgh, PA: Pittsburgh 
University Press, 2010), p.252. 
148 Ibid., pp.252-253. 
149 John Murray, The Russian Press from Brezhnev to Yeltsin: Behind the Paper Curtain (Aldershot: 
Edward Elgar, 1994), pp.31-32; Frank Ellis. Review of Thomas C. Wolfe, 'Governing Soviet 
Journalism' Slavonic and East European Review 85/1 (2007), 166. 
150 See KP, 5-13/4/31, all p.4; Pravda, 7-13/4/48. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 134 
In vain. shamefully we stay silent.151  Priliuk spoke of the fact that the press 
had not covered a fire in the public library in Kiev for several days, leading to 
philistine rumours.  He concluded:  
The paper wrote about a tragedy in a stadium in Peru, but on the misfortune of 
their own city, nothing  What else remained for the curious?  Nothing other 
than to tune their radios to the BBC or the Voice of America.  The question is: 
who benefits from our embarrassment?152 
Estonian radio had already pioneered the clever ruse of ensuring that their 
news broadcasts always contained details of accidents and disasters, ostensibly 
to make a point about safety, but also to gain listeners trust.153   
 Soviet media as a whole was not so flexible, as coverage of the Tashkent 
earthquake was to illustrate.  Early reports, while noting the destruction of 
buildings and casualties, claimed that Tashkent was living a normal, measured 
life where, as always, the streets were lively.154  Although a small photograph 
was printed on the front page, a measure of the papers priorities can be 
garnered from the far greater amount of space devoted to the story of a female 
tractor drivers experiences at the Twenty-Third Party Congress: Traktoristka? 
Da  This low-key coverage continued over the days that followed: a report 
notified readers that Brezhnev and Kosygin had arrived in Tashkent; another 
report informed them of their departure.155  Nothing in the early coverage of the 
disaster marked any sort of change from the way such disasters had been 
reported in the past  in fact, the Ashgabat earthquake of 1948 actually received 
significant more publicity than Tashkent.   
 Indeed, it was radio, not the press, that broke the veil of silence, 
illustrating the new informational hierarchy in the Soviet media.  The exact 
reasons for the change in approach are not clear.  An article in Sovetskaia 
pechat suggested that Brezhnev himself stepped in to demand full, prompt, 
151 Stenogramma Vsesoiuznogo tvorcheskogo soveshchaniia publitsistov. Tom 1 3/6/64, GARF, 
f.10124, op.1, d.242, l.24. 
152 Ibid. 
153 Lisann, pp.28-29. 
154 Zemletriasenie v Tashkente KP 27/4/66, 2. 
155 Zemletriasenie v Tashkente. L.I. Brezhnev i A.I. Kozygin v Tashkente KP 27/4/66, 1; Otezd 
L.I. Brezhnev i A.I. Kosygin iz Tashkenta KP 29/4/66, 1. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 135 
and  sincere information.156  This would not have been out of character: the 
same month he argued on Soviet radio that the supply of fuller information to 
the people about what is occurring inside the country and in the international 
arena was one of the medias key unresolved tasks.157  A number of 
newspapers, including Pravda, Izvestiia, Selskaia zhizn, Ekonomicheskaia gazeta 
and Literaturnaia gazeta, sent correspondents to cover the disaster; KP 
dispatched Vasilli Peskov, whose reporting on Gagarin had won him a Lenin 
Prize and made him a household name.  
Press coverage of the earthquake fitted neatly into a wider propaganda 
campaign which attempted to create a new myth of the unified effort of the 
Soviet people to raise the Uzbek capital from the rubble as fast as possible.158  
Peskovs article stated that it was the earthen, one-storied Tashkent that 
suffered, on the whole; the new, multi-storied Tashkent did not suffer at all and 
expressed faith that the city would arise from the ruins: Our main duty is to 
construct a new Tashkent.  This city which has become known to the world 
must rise up, pretty and strong.159  The articles by Peskov and Pravdas Nikolai 
Gribachev (the latter far more explicitly) formed part of a narrative which 
ultimately justified the homogenisation of the Silk Road city of Tashkent into an 
identikit Soviet city.160   
 These articles also brought to the fore the notion of the journalist as 
eyewitness.  Peskov set himself the task of find[ing] out how it was and, by 
experiencing the aftershocks, was able to say to readers I can tell you myself 
how it was 161  Peskov described for readers the ruined buildings, the fight to 
attend to the injured, and carried interviews with a number of inhabitants of the 
city.  In this sense, Peskov and Gribachevs articles placed them in the category 
of what Graldine Muhlmann has called the witness-ambassador, a reporter 
who seeks to confront the public with a test which first divides, but ultimately 
156 Lisann, p.52.  Further research is needed to ascertain the role of Western broadcasting in the 
regimes decision. 
157 Quoted in Lisann, p.64. 
158 Stronski, p.255. 
159 V. Peskov, Drama i podviga Tashkenta KP 15/5/66, 4. 
160 Stronski, Ch. 9. 
161 Peskov, 4. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 136 
brings together the social body at a higher level.162  Both articles began by 
asserting the terrible suffering of the people of Tashkent, and ended by 
asserting the eternal brotherhood of the Soviet people, and the values of the 
system under which they lived.  As Gribachev wrote: 
Never has a single bourgeois state in such circumstances done anything similar, 
nor could it  Not the pitiful crumbs of the philanthropic rich and senile 
hypocrites, but a first-class concern of the state  such is the social and socialist 
meaning of these measures.163 
The regimes response to the quake had, in both authors eyes, proved its 
enduring humanity and flexibility.  For Gribachev, even Soviet bureaucracy 
could be turned into a unifying principle: 
Theres no point in hiding the fact that we sometimes rather passionately abuse 
the bureaucratic thorns in our institutions  real or apparent.  But in these days, 
even to our own amazement  we should have known  that one can see with 
ones own eyes the organisational complexity and flexibility of our society, the 
whole extraordinarily fast-acting and reliable mechanism of its self-management.  
And there arises a respect towards it, as a powerful and wise power, capable of 
opposing terrible experiences, defending the human against them.  And, in a 
special way, not dogmatically, but through direct perception, one understands 
what is meant by Soviet collectivism, and the community of interests and fates.164 
Here, Gribachev brought the public together through a social common-place 
(disappointment with Soviet bureaucracy) which was then sublated into a 
celebration of the political order.  Previous reporting on disasters, which was 
constrained by the straightjacket of bureaucratic formulae, was unable to do 
anything similar, and thus the warmth and humanity of both Peskov and 
Gribachevs articles seemed to signal the dawn of a new kind of Soviet reporting. 
An article in Sovetskaia pechat written by Iurii Kruzhilin, the Head of the 
Department of Information at the Russian-language Uzbek newspaper Pravda 
vostoka, interpreted the leeway granted to journalists as a step forward for 
Soviet journalism.  The article described the publishing of information in the 
days following the quake as a battle against inertia: 
162 Graldine Muhlmann, A Political History of Journalism. Trans. Jean Birrell (Cambridge: Polity 
Press, 2008), pp.61-111. 
163 Nikolai Gribachev, Tashkent v mae Pravda 15/5/66, 3. 
164 Ibid. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 137 
We needed to write something for the edition  
And then the correspondent of a Moscow newspaper appeared: Im not going to 
deliver anything.  And Id advise you not to.  Theres no need to make an 
unhealthy sensation out of the earthquake. 
Then came a correspondent from an agency: What?  Write about it?  Tomorrow 
everybody abroad would reprint it.165 
Here, we see familiar fears on display: that reporting on disasters would inflame 
the public mood unnecessarily and provide counter-propaganda for the West.  
Thus, Kruzhilin concluded that his experiences in Tashkent illustrated how 
Soviet media continued to suffer from "information inertia", adding that [t]o 
some it still seems that an earthquake can happen anywhere, just not here.  He 
argued that the fear of stir[ring] up terror held by some journalists really just 
showed a lack of trust in readers.166 
 In Kruzhilins article, coverage of the earthquake in Tashkent was proof 
of journalists brave service to the public: journalists in Tashkent were among 
the first to enter the battle with the elements and on the alert [].167  
Kruzhilin wrote: What the reader is worried about today defines the direction 
of journalists efforts, adding that the journalists had asked themselves [w]hat 
help can we offer to the population?  The city is shaking all the time, and people, 
having lost their homes, want to know what will happen.  Right now information 
for them is as important as bread.168 And thus, the coverage of Tashkent 
returned to the question of information and its socially progressive function.  In 
Kruzhilins article, timely information was not just as way of improving the 
newspaper, but a matter of life or death. 
 In many ways, coverage of the earthquake was testament to the 
contradictions of Soviet news reporting in the mid-1960s.  The fact that Peskov 
and Gribachevs reports eventually appeared three weeks after the event does 
not reflect well on the timeliness of Soviet news.  Though journalists were 
granted the possibility of reporting on an area of Soviet life that had largely 
165 Iu. Kruzhilin. Sem' s polovinoi SP 6 (1966), 3839.  See also Viktor Veselovskii, 12 ballov 
muzhestva RT (12) 1968, 4. 
166 Ibid., 38. 
167 Ibid., 38, 39. 
168 Ibid., 39. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 138 
been untouched, old habits were hard to change.  Peskov himself admitted as 
much in his comments at an editorial meeting: 
Were used to saying: write about that. Were used to saying: In the Soviet 
Union there are no earthquakes and no floods. We sat for eight days and waited 
for Rashidov [First Secretary of the Uzbek Communist Party] to call and say: 
children, you can write. On the day of the earthquake a journalist from 
Komsomolskaia pravda should have been in Tashkent.  Its another matter 
whether they would have managed to print anything, but someone should have 
been there.  As it turned out, there was no particular obstacle preventing us from 
printing such material.  We need to draw an important lesson from Tashkent.169 
Despite their bold words, journalists were still waiting for that phone call before 
reporting  even after the loosening of restrictions.  It would be harsh to 
apportion blame to them for this: for a journalist the potential rewards for 
speedy reporting were more than outweighed by the prospect of punishment 
for transmitting information that the regime disapproved of.  Indeed, the regime 
provided no showcase example that confirmed that a speedy response to events 
was required more than approval from upstairs.  This is the single main reason 
that debates over information rumbled on, seemingly without conclusion, for 
four long years.   
 However, despite the disappointing conclusions, the lessons of Tashkent 
lingered long in the memory.  Under glasnost, the example of Tashkent was 
cited by Soviet sources as an example of what a responsible press should do.  
One Sovetskaia Rossiia reader, angry at the lack of coverage of a recent 
earthquake in Tajikistan, cited the presss humanistic coverage of the Tashkent 
earthquake as an exemplar, calling it a great lesson in internationalism, 
kindness and Soviet responsiveness.  He warned: The ideological losses from 
reporting information too late or not reporting it fully are too great.170  The 
lesson was taken on board: when a 6.8 magnitude earthquake hit Northern 
Armenia in December 1988, the Soviet government permitted far more 
information than ever before to come to light, and even allowed foreign press 
169 1/6/66, d.430, l.12.  See also similar comments from Goriunov: II sezd Soiuza zhurnalistov 
SSSR. Stenograficheskii otchet 28/9/66, GARF, f.10124, op.1, d.301, ll. 4546. 
170 Continuing the Topic  Being Well Informed: There Wont Be Grounds for Rumours 
Sovetskaia Rossiia, January 5 1986, translated in Current Digest of the Soviet Press (CDSP), 38/1 
(1986), 23. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 139 
and television crews to visit and report from the scene.171  The pressing 
problem of Soviet disasters had finally become a non-issue. 
Conclusion 
At 8.30pm on New Years Day, 1968, a Soviet institution was born.  Vremia 
[Time] was a 45-minute television news report that aimed to create a definitive 
account of daily events.  It was not the first news programme that had existed 
on Soviet television, but in its form and content, but it was the most successful 
and the most enduring.  Unlike its more commentary-based predecessors, 
Vremias creators spoke in the language of events, clearly setting itself the goal 
of presenting a definitive statement on the days occurrences.172  One of its 
protagonists said of the programme in 1969 that it was the television 
equivalent of the day  in which our very epoch speaks in the language of facts 
and events.173   
 The appearance of Vremia on Soviet screens marked the endpoint of a 
decade-long process that saw the print media supplanted by broadcast media in 
news reporting.  By 1970, former KP journalist Nikolai Biriukov was able to 
demand that Vremia should contain a summary of all political information of 
the day, including material that the papers publish only the following day.174  
This is illustrative of a wider shift in Soviet mass media policy, where visual 
media (film and television) largely supplanted print media as the most 
important weapon in the regimes armoury.175 
 However, the creation of Vremia did little more than transfer the long-
standing problems of Soviet news from print to screen.  As Christine Evans has 
shown, Vremia struggled to solve a problem which newspaper journalists had 
long been wrestling with: how to create a form of news that was both dynamic 
enough to rival western news, and typical enough to be Soviet.  Under new 
Gostelradio chief Sergei Lapin, positive stories proliferated, particularly in the 
171 Brian McNair, Glasnost, Perestroika and the Soviet Media (London: Routledge, 1991), p.67.  
172 Evans, From Truth, pp.97-98. 
173 Ibid., p.87. 
174 Quoted in Ibid., p.116. 
175 On this point see Elena Prokhorova, Fragmented Mythologies: Soviet TV Mini-Series of the 
1970s Unpublished PhD Dissertation. University of Pittsburgh, 2003. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 140 
form of hagiographical portraits of Soviet citizens.  But, by focusing on the 
typical events of Soviet everyday life on a daily basis, Soviet life came to seem 
predictable and drab.  By contrast, international events, not subject to the 
comforting historical certainties of Marxism-Leninism, were full of dramatic 
unpredictability.176  If the result of this impasse was not quite disengagement 
from Soviet media (the popularity of Vremia attests to this) it did cause Soviet 
audiences to question official sources  particularly when, as media figures had 
warned in the 1960s, foreign media got there first, as they often did.  
 It was the inability of Soviet media elites to confront the contradictions of 
Soviet news, and the inability of Soviet ideological elites to relax the long-
standing rules of representation that undergirded them, that caused this 
impasse.  Journalists constantly circled around the key issue: the extent to 
which the Soviet press could modify its model of news without compromising 
its identity.  While the forms of journalism inherited from Gorkii seemed to be 
safely Soviet, they were also ill-adapted for a Soviet Union that was becoming  
part of a global media network.  Journalists were to some extent flattered and to 
some extent aghast at this development.  On the one hand, they basked in the 
reflected glory and excitement that the image of the reporter gave them; on the 
other, they recoiled at the excesses of western yellow journalism, and the 
dumbing down that  represented.  Unvarnished information was 
essential for a democratic, modern society, said some journalists; it was a step 
towards a factological newspaper and an attempt to annihilate 
intellectualism claimed others.177 
 The invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968, and the crackdown on 
heterogeneity that it triggered, represents a natural endpoint to this chapter.  It 
certainly put an end to the regimes brief flirtation with the more open reporting 
of events that had begun with the creation of Maiak.  Over the course of 1968, 
there were ever-louder rumblings of discontent within Soviet government and 
mass media about the deleterious effects of foreign radio.  At the April 1968 
Plenum, with political ferment growing in Eastern Europe, Brezhnev demanded 
176 Evans, From Truth, pp.86-136. 
177	18/10/66,	d.438,	ll.42,	44. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 141 
that Party organisations and the media go on the attack against bourgeois 
ideology and negative tendencies within the arts.  Once again, the passions of 
intellectuals, the political situation in Eastern Europe, and mass media were 
linked.  However, that same month, a new publication illustrated the dangers of 
foreign broadcasts.  The Chronicle of Current Events, a samizdat publication 
printed in Moscow may have had only a very small circulation, but it counted 
Western journalists among them.  In its very form it mocked the reluctance of 
Soviet news to broadcast raw information, printing short items about recent 
events, without commentary.  Western broadcasting of information on the court 
cases of Siniavskii and Daniel and Galanskov and Ginsburg in 1966 and 1967 
interfered with the stage management of trials against dissidents, and forced 
Soviet news media onto the defensive.178  A feedback loop between dissidents, 
foreign media, and Soviet mass media became evident: dissidents would publish 
a story, western media would broadcast it to the Soviet public, and the official 
press would be forced to change its carefully manicured line in response.179   
 It was clear that foreign counter-propaganda had forced Soviet news 
media onto the back foot.  But now, rather than continue to argue for more open 
and timely reporting as they had before, voices began to advocate jamming as a 
potential solution.  Maury Lisann has suggested that jamming was far from a 
foregone conclusion, and only the desire to prevent foreign media coverage of 
the Czechoslovakian crisis dictated its return, timed to coincide with the 
invasion on August 22.180  It may have seemed to the authorities that their 
problems were now over.  However, the policy prompted protests from the US 
government, which swiftly resumed broadcasting on the long-wave bands it had 
vacated.181  Soviet authorities were once again confronted with the fact that 
jamming was ineffective, with newspapers periodically forced to rebut foreign 
news reports.182  Most tellingly, the policy failed to resolve the key problem of 
what Soviet news should look like.  It was still a genre in search of a form, and 
178 Lisann, pp.57, 91-92. 
179 On this point see Barbara Walker, Moscow Human Rights Defenders Look West: Attitudes 
Toward U.S. Journalists in the 1960s and 1970s Kritika 9/4 (2008), 905-927. 
180 Ibid., pp.101-102. 
181 Ibid. 
182 Ibid., pp.101-103. 
MAKING NEWS SOVIET | 142 
would remain so throughout the Brezhnev era.  In its unceasingly positive 
representation of the Soviet people, and its repetitive incantations of 
authoritative slogans, we might say that Soviet news  on television and radio as 
in print  not only failed to capture the dynamism of everyday life, but actually 
produced something else, something sluggish and anaemic  something, in 
fact, quite like stagnation.183 
183 Aleksei Yurchak, Everything Was Forever Until it Was No More: The Last Soviet Generation 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2006). Sluggish and anaemic come from Lapins 
assistant, Enver Mamedovs description of Soviet domestic news in 1973, quoted in Evans, 
Panorama, 144. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 143 
CHAPTER 3 | Edited Subjects: Letters, Diaries and Notebooks of 
Our Contemporaries and the Rise and Fall of Romantika 
The Trans-Siberian The Mainline I'm going1   So began the diary of Liana 
Danilenko, a young woman from Kharkov, who journeyed to a small settlement 
in Siberia, overcoming self-doubt and adversity to set up a university of 
culture.2  Danilenkos diary was a document of optimism in which she expressed 
her happiness at arriving in Siberia, her rapture at the beauty of the nature 
surrounding her, her joy at bringing culture to the masses.  Such diaries were 
printed frequently in the press of the 1950s and 1960s, playing an important 
role in disseminating images of the contemporary hero(ine).  This chapter, by 
paying close attention both to the articles and to journalists discussions about 
them, provides an insight into the diverse and changing meanings of heroism in 
the decades following Stalins death, as well as into the significance of the vague-
but-ubiquitous notion of romantika. 
It could be argued that Khrushchev-era romanticism was merely a media 
construct, designed to promote Soviet achievements and shore up public 
support for the regime.  Articles about the affirmative aspects of Soviet life, from 
its industrial achievements to heroic feats, were seen as an important 
counterweight to press portrayals of shortcomings, and stories of exemplary 
individuals imbued with high-minded romantic ideals played a fundamental 
part.  This was considered to be of particular importance at newspaper aimed at 
young people, whose readers needed to be prevented from slipping into 
dangerous nihilism.  Journalists tapped into an important vein of Wanderlust 
both within official and unofficial Khrushchev-era culture, with the lure of 
faraway places a dominant trope.3  This reflected a utopian belief in the 
1 Liana Danilenko, Ia poliubliu tebia, Sibir' KP 8/3/61, 3-4. 
2 On universities of culture, see Gleb Tsipursky, Pleasure, Power, and the Pursuit of 
Communism: Soviet Youth and State-Sponsored Popular Culture During the Early Cold War, 
1945-1968. Unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2011, 
pp.312-336. 
3 Petr Vail, Aleksandr Genis, 60-e. Mir sovetskogo cheloveka. 2-e izd. (Moscow: Novoe 
literaturnoe obozrenie, 1989), pp.126-138. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 144 
Communist future, but also nostalgia for the past; a desire for exploration and 
individual fulfilment, but also for the melding of the individual will with the 
collective. 
Diaries like Danilenkos formed a key part of this long-standing campaign 
to describe the contemporary hero.  Her name, and those of unpretentious 
youths like Valia Chunikhina, Viktor Golovinskii, and Olga Popkova became part 
of a new pantheon.  With their romantic view of the future, their spirit of self-
sacrifice, and their unpretentious tone, they were perfect exemplars for the 
Khrushchev era.  What was most important about them was that they were 
ordinary: prone to doubt and to making mistakes, natural and sincere  quite 
unlike the airbrushed Stalinist bogatyrs that leapt out from the pages of the 
press in the 1930s and 1940s.  Yet behind this artless exterior, journalists were 
in charge of polishing and perfecting readers contributions, making 
autobiographical texts a particularly literal example of constructing the 
contemporary hero.  By tapping the newspapers behind-the-scenes debates, we 
see that journalists acted not as custodians of an inviolable personal text, but as 
retouchers, who needed to purge texts of all stupidities.  The papers 
contributors were thus doubly written.  
But although journalists sought to perfect readers histories, the stories 
they (co-)produced showed signs of strain.  Journalists seemed unable to 
resolve a number of tensions lurking beneath the surface of the promised 
Communist society.  Heroes were trapped between building a glorious future 
where the shiny objects of consumer modernity blazed bright, and renouncing 
all comforts and all objects as an unacceptable distraction.  Thus, this chapter 
asks the wider question of how these young heroes, and the journalists who 
made them, understood the meaning of Communism in an era of mass 
consumption. 
The chapter concludes by asking what happened to the Soviet hero after 
Khrushchev was deposed.  It suggests that Soviet discourse entered an extended 
period of sobriety which rendered the romantic voluntarism of the Khrushchev 
era obsolete.  With the regime attempting to reorient the economy along 
technocratic lines, journalists became increasingly dubious about the merits of 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 145 
utopian optimism, in an era where rational calculation was seen to be more 
worthy than hazy utopianism.  As a result, the rubric appeared more out of 
inertia than enthusiasm, as journalists lost the spark of romanticism that had 
sustained it. 
1 The Emergence of Romantika 
For some reason the paper only seeks out unusual circumstances when 
describing great feats [].  Meanwhile, thousands of young men and 
women are accomplishing wonderful feats in labour and in ordinary, everyday 
life, even if they dont realise it themselves.4   
So stated Pravdas press review of May 1953, an article which criticised the 
paper for its negative focus, saying that the paper tells youth how it should not 
live, and shows too little about how one ought to live.  As we have seen in the 
previous two chapters, journalists at KP found it difficult to strike a balance 
between positive and negative.  In September 1954, the Komsomol Secretary of 
the Gremianchinsk gorkom complained that, alongside the condemnation of 
hooligans and drunks, there needed to be more positive examples showing the 
right way to live.5  A year later, Shatunovskii was criticised by a fellow journalist 
for an article on hooligans which was insufficiently vivid or condemnatory, 
and, in places displayed a certain romanticism of hooliganism.6  The eventual 
solution was to counter this romanticism of the outlaw with a more 
constructive romanticism of adventure.  This section examines the evolution of 
attitudes towards so-called romantika between 1953 and the beginning of the 
Contemporaries rubric, in 1959.   
On the face of it, the regimes February 1954 call for young, enthusiastic 
cadres to nurture agriculture in the Virgin Lands should have provided an 
opportunity for the paper to present an optimistic view of the world, and 
revitalise a newspaper till searching for direction after the Stalinist period.  But 
although thousands heeded the partys 1954 call to work in the Virgin Lands, 
journalists bemoaned their inability to find an adequate line for the campaign.7  
4 Byt drugom i nastavnikom molodezhi Pravda 22/5/53, 2. 
5 6/9/54, d.131, ll.26-32.  See also Voronovs comments: 1/11/54, d.133, l.40. 
6 16/5/55, d.148, ll.40-41. 
7 24/5/54, d.129, ll.66-68; 6/9/64, d.131, l.1; 1/11/54, d.133, l.4. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 146 
Indicative of this lack of inspiration was the diary of agronomist Anatolii 
Kuzulin, who was shortly to travel to Kazakhstan to answer the partys call.8  
Containing little of the sincerity and humanity that characterised later efforts, 
dialogue was stilted and narrative tension almost entirely absent.  The problem, 
claimed the papers theatre critic, Natella Lordkipanidze, was that the papers 
coverage lacked drama and excitement: it was guilty of the Stalinist sin of 
conflictlessness	[].		To	dream	is	a	characteristic	of	youth,	
she said, paraphrasing Kalinin, before asserting I think that we need to be a bit 
more romantic.9   
However, this romantic mission sat uncomfortably with some 
journalists, who felt pangs of remorse for the young people they had sent to 
Kazakhstan, who now found themselves in the most difficult and deprived 
conditions.  A clear tension opened up between the demands of positive 
propaganda, of which Kuzulins diary was an example, and the paternalistic 
desire to protect their young readers by publicising shortcomings.  An April 
1954 report sent to Dmitrii Shelepin, the First Secretary of the Komsomol, by 
two of the papers correspondents described appalling conditions in Kustanai 
and Akhmolinsk.10  Mass hooliganism and drunkenness were rife; individuals 
were allocated to roles without regard to speciality; there was a lack of 
equipment and spare parts; and above all a complete lack of organisation: one 
group was stranded at a local railway station in the snow, with nobody from the 
local Komsomol having been informed that they would be arriving.  But the 
papers coverage continued to tell a very different story, leading tens and 
thousands of Komsomols to wend their way to Kazakhstan unawares.  In June 
1954, Semen Garbuzov, the papers Responsible Secretary, spoke of the papers 
enormous guilt: 
We sent a large brigade of Komsomols on this large and important task.  And we 
forgot about them. People came to a new place completely unprepared for 
having to live in such basic [  -] cultural conditions.  People 
are not offended by the absence of living quarters, nor by the sometimes bad 
8 Anatolii Kuzulin, Nachalo puti, KP 22/2/54, 2. 
9 15/2/54, d.127, ll.92-93. 
10 N.Drachinskii, Iu.Falatov to A.Shelepin. 3/4/54, d.135, ll.65-71. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 147 
supplies.  Theyre offended by the lack of organisation  thanks to which they 
cannot give what they would like to give.11  
Indeed, many years later, one woman recalled her thoughts on arriving in the 
Virgin Lands: Why did they tell us it was so great here?  On the radio it said 
how in Kazakhstan, how it couldn't be better than that."12 
 A second wave of discussion took place after the Congress of 1956.  As 
we saw in Chapter 1, journalists proclaimed the importance of criticising 
shortcomings and righting social wrongs, with Shatunovskii declaring that the 
paper would no longer print material which would embroider 
[]	 reality.	 	 But	 he	 nevertheless	 argued	 that	 positive	material	
was more vital to the paper than negative:  
We can show youth how they shouldnt live and educate them on that basis.  But 
those materials which show youth how they should behave and act and how they 
should live are no less important. We have had an enormous bias towards 
critical materials, and printed less positive. I think this ratio of positive to 
negative material needs to be evened out, and not in favour of critical material.13 
It is striking how central the notion of the positive hero was to journalists 
understanding of the de-Stalinised newspaper.  As we have seen in previous 
chapters, journalists were intensely worried about the mood of Soviet youth, 
including widespread manifestations of hooliganism and non-conformist ideas 
among the intelligentsia.  According to this way of thinking, only by reasserting 
a positive ideal of what the Soviet Union was about could the task of rebuilding 
begin.  Garbuzov spoke of the problems of a whole generation having been 
brought up under the cult of personality.  In order to counter the unbelievable 
scepticism of young people, he suggested that there was only one solution: 
propaganda of revolutionary traditions, labour feats, and heroism of the 
everyday.14  But he saw a need for a new kind of positive material to provide 
11 28/6/54, d.129, ll.176-77. 
12 Michaela Pohl, The Planet of One Hundred Languages: Ethnic Relations and Soviet Identity in 
the Virgin Lands in Peopling the Russian Periphery: Borderland Colonization in Eurasian History, 
ed. by Nicholas B. Breyfogle, Abby Schrader, Willard Sunderland (London & New York: 
Routledge, 2007), p.245. 
13 19/3/56, d.170, l.44.  See also Ibid., ll.57-58 and Closed Party Meeting, 30-31/7/56, d.30, 
ll.114-115; Party Meeting, 25/12/56, Ibid., l.170. 
14 5/3/56, d.170, l.113. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 148 
stability: we have to affirm our revolutionary traditions, to affirm the role of 
the party, we must show the great, war-like feats of the people in a different way 
than before.15   
 In May 1956, the party issued a second appeal for young people to build 
the future in the Virgin Lands, the Arctic, Siberia, and the Donbass, providing a 
chance for journalists to put their post-Congress debates and discussions into 
practice.  But, at the first letuchka at which the papers approach was discussed, 
journalists ran into the very same problems of balancing romanticism with 
criticism.  Ilia Kotenko saw something frightful in a conversation he had with 
a tenth grade student, who was about to depart for Siberia but had learned 
everything he knew from old guidebooks.  He noted bitterly that students have 
a completely incorrect conception about Siberia in general, even though theyre 
tenth graders, they study, they read newspapers and theyre Komsomols.16  
Garbuzov backed Kotenko, arguing that tenth graders without life experience 
and training would have absolutely nothing to do there. They're a burden on 
the state. Why, he asked, did they have to be trained on the job in faraway 
places?  Couldnt these young people be trained in their own towns?17  
Karelshtein agreed: 
Romantika is a good thing. But when a person comes across great difficulties, 
when things at work arent going well and in day-to-day life some things dont 
run smoothly, its bad.  A valuable and important thought is that we need to 
prepare people for an important job, not just talk about romantika, about living in 
tents and so on.18 
But Vladimir Chachin, who would in 1960 go on to write a book of heroic stories 
for young people, disagreed, citing parallels with wartime heroism: 
If your daughter expressed a desire to go to Siberia what would you do?  Youd 
say: live here for three years and study. But wheres the romantika?  In my 
opinion, you need to go there immediately, like it was during the war: people will 
teach them, theyll need minimal instruction, and theyll have their training 
there.19 
15 Ibid. 
16 21/5/56, d.172, l.76. 
17 Ibid. l.80. 
18 Ibid. l.83. 
19 Ibid. l.81. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 149 
However, Chachins romanticism didnt impair his ability to see the downsides.  
Reporting back to colleagues on poor conditions in Bratsk, even he felt that the 
romantika of green tents was a cover for inadequate provision of living 
quarters.20  In September of that year, he complained that the paper had not 
printed his critical article on problems with facilities and a lack of work for new 
arrivals in the Donbass region, asking What should we do?  Either varnish 
[] reality or write the truth without fear.21 
 Chachins comments illustrated the papers dilemma.  Over the course of 
1956 and beyond, journalists reported back to the editorial collective about 
problems in the regimes novostroika projects.22  But there was a lack of 
agreement over how the paper should balance negative articles with the needs 
of a mobilisatory campaign.  Having heard a harrowing account of drunkenness 
and knife fights in Taishet from correspondent Kochergin, Deputy Editor Aleksei 
Adzhubei failed to respond, and instead commented that the paper needed to 
cover the romanticism in the everyday and suggested introducing a rubric 
entitled A hero of our time.23  Adzhubei also explained that Chachins critical 
article had been shelved for fear of antagonising the authorities, arguing that 
We are propagandist-agitators.  We have a campaign, an appeal, and at such a 
time we need to write about shortcomings wisely.24  Replying to the earlier 
debate about the inadequacy of romantika, Adzhubei merely commented that 
the issue was complicated, and that the proper balance between preparing 
young people for what they might encounter and the romantika that had sent 
them there in the first place would be worked out in future articles.25  But under 
his editorship, between 1957 and 1959, the balance was firmly weighted in 
favour of romantika, even though the underlying tensions were never 
satisfactorily resolved. 
20 26/3/56, d.170, l.36. 
21 3/9/56, d.176, l.21. 
22 16/4/56, d.171, l.99; 7/5/56, d.172, ll.22-25; 20/8/56, d.175, ll.104-105; Goriunov to TsK 
VLKSM, 4/12/56, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.821, ll.176-78; 28/4/58, d.225, ll.58-63. 
23 20/8/56, d.175, ll.104-105, 125. 
24 3/9/56, d.176, ll.4-5. 
25 21/5/56, d.172, l.85. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 150 
Romantika was one of the keywords of the Khrushchev era, but defining 
it is not so simple:  Vail and Genis, who devoted a whole section of their book on 
the Soviet sixties to the term, admitted that definitions of the term were fuzzy 
[].26  Speaking at an editorial letuchka in 1959, Sasha Didusenko 
described a discussion within the secretariat on the meaning of romantika, and 
realised that nobody knew what it meant: The fact of the matter, he said, is 
that we often understand romantika as anything under the sun.27  For this 
reason, Iurii Zerchaninov stated in 1958 that he had hated the word 
romantika from the moment [he] started to work at the paper.28  Nevertheless, 
there were certain common characteristics beneath this fuzzy surface.  
Romantika was both a way of seeing the world and also a set of tropes which 
linked closely to longer-standing dominants within Soviet cultural production.  
In this chapter, I regard it as a product of the utopianism of the Khrushchev era.  
It combined a youthful desire for exploration, exemplified by the lure of faraway 
places, with a heightened sense of connection with the collective, whether that 
be a group of friends or one's workmates.  It borrowed from the past in the form 
of campfire songs, or the appropriation of symbols from history, but also looked 
towards the future because of its optimism.  
This optimism sat well with existing Socialist Realist norms and led to a 
process where reports on the Virgin Lands, the Arctic, and the Far East moved 
out of the realm of news reporting, and into the sphere of aesthetics  in fact, as 
the previous chapter suggested, a romantic view of the world pervaded Soviet 
news reporting in general through the Khrushchev era and beyond.  This is not 
to say that everything Soviet journalists printed about the Virgin Lands was 
fiction, but rather that it became subject to the laws of fictional production29, 
which is why the texts printed in this rubric can be profitably compared with 
literature and cinema (romantika can in some senses be considered a variant of 
26 Vail/Genis, p.127. 
27 18/5/59, d.247, l.45. 
28 16/2/58, d.244, l.30. 
29 On this point see Evgeny Dobrenko, Political Economy of Socialist Realism (New Haven & 
London: Yale University Press, 2007), xiv.  On the novel see Katerina Clark, The Soviet Novel: 
History as Ritual. Third Edition (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2000), pp.210-233.  
On cinema see Vitalii Troianovskii, Novye liudi shestidesiatykh godov in Kinematograf ottepeli. 
Kniga vtoraia, ed. by Troianovskii (Moscow: Materik, 2002), pp.6-60. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 151 
Socialist Realism).  By invoking the Socialist Realist dictum that life should be 
depicted in its revolutionary development (e.g. with an eye on the Communist 
future), journalists were able to avoid uncomfortable questions about the past 
and present, and to concentrate instead on the future.  In this way, they 
exercised one of the key skills they required to survive in the industry: the 
ability to look deeper than the isolated fact, and instead find the wider process 
within which that fact was embedded.  Problems were turned into 
surmountable hurdles, all but certain to be overcome on the road to 
Communism.  This is what made Kim Kostenkos Will there be a city of Bratsk? 
so daring, since it ventured to go against a decade of rose-tinted dispatches from 
the River Enisei.30  In fact, as section three of this chapter will show, Soviet 
cultures romantic turn, by self-reflexively focusing on models of heroism that 
borrowed from the periods of the First Five-Year Plan and the Second World 
War, and by restricting heroism to physical labour, avoided difficult questions, 
both about the past and also about how models of heroism should adapt to 
changing social conditions.31  The well-known liriki-fiziki debate of 1959, in 
which readers debated whether art was necessary in an era of science, provided 
a first attempt to engage with topical questions, but the papers 
Contemporaries rubric reflected little of this.32 
   Instead, most articles on Siberia and the Arctic acquired a dreamlike 
quality: they were infused with the allure of adventure, and the social fantasy of 
a radiant future.  And the autobiographical narratives drafted by young people 
provided a means for showing those dreams in a way that was in tune with the 
humanistic ideals of the post-1956 period.  A diary of 1959, entitled The 
Morning of Construction, one of the first to be published under the 
Contemporaries banner, was praised by science correspondent Mikhail 
Khvastunov:  
30 A. Glazov, K. Kostenko, Byt li gorodu Bratsku KP 16/10/63, 2. 
31 On the enduring nature of Stalinist tropes see Alexander Prokhorov, Inherited Discourse: 
Stalinist Tropes in Thaw Culture Unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, 2002, 
esp. pp.104-191. 
32 Susan Costanzo, The 1959 Liriki-Fiziki Debate: Going Public With the Private? in Borders of 
Socialism: Private Spheres of Soviet Russia, ed. by Lewis H. Siegelbaum (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 
2006), pp.251-268. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 152 
Its a notebook by an eyewitness  a person, its a reportage from the cutting 
edge of our battle  and it was done by a participant in that battle, by a person 
who was on that very Komsomol building site.  Its a reportage which will ignite a 
desire	 to	 go	 there.	 	 And	 its	 clear	 that	 if	 one	 of	 the	waverers	 []	
reads this material  someone who has been sent there but doesnt know 
whether to go or not  theyll go.  This is true Komsomol romantika of a great 
construction site, the romantika of 1959.33 
Thus, autobiographical testimonies lent a certain immediacy to processes of 
construction that might otherwise have remained abstract.  They also, as 
Khvastunov suggested, seemed to have a human resonance that rendered them 
all the more effective. 
2 Edited Subjects 
The appearance of personal testimonies in the Khrushchev-era KP represented 
a new stage in a long-term fascination with biography and autobiography within 
Soviet culture.  Autobiographical writing disseminated the heroic stories of the 
Soviet people as a way of consolidating power and promoting the regimes 
construction tasks.  The diary in particular provided a powerful lever for 
disciplining the self towards a highly normative ideal subject.34  Party discipline 
had traditionally been centred around autobiographical practices, with 
individuals enjoined to produce a public account of their lives and works in 
order to enter the party or retain their membership.  Authors described a 
personal journey from ignorance to consciousness  from 'darkness to light'  
something that became a trope in other narrative contexts, too.35  It was also a 
way of recording and preserving memories for posterity.  Soviet leaders and 
cultural figures were convinced that the birth of the Soviet Union represented a 
new historical epoch, and sought to preserve documents from past and present 
to provide testimony for future generations. 
33 15/06/59, d.248, l.113.  The diary is Andrei Bogachuk, Utro stroiki KP 14/6/59, 3. 
34 Jochen Hellbeck, Revolution on My Mind: Writing a Diary Under Stalin (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 2006). 
35 Igal Halfin, From Darkness to Light: Class, Consciousness, and Salvation in Revolutionary Russia 
(Pittsburgh, PA: Pittsburgh University Press, 1999). 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 153 
Perhaps the closest parallel to the diaries and autobiographical texts 
published in Komsomolskaia pravda in the 1950s and 1960s were the projects 
of Maksim Gorkii after his return from exile in 1932.  In projects like the 
History of Factories and Plants and the People of the First and Second Five-
Year Plans, Gorkii aimed to create a collective portrait of a generation, charting 
the development of the Soviet Union from revolution to industrialisation by 
employing collective biographical techniques.  In many ways, the 
Contemporaries rubric can be considered as a similar kind of collective 
portrait, for it featured the stories of heroic individuals who were performing 
socially useful labour and presented them as a kind of history of the present 
(or, the present as history in the making).  Indeed, it is little surprise that there 
were attempts to revive Gorkiis initiative in the 1950s.  A journalist's 
introduction to one diary published in 1963 made this explicit: 
Sons and grandsons write letters and diaries.  These are also living witnesses to 
the continuing revolution.  This is a self-portrait  though still unfinished  of the 
generation of Komsomol members of the Sixties.  We at Komsomol'skaia pravda 
adds yet more brush strokes [] to the unfinished canvas.36 
Contemporaries narratives in some ways mirrored classic Socialist 
Realist forms developed under Stalin in the 1930s, from their romantic 
evocation of faraway places down to the notion of bodily sacrifice (only here 
represented by giving blood or undergoing a skin graft to save a colleague), but 
they also sought to move away from those forms.37  However, in contrast to the 
portraits produced in the 1930s, where the subjects usually spoke as a 
collective, the collective portrait of the Khrushchev era was to be formed from 
an accumulation of individual autobiographies.38   
Journalists spoke of reader-submitted texts, including diaries, as human 
documents, which disclosed the genuine inner world of their protagonists.39  
36 Valia Demikhina, Tak my zhivem KP, 29/10/63, 3. 
37 Chunikhina, Libliu tebia; D. Oskin, Esli v zhilakh krov, a ne voditsa KP 1/5/64, 3. 
38 E.g. see Dnevnik odnoi iacheiki KP 19/02/30, 4; Kak my stroili metro. Istorii metro im. L.M. 
Kagnovich (Moscow: Izd. Istoriia fabrik i zavodov, 1935); The White Sea Canal, ed. by Maxim 
Gorky, L. Auerbach, S. G. Ferin. Trans. Annabel Williams-Ellis (London: John Lane, 1935). 
39 30/3/59, d.245, l.68. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 154 
You asked me to pluck up courage [		] and write everything in 
detail.  So I wrote about everything, I kept nothing secret", wrote tractor driver 
Valia Chunikhina to her mentor in I love you, life", a correspondence published 
in 1962.40  Svetlana Serdiuk said of her diary: I have no secrets there. I simply 
think about what excites me, and write what seems interesting".41  Here, the 
promises of absolute openness offered communion with a transparent and 
truthful soul  what Lidia Ginzburg described as their orientation toward 
authenticity.42   
That authenticity was to be demonstrated by emphasising their 
artlessness.  The diary of construction-site manager, Valia Demikhina, was 
composed of rushed, sometimes scrappy notes, which were made in the heat 
of the moment, not for an audience, but for herself.43  The posthumously-
published diaries of the 25-year old Viktor Golovinskii were introduced with a 
similar disclaimer: 
It's natural that these diaries don't lay claim to any special fullness in the scope of 
events; in places they have a personal character, and some of the author's 
thoughts are scrappy and even, as is characteristic of youth, contentious.  But, 
reading them, we see how rich was his heart, how wide open it was to all of life's 
joys and labours.44 
In these diaries, scrappiness became a guarantor of sincerity and truth.  
Marianne Liljestrm, analysing womens memoirs of the revolution written 
during this period, similarly noted the belief amongst critics that non-
professional authors possessed a genuine interest in remembering and, 
therefore, they [were] able to tell only the truth.  Hence the degree of truth-
telling [was] directly connected here to the texts' literary insufficiency.45   
In KP journalists debates, there existed an often-nave belief in the truth-
value of autobiographical writing quite at odds with Ginzburg's comments about 
40 Valia Chunikhina, Ia liubliu tebia, zhizn', KP 16/11/62. 
41 Svetlana Serdiuk, Dariu liudiam sad, KP 30/6/63. 
42 Lidya Ginzburg, On Psychological Prose. Trans. Judson Rosengrant (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1991), p.6. 
43 Demikhina, Tak my zhivem 
44 Viktor Golovinskii, Stranitsy odnoi zhizni KP, 29/3/59, 3. 
45 Marianne Liljestrm, Monitored Selves: Soviet Women's Autobiographical Texts in the 
Khrushchev Era, in Women in the Khrushchev Era, ed. by Melanie Ilic, Susan E. Reid and Lynne 
Attwood (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 2004), p.135. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 155 
its inherent unreliability.46  Journalists at KP enthusiastically endorsed the work 
of non-staff authors, and equated their work with simple, unpretentious, and 
true  something more direct and more authentic than journalists own writing.  
Vitalii Ganiushkin, a correspondent in the Student Youth Department, said of 
Golovinskiis diary: It would be one thing if it had been written by a journalist  
but it wouldn't have been as effective as the way a person writes about himself 
and about his path in life.  [...] It's believable because it's written sincerely.47 
 Unlike Aleksei Stakhanov and other exemplary heroes of the 1930s, the 
young people who came to prominence in the 1950s and 1960s  in the papers 
diaries and in literature more widely  were not all-powerful bogatyry, but shy, 
unassuming, vulnerable and, above all, typical.  Liana Danilenko was painted as 
our contemporary, a rank-and-file Komsomol member, and a remarkable  
person".48  Likewise, Viktor Golovinskii was an  
ordinary young person, educated in the spirit and the meaning of our Soviet 
reality. [...] Amongst our Soviet youth there are many people like Viktor 
Golovinskii.  It is they who rise high beyond the clouds in jet-planes, steer ships 
through the storm, construct towns, and build new highways.  For them, life is 
intense and beautiful.49 
In Chapters 1 and 2 we saw how reporting of the negative aspects of Soviet life 
conflicted with the demand that the press should report on the typical.  Heroes 
like Danilenko and Golovinskii were both typical and extraordinary.  Anybody 
could become like them  that was the point of printing their diaries and letters 
 but they remained atypical: lighthouses, to use a term fashionable at the 
time.50   
To make such figures truly capable of emulation, journalists sought to 
contrast the modest outer appearance of an individual to their great deeds.  In 
his introduction, Dnepropetrovsk correspondent Aleksandr Murzin recounted 
having asked Danilenko to explain her diary: Liana became embarrassed  she 
46 Ginzburg, p.6. 
47 30/3/59, d.245, ll.68-70 [emphasis added]. 
48 Liana Danilenko, Ia poliubliu tebia, Sibir KP 8/3/61, 3-4. 
49 Golovinskii, Stranitsy. 
50 See also Boris Pankin's words on the typicality of Otar Ioseliani's diary/testimony: 24/2/64, 
d.361, l.72. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 156 
started to talk about how and when it all began, but then got flustered 
[]."51  A year later Murzin wrote about a young field-doctor, the 
frail Rita Vlasova, and asked How did you not take fright, not leave, and yet 
work for more than a year at the end of the earth [	 	 ], and 
overcome	everything:	distance,	separation,	discomfort,	pangs	[]	of	doubt	
in yourself, in your strengths, in your abilities?52  Danilenko's unprepossessing 
stature and modest demeanour, and Vlasova's physical weakness were 
apparently no impediment to the accomplishment of great feats. 
Although journalists took care to paint these individuals as ordinary and 
otherwise remarkable, they were still exemplars.  Kristin Roth-Ey has pointed 
out how Soviet television sought to replace the Stalinist kult lichnosti with 
images of ordinary lichnosti.  But the idea of lichnost was far from  inclusive: A 
lichnost was someone worth emulating, a person with something to teach, a 
cultural authority.53  The same was true in the press.  In order to have their 
heroes project cultural authority, journalists corrected and prepared 
autobiographical documents before publication.  It is clear that this process 
went far beyond mere editing, to encompass rewriting entire sections of text.54  
Such practices were thus reminiscent of the collective autobiographical projects 
of the 1930s, where workers contributions were polished by professional 
writers to bring them up to standard.55 
There did, in fact, exist a moral code for the editing of reader material.  
Elena Bruskova, one of the paper's roving correspondents, furiously criticised 
colleagues for the way in which they had misrepresented the content of a 
readers letter, saying that [letters] should be grammatical in a literary sense, 
appropriate for the press, and nothing more", while a 1962 article in Sovetskaia 
51 Danilenko, Ia poliubila. 
52 Rita Vlasova, Adres schast'e, Sever KP 3/10/62, 1, 3. 
53 Kristin Roth-Ey, Moscow Prime Time: How the Soviet Union Built the Media Empire That Lost 
the Cultural Cold War (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2011), p.273. 
54 13/3/61, d.298, l.41, 8/10/62, d.326, l.81. 
55 Josette Bouvard, Linjonction autobiographique dans les annes 1930. G.A. Medynskij et 
lhistoire du mtro de Moscou Cahiers du Monde russe 50/1 (2009), 69-92; Katerina Clark, 'The 
History of the Factories' as a Factory of History: A Case Study on the Role of Soviet Literature in 
Subject Formation, in Autobigraphical Practices in Russia - Autobiographische Praktiken in 
Russland, ed. by Jochen Hellbeck and Klaus Heller (Gttingen: V&R unipress, 2004), pp.25178. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 157 
pechat spoke out against the practice of re-writing.56  However, processes of 
editing material written by non-professionals were institutionalised: sixty per 
cent of the paper's stories had to be sourced from outside the paper's staff, so 
for every two stories written by the journalist themselves, at least three had to 
be re-written 'for' authors (the so-called '60-40 rule'), or else part of their salary 
was docked.57    
But some journalists viewed this process of editing and correcting as a 
service to the original authors.  Writing about the 60-40 rule, special 
correspondent Vera Benderova claimed: They have something to say, 
experienced people.  But not everybody has the ability to write, is able to 
accommodate a lifes experience to the severe framework of a newspaper 
article.58  Speaking about the Contemporaries rubric, science correspondent 
A. Biriukov explained to his colleagues the benefits of such editing: 
[Diarists] can't always explain or talk in bombastic words about why they went. 
They went, which means that they've got conviction.  That means that we 
certainly need to work with these people's diaries, to help them so that any 
stupidities [] are cleaned up, so that they're as cogent as they ought to 
be.  We should support these authors because they are real heroes and for that 
we should sing their praises. That doesn't mean that illegibility is permissible.59 
The duty of the journalist before the diary-writer consisted not in preserving 
original words and thoughts, but in editing and re-drafting, so that stupidities 
were eliminated.  Through correction, journalists would help and support 
diary-writers (who had already proved their heroism by going to distant climes) 
by making them appear to be as heroic as they always-already were.  These 
journalist-editors were not, then, sensitive gatekeepers of a sacred original text, 
but sculptors of the Soviet contemporary.   
 This sculpting could acquire substantial proportions.  Aleksandr Murzin 
rewrote nearly 80 per cent of Liana Danilenkos diary, leading one journalist to 
56 13/1/58, d.219, ll.99-102; E. Kamenetskii, "Orginapu - net SP 4 (1962), 2225. 
57 Vladimir Pozner, Parting With Illusions (London: Grafton Books, 1990), 201; Ilya Gerol, 
Geoffrey Molyneux, The Manipulators: Inside the Soviet Media (Toronto: Stoddart, 1988), pp.58-
58 Vera Benderova, Sol' chuzhikh slez, in Soldaty slova: Rasskazyvaiut veterany Sovetskoi 
zhurnalistiki. Tom 5, ed. by B. S. Burkov and V. A. Miakushkov (Moscow: Politizdat, 1985), p.327. 
59 30/9/63, d.349, l.15a (unnumbered). 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 158 
denounce fabrications, but Editor-in-Chief Iurii Voronov, while considering 80 
per cent excessive, insisted that Murzin prepared, not wrote the diary, praised 
it for being sincere, and reported that one of the countrys most famous 
journalists, Iurii Zhukov, had called the paper to offer his congratulations.60 
Autobiographical testimonies merely needed to possess a 'sense' of the 
individual to be successful.  Boris Pankin said of one text He expressed himself 
[in his diary].  Having read it, we made corrections.  But we understand this 
person's feelings".61   
For such articles to be effective, the role of journalist as editor needed to 
be kept under wraps.  When the papers preparation of a diary was mentioned, 
Iurii Zerchaninov criticised the paper's candour: That's an editorial secret, he 
argued.62  However, one reader saw editorial intervention in positive terms: 
upon reading the diary of Zoia Abramova, he pleaded: Send Zoia an 
experienced writer who would, God willing, not suppress her authority, but the 
opposite: would raise it, inspire it, and support it.63  And some contemporaries 
were perfectly capable of penning legends of their own.  Almost two years after 
her diary appeared in Komsomol'skaia pravda, the name of Liana Danilenko, the 
librarian from a lonely Siberian village, appeared in the magazine Sibirskie 
ogni as Bratsk GES gave its first current  only this time Danilenko wasn't the 
subject of the breathless report, but its author.64  Several years later, Vika 
Sagalov praised the testimony of Al'bert Mukhitdinov, entitled Key to the 
Arctic, for its literary qualities before pausing to lament: I found out later that 
[the author] is a professional journalist.  It would have been better if we 
presented him as such".65  But such facts were another editorial secret. 
 For other contemporaries, the practice of public-private diary-writing 
was a subjectivising mechanism par excellence  and editing was at the heart of 
it.  Citing the plentiful images of dismemberment in Stalinist canonical works, 
60 8/10/62, d.326, ll.70-71, 118-120. 
61 24/2/64, d.361, l.72. 
62 13/3/61, d.291, l.41.  See also Sergei Ivanov, Nash poezd idet dalshe KP, 27/11/57, 2, 
prepared for the press by A. Vinogradov. 
63 Stenogramma vsesoiuznogo tvorcheskogo seminara: Zhurnalist i trebovaniia zhizni, 
23/6/64, GARF, f.10124, op.1, d.244, l.37. 
64 Vail'/Genis, p.83. 
65 12/12/67, d.457, l.2. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 159 
Eric Naiman has claimed that [t]he ideal Stalinist subject [...] was an abridged 
man, not a sokrovennyi [	private]	but	a	sokrashchennyi [abridged] chelovek".66  
In a similar way (though with less physically crippling results) we might say 
that journalists produced a redaktirovannyi chelovek, an edited person, and that 
this was one of the myriad ways of being in the world created by the power of 
the Soviet state. 
Many of the editorial secrets referred to by Zerchaninov perished in a 2006 
fire in KPs archive.  Without access to the original texts, it is impossible to 
discern how they were edited and thus such texts might seem to be of limited 
use to historians.  Recent work on Soviet subjectivity has, after all, illustrated 
the benefits of using original documents to interrogate individuals' inner worlds 
via close textual analysis.67  However, the question of subjectivity is not only a 
question of what subjects really thought, but also about the processes and 
practices through which authors were constituted as authors and as subjects.68  
Articles bore the name of their original authors and articles ostensibly 
presented their thoughts.  These texts, then, do not show us the process of an 
individual attempting to adopt a language as his/her own, as in Hellbeck, but 
instead ask the time-honoured question  ?: who (is writing) whom?  
As one young diarist of the 1960s asked in her own private diary: Am I writing 
or am I being written?"69  This process is reminiscent of what Gor'kii wrote to 
Iurii Tynianov, who had written a biographical novel about the playwright 
66 Eric Naiman, On Soviet Subjects and the Scholars Who Make Them Russian Review 60 (July 
2001), 314.  This argument would later be taken up with great cogency by Lilya Kaganovsky in 
How the Soviet Man Was Unmade: Cultural Fantasy and Male Subjectivity Under Stalin 
(Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2008) 
67 See Hellbeck, Revolution; Irina Paperno, Stories of the Soviet Experience: Memoirs, Diaries, 
Dreams (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2009). 
68 See Choi Chatterjee and Karen Petrone, Models of Selfhood and Subjectivity: The Soviet Case 
in Historical Perspective, Slavic Review 67/4 (Winter 2008): 967-968 on this point.  The key 
text in this regard is Michel Foucault, What is an Author? in The Foucault Reader: An 
Introduction to Foucault's Thought, ed. by Paul Rabinow (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1984), 
pp.10120. 
69 Irina Savkina, Am I Writing or Am I Being Written?: A Diary of a Young Soviet Woman (1968-
1970), in Real Stories, Imagined Realities: Fictionality and Non-Fictionality in Literary Constructs 
and Historical Contexts, ed. by Markku Lehtmki, Simo Leisti and Marja Rytknen (Tampere: 
Tampere University Press, 2007), pp.289303. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 160 
Aleksandr Griboedov: Griboedov is remarkable, although I didn't expect to see 
him like this. But you showed him so convincingly that he must have been thus. 
And if he wasn't, he will be now."70   
Analysing texts in terms of their biographical progression can deliver valuable 
insights into the ideological mechanisms and presuppositions underpinning a 
society, since they uncover the rites of passage that a particular society finds 
significant.71  The texts featured in the Contemporaries rubric rigidly followed 
a single biographical model, through which journalists sought to render authors 
lives culturally legible.  The narratives in question enacted a journey to 
consciousness: they were a kind of Bildungsroman, beginning with their 
protagonists on the brink of a breakthrough, following them to a triumphant 
conclusion where they found maturity, happiness, and consciousness.72 
The journey between these two points was not a steady progression, but 
a great symbolic leap  or, in fact, two leaps.  The first of these was exemplified 
by the decision to leave home, which set the narrative into motion, and was 
often accompanied by a series of breathless exclamations: The Trans-Siberian 
The Mainline I'm going"; Great, I'm going to Bratsk"; I'm going I'm going"73  
The decision not only marked the beginning of the narrative, but set the 
authors journey into motion.  One diarist wrote I arrived at Chita on August 12 
at half past five, in much the same way as if she was recording the exact place 
and time of her birth.  And indeed, this was the moment when a new page of 
history was being written.74  Sometimes this decision came after a bout of soul-
searching; more often, the decision was instantaneous  almost as if it had 
70 Quoted in Angela Brintlinger, Writing a Usable Past: Russian Literary Culture, 1917-1937 
(Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 2000), p.16. 
71 In this regard there is considerable merit in Katerina Clarks reading of the Soviet novel as 
ritual in The Soviet Novel. 
72 The Bildungsroman is a coming-of-age narrative which enacts the protagonists journey 
towards maturity.  See Franco Moretti, The Way of the World: The Bildungsroman in European 
Culture (London: Verso, 2000).  Katerina Clark has suggested that, while sharing aspects of the 
Bildungsroman form, the Soviet novel was not a Bildungsroman because the heros progress is 
never individual nor self-valuable (Soviet Novel, pp.16-17).  However, this chapter suggests that 
this renunciation of the self was problematic by the 1960s. 
73 Danilenko, Ia poliubliu; Tadeush Skibinskii, Dogoniaite nas, poezda, KP 26/9/63, 2-3; 
Ivanov, Nash poezd; Tamara Prokopenko, Postigaia azbuka truda, KP 17/9/63, 1-2. 
74 Chunikhina, Ia lubliu . 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 161 
required no thought whatsoever, suggesting that heroism was always-already 
within the hero  a character trait that merely needed to be awakened.   
Sometimes, friends or family members tried to warn protagonists against 
going to the wilds of the country, but were overruled.  This speaks of the 
individualism and iron will of contemporaries, and their choice of a public over 
a private identity.  Valentina Demikhina recalled how her mother left in tears 
after seeing her daughters inhospitable living conditions.75  Liana Danilenko 
wondered how to persuade her sick mother to allow her to go to Siberia, but 
wrote that if she went, she would never be able to forgive herself for her 
callousness [].  Despite this, she overrode her mother's 
objections, writing defiantly: No, I won't rethink".76  Her mother was not 
mentioned again.  This clearly displayed a commitment to public values over the 
trifles of private life, but it could also make authors seem wilful  perhaps even 
cruel.77  Such behaviour thus sat uneasily with the more 'sincere' notion of 
human relations being put forward by the intelligentsia during the Thaw: 
Danilenko was willing to give a piece of her heart to the locals, but such 
sentiments were notably absent when it came to her own family. 
 At this point, two main paths were available.  Either, there was a more-
or-less uninterrupted narrative journey towards productive and fulfilling work 
(which tended to lack dramatic tension) or, much more frequently, a bout of 
soul searching and even crisis: this was the second great narrative leap.  
Tadeusz Skibinskii, a twenty-year-old from Mogilev in Belarus, who journeyed 
to Bratsk to lay rails, wrote that he had started to regret ever coming to 
Siberia.  Liana Danilenko, faced with the fact that Siberians [had] turned out to 
be not as romantic as they were in [her] imagination confessed: Right now I 
hate myself completely.  Her solution: I need to create a cast-iron timetable for 
myself and keep to it with Tolstoi-like diligence.78   
Doubts were to be assuaged through discipline and self-criticism.  Diarists 
frequently upbraided themselves.  [...] I'm a gossip.  I need to reproach myself 
75 Demikhina, Tak my zhivem. 
76 Dalinenko, Ia poliubila. 
77 On this point see Liljestrm, p.137. 
78 Danilenko, Ia poliubila. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 162 
for that.  I don't read many books, I don't embroider, I don't go anywhere  not 
even to the cinema,"79 wrote Valia Chunikhina, and readers seemed to respond 
in kind: replying to Valia, Lialia from Sochi confessed to the crime of having 
borrowed a friend's book and not returned it.80  This tendency could be seen 
most clearly in the diary of Viktor Golovinskii, in which he seemed to implore 
himself to improve in almost every entry.  My main shortcoming is that I waste 
my time on petty things,"81 he wrote, and elsewhere he drafted a set of maxims 
that could have come out of Chernyshevskiis What is to be Done? 
(1) Renounce any activity that deflects me from concerted work 
(2) Watch myself [  ]. Not to allow myself the familiar tone with 
which I speak at the gorkom, at rehearsals, at the paper.  Be attentive to people. 
(3) For the education of the will  a firm regime [    
 ]. 
(4) Write my diary every other day.82 
However, Golovinskii also saw such introspection as unhealthy: A man should 
not live by his thoughts and feelings alone. A man must remain a man," he said.83 
Others derided intellectual reflection outright: Anatolii Shelkopliasov, writing to 
Valia Chunikhina, whose correspondence had been published in November 
1962, talked of how his intellectual abilities almost ruined [his] life because 
they offered him a clean job [ ].  But he claims to have been 
oppressed by the feeling of being of little use, and ashamed by [his] hands, 
which were soft and delicate  not like a man's hands [ - , 
].84  Shelkopliasov eventually became a geologist-scout in the Arctic.  
Thought was not only unhealthy but emasculating: only by acting, making a 
physical mark on the world (and, in turn, by being physically marked by it) 
could these diarists prove their worthiness.85 
79 Chunikhina, Ia liubliu. 
80 My liubim zhizn, KP 26/12/62, 2. 
81 Golovinskii, Stranitsy. 
82 Ibid. 
83 Ibid. 
84 My liubim, 2. 
85 See, for example, the poem Byl li ty molodym, where squeeze[ing] blisters by the palmful 
becomes a marker of true youthfulness (KP, 6/5/59).  In the next section, we will see how such 
masculine qualities conflicted with the more rarefied values of the Khrushchev and Brezhnev 
periods. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 163 
 If labour was a path to maturity and masculinity, it also offered a route to 
community.  Filmmaker Otar Ioseliani wrote in elevated tones about his 
relationship with colleagues: My work now, and this blast-furnace today will  
become memories, maybe some of the very best, and these comrades will be 
with me forever.86  He later spoke of the fact that the most beautiful, inspiring, 
and even touching minutes are after work  the minutes of recognition of what 
youve done, of pride.  Colleagues hearts are full of tenderness and care for 
one another.  He looks tenderly and lovingly at a colleague, and speaks of a 
unity of spilled sweat [  ].  A similar theme of 
collective belonging was visible in the diary of Tadeusz Skibinskii, who 
overcame his regrets about coming to Siberia:  
You're looking for romantika?  Here it is before your very eyes.  You're looking for 
romantics?  Here they are, sixty odd people.  They've worked ten hours today and 
they're going to work another ten.  You won't hear anyone complain that they're 
tired, or that they're sorry they came to Siberia. 
 I became awfully ashamed.  An hour ago you said you were sorry you came to 
Siberia, a voice opposite said. No, I'm not sorry, replied another voice. Are you 
sorry you came? No, I'm not sorry, I said loudly. Zemliak, who are you talking 
to? said Nina. To you, Nina ... to myself, to everybody I understand, she 
proffered, amazed.87  
"To you [...] to myself, to everybody": the podvig represented the moment when 
individual loneliness and self-doubt gave way to the discovery of an authentic 
community of individuals.  Through the podvig, a potentially subversive 
individualism was converted into a narrative of collective action.  Personal 
history and national history were concentrated into a single instant and a single 
space: individuals were not just building a dam, or a new house, but history 
itself.  Almost inevitably, given the extreme labour-centricity of the Soviet 
project, the construction site was the place where the processes of history were 
made flesh  where physical space was shown to be the product of human 
processes.   
86 Ioseliani, Geroi, vy riadom so mnoi, KP 21/2/64, 2-4. 
87 Skibinskii, Dogoniaite, 3.  See also examples in Albert Miftakhutdinov, Kliuch ot zapoliaria, 
KP 30/11/67, 2. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 164 
It was also the place where young people reached consciousness and 
blended in with the collective: from this point, diarists and letter-writers 
proclaimed their self-understanding, or personal happiness, thus casting the 
narrative as one of individual transformation.  There was nothing inherently 
problematic about this: after all, Communism promised individual fulfilment.  
But it is also necessary to ask how these individual transformations fit in with 
the wider social and historical process in which they were embedded.  What 
part did the contemporary hero play in these processes: were they to be 
exemplars to be emulated by anybody, or exceptional figures, proof of what 
could be achieved, but not necessarily what should be achieved?   
3 Spaces and Things 
Movement was at the heart of the Contemporaries rubric: from urban to rural, 
centre to periphery, from comfort to struggle.  It seemed that only in labour and 
in estrangement from the luxury and temptations of city life could individuals 
find fulfilment.  But, given that Soviet society was ostensibly moving towards a 
Communist society based on increased satisfaction of consumer desires, a 
tension emerged between the values of Contemporaries and those projected by 
the regime.  Moreover, behind the vivid spatial descriptions of nature and travel, 
a temporal narrative of historical continuity and progress was more difficult to 
produce.  Alongside the narrative of personal fulfilment and exploration, 
another narrative of supressed history and social problems was left unspoken. 
The previous section illustrated how narrative time in the Contemporaries 
rubric was synonymous with biographical time.  This was, of course, an 
inevitable consequence of their autobiographical focus.  However, what is 
striking is the remoteness of historical concerns  how even the most basic 
conceptions of historical time, of past and future and their relation to the 
present, were often absent.  Again, this was partly down to the genre: 
individuals tend to talk about themselves in diaries and letters.  However, given 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 165 
the fact that journalists were actively intervening in redrafting texts, this 
absence is nevertheless surprising.   
The absence of temporal anchors can be partly attributed to the fact that 
the papers autobiographical texts appeared at a time of crisis.  The Secret 
Speech tore a hole in the narrative of historical progress that the regime had 
hitherto put forward.  On the evidence of the Contemporaries rubric, it seems 
that journalists at KP were only able to provide a new narrative at the expense 
of passing over aspects of the past in silence.  The only diary in the series to 
mention the Terror, published in 1964 and written by Andrei Chukhno, 
reflected this.88  Rather than a personal testimony, it was a history of the 
Lighthouse kolkhoz from the 1920s through to the 1960s, which read more like 
a chronicle than a diary.  When it touched on the Terror, the neutral tone was 
disconcerting: having been arrested after a false denunciation in 1937, all 
Chukhno wrote was that: In November [1938], thirteen months after my arrest, 
I returned to my job. Lapa, Kozachok and Kondratenko never returned.  And 
with those terse words, a line was drawn under the affair.   
Katerina Clark has written of a leapfrog manoeuvre where the historical 
narrative jumped from revolution and Civil War to Five-Year Plan to Great 
Patriotic War, while omitting difficult-to-explain episodes such as NEP, the 
Terror, and the repressions of post-war Stalinism.89  This was certainly true of 
KP, which largely omitted to mention the Terror and, when it did, argued that, 
while crimes were committed under Stalin, heroic feats and romanticism were 
far more prevalent.90  Diaries appeared from figures like Sergei Chekmarev, a 
poet and activist who died in 1933, and Valentin Maltsev, an eighteen year-old 
whose letters from the siege of Leningrad were serialised over several days.91  
Both publications brought their authors posthumous fame, suggested a way of 
88 Andrei Chukhno, Sveti, Maiak, KP 4/8/64, 1, 2. 
89 Katerina Clark, Changing Historical Paradigms in Soviet Culture in Late Soviet Culture from 
Perestroika to Novostroika, ed. by Thomas Lahusen, Gene Kuperman (Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 1993), p.298. 
90 E.g. see Boris Pankin, My  v lagere dobra, KP 27/11/63, 2.  For editorial discussion of this 
article see 2/12/63, d.350, ll.4, 11, 16-21. 
91 Sergei Chekmarev, Na peredem krae, KP 2, 5, 7, 9, 12, 14/9/56; Valentin Maltsev, Zhivym 
zhit na zemle, KP 15-20/6/58. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 166 
linking the past with the present, and invited comparisons with the 
autobiographical efforts of contemporaries. 
Characteristic of this tendency was the editorial introduction to Valia 
Demikhinas diary:  
 After our fathers and grandfathers there still remain cities on the map, 
factories, canals, and scientific discoveries, statues to heroes and the fraternal 
graves of the unknown soldiers of Communism. 
And memoirs, diaries and letters still remain, too.  Self-portraits of 
Korcharginites and the Young Guard  Sons and grandsons want to be worthy of 
the glory of their fathers and grandfathers; sons and daughters want their 
Zimnii and their Magnitka.  Today, there are Komsomol construction projects, 
chemicals, the fight for the harvest, the storming of space.  And sons and 
grandsons are writing letters and diaries.  They are also living witnesses of the 
continuing revolution.  These are, though incomplete, a self-portrait of the 
Komsomol generation of the 1960s.92 
But despite these appeals to a pristine, heroic history, it was space, not time, 
that was asked to bear the weight of meaning.  Under Stalin, Moscow was the 
symbolic and literal centre of the nation; power radiated outwards from the 
Kremlin to the periphery.93  We can illustrate this process by comparing the 
amount of column space that was devoted to different locations in the late-Stalin 
and Khrushchev periods.  As Figure 2 (page 187) shows, the vast majority of 
material printed in the last years of Stalinism was concerned with locales urban 
or European  and overwhelmingly with affairs in Moscow.  However, after 
1956, this skewing of the papers geography became a matter for debate.  
Journalists found it a worrying sign that KP spoke so little on the countrys 
outlying areas and it was considered unacceptable to allow a single week to go 
by without an article on Siberia or the Virgin Lands.94  Over time, there emerged 
an increased provision of information from exotic locales where the paper did 
92 Demikhina, Tak my zhivem. See also Iurii Zhukovs People of the 30s, which attempted to 
draw a line between the constructors of Komsomolsk-na-Amure and Magnitogorsk in the past, 
and the builders of Bratsk and the conquerors of the Virgin Lands in the present day.  See Iurii 
Zhukov, Liudi 30-x godov (Moscow: Izdatelstvo Sovetskaia Rossiia, 1966).  The book was 
printed before Khrushchevs ouster. 
93 See the essays in The Landscape of Stalinism: The Art and Ideology of Soviet Space, ed. by 
Evgeny Dobrenko, Eric Naiman (Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 2003). 
94 See, for example, 20/8/56, d.175, ll.100-101; 2/12/57, d.298, ll.17-18; 16/12/57, d.198, l.60; 
2/6/58, d.227, ll.20, 28, 30; 18/5/59, d.247, l.56. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 167 
not have correspondents, such as short faits divers on the construction of a 
factory, or a new hydro-electric power plant.   
By 1960, the papers geography had shifted eastwards (Figure 3, page 
188).  The vast majority of column inches devoted to the Soviet periphery came 
from longer items: sketches, reportages, so-called documentary narratives  
and, of course, from readers diaries, letters, and notebooks  all devoted to 
selling the natural wonders of the Soviet wilderness to urbanised readers.  
Such articles painted the periphery as purer and more authentic than the centre.  
Relations of space were cast as relations of quality; the distance travelled from 
civilisation signified the size of ones soul.  KP both reflected and encouraged 
this overturning of the Moscow-centric hierarchy established under Stalin.  
Though Moscow undoubtedly remained the symbolic centre  The Stars of the 
Kremlin are the Planet's Lighthouse proclaimed one headline95  it also 
frequently subverted this Moscow-centrism by printing articles about the 
troublesome and subversive behaviour of Muscovites.  Moscow was therefore 
caught between two diametrically opposed roles: it was the political centre  
and seemingly a den of vice.   
A letter from a reader in Amur, published in 1956 in the youth monthly 
Iunost, contended:   
This town is interesting because it's mostly working people living in it, you never 
see idlers; in Moscow on an ordinary working day I saw people hanging around 
idly [-] on the street  there's none of that here.96   
This equation of Moscow with idleness and debauchery became so widespread 
that at the Twenty-Second Party Congress of 1961 Aleksandr Tvardovskii, the 
editor of Novyi mir, felt compelled to speak out against the denigration of the 
nations capital: 
[...] the conception of Moscow as a kind of Babylon, full of all sorts of temptations 
and supreme vanities, and as the antithesis, as it were, to the righteous life seems 
to me hardly valid.  As though Moscow were not the centre of the country's 
political and cultural life, were not one of the most important sectors of our 
95 Zvezdy Kremlia  maiak planety, KP 3/9/63, 3. 
96 Pervye pis'ma, Iunost' 11 (November 1956), 69. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 168 
construction, as though it did not provide wonderful and extremely rich material 
for studying life in all its most intricate interweavings.97 
Despite this apparent inversion of the cultural significations of centre 
and periphery, the reversal of symbolic roles was far from total.  The residents 
of faraway towns seemed to require assistance of visitors from the centre, and 
were often in thrall to superstition, or lacking in culture.  Moreover, Moscow 
and the cities still retained their unique power to produce heroes  a power 
which was denied, for the most part, to the periphery.  For a hero to originate 
from the periphery (and, what's more, to stay there) was a rare occurrence: the 
city, it seems, was the place where heroes came from; the periphery was the 
place in which they could emerge.   
This possibility of emerging was the real attraction.  The paper painted 
the periphery as a space of truth, but also enjoyment and self-actualisation; 
readers of KP were invited to enjoy Soviet space, with Siberia, especially, 
depicted as a land of natural wonders, beauty  and freedom.98  In the Soviet 
novel, the periphery functioned as a kind of adventure space freed from the 
weight of the past.  The letters, diaries and testimonies of the 1950s and 1960s 
explicitly played on the joys of sleeping under the stars, of communing with 
nature, of overcoming hardship and finding oneself; Kazakhstan, the Arctic, and 
Siberia  in short, anywhere far from Moscow  were the stages upon which a 
personal journey was played out. 
Rather than redeeming the past, the Soviet wilderness provided an 
opportunity for individuals to fulfil their own dreams in the present.  The 
Contemporaries narratives of the 1950s and 1960s had something in common 
with the films of the period, in which historical events were deprived of their 
symbolic significance and instead represented a plateau of experience that 
displays the highest manifestations of a human self, a realm of ultimate being.99  
But perhaps this phenomenon extended beyond historical narratives  perhaps 
97 Current Soviet Policies IV: The Documentary Record of the 22nd Congress of the Communist Party 
of the Soviet Union, ed. by Charlotte Saikowski, Leo Gruliow (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1962), p.189. 
98 E.g. Pod ogniami poliarnogo siianiia, KP 5/12/59, 4; Clark, Soviet Novel, pp.224-233. 
99 Petre Petrov, The Freeze of Historicity in Thaw Cinema, Kinokultura 8 (April 2005) 
<http://www.kinokultura.com/articles.apr05-petrov.html> [Accessed: 10/7/2011] 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 169 
it was a tendency of this period not just to look for times of heightened intensity, 
but also spaces: Siberia merely literalised this tendency.  Yuri Slezkine describes 
the process in this way:  
[D]ozens of orphaned fictional youngsters stampeded out of the soulless old 
capitals to a land where the snow never melted and where men kept their word. 
Leaving behind their dead-end jobs, clinging girlfriends, and shattered ideals, the 
new heroes of the 1950s and 60s followed the Cheliuskintsy" to Siberia  only  
now they tempered themselves by submitting to it, not by taming it. If the 
mechanised future was a fraud, then the remaining wilderness represented 
purity and authenticity. Siberia was a stern mentor (The tundra does not like the 
weak), but its truth was timeless.100 
Timeless is the operative word, for it signified an escape from history into an 
endless present.  Historical time seemed to be frozen, petrified  and space, 
while appearing to provide a refuge, was actually implicated in the process.  For 
if Magnitka and Turksib were lieux de memoire, Magadan and Taishet  where a 
number of diaries were set  were no less so.101  Siberia could only be a virgin 
field in the world of rhetoric: it was too pock-marked with the detritus of a 
brutal past to be so in reality.102   
For younger journalists, this proved a shock.  Vsevolod Bogdanov 
remembered being criticised by an older journalist for calling the city of 
Severodvinsk a dream city when, in fact, it was the centre of the Gulag 
network:  
I was really upset.  I thought that Severodvinsk truly was a romantic city of youth, 
with white nights and enormous industrial enterprises.  But someone from 
another generation remembered something else.  For the first time, I felt the 
mismatch between what I saw and immediately felt, and the underlying 
principles of what had happened in the past.103 
While journalistic rhetoric sought to emphasise a new beginning, in reality it 
proved difficult to start the page afresh.  Many of Khrushchev's showpiece 
100 Yuri Slezkine, Galya Diment, Introduction, in Between Heaven and Hell: The Myth of Siberia in 
Russian Culture, ed. by Diment & Slezkine (New York: St. Martins Press, 1993), p.6. 
101 Pierre Nora, Les lieux de mmoire. 3 vols. (Paris: Gallimard, 1997) 
102 Vail/Genis, p.82. 
103 V. Bogdanov, 'Ia chelovek postoianno vlubliennyi ...' , Zhurnalist, 2 (2004), 66. [Originally 
quoted in Natalia Roudakova, From the Fourth Estate to the Second Oldest Profession: Russia's 
Journalists in Search of Their Public After Socialism Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Stanford 
University, 2007, pp.86-87, translation modified]. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 170 
projects (the Virgin Lands campaign, Bratsk GES) were spaces where the brutal 
'internal colonisation' of the Stalin Era was beginning to unravel, with chaotic 
and unexpected results.104   
Journalists were more than aware of this process.  P.L. Godlevskii, a 
correspondent who had just returned from komandirovka to Bratsk GES 
reported back to colleagues about the negative consequences of the mingling of 
camp labour, 'free' (ex-convict) labour, and young enthusiasts from the cities 
(Bratsk was in the vicinity of five large camps).  According to Godlevskii, 
construction sites like Bratsk GES, were problematically split into distinct 
'zones' which housed 'criminal' and 'civilian' elements respectively.105  But, as 
he told his colleagues, there's no need to write about that in the newspaper  a 
recommendation that the newspaper faithfully observed.106  As KP journalist 
Inna Rudenko recalled in 2003:  
My romantic elation clearly prevented me from seeing life in its real, 
contradictory complexity.  That is, I saw  I knew, for example, how many 
prisoners, how many newly-released political prisoners there were on the 
construction sites of Communism  but to write about it?  The thought never 
came into my head.107 
As long as these tensions stayed out of the newspaper, it may seem that 
journalists had nothing to worry about.  However, by emphasising the 
biographical over the historical, narratives lost sight of the official structures of 
Party and Komsomol, and instead spoke of an abstract collective.  Only in the 
very final lines of Tadeusz Skibinskiis diary did he decide to join the Komsomol, 
leading one member of the editorial team to comment incredulously that he had 
needed two years to come to that realisation.108  Though the activities of a 
handful of diarists were intertwined with the work of the Komsomol, to the 
104 The application of notions of (internal) colonisation to Soviet space is most forcefully made in 
Kate Brown, Out of Solitary Confinement: The History of the Gulag Kritika 8/1 (Winter 2007): 
67-103 and taken up in Stephen Lovell's discussion of centre/periphery models in The Shadow 
of War: Russia and the USSR, 1941 to the Present (Chichester: Wiley Blackwell, 2010), Chapter 6.  
See also Aleksandr Etkind, Internal Colonization: Russias Imperial Experience (Cambridge: Polity 
Press, 2011). 
105 28/4/58, d.225, l.63. 
106 Ibid. 
107 Inna Rudenko, Nado pomnit', chto est' liudi, kotorye luchshe tebia, in Zhurnalisty XX veka: 
liudi i sud'by (Moscow: Olma-press, 2003), p.760. 
108 30/9/63, d.349, ll.8-9. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 171 
majority of authors, they seemed almost irrelevant.  Even in journalists 
introductions to articles, where protagonists work was placed in the heroic 
lineage of previous mass actions, it appears that these were performed for 
personal satisfaction and, at best, in order to build Communism  not for the 
Communist Party or Komsomol.   This might appear to be a purely semantic 
distinction  after all, the building of Communism was the Partys raison d'tre  
but it illustrates a certain hollowing out of the Partys authority.  Whilst belief in 
Communism as a goal remained active, this no longer needed to flow through 
the Party.  Instead, it travelled through the individual, or through a collective 
that was only tenuously linked to official structures. 
At a letuchka in January 1960, Sofia Bolshakova spoke of how material plenty 
was not on its own a guarantee of Communism: 
In a number of countries  Sweden, America, they've already reached such a level 
of production of material goods that in certain circumstances it would be possible 
to talk about prosperity in every home.  But of course, even if a social revolution 
occurred in these countries, we couldn't talk about communism existing, for 
communism is, above all, communist consciousness.109 
Sweden was on the agenda once more in June, as KPs journalists discussed an 
article on a crisis amongst the youth of Sweden, entitled The Fruits of a Free 
Education.110  Such articles were common: they allowed the paper to turn the 
spotlight on a perceived moral crisis in the West, while deflecting attention from 
journalists own sense of malaise.  Kira Nikiforova, the Deputy Head of the 
Department of Letters, argued that Soviet citizens differed from their western 
counterparts in terms of moral outlook: 
Nikiforova: Everybody who has been abroad has come across the fact that young 
people from capitalist countries, who are wonderful on the outside, bring about a 
feeling of sympathy  very often theyre somehow without aspirations, without 
ideas. 
Khvastunov: Sweets without fillings ... [  ] 
109 18/1/60, d.268, l.153. 
110 M. Arkadev, Plody svobodnogo vospitaniia KP 12/6/60, 4. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 172 
Nikiforova: If you like, sweets without fillings.111 
Thus, it was through moral characteristics, exemplified by the parade of 
unstinting, dedicated heroes in the Contemporaries rubric, that Soviet 
superiority was to be demonstrated.   
However, there remained confusion as to the meaning of Communism.  
At the January 1960 letuchka, Bol'shakova criticised the simplistic view of 
Communism that many citizens possessed: 
How do our people imagine communism?  Communism is when there will be lots 
of everything; when you don't need to work and everything will be available, and 
the quicker products are available, the quicker communism will exist  that's how 
plainly some people understand it.112 
But this was a misconception propagated by the countrys leaders: the very next 
year, Khrushchev, in his report to the Twenty-Second Party Congress, 
announced that the cup of Communism is the cup of abundance, and it must 
always be full to the brim".113  At the very same Congress, a new party 
programme was approved which promised that the Soviet Union would be built 
(in the main) by 1980.114   
 However, the regimes focus on the material aspects of communism 
invited problems.  Competition with the Wests superior material wealth invited 
unwanted comparisons.  Many Soviet tourists to Eastern Europe came home 
laden with as many items as they could carry  sometimes even selling their 
own possessions to buy more goods.115  Judged by one of the Soviet regime's 
most important yardsticks, the apparently less-developed 'periphery' of Eastern 
Europe was, in reality, somewhat more advanced than its Soviet centre.  This 
development not only threatened to place the Soviet Union on a collision course 
with the world's most advanced producers of such trinkets but also to 
111 13/6/60, d.273, l.87. 
112 18/1/60, d.268, ll.127-128. 
113 N.S. Khrushchev, On the Program of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union: Report at the 
22nd Congress of the CPSU, October 18, 1961 in Current Soviet Policies IV, p.89. 
114 The Party Program in Ibid., p.15. 
115 Anne E. Gorsuch, Time Travellers: Soviet Tourists to Eastern Europe, in Turizm: The Russian 
and East European Tourist Under Capitalism and Socialism, ed. by Anne E. Gorsuch, Diane 
Koenker (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2006), pp.205-226. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 173 
destabilise a moral edifice which had thrived upon renunciation.116  The papers 
contemporaries gave clear evidence of these tensions, and their own lack of a 
consistent viewpoint on the creation of wealth, of comfort, and of the moral 
value of things, is illustrative of one of the regime's basic dilemmas as the Cold 
War entered the Soviet home.   
  Such tensions had been present since NEP, when the temporary 
abandonment of Communist construction for the inequalities of a capitalist 
economy left activists disillusioned.117  Historians have shown how, in the 
1930s, Stalin's ideology of abundance caused disquiet amongst a population 
which struggled to get hold of essentials, let alone caviar and champagne, while 
the post-war period saw the gaudy figure of an orange lampshade, scalloped 
and fringed threatened to bury Soviet ideological purpose in meshchanstvo.118  
However, the potential mismatch between rhetoric and reality was less 
threatening to the regime under Stalin, not just because of the risks of voicing 
one's anger publicly, but because Stalin's policy of abundance had asceticism 
built into it. Soviet citizens didn't need to 'renounce' the material because the 
material had already renounced them.  Hard work and sacrifice were facts of 
life, adding a sense of sobriety to the acquisitive official values.  What was 
different  and potentially more divisive  was the fact that the leadership was 
now saying that such abundance was within reach.   
 The introduction of an explicit moral dimension into Soviet communism 
represented an attempt to ground these tensions.  Exemplified by the 
imposition of the 'Moral Code of the Builder of Communism', part of the Second 
Party Programme at the Twenty-Second Congress, this moral focus provided a 
necessary complement to the regimes promises of material plenty, as a way of 
116 For more on this dynamic see Amir Weiner, Robust Revolution to Retiring Revolution: The 
Life Cycle of the Soviet Revolution, 19451968 Slavonic and East European Review 86/2 (April 
2008), pp.208-231. 
117 See, for example, Anne E. Gorsuch, Youth in Revolutionary Russia. Enthusiasts, Bohemians, 
Delinquents (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2000). 
118 Sheila Fitzpatrick Becoming Cultured: Socialist Realism and the Representation of Taste and 
Privilege in The Cultural Front: Power and Culture in Revolutionary Russia (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1992), pp.227-229; Jukka Gronow, Caviar with Champagne: Common Luxury 
and the Ideals of the Good Life in Stalin's Russia (Oxford: Berg, 2003); Vera S. Dunham, In Stalin's 
Time: Middle Class Values in Soviet Fiction (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976), p.37. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 174 
preventing Communism from slipping into meshchanstvo.119  The regime also 
attempted to rein in subversive energies by regulating excessive consumption 
through the regulation of everyday life and taste.120  Through the press, 
including KP, and through advice literature, Soviet citizens were informed that 
their interiors needed to be free from all ornamentation (What is excessive is 
bad), while excessive consumption was to be kept in check.121  
 Despite attempts to create a harmony between the rhetoric of material 
comfort in the present and revolutionary transformation in the future, a logic of 
either/or nevertheless prevailed, and turned into a battle between imminent 
material plenty, on the one hand, and a spirit of renunciation and a fetishisation 
of physical toil, on the other.  But while some journalists perceived such 
renunciation as proof of authors high ideals, others considered their values of 
self-sacrifice to be out of step with the epoch.  Although communism was now 
synonymous with universal plenty, its opposite  universal asceticism  was 
equally powerfully put forward.  As a character in one of the paper's frequent 
documentary stories exclaimed: To hell with everything material122 
Such conflicts are visible in the testimony of Otar Ioseliani, adapted from 
his diaries, which we encountered in the previous section.123  Ioseliani is a 
Georgian filmmaker (today living in Paris and continuing to make films) whose 
second feature, April (1961), had been heavily criticised as being divorced from 
real life.  He was ordered to go closer to the masses and learn about the 
labour of ordinary workers at an iron ore factory in Rustaveli, Georgia.  The 
documents advocacy of action over thought, of manual over intellectual labour, 
119 See Catriona Kelly, Refining Russia: Advice Literature, Polite Culture, and Gender from 
Catherine to Yeltsin (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001), pp.314-15; Miriam Dobson, 
Khrushchev's Cold Summer: Gulag Returnees, Crime, and the Fate of Reform After Stalin (Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press, 2009), Ch.7; Deborah Ann Field, Communist Morality and Meanings of 
Private Life in Post-Stalinist Russia, 1953-1964 Unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of 
Michigan, 1996, Ch.1. 
120 Victor Buchli, Modernism, and the Fight Against Petit-bourgeois Consciousness in the Soviet 
Home Journal of Design History 10/2 (1997), 161-176; Susan E. Reid, Cold War in the Kitchen: 
Gender and the De-Stalinisation of Consumer Taste in the Soviet Union under Khrushchev Slavic 
Review 61/2 (Summer 2002), 211-252. 
121 M. Mertsalova, Chto cherezchur, to plokho Rabotnitsa 11(1964), 30; Kelly, Refining Russia, 
Ch.5. 
122 Klara Skopina, Piatera otpravliaiut za mechtoi, KP 11/1/63, 2. 
123 Ioseliani, Geroi. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 175 
provided a rejoinder to one of the main groups challenging the partys 
authority: young, urban intellectuals.  The formalist Ioseliani was a 
representative of those who had set out on the wrong path; his induction into 
the world of manual labour was to provide proof of its redemptive power, and 
show a more authentic collective away from the unhealthy influence of effete 
urban intellectuals.  Ioselianis testimony (which, transcripts indicate, was 
corrected by journalists), puts this notion across powerfully: 
 a feeling of life in its fullness, a feeling of beauty and joy, as well as a feeling of 
closeness to people, a feeling of spiritual communion with any person 
(important: with precisely anyone, with everyone) is possible only when youve 
finished work, when you sit opposite them and lay your tired hands on your 
knees. 
Other diarists shared this suspicion. Golovinskii argued that: A man should not 
live by his thoughts and feelings alone and blamed his unhappiness on the fact 
that I think too much and do to little, while one reader wrote to Valia 
Chunikhina claiming that his intellectual abilities almost ruined [his] life.124 
 Such comments were in many ways a throwback to the past.  In one 
letter from Sergei Chekmarev, written in the late-1920s or early-1930s, the 
concept of the diary as a means for introspection was derided. All that was for 
intellectuals (in the pejorative sense), for those who were studying 
themselves and digging in the depths of their psychology oh, what a bad 
person I still am, what a weak-willed person, what things Ive done  All that 
was for young ladies who are in love with Douglas Fairbanks.125  In the 
thirties, the builders of Komsomolsk-na-Amure and Magnitka had relied on 
brute force, not on intellect.  In the forties, the victors of the Great Patriotic War 
had required bravery.  In sixties, once more it was physical toil, rather than 
intellectual labour that seemed to be prized above all.  So perhaps these paeans 
to the joys of sweat and grind were an attempt to recapture heroism for a 
generation too young to have fought in the war.  Deputy Editor Boris Pankin saw 
Ioselianis exaggeration of the significance of physical labour as a strength, 
124 Golovinskii, Stranitsy; My liubim. 
125 Chekmarev, Na perednem krae, 16/9/56, 4. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 176 
not a shortcoming.126  For him, Ioselianis diary was important because it 
showed an individual at the stage at which the person is found.  A diary is a 
photograph of that stage [...] through which one needs to go through.   
 But Aleksandr Egorov was uncomfortable with Ioseliani's praise for 
physical labour.  For him, following the filmmakers logic through to the end led 
to some worrying conclusions:  
What comes of this?  No intellectual, no artist will be able to find a path [  
 ] to a person of physical labour as long as this creative individual 
does not become a steel founder, a milkmaid, [work on] a fishing vessel, or break 
their back with tiredness.  This is amateur philosophising [   
 ].  Creative labour is equal to physical labour.  Maiakovskii didn't 
talk about himself as an unskilled labourer for nothing.  And so this poetry of 
physical tiredness is, in my opinion, a sin [] of the material, which could have 
been more interesting in terms of its length and in terms of the themes it touches 
on.127 
This raised the question of just how typical the heroes of these diaries should 
be.  Were their actions to be emulated by everybody, or was the lack of culture 
that some of them displayed in their striving for the future a fault in the 
material?   
Such questions had already reared their heads the year before in 
response to the diary of Tadeusz Skibinskii.  Having left his home town without 
a second thought, Skibinskii is told what to expect in his adopted home of 
Bratsk: It turns out we're most likely going to live either in wagons or in tents, 
but maybe even in a dormitory, but when he arrives, he seems almost 
disappointed to find that his new home is more comfortable than expected: We 
expected that it would be just tents and wagons, but there are so many houses 
with two floors.  And the dirt is something temporary: they'll soon asphalt the 
streets.128  After a while, he travels to the nearby town of Taishet.  On his way 
to Bratsk months earlier, he passed the town and found that it was made up of 
antiquated buildings and huts.  But, in the intervening period, things have 
changed:  
126 24/2/64, d.361, l.72. 
127 Ibid., ll.62-63. 
128 Skibinskii, Dogoniaite. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 177 
We're housed in a dormitory with two floors.  To be honest, at first I couldn't get 
used to it.  Cleanliness, wardrobes with mirrors, lace curtains on the wall, rugs, a 
bathroom and toilet ... just like in Mogilev.  After wagons and tents it's kind of 
unusual.  I'd got used to them. 
Before long, Skibinskii, tiring of all this comfort, decides to leave:  
I was bored in Taishet. A warm room, clean bed-sheets, a shower, a cinema  I 
had all that in Mogilev, and now it was the same thing there.  Why did I come 
here?  I could have stayed at home.  There's no difference.  No, that sort of life's 
not for me. 
He moves on to a small station in an even more remote location: The 
dormitories are being renovated so at the moment you'll have to live in a 
wagon, explained Vasilii Zakharovich Popov, the head of personnel.  Is that 
okay? Did I come here to work or to be comfortable? replies Skibinskii. 
 Because of the logic of comfort, Skibinskii found an 'authentic' life, 
exemplified by material deprivation and geographical desolation, impossible to 
find.  He went in search of new challenges, new things to construct, but, once 
completed, they became the very thing he was fleeing from.  Skibinskii thus 
became a nomadic figure, escaping the very logic of Communist development: 
asceticism today in the name of comfort tomorrow.  But wardrobes, mirrors, 
and lace curtains that were central to notions of the new kul'turnost', while 
curtains had historically been a universal symbol of kulturnost, through which 
public and private space could be divided.129  But for a man who lived in public 
view, such a partitioning of an inside space from the outside was quite 
unnecessary  an emasculation from which Skibinskii needed to flee as soon as 
possible to reassert his independence and his masculinity.130   
Skibinskii could be considered a product of his time.  Vail and Genis saw 
hostility to furniture as a typically romantic gesture: 
129 Catriona Kelly and Vadim Volkov, Directed Desires: Kul'turnost' and Consumption in 
Constructing Russian Culture in the Age of Revolution, 1881-1940, ed. by Catriona Kelly, David 
Shepherd (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998): 299. 
130 On domesticity as emasculation see Christine Varga-Harris, Homemaking and the Aesthetic 
and Moral Perimeters of the Soviet Home during the Khrushchev Era, Journal of Social History 
41/3 (2008), 571-572.  For a counter-argument, see Susan E. Reid, Happy Housewarming: 
Moving Into Soviet Apartments in Petrified Utopia: Happiness Soviet Style, ed. by Marina Balina, 
Evgeny Dobrenko (London: Anthem Press, 2009), pp.150-151. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 178 
The aggressive morality of the builder of communism didnt want to wait while 
the philistine [] crawled across the dam with dynamite in his teeth.  The 
philistine should be disarmed at the point of passive preparation: the sofa.  It was 
easier for him to lie down than yearn for the road.  Thats probably why the main 
hatred of romantics was for soft furnishings: a plush armchair, a bed with an 
ornamental frame [  ], and a couch [-].131 
Romantic gesture or not, Skibinskiis hostility to comfort didn't escape the 
attention of the paper's staff.  In an editorial meeting, Tamara Afanas'eva 
commented:  
This person is running away from elementary hygienic requirements.  He left 
Mogilev because he had a room there, he left Taishet because there were clean 
bed-sheets and a warm bathroom.  [...] He runs wherever the most minimal of 
conveniences are lacking.  I don't know how it looks to journalists, but for me, the 
creation of discomfort as a goal in itself is strange.  It reeks of feeble-
mindedness.132 
Skibinskii's actions were, according to one system of ideals, "feeble-minded" 
and "strange", but according to a system that actively suggested that discomfort 
was moral, his actions were only to be applauded.  Opposed to the ideals of 
Communist plenty, Skibinskii stood in a line that ran from Chernyshevskiis 
Rakhmetov to the ascetics of the 1920s.  While the leader of the country was 
arguing over kitchens, Skibinskii was denouncing domestic trash, just as the 
paper itself had done three-and-a-half decades before.133   
Yet not all diarists shared Skibinskiis unease: Olga Popkova wrote in hers 
that We have our own apartment  a room with a kitchen. Weve started to feel 
at home and weve improved our apartment. Now were in bliss, though she, 
too, drank a toast to hated, worthless comfort.134 But frequent references to 
unreliable girlfriends who wanted to live the good life, or friends who 
ridiculed diarists for travelling East because romanticism was temporary 
showed that there was at least some perception that these heroes were 
131 Vail/Genis, p.130.  See also Victor Buchli, An Archaeology of Socialism (London: Berg, 2000), 
pp.44-45. 
132 30/9/63, d.349, ll.6-7. 
133 Svetlana Boym, Common Places: Mythologies of Everyday Life in Russia (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1994), p.43. 
134 Olga Popkova, Eto i est nastoiashchaia zhizn KP 15-16/6/56, 2. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 179 
swimming against the current.135  Boyfriends, too, could be fickle, as a letter 
from Rita Vlasovas boyfriend showed: 
Rita, sweetheart, you have to understand, romantika is only good for books.  
Taiga, tundra, wastelands ... they're for special people, fanatics  physically 
strong, it's true  but fanatics who are also against [] urban comforts, 
just like I'm against sleeping under a cold sky.  It's a difference of tastes  that's 
all there is to it.  I've never witnessed that sort of fanaticism in you: you're an 
urbanite. [...] I think all this will pass. You're still blind, but you'll see and 
believe136 
His final words to Rita thus reversed the usual biographical trajectory of 
blindness to sight: to believe, here, was not to see the light of romantika, but to 
reject it.  Idealistic journeys to Siberia were not romantika, but fanaticism, and 
there was an ever-present danger that one could spill over into the other.  Given 
this opposition of values, quite inevitably, Rita and her boyfriend split.   
 If romanticism still consisted in saying to hell with everything material, 
then this suggested that the image of the hero had failed to adapt to changing 
material circumstances which encouraged comfort.  Thanks to builders like 
Skibinskii, the country was inching closer to Communism which was, according 
to the Party, a land of material plenty.  However, under changed social and 
cultural conditions, was it still acceptable for heroes to display the same 
qualities of toil and struggle as their predecessors in the 1930s?  If so, then it 
suggested that the values of culture and taste were, in reality, second order 
values and that displaying ones commitment to the cause through manual 
labour was what mattered above all.  The continued reliance on models of 
heroism borrowed from the 1930s suggested that as the country moved 
towards that mythical 1980 date, journalists were struggling to find compelling 
exemplars who represented both the need for self-sacrifice to build the future, 
and the material comforts that were now within reach.  These tensions would 
become abundantly clear after Khrushchevs ouster. 
135 E.g. Danilenko, Ia poliubila; Aleksandr Mishchenko, Filosofskii kamen KP 18/11/64, 2. 
136 Vlasova, Adres schast'e. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 180 
4 Epilogue: The End of Romantika 
For all the problems identified by journalists, it would be wrong to suggest that 
the series was unsuccessful  otherwise it would not have run for more than a 
decade.  Amidst the criticism, there was also praise  especially as readers 
responded positively to the stories of their contemporaries.  Sometimes the 
journalists themselves were surprised by the response the diaries received.  At a 
meeting of the Union of Journalists in 1964, Editor-in-Chief Iurii Voronov read 
out a letter from V. Berezhnoi, a tram driver from Odessa who had been inspired 
by the diary of Zoia Abramova.  Though Voronov considered the diary no better 
than a run-of-the-mill diary,  Berezhnoi called it a poem about people in love 
with the earth, about enthusiasts, about the obsessed137  Figures like Valia 
Chunikhina inspired many readers and won a kind of minor celebrity: Anatolii 
Petrianin was one of more than two-thousand readers who wrote to her, telling 
her that he had contemplated leaving his own romantic dream in the wilderness 
of Teia, Krasnoiarsk, because of problems with a lack of materials, but then 
asked himself: Would Valia have left? Of course she wouldnt. So I stayed, 
too.138  Thus, it appeared that journalists had managed to find contemporary 
heroes whose lives resonated with readers. 
Despite their public popularity, journalists began to worry about diaries 
negative effect on their audience, and wondered whether continually promoting 
the virtues of romantika might not be out of step with a nation which was 
moving from romanticism to rationalism.  Those staff who criticised the rubric 
were raising a key issue: what were the qualities that should make up the 
contemporary hero  were they the same as for any other citizen?  And what 
was their relationship to contemporary society?   
After October 1964, these questions found new answers.  While the 
Contemporaries rubric continued after Khrushchevs ouster, its mood and its 
focus changed significantly.  In 1965, only a quarter of the papers sixteen 
published diaries were written by contemporaries, the rest were historical 
137 Stenogramma Vsesoiuznogo tvorcheskogo seminara Zhurnalist i trebovaniia zhizni, 
23/06/64. GARF, f.10124, op.1, d.244. ll.35-37. 
138 My liubim. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 181 
diaries written during the war.  By 1968, in a faintly ridiculous move, diaries 
from the Leningrad blockade were published under the Contemporaries 
rubric.139  This reflected the growing demand for the press to promote the 
countrys revolutionary traditions  a clear attempt to repair the nations 
damaged sense of a useable past  albeit at the expense of the papers 
contemporaries.  Even contemporary diaries became far less romantic: the 
diary of teacher Natasha Iablonskii, although it took place in Kamchatka, was 
actually an attack on local bureaucracy.140   
It was clear that the romantic focus of the rubric was becoming less central 
to the papers output: staff devoted less time to discussing the rubric, and their 
reactions were sometimes less than effusive.  Indeed, in their growing rejection 
of romantika, they recalled the aborted critical debates of 1956.  In 1960, the 
story of four sailors trapped in the Pacific Ocean for forty days was a sensation 
that captivated the nation, providing proof of the moral fibre of the Soviet 
citizen.  But in 1965, when soldiers survived four weeks in a snow drift on a 
mountain, Kubichev argued that the article should have asked why the soldiers 
were not rescued sooner: The article should have been critical.  The soldiers 
would have been a hundred times more grateful to us.141 
In June 1965, an article by Leonid Zhukhovitskii focused on the damaging 
effects of the medias abstract romanticism.142  It focused on two disillusioned 
teenagers in the small town of Orekhovo-Zuevo, who wanted dangerous work, 
romantic work, like in books, like in films.  They rejected their dull lives in their 
hometown, and, despite their lack of qualifications, dreamed of taking part in a 
geological mission.  Zhukovitskii believed that their rejection of everyday life in 
a suburban town was attributable to the lazy education they had received from 
teachers and the mass media: 
Romantika  How many honourable, but still very naive children furiously idolise 
its extremely hazy form? And how many lazy managers, negligent educators, 
untalented film directors and literary commentators try to cash in on it with 
139 Boris Gubanov, Zhizn soldata, KP 17/1/68, 4. 
140 Natasha Iablonskii, God pervyi, ne poslednyi KP 2/10/66, 2, 4. 
141 24/2/65, d.382, ll.4-5. 
142 Leonid Zhukovitskii, Kto podnimaet parus? KP 2/6/65, 2. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 182 
neither	 rhyme	 nor	 reason	 [	 ]?	 ...	 It	 is	 very	 complicated	 to	 seriously	
prepare teenagers for the real difficulties awaiting them in the future. How much 
easier to rapturously blow into paper sails 
He was especially scathing about what he called the romantika of the train 
ticket: 
Get a ticket, leave for the hazy faraway expanses, and all questions will solve 
themselves  For there, in the faraway expanses, is the authentic life (obviously 
very different from the inauthentic one here).  There, you find genuine people 
(again, as opposed to the philistines and stiliagi here).  So pack up your suitcase 
and run fast to the ticket office  perhaps also from all difficult problems and, at 
the same time, from your own personal shortcomings. 
For Vitalii Ignatenko, a recent graduate from MGU, who would become Director 
of TASS within a decade, the article showed the side effects of the papers 
unthinking romantika.   
We say that a person will find some sort of happiness, that changes in character 
await, but not about the fact that this character depends above all not on 
distance, and not on changing home, but is within the person themselves, 
wherever they work.  First of all, one needs to forge character in oneself.143 
Ignatenko also saw the heroes of romantic sketches as coming from a narrow 
sphere of society: steeplejacks, plumbers, constructors  people who must 
perform great feats.  But, in doing so, the paper was focusing on a group of 
people who [found] themselves outside the material sphere, the sphere of 
everyday life [		,		 	].144  In other words, 
the paper was only able to find romantika in a limited range of atypical (and 
perhaps uncultured?) professions. 
In October, journalists discussed a diary by Vera Trotskaia, a thirty-four 
year-old philologist from MGU, working as a concrete worker, electrician and 
bricklayer in Aramil, a small settlement in the Urals.145  Kira Nikiforova was 
unimpressed, commenting: 
I don't in any way doubt that [the diary's] author is an absolutely pure, sincere, 
inspiring person.  But nevertheless, reading what was written by this person, 
143 8/6/65, d.383, ll.1-2. 
144 On this point see Boris Pankin, Effekt romantiki KP 20/7/65, 2-3. 
145 Vera Trotskaia, Ia za polnyi spektr, KP 30/9/65, 3-4. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 183 
these rapturous lines, these difficulties in a rosy haze, this bunch of difficulties, I 
felt an ever-strengthening feeling of pity for the author ...146 
Nikiforova wondered what a graduate of MGU was doing in such a backwater 
and asked: Is this a search for the self or something that benefits the cause? Is it 
an inclination for a change of scene or civic consciousness? An escape from an 
unhappy life or a search for personal happiness?147  She further claimed that 
publishing the diary under the contemporaries rubric was a mistake, since 
such contemporaries should be typical: 
Is the true young hero of our time a personally unsettled, wavering 
[	 ]	 person,	 without	 their	 own	 home,	 without	 their	
own family, for whom the whole poetry of life is in difficult, sometimes 
unjustified and back-breakingly	[]	difficult	work?		I	don't	agree	with	
this. I don't agree with the raising of personal disorder and asceticism into typical 
features of the contemporary leading young person.148 
There emerged a growing belief amongst journalists that the time for romantic 
renunciation had passed: what was typical was not a search for the self in exotic 
climes, but to settle down in Moscow and enjoy the fruits of ones education. 
The harmful results of romantika were illustrated by a 1966 article which 
described luxurious living conditions at the new Saiano-Shushenskaia GES, 
prompting two readers to make their way there on spec.149  However, as an 
article published a year later revealed, there was no job waiting for them.150  
The paper admitted that it should have made clear to readers that they needed 
to contact the management of the construction site beforehand, indicating their 
specialty: non-specialists evidently need not apply. The era of naked 
enthusiasm, of turning up on a construction site with nothing but passion, was 
coming to an end.   
Also on the wane was journalists appetite for faraway places.  In late 
1967, science correspondent Vladimir Gubarev condemned the papers focus on 
the Arctic and Siberia as exoticism, and spoke of how those in the periphery 
felt about romantika: 
146 12/10/65, d.386, l.20. 
147 Ibid., l.21. 
148 Ibid. 
149 G. Viatkin, O. Krat, Stroika bez palatok KP 26/10/66, 1. 
150 G. Boshchkin, Ha Enisei za pirogami? KP 11/1/67, 2. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 184 
 I know how those who live in the wilderness  feel about such material.  It just 
makes them smile and feel a lack of respect towards journalism.  Why?  Because a 
journalist, having sat in a plane, goes there for three days, runs around, takes a 
look around, goes home and then writes.  But people live there for twenty years 
or more, its their home, and these are not the problems that bother them  what 
bothers them are the most ordinary things, which we dont write about because 
we rarely go there, and see only the exotic side of things ...151   
Other articles in the press came to the same conclusion: an article published in 
Zhurnalist in 1968, by Mikhail Briman, the Deputy Editor of the newspaper 
Krasnoe znamia, argued that journalists had embellished their descriptions of 
the Arctic for the sake of romantika, but, in doing so, had wrought a damaging 
effect on society.152  The article claimed that work in itself was not fulfilling.  
Talking of open skies and difficulties to be surmounted tempted people to 
faraway places, but once those had been overcome, boredom soon set in.  
Briman called on journalists to use more sociological research to investigate the 
life plans of young people, so that they could avoid printing damaging articles.   
By 1969, some journalists felt that the Contemporaries rubric was so 
out-of-step with the values of the time, that it made more sense to end it.  At a 
letuchka in October 1969, a correspondent in the Department of Propaganda, 
Tamara Gromova spoke about a diary by Aleksandr Iurev which, she said, 
brought about melancholy thoughts.153  In the past, she argued, such diaries 
had been positive for the paper.  She added that the diaries of Golovinskii and 
Chunikhina had been valuable because they contained a spiritual portrait of 
our contemporary. A whole epoch.154  Now, however, they were an 
anachronism; the paper needed a more analytical relationship to the world.  
The paper needed to find a new vein, and, once it had found it, Gromova 
suggested, it was time to finish with the rubric.  Grigorii Oganov agreed, saying 
that, while the diaries might have been a victory for the paper ten years ago, 
times had changed: With todays requirements, material that five to ten years 
ago seemed good, and was even named the best material of the week or the 
151 Ibid., l.7. 
152 Mikhail Briman, Romantika bez prikras, Zhurnalist (1968), 18-19, 26. 
153 Aleksandr Iurev, Eto ia bez stepi ne mogu  KP 12/10/69, 2. 
154 23/10/69, d.488, l.72. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 185 
month, can seem ordinary.  A definite shift in time has taken place, a shift in the 
criteria that a person uses to judge material, wanting to see in it some sort of 
discovery.155  A couple of months later, Boris Ivanov reported back to the paper 
on the results of a commission devoted to discussing KPs future work.  He 
expressed the grandiose sentiment that in diaries our epoch came into 
existence, but expressed disappointment at the papers recent texts.  In 
response to the opinion of some Commission members that the rubric should be 
shut down, Ivanov argued that it should be retained but inspire a new life, in 
correspondence with the time in which we live.156 
 This was, in fact, the question that the rubric had raised all along: the 
relationship of heroes to their epoch.  While under Khrushchev there was a 
belief that sheer enthusiasm and purity of soul was sufficient, the early 
Brezhnev era was a period in which rational calculation, exemplified by 
economic planning and discussion was the order of the day.  In 1966, a 
Komsomol Agit-Prop report claimed: We live in an era when the high level of 
the reader forces journalists to study their hero more thoroughly and more 
deeply, and find new ways of showing our contemporary, of uncovering his/her 
basic qualities.157  The article mentioned a number of new forms: the 
interview-portrait, the research sketch, and the social portrait of the 
contemporary hero.   
 Between 1967 and 1968, Komsomolskaia pravda published its own 
rubric, entitled simply Social Portrait.  Rather than readers diaries and letters, 
these portraits were written by professional journalists.  Each portrait dealt 
with a particular profession  the kolkhoznik, the teacher, the fisherman, the 
driver  and explained its relevance to the construction of socialism.158  In this 
way, the rubric dealt with Ignatenkos complaint that the paper dealt with an 
all-too-narrow circle of occupations.  These portraits differed from the time-
honoured articles about heroic milkmaids and toiling factory workers insofar as 
155 Ibid., l.83. 
156 Proizvodstvennoe soveshchanie KP  Komsomolka-70, 15/12/69, d. 491, ll.8790. 
157 Zadachi komitetov komsomola po usileniiu rukovodstva molodezhnoi pechatiu, redaktsiami 
radio i televideniia, 1966, RGASPI, f.1M, op.34, d.52, l.4. 
158 E.g. V. Agranovskii, Shofer, 9/2/67, 4; V. Liashenko, Chaban, 19/3/67, 1-2; L. Pleshakov, 
Rybak, 7/4/67, 1-2. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 186 
they described not how exceptional their protagonists were, but how typical.  
Editorial Board member Inga Prelovskaia praised the rubric for showing the 
social profile of a profession, the philosophy of labour, and  the typicisation of 
the contemporary hero.159  Indeed, insofar as the series aimed to run the gamut 
of Soviet professions, nothing could have been more typical.   
However, it was not clear exactly why their protagonists were heroic, nor 
whether they could serve as a mobilising ideal.  The series suggested that the 
nation was now entering a period of prolonged consolidation, and that heroism 
no longer required grand revolutionary gestures.  Vail and Genis spoke of the 
collapse of the hierarchy of romantic deeds in the late 1960s, such that even 
giving blood became a mark of heroism.160  While schemes like the Baikal-Amur 
Mainline were testament to the fact that the leadership needed to maintain at 
least a public faade of revolutionary dynamism, it was no longer clear whether 
such self-sacrificing heroes were in tune with contemporary values.  At a 
production meeting at the end of 1969, Kapitolina Kozhevnikova suggested 
that the romantic enthusiasm of the past had given way to new values: 
efficiency and pragmatism.  The task of the paper was to ensure that todays 
pragmatists did not turn into cynics and careerists who neglected all moral 
categories, but were harmonious individuals.161  But Inna Rudenko argued 
that the loss of heroes was leading to disillusionment amongst young people, 
who no longer had a goal in life.  She asked what the paper should do with an 
avalanche of desperate revelations of the type I wanted to do something 
great, something extraordinary, but I have to simply live: eat, sleep, work.162  
What could the paper do to ensure that young people [possessed] a craving, not 
just for ideas, but for a concrete ideal?  As the 1970s dawned, the answer to 
that question was far from clear, and illustrated a growing gap between the 
Brezhnev leaderships vision of the future, and the ability of Komsomolskaia 
pravda journalists to turn this into a compelling vision of the contemporary 
hero. 
159 Party Meeting, 29/9/67, d.41, l.42. 
160 Vail/Genis, p.137. 
161 Proizvodstvennoe soveshchanie KP: Komsomol-70, RGASPI, f.98M, op.1, d.491, ll.126-129. 
162 Ibid., ll.28-29. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 187 
FIGURE 2: Column Space Devoted to Different Geographical Locations, 1951 
The maps in Figures 2 and 3 
show the amount of 
newspaper space devoted to 
geographical locations over 
twelve editions in 1951 and 
1961. 
Articles were measured, and 
overall figures for different 
locales tabulated and plotted 
on the map. 
EDITED SUBJECTS | 188 
FIGURE 3: Column Space Devoted to Different Geographical Locations, 1961 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 189 
CHAPTER 4 | This number says a lot: The Institute of Public 
Opinion and the Rebirth of Polling in the Soviet Union (1960-68) 
The first three chapters of this thesis have looked at how Komsomolskaia 
pravda journalists sought to represent a number of different aspects of 
everyday life: shortcomings, news, and the contemporary.  They have shown 
how the representational norms of the post-Stalin press were challenged and 
(often, but not always) reasserted.  The final two chapters concentrate on the 
relationship between journalists and their readers.  They show how journalists 
sought to mould their audience with the aim of creating an ideal public.  Chapter 
5 analyses KP journalists discussions of their readers, showing how an 
educational impulse came into conflict with the desire to make the paper more 
popular.  This chapter, meanwhile, asks the question of how journalists coped 
with the diversity of Soviet public opinion through a case study of one of the 
papers boldest experiments: the creation of a polling institute within KPs 
Department of Propaganda. 
On May Day 1960, Francis Gary Powers plane was shot down over Sverdlovsk.  
Though US officials initially insisted that it was a weather plane, analysis of the 
wreckage revealed the presence of photography equipment.  After a long hiatus 
while Soviet authorities calculated how best to exploit the incident, the press 
leapt into action, with KP warning Dont play with fire, Mr Aggressor and 
printing letters from readers claiming that there was No limit to the 
indignation.1  A fortnight later, the Paris Summit broke down in acrimony after 
Eisenhower refused Khrushchev's demand for an apology. 
Three days after this, a front-page article asked Will mankind succeed in 
averting war?  Yes Replies the Thirtieth Meridian, came the answer.2  On the 
face of it, the article was a typical response to the tense international situation, 
stressing Soviet unity and optimism in the face of provocation.  However, this 
1 Ne igraite s ognem, gospoda agressory KP 8/5/60, 4. 
2 B.Grushin, V.Chikin, Udastsia li chelovechestvu predotvratit' voinu? KP 19/5/60, 1-3. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 190 
unity was demonstrated not via the ideological clich of the unity of the Soviet 
people, but through a poll of public opinion, carried out by an organisation 
whose name had hitherto not been heard in Soviet life: the Institute of Public 
Opinion [  ], or IOM, an initiative that 
started life in the papers Department of Propaganda.  
The Institute would become one of KPs most successful innovations, 
running for eight years and attracting well over a hundred thousand replies to 
surveys on subjects as diverse as the nations quality of life, the state of Soviet 
customer service, and the national anthem.  In the West, its very existence was 
taken as proof that Soviet journalists were actually asking the young what their 
problems are, rather than telling them; visitors came from as far afield as 
Canada and France, seeing the IOM as a symbol of democratisation.3   
The Institutes founder, Boris Grushin, has already given a potted history of the 
Institute in research published before his death.4  For that reason, this chapter 
seeks to present a new angle on the relationship between journalists, the 
intelligentsia, the public, and the regime, using the Institute as a means for 
gauging journalistic attitudes to readers opinions, and their ideas about the role 
of the paper in reflecting and moulding public opinion.  The Institutes surveys 
performed an important democratising function, popularising the notion that 
the Soviet public held diverse viewpoints, and upholding the importance of 
expressing and debating ones opinion.  However, the IOMs mission statement 
was telling, in that it affirmed that it would consider the varied opinions that 
seem most important for the practice of propaganda work.5  In practice, the 
Institute was used, not so much a means for democratisation, but as a tool for 
moulding Soviet citizens.  Journalists were never able to jettison the idea that 
the Soviet public needed to be educated and persuaded.  When the Institutes 
3 Edward Crankshaw, Soviet Youth Gets a Chance to Speak The Observer 15/1/61, 7; Galina 
Ronina, My zhili ideiami obnovleniia, in Bol'she, chem gazeta ed. by Liudmila Semina (Moscow: 
PoRog, 2006), pp. 4749. 
4 B.A. Grushin, Chetyre zhizni Rossii v zerkale oprosov obshchestvennogo mneniia. Zhizn 1-aia: 
Epokha Khrushcheva (Moscow: Progress-Traditsiia, 2001);  B.A. Grushin, Chetyre zhizni Rossii v 
zerkale oprosov obshchestvennogo mneniia. Zhizn 2-aia: Epokha Brezhneva. (Moscow: Progress-
Traditsiia, 2003).    
5 Institut obshchestvennogo mneniia Komsomolskoi pravdy KP 19/5/60, 1. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 191 
surveys deviated from this task, revealing signs of social discord or delivering 
results that were unsuitable or simply uninteresting for the purposes of 
propaganda, journalists expressed their discontent.  The failure to find a place 
for the IOM ultimately led to the Institutes closure  ironically, at a point in the 
late 1960s when the technocratic Brezhnev leaderships hunger for sociological 
research was at its keenest.  Thus, this chapter suggests that journalists political 
vision of remaking Soviet society could come into conflict with their 
professional desire to create an effective and interesting newspaper. 
This chapter relies on main four sources: the IOMs original newspaper articles; 
editorial letuchki; Grushins three-volume history of public opinion in the Soviet 
Union, entitled Russias Four Lives (in which Grushin gives a history of the IOM, 
provides survey results and excerpts from unpublished reader responses); and 
Grushins personal archive, posthumously donated to the Hoover Institution, 
containing preliminary work on surveys and other behind the scenes materials, 
including a handful of readers letters and survey responses.  Such material only 
scratches the surface of the documentation that the Institute created, but much 
of the original documentary material has been lost or destroyed.6 
1 Beginnings: 1917-1960 
The founding of the IOM was an important moment in legitimising sociological 
ideas after many years in which sociological methods, including polling, had 
been effectively banned.  To understand the significance of the IOM, it is 
therefore necessary to trace the long-term history of the relationship between 
Bolshevism and sociology, and the philosophical ideas that underpinned them.  
Given the sociological origins of Bolshevik ideas, the tensions that emerged 
between Marxist principles and bourgeois empirical sociology after the 
revolution could be considered a battle within sociology, rather than external to 
it.  Before the revolution, Lenin spoke of the importance of social researches in 
constructing socialism, but this commitment ended after the Bolsheviks took 
6 Grushin, Khrushchev, p.67. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 192 
power.7  The regime claimed that Marx provided a totalising vision of society 
and social progress, which rendered worthless all attempts to capture social 
reality empirically.  Lenin was unprepared to compromise with so-called 
bourgeois sociologists, and under his leadership the leading sociologist, the 
anti-Marxist Pitrim Sokorin was exiled.8  However, empirical research 
remained important to the regime throughout the 1920s, as studies into 
readerships and audiences were useful in determining the effectiveness of Party 
propaganda.9   
Under Stalin, mistrust of the so-called bourgeois experts led to the eclipse 
of empirical sociology.  Sociology was de facto banned, and key exponents were 
purged; in the 1960s, those who had survived became known affectionately as 
the last of the Mohicans.10  In place of social heterogeneity was planted an 
image of a society without divisions, where public opinion was unanimous on all 
key questions.  After the war, signs of change became visible.  A	 section	 of	
Sociology	 was	 formed	 at	 the	 Academy	 of	 Sciences;	 critiques	 of	 bourgeois	
sociology	(a	means	for	keeping	abreast	of	Western	ideas)	appeared	in	Bolshevik,	
and	an	article	appeared	in	the	academic	journal	Voprosy	filosofii	demanding	that	
academics	look	to	real-life	examples	in	the	building	of	communism,	setting	the	
door	ajar,	if	only	slightly,	for	empirical	research.11	 	However,	empirical	research	
remained	 illegitimate,	 and	 even	 after	 Stalins	 death,	 the	 situation	 failed	 to	
improve:	in	1953	an	invitation	to	attend	the	second	World	Congress	of	Sociology	
7 Martine Mespoulet, La renaissance de la sociologie en URSS (1958-1972). Une voie troite 
entre matrialisme historique et recherches sociales concretes Revue dHistoire des Sciences 
Humaines 16 (2007), 58-59. 
8 On the debates of the 1920s see Elizabeth	Ann	Weinberg,	The	Development	of	Sociology	in	the	
Soviet	Union	(London:	Routledge	and	Kegan	Paul,	1974),	pp.1-10;	Mespoulet,	58-61. 
9 Evgeny Dobrenko, The Making of the State Reader: Social and Aesthetic Contexts for the 
Reception of Soviet Literature. Trans. Jesse M. Savage (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 
1997); Michael S. Gorham, Speaking in Soviet Tongues: Language Culture and the Politics of Voice 
in Revolutionary Russia (Dekalb, IL: Northern Illinois University Press, 2003). 
10 Nikolai Novikov, The Sociological Movement in the USSR (1960-1970) and the 
Institutionalization of Soviet Sociology.  Studies in Soviet Thought 23 (1982), 97; Weinberg,	
Development;	Alex Simirenko, The Development of Soviet Social Science in Professionalization 
of Soviet Society, ed. by Alex Simirenko, C.A. Kern Simierenko (New Brunswick: Transaction, 
1982), pp.67-81. 
11 Gennady S. Batygin and Inna F. Deviatko, The Metamorphoses of Russian Sociology in 
Eastern Europe in Transformation: The Impact on Sociology, ed. by Mike Forrest Keen and Janusz 
Mucha (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994), pp.13-15; Elizabeth A. Weinberg, Sociology in 
the Soviet Union and Beyond: Social Enquiry and Social Change (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004), p.8. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 193 
in	 Liege	 was	 turned	 down,	 due	 to	 the	 fact	 that	 the	 questions	 studied	 by	 the	
Congress	were	not	of	interest	to	Soviet	academics.12		 
Yet there were many individuals, mostly recent philosophy graduates, who 
wanted to know more about the society in which they lived, and saw sociology 
as a means to do so.13  The situation slowly began to change, but it could not 
gain traction without an institutional transformation.  The creation of the Soviet 
Sociological Association in 1958 represented a step forward, but, rather like the 
Union of Journalists, it seems to have been created a means for Soviet elites to 
prove that they had this thing, sociology, that the West also had.14  Those 
elites wanted to prove that Soviet sociology, resting as it did on the solid base of 
Marxism-Leninism, was actually superior to Western bourgeois sociology.  
Although Soviet participation in the World Congresses of Sociology in 
Amsterdam in 1956 and in Milan in 1959 was an important step towards 
legitimation, Soviet delegates were, on the whole, made up of Party ideologues, 
who argued their way through proceedings  sometimes going as far as to 
impugn the disciplines right to exist.15  As two Soviet participants at the Milan 
Congress stated:  
Inquiries must be conducted on the theoretical basis of historical materialism  
that is, to apply to the particular social fact [a] Marxist understanding of socio-
economic formations (laws) which determine the relation between the economic 
structure of society and its superstructures ... the relationships between classes, 
etc.16 
This	 surely	 made	 depressing	 reading	 for	 a	 younger	 cohort	 of	 philosophy	
graduates,	and	 served	as	a	reminder	that	 the	 fault	 lines	 in	Soviet	 academia	no 
longer divided 'sociology' from 'anti-sociology', but a doctrinaire Marxist-
12 Sotsiologiia i vlast: Dokumenty i materialy, 1953-1968. Sbornik 1, ed. by L.N. Moskvichev 
(Moscow: Academia, 1997), pp.15-16. 
13 Novikov, 98. 
14 Ibid., 103. 
15 Novikov,	 103;	Transactions	 of	 the	 Fourth	World	 Congress	 of	 Sociology	 (Milan	 &	 Stresa,	 8-15	
September	1959).	Volume	 III	(Louvain:	 International	Sociological	Association,	1961),	44-46	(as	
an	example).	See	also	See	Sotsiologiia	i	vlast,	pp.47-53.		Batygin	and	Deviatko	suggest	that	these	
shows	 of	 ideological	 unanimity	 at	 international	 conferences	 were	 'for	 show',	 and	 that	 the	
situation	within	the	Soviet	Union	was	healthier.		See	Metaphorphoses,	p.17. 
16 T. Oizerman, A. Okulov, Ob itogakh IV Vsemirnogo sotsiologicheskogo kongressa Voprosy 
filosofii 13/12 (1959), 72-86. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 194 
Leninist conception from an alternative notion based on empirical research.  But 
the battle was not cast in terms of Marxism and anti-Marxism (nor could it be). 
Rather, it was a family quarrel for the heart of sociology, in which both sides 
claimed support from Marxist theories.17  The IOMs founder, Boris Grushin, like 
a number of other philosopher-sociologists, reached his intellectual maturity in 
the early 1950s in a kruzhok devoted to a re-reading of Marxs Capital; in the 
early 1960s he would proudly proclaim to fellow sociologist Vladimir 
Shlapentokh that he was a Marxist.18  
A key article of 1957, by the East German historian and economist Jrgen 
Kuczynski, illustrated the utility of Marx quite clearly.19  Marxs idea that social 
forces were the central factor in defining individual consciousness had typically 
been interpreted to mean that the tenets of historical materialism rendered 
concrete social analysis redundant.  However, Kuczynski argued that 
consciousness could not be understood without empirical study of everyday 
life: Istmat would therefore be elevated to the lofty position of sacred 
universal, while sociology would do the dirty work of social inquiry.20  Orthodox 
scholars, many of whom sought to maintain prestigious institutional positions 
from younger rivals, rebutted Kuczynskis assertions on the basis of what Marx 
really meant, but in this fashion, empirical research was squared with Marxist-
Leninist theory, and eventually became the cornerstone of the Partys attitude 
towards sociological research.21    
Progress may have seemed painfully slow to sociologists, yet by 1960, 
three centres of sociological research on the empirical model had been 
established in Moscow, Leningrad, and Sverdlovsk, plus a sector for the 
investigation of new forms of work and everyday life at the Academy of 
17 Peter L. Berger, Marxism and Sociology: View from Eastern Europe (New York: Appleton 
Century, 1969), vii 
18 Svetlana Tabatchnikova, Le cercle de mthodologie de Moscou: 1954-1959: Une pense, une 
pratique (Paris: EHESS, 2007), p.61; Vladimir Shlapentokh, An Autobiographical Narration on the 
Role of Fear and Friendship in the Soviet Union (Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press, 2004), p.69. 
On Marxism-Leninism and the intelligentsia see Vladimir Zubok, Zhivagos Children: The Last 
Russian Intelligentsia (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009), pp.66-68. 
19 Iurgen Kuchinskii, Sotsiologicheskie zakony Voprosy filosofii 5 (1957), 95-100. 
20 Metamorphoses, 18. 
21 See A.I. Verbin, V.Zh. Kelle, M.Ia. Koval'zon, Istoricheskii materializm i sotsiologiia Voprosy 
filosofii 5 (1958), 151-155.  On this process see also Mespoulet, 65. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 195 
Sciences.22  These hubs investigated a wide range of questions, such as the 
structure of Soviet society, families, problems of labour, and methodological 
issues.23  This was, to be sure, abstract empiricism  sociology in the service of 
the state  but it nevertheless allowed for the investigation of concrete social 
reality, rather than endless permutations of Marxist theory.24  Though teaching 
was almost non-existent and the subject lacked a public profile, Soviet sociology 
at last had the institutional base that it required to propagate itself. 
At the start of 1960, the Deputy Head of the Department of Propaganda, 
Aleksei Romanov, spoke, perhaps thinking of public opinion research centres in 
Hungary and Poland, of the need for the press to undertake sociological 
research.25  At a letuchka days later, one of the meetings attendees, Editor-in-
Chief Iurii Voronov related Romanovs instructions to staff, calling sociology 
unploughed virgin soil, and admitting that the paper had little experience in 
that area.  He called on the Department of Propaganda to examine the 
question.26  Four months later, the Institute of Public Opinion, which was to 
bring public opinion research into the mainstream, saw the light of day, headed 
by Boris Grushin. 
Like many prominent sociologists of post-Stalin period, Grushin was 
born in the late-1920s or early-1930s.  Well	known	figures	of	the	stature	of	I.S.	
Kon	 (b.1928),	 Vladimir	 Iadov	 (b.1929),	 Leonid	 Gordon	 (b.1930),	 Gennadii	
Osipov	 (b.1929),	 were	 all	 in	 their	 early	 thirties	 at	 the	 time	 that	 the	 IOM	was	
created.	 	Too young to go to the front, these sociologists were on the verge of 
attending university at the wars end.  Grushin entered the philosophy faculty of 
22 Mespoulet, 66. 
23 D.V. Ivanov, Sotsiologiia v Rossii: Institutional'naia i kontseptual'naia struktura in Rosiiskaia 
sotsiologiia: istoriia i sovremenennye problemy, ed. by N.G. Skvortsov, V.D. Vinogradov, N.A. 
Golovin (St. Petersburg: Izd. S.Peterburgskogo gosudarstvennogo universiteta, 2007), p.108; 
Weinberg, Development, p.19; Mespoulet, 69. 
24 C. Wright Mills, The Sociological Imagination (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1970), pp.60-86, 
131-132. 
25 Aleksei Romanov, Vysokaia ideinost pechati i zhurnalistskoe masterstvo Sovetskaia pechat 1 
(Jan 1960), 4-10.  Grushin, Khrushchev, p.59; Weinberg, Sociology in SU, pp.99-100; Edward 
Beliaev, Pavel Butorin, The Institutionalization of Soviet Sociology: Its Social and Political 
Context Social Forces 61/2 (December 1982), 420,  On the influence of Polish sociology more 
generally, see Boris Firsov, Istoriia Sovetskoi sotsiologii, 1950-1970-e gody (St. Petersburg: Izd. 
Evropeiskogo universiteta, 2012), pp.270-278. 
26 11/1/60, d.268, l.30. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 196 
MGU in 1947 with the belief that Communism was a sacred cause; that 
everything was going in that direction, that power thought only about resolving 
all problems, creating a new type of society, and so on.27  He later claimed that 
only when the realities of the campaign against cosmopolitanism became clear 
did he begin to search for a new understanding of the world.  Out of his 
friendship with fellow logicians Georgii Shchedrovitskii, Merab Mamardashvili, 
and Aleksandr Zinovev emerged an underground kruzhok, or kompaniia, called 
the Moscow Methodological Circle, which sought to produce a theory of logic 
and cognition based on Das Kapital; its participants later claimed that their 
work was purely apolitical, and that logic was the least ideologically 
compromised of all the branches of philosophy, allowing them to investigate 
pure human relations.28  Indeed, Grushins later work in public opinion could be 
considered as an extension of this work into the human consciousness; whether 
it was less ideologically compromised is debatable. 
 It was Zinoviev who secured Grushin a post at KP, after the latters thesis 
was rejected by MGU (partly as a result of their friendship) but after that point, 
their subsequent career paths would diverge.29  Zinoviev became a professor of 
logic at MGU, but in the 1970s, his 'sociological novels', The Yawning Heights and 
The Radiant Future, led to his effective expulsion from the USSR.  Grushins 
relationship to Soviet power was somewhat more conflicted.  During his career, 
Grushin consistently seemed to occupy a space between professional goals and 
state imperatives.  Such spaces were unstable, sometimes quite informal, and 
prone to contradictions.  They offered room for innovation, but no guarantee as 
to where the limits of innovation lay.  Although those spaces allowed new 
initiatives to take root, they were also unstable and ultimately short-lived. 
27 Tabatchnikova, p.61. 
28 Ibid., pp.44-47, 61. 
29 Boris Grushin, My vse vremia veli voiny za svoi predmet.  Nauchnyi fond im. G.P. 
Shchedrovitskogo. <http://www.fondgp.ru/lib/chteniya/x/pub/12> [Accessed: 21/7/2009] 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 197 
2 1960-1963: The Early Surveys 
The science of public opinion polling was in its infancy in 1960.  In a country 
shielded from the scientific literature for the best part of thirty years, the first 
methodological article was not published until the year after.30  The IOMs first 
polls, conducted in 1960 and 1961, reflected this and were successes on a 
journalistic, rather than a scientific level.31   
However, before discussing those surveys in more detail, it is necessary 
to examine the difference between two terms which are commonly translated 
into English as public opinion: obshchestvennost and obshchestvennoe mnenie.  
On a basic level, one might see the difference between them as a difference 
between subject and object: obshchestvennost signifies the holders of public 
opinion, and obshchestvennoe mnenie the opinions that they held.  But in 
practice, the divisions were not so clear.  Before beginning, it is important to 
note a semantic subtlety that is lost in translation.  The grammatical root of both 
terms, , came as a calque translation from the Greek, , 
meaning common or communal, and, in practice came to exist in opposition to 
a notion of the public [].  This latter was identified by one academic as a 
weaker form of collectivity, synonymous with the fragile social bonds created by 
capitalism.32  In other words, the social dimension of both obshchestvennost and 
obshchestvennoe mnenie was central to its appeal, and was seen to describe a 
superior form of collective identity to the Wests alienated social ties. 
Obshchestvennost signified an educated, socially active stratum of the 
population.  The term entered the Russian language in the late-Eighteenth 
Century as a secular response to the concept of religious collectivity, 
sobornost.33  It was taken up by radicals in the mid-Nineteenth Century, where 
it came to signify a sense of public duty and a commitment to social 
30 M.N. Rutkevich, L.N. Kogan, O metodakh konkretno-sotsiologicheskogo issledovaniia Voprosy 
filosofii 3 (1961). 
31 On the methodological problems of these surveys, please see Section 4 of this chapter. 
32 L.K. Uledov, Obshestvennoe mnenie Sovetskogo obshchestvo (Moscow: Sotsetgiz, 1963), pp.70-
33 Catriona Kelly, Vadim Volkov, Obshchestvennost, Sobornost: Collective Identities in 
Constructing Russian Culture in the Age of Revolution: 1881-1940 (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1998), p.26. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 198 
transformation as well as a concern for educating public opinion.34  The term 
survived into the Soviet period, and in the Second Edition of the Great Soviet 
Encyclopaedia (1954), it defined, either a group of socially active individuals, a 
social organisation, a people or a society, or obshchestvennoe mnenie.35   
 Despite its appearance here, Obshchestvennoe mnenie did not merit its 
own entry in the encyclopaedia, pointing to the fact that it reached common 
usage far later.  The term appeared in V. Bekhterevs Collective Reflexology 
(1921) as so-called obshchestvennoe mnenie, but it seems that 
obshchestvennost was the preferred term into the 1950s.36  Though there is 
evidence of the term being used in the mid-1950s (see page 245), it was the 
IOMs surveys that helped it gain common currency.    
Early works on obshchestvennoe mnenie seemed to view it as identical to 
obshchestvennost, as the example from the Great Soviet Encyclopaedia shows.  
It could not be otherwise, for scholars posited a close connection between social 
system and the nature of public opinion.  The correctness of the Soviet social 
system led to a unanimity of opinion, while the diverse views expressed in 
bourgeois societies were considered to be the inevitable product of social 
division.  This led to debates over the ontological status of the individual 
opinion, and its relation to public opinion.  For L.K. Uledov, a personal opinion 
[ ] or the sum of personal opinions could not be considered to 
be obshchestvennoe mnenie, because personal opinions refer to the sphere of 
individual consciousness, whereas public opinion refers to public 
consciousness.37  He opposed the individualist connotations of obshchestvennoe 
mnenie, and instead defined public opinion in a socialist society as a unanimous 
34 Ibid., p.27. 
35 Obshchestvennost in Bolshaia Sovetskaia entsiklopediia. 2-e izd. Tom 30 (Moscow: Bolshaia 
Sovetskaia entsiklopediia, 1954), p.418.  Karl Loewenstein suggests that the principles of 
obshchestvennost animated the work of Soviet writers in the period following the Twentieth 
Congress, but fails to suggest that the term itself was an animating concept (Obshchestvennost 
as Key to Understanding Soviet Writers of the 1950s: Moskovskii Literator, October 1956-March 
1957, Journal of Contemporary History 44/3 (2009), 473-492. 
36 Quoted in Uledov, pp.73-74. 
37 Uledov, p.66. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 199 
judgement of the people on questions of social life, touching on the common 
interest and demanding practical solution.38   
However, a theoretical work by Grushin, published in 1967 upbraided 
Uledov for remaining entirely on a theoretical plane, and pointed out that the 
IOM showed that there was not one survey where the publics views could be 
considered unanimous.39  Grushin argued that, while obshchestvennoe mnenie 
could not be considered as the aggregate of individual opinions, it could not 
exist outside the form of expressions of individual members of society: The 
sum total, groups of individuals are the subject of obshchestvennoe mnenie, 
obshchestvennost.40  The close link between obshchestvennoe mnenie and 
obshchestvennost was, in Grushins explanation, both problematised (public 
opinions link with a unanimous community was called into question) and 
confirmed (the terms were seen as synonymous).   
But if the two terms really were synonymous, why had it been necessary 
to introduce a new term into the lexicon?  Though the exact route to the 
adoption of the term obshchestvennoe mnenie is unclear, we might suggest that 
it was called upon to perform a function that the old term could not.  Soviet 
society was modernising and becoming more complex;  Stalinist concepts were 
inadequate for describing its character.  This was one of the main reasons for 
the return of sociology. Mikhail Rutkevich, a sociologist on the Soviet social 
structure in Sverdlovsk, argued that the Twentieth Party Congress had placed 
social processes at the centre of attention, which created a demand for 
empirical sociology.  Anyone who taught from university textbooks on 
historical materialism  wanted to enrich the general theoretical situation, to 
bring it into the system, to fill it with real content regarding our reality.41 
But there were also more worrying social changes that needed to be 
explained.  One prominent scholar has shown that the post-Stalin period saw 
the emergence of a Soviet public opinion, an unprecedented outpouring of 
38 Ibid., p.89, see also pp.79-81. 
39 Boris Grushin, Mneniia o mire i mir mnenie. Problemy metodologii issledovaniia 
obshchestvennogo mneniia (Moscow: Politizdat, 1967), p.169, 173-175. 
40 Ibid., p.171. 
41 M.T. Rutkevich, Mnogoe bylo predresheno in Rossiiskaia sotsiologiia 60-x, p.239. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 200 
debate amongst citizens.42  The events of 1956, with their unpredictable 
eruptions of public sentiment, had shown that the views of Soviet citizens were 
not, as far as the regime was concerned, as rational, deliberative, or 
homogeneous as they might have hoped.  The debates of the literary world over 
books like Not By Bread Alone have been analysed by Karl Loewenstein as 
illustrating the importance of obshchestvennost for understanding the actions of 
the intelligentsia, but for the regime these were not the ideas of a Party-minded 
public sphere.43  One might therefore suggest that obshchestvennost defined 
public opinion as it should be, whereas obshchestvennoe mnenie was 
increasingly called upon to describe public opinion as it actually was.  It is 
telling that, in 1974, when the third edition of the Great Soviet Encyclopaedia 
was published, obshchestvennost had disappeared from its contents, but 
obshchestvennoe mnenie was now included, in the form of an entry written by 
none other than Boris Grushin.44 
For the avoidance of confusion, it is also worth reflecting on the 
divergent meanings of the term science in journalists discussions.  Grushin, 
though he never actually used the term in discussions with colleagues, 
embodied scientific principles in practice.  This meant keeping abreast of the 
latest academic developments and innovations in poll design.  For colleagues at 
KP, however, science meant something quite different, signalling above all a 
positivistic belief in objectivity and truth.  When survey results were positive for 
the regime, they illustrated the scientific nature of Soviet Communism, and the 
objective approval of the public.  However, this belief in objectivity was not 
valuable in itself, which brings us to a third meaning.  When surveys ceased to 
deliver affirmative results, the Institute was accused of being pseudo-scientific, 
of delivering material more suited to academic journals than to the press.  Here, 
science signified dry academicism, something quite inappropriate for a youth 
newspaper.  The tensions between these understandings of the scientific 
42 Elena Zubkova, Russia After the War: Hopes, Illusions and Disappointments, 1945-1957. Trans. 
Hugh Ragsdale (Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 1998), pp.139-201. 
43 Loewenstein, Obshchestvennost.  On Hungary and public opinion see Zubkova, pp.191-201. 
44 Boris Grushin, Obshchestvennoe mnenie, in Bolshaia Sovetskaia Entsiklopediia. 3-e izd. Tom 
18 (Moscow: Bolshaia Sovetskaia Entsiklopediia, 1974), pp.242-243. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 201 
purposes of the Institute would grow over time, and explain, at least in part, 
why the Institute ended in mutual recrimination. 
These considerations were far from the minds of Soviet journalists in the 
early days of the IOM, however.  In their subject matter and results, the 
Institutes first surveys provided a series of sensations for the paper, and 
brought its name to national prominence.  Its first survey, carried out in the 
wake of the spy plane scandal was simple and effective, comprising only three 
questions: (1) Will humanity succeed in averting war (yes/no) and (2) why? and 
(3) What, above all, should be done to consolidate peace?45  96.8 per cent of 
respondents replied that humanity would indeed avert war, delivering a clear 
endorsement of Party policy.  As Grushin summarised many years later, its 
message was: Socialism: yes; Capitalism: no.46  In an article, Grushin and 
Deputy Head of the Department of Propaganda, Valentin Chikin, waxed lyrical: 
This number says a lot.  The Soviet people, irrespective of sex, age or profession 
are committed optimists, a buoyant people [e].  The entire 
construction of its thought is permeated with the pathos of creativeness, 
endeavour and optimism.  They are distinguished by their high ideals, their 
unshakeable belief in truth, and in the victory of the cause for which they fight.47 
The survey therefore suggested, just as propaganda had always insisted, that 
the Soviet public was united in its optimism and high ideals.  A second survey on 
living standards delivered much the same result, with the vast majority 
responding that their quality of life had improved in recent years.  From day to 
day the life of the Soviet individual is becoming better, becoming richer, gushed 
Grushin and Chikin (no doubt inadvertently channelling Comrade Stalin).48    
In a nation where legitimacy had to be secured without recourse to the 
ballot box, the endorsement of the public played an important role: 
When one reads this material, then it's immediately evident that our Soviet 
people approve of the policies of the party, that the party is today devoting 
45 Grushin/Chikin, Udastsia. 
46 Grushin, Khrushchev, p.110. 
47 Grushin/Chikin, Udastsia. 
48 B. Grushin, V. Chikin, Kak izmenilsia uroven vashei zhizni? O chem rasskazali ankety KP 
7/10/60, 2. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 202 
special attention so that our people live well, so that people have somewhere to 
live [...]49  
As Vladimir Babanovs words show, the key attraction of the IOMs first two 
surveys lay in its endorsement of the regimes policies.  Voronov said of the 
IOMs first survey: When we put out an article, they say to us  that's the 
author's opinion, the opinion of our collective.  But when we say 5000 people 
replied to this question, then that's public opinion [	 ] 
...50  For KP journalists, whether or not surveys conformed to the latest 
methodological advances was of little interest; what was important was the 
objective status of the data.  In this way, the IOMs first surveys showed public 
approval of the regimes policies, presented not as opinion, but as scientific 
fact. 
 This made KPs propaganda stand out from its competitors.  Aleksei 
Geguzin, the Head of the papers regional correspondent network, claimed of the 
Institutes quality of life study that many journalists at central newspapers 
envy this material.51  Babanov and science correspondent Iaroslav Golovanov 
both emphasised the importance of Pravdas positive evaluation of the IOMs 
work, as did Editor Voronov, who mentioned words of congratulation from 
other journalists  and the Central Committee, too.52  Grushin described 
Voronov waiting on the phone for the assessment of the Partys ruling elite, and 
eventually being told that Khrushchev thought the Institutes first article was 
wonderful.53  The story has the ring of myth to it but, whether or not the event 
occurred, it certainly illustrates how journalists at the paper perceived that the 
IOM had captured the attention, not just of colleagues at other papers, but also 
figures within the highest corridors of power.  In a nation where the press was 
characterised by partiinost, the approval of the Partys most powerful figure 
49 10/10/60, d.277, l.89. 
50 23/5/60, d.272, ll.134-35.  See also Voronovs similar comments on the second survey at the 
meeting of 10/10/60, d.277, l.115-116. 
51 10/10/60, d.277, l.91. 
52 Ibid., 89-90, 115; 23/05/60, d.272, ll.117, 133.  For Pravdas response see: Iz poslednei 
pochty: Da - otvechaet tridtsatyi meridian Pravda 20/5/60, 2; Iz poslednei pochty: O chem 
rasskazali ankety Pravda 8/10/60, 2. 
53 B.A. Grushin, Gor'kii vkus nevostrebovannoisti in Rosiiskaia sotsiologiia shestidesiatykh godov 
v vospominaniiakh i dokumentakh, ed. by G.S.Batygin, S.F. Iarmoliuk (Saint Petersburg: Russkii 
khristianskii gumanitarnyi institut, 1999), p.213. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 203 
was the highest marker of social capital.  This approval would sustain the 
Institute through darker days. 
The two years between 1961 and 1963 can be considered a transitional period.  
During this time, the IOM carried out five surveys which blurred the boundaries 
between the IOM as sociological research institute, and the IOM as a branch of 
the Department of Propaganda.54  Two surveys (on youth and on families) are 
discussed in the next section, while the two surveys treated below help to 
illustrate the increasing tensions between the Institutes journalistic roots and 
its founders scientific ambitions. 
A simple-yet-effective questionnaire carried out in January and February 
1962 (but, for reasons unclear, not published until 1964) bore all the hallmarks 
of the IOMs desire to produce readable propaganda.  It asked 1000 children 
aged eight and nine how they understood fifty adult words.  Children 
wondered whether an altar was someone from Altai province, and if 
panikhida (Tsarist-era funerary rites) was when somebody shouts out, theres 
panic, and everybody runs away.55  But the survey was more than just a 
humorous look at Soviet children and their understanding of the world.  The 
pupils had been asked to define words which referred to the so-called 
perezhitki proshlogo, the survivals of the past: Virgin Mary, down-and-out, 
profiteer, and bribe.  Less than ten per cent knew the meaning of any of those 
words, apparently proving the success of the revolutionary Soviet state in 
eliminating such problems from daily life.  The results, while showing that not 
all negative tendencies had been overcome, apparently illustrated that: Recent 
hardships, foolish habits, and antiquated models are being expunged from our 
reality.56 
The result was yet another enormous success: Pravda published an 
article in praise of it, while opinion within the redaktsiia was glowing: Their 
answers speak for themselves, said Valentin Liashchenko. We should have 
54 I omit a 1961 survey, the Soviet-French collaboration In whose name do you study?, which 
was never completed because the data were lost. 
55 Ot deviati do desiati KP 2/8/64, 4; Grushin, Khrushchev, p.353. 
56 Ot deviati. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 204 
said [to the reader  S.H.]: Comrades  Look closely, pay serious attention to 
these kids answers, take note of the process that is taking place57  He also 
mentioned the enthusiastic reaction of readers: Theyve been talking about 
nothing else for two days in Moscow.  People read it and ask and did you read 
it?, and did you read it?58  The survey marked a continuation of the Institutes 
previous work in so far as it was geared towards demonstrating the glory of the 
age through statistics.  It was different, however, in that it was no longer even 
ostensibly geared to investigating key social issues.  Instead, it aimed at the 
rather loftier task of showing how the Soviet state had succeeded in overcoming 
the backwardness of the Tsarist past.  
 The choice to conduct such an idiosyncratic survey may have been 
influenced by the relative failure of a previous survey on Brigades of Communist 
Labour, carried out at the end of 1961.  The Brigades were founded on the belief 
that enthusiasm and the creation of tightly-knit, self-policing collectives could 
improve productivity.59  Given the enormous amount of press coverage of the 
initiative, the collective might have expected a ringing endorsement of the 
regimes policies.  Writing some years later, Grushin called the survey a unique 
referendum on public opinion regarding the course and the outlook for the 
construction of communism in the country and the masses conception of 
communism as such.60  Grushin was exaggerating the surveys significance 
somewhat, but the publics indifference to the initiative was nevertheless 
striking.  Of the eleven surveys that invited readers to write to the paper, this 
was the least popular by a distance, garnering only 1295 responses.61  Grushin 
later suggested that the results showed that, for many people, the movement 
didnt exist, just like the construction of communism didnt exist.  Of course, it 
was a shocking result  shocking for propaganda, for ideology, and thats why 
57 4/8/64, d.365, ll.38-39, 42-43 [38]. 
58 Ibid. l.38. 
59 Thomas Riha, Readings in Russian Civilization. Volume 3: Soviet Russia, 1917 to Present 
(Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1969), pp.766-773; Christel Lane, The Rites of Rulers: 
Ritual In Industrial Society  The Soviet Case (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1981), 
pp.117-118. 
60 Grushin, Khrushchev, p.251. 
61 The next least popular survey, Five questions to mums and dads (1967), received three 
times more responses  and was a failure that led to the Institutes closure. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 205 
we had very great difficulties in publishing the results.62  Grushins reading is 
very much a retrospective one, however, and another explanation for the 
surveys lack of success might be its desire to focus on dense technical issues.  
One correspondent, a certain Salutskii, pronounced himself astonished by the 
complexity of the questions, suggesting that some of the questions demanded 
theoretical preparation.  He suggested that such a complicated anketa might 
stem the flow of replies, and urged the IOM to rethink its approach.63 
Salutskiis comments touched only on the questionnaire, but it wasnt 
just the survey that was problematic, but also the amount of resources that the 
Institute demanded.  The IOM, was an initiative of one of the papers most 
powerful departments: the Department of Propaganda.  For many at KP, the 
IOM was not a scientific research institution, but a newspaper rubric that should 
have been devoted to glorifications of the regimes policies.  That Grushin was 
taking it more seriously would become a bone of contention.  In early 1962, 
Kamil Devetiarov implied that the IOM was having a negative effect on the 
work of the Department of Propaganda, and suggested to Grushin that If the 
Institute is weighing you down, let's close it in ten days' time  and get 
[] the whole Department of Propaganda back to its main job.  To 
Grushins telling reply, We already have a main job: the Institute, Devetiarov 
replied: We can't substitute all propaganda, all questions of ideological work 
for the work of the Institute of Public Opinion.64 
Later that year, the IOM was under attack once more for publishing the 
full conclusions of the Brigades of Communist Labour survey in an academic 
journal: 
Who do they think they are, arbitrarily publishing materials in a journal?  They're 
an editorial department  an editorial rubric.  The 'Institute of Public Opinion' ... 
for some reason we write it with capital letters.  I don't know ... the department of 
science, the department of agriculture are usually written with small letters.65 
62 Boris Grushin, Institut obshchestvennogo mneniia  otdel Komsomolskoi pravdy in A.I. 
Volkov, Pressa v obshchestve (1959-2000). Otsenki zhurnalistov i sotsiologov. Dokumenty 
(Moscow: Moskovskaia shkola politicheskikh issledovanii, 2000), p.57. 
63 21/8/61, d.303, l.34. 
64 8/1/62, d.317, l.31. 
65 17/9/62, d.325, l.54. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 206 
Here, David Novoplianskii, the papers longest-serving journalist, having written 
in the very first edition of the paper, did not even bother to hide the implication 
that the Institute was getting too big for its boots.  This may seem to be a trivial 
matter, but that is precisely the point: the IOM was an enterprise of social 
significance, but its eventual downfall was partially the result of mundane office 
politics: it was not just the regime that imposed limits on journalists actions. 
For these journalists, there was a serious point: there was a time and a 
place for scientific research, and it was not in the press.  The IOMs latest 
articles, claimed Novoplianskii, were written rather pseudo-scientifically 
[] and not accessibly [-].  Extremely academic, 
difficult phraseology.66  He then compared the IOMs previous work, which was 
produced in a newspaper style [-], to its new material.  He 
accused Grushin and his colleagues of harbouring ambitions above their station:  
Now there are considerations of a prestigious publication, a striving to become a 
'classic', to sit on the bookshelf.  They don't really consider how to use the 
newspaper, how to aim it at a newspaper audience.  And if we really love and 
esteem the Institute's workers [...] then we have to tell them the truth to their 
faces.  That would be the first demonstration of our love and esteem.67 
Science was getting in the way of the Institutes work, and only tough love, 
according to the papers elder statesman, could get the Institute back on track.   
 All of which suggests that Grushins initial diagnosis that that results 
were subject to censorship were wide of the mark.  In fact, the results were the 
least of Grushins worries, with Alik Shalaev calling the survey an extremely 
significant piece of work.68  The problem was rather that the scientific demands 
of the Institute were getting in the way of good newspaper practice.  Why, asked 
military journalist N.S. Kiselev, was the Institute starting on another survey on 
the family before having printed the conclusions to the survey on Communist 
Labour?69  The answer was that, because of the limited resources of the 
Institute, such conclusions needed to be analysed without computers  a slow 
and tedious process.  But, for many journalists, properly worked out conclusions 
66 Ibid. l.55. 
67 Ibid. ll.55-56. 
68 Ibid., l.52. 
69 8/1/62, d.317, ll.26-27. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 207 
were an irrelevance.  The important thing was to create material that was fit for 
the press: something that was worked out in a newspaper style.  Given 
Grushins determination to plot his own course, these frictions between 
newspaper form and academic aspirations would only increase over time.  
3 What is Public Opinion For? 
In 1963, the Institute was at a transitional stage.  It had published surveys which 
clearly endorsed the regimes policies, but also materials that pointed to social 
problems, such as the survey on Communist Labour and a survey on families.  
As we have suggested, there was a continued tension between the IOMs role as 
a producer of propaganda, and its scientific role in investigating Soviet society.  
However, a continuing conflict over the meaning and functions of public opinion 
is also worthy of discussion.  Polling implies giving equal weight to respondents 
answers, even if that weight is only statistical.  And yet, in a Soviet state where 
public values were considered in normative terms, the value of such 
heterogeneity was not recognised.  A rift emerged between public opinion as a 
record of social diversity, and public opinion as a force to be manoeuvred 
towards a pre-defined goal.  
While the IOMs earliest surveys provided an argument for equating 
obshchestvennost with obshchestvennoe mnenie, they did not show the social 
unanimity that Uledov had suggested was inherent to it.  Indeed, to the extent 
that even the first surveys allowed for open-ended answers, they played a role 
in challenging journalistic attitudes about their audience.  Allan Starodub, 
reviewing the IOMs first survey at a letuchka, told colleagues: 
When this column first started, we often found that many of our colleagues, 
reading the responses, said That's not true, It's not like that or I don't agree 
with that.  Today we need to redouble our efforts [] and 
immediately conduct a debate on the same sincere and critical [] level, 
and understand that often our opinions don't coincide with the opinions of our 
readers.  If weve ventured to set up this Institute, then we should, within 
sensible limits, allow for free expression of our readers opinions.70 
70 23/05/60, d.272, l.133. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 208 
By revealing the heterogeneity of Soviet public opinion, initiatives like the IOM 
forced journalists to confront the fact that readers opinions differed from their 
own (something that the next chapter will show in more detail).  While under 
Stalin, propaganda was called upon to work on the public, to inculcate it in 
correct modes of thinking, initiatives like the IOM played an important part in 
prompting the press to reflect the ways its readers thought.    
The question of how far the newspaper could go towards echoing readers 
opinions remained a moot point, however.  Starodub warned colleagues about 
the dangers of distorting the evidence: Because the opinions expressed are 
very diverse, it would only take for us to try to level [] them, to 
somehow try to foolishly hide them, for our Institute to come to an unhappy 
end.71  Early surveys, which showed a high degree of unanimity, did not bring 
this issue to the fore, but later surveys did.  Commenting on the papers highly 
successful survey canvassing the views of Soviet youth on their generation, The 
Observers Edward Crankshaw suggested that, while many readers would be 
more than able to answer using the familiar stereotypes, the heretically 
minded might be able to form coherent little essays in frustration and 
discontent.72  Crankshaw raised a valid question: how would the paper deal 
with heretical responses? 
 The answer was provided by one such essay of frustration from a 
nineteen-year-old Komsomol member from Moscow who wrote of her apathy 
and indifference to everything.73  Speaking of her goals in life, she argued that 
Money is everything.  Luxury and success, love and happiness. If you have money, 
you have friends and comrades, you have everything you ever wanted.  You judge 
those who don't work, who don't do anything, but you can only envy them, 
because they're making the best of life [ ]  we only live 
once 
Thus, her goal was to find a husband who would enable her to marry into 
wealth.  She claimed that she would eventually get her way because I do 
everything I want, and if I want it, I get my own way [ ,   
71 Ibid., l.145. 
72 Crankshaw, Soviet Youth. 
73 Molodoe pokolenie o samom sebe KP 26/1/61, 2. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 209 
].  Her sentiments were in the minority, but far from isolated (2.3 per 
cent of readers  around 400 respondents  said they wanted to marry into 
money; 0.1 per cent  around 120 respondents  said that their goals in life 
were money and hedonism).74  This was worrying for the regime: here was 
someone who felt no joy in constructing communism, derived no inspiration 
from the heroic feats of the Komsomols, and claimed that money is everything.   
And yet the letters final paragraph read: 
I've told you everything I think. Of course you won't print my letter in the paper. 
But all the same I would really like it if you could persuade me of the error of my 
opinions on life.  If you dont, then, of course, I'll never again write such a letter.  
I'd like to believe that I'm wrong. 
Was the ending doctored?  It is impossible to say without access to the original, 
but it perhaps telling that when Grushin printed the letter in his 2001 
monograph, he omitted these words.75  Without them, the letter ended defiantly 
If I want it, I get my own way; with them, it became a plea for help.  Whatever 
was the case, the paper received more than a thousand replies, a selection of 
which were printed a month later.  
Such discussions, which invoked the power of obshchestvennost in 
resolving social issues, were popular throughout the post-war period, but 
particularly suited to a Khrushchev era where rigid behavioural norms were 
imposed on individuals by semi-organic collectives like comrades courts and 
house collectives.76  The replies to the young Muscovite should be seen as an 
attempt to prevent an individual from being lost to a lifetime of vulgarity 
through the reforming words of the collective.  Some were addressed to the 
paper, some directly to the Muscovite, and some employed a mixture.  One 
writer took on the tone of a friend, giving out her address so that she could 
write to her.  Others were more angry: Your letter, dear girl, offended me, 
wrote V. Tiunin, a worker in Kuibyshev.  According to you, it turns out Im a 
74 Grushin, Khrushchev, p.185. 
75 Ibid., pp.172-173. 
76 Oleg Kharkhordin, The Collective and the Individual in Russia: A Study of Practices (Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press, 1999); Deborah Ann Field, Communist Morality and 
Meanings of Private Life in Post-Stalinist Russia, 1953-1964 Unpublished PhD Dissertation. 
University of Michigan, 1996. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 210 
good-for-nothing [] person.  But I am a worker, one who is building 
the future.  You try to make me believe that Im living for the present day.  
Nothing of the sort.  I want to look at tomorrow and the day after tomorrow.  I 
want to work for the future as long as my hands and my brain allow.77   
 Others quoted from their own, sometimes tragic, biographies to educate 
her.  A. Rudenko, a kolkhoz electrician from Kirovograd oblast told of how his 
father died in the war, and his sister became seriously ill; after the war, his 
girlfriend died and he started to drink.  However, after a short period of crisis, 
he retained a belief in life, which was confirmed one autumn, when he and his 
Komsomol colleagues collected the harvest in the rain every day:  would a girl 
striving only for good company, for a life without cares have been able to 
tolerate it?  I dont think so78  T. Bezmogorychnaia, from a small village in 
Bashkiria, wrote about her difficult life: Yes, its hard  But Im happy Im happy 
when I see the happy faces of children when they find out from me something 
new, something they didnt already know.  If it wasnt for my children, then Id 
probably be as passive and indifferent as the girl from Moscow.  Love for my 
work, and for the people that surround me give me strength.79  Work, and the 
cause of communism, it was suggested, provided a kind of salvation: Devote 
yourself to the common cause, and youll understand happiness and the 
meaning of life, wrote E. Ermachenkov and B. Markov.80   
Seen in the context of other reader discussions (see Chapter 5), the 
debate over the Muscovites loss of faith might not seem to be anything out of 
the ordinary.  However, to the extent the discussion was prompted by a poll of 
public opinion, they show how the IOMs purpose was not simply to collect and 
analyse the views of the public, but also to discipline and normalise.  Limor Peer 
has written that: 
Polls generate an enormous amount of data which is used to characterize, 
classify, specialize; distribute along a scale, around a norm, hierarchize 
77 Chto vy dumaete o svoem pokolenii? KP 24/2/61, 3. 
78 Ibid. 
79 Ibid. 
80 Ibid. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 211 
individuals in relation to one another and, if necessary, disqualify and 
invalidate.81 
The treatment of the Muscovite shows this desire to disqualify and invalidate 
quite clearly, as does the description of aberrant respondents to a poll on free 
time as Oblomovs (after the hero of Goncharovs 1859 novel, who spends most 
of the book lying on his sofa).82  In the Soviet context, the ability of polling to 
distribute [individuals] around a norm was less a criticism, and more of a 
recommendation.  The IOMs job was inherently one of, as Starodub had put it in 
1960, levelling.83  It aimed to guide public opinion towards a pre-determined 
norm of citizenship, regulating difference in the name of social unity.  This 
normalising function of the press was not a specifically Soviet invention: it is a 
feature of the mass media more generally.84  What is unusual in this case is both 
the use of polling as a platform for doing so, and also the willingness of 
journalists and academics to mention it explicitly.   
Grushins encyclopaedia entry of 1974 argued that Obshchestvennoe 
mnenie regulates the behaviour of individuals, social groups and institutions in 
society, developing, assembling  or implanting certain norms of social 
relations.85  A work of 1964 by the Leningrad-based academic Boris Erunov, 
discussing the work of the IOM, explicitly cited this disciplinary function: 
Those who adhere to the opinion of the majority, and take up a correct position, 
will feel that the correctness of their judgement has been upheld.  This will help 
them to bring their opinion into life with clarity and determination.  The others, 
who found themselves in the minority, will feel that errors have crept into their 
judgements, which they ought to correct.  In any case they will feel that there is 
something wrong in the fact that they are in the minority and that will force them 
to think and rethink many of their views.86 
At a letuchka the year before, Iurii Voronov spoke of the method by which the 
IOMs work proceeded: First of all we direct obshchestvennoe mnenie towards a 
81 Limor Peer, The Practice of Opinion Polling as a Disciplinary Mechanism: A Foucauldian 
Perspective, International Journal of Public Opinion Research 4/3 (1992), 238. 
82 A. Egorov, Podnimite perchatku, Ilia Ilich KP 24/11/63, 2-3. 
83 23/05/60, d.272, l.133. 
84 See The Manufacture of News. Deviance, Social Problems & The Mass Media, ed. by Stanley 
Cohen, Jock Young (London: Constable, 1973). 
85 Grushin, Obshchestvennoe mnenie. 
86 B.A. Erunov, Sila obshchestvennogo mneniia (Leningrad: Lenizdat, 1964), pp.49-50. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 212 
certain problem, secondly, we ascertain readers' opinions (obshchestvennoe 
mnenie) on these problems and, thirdly, by discussing and making conclusions, 
we form obshchestvennoe mnenie.87  The year after, the IOMs Valentin Chikin 
told an audience at the Union of Journalists that: 
By publishing this material, we not only talk about what public opinion thinks 
[				],	but	 form	 it.	 	Because	when	
people have the full results in front of them, and analyse genuine public opinion 
[	 	 ],	 then	 people	 can	 correct	 themselves	
[].	 We	 constantly	 receive	 letters	 from	 people	 who,	
having read our results, renounce their views.88 
Evidence from readers letters bear this out: a 23-year-old engineer from 
Moscow claimed that The IOM helps us to understand the most important thing 
at a given moment; what it is necessary to say and what it is possible to say, and 
helps us to feel like the masters of our futures and to feel responsible for that 
future.89  A Foreman from Zaporozhe said of it: Here we can share our 
thoughts, and read about the opinion of other comrades.  Thats very valuable.  
Thats the only way we can examine the correctness or incorrectness of our 
thoughts and ideals.90   
Nevertheless, others remained fearful of expressing their opinion. Even 
in 1967, instructions distributed to interviewers stated that: The respondent 
needs to be made to understand that his/her selection was completely by 
chance, that the anonymity of his statements is completely guaranteed (his 
surname is not required, etc.).91  However, the printing of readers names in full 
may have added to their disquiet: one reader who had written in with a 
minority opinion implicitly acknowledged the IOMs stigmatising impact by 
writing a follow-up letter: Without thinking I put my surname on the 
questionnaire, but I dont want my familys name to appear in the paper.92 
Individuals who submitted their opinions to the Institute must have been aware 
87 22/4/63, d.342, l.30 (brackets in original). 
88 Stenogramma vsesoiuznogo tvorcheskogo soveshchaniia publitsistov. Tom II, 4/6/64, GARF, 
f.10124, op.1, d.243, l. 109. 
89 HIA, Boris Grushin Papers, Box 1, Folder 2 (emphasis in original). 
90 Ibid. 
91 Instruktsiia anketeru, April 1967, HIA, Box 4, Folder 21. 
92 Kak vy provodite svobodnoe vremia? KP 11/1/63, 4. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 213 
that they were on display, and this is likely to have had the effect of reducing 
the volume of dissenting views.93   
A 1966 academic article described the Soviet press a machine, and 
readers as the medium on which the machine works for the attainment of a 
pre-formulated [] goal.94  The metaphor was not especially 
flattering to readers yet, as we have seen, journalists, too, saw the situation in 
these terms.  Whether the IOM was printing responses, inviting judgement of 
individuals, criticising or ridiculing them, it was forming public opinion.  The 
IOM machine provided a means for manufacturing a unanimous public opinion, 
forming an assembly line for producing model Soviet citizens.  In that sense, the 
IOM provided a microcosm of the Soviet newspapers relationship to its 
readership. 
In 1962, the paper conducted a far-reaching survey on Soviet families.  It asked 
readers whether they believed that young people were ready to start a family, 
and whether social provision was conducive to family life.  Like the Brigades of 
Communist Labour survey, it revealed a range of problems with the preparation 
of young people for family life.95  While it is clear that the IOMs workers saw the 
Institute as a means for forming public opinion, reading through responses to 
the survey, one is struck by, not by the homogeneity of responses, but by their 
diversity: from ringing endorsements of the party line, to the grumbling of 
middle-aged Soviet citizens about their inability to find housing.  The 
respondents illustrate how it is wrong to assume that readers simply wrote 
their opinions, cut out the form, and sent it to the newspaper.  Instead, they took 
the survey theme as a launching pad and wrote for five pages, ten pages, 
93 This, of course, may be a phenomenon common to the press in general, but it was more 
pronounced in the Soviet case.  See Lucy Atkinson, The Public Sphere in Print: Do Letters to the 
Editor Serve as a Forum for Rational-Critical Debate? Unpublished Conference Paper, 
Association for Education in Journalism and Mass Communication, Washington DC, 2007. 
94 E.I. Pronin, Pechat' i obshchestvennoe mnenie, Vestnik moskovskogo universiteta. Seriia XI 
(Zhurnalistika) 6 (1966), 28. 
95 The following discussion relies on twenty responses to the survey, held in the Hoover 
Institution Archives.  None of them have previously been published, and they represent the only 
original replies to the Institutes surveys available to researchers.  The criteria for retention are 
unclear, so no statistical conclusions can be drawn.  Nonetheless, the selection does give us an 
insight into the ways in which readers responded to the IOM. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 214 
sometimes more, often failing to answer the Institutes questions altogether.  
Some philosophised; some wrote essays; others told the story of their lives, but 
it is the differences that are most striking.   
A. K., a pensioner from Dnepropetrovsk, urged the paper to print his 
letter, entitled I cant forgive myself: I think that if a young family man 
[] reads my letter, it will be a lesson.  So Im asking you to print it.  He 
introduced himself: Now Im a pensioner.  Ive worked for the good of the 
people; Ive fought.  Everything that a citizen of our Fatherland [] ought 
to do.  But theres one thing I cant forgive myself for, something for which 
nobody has judged or punished me.  He narrated how he left his wife, Nina, and 
his son for another woman during the famine of 1931-33.  His wife died and his 
son moved in with his grandmother, but she was killed during the war by 
German troops and his son spent the war without a family.  After the war, K. re-
established contact with his son, who told him that he knew all about his affair 
from his mothers diary.  Although K. managed to patch up the relationship, he 
wrote: I am ashamed and pained to tears for the thoughtlessness I gave in to; I 
am ashamed that I didnt help, that I didnt support my friend and the mother of 
my child when they were in need [ ].  Dont allow yourself to do the 
same.96  K. didnt strictly provide an answer to the IOMs questions, but he did, 
in a broader sense, respond to them by unburdening himself of his sorrow over 
his past infidelities.  Indeed, he saw his story as useful and instructive for Soviet 
youth.   
A letter signed by seven students from the Kuban Red Army Medical 
Institute in Krasnodar indicated another use for the IOM.  They wrote PLEASE 
HELP at the top of the page, and detailed the marital infidelities of three 
members of staff.  The students called on the paper to help us get rid of 
[] such educators.  Please understand that when we look at such 
people our lives seem foul and vulgar, and we want to look at the shining, happy, 
and joyful future.97  Whether the accusations were true or not is unclear, but it 
96 HIA, Box 2, Folder 6, Letter 8184. All subsequent references to letters from this collection are 
from this box and folder.  Correspondents name changed to protect anonymity. 
97 Letter 11600. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 215 
is evident that the IOMs survey provided an opportunity for students to 
denounce unpopular teachers. 
Betti, a 40-year-old writer from Riazan' oblast praised the Institute, 
calling it a new, wise, and genuinely democratic initiative and suggesting that 
its founder should be given an award.98   She contributed a utopian response 
reminiscent of the early 1920s, in which she denounced the family as a prison, 
claimed that it would be changed in revolutionary fashion as the nation 
approached Communism, and stated her belief that the happiness of the future 
would make the present day seem unspeakable with the memorable words We 
are the manure of history [   ], preparing the ground for the 
wonderful future.  Like K., Betti invited the papers editors to print her 
response, but added: I hope that its not just me who expresses an opinion of 
this kind.  Though, judging by the published results, few readers agreed with 
Betti about the need to abolish the family, the results to the survey showed a 
diversity of opinions at work in Soviet society, and a plurality of views on how 
to resolve social problems.  Soviet citizens were thus engaged in a form of civic 
debate, whose parameters were not entirely controlled by the newspaper.99 
 The IOM gave readers a rare opportunity to debate social issues, and the 
opinions it printed were sometimes at odds with the Party line.  Readers were 
able to colour outside the lines by using the Institute for their own purposes  
purposes that diverged from the intentions of its founders.  To the extent that 
journalists attempted to engineer a mass opinion amenable to the regime by 
circumscribing the frame of debate and stigmatising certain opinions, it limited 
the potential of the Institute to form a public sphere.  At the same time, the 
Institute implicitly endorsed the right to possess an opinion and the right to 
differ from others.  By publicising the results, it suggested that Soviet public 
opinion was less like the purposeful, educated obshchestvennost that it had 
always depicted, and something more diverse and divided. 
98 Letter 8015. 
99 B. Grushin, Poeziia i proza semeinoi zhizni KP 9/7/64, 4. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 216 
4 1964-1968: Endgame 
The idea of the IOM as a scientifically-oriented research institute would have 
come as a shock to those who studied the Institutes first two surveys.  Those 
had been relatively small-scale undertakings (n=1000 and n=1399) and, both in 
survey design and in calculation and evaluation of results, they exhibited a 
slightly home-made quality.  The first survey was self-selecting; included fifty 
per cent more men than women; and was not weighted to the population as a 
whole.100  Party and Komsomol leaders, whose instincts were not entirely 
geared towards scientific neutrality, were involved in the data collection, and in 
Gaivoron in Ukraine, the Party Secretary, seeing that some responses were not 
as required tore them up.  The shortfall was made up by interviewing more 
individuals in Pskov.101  The second survey was conducted through 
questionnaires handed out by the conductor on trains departing from Moscow.  
This survey, on quality of life, did at least pay lip service to modelling the nation 
as a whole (the thinking was that, since trains were heading in all directions, the 
individuals travelling on them would be from a wide range of demographic 
groups).  However, as critics pointed out, the sample inevitably over-
represented Muscovites, and peasants and rural inhabitants were rarely found 
in Moscow  and especially not at a busy work period during the summer.102   
With its next survey on youth, the Institute introduced an innovation that 
characterised subsequent activities.  The front-page questionnaire provided a 
simple means for data collection, and had the additional benefit of eliminating 
many of its costs.  The attraction was all the greater because of the enormous 
number of responses: the IOM interviewed 1000 individuals for its survey on 
war; it managed more than 20,000 for the one on youth.103  This was impressive 
by any measure, and especially when one considers that the French IFOPs 1957 
survey on French youth, despite greater publicity, garnered fewer than 15,000 
100 Grushin, Khrushchev, pp.113-115. 
101 Ibid., p.75. 
102 Weinberg, Sociology in SU, pp.96-99. 
103 Only 17,466 were analysed, the rest disqualified for being over the age of 30, or for other 
reasons, including being written in the form of poetry. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 217 
responses.104  It also increased greatly the number of letters the paper received, 
which was considered by the regime to be a measure of a papers effectiveness.  
With every response received, the paper became objectively better in the eyes 
of the Agit-prop bean counters. 
However, there were costs to such an approach.  The IOMs surveys were 
now drawn from a self-selecting group of readers  a form of sampling which 
delivered notoriously unreliable results.  Studies of the corpus of letter-writers 
to KP conducted by IOM staff concluded that they were unrepresentative of the 
papers readership as a whole, and this very likely extended to the respondents 
to the IOMs own surveys.  For Russian historian Nikolai Mitrokhin, the presence 
of such a sample was the Achilles heel of the IOMs work.105  Readers 
themselves pointed this out. The trouble is that its mainly leading youths who 
take part in discussions, but there is a backward [] section of young 
people who dont read newspapers and dont take part in any discussions and 
dont express their opinions, wrote an economist from Lipetsk.106  
Nevertheless, it should be noted that those methodological flaws may have 
amplified positive responses, and thus aided newspaper propaganda. 
A second main drawback of the Institutes new methodology was that the 
high number of respondents threatened to overwhelm the IOMs resources.  
Seventeen thousand replies was seventeen times more than the Institutes 
previous surveys, but the IOM had only three staff members to read, analyse, 
and tabulate them.  As we saw in the second section, the Institute was criticised 
for the amount of time it took to print survey conclusions.  For the youth survey, 
for example, the original anketa was printed in January 1961 but its conclusions 
were ready for publication only in July; the results of a survey on free time 
would take three years.   
The contradiction between the desire for quick results and the needs of 
academic research only increased between 1962 and 1966, when Grushin was 
104 Franoise Giroud, Nouvelle Vague: Portraits de la jeunesse (Paris: Gallimard, 1958), p.23. 
105 Nikolai Mitrokhin. Zametki o sovetskoi sotsiologii (po prochtenii knigi Borisa Firsova) 
Novoe literaturnoe obozrenie 98 (2009): 118-119.  My thanks to Prof. Stephen Lovell for alerting 
me to this reference. 
106 HIA, Box 1, Folder 2. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 218 
seconded to Prague to work at the journal Problemy mira i sotsializma under the 
liberal stewardship of Aleksei Rumiantsev (briefly to become Editor of Pravda, 
and later the President of the Academy of Sciences).107  Although Grushin 
continued to run the paper from Prague, the secondment removed him from the 
everyday workings of the paper.  While at the journal, Grushin made intellectual 
friendships with leading scholars, organised conferences, and enjoyed greater 
academic freedom than he had in Moscow.  Between 1960 and his departure, 
Grushin had been both journalist-propagandist and sociologist-academic, but 
after his trip abroad, his work was far more sober.  It should be borne in mind 
that Grushin came to KP only by accident, having found his philosophical 
vocation blocked as a result of his suspect intellectual friendships.108  One likely 
interpretation  supported by his subsequent career path  is that although 
Grushin took newspaper work seriously, he never renounced his original 
academic ambitions. 
In Grushins absence, resentment about the IOMs work bubbled to the 
surface.  At an editorial meeting in April 1963, Sofia Finger, one of the papers 
senior figures and head of the papers Party Organisation, read colleagues a 
readers letter entitled Arent there too many questionnaires?  Isnt there 
anything else to write about? the letter asked, adding that the paper up to now 
has been (note: has been) one of the best.  But now its started to decline. I dont 
know how to explain it.  But its become bureaucratised. Because the 
questionnaires are dreamt up by none other than a bureaucrat.  But 
Komsomolka is a youth newspaper and the fewer questionnaires the better.109  
For Finger, the letter provided proof that the paper was merely reflecting public 
opinion and not doing enough to mould it: We ask [questions] too often, but we 
need to give answers ourselves significantly more often, and, most importantly, 
to give food for thought, so that the reader thinks, discovers new horizons, and 
107 Grushin, Gorkii vkus, pp.211-214. 
108 Boris Grushin, Ne na tekh napali in Bol'she, chem gazeta, p.45. 
109 22/4/63, d.342, l.16. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 219 
goes from strength to strength.110  For Vladimir Razumnevich, meanwhile, the 
paper was being turned into a dry organ of accounting.111   
Fingers criticisms were sufficiently robust for the IOMs Valentin Chikin 
to feel the need to defend its work.  He reminded the collective that the IOM had 
only one member of staff to process questionnaires, and predicted  with 
remarkable accuracy, as it turned out  that to process the thirteen thousand 
questionnaires received for the free time survey would require 644 working 
days.  He spoke of the enormous social importance of the Institutes survey on 
free time, and read out a letter from a young man in Cheliabinsk who claimed 
that a total absence of leisure facilities had driven both him and his colleagues to 
drink, with the result that many had had brushes with the penal system.112  
Chikin thus argued that the gathering of such data was in the public interest, for 
it provided valuable information on social problems that might otherwise have 
gone unreported.  He also defended the IOM on pragmatic grounds.  He 
reminded his audience that the Institute brought in an enormous number of 
letters: 28,336 in 1961, 46,700 in 1962, and 20,000 in the first three months of 
1963, representing between 17 and 22 per cent of the total postbag of the 
newspaper.  But the real ace in his hand was the fact that research into free time 
had been commissioned by the partys Central Committee. 
From humble beginnings, the Institute was now called upon to provide 
research for the regime.  This decisive moment was to dictate the IOMs 
direction for the remainder of its existence.   Following the survey on free time, 
subsequent surveys were to concentrate on customer service, the Komsomol, 
child and teenage crime, the national anthem, elections in industry, and 
economic reform.  Save for its final survey in 1967-68, a desperate attempt to 
return to favour with the collective in order to keep the IOM open, the free-
wheeling, propaganda-friendly days of the Institute were gone.  Each of the 
Institutes subsequent surveys was focused on a particular social issue and most 
110 Ibid., l.16. 
111 Ibid., l.21. 
112 Ibid., ll.19-20. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 220 
were commissioned by a branch of the ruling apparatus, from the Central 
Committee to the KGB.   
Editor Iurii Voronov spoke of the importance of the Institute gaining 
gosudarstvennost [statehood], and pointed out that its work had been 
evaluated positively by Leonid Ilichev at the Ideological Commission, that the 
First Secretary of the Komsomol, Sergei Pavlov, had referred positively to it, and 
that it was cited in the Partys theoretical journal Kommunist.113  If working in 
the Soviet press sometimes seemed like a battle between the authorities and 
journalists, then having the IOM as part of the establishment clearly represented 
a sort of insurance  an example of patronage that could be wheeled out when 
necessary.  It is striking nevertheless that the Institute had to rely on that 
approval, rather than the strength of its material, to shore up its support. 
 Between 1963 and 1966, the ties linking the IOM and the Party tightened, 
possibly because of the increased prominence of Grushin nationally, but also 
because he was the only figure conducting polling at the time.  The Institute 
became a kind of sandbox for the regimes tentative experiments in using social 
data to govern society.  Crossing the boundary between Khrushchev and 
Brezhnev eras, two surveys conducted in late 1964, Lets design and A new 
product needs a name, were dismissed by Grushin as transparent attempts to 
attract reader responses to bulk up the size of the postbag before the end of the 
year.114  One asked readers to answer questions about the design of televisions 
and record players; the other invited them to propose names for these new 
products.  In both cases, prizes were offered.  Though these surveys were closer 
to market research than sociology, they nevertheless showed which way the 
wind was blowing: only a few months later, the regime announced the opening 
of the nations first ever market research institute.115 
 The Institutes links with the Party could also be seen as exerting a 
democratising effect on the nations governance.  Even from the Institutes 
earliest surveys (such as the questionnaire on living standards) government 
113 Ibid., l.30. 
114 Grushin, Brezhnev, p.17 n.1. 
115 Little is known about the work of the Institute, which existed for less than a year.  
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 221 
officials had been asked to comment on the points that the public had made.  If 
this early attempt to link the public and their politicians was not especially 
successful (all three ministers resorted to speechifying, rather than responding 
directly to social issues), then later attempts would be more far-reaching.116  
Amongst the articles produced for the Are you being served well? survey of 
1964 was a series of interviews with the Minister of Trade, the Minister of Light 
Industry, and the Minister of Transport and Highways.  Here, the tone was far 
more combative: 
IOM 66% of participants in the survey are complaining about the fact that our 
everyday life is aggravated by queues.  What do you have planned for the coming 
year to eradicate the tailed monstrosity [ ]? 
A.I. Struev I have to admit to a problem.  To promise a complete, as you put it 
eradication of queues in the coming year would be silly.  Queues are produced 
for a number of reasons.  And one of the main ones is that production of a 
number of products has not kept up with the rising income of the Soviet people 
And the questions continued, each citing a survey figure, each pointing to 
dissatisfaction amongst the Soviet citizenry about the state of retail and 
transport.  Needless to say, such questions did not touch the highest levels of 
political power.  They were, however, a step forward for the evolution of Soviet 
public opinion.  Although in the post-Stalin period ministers were sometimes 
invited to discuss their work on the pages of KP, the connection to the IOM was 
crucial.  Politicians now had to respond to the views of the public they 
ostensibly served, to explain their policies and admit errors.118  They were being 
held accountable. 
By the beginning of 1966, the links between the IOM and the Party 
apparatus were stronger than ever.  The Institute was beginning to win 
commissions from the government, and there was now no need to fight the 
battles of the past about whether empirical research had a right to exist.  But it 
was equally clear that the IOM was losing support among sections of the 
editorial collective.  Only the opposition of Mikhail Suslov prevented him from 
116 Radostnye itogi, tsennye predlozheniia KP 8/10/60, 1-2. 
117 A.I. Struev 10 voprosov o prilavke KP 14/12/65. 1. 
118 See also N. Shelomov, Industriia otdykha KP 27/9/66, 2. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 222 
relocating the Institute to Pravda, where his former editor in Prague, Aleksei 
Rumiantsev, was now editor.119  Having failed in this bid, Grushin set about 
altering the IOMs institutional ties to KP in a bid to gain some security.  The 
Institute became independent of the Department of Propaganda, and was split 
into two sections.  A science section, headed by Grushin, dealt with survey 
design, data collection, and analysis, and a newspaper section, headed by 
Ervant Grigoriants, concentrated on producing articles.  It received funds from 
KPs budget, but also financed itself through income derived from work for 
external agencies, such as ministries.120 As Figure 4 (page 233) shows, seven of 
the nine surveys undertaken after Grushins return were projects of this type. 
However, it appears that this did little to improve the dearth of 
newspaper material.  Eleven of the twelve surveys conducted before 1966 
produced articles, but only five of the eleven produced afterwards bore similar 
fruit (and two of those only a single article).  While those early surveys had 
attracted enthusiastic comments from the papers editorial staff, the IOMs later 
work was often passed over in silence.  Nevertheless, the IOM still brought a 
large volume of postal traffic, and the prestige that attended the Institutes 
patronage by the regime was no small matter.  It therefore made sense for KPs 
editor, Boris Pankin to continue to offer his support  indeed, he was one of the 
driving forces behind granting the IOM its autonomy.121   
In Spring 1966, the prospects for the Institute looked rosy.  In April of 
that year, Brezhnev endorsed the conducting of concrete research into social 
problems, and announced the opening of a major research institute to that 
end.122  At the same time, the IOM was conducting its first survey as an 
independent organisation, Komsomols on the Komsomol, which, although not 
commissioned by the organisation, was prepared in close collaboration with it.  
The survey, which gauged members opinions on their organisation delivered 
desperately negative results.  Barely a quarter of respondents thought that the 
Komsomol determined their tasks in life, and only a third thought that the 
119 Grushin, Brezhnev, p.21 n.1. 
120 Ibid.. 21-22. On the IOMs finances p.423. 
121 Ibid. 
122 Mespoulet, 70. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 223 
organisation dealt with suggestions adequately.  Almost three quarters of 
respondents claimed that the Komsomol was of no help to them in achieving 
their goals in life, while more than half felt that changes to admissions 
procedures were required.123  In many ways, the survey was a form of self-
criticism of the sort we encountered in Chapter 1, and the Komsomols reaction 
to the survey underlined this.  So incendiary were these almost entirely negative 
results that they remained unpublished for thirty-five years.  In Grushins 
account, the editors of KP, fearing potential prosecution from the KGB, 
attempted to destroy the survey data, which were apparently rescued by IOM 
employee Iakob Kapeliush in a daring rescue from the Pravda publishing 
complex.124 
 Even without publication of the results, the paper still managed to 
convey a sense of the public mood by printing a collection of readers responses 
in late April.  Even though these responses were accented towards the positive, 
they nevertheless provided a window onto the organisations problems.  One 
26-year-old engineer-constructor from Moscow complained that The main 
principle in the organisation is numbers [] and nothing more ... As a 
result a dumb little seventeen year-old girl and a twenty year-old parent turn up 
in the same organisation.  They don't have any of the same interests, both are 
politically illiterate.  What unites us?  We all pay our membership fees on 
time.125  The postscript to the article gravely admitted  the arguments 
mentioned above raise many serious problems connected with the life of today's 
Komsomol without offering a crumb of solace.126  Most likely, it was as much 
for this article, as much as for the survey itself, that Grushin and the paper found 
themselves under fire. 
 Seen in retrospect, it appears that the surveys main sin was to have been 
published in the wrong place at the wrong time.  It was the wrong place, 
because, as the leading Komsomol newspaper, KP should have been publishing 
ritualised celebrations.  It was the wrong time, because it came only months 
123 For full details see Grushin, Brezhnev, pp.59-135.  
124 Ibid., pp.30-31. 
125 Komsomol'tsy o komsomole KP 26/4/66, 2. 
126 Ibid. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 224 
after Voronovs sacking for the Sakhnin affair.  And, to add insult to injury, the 
survey was commissioned in the run-up to the Komsomols Fifteenth Congress.  
Narrated in this way, the failure of the Komsomol survey seems pre-ordained.  
But Pankin nor Grushin were seasoned tyros  they knew the way the press 
worked.  Why, then, had they made such a grave error?   
In conducting this research, Grushin and Pankin were responding to 
signals from the Komsomol.  In June 1965, the First Secretary of the Komsomol, 
Sergei Pavlov, stated that Komsomol officials need to know the true opinions of 
youth on concrete questions, to construct our work on the basis of their 
interests, desires, and demands .  Without this there is subjectivism, 
haphazardness [], rushing from one initiative to another, and 
work in bursts [ ].127  Whether by accident or design, his words 
are strikingly similar to those used by Grushin in his proposal for the 
Komsomols on the Komsomol research: 
Today, we cannot be satisfied with decisions taken by guesswork [ ], 
by recommendations born within the four walls of an office.  We need to study 
life deeply and seriously, to study the objective processes that are occurring 
amongst youth, and on the basis of this study to programmatise all our activity.  It 
is clear that in this work, concrete sociological research into youth problems will 
play an enormous role.128 
However, the Komsomol was in the process of changing.  Brezhnev claimed that 
there was a Komsomol opposition at work.129  It was around this time that the 
Communard movement was ordered to disband.  Soon after the Congress, 
Pavlov (hardly a liberal, but at least open to new ideas) was replaced by the 
bootlick (to use Steven Solnicks word) Evgenii Tiazhelnikov.130  The mass of 
research commissioned into the true opinions of Soviet youth was effectively 
ignored, the Komsomols on the Komsomol survey included.  It could never be 
said that the Komsomols governing organs did not know what was wrong with 
their organisation  the problem was, they would rather not have known. 
127 S. Pavlov, Raboty komsomola - vroven' s vremenem KP 16/6/65, 2. 
128 K programme  HIA, Box 3, Folder 27. 
129 Steven L. Solnick, Stealing the State: Control and Collapse in Soviet Institutions (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1998), pp.73-75. 
130 Ibid. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 225 
The regime had expected the fanfares that greeted the survey on Soviet 
youth five years earlier; when it received an eight-page summary of the results 
without commentary, it regarded the survey as a blackening of reality.131  Two 
years later, at the Fifth Komsomol Congress, a similar report (not, this time, 
conducted by the IOM), investigating why Soviet youth had turned to rebellion, 
was suppressed and bowdlerised.132  From that point, sociological research 
would be used to provide scientific support for decisions already taken.133 
 However, Grushins survey was oriented, not towards an open-ended 
study of members attitudes, but towards an explanation of Komsomol 
members dissatisfaction.  He hypothesised that the vagueness of the regimes 
goals was one reason for the rank-and-files indifference, and predicted that he 
would find a massive difference in opinion between various socio-professional 
groups and different age groups.134  Thus, the intention of the survey was not to 
unify, but to account for the Komsomols lack of unity.  Moreover, the IOM had 
abandoned its earlier reliance on questionnaire-based research and self-
selecting samples, and now sought to build a stratified sample of the 
organisation as a whole.  Earlier surveys partly derived their positive results 
from the distortions introduced by utilising a self-selecting sample; this survey 
ironed out those problems.  In order to orient Komsomol respondents to a 
conversation that would be as practical and honest as possible, without false 
pathos the preamble to the survey was left as dry as possible in order not to 
influence respondents answers.135  Thus, Grushins greater methodological 
acuity is likely to have amplified the negative cast of the responses. 
The controversy over the Komsomol survey was to have profound effects 
for the Institutes future work.  Plans for a regular sociologists column were 
cancelled, and, with the paper taking fright after the departure of Voronov, the 
131 Grushin, Brezhnev, p.28; Grushin, Gorkii vkus, p.210. For the original report see Grushin to 
Pavlov, Spravka po rezul'tatam anketnogo oprosa Komsomol'tsy o komsomole HIA, Box 3, 
Folder 17. 
132 Solnick, pp.81-82. 
133 Ibid., p.83. 
134 Komsomoltsy o komsomole: programma issledovaniia (1-i variant). HIA, Box 3, Folder 27. 
135 Grushin, Brezhnev, p.59. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 226 
IOMs projected series of articles to greet the survey were similarly dropped.136   
However, the scandal did more damage to the IOMs standing at the paper than 
with the Party.  The year following the controversy saw the Institute at its 
busiest, conducting seven separate surveys, commissioned by a number of 
different sections of the ruling apparatus.  There were two surveys on the KP 
readership; a study of youth crime for the KGB; another on the national anthem 
for the Central Committee; and a survey on holidays for a branch of the State 
Construction agency.  Such a record is proof of the remarkable popularity of 
sociology in the mid- to late-1960s, but also of the lack of organisations that 
were qualified to carry out such research. 
Though the new-found independence of the IOM was a boon for the 
sociological side of the operation, it still did little to improve the Institutes 
viability as a journalistic undertaking.  Naturally enough, the KGB did not allow 
the results of the survey on youth crime to be disseminated, and the IOMs two 
in-depth surveys of the KP readership, their results being of more interest to 
journalists than readers, received only one short article each.  That left only the 
Institutes survey on holidays, which, despite being fairly successful in terms of 
the quantity of articles it produced, met with a decidedly lukewarm reaction 
from journalists: When one reads one letter after another, one comes to the 
conclusion that nothing new is being said, one journalist complained.137  And at 
a letuchka of 9 January 1967, the collective rated the Institutes work as 
unsatisfactory, and perceived the main root of this lack of success of the 
journalists [] solely in the ill-intentioned actions of the 
sociologists.138 
 The low point of the Institute at the newspaper coincided with the high 
point in its relationship with officialdom: the Central Committees 
commissioning of a survey on the national anthem in March 1967 (no articles 
came from the survey).  A month later, the IOM frittered this goodwill away, 
ultimately setting in motion the controversy that forced the Institutes closure.  
136 Ibid., p.28. 
137 5/7/66, d.432, l.4. 
138 Grushin, Brezhnev, p.26. The transcript of this meeting is not available, so we are relying on 
Grushins account of the meeting. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 227 
Following on from an article published in September 1966 about an experiment 
in workers democracy in Krasnoiarsk, the Institute decided to undertake 
research into the question.139  The results suggested widespread support of 
respondents for elections, not just at grass roots, but at all levels of industrial 
enterprises  a policy that the regime had no intention of supporting.  Again, 
Grushins motives in carrying the survey out remain obscure.  He seems to have 
possessed a genuine desire to reveal certain truths about Soviet society that 
contradicted official rhetoric.  Pankin was not so foolish as to test the limits, and 
prevented publication of any material relating to the survey.140  The damage to 
the Institutes image at the paper, however, was terminal. 
 In a bid to stave off the inevitable, Grushin attempted to redress the 
balance between science and propaganda by trying to return to the good old 
days of the early 1960s, with a light-hearted survey on parents reasons for 
choosing childrens names.  The survey recalled earlier efforts like the very 
successful 1000 children on 50 words survey of 1962, and the youth survey of 
1961  right down to the questionnaire-based, self-selecting survey design.  Yet 
while the latter had attracted more than 17,000 readers, this latter survey 
barely managed 4000.  The reaction from within the collective was even less 
positive: Aleksei Ivkin tore into the surveys boring conclusions.141  He argued 
that, while the IOMs previous survey on free time had obtained wide social 
resonance, this survey would only make the Department of Letters happy142  
He continued: 
When in our country sociology was underground, under pressure, then the 
appearance of such an organisation in our paper played a progressive role.  We 
were the first  that was to our credit.  Now, when sociology and social 
psychology are already in every corner of our lives, the retention of the Institute 
of Public Opinion at our paper as a scientific organisation just makes you smile, 
because at the quality and the quantity that the Institute of Public Opinion is 
working at it all looks unserious and unscientific.  We need to close down the 
Institute.  It cant work with such amateurish [] methods, with such 
amateurish principles, and with such amateurish equipment  all the more so 
139 Ibid., p.28. 
140 Though the regime still punished the paper in 1969, a year after the closure of the IOM 
(Grushin, Brezhnev, pp.28-29 n.3). 
141 8/1/68, d.470, l.13. 
142 Ibid. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 228 
when you compare the level of sociological research in the West with ours, where 
things are done on a large scale.  When you look at it like that, the IOM looks like 
a dilettante.143 
The IOMs attempts to be less amateurish and create viable works of sociology 
had ended in acrimony.  But now Grushins attempts to turn the clock back to 
the Institutes propaganda-friendly glory days were mocked.  Ivkins comments 
encapsulate Grushins failure to navigate between the conflicting demands of KP 
and social science.  The collision seemed ever more inevitable the longer 
Grushin maintained the illusion that the IOM could continue to undertake social 
research at a large newspaper without paying the piper.  The IOM was 
expensive; it produced precious little material; and it often brought problems 
from the Party  even though it ostensibly had its political support.  Pankins 
decision to close the Institute, notwithstanding Grushins later criticisms of the 
short-sightedness of his former Editor and supporter, was unlikely to have been 
a difficult one.144 
 However, as Ivkins comments hinted, the situation for sociology was 
changing.  Party support for sociology occasioned the opening of an Institute of 
Concrete Social Research (IKSI) at the Academy of Sciences in 1968, followed in 
1969 by the Centre for the Study of Public Opinion (TsIOM), headed by Grushin.  
There, he extended his IOM research into socially uncharted territory, with the 
Centre surveying areas such as drunkenness, political education, the work of 
local party organs, physical culture, and personal finance.  After the IOM gained 
administrative independence, forty-two different institutes and ministries made 
enquiries to the TsIOM.145  Indicative of the TsIOMs influence was the fact that 
the most persistent enquirers were at the very top of the state hierarchy: the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Culture.146   
It is hard to escape the conclusion that it made more sense for Grushin to 
work at the Academy of Sciences.  However, after the IOM left KP, results were 
limited to a narrow, specialist circle, without press publicity.  As sociologist 
143 Ibid. 
144 Grushin, Brezhnev, p.30; Gorkii vkus, p.210. 
145 Grushin, Brezhnev, pp.433-434. 
146 Ibid. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 229 
Vladimir Shlapentokh has suggested, press coverage of polls has a magnifying 
effect.  The presence of results in a national forum enhances their critical 
orientation among the general public.147  It was precisely this effect that the 
regime feared.  Empirical sociology was no longer hounded on a theoretical 
level (though it never sat entirely comfortably with historical materialism), but 
its wider public resonance remained problematic.  Away from KP, Grushins 
surveys could no longer create a new kind of public opinion, but instead became 
a tool for rational-bureaucratic governance.148  The time for experiments had 
passed; an era of scientific managerialism was dawning. 
 But the growing importance of sociology to the Soviet leadership brought 
enhanced status for sociologists who, for a time, dined at the top table with the 
Soviet elite.  Sociologists who had once been under attack now found 
themselves invited to Central Committee meetings; they were frequently asked 
to participate in seminars, lectures and conferences; their work appeared in the 
most prestigious publications.149  Grushin himself was asked to head a large 
research project into mass media, which ran for six years from 1967 to 1973.  
However, sociologists position was subject to the vagaries of high politics.  Even 
before the opening of the IKSI, the Siniavskii-Daniel trial showed the Partys 
fear of ideological ferment amongst the intelligentsia.  A year later, Fedor 
Burlatskii, who would become Deputy Head of the ISKI, was fired from Pravda 
after he co-authored an article in KP with Len Karpinskii, another sociologist, 
which spoke out against theatre censorship.150 
After the Prague Spring, the situation grew graver still.  A scandal over 
the lack of reverence shown to Marxism in Iurii Levadas lectures was followed 
by attacks on other prominent scholars.151  The liberal Aleksei Rumiantsev was 
removed from the leadership of the Institute, to be replaced by Mikhail 
Rutkevich, who replaced prominent academics with ideologues one by one.  By 
147 Vladimir Shlapentokh, The Politics of Sociology in the Soviet Union (Boulder, CO: Westview 
Press, 1987), pp.109-110. 
148 Mespoulet, 72. 
149 Shlapentokh, Politics, p.38. 
150 F. Burlatskii, L. Karpinskii, Na puti k premere KP 30/6/67, 4.  KP was forced to print a 
retraction: The Artists Party Spirit KP 8/7/67, 2, reprinted in CDSP 19/27 (1967), 15-17. 
151 Mespoulet, 76-77. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 230 
1972, studies of public opinion was one item on a long list of subjects 
proscribed for publication.152  Grushin jumped before being pushed, emigrating 
to Prague in 1974.  Only under Gorbachev, when sociology once again became 
part of a reformist agenda, was he able to return to Moscow and his work on 
public opinion.  
5 Doublethink? 
In a 2009 review of sociologist Boris Firsovs memoirs, Raznomyslie [Different 
Views], the historian Nikolai Mitrokhin attacked the heroic shestidesiatniki 
stance of the books author, claiming that a more apt term would be 
doublethink.153  His harsh words extended to Grushins work at the IOM, which 
he saw as merely reflecting the views of an activist elite.  Grushin was not averse 
to doing some of his own self-mythology:  
[Our press] undermined the system. And this happened on a massive scale. On 
the whole, with the exception of some brazen toadies, who picked the crumbs 
after the feast and sold themselves in plain view, all the rest worked on 
undermining.154 
Grushin knew better than anyone how undermining was often a long way 
from journalists minds.  Though he claimed that the IOM provided a means for 
training citizens in the values of civil society, as we have seen from the words of 
his colleague, Valentin Chikin, the IOM was also a tool for creating model 
Communist citizens.155  For this reason, Mitrokhins iconoclastic demolishing of 
shestidesiatniki certainties is welcome.  But, by calling into question the ultimate 
impact of Firsov and Grushins work, Mitrokhin raises important questions 
about the way historians should view the work of those, such as journalists and 
sociologists, who were forced into compromises to resurrect their profession.  
Doublethink, if that is what it was, would suggest that they had fooled 
152 Ibid., 83. 
153 Mitrokhin, 120. 
154 Grushin, IOM  otdel KP, p.63. 
155 Grushin, Khrushchev, pp.53-54. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 231 
themselves into thinking they were changing society, when, in fact, they were 
contributing to the perpetuation of the status quo.   
The IOM came from both inside and outside the ruling apparatus, and it 
both sought both social change and social continuity.  For Mitrokhin, it could not 
be considered a serious scientific institute, since its orientation towards self-
selecting samples meant that its results were just echoes of the Partys own 
voice.156  True enough, although later surveys ironed out these flaws.  Yet even 
when the sampling was unsound, surveys were seen by readers as an 
opportunity to air their views, and on occasion forced government ministers to 
respond to the voice of the public.  Despite attempts to demonstrate social 
unanimity, the fracturing of the ideological certainties was real.157 
And, for all the talk of doublethink, Grushin was brave: his daring in 
conducting his surveys on the Komsomol and on elections in production cannot 
be explained by any desire to please the regime: transcripts show that Grushins 
defence of the liberal sociologist Iurii Levada, whose course of lectures on 
sociology were denounced as deviating from Party principles, put him in a 
minority of one.158  Yet, one instinctively feels that arguing in such terms is a 
dangerous game, somehow damaging to historical understanding.  It turns 
history into a test of bravery (as if dissidence was the only acceptable course of 
action) and makes historians into judges, rather than analysts of the past.   
Far better to be more measured in ones judgements: the IOM stands as a 
testimony to the power of Komsomolskaia pravda to effect change in public life; 
it also exposes its limitations.  The ease with which Grushin was able to open the 
Institute and rapidly turn it into an organisation of national importance 
illustrates how amateurs could exploit the loosening of everyday control over 
society to create something completely new within the cultural space of the 
newspaper.  However, the reaction of a significant section of its staff to the 
Institutes later work, and its use as a tool for forging normative citizens, 
illustrates the limitations of such institutionalised spaces in Soviet conditions.   
156 Ibid., pp.18-19. 
157 On this point see also Rutkevich, p.240. 
158 V.E. Kozlovskii and Iu. A. Sychev, Obsuzhdenie kursa lektsii Iu.A. Levady po sotsiologii 
Filosofskie nauki 3 (1970), 178-85.   
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 232 
Looking back on the work of the Institute, Grushin claimed that it was 
called upon to perform two functions: firstly, to allow a space for free 
expression of opinions; secondly, to clear a space for this public opinion in civil 
society by forming public opinion [], raising the level of its 
self-consciousness, enabling links with political instances, including institutions 
with the power to take decisions.159  This chapter has suggested that the IOM 
performed other functions, rather less in tune with the values of post-
Communism.  But contradiction is not doublethink.  These were simply the 
conditions of the period, and they made the Institute into what it was: part 
success and part failure. 
159 Grushin, Khrushchev, p.53. 
THE INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC OPINION | 233 
FIGURE 4: List of Surveys Undertaken by the IOM 
NAME OF SURVEY 
(entries in bold signify 
commissioned research) 
(mth/yr) 
n= METHODOLOGY ARTICLES 
First Last Total160 
Will Humanity Succeed in 
Averting War? 
5/60 1000 Interviews 5/60 5/60 1 
Quality of Life 8-9/60 1399 Questionnaire 10/60 10/60 3 
Opinions of Soviet Youth 1-3/61 17466 + 
Questionnaire 1/61 7/61 7 
Brigades of Communist 
Labour 
8-11/61 367 + 
Questionnaire 8/61 12/62 5 
Problems of the Soviet 
Family 
12/61-62 12104 Questionnaire 12/61 12/62 5 
1000 Children on 50 Words 1-2/62 1000 Questionnaire 8/64 8/64 1 
In Whose Name Do You 
Study? 
5-9/62 1300 Questionnaire 9/62 9/62 1 
To Mars  With What? 3-4/63 6425 Questionnaire 3/63 10/63 7 
Free Time 1-11/63 2730 + 
10392 
Questionnaire 1/63 2/66 16 
An Invention Needs a 
10-12/64 46000 Competition 11/64 11/64 2 
Lets Plan 6-7/64 14150 Competition 7/64 10/64 1 
Customer Service 11-12/64 6127 Questionnaire 12/64 1/66 8 
Free Time of Senior High 
School Students 
1965 1000 Questionnaire n/a n/a 0 
Komsomols on the 
Komsomol 
3-4/66 3101 Interviews 4/66 9/66 3 
Child and Teenage crime 3-4/66 643 Interviews n/a n/a 0 
Vacations: How to spend 
them? 
6-7/66 5765+ 
6235+ 
Questionnaire, 
interviews 
6/66 11/66 6 
Readers on Themselves 
and on the Paper 
10-12/66 18000 Questionnaire 10/66 10/66 1 
Letters to KP and their 
Authors 
2-7/67 421 Interviews 3/68 3/68 1 
The National Anthem 3/67 3500 Interviews n/a n/a 0 
The Problem of Elections 
in Industry 
4/67 900 Interviews n/a n/a 0 
The Population and 
Economic Reforms 
5/67 1000 Interviews n/a n/a 0 
Five Questions to Mums and 
9-10/67 > 4000 Questionnaire 9/67 12/67 3 
TOTAL  170,841    71 
160 Excluding the printing of blank questionnaires. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 234 
CHAPTER 5 | The reader is not an icon: from the Reader-citizen 
to the Reader-consumer 
If Komsomolskaia pravda were a person, what sort of person would it be?  In 
March 1965, KP journalist Valerii Kondakov mused aloud to colleagues on this 
question.  It would be extremely interesting, very knowledgeable, and able to 
examine many problems of society.  One would want to chat with such a person 
 a good friend who you meet every morning.  But, at the same time, this is an 
extremely serious person, who rarely smiles or jokes.  Their head is filled with 
the great and serious problems of life, and they sometimes dont notice what is 
happening around them, and what is bothering every reader.  The problem 
with this friend, argued Kondakov, was that they like to talk for a very long 
time, with their conversation sometimes going on for ten-or-more pages.1  
Such talkativeness tried readers friendship.   
 Kondakovs comments on the papers image illustrate how, in a climate 
of growing competition, journalists felt an increasing pressure to be liked.2  
Komsomolskaia pravda had a rather complex personality.  It was the sort of 
friend who might be a little prissy and demanding, but was also reliable and 
upstanding.  But it was also neurotically trying to be someone else: a chatty and 
entertaining interlocutor who automatically won everyones friendship.  The 
conflict between the two roles is at the heart of this chapter. 
Forging links with the reader was at the very heart of the Soviet press as 
a cultural project.  Newspapers were encouraged to print and respond to 
readers correspondence and journalists were to learn from readers and draw 
on their wealth of real-world experience.  Readers were founts of knowledge, 
but they were imperfect.  Under Khrushchev, journalists saw their task as being 
to bring into being a modern, civic-minded subject  the opposite of the 
1 25/3/65, d.382, l.40. 
2 On the reader-journalist friendship see To Our Readers, Izvestiia 5/1/65, 1, translated in 
CDSP 17/1, 1965, 30. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 235 
obedient, unimaginative Stalinist individual.3  Journalists at KP provided new 
ways for readers to exercise their rights as citizens, but many journalists 
resisted attempts to give publicity to individuals whose utterances lay outside 
cultured limits.   
This focus on citizenship was put under stress after Khrushchevs ouster 
 partly because of a natural evolution of journalistic attitudes, but also as a 
direct effect of political decisions.  The Brezhnev leadership was wary of grass 
roots initiatives to remodel society and forced journalists to neuter their civic 
activism.  But it also placed enormous faith in the modernising potential of 
economic reform and social science.  Profit motives were increasingly seen as a 
panacea for the countrys ills, which led to the abolition of circulation limits in 
late-1964.  Exposing journalists to the vicissitudes of reader preference forced 
the press to pay more attention to their audiences interests, intensified 
competition between newspapers, and necessitated a more prominent role for 
sociological research. This forced a role reversal in the teacher-pupil 
relationship that had previously characterised interactions between journalists 
and readers.  By 1968, the educational role of the press, which assumed that 
journalists possessed superior knowledge to readers, was increasingly being 
squeezed out in favour of the relatively novel requirement that newspapers 
should cater to readers tastes, which implied that the customer is always right.   
1 The Audience Before the Twentieth Party Congress 
The audience held an ambiguous place within Soviet discourse.4  The 
paternalistic aims of Bolshevik culture stressed education and agitation: 
audiences were to learn from producers and, in so doing, come to consciousness 
3 Thomas C. Wolfe, Governing Soviet Journalism: The Press and the Soviet Person after Stalin 
(Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2005) 
4 There exists no like-for-like translation of the word audience into Russian.  The nearest 
cognate,	 ,	 symbolised	 the	 bourgeois	 public,	 and	 alternatives	 like	 	 	
[circle of readers] were not used.  The audience was referred to as 	 [readers]	 or	
		[our	readers].		Also	common	was	referring	to			[our	reader].		I	use	
audiences or readers to refer to newspaper readerships, but when translating journalists 
terms, I use journalists own terms. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 236 
as revolutionary subjects.5  But the masses were simultaneously seen as the 
source of authentic knowledge, as being closer to everyday life than the 
intellectual elite.  Audiences became producers through a burgeoning worker-
peasant correspondent network which was to bring the world of the toiling 
masses to a wider audience, while workers were encouraged by Gorkii to write 
in their own voice about their everyday travails.6  The common refrain to 
writers and artists who had become divorced from the people was to re-educate 
themselves by learning from workers and peasants.7   But following the Great 
Break, authorities attitudes to both audiences and producers changed.  The 
proletkult experiments of the 1920s were curtailed, and cultural production 
was professionalised  a development exemplified by the sidelining of the 
worker-peasant correspondent movement.8  Cultural products now projected a 
singular, positive, vision of reality, leaving little room for artistic 
experimentation.  Katerina Clark uses the term ritual to describe the inner 
workings of the Soviet novel; Jeffrey Brooks calls this new public culture both a 
ritual and a performance, while Evgeny Dobrenko calls Socialist Realism a 
machine for producing Soviet reality.9  The implication of such metaphors is that 
real life was gradually ritualised, aestheticised, or mass manufactured.10  Soviet 
audiences, were, by implication, disenfranchised by this loss of reality. 
Empirical data with which to test this is difficult to come by, since the 
readership studies which had produced a wealth of data on Soviet audiences in 
the 1920s disappeared in the 1930s and 1940s (see Chapter 4).  However, the 
5 Peter Kenez, The Birth of the Propaganda State: Soviet Methods of Mass Mobilization, 1917-1929 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985). 
6 Evgeny Dobrenko, The Making of the State Reader: Social and Aesthetic Contexts of the 
Reception of Soviet Literature. Trans. Jesse M. Savage (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 
1997). 
7 Evgeny Dobrenko, The Making of the State Writer: Social and Aesthetic Origins of Soviet Literary 
Culture, Trans. Jesse M. Savage (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2001). 
8 Michael S. Gorham, Tongue-Tied Writers: The Rabsel'kor Movement and the Voice of the "New 
Intelligentsia" in Early Soviet Russia, Russian Review 55/3 (July 1996), 412-429. 
9 Jeffrey Brooks, Thank You Comrade Stalin Soviet Public Culture from Revolution to Cold War 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000); Evgeny Dobrenko, Political Economy of 
Socialist Realism. Trans. Jesse M. Savage (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2007); Katerina 
Clark. The Soviet Novel: History as Ritual. Third Edition (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University 
Press, 2000). 
10 For this reason, Dobrenkos conception of Soviet reality has been criticised for failing to 
understand its nature: Petre Petrov, The Industry of Truing: Socialist Realism, Reality, 
Realization Slavic Review 70/4 (2011), 873-892. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 237 
Harvard Study on the Soviet Social System, an American study of the attitudes 
of migrs to the Soviet system, though far from a representative sample, 
delivers an insight into readers opinions on the press of the 1930s and 1940s.11 
One young reader said that KP was dry and uninteresting, and added that 
in general, [newspapers] were regarded with boredom.12  A 29-year-old spoke 
of reading KP once in a while, but only when he had nothing else to do.13  A 
former journalist claimed that most readers only looked at foreign news and 
sensational news items, such as those on accidents  otherwise there were 
only letters to Stalin, letters about Stakhanovism, things that people knew and 
were tired of hearing.14  A third agreed that: [The newspapers] were very 
boring.  They were always about the marvellous achievements of the regime but 
meanwhile we were living so miserably.15 
These comments suggest that catering to the tastes of the readership was 
not a priority.  Instead, the press focused on transmitting instructions to 
activists.16  One military political leader [] stated that [m]ost of the 
things in the newspapers were always the same, so you did not have to read too 
much to know what the papers said.  However, I had to use materials from the 
newspapers for my work in addition to the instructions which I received.17  An 
engineer and agitator recalled a situation where he asked for more information 
for propaganda work, only to be told that everything of any importance is 
printed in Pravda and Izvestiia.18  The effect of using the newspaper as an 
agitators notebook led to reader dissatisfaction, but it made sense.  The Stalinist 
leadership saw enemies both internal and external as threatening the Soviet 
11 On the Harvard Study, see Alex Inkeles, Public Opinion in Soviet Russia: A Study in Mass 
Persuasion (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1950); Raymond A. Bauer, Alex Inkeles, 
Clyde Kluckhorn, How the Soviet System Works (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1956). 
12 Harvard Study on the Soviet Social System (henceforth HS). Schedule A, Volume 34, Case 420 
(Female, 25) 
13 HS. A 16/314 (Male, 29) 
14 HS. A 23/470 (Male, 37) 
15 HS. A 8/10 (Female 25) 
16 Brooks, Thank You; Matthew Lenoe, Closer to the Masses: Stalinist Culture, Social Revolution, 
and Soviet Newspapers (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004), pp.174-181. 
17 HP. A 8/10 (Male, 33) 
18 HP. A 31/445 (Male, 32) 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 238 
Unions existence.19 The flow of information was therefore a military priority 
and it was therefore natural for elites to save paper by rationing information to 
the most essential material.20  Repetition might seem to be a waste of paper, but 
it ensured that essential messages reached their intended audience.21   
This shift in focus reflected changing notions of citizenship.  The 
romantic belief in the natural creativity of workers, had allowed the non-
professional a space for self-expression.  But now that the audiences role was 
passive, this was no longer necessary.  Instead, citizenship became a question of 
participating and observing a series of rituals and ceremonies.22  The Second 
World War altered this situation fundamentally.  In a period of total 
mobilisation, Soviet authorities were forced to widen their appeal to the masses.  
Writers like Ilia Erenburg proclaimed the need to address readers in their own 
voices, and he was joined by literary figures such as Konstantin Simonov, 
Vasilii Grossman, and Aleksei Tolstoi.23  These writers realigned the relationship 
between journalist and audience, using the pronoun we as a way of sharing 
suffering and joy with readers.24  Onto the pages of the press came stories, not 
just of public heroism, but also tales of domestic life and personal 
relationships.25   
Although the Stalin cult had begun to make its reappearance by the end 
of the war, these changes were lasting, with turn towards questions of 
individual morality continuing into the 1940s and early-1950s.26  Certainly, 
such discussions always remained within safe parameters, but their presence is 
illustrative of a shift from the party rank-and-file to the general reader.  In June 
1951, KPs Boris Strelnikov said of a propaganda article: Of course, each of us 
19 David L. Hoffman, Stalinist Values: The Cultural Norms of Soviet Modernity (1917-1941) (Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 2003), pp.175-183. 
20 On newsprint shortages, see Kenez, pp.45-49. 
21 HP. A 30/644 (Female, 30); HP. A 6/67 (Male, 50); HP. B 6/606 (Male, 41). 
22 Serhy Yekelchik, The Civic Duty to Hate: Stalinist Citizenship as Political Practice and Civic 
Emotion (Kiev, 194353) Kritika 7/3 (2006), 529-556. 
23 Brooks, p.167. 
24 Ibid., p.180. 
25 Ibid., pp.180-184. 
26 Tekst vystupleniia glavnogo redaktora gazety Komsomolskaia pravda tov. D. Goriunov v 
sviazi s 25-letiem gazety, May 1950, RGASPI, f.98M, op.1, d.99, l.10; Juliane Frst, Stalins Last 
Generation: Soviet Post-War Youth and the Emergence of Mature Socialism (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2009), pp.250-291. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 239 
has asked the question: for whom are we putting out the paper, for the wide 
mass reader [   ], or just for the Komsomol 
aktiv?  He argued that the paper needed to move beyond the latter: 
Propagandists dont need this article, because propagandists can read Comrade 
Stalins speech themselves.  He claimed that such articles needed to become 
more enticing to the general reader.27 
Strelnikovs frustration was shared by other journalists, who urged the 
paper to do more to interest readers.28  In early 1952 the papers Party 
Organisation admitted that Much of what we print on the pages of our paper 
does not satisfy our readers  The pages of our paper are often filled with 
boring, grey material and it suggested that the paper find out more about the 
desires of readers: We will be able to more clearly imagine the demands of 
young people, what they demand from the paper.  Readers criticism will help us 
to work better.29  It is striking how journalists no longer conceived of readers 
as passive observers of proceedings, but as individuals whose interest needed to 
be roused.  Indeed, journalists often spoke of their culpability: We are guilty 
before our readers, said Deputy Editor Aleksandr Pliusch, while Popov, who 
had been told by students that his papers coverage was too similar to Pravdas, 
recalled: I blushed, I had nothing to answer.30  This suggests that the seeds of a 
public service orientation already existed under Stalin.  But although readers 
needs were acknowledged, they remained unsatisfied, most likely because there 
was a fear of overstepping the limits of acceptable discussion in a period when 
punishments for misconduct were severe.  All the same, their comments show 
how the seeds of the Khrushchev-era reconstruction of journalism were sown in 
the late Stalin period  even if such a shift was not always evident on the page. 
27 25/6/51, d.107, ll.25-26. 
28 Closed Party Meeting, 23/1/50, d.25, ll.1, 4; Party Meeting, 26/1/51, d.26, ll.4-5; 25/6/51, 
d.107, l.123; 12/11/51, d.112, ll. 69, 79, 83, 85; See also Izvestiia letuchka, 3/3/52, GARF, 
f.R1244, op.1, d.132, ll.1-34. 
29 Otchetnyi doklad partbiuro redaktsii Komsomolskaia pravda o rabote prodelannoi s ianvaria 
1951 g. po mart 1952 g., 10/3/52, TsAOPIM, f.1968, op.1, d.27, ll.24, 38. 
30 Closed Party Meeting, 23/1/50, d.25, l.11; 12/11/51, d.112, l.70. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 240 
2.1 After Stalin 
In May 1953, Pravda criticised KP for striving to copy other general political 
newspapers and told journalists of the need to popularise the partys policies 
for a young audience in a way that is imaginative, clear, and interesting.31  
Journalists at the paper were reminded to  
find the right form of language, the right form of address, and the right themes so 
that the paper is interesting for all young people.  Young people do not forgive 
indifference and sterility.  Thus, every article, every news story of a youth 
newspaper should be emotional and heart-felt so that the reader hears the voice 
of a friend. 
Nikolai Drachinskii, Head of the Department of Illustration at KP, saw the article 
as a call to see the face of our reader, and to take into account his/her specific 
demands.32  He claimed that the papers redaktsiia had ignored the suggestions 
of rank-and-file journalists, claiming that it had become merely an 
administrative and management organ which deals with creative questions 
badly.33  Yet in the three years between Stalins death and the Twentieth Party 
Congress, though life at the paper became more convivial, journalists remained 
reticent about taking too radical a step towards readers. 
The Congress changed this situation at a stroke.  Khrushchevs speech 
had an impact on almost all aspects of newspaper work, including the way 
journalists at the paper saw their readers.  Journalists believed that it was vital 
that the paper redoubled its efforts to communicate effectively with young 
people, a whole generation of whom had been raised on the cult of 
personality.34  One response to the Congress was the legitimisation of a popular 
 but not populist  impulse.  There emerged an expectation that the press 
would seek to find popular forms to communicate the Partys ideas.  An editorial 
in Sovetskaia pechat in June 1956 stated:  
For us it is important for a person picking up a newspaper to read it, for him to 
see something good in it, an interesting interlocutor, who communicates 
something useful, shares news, reproaches, scolds, and gives good advice.  How 
31 Byt drugom i nastavnikom molodezhi Pravda 22/5/53, 2. 
32 Open Party Meeting, 15/6/53, d.28, l.27. 
33 Ibid. 
34 5/3/56, d.170, l.113. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 241 
important it is for a newspaper not just to be glanced through, but read 
attentively and arouse thoughts in the reader35 
Adzhubei and Voronov led the search for forms of popular journalism that 
would both interest readers and educate them in the tasks and achievements of 
Communist construction.  A key resolution of January 1960 demanded that 
Propaganda of the idea of Communism should be close and understandable to 
workers, should be sincere and reach the hearts and minds of every Soviet 
individual, rousing in him/her the brightest and noblest thoughts and 
feelings.36  How this should be achieved remained shrouded in doubt, however.  
To give an example, the papers Sunday supplement, which was supposed to be 
a compendium of such popular material, was frequently the target of criticism, 
both within the redaktsiia and outside: a 1960 Komsomol report on the papers 
work censured it for lacking ideological direction.37  The tension between an 
entertainment impulse and an educational one was never far from the surface. 
The papers attempts to recalibrate its appeal to readers foundered in 
part because of journalists lack of concrete knowledge.  Because subscription 
limits were set from above, they provided no information on the papers appeal 
to readers.  Moreover, sociological research had been effectively banned under 
Stalin, which meant that journalists had to rely on letters to gain an 
understanding of their audience.  But these letters gave contradictory signs: 
officially, KP was a newspaper for readers of Komsomol-age, but letters 
indicated that the paper had as many readers outside this demographic as 
within it.38  Journalists were forced to engage in guesswork:  Fifteen to sixteen 
year-olds are our readers and we must work on them claimed one journalist, 
while another insisted that the papers main readers were 18-20 year olds.39  
They also resorted to some less-than-scientific research methods to find out 
about readers interests, such as observing the preferences of the buying public 
35 Zhurnalist i chitatel SP 6 (1956), 1-3 
36 Postanovlenie TsK KPSS: O zadachakh partiinoi propagandy v sovremennykh usloviiakh, 
10/1/60 in KPSS v rezoliutsiiakh i resheniiakh s"ezdov, konferentsii i plenumov TsK, Tom 9 
(Moscow: Politizdat, 1986), pp.500-501. 
37 Nekotorye zamechaniia o rabote gazety KP, 2/11/60, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.1002, l.138. 
38 A. Verkhovskaia, Pismo v redaktsiiu i chitatel (Moscow: MGU, 1972), p.90. 
39 22/11/54, d.133, l.162; 11/2/57, d.190, l.65. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 242 
at a Soiuzpechat kiosk, noting readers behaviour on a tram, or conducting a 
straw poll of fellow residents at ones apartment block.40 
There was always a sense that, given their lack of knowledge of the 
audience, journalists were whistling in the dark.  At a meeting in October 1956, 
Alan Starodub, one of the journalists in charge of the papers coverage of the 
Moscow Youth Festival in 1957, lamented the fact that we have whole groups 
of youth outside our field of vision, who fall out of our influence altogether.41  
He cited cases where the paper had expected a big reader response to an article, 
but received no letters, and called for more information on the demographic 
characteristics of subscribers, as well as the sending out of questionnaires to 
readers to find out their opinions on the paper.  A year later he asked 
colleagues: How does our reader read the paper?  Its always remained a 
mystery, a secret to us.  A recent edition was extremely serious  not in itself a 
bad thing, but, he asked, who was it designed for?42 
In the absence of data to the contrary, journalists were apt to imagine the 
reader that suited them.  At a Party Meeting in 1962, Grigorii Oganov claimed 
that todays reader is a person who is, first of all, active and ready for action; 
secondly, a thoughtful person; thirdly, a person with a critical disposition; and 
fourthly, a person who is more intellectual than we thought 43  Iurii Voronov 
stated that an excessive reliance on readers opinions was harmful: It so 
happens that when there is an inner dissatisfaction with the paper or with 
[certain] themes that the paper raises, some comrades try to reinforce their 
argument by relying on the opinion of readers. Thats not right.44  Instead, 
Voronov insisted that the paper had an educational role, arguing that there 
existed readers whom the paper should take by the hand and form 
[].45  At a Party meeting the year before, Vladimir Orlov decried 
the readers tendency to respond to emotional material over, one presumes, 
40 9/4/56, d.171, l.43; 4/8/64, d.365, l.38; 6/12/56, d.177, l.200; Party-Komsomol meeting, 
13/12/61, d.35, ll.161-62. 
41 8/10/56, d.126, ll.127-129, see also ll.132, 146. 
42 17/5/57, d.194, l.50. See also 6/5/57, d.193, l.38. 
43 Open Party Meeting, 29/6/62, l.17. 
44 Ibid., l.60. 
45 Ibid., l.61. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 243 
more thoughtful items.  He quoted an earlier comment by Allan Starodub, who 
had suggested that the reader is not an icon, and added that from our lofty 
position, the opinion of our readers can even be wrong.46  Journalists thus 
recognised the problem of reader taste, but refused to relinquish their self-
image as educators of the masses.   
In what follows, I will examine how journalists at KP attempted to cater to their 
material, not necessarily to an existing reader, but to their particular image of 
the audience.  The three examples presented are not exhaustive, but by 
examining the papers attempts to promote cultured debate, to rejuvenate the 
Komsomol, and their divided attitudes to the discussion of personal 
relationships, I show how journalists sought to deliver a civic education, but, at 
the same time show how this belief in a cultured reader led journalists to shun 
readers whose behaviours lay outside accepted limits. 
2.2 The Young Communards Club and the Scarlet Sail 
Welcome, or Keep Out, Elem Klimovs popular film of 1964, concerns a young 
Pioneer, Inochkin, who disobeys camp rules by swimming out to an island 
which lay beyond camp territory.  A meeting is held to discuss Inochkins 
conduct, at which Comrade Diunin, the camp leader, addresses the assembled 
(and silent) Pioneers: 
Diunin:  Look around you.  What magnificent buildings we have built.  What 
wonderful lawns.  Running water. Television. Gas cookers. Greenhouses, gardens, 
entertainment. Children You are the masters of the camp. You In return, what 
do we ask of you, friends? [Gestures towards Pioneers] 
Pioneers: [In chorus] DISCIPLINE 
Diunin expels Inochkin from the camp but, rather than face his grandmother, 
who, he believes, would die of a heart attack if she found out, Inochkin sneaks 
back into the camp.  The remainder of the film sees the camp attendees run 
rings around the camp leader in a bid to hide Inochkins presence, and ends 
46 Party-Komsomol meeting, 13/12/61, d.35, ll.173-174. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 244 
with the children victorious, and Diunin packing his bags and leaving.  Diunin 
represented the Stalinist old guard who cherished discipline above all else.47  
While he proclaimed that Pioneers were the masters, it was he who did all the 
talking.  But, as his fate shows, his values were increasingly out of kilter with 
post-Stalinist norms.  So-called formalism in Komsomol work, which 
encompassed tedious meetings, detachment on the part of the aktiv, and 
hierarchical structures, was a frequent target of criticism, both on the podiums 
of Komsomol Congresses and in KP journalists articles and private 
discussions.48   
This led to attempts to create a different kind of social space for young 
people.  Chapter 1 discussed the Kaluga Torch, an example of a youth initiative 
club which cropped up after the Twentieth Party Congress.  Other scholars have 
highlighted the resurgence of amateur societies, or samodeiatelnost.49  Another 
prominent example took shape in Leningrad, where a number of young 
pedagogues and youth leaders sought to overcome Komsomol formalism by 
introducing a grassroots initiative known as the Communard movement.  
Evocative both of Paris, 1871 and of their successors in the Soviet 1920s, the 
Communard movements name betrayed a fascination with the revolutionary 
past, which extended to the influence of the pedagogical teachings of figures 
such as Stanislav Shchatskii and Anton Makarenko.50  Its ideas were a synthesis 
47 See Gleb Tsipursky, Having Fun in the Thaw: Youth Initiative Clubs in the Post-Stalin Years 
Carl Beck Papers 2201 (2012), 7-10. 
48 See, for example, D. Novoplianskii, Dva pisma KP 12/2/54, 3; 1/11/54, d.133, l.6.  See also 
Tsipursky, Having Fun; Conflict Between the Generations, in The Soviet Cultural Scene 1956-
1957, ed. by Walter Z. Laqueur, George Lichtheim (New York: Atlantic Books, 1958), pp.202-214; 
Ralph Talcott Fisher, Jr., Pattern for Soviet Youth: A Study of the Congresses of the Komsomol, 
1918-1954 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1959), pp.251-278. 
49 Susan Costanzo, Amateur Theatres and Amateur Publics in the Russian Republic, 1958-1970 
Slavonic and East European Review 86/2 (2008), 372-395; Bella Ostromoukhova, Le Dgel et les 
Troupes Amateur: Changements politiques et activits artistiques des tudiants, 1953-1970, 
Cahiers du Monde russe, 47/1-2 (2006), 30326. 
50 Oleg Gazman, Kollektivnoe tvorcheskoe: Rasskaz o tom, kak rodilas' i razvivalas' metodika 
kollektivnogo tvorcheskogo vospitaniia. Uchitel'skaia gazeta, December 17, 1987; Simon 
Soloveichik, Kommuna, god piatyi KP 31/7/63; Richard Sokolov, V poiskakh nastoiashchei 
sotsialnoi pedagogiki, Na putiakh k novoi shkole 3 (2004), 5-10. 
<http://altruism.ru/sengine.cgi/5/7/8/17/8.html#5> [Accessed: 13 March, 2011]. On the 
house communes of the 1920s, see Andy Willimott, Socialism in One Apartment: Activist 
Communes, Ideology, and Praxis in the Early Soviet State, 1917-1934. Unpublished PhD 
Dissertation, UEA, 2012. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 245 
of Western group psychotherapy, Soviet theories of play, and the British and 
Polish Scouts.51  At the heart of the movement was the idea that members would 
decide what tasks to perform, carry them out, and evaluate success and failure 
themselves.   
The movements founders replaced notions of discipline, regimentation, 
militarism and formality with free and open debate around the campfire, 
childish creativity, and the romantika of guitar-accompanied sing-songs.52  At a 
meeting of the Academy of Pedagogical Sciences in March 1956 on the public 
opinion [	 ] of Pioneers and Komsomols, prominent 
Communard Liudmila Borisova criticised the scripted nature of Komsomol 
meetings, claiming that this caused passivity in Soviet children.  Where is the 
lively discussion of work, she asked, where's the fervour and fire?  She 
concluded: As a rule, we don't know the sincere opinions of our Komsomol 
members.  But how can we educate people, how can we lead them, if we don't 
know what they think?53 
 Because of its challenge to prevailing ideas, the Union of Enthusiasts, and 
its successor movement, the Leningrad-based Frunze Commune, have been 
termed underground.54  But this ignores the close ties between official state 
structures and the founders of the movement (the flagship of the movement, the 
Frunze Commune, was a district Pioneer headquarters), as well as their similar 
values.  Not only was the idea of revitalising the Komsomol and Pioneers much 
debated within the Party, but the ideals of the 'Communard' method  a love of 
nature, moral values, comradely relations, concern for others, collective labour, 
discussion, and self-directed work  were all mainstream Communist values.  
However, without any means of disseminating the method, its founders were 
51 Sokolov, V poiskakh; Mikhail Kordonskii, Vvedenie v kommunarskoe dvizhenie 
<http://www.altruism.ru/sengine.cgi/5/22/1> [Accessed: February 28, 2011];  
52 Ibid.; Roman Sinelnikov, Ostavliaiu vam na pamiat (Pesni kommunarov) (Moscow: The 
Olympic Editorial, 1997).  On the romantika of sing-songs see Petr Vail, Aleksandr Genis, 60-e: 
Mir sovetskogo cheloveka. 2-e izd. (Moscow: Novoe literaturnoe obozrenie, 1998), pp.126-128. 
53 Liudmila G. Borisova. Puti sozdaniia obshchestvennogo mneniia pionerov i komsomol'tsev. 
Doklad na Pedagogicheskikh chteniakh APN RSFSR, Moscow, March 1956. 
<http://www.kommunarstvo.ru/index.html?/biblioteka/bibborput.html> [Accessed: February 
27 2011] 
54 Valerii Khiltunen, Perevod s prostogo na russkii <http://soob.ru/n/2002/10/c/10> 
[Accessed: March 1, 2011]. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 246 
forced to rely on word of mouth, which effectively limited its reach to Leningrad 
 at least until Komsomolskaia pravda journalist Simon Soloveichik, who visited 
School No. 91 in Leningrad and wrote an article praising the Frunze Commune, 
came to visit.55  Within weeks, the paper followed up its article with a new 
feature, Klub Iu.K. (standing for  : young communist), 
which brought the interaction between this unofficial, peripheral method, and 
the official Komsomol organ to a new level. 
The Clubs access requirements were modest.  It was open to all those 
who refuse to compromise with shortcomings, and seek to improve the life that 
surrounds us.56  Any school or tekhnikums Komsomol organisation would 
receive an official pennant if they managed to complete two of the tasks set by 
the paper, such as performing a variety show at a collective farm, painting the 
walls of their classroom or holding a debate on the question What is a hero?57  
Buoyed by the publicity, the movement rapidly grew from a few hundred 
enthusiasts in Leningrad to a quarter of a million followers across Russia, while 
the newly-built Little Eagle [] summer camp on the Black Sea 
adopted the Communard Method.58  This interaction between official structures, 
the paper, and the Communard movement shows that ideas could circulate 
upwards: a grassroots idea could be picked up by the press, who might succeed 
in bringing it to the attention of officials, who could then adopt the method on a 
wider scale.   
It is not hard to see why the Young Communards Club had such an 
impact on the Communard movement, for, as Soloveichik later admitted, its goal 
virtually consisted in propagandising the experience of Frunze Commune.59  
The first edition contained a transcript of a bad-tempered debate between 
school pupils from Leningrad, who advocated Communard methods, and those 
55 Simon Soloveichik, Frunzenskaia kommuna KP 10/1/62, 4.  On Soloveichiks link with the 
Coommunards, see Vladimir Shakhidzhanian, Mne interesny vse liudi 
<http://1001.ru/books/people/mivl24.htm> [Accessed: 11 March, 2011]. 
56 Shkola, klass, druz'ia  interesno li tebe s nimi? KP 24/1/62, 2-3. 
57 Slovo - kommunaram. KP 24/9/63, 4; Zadanie  bespokoinym, KP 18/3/62, 4 ; Slovo  
kommunaram, KP 24/9/63, 4. 
58 Simon Soloveichik, Vospitanie tvorchestvom (Moscow: Znanie, 1978), p.19.  Gazman, 
Kollektivnoe. 
59 Soloveichik, Vospitanie, p.12. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 247 
from Moscow, who exemplified traditional approaches.60  When one student 
from Moscow spoke indifferently about a task his class had carried out only for 
the sake of an easy life, Leningrad communard Ira Merkusheva responded 
angrily: What are you saying  I cant bear to listen to this Why are you so 
indifferent?  Why do you agree to do what your hearts not in?  Another 
student chipped in: I'm sure if the teacher left you in peace; if they granted you 
absolute freedom, you'd completely lose your heads ... You're completely lacking 
in initiative  When a third student, Olia Tsvetkova argued that some 
Komsomols simply don't make use of their rights, a Muscovite responded 
angrily:  
Zhenia Lebedev: I was also one of the active ones  a secretary of the committee, 
even.  You speak at a meeting, you try [to make an effort], you become passionate, 
but you look into someone's cold eyes, you see someone bent over a book, and 
your passion disappears, and you even become ashamed of yourself  you think: 
absolutely no-one cares.  Nobody understands what they're voting for, and 
everybody just thinks: the sooner this meeting ends the better.  So what am 
I getting on my soapbox for like an idiot?  That's how the active turn into the 
passive. 
Natasha Fedorova: It needs to be the other way round, so that the passive 
become active.  What did you do to make that happen? 
Zhenia Lebedev: Please forgive me, but I'm about to use a primitive formula: 
why do I have to do more than others? 
The meeting ended with one Leningrad student lamenting: We're fighting over 
different things, and now its suddenly become clear: there are two sharply 
opposite lifestyles, and we live differently.  Lebedevs comments were mirrored 
in a letter published in October 1963 from Olga Kashkina, a tenth grade pupil 
from Saratov, who complained that Komsomol meetings were uninteresting, 
and that her class was passive.  She wanted to change the situation, but 
admitted that Alone, I cant stir them up and rouse them, they need to want it 
themselves, to understand that things cant carry on like this.61  Amongst the 
many replies was a letter from Aleksandr Kovalenko from Leningrad, who 
claimed that he had no interest in the Komsomol because of its pursuit of box-
60 Shkola, 2-3. 
61 Chto ty dumaesh' o shkol'nom komsomole? KP 18/10/63, 4. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 248 
ticking, a surfeit of dull circulars and orders from above, and the 
obstructiveness of teachers.  Its time to believe in Komsomols, he concluded.62 
 Olga and Aleksandrs letters were among the first to be published under 
the umbrella of a new rubric called "The Scarlet Sail" [ ], which was 
named after a childrens adventure of the 1920s by Aleksandr Grin (a key 
romantic author, according to Vail and Genis).63  The storys faith in youthful 
independence and playfulness chimed with the romantic values of the post-
Stalin period, and was later made into a film.64  The Scarlet Sail was the product 
of journalists like Soloveichik, who believed that the press needed to listen to 
the needs of adolescent readers  a group often ignored by the paper.  This lack 
of coverage was thought to be a cause of social problems.  At a letuchka at the 
start of the 1960s, Elena Bolshakova linked an anecdote about a teenage stiliaga 
who refused to pay for a bus ticket, a recent article on criminal adolescents, and 
the lack of material aimed directly at this age group.65  The Scarlet Sail filled this 
gap in the papers coverage extremely effectively, prompting thousands of 
letters every year.  A survey of 1966 suggested that it was read regularly by over 
four million readers.66  What was perhaps most appealing was the rubrics 
magazine format, featuring a varied range of materials, from brief snippets of 
readers letters to longer articles by grown-up journalists.   
For journalists like Soloveichik, it provided yet another opportunity to 
advance Communard ideals. 67  Indeed, Klub Iu. K. and the Scarlet Sail were often 
printed on the same page, and possessed complementary aims.  But while the 
Young Communards Club was concerned with collective values, the Scarlet Sail 
was predominantly concerned with individual issues.  Its articles suggested that 
young people should take personal responsibility for their actions, seek their 
true goal in life, and, most importantly, think for themselves because, as one 
62 A. Kovalenko, Pochemu ia ostyl KP 18/10/63, 4. 
63 Vail/Genis, p.127. 
64 Alexander Grin, The Seeker of Adventure: Selected Stories (Moscow: Progress, 1979), pp.19-93.  
The film was Alye parusa (1961, dir. Aleksandr Petushko). 
65 18/1/60, d.268, ll.115-122.  On the youth crisis see Kristin Roth-Ey,Mass Media and the 
Remaking of Soviet Culture, 1950s-1960s Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Princeton University, 
2003, 46-98. 
66 HIA, Boris Grushin Papers, Box 4, Folder 5. 
67 Simon Soloveichik, Posledniaia kniga (Moscow: Pervoe sentiabria, 1999), p.272. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 249 
article told readers, Youre not children any more.68  Independent thinking 
was a central value of the Scarlet Sail.  One of its articles proclaimed that A 
person not possessing their own opinion, their own view on things; a person 
repeating parrot-like what they've heard and learned; a person foregoing their 
own conscience for the sake of a quiet life is not a grown-up, but a know-
nothing, even if they're fifty-odd years old.69   
Such independence of mind sometimes breached collective norms of 
social propriety.  The Kyrgyz writer Chingiz Aitmatov told the story of tenth 
grader Sergei, who, prevented from dating his beloved, proclaimed his love by 
painting Happy Birthday, Kira in red letters on the fence outside Kiras 
residence.70  For Aitmatov, Sergeis actions were not hooliganism, but proof that 
he had unfurled his Scarlet Sail in life: an adolescent expression of his own 
understanding of justice, his right to independence and an assertion of his 
own relationship to life.  Aitmatov asked rhetorically whether Sergei had 
displayed childishness or maturity and conviction, and replied that both were 
present in his actions.  That, Aitmatov claimed, was: the charm, the uniqueness 
of the age when a persons will awakens, when he himself develops in himself 
the features of his character.71 
The Young Communards Club and the Scarlet Sail reflected changing 
norms of citizenship for young people.  Though individuals were still supposed 
to progress through the official structures  Pioneer, Komsomol, Party  in order 
to come to political maturity, but structures were painted as meaningful only 
insofar as they were invested with individual values.  In a 1963 article, written 
to celebrate the fifth anniversary of the Frunze Commune, Soloveichik stated 
that the Pioneer organisations main goal was to inculcate values and 
independence, and continued that: There can be no principles where work 
proceeds only by orders from above   Soloveichik concluded by saying that: 
One wonderful day he will tie the red necktie of the Pioneers, and perhaps he 
will even become a Communard, and he will be glad of the honour, and at home 
68 A. Rekemchuk, Kogda ty stanovsishsia vzroslym KP 4/12/63, 4. 
69 Ibid. 
70 Chingiz Aitmatov, Druzhi s vetrom, KP 24/9/63, 4. 
71 Ibid. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 250 
mum  will worry: what if they dont take him?72  In these quotations, we not 
only see the intrusion of Communard values onto Pioneer values, but, in the 
second quotation, a telling ambiguity: to what does the honour refer?  entry 
into the Pioneers, or into the Communard movement?  This ambiguity was 
indicative of the fact that, although the Communard movement had emerged 
from within official structures, its pursuit of new values was in some ways 
threatened to supplant them.  This would be the cause of significant conflict in 
the years to come. 
2.3 The Club is Open  Come In 
The Communard movement illustrates how practices of citizenship underwent a 
profound change after Stalins death.  Under Stalin, participation in certain key 
rituals had offered the key to social belonging.73  But though participation 
remained central to questions of citizenship in the Khrushchev period (there 
were, after all, still parades and rallies and one was still expected to stand and 
applaud at Congresses), citizenship practices were now expected to be 
meaningful on an individual level.74  Individuals were expected, not just to 
observe the form, but to find their own relation, their own place, within Soviet 
civic life.75  It is thus no accident that sincerity [] became the buzz-
word of the Khrushchev period, for it posits an opposition between an outer 
surface that is for show, and hence untruthful, and an authentically personal 
inner core.  The task of the individual under Khrushchev was to bring that inner 
core into line with the publically mandated values. 
72 Soloveichik, Kommuna, god piatyi. 
73 In the discussion that follows I concentrate on practices of citizenship, rather than the formal 
question of who had the right to become a citizen.  On this latter see Golfo Alexopoulos, Soviet 
Citizenship, More or Less: Rights, Emotions, and States of Civic Belonging Kritika 7/3 (Summer 
2006), 487-528. 
74 On performative practices of citizenship in the first Soviet decades, see Elizabeth A. Wood, 
Performing Justice: Agitation Trials in Early Soviet Russia (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
2005); Brooks, Thank You; Yekelchyk, Civic Duty; Natalia Skradol, Laughing with Comrade 
Stalin: Laughter of the Audience in the Great Kremlin Palace in 1939 Russian Review 68/1 
(2009), 26-48. 
75 Cf. Oleg Kharkhordin, The Collective and the Individual in Russia: A Study of Practices (Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press, 1999), 279-328. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 251 
  As the reference to Pomerantsev suggests, the Soviet intelligentsia was a 
prominent player in the process of social change under Khrushchev.  Students, 
writers, artists, and academics took to the podium at meetings of the party, 
creative unions and other formal gatherings to debate the future direction of 
Soviet society, and they frequently offered far-reaching diagnoses of social ills.76  
However, the unruly public reaction to the Secret Speech meant that such 
debates were considered by journalists and regime alike to be potentially 
dangerous.77   Part of the reason for such disquiet was the prominent role of 
Soviet youth.  In universities across the country, young people discussed the 
implications of Khrushchevs speech, in the process venturing opinions that 
were anathema to the officially-held values.78  In Chapter 3, we saw how the 
return of the positive hero was seen as one solution to this state of affairs, but 
other solutions were put forward.  Speaking at one of the first editorial letuchki 
after the Twentieth Party Congress, Ilia Shatunovskii said that Today our 
newspaper ought not to give young people prepared formulae, but to teach 
young people and all our readers to critically interpret occurrences, and to 
reach by themselves correct and important ideas and conclusions.79  The key 
words in that statement were by themselves and correct.  Shatunovskiis 
comments were indicative of the opinions of many journalists who saw the 
importance of unlocking youthful independence, but at the same time believed 
that it would require the involvement of journalists to ensure that that 
autonomy was kept within correct limits.   
A perfect example of the papers attempts to straddle the border 
between youthful self-expression, and the requirement to keep debate within 
safe limits, was provided by the discussion club, a form which, borrowing from 
76 Karl Loewenstein, The Thaw: Writers and the Public Sphere in the Soviet Union, 1951-1957 
Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Duke University, 1999. 
77 Polly Jones, From the Secret Speech to the Burial of Stalin: Real and Ideal Responses to De-
Stalinization in Dilemmas of De-Stalinization: Negotiating Cultural and Social Change in the 
Khrushchev Era, ed. Polly Jones (London: Routledge, 2006), 41-63; Vladimir Kozlov, Mass 
Uprisings in the USSR: Protest and Rebellion in the post-Stalin Years. Trans. Elaine McClarnand 
(Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 2002). 
78 Benjamin K. Tromley, Re-Imagining the Soviet Intelligentsia: Student Politics and University 
Life, 1948-1964 Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Harvard University, 2007, pp.206-309. 
79 19/3/56, d.170, ll.43-44. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 252 
the structure of  Komsomol or Pioneer meeting, emerged at KP in the late-1950s 
and early-1960s.  There, readers debated important issues of the day with their 
contemporaries, following on the heels of a debate held within a school or 
Komsomol organisation, the transcript of which was printed in the paper.  This 
was, most likely, a response to a Komsomol Central Committee request of 1956 
to use debates and discussions more widely.80 
Thus, in April 1957, at roughly the same time that the regime was 
beginning to crack down on the harmful discussions of the Moscow 
intelligentsia after the publication of Dudintsevs Not By Bread Alone, the first 
edition of the papers Senior Students Club [ ] was 
printed.81  While writers debates frequently overstepped the borders of the 
acceptable, KPs discussions were positioned firmly within conventional limits, 
discussing such staples as How to become a good person; How to become 
strong; What path leads to a great feat? or How to keep pace with our 
century. 
Nevertheless, by encouraging individuals to put forward their own ideas, 
KP was endorsing a new set of values that owed much to the intelligentsia.  The 
headline to the clubs first discussion, The club is open, come in, illustrates 
that this was to be a gathering to which all were welcome  indeed, the article is 
peppered with words suggesting inclusiveness: open, not closed, 
participation.82  The ideals of the club were clear from the litany of synonyms 
for thought, discussion and conversation: to have a discussion [], 
to say/express [, ], to argue [], interesting 
conversation [ ], human thought [ 
], serious reflection [ ], as well as negative 
reference to teachers who dont prompt any thoughts at all [  
 ].83  Perhaps the clearest guide to importance of Khrushchev-era values 
of sincerity is provided by the strict condition to which all participants 
80 Tsipursky, 22. 
81 Zapiska otdela kultury TsK KPSS: O nekotorykh nezdorovykh iavleniakh v Moskovskom 
otdelenii Soiuza pisatelei, no later than 30/5/57 in Apparat TsK KPSS i kultura, 1953-1957. 
Dokumenty. ed. V.Iu. Afiani, (Moscow: Rosspen, 2001), p.680. 
82 Klub otkryt, vkhodite KP 24/4/57, 2-3. 
83 Ibid., 2-3. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 253 
apparently signed up to before entering the club: Always to say honestly and 
openly what you think.84 
The papers discussion clubs proved to be a success, with journalists 
extremely enthusiastic about their educational potential.  Readers displayed 
similar enthusiasm, sending almost five thousand letters in response to the first 
debate, with subsequent debates each receiving around two to three 
thousand.85  The biggest criticism of the clubs first edition came from one of the 
clubs grown-up friends  a literature teacher who was upset that his closing 
address had been edited out of the final article.86  However, one journalist 
endorsed that decision, reminding colleagues that: The club shouldnt turn into 
a lesson on literature, and adding that the club existed so that children could 
openly express what they think, and so that the pressing problems of todays 
children are presented in the paper today.87   
In his introduction to a published selection of columns from Klub 
starsheklassnikov and its 1961 successor, Time and I [  ], editor Iurii 
Voronov, having listed a number of debate titles, such as What is happiness? 
and How to find a path in life, wrote: 
The discussions that take place in [the Club] will help you to answer these 
questions.  You will note that we dont say answer.  We say help to answer not 
from caution and not from modesty. There are questions that everybody needs to 
answer for  themselves.  But nevertheless, it will be very useful to you to know 
what people say and think: your peers, your contemporaries, your comrades in 
battle.88 
But although individuals were supposed to come to their own opinion, they 
were also expected to bow to the majority: It is remarkable that whatever 
argument blazed, the opinion of the absolute majority of its participants was 
unanimous.  A person can be wrong, but the collective  never.89  So although 
the presence of a range of opinions marked a change from the Stalinist press, 
84 Ibid., 2. 
85 Predlozheniia po rabselkorovskomu dvizheniiu, undated 1958, RGASPI, f.98M, op.1, d.228, 
l.49; Doklad redkollegii gazety KP, undated 1958, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.929, l.18. 
86 6/5/57, d.193, l.8. 
87 Ibid., ll.8-9. 
88 Alyi parus, ed. by N. Sidneva (Moscow: Molodaia gvardiia, 1966), p.4. 
89 Ibid., p.5. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 254 
opinions that deviated from the norm were rapidly rebutted.  Discussion clubs 
gave readers the image of an ideal public, composed of rational individuals 
using their powers of reasoning to debate important issues, but its organisers 
believed that there was a clear right-or-wrong opinion, and that the natural 
rationality of the public would ensure that the Partys truth would win the day.  
In this sense, discussion clubs provided a microcosm of the mechanisms of 
Soviet citizenship under Khrushchev, where individuals were permitted to 
debate questions of everyday life on the proviso that such debates would 
eventually arrive at the correct answer. 
2.4 All women are offended by your thoughtlessness 
The closer we examine KP journalists discussions of their educational work, the 
clearer emerges the tension between the ostensible ideals of debate as being 
open to all, and a highly normative vision of the ideal participant.  As we have 
seen, journalists were more than willing to welcome exemplary individuals onto 
the pages of their newspaper.  This section illustrates what happened when 
readers contributions failed to live up to journalists high standards.   
Komsomolskaia pravda was well known for its discussion of questions of 
moral and ethical questions.  As early as 1950, Dmitrii Goriunov called the 
treatment of such questions as KPs specialty, and a decade later Agitprops 
Aleksei Romanov placed the paper in first place for its treatment of such 
questions.90  A resolution of 1960 called on journalists to intensify the 
educational role of the press in moral and ethical questions.91  A year later, the 
Moral Code of the Builder of Communism was published, its twelve 
commandments amounting to a Communist covenant in all but name.  
Communists were invited to display a high sense of public duty and foster 
mutual respect between individuals, but also to remember that whoever does 
not work, does not eat.92 
90 Vystuplenie glavnogo redaktora, l.8; A. Romanov, Vysokaia ideinost' pechati i zhruanlistskoe 
masterstvo, SP 1 (1960), 7. 
91 O zadachakh, 507-508. 
92 Programma KPSS KP 2/8/61, 2. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 255 
Amongst intellectuals, there was a tendency to see the transformation of 
the individual as a prerequisite for wider social transformation.93  But 
journalists could react to this injunction in differing ways.  For many journalists, 
such as Anatolii Agranovskii and Tatiana Tess at Izvestiia, and Vera Benderova 
and Inna Rudenko at Komsomolskaia pravda, the sketch provided a means to 
discuss contemporary social issues, and tease out the public implications of 
individual conflicts.94  For these writers, the journalist needed to rely not on gut 
feeling, but on careful, balanced thought.  In a speech in 1964, Tess emphasised 
the sense of responsibility needed: Journalists who begin work on a moral 
theme are not just journalists.  They are also investigators, researchers, doctors, 
and then, in the end, judges.  Only then do they have the right to embark on such 
themes.95  However, in their internal discussions, many KP journalists were not 
so even-handed, displaying an intolerant, even mocking, attitude towards those 
who deviated from established norms of behaviour.  Male journalists, in 
particular, seemed particularly hostile to tackling personal issues.  For them, 
only lively, goal-oriented debate, designed to create citizens who thought the 
right things about the right topics, was acceptable.  Dealing with the emotional 
lives of often-nave teenage girls, by contrast, was seen as demeaning and 
emasculating. 
One letter published under the Forum of Our Readers banner from Anna 
Nikoleva, a tenth grade student from Pskov oblast, raised the important 
question of why life was different to the way it was represented in books and 
newspapers: Im an ignoramus in culture, studies  and life.  How could I not 
be when all Ive seen is my village and school?  I only know life from books and 
newspapers, and people seemed to me genuine [] and wonderful.  
But she contrasted this to what she saw around her: In people, in those 
surrounding me, I see so much rudeness, vulgarity, callousness, and 
93 Anatoly Pinsky, The Individual after Stalin: Fedor Abramov, Russian Intellectuals, and the 
Revitalization of Soviet Socialism, 1953-1962 Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Columbia 
University, 2011. 
94 On this dynamic see Wolfe, pp.71-103. 
95 Stenogramma vsesoiuznogo tvorcheskogo soveshchaniia publitsistov. Tom II, 4/6/64, GARF, 
f.10124, op.1, d.243, l.124. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 256 
philistinism.96  Such an anguished letter may have betrayed a certain 
ingenuousness, but its sentiments were nevertheless rife within a public culture 
which aimed to project a certain innocent romanticism.  For many young people, 
entering into a world rather more prosaic than the one described in popular 
culture, witnessing contradictions between the two could be a traumatic 
experience.97  Yet sports correspondent Iurii Zerchaninov pulled no punches in 
his assessment of this silly girl.    Unable to countenance that someone could 
genuinely hold such opinions, he wondered whether someone had concocted 
the letter as a joke.98  He insisted maybe only a housewife would be as foolish 
as to believe that people were swine [] just because they swore.  He 
characterised her as a nave girl who read books and in her books everyone 
seemed wonderful but concluded that she was a sheltered person, trapped, 
sick, for being so negative about the world around her.  If shes got no friends, 
concluded Zerchaninov, that means that no-one wants to be friends with her.  
Why use her to start a discussion?99 
In 1964, the paper printed a letter from a teenager from Kazakhstan, Olia 
Akhmetova, who, on a train journey, had been tricked into sleeping (it is 
implied) with a boy, Sergei, who promised that he would marry her.  Sergei 
never replied to her letters, and, when she visited his home town, he refused to 
see her.  She wrote to the paper, saying I can't understand why he said that he 
loved me and wanted to marry me. I'm offended to the point of tears. I've read 
so many books, but I've never read anything like this.100  She appealed to 
readers for their opinions, asking How do you know if someone really loves 
you?   
It was not out of the ordinary for the paper to print articles on 
relationships, but they often caused problems: Agitprops Aleksei Romanov 
96 Podvig  mgnovenie ili zhizn? KP 15/5/60, 2. 
97 Precisely this state-sanctioned navet is commented upon by one of the interviewees in 
Robin Hessmans documentary My Perestroika (2010).  See also the comments on belief in 
Communism made by interviewees in Donald Raleighs Russias Sputnik Generation: Soviet Baby 
Boomers Talk About Their Lives. Ed. and Trans. Donald J.Raleigh (Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press, 2006), pp.72-73, 199-200, 234-236. 
98 16/5/60, d.272, l.87. 
99 Ibid., l.86. 
100 Pochemu tak sluchilos? KP 22/2/64, 2. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 257 
decried the papers dangerous and unacceptably frivolous approach to 
human relations in a discussion asking Can one be in love with two 
people?101  Yet the recurrence of such questions showed that this was a 
common concern: a letter on the same subject was also received by the paper in 
1962, and the issue was discussed at Komsomol meetings.102  There remained a 
certain prudishness in Soviet culture (it was, of course, not unique in this 
respect) that prevented the paper from examining such issues.103  Later that 
year, an article on sex education decried the euphemistic way in which the 
subject was talked about, but it did not mention the word sex once.104  The day 
after Akhmetovas letter was published, Kim Kostenko maintained that: People 
are talking about this letter only because it's about love. In our youth paper we 
rarely touch on such areas as personal life and intimate life.105  This was 
precisely the reason that the paper had been right to publish the letter, claimed 
Grigorii Oganov: Why does the newspaper need to deal with this?  Alas, the 
paper needs to because pedagogues, the family, and the collective still do it very 
badly.106   
But would this letter help journalists to educate readers?  Many 
journalists worried that readers might confuse the papers lack of opprobrium 
for approval, that readers would think that the paper was on the side of this 
vulgar, idiotic little girl, as Vladimir Ponizovskii put it.107  Sasha Egorov argued 
that to print this [letter], calculating that our readers are so discriminating that 
they'll bombard us with letters, that they'll answer this question correctly, is 
nave.108  He continued, We didn't give this letter any evaluation, we didn't in 
101 Aleksei Romanov, Moralno-eticheskaia tema na stranitsakh gazet SP 9 (1959), 5.  Romanov 
is referring to Mozhno li liubit dvoikh?, KP 4/1/58, 4. 
102 See 8/5/62, d.322, l.3; Tsipursky, p.21. 
103 Anna Rotkirch, What Kind of Sex Can You Talk About? Acquiring Sexual Knowledge in Three 
Soviet Generations, in On Living Through Soviet Russia, ed. by Daniel Bertaux, Paul Thompson, 
Anna Rotkirch (London: Routledge, 2004), pp.105-107. 
104 Irina Ovchinnikova, Net, ne zapretnaia zona KP, 1/12/64, 2. 
105 5/2/64, d.361, l.17.  On discourses around sex in the Khrushchev period, see Deborah A. 
Field, Private Life and Communist Morality in Khrushchevs Russia (New York: Peter Lang, 2007), 
pp.51-65. 
106 5/2/64, d.361, l.16.  See also Chukaevas comments (l.16) 
107 Ibid., l.15. 
108 Ibid., l.12. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 258 
the slightest bit [  ] show our ironic attitude to it.109  However, others 
had more faith in the audience: we have to believe in our readers, that they'll 
understand everything correctly: our readers aren't idiots.  If we had published 
this letter with our comments, it would have lost all of its charm and directness.  
It's just a wonderful human document.  It's very good that it found its way onto 
the pages of the paper, claimed Chukaeva.110  The dividing line between the two 
camps seemed to be the amount of trust that could be placed in the audience.  
Some were reluctant to relinquish the peremptory tone of authority that 
journalists had traditionally employed, but others felt that leaving the question 
open was healthy: We're sitting here and arguing, and young people are too, 
commented Boris Pankin, to which Sonia Startseva retorted We're arguing, but 
we're all grown-ups.111 
Unsurprisingly, journalists positions on the wisdom of printing the letter 
to a large extent depended on how they judged Olias actions.  Grigorii Oganov, 
who approved of printing the letter, sympathised with Olia, saying that she was 
not a vulgar person, but an individual who had got caught up in a vulgar 
situation.112  The paper needed to tread very carefully, as it was dealing with a 
fragile teenager, not a fully-grown adult, he argued.  As Karel'shtein put it: We 
need to treat such human documents carefully.  Though we could lead a more 
severe conversation with a grown-up, it's best to reason with Akhmetova and 
people like her.113  Thus, journalists needed to see Olia's letter from a less lofty, 
more sympathetic, standpoint.  As Chukaeva commented: 
If, from the heights of our 30-40 years, we deign to sink to the level of this person, 
without considering it humiliating, then we'll help her and those like her.  For 
her, this is a supreme tragedy, an experience from which she can extricate herself 
and become a real person, or turn into an offended whiner and a vulgar 
person.114 
109 Ibid. 
110 Ibid., l.16. 
111 Ibid., l.16-17. 
112 Ibid., l.12. 
113 Ibid., l.15. 
114 Ibid., l.13. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 259 
For the letter's defenders, it was vital to address their young audience on their 
own terms.  Publication was justified insofar as it gave the paper an opportunity 
to speak to a group who didn't have fully formed viewpoints, and was therefore 
vulnerable to con-artists like Sergei.  But even Olia's most passionate defender, 
Oganov was forced to admit that Of course, she's not got two brain cells to rub 
together ... [, ,     ].115  For others who opposed 
publication there was nothing there except for a normal, grey vulgar person 
[], while Ponizovskii went as far as to largely absolve Sergei of 
blame: The majority [of readers] will think that the girl is right, although the 
main criticism shouldn't be laid at the door of the boy [    ], 
but at her door  it should be criticism of her attitude to life.116   
On the evidence of readers printed replies (which are, of course, not a 
scientific cross-section) KPs audience was no more sympathetic than 
Ponizovskii and Egorov.  True, some were conciliatory, promising Olia that [...] 
your next good friend will certainly be a million times better than Sergei 
Gavrilov.117  (Not by coincidence, this letter, the most sympathetic of those 
printed, was condemned as being written at the same level as Olgas.118) Most, 
however, were less understanding.  Three female Komsomol members 
declaimed: In our country we still haven't got rid of women who don't give a fig 
for their womanly virtue and pride and added that All women are offended by 
your thoughtlessness.  One man asked whether anybody could be so stupid in 
real life, while another questioned Olias motives, arguing that her acceptance of 
such a marriage proposal meant that she's got one aspiration in life  to get 
married quickly, or, as they say, to make it.  Can we really talk about 'love' in 
such circumstances?119  The most indicative reply came from a class of school 
pupils in Taldy-Kurgan in Kazakhstan (responses to KP articles were often set 
as class exercises), who told Olia that she was mad to think of getting married at 
the age of seventeen: Seventeen, Olia  that's the age at which a person is still 
115 Ibid., l.14. 
116 Ibid., l.12, 15. 
117 Chto eto  liubov? KP 25/2/64, 2. 
118 18/2/64, d.361, l.35. 
119 Pochemu tak sluchilos?, KP 22/2/64, 2. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 260 
just searching for a goal in life, absorbing knowledge, in order to generously pay 
the people back for their care, and castigated her trip to see Sergei as stupid 
and humiliating.  They concluded with the hope that their comradely advice 
would allow Olia to stand on the right path once more.120  But whilst class 11A 
might have thought that she had done the right thing in appealing for help, one 
wonders if Olia felt the same way, and whether the combination of know-it-all 
advice and homilies really did help her recover from her traumatic experience.   
The delo Akhmetova was traumatic for journalists, too, and the widely-
perceived failure of the letter remained in journalists memory for many years 
to come.  In 1967, Sofia Finger spoke of colleagues suspicion of such themes 
after the ill-fated story of Olia Akhmetova, adding that she understood 
journalists caution: two or three years, thats understandable.  But when this 
suspicion becomes prolonged, then that is foolish.121  In 1969, Inna Rudenko 
said that the Akhmetova case raised a question: Do we need discussions for 
Olia Akhmetova, or do we need discussions for academics? Is it true, the point 
of view that people conduct research of social and political questions and place 
more significance on them, and so the paper doesnt need to conduct 
discussions?  Rudenko implied that by failing to tackle such questions the 
paper was losing its connection with and influence over its young readers.  As 
the next section shows, such questions of reader interest would become 
increasingly important after Khrushchevs ouster, leading to intense discussion 
of what readers wanted, but also intense confusion as to how this should be 
squared with the perceived ideological needs of the audience. 
* * * 
The Communard movement, discussion clubs, and debates over morals 
represented three distinct ways in which KP attempted to revivify Soviet society 
and its institutions through public participation.  This illustrates that more 
inclusive notions of the public had emerged, albeit accompanied by powerful 
mechanisms of exclusion.  These examples demonstrate how widespread was 
the civilising mission of Soviet journalists, who believed that their task was to 
120 Ibid. 
121 Proizvodstvennoe soveshchanie KP, 16/11/67, RGASPI, f.98M, op.1, d.458, l.183. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 261 
form individuals, to refine them into something better.  The individual to be 
shown by Soviet media was not an ordinary individual, however, but someone 
intelligent, thoughtful, and single minded122  even if that single-mindedness 
could spill over into over-exuberance. 
Yet journalists understanding of the individual could be constricting.  
The messy business of readers everyday emotional lives remained off-limits, 
and was even stigmatised.  In the battle between untidy reality and wholesome 
myth, many journalists preferred the latter.  As Sasha Didusenko stated at one 
editorial meeting, it had always been the papers tradition, not to show the 
reader as they are, but also to lead this reader behind you so as to open their 
eyes to the most interesting and vital questions that the present day places 
before us.123  Journalists were not expected to reflect their readership as it was, 
but as it should be.  However, after Khrushchevs ouster, this normative view of 
the reader was to come under increased challenge from an unexpected quarter. 
3.1 The Decline of the Reader-citizen 
Between the October Plenum of 1964 and the Prague Spring of 1968, journalists 
began to see their readers anew.  It was a period when Soviet authorities gave 
the green light to certain kinds of progressive social research which changed 
journalists vision of the audience.  It was also a period when these self-same 
authorities became far more wary of activity taking place outside the bounds of 
the Party and sought to integrate public energies into official structures (even if 
the overpowering formalism of such institutions meant that they became 
emptied of meaning).124  Over the course of this four-year period, the 
Communards, and its KP counterpart the Young Communards Club, became 
122 Bella Ostromoukhova, KVN - "Moldezhnaia kul'tura shestdesiatykh"?, Neprikosnovennyi 
zapas, 4/36 (2004), 38-39. 
123 Open Party Meeting, 29/6/62, d.37, l.41. 
124 See Aleksei Yurchak, Everything Was Forever, Until It Was No More: The Last Soviet Generation 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2006); Sergei Zhuk , Rock and Roll in the Rocket City: 
the West, Identity, and Ideology in Soviet Dniepropetrovsk, 1960-1985 (Baltimore, MD: John 
Hopkins University Press, 2010); Steven Solnick, Stealing the State: Control and Collapse in Soviet 
Institutions (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998), Ch.4. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 262 
casualties of this drive to regain control of Soviet social space from the 
apparently erosive force of obshchestvennost. 
It would be wrong to depict this as a case of Khrushchev-era tolerance 
versus Brezhnev-era repression.  The Communards had been on shaky ground 
right from the start, with frequent conflicts between representatives of the 
movement and officials within local Komsomol and Pioneer organs, with the 
latter seeing the Communards as usurping its natural prerogatives.125  Klub 
Iu.K., for example, was a club for Komsomol groups, but not entirely a part of 
those structures.  By issuing orders to young people, the paper was 
circumventing central authority.  Young Communards were beginning to 
demand that Komsomol practice should live up to the theory. At gorkoms and 
raikoms of the Komsomol, and at school committees teenagers began to meet 
who were not indifferent and dissatisfied with the greyness of school life, 
commented one prominent pedagogue many years later.126   
But if before Khrushchevs ouster such tensions were bearable, now all 
de-centralising tendencies were under suspicion.  At the 1966 Komsomol 
Congress, Pavlov called discipline and unity the most important goals of the 
organisation, and there was a clampdown on many of the grass-roots initiatives 
of the Khrushchev period.127  In December 1965, the Central Committee of the 
Komsomol issued an order to the Communard Movement to either subsume 
itself to the official Komsomol and Pioneer structures or be closed down.128  The 
next summer, the Little Eagle camp was subjected to severe criticism, in 
particular for its discussions which, according to the Komsomols resolution, 
provoke an unhealthy fuss [],	and	lead	school	children	down	the	path	
of political ambiguity, and educate them in nit-picking [] and 
125 E.g. Piat' voprosov o samom glavnom KP 4/12/63, 4; Peregovornyi punkt orliat. KP, 
20/11/64.  On this conflict see Gazman, Kollektivnoe. 
126 Gazman, Kollektivnoe. 
127 Tsipursky, 36-37. 
128 Sinelnikov, Ostavliaiu. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 263 
nihilism.129  Klub Iu. K. no longer appeared in the paper, and there were even 
attempts to force Pankin to close the Scarlet Sail, which he resisted.130   
The fatal blow to an already stricken movement was dealt two years 
later, when Socialism with a Human Face in Czechoslovakia persuaded 
Brezhnev that the values exemplified by the Communards were politically 
dangerous.  By the end of that year, the entire Communard movement was de 
facto banned.  Prominent members were the subject of harassment: some were 
excluded from their pedagogical institutes, thrown out of the Komsomol, 
banned from working with Pioneer and Komsomol members, or purged from 
summer camps.131  The movement entered into a two decade-long period of 
conservation, only re-emerging during the period of perestroika.132 
It is hard not to see the fall of the Communard movement and the Young 
Communards Club as the death of the dream that journalists could join forces 
with the public to transform society.  Yet evidence of such a transition in models 
of journalistic governmentality was evident even before the Prague Spring.  
Discussion was still oriented towards social transformation, but not through the 
power of public opinion, but expertise.  Rubrics like Calendar of Economic 
Reform began to appear in this period, and they showed that, while debate was 
still active, the floor belonged only to those who possessed a new esoteric 
language of consumers, optimal pricing, and other such buzz-words.  Despite a 
belief that material should be oriented to a wide public, a stratification of 
content was evident.  Only one in five readers read such material as Calendar of 
Economic Reform, making it the single least popular feature in the entire 
paper.133  Such was the orientation towards specialisation in this period that 
129 Postanovlenie TsK VLKSM: O sereznykh nedostatkakh v rabote Vserossiiskogo pionerskogo 
lageria Orlenok, 26/6/66, RGASPI, f.9, op.1, d.114, ll.32-35.  My thanks to Evelin Eichler for 
this reference. 
130 Inna Rudenko, Za abstraktnyi gumanizm in Bolshe, chem gazeta, ed. Liudmila Semina 
(Moscow: PoRog, 2006), p.120. 
131 Sinelnikov, Ostavliaiu. 
132 Gazman, Kollektivnoe. 
133 HIA, Box 4, Folder 5. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 264 
Editor Boris Pankin even suggested that moral questions should be adjudicated 
by a panel of experts.134 
Journalists in the 1970s certainly retained some sense of guiding readers.  
The paper continued to print articles on love and happiness and not only did the 
Scarlet Sail survive the cull of 1968, it was one of the few rubrics from the Soviet 
period to survive the transition to post-Communism.  Paradoxically, discussions 
on the relationship between the individual and the collective now became 
increasingly formalised, while the potentially subversive individuality that the 
paper had originally grounded in the language of the collective and the 
perfection of social relations was allowed to continue.  It is one of the ironies of 
the Brezhnev era that any number of actions that potentially undermined the 
regimes ultimate goals were allowed to continue, just as long as a superficial 
adherence to the forms of belief could be maintained.   
But for the children of the Twentieth Congress, for whom form and 
content were united, the change from romantic to cynical reason was difficult to 
accept.  In 1971, editor Boris Pankin printed an article by the Scarlet Sails 
Simon Soloveichik, which advocated the idiosyncratic pedagogical methods of a 
schoolteacher by the name of Shatalov.135  What had once been seen as an 
acceptable way to encourage social transformation was now considered to be 
dangerous abstract humanism.136  After the usual round of disciplinary 
hearings, Soloveichik was fired from the paper, later continuing his plans for 
social transformation outside the journalistic sphere, in his new profession as a 
pedagogue.137 
134 Proizvodstvenno-tvorcheskogo soveshchaniia KP, 16/11/67, d.458, l.206.  This was not just 
the case at KP: see Pravda Party Meeting, TsAOPIM, f.3226, op.1, d.79, ll.2-16. 
135 S. Soloveichik, Metod Shatalova KP 3/11/71, 2, 4. 
136  Inna Rudenko has written extensively about this: see Za abstraktnyi, 120-121; Nado 
pomnit', chto est' liudi, kotorye luchshe tebia. in Zhurnalisty XX veka: liudi i sud'by (Moscow: 
Olma-press, 2003), 762 and Vy blestiashchii uchitel, u vas prekrasnye ucheniki 
<http://madan.org.il/node/815> [Accessed: 15 March 2011]. 
137 Soloveichik, Posledniaia, p.45. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 265 
3.2 Selling Komsomolka 
On October 18, 1964, Pravda announced that subscription limits for central 
newspapers and journals would be abolished.138  This was not a decision that 
made the headlines in the Soviet press, unlike in the United States (where a 
photograph of reformist economist Evsei Liberman appeared on the cover of 
Time magazine), but it was to exert a profound influence on the future direction 
of the Soviet media.139  Although newspapers in the early 1960s had been 
encouraged to compete with each other, this had little meaning when the overall 
winner was decided by planners.  But now that circulations were to be allowed 
to rise and fall with demand, journalists were about to find out how popular 
their titles really were.   
 Before 1965, the vast majority of Soviet newspapers were sold through 
subscriptions organised by the official distributor, Soiuzpechat, which took a cut 
of each subscription arranged.  Only around ten per cent of the circulation came 
through retail.140  But due to paper shortages, demand was far higher than 
supply.  This meant that Soiuzpechat could force readers to subscribe to a 
bundle, which paired an uninteresting title, like Civil Aviation, with a more 
popular one, like Radio.  One disgruntled reader complained that: Its easier to 
win the state lottery than to get a subscription you want.141  Moreover, state 
officials were granted priority in subscribing.  Bureaucrats could obtain popular 
titles for themselves with state money, leading some KP journalists to demand 
controls to ensure a more equitable distribution of the paper.142   
There were periodic attempts to change the retail base of the press. As 
early as 1955, subscription limits were periodically allowed to mirror reader 
interest, but it seems that the market was allowed to decide only a small 
proportion of the circulation, with the rest being dictated from above.143  
138 Million obshchestvennykh rasprostranitelei pechati Pravda 18/10/64, 6. 
139 On the rationale for the reform (though not specifically the removal of subscription limits) 
see Michael Kaser, Kosygin, Liberman, and the Pace of Soviet Industrial Reform The World 
Today 21/9 (1965), 375-88. 
140 Spravka o kolihestve ekzempliarov gazety Komsomol'skaia pravda, vydeliaemykh dlia 
roznichnoi prodazhi v 1958 g., 16/10/58, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.929, l.52. 
141 The Subscriber Complains Literaturnaia gazeta 22/12/56 in CDSP 8/52, 33-34. 
142 Hopkins, 137-138; 8/10/56, d.176, ll.127-129, 132, 146. 
143 See Psurtsev to Khrushchev, 8/3/55, RGANI f.5, op.16, d.712, l.34. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 266 
Several years later, in 1958 and 1959, the regime took more concerted action to 
place the Soviet press on a firmer financial footing by issuing a number of 
resolutions that standardised salaries and placed restrictions on the publication 
of unprofitable titles.144  One reason was that the supply of paper was unable to 
keep pace with growing demand.  In 1959, the editors of KP sent a dossier 
featuring dozens of complaints from readers unable to subscribe to the 
Komsomol Central Committee.145  A year later, the paper situation was so 
critical that there were fears that a number of newspapers in the Russian 
republic might be forced to cease publication.146  For want of paper, propaganda 
literature publicising the partys policies went unpublished; in 1961 and 1962, 
Russian officials were forced to choose between printing exercise books or 
newspapers; numerous requests to open new newspapers had to be turned 
down.147   A second reason was financial.  A resolution issued by the Central 
Committee in the summer of 1959, On the liquidation of losses in newspapers 
and journals, called for the closure of unprofitable publications, thus freeing up 
paper and filling the nations coffers.  The number of newspapers, which had 
grown almost 400 per cent between 1953 and 1957, fell 40 per cent between 
1958 and 1962, breaking a twenty-year trend of unbroken rises.148  But overall 
circulations rose by 35 per cent, meaning that readers were increasingly 
concentrated in profitable central publications.149  Thus, the decision of October 
1964 to eliminate subscription limits illustrates a relative calming of the waters 
with regard to paper provision (though problems with paper supplies still 
remained evident) and a desire to increase profits.150  
144 Postanvleniia TsK KPSS: Ob izlishestvakh v raskhodovanii sredstv gosudarstvennymi i 
obshchestvennymi organizatsiami na vypusku gazet i zhurnalov, 15/11/58; O sokrashchenii 
vypuska besplatnoi literatury, 11/2/59; O likvidatsii ubytochnosti gazet i zhurnalov, 31/7/59; 
O merakh po uluchsheniiu rozichnoi prodazhi gazet i zhurnalov, 1/10/59 in Sovetskaia pechat 
v dokumentakh, ed. by N. Kaminskaia (Moscow: Gospolitizdat, 1961), pp.297, 298-299, 301-306, 
309-310. 
145 See Pis'ma chitatelei o pomoshchi v oformlenii podpiski na gazety Komsomol'skaia pravda, 
September-October 1959, d.261 and d.262. 
146 RGASPI, f.5, op.34, d.72, ll.111-118; Stepakov/Stukalin (17/11/61) RGANI, f.5, op.34, d.92, 
ll.142-143. 
147 RGANI, f.5, op.34, d.72, ll.111-118, d.111, ll.4-6. 
148 See Mark Hopkins, Mass Media in the Soviet Union (New York: Pegasus, 1970), pp.94, 191. 
149 Ibid. 
150 E.g. Kuprikov to Chkhikvishvili, 3/1/66, RGANI, f.5,op.33, d.224, l.125. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 267 
 The abolition of dirigisme in the press sector after 1964 was 
accompanied by a change in quantitative measures of a newspapers quality.  In 
the past, the quantity of letters received had provided such a measure: 
journalists reported back to the authorities on the size of the papers postbag 
and the proportion of letters that responded directly to the papers articles.  
More letters ostensibly meant that the paper had improved.151  But, as so often 
in the Soviet Union, once workers were given a plan to fulfil, they often found 
novel ways of achieving it.  Letters were not a reliable measure of a newspapers 
popularity, but a measure of the papers success in producing the impression of 
popularity.  We saw an example of this in the previous chapter: in 1964 the IOM 
ran two competitions with the express purpose of increasing the size of the 
papers postbag.  Doing so increased the number of letters received that year by 
over a fifth.152   
Journalists quickly understood that circulation figures had supplanted 
letters as a means for measuring popularity.  It was, according to one report of 
the KP Party Organisation, the most convincing evidence of the papers 
popularity amongst young people.153  Deputy Editor Boris Pankin said of the 
1965 subscription campaign: 
The results of the subscription campaign and the circulation of the paper tell us 
how readers judge the work of our paper, and the work of every one of us.  It is 
an all-Union election, if you like.  I dont think that any of us can be indifferent to 
its results. If before we were behind a brick wall, a limit, and thought open the 
gate and well sign up twenty-million, then now the time has come for realistic, 
sober assessments.154 
151 See, for example, Perepiska s redaktsiei gazety Komsomol'skaia pravda po soderzhaniiu 
publikuemykh v gazete materialov, informatsii o pis'makh, otklikakh i predlozheniiakh 
chitatelei, January-December 1954, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.764; Perepiska s redaktsiei gazety 
Komsomol'skaia pravda po soderzhaniiu publikuemykh v gazete materialov, informatsii o 
pis'makh, otklikakh i predlozheniiakh chitatelei, January-November 1955, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, 
d.798; Doklad redkollegii gazety "Komsomol'skaia pravda" na torzhestvennom sobranii 
komsomol'tsev i molodezhi Moskvy, posviashchennom vykhodu 10-tysiachnogo nomera, 
undated, 1958, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.929, ll.1-20. 
152 B.A. Grushin, Chetyre zhizni Rossii v zerkale oprosov obshchestvennogo mneniia. Zhizn 2-aia: 
Epokha Brezhneva (Moscow: Progress-Traditsiia, 2001), p.17. 
153 Otchetnyi doklad o rabote partbiuro, after 29/9/65, TsAOPIM, f.1968, op.1, d.40, l.25. 
154 21/9/65, d.385, l.68. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 268 
By calling the battle for sales an election, Pankin illustrated the changed  and 
by implication democratic  relationship between reader and journalist.  
Leningrad sociologist and media executive Boris Firsov wrote in a Zhurnalist 
article that by depositing [] their money for subscriptions, readers in 
some way give their vote to the publications which answer most keenly to the 
themes of the day, stand at the centre of events, and answer the multi-faceted 
demands of readers.155  While in the past readers were understood as pupils 
learning from their more worldly wise journalist-teachers, now the roles were 
reversed, with the paper in the role of student: We now find ourselves in 
examination season, said Pankin, warning that if the student who crams 
before exams is bad, the student who sits in the exam hall with his arms crossed 
is not much better.156   
With the help of the Komsomol and Soiuzpechat, the press distribution 
agency, KP employed all possible means to ensure that subscriptions were 
increased in 1965.  Most important among these was the creation of an editorial 
department, the Department of the Youth Press, Distribution, and Mass Work, 
which was devoted to increasing subscriptions.157  Amongst its initiatives were 
a ten-day festival of the youth press in Leningrad, reader conferences in various 
cities, meetings in factories, construction sites, and educational institutions, an 
agit bus, which toured the country, and travelling brigades of poets.158  On the 
initiative of the Komsomol, advertisements appeared in the press, and on radio 
and television, while posters and banners were displayed.159  Komsomol 
members were forced to voluntarily subscribe to Komsomol publications, 
while those Komsomol organisations that failed to assist in the campaign were 
criticised for having failed to see in [the campaign] the enormous possibility for 
155 Boris Firsov, Massovaia kommunikatsiia, Zhurnalist 2 (1967), 51. 
156 Ibid. 
157 Pankin to TsK VLKSM, 1966, RGASPI, f.98M, op.1, d.440, ll.1-2. 
158 Ibid. 
159 B. Solovev to TsK VLKSM, 13/12/65, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.1213, ll.145-151; V. Riabov to 
Agitprop VLKSM, 12/1/65, Ibid. d.1213, ll.176-181; Proizvodstvenno-tvorcheskoe soveshchanie 
o rabote KP, 16/11/67, RGASPI, f.98M, op.1, d.458, l.68. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 269 
carrying out work on the Communist formation [] of youth.160  
They had also failed to see that increasing subscriptions to its publications was 
one of the most important means for replenishing the Komsomol budget.161  
Prizes were offered to the Komsomols who proved most successful at 
encouraging young people to sign up as subscribers, while the press was 
encouraged to publish laudatory articles to the new Stakhanovites of 
distribution.162   
The papers rapid increase in circulation  it added almost one-and-a-half 
million readers in the year following the reform  was in large part down to this 
ability to enlist the papers apparatus and institutional connections in the 
service of increasing the readership.163  As such, the introduction of market 
forces into the press saw Soviet journalists turn to methods that represented a 
distinctively Soviet version of the blanket marketing of the capitalist world. 
3.3 Sociology and the Mass Reader 
As Pankins reference to journalists finding themselves in examination season 
suggests, the move towards market principles gave readers the power to confer 
on journalists prestige or dishonour by a small act of consumer choice.164  This 
made it especially important for journalists to know more about the tastes of 
those consumers, and it was the newly-rehabilitated science of sociology that 
stepped into the breach.  By 1965, a Komsomol circular stated that 
[s]ystematic, solidly organised study of readers interests, and the reaction of 
160 O khode podpiski na tsentralnye molodezhnye izdaniia, 29/10/66, RGASPI, f.98M, op.1, 
d.419, l.13. My thanks to Sergei Zhuravlev and Natalia Kibita for discussing the obligation to 
subscribe to Komsomol publications with me. 
161 Ibid. 
162 Ibid., l.14; B. Solovev to TsK VLKSM, 13/12/65, RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.1213, ll.145-151. 
163 Figures on circulation: Otchetnyi doklad na rabote partbiuro, after 29 September 1965,  
TsAOPIM, f.1968, op.1, d.40, l.25. On the link between institutional apparatuses and rising 
circulations: Mikhail Nenashev, An Ideal Betrayed: Testimonies of a Prominent and Loyal Member 
of the Soviet Establishment (London: Open Gate Press, 1995), pp.50-51. 
164 On this question see also Susan Reid, Khrushchev Modern: Agency and Modernisation in the 
Soviet Home Cahiers du Monde russe 47/1-2 (2006), 244-255; Joshua First, From Spectator to 
Differentiated Consumer: Film Audience Research in the Era of Developed Socialism (1965-
80) Kritika 9/2 (Spring 2008), 317-344. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 270 
young people to the most important articles needs to become the rule.165  This 
thirst for reader information extended to the Party press.  Between 1966 and 
1968, all of the main newspapers of the Soviet Union (including Pravda, 
Izvestiia, and Trud) carried out readership studies, compelling journalists to 
rethink their ideas about readers. 
But although the regimes green light for sociological research was 
decisive, something else was needed for it to become a major factor.  Even after 
the rehabilitation of Soviet sociology, editorial staff at KP were still lamenting 
their lack of knowledge of the reader.  And yet there was no real impetus to 
launch a costly and time-consuming programme of research, given that fixed 
subscription limits made such knowledge a luxury rather than a necessity.  The 
new press market changed the rules of the game.  The inability of journalists 
and editors to navigate this unmapped territory and the intense competition for 
readers had forced newspapers to pay renewed attention to their readership, 
claimed one media sociologist.166   
A number of articles in the professional press spoke of the need for more 
research of journalists work, from the composition of editorial staff, the content 
of the paper, to readers own use of media and even their feelings about what 
they had read.167  KP, which benefited from the presence of the IOM at the 
paper, was amongst the first media outlets to incorporate sociological research 
into its work.  In September 1965, Valentin Chikin presented the results of a 
survey of almost five-hundred lapsed subscribers in several large cities across 
the USSR.168  The IOM found that, while just over half of subscribers did so for 
reasons not to do with the papers content (e.g. a lack of money to pay for 
165 K vystupleniiu na soveshchanii zhurnalistov, pishushchikh na moralno-eticheskuiu temu 
(1965) RGASPI, f.1M, op.32, d.1185, ll.107-108. 
166 V.E. Shliapentokh, ed., Chitatel i gazeta. Vyp. 1: Chitateli Truda (Moscow: ISKI AN SSSR, 
1969), pp.11-12. 
167 For an overview of such research see Nils Hartley Wessell, The Credibility, Impact and 
Effectiveness of the Soviet General Press: An Analysis of Soviet Research on the Soviet Non-
Specialized Newspaper.  Unpublished PhD Dissertation. Columbia University, 1972. On the use 
of psychology in reader studies see Valentin Kuzin. Issledovanie razrushaet stereotipu 
Zhurnalist 1 (1967), 9. 
168 7/9/65, d.385, ll.58-62.  Full results were never published, though scattered fragments were 
printed in KP.  Other results were announced in editorial and Party meetings, while others are 
held within the personal archive of IOM founder Boris Grushin.  A particularly glaring absence is 
any systematic data on the demographics of the papers readership. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 271 
subscriptions or a lack of timeliness in delivery), more than a third believed that 
the paper had become less interesting.   
Upon hearing the results, editor Iurii Voronov argued that the paper was 
losing readers because it was becoming too highbrow.  He scorned the idea that 
the paper should try to rival Literaturnaia gazeta, a newspaper with a 
circulation almost ten times smaller than KPs: We are a mass newspaper and 
we need every one of us, every worker to learn to look at the paper through the 
eyes of the mass reader.169  Reference to this mass reader occurs frequently in 
journalists conversations.  There is ample evidence of journalists employing the 
term across the 1950s and 1960s.170  But the idea of the readership as a 
homogeneous public was beginning to be challenged by sociologists, who 
argued that journalists should recognise that their paper was read by diverse 
social groups with diverse interests.  A Komsomol report of 1966 stated that 
Todays newspaper can no longer orient itself towards the average reader.  It 
simply doesnt exist.  There are defined groups of youth with professional, age, 
and educational differences.171  The findings of newspaper sociologists 
mirrored those of film sociologists, who increasingly sought to overturn widely-
held ideas about the mass audience by suggesting that audience perception of 
films was stratified by socio-demographic criteria.172  In doing so, these film 
sociologists both challenged the authority of film critics, and posited the 
spectator as an object of knowledge (knowledge created by the sociologist), 
rather than the subject of a the film text (knowledge created by the critic).  The 
report cited above would suggest that this process was carried into the Soviet 
press, too.   
However, because sociologists at KP doubled as journalists, the 
comparison between the papers in-house sociologists and film sociologists is 
not like-for-like.  Although KPs sociologists recognised the divisions within the 
169 Ibid., ll.60-62. 
170 E.g. 6/5/57, d.193, l.38; Party meeting, 29/6/62, Izvestiia letuchka, 19/5/58, GARF f.R1244, 
op.1, d.186, l.3. 
171 Zadachi komitetov komsomola po usileniiu rukovodstva molodezhnoi pechatiu, redaktsiami 
radio i televideniia, 1966, RGASPI, f.1M, op.34, d.52, l.22.  See also Iurii Kurganov, Tamara 
Kharlamova Anketa protiv mifa. Zhurnalist, 7 (1967), 32-33. 
172 First, 322. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 272 
newspaper readership, they were nevertheless keen to retain the concept of the 
mass reader, which they associated with the transformative power of the 
press.  Ervant Grigoriants, one of the IOMs leading researchers, spoke in 1966 
of the paradox of the seven million: that the paper was read by the advanced 
[] and literate reader, but also by a fifth or sixth grade 
student.173  One might have expected Grigoriants, as a sociologist, to advocate 
an increased differentiation of material  indeed, at the very same meeting, 
Grigorii Oganov pointed out that nobody reads the newspaper from cover to 
cover [   ], and suggested that journalists should be relaxed 
about this fact.174  However, Grigoriants also spoke as a journalist, and it was in 
this capacity that he called Oganovs approach fatalistic.175  He admitted that it 
would be hard to find the reader who read all the way through the paper, but 
nevertheless concluded that this was what the paper should strive for.176 
Two years later, another IOM researcher, Anna Pavlova, criticised 
colleagues, saying that: We have the tendency to disseminate the tastes of the 
intelligentsia to society as a whole and that has its psychological costs [ 
   ].177  Speaking as a sociologist, she listed 
the ways in which the papers readership was stratified, and argued that the 
paper needed to find a different approach for both intellectuals and women with 
lower educations.  Yet, speaking as a journalist, Pavlova lamented the fact that 
readers under the age of twenty didnt enjoy reading serious articles.  She 
called for a campaign to create a serious reader and claimed, paraphrasing 
Pushkin, that a good newspaper, like a good novel, should always be a bit 
boring.178  Thus, in this case, we see that sociological research did not 
necessarily coincide with the abandonment of the desire to transform readers.  
In the context of the Brezhnev period, the rhetoric of the mass reader signified 
not only the need for the paper to become more appealing to its audience, but 
also the need for journalists to retain their sense of the readership as a public. 
173 18/10/66, d.438, l.23. 
174 Ibid., l.2. 
175 Ibid., l.26. 
176 Ibid. 
177 16/11/67, d.458, l.82. 
178 Ibid., ll.86-88. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 273 
Nevertheless, the concept of the mass reader could also lead to an 
intolerance of deviations from the mean  which now included intellectuals.  
Grigorii Oganov, who, three years before, had lauded the reader as more 
intellectual than journalists had thought, by 1965 came under attack from 
colleagues for his high-minded writing style: 
I think that many of our readers are incapable of grasping the article in its 
entirety, and I found out that even some of our comrades didnt manage.  The 
reader of the article was a very particular one, and not a very wide one.  I think 
that in raising serious themes we need to strive to write so that articles are 
addressed to as wide an audience as possible.179 
The papers more literary journalists countered this viewpoint: for the 
audience to whom the article was addressed, it was written precisely and 
clearly   It did its job, argued science correspondent Dmitrii Bilenkin, and 
others, including publitsist Inna Rudenko, agreed .180   
However, research by the IOM was beginning to support these attacks on 
intellectual material.  A rubric called 100 lines by a publitsist, which 
published belletristic material by the papers correspondents, was highly 
praised by journalists at the paper, yet surveys showed that readers ranked it as 
one of the papers five least popular features, an unhappy group which also 
included Workers Planning Meeting and Calendar of Economic Reform.181  
The essayistic material most beloved of journalists was being ignored by 
readers.  Respondents also complained that articles were too long  another 
product of the uneasy marriage between literature and journalism.  One reader 
whose subscription had lapsed said that he had no time to read a paper which 
is full of long articles.182  Yet journalists, consciously or unconsciously, set 
much store by the length of material, and it was difficult to purge them of such 
habits.  One KP correspondent, speaking at a meeting in 1967, talked 
sarcastically about the prestige that was attached to wordy articles: If a piece 
[] is long I dont read it, but I go and congratulate [the journalist]: well 
done, its good   He spoke of the psychological attraction to large pieces 
179 17/8/65, d.385, l.15. 
180 Ibid. ll.24-25. 
181 1/6/66, d.430, l.6; HIA, Box 4, Folder 5. 
182 Ibid. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 274 
while a small piece was considered to be a mere trifle [] or a 
garnish.183  At the same meeting, Zharov argued that material needed to be 
more brief, but added that a psychological revolution in the minds of 
journalists, was taking place at a paper where the rule had always been twelve 
pages, never write less.184  
Nevertheless, journalists at KP appear to have encountered great 
difficulty in finding a popular form which appealed to the mass reader, was 
ideologically acceptable, and professionally praiseworthy.  According to one 
IOM survey, the most frequently read genre was one that journalists rarely 
printed, and condemned as sensationalistic: court reports.185  This illustrates a 
crucial question about the rhetoric of the reader-consumer in the Soviet press: 
how far could journalists go towards satisfying the tastes of readers who were, 
apparently, as interested in sensations as they were in moral edification?  
Before 1964, journalists tended to talk about sensations in negative terms: as an 
inadmissible excess in the search for popularity, and as a fundamental part of 
bourgeois yellow journalism.186  By 1966-67, however, journalists were 
criticising a lack of them and demanding material that would ensure that, as 
Kondakov put it, readers were tearing the paper from [their] hands.187 
However, journalists found it difficult both to keep their material within 
acceptable limits and attract readers attention.  Though there remained a great 
distance between the bourgeois model of celebrity news and scandals and the 
content of the Soviet press, reprimands handed out to Sovetskaia Rossiia in 1965 
for articles on kidnapping and drug addiction showed how journalistic values 
183 Proizvodstvenno-tvorcheskogo soveshchaniia o rabote KP, 16/11/67, d.458, l.118. 
184 Ibid., ll.2, 116. 
185 HIA, Box 4, Folder 5.  The priority accorded to this rubric equally suggests that the public was 
concerned about crime, and wanted to read more about it, though this, in its own way, implies a 
sensationalist desire to be outraged.  On this point see Miriam Dobson, Khrushchevs Cold 
Summer: Gulag Returnees, Crime, and the Fate of Reform After Stalin (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 2008), esp. pp.44-48, 179-184. 
186 Otchet o rabote partiinogo biuro redaktsii Izvestii s dekabria 1960 po avgust 1961 gg., 
TsAOPIM, f.453, op.2, d.32, l.45. 
187 26/4/66, d.427, l.47. See also Proizvodstvennoe-tvorcheskoe soveshchaniie o rabote KP 
16/11/67, RGASPI, f.98M, op.1, d.458, l.139; Proizvodstvenno-tvorcheskogo soveshchaniia o 
rabote "Komsomol'skaia pravda" v 1968 g., 16/11/67,  d.458, l.139.  See also Mark Karpovich. 
Pozvol'te byt' pristrastnym  Zhurnalist, 9 (1967), 4849.  On negative understandings of 
sensationalism see Wolfe, pp.26-28. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 275 
were changing under the pressure of reader demand.188  An editorial published 
in Sovetskaia pechat in 1966 talked about the dark sides of the pursuit of 
subscriptions amongst some publications.189  While agreeing that it was 
completely natural and correct that publications were profitable, the editorial 
nevertheless asked whether it was correct to construct a publication purely on 
a commercial basis.  What wont journalists do for an increase in 
circulation? it asked. They look for any old peculiarity [] so as to 
capture the imagination of the reader.  Worse still, the creative pen of certain 
capable journalists gradually begins to adjust to this demand: to attract readers, 
to strike them with an unusual photograph, to cater [] to them with 
something peculiar, to satisfy [] what are, in effect, sometimes 
backward interests.190 
 Thus, the ultimate effect of the twin assault of markets and social science 
on the world of journalism between 1964 and 1968 was subtle but far-reaching.  
Journalists began to conceive of their readers as individuals whose attention 
could not be taken for granted, lest they turn towards other sources of 
information.  The majority of people, argued KP correspondent Vladimir 
Orlov, by virtue of the fact that they have an enormous number of newspapers, 
magazines  the television screen, radio broadcasts, the cinema, books, and a 
lack of time, must read and watch selectively.  He added that: Through their 
selection, readers spontaneously define what is most interesting for them.191  
The language of choice, and of reader interest is striking.  Orlovs imagined 
reader showed discernment in choosing between different titles, and this choice 
was not to be denigrated, but accommodated by media producers.  However, 
this new concept of the audience had increasingly shed the socially progressive 
terms of reference that defined the early 1960s, and now defined readers in 
language that painted them as consumers. 
188 See Wolfe, pp.112-113.  See also Viktor Perelman, Pokinutaia Rossiia: Zhurnalist v zakrytom 
obshchestve. 2-e izd. (Tel Aviv: Vremia i my, 1977), 170-171.  
189 Otvetstvennost pered chitatelem. SP 7 (1966), 12. 
190 Ibid., 2. 
191 18/10/66, d.439, l.2. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 276 
Conclusion 
The story of Komsomolskaia pravdas changing relationship to the reader might 
seem to be a peculiarly Soviet affair.  After all, Soviet journalists lack of 
knowledge about readers was the result of a specifically Soviet mistrust of 
sociological research and stemmed from a financial model that for a long time 
rendered circulation data unimportant.  It was, moreover, a media system that 
placed a heavy premium on moral and educational content, in the service of 
creating a new, specifically Soviet, kind of individual. 
 And yet there was a form of Western journalism that sought to do the 
same: public service broadcasting.  In the United States, NBC and CBS held 
town-hall debates, and produced documentation to help educate readers in 
democratic citizenship.192  In Britain, Lord Reith developed his notion of 
broadcasting as an educational, culture-forming, morally upright, and defiantly 
non-commercial undertaking.193  And in the Netherlands, the socialist 
broadcaster VARA produced uncompromisingly political and moral 
programming.194  The historical trajectories of these nations differed, but in the 
broad outlines of change, there were remarkable similarities.  The introduction 
of competition into media markets led the producers of public service media to 
question assumptions about their audiences, leading to the realisation that prior 
conceptions of the audience as a homogeneous group, desiring cultural uplift 
(what Ien Ang has called the normative public) were erroneous.195  
Broadcasters increasingly turned towards quantitative methods to understand 
their audiences.  As a result, their commitment to serving the public gave way to 
a desire merely to capture audiences, bringing in its tow a search for more 
popular forms.  This turn towards the popular led to the abandonment of the 
public service ethos.196 
192 Richard Butsch, The Citizen Audience: Crowds, Publics, and Individuals (New York: Routledge, 
2008), pp.84-94. 
193 Asa Briggs, The BBC: The First Fifty Years (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985), pp.53-58. 
194 Ien Ang, Desperately Seeking The Audience (London; New York: Routledge, 1991), pp.121-
195 Ibid., pp.101-107. 
196 Ibid.; Michael Tracey, The Decline and Fall of Public Service Broadcasting (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1998), pp.20-48. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 277 
 It is important not to overemphasise the arguments applicability to the 
Soviet Union.  Even though journalists began to question their beliefs about the 
reader, they never abandoned the conviction that a newspaper was an organ for 
transforming the individual and society.  However, they increasingly felt that it 
was losing that focus.  Even Tatiana Agafonova, who worked in the Department 
of News lamented in 1969 that  
However business-like [] and informational [] the 
pages of our newspaper are, without our moral materials, in which we sit next to 
the reader, so to speak, try with our souls to explain to them their incorrect views 
[] and errors  without that, Komsomolskaia pravda  cannot exist.  
Its a shame that we are losing our great achievement.197 
Could this sense of moral leadership survive the introduction of market forces?  
Ever since Allan Starodub reminded colleagues that readers views did not 
always coincide with those of journalists upon seeing the IOMs first survey, 
there had been an increasing recognition that readers views did not always 
coincide with those of journalists.  This applied not just to political views, but 
also to tastes, which were changing in unexpected ways.  Again, the West 
provides a helpful parallel.  There, the saturation of the media landscape in the 
post-war period by commercial considerations and the democratisation of 
cultural consumption towards popular forms after World War II led to a 
transformed media landscape with greater choices, and more demanding 
consumers.  This proliferation of media choices led to the terminal fracturing of 
the mass media audience, its ceasing to exist as a public. Writes Michael Tracey:  
The brute truth is that in an interactive communications system, the construction 
of which necessarily presupposes a significant increase in the amount of potential 
communications that are available, it is difficult, probably impossible, to have a 
patrician relationship with the audience. The relationship becomes one of 
providing the market with whatever the consumer might decide he or she 
needs.198 
A similar process, albeit more modest, took place in the USSR.  As Kristin Roth-
Ey has shown, the post-war media landscape gave audiences choices.  It allowed 
them to fashion themselves as subjects, to construct a mass media bricolage 
197 10/9/69, d.488, l.2 
198 Tracey, p.49. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 278 
which seemed to fit their own identities.199  Media producers responded in two, 
conflicting ways: on the one hand indulging in bouts of hand-wringing over the 
invasion of capitalist lowbrow culture, on the other, fighting to retain their 
audience in the recognition that audiences wanted certain things that media 
producers would have to provide.200  As a result, the natural audience  a 
highly normative vision of a malleable mass awaiting transformation  was 
lost.201 
 The disappearance of this natural audience had profound consequences 
for Soviet mass media, for with it went an entire constellation centred around 
media as a means for refining readers.  But the ultimate consequence was not 
that the press became more populist  far from it.  Over the course of the 1970s, 
newspapers became less focused on their readers, the experiments of the 1950s 
and 1960s having been comprehensively curtailed after the Prague Spring.  The 
presss central role amongst Soviet mass media was squeezed between two 
incompatible impulses.  The written word became the means by which 
ideological conformity was imposed, while visual media, such as television and 
film, were seized by an entertainment impulse which sought to provide a 
coherent vision of an ideologically normalised regime.202  While KP and other 
youth papers continued to adhere to the tried-and-tested formula of debates on 
moral and ethical issues well into the 1980s203, they were no longer 
accompanied by the optimistic sense that they were changing society by doing 
so.  When journalists regained that belief in the late-1980s, their energies were 
aimed neither towards the creation of a new model individual, nor towards new 
199 Roth-Ey, pp.71-130; Sudha Rajagopalan, Leave Disco Dancer Alone: Indian Cinema and Soviet 
Movie-Going After Stalin (New Delhi: Yoda Press, 2008). 
200 Roth-Ey, Moscow. 
201 The term natural audience comes from Ang, pp.121-139. 
202 On the link between television and normalisation in Czechoslovakia see Paulina Bren, The 
Greengrocer and his TV (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2010).  On the Soviet context see 
Elena Prokhorova, Fragmented Mythologies: Soviet TV Mini-Series of the 1970s Unpublished 
PhD Dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, 2003; Sergei Oushakine, Crimes of Substitution: 
Detection in Late Soviet Society Public Culture 15/3 (2003), 426-451. 
203 Natalia Roudakova, Bringing Culture Back Into the State: A Post-structural Look at the Soviet 
Press. Unpublished m/s, 2009. 
THE READER IS NOT AN ICON | 279 
forms of sociality within the socialist system, but towards the promotion of a set 
of values that would undermine the fundamental tenets of Soviet power.204 
204 Wolfe, pp.143-175. 
CONCLUSION | 280 
CONCLUSION | A Compass in the Sea of Life: Journalists and their 
Public Before and After the Prague Spring 
 [T]he newspaper must be a compass in the sea of life; it must give answers to 
lifes complex questions, and help [readers] come to terms with themselves 
[	 	 ],	with	 their	 I,	with	 how	 to	 form	 themselves,	with	
how	 to	 make	 a	 life.	 	 It	 must	 be	 a	 compass	 in	 the	 social	 world	 [	 	
],	a	compass	in	the political world, and it must teach them to look 
at	the	world	with	true	eyes	[				].1 
(Elena Bruskova, 1967) 
At the start of the Brezhnev era, journalists began to lose their sense of the 
natural audience as a combined effect of the introduction of market forces, and 
readers changing requirements, yet they never lost the sense of the reader as 
an individual to be transformed.  The idea of journalism as a guide to everyday 
life had exerted a grip on journalists since the Twentieth Party Congress.  The 
Soviet newspaper would not merely be a medium for recounting recent events, 
but also a means for inculcating correct individual, social, and political values.  
It would be a compass with which readers would navigate everyday life, and be 
steered through everyday moral quandaries to the safe shores of Soviet 
citizenship.  It would enable readers to understand the world around them by 
providing them with the knowledge they needed to form educated opinions.  
Journalists moved away from Stalinist forms of rote learning and towards the 
more difficult task of nurturing individual and collective agency.  They sought to 
communicate with their readers more directly and more sincerely; they would 
regain readers trust by exposing actions they considered detrimental to the 
public good; they would promote the initiative of young people as the country 
sought to build Communism; and they would satisfy readers right to accurate 
information about the world in which they lived. 
Journalists vision of the newspapers role in promoting social change 
was a very particular one.  Though a number of gazetchiki sought to describe 
Soviet individuals in all their complexity, the dominant tendency was to present 
a normative view of the Soviet citizen.  There remained a tendency towards 
1 17/10/67, d.455, l.52. 
CONCLUSION | 281 
hyperbole, with ordinary individuals having their blemishes airbrushed.  
Measured by this exemplary yardstick, many ordinary readers fell short: 
those who failed to serve as exemplars were mocked, and when their everyday 
worries were published, journalists sometimes expressed outrage that such 
anti-exemplars had been allowed publicity.  This inability to talk about 
important issues that concerned readers in their everyday lives showed the 
limits of journalists attempts to go closer to life.  For Soviet gazetchiki, 
journalism needed to represent the world as it was supposed to become, rather 
than as it was.  A rift emerged between the injunction to describe the typical, 
on the one hand, and the need to more accurately represent the vicissitudes of 
everyday life, on the other.  Debates over news illustrated the tensions within 
this position: both journalists and politicians recognised the need for wider and 
more timely news coverage, yet remained unable to put this into practice.  
Moreover, journalists continued inability to provide a satisfactory image of the 
contemporary was indicative of an inability to imagine a compelling exemplar 
that would embody the values of a post-Stalin age. 
This thesis has contributed to scholarly understanding of the post-Stalin 
period, not only by examining the content of the press, but also by analysing 
journalists as a distinct social group.  The transformed political climate allowed 
journalists the opportunity to change the face of the Soviet press.  The 
Twentieth Party Congress was both catalyst and agent in this process.  It was a 
catalyst insofar as many of the conditions for the changes that overtook 
journalism after 1956 already existed: improved education, a sense of group 
identity, and intense discussion of professional priorities were present before 
Stalins death.  In this sense, the Congress merely hastened pre-existing 
processes of change.  Yet, to the extent that it eliminated journalists fear of 
innovation and served as proof of the Partys reformist instincts, the Congress 
can be considered an active agent in the presss reconstruction.  In this second 
sense, therefore, the indistinctness of the Congresss messages had a 
transformative effect for, although these messages caused widespread 
confusion, their ambiguity demanded creative interpretations.  
CONCLUSION | 282 
The changed post-1956 cultural climate allowed journalists to develop a 
shared set of values and beliefs in which they had considerable investment.  
Many of these beliefs, such as the idea of journalism as a tool to transform 
society, or the need for newspapers to interest readers, had existed under Stalin, 
but political interference prevented journalists from putting them into practice.  
After 1956, the rules of the game remained unpredictable, but their increased 
regularisation allowed the collective at KP to exercise agency in transforming 
the profession.  Indeed, this thesis has demonstrated the centrality of the 
collective to the process of change.  The KP collective was home to prominent 
editors and star sketch-writers (such as Aleksei Adzhubei or Vasilli Peskov) but 
also to a large number of rank-and-file journalists (some forgotten even by 
those who once worked at the paper); both groups played a significant role in 
drafting the papers line. 
The daily drafting of this line was both a private and public activity. It 
was public insofar as the collective was geared towards social transformation 
and its work heavily intertwined with the Party.  It was private insofar as the 
newspaper was the end result of internal debates within individual redaktsii, 
which owed much to professional as well as political commitments.  The case of 
KP suggests that the rigid division of Soviet society into public and private 
spaces (and the argument that Soviet society was becoming increasingly 
privatised) is questionable.2  There was a continuum between public-ness and 
privacy that structured Soviet society, which the collective traversed.  The 
redaktsiia was a public-private space in which public objectives were pursued, 
but which also allowed for the fulfilment of private goals, such as professional 
advancement and personal friendships.3  The spirit of the sixth floor mentioned 
by journalist after journalist may be a clich, but it is repeated often enough for 
us to suspect that it bears at least a passing relationship to reality. 
2 The argument on the privatisation of Soviet society is made in Vladimir Shlapentokh, Public 
and Private Life of the Soviet People: Changing Values in Post-Stalin Russia (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1989), pp.153-163. 
3 Shlapentokh, pp.133-134.  On public-privacy within the Soviet communal apartment see 
Katerina Gerasimova, Privacy in the Soviet Communal Apartment, in Socialist Spaces: Sites of 
Everyday Life in the Eastern Bloc, ed. by David Crowley, Susan E. Reid (Oxford: Berg, 2002), 
p.210. 
CONCLUSION | 283 
Crucially, the lessening of political constraints led to a situation where 
journalists were much freer to produce content than under Stalin.  In this way, 
they acted as intermediaries between the public and the political elite.  The 
cases of the Kaluga Torch, the Communards, and the IOM suggest that messages 
were not just top-down, but could flow from the public to the Party via 
journalists, or, in the case of the IOM, from journalists to the Party.  Soviet 
propaganda should therefore be considered not just as a series of messages and 
texts, but also as a practice: the end result of a negotiation between journalists 
and the Party, journalists and their audience (real or imagined), and between 
individuals within the profession.     
* * * 
Rocked by events in Prague, the Party sought to consolidate its hold on power 
by demanding constant transmission of the signs and symbols of Communist 
rule.  In December 1969, Boris Pankin announced that the three main tasks of 
the paper in 1970 would be to cover the centenary of Lenins birth, the twenty-
fifth anniversary of victory in the Great Patriotic War, and Komsomol elections.4  
By 1972, the papers primary tasks were to propagate Leninist propaganda, 
military propaganda, and material on Komsomol life.5  Though the concept of 
Brezhnev-era neo-Stalinism is overstated, if the term is employed historically 
rather than pejoratively, then it might be said that, in its emphasis on 
exhortations of present-day unity and the glories of the past, there was 
something Stalinist about the post-1968 press.6  The binding mechanisms of 
citizen to state were now passive, with the press once again called upon to play 
a stabilising role rather than encouraging revolutionary transformation.  To use 
Ron Sunys terms, its role was dogmatic rather than discursive.7 
4 Proizvodstvennoe soveshchanie KP  Komsomolka-70, 15/12/69, RGASPI, f.98M, op.1, 
d.492, ll.1-2. 
5 O gazete Komsomolskaia pravda, after February 1972, RGASPI, f.1M, op.34, d.648, ll.3-5. 
6 Victor Zaslavsky, The Neo-Stalinist State: Class, Ethnicity, and Consensus in Soviet Society 
(Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 1994 [1982]). 
7 R.G. Suny, On Ideology, Subjectivity, and Modernity: Disparate Thoughts about Doing Soviet 
History Russian History/Histoire russe 35/1-2 (2008), 253-255. 
CONCLUSION | 284 
 Only under Gorbachev did the balance shift back to the latter.  During the 
Indian Summer of perestroika journalists truth-telling capacities were placed at 
centre stage.  They possessed the freedom to speak their minds, and the 
audiences and authority to match.8  Journalists like Inna Rudenko wrote hard-
hitting articles about the heavy toll of the war in Afghanistan; Ogonek published 
letters from the public, exposing a range of social problems and scandals, as well 
as articles reassessing the Soviet past.9  Prominent journalists of the 1950s and 
1960s found fame elsewhere: Boris Grushin returned from Czechoslovakia to 
work at the All-Union Institute of Public Opinion; Iurii Voronov was recalled 
from his exile in the DDR to become Minister of Culture; while Boris Pankin 
became the last Soviet Minister of Defence, presiding adeptly over the post-coup 
chaos of 1991, before becoming an Ambassador to the United Kingdom and 
Sweden.  If ever there was a golden age for Soviet journalists, this was it. 
But although the fall of Communism in theory granted journalists greater 
freedom, in practice, their situation fell far short of what they might have 
expected.  The conditions of Communism had sustained as much as hindered 
journalists high social standing.  Communism gave journalists  and the 
intelligentsia as a whole  a public platform, a delegated authority, and, in a 
climate of limited, albeit expanding, media choices, a captive audience.  After 
1991, the foundations underpinning journalistic authority disappeared, too.  
Under Communism it had been possible to carve out a sphere of independent 
activity, however circumscribed, safe from political interference.  Now, 
journalistic allegiances were subject to the vicissitudes of the market, leading 
journalists to describe themselves as prostitutes.10  An alien new language of 
kompromat, biznes, and marketing emerged.  The protagonists of the 
Khrushchev era felt set adrift, while younger journalists accepted that 
8 Ivan Zassoursky, Media and Power in Post-Soviet Russia (Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 2004), p.12. 
9 On Ogonek, see The Best of Ogonyok: The New Journalism of Glasnost, Trans. Cathy Porter, ed. 
by Vitaly Korotich, Cathy Porter (London: Heinemann, 1990). 
10 Natalia Roudakova, From the Fourth Estate to the Second Oldest Profession: Russia's 
Journalists in Search of their Public after Socialism Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Stanford 
University, 2007; Svetlana Pasti, A New Generation of Journalists, in Russian Mass Media and 
Changing Values, ed. by Arja Rosenholm, Kaarle Nordenstreng, Elena Trubina (London: 
Routledge, 2010), pp.61-62, 67-68. 
CONCLUSION | 285 
professionalism and corruption were connected.11  A 2008 survey found that 
journalists were trusted by only six per cent of the population.12  
To the shestidesiatniki, this loss of trust and values was profoundly 
demoralising.  Zoia Krylova, who ran an advice column in the late-1960s, 
decried the bloodlust of modern journalism, and mused on the thin layer of 
culture that divides people from predators, and how easy it is to strip it away.13  
Former Special Correspondent Lidia Grafova, who today heads an organisation 
devoted to defending migrants rights, wrote that:   
To our freedom of speech, the authorities have replied: freedom of rumour.  
The word human rights advocate [] ... today sounds like a 
diagnosis  Times have changed steeply [  ], and 
social morals have rolled downhill.  One can do little more than return to articles 
on self-perfection.  But who reads those today?14 
There was a very real sense amongst the journalists who came of age in the 
1960s and 1970s that the human values so central to their work had been lost.  
Inna Rudenko, still employed by the paper as a totem of journalistic 
professionalism, was asked by a group of young journalism students whether 
she thought it was easier to write under todays new conditions or those of the 
past:  
In the new [conditions], of course, I wanted to say, thereby underlining to them, 
to young people, how easy it was today without censors.  But, having thought 
about it, I said: Both easier and harder.  Infotainment  thats the slogan of the 
new Komsomolka (oh, this current passion for foreign words).  Information and 
diversion, in Russian translation.  To me, that formula seems limited, 
impoverished.  Is human life limited to information and diversion?  In any case, 
my pen is not well inclined to such a formula.15 
The opposition between those new values and those of the past were placed in 
sharp relief in 2009, when KP reprinted an edition that was first published half a 
century before.  On New Years Day 1960, the editors explained that Father 
11 Pasti, pp.65-67. 
12 Ibid., p.57. 
13 Zoia Krylova, Slovo, kotoroe vsegda so mnoi, in Bol'she, chem gazeta, ed. by Liudmila Semina 
(Moscow: PoRog, 2006), p.79. 
14 Lidia Grafova, Eto byla zhizn vzakhleb, in Ibid., pp.4445. 
15 Inna Rudenko, Nado pomnit, chto est liudi, kotorye luchshe tebia, in Zhurnalisty XX veka: 
liudi i sudby (Moscow: "Olma-press", 2003), p.762. 
CONCLUSION | 286 
Christmas had left them the edition they saw in front of them, dated January 1, 
2010.  Fifty years later, Father Christmas once again worked his magic, bringing 
Komsomolkas editors an edition from 31 December, 2059.   
The news stories from 2059 included information about a spacecraft 
containing extra-terrestrials that had landed on Red Square; about the 
Tunguska meteorite, which had apparently been found to be a spaceship  and 
about a special gel named Pamela-5, which would enable women to go from a 
size AA to a size GG bust in just five minutes, without the need for an 
operation.16  These stories were run-of-the-mill boulevard sensations, with the 
story of Pamela-5, in particular, illustrating the impossible feminine ideals of 
post-Soviet life, particularly when seen alongside the come-to-bed eyes of 
Valentina Kostina, a political science student from Kazan, who stared out 
hopefully from the back page in expectation of becoming Miss Komsomolka 
2009.17  By contrast, the journalists of 1960 had imagined a discussion on 
whether singular possessive pronouns still had a place in the language, since 
their spirit was so alien to the collectivist values of 2010.18  Their news from the 
future evinced an optimistic faith in science to change the world, describing life 
in a twenty-first century where a city had been built under the Pacific Ocean, 
extinct species had been reanimated, and video link-ups allowed individuals 
living far apart to see one another.19  The difference between these two visions 
of the future is the difference between two distinct visions of journalism: one 
that sees itself as transforming its public; the other that seeks to amuse it.  
Komsomolskaia pravda has thus shadowed long-term changes in the Russian 
press, moving from a vehicle of the Stalin cult, via the romantika of the 
Khrushchev period and the social activism of the Gorbachev years, to a populist 
tabloid that embodies the social values of the Putin era. 
16 KP 31/12/2009-7/1/2010, 8-9. 
17 KP 29/12/2009, 28. On women in post-Soviet media see Rebecca Kay, Images of the Ideal 
Woman: Perceptions of Russian Womanhood through the Media, Education and Womens Own 
Eyes, in Post-Soviet Women: From the Baltic to Central Asia, ed. by Mary Buckley (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1997), pp.77-98. 
18 Iazyk dolzhen stat vroven s vekom KP 1/1/60, 10. 
19 KP 1/1/1960, 7-10. 
CONCLUSION | 287 
In his posthumously published autobiography, Simon Soloveichik mused 
on a journalists civic responsibility: 
All my life Ive known why I write, and Ive never  not once  written an article 
just because I wanted to write an article.  Or for a wage.  To write in a newspaper 
for money is not possible, its dishonourable.  A script or a novel  thats a 
different matter  but a newspaper?  No, a newspaper is holy.  Can a person write 
poems for money?  Its the same with a newspaper.  You cant write poems for 
money because theyre too personal, and you cant write in a newspaper for 
money because its too social [ ].  Poems are very yours 
[ ], a newspaper is very not yours [  ].20 
Soloveichik was writing at a time when the process of transition from the Soviet 
Komsomolka to its post-Soviet variant was in full flow.  His quotation posits an 
opposition between ethics and capital and, implicitly, between his vision of 
socially responsible journalism, and the forms of journalism that were becoming 
popular after the fall of Communism.  However, while Soloveichik presents an 
opposition between money and morals, it may be that two, seemingly antinomic 
visions of the press actually sit side by side.  In a study of the contemporary 
Russian business press, Natalia Roudakova has suggested that Russian 
newspapers are currently deadlocked between two concepts of the social: a 
neoliberal vision, devoted to the privatisation of individual experience, and a 
socialist one, which emphasises collectivist public values.21  Even as the Soviet 
experience recedes from view, it seems that the model of journalism that it 
generated refuses to disappear. 
20 Simon Soloveichik, Posledniaia kniga (Moscow: Pervaia sentiabria, 1999), p.124. 
21 Roudakova, pp.293-378. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 288 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
ARCHIVES 
Gosudarstvennyi arkhiv Rossiiskoi Federatsii, Moscow (GARF) 
(State Archive of the Russian Federation) 
f.1244R Redaktsiia gazety Izvestiia 
f.10124 Soiuz zhurnalistov 
Rossiiskii gosudarstvennyi arkhiv noveishei istorii, Moscow (RGANI) 
(Russian State Archive of Contemporary History) 
f.5, op.16 Otdel propagandy i agitatsii TsK KPSS (1948-1956) 
f,5, op.33 Dept. of Propaganda and Agitation TsK KPSS of the Republics 
(1956-62) 
Otdel propagandy i agitatsii TsK KPSS (1965-66) 
f.5, op.34 Otdel propagandy i agitatsii TsK KPSS po RSFSR (1956-  
  62, 1964-66) 
f.5, op.55 Ideologicheskii otdel TsK KPSS (1962-65) 
f.72, op.1 Ideologicheskaia komissiia TsK KPSS 
f.96, op.1 Redaktsiia gazety Sovetskaia Rossiia 
Rossiiskii gosudarstvennyi arkhiv sotsialno-politicheskoi istorii  
(Dokumenty Komsomola i molodezhnykh organizatsii), Moscow  
(RGASPI-M) 
(Russian State Archive of Socio-Political History  former Komsomol Archive) 
f.1, op.2 Plenumy TsK VLKSM 
f.1, op.5 Soveshchaniia TsK VLKSM 
f.1, op.31 Obshchii otdel TsK VLKSM 
f.1, op.32 Otdel propagandy i agitatsii TsK VLKSM (to 1965) 
f.1, op.34 Otdel propagandy i agitatsii TsK VLKSM (1965 onwards) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 289 
f.9  Vserosiiskii pionerskii lager Orlenok 
f.98, op.1 Redaktsiia gazety Komsomolskaia pravda 
Tsentralnyi arkhiv obshchestvenno-politicheskoi istorii Moskvy, Moscow 
(TsAOPIM) 
(Central Archive of Socio-Political History of Moscow) 
f.453, op.2 Partiinaia organizatsiia redaktsii gazety Izvestiia 
f.1799 Partiinaia organizatsii redaktsii zhurnala Sovetskaia pechat 
f.1968, op.1 Partiinaia organiatsiia redaktsiia gazety Komsomolskaia pravda 
f.3223, op.1 Partiinaia organizatsiia redaktsiia gazety Pravda 
f.3273, op.1 Partiinaia organizatsii redaktsii zhurnala Kommunist 
Hoover Institution Archives, Stanford, California 
  Boris Grushin Papers 
Widener Library, Harvard University, Massachusetts 
Harvard Study on the Soviet Social System 
<http://hcl.harvard.edu/collections/hpsss/index.html> 
NEWSPAPERS AND JOURNALS 
Bolshevistskaia pechat 
Current Digest of the Soviet Press (CDSP) 
Filosofskie nauki 
Iunost 
Izvestiia 
Kommunist 
Komsomolskaia pravda (KP) 
Novyi mir 
The Observer 
Ogonek 
Pravda 
Rabotnitsa 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 290 
Sovetskaia pechat (SP) 
Sovetskaia Rossiia 
Vestnik MGU: Seria XI (Zhurnalistika) 
Voprosy filosofii 
Zhurnalist 
PRIMARY SOURCES 
Adzhubei, Aleksei, Te desiat let (Moscow: Sovetskaia Rossiia, 1989) 
, ed., Den mira (Moscow: Izvestiia, 1961) 
Adzhubei, Rada, Reshaiushchii shag byl sdelan, in Pressa v obshchestve (1959-
2000): Otsenki zhurnalistov i sotsiologov. Dokumenty., ed. by A. I. Volkov, M. G. 
Pugacheva and S. F. Iarmoliuk (Moscow: Moskovskaia shkola politicheskikh 
issledovanii, 2000), pp. 14-45 
Afiani, V. I., ed., Apparat TsK KPSS i kultura, 1953-1957. Dokumenty (Moscow: 
Rosspen, 2001) 
Aimermakher [Eimermacher], Karl et al, eds., Ideologicheskie Komissii TsK KPSS, 
1958-1964. Dokumenty (Moscow: Rosspen, 1998) 
Benderova, Vera, Sol' chuzhikh slez, in Soldaty slova: Rasskazyvaiut veterany 
Sovetskoi zhurnalistiki. Tom 5, ed. by B. S. Burkov and V. A. Miakushkov 
(Moscow: Politizdat, 1985), pp. 31638 
Blatin, Anatolii, U zhivotvornogo istochnika, in Soldaty slova: Rasskazyvaiut 
veterany sovetskoi zhurnalistiki. Tom 2, ed. by V. A. Miakushkov and N. P. Stor 
(Moscow: Politizdat, 1980) 
Bogdanov, N., and B. Viazemskii, Spravochnik zhurnalista (Leningrad: Lenizdat, 
1960) 
, Spravochnik zhurnalista. 2-e izd. (Leningrad: Lenizdat, 1965) 
Bolshaia Sovetskaia entsiklopediia: 2-e izd., 49 vols. (Moscow: Bolshaia 
Sovetskaia entsiklopediia, 1949-1958) 
Bolshaia sovetskaia entsiklopediia. 3-e izd. 30 vols. (Moscow: Bolshaia 
Sovetskaia entsiklopediia, 1969-1978) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 291 
Borisova, Liudmila G., Puti sozdaniia obshchestvennogo mneniia pionerov i 
komsomol'tsev. Doklad na Pedagogicheskikh chteniakh APN RSFSR, 
Moscow, March 1956. 
<http://www.kommunarstvo.ru/index.html?/biblioteka/bibborput.html> 
[Accessed: February 27 2011] 
Burkov, B.S. and V.A. Miakushkov, eds., Soldaty slova: Rasskazyvaiut veterany 
Sovetskoi zhurnalistiki. Tom 5 (Moscow: Politizdat, 1985) 
Cherepakhov, M. S., ed., Zhanry sovetskoi gazety (Moscow: MGU, 1959) 
Chernyshev, Viacheslav, Planeta u nas doma, in Den mira, ed. by Aleksei 
Adzhubei (Moscow: Izvestiia, 1961), pp. 790-791 
Dudel, S., Kritika i samokritika, in Filosofskaia entsiklopediia. Tom 3, ed. by F.V. 
Konstantinov (Moscow: Izd. Sovetskaia entsiklopediia, 1964), pp. 94-95 
Erunov, B. A., Sila obshchestvennogo mneniia (Leningrad: Lenizdat, 1964) 
Filonovich, Iu., U samogo istoka, in Den mira, ed. by Aleksei Adzhubei 
(Moscow: Izvestiia, 1961), pp. 768-770. 
, Istoriia odnoi knigi, in Soldaty Slova: Rasskazyvaiut veterany sovetskoi 
zhurnalistiki. Tom 1, ed. by A. A. Mandrugin and V. A. Miakushkov (Moscow: 
Politizdat, 1976), pp. 299317 
Filosofskaia entsiklopediia. 5 vols., ed. by F.V. Konstantinov (Moscow: Izd. 
Sovetskaia entsiklopediia, 1960-1970) 
Fursenko, A. A., Presidium TsK KPSS. Tom 1: Chernovye protokolnye zapisi 
zasedanii. Stenogrammy (Moscow: Rosspen, 2004) 
Gazman, Oleg, Kollektivnoe tvorcheskoe: Rasskaz o tom, kak rodilas i 
razvivalas metodika kollektivnogo tvorcheskogo vospitaniia, Uchitelskaia 
gazeta, 17 December 1987 
Gorkii, Maksim, and Mikhail Koltsov, eds., Den mira (Moscow: Zhurnalno-
gazetnoe obedinenie, 1937) 
Goriunov, Dmitrii, Delo vsei zhizni, in Soldaty slova: Rasskazyvaiut veterany 
Sovetskoi zhurnalistiki. Tom 5, ed. by B. S. Burkov and V. A. Miakushkov 
(Moscow: Politizdat, 1985), pp. 41-64 
Gorky, Maxim, L. Auerbach, S. G. Ferin, eds., The White Sea Canal, Trans. Annabel 
Williams-Ellis (London: John Lane, 1935) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 292 
Grafova, Lidia, Eto byla zhizn vzakhleb in Bolshe, chem gazeta, ed. by Liudmila 
Semina (Moscow: PoRog, 2006) 
Gribachev, Nikolai, Novyi oblik planety, in Den mira, ed. by Aleksei Adzhubei 
(Moscow: Izvestiia, 1961), pp. 12-14. 
Grin, Alexander, The Seeker of Adventure: Selected Stories (Moscow: Progress 
Publishers, 1979) 
Grushin, Boris, My vse vremia veli voiny za svoi predmet (Nauchnyi fond im. G.P. 
Shchedrovitskogo) <http://www.fondgp.ru/lib/chteniya/x/pub/12> 
[Accessed: 21 July 2009] 
, Mneniia o mire i mir mnenie: Problemy metodologii issledovaniia 
obshchestvennogo mneniia (Moscow: Politizdat, 1967) 
, Gorkii vkus ne vostrebovannosti, in Rosiiskaia sotsiologiia shestidesiatykh 
godov v vospominaniiakh i dokumentakh, ed. by Gennady S. Batygin and S. F. 
Iarmoliuk (St. Petersburg: Russkii khristianskii gumanitarnyi institut, 1999), 
pp. 205-228 
, Obshchestvennoe mnenie, in Bolshaia sovetskaia entsiklopediia: 3-e izd., 
Tom 18 (Moscow: Bolshaia sovetskaia entsiklopediia, 1974), pp. 242-243 
, Institut obshchestvennogo mneniia - otdel Komsomolskoi pravdy, in 
Pressa v obshchestve (1959-2000): Otsenki zhurnalistov i sotsiologov. 
Dokumenty., ed. by A. I. Volkov, M. G. Pugacheva and S. F. Iarmoliuk (Moscow: 
Moskovskaia shkola politicheskikh issledovanii, 2000), pp. 46-64 
, Chetyre zhizni Rossii v zerkale oprosov obshchestvennogo mneniia: Zhizn 1-
aia: Epokha Khrushcheva (Moscow: Progress-Traditsiia, 2001) 
, Chetyre zhizni Rossii v zerkale oprosov obshchestvennogo mneniia: Zhizn 2-
aia: Epokha Brezhneva (Mosow: Progress-Traditsiia, 2003) 
, Ne na tekh napali, in Bolshe, chem gazeta: Chistosedechnye priznaniia 
komandy shestogo etazha, sluzhivshei Komsomolke v 60-70-e gody proshlogo 
veka, ed. by Liudmila Semina (Moscow: PoRog, 2006), pp. 4547 
Iakovlev, A.N, Sumerki. 2-e izd. (Moscow: Materik, 2005) 
Iakovlev, Egor, Pressa ravna obshchestvennomu sostoianiiu, in Pressa v 
obshchestve (1959-2000): Otsenki zhurnalistov i sotsiologov. Dokumenty., ed. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 293 
by A. I. Volkov, M. G. Pugacheva and S. F. Iarmoliuk (Moscow: Moskovskaia 
shkola politicheskikh issledovanii, 2000), pp. 258-271 
Ignatev, Oleg, Kak sbili sensatsiiu  <http://only-paper.ru/forum/24-5071-
203038-16-1300528850> [Accessed: 10 November 2011] 
Iurkov, A., V Baikale voda, u Baikala beda, in Bolshe, chem gazeta: 
Chistosedechnye priznaniia komandy shestogo etazha, sluzhivshei 
Komsomolke v 60-70-e gody proshlogo veka, ed. by Liudmila Semina 
(Moscow: PoRog, 2006), pp. 133-142 
Kak my stroili metro. Istorii metro im. L.M. Kagnovich (Moscow: Izd. Istoriia 
fabrik i zavodov, 1935) 
Kaminskaia, N., ed., Sovetskaia pechat v dokumentakh (Moscow: Gospolitizdat, 
1961) 
Khiltunen, Valerii, Perevod s prostogo na russkii (2002) 
<http://soob.ru/n/2002/10/c/10> [Accessed: 1 March 2011] 
Khrushchev, Nikita, On the Program of the Communist Party of the Soviet 
Union: Report at the 22nd Congress of the CPSU, October 18, 1961, in 
Current Soviet Policies IV: The Documentary Record of the 22nd Congress of 
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, ed. by Charlotte Saikowski and Leo 
Gruliow (New York; London: Columbia University Press, 1962), pp. 83116 
Kordonskii, Mikhail, Vvedenie v kommunarskoe dvizhenie  
<http://www.altruism.ru/sengine.cgi/5/22/1> [Accessed: 28 February 
2011] 
Korneshov, Lev, Ia ee liubil, a ona menia?, in Bolshe, chem gazeta: 
Chistosedechnye priznaniia komandy shestogo etazha, sluzhivshei 
Komsomolke v 60-70-e gody proshlogo veka, ed. by Liudmila Semina 
(Moscow: PoRog, 2006), pp. 151-160 
Kotlyar, A., Newspapers in the USSR: Recollections and Observations of a Soviet 
Journalist (New York: Research Program on the USSR, 1955) 
KPSS o sredstvakh massovoi informatsii i propagandy. 2-e izd. (Moscow: 
Politizdat, 1987) 
KPSS v rezoliutsiiakh i resheniiakh sezdov, konferentsii i plenumov TsK. Tom 9 
(Moscow: Politizdat, 1986) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 294 
Kritika i samokritika, in Bolshaia Sovetskaia entsiklopediia. 2-e izd. Tom 23 
(Moscow: Bolshaia Sovetskaia entsiklopediia, 1950), p. 515 
Kritika i samokritika, in Bolshaia sovetskaia entsiklopediia. 3-e izd. Tom 13 
(Moscow: Bolshaia sovetskaia entsiklopediia, 1973), pp. 452-453 
Krylova, Zoia, Slovo, kotoroe vsegda so mnoi, in Bolshe, chem gazeta: 
Chistosedechnye priznaniia komandy shestogo etazha, sluzhivshei 
Komsomolke v 60-70-e gody proshlogo veka, ed. by Liudmila Semina 
(Moscow: PoRog, 2006), pp. 7781 
Lenin About the Press (Prague: International Organisation of Journalists, 1972) 
Lenin, V.I., What is To Be Done?, in Lenin About the Press (Prague: International 
Organisation of Journalists, 1972), pp. 67-72 
, Where to Begin?, in Lenin About the Press (Prague: International 
Organisation of Journalists, 1972), pp. 72-106 
Letopis periodicheskikh izdanii SSSR 1966-1970. Chast II (Moscow: Kniga, 
1967) 
Mamleev, Dmitrii, ed., Aleksei Adzhubei v koridorakh chetvertoi vlasti (Moscow: 
Izvestiia, 2003) 
Mandrugin, A. A., and V. A. Miakushkov, eds., Soldaty Slova: Rasskazyvaiut 
veterany sovetskoi zhurnalistiki. Tom 1 (Moscow: Politizdat, 1976) 
Miakushkov, V. A., and N. P. Stor, eds., Soldaty slova: Rasskazyvaiut veterany 
sovetskoi zhurnalistiki. Tom 2 (Moscow: Politizdat, 1980) 
Moskvichev, L. N., ed., Sotsiologiia i vlast: Dokumenty i materialy, 1953-1968. 
Sbornik 1 (Moscow: Academia, 1997) 
Nenashev, Mikhail, An Ideal Betrayed: Testimonies of a prominent and loyal 
member of the Soviet Establishment (London: Open Gate Press, 1995) 
 Obshchestvennost, in Bolshaia Sovetskaia entsiklopediia: 2-e izd., Tom 30 
(Moscow: Bolshaia Sovetskaia entsiklopediia, 1954), p. 418 
Palgunov, N. G., Tridtsat let: Vospominaniia zhurnalista i diplomata (Moscow: 
Izdatelstvo Politicheskoi Literatury, 1964) 
, Zametki ob informatsii (Moscow: MGU, 1967) 
Pankin, Boris, Preslovutaia epokha: V litsakh i maskakh, sobytiakh i kazusakh 
(Moscow: Voskresene, 2002) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 295 
Pelt, V. D., Korrespondentsiia in Zhanry sovetskoi pechati (Moscow: MGU, 
1959) 
Perelman, Viktor, Pokinutaia Rossiia: Zhurnalist v zakrytom obshchestve. 2-e izd. 
(New York; Jerusalem; Paris: Vremia i my, 1989) 
Pervyi vsesoiuznyi sezd zhurnalistov. Stenograficheskii otchet (Moscow: 
Gospolitizdat, 1960) 
Poliakov, Iurii A., Istoricheskaia nauka: liudi i problemy (Moscow: Rosspen, 
1999) 
Polveka na Mokhovoi (1947-1997) (Moscow: MGU, 1997) 
Pozner, Vladimir, Parting With Illusions (London: Grafton Books, 1990) 
Reabilitatsiia: kak eto bylo. Fevral 1956  nachalo 80-x godov. Tom 2 (Moscow: 
Mezhdunarodnyi fond Demokratiia, 2003) 
Ronina, Galina, My zhili ideiami obnovleniia, in Bolshe, chem gazeta: 
Chistosedechnye priznaniia komandy shestogo etazha, sluzhivshei 
Komsomolke v 60-70-e gody proshlogo veka, ed. by Liudmila Semina 
(Moscow: PoRog, 2006), pp. 4749 
Rudenko, Inna, V Moskve i daleko ot Moskvy, in Polveka na Mokhovoi (1947-
1997) (Moscow: MGU, 1997), pp. 12931 
, Nado pomnit, chto est liudi, kotorye luchshe tebia, in Zhurnalisty XX 
veka: liudi i sudby (Moscow: Olma-press, 2003), pp. 76063 
, Vy blestiashchii uchitel, u vas prekrasnye ucheniki 
<http://madan.org.il/node/815> [Accessed: 15 March 2011] 
Rutkevich, M. T., Mnogoe bylo predresheno, in Rosiiskaia sotsiologiia 
shestidesiatykh godov v vospominaniiakh i dokumentakh, ed. by Gennady S. 
Batygin and S. F. Iarmoliuk (St. Petersburg: Russkii khristianskii 
gumanitarnyi institut, 1999), pp. 236-252 
Saikowski, Charlotte, and Leo Gruliow, eds., Current Soviet Policies IV: The 
Documentary Record of the 22nd Congress of the Communist Party of the 
Soviet Union (New York; London: Columbia University Press, 1962) 
Semina, Liudmila, ed., Bolshe, chem gazeta: Chistosedechnye priznaniia komandy 
shestogo etazha, sluzhivshei Komsomolke v 60-70-e gody proshlogo veka 
(Moscow: PoRog, 2006) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 296 
Sergeev, Stanislav, Do i posle slavy, in Polveka na Mokhovoi (1947-1997) 
(Moscow: MGU, 1997), pp. 10212 
Shakhidzhanian, Vladimir, Mne interesny vse liudi  
<http://1001.ru/books/people/mivl24.htm> [Accessed: 11 March 2011] 
Shatunovskii, Ilia, Sdelal bol'she, chem mog, no men'she, chem khotel in 
Adzhubei v koridorakh chetvertoi vlasti, ed. by Dmitrii Mamleev (Moscow: 
Izvestiia, 2003), pp. 40-50 
, Tretii, in Zhurnalisty XX veka: liudi i sudby (Moscow: Olma-press, 2003), 
pp. 57783 
, Zapiski strelianogo vorobia (Moscow: Voskresene, 2003) 
Shetinskii, O.N, Iurii Petrovich Voronov: Vospominanie o druge, in Zhurnalisty 
XX veka: liudi i sudby (Moscow: Olma-press, 2003), pp. 350-355 
Shlapentokh, Vladimir, An Autobiographical Narration on the Role of Fear and 
Friendship in the Soviet Union (Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press, 2004) 
Shliapentokh, V. E., ed., Chitatel i gazeta: itogi izucheniia chitatelskoi auditorii 
tsentralnykh gazet. Vyp. 1: Chitateli Truda (Moscow: IKSI AN SSSR, 1969) 
Sidneva, N., ed., Alyi parus (Moscow: Molodaia gvardiia, 1966) 
Sinelnikov, Roman, Ostavliaiu vam na pamiat (Pesni kommunarov) (Moscow: 
The Olympic Editorial, 1997) 
Skakunov, Leonid, Zhurfak 65-70 (Vladimir, 1999) 
Skopina, Klara, Pauers  43 goda posle provokatsii, Nash sovremennik, 12 
(2003), pp. 218-228 
Sokolov, Richard, V poiskakh Nastoiashchei sotsialnoi pedagogiki, Na putiakh 
k novoi shkole, 3 (2004) 
 <http://altruism.ru/sengine.cgi/5/7/8/17/8.html#5> [Accessed: 13 November 
2011] 
Soloveichik, Simon, Vospitanie tvorchestvom (Moscow: Znanie, 1978) 
, Posledniaia kniga (Moscow: Pervoe sentiabria, 1999) 
Spravochnik partiinogo rabotnika. Vyp. 4 (Moscow: Gospolitizdat, 1963) 
Transactions of the Fourth World Congress of Sociology (Milan & Stresa, 8-15 
September 1959). Volume III (Louvain: International Sociological Association, 
1961) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 297 
Tretiakov, Sergei, The New Leo Tolstoy, October, 118 (2006), 45-50 
Tvardovskii, Aleksandr, Speech at the 22nd Party Congress, in Current Soviet 
Policies IV: The Documentary Record of the 22nd Congress of the Communist 
Party of the Soviet Union, ed. by Charlotte Saikowski and Leo Gruliow (New 
York; London: Columbia University Press, 1962), pp. 18890 
Uledov, L. K., Obshchestvennoe mnenie Sovetskogo obshchestvo (Moscow: 
Sotsetgiz, 1963) 
Verkhovskaia, A.I, Pismo v redaktsiiu i chitatel (Moscow: MGU, 1972) 
Volkov, A. I., M. G. Pugacheva, and S. F. Iarmoliuk, eds., Pressa v obshchestve 
(1959-2000): Otsenki zhurnalistov i sotsiologov. Dokumenty. (Moscow: 
Moskovskaia shkola politicheskikh issledovanii, 2000) 
Zhdanov, A. A., Soviet Literature  The Richest in Ideas, the Most Advanced 
Literature.  Speech at the First Congress of Soviet Writers, Moscow, August 
1934. 
<http://www.marxists.org/subject/art/lit_crit/sovietwritercongress/zdhan
ov.htm> [Accessed: 22 December 2010] 
Zhiveinov, N., Kapitalisticheskaia pressa SShA (Moscow: Gosudarstvennoe 
izdatelstvo politicheskoi literatury, 1956) 
Zhukov, Iurii, Liudi 30-x godov (Moscow: Izdatelstvo Sovetskaia Rossiia, 1966) 
Zhurnalisty XX veka: liudi i sudby (Moscow: Olma-press, 2003) 
SECONDARY SOURCES 
Aimermakher [Eimermacher], Karl, Partiinoe upravlenie kulturoi i formy ee 
samoorganizatsii (1953-1964/67), in Ideologicheskie Komissii TsK KPSS, 
1958-1964. Dokumenty, ed. by Karl Aimermakher [Eimermacher] et al 
(Moscow: Rosspen, 1998) 
Alexopoulos, Golfo, Soviet Citizenship, More or Less: Rights, Emotions, and 
States of Civic Belonging, Kritika, 7/3 (2006), 487528 
Ang, Ien, Desperately Seeking The Audience (London; New York: Routledge, 
1991) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 298 
Apor, Balzs et al, eds., The Leader Cult in Communist Dictatorships: Stalin and 
the Eastern Bloc (Macmillan, 2004) 
Attwood, Lynne, Creating the New Soviet Woman: Womens Magazines As 
Engineers of Female Identity, 1922-53 (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1999) 
Balina, Marina, and Evgeny Dobrenko, eds., Petrified Utopia: Happiness Soviet 
Style (London: Anthem Press, 2009) 
Barghoorn, Frederick, Soviet Foreign Propaganda (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1964) 
Barnhurst, Kevin, and John Nerone, The Form of News: A History (New York: 
Guildford Press, 2001) 
Batygin, Gennady S., and Inna F. Deviatko, The Metamorphoses of Russian 
Sociology, in Eastern Europe in Transformation: The Impact on Sociology, ed. 
by Mike F. Keen and Janusz Mucha (Westport, CT; London: Greenwood Press, 
1994), pp. 11-23 
Batygin, Gennady S., and S. F. Iarmoliuk, eds., Rosiiskaia sotsiologiia 
shestidesiatykh godov v vospominaniiakh i dokumentakh (St. Petersburg: 
Russkii khristianskii gumanitarnyi institut, 1999) 
Bauer, Raymond A., Alex Inkeles, and Clyde Kluckhorn, How the Soviet System 
Works (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1956) 
Beliaev, E., and P. Butorin, The Institutionalization of Soviet Sociology: Its Social 
and Political Context, Social Forces, 61/2 (1982), 418-435 
Berger, Peter L., Marxism and Sociology: View from Eastern Europe (New York: 
Appleton Century, 1969) 
Bertaux, Daniel, Paul Thompson, and Anna Rotkirch, eds., On Living Through 
Soviet Russia (London: Routledge, 2004) 
Bittner, Steven V., The Many Lives of Khrushchevs Thaw: Experience and Memory 
in Moscows Arbat (Ithaca, NY; London: Cornell University Press, 2008) 
Blium, Arlen, Kak eto delalos v Leningrade: tzenzura v gody ottepeli, zastoia i 
perestroiki (St. Petersburg: Akademicheskii proekt, 2005) 
Bonnell, Victoria, Iconography of Power: Soviet Political Posters Under Lenin and 
Stalin (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1999) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 299 
Bouvard, Josette, Linjonction autobiographique dans les annes 1930. G.A. 
Medynskij et lhistoire du mtro de Moscou Cahiers du Monde russe 50/1 
(2009), 69-92 
Boym, Svetlana, Common Places: Mythologies of Everyday Life in Russia 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994) 
Brandenberger, David, Propaganda State in Crisis: Soviet Ideology, 
Indoctrination, and Terror under Stalin, 1927-1941 (New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 2011) 
Bren, Paulina, The Greengrocer and His TV: The Culture of Communism after the 
1968 Prague Spring (Ithaca, NY; London: Cornell University Press, 2010) 
Breyfogle, Nicholas B., Abby Schrader, and Willard Sunderland, eds., Peopling 
the Russian Periphery: Borderland Colonization in Eurasian History (London: 
Routledge, 2007) 
Briggs, Asa, The BBC: The First Fifty Years (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1985) 
Brintlinger, Angela, Writing a Usable Past: Russian Literary Culture, 1917-1937 
(Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 2000), Studies in Russian 
Literature and Theory 
Brooks, Jeffrey, Pravda Goes to War, in Culture and Entertainment in Wartime 
Russia, ed. by Richard Stites (Bloomington, IN; Indianapolis, IN: Indiana 
University Press, 1995), pp. 927 
, Thank You Comrade Stalin: Soviet Public Culture from Revolution to Cold 
War (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000) 
Brown, Kate, Out of Solitary Confinement: The History of the Gulag, Kritika, 8/1 
(2006), 67103 
Buchli, Victor, Modernism, and the Fight Against Petit-bourgeois 
Consciousness in the Soviet Home, Journal of Design History, 10/2 (1997), 
16176 
, An Archaeology of Socialism (London: Berg, 2000) 
Buckley, Mary, ed., Post-Soviet Women: From the Baltic to Central Asia 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 300 
Butsch, Richard, The Citizen Audience: Crowds, Publics, and Individuals (New 
York: Routledge, 2008) 
Buzek, Antony, How the Communist Press Works (London: Pall Mall Press, 1964) 
Bykov, Dmitrii, Bulat Okudzhava (Moscow: Molodaia gvardiia, 2009) 
Chatterjee, Choi, and Karen Petrone, Models of Selfhood and Subjectivity: The 
Soviet Case in Historical Perspective, Slavic Review, 67/4 (2007), 96786 
Childin, Marianna T., and Max Friedberg, eds., The Red Pencil: Artists, Scholars, 
and Censors in the USSR (Boston, MA: Unwin Hyman, 1989) 
Clark, Katerina, Changing Historical Paradigms in Soviet Culture, in Late Soviet 
Culture from Perestroika to Novostroika, ed. by Thomas Lahusen and Gene 
Kuperman (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1993), pp. 289-306 
, The Soviet Novel: History as Ritual. Third Edition (Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press, 2000) 
, The History of the Factories as a Factory of History: A Case Study on the 
Role of Soviet Literature in Subject Formation, in Autobigraphical Practices 
in Russia - Autobiographische Praktiken in Russland, ed. by Jochen Hellbeck 
and Klaus Heller (Gttingen: V&R unipress, 2004), pp. 25178 
Clews, John C., Communist Propaganda Techniques (London: Meuthen, 1964) 
Cohen, Stanley, and Jock Young, eds., The Manufacture of News. Deviance, Social 
Problems & The Mass Media (London: Constable, 1973) 
Cohen, Stephen F., The Friends and Foes of Change: Reformism and 
Conservatism in the Soviet Union, in The Soviet Union Since Stalin, ed. by 
Stephen F. Cohen, Alexander Rabinowitch and Robert Sharlet (Basingstoke: 
Macmillan, 1980), pp. 1131 
Cohen, Stephen F., Alexander Rabinowitch, and Robert Sharlet, eds., The Soviet 
Union Since Stalin (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1980) 
Condee, Nancy, The Cultural Codes of the Thaw, in Nikita Khrushchev, ed. by 
William Taubman, Sergei Khrushchev and Abbot Gleason (New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press, 2000), pp. 160-176 
Conflict Between the Generations, in The Soviet Cultural Scene 1956-1957, ed. 
by Walter Z. Lacqueur and George Lichtheim (New York: Atlantic Books, 
1958), pp. 202-214 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 301 
Costanzo, Susan, The 1959 Liriki-Fiziki Debate: Going Public With the Private?, 
in Borders of Socialism: Private Spheres of Soviet Russia, ed. by Lewis H. 
Siegelbaum (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 2006), pp. 251-268 
, Amateur Theatres and Amateur Publics in the Russian Republic, 1958-
1970, Slavonic and East European Review, 86/2 (2008), 37295 
Crowley, David, and Susan E. Reid, eds., Socialist Spaces: Sites of Everyday Life in 
the Eastern Bloc (Oxford: Berg, 2002) 
Curry, Jane L., Polands Journalists: Professionalism and Politics (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1990) 
Dautova, R. V., Rol sredstv massovoi informatsii v kulturnom vzaimoobmene v 
period Khrushchevskoi ottepeli, Uchebnye zapiski Kazanskogo universiteta. 
Seriia: Gumanitarnye nauki, 152/5 (2010), 91100 
Diment, Galya, and Yuri Slezkine, eds., Between Heaven and Hell: The Myth of 
Siberia in Russian Culture (New York: St. Martins Press, 1993) 
Dobrenko, Evgeny, The Making of the State Reader: Social and Aesthetic for the 
Reception of Soviet Literature, Trans. Jesse M. Savage (Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press, 1997) 
, The Making of the State Writer: Social and Aesthetic Origins of Soviet 
Literary Culture (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2001) 
, Political Economy of Socialist Realism, Trans. Jesse M. Savage (New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press, 2007) 
Dobrenko, Evgeny, and Eric Naiman, eds., The Landscape of Stalinism: The Art 
and Ideology of Soviet Space (Seattle, WA: Washington University Press, 
2003) 
Dobson, Miriam, Anti-religious Campaigns in the Russian Press, 1953-1964 
Slovo 13 (2001), 139-152 
, Khrushchevs Cold Summer: Gulag Returnees, Crime, and the Fate of Reform 
After Stalin (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2009) 
Dunham, Vera S., In Stalins Time: Middle Class Values in Soviet Fiction 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 302 
Dzirkals, Lilita, Thane Gustafson, and A. Ross Johnson, The Media and Inter-
Elite Communication in the USSR, Rand Corporation Report R-2869 (Santa 
Monica, CA, 1982) 
Eaton, William J., Red Editor: Alexei Adzhubei, Nieman Reports, 16/2 (1963) 
Edele, Mark, Strange Young Men in Stalins Moscow: The Birth and Life of the 
Stiliagi, 1945-1953, Jahrbcher fr Geschichte Osteuropas, 50/1 (2002), 37
Eggeling, Volfram, Politika i kultura pri Khrushcheve i Brezhneve, 1953-1970 gg. 
(Moscow: Airo-XX, 1999) 
Ellis, Frank, The Media as Social Engineer, in Russian Cultural Studies: An 
Introduction, ed. by Catriona Kelly and David Shepherd (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1998), pp. 192222 
, Review of Thomas C. Wolfe, Governing Soviet Journalism, Slavonic and 
East European Review, 85/1 (2007), 16567 
Eremina, L. S., and E. B. Zhemkova, eds., Korni travli: Sbornik statei molodykh 
istorikov (Moscow: Zvenia, 1996) 
Etkind, Aleksandr, Internal Colonization: Russias Imperial Experience 
(Cambridge: Polity Press, 2011) 
Evans, Christine, A Panorama of Time: The Chronotopics of Programma 
Vremia, Ab Imperio, 2 (2010), 12146 
Fateev, A.V, Obraz vraga v sovetskoi propaganda, 1945-1954 gg. (Moscow: RAN, 
1999) 
Feldman, D. M., Terminologiia vlasti: Sovetskie politicheskie terminy v istoriko-
kulturnom	 kontekste (Moscow: Rosiiskii gosudarstvennyi gumanitarnyi 
universitet, 2006) 
Field, Deborah A., Private Life and Communist Morality in Khrushchevs Russia 
(New York: Peter Lang, 2007) 
Firsov, Boris, Istoriia Sovetskoi sotsiologii, 1950-1970-e gody (St. Petersburg: Izd. 
Evropeiskogo universiteta, 2012) 
First, Joshua, From Spectator to Differentiated Consumer: Film Audience 
Research in the Era of Developed Socialism (1965-80), Kritika, 9/2 (2008), 
31744 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 303 
Fisher, Ralph T., Jr., Pattern for Soviet Youth: A Study of the Congresses of the 
Komsomol, 1918-1954 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1959) 
Fitzpatrick, Sheila, Becoming Cultured: Socialist Realism and the 
Representation of Taste and Privilege, in The Cultural Front: Power and 
Culture in Revolutionary Russia (Ithaca, NY; London: Cornell University Press, 
1992), pp. 21637 
, The Cultural Front: Power and Culture in Revolutionary Russia (Ithaca, NY; 
London: Cornell University Press, 1992) 
, Social parasites: How Tramps, Idle Youth, and Busy Entrepreneurs 
Impeded the Soviet March to Communism, Cahiers du Monde russe, 47/1-2 
(2006), 377408 
Foucault, Michel, What is an Author?, in The Foucault Reader: An Introduction 
to Foucaults Thought, ed. by Paul Rabinow (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 
1984), pp. 101-120. 
Frst, Juliane, Friends in Private, Friends in Public: The Phenomenon of the 
Kompaniia Among Soviet Youth in the 1950s and 1960s, in Borders of 
Socialism: Private Spheres of Soviet Russia, ed. by Lewis H. Siegelbaum 
(Basingstoke: Macmillan, 2006), pp. 22949 
, The Arrival of Spring? Changes and Continuities in Soviet Youth Culture 
and Policy between Stalin and Khrushchev, in The Dilemmas of De-
Stalinization: Negotiating Cultural and Social Change in the Khrushchev Era, 
ed. by Polly Jones (London: Routledge, 2007), pp. 13553 
, Stalins Last Generation: Soviet Post-War Youth and the Emergence of 
Mature Socialism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010) 
Gans, Herbert, Deciding Whats News: A Study of CBS Evening News, NBC Nightly 
News, Newsweek and Time (London: Constance, 1980) 
Gerasimova, Katerina, Privacy in the Soviet Communal Apartment, in Socialist 
Spaces: Sites of Everyday Life in the Eastern Bloc, ed. by David Crowley, Susan 
E. Reid (Oxford: Berg, 2002), pp. 207-230 
Gerol, Ilya, and Geoffrey Molyneux, The Manipulators: Inside the Soviet Media 
(Toronto: Stoddart, 1988) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 304 
Gilburd, Eleonory, and Larisa Zakharova, Avant Propos, Cahiers du Monde russe, 
47/1-2 (2006), 9-14 
Ginzburg, Lydia, On Psychological Prose, Trans. Judson Rosengrant (Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991) 
Giroud, Franoise, Nouvelle Vague: Portraits de la jeunesse (Paris: Gallimard, 
1958) 
Goldfarb, Stanislav, Komsomolskaia pravda 1925-2005 gg.: Ocherki istorii 
(Irkutsk: Irkutskaia oblastnaia tipografiia No.1, 2008) 
Gorham, Michael S., Speaking in Soviet Tongues: Language Culture and the 
Politics of Voice in Revolutionary Russia (Dekalb, IL: Northern Illinois 
University Press, 2003) 
, Tongue-Tied Writers: The Rabselkor Movement and the Voice of the 
New Intelligentsia in Early Soviet Russia, Russian Review, 55/3 (1996), 
41229 
Goriaeva, Tatiana, Politicheskaia tsenzura v SSSR: 1917-1991 gg. 2-e izd. 
(Moscow: Rosspen, 2009) 
Gorsuch, Anne E., Youth in Revolutionary Russia. Enthusiasts, Bohemians, 
Delinquents (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2000) 
Time Travelers: Soviet Tourists to Eastern Europe, in Turizm: The Russian 
and East European Tourist Under Capitalism and Socialism, ed. by Anne E. 
Gorsuch and Diane P. Koenker (Ithaca, NY; London: Cornell University Press, 
2006), pp. 20526 
, All This is Your World: Soviet Tourism at Home and Abroad After Stalin 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011) 
Gorsuch, Anne E., and Diane P. Koenker, eds., Turizm: The Russian and East 
European Tourist Under Capitalism and Socialism (Ithaca, NY; London: 
Cornell University Press, 2006) 
Graber, Kathryn, Public Information: The Shifting Roles of Minority-Language 
News Media in the Buryat Territories of Russia, Language and 
Communication, 32 (2012), 12436 
Gronow, Jukka, Caviar with Champagne: Common Luxury and the Ideals of the 
Good Life in Stalins Russia (Oxford: Berg, 2003) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 305 
Halfin, Igal, From Darkness to Light: Class, Consciousness, and Salvation in 
Revolutionary Russia (Pittsburgh, PA: Pittsburgh University Press, 2000) 
Hallin, Daniel C., and Paolo Mancini, eds., Comparing Media Systems Beyond the 
Western World (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012) 
, Comparing Media Systems: Three Models of Media and Politics (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2004) 
Hanson, Stephen E., Time and Revolution: Marxism and the Design of Soviet 
Institutions (Chapel Hill, NC; London: North Carolina University Press, 1997) 
Hellbeck, Jochen, Revolution on My Mind: Writing a Diary Under Stalin 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006) 
Hellbeck, Jochen, and Klaus Heller, Autobigraphical Practices in Russia - 
Autobiographische Praktiken in Russland (Gttingen: V&R unipress, 2004) 
Hicks, Jeremy, From Conduits to Commanders: Shifting Views of Worker 
Correspondents, 1924-1926, Revolutionary Russia, 19/2 (2006), 13149 
Hoffman, David A., Stalinist Values: The Cultural Norms of Soviet Modernity 
(1917-1941) (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2003) 
Hollander, Gayle D., Soviet Political Indoctrination: Developments in Mass Media 
and Propaganda Since Stalin (New York: Praeger, 1972) 
Hopkins, Mark, Mass Media in the Soviet Union (New York: Pegasus, 1970) 
Hudson Jr, Hugh D., Shaping Peasant Political Discourse during the New 
Economic Policy: The Newspaper Krestianskaia Gazeta and the Case of 
Vladimir Ia., Journal of Social History, 36/2 (2002), 30317 
Ilic, Melanie, Susan E. Reid, and Lynne Attwood, eds., Women in the Khrushchev 
Era (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 2004) 
Inkeles, Alex, Public Opinion in Soviet Russia: A Study in Mass Persuasion 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1950) 
Ivanov, D. V., Sotsiologiia v Rossii: Institutionalnaia i kontseptualnaia 
struktura, in Rosiiskaia sotsiologiia: istoriia i sovremennye problemy, ed. by N. 
G. Skvortsov, V. D. Vinogradov and N. A. Golovin (St. Petersburg: Izd. S. 
Peterburgskogo gosudarstvennogo universiteta, 2007), pp. 107-125 
Izmailova, Ninel, Adzhubei: talant  eto pozitsiia, Chitaiushchaia Rossiia, 1/1 
(1994), 1315 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 306 
Johnson, A. R., and R. E. Parta, eds., Cold War Broadcasting: Impact on the Soviet 
Union and Eastern Europe: A Collection of Studies and Documents (Budapest; 
New York: Central European University Press, 2010) 
Jones, Polly, ed., The Dilemmas of De-Stalinization: Negotiating Cultural and 
Social Change in the Khrushchev Era (London: Routledge, 2007) 
, Ive Held, and I Still Hold, Stalin in the Highest Esteem: Discourses and 
Strategies of Resistance to De-Stalinisation in the USSR, 1953-62, in The 
Leader Cult in Communist Dictatorships: Stalin and the Eastern Bloc, ed. by 
Balzs Apor et al (Macmillan, 2004), pp. 22745 
, From the Secret Speech to the Burial of Stalin: Real and Ideal Responses 
to De-Stalinization, in The Dilemmas of De-Stalinization: Negotiating Cultural 
and Social Change in the Khrushchev Era, ed. by Polly Jones (London: 
Routledge, 2007), pp. 4163 
Josephson, Paul R., New Atlantis Revisited: Akademgorodok, the Siberian City of 
Science (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997) 
Kaganovsky, Lilya, How the Soviet Man Was Unmade: Cultural Fantasy and Male 
Subjectivity Under Stalin (Pittsburgh, PA: Pittsburgh University Press, 2008) 
Kaser, Michael, Kosygin, Liberman, and the Pace of Soviet Industrial Reform 
The World Today 21/9 (1965), 375-88 
Kay, Rebecca, Images of the Ideal Woman: Perceptions of Russian Womanhood 
through the Media, Education and Womens Own Eyes, in Post-Soviet 
Women: From the Baltic to Central Asia, ed. by Mary Buckley (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1997), pp.77-98 
Keen, Mike F., and Janusz Mucha, eds., Eastern Europe in Transformation: The 
Impact on Sociology (Westport, CT; London: Greenwood Press, 1994) 
Kelly, Catriona, Refining Russia: Advice Literature, Polite Culture, and Gender 
from Catherine to Yeltsin (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001) 
Kelly, Catriona, and David Shepherd, eds., Constructing Russian Culture in the 
Age of Revolution: 1881-1940 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998) 
, eds., Russian Cultural Studies: An Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1998) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 307 
Kelly, Catriona, and Vadim Volkov, Directed Desires: Kulturnost and 
Consumption, in Constructing Russian Culture in the Age of Revolution: 1881-
1940, ed. by Catriona Kelly and David Shepherd (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1998), pp. 291313 
, Obshchestvennost, Sobornost: Collective Identities, in Constructing 
Russian Culture in the Age of Revolution: 1881-1940, ed. by Catriona Kelly and 
David Shepherd (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998), pp. 2627 
Kenez, Peter, The Birth of the Propaganda State: Soviet Methods of Mass 
Mobilization, 1917-1929 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985) 
, Cinema and Soviet Society: From the Revolution to the Death of Stalin 
(London: I.B. Tauris, 2001) 
Kharkhordin, Oleg, The Collective and the Individual in Russia: A Study of 
Practices (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1999) 
Kokh, Alfred, and Igor Svinarenko, A Crate of Vodka: An Insider View of the 20 
Years that Shaped Modern Russia (New York: Enigma Books, 2009) 
Koltsova, Olessia, News Media and Power in Russia (London: Routledge, 2006) 
Korotych, Vitaly, and Cathy Porter, eds., The Best of Ogonyok: The New 
Journalism of Glasnost. Trans. Cathy Porter (London: Heinemann, 1990) 
Kosinova, Tatiana, Sobytiia 1956 g. v Polshe glazami sovetskikh dissidentov, 
in Korni travli: Sbornik statei molodykh istorikov, ed. by L. S. Eremina and E. B. 
Zhemkova (Moscow: Zvenia, 1996), pp. 193215 
Kotkin, Steven, Steeltown USSR: Soviet Society in the Gorbachev Era (Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press) 
Kozlov, Denis, Naming the Social Evil: the Readers of Novyi mir and Vladimir 
Dudintsevs Not By Bread Alone, 1956-59 and Beyond, in The Dilemmas of 
De-Stalinization: Negotiating Cultural and Social Change in the Khrushchev 
Era, ed. by Polly Jones (Abingdon: Routledge, 2006), pp. 80-98 
Kozlov, Vladimir A., Mass Uprisings in the USSR: Protest and Rebellion in the Post-
Stalin Years, Trans. and Ed. by Elaine McClarnand MacKinnon (Armonk, NY: 
M.E. Sharpe, 2002) 
Krementsov, Nikolai, Stalinist Science (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1997) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 308 
Kruglak, Theodore E., Two Faces of TASS (Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota 
University Press, 1962) 
Lacqueur, Walter Z., and George Lichtheim, eds., The Soviet Cultural Scene 1956-
1957 (New York: Atlantic Books, 1958) 
Lahusen, Thomas, and Gene Kuperman, eds., Late Soviet Culture from 
Perestroika to Novostroika (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1993) 
Lane, Christel, The Rites of Rulers: Ritual in Industrial Society - The Soviet Case 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981) 
Lapierre, Brian, Private Matters or Public Crimes: The Emergence of Domestic 
Hooliganism in the Soviet Union, 1939-1966, in Borders of Socialism: Private 
Spheres of Soviet Russia, ed. by Lewis H. Siegelbaum (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 
2006), pp. 191207 
Lauk, Epp, and Tiiu Kreegipuu, Was It All Pure Propaganda?: Journalistic 
Practices of Silent Resistance in Soviet Estonian Journalism, Acta Historica 
Tallinnensia, 15 (2010), 16790 
Lehtmki, Markku, Simo Leisti, and Marja Rytknen, eds., Real Stories, Imagined 
Realities: Fictionality and Non-Fictionality in Literary Constructs and 
Historical Contexts (Tampere: Tampere University Press, 2007) 
Lendvai, Paul, The Bureaucracy of Truth: How Communist Governments Manage 
the News (London: Burnett Books, 1981) 
Lenoe, Matthew, Closer to the Masses: Stalinist Culture, Social Revolution, and 
Soviet Newspapers (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004) 
Liljestrm, Marianne, Monitored Selves: Soviet Womens Autobiographical 
Texts in the Khrushchev Era, in Women in the Khrushchev Era, ed. by 
Melanie Ilic, Susan E. Reid and Lynne Attwood (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 
2004), pp. 13148 
Lisann, Maury, Broadcasting to the Soviet Union: International Politics and Radio 
(New York: Praeger, 1975) 
Little, Alan M. G., Pavlov and Propaganda, Problems of Communism, 2 (1953), 
1421 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 309 
Loewenstein, Karl, Obshchestvennost as Key to Understanding Soviet Writers of 
the 1950s: Moskovskii Literator, October 1956-March 1957, Journal of 
Contemporary History 44/3 (2009), 473-492 
Lovell, Stephen, The Shadow of War: Russia and the USSR, 1941 to the present 
(Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010) 
Lyons, Louis M., ed., Reporting the News: Selections from Nieman Reports 
(Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 1965) 
Mally, Lynn, The Americanization of the Soviet Living Newspaper, Carl Beck 
Papers, 1903 (2008) 
Markham, James W., Voices of the Red Giants: Communications in Russia and 
China (Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press, 1967) 
McNair, Brian, Glasnost, Perestroika and the Soviet Media (London: Routledge, 
1991) 
McReynolds, Louise, Dateline Stalingrad: Newspaper Correspondents at the 
Front, in Culture and Entertainment in Wartime Russia, ed. by Richard Stites 
(Bloomington, IN; Indianapolis, IN: Indiana University Press, 1995), pp. 28
Mespoulet, Martine, La renaissance de la sociologie en URSS (1958-1972): Une 
voie troite entre matrialisme historique et recherches sociales concretes, 
Revue dHistoire des Sciences Humaines, 16 (2007), 5786 
Mickiewicz, Ellen P., Media and the Russian Public (New York: Praeger, 1981) 
Mills, C. Wright, The Sociological Imagination (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1970) 
Mitrokhin, Nikolai, Zametki o sovetskoi sotsiologii (po prochtenii knigi Borisa 
Firsova), Novoe literaturnoe obozrenie, 98 (2009), 11122 
Mlechin, Leonid, Zheleznyi Shurik (Moscow: Iauza, 2004) 
Moretti, Franco, The Way of the World: The Bildungsroman in European Culture 
(London: Verso, 2000) 
Mueller, Julie K., Staffing Newspapers and Training Journalists in Early Soviet 
Russia, Journal of Social History, 31/4 (1998), 85173 
Muhlmann, Graldine, A Political History of Journalism, Trans. Jean Birrell 
(Cambridge: Polity Press, 2008) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 310 
Murray, John, The Russian Press from Brezhnev to Yeltsin: Behind the Paper 
Curtain (Aldershot: Edward Elgar, 1994) 
Naiman, Eric, On Soviet Subjects and the Scholars Who Make Them, Russian 
Review, 60 (2001), 30715 
Nelson, Michael, War of the Black Heavens: The Battles of Western Broadcasting 
in the Cold War (Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1997) 
Nora, Pierre, Les lieux de mmoire. 3 vols. (Paris: Gallimard, 1997) 
Novikov, Nikolai, The Sociological Movement in the USSR (1960-1970) and the 
Institutionalization of Soviet Sociology, Studies in Soviet Thought, 23 (1982), 
95118 
Ogryzko, Viacheslav, Zhertva apparatnykh intrig, Literaurnaia Rossiia, 15 (16 
April 2010) 
Osipov, G.V, The Rebirth of Sociology in Russia: How It Actually Developed, 
Russian Social Science Review, 50/6 (2009), 80108 
Ostromoukhova, Bella, KVN - Moldezhnaia kultura shestdesiatykh?, 
Neprikosnovennyi zapas, 4/36 (2004), 3439 
, Le Dgel et les Troupes Amateur: Changements politiques et activits 
artistiques des tudiants, 1953-1970, Cahiers du Monde russe, 47/1-2 
(2006), 30326 
Oushakine, Serguei, Crimes of Substitution: Detection in Late Soviet Society, 
Public Culture, 15/3 (2003), 42651 
Ovsepian, R.P, Istoriia noveishei otechestvennoi zhurnalistiki (Moscow: MGU / 
Nauka, 2005) 
Papazian, Elizabeth A., Manufacturing Truth: The Documentary Moment in Early 
Soviet Culture (Dekalb, IL: Northern Illinois University Press, 2009) 
Paperno, Irina, Stories of the Soviet Experience: Memoirs, Diaries, Dreams (Ithaca, 
NY; London: Cornell University Press, 2009) 
Parsons, Talcott, Professions, in International Encyclopedia of the Social 
Sciences. Vol. 12 (New York: Macmillan/Free Press, 1968), pp. 536-547. 
Pasti, Svetlana, A New Generation of Journalists, in Russian Mass Media and 
Changing Values, ed. by Arja Rosenholm, Kaarle Nordenstreng, and Elena 
Trubina (London: Routledge, 2010), pp. 57-75 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 311 
Peer, Limor, The Practice of Opinion Polling as a Disciplinary Mechanism: A 
Foucauldian Perspective, International Journal of Public Opinion Research, 
4/3 (1992), 230-242 
Petrov, Petre, The Freeze of Historicity in Thaw Cinema, Kinokultura, 8 (2005) 
<http://www.kinokultura.com/articles.apr05-petrov.html> 
, The Industry of Truing: Socialist Realism, Reality, Realization, Slavic 
Review, 70/4 (2011), 87392 
Pinkerton, William M., The Newspaperman, in Reporting the News: Selections 
from Nieman Reports, ed. by Louis M. Lyons (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 
1965) 
Plamper, Jan, The Stalin Cult: A Study in the Alchemy of Power (New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press, 2012) 
, Abolishing Ambiguity: Soviet Censorship Practices in the 1930s, Russian 
Review, 60/4 (2001), 52644 
Pohl, Michaela, The Planet of One Hundred Languages: Ethnic Relations and 
Soviet Identity in the Virgin Lands, in Peopling the Russian Periphery: 
Borderland Colonization in Eurasian History, ed. by Nicholas B. Breyfogle, 
Abby Schrader and Willard Sunderland (London: Routledge, 2007), pp. 238-
Porter, William E., Journalism, in International Encyclopedia of the Social 
Sciences, Vol. 8 (Macmillan/Free Press), pp. 26572 
Possony, Stefan T., A Century of Conflict: Communist Techniques of World 
Revolution (Chicago, IL: Henry Regnery, 1953) 
Rabinow, Paul, ed., The Foucault Reader: An Introduction to Foucaults Thought 
(Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1984) 
Rajagopalan, Sudha, Leave Disco Dancer Alone: Indian Cinema and Soviet Movie-
Going After Stalin (New Delhi: Yoda Press, 2008) 
Raleigh, Donald, Russias Sputnik Generation: Soviet Baby Boomers Talk About 
Their Lives (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2006) 
, Soviet Baby Boomers: An Oral History of Russias Cold War Generation 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 312 
Reid, Susan E., Cold War in the Kitchen: Gender and the De-Stalinization of 
Consumer Taste in the Soviet Union under Khrushchev, Slavic Review, 61/2 
(2002), 21152 
, Khrushchev Modern: Agency and Modernisation in the Soviet Home, 
Cahiers du Monde russe, 47/1-2 (2006), 227-268 
, Happy Housewarming: Moving into Khrushchev-era Apartments, in 
Petrified Utopia: Happiness Soviet Style, ed. by Marina Balina and Evgeny 
Dobrenko (London: Anthem Press, 2009), pp. 13360 
, Who Will Beat Whom? Soviet Popular Reception of the American 
National Exhibition in Moscow, 1959, Kritika, 9/4 (2008), 855904 
Remington, Thomas, The Truth of Authority: Ideology and Communication in the 
Soviet Union (Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1988) 
Riha, Thomas, Readings in Russian Civilization. Volume 3: Soviet Russia, 1917 to 
Present (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1969) 
Rosenholm, Arja, Kaarle Nordenstreng, and Elena Trubina, eds., Russian Mass 
Media and Changing Values (London: Routledge, 2010) 
Ross, Corey, Media and the Making of Modern Germany: Mass Communications, 
Society, and Politics from the Empire to the Third Reich (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2008) 
Roth-Ey, Kristin, Moscow Prime Time: How the Soviet Union Built the Media 
Empire That Lost the Cultural Cold War (Ithaca, NY; London: Cornell 
University Press, 2010) 
Rotkirch, Anna, What Kind of Sex Can You Talk About? Acquiring Sexual 
Knowledge in Three Soviet Generations, in On Living Through Soviet Russia, 
ed. by Daniel Bertaux, Paul Thompson, Anna Rotkirch (London: Routledge, 
2004), pp. 93-119 
Roudakova, Natalia, Comparing Transitions: Media, Transitions, and Historical 
Change, in Comparing Media Systems Beyond the Western World, ed. by 
Daniel C. Hallin and Paolo Mancini (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2012), pp. 24677 
Savkina, Irina, Am I Writing or Am I Being Written?: A Diary of a Young Soviet 
Woman (1968-1970), in Real Stories, Imagined Realities: Fictionality and 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 313 
Non-Fictionality in Literary Constructs and Historical Contexts, ed. by Markku 
Lehtmki, Simo Leisti and Marja Rytknen (Tampere: Tampere University 
Press, 2007), pp. 289303 
Schattenberg, Susanne, Democracy or Despotism?: How the Secret Speech 
was Translated into Everyday Life, in The Dilemmas of De-Stalinization: 
Negotiating Cultural and Social Change in the Khrushchev Era, ed. by Polly 
Jones (London: Routledge, 2007), pp. 6479 
Schmelz, Richard, Such Freedom, If Only Musical: Unofiicial Music During the 
Thaw (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009) 
Schramm, Wilbur, The Soviet Communist Theory of the Press, in Four Theories 
of the Press: The Authoritarian, Libertarian, Social Responsibility, and Soviet 
Communist Concepts of What the Press should Be and Do, ed. by Fred S. 
Siebert (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1956), pp. 10546 
Shapiro, J., The Soviet Press and the Problem of Stalin Studies in Comparative 
Communism 4/3-4 (1971), 179-209 
Shlapentokh, Vladimir, The Politics of Sociology in the Soviet Union (Boulder, CO: 
Westview Press, 1987) 
, Public and Private Life of the Soviet People: Changing Values in Post-Stalin 
Russia (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989) 
Siebert, Fred S., ed., Four Theories of the Press: The Authoritarian, Libertarian, 
Social Responsibility, and Soviet Communist Concepts of What the Press should 
Be and Do (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1956) 
Siegelbaum, Lewis H., ed., Borders of Socialism: Private Spheres of Soviet Russia 
(Basingstoke: Macmillan, 2006) 
Sills, David L., ed., International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences (New York: 
Macmillan, 1968) 
Simirenko, Alex, The Development of Soviet Social Science, in 
Professionalization of Soviet Society, ed. by Alex Simirenko and C. A. Kern 
Simirenko (New Brunswick: Transaction, 1982), pp. 6781 
Simirenko, Alex, and C. A. Kern Simirenko, eds., Professionalization of Soviet 
Society (New Brunswick: Transaction, 1982) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 314 
Skradol, Natalia, Laughing with Comrade Stalin: Laughter of the Audience in the 
Great Kremlin Palace in 1939, Russian Review, 68/1 (2009), 2648 
Skvortsov, N. G., V. D. Vinogradov, and N. A. Golovin, Rosiiskaia sotsiologiia: 
istoriia i sovremennye problemy (St. Petersburg: Izd. S. Peterburgskogo 
gosudarstvennogo universiteta, 2007) 
Slezkine, Yuri, and Galya Diment, Introduction, in Between Heaven and Hell: The 
Myth of Siberia in Russian Culture, ed. by Galya Diment and Yuri Slezkine 
(New York: St. Martins Press, 1993), pp. 114 
Smith, Hedrick, The Russians (New York: Quadrangle, 1976) 
Solnick, Steven L., Stealing the State: Control and Collapse in Soviet Institutions 
(Harvard, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998) 
Stites, Richard, ed., Culture and Entertainment in Wartime Russia (Bloomington, 
IN; Indianapolis, IN: Indiana University Press, 1995) 
Stronski, Paul, Tashkent: Forging a Soviet City, 1930-1966 (Pittsburgh, PA: 
Pittsburgh University Press, 2010) 
Suny, R. G., On Ideology, Subjectivity, and Modernity: Disparate Thoughts about 
Doing Soviet History Russian History/Histoire russe 35/1-2 (2008), 253-255 
Suslov, Ilia, Censoring the Journalist, in The Red Pencil: Artists, Scholars, and 
Censors in the USSR, ed. by Marianna T. Childin and Max Friedberg (Boston, 
MA: Unwin Hyman, 1989), pp. 14554 
Tabatchnikova, Svetlana, Le cercle de mthodologie de Moscou: 1954-1959: Une 
pense, une pratique (Paris: EHESS, 2007) 
Taubman, William, Sergei Khrushchev, and Abbot Gleason, eds., Nikita 
Khrushchev (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2000) 
Thom, Franoise, Newspeak: The Language of Soviet Communism, Trans. Ken 
Connelly (London; Lexington: The Claridge Press, 1989) 
Tolz, Vera, Cultural Bosses as Patrons and Clients: the Functioning of the 
Soviet Creative Unions in the Postwar Period, Contemporary European 
History, 11 (2002), 87105 
Tomov, Kirill, Creative Union: The Professional Organization of Soviet Composers 
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2006) 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 315 
Tracey, Michael, The Decline and Fall of Public Service Broadcasting (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1998) 
Troianovskii, Vitalii, ed., Kinematograf ottepeli. Kniga vtoraia (Moscow: Materik, 
2002) 
, Novye liudi shestidesiatykh godov, in Kinematograf ottepeli. Kniga 
vtoraia, ed. by Vitalii Troianovskii (Moscow: Materik, 2002), pp. 660 
Tsipursky, Gleb, Having Fun in the Thaw: Youth Initiative Clubs in the Post-
Stalin Years, Carl Beck Papers, 2201 (2012) 
Tuchman, Gaye, Making News: A Study in the Construction of Reality (New York: 
Free Press, 1978) 
Vail, Petr, and Aleksandr Genis, 60-e: Mir sovetskogo cheloveka. 2-e izd. 
(Moscow: Novoe literaturnoe obozrenie, 1998) 
Varga-Harris, Christine, Homemaking and the Aesthetic and Moral Perimeters 
of the Soviet Home during the Khrushchev Era, Journal of Social History 41/3 
(2008), 561-589 
Volkovskii, N. L., Otechestvennaia zhurnalistika, 1950-2000. Uchebnoe posobie. 
Chast 1 (St. Petersburg: Izd. Sankt-Peterburgskogo universiteta, 2006) 
Walker, Barbara, Moscow Human Rights Defenders Look West: Attitudes 
Toward U.S. Journalists in the 1960s and 1970s, Kritika 9/4 (2008), 905-
Weinberg, Elizabeth A., The Development of Sociology in the Soviet Union 
(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1974) 
, Sociology and the Soviet Union and Beyond: Social Enquiry and Social 
Change (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2004) 
Weiner, Douglas R., A Little Corner of Freedom: Russian Nature Protection from 
Stalin to Gorbachv (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1999) 
Weiner, Amir, Robust Revolution to Retiring Revolution: The Life Cycle of the 
Soviet Revolution, 19451968, Slavonic and East European Review, 86/2 
(2008), 20831 
, Foreign Media, the Soviet Western Frontier, and the Hungarian and 
Czechoslovak Crises, in Cold War Broadcasting: Impact on the Soviet Union 
and Eastern Europe: A Collection of Studies and Documents, ed. by A. R. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 316 
Johnson and R. E. Parta (Budapest; New York: Central European University 
Press, 2010), pp. 299317 
Wilensky, Harold L., The Professionalization of Everyone?, American 
Sociological Review, 70/2 (1964), 13758 
Wolfe, Thomas C., Governing Soviet Journalism: The Press and the Soviet Person 
after Stalin (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 2005) 
Wood, Elizabeth A., Performing Justice: Agitation Trials in Early Soviet Russia 
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2005) 
Yekelchik, Serhy, The Civic Duty to Hate: Stalinist Citizenship as Political 
Practice and Civic Emotion (Kiev, 1943-53), 7/3 (2006), 52966 
Yurchak, Aleksei, Everything Was Forever, Until It Was No More: The Last Soviet 
Generation (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2006) 
Zaslavsky, Victor, The Neo-Stalinist State: Class, Ethnicity, and Consensus in Soviet 
Society (Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 1994 [1982]) 
Zassoursky, Ivan, Media and Power in Post-Soviet Russia (Armonk, NY: M.E. 
Sharpe, 2004) 
Zhao, Yuezhi, Understanding Chinas Media System in a World Historical 
Context, in Comparing Media Systems Beyond the Western World, ed. by 
Daniel C. Hallin and Paolo Mancini (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2012), pp. 14373 
Zhuk, Sergei, Rock and Roll in the Rocket City: The West, Identity, and Ideology in 
Soviet Dniepropetrovsk, 1960-1985 (Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University 
Press, 2010) 
Zubok, Vladimir, Zhivagos Children: The Last Russian Intelligentsia (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 2009) 
UNPUBLISHED WORKS 
Atkinson, Lucy, The Public Sphere in Print: Do Letters to the Editor Serve as a 
Forum for Rational-Critical Debate.  Unpublished Conference Paper, 
Association for Education in Journalism and Mass Communication, 
Washington DC, 2007 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 317 
Clibbon, Jennifer, The Soviet Press and Grass-Roots Organization: The Rabkor 
Movement, NEP to the First Five Year Plan. Unpublished PhD Dissertation, 
University of Toronto, 1993 
Coe, Stephen, Peasants, the State and the Languages of NEP: The Rural 
Correspondents Movement in the Soviet Union, 1924-28. Unpublished PhD 
Dissertation, University of Michigan, 1993 
Evans, Christine, From Truth to Time: A History of Soviet Television, 1957-
1982. Unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, 
Field, Deborah A., Communist Morality and Meanings of Private Life in Post-
Stalinist Russia, 1953-1964. Unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of 
Michigan, 1996 
Gilburd, Eleonory, To See Paris and Die: Western Culture in the Soviet Union, 
1950s and 1960s. Unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of California, 
Berkeley, 2010 
Loewenstein, Karl, The Thaw: Writers and the Public Sphere in the Soviet 
Union, 1951-1957. Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Duke University, 1999 
Mills, Rilla D., The Soviet Journalist: A Cultural Analysis. Unpublished PhD 
Dissertation, University of Illinois, 1981 
Pinsky, Anatoly, The Individual after Stalin: Fedor Abramov, Russian 
Intellectuals, and the Revitalization of Soviet Socialism, 1953-1962. 
Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Columbia University, 2011 
Prokhorov, Alexander, Inherited Discourse: Stalinist Tropes in Thaw Culture 
Unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, 2002 
Prokhorova, Elena, Fragmented Mythologies: Soviet TV Mini-Series of the 
1970s. Unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, 2003 
Rogers, Rosemarie S., The Soviet Audience: How it Uses the Mass Media. 
Unpublished PhD Dissertation, MIT, 1967 
Roth-Ey, Kristin, Mass Media and the Remaking of Soviet Culture, 1950s-1960s. 
Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Princeton University, 2003 
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 318 
Roudakova, Natalia, From the Fourth Estate to the Second Oldest 
Profession: Russias Journalists in Search of their Public After Socialism. 
Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Stanford University, 2007 
, Bringing Culture Back Into the State: A Post-structural Look at the Soviet 
Press. Unpublished m/s, 2009 
Trofimov, Leonid T., The Soviet Media at the Onset of the Cold War, 1945-50. 
Unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of Illinois at Chicago, 2004 
Tromley, Benjamin K., Re-Imagining the Soviet Intelligentsia: Student Politics 
and University Life, 1948-1964. Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Harvard 
University, 2007 
Tsipursky, Gleb, Pleasure, Power, and the Pursuit of Communism: Soviet Youth 
and State-Sponsored Popular Culture During the Early Cold War, 1945-
1968. Unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, 2011 
Varga-Harris, Christine, Constructing the Soviet Hearth: Home, Citizenship and 
Socialism in Russia, 1956-1964. Unpublished PhD Dissertation, University of 
Illinois, 2005 
Volkova, Tatiana A., A.I. Adzhubei -- Redaktor i publitsist. Unpublished PhD 
Dissertation, MGU, 2010 
Wessell, Nils H., The Credibility, Impact and Effectiveness of the Soviet General 
Press: An Analysis of Soviet Research on the Soviet Non-Specialized 
Newspaper. Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Columbia University, 1972 
Willimott, Andy, Socialism in One Apartment: Activist Communes, Ideology, and 
Praxis in the Early Soviet State, 1917-1934. Unpublished PhD Dissertation, 
UEA, 2012 
