Precipitate characterization and 
stability in V-based alloys for nuclear 
fusion reactors 
A thesis submitted to the University of Manchester for the 
degree of Doctor of Philosophy in the Faculty of Engineering 
and Physical Sciences 
Andrea Impagnatiello 
School of Materials 
LIST OF CONTENTS 
 Abstract 5 
 Declaration 6 
 Copyright statement 7 
 Acknowledgements 8 
 List of acronyms 9 
1.  Introduction 10 
1.1 Introduction to fusion energy... 10 
Brief description of nuclear fusion reactors and expected operating 
1.5 References 28 
2.  Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 31 
2.2 Basic properties of V-4Cr-4Ti. 32 
 2.2.1    Crystallography 32 
 2.2.2    Phase diagram.. 34 
 2.2.2    Diffusion.. 41 
 2.2.4    Physical properties... 48 
    2.3.2    Nanoscale precipitation... 52 
 2.4.1   Toughness... 56 
    2.4.2    Strength..... 58 
    2.4.3    Thermal creep ... 62 
    2.5.1    Material activation... 68 
 2.5.2    Irradiation hardness and embrittlement.... 64 
 2.5.3    Irradiation creep... 75 
2.6 Previous efforts to improve the mechanical properties in radiation environment 78 
 2.6.1   Tailored thermo-mechanical treatment. 78 
 2.6.2   Removal of interstitials from the matrix... 82 
 2.6.3   Refined grain size microstructure with nanoparticles as strengtheners 83 
2.7 References 86 
3.       Feasibility of vanadium alloys for fusion reactor applications 93 
3.1 Comparisons of vanadium alloys with other fusion reactor materials. 93 
3.2 Large scale production of vanadium components.... 101 
3.4 References.... 104 
4.       Characterization Methods 107 
4.1 Sample preparation... 107 
4.2 Electron microscopy. 109 
 4.2.1 Scanning electron microscopy 111 
 4.2.2 Transmission electron microscopy.. 112 
4.3 Positron annihilation spectroscopy.. 125 
4.4 Hardness test 127 
4.5 References 128 
5.       Ti-rich precipitate evolution in vanadium-based alloys during annealing                      
          above 400C 
6.       Atomically resolved chemical ordering at the nm-thick TiO  
          precipitate/matrix interface in V-4Ti-4Cr alloy 
7.        Monolayer-thick TiO precipitation in V-4Cr-4Ti alloy induced by proton  
           irradiation 
8.        Conclusions and further studies 185 
Final word count: 38174 
ABSTRACT 
Andrea Impagnatiello submitted this thesis entitled Precipitate characterization and 
stability in V-based alloys for nuclear fusion reactors for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
at the University of Manchester, 2016. The aim of this work was to investigate the 
precipitation and stability of nm-sized Ti oxides in vanadium-based alloys, a prime candidate 
material for future nuclear fusion reactors based on the magnetic confinement of the plasma.  
Fusion energy reproduces the nuclear reactions occurring in stars. It can potentially produce 
more energy than current nuclear fission power plants, and it is meant to be a solution to the 
clash of todays increasing energy demand with the continuous decrease of fossil-based 
energy sources, whose use is harmful for the environment. The operating conditions in a 
fusion reactor will be unprecedented in terms of ultra-high temperatures, stresses, radiation 
fields and very corrosive media. Only a limited number of materials may be able to withstand 
such combination of harsh environmental conditions, and vanadium-based alloys are among 
them. Recent research efforts have identified V-4Cr-4Ti as the most promising vanadium-
based alloy for application in the first wall of future fusion nuclear reactors such as DEMO 
and beyond. The presence of TiO-type precipitates, containing relatively small amounts of 
C and N, strongly influences the final mechanical properties and radiation resistance of the 
alloy. Therefore, a thorough understanding of the precipitate structure and evolution at both 
relatively high temperatures and radiation dose levels is primordial to predict and optimise 
the final performance of the structural component in the fusion reactor. 
This thesis is written in alternative format and collects one article already published in Scripta 
Materialia, and two additional articles to be submitted to peer-review scientific journals. 
Atomic resolution imaging of the precipitates, coupled with chemical analysis, constitutes the 
main body of the first article: a novel intergrowth of the fcc Ti oxide in the bcc V matrix is 
revealed at the precipitate/matrix interface. The evolution of the vacancies present in the TiO 
precipitates above 400C, together with the recovery of dislocations in the matrix and the 
formation of extra precipitates, is studied in the second article by positron annihilation 
spectroscopy and micro-hardness measurements. The formation of additional precipitates 
below 400C induced by radiation is assessed in the third article using proton irradiation as a 
surrogate of neutron damage. The structure of those additional precipitates and of the 
dislocation loops induced by the proton bombardment is characterized by advanced analytical 
electron microscopy.  
DECLARATION 
I, Andrea Impagnatiello, declare that no portion of the work referred to in the thesis has been 
submitted in support of an application for another degree or qualification of this or any other 
university or other institute of learning. 
COPYRIGHT STATEMENT 
I. The author of this thesis (including any appendices and/or schedules to this thesis) 
owns certain copyright or related rights in it (the Copyright) and s/he has given The 
University of Manchester certain rights to use such Copyright, including for 
administrative purposes. 
II. Copies of this thesis, either in full or in extracts and whether in hard or electronic 
copy, may be made only in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 
1988 (as amended) and regulations issued under it or, where appropriate, in 
accordance with licensing agreements which the University has from time to time. 
This page must form part of any such copies made. 
III. The ownership of certain Copyright, patents, designs, trade marks and other 
intellectual property (the Intellectual Property) and any reproductions of copyright 
works in the thesis, for example graphs and tables (Reproductions), which may be 
described in this thesis, may not be owned by the author and may be owned by third 
parties. Such Intellectual Property and Reproductions cannot and must not be made 
available for use without the prior written permission of the owner(s) of the relevant 
Intellectual Property and/or Reproductions. 
IV. Further information on the conditions under which disclosure, publication and 
commercialisation of this thesis, the Copyright and any Intellectual Property 
University IP Policy (see 
http://documents.manchester.ac.uk/display.aspx?DocID=24420), in any relevant 
Thesis restriction declarations deposited in the University Library, The University 
Librarys regulations (see http://www.library.manchester.ac.uk/about/regulations/) 
and in The Universitys policy on Presentation of Theses 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I acknowledge my supervisor Enrique Jimenez-Melero for having taught me about one of the 
most beautiful jobs. Our differences in character were filling the gaps of my formation as a 
scientist capable to work with others.  
I acknowledge the rest of my team and every person that during my PhD was so kind to share 
part of his time that has been used to construct my development. My mother Theodora 
Karavioti and the rest of my family were always present to support me. 
I acknowledge the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPRSC) for having 
funded this project, I also thanks for additional funding and trust Paul Mummery, Martin 
O'Brien and Simon Pimblott. I thank finally the Dalton Cumbrian Facility, where I was 
based, for having hosted me in all these years.  
LIST OF ACRONYMS 
bcc  body-centered cubic 
CBED  convergent beam electron diffraction 
CCD  charge coupled device 
CW  cold work 
DBTT - ductile-to-brittle transition temperature  
DEMO  DEMOnstration Power Plant 
DSC  differential scanning calorimetry 
EBSD  electron backscatter diffraction 
EDS  energy dispersive spectroscopy 
EELS  electron energy loss spectroscopy 
fcc  face-centered cubic 
FFT  fast Fourier transformation 
FW  first wall 
GB  grain boundary 
GBS  grain boundary sliding  
HAADF  high angle annular dark field detector 
IFC  inertial fusion confinement  
ISDC  ITER structural design criteria 
ITER  International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor 
JET  Joint European Torus 
MFC  magnetic fusion confinement 
NIFS  National Institute for Fusion Science (Japan) 
ODS  oxide dispersion strengthened  
PAS  positron annihilation spectroscopy 
PKA  primary knock-on atom 
PLB  power-law-breakdown  
RAFM  reduced activation ferritic-martensitic  
RT  room temperature 
SA  solution annealing 
SAA  solution annealing & aging 
SAACW  solution annealing, aging & cold working 
SACWA  solution annealing, cold working & aging 
SADP  selected area diffraction pattern 
SE  secondary electrons 
SEM  scanning electron microscopy 
SIA  self-interstitial atoms 
STD  standard thermal treatment 
TBR  Tritium breeding ratio  
TEM  transmission electron microscopy 
UTS  ultimate tensile strength  
1. Introduction 
1. INTRODUCTION 
"Man will learn one day to free this energy and use it to his own ends" 
Arthur Eddington (1882-1944) 
In section 1.1 an introduction to what fusion energy is and its similarities with fission energy 
will be given. Afterwards in section 1.2 we will describe how fusion energy can be 
implemented in the future, together with the operating conditions expected in the fusion 
reactor. Some of the main remaining material challenges, such as the changes in the structure 
of the material under irradiation and the effects on the structural integrity of the reactor 
component, are addressed in section 1.3. Finally, the advantages of using vanadium alloys as 
structural materials in the construction of a fusion power plant are described in section 1.4. 
1.1 Introduction to fusion energy 
Fusion energy, as well fission energy, is produced by nuclear reactions where a 
comparatively large amount of energy is released according to Einsteins energy-mass 
equivalence formula: 
 =    2                                                          (1) 
This released energy E comes from the difference in mass between reactants and products 
(). c denotes the light velocity. The released energy is manifested as an increase in 
temperature of the system where the reaction takes place. 
Figure 1.1 Sun coronal mass ejection (CME), credit: NASA/SDO (see http://www.nasa.gov). 
http://www.nasa.gov/
1. Introduction 
In fusion energy generation, light nuclides fuse together to form a heavier nuclide. This 
process occurs naturally in the sun (Fig. 1.1). In contrast, when producing fission energy 
there are no nuclei merging, but a fragmentation of the relatively heavy unstable nuclide into 
smaller nuclides with a higher stability. Figure 1.2 shows the binding energy per nucleon as a 
function of mass number, together with the yields of fission and fusion energy production. 
Note that fission takes place at relatively large values of the mass number, where fusion of 
nuclides would require external energy to occur. 
Figure 1.2 Binding energy per nucleon as a function of the mass number. The yield obtained by fission 
and fusion energy generation is indicated in the graph. (taken from http://www.ncssm.edu/). 
To trigger these nuclear fusion reactions, nuclei need to be closer than the limit posed by the 
electrostatic potential. To overcome this Coulomb potential, the kinetic energy of the 
reactants must be increased. For fusion energy generation, one way to achieve this is to heat 
the nuclides to 150  10
 C, 10 times higher than the temperature at the core of the sun [1]. 
Nuclei and electrons now separated at those high temperatures constitute an ionised gas, 
called plasma, which is considered to be the fourth state of the matter. The most promising 
nuclear reaction for fusion power applications involves two hydrogen isotopes [2], deuterium 
2 ) and tritium ( 1
3 ), that react to form an -particle ( 2
4 ) plus a neutron ( 0
2    +2
3  + 17.6 MeV                                         (2)                
Mass number (A) 
http://www.ncssm.edu/
1. Introduction 
In this process, due to the energy and momentum conservation, neutrons with an energy 
content of 14.1 MeV are released. The remaining energy is carried away by the -particles. 
Tritium is not found abundantly in nature: it is an unstable isotope with a half-life of 
12.3 years. However, tritium can be produced by the following nuclear reaction: 
1  +     + 2
6  + 4.8 MeV                                         (3) 
where the necessary neutrons are generated by the main reaction in the reactor plasma (2). 
When dividing the released energy E by the total mass (in energy) of the reactants we obtain 
a fractional yield of 0.00375 for fusion, while for fission energy this is of 0.00098 if we take 
for the products an average mass-energy equivalent of 215 MeV. This means that, for equal 
masses of reactants, fusion produces about 4 times more energy than fission. However, the 
construction of a fusion power plant that can withstand this increased energy load released by 
the fusion reaction is very challenging from the materials point of view and is nowadays 
subject of intense international research. Moreover, the plasma is very harmful if it gets in 
contact with the reactor materials, and its confinement is compulsory. There are currently two 
approaches to confine the plasma: to use strong magnetic fields (MFC: magnetic fusion 
confinement), or to initiate chain reactions inside a chamber by heating and compressing a 
fuel target using lasers (IFC: inertial fusion confinement). The potential way to implement 
both approaches in a future nuclear reactor is described in the next section. 
1.2 Brief description of nuclear fusion reactors and expected operating 
conditions  
The initial challenges to overcome in order to build a fusion reactor are: (1) the start of the 
nuclear fusion reaction and (2) the confinement of the plasma in such a way that it is not in 
contact with the structural components of the reactor. Moreover, a tritium breeding system is 
required to produce tritium at a rate higher than that of its consumption in the plasma, in 
order to make the whole process self-sufficient. It is also important that the reactor is 
equipped with appropriate diagnostic systems to control: (1) the progression of the reactions 
and (2) other important parameters for the safe and efficient reactor operation, such as the 
flux of neutrons and the temperature in the reaction chamber. The structural materials will 
need to maintain their properties during the scheduled reactor life time which, together with 
the materials costs, manufacturing and reactor power efficiency, determine the economical 
1. Introduction 
feasibility of this new form of nuclear energy generation. As anticipated earlier, there are 
two approaches: IFC and MFC. The latter will be described in more detail in this report, since 
it constitutes the potential application of the vanadium-based alloys studied in this project. 
Figure 1.3 Proposed design of an inertial fusion confinement (IFC) reactor [3]. 
In inertial fusion confinement (ICF) the starting point is a spherical liquefied mixture of 
deuterium and tritium of few millimetres of diameter called target, see Fig.1.3. The target is 
located in the centre of a chamber of several meters of radius, and heated by an impressive 
laser system with a power of several hundreds of TW. The heated outer layer of the target 
explodes outwards, producing a reaction force against the remainder of the target, which is 
accelerated inwards and compressed. The density rises until the ignition conditions for the 
fusion reaction are reached. The products of this thermonuclear burn will be removed from 
the chamber and a new pellet of fuel will be put in place [3, 4]. 
In magnetic fusion confinement (MFC), see Fig.1.4, deuterium and tritium fill the vacuum of 
a toroidal chamber in the gas state, and they are subsequently heated by electromagnetic 
waves. Once the ignition conditions are reached, the plasma is formed in the chamber [1]. In 
order to confine the plasma and avoid any harmful contact with the chamber wall, a toroidal 
system of coils, together with a poloidal system and a central solenoid, is used. These coils 
generate a magnetic field which shapes the plasma into a torus, where charged particles will 
start to circulate along its circumference, ideally without hitting the chamber. Nowadays, 
efforts focus on maximising the plasma stability and its confinement, in order to avoid 
particle dispersions that would be harmful for the chamber. 
target 
lasers 
2.4 mm chamber 
1. Introduction 
Figure 1.4 Schematic description of a magnetic fusion confinement (MFC) with the toroidal plasma and 
the magnetic coils. Taken from http://www.ipp.mpg.de/ippcms/eng/index.html. 
Magnetic confinement was the first tested fusion energy approach [5]: first experiments were 
conducted secretly after the end of the Second World War by several countries. Only after the 
International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy in Geneva in 1958 was the 
importance of fusion energy recognized worldwide and international scientific collaboration 
to develop fusion reactors initiated. In 1968 Russia announced the Tokamak: the first device 
whose concept involved toroidal magnetic fields to confine the plasma. The results were 
promising and the concept was scaled up to accommodate higher plasma currents and larger 
sizes with the development of JET (Joint European Torus) and TORE SUPRA (from the 
French words for torus and superconductor) during the 70s and the 80s, respectively [5].  
After examining their cost, lifetime and energy efficiency, it was concluded that these devices 
with a major radius of the vacuum chamber of about 3m were not profitable for energy 
production on a large scale. To improve their economical potential, it was necessary to 
enlarge the plasma volume significantly, and a device expected to have a power production of 
2GW is currently under development. Its name is DEMO (DEMOnstration Power Plant) [6, 
7, 8], and it is intended be the first fusion power plant on a large scale with a plasma major 
radius of about 7.7 m. Scaling up brings new technological challenges about plasma 
confinement and materials integrity [9]. 
The development of DEMO requires an intermediate device whose operating conditions are 
closer to DEMO than those of the Tokamak devices built in the 70s and the 80s. The results 
from the study of the behaviour of such device will be used in the final DEMO design. This 
http://www.ipp.mpg.de/ippcms/eng/index.html
1. Introduction 
intermediate device is called ITER (International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor) with 
a plasma major radius of 6.2 m [10, 11]. Its goal is to produce 500MW of fusion power. Its 
construction, sponsored by several countries, has already started in France and the first 
plasma is scheduled in December 2025 [1]. Its current design is shown in Fig. 1.5.  
Figure 1.5 Sketch of the ITER structural design. Its main components are also indicated in the figure [1]. 
The magnetic coils, made of superconductors, will produce fields of around 10 T. These coils 
are quite expensive and represent nearly a third of the total cost of ITER [12]. A cryostat 
system is present to keep the coils below their superconducting temperature. The vacuum 
vessel constitutes the reaction chamber containing the plasma [13]. This vessel is kept at a 
vacuum level of ~10
 Pa and is protected from the harmful effects of the plasma by the 
blanket and the divertor [14]. The latter is the only component in direct contact with the 
plasma. Figure 1.5 shows the cross section of the vacuum vessel covered by the blanket and 
the divertor, together with the shape of plasma in the proximity of both components. 
blanket 
vacuum 
vessel 
divertor 
cryostat 
diagnostics 
magnets 
heating 
1. Introduction 
Figure 1.5 (a) Cross section of the ITER toroidal chamber with (b) the plasma profile [15]. 
The divertor is the main heat extraction component (Fig. 1.6). It also removes the -particles 
produced in the fusion reaction and other impurities present in plasma that may compromise 
its stability. The divertor deals with the major heat and neutron load. It needs to be made of 
materials capable of operating up to 3000C: the current ITER project will use either carbon 
composites or tungsten alloys as the plasma facing materials in the divertor [15, 16, 17]. 
Figure 1.6 Current design of the cassettes forming the ITER divertor, each of them has two target area that 
will be in contact with the plasma [1]. 
The blanket (Fig. 1.7) gives protection to the vacuum vessel in other areas apart from the 
divertor [18]. It will be composed by modules of 1.0  1.45 m mounted on the internal wall 
of the vessel. The side of the modules facing the plasma is called the first wall (FW) and, as 
inner vertical target 
outer vertical target 
cassette body 
umbrella 
inner reflector plate 
outer reflector plate 
1. Introduction 
the divertor, will deal with a huge flux of heat and particles. In ITER, the FW will be made of 
beryllium, while for the remaining blanket structure high-strength copper alloys and stainless 
steels are going to be used. For both the divertor and the blanket, an appropriate cooling 
system will be implemented in order to remove the heat from these devices and convert that 
heat into electrical energy. 
Figure 1.7 ITER blanket design where the main components are shown from different points of view: (a) 
front, (b) lateral and (c) rear [1]. 
Several windows are present on the equatorial line of the vacuum vessel: they will host 
additional devices such as the heating system which triggers the plasma, diagnostics 
components and the tritium breeding module. In the DEMO project, every blanket module is 
intended to produce tritium in order to guarantee an adequate tritium production [19]. In 
ITER, six different types of breeding modules are going to be tested, and the results will 
influence the future design choice for DEMO [20]. The design of a breeding module, which 
implies how lithium is exposed to neutrons and how tritium is extracted for its insertion into 
the plasma, changes with the structural material selected for the breeding module [20]. In the 
1. Introduction 
case of modules made of vanadium alloys, liquid lithium constitutes the coolant, and tritium 
is produced by the interaction of the coolant with the neutrons produced in the plasma. 
Definitive designs for DEMO are not established due to the early stage of the project. 
Proposed concepts change continuously with the income of newer ideas that increase the 
quality and feasibility of the reactor. Fig. 1.8a shows the DEMO configuration in the 2014 
with a shield meant to protect the magnets from the plasma neutron irradiation. The 
realization of such shield inside the toroidal chamber would be quite demanding and 
impractical [21]. The vacuum vessel, built outside the toroidal chamber, is thought to protect 
the magnets in the DEMO configuration of the 2015 (Fig. 1.8b), at the condition to afford 
properly the incoming radiation [22]. 
Figure 1.8 DEMO configuration showing components as the vacuum vessel (VV), the blanket with 
manifold, the divertor and the coils to generate the magnetic fields. (a) concept of the 2014 with shield (b) 
concept of the 2015 without shield [21, 22]. 
In both cases the blanket is decomposable in modules in order to improve maintenance and 
building feasibility. The nowadays general design of the DEMO blanket involves the use of 
EUROFER steel and a 2 mm thick FW made of tungsten. Inside the blanket module (Fig. 1.9) 
a                                           b 
1. Introduction 
there will be the coolant and the breeding system meant respectively to lower the blanker 
temperature and produce the tritium needed to run the fusion nuclear reactions [23]. 
Figure 1.9 Blanket modules in DEMO, the production of tritium occurs in the breeder zone and the first 
wall provides protection from the plasma [23]. 
As mentioned previously, fusion reactors are intended to operate at more extreme conditions 
than fission reactors. Fig. 1.10 gives an overview of the operating temperature and the 
expected radiation damage levels over 60 years of reactor operation showing also in years the 
experience with that particular type of reactor [24]. DEMO is scheduled to operate at least 30 
years [25].  
Table 1.3 summarizes the expected operation conditions of the structural materials in the 
plasma environment of ITER and DEMO [26, 27].  Fusion power corresponds to the expected 
energy that the power plant can produce and put into the grid. The heat flux and the neutron 
load are the energy and the neutrons flux emitted by the plasma, respectively. The expected 
damage (dpa) generated during the whole device lifetime ( 30 y) is also indicated, together 
with the rate of potential transmutation products. While a damage level of less than 3 dpa is 
expected in materials used for ITER, after 30 years the DEMO materials will need to 
withstand a level of 50-80 dpa.  
1. Introduction 
Figure 1.10 Overview of the operating temperatures and radiation damage level expected after 60 years 
for different fission and fusion nuclear reactors. DEMO reactor is named among Fusion, the abbreviations 
for the fission reactors are: GEN II, Generation II; GFR, gas-cooled fast reactor; LFR, lead-cooled fast 
reactor; LWR, light-water-cooled fission reactor; MSR, molten saltcooled reactor; SCWR, supercritical 
water reactor; SFR, sodium-cooled fast reactor; VHTR, very high temperature reactor. [24]. 
1. Introduction 
Table 1.3 Principal operating conditions of structural materials in ITER and DEMO [26, 27]. 
 ITER DEMO 
Fusion power  0.5 GW 2.5 - 5 GW 
Heat flux 
    (first wall) 
    (divertor) 
0.1-0.3 MW/m
~ 10 MW/m
0.5 MW/m
~ 15-20 MW/m2 
Neutron Load (FW) 0.78 MW/m
 < 2 MW/m
Integrated  
Neutron Load (FW) 
0.07 MWyears/m
(3 years operation) 
5 - 8 MWyears/m
Displacements per atom 
(dpa) 
< 3 dpa 50 - 80 dpa 
Trasmutation product rates 
at FW 
~ 10 appm He / dpa 
~ 45 appm H / dpa 
With a stationary heat load of 1 MWm
 over the FW of a DEMO blanket, the temperatures 
of W and EUROFER steel are calculated in Fig. 1.11. The temperature drop can be around 
100 C in the areas close to the coolant system. Disruptive instabilities of the plasma increase 
the heat load with deleterious effects for the materials, Fig. 1.12 shows the temperature rise in 
the DEMO blanket during stationary heat load of 1 MWm
 with additional periodic loads of 
20 MW m
. These loads increase the temperature of the EUROFER steel above its allowed 
range, also the W temperature rises above the limits and the W coating gets locally melted 
[28]. 
Increasing materials challenge 
1. Introduction 
Figure 1.11 The temperatures profile in a DEMO blanket  plotted versus the depth from the FW surface. 
The solid line is for the hot spot position (the farest to the coolant tube) and the dashed one is for the cool 
spot position (the nearest to the coolant tube) [28]. 
Figure 1.12 The temperatures profile in a DEMO blanket  of the cooling tube, EUROFER steel and W 
first wall plotted versus time. The heat load has a stationary component of 1 MWm
with additional loads 
of 20 MW m
 at a frequency of 0.8 Hz and deposition time of 0.6 ms. The coloured bars represent the 
allowed temperature ranges[28]. 
1. Introduction 
1.3 Expected material degradation phenomena during operation 
In general, when an energetic particle hits an atom in the lattice of the target material, three 
different processes may occur [29]: 
 Inelastic collisions (d): where bombarding particles transfer energy to the lattice 
atoms, which can move from their initial position in the lattice. This would generate 
atomic displacements. 
 Nuclear reactions (n): where fast particles take part in nuclear reactions with the target 
nuclei. This may produce considerable amounts of foreign elements within the 
material.  
 Electronic excitations/ionizations (e): are of only very limited importance for metals 
and the irradiation damage process. 
The stopping power (dE/dx) denotes the change in energy E of the bombarding particle as a 
function of the penetration depth x in the material. It contains the three terms mentioned 
above: 
Nuclear reactions are important for safety reasons because the nuclear transmutation 
processes may involve radioactive decays with emission of neutrons, protons and/or -
particles. The decay may be immediate or extend over several years. Inelastic collisions are 
mainly responsible for the changes in the mechanical properties of the structural material. 
When the transferred energy exceeds the threshold energy for atomic displacement, the atom 
is moved away from its equilibrium position in the lattice and a vacancy-interstitial pair 
(Frenkel defect) is created. If the transferred energy is significantly higher than the threshold 
energy, the atom firstly hit by the bombarding particle becomes a primary knock-
on atom PKA (Fig. 1.12). This PKA is able to transfer energy by moving further in the 
crystal creating additional point defects, a process called displacement cascade. An important 
quantity to evaluate the radiation damage is the number of displacements per atom (dpa) in 
the radiated volume, i.e. the number of times that an atom has been displaced from its 
equilibrium position in the lattice. 
1. Introduction 
Figure 1.12 Development of a collision cascade when a knocking neutron interacts with the target 
material [29]. 
The radiation-induced point defects consist of self-interstitial atoms (SIA) or vacancies 
(VAC). At longer timescales (after a few ps), those defects may annihilate by recombination 
between them. Otherwise SIAs and VACs can combine with defects of the same type to form 
new lattice defects of higher dimensionality, such as dislocation loops and voids, or be 
trapped by other pre-existing defects (Table 1.4). 
Table 1.4 Some examples of defect reactions occurring in the radiated material [29]. 
As a consequence of the evolution of SIAs and VACs and their clustering, dense zones are 
formed where the dislocation density is higher, and where phase transformations and 
1. Introduction 
precipitation reactions may occur, i.e. radiation-induced transformations. In addition to this, 
the formation of a diluted zone, may lead to void growth and material swelling. The 
consequences of these and other effects of SIAs and VACs reactions for the material 
degradation are summarized in Table 1.5. 
Table 1.5 Different types of radiation damage and the resulting consequences for the degradation of a 
nuclear component [29]. 
The mobility of the defects at a given temperature strongly influences the resultant irradiated 
microstructure. At low temperatures the diffusion of defects induced by irradiation 
predominates over thermal diffusion. As a consequence, the density of radiation-induced 
defects becomes higher than that corresponding to thermal equilibrium. By contrast, at high 
temperatures the diffusion and the density of thermally induced defects dominate over the 
effects of irradiation. Figure 1.13 shows the influence of the irradiation temperature on the 
formation of different types of lattice defects. 
1. Introduction 
Figure 1.13 Influence of irradiation temperature on the formation of different lattice defects, taking 
austenitic steel as an example [30]. 
The lattice type seems to have a correlation with the resultant irradiated microstructure: 
fundamental differences in the behaviour of face centred cubic (fcc) and body centred cubic 
(bcc) metals have been observed. Although the defect production was similar, the average 
size of voids in bcc metals was much smaller, indicating a greater swelling resistance [31]. 
Solute additions to pure metals generally increase the nucleation rate of dislocation loops 
[32]. On the other hand, alloying additions can also create second phases that may improve 
the strength of the material. A fine dispersion of highly stable nanoscale precipitates, as well 
a high grain boundary density due to the fine grain structure of the matrix, can be very 
effective in providing resistance to radiation damage by acting as effective sinks for 
radiation-induced defects [33].  
1. Introduction 
1.4 Advantages of using vanadium alloys as blanket materials 
Vanadium alloys are considered as promising candidates for the fusion blanket due to the 
following properties [34, 35]: 
 Low activation: vanadium nuclei do not activate easily under irradiation of 14 MeV 
neutrons. As a consequence, the material does not become radioactive and the blanket 
modules will not constitute a high-level radioactive waste after the shutdown of the 
power plant [36, 37]. 
 High temperature strength: vanadium has melting point about 1800C. This allows to 
maintain good strength at the high temperatures expected in fusion reactors where 
other potential alloys, such as ferritic/martensitic steels, would start to weaken and 
therefore compromise the structural integrity of the blanket [38, 39]. 
 Swelling resistance: vanadium as a bcc metal has a relatively high swelling resistance 
as compared to fcc metals, allowing to extend the lifetime of the blanket [40, 41]. 
 Compatibility with liquid lithium as a coolant, combined with a low neutron 
absorption cross section: the required production of tritium can be achieved without 
neutron-multiplying materials such as beryllium, which poses additional challenges in 
terms of safe handling of materials and natural resource limitations. The design of the 
blanket is also simplified, as periodic replacements of burned beryllium are not 
anymore needed [42]. 
 Non-magnetic vanadium components will not be affected by the relatively intense 
magnetic fields required to confine the plasma [43, 44]. 
1. Introduction 
1.5 References 
[1] http://www.iter.org/ 
[2] J.K. Shultis, R.E. Faw, Fundamentals of nuclear science and engineering. CRC Press, 
(2002) 151.  
[3] https://life.llnl.gov/ 
[4] https://lasers.llnl.gov/ 
[5] http://www-fusion-magnetique.cea.fr/gb/ 
[6] D. Maisonnier, I. Cook, S. Pierre, B. Lorenzo, L. Di Pace, G. Luciano et al., DEMO and 
fusion power plant conceptual studies in Europe, Fusion Eng Des 81 (2006) 1123. 
[7] K. Tobita, S. Nishio, M. Enoeda, M. Sato, T. Isono, S. Sakurai et al., Design study of 
fusion DEMO plant at JAERI, Fusion Eng Des 81 (2006) 1151. 
[8] G. Federici, R. Kemp, D. Ward, C. Bachmann, T. Franke, S. Gonzalez et al., Overview of 
EU DEMO design and R&D activities, Fusion Eng Des 89 (2014) 882. 
6[9] http://www.efda.org/ 
[10] R. Aymar, P. Barabaschi and Y. Shimomura, The ITER design, Plasma Phys Contr F 44 
(2002) 519.  
[11] G. Federici, P. Andrew, P. Barabaschi, J. Brooks, R. Doerner, A. Geier et al., Key ITER 
plasma edge and plasmamaterial interaction issues, J Nucl Mater 313316 (2003) 11. 
[12] N. Mitchell, D. Bessette, R. Gallix, C. Jong, J. Knaster, P. Libeyre et al., The ITER 
Magnet System, IEEE Trans Appl Supercond, 18 (2008) 45. 
[13] R. Tivey, M. Akiba, D. Driemeyer, I. Mazul, M. Merola, M. Ulrickson, ITER R&D: 
Vacuum Vessel and In-Vessel Components: Divertor Cassette, Fusion Eng Des 55 (2001) 
[14] G. Janeschitz, K. Borrass, G. Federici, Y. Igitkhanov, A, Kukushkin, H.D. Pacher,  
The ITER divertor concept, J Nucl Mater 220-222 (1995) 73. 
[15] G. Federici, C. H. Skinner, J. N. Brooks, J. P. Coad, C. Grisolia, A. A. Haasz et al., 
Plasma-material interactions in current tokamaks and their implications for next step fusion 
reactors, Nucl Fusion, 41 (2001) 1967. 
[16] G. Janeschitz, ITER JCT and HTs, Plasma-wall interaction issues in ITER, J Nucl Mater 
290-293 (2001) 1. 
[17] V. Philipps, Tungsten as material for plasma-facing components in fusion devices, J 
Nucl Mater 415 (2011) S2. 
http://books.google.com/books?id=SO4Lmw8XoEMC&pg=PA151
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CRC_Press
http://www-fusion-magnetique.cea.fr/gb/
http://www.efda.org/
1. Introduction 
[18] L. Giancarli, V. Chuyanov, M. Abdou, M. Akiba, B.G. Hong, R. Lsser et al., Breeding 
Blanket Modules testing in ITER: An international program on the way to DEMO, Fusion 
Eng Des 81 (2006) 393. 
[19] D. Demangea, R. Antunes, O. Borisevich, L. Frances, D. Rapisarda, A. Santucci et al., 
Tritium extraction technologies and DEMO requirements, Fusion Eng Des (2016) article in 
press. 
[29] L.M. Giancarli, M. Abdou, D.J. Campbell, V.A. Chuyanova, M.Y. Ahn, M. Enoeda et 
al., Overview of the ITER TBM Program, Fusion Eng Des 87 (2012) 395. 
[21] C. Bachmann, F. Arbeiter, L.V. Boccaccini, M. Coleman, G. Federici, U. Fischer et al., 
Issues and strategies for DEMO in-vessel component integration, Fusion Eng Des (2016) 
article in press. 
[22] C. Bachmann, G. Aiello, R. Albanese, R. Ambrosino, F. Arbeiter, J. Aubert et al., Initial 
DEMO tokamak design configuration studies, Fusion Eng Des 9899 (2015) 1423. 
[23] L.V. Boccaccinia, G. Aiello, J. Aubert, C. Bachmann, T. Barrett, A. Del Nevo et al., 
Objectives and status of EUROfusion DEMO blanket studies, Fusion Eng Des (2016) article 
in press. 
[24] S.J. Zinkle and L.L. Snead, Designing Radiation Resistance in Materials for Fusion 
Energy, Annu Rev Mater Res 44 (2014) 241. 
[25] I.R. Kirillo, RF DEMO team, Lithium cooled blanket of RF DEMO reactor, Fusion Eng 
Des 4950 (2000) 457. 
[26] P.M. Raole, S.P. Deshpande and DEMO Team, Structural materials for fusion reactors, 
Trans Indian Inst Metals 62 (2009) 105. 
[27] E. Magnani, F. Gabriel, L.V. Boccaccini, A. Li-Puma, DEMO relevance of the test 
blanket modules in ITERApplication to the European test blanket modules, Fusion Eng Des 
85 (2010) 1271. 
[28] Y. Igitkhanov, R. Fetzer, L. Boccaccini and B. Bazylev, Thermo-mechanical analysis of 
the DEMO FW module, Phys Scr 90 (2015) 1. 
[29] W. Hoffelner, Materials for Nuclear Plants, Chapter 5, Springer-Verlag 2013. 
[30] S.J Zinkle, P.J. Maziasz, R.E. Stoller, Dose dependence of the microstructural evolution 
in neutron-irradiated austenitic stainless steel, J Nucl Mater 206 (1993) 266. 
[31] S.J. Zinkle, Fusion materials science: overview of challenges and recent progress, Phys 
Plasmas 12 (2005) 1. 
[32] S.J. Zinkle, A. Horsewell, B.N. Singh, W.F. Sommer, Defect microstructure in copper 
alloys irradiated with 750 MeV protons, J Nucl Mater 212 (1994) 132. 
1. Introduction 
[33] L.K Mansur, E.H. Lee, Theoretical basis for unified analysis of experimental data and 
design of swelling-resistant alloys, J Nucl Mater 179181 (1991) 105. 
[34] S.J. Zinkle, J.T. Busby, Structural materials for fission & fusion energy, Mater Today 12 
(2009) 12. 
[35] T. Muroga, J.M. Chen, V.M. Chernov, R.J. Kurtz, M. Le Flem, Present status of 
vanadium alloys for fusion applications, J Nucl Mater 455 (2014) 263. 
[36] B.A. Loomis and D.L. Smith, Vanadium alloys for structural applications in fusion 
systems: a review of vanadium alloy mechanical and physical properties, J Nucl Mater 191-
194 (1992) 84. 
[37] T. Muroga, Vanadium Alloys for Fusion Blanket Applications, Materials Transactions 46 
(2005) 405. 
[38] D.L. Smith, H.M. Chung, B.A. Loomis and H.-C. Tsai, Reference vanadium alloy V-
4Cr-4Ti for fusion application, J Nucl Mater 233-237 (1996) 356. 
[39] H.M. Chung, B.A. Loomis and D.L. Smith, Development and testing of vanadium alloys 
for fusion applications, J Nucl Mater 239 (1996) 139. 
[40] D.L. Harrod, R. E. Gold, Mechanical properties of V and V-base alloys, Int Met Rev, 4 
(1980) 163. 
[41] D.L. Smith, B.A. Loomis, D.R. Diercks, Vanadium-base alloys for fusion reactor 
applications - a review, J Nucl Mater 135 (1985) 125. 
[42] T. Muroga, J.M. Chen, V.M. Chernov, R.J. Kurtz and M. Le Flem, Present status of 
vanadium alloys for fusion applications, J Nucl Mater 455 (2014) 263.  
[43] Landolt-Brnstein, Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in Science and 
Technology, New Series, III/19, Subvolumes a to i2, Magnetic Properties of Metals, 
Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1986-1992. 
[44] D.L. Smith, M.C. Billone, S. Majumdar, R.F. Mattas and D.-K. Sze, Materials 
integration issues for high performance fusion power systems, J Nucl Mater 258-263 (1998) 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
2.  DESCRIPTION OF VANADIUM AS  
FIRST WALL REACTOR MATERIAL 
A brief history about basic research on vanadium for fusion applications and the motivation 
behind the selection of the alloy V-4Cr-4Ti as the main vanadium-based material candidate 
for the reactor blanket are presented in section 2.1. The physical properties of this alloy, 
together with its phase diagram, diffusivity and crystallography, are addressed in section 2.2. 
In section 2.3 and 2.4 the microstructure and the mechanical properties are discussed in 
relation to the thermo-mechanical treatments and the chemical composition. Section 2.5 
contains information about the irradiation effects on the structure and properties of this 
material and finally, section 2.6 describes the upfront research to improve the performance of 
V-based alloys in radiation environments. 
2.1 Brief history about vanadium alloys for fusion energy  
Vanadium (V) was initially discovered in 1801 by the Spanish scientist Andres Manuel del 
Rio in New Spain (Mexico) and he called it erythronium. However, in 1805 the French 
chemist Hippolyte-Victor Collet-Descotils examined erythronium and concluded that it was 
actually impure chromium. In 1831 Nils Gabriel Sefstrm in Stockholm found a new metal in 
a Swedish iron ore. He called this new element vanadium after Vanadis the Scandinavian 
goddess of beauty, due to the beautiful multicolored compounds formed by the new metal.  In 
the same year, the German chemist Friedrich Whler reinvestigated the Mexican ore and 
discovered that the erythronium mineral indeed contained vanadium [1].  
One noticeable property of vanadium is its high melting point (1910C), more than 350C 
higher than pure iron. This fact manifests in the high-temperature strength of vanadium and 
its alloys, as was already reported during the 60s [2, 3]. The first experiments for a potential 
application of vanadium alloys in fusion reactors were conducted in the 70s [4-6]. The 
results were encouraging as vanadium also had favourable neutronics properties: low 
absorption cross section for neutrons, what reduces the materials activation and allows to 
have a high production rate of tritium by the reaction between neutrons and lithium nuclei. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
One of the first reviews of vanadium alloys for fusion reactor applications was published by 
Gold et al. in 1981 [7]. The most studied vanadium alloys during the 80s were the V-15Cr-
5Ti, V-20Ti and the VANSTAR (V-9Cr-3.3Fe-1.2Zr-0.054C) [8, 9]. Chromium (Cr) has 
been identified to be an effective solid-solution strengthener that increases the creep and 
oxidation resistance of the alloy. Titanium (Ti) instead acts as a scavenger for interstitial 
impurities forming precipitates. Ti is also a solid-solution strengthener like Cr, and improves 
fabricability and resistance to radiation swelling [10]. On the other hand, relatively high 
amounts of Cr and Ti (i.e. Cr+Ti > 10wt.%) cause some negative effects for the alloy, such as 
excessive irradiation hardening and a decrease in creep resistance [10]. Researchers started to 
decrease the concentrations of Cr and Ti in vanadium alloys, and at the end of the 90s the 
alloy V-4Cr-4Ti was widely considered as the reference vanadium alloy for structural 
application in fusion reactors [11]. 
In 2000 India and Russia developed two blanket concepts for DEMO based on this vanadium 
alloy as structural material [12, 13]. Since then, several experiments have been conducted to 
extend the mechanistic understanding about its thermal [14, 15] and irradiation creep 
resistance [16, 17], the irradiation effects on the microstructure and on the mechanical 
properties [18, 19], and about the role of the precipitates and interstitial atoms on the alloy 
performance [20, 21]. However, basic questions about the evolution of the microstructure 
under irradiation at the expected operating temperatures, and its influence on the integrity of 
the reactor component, still remain unsolved [17]. 
2.2 Basic properties about V-4Cr-4Ti 
2.2.1  Crystallography 
Vanadium crystallizes in a body-centered cubic (bcc) structure that is stable from room 
temperature (RT) up to its melting point of 1910C. The lattice parameter takes a value of 
3.026  at RT [22].  
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.1 Model of a bcc unit cell (space group Im-3m). 
Table 2.1 shows the lattice parameter of V-Cr-Ti alloys for different compositions. Cr and Ti 
exert an opposite effect on the lattice parameter. The difference can be mainly attributed to 
the relative atomic sizes: Cr is undersized respect to V and crystalizes in a bcc structure with 
a smaller lattice parameter of 2.880 , whereas Ti is oversized with respect to V and its low-
temperature bcc structure presents a lattice parameter of 3.268  [23]. The effect of variable 
amounts of Ti on the V lattice parameter is shown in Fig. 2.2. 
Table 2.1 Lattice parameter of V-Cr-Ti alloys for different compositions [24]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.2 Experimental values of the room-temperature lattice parameter of bcc V as function of Ti 
content [23]. 
2.2.2  Phase diagram 
The binary V-Ti and V-Cr phase diagrams are shown in Fig. 2.3 [25]. Cr is totally soluble in 
V forming a uniform bcc phase. For Ti the situation is different, it precipitates in the bcc V 
matrix as hcp even at concentration of V above 50 at.%. Figure 2.4 shows the binary Ti-Cr 
phase diagram [25], there are present three different allotropes (,  and ) of the 
intermetallic compound TiCr2, which precipitates as a Laves phase. The -TiCr2 has cubic 
MgCu2-type crystal structure (space group Fd 3m), the other two ( and ) both belong to the 
space group is P 63/mmc with hexagonal crystal structure. 
The phase diagram of the V-4Cr-4Ti system is shown in Fig. 2.5 at selected temperatures 
[26]. The V-4Cr-4Ti alloy retains the bcc structure up to the melting point of 1890C. The 
increase in Ti content leads to a decrease in melting point (Fig. 2.6) [25]. Moreover, at Cr 
concentrations above ~10-15 wt% the intermetallic -TiCr2 phase is formed within the bcc 
matrix, above 900 C it appears also the  -TiCr2 phase. Increasing the temperature reduces 
the stability of the TiCr2 Laves phases in the bcc matrix. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.3 Calculated phase diagrams of the (a) TiV and (b) V-Cr system,  and  are respectively bcc 
and hcp phases [25]. 
Figure 2.4 Calculated phase diagram of TiCr system showing the 3 (--) TiCr2 Laves phases,  and   
are respectively bcc and hcp phases [25]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.5 Calculated phase diagram of the ternary VCrTi system at selected temperatures.  and -
TiCr2 are bcc phases, while  and  -TiCr2 are hcp phase [26]. 
1000 C 1200 C 
700 C 900 C 
500 C 600 C 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.6 (a) Calculated solidus, /(+liquid), contour (in C) in the ternary TiCrV system, and (b)                               
experimental solidus contour [25]. 
The presence of O can lead to the formation of other phases as oxides, Fig. 2.7 and Fig. 2.8-9 
show the V-O and Ti-O phase diagrams respectively [27, 28]. Both diagrams are 
characterized by a large number of different oxides phases, it is remarkable to note that the 
VO and the TiO have both NaCl type crystal structure with lattice constant very similar: 
0.408 nm and 0.418 nm respectively [27, 28]. The phase diagram of the ternary V-Ti-O 
system is presented in Fig. 2.10 together with the ternary V-Ti-C and V-Ti-N systems (Fig. 
2.11 and Fig. 2.12) [29, 30, 31]. It is possible the simultaneous presence of TiO, TiC and TiN 
at temperatures above 1000C where the concentration of Ti is locally high, like areas with Ti 
precipitates. These compounds have the same type of crystal structure of NaCl type, and 
similar lattice parameter:  0.418 TiO [32], TiC 0.4328 nm [33], TiN 0.4259 nm [33]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.7 Calculated phase diagram of V-O system, courtesy of ASM International [27]. 
Figure 2.8 Calculated phase diagram of Ti-O system [28]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.9 Calculated phase diagram of Ti-O system, from 58 to 68 at.% O [28]. 
Figure 2.10 Calculated phase diagram of V-Ti-O system at 1200C, courtesy of ASM International [29]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.11 Calculated phase diagram of V-Ti-C system at 1000C, courtesy of ASM International [30]. 
Figure 2.12 Calculated phase diagram of V-Ti-N system at 1200C, courtesy of ASM International [31]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
2.2.3  Diffusion 
The atomic diffusion in vanadium alloys relates to the migration of substitutional (Ti, Cr) and 
interstitial (C,O,N) atoms in the host crystalline lattice. In general, an atom migrates by 
jumping from its atomic position in the lattice to an adjacent position. This process is 
thermally activated. The migrating atom requires that the thermal energy is high enough to 
break all the bonds with the other neighbouring atoms and distort locally the lattice as 
required during the jump.  Interstitial diffusion is faster since the local bonds are weaker and 
the presence of an adjacent vacancy is not required. The diffusion can be described by the 
two Fick laws (1-2), for the steady and non-steady state respectively [34]:    
 =  
()
(,)
=  
where J is the flux of diffusing particles; c is the concentration of the diffusing particles as 
function of position x and time t. D is finally the diffusion coefficient, whose temperature 
dependence can be expressed by an Arrhenius-type equation: 
  = 0
/
where Q is the activation energy for diffusion and as deductible: the highest Q, the lowest 
diffusion. The gas constant is R and D0 is called the pre-exponential factor, or diffusion 
constant, and  it  takes into account parameters such as the vibrational frequency of the atom 
in the lattice and its coordination number. Values of D can be obtained experimentally using 
radioactive tracer isotopes. The term self-diffusion denotes the case when the diffusing 
atom is of the same species of that of the host lattice. 2.4Dt corresponds to the diffusion 
range assuming a random walk, that is to say, the direction of one atomic jump is not 
correlated with the previous jump of the same atom [35]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Diffusion of interstitial species 
From first-principles calculations is evidenced that O, N and C atoms in a V matrix prefer to 
occupy an octahedral interstitial site rather than a tetragonal one which is occupied only 
during the jump from one octahedral site to the other in the so called hopping mechanism 
shown in Figure 2.13 [36]. It would be expected that the tetragonal site is occupied since it 
provides the highest volume for the interstitial atom but 4 host atoms have to be displaced. In 
the octahedral position instead, the interstitial is surrounded by 6 host atoms but only the two 
closer atoms will be displaced significantly due to the irregularity of a bcc octahedral 
position. In the case of C in Fe, it happens that the remaining 4 host atoms will move towards 
the C atoms after the Poisson compression [37]. 
The difference in energy between an octahedral and tetragonal site is the activation energy Q. 
Table 2.2 provides the estimated Q and D0 for O, N and C compared with experimental 
values. O, N and C exhibit repulsive interactions with the neighbour vanadium atoms leading 
an outward expansion by about 25%. The formation energy or O, N and C in the octahedral 
interstitial site are respectively -5.12 eV, -2.97 eV and -2.1 eV, C and O have so the lowest 
and highest solubility in V [36]. 
Figure 2.13 (a) Diffusion energy curves of O atom (red balls) moving from an octahedral site (*) to 
another through a tetragonal one (+^) in V (green balls) [36]. 
*    ^   * 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.14 shows for O, C and N the deductible plot of the natural logarithm of D with the 
inverse of T (Arrhenius plot) [36]. C diffuses faster, follows O and N. This order is the same 
met for Q: the lowest activation energy equals to the highest diffusivity. 
Table 2.2 Pre-exponential factor and activation energy (diffusion barrier) of the diffusion of C, O, N in 
pure V calculated by first-principles calculations [36] and compared with experimental values [38]. 
Figure 2.14 Temperature dependence of the diffusion coefficient of O, C and N in pure V [36]. 
Regarding the effect of alloying elements in the interstitial diffusion, experimental data is 
shown for O in Table 2.3 [39]. Cr increases diffusion of O as it extends the lattice parameter 
(Par. 2.1.1) that would lead to a decrease of the activation energy as the repulsive interactions 
are lowered and the bonds are weakened. Such effect of the lattice parameter has been 
confirmed by other first-principle calculations [40]. The addition of Ti has a total opposite 
effect and it appears to act as a trap for O. One explanation that has been suggested [39] 
relates the O diffusivity with the Gibbs free energy of formation of the oxide formed with the 
host metal, as listed in Tab. 2.4. The table does not list all the different Ti and V oxides that 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
may form according to the phase diagrams (Par. 2.2.2) and differences on type among the 
oxides impede a direct comparison, but it is worth mentioning that the free energy of the Ti 
oxide has the highest magnitude, suggesting the presence of a strong affinity between Ti and 
O. Another explanation is possible comparing O diffusivity in pure V and Ti, both bcc. The Q 
in Ti is 288.3 kJ/mol [41] and is more that the double of the Q in bcc V (121 kJ/mol). The 
addition of Ti in V will lead to the appearance of bcc Ti (Par. 2.2.2) and it will impede O 
diffusion since O diffuses much slower in Ti rather than in V. 
Table 2.3 Pre-exponential factor D0 and activation energy Q of the diffusion O for in pure and alloyed V 
[39]. 
Table 2.4 Gibbs free energy of formation of different oxides at 600K [39]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Diffusion of substitutional species and V self-diffusion 
Figure 2.15 shows the Arrhenius plot of the self-diffusion coefficient of V modelled with the  
CALPHAD method (CALculations of PHAse Diagrams) and compared with experimental 
results from literature [42].  
How the self-diffusion of V is affected by Ti is shown in Figure 2.16a while Figure 2.16b 
shows diffusion of Ti in V. At the limit of Ti weight fraction towards 1, the self-diffusion 
coefficient of V becomes the impurity diffusion coefficient of V in Ti and the diffusion 
coefficient of Ti in V becomes the self-diffusion coefficient of Ti [42].   
Figure 2.15 Arrhenius plot of the self diffusion coefficient of V with values from experiments (dots) and 
modelling analysis by CALPHAD method (line) [42]. 
Figure 2.16 CALPHAD calculated (lines) and experimental (dots) diffusivities of V (a) and Ti (b) is V-Ti 
alloy for different Ti concentrations [42, 43]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Regarding the effect of Cr on the diffusivities of Ti and V, the V-Ti-Cr has been modelled 
[26] and the diffusion coefficients of V, Cr and Ti are evaluated with the Einstein relation, 
having strongly assumed that the correlation effects are negligible. The results of the model 
are in good agreement with available literature data. Fig. 2.17 and 2.18 are calculations based 
on that model showing  how Ti and V diffusivities rise with the amount of Ti, as reported 
before [42, 43]. The addiction of Cr decreases the diffusivities of all elements (Fig. 2.19). 
Fig. 2.20 shows the average of the diffusional range of V, Ti and Cr after 2 h at 1200 C, Ti is 
the most mobile element followed by V and Cr. 
Figure 2.17 Calculations from [26] of the diffusion coefficients of V in a V-Cr-Ti alloy for different 
temperatures 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.18 Calculations from [26] of the diffusion coefficients of Ti in a V-Cr-Ti alloy for different 
temperatures. 
Figure 2.19 Calculations from [26] of the diffusion coefficients of Cr in a V-Cr-Ti alloy for different 
temperatures. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.20 Calculations from [26] of the diffusional range of V, Ti and Cr in a V-Cr-Ti alloy at 1200 C 
for 2 h. 
2.2.4  Physical properties 
Some physical properties of V-4Cr-4Ti are collected in Table 2.5 [44]. The melting point is 
well above the expected reactor operating conditions of about 800C (Par. 1.2). The thermal 
expansion and conductivity are key parameters to consider during the design of the blanket 
reactor in order to avoid excessive changes in dimensions of the blanket with temperature, 
and also to maximise the heat transfer to the coolant. The thermal conductivity of the V alloy 
is meant to be good as higher than that of EUROFER, main candidate material for DEMO, 
which is about 30 W/mK between 400-800C [45]. Also the linear thermal expansion is 
better than in EUROFER since it is shorter, values for this latter alloy are 11.9 and 12.5 1/10
K at 400 and 600C respectively [46].  
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Table 2.5 Selected physical properties of the V-4Cr-4Ti alloy [44]. 
One other important property of V is its magnetic susceptibility  of 34.110
 [47] at standard 
conditions which relates the magnetization of a metal (M) with the applied magnetic field (H) 
according to the equation: M =  H. The sign of  is positive as the unpaired electrons align 
the spin accordingly to H. The magnetization of V is limited defining it as a paramagnetic 
metal that will not be affected relevantly by the magnetic fields applied to confine the plasma 
in the fusion nuclear reactor.  
2.3 Microstructure 
2.3.1  Recovery, recrystallization, grain growth  
The evolution of the deformed microstructure of V-4Cr-4Ti during annealing in the 
temperature range from RT to 1100C is shown in Figure 2.21. The V-4Cr-4Ti 
microstructure is recovered below 800C, and full recrystallization occurs in 1h at around 
1000C. At 1100C significant grain growth can be observed [48]. As revealed by the results 
of the differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) (Fig. 2.22), recrystallization starts at around 
900C, and before that recovery of the deformed microstructure takes place. Significant grain 
growth has been reported at 1100C, although Heo et al. showed that this phenomenon is 
dependent on the level of interstitials in the structure (Fig. 2.23). Results for pure V are 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
similar to those of the alloy, but shifted down in temperature by approximately 200C (Fig. 
2.24) [49, 50]. The presence of a fine dispersion of precipitates (Par. 2.3.2) in alloyed V 
would retard recrystallization and grain growth by Zener pinning mechanism. 
Figure 2.21 Microstructure evolution during annealing after cold rolling. The annealing was carried out 
for an hour at the selected temperature [51]. 
Figure 2.22 DSC thermogram for V-4Cr-4Ti obtained at a heating rate of 20 C/min [49]. 
600 C 1100 C 1000 C 900 C 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.23 Changes of grain size from 900 to 1100C in three V-4Cr-4Ti alloys                                             
varying in oxygen content [51]. 
It is worth noticing that Nagasaka et al. did not find any relevant effect of O and N on the 
grain growth of pure V [49]. Similarly to the previous review of Harrod and Gold [50], 
Nagasaka et al. found that the recrystallization starts around 700C (Fig. 2.24). 
Figure 2.24 Recovery, recrystallization, and grain-growth behaviour in pure vanadium [50]. 
Increasing 
oxygen 
content 
900 C 1000 C 1100 C 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
2.3.2   Nanoscale precipitation  
The microstructure of the V-4Cr-4Ti alloy is characterized by precipitates of Ti with 
interstitials (O, N, C) in the bcc matrix, see Fig. 2.25 and 2.26. In the production of the                       
V-4Cr-4Ti alloy (NIFS-Heat-1), three types of precipitates were found [51-54]:  
(a)  Blocky Ti-rich precipitates containing N, O and C, which are formed from the early 
stage of fabrication (hot forging at 1150C and hot rolling at 1100C). These 
precipitates are stable up to 1100C (blocky precipitates). 
(b)  Thin Ti(O,C,N) precipitates which form during annealing above 700C and dissolve 
at 1000-1100C (thin precipitates). 
(c)  VC precipitates which form at grain boundaries at 1100C (GB precipitates) as a 
consequence of the release of C from the dissolution of the thin Ti(O,C,N) 
precipitates. 
Figure 2.25 Precipitate formation and distribution during the fabrication process of the V-4Cr-4Ti                     
alloy (NIFS-Heat-1) [53]. 
1150C 700C            900C           1100 C 
 1100C 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.26 TEM images of the V-4Cr-4Ti alloy (NIFS-Heat-1) annealed at 1000 and 1100C. Two kinds 
of precipitates were observed at 1000C. Only larger precipitates were observed at 1100C [51]. 
The presence of Ti precipitates should not be surprising if we consider the relatively high free 
Gibbs energy formation of Ti oxide (Tab. 2.4). Moreover V and Ti have a substantial 
difference in the crystal structure that would make the mixing harder, indeed theoretical 
investigation showed that Ti-V alloys exhibit a clear tendency towards phase separation [55]. 
The precipitate distribution can be tailored by solution annealing (SA) at 1100C followed by 
a second annealing at lower temperatures for re-precipitation, see Fig. 2.18 [21]. A high 
density of precipitates was present at 700C. The density of precipitates decreased with 
increasing temperature. The majority of the precipitates were again dissolved at 1000C and 
they do not appear in the microstructure at higher temperatures.  
A significant hardening effect occurred already at 600C. This effect was related to the 
presence of submicroscopic precipitates [21, 56]. The hardening at 600C continued to 
increase with the annealing time (Fig. 2.28a). According to Muroga et al. [57], re-heating at 
600C for 20 h after precipitate dissolution is the best thermal treatment to improve the 
mechanical properties of this alloy, because the density of fine precipitate is the highest. 
Analogous hardening has not been found with prolonged annealing at 750C. At this 
temperature a coarsening of the initial precipitates was observed (Fig. 2.29) simultaneously 
with a reduction in hardening (Fig. 2.28b) [57]. A heat treatment which maximizes the Ti-
rich precipitates is considered to be effective in order to obtain good impact properties, 
because the interstitial atoms (C, O, N) in the matrix are bound by titanium atoms to form 
nano-precipitates. 
1100C 1000C 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.27 Microstructure evolution of V-4Cr-4Ti (NIFS-HEAT-2) as a function of the annealing 
temperature, after an initial solubilisation treatment at 1100C for 1 h [21]. 
600C 700C 
900C 
1100C 
800C 
1000C 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.28 Vickers hardness as a function of annealing time at (a) 600C and (b) 750C, after precipitate 
dissolution at 1100C for 1 h [57]. 
Figure 2.29 TEM images of the microstructure after solubilisation and subsequent annealing at 750C for 
different periods of time [57]. 
In the temperature range of 700-900C, Ti-enriched plate-like precipitates form with {100} 
habit planes lying along the V {001} habit planes (Fig. 2.20) [58]. The Ti(C,N,O) precipitates 
adopt a NaCl-type crystal structure with a lattice constant at RT of 0.418nm [59, 60]. The 
precipitate formation seems to be controlled mainly by the oxygen concentration in the 
matrix. However, at long annealing times precipitation could not arise only from the oxygen 
atoms already present in the alloy before annealing. There may be an additional contribution 
precipitate formation 
precipitate coarsening 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
coming from those oxygen atoms coming from atmosphere even if we are operating at 
reduced pressures or inert atmospheres [61, 62]. The possibility of external oxygen 
contamination has been previously studied, and results show that additional oxygen atoms are 
absorbed in the specimen surface (500 nm). This increased the oxygen concentration to about 
100 wppm in 2 h, and enhanced the precipitation [62].  
2.4 Mechanical properties 
2.4.1  Toughness 
Fracture toughness is very important property, since in a future fusion reactor the ductile-to-
brittle transition temperature (DBTT) is required to remain below the operational 
temperatures of the reactor. Fig. 2.30 shows the Charpy test results of V-4Cr-4Ti after 
different annealing treatments which led to the different degrees of precipitation  discussed in 
section 2.3.2. The DBTT rises with the annealing temperature above 1000C, due to the 
dissolution of Ti(C,N,O) precipitates [56]. The changes in the DBTT with the amount of O, 
C, N and H present in the matrix are shown in Fig. 2.22. The release of interstitial atoms to 
the matrix at those high temperatures exerts a pinning effect on the gliding of dislocations. If 
the movement of dislocations is impeded, less plastic deformation (and so less absorbed 
energy) will occur before the induced crack propagates all through the sample fracturing it.  
Figure 2.30 Charpy test results of V-4Cr-4Ti (NIFS-HEAT-2) annealed at different temperatures for 1 h  
[56]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.31 DBTT in V as function of the amount of interstitial atoms [50]. 
K. Sakai et al. found that DBTT of V-4Cr-4Ti and V-7Cr-4Ti alloys was around -190C [63] 
(see Fig. 2.32), while for the alloys containing 10 wt% Cr the DBTT raised to -30C. Further 
increase in chromium content shifts the DBTT above room temperature. It is possible to 
increase Cr concentrations as high as 7wt% in VxCr4Ti alloys without degrading the 
impact properties, but this would cause excessive irradiation hardening [63].  
Figure 2.32 Ductile-to-brittle transition temperature (DBTT) of VxCr4Ti alloys as a function of the Cr 
concentration. The circles represent specific heat treatment conditions to obtain a mean grain size of 17 
m. The triangles correspond to a  microstructure annealed at 950 C for 1 h [63]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
2.4.2  Strength 
Pure vanadium 
The stress-strain curves of pure vanadium as a function of temperature are shown in 
Fig. 2.33, while the yield strength (y) and ultimate tensile strength (UTS) are displayed in 
Fig. 2.34. The stress-strain behaviour of vanadium is similar to that of other bcc metals. The 
behaviour is characterized by a strong temperature dependence of the yield and tensile 
strength with maxima at around 400C [50]. 
Figure 2.33 Stress-strain curves of pure vanadium as function of temperature [50]. 
Figure 2.34 (a) Yield strength and (b) ultimate tensile strength of various grades of commercial pure 
vanadium as a function of temperature [50]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Effect of substitutional atoms 
Fig. 2.35 shows the variation of the UTS with temperature for different chromium contents. 
Cr clearly increases the high-temperature strength of the material. Additionally, Cr is also 
added to increase the creep resistance of the alloy [10]. Ti in turn increases significantly the 
swelling resistance of the alloy (Par. 2.5.1), and also improves creep strength up to about 
3wt.%. However, further Ti additions reduce the creep strength of this alloy [10]. Further 
details are presented in paragraph 2.4.3 regard the effect of substitutional atoms on the creep 
properties. 
Figure 2.35 Temperature dependence of ultimate tensile strength for V-xCr-(4-5)Ti alloys with increasing 
chromium contents [64]. 
Effect of interstitials atoms 
The mechanical properties of V-4Cr-4Ti depend on the concentration of interstitial atoms 
such as O, N, and C. These elements provide additional solution hardening to the matrix 
(section 2.3.2). The effect of those elements on the mechanical properties can be observed in 
Fig. 2.36. This figure shows the results of the tensile tests of the NIFS-Heat1 V-4Cr-4Ti alloy 
(56 C, 181 O, 103 N wppm), together with previous data on similar samples, at different 
temperatures [65]. The authors noticed a slight deviation of the NIFS-Heat1 results from the 
group average: the UTS was lower and the UE higher. This is probably due to a significant 
reduction of the concentration of interstitials in the matrix. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.36 Temperature dependence of ultimate tensile strength and uniform elongation for the 
NIFS-Heat1 alloys annealed at 950 and 1000 C, together with previous data on similar alloys [65]. 
Figure 2.37 shows the recovery curves for pure V for different amounts of N and O in the 
matrix [49]. An increase in N and O content causes a clear shift of the hardness vs annealing 
temperature curve to higher values, but the behaviour observed as a function of temperature 
remains unaltered. 
Figure 2.37 Variation in hardness of vanadium with temperature at different concentrations of N and O               
in wppm [49]. 
Code N O 
V-EB-1 12 290 
V-LI 91 43 
V-N-3 540 56 
V-O-3 140 920 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Wrapping vanadium and its alloys in Zr foils for annealing treatments has proved to be an 
efficient technique to remove interstitials from the vanadium surface and prevent O pick-up 
from the furnace atmosphere [66]. Fig. 2.38a shows the changes in grain size, resistivity ratio 
and hardness for different annealing temperatures in the case of samples with and without Zr 
wrapping. The evolution of the concentration of C, N and O is shown in Fig. 2.38b. The 
samples wrapped in Zr foils present lower concentration of O, N, and C and an enhanced 
grain growth at temperatures  higher than 1000C. 
Figure 2.38 (a) Effect of wrapping vanadium samples in Zr foil on the resultant of vanadium at different 
temperatures, (b) Effect of annealing temperature on the concentration of carbon, nitrogen and oxygen. 
The annealing time was 1 h [66]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
2.4.3  Thermal creep 
Thermal creep is defined as the time-dependent plasticity that occurs in materials under a 
constant stress at elevated temperatures [67]. Figure 2.39 gives an example of the general 
variation of the materials elongation with time during a creep test. Three different stages can 
be observed:  
I. Primary creep. The creep-rate is relatively high, but decreases with increasing time 
due to work hardening effects in the material. 
II. Secondary creep. The creep-rate has reached a constant value that is maintained over 
a relatively long time. This zone is also called steady-state region and, it is due to a 
balance between work hardening and annealing of lattice defects. 
III. Tertiary creep. This is the last stage before the rupture of the material. The creep-rate 
exponentially increases with stress as a consequence of the necking of the sample.  
Figure 2.39 Illustrative example of the variation of the elongation () of a material with time (t) during a 
thermal creep experiment. The three different stages during creep are indicated in the figure, together with 
the geometrical explanation of the creep-rate at the steady-state () [67]. 
In a first approximation during secondary creep, the creep-rate in the steady-state () as a 
function of the applied stress () can be described using the following equation [67]:  
 =     
/                                                      (4) 
stage stage stage 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
A is a constant, Qc the activation energy of the creep process, k the Boltzmanns constant and 
n the creep exponent. 
The value of n is indicative of the creep mechanism. Some examples are given below: 
 n = 5 (but could range between 4 and 7): dislocation climb (or creep). The metal is 
plastically deformed by climbing of dislocations. The activation energy Qc of the 
creep process has often been found to be similar to that of self-diffusion. 
 n = 3: dislocation (or viscous) glide. The metal is plastically deformed by movement 
of dislocations that occurs by two competing mechanism: climb and glide. This latter 
is slower and thus it is rate controlling. 
 n = 2: superplasticity. The metal is plastically deformed mainly as a result of the 
weakening of the grain boundaries. The grains would slide each other in a mechanism 
called grain boundary sliding (GBS).  
 n = 1: diffusion creep. The metal is plastically deformed via the diffusion of vacancies 
to the grain boundaries through the grains (Nabarro-Herring creep) or, at lower 
temperatures, along the grain boundaries (Coble creep). 
Each mechanism occurs in a specific range of pressure and temperature. Beyond these 
experimental limits, eq. (4) is not more able to predict the creep-rates and when power-law-
breakdown (PLB) occurs [67]. It is not uncommon that several mechanisms occur 
simultaneously, in that case it is possible to determine the predominant mechanism. 
In the case of the V-4Cr-4Ti alloy, it has been reported that the predominant creep 
mechanisms are dislocation glide and climb, in the range between 100 and 300 MPa and at 
around 700 C [40, 68]. Zheng et al. carried out creep tests at 700 and 750C (Fig. 2.40) for 
several NIFS-Heat-2 plates treated following different thermo-mechanical routes (Table 2.6). 
For STD, they found that the creep mechanism below 180 MPa is dislocation climb because 
the estimated activation energy, Qc, takes a value of 243 kJ/mol, consistent with the self-
diffusion activation energy of vanadium (about 270 kJ/mol at 700-800C) [50]. Above             
180 MPa, dislocation glide is considered to operate since Qc becomes much higher: 360-
580 kJ/mol for  = 220-240 MPa [15]. A similar behaviour has been found for the SAACW 
sample and so its creep mechanisms are considered the same as STD. However, the creep 
mechanism of SACWA does not change to dislocation glide. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Table 2.6 Description of several thermo-mechanical treatments [15]. 
Abbreviation Treatment Conditions 
STD Standard 1000C for 2 h 
SAA Solution Annealed and Aged 1100C for 1 h + 600C for 20 h 
SAACW Solution Annealed, Aged and Cold-Worked SAA + 20% cold-working 
SACWA Solution Annealed, Cold-Worked and Aged 1100C for 1 h + 20% cold-working + 
600C for 20 h 
The average grain size of the alloy in SAA and STD states was about 28 m and 18 m, respectively 
Figure 2.40 Steady-state creep rate dependence on the applied stress at (a) 700C and (b) at 750C [15]. 
Figure 2.41 shows the results of uniaxial and biaxial creep tests for the V4Cr4Ti 
(US 832665) and V3Fe4Ti alloys [11]. A uniaxial test is the classical creep experiment 
where the stress acts in one direction. In biaxial tests the sample geometry is cylindrical and 
inside it a liquid or a gas under pressure is placed. That liquid/gas will exert a force against 
the inner walls of the tube causing its creep deformation. The advantage of biaxial tests is the 
possibility to simulate the expected conditions of pressure and temperature inside the pipes of 
a blanket cooling system in the fusion reactor. The resultant creep activation energy Qc was 
299 kJ/mol, close to the self-diffusion activation energy of vanadium. These results confirm 
that the predominant creep mechanism in V-4Cr-4Ti at 700-800C is dislocation glide for 
effective stresses ranging from 50 to 120 MPa. 
The creep mechanism for STD and 
SAACW changes to dislocation glide 
above 180 MPa 
Above 180 MPa the creep 
mechanism for SACWA is still 
dislocation climb and does not 
change 
The creep mechanism for all the 
samples is dislocation climb below 
180 MPa 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.41 Stress dependence of the normalized effective mid-wall creep strain for unirradiated                                
V4Cr4Ti and V3Fe4Ti, D is the diffusion coefficient, G the shear modulus and b the burgers vector 
[11]. 
Interstitial atoms in the lattice can increase the activation energy Qc after interactions with 
vacancies. Creep experiments at 100 and 150 MPa have been performed for the 
(NIFS-Heat-2) V-4Cr-4Ti alloy, which has a lower amount of interstitials than the (US 
832665) V-4Cr-4Ti alloy, and the activation energy resulted to be 210 kJ/mol. This reduction 
in activation energy may be due to the lower amount of interstitials atoms in the matrix, 
which increase the potential barrier for the vacancy diffusion since interstitials act as a 
trapping site for vacancies, leading in VCrTi alloys to the formation of vacancy complexes 
between the Ti and the interstitial atom which could act as an obstacle for the dislocation 
motion [14].  
Kurtz et al. [11] pointed out that at low pressures the creep mechanism could be different 
from dislocation creep. For the lowest stress specimens tested at 800C the occurrence of 
other mechanisms such as Coble creep in conjunction with dislocation creep, cannot be 
excluded due to the relatively fine grain size (20 m) and, especially, due to the decrease of 
the creep exponent to a value close to 1. Proof of a diffusional creep mechanism was 
provided by Gelles et al. [68]. They found that precipitate particles appeared to accumulate 
mainly on the grain boundaries oriented perpendicularly to the stress direction (Fig. 2.42). 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Indeed, in diffusion creep, the grain boundaries oriented perpendicularly to the stress 
direction are those with the higher vacancies concentration, and so with the higher probability 
of precipitation due to the formation of Ti-vacancy complexes precursors of Ti precipitates 
[69]. 
Figure 2.42 Precipitation at grain boundaries in the specimen tested by Gelles et al. [68]. 
Returning to the results in Fig. 2.40, the (steady-state) creep rates ranged between 10
. These results are in accordance with the theoretical creep map proposed by Zinkle 
and Lucas [70]. Using the established constitutive equations of Sherby and Miller [71] of 
several creep mechanisms, the authors calculated the deformation map for V4Cr4Ti (Fig. 
2.43) at two different strain rates. They assumed a grain size of 30m, close to the typical 
values (18-35m) reported in several experimental studies. The diffusion creep mechanism 
(Nabarro-Herring and Coble) is almost present only in the deformation map at 10
 since 
the motion of vacancies cannot drive creep at higher strain rates. Together with dislocation 
creep, it has a significant contribution and more experiments are suggested to define the 
border between the occurrences of these different creep mechanisms. Glide range does not 
change increasing the strain rate dislocation, but the start dislocation creep shifts at higher 
temperatures. If the strain rate increases, dislocation creep is sustained only if dislocations 
can move faster and a higher temperature is so required.  
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.43 Predicted deformation maps for V-4Cr-4Ti at a strain rate of (a) 10
 and (b) 10
 [70]. 
The effect of the alloying elements is now addressed. Figure 2.44 shows for V-Ti alloys a 
creep resistance peak at around 3 wt% of Ti, further addition becomes deleterious for the 
creep resistance. The substitutional hardening effect of Ti is overpassed by the effect of Ti 
over the recovery of V during creep [50] that would occur earlier due to the lowering of the 
melting point (Par. 2.2.2). Creep rate increases with the addition of Cr even up to 15 wt% as 
shown in Figure 2.45.  
Figure 2.44 Creep exponent n dependence with Ti concentration in V [50]. 
Figure 2.45 Creep rates in V-Cr-Ti alloys [50]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
2.5 Irradiation effects 
2.5.1   Material activation  
Another advantageous property of vanadium alloys for application as first-wall materials is 
the low activation probability when in contact with 14 MeV neutrons. Unfortunately, the low 
activation properties of the material are modified by the level of interstitial atoms. In Figure 
2.46a the dose rate as a function of the time for the three V-4Cr-4Ti grades is shown, together 
with the theoretical curve for the ideal pure vanadium material. The contribution of each 
potential element present in the vanadium microstructure is reported in Fig. 2.46b. Co-60 
provides the most dominant contribution for cooling times up to 60 years [72]. 
Figure 2.46 (a) Dose rate as a function of cooling time for V-alloys and (b) contributions of different 
nuclides to the dose rate of the NIFS-HEAT-2 alloy [72]. 
New development efforts are required to reduce the level of active species in the matrix 
during the material production. Table 2.7 shows the maximum amounts allowed for two 
recycling mechanisms: the remote and the hands-on mechanism. In the first case, the operator 
can handle radioactive materials only through remote devices such as robotic arms, while in 
the last case the operator, with appropriate clothing protection, can handle the radioactive 
materials directly. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Table 2.7 Required impurity level (wppm) for recycling the first wall materials [72]. 
2.5.2 Irradiation hardening and embrittlement  
Radiation induced precipitation 
Radiation induced hardening and embrittlement occur at relatively low temperatures and in 
the case of vanadium alloys, there is a threshold temperature around 400C, below which 
significant radiation hardening has been observed even at a radiation level of 0.1-0.5 dpa  
[69]. This effect may be attributed to the presence of high densities of fine defect clusters and 
fine Ti precipitates containing interstitials (C, O and N) after irradiation [59, 73]. Radiation 
induces so a phase transition (Par. 1.3) that in this case regards Ti(O, C, N)  precipitation. The 
reduction of the interstitials is expected to improve the radiation resistance of the alloys at 
low temperatures [20]. The harmful effect of the impurities has been confirmed by Fukumoto 
et al. [74]. Fig. 2.26 shows that irradiation hardening decrease in V-4Cr-4Ti purified with a 
Zr-treatment [74]. 
Figure 2.47 shows the change of selected mechanical properties after irradiation. It is worth 
noting that irradiation hardening in pure vanadium does not change significantly when the 
metal is alloyed with 5 wt.% of Ti or Cr. However, if a slight amount of Ti is added to the V-
5Cr alloy, the irradiation hardening suddenly increases. In the V-4Cr-0.1Ti and V-4Cr-0.3Ti 
alloys, high densities of tiny voids (5nm) were formed homogeneously in the irradiated 
microstructure while for V-5Cr alloy, a high density of voids (10nm) was formed under the 
same irradiation conditions. However, those 10nm voids were inhomogeneously distributed 
around the dislocations. Titanium is an oversized atom for the vanadium matrix, and disturbs 
the vacancy diffusion in the matrix and therefore hinders the growth of voids. Indeed, Ti has 
been reported to prevent irradiation swelling in vanadium alloys [75]. The main source of 
irradiation hardening is considered to be void formation in V-4Cr-0.1Ti and V-4Cr-0.3Ti, and 
Ti(O, C, N) precipitates induced by irradiation in V-4Cr-1Ti and V-4Cr-4Ti [73]. The 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
precipitates present a TiO type structure with a lattice parameter of 4.18 at RT [59, 60]. The 
crystallographic relationship between the precipitates and the vanadium matrix was 
determined to be (110)precipitate// (100)matrix and  <011> precipitate // <011> matrix [74]. 
Irradiation is so anticipating the Ti (O, C, N) precipitation that would occur from 600C (Par. 
2.3.2). This phase transformation is facilitated also by the enhanced Ti diffusion during 
irradiation. As Ti is oversized atom, the activation energy for a vacancy to diffuse by 
exchange with a Ti atom will be lower than that by exchange with a V atom. Both V and Ti, 
are substitutional atoms and require the coordination with a vacancy to diffuse; those 
generated by irradiation will preferentially interact with Ti atoms, improving its diffusion 
rates [75]. 
Figure 2.48 shows the microstructural differences between two pure vanadium specimens 
with different concentration of interstitials after irradiation to 1dpa. Interstitials affect the 
microstructural evolution of pure V after irradiation at 400C: the void nucleation that is more 
predominant in the most purified samples since vacancies can move easier [20]. For alloyed 
V, Zr-treated V-4Cr-4Ti alloys have significantly reduced irradiation hardening at 425C                      
(Fig. 2.47). However, no voids and differences in microstructure, dominated by dislocation 
loops and Ti(O, C, N) precipitates, were observed between the untreated Zr-treated 
specimens, see  Fig. 2.49 and Fig. 2.50. 
Figure 2.47 Changes of yield stress (y), ultimate tensile stress (UTS), and uniform elongation (u) by 
neutron irradiation up to 3.7 dpa for pure vanadium and selected alloys [74]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.48 TEM micrographs of pure vanadium irradiated with 4MeV Cu to a damage level of 1 dpa. The 
two upper images correspond to as-received vanadium containing 170 wppm O, while the bottom images 
are from Zr-treated highly purified vanadium containing 15 wppm O [20]. 
Figure 2.49 Examples of TEM microstructures of untreated and Zr-treated V-4Cr-4Ti alloys irradiated at 
425 C and 598 C in HFIR. B = [001], g = (110) [74] at 3.7 dpa. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.50 Size distributions of precipitates for untreated and Zr-treated V-4Cr-4Ti alloys irradiated at 
425 C [74]. 
Fukumoto et al. [74] suggested that the reduction of irradiation hardening in the V-4Cr-4Ti 
alloys is due to the fact that almost all the interstitials atoms have formed precipitates leaving 
the matrix free from them. In not Zr-treated specimen, interstitial atoms are still present in the 
matrix even after the precipitation. The amount of interstitial atoms in the matrix seems to 
play an important role as barrier against dislocation motion favouring irradiation hardening. 
The pinning effect of the interstitials (Par. 2.4.1) prevents dislocation loops to annihilate at 
the defect sinks. 
About the nucleation of precipitates induced by irradiation, PAS measurements [69] detected 
voids rich of Ti for samples irradiated below 300C. Itis believed that O and other interstitials 
may reach these voids, invisible to TEM, forming an atmosphere that reacts with the Ti 
leading the precipitate nuclei.  
He bubble formation 
He is insoluble in metals and tends to form bubbles in the microstructure. This causes 
swelling and degradation of the mechanical properties of the material. The amount of He and 
H in V-4Cr-4Ti are of 855 and 4050 appm respectively at 15 MWy/m
 [76]. The parameters 
characterizing the formation of helium bubbles and swelling by implanting of helium ions in 
vanadium alloys at 650C are collected in Table 2.8.  
Doping with titanium (from 0.1 to 10%) considerably decreases helium swelling as compared 
to pure vanadium. Ti has no significant effect on the density of the bubbles by decreasing the 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
average size of the bubbles [77]. Fe is an undersized substitutional atom in the V matrix and 
so it acts as a sink for interstitial helium atoms preventing their diffusion. This is most likely 
why the addition of 1wt.% Fe prevented the growth of the He bubbles and the corresponding 
swelling. However, when the iron concentration is increased the bubble size and the swelling 
started to grow continuously. In conclusion, the minimum bubble size and swelling are 
observed in the alloy with the maximum content of titanium (V-10Ti) and also in the 
reference V-4Cr-4Ti alloy. 
Table 2.8 Parameters characterizing the formation of helium bubbles in vanadium and its alloys (dmax, 
dav, dm.l  maximum, average, and most likely bubble size, respectively; density () and swelling (S%)) 
[69]. 
The effect of the He bubble formation on the mechanical properties of vanadium alloys is not 
fully understood. According to Chen et al. [17] helium embrittlement is critical to determine 
the upper temperature limit of vanadium alloys. According to Kurtz et al. [78], He ion 
implantation plays a significant role in the reduction of the ductility at elevated temperatures. 
But with the subsequent neutron irradiation, the effect of He implantation seems to become 
insignificant. The implanted He seemed to have positive effect on creep property if small 
dispersive He clusters are formed in the matrix.  
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Swelling due to void formation 
Pure vanadium presents a bcc crystal structure at RT and good swelling resistance. 
Experimental results on the swelling of vanadium and selected vanadium-based alloys are 
summarized in Fig. 2.51. Vanadium and vanadium alloys exhibit peak swelling at ~525 C 
under fast neutron irradiation [79, 80]. Experiments have shown that titanium concentrations 
of only a few percent in the alloy greatly suppress swelling as compared to pure vanadium 
[79, 80]. High swelling resistance has been reported in a number of vanadium alloys. The 
estimated total dose for swelling of V-Cr-Ti alloys would be > 250 dpa [81]. It is worth to 
notice that swelling is almost totally suppressed even at very high dose in all the vanadium 
alloys with Ti. It happens that vacancies produced by irradiation are trapped by Ti which is 
oversized with respect to V. Strain-energy considerations predict indeed that vacancies will 
preferentially exchange with oversize solute atoms rather than agglomerate in voids [75]. 
Figure 2.51 Swelling of pure and alloyed vanadium caused by neutron and ion irradiation [81]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
2.5.3 Irradiation creep 
Creep can be induced by irradiation at temperatures where thermal creep is not significant. 
This would cause failure of blanket components even though creep is not expected to occur. 
At high temperatures radiation- and thermally-induced creep take place simultaneously [82]. 
Irradiation creep is therefore a critical issue to consider when selecting the structural 
materials for the blanket. Figure 2.52 shows experimental creep data for the V-4Cr-4Ti (US 
832665) neutron irradiated in different reactors: HFIR 17J [83], ATR A1 [84, 85], HFIR 12J 
[86], and by Troyanov et al. [87]. Irradiation creep strain seemed to be proportional to the 
applied stress below 120MPa at irradiation temperatures of 400-600C. 
By subtracting the thermal creep strain from the total strain, we can derive the irradiation and 
the thermal contributions to the total strain. These contributions are plotted in Fig. 2.53 as a 
function of the applied stress for V4Cr4Ti irradiated at 600C in the HFIR 17J test reactor 
[16]. The contribution coming from the irradiation creep is much higher than that of the 
thermal creep, which confirms that this was the main cause of the material deformation at that 
temperature. The activation energy for irradiation creep is considered to be significantly 
lower than the one corresponding to thermal creep [17]. 
Figure 2.53 Irradiation creep data obtained for the V-4Cr-4Ti alloy irradiated with neutrons in                                 
different test reactors [16, 84-87]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.53 Irradiation creep strain and thermal creep strain as a function of stress the V-4Cr-4Ti alloy 
irradiated to 3.7 dpa at 600C. Thermal creep was predicted using a power-law dislocation model. Open 
circles represent the best estimate, while open triangles represent the upper bound estimate [16]. 
A more recent study of the creep of V4Cr4Ti alloy (NIFS-Heat-2) irradiated in the 
Japanese JOYO test reactor at 425600C to 1.8-5 dpa showed no difference with the 
previous US 832665 heat (see Fig. 2.54). Moreover, experiments where also carried in liquid 
Li and Na and no significant differences were observed between the two metallic liquids. The 
reason to perform creep experiments in liquid Li was to simulate the blanket conditions 
during operation [88].  
Figure 2.54 Irradiation creep data of the V-4Cr-4Ti (US 832665) alloy, closed circles [16]; V-4Cr-4Ti 
(NIFS-Heat) alloy in liquid lithium, open circles [80]; V-4Cr-4Ti (NIFS-Heat) alloy in liquid sodium, 
closed triangles [88]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
In order to study the contributions of thermal and irradiation creep to the overall creep 
process, several experiments have been performed with and without irradiation keeping the 
other experimental conditions constant (Table 2.9). In the range between 450 and 600C 
irradiation creep strain was significantly larger than thermal creep, implying that it is the 
predominant creep during neutron irradiation at those temperatures. 
Table 2.9 Results of creep tests with and without irradiation of V4Cr4Ti alloys in liquid sodium 
environment with same conditions of creep temperature, creep period and internal pressure [89].  
Neutron dose and estimated damage level at 419 and 560 C were respectively 2.4  10
 (1.5 dpa) and 6.7  10
 (4.2 dpa) 
At temperatures below 500C, the irradiation creep was found to be proportional to the 
square root of the damage level (Fig. 2.55) and to be linearly proportional to the stress level 
(Fig. 2.56). Above 500C, the irradiation creep strain appeared to be proportional to the stress 
level but with a power exponent higher than the unity [89].  
Figure 2.55 A plot of the effective irradiation creep strain as a function of neutron dose for V4Cr4Ti 
alloys irradiated at 450C [89]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.56The effective irradiation creep strain as a function of stress for V4Cr 4Ti alloys irradiated at 
temperatures close to 450C [89]. 
2.6 Previous efforts to improve the mechanical properties in radiation 
environments 
2.6.1 Tailored thermo-mechanical treatment 
Several attempts have been carried out to improve the alloy resistance to thermal creep by 
thermo-mechanical treatments. A solution annealing plus aging (Table 2.6), SAA, seems to 
be the thermal treatment that provides the highest precipitation hardening [21]. Unfortunately 
the expected operating temperature in the fusion reactor may reach 800C. At this 
temperature precipitate coarsening would occur leading to a degradation of the optimized 
precipitation distribution at 600C. The precipitate coarsening may be reduced at higher 
temperatures through cold working after aging (SAACW, see Table 2.6). The dislocations 
produced by cold rolling would trap interstitial atoms and would prevent a significant 
precipitate coarsening during operation. Figure 2.48 shows the effect of cold working on the 
SAA sample during subsequent aging at 800C. The dislocations introduced by cold work 
suppressed the precipitate coarsening during high-temperature aging [90]. The creep rates for 
different thermo-mechanical treatments have been reported in Fig. 2.40. SACWA showed the 
best creep resistance at the higher stresses. This sample kept dislocation climbing-assisted 
creep mechanism at larger stress levels than SAACW and STD. This may be due to the 
pinning of dislocations by the high density of fine precipitates formed along these latter [15]. 
At low stress levels ( <180 MPa), the dislocations act as vacancy sinks [91], enhancing the 
dislocation climb mechanism and leading for SACWA a higher creep rate than that of 
SAACW and STD [15]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.57 The evolution of precipitate size and density with the aging time at 800C for SAA specimens. 
The data in ellipses are for SAACW specimens after the creep deformations [90]. 
The fact that the dislocation in SACWA can be pinned by the precipitates seems confirmed 
from the comparison of the microstructure after and before 60h creep test at 176 MPa and 
750C (Fig. 2.58). The recovery of dislocation is not visible as in Fig. 2.59, which shows 
instead the microstructure evolution of a STD sample 20% cold worked, creep deformed 
under the same condition [92]. 
Regarding the characterization of the dislocation nature, it has been found that cold working 
induces in V-4Cr-4Ti alloys a mixture of a<100> and a/2<111> dislocation types after 
thermal aging. When a force is applied (creep deformation) the predominant type becomes 
a/2<111> [92]. Fig. 2.60 resumes the concentration of different dislocation types for several 
cold rolled samples while in Fig. 2.61 is provided an example of microstructure evidence 
from the SAACW sample. This latter has been heated at 750C for 80h both with and without 
176 MPa of applied pressure. 
800C 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.58 Comparison of microstructure of SACWA (a) as-prepared and (b) after creep deformation 
at 750C for 60 h at 176 MPa [92]. 
Figure 2.59 Recovery of dislocations induced by cold work during creep deformation at 750C and 176 
MPa for a STD specimen 20% cold rolled [92]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.60 Graph of the dislocation density listed by their type after aging (0 MPa) and creep test (0 
MPa) at 750C. Residual strain in cold worked specimen can make the dislocation analysis problematic 
leaving the dislocations unidentified [92]. 
Figure 2.61 Microstructure of the SAACW specimen after thermal aging (0 MPa) and creep test (175 
MPa) for 80h at 750C. Using the gb = 0 invisibility criterion, the dislocations in the circles 1,2 and 3 are 
attributable to the Burgers vectors b = a[100], b = a[010], and b = a/2[111], respectively. The 
dislocation in circle 4, and most in the row below (creep-deformed sample), have instead Burgers vector b 
= a/2[1-11] [92].  
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
The a<100> type dislocation is formed by interactions of a/2<111> dislocations at different 
planes during cold work [90]. As sessile, the a<100> type dislocation is meant to be stable 
and contributes so to the suppression of precipitate coarsening. Unfortunately this dislocation 
type recovers leaving a/2<111> dislocations, which are glissile (capable to move by glide) 
and so more mobile. In order to maintain high temperature strength, it should be avoided 
conditions that led to the recovery of a<100> dislocations. 
2.6.2 Removal of interstitials from the matrix 
In order to reduce the occurrence of irradiation hardening, the amount of interstitial atoms 
must be as low as possible. Besides an appropriate forging to prevent impurities pick up in 
the heat, the amount of free interstitials atoms in the matrix can be reduced by precipitation 
during annealing [54]. Direct aging at 900C for 1h seemed to be the best thermal treatment 
because the precipitation is maximised, as evidenced by the minimum in hardness (see                        
Fig. 2.46). After irradiation, however, the hardness did not change significantly from 800 to 
1000C, implying that the levels of interstitials in solution was similar. This is probably due 
to the irradiation-induced dissolution of the thin precipitates [54]. 
Figure 2.62 Vickers hardness as a function of the annealing temperature before and after irradiation. Note 
that the applied load is indicated in the figure and is different in the two cases [54]. 
It is possible to further reduce the amount of O by introducing yttrium (Y) in the alloy [93]. 
The Y addition was effective to slag-out oxygen due to the formation of Y2O3. It also 
provided protection from oxygen contamination during melting [93]. Oxygen concentration 
in the alloys decreased linearly with increasing yttrium addition (Fig. 2.63). 
800C 
900C 
1000C 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.63 Dependence of oxygen concentration on the amount of Y added to the alloy [94]. 
2.6.3 Refined grain size microstructure with nanoparticles as strengtheners 
Microstructures with a reduced grain size seem to behave better under irradiation. This is due 
to the high density of grain boundaries, which acts as a sink for irradiation induced defects 
[95]. V-Y alloys with a grain size of around 300nm have been obtained through powder 
metallurgical methods including mechanical alloying and hot isostatic pressing (sintering). 
Mechanical alloying (MA), if carried from high purity powders, is an effective method to 
obtain a material with a remarkable purity and reduced amount of interstitial in the matrix. 
The results from the sintered samples seem promising (Fig. 2.64): at 290C and 0.25 dpa the 
irradiation hardening was almost non-existent. Figure 2.65 shows the absence of voids for the 
V2.6Y alloy irradiated at 290C to 0.25 dpa, suggesting that the defects have been absorbed 
at the grain boundaries. However, at 800C there was an appreciable hardening effect. 
According to the authors, this hardening can be attributed to the precipitation induced by 
irradiation of Y2O3 and YN particles. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.64 Vickers microhardness before and after neutron irradiation in various conditions for V1.6Y 
and V2.6Y alloys,* the irradiation temperature ranged between 600C and 800C in 6 cycles [95]. 
Figure 2.65 TEM micrograph of the V2.6Y irradiated at 563 K to 0.25 dpa [95]. 
The dispersion of Y nanoparticles strengthens also V-4Cr-4Ti alloys and becomes effective to 
improve also its mechanical properties at the higher temperatures [96]. It has been found that 
the high number density of Y2O3 nano-particles is effective to improve creep resistance of V
4Cr4Ti1.5Y0.3TiC alloy under 100 MPa stopping the motion of dislocations as shown in 
Figure 2.66, overpassing the STD and SACWA samples [97]. Anyway at higher loads, due to 
the refined grain size, the creep resistance is the lowest [97]. 
290C 
290C 
600C 600C  800C* 
800C 
0.25 dpa   0.25 dpa   0.60 dpa   0.40 dpa   0.70 dpa 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
Figure 2.66 Creep rates of 40 h MA V4Cr4Ti1.5Y0.3TiC alloy compared with those of 
different thermo-mechanical treated samples of V-4Cr-4Ti (table 2.2) [97]. 
TiC, SiC and Ti3SiC2 particles can be added together to Y to enhance the performance. 
Understand the stability and the coarsening of the added particles under thermal treatment is 
fundamental to predict the performance of sintered V-4Cr-4Ti components [96]. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
2.7 References 
[1] P. Cintas, The Road to Chemical Names and Eponyms: Discovery, Priority, and Credit, 
(2004). 
[2] B.R. Rajala, R.J. Van Thyne, The development of improved vanadium-base alloys for use 
at temperatures up to 1800F, J Less Common Met 3 (1961) 489. 
[3] F.C. Holtz, R.J. Van Thyne, Pilot Evaluation of Vanadium Alloys, Report IITRI-B231-10 
Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute (Jan. 1964). 
[4] M. Bocek, H. Bhm, W. Schneider, The influence of neutron radiation on the yield stress 
and on some activation parameters of polycristalline vanadium, J Nucl Mater 40 (1971) 249. 
[5] M. Bocek, J. D. Elen, The dose and strain dependence of the activation volume of 
vanadium irradiated with fast neutrons, J Nucl Mater 44 (1972) 194. 
[6] D. Kaletta, The influence of temperature on the blister behavior of vanadium and binary 
V Ti-alloys during 200- and 2000-keV helium irradiation, J Nucl Mater 63 (1976) 347. 
[7] R.E. Gold, E.E. Bloom, F.W. Clinard, D.L. Smith, R.D. Stevenson, W.G. Wolfer, 
Materials technology for fusion: current status and future requirements, Nucl 
Technol/Fusion, 1 (1981) 169. 
[8] J. Bethin, A. Tobin, Application of vanadium and vanadium alloys, J Nucl Mater 122 & 
123 (1984) 864. 
[9] R.E. Gold, R. Bajaj, Mechanical properties of candidate vanadium alloys, J Nucl Mater 
122 & 123 (1984) 759. 
[10] D.R. Diercks, B.A. Loomis, Alloying and impurity effects in vanadium-base alloys, J 
Nucl Mater 141-143 (1986) 1117. 
[11] R.J. Kurtz, K. Abe, V.M. Chernov, V.A. Kazakov, G.E. Lucas, H. Matsui et al., Critical 
issues and current status of vanadium alloys for fusion energy applications, J Nucl Mater 
283-287 (2000) 70. 
[12] Y. Gohar, S. Majumdar, D. Smith, High power density self-cooled lithiumvanadium 
blanket, Fus Eng Des 4950 (2000) 551.  
[13] I.R. Kirillo, RF DEMO team, Lithium cooled blanket of RF DEMO reactor, Fusion Eng 
Des 4950 (2000) 457. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
[14] K.-i. Fukumoto,T. Nagasaka, T. Muroga, N. Nita, H. Matsui, Creep mechanism of highly 
purified V-4Cr-4Ti alloys during thermal creep in a vacuum, J Nucl Mater Materials 367370 
(2007) 834. 
[15] P.F. Zheng, T. Nagasaka, T. Muroga, J.M. Chen, Y.F. Li, Creep properties of V4Cr
4Ti strengthened by cold working and aging, Fus Eng Des 86 (2011) 2561. 
[16] M. Li, D.T. Hoelzer, M.L. Grossbeck, A.F. Rowcliffe, S.J. Zinkle, R.J. Kurtz, 
Irradiation creep of the US Heat 832665 of V4Cr4Ti, J Nucl Mater 386388 (2009) 618. 
[17] J.M. Chen, V.M. Chernov, R.J. Kurtz, T. Muroga, Overview of the vanadium alloy 
researches for fusion reactors, J Nucl Mater 417 (2011) 289.    
[18] H. Kuroiwa, K.-i. Fukumoto, M. Narui, H. Matsui, X. Qiu, Mechanical properties of 
neutron-irradiated vanadium alloys, J Nucl Mater 386388 (2009) 594. 
[19] M. Hatakeyama, T. Nagasaka, T. Muroga, T. Toyama, I. Yamagata, Irradiation-induced 
precipitation in V-4Cr-4Ti alloys studied using three-dimensional atom probe, J Nucl Mater 
Accepted Manuscript (2013). 
[20] K. Fukumoto, K. Takahashi, Y. Anma, H. Matsui, Effects of Impurities on 
Microstructural Evolution and Deformation Process of Ion-Irradiated VCrTi Alloys, Mater 
Trans, 46, 3 (2005) 503. 
[21] T. Muroga, T. Nagasaka, P.F. Zheng, J.M. Chen, Microstructural Control for Improving 
Properties of V-4Cr-4Ti Alloys, Adv Sci Tech 73 (2010) 22. 
[22] K. Srinivasa Rao, R. Balasubramaniam, Finite element evaluation of lattice distortions 
around hydrogen occupied interstitial sites in vanadium and niobium, ht. J. Hydrogen Energy 
21, 7 (1996) 563. 
[23] G. Aurelio, A.F. Guillermet, G.J. Cuello, and J. Campo, Metastable Phases in the Ti-V 
System: Part I. Neutron Diffraction Study and Assessment of Structural Properties, Metall 
Mater Trans A 33A (2002) 1310. 
[24] M. Tsukahara, Hydrogenation Properties of Vanadium-Based Alloys 
with Large Hydrogen Storage Capacity, Mater Trans, 52 (2011) 68. 
[25] J.Y. Lee, J.H. Kim, S. Park, H.M. Lee, Phase equilibrium of the TiCrV ternary system 
in the non-burning -Ti alloy region, J Alloy Compd 291 (1999) 229. 
[26] G. Ghosh, Thermodynamic and Kinetic Modeling of the Cr-Ti-V System, J Phase Equilib 
23 (2002) 310. 
[27] H.A. Wriedt, V-O Phase Diagram, ASM Alloy Phase Diagram Database, P. Villars, 
editor-in-chief; H. Okamoto and K. Cenzual, section editors, ASM International, Materials 
Park, OH, 2006. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
[28] M. Cancarevic, M. Zinkevich, and F. Aldinger, Thermodynamic Description of the Ti-O 
System Using the Associate Model for the Liquid Phase, Calphad, 31 (2007) 330. 
[29] M. Enomoto, V-Ti-O Phase Diagram, ASM Alloy Phase Diagram Database, P. Villars, 
editor-in-chief; H. Okamoto and K. Cenzual, section editors, ASM International, Materials 
Park, OH, 2007. 
[30] M. Enomoto, V-Ti-C Phase Diagram, ASM Alloy Phase Diagram Database, P. Villars, 
editor-in-chief; H. Okamoto and K. Cenzual, section editors, ASM International, Materials 
Park, OH, 2006. 
[31] M. Enomoto, V-Ti-N Phase Diagram, ASM Alloy Phase Diagram Database, P. Villars, 
editor-in-chief; H. Okamoto and K. Cenzual, section editors, ASM International, Materials 
Park, OH, 2007. 
[32] B.M. Pabn, J.I. Beltrn, G. Snchez-Santolino, I. Palacio, J. Lpez-Snchez, J. 
Rubio-Zuazo et al., Formation of titanium monoxide (001) single-crystalline thin film 
induced by ion bombardment of titanium dioxide (110). Nat Commun 6:6147 doi: 
10.1038/ncomms7147 (2015). 
[33] Toth, L.E., Transition Metal Carbides and Nitrides. New York: Academic Press (1967).. 
[34] W. F. Smith, Foundations of Materials Science and Engineering, 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill 
(2004). 
[35] D.A. Porter, K.E. Easterling, M. Sherif, Phase Transformations in Metals and Alloys, 
3rd ed. CRC press (2009). 
[36] R. Li, P. Zhang, X. Li, C. Zhang, J. Zhao, First-principles study of the behavior of O, N 
and C impurities in vanadium solids, J Nucl Mater 435 (2013) 71. 
[37] E.J. Mittemeijer, Fundamentals of Materials Science, Springer (2010). 
[38] P. Shewmon, Diffusion in Solids, John Wiley & Sons (1989). 
[39] H. Nakajima, S. Nagata, H. Matsui, S. Yamaguchi, Diffusion of oxygen in vanadium and 
its alloys, Philos Mag A 67 (1993) 557. 
[40] C.L. Muhich, V.J. Aston, R.M. Trottier, A.W. Weimer, C.B. Musgrave, First-Principles 
Analysis of Cation Diffusion in Mixed Metal Ferrite Spinels, Chem Mater 28 (2016) 214. 
[41] M.H. Song, S.M. Han, D.J. Min, G.S. Choib, J.H. Park, Diffusion of oxygen in b-
titanium, Scripta Mater 59 (2008) 623. 
[42] Y. Liua, Y. Ge, D.Yu, T. Pana, L. Zhangd, Assessment of the diffusional mobilities in 
bcc TiV alloys, J Alloy Compd 470 (2009) 176. 
[43] J.F. Murdock, C.J. McHargue, Self-diffusion in body-centered cubic titanium-vanadium 
alloys, Acta Metall Mater 16 (1968) 493. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
[44] D.L. Smith, H.M. Chung, B.A. Loomis, H. Matsui, S. Votinov, W. Van Witzenburg, 
Development of vanadium-base alloys for fusion first-wall- blanket applications, Fusion Eng 
Des 29 (1995) 399. 
[45] K. Mergia, N. Boukos, Structural, thermal, electrical and magnetic properties of Eurofer 
97 steel, J Nucl Mater 373 (2008) 1. 
[46] P. Norajitra, Divertor Development for a Future Fusion Power Plant, KIT Scientific 
Publishing (2011). 
[47] Landolt-Brnstein, Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in Science and 
Technology, New Series, II/16, Diamagnetic Susceptibility, Springer-Verlag (1986). 
[48] A.N. Gubbi, A.F. Rowcliffe, Recovery and recrystallization of vanadium alloys, J Nucl 
Mater 233-237 (1996) 497. 
[49] T. Nagasaka, H. Takahashi, T. Muroga, T. Tanabe, H. Matsui, Recovery and 
recrystallization behavior of vanadium at various controlled nitrogen and oxygen levels, J 
Nucl Mater 283-287 (2000) 816. 
[50] D.L. Harrod, R. E. Gold, Mechanical properties of V and V-base alloys, Int Met Rev, 4 
(1980) 163. 
[51] N.J. Heo, T. Nagasaka, T. Muroga, Recrystallization and precipitation behavior of 
low-activation VCrTi alloys after cold rolling, J Nucl Mater 325 (2004) 53. 
[52] T. Nagasaka, T. Muroga, M. Imamura, S. Tomiyama, M. Sakata, Fabrication of High-
Purity V-4Cr-4Ti Low Activation Alloy Products, Fus Technol 39 (2001) 659. 
[53] T. Muroga, T. Nagasaka, K. Abe, V.M. Chernov, H. Matsui, D.L. Smith et al., 
Vanadium alloys  overview and recent results, J Nucl Mater 307311 (2002) 547. 
[54] T. Muroga, T. Nagasaka, H. Watanabe, M. Yamazaki, The effect of final heat treatment 
temperature on radiation response of V4Cr4Ti, J Nucl Mater 417 (2011) 310. 
[55] M. Sluiter, P.E.A. Turchi, Phase stability in Ti-V and Ti-Cr alloys: A theoretical 
investigation, Phys Rev B 43 (1991) 251. 
[56] A. Nishimura, A. Iwahori, N. J. Heo, T. Nagasaka, T. Muroga, S. -I. Tanaka, Effect of 
precipitation and solution behavior of impurities on mechanical properties of low activation 
vanadium alloy, J Nucl Mater 329-333 (2004) 438. 
[57] J.M. Chen, T. Nagasaka, T. Muroga, S.Y. Qiu, C. Li, N. Nita, Mechanical properties of 
V4Cr4Ti strengthened by precipitation and cold rolling, J Nucl Mater 374 (2008) 298. 
[58] M. Hatakeyama, T. Muroga, S. Tamura, I. Yamagata, Nano-structural evolution of Ti(O, 
N, C) precipitates in V4Cr4Ti alloys studied by 3-dimensional atom probe, J Nucl Mater 
417 (2011) 303. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
[59] K.-i. Fukumoto, H. Matsui, Y. Candra, K. Takahashi, H. Sasanuma, S. Nagata et al., 
Radiation-induced precipitation in V-(Cr,Fe)-Ti alloys irradiated at low temperature with 
low dose during neutron or ion irradiation, J. Nucl. Mater. 283287 (2000) 535. 
[60] D.T. Hoelzer, S.J. Zinkle, Structural analysis of plate-shaped precipitates in neutron 
irradiated V-4Cr-4Ti, DOE/ER-0313/29 (2000) 19 
[61] M. Hatakeyama, H. Watanabe, T. Muroga, N. Yoshida, The precipitation behavior of 
ion irradiated V4Cr4Ti alloys at various oxygen and nitrogen levels, J Nucl Mater 329-333 
(2004) 420. 
[62] M. Hatakeyama, S. Tamura, T. Muroga, N. Yoshida, M. Hasegawa, H. Matsui, The 
diffusion behaviors of interstitial impurities in V4Cr4Ti alloys under ion irradiation,  
J Nucl Mater 367370 (2007) 882. 
[63] K. Sakai, M. Satou, M. Fujiwara, K. Takanashi, A. Hasegawa, K. Abe, Mechanical 
properties and microstructures of high-chromium VCrTi type alloys, J Nucl Mater 329
333 (2004) 457.            
[64] D.L. Smith, H.M. Chung, B.A. Loomis, H. Matsui, S. Votinov, W. Van Witzenburg, 
Development of vanadium-base alloys for fusion first-wall-blanket applications, Fusion 
Engineering and Design 29 (1995) 399. 
[65] K. Fukumoto, T. Yamamoto, N. Nakao, S. Takahashi, H. Matsui, High temperature 
performance of highly purified V4Cr4Ti alloy, NIFS-Heat1, J Nucl Mater 307311 (2002) 
[66] K. Abe, K. Toma, H. Yoshinaga, S. Xorozumi, A foil-wrapping technique to prevent the 
contamination of vanadium annealed in silica in the temperature range 10001250C, J. 
Less-Common Metals, 23 (1971) 213-216. 
[67] M.E. Kasser, Fundamentals of Creep in Metals and Alloys, Second Edition (2009). 
[68] D.S. Gelles, M.B. Toloczko, R.J. Kurtz, Thermal creep mechanisms in V4Cr4Ti 
pressurized tube specimens, J Nucl Mater 367370 (2007) 869875 
[69] K.-i. Fukumoto, H. Matsui, H. Ohkubo, Z. Tang, Y. Nagai, M. Hasegawa, Identification 
of ultra-fine Ti-rich precipitates in VCrTi alloys irradiated below 300 C by using positron 
CDB technique, J Nucl Mater 373 (2008) 289. 
[70] S.J. Zinkle, G.E. Lucas, Deformation and Fracture Mechanisms in Irradiated FCC and 
BCC Metals, DOE/ER-0313/34 (2000) 101.     
[71] O.D. Sherby and A.K. Miller, Combining phenomenology and physics in describing the 
high temperature mechanical behavior of crystalline solids, J Eng Mater and Technol 101 
(1979) 387. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
[72] Y. Wu, T. Muroga, Q. Huang, Y. Chen , T. Nagasaka, A. Sagara, Effects of impurities on 
low activation characteristics of V4Cr4Ti alloy, J Nucl Mater 307311 (2002) 1026. 
[73] M. Satou, T. Chuto, K. Abe, Improvement in post-irradiation ductility of neutron 
irradiated V-Ti-Cr-Si-Al-Y alloy and the role of interstitial impurities, J Nucl Mater 283287 
(2000) 367. 
[74] K.-i. Fukumoto, Y. Kuroyanagi, H. Kuroiwa, M. Narui, H. Matsui, Effect of impurities 
on mechanical properties of vanadium alloys under liquid-lithium environment during 
neutron irradiation at HFIR, J Nucl Mater 417 (2011) 295. 
[75] G. S. Was, Fundamentals of Radiation Materials Science Metals and Alloys, Springer-
Verlag (2007). 
[76] D.L. Smith, S. Majumdar, M. Billone, R. Mattas, Performance limits for fusion first-wall 
structural materials, J Nucl Mater 283-287 (2000) 716.    
[77] I.I. Chernov, M.S. Staltsov, S.Yu. Binyukova, B.A. Kalin, V.M. Chernov, Mechanisms 
of helium porosity formation in vanadium alloys as a function of the chemical composition, 
Atom Energy+ 109 (2011) 176. 
[78] R.J. Kurtz, K. Abe, V.M. Chernov, D.T. Hoelzer, H. Matsui, T. Muroga et al., Recent 
progress on development of vanadium alloys for fusion, J Nucl Mater 329 (2004) 47. 
[79] R. Carlander, S. Harkness, A. Santhanam, Effects of Radiation on Substructure and 
Mechanical Properties of Metals and Alloys, ASTM STP-529 Philadelphia (1973) 399. 
[80] J. Bently, F.W. Wiffen, Swelling and microstructural changes in irradiated vanadium 
alloys, Nucl Technol 30 (1976) 376. 
[81] D.L. Smith, B.A. Loomis, D.R. Diercks, Vanadium-base alloys for fusion reactor 
applications - a review, J Nucl Mater 135 (1985) 125. 
[82] W. Hoffelner, Materials for Nuclear Plants, Chapter 5, Springer-Verlag 2013. 
[83] P.M. Raole, S.P. Deshpande and DEMO Team, Structural materials for fusion reactors, 
Trans Indian Inst Metals 62 (2009) 105. 
[84] H. Tsai, H. Matsui, M.C. Billone, R.V. Strain, D.L. Smith, Irradiation creep of 
vanadium-base alloys, J Nucl Mater 258263 (1998) 1471. 
[85] D.S. Gelles, Microstructural examination of irradiated and unirradiated V-4Cr-4Ti 
pressurized creep tubes, J Nucl Mater 307311 (2002) 393. 
[86] H. Tsai, T.S. Bray, H. Matsui, M.L. Grossbeck, K. Fukumoto, J. Gazda et al., Effects of 
low-temperature neutron irradiation on mechanical properties of vanadium-base alloys, J 
Nucl Mater 283-287 (2000) 362. 
2. Description of vanadium as first wall reactor material 
[87] V.M Troyanov, M.G Bulkanov, A.S. Kruglov, E.A. Krjuchkov, M.P. Nikulin, 
J.M. Pevchykh et al., Irradiation creep of V-Ti-Cr alloy in BR-10 reactor core instrumented 
experiments, J Nucl Mater 233-237 (1996) 381. 
[88] K. Fukumoto, M. Narui, H. Matsui, T. Nagasaka, T. Muroga, M. Li et al., Environmental 
effects on irradiation creep behavior of highly purified V4Cr4Ti alloys (NIFS-Heats) 
irradiated by neutrons, J Nucl Mater 386388 (2009) 575. 
[89] K. Fukumoto, H. Matsui, M. Narui, M. Yamazaki, Irradiation creep behavior of V4Cr
4Ti alloys irradiated in a liquid sodium environment at the JOYO fast reactor, J Nucl Mater 
437 (2013) 341. 
[90] T. Muroga, T. Nagasaka, J.M. Chen, Y.F. Li, H. Watanabe, Microstructure of creep-
deformed V4Cr4Ti strengthened by precipitation and cold rolling, J Nucl Mater 386 
(2009) 606.  
[91] S.J. Zinkle, A. Horsewell, B.N. Singh, W.F. Sommer, Defect microstructure in copper 
alloys irradiated with 750 MeV protons, J Nucl Mater 212 (1994) 132. 
[92] T. Muroga, T. Nagasaka, P.F. Zheng, Y.F. Li, H. Watanabe, Dislocation evolution 
during thermal creep deformation in V4Cr4Ti with various thermal and mechanical 
treatments, J Nucl Mater 442 (2013) S354. 
[93] T. Nagasaka, T. Muroga, T. Hino, M. Satou, K. Abe, T. Chuto et al., Impurity behavior 
in V4Cr4TiY alloys produced by levitation melting, J Nucl Mater 367370 (2007) 823.  
[94] T. Chuto, M. Satou, A. Hasegawa, K. Abe, T. Muroga, N. Yamamoto, Effects of small 
amount of additional elements on control of interstitial impurities and mechanical properties 
of V4Cr4TiSiAlY alloys, J Nucl Mater 326 (2004) 1. 
[95] H. Kurishita, T. Kuwabara, M. Hasegawa, S. Kobayashi, K. Nakai, Microstructural 
control to improve the resistance to radiation embrittlement in vanadium, J Nucl Mater 343 
(2005) 318. 
[96] P.F. Zheng, J.M. Chen, T. Nagasaka, T. Muroga, J.J. Zhao, Z.Y. Xu et al., Effects of 
dispersion particle agents on the hardening of V4Cr4Ti alloys, J Nucl Mater 455 (2014) 
[97] P.F. Zhenga, T. Nagasakab, T. Muroga, J.M. Chen, Microstructures and mechanical 
properties of mechanically alloyedV4Cr4Ti alloy dispersion strengthened by nano-
particles, Fus Eng Des 89 (2014) 1648. 
3.  Feasibility of vanadium alloys for fusion reactor applications 
3.  FEASIBILITY OF VANADIUM ALLOYS FOR 
FUSION REACTOR APPLICATIONS 
In the first section, the feasibility of vanadium alloys in fusion energy is discussed in relation 
to the technical requirements: which ones are satisfied and which are the remaining issues. 
Comparisons with others candidate materials are also included. Section 3.2 describes the first 
trials of large production of V-4Cr-4Ti alloys, with a description of the two heats mainly 
reported in literature. Section 3.3 finally summarizes the remaining issues of V for fusion 
energy applications and where research needs to focus in the next years. 
3.1 Comparisons of vanadium alloys with other fusion reactor materials 
The performance limits of the first-wall/blanket structure will be limited by both the 
inherent properties of the candidate structural materials and by factors imposed by the fusion 
system environment, such as the coolant/breeder system, the high-energy neutron 
environment and the magnetic field effects. Also the specific design configuration will affect 
the performance of the blanket [1] 
In order to consider fusion energy as a viable energy source, it needs to be economically 
competitive with other energy sources, and it must be public accepted as a safe and 
environmentally friendly energy source [1, 2]. The first wall/blanket system constitutes the 
key component that influences the economical performance and safety of the future fusion 
reactor. The development and testing of materials that can withstand the extreme conditions 
generated by the plasma without compromising the safety of the power plant is considered as 
one of the greatest materials science challenges in history [3]. Table 3.1 collects the 
suggested minimum requirements that a material must be able to withstand for a future fusion 
energy reactor, together with the performance goals of the reactor. These values are based on 
US estimates which were derived primarily for a tokamak configuration, but are assumed to 
be generic to magnetic confinement fusion devices [2, 4]. 
3.  Feasibility of vanadium alloys for fusion reactor applications 
Table 3.1 Suggested performance goals for a future fusion power plant [2]. 
Several materials have been proposed for the DEMO blanket and the V-4Cr-4Ti                              
alloy is amongst them due to their low absorption cross section for 14 MeV neutrons,                                    
high-temperature strength, good chemical compatibility with liquid lithium as coolant and 
good swelling resistance [5, 6, 7]. Other proposed candidate materials are the reduced 
activation ferritic-martensitic (RAFM) steels, oxide dispersion strengthened (ODS) steel 
variant of the EUROFER and SiC composites. These materials are characterized by different 
operating temperature windows: 
(1) RAFM steels are based on the experience with 812%CrMoVNb steels developed for 
fission reactor applications, where alloying elements such as Mo, Nb and Ni have been 
replaced with W and Ta to decrease the probability of producing radioactive nuclides. 
They are relative cheap (Tab. 3.2). They are also the best developed and characterized 
candidate materials up to date, and require the smallest extrapolation for use in DEMO. 
The test blanket modules (TBMs) to be installed and tested in ITER will be produced 
using RAFM steel [8]. However, their upper operational temperature limit is 
approximately 650C [9].   
(2) ODS steels allow to increase the upper operational temperature limit up to about 750C. 
This is achieved by introducing a nanoscale oxide dispersion of yttrium in the EUROFER 
alloy, which increases the high-temperature strength by acting as pinning points for 
dislocations [1013]. These nano-particles also promote radiation resistance, since the 
large density of interfaces between the matrix and the oxide particles are expected to act 
as sinks for the irradiation-induced defects [14, 15]. However, the long-term stability of 
the nano-precipitates under irradiation is still an open question [16]. 
(3) SiC composites have excellent high-temperature strength which provides an upper 
operational temperature of 1000-1100C [2]. Unfortunately, these composites are brittle 
3.  Feasibility of vanadium alloys for fusion reactor applications 
and the effect of irradiation damage on their microstructure hinders their application as 
blanket material. 
(4) The upper operating limit of V-4Cr-4Ti is expected to be 750C [1, 6]. Based on this fact, 
India and Russia have already developed two blanket projects for DEMO [17, 18]. The 
operating temperature window is relatively wide (400-750C) at a neutron wall loading of 
510 MW/m
, and the power conversion efficiency is >40% [1]. Unfortunately, the 
vanadium technology for production of large components is still immature [3, 5], and the 
price to produce large amounts of vanadium alloys with low content of interstitials (Table 
3.2) may prevent their extended use in future fusion reactors 
The individual challenges that a blanket material will face are discussed below with respect to 
the vanadium alloys, together with a comparison with other candidate materials. A discussion 
about the factors that affect the materials operating temperature window is also included in 
the text. 
Table 3.2 Cost for bulk quantities of simple plate products in year 2000 [19]. 
Neutron wall load  
Table 3.3 presents a summary of the neutronic response of the V-4Cr-4Ti alloy and other 
candidate structural materials. As explained in section 1.3, neutron irradiation causes 
materials activation and displacement of atoms (dpa) which leads to material damage and 
embrittlement. The hardening and embrittlement of the material determines the low limit of 
3.  Feasibility of vanadium alloys for fusion reactor applications 
the operating temperature window of that material. In order to avoid crack formation in the 
blanket during the cooling of the reactor, the DBTT must be below RT for the total damage 
level expected to receive during its lifetime. Furthermore, the He and H embrittlement is very 
pronounced in SiC composites due to their low Z number and this compromises its feasibility 
as a structural material. Among the candidate blanket structural materials, vanadium alloy 
exhibit the lowest He and H transmutation rates; however, the effect of these products on the 
material properties and so to the lifetime and performance limits are still not clear [1, 6].  
Table 3.3 Neutronic response of first-wall/blanket structural materials
Surface heat flux  
A neutron wall load of 5-10 MW/m
 corresponds approximately to heat fluxes of 1 and                
2 MW/m
 [1]. The resulting temperature on the FW depends on: (1) the heat flux on the wall, 
(2) thickness of the material, (3) the input temperature of the coolant and the thermal 
conductivity of the material. Fig. 3.1 shows the maximum allowed surface heat flux for the 
first wall of a V-4Cr-4Ti module as a function of its thickness and wall temperature, for a 
fixed temperature and pressure of the coolant. The solid lines indicate the structural design 
limits based on the ITER structural design criteria (ISDC). 3Sm is a set of rules used in the 
past [20]. New structural design stress criteria have been extended to include radiation-
induced embrittlement and thermal creep (but not fatigue) for vanadium-base alloys [21]: the 
Bree limit for ductile materials, with an uniform elongation u > 2%, and the Sd limit, for 
brittle materials (u < 2%,). With these new criteria, it is possible to raise substantially the 
heat load in the first wall. This will allow to increase the energy conversion efficiency of the 
plant. 
3.  Feasibility of vanadium alloys for fusion reactor applications 
Figure 3.1 Maximum surface heat flux as a function of wall thickness for a blaket made of V-4Cr-4Ti 
vanadium alloy structure [1]. 
Energy conversion efficiency 
The energy conversion efficiency depends on the coolant parameters [2]. Keeping the 
difference between the input and output coolant temperature as wide as possible increases the 
energy conversion efficiency, but at the same time increases the pressure of the coolant which 
introduces additional stresses on the blanket. Moreover, a high outlet coolant temperature 
would correspond to a high FW temperature where thermal creep effects would further 
compromise the device lifetime of the blanket module. The occurrence of thermal creep 
effects determines the upper limit of the operating temperature window: the higher the creep 
resistance of the material, the higher the upper operating temperature limit. 
On the basis of the material properties and of a target blanket lifetime, the input and output 
coolant temperatures of several coolants (He, Li, PbLi) have been established, see Table 3.4. 
In the case of vanadium blanket the proposed coolant is liquid Li. 
3.  Feasibility of vanadium alloys for fusion reactor applications 
Table 3.4 Estimated energy conversion efficiencies for selected candidate blanket concepts [2]. 
Fig. 3.2 summarizes the operating temperature window of several materials which may be 
used to fabricate facing components. ODS steels remain the most versatile material for the 
blanket and so the main candidate among the advanced materials up to now. 
Figure 3.2 Operating temperature windows for refractory alloys, Fe(89%)Cr ferritic-martensitic steels, 
Fe13%Cr oxide dispersion strengthened (ODS) ferritic steels, Type 316 austenitic stainless steels, 
solutionized and aged Cu2%Ni0.3%Be, and SiC composites. The proposed windows of temperature are 
based on radiation damage and thermal creep considerations. The light shaded bands on either side of the 
dark bands represent the uncertainties in the minimum and maximum temperature limits [19]. 
3.  Feasibility of vanadium alloys for fusion reactor applications 
Magnetohydrodynamics effects 
Due to the high magnetic fields generated by the magnetic coils, magnetohydrodynamics 
(MHD) effects are expected to be relevant for the metallic liquid used as coolant in the 
blanket module. These magnetic effects will cause a large pressure drop in the flowing 
system affecting the system pressure and the pumping power. The heat transfer in the coolant 
will also be degraded since the magnetic field will tend to laminarize the flow [2]. To avoid 
these effects, the use of electrical insulating coatings is planned: calcium oxide (CaO) and 
aluminium nitride (AlN), are currently the leading candidate materials for coating the Li/V 
system [2].  
Corrosion 
Liquid Li is expected to cause corrosion of the blanket material. Corrosion data of various   
V-Cr-Ti alloys tested in stagnant, thermal forced and convective flowing lithium showed that 
this alloy could be used in lithium environments at temperatures up to 700C. This would 
lead to a corrosion rate lower than 7.5 m/year [6, 22].  It is known that the corrosion of 
vanadium alloys in liquid lithium is highly dependent on the alloy composition and chemistry 
[23, 24]. 
Other oxidizing conditions such water, He and Na are more deleterious than Li coolants, an 
anti-corrosion barrier is so compulsory. A silicide coating is being developed as oxidation 
barrier for vanadium alloys [25, 26].  
Tritium breeding ratio (TBR) 
In DEMO each blanket module will act as a tritium breeding module. In order to make 
DEMO self-sufficient, a TBR > 1.15 is required [27]. The expected TBR for the proposed 
DEMO blanket project would meet this requirement [28]. Unfortunately this concept is not 
going to be tested in ITER [8]. 
Safety and environmental issues 
The safety and environmental issues for future fusion reactors will be dominated by the first-
wall blanket system [2]. The materials challenges are:  
(1) Tritium is radioactive and its potential release is of great concern. The tritium 
containment in the V/Li system at elevated temperatures is an open issue.  
3.  Feasibility of vanadium alloys for fusion reactor applications 
The accepted limit of tritium dissolved in a DEMO blanked is less than 1kg [29]. Tritium 
inventory in V blanket changes with different types of Li coolant. Data in Fig. 3.2 show 
the tritium amount in equilibrium inside a 700 tons blanket of V-4Cr-4Ti at 1273C, as 
function of the tritium concentration in the coolant [30]. Not pure Li coolants lead to an 
unacceptable amount of tritium (10 kg <<) that can be reduced lowering the tritium 
partial pressure in the coolant with TF (Tritium Fluoride) control [31].  
Figure 3.2 Equilibrium tritium inventory in a 700 tons V4Cr4Ti DEMO blanket at 1273C for three 
tritium breeders as a function of tritium level in the breeders assuming self-cooled FFHR reactor [30]. 
(2) The chemical reactivity of liquid lithium with air and water [2]. 
(3) The structural materials under irradiation may become active. It is important that the 
plasma facing materials contain low activation elements in order to limit the production 
of radioactive waste. Figure 3.3 compares radioactivity of four materials after their use in 
the first wall of a commercial fusion reactor. The full-remote and full-hands-on recycle 
limits are shown to indicate the guideline for recycling and reuse [32]. V-4Cr-4Ti alloy 
remains between both safety after 1000 years. 
3.  Feasibility of vanadium alloys for fusion reactor applications 
Figure 3.3 Radioactive levels of four reference materials after use as first wall materials in a commercial 
fusion reactor: SS316LN-IG (the reference ITER structural material), F82H (a candidate RAFM steel), 
NIFS-HEAT-2 (a V-4Cr-4Ti alloy heat) and SiC/SiC composite assumed to be free from impurities [5]. 
3.2 Large scale production of vanadium components 
V-4Cr-4Ti alloys would require a production route that can be adopted at industrial scale. 
The first experiments to develop a production route were reported in the US: during the last 
years of the 90s Oremet-Wah Chang of Oregon (WCA, previously Teledyne Wah Chang of 
Albany) produced a large ingot of 500 kg called US 832665 for the US Department of Energy 
for basic fusion material research [33, 34] and a second ingot called US 832864 of 1200 kg, 
requested by General Atomics for the DIII-D radiative divertor upgrade [35]. In 2000 the 
Japanese National Institute for Fusion Science (NIFS), in collaboration with the Japanese 
industry, announced the production of a high purity ingot of 30 kg (NIFS-HEAT-1) [36, 37], 
followed by other ingots with a total weight of 166 kg (NIFS-Heat-2) [38]. In Table 3.5 the 
chemical composition of the nominated heats is summarized [39]. 
The production of the NIFS-HEATs was an important achievement since it demonstrated the 
development of a technology capable to produce large amounts of vanadium alloys with high 
purity. Figure 3.4 shows the levels of Al, Nb, Ag and Mo in USHEATs, NIFS-HEATs and 
raw V, Cr and Ti metals used for producing NIFS-HEATs. The impurity levels are shown as 
relative values with respect to the recycling limit proposed by Dolan and Butterworth [28]. 
This figure shows that all produced heat meet the criteria for full remote recycling, and that 
3.  Feasibility of vanadium alloys for fusion reactor applications 
the NIFS-HEATs are close to meet the criteria for quasi-hands-on recycling. Thus NIFS-
HEATs are considered to have demonstrated the feasibility of recycling vanadium alloys 
economically [39]. 
Following the Japanese, fabrication efforts have been in Russia (RF-VVC-2, VM-DPCh-9, 
ingots of 30110 kg) in 20002013 [40], in China (SWIP-30, ingots of 30 kg) in 2010 [41], 
and in France (CEA-J57, ingots of 30 kg) in 2011 [42]. Similar and consistent fundamental 
properties have been obtained for these materials providing evidence that the fabrication 
technology has been almost standardized [25]. 
Table 3.5 Chemical composition of the different V-4Cr-4Ti heats [39]. 
Figure 3.4 Impurity levels of US-HEATs, NIFS-HEATs and the raw metals used for production of NIFS-
HEATs, as relative to the hands-on recycle limits [39, 28]. 
3.  Feasibility of vanadium alloys for fusion reactor applications 
3.3 Remaining challenges 
The remaining scientific and technological challenges to address in order to consider 
vanadium alloys as the material candidate for the blanket modules of the future fusion 
reactors are: 
 Improve the mechanical properties at high temperatures, in order to extend the upper 
limit of the operating temperature window of the blanket modules.  
 Improve the resistance to radiation embrittlement, in order to extend the lower limit of 
the temperature window. 
 Ensure tritium production at sufficient levels in the blanket. 
 Design blankets capable of withstanding the chemical reactivity of lithium. 
 Develop an economic industrial rate to produce high purified vanadium alloys with a 
reduced activation probability on the fusion reactor environment. 
 Understand and control the He embrittlement of these alloys. 
3.  Feasibility of vanadium alloys for fusion reactor applications 
3.4 References 
[1] D.L. Smith, S. Majumdar, M. Billone, R. Mattas, Performance limits for fusion first-wall 
structural materials, J Nucl Mater 283 (2000) 716. 
[2] D.L. Smith, M.C. Billone, S. Majumdar, R.F. Mattas, D.-K. Sze, Materials integration 
issues for high performance fusion power systems, J Nucl Mater 258-263 (1998) 65. 
[3] D.M. Duffy, Fusion Power Materials, Advanced Materials & Process July 2010.  
[4] M. Saltmarsh et al., Final Report of the Advanced Technologies/Materials Working 
Group (unpublished). 
[5] T. Muroga, Vanadium Alloys for Fusion Blanket Applications, Materials Transactions 46 
(2005) 405. 
[6] J.M. Chen, V.M. Chernov, R.J. Kurtz, T. Muroga, Overview of the vanadium alloy 
researches for fusion reactors, J Nucl Mater 417 (2011) 289.    
[7] R.J. Kurtz, K. Abe, V.M. Chernov, D.T. Hoelzer, H. Matsui, T. Muroga et al., Recent 
progress on development of vanadium alloys for fusion, J Nucl Mater 329 (2004) 47. 
[8] L.M. Giancarli, M. Abdou, D.J. Campbell, V.A. Chuyanova, M.Y. Ahn, M. Enoeda et al., 
Overview of the ITER TBM Program, Fusion Eng Des 87 (2012) 395. 
[9] R. Lsser, N. Baluc, J.-L. Boutard, E. Diegele, S. Dudarev, M. Gasparotto et al., 
Structural materials for DEMO: The EU development, strategy, testing and modelling, 
Fusion Engineering and Design 82 (2007) 511. 
[10] S. Ohtsuka, S. Ukai, M. Fujiwara, T. Kaito, T. Narita, Improvement of creep strength of 
9CrODS martensitic steel by controlling excess oxygen and titanium concentrations, Mater 
Trans JIM 46 (2005) 487. 
[11] H. Sakasegawa, S. Ukai, M. Tamura, S. Ohtsuka, H. Tanigawa, H. Ogiwara et al., Creep 
constitutive equation of dual phase 9Cr-ODS steel, J. Nucl. Mater. 373 (2008) 8289. 
[12] S. Ukai, T. Okuda, M. Fujiwara, T. Kobayashi, S. Mizuta, H. Nakashima, 
Characterization of high temperature creep properties in recrystallized 12Cr-ODS ferritic 
steel claddings, J. Nucl Sci Technol 39 (2002) 872. 
[13] D.T. Hoelzer, J. Bentley, M.A. Sokolov, M.K. Miller, G.R. Odette, M.J. Alinger, 
Influence of particle dispersions on the high-temperature strength of ferritic alloys, J 
Nucl Mater 367370 (2007) 166172. 
[14] G.R. Odette, M.J. Alinger, B.D. Wirth, Recent developments in irradiation-resistant 
steels, Annu Rev Mater Res 38 (2008) 471. 
3.  Feasibility of vanadium alloys for fusion reactor applications 
[15] N. Baluc, J.L. Boutard, S.L. Dudarev, M. Rieth, J. Brito Correia, B. Fournier et al., 
Review on the EFDA work programme on nano-structured ODS RAF steels, J Nucl Mater 
417 (2011) 149. 
[16] A. Certain, S. Kuchibhatla, V. Shutthanandan, D.T. Hoelzer, T.R. Allen, Radiation 
stability of nanoclusters in nano-structured oxide dispersion strengthened 
(ODS) steels, J Nucl Mater 434 (2013) 311. 
[17] Y. Gohar, S. Majumdar, D. Smith, High power density self-cooled lithiumvanadium 
blanket, Fus Eng Des 4950 (2000) 551.  
[18] I.R. Kirillov, RF DEMO team, Lithium cooled blanket of RF DEMO reactor, Fus Eng 
Des 4950 (2000) 457.    
[19] S.J. Zinkle, N.M. Ghoniem, Operating temperature windows for fusion reactor 
structural materials, Fus Eng Des 5152 (2000) 55. 
[20] S. Majumdar, P. Smith, Treatment of irradiation effects in structural design criteria for 
fusion reactors, Fus Eng Des 41 (1998) 25. 
[21] S. Majumdar, Structural design criteria for high heat flux components, Fus Eng Des 49-
50 (2000) 119. 
[22] Y. Strebkov, V. Belyakov, Review of the activity in Russia in the area of fusion nuclear 
technology, Fus Eng Des 81 (2006) 45. 
[23] V.A. Evtikhin, I.E. Lyublinski, A.V. Vertkov, Compatibility of vanadium alloys and its 
weld joints in homogeneous and heterogeneous liquid lithium systems, J Nucl Mater 258 
(1998) 1487. 
[24] O.I. Yeliseyeva, V.N. Fedirko, V.M. Chernov, L.P. Zavialsky, Corrosion of V-Ti-Cr 
alloys in liquid lithium: Influence of alloy composition and concentration of nitrogen in 
lithium, J. Nucl Mater 283 (2000) 1282. 
[25] T. Muroga, J.M. Chen, V.M. Chernov, R.J. Kurtz, M. Le Flem, Present status of 
vanadium alloys for fusion applications, J Nucl Mater 455 (2014) 263. 
[26] N. Chaia, S. Mathieu, T. Cozzika, F. Rouillard, C. Desgranges, J.L. Courouau et al., An 
overview of the oxidation performance of silicide diffusion coatings for vanadium-based 
alloys for generation IV reactors, Corros Sci 66 (2013) 285. 
[27] M.E. Sawan, M.A. Abdou, Physics and technology conditions for attaining tritium 
self-sufficiency for the DT fuel cycle, Fus Eng Des 81 (2006) 1131. 
[28] S.J. Zinkle, Fusion materials science: overview of challenges and recent progress, Phys 
Plasmas 12 (2005) 1. 
3.  Feasibility of vanadium alloys for fusion reactor applications 
[29] H. Nakamura, S. Sakurai, S. Suzuki, T. Hayashi, M. Enoeda, K. Tobita, Case study on 
tritium inventory in the fusion DEMO plant at JAERI, Fus Eng Des, 81 (2006) 1339. 
[30] T. Muroga, T. Tanaka, Z. Li, A. Sagara, D.-K. Sze, Tritium control for flibe/v-alloy 
blanket system, Fus Sci Tech 52 (2007) 682. 
[31] D.-K Sze, IPFR, INTEGRATED POOL FUSION REACTOR CONCEPT, Fus Tech 10 
(1986) 875. 
[32] T.J. Dolan, G.J. Butterworth, Vanadium recycling, Fusion Technol. 26 (1994) 1014. 
[33] H.M. Chung, H.-C. Tsai, D.L. Smith, R. Peterson, C. Curtis, C. Wojcik et al., Fusion 
Reactor Materials Semiannual Progress Report, DOE/ER-03 (1994) 178. 
[34] M.L. Grossbeck, R.L. Klueh, E.T. Cheng, J.R. Peterson, M.R. Woolery, E.E. Bloom, 
Analysis of VCrTi alloys in terms of activation of impurities, J Nucl Mater 258 (1998) 
1778. 
[35] W.R. Johnson, J.P. Smith, P.W Trester, Metallurgical bonding development of V4Cr
4Ti alloy for the DIII-D radiative divertor program, J Nucl Mater 256 (1998) 1425. 
[36] T. Nagasaka, T. Muroga, M. Imamura, S. Tomiyama, M. Sakata, Fabrication of High-
Purity V-4Cr-4Ti Low Activation Alloy Products, Fus Technol 39 (2001) 659. 
[37] T. Muroga, T. Nagasaka, A. Iiyoshi, A. Kawabata, S. Sakurai, M. Sakata, NIFS program 
for large ingot production of a VCrTi alloy, J Nucl Mater 283 (2000) 711. 
[38] T. Muroga, T. Nagasaka, Fusion Energy 2000, 18th Conference Proceeding Sorrento, 
(2000) FTP1/09. 
[39] T. Muroga, T. Nagasaka, K. Abe, V.M. Chernov, H. Matsui, D.L. Smith et al., 
Vanadium alloys  overview and recent results, J Nucl Mater 307311 (2002) 547. 
[40] V.M.Chernov, Low Activation Vanadium Alloys for Fusion Power Reactors - The RF 
Results, ISFNT-11 Presented. 
[41] H.Y. Fu,  J.M. Chen, P.F. Zheng, T. Nagasaka, T. Muroga, Z.D. Li, S. Cui, et al., Nucl 
Mater 442 (2013) 336. 
[42] V. Duquesnes, T. Guilbert, M. Le Flem, French investigation of a new V-4Cr-4Ti grade: 
CEA-J57 - Fabrication and microstructure, J Nucl Mater 426 (2012) 96. 
4. Characterization methods 
4. CHARACTERIZATION METHODS  
The as received samples are described together with their preparation (4.1). Some of the main 
techniques implemented in this thesis are described: electron microscopy (4.2), positron 
annihilation spectroscopy (4.3) and hardness test (4.4).  
4.1 As received sample description and preparation 
All the as-received samples have been provided as plates by Goodfellow, an external 
company specialized in materials supply. The manufacturing method is unknown due to 
industrial secret but it is believed the samples have been crafted by arc melting. The nominal 
purity was 99.9% and it has been confirmed by atom probe tomography analysis (section 6). 
The concentration of Ti and Cr has been confirmed by energy dispersive spectroscopy (Par. 
4.2.2), this technique is suitable for the scope since the Ti and Cr signals do not overlap 
among them and are thus clearly recognizable and measurable. Thermal treatments have been 
carried in a tube furnace in inert atmosphere of argon. 
Regarding metallic samples, a polished surface is compulsory to carry on correctly several 
analyses like EBSD and hardness. The initial surface of a metal, as for example received 
from the supplier, can be very rough and present a lot of defect like scratches and holes that 
hide the microstructure information to the scientific instrumentation. 
Grinding the samples can remove those defects and prepare a more flat and homogenous 
surface. In this thesis SiC foil ranging from 320 and 4000 grit has been implemented. The 
surface can be improved with polishing which will prepare a surface ideally free of defects 
and with a roughness below than m. Polishing can be done in two ways: mechanically 
(grinding using submicron particles in a suspension) or chemically (dissolving the metal with 
an acid or basic solution). Chemical polishing, also called electropolishing, consists in 
applying an electric potential difference between the surface (anode) and a liquid solution 
(cathode) which could be acid or basic, called etching solution. In this thesis the etching 
solution was 60vol.% methanol  35vol.% 2-buthoxyethanol  5vol.% perchloric acid (60%)  
and it was used at a temperature of -35C. 
4. Characterization methods 
The applied potential triggers electrochemical reactions that dissolve the metallic atoms in the 
solution as ions. The dissolution ideally will be faster on the spurs of the surface, leading to a 
homogenization of the surface topography and a consequent decrease of roughness. Fig. 4.1 
is a hypothetical plot of the electrical current passing trough the surface as function of the 
potential during electropolishing, the curve is not following an unique trend and three 
different situations are present in order as current rises: etching, polishing and pitting. Due to 
the low currents in etching, the regions with more crystal disorder will be attached first, like 
the grain boundaries. The resulting surface will show a microstructure where the grain 
boundaries are clearly visible and each grain is etched in a different way because the 
dissolution rate was sensible to the crystal orientation. Such condition can be achieved even 
without applying a potential and could be implemented just for simple optical microscope 
analysis. 
Figure 4.1 Example of a current/potential plot during electropolishing. 
Increasing the potential, the ideal condition of polishing is achieved in a flat region after the 
etching ramp. Increasing more the potential, the corrosive action of the solution will be more 
aggressive causing pitting, i.e. the formation of holes over the surface. When the passivation 
layer is locally removed, the pure uncovered metal becomes an anode, while the vast left 
passivation layer is cathode. The thermodynamic conditions will favour so the passage of 
high currents that will cause a fast dissolution of the metal under the uncovered passivation 
layer leaving it quite unchanged. This last condition, known as deleterious in corrosion 
prevention literature, should be avoided during the sample preparation. Decreasing the 
temperature of the etching solution is effective to lower the current and avoid pitting. 
The same recipe of electropolishing can be applied to prepare metallic TEM foils by double 
jet thinning technique. In this procedure a disk usually of 3mm diameter and thick around 
100m is hit both sides by a jet of the etching solution. Each side of the disk is getting 
4. Characterization methods 
thinned after the formation of a concave shaped pit. As the two pits merge together and the 
jets touch each other, a hole with a diameter of the order of the m is formed. The border of 
that hole can be thick tens of nm, enough for electrons with 100-300 KeV energy to pass 
through, permitting TEM analysis. It is fundamental to interrupt the jet of solution as soon the 
hole has been formed, in order to avoid its enlargement and thickening of the edge that would 
become invisible to electrons. To stop the process in time a laser is pointed perpendicularly 
over one side of the disk, as soon the hole is formed the laser crosses the disk and is revealed 
by a detector located on the opposite side. The signal boost from the detector will trigger 
finally the immediate interruption of the electropolishing process. 
4.2 Electron Microscopy 
A detailed description of the relevant electron microscopy instrumentation implemented in 
this thesis is provided in section 5. Electron microscopy is a technique that permits to obtain 
magnified images of solid matter at magnifications orders of magnitude higher than optical 
microscopy, up to the atomic resolution. The resolution of a microscope is affected by the 
wavelength of the radiation according to the Rayleigh criterion, the shortest the best. Electron 
microscopes use as radiation a beam made of electrons which behave both as particles and 
waves, according to the waveparticle duality from quantum mechanics. The wave is 
described by the wave function and propagates along the vector k. The wavelength  of the 
wave is function of the electron energy from the Louis de Broglies equation. For electrons 
accelerated at 100 keV,  has value of ~4 pm which is noticeably shorter than the 380-750 
nm of the visible light adopted in optical microscopes. Resolution is also affected by the 
defects of the lenses such as chromatic and spherical aberration. In electron microscopy the 
lenses are not anymore made of glass but are constituted by magnetic fields capable to deflect 
incoming charged particles such as electrons. The electron beam is ideally monochromatic, 
i.e. all electrons travel at the same energy. 
The interactions between the electrons of the beam and the atoms of the sample are the basis 
of what can be achieved by electron microscopy. Figure 4.2 summarises some of the main 
effects. If the sample is thin enough, electrons can get transmitted through the specimen 
forming the transmitted beam that can be divided in two parts: the direct and the scattered 
beam, only this latter is made of electrons that have changed their direction after interaction 
with the sample. The scattered electrons may have lost kinetic energy (inelastic scattering) 
after a collision with a nucleus or an electron of the sample. If the energy of the incident 
4. Characterization methods 
electron is high enough, the collided electron can escape from the attraction of the nucleus 
and come out from the sample surface taking the name of secondary electron (SE). In the 
case of elastic scattering, the beam electrons do not lose kinetic energy but their path has 
been deviated of an angle by the electromagnetic fields of the atoms. It may happen that the 
angle is > 90 and the electrons come out from the surface hit by the beam, these electrons 
are called back scattered electrons (BSE). Occurrence of scattering increases with the 
thickness of the sample, as the electron can collide with more atoms. How far the electron is 
deviated from the original path is related with the Z number, bigger atoms have stronger 
electric fields that perturb more the beam electron paths. If the sample is crystalline, 
diffraction phenomena will occur during the scattering from equally spaced atomic planes in 
a crystal due to the wave nature of electrons. Destructive wave interference will limit the 
number of scattered beam that will be addressed as scattered diffracted beams and those 
provide precious information about the crystal structure. 
Figure 4.2 Summary of main effects of the incident electron beam over a sample. 
Electron microscopy is divided in two fundamental modes: scanning electron microscopy 
(SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM).  
4.2.1 Scanning electron microscopy 
In SEM the electron beam has energies around tens of keV and it is focused in one spot over 
the sample surface (Fig. 4.3). The electrons of the beam can ionize the atoms of the sample 
forming SE that are collected by a detector and their intensity is measured. That intensity 
electron beam 
elastic 
scattering 
scattered 
back-scattered 
electron 
transmitted 
direct 
inelastic 
scattering 
sample 
secondary 
electron 
4. Characterization methods 
measure provides the value of the digital pixel related to that particular position of the beam 
spot. The beam is deflected and the position of the spot changes, other pixels are acquired and 
a (digital) image is obtained, representative of the SE intensity along the samples surface. 
Contrast is made since the SE intensity is function also of the angle of the surface with the 
beam and the detector. The digital image can be interpreted as a measure of the surface 
geography where cracks, pits and other features appear clearly. Besides the SE, an image can 
be formed detecting only the BSE. The intensity of the BSE is strongly dependant of the 
atomic number Z of the nuclei. The contrast of BSE images is indicative of the presence of 
different phases with different chemical elements. BSE intensity is also affected by the 
degree of channeling of the incident electrons through the sample crystal lattice. Different 
grains in the microstructure of a metallic sample will show in a BSE image different contrast 
as for each crystal orientation the electron channeling varies.  
Figure 4.3 Schematic representation of how an SEM operates. 
4.2.2 Transmission electron microscopy 
In TEM the beam has higher energies (usually 100-300 keV) and it is meant to get 
transmitted through thin foils of the order of several tens of nm (TEM foil). The beam is 
4. Characterization methods 
considered parallel if all electrons are hitting the sample at the same angle, or convergent if 
the electrons are focused in a spot (< nm) changing the beam shape to conical with an apex 
angle limited to tens of mrad. Convergent beam is meant for particular operating modes 
described later. In conventional TEM mode (CTEM) the incident (parallel) beam spot is 
spread over the area of interest and, as described in Figure 4.4, it can operate in two modes: 
imaging mode (to obtain magnified images of the sample) or diffraction mode (to obtain 
electron diffraction patterns), this latter mode will be addressed ahead. Using the terminology 
of optical geometry, in image mode the objective of the sample that will form the image is 
wherever the beam electrons are hitting, the transmitted beam is collected by the objective 
lens that divides the direct and the scattered beams focusing them on different points placed 
on a plane called the objective back focal plane. On that plane a physical aperture (called 
objective aperture) filters the scattered beam leaving only by the direct beam. It happens that 
the direct beam interacts with the scattering beam and viceversa, its intensity increases with 
the reduction of scattering events, so with the reduction of the scattering beam intensity. The 
transmitted beam is afterwards collected by the intermediate lens whose objective plane 
matches the objective lens image plane. The signal is finally spread by the projector lens over 
a screen fluorescent to electrons in order to make visible by eye the objective area chosen 
over the TEM foil. The brightness over the screen is proportional to the intensity of the direct 
beam which variation lead contrast. Alterations of the microstructure are revealed and are 
attributable for example, with a proper interpretation, to the presence of different phases or 
crystal defects that changes the diffraction conditions, by modifying the crystal structure. The 
magnified image of the sample can be stored in a digital format using a CCD (charged-
coupled device) camera or in an analogic one using photographic film.  
In the next sections different topics of TEM microscopy will be addressed. As diffraction 
phenomena occur from the electron-sample interaction, relevant data regarding the crystal 
structure of the sample can be obtained through the acquisition of electron diffraction 
patterns. If the beam is convergent, the microscope can obtain convergent electron beam 
diffraction (CBED) patterns that could provide a measure of the foil thickness and help to set 
the two-beam condition, important to analyse crystal defects such as dislocation loops 
(imaging structural defects). Keeping the convergence, the microscope can operate in 
scanning transmission mode (STEM) and carry out chemical analysis along the sample 
microstructure by electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) and energy dispersive 
spectroscopy (EDS). 
4. Characterization methods 
Figure 4.4 Schematic representation not in scale of the optical geometry behind the image and diffraction 
modes in CTEM. 
4. Characterization methods 
Electron diffraction 
As the incident electrons behave also like a wave, they undergo diffraction phenomena after 
interaction with a crystalline sample in TEM leading to the formation of particular scattered 
beams called diffracted beams. These beams and the direct one are focused on distinct spots 
over the objective back focal plane, as shown in Figure 4.4. The electron diffraction pattern is 
formed over the screen when the objective plane of the intermediate lenses matches the 
objective back focal plane. 
Diffraction of electrons from the lattice planes of the crystal, like the X-rays case, follows the 
Bragg Law and for TEM electrons the values of the Bragg angles are around tens of mrad. 
For every hkl set of planes satisfying the Braggs Law, there will be a different scattered 
beam, inclined with respect to the direct beam of an angle two times the Bragg angle of that 
set of planes with spacing dhkl. The construction of the Ewald Sphere (Fig. 4.5) allows 
understanding which set of planes, at a given crystal orientation, will reflect electrons and at 
which intensity. The k of the incident beam (kI) is pointing the origin of the reciprocal lattice 
of the crystalline sample, the origin of kI is the centre of the Ewald Sphere with radius the 
modulus of kI, which is the reverse of . Whatever hkl point of the reciprocal lattice that is 
intersecting the sphere surface can be linked from the centre of it by the k of the diffracted 
beam (kD). The change in k of the electron due to diffraction is: 
K = kD - kI. = ghkl + s                                                       (1) 
Where ghkl is the diffraction vector of that hkl set of planes and has as modulus the reverse of 
dhkl. The deviation parameter is s, at the Bragg angle s = 0 and diffraction occurs. However 
diffraction occurs even when s  0 (at lower intensity), since each point of the reciprocal 
lattice becomes a kind of relrod intersecting the Ewald Sphere. This in general is due to the 
fact that the TEM foil is much larger than thicker. Translated in the reciprocal space, each 
point of the lattice is affected by this surface/thickness ratio and extends along the direction 
perpendicular to the sample surface.  
4. Characterization methods 
Figure 4.5 2D sketch not in scale of the Ewald sphere construction. 
Figure 4.6 shows an example of diffraction pattern characterized by different spots, 
reflections of the focused scattered and direct beams. The brightest spot is called the direct 
spot since it is the reflection of the direct beam and corresponds to the origin of the reciprocal 
lattice (hkl=000). Each ghkl vector is starting from the direct spot and points the 
corresponding hkl spot, reflection of the focused beams that have been scattered by the dhkl 
planes. In first approximation, the length of ghkl is equal to the linear distance between the 
direct spot and the hkl spot, thus providing a measure of the planes spacing. The angles 
between different g vectors will provide sights for the determination of the crystal structure. 
The intensity of the diffraction spot is maximum when s = 0.  
Figure 4.6 Diffraction pattern of crystalline aluminium with the incident beam perpendicular to the (111) 
plane [1]. 
EWALD SPHERE 
reciprocal 
lattice 
1/dhkl 
origin of the 
reciprocal 
lattice 
Bragg 
angle 
4. Characterization methods 
If we are interested to get the diffraction pattern only from a specific area of the sample, like 
a large precipitate, we can apply an aperture that filters the transmitted beam from the not 
interesting area, the diffraction pattern is called SAD (selected-area diffraction). The aperture 
is called SAD aperture and is located on the image plane of the objective lens. The available 
apertures have diameters of the order of the m, in case the selected area has to be smaller, of 
the order of the nm, the nano-diffraction technique can be used. The TEM is operating in 
STEM mode, the incident beam is focused keeping as much as possible the parallel condition 
to prevent an enlargement of the diffraction spots (CBED paragraph). Once a STEM image 
is acquired, the position of the beam spot can be changed relating it to the image. The 
diffraction pattern is afterwards recorded in live mode and it changes as the spot moves in the 
different features measured by the image. 
To record a diffraction pattern a CCD camera can be used but the danger of damage from the 
direct beam limits the amount of collectable signal. Where possible, photographic film should 
be used which does not pose any restriction of acquisition time allowing the detection of the 
weakest spots. 
Information about the crystal lattice can be obtained also from atomic resolution images by 
the fast Fourier transformation (FFT) algorithm. This mathematical operation recognizes in 
the image the presence of periodicities of the intensity signal due to the ordered disposition of 
the atoms. The FFT translates these periodicities in a sort of diffraction pattern. Anyway it 
has to be reminded the mathematical nature of this method and that data from conventional 
diffraction techniques, more physical, should always be considered first. 
Convergent electron beam diffraction (CBED) 
Due to the beam convergence, the diffraction spots are spread like disks as the electrons are 
incident at different angles (Fig. 4.7). The diffraction cannot be described with the 
kinematical approximation but it has to be treated as dynamical, with the Howie-Whelan 
equations, where the transmitted and the diffracted beam are interacting creating a contrast 
that permits thickness measurements. 
4. Characterization methods 
Figure 4.7 Sketch of optical geometry that shows how the diffraction spots enlarge when the beam in 
convergent. 
The variance of the incidence angle will be responsible of interesting phenomena like the 
appearance of the Kikuchi lines superimposed over the diffraction pattern, each of these lines 
is straight and related to a ghkl spot, the line of a particular ghkl spot crosses perpendicularly 
the middle of an hypothetical line linking that ghkl spot with the direct spot. 
Two beam condition 
The TEM foil is tilted at the two beam condition when there is only one strong diffracted 
beam. Diffraction contrast interpretation is made easier as it is known that the set of 
diffracting planes which has been perturbed is the set of planes responsible for the strong 
diffracted beam. In the diffraction pattern, the main diffracted beam will appear bright like 
the direct one, formally s = 0. The set up of the two beam condition is straightforward during 
CBED. Following Fig. 4.8, the Kikuchi line of the diffraction spot g (of the strong diffracted 
beam) has to lie over it in the middle, the Kikuchi lines of the opposite spot g lies instead in 
the middle of the direct spot, which should not be crossed by the Kikuci lines of other main 
reflections.  
4. Characterization methods 
Figure 4.8 a) Kikuchi lines over the diffraction pattern of a fcc crystal oriented in a [111] zone axis. b) the 
sample is tilted at the two beam condition with g 02-2 as strong reflection [2]. 
Measure of the foil thickness 
Every time the thickness increases of half of a length called the extinction distance g the 
transmitted beam is depleted by destructive interference with the diffracted beam of that 
particular g. At a particular zone axis, the direct (spot) disk will usually contain concentric 
diffuse fringes known as Kossel-Mllenstedt (K-M) fringes, each fringe will correspond to an 
increase of the thickness equal to the extinction distance. Those fringes became parallel when 
the foil is tilted at the two beam condition (Fig. 4.9). For the appearance of the fringes the foil 
has to be thicker than g and the convergence angle has to be wider than the Braggs angle of 
that particular zone axis. 
4. Characterization methods 
Figure 4.9 Parallel Kossel-Mllenstedt fringes in a CBED pattern under two-beam condition with g 200 as 
strong reflection [1]. 
From the position of the Kossel-Mllenstedt fringes, the thickness t can be measured together 
with g. Figure 4.10 shows how the spacing of the Kossel-Mllenstedt fringes corresponds to 
i angles, the index i is an integer that rises of 1 every time with the following fringe.  
Figure 4.10 Sketch of two diffraction disks showing the  parameters [1]. 
The i angles will be used to measure the deviation parameter si as shown in equation (2).  
 = 
4. Characterization methods 
Where  is the electron wavelength, d is the spacing of the diffracting planes and B is the 
Braggs angle. For each si the following equation (3) is satisfied. 
Where nk is an integer that raises of 1 every time with the following fringe satisfying that k = 
i + j, where j is the largest integer < (t/g). 
Figure 4.11 show how from equation (3) a straight line plot can be drawn using the different 
values of si, from the slope and the intercept the g and t can be measured respectively. 
Figure 4.11 Liner plot of equation (3) [1]. 
Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) 
In STEM the beam is convergent and focused in a probe large less than 1 nm. The transmitted 
beam is collected by several detectors in order to measure both the direct beam and the 
scattered ones at different angles. As in SEM, the collected signal is translated in a digital 
pixel and a digital image is formed as the beam spot raster the area of interest. The HAADF 
(high angle annular dark field) detector is the one detecting the electrons scattered at the 
higher angles and its images are the most sensible to the Z contrast. 
The advantage of STEM over CTEM is that the transmitted beam is not passing through any 
lens, preventing the issues related to lens defects. With the new technology advancements, 
the spherical aberration of the lenses between the electron source and the sample can be 
drastically reduced. As a result, the probe can have a diameter of around 0.1 nm, keeping at 
4. Characterization methods 
the same time the current high enough to limit noise at acceptable levels. As the probe size is 
shorter than the atomic bond, it is possible to acquire atomic resolution images. 
Electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). 
A chemical analysis of the microstructure shown by the microscope can be conducted after 
two phenomena arising from the sample interaction with the electron beam. 
The first phenomenon is the emission of X-rays from the sample, the chemical analysis that 
detects an element from the emitted X-ray wavelengths is called energy dispersive 
spectroscopy (EDS). The emission of an X-ray photon arises from the knock-off of an 
electron of an atom belonging to the sample by an electron of the beam. This knocked off 
electron, literally the known SE (secondary electron), has left an empty space in the 
electronic structure of the atom. An electron from the upper atomic levels (with higher 
energy) will occupy this empty space (with lower energy) through an electronic transition 
that can release energy under the form of an X-ray photon. The energy of that photon is equal 
to the difference between the initial and final atomic level of the electron. From that energy 
value, the atomic element can be determined. X-rays, under the name of Bremsstrahlung 
radiation, can also be generated when the incident electron approaches the nuclei and 
undergoes a substantial change of its momentum. 
Fig. 4.12 shows an example of EDS spectrum with at the ordinate the energy of the measured 
X-ray photons (0-30 keV) and on the coordinates the intensity. After acquisition, the 
background consists of the noise at zero energy (strobe peak) and the Bremsstrahlung 
radiation, both have to be removed.  Peaks denote the occurrence of electronic transitions. 
Figure 4.12 Example not in scale of an EDS spectrum. 
4. Characterization methods 
Precise qualitative analysis can be problematic due to the resolution of the detector and the 
broadening of the peaks which overlap making trivial the precise element identification. To 
overcome the problem, the hypothesis that a peak belongs to that element should be 
supported by the presence of the other peaks expected for that element at other energies. 
Since different electronic transitions have different cross sections, it is expected that the 
intensity ratio between two peaks from the EDS spectra corresponds to the ratio between the 
cross sections of their identified electronic transitions. 
If the qualitative analysis is satisfactory, a quantitative one can be carried. From the Cliff-
Lorimer equation, the concentrations ratio between element A and B is proportional to the 
ratio between the X-rays intensity from A and B. The constant of proportion is dependant to 
several factors, and can be obtained through standards of known composition. The formula 
works best for thin specimens (<100nm, TEM foils) as absorption effects can be neglected 
facilitating the interpretation.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
The second phenomenon regards the energy lost by the electron from the beam after 
transmission through the TEM foil. These losses of energy are due to inelastic interactions 
with the electrons of the sample and are indicative of the type of atom and its chemical 
surrounding. The analysis measuring the electron loss of energy is called electron energy loss 
spectroscopy (EELS). 
An EELS spectrum, as shown in Fig 4.13, has as ordinate the energy lost by the electron and 
as coordinate the occurrence of the loss. Usually three distinctive parts can be recognized. 
The first one is the zero-loss peak, due to the high number of electrons that have been 
transmitted without undergoing inelastic interactions. The second one after the zero loss peak 
and up to ~50 eV is the low-loss region, there are collected interactions with bound 
conduction and valence-band electrons which generate plasmon vibrations. The low-loss 
spectrum can be used to fingerprint specific elements and their chemical surrounding, 
different chemical compositions change the atoms electronic structure causing shifts of the 
low loss spectrum peaks.  
4. Characterization methods 
Figure 4.13 Example not in scale of an EELS spectrum. 
Above ~50 eV there is the region of the core loss, where the beam electrons have interacted 
with the atoms ionizing them. The energy loss associated to this process corresponds to the 
ionization energy, it cannot be lower but it can be higher (with lower probability). As a result 
of this, from low to high energy loss, the shape of the intensity signal associated with a 
particular ionization becomes very sharp as the precise ionization energy is reached and after 
it decreases exponentially. The overall signal shape is thus asymmetric, is called edge instead 
of peak. The position of the edges in indicative of the chemical element present, shifts of 
those edges are related to the atoms chemical surrounding.  
With EELS is possible to carry quantitative analysis if the background can be properly 
removed and it is know the ionization cross section. 
Imaging structural defects 
Dislocations lines, dislocation loops, whatever crystal defect is visible on TEM if it distorts 
the crystal lattice changing locally the diffraction conditions for the beam electrons. If after 
the lattice distortion the electron is now scattered, the direct beam intensity is lower with 
respect to where the lattice is undistorted. That intensity difference creates a contrast that 
describes the defect responsible of that lattice distortion. 
4. Characterization methods 
The Burgers vector b of a dislocation defines the distortion of the crystal by its modulus and 
the glide plane by its direction. Defining b is important in the description and understanding 
of the microstructure evolution subsequent to irradiation or plastic deformation. The contrast 
of the dislocation under TEM analysis is proportional to the dot product gb, when it is equal 
to zero the dislocation is ideally out of contrast and so invisible. Measuring the different 
contrast of a dislocation at different two-beam conditions (so different g vectors) will provide 
insights to define the b vector for that dislocation. The g vector lies on the plane of the image 
perpendicular to the incident beam, in first approximation. 
The nature of dislocation loops can be of interstitial type if they are represented in the lattice 
as an inserted atomic plane, or vacancy type if the atomic plane is missing. The nature of 
edge loops larger than 30nm can be understood with the outside-inside contrast method 
where the dark line of the loop can appear inside the loop, or outside it (appearing larger) on 
the basis of the loop nature and versus of g and b. Figure 4.14 resume the imaging condition, 
first of all we are not in two-beam condition as the deviation parameter s is > 0. The strain 
induced by the loop can bring back the diffracting planes to the Bragg condition (s = 0) 
leading to a peak of the contrast that could lie inside (inside contrast) or outside (outside 
contrast) the dislocation core. Formally inside contrast arises when (g  b) s < 0 and outside 
when (g  b) s > 0.  
Figure 4.14 Schematic representation of the outside-inside method applied for a interstitial and vacancy 
loop, changing the versus of g (rotating so the diffracting planes) shifts the contrast peak position due to 
the diffracting planes back to the Bragg condition after the distorting action of the loop [1].  
4. Characterization methods 
4.3 Positron annihilation spectroscopy  
Nanoscale defects like clusters, precipitates and open-volume defects (as voids and 
vacancies) and their chemical surroundings can be studied non-destructively by positron 
annihilation spectroscopy. Positron is the anti-particle of the electron and it has positive 
charge; it can be created in laboratory from the decay of radioactive isotopes such as 22Na. 
Figure 4.15 shows the events that follow the collision of a positron with the sample. After 
implantation in a material, positrons thermalize within picoseconds with a depth of about 100 
m, then diffuse through the crystal lattice (in the range of 100 nm), and finally annihilate 
with an electron of the sample. The annihilation process leads to the emission of two photons 
of exactly 511 keV in opposite directions from the center-of-mass of the electron-positron 
system. In this phenomenon, two aspects are relevant form the experimental point of view: 
 Positron lifetime , i.e. the time from the birth of the positron to its annihilation 
 Doppler broadening, the energy peak of the photons at 511 keV is broadened. 
Figure 4.15 Summary of the events that follow the collision of a positron (e
) with the sample. 
4. Characterization methods 
Positron lifetime 
Positrons are very sensitive to vacancy-type defects. The free positron in a crystal lattice 
experiences strong repulsion from the positive ion cores. An open-volume defect like a 
vacant lattice site is therefore an attractive centre where the positron gets trapped. The 
reduced electron density at the vacant site increases the positron lifetime. Not only vacancy-
like defects form attractive potentials for positrons but also metallic clusters or layers as long 
as their positron affinity is higher than the surrounding material. The intensity of the emitted 
radiation at a determinate lifetime is indicator of the concentration of that particular defect. 
Doppler broadening 
Since the energy of the fully thermalized positron can be neglected, the momentum of the 
electron-positron system is determined mainly by the electron momentum which will change 
the measured energy of the emitted 511 keV photons. This change can be up to 2 keV. Hence, 
the broadening of the 511 keV (Fig. 4.16) is a direct measure of the electron momentum 
distribution at the annihilation site. If the positron is trapped in open-volume defects such as 
vacancies, the annihilation probability with core electrons strongly decreases, which leads to 
a lower broadening. The ratio curve from the rapport between the doppler broadening curve 
of a sample over a standard constituted of a pure material is indicative of where positrons 
annihilate. The closer of that ratio curve to the unit, the higher number of positrons that 
annihilate in zones where the electron density is the same of the standard material in that ratio 
curve. 
The ratio of the area of the central part of the broadening curve over the area of the entire 
curve is called the S-parameter, whereas the W-parameter is the ratio of the area of the 
bounds of the broadening curve over the area of the entire curve (Fig. 4.16). S corresponds to 
positron annihilating with the valence electrons and W-parameter corresponds to positron 
annihilating with the core electrons. S is sensitive to open volume defects and its increase 
indicates presence of vacancy defects. W is instead sensitive to the chemical surrounding at 
the annihilation site and is so the considered zone in the ratio curves. 
4. Characterization methods 
Figure 4.16 Example of broadening of the photons energy from the peak at 511 keV. The ratio of the 
curve area included in the W and S rectangles over the entire curve area provides respectively the S and W 
parameters. 
4.4 Hardness test 
The hardness of a material is a mechanical related property and is often reported to vary 
linearly with the tensile strength. There are different methods to measure it on the basis of the 
material type, for this study the Vickers method has been adopted which can be used for all 
metals and it has one of the widest scales among hardness tests. 
Figure 4.17 Schematic representation of a Vickers indenter indenting a sample leaving a pyramidal 
indentation characterized by two diagonals (d1, d2)[credits from Wikipedia]. 
4. Characterization methods 
The measure consists of pressing the tip of a square pyramidal indenter over the sample 
surface for a precise duration of time in order to leave at the end a pyramidal indentation (Fig. 
4.17). The indenter has to be ideally not deformable and is made of diamond; the slant angle 
is 22 and comes from the previous optimization of the Brinell hardness method. The ratio of 
the used force (F) over the area of the pyramidal impression (A) left by the indenter is the 
measure of the Vickers hardness (HV) as stated by the following equation (4) 
 ()
 (2)
The value of A can be obtained from the average d of the two diagonals defining the 
indentation. 
2 (2)
2 sin(
Vickers hardness has the enormous advantage over tensile tests to be not destructive. A 
proper Vickers hardness measurement should consist in the average over a statistically 
relevant number of indentations, surface quality affects data scattering and an indentation is 
considered acceptable if the difference of the two diagonals is less than the 5% of their 
average. An indentation should not be taken close to the edge or to another indentation in 
order to avoid respectively lack of interaction with the sample and interaction with the cold-
worked region around the pre-existent indentation. The ASTM E384 method states that the 
distance of an indentation between another or the edge should be 2.5 d.  
4.5 References 
Most of the text of this chapter is based from the following books 
[1] Transmission Electron Microscopy 2
 edition, D.B. Williams and C.B. Carter, Springer. 
[2] Microstructural Characterization of Materials 2
 edition, D. Brandon and W.D. Kaplan, 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
[3] Characterization of Radiation Damage by Transmission Electron Microscopy, M.L. 
Jenkins and M.A. Kirk, IOP Publishing Ltd. 
Atomically resolved chemical ordering at the nm-thick TiO 
precipitate/matrix interface in V-4Ti-4Cr alloy  
A. Impagnatiello
, D. Hernandez-Maldonado
, G. Bertali
, E. Prestat
D. Kepaptsoglou
, Q. Ramasse
, S.J. Haigh
,  E. Jimenez-Melero,
Dalton Cumbrian Facility, The University of Manchester, Moor Row CA24 3HA, UK 
School of Materials, The University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK 
SuperSTEM Laboratory, STFC Daresbury Campus, Keckwick Lane, Daresbury WA4 4AD, UK 
Corresponding author (*):  
Dalton Cumbrian Facility 
University of Manchester 
Westlakes Science & Technology Park 
Moor Row 
CA24 3HA  
United Kingdom 
Tel.: +44 1946 508860 
Email: andrea.impagnatiello@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk 
mailto:andrea.impagnatiello@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk
Contribution of the different co-authors 
The samples were prepared by the main author A. Impagnatiello, who also analysed and 
interpreted the data with the valuable input of all the co-authors in their specific areas of 
expertise. 
With regard to the data acquisition, D. Hernandez-Maldonado operated the SuperSTEM and 
calculated the simulated image that appears in the supplementary section of the manuscript. G. 
Bertali and E. Prestat operated the FEI Titan, and the collected data is shown in Fig.1. The 
main author was always present during the data acquisition, providing input about the regions 
of interest for detailed characterization. 
The main author wrote the manuscript together with E. Jimenez-Melero. G. Bertalli, 
D. Kepaptsoglou, Q. Ramasse and S.J. Haigh provided feedback to the written manuscript 
before the journal submission. 
Abstract 
We have used advanced analytical electron microscopy to characterise the local structure and 
chemistry at the interface between nm-thick TiO precipitates and the V-based matrix in a     
V-4Ti-4Cr alloy. Our results reveal the presence of an intergrowth between the fcc TiO and 
bcc vanadium structures, with a repeat lattice distance that equals 2.5 times the vanadium 
lattice parameter along the c-axis. Our atomic resolution analysis of the interface will impact 
the mechanistic understanding of its interaction with interstitials and radiation-induced lattice 
defects, and consequently trigger the development of improved alloy structures with 
interfaces engineered for enhanced radiation tolerance.   
Keywords: refractory metal, crystalline oxides, lattice defects, high-resolution electron 
microscopy, nuclear fusion reactor 
Vanadium-based alloys constitute advanced structural material candidates for the first wall of 
future magnetically-confined fusion reactors, due to their relatively low cross section for 
neutron activation [1,2]. Consequently, the targeted tritium breeding ratio will be achieved 
without the need of an additional neutron-multiplier material such as beryllium. The high 
strength and creep resistance of V-based alloys, enhanced by the addition of Cr, will allow 
these materials to withstand temperatures up to 750C without compromising reactor 
operability and safety [3]. In addition, the body-centred cubic (bcc) nature of the V matrix, 
with additions of Ti, provides these materials with good resistance to radiation-induced void 
swelling [4,5]. These considerations have led to the V-4Cr-4Ti alloy being identified as the 
prime V-based candidate material for fusion reactor applications [2,6,7].  
However, the presence of H, C, O and N as free interstitials in the V-matrix causes 
the detrimental shift of the ductile-to-brittle transition temperature from -200C to values 
well above room temperature [8-10]. Ti was identified as an effective scavenger for 
interstitials [11], by forming plate-like oxycarbo-nitride precipitates [12-15]. The additional 
benefit is that the precipitate/matrix interface could potentially act as an effective sink for 
radiation-induced lattice defects, such as vacancies, vacancy clusters or dislocation loops, or 
for transmutant helium atoms [16,17]. Unfortunately, a unified view about the local structure 
and chemistry of these nano-precipitates is still lacking. In this paper, we have addressed this 
by characterizing, with atomic resolution, the chemical distribution and local structure inside 
the precipitates and within the precipitate-matrix interface region. 
In this study we annealed V-4Cr-4Ti (wt.%) sheet material for 2h at 1200C in an 
inert atmosphere, followed by water-quenching to room temperature. For transmission 
electron microscope (TEM) imaging and analysis discs were prepared by mechanical pre-
thinning, followed by electro-polishing using an electrolyte of 60vol.% methanol  35vol.% 
2-buthoxyethanol  5vol.% perchloric acid (60%)  at a temperature of -35C. Advanced 
scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) imaging, coupled with Energy-
Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) and Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy (EELS) 
measurements performed in a STEM microscope, was used to obtain structural and chemical 
information with atomic resolution. A High Angle Annular Dark Field (HAADF) detector 
was used to collect the Rutherford-like scattering signal while the subnanometer-sized 
electron probe was scanning the sample. The intensity in the HAADF images is proportional 
, where Z denotes the atomic number and  = 1.6-1.9 [18]. The HAADF data therefore 
yielded information about the atomic positions and local arrangements inside the Ti-rich 
precipitates present in the V-4Cr-4Ti alloy. For the chemical identification we used 
(1) STEM-EDS to detect elements with high atomic number, and (2) STEM-EELS suitable to 
detect low-Z elements, and also to determine the chemical environment of a specific element.  
Fig. 1a shows a TEM bright-field (BF) image of the V-4Cr-4Ti specimen after the 
annealing treatment. A significant number of plate-like precipitates, with lengths of up to a 
few microns and only a few tens of nanometers in width, were observed in this material. The 
selected area electron diffraction pattern (SADP) of Fig. 1e shows the [001] zone axis of the 
V matrix with additional reflections due to the presence of one of the plate-like precipitates. 
The lattice parameter of bcc V (av) is 3.02. The pattern clearly shows that the plates are 
lying on the V{100} family of planes. Additionally, we have observed the presence of 
diffraction spots corresponding to a superstructure with a spacing of 7.56, which 
corresponds to 2.5 times the lattice parameter of the matrix. 
High resolution STEM imaging of the precipitates (Fig. 1) revealed a range of atomic 
structures within different plate-like precipitates: uniform (b), showing a superstructure 
through the thickness (c), or showing a superstructure localised on one (d) or both (f) long 
sides of the precipitates. The spacing determined in the high resolution STEM data for the 
superstructure corresponds to the value obtained from the SADP. Fig. 1g and 1h are the 
related background-subtracted EDS spectrum images for the K Ti and K V lines, 
respectively. The EDS data show that the uniform area of the precipitate mainly contains Ti, 
whereas both Ti and V are present in the superstructure regions. Cr has not been detected in 
significant amounts inside any of the precipitates. Two additional cases are also reported in 
Fig. 1: superstructure at the short edge of the precipitates (i), and surrounding a region of 
uniform atomic structure (j). Interestingly, the interface between the precipitate superstructure 
and the matrix acts as an effective trap for dislocations present in the matrix (k).  
In order to obtain further information about the local chemical distribution and the 
origin of the interfacial superstructure phase, we recorded the EELS core loss and low loss 
spectra [19] at representative locations of the matrix, the superstructure and the uniform 
structure of the precipitate (Fig. 2). The EELS core loss spectrum of the matrix is dominated 
by the L2,3 edges of vanadium (in the region of 440-590eV). A relatively weak L2,3 edge from 
the substitutional Cr atoms can also be observed close to 580eV. When profiling from the 
matrix to the superstructure of the precipitate, the vanadium edge is still visible but decreases 
in intensity, whereas the L2,3 edge of Ti starts to appear at characteristic peak energies of 
457 and  462eV. The edge consists of L3 and L2 white lines which originate from electron 
transitions from the inner 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 orbitals respectively to empty 3d orbitals of Ti [20]. 
Those characteristic Ti lines constitute the main feature of the EELS spectrum in the uniform 
structure of the precipitate. Additionally, we can also observe the appearance of the K-edge 
of oxygen at 530-550eV, with the most distinctive maximum located just above the edge 
onset at 532eV. The lower-energy features of this peak are known to originate from 
transitions between oxygen 1s and 2p * states that are hybridized with empty Ti 3d orbitals 
[20]. The intensity of the 532eV peak increases when moving the beam from the matrix into 
the superstructure and further into the uniform structure of the precipitate. We have not 
observed any significant signal in the EELS spectrum at around 280 and 400eV which 
suggests the absence of C or N within the precipitate. These results would point to the 
precipitates consisting of a titanium oxide phase. To confirm this, we have also examined the 
EELS low loss or valence spectrum below 35eV (Fig. 2c), which is dominated by plasmon 
excitations. The main plasmon peak of the matrix at 21.6(1) eV can be attributed to metallic 
vanadium [19]. The position of the maximum consistently shifts to a value of 23.8(1)eV 
inside the precipitate. An equivalent peak shift is observed for the superstructure and the 
uniform structure in the precipitate, see Fig. 2a-II. The main plasmon peak of metallic Ti 
would be located at 18 eV [19], and is expected to shift to 20 eV when forming Ti hydrides 
[21] and to 22-26 eV when Ti forms compounds with C, N or O [19, 20]. Our combined 
EELS core loss and low loss spectral data are therefore consistent with a titanium oxide phase 
as precipitate.  
An HAADF image of one of the precipitates and surrounding matrix is shown in 
Fig. 3a, together with its Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) and the measured electron diffraction 
pattern taken at selected locations in the precipitate and the matrix. The diffraction pattern of 
the matrix corresponds to the vanadium bcc structure acquired along the [100] zone axis. The 
pattern of the uniform structure in the precipitate has been indexed based on a face-centred 
cubic TiO unit cell (S.G. Fm-3m) along the [110] zone axis. This titanium mono-oxide phase 
presents a NaCl-type fcc structure, with a reported value of its lattice parameter of 4.184. Its 
structure can host up to approx. 15% of vacancies [22, 23], and also small amounts of C and 
N, since both TiN and TiC are isostructural with TiO [24]. We have determined the lattice 
parameter of the TiO-type precipitates in V-4Cr-4Ti as 4.28. This value corresponds to 
2 , where av is the lattice parameter of V matrix. Furthermore, the TiO precipitates must 
be related to the V matrix by the BakerNutting orientation relationship: [001]TiO // [001]V, 
(110)TiO // (100)V. From these results, it is then possible to construct a proposed model for the 
superstructure in the precipitates, which consists of an intergrowth of the two end structures: 
the V bcc matrix and the TiO fcc uniform structure, see Fig. 3b. The unit cell contains one 
vanadium octahedron from the V bcc structure, located between two TiO layers. The unit 
cell becomes elongated along the c-axis with a lattice parameter of c = 2.5  aV  7.56. The 
orientation relationship of the superstructure with the V matrix is thus: [001]st // [001]V, 
(100)st // (100)V. 
Fig. 4 contains a plan view representation of the proposed model along the 
[100] direction, together with an experimental atomic resolution HAADF image of the 
superstructure, and the spatial distribution of the V and Ti derived from the EELS spectra 
using the L2,3 edges of both elements. The combined interpretation of the chemical and 
structural data strongly supports the validity of the proposed superstructure model. The repeat 
distance of 7.56 corresponds to the c-axis of the simple tetragonal unit cell. The dark and 
bright lines observed in the HAADF images can therefore be linked to TiO and V layers 
respectively. Careful examination and comparison of the images and chemical information 
from the EELS data also suggest that it is possible to identify individual V atoms at two 
positions in the unit cell, i.e. x=0 and x=1/2 from the V octahedron in the intergrowth, and 
also interleaving Ti atoms.  
Some simple diffusion considerations can be put forward to explain how the 
superstructure forms. When the sample is annealed at 1200C, both Ti and O diffuse in the 
V bcc matrix to form the TiO precipitates. The diffusion of O interstitials is relatively fast; 
with a reported value of the activation energy of 119.6-122.5 kJ mol
 [25-27]. Early trace 
diffusion experiments in binary V-Ti alloys yielded a value for the Ti diffusion coefficient of 
1.5  10
/s at 1200C [28].  If we assume a random walk approach for the diffusion of 
Ti in the V matrix, we obtain a Ti diffusion length of Dt   3.3m. This value is in good 
agreement with our experimental value for the average precipitate length in this material 
( 3m). A correlation factor (f) is defined as the ratio of the diffusion coefficient of a given 
species, Ti in this case, to the diffusion coefficient calculated assuming randomly oriented 
jump vectors [29]. The reported value of this correlation value for Ti diffusion, assuming that 
the Ti atoms produce only a weak perturbation of the V lattice and also a vacancy-mediated 
mechanism, takes a value lower than but close to 1, i.e. fTi = 0.75-0.80 in the temperature 
range of 1100-1550C [28]. In general, the greater the freedom of movement of the vacancy, 
the less important the correlation effects become, and therefore the smaller 1-f is [30]. This 
means that the binding energy for a Ti-vacancy is relatively low, and the random walk 
treatment is a suitable approach for the Ti diffusion in the V matrix. The V self-diffusion is 
slower than the Ti diffusion, but the V diffusivity is affected by the rate at which Ti-vacancy 
pairs break up. The V diffusion coefficient takes a value of 6.0  10
/s at 1200C [28, 
31], which yields a V diffusion length of Dt  2.1m. V can therefore form the 
superstructure phase together with Ti along the precipitate-matrix interface during the 
annealing treatment.      
The local structure and chemical distribution at the precipitate interface with the 
V matrix will influence the strength of the precipitates as sinks and recombination sites for 
radiation-induced lattice defects and He atoms [32]. Helium has a relatively low solubility in 
metals [33, 34], and hence the diffusion and accumulation of He at interfaces and grain 
boundaries can potentially form bubbles. The presence of He has also been proposed to 
accelerate the radiation-induced swelling, both by stabilising the void nuclei formed by 
clustering of the vacancy defects, and by enhancing the void growth that may lead to 
percolating networks [35]. The leading approach to mitigating void swelling in He-containing 
materials is to delay the bubble transformation into voids by nano-structuring [36, 37]. 
Recent work reports the role of semi-coherent fcc-bcc heterophase interfaces in delaying 
bubble growth in nano-layered composites, materials in which helium seems to accumulate at 
intersections between misfit dislocations. The spacing between those dislocation interactions 
could therefore be optimised to influence the effectiveness of the interface as point defect 
sinks so that enhanced damage tolerance is achieved [35, 38]. In the case of the TiO(fcc)-
V(bcc) system, the observed atomic ordering at the interface could effectively delay the He 
bubble growth, and also accommodate significant amounts of lattice defects and interstitial 
atoms at the interface, so that low-temperature embrittlement is minimised or delayed.      
In conclusion, our atomic-resolution STEM imaging and analysis results have 
revealed the presence of an intergrowth of the TiO fcc and V bcc structures at the 
precipitate/matrix interface in the V-4Ti-4Cr alloy. The O atoms are primarily concentrated 
inside the nm-thick precipitates, where they seem to be homogeneously distributed, while the 
V/Ti superstructure atomic ordering can in some cases extend through the full thickness of 
the plate-like precipitates. This atomic-scale characterization of the local structure and 
chemistry of the interface and precipitate structure will assist the mechanistic understanding 
of the interaction of interstitials and radiation-induced lattice defects with the precipitate 
interface, and hopefully trigger the development of novel alloy structures with enhanced 
radiation tolerance. 
We acknowledge the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPRSC) 
for providing funding for this project via the Centre for Doctoral Training in the Science and 
Technology of Fusion Energy (http://www.fusion-cdt.ac.uk/), and also for providing access to 
the SuperSTEM Laboratory, the U.K. National Facility for Aberration-Corrected STEM 
(http://www.superstem.com/). S.J.H. would like to acknowledge EPSRC grant 
EP/M010619/1 as well as the defence threat reduction agency grant number HDTRA1-12-1-
0013. We would also like to thank Matthew Smith for his valuable help with the FEI Titan 
microscope in Manchester. 
References  
[1] S.J. Zinkle, A. Mslang, T. Muroga, H. Tanigawa, Nucl. Fusion 53 (2013) 104024. 
[2] T. Muroga, J.M. Chen, V.M. Chernov, R.J. Kurtz, M. Le Flem, J. Nucl. Mater. 455 
(2014) 263. 
[3] S.J. Zinkle, N.M. Ghoniem, Fusion Eng. Des. 5152 (2000) 55. 
[4] B.A. Loomis, D.L. Smith, F.A. Garner, J. Nucl. Mater. 179-181 (1991) 771. 
[5] H.M. Chung, B.A Loomis, D.L. Smith, J. Nucl. Mater. 212-215 (1994) 804. 
[6] D.L. Smith, H.M. Chung, H. Matsui, A.F. Rowcliffe, Fusion Eng. Des. 41 (1998) 7. 
[7] D.L. Smith, M.C. Billone, K. Natesan, Int. J. Refract. Met. Hard Mat. 18 (2000) 213. 
[8] N. Baluc, Phys. Scr. T138 (2009) 014004. 
[9] T. Nagasaka, N.J. Heo, T. Muroga, M. Imamura, Fusion Eng. Des. 61/62 (2002) 757. 
[10] D.L. Smith, H.M. Chung, B.A. Loomis, H.C. Tsai, J. Nucl. Mater. 233-237 (1996) 356. 
[11] D.R. Diercks, B.A. Loomis. J. Nucl. Mater. 141-143 (1986) 1117.  
[12] B. Zhu, S. Yang, M. Zhang, J. Ding, Y. Long, F. Wan, Mater. Charact. 111 (2016) 60. 
[13] M. Hatakeyama, T. Muroga, S. Tamura, I. Yamagata. J. Nucl. Mater. 417 (2011) 303. 
[14] J.M. Chen, T. Muroga, T. Nagasaka, Y. Xu, C. Li, S.Y. Qiu, Y. Chen, J. Nucl. Mater. 
334 (2004) 159. 
[15] T. Muroga, T. Nagasaka, P.F. Zheng, J.M. Chen, Adv. Sci. Tech. 73 (2010) 22. 
[16] M.S. Staltsov, I.I. Chernov, B.A. Kalin, K.Z. Oo, A.A. Polyansky, O.S. Staltsova, et al., 
J. Nucl. Mater. 461 (2015) 56. 
[17] A. van Veen, A.V. Fedorov, A.I. Ryazanov, J. Nucl. Mater. 258-263 (1998) 1400. 
[18] P. Hartel, H. Rose, C. Dignes, Ultramicroscopy 63 (1996) 93. 
[19] R.F. Egerton, Electron Energy-Loss Spectroscopy in the Electron Microscope. 
Springer, 2011.  
[20] E. Stoyanov, F. Langenhorst, G. Steinle-Neumann, Am. Miner. 92 (2007) 577.  
[21] N. G. Alexandropoulos, G. Bambakidis, T. Sparrow, B. Williams, J. Phys. F: Met. Phys. 
16 (1986) L24S. 
[22] M. D. Banus, T. B. Reed, A. J. Strauss, Phys. Rev. B 5 (1972) 2775. 
[23] A. I. Gusev, J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 117 (2013) 293. 
[24] H.O. Pierson, Handbook of Refractory Carbides and Nitrides: Properties, 
Characteristics, Processing, and Applications. Noyes Publications, 1996. 
[25] R.W. Powers, M.V. Doyle. Acta Metall. 6 (1958) 643.  
[26] R.W. Powers, M.V. Doyle. J. Appl. Phys. 30 (1959) 514. 
[27] H. Nakajima, S. Nagata, H. Matsui, S. Yamaguchi. Phil. Mag. 67 (1993) 557. 
[28] J.F. Murdock, C.J. McHargue. Acta Metall. 16 (1968) 493.  
[29] R.E. Howard. Phys. Rev. 144 (1966) 650.  
[30] R.E. Howard, A.B. Lidiard. Rep. Prog. Phys. 27 (1964) 161.  
[31] Y. Liu, Y. Ge, T. Pan, L. Zhang. J. Alloys Comp. 470 (2009) 176.  
[32] M.J. Demkowicz, P. Bellon, B.D. Wirth. MRS Bull. 35 (2010) 992. 
[33] J. Laakmann, P. Jung, W. Uelhoff. Acta Metall. 35 (1987) 2063. 
[34] F. Gao, H. Heinisch, R.J. Kurtz. J. Nucl. Mater. 351 (2006) 133. 
[35] M.J. Demkowicz, A. Misra, A. Caro. Curr. Opin. Solid State Mat. Sci. 16 (2012) 101. 
[36] P.D. Edmonson, C.M. Parish, Y. Zhang, A. Halln, M.K. Miller. Scripta Mater. 65 
(2011) 731. 
[37] Y. Wu, J. Ciston, S. Kremer, N. Bailey, G.R. Odette, P. Hosemann. Acta Mater. 111 
(2016) 108. 
[38] E.G. Fu, A. Misra, H. Wang, L. Shao, X. Zhang. J. Nucl. Mater. 407 (2010) 178. 
Fig. 1. (a) TEM BF image of the V-4Ti-4Cr alloy microstructure with the plate-like precipitates viewed 
along the [001] zone axis. (b-d) HAADF images showing precipitates with (b) a uniform atomic structure, 
(c) a superstructure and (d) both uniform and superstructure regions. (e) The corresponding SADP of (a) 
with the V matrix and simple tetragonal (st) superstructure reflections highlighted. Precipitates with 
different proportions of superstructure fringes: (f) with superstructure at both long sides with the relative 
EDS spectrum images for (g) K Ti and (h) K V, (i) with superstructure at the short edge of the 
precipitates, and (j) with superstructure surrounding a region of uniform atomic structure. (k) BF image of 
a precipitate with dislocations pinned at the precipitate-matrix interface. 
Fig. 2. (a-I) HAADF image showing a precipitate with regions of both uniform structure and 
superstructure and (a-II) related map of the plasmon peak. (b-I) EELS core loss and (b-II) EELS low loss 
spectra taken from the regions highlighted by the coloured squares in (a-I), corresponding to matrix (red), 
superstructure (black) and uniform precipitate (blue) structure regions. The fitted position of the main 
plasmon peak in the region of interest is reported in (a-II).  
Fig. 3. (a-I) HAADF image showing a TiO precipitate with regions of both superstructure and uniform 
atomic structure. (a-II) to (a-IV) show the FFT and diffraction patterns taken from the regions outlined by 
the coloured squares in (a-I). (a-V) is the superimposed pattern containing the position of the spots in (a-II) 
to (a-IV). (b) Proposed crystal structure model relating the V bcc matrix structure to the TiO fcc (NaCl-
type) precipitate and the superstructure (simple tetragonal st of TiO with V). The lattice parameter of 
both TiO structures is indicated taking the lattice parameter (aV) of the V bcc matrix as reference. 
Fig. 4. (a) HAADF image of the superstructure within the precipitate, (b) composite image constructed 
from the EELS maps generated by integrating the L2,3 edge intensity of V (red) and Ti (blue). (c) Atomic 
resolution detail of the region marked by the yellow rectangle in (a), with atomic positions superimposed 
inside the blue rectangle.(d) Crystal structure model showing two repeating units of the superstructure 
along the z-direction with the atomic pattern shown in (c) highlighted by the blue rectangle. 
Detailed experimental conditions 
We employed an FEI Titan G2 80-200 aberration-corrected S/TEM with an X-FEG and 
ChemiSTEM
 technology [1], i.e. four solid-state detectors for high EDS data collection efficiency. 
This instrument used an accelerating voltage of 200 kV and a probe current of 90 pA. The HAADF 
detector had a semi-angular range from 36 to 180mrad, and the EDS collection angle was 0.7 sr. We 
also used in this work a Nion UltraSTEM
 100MC with C5 Nion QO corrector, full correction up to 
six-fold astigmatism for high spatial resolution imaging, together with a high-energy-resolution 
monochromator for enhanced energy resolution [2]. For this microscope the accelerating voltage was 
100 kV and the probe current after monochromation was 16-20 pA. The HAADF detector here 
covered a semi-angular range from 86 to 190 mrad, whereas the EELS detector covered a semi-angle 
of 44mrad and the dispersion was 0.02eV/channel. In both microscopes it is possible to achieve a 
spatial resolution < 0.08nm.  
[1] D. Sudfeld, O. Lourie, S. Kujawa, J. Phys.: Conf. Series 522 (2014) 012026. 
[2] O.L. Krivanek, G.J. Corbin, N. Dellby, B.F. Elston, R.J. Keyse, M.F. Murfitt, et al., 
Ultramicroscopy 108 (2008) 179. 
Simulation of the HAADF STEM image  
The simulation has been performed using the QSTEM software package and the following input 
parameters: (a) beam energy 100kV, (b) convergence semi-angle 30mrad, (c) angles HAADF 80-
240mrad, (d) foil thickness 18nm. 
Fig. A.1. (a) Simulated HAADF STEM image of the precipitate superstructure, and (b) comparison 
with the atomic resolution experimental image in Fig. 4c of the article. 
 Electron diffraction patterns of the superstructure 
Fig. A.2. Selected area electroon diffraction patterns. 
Fig. A.3. Nano-diffraction patterns. 
Ti-rich precipitate evolution in vanadium-based alloys during 
annealing above 400C 
A. Impagnatiello
a,b,*
, T. Toyama
, E. Jimenez-Melero,
School of Materials, The University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK 
Dalton Cumbrian Facility, The University of Manchester, Moor Row CA24 3HA, UK 
The Oarai Center, Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University,                                                 
Oarai, Ibaraki 311-1313, Japan 
Corresponding author (*):  
Dalton Cumbrian Facility 
University of Manchester 
Westlakes Science & Technology Park 
Moor Row 
CA24 3HA  
United Kingdom 
Tel.: +44 1946 508860 
Email: andrea.impagnatiello@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk 
mailto:andrea.impagnatiello@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk
Contribution of the different co-authors 
The samples were prepared by the main author A. Impagnatiello, who also analysed and 
interpreted the data with the assistance of all the co-authors. In particular, T. Toyama 
supervised his work during his stay in Japan, and taught A. Impagnatiello the operation of the 
PAS set-up. Atom probe tomography maps and relative FIB sample preparation were 
obtained with the help of K. Tomura and E. Ebisawa. 
The main author wrote the manuscript together with E. Jimenez-Melero. T. Toyama provided 
feedback of the written manuscript before the journal submission. 
Abstract 
We have assessed the plate-like TiO precipitate evolution in V-4Ti and V-4Ti-4Cr alloys 
during isochronal annealing above 400C, by combining Vickers hardness, positron lifetime 
and coincidence Doppler broadening measurements.  Our results reveal the formation of 
additional TiO precipitates in both alloys at temperatures of 450-600C in both alloys. The 
implanted positrons become trapped at the nm-thick TiO/matrix interface, and act as effective 
probes of the concomitant annealing of vacancies taking place inside the TiO precipitates 
above 550C in V-4Ti alloy. The presence of Cr in the ternary alloy not only retards the 
recovery of dislocations, but also enhances the oxygen diffusivity and therefore decreases the 
vacancy content in the TiO precipitates. These results will impact the expected alloy stability 
and capacity to bind light elements in the operational temperature window of these alloys for 
fusion reaction applications.     
Keywords: refractory metal, crystalline oxides, positron annihilation, electron microscopy, 
nuclear fusion reactor 
1. Introduction  
The future realization of magnetically-confined fusion reactors relies on the prior 
development and testing of reduced-activation engineering alloys for the first wall and 
divertor components of the reactor [1, 2]. Vanadium-based alloys stand out as promising first 
wall materials due to their low activation characteristics under fast neutron bombardment [3-
6], in combination to their high temperature strength [6-9], void swelling resistance [10, 11] 
and compatibility with liquid metal coolants [12-14]. Cr is added to the material as an 
effective solid-solution strengthener that increases the thermal creep and oxidation resistance, 
while Ti enhances the void swelling resistance of the alloy [15]. The high temperature limit 
of 700C for safe operation of V-based alloys in fusion reactor conditions is controlled 
mainly by the materials resistance to thermal creep and helium embrittlement. On the other 
hand, the low temperature limit is currently considered to lie at 400C, due to the significant 
low-temperature hardening and embrittlement caused by the presence of small amounts of O, 
C, and N and/or radiation-induced lattice defects in the matrix [9, 16, 17]. Furthermore, 
relatively high amounts of Cr + Ti (>10wt.%) also lead to additional embrittlement at low 
temperatures [18]. V-4Cr-4Ti is therefore widely considered as the reference vanadium alloy 
for structural applications in future nuclear fusion reactors [18, 19]. 
The presence of Ti in the material triggers the formation of ultra-fine Ti(C,O,N) 
precipitates during the thermo-mechanical processing of the material, and therefore improves 
the materials resistance to low-temperature hardening and embrittlement, and also the 
workability and weldability of V-4Cr-4Ti [20, 21]. The precipitate density can be maximised 
by cold working prior to annealing, and the best impact properties are achieved by annealing 
at 900-950C [22]. Welding V-based plate materials can dissolve part of the Ti-rich 
precipitates, and a post-weld heat treatment is recommended to recover the precipitate 
distribution and, consequently, the pre-weld values of the ductile-to-brittle transition 
temperature [19]. Recent work on the low-temperature behaviour of V-4Cr-4Ti reveals the 
formation of additional Ti(C,O,N) precipitates below 400C in the vicinity of radiation-
induced dislocation loops [23]. This radiation-induced precipitation allows the optimal 
temperature window during annealing prior to irradiation to be extended up to 1000C [24].        
Despite the intensive efforts to optimise the precipitate characteristics for improved 
properties at low temperatures, limited information is available about the behaviour of those 
precipitates at intermediate temperatures, i.e. within the accepted temperature window (400-
700C) for use of the V-4Cr-4Ti alloy in fusion reactor applications, and how any potential 
changes would affect mechanical properties and radiation resistance of this material. In this 
paper, we performed micro-hardness tests to monitor the microstructural changes above 
400C in this material containing Ti-rich precipitates, in combination with positron 
annihilation spectroscopy studies, since positrons are reported to present a relatively high 
affinity for the Ti-rich precipitates in the V-4Cr-4Ti alloy [23]. The potential influence of Cr 
on the structural stability is assessed by comparing the results for the V-4Ti and V-4Cr-4Ti 
alloys. This study constitutes the stepping stone to assess the precipitate stability at relevant 
reactor temperatures and radiation doses, and the consequences for the radiation tolerance 
and structural integrity of these low-activation materials.       
2. Experimental 
V-4Ti and V-4Cr-4Ti materials, named V4Ti and Val respectively, were solution 
annealed at 1100C for 2 hours in inert atmosphere, followed by water quenching to room 
temperature. The resultant microstructure was characterized by combining scanning and 
transmission electron microscopy, and also atom probe tomography (APT) of selected 
precipitates. For transmission electron microscope (TEM) imaging and analysis discs were 
prepared by mechanical pre-thinning, followed by electro-polishing using an electrolyte of 60 
vol.% methanol35 vol.% 2-buthoxyethanol5 vol.% perchloric acid (60%) at a temperature 
of 35C. We used the FEI Tecnai G2 F30 (FEG TEM) microscope operating at an 
accelerating voltage of 200kV.  Needles with a tip diameter less than 100nm for APT were 
prepared using 30 keV Ga
 focused ion beam (FIB) milling [25]. The needles were prepared 
from cross section lamellae taken from the surface of electro-polished samples and lifted with 
an omniprobe device. The APT data was collected using the AMETEK-CAMECA LEAP 
4000X HR equipment at a temperature of -223C, with a pulse mode with UV laser at 50pJ 
and a pulse fraction of 200 kHz. The software program IVAS from Cameca Instruments Inc. 
was used to analyse the APT data. 
Afterwards, samples of both alloys were isochronally annealed for 1.5 hours at 
selected temperatures between 200C and 900C, and subsequently quenched in water to 
room temperature. We measured the Vickers micro-hardness of the annealed samples using a 
load of 0.5kg and duration of 5s. Samples annealed at temperatures in the range of 500-700C 
of both alloys, together with the reference room temperature condition, were also studied 
using Positron Annihilation Spectroscopy (PAS).  For this experiment, positrons were 
emitted from a 
Na source having an activity of 1MBq and sealed in Kapton foil. The 
source was placed between two equivalent vanadium samples. The positron lifetime spectra 
were obtained using a fast digital oscilloscope and two BaF2 scintillator detectors, with a time 
resolution of 180ps at full width at half maximum. For each spectrum we collected 2.5-
4  10
 coincidence events. The data was corrected for the background and source 
contributions, and analysed using the PALSfit software package [26]. We also recorded the 
Coincidence Doppler broadening (CDB) spectra of the positron annihilation radiation using 
two high-resolution Ge detectors in coincidence. This arrangement enhances the signal to 
noise ratio by three orders of magnitude, as compared to the single-detector approach. We 
were therefore able to assess, using the high-momentum region of the CBD spectra, the 
positron annihilation with the core electrons of atoms in the vicinity of the positron trapping 
site [27]. The overall momentum resolution was  4  10
 m0c, where m0 denotes the 
electron/positron rest mass and c is the speed of light. The CDB spectra for each sample were 
taken for 80k s with a total number of counts of 800k, whereas the counting time for 
reference Ti and SiO2 materials was 420k s, with a total number of counts of 40M. From the 
recorded CBD spectra, we derived the line shape parameters, namely the S- and W-parameter, 
by taking the ratio of the low momentum (pL < 4  10
 m0c) and high momentum (10  10
m0c < pL < 18  10
 m0c) region of the spectrum to the total region, respectively. We also 
obtained the CDB ratio curves by normalizing the momentum distribution of each 
spectrum to that of a reference sample of either well-annealed Ti or SiO2. The high 
momentum region of the CBD ratio curves manifests the presence of either Ti or O close to 
the positron trapping site [27-29].   
3. Results  
3.1. Initial microstructure 
 The room-temperature microstructure of both V-4Ti and V-4Cr-4Ti materials, after 
annealing at 1100C for 2 hours, contains a relatively high density of precipitates. Fig. 1a 
show an SEM image of plate-like TiO precipitates present inside the grains of the V matrix. 
The interface between those precipitates and the matrix is characterised by a superstructure 
(Fig. 1b), which in some cases even extends through the full thickness of the precipitate 
(Fig. 1c). Our recent aberration-corrected STEM/EELS results revealed the atomic ordering 
of the V and Ti at the precipitate/matrix interface (Fig. 1d). This superstructure was 
interpreted in terms of the intergrowth of the TiO fcc and V bcc structures [30]. In addition to 
the plate-like precipitates, we have also observed the presence of a high density of cuboidal-
shaped precipitates, which are mainly decorating the grain boundaries of the V matrix, see 
Fig. 2a. The chemical analysis of those precipitates using APT (Fig. 2b) confirms the TiO 
nature of these GB precipitates. However, they also contain relatively high amounts of C, 
together with N in smaller quantities. Cuboidal-shaped precipitates were also observed inside 
the grains in the V matrix, but mainly in the vicinity of grain boundaries. 
3.2. Behaviour during annealing 
   Fig. 3 shows the hardness values of both V-4Cr-4Ti and V-4Ti as a function of the 
annealing temperature. At room temperature, in the as-quenched condition after the initial 
annealing at 1100C for 2 hours, the hardness of the ternary alloy is higher due to the 
presence of Cr atoms in the matrix. The hardness remains constant up to 300C in both 
materials. At higher temperature, the hardness in V-4Ti decreases, and only recovers the 
room temperature value when 500C is reached. On the contrary, the hardness in V-4Cr-4Ti 
remains constant until 400C, and above that temperature the hardness gradually increases 
and attains a maximum at 600C. The V-4Ti alloy also presents a maximum in hardness at 
600C. However, this alloy presents a smaller increase in hardness with respect to the room 
temperature value, as compared to the ternary alloy. At temperatures higher than 600C, the 
hardness in both materials gradually decreases, reaching values at 900C even lower than at 
room temperature. This decrease in hardness is especially noticeable in the V-4Ti alloy.  
In order to gain further insight into the processes taking place in both alloys during 
annealing in the temperature range of 500-700C, we performed positron lifetime and CBD 
measurements at selected temperature in that range, and also at room temperature for both 
alloys and pure V as reference. Fig. 4 shows the values of the lifetime () and line shape S-
parameter for the studies samples. The lifetime values of the alloy samples lie in the range of 
116-128ps, in close vicinity of the measured  value for V of 117ps. Both the  and S-
parameter for the room temperature, 500C and 550C samples in the V-4Ti alloy are 
significantly higher than for the V-4Cr-4Ti samples, and shift to lower values when the 
annealing temperature is 600C or higher. In contrary to the behaviour observed for the 
binary alloy, the values of both positron parameters remain closer to the values for V, and do 
not reveal any clear trend with temperature. We have extracted additional information about 
the positron local environment from the CDB data, by deriving the W-parameter from the 
high-momentum region of the 511keV peak and the ratio curves with respect to Ti and SiO2, 
see Fig. 5 and 6 respectively. The data collected in both figures reveal that the values of the 
W-parameter and the CBD ratios lie closer to Ti and SiO2 in the case of V-4Ti, and shift 
toward the ternary alloy and the V sample with increasing annealing temperature. 
4. Discussion 
 V-4Ti and V-4Cr-4Ti alloys present an equivalent microstructure at room temperature, 
after the initial solution annealing at 1100C for 2 hours. Their microstructure contains a fine 
dispersion of Ti-rich precipitates, with two types of morphologies and spatial distributions: 
cuboidal-shaped precipitates [31] decorating or in the vicinity of the grain boundaries of the 
V matrix, and plate-like precipitates [30, 32, 33] distributed within the grains of the V matrix. 
The interface of the latter precipitates with the matrix is characterised by an intergrowth of 
the bcc V and fcc TiO structures [30]. Both types of precipitates are primarily TiO, but 
contain small amounts of C and N. These precipitates may have formed during cooling from 
1100C down to room temperature, by the transformation of the high temperature -TiO to 
-TiO [34].  
Despite the similarities in the starting precipitate characteristics and distribution of 
both alloys at room temperature, the hardness dependence on the annealing temperature up to 
900C shows significant differences. The hardness in the V-4Ti alloy decreases in the 
temperature range of 300-450C. This reduction in hardness is not observed in the V-4Cr-4Ti 
alloy. Previous work on the recovery and recrystallization of V samples with varying nitrogen 
and oxygen levels showed that the dislocation-impurity interaction in vanadium is overcome 
at 300C or higher temperatures [35]. Therefore the softening observed in V-4Ti can be 
attributed to an additional recovery of pre-existing dislocations at 300-450C. However, in   
V-4Ti-4Cr, the Cr atoms present in the matrix exert an effective pinning effect on the 
movement of dislocations [36, 37], and can therefore delay the recovery and the 
corresponding alloy softening at those temperatures. Furthermore, the presence of extra O 
atoms in the V matrix, due to O intake during the materials processing or from the Li-based 
coolant during reaction operation, is expected to precipitate as plate-like TiO [32], and 
therefore induce additional hardening to these alloys. The diffusion of O interstitials in the V 
matrix is relatively fast; with a reported value for activation energy of 119.6-122.5 kJ mol
[38-40]. The presence of Cr in the matrix reduces the activation energy for oxygen diffusion 
by 10-15% [40]. Ti atoms tend to decorate dislocations in V-Ti alloys, and therefore 
experience an enhanced mobility due to pipe diffusion along dislocations, prior to the 
formation of Ti-rich precipitates [23, 34]. The increase in hardness in both alloys at 
temperatures of 400-600C can therefore be attributed to the additional formation of Ti-rich 
precipitates. Further increase in temperature above 600C leads to the precipitate coarsening 
destabilization and subsequent dissolution.    
Once implanted in the sample and thermalized, the positron can become trapped by 
existing open volume lattice defects. The reduced electron density at the trapping site 
increases the positron lifetime with respect to the bulk lifetime. Not only vacancy-like defects 
form attractive potentials for positrons but also metallic clusters or precipitates, as long as 
their positron affinity for those is higher than for the surrounding material. In the case of the 
V-Cr-Ti system, the positron affinity for Cr is lower than for either V or Ti, and has recently 
been reported to be relatively high for the Ti-rich precipitates [23, 41]. In our study, the 
measured positron lifetime in each of the studied samples remain close to the value for the V 
sample of  = 117ps [42]. We have only detected one component in the lifetime spectrum, 
which could be the average value of positrons annihilating in the bulk V matrix and in open 
volume defects. The lifetime of positrons trapped in vacancy cluster is higher than in the bulk, 
and its value increases with the number of vacancies in the cluster [29]. Our results yield 
values for the positron lifetime that are in all cases higher, but relatively close to the value for 
vanadium. This means that a fraction of the positrons are annihilating at mono-vacancies. 
This is confirmed by the higher values of the S-parameter encountered in the samples of both 
V-4Ti and V-4Cr-4Ti. The fcc structure of TiO-type precipitates can host up to approx. 15% 
of vacancies [43, 44] and also small amounts of C and N [45]. Therefore, a significant 
fraction of the implanted positrons will be annihilating at vacancy-type defects present either 
in the TiO layer of the precipitate/matrix interface or inside the precipitates. The decrease in 
both the positron lifetime and the S-parameter in V-4Ti when the temperature is higher than 
550C can be attributed to the annealing of vacancies associated with the TiO precipitates 
[34].   
The decrease in the S-parameter takes place simultaneously with an increase in the 
W-parameter that characterises the high-momentum region of the CDB spectrum. This region 
of the spectrum, together with the CBD ratio with respect to reference materials such as Ti or 
SiO2, contains additional information about the nature of the atoms surrounding the positron 
trapping side [28, 46].  The results in Fig. 5 and 6 reveal that the local environment of the 
positron trapping site has a higher fraction of Ti and O in the binary alloy, and shifts towards 
a higher presence of V atoms with increasing temperature. The values derived for the ternary 
alloys at the studied annealing temperatures are all closer to the values of the V sample. The 
relative positron affinity for the mono-vacancies in the fcc TiO layer and for the bcc V-type 
layer, both forming the intergrowth in the plate-like precipitates, lead to the observed trends 
in the W-parameter and CBD ratios. The vacancy content in TiO depends on the annealing 
temperature, and also on the O diffusivity that is enhanced in the presence of Cr atoms in the 
V matrix [34]. The decrease in the S-parameter and the concomitant increase in the W-
parameter observed in the V-Ti alloy with increasing annealing temperature is not clearly 
observed in the V-4Cr-4Ti, most likely due to the enhanced O diffusivity and therefore lower 
vacancy content in the TiO precipitates.   
5. Conclusions 
We have studied the evolution of the Ti-rich precipitates present in V-4Ti and V-4Cr-4Ti 
alloys during isochronal annealing, by combining Vickers hardness, positron lifetime and 
coincidence Doppler broadening measurements.  Our results reveal that the local atom probe 
characteristics of the implanted positrons are suitable to monitor the annealing of vacancies in 
plate-like TiO precipitates, esp. at the interface with the surrounding matrix. The presence of 
Cr in the material both retards the recovery of pre-existing dislocations in V-4Cr-4Ti and 
enhances the O diffusivity, and consequently increases the oxygen content in the precipitates. 
Additional precipitate formation takes place in both alloys materials above 400C, whereas 
the annealing of vacancies, present in the TiO precipitates, above 550C is observed only in 
the V-4Ti alloy.     
Acknowledgements 
We acknowledge the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPRSC) for 
providing funding for this project via the Centre for Doctoral Training in the Science and 
Technology of Fusion Energy (http://www.fusion-cdt.ac.uk/). The work described was 
supported in part by the Dalton Cumbrian Facility Project, a joint initiative of The University 
of Manchester and the Nuclear Decommissioning Authority. A.I. would also like to thank the 
Tohoku University for the travel grant to perform PAS experiments at its facilities. 
References  
[1] N. Baluc, R. Schublin, P. Sptig, N. Ilchuk, L. Veleva, Z. Oksiuta, et al. Nucl. Fusion 51 
(2011) 113006. 
[2] M. Porton, B.P. Wynne, R. Bamber, C.D. Hardie, M. Kalsey. Fusion Eng. Des. 109111 
(2016) 1247. 
http://www.fusion-cdt.ac.uk/
[3] G.J. Butterworth. Fusion Eng. Des. 11 (1989) 231. 
[4] S. Cierjacks. Fusion Eng. Des. 13 (1990) 229. 
[5] D.L. Smith, M.C. Billone, K. Natesan.  Int. J. Refract. Met. Hard Mat. 18 (2000) 213. 
[6] D.V. Markovskij. Fusion Eng. Des. 51-52 (2000) 695. 
[7] K. Fukumoto, T. Morimura, T. Tanaka, A. Kimura, K. Abe, H. Takahashi, et al. J. Nucl. 
Mater. 239 (1996) 170.  
[8] H.M. Chung, B.A. Loomis, D.L. Smith. J. Nucl. Mater. 239 (1996) 139. 
[9] J.M. Chen, V.M. Chernov, R.J. Kurtz, T. Muroga. J. Nucl. Mater. 417 (2011) 289. 
[10] T. lwai, N. Sekimura, F. A. Garner. J. Nucl. Mater. 239 (1996) 157. 
[11] F.A. Garner, T. Okita, N. Sekimura. J. Nucl. Mater. 417 (2011) 314. 
[12] R. L. Ammon. Int. Met. Rev. 5-6 (1980) 255.  
[13] B.A. Pint, J.L. Moser, P.F. Tortorelli. Fusion Eng. Des. 81 (2006) 901. 
[14] I.V. Borovitskaya, I.E. Lyublinski, V.V. Paramonova, S.N. Korshunov, 
A.N. Mansurova, M.M.  Lyakhovitskiy, et al. Inorg. Mater. Appl. Res. 6 (2015) 133. 
[15] D.R. Diercks, B.A. Loomis, J. Nucl. Mater. 141-143 (1986) 1117. 
[16] S.J. Zinkle, N.M. Ghoniem, Fus Eng Des 51-52 (2000) 55.  
[17] A.-A.Tavassoli. J. Nucl. Mater. 302 (2002) 73. 
[18] D.L. Smith, H.M. Chung, B.A. Loomis, H.-C. Tsai. J. Nucl. Mater. 233-237 (1996) 356. 
[19] T. Muroga, J.M. Chen, V.M. Chernov, R.J. Kurtz, M. Le Flem. J. Nucl. Mater. 455 
(2014) 263. 
[20] T. Nagasaka,  N.J. Heo, T. Muroga, M. Imamura.  Fusion Eng. Des. 61-62 (2002) 757. 
[21] N.J. Heo, T. Nagasaka, T. Muroga. J. Nucl. Mater. 325 (2004) 53. 
[22] T. Muroga, T. Nagasaka, P.F. Zheng, J.M. Chen, Adv Sci Tech 73 (2010) 22. 
[23] K.-i. Fukumoto, H. Matsui, H. Ohkubo, Z. Tang, Y. Nagai, M. Hasegawa, J. Nucl. 
Mater. 373 (2008) 289. 
[24] T. Muroga, T. Nagasaka, H. Watanabe, M. Yamazaki. J. Nucl. Mater. 417 (2011) 310. 
[25] M.K. Miller, K.F. Russell. Ultramicroscopy 107 (2007) 761. 
[26] P. Kirkegaard, J.V. Olsen, M. Eldrup, N.J. Pedersen, PALSfit: A Computer Program for 
Analysing Positron Lifetime Spectra, 2009. 
[27] P. Asoka-Kumar, M. Alatalo, V. J. Ghosh, A. C. Kruseman, B. Nielsen, K. G. Lynn. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 (1996) 2097. 
[28] Y. Nagai, T. Nanaka, M. Hasegawa, Y. Kabayashi, C.L. Wang, W. Zheng, et al. 
Phys. Rev. B 60 (1999) 11863. 
[29] T. Riewcharoon, Z. Tang, Y. Nagai, M. Hasegawa. Mater. Sci. Forum 363-365 
(2001) 167. 
[30] A. Impagnatiello, D. Hernandez-Maldonado, G. Bertali, E. Prestat, D. Kepaptsoglou, 
Q. Ramasse, et al. Scripta Mater. 126 (2017) 50. 
[31] T. Schober, D. N. Braski. Metall. Trans. A 20 (1989) 1927. 
[32] K.-H. Kramer. J. Less Common Metals 21 (1970) 365. 
[33] D.S. Gelles, P.M. Rice, S.J. Zinkle, H.M. Chung. J. Nucl. Mater. 258-263 (1998) 1380.   
[34] T. Leguey, R. Pareja. J. Nucl. Mater. 279 (2000) 216. 
[35] T. Nagasaka, H. Takahashi, T. Muroga, T. Tanabe, H. Matsui. J. Nucl. Mater. 283-287 
(2000) 816. 
[36] B.A. Loomis, R.H. Lee, D.L. Smith, J. R. Peterson. J. Nucl. Mater. 155-157 (1988) 631. 
[37] D.L. Smith, H.M. Chung, B.A. Loomis, H. Matsui, S. Votinov, W. Van Witzenburg. 
Fusion Eng. Des. 29 (1995) 399.  
[38] R.W. Powers, M.V. Doyle. Acta Metall. 6 (1958) 643.  
[39] R.W. Powers, M.V. Doyle. J. Appl. Phys. 30 (1959) 514. 
[40] H. Nakajima, S. Nagata, H. Matsui, S. Yamaguchi. Phil. Mag. 67 (1993) 557. 
[41] M J Puska, P Lanki, R M Nieminen. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 1 (1989) 608. 
[42] J. M. Campillo Robles, F. Plazaola, Defect Diffus. Forum 213-215 (2003) 141. 
[43] M.D. Banus, T.B. Reed, A.J. Strauss, Phys. Rev. B 5 (1972) 2775. 
[44] A.I. Gusev, J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 117 (2013) 293. 
[45] H.O. Pierson, Handbook of Refractory Carbides and Nitrides: Properties, 
Characteristics, Processing, and Applications, Noyes Publications, 1996. 
[46] K.G. Lynn, A.N. Goland. Solid State Commun. 18 (1976) 1549.  
Fig. 1. (a) SEM image of the plate-like precipitate distribution in V-4Cr-4Ti alloy, TEM HAADF image of 
(b) superstructure and uniform regions inside the precipitates, and (c) superstructure region extending 
through the thickness of the precipitate, (d) composite image constructed from the EELS maps generated 
by integrating the L2,3 edge intensity of V (red) and Ti (blue). Data in (b)-(d) taken from ref. [30]. 
Fig. 2. (a) SEM image of V-4Cr-4Ti alloy showing the distribution of cuboidal-shaped precipitates at the 
grain boundaries of the V matrix, and (b) atom probe tomography maps for different elements and relevant 
compounds of a selected cuboidal-shaped precipitate. 
Fig. 3. Variation of the Vickers hardness with annealing temperature for both V-4Cr-4Ti and V-4Ti alloys. 
Fig. 4. CDB line shape S-parameter as a function of the positron lifetime () for V-4Cr-4Ti and V-4Ti 
alloys annealed at different temperatures, together with the room-temperature values for a reference V 
sample. 
Fig. 5. (a) W-S plot containing data for V-4Cr-4Ti and V-4Ti alloys annealed at different temperatures, 
together with data for reference V, Ti, Cr and SiO2 samples, (b) enlarged view of the V-containing 
samples. 
Fig. 6. CBD ratio curves for V-4Cr-4Ti and V-4Ti alloys, both at room temperature and after annealing at 
700C for 1.5 hours, taken as a reference material (a) pure Ti and (b) SiO2. The inset show the high-
momentum region of the curves. 
Monolayer-thick TiO precipitation in V-4Cr-4Ti alloy induced by 
proton irradiation 
A. Impagnatiello
a,b,*
,  S.M. Shubeita
, P.T. Wady
, I. Ipatova
, H. Dawson
, C. Barcellini
Jimenez-Melero
School of Materials, The University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK 
Dalton Cumbrian Facility, The University of Manchester, Moor Row CA24 3HA, UK 
Corresponding author (*): 
Dalton Cumbrian Facility 
University of Manchester 
Westlakes Science & Technology Park 
Moor Row 
CA24 3HA  
United Kingdom 
Tel.: +44 1946 508860 
Email: andrea.impagnatiello@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk 
mailto:andrea.impagnatiello@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk
Contribution of the different co-authors 
The samples were prepared by the main author A. Impagnatiello. S.M. Shubeita and P.T. 
Wady set up the required instrumentation to perform the proton irradiations of the V samples, 
and supervised the process together with the experimental officers for the ion accelerator 
A.D. Smith and N. Mason. Additional assistance during the irradiation experiments was 
provided by I. Ipatova, H. Dawson and C. Barcellini. 
The main author wrote the manuscript together with E. Jimenez-Melero. S.M. Shubeita, P.T. 
Wady and H. Dawson provided feedback of the written manuscript before the journal 
submission. 
Abstract 
We have characterised with atomic resolution the mono-layer thick TiO-type precipitate 
induced by proton irradiation in V-4Cr-4Ti alloy at a dose of 0.3dpa and a temperature of 
350C. Its formation coincides with the coarsening radiation-induced interstitial a/2111 
dislocation loops that are already present at 300C. The dislocation network induced by prior 
cold work is mostly recovered at 300C and 0.3dpa, and is therefore expected to exert a 
minimal effect on the precipitate formation. This monolayer-thick precipitate constitutes an 
early stage in the radiation-induced aging process of V-4Cr-4Ti at low temperatures, and can 
potentially absorb additional light elements in reactor environments. 
Keywords: refractory metal, precipitation, lattice defects, high-resolution electron 
microscopy, nuclear fusion reactor 
Vanadium-based alloys currently constitute advanced candidate materials for the first wall of 
future fusion reactors such as DEMO [1, 2]. In particular, V-4Cr-4Ti alloy offers an 
outstanding combination of high-temperature strength and radiation resistance [3-5], coupled 
with low neutron activation [6, 7] and corrosion resistance to liquid metal coolants [8-10]. 
However, the presence of relatively small amounts of light atoms in the matrix can drastically 
increase the ductile-to-brittle transition temperature, and consequently also the minimum 
temperature for safe use of this alloy in structural components of the reactor [11, 12]. Ti acts 
as an effective scavenger for light elements, by forming Ti(O,C,N) precipitates during the 
materials processing [13]. Cold working prior to annealing can be used to minimise the 
coarsening of the precipitates and increase the thermal creep resistance of the alloy [14]. 
Additionally, the interface of those nano-scale precipitates with the matrix can act as an 
effective sink for mobile lattice defects [15, 16]. Therefore, the radiationinduced hardening 
and embrittlement that take place in V-4Cr-4Ti below 400C and at dose levels as low as          
0.1-0.5dpa can be reduced.  
 Neutron irradiation of V-4Cr-4Ti alloy at temperatures below 275C induces 
the formation of a high density of faulted dislocation loops with a Burgers vector of a/2 <110> 
and an average size of 3nm. These small dislocation loops present a barrier strength lower 
than the Orowan value for impenetrable obstacles during dislocation gliding, and facilitate 
the formation of 50nm-wide cleared dislocation channels on {110} slip planes at those low 
temperatures. This channel formation causes a pronounced loss of strain capability and 
uniform elongation in the V-4Cr-4Ti alloy. At higher irradiation temperatures, a/2 111 
unfaulted dislocation loops predominate in the microstructure. They attain a larger average 
size of 200nm, whereas their density is reduced to < 10
 [17].  In parallel to the 
occurrence and evolution of dislocation loops with temperature, recent positron annihilation 
results revealed the presence of Ti-vacancy complexes in the vicinity of the radiation-induced 
dislocation loops below 300C [18]. These complexes may act as precursors for the 
formation at higher temperatures of Ti-rich Radiation-Induced Precipitates (RIPs). The 
growth of the additional precipitates induced by radiation may occur by changing their 
morphology from sphere to platelet, and also the O/Ti ratio [19]. And enhanced V content has 
also been reported in some of these RIPs [20]. Despite the key role of the RIPs in improving 
the radiation resistance of V-4Cr-4Ti in the low temperature regime, a detailed 
characterization of their structure and elemental content, especially at the interface with the 
surrounding matrix, is still required to improve the alloy resistance in radiation environments. 
The potential effect of pre-existing dislocations due to prior cold working on the precipitate 
formation should also be assessed. In this paper, we address these points by using proton 
irradiation as a surrogate to neutron damage, in combination with high-resolution electron 
microscopy to characterise both the RIPs and the presence of dislocation structures in the 
matrix. This study provides a comparison of proton irradiated microstructures with and 
without prior cold work. Generally speaking for other types of materials, the presence of 
dislocations due to cold work would favourably increase radiation resistance at relatively low 
dpa levels, since the dislocations would trap and slow down the diffusion of radiation-
induced point defects [21, 22]. Cold work can also be induced during the manufacturing of 
the reactor components, so understanding the effect of cold work on materials that will be 
under irradiation becomes even more important. 
Equivalent V-4Cr-4Ti (wt.%) samples were solution-annealed (SA) at 1100C for 
2 hours and afterwards water quenched to room temperature. Some of the material was 
afterwards 10% cold rolled (SACW). The sample surface was ground to 4000 grit SiC paper, 
and then electro-polished using an electrolyte of 60vol.% methanol  35vol.%                        
2-buthoxyethanol  5vol.% perchloric acid (60%)  at a temperature of -35C. After that, the 
samples were irradiated with a 1.4MeV proton beam produced using the 5 MV tandem ion 
accelerator of the Dalton Cumbrian Facility [23]. The beam current deposited on the samples 
was 28 A, and the damage rate was 310
 dpa/s. We achieved a particle fluence of 
~1.6protons/m
, which is of the same order of magnitude of the neutron fluence expected in 
the first wall of the DEMO reactor. The temperature during irradiation (either 300 or 350C) 
was monitored both with welded thermocouples on the sample surface adjacent to the 
irradiated area, and also with a non-contact pyrometer. For transmission electron microscope 
(TEM) imaging and analysis discs were prepared by mechanical pre-thinning, followed by 
electro-polishing using the same electrolyte and temperature as mentioned before. In order to 
characterise the damaged structure, we used a FEI Tecnai T20 with LaB6 crystal and an FEI 
Titan G2 80-200 aberration-corrected S/TEM with an X-FEG and ChemiSTEM
 technology 
[24], both microscopes operating at 200 kV. The thickness of the disc area studied by TEM 
was derived from the fringes spacing of the convergent beam electron diffraction pattern, the 
interstitial or vacancy nature of the defects using the inside-outside method, and the Burgers 
vector from the g.b=0 invisibility criterion [25, 26]. Vickers hardness measurements were 
taken using a load of 0.025 g, resulting in an indentation depth of 8 m, which is close to 
the 60% of the Bragg peak position from the irradiated sample surface. 
The initial (SA) microstructure contained a fine dispersion of plate-like Ti(O,C,N) 
precipitates [27], together with a number of cuboidal Ti-rich precipitates decorating the grain 
boundaries of the matrix. Fig. 1a shows a scanning electron micrograph of the cross section 
of the SA sample surface irradiated at 350C. The large plate-like precipitates formed during 
prior annealing treatment are clearly visible in the image. A relatively bright line at 15 m 
below the sample surface can be observed passing through two neighbouring grains of the 
matrix. The position of this bright line agrees well with the Bragg peak position of 14 m 
calculated using the SRIM software [28], see Fig. 1b. In the region of the Bragg peak, the 
lattice is mostly damaged, the channelling of electrons is more impeded and therefore the 
BSE signal increases. We have prepared TEM discs of the irradiated samples at a depth of 60% 
of the Bragg peak position from the sample surface. This corresponded approximately to an 8 
m depth from the surface and a damage dose of 0.3 dpa in the studied samples. 
Fig. 2 shows the TEM images of the SA and SACW samples, both before and after 
having been irradiated up to 0.3 dpa at a constant temperature of 300C. Before irradiation 
and cold work, the prior annealing at 1100C led to a microstructure free from the dislocation 
networks and other defects that are instead present after 10% cold work. After irradiation, 
dislocation loops are present in the SA sample with a density of ~1.110
. The majority 
of these loops have a Burgers vector of a/2 111 and their average size is 12 nm. A slightly 
lower density of dislocation loops is present in the SACW sample after irradiation, namely 
~0.910
, and their average diameter of 14 nm is close to the value for the SA sample. It 
is remarkable that the pre-existing dislocation network in the SACW sample is mostly 
recovered after irradiation. 
The damaged microstructure of the SA sample after irradiation up to 0.3 dpa at 350C 
is shown in Fig. 3a. Interstitial a/2111 dislocation loops are also present in the 
microstructure. They are characterised by a larger average diameter of 86 nm and a lower 
density of ~2.110
, as compared to the dislocation loops observed at 300C. However, 
at 350C we also observed new plate-shaped RIPs, oriented along the {100} planes of the 
V matrix. They appear with an average length of 56nm and a density of ~1.510
. Fig. 3b 
and c show a higher-resolution image of the RIPs. The precipitates seem to be composed of 
only one atomic layer. Chemical analysis using energy-dispersive spectroscopy confirmed the 
presence of Ti. These results suggest that these observed RIPs correspond to TiO-type 
precipitates with lattice parameter of 0.42nm [27, 29] and the BakerNutting orientation 
relationship with the matrix [30]: [001]TiO // [001]V, (110)TiO // (100)V. Assuming that the 
RIPs own that crystal structure, it allows us to propose in Fig. 3e-f a crystal model of the 
plate-like precipitates that is consistent with the atomic resolution TEM data of Fig.3c-e. 
Table 1 summarises the microstructure of the irradiated samples in terms of average 
size and density of RIPs and dislocation loops, together with the change in hardness due to 
irradiation. The number of dislocation loops in the SACW sample is somewhat lower than in 
the SA at 300C. The dislocation network in SACW has not completely recovered after 
irradiation, and may have reduced the mobility of the radiation-induced point defects that 
eventually form dislocation loops. As reported for cold-worked irradiated steels, a significant 
reduction of the initial dislocation network is required for the development of observable 
dislocation loops [31]. Irradiation at higher doses would be required to understand the 
evolution of pre-existent dislocations and the conditions to achieve their full recovery at the 
relatively low temperature of 300C. In this alloy recovery occurs during annealing above 
400C in absence of irradiation [32]. Furthermore, the hardness values of the SA and SACW 
samples after irradiation lie very close. This is due to their dislocation structures after 
irradiation being also very similar. Taking into account that the cold work raised the hardness 
of the material before irradiation, the hardness change after irradiation seems to decrease with 
the amount of cold work prior irradiation. In conclusion it appears that initial 10% cold work 
does not affect significantly the final hardness of the alloy after irradiation.  
Dislocation loops found in all the irradiated samples were of interstitial nature, 
consistent with previous work on neutron irradiated V-4Cr-4Ti in this temperature range [17]. 
They are unfaulted and the predominant Burgers vector is a/2 111. Faulted dislocation 
loops with a Burgers vector of a/2 110 was reported for temperatures below 300C in 
neutron-irradiated samples. Molecular dynamic simulations previously showed that this latter 
type of dislocation loops has a relatively high formation energy and become unstable at high 
temperatures [33].The increase in irradiation temperature from 300C to 350C causes a 
reduction in the density of dislocation loops and an increase in the average size of the loops. 
As a consequence, the irradiation-induced hardening of the alloy diminishes with increasing 
temperature above 300C. A higher density of loops at 300C implies more obstacles to the 
motion of dislocations and, as a consequence, an enhanced irradiation hardening [17].  
The appearance of Ti-rich RIPs at a radiation dose of 0.3 dpa occurred between 300C 
and 350C, in agreement with previous neutron irradiation experiments [18]. In non-
irradiated conditions, the formation of plate-like Ti(O,C,N) precipitates is induced above 
500C by climbing dislocations during recovery [35]. Proton irradiation at lower 
temperatures has triggered the formation of dislocation loops, and at 350C also the 
formation of additional plate-like TiO-type precipitates. The radiation-induced mobile 
vacancies would increase the diffusion of substitutional Ti atoms, and the occurrence of Ti-
vacancy complexes close to the dislocation loops, where the additional TiO-type precipitates 
form [17, 18]. The crystal structure model in Fig. 3e describes the precipitate platelet as a fcc 
TiO monolayer, whose interface with the V matrix is coherent along the sides of the platelet. 
This monolayer platelet could evidence that the proposed Ti spherical clusters [19] evolve to 
a platelet Guinier-Preston (GP) zone visible with TEM techniques. The GP zone would 
finally evolve to a thicker plate as the dose is increased. The thickness of these TiO-type 
plates has been reported to be 1-3 nm at a neutron radiation dose of 4 dpa and a temperature 
of ~510C [36]. This precipitation sequence is similar to the precipitation behaviour observed 
in Al-Cu alloys during annealing at 130C, where monolayer, bilayer and multilayer Cu-rich 
plate-like precipitates correspond to different stages of hardening during aging [37]. 
Therefore, the initial Ti-vacancy clusters, the monolayer platelet reported in this work, and 
the multilayer TiO-type precipitates characterize different stages of radiation-induced 
precipitation hardening in the V-4Cr-4Ti alloy.  
In conclusion, our results on proton-irradiated V-4Cr-4Ti alloy lie in accordance with the 
nature and evolution of dislocation loops observed in the same alloy irradiated with neutrons 
at equivalent temperatures. Our TEM data also revealed that the dislocation networks induced 
by prior cold work are mainly recovered at 300C and a radiation dose of 0.3 dpa. Therefore 
those pre-existing dislocations exert a minor effect on the formation of radiation-induced 
TiO-type plate precipitates observed at 350C. Our high-resolution TEM data allowed us to 
characterise the monolayer-thick TiO precipitate. This precipitate constitutes an early stage in 
the radiation-induced aging process of V-4Cr-4Ti at relatively low temperatures, and 
therefore possesses the capacity of absorbing additional light elements in fusion reactor 
operation conditions. 
We acknowledge the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPRSC) for 
providing funding for this project via the Centre for Doctoral Training in the Science and 
Technology of Fusion Energy (http://www.fusion-cdt.ac.uk/). The work described was 
supported in part by the Dalton Cumbrian Facility Project, a joint initiative of The University 
of Manchester and the Nuclear Decommissioning Authority. We would also like to thank 
A.D. Smith and N. Mason for their assistance during the irradiation experiment. 
References 
[1] J.M. Chen, V.M. Chernov, R.J. Kurtz, T. Muroga. J. Nucl. Mater. 417 (2011) 289. 
[2] T. Muroga, J.M. Chen, V.M. Chernov, R.J. Kurtz, M. Le Flem. J. Nucl. Mater. 455 (2014) 
[3] K. Fukumoto, T. Morimura, T. Tanaka, A. Kimura, K. Abe, H. Takahashi, et al. J. Nucl. 
Mater. 239 (1996) 170.  
[4] J.M. Chen, V.M. Chernov, R.J. Kurtz, T. Muroga. J. Nucl. Mater. 417 (2011) 289. 
[5] F.A. Garner, T. Okita, N. Sekimura. J. Nucl. Mater. 417 (2011) 314. 
[6] D.L. Smith, M.C. Billone, K. Natesan.  Int. J. Refract. Met. Hard Mat. 18 (2000) 213. 
[7] D.V. Markovskij. Fusion Eng. Des. 51-52 (2000) 695. 
http://www.fusion-cdt.ac.uk/
[8] R. L. Ammon. Int. Met. Rev. 5-6 (1980) 255.  
[9] B.A. Pint, J.L. Moser, P.F. Tortorelli. Fusion Eng. Des. 81 (2006) 901. 
[10] I.V. Borovitskaya, I.E. Lyublinski, V.V. Paramonova, S.N. Korshunov, 
A.N. Mansurova, M.M.  Lyakhovitskiy, et al. Inorg. Mater. Appl. Res. 6 (2015) 133. 
[11] S.J. Zinkle, N.M. Ghoniem, Fus Eng Des 51-52 (2000) 55.  
[12] A.-A.Tavassoli. J. Nucl. Mater. 302 (2002) 73. 
[13] D.R. Diercks, B.A. Loomis, J. Nucl. Mater. 141-143 (1986) 1117. 
[14] T. Muroga, T. Nagasaka, P.F. Zheng, J.M. Chen, Adv Sci Tech 73 (2010) 22. 
[15] M.S. Staltsov, I.I. Chernov, B.A. Kalin, K.Z. Oo, A.A. Polyansky, O.S. Staltsova, et al., 
J. Nucl. Mater. 461 (2015) 56. 
[16] A. van Veen, A.V. Fedorov, A.I. Ryazanov, J. Nucl. Mater. 258-263 (1998) 1400. 
[17] P.M. Rice, S.J. Zinkle. J. Nucl. Mater. 258-263 (1998) 1414. 
[18] K.-i. Fukumoto, H. Matsui, H. Ohkubo, Z. Tang, Y. Nagai, M. Hasegawa. J. Nucl. 
Mater. 373 (2008) 289. 
[19] N. Nita, Y. Anma, H. Matsui, T. Ohkubo, K. Hono. J. Nucl. Mater. 367-370 (2007) 858. 
[20] M. Hatakeyama, T. Nagasaka, T. Muroga, T. Toyama, I. Yamagata. J. Nucl. Mater. 442 
(2013) S346. 
[21] S.J. Zinkle, L.L. Snead. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 44 (2014) 241. 
[22] J.O. Stiegler, E.E. Bloom. J. Nucl. Mater. 41 (1971) 341. 
[23] P.T. Wady, A. Draude, S.M. Shubeita, A.D. Smith, N. Mason, S.M. Pimblott, et al. 
Nucl. Instr. Meth. Phys. Res. A 806 (2016) 109. 
[24] D. Sudfeld, O. Lourie, S. Kujawa. J. Phys.: Conf. Series 522 (2014) 012026. 
[25] S.M. Allen. Philos. Mag. B 43 (1981) 325. 
[26] M.L. Jenkins, M.A. Kirk. Characterization of Radiation Damage by Transmission 
Electron Microscopy, Institute of Physics Publishing, 2001. 
[27] A. Impagnatiello, D. Hernandez-Maldonado, G. Bertali, E. Prestat, D. Kepaptsoglou, 
Q. Ramasse, et al. Scripta Mater. 126 (2017) 50. 
[28] J.F. Ziegler, M.D. Ziegler, J.P. Biersack. Nucl. Instrum. Meth. B 268 (2010) 1818. 
[29] K.H. Kramer. J. Less-Common Met. 21 (1970) 365. 
[30] J.W. Edington. Practical Electron Microscopy in Materials Science,  
Gloeilampenfabrieken, Eindhoven, 1975. 
[31] S.J. Zinkle, P.J. Maziasz, R.E. Stoller. J. Nucl. Mater. 206 (1993) 266. 
[32] A.N. Gubbi, A.F. Rowcliffe. J. Nucl. Mater. 233-237 (1996) 497. 
[33] L.A Zepeda-Ruiz, J. Marian, B.D. Wirth. Philos. Mag. 85 (2005) 695. 
[35] T. Leguey, R. Pareja. J. Nucl. Mater. 279 (2000) 216. 
[36] D.T. Hoelzer, S.J. Zinkle, DOE/ER-0313/29 (2000) 19. 
[37] S.K. Son, M. Takeda, M. Mitome, Y. Bando, T. Endo. Mater. Lett. 59 (2005) 629. 
Fig. 1. (a) SEM (BSE, 30keV) image of the cross section of the solution-annealed V-4Cr-4Ti alloy 
irradiated up to 0.3 dpa at 350C, and (b) simulated damage profile using the SRIM software and the total 
current deposited on the sample during the irradiation experiment. The asterisk locates the depth equal to 
60% the Bragg peak position, and denotes the region in the sample from where TEM foils were prepared. 
Fig. 2.  TEM images of the microstructure of the solution annealed (SA) and SA+10% cold worked (CW) 
samples, before and after proton irradiation up to 0.3 dpa at 300C. The arrows show the g 200 direction. 
Fig. 3. (a) Microstructure of the solution-annealed sample after undergoing proton irradiation up to 0.3 dpa 
at 350C, (b) detail from (a) of Ti-rich radiation induced precipitates aligned along the [100] direction of 
the vanadium matrix, together with a number of dislocation loops, (c) atomic-resolution image of the 
region outlined by the square in (b), (d) atomic-resolution detail of the region outlined by the square in (c) 
where the potition of the Ti and V atoms are indicated by blue and red circles, respectively, (e) upper and 
(f) 3-D view of the crystal structure model of the plate-like precipitate shown in (c) and (d). (a) was 
obtained in TEM mode, whereas the (b-d) were collected in STEM mode. In all images, B = [001] and 
g 200 lies parallel to the scale bar. 
Table 1. Average size and density of the dislocation loops and irradiation-induced Ti-rich precipitates 
observed in the irradiated V-4Cr-4Ti samples. together with the initial hardness value (HVi) and the 
change in hardness due to proton irradiation (HVirr). 
sample 
condition 
HVi Tirr(C) 
(dpa) 
HVirr 
Dislocation loops Irr. induced Precipitates  
average size(nm) density x 10
 average size(nm) density x 10
1968 300 0.3 13019 12 11 - - 
1968 350 0.3 9018 85 2.1 56 1.5 
10%CW 
21713 300 0.3 10426 14 9.0 - - 
8.  CONCLUSIONS 
The formation and structure of TiO-type precipitates has been studied in the              
V-4Cr-4Ti alloy, together with the precipitate stability and evolution at high temperatures and 
under radiation fields. The structure and local chemistry of plate-shaped precipitates larger 
than 1m in length and less than 100nm in width are addressed for the first time with atomic 
resolution. The results reveal the presence of an ordered intergrowth of the fcc TiO and the 
bcc V structures at the precipitate/matrix interface. In some cases the intergrowth extends 
through the full thickness of the plate-like precipitates.  
These precipitates can contain a large number of vacancies that may prove useful to trap 
interstitials from the matrix and therefore improve the mechanical properties of these alloys 
under irradiation. The presence of vacancies in those precipitates has been confirmed by 
positron annihilation spectroscopy in samples annealed at different temperatures. This 
phenomenon has been observed primarily above 550C and in the V-4Ti alloy. The presence 
of Cr in the V-4Cr-4Ti alloy enhances the O diffusivity, and consequently increases the 
oxygen content in the precipitates and fills most of the pre-existing vacancies. 
Cr also retards the recovery of initial dislocations in the V-4Cr-4Ti alloy. However, the 
dislocation networks induced by prior cold work are mainly recovered after proton irradiation 
up to a dose of 0.3 dpa and at a constant temperature of 300C. The increase in irradiation 
temperature to 350C leads to the formation of radiation-induced plate-like TiO precipitates 
of ~50 nm in size. Atomic resolution images of those precipitates are provided for the first 
time. The precipitates form in the vicinity of a/2 <111> dislocation loops, induced by 
irradiation even at the lower temperature of 300C. In the absence of irradiation, positron 
annihilation spectroscopy and micro-hardness measurements detected the formation of 
additional TiO-type precipitates at temperatures higher than 400C. 
FURTHER STUDIES 
Phase diagrams (section 2.2.2) provide sights for different interpretation of the addressed 
phenomena that are worth to investigate. The Ti-O system shows a very complex situation at 
higher temperatures around 50 at. % of Ti. During annealing is so possible that the crystal 
structure and stoichiometry of the TiO undergoes to changes which should be investigated by 
transmission electron microscopy or X-ray diffractometer with heating stage in-situ. For 
example, the increase of hardness at 500C can be related to the crossing of the eutectic line 
at 465C. The appearance of V oxides at higher temperature is suggested by the V-Ti-O 
phase diagram. They have crystal structures very similar to the Ti oxides and their 
coexistence with these latter would play an important role in the formation of the V-Ti 
intergrowth present at the nm-thick TiO precipitate/matrix interface.  
Future studies with proton and neutron irradiation over samples with and without this 
intergrowth will aim also to investigate if this novel feature can act as an effective sink for 
radiation-induced lattice defects and transmutant H/He atoms, and therefore enhance the 
radiation tolerance of the V-4Cr-4Ti alloy, as candidate material for the reactor of DEMO. 
