Analysis and design of stainless steel 
reinforced concrete structural elements 
Musab Mohammad Rabi  
A thesis submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
College of Engineering, Design and Physical Science 
Brunel University London 
December 2019 
Abstract  
Stainless steel reinforced concrete has seen a large increase in usage in recent years, in response to the 
ever-increasing demands for structures and infrastructure to be more durable, efficient and 
sustainable. Stainless steel has excellent corrosion resistance, as well as many other distinctive 
properties such as excellent strength and ductility, ready availability and a long, low-maintenance, life 
cycle. On the other hand, one of the fundamental challenges that dramatically limits the lifetime and 
reliability of traditional carbon steel reinforced concrete is corrosion of the reinforcement, especially 
in harsh environments such as coastal, marine or industrial settings. With the increased focus on 
environmentally conscious and reliable design, stainless steel reinforcement represents an ideal 
solution for the corrosion and deterioration problems faced by reinforced concrete structures, as well 
as the associated maintenance issues. However, it is also has a higher initial cost, and therefore needs 
to be used carefully and efficiently.  
The existing material models provided for the structural analysis of reinforced concrete members in 
current design standards, such as Eurocode 2, are not appropriate for stainless steel reinforced 
concrete and lead to inaccurate predictions of the section capacity. Generally, there is a lack of data in 
the public domain regarding the behaviour of concrete beams reinforced with stainless steel, mainly 
owing to this being a relatively new and novel topic. This is especially true for the important issue of 
bond strength and the relationship that exists between the reinforcement and the surrounding concrete. 
Currently, existing design standards advise using the same design rules for stainless steel reinforced 
concrete as traditional carbon steel reinforced concrete, owing to a lack of alternative information, 
although this is not based on test or performance data. As such, there is a real need to develop a full 
and fundamental understanding of the behaviour of stainless steel reinforced concrete, to achieve 
more sustainable and reliable design methods for reinforced concrete structures. 
In this context, this thesis provides a detailed background of the existing information on stainless steel 
reinforced concrete, as well a discussion on the potential advantages and challenges. Then, attention is 
given to analysing the behaviour of stainless steel reinforced concrete beams by developing the 
Continuous Strength Method to predict the bending moment capacity. A finite element model has 
been developed in order to further assess the performance, and this is also used to conduct a 
parametric study of the most influential properties. It is concluded that the proposed analytical models 
provide a reliable solution for predicting the capacity of concrete beams reinforced with stainless 
steel. 
In addition, this thesis investigates the bond behaviour of stainless steel reinforced concrete and 
compares the performance to traditional carbon steel reinforced concrete, through experimental 
testing and analysis. It also compares the results to existing design rules in terms of bond strength, 
anchorage length and lap length. It is shown that stainless steel rebar generally develops lower bond 
strength with the surrounding concrete compared with equivalent carbon steel reinforcement. 
Moreover, it is shown that existing design codes are extremely conservative and generally 
underestimate the actual bond strength by a significant margin. Therefore, following detailed analysis, 
it is concluded that current design rules can be safely applied for stainless steel rebar, although more 
accurate and efficient methods can be achieved. Hence, new design parameters are proposed 
reflecting the bond behaviour of stainless steel rebars, so that more efficient designs can be achieved.  
List of publications  
The work presented in this thesis has led to a list of publications and conferences, as follows: 
 Journals 
 Rabi, M., Cashell, K. and Shamass, R. (2019) 'Flexural analysis and design of stainless steel 
reinforced concrete beams', Engineering Structures, 198, pp. 109432. 
 Rabi, M., Cashell, K. and Shamass, R. 'Ultimate and serviceability analysis of stainless steel 
reinforced concrete beams', (Submitted to Structures). 
 Rabi, M., Cashell, K., Shamass, R. and Desnerck, P. 'Bond behaviour of stainless steel 
reinforced concrete', (Submitted to Engineering Structures). 
Conferences 
 Rabi, M., Cashell, K.A. and Shamass, R. (2019) 'Analysis of concrete beams reinforced with 
stainless steel'. Proceedings of the fib Symposium 2019: Concrete-Innovations in Materials, 
Design and Structures, Krakow, Poland, (pp. 690-697). 
 Rabi, M., Cashell, K.A. (2019) 'Investigation on the behaviour of concrete beams with 
stainless steel reinforcement', 21
 Young research conference, the institution of structural 
engineers (IStructE), London, UK.   
 Rabi, M., Cashell, K.A. (2019) 'Design of reinforced concrete beams with stainless steel', 
Civil and Environmental Engineering research conference, London, UK.   
 Rabi, M., Cashell, K.A. (2019) 'Novel design approach for stainless steel reinforced concrete 
beams', Brunel University research student conference, London, UK.   
Acknowledgment  
First and foremost, I am very grateful and thankful to Allah, the most gracious and merciful, for 
guiding me to the right path and providing me with countless bounties and blessings through all the 
stages of my life. Millions of thanks to my supervisor Dr Katherine Cashel for the time, expertise, 
knowledge and guidance. This thesis could not be accomplished without her feedback and continuous 
support. I would like to thank Dr Rabee Shamass for providing invaluable comments and insightful 
suggestions. I also appreciate the PhD studentship received from Jerash University. Exceptional 
thanks to my parents for their endless support and encouragement, without them I would not be able 
to achieve this. I would like to express my special thanks to my beloved wife Noor for her spiritual 
and emotional support and for her always stuck with me in the tough times. Last but not least, many 
thanks to all my loyal friends and colleagues, namely Dr Mazen Al-Kheetan and Asif Mohammed, 
who made my time through the PhD journey unforgettable. 
Contents 
Chapter 3: Development and validation of the finite element model for simply supported reinforced 
List of Figures  
Fig. 2.2: Corrosion behaviour of different stainless steel reinforcements compared with carbon steels 
Fig. 2.3: Comparison of stainless steel and carbon steel (a) strength retention factor (b) stiffness 
Fig. 2.4: Thermal expansion behaviour of austenitic and duplex stainless steels, carbon steel and 
Fig. 2.8: Typical stress-strain curves for carbon steel and stainless steel (Baddoo and Burgan, 2012).
Fig. 3.5: Geometrical and reinforcement details of the beams used in the validation study, including 
(a) B3 (Medina et al., 2015) (b) SS (Alih and Khelil, 2012), (c) SR6 (Dong et al., 2013), (d) U2 
Fig. 3.9: Comparison between experimental and numerical load-displacement curves for beams SS 
(Alih and Khelil, 2012), SR6 (Dong et al., 2013), U2 (Alfano et al., 2011) and O (Obaidat et al., 
Fig. 3.10: Comparison between experimental and numerical moment-displacement curves for beam 
Fig. 3.11: Crack patterns of beam SR6 obtained by the (a) numerical analysis and (b) experiment 
Fig. 4.1: Strain and stress distribution diagrams for a singly reinforced concrete beam including (a) the 
cross-section (b) the strain distribution through the section, (c) the stress distribution and (d) an 
Fig. 4.3: Stress-strain curves obtained experimentally and analytically for grade 1.4311 (a) full curve 
Fig. 4.4: Stress-strain curves obtained experimentally and analytically for grade 1.4162 (a) full curve 
Fig. 4.5: Stress-strain curves obtained experimentally and analytically for grade 1.4307 (a) full curve 
Fig. 4.6: The influence of the stainless steel material model on the load-displacement response for 
Fig. 4.7: The simplified material model for stainless steel with reference to the modified R-O model.
Fig. 4.9: Comparison between the results obtained using the full and simplified analytical solution. . 57 
Fig. 5.1: Bending moment predictions for beams with grade 1.4311 austenitic stainless steel using a 
Fig. 5.2: Bending moment predictions for beams with grade 1.4162 duplex stainless steel using a b/h 
Fig. 5.3: Bending moment predictions for beams with grade 1.4307 austenitic stainless steel using a 
Fig. 5.4: Load-displacement curves obtained numerically using various concrete strength for beams 
Fig. 5.5: Load-displacement curves obtained numerically using various concrete strength for beams 
Fig. 5.6: Load-displacement curves obtained numerically using various concrete strength for beams 
Fig. 5.8: Effect of the beam geometry on the bending moment predictions for beams with austenitic 
Fig. 5.9: Effect of the beam geometry on the bending moment predictions for beams with lean duplex 
Fig. 5.10: Effect of the beam geometry on the bending moment predictions for beams with austenitic 
Fig. 5.12: Effect of the reinforcement ratio () on the bending moment capacity for beams made using 
Fig. 5.13: Effect of the reinforcement ratio () on the bending moment capacity for beams made using 
Fig. 5.14: Effect of the reinforcement ratio () on the bending moment capacity for beams made using 
Fig. 5.15: Effect of reinforcement ratio on the exploitation of strain hardening for beams reinforced 
Fig. 5.16: Effect of reinforcement ratio on the exploitation of strain hardening for beams reinforced 
Fig. 5.17: Effect of reinforcement ratio on the exploitation of strain hardening for beams reinforced 
Fig. 5.18: Effect of reinforcement ratio on the deflection of a stainless steel reinforced concrete beam 
Fig. 5.19: Elastic analysis of a reinforced concrete beam including (a) the cross-section (b) the strain 
Fig. 6.4: Stress-strain curves of stainless steels and carbon steels (a) full curve and (b) more detailed 
Fig. 6.6: Pull-out test arrangement including (a) an image of the testing machine, (b) a schematic of 
the pull-out set-up for phase 1 and (c) a schematic of the pull-out set-up for phase 2. All dimensions 
Fig. 6.7: Failure mode for specimens with stainless steel reinforcement from (a) phase 1- splitting 
Fig. 6.8: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for carbon and stainless steel reinforcements with concrete 
Fig. 6.9: Pull-out bond stress-slip curves for carbon and stainless steel reinforcements with concrete 
Fig. 6.10: Bond stress-slip curves for samples with 10 mm bar diameter and concrete strengths C20, 
Fig. 6.11: Bond stress-slip curves for samples with reinforcement which is (a) 10 mm in diameter and 
Fig. C. 1: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for stainless steel reinforcements with 10 mm diameter and 
Fig. C. 2: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for stainless steel reinforcements with 12 mm diameter and 
Fig. C. 3: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for carbon steel reinforcements with 10 mm diameter and 
Fig. C. 4: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for carbon steel reinforcements with 12 mm diameter and 
Fig. C. 5: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for stainless steel reinforcements with 10 mm diameter and 
Fig. C. 6: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for stainless steel reinforcements with 12 mm diameter and 
Fig. C. 7: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for carbon steel reinforcements with 10 mm diameter and 
Fig. C. 8: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for carbon steel reinforcements with 12 mm diameter and 
Fig. C. 9: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for stainless steel reinforcements with 10 mm diameter and 
Fig. C. 10: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for stainless steel reinforcements with 12 mm diameter 
Fig. C. 11: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for carbon steel reinforcements with 10 mm diameter and 
Fig. C. 12: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for carbon steel reinforcements with 12 mm diameter and 
Fig. C. 13: Pull-out bond stress-slip curves for stainless steel reinforcements with 10 mm diameter and 
Fig. C. 14: Pull-out bond stress-slip curves for stainless steel reinforcements with 12 mm diameter and 
Fig. C. 15: Pull-out bond stress-slip curves for carbon steel reinforcements with 10 mm diameter and 
Fig. C. 16: Pull-out bond stress-slip curves for carbon steel reinforcements with 12 mm diameter and 
List of Tables  
Table 2.1: The chemical composition of some common stainless steel grades (Markeset et al., 2006). 6 
Table 2.2: Mechanical properties for some common stainless steel grades EN 10088-2 (2014) with 
Table 2.3: Classification of stainless steel reinforcement according to their corrosion resistance 
Table 2.5: Summary of the mechanical properties of stainless steel reinforcement (Gardner et al., 
Table 2.6: Design changes for durability requirements in highways structures and bridges (BA 84/02, 
Table 3.1: Material properties of the RC beams reported by (Medina et al., 2015; Alih and Khelil, 
Table 4.2: Comparison between the ultimate loads obtained numerically by implementing Eurocode 2 
and modified RO material models using beam SS with a width of 150 mm and a depth of 280 mm. . 47 
Table 4.4: Comparison between the ultimate bending moment capacity of the numerical and that of 
Table 4.5: Comparison between the ultimate bending moment capacity of the numerical and that of 
Table 5.2: Comparison between the ultimate bending moment predictions obtained numerically and 
Table 5.3: Results of the predicted deflection obtained from Eurocode 2 in comparison with the 
Table 5.4: Deflection results obtained using the initial modulus, secant modulus and the tangent 
Table 6.5: Ranges for rib parameters for stainless steel BS 6744 (2016) and carbon steel BS 4449+A3 
List of notation  
This list defines the symbols used in this thesis. However, those are not included here are defined in 
the text as appropriate.   
0.2 0.2% proof strength of reinforcement 
u Ultimate strength of reinforcement 
Yield strength of reinforcement 
Characteristic yield strength of reinforcement 
Design yield strength of reinforcement 
Mean compressive strength of concrete 
Characteristic cylinder compressive strength of concrete 
Ultimate tensile strength of concrete 
Characteristic design tensile concrete strength 
fb0/fc0 
Ratio of the strength in the biaxial state to the strength in the uniaxial state 
Stress in the bar to be anchored by bond over the anchorage length 
true True stress 
fbd Design bond strength 
fbd,0 
Basic bond strength 
bu,split Bond strength for splitting failure  
bf Constant residual bond strength 
Internal tensile forces in the beam 
Internal compression forces in the beam 
Applied load 
Youngs modulus  
Tangent modulus at the 0.2% proof stress  
Slope of the strain hardening region 
Tangent modulus at the ultimate stress 
Secant modulus of elasticity 
Tangent modulus of elasticity 
Elastic modulus of concrete 
Ultimate strain  
0.2% strain  
Yield strain 
true true strain 
Compressive ultimate strain of concrete  
Compressive strain at the peak stress of concrete 
Inelastic strain of concrete 
cr Tensile ultimate strain of concrete 
n Strain hardening constant  
m Strain hardening constant 
A Reinforcement elongation 
As Reinforcement area 
As,cal Designed reinforcement area 
As,ef Actual reinforcement area 
 Reinforcement ratio 
bal Balanced reinforcement ratio 
min Minimum reinforcement ratio 
dc Compressive damage parameter of concrete 
dt Tensile damage parameter of concrete 
d Position reinforcement from the top fibre of the cross-section 
y Depth of neutral axis  
su Limiting curvature for reinforcement failure 
cu Limiting curvature for concrete failure 
Mpl Plastic bending moment 
Mcr Bending moment at cracking load 
Ma Bending moment at service load 
max Max deflection 
1 Deflection for un-cracked section  
2 Deflection for cracked section 
 Distribution coefficient represented the tension stiffening phenomenon 
 Loading duration coefficient  
Ig Gross second moment of area 
Icr Second moment of area for cracked section 
L Clear span in the beam 
a The distance between the support and the position of the load 
 Bar diameter 
fP Relative rib area 
FP Area of the longitudinal section of a single rib 
c Rib spacing 
cclear Clear distance between adjacent ribs 
 Rib inclination 
Ibd Design anchorage length 
xviii 
Ib,rqd Basic anchorage length 
Ibd,min Minimum design anchorage length 
I0 Design lap length 
I0,min Minimum design lap length 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
1.1 General  
In response to growing demands for civil engineering structures and infrastructure to be more durable, 
sustainable and efficient, stainless steel has emerged as a very attractive material for many 
applications. It is available in several different forms including sheet, plate and bar products as well as 
structural sections. Stainless steel elements are corrosion resistant with low or negligible maintenance 
requirements and also offer excellent strength, ductility, toughness, recyclability and fatigue 
properties. Of course, they are considerably more expensive than traditional carbon steel and therefore 
must be used efficiently and in appropriate applications. Until recently, their most common use in 
load-bearing applications was as bare structural sections such as beams, columns, etc. However, the 
current thesis is focussed on a relatively new application for stainless steel which as reinforcement in 
concrete structures. 
1.2 Research significance  
The subject of durability, resilience and efficiency of structures and infrastructure is highly topical at 
the current time, especially following the Polcevera Viaduct tragedy in Italy 2018 (Smale, K., 2018). 
Whilst there are ever-increasing demands for civil engineering structures and infrastructure to be more 
durable, there are also huge pressures for them to remain in service for long periods without requiring 
rehabilitative or remedial works, to be more efficient in terms of material usage, and to be more 
resilient to both natural and man-made environments and scenarios.  It is estimated that Western 
Europe spends around 5 billion annually to repair corroding concrete infrastructure (Markeset et al., 
2006), with a corresponding figure of $8.3 billion for the United States (Kalina et al., 2011). In 
addition, there can be significant further indirect costs associated with important infrastructure being 
out-of-service. In this context, there is a high demand to improve the life-time performance of 
reinforced concrete structures, especially for those subjected to sensitive or harsh environments such 
as bridges, tunnels and marine structures.  
There is a huge demand to improve the durability and life-cycle of reinforced concrete structures. The 
typical approach is to increase the concrete cover or to control the alkalinity of concrete (British 
Highways Authority, 2003). However, in aggressive conditions, these measures may not be sufficient 
to prevent a significant corrosion problem. In this context, the use of stainless steel reinforcement 
represents an ideal solution for exposed reinforced concrete structures. Replacing the traditional 
carbon steel reinforcement with stainless steel improves the expected life time of these structures and 
may also significantly reduce the costs associated with expensive inspection and rehabilitation works. 
Although the initial cost of stainless steel reinforcement is relatively high compared to that of 
traditional carbon steel, the use of stainless steel reinforcing bar can reduce the overall maintenance 
costs up to 50% (Cramer et al., 2002). 
1.3 Knowledge gap 
Current design codes such as Eurocode 2 (EN 1992-1-1, 2004) do not include explicit rules for 
stainless steel reinforced concrete structures. Moreover, the standards do not incorporate efficient 
approaches for designing structures with stainless steel reinforcement as the given material models for 
the reinforcement do not fully exploit the significant strain hardening characteristics and high levels 
of ductility that are present for stainless steel. The behaviour of stainless steel is quite different from 
that of carbon steel in that carbon steel has a linear elastic response with a well-defined yield point 
and yield plateau, followed by a moderate degree of strain hardening. On the other hand, stainless 
steel exhibits a predominantly non-linear and continuous stress-strain response without a clearly-
defined yield point as well as significant levels of strain hardening. However, as stated before, current 
design approaches do not include specific rules for stainless steel reinforced concrete, and generally 
suggest using the same criteria as for traditional carbon steel reinforced concrete. The existing 
material models provided for the structural analysis of reinforced concrete members in current design 
standards, such as Eurocode 2, are not appropriate for stainless steel reinforced concrete and lead to 
overly conservative (or indeed unconservative in some cases) predictions of the section capacity.  
Additionally, existing design standards advise using the same bond design rules for stainless steel 
reinforced concrete as traditional carbon steel reinforced concrete, owing to a lack of alternative 
information, although this is not based on test or performance data. As such, there is a real need to 
develop a full and fundamental understanding of the bond behaviour of stainless steel reinforced 
concrete, to achieve more sustainable and reliable design methods for reinforced concrete structures. 
Given the high initial cost of stainless steel, it is imperative that structurally efficient design solutions 
are made available which consider and exploit the distinctive and advantageous properties of stainless 
steel.  
1.4 Aims and objectives  
There is a real need to develop a full and fundamental understanding of the behaviour of stainless 
steel reinforced concrete in order to achieve more sustainable and reliable design methods for 
reinforced concrete structures. The primary aims of this research are to examine the behaviour of 
stainless steel reinforced concrete beams and to develop a new design approach which incorporates 
the advantageous material properties. The main research objectives are summarized as follows: 
 To conduct a detailed literature study of the existing information on stainless steel reinforced 
concrete, as well as a discussion on the potential advantages and challenges.  
 To assess the design of stainless steel reinforced concrete beams using the current design 
rules in Eurocode 2 which were developed and validated for carbon steel concrete members.  
 To develop a new deformation-based design method that incorporates the distinctive 
properties of stainless steel and reflects the actual behaviour, in order to predict the bending 
moment capacity of reinforced concrete beams.  
 To develop a finite element model to further assess the performance of the proposed 
analytical method, and this is also used to conduct a parametric study of the most influential 
properties.  
 To investigate the bond behaviour of stainless steel reinforcement with reference to traditional 
carbon steels through experimental testing and analysis. These findings will be compared with 
the existing design guidance provided in both Eurocode 2 and Model Code 2010 (Fdration 
Internationale du Bton, 2013). Accordingly, proposing new design parameters in the light of 
the findings of this bond study. 
1.5 Thesis outline  
This thesis is divided into six further chapters which are summarised below: 
Chapter 2 provides a detailed background of the existing information on stainless steel reinforcement 
including the metallurgical, mechanical and structural aspects as well as the corrosion behaviour and 
bond performance. In addition an overview of the current code of practice and some design changes 
that are considered as a result of using stainless steel reinforcement in concrete structures is presented. 
Chapter 3 describes the development of the finite element model of a simply reinforced concrete beam 
using the ABAQUS software package including the solution procedures, materials behaviour, types of 
mesh and element, and boundary and loading conditions. This chapter also presents the validation of 
the numerical model using the available data in the literature. 
Chapter 4 focuses on the design of stainless steel reinforced concrete beams, and investigates the 
impact that neglecting strain hardening has on the load-bearing capacity. Additionally, a new 
deformation-based design method is developed to predict the bending moment capacity for stainless 
steel reinforced concrete beams. The proposed method is based on the increasingly popular 
continuous strength method (CSM), which harnesses the advantages of material strain hardening in 
the design procedure. The design method is developed in two forms, first as a full model in which the 
whole material response is considered and then as a simplified model incorporating a more simplistic 
elastic-linear hardening stainless steel constitutive response. Finally, the proposed method is validated 
by utilising the numerical model developed in the previous chapter.  
Chapter 5 further develops and analyses the behaviour and design of stainless steel reinforced 
concrete beams, using the proposed CSM approach. A comprehensive parametric study is carried out 
to investigate the effect of the most influential parameters on the performance of stainless steel 
concrete beams including various concrete strengths and reinforcement grades and different 
geometries. Additionally, this chapter aims to provide guidance for selecting an appropriate 
reinforcement ratio that exploits the strain hardening properties of stainless steel rebar. Moreover, 
attention is also given to assessing the serviceability limit state of stainless steel reinforced concrete 
beams through analysing the deflection behaviour compared to the predicted response from 
Eurocode 2.    
Chapter 6 investigates the bond behaviour of stainless steel reinforced concrete and compares the 
performance to traditional reinforced concrete, through experimental testing and analysis. This 
chapter proceeds with a background of the information currently available in design standards, 
following by a detailed description and analysis of a pull-out test experimental programme involving 
both stainless steel and carbon steel reinforcements. It also compares the results to existing design 
rules in terms of bond strength, anchorage length and lap length. Finally, suitable bond-slip models 
for stainless steel and also carbon steel reinforcements are proposed.   
Chapter 7 concludes the main findings from this research and identifies the potential future research in 
this area.   
Chapter 2: Literature review 
2.1 Introduction  
There has been increased interest and application of stainless steel reinforcement in concrete 
structures in recent years, owing mainly to its excellent corrosion resistance as well as its other 
distinctive properties such as significant development of strain hardening and high ductility. Giving 
that stainless steel has excellent corrosion resistance would significantly contribute to improve its life 
cycle which reflects the advantageous sustainability and economic efficiency. In this chapter, a 
detailed background of the previous research on the behaviour and design of stainless steel as a 
structural material is presented. This chapter is divided into three main sections in which the first 
section gives a background of stainless steel in general including the chemical composition, grade 
categories, classifications and material properties. The second section provides detailed information 
about the use of stainless steel as reinforcement in concrete structures, outlining the needs and 
challenges. It also discusses the behaviour of stainless steel in corrosive environments and under fire 
conditions as well as its bond performance. Additionally, this section reviews the current applications 
for stainless steel reinforcement. The third section focusses on the design aspects of stainless steel 
reinforcement highlighting the differences between stainless steel and carbon steel, particularly the 
constitutive relationship, and discusses the current codes of practice for concrete members reinforced 
with stainless steels with an emphasis giving to the durability requirements.  
2.2 Stainless steel in structural applications   
2.2.1 Background  
Stainless steel is widely used for load-bearing applications in structural engineering, largely owing to 
its excellent corrosion resistance. In addition to durability, it has a long life-cycle, excellent 
mechanical characteristics, good formability and recyclability and requires little maintenance 
(Shamass and Cashell, 2018). Stainless steel offers excellent ductility and strain hardening capacity 
compared with traditional carbon steel, which is particularly desirable in design as a ductile section 
which provides warning of imminent collapse.  
The earliest use of stainless steel in construction was in the 1920s, for roofing and facade 
applications (Baddoo, 2008). In more recent times, stainless steels have become popular in load-
bearing applications where the durability, ductility, stiffness and strength are required, as well as 
excellent fire resistance. Stainless steels are produced in different forms including sheet, plate, bar, 
tube, hot-rolled and cold-formed structural sections, fasteners and fixings. Cold-formed sections 
fabricated from steel plates are the most commonly used products for structural members because 
they are the most readily available and are reasonably straight-forward to manufacture (Gardner, 
2005).   
2.2.2 Composition  
Stainless steels are defined as a group of corrosion resistant alloying steels which possess a minimum 
chromium content of 10.5% and a maximum carbon content of 1.2% (EN 10088-1, 2014). The 
distinctive properties of stainless steel depend on the constituent elements of the stainless steel alloy, 
and therefore it is important to select the appropriate grade for each application. One of the most 
important chemical elements in all stainless steel alloys is chromium (Cr) which provides the 
corrosion resistance through the formation of a thin chromium oxide film on the surface of the 
material in the presence of oxygen, resulting in a passive protective layer (Evans, 2002). There are 
other influential alloying elements that play important role in identifying the properties of stainless 
steel. For example, nickel (Ni) improves the ductility and the formability of the material, molybdenum 
(Mo) improves the resistance against the uniform and localized corrosion and nitrogen (N) 
significantly enhances mechanical properties of the material including strength and ductility 
(Markeset et al., 2006). Additionally, a number of other alloying elements are typically present 
including manganese (Mn), copper (Cu), carbon (C), silicon (Si), phosphorus (P) and sulphur (S). 
Detailed information about the chemical composition associated with different stainless steel grades is 
given in the European Standard EN 10088-1 (2014). Table 2.1 presents the chemical composition of 
some common stainless steel grades available as reinforcement. 
Table 2.1: The chemical composition of some common stainless steel grades (Markeset et al., 2006).   
European  
(EN 10088-1) 
American 
(AISI) 
Chemical composition (%) 
Grade Name Grade C 
1.4301 
X5CrNi 
18-10 
304 0.07 1.0 2.0 0.045 0.03 17.5/ 
10.50 
- max 
1.4401 
X5CrNiMo 
17-12-2 
316 0.07 1.0 2.0 0.045 0.03 16.5/ 
10.0/ 
2.00/ 
1.4429 
X2CrNiMoN 
17-13-3 
316LN 0.03 1.0 2.0 0.045 0.015 16.5/ 
11.0/ 
0.12/ 
1.4162 
X3CrNiMo 
22-2-0 
0.03 0.4 5.0 - - 21.5 1.5 0.3 max 
1.4362 
X2CrNiMo 
2304 0.03 1.0 2.0 0.035 0.015 22.0/ 
0.05/ 
1.4462 
X2CrNiMoN 
22-5-3 
2205 0.03 1.0 2.0 0.035 0.015 21.0/ 
0.10/ 
2.2.3 Classification 
There are number of different global classification systems used for stainless steels. The most widely 
adopted are the European standard and the American Iron and Steel Institution (AISI) specification. 
The following sub-sections provide more information about these classification systems. 
European standard  
Stainless steels are classified in the European standard EN 10088-1 (2014) according to their chemical 
composition. Each grade is given a generic number to identify its group, and then an individual 
number is specified to refer to the nominal alloy composition. For example, the numbers in grade 
1.4436 represent:    
 1 refers to the steel. 
 44 refers to the group of stainless steel. 
 36 refers to the individual material identification.  
The grade number is also given a corresponding grade name to provide more information about the 
chemical composition of a particular grade. For instance, the name of grade 1.4436 is X3CrNiMo 17-
13-3 and represents: 
 X refers to a high alloy steel. 
 3 represents the percentage of carbon content. 
 CrNiMo is the chemical symbols of the main alloying elements. 
  17-13-3 represents the nominal percentage of the main alloying elements. 
American Iron and Steel Institute system (AISI)  
AISI classifies stainless steels according to the category of stainless steel. For instance, austenitic and 
ferritic stainless steels are classified as 300 series alloys (e.g. 316, 304) and as 400 series alloys (e.g. 
403, 409), respectively. The main limitation of this system is that the details of the chemical 
composition for a particular grade are not provided. Table 2.1 presents some stainless steel grades 
available as reinforcement with their European designation and the equivalent American numbers. 
2.2.4 Stainless steel categories 
There are five main categories of stainless steel which are classified according to their metallurgical 
structure, including the austenitic, ferritic, duplex, martensitic and precipitation hardened grades. The 
austenitic and duplex grades are most common in structural applications, including for stainless steel 
reinforcement. Precipitation hardened stainless steels are also used in construction for particular 
applications such as tie-bolts. Ferritic stainless steels are more suitable for indoor components. 
Whereas, the use of martensitic stainless steels is typically limited for applications such as valves and 
knife blades. A summary of the main advantages and limitations of each category is given below: 
Austenitic stainless steel 
Austenitic stainless steels are the most commonly used grades in structural applications owing to the 
excellent mechanical properties and high corrosion resistance. They typically comprise of 17-18% 
chromium and at least 8-11% nickel (Gardner, 2005). The austenitic grades offer very good 
weldability and formability and large scale of service temperature (British Stainless Steel Association, 
2000). Austenitic stainless steels have been used in various applications such as load-bearing 
structural members, containers, architectural facades, house wares and industrial piping.  
Ferritic stainless steels  
The ferritic stainless steels typically have chromium content between 11% and 17% (British Stainless 
Steel Association, 2000). They comprise less nickel compared to the austenitic stainless steels and 
have an atomic structure similar to that of carbon steels. Consequently, they have generally limited 
ductility and toughness and less formability and weldability as well as less corrosion resistance 
compared to austenitic stainless steels. Ferritic stainless steels are relatively inexpensive because of 
the limited nickel content, and have fewer price fluctuations. Since ferritic stainless steels are less 
corrosion resistance compared with other grades, they are more suitable for indoor components such 
as shop-fittings and handrails or for other household products such as washing machines parts and 
boilers (Baddoo and Burgan, 2012).  
Duplex stainless steel   
Duplex stainless steels are also known as austenitic-ferritic stainless steels because of the mixed 
microstructure between the ferritic and austenitic stainless steels. Typically, duplex stainless steels 
contain around of 22-23% chromium and 4-5% nickel (Gardner, 2005). These grades exhibit high 
strength and great ductility properties as well as outstanding corrosion performance. Duplex stainless 
steels should be used in applications that require high strength materials where the materials are 
subjected to aggressive or contaminated environments. Accordingly, they are commonly used in 
offshore structures and chemical industries as tension bars, shafts, valves and pins connection 
(Baddoo and Burgan, 2012). 
Martensitic stainless steels 
Martensitic stainless steels contain higher carbon content than the other grades. The microstructure of 
martensitic stainless steels are similar to that of ferritic stainless steels and carbon steels. These grades 
exhibit similar level of corrosion resistance to that of ferritic grades. They have limited ductility in 
comparison with austenitic, duplex and ferritic grades (British Stainless Steel Association, 2000). 
Additionally, martensitic stainless steels require heat treatment before and after welding. Despite their 
relative cheapness compared to the other grades of stainless steels, their lower corrosion resistance 
and weldability requirements limit their use to applications such as valves and knife blades. They are 
typically not used in load bearing applications.  
Precipitation hardened stainless steels 
Precipitation hardened stainless steels have a better corrosion resistance than that of ferritic or 
martensitic stainless steels and similar to the austenitic grades which comprise of 18% chromium and 
8% nickel (Baddoo and Burgan, 2012). They generally exhibit excellent strength, good ductility and 
toughness depending on the heat treatment conditions. These grades are mostly used in oil and gas 
and aerospace industries, but they are also used in construction for particular applications such as tie-
bolts (Baddoo and Burgan, 2012). 
2.2.5 Material properties 
Stainless steels do not just offer high corrosion resistance but also provide excellent strength, 
toughness and weldability. The material properties of stainless steel vary depending on several 
parameters including the chemical composition, material thickness, direction of rolling and level of 
cold-working. Austenitic and duplex stainless steels have relatively higher strength and significant 
strain hardening properties compared with carbon steels. These grades typically exhibit large ductility 
that may reach more than 40%. Ferritic and martensitic stainless steels exhibit relatively lower 
strength and limited strain hardening. On the other hand precipitation-hardened stainless steels have 
extraordinarily high strength that may reach more than 1500 N/mm
, however these grades have low 
ductility, depending on the heat treatment condition (British Stainless Steel Association, 2000). In 
general, the modulus of elasticity for different stainless steel categories is quite similar to that of 
carbon steels. According to the European standard EN 10088-2 (2014), a value of 200000 N/mm
maybe used to specify the modulus of elasticity for all grades of stainless steel. Information on the 
mechanical properties of some common stainless steel grades is presented in Table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Mechanical properties for some common stainless steel grades EN 10088-2 (2014) with 
reference to carbon reinforcement BS 4449+A3 (2005). 
Stainless 
steel type 
Grade Minimum 
0.2% proof 
strength, 0.2  
(N/mm
Ultimate tensile 
strength, u 
(N/mm
Modulus of 
elasticity, E 
(kN/mm
Minimum 
elongation after 
fracture (%) 
Carbon 
steel 
B500B 485 515-690 200 4 
Austenitic  
1.4301 
(304) 
210 520  720 200 45 
1.4307 
(304L) 
200 500  650 200 45 
1.4401 
(316) 
220 520  670 200 40 
1.4404 
(316L) 
220 520  670 200 40 
Duplex  
1.4362 
(SAF2304) 
400 600  850 200 20 
1.4462 
(2205) 
400 640  840 200 20 
Ferritic 
1.4000 
(410S) 
220 400-600 200 19 
1.4512 
(409) 
210 380-560 200 25 
2.2.6 Cost  
The use of stainless steels in structural applications is inevitably more expensive than that of carbon 
steels (Sharif et al., 2019; Eladly, 2020). This limits the more widespread of using stainless steel in 
structural applications. However, the initial cost of the material itself does not reflect the total costs 
over the lifetime of a structure. There are other factors which must be considered to have a rational 
comparison including maintenance and inspection costs as well as the immediate costs associated with 
corrosion and fire protections. If these factors are counted together, stainless steel would represent 
more efficient option compared to carbon steel especially for those structures subjected to harsh 
conditions.  
2.2.7 Recycling 
The construction industry produces a large amount of material waste. Currently, there is a need to 
minimize the waste in the construction sector by using more environmentally friendly materials. In 
this context, stainless steels are highly durable materials that retain high residual value of the basic 
elements including chromium, nickel and molybdenum (British Stainless Steel Association, 2016). It 
has been shown that about 80% of the new stainless steels produced in western European are made 
from the recycled scrap stainless steel (Aalco, 2013). This provides stainless steels with additional 
economic and environmental advantages. 
2.3 Stainless steel reinforcement in concrete structures  
2.3.1 General  
Reinforced concrete is one of the most common structural solutions found in construction. It is 
popular because it provides an economic, efficient and versatile solution and there is plenty of 
guidance and performance criteria available for designers. Stainless steels have recently being 
included in reinforced concrete structures owing to the exceptional corrosion resistance, excellent 
durability, long life cycle, significant strain hardening and great ductility. Reinforced concrete (RC) 
structures are widely used for a range of applications such as multi-storey buildings, tunnels and 
bridges owing to the efficient use and ready availability of the constituent materials.  
2.3.2 Durability  
There are increasing demands to improve the durability and the life-cycle cost of reinforced concrete 
structures because of the high maintenance costs associated with corrosion of the steel reinforcement 
and carbonation and deterioration of the concrete. This is particularly true for structures subjected to 
harsh environments such as in marine, coastal or industrial settings. For structures reinforced with 
traditional carbon steel and subjected to aggressive conditions, corrosion is difficult to avoid. The 
typical approach to improving the durability of RC structures is to change some of the design 
parameters such as the thickness of the concrete cover or to control the alkalinity of the concrete mix 
(British Highways Authority, 2003). However, in aggressive conditions, these measures may not be 
enough to prevent unacceptable levels of corrosion developing. In this context, the use of stainless 
steel reinforcement in exposed structures like bridges, retaining walls and tunnels can provide an ideal 
solution to the deterioration and corrosion problems. This may even result in the structure not 
requiring expensive inspection and rehabilitation works over its lifetime. Stainless steel reinforcement 
can also be used for the restoration and rehabilitation of existing concrete structures (Prez-Quiroz et 
al., 2008). 
2.3.3 Life cycle cost  
The initial cost of stainless steel reinforcing bars is relatively high, typically between 3 and 8 times 
than that of traditional carbon steel rebar, depending on the grade (Nationwide Stainless, 2019; 
Metals4U, 2019). In some cases, the use of stainless steel reinforcement is limited only to the outer 
layer of the reinforcement, which is more susceptible to chloride-ingress, due to the high initial costs. 
In spite of this, it has been shown that stainless steel reinforcement can reduce the overall 
maintenance costs during the service life by up to 50%, especially for bridges and marine structures 
(Cramer, 2002). A study conducted by The Arup Research & Development group and supervised by 
the UK Highways Agency found that using stainless steel reinforcement can significantly increase the 
lifetime of structures and also reduce the associated maintenance costs (Gedge, 2003). Implementing 
stainless steels in concrete structures results in these structures requiring less maintenance and 
rehabilitation works over their lifetime. These characteristics are extremely important for highways 
and infrastructure to avoid road closures and highway rerouting as well as the associated delays and 
carbon emissions. 
Additionally, using high corrosion resistant reinforcement such as stainless steel results in further 
savings due to a potential relaxation of some of the durability requirements including the depth of 
concrete cover, design crack width and the need for reinforcement coating. Implementing these 
changes into the design of RC structures may result in significant cost saving especially in mega-
projects.   
Fig. 2.1 presents an example of the actual life cycle costs for the Oland Bridge in Sweden where both 
stainless steel and carbon steel reinforcement were used. The data presented in the figure shows that 
the cost of the bridge incorporating stainless steels remains constant indicating no additional costs 
over the entire lifetime whereas the cost of the carbon steel reinforced concrete solution significantly 
increases after around 20 years. Another important observation is that the whole initial construction 
costs when stainless steel reinforcement is employed instead of carbon steel rebar only increase by 
around 5-10%. This means that although the initial costs of the bare stainless steel reinforcement are 
undoubtedly more expensive than that of carbon steel, the variation on the entire construction costs is 
much less significant. Another study on the Schaffhausen Bridge in Switzerland revealed that the life 
cycle cost of stainless steel grade 1.4301 is 14% lower than carbon steel reinforcement (McGurn, 
1998). This is clear evidence of the long term cost efficiency of using stainless steel reinforcement in 
infrastructure projects. 
Fig. 2.1: Analysis of the life-cycle cost for Oland Bridge in Sweden (McGurn, 1998).
2.3.4 Common stainless steel reinforcement grades   
Stainless steel reinforcement is currently available in the open market in a number of different grades 
including austenitic grades 1.4311, 1.4307 and 1.4301 and duplex grades 1.4462, 1.4162 and 1.4362. 
Grade 1.4307 is the most commonly found grade used in construction and is a standard low-carbon 
austenitic stainless steel whereas grade 1.4311 is also a low-carbon austenitic stainless steel but with 
improved low-temperature toughness and strength owing to its higher nickel and nitrogen content. 
Both of these grades are very suitable for low magnetic structural applications. Grade 1.4362 is a 
duplex stainless steel which offers superior corrosion resistance due to the relatively high nickel 
content compared to the austenitic grades. In recent years, a new type of duplex stainless steel has 
been developed which has a relatively low nickel content and these are known as the lean duplex 
grades. Grade 1.4162 is in this category and offers excellent corrosion resistance whilst also 
possessing around double the characteristic strength of austenitic stainless steel for almost the same 
cost, owing to the low nickel content. 
2.3.5 Classification and selection of stainless steels reinforcement     
It is clear that one of the fundamental advantages for using stainless steel reinforcement is its 
excellent corrosion resistance. Therefore, classifying stainless steels according to their corrosion 
resistance may facilitate the selection of the appropriate grade. The most widely used classification 
method to measure the relative corrosion resistance of metals is the Pitting Resistance Equivalent 
Number (PREN). The criteria for predicting the corrosion resistance of a metal depends mainly on the 
contents of chromium (Cr), nickel (Ni) and molybdenum (Mo) in the alloy, as shown in Eq. (2.1) 
(Markeset et al., 2006).  
PREN = % Cr + 3.3 (% Mo) + 16 (% N) For austenitic stainless steels 
(2.1) 
PREN = % Cr + 3.3 (% Mo) + 30 (% N) For duplex stainless steels 
Classifying stainless steels according to their PREN number is quite useful in the selection of the 
appropriate stainless steel grade for a particular application. However, the PREN does not take into 
account the chloride threshold of each grade and also ignores the beneficial effects come from the 
concrete cover on the passivity of stainless steels (Markeset et al., 2006). 
A classification example for stainless steel reinforcement is given in Table 2.3. In this example, the 
reinforcement is classified into four groups according to their PREN, lifetime of the structure and the 
surrounding environment. Class 0 is recommended for those structures located in a marine 
environment and subjected to moderate temperature and relative humidity with a design service life 
between 10 and 30 years. Class 1 is suggested for the same conditions but with a design service life 
between 50 and 100 years. On the other hand, Class 2 is suitable for those structures subjected to high 
chloride-ingress and moderate to high temperature and relative humidity with a moderate design 
service life. Finally, Class 3 is recommended for those structures located in marine environments and 
requiring long design service life with high temperature and relative humidity. 
Table 2.3: Classification of stainless steel reinforcement according to their corrosion resistance 
(Markeset et al., 2006).   
Corrosion resistance 
class 
Steel Type Stainless steel 
grade 
Class 0 
Carbon steel - - 
Class 1 
Austenitic 
stainless steel 
(without Mo) 
1.4301 19 
1.4541 17 
Class 2 
Austenitic 
stainless steel 
(with Mo) 
1.4401 25 
1.4429 26 
1.4436 26 
1.4571 25 
Class 3 
Duplex 1.4462 36 
Table 2.4 provides recommendations for selecting the appropriate grade of stainless steel 
reinforcement based on the exposure conditions as suggested by the Design Manual for Road and 
Bridges (BA 84/02, 2003) for highways and infrastructures. 
Table 2.4: Selection of stainless steel grades (BA 84/02, 2003). 
Exposure Condition Stainless 
steel grade 
Stainless steel reinforcement embedded in concrete with normal exposure to chlorides in 
soffits, edge beams, diaphragm walls, joints and substructures. 
1.4301 
As above but where additional relaxation of design for durability is required for specific 
reasons on a given structure or component i.e. where waterproofing integrity cannot be 
guaranteed over the whole life of the structure. 
1.4436 
Direct exposure to chlorides and chloride bearing waters for example dowel bars, holding 
down bolts and other components protruding from the concrete. 
1.4429 
1.4436 
Specific structural requirements for the use of higher strength reinforcement and suitable 
for all exposure conditions. 
1.4462 
1.4429 
2.3.6 Mechanical behaviour  
Stainless steel reinforcement exhibits excellent mechanical behaviour compared with the traditional 
carbon steels. A limited number of investigations on the mechanical behaviour of stainless steel 
reinforcement has been conducted in recent years. It has been shown that austenitic stainless steel 
reinforcement grades 1.4429 and 1.4311 provide higher strength and hardness characteristics 
compared with the equivalent carbon steels (Castro et al., 2003). More recently, Medina et al. (2015) 
investigated the ductility and the mechanical properties of austenitic and duplex stainless steel 
reinforcement grades 1.4301, 1.4362 and 1.4482 with reference to carbon steel grade B500SD. It was 
observed that stainless steels show great ductility that can reach three times than that of carbon steels. 
However, these stainless steels exhibited a lower modulus of elasticity compared to carbon steels by 
around 15%. This is mainly because stainless steels exhibit nonlinear behaviour from an early stage 
and therefore the elastic modulus can be harder to quantify. A summary of some of the mechanical 
properties for different stainless steel reinforcement grades is presented in Table 2.5. It is clear that 
the stainless steels have excellent tensile strength associated significant strain hardening and great 
ductility. These characteristics are very desirable in design in order to avoid sudden collapse. 
Table 2.5: Summary of the mechanical properties of stainless steel reinforcement (Gardner et al., 
2016). 
Product 
Grade Bar diameter 
0.2 (N/mm
) u (N/mm
) E (kN/mm
Plain 
round bars 
1.4307 12 562 796 210.2 39.9 
1.4162 12 805 964 208.7 18.8 
1.4307 16 537 751 211.1 42.4 
1.4362 16 760 860 197.5 22.0 
Ribbed 
1.4311 12 480 764 202.6 48.3 
1.4162 12 682 874 199.1 32.4 
1.4162 16 646 844 195.2 32.9 
1.4311 16 528 717 199.9 47.9 
1.4362 16 608 834 171.4 35.1 
2.3.7 Corrosion behaviour  
It is now clear that one of the fundamental challenges that is experienced by reinforced concrete 
structures is corrosion of the reinforcement, especially for members which are exposed to harsh 
environments (Helland, 2013). Corrosion is a serious problem that results in a reduction in the 
nominal reinforcement area and weakness in the bond strength between the reinforcement and 
surrounding concrete which impacts the safety and integrity of concrete structures. Corrosion occurs 
as a result of chloride penetration or carbonation of concrete. The former is caused by chloride ingress 
from using de-icing salts in frosty weather or from marine environments. Whereas the latter occurs as 
a result of carbon dioxide existing in the surrounding air, which attacks the calcium in the concrete. In 
standard RC design, the corrosion protection of the reinforcement mainly relies on the concrete cover 
and the durability of the steel passivation layer. For traditional carbon steels, this passivation layers 
can easily break down and then corrosion develops, especially in a contaminated or harsh 
environment.  
The typical approaches to reducing the potential corrosion risk are to control the alkalinity of 
concrete, increase the depth of concrete cover or use cement inhibitors or reinforcement coating 
materials (British Stainless Steel Association, 2003). However, these measures may not be enough to 
prevent the development of unacceptable levels of corrosion. In this context, the use of stainless steel 
reinforcement is an ideal solution to solve the inherent corrosion problem. Stainless steels exhibit 
outstanding corrosion resistance performance even in aggressive conditions owing to have rich 
chromium content (i.e. minimum of 10.5%). Chromium provides the corrosion resistance through the 
formation of a thin self-regenerating chromium oxide film on the surface of the material in the 
presence of oxygen, resulting in a strong passive protective layer (Evans, 2002; Medina et al., 2015).  
It is shown that austenitic stainless steel reinforcement, particularly grades 1.4404 and 1.4301, have 
corrosion resistance 10 times better than that of carbon steels (Nurnberger, 1996; Garca-Alonso et al., 
2007). Duplex reinforcement generally demonstrates similar or even better corrosion resistance 
compared to that of the austenitic grade (Bertolini et al., 2002; Bautista et al., 2007; Serdar et al., 
2013). Fig. 2.2 demonstrates the corrosion behaviour of different stainless steel grades with reference 
to that of carbon steels. The influence of chloride concentration is given on the y-axis, whilst the 
influence of the PH value of concrete is given on the x-axis. It is obvious that carbon steel has poor 
corrosion resistance even at very low chloride contents. It is also very sensitive to the PH values as it 
becomes corroded once the PH value drops below 11. On the other hand, stainless steel reinforcement 
shows exceptional corrosion resistance even at very high chloride contents and low PH values.       
Fig. 2.2: Corrosion behaviour of different stainless steel reinforcements compared with carbon steels 
(Pietro et al., 1998). 
2.3.8 Fire behaviour  
One of the fundamental features for achieving fire-resistant structures is the capability of the material 
to retain stiffness and strength at elevated temperature. Stainless steels exhibit excellent stiffness and 
strength retention at elevated temperature owing to the advantageous of the chemical composition 
(Baddoo, 2008). There has been plentiful research into the behaviour of structural stainless steel in 
fire (e.g. Lopes et al., 2012; Tondini et al., 2013; Huang and Young, 2014; Fan et al., 2016) and much 
more limited research studies into the behaviour of stainless steel reinforcement at elevated 
temperature (e.g. Gardner et al., 2016). Moreover, there is an even greater dearth of research 
publications on the behaviour of stainless steel reinforced concrete under fire conditions. In fact, none 
have been found in the available literature.  
Fig. 2.3(a) and (b) present a comparison of the strength and stiffness retention factors between 
stainless steel grade 1.4301 and carbon steel at 0.2% proof stress, respectively. It is clear that stainless 
steel retains better strength and stiffness at elevated temperature compared with carbon steel. These 
distinctive features are extremely beneficial in the event of fire which provide the structure with the 
essential resistance required for a longer period. 
Fig. 2.3: Comparison of stainless steel and carbon steel (a) strength retention factor (b) stiffness 
retention factor (Baddoo, 2008). 
Fig. 2.4 shows the thermal expansion performance of duplex and austenitic stainless steel 
reinforcement compared with that of carbon steel, as well as concrete aggregates. It is clear that 
stainless steels demonstrate higher thermal expansion than that of carbon steel over the entire range of 
temperature included in this examination, and do not exhibit a phase-change plateau at 750 
C, like 
occurs for the carbon steel rebar. The thermal expansion performance of concrete is influenced by the 
type of aggregate. The figure shows that the thermal expansion of siliceous and calcareous aggregates 
increases gradually with temperature until around 700-800 
C, where it becomes constant owing to the 
changes in the chemical composition at these temperatures. Given that reinforced concrete elements 
rely on the effective development of composite action between the two constituent materials, namely 
concrete and the reinforcement, the greater thermal expansion properties of stainless steel may not be 
desirable during exposure to elevated temperature.  In this scenario, the higher coefficient of thermal 
expansion of stainless steel reinforcement compared with traditional carbon steel rebars may cause 
premature loss of bond between the two constituent materials, leading to greater cracking and more 
concrete spalling 
Fig. 2.4: Thermal expansion behaviour of austenitic and duplex stainless steels, carbon steel and 
aggregates (Gardner et al., 2016). 
2.3.9 Bond behaviour  
Bond is an essential property in the design of reinforced concrete structures. It is essential for ensuring 
that the composite action between the two constituent materials is achieved, thereby enabling loads to 
be efficiently carried. Inadequate steel-concrete bond can cause excessive slippage of the 
reinforcement resulting in serious cracking of the concrete, ineffective anchorage of the reinforcement 
bar as well as excessive deflections or rotations. Bond is a complex phenomenon owing to the many 
inter-related parameters that influence its development. The most influential parameters are the 
quality of the concrete and the surface geometry of the reinforcing bar. There are other relevant 
parameters also including the cover distance, clear space between adjacent bars, bar size, number of 
reinforcement layers and the direction of casting with respect to the orientation of the bars. 
There has been a limited research on the bond behaviour of stainless steel reinforcement in a corrosive 
environment (e.g. Calderon-Uriszar-Aldaca et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2017) and very few studies on the 
bond behaviour of stainless steel reinforcement in normal conditions, and these have even resulted in 
inconclusive results with one study showing that the bond developed by some austenitic and duplex 
stainless steel bars is lower than for similar carbon steel reinforcement (Aal Hassan, 2003) whilst 
other publications have shown the opposite finding (Ahlborn and DenHartigh, 2003; Johnson, 2010). 
Therefore, further research on the bond behaviour of stainless steel reinforcement in concrete is 
required.  
Most global design standards including Eurocode 2 and MC2010 do not provide specific design rules 
for bond in stainless steel reinforced concrete structures, and therefore designers typically use the 
same design rules developed for traditional carbon steel reinforcement when designing stainless steel 
reinforced concrete structures. Since it is reported that stainless steel may develop lower bond strength 
compared with carbon steel, this is not necessarily a safe strategy, unless specific experimental 
evidence is available.   
2.3.10 Applications of stainless steel reinforcement 
It is now recognised that reinforced concrete with carbon steel reinforcement may not be as durable in 
all conditions as was previously assumed (British Stainless Steel Association, 2003). In harsh 
environments such as marine or coastal locations, corrosion of carbon steel reinforcement can result in 
very expensive, challenging and inconvenient rehabilitation works. In this context, stainless steel 
reinforcement offers a durable and efficient alternative. One of the earliest examples of the use of 
stainless steel reinforcement is the Progresso Pier in Mexico, as shown in Fig. 2.5, which was 
constructed in the early 1940s using grade 1.4301 austenitic stainless steel. It has been in continuous 
service for over 70 years without any major repair or significant maintenance activities. The benefits 
of using stainless steel rebar are quite starkly visible in this image as, in the foreground, the remains 
of a carbon steel reinforced concrete pier are evident. This was built many years after the stainless 
steel reinforced concrete pier, but is clearly no longer in service.  
Stainless steel reinforcement has also been used in a number of other projects, including Stonecutters 
Bridge in Hong Kong and Sheik Zayed Bridge in Abu Dhabi, as shown in Fig. 2.6 and Fig. 2.7, 
respectively. These two bridges are reinforced with grade 1.4462 duplex stainless steel. Because of 
the relatively high initial cost, the stainless steel rebars are strategically placed and only used for the 
outer layer of the reinforcement in both projects, in the so-called splash zone. Grade 1.4436 stainless 
steel was used in the Highnam bridge widening project in the UK as well as the Broadmeadow Bridge 
in Ireland. One of the most high profile and recent applications of stainless steel rebar is in the 
Queensferry Crossing in Scotland which opened in 2017. As well as new construction, stainless steel 
reinforcement has also been used for renovation and restoration purposes. For example, austenitic 
grade 1.4301 stainless steel reinforcement was used to rehabilitate the pillars and stone arches of the 
Knucklas Rail Bridge (McGurn, 1998). In summary, the main usage of stainless steels is in 
applications that require high corrosion resistance and long life cycle owing to aggressive 
environment such as infrastructures and marine buildings. 
Fig. 2.5: The Progresso Pier in Mexico (Nickel Institute, 2018). 
Fig. 2.6: Stonecutters Bridge in Hong Kong (Thousandswonder, 2015). 
Fig. 2.7: Sheik Zayed Bridge in Abu Dhabi (Edvardsen, 2008). 
2.4 Design of RC structures using stainless steel reinforcement 
2.4.1 Constitutive relationship of stainless steel 
The constitutive behaviour of stainless steel is noticeably different than that of carbon steel, in that 
stainless steel exhibits a relative initial linear behaviour, particularly at a very early stage, followed by 
a rounded response, without a clearly defined yield point and with significant strain hardening and 
high ductility. In contrast, carbon steel exhibits a more linear relationship in the elastic range with a 
well-defined yield point, which is then followed by a moderate (even negligible) degree of stain 
hardening, as shown in Fig. 2.8. In the absence of a visible yield point, the typical value adopted in 
design is the 0.2% proof stress (0.2). 
Fig. 2.8: Typical stress-strain curves for carbon steel and stainless steel (Baddoo and Burgan, 2012). 
The modified Ramberg-Osgood (R-O) stainless steel material model (Mirambell and Real, 2000; 
Rasmussen, 2003), which is an extension of the original version proposed in 1943 (Ramberg and 
Osgood, 1943), is commonly used to represent stainless steels. It includes the two expressions 
presented in Eqs. (2.2) and (2.3), for the elastic and non-elastic stages of the behaviour, respectively:   
+ 0.002 (
                                                         for      0.2 
(2.2) 
 = 0.2 +
0.2
+ (u  0.2 
u0.2
0.2
u0.2
         for    0.2 <   u 
(2.3) 
In these expressions,  and  are the engineering strain and stress, respectively, E2 is the tangent 
modulus at the 0.2% proof stress point, u and u are the ultimate stress and corresponding strain, 
respectively, 0.2 is the strain corresponding to 0.2 and n and m are model constants related to the 
strain hardening behaviour.   
2.4.2 Current design of practice  
Currently, the majority of global design standards including Eurocode 2 do not incorporate an 
efficient design approach for RC members with stainless steel. In particular, they generally only 
include inappropriate material models for the reinforcement, such as an elastic-plastic stress-strain 
idealisation, which does not exploit the significant strain hardening and high ductility characteristics 
of stainless steel. This means that any contribution to the load capacity after the steel yield strength 
has been reached, is not considered in design. Although, this assumption could be acceptable for 
design traditional concrete structures reinforced with carbon steel, it results in inaccurate predictions 
for stainless steel RC members. It has been shown that design of stainless steel reinforced concrete 
members using the current design rules in Eurocode 2 can be either over- or under-conservative 
(Technical Research Centre of Finland, 2011). This is particularly because stainless steel exhibits a 
relatively nonlinear response in the elastic stage followed by significant strain hardening. Therefore, 
designing RC structures with stainless steel using the current design rules, which have been developed 
and verified for carbon steel reinforced concrete, is neither efficient nor accurate. 
2.4.3 Deformation-based design  
The continuous strength method (CSM) is a deformation-based design approach which harnesses the 
advantages of material strain hardening. A brief description of the method and its evolution in recent 
years is covered in this section while more details are presented in Chapter 4, where the method is 
further analysed and expanded. The CSM is based on replacing traditional cross-section classification 
with an assessment of the deformation capacity of the section, using a realistic material model. As 
such, the method predicts the cross-sectional resistance of the member depending on two main 
components: (1) a base curve that defines the relationship between the limiting strain at the ultimate 
load and the cross-section slenderness, and (2) a material model that allows for strain hardening 
(Theofanous et al., 2016). The approach was originally developed for stainless steel structural 
members with non-slender cross-sections (Gardner and Nethercot, 2004) and has been developed 
many times over the last 15 years to account for different conditions (e.g. Ashraf et al., 2008; Gardner 
et al., 2011; Lan et al., 2018). In recent years, the method has been adapted for composite construction 
including carbon steel-concrete composite beams (e.g. Gardner et al., 2017) and stainless steel-
concrete composite members with either a full and partial shear connection (e.g. Shamass and Cashell, 
2018).  
2.4.4 Design changes for durability requirements 
The main objective of considering the durability requirements in the design of concrete structures 
reinforced with carbon steel is to protect the reinforcement against aggressive conditions. Given the 
exceptional corrosion performance of stainless steel reinforcement, it is possible that these 
requirements may be relaxed including a reduction in the required concrete cover, an increase in the 
allowable design crack widths as well as illuminating the use of cement inhibitors and reinforcement 
coating during construction. Relaxing these requirements may result in a significant cost saving 
especially in large scale projects, as well as a more efficient use of materials. A number of 
modifications of the durability requirements have already been implemented in the design of 
highways structures and bridges (BA 84/02, 2003), as summarized in Table 2.6. 
Table 2.6: Design changes for durability requirements in highways structures and bridges (BA 84/02, 
2003). 
Design condition Relaxation 
Cover Cover for durability can be relaxed to 30 mm where stainless 
steel reinforcement is used irrespective of the concrete quality or 
exposure condition. 
Design crack width Allowable crack width increased to 0.3 mm 
Silane treatment Not required on elements with stainless steel reinforcement. 
2.5 Concluding remarks  
This chapter presents the state-of-the-art for the use of stainless steel as a structural material, and 
provides the context for the work in this thesis. It is shown that stainless steel is an exceptional 
construction material that has become an increasingly attractive choice for reinforced concrete 
structures owing principally to its excellent corrosion resistance, favourable mechanical properties, 
great ductility, long life cycle and recyclability. There are a number of inhibitors to stainless steel 
reinforcement not being more commonly employed in every-day reinforced concrete structures. 
Firstly, there is a perception amongst engineers that stainless steel reinforcement is prohibitively 
expensive. Although the initial cost of stainless steel is undoubtedly more expensive than carbon steel, 
over the life time of a structure if maintenance and rehabilitation costs are considered, then stainless 
steel provides a very competitive and efficient design option. Secondly, there is a lack of design 
guidance and performance data available in the public domain, mainly owing to this being a relatively 
new topic in structural engineering terms.  
Given the high initial cost of stainless steel, it is imperative that structurally efficient design solutions 
are made available which consider and exploit the distinctive and advantageous properties of stainless 
steel. However, current design codes such as Eurocode 2 do not incorporate an efficient approach for 
designing structures with stainless steel reinforcement and instead include inappropriate material 
models for the rebar which does not utilise the distinctive characteristics of stainless steel. Although, 
this assumption may be acceptable for carbon steel reinforced concrete, it gives very inaccurate 
predictions when stainless steel reinforcement is employed. This is mainly because stainless steel 
exhibits nonlinear behaviour from an early stage and also significant strain hardening. Therefore, 
designing stainless steel reinforced concrete members using the existing design rules which have been 
validated for carbon steel reinforced concrete structures is neither efficient nor accurate. 
It has also been observed that the bond behaviour of stainless steel reinforcement is barley discussed 
in the literature with very limited research, and inclusive and conflicting results. The current design 
standards such as Eurocode 2 and MC2010 do not include specific bond design rules for stainless 
steel reinforced concrete, and generally suggest using the same criteria as for traditional carbon steel 
reinforcement. Since it has been reported that stainless steel reinforcement may develop lower bond 
strength than carbon steel reinforcement, using the current bond design rules for designing stainless 
steel reinforced concrete structures without proper experimental data may not be a safe option.  
Chapter 3: Development and validation of the finite element model for 
simply supported reinforced concrete beams 
3.1 General 
Numerical modeling and computational power have advanced rapidly in recent years, making it the 
best choice to simulate complex experiments with minimum cost and time. Numerical modeling can 
handle arbitrary loading conditions, boundary conditions, non-linearities and time dependence with 
emphasis on the geometric complexities and material characteristics (Jamali et al., 2013). It provides a 
better understanding of reinforced concrete structures as it shows the deformation shape, load factor 
and crack pattern (Otieno, et al., 2011). It also provides high flexibility as parameters can be changed 
easily and salient parameters identified and studied.   
A finite element model has been developed using the general purpose finite-element analysis software 
Abaqus (Dassault Systmes, 2016) in order to examine the behaviour of stainless steel reinforced 
concrete beams, and to conduct further parametric studies. Abaqus offers a number of different 
solution strategies for complex nonlinear problems and in the current work, an implicit dynamic 
solution procedure is selected following a detailed literature survey (e.g. Shamass and Cashell, 2017; 
Cotsovos, 2013; Chen et al., 2015; Sunayana and Barai, 2019). It was found that this method can be 
used efficiently for quasi-static applications and has been shown to provide excellent convergence 
behaviour.  
Developing such numerical model typically involves serious challenges related to convergence 
problems owing to the complexity of the nonlinear behaviour of the composite materials. In order to 
overcome such problems, the following measures have been implemented: 
 An implicit dynamic solution is rather than general static. 
 A power stress-strain relationship is selected to model the softening tensile behaviour in 
concrete (this will be further discussed in next section). 
 The maximum numbers of iterations and the number of increments are taken as 15 and 
1000000, respectively.  
 Additionally, the initial increment size was taken as 0.01 with the minimum value of 110-15.  
In this chapter, details of the development and validation of the finite element model are discussed. 
3.2 Material behaviour  
3.2.1 Concrete  
A number of concrete material models are available in Abaqus including the smeared crack concrete 
model and the concrete damage plasticity (CDP) model. The former is based on reducing the stiffness 
of concrete elements when the stresses exceed the maximum tensile stress, while the latter considers 
the inelastic behaviour of concrete by defining damage factors in both compression and tension. The 
CDP model is selected in this study for simulating the concrete behaviour as it is more desirable in 
applications where the concrete is subject to static loads and has been used widely for similar 
applications in the literature (e.g. Earij et al., 2017; George et al., 2017; Solhmirzaei et al., 2017; Fan 
et al., 2018).  
The CDP model is based on continuum damage mechanics and considers two failure modes, namely 
cracking of the concrete in tension and crushing in compression. The material behaviour is defined in 
terms of the elastic, plastic, compressive and tensile properties.  In the current work, Poissons ratio 
and density of concrete are taken as 0.15 and 2400 kg/m
, respectively. For the compression 
behaviour, the model given in Eurocode 2 (EN 1992-1-1, 2004) is adopted, given as:  
c = (
k  2
1 + (k  2)
) fcm for 0  c  cu (3.1) 
In this expression, cu is the nominal ultimate strain and fcm is the ultimate compressive strength of 
concrete (in MPa), given by:  
fcm = fc + 8 (3.2) 
where fc is the characteristic cylinder strength. The parameters k and  are determined from Eqs. (3.3) 
and (3.4), respectively: 
k = 1.05Ec
(3.3) 
(3.4) 
in which Ec is the elastic modulus of concrete (in MPa) and c1 is the strain at the peak stress, 
determined from Eqs. (3.5) and (3.6):  
Ec = 22(0.1fcm)
0.3            (3.5) 
c1 = 0.7(fcm)
0.31  2.8 (3.6) 
The nominal ultimate strain (cu), as a percentage, is given by:  
cu = 2.8 + 27[(98  fcm)/100]
4     for      fc  50 N/mm
2,  otherwise  3.5 (3.7) 
The CDP model requires the compressive damage parameter (dc) to be defined at each inelastic strain 
increment (c
in), ranging from 0, for un-damaged material, to 1, when the concrete completely loses its 
load-bearing capacity. As shown in Fig. 3.1, this parameter is calculated for the descending branch of 
the stress-strain curve of concrete in compression as follows:  
dc = 0 for c < c1 (3.8) 
fcm  c
 for c  c1 
Fig. 3.1: CDP model for concrete in compression (Dassault Systmes, 2016). 
In tension, the concrete stress-strain behaviour is modelled as a linear relationship up to the ultimate 
tensile strength (cr) followed by a gradually descending branch, which inherently incorporates the 
effects of tension stiffening (Fig. 3.2). The effect of the bond between the rebar and the concrete is 
approximated within this tension stiffening branch. Tension stiffening refers to the phenomenon 
whereby concrete continues to carry some tensile load even after cracking has taken place, though the 
tensile strength gradually decreases with increasing tensile strain. This is captured within the 
descending branch of the concrete stress-strain model which, in Abaqus, can be described using a 
linear, bilinear or nonlinear relationship. In this study, the power stress-strain relationship proposed by 
Wang and Hsu (2001) is employed for the descending branch, as described in Fig. 3.2 and presented 
in Eq. (3.9). This nonlinear formula is found to be capable for providing accurate predictions of the 
experimental response and has also been used by other researchers in the literature (e.g. Kmiecik and 
Kamiski, 2011; Dede and Ayvaz, 2009):  
t = Ect if t  cr 
(3.9) 
t = ft(
)0.4  if t > cr 
The tensile strength (ft) can be obtained as follows (EN 1992-1-1., 2004): 
ft = 0.3(fc)
2/3 (3.10) 
Similar to the compression behaviour, the CDP model requires the tensile damage parameter (dt) to 
be defined as follows: 
dt = 0                                          t < cr 
(3.11) 
ft  t
t  cr 
Fig. 3.2: Post-failure stress-strain relationship proposed by (Wang and Hsu, 2001). 
In addition to the compressive and tensile constitutive relationships, the model makes use of the yield 
function of Lubliner et. al. (1989), with the modifications proposed by Lee and Fenves (1998), to 
account for different evolution of strength under tension and compression. The evolution of the yield 
surface is calculated by defining the ratio of the strength in the biaxial state to the strength in the 
uniaxial state (fb0/fc0) and the parameter K. The recommended default values in Abaqus manual are 
1.16 and 0.667 for (fb0/fc0) and K, respectively. A number of other parameters are required in order to 
define the CDP model including the eccentricity, viscosity parameter and dilation angle. 
Eccentricity is a parameter defines the rate at which the function approaches the asymptote (the flow 
potential tends to a straight line as the eccentricity tends to zero). A defualt value of 0.1 is selected for 
the eccentricity parameter. 
Viscocity parameter, also known as the viscous regularisation, is an internal property of a fluid that 
offers resistance to flow. This parameter is used in the FE analysis in order to minimize the 
computational time and suppress numerical instabilities due to convergence difficulties by permitting 
stresses to be outside of the yield surface (Dassault Systmes, 2016). However, the viscous 
regularisation must be used with extream cuation as the results might become quite inaccurate if a 
relatively large value is used. Hence, a defult value of zero is selected for the viscocity parameter.  
The dilation angle is the angle of internal friction of the material and is also related to the mechanisms 
of crack propoagations in the concrete during the plastic period. The dilitaon angle is taken as 36 
following other researchers in the literature (e.g. Shamass et al., 2014; Earij et al., 2017; Bypour et al., 
2019; Farzad et al., 2019). 
3.2.2 Reinforcement 
The stainless steel material is represented in the model using the modified Ramberg-Osgood material 
model described in Chapter 2 and presented in Fig. 3.3. On the other hand, the carbon steel material is 
modelled using an elastic perfectly-plastic model, as shown in Fig. 3.3. As stainless steel does not 
exhibit a clearly defined yield point, the 0.2% proof stress is used to define the yield stress. The stress-
strain relationships described in Eqs. (2.2) and (2.3) are employed to model the stainless steel 
constitutive relationship in Abaqus.  
Fig. 3.3: Typical material model for stainless steel and carbon steel reinforcements. 
Abaqus requires that the material properties are specified in terms of true stress (true) and strain (true) 
which can be derived from the engineering stress-strain curves as follows: 
true = (1 + ) 
true = ln (1 + ) 
(3.12) 
3.3 Element types and mesh  
In the model, the concrete elements are represented using 3D eight-node hexahedral elements which 
are known as C3D8 in the Abaqus library whereas the reinforcement is simulated using 2-node beam 
elements (B3). The reinforcement is embedded in the concrete. This means that if a node lies on the 
reinforcement which is embedded in the host element (e.g. concrete), the translational degrees of 
freedom at this node are eliminated and the node becomes embedded node. Thus, the translational 
degrees of freedom at each node of the reinforcement are constrained to the interpolated values of the 
corresponding degrees of freedom of the concrete element (Dassault Systmes, 2016). A mesh 
sensitivity study has been conducted to select the most appropriate size and it was found that elements 
which are 15 mm in size are the most appropriate in terms of achieving both computational accuracy 
and efficiency. For relatively small beams, a smaller element size of 10 mm is used. The mesh 
sensitivity study is discussed in more details in Section 3.6. 
3.4 Boundary and loading conditions    
The beam model is designed to simulate a four-point bending test arrangement where the loads are 
applied through a 3 cm wide surface in displacement control in order to avoid the local stress 
concentration, as shown in Fig. 3.4. There are pinned boundary conditions and therefore the beam 
ends are restrained against vertical displacement but allow movement at the other degrees of freedom. 
As the beam is symmetrical about both its longitudinal axis and along the length, it is only necessary 
to model a quarter of the beam, and use symmetrical boundary conditions along the length and also 
around the x-axis and z-axis at the mid-span to reduce the computational time and cost. 
Fig. 3.4: Position of the boundary and load surface on the model. 
3.5 Experimental results for validation 
The FE model is validated using five reinforced concrete beams from different experimental 
programmes, as presented in Table 3.1. Beams SS and B3 were reinforced with austenitic and duplex 
stainless steel rebars in grade 1.4311 and 1.4362, respectively. As these are the only two stainless 
steel reinforced concrete beam tests which have been found in the literature, three other beams 
containing carbon steel reinforcement are also included in the validation exercise for additional 
robustness. The details of geometry and reinforcement of these beams are shown in Fig. 3.5. 
Fig. 3.5: Geometrical and reinforcement details of the beams used in the validation study, including 
(a) B3 (Medina et al., 2015) (b) SS (Alih and Khelil, 2012), (c) SR6 (Dong et al., 2013), (d) U2 
(Alfano et al., 2011) and (e) O (Obaidat et al., 2011).  
All of the beams were tested under monotonic loading, in displacement control. Beams B3, SR6 and 
O were loaded continuously until failure. On the other hand, beam U2 was loaded until cracking 
occurred and then unloaded to zero before being reloaded up to failure. Beam SS was subjected to 
loading up to 80 kN before the test was stopped (the reason for stopping the test at this point is not 
known but it was possibly owing to the test machine capacity being reached). Table 3.1 presents the 
material properties of the concrete and the reinforcement for each of these beams, as provided in the 
literature. The elastic modulus and tensile strength of the concrete can be calculated using Eq. (3.5) 
and Eq. (3.10), respectively, for beams where this data was not provided. For beam SS, the exponent 
of 0.4 in Eq. (3.9 is changed to 0.3 in order to obtain better depiction of the experimental response. 
This is most likely because this grade of stainless steel reinforcement has a different bond relationship 
with the surrounding concrete compared with carbon steel rebar.   
Table 3.1: Material properties of the RC beams reported by (Medina et al., 2015; Alih and Khelil, 
2012; Dong et al., 2013; Alfano et al., 2011 and Obaidat et al., 2011.   
Beam Reinforcement Concrete 
Material Diameter 
Youngs 
modulus 
(kN/mm
Yield 
strength 
(N/mm
Ultimate 
strength 
(N/mm
Youngs 
modulus 
(N/mm
Compressive 
strength 
(N/mm
B3 Duplex 
stainless 
Steel 1.4362 
8 189 1003 1066 Not 
provided 
 (cylinder) 
SS Austenitic 
stainless steel 
1.4311 
20 177 480 773 37.6 50.0 
(cylinder) 
SR6 Carbon steel 14 200 410 Not 
provided 
provided 
(cube) 
U2 Carbon steel 12 205 380 Not 
provided 
26.0 19.4       
(cube) 
O Carbon steel 12 209 507 Not 
provided 
provided 
(cylinder) 
3.6 Mesh sensitivity analysis  
In numerical modelling, it is imperative to select a sufficiently fine mesh for achieving accurate 
results. A fine mesh provides more precise results than the coarse one but at higher computational 
cost. Therefore, it is extremely important to select an appropriate mesh size that provides accurate 
results at minimal computational costs. Hence a mesh sensitivity study is carried out through 
comparing the load-displacement curves form the numerical model with their corresponding 
experimental responses. Three experimental beam tests are selected for this purpose, two beams were 
reinforced with stainless steel (e.g. SS and B3) and one beam with carbon steel (e.g. SR6).  
Fig. 3.6 and Fig. 3.7 present the load-displacement curves obtained numerically for beams SR6 and 
SS, respectively, using three different mesh sizes (namely 10 mm, 15 mm and 20 mm) in comparison 
with their corresponding experimental responses. It is observed that the overall load-displacement 
responses obtained using these different meshes are generally in good agreement with experimental 
response. However, the coarse mesh tends to provide slightly stiffer response compared with the 
others in the early stages. It is found that mesh size 15 mm provides accurate predictions which are 
quite similar to that of 10 mm
mesh size, and therefore elements which are 15 mm in size have been 
selected in order to keep the computational cost to the minimum.  
Fig. 3.8  shows the moment-displacement curves obtained numerically for beam B3 using three 
different mesh sizes in comparison with the corresponding experimental response. It is observed that 
there is no considerable difference between the responses obtained using the three meshes in terms of 
the cracking load, initial stiffness and the ultimate load. However, in the post-failure region, it is 
observed that the models with mesh size 20 mm and 15 mm fail to capture the experimental response 
whilst the model with mesh size 10 mm exhibits a very good agreement with the experimental 
response, and therefore it has been selected for beams with relatively short span.  
Fig. 3.6: Mesh sensitivity analysis for beam SR6. 
Fig. 3.7: Mesh sensitivity analysis for beam SS. 
0 2 4 6 8 10
Displacement (mm)
SR6 (Dong et al., 2013)
10 mm mesh
15 mm mesh
20 mm mesh
0 2 4 6 8 10
Displacement (mm)
SS (Alih and Khelil, 2012)
10 mm mesh
15 mm mesh
20 mm mesh
Fig. 3.8: Mesh sensitivity analysis for beam B3. 
3.7 Failure criteria  
In the numerical analysis, it is typically assumed that ultimate failure of a normally reinforced 
concrete beam occurs when the outer fibre of the concrete in compression reaches the ultimate 
crushing strain (usually taken as 0.003 or 0.0035). This is likely to occur when the reinforcement 
material exhibits elastic perfectly-plastic stress-strain properties, because the compressive strain in the 
concrete at the top surface is reached after the reinforcement yields so the steel no longer contributes 
towards the ultimate bearing capacity of the section. However, this behaviour is different when the 
reinforcement is made from stainless steel rather than carbon steel, owing to the significant levels of 
strain hardening and ductility in the stainless steel, and the lack of a distinct yield point. Even when 
the concrete reaches the crushing strain at the top surface, the stainless steel reinforcement is still 
contributing towards the ultimate bearing capacity of the section. In addition, it is difficult to predict 
exactly when the concrete has crushed and therefore, it is necessary to make an assumption regarding 
the exact point at which the concrete is assumed to have failed (e.g. once the first node at the top 
surface reaches the assumed strain limit or all nodes on the top surface). In order to avoid this 
uncertainty, in the current work the maximum capacity of the section is taken at the ultimate load 
capacity of the section, in the same manner that this is commonly determined experimentally. 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Displacement (mm)
B3 (Medina et al., 2015)
10 mm mesh
15 mm mesh
20 mm mesh
3.8 Validation of the finite model 
3.8.1 Load-displacement response 
Fig. 3.9 presents the load-displacement curves obtained for beams SS, SR6, U2 and O from the FE 
model, together with the corresponding experimental data. Fig. 3.10 presents the moment-
displacement curve for beam B3, as this is the manner in which the experimental data is published 
(Medina et al., 2015). With reference to Fig. 3.9, it is observed that the model presents an excellent 
depiction of the overall behaviour in all cases. The key features such as initial stiffness, cracking 
point, and ultimate strength are in very good agreement. For all of the beams, the initial stiffness of 
the beams is slightly greater in the FE model data compared with the experimental response, most 
likely due to some localised cracking in the experiment which is not captured in the numerical 
simulations. For beam U2, the loading-unloading-reloading path is reasonably well simulated by the 
model although there is some disparity between the residual displacements (i.e. the displacements 
when the applied load returns to zero following the unloading phase) predicted (around 3.9 mm) and 
those that occurred in the test (1.53 mm). This is possibly due to differences in the way that the tensile 
behaviour of concrete is represented in the model, compared with the experimental performance. 
Fig. 3.9: Comparison between experimental and numerical load-displacement curves for beams SS 
(Alih and Khelil, 2012), SR6 (Dong et al., 2013), U2 (Alfano et al., 2011) and O (Obaidat et al., 
2011).   
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Displacement (mm)
Test results
FE resultsSR6
The results for beam B3 presented in Fig. 3.10 demonstrate that the FE model captures the ultimate 
moment quite well, with the disparity between the model predictions and the experimental data being 
around 2%. However, the stiffness response obtained numerically is greater than occurred during the 
experiment, which is most likely due to localised cracking again that is not captured exactly by the 
model. It is observed in the numerical model that the beam exhibits a sudden failure in the post-failure 
region owing to concrete crushing, this result is in line with the experimental response. In conclusion, 
a good agreement has been shown between the numerical load-displacement response and the 
experimental data. 
Fig. 3.10: Comparison between experimental and numerical moment-displacement curves for beam 
B3 (Medina et al., 2015). 
3.8.2 Crack pattern 
Fig. 3.11 (a) and (b) show the crack patterns obtained numerically and experimentally, respectively, 
for beam SR6 at the ultimate load, which occurred at a displacement of 3.7 mm (it is noteworthy that 
the FE model captures the opposite side of the beam than that is represented in Fig. 3.11 (b). This 
beam is selected for demonstration purposes and similar comparisons have been found for all of the 
other beams in this validation study, where the data is available in the literature. In the legend for Fig. 
3.11 (a), the term PE Max Principle as outputted by Abaqus refer to the tensile plastic strain values 
in the concrete which represent tensile cracks in the beam. In the FE analysis, two cracks develop in 
the constant-moment region (i.e. the region between the middle of the beam and the application of the 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Displacement (mm)
Test results
FE results
point load), comprising a large crack near the middle of the beam and another under the applied load. 
In addition, a number of cracks merge into one large diagonal crack in the high shear region (i.e. the 
area between the support and the application of the point load). Similarly, in the experimental image, 
one vertical crack formed in the constant-moment region, another short crack occurred below the 
applied load and a diagonal crack developed in the high shear region. 
Fig. 3.11: Crack patterns of beam SR6 obtained by the (a) numerical analysis and (b) experiment 
(Dong et al., 2013).
Fig. 3.12 and Fig. 3.13 present the crack patterns obtained numerically for the beams SS and B3, 
respectively, which are the beams reinforced with stainless steel; the experimental patterns are not 
included in the literature for these beams. With reference to beam SS, it is observed that a large 
number of cracks developed, which are well distributed along the length of the beam. On the other 
hand, in Fig. 3.13 for beam B3, it is shown that two cracks developed in the constant-moment region, 
one crack beneath the load point and four cracks in the shear region. The fewer number of cracks in 
this case, compared with SS, are mainly due to the shorter member length. 
Fig. 3.12: Crack patterns of beam SS obtained numerically. 
Fig. 3.13: Crack patterns of beam B3 obtained numerically. 
3.9 Concluding remarks  
In this chapter, the FE model has been developed using Abaqus software and validated using the 
available data in the literature. On the basis of data presented in the previous sections, it is concluded 
that the FE model developed in this study is capable of providing a good prediction of the behaviour 
of stainless steel and carbon steel reinforced concrete beams in terms of the ultimate load, load-
displacement response and crack propagation. There are some very small differences in terms of 
initial bending stiffness, but this is most likely due to localised cracking in the test which cannot be 
accurately assessed in the numerical model. 
Chapter 4: A new design method for stainless steel reinforced concrete 
beams 
4.1 Introduction  
One of the great advantages of stainless steel compared with carbon steel is the greater ductility and 
strain hardening capacity. Currently, the vast majority of global design standards, including 
Eurocode 2, do not include an efficient design model for concrete structures with stainless steel 
reinforcement as they neglect the ductility and strain hardening characteristics of stainless steel. 
Although this assumption is acceptable for carbon steel reinforced concrete, it gives inaccurate 
predictions when stainless steel reinforcement is employed. Extensive research into the behaviour of 
structural stainless steel has been reported in the literature including the flexural behaviour (e.g. Yang 
et al., 2016; Hassanein and Silvestre, 2013; Wang et al., 2014), compressive behaviour (e.g. Gardner 
and Theofanous, 2008; Huang and Young, 2014; Afshan and Gardner, 2013) and the mechanical 
characteristics (e.g. Ramberg and Osgood, 1943; Rasmussen, 2003). Although there has been 
extensive research in recent years into the behaviour of structural stainless steel, most of this has been 
on bare stainless steel sections, rather than reinforced concrete. Therefore, the aim of this chapter is to 
assess the behaviour and design of stainless steel reinforced concrete beams and to investigate the 
impact of neglecting strain hardening in the design roles given in Eurocode 2 on the load-bearing 
capacity. The novel contribution of this chapter is to develop and validate a new deformation-based 
design approach for stainless steel reinforced concrete beams including full and simplified analytical 
models in order to exploit the distinctive strain hardening properties of stainless steel reinforcement.   
4.2 Design of reinforced concrete beams in Eurocode 2   
In the design of reinforced concrete beams, Eurocode 2 assumes that the compression forces are 
resisted entirely by the concrete whereas the steel reinforcement carries the tension. The tensile 
strength of concrete is difficult to measure accurately and represents only about 10% of the 
compressive strength, so its contribution is usually ignored. Fig. 4.1 shows (a) a typical simple RC 
cross-section together with the corresponding (b) strain and (c and d) stress distributions, as assumed 
in Eurocode 2. In these figures, b and h are the width and depth of the beam, respectively, and y and d 
are the locations of the neutral axis and steel reinforcement from the top fibre of the beam, 
respectively. The strain in the concrete at the outer fibre is c whereas s is the reinforcement strain, 
and fc and s are the characteristic compressive stress of the concrete and tensile stress in the 
reinforcement, respectively. The failure mechanisms considered are either crushing of the concrete 
(i.e. when the strain at the outer fibre of the concrete reaches the ultimate crushing strain) or yielding 
of the reinforcement (i.e. when the strain in the steel reinforcement reaches its yield value). In 
accordance with the stress blocks presented in Fig. 4.1(d), any contribution to the load capacity after 
the steel yield strength has been reached, is not considered in design. Giving that the majority of 
global design standards including Eurocode 2 implement an elastic-plastic idealisation, the significant 
levels of strain hardening and great ductility of stainless steels would not be utilised.  
Fig. 4.1: Strain and stress distribution diagrams for a singly reinforced concrete beam including (a) the 
cross-section (b) the strain distribution through the section, (c) the stress distribution and (d) an 
equivalent stress distribution in the section, simplifying the concrete stress block. 
4.3 Stainless steel constitutive stressstrain relationships  
As stated previously, the stress-strain behaviour of stainless steel is quite different from that of carbon 
steel. Carbon steel has a linear elastic response with a well-defined yield point and yield plateau, 
followed by a moderate degree of strain hardening. On the other hand, stainless steel exhibits a 
predominantly non-linear and continuous stress-strain response without a clearly-defined yield point 
as well as significant levels of strain hardening. In the absence of a visible yield point, the typical 
value adopted is the 0.2% proof stress (0.2) which is determined by drawing a line with a slope equal 
to the elastic modulus (E) between 0.2% strain on the x-axis and the stress-strain curve.  
The relationships proposed by Ramberg-Osgood (1943) and updated by Mirambell & Real (2000) and 
Rasmussen (2003), are employed to represent the stress-strain relationship of stainless steel, as 
presented in Eq. (4.1), to define the stress-strain relationship of stainless steel up to the proof stress 
followed by Eq. (4.2) for greater levels of stress. 
+ 0.002 (
                                                 for      0.2 
(4.1) 
 = 0.2 +
0.2
+ (u  0.2 
u0.2
0.2
u0.2
   for    0.2 <   u 
(4.2) 
In these expressions,  and  are the engineering strain and stress, respectively, E2 is the tangent 
modulus at the 0.2% proof stress point, u and u are the ultimate stress and corresponding strain, 
respectively, 0.2 is the strain corresponding to 0.2 and n and m are model constants related to the 
strain hardening behaviour. 
4.3.1 Constitutive relationship comparison 
In order to build a greater understanding of the stress-strain characteristics of stainless steel 
reinforcement and to evaluate the deficiencies in current design rules, the experimental data presented 
in the literature (Gardner et al., 2016) is compared to the relationships obtained using the material 
model presented in equations (4.1) and (4.2), as well as the elastic-plastic material model currently 
provided in Eurocode 2. A number of different grades of austenitic and lean duplex stainless steel are 
considered, including grades 1.4162, 1. 4307 and 1.4311. Fig. 4.2 presents the experimental stress-
strain curves for stainless steel reinforcement tested by Gardner et al. (2016). The previously-
discussed nonlinear relationship is clear, with no defined yield point and a high degree of strain 
hardening. All of the tested grades exhibited excellent strength and ductility.  
Fig. 4.2: Stress-strain curves for different grades of stainless steel (Gardner et al., 2016). 
Fig. 4.3, Fig. 4.4 and Fig. 4.5 present the same experimental stress-strain curves as presented in Fig. 
4.2 (Gardner et al., 2016), together with the relationships obtained using the modified Ramberg-
Osgood material model and Eurocode 2, for grades 1.4162, grade 1.4307 and 1.4311, respectively. In 
these figures, both the overall response is presented as well as a closer view of the elastic portion of 
the behaviour. The parameters for these stress-strain curves are presented in Table 4.1. It is 
noteworthy that the steels are listed giving their European designation (i.e. 1.4XXX) as well as the 
commonly used AISI names, in brackets. Generally, it is shown that the modified Ramberg-Osgood 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Strain (%)
1.4162
1.4307
1.4311
model provides a better representation of the experimental behaviour for all stainless steel grades 
compared with Eurocode 2. Clearly, ignoring strain hardening in the material response leads to 
significant errors in the stress-strain curve. The modified Ramberg-Osgood (RO) model provides an 
excellent depiction of stainless steel grade 1.4311, however it slightly overestimates the stresses for 
lean duplex grade 1.4162, and slightly underestimates the response of austenitic stainless steel grade 
1.4307.  
Fig. 4.3: Stress-strain curves obtained experimentally and analytically for grade 1.4311 (a) full curve 
and (b) more detailed view of the elastic region. 
Fig. 4.4: Stress-strain curves obtained experimentally and analytically for grade 1.4162 (a) full curve 
and (b) more detailed view of the elastic region. 
Fig. 4.5: Stress-strain curves obtained experimentally and analytically for grade 1.4307 (a) full curve 
and (b) more detailed view of the elastic region.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Strain (%)
Gardner et al. (2016)
Modified RO
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Strain (%)
Gardner et al.
(2016)
Modified RO
0 10 20 30 40
Strain (%)
Gardner et al. (2016)
Modified RO
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Strain (%)
Gardner et
al. (2016)
Modified RO
0 10 20 30 40 50
Strain (%)
Gardner et al. (2016)
Modified RO
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Strain (%)
Gardner et
al. (2016)
Modified RO
Table 4.1: Material properties of stainless steel (Gardner et al., 2016).  
Stainless steel 
Grade Bar 
diameter 
(MPa) 
(MPa) 
(MPa) 
Austenitic 
1.4311 
(304LN) 
12 480 764 202600 38.6 4.7 4.8 
Lean duplex 
1.4162 
(LDX2101) 
12 682 874 199100 20.4 5.3 5.0 
Austenitic 
1.4307 
(304L) 
12 562 796 210200 30.7 4.7 4.8 
4.3.2 Effect of neglecting strain hardening on the load-bearing capacity 
In this section, the validated FE model described in the previous chapter is utilized to investigate the 
effect of neglecting strain hardening on the load-bearing capacity of concrete beams with stainless 
steel reinforcement by implementing the elastic-perfectly plastic material model provided currently in 
Eurocode 2 as well as the modified Ramberg-Osgood model which captures the strain hardening 
contribution. The numerical model is then used to study the influence of different stainless steel 
grades and concrete strengths on the overall behaviour. Beam SS is utilised herein for illustrative 
purposes as it was reinforced with stainless steel. The material properties of the stainless steel grades 
are given in Table 4.1.  
Fig. 4.6 presents the load-displacement curves obtained from the FE model using both material 
models. It can be clearly observed that there is an excellent agreement in all cases in terms of the 
initial stiffness and the cracking point, regardless of the model used for the stainless steel rebar. 
However, later in the response, there is a considerable difference in terms of the plastic behaviour as 
the simulation which employed the modified Ramberg-Osgood model exhibits significant strain 
hardening, whilst the response generated using the elastic-perfectly plastic material model from 
Eurocode 2 has a well-defined yield point followed by no strain hardening. The effect of including 
strain hardening in the analysis is clearly demonstrated by the significant difference in the ultimate 
loads. The beams reinforced with stainless steel grades 1.4311, 1.4162 and 1.4307 and depicted using 
the modified Ramberg-Osgood material model have load capacities which are 48.6, 24 and 37.17% 
greater than those modelled with the material model in Eurocode 2, respectively. These results 
emphasize the deficiency of the design rules in Eurocode 2 in predicting the load capacity for concrete 
beams with stainless steel mainly because of neglecting the significant strain hardening characteristic. 
However, there are other important parameters that govern design including deflections and safety 
factors, therefore a serviceability limit state analysis must be considered too.   
Fig. 4.6: The influence of the stainless steel material model on the load-displacement response for 
beams reinforced with (a) grade 1.4311, (b) grade 1.4162 and (c) grade 1.4307 stainless steel. 
0 10 20 30 40 50
Displacement (mm)
Modified RO
0 10 20 30 40 50
Displacement (mm)
Modified RO
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Displacement (mm)
Modified RO
Table 4.2 presents a comparison of the ultimate loads obtained numerically using either the 
reinforcement material model in Eurocode 2 or the modified RO material model for different grades 
of stainless steel and a range of concrete strengths. For all cases, the beams modelled in accordance 
with the modified Ramberg-Osgood model have an average of a 33% greater ultimate load capacity 
compared with those modelled using the Eurocode 2 approach. Moreover, using higher concrete 
strength results in an increase in the load capacity of the beams as illustrated in the final column in 
Table 4.2, owing to the improvement in compression capacity in concrete. These results emphasise 
that the design rules suggested by Eurocode 2 provide overly-conservative results and underestimate 
the capacity of the concrete beams reinforced with stainless steel. For this reason, designing stainless 
steel RC structures using the existing design rules is neither efficient nor reflective of the real 
behaviour. It is in this context that the current work is undertaken and a new approach for the design 
of reinforced concrete structures with stainless steel rebar is developed. 
Table 4.2: Comparison between the ultimate loads obtained numerically by implementing Eurocode 2 
and modified RO material models using beam SS with a width of 150 mm and a depth of 280 mm. 
Stainless steel 
grades 
Concrete 
grades 
Ultimate 
load using 
Eurocode 2 
material 
model (kN) 
Ultimate 
load using 
Modified RO 
material 
model (kN) 
Modified RO 
/ Eurocode 2 
1.4311 
30 59.6 78.9 +32.4 
40 62.2 91.4 +47.0 
50 63.1 93.7 +48.6 
1.4162 
30 84.9 101.5 +19.5 
40 86.3 104.9 +21.5 
50 86.6 107.4 +24.0 
1.4307 
30 71.2 94.1 +32.2 
40 71.9 97.1 +35.0 
50 72.7 99.7 +37.2 
4.4 New design method of stainless steel reinforced concrete beams 
4.4.1 Background to the Continuous Strength Method 
The Continuous Strength Method (CSM) is a deformation-based design method which has been 
developed in recent years to enable material strain hardening properties to be exploited, thus resulting 
in more accurate capacity predictions and more efficient design. The CSM was originally developed 
for the design of stainless steel members with non-slender cross-sections (Gardner and Nethercot, 
2004). Since then, it has been extended many times to cover the design of structural members made 
from stainless steel (e.g. Afshan and Gardner, 2013; Ashraf et al., 2008, carbon steel (e.g. Gardner, 
2008; Gardner et al., 2011; Liew and Gardner, 2015), aluminium (Su et al., 2016) and high strength 
steel (Lan et al., 2018). In recent years, the method has been adapted for composite construction 
including carbon steel-concrete composite beams (Gardner et al., 2017) and stainless steel-concrete 
composite members with either a full and partial shear connection (Shamass and Cashell, 2018).  
In the current work, a similar approach is adopted to develop a deformation-based design method for 
reinforced concrete beams with stainless steel rebar, allowing for the true stainless steel constitutive 
relationship. This is developed in two forms, first as a full model in which the whole material 
response is captured and then as a simplified model incorporating a more simplistic elastic-linear 
hardening stainless steel constitutive response.  
4.4.2 Material models  
The full and simplified version of the proposed CSM design model use two different material models 
for representing the stainless steel reinforcement. The modified Ramberg-Osgood stainless steel 
material model presented previously in Eqs. (4.1) and (4.2) and depicted in Fig. 4.7, is used for the 
full CSM analysis. Whilst, the simplified CSM employs a bilinear, elastic-linear hardening stress-
strain relationship for the stainless steel rebar, as shown in Fig. 4.7, in order to avoid the need to solve 
complex nonlinear equations. In this approach, the yield point is identified as the 0.2% proof stress 
and the corresponding yield strain (i.e. 0.2 and y =
,  respectively). The slope of the strain 
hardening region (Esh) is obtained from the line passing through the yield point (y, 0.2) and the 
defined ultimate point (C2u, u), as defined in Eq. (4.3). It has been found that a value of 0.15 is an 
appropriate value for the constant C2 in the current work, in agreement with previous CSM 
developments (Afshan and Gardner, 2013).  
Esh =
u  0.2
C2u  y
(4.3) 
Fig. 4.7: The simplified material model for stainless steel with reference to the modified R-O model. 
4.4.3 Flexural capacity of stainless steel reinforced concrete beams  
4.4.3.1 Full analytical model 
In this section, the continuous strength method (CSM) is developed to analyse the behaviour of 
stainless steel reinforced concrete beams, using the modified Ramberg-Osgood relationship described 
in Eqs. (4.1) and (4.2) to model the rebars. The plastic bending moment capacity is obtained by 
locating the neutral axis (NA) and then applying the equilibrium of internal force equations to the 
cross-section of the beam. In order to idealise the behaviour, the following assumptions are made in 
the analytical model, in accordance with Eurocode 2: 
[1] The nominal ultimate strain of the concrete (cu) is assumed to be 0.0035 for material with a 
compressive strength less than 50 N/mm
, otherwise it is determined using Eq. (4.4): 
cu = 2.6 + 35[(98  fcm)/100]
4 (4.4) 
[2] As presented in Fig. 4.1(d), an equivalent rectangular stress distribution is assumed for the 
concrete in compression. The effective strength of the concrete is 0.85fc, where fc is the 
characteristic compressive strength of the concrete, and the effective height of the 
compression zone is 0.8y, where y is the distance from the NA to the top fibre of the cross-
section.   
The material model for stainless steel given in Eqs. (4.1) and (4.2) provides strain as a function of 
stress. However, in order to implement the material model in conjunction with the design method, it is 
necessary to identify the stress as a function of strain, which requires a numerical procedure. In the 
current work, the approximate inversion relationship proposed by Abdella (2006) for the full stress-
strain relationship of stainless steel is employed to describe the stress () as an explicit function of 
strain (), as presented in the Eqs. (4.5) and (4.6): 
1() = 0.2
1+(r1)(
p                           for      0.2 (4.5) 
2() = 0.2
1+(r1) (
        for  > 0.2 (4.6) 
where the material parameters are: 
0.2 =
+ 0.002 r =
E 0.2
1 + 0.002 n/e
 p = r
1  r2
r  1
 m = 1 + 3.5
u = 0.2
1  0.0375(n  5)
0.2 + 185e
1 + (r  1)m
E2 0.2
Eu(u  0.2)
u  0.2
u = min (1 
p = r
1  ru
r  1
E2(u  0.2)
u  0.2
In these expressions, A is the stainless steel elongation, E2 and Eu are the slope of the stress-strain 
curve at 0.2 and u, respectively, and r, r2, r*, ru, p, p* and m are parameters that need to be 
determined. 
For calculating the bending moment capacity of a singly reinforced beam, there are two possible 
cases. Case 1 is when the tensile strain of the reinforcement is less than the total strain corresponding 
to 0.2 (i.e. s  0.2) and Case 2 is when the tensile strain of the reinforcement is greater than the total 
strain corresponding to 0.2 (i.e. s > 0.2). The internal tensile and compressive forces in the cross-
section are calculated based on the full stainless steel stress-strain material model and the equivalent 
rectangular compressive stress distribution in the concrete, together with the strain distribution in the 
section. In order to determine the tensile stress in the reinforcement at failure of the beam, the strain 
can be calculated from the strain distribution in Fig. 4.1(d), as follows: 
s = (d  y)                       (4.7) 
 = min(su, cu) (4.8) 
where su is the limiting curvature for stainless steel failure and cu is the limiting curvature for 
concrete failure (i.e. when the strain at the top fibre of the beam reaches the ultimate strain of 
concrete). There are two possible failure modes, defined by su and cu. If  su < cu, the beam fails due 
to rupture of the stainless steel reinforcement whereas if  su > cu, the reinforced beam fails due to 
concrete crushing. The values of su and cu are determined as: 
su =
d  y
cu =
(4.9) 
From equilibrium of the internal forces in the beam, the sum of the tensile forces (Ft) and the 
compression forces (Fc) must equal zero: 
Fc  Ft = 0    (4.10) 
The tension force is determined as the product of the steel area (As) and the stress in the stainless steel 
(s): 
Ft = Ass (4.11) 
and the compression force is found using the equivalent rectangular stress block presented in Fig. 
4.1(d), to give: 
Fc = 0.85fc(0.8y)b (4.12) 
Substituting Eq. (4.12) and Eq. (4.11) into Eq. (4.10) gives: 
0.68fcy b  Ass = 0               or  
0.68fc b
(4.13) 
When the stainless steel strain is less than 0.2 (i.e. s  0.2), the tensile stress in the reinforcement at 
d is determined by substituting Eq. (4.7) into Eq. (4.5) to give: 
s = 1(y) = 0.2
(dy)
1+(r1)(
(dy)
(4.14) 
which can be used together with Eq. (4.13) to obtain y, the depth of the neutral axis measured from 
the top fibre of the beam. Since the stress 1(y) is a nonlinear function of the variable y, Eq. (4.13) 
and Eq. (4.14) create a nonlinear problem which must be solved using an iterative method. Once the 
position of the neutral axis, y, is located, the assumption of s  0.2 must be checked by calculating 
the strain in the stainless steel using Eq. (4.7). If the assumption is correct, the plastic bending 
moment capacity of the beam is calculated by taking moments about the position that the compressive 
internal force in the concrete acts, as follows: 
Mpl = Ass(d  0.4y) (4.15) 
where s is the tensile stress in the stainless steel calculated from Eq. (4.14) and corresponding to the 
obtained neutral axis depth, y. 
If the stainless steel strain is higher than the strain corresponding to 0.2 (i.e. s > 0.2), the tensile 
stress of the reinforcement can be obtained by substituting Eq. (4.7) into Eq. (4.6) to give: 
s = 2(y) = 0.2
(dy)
1+(r1) (
(dy)
(4.16) 
The position of the neutral axis (y) can then be obtained, as before, using the equilibrium of internal 
forces (i.e. Eq. (4.13)) and substituting the tensile stress obtained from Eq. (4.16) into Eq. (4.13). 
Once the position of neutral axis is known, the plastic bending capacity is calculated by taking 
moments about the position of the compression force, and is given in the Eq. (4.15). As before, s is 
the tensile stress in the stainless steel calculated from Eq. (4.16) and corresponding to the calculated 
value of y. A flow chart presenting the full procedure for determining the neutral axis and the plastic 
bending moment capacity is given in Fig. 4.8. 
Fig. 4.8: Flow chart of the solution procedure for a singly reinforced concrete beam. 
4.4.3.2 Simplified analytical model   
In the previous section, a detailed analytical solution was presented to predict the plastic bending 
moment capacity of stainless steel reinforced concrete beams, incorporating the full stress-strain 
behaviour of the stainless steel material. This method involves a solution of complex nonlinear 
equations requiring iterative methods to obtain the position of the neutral axis, which may not be a 
straightforward procedure for designers. Therefore, in this current section, a simplified analytical 
solution is developed based on a simpler material model for the stainless steel, as described in 
Section 4.4.2 and Fig. 4.7. The other initial assumption in the simplified model is that the section 
always fails due to concrete crushing (i.e. su > cu), which is a legitimate assumption for concrete 
beams reinforced with stainless steel rebar owing to its ductility. Hence, the tensile strain of the 
reinforcement at the failure of the section is determined from the strain distribution in Fig. 4.1(b) as 
follows:  
 (d  y)   (4.17) 
The tensile stress of the stainless steel can be calculated from the simplified material model presented 
in Fig. 4.7, in accordance with Eqs. (4.18) and (4.19) hereafter: 
s = Es s  y (4.18) 
s = 0.2 + Esh(s  y) s >   (4.19) 
There are two possible cases for prediction of the bending moment capacity of reinforced beam. 
Case 1 is when the tensile strain of the reinforcement is less than the yield strain (i.e. s  y) and 
Case 2 is when the tensile strain of the reinforcement is higher than the yield strain (i.e. s > y). For 
Case 1, when the strain in the stainless steel is less than y (i.e. s  y), the tensile stress in the 
reinforcement at d is determined by substituting Eq. (4.17) into Eq. (4.18) to give: 
s = E
 (d  y)   (4.20) 
which can be used together with Eq. (4.13) to give: 
0.68fc y b  AsE
 (d  y) = 0                (4.21) 
This can be simplified to Eq. (4.22): 
0.68fcby
2 + AcuEy  AscudE = 0 (4.22) 
Once the position of the neutral axis (y) is located by solving this quadratic equation, the assumption 
of s  y must be checked by calculating the strain in the stainless steel using Eq. (4.17). If the 
assumption is correct, the plastic bending moment capacity of the beam is calculated by taking 
moments about the position of the compressive internal force in the concrete using Eq. (4.15) where 
s is the tensile stress in the stainless steel calculated from Eq. (4.20). 
If the stainless steel strain is higher than the yield strain (i.e. s > y), the tensile stress of the 
reinforcement can be obtained by substituting Eq. (4.17) into Eq. (4.19) to give: 
s = 0.2 + Esh  (
 (d  y)  y)   
(4.23) 
As before, the position of the neutral axis is located using the equilibrium of the internal forces by 
substituting the tensile stress obtained from Eq. (4.23) into Eq. (4.13) to give: 
 0.68fcy b  As (0.2 + Esh  (
 (d  y)  y)) = 0                
(4.24) 
This can simplified, as follows: 
0.68fcb y
2 + (Eshcu + Eshy  0.2)As y  AsEshcud = 0 (4.25) 
Once the position of the neutral axis is located using Eq. (4.25), the plastic bending moment capacity 
is calculated as given in Eq. (4.15) where s is the tensile stress in the stainless steel calculated from 
Eq. (4.23). In both cases, the assumption of su > cu must be checked to ensure that the beam section 
fails due to concrete crushing.   
In the case that the limiting curvature for stainless steel is less than that of the concrete (i.e. su <cu), 
the beam fails due to the rupture of stainless steel reinforcement, which should be very rare in reality 
or even impossible. In this scenario, the tensile strain of the reinforcement at failure of the section is 
its ultimate tensile strain, as given in Eq. (4.26):  
s = u (4.26) 
The tensile stress of the stainless steel is determined by substituting Eq. (4.26) in to Eq. (4.19) to give: 
s = 0.2 + Esh(u  y)  (4.27) 
As before, the position of the neutral axis is located by applying the equilibrium of internal forces 
criteria, and substituting the tensile stress obtained from Eq. (4.27) into Eq. (4.13) to give: 
0.68fcky b  As(0.2 + Esh(u  y)) = 0    (4.28) 
Again, once the position of the neutral axis is located using Eq. (4.28), the plastic bending moment 
capacity is calculated as given in Eq. (4.15) where s is the tensile stress in the stainless steel 
calculated from Eq. (4.27).           
4.5 Validation of the proposed analytical models 
Both the full and simplified analytical models described previously are validated herein using the FE 
model, by comparing the predicted bending capacities. In order to obtain a robust validation, both of 
the reinforced concrete beams which included stainless steel rebar, i.e. SS and B3, are studied. A 
number of different concrete strengths are used in the analysis (i.e. C26, C30, C40, C50). 
Additionally, three different grades of stainless steel are investigated using the data presented by 
Gardner et al. (2016), which is presented in Table 4.1. Both beams B3 and SS are selected for further 
analysis in which a number of different geometric properties are varied, in order to assess their 
influence on the response. These parameters are detailed in Table 4.3.  
Table 4.3: Range of geometrical parameters included in the study. 
Width (mm) Depth  (mm) Bar diameter (mm) 
100-150 125-255 8-12 
Table 4.4 and Table 4.5 present the bending moment capacity obtained from the proposed full 
analytical method (AM), the simplified analytical method (SM) and the numerical analysis (FE) as 
well as the values determined using the design method provided in Eurocode 2 (EC2), for beam SS 
and B3, respectively. In the Eurocode calculation, it is assumed that the stainless steel material model 
is elastic-perfectly plastic. In addition, the bending moment capacity predicted using both the full and 
the simplified analytical solutions are presented together in Fig. 4.9. This figure also includes the 
equation for the tendency of the data, as well as the R
 (coefficient of determination).  
Table 4.4: Comparison between the ultimate bending moment capacity of the numerical and that of 
the analytical analysis for beam SS. 
Stainless 
steel grade 
diameter 
Concrete 
strength 
(kNm) 
(kNm) 
(kNm) 
(kNm) 
EC2 / 
FE (%) 
AM / FE 
1.4311 
(304LN) 
30 26.15 31.95 39.56 30.20 -33.89 -19.23 
40 26.53 33.44 41.11 32.25 -35.47 -18.67 
50 26.76 34.49 42.20 34.04 -36.59 -18.27 
1. 4162 
(LDX2101) 
30 36.23 40.01 45.79 39.35 -20.88 -12.62 
40 37.00 41.78 47.21 41.88 -21.63 -11.51 
50 37.47 42.92 48.37 44.01 -22.54 -11.27 
1.4307 
(304L) 
30 30.30 35.13 42.36 33.76 -28.48 -17.07 
40 30.83 36.66 43.71 35.88 -29.47 -16.13 
50 31.15 37.69 44.87 37.70 -30.58 -16.01 
Table 4.5: Comparison between the ultimate bending moment capacity of the numerical and that of 
the analytical analysis for beam B3. 
Stainless 
steel grade 
Diameter 
Concrete 
strength 
(kNm) 
(kNm) 
(kNm) 
(kNm) 
EC2 / 
FE (%) 
AM / FE 
1.4362 (AIS 
2304) 
27 10.45 9.79 11.12 10.45 -6.03 -11.92 
40 11.61 11.84 12.32 11.68 -5.76 -3.90 
1.4311 
(304LN) 
27 11.51 11.37 11.54 11.65 -0.26 -1.49 
40 12.38 13.50 15.11 12.94 -18.06 -10.64 
1. 4162 
(LDX2101) 
27 13.11 12.33 11.43 13.11 14.70 7.88 
40 16.55 15.98 17.32 16.69 -4.43 -7.73 
1.4307 
(304L) 
27 12.95 11.98 11.22 12.98 15.42 6.81 
40 14.15 14.78 17.02 14.52 -16.86 -13.16 
Fig. 4.9: Comparison between the results obtained using the full and simplified analytical solution. 
y = 0.9898x + 0.3172
R = 0.9926
0 10 20 30 40 50
MAM (kNm)
Based on the data presented in Table 4.4 and Table 4.5 and Fig. 4.9, the following general 
observations are made: 
 A very good agreement is obtained between the numerical analysis and the proposed full 
analytical method in almost all cases, with the maximum and average AM/FE values being -
19% and -15.6%, respectively, for beam SS and -13% and -4.3%, respectively, for beam B3. 
These same values using the Eurocode 2 design rules (EC2/FE) are -37% and -28.8% for SS 
and -18% and -2.7% for B3. Clearly, the full analytical design method, based on 
determination of limiting deformations, provides more accurate and realistic moment 
capacities.  
 For beam SS (Table 4.4) the full analytical method underestimates the bending moment 
capacity in all cases, similarly for beam B3 (Table 4.5), the predicted analytical results are 
below the numerical results in all cases, except two values. 
 For beam SS, it can be seen that the proposed full analytical method improves the bending 
capacity of the section in average by around 19.0% compared to the current design approach 
in EC2 whilst no improvement is found for beam B3. In the latter case, the relatively lower 
prediction using the analytical model rather than existing design rules in some cases is due to 
the fact that the stresses in the rebar are lower than their proof stress, as shown by the values 
presented in Table 4.6, when the beam reaches to the maximum loading capacity. Therefore, 
these beams were not designed to exploit the strain hardening qualities of the stainless steel as 
concrete failure dominates. 
 With reference to Fig. 4.9, it is observed that the predictions of the bending moment capacity 
obtained using the simplified analytical solution are in very good agreement with those 
obtained using full analytical solution. In all cases, the simplified predictions fluctuate above 
and below the prediction of the full analytical model. Therefore, it is concluded that the 
simplified solution is adequate for predicting the bending moment capacity for stainless steel 
RC beams. 
By implementing these proposed analytical solutions for the design of concrete beams reinforced with 
stainless steel, the distinctive strain hardening properties of stainless steel are exploited, thus 
improving the capacity and ductility of the beams in design. At ultimate load capacity, the beam 
section is more likely to fail by the crushing of concrete rather than the rupture stainless steel. Hence, 
the strain hardening capacity of the stainless steel reinforcements would not be fully exploited 
compared with stainless steel structural elements. Nevertheless, the results presented in Table 4.4 and 
Table 4.5  illustrate the capability of the proposed methods for providing a more accurate and efficient 
bending moment capacity over a wide range of concrete strengths and stainless steel grades, compared 
to the traditional design method. 
Table 4.6: Rebar stresses compared to their proof stresses for beam B3. 
Grade of 
stainless steel 
Reinforcement 
diameter  (mm) 
Concrete 
grade 
Stress in the 
reinforcement 
(N/mm
Reinforcement 
proof strength 
(N/mm
1.4362 (AIS 
2304) 
27 879.88 1003 
40 1023.88 1003 
1.4311 
(304LN) 
27 472.79 480 
40 529 480 
1. 4162 
(LDX2101) 
27 525.63 682 
40 652.72 682 
1.4307 
(304L) 
27 505.74 562 
40 590.24 562 
4.6 Concluding remarks  
This chapter has presented a detailed study on the behaviour of stainless steel reinforced concrete 
beams. It is now clear that the design rules in Eurocode 2 ignore the significant strain hardening 
characteristics and high levels of ductility that stainless steel offers. This design approach provides 
over-conservative and inaccurate predictions of the section capacity. Therefore, a new deformation-
based design method is proposed including full and simplified approach which incorporates the 
distinctive strain hardening characteristics of stainless steel in design of reinforced concrete beams. 
The proposed methods have been validated and shown to be effective design tools for stainless steel 
reinforced concrete beams. 
Chapter 5: Parametric study 
5.1 Introduction 
This chapter further develops and analyses the behaviour and design of stainless steel reinforced 
concrete beams with reference to the current design provisions in Eurocode 2. Building on the 
previous chapter, the CSM approach is examined over an extensive range of parameters, with 
emphasis given to the geometry of the section, reinforcement ratio and also deflections, in the context 
of the nonlinear stress-strain behaviour. Around 100 numerical simulations have been conducted to 
investigate the influence that the design parameters have on the exploitation of strain hardening and 
ductility of the stainless steel reinforcement in the section. Moreover, the serviceability limit state is 
also explored through a detailed analysis of the deflection behaviour. 
5.2 Range of parameters  
All of the members in this study are assumed to be simply supported beams under four-point loading 
conditions and have a clear span of 3300 mm in order to avoid shear failure in the beam. The full 
range of parameters examined is presented in Table 5.1. Four different concrete strengths are used in 
the analysis (i.e. C20, C30, C40 and C50). In addition, three different grades of stainless steel, 
including two austenitic grades (1.4311 and 1.4311) and one lean duplex stainless steel (grade 
1.4162), are studied using the material data presented by Gardner et al. (2016). This data is given in 
Table 4.1, including the n and m parameters required for application of the modified Ramberg-
Osgood material model.  
Table 5.1: Range of geometrical parameters included in the study. 
Parameter Range examined 
Concrete grade C20, C30, C40, C50 
Grade of stainless steel reinforcement 1.4311, 1.4162 and 1.4307 
Width/height (b/h) ratio of the beam  0.55 to 1 
Diameter of the reinforcement 12 mm and 20 mm 
Reinforcement ratio (%) 0.187  5.2 % 
5.3 Bending moment capacity predictions 
Fig. 5.1, Fig. 5.2 and Fig. 5.3 present the bending moment predictions obtained from the proposed full 
analytical model (AM), the simplified analytical model (SM) and the numerical model (FE) as well as 
those obtained using the design method provided in Eurocode 2 (i.e. elastic-perfectly-plastic 
behaviour of the material is assumed), for beams reinforced with stainless steel grades 1.4311, 1.4162, 
1.4307, respectively. The results are presented in terms of bending moment versus concrete strength 
(fc), to highlight how this parameter influences the behaviour.  
(a) (b) 
(c) (d) 
Fig. 5.1: Bending moment predictions for beams with grade 1.4311 austenitic stainless steel using a 
b/h ratio of (a) 1.00 (b) 0.85 (c) 0.70 and (d) 0.55. 
15 25 35 45 55
fc (N/mm
FE AM SM
SM-I EC2
15 25 35 45 55
fc (N/mm
FE AM SM
SM-I EC2
15 25 35 45 55
fc (N/mm
FE AM SM
SM-I EC2
15 25 35 45 55
fc (N/mm
FE AM SM
SM-I EC2
(a) (b) 
(c) (d) 
Fig. 5.2: Bending moment predictions for beams with grade 1.4162 duplex stainless steel using a b/h 
ratio of (a) 1.00 (b) 0.85 (c) 0.70 and (d) 0.55. 
15 25 35 45 55
fc (N/mm
FE AM SM
SM-I EC2
15 25 35 45 55
fc (N/mm
FE AM SM
SM-I EC2
15 25 35 45 55
fc (N/mm
FE AM SM
SM-I EC2
15 25 35 45 55
fc (N/mm
FE AM SM
SM-I EC2
(a) (b) 
(c) (d) 
Fig. 5.3: Bending moment predictions for beams with grade 1.4307 austenitic stainless steel using a 
b/h ratio of (a) 1.00 (b) 0.85 (c) 0.7 and (d) 0.55. 
The figures show a good agreement between the results obtained numerically with those calculated 
using the full proposed analytical model with average and maximum AM/FE values being -14.9% and 
-22.3% whilst these same values obtained using the Eurocode 2 design rules are -28.3% and -44.77%, 
respectively. It is noteworthy that a negative value for the AM/FE ratio indicates a conservative result 
from the analytical model. Clearly, the Eurocode 2 design rules provide an overly conservative 
prediction of the ultimate bending moment capacity, whereas the full analytical design model 
provides less conservative yet more accurate and realistic results. There is still some disparity between 
the analytical and numerical results, which is most likely owing to some of the simplifications in the 
analytical model. These include the assumption that concrete does not contribute to the load carrying 
15 25 35 45 55
fc (N/mm
FE AM SM
SM-I EC2
15 25 35 45 55
fc (N/mm
FE AM SM
SM-I EC2
15 25 35 45 55
fc (N/mm
FE AM SM
SM-I EC2
15 25 35 45 55
fc (N/mm
FE AM SM
SM-I EC2
capacity in tension and also the idealisation of rectangular stress blocks. Nevertheless, the results are 
better than the existing design provisions, and remain on the conservative side consistently. 
The simplified analytical model which incorporates the bilinear stress-strain curve for the stainless 
steel, also provides conservative predictions for the bending moment capacity in most cases with the 
average and maximum SM/FE values being -9.9% and -26.8%, respectively. It is noteworthy that the 
simplified analytical model provides less conservative results overall compared with the full 
analytical model mainly because the simplified material model has greater slope in the strain 
hardening portion. In addition, in a small number of cases when beams have a relatively low b/h ratio 
and are made using high strength concrete and grade 1.4162 stainless steel, the simplified analytical 
model tends to overestimate the bending moment capacity compared with the numerical results, 
which slightly skews the average and maximum SM/FE values given before. Therefore, it is necessary 
to recalibrate the simplified method in order to achieve better agreement with full method predictions, 
and to provide conservative predictions for all cases, as discussed in the following section.   
5.3.1 Proposed modifications into the simplified analytical model  
In this section, the slope of the strain hardening portion of the stainless steel constitutive relationship 
is modified to improve the accuracy of the simplified analytical model, especially for the cases 
highlighted in the previous section where slightly unconservative results were obtained. This is 
achieved by recalibrating the C2 parameter in Eq. (4.3) based on the extensive range of the full 
analytical data obtained. Since different stainless steel grades have their own mechanical properties, 
an optimization study for the C2 parameter is conducted individually for each material type. 
Consequently, it has been found that the most accurate bending moment predictions for the full range 
of parameters examined in the current study are achieved using a C2 value of 0.25 for beams with 
austenitic stainless steel grades 1.4311 and 1.4307, and 0.3 for beams with lean duplex stainless steel 
grade 1.4162. This is reasonably acceptable as a higher value of C2 results in a lower Esh value and 
hence lower strain hardening capacity, as is the case for lean duplex stainless steel compared with the 
austenitic grades.  
The results of the simplified analytical model predicted using the new proposed values for C2 
(denoted as SM-I) are presented in Fig. 5.1, Fig. 5.2 and Fig. 5.3, for beams made using grade 1.4311, 
1.4162 and 1.4307 stainless steel, respectively. The figure also presents the data from the previous C2 
value of 0.15 (SM in the figures). It is observed that the simplified analytical model predictions with 
the newly proposed C2 values are in excellent agreement with the predictions of the full analytical 
model. The average and maximum SM-I/AM ratios are -2.8% and -17.2%, respectively, whilst these 
same values for SM/AM are 5.9% and 34.5%, respectively. This also ensures that the simplified 
predictions are below that of the numerical model, for all examined cases. Therefore, the proposed 
values for C2 parameter are implemented in the simplified analytical model for all the results 
presented in the following sections.  
5.4 Influence of concrete strength 
The results presented in Fig. 5.1, Fig. 5.2 and Fig. 5.3 exhibit the influence that concrete strength has 
on the ultimate bending moment capacity for a range of beam geometries and different grades of 
stainless steel. It is observed that the ultimate bending moment capacity obtained using the numerical 
model and the full analytical model improves by around 8% on average, respectively, when the 
concrete strength is increased from 20 to 50 MPa, for all cases considered. Whilst this same value for 
the simplified analytical model is 21.5%. Clearly, the ultimate bending moment calculated from the 
simplified analytical model is more influenced by the strength of concrete compared with those 
obtained using the numerical or the full analytical models. This is perhaps owing to the simplified bi-
linear material behaviour of the stainless steel employed in the simplified material model which, for 
beams made from a relatively higher concrete strength, enables the reinforcement to carry further 
tensile forces prior concrete crushing failure. Despite this, all the predictions of the simplified method 
are currently lower than the numerical values, considering the new proposed values for the C2 
parameter.  
The effect of concrete strength on the load-displacement response is illustrated in Fig. 5.4, Fig. 5.5 
and Fig. 5.6 for beams made using stainless steel reinforcement in grade 1.4311, 1.4162 and 1.4307, 
respectively. The section used in this analysis is 300 mm in width and 545 mm in height (i.e. the b/h 
ratio is 0.55). The concrete strength is varied between 20 and 50 MPa. It is clear that as expected, the 
initial bending stiffness, crack load (i.e. identified as the load in which the slope of the load-
displacement curve begins to change) and ultimate load of the beam is improved by increasing the 
strength of concrete, for all cases. For example, increasing the strength of concrete from 20 MPa to 
50 MPa enhances the cracking load and the ultimate load by around 43% and 11% on average, 
respectively. Beams with C20 concrete exhibit a softer bending stiffness, lower cracking load and 
ultimate load compared with the responses obtained using the other concrete strengths.  
Fig. 5.4: Load-displacement curves obtained numerically using various concrete strength for beams 
with stainless steel grade 1.4311. 
Fig. 5.5: Load-displacement curves obtained numerically using various concrete strength for beams 
with stainless steel grade 1.4162. 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Displacement (mm)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Displacement (mm)
Fig. 5.6: Load-displacement curves obtained numerically using various concrete strength for beams 
with stainless steel grade 1.4307. 
5.5 Stainless steel grade  
The effect that stainless steel grade has on the load-displacement response is illustrated in Fig. 5.7. 
For illustrative purposes, a beam with C50 concrete is considered in this study which is 300 mm in 
width and 353 mm in height (i.e. b/h ratio of 0.85). It is evident from the figure that using different 
stainless steel grades shows no significant effect on the cracking load or the initial bending stiffness of 
the beams mainly owing to having similar modulus of elasticity. However, using stainless steel grades 
1.4162 and 1.4307 improves the ultimate load capacity by around 13.7% and 4.3%, respectively, 
compared to grade 1.4311. It is noteworthy that grade 1.4162 has the highest yield strength of the 
grades examined in this study, and therefore the beam with reinforcement made from this material is 
expected to reach a higher load capacity. 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Displacement (mm)
Fig. 5.7: Load-displacement curves obtained numerically for different stainless steel grades. 
The other important observation is that the deflection at the ultimate load of the beam is influenced by 
the grade of stainless steel, as shown in Fig. 5.7. For the purpose of comparison, the deflection values 
corresponding to the maximum load are selected here mainly because the main concern is the ultimate 
capacity of the section. For instance, the beam with grade 1.4311 stainless steel reinforcement deflects 
to 34.7 mm at the ultimate load whereas the corresponding deflections for beams with grades 1.4162 
and 1.4307 are 23.5 and 22.1 mm, respectively. Given that grade 1.4311 has the highest strain 
hardening capacity of the stainless steels examined herein, it is clearly intuitive to conclude that the 
ductility of the section is improved by using reinforcement with a greater ultimate strain.  
In order to analyse the accuracy of the full and simplified analytical models when different stainless 
steel grades are used, Table 5.2 shows a comparison of the bending moment predictions obtained 
numerically and analytically with reference to the predictions of Eurocode 2. The results are obtained 
for two different sections with width to height (b/h) ratios of 0.85 and 0.70. The results demonstrate 
that both the full and simplified models as well as the Eurocode 2 tend to provide less conservative 
bending moment predictions compared with the numerical values when a grade of stainless steel with 
a relatively higher strength is used. 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Displacement (mm)
1.4311
1.4162
1.4307
Table 5.2: Comparison between the ultimate bending moment predictions obtained numerically and 
analytically for different stainless steel grades.  
ratio 
Grade FE 
(kNm) 
(kNm) 
(kNm) 
(kNm) 
AM/FE 
SM-I/FE 
EC2/FE 
1.4311 75.9 61.4 65.1 43.3 -19.0 -14.1 -42.9 
1.4162 85.8 74.5 80.0 61.2 -13.2 -6.8 -28.6 
1.4307 78.7 66.1 71.2 50.6 -16.0 -9.5 -35.7 
1.4311 
60.5 49.1 50.1 35.1 -18.9 -17.2 -41.9 
1.4162 
68.3 59.8 62.2 49.7 -12.5 -8.9 -27.3 
1.4307 
62.9 53.0 55.1 41.1 -15.7 -12.4 -34.7 
5.6 Geometry   
In order to investigate the effect that the geometry of the section has on the behaviour of stainless 
steel RC beams, beams with different b/h ratios ranging from 1.00 to 0.55 are considered in the 
current section. The results presented are obtained for beams made from C50 concrete. Fig. 5.8, Fig. 
5.9 and Fig. 5.10 illustrate the relationship between the bending moment predictions obtained from 
the numerical and analytical models, and b/h ratios for beams with stainless steel grades 1.4311, 
1.4162 and 1.4307, respectively. It is clear that the ultimate bending moment significantly increases 
for beams with a relatively lower b/h ratio, as expected since these beams would have a greater 
second moment of area. The simplified analytical model tends to provide a higher prediction 
compared with the full analytical model for beams with a lower b/h ratio. However, the bending 
moment predictions obtained from the simplified analytical model are lower than those obtained 
numerically in all cases, therefore providing a conservative prediction. It is noteworthy that the full 
analytical method improves the accuracy of the bending capacity of the section by around 41%, 21% 
and 32% on average, compared with the current design approach in Eurocode 2, for the results 
presented in this section and obtained using stainless steel grades 1.4311, 1.4162 and 1.4307, 
respectively.  
Fig. 5.8: Effect of the beam geometry on the bending moment predictions for beams with austenitic 
stainless steel grade 1.4311. 
Fig. 5.9: Effect of the beam geometry on the bending moment predictions for beams with lean duplex 
stainless steel grade 1.4162 
0.4 0.55 0.7 0.85 1 1.15
b/h ratio
0.4 0.55 0.7 0.85 1 1.15
b/h ratio
Fig. 5.10: Effect of the beam geometry on the bending moment predictions for beams with austenitic 
stainless steel grade 1.4307. 
Fig. 5.11 presents the relationship between the beam geometry and the ability of the section to exploit 
the strain hardening capabilities of the stainless steel, using the full analytical model. It is shown that 
the geometry of the beam has a relatively small influence on the exploitation of strain hardening. For 
example, a beam with a b/h ratio of 0.55 develops around 4.2%, 2.9% and 2.2% more stress in the 
reinforcement for grades 1.4311, 1.4162 and 1.4307, respectively, compared with members with a b/h 
ratio of 1.00. In general, it is observed that beams reinforced with 1.4162 grade lean duplex stainless 
steel reinforcement exhibit greater exploitation of the strain hardening capacity in the stainless steel, 
compared with beams reinforced with the austenitic grades 1.4307 and 1.4311. 
0.4 0.55 0.7 0.85 1 1.15
b/h ratio
Fig. 5.11: Effect of the beam geometry on the exploitation of strain hardening. 
5.7 Reinforcement ratio  
Reinforcement ratio is an important parameter in the design of reinforced concrete sections as it 
dictates not only the load carrying capacity but also the failure mode. In this section, the influence of 
reinforcement ratio on the behaviour of stainless steel RC beams, in particular the exploitation of 
strain hardening in the reinforcement, is assessed. The results presented are obtained for beams with 
concrete strength C40 and a b/h ratio of 0.70.  
Fig. 5.12, Fig. 5.13 and Fig. 5.14 illustrate the effect that reinforcement ratio () has on the bending 
moment capacity values obtained numerically and analytically for beams made using stainless steel 
reinforcement in grades 1.4311, 1.4162 and 1.4307, respectively. The results demonstrate that both 
the full and simplified analytical models underestimate the bending moment capacities obtained 
numerically in almost all cases, which is conservative and in line with previous findings. The 
numerical analyses show that the bending moment capacity improves as the reinforcement ratio 
increases until it reaches a specific ratio (i.e. around 0.032 in the cases presented herein) after which 
no further improvement in the bending capacity is observed. The reason for this is most likely due to 
the greater depth of the neutral axis when a higher reinforcement ratio is employed which increases 
the compressive stress in the concrete until it crushes, and no further improvement can be achieved. 
Moreover, both the simplified analytical model and the Eurocode 2 design rules provide identical 
predictions, as expected, when a higher reinforcement ratio is used since both models are based on the 
same constitutive behaviour for the stainless steel in the elastic range. It is also observed that for 
beams with a relatively higher reinforcement ratio, the moment capacities predicted by the full 
analytical model are below those from the simplified analytical model and also Eurocode 2. This is 
owing to the nonlinearity of the material model which starts from an early stage.  
0.4 0.55 0.7 0.85 1 1.15
b/h ratio
1.4311
1.4162
1.4307
Fig. 5.12: Effect of the reinforcement ratio () on the bending moment capacity for beams made using 
grade 1.4311 austenitic stainless steel. 
Fig. 5.13: Effect of the reinforcement ratio () on the bending moment capacity for beams made using 
grade 1.4162 lean duplex stainless steel. 
0.000 0.005 0.010 0.015 0.020 0.025 0.030 0.035 0.040 0.045 0.050
0.000 0.005 0.010 0.015 0.020 0.025 0.030 0.035 0.040 0.045 0.050
Fig. 5.14: Effect of the reinforcement ratio () on the bending moment capacity for beams made using 
grade 1.4307 austenitic stainless steel. 
Fig. 5.15, Fig. 5.16 and Fig. 5.17 demonstrate the influence of reinforcement ratio on the exploitation 
of strain hardening in the rebar for beams with stainless steel reinforcement in grades 1.4311, 1.4162 
and 1.4307, respectively. These results are obtained using the full analytical model, for a range of 
different concrete strengths. The figures illustrate the amount of stress in the rebars that can be 
exploited when calculating the ultimate bending moment capacity of the section. The horizontal solid 
line in each of the figures represents the yield limit for that particular grade of stainless steel (i.e. 
0.2 u ).  
Fig. 5.15: Effect of reinforcement ratio on the exploitation of strain hardening for beams reinforced 
with grade 1.4311 austenitic stainless steel. 
0.000 0.005 0.010 0.015 0.020 0.025 0.030 0.035 0.040 0.045 0.050
0.0000 0.0075 0.0150 0.0225 0.0300 0.0375 0.0450 0.0525 0.0600
Fig. 5.16: Effect of reinforcement ratio on the exploitation of strain hardening for beams reinforced 
with grade 1.4162 lean duplex stainless steel. 
Fig. 5.17: Effect of reinforcement ratio on the exploitation of strain hardening for beams reinforced 
with grade 1.4307 austenitic stainless steel. 
It is shown in the figures that further exploitation of the strain hardening capacity in the reinforcement 
is achieved when a relatively higher grade of concrete is employed. This is mainly because the higher 
strength concrete can carry greater compressive forces allowing the rebar to reach greater levels of 
stress. In all cases, it is observed that the level of stress in the stainless steel is relatively lower when a 
higher reinforcement ratio is employed. This is because an increase in the steel cross-sectional area 
generally reduces the levels of stress and strain in the reinforcement and increases the depth of the 
neutral axis, which causes a relative increase in the levels of applied stress and strain in the concrete 
0.0000 0.0075 0.0150 0.0225 0.0300 0.0375 0.0450 0.0525 0.0600
0.0000 0.0075 0.0150 0.0225 0.0300 0.0375 0.0450 0.0525 0.0600
resulting in crushing of the concrete. Accordingly, lower exploitation of the tensile strength in the 
reinforcement is achieved.       
A balanced reinforcement ratio (bal) is defined as the ratio where concrete crushing and 
reinforcement yielding occur simultaneously in the cross section. In order to utilize and exploit the 
positive strain hardening properties of stainless steel reinforcement in the design of reinforced 
concrete beams, it is necessary to design the section to be under-reinforced. An under-reinforced 
section is when the reinforcement ratio is lower than the balanced ratio (i.e.  < bal). This allows the 
reinforcement to yield first and then develop some strain hardening before the section fails due to 
crushing of concrete. It ensures enough ductility in the section to avoid sudden catastrophic failure of 
the reinforced concrete member. On the other hand, if the beam is designed to be over-reinforced (i.e. 
 > bal), failure will occur by crushing of the concrete before the rebar yields, and the strain 
hardening characteristics of the stainless steel will not be exploited. This design case is neither 
desirable nor efficient, but could still be employed if a higher partial safety factor is considered.  
A balanced reinforcement ratio (bal) can be identified for stainless steel reinforced concrete sections 
as the reinforcement ratio at which when the tensile strain in the rebar reaches to 0.2% strain (0.2) 
simultaneously with the concrete on the top surface reaching the ultimate crushing strain (cu). This 
requires obtaining the depth of the neutral axis (y) from the strain distribution in Fig. 4.1, as presented 
in Eq. (5.1): 
1 + 0.2 cu
(5.1) 
The equilibrium of internal forces can be applied, as presented in Eq. (5.2), by assuming the depth of 
the compressive stress block of the concrete is 0.8y and the concrete compressive stress in the 
concrete stress block is 0.85fc: 
0.68fcy b  Ass = 0 (5.2) 
In this expression, the tensile stress (s) is the 0.2% proof stress of the reinforcement (0.2). 
By substituting Eq. (5.1) into Eq. (5.2), Eq. (5.3) is obtained: 
 0.68fc (
1+0.2 cu
) b  As0.2 = 0 
(5.3) 
The balanced reinforcement ratio (bal) is obtained by rearranging Eq. (5.3), as follows: 
bal =
1 + 0.2 cu
(5.4) 
In the case of under-reinforced section, the reinforcement ratio must be greater than the minimum 
ratio required to prevent the rupture of the rebar which it can be obtained using Eq. (5.5).  
min =
1 + u cu
(5.5) 
5.8 Deflections  
A realistic estimation of the levels of deflection that develop in a structure is imperative to ensure 
acceptable serviceability and the comfort of end-users. Thus, global design standards typically 
provide limiting values for deflections which should not be exceeded. In Eurocode 2, for example, the 
allowable deflection is limited to span/250 for members subjected to quasi-permanent loads (EN 
1992-1-1, 2004). Deflections are in important consideration for concrete members reinforced with 
stainless steel owing to the excellent ductility of the reinforcing material. In the deflection calculations 
for RC beams, using the elastic modulus of stainless steel may result in over-conservative predictions 
due to the non-linear behaviour of the stainless steel, even in the low-strain range. Therefore, this 
section aims to evaluate the deflection design approach in Eurocode 2 for stainless steels RC beams. 
The predicted results from Eurocode 2 are compared with the corresponding values from the 
numerical model. The influences of implementing the secant modulus and the tangent modulus of 
stainless steel in the deflection calculations for RC beams are also explored.  
In Eurocode 2, the deflection of a member is obtained based on the assumption that the concrete 
member comprises cracked and un-cracked sections, at the service load. Accordingly, the maximum 
deflection (EC2) for RC members is calculated as follows:    
EC2 = (1  )1 + 2 (5.6) 
In this expression,  is a distribution coefficient representing the tension stiffening phenomenon in the 
section, and is taken as zero for the un-cracked portion of the section, otherwise it is calculated using 
Eq. (5.7):   
 = 1  (
(5.7) 
where  is a coefficient that accounts for the effect of the duration of loading on the average strain, 
and is assumed to have a value of unity for a single short-term loading and 0.5 for sustained and 
cyclic loading. Mcr and Ma are the bending moment values calculated at the cracking and service 
loads, respectively. The cracking moment (Mcr) is determined as: 
Mcr =
(5.8) 
1 and 2 are the deflection values obtained for the un-cracked section and cracked section, 
respectively, and are determined from Eqs. (5.9) and (5.10) for beams subjected to four point bending 
conditions: 
24EcIg
 (3L2  4a2) 
(5.9) 
24EcIcr
 (3L2  4a2) 
(5.10) 
In these expressions, P is the applied load at each point, L is the clear span and a is the distance 
between the support and the nearest loading point. Ig and Icr are the second moment of area calculated 
on the basis of the un-cracked and cracked sections, respectively, determined using the expressions in 
Eqs. (5.11) and (5.12):  
(5.11) 
Icr =
bd3k3
+ nAsd
2(1  k)2 
where k = 2n + (n)2  n 
(5.12) 
In Eq. (5.12), the term n refers to the modular ratio between the reinforcement and the concrete, given 
as the ratio of E to Ec. 
In the case of extreme load conditions, deflections corresponding to the ultimate bending moment 
would be an important point of consideration. However, for serviceability requirements, the deflection 
of the beam is calculated in this analysis at the mid-span of the member at the service moment, which 
is 30% of the ultimate bending moment (0.3Mu), as well as at 67% of the ultimate bending moment 
(0.67Mu). Table 5.3 presents a comparison between the measured deflections from the numerical 
model (FE) and the predicted values obtained using Eurocode 2 (EC2), using the expressions given in 
Eqs. (5.6)-(5.12). The results presented in the table are for beams made from C40 concrete which are 
300 mm in width and 428 mm in depth, and employ the elastic modulus for the stainless steel (E) in 
the calculations. In order to study the influence of the stainless steel constitutive relationship on the 
deflection of RC beams, various reinforcement ratios () are considered to develop different levels of 
stress in the reinforcement. It is observed that the Eurocode 2 design deflections at 0.3Mu are in very 
good agreement with the corresponding numerical values (EC2/FE) with the maximum and average 
differences being around -38% and -2%, respectively. These same values at 0.67Mu are -28% and -
15%, respectively.    
Table 5.3: Results of the predicted deflection obtained from Eurocode 2 in comparison with the 
measured values from the FE model.  
Reinforcement  
ratio () 
Grades Bending moment  Deflections at 0.3Mu Deflections at 0.67Mu 
0.3Mu 
(kNm) 
0.67Mu 
(kNm) 
EC2/FE 
EC2/FE 
0.0019 
1.4311 22.7 50.6 0.38 0.36 1.05 6.05 6.47 0.94 
1.4162 25.6 57.1 0.43 0.70 0.62 7.80 8.19 0.95 
1.4307 23.6 52.6 0.40 0.42 0.95 6.36 6.70 0.95 
0.0039 
1.4311 40.9 91.3 2.16 2.07 1.04 9.10 9.31 0.98 
1.4162 46.0 102.7 3.04 3.05 1.00 10.64 11.22 0.95 
1.4307 42.2 94.2 2.32 2.38 0.98 9.17 9.51 0.96 
0.0078 
1.4311 75.0 167.5 4.05 3.79 1.07 10.15 11.34 0.90 
1.4162 86.6 193.3 4.91 4.76 1.03 11.96 13.82 0.87 
1.4307 79.6 177.8 4.24 4.02 1.06 10.49 12.02 0.87 
0.0117 
1.4311 103.4 231.0 4.39 4.27 1.03 10.30 12.30 0.84 
1.4162 118.7 265.1 5.18 5.20 1.00 12.02 14.83 0.81 
1.4307 109.7 244.9 4.56 4.47 1.02 10.63 12.84 0.83 
0.0156 
1.4311 122.9 274.4 4.30 4.26 1.01 9.89 12.27 0.81 
1.4162 143.1 319.6 5.12 5.27 0.97 11.69 15.37 0.76 
1.4307 133.9 299.1 4.59 4.62 0.99 10.50 13.36 0.79 
0.0216 
1.4311 152.6 340.9 4.29 4.51 0.95 9.73 13.27 0.73 
1.4162 158.6 354.2 4.52 4.78 0.94 10.23 14.15 0.72 
1.4307 157.2 351.0 4.31 4.53 0.95 9.76 13.28 0.74 
Fig. 5.18(a) and (b) demonstrate the influence that the reinforcement ratio has on the beam deflections 
at 0.3Mu and 0.67Mu, respectively. It is clear that Eurocode 2 predictions are in very good agreement 
with the corresponding measured values from the FE model in almost all cases for beams which are at 
the service load, corresponding to a bending moment of 0.3Mu. On the other hand, the code results in 
over-conservative predictions for beams with relatively higher reinforcement ratios, when the beam is 
subjected to 0.67Mu. It is also observed that the deflections rise with an increase of reinforcement 
ratio up to specific point (i.e. at a reinforcement ratio of around 1%) after which remains more or less 
constant. This indicates that the deflection is more influenced by the reinforcement ratio for relatively 
low values of , where the stress level in the reinforcement is relatively greater.  
Fig. 5.18: Effect of reinforcement ratio on the deflection of a stainless steel reinforced concrete beam 
at (a) 0.3Mu and (b) 0.67Mu.  
0 0.005 0.01 0.015 0.02 0.025
EC2-1.4311
FE-1.4311
EC2-1.4162
FE-1.4162
0 0.005 0.01 0.015 0.02 0.025
EC2-1.4311
FE-1.4311
EC2-1.4162
FE-1.4162
As stated before, the current design approach in Eurocode 2 (EN 1992-1-1, 2004) calculates the 
deflection on the basis of the modulus of elasticity of the reinforcement. This assumption is 
acceptable in the case of carbon steel reinforcement, however it may result in an over-conservative 
prediction in the case of stainless steel reinforcement owing to its nonlinear behaviour. In the design 
of structural stainless steel sections, it is recommended to use the secant modulus in deflection 
calculations rather than the elastic modulus (SCI, 2017). In order to investigate this for reinforced 
concrete design, the predicted deflections calculated using secant modulus and also the tangent 
modulus of the stainless steel reinforcement are compared with their corresponding numerical values. 
The secant modulus of elasticity (Esec) for stainless steel is obtained from the modified Ramberg-
Osgood material model presented earlier in Eqs. (4.1) and (4.2) according to: 
 Esec =
1+0.002 
n  for      0.2 (5.13) 
Esec =
0.2 +
  0.2
+ (u  0.2 
u  0.2
  0.2
u  0.2
for    0.2 <   u (5.14) 
The tangent modulus of elasticity (Etan) is the derivative of the secant modulus and is determined as 
follows: 
 Etan =
0.2 E
0.2 + 0.002 n E(
for     < 0.2 (5.15) 
Etan =
+ (u  0.2 
u  0.2
(u  0.2)
m) (  0.2)
for    0.2 <   u (5.16) 
In order to obtain the secant modulus and the tangent modulus of the reinforcement at 0.3Mu and 
0.67Mu, the stress in the reinforcement must first be determined. An elastic analysis of the section is 
conducted to obtain the depth of the neutral axis (y) and the stress in the reinforcement, according to 
the stress and strain distributions presented in Fig. 5.19. 
Fig. 5.19: Elastic analysis of a reinforced concrete beam including (a) the cross-section (b) the strain 
distribution, (c) the stress distribution in the section. 
The location of the neutral axis can be obtained from Eq. (5.17): 
y = d (2n + 2n2  n)  (5.17) 
where n is the modular ratio between the reinforcement and concrete: 
for secant modulus 
(5.18) 
for tangent modulus 
Once the neutral axis depth is located, the stress in the reinforcement is calculated from the stress 
distribution in Fig. 5.19(c), as follows: 
As(d  y 3 )
(5.19) 
Since the secant and tangent moduli are functions of the stress in the reinforcement, an iterative 
technique is required to obtain the solution of Eq. (5.19). A flow chart describing the solution 
procedure for determining the secant modulus is given in Fig. 5.20. The same solution procedure can 
be followed to determine the tangent modulus. Then, the deflections of the beam for load levels 
corresponding to 0.3Mu and 0.67Mu are calculated using secant modulus and the tangent modulus.  
Fig. 5.20: Flow chart of the solution procedure. 
The predicted deflections obtained using the elastic modulus (EC2), secant modulus (EC2(Esec)) and 
tangent modulus (EC2(Etan)) for the stainless steel grades considered herein, are presented in Table 5.4 
in comparison with the corresponding numerical values (FE). The results show that implementing the 
secant modulus in the calculations of deflection provides quite accurate predictions at 0.3Mu with 
maximum and average EC2(Esec)/FE values of -38% and 0%, respectively. However, these results are 
quite similar in terms of accuracy as the corresponding deflections obtained using the elastic modulus 
of stainless steel, as presented earlier, which gave maximum and average EC2/FE values of -38% and 
-2%, respectively. On the other hand, at 0.67Mu, using the secant modulus in deflection calculations 
results in un-conservative predictions with maximum and average EC2(Esec) /FE values of 55% and 
18%, respectively. The corresponding values when the elastic modulus is used in the calculations are -
28% and -15%, respectively, as previously presented.   
Using the tangent modulus in deflection calculations at load levels corresponding to 0.3Mu results in 
maximum and average EC2(Etan)/FE values of -38% and 6%, respectively, whilst at 0.67Mu the 
maximum and average EC2(Etan)/FE values are 1130% and 205%, respectively. It is clear that the using 
the tangent modulus to calculate the deflections results in a significant overestimation of the 
deflections compared with the numerical model values, especially at higher load levels.  
Table 5.4: Deflection results obtained using the initial modulus, secant modulus and the tangent 
modulus of stainless steel in comparison with the measured values from the FE model.  
Reinforcement  
ratio 
Grade Bending moment 
(kNm) 
Deflections at 0.3Mu Deflections at  0.67Mu 
0.3Mu 0.67Mu 
EC2(Esec
) /FE 
EC2(Etan) 
EC2(Esec) 
EC2(Etan) 
0.00187 
1.4311 22.7 50.6 1.05 1.05 1.05 0.94 1.36 12.30 
1.4162 25.6 57.1 0.62 0.62 0.62 0.95 1.35 2.89 
1.4307 23.6 52.6 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 1.46 4.02 
0.00390 
1.4311 40.9 91.3 1.04 1.09 1.29 0.98 1.48 5.91 
1.4162 46.0 102.7 1.00 1.01 1.05 0.95 1.26 2.45 
1.4307 42.2 94.2 0.98 1.01 1.11 0.96 1.55 3.60 
0.00779 
1.4311 75.0 167.5 1.07 1.12 1.29 0.90 1.41 3.60 
1.4162 86.6 193.3 1.03 1.04 1.08 0.87 1.09 1.94 
1.4307 79.6 177.8 1.06 1.08 1.19 0.87 1.33 2.79 
0.01169 
1.4311 103.4 231.0 1.03 1.06 1.19 0.84 1.35 2.94 
1.4162 118.7 265.1 1.00 1.00 1.03 0.81 0.96 1.52 
1.4307 109.7 244.9 1.02 1.04 1.12 0.83 1.15 2.17 
0.01559 
1.4311 122.9 274.4 1.01 1.03 1.11 0.81 1.14 2.16 
1.4162 143.1 319.6 0.97 0.98 0.99 0.76 0.85 1.21 
1.4307 133.9 299.1 0.99 1.01 1.06 0.79 1.01 1.72 
0.02165 
1.4311 152.6 340.9 0.95 0.97 1.02 0.73 0.94 1.57 
1.4162 158.6 354.2 0.94 0.95 0.95 0.72 0.76 0.90 
1.4307 157.2 351.0 0.95 0.96 0.99 0.74 0.85 1.23 
In summary, the results presented in this analysis show that there is only a minor improvement in the 
deflection predictions by adopting the secant modulus rather than the elastic modulus in the 
calculations. The predictions obtained using the tangent modulus were significantly less accurate than 
when the elastic modulus or the secant modulus is employed. Therefore, it is recommended to use the 
elastic modulus in the calculation of deflections for stainless steel RC beams. It is noteworthy that the 
predicted deflections for beams with a reinforcement ratio 0.187% at loads corresponding to 0.3Mu 
are typically the same for each stainless steel grade considered herein. After a careful examination of 
these cases, it was found that applied load is lower than the cracking moment and therefore the 
deflection is calculated only on the basis of an un-cracked section. In this scenario, the second 
moment of area is calculated based on the gross area of the section which is the same irrespective of 
the reinforcement modulus of elasticity.  
5.9 A summary of the recommendations for the codes of practice  
A comprehensive parametric study has been carried out to investigate the effect of the most influential 
parameters on the performance of stainless steel concrete beams including various concrete strengths 
and reinforcement grades and different geometries. Consequently, the following recommendations for 
the codes of practice have been summarized as follows:  
 It is shown that further exploitation of the strain hardening capacity in the rebar is achieved 
when a relatively higher grade of concrete is employed.  
 It is also found that the geometry of the beam has a relatively small influence on the 
exploitation of strain hardening.  
 It is observed that the levels of stress in the rebar are relatively lower when a higher 
reinforcement ratio is employed. 
 It is recommended that the elastic modulus is employed in the calculation of deflections for 
stainless steel RC beams.  
5.10 Concluding remarks  
The full and simplified version of a deformation-based design method for the analysis of these 
elements has been further developed and examined herein. It has been compared with the current 
design rules in Eurocode 2 and shown to provide very favourable results, in terms of accuracy and 
efficiency. A comprehensive parametric study was conducted to study the influence that various 
geometric and material properties have on the capacity of the members. Moreover, this chapter 
provides guidance for selecting an appropriate reinforcement ratio in order to achieve maximum 
exploitation of the strain hardening properties of the stainless steel reinforcement. In the final section 
of the chapter, the serviceability limit state for stainless steel reinforced concrete beams has been 
explored through a detailed analysis of the deflection behaviour.  
Chapter 6: Bond behaviour of stainless steel reinforced concrete 
6.1 Introduction  
The current chapter is focussed on the bond relationship that develops between stainless steel rebar 
and the surrounding concrete, which is critical to the load-carrying performance and serviceability and 
is therefore important information for designers. Bond is clearly a key property that needs to be 
considered when assessing the response of reinforced concrete and composite structures. It has a 
direct influence on the structural performance and inadequate bond can cause many different issues 
including ineffective anchorage, widespread cracking of the concrete and excessive deflections or 
rotations. Thus, having an accurate and realistic knowledge of the bond strength is imperative 
especially for the serviceability limit state.  
However, bond is a relatively complex phenomenon owing to the many inter-related parameters 
which govern its development. Amongst the most influential parameters are the quality of the 
concrete and the surface geometry of the reinforcing bar. For example, voids that develop in the 
concrete during the casting and hardening process may result in a reduction in the local bond strength. 
Other factors which influence the development of bond strength include the cover distance, the clear 
space between adjacent bars, the number and size of bar layers and the direction of casting with 
respect to the orientation of the bars. The influence of bar stresses on the bond behaviour is relatively 
small as long as the bar does not yield. However, once it yields, the transverse forces between the bars 
and the concrete decrease resulting in a reduction in the bond stress-slip response.  
Bond stress is developed by an adhesive action combined with frictional forces and the mechanical 
interlocking of the concrete against the bar-surface deformities. For plain, smooth bars, the 
development of bond relies primarily on adhesion and friction although there may be some 
interlocking if the bar surface is rough. Therefore, the use of ribbed reinforcement rather than plain 
bars significantly increases the bond strength that develops. The relative rib area (fP), which is a 
dimensionless property, is used as indication of the quality of the rib geometry according to EN 
15630-1 (2010). A typical value in the range of 0.05-0.10 for the relative rib area is appropriate for 
generating adequate bond strength and providing a good service-load performance. It has been shown 
that bond strength increases linearly with the increase of relative rib area (Darwin and Graham, 1993). 
The relative rib area is calculated as shown in Eq. (6.1). 
Fp,i sin
 (6.1) 
in which FP is the area of the longitudinal section of a single rib,  is the bar diameter, n is the number 
of indentation rows and c and 
 are the rib spacing and rib inclination, respectively.  
Current design standards such as Eurocode 2 (EN 1992-1-1, 2004) and MC2010 (Fdration 
Internationale du Bton, 2013) do not include specific rules for stainless steel reinforced concrete, and 
generally suggest using the same criteria as for traditional carbon steel reinforced concrete. There has 
been considerable research into stainless steel reinforcement, especially in recent years, but most has 
focussed on the corrosion behaviour (e.g. Bautista et al., 2007; Alvarez et al., 2011; Serdar et al., 
2013), with limited research on the bond behaviour in a corrosive environment (e.g. Calderon-
Uriszar-Aldaca et al., 2018 and Zhou et al., 2017). There have been very few studies in to the bond 
behaviour of stainless steel rebar, and these have even resulted in inconclusive results with one study 
showing that the bond developed by some austenitic and duplex stainless steel bars is lower than for 
similar carbon steel reinforcement (e.g. Aal Hassan, 2003) whilst other publications have shown the 
opposite finding (e.g. Ahlborn and DenHartigh, 2003; Johnson, 2010). Accordingly, the work 
presented in this chapter aims to investigate the bond behaviour of stainless steel rebar encased in 
concrete with reference to that of traditional carbon steel, and suggest suitable values which can be 
used in design. In addition, the applicability of current bond design rules in Eurocode 2 and MC2010 
in terms of bond strength, anchorage length and lap length, is examined. Accordingly, this chapter 
proceeds with a background of the information currently available in design standards, following by a 
detailed description and analysis of a pull-out test experimental programme involving both stainless 
steel and carbon steel rebars. Finally, a suitable bond-slip model for stainless steel reinforcement is 
proposed.   
6.2 Current standards of practice 
The bond strength that develops between steel reinforcement and the surrounding concrete is an 
influential property in the behaviour of reinforced concrete, as it governs the composite action and 
hence cracks development, anchorage of the bars in the concrete and also the transfer of stresses at 
laps. Accordingly, international design standards such as Eurocode 2 (EN 1992-1-1, 2004) and the 
Model Code 2010 (Fdration Internationale du Bton, 2013) include design predictions for the bond 
strength, and also these other important performance criteria. Of course, as stated before, bond is a 
complex and multi-faceted phenomena, so different design codes adopt various simplifications in 
order to aid designers. In this section, the provisions provided in Eurocode 2 and MC2010 are 
summarized, as well as their key differences. 
6.2.1 Eurocode 2 (2004) 
In Eurocode 2, to obtain the design anchorage length and lap length, the design bond strength (fbd) 
must first be calculated, followed by the basic anchorage length (Ib,rqd). The design bond strength is 
determined as follows:     
fbd = 2.2512fctd  (6.2) 
In this expression, 1 is a coefficient related to the bond condition and the bars position during 
concreting, and a value of unity represents good bond condition and 0.7 represents all other 
conditions. 2 is a coefficient related the bar diameter () and is taken as unity when the diameter is 
less than 32 mm and is otherwise determined using Eq. (6.3): 
132
  for  > 32 mm  (6.3) 
The tensile concrete strength (fctd) is obtained as a function of the characteristic concrete compressive 
strength (fc) as given in Eq. (6.4): 
fctd = 0.21(fc)
2/3    for concrete strength  C60/75.    (6.4) 
Eurocode 2 states that the tensile concrete strength is limited for concrete class C60/75, unless it can 
be verified that the bond strength can be increased above this limit. 
The basic anchorage length is determined as: 
Ib,rqd =
 sd
4 fbd
(6.5) 
where sd is the design stress in the reinforcing bar. 
The design anchorage length (Ibd) is calculated using Eq. (6.6): 
Ibd = 12345Ib,rqd  Ib,min (6.6) 
In this expression, Ibd,min is the minimum accepted value for the design anchorage length, determined 
Ib,min  max {0.3Ib,rqd; 10; 100 mm} for anchorage in tension  (6.7) 
1 and 2 are coefficients related to the form of bar and the minimum cover distance, respectively, and 
3, 4 and 5 are coefficients related to the condition of confinement. These parameters are obtained as 
follows for reinforcement that is in tension: 
1 =  1   for straight bars. 
2  = 1  0.15(cd  )/  0.7 and  1.0   
3 , 4, and 5 are taken as unity if there is no confinement provided by transverse reinforcement, 
welded transverse reinforcement and transverse pressure, respectively.  
The design lap length (I0) is calculated using Eq. (6.8): 
I0 = 12356Ib,rqd  I0,min  (6.8) 
 In this expression, (I0,min) is the minimum accepted value for the design lap length, determined as: 
I0,min   max {0.36Ib,rqd; 15; 200 mm}  (6.9) 
where 6 is coefficient related to the percentage of the lapped bars relative to the total cross-section 
area which is taken as 1 for percentage lower than 25%.  
6.2.2 Model Code 2010 (2013) 
The Model Code 2010 as it will be referred to, hereafter, provides guidance for the design of 
reinforced and prestressed concrete by the International Federation for Structural Concrete (known as 
the fib, or Fdration Internationale du Bton). Similar to Eurocode 2, MC2010 requires calculation of 
the design bond strength (fbd) in order to establish the required anchorage and lap lengths. It is 
noteworthy that the symbols used in this section may vary from those employed in the MC2010, but 
are changed herein to be consistent with the earlier discussions.  
The bond strength is determined as:   
fbd = (2 + 3)fbd,0  (6.10) 
where 2 and 3 represent the influence of passive confinement from the concrete cover and from 
transverse reinforcement. These values are found from:  
2 = (cmin/)
0.5. (cmax/cmin)
0.15  for ribbed bars;  
2 = (cmin/)
0.8. (cmax/cmin)
0.15  for epoxy-coated or plain bars; and 
3  = Kd. (Ktr  t/50)  
cmax and cmin are cover parameters, t is 0.5 for bars with size up to 25 mm and Kd and Ktr are the 
effectiveness factor dependent on the reinforcement details and the density of the transverse 
reinforcement relative to the anchored or lapped bars, respectively. Kd and Ktr are taken as zero in the 
case where no transverse reinforcement is provided. 
fbd,0 is the basic bond strength which is a function of the characteristic concrete compressive strength 
(fc) and is calculated using Eq. (6.11):  
fbd,0 = 1234(fc/25)
0.5  (6.11) 
In this expression, the following values are employed for the various constants:  
1= 1.75 for ribbed bars; 
2 = 1 for good bond conditions;  
3 = 1 for  < 25; and 
4 represents the characteristic strength of the reinforcement (fyk) which is being anchored or lapped 
and is obtained from the values given in Table 6.1.  
Table 6.1: Determining 4 coefficient.   
Characteristic strength of the 
reinforcement fyk (MPa) 
400 1.2 
500 1.0 
600 0.85 
700 0.75 
800 0.68 
The design anchorage length (Ib) is calculated as presented in Eq. (6.12): 
  Ib,min 
(6.12) 
In this expression, Ib,min is the minimum accepted value for the design anchorage length, determined 
Ib,min > max {
0.3fyd
; 10, 100 mm} 
where sd is the stress in the bar to be anchored by bond over the anchorage length and is obtained as 
follows:   
sd = 1fyd 
1 = As,cal As,ef  
 (6.13) 
In these expressions, fyd is the design yield strength of the reinforcement, and As,cal and As,ef are the 
required area of reinforcement determined in design and the actual area of reinforcement as provided, 
respectively.  
 The design lap length (I0) is calculated as given in Eq. (6.14):  
I0 = 4
 I0,min 
(6.14) 
In this expression, I0,min is the minimum accepted value for the design lap length, determined as: 
I0,min > max {
0.7fyd
; 15, 200 mm} 
where 4 is typically taken as unity but it can be reduced to 0.7 when the calculated stress in the bar at 
the ultimate limit state throughout the lap length does not exceed 50% of the reinforcement 
characteristic strength.  
6.2.2.1 Bond stress-slip model 
In addition to the design bond strength and anchorage length values, MC2010 also provides two 
different design bond stress-slip relationships. The designer selects the appropriate relationship to 
employ based on the failure mode, either failure through bond or confinement. The general bond 
stress-slip model is shown in Fig. 6.1, and has four main stages for pullout failure. Firstly, and with 
reference to Fig. 6.1, while the slip (s) is less than s1, the bond stress is developing as the ribs on the 
rebars penetrate into the concrete. This stage is characterized by local crushing and micro-cracking of 
the concrete. Then, in the second stage when s1 < s < s2, the bond strength plateaus at the maximum 
value of bmax. This represents the bond capacity which is influenced mainly by the degree of 
confinement. This is followed by the third stage (s2 < s < s3) in which the bond stress decreases as the 
interlocking mechanical bonds between the ribs and concrete reduce. Finally, when s > s3, the 
constant residual bond level (bf) is reached, which is mainly comprised of frictional resistance.   
The bond-slip relationship provided in MC2010 describes the bond stress (b) as a function of the 
relative displacement (s), as presented in Eqs. (6.15), (6.16), (6.17) and (6.18) for the four stages, 
respectively: 
b = bmax (s/s1)
 for  0  s  s1 (6.15) 
b = bmax for  s1  s  s2 (6.16) 
b = bmax  (bmax  bf)(s  s2)/(s3  s2) for  s2  s  s3 (6.17) 
b = bf for  s3  s (6.18) 
The parameters required in these equations are given in Table 6.2, where bf is the residual bond 
stress, cclear is the clear distance between adjacent ribs and fcm is the mean cylinder concrete 
compressive strength and is calculated using Eq. (6.19): 
fcm = fc + 8 (6.19) 
Table 6.2: Parameters defining the bond stress-slip relationship. 
 Pull-out failure Splitting failure 
(unconfined) 
bmax 2.5(fcm)
0.5 2.5(fcm)
bu split - Eq. (6.20) 
s1 1.0 mm s(bu split) 
s2 2.0 mm s1 
s3 cclear 1.2s1 
 0.4 0.4 
bf 0.4bmax 0 
It is noteworthy that the values given in Table 6.2  are for a good bond conditions and are only valid 
for ribbed rebars in which the tensile strain in the rebar is lower than its yield limit.  
The other bond stress-slip model given in MC2010 is for splitting failure, and in this, the bond 
strength (bu,split) is determined as follows: 
bu,split = 6.52 (
+ kmKtr] 
(6.20) 
In this expression, km represents the efficiency of the confinement from the transverse reinforcement 
and is taken as zero when no transverse reinforcement is provided.  
Fig. 6.1: Bond stress-slip model in MC2010 (Fdration Internationale du Bton, 2013). 
It is clear from the above discussion that Eurocode 2 provides relatively more simplistic design 
procedures for predicting the design bond strength compared with the MC2010. However, Eurocode 2 
does not provide design guidelines for predicting the bond stress-slip relationship. On the other hand, 
MC2010 includes the influence of important parameters in the design expression such as the 
confinement effect, presence of transverse reinforcement, form of the indentations, bar size and the 
characteristic yield strength of the rebar. Neither Eurocode 2 nor MC2010 account for the influence 
that the reinforcement material type has on the bond response. 
6.3 Experimental programme  
In order to assess the bond strength between stainless steel reinforcing bars and the surrounding 
concrete, and to compare the behaviour to carbon steel reinforcement, a series of pull-out tests has 
been conducted. A further aim of this study is to investigate if the existing design criteria which have 
been produced on the basis of test results on carbon steel rebar, can be used for stainless steel 
reinforced concrete. Different concrete strengths and reinforcement grades are included in the test 
programme. Concrete compression tests and reinforcement tensile tests have also been carried out to 
determine the characteristic material properties.     
6.3.1 Type of bond test 
There are a number of different methods for bond testing available in the literature. As is clear from 
earlier discussions, there are many factors which influence bond strength, which makes quantifying 
this property quite challenging. In addition to the material and geometric properties, bond behaviour is 
influenced by the details of the test setup which affect the stress conditions in both the concrete and 
the reinforcement, as well as at the interface. The most widely-used experimental set-ups for 
evaluating bond strength are the pull-out and beam tests. The beam test requires large specimens and 
comprises two half-beams which are connected at the bottom by the reinforcing bar and at the top by 
a hinge. This arrangement closely replicates a real structural arrangement where both the rebar and the 
surrounding concrete are in tension. On the other hand, the pull-out test is a more straight-forward and 
simple arrangement in which the reinforcement is embedded at the centre of a cubic or cylindrical 
concrete specimen, over a controlled bonded length. In this case, the concrete is subjected to 
compressive stress whilst the reinforcement is in tension. Although this may not represent the actual 
scenario in reinforced concrete structures, the pull-out test is widely adopted in research because of its 
capability to provide a reasonable bond response, the relatively low cost and the ease of fabrication. 
They are generally accepted as providing excellent basis for comparison at least, and for 
understanding the relative influence that different properties, such as reinforcement type, may have on 
the bond. Therefore, the pull-out test has been selected in the current programme. 
6.3.2 Material properties 
6.3.2.1 Concrete  
There were three different concrete mixes designed for the tests to produce C20, C40 and C60 
concrete. The concrete was made using high strength Portland cement (CEM I 52.5 N) and the mix 
proportions are summarized in Table 6.3. As stated in the table, a super plasticizer was used to 
enhance the workability of the C60 concrete because it had a relatively low water to cement ratio. In 
addition to the pull-out samples, a number of additional cylindrical specimens were casted in order to 
conduct compression tests. These were carried out in accordance with the guidance given in EN 
12390-3 (2009), as shown in Fig. 6.2. A total of 18 cylindrical specimens with a diameter of 100 mm 
and depth of 200 mm were casted and then cured in a water tank for 28 days. Sulphur capping was 
applied at both ends of the specimens, as shown in Fig. 6.3, to avoid any reduction of the measured 
strength owing to stress concentrations caused by irregularity of the surface. The mean compressive 
strength from each of the design mixes was determined as the average of six samples, and is presented 
in Table 6.3. It is noteworthy that the mean measured compressive strengths of concrete are quite less 
than the targeted values in some cases. This may be linked to the fact that cylindrical concrete sample 
provides lower compression strength compared with that of a cube. 
Fig. 6.2: Concrete compression testing machine. 
Fig. 6.3: Cylindrical concrete samples capped with sulphur. 
Table 6.3: Concrete mix proportions. 
Target 
concrete 
grade 
ratio 
Mix proportions (kg/m
) Mean 
measured 
compressive 
strength 
(MPa) 
Standard 
deviation 
(MPa) 
Cement 
(kg/m
Water 
(kg/m
(kg/m
Coarse 
aggregate 
(kg/m
Aggregate 
Super 
Plasticizer 
(kg/m
C20 0.75 304 229 990 862 4-14 - 24.5 2.59 
C40 0.53 365 195 736 1117 4-14 - 33.7 2.71 
C60 0.36 450 164 751 1088 5-16 5.9 51.2 1.93 
6.3.2.2 Reinforcement  
Austenitic stainless steel is the most common type of stainless steel material that is used for 
reinforcement and therefore grade 1.4301 is selected in this study. Pull-out tests on carbon steel grade 
B500 rebar are also conducted. In both cases, for the stainless and carbon steel tests, bars with a 
diameter of 10 mm and 12 mm are included. The geometrical details of all of the bars included in this 
study have been closely examined and measured, and the data is presented in Table 6.4.   
The 12 mm stainless steel rebars are a new version of grade 1.4301 reinforcement known as grib-
rib which is available as high strength material (Stainless UK, 2016). This was not deliberately 
ordered as part of this study but is now the default form of 12 mm stainless steel rebar that is available 
in the UK. The manufacturers claim that the grib-rib bars provide better bond behaviour compared 
with regular stainless steel rebar because they comprise three series of transverse ribs around the bar 
cross-section rather than the typical two series. On the other hand, all of the carbon steel rebars 
included in this study consist of two series of transverse ribs at the cross-section and also two 
longitudinal ribs. The relative rib areas (fp) presented in Table 6.4 are calculated using Eq. (6.1). It is 
noteworthy that the stainless steel and carbon steel reinforcements comply with the requirements 
given in BS 6744 (2016) and BS 4449+A3 (2005), respectively, which are presented in Table 6.5, 
apart from the relative rib area for the 10 mm diameter stainless steel rebar which is found to be lower 
than the minimum required value.   
Table 6.4: Geometrical properties of the reinforcing bars.  
Material Bar 
diameter 
Maximum 
Rib height 
spacing 
inclination 
FP area of a 
single rib 
Relative 
rib area 
Stainless steel 10 0.67 9.34 50
 5.74 0.030 
Stainless steel 
(grib-rib) 
12  0.75 7.58 55
 7.19 0.062 
Carbon steel 10 1.03 6.85 55
 7.74 0.059 
Carbon steel 12 1.16 7.04 60
 10.13 0.066 
Table 6.5: Ranges for rib parameters for stainless steel BS 6744 (2016) and carbon steel BS 4449+A3 
(2005). 
Rib height (mm) 
Rib spacing 
Rib inclination 
Min relative rib area for 10 
and 12 mm bar diameter (fP) 
0.03d  0.15d 0.4d  1.2d 35
Tensile tests have been conducted in order to obtain the characteristic stress-strain curves and the 
mechanical properties of both the carbon and stainless steel rebars, in accordance with EN 6892-1 
(2016), and the results are presented in Fig. 6.4 and Table 6.6, respectively. Three repeat tests were 
carried out on each type of bar, and the average response is taken for the value presented. In Fig. 6.4, 
both the overall response is presented as well as a closer view of the elastic portion of the behaviour. 
It is clear from the graph that the stainless steel and carbon steel rebars exhibit quite different stress-
strain responses. The stainless steel specimens are much more ductile, with high ultimate strains and 
significant strain hardening, and also have a continuous curve without a clearly defined yield point. 
On the other hand, the carbon steel bars show a clear yield plateau followed by a moderate degree of 
strain hardening and limited ductility.  
With reference to the data presented in Table 6.6, the yield stress (fy) for the stainless steels are 515 
and 715 N/mm
 for the 10 mm and 12 mm bars, respectively, where the equivalent values for the 
carbon steel rebars are 589 and 554 N/mm
, respectively. The ultimate stress (fu) for stainless steels 
are 19.6% and 36.8% higher than that of carbon steel for 10 mm and the 12 mm bars, respectively. As 
expected, the grib-rib stainless steel rebars exhibit the highest strength value among the others. 
Additionally, the stainless steels provide greater ductility than the carbon steel by around 159% and 
129% for 10 mm and the 12 mm bars, respectively. It is also observed that the bars with diameter of 
12 mm have lower ductility than those with diameter of 10 mm by around 35.0% and 26.3% for 
stainless steel and carbon steel, respectively. Moreover, the modulus of elasticity for stainless steel 
and carbon steel are quite similar, apart from the grib-rib stainless steel rebar which shows relatively 
lower modulus of elasticity compared to the equivalent carbon steel rebar. 
Fig. 6.4: Stress-strain curves of stainless steels and carbon steels (a) full curve and (b) more detailed 
view of the elastic region. 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Strain (%)
CS D12
SS D12
CS D10
SS D10
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3
Strain (%)
CS D12
SS D12
CS D10
SS D10
Table 6.6: Mechanical properties of the reinforcements. 
Material  
Diameter 
Yield stress 
 (N/mm
Ultimate 
strength  
(N/mm
Modulus of 
elasticity 
(N/mm
Ductility  
(mm/mm) 
Stainless steel 10 515 790 200899 32.39 
Stainless steel 
(grib-rib) 
12 715 868 184000 21.05 
Carbon steel 10 589 661 201368 12.49 
Carbon steel 12 554 635 211766 9.21 
6.3.3 Bond test arrangement 
A total of 72 pull-out test samples were prepared, in accordance with the guidance in EN 10080 
(2005), in two phases. The first phase comprised 60 tests with 12 more cast for Phase 2. The moulds 
were fabricated from PVC material, as shown in Fig. 6.5. In the first phase of testing, each specimen 
was 110 mm in diameter and 120 mm in height. A single piece of rebar which was 500 mm in length 
was positioned at the centre of the specimen. The bond length was set at 60 mm for all specimens, so 
either 5 or 6 times the bar diameter, to reduce the effect of the longitudinal compressive stresses 
caused by bearing of the concrete against the plate that restrains the pull-out specimen (Carvalho et 
al., 2018). The concrete was then cast in a vertical direction, and was compacted using manual 
procedures. All specimens were demoulded the day after casting and then cured in a water tank for 28 
days, at a temperature of 21
C. Fig. 6.6  presents an image of a specimen in the testing machine as 
well as a schematic of the pull-out test arrangement. Two transducers were used to measure the slip 
and then the average value was taken. These were located on the bottom of the specimen, as shown in 
the figure. 
The second stage of testing was planned based on the results of the first phase, where splitting failure 
was prevalent (this will be discussed in more detail later). Accordingly, 12 more samples were 
prepared, each of which was 200 mm in length in order to avoid splitting failure. Cubic moulds were 
used in this phase due to unavailability of cylindrical moulds with a large enough diameter to avoid 
splitting of the concrete. In these samples, the bond length was set at 5 times the bar diameter and the 
overall bar length was 500 mm. As before, the stainless steel reinforcing bar was positioned in the 
centre of the specimen. The target concrete strength was 40 MPa and these specimens were cast in a 
horizontal direction and compacted using an electrical vibrator. 
Fig. 6.5: Photo of the rig used for casting pull-out specimens. 
(b) (c) 
Fig. 6.6: Pull-out test arrangement including (a) an image of the testing machine, (b) a schematic of 
the pull-out set-up for phase 1 and (c) a schematic of the pull-out set-up for phase 2. All dimensions 
are given in mm with a scale 1:7. 
6.4 Test results   
The pull-out test results are presented in Table 6.7. The programme included 5 repetitions of each 
specimen and the results presented in the table reflect the average behaviour. The results obtained 
from these repetitions are reported in Appendix C. A reference-system was adopted to label each 
specimen, where the first portion of the name denotes the type of rebar used (i.e. stainless steel (SS) or 
carbon steel (CS), the next term between the two hyphens defines the bar diameter (D10 or D12 for 
10 mm and 12 mm reinforcement, respectively), the third portion is the target concrete strength, 
whilst the last number refers to the phase of testing. In Table 6.7, the ultimate experimental bond 
strength () is calculated using Eq. (6. 21), where F is the ultimate applied load, l is the bonded length 
and  is the diameter of the rebar: 
(6. 21) 
Fig. 6.7(a) presents an image from a specimen in the first phase of testing. All of the cylindrical 
specimens in this group failed by splitting, irrespective of the type or size of the reinforcement. This is 
mainly attributed to the insufficient confinement provided by the concrete as well, perhaps, as the 
relatively long bonded length compared to the total length of the specimen. On the other hand, pull-
out failure was observed for all cubic specimens in Phase 2, as shown in Fig. 6.7(b), which were 
designed to provide more confinement.  
Fig. 6.8 presents the bond-slip response for the bond tests conducted in Phase 1 of the test 
programme, for samples with (a) C20, (b) C40 and (c) C60 concrete, respectively. All of these 
specimens failed by splitting of the concrete. Generally, with reference to the graphs, it is observed 
that the stainless steel rebars exhibit lower ultimate bond strength compared with that of carbon steels 
by around 28% on average. Using a higher bar diameter resulted in a slight improvement in the 
ultimate bond strength, relative to carbon steel. It is also shown that the samples with stainless steel 
rebars had a relatively lower softening response compared to that of carbon steels in all cases except 
the specimen with 12 mm stainless steel and C60 concrete strength. Additionally, it is noted that the 
ultimate bond strength is highly influenced by the strength of concrete as the samples with C60 
concrete strength achieved greater bond strengths by around 87% and 64% compared with the 
specimens made from C20 concrete, for stainless steel and carbon steel, respectively. 
Fig. 6.9 presents the bond-slip response for the samples from Phase 2 of the bond test programme, all 
of which failed by pull-out failure. Similar to the earlier observations, it is again shown that stainless 
steels achieve lower ultimate bond strength values compared with carbon steel reinforcement, by 
around 40% on average. By comparing specimens with the same concrete strength and bar diameter 
from Phase 1 and 2, it is clear that the difference in ultimate bond strength between the samples with 
stainless steel and carbon steel rebars is even greater when pull-out failure occurs rather than splitting. 
Additionally, it is noteworthy that stainless steels exhibit lower ultimate bond strength in phase 2 
compared to that of phase 1. The reason for this could be attributed to the influence that the geometry 
of specimens has on the bond strength of stainless steels. In general, the samples with stainless steel 
exhibit a more rapid reduction of bond strength also in the softening range compared to those with 
carbon steel, as well as lower residual bond values. It is also interesting to observe in Fig. 6.9 that the 
bond response for samples with stainless steel rebar fluctuates in the post-peak range, which did not 
occur for either the carbon steel reinforced samples or those in Phase 1 which failed by splitting. This 
could be linked to the rib spacing in the reinforcement since it is observed that the distance between 
the two plateaus is quite coinciding to the rib spacing. In the following sub-sections, the tests results 
are further analysed and the impact of particular properties such as concrete strength, bar diameter and 
reinforcement material type are discussed.  
(a) (b) 
Fig. 6.7: Failure mode for specimens with stainless steel reinforcement from (a) phase 1- splitting 
failure and (b) phase 2- pull-out failure. 
Table 6.7: Ultimate bond strength results of the pull-out tests.  
Specimen 
measured 
compressive 
strength, fc 
(MPa) 
diameter, 
Failure 
Ultimate 
strength,  
(MPa) 
Standard 
deviation 
(MPa) 
Difference in 
the ultimate 
bond strength, 
SS/CS (%) 
SS-D10-C20-1 
Splitting 12.1 0.75 
-24.4 
CS-D10-C20-1 Splitting 16.1 0.77 
SS-D12-C20-1 12 
Splitting 12.0 0.49 
-35.2 
CS-D12-C20-1 Splitting 18.5 0.51 
SS-D10-C40-1 
Splitting 21.3 1.56 
-15.6 
CS-D10-C40-1 Splitting 25.2 1.36 
SS-D12-C40-1 
Splitting 18.9 1.19 
-27.8 
CS-D12-C40-1 Splitting 26.1 0.82 
SS-D10-C40-2 
Pull-out 14.2 2.00 
-46.1 
CS-D10-C40-2 Pull-out 26.3 1.09 
SS-D12-C40-2 
Pull-out 17.5 1.83 
-34.3 
CS-D12-C40-2 Pull-out 26.6 0.60 
SS-D10-C60-1 
Splitting 22.4 1.28 
-15.0 
CS-D10-C60-1 Splitting 26.4 1.30 
SS-D12-C60-1 
Splitting 22.7 0.59 
-25.1 
CS-D12-C60-1 Splitting 30.26 0.64 
0 5 10 15 20
Slip (mm)
SS-D12-C20-1
CS-D12-C20-1
SS-D10-C20-1
CS-D10-C20-1
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Slip (mm)
SS-D12-C40-1
CS-D12-C40-1
SS-D10-C40-1
CS-D10-C40-1
Fig. 6.8: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for carbon and stainless steel reinforcements with concrete 
strength (a) 20 MPa (b) 40 MPa and (c) 60 MPa. 
Fig. 6.9: Pull-out bond stress-slip curves for carbon and stainless steel reinforcements with concrete 
strength 40 MPa. 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Slip (mm)
SS-D12-C60-1
CS-D12-C60-1
SS-D10-C60-1
CS-D10-C60-1
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Slip (mm)
SS-D12-C40-2
CS-D12-C40-2
SS-D10-C40-2
CS-D10-C40-2
6.4.1 Reinforcement material and diameter  
It was observed in the previous section that stainless steel rebars achieve lower ultimate bond strength 
values compared with carbon steels, in all cases examined in the current programme. For the samples 
that experienced splitting failure, the bond that develops for the 12 mm stainless steel rebar is 35.2%, 
27.8% and 25.1% lower than for carbon steel rebar for C20, C40 and C60, respectively. These same 
values for the 10 mm bars are 24.4%, 15.6% and 15%, respectively. It is shown that for both bar 
diameters examined, the difference between stainless steel and carbon steel is greatest when the 
concrete strength is relatively low, i.e. for the samples with C20 concrete. This is most likely owing to 
the fact the stainless steels have lower relative rib areas than the carbon steel bars, and this influence 
is greater when the concrete strength is relatively low.  
It is also observed that using bars with a greater diameter increases the difference in the ultimate bond 
strength between stainless steel and carbon steel, in all cases in Phase 1. This is attributed to the fact 
that increasing the bar diameter from 10 mm to 12 mm enhances the ultimate bond strength for carbon 
steel by around 11% on average whereas in contrast there is no considerable improvement for 
stainless steels or even results in lower bond strength in some particular cases. In contrast, for the 
samples that experienced pull-out failure in Phase 2, it is found that using bars with a greater diameter 
decreases the difference in the ultimate bond strength between stainless steel and carbon steel. It is 
observed that the bond strength for stainless steel increases by around 23% when the bar diameter 
changes from 10 mm to 12 mm. The equivalent value for carbon steel is just 1%. It is likely that the 
reason for this disparity is owing to the difference in the geometry of the samples used in Phase 1 and 
2, including bonded length. Therefore, conducting further tests on the influence of the bar diameter 
would be recommended.   
6.4.2 Concrete strength 
Fig. 6.10 (a) and (b) represent the influence that concrete strength has on the bond stress-slip 
behaviour for 10 mm stainless steel and carbon steel samples, respectively. The figures show that the 
samples with relatively higher concrete strength exhibit greater bond strength, in all cases. For 
example, the ultimate bond strength that develops for 10 mm diameter samples with C60 concrete 
strength is improved by around 85% and 65% for stainless steel and carbon steel rebars, respectively, 
compared to those with C20 concrete strength. These same values for 12 mm bars are 89% and 63%. 
This conclusion is in line with the research findings reported by the International federation for 
structural concrete (Balazs et al., 2014; Gambarova et al., 2000).  
It is noteworthy to observe that the samples with concrete strength C40 and C60 generate relatively 
similar ultimate bond strength values with difference being around 5.4% and 4.6% for stainless steel 
and carbon steel rebars, respectively, as shown in Fig. 6.10. This indicates that the influence of 
concrete strength becomes less significant after a certain strength level. This observation is in line 
with the guidance given in Eurocode 2, where the design rules limit the bond strength to the value for 
C60/75 concrete strength class, unless it is verified that the average bond strength increases above this 
limit (EN 1992-1-1, 2004).  
Fig. 6.10: Bond stress-slip curves for samples with 10 mm bar diameter and concrete strengths C20, 
C40 and C60 for (a) stainless steel and (b) carbon steel rebar. 
0 5 10 15 20
Slip (mm)
SS-D10-C20-1
SS-D10-C40-1
SS-D10-C60-1
0 5 10 15 20
Slip (mm)
CS-D10-C20-1
CS-D10-C40-1
CS-D10-C60-1
6.5 Comparison with design codes  
6.5.1 Design bond strength, anchorage and lap lengths  
Understanding the bond behaviour that develops between reinforcement and the surrounding concrete 
is imperative in the design of reinforced concrete structures, as it underpins the composite 
performance of the member. However, bond is a highly complex phenomenon that is influenced by 
many inter-related parameters which are difficult to measure and predict and therefore most global 
design standards provide quite conservative estimates for the bond strength that develops. In this 
context, the aim of this section is to evaluate the current design rules in Eurocode 2 and MC2010 for 
reinforced concrete through comparison with the experimental results discussed previously, in terms 
of bond strength, anchorage length and lap length, as shown in Table 6.8. Both stainless steel and 
carbon steel are included in the analysis.  
The experimental anchorage and lap lengths are obtained by substituting the experimental bond 
strength values into the appropriate Eurocode 2 design expressions without considering the minimum 
design values. It is noteworthy that the characteristic values for concrete and the reinforcement 
obtained experimentally and described in Section 6.3.2 are employed in this section in order to 
provide more realistic comparison. Since both codes predict bond strength on the basis of the 
characteristic values, the experimental bond results are presented here as the characteristic values 
which obtained using Eq. (6.19). 
It is observed from the data presented in Table 6.8 that the design bond strength values predicted by 
both Eurocode 2 and MC2010 are very conservative when compared with the experimental ultimate 
bond strength values obtained in the current analysis. The Eurocode 2 bond strength predictions are 
around 49% and 73% less than the test values for stainless steel and carbon steel reinforcement, 
respectively, whereas the equivalent values for MC2010 are 59% and 78%, respectively. In all cases 
included in the current study, MC2010 is more conservative in its predictions of the design bond 
strength compared with Eurocode 2 with the average difference being around 19%. 
With reference to the data in Table 6.8, it is observed that bond strength values obtained from 
Eurocode 2 for samples with stainless steel are identical to those with carbon steel for each concrete 
category irrespective of the bar size. On the other hand, in MC2010, it is observed that the difference 
in bond strength predictions between stainless steels and carbon steels are 13% and -19.6% on 
average for 10 mm and 12 mm bar diameter, respectively. As discussed in Section 6.2, the bond 
design rules in both codes are not influenced by the reinforcement type. Hence, this disparity in the 
prediction of bond is mainly because MC2010 takes into account the characteristic yield strength of 
the reinforcement and a higher reduction factor is applied for the rebar with greater characteristic 
yield strength. Since the 12 mm stainless steel rebar (grib-rib) has relatively higher strength property 
compared with the other bars, a lower bond strength is predicted.  
Similar conclusions are found for the design anchorage and lap lengths, as both Eurocode 2 and 
MC2010 provide extremely conservative anchorage and lap lengths compared with those calculated 
based on the experimental results. For instance, the anchorage lengths predicted using Eurocode 2 and 
MC2010 are higher than the experimental values by around 116% and 310% on average for stainless 
steel rebars and by around 281% and 570% for carbon steels, respectively. The equivalent values for 
the lap lengths are higher than the experimental results by around 134% and 310% on average for 
stainless steel rebars and by around 300% and 570% for carbon steel, respectively. It is clear that 
MC2010 is significantly more conservative than Eurocode 2, although it does take more of the 
influential material and geometrical properties in to account.  
For 10 mm stainless steel, the anchorage lengths obtained using Eurocode 2 and MC2010 are lower 
than those for carbon steels by around 13% and 22% on average, respectively. On the other hand, the 
equivalent values for the 12 mm stainless steel are higher than those for carbon steels by 29% and 
61%, respectively. Similar results are found for the lap lengths, as both Eurocode 2 and MC2010 
require shorter lap lengths for the 10 mm stainless steel rebars compared with those for carbon steels 
by 7% and 22% on average. However, the codes require greater lap lengths for the 12 mm stainless 
steel rebars compared with those for carbon steels by 25% and 60% on average. As discussed earlier, 
the differences in the anchorage and lap lengths between stainless and carbon steel rebars are mainly 
attributed to the variations of the characteristic yield strength of the reinforcements. 
In conclusion, the design bond values given in both Eurocode 2 and MC2010 are shown to be very 
conservative compared with the experimental results, even for the stainless steel reinforced concrete 
which was shown to have lower bond strength compared with regular carbon steel reinforced 
concrete.  Therefore, it is concluded that the current design rules can be safely applied for stainless 
steel reinforced concrete structures, for the parameter range considered herein. However, the design 
codes provide inaccurate and inefficient predictions, mainly owing to the fact that they are not based 
wholly on fundamental principles with all key parameters considered. In the following sub-section, 
the design bond-slip model provided in the MC2010 is evaluated for the case of splitting and pull-out 
failure modes. Consequently, new bond-slip models are proposed for both stainless steel and carbon 
steel reinforced concrete.     
Table 6.8: Results comparison with codes predictions  
Specimens Mean 
measured 
compressive 
strength, fc 
(MPa) 
Design bond strength, 
(MPa) 
Design anchorage 
length, 
Design lap length, 
Exp EC2 MC201
Exp EC2 MC2010 Exp EC2 MC201
SS-D10-C20-1 
4.1 3.1 3.1 190 256 360 190 256 360 
CS-D10-C20-1 8.1 3.1 2.8 111 293 464 111 293 464 
SS-D12-C20-1 4.0 3.1 2.1 325 427 878 325 427 878 
CS-D12-C20-1 10.5 3.1 2.6 96 331 547 96 331 547 
SS-D10-C40-1 
13.3 4.1 3.9 59 192 290 59 200 290 
CS-D10-C40-1 17.2 4.1 3.4 52 219 373 52 219 373 
SS-D12-C40-1 10.9 4.1 2.6 120 320 707 120 320 707 
CS-D12-C40-1 18.1 4.1 3.3 56 248 441 56 248 441 
SS-D10-C40-2 
6.2 4.2 3.9 127 187 284 127 200 284 
CS-D10-C40-2 18.3 4.2 3.5 49 213 365 49 213 365 
SS-D12-C40-2 9.5 4.2 2.7 138 311 692 138 311 692 
CS-D12-C40-2 18.6 4.2 3.3 54 241 431 54 241 431 
SS-D10-C60-1 
14.4 5.8 5.0 54 135 222 54 200 222 
CS-D10-C60-1 18.4 5.8 4.5 49 154 286 49 200 286 
SS-D12-C60-1 14.7 5.8 3.4 89 225 542 89 225 542 
CS-D12-C60-1 22.3 5.8 4.3 45 174 338 45 200 338 
6.5.2 Proposed bond stress-slip curve  
The local bond stress-slip relationship is a key issue in design of reinforced concrete structures and 
has a significant influence on the crack propagation, stiffness and also integrity and resilience of 
members and frames. Owing to the previously-discussed complexity in analysing bond, and the 
variety of test conditions and structural applications, a large number of analytical models have been 
proposed in the literature to simulate the bond-slip response in reinforced concrete (e.g. Nilson, 1968; 
Somayaji and Shah, 1981; Harajli et al., 1995 and Oh and Kim,  2007). The model which was 
presented by Eligehausen et al. (1982) and then further developed for inclusion in MC2010 
(Fdration Internationale du Bton, 2013) incorporates a more simplistic solution and corresponds to 
the experimental behaviour. Therefore, this model has been selected herein to evaluate the bond-slip 
response.  
As discussed in the experimental analysis earlier in this chapter, stainless steel rebars exhibit 
relatively lower bond strengths compared with carbon steel reinforcement. Hence, it is very 
imperative to examine the applicability of using the bond-slip model given in MC2010 for concrete 
members with stainless steel reinforcement. Since both pull-out failure and splitting failure were 
experienced in the tests, the bond-slip response is evaluated in terms of both failure modes. The 
results presented in this section are obtained for samples with C40 concrete strength. The details of 
the bond-slip model given in MC2010 are described previously in Fig. 6.1 using Eqs. (6.15)-(6.18) 
together with the parameters defined in Table 6.2.  
Fig. 6.11 presents the bond-slip curves predicted using MC2010 for the splitting failure mode together 
with the corresponding experimental results, for samples with bar diameter of 10 mm and 12 mm. It is 
generally shown that the bond-slip response obtained using MC2010 underestimates the experimental 
response, in all cases, by quite some margin. It is clear that the current bond-slip model provided in 
the MC2010 for splitting failure mode does not reflect the actual behaviour for both stainless steel and 
carbon steel, for the test parameters studied herein.  
It has been shown in this chapter that the bond behaviour for stainless steel reinforced concrete is 
different to that of carbon steel reinforced concrete and therefore different bond-slip models are 
developed for each. The proposed curves for stainless steel and carbon steel are presented in Fig. 6.11 
using Eqs. (6.15)-(6.18) together with the parameters defined in Table 6.9. The clear space between 
ribs (cclear) is taken as 6 mm in all cases. It is evident from the data presented in Fig. 6.11 that the 
proposed curves provide a more accurate and representative depiction of the experimental behaviour 
in terms of the ascending branch, the ultimate bond strength and also softening range, in all cases. It is 
observed that implementing the proposed curves improves the ultimate bond strength by around 22% 
on average for stainless steel rebars and 38% for carbon steels.  
Table 6.9: Parameters details for the proposed splitting bond-slip model. 
 Splitting failure (unconfined) 
Current model in 
MC2010 
Proposed model 
for stainless steel 
Proposed model 
for carbon steel  
bmax 2.5(fcm)
0.5 3(fcm)
0.5 4(fcm)
bu split Eq. (6.20) Eq. (6.22) Eq. (6.23) 
s1 s(bu split) 0.5s(bu split) 0.5s(bu split) 
s2 s1 s1 s1 
s3 1.2s1 cclear 1.5cclear 
 0.4 0.4 0.4 
bf 0 0 0 
In addition to the bond stress-slip relationship, the expression given in Eq. (6.20) previously for the 
ultimate bond strength for the splitting failure mode has been updated based on the analysis presented 
herein for stainless steel and carbon steel, as presented in Eqs. (6.22) and (6.23), respectively. It is 
indicated that Eqs. (6.22) and (6.23) have been updated by only calibrating the first parameter in 
Eq. (6.20).  
bu,split = 8.52 (
+ kmKtr] 
(6.22) 
bu,split = 112 (
+ kmKtr] 
(6.23) 
Fig. 6.11: Bond stress-slip curves for samples with reinforcement which is (a) 10 mm in diameter and 
(b) 12 mm in diameter.  
0 5 10 15 20
Slip (mm)
CS-D10-C40-1
SS-D10-C40-1
MC 2010
Proposed curve for SS
Proposed curve for CS
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Slip (mm)
CS-D12-C40-1
SS-D12-C40-1
MC 2010
Proposed curve for SS
Proposed curve for CS
Fig. 6.12 presents the bond-slip curves predicted using the MC2010 for pull-out failure, together with 
the corresponding values from the experimental programme, for both stainless and carbon steel 
reinforcement. Generally, it is clear that the MC2010 bond model does not reflect the actual bond-slip 
behaviour for either stainless steel or carbon steel reinforced concrete. For example, the MC2010 
bond model results in a softer response in the ascending and descending branches and lower ultimate 
bond strength as well as an overestimation of the residual bond strength, compared with the 
experimental data. Moreover, the de-bonding part of the response is simulated in MC2010 as a 
linearly descending branch followed by constant level of the residual bond stress. It is very clear that 
this is quite different from the behaviour observed during the tests where the bond stress decreased 
gradually in an exponential manner.  
The shape of the proposed bond model for the pull-out failure mode is presented in Fig. 6.13, together 
with the current model provided in MC2010. Since the post-peak region of the response has already 
been shown to be inaccurately represented by the MC2010, an exponential curve is implemented in 
order to reflect the experimental behaviour. The bond stress for the proposed model is calculated as a 
function of the relative displacement as given in Eqs. (6.24)-(6.26) and shown in Fig. 6.13. By 
comparing the proposed models with experimental responses, as presented in Fig. 6.12, it can be seen 
that the proposed models are in excellent agreement with experimental responses especially in the 
post-peak range, for both stainless steel and carbon steel reinforced concrete. It is believed that 
implementing these changes in the codes of practice will ensure providing more accurate and efficient 
design rules, which is extremely important for all structures, but particular those containing stainless 
steel reinforcement owing to its high initial cost. 
b = bmax (s/s1)
 for  0  s  s1 (6.24) 
b = bmax for  s1  s  s2 (6.25) 
b = bmax (s2/s)
1 for  s2  s (6.26) 
where these parameters are defined in Table 6.10. 
Table 6.10: Parameters details for the proposed pull-out bond-slip model. 
 Pull-out failure 
Current model in 
MC2010 
Proposed model 
for stainless steel 
Proposed model 
for carbon steel 
bmax 2.5(fcm)
0.5 2.4(fcm)
0.5 4(fcm)
s1 1.0 mm 0.5 0.2 
s2 2.0 mm 2 1 
s3 cclear - - 
 0.4 0.4 0.4 
1 - 0.9 0.6 
bf 0.4bmax - - 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Slip (mm)
SS-D12-C40-2
SS-D10-C40-2
MC 2010
Proposed curve
Fig. 6.12: Bond stress-slip curves for samples with (a) stainless steel and (b) carbon steel.  
Fig. 6.13: Bond stress-slip models for pull-out failure mode. 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Slip (mm)
CS-D12-C40-2
CS-D10-C40-2
MC 2010
Proposed curve
6.6 A summary of the recommendations for the codes of practice 
Following a detailed experimental and analytical analysis on the bond behaviour of stainless steel and 
carbon steel reinforcements, recommendations for the code of practice have been summarized as 
follows: 
 For the range of data examined here, it is observed that the stainless steel rebars exhibit lower 
ultimate bond strength compared with that of carbon steels by around 28% on average. 
 In general, the samples with stainless steel exhibit a more rapid reduction of bond strength 
also in the softening range compared to those with carbon steel, as well as lower residual 
bond values in the case of pull-out failure. 
 It is shown that the samples with relatively higher concrete strength exhibit greater bond 
strength. However, the influence of concrete strength becomes less significant after a certain 
strength level. 
 The design bond values given in both Eurocode 2 and MC2010 are shown to be very 
conservative compared with the experimental results, even for the stainless steel reinforced 
concrete.  
 It is concluded that the current design rules can be safely applied for stainless steel reinforced 
concrete structures, for the parameter range considered herein. However, the design codes 
provide inaccurate and inefficient predictions, mainly owing to the fact that they are not based 
wholly on fundamental principles with all key parameters considered.  
 It is generally shown that the bond-slip response obtained using MC2010 underestimates the 
experimental response, in all cases, by quite some margin, which does not reflect the actual 
behaviour for both stainless steel and carbon steel, for the test parameters studied herein.  
 The post-peak region of the response has already been shown to be inaccurately represented 
by the MC2010, therefore it is suggested to implement an exponential curve in order to reflect 
the experimental behaviour. 
 Consequently, new bond-slip models are proposed for both stainless steel and carbon steel 
reinforced concrete, as discussed in Section 6.5.2.     
6.7 Concluding remarks  
This chapter has presented a detailed analysis of the bond behaviour between stainless steel 
reinforcement and the surrounding concrete, including both experimental and design analysis. It is 
shown that stainless steel rebar generally develops lower bond strength with the surrounding concrete 
compared with equivalent carbon steel reinforcement. Moreover, it is shown that existing design 
codes are extremely conservative and generally underestimate the actual bond strength by a 
significant margin. Therefore, following detailed analysis, it is concluded that current design rules can 
be safely applied for stainless steel rebar, although more accurate and efficient methods can be 
achieved. Hence, new design parameters are proposed reflecting the bond behaviour of stainless steel 
rebar, so that more efficient designs can be achieved. 
Chapter 7: Conclusions and suggestions for future research  
7.1 Introduction  
There are currently huge demands to improve the durability and the resilience of reinforced concrete 
structures, mainly because of corrosion of the reinforcement and as a result of deterioration and 
carbonation of concrete. In aggressive environments, corrosion is difficult to avoid especially for 
those structures reinforced with traditional carbon steels. In this context, the use of stainless steel 
reinforcement is an ideal solution to treat the corrosion problem owing to its exceptional corrosion 
resistance. This chapter presents a summary of the main research findings and primary conclusions 
drawn from this thesis. Additionally, this chapter provides recommendations for further research 
building on the current work. 
7.2 Conclusions  
This thesis has presented a detailed study into the behaviour of stainless steel reinforcement in 
reinforced concrete. The current design approach for stainless steel reinforced concrete members has 
been evaluated. Accordingly, a new deformation-based design method that harnesses the advantages 
of material strain hardening in the design has been developed to predict the bending moment capacity 
for stainless steel reinforced concrete beams. The design method is developed in two forms, first as a 
full model in which the whole material response is considered and then as a simplified model 
incorporating a more simplistic elastic-linear hardening stainless steel constitutive response. Finally, 
the proposed method is validated by utilising the numerical model. 
A comprehensive parametric study has been carried out to investigate the effect of the most influential 
parameters on the performance of stainless steel concrete beams including various concrete strengths 
and reinforcement grades and different geometries. Moreover, the serviceability limit state of stainless 
steel reinforced concrete beams has been assessed through analysing the deflection behaviour 
compared to the predicted response from Eurocode 2.    
The bond behaviour of stainless steel reinforced concrete has been explored in comparison with the 
traditional reinforced concrete, through experimental testing and analysis. The results are also 
compared with existing design rules in terms of bond strength, anchorage length and lap length. 
Finally, suitable bond-slip models for stainless steel and also carbon steel reinforcements are 
proposed. 
Overall, the results and analysis presented in this thesis have provided an excellent basis for engineers 
to specify stainless steel reinforcement in reinforced concrete beams in an efficient and sustainable 
manner, with minimal wastage of materials. The main conclusions from the work presented in this 
thesis are as follows:  
 Stainless steel is a very ductile material that has distinctive characteristics such as corrosion 
and fire resistance, durability and excellent sustainability credentials. A strong case was 
presented for why stainless steel can provide a legitimate solution for some of the most 
common and expensive challenges associated with concrete infrastructure, i.e. premature 
failure or loss of the structural capacity through degradation of the steel reinforcement.  
 There are two main barriers to more widespread use of stainless steel rebar in construction. 
Firstly, there is a perception amongst engineers that it is prohibitively expensive. Although 
stainless steel is undoubtedly more expensive than carbon steel in terms of initial costs, over 
the life time of a structure if maintenance and rehabilitation works can be avoided through the 
use of more durable materials, then stainless steel provides a very competitive and efficient 
design option. This is certainly an area that warrants a more detailed analysis, once efficient 
design rules have been established. Secondly, there is a huge dearth of useful design data and 
guidance to assist engineers in the specification of stainless steel reinforced concrete, which is 
the focus of the current thesis. 
 Current design codes such as Eurocode 2 do not include specific guidance for stainless steel 
and therefore ignore the significant strain hardening characteristics and high levels of ductility 
that it offers. This design approach provides inaccurate strength capacity predictions. It is 
concluded that ignoring strain hardening of stainless steel results in overly-conservative and 
inaccurate capacity predictions and underestimates the load-bearing capacity of stainless steel 
concrete beams. 
 The current study implements the Continuous Strength Method for the design of reinforced 
concrete beams including full and simplified approaches which incorporate the distinctive 
mechanical characteristics of stainless steel. It is shown that the full and simplified analytical 
solutions provide a reliable means for predicting the capacity of beam. These approaches can 
be used by engineers wishing to include stainless steel reinforced concrete in their designs, 
without the inefficiencies of existing methods. 
 A comprehensive parametric study has been conducted to study the influence that various 
geometric and material properties have on the capacity of stainless steel reinforced concrete 
members and on the exploitation of strain hardening in the rebar. It is shown that further 
exploitation of the strain hardening capacity in the rebar is achieved when a relatively higher 
grade of concrete is employed. It is also found that the geometry of the beam has a relatively 
small influence on the exploitation of strain hardening. Moreover, it is observed that the 
levels of stress in the rebar are relatively lower when a higher reinforcement ratio is 
employed. 
 In the design of structural stainless steel sections, it is recommended to use the secant 
modulus in deflection calculations rather than the elastic modulus. In order to investigate this 
for reinforced concrete design, the predicted deflections calculated using secant modulus and 
also the tangent modulus of the stainless steel reinforcement are compared with their 
corresponding numerical values. The results presented in Chapter 5 show that there is only a 
minor improvement in the deflection predictions by adopting the secant modulus rather than 
the elastic modulus in the calculations. The predictions obtained using the tangent modulus 
were significantly less accurate than when the elastic modulus or the secant modulus is 
employed. Therefore, it is recommended that the elastic modulus is employed in the 
calculation of deflections for stainless steel RC beams. 
 From the data and analysis presented in Chapter 6, it is clear that stainless steel reinforcement 
exhibits lower bond strength compared with carbon steel reinforcement. The current bond 
design rules in global design standards such as Eurocode 2 and MC2010 do not reflect this 
fact, but are shown to be very conservative nonetheless. The code predictions are compared 
with the experimental findings, in terms of bond strength, anchorage length and lap length 
and it is shown that the standards are overly conservative for both stainless and carbon steel 
reinforcements. Although the current design rules in Eurocode 2 and MC2010 can be safely 
applied for stainless steel reinforced concrete, they provide neither an accurate nor efficient 
solution. Moreover, the bond stress-slip model presented in the MC2010 has been examined 
in terms of pull-out and splitting failure modes and has been found to not reflect the 
experimental response. Therefore, new design parameters have been proposed which more 
accurately depict the true behaviour. 
7.3 Recommendations for further research 
This thesis has filled significant knowledge gaps in the design of stainless steel reinforced concrete 
and enables stainless steel rebars to be specified in design with more confidence. However, there are 
still other aspects which should be explored to thoroughly understand the behaviour of stainless steel 
reinforced concrete owing to this being relatively new and novel topic. Therefore, the following 
suggestions are proposed for future research:    
 Stainless steel reinforcement is exploited widely in the construction industry and can be found 
in a wide range of applications owing to its favourable characteristics in terms of corrosion 
resistance, long life cycle, formability, durability and recyclability. These distinctive 
properties depend on the constituent elements of the stainless steel alloy. However, there is 
currently a lack of useful guidance in global design standards to assist engineers in the 
selection of the appropriate stainless steel grade. Therefore, it is recommended to establish a 
new classification system considering the key parameters including the metallurgical 
composition, exposure conditions, type of the application and design lifetime. 
 It is now clear that the different grades may demonstrate different behaviour owing to the 
variations in the chemical composition. Therefore, it is recommend to study the metallurgical 
behaviour of various grades of stainless steel reinforcement.  
 There is a huge dearth of the experimental data in the literature into the structural behaviour 
of stainless steel reinforced concrete members, and therefore it is highly encouraged to 
conduct experimental tests on this topic to build robust understanding of the behaviour and to 
provide a sufficient data which can be used for numerical validation purposes. 
 A new deformation-based design method has been proposed in this thesis including full and 
simplified approach in order to exploit the significant strain hardening and ductility of 
stainless steel reinforcement in the flexural design of reinforced concrete beams. This 
approach has been successfully implemented and shown to improve the load bearing capacity 
of the section. Hence, it is suggested to extend this approach for different applications 
including columns, slabs and retaining walls. Moreover, a detailed analysis of the behaviour 
of building frames and systems, rather than individual elements, is required. 
 Although, this thesis has demonstrated a comprehensive analysis to study the behaviour of 
stainless steel reinforced concrete and the most influential parameters, the behaviour was only 
assessed under normal conditions and therefore it is recommended to study the behaviour 
under excessive load conditions including fire and earthquake conditions. 
References  
Aal Hassan,  A. (2003) 'Bond of reinforcement in concrete with different types of 
corroded bars', Master Thesis, Reyerson University, Toronto, pp. 106.  
Aalco. (2013) 'Specifications for Stainless Steel Products'. Available at: 
http://www.aalco.co.uk/literature/files/aalco-stainless-steel.pdf (Accessed: 26/3/2017). 
Abdella, K. (2006) 'Inversion of a full-range stressstrain relation for stainless steel 
alloys', International Journal of Non-Linear Mechanics, 41(3), pp. 456-463. 
Afshan, S. and Gardner, L. (2013) 'The continuous strength method for structural stainless 
steel design', Thin-Walled Structures, 68, pp. 42-49. 
Ahlborn, T. and DenHartigh, T. (2003) 'Comparative bond study of stainless and high-
chromium reinforcing bars in concrete', Transportation Research Record: Journal of the 
Transportation Research Board, (1845), pp. 88-95.  
Alfano, G., De Cicco, Ph. D, Fiorenzo & Prota, A. (2011) 'Intermediate debonding failure 
of RC beams retrofitted in flexure with FRP: Experimental results versus prediction of 
codes of practice', Journal of Composites for Construction, 16(2), pp. 185-195. 
Alih, S. and Khelil, A. (2012) 'Behavior of inoxydable steel and their performance as 
reinforcement bars in concrete beam: Experimental and nonlinear finite element analysis',  
Construction and Building Materials, 37, pp. 481-492.  
Alvarez, S.M., Bautista, A. and Velasco, F. (2011) 'Corrosion behaviour of corrugated 
lean duplex stainless steels in simulated concrete pore solutions', Corrosion Science, 
53(5), pp. 1748-1755. 
Ashraf, M., Gardner, L. and Nethercot, D.A. (2008) 'Structural stainless steel design: 
resistance based on deformation capacity', Journal of Structural Engineering, 134(3), pp. 
402-411. 
BA 84/02 (2003) 'Design manual for roads and bridges part 15: use of stainless steel 
reinforcement in highway structures'. Highways Agency UK. 
Baddoo, N.R. (2008) 'Stainless steel in construction: A review of research, applications, 
challenges and opportunities', Journal of Constructional Steel Research, 64(11), pp. 1199-
1206.  
Baddoo, R. and Burgan, A. (2012) 'Structural Design of Stainless Steel', SCI Publication 
No. P291. The Steel Construction Institute. 
Balazs, G., Cairns, J., Eligehausen, R., Lettow, S., Metelli, G., Pantazopoulou, S. and 
Plizzari, G. (2014) 'Bond and anchorage of embedded reinforcement: background to the 
fib model code for concrete structures 2010', Bulletin 72, pp. 7. 
Bautista, A., Blanco, G., Velasco, F., Gutirrez, A., Palacn, S., Soriano, L. & Takenouti, 
H. (2007) 'Passivation of duplex stainless steel in solutions simulating chloride-
contaminated concrete', Materiales de Construccin, 57(288), pp. 17-32. 
Bautista, A., Blanco, G., Velasco, F., Gutirrez, A., Palacn, S., Soriano, L. and 
Takenouti, H. (2007) 'Passivation of duplex stainless steel in solutions simulating 
chloride-contaminated concrete', Materiales de Construccin, 57(288), pp. 17-32. 
Bertolini, L., Gastaldi, M., Pedeferri, P. and Redaelli, E. (2002) 'Factors influencing the 
corrosion resistance of austenitic and duplex stainless steel bars in chloride bearing 
concrete', 15th International Corrosion Congress-ICC, pp. 1-9. 
British Highways Authority (2003) 'Advice note: Design manual for roads and bridges 
BA84/02:" The use of stainless steel reinforcement in highway structures. Available at: 
https://www.bssa.org.uk/cms/File/REBar%20report.pdf (Accessed: 5 March 2019). 
British Stainless Steel Association. (2000) 'Classification of stainless steel types'. 
Available at: https://www.bssa.org.uk/cms/File/SSAS1.2-
Classification%20of%20Stainless%20Steels.pdf (Accessed: 25/3/2017).  
British Stainless Steel Association. (2003) 'The use of stainless steel reinforcement on 
bridges'. Available at: http://www.bssa.org.uk/cms/File/REBar%20report.pdf (Accessed: 
11 April 2017).  
British Stainless Steel Association. (2016) 'Recycling of stainless steel'. Available at: 
http://www.bssa.org.uk/topics.php?article=92 (Accessed: 9/4/2017). 
Briz, E., Biezma, M. and Bastidas, D. (2018) 'Stress corrosion cracking of new 2001 
leanduplex stainless steel reinforcements in chloride contained concrete pore solution: 
An electrochemical study', Construction and Building Materials, 192, pp. 1-8. 
BS 4449+A3 (2005) 'Steel for the reinforcement of concrete. Weldable reinforcing steel. 
Bar, coil and decoiled product. Specifications', British Standards Institution. 
BS 6744 (2016) 'Stainless steel bars for the reinforcement of concrete. Requirements and 
test methods', British Standards Institution. 
Bypour, M., Gholhaki, M., Kioumarsi, M. and Kioumarsi, B. (2019) 'Nonlinear analysis 
to investigate effect of connection type on behavior of steel plate shear wall in RC frame', 
Engineering Structures, 179, pp. 611-624. 
Calderon-Uriszar-Aldaca, I., Briz, E., Larrinaga, P. and Garcia, H. (2018) 'Bonding 
strength of stainless steel rebars in concretes exposed to marine environments', 
Construction and Building Materials, 172, pp. 125-133. 
Carvalho, E.P., Miranda, M.P., Fernandes, D.S. and Alves, G.V. (2018) 'Comparison of 
test methodologies to evaluate steel-concrete bond strength of thin reinforcing bar', 
Construction and Building Materials, 183, pp. 243-252.  
Castro, H., Rodriguez, C., Belzunce, F. and Canteli, A. (2003) 'Mechanical properties and 
corrosion behaviour of stainless steel reinforcing bars', Journal of Materials Processing 
Technology, 143, pp. 134-137. 
Chen, W., Hao, H. and Chen, S. (2015) 'Numerical analysis of prestressed reinforced 
concrete beam subjected to blast loading', Materials & Design (1980-2015), 65, pp. 662-
Cotsovos, D.M. (2013) 'Cracking of RC beam/column joints: Implications for the analysis 
of frame-type structures', Engineering Structures, 52, pp. 131-139. 
Cramer, S., Covino, B., Bullard, S., Holcomb, G., Russell, J., Nelson, F., Laylor, H. and 
Soltesz, S. (2002) 'Corrosion prevention and remediation strategies for reinforced 
concrete coastal bridges', Cement and Concrete Composites, 24(1), pp. 101-117.  
Darwin, D. and Graham, E.K. (1993) Effect of deformation height and spacing on bond 
strength of reinforcing bars, ACI Structural Journal, 90 (6), pp. 646-657.  
Dassault Systmes. (2016) Abaqus users Guide Manual [Computer program]. 
http://dixon:2080/texis/search/?query=concrete+materialandgroup=bkandCDB=v2016and
submit.x=0andsubmit.y=0.  
Dede, T. and Ayvaz, Y. (2009) Nonlinear analysis of reinforced concrete beam 
with/without tension stiffening effect, Materials & Design, 30(9), pp. 3846-3851. 
Dong, J., Wang, Q. and Guan, Z. (2013) 'Structural behaviour of RC beams with external 
flexural and flexuralshear strengthening by FRP sheets', Composites Part B: 
Engineering, 44(1), pp. 604-612.  
Earij, A., Alfano, G., Cashell, K. and Zhou, X. (2017) Nonlinear threedimensional 
finiteelement modelling of reinforcedconcrete beams: Computational challenges and 
experimental validation, Engineering Failure Analysis, 82, pp. 92-115.. 
Edvardsen, C. (2008) 'Tailor-made concrete structuresCase studies from projects 
worldwide'. Available at: http://www.abece.com.br/web/restrito/restrito/pdf/ch011.pdf 
(Accessed: 5 March 2017). 
Eladly, M.M. (2020) 'Behaviour of stainless steel beam-to-column bolted connections
Part 1: Simplified FE model', Journal of Constructional Steel Research, 164, pp. 105784. 
Eligehausen, R., Popov, E.P. and Bertero, V.V. (1982) 'local bond stress-slip relationships 
of deformed bars under generalized excitations', (4) pp. 69-80 
EN 10080 (2005) 'Steel for the reinforcement of concrete Weldable reinforcing steel
General', European Committee for Standardization (CEN).  
EN 10088-1 (2014) 'Stainless steels Part 1: List of stainless steels', European Committee 
for Standardization (CEN).   
EN 10088-2 (2014) 'Stainless steels Part 2: Technical delivery conditions for sheet/plate 
and strip of corrosion resisting steels for general purposes', European Committee for 
Standardization (CEN).  
EN 12390-3 (2009) 'Testing hardened concrete Part 3: Compressive strength of test 
specimens', European Committee for Standardization (CEN).   
EN 15630-1 (2010) 'Steel for the reinforcement and prestressing of concrete. Test 
methods Part 1: Reinforcing bars, wire rod and wire', European Committee for 
Standardization (CEN).   
EN 1992-1-1. (2004) Eurocode 2: Design of concrete structures part 1-1: General rules 
and rules for buildings', European Committee for Standardization (CEN).      
EN 6892-1 (2016) 'Metallic materials- Tensile testing part 1: Method of test at room 
temperature', European Committee for Standardization (CEN).   
Evans, K. (2002) 'RB Rebak in Corrosion ScienceA Retrospective and Current Status in 
Honor of Robert P', Frankenthal, PV, 13, pp. 344-354.  
Fan, S., Ding, X., Sun, W., Zhang, L. and Liu, M. (2016) 'Experimental investigation on 
fire resistance of stainless steel columns with square hollow section', Thin-Walled 
Structures, 98, pp. 196-211. 
Fan, S., Tan, K.H. and Nguyen, M.P. (2018) 'Numerical Model to Determine Shear 
Capacity of Reinforced Concrete Deep Beams Exposed to Fire', in High Tech Concrete: 
Where Technology and Engineering Meet. Springer, pp. 1410-1419. 
Fan, S., Tan, K.H. and Nguyen, M.P. (2018) 'Numerical Model to Determine Shear 
Capacity of Reinforced Concrete Deep Beams Exposed to Fire', in High Tech Concrete: 
Where Technology and Engineering Meet. Springer, pp. 1410-1419. 
Farzad, M., Shafieifar, M. and Azizinamini, A. (2019) 'Experimental and numerical study 
on bond strength between conventional concrete and Ultra High-Performance Concrete 
(UHPC)', Engineering Structures, 186, pp. 297-305. 
Fdration Internationale du Bton (2013) Fib Model Code for Concrete Structures 2010. 
Berlin: Wilhelm Ernst & Sohn Verlag fur Architektur und Technische. 
Gambarova, P, Balazs, G, Vliet, AB, Cairns, J, Eligehausen, R, Engstrom, B, Giuriani, E, 
Leon, R, Mayer, U, McCabe, S, Noghabai, K, Plizzari, G, Rosati, GP, Russo, G, Shima, 
H, Ueda, T and Vandewalle, L (2000) 'Bond mechanics including pull-out and splitting 
failures', Bulletin - Federation internationale du beton, pp. 1-97. 
Garca-Alonso, M., Escudero, M., Miranda, J., Vega, M.I., Capilla, F., Correia, M., Salta, 
M., Bennani, A. and Gonzlez, J. (2007) 'Corrosion behaviour of new stainless steels 
reinforcing bars embedded in concrete', Cement and Concrete Research, 37(10), pp. 
1463-1471. 
Gardner L., Nethercot D.A. (2004) Structural stainless steel design: a new approach. 
Journal of Structural Engineering, 82(21),pp. 21-30.  
Gardner, L. (2005) 'The use of stainless steel in structures', Progress in Structural 
Engineering and Materials, 7(2), pp. 45-55.  
Gardner, L. (2008) 'The continuous strength method', Proceedings of the Institution of 
Civil Engineers - Structures and Buildings, 161(3), pp. 127-133. 
Gardner, L. and Theofanous, M. (2008) 'Discrete and continuous treatment of local 
buckling in stainless steel elements', Journal of Constructional Steel Research, 64(11), pp. 
1207-1216.  
Gardner, L., Bu, Y., Francis, P., Baddoo, N.R., Cashell, K.A. and McCann, F. (2016) 
'Elevated temperature material properties of stainless steel reinforcing bar', Construction 
and Building Materials, 114, pp. 977-997. 
Gardner, L., Wang, F. and Liew, A. (2011) 'Influence of strain hardening on the behavior 
and design of steel structures', International Journal of Structural Stability and Dynamics, 
11(05), pp. 855-875.  
Gardner, L., Yun, X., Macorini, L. and Kucukler, M. (2017) 'Hot-rolled steel and steel-
concrete composite design incorporating strain hardening', Structures, 9, pp. 21-28. 
Gedge, G. (2003) 'Rationale for using stainless steel reinforcement in the UK construction 
industry', Arup Materials Consulting, UK. 
George, J., Rama, J.K., Kumar, M.S. and Vasan, A. (2017) 'Behavior of Plain Concrete 
Beam subjected to Three Point Bending using Concrete Damaged Plasticity (CDP) 
Model', Materials Today: Proceedings, 4(9), pp. 9742-9746 
Harajli, M., Hout, M. and Jalkh, W. (1995) 'Local bond stress-slip behavior of reinforcing 
bars embedded in plain and fiber concrete', Materials Journal, 92(4), pp. 343-353. 
Hassanein, M. and Silvestre, N. (2013) 'Flexural behavior of lean duplex stainless steel 
girders with slender unstiffened webs', Journal of Constructional Steel Research, 85, pp. 
12-23. 
Helland, S. (2013) 'Design for service life: implementation of fib Model Code 2010 rules 
in the operational code ISO 16204', Structural Concrete, 14(1), pp. 10-18. 
Huang, Y. and Young, B. (2014) 'Design of cold-formed lean duplex stainless steel 
members in combined compression and bending', Journal of Structural Engineering, 
141(5), pp. 04014138. 
Huang, Y. and Young, B. (2014) 'Stressstrain relationship of cold-formed lean duplex 
stainless steel at elevated temperatures', Journal of Constructional Steel Research, 92, pp. 
103-113. 
Jamali, A., Angst, U., Adey, B. and Elsener, B. (2013) 'Modeling of corrosion-induced 
concrete cover cracking: A critical analysis', Construction and Building Materials, 42, pp. 
225-237. 
Johnson, J.B. (2010) 'Bond strength of corrosion resistant steel reinforcement in concrete', 
Master of Science in Civil Engineering, Faculty of the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University.  
Kalina R. D., Mac Lean S., and Breen J. E. (2011) 'Comparative Study of Mechanical and 
Corrosion Resistance Properties of Bridge Post-Tensioning Strands', The Center for 
Transportation Research at The University of Texas. Austin. 
Kmiecik, P. and Kamiski, M. (2011) 'Modelling of reinforced concrete structures and 
composite structures with concrete strength degradation taken into consideration', 
Archives of civil and mechanical engineering, 11(3), pp. 623-636. 
Lan, X., Chen, J., Chan, T. and Young, B. (2018) 'The continuous strength method for the 
design of high strength steel tubular sections in compression', Engineering Structures, 
162, pp. 177-187. 
Lee, J. and Fenves, G.L. (1998) 'Plastic-damage model for cyclic loading of concrete 
structures', Journal of Engineering Mechanics, 124(8), pp. 892. 
Liew, A. and Gardner, L. (2015) 'Ultimate capacity of structural steel cross-sections under 
compression, bending and combined loading', Structures, 1, pp. 2-11. 
Lopes, N., Real, P.V., da Silva, L.S. and Franssen, J. (2012) 'Numerical analysis of 
stainless steel beam-columns in case of fire', Fire Safety Journal, 50, pp. 35-50. 
Lubliner, J., Oliver, J., Oller, S. and Onate, E. (1989) 'A plastic-damage model for 
concrete', International Journal of Solids and Structures, 25(3), pp. 299-326. 
Markeset, G., Rostam, S. and Klinghoffer, O. (2006) Guide for the use of stainless steel 
reinforcement in concrete structures, Norwegian Building Research Institute, Norway. 
McGurn, J. (1998) 'Stainless steel reinforcing bars in concrete', Proceedings of the 
International Conference of Corrosion and Rehabilitation of Reinforced Concrete 
Structures, Orlando, FL, FHWA.  
Medina, E., Medina, J.M., Cobo, A. and Bastidas, D.M. (2015) 'Evaluation of mechanical 
and structural behavior of austenitic and duplex stainless steel reinforcements', 
Construction and Building Materials, 78, pp. 1-7.  
Metals4U. (2019) 'Stainless steel reinforcing bar'. Available at: 
https://www.metals4u.co.uk/stainless-steel/c8/reinforcing-bar/c1875 (Accessed: 19/11 
2019). 
Mirambell, E. and Real, E. (2000) 'On the calculation of deflections in structural stainless 
steel beams: an experimental and numerical investigation', Journal of Constructional Steel 
Research, 54(1), pp. 109-133. 
Nationwide Stainless. (2019) 'Stainless Steel Rebar'. Available at:  
https://www.nationwidestainless.co.uk/products/stainless_steel_rebar/ (Accessed: 
19/11/2019). 
Nickel Institute (2018) 'Progreso pier built with nickel-containing stainless steel'. 
Available at: https://www.nickelinstitute.org/media/2541/progresopierrepackagefb.pdf 
(Accessed: 11/04 2019). 
Nilson, A.H. (1968) 'Nonlinear analysis of reinforced concrete by the finite element 
method', Journal Proceedings. , pp. 757-766. 
Nurnberger, U. (1996) Stainless Steel in Concrete: State of the Art Report. European 
Federation of Corrosion. 
Obaidat, Y.T., Heyden, S., Dahlblom, O., Abu-Farsakh, G. and Abdel-Jawad, Y. (2011) 
'Retrofitting of reinforced concrete beams using composite laminates', Construction and 
Building Materials, 25(2), pp. 591-597. 
Oh, B.H. and Kim, S.H. (2007) 'Realistic models for local bond stress-slip of reinforced 
concrete under repeated loading', Journal of Structural Engineering, 133(2), pp. 216-224. 
Otieno, M.B., Beushausen, H.D. and Alexander, M.G. (2011) 'Modelling corrosion 
propagation in reinforced concrete structuresA critical review', Cement and Concrete 
Composites, 33(2), pp. 240-245. 
Prez-Quiroz, J., Tern, J., Herrera, M., Martnez, M. and Genesc, J. (2008) 'Assessment 
of stainless steel reinforcement for concrete structures rehabilitation', Journal of 
Constructional Steel Research, 64(11), pp. 1317-1324. 
Pietro, P., Luca, B., Fabio, B., Tommaso, P. (1998) 'Behavior of Stainless Steels in 
Concrete', Repair and Rehabilitation of Reinforced Concrete Structures: The State of the 
Art, pp. 192. 
Rabi, M., Cashell, K. and Shamass, R. (2019) 'Flexural analysis and design of stainless 
steel reinforced concrete beams', Engineering Structures, 198, pp. 109432. 
Ramberg, W. & Osgood, W.R. (1943) 'Description of stress-strain curves by three 
parameters'. 
Rasmussen, K.J.R. (2003) 'Full-range stressstrain curves for stainless steel alloys', 
Journal of Constructional Steel Research, 59(1), pp. 47-61.  
RILEM. (1994) Technical recommendations for the testing and use of construction 
materials. Taylor & Francis, London. 
SCI. (2017) 'Design Manual for Structural Stainless Steel', fourth edition, SCI Publication 
No. P413. The Steel Construction Institute. 
Serdar, M., ulj, L.V. & Bjegovi, D. (2013) 'Long-term corrosion behaviour of stainless 
reinforcing steel in mortar exposed to chloride environment', Corrosion Science, 69, pp. 
149-157. 
Serdar, M., ulj, L.V. and Bjegovi, D. (2013) 'Long-term corrosion behaviour of 
stainless reinforcing steel in mortar exposed to chloride environment', Corrosion Science, 
69, pp. 149-157. 
Shamass, R. and Cashell, K. (2017) 'Behaviour of Composite Beams Made Using High 
Strength Steel', Structures, 12, pp. 88-101. 
Shamass, R. and Cashell, K.A., (2018) 'Analysis of Stainless Steel-Concrete Composite 
Beams', Journal of Constructional Steel Research, 152, pp. 132-142. 
Shamass, R., Zhou, X. and Alfano, G. (2014) 'Finite-element analysis of shear-off failure 
of keyed dry joints in precast concrete segmental bridges', Journal of Bridge Engineering, 
20(6), pp. 04014084 
Sharif, A.M., Al-Mekhlafi, G.M. and Al-Osta, M.A. (2019) 'Behavior of circular stainless 
steel stub columns internally strengthened by longitudinal carbon steel bars', Engineering 
Structures, 199, pp. 109617. 
Sharif, A.M., Al-Mekhlafi, G.M. and Al-Osta, M.A. (2019) 'Behavior of circular stainless 
steel stub columns internally strengthened by longitudinal carbon steel bars', Engineering 
Structures, 199, pp. 109617. 
Smale, K. (2018) 'From the scene | Collapsed Italy bridge laid bare'. Available at: 
https://www.newcivilengineer.com/latest/from-the-scene-collapsed-italy-bridge-laid-bare-
17-08-2018/ (Accessed: 18 September 2019). 
Solhmirzaei, R. and Kodur, V. (2017) 'Modeling the response of ultra high performance 
fiber reinforced concrete beams', Procedia Engineering, 210, pp. 211-219. 
Somayaji, S. and Shah, S.P. (1981) 'bond stress versus slip relationship and cracking 
response of tension members.', Journal of the American Concrete Institute, 78(3), pp. 
217-225. 
Stainless UK (2016) 'Stainless steel reinforcing bar'. Available at: https://www.stainless-
uk.co.uk/products/rebar/ (Accessed: 07/30 2019). 
Su, M., Young, B. and Gardner, L. (2016) 'The continuous strength method for the design 
of aluminium alloy structural elements', Engineering Structures, 122, pp. 338-348. 
Sunayana, S. and Barai, S.V. (2019) 'Performance of fly ash incorporated recycled 
aggregates concrete column under axial compression: Experimental and numerical study', 
Engineering Structures, 196, pp. 109258. 
Technical Research Centre of Finland (2011) 'Design with stainless steel rebars applying 
Eurocode 2', Research Report N VTT-S-06464-11. VTT Expert Services Ltd. 
Theofanous, M., Propsert, T., Knobloch, M. and Gardner, L. (2016) 'The continuous 
strength method for steel cross-section design at elevated temperatures', Thin-Walled 
Structures, 98, pp. 94-102. 
Thousandswonder. (2015) Stonecutters Bridge. Available at: 
http://www.thousandwonders.net/Stonecutters+Bridge (Accessed: 10 April 2017). 
Tondini, N., Rossi, B. and Franssen, J. (2013) 'Experimental investigation on ferritic 
stainless steel columns in fire', Fire Safety Journal, 62, pp. 238-248. 
Truman, J. (1985) 'The Initiation and Growth of High Alloy (Stainless) Steel Production 
in Alloys 1900-1950.', Historical Metallurgy.Journal of the Historical Metallurgy Society 
Oxford, 19(1), pp. 116-125.  
Wang, T. and Hsu, T.T. (2001) 'Nonlinear finite element analysis of concrete structures 
using new constitutive models', Computers and Structures, 79(32), pp. 2781-2791.  
Wang, Y., Yang, L., Gao, B., Shi, Y. and Yuan, H. (2014) 'Experimental study of lateral-
torsional buckling behavior of stainless steel welded I-section beams', International 
Journal of Steel Structures, 14(2), pp. 411-420. 
Yang, L., Zhao, M., Xu, D., Shang, F., Yuan, H., Wang, Y. and Zhang, Y. (2016) 
'Flexural buckling behaviour of welded stainless steel box-section columns', Thin-Walled 
Structures, 104, pp. 185-197.00 
Zhou, Y., Ou, Y. and Lee, G.C. (2017) 'Bond-slip responses of stainless reinforcing bars 
in grouted ducts', Engineering Structures, 141, pp. 651-665. 
Appendix A 
Examples of the analytical calculations are included herein. 
Section details: 
Austenitic stainless steel grade 1.4311. 
As = 226.2 mm2. 
Section dimensions are 300 mm in width and 428 mm in height.  
Concrete cover is 25 mm. 
Eurocode 2 
Assuming that y  cu, which means that the reinforcements yield before concrete crushes.  
The position of the neutral axis (y) is determined from the equilibrium of the internal forces as 
follows: 
0.68fcy b  Ass = 0 
y =10.64 mm. 
Now check the assumption (y  cu). 
d  y
0.0024
403.6  10.64
= 6  106 
cu =
0.0035
10.64
= 3.3  104 
y  cu     OK 
The bending moment capacity is calculated as follows: 
Mpl = Ass(d  0.4y) 
Mpl = 43.3 kNm 
Full analytical model 
In order to obtain the bending moment capacity of the section using the actual stress-strain behaviour 
of stainless steel, an iterative method is required to locate the position of the neutral axis (y). 
Firstly, assume an initial value of the neutral axis (e.g. yi = 50 mm).  
Calculate the curvature  = min(su, cu). 
where  
su =
  and cu =
 = 0.00007. 
Calculate the strain in the rebar; s = (d  y) = 0.02475. 
Calculate the proof strain; 0.2 =
+ 0.002 = 0.00437. 
s  0.2, this means the rebar yields and therfore Eq. (4.16) is used to obtain the stress in the rebar 
(s). 
s = 617N/mm
The position of the neutral axis (y) is determined from the equilibrium of the internal forces as 
follows: 
0.68fcy b  Ass = 0. 
y =13.68 mm. 
Since the difference between the obtained value of the neutral axis and the initial one is greater than 
0.1 error, the process must be repeated using the obtained value until the condition |y  yi| < 0.1 is 
acheived. 
The position of the neutral axis is 15.18 mm. 
The bending moment capacity is calculated as follows: 
Mpl = Ass(d  0.4y). 
Mpl = 61.4 kNm. 
Simplified model 
Assuming that the section always fails due to concrete crushing (i.e. su > cu) and the tensile strain 
of the reinforcement is higher than the yield strain (i.e. s > y), the position of the neutral axis is 
calculated as follows:  
0.68fcb y
2 + (Eshcu + Eshy  0.2)As y  AsEshcud = 0. 
where Esh =
u0.2
C2uy
 and C2 is 0.25 for grade 1.4311. 
The position of the neutral axis (y) is 16.12 mm. 
The bending moment capacity is calculated as follows: 
Mpl = Ass(d  0.4y) 
Mpl = 65.1 kNm 
 Check    su > cu; 0.000996 > 0.000217 OK 
                s > y; 0.0842 > 0.0024 OK  
Appendix B 
In this section, an example of the numerical data obtained from Abaqus software for beam U2 have 
been reported in Table B1. Details of the reinforcement and geometry for beam U2 can be found in 
Fig. 3.5 (d). 
Table B. 1: Numerical data for beam U2.  
Displacement 
0 0 0 
0.01 0.254156 7.224386 
0.0125 0.317989 9.12364 
0.013438 0.341851 9.81751 
0.014844 0.37761 10.83993 
0.015371 0.391057 11.2172 
0.015404 0.391898 11.24076 
0.015437 0.392739 11.26428 
0.015449 0.393054 11.2731 
0.015468 0.393527 11.28632 
0.015496 0.394237 11.30613 
0.015537 0.395302 11.3358 
0.015553 0.395701 11.34692 
0.015577 0.396301 11.36359 
0.015612 0.397201 11.38856 
0.015665 0.398553 11.42595 
0.015678 0.398891 11.4353 
0.015691 0.399229 11.44464 
0.015711 0.399735 11.45865 
0.01574 0.400495 11.47967 
0.015785 0.401663 11.51128 
0.015852 0.403503 11.5601 
0.015952 0.406315 11.63851 
0.016102 0.410449 11.73126 
0.016328 0.416433 11.75553 
0.016412 0.418648 11.74913 
0.016444 0.419475 11.74468 
0.016492 0.420707 11.73436 
0.016563 0.422536 11.7166 
0.01667 0.425252 11.7081 
0.01671 0.426266 11.70867 
0.01677 0.427784 11.72133 
0.016793 0.428353 11.7279 
0.016827 0.429205 11.74222 
0.01684 0.429524 11.74824 
0.016859 0.430003 11.75876 
0.016887 0.430721 11.77798 
0.016898 0.43099 11.78567 
0.016914 0.431393 11.79829 
0.016938 0.431996 11.81959 
0.016974 0.432879 11.85639 
0.017028 0.434153 11.91998 
0.01711 0.436088 12.02112 
0.017232 0.439132 12.13455 
0.017415 0.443834 12.19934 
0.017484 0.445626 12.21177 
0.017587 0.448403 12.22679 
0.017741 0.452636 12.289 
0.017973 0.458918 12.41883 
0.01832 0.468081 12.56998 
0.018842 0.481635 12.7976 
0.019624 0.502117 13.14099 
0.020797 0.532987 13.56241 
0.021237 0.544578 13.71233 
0.021402 0.548915 13.76759 
0.021649 0.555378 13.84756 
0.021742 0.557796 13.87709 
0.021881 0.561424 13.92065 
0.02209 0.566897 13.98669 
0.022403 0.574867 14.00644 
0.022716 0.582951 14.05251 
0.023029 0.591193 14.17991 
0.023499 0.603619 14.37799 
0.024203 0.622089 14.55886 
0.02526 0.649874 14.81765 
0.026846 0.691539 15.2059 
0.029224 0.753839 15.76866 
0.030115 0.777202 15.97924 
0.031453 0.812335 16.29021 
0.03346 0.864686 16.72568 
0.034212 0.884431 16.90122 
0.034494 0.891844 16.96813 
0.0346 0.894624 16.99326 
0.034759 0.898792 17.03057 
0.034997 0.905024 17.0836 
0.035086 0.907358 17.10292 
0.03522 0.910849 17.1306 
0.035232 0.911176 17.13318 
0.035237 0.911299 17.13415 
0.035244 0.911483 17.1356 
0.035255 0.911759 17.13777 
0.035271 0.912173 17.141 
0.035287 0.912586 17.14422 
0.035302 0.913 17.14742 
0.035326 0.913614 17.15218 
0.03535 0.914217 17.1569 
0.035374 0.914802 17.16155 
0.03541 0.91565 17.16746 
0.035463 0.916951 17.16577 
0.035544 0.919007 17.11816 
0.035664 0.92214 16.98112 
0.035845 0.92686 16.84428 
0.036117 0.933929 16.90538 
0.036524 0.944439 17.09272 
0.037135 0.96016 17.28159 
0.038051 0.983991 17.5415 
0.039426 1.01987 17.85815 
0.041487 1.073522 18.26904 
0.044579 1.153724 18.88919 
0.049218 1.274146 19.8397 
0.050378 1.304194 20.07638 
0.050396 1.304663 20.08007 
0.050403 1.304839 20.08145 
0.050413 1.305103 20.08353 
0.050428 1.3055 20.08664 
0.050434 1.305648 20.08781 
0.050442 1.305871 20.08956 
0.050455 1.306205 20.09219 
0.050475 1.306706 20.09614 
0.050504 1.307458 20.1018 
0.050547 1.308584 20.10356 
0.050612 1.310262 20.06137 
0.05071 1.312721 19.91969 
0.050857 1.316323 19.78261 
0.051078 1.321764 19.9093 
0.051408 1.330184 20.25172 
0.051904 1.343085 20.48635 
0.051951 1.344297 20.50566 
0.05202 1.346118 20.52798 
0.052047 1.346801 20.53537 
0.052086 1.347827 20.54424 
0.052101 1.348212 20.54725 
0.052123 1.348789 20.55109 
0.052131 1.349006 20.55244 
0.052143 1.349331 20.55424 
0.052162 1.349819 20.55647 
0.052169 1.350001 20.55724 
0.052179 1.350276 20.55825 
0.052195 1.350688 20.55943 
0.052219 1.351308 20.56052 
0.052254 1.35225 20.56075 
0.052307 1.353708 20.55856 
0.052387 1.355951 20.55438 
0.052506 1.359347 20.56147 
0.052685 1.364397 20.58192 
0.052752 1.366279 20.58879 
0.052852 1.369074 20.58585 
0.053003 1.373198 20.53485 
0.05323 1.379194 20.43505 
0.05357 1.387878 20.40485 
0.054079 1.400786 20.55254 
0.054843 1.420415 20.82297 
0.05599 1.450022 21.08816 
0.057709 1.494463 21.41825 
0.058354 1.511124 21.54071 
0.058596 1.517371 21.58726 
0.058687 1.519713 21.60489 
0.058823 1.523226 21.63174 
0.058874 1.524544 21.64186 
0.05895 1.52652 21.65713 
0.058979 1.52726 21.66288 
0.059022 1.528371 21.67152 
0.059038 1.528788 21.67477 
0.059062 1.529413 21.67965 
0.059071 1.529647 21.68148 
0.059085 1.529999 21.68423 
0.059106 1.530526 21.68838 
0.059136 1.531313 21.69463 
0.059182 1.532475 21.7043 
0.059251 1.534175 21.72054 
0.059354 1.536719 21.7465 
0.05951 1.540583 21.7678 
0.059742 1.546471 21.77459 
0.060091 1.555472 21.82033 
0.060615 1.569118 21.92871 
0.0614 1.589304 22.07559 
0.062185 1.60949 22.21493 
0.062382 1.61454 22.25136 
0.062676 1.622122 22.31256 
0.063118 1.633499 22.40683 
0.06378 1.650557 22.53939 
0.064774 1.676127 22.71694 
0.066265 1.714511 22.99589 
0.068501 1.772077 23.42668 
0.071856 1.85846 24.08551 
0.073113 1.890794 24.32031 
0.075 1.939217 24.65523 
0.075118 1.942243 24.67465 
0.075236 1.945268 24.68361 
0.075354 1.94829 24.68551 
0.075531 1.952815 24.71228 
0.075796 1.959606 24.80162 
0.076194 1.969838 24.92146 
0.076791 1.985212 25.02565 
0.077687 2.008243 25.16949 
0.07903 2.042809 25.41857 
0.080037 2.06874 25.60793 
0.080415 2.078463 25.68064 
0.08045 2.079375 25.68747 
0.080504 2.080742 25.69777 
0.080583 2.082792 25.71331 
0.080598 2.083177 25.71623 
0.080621 2.083754 25.72061 
0.080654 2.084619 25.7272 
0.080667 2.084943 25.72967 
0.080686 2.085429 25.73337 
0.080714 2.086159 25.73893 
0.080757 2.087252 25.74721 
0.080821 2.088881 25.75968 
0.080916 2.09128 25.77589 
0.08106 2.094842 25.78145 
0.081275 2.100244 25.7695 
0.081598 2.108514 25.82159 
0.082083 2.121065 25.96361 
0.08281 2.139871 26.11877 
0.0839 2.167977 26.31197 
0.084309 2.178514 26.38545 
0.084923 2.19432 26.49532 
0.085153 2.200213 26.53368 
0.085383 2.20608 26.56476 
0.085613 2.211956 26.59373 
0.085958 2.220817 26.65415 
0.086475 2.23415 26.75991 
0.087252 2.254114 26.90013 
0.088416 2.284003 27.11122 
0.089581 2.313879 27.32323 
0.090745 2.343774 27.53405 
0.092492 2.388615 27.84897 
0.095112 2.455904 28.33487 
0.099042 2.556771 29.05046 
0.102972 2.657625 29.76602 
0.106902 2.758358 30.47865 
0.108376 2.796134 30.74547 
0.108514 2.799675 30.76993 
0.108566 2.801003 30.77888 
0.108586 2.801501 30.7822 
0.108615 2.802248 30.78704 
0.108626 2.802528 30.78883 
0.108642 2.802949 30.79145 
0.108648 2.803106 30.79242 
0.108657 2.803343 30.79385 
0.108671 2.803697 30.79592 
0.108692 2.804229 30.79879 
0.108723 2.805027 30.80007 
0.10877 2.806224 30.76167 
0.10884 2.808019 30.59597 
0.108945 2.810693 30.36278 
0.109102 2.814621 30.36549 
0.109339 2.820463 30.70709 
0.109693 2.829402 31.00856 
0.110048 2.838489 31.14685 
0.110402 2.847633 31.21736 
0.110934 2.861345 31.27215 
0.111732 2.881853 31.33039 
0.112928 2.912608 31.49082 
0.114723 2.95865 31.8164 
0.115396 2.975907 31.94042 
0.116406 3.001794 32.12566 
0.11792 3.040648 32.39631 
0.118488 3.05522 32.49571 
0.119339 3.077081 32.64082 
0.119659 3.085286 32.69534 
0.120138 3.097626 32.77389 
0.120857 3.116131 32.88726 
0.121935 3.143803 33.076 
0.123552 3.185315 33.36297 
0.125977 3.247616 33.78148 
0.129616 3.341208 34.39877 
0.133254 3.434639 35.02255 
0.136893 3.528037 35.6447 
0.14235 3.66813 36.56087 
0.147808 3.808088 37.47883 
0.153265 3.947834 38.38343 
0.153777 3.960939 38.46946 
0.154545 3.980601 38.59991 
0.155696 4.010076 38.7866 
0.155714 4.010537 38.78952 
0.155732 4.010997 38.79246 
0.155759 4.011688 38.79693 
0.155799 4.012724 38.79452 
0.15586 4.014278 38.72209 
0.155951 4.016608 38.54975 
0.156088 4.020072 38.44197 
0.156292 4.025193 38.6069 
0.1566 4.032891 38.88906 
0.157061 4.04463 39.07262 
0.157752 4.062393 39.19581 
0.15879 4.088988 39.31092 
0.160345 4.128807 39.52091 
0.162679 4.188447 39.89482 
0.16618 4.277933 40.47295 
0.171431 4.412153 41.32139 
0.176682 4.546408 42.16901 
0.181933 4.680695 43.01554 
0.18981 4.882203 44.28761 
0.19981 5.138195 45.92273 
0.20231 5.202193 46.33319 
0.202935 5.218194 46.43549 
0.203873 5.242195 46.5871 
0.204224 5.251183 46.6089 
0.204576 5.260148 46.64443 
0.204927 5.269105 46.71213 
0.205455 5.282546 46.80857 
0.205982 5.296004 46.92358 
0.206509 5.309486 47.03172 
0.2073 5.329734 47.15902 
0.208487 5.360113 47.32874 
0.210267 5.405657 47.60585 
0.212936 5.473901 48.04064 
0.216941 5.57063 48.66387 
0.222948 5.69779 49.4706 
0.228954 5.803457 50.13497 
0.234961 5.887615 50.65834 
0.240968 5.950338 51.05178 
0.246975 5.991594 51.31123 
0.252981 6.011373 51.43553 
0.258988 6.009678 51.3999 
0.264995 5.986555 50.91431 
0.271002 5.941994 49.97842 
0.273254 5.919805 49.52701 
0.276633 5.880724 48.69774 
0.281701 5.809559 47.16217 
0.289304 5.67553 43.99673 
0.296906 5.531624 40.40545 
0.304508 5.387756 36.74247 
0.312111 5.243907 33.04638 
0.319713 5.09994 29.34078 
0.327315 4.955885 25.65054 
0.334918 4.811725 21.98413 
0.34252 4.667553 18.34886 
0.34502 4.620163 17.16051 
0.34877 4.549124 15.3909 
0.354395 4.442575 12.76895 
0.362832 4.282777 8.930913 
0.364942 4.24433 8.008048 
0.367051 4.208247 7.151063 
0.370215 4.158569 5.994974 
0.374961 4.093923 4.512539 
0.382081 4.019293 2.867477 
0.384581 3.999377 2.423683 
0.388331 3.975893 1.939932 
0.393956 3.954528 1.49328 
0.402393 3.95385 1.478869 
0.404893 3.90079 0.20148 
0.408643 3.97757 2.126975 
0.414268 4.01655 3.195178 
0.422706 4.106338 5.650017 
0.432706 4.261438 9.879378 
0.435206 4.308376 11.13868 
0.438956 4.384608 13.25317 
0.444581 4.500947 16.473 
0.453018 4.67539 21.30402 
0.463018 4.882139 27.01499 
0.473018 5.088894 32.64784 
0.475518 5.140573 34.0334 
0.479268 5.218088 36.09566 
0.484893 5.334327 39.13229 
0.493331 5.508726 43.46296 
0.498331 5.612243 45.71353 
0.505831 5.769449 48.18479 
0.511456 5.888176 49.38625 
0.517081 6.006204 50.39302 
0.522705 6.123803 51.31886 
0.528331 6.241259 52.20314 
0.533956 6.358702 53.06746 
0.536065 6.402734 53.38816 
0.539229 6.468744 53.86318 
0.543975 6.567638 54.56443 
0.548721 6.666416 55.25754 
0.553467 6.765271 55.9383 
0.558213 6.864155 56.60157 
0.558232 6.864541 56.60415 
0.55825 6.864927 56.6067 
0.558278 6.865507 56.61055 
0.558289 6.865724 56.61201 
0.558304 6.86605 56.61426 
0.558328 6.866539 56.61777 
0.558363 6.867271 56.6187 
0.558398 6.868005 56.60204 
0.558433 6.868738 56.56832 
0.558486 6.869838 56.50988 
0.558565 6.871488 56.45425 
0.558684 6.873959 56.465 
0.558862 6.877644 56.59455 
0.55913 6.88315 56.71608 
0.55953 6.891458 56.82022 
0.560132 6.904009 56.90922 
0.561034 6.922848 57.01034 
0.562387 6.951079 57.16916 
0.564416 6.993412 57.44023 
0.567461 7.056931 57.84949 
0.572027 7.152794 58.40097 
0.576594 7.252395 58.65641 
0.58116 7.352482 58.85068 
0.585727 7.452927 59.02802 
0.590294 7.554026 59.16339 
0.597143 7.706355 59.33821 
0.603993 7.859699 59.4873 
0.610843 8.013341 59.60923 
0.617693 8.167129 59.70725 
0.624543 8.321035 59.79407 
0.631392 8.475047 59.87663 
0.638242 8.629282 59.95153 
0.645092 8.783493 60.01538 
0.651942 8.937436 60.06843 
0.658792 9.091246 60.11502 
0.665642 9.24501 60.15732 
0.672491 9.398611 60.18957 
0.679341 9.551981 60.21589 
0.686191 9.705567 60.24329 
0.688691 9.761649 60.25399 
0.692441 9.845789 60.27063 
0.698066 9.972054 60.29293 
0.706504 10.16153 60.32217 
0.714941 10.3512 60.34532 
0.721269 10.49345 60.36011 
0.727597 10.6357 60.3746 
0.733925 10.77807 60.38643 
0.740254 10.92057 60.39502 
0.746582 11.06312 60.40341 
0.75291 11.20569 60.41052 
0.759238 11.34826 60.41735 
0.765566 11.49082 60.42364 
0.771894 11.63338 60.42934 
0.778222 11.77592 60.43611 
0.78455 11.91847 60.44133 
0.790879 12.06098 60.44753 
0.797207 12.20348 60.45329 
0.79958 12.25692 60.45516 
0.803139 12.33707 60.45843 
0.808479 12.4573 60.46274 
0.816488 12.63764 60.46877 
0.824497 12.81797 60.47438 
0.832506 12.99833 60.47837 
0.835006 13.05464 60.4793 
0.838756 13.1391 60.48061 
0.844381 13.26581 60.48139 
0.852818 13.45589 60.48218 
0.859146 13.59849 60.48185 
0.865474 13.74112 60.48028 
0.871803 13.88377 60.47744 
0.873385 13.91944 60.47667 
0.874967 13.9551 60.47602 
0.87734 14.0086 60.47494 
0.880899 14.08885 60.47241 
0.881233 14.09637 60.47202 
0.881734 14.10766 60.47155 
0.882484 14.12458 60.47097 
0.883611 14.14998 60.46994 
0.8853 14.18807 60.46831 
0.887834 14.24521 60.46592 
0.888784 14.26664 60.465 
0.888874 14.26865 60.46491 
0.889007 14.27166 60.46476 
0.889208 14.27618 60.46446 
0.889508 14.28296 60.46411 
0.889959 14.29313 60.4638 
0.890636 14.30839 60.46327 
0.891651 14.33127 60.46218 
0.893173 14.3656 60.46032 
0.895456 14.41709 60.45759 
0.898881 14.49434 60.4536 
0.904018 14.61023 60.44649 
0.909156 14.72613 60.43823 
0.914293 14.84204 60.42913 
0.915577 14.87102 60.42666 
0.916862 14.9 60.42413 
0.918788 14.94347 60.42029 
0.921678 15.00868 60.4145 
0.926013 15.10652 60.40509 
0.930347 15.20437 60.39474 
0.934682 15.30222 60.38316 
0.941184 15.44902 60.36473 
0.943622 15.50408 60.35741 
0.94728 15.58667 60.34588 
0.952766 15.71058 60.32713 
0.954823 15.75705 60.31982 
0.957909 15.82677 60.30864 
0.962538 15.93135 60.29074 
0.969481 16.08822 60.26242 
0.974688 16.20587 60.2423 
0.979896 16.32352 60.22276 
0.987707 16.50001 60.19107 
0.995518 16.67651 60.15627 
1.003329 16.85301 60.11795 
1.011141 17.02943 60.08077 
1.018952 17.20583 60.04388 
1.026763 17.38227 60.00793 
1.034574 17.55863 59.97395 
1.040432 17.69086 59.94801 
1.046291 17.82308 59.92163 
1.052149 17.95532 59.89691 
1.058008 18.08758 59.87155 
1.063866 18.21981 59.8468 
1.069724 18.35205 59.82333 
1.075583 18.48427 59.80015 
1.08437 18.68251 59.76594 
1.090961 18.83116 59.74326 
1.097552 18.97983 59.72235 
1.100023 19.03558 59.71446 
1.103731 19.11919 59.70264 
1.109291 19.24458 59.68645 
1.113462 19.33862 59.67523 
1.119718 19.47966 59.65967 
1.125974 19.6207 59.6433 
1.13223 19.76176 59.62733 
1.134576 19.81466 59.62114 
1.138095 19.894 59.6115 
1.143374 20.01301 59.59688 
1.151291 20.19164 59.57594 
1.159209 20.3704 59.55454 
1.167127 20.5491 59.53424 
1.175045 20.72777 59.51573 
1.179003 20.8171 59.50653 
1.184942 20.9511 59.49333 
1.187169 21.00134 59.48861 
1.190509 21.07672 59.48225 
1.195519 21.18978 59.47309 
1.203035 21.35937 59.46027 
1.210551 21.52893 59.44762 
1.218066 21.69845 59.43502 
1.220566 21.75483 59.43081 
1.224316 21.8394 59.42443 
1.229941 21.96625 59.41479 
1.238379 22.15652 59.40055 
1.246816 22.3468 59.3856 
1.255254 22.53709 59.36988 
1.265254 22.76263 59.35032 
1.267754 22.81902 59.34509 
1.271504 22.90359 59.33778 
1.277129 23.03046 59.3262 
1.285566 23.22079 59.30778 
1.288066 23.27718 59.30198 
1.291816 23.36179 59.29412 
1.297441 23.48869 59.2832 
1.305879 23.67903 59.26577 
1.314316 23.8694 59.24734 
1.316426 23.917 59.24243 
1.31959 23.98839 59.23513 
1.324336 24.09545 59.22425 
1.331455 24.256 59.20782 
1.333955 24.31238 59.2024 
1.337705 24.39695 59.19462 
1.34333 24.52381 59.18257 
1.351768 24.7141 59.16516 
1.354268 24.77049 59.1597 
1.358018 24.85506 59.15158 
1.363643 24.9819 59.13955 
1.37208 25.1722 59.12289 
1.380518 25.36253 59.10835 
1.382627 25.41012 59.10477 
1.385791 25.4815 59.09944 
1.390537 25.5886 59.09131 
1.397656 25.74925 59.07938 
1.407656 25.975 59.06183 
1.410156 26.03145 59.05722 
1.413906 26.11615 59.05035 
1.419531 26.24322 59.04026 
1.421641 26.29087 59.03648 
1.424805 26.36236 59.03081 
1.429551 26.46959 59.02205 
1.43667 26.63045 59.00845 
1.43917 26.68692 59.00382 
1.44292 26.77163 58.99721 
1.448545 26.89869 58.98817 
1.456982 27.0893 58.97565 
1.459482 27.14577 58.97193 
1.463232 27.23049 58.96612 
1.468857 27.35757 58.9571 
1.477295 27.5482 58.94346 
1.479795 27.60468 58.93933 
1.483545 27.68941 58.93355 
1.48917 27.81647 58.92544 
1.497607 28.00708 58.9131 
1.5 28.06113 58.9097 
Appendix C 
Figures C.1- C.16 present the bond-slip response for the tests which are repeated for each category of 
parameters. 
Fig. C. 1: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for stainless steel reinforcements with 10 mm diameter and 
20 MPa concrete strength. 
Fig. C. 2: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for stainless steel reinforcements with 12 mm diameter and 
20 MPa concrete strength. 
0 5 10 15 20 25
Displacement (mm)
0 5 10 15 20
Displacement (mm)
Fig. C. 3: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for carbon steel reinforcements with 10 mm diameter and 
20 MPa concrete strength. 
Fig. C. 4: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for carbon steel reinforcements with 12 mm diameter and 
20 MPa concrete strength. 
0 5 10 15 20
Displacement (mm)
0 5 10 15 20
Displacement (mm)
Fig. C. 5: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for stainless steel reinforcements with 10 mm diameter and 
40 MPa concrete strength. 
Fig. C. 6: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for stainless steel reinforcements with 12 mm diameter and 
40 MPa concrete strength. 
0 5 10 15 20 25
Displacement (mm)
0 5 10 15 20
Displacement (mm)
Fig. C. 7: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for carbon steel reinforcements with 10 mm diameter and 
40 MPa concrete strength. 
Fig. C. 8: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for carbon steel reinforcements with 12 mm diameter and 
40 MPa concrete strength. 
0 5 10 15 20 25
Displacement (mm)
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Displacement (mm)
Fig. C. 9: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for stainless steel reinforcements with 10 mm diameter and 
60 MPa concrete strength. 
Fig. C. 10: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for stainless steel reinforcements with 12 mm diameter 
and 60 MPa concrete strength. 
0 5 10 15
Displacement (mm)
0 5 10 15 20 25
Displacement (mm)
Fig. C. 11: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for carbon steel reinforcements with 10 mm diameter and 
60 MPa concrete strength. 
Fig. C. 12: Splitting bond stress-slip curves for carbon steel reinforcements with 12 mm diameter and 
60 MPa concrete strength. 
0 5 10 15 20 25
Displacement (mm)
0 5 10 15 20 25
Displacement (mm)
Fig. C. 13: Pull-out bond stress-slip curves for stainless steel reinforcements with 10 mm diameter and 
40 MPa concrete strength. 
Fig. C. 14: Pull-out bond stress-slip curves for stainless steel reinforcements with 12 mm diameter and 
40 MPa concrete strength. 
0 10 20 30 40
Displacement (mm)
0 10 20 30 40
Displacement (mm)
Fig. C. 15: Pull-out bond stress-slip curves for carbon steel reinforcements with 10 mm diameter and 
40 MPa concrete strength. 
Fig. C. 16: Pull-out bond stress-slip curves for carbon steel reinforcements with 12 mm diameter and 
40 MPa concrete strength. 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Displacement (mm)
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Displacement (mm)
