"They don't understand how we feel" 
An affective approach to improving the 'best practice' of community-based post-
disaster recovery  
Anna Vainio 
A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy  
The University of Sheffield 
Faculty of Arts and Humanities 
School of East Asian Studies 
February 2020 
Abstract 
This thesis presents a critical investigation into the community-based approaches on post-disaster 
recovery, approaching the subject through the case of Japan after the 2011 Great East Japan 
Earthquake and Tsunami. Community-based approaches form a part of the general participatory 
turn over the last decades, with the purpose of engaging citizens into decision-making processes by 
following four key principles: participation, empowerment, resilience and proximity. The popularity 
of these approaches has given rise to their status as the global 'best practice' in the field of 
development, and post-disaster recovery more specifically, thus warding further attention and 
investigation.   
Despite the popularity of these approaches, I will show how community-based approaches often 
lead to inconsistent outcomes, and communal dissatisfaction toward the processes themselves 
remain prevalent. In Tohoku, this dissatisfaction was emphatically articulated by majority of the 
participants through the utterance kimochi ga wakaranai (they don't understand how we feel). The 
thesis therefore asks, why does dissatisfaction remain rife despite the adoption of community-
based recovery in Tohoku? While many authors propose that this dissatisfaction is primarily a 
procedural problem leading from a gap between theory and practice, I argue that the problem is 
related to the epistemological and methodological starting points of recovery that divide recovery 
and trajectories for the future into endogenous and exogenous domains and discourses.   
Where the exogenous discourse of the authorities emerged from motivations to understand how 
this disaster was able to take place and how in the recovery vulnerabilities that led to its onset could 
be minimised, for the locals it was the affective intensities of their personal experiences and 
intimate daily existence within the post-disaster landscape that drove their understanding of the 
events and desired shape for the future of their communities. Through the ethnographic data 
analysis, the research finds the dominant exogenous discourses did not resonate with their localised 
daily experience of the recovery, with the discrepancy in the visions creating tensions and 
dissatisfaction toward the recovery process and paradoxically distancing the communities from the 
'community-based' recovery.  
Notes to reader 
On the spelling of Japanese names 
All Japanese names in the thesis use roman transliterations as provided in the source text. When 
full Japanese names are provided they follow the Japanese conventions of surname, first name. 
Gender is indicated throughout the text by use of pronouns she/her and he/him, as well as through 
titles Ms./Mr. Gender is indicated to show the reader the consideration the author has placed on 
representation in the selection of quotes and episodes from across the pool of participants. Marital 
status is omitted from the titles as it is not relevant to the study and presents no analytical 
advantages.  
On anonymisation of interview participants and places 
Place names and the setting of events and episodes presented in this thesis are the real locations in 
which this study took place. The author finds this to be important for contextual accuracy and 
transparency of the research process. All individuals referenced in association with a specific 
location are genuine people and place connections.  
To protect the anonymity of the research participants, all real names have been omitted from the 
pages of this thesis. All interviews are listed in the appendices and each interview is provided with 
a reference number that is used throughout the text to provide reference when the interviewees' 
words are quoted either directly or paraphrased.  
e.g. "QUOTE" (REF XX).  
When stories or episodes involving specific individuals are explored in more depth in the text, the 
interviewees are referred to using pseudonyms, primarily in the format 'Mr./Ms. + surname'. The 
pseudonyms are selected randomly from a list of common Japanese surnames, with none of the 
surnames utilised coinciding with the actual surnames of any of the individuals interviewed for this 
study. The passages including reference to individuals with pseudonyms are also referenced using 
the referencing system explained above in order for the reader to trace the specific interview being 
used in the passage. The pseudonyms are listed in the appendices.  
e.g. Ms. Shimizu (REF XX) explained... 
Ethical approval 
The research was granted ethical approval by the University of Sheffield: 005375 
Alphabetisation 
List of references is alphabetised using the Nordic convention for names beginning with ,  and  
listed at the end.   
List of images  
Image 1 
Town of Minamisanriku in November 2015, viewed from the Junior High School. Image on the 
forefront of from 2007, showing the townscape before the tsunami, with the 'blank canvas' behind 
it, Anna Vainio 2015, p. 54 
Image 2 
Ogatsu Bay, Broken seawall, Anna Vainio 2016, p. 76 
Image 3 
Outside Nobiru railway station in 2016, Anna Vainio, p. 95 
Image 4 
Post-disaster infrastructure in Onagawa, Anna Vainio, September 2016, p. 105 
Image 5 
Landslide in Ogatsu, Anna Vainio, May 2016, p. 105 
Image 6 
'Ganbarou Nippon' display at Ueno station, September 2011 (Anna Vainio), p. 115  
Image 7  
The former disaster prevention centre in Minamisanriku. The site has been left as a memorial of 
3/11 in the town and part of the disaster legacy. The land elevations that are an integral part of 
Minamisanriku's tsunami resilience strategy can be seen behind. Anna Vainio, 2015, p. 144 
Image 8 
Lion Dance performance, Onagawa, 2016 (Anna Vainio), p. 160 
Acknowledgements 
As I am writing this, we are mere days away from the second wave of industrial action of my PhD 
degree. In 2018, I stood with colleagues and PhD Students across the university in the blistering cold, 
demanding an end to the devaluation of our pension funds. And in the weeks to come, I will be 
standing outside again, continuing the fight for pensions security, but also against further 
casualisation and precarious contracts within the Higher Education sector. These actions and the 
current working culture, pressures, and monitoring within the Higher Education sector have made 
me weigh my future and prospects within British academia. Working to contract should not be a 
strategy for exerting pressure against the employer, but a norm, that along with decent wages, 
working conditions and reasonable expectations can create for a vibrant working environment from 
which socially valuable research and teaching can emerge. As I begin to build my future in the 
academia, I will strive to maintain the lessons of solidarity I absorbed on the picket line as my career 
guide, over personal gratification and advancement.  
This research emerged from primarily small and personal motivations of trying to find a way to 
combine my two passions: the one for Japan, and the one for communities. Before this journey I 
had never been to the Tohoku region before, and in 2015 when I began my field work, I was nervous 
of the prospects of landing in this unfamiliar region. All the contacts I made in Miyagi are unique 
and special, with every encounter not only impacting my research, but me as a person. However, as 
the reader will note on the pages of this thesis, the man who will be referred to as Mr. Takeda 
throughout, more than deserves special mention (and his neighbours would undoubtedly agree). 
Without his patient, enthusiastic and warm support and guidance, my field work would still most 
likely have been successful, but the depth and paths I was able to follow as a result of our 
conversations would not have been there had it not been for the friendship I was able to forge with 
Mr. Takeda.  
This thesis would not have been possible without the generous financial support of the Great Britain 
Sasakawa Foundation, The University of Sheffield, The Cross-National Doctoral Course, and the 
British Association for Japanese Studies supporting my writing up period through the John Crump 
scholarship as well as conference support that has enabled me to link with colleagues near and far. 
In the climate of rising tuition fees and marketisation of the Higher Education sector, securing 
scholarships and financial support for post-graduate students is more important than ever.  
I have been extremely lucky during my PhD to have had not one, not two, but three supervisors to 
aide me in my journey and reach the point of conclusion. Firstly, I would like to thank Dr. Peter 
Matanle for his invaluable support in the post-graduate application process, as well as for the many 
valuable lessons he has taught me over the years that will undoubtedly help me navigate the 
academia in the years to come. Secondly, I want to express gratitude toward Dr. Jamie Coates, 
whose academic guidance has enabled me to push my research to a completely different level, one 
that I did not think was intellectually possible for me still 12 months ago. Thirdly, Dr. Yu Chen for 
her meticulous methodological attention to detail, and support in accessing and successfully 
completing a variety of training opportunities available to me through the University and further 
afield. Finally, I also want to express my gratitude to the to my academic advisers and staff at Tohoku 
University that hosted me during my field work. Special thanks go to Dr. Okabe and Dr. Anami, 
whose kindness and care toward not only my research, but presentation and language skills, 
criticality, and access to research participants during my field work made my time in Japan and at 
Tohoku University a thoroughly enjoyable and stimulating experience.  
Aside from the supervisory team, the School of East Asian Studies at the University of Sheffield and 
the Graduate School of Law in Tohoku have provided me with a community that is both intellectually 
stimulating and emotionally nurturing. While all colleagues in Sheffield and in Tohoku have 
contributed greatly to my development as an academic, few deserve special mention. Dr. Mark 
Pendleton, who helped me see the light, direction, and a future in academia when all I wanted to 
do was quit and become a potato farmer. With his knowledgeable and patient mentorship, I have 
found my love for teaching, and the wisdom to reflect on that which we often take for granted. Dr. 
Kate Taylor-Jones for being the type of role model that majority of female academics are still missing. 
For Dr. Taeko Misumi and her successor Dr. Suzuki Minami for providing an anchor in Japan, and 
always having your door open. And for the professional support staff at the School of East Asian 
Studies who have gone far and beyond their duties and paygrades to help not just me, but all of us, 
to navigate the intricate webs of academic bureaucracy and finding solutions when I thought there 
were none.  
A PhD can be a solitary journey but having a community of fellow travelers has truly been lifesaving. 
Many people have come and gone during my long slog on this journey, both in and out of academia, 
but all of you have made an impact on me and my work. Special thanks have to go to friends who 
have stuck by me through the years and given critical perspective to my academic bubble and kept 
me grounded. Those inside the bubble have understood why I am crying and hyperventilating over 
sentence structures, arguments, and narratives, and consoled me when I just could not see a way 
out of the knot that I had tied myself into. Colleagues and friends across different institutions and 
disciplines, you are all friends that I never would have made had I not began this crazy journey of 
writing a PhD.  
And last but not least, special thank you and eternal gratitude will go to my family in Finland. My 
dad for proudly telling everyone he knows that his daughter is doing a PhD "on Japan", and for my 
mom always checking in and asking questions I never thought about before. For my sister Minna for 
being there when things were rough, and for my brother-in-law Fouad for always making me laugh. 
And finally, to my little nephew Mika, whose birth flew me from Japan to Lebanon in the middle of 
my field work and whose playfulness as well as the tantrums have made me realise that reflecting 
on the world and trying, in our own small ways, to make the world a better place is not just for us 
right now, but more than anything for them in the future.  
Thank you  
Anna Vainio 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ABSTRACT I 
NOTES TO THE READER I 
LIST OF IMAGES AND TABLES II 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS IV 
INTRODUCTION 3 
THE ENDINGS AND BEGINNINGS IN THE 'POST-DISASTER' SPACE 9 
LOCATING THE NARRATOR 14 
ORGANISATION OF THE THESIS 16 
CHAPTER 1 20 
DISASTERS AS MORE THAN HINDSIGHT:  FROM TECHNOCRATIC ANALYSES TO LOCAL IMAGINATIONS 20 
1.1. DISASTER GOLD RUSH AND THE SOCIOLOGY OF DISASTERS 27 
1.2. THE BEST PRACTICE FOR BUILDING BACK BETTER: THE PARTICIPATORY TURN AND DISASTER RESEARCH 33 
1.3. THE INSTITUTIONAL ENVIRONMENT FOR 'BEST PRACTICE' IN JAPAN 40 
CHAPTER 2 48 
THE DUAL SPHERES OF RECOVERY:  WHEN RECOVERY STANDS IN THE WAY OF RECOVERY 48 
2.1. FROM POST-DISASTER HETEROTOPIA TO 'TWO RECOVERIES' 53 
2.2. HIERARCHY OF DISCOURSES 59 
2.3. HEARING AFFECT 64 
CHAPTER 3 69 
METHODOLOGY 69 
3.1. RESEARCH LOCATIONS 74 
3.2. DATA COLLECTION 79 
3.3. DATA ANALYSIS 86 
CHAPTER 4 90 
EVERYONE'S VOICE IN RECOVERY:  PARTICIPATION IN AND OUT OF THE LEGITIMATE SPACES 90 
4.1. "WE'VE NEVER ACTUALLY BEEN ASKED ABOUT THE RECOVERY" 93 
4.1.2. Elimination of the affective from designated spaces 100 
CHAPTER 5 110 
EMPOWERMENT IN RECOVERY THROUGH RESIGNATION 110 
5.1. "I DON'T EXPECT ANYTHING FROM THIS GOVERNMENT ANYMORE" 117 
5.1.1. 'Resignation' from disempowerment 123 
5.2. "SOMEHOW I FOUND MY IKIGAI AGAIN" 128 
5.2.1. Rejecting the norm and embracing the alternative 132 
CHAPTER 6 140 
BETWEEN PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL RESILIENCE:  BUILDING 'SAFE AND SECURE' COMMUNITIES 140 
6.1. "WE CAN SLEEP EASY NOW, BUT..." 146 
6.1.1. Town planning as resilience 151 
6.2. "OUR COMMUNITY IS WIDER AND STRONGER NOW" 156 
6.2.1. Community building for resilience 161 
CHAPTER 7 168 
RECOVERY STANDING IN THE WAY OF RECOVERY 168 
7.1. PROLONGED STATE OF GAMAN 172 
7.2. BUILDING OCHITSUKU OUT OF COMPLETION OF SMALL PLANS 178 
CHAPTER 8 183 
FINDING THE BEGINNINGS THAT COUNT:  DECONSTRUCTING THE DUALITY OF DEVELOPMENT IN THEORY AND PRACTICE
8.1. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THEORY AND PRACTICE 187 
8.2. DIFFERENT BEGINNINGS, DIFFERENT ENDINGS 191 
8.3. DEVELOPING A NEW 'BEST PRACTICE' 195 
CONCLUSIONS: PUTTING THE 'COMMUNITY' BACK INTO THE COMMUNITY-BASED APPROACHES 198 
LIST OF REFERENCES 203 
APPENDICES 235 
Introduction 
Communities in Japan's North-Eastern region, Tohoku, have for a long time lived in a state of 
incremental disaster brought on by socio-economic decline and depopulation. The loss of a 
school one day, a hospital another, the merger of municipalities, shuttered streets and the 
diminishing sounds of playing children. These everyday losses have been constant 
companions for most of Japan's rural regions for decades, with wider narratives of precarity 
and national decline intensifying their sense of loss and failure. Communities in Tohoku have 
lived with a sense of creeping disaster for a long time, with the anticipation and anxiety over 
the eventual death of communities existing as constant white noise in the background. These 
issues become all the more severe when the specter of a potential future socio-economic 
losses meet the realities of a cataclysmic event. On March 11, 2011, a magnitude 9.0 
earthquake shook the region, triggering an 'unprecedented' tsunami, and giving rise to a 
nuclear disaster and bringing this background noise to the foreground. The sense of 
incremental disaster of rural decline among Tohokus residents collided with the immediate 
and sudden disaster of 3/11, bringing people face to face with problems they had perceived 
as existing only in the distant future.  
For Tohoku to recover from both the disaster and its long-term decline, the Japanese 
Government has actively promoted a 'community-focused' recovery (Reconstruction Design 
Council 2011a), that has been enshrined as one of the key principles of the recovery, and built 
into the financial, operational and legal structures of the reconstruction and recovery 
administration. By 'community-focused' the government refers to a process where the 
municipalities function as the main actors in the recovery, planning, designing and executing 
the recovery, while engaging local residents into the process in order to provide affected 
populations a voice in determining the future of Tohoku. This position follows the logic of 
'community-based' development approaches which emphasise the importance of localised 
development, and are widely promoted in a number of fields, representing the global 'best 
practice' today, (Maskrey 2011, Longstaff et al. 2010, Twigg 1999, Edgington 2017). As a 
process, community-based approaches can be summarised as taking place close to the 
community to enable engaged and effective communal participation, through which local 
communities become empowered to take ownership over the recovery and build more 
resilient communities. The community-based logic highlights the advancement of four key 
principles of participation, empowerment and resilience, and proximity with the community 
lying at the heart of the development, both as the main beneficiaries and actors.  
Yet, despite the government's active promotion of Tohoku's post-disaster recovery as 
'community-focused', dissatisfaction among the disaster affected communities has remained 
wide-spread (Kimura et. al. 2014, Tsuchiya et al. 2014, NHK 2015). This paradox in Tohoku's 
post-disaster recovery is not an anomaly, as similar reports of popular dissatisfaction and 
failure of community-based and participatory methods have been reported elsewhere as well 
(Cleaver 2001, Sou 2019a, Davidson et al. 2007, Curato 2018). Authors in several fields note 
that there appears to be a gap between theory and practice when development moves from 
abstractions to applications (e.g. Carr 1980, Murphy 1991, Elliot et al. 2002, Kielhofner 2005). 
Despite the theoretical centrality of the community in the 'best practice' of post-disaster 
recovery, I began to wonder why are reports of dissatisfaction and voicelessness in post-
disaster recovery settings consistently present? And what is the shape, intensity and 
projections of the voices that are remaining unheard?  
For this purpose, as I will further elaborate in this thesis, I carried out a 13-month ethnography 
in the Miyagi prefecture in north-eastern Japan between September 2015 and October 2016. 
My analysis centres on 39 in-depth conversational interviews with 45 individuals residing in 
the disaster affected region of north-eastern Japan, where I did 32 field visits into selected 
four coastal communities (Minamisanriku, Onagawa, Higashimatsushima and Ishinomaki) and 
collected observational and participatory data alongside the aforementioned interviews. 
Throughout my fieldwork, I spent considerable amount of time in the disaster region, 
observing the developments and having both structured and non-structured conversations 
with local residents about their experiences of the disaster and the recovery. From these 
conversations, and the sheer presence in the post-disaster landscape, an endogenous 
discourse about the daily experiences and a vision of a common future began to slowly 
emerge. Both the performance of daily lives and vision for the future that was communicated 
through this discourse was one centred appeasement with the natural world and the 
restoration of human and non-human relationships that would enable an affective state of 
settledness and belonging to emerge. Standing sharply against this hopeful notion, there was 
however one utterance that I heard time and time again in Tohoku: "kimochi ga wakaranai", 
'they don't understand how we feel'. This utterance was in particular reference to the 
authorities, and one that I heard from the mouths of the young and old in each location I 
visited. The more I heard this, the more I began to wonder why were so many people 
articulating their experience of the recovery in the same way, despite the apparent 
simultaneous sense of renewal that their words and communications otherwise exerted? This 
question seemed to represent the aforementioned sense of voicelessness so often 
encountered in post-disaster spaces, standing in stark opposition to the 'community-focused' 
recovery promoted by the Japanese authorities.  
While the sense of voicelessness was palpable in Tohoku, I also wanted to understand what 
locals wanted to convey instead? What were the voices they wanted people to hear, and how 
they were transmitting their stories?  And what could kimochi ga wakaranai as a reflection of 
the constellation of emotive, affective and articulated sense of voicelessness tell us about 
Japan's community-based approach to recovery? I carried out a thematic data analysis upon 
return from the field, focusing on residents' views about the community, disaster experience, 
the post-disaster recovery process, visions for the future, and roles in recovery. My research 
was carried out in an inductive manner, drawing methodological elements and rationale from 
grounded theory, exploring the lived experience of individuals and communities under long-
term recovery and reconstruction. I found that while there were several competing 
imaginaries emerging from the post-disaster space, produced by individuals, communities, 
authorities, civil society actors, and policy-makers alike, there was nevertheless an inherent 
duality in the telling of Tohoku's recovery; one produced by the authorities, and one by the 
local populations themselves, developing into two distinctly separate discourses about the 
recovery and the future. The local communal understanding of recovery diverged greatly from 
the meta-narratives produced by the formal agents of reconstruction planning, such as 
authorities, experts, academics and technocracy, despite their community-based 
commitments. These latter visions were neatly packaged in reconstruction plans, policies, 
working papers and reports, aiming to provide a detailed path into the future built on the 
foundation of scientific and socio-economic knowledge and expertise. Despite the local 
populations often recognising the logic of the recovery presented to them in the formal plans 
produced by the municipalities and the government, these plans nonetheless did not 
resonate with their localised daily experience of the recovery; nor what they hoped for from 
the future. This discrepancy in the visions not only created tensions and dissatisfaction toward 
the recovery process among those most affected, but also made it hard to argue for the 
recovery being 'community-focused'.  
Illustrating the lack of understanding by the authorities, frustrated utterances like "come and 
see for yourself how we live" or "none of them [civil servants] even live here", that I also heard 
multiple times from local residents gained new urgency and meaning. What these utterances 
communicated was the imperative of physical presence in these communities in order to 
understand the intensity and intimacy of the local experiences and desires for the future that 
resided not only in words, but emerged from the direct bodily and sensory experiences with 
the local context, the performance of daily life, and the visible reminders of the absence of 
the past. The story that was being told needed to be heard but also felt for it to be fully 
understood as local knowledge and aspirations for the future. Against the exogenous 
discourse of the authorities, driven by efforts to understand how this disaster was able to 
take place and how in the recovery vulnerabilities that led to its onset could be minimised, 
for the locals it was the affective intensities of their personal experiences and intimate daily 
existence within the post-disaster landscape that drove their understanding of the events and 
desired shape for the future of their communities. The endogenous discourse emerged from 
the diffusion of bodies and landscapes, the physical context of the recovery, where the 
performance of everyday life within the context and the interactions of the space shaped this 
discourse as a deeply affective one.  
For the locals, the meaning of the words and descriptions that were uttered could only fully 
be transmitted when they were juxtaposed with the landscape of simultaneous destruction 
and regeneration. Without spending time in these spaces, the formal recovery plans were not 
able to capture the affective intensities that determined the discourses of the local residents, 
leaving them feeling voiceless and unheard. Exogenous discourses, and their tangible 
manifestations in national and local recovery plans and architectural designs, were literally 
external to this affective communal experience, developed in isolation from being physically 
affected by the intimacy of the context and the people within. The purpose of this thesis is to 
explore the disconnect and tensions between the exogenous and endogenous discourses for 
the recovery, and ask how can we make better sense of Tohoku residents experience of 
recovery in the context of ongoing demographic and economic concerns, in the landscape of 
broad-scale national plans for Tohoku's recovery and revitalisation that are conflict with the 
personal and communal aspirations and future orientations in the local level?  
My research therefore addresses the practitioners occupying the space between theory and 
practice, who as researchers, development workers, policy makers and civil servants, try to 
navigate and understand the movement between the raw lived experience and the 
abstractions that we create to communicate these experiences and their meanings. As I will 
explore in more depth in Chapter 1, despite the good intentions of the 'participatory turn' 
that gave rise to community-based approaches as a way of understanding local needs and 
desires (Bherer et al. 2016, Mansuri & Rao 2004, Peterman 2000, Eliasoph 2011), merely 
applying community-based concepts, principles and language to the recovering context does 
not guarantee the capturing of local sensibilities and meanings of recovery. While conceptual 
and theoretical development are vital for improving cross-disciplinary and transnational 
understandings of phenomena, reapplying these concepts and theoretical principles (such as 
participation, empowerment, resilience and proximity) back into the unique localised 
experiences taking place in diverse socio-economic, cultural and political contexts may not 
always produce practical outcomes that meet the hypothesised objectives. I argue that the 
reason community-based approaches have remained untransformative is because they have 
continued to be transfixed on understanding local experience through fixed categories of 
abstract meanings, rather than trying to create meaning for those categories from the local 
experience. As a result, by continuing to subordinate the local experience, community-based 
approaches are trying to fix a problem before the nature of the problem can be understood.  
Conceptual development and clarity are not therefore rejected in this research, as Tim Ingold 
(2018) writes, "knowledge seeks to fix things within concepts and categories of thought, to 
hold them to account, and to make them to some degree predictable" (p. 17), where the 
certainties written into the into language and categories can give us comfort in the direction 
of travel. However, my research notes that such certainties might also make us blind to the 
directions that others seek to travel. In my analysis, I have not rejected the key concepts of 
participation, empowerment, resilience and proximity, but have instead focused on 
contesting their value as externally applied categories of meaning, rather than emergent 
notions of the reality on the ground. Throughout the following chapters, I will emphasise that 
it is not enough for researchers and practitioners to be reflective in order to situate 
theoretical knowledge into diverse context (Nicholls 2009), they also need to employ methods 
that: i) are able to uncover competing discourses that emerge from different epistemological 
positions; ii) lead to diversification of understandings of how different actors construct 
knowledge and the surrounding reality; and iii) help uncover research and development 
agendas as acts of power in themselves (Kingdon 1993, Kessler 1990, Majone 2006).  
The thesis is therefore not suggesting that we forgo concepts like empowerment, 
participation, resilience and proximity altogether, but rather that we approach our 
understanding of them through endogenous ways of knowing and the embodied experience 
of their performance. I propose that starting from the affective everyday experiences, spaces 
and individual articulations of the meaning of events and phenomena can build an 
understanding of what empowerment, participation, resilience and proximity mean in each 
context for the people most affected. Doing so allows us to better understand how people 
perform the above principles in their unique contexts and life worlds. By bringing together 
affect, discourse and context, the thesis approaches affect not as a theory, as it is so often 
described, but as a methodology that can be helpful in uncovering the intensities through 
which people navigate their shaken-up worlds and create articulable meanings for their 
experiences. Throughout this thesis I will show how a focus on the endogenous does not 
necessarily threaten the premise and principles of 'community-based' recovery itself, but can 
help practitioners to employ new starting points from which to inquire into the processes 
through which we seek empowerment, participation, resilience and proximity with and within 
the subjects of development. Importantly, this focus can expose the human costs associated 
with the affixed certainties within the terms and concepts that we use to develop knowledge 
about recovery and development practices; and the imperative for their destabilisation.  
The endings and beginnings in the 'post-disaster' space 
Within the landscapes left behind by large scale destructions, be they wars, environmental 
catastrophes, or tsunamis and earthquakes, both beginnings and endings are often seen. The 
past has been annihilated, while the future needs somehow to emerge from the wreckage. 
Despite the sharp characterisations of disasters as 'watershed events' or 'blank slates', the 
space of the post-disaster destruction is neither spatially nor temporally as clear cut as these 
nomenclatures would have us believe. Disasters present as 'cosmology events', where a 
sudden loss of meaning caused by a catastrophic event, leads the established system, or what 
is considered the 'normalcy', to lose its rational order (Weick 1993). What is witnessed in this 
temporal and physical space, is not emptiness, but what Foucault (1998) terms as 
'heterotopia', a space that is more a reflection of what remains outside of its remit than of 
itself. A disaster can "lift veils" (Curato and Ong 2015), uncovering the development of 
vulnerabilities and resilience, and how they impact, are experienced, and performed across 
different communities, revealing power structures that lead to injustices and inequalities to 
take shape the way they do. While a post-disaster heterotopia can reveal the order and 
structures of things, offer alternatives, and challenge the existing structures, it is 
simultaneously the site of governmentality where the existing structures are reinforced 
(Boano 2011). The duality of Tohoku's recovery that my thesis refers to, is an indication of this 
tension between the alternative and the normative approaches that operate in the post-
disaster heterotopian space.  
Disasters are a universal phenomenon, emerging from naturally occurring environmental 
conditions, human intervention, or accidents. They can be long-term or short-term, sudden 
impact or gradual. Whatever shape disasters take, today disasters are primarily seen as 
sociological events (Crutzen 2006, Quarantelli 1999), where they impact upon human 
settlements, infrastructure and social and communal life draws the line between 
characterisations of naturally occurring phenomenon and a disaster. While the impact of 
natural hazards from a sociological perspective is the greatest in densely populated and urban 
areas, disasters of course regularly take place in depopulating, ageing and economically 
struggling communities as well (e.g. Cartlidge 2010, Barrios 2017, Smith & Cartlidge 2011, 
Scott et al. 2012), with the Great East Japan Earthquake and Tsunami being particularly 
significant as a disaster, affecting a region in a state of socio-economic decline. Despite 
decades of recognition and research on urban-rural inequalities and efforts to revitalise 
declining communities, it took a large-scale disaster to shed light on the persistence of 
discrimination, exploitation and peripheralisation of Japan's rural regions.  
This socio-economic context has complicated the region's post-disaster recovery in terms of 
long-term sustainability, growth, and the cost-effectiveness of rebuilding. By focusing on the 
endogenous in this context, my thesis thus aims to draw attention to the alternative 
framework through which to critically examine processes of meaning-making and rebuilding 
in the wake of disasters and sudden sociological upheavals. My research presents critical 
discussion on Tohoku's recovery through examples of problematic management structures, 
policies and practices on the ground, but the purpose of the research is not to present a 
critique of Tohoku's recovery as the main objective. Rather, through this research I want to 
direct discussion toward the dominant development practices, through an ethnographic 
exploration of the experiences of populations affected by a landscape-scale disaster in Japan. 
Naturally, this does not mean that the Japanese disaster is not unique, or that the institutional 
and social characteristics present in the country do not produce specific characteristics for 
recovery to take place. Rather, I emphasise that all disasters present unique environments for 
recovery and argue that despite individual experiences being individual, they can nonetheless 
offer us concrete ways of beginning to see the way larger frameworks of post-disaster 
recovery and development operate. A useful methodology for this approach is to reflect upon 
the experiences, feelings, intensities and affects that those structures induce in people across 
disaster affected regions and localities. 
While the demographic and socio-economic conditions of Japan are unique due to their 
extremity (Tsuya 2014, Anderson et al. 2014), many nations particularly in the global north, 
are expected to be heading down a similar sociological development path of further 
accelerating decline in birth rates and rapid ageing. Despite these socio-economic and 
contextual differences however, the approach to post-disaster recovery and reconstruction 
in Japan nevertheless reflects international guidelines, learning and 'best practice' (e.g. the 
Hyogo Framework for Action), and has provided a context of study from which a large number 
of studies aimed at international disaster recovery communities have been produced (Gaillard 
& Gomez 2015, Gomez and Hart 2013). With notions of vulnerability, resilience, adaptation 
and mitigation at the heart of international debates on combatting disaster events and 
recovering from them, Tohoku's socio-economic conditions, regional peripheralisation, 
poverty, unequal development and government accountability (e.g. Jacobs 2011, Rausch 
2012, Kohara 2007, Aldrich 2010) nonetheless contribute to these debates in multiple ways. 
Tohoku's disaster, among other landscape-scale disasters, has therefore played an important 
role in how international organisations approach the question of disaster recovery, 
adaptation and mitigation, and what we can learn from the differences and similarities found 
in the local recovery approaches across a variety of contexts.  
The purpose of this research however is not to equate the impact of disaster events and 
recovery contexts between the global north and the global south, but rather to highlight the 
way in which knowledge and learning becomes homogenised in international debates, while 
at the same time demanding localised heterogenisation of practices. This intertwining of the 
global and local is sometimes also referred to as 'glocalism' (Hartman 2017, Roudometof 
2016). While the directionality of these discourses is often north-south, today, wealthy 
nations of the global north are increasingly struggling to rescue their populations when 
natural hazards occur, provide emergency assistance, and support the efforts of victims to 
rebuild their lives and communities. Critical analyses of the practices that emerge in the global 
north and are proliferated to the global south under the auspices of 'progress' and growth are 
thus urgently needed to challenge and renegotiate the community-centred narratives and the 
global north/global south directionality of development (Bankoff 2001, Nakano 2019). It is 
pertinent to recognise the problems (in the case of Japan, nuclear safety, infrastructure 
failures, and slowness of recovery, for instance) that are increasingly dividing populations in 
some of the richest economies in the world, their weaknesses revealed when faced with 
disaster events, and to challenge the established division of the societies into recipients and 
projectors of global knowledge and learning. While the critical discussion on community-
based post-disaster recovery in this thesis is therefore carried out through the specific 
Japanese case, the research invites practitioners, researchers, and policymakers on various 
levels to fundamentally rethink the principles that guide global post-disaster recovery 
processes. Not merely the processes of recovery, but the processes that lead us to develop 
those processes and plans in the first place. The ultimate aim of my research is to contribute 
to the critical debates on international policies and discourses of 'best practice', precisely 
through its examination of a disaster in the global north, thus helping researchers explore the 
problematic aspects of these globalised discourses and raise key questions about the 
sustainability of such models. 
To link my findings into the broader intellectual narratives, the thesis draws from 
anthropology, development studies (both community and international), and conflict and 
disaster literature, while situating itself within the geographical context of Japanese Studies. 
Within the development sphere, community-based development refers to philosophies, 
methods, and approaches to development that centres on the community-level, where 
theoretically the community members become both the beneficiaries and instigators of 
development (Narayan 1995). As noted above, community-based approaches are the 
common accepted wisdom in development, being heavily influenced by the participatory turn 
and diversification of actors involved in the development processes (Bherer et al. 2016). While 
development studies have adopted the ethnographic emphases on local context and 
participation, anthropology has gone on the interrogate the everyday experiences and 
lifeworlds of individuals at the centre of development processes. Throughout the thesis I will 
be utilising the strengths and intellectual traditions of both fields in carrying out both the data 
collection and analysis for this research.  
As noted above, there is a sense of duality in Tohoku's recovery, driven by exogenous and 
endogenous discourses. I will show in this thesis, how this duality also has a hierarchy, with 
the realisation of exogenous and endogenous aspirations allowed in a sequential order, with 
the official recovery having come to stand in the way of the realisation of localised, communal 
and personal objectives. By drawing on literature and insights on 'affect', the thesis explores 
how the personal fits within social and institutional responses to the disaster event. While 
affect has been widely theorised over the last two decades, my thesis on the other hand 
explores how affect can function as a methodology, helping to understand the affective 
intensities from which a lot of the development goals and aspirations emerge for the people 
who are intimately experiencing the challenges that recovery processes are trying to solve. 
As a result, I will explore affect in conjunction with discourse and socio-physical context of the 
post-disaster space, focusing on the process through which affect becomes transmitted, 
arguing that this endogenous transmission process is largely ignored in the formal recovery 
process, leading to a sense of voicelessness among disaster affected communities.  
The thesis concludes that as practitioners and researchers, we must resist the urge to make 
determinations and try to fix problems, before we understand the nature of those problems.  
I argue that we cannot fully understand the nature of problems from an exogenous position. 
By listening to the local stories, narratives and anecdotes, a discourse begins to emerge that 
can help us understand these problems and how they affect the personal and communal lives 
of individuals who are directly impacted by them. While through my field work it became clear 
that the disaster had induced immediate destruction and long-term lingering trauma for 
those directly affected, I could not ethically escape the positive interpretations of the natural 
hazard itself and the reflections on the meaning of the recovery that for the local residents 
appeared to override the common desolate imaginary of the 'post-disaster'. For the local 
residents, the disaster was not a mere anomaly, or a wrinkle in time, but a profound 
experience where the survivors felt a 'duty' to reimagine a different kind of a future, both 
personally and collectively. Both locally and globally. In this thesis I will explore this 'duty' to 
reimagine through various endogenous notions on the meaning, purpose and process of 
recovery, and exploring how local residents are developing a cohesive discourse for their 
collective future. In the empirical chapters of this thesis, I will show how the key principles of 
community-based approaches, participation, empowerment and resilience, and proximity 
can be found in the endogenous notions and ideas that emerge from the affective experiences 
in the recovery space and how they are articulated and transmitted by local residents.  
Through listening to individual stories, we can learn to build a community-based discourse 
and practice without imposing our understanding upon the situation.  
These concluding remarks and future directions of action resonate with Nabeel Hamdi's 
(2014) call for 'beginnings that count'. Following Hamdi's argument that development 
processes often begin from 'big plans' that are developed in order to identify the chronologies, 
priorities, and objectives of the recovery, but where individual losses are evaluated through 
the lens of abstract and objectified notions of equity and justice, rather than the real affective 
losses that people have experienced. Hamdi argues that instead by focusing on the 'small 
plans', and small stories, we can learn to understand the larger structures that govern the 
sense of loss in the present, and the direction of the recovery into the future, while 
simultaneously making difference in the lives of affected populations here and now.  
Locating the narrator 
It was a warm summer afternoon when I sat at a restaurant with Mr. Takeda, one of my 
research participants I had come to know early on in my field work and who will feature 
heavily in this thesis. We were waiting for dinner with him, his wife, and their granddaughter 
who they were looking after for the weekend. The granddaughter, a girl of about seven years 
old, was getting bored waiting for the food to arrive, and to entertain her we started pulling 
out the contents of our bags and purses. She insisted on seeing my driving license that I 
happily supplied, followed by a similar request to her grandparents. Upon seeing the pictures 
of her grandparents in the small pieces of plastic, she noted: "you both look really tired". Mr. 
Takeda explained to his granddaughter that the driving licenses were quite new, because of 
what happened in Tohoku: "the pictures were taken right after the disaster, so we were 
indeed really tired". These experience of the disaster, imprinted upon the faces of Mr. Takeda 
and his wife in those small images on the driving licenses and still mirrored in their 
complexions and manners five years later, was picked up by their granddaughter who had no 
memory or experience of the disaster herself. Suddenly, through this brief and intimate 
interaction, the pervasiveness of the disaster experience upon the affected populations 
became clear to me.  
This episode is but a small event in the sea of experiences and perspectives that were shared 
with me during my field work in the Miyagi Prefecture's Sanriku Coast between 2015 and 
2016. Yet it was the intensity of these quotidian encounters that suggested that a more 
grounded understanding of the recovery process was needed. Things such as place 
attachment, familiar landscapes, social relationships, learning and understanding, how to 
remember and be remembered, the morality of ones own survival, ones personhood and 
position within society, all came together in brief exchanges such as this one that cut across 
generations and geographies on that summer evening. My thesis draws its strength from 
these personal stories of the affected populations, both those directly affected by the disaster 
event itself, and those who were affected living in recovering towns afterwards, including the 
views and experiences of the new arrivals who established their lives in the region after the 
11th of March, 2011. The subjectivity of experiences is an important factor in the narrative of 
this thesis, as it is the often precisely the personal stories that can expose the links with the 
larger structures and histories that exist around each individual life. It is these structures that 
affect the way life is experiences, and it is these life experiences that reflect those structures. 
It can be beneficial to offer a varied and balanced view of phenomena from diverse 
perspectives, for instance between the affected populations and the authorities in this case.  
Although I contrast the perspectives of the affected populations and the authorities, I do not 
see these positions as mutually exclusive or in full competition with each other. Throughout 
this research, I have tried to recognise the good intentions of the governmental actors, 
prefectural government, and local municipalities; specifically, the individual civil servants, 
community development workers, policy makers, and local residents assuming public roles in 
the recovery at all levels of recovery governance. Their daily pursuits have undoubtedly been 
motivated by bringing the recovery to a successful conclusion and supporting local residents 
in realising their dreams and aspirations. Despite the critiques, and even anger, expressed 
toward the officials in recovery, the recognition of the element of 'service' toward the 
recovery by the civil servants was widely recognised both by residents and official recovery 
actors themselves. My aim is not to dehumanise the individuals who are working for the 
official recovery, but rather highlight the strong institutional guidance that the recovery has 
assumed despite its supposed community-focused nature. I do so while trying to question the 
narrative that has driven this development and its eventual operation in practice.  
I have therefore centred the research and discussion on the perceptions of the affected 
populations, and how they construct their own life trajectories within and outside of the lived 
reality of the physical reconstruction and the future that is envisioned in the exogenous story 
of their recovery. How do local residents interpret those trajectories when they become 
entangled, affected, directed, and enabled by the recovery process happening in their 
communities. This thesis will show through its empirical analysis, how affect plays a central 
role in making experiences internally meaningful for individuals and communities, and how 
those meanings become transmitted and understood only by engaging with the affective 
through the narrative and contextual aspects of endogenous discourse. The purpose is to 
understand how local populations are trying to transmit the emergent, yet largely unheard, 
endogenous discourses about their past, present and future.  
Organisation of the thesis 
To weave the above themes into the fabric of the thesis, I will begin by tracing the conceptual, 
procedural and theoretical background of the notion of 'community-based', with Chapter 1 
beginning with an exploration into the context of natural hazards and the disasters they 
induce, as well as the guiding principles and practices of post-disaster recovery. The 
discussion is contextualised through the Great East Japan Earthquake and Tsunami of 2011, 
with impact, level of damages, emergency management, role distribution between 
authorities and affected populations, and the foundations of the post-disaster recovery 
process discussed through the specific case of Japan. However, throughout this description, 
the specific disaster that took place in Japan is linked to broader narratives of theories of 
recovery and the notion of 'best practice' as reflected in the Japanese case. The chapter 
concludes that the post-disaster recovery process in Japan closely follows international 
guidelines, with the institutional framework within which Tohoku's recovery is carried out, 
rendering the 'community-based' recovery to a technocratic rather than an embedded and 
transformative process.   
Following this contextualisation of the events of the disaster in relation to notions and 
theories about community-based and participatory practices, Chapter 2 then explores the 
entanglements of affect, context and discourse. The chapter outlines how the post-disaster 
setting gives rise to multiple discourses about the future, but focusing on two: the formal 
'community-based' recovery discourse built upon the established learning and 'best practice'; 
and, the local discourse that emerges from the intimate affective experiences with the 
disaster and recovery context. I embed my discussion of the context of Tohoku through the 
work of Japanese and foreign scholars, specifically anchoring the discussion to Numazaki 
Ichiro's desire for the greater localisation of recovery processes in Tohoku, as well as 
Uchiyama Takashi's call for the recovery to take as its objective for local residents to reach a 
place where they can "die in comfort", a deeply affective notion in itself. The chapter presents 
a theoretical framework for arguing that there is a dissonance between the localised notions 
of recovery emerging from individuals and communities, and the grand vision for Tohoku 
presented in the official reconstruction plans on multiple levels of governance. The chapter 
sets the conceptual and theoretical foundation for the duality of recovery with two distinct 
domains, demonstrating the resonance between the above-mentioned call by Hamdi for a 
practical approach in development, with a starting point residing in the affective perceptions, 
experiences and stories of the local populations in Tohoku. 
Following the methodology chapter outlining the research locations, participants and the data 
collection process, the analysis of this empirical material is presented in chapters 4 through 
7, where I critically examine the presentations of entanglements between affect, context, and 
discourse in how local affected populations are structuring and creating meanings for their 
disaster and recovery experiences as an endogenous narrative. These experiences are then 
mirrored and discussed in conjunction with the exogenous narrative for Tohoku's recovery as 
an example of a community-based approach to post-disaster recovery. Each chapter 
therefore focuses on the oscillation and tensions between the endogenous and exogenous 
discourse for the recovery, with the discussion structured around each key principle of 
community-based approaches to post-disaster recovery: participation, empowerment, 
resilience and proximity. The key principles of community-based approaches form the uniting 
thread between the exogenous and endogenous discourses in the discussion, with the 
analysis centering on exposing the points of discomfort in how the meanings for these 
principles become constituted as both knowledge and practices. The oscillation between the 
exogenous and endogenous narratives shows how despite the overlapping articulated 
objectives, aims and intentions, the meanings for these principles can be constructed and 
performed in markedly different ways by authorities and affected populations. The empirical 
material shows how local affected populations constructed their meanings and discourses 
primarily through affective experiences. It also shows how the exclusion of these vital 
characteristics from the formal side of the recovery affected local populations engagement, 
ownership and motivations in the recovery.  
The implications of these findings are discussed in Chapter 8 with the thesis concluding that 
by setting the life worlds of those most affected by phenomena such as disasters as the 
starting point of inquiry, practitioners can construct more fitting meanings for empowerment, 
participation, resilience and proximity. While these findings are not unique as such, with a 
growing corpus of critical literature existing on the weaknesses of participatory and 
community-based approaches (e.g. Mohan and Stokke 2000, Williams 2004, Chambers 1994, 
White 1996, Cannon 2008), I connect these critiques to the growing imperative in 
understanding the future, and the relevance this bears to community development 
practitioners. The future in this context is not treated as a mere tangible chronological entity 
whose on-coming we need to prepare for, but as a philosophical orientation through which 
we construct meanings for politics, public discourse, and social systems, that is increasingly 
being steered by notions of uncertainty and risks. Nowhere is uncertainty and the urgency for 
development more present than in the post-disaster context, but we should treat these 
events not as mere warnings of what could go wrong, but as sites where structures that 
induced the catastrophes become exposed, vulnerable for exploration and subject to the 
search for alternatives. Returning to the discussion of Hamdi's call for "beginnings that count", 
the thesis further calls for a heightened consciousness of the starting points of community-
based approaches among theorists and practitioners. Focusing on the everyday life worlds, 
knowledge and daily struggles can show us the structure and dynamic of problems better 
than grand scale strategic planning developed from abstracted theoretical positions. 
Approaching affect from a methodological perspective can help to challenge and even 
unlearn established practices, thus aiding the exploration of new and radically different 
epistemological positions from which community-based post-disaster recovery processes can 
be constructed into better and more transformative narratives for development. 
Chapter 1 
Disasters as more than hindsight:  
from technocratic analyses to local imaginations 
This chapter will problematise the universalist metrics and characterisations of recovery in 
extant disaster approaches. This is not to say that definitions do not matter, in fact they 
matter a great deal in disaster contexts. Like Strmberg (2007) states, "the decision about 
what to call a disaster and how much relief provided depends on who is suffering" (p. 200), 
with the language that we use about disasters, recovery and the actors within is of vital 
importance and worth spending some time debating. In order for us to understand the point 
of entry or a particular position from which we view the suffering in disasters, I will show 
throughout the unfolding of this chapter that accepting the complexity of viewpoints and 
their hierarchies has become of particular relevance and importance for recovery and 
development discourses. In the context where the narrative around disasters today is 
increasingly centred on the communities directly affected, settling for a specific terminology 
may be less relevant than exploring tools and methods of enquiry that help us bolster the 
approaches developed by recovering communities themselves. This chapter, and in fact the 
entire thesis, will eschew seeking precise answers and definitions, in order to explore the 
multitude of potential meanings within the complex phenomenon that is disaster.  
Within this chapter, I will firstly outline the nature and complexity of the events that saw their 
onset in Japan on 11 March 2011, debating the relationship between the disaster and its 
ensuing recovery. Secondly, I will outline the genealogy of disaster studies through the 
shifting foci from the physical environmental hazards to the social, cultural and economic 
context of human societies, and the impact the disciplinary expansion away from technology 
and engineering centeredness toward social sciences, and the temporal projections of 
disaster research. Finally, moving from the theoretical positions to that of recovery practice, 
I will offer a critical exploration into the development of community-based and participatory 
approaches to disaster recovery, outlining the gap between theory and practice. Returning 
the conversation to the notion of language, the chapter will conclude that the gap between 
theory and practice in community-based approaches appears to be a semantic one, where 
the meanings attached to disaster and recovery-related terminology are bound within 
separate domains, occupied by actors who speak the same language without understanding 
each other.  
To understand the sociology of Tohoku's disaster, it is however important to place the event 
within the physical parameters of disaster events in order to understand the scale and impact 
of the event that I am discussing. The disaster hit Japan at sea off the coast of Honshu at 
magnitude 9.0, approximately 130km from Sendai and 370km from Tokyo affecting Iwate, 
Miyagi and Fukushima prefectures on the afternoon of 11th March 2011 (USGS 2011a). The 
earthquake was caused by a large plate-boundary slip at the hypocenter off the Tohoku 
coastline (Chester et al. 2013). It was the largest earthquake in Japan's recorded history, and 
the fourth largest in the world since 1900 (USGS 2011b). Aftershocks were experienced days 
after the initial impact and their frequency remained high (JMA 2011). The ensuing tsunami 
waves reached Japan's entirety, from Hokkaido to Okinawa, with tsunami waves ranging from 
10m to 40m across 400km the Tohoku coastline, reaching more than 5km inland (JMA 2013, 
Reconstruction Design Council 2011a). The tsunami was responsible for the majority of 
material damages and fatalities, as well as a compounded disaster where Fukushimas nuclear 
power facilities were damaged (Reconstruction Design Council 2011a). The resulting nuclear 
incident was recorded at 7, the highest level on the International Nuclear Event Scale (INES), 
the same scale as Chernobyl (NEA 2014). However, although similar in magnitude to 
Chernobyl it is argued that the events are different because Fukushima did not cause 
widespread and immediate health effects (NEA 2014). The true impact of the incident, 
however, may only be revealed years or decades later.  
The Great East Japan Earthquake has been characterised as unprecedented, cascading, 
complex, and a mega-event, with each characterisation bringing different aspects of the 
disaster into focus. Large scale environmental disturbances can be referred to as 'landscape-
scale disasters' impacting large geographical areas and whose effects are multi-dimensional, 
affecting the stability and functions of social, political, economic, cultural and psychosocial 
conditions (Howitt 2012). The Great East Japan Earthquake and Tsunami, while in many 
respects an event that is one of a kind (Smits & Dengler 2011), reflects the consequences 
environmental disturbances can inflict upon even the most resource-rich nations in the global 
north. We are witnessing an increasing number of environmental disturbances across the 
world, with the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction reports increases of 40% in 
flooding, 28% in storm and 8% in earthquakes between 1997 and 2017 (UNDRR 2018). While 
the vast majority of damages from disasters are sustained locally by local populations 
(Quarantelli 1999, Paton & Johnson 2001), 'landscape-scale' events such as the 2004 Indian 
Ocean earthquake and tsunami, Hurricane Katrina in 2008, and Haitian Earthquake in 2010 
have local, national, and global consequences. In the case of Japan, aside from the losses and 
damages sustained by the local populations themselves, nationally, the breakdown of disaster 
mechanisms brought on legal and structural changes and catalysed major shifts in public 
discourse. Further still, the Fukushima nuclear accident triggered an active global discussion 
on nuclear safety and the viability of the entire industry, leading some countries like Germany 
to turn to a path of total decommissioning of their nuclear facilities (European Commission 
2011, Joskow & Parsons 2012).  
Japan lies in one of the most geologically active regions of the world, subject to a variety of 
natural hazards, some of which are subject to seasonal changes (e.g. typhoons), but most of 
them constant threats to life and habitation on the islands (e.g. earthquakes). The exposure 
of everyday life to hazards, combined with rapid post-war economic and technological 
development has made Japan into one of the best prepared countries against disasters. Yet, 
the triple disaster left 23,000 people dead or unaccounted for, 470,000 people evacuated out 
of which 300,000 lost their homes and were forced into long-term evacuation, with the 
majority of them still unable to return home in 2015 (Reconstruction Agency 2015). More 
than 500 square kilometres of land was flooded, leading to contamination of agricultural land 
and fresh water sources through salination, siltation of canals, and up to 200 million tons of 
debris (World Bank 2012, UNEP 2011).  The initial report to the Prime Minister from the 
Reconstruction Design Council released in June 2011 estimated the cost of reconstruction and 
recovery at 16.9 trillion yen, making it the most expensive disaster in the world 
(Reconstruction Design Council 2011a, UNEP 2011). While some of the blame can be placed 
upon the unprecedented nature of the disaster, clear failures took place both in the human 
and technological sides.  
Preventative technologies too have their own life cycles (Mileti 1999), with the effectiveness 
of seawalls against tsunamis for instance being subject to specific conditions on the ground 
(Nateghi et al. 2016). A tsunami wall in Miyakoshi City was already damaged by previous 
tsunamis by March 2011 and could not sustain the impact and protect communities behind 
what was locally dubbed as the 'Great Wall' (Yamori 2013). Many deaths in Tohoku were 
related to overreliance on such technologies that seem to have suppressed local knowledge 
and instinctive evacuation (Coulmas 2012, Nakahara 2011, Ando et al. 2011, Suppasri et al. 
2013), despite the latter options offering the best protection against adversities (Twigg 2002, 
Hall 2007). However, as Morris emphasises in a passage from an autobiographical article by 
Morris (2013) of his experiences from the Great East Japan Earthquake: "Ultimately the 
success or otherwise of the system depends on how the recipients of such information react, 
which is a problem beyond the realm of science and technology" (p. 34). Preventative 
technologies are only as effective as the human response to them. 
While studies conducted after the earthquake and tsunami confirm that early evacuation was 
most effective in saving lives, linked to effective pre-disaster evacuation information and drills 
conducted in various localities (Yun & Hamada 2012, Sawai 2011, Mimura et al. 2011), there 
were nevertheless problems in the conveyance of both local and technical information into 
successful actions. Disaster risk in Japan has increased over the last 50 years, with rural areas 
being more prone to hazards than highly urbanised regions (Matsunaga et al. 2018). However, 
prior to the disaster, anticipation for the Tohoku event remained low and the most inundated 
areas were not designated as high-risk in hazard maps (Geller 2010, Stein et al. 2012), and the 
local populations did not have prior personal experience of earthquakes of this magnitude in 
the region. Geller (2010) notes that overall the Japanese government's disaster hazard 
predictions have proven inconsistent with real life events and over the last 30 years 
"Earthquakes that have caused 10 or more fatalities in Japan have occurred in places that it 
[the government] designates as low risk" (p. 408). Evacuation efforts therefore led to mixed 
results. Where some relied on local knowledge of tsunamis not reaching so far inland, as was 
the case with the tragedy that took place at the Okawa elementary school, leading to over 70 
children perishing in the tsunami (Suppasri et al. 2013), in others, communal action based on 
historical tradition resulted in what came to be known as the 'Kamaishi Miracle', where 
rigourous training and decisive action were the key principles that saved the students and 
staff at the Kamaishi school (Government of Japan 2013, Suppasri et al. 2013). These incidents 
reveal a gap, or a clash, between information provided by authorities through hazard maps 
and warnings that did not always correspond to the unfolding of the actual event, and 
community knowledge passed on through historical narratives to seek refuge on higher 
ground after heavy earthquakes (Government of Japan 2013, Suppasri et al. 2013, Asahi 
shimbun 20.3.2013).  
The frequency of natural disturbances to human habitation and communal life in the country 
is an important factor that makes this research relevant for the Japanese context. As a 
cascading disaster where a tsunami and nuclear disaster quickly drove the disaster out of 
control, the events in Tohoku presented multiple challenges not only to the logistics of the 
disaster response in the hours and days following the tsunami (Holgun-Veras et al. 2014, 
Taniguchi & Thompson 2013), but also to the still on-going recovery efforts related to 
permanently displaced communities in Fukushima (Maly 2018), the on-going psychological 
trauma and the reconstruction and recovery of areas that are rapidly ageing, and in a decades 
long state of socio-economic decline (Dimmer 2014, Okuyama et al. 2017). Yet Tohoku speaks 
beyond the Japanese context and helps us address some of the most pressing issues we face 
globally. The Japanese case exemplifies how some of the wealthiest countries in the world 
are battling with disaster preparedness, failed safety measures and prolonged recovery 
periods. One of the central contextual questions within this thesis is therefore why is Japan, 
despite resources, education, and technological advancements, facing these challenges? 
We have associated developmentalism for decades (if not centuries) with the global south, 
with the donors and recipients of development divided into the global north and the global 
south. The way we discuss hazards and disasters on the whole is largely subordinated to 
modernist cultural discourse, with large parts of the world outside of the global north being 
generalised as vulnerable and hazard prone (Bankoff 2001). However, as the productivist 
models of the global north give rise to increasing number of crises that have global 
consequences, the universality of these models to produce wellbeing for humanity needs to 
be questioned (Nakano 2019). Similarly, ethical questions and resistance to universalist 
valuations of development have raised criticism of 'disaster capitalism' (Klein 2007, Sou 
2019b). In light of these failures and critiques, an openness to explore alternative visions for 
the future have also emerged.  
In 2012 Ichiro Numazaki a Professor of Cultural Anthropology at Tohoku University published 
a reflection based on the personal experiences of 3/11 during and immediately after the 
disaster. He dubbed the events that were still unfolding in his native Miyagi as "too wide, too 
big, and too complicated to comprehend" (Numazaki 2012). Today disasters are primarily 
seen as social events, where a disaster is a process causing disturbances to human life and 
habitation, triggered by an external catalyst, often an environmental one (Mileti 1999, 
Susman et al. 1983). When we refer to a 'natural disaster', a hotly contested term in itself 
today, we tend to speak about short-term events caused by an environmental disturbance. If 
we accept this causal conceptualisation, then the element of a 'disaster' in Tohoku's itself 
becomes increasingly easier to comprehend. In the case of the 2011 Great East Japan 
Earthquake and Tsunami, we know where and when the physical process of the cataclysmic 
earthquake began, how it unfolded, and why it reached the coastal communities with such 
force. We also know the social and cultural factors that led to unprecedented amounts of 
death and destruction in these communities: the emergency procedures were not ready for 
a disaster of this magnitude, people made mistakes in evacuation, and some physical safety 
measures simply failed under the stress of the oncoming waves. From this perspective there 
is not much that is inherently complex about the physical sequence of events that took place 
on and around the March 11th 2011, leading to catastrophic consequences.  
However, disaster events remain in crowded and intimate association with complex and often 
overlapping vocabulary. We talk about approaches to recovery and disaster mitigation that 
demand 'participation' of local communities to 'build resilience' and 'reduce vulnerabilities'. 
Aside from the procedural terminology, we also battle with more foundational concepts of 
what we mean when we say 'local' and 'community', not to mention 'recovery' and 'disaster' 
themselves. Disaster, recovery and the associated concepts have remained subject to intense 
debate and fluidity (Pateman 1970, Rowlands 1995, Davidson et al. 2007, Quarantelli 1999), 
at times argued to insufficiently capture the full breadth of the phenomenon under 
investigation (Sou 2019b). What Numazaki's reflection perhaps aptly illustrates, is the 
sustained complexity of the human experience in interplay with environmental and social 
forces that haunts individuals, communities, and nations. It is therefore not the question of 
'what happened?' but 'where do we go from here?' that rises before us with all its 
complexities. Curato and Ong (2015) write that "disasters can lift veils", where the accepted 
reality comes into question, activating our responses, adaptive capacities and bringing about 
post-disaster growth (Cretney 2016, Shaw & Goda 2004, Sakamoto 2012, Berkes & Ross 2013, 
Siegel et al. 1999), showing the force of resilience, networks and social capital (Aldrich 2012, 
Aldrich & Meyer 2014, Paton & Johnson 2017, Norris et al. 2007), uncovering social 
vulnerabilities and inequalities that expose different populations to different levels of 
damages (Cannon 2008, Tanida 1996, Elliot & Pais 2006), and opening new avenues for 
understanding how societies and communities cope with the post-disaster trauma (Hikichi et 
al. 2016, Neria et al. 2008, Spurrel & MacFarlane 1993, Bourque et al. 2006). Disasters can 
open doors for novel responses, where a new society is envisioned, but equally they can 
entrench us into conservatism in search of stability and familiarity amidst difficult changes 
(Morris-Suzuki 2017, Koikari 2017, Nilson 1995, Mullins & Nakano 2016). Disasters have 
therefore become accepted as intense sociological moments of humanity and community, 
often telling us much more about our societies than they do about the disaster itself.  
It is not merely the disaster as a physical force of nature that haunts us, with the majority of 
research focus having moved toward mitigation and preparedness. In this process ways of 
accounting for complex futures becomes crucial. The interplay between the devastation in 
the present, left by the physical phenomenon, and the ensuing recovery creates a complex 
entity. This entity becomes all the more complex when we try to account for its human 
aspects, which include sociocultural, affective and temporal imaginaries. The moment of the 
disaster in Tohoku was a seismic shift not only in the crust of the earth, but in the lifeworlds 
of individuals and communities, through which their pasts, presents and futures became 
reassessed and recombined. While Numazaki reflects upon the complexity of the disaster, 
what he actually achieves through his argumentation, is a critical call to understanding the 
disaster in this larger historical context of Tohoku, its role within the nation, and the 
significance of the disaster for the future as an on-going long-term process of re-evaluation 
and recovery. It is therefore not the disaster itself that emerges as a complex entity, but the 
sociology of the communities within which disasters take place, and how they rebuild their 
lives from the destruction.  
1.1. Disaster Gold Rush and the sociology of disasters 
Disasters tend to generate a rush of public, academic, media, and creative interest into the 
various aspects of the disaster experience and recovery. While disasters and post-disaster 
recovery have today moved from a enviro-technological frame to a sociological one, in order 
to understand how future is envisioned from the destruction onward, it is important to 
critically examine how we produce knowledge on disasters, recovery and development in the 
first place, and what that knowledge looks like for different actors. Throughout this section I 
will outline how our understandings and foci of disaster events has shifted and show how 
political and social contexts have become importantly reflected in the language and framings 
of the directions post-disaster recovery should take.  
Gomez and Hart (2013) writing about academic research activities, refer to the rapid and 
immediate interest in disaster events as a 'Disaster Gold Rush', referring to the short-term 
nature of research efforts after disasters. Similar trends can be witnessed in creative fields as 
well, where the Tohoku disaster alone has become subject to hundreds of documentary films 
since the tsunami. Fujiki (2018) scratching the mere surface, lists 25 such films in his analysis 
about their contents. The main concern presented by Gomez and Hart (2013) and further by 
Gaillard and Gomez (2015) toward the disaster gold rush is the quality of the research 
produced, and the ethical considerations of this behaviour when compared to the benefits 
the immediate entry to the field might reap, such as access to perishable materials and 
immediacy of the experience, as argued by others (e.g. Stallings 2007, Bourquet et al. 1997). 
The disaster gold rush effect has resulted in the trend-like development of disaster research 
with a greater number of studies being published on the initial response efforts, with less 
attention paid to the long-term reconstruction, recovery, and development efforts.  
The main concern here lies in the development of concepts and language through which we 
approach disasters as an intellectual and practical experience. After 3/11, in 2011 and 2012 
the number of tsunami-related publications stood at 1300 and 1200 respectively compared 
to the average of 800 per year in the five previous years, with approximately 60 new 
publications made available to readers each month (Gomez & Hart 2013, Gaillard & Gomez, 
2015).  They estimate the average length of the gold rush being two years from the impact, 
with similar trends noted after other landscape-scale events, such as the 2004 Indian Ocean 
Earthquake and Tsunami (Gomez & Hart 2013, Gaillard & Gomez 2015). With recovery from 
landscape-scale events normally taking years, a decade as estimated in the case of Tohoku 
(Reconstruction Agency 2017), it becomes questionable to what degree we can develop an 
understanding of long-term recovery if the majority of the intellectual outputs are carried out 
within a two-year window? Iuchi et al. (2015) argue that one of the main contributions from 
the Government after the 2011 disaster in Japan was the development of common concepts 
and vocabulary through which we discuss the disaster and recovery. However, from an 
ethnographic perspective this can problematic, as the concepts adopted at the initial stages 
of recovery form a register upon which further intellectual outputs and experiences from the 
communities themselves are often indexed, dwarfing the adoption of concepts and ideas that 
may incrementally emerge at later stages of recovery, particularly those emerging from the 
on-going lived experience of communities themselves.  
This is not to say that vital research is not being produced in the context of disasters of course, 
and researchers and practitioners dedicated to the field of understanding disaster events are 
constantly producing high quality critical outputs and innovations beyond the "gold rush" 
window (e.g. Barrios 2017). Equally, disaster researchers are increasingly calling attention to 
inaccurate or misleading terminology, such as 'natural disasters' (Nexo 2015, GNDR 2015, 
Crutzen 2006), which is still the most commonly used term for discussing disasters caused by 
natural hazards, despite decades of research into the sociology of disasters and recovery. 
However, the problem lies in the proliferation of often government and local authority led 
terminology and their application into practice at the very early stages of recovery. I argue 
that this conceptual fixing is part of a broader problem in the field of disasters, and relevant 
to our understanding of what we mean by the terms 'disaster' and 'recovery' in more general 
terms, how their relationship to one another is structured, and the relationship these 
processes have to the everyday lifeworlds of communities.  
The word 'disaster' appears frequently in public discourse and media reporting. It is attached 
to a number of phenomena, ranging from large scale events such as sudden environmental 
hazards, terror attacks and oil spills to community and family level incidents such as pollution, 
loss of employment, and poverty. Disasters are both sudden and incremental that pose 
individual and existential threats. Overall, the word 'disaster' has a negative connotation that 
tends to induce emotional responses among the immediate sufferers of disasters, and those 
following their unfolding from afar. Despite decades of research into disasters problems in 
the conceptualisation of disasters have nevertheless remained 'fuzzy', that in turn induces 
consequences in the context of disaster mitigation and public policies. We repeatedly find 
ourselves asking "what is a disaster?" (Quarantelli 2005, Oliver-Smith & Hoffman 1999, Kroll-
Smith et al. 1991, Perry 2007) and tens of thousands of studies have been produced trying to 
understand how humanity can best prepare for and recover from their increasing threat. We 
have gained tremendous amounts of knowledge from different disasters and how to prepare 
for them. But the proliferation of short-term immediate research simply cannot convey the 
role and direction of recovery in the cycles of disaster events that span across generations.  
The centrality of humans in disaster events, and human involvement in constructing the 
conditions for disasters to emerge is broadly emphasised today. For instance, Picou and 
Martin (2006) divide disasters into natural and technological disasters, with the former being 
out of control of the human subject, while the latter one is caused by humans, both having 
negative consequences to the human habitation and society that is affected. Another 
characterisation is human-induced and environmental hazards (Furedi 2007). One of the most 
commonly cited ways of describing disasters comes from Quarantelli (1999), whereby 
disasters are not disasters unless they have an impact on the human settlement either 
through negative effects on the built environment or the social fabric of the community 
(through death, homelessness, and loss of livelihood). In this respect, their view reflects one 
posed by Mileti (1999), arguing that disasters always take place within the intersection of the 
nature, the social and human community and the built environment. The human-centredness 
of the conceptualisations alone is distancing disasters from the 'natural'.  
Through the sociological turn in disaster studies the focus has shifted from disasters as 
physical phenomena to the human/society-environment relationship which is intimately 
attached to arguments for a geological era of the 'anthropocene' (Crutzen 2006). Disasters in 
the era of anthropocene are approached as human phenomena beyond their physical 
capabilities and impacts, highlighting the centrality of human agency and suffering in 
rendering naturally occurring processes as disasters. Due to many human activities today 
having outpaced natural ones draws attention to the destructive forces of humanity itself 
upon the rest of the living environment (Crutzen 2006). However, focus on the social aspects 
of the anthropocene in disasters contexts does not have to exclude the environmental and 
non-human aspects of recovery and risk mitigation (Dominey-Howes 2018), but can perhaps 
help to highlight them. Human subordination to nature and the environment for instance was 
a strong theme that arose from the reflections on the disaster and the recovery among the 
local populations in Tohoku, as was already outlined in the introduction to this thesis.  
Focus on the sociological aspects of disasters also changed the way we view post-disaster 
recovery, not as a mere process of restoration and reconstruction, but as a long-term process 
of change and adaptation. However, perhaps due to the deep integration into the social, 
cultural, political and economic life of communities and societies, post-disaster recovery is 
still considered to be one of the least well understood phases in disaster cycles, involving 
overlapping processes of physical, social, cultural, medical and psychosocial recovery 
(Passerini 2000, Olshansky et al. 2012, Quarantelli 1999, Alesch 2005). Several attempts to 
understand the structure of post-disaster recovery were made in the late 1960s, mainly 
focusing on the organisational capacity, structure and relationships after disasters (Joakim 
2008) followed by a more systematic investigation into the recovery process with an attempt 
to build a disaster recovery model (Haas et al. 1977). It was not until White and Haas (1975) 
provided a groundbreaking shift in disaster recovery thinking by discussing the social aspects 
of disaster response, preparedness and mitigation that was a diversion from the earlier 
emphasis on physical infrastructure and scientific engineering aiming to prevent disasters. 
This shift moved the discourse toward an emphasis of making living environments more 
resistant to disasters (Mileti 1999, White & Haas 1975) and thus broadened, as well as 
complicated, the focus post-disaster recovery needed to take. No longer was the purpose of 
recovery mere restoration or reconstruction, but rather recovery turned into a process of 
building better and more resilient communities with reduced vulnerabilities to natural 
hazards. As I will discuss in Chapter 6, this is also the narrative used by the authorities and 
local populations in Tohoku who view the recovery as a 'chance' to build something better 
than what was. In this manner, the discourse in Tohoku aligns itself with the broader narrative 
of disaster as a 'window of opportunity' (e.g. Becker and Reusser 2016, Mochizuki & Chang 
2017) that emerged from the sociological turn of disaster studies, with a greater focus on 
recovery and mitigation.  
After disaster events, change in communities is inevitable, not only in terms of physical 
infrastructure, but their economic, social and demographic shape that may transform 
drastically after extreme events (Alesch 2005). However, the change is often not equally 
distributed across the disaster affected area or demographic groups as vulnerabilities such as 
age, gender, economic conditions and access to decision-making across different groups. In 
many cases, disasters also accelerate the pre-existing patterns of social development (Chang 
2010, Rubin & Berbee 1985), increasing disparities between social groups that affect change 
and equity (Brown & Westaway 2011, Mileti 1999, Quarantelli 1999), polarise existing power 
and economic patterns (Cannon 2008), and deliver unequal destruction where certain units 
(such as an individual, family or neighbourhood) or geographic areas may be entirely 
devastated while others remain virtually unharmed (Quarantelli 1999, Aldrich 2012). 
Inequalities and access to resources also affect the way people are able to adapt to post-
disaster contexts (Lpez-Marrero 2010), and exacerbation of inequalities and vulnerabilities 
have been readily found in the post-disaster contexts of Hurricane Katrina (Hawkins 2009, 
Yarnal 2007, Weber & Messias 2012), Puerto Rico (Garcia-Lopez 2018) and Honduras (Barrios 
2017) to name a few. Individuals, social groups, and geographical areas are therefore 
impacted by the disaster in varying degrees that also affects the successes and failures of their 
recovery, resulting in high degrees of variability between even neighbouring communities.  
Vulnerabilities therefore do not simply emerge from the strength of the impact but are 
experienced heterogeneously depending on everyday community practices and conditions. 
Strength and diversity of livelihoods, measures of social protection, equality of resource 
distribution, and poverty (Cannon 2008), or demographic and economic decline such as is the 
case in Tohoku (Dimmer 2013, Matanle 2011) are the foundation for daily and chronic risks 
in communities (Sen 2000). Recovery today is seen as reducing vulnerabilities and building 
resiIience to disasters, bringing issues such as geographical location, demographic character, 
and socio-economic composition of the communities intimately into the centre of the 
recovery process. Recovery is understood as a localised process that is defined by the overall 
needs of the community beyond immediate physical reconstruction and socio-economic 
restoration. Instead, for many researchers, recovery and disaster risk mitigation are no longer 
treated as an isolated activity from the rest of the communal and social life (Mileti 1999, Paton 
& Johnson 2001, Godschalk 1999, Tierney & Oliver-Smith 2012, Fordham 2012). For example, 
the socio-economic and demographic issues of rural Japan, particularly in Tohoku, are central 
features in the recovery from the 2011 disaster in Japan. Taking issues such as these into 
account through the case of Japan has the potential to become a point of transferrable 
knowledge, as many nations are experiencing similar demographic and socio-economic 
trends.  
In a context of stagnation or decline, such as exists in rural Japan, it is often the issues that 
are strictly not about the recovery that arise as the main concern for the local residents.  In 
the face of questions where giving definitive answers is impossible, hope, and utopian visions 
can be offered (Chamlee-Wright 2010, Barrios 2017). This has led to a conclusion that disaster 
risk mitigation and resilience building should move towards growth rather than hazard-
oriented activities (Paton & Johnson 2000), such as improving people's baseline livelihoods, 
the value of local building stock, environment and social life, and building up people's sense 
of power, belonging, competencies and relations to one another while reducing inequalities 
are inherently resilience building activities that would reduce risk outside the context of 
mitigating the immediate environmental hazards (Paton & Johnson 2001, Cannon 2008, 
Chamlee-Wright & Storr 2011). While disaster prevention and preparedness that focus on 
reducing vulnerabilities remain vital activities in the Japanese context, turning resilience 
building into a growth-oriented activity will alter the theoretical and methodological 
perspective from which it is viewed. When we begin to consider recovery and resilience 
building as a growth-oriented activity, the focus shifts away from the deficits to assets, 
migrating disaster preparedness activities more firmly into the field of community 
development (Paton & Johnson 2001, Shevaller et al. 2015, Bhattacharyya 2004, Perkins et al. 
2002). Today long-term disaster recovery is approached more as a process of development, 
without a clearly defined ending date, where social, economic, cultural and demographic 
characteristics and projections for the recovering communities are weaved into the recovery 
and risk management practices.  
Perhaps it is this overlap of multiple simultaneous processes, actors and timelines, and the 
lack of clearly defined endings, that induces the sensation of the post-disaster recovery 
process being "too big, too wide and too complicated" or 'fuzzy' to comprehend. Today, the 
post-disaster recovery process has to incorporate the necessity of immediate and rapid 
reconstruction and recovery that responds of the needs of the affected populations and 
provides physical and material restoration in an equitable manner, while simultaneously 
working towards long-term on-going processes of disaster preparedness, resilience building, 
vulnerability reduction, and community development in a localised manner. Not to mention 
at the same time providing learning for the international community battling with existential 
issues of human survival, poverty, overpopulation and growing social, economic and 
geographical disparity. In sum, recovery has to respond to hyper global and hyper local 
contexts and needs, where homogeneous learning from multiple disasters and post-disaster 
recovery contexts can give rise to a variety of recovery outcomes through heterogeneous 
applications of knowledge. It is from this context of rising global risk society, and the 
diversified impacts in which they result that has given rise to the community-based 
approaches to recovery (Maskrey 2011).  
1.2. The best practice for building back better: The participatory turn and disaster research 
Community-based and participatory approaches are today widely recognised as the 'best 
practice' in recovery by intra-governmental organisations, governments and NGOs alike 
(Mansuri & Rao 2004, Peterman 2000, Eliasoph 2011). In this section I will critically assess 
community-based and participatory approaches as the 'best practice' and introduce how they 
have been applied in the Japanese context. As I have outlined above, post-disaster recovery 
has increasingly become seen as a process of development, rather than a process of 
restoration, and therefore the following section will draw from (international) development 
literature, exploring the evolution of the principles of community-based practices and an 
analysis of their application into the post-disaster context of Japan.  
Community-based approaches can be broadly defined as bottom-up processes arguing to 
improve recovery outcomes by empowering local communities as the agents of their own 
recovery. They are based on the arguments that the closer to the affected communities the 
recovery takes place, the more empowered residents are in participating in recovery efforts. 
This approach is intended to improve the efficiency and suitability of recovery methods and 
outcomes in localised contexts (Narayan 1995, Rubin 2000). While positive reports of 
community-based processes can be found in abundance, the outcomes of community-based 
recovery processes nevertheless remain consistently inconsistent (Davidson et al. 2007, 
Curato 2018, Sou 2019a). This is not to say that movement toward community-based 
approaches have not improved recovery outcomes or corresponded to the general calls for 
localism and decentralisation of governance processes overall, but a critical conversation on 
their associated costs is sorely needed. Some of the key questions revolve around whether 
these approaches are about creating something new or merely adjustments to the old. 
Through community participation and community-based means, while aiming to empower 
affected populations, equally, we can argue that the responsibility for finding one's way is laid 
on the shoulders of the residents and affected populations themselves, bearing the 
responsibility over the failures (Curato 2018).  
While many organisations had been working with individual communities and households in 
post-disaster contexts, it was Maskrey's conceptualisation of community-based disaster 
planning and responses in 1984 that shifted the focus further, highlighting the importance of 
not only localised context of disasters, but that the solutions and recovery process overall 
needs to involve a sense of local agency and active participation by the affected populations 
(Maskrey 1984). Since Maskrey's conceptualisation of the 'community-based approach' to 
post-disaster recovery, it has been adopted widely by the civil society sector, global 
organisations and governments as the best practice in the field of disaster recovery and 
preparedness (Maskrey 2011, Longstaff et al. 2010, Twigg 1999). The emphasis of community-
based recovery focuses on the need to "build back better" after disasters and is the main 
policy guideline for post-disaster recovery by national governments today (Edgington 2017). 
Similarly, embeddedness of disaster and recovery related processes into the communal 
setting stand at the heart of international cooperation and learning from disaster events, 
highlighted for instance in the Sendai Framework for Action of 2015 by the United Nations 
Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, a continuation to previous international cooperation 
achieved through the Hyogo Framework for Action initiated in 2005 for a ten year period 
(UNDRR 2005, Valenzuela et al. 2019). In accordance with the 'best practice' of international 
recommendations toward post-disaster recovery and resilience building, as outlined for 
instance in both the Hyogo and Sendai frameworks, the Japanese Government has adopted a 
participatory approach, styled in reconstruction documentation as 'community-focused 
recovery' (chiiki, komyuniti shutai no fukkou1), to rebuilding Tohoku after the triple disaster 
of 2011 (Reconstruction Design Council 2011a p. 2 and 2011b, p. 5).  
Post-disaster recovery has become attached to the broader debates on governance centred 
on what has been termed the 'participatory turn' among academics and practitioners working 
on democracy, decision-making and citizen-government relationship since the beginning of 
the 1960s (Bherer et al. 2016). As outlined above, participatory methods entered the post-
disaster recovery context in the 1980s as the intellectual debates on sociological disasters 
advanced, beginning to emphasise the active role of communities in developing their own 
resilience and reducing risks and vulnerabilities. Participatory approaches are today widely 
considered the global 'best practice' in the field of development, and when applied to post-
disaster recovery contexts research finds that citizens involvement in recovery and planning 
for their own future has been indicated to improve recovery outcomes (Olshansky et al. 2006, 
Nakagawa & Shaw 2004, Berke et al. 2008). Most studies however only focus on citizen 
participation in decision-making process, not action and recovery planning itself (Shaw & 
Goda 2004, Aldrich 2013). Olshansky et al. (2006) studying recovery from Kobe earthquake 
note however that while communities were integrated into the decision-making processes 
1  
through machizukuri-organisation 2 , the resulting involvement was only extended to 
consultation, not the actual drawing of plans and action, which they see as a weakness in the 
process. Similar sentiments were reported by the encountered populations in Miyagi as well, 
distinctly expressing negative feelings towards the perceived externality of the planning 
process and the role of 'commenting' that was awarded to the communities themselves.  
Participatory turn emerged from the context of counterhegemonic approaches to bring 
forward social transformation and as a critical response to the development of modern 
democratic proceedings (Leal 2007, Polletta 2016, Bherer et al. 2016). Despite participatory 
approaches having a long history, their incorporation into public administration and 
governance structures has increased dramatically, to a point that we can talk about a 
'participatory revolution' (Ganuza et al. 2016) that is partly linked to the rapid adoption of 
technology since the 1990s that has diversified the opportunities and forms of participation 
(Poletta 2016), but also its rising "trade value" in winning development contracts in what had 
become an increasingly competitive market by the 1990s (Leal 2007).  Equally, Stokke and 
Mohan (2001) recount this radical shift in development discourse in the 1980s as coinciding 
with the rise of decolonising narratives on the left and the private interest view of the right 
that shifted the perceptions of the state as the 'engine of development' to a position of being 
the central problem for development. The state needed to be minimised, with the focus 
leaning toward citizen-oriented and participatory perspectives, bringing civil society 
organisations into the spotlight, with both left and right leaning political actors recognising 
their high value in participatory development (Stokke & Mohan 2001).  
More community-focused development practices and governance principles have brought 
many positive developments into the government-citizen relationship. There are many 
benefits outside the range of accountability that have emerged from the participatory turn. 
The development of participatory praxis in the form of Asset-Based Community Development 
(ABCD), Appreciative Inquire (AI), and Community Organising, to name a few have all despite 
their many weaknesses (MacLeod & Emejulu 2014, Roy 2017), highlighted the importance of 
2 Machizukuri literally means 'town making' and refers to community development. Machizukuri organisation 
is therefore a community development organisation normally operating in a place-based community whose 
membership is composed of local residents.  
community voices in understanding the breadth and depth of issues in a localised context, 
and provided tools for those voices to be heard as part of the official governance processes, 
and sometimes against them (Mathie & Cunningham 2003, Jones 1998, Reed et al. 2009, 
Freire 1970, Alinsky 1989). A good example from the Japanese context, extremely relevant to 
post-disaster recovery as well, is the development of machizukuri councils for city and town 
planning processes. The machizukuri boom can be traced to the 1980s and the general rise of 
the participatory ethos, where citizens' views and voices have been able to make tangible 
changes to overall town and city planning processes, in some cases being able to maintain 
historical character of neighbourhoods and stop undesirable development projects from 
taking place (Srensen et al. 2008, Srensen 2009). The value and benefits of community 
participation and proximity of development processes to the developing context itself cannot 
be negated, but the questions around the transformative power of these tools and practices 
have nevertheless remained, demanding urgent critical inquiry.  
Throughout the last three decades participatory approaches have arguably lost some of the 
connections with their radical roots and have come to be seen as processes designed for the 
development of 'good governance' (Sou 2018, Bherer et al. 2016, White 1996). Equally 
however, these processes are subject to their potential cooptation and appropriation of 
institutional actors (Leal 2007, Rushings 2016). As some have argued, the separation of 
participatory processes from their political roots has removed the political element from 
citizen participation and development processes. For example, Stokke and Mohan (2001) 
note that the apparent consensus across the political spectrum on the desirability of 
participatory approaches has not only depoliticised the participatory narratives but also 
essentialised local civil society and communities (p. 19-20). Communities, like participation 
itself have become understood as, 'a good thing' whose goodness is taken for granted 
(Cleaver 2001, Cannon 2008). This tendency to essentialise the 'goodness' of communities is 
something found in high prevalence in the context of Japanese rural revitalisation (and by 
extension reconstruction) initiatives for instance, many of which rest on an essentialist and 
romanticised narrative of the furusato (Love 2013, Knight 1997, Creighton 1997). Discussing 
participation in the contemporary context of political decision-making cannot however be 
separated from notions of power, or in fact politics, especially as participation today largely 
takes place under the motivation of citizen empowerment (Ganuza et al. 2016). 
Empowerment in itself is after all a form of politics, where participation is incorporated into 
the new non-confrontational institutional regimes (Williams 2004, Cooke & Kothari 2001). 
Despite the element of 'power' within the very word itself, empowerment does not 
necessarily mean sharing power, and there is a difference between citizens providing 
justification and legitimacy to decision-making processes and the act of actually shifting the 
decision-making processes into the hands of the citizens. Simultaneously, the insertion of 
participatory approaches to contemporary decision-making has brought to the surface new 
politicised questions on whether participation is disrupting the processes of decision-making 
and power hierarchies, or in fact reinforcing them and pushing responsibilities over successes 
and failures to the localised and decentralised setting (Rushings 2016, Sou 2018, Leal 2007, 
White 1996, Stokke & Mohan 2001, Mohan & Stokke 2000, Pyles 2009). With the 
enforcement of empowerment without power, the participation of today has moved away 
from classical notions of democracy in broader decisions-making processes, to the sphere of 
local 'ownership' and responsibilisation of citizenry.  
The rise of participatory narratives in the name of localism has had important and tangible 
consequences for development practice, a sphere into which 'recovery' has also increasingly 
become slotted. White (1996) argues that development practice today is a technocratic 
process, reduced to techniques that aim to accommodate practice into the specific contexts, 
without the process of participation upsetting the dominant narratives. This development has 
been accompanied by the professionalisation of the development (Polletta 2016), and indeed 
post-disaster recovery sectors, where external technical expertise sets the parameters of 
action (Barrios 2017). In post-disaster Tohoku too the distance between the affected 
populations and the external experts and authorities3 was lamented on many occasions, 
despite overwhelming dissatisfaction toward the plans and future townscapes themselves 
lacking, such as was the case with one long-term resident who stated that he no longer cared 
about what the town would look like, he is used to it already (REF 45). Despite meeting the 
needs and requirements of the communities, it was however the externality of the planning 
3 Interestingly in many cases also municipal workers were seen as external, given their lack of residence or 
visibility in the recovering communities 
process carried out "by experts and architects in Tokyo and Sendai" (REF 15) that was met 
with dissatisfaction and seen as an imposition upon the community.  
There is a gap between theory and practice in terms of the democratic ethos of participatory 
approaches, and their application in real life circumstances. Davidson et al. (2007), similar to 
Curato (2018), find in their comparison on different forms of community-based participatory 
approaches applied to development of housing projects that it is the aspects of the 
'community' and 'participation' that are neglected, and loosely applied to the specific 
contexts. Their specific concern lies in the models of participatory development that are 
assumed to result in 'better' outcomes without the community participants being involved in 
defining what 'better' is for their specific context (Davidson et al. 2007, p. 112). Similarly, Sou 
(2018) working in the context of post-disaster Puerto Rico argues that opening participatory 
spaces was not enough as their remit and focus was often unsuitable to the community 
context, where participants defined notions of responsibility, risk and blame in very different 
ways than the definitions upon which the participatory space and process was based.  
Much of the gap between theory and practice therefore appears to be semantic, where local 
populations and authorities assume they are speaking the same language and referring to the 
same terminology, which on closer inspection are found to have different internal logics and 
purposes. This fallacy of the benefits of community-based approaches to the communities 
themselves is widespread, with Mansuri and Rao (2004) stating that despite developments of 
effective community organisation and skills, "not a single study establishes a causal 
relationship between any outcome and participatory elements of a community-based 
development project" (p. 1); with Cleaver (2001) also stating that there is "little evidence of 
the long-term effects of participation [...] as a strategy for social change" (p. 36). Echoing the 
reference from Strmberg in the opening of this chapter, Mansuri and Rao (2004) finds that 
external agents and institutional environments are instrumental in influencing the direction 
and objectives of the community-based development projects, findings that can be 
corroborated through the work of others (e.g. Barrios 2017). When examining the context 
and administrative infrastructure developed in Japan, it becomes clear that Tohoku's 
community-focused recovery is a classic example of an externally driven process that merely 
replicates and enforces existing power positions.  
1.3. The institutional environment for 'best practice' in Japan 
The application of community-based approaches to recovering contexts is inherently flexible, 
as it is within their internal logic and philosophy that the principles be applied to the local 
context in ways most suitable to the local needs and desires. The application of the core 
principles of participation, empowerment, resilience and proximity relies on how these ideas 
become reflected as practical processes within the recovering context, and how they are 
conceptualised as ways in which we then speak about those processes that are taking place 
on the ground. As noted above, from the perspective of application of community-based 
recovery into the local context, it is often not the work that is carried on the ground with 
affected populations by community development practitioners that influence the success or 
failure of these measures. Rather, it is the established institutional environment that already 
directs the nature and content of those successes and failures before affected populations 
have had a chance to consider and reflect on what those successes and failures might look 
like.  
Soon after the disaster the Japanese central government began developing a legislative and 
administrative infrastructure to facilitate the pressing need for both immediate and sustained 
long-term support. In Japan too, the post-2011 recovery has largely followed international 
'best practice' by adopting a 'community-focused' 4  approach to Tohoku's recovery. The 
community-orientation of the post-disaster recovery process in Japan became firmly 
embedded into the core documents that the government produced in the early months of 
the post-disaster period, outlining the legislative, administrative and fiscal direction of the 
recovery:  
1. Towards Reconstruction - Hope Beyond Recovery, the Reconstruction Design Council's 
Report to the Prime Minister, June 2011. 
2. Basic Guidelines for Reconstruction in response to the Great East Japan Earthquake, 
Reconstruction Headquarters, July 2011. 
4   (Reconstruction Design Council 2011b, p. 5) 
3. Basic Law for Reconstruction in response to the Great East Japan Earthquake, 
Reconstruction Headquarters, July 2011. 
A close reading of these documents can be found in the appendices of this thesis (See Annex 
3), but the main message carried through the documents is one that outlines a recovery 
process that closely reflects the key principles of community-based recovery outlined in the 
previous chapter: participation, empowerment, resilience and proximity of the recovery. In 
its application of the community-based principles, the reports emphasise localism and 
participatory governance by noting on the diversity of circumstances in which recovery has to 
be successfully achieved, with the municipalities placed in a position of leadership, expected 
to co-produce a recovery plan for their localities together with the community members; a 
common feature in Japanese community development processes (Dimmer 2014). In terms of 
the administrative division of labour, they indicate that the main decision-making power over 
the style and direction of the recovery therefore rests on the local municipalities, while 
stressing that they should aim to empower local populations to actively take part in these 
decision-making processes. However, vitally, in the documents the government also reserves 
the right to outline the legal, financial and administrative structures for decision-making in 
the recovery; thus effectively undercutting the leadership of municipalities as I will discuss in 
more detail in the subsequent chapters. Finally, the reports stress that the recovery should 
stand as a moment to learn from this tragedy and an opportunity to create communities that 
will be socially, economically and physically more resilient to future adversities.  
While the emphasis lies on the aspect of decision-making taking place in proximity to and in 
collaboration with the affected populations, the sheer scale of the disaster not only paralysed 
but also physically isolated many of the disaster struck communities from aid in the early 
stages of the emergency. Equally, small municipalities whose public officials themselves 
became victims of the disaster, found themselves physically, fiscally, and emotionally 
overwhelmed by the scale of the emergency, and later the recovery project (Oguma 2013). 
Due to these reasons, the central government support and intervention was necessary and 
welcomed (Samuels 2013, Dimmer 2014) in order to offer efficient financing of the recovery 
and technical and administrative support to deal with the scale and intensity of the 
catastrophe. Despite the immediate impact of the disaster being contained to a specific 
region and communities, the event nonetheless had a reverberating effect upon the entire 
nation, thus requiring a decisive national action.  
The central government intervention was welcomed not only to provide a response in line 
with the scale of the devastation, but due to the strong expectations among the Japanese 
populations that in cases of large-scale emergencies the central government is the most 
efficient agent for assistance (Dionisio and Pawson 2016). The Government did take decisive 
action in the aftermath of the disaster to alleviate both the immediate and long-term logistical, 
bureaucratic and financial burden on the municipalities themselves, announcing the 
establishment of a Reconstruction Agency that would function as a centralised arm of the 
government in the disaster recovery; it began its work in early 2012 (Reconstruction Agency 
2012). Despite the prominent role and expectation placed upon the central government, to 
maintain the principles of proximity to the affected context the importance of local self-
governance and municipal leadership was nonetheless emphasised throughout the planning 
of the recovery process (Reconstruction Design Council 2011a). One of the main tasks of the 
local authorities was to develop local reconstruction plans that most municipalities did 
already within 2011. The main purpose of the Reconstruction Agency was then to coordinate 
the central resources and function as a one-stop-shop for local authorities to gain 
administrative and fiscal approval for their locally developed recovery plans as well as gain 
support for their local execution (Reconstruction Agency 2012).  
The above-mentioned documents therefore outline a clear division of labour between the 
national and local governments, with the aim to establish a 'bottom-up' line of command, in 
keeping with the principles of community-based approaches. Even under 'regular' emergency 
circumstances local governments in Japan are expected to bear the financial and 
administrative responsibility for the immediate disaster responses (Library of Congress 2013) 
with the Japanese emergency legislation carrying a strong character of local leadership and 
management. Despite the unprecedented nature of Tohoku's disaster that in many cases 
exceeded the capacity of the existing recovery and reconstruction systems (Iuchi et. al. 2015) 
and the high expectations placed upon the central state for care and action in case of crises 
(Dionisio and Pawson 2016), combined with a growing appetite for citizen participation 
decentralisation efforts in the early 2000s (Jacobs 2011, Srensen and Funck 2007) have 
introduced rising expectations upon the local governments to assume a leading role in 
facilitating the opportunities for citizens to engage in decision-making and co-production of 
local development (Foljanty-Jost 2011). As a result, the role of the municipal governments has 
been central in the practical realisation of what the community-focused recovery looks like 
on the ground.  
Community engagement in the disaster affected towns has primarily been evoked and led by 
the municipal actors, either directly engaging with residents through meetings and surveys 
organised by the municipality itself, or indirectly by relying on secondary organisations to 
carry out on-going engagement work (Murakami et. al. 2014, Dimmer 2014). Initially, direct 
engagement appears to have been more prominent. Many municipalities organised a number 
of consultation meetings and workshops to develop local recovery plans in 2011. In Onagawa 
and Minamisanriku for instance, hundreds of people joined the initial planning meetings over 
the months following the tsunami (Town of Onagawa 2011b, Town of Minamisanriku 2011b), 
where local residents could debate the plans for the reconstruction. These initial meetings 
across municipalities produced the outline for the principles and general directions for the 
recovery, where "contents of the plan reflect the ideas [of the local residents] as much as 
possible" (Town of Higashimatsushima 2011, p.3). In time, indirect community engagement 
has gained prominence in order to maintain momentum throughout the recovery, with 
neighbourhood organisations and machizukuri councils assuming a central role in the making 
the formal recovery process reside closer to the affected residents.  
Neighbourhood Associations and Machizukuri councils are natural partners for municipalities, 
with a long history of cooperation. While the Non-Profit Organisations (that still have a 
relatively short history in Japan) have contributed greatly to the localised recovery efforts in 
Tohoku (Srensen and Funck 2007), their typical remit in Japan has been to work on advocacy 
and support primarily outside of the state structures (Tsujinaka and Pekkanen 2007, Haddad 
2007). Neighbourhood Associations and Machizukuri councils on the other hand have strong 
historical roots in collaborating with local authorities on public matters of interest, 
information sharing, and co-production of services (Pekkanen 2009), to a point where their 
independence from the state structures has been questioned (Tsujinaka and Pekkanen 2007). 
Many of these organisations have assumed vital and formalised roles in disasters for decades, 
such as evacuation and emergency management on the ground (Ito 2007, Kawato et al. 2013). 
Preference toward these partners by the municipalities is explained by the historical 
association that has fostered established working patterns and trust between the authorities 
and the citizens, but also arguably their controllability. The primary role of these community 
organisations in the recovery has been to function as a platform between the citizens and the 
authorities, both feeding back views and concerns from the residents to the municipality, as 
well as deliver, explain and unpack information from the authorities and how decisions and 
municipal plans will affect the local context of the residents. The interrelationship is therefore 
founded primarily on information exchange, rather than politicised debates.  
There are several benefits and drawbacks to this model of public engagement. The general 
public taking part in meetings and events organised by community organisations is popular in 
Japan and requires low levels of skills, but assuming leadership positions within the 
organisational structures often requires a great deal of expertise and understanding of 
municipal structures and way of communicating between the authorities and residents 
efficiently. While these roles have been found to inject valuable leadership skills and expertise 
directly into the communities (Foljanty-Jost 2011), the time and skills commitments have 
equally been found to exclude people from the process (Tsujinaka and Pekkanen 2007, 
Haddad 2007); This was also the case in Tohoku as well (Chapter 4). In this way, even locally, 
community-based recovery gains a top-down structure, where community organisations are 
recruited into a partnership to deliver the agenda fixed into a locally developed recovery plan.  
Despite the local municipalities being nominated as the leaders of the recovery, the top-down 
driven national plan set considerable limits to the types of execution that could take place in 
the localities (Oguma 2013). The majority of this funding is directed straight to the local 
municipalities through 'core programmes' and 'additional projects' (Iuchi et. al. 2015). Core 
programmes represents the lion share of the entire reconstruction budget, with local 
municipalities primarily offered only two types of projects coordinated by the Reconstruction 
Agency: infrastructure upgrades that consisted of either land elevations or community 
relocations in order to improve physical resilience of communities along the coastline. The 
'additional funding' was allocated for "softer" projects, such as community engagement and 
development; these grants were only made available after municipalities began to critique 
the inflexibility of the core reconstruction grants (Iuchi et. al. 2015). There are restrictions in 
place however for the "softer" project allocations: the second type of funding dictates that 
municipalities need to fund a part of these activities independently, and the budget for these 
"softer" activities cannot exceed 35% of the overall cost of reconstruction; all activities 
through the additional programmes also need to be linked to the projects funded under the 
core funding (Cabinet office 2013). Since the majority of socio-economic and community 
development needs in Tohoku are not directly related to the disaster recovery, but rather 
stem from long-term deflation of industries, aging and outmigration, short-term development 
funding that can only be used to fund reconstruction related activities is unlikely to address 
the bigger concerns that are threatening the livability and resilience of these communities for 
the future.  
As Tohoku's reconstruction budget is considerable, it has however become lucrative for local 
governments to take advantage of these additional funding streams, as their own fiscal 
capacity has long been undercut by aging, population exodus, and municipal mergers (Cho 
2014, Oguma 2013, Jacobs 2011). While reconstruction funding has improved the financial 
capacity of the municipalities as financial allocations toward these rural municipalities have 
increased, the disaster induced outmigration and socio-economic damages have permanently 
weakened the local tax base that in some places has decreased by as much as 70% (Cho 2014). 
This short-fall has been filled by government issued reconstruction subsidies that not only 
make municipalities more accountable to the state than their communities but also tend to 
prioritise national goals set for the recovery, rather than municipal and communal aspirations, 
with little funding available to run basic services that are normally financed through local 
taxes and are now severely lacking resources (Cho 2014).  This structural change in the 
character of the funding allocation therefore comes with consequences to local authority and 
governance, with proximity and local leadership in recovery ringing increasingly hollow. By 
placing municipalities in the lead in the public narrative, the state is effectively distanced from 
the recovery in the everyday setting, while maintaining the overall control of the direction 
and narrative for the recovery through control of resources.  
By looking at the institutional framework of Tohoku's reconstruction in more detail, it 
becomes increasingly clear that, there is a strong national top-down authorship of the 
recovery that manifests itself, not only in what is happening, but what is possible to imagine 
happening in these localities. Cornwall and Brock (2005) write on development policies and 
the use of "buzzwords", that they deem "[...] are never neutral. They come to be given 
meaning as they are put to use in policies. And these policies, in turn, influence how those 
who work in development come to think about what they are doing" (p. iii). Investing in 
community-based language and principles alone does not make the process of recovery, or 
development in general, manifest in local, participatory, empowered and resilient outcomes, 
if the precise meanings and the actions these principles induce do not resonate with the 
experiences in the local context (Pateman 1970, Poletta 2016, Barrios 2017). Through the 
organisation of financial, administrative and legal structure around the recovery the national 
vision for Tohoku's future has become fixed into place, establishing a discourse that reflects 
the abstracted notion of global 'best practice' rather than the intimate and localised (i.e. 
community-based) experiences of those whose recovery the community-based process is 
supposed to support and improve.  
By the time community members are invited to the tangible community-based process of 
recovery, the problems of the locals have already been externally defined, rather than 
emerging from the tangible and affective daily life experiences in the recovering local context. 
I argue that that this lack of agency to define their own problems as part of the formal 
recovery has led to an affective state within the local population that the they are 
communicating through frustrated exclamations like 'kimochi ga wakaranai'. However, this 
does not mean that the local populations are not defining their issues or imagining 'better' 
futures for themselves in the shadows of the government's 'community-focused' grand 
narrative, whose realisation was being cemented by the institutional framework outlined 
above. Despite numerous meetings, surveys, workshops and consultation events that had 
taken place in their municipalities, when I asked local residents what role they wanted local 
and national authorities to occupy in the recovery of their communities, the overwhelming 
majority simply responded: "to listen to us". I became curious about how to listen to the 
community; their endogenous stories, meanings, understandings and definitions of recovery, 
where they emerge from and how do they operate alongside and resist the advancement of 
the formal vision and operations of the top-down community-based recovery.  
When the discourse and narrative for the community-based recovery is externally infused 
into the local context, the top-down fixed narrative becomes to advance a singular vision of 
victimisation and vulnerability of the local affected populations, where empowerment is 
emphasised as an integral element of the community-based discourse, while the environment 
in which the tangible actions leading to empowerment remains devoid of power itself. In an 
environment where mechanisms through which local experiences and views can alter that 
discourse remain few, the endogenous stories that are produced about the disaster and 
recovery are forced to exist and be practiced outside the formal remit of the recovery, leaving 
the people wanting to tell these stories voiceless. Japan's community-focused process 
appeared to be separating authorities and locals into two distinctly different domains of 
meanings, objectives and actors, thus creating two separate recoveries that were operating 
simultaneously. This duality, I argue, is a direct consequence of the way in which the 
community-based discourse becomes operationalised in community contexts, leading to 
clashing exogenous and endogenous narratives, where the former has come to stand in the 
way of communities defining their own problems, needs and visions for the future. How can 
practitioners (e.g. researchers, community development workers, experts) become better at 
navigating and advancing post-disaster development through the endogenous stories that 
emerge from the local recovery experience, rather than the implanted exogenous ones?  
Chapter 2 
The dual spheres of recovery:  
When recovery stands in the way of recovery 
The events in Tohoku defied comprehension, with words such as 'unprecedented' and 
'unimaginable' quickly entering popular discourse. The disaster certainly defied 
comprehension. Its effects lingered in the air, even after the immediate grief had eased, 
mountains of debris had been cleared, and a semblance of normal life had resumed. Traveling 
to the disaster affected regions put me in direct contact with this emotional and physical 
atmosphere where momentous changes were taking place, personal lives were being 
reshaped, and communities were trying to weave the destructive effects of the disaster into 
a story that would tie together their past, present and future into a unified and cohesive 
trajectory. The intensity of change and continuation lingered in the air, in the environment, 
in the sensory landscape, and social relationships. The necessity for me to 'feel the affects of 
others' (Brennan 2004) gained its own urgency as I struggled to understand the problems 
people were facing.  While I would never be able to experience the disaster and post-disaster 
recovery in the same way as the locals did, there was nonetheless a noticeable process of 
active transmission of intensities and feelings, or affects, with the locals inviting outsiders into 
this affective atmosphere through which they were interrogating their past, organising their 
present, and imagining the future. The rejection of these invitations into the affective 
atmosphere by the authorities is what I argue is encapsulated in my participants utterance 
of "kimochi ga wakaranai".  
The focus on the affective intensities in determining the way local residents were defining 
their own problems, needs and visions for the future, however raises the question on how 
affects are, or even whether they can be, transmitted? The scholarly work on this matter is 
somewhat divided. Affect has been most commonly defined as the pre-discursive intensity 
that emerges from elements within the sensed atmosphere (Massumi 2002, Thrift 2004). Due 
to this focus on the pre-discursive, affect theorists have actively moved away from and 
critiqued the overt focus on narratives and verbal communications within the social and 
human sciences (Sedgwick 2003, Massumi 2002, Thrift 2004, Clough 2009), arguing that 
language preferences the representational and interpretative clarity, over the entanglements 
with bodies and environments that are so inherent to affective phenomena (Blackmann & 
Venn 2010, Clough 2009). Engaging with affect has enabled scholarly work on the human 
experience to engage more deeply with materiality and how these embodied, not just 
discursive, experiences influence the practices of meaning-making (Wetherell 2013).  
However, Wetherell (2013), among others (e.g. Hemmings 2005, Leys 2011, Blackmann 2012), 
has questioned whether we can in fact separate the embodied experience (affect) from the 
process of meaning-making (discourse). She notes the integral continuum of the two, where 
"any initial bodily hit [...] is always already occurring within an ongoing stream of meaning-
making or semiosis" (p. 355). In other words, both the affective experiences and 
communicable representations and categorisations of those experiences exist in continuous 
connection with one another, influencing the way we experience affects and the way we 
attribute meaning to them.  Throughout my field work, the connection between affect and 
discourse became an unavoidable, and overt, element in the interactions between myself and 
the affected populations, where the "duty to tell others what happened here" (REF 6) 
intersected with the notions of an 'unprecedented' and 'unimaginable' disaster that defied 
not only words but comprehension. I started noticing a common pattern in the descriptions 
of the locals, who often relied on universal notions of destruction, pain and suffering to try 
and transmit the sensations that they felt during and after the events; 'hell', 'war', and 
'nuclear catastrophes' for instance were among the schemas that locals used to describe the 
scenes they witnessed in their post-disaster communities to me, with these words and 
utterances in themselves containing ingrained affective intensities. What I began to notice as 
an emergent quality of the affective landscape now occupied by the long-term residents, new 
arrivals and visitors, was the creation of a common and shared narrative through which on-
going process of meaning-making underpinned defining the needs and visions for the future 
that were taking place.  
Through my encounters with local residents in Tohoku, and the affective environment that 
we came to share, a different vision and practical realisation for the recovery began to emerge 
that stood in stark contrast with the vision outlined in nationally and locally produced official 
documents. The locals were building a common discourse for the disaster and recovery too; 
one that did not emerge from 'best practice' but from the affective intensities of the direct 
physical and social context of the recovering space, developed through active engagement 
with the practice of sharing narratives of memory, loss, desire, and imagination. Yet, there 
was little space for these practices and intensities within the official recovery process. While 
the community-focused recovery was supposed to bring communities and authorities closer 
together to articulate a common vision for the future, I argue that there was an inability to 
recognize these other modes of recovery and transmission in many of the community-focused 
recovery activities.  
While my thesis does appreciate the quality of affect as a pre-cognitive and pre-discursive,  as 
my interest in affect in the context of post-disaster recovery approaches it from the 
perspective of practitioners, I will be focusing on the strategies through which affects can 
become felt and understandable to others by those whose life worlds are under 
reconstruction. It is therefore imperative to understand, how affect is transmitted, and how 
practitioners can learn to better recognise affective intensities embedded in endogenous 
discourses of local residents and methods of storytelling. To understand affect and integrate 
it as an element in development practice, we therefore need to begin from the process of 
transmission itself.  
While drawing on Wetherell's (and others') notion of the integral connection between affect 
and discourse outlined above, I argue that the context of transmission, the how and where, 
is likewise important. How people match affective intensities with existing processes of 
meaning-making and develop those into transmittable units of language is vital, but 
transmission of affects does not only take place at the level of language and abstractions. 
How people articulate their stories and where these stories are shared are equally important, 
especially in post-disaster settings where the violent and turbulent shifts in landscape, 
everyday life, social relations and future trajectories have been thrown out of focus and being 
reassembled. The sense of loss, the impact of life in limbo, and future aspirations cannot be 
fully captured through the abstractions of language alone, with the meanings being 
embedded in and emerging from the surrounding context in which the sharing and 
transmission takes place. In disaster contexts, where there are few precise existing schemas 
for the primary and first-hand experience of the disaster and the enduring state of the post-
disaster recovery, these experiences are impossible for outsiders to fully understand. As a 
result, discourse and the affective space become integrally linked, where the affective 
elements embedded into the discourse cannot be fully transmitted outside the affective 
spaces themselves, helping to uncover the fuller meaning of the frustrated exclamations such 
as "none of them [the authorities] ever even come here", that were often uttered by the 
local residents.  
How the context and situation impact the assemblage and transmission of affects therefore 
becomes a part of the discursive process. Goodwin (2006) has explored the notion of 'situated 
activities' in relation to discourse, stating that like the relationships between those who are 
interacting, the situation and context in which interaction takes place is also guided and 
governed by existing patterns of practice, values and morals, that are recognised by 
participants, leading them to behave and communicate in specific ways. While activities and 
behaviours in this view are partly constrained by the past practice and the application of 
familiar schemas to the navigation of the immediate situation, every situation, interaction 
and context nonetheless remain unique and open-ended, with a sense that alternatives are 
possible (Edwards 1997). This latter notion is relevant to post-disaster contexts as a 
heterotopian space (Foucault 1998), where the familiar order of the social and physical world 
has been disrupted, and the process of re-establishing rules, moral orders, trajectories, sense 
of history, and relationships need to be understood as an integral part of meaning-making 
itself.  
Endogenous discourses that emerge from heterotopian spaces are not fixed, but are rather 
generative, embodied and performative, impinged in the process of sharing, and driven by 
the desire to transmit affective intensities of the disaster and recovery experience. Discursive 
practices, content of discourse and the action and encounters and the interactions within a 
specific context are an integral part of the transmission of affects, and thus of the meaning-
making process (Wetherell 2013, Goodwin 2006). Yet, often in trying to map clear outcomes 
in recovery and development processes, those who are trying to help become fixated on clear 
content and labels of success, priorities, and goals set for the recovery. When practitioners 
consider community-based participation and community engagement in developing 
meaningful recovery, they should not only focus on the end results of these processes, but 
the meaningfulness of the process itself as re-assembling and ordering of collective and 
individual understandings of the past, present and the future.  
This difference between process and fixed content bears particular relevance to the emphasis 
on participation within community-based development practices, that tends to centre on the 
articulation of content. As outlined in the previous chapter, community-based recovery is not 
merely a set of 'best practices', but an exogenous discourse through which knowledge has 
already become cemented, analysed and actioned, supported by institutional and policy 
frameworks implemented outside the communal context. I argue that the endogenous 
discourses that are emerging directly from the disaster contexts rather represent embodied 
discursive practice driven by the desire to transmit affects, in an effort to help outsiders 
understand "how we feel" (kimochi ga wakaru). Local meaning-making as an affective 
performance, and how these meanings are developed into endogenous discourses about the 
past, the present and the future in their own right, are however often ignored by the 'best 
practice' of community-based approaches. Despite its emphasis on the 'community', 
community-based recovery may be physically community-based, but not determined by the 
community. It is important to understand that while we speak about community-based 
recovery as the 'best practice', it only provides practitioners with a set of techniques to 
engage local residents into participatory spaces and within those spaces (White 1996), but 
not a foundation for how the recovery is are conceptualised and communicated in and for the 
specific recovering context by those most intimately impacted.  
In this chapter I will outline how endogenous and exogenous discourses exist and operate in 
post-disaster spaces, arguing that their existence side by side in a tense and hierarchical 
relationship leads to a duality of the post-disaster recovery. Each sphere of recovery is 
dominated by different meanings, actions and actors. I argue, practitioners (be them 
development workers, researchers or civil servants) working in direct contact with affected 
populations, can and should become better at recognising the endogenous narratives, and 
build 'better' practices from these narratives. By learning to not only focus on the end results 
of engagement processes, but the meanings embedded in the process of engagement itself, 
practitioners can help affected populations to become the authors of their own development.  
2.1. From post-disaster heterotopia to 'two recoveries' 
The disaster left behind an endless wasteland of debris and destruction where communities 
once stood (Massumi 2011). In a disaster familiar life suddenly loses its rational order, what 
Weick calls a 'cosmology event' (1993), breaking the chronology of time in the disaster 
affected space, as well as the sense-making both the time and space had facilitated. As an 
unprecedented event, the disaster reroutes communities, individuals, and authorities onto a 
different trajectory of a future from the one they had imagined prior to the event. The disaster 
therefore turns the affected region into what Foucalt (1998) calls 'heterotopian' spaces that 
have neutralised the normal relations, representations and designations of the space, and 
where traditional time has broken down (p. 178). While Foucault used the example of a 
cemetery as a heterotopian space, Boano (2011) has applied the concept to post-conflict sites, 
such as refugee camps, showing that a heterotopia can exist in a permanent or temporary 
state. Heterotopia is however always a deviation from the surrounding familiar and accepted 
'normalcy', containing the intensity of emotions that emit from it and a possibility for a 
diversity of spaces to emerge from it (Boano 2011), and for the past to be renegotiated and 
re-understood through the space (Collins and Opie 2010). As 'spaces apart' they are more a 
reflection of the space that surround them (the familiar space) than of themselves; and 
through their existence they are contesting the order and form of the external accepted and 
familiar normalcy (Boano 2011). The apparent return to 'normalcy' becomes contested, 
enabling the imagination of a different future and alternative political visions. The sites of 
recovery, the physical geography and space of the disaster struck towns, facilitate new 
imaginaries of the past, present, and future, reverberating from the traces of the disaster in 
a given space. It is these imaginaries that become developed into new meanings, stories and 
discourses.  
In Tohoku, once the debris was removed, it revealed what some local residents and 
authorities described as a 'blank canvas' upon which the future would be rebuilt. Despite 
some physical development such as main access roads, commercial and industrial buildings 
having been completed, alongside waterfronts, the majority of recovering towns that had 
suffered major damages still resembled such blank canvases with the construction vehicles 
working on brown fields (Image 1). Imagining what that future would look like has taken place 
simultaneously on numerous fronts, ranging from inter-governmental organisations, 
academics, and authorities to grassroots organisations, citizen's groups and non-profits, 
where individuals, communities, governments, and the nation have begun to build new 
possibilities for the space. As outlined in Chapter 1, the advancement of a 'better' future upon 
the blank canvas of Tohoku's devastated communities has become encoded into permanent 
legislative and policy measures that affect the way in which principles that are driving the 
community-based logic are put into action in a specific context. These measures dictate where 
communities can build now, and in the future, with the effects spanning across multiple 
generations into the future. It has been estimated that the disaster that took place in Japan 
is a once-in-a-thousand-year event (Dengler 2011, Smith and Dengler 2011). It is against this 
unprecedented eventuality that multiple actors are now trying to realign humanity's safety 
amidst the prevalence of surrounding forces of nature, while simultaneously solving the 
socio-economic troubles of a specific region. 
Image 1: Town of Minamisanriku in November 2015, viewed from the Junior High School. Image on the forefront 
of from 2007, showing the townscape before the tsunami, with the 'blank canvas' behind it (Anna Vainio 2015) 
Equally, the local residents have been giving consideration to the mega-events of the future, 
driven by their own survival from the 2011 disaster, stating that "we have a duty to protect 
the future generations and make sure a disaster like doesn't happen again elsewhere" (REF 
6). Those living in the locations directly affected by this once-in-a-thousand-year event, are 
now faced with the reality of a post-disaster recovery where they are put in a position of 
intense reflection of what a better future will look like, not only for themselves but for 
generations to come. On numerous occasions I stood at the waterfront in Onagawa, 
overlooking the traces of destruction that still existed side by side with the on-going 
reconstruction, and reflected on the residents' intense yearning and immediate needs and 
new homes on the steep mountain sides, while they were simultaneously asked to worry 
about the long-term sustainability of these towns a thousand years from now.  
Through local encounters and simple presence in these locations, it became clear that the 
narrative for Tohoku's recovery, supported by the speedily established institutional and 
financial framework (Chapter 1) did not quite reflect the intensities and emotions of those 
dwelling in the affected communities. New homes, infrastructure and socio-economic 
sustainability of these declining regions commonly discussed, with local residents presenting 
concrete analyses and discussing ideas at times in very technical terms. What was perhaps 
less immediately observable were the subtle ways in which the locals were collectively 
creating meanings for the disaster and their on-going suffering that diverged from the 
meanings offered by the official reconstruction discourse. In psychological terms, Evans et al. 
(2020) describe narrative constructions of catastrophic events as collective meaning-making 
processes that are built upon 'unveiling', 'restoration', and 'rebirth' that emerge from 
different temporal framings. The locals approached the disaster, and the on-going recovery 
as its extension, not as a break or an anomaly in history, but rather as a moment of revelation 
where the disaster was not a mere result of a chain of events, but the outcome of persistent 
unsustainable and 'unnatural' conditions where humanity had broken too far away from its 
natural surroundings; reflecting fatalism that remains a strong current in Japanese disaster 
representations (Yamori 2013). The disaster was able to "reveal things as they really are" 
(Evans et al. 2020, p. 4). The events in their communities were therefore seen as an integral 
part of their local historiography that had now come to re-determine not only their future but 
reconstructed and given new meanings to their pasts as well.  For the locals, imagining a 
future took the shape of realignment of the events, emotions and experiences across the 
temporal arc from the past into the future, rather than the official narrative that framed the 
recovery as a process of overcoming and "making whole again" while also leading to the "birth 
of the new" (Evans et al. 2020, p. 4), or 'better' as the community-based development 
parlance would put it.  
This discord between the official story and local experiences was equally reflected through 
tangible behaviours, actions and the environment in which my encounters with the locals 
took place. I was often escorted from one place to another, with locals eagerly showing me 
the new developments and recounting what their lives were like in this somewhat strange 
setting. The positivity and eager anticipation were palpable, only narrowly masking the 
anxieties, frustrations and worries over the future that burned under the surface. It was hard 
not to notice the slowness of the recovery, with broken roads, lack of permanent housing and 
in places even debris still dominating the landscape. The amount of hustle and bustle in the 
communities was palpable, but there was a clear disconnect between "the" recovery and 
these localised actions. Much of the action took place at the initiative of local residents 
themselves rather than as part of the official recovery action initiated and led by the 
municipalities. They were distinctly separate and something that kept people going, but not 
necessarily any closer to having their immediate needs of a stable home, community, social 
networks and peace of mind being satisfied. 
It was clear that the post-disaster heterotopian atmosphere was giving rise to alternative 
visions about the future and generating bustling actions and reflections among the local 
populations, with the intimate affective intensities and first hand experiences with the 
recovering context driving the shape and content of what was transmitted between the locals 
and outsiders. However, these endogenous transmissions, while developed in direct 
relationship with the contextualised affective intensity of the lived experience in these 
locations, were never quite able to puncture to the surface and were being subordinated by 
the official discourse that was fixed in place long before local residents could even come to 
terms with their new reality. Ghassan Hage (2015) argues that this fixation of a particular 
vision of the future as the index of reality and everyday actions in the present can inhibit our 
capacity to engage with alternative political visions. He argues that today governments are 
increasingly concerned with 'the real world', composed of the past and the present, a tangible 
and known reality, where we act on and in that reality.  
Drawing from Agamben, Hage continues to argue that this gazing backwards is the result of 
modern governance reversing cause and effect. The practice of managing causes is complex 
and uncertain, whereas governing effects is seen as supposedly cost-effective and linear with 
identifiable outcomes. On the other hand, the process of thinking and reflecting on the 
alternatives of future is deemed as unrealistic, a frivolous past-time that only engages people 
to 'think about doing', rather than the 'doing' itself that happens in the real world of the 
present (Hage 2015). The consequences of focusing on 'doing' is that it draws people intensely 
into the present, the 'real world', where 'doing' becomes marked by its urgency forcing people 
to constantly keep moving (Hage 2015). The friction and slippage between a hopeful 'doing' 
and an imaginative 'thinking about doing' ensures the post-disaster recovery process can 
appear like a maze to the subjects of recovery, for whom the future is promised. Like Kelly 
(2012) indicates, this intense focus on 'doing' that emerges from the reversal of cause and 
effect is about predicting outcomes rather than imagining possibilities (p. 1). Path into the 
future becomes narrowed and frozen into a limited index of qualities that emerge from our 
knowledge of the trajectories that have already taken place from the past to the present, not 
the imaginations and possibilities that emerge from present conditions into the future.  
Arguably, by embedding practice in 'doing' rather than 'thinking about doing' community-
based approaches to recovery suffer from the governance logics Hage describes above, 
despite their emphasis on grassroots action within the development context. I argue that in 
community-based approaches to recovery, the process of organic construction of local visions 
of the governed that emerge directly from the affective space and affected subjects that stand 
'apart' from the familiar normalcy have been bypassed. This leaves affected communities 
merely able to respond to a governmental visions and goals for recovery, community, and 
practice that emerges from technocratic knowledge of experts (White 1996), who are 
external to the context and space that is in motion. Recovery therefore comes to bypass the 
heterogenic ways in which the future could be reached (the alternatives) and sets 
development onto a fixed plan. By doing this the conditions for development are made 
available before the affected populations have had the time to explore the locally emerging 
alternatives and imagine what that development should look like and lead to in their specific 
context.  
Throughout my field work it became increasingly clear that the grand narrative, or the 
external imaginary, for Tohoku's future and the locally emerging imaginaries were 
establishing two distinct domains of thought, language, action and actors; the two recoveries. 
Where the external imaginary drew on the lessons of the past and projecting into the distant 
future, the local residents were actively and increasingly building visions and narratives that 
looked into the immediate context and intensities of their present and 'soon to be' conditions, 
what Guyer (2007) calls the "near future". The hopefulness toward the future, often 
expressed by focus on the 'doing' that was taking place in these communities (the activities, 
projects and overt hopefulness over the future that the local projected), was nonetheless 
standing in constant contrast with the frustrations and anxieties over their own voicelessness 
to be able to express their own ideas and communicate with the authorities in a way that 
would reflect their true feelings. With these 'two recoveries' operating simultaneously, 
affected populations were lodged between the polarised states of waiting and chasing, 
hopefulness and uncertainty, and adaptation and trauma. The contextualised observations in 
the recovering space reflected the intensity of this polarisation where it seemed that people 
were constantly running without going anywhere.  
These polarised themes cut across impressions of local residents about the recovery. Despite 
the deafening noise and constant action of the recovery that surrounded these communities, 
return to their homes still remained years away. Juxtaposed with this anxiety and living in a 
state of waiting existed an anticipation toward the unknown future that kept people active 
and moving, although without a clear trajectory. While the post-disaster space can be a site 
that facilitates the blossoming of multiple imaginaries and meanings for the events that took 
place and the emergent future, it also functions as an instrument of governmentality (Barrios 
2017, Foucault 1998 in Boano 2011) where the "benign relationships of power" that govern 
our lives become unmasked, but often also reinforced (Curato and Ong 2015, p. 3). While the 
post-disaster heterotopia enables the blossoming of these imaginaries, it also helps to reveal 
the pre-existing hierarchies, priorities and discourses of development that in themselves are 
dictating the development of conditions, structures and policies through which certain 
imaginaries become more realisable than others (Chapter 1).  
2.2. Hierarchy of discourses 
In Tohoku after the 2011 disaster, the government saw recovery as a solution to the long-
term woes of rural Tohoku; soon after producing the foundations for a master-vision for 
recovery and building a legal, fiscal, and policy framework to support the realisation of that 
vision. These narratives and visions of a "new" Tohoku are not new at all, as rural revitalisation 
has been debated for as long as rural decline has been a statistical reality in Japan. The impact 
of the recovery was to be long-lasting, propelling Tohoku onto a trajectory of long-term 
growth and prosperity it had not experienced in decades, a continuation of the long-term 
revitalisation and self-determination drive for Japan's rural regions (Jacobs 2011, Rausch 2006, 
Rausch 2012). The government's vision for the recovery, while 'community-focused', was 
nonetheless driven by nationalised goals of development and rural revitalisation. 
Communities had been centralised while deprived of power due to the lack of recognition of 
the nationally embedded vulnerabilities and regional hierarchies upon which the country's 
past successes have rested, and upon which they are envisioned to be built once again.  
When the 'Hope beyond the Disaster' -report was presented to the then Prime Minister Kan, 
he said: "I am looking forward to seeing a proposal with a vision to recreate Japan, so that the 
later generations will see the Great East Japan Earthquake as a kind of major turning point for 
revitalizing Japan and building a better society for the people of Japan" (Cabinet Office 2011). 
What is important to note in the Prime Minister's message, is the recovery's objective as both 
a local and a national project. This message is also echoed on the pages of the report itself, 
as well as outlined into The Basic Guidelines for Reconstruction in response to the Great East 
Japan Earthquake (Reconstruction Headquarters 2011), that stems from the Hope beyond 
Recovery report: 
"The reconstruction of the disaster afflicted areas plays a leading role in the revitalization of 
vibrant Japan, and the disaster areas cannot be truly rebuilt unless Japan's whole economy is 
revitalized. Especially, in order to revive Tohoku region, a new shape of Tohoku will be created 
by maximizing the diversity and the potentiality of the region in an integrated manner" (p. 2) 
This dual focus is not surprising from a practical perspective, as national leadership was sorely 
desired in localised post-disaster contexts, where the disaster had paralysed normal functions 
of society, disturbing familiar social and emotional life of communities. Equally, as the most 
expensive recovery project in modern Japanese history, Tohoku's reconstruction and 
recovery affects not only disaster struck regions of Tohoku, but the country as a whole. From 
this perspective it is unsurprising that the recovery is framed both in national and local terms. 
However, noting that revitalisation of disaster affected areas is not possible without the 
revitalisation of the nation, does in itself echo hierarchy and sequencing of the recovery's 
priorities; and the priorities that have been perpetuated by the on-going historical 
conversations about revitalisation in general (Kelly 2012, Oguma 2013, Hopson 2013, Jacobs 
2011, Rausch 2006, Rausch 2012). 
It is reasonable to question whether this statement subordinates Tohoku's recovery to the 
goals of national revitalisation, thus going against the key principles of bottom-up 
determination for the directions and goals that elevate community-based approaches as the 
'best practice'. First of all, revitalisation in itself would need to be reconceptualised for the 
context of Japan's absolute population decline and economic stagnation (Chiavacci & 
Hommerich 2017), where revitalisation along the familiar growth parameters is unlikely to be 
achieved. But more importantly, when assessing whether the recovery process is justified to 
serve both local and national needs, this can lead to tensions between the local and the 
national spheres.  
Professor Oguma Eiji at the Faculty of Policy Management at Keio University wrote a seminal 
piece on the tensions between national recovery policies and local needs in late 2013, 
pointing to the inappropriate implementation of reconstruction and recovery in the affected 
region, that he argues has led to irrational recovery projects and  the subsequent 
enforcement of the historically subordinated position of Tohoku within the Japanese nation. 
In the piece Oguma outlines the numerous restrictions placed upon the way in which 
municipalities, that are named as the main administrative actors of the recovery 
(Reconstruction Design Council 2011a), can utilise the generous reconstruction budget made 
available by the Government. This structural issue effectively restricts the community-
focused and localised ethos of the recovery and goes against the wishes and needs articulated 
by local communities and municipal authorities themselves.  
Equally, while the recovery's purpose being a national one may be necessary, these 
statements and principles need to be placed into the larger historical context of Tohoku within 
Japan to understand their full impact on the recovery in this particular region. To return to 
Professor Numazaki's call for a broader investigation of the significance of the disaster and 
the variety of responses to it, the nationally articulated objectives of the recovery need to be 
investigated in the historical context of Tohoku's subordination in the larger national context, 
that others too argue is being ignored in the recovery (Hopson 2012, Kelly 2012). Not only 
because of the overall decline and depopulation that is affecting rural regions in Japan in 
general, but the position the region of Tohoku in particular has occupied in modern Japanese 
history, as an internal colony to which the externalities of modernisation and progress have 
been located (Hopson 2012). The official recovery promoted community-focused recovery, 
painting a picture of the emergence of a 'new Tohoku', and highlighting the need to bolster 
the voices of the people (Reconstruction Design Council 2011a and 2011b). Yet, the tsunami 
walls erected along the vast expanses of the Sanriku coast, despite the vast popular 
opposition to them (Oguma 2013), is an indication of the limitations of the current 
community-focused rhetoric, and the persistence and strength of the Japanese construction 
state5.  
The simultaneous and elevated focus on national revitalisation is an indicator of the problems 
with community-based recovery as it is currently framed and returns us to question why 
people feel like they are not being understood (kimochi ga wakaranai), despite the 
widespread use of community-based approaches that encourage active local participation in 
decision-making spaces and processes. In large-scale crises or disasters, development needs 
are greater and often more complicated, spanning across not only the restoration of lives and 
livelihoods, but the entire socio-economic context of the community. What exactly is not 
being translated between the authorities and the localities where the two domains of 
knowledge and experiences lead to contrasting practical approaches and desires? It seems 
that in these contexts external intervention and institutional design has come to occupy a 
dominant role over the subjective, localised, and affective needs of recovering communities. 
We can argue that this is due to the very real lack of physical and mental resources in 
recovering communities, and external agents are certainly vital to facilitating the recovery 
process and providing sociological, mental and physical care and respite for victim 
communities in many ways. But the question is what type of support do the communities feel 
that they need and welcome?  
Stratification and hierarchy of meanings has created tensions in who are the subjects and 
actors of recovery and a disconnect between the processes and goals of recovery, perhaps 
5 The 'Construction State' (Doken Kokka) refers to the persistent government, industry and bureaucratic 
collaboration where more public investment is placed into the construction of public works than can be 
realistically justified by public need (Broadbent 2002). In the Japanese case this often refers to literal 
construction works, with the tsunami walls erected along the Sanriku coast since the tsunami being a 
good example.  
helping to shed light on why do we to repeatedly ask central epistemic questions such as: 
What is recovery? Where does it end? Who benefits and why? (Chapter 1). While people 
broadly used the term 'recovery' (fukk) as a catch-all term containing the various elements 
necessary for re-establishment of 'normalcy' of everyday life and moving into the post-
disaster future, there appeared to be hierarchy and sequencing along which the fruits of the 
recovery could be harvested, as one of my research participants succinctly noted when he 
said: "Once this recovery is over, we can finally start to rebuild our communities" (REF 6). His 
utterance exposed not only the priorities of the local residents, but also the supremacy of the 
formal recovery process over those priorities toward revitalisation that the communities 
themselves did not necessarily even share, as I will discuss in more detail in the empirical 
chapters of this thesis. While it was not always apparent in the overt language that was used 
correspondingly by local residents, civil servants and official documents alike, that the deeper 
meanings constructed and attached to these concepts were nonetheless different, reflecting 
the different processes through which words, language, and discourses gain their meanings.  
As noted in the opening of this chapter, there is an integral connection between affect, 
discourse, and context, one that I argue is imperative for our understanding of both meaning-
making and the transmission of those meanings. What appears to separate the two domains 
of recovery is affect; and the lack thereof. Affect is a vital element of the process of building 
endogenous discourses, emerging from time spent engaging with localised experiences, 
needs and desires, in an open and embodied fashion. In contrast the affective dimension of 
the recovery has been stripped away from exogenous discourses that are, as in the case of 
Japan, produced without contact with the affective space and experiences where the 
development is envisioned to take place. Through fiscal measures, policies and legal 
structures, these external plans become fixed, perpetuating the tensions between the locals 
and the authorities, and embodied in the inattention to affect as expressed in phrases such 
as 'kimochi ga wakaranai'.  
Despite the emergence of community-based recovery as the 'best practice' of post-disaster 
recovery, it has not been able to resolve these tensions. And there is growing evidence of 
dissatisfaction and a sense of voicelessness in post-disaster recovery processes (Davidson et 
al. 2007, Curato 2018). I argue that a 'community-based' development is meaningless, unless 
the discourse, vision, plan, narrative and imaginary for its shape, objectives and processes 
emerge from that context in ways that show a commitment to affective intensities, and being 
there as much as outcome-oriented discourses. While clear imaginaries of the future do not 
yet exist, thinking about those futures and how we get there happens in the contemporary 
present (Abram 2017). Therefore, before a participatory practice is developed, adopted and 
applied to specific contexts of development, we first need to understand how affected 
populations are ordering, structuring and making sense of the situation into which disasters 
throw them, and make a deliberate effort to understand the personal and communal futures 
they are imagining out of that destruction. A community-based approach and its associated 
practices cannot exist before communities can imagine what community, recovery, and 
practice should look like, and tell us about it. I argue that becoming better at being-with, 
listening to and hearing the affective therefore needs to be better integrated into 
development practice, as a problem cannot be solved before the nature of the problem is 
understood.  
2.3. Hearing Affect 
People like to see their lives as stories, with a clear trajectory, and when they recognise the 
arc of the story they can see themselves as the authors of those stories (Berlant 2011). The 
tensions between the hard and soft recovery, the hopeful and precarious images of the future, 
and the daily lives filled with doing and waiting indicate that there are competing narratives 
about the recovery existing side by side. While the community-based approach in this context, 
offers a compelling format for placing the affected populations in the position of authorship, 
due to the stratification and sequencing of imaginaries they are not actually the ones 
authoring the story of recovery. This does not mean that stories are not being told. In fact, 
stories are constantly produced and reproduced on the communal level. My intention in 
conducting this study was to understand how people were telling their stories 'in place' about 
the recovery and explore to what degree people felt like the authors of the recovery. By 
focusing on these stories, I argue we can begin to open up the problems with community-
based approaches, and perhaps begin to find solutions to fixing them.  
Following Kelly's (2012) call for the reorientation of research on Tohoku to focus on studying 
imagination (souzgaku) over hope (kibgaku) and on the 'deliberate effort' to understand 
how we can build a path to the future, narratives and stories can offer a fruitful avenue to 
explore the sequencing and stratification of imaginaries. Following the narrative turn in social 
sciences, stronger links between everyday experiences and storytelling have been established, 
arguing that people construct their understanding of everyday life around stories (Berger and 
Quinney 2004). Narrative constructions are used to make sense of the reality and connect 
everyday experiences to the known past and the imagined future. Storytelling has been 
widely studied in traumatic contexts and plays an important role in the construction of 
collective and personal history and memory, sense-making, adaptation, and coping (Gillies & 
Neimeyer 2006, Currier & Neimeyer 2006, Hidalgo & Barber 2009, Baumeister & Newman 
1994). Stories are essentially tools that can mitigate the negative consequences of traumatic 
events (Smyth & Greenberg 2000, Weine 2006), therefore relevant to post-disaster recovery 
contexts.  
Since the disaster, Tohoku has been the subject of intense attention, and interactions with 
outsiders have magnified. The aftermath of disasters is more often than not followed by huge 
popular, media, and institutional attention that is only matched by equally rapid evaporation 
of that attention (Massumi 2011, Gomez & Hart 2013). While the national and international 
interest in Tohoku has waned, and today mostly rises to the headlines during anniversary 
events, daily interactions between Tohoku's residents and visitors have persisted five years 
after the disaster, even if in a smaller scale, and have become an integral part of the recovery 
experience for the locals and the visitors alike. I will exemplify the importance and intensity 
of these interactions throughout the ethnographic sections.  
During the 13 months that I spent in Tohoku, I gained not only a better understanding of the 
lived experience of people in the region, but also began to pay attention to the way in which 
people were conveying their experiences through our interactions. Each interaction was of 
course unique, but I soon began to notice specific patterning through which these interactions 
were being conveyed in and on the recovering space. What I found was a clear narrative arc 
in our interactions. As I began to recognise the narrative arc in the interviews, discussions and 
conversations, I became equally interested in how the story was told as I did of the story itself. 
I argue that these narrative patterns and structures are the main way in which affected 
populations are constructing their imaginaries of the future. As a result, they offer an 
opportunity to re-examine the larger processes of post-disaster recovery planning and 
execution that are taking place in disaster struck regions, from the perspective of the affected 
populations. By reorienting our attention to the stories that affected populations tell in and 
on the recovery, it becomes possible to bring 'community' back into the community-based 
approaches, with communal authorship rising to the centre of attention. 
Stories and storytelling enable us to piece together not only the direct influences of the 
disaster and the individual experience as an anecdote, but also the socially and collectively 
experienced conditions of vulnerability, resilience, and power that today lie at the forefront 
of what is meant by a 'disaster' as a social, not a natural, event (Chapter 1). In writing about 
trauma, Erikson (1994) states that trauma does not result only from a specific traumatic event 
but is equally influenced by a 'constellation of life experiences' that produce a persistent 
condition and identity for individuals from which they create meaning and participate in 
society (p. 229). Whether a catastrophic event like the tsunami of 3/11 results in trauma or 
not, the same principle applies. On the surface, I often heard that the disaster was a defining 
moment for the communities, a watershed, or a moment of irreversible change, illustrating 
the magnitude of the event. The disaster fundamentally changed people's outlook on life, it 
altered the course of their futures, shaped their memories, and inconvenienced their 
everyday lives. However, by focusing only on the content of the interactions, the magnitude 
of disaster as an agent of dislodgement and change runs the risk of becoming highlighted, 
simultaneously subordinating the experiences where change is not desired and has not 
happened. While the disaster has forced change upon these communities, it has also 
strengthened their reliance on established social connections, fundamental desires to uphold 
traditions and protect ancient ways of life. Through stories the new imaginaries that people 
are developing in the post-disaster heterotopian space, the values, symbols, directions and 
networks that are being negotiated, become part of the larger experiences of life and life 
histories.  
By focusing on the narrative structures and stories that people tell in post-disaster settings 
we can begin to make sense of the connections between the event and the broader individual 
and collective life experiences of the affected populations that have formed into forms of 
endogenous discourses about the recovery. In line with previous narrative research on post-
disaster recovery (Barber et al. 2007), my thesis therefore argues for increased focus on 
methodologies for disaster research that centre on stories. Through narrative structures we 
can see the connections between the acute event and the persistent condition (Erickson 1994, 
Barber et al. 2007), enabling us to subordinate the disaster event to the 'constellation of life 
experiences' that I argue in post-disaster settings define people's imaginaries more than the 
disaster event itself.  
When observed through the narrative window, the utterance "once this recovery is over, we 
can start to rebuild our communities" reveals the two different narrative domains, one that 
was referred to as 'recovery' and one that was referred to as 'community building', through 
which the themes of hopefulness and anxiety, and the urgency of action and necessity of 
waiting become organised into the two polarised experiences of the disaster. This polarised 
duality of the recovery can be explored through Berlant's (2011) concept of 'cruel optimism', 
where the desired goal becomes an obstacle to the achievement of that goal, reflected by the 
sequential nature of the recovery process in which 'recovery' precedes 'community building'. 
In doing so, the sequencing has inadvertently produced a hierarchy for the entire recovery 
process, where one recovery stands in the way of the achievement of the other. Qualitatively 
the material recovery (roads, services, and housing), or the hard side of recovery as it was 
often referred to in the communities, becomes prioritised over the re-establishment of the 
meta-physical social connections, community building and attachments, or the soft side, 
whose progress becomes subjected to the progress of the material recovery.  
When the local populations are at the centre of recovery whose imaginaries on the recovery 
revolve around community building, it becomes reasonable to inquire, why is it that despite 
community-based approaches, the material side of recovery has come to stand in the way of 
the meta-physical, rather than facilitating its blossoming? Following the Tohoku disaster, 
Japanese philosopher Uchiyama (2011) stated that "what is important is to recreate places 
where people can die in comfort" (in Murakami et al. 2014, p. 238), where the aims of the 
recovery are not centred on the material recovery focused on housing and economic revival 
that are mere tools for achieving what is really important, that is realm of the immaterial and 
the re-establishment of the relationship people have with their memories, landscapes, 
ancestors, sense of belonging and local cultures and identities. Endings were equally 
important as beginnings in post-disaster Tohoku, "Will the next house be the one I get to die 
in", was the main puzzle expressed by a local man in Onagawa when I inquired after his plans 
for the new house and new community that he was still waiting for (REF 45). Resonating with 
Uchiyama's thoughts, what matters is the stability of the story in which the man gets to live 
and die in comfort; a story that becomes imaginable only through the affective setting that is 
the house, the community, and the town.  
It is the purpose of this thesis to privilege the story that searches for the affective, for a 'place 
to die in comfort', over the material recovery plans and modernist ideas of growth and 
quantitative development that reign in people's field of vision when entering the recovering 
regions, and when consuming  media portrayals and expert evaluations. Two oscillating 
domains of analysis began to emerge from these stories, with a focus on the tensions that 
exist between them. Firstly, the domain of local visions, governed by affects, daily life 
experiences and narrative structures in how people were adapting to the post-disaster reality 
and placing the disaster into the broader context of their personal and collective histories. 
Secondly, the domain of the formal recovery, governed by external expertise, 'best practice' 
and learning, where the disaster stands apart as an abnormal phase aiming to re-establish the 
affected zone upon the path of growth. Through the following ethnography I will explore how 
for the affected populations, or the governed, recovery as an intimate and pervasive 
experience of life itself, where the disaster and the recovery had become part of the arc of 
their personal and communal histories. For the governor on the other hand, recovery is a 
technical process driven by expertise, budgetary constraints, and modernist benchmarks of 
development, seen as an abnormal phase in the "normalcy" of growth. I will show how the 
recoveries of the governed and the governor, while drawing their energies from 
corresponding ideals (proximity, participation, empowerment and resilience), are 
operationalising these ideals in different domains of meaning, temporal trajectories, and 
actors; thus making the formal process of (community-based) recovery stand in the way of 
the affected populations' desires to re-establish their lives centred on the rebuilding of their 
communities.  
Chapter 3 
Methodology 
Four and a half years after the tsunami, I spent 13-months in Tohoku along the Sanriku 
coastline, conducting field work for this research. During my time in Tohoku, I was based in 
Sendai City, the largest population centre in the region, but my field research took place in 
four coastal locations in the Miyagi Prefecture: Onagawa, Minamisanriku, the Ogatsu district 
of Ishinomaki City, and the Nobiru district of Higashimatsushima City [see map]. I limited my 
research to the coastal area of Miyagi prefecture as this was the area most severely impacted 
by the disaster (NPA 2011). I wanted to work only within the context of a single prefecture to 
focus on the depth of local experiences. I excluded Fukushima prefecture from the study 
where post-disaster community return and development has been further complicated by 
issues of radiation and the nuclear disaster. I felt this was an added layer of complexity that I 
could not do justice within the scope of a doctoral dissertation in addition to the focus on 
recovery from the tsunami. I visited the Sanriku Coast countless times, but 32 of these visits 
were designated for research purposes, ranging from day trips to sojourns lasting several 
weeks (Annex 1). 
By this time, most of the visible signs of the destruction were long gone; there were no piles 
of rubble, roads were cleared and mostly freshly paved, and construction vehicles were 
driving in an out of towns in continuous motion. Most on the foundational infrastructure was 
in place, with life on the temporary shopping districts and untouched residential areas going 
along as usual. However, the majority of towns most affected by the disaster still remained 
as visible construction sites, with brown fields and construction dominating the landscape, 
and residential areas still primarily unfinished. These daily reminders of the events of the 
Great East Japan Earthquake and Tsunami were inescapable, despite the pockets of "finished" 
reconstruction such as shopping districts of industrial areas, with residents having to 
maneuver between changing roads and construction machinery, whilst lamenting at the lack 
of sidewalks that prevented their children from riding their bikes or walking to school. Despite 
the lushness of the mountains that surrounded these towns that were nestled in valleys close 
to the sea, there was a surprising lack of nature once the access roads descended into the 
main areas of destruction; the air was only filled with the deafening sounds of construction.  
With sporadic, or in worst cases non-existent public transport, travelling to and within the 
towns was challenging, each time requiring extra mental effort and planning. Such differences 
between the towns at times struck with dramatic force, as indications of the different 
character, pace and speed of reconstruction, resulting from a number of reasons ranging from 
political influence to economic conditions and priorities. Where Onagawa was enjoying a flush 
of weekend visitors to their newly opened central promenade, with various attractions 
ranging from local shops and events, to a bath house conveniently situated at the station, just 
across the bay in eastern Ishinomaki lay the district of Ogatsu, whose existence any visitor 
would surely miss when driving past if they did not know the town was there. This was my 
first impression when I descended into Ogatsu Bay and had to check my map that I had 
actually arrived at my destination. The pre-2011 seawalls still lay broken, and in many places, 
it was still possible find remnants of the pre-2011 lives along the sea, with household objects 
strewn on the side of the road, alongside the bent railings and abandoned houses as obvious 
signs of the destruction that had taken place. These differences between municipalities were 
widely discussed across the region, at times to a bitter degree.  
Whether it was the extensive construction work along the coast, a sign at the side of a building 
showing the height of the tsunami, or conversations with local residents, it was clear that the 
disaster had developed into a permanent undercurrent defining how people remembered the 
past, experienced the present and imagined the future in Tohoku. Aside from the physical 
signs and reminders of the brunt of the violence and destruction that had taken place in the 
area, visitors like myself were also continuously reminded of the event of March 11 through 
the encounters with local residents, with conversations pierced with references, anecdotes 
and off-hand remarks to the disaster and the surrounding recovery. Early on in my field work 
I puzzled over the possibility of re-traumatising the very people with whom I would become 
in contact and initially tried to refrain myself from asking people about their direct 
experiences with the disaster on the 11th March 2011. I was after all researching the post-
disaster recovery process, and I thought the relevance that I would gauge from the stories 
about the day of the disaster would be negligible, information and knowledge that I could 
glean from the dozens of early ethnographies that were produced by those who entered the 
field soon after the disaster took place. I rationalised that these early impressions were 
fresher and more accurate as they were conducted soon after the disaster took place. I was 
viewing the disaster experience in the framework of knowledge and information, discounting 
the affects and reverberating impact that these experiences were having in the region and 
among the affected populations, shaping the sense-making, adaptation and imaginaries of 
the future.  
However, when I arrived at my field site and made my first contacts, practically every 
interaction with the locals soon turned to the day of the disaster. A verbal recognition of the 
obvious condition that surrounded us seemed to be a vital precursor for any other stories, 
views, or ideas they wanted to share, and a bridge they had to walk me across. I believe these 
overt affirmations of what had happened in these communities represent the 
aforementioned connections between affect and discourse (Wetherell 2013) and constituted 
an invitation to break the silence on the obvious loss, destruction and absence that 
surrounded us. Sharing experiences of trauma can be beneficial coping, adaptation and 
overcoming traumatic impacts (Greenberg 2008), with Tohoku's affected populations 
wanting to share their stories on how they escaped the biggest tsunami to hit the region in 
living memory, the scenery they met on the following morning, the losses they endured in 
seeing their homes and neighbourhoods being swept under; some even sharing the painful 
memories of seeing relatives being lost to the waves. There was a sense of urgency in telling 
the stories, and it was this urgency that resided in the moments when the stories were 
conveyed to me that I felt I had to concentrate on as much as the stories and their contents. 
On the subject of sharing their experiences, some noted that it is important to tell people 
what happened in these communities so that a disaster like this does not happen again 
elsewhere (REF 6), but the emphasis seemed to be as much as on the 'what' of the stories, 
the knowledge that was passed on, as in the act of sharing the story itself.   
In the introduction to this thesis I shared a short anecdote about the brief interaction I 
witnessed between Mr. Takeda and his granddaughter one evening in the summer of 2016 as 
we were looking at each other's driving licenses. What I recounted of that interaction was the 
sudden realisation of the pervasiveness of the disaster experience, its intimacy and presence 
in people's daily existence, their daily routines, the fabric of their relationships, and in the 
landscape that they saw destroyed in front of their eyes and now being rebuilt over the years. 
I believe it was in that moment that the affective nature of the disaster was transmitted to 
me with greater understanding that I could glean from research papers or isolated interviews 
with individuals. The affective intensity of that moment could not be captured in words alone, 
but transmitted through expressions, tones, pace, bodies and the air that we were sharing.   
Stories, as narratives or life histories were complex and emotional, and in their moments of 
sharing integrated the contents with the spaces, temporalities and individuals who were most 
affected by the changes incurred by the disaster and the recovery. I was taken to the places 
of destruction, told about the material and human costs of the disaster, and explained what 
people saw and feared during those hours of the tsunami. I had of course already read 
numerous accounts of the events, knew the scale and statistics of the disaster and had seen 
scary pictures and video footage of the tsunami online. While the data and analyses I had read 
before my field work had certainly provided me with knowledge of the context in Tohoku, 
what I realised is that during these moments that I spent with local people listening to their 
stories, sharing conversations, and visiting the places of destruction, that I was not simply 
invited to listen to a story, but to understand the affects that were contained in the story and 
transmitted through the interaction that we had with each other in that moment and in that 
space. 
As outlined in the previous chapters, my research has developed into an exploration of the 
endogenous discourses about the disaster and recovery, and the relationship of these 
narratives to the formal recovery process. However, this understanding and focus has only 
emerged through a careful analysis of the experiences and data I gathered during my 
fieldwork. I entered the field with strongly inductive research plan of trying to understand the 
local constructions of Tohoku's post-disaster recovery and build a picture of the long-term 
effects and experiences of the disaster. In particular, I was interested in how communities 
were rebuilding themselves after such a large-scale disaster.  
To explore the topic, I engaged in multiple forms of ethnographic data collection and 
interactions in the localities. I began by making repeated visits to several towns along the 
coast, focusing finally on the four mentioned above, taking in the atmosphere and trying to 
understand he process through which the disaster was both remembered and masked in the 
towns, collecting observational data. As I slowly began making contact with local residents, 
either through organisational contacts, chance meetings or introductions, the physical 
context became humanised as the setting of the lived experiences of those who still inhabit 
the landscape. Aside from my main data that consists of qualitative interviews with local 
residents, I also observed community meetings and carried out participatory research by 
volunteering for local organisations, taking part on disaster tours and even living in one of the 
towns for a short period of time.  
By the end of my field work, my data ranged from survival stories and personal dreams and 
aspirations to deep analyses of the complexities of the recovery process and the future of 
Japan, shared with me through encounters along the way and by acquaintances turned 
friends. I had visited construction sites, abandoned residential areas, tsunami walls, 
temporary housing units, and newly built town centres with shiny cafes and restaurants, 
sampling their local specialties, trying to take in and understand the nuances of the 
atmosphere that existed in these towns. The spaces and conversations were nevertheless 
riddled with apparent contradictions and signs of uncertainty. New towns and residential 
areas were being constructed in the midst of accelerating depopulation and decline. In the 
space of a single conversation with residents, I often heard utterances that expressed 
enthusiasm and anticipation about the future, sharing their visions of a better things to come, 
only moments later to be witnessing extreme anger and frustration about the recovery, 
hopelessness of the state of affairs and fear of the future that looked ever more precarious. 
It was this tension that drew my attention and warding further investigation. What I found 
was that these contradictory emotional reactions and responses to the development in these 
communities that were reflecting the duality the post-disaster recovery.  
3.1. Research locations 
The selection of research locations for the study happened incrementally, where I narrowed 
my focus on specific towns and neighbourhoods only towards the end of my field work, and 
finally the analysis. The locations that became the centre of focus in the study were chosen 
for their diverse municipal organisation and history, demographic characteristics, social fabric, 
geographical location and transportation links. These are some of the key characteristics that 
are linked to prospects of recovery from social, cultural, and economic perspectives (Barrios 
2017, Aldrich 2012), therefore potentially affecting the way residents and municipal 
authorities alike envision their recovery and prospects for the future from social, cultural, and 
economic perspectives. The selection includes two cities (Higashimatsushima and Ishinomaki), 
where the research focused on one district in each city (chiku) (Nobiru and Ogatsu 
respectively), and two coastal towns (Minamisanriku and Onagawa) representing different 
demographic and geographical reach, thus providing a level of diversity between the locations.  
Map of research locations along the Sanriku Coast 
From the perspective of formal administrative and fiscal organisation of the recovery, 
Ishinomaki, Higashimatsushima and Minamisanriku had all undergone municipal mergers 
during the great Heisei municipal amalgamation (heisei daigappei), while Onagawa had 
remained independent (Miyagi Prefectural Government 2012). While these descriptive 
characteristics of the municipalities directed their selection as key locations for my research, 
the importance of the municipal mergers in understanding people's perceptions of the formal 
recovery, particularly in relation to municipal decision-making, became apparent only during 
the field work itself; something that will be discussed in detail in the following chapters. 
Onagawa, as the only location that was able to resist the Heisei mergers, has at times been 
elevated as the ideal benchmark for the recovery (Cosson 2020), where the municipal 
leadership was viewed as exercising their independent authority and working closely with 
local residents to get them to return home. These views were particularly held by people 
outside of Onagawa, in comparison to their own local situations. Minamisanriku had 
undergone a difficult municipal merger earlier in the 2000s. Nobiru and Ogatsu today were 
districts within larger cities having merged with them during the same period; Nobiru existed 
within Higashimatsushima, a new city born out of a merger of two smaller cities and Ogatsu 
had been absorbed by Ishinomaki city (Miyagi Prefectural Government 2012). Whereas 
Nobiru occupied a central well-connected location in the Higashimatsushima city, Ogatsu was 
located far away from the new municipal centre, on the eastern fringe of Ishinomaki City that 
the locals argued had an impact on the levels of attention and speed of recovery.  
Similarly, geographic location and access to the locations seemed meaningful for the same 
reasons and I took the proximity and transport links to Sendai, the primary metropolitan hub 
in the Tohoku region, into consideration when selecting the research locations. Out of the 
four locations, Onagawa and Nobiru had a train, highway bus and local bus connection to 
Sendai and Ishinomaki, while Minamisanriku was connected to Sendai via highway bus and to 
Ishinomaki with a bus and train connection. Ogatsu was the outlier of the four representing a 
much more peripheral community in the study; they had limited transportation links within 
the community or outside it, and the majority of the population relied on their own vehicles. 
Ogatsu was also the only location out of the four that was still undergoing repairs to key 
infrastructure (Image 2), such as roads and seawalls, starkly highlighting its peripheral 
position within the city of Ishinomaki, causing a great deal of dissatisfaction among the local 
residents.  
Image 2: Ogatsu Bay, Broken seawall, Anna Vainio 2016 
Throughout my fieldwork I also began to note on the attitudes of local residents toward the 
municipal authorities that seemed to strongly impact their views on the recovery process 
overall. In Onagawa, it was common for local residents to note on their down-to-earth and 
dynamic Mayor, who due to his young age was thought to be in a great position to breathe 
new life into the recovery. His personality was attributed as one of the key factors in the 
successes of the recovery by local residents. Contrastingly, during one of my first visits to 
Minamisanriku, I was told about 'the feud' between the Mayor and the vice-Mayor of the 
town, whose different approaches and views, according to the locals, had divided the town 
into two separate factions, broadly along the pre-merger municipal lines. Some residents 
found this distressing and damaging to the recovery. Ogatsu's position as a peripheral part of 
Ishinomaki led to locals feeling forgotten (wasurechatta), who specifically noted that as none 
of the municipal workers who were in charge of the decisions over their district actually lived 
there, they could not understand people's experiences, thus highlighting the connection 
between the context and discourse in affective transmission. Out of the four locations 
Higashimatsushima seemed to have the most balanced and satisfied residents with regard to 
what the city authorities were doing.  
Despite the changes in the geographical positions, histories and administrative organisation 
of the municipalities that brought diversity into the research, the scale of destruction and 
overarching framework of the government's reconstruction approach nonetheless 
neutralised many of these differences, and placed localities along the same start line. All of 
the locations selected for the study suffered large scale destruction as a result of the tsunami 
(NPA 2011), specifically to their housing and infrastructure, and a considerable drop in 
population levels, with a number of missing and deceased. The damages combined with 
population loss forced the towns to engage in broad reorganisation of infrastructure and 
relocation of residential districts. Furthermore, reduction in land for redevelopment and new 
national planning and zoning legislation is forcing all of the locations to rebuild their physical 
infrastructure as compact towns (Hirano 2013). While some of these infrastructure changes 
have been unavoidable, wide scale critiques over the scale of the projects have also emerged, 
primarily relating to the prolonged displacement of communities and the long-term 
sustainability of growth-oriented or stable development (Nagamatsu 2018). While all 
interviewees felt that the recovery was taking too long, the response toward the scale of the 
projects was again mixed depending on the municipality. In Onagawa where the recovery was 
advancing at a quicker pace and the town was managing to establish steady forms of income 
from tourists and visitors, the delays seemed easier to bear, whereas in other locations such 
responses were rarer.  
Geographically all of the locations were along the coast, making them primarily reliant on 
fishing and farming with fringe levels of pre-disaster tourism and other leisure activities. 
Primary industries that dominated the economic landscape in the region were particularly 
badly affected. In Miyagi alone, the tsunami swept away practically all fishing equipment and 
facilities, 12.000 fishing boats, 142 harbours, and 10 markets, delivering a huge blow to the 
industry (JFA 2012). Salination of farmland meant that only 35% of land could be used for 
production in the year following the disaster (Roy et al. 2014). The high costs and lack of 
successors to take over the business upon retirement caused many fishermen and farmers I 
encountered in Tohoku to worry over or decide against restarting their businesses. Additional 
blow to the industries was delivered by the import blockade put in place by the foreign 
governments on marine products from the Sanriku Coast. Along with some agricultural 
products, the South Korean government imposed a ban due to fear of contamination by the 
Fukushima Nuclear Plant, affecting around 15% of marine product sales nationally (FT 
6.9.2013). Further bans have been put up by Russia, the EU and the US (FT 6.9.2013). The 
increased instability brought on by the contamination issue has further exacerbated problems 
of maintaining needed levels of production.  
While the impact on key economic infrastructure extended across the towns, Onagawa stood 
at a better financial position than most of its neighbours due to a three-reactor nuclear power 
facility being located within its borders. During the earthquake and tsunami, the nuclear 
facility had a successful shut down and no radioactive material was released into the 
environment (Obonai et al. 2014). The facility, like others in Japan, was subjected to the post-
quake stress testing (Epstein 2015) and had not been restarted by 2016. Since then the 
operator, Tohoku Electric Power Company, has decided to decommission the oldest reactor 
on site (Mainichi Shimbun 26.10.2018). However, the facility continues to offer employment 
to thousands of town residents and financially contributes to the town's budget both through 
taxes and direct contributions. It was widely agreed by both residents of Onagawa and the 
neighbouring municipalities alike, that it was due to the nuclear power plant that Onagawa 
had managed to resist the municipal mergers a decade earlier and be able to provide high 
level of public services such as hospitals and schools.  
Through the selection of research locations, I aimed to achieve a balance and representative 
diversity as well as balance across the region. Formally, Onagawa appears as an outlier, but 
as I will show through my empirical material, many of these formal advances only managed 
to attune some of the sharpest anxieties and dissatisfactions, but not erase them altogether. 
I began the data collection in stages, focusing on a single own at a time in the beginning, which 
gave me adequate time and space to understand the overall context of the recovery prior to 
making contact with local residents and beginning the interview process that I had deemed 
as my main form of data collection. Initial visits to the locations proved helpful in providing 
more context into the interviews, having a visual understanding of the geography, economies, 
social relations and cultural activities of the towns that in turn gave depth to the 
conversations with local residents.  
3.2. Data collection 
The majority of the data used in the analysis consists of interviews, a process that is outlined 
in detail below. I began interviewing at relatively later stages of my fieldwork, with the 
majority of them carried out in the summer and autumn of 2016. As I wanted to understand 
the connections between affect, context and discourse, spending a great deal of time in these 
locations was necessary in order to understand the context as well as build trusting 
relationships between myself and the individuals who would become my key informants, and 
learn the patterns through which affective and articulated content was transmitted. The data 
collection therefore was also exploratory at first, and I found myself engaging in multiple 
activities that could help me understand the context of people's daily lives, process of 
decision-making and participation, interactions with outsiders.  
I met with many of my key research participants multiple times over the year and our 
conversations normally revolved around the recovery and their thoughts about the future 
during these meetings. As a result, I ended up conducting a number of what Bernard (2011) 
would describe as informal interviews that are designed to familiarise yourself with your 
participants, build trust, understand the field sites, and landscapes. This data is composed 
primarily notes and field work diary entries. I always took notes during the meetings or noted 
down the key points of the conversations afterwards in my research diary, or a separate 
document describing the encounter and the discussion. These conversations and information 
are also utilised to a limited degree in the analysis, but not coded as they cannot be 
reproduced in verbatim, and reliance on them will be clearly indicated in the text when I am 
doing so.  
I also rely on other material directly collected from the field as supporting evidence, such as 
field notes, participatory observations, photographs, leaflets, and other relevant material. In 
all locations my first visit took place at the guidance of a contact, who introduced me to the 
key places and facilities, such as memorials, institutions, commercial districts, sights, and 
other facilities such as community centres or organisations. As these visits were planned and 
guided by the participants, they gave me a good chance to understand what places they 
considered worthy of seeing and of interest to me. However, selection bias was taken into 
consideration and in addition to these visits I also visited the locations independently to 
ensure I was able to experience and observe the location without this bias. Repeated trips to 
the locations enabled me to observe the development of the construction in the areas; longer 
stays on the other hand in some location enabled me to gain limited first-hand experience of 
the pace of the recovery and everyday life in a recovering town.  
Interview data 
I collected altogether 49 oral narratives from these four locations, either through individual 
or group interviews (altogether 39 interview instances were included in the study) (Annex 2). 
I met most of the participants several times throughout my field work. In the end, the 
interviews formed only a part of my overall interactions, observations, and experiences I had 
in the field. I adopted elements from the data collection process outlined in grounded theory 
(Urquhart 2013). The aim was to produce an inductive data set for my research that is centred 
around a question rather than a framework through which to approach a phenomenon. 
Emerging from my desire to understand the perspectives of the affected populations in 
relation to the phenomenon of the post-disaster process in their communities, I wanted to 
remain flexible for the exploration of unanticipated storylines and directions, which is a key 
component of grounded approaches (Urquhart 2013, p. 8). All the interviews were carried 
out in a semi-structured format, with a great deal of space provided for participant-led 
narration of their own experiences and stories. 
Prior to entering the field research stage, I had constructed five broad themes for the 
interviews: thoughts about their hometown, disaster event, experiences of the recovery, 
visions for the future, and roles in recovery. However, through the field work and individual 
narratives, theoretical connections began to emerge that linked with broader phenomena. 
The difference between grounded theory and my research is that the aim is not to produce a 
new theory, but to use elements of grounded theory method that has enabled me to make 
the theoretical connections that are explored in this chapter. Using the methods of data 
collection embedded in grounded theory however, enabled me to maintain the inductive 
quality through field work to analysis, and build a theoretical framework for my research from 
the ground up. The writing of this chapter will reflect the process where the theoretical 
aspects have not been heavily present in guiding the field work itself, but rather the analysis 
and organisation of the data. 
The interviews were carried out as a two-way conversation following a semi-structured 
interview format based on the thematic structure mentioned above.  Throughout my field 
work I had decided to position myself deliberately as an outsider, a novice if you will, and an 
active participant in the sense-making, imagining, and interpretation of the disaster and 
recovery with those whose life world I had entered. My reasoning resonates with the 
argument on positionality put forward by Ingold (2018) who states that the role of 
anthropology is to learn from our education with other people to speculate on what the 
conditions and possibilities of life might be (p. 141), through which anthropology becomes a 
two-way process between the anthropologists and their subjects of study. I saw the act of 
asking questions as this very process of learning, trying to see the reality of the disaster and 
the recovery from the perspective of those whose experiences and interpretations of that 
reality rarely become counted within the realms of 'knowledge' produced by 'experts' (Ingold 
2018, Appadurai 2000).  By asking questions and trying to negotiate the meanings and 
understanding of that reality together with the affected populations, I saw my research not 
as a representation of their voices but an interpretation that emerges from their stories.  
In participant recruitment I relied on chain-referral sampling (snowball methods) through 
introductions from local residents to their neighbours and friends. While there are 
disadvantages to chain sampling (e.g. Biernacki and Waldorf 1981), Noy (2008) argues the 
technique itself carries an empirical quality that develops knowledge about the relationships 
within the target population, and remains relevant in light of social capital discourse within 
the disaster risk management and recovery field (Meyer 2018, Aldrich 2012). Given its 
proponents (Aldrich and Meyer 2014, Nakagawa and Shaw 2004, Masud-Al-Kamal & Hassan 
2018) and more critical views (Tierney 2015), including elements of social connections in post-
disaster setting seemed important to include. In Tohoku where the disaster and recovery has 
led to a widespread dispersal of communities (Hikichi et al. 2017), chain sampling offered not 
only access, but also provided an opportunity to understand how social networks and 
community ties were upheld in this context, and helped me understand how and who was 
able to maintain and operationalise these networks for a variety of purposes. 
To adjust any imbalances in representation related to age, gender, location, and relationships 
(Annex 3), I used some purposive sampling methods (Guest et al. 2013, Robinson 2014) to 
recruit participants outside of the snowball chain of relationships. The context of recovery 
increased the presence of outsiders in the region, and the closeness and less formal nature of 
the rural communities, eased the establishment of ad hoc encounters, and interviews tended 
to result from initial informal discussions, tours or introductions to facilities, but also 
conversations struck up in cafes and restaurants. I maintained the criteria for inclusion in the 
study purposely loose, with the only requirement being that the interviewees had an 
established connection with the recovering location. The openness of recruitment rose as a 
key criterion after one of my first visit to the recovering region in November 2015 I asked my 
contact, a young man actively involved in the local recovery and reconstruction, if he knew 
other people who were involved in the recovery that I could meet. He seemed puzzled and 
responded: "well, there's no one who isn't" (REF 1), arguing that everyone who lives in the 
region are by default involved in the recovery merely by trying to lead and re-establish their 
lives in the region. The various capacities, dreams, resources, and actions of each individual 
were all contributing to the recovery, both personally and collectively. This point helped me 
readjust my initial assumptions about the meaning of recovery-related participation, agency, 
and actions; thus enabling the research to uncover and explore diverse views of community 
participation and involvement in the recovery from a multitude of angles, as it was framed by 
the participants themselves. 
In practice this led to the inclusion of two broad categories of individuals: long-term residents 
living in or returning to live in the disaster struck municipalities and new arrivals who had 
permanently relocated to the towns after the disaster. Inclusion of long-term residents is 
relatively self-explanatory, but the post-disaster population exodus that all of these towns 
had experienced (NIPSSR 2013) made the documentation of impressions and framing of the 
disaster in the new context through these long-term residents' voices all the more important. 
As the analysis will indicate, their connections to the location have strengthened, and 
motivations to contribute toward the recovery have been influenced by adaptation to the 
new post-disaster community context.  
The post-disaster setting saw an influx of volunteers and new migrants, as well as the 
proliferation of non-profit organisations and start-ups across the region in the aftermath of 
the disaster (e.g. Tohoku Planning Forum 2011, Dimmer 2014). I wanted to include these 
voices into the diversity of community actors, as they assumed a variety of roles in the 
recovery and long-term development of the communities and contribute financially to the 
locations' development through projects, employment, and civic activities (Shaw 2003, 
Aldrich 2012, Dimmer 2014). Inclusion of these new actors into the research reflected the 
depopulation problems that have plagued the region for decades with migration playing a key 
role in revitalisation and recovery discussions (Matanle & Rausch 2011, Knight 1997). Local 
reconstruction and recovery plans from the municipalities highlight the population aspects of 
post-disaster recovery that includes the need to attract migrants and visitors to the region 
(e.g. Town of Minamisanriku 2011, City of Higashimatsushima 2011, Town of Onagawa 2011). 
Similarly, as I began my field work, demographic development arose as one of the major 
reoccurring themes in the discussions with long-term residents, indicating that this was an 
important aspect to investigate. Demographic decline and population exodus were 
mentioned as one of the key concerns, and in-migration was gravely needed in these locations. 
The post-disaster areas saw a huge influx of volunteers in the months and years following the 
disaster, many of whom have since turned these communities into their new permanent 
homes (Klien 2017). In light of the underlying question of demographic development, it was 
pertinent to understand how these new arrivals understood the disaster context and were 
building their lives in these communities and taking part in recovery activities.  
Observations and participatory data 
During the field work I also wanted to get to know my research participants and the field sites 
in a more profound and engaging ways. Throughout the 13-months I spent in Tohoku I kept 
in continuous contact with the majority of the participants and visited the field sites 
numerous times to observe the advancement of the recovery or take part in activities. I took 
part in community meetings and traditional festivals, joined disaster tours aimed at students 
and foreign tourists, designed to help them understand the events of the 11th March 2011, 
volunteered for community organisations and NPOs, and toward the end of my field work I 
stayed in Onagawa for two weeks to gain a better understanding of what daily life is like in 
the recovering region. To record my impressions and initial reflections of the trips to the field 
sites, encounters with local residents and other activities, I maintained a weekly research 
diary that in parts will be referenced in the empirical chapters where necessary.  
Aside from the individual impressions toward the recovery, it was important to understand 
the role civil society organisations were playing in the recovery, especially given the 
prominent role machizukuri organisations and neighbourhood associations were assigned in 
the formal recovery. I took part in altogether four meetings of such organisations, one in 
Onagawa and three in Higashimatsushima, where I had contacts that could facilitate access 
to the meetings. I also had the opportunity to interview two civil servants in the same towns 
to gain a more localised perspective into the formal recovery process. While I found the 
attending meetings and interviewing civil servants enlightening and interesting, the narratives 
that were adopted in these spaces felt descriptive, where issues were discussed firmly within 
the framework of the formal recovery.  
The majority of the content of machizukuri meetings for instance related to detailed planning-
oriented activities, such as size and location of housing units, allocation of building sites, and 
the designs for new public places such as parks. As my primary interests related to the task of 
exploring the "other stories", I decided in the end not to concentrate too much on the civil 
society activities as the main research avenue. There was value in participating the meetings 
however, as these activities helped to verify my impressions of the role these organisations 
were playing in the recovery (Chapter 1), while also diversifying my understanding of roles 
that local residents were playing through their participation in these spaces. While taking part 
in committees and joining meetings was less about resisting the narrative and offering 
alternatives, by collaborating and co-producing solutions through a consultative format, they 
were nonetheless holding officials to account. Participation in the meetings was therefore 
important in providing the research more in-depth understanding of the different qualities of 
participation. 
As the aim of the research was to understand the affective atmospheres that impact people's 
construction of understanding and desires for the recovery, as well as visions for the future, 
spending as much time in the disaster region as possible was imperative. Longer stays in the 
region were particularly helpful for this purpose as they provided a deeper understanding of 
the pervasiveness of the atmospheres, as well as complexities of daily life management of 
people residing in these locations. One of the most striking things was perhaps experiencing 
the logistical challenges of navigating townscapes that remained active building sites and 
where public transport within towns was limited. During these says I relied primarily on the 
kindness of my research participants to help me move around, or alternatively had to hire a 
car in order to be able to travel from one place to another. My two-week stay in Onagawa at 
the end of my field work was perhaps the most eye-opening. I stayed in a part of town that 
was away from the main area of destruction and reconstruction, with my bicycle being the 
main mode of transport to carry out shopping and visits to meet interviewees and contacts. 
This period enlightened me to the challenges produced by the lack of key services (e.g. 
supermarkets), dangers and imposition posed by the construction to residents, and the sense 
of space and distance that were ever evolving. On the whole, the observational and 
participatory data helped me better understand the contexts from which the local 
experiences and constructed meanings for the recovery emerged. It supplemented the 
interviews by providing texture to the interview data and deepened the connection between 
myself and the research participants. The brief moments of being able to share the affective 
space with the locals whose daily life it constituted, was vital for the analysis of the data that 
I was collecting.  
3.3. Data analysis 
The objectives of my primary data analysis are exploratory, to discover how people were 
making sense of the disaster and imagining the future of their communities. For data 
processing I opted for a thematic analysis suitable for both deductive and inductive research 
that allows for interpretation and analysis to take place in relation to theory and conceptual 
framework, and enables coding to take place both on manifest or latent levels of the data 
(Boyatzis 1998, Attride-Stirling 2001). The aim is to uncover the important themes at various 
levels of the data and produce a connection between what is said and its meaning in order to 
produce an analysis of the situation that is being studied (Attride-Stirling 2001). As such, it 
provided a flexible process of encoding information. Some themes were anticipated as there 
is an intrinsic link between the theoretical principles and the secondary and primary data, and 
as a result some of the core themes that emerged out of the literature review were integrated 
into the data collection process as points of investigation; this is a core feature of semi-
structured interviews (Ayres 2012). While some themes are anticipated, the aim of the 
thematic analysis is not only to understand the meaning of unique utterances, but primarily 
what the utterance represents in a particular context and in relation to other participants' 
views on the same topic.  
The data collection utilised methodological elements from grounded theory, and therefore 
aligned itself with the epistemological and ontological positions where multiple perspectives 
and interpretation of the social reality are meaningful, and qualitatively equal (Mason 2002, 
Bernard 2011). Utilising Attride-Stirling's (2001) analytical networks as a guide, I carried out a 
thematic analysis of the interview data that functioned as a means and initial exploratory 
process for organising the data and locating meanings and interpretations within (Guest et al. 
2012). While Attride-Stirling only lists three levels of abstraction for the coding work (Basic, 
organising, and global themes), I added further two levels to both ends of the coding levels 
that I called 'utterances' and 'interview themes'. The coding work began with an inductive 
coding from 'utterances', where I collected meaningful sections from each interview to be 
organised into basic themes, that were further abstracted to organising and global themes 
using Attride-Stirling's method. Research can ever be purely deductive or inductive (Bernard 
2011, Mason 2001, Miles et al. 1994, Boyatzis 1998), and this was reflected in the coding 
practices for my research data too. To link the data that emerged from the interviews to 
existing literature and theoretical underpinnings that had driven the research design process 
before entering the field, the initial inductive analysis of the data was followed by a deductive 
element of the coding work, where the coded material was reorganised "backwards", with 
entire sections of the initial inductive coding were reorganised under the 'interview themes' 
that corresponded with the areas of questioning that were covered in the actual interviews 
in Tohoku: disaster experience, perceptions of the town, perceptions of the recovery process, 
imaginations of the future and roles in recovery.  
Throughout the following empirical data chapters, the analysis explores the tensions that 
emerge from the intersection of the divergent discourses, the 'two recoveries', as exogenous 
and endogenous stories for the recovery and Tohoku's long-term future and how they reflect 
the principles and values of a community-based recovery process, both as ideals and practices. 
As outlined in Chapter 1, the Japanese post-disaster recovery also closely followed 
international best practice by integrating principles of participation, empowerment, 
resilience and proximity into the recovery discourse (Annex 3). These principles will form the 
guiding framework for the discussions and analyses in the following empirical chapters.  
The narrative across the empirical chapters is told by foregrounding episodes and encounters 
with local residents that took place during the field work, thus grounding the material into 
the local context, told from the perspective of the local residents who inhabit these affective 
spaces and whose processes of adaptation, coping, and envisioning emerge from the 
interactions of the divergent discourses. It is through these encounters that I will help the 
reader construct a layered and vibrant picture of the affective landscape and intensities that 
dominated the experiences and discourses of local residents, through which the ways of re-
ordering lifeworlds, social relations, adaptation to the new situation, and imagining and 
visioning a future by the locals can become understood. Through these encounters I will 
highlight the tensions that exist in Japan's recovery planning and execution when approached 
simultaneously from two directions.  
One of the reoccurring narrators in the following chapters will be Mr. Takeda, with whom I 
established a long-term and tight collaboration, as well as friendship that lasts to this day, 
during the 13 months I spent in Tohoku. His inclusion as a steady voice running through the 
chapters is two-fold: Firstly, he was one of the first people I met upon arrival, and his warm 
welcome, eager and thoughtful conversations and passion for the recovery and the future of 
his community, in many ways embody the key analytical points I will be making. While I made 
many meaningful contacts throughout my field work, Mr. Takeda was the most intimately 
involved in my research, and I would not have been able to carry out my work without his 
endless and tireless assistance. The second reason for featuring Mr. Takeda as a central figure 
in this research is both a narrative and analytical one, as he was one of the key participants 
during my fieldwork, helping to guide the reader through my description, analysis and 
interpretations of Tohoku's affected populations' disaster and recovery experience. Due to 
the qualitative nature of my field work and the data I captured through observations, 
conversations and participatory methods, the diversity of the material, perceptions, 
viewpoints and opinions can get overwhelming. Mr. Takeda, through his continued and stable 
presence, exemplifies the mutuality and shared communal discourse that overlay people's 
differing personal views, and the diversity and complexity of feelings and thoughts about the 
recovery that often reside within a single person.   
What I hope will emerge to the reader through the following empirical chapters, is that while 
the local residents did not necessarily use the language of the authorities to describe their 
experiences of recovery in their communities, and at times were also openly resistant to the 
external discourse of their communities' future, it does not mean that the values of 
empowerment, resilience, participation and proximity were not part of their endogenous 
stories. Each of the following chapters elevates the endogenous discourse on the post-
disaster recovery by exploring and analysing local residents' relationship with the formal 
recovery process as well as their own alternative stories that carry the transmissions they feel 
have not been understood (kimochi ga wakaranai). The chapters are constructed in reference 
to principles of community-based best practice, and how the locals view the realisation of 
these principles in the recovery's execution. The aim of the empirical chapters is to show that 
the endogenous local narratives, behaviours and daily life management under conditions of 
recovery in themselves contain participatory, empowered and resilient acts and envisioning 
that are rooted into and emit from the local context and understanding, arguing that the 
meanings we attach to these principles in the local recovery contexts can and should be 
constructed together with the local residents, rather than imported as part of external visions 
and narratives.  
Chapter 4 
Everyone's voice in recovery:  
Participation in and out of the legitimate spaces 
'Voice' has been prominently present in Tohoku's formal recovery domain, with the 
government's reconstruction approach expected to have a positive impact beyond the 
reconstruction and recovery period. It is stated in the very introduction of the Reconstruction 
Design Council's report to the Prime Minister that "When considering the revitalization of 
regions that have lost everything, it is first and foremost essential to listen to the voices of 
the people who have actually been affected and provide them with linkage that will 
empower them to realize their aspirations" (p.11). The government documents follow this 
emphasis on listening and local engagement, making detailed references to activities through 
which the local populations can be engaged into the recovery process. These documents 
make detailed references to community engagement, participation and 'voice gathering' 
activities (Annex 3), with words like 'consultation', 'views', and 'opinion' utilised to refer to 
the content of affected populations' participation in the process. In relation to participation 
itself, the documents make references to 'forums', 'consultative organizations', 'meetings' 
and 'conferences' to illustrate spaces of participation where the voices of the affected 
populations could be easily heard. Motivated by the desire to "listen to the voices of the 
people", there is a clear commitment to the principle of community participation within 
Japan's 'community-focused' recovery. 
The tangible and practical execution of the task of listening itself has been left to the 
discretion of the communities and municipalities themselves as the 'leaders in recovery'. To 
this end, a number of different listening exercises and community participation/engagement 
events have been carried out in the disaster affected municipalities, many of which have been 
carefully documented on their websites. For instance, both Minamisanriku and Onagawa 
began engaging with residents early in the recovery period by organising a series of public 
hearings for residents, with activities within the events ranging from public addresses to small 
group activities, brainstorming and reporting. In Onagawa these took place across ten 
different sessions, between May and July of 2011 with the meetings recording attendance of 
approximately 100 people on average (Town of Onagawa 2011b). Likewise, Minamisanriku 
organised five sessions between July and August of 2011, with the results of the meetings 
published in a pamphlet called 'Our ideas for reconstruction'6 (Town of Minamisanriku 2011b). 
Similar efforts took place across the towns and cities in the disaster affected region, followed 
by more focused meetings on location and design of parks and public spaces (Dimmer 2014) 
and setting up of special committees and machizukuri councils for both residential and 
commercial districts. Residents in the research locations also reported having responded to 
surveys about housing and wellbeing at different points of the recovery.  
Most of the participatory processes in the Japanese post-disaster context have been 
collectively carried out under the machizukuri process broadly meaning "town making". As 
outlined in Chapter 1, it is a community development process native to Japan that emerged 
in the wake of rapid post-war urbanisation, with an emphasis on traditional community 
organisations to combat new social woes, as a participatory process and social organisation 
between the citizens and the administration (Ito 2007). It is an epitome of the 'good 
governance' approach, where public engagement and participation through organised civil 
society are integrated into formal governance processes (Chapter 1). Machizukuri councils are 
6  fukk e no watashitachi no omoi 
therefore usually established to capture citizens' voices with regards to specific development 
projects, thus having clear aims and objectives and end goals. Head of one of the local 
machizukuri organisations in Higashimatsushima for instance noted that his job now coming 
to a close, as the physical recovery is already on its way and the views of the residents have 
been integrated into the formal architectural and development plans (REF 24). This framing 
of duties indicated a close connection between the councils and the municipal administration 
in public imagination, as well as tangible activities that are in line with the formal progress of 
the recovery.  
It was clear that populations in Tohoku have been offered numerous opportunities and 
outlets for expressing themselves in relation to disaster restoration. However, given the 
overall prevalence of kimochi ga wakaranai (they don't understand how we feel) in Tohoku, 
it was clear that despite the plethora of opportunities, participation in recovery through 
workshops, meetings, committees and surveys had not necessarily resulted in people feeling 
like they had a 'voice' in the recovery, with something about voice being left uncommunicated. 
Having a voice seemed to rely on the access to a space where voice became a legitimate part 
of the recovery process. This access, as I came to discover, was however restricted in a 
number of ways in the domain of people's everyday affective experiences of the recovery, 
either through physical barriers to participation or through self-imposed ideas of having less 
rights or needs to use a voice or the participatory spaces simply not offering outlets for the 
kinds of transmissions that would reflect the experiences of local populations. Therefore, 
despite numerous participatory activities that have run through the years in the municipalities, 
a mounting sense of voicelessness and frustrations was ever present in my conversations with 
the majority of the affected population.  
In this chapter I will explore the principle of 'participation' through the local residents' 
experiences and views on the way in which community's engagement into the recovery 
process has been carried out in their towns. I will argue that the main problem seems to be 
the authorities' assumption of a causal relationship between participation and voice that 
could effectively take place only in a designated space offered for this designated purpose, 
where providing the opportunity to participate in recovery and have a say in itself was viewed 
as sufficient to give voice to the affected populations. This relationship views both 
participation and voice in a narrow view that was spatially and temporally restricted, while 
also reducing voice to its articulable qualities. For many local residents, the feelings, views 
and sensibilities about the recovery are developed in conjunction with landscape, lived 
experience and social relations of the affected populations, with the transmission of these 
views equally requiring active engagement with the affective context of the lived experience 
in the recovering region on the part of the listener, rather than just the articulated content in 
a designated space for participation. However, the majority of the engagement opportunities 
offered to the local residents eliminate the affective elements that determine local 
understanding and desires for recovery.  
In this chapter I will show that both participation and voice are complicated categories, where 
the local nuances and understanding define their execution and success. The chapter 
concludes that the formal framing and execution of participation within Japan's community-
focused recovery is insufficient, merely offering the opportunity to have a say but not 
necessarily leading to people feeling like they are being heard. Through the following 
empirical material, I explore the plurality of the ways in which the affected populations 
interpret voice, the conveyance of voice, and how they want to be not only listened to, but 
also understood and heard. 'Voice' stands at the centre of the affected populations' desire to 
be heard, and the duty to listen projected by the authorities, thus functioning as a way of 
exploring the notion of participation within Japan's community-focused recovery. I will begin 
the chapter with an exploration into the notions of 'everyone's voice'. I will outline the sense 
of voicelessness local affected populations were experiencing in the recovery, despite the 
abundance and variety of formal participatory processes and opportunities that have been 
made available in the recovery across different municipalities. The chapter will then explore 
people's experiences of participation in the recovery, and how the reduction and even the 
complete elimination of the affective qualities of voice in the established format of 
participation is leading people to feel voiceless and unheard.  
4.1. "We've never actually been asked about the recovery" 
Out of the four research locations, it was in Higashimatsushima where I had the opportunity 
to engage with the local organisations functioning as intermediaries between the municipality 
and the residents the most. While I noted in the previous chapter that the machizukuri 
process quickly reduced in focus in my research from the perspective of content and 
organisation, attending the meetings nonetheless provided me with an improved critical 
perspective from which to approach people's views about participatory activities in their 
towns.  My main contact in Higashimatsushima was Mr. Maeda (REF 10), who worked for a 
national organisation, but was based in the city supporting the local recovery through a 
community centre in the Nobiru district of the city. He invited me to come and observe several 
machizukuri meetings in the neighbourhood, while introducing me to the members, other 
development workers at the community centre, and local residents at the same time. I first 
visited the area in the spring of 2016, which was an exciting time for residents who had been 
displaced by the disaster, as the majority of the major foundational infrastructure work was 
coming to a close in the next 6 months in the area, with residents soon being able to start 
rebuilding their homes. Many of the meetings I attended during this period reflected the stage 
of development, with topics such as housing selection, park design and commercial 
opportunities reigning much of the discussions. While the majority of the content of these 
meetings followed the formal narrative for the recovery, conducting interviews with 
individuals who were actively engaging with these participatory spaces between the 
authorities and the citizens did provide a great deal of insights into the notion of participation 
itself.  
By the time we sat down for an interview with two local residents who worked as community 
development workers in Nobiru, a badly damaged neighbourhood of the Higashimatsushima 
city, I had already visited the community centre and the neighbourhood several times. 
Higashimatsushima was in a comparatively advanced stage of recovery, with a recently 
restored railway line opened for passenger traffic and neighbourhoods relocated to higher 
ground now beginning to be built (Image 3). Both of these developments were immediately 
visible when I arrived in the Nobiru district of the city where I was to meet Mr. Maeda, with 
the modern railway station bordering the soon-to-be residential area now standing on the 
hillside overlooking the sea. Mr. Maeda escorted me to the community centre that I had come 
to see and where he was working. The centre was currently housed in a temporary unit, with 
meeting rooms for community activities and an adjacent office for the employees. I was told 
that once the building work was finished the centre would move to the new takadai (higher 
ground) area on the mountain side, next to the newly re-opened railway station and much of 
the new residential areas. For the time being however, the centre would remain in the 
temporary unit, and the work carried out would revolve around the advancement of the post-
disaster rebuilding and recovery. It was quiet at the centre that day, with a few cars parked 
on the carpark and the occasional resident coming to talk to the staff, or small groups of 
elderly residents coming to use the rooms for activities.  
Image 3: Outside Nobiru railway station in 2016, Anna Vainio 
At the centre I was introduced to a number of staff members, and also saw Mr. Inoue and Mr. 
Hayashi, who I had met on one of my previous visits. I had come to do a formal interview with 
them. I had wanted to interview the two gentlemen for a while now as they were both local 
residents and heavily involved in the recovery due to their roles at the community centre. The 
interview started as usual, but as we began to discuss the recovery process in the city, all of a 
sudden Mr. Inoue (REF 29) looked frustrated and said "Anna-san, why are you here asking 
these questions?". For a moment my mind went blank as I was taking in the question...what 
exactly did he mean? He quickly continued, with me realising that the question was more of 
a rhetorical move rather than as a genuine question interrogating my motivations: "why are 
the city official here not asking these kinds of questions?". What Mr. Inoue seemed to imply 
with this exclamation was something that became increasingly chrystalised in the coming 
months, with a tangible reflection coming from Ms. Ishida (REF 43) in Onagawa who during 
her reflection on the communication between the residents and the municipality said "to be 
honest I don't think we've ever been asked what we actually think about the recovery itself. 
They often send stuff like health surveys, but never anything about just the recovery". It 
seemed increasingly clear that residents as the affected populations and subjects of recovery 
were having difficulties conveying their thoughts, ideas, and worries about the recovery to 
the authorities.  
The idea of listening to community voices was something the authorities had put forward 
strongly both in reconstruction plans as well as in conversations. While it was not my main 
objective to interview civil servants, I did have an opportunity to do so on a few occasions. 
Understanding the needs of the communities, fostering community cohesion, and hearing the 
opinions of the residents were typical responses from the officials (REF 27, REF 31) when 
asked what the role of the municipal offices is in the recovery, echoing the narrative put 
forward in reconstruction documents of the government, and closely echoed at the local level. 
For instance, the reconstruction plan for Minamisanriku places local residents squarely at the 
centre of recovery, stating that "every citizen is the leader of this recovery" (Town of 
Minamisanriku 2011, p. 9), corresponding to the overall 'community-focused' recovery 
advocated in the national guidance for reconstruction and recovery (Reconstruction Design 
Council 2011). Equally, prior to the publication of local reconstruction plans, most localities 
held meetings, workshops and public hearings, where 'citizens' ideas and opinions were 
listened to carefully, with the contents of the plan reflecting those ideas as much as possible7" 
(City of Higashimatsushima 2011, p. 3). Residents' participation in the recovery activities 
functions as the practical culmination of the public engagement aspect of community-based 
approaches and is, in theory at least, integrally linked to local empowerment.  
7 Author's translation of:  
 
While inclusion of local populations in multiple aspects of recovery and reconstruction 
activities has been noted as vital (Miyake and Ohtaki 2018), Tohoku's disaster affected 
populations stressed the necessity of both top-down and bottom-up approaches (Chino and 
Abe 2013). In relation to community participation as representing the bottom-up direction, 
each municipality in my research engaged with local residents by using a variety of methods, 
ranging from surveys to public meetings and individual interviews (e.g. Town of Onagawa 
2018). Many local residents recognised that the job of a civil servant in the context of the 
recovery was a difficult one; something that Mr. Takeda (REF 6), a former civil servant himself 
empathised strongly, expressing gratitude toward the difficult task that these individuals in 
the administration were facing. Mr. Takeda was also unwavering in his trust that the public 
authorities had the best interest of the communities at heart. While of course Mr. Takeda's 
understanding toward the civil servants was influenced by his own history, the idea of the 
logistics and management of the recovery was simple for the majority of the locals: the 
authorities listen to what the residents want, and then they go away and deliver on their 
wishes the best they can. The locals highlighted the desired, and in many cases belief, in the 
moral correctness and integrity of the civil servants to maintain the will of the people and 
direct the recovery to the direction the residents desired it to go. The aspect of servitude of 
the civil servants was strongly highlighted by the residents, and also corroborated by the civil 
servants' views of themselves and their responsibilities.  
Considering the community-focused ethos and the effort put into community consultation in 
the communities themselves, it was therefore curious that despite these efforts, many felt 
voiceless in the process with their circumstances and needs not being understood. Continuing 
my conversation with Mr. Inoue and Mr. Hayashi at the community centre, they enlightened 
me on some of the challenges: "We've had one visit from them [city officials] in eight months. 
When they come, we host a big meeting, a lot of people come, the car park is full of cars", 
recounting the eager participation of the residents in the recovery-oriented meetings. I myself 
attended one such meeting on 16 June 2016, with the big hall of the community centre being 
packed with people, mostly from the members of the local machizukuri organisations and 
staff from the city hall. However, packed halls with many people using their voice also had a 
downside as Mr. Inoue explained: "No matter what we say, they won't get a realistic image 
of the situation in this town" (REF 29). What he referred to was that full community halls and 
car parks were not in fact reality that Mr. Inoue and Mr. Hayashi experienced everyday; a 
reality that I too attested to during most of my visits, with a small number of visitors to the 
community centre being the normal state of affairs. This did not mean people were not 
interested in the recovery on most days, but rather that the recovery and community voice 
could not be contained and captured solely within the walls of the community centre, on the 
days when the civil servants made their rare descends into the communities.  
The authenticity of experiences in the community were highlighted elsewhere as well, not 
only in terms of the context that would enable a genuine observation of the state of affairs, 
but also the way in which discussions and conversations between the locals and the officials 
were carried out. A chance encounter with a gentleman in Ogatsu in the outskirts of 
Ishinomaki in the summer of 2016 reflected this frustration. I met him outside a temporary 
housing compound set up in the local park, where him and a number of neighbours were 
enjoying the weather and having tea together. I was invited to the gathering and after 
explaining to them what I was doing in Ogatsu the conversation organically developed from 
there.  He recounted his numerous trips to the city hall to ask for assistance in relation to the 
recovery in his village. He explained how he is met with rules and regulations saying that what 
he is asking cannot be done, even if it would mean improvement in the living conditions and 
well-being of the residents at what he deemed to be little or no cost to the municipality. He 
was particularly alluding to the fact that the majority of the temporary housing units now 
stood empty, as people slowly began to vacate the units. Families still living in the compound 
were living in cramped quarters but were not allowed to accommodate the empty units on 
account of fairness and equality. He concluded by saying that if the city officials ever came to 
the village and talked to the locals like this, over tea, they would understand what local 
residents were feeling, and the residents would feel better about it (Research Diary 
14.8.2016). He and his neighbours also expressed frustration over the fact that the city official 
always arrive with cameras, clipboards and recording devices, wanting to capture specific 
information (e.g. on health). However, what the locals really wanted was to have a normal 
conversation about the recovery, and how they felt about it. 
For the local residents, expressing their voice within the formal recovery process was 
complicated by two issues: Firstly, voice was an embodied experience that could only be 
transmitted in the context to which their voices were linked; hearing everyone's voices was 
as much a matter of feeling their lives as it was a matter of hearing their articulations of needs, 
visions and opinions. When the recovery that was carried out somewhere "outside", in 
designated spaces, during designated times, and by designated representatives, it was not 
deemed to convey a genuine representation of the needs and desires of the affected 
populations regarding the future of their communities. In the above example, it was the 
affective experience of having tea with community members while sitting under the trees at 
the temporary housing compound that was deemed an essential part of the transmission of 
needs, opinions, and ideas; i.e. voice.  
Second complication related to the notion of "everyone's voices". While equity between 
victims was considered one of the key principles, such homogenisation of disaster victims did 
not reflect the reality of people's experiences of using their voice. While some had assumed 
roles as community development workers and leaders of machizukuri councils, others shied 
away from these organisations and responsibilities. Some eagerly took part in organised 
recovery activities, while at the same time others felt marginalised by their personal 
circumstances or communal hierarchies and social standing. Yet, everyone did have a voice, 
and the importance was less on capturing those voices into official recovery and development 
plans, but rather the chance of voicing them and the feeling (kimochi) of being heard. Mr. 
Sasaki, a local resident of Higashimatsushima explained the importance of this to me, 
"Sometimes people say unrealistic and irrational things [related to the recovery], but it's ok. 
It's important that they get to say them anyway. It's beneficial for their mental health. For 
instance, when the Emperor visited us, he sat like this, on his knees, talking and conversing 
with every elderly person in the room. That [talking] was the only objective." (REF 26). For the 
affected populations, recovery represented the new normal and the state of life that was 
intimate and pervasive experience of the everyday, something that remained unpackageable 
into an agenda of a meeting or pages of a survey that focused primarily on collecting 
information and gaining consensus.  
Instead, for the locals, the objective of expressing views and using one's voice was therefore 
less about the transmission of knowledge and ideas, but more about transmitting affects that 
helped outsiders (in this case the officials) to fully comprehend the meaning of the knowledge 
and ideas, or voices, that were expressed. For the locals, being listened to was therefore a 
much more diffused and affective process, intertwined with daily life, the physical 
environment, and the shifting range of available choices that were directed by the recovery 
context that instructed the construction of ideas about the future and the physical actions 
and behaviours in the communities. Transmitting these experiences was difficult, if not 
impossible, in the designated spaces that did not render themselves conducive to the 
transmission of the affective. To understand the proliferation of acute 'voicelessness' and the 
limitations to the genuine transmission of the affective intensities that directed people's 
views and understanding of the recovery and desires for the future, it is important to 
understand how locals constructed their relationship with these designated spaces. 
4.1.2. Elimination of the affective from designated spaces    
One of the common features of community-based participatory practices is the involvement 
of local organisations and organisational structures into the decision-making process as the 
facilitators between the authorities and citizens. These organisations are often central to the 
development of the designated spaces for participation and dialogue, a process that can of 
course have many benefits, but often equally many drawbacks. In Tohoku too, as I have 
outlined in the opening of this chapter, involvement of residents in the recovery took place 
within familiar structures, through organisations that have an established history across Japan, 
and membership based on physical proximity to the local community (Haddad 2007), that 
presents both benefits and drawback from the perspective of voice and inclusion (Pekkanen 
2009, Hashimoto 2007). This familiarity can make it easier for people to recognise the place 
of participatory processes within administrative structures and understand the nature of 
participation.  
Equally, stability of such organisations and their place in regular town planning and 
community development processes, can foster positive continuation of information sharing, 
consensus building and community participation that can be beneficial for increasing 
resilience against future disasters (Kariya and Ubaura 2013). Participation in voluntary 
organisations is prompted by a multitude of factors, such as availability (e.g. retirement), civic 
duty, meaningfulness, and general interests and well-being (Nakano 2004, Matsushima and 
Matsunaga 2015, LeBlanc 1999, Hashimoto 2007, Hommerich 2015), through which 
individuals can determine their interests, motivations, and opportunities for participation. 
Equally, traditional format, structures and membership can place certain expectations and on 
who is and is not able to participate based on their skills, knowledge, motivations, and social 
standing (Hashimoto 2007, Funck 2007, Haddad 2010). These expectations can destabilise the 
statement that "everyone deserves to have a voice in this recovery", as the organisational 
structure itself and local customs can bias the inclusion and exclusion of individuals into 
participatory spaces and processes, thus also impacting the types of voices that are included 
and excluded.  
The composition of membership in the established organisations in Japan tends to be 
overwhelmingly older and male, as the head of the household has been traditionally expected 
to represent families in the meetings (particularly the case with the neighbourhood 
associations) (Haddad 2010, Hashimoto 2007, Hommerich 2015). While part of the blame for 
the homogeneous nature of the membership can be placed on the archaic image, disinterest, 
and structural characteristics that tend to favour membership from a specific demographic 
(Hommerich 2015), issue of physical access in the participatory processes also featured 
heavily in the discussions with residents. Most common forms of participation in post-disaster 
Tohoku rely on physical presence of local residents (meetings, workshops, etc.) where 
problems relating to access and inclusivity at times led to negative perceptions of the 
participatory procedures and warded people off from joining the process. Timings and 
locations of meetings were limiting the opportunities to participate among some groups more 
than others, as explained by Ms. Ishida (REF 44): "the meetings are often in the evenings. I 
need to feed the children and put them to bed, so it is really difficult for me to participate. Also, 
I heard that in [the neighbouring town] they have also asked people not to bring their children 
to the meetings, and this has barred many young women from participating" (REF 43). While 
the last point she made remained anecdotal, the negative perception of the participation 
process nevertheless influenced her actual behaviour that led to a sense of marginalisation 
by the style of participation itself.  
Based on my observations in Tohoku, older generations tended to associate participation with 
machizukuri and neighbourhood associations and their connections with the official 
governance structures, whereas the younger individuals and new arrivals in particular, were 
more heavily involved in NPOs, social enterprises and other new ventures (e.g. REF 1, REF 22, 
REF 39). The participants in the machizukuri process, through which the majority of the 
'official' participation in the recovery took place, were themselves critically aware of the 
problems related to the participatory process, as was made apparent by an amusing incident 
at a machizukuri council meeting in one of the towns I visited. The members were worried 
about the advanced age of the majority of the people in the council and the difficulty of 
attracting younger members. They noted how this might skew the recovery in many ways, 
and that the council could really do with some younger energy among its ranks. To this, 
another member of the council, nudged toward another member sitting close by and gave a 
tongue-in-cheek response: "well, we do have OO-san here. He's only in his 50's. That's young 
compared to the rest of us" (Research diary 17.6.2016). All the members of the council were 
male and no younger than 50-years-of-age, corresponding with previously documented 
patterns of civic participation in Japan (Hommerich 2015, Hashimoto 2007). The council 
members were critically aware of the short comings of their membership in terms of age, 
vitality, and diversity and worried how they could not possibly represent the voices of 
"everyone".  
However, exclusion was also actively carried out by victims themselves where unspoken rules 
and hierarchies guided the types of voices that were brought to public discussion. Like 
disasters themselves, recovery too is highly contextualised both as a collective and individual 
experience. While comparable trends and processes to recovery can be found across Tohoku, 
no two towns experienced the disaster in the same way, and equally no two households did 
either; the disaster was a deeply personal experience inside collective suffering. Different 
levels of loss for oneself and others created an internalised hierarchy of suffering that at times 
led to self-imposed marginalisation from the recovery process by those who perceived 
themselves to have suffered less than others. Mr. Ono in Ogatsu explained this to me in the 
following way: "We didn't lose our house in the tsunami and continue to lead a relatively 
normal life. I think this disaster is a great chance for us to turn things round [to revitalise], but 
there are people who don't have houses yet, so I don't feel I should press on this issue too 
much" (REF 9). Despite agreeing with utterances such as "everyone deserves to have a voice 
in this recovery", the degree of loss and suffering seemed to make some people's voices more 
urgent and valid in the recovery process. It was this sense of suffering that deeply impacted 
people's feelings of inclusion or exclusion from the recovery that I found particularly curious 
in Tohoku.  
Where in the case of representation voice was collectivised, in the case of suffering voice 
became an individual quality and a right, directing the types of things that were appropriate 
for discussion at a given point of the recovery, as indicated by Mr. Ono above. Discussion 
about housing took precedent over discussion about parks and business opportunities for 
instance, thus putting on hold the voices of those whose needs and ideas related to these 
topics. As our conversation with Mr. Ono continued, I asked him what opportunities he saw 
for his community. At this point he got excited and began to recount ideas he had for a new 
fish market and products that could be made locally, opportunities for tourism, forest 
management, and better transport, just to name a few. His self-imposed silence was 
motivated by solidarity toward those he felt had lost more than he had and emerged from 
the internalised hierarchy of needs.  
In practice, the hierarchy of needs was also external to the individual in relation to the 
benefits of recovery and led to social divisions and real sense of marginalisation. The 
legislation on public financing in Japan does not allow for restoration of individual lifestyles 
but has to be used for public benefit in areas affected by the disaster (Oguma 2013). The 
separation of voices and needs is relevant in this context. People who did not suffer as much 
as those who lost everything were also deemed to have less needs for the recovery and 
became to benefit less from the public good of the recovery as well. Upon my visit to the 
community centre at Higashimatsushima, I also had a conversation with another worker there, 
Ms. Tanaka (REF 10) who explained the social divisions that were emerging as a result of the 
hierarchy of needs, determining who benefits from the recovery and in what way. Ms. Tanaka 
explained that the community is now experiencing divisions between the people moving to 
the new are on the mountain side, takadai, and those remaining in the lower lying regions, 
motochi: new houses, services, roads, and other facilities are being built in the takadai area, 
and in many cases services were moved to takadai from their original locations in the motochi. 
While those in the motochi who suffered damages to their properties but were able to restore 
them more quickly, were now being left behind the development and losing facilities that 
were moved to less riskier places but becoming more difficult for the residents of motochi to 
access.  
Changes in public financing that accompanied the Heisei municipal mergers have left many 
rural municipalities with aging population and dwindling numbers of taxpayers lacking the 
funds to maintain existing road networks, public facilities, and services (Oguma 2013). Some 
of my research participants did long for the charm, pace, and social relations of the pre-
disaster town and found solace in the fact that some of the old town still remained untouched. 
One such person was Mr. Kondo (REF 40) who had decided with his wife to move to an area 
of his hometown that was untouched by the disaster. His reasoning was that the newly 
developed part of the town was just not their kind of place and they did not want to get 
wrapped up in the 'money-driven' lifestyle as he described it. But the contrast between post-
disaster development and the areas left untouched by the disaster were often drastic (Image 
4, 5), and not everyone was going to benefit from new houses and public infrastructure.  
Mr. Ono (REF 9) remained positive about his town's development and was grateful for the 
fact that his own ancestral house had been spared the brunt of the tsunami, but also 
explained that there are needs in his town that are beyond the recovery from the tsunami. 
He was referring to two landslides that had taken place within the last 12 months on the 
narrow mountain road that snaked across the steep hills and valleys and was the only lifeline 
for people on the mountains. Despite all the attention Mr. Ono recognised people needed in 
the badly hit areas, the landslides on the mountain road leading to their inlets also needed to 
be fixed. He explained to me that they have now been in that state for months and they were 
not getting the urgent attention from the city that he felt they needed. The lack of attention 
paid to the landslides in one part of the community, while intense building the development 
work was being carried out mere kilometres away in the disaster affected zone, highlighted 
the division between the concrete immediate needs and the broader more abstract issues of 
general decline that had been plaguing these communities for decades, but now brought to 
new levels of intensity due to the disaster.  
Image 4: Post-disaster infrastructure in Onagawa, Anna Vainio, September 2016 
Image 5: Landslide in Ogatsu, Anna Vainio, May 2016 
I frequently inquired from the residents I met whether they have attended any local 
workshops or other formally organised participatory recovery activities. While some were 
positive and felt that their ideas now live on in this new landscape (REF 6) or were happy 
with the outcomes of reconstruction without having participated in the workshops 
themselves (REF 39), the majority of the responses ranged from disinterest to negative 
responses toward the way in which participation was facilitated: Some felt there are too many 
meetings and that not everything needs to be consulted, what was needed was more rapid 
action and progress (REF 44), while others felt that going to the meetings was pointless 
because everything was already decided (REF 14, REF 45). This last point was highlighted by 
Mr. Iwasaki, a community activist in Minamisanriku, saying that you cant actually propose 
anything [in these meetings], you can only comment on the ready-made plans that the 
outsiders like architects and engineers have already made (REF 15). While the issue appears 
to be that of implementation, it is not merely the case of the solution (participatory process) 
not meeting its objectives (inclusion and empowerment). Sometimes, despite having 
participated in a workshop or meeting, people like Mr. Iwasaki departed from the situation 
feeling voiceless.  
Participation in spaces where the community voices became legitimised were also geared 
towards fostering technical expertise. Having a voice therefore became narrowly defined as 
the ability to take part in the administration of recovery, rather than a process of expressing 
unmitigated views and opinions that emerge from the intimate context of recovery as a lived 
experience and reflections on the realisation of such visions. To be able to work in 
collaboration with the authorities, participatory processes based on the machizukuri logic 
contain a distinct character of skills development, dissemination of information, and 
community leadership that members can develop through participation (Funck 2007), but 
equally many become (or are invited to become) members because they already possess the 
skills and networks that will be desirable for the organisation (e.g. former civil servants), as I 
observed in Tohoku.  
These predetermined characteristics make some individuals better positioned to engage in 
developmental activities through these organisations, giving them a representational 
character relying on fixed membership. For the affected populations however, representation 
was less reliant on a democratic procedure of selecting a representative rather than on the 
closeness of experiences between the representative and the represented that led to a 
mutual sense of understanding and trust. The 2012 replacement of the railway line operated 
by JR East between Yanaizu and Kesennuma with a Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) service, left 
Minamisanriku (among other locations) without a railway service (JR East 2012). The decision 
caused outrage and concern among local populations leading to the establishment of a 
campaign to restore rail service in the community (REF 15). Ms. Wada (REF 43) who was a 
local resident on the southern part of Minamisanriku, now severely impacted by the loss of 
the railwayline, gave a passionate account of the JR issue: "I feel we have absolutely no say in 
anything. No one who actually lives here was invited to the meeting [about replacing the JR 
line with a BRT]. Only the 'yes-men' of the Mayor attended. We found out about the decision 
in the newspaper and asked ourselves 'what meeting?'". Ms. Wada felt the decision did not 
represent the sentiments among those who will be directly affected by the decision and 
showed no trust in the process of decision-making or those who were involved. For her, voice 
was connected to the physical context of the recovery and the proximity of experiences and 
understanding between the representative and the represented. Genuine encounters with 
lives in the recovery context were seen as an essential part of creating understanding and 
trust.   
Through the lens of kimochi ga wakaranai (they don't understand how we feel), we can see 
'recovery' as disjointed from the holistic experience of life it represented for the local 
populations, and equally there was a lack of connection between each meeting, consultation, 
workshop, and survey that demanded the participation of the affected populations. Lack of 
connection to the larger context of the overall recovery and the impact each individual and 
collective participatory effort had as a cumulative progression toward the recovery. The 
connection between acts of participation were not linked up in people's reasoning, leading 
Mr. Ishida (REF 44) to exclaim: "There are too many meetings. Just get on with it" that was 
less an indication less of lack of interest in participating in the recovery, than of the futility of 
the impact these acts were seen as having on the speed and direction of the recovery as a 
whole. Returning to Ms. Ishida's (REF 44) reflection on never having been asked about her 
thoughts on the recovery, the shattering of the recovery experience into consultive spheres 
of health, finance, housing, and well-being, seems to have led to a fractured image of the 
recovery as a whole. Connections between health and housing for instance may be recognised 
by the authorities but were not adequately reflected in the participatory processes on offer 
to the populations. Thus, the participatory processes were failing to recognise recovery as the 
holistic process that is intimately intertwined into the multiple facets of people's everyday 
actions and routines.  
For the local residents, voice was more than the physical act of uttering an opinion or 
expression of views. It existed and emerged from the multitude of ways in which people were 
sensing, responding to, and expressing their experiences that could not always be captured 
into words. Participation as it was carried out in legitimised spaces, where 'everyone's voice' 
was treated as an aggregation of people's opinions, views, and ideas, thus running the risk of 
reducing voice to explicit, abstract and verbal knowledge. What the above exploration has 
however shown is the affective nature of voice, connected to the persons and networks 
within which voice was used, and where the contexts and spaces can determine the meanings 
and precise messages that it carried. The focus on 'voice' in the context of community-based 
recovery setting is a vital one, as the mutuality and equality of authorities and communities 
in the recovering space rests on the ability to express and understand one another. But voice 
is more than an articulation that follows a number of social logics (Howarth 2005), and it is 
the reduction of voice into this narrow category from which I argue the sense of voicelessness 
emerges. It is therefore the very notion of 'voice' itself that divides the temporal, material and 
metaphysical aspects of the recovery experience into different domains of action, where 
despite the affected populations and the authorities speaking the same language, using the 
same terminology, and utilising the same concepts, they appear to not understand each other.  
This raises the question of what is 'voice' supposed to achieve in recovery? And for whom? 
As discussed in Chapter 1, governments and authorities have embraced participatory 
approaches to include community voices in order to legitimise their actions and decision-
making. Much of this work is carried out with the ethos of 'community empowerment' 
attached to it. In community development literature we often see empowerment as an 
internal process through which participants gain the power and confidence to act, while also 
linked to taking ownership and authority over the development and issues in their 
neighbourhoods and communities, thus leading to higher rates of satisfaction and mutuality 
between the authorities and their subjects (Watt et al. 2000, Zippay 1995, Simpson et al. 
2003). In light of the overarching sense of kimochi ga wakaranai in Tohoku, perhaps we need 
to think whether this is all that empowerment is however? For the local residents in Tohoku 
being listened to seemed to be less about empowering the individuals to utter what they 
wanted to say (and based on my observations and interviews that I carried out, everyone was 
capable of articulating their ideas and feelings toward the recovery), but more about 
empowering the spaces and situations where uttering voices could become a legitimate part 
of the recovery that went beyond the official consultation remit. In the current state, locals 
felt their voices became authorised only through specific channels of communication, or 
when uttered in pre-determined and legitimised spaces and contexts. Access to these spaces 
was limited by several factors that many felt went against the notion that "everyone deserves 
to have a voice in this recovery". The established hierarchies and authorisation of voices led 
to a sense of irresolvable internal contradiction regarding participation and voice in the 
recovery context that was distinctly disempowering to many local residents, reflected 
through the notion of kimochi ga wakaranai.  
If capturing "everyone's voice" as an extrapolation of opinions into a consensus does not 
reflect the recovery as a lived and affective experience, then what does? How can we capture, 
and more importantly understand (wakaru) the feelings, experiences, and affects that are 
involved in recovery where "every person is the leader"? How can 'voice' that encapsulates 
more than articulated opinions to be heard? Disasters like the one that happened in Tohoku 
in 2011 cannot be counted as mere anomalies in life's normalcy, where individuals can after 
a period of disruption where towns are rebuilt, and damages are fixed return onto the same 
trajectory as the one they had before the event took place. The events of 2011 shifted the life 
worlds of individuals, communities, the region and the nation, with the events having an 
effect in the way in which we not only view the future from the point of destruction, but how 
we reflect on and place and construct meaning upon the past as well.  
Chapter 5 
Empowerment in recovery through resignation  
In the previous chapter I have explored the statement of 'everyone's voice' in the recovery 
process, breaking the homogeneity in community's voice construction and usage of voice, 
while arguing for the affective nature of voice that consists of more than just articulations. 
The community-based approaches to development, post-disaster recovery included, argue 
that participation in development processes enables community members to get their voices 
heard, which in turn will have a positive and empowering effect on the affected communities. 
Batliwala (2007) notes that while 'empowerment' "represent[s] a clearly political concept, it 
has been 'mainstreamed' in a manner that has virtually robbed it of its original meaning and 
strategic value" (p. 557), here referring to the notion of power within a political setting, where 
'empowerment' was "coined to represent a clearly political concept" (p. 557). The term is fluid 
and porous and used in a number of different contexts, often without awarding sufficient 
discussion to pinpoint a clear definition (Batliwala 2007, Hirsch 1994). This does not however 
negate its usefulness in describing the sensations, feelings, and analyses of the situation in 
Tohoku. In my usage of the term, empowerment is integrally linked with power. Being 
empowered resulted from the feeling of having the power to "change things", and 
disempowerment emerged from the opposite state.  
As discussed in Chapter 1, empowerment is one of the core principles of the community-
based logic, but as I will show in this chapter, local empowerment has been complicated by 
the tension between exogenous and endogenous discourses that are emerging from the 
authorities and the localities alike. In the government's documents (Annex 3), the view of 
empowerment primarily emphasises the connection between tangible and direct 
engagement and participation in communications and projects around recovery that is 
viewed, through consensus and capacity building, to lead to empowered communities. 
However, this view of empowerment is increasingly devoid of the above mentioned political 
power and the ability to change things, that through my empirical material emerged as the 
main way through which local residents were assessing their own dis/empowerment. Despite 
the prominent use of language of empowerment, the state's exogenous narrative was 
simultaneously developing an environment of powerlessness, where local residents did not 
feel they had the power to change things within the setting that is reserved for political 
decision making. This depolitisation is integrally connected to the homogenisation and 
harmonisation of communities, characteristic of community-based and participatory 
approaches today (Cannon 2008, Cleaver 2001), with participatory approaches increasingly 
being modelled to reflect this apolitical notion of the community within the exogenous 
narrative for the disaster recovery. 
For the locals, the ability or lack thereof to change things in specific settings led to affective 
states of empowerment or disempowerment that in the case of the Tohoku residents were 
verbalised through emotional states ranging "from love and solidarity to resentment and 
rage", to borrow from Shaw's (2017) reports on the descriptions of responses to the national 
post-disaster climate among the activist communities. The connection to the national debate 
here is deliberate, as I will show how these different emotional responses embedded into and 
driving the endogenous discourse of the recovery, were connected to the very notion of what 
it means to be part of the community and the nation whose rejuvenation the recovery is 
advancing, and what the path to prosperity looks like within the scope of the two recoveries.   
The geological position of the Japanese isles makes disasters an integral part of the 
historiography of the times in which they take place, reflected in the public and popular 
responses to them. The temporal characterisation post-disaster needs to be understood as 
much a cyclical development as a linear one, where disasters have a unique capacity to shake 
conformity and suddenly bring forth and visible the mounting hidden tensions. Where the 
1923 Tokyo earthquake reflected the political atmosphere of the pre-war militarism and 
nationalism, bringing forth ethnic tensions, the rapid expansion and integration of civil society 
actors into formal politics of the post-bubble Japan was a feature after the Hansin-Awaji 
earthquake of 1995. The reflections after 2011 on the other hand have brought to the surface 
the growing social and geographical divides as distinctive features of post-growth Japan, 
where (economic) growth is no longer a given, and perhaps not even anticipated anymore. It 
is against this framework that Sociologist Eiji Oguma (in Brown 2018) suggests that the 
awakening experienced in the post-Tohoku reality is more a reaction to the increasing 
insecurity and growing divides in Japanese society, rather than a reaction to the disaster per 
This "awakening" was a key characteristic in the individual and communal stories in Tohoku, 
or what locals referred to as mezamerareru, "our eyes are open now", reflecting Curato and 
Ong's (2015) notion that disasters can "lift veils", revealing that which has remained hidden, 
giving rise to competing narratives and recognition of the underlying conditions and 
structures that influenced the nature and direction of the destruction; but equally, the 
direction that the future must now take. Disasters, particularly large-scale events like the one 
in Japan in 2011, often reach their impact broader than the immediately affected 
communities. In the Japanese context, resonating with Oguma's notion of "awakening", Shaw 
(2017) has equally explored the emergent feeling of mezamerareru, in the wake of the 
earthquake, tsunami and the nuclear disaster. Shaw argues that as people "disentangle their 
nation from the shadow of the state, affective structures of obligation and social belonging 
underwrite the ways that activists negotiate dialogical emotion - from love and solidarity to 
resentment and rage" (p. 61), she finds that the narrative of the nation and belonging is 
moving away from the monolithic harmony based on racial and cultural similarity to one of 
inclusion that sees beyond these markers as the basis of social belonging. In the context of 
the post-disaster communities, historically embedded structural injustices (Hopson 2013, 
Kelly 2012, Shaw 2017) are becoming increasingly apparent and pressing for local populations.  
The 2011 triple disaster in Tohoku had a profound effect on people across Japan, not just in 
Tohoku. On a national scale the sense of mezamerareru can be witnessed through the 
fundamental re-thinking of everyday life, consumption and family relations, as well as 
modernity itself (Morris-Suzuki 2017, Shaw 2017, Samuels 2013, Geilhorn and Iwata-
Weickgenannt 2017), providing a context of rapid and sudden change requiring equally rapid 
modes of adaptation to be developed. This has led to a widespread desire and national 
contemplation over fundamental transformation of the social, economic and political 
conditions that have led the society into a perceived crumbling point and a rediscovery and 
regeneration of the lost self and true nature of existence in the future (Morris-Suzuki 2017, p. 
8). These post-disaster imaginaries paint a picture of a 'new society', what Morris-Suzuki 
(2017) calls a 'Disaster Utopia', where the disaster "forces people to create their own patterns 
of order and ethics in the wastelands left where formal structures have been stripped away" 
(p. 7). I argue that the sense of mezamerareru, imagining of new visions for the future, 
criticality of growth as equalling prosperity, and the emergence of various practices around 
alternative lifestyles have been the driving forces of local affective experiences of possibilities 
for change, and thus of empowerment.  
However, despite the emergence of new debates and alternative visions for the future of 
Tohoku, and Japan as a whole, the idea of propelling Japan onto a path of growth was 
enshrined into the principles of recovery after the Great East Japan Earthquake and Tsunami, 
where the future of Japan was integrally linked with the recovery of Tohoku's affected regions. 
For example, principle five in the aforementioned 'Hope beyond the disaster' -document 
states that: "Japans economy cannot be restored unless the disaster areas are rebuilt. The 
disaster areas cannot be truly rebuilt unless Japans economy is restored. Recognising these 
facts, we shall simultaneously pursue reconstruction of the afflicted areas and revitalization 
of the nation" (Reconstruction Design Council 2011, p. 2). Despite aiming to emphasise the 
necessity of mutual cooperation and the interconnectedness of national and local needs, the 
statement however shows Tohoku's central position in national prosperity, while also 
continuing to subordinate its regional needs to the national ones, thus illustrating the 
continuation of broader historical patterning of local disempowerment within the national 
discourse.  
Despite the language of empowerment equally and prominently embedded into the 
government's narrative on the recovery, the state has continuously been fostering an 
environment of powerlessness build on the emphases on solidarity and harmony. Already in 
the early days and weeks after the disaster, notion of ganbaru (do one's best) and individual 
stoicism and perseverence (gaman) rose as key words to lift public mood and increase 
solidarity among citizens, widely proliferated through billboards and banners in public spaces 
(Image 6) (Azuma 2014, Forgash 2011), with ganbaru recorded as the single most widely used 
word in earthquake slogans after the disaster (Azuma 2014). Promoting ideas of harmony and 
national unity, the state has not only glossed over the structurally ingrained regional 
inequalities that have directed Japan's development for decades, but also depoliticised the 
recovery project as a whole. Slater et al. (2012) argue (in reference to Agamben 2005) that by 
enabling the state to function in a 'state of exception', where normal functions of society 
become suspended due to an 'exception' from normalcy (e.g. emergency), the state can 
validated the location of power more firmly within the state in order to overcome the 
'exception' (Agamben 2005). Agamben further notes that this incremental suspension of 
normalcy and basic right can lead to a gradual disappearance of meaningful political action; 
and thus disempowerment. To understand whether 'meaningful political action' has 
disappeared or not in Tohoku, we need to explore what exactly is understood as political in 
the specific context.  
Image 6: 'Ganbar Nippon' display at Ueno station. Anna Vainio, September 2011 
The increasing disempowerment and voicelessness people were experiencing in the formal 
depolitisised participatory spaces, I argue, led to communities 'resigning' and actively 
rejecting the formal participatory processes, with the lowering numbers of participants and 
comments like Mr. Ishida's (REF 44) "there are too many meetings" reflecting this 
overarching sentiment in the region. However, what was equally noteworthy among the 
participants, was that there were spaces and contexts within which making changes was 
deemed possible, where the affective experiences of empowerment for the local residents 
had primarily become located. These spheres emerged directly from the daily life context in 
the recovering regions, where the experiences of survival, "opening one's eyes" to regional 
vulnerabilities and inequalities, and the discovery of one's own abilities in spite of the sense 
of powerlessness within the formal recovery context. Through activation of communal 
support networks, engagement with non-profit initiatives and starting of businesses, 
community members were throwing themselves into the sphere of informal politics and 
communal action in ever greater numbers.  
In relation to the affective notions of empowerment and disempowerment that were 
therefore equally apparent in the region, the conversations I had with residents in the disaster 
struck region presented a divergence from the normative narratives on social activism, 
movements and political participation. Not necessarily in terms of agenda or direction, but in 
the framing of politics and the actors that are included into these narratives. The critical 
discussions on the diversity of voices, the processes for reaching consent, and the direction 
of social action to date have tended to focus on the formal administrative actors, such as 
municipalities and civil society actors of the recovery (e.g. Aldrich 2012, Avenell 2012, 
Dusinberre & Aldrich 2011). What has been missing from this discussion are the questions of 
what constitutes political activism and the ways in which politics is practiced in non-
administrative spaces however.  
While exploitation of community solidarity and celebrations of individual perseverance 
(gaman) have certainly contributed to the depolitisation of the recovery process where the 
power in community empowerment has become attuned and aligned with the objectives of 
the state, disenfranchisement from the formal recovery has not however meant 
disempowerment of the populations from the recovery overall. And in fact, as I will show 
through the ethnography in the latter part of this chapter, affected populations have been 
broadly empowered by their experiences of the disaster and prolonged habitation in 
temporary conditions. This scene of informal politics has been explored in the East Asian 
setting before (e.g. Morris-Suzuki & Soh 2017, LeBlanc 1999) (as well as beyond), but remains 
mostly invisible and unrecognised as belonging in the sphere of politics. But does peoples 
resignation from the formal political processes (e.g. voting), from mass movements and 
protests (that however admittedly did take place, but with varying degrees of long-term 
success), and more concretely from the organisation of post-disaster recovery (by not 
attending workshops and responding to surveys) represent disinterest and political apathy 
among the populations, or a political reaction to their voicelessness that reigns within these 
processes and structures of what is typically considered as political? Or does it simply mean 
resignation from the empowerment without power? 
To return to Shaw's (2017) emotional scale mentioned in the beginning of this chapter, the 
first part of the chapter will outline the puzzle by looking at what she has termed "resentment 
and anger" with 'formal' politics and decision-making being seen as exclusionary and decided 
from the outside. This part will explore people's relationship with the formal recovery and 
how through a variety of actions they are trying to get their voices heard, and how despite 
these actions they nevertheless end up voiceless. I argue that the affective state of 
disempowerment that reigns in these settings has led people to resignation from the 
participatory spaces of the recovery. The second part of the chapter then explores the side of 
"love and solidarity" of the 'informal politics', not as an expression of harmony but as a 
collective voice for their communties through actions, and connecting the events in their 
communities and the internal processes of sense-making to the broader debates of the nation 
and belonging as individuals with voice and something to say. The second part of the chapter 
will explore the alternatives that have emerged from resignation from 'formal politics', and 
how the active rejection of normative forms of influencing and traditional value bases has had 
a distinctly empowering effect on the local populations.  
5.1. "I don't expect anything from this Government anymore" 
I met Ms. Wada (REF 43) on my last visit to northern Miyagi; we were introduced to one 
another by a mutual friend who accompanied me the meeting. We travelled to an area of 
town that was further away from the hussle and bussle of construction that was taking place 
in the town centre. We arrived at an empty lot where Ms. Wada and her family were running 
a small restaurant close to the seaside. The quietness or the place was noticeable, with the 
sounds of nature being suddenly amplified after leaving the noise of construction in the town 
centre. No other buildings were around, and the road winded between what looked like 
mounds of dumped gravel now sprouting a variety of weeds, evidently having stood there 
undisturbed for a while. Ms. Wada told me that this is where her house, and in fact her whole 
neighbourhood had once stood, and the land where the restaurant now stood still belonged 
to her. On March 11th she had heard the evacuation order and together with her mother they 
had packed the car, with emergency provisions, warm clothes for the children, and the family 
dog. Together they had driven to a higher ground to watch the disaster unfold. The height of 
the tsunami nevertheless exceeded their expectations, reaching their place of safety. They 
were forced to haphazardly run up the hill to escape the oncoming waves, leaving the car with 
all their belongings behind. In the end, despite their well-prepared escape, nothing else was 
left except a single mobile phone that she had held in her hand when running for safety.  
The restaurant that she now operated on her own land was in a charming log cabin like 
building, containing a kitchen, a small dining area for the customers, and a mezzanine upstairs. 
She had originally opened the restaurant with her mother next to the main highway where 
she was making good business especially with the construction workers coming for lunch, but 
eventually the site became subject for redevelopment and they were asked to move. 
Throughout our conversation there was a hint of tiredness and even bitterness in her voice 
toward what was happening in the town that culminated in her final words about the 
relocation: "When we were asked to move, we looked for other places but couldn't find 
anything suitable. So, we decided to come back here. This is my land, I never sold it to the town 
[after the disaster]. At last they can't tell us to shift from here" (REF 43).  
By the time I was interviewing the residents, five years had passed since the tsunami came 
and took the familiar landscapes and connections away. While many had established a sense 
of new normalcy and forging on in the constantly changing landscape and community, there 
was a sense of unfairness present in people's speech. "It's been five years since the disaster", 
Ms. Wada tells me, continuing to talk about the Government, "Disaster? Life is normal in 
Tokyo, why should they remember us? They make a budget for three years, and then for five 
years, but could they also finish the recovery in that time? The recovery is not over yet, come, 
see, and judge for yourself, then you'll see what we actually need here. There's still no shops, 
no houses, even the land is still not finished [i.e. yet fit for building]", finally explaining in a 
tired and impassionate manner: "I expect nothing from this Government anymore". Looking 
at the landscape, her own land, and the vast emptiness that continues to surround it, it was 
easy to understand her anger.  
The sense of injustice and unfairness that Ms. Wada, along with many others I met, felt 
toward the system and the process that governs her town's resurrection was painfully 
apparent. After the tsunami, the political process of the post-disaster recovery commenced 
quickly. Within months the Government and municipalities had produced guidelines for 
recovery, legislation and budgets that govern (and as Oguma 2013 for instance explores, also 
constrain) the process, new institutions were activated to dispense justice, and thousands of 
volunteers and organisations had descended into the communities to "do recovery". The aim 
was to 'build back better' (Chapters 1 and 2), revitalise these rural regions, and spur them and 
the entire nation back on the path of growth. The official plans for the recovery of Tohoku 
were presenting grand scale plans for the future where the mistakes of the past would not be 
repeated.  
Planners, architects, and authorities too refer to post-disaster situations as a 'blank slate' and 
a 'window of opportunity' for development (Chapter 1), where planning starts from zero and 
more creative and flexible designs become possible (Barrios 2017). The positives of the 'blank 
slate' state of town development cannot be underestimated and were recognised in Tohoku 
too. Mr. Miyazaki (REF 14) for instance was a big proponent of a completely new town design 
for his hometown of Onagawa, saying that among other things, the decision to do away with 
the old and build a completely new town has enabled them to recover much quicker than 
neighbouring towns. The new opportunities were recognised wider in Onagawa too, including 
the decision to build the central shopping district to last approximately 30 years, as explained 
by one of the members of the central machizukuri council, so that the next generation can 
demolish them in the future much easier and build a town that they want (Research Diary 
12.6.2016). While it can be tempting to think of post-disaster settings as a 'blank slate' 
enabling versatility and creativity for the recovery processes (Olshansky 2009), discussions 
and consequences of exploitative neoliberal processes are an equally likely outcome. Disaster 
capitalism too presents a form of grand scale planning, where the social relations, individual 
livelihoods, and forms of culture and sociality are reduced to a relationship of capital 
transactions (Klein 2007, Barrios 2017, Cuff 2009) and need to likewise be critically considered 
in these contexts.  
According to the rationale of the community-based recovery process, local residents were 
engaged into the post-disaster recovery process. They were asked to critically engage with 
architectural designs, engineering solutions and town planning by expressing their views on 
the process at hand and becoming active participants in the recovery. However, after the 
disaster, Tohoku's residents needed to come to terms with the new reality. Multiple 
simultaneous processes were on-going: local residents were battling with issues of coming to 
terms with their communities being gone, trauma of loss, making sense of the impeding 
future of their communities. Ms. Ishikawa (REF 34), a long-term resident turned business-
woman in Ogatsu connected these on-going complex and overlapping processes of grieving, 
fear, and sense-making to the "bad decisions" that were made all over coastal Japan at this 
time: "In the beginning we were asked if we want a tsunami wall here, and we said 'yes'. But 
we were in shock, people had just died from a tsunami Now [after five years] realising the full 
impact of the wall, we just don't want it anymore. It was a bad decision" (REF 34). By the time 
I was talking with people in Tohoku, the decision was said to be irreversible and people were 
now stuck with that bad decision.  
While the tsunami walls are not the only safety driven anti-tsunami engineering solution that 
has raised worries over biodiversity loss and ecological damages (Nishiro et al. 2014), they 
presented a particularly heated issue in Tohoku, and numerous problems have been 
associated with them. Concerns have been raised around ecological disruption of water flows 
and the impact this will have on marine cultures and economies (Dionisio and Pawson 2016), 
social concerns over the lifestyle development and fishermen's engagement with the sea 
(Littlejohn 2018, Dionisio and Pawson 2016), and critiques on the safety of the barriers that 
is a strong current in the governmental narrative for their construction (Matanle et al. 2019). 
While no one argued against the necessity for physical safety and resilience of the 
infrastructure, many felt that the tsunami walls were not the way forward. The construction 
of the tsunami walls despite popular opposition and concerns were seen as distinctly 
disempowering processes, where residents felt that their endogenous communal concerns 
were not discussed or ignored as part of the agenda.  
Mr. Ono (REF 9), a fisherman in Ogatsu for instance excitedly noted on the potential that the 
tsunami has brought in its wake for the reinvigoration of the fishing industry. Not only did the 
sea get healthier after the tsunami, Mr. Ono explains, but the long-term deflation in the 
numbers of fishermen now means that fishing areas for individual fishermen have expanded, 
thus creating for more thriving livelihoods. The media focus on fishermen in Tohoku have also 
brought on a fresher image for the entire profession (being a fishermen was often noted as 
being oshare, 'cool', by young outsiders), that had attracted people like Mr. Shimizu (REF 7) 
to change his familiar salaryman life upside down and become a full-time fisherman after the 
disaster. Against the positive excitement and small-scale hopeful steps toward the 
revitalisation of the fishing industry, the threats posed by the new development loomed 
heavily over the heads of locals involved in the industry. Another fisherman in Minamisanriku, 
Mr. Goto (REF 37) who was showing me around the sandy beach near his fishing hut explained 
that it is not just a lovely place for swimming, but how the shoreline is full of fossils as well, 
something that cannot be found anywhere else in the region. The same sandy beach was the 
siting for the new tsunami wall. The potential of the natural beauty of the shoreline as a 
cultural and tourism resource would according to Mr. Goto be destroyed, not to mention the 
threat he saw in the wall cutting the natural flow of the fresh water supply to the sea that was 
imperative for the healthy growth of oysters and scallops, the main marine products in the 
region. While Mr. Goto and other locals noted on the opportunities that these resources 
would reap for the future of their communities (e.g. REF 15, REF 4, REF 22), they also 
recognised their own powerlessness against the development of the walls themselves. For 
the locals like Mr. Ono and Mr. Goto, the concerns were interrelated, integrating multiple 
aspects of the necessity for safety and resilience into the trauma and loss of heritage, culture, 
history, as well as the affective notions of feeling connected with nature and community.  
Despite what Ms. Ishikawa had mentioned about the tsunami walls and people saying 'yes' to 
them, the decisions were not made without protest or opposition from the local residents. 
Mr. Iwasaki (REF 15) noted that once a decision has been made and it has been entered into 
the official plan for the town, it cannot be reversed. He explained how he witnessed the 
'empowering' community participation working in his community through the designated 
spaces: "The initial planning process involved academics from the outside. They created the 
backbone of the plan, after which representatives of the town people were selected to 
comment on the plans. There were about 20 invited people, I was one of them. This then 
became the 'voice of the community'". Mr. Iwasaki's explanation alone already shows the 
limited scale of engagement in spaces where voice became legitimised, but he also continued 
to explain how the process did not only exclude most town folks from having a say, but also 
disempowered those who did join: "There were more local leaders than ordinary residents in 
the public meetings. And those who didn't go against the plans became the committee 
members [...]. Eventually the participation rates have really gone down, hardly anyone goes 
to the meetings anymore". I asked Mr. Iwasaki why people did not join the meetings where 
much of the recovery process was being decided and where the authorities were collecting 
"everyone's voices", he explained: "people no longer see the meaning of going to the meetings. 
Even if you say your opinion, they will just stick to the original plan. There is no room for 
alternative opinions, or anything new [...] people feel unheard and they have given up 
(akirameta)".  
It is easy to recognise that participation does not necessarily lead to empowerment, and as 
explained by Mr. Ishikawa, in Tohoku it has had a distinctly disempowering effect on the local 
populations. The problematic relationship between empowerment and the external agents 
related to the decision-making, discussed in Chapter 4, becomes further clarified in this 
context. The local voices had the 'power to change things' as long as they conformed to the 
goals and legal and fiscal structures set out in the exogenous narrative for the recovery, and 
as a result, only certain kinds of voices were welcomed into the sphere of 'empowerment', 
namely those that agreed with the external plans.  
This language of empowerment in an environment of powerlessness led to what could be 
dubbed as political apathy, but in reality, resembled more what Mr. Iwasaki termed as 
'resignation' (akirameru). Mr. Ishida (REF 44) too echoed this theme during our conversation, 
noting that there are too many meetings and how the authorities should just "get on with it", 
recognising the perceived futility of attending meetings in the legitimised spaces, as he was 
not sure if attending would actually change anything: "We said our opinions, but whether they 
were reflected upon or not [by the authorities], I do not know". He felt that the meetings were 
only a hindrance to achieving a quicker pace for the recovery, and if the authorities were not 
going to listen to the residents anyway, then they might as well just get on with their plans 
and be done with it: "they say they hear our opinions for building a new town, but maybe it's 
just an excuse for them". What the above descriptions and experiences of local residents 
illustrate is that participation itself does not empower anyone, because as Picton (2018) notes, 
disempowerment stems from the exclusion from the political process. Due to the lack of 
access to the political in the legitimised participatory spaces, the local attempts to participate 
that the authorities are dubbing as "giving everyone a voice" instead appeared to be distinctly 
disempowering. By actively opting to 'resign' from these spaces, local residents were 
therefore also resigning from the affective state of disempowerment that these spaces have 
induced. The "empowered" processes and 'best practices' of the community-based recovery 
in Tohoku, therefore, stood in stark contrast with people's intimate experiences of the 
disaster, and the sense of "awakening" that ensued, that have been instrumental in 
constructing local needs, visions and desires as a politically connected and motivated 
discourse.  
5.1.1. 'Resignation' from disempowerment 
The inability of the formal recovery to empower local residents in the designated participatory 
spaces, I argue, stems not only from the deliberate harmonisation and depolitisation of these 
spaces and processes, but also from the framework through which political action is typically 
defined. As alluded to in the opening of this chapter, the sphere of informal politics has 
expanded rapidly across the world, not only in East Asian (Morris-Suzuki and Soh 2017), 
illustrating the growing distance between political participation and political returns. In 
Tohoku, grassroots responses to the 2011 disaster and its aftermath have been as numerous 
as they have been diverse, penetrating every level and sphere of society. The months 
following the disaster witnessed national movements, culminating in some of the largest and 
loudest mass protests in Japan since the anti-US security treaty demonstrations of the 1960s 
(Brown 2018). Loss of trust in the government due to its handling of the Fukushima nuclear 
accident led to the increase in citizen science, such as radiation measuring campaigns in 
localities in the Fukushima prefecture and beyond (Hultquist & Cervone 2018, Brown et al. 
2016), linking with the wider critical reflections on the relationship between the public and 
science itself (Achenback 2015, Bonney et al. 2016). In addition to this, the Tohoku region has 
been the site of new businesses and non-profit initiatives, working in the fields of ageing 
populations and social care, rural decline and economic revitalisation, and cultural diversity 
since 2011. Non-profit initiatives as well as new migrants have brought much needed new 
resources into the areas (Watanabe & Mano 2015) that have been increasingly integrated 
into the delivery of public services in areas where economic activity is diminishing rather than 
growing, which can been seen both as the potential maturation of the Japanese civil society 
sector (Sakai & Inaba 2014, Cho 2014, Leng 2015), as well as the neoliberalisation of public 
service delivery (Cho 2014).  
Equally notable have been localised efforts to gain justice and accountability for painful losses 
endured through deadly institutional mistakes made on the day of the disaster. Some of these 
tragedies have risen into the public consciousness across Japan and abroad, as is the case of 
the Okawa elementary school in Ishinomaki, where dozens of students perished as a result of 
delayed evacuation, and where the parents have now brought forward a legal case against 
the municipality for negligence (Lloyd-Parry 2017, Mainichi Shimbun 9.5.2018). Some remain 
less well know, such as the law suit against the Miyagi-based 77 Bank in Onagawa that has 
raised questions about authority and accountability of private employers (Japan Times 
25.3.2014). It is not only cases brought to public and media attention however, difficult 
reflections are on-going in the everyday context all across multiple sites of action in the 
disaster region: for instance, navigating identity and sites of protest in the narrow line 
between harm to self and community and responsibility to speak out (Slater et al. 2014), or 
negotiating between adaptation and authenticity for the sustainability and survival of local 
traditions and lifestyles (Lahournat 2016).  
The sphere of political action among the local communities therefore extended far beyond 
the oppositional tactics, protests, and dissatisfied comments toward the formal recovery 
process. Politics was intertwined with the social, cultural, economic and ecological life within 
the communies, where sources of empowerment and disempowerment overlapped. The 
meaning of 'political' therefore wards further challenging and dismantling. Ghassan Hage 
(2015) offers an analysis of the political that can shed light on the nature of the political  
actions within Tohoku's disaster affected communities and the way they action the 
politisation of their everyday lives through the recovery. By making a distinction between 
anti-political directed at changing or overthrowing the political establishement and the search 
for alternative modes of politics in the sphere of alter-politics, Hage (2015) argues that most 
political passion has been directed at the anti-political and it is in this sphere that we 
understand political passion itself. Hage further explains that the sphere of anti-politics has 
historically become to dominate our understanding of what we mean by 'political' itself. To 
view the actions through the lens of anti-political as political effectively depoliticises the 
affected communities themselves, especially in the light of statements such as the ones made 
by Mr. Ishida (REF 44) when he said that "there are too many meetings", hoping that the 
authorities would simply "get on with it".  
This also speaks to the narrative of supposed political apathy among the Japanese citizens. 
Political participation in Japan remains well studied, normally focusing on the changes in the 
normative characteristics of political participation. Voting rates have continued to dwindle 
and the aftermath of the disaster has witnessed a reinvigoration of conservatism, ranging 
from the resurrection of conservative family ideals (Koikari 2017), and surging support for the 
politics of Prime Minister Abe and his Liberal Democratic Party (Morris-Suzuki 2017) that 
perhaps pay more lip service to progressive liberalism than put forward radical policies that 
tackle long-term issues. But this is not enough to confirm that Japanese population is riddled 
with political apathy and conformity however, or that the relatively rapid decline of mass 
political activism after 2011 is a sign of disinterest or incapability of the Japanese civil society 
to uphold pressure. I argue that this image of apathy is a matter of epistemology, the result 
of lack of recognition of the type of action that counts as political in the normative sense, 
rather than lack of politicity itself among the populations.  
When the 'political' is only seen in the framework where individual actions either conform or 
oppose the established structures of the institutions within which normative decision-making 
takes place, then any actions falling outside of that framework become non-politicised. The 
difference between anti- and alter-political is particularly pertinent to recognise in the sphere 
of recovery, where community-based approaches often tend to frame the community as a 
geographical and harmonious unit, lacking in political identity (Cannon 2008). Based on the 
community-based logic, the community is often 'the level' in which the majority of the 
decision-making is envisioned to take place (Cannon 2008). We tend to see the community as 
somehow more than just the administrative process, more connected and more attached to 
their surroundings, thus being able to provide a more detailed and better picture of the needs 
and directions of the recovery. As Cannon (2008) states however, it is this "benign and 
supposedly beneficial aspect of community that outsiders want to tap into" (p. 11, emphasis 
added), rather than the 'political', whether in the anti- or alter sphere, through which 
different visions are produced and offered for consideration. When communities are treated 
as harmonious however, it is hard to argue for community-based recovery processes as 
'empowering', when the very association between community and power is negated, and 
attuned by elevating its solidarity, harmony and lack of political passion.  
Similar to LeBlancs (1999) work on political activism of housewives whose very identity, she 
argues is thoroughly depoliticised, I wish to discuss growth of the political by locating it in the 
subject (community and individual) rather than the system. The community whose identity, 
like that of the housewife, remains depoliticised in discussions about community-based post-
disaster recovery. I posit that rather than interpreting the steady decline of mass protests and 
quick return to normalcy in national politics as political apathy, by focusing on the actions and 
narratives of people on the micro-level we can see that this is more a question of resignation 
from the structures or governance and forms of participation that do not serve the goals and 
values that people have developed in these regions. Resignation from normative politics 
however is a political act, with public participation no longer able to capture the 
diversification of forms of democratic citizenship (Dalton 2008). It is political activism of the 
everyday resembling more decentralised spheres of individual anarchy rather than apathy.  
I argue that moving the analytical gaze away from the political system into the political subject 
can help to unearth the political in the everyday actions of the local populations in Tohoku, 
and their involvement in the recovery. Re-framing the 'political' in this way helps to 
understand why it was possible for the local residents to feel and express that "everyone is 
involved in the recovery" (REF 1) irrespective of only a minority of them being active in the 
formal recovery process itself, such as participating in meetings or serving in committees. In 
reality, communities in Tohoku were engaging in multiple forms of politics, actively attaching 
their personal and collective actions to the betterment of society. Drawing on my own 
experiences and data from Tohoku, I argue that it is in the sphere of everyday politics and 
civic action where the majority of political activation has taken place, and has in fact been 
growing due to the 'awakening' associated with the disaster and recovery experiences. What 
I witnessed in Tohoku was a thriving scene of what Hage (2015) would term as alter-politics. 
What my data reveals is a wide range of actions and forms of participation in the everyday, 
that are largely packaged as non-political civic action, but that people in Tohoku were framing 
in highly political terms. 
The small local and individual actions ranged from passive functions such as paying taxes in 
the recovering municipality while maintaining residence elsewhere for the duration of the 
reconstruction (REF 25), to more active ones of such as having kids and starting a family (e.g. 
REF 4, RF 33, RF 42), getting involved with traditional festivals in order to ensure their survival, 
starting businesses, connecting with neighbours (REF 12) and simply helping out however I 
am able to (REF 11) to make sure that life could continue to exist in the future. 'Political' was 
defined in a larger framework of actions in the everyday that aimed for the betterment of the 
self and the community, focusing on the political passion toward things that people felt they 
could change. The post-disaster setting had come to show them the multiple possibilities of 
their own efforts and the value and potential of communal actions, thus politicising the 
everyday.  
The majority of these actions were reportedly motivated by the sense of mezamerareru, or 
'awakening' mentioned above. The relational quality of 'awakening' was present in many of 
the conversations I had with local residents in Tohoku, most crucially relating to resources, 
development, and demographics, and Tohoku's role within the nation brought isolation and 
exclusion into focus. Though the majority of the conversations with local residents revolved 
on the hyperlocal level and making a consistent difference in the day-to-day life, the disaster 
experience had been able to link these experiences into the broader national context. This 
passion in the alter-political was driven by this 'resignation' from the status quo, the growth-
oriented development, and revitalisation along the national principles that dominate the 
grand vision within the formal recovery domain. The focus in Tohoku has shifted inward 
where the micro level actions in the informal sphere of the everyday that had become framed 
as political actions of survival and resistance to the demise of local habitats, lifestyles, and 
cultures.  
Resignation from the normative political sphere of conformity and opposition were intensily 
political actions, and an integral part of the construction of collective voice and vision for the 
future within Tohoku's communities. Hage (2015) further notes on the productive nature of 
political passion, where the personal is political. Both alter- and anti-political passions, while 
different, contain the possibilities for change, making them relevant for the post-disaster 
settings as 'windows of opportunity'. What I further discuss in the following section is the 
need for us to become better at recognising the alter-political passion and the actions that 
stem from it, in order to fullfill the promise of the 'opportunity' awarded by the disaster. In 
the following chapter I will show that for the affected populations, 'empowerment' has 
followed from the 'awakening' but only become properly fullfilled through the alter-political 
actions that were seen as the path toward the desired imaginaries of the future.  
5.2. "Somehow I found my ikigai again" 
Mr. Kondo (REF 40) had fascinated me ever since I met him for the first time in June 2016 as 
I stumbled into his small shop in the temporary shopping village. I returned a few months 
later when I was staying in Onagawa and decided to go for a visit that turned into an 
impromptu interview. During my first visit Mr. Kondo had shown me large laminated photos 
that pictured the scene of the tsunami on 11 March 2011, taken from Onagawa's municipal 
hospital. The images depicted a dark scene of tsunami waves that had engulfed the 
neighbourhood immediately below the municipal hospital, with several houses either under 
water or lifted off their foundations and crashing in the waves. Amongst the floating houses 
and dark violent waves, a figure sat straddled across the roof. He pointed at the figure and 
said: "that's me". Mr. Kondo told me the rest of his miraculous survival from the tsunami, 
being carried off into the sea, jumping from one empty boat to another and surviving at the 
mercy of the elements for three days before finally being discovered by a group of boaters 
and being taken back to land. To my surprise, a few weeks later Mr. Kondo's story was further 
elaborated on by Ms. Ishida (REF 44), who I found out had been one of Mr. Kondo's 
neighbours before the disaster. She herself had survived the tsunami equally miraculously, in 
a canoe. Ms. Ishida explained that while being caught in the tsunami herself, she saw Mr. 
Kondo on the roof of his house. While trying to shout to him, she saw his house lifted from its 
foundations and being drawn into the sea. As she was sitting in her canoe and holding onto 
the eaves of her house, all she could think was "that's the last I'll see of Mr. Kondo", unsure 
whether she was thinking of her own or his impending death. The two would however end 
up meeting again, about six days later as Ms. Ishida recalled. She was entering the emergency 
shelter when she saw Mr. Kondo standing in the entry hall. At this point of the story she 
started laughing and said "I shouted his name and ran towards him. I was so surprised that I 
had to shake his hand to make sure he was real".  
The story of these two individuals is not only a compelling one, but also illustrative of the 
strength of the affective impact that 'awakening' was having across the region, arising from 
the intensity of feelings associated with the survival that emerged from the equally intense 
surety of one's own demise. Both Ms. Ishida and Mr. Kondo referred to a strange atmosphere 
in the town after the tsunami, of being alive amongst destruction. It was Mr. Kondo who called 
this the period of "high tension" in the community, that he reflects led to his own confusion 
and numbness towards life itself: "When you discover a body it's normal to cry, right? Here 
people laughed when they found the bodies of loved ones [...] It was such a strange 
atmosphere" (REF 40). Ms. Murakami (REF 39) too, who had been working at the Onagawa 
nuclear power plant at the time of the disaster explained that when she saw the town three 
days after for the first time she burst out laughing in disbelief at what was in front of her eyes; 
equally not really understanding her own reaction at the time. Mr. Kondo explained that while 
such 'inappropriate' reactions were common place in this period of 'high tension', he felt that 
it primarily resulted in two different types of actions among the community members: some 
people were resolved to start working, create something new, and work hard; others on the 
other hand thought it was inappropriate to do anything so soon after so many people had 
died in the town. Mr. Kondo explained however, that he himself got caught somewhere in 
between: "I knew that there was still life to be lived, but I couldn't think anything of it." In the 
first few months he was initially spending his days drinking, feeling like all his usual desires 
and senses were numbed.  
The sense of awakening that emerged from this 'strange atmosphere' was often referred to 
as ikigai in the context of personal and individual changes people recounted to me. It was 
obvious from the setting of his tea shop that this had not been the end of Mr. Kondo, who 
too explained his personal survival and the will to carry on as "finding his ikigai", referring to 
his will to carry on and finding purpose for his life. Ikigai, literally meaning the 
'purpose/meaning of life', has been widely studied in the Japanese context, though it is not 
limited to Japan (Mathews 1996). While studied particularly in relation to aging and well-
being (e.g. Sone et al. 2008, Yamamoto-Mitani & Wallhagen 2002, Kavedija 2015), ikigai has 
been found to be relevant for understanding adaptation and coping in adversial life contexts 
such as post-disaster adaptation and physical and mental illness (Ishida 2011, Ozawa De Silva 
2008, Mori et al. 2017). In the context post-disaster Tohoku, Ishida (2011) finds that ikigai has 
had a positive impact on not only dealing with stress and aid coping, but also to the 
development of positive life-orientation and thus related to the notion of 'awakening' or 
mezamerareru widely noted as having taken place in the region (Shaw 2017, Oguma 2013). 
They found that ikigai was specifically developed through positive life experiences, such as 
sympathetic listening of victims that enabled space and opportunities for making sense of the 
changes, and through actions related to receiving and giving assistance that has the power to 
inspire others.  
Surviving the disaster and experiencing rapid changes and upheavals in the affected 
communities had led to unprecedented changes in social cohesion and the very mindsets of 
individuals, thus intimately associated with the broader trends of 'awakening' observed also 
nationally. For some like Mr. Kondo it meant re-orientation of life values and reflecting on 
priorities, "before we were only chasing money, but somehow my ancestors, the gods, and 
Buddha saved me [in this disaster], so I must now enjoy my life more"; while for others like 
Ms. Nakano (REF 17) it was a matter of reconnecting with the wider community and improving 
human relations "I have begun to talk to more people, learn new things, expand my field of 
vision [...] I've started to feel less bored in this town". In fact, finding a larger meaning for life, 
communality in grieving, and solidarity are commonplace after adversities (Bloch & Parry 
1982) to a point where they have been sometimes been argued to represent a "celebration 
of death" (Metcalf & Huntington 1991). In Tohoku, the primary message that I gauged from 
people's personal life journeys since the disaster was the continued sense of gratitude 
(kansha) for having been able to create a more meaningful existence for one's life after so 
much death, resonating with Hertz's (1960) notion that "death is not mere destruction, but a 
transition" (p. 48). However, while resonating with gratitude, that can be seen as a more 
passive state, these existential questions relating to the moral of their own survival, "why was 
I allowed to live when so many others died?", stimulated the desire to change one's life and 
that of their communities too, leading to more proactive actions of change. Finding the moral, 
and further ikigai, remained the foundation upon which the motivations, excitement, and 
actions rested, reverberating through people, families, and communities still in 2015 and 
2016, long after the actual disaster event.  
Alongside gratitude and proactiveness toward communities and making life changes, 
explorations of ikigai also reflected rejection, which was particularly visible among the new 
migrants who had moved into Tohoku's disaster struck communities since 2011. These 
inbound populations were reflecting on their changing life circumstances and trajectories 
through ikigai. Ms. Mori (REF 4) who had moved to Minamisanriku some years earlier 
explained that one of the reasons she quit her job in a big and well respected corporation in 
favour of becoming a farmer in Tohoku was the coincidence of her own disaster volunteering 
with the loss of her close friend to suicide. She explained that she felt like a "bad person" 
because she could not help her friend, even though she was helping disaster victims, and 
through making the dramatic change in her life prospects and finding new meaning for her 
life she felt that all her dreams have come true now.  
During my time in Tohoku I interviewed a number of new arrivals for this research, but equally, 
met and encountered countless visitors and tourists to the area as well, whose reflections 
complemented the picture of the 'rural migrant' to these locations. The stereotype of Tohoku 
as distant, cold, and isolated (Hopson 2013) was persistently broken in the minds of outsiders 
who ventured into these towns. As they were recounting what they had learned of the 
goodness of the people, the value of learning local traditions, and the necessity of protecting 
the diversity of cultures, they were reflecting on and challenging the accepted normative 
notions of progress, growth, and sense of 'good life'. through their actions these migrants 
who primarily arrived from the large metropolitan areas of Japan, had come to 'reject' these 
notions as goals to strive for, and were trading off the modernist comforts and conveniences 
of Japanese urban life. The new arrivals who had changed their lives often recounted the 
contrasts between their lives in the city and their lives now in the country, and the meaning 
and richness of life they now experienced that they did not have in the city. Alongside the 
personal benefits, when asked what they felt was their role in the recovery, many rural 
migrants felt that by setting up businesses, getting married and raising children, and settling 
down in Tohoku, and through other personalised efforts they could not only contribute to 
thwarting decline and depopulation; but be part of building a 'new society'.  
Rejecting the 'norm' was therefore an empowering act both for the local residents and the 
new arrivals, replaced by acts that had social value and challenged the status quo. The disaster 
and the awakening that followed were actively breaking the long-term insularity of the region 
(Hopson 2013, Kelly 2012) and giving rise to fresh perspectives on the nature of growth, 
revitalisation, and progress; a thriving ground of the alter-political. Against the backdrop of 
slow and incremental anxieties over the decline of rural communities and the more or less 
fruitless revitalisation initiatives of the last decades, these critical narratives of Japan's 
modernity and the sudden influx of primarily young metropolitan people into the 
communities has enabled the growth and yearning for radical changes and for a 'new society', 
connecting personal and communal observations and reflections to the broader critical 
narratives of growth and prosperity. Kavedija (2016) notes that ikigai is about finding 
purpose and meaning in life, but also "historically linked to the idea of social value and social 
role" (p. 13). This notion of "social value" was present in Tohoku's post-disaster dreaming, 
alter-political actions and everyday politics; finding a place for oneself that was useful not 
only in society, but for (a new) society. 
5.2.1. Rejecting the norm and embracing the alternative 
The vibrancy of social action was easy to detect in Tohoku. It was common for the local 
residents I met to give me a tour of their neighbourhoods and towns, recounting the story of 
the disaster and showing off the new landmarks and social spaces, ranging from non-profit 
initiatives, social cafes, restaurants selling "rediscovered" local foods and temporary shopping 
villages that were teeming with visitors in the weekends. In larger towns the vibrancy was 
easy to detect, yet, the newly forged atmosphere and activity had penetrated even the 
remotest corners of the disaster region and a sense of excitement and anticipation of a better 
future was in the air everywhere I went. The longer I spent in Tohoku, the more I realised the 
truth of what my first ever interviewee told me when I asked if he knew anyone else who 
might be involved in the recovery: there is no one who isnt (REF 1).  
The disaster opened people's eyes to what is meaningful, but equally to that which is wasteful, 
both of which are arguably aspects of ikigai. Eiko Maruko Siniawer (2019) writes how 'waste' 
has a "remarkable capacity to reveal what is valuable and meaningful" (p. 3), providing 
connecting points between loss and new beginnings, and integrally connecting to the 
sensation of mezamerareru, or 'awakening', in the post-disaster context. By the time I met 
Mr. Maeda (REF 10), my contact in Higashimatsushima introduced in the previous chapter, he 
was working as a community development worker in a coastal community in Miyagi, where 
his past life contrasted sharply with the passion with which he now recounted his life and 
dreams for his home prefecture. When I inquired from Mr. Maeda if he feels differently about 
his life and his community now, he responded: "I am from Miyagi, but before the disaster I 
didn't pay attention to things like community development. I went to work, came home, slept. 
That was my life cycle. I didn't take part in neighbourhood activities". For Mr. Maeda it was 
the disaster had spurred him into action, revealing the 'wastefulness' of his inactions to the 
broader framework of culture and community. In contrast to his previous life cycle he now 
recounted his reflections of the society around him "I've always liked this area, but after the 
disaster we lost so many things, it was such a shame. I've began to notice things more and 
started to feel the effects of aging and decline in this region. I've become much more aware 
and conscious of these issues since the disaster"; revealing the meanings life has for himself 
and the larger collective in his immediate surroundings.  
Presenting contrasts in this way featured heavily in how people were constructing the local 
story of the recovery and the future, where their own experiences of what many called a 
'mindshift' that had led to rediscovery of values, wastes, tangible actions, as part of their ikigai, 
reflected or contrasted with the changes they saw taking places around them. For long-term 
residents this mindshift was often presented through a recalibration of their relationship with 
the surrounding nature and their lived environment. Ms. Noguchi (REF 14 and 19), for 
instance, used to hate her town before the disaster, but was now, along with many other 
locals, taking pride in the distinctiveness and value of their lifestyles in the rural region that 
was not available in the cities. For new migrants on the other hand it was the stark contrast 
between the urban and rural life that gave justification for their choices and deepened their 
motivation to remain and make a life for themselves in the rural setting. Utterances such as 
"whenever I go to Tokyo these days I get exhausted and angry" (REF 1), "in the city you just 
make money in order to spend money" (REF 32), or "in Tokyo I never knew my neighbours" 
(REF 4) were commonplace in the speech of new arrivals, juxtaposed with positive notions of 
community cohesion, slowness and peacefulness of life, and the contentment (manzokukan) 
they reported having found in the rural towns and villages.  
The experiences of the new arrivals were by no means unique or simply attached to the 
disaster event, but rather a reflection of the role an individual can play in the larger process 
of social change that have been recorded elsewhere in Japan (e.g. Hustinx et a. 2010, Ichikawa 
2015, Furuichi 2010 in Klien 2017). Nakano (2004) has researched the enactment of social 
change through individual acts in the everyday setting, noting that many of such activities in 
the realm of the everyday are not often considered acts of volunteering or community action, 
but rather as people filling their individual duties and roles in society (p. 3), which echoes the 
rise of ikigai narrative in post-disaster societies in Tohoku, emphasising the need to find ones 
place and fullfill one's social role and responsibilities, such as helping neighbours, starting 
families and paying taxes that residents framed as everyday individual acts of supporting 
Tohoku's long-term and immediate recovery. Similarly Klien (2017) on her work among post-
disaster migrants in Tohoku explored the motivations of migrants, finding that most wanted 
to render their lives more meaningful than those of their parents (p. 3). Taking in findings 
from Nakano who in their work traces volunteering and social action in Japan since the 1970s, 
and more recent findings, suggests that asserting change through personal actions is a 
persistent character of Japanese society, where people have opted to invest in social change 
through exit from the mainstream normative lifestyles (Schoppa 2006, Klien 2017), perhaps 
more so than through mass activism.  
Similar to Mr. Takeda who felt it his duty to tell the world what happened in his community, 
Ms. Mori (REF 4) who I met in Minamisanriku early on in my field work too felt that she had a 
responsibility in this regard: "The countryside has the power to heal people's hearts. If a person 
who is tired of the urban life and they know my story, they might be inspired to do the same 
as me". She said it can be scary to talk about such personal things, but there are so many 
people who are interested in people like herself, who have made such radical changes in their 
lives, continuing that she has been thinking about getting more involved in activities where 
she can connect with outsiders to share her own experience. Importance of communication 
was stressed as a way of providing people (mainly in the cities) with positive stories and 
examples that could encourage the emergence of the 'new society' through individual actions. 
This was the view presented by Mr. Hashimoto (REF 32), who I met in Ogatsu in 2016 where 
he had now been living for a few years now. He had been a somewhat transient character 
throughout his youth, having lived and worked in the traditional hospitality sector that had 
taken him to work in a lot of rural locations, but said he was now there to stay in Ogatsu. He 
explained that people like himself are a rarity in Japan, saying that making such changes and 
stepping outside the conventional norms is considered risky, and "especially in Japan, people 
don't take risks". He went further to explain that despite the uncertainty and instability of 
current society, there are still plenty of opportunities for people to have conventional paths 
through life, and still plenty of people who desire this. But, he also argued that the stability 
that was awarded to people for decades also made people avert taking risks, and that without 
risks or challenges he argues, nothing new can be created.  
Considering the long-term decline of the Japan's rural regions and the rapid acceleration of 
this process due to the disaster, creating 'something new' was felt with urgency among the 
long-term residents and migrants alike. The urgency for this to happen was reflected in Mr. 
Takeda's (REF 6) explaination that his community had "suddenly been flung into the distant 
future", forcing them to live the future they had long anticipated, where decline, 
depopulation and death of their communities that was no longer just around the corner, it 
had already arrived. The story of Japan's rural regions often emerges as a victim of Japan's 
rapid post-war prosperity, highlighted through contrasts: decline against prosperity, 
backwardness against progress, and expansion against exploitation. The contrasts between 
the urban and rural are premised on the idea of growth or and the lack of it, where both 
regions perform distinctive roles, ideally, in support of one another, but not often in reality. 
Both decline and growth are measured and discussed along demographic and economic 
metrics, reflecting the different stages of development between the urban Japan, where the 
rural peripheries emanating from metropoles have existed in an extractive relationship with 
these urban sites of growth (Matanle and Rausch 2011, Aldrich 2012), as the "dumping 
ground for externalities of post-war economic growth" (Hopson's 2013, p. 7). Even in 
counternarratives of the rural regions, growth remains an integral part of the story. 
Imaginations such as the furusato, as the native rural home and the ultimate essence of 
Japaneseness, has been periodically revived and proliferated through tourism, marketing and 
media, into a persistent trope where the rural regions are characterised as a respite for the 
urban individual, weary and tired of the toils in the city (Robertson 1991, Ivy 1995, Knight 
1997). Despite the powerful position furusato occupies in the Japanese imagination, sojourns 
there are imagined as short-term and temporary with the ultimate return to the city rarely 
questioned. The furusato is a site of healing, whereas the city a site of growth offering 
unending opportunities for employment, prosperity, and personal fulfilment. 
Through 'awakening', ikigai and transformative actions in the sphere of the alter-political, 
these contrasts were however changing shape and new values were attached to both rural 
and urban spaces, and the relationship they were envisioned to have with one anonther. 
Hopson (2013) recounts the statement of Nitobe Inazou from the late 19th century, 
describing the newly constructed Tohoku railway line as a "giant straw" that is bleeding the 
rural regions dry (p. 5), and crippling the local development and while extracting the human 
and physical power of the region for the benefit of the metropolitan regions. In the post-
disaster context, the need to build a new society that would break this cycle of decline and 
exploitation was felt with urgency. Contacts across geographical, social, and generational 
lines between the long-term residents and outsiders were instrumental in the development 
of new imaginaries that questioned the accepted and familiar order between the centre and 
the periphery. Mr. Hashimoto (REF 32) explained to me that rurality should not stand at odds 
with the perceived progress and quality of life in the city, but in fact that the rural regions can 
offer "some keys to describing the next society". He continued that "rural versus city is not 
what I'm saying, both are necessary", but stated that in order for a new society to emerge, 
the position of Tohoku (and rural regions in general) within Japan was no longer about 
residing at the end of a straw and being sucked dry of its resources and people, but rather to 
actively provide (or push) new ideas, values, and progress based on sustainability and 
degrowth in order to not only change Tohoku and rural Miyagi, but entire Japan.  
These radical ideas bordering utopia were not unrealistic notions of grandeur or fantasy, but 
functioned as a metaphor for the change and tangible actions that people were working 
towards in the recovery. It was the story that was being constructed through acts of both 
resignation and rejection that generated affective states of empowerment among the 
communities. More importantly, as I want to stress in this chapter, the endogenous story that 
was shared by long-term residents and migrants alike, and disseminated through informal 
networks, have resulted in real life behavioural and attitudinal changes toward the 
community and ones personal life, leading people to take a number of actions toward the 
realisation of the new society, or aspects of it, and feel empowered by those actions. The 
notions of a new society are also refrenced on the pages of of the governmental vision that 
paints a picture of a 'New Tohoku' (Reconstruction design council 2011a), as a response not 
only to improving the safety and comfort of the communities left in ruins after the disaster, 
but to turn the tide on Tohoku's long-term decline and propel the country and the region onto 
a path of growth. One could argue that for communities that have all of a sudden been jolted 
into their distant future and are facing radically different degree and intensity of challenges 
than they did before the disaster, such sudden and drastic changes require equally radical 
thinking.  
Like the authorities, the local affected populations were drawing on the notion of disaster as 
a 'blank slate' and a 'window of opportunity' narrative, offering them avenues for 
empowerment and positive interpretations of post-disaster development. Radical visions can 
help people "make sense of today's realities and articulate a vision for the future" (Curato 
(2017, p.1). As Solnit (2010) writes: "[after disasters] a struggle takes place over whether the 
old order with all its shortcomings and injustices will be reimposed or a new one, perhaps 
more oppressive or perhaps more just and free, like the disaster utopia, will arise" (p. 16). 
Where utopias are imaginary perfect entities and by nature unreachable, what I have argued 
in this chapter is that the pursuits and aspirations toward utopian dreams as I found them in 
Tohoku were nevertheless concrete and tangible. Ranging from recalibrations of the 
relationship between humans and nature to the slow life movement, reappreciation of the 
hardness of life, and the romantic simplicity of rural communities, these utopian imaginaries 
are all taking multiple shapes in Tohoku under the aspirations of building a new society. These 
efforts had concrete effects on the type and nature of change that the disaster as a 'window 
of opportunity' had awarded to the affected populations. Building utopias and taking steps 
toward their realisation had an empowering effect on people.  
Disasters and utopias are integrally linked. Along the lines of Kantian thinking, the obstacles 
to creating a 'better world', 'new society' or a 'utopia' lie in people's prejudices, selfishness 
and focus on differences, and only a disaster can open people's eyes and allow them to see 
beyond the divisions and recognise the mutuality they share in humanity (Ashworth 2013). 
The prevalence of utopianism is the result of the destruction that functions as an assertion of 
the order that is desired against the disorder that is witnessed (Biel 2001, p. 5), providing an 
opportunity to reorganise the desired order in a different way. Shaw (2017) writes that 
"awakening is often understood as a collective experience" (p. 60), where The Great East 
Japan Earthquake, Tsunami and Nuclear Disaster can be seen as a moment of transformation 
for the entire nation, on hindsight perhaps less so in the direction of national politics and 
democracy (Samuels 2013, Koikari 2017), but certainly in the popular psyche and the intensity 
and direction of social action we are witnessing in post-3/11 Japan (Aldrich 2013, Geilhorn & 
Iwata-Weickgenannt 2016, Brown & Mackie 2015). In Tohoku this collective nature of 
awakening was not only internal, but relational, where the initial craziness of survival, as 
Mr. Kondo (REF 40) put it, has diversified into tones of anger and frustration toward the 
injustices and exploitation Tohoku has experienced throughout Japans modernisation.  
What 3/11 has enabled is the movement of Tohokus troubles from a peripheral issue of 
isolation to a national issue of exclusion, from an internal predicament to a relational one, 
revealing the relationship between Japans prosperity, and Tohokus lack of it. Shaw (2017) 
argues that systemic issues of exclusion, isolation and marginalisation, are historically 
embedded into the structures of Japanese society and the collective awakening refers to the 
realisation that Tohokus isolation and exclusion from national prosperity resulted from 
structural exploitation that set the limits of what citizens local self-responsibility in the post-
disaster context can achieve. In this sense, Tohoku has never been isolated from national 
politics, merely from reaping the benefits of the growth it has been instrumental in producing. 
Shaw furthers this point when she argues that the post-3/11 era activism, and everyday 
politics in general, has moved it's focus to this exclusion, away from the dominant ideas of 
national cohesion (p. 62). Where the imaginary or vision promoted by the official recovery is 
about pulling together as a nation under the banner of national cohesion, mutuality, and unity, 
in the localised imaginaries we see social belonging and the criteria for nation being built on 
the ideas of inclusion through diversity that end up foregrounding the problematic processes 
of exclusion. Thus, 3/11 has become a highly politicised event where its consequences have 
been broadened into a larger shared framework: not only is te responsibility for Tohokus 
survival shared but so is the culpability for its demise.  
Therefore, instead of engaging with the administrative recovery processes, many have turned 
their gaze inward to community cohesion and connectedness, self-help and doing things with 
their own hands (jibun no te de dekiru koto). While echoing notions of social capital, resilience, 
self-responsibility, and communality that were unequivocally highlighted by the community 
members as social goods, these actions were more than anything associated with informal 
politics and socially prescribed and assumed duties (Nakano 2004), or to follow Ghassa Hage's 
(2015) denomination of 'alter-politics', through which the majority of these post-disaster 
social actions were articulated. For Tohoku's populations 'political' had come to mean the 
search of alternatives to the future in terms of economic organisation, modes of sociality, and 
relationship with the living environment, thus breaking from the continuation of the same old 
that had produced the conditions from which the disaster emerged.  
Against resignation from and rejection of the formal politics of the recovery, that many 
identified as disempowering, emerged a strong sense of connectedness, mutuality, and a 
common narrative for the future that was more than just an aggregation of opinions, but 
rather a joint vision within which individual aspirations and actions could be accommodated. 
It was this vision that many saw as empowering, wanting to take advantage of the window of 
opportunity left behind by the disaster to explore alternative ways of building a better future. 
This vision was not written on the pages of recovery and reconstruction plans, but was being 
developed and existed in the actions individuals were taking and the social networks and 
relationships they were creating. The role of the social interactions is a crucial one in this 
context, not only from a demographic perspective, but as an integral part of the community 
bulding process that was taking place. It was through these community building processes, 
sociality and communication, that alternative imaginaries and explorations for the future 
were being created.   
Chapter 6  
Between physical and social resilience:  
Building 'safe and secure' communities 
The disaster hit Japan during a comparatively 'unremarkable' era, having travelled far enough 
from the booming 1980s and the economic crash of the 1990s, with the discourses of the 'lost 
decades' giving way to relative socio-economic stability and modest growth (Adams et al. 
2007). 3/11 has since been followed by further disasters in Kysh where a strong earthquake 
induced widescale damage in 2016, and further in Kansai region that suffered from severe 
flooding in succeeding years. Yet, national economic imperatives seem to have dominated 
public discourse with the impending 2020 Olympics in Tokyo; the declaration of the new 
Reiwa era; and, Prime Minister Abe's continued emphasis on creating a "strong Japan" 
(Hughes 2015) and renewing national cohesion (Shaw 2017). Alongside the question of 
demographic, socio-economic and cultural vitality, discourse around Tohoku's reconstruction 
has been constructed as needing to respond to the necessity to build more 'resilient' towns 
with the principle four of the disaster recovery stating: "While preserving the strong bonds of 
local residents, we shall construct disaster resilient safe and secure communities" 8 
(Reconstruction design council 2011, p. 2). By examining the key documents at the base of 
recovery planning in Japan (Annex 3), the government's approach to rebuilding more resilient 
communities rests on two interconnected pillars: physical and social resilience, also noted by 
8  
Ubaura (2018). Social resilience in the report was explained to rely 'linkages' between people, 
regions, businesses, organisations and institutions (p. 8), while physical resilience would be 
achieved through infrastructure and engineering solutions.   
The separation of resilience into physical and social spheres is a further characteristic of the 
dualities that separate Tohoku's recovery into two distinct domains of action, meaning, and 
direction. Resilience in the physical and social spectrum referred to safety, with the post-
disaster towns imagined as places where, people can live safe from the dangers of natural 
hazards and re-establish 'linkages' to improve social support and sense of safety. The term 
'safety' in Japanese encompasses two ideas, anzen and anshin, most often uttered as a pair 
and commonly used by my research participants as well. Roughly translating as 'safety' and 
'peace of mind' (Walravens 2017), where the former is often used to denote to objective, 
measurable and science-based safety, and the latter is a subjective and value-based sense of 
security. Subjectivity of anshin refers to individual and collective sense of security, as Novak 
(2017) states, being "an affective term, denoting to a sense of personal well-being, protection 
from danger, and the benevolent feeling that ones community is out of harms way" (p. 237). 
Creating resilience through these two notions of safety therefore automatically separates 
safety into two different spheres of action, including different actors. Where anzen emits 
from public accountability, anshin relies on public trust in that accountability (Sternsdorff-
Cisterna 2014, Novak 2017). Where it is the technocracy (the government, scientists, 
engineers, and academics) that operates primarily in the sphere of safety, or anzen, objective 
and scientifically measurable engineering solutions for safe rebuilding for instance, it is the 
communities and the 'linkages' throughout that are seen as instrumental in the development 
of peace of mind, or anshin, the subjective sense of safety residing within the community.  
While ideologically connected as part of the same resilience building process, the siloing and 
separation of the different responsibilities over collective safety into two spheres has created 
a discourse that does not reflect the way resilience is understood and experienced in the post-
disaster reality by Tohoku's communities. Trust was severely shaken in Japan after the 2011 
triple disaster. Failures in the anzen axis of safety took place in the disaster, relating to the 
procedures and monitoring of nuclear facilities, effectiveness of tsunami walls, and 
incorrectness of hazard maps (Chapter 1), shocking people across the country (Kawato et al. 
2013, Coulmas 2012).  These shocks have had a considerable effect on the levels of trust and 
confidence on authorities, the civil society, technology, and in fact research itself. The 
Edelman Trust Barometer of 2012 for instance showed dramatic drop in trust in technical and 
academic experts after 3/11, with levels of public trust in academics dropping 38 percentage 
points in a single year (Edelman Trust Barometer 2012). Trust is an essential component in 
post-disaster recovery and community development (Gilchrist 2004, Aldrich 2012, Aldrich & 
Meyer 2014); such a profound lack of trust in the preparedness, safety, rescue and recovery 
mechanisms in Japan has broken the interrelationship between anzen and anshin; As Novak 
(2017) notes, "once lost, this affect [of anshin] cannot be easily recovered" (p. 237).  
This tension between public accountability and a sense of safety, manifested in the terms 
anzen and anshin as representations of physical and social resilience in the exogenous 
discourse, reflects one of the many dualities that constitute the experience of recovery in 
Tohoku. Even though rigorous training and disaster drills had developed an understanding of 
the physical phenomenon that took place in the earthquake and the necessary preparations 
for the tsunami, the scale of the tsunami nevertheless surprised the locals and created 
conditions where no existing framework of previous disasters could have prepared them for 
the destructive forces and explain the event that took place on 11 March 2011. The notion of 
the unprecedented disaster was equally present in the expressions of those who experienced 
the event first-hand: "The whole scene was like hell, and I was thinking is this my last day on 
earth" (REF 6). Despite the disaster being widely accepted as being 'unprecedented', and like 
Mr. Kimura (REF 1) noted, "these communities were simply not ready for a disaster of this 
magnitude", a sense of betrayal by the authorities existed in the communities. Individuals and 
groups had carried out their responsibilities (jiko sekinin) of making emergency preparations 
and doing annual disaster drills in their communities, yet so many perished on account of 
simply not being prepared enough. Mr. Takeda touched upon this topic during one of our 
meetings, angrily exclaiming "why didn't they tell us?", referring to the experts both near and 
far, who did not provide them the information that would have enabled more accurate 
preparedness.  
In the context where public trust has collapsed, the integral connection and reliance of anzen 
and anshin as the two sides of overall resilience also began to break down, with community 
members now increasingly relying on the affective sense of security (anshin) as their main 
source of communal resilience against natural hazards, over the physical and technological 
safety measures. Local residents in Tohoku had increasingly begun to see strong social ties 
among community members as not only contributing both to their sense of security and 
communal well-being, but also as the best form of resilience against and physical safety 
against disasters. The mistrust in physical resilience is understandable, given that many 
physical safety measures had failed in communities across the region: "We had a tsunami wall, 
but many people still died waiting in their cars when the roads got congested with people 
trying to escape to higher ground" said Mr. Sasaki (REF 26) remembering the day of the 
disaster. Instead of tsunami walls that fell onto the anzen axis of safety when it came to 
resilience, community members were more eager to develop efficient escape routes away 
from the seaside onto the mountains, maintain good public transport, and increase social 
connectivity in neighbourhoods, that were seen as more effective ways of mitigating disaster 
risks and damages.  
Some were even ready to take tsunami related risks in order to maintain semblance of 
normalcy and community in their lives. On one of my very first visits to Minamisanriku, I was 
shown around town by the Kimuras (REF 1), taking me to the well-known places such as the 
ruins of the Disaster Prevention Centre (Image 7). Toward the end of the "tour" we entered a 
small valley that lay low compared to the rest of the landscape, and Mr. Kimura told me that 
this area used to be full of houses but since the tsunami they are not allowed to build here 
anymore. Just as the words came out of his mouth, we turned around a bend in the road and 
in front of our eyes stood a newly built house in the field, immediately prompting me to blurt 
out: "what about that one?". Mr. Kimura explained that some people simply chose to take 
the risk. Like Ms. Wada (REF 43) in Chapter 5, they wanted to rebuild on the piece of land they 
owned, deciding to forgo the ability to insure their houses and live outside the reach of future 
tsunamis, thus waiving the notions of financial and physical safety in favour of resilience 
through continuation and familiarity. 
Image 7: The former disaster prevention centre in Minamisanriku. The site has been left as a memorial of 3/11 
in the town and part of the disaster legacy. The land elevations that are an integral part of Minamisanriku's 
tsunami resilience strategy can be seen behind. Anna Vainio, 2015. 
Throughout this chapter I will argue that for the authorities, resilience still firmly resides 
within the sphere of anzen, where both physical and socio-economic resilience is to be 
achieved through physical means of better and safer town building, with the Japanese 
reiteration of shinzai ni tsuyoi (strength against disasters), exclusively used in the 'Hope 
beyond disaster' report for instance clearly indicating the government's conceptualisation of 
resilience. The report discusses safety solely in conjunction with physical resilience, namely 
the rebuilding process and infrastructure and resilience against future natural hazards. 
Against the loss of trust and people's discomfort with the notion of an 'unprecedented' 
disaster, the first part of this chapter will explore the affected populations' relationship with 
the sphere of physical resilience and its impact on not only the safety of their communities, 
but the sustainability and abilities to build a sense of security and peace of mind through 
sociality. Through the field data I will further show how local residents are seeing that the 
physical recovery, and the infrastructure rebuilding as a threat to the recreation of social 
resilience, whose importance in achieving overall better levels of resilience and preparedness 
against future hazards has increased in importance among the affected populations.  
The second part will then look at how individuals and communities are more willing to bear 
physical safety related risks in order to gain and protect their social connections and cohesion. 
When the disaster happened in Tohoku it induced not only severe physical damages, but also 
dramatic changes in the composition of the community and social cohesion. Hundreds of 
neighbours, family members, and acquaintances were lost to the disaster, followed by a 
dispersal of communities into different temporary housing complexes, as well as the trickling 
exodus when people simply could not persevere any longer and made a permanent move 
away from the communities. Simultaneously, the coastal towns and villages became suddenly 
aflush with visitors, volunteers and new migrants, who symbolised Tohoku's exit (even if 
temporarily) from its long-term peripherality and isolation. These various developments have 
implications for how the desire for anshin connects to communal notions of sociality and 
community. Sociality is a foundational concept and a process, "a dynamic relational matrix 
within which human subjects are constantly interacting" and "through which they come to 
know the world they live in and find their purpose and meaning within it" (Long & Moore 
2012, p. 41), but one that often remain poorly understood in by external agents in disaster 
recovery contexts (Okada et al.2018). 
In this context not only was the community itself in flux, but their sense of anshin needed to 
be reconfigured and restructured. The very basis of trust, sense of security and peace of mind 
was therefore shaken up by the disaster and the dispersal of communities that followed. As 
resilience for the local residents was primarily linked to the community building process 
rather than physical rebuilding, in the changing social context after disasters, it is vital to 
understand how people are rebuilding their social connections, while grieving for those who 
perished, missing those who departed, and welcoming fresh faces into the community. These 
affective ways of building resilience were articulated as being threatened by the physical town 
building processes that preferenced physical safety and economic prosperity over local 
connectedness.  
6.1. "We can sleep easy now, but..." 
Toward the end of my field work I stayed for two weeks in Onagawa, aiming to gain a small 
glimpse of what daily life was like in the recovering areas. I stayed in Urashuku, an area of 
town that had not been affected by the tsunami, despite being by the sea. The area had been 
protected by the narrow opening leading to the bay area that prevented the onslaught of the 
tsunami from reaching the main residential areas, with the damages from the earthquake and 
small tsunami remained relatively minor, as explained by a local resident of the area (REF 39). 
I cycled each day to the new town centre across the mountain, experiencing the drastic 
change in atmosphere and development during that short journey. For me the two areas 
seemed a world (and decades) apart from one another. Where Urashuku remained a typical 
sleepy Japanese rural suburb, the Onagawa Bay area in contrast was buzzing with 
construction activity and visitors arriving near and far to see the town's new railway station 
and promenade and get a glimpse of the recovering Tohoku. One of the most tangible things 
that separated the two areas from one another was the visible line in the road paving at the 
top of the hill, where the pot-hole littered and uneven road surfacing on the Urashuku side 
changed to the freshly paved asphalt leading to Onagawa Bay area. During this time, I wrote 
in my research diary the following passage: "The central area of the town also seems like 
somewhere you have to 'arrive' to rather than just 'pass by'. [...] the flow of people has to 
arrive from the periphery to the centre which is the destination. When something becomes a 
destination, might it lose some of its essence?" (Research Diary 28.9.2016).  
The distinction between 'arrival' and 'passing by' seemed to resonate with people's reports 
about the changes in the relationship people held with the physical aspects of their 
hometowns. Ms. Shimizu (REF 7 and REF 11), a long-term resident of Onagawa for decades 
now, for instance was able to expand on my impression by explaining how her life and 
behaviour in the town before the tsunami was carried out in what she called an "instinctive" 
manner: "I knew where everything was without thinking. I went to the fish market, then to get 
other groceries", continuing to explain how the development of the new town centre had 
altered her behaviour: "I used to stop at the town centre but now I hardly ever stop at there. 
The prices have gone up and it seems to be a place for visitors" (REF 7 and REF 11). Ms. 
Shimizu's reflections provided further depth to my own musings about the town centre 
becoming a destination where one "arrives", by forcing me to ask who is it that is supposed 
to arrive to this town, and what are they arriving for? For Ms. Shimizu the town centre had 
become increasingly removed from her previous daily routine where she had instinctively 
moved through the town's landscape. Instead, what she found in her once familiar geography 
was a destination that she felt no longer belonged to her and her community, causing anxiety 
and loss of attachment to the space that used to be so familiar to her.  
Like with many other individuals I spoke with in Tohoku, Ms. Shimizu however couched her 
main thesis into the language of gratitude. In response to the reality of accelerated decline, 
the experience of personal survival from the tsunami and the impact of coming to contact 
with a steady stream of outsiders who 'had never experienced communities like this before' 
(e.g. REF 1, REF 4, REF 3) had helped people experience new sense of pride of place, 
reconsider their social roles, and reflect on the future, as well as bring new ideas and 
resources (both material and immaterial) into the communities. The wonder expressed by 
outsiders toward these locations has turned what had always existed as the mundane 
everyday reality, into something special: "Many outsiders have come here and fallen in love 
with the place. This makes many locals feel proud of the town. I think [through these 
connections] local people here have come to understand the value of normal things around 
them (REF 18). Reflected by the government's emphasis on both physical and social resilience, 
much of the new town building and reconstruction in Tohoku is trying to sustain the new 
influx of people and interest toward their towns as part of their planning for long-term socio-
economic resilience.   
Many of the new town plans are therefore built in a compact fashion in order to facilitating 
better access and accommodation of new tourism industries.  While echoing these oft heard 
reflections regarding the new-found openness and influx of visitors, Ms. Shimizu however 
finally admitted that perhaps too much attention was being paid to building and catering for 
that which had never existed before. The post-disaster and post-recovery vibrancy and long-
term sustainability and socio-economic resilience was built upon a sense of specialness and 
amazement of the everyday lives and landscapes, compactly presented and easily consumed 
at the centre of town, with vibrancy becoming manufactured and built upon brief sojourns by 
outsiders into the town, rather than the sustained everyday experience of life in these rural 
communities by the local residents. While many of the revitalisation and recovery initiatives 
did focus on the normal everyday things in the villages and towns, the commodification 
nevertheless distanced these experiences from the real daily experience of life whose charm 
lies in its very mundaneness that emerges from the lifestyles that have been cultivated by the 
pattern and cycles of nature for centuries; across the valleys and mountain passages, where 
life has settled itself into familiar patterns in the small hamlets dotting the coastline.  
While vibrancy is something that revitalisation initiatives great and small have aimed to 
maintain for decades, the context of the disaster has made many municipalities respond to 
the number of visitors, intensified contacts, and the media spotlight that brought many of 
these communities to public consciousness as a result of the disaster. Much like the rural 
treasure hunts of the past revitalisation initiatives, aspects of daily life had become isolated 
into marketable products (Love 2013, Knight 1998), further promoted as part of 'the rural life 
experience' that was made accessible through an established calendar of seasonal festivals, 
rites and events. Each town had become to promote aspects of its landscape, cuisine, 
environment, and the like as the foundation of its rediscovered identity. Ranging from 
localised specialty foods and dishes (kirakiradon in Minamisanriku and sanma in Onagawa for 
instance) to 'experience tourism' (taiken kankou) among fishermen and farmers, the 
'specialness' of each town was promoted through a similar pattern, where various elements 
of everyday rural life were picked and elevated into a consumable status that emphasised the 
rurality and authenticity of these aspects of the experiences.  
However, tourism-based revitalisation was increasingly promoted as a key component of 
Tohoku's socio-economic resilience, and was now being embedded into the key infrastructure 
of these towns. I was often puzzled by this when I visited the coastal towns, thinking what the 
costs and benefits of this development in the long run would be as these processes were 
becoming more established and structured, with policies, legislation and town planning 
adjusting itself in efforts to maintain outside interest and circulation of people and capital 
beyond the fervour of the disaster and recovery. Within overall planning for compact cities, 
to maintain the vibrancy that has been undercut by population exodus and rapid aging, 
vibrancy becomes concentrated and contained within the boundaries of the central areas of 
towns. Ironically, the more larger the plans for long-term sustainability and revitalisation, the 
longer it will take to realise them, leading to what Nagamatsu (2018) has dubbed as the 
"reconstruction paradox", with more and more people leaving due to the inability to 
persevere; making it even more necessary to ask what this concentration does to the nature 
and meaning of vibrancy, particularly when combined with the context of a disaster recovery 
and long-term resilience building both in the physical and socio-economic aspects.  
In connection with the notion of overall future resilience of these towns, I wondered whether 
local sense of security, or anshin, that rested in the affective notions of the community, 
sociality and mutual support networks, could be built upon the relationships that by nature 
composed of short sojourns and were primarily founded on capitalist and commercial 
transactions. Despite local residents being eager to share their stories and for the disaster to 
develop into a moment of learning for Japan, the attention paid to the aspects of their towns 
related to the disaster has raised equally serious concerns among the local residents about 
their home towns being labelled as "disaster towns", and being forgotten once the recovery 
is finished, when the tours and visitors can no longer contribute to the recovery effort simply 
by turning up.  
To facilitate reductions in overall population, availability of developable land, and the 
establishment of a new tourism industries, like most affected towns (Hirano 2013), 
Minamisanriku was being rebuilt as a 'compact town' as a way of enabling better 
concentration of services and attractions for visitors, while simultaneously fostering 
increased physical resilience against tsunamis and other natural hazards. The topic of 
'compactness' came up during my conversation with Ms. Nakamura (REF 22), a woman in her 
mid-20s who had lived all her life in Minamisanriku and passionately confessed loving the 
town and wanting to live all her life there. She explained how the new town centre along with 
the majority of the key public and commercial services would be located on elevated land 
near the former railway station. Just the day before I had had a discussion with one of the 
machizukuri council members for the commercial district in Minamisanriku, Mr. Ogawa (REF 
21) and had the plans shown and explained to me in detail. Mr. Ogawa stated early on in the 
interview that one of the key aims of the new shopping district was to serve what they hoped 
would grow into a steady tourism industry in the town, while also providing vital services for 
the residents. The shops in the plan were all clustered together, with a car park to the side of 
the retail units. Mr. Ogawa was in favour of having all the shops in a single location, with the 
new BRT station (replacing the Kesennuma railway Line) also being located in the area. He 
stated that having the shops clustered together would bring more people into the area, 
enable people to park at ease, and spend time doing their shopping and visiting restaurants 
in a single location. In general, he was explaining that this way there would be more people 
circulating in a single area, echoing with the arguments I heard multiple times over in relation 
to the positives of the new centre heavy towns.  
For Mr. Ogawa there were multiple positives, with him listing downsides to this arrangement 
mostly occurring only to the shop owners in relation to having to work more together as a 
community from now on. However, my conversation with Ms. Nakamura in particular 
challenged some of these notions of ease and comfort. She offered a different perspective to 
the new town design. She recounted her memories of the childhood in Minamisanriku, 
explaining how she knew every kid in her neighbourhood, and who their parents were. She 
knew who the butchers child was, whose parents ran a vegetable shop, whose father was a 
fisherman and so on. She was telling a concrete story of social relations that were fostered in 
mixed purpose neighbourhoods, where residential and commercial districts fluidly 
intertwined together and barriers between commercial and social activities were lowered. 
For Ms. Nakamura the objective of buying groceries for instance was linked to forming closer 
bonds with those who lived and ran businesses in the neighbourhoods. It was these 
overlapping objectives of everyday routines and actions that facilitated organic coming 
together, forming bonds across people in the neighbourhoods, leading to strengthening of 
social networks and creating what she noted was a sense of security, or anshin, that she 
argued was being destroyed by the centralisation of commercial activities: "now you have to 
have a car. You drive into the centre to do your shopping. When you're walking in the 
neighbourhood [doing your shopping] you stop and talk to your neighbours. You won't do that 
when you are in a car just driving past". 
She was referring to the separation of the commercial and residential districts that was seen 
as the solution for fostering socio-economic resilience in these towns, a key element in the 
new 'compact town' logic. Following the trauma of the tsunami, the majority of the new town 
designs the residential areas were to be located on higher ground, while the central areas of 
town were reserved exclusively for commercial purposes, with the government's 
reconstruction funding geared toward compact town style development and communal 
relocation to higher ground. These efforts have ensured a successful, if slow, reconstruction 
of basic infrastructure, upgrades to the municipal and private housing stock, and compact 
town centres that are hoped to facilitate the circulation of people, good, and capital in cost-
efficient and atmospheric ways (Oguma 2013) that sit at the foundation of the government's 
vision for a physically and socio-economically more resilient Tohoku. The residents too 
wanted safe and resilient communities of course, but the steep mountain sides where 
residential neighbourhoods were relocated in the name of safety and the city centres rebuilt 
in a compact fashion proved a threat as well as a promise. "Our bodies are growing old" and 
"I don't even know any of my new neighbours", remained constant anxieties for people living 
in the suspended reality between the past they lost and the future that remained full of 
uncertainties: "We can sleep easy now, but how are we to live our lives high up there on the 
mountain side?" (REF 45). 
The residents however feared that the centralisation of commercial services and their 
separation from people's daily habitats would disrupt the very processes through which 
strong communal ties and social relations were built, that were seen as an integral and 
cherished part of the local rural lifestyle. Both locals and outsiders referred to community as 
having a different character in these towns compared to urban areas for instance, with this 
character being primarily associated with the depth and strength of social networks. When I 
asked people what they loved about these towns, most often I heard the response hito 
(people), komyuniti (community), or ningen kankei (human relations). Community was seen 
as being closer together in these rural towns, where people were looking out for one another 
(mimamoru). It was this social character of the community that brought sense of anshin for 
people, that was simultaneously seen as being destroyed by the reconstruction logic.  
6.1.1. Town planning as resilience 
For the Government, socio-economic resilience building happened through physical 
rebuilding, with the responsibility for the safety of citizens being executed primarily through 
methods and procedures in the sphere of anzen. Yet, the government also tried to foster 
other less tangible principles in their plans for rebuilding. Through compact cities and 
inducing vibrancy, rebuilding edged on the side of the immaterial, where safety-oriented 
rebuilding, such as the separation of commercial and residential districts, was also seen as 
creating social and economic resilience. 
The phrase compact towns represents a planning principle where towns are developed to 
accommodate a larger number of residents and services into more compact geographical 
areas. Originating in the context of rapid urbanisation in the 20th century, 'compact cities' 
have tried to respond to the "paradox of urban desirability and suburban livability" (Neumann 
2005, p. 11), where people sought the convenience offered by the urban service 
infrastructure without the accompanying urban problems by residing in the suburbs, leading 
to a problem of 'urban sprawl'. In Tohoku the anticipated demographic and social decline has 
led to most municipalities across the regions needing to reduce the infrastructure investment 
and the long-term management costs. Developing post-disaster town planning under the 
concept of a 'compact towns' is hoped to facilitate economic growth in the context of overall 
decline (Hirano 2013, Ubaura 2018). Despite the original logic of 'compact cities' as an urban 
solution diverging greatly from the rural context, the concept is now being widely applied in 
Tohoku's post-disaster recovery, and was therefore an imported concept embedded into the 
government's exogenous narrative. Compact cities are linked to multiple benefits, ranging 
from advancing sustainability to reducing ecological impact (Jenks et al. 1996, Burgess 2002) 
that are also noted as desired outcomes for Tohoku's post-disaster future (Reconstruction 
Design Council 2011, Ubaura 2018). Compact cities have also been argued to induce better 
social cohesion (Katz et al. 1994, Raman 2008), that as we have briefly explored above, is not 
the experience local residents associate with their new compact towns. There are multiple 
paradoxes in the application of compact town planning into the rural context that gave rise 
to anxiety and worries among the affected populations regarding the survival of local lifestyles 
many saw as the main charm and attraction of the region.   
Compact cities in the context of reconstruction have to serve multiple roles on the local level, 
while nationally the primary driver of the recovery is to increase safety and resilience against 
natural hazards (Hirano 2013). The vast majority of the core reconstruction funding is 
earmarked for infrastructure rebuilding and upgrades toward physical safety and resilience in 
line with new regulations on zoning and coastal planning (Iuchi et al. 2015, Edginton 2017, 
Hirano 2013). Such approaches follow the long-established pattern of top-down development 
where municipalities become marginalised from their local planning processes due to fiscal 
and policy arrangements (Satoh 2012 in Murakami et al. 2014). In order to prevent the 
reoccurrence of similar tsunami damages in the future, new planning regulations prevent re-
establishment of housing along the low-lying coastal areas (Hirano 2013). Due to the nature 
of Sanriku's ria style coastline, with narrow stretches of land and valleys nestled between the 
sea and steep mountains, most affected towns in Tohoku will be divided into coastal 
commercial districts with residential areas being located on higher ground and surrounding 
mountains (Hirano 2013), in places shifting commercial life away from the neighbourhoods to 
the town centre. The separation of commercial and residential life however goes directly 
against the main principles of compact cities where the distances between residences and 
services are ideally reduced to facilitate a primarily pedestrian life (Neumann 2005). In rural 
areas private vehicle ownership is a necessity due to scarcity of public transportation and 
greater traveling distances. Centralisation of services will increase private vehicle usage and 
is linked to loss of social cohesion in peripheral areas (Gray et al. 2010), a point to which Ms. 
Nakamura was referring to above.   
Walkability was a major theme in the affected towns, where the centralisation of public and 
commercial services would force people to come to the town centres. While walkability 
overall has a positive impact on the area development (Kimura et al. 2018), in Tohoku, 
walkability in the compact town centres however came at a cost to the walkability in the 
peripheries, and the eventual sustainability of life in these peripheral settlements. Mr. Takeda 
(REF 6) for instance was worried about the gradually advancing age of himself and his 
neighbours, wondering how long they as a community would be able to manage their daily 
lives in these new safer (anzen) residential areas, many of which were located far from the 
central area of town and high up away from the sea. He wondered how long they would be 
able to manage by simply organising car sharing to make sure that everyone in the 
neighbourhood made it to their hospital appointments and were able to do their shopping in 
the central town area. He recounted with some anxiety to me during one of our meetings: 
"once you get up into the housing area it's very difficult to get down, and once you get down 
it will be very difficult to get back up ", adding, "Anna-san, please think about something for 
our future life Any good idea Now nobody knows what will happen to our lives". It became 
clear that while compact cities might increase pedestrianisation, the centralisation of social 
and commercial activities as well as the circulation of people in the central parts of town, they 
were having a negative impact on daily life management and neighbourhood relations, and 
causing anxiety and loss of the sense of security and peace of mind (anshin) that people relied 
upon.  
The increased safety promised by the compact town model was however met with increased 
sense of insecurity, thus making the new towns overall feel less safe than before. It was the 
management of daily life in the new space that was of major concern to local residents, 
particularly those who were returning and who would need to renegotiate their pre-disaster 
attachment and daily activities and find ways to accommodate them into the new 
architectural design. People worried about who their new neighbours would be, where their 
children would end up going to school, would there be functioning public transport, and how 
would they manage to do their shopping once they grew older and could no longer drive a 
car. These individual and household arrangements are vital for social cohesion that is 
developed and reinforced through routines that adapt and operate within the structural and 
institutional environment of habitats (Jarvis et al. 2001, Neumann 2005, Barrios 2017). The 
development of social relations and cohesion in Tohoku's coastal communities was strongly 
associated with these daily routines, interactions and relationships established and nurtured 
directly at the neighbourhood level.  
This diffusion of daily routines was precisely the point Ms. Nakamura (REF 22) was lamenting 
by reminiscing on her memories from her childhood neighbourhood. As everyone lived in 
close proximity to their shops and businesses with main footfall comprising of neighbours and 
local residents traveling on foot to do their shopping, social life was built into the very fabric 
of daily routines that would now be separated due to the compact town models. This led to 
residents worrying about the changing social character of their hometowns, many fearing that 
the new town designs were not suitable in accommodating the familiar, and mundane, 
lifestyles that people wanted to return to in order to feel settled or satisfied in their 
neighbourhoods. Due to the nature of change people were experiencing resulting from the 
loss of opportunities for organic socialisation facilitated by the physical alterations to their 
habitats, it is therefore questionable whether the compact towns would come to increase 
resilience in these towns.  
Therefore, re-establishment of everyday normalcy and social relations in the spatial setting 
of the compact town was a priority for the long-term residents, that some felt stood in direct 
competition with the emerging priorities of fostering new industries like tourism. While 
recognising the importance and potential of tourism that could be better fostered through 
compact town models, and the benefits that could be received from developing a vibrant 
tourism industry, many were skeptical about the role of tourism in the long run and struggled 
to identify what was 'sellable' in their hometowns. Despite eagerly hoping for the increase in 
kouryuu jinkou (visitor populations), most were careful not to overestimate their abilities to 
pull visitors and rely on tourism to keep their hometowns livable. Mr. Kondo (REF 40) for 
instance laughed at the intense focus on tourism in his town by saying that there was "nothing 
of interest in this town"; it boasted no big temples nor sites of interest and was surrounded 
only by endless vistas of mountains and the sea, but remarked that it was from the nature 
and the interconnectedness of human life within the environment that had created life as it 
existed, and this was the charm that he could see in his town.  
The main focus for local residents resided in building new forms of permanence in their 
neighbourhoods, rather than temporary character of visitation and consumption of the local 
culture. It was therefore the affects of these towns, like the sea breeze upon the skin, from 
which the charm and character emitted. Their focus was more geared toward how to attract 
younger residents and get people to return to their hometowns. Revitalisation was not so 
much associated with a new sense of vibrancy, but to the rejuvenation of the familiar 
atmosphere from which resilience was seen as emerging. Vibrancy was eagerly desired by 
long-term residents but associated with more young people moving into these rural towns 
and seeing friends and neighbours return after the post-disaster reconstruction was finished. 
Equally, new arrivals explained that they wanted the places to maintain an open and 
welcoming atmosphere so that other people like them would feel comfortable and excited 
moving to the towns and make these towns their permanent homes (e.g. REF 1, REF 42). The 
new arrivals were in fact seeking for the everyday mundaneness as the desired new normal 
for the everyday. For the new arrivals who were seeking a different life for themselves and 
were motivated enough to make the transition, and the long-term residents alike, everyday 
life was about the mundane feelings of being satisfied with ones life (manzokukan).  
6.2. "Our community is wider and stronger now" 
The emphasis of social resilience expressed by the local affected populations, as discussed 
above, indicates that in many ways coastal communities were already resilient against 
disasters. This impression certainly seemed to strongly exist in the reports of local residents, 
through references to the failure of physical safety measures (Yamori 2013, Coulmas 2012, 
Nakahara 2011, Ando et al. 2011, Suppasri et al. 2013), with many local residents contrastingly 
stressing on the role localised networks and knowledge played in saving lives and mitigating 
damages. The main fear locally resided in the loss of these networks as a source of social 
resilience, due to the disaster causing a massive reorganisation of these relationships through 
loss of life, displacement and intensified outmigration. Equally, the influx of new residents 
and visitors was contributing to the diffusion of communal networks. Overall, the community 
was in a state of flux that necessitated the rebuilding and reconfiguration of the basic 
foundation of resilience.  
Collectively, post-disaster depopulation has reached critical levels in many locations that were 
already experiencing population exodus prior to the disaster (NIPSSR 2013). The population 
of Onagawa for instance is projected to shrink by 20% by the end of the recovery period, 
reaching approximately 8000 inhabitants after resettlement, but expected to carry on 
decreasing after (NIPSSR 2013). Similarly, Minamisanriku whose population was around 
17,000 in 2010, is now looking to lose 17% of its population by 2020 (NIPSSR 2013).  Combined 
with the impact of the disaster that has accelerated the exodus from Iwate, Miyagi and 
Fukushima, these three most affected prefectures in Tohoku are on average projected to lose 
15% of their total population by 2030 (NIPSSR 2013). Together with Japan's overall population 
decline that has been taking place since 2005 (Statistics Bureau of Japan 2017), the context 
of absolute population decline has resulted in a condition where a gain of population in one 
location will automatically mean a loss in another. With merely seven of Japan's 47 
prefectures experiencing population increases (mostly those hosting major population 
centres) (Statistics Bureau of Japan 2014), rural regions like Tohoku are likely to bear the brunt 
of this development. Under these conditions, population growth for Tohoku's disaster 
affected regions therefore remains unlikely, forcing municipalities, communities, and families 
to make critical choices regarding their futures and adjusting to sustained decline. 
At the same time, the area has drawn 'unprecedented' attention from the outside, pulling the 
region from obscurity into the limelight. Since the disaster, Tohoku has attracted hundreds of 
thousands of visitors from across Japan and abroad to help with the immediate emergency 
support, as well as long-term development and recovery (Klien 2017, McMorran 2017, Leng 
2015). Within the first few months of the disaster, Tohoku's devastated communities had 
welcomed nearly half a million volunteers to the region to help with the immediate 
emergency aid and the subsequent cleaning operations (Leng 2015). Since then the number 
of volunteers has quickly waned and been partly replaced by a small but steady stream of 
tourists and visitors to the region (Suma 2012), with the landscape and intensity of the local 
visitor-oriented industries and attention paid to the temporary visitor populations (kouryuu 
jink) rising to the attention of local residents and authorities alike. Despite depopulation 
remaining a critical concern for local communities, positive population changes have taken 
place alongside overall decline. For communities who have suffered the constant 
companionship of depopulation for many decades, the influx of new visitors represented a 
breath of fresh air, and when intertwined with the 'window of opportunity' that had never 
existed before, brought a new sense of hopefulness and vitality into the communities. 
During my field work I often puzzled about the notion of the community and people's 
attachments to each other and the surrounding landscape, when 'unprecedented' social and 
interpersonal changes had taken place in his community alongside the 'unprecedented' 
environmental and physical transformation. The rapid drop in population numbers due to the 
disaster, loss of neighbours and family members, communities being dispersed into different 
temporary housing units across the regions, and many eventually relocating elsewhere for 
not being able to persevere the long recovery period. Community members had in many cases 
recognised the exacerbated impact the disaster would have on the resurrection of life in these 
communities immediately after the disaster, with Ms. Murakami (REF 39) for instance 
remembering the first moment she saw the destruction in her native Onagawa that "this 
would be a defining moment for our community".  
During one of my meetings with Mr. Takeda, our conversation veered towards to the notion 
of the community. For Mr. Takeda, the dispersal of communities as regrettable (zannen), but 
that he understood the motivations behind people's personal choices but expressed joy over 
the interest outsiders were now paying toward their community. For Mr. Takeda these 
parallel changes were viewed with adjustment and hopeful anticipation where the 
"community is stronger and wider now as a result of the disaster", indicating toward the unity 
that he argued was now in many ways shared across geographical, generational, and social 
boundaries. While everyone's experience was unique, and each individual, family, and 
neighbourhood had been impacted by the disaster in various ways, the local residents 
nevertheless regarded the disaster as a levelling and uniting experience that had brought 
them closer together (REF 5, REF 6, REF 14). Individuals and members of a community, the 
interviewees expressed a sense of humility in front of the forces of nature, where the "sea 
got angry with us" (REF 6) and brought them together as bare humans. Nature itself did not 
discriminate, and everyone had been touched by it whether they had lost their homes, their 
family members, or none of it. Each member of the community who was alive after the 
tsunami had recoiled back to the sea had, irrespective of their remaining circumstances, 
survived. Surviving, and connecting in that survival with others had made communities 
"stronger", bringing people into a shared space of searching meaning within the 
'unprecedented' destruction and making the future emerging from that destruction more 
meaningful, better, and valuable.  
Mutual survival and the impact of the disaster had brought people closer together, but also 
created conditions and atmosphere that was reported to be open and welcoming to new 
individuals who were inspired by their contact with Tohoku. Even I became part of their 
communities, "You too are part of us now", Mr. Takeda. said, jokingly adding "I will issue you 
your membership card very soon". The joke was reflective of the shifts that had taken place 
in the communities throughout the recovery, with new arrivals to the communities often 
noting on the welcoming and open atmosphere that resided in Tohoku's tsunami ravaged 
coastline (e.g. REF 1, REF 42, REF 20). Together with the loss of neighbours and family 
members to the disaster, post-disaster population exodus and dispersal of communities, as 
well as influx of visitors, and importantly, new permanent residents into the communities has 
dramatically changes the notion of community itself, "widening" the scope of who belongs to 
it and what is its purpose.  
My curiosity in this arena resided primarily in the interactions between the locals and the non-
locals, including visitors, tourists and the new arrivals, and will use the rest of the chapter to 
discuss  importance placed upon population, not in terms of numbers, but the notions of hito 
(people), komyunity (community) and ningen kankei (human relations) that many referred to 
as the most important things in these communities. Locals were realistic in relation to 
population growth that was seen as unlikely, and what they sought instead was a sense 
stability and the feeling of continuity. Even if one family, or one young person moved into a 
peripheral neighbourhood, that alone was seen as a step toward a brighter future. Even the 
temporary visitors were viewed in a positive light and brought into the sphere of the "wider 
community", but in a different way than what the authorities envisioned. While the 
government presented compact towns as the best way to respond to the needs to rebuild 
socio-economic and physical resilience, for the locals the sense of stronger and wider 
community was built through engaging outsiders into the affective atmosphere and 
connections in the community.  
The primary emphasis on building communal relations seemed to reside in the importance of 
establishing intimate and persistent interactions in the affective living space of the 
neighbourhoods and teaching and learning across the lines that had typically not been 
crossed in the past. In practice, much of community building work seemed to be condensed 
in the sphere of heritage and traditions, with a clear emphasis on the affective bodily 
entanglements with traditions rather than sheer consumption. In this affective type of 
community building, the boundaries between the locals and non-locals were diffused, with 
the performance of traditions and heritage moving from a distinction between performers 
and spectators to the mutual physical and active production and reproduction of the 
traditions and rites themselves. Concretely this meant the physical and bodily occupation of 
spaces and performances by outsiders in the production of traditions, ranging cycles of local 
food production, harvesting, cooking and eating, to dressing up and carrying the o-mikoshi 
(portable shrine) during a local festival for example.  
The curiosity with which many outsiders came to the region presented a sign of hope for Mr. 
Takeda for the sustainability of the new "wider and stronger community". He explained that 
perhaps through the influx of people into the communities, forms of living heritage and the 
very uniqueness of the lifestyles of the local communities would be secured into the future. 
Mr. Takeda gave the example of the local Lion Dance troupes (Image 8) that he himself was 
particularly passionate about, regularly performing in his local troupe as well. "When we hear 
the drums, we get excited", he told me in relation to the local Lion Dance performance, 
explaining the physical and emotional feeling it induced in people, continuing to explain how 
he wanted "everyone to enjoy this tradition", equally noting with surety that "many outsiders 
and visitors should experience the sensation [of performing Lion Dance] too". For Mr. Takeda, 
it was continuity and community that mattered, a sense of common purpose and mutuality 
that would ensure the continuation of the past into the future amongst the unprecedented 
changes that were taking place in the physical environment around them; including the 
inception of the compact towns.  
Image 8: Lion Dance performance, Onagawa. Anna Vainio, 2016 
While community that existed prior to the disaster was not the same community that was 
reassembling post-disaster and planning a life in the community, the disaster experience had 
brought community members closer together through their collective survival, but equally 
the recovery had brought a steady influx of visitors and new residents who through their 
presence and personal connections reaffirmed the importance and the meaning of the events 
that took place. It was this process of ensuring the continuation and successful re-
establishment of the community as a form of resilience that I was interested in.  The traditions 
that the locals often emphasised as the essence of their community, vehicles and creators of 
the affective atmosphere through which communal resilience could be rebuilt, and thus 
metaphors for communality and sociality themselves. Traditions in Tohoku therefore often 
seemed to form the connecting points through which sense of common future and mindset 
of connectedness for the new "stronger and wider" community was created.  
6.2.1. Community building for resilience 
Communality has been a persistent theme in Tohoku's post-disaster recovery. In the 
government's discourse about the recovery, sociality in post-disaster Japan has been built 
upon the notion of 'linkages', with idea of 'linkages' is prominently present in the 
government's philosophy toward the recovery. Equal to the notion of 'hope', 'linkages' too 
are prominently superimposed in the government's philosophy for Tohoku's recovery, with 
the 'Hope beyond disaster' -document mentioning linkages nearly 30 times, where 
communality and sociality are shown as integral components to resilience building for the 
future. Given the attention and detail paid to these 'linkages', it is necessary to ask what is 
the nature of these linkages, what is their purpose, and how are they to be formed?  
In Japanese version of the report, 'linkages' was referred to as tsunagu (to link together, to 
fasten and tie together), a common verb utilised in conjunction with sociality, as will be 
discussed below. For the government 'linkages' meant "[...] activities that will help the people 
in the disaster-affected regions to first work to achieve harmonious coexistence between 
humanity and nature, from which they can engage in disaster reduction. Such an approach 
will generate independent efforts to revitalize local communities and local industries. This, in 
turn, will elicit hope. The capacity to live through this disaster with hope will become a 
testimony to the reconstruction process" (p. 8). In this conceptualisation, 'linkages' were 
characterised as individual, person-to-person connections that when aggregated would have 
a ripple effect on societal level, bringing communities and the entire society under stronger 
ties of mutuality and learning. Through linkages communities are envisioned to become more 
resilient against natural hazards, but also importantly, leading to their revitalisation.  
Tsunagu was not merely present in the official documentation on the recovery and the 
parlance of authorities. Like Mr. Takeda pointed out when he said, "when this recovery is over, 
we can start to rebuild our communities", community building and social cohesion were in 
fact the prime objectives of the recovery for the communities themselves. Concepts referring 
to sociality, harmony and solidarity, such as fureai (coming together), tsunagari (connection, 
togetherdness), and kizuna (bonding, linking), have been widely attached to the triple disaster 
in research, popular discourse and people's everyday conversations (Slater et al. 2012, 
Hommerich 2015, Gerster 2019, Forgash 2011). The local populations too often referenced 
their broadened sociality through fureai, tsunagari, and kizuna, that are all common idioms 
used in Japan to refer to sociality (Nozawa 2015). Kizuna was even selected as the kanji of the 
year for 2011 to reflect the mood of the year (Hommerich 2012), but perhaps due to the wide-
spread media co-optation of the term, kizuna in the local usage has gained some negative 
connotations too (NHK 2015). The terms I heard most often were fureai and tsunagari, almost 
exclusively uttered as a pair, indicating the interrelation they carry with one another.  
Fureai and tsunagari, used in reference to sociality, can collectively be described as forms of 
mutual (and emotional) human contact (Plourde 2014). Their prevalence in the post-disaster 
context is interesting, as it can be seen as a clear countertrend to the public discourse of Japan 
as muen shakai (relationless society) (Hommerich 2012, p. 48), along with the precarity of 
social and economic conditions (Allison 2013). Noting back to the media coverage in the 
immediate post-disaster setting of the spring of 2011, the emphasis of the stoic Japanese and 
their mutual solidarity and persistence in the face of adversity in the immediate aftermath of 
the disaster (Burgess 2011), is therefore interesting in relation to the broader narratives of 
muen shakai (relationless society). It is important to note however, that Japanese people are 
not uniquely attuned to altruism. In fact, altruism, solidarity, and mutual assistance as 
examples of post-disaster growth have been typical presentations after multiple disasters 
across the globe (e.g. Zahran et al. 2009, Siegel et al. 1999, Krzysztof & Norris 1995). Despite 
some arguing that altruism quickly disappears and changes to disillusionment and can have a 
distinctly negative and disruptive impact on communities leading to feelings of inequality and 
injustice (Krzysztof and Norris 1995), what my research however found is that notions and 
emphasis on sociality very still very active in the post-disaster communities of Tohoku in 2015 
and 2016, with similar findings having been made elsewhere as well (Silver & Grek-Martin 
2015). Sources of solidarity and social trust however, as Solnit (2009) argues, can be "largely 
dormant and unacknowledged" until an incident where such relationships are vital strikes a 
community, appearing only when the normal order of things is disrupted. What I witnessed 
in Tohoku however is that it is through the process of building these relationships that people 
understand and communicate their recovery experiences and the way they anticipate their 
futures to unfold. Dismissing solidarity and sociality as a quickly disappearing phenomenon, 
or one that is culturally affixed, can distort and oversimplify the ways in which post-disaster 
communities create new meanings for their communities and the very recovery process that 
is taking place around them.  
Nozawa (2015) argues that fureia, or contact, is in fact an idiom for communication itself (p. 
386), and as explained to me in detail by a contact in Ogatsu, denotes the moment of contact 
between people in a common space, for instance through events and social actions (Research 
Diary 19.8.2016). Tsunagari on the other hand is used to refer to the mental and emotional 
connection between people, through shared values, memories, feelings, and directions, 
representing relationality or networking in society (Ikuyo 1992 in Ogawa 2004) that in cross-
cultural terms has sometimes been argued to reflect 'social capital' (Indrawan et al. 2014). 
While there are elements of social boding and bridging (Putnam 2000), and social capital 
certainly has been found influential in Tohoku's recovery (Aldrich and Meyer 2014), the 
examples in this chapter will show that despite sharing some qualities of social capital, the 
multiple forms of linkages that have emerged in the changing communal context of disaster 
and recovery have further meanings that cannot be captured purely through concepts like 
social capital and networking.  
Community building instead seemed to rely upon the re-establishment of the affective 
atmosphere in the communities as the foundation of social connections and resilience. 
Ranging from shared experiences in a physical space, the bodily experience of participating in 
community life by being involved in the Lion Dance, experiencing fishing and farming, and 
similar activities that many local people were involved in, were integral parts of 
understanding (wakaru) of community life and showing interest and investment in the 
everyday life in these regions. Like Ms. Shimizu explained above, the recovery and the focus 
on vibrancy and revitalisation of life through compact town building had changed the entire 
atmosphere of the town into a destination, thus distancing it from the affective nature of the 
community (Martini & Vainio, forthcoming). My thoughts returned to the traditions that Mr. 
Takeda saw as the vehicle for community building, and I wondered whether traditions like 
Lion Dance could truly be salvaged with the help of outsiders, however. Like Lahournat (2016) 
explored in her article on Kagura heritage in Ogatsu, I too wondered about the care for 
authenticity and form of the ritual and whether locals who had lived and practiced these 
traditions their whole lives would be comfortable to slowly relinquish them in the hands of 
the outsiders.  
Mr. Takeda considered this question carefully, finally responding: "these traditions are quite 
patriarchal you know. Lion Dance, for instance, is supposed to be performed only by men". He 
continued to explain how for a number of years now, dating to the period before the tsunami, 
his neighbourhood has caused a stir among the Lion Dance troupes in the region by allowing 
women to perform as well. "It didn't seem fair that they should be deprived of being part of 
this heritage, so we started allowing women and girls to perform as well", he concluded. What 
Mr. Takeda was alluding to was therefore the importance the affective nature of performing 
Lion Dance had over the authenticity of the tradition itself. Belonging and communal 
connections therefore emerged not from the shape, authenticity and formal continuation of 
the tradition itself, that was divisive after all, but from the fact that it kept being performed 
at all due to communal effort to ensure its survival. Traditionalism therefore was not simply 
longing for the past but represented a dynamic perception of traditions whose role and 
performance had become critically assessed in the post-disaster crisis of continuity along 
several axes: gender, generation, and geography most importantly. In these discussions the 
tradition as a rite, skill, or habit and the values and meanings attached to in the past were 
separated from each other, with the continuation of the tradition and diversity of heritage 
rising as the primary values over historical formal characteristics.  
It is important to understand the different meanings placed on heritage and tradition, and 
the power that is contained in these characterisations. By focusing on the framing of heritage 
in universal narratives produced through processes of heritage protection by transnational 
organisations, Rico (2014) for instance critically assesses our understanding of heritage and 
traditionalism, arguing that we have a tendency to place heritage into a framework of 'risk 
and vulnerability' in post-disaster situations and that this can overshadow the capacity of 
heritage to develop resilience through transformation.  Rico has argued that heritage, when 
seen as a dynamic rather than a static process, can aid in the development of positive post-
disaster identities, attachments, and adaptations to the new context. While the locals I 
encountered in Tohoku placed their heritage and traditions in the framework of 'risk', quite 
rightly so considering the Tohoku's long-term decline that has had a heavy impact on the 
diversity of localised traditions and festivals (Thompson 2008), what I found is that new 
reinterpretations of heritage and tradition were advancing continuity by taking place in the 
context of change rather than permanence, indicating that perhaps 'vulnerability' and 
'resilience' are not mutually exclusive.  
By emphasising the continuation of traditions as an affective embodiment of sociality, over 
the historical authenticity of the form and performance, traditions are seen as vehicles of 
resilience where their continuation is ensured through transformation and change, thus 
maintaining their relevance in the present day rather than as vulnerable artefacts of the 
historical past. Through increased contact with outsiders, both visitors and new arrivals, and 
their continued presence in these previously rather isolated communities has brought new 
hope for the continuation of traditions, and life in these declining communities more broadly. 
Resilience within the local imaginaries resided in the process of creating "stronger and wider" 
social relations and the sense of security and peace of mind (anshin) that accompanied these 
intensified interactions. As Novak (2017) explains, anshin is an affective state, with non-locals 
being invited to experience the community through the affective spaces, such as the lion 
dance, local matsuri, industries and everyday lives, rather than through transactions and mere 
interactions within the bounds of a compactly planned commercial centres. 
Indeed, there seemed to be little tension between continuation and adaptation, expressing 
remarkable dynamism of Japanese culture and lifestyles as has already been observed 
elsewhere (Lahournat 2016, Allison 2017). In people's imaginations, tradition and the survival 
of all aspects of communal life were integrally connected and not in competition with one 
another, and change was seen as complimenting the survival of traditions. For many 
traditions and the importance of revival lay in the recreation and ritualistic observance of 
tradition as part of a living culture, rather than achieving authenticity of the performance of 
the tradition per se. Therefore, expressions of cultural history through local festivals and 
performances for instance, reconfirm the shared values and a sense of belonging in the 
present moment, and in the specific space (Schnell 1999, Lahournat 2016). Anne Allison 
(2013) points out that rather than seeing the threats and changes to traditions as a sign of 
death and decline, they can be seen as a sign of vitality of the culture itself that is able to 
persevere through changing times, increasing precarity, and even catastrophes, and continue 
to provide a sense of attachment, familiarity, and comfort for people (Allison 2013). It was 
this sense of continuity in the face of adversity and death that gave emotional comfort and a 
sense of security for people (anshin).  
What the residents I encountered in Tohoku imagined for their futures and the post-disaster 
and post-recovery life was the re-establishment of lifestyles that have emerged from the 
relationships that human communities have with the nature around them as well as each 
other, and for life to carry out its cycles of birth and death. For the locals the 'window of 
opportunity' that the disaster awarded was as much about new beginnings as it was about 
endings with a peace of mind, both inescapable parts of life itself. For the communities 
rebuilding communities was not centred on the material recovery focused on housing and 
economic revival that were seen as mere tools for achieving what is really important, the 
realm of the immaterial and the re-establishment of the relationship people have with their 
memories, landscapes, ancestors, sense of belonging and local cultures and identities. For the 
local populations, who are dealing with the events of March 11, their own survival, and 
changing social fabric of their communities, the process of community building was about 
making sense of what happened and forging a path into a common future by realigning the 
trajectory between the past, the present and the future through their communal relations. 
The aim of sociality for the affected populations was to create a sense of security (anshin), 
not only against future natural hazards through physical rebuilding and socio-economic 
resilience, but as a means for finding ones place, and establishing a sense of belonging as 
individuals, communities, and as a nation. In the context of continuing decline, further 
difficulties, and passage of time, the affected populations did not want their experiences to 
be forgotten. Equally, concerns over the future of the community as a comfortable place to 
live and die occupied people's pursuits toward the future.  
The sense of comfort existed beyond public services, and how would people be taken care of 
when their physical bodies grew tired and unable to lead an independent life, but equally it 
was about finding a peace of mind for the afterlife. Who would take care of the family graves, 
who will keep performing Lion Dance and teach it to the next generation? Death of the 
community was a painful thought, and one that many people recognised as a possible future 
outcome for these towns, villages and inlets by the sea. The belief in the continuation of local 
heritage, lifestyles and cultures would live on after ones own demise gave people emotional 
and psychic comfort, and a sense of security that tsunami resistant communities and "disaster 
preparedness" could not give.  
Chapter 7 
Recovery standing in the way of recovery 
Throughout the preceding empirical chapters, I have built the discussion on Japan's 
community-focused recovery in line with the key principles are driving academic debates, 
governmental narratives and development practices of community-based approaches. So far, 
I have focused on the principles of participation (Chapter 4), empowerment (chapter 5) and 
resilience (Chapter 6). The remaining principle is that of proximity, one of the foundational 
characteristics that make community-based approaches literally processes that are 'based in 
the community'. I have deliberately left this principle as the last one to be discussed, as it 
stands at the foundation of these approaches. In this chapter I will argue that 'proximity' as a 
tangible and physical iteration of closeness to the community, best illustrates the point of 
divergence and slippage between the exogenous and endogenous narratives for post-disaster 
recovery.  As I have argued and further discussed in previous chapters of this thesis, for the 
local residents, the recovery presents primarily as an affective process, where the meanings, 
priorities, and language emerge as a distinct discourse from the connection between the 
affective context and the meanings that are formed from direct and embodied experiences 
with this context. It is therefore 'proximity' to the affective landscape and embodied 
experiences with the landscape that form the starting point for the recovery narratives, 
articulations, transmissions and practices of the disaster victims.  
For the authorities however, 'proximity' has come to mean physical closeness of the 
administrative procedures with the geographical context of the recovery (Annex 3). The 'Hope 
beyond the Disaster' -report for instance reads: "[the government should] make efforts to 
make maximum use of the abilities of municipalities, which are the main actors in 
reconstruction" (Reconstruction Design Council 2011, p. 18, emphasis added), where the 
affected municipalities are expected to assume the lead role in reconstruction and recovery, 
as they are viewed to be in the best position to understand local conditions, respond to 
emerging needs, and consult local populations. They are also the administrative units that will 
work directly and independently within national reconstruction frameworks. This iteration of 
'proximity' seems to follow the general conceptualisation embedded into academic and 
practitioner debates about proximity, that focus on the intensification of the relationship 
between the developer and the developed. Maskrey (2011) for instance notes that progress 
in the development of community-based approaches depends on the embedded 
closeness/proximity into the process, with "communities progressively engaging and 
involving supra-local actors such as local and central government agencies and non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) to support their activities" (p. 44). The principle of 
proximity in the Japanese government's reconstruction documents is primarily framed as a 
synergy between the municipalities at the centre, functioning as the primary actors designing 
a recovery based on local needs and wishes, while being financially and legally supported by 
the government.  
However, the focus on the administrative closeness and proximity not only makes the starting 
point for the disaster recovery diverge strongly from the affective experiences of the disaster 
affected communities themselves, but also limits the municipalities' abilities to even consider 
the affective nature of recovery. To frame proximity as an administrative process where the 
municipalities hold the consultative power but only limited legislative and fiscal control, in 
itself radically limits the power of municipalities to realise the ideas, needs and desires of the 
populations who they are in proximity to, and whose voices are supposed to be guiding the 
recovery. Equally, the government's fervent commitment on equity in the recovery process 
(Oguma 2013) makes it increasingly difficult to fully service and respond to localised needs 
that can be radically different from one place to another. Paradoxically, the promotion of 
proximity of the process to the recovering communities, seems to be actually distancing 
communities from the formal recovery, while also arguably standing at the root of the 
separation of the exogenous and endogenous discourses on the recovery into two different 
spheres of language, action and directions. 
In this chapter I will explore the different starting points for these discourses through two 
concepts gaman (perseverence) and ochitsuku (settledness) that through their polarised 
affective states for the local residents, represent the discord and tension in the duality of the 
recovery process. Gaman and ochitsuku are verbal and articulated representations of these 
affective states through which the local populations were sequencing the recovery in the 
temporal space: One must persevere the discomfort before reaching a place of comfort. 
Achieving the goals set out in the formal recovery will simultaneously mean the onset of 
another recovery where the values and priorities outlined by the local populations, such as 
rebuilding communities, forming social bonds, and building a sense of homeliness, can finally 
be realised; as Mr. Takeda noted "once this recovery is over, we can start to rebuild our 
communities". These polarised states exemplify and illustrate the tangible aspects of the 'two 
recoveries' discussed throughout this thesis, where the end of the formal recovery period, 
with its embedded goals of increased safety and foundations for socio-economic growth 
being completed, will constitute the end of waiting and persevering in a state of discomfort. 
But despite the formal recovery making a promise to deliver communities that are safe from 
the harm of environmental hazards and contain the potential for socio-economic growth and 
prosperity, for the local populations this promised 'end goal' only formed the beginning of the 
second recovery through which the meanings embedded into the endogenous narrative could 
be achieved. In this way, the formal recovery was standing in the way of the communal 
recovery, suspending local populations into a persistent state of liminality between the past 
that was lost, and the future that is promised.  
The chapter discusses the meanings of the different intensities these two states produce, 
from enforced waiting and longing for new beginnings, and how these states can illustrate 
the impact these intensities has on the recovery as proximal to the communities and thus 
'community-based'. Despite the terms being embedded into the Japanese contextual, 
interpersonal and linguistic setting, these states and intensities are not uniquely Japanese 
(Cox and Perry 2011, Barrios 2017, Albrecht 2006). While gaman tends to be the accepted 
state from which recovery begins within the exogenous discourse for the recovery, seen as 
the unavoidable period of discomfort and tensions, the chapter posits that perhaps instead 
of accepting of discomfort as necessary for a period of time, and should rather begin from the 
search of comfort. In the chapter I will show that both gaman and ochitsuku influence 
people's abilities, motivations, and directions in relation to the recovery and it is therefore 
imperative from the perspective of community-based approaches to recovery, that these 
varying intensities are taken into consideration both in the strategic and practical work of 
recovery.  
In relation to the principle of 'proximity', I will argue that only bringing administrative 
processes close to the recovering communities is simply not enough, as reducing recovery 
into mere administrative efforts lacks genuine engagements with the daily reality of 
communities living in recovery contexts. As outlined in the previous chapters, the majority of 
communities included in this study were still leading their lives amidst physical reconstruction 
in 2015 and 2016, with the main forms of attachments emerging from the sphere of the 
intangible and the immaterial for the local residents. However, as I will exemplify in this 
chapter, while these intangible and immaterial values were at the forefront of the exogenous 
discourse, emphasising the latent, quintessential and unique characteristics of Tohoku's rural 
communities as the foundation for a 'better' society, I will show how the language utilised by 
the authorities nonetheless echoed romanticised appropriation rather than genuine 
reflections of contemporary rural societies. Such romanticised notions as grand aspirational 
goals for the recovery did not meet the real, and rather small and mundane, needs of the 
communities where residents were eagerly waiting for the re-opening of supermarkets, 
pharmacies and pavements that were holding people from feeling settled (ochitsuku). Due to 
such differences, proximity as an administrative process of 'listening to voices', 'empowering 
local populations' and 'building resilience' can only result in good intentions that can help 
people persevere, rather than real actions through which people would feel at home in their 
communities.  
Hamdi (2014) refers to this process as finding "beginnings that count", where instead of 
strategic planning for the 'big' purposes meeting the broader goals of the recovery, fixing 
vulnerabilities and democratising the process through which these goals will be achieved, 
overshadow the real needs of people are much more tangible, smaller and immediate, related 
to destroyed properties and loss of livelihoods that often have to wait for the big plans to be 
completed. Rather, 'proximity' should also include genuine efforts to understand the intimacy 
to the recovering context in which the recovering populations are existing and how this 
context tangibly impacts their capacities for action and engagement in the recovery. Recovery 
should therefore start from genuine attempts to understand the real lived experience of 
communities and the shape of the problems and challenges that reside at the heart of the 
motivations for disaster affected communities to engage with authorities and development 
practitioners. Solving these small problems would not only help to understand the shape of 
the problems through the act of solving them (Kay 2011), but also enable victim communities 
to increase their levels of comfort along the way. The chapter therefore raises questions on 
whether democratic and empowered community engagement into the big and strategic plans 
is ever really possible, if it leads to a sense of inescapable enforced state of waiting (gaman) 
where people only need to wait for the 'big plan' of the recovery to be over in order for its 
logic to be reveals and the reap the benefits it bring, while not responding to the immediate 
concerns and needs that emerge from the affective context that would help people reach a 
point of comfort (ochitsuku).  
7.1. Prolonged state of Gaman 
Anxiety over change is reasonable, as is the expectation that the majority of residents will in 
time successfully adapt to their new living conditions and be able to recreate the sense of 
community in their neighbourhoods. As outlined in Chapter 6, the majority of affected 
municipalities were engaged in large scale reconstruction projects that often included either 
community relocations to higher ground, land elevations, construction of tsunami walls, or all 
of the above. The length of the recovery was therefore set at approximately 10 years, so that 
these structural and infrastructure changes that would facilitate the emergence of the 
government's grand vision of a stronger and vibrant Tohoku and Japan to be brought into 
reality. While the majority of local residents well understood the realities of a recovery project 
of this magnitude, when I asked people what they thought about the recovery, the first 
reaction to my question was almost universally "osoi desu" (it's so slow), usually uttered 
with exasperation and sense of frustration or disbelief.  
To manage the long recovery period necessitated by the realisation of government's grand 
vision for Tohoku, affected populations were expected to persevere (gaman) (Gerster 2019, 
Slater et al. 2014, Samuels 2013). Gaman is a typical expression in the Japanese language, one 
that even foreign learners pick up and learn to use in everyday language relatively quickly. 
The word has its origins in Zen Buddhism, denoting one of seven types of human conceit, but 
since the Edo period has been used to refer to a positive meaning of stoicism, perseverance 
and the ability to endure difficulties. This contemporary meaning has been widely attached 
to the 3/11 disaster (Burgess 2011, Victoria 2012), and was strongly present as a theme in my 
discussions with the disaster affected populations too, with an emphasis on strength of 
character and abilities to wait out the recovery. One day as we were sitting in Mr. Takeda's 
and his wife's small temporary housing unit, he excitedly started telling me how much he was 
looking forward to their new house that they were planning to build on higher ground in the 
same inlet where they had lived for decades and raised a family, finally noting that "we have 
to gaman (persevere) just a little bit longer".  
By its nature gaman therefore contains a sense of endurance of discomfort, that in the case 
of post-disaster context was often associated with the physical and mental precarity of the 
temporary living situations. While lack of space and poor insulation with noises from the 
neighbouring units causing a great deal of discomfort and irritation for residents, these 
temporary houses nonetheless were the first semblance of home after the loss of their long-
term, and often ancestral, homes in the tsunami. Ms. Shimizu who was Mr. Takeda's 
neighbour in the temporary housing complex, explained feeling a sense of relief when they 
had finally been allocated their current abode, saying: "when we got here, it was the first time 
I started feeling more at ease". Simultaneously however, these homes were not permanent, 
and often residents had had to move from one temporary unit to another as the recovery 
went on, with each move including a series of complicated and emotional decisions for 
individuals that cannot be overlooked in housing and relocation policies (Watanabe and 
Maruyama 2018), leading many to proclaim their tiredness of waiting, and coming close to 
joining those who had already permanently moved out of these communities as they simply 
could not persevere anymore.  
The slowness of the recovery and reconstruction, the distance and voicelessness people 
experience in the recovery, and the barriers it presents in helping people move forward have 
forced people in Tohoku to exist in a prolonged, and often enforced, state of gaman for years. 
Even those who remained positive about the official reconstruction process, and who had 
actively participated in it, seemed tired: "We have been very patient" Mr. Takeda sighed, 
hoping that soon, in six months or a year people will be able to return to their communities, 
but also noting on the opaqueness of imagining ones long-term future: "[the new 
neighbourhoods will be] very safe but no one has experienced them yet. In six month or a year, 
we will know what our life will be like when we live on higher ground [...] But actually no one 
is still very sure", Mr. Takeda continued, referring to the uncertainty over the future that 
reigned in people's minds. Similarly, Ms. Ishida (REF 44), worrying about her children's future 
wondered "what will this community be like, I cannot imagine it, not even a little bit".  
Disasters are primarily associated with destruction. They do not only destroy physical 
landscapes but significantly impact the emotional and psychological attachments people have 
with localities (Blunt & Dowling 2006, Morrice 2013, Cartlidge 2010, Barrios 2017, Albrecht 
2006). Disaster experiences result in both disorientation and reorientation; disorientation is 
caused by the loss or change of familiar markers of the community, while reorientation refers 
to the psychological process of forming a new sense of identity and place within the changing 
landscape (Cox and Perry 2011). More importantly, Cox and Perry (2011) found that the 
restoration of the physical community as a meaningful place was found to help people form 
positive place-attachments and make them feel at home. As we were driving in 
Minamisanriku, Mr. Kimura made a familiar turn but suddenly found himself somewhere he 
was not meant to be, stating that "the roads keep changing all the time", noting on the impact 
this fluctuation has on the daily life in the town and the ability to connect with the landscape, 
and the loss of 'instinctiveness' that Ms. Shimizu noted on in the earlier chapters. Due to the 
length and complexity of the physical recovery, the processes of disorientation and 
reorientation in Tohoku were in constant motion. Therefore, the sustained and prolonged 
state of recovery that was "osoi desu", had suspended locals from establishing such 
permanent and meaningful connections with their landscapes, having a detrimental effect on 
the recovery of the localities in the long-run. The physical landscape no longer bearing 
resemblance or holding physical points of attachment with the past, nor yet giving clear 
indications of the shape of the community in the future, was also impacting people's abilities 
to finding a sense of home in their communities.  
Such attachments however are fundamental for coping and adaptation (Brown & Perkins 
1992), making trajectories into the future increasingly difficult to imagine. Similar to Klien's 
(2017) findings along new migrants to the Tohoku region, many new arrivals I spoke with 
recounted the opaqueness of their futures when viewed from the present. Many had moved 
to the region in subsequent waves of recovery and reconstruction action, taking on new jobs 
and roles in non-profit initiatives, new businesses and ventures that had emerged as a result 
of the increased interest in the Tohoku region. While many of the individuals I spoke to were 
happy with their choices, feeling an increased sense of life satisfaction in the rural regions and 
wanting to start lives and families in the towns, similar to the long-term residents who could 
not yet imagine their new lives at all, the future of the new migrants seemed uncertain with 
lack of permanent employment, housing and continued decline of the region (e.g. REF 1, REF 
4, REF 32, REF 33, REF 42). The long time scale and grand scale of the recovery resulted in a 
distancing and misting over the path from the present to the imaginative future, where the 
distance not only made imagining a concrete and tangible future difficult. Determined to 
continue on their chosen path and hoping that their dreams would come into being 
"sometime" in the future, they also recognised that the realisation of their dreams depended 
on the sustainability of employment and access to housing that stood at the foundation of 
the possibilities to build a stable life in the rural regions, far away from family.  
The desired stability in many ways culminated in the completion of the physical 
reconstruction, whose absence, or delay, can often accentuate attachments to the immaterial 
that gains new meanings and importance in people's adaptation to unfamiliar situations and 
contexts (Forbes 2017, Sou & Webber 2019, Meyer 2012). Because the populations in Tohoku 
were not yet physically inhabiting their permanent homes, the material community remained 
imagined and idealised and was not yet connected to tangible affects that a physical 
community would induce. Morrice (2013) argues that these immaterial aspects of the 
community are often idealised, drawing on affective states and memories as the building 
blocks of what communities of the future would mean. Such idealised sources of affective 
intensities can however also lead to political and ethical consequences (Ahmed 2004), with 
nostalgic notions of traditionalism and authenticity becoming projected into the future as the 
ideal goals for the recovery to achieve, while also propelling the framing of tangible actions 
in the present.  
As noted in chapter 6, the emphases on the immaterial, such as resurrection of local festivals 
and traditions were overtly dettectable, functioning as invitations for outsiders and visitors 
to share this affective atmosphere with the locals, that also resonated with the outsiders' 
views of rural Tohoku. For the urbanites who visited or moved to Tohoku, rurality was 
generally accepted and recognised as 'good', or 'better' than the city, with natural life cycles, 
cultural authenticity, seasonal eating, or wholesome and close knit communities that in Japan 
are quintessentially associated with the 'rural' (Traphagan 2000), or mutually agreeable and 
shared positive values that people wanted to foster in the new post-disaster spaces. 
Frameworks for idealistic aspirations of slow life and de-growth for instance, especially 
common motivators for new rural migrants (Klien 2017), were equally utilised to envision the 
future and give it shape.  
While providing psychic comfort and points of contact between the outsiders and the local 
residents, the immaterial assets and points of attachment were simultaneously being 
appropriated by the government under the guises of rurality. Protecting the 'special' rural 
character and Tohoku's "latent strengths" (p. 2) is overtly present in the government's aims 
for the recovery in the 'Hope beyond the disaster' -document, also including a sections on 
cultural restoration (p. 24-25) and tourism promotion (p. 31-32) in which the elements of 
rurality are promoted through emphases on nativist concepts like kizuna (social bonding) and 
the establishment of a 'Tohoku brand' based on promotion of "indeginous cultural assets" (p. 
31), such as fishing, farming, festivals and food. These emphases on romanticised notions of 
rural harmony and natural abundance broadly coincide with the government's 
neoconservative aims of regaining Japan's national strengths and calls for national solidarity 
in order for the recovery to be successful (Forgash 2011).  
These imaginaries of that romanticise the rural regions however are often regenerated and 
recreated at a distance, in hyper-urban regions of Kant or Kansai by urbanites living away 
from the authentic and natural order of Japanese life (Nishimura 2014) and therefore distant 
from the daily experiences and affective mundaneness of contemporary rural regions. The 
rural ideal functioned as a metaphor for a promise of a 'better' post-disaster reality, enabling 
the juxtaposition of discomforts and displeasures, such as anxieties over the future, 
uncomfortable living conditions and continuously changing landscapes of the recovery of the 
present, against the future comforts of a more safer and resilient communities, socio-
economic prosperity and growth. This embedded liminality is mirrored in the government's 
'big plan' for the future of Tohoku, that too induced a state of discomfort and the future 
existing in the real of "sometime" at the end of the opaque pathway to the future. Abram 
(2017) argues that such opaqueness is characterstic of contemporary participatory city 
planning processes, where genuine envisioning and imagining of the future is not often 
happening, but rather that the delivery of the promised future is embedded within the very 
making of a promise itself (p. 77-78), where the goals and 'big plans' of the future are used to 
justify the actions in the present to enable the coming of the promised future; thus also 
justifying making people wait for the government's exogenous grand vision of the future to 
be completed and helping to maintain people in an extended state of gaman.  
The suspension embedded into the recovery planning and practical execution that 
maintained people in a constant state of waiting is integrally linked to the duality of the 
recovery, exemplified by Mr. Takeda saying that "once this recovery is over, we can start to 
rebuild our community". Andrew Littlejohn (2018) writes that "rebuilding is not, and can never 
be a strictly technical or bureaucratic process: it always involves value judgements", and it is 
the vast qualitative difference in the values between the two notions of recovery that I have 
tried to interpret throughout these chapters. Mr. Takeda's utterance in itself encompasses 
the duality of the recovery, organised into a sequential order, linked to the inbuilt hierarchies, 
prioritisation and value orientations that remain persistent problems within participatory 
governance processes. It is therefore questionable to what degree can simply pushing 
externally driven administrative processes of strategic planning and participatory governance 
really bring in a sense of proximity to the recovery process, if the negotiation of different 
value judgements between 'building housing units' versus 'rebuilding homes and 
communities' for instance are not included into the establishment and negotiations of the 
bureaucratic processes guiding the recovery. What Mr. Takeda's utterance above indicates is 
that for the local populations the 'recovery' did not include 'rebuilding communities'; raising 
the question of whether recovery process can truly be 'community-based' if the community 
that is supposed to be a part of the process is not there yet.  
7.2. Building ochitsuku out of completion of small plans 
Familiar values and rural ideals that were embedded into government's plans as the ultimate 
goals helped people to gaman, by regaining a sense of pride in their communities, and form 
attachments and maintain momentum. However, reaching the idealised goals did not 
constitute a full recovery in itself as I argue it did not respond to the immediate needs of 
communities to increase their sense of comfort and settledness in these locations, while also 
disengaging people from genuine engagements with the participatory recovery processes. 
This is exemplified for instance by the inabilities many locals presented to concretely imagine 
lives and communities at the end of the recovery, as outlined above, while also leaving 
people's immediate daily needs unattended. "Saying that we still don't have a supermarket 
seems like such a small complaint compared to all the other bigger problems, but it is actually 
a very big issue for us", Mr. Kimura noted, and through this observation honed in on the lack 
of comfort, stability, and consistency experienced in these everyday life of communities, that 
I argue stood in the way of people's abilities to engage with the the processes of solving the 
'bigger problems'.  
In response to my question 'what is the most important thing the recovery needs to achieve', 
people often referred to the re-establishment of housing that would enable people to return 
home, to which the success of the recovery culminated for many. Despite the sense of stability 
the temporary houses had provided to many, these living arrangements were nonetheless 
temporary, offering little sense of predictability or affective comfort that would fulfill the 
long-term desires for social cohesion, sense of security, and settledness in place. Many others 
too, were describing their future homes primarily through embodied and affective imagery, 
rather than through connections of references to the specific building plans of neighbourhood 
designs. Mr. Takeda laughingly told me that while there were many bigger things to worry 
about, his dream was to be able to stretch his legs in the fur (Japanese style bath) once again, 
as the bathtub in their temporary house was too small for this. For Ms. Shimizu on the other 
hand, being at home was associated with the surrounding forests and the sea, and that way 
being able to experience the changes of the season around her through these natural 
elements. "All I can think about is my house", Ms. Shimizu exclained, for instance when I asked 
her the same question about what the future of her neighbourhood, and the town of 
Onagawa would more broadly look like. Home therefore referred to the affective intensities 
of comfort and stability, communal relations and security, representing the starting point for 
what Mr. Takeda referred to as 'community building', following the end of the formal recovery 
that in many ways was impeding and distancing the onset of building homes and communities.  
The desires for settledness and permanence were at times exacerbated by the changing life 
circumstances that were taking place in exile. Ms. Wada (REF 43) had been a single mother at 
the time of the disaster. After the loss of her home to the tsunami, she found herself sharing 
a small sleeping area with her three sons in the emergency shelter, with little privacy or space 
for family activities. After months of waiting, they were able to move to their allocated 
temporary housing unit that, like for many disaster victims (Watanabe and Maruyama 2018), 
provided Ms. Wada and her family the much-needed respite and privacy. During her life in 
the temporary house, she met her new husband who moved in with her and her sons; soon 
followed by the birth of their baby daughter: "all of a sudden we were six people sharing a 
small house like that [...] there was no space to sit down and have a meal, we had to eat 
standing up". The birth of their daughter enabled them to move into a larger temporary 
housing unit, but despite the added space, life was still cramped. Her sons who were 12, 15 
and 18 at the time of our conversation, had all become teenagers during their time in exile: 
"their bodies are so big now", Ms. Wada said, hoping that very soon they would have a proper 
house of their own where all her children, and her and her husband could have their own 
space and settle down (ochitsuku) properly.  
I heard this word ochitsuku frequently among the affected populations. Composing of two 
characters,  and , the first with the literal meaning 'to fall' (ochiru) and the latter 'to 
arrive' (tsuku) and to wear something on the lower half of the body, both refer to the 
connection between bodily experiences, a sense of destination and belonging, and the 
proximity of these physical sensations. As a compound, ochitsuku refers to calmness, 
composure and presence of mind, and therefore a fitting analogy for reaching a place where 
one can feel 'settled'. The state of discomfort experienced through gaman, thus stood in stark 
juxtaposition with the longing for sense of ochitsuku, a state in which the long-term and 
prolonged tensions could be released.  For the local residents, reaching ochitsuku culminated 
in the idea of being able to get home from which the community building process would begin, 
representing the starting point for the second, or perhaps the 'true' recovery for local 
residents.  
Such transmission with affective characteristics are not unique to Japan, but still remain only 
an emerging aspect of scholarly work on post-disaster recovery. Clear patterns of the 
centrality of the affective can however be detected. Studying decision-making on return to 
New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina, Morrice (2013) found that the way people 
accommodate the stress induced by a catastrophe is an important determinant of the 
direction they take regarding their futures, where the non-material and affective attachment 
were the main drivers of decision-making. The importance of affective place attachment have 
been highlighted elsewhere as well (Smith & Cartlidge 2011, Chamlee-Wright & Storr 2009), 
specifically in relation to the sense of 'feeling at home' (Cox & Perry 2011, Barrios 2017, 
Albrecht 2006). Based on my research in Tohoku, the future-oriented imaginations of 'home' 
and the feeling of being at home also played an important role in people's imaginations of the 
future, the recovery, and adaptation to the new situation, thus making their apparent lack in 
the formal recovery process all the more acute.  
Homes and feeling at home feature heavily as the central articulation of people's desires and 
personal objectives, but also clearly indicating toward the broader meaning of homeliness 
beyond physical reconstruction. Simlar to ochitsuku, Barrios (2017) found that people post-
disaster relocation sites in Honduras rested their acceptance and adaptation to the new 
community on whether they felt 'hallarse' (to find oneself) or not. What he found was that 
the majority of relocated populations were experiencing difficulties in feeling hallarse in their 
new homes, whose socio-material conditions were not inducing the sensory and affective 
familiarity or comfort that would induce a new attachment, leading the new homes to 
perpetuate the sense of discomfort and displacement many already felt (Barrios 2017, p. 57). 
Similarly, Albrecht (2006) coined the term 'solastalgia', an amalgamation of nostalgia and 
solace, to refer to a sense of homesickness in the loss of familiar landscapes, memories, and 
landmarks, that they found among survivors of disasters; something that Ms. Shimizu seemed 
to refer to with the loss of 'instinctiveness' she experienced in her hometown.  
What these reports exhibit is the dissonance that disaster victims often feel in relation to their 
affective desires and the tangible physical contexts and socio-economic outcomes that 
emerged and became fixed into place as a course of the recovery; eventually coming to stand 
in the way of finding such comfort in the new material context even after the recovery comes 
to its official closure (Barrios 2017). This dissonance is crucial to our understanding local 
dissatisfactions that are nonetheless present, despite the majority of community-based 
reconstruction processes executing a wide array of engagement processes with local 
communities (Barrios 2017, Curato 2018) and do end up meeting the promised objective 
metric of recovery (numbers of housing units, increased physical resilience, standard of living 
for instance). The dissatisfaction that disaster victims often feel irrespective of these 
processes, sense of voicelessness and 'kimochi ga wakaranai', are indications of the 
connection between the articulate and the affective that is not being satisfied in the process.  
Being able to engage with the big questions and big plans that existed outside of the 
immediate remit of the personal recovery depended on the ability to be able to feel at home 
and be settled into place that was still not a reality for many of the residents, thus 
compromising the very foundation of community-based 'best practice' as reflective and 
inclusive of the communal voices. It is therefore questionable to what degree are local 
residents who are still far away from being in a state where they could feel secure and 
comfortable enough to fully explore and engage with the possibilities of the recovery. But 
also, without such engagement, can the sense of settledness and comfort be truly recreated 
by a system of governance and reconstruction from which the affective intensities and sense 
of 'understanding how we feel' has been evacuated?  
It is therefore important to recognise the differences in how narratives and discourses of 
authorities and citizens are formed, experienced and transmitted, and the inherent resistance 
to articulations that remains characteristic of affective intensities (Wetherell 2013). Modern 
planning and community development practices do not seem conducive to include affective 
transmissions (Abram 2017) that form such a central part of the localised narratives that 
however resist precise and well-defined articulations. If it is affects that are driving people's 
experiences of the recovery and imaginaries of the future, how can we become better at 
recognising them and integrating the affective nature of recovery as a starting point for the 
community-based practices?  
Kay (2011) argues that by solving the small problems in people's everyday (lack of a 
supermarket, crowded living spaces, loss of neighbours), the structure of the broader 
problems and societal challenged can be revealed through the very process of solving them. 
Kay's observation of the small problems being the tangible reflections of larger societal 
challenges themselves, is exemplified by the dissonance between the exogenous and 
endogenous narratives that have dominated the articulation and transmission of Tohoku's 
recovery. If the objective of post-disaster recovery is to be community-based or community-
focused, with communities being the 'leaders' in recovery, then we need heightened 
consciousness toward the affective nature of recovery that are driving people's everyday 
experiences, articulations and the very meaning of community itself. This dissonance and 
tension also illustrate the impossibility of devising community-based processes from afar and 
how problems that emerge directly from life in recovering contexts cannot be determined 
without continuous efforts to try and understand shape of those problems in proximity to 
them. Stewart (2007) argues that the main motivation for focusing on affects is the need to 
slow down "the quick jump to representational thinking", referring to the clarity awarded by 
abstractions we form of the ordinary world, and instead point back to the ordinary world 
"whose forms of living are now being composed and suffered " (p. 4-5). We need to 
deconstruct the unidirectional movement from abstract and representational thinking to 
practical applications in post-disaster recovery processes, through which the affective 
intensities of the everyday get sidelined and subordinated to the technocratic objectives in 
the authorities' 'big plans'.   
Chapter 8 
Finding the beginnings that count:  
Deconstructing the duality of development in theory and 
practice 
Throughout the thesis I have drawn on concepts such as participation, empowerment, 
resilience and proximity as integral values in community-based development, and equally, 
discussed contextually embedded concepts such as 'window of opportunity', 'building back 
better', and 'everyone's voice' in relation to post-disaster recovery processes. Previous 
research on post-disaster recovery and risk mitigation has already widely discussed the 
conceptual development and applications, finding that these concepts remain fuzzy (Cornwall 
and Brock 2005, Kelman 2018, Quarantelli 2005), coopted from their original meanings 
(Bherer et al. 2016, Batliwala 2007, Leal 2007), or their arenas of usage are so broad that the 
concepts themselves have been argued to have become almost meaningless (Rushing 2016). 
Throughout this thesis I have contested the application of fixed abstractions and definitions 
to recovering contexts and have illustrated that these concepts do not in fact carry fixed 
contents or descriptions but are living entities that circulate in the power struggles and 
agendas within which they are used. By approaching the subject matter of recovery through 
individual experiences and lives, we can learn to understand the structures and behaviour of 
problems and develop strategies for solving them (Kay 2011, Hamdi 2014). My approach 
therefore relates to work on critical narratives relating to the utilisation and application of 
terminology, concepts and glossaries on disaster resilience, empowerment, participation and 
localism (e.g. Williams 2004, Mohan and Stokke 2000, Rushing 2016, Leal 2007, Mason and 
Boutilier 2009), that do not fully capture what Kelman (2018) argues is the necessary depth 
of these concepts as on-going processes. The purpose of has been to demonstrate how the 
'fuzziness' associated with the key concepts is not in itself a problem, but rather can be used 
as a methodological starting point to getting closer to the experiences and discourses that 
circulate within recovering contexts.  
As I have discussed throughout this thesis, despite the language of "leaders of recovery" 
denoting either municipalities or individual citizens, the question of true leadership and 
location of power should be raised, as all actors at times work within conflicting power 
structures. Municipalities for instance, while gaining a say in the recovery process due to their 
physical proximity to the recovering space, nonetheless face structural barriers in terms of 
financial arrangements and fiscal procedures set by the national government that is 
effectively reducing their powers to actually take the lead in the recovery (Chapter 1). 
Similarly, on the community level, participatory processes that are designed to place affected 
populations in a position of power and leadership were often the very instruments that led 
to the sensation of disempowerment among the affected populations, and thus not seen fit 
for purpose (Chapter 4, Chapter 5). In terms of conceptual development then, we can ask, 
where do the definitions and meanings for concepts come from?  Applying a process that has 
been defined as empowering, or participatory, or community-based on a theoretical level, 
does not automatically make it relevant to the life worlds of those who are subject to the 
application of these concepts. Unless we develop an understanding of what empowers those 
who have most at stake in the recovery, how they want to participate, what makes them feel 
safe, and what motivates them, can we truly understand how people are feeling in the 
recovery (kimochi ga wakaru)? Once we step into their life worlds and try to see the reality 
from their stand point, we can learn to understand not only what constitutes empowerment 
for those with most at stake, but also understand the intensities, feelings, and sensations that 
lead from empowerment, or in fact disempowerment, when it is genuinely experienced.  
As I have discussed above, the majority of strategies within community-based recovery in 
Japan have relied on the articulated feelings, opinions, ideas and emotions, and the 
verbalisation of knowledge and information to the authorities. However, throughout this 
thesis I have shown that the overarching trend in how the disaster affected populations were 
communicating their individual disaster experiences was in association with the affective 
context, forming into an endogenous discourse about the recovery that was distinctly 
separate from the government's narrative for the recovery. The strategies utilised within the 
authorities' community-based approaches to the recovery were however failing to capture 
the affective impact of the disaster and recovery on the disaster affected populations 
themselves. Affects by nature exist beyond articulations and are individually and communally 
experienced in the realms that can be hard to convey through verbalisations and abstractions 
alone. What matters is not only the surface level analytical verbalisation of key principles such 
as empowerment, participation, resilience and proximity, but also the intended affects and 
meanings that these verbalisations are trying to transmit.  
It is these intended meanings that do not always neatly reflect the established abstractions 
of the concepts in the contexts in which they are applied, and from which I argue that the 
majority of tensions and dissonance between the exogenous and endogenous discourses 
emerges. As we have seen in the context of Tohoku's post-disaster communities, a sense of 
empowerment did not always lead from participation in the official recovery process. Indeed, 
participating in the official and legitimated spaces of participation, such workshops and 
community meetings, at times produced the opposite outcomes of voicelessness. While 
residents had been offered numerous opportunities to participate and voice their ideas and 
concerns, as Mr. Iwasaki noted, many had already ceased to come along, as participation only 
led to frustrations due to "everything having been decided already", recounting how the 
participatory processes worked for the 'yes-men' of the authorities, while leading others to 
give up. Equally, voicelessness in the recovery process was induced through the organisation 
of meetings in terms of timings and regulations that prevented people from taking part. While 
there were positive outcomes of participation too, like Mr. Takeda who expressed excitement 
toward the opportunities he had had to participate in the recovery workshops and felt like his 
ideas now lived on in the landscape, he too nonetheless kept recounting his inabilities to 
imagine a future in the new town and expressed worries about the shape that life would take 
in the new townscape, not quite able to grasp its possibilities and limitations in any concrete 
sense. The experiences people had in and out of the participatory spaces therefore leave one 
to question whether physical verbalisation and voicing of concerns can ever be enough and 
can participatory processes that do not include the non-verbal and the non-articulate really 
capture the voices of the local affected populations.  
While we cannot access the interior states of other people, we can trace these states through 
the way people affect each other and are in turn affected (Massumi 2002, Ahmed 2004). The 
performative quality of affects, sentiments, and narrating as a practice of affecting each other 
and being affected by others represent ways of transmitting the affects that move us and 
present useful and powerful ways to understand peoples experiences in times of disaster and 
recovery. The question is, where does the affective landscape of performances, intensities 
and embodied discourses fit into within the spectrum of theory and practice? By approaching 
recovery from the affective perspective, more as a methodology than as a theory, can help 
the development of community-based recovery to become truly community-based, where 
the importance of direct entangled and embodied engagements with the affective context 
rises to the surface. The importance of the experiences in and with the affective context were 
reflected in the numerous frustrated iterations of local residents, such as Ms. Wada pleading 
people in Tokyo to "come and see for yourself", or Mr. Hayashi and Inoue recounting the small 
number of times city official come to their neighbourhood to talk to the residents, illustrating 
the points of contention that lead to people feeling like they are not being understood 
(kimochi ga wakaranai).  
The key puzzle explored in this thesis has been an exploration of the gap between theory and 
practice in community-based approaches. This core problem is often analysed at residing in 
the process where theoretical and representational knowledge is applied into practice, with 
the context often not behaving in the way that the theory suggests. However, as I have 
outlined in this thesis, the problem is not a simple matter of application, as White (1996) 
recounts in her argument on the technocratisation of development processes. Rather the 
issue is how the meaning, shape and evaluation of the problems that are addressed in the 
development process are constructed and transmitted both verbally and non-verbally in 
remarkably different ways by the authorities. By approaching the gap between theory and 
practice from a perspective where the affective, the physical context and articulations meet, 
it becomes possible to see that what has been assumed to be a gap, is rather a deliberate 
effort to structure paths and decisions that preferences one discourse while silencing 
another; reflective of the dominant epistemological positions held on the relationship 
between theory and practice.  
8.1. Relationship between theory and practice 
Throughout the research project I have tried to approach the subject of post-disaster recovery 
both from the perspectives of investigation and understanding, as well as the practices and 
interactions that take place in communities that do not necessarily follow the logic of our 
theoretical and abstract reasonings. I have discussed the recovery project in Tohoku both 
from the perspective of discourses as either emerging from the inside and or the outside, 
oscillating between the discourse formed by the so-called technocracy (experts, academics, 
policy-makers, bureaucrats), and the everyday experiences and affects of individuals who are 
creating a story for themselves, their communities, and the future of their regions (the 
affected populations). The dissonance and the gap between these two discourses was found 
to exist in a hierarchical relationship with one another, where despite the shared principles 
and goals for the recovery, the two discourses were driven by different emergent meanings, 
values and actors. The thesis finds that what we take as the gap between theory and practice 
points to different starting points in the way development is imagined, tensions rising 
between dissonant ways of transmitting what recovery or development might be. However, 
equally, I propose that by focusing on the everyday, as the domain where theory and practice 
converge, we can more flexibly navigate and understand these tensions, whether in the 
domain of theory or practice, without recourse to privileging one over the other. 
I have discussed the gap between theory and practice but maintained a position where I do 
not frontload the research with definitions of what these two terms refer to, wanting to avoid 
fixing the reader's imaginations to a specific terminology and definitions. However, a 
discussion on what exactly is a gap between theory and practice becomes relevant at this 
juncture. Both theory and practice are necessary of course, but their relationship is often 
presented in a hierarchical manner, with some arguing that a "well applied theory answers 
interesting questions in a well-known thematic stream of work" (Straub 2009, p. vii), while 
others emphasise on the necessity of empirical contributions and the focus on qualitative 
characteristics of the research itself rather than placing theory as the starting point for 
evaluating all research (Lee 2014, Avison and Malaurent 2014, gerfalk 2017). However, the 
question resides perhaps not in the straightforward linear hierarchy per se, but rather in the 
nature of the relationship that the two assume with one another. Whether arising from the 
sphere of theory or practice, the emphasis often remain on the systematic accumulation of 
knowledge and the influence of this knowledge in the real world (Gregor 2006). 
However, I have shown throughout the previous chapters of this thesis, knowledge is not in 
fact always accumulated in a systematic manner. This notion connects with Tim Ingold's 
(2018) reflections on the nature of knowledge and who is considered to be producing 
knowledge. Processes of adaptation, sense-making, knowledge production, or understanding 
are not always conscious processes that follow a straightforward pattern leading from 
observations and experiences to abstractions and representative knowledge. In relation to 
the relationship between theory and practice, based on my own observations, experts are 
expected to draw from their knowledge, learning and training and in an agile and sensitive 
manner apply this to the specific contexts within which they are working. The role of the 
practitioners is to work with those who are affected and use their learning and training to 
connect, engage and empower local residents and affected populations into the processes of 
development in order to make the plans of the experts fit the needs of those for whom the 
plans are made. The process is imagined as fluid, with various actors working in conjunction 
with one another to meet the outcomes and objectives of plans that are set out in the 
beginning as the overall vision of the future. The affected populations themselves are seen as 
eager participants in knowledge production and decision-making as this is their future that 
we are rebuilding.  
Applying outside knowledge to the inside, theory to practice so to speak, nor building a theory 
and abstraction from the knowledge and insights of individuals is never clear cut. Like the 
differences between inductive and deductive research get infused and the borders between 
them ebb and flow over and in between each other, so do the boundaries between what are 
termed as theory and practice. It is this fuzzy space in between theory and practice that I 
aimed to explore in this thesis. However, development processes are still persistently framed 
in a vertical manner, either as top-down or bottom-up, where development practitioners and 
anthropologists (like myself) tending to lean toward the bottom-up approach. But direction 
of the movement along the vertical axis does not guarantee a process of being either bottom-
up of top-down. Top-down efforts require at least minimal response from the bottom (Keare 
2001), and bottom-up initiatives often require either a favourable operational climate or, in 
ideal cases, meaningful support from the top (Bek et al. 2004).  
Both theory and practice develop in a circular relationship with one another. We develop 
theories that are then applied to contexts, after which we develop theories further and again 
apply them into practice. While it can be useful to think of theory and practice as separate 
domains, it risks rendering the domain of the everyday life worlds of those who are most 
affected by the upheavals as the fuzzy and unpenetrable space, where neither theory or 
practice can operate fully to their intended degree, thus rendering the drive for clarity as 
meaningless. To lend from Michael Fischer's (2007) notion that "culture is not a variable" (p. 
39), nor are theory or practice with fixed meanings and fixed operations. Like Fischer's notion 
on the relational quality of culture, the meanings and performances of concepts, theories, 
and practices are in continuous motion, something that can never be reduced to a fixed 
concept or a variable, but rather a symbiotic relationship that exists in multiple discourses, 
multiple relationships and multiple levels of action simultaneously. 
Theory means different things in different contexts, and the same principle can be equally 
applied to practice as well (Lee 2014). As exemplified in this thesis, the representational 
categories of knowledge assigned for the key principles or participation, empowerment, 
resilience and proximity in the recovery documents diverged greatly from the understandings 
and constructed meanings that affected populations were developing in close contact with 
the physical and affective context of their everyday lives of living amidst the recovery. While 
fixed meanings of concepts such as empowerment, resilience, participation or proximity 
cannot be applied upon the affected populations without due consideration for the localised 
contexts, but neither should we call for a simple extraction of meanings from the populations 
and treat those as universal truths. Instead, a better recognition of how the two converge in 
the spaces and contexts of development are needed.   
However, this symbiotic relationship where both theory and practice emerge with different 
qualities depending on the contexts and circumstances in which they operate is often not the 
reality of the recovering contexts. While at the beginning of this research project I quite 
naively envisioning outcomes that would develop techniques and practices that would bridge 
the gap between theory and practice and lead to better development outcomes. What I 
became interested in during my field work in Tohoku however, was not how to bridge the gap 
I had assumed existed merely due to the dissatisfaction people presented toward the post-
disaster recovery process, and thus validate the technocratic narratives of development from 
a theoretical and practical angles. Rather, through the long-term engagement with the 
everyday context of the recovery and explorations of daily routines, feelings and priorities, I 
began to recognise the disaster context as an affective space from which a wealth of 
alternative ideals, practices, theories and intensities were forming into distinct discourses 
that formed the primary strand of sense-making for local residents.  
What I found in Tohoku is that local residents were caught between theory and practice, 
policy and daily life, knowledge and performance that split the reality of the recovery into two 
spheres. In one, the top-down reality of the 'big plans' and visions of the recovery, guided and 
supported by policies, legislation, financial arrangements, academic and technical knowledge 
were driving the recovery toward a long-term future. This sphere was the abstracted 
unmovable entity that local residents had to learn to live with, go around, or over. People 
were suspended between the past that was lost and the splintered future between their own 
plans and dreams for the future, and the official plans that pulled and tugged them in various 
directions, putting their own plans on hold, or suddenly jolting them into a place where they 
needed to make decisions. And the potentialities that existed at the mercy of the official 
recovery, and those that could exist irrespective of it.  
These tensions in many senses resemble Jansen's (2014) notion of "enforced presentism" 
(S75), filled with running, chasing, and striving for things, while not actually being able to 
move forward toward the set objectives. In Tohoku, the temporal space of or enforced 
presentism was filled with administered hope that was encouraging people to persevere 
(gaman) and work hard (ganbaru) in the name of the recovery. Due to the evacuation of their 
own endogenous processes of imagination from the formal recovery, all affected populations 
could do was to hope that the 'big plan' was going to deliver the promised prosperity and 
sustainability of the promised future, in which the affected populations could settle down in 
comfort (ochitsuku).  
8.2. Different beginnings, different endings 
It was the everyday performances of individuals and communities within this tug and pull 
motion between the two recoveries that were particularly present in the recovery 
experiences of the affected populations. Resignation from the formal recovery, awakening to 
alternatives, drawing on nostalgic notions, and the mundane experiences in the 
contemporary present of the community all reflected the motivations of the local populations, 
developing into specific forms of performances that that could be carried out in the state of 
gaman, while being motivated by the imaginaries of the future. In the beginning of Chapter 
4, I explored the activities people were engaged in and the constant buzz that seemed to exist 
in these communities, filled with actions and performances in the enforced presentism. These 
actions were directional, toward the storyline or the future of the 'what can be' that had 
emerged through affective experiences of the disaster and the recovery. While directional 
and strategic, many of these activities contained a note of playfulness, attitude of "nothing to 
lose", and freshness, in the sphere of alternatives or possibilities beyond the norm. 
Performance of these alternative actions could be characterised as a form of improvisation. 
It is the human labour that went into improvisatory practices and knowledge production that 
also went unnoticed within the space between theory and practice, trying to bridge the space 
between the abstractions and the messiness of the everyday.  
Improvisation is often characterised as a form of thinking on your feet, acting out things in 
the moment, and producing unexpected outcomes. Improvisation however has gained some 
traction in research in recent years, emphasising the role of improvisation in development 
practice (Hamdi 2014, Wetmore and Theron 1998), in imaginations of the future (Sjberg 
2017), organisational research (Zheng et al. 2007), education (Rush & Fecho 2008, Sarantou 
2018), and disaster readiness (Tint et al. 2015) to name a few. Sarantou 2018 states that 
improvisation is "considered synonymous with play, offering only second-best solutions to 
problems", further continuing that "improvisatory processes often respond to pressing 
demands and notions of having to do what needs to be done to sustain livelihoods" (p. 1358), 
therefore making improvisatory processes exceedingly relevant to the post-disaster context 
that combines elements of social well-being, design, art, culture, architecture, and economy.  
However, improvisation is not mere 'grappling in the dark' or responding to unexpected 
situations, or externally forced actions. Nor is improvisation merely a "second-best solution" 
as Sarantou notes above, that can be sidelined as a frivolous past-time. Improvising is often 
strategic in a sense of getting things done (reflective of Kay's (2011) notion of learning about 
the structure of the problem by the process of solving it), but equally, of enabling people to 
keep paths open for different possibilities and alternatives from the expected or the norm to 
take place.  Starting from the big plans requires strategic planning, where all the pieces are 
put together into a grand scale puzzle, all pieces fit and move together, orchestrated through 
a carefully crafted manual of operations, enshrined in legislation, policies and fiscal 
procedures, aiming to deliver equitable, fast, safe and quality recovery in a community-
focused manner. But imagine if one piece of this puzzle goes missing, or in the flow of action 
one path gets blocked or overflows. Inevitably, big plans never go as they are planned. They 
always involve adjustments and readjustments, negotiated across actors, budgets, legislation, 
policies and needs of individuals.  
These readjustments were present in Tohoku numerous times over, both on the level of 
national planning, and on the municipal level, and what Ms. Wada (REF 43) referred to when 
she recounted her frustrations over the slowness of the recovery: "They make a budget for 
three years, and then for five years, but could they also finish the recovery in that time?". The 
overall slowness of the recovery, delays in housing restoration, and population exodus for 
instance however have resulted in the real human costs, primarily experienced on individual 
and communal levels: Decisions to abandon communities that have provided homes for 
people for decades, often generations; the pressures of perseverance (gaman) in a state of 
discomfort; loss of sense of place and belonging; and the trauma relived everyday through 
the daily reminders of the disaster still lingering in the landscape of reconstruction. When all 
the pieces of the puzzle are drawn from the start, it leaves little room to maneuver and 
explore alternatives. The plans are fixed and once decided they are there to stay. In this 
context where the 'big plan' dominates the recovery, improvisation can sometimes be the 
only way for individuals to navigate through the small cracks that emerge in the seams of the 
puzzle and mitigate the human costs of the recovery.  
Twenty years ago Anthony Giddens noted that we live in "a society increasingly preoccupied 
with the future (and also with safety), which generates the notion of risk" (Giddens and 
Pierson 1998, p.209), referring to the separation of the notion of risk from danger or hazards, 
with a specifically future-oriented landscape of uncertainty. Further noting: "in a world where 
one can no longer simply rely on tradition to establish what to do in a given range of contexts 
[...] the future becomes ever more absorbing, but at the same time more opaque. There are 
few direct lines to it, only a plurality of 'future scenarios'" (p. 210). What Giddens refers to is 
the fragmentation of the path to the future, or the 'evacuation of the near future' according 
to Guyer (2007), where each milestone that is reached contains a number of new trajectories, 
whose riskiness needs to be individually assessed and weighed against each other in order for 
a calculated decision to become possible. Improvisation forms a part of this broader process 
of imagination of the future and qualitative calculation of risks on a societal level; For the 
affected populations in Tohoku this meant navigating between waiting and acting, precarity 
and settledness, risks and opportunities.  
In chapter 2, I refer to Lauren Berlant's emphasis on people viewing their lives as stories, and 
they recognise the arc of the story they can see themselves as the authors of those stories 
(Berlant 2011). The stories we develop for ourselves are not woven in isolation, but they are 
impacted by larger narratives in society as well. They impact the way we see our stories 
practically being realised, and the barriers and propellants that can make our stories come 
true or stop them in their tracks. The notion of a risk society is relevant for Japan's 
contemporary history, where, the post-1990s metanarratives of the Lost Decade/s, 
precarious society, uncertainty, the loss of stability and so on have dominated the social and 
economic analyses of the future in the field of Japanese studies for decades. Alongside these 
bleak and risk-filled imaginaries, as a form of antidote, discourses centering on hope and 
happiness have emerged to indicate that among the uncertainty that exists within the 
structures of society, individual lives need not be quite as hopeless and lost. 
The emphases on hopefulness have gained traction in Japanese society for a long time before 
the onset of the Great East Japan Earthquake and Tsunami (e.g. Hirowatari 2009, Leheny 2018, 
Genda 2006) but gained specific meaning in the aftermath of the 'unprecedented' disaster. 
Hope as a broader social narrative does not in fact simply mean 'to have hope', but is 
incorporated as a propellent to the social processes of self-improvement, happiness, 
responsibilisation, effort, and hard work that are argued to provide individuals with 
personalised tools for mitigating the risks that are posed by the broader systemic troubles 
and risks of an existential nature. Against these individualising processes, a sense of social 
diversification, critiques of modernisation, and challenges to the nations vision for the future 
became equally challenged in the disaster's aftermath (Morris-Suzuki 2017, Shaw 2017). For 
the populations in Tohoku, the 'unprecedented' disaster brought the most unimaginable 
destruction in its wake, shaking the very notion of risk itself, and how to prepare for them. 
The disaster exposed the weaknesses and futility within the emphases on risk mitigation; no 
matter how prepared communities were, the most unimaginable thing nevertheless 
happened.  
In the post-disaster landscape, the focus on risks for many local residents however has shifted 
from risk mitigation to that of possibilities, where seeing the benefits of alternatives and 
untried options have become more appealing. While the actions of rural migrants were made 
and actioned on the individual level, they indicated toward a desired structural change where 
individual life choices and the rural society offered "keys to describing the next society", as 
Mr. Hashimoto (REF 32) explained it. For the locals, the disaster did offer a 'window of 
opportunity' for new beginnings, where the focus was on these alternative paths, aiming to 
bring about the alternatives and the possibilities that are removed from the norm that start 
to sprout through the cracks in the 'big plan', with a collective and even existential morality 
that was challenging the mainstream norms and values of consumption, employment, and 
sources of life satisfaction. Unfortunately, due to the lack of affective proximity and emphasis 
on articulable content and harmonious coexistence in the community development practice 
in Tohoku's recovery context made these alternative paths, visions and conceptualisation of 
the future sidelined from the formal recovery process.  
8.3. Developing a new 'best practice'  
The nature of the gap between theory and practice and how we approach it has implications 
for practitioners and their engagement with the populations whose lives they are supposed 
to support and whose problems they are supposed to intervene. From a methodological 
standpoint as practitioners we need better tools for learning with people (Pink and Salazar 
2017, Ingold 2018); how the learning we can bring into the developing contexts can converge 
with and reflect the lived experiences of affected populations in that context better. Not in a 
sense of political or social advocacy, but in coming up with ways to understand the intensities 
of people's lived experience and how these intensities are transmitted to others. The methods 
and approaches that we use need to correspond with the reality that we are exploring in order 
to understand the complexities of multiple and often competing futures, and the 
consequences these struggles have on the future of individuals and communities.   
While I began this journey by asking why there is a gap between theory and practice in 
community-based approaches to post-disaster recovery (Chapter 1), reflected by the localised 
utterance of kimochi ga wakaranai in Japan, reaching the end of this journey has enabled me 
to question the meaning of a 'gap' and how partitioners should approach it. When we discuss 
gaps, especially in the field of research, they are often discussed in terms of something that 
is 'missing', 'lacking' or questions that remain 'unasked' or 'uncovered' (George et al. 2005, 
van Evera 1997). A 'gap' therefore suggests a divide, an empty space that produces a divide 
that separates two entities from each other. In the field of development too, the gap between 
theory and practice remains a central concern that has been widely discussed both as a 
primary research question (Mason and Boutlier 2009, Reimers 2016, De Neufville 1983, Lloyd-
Jones 2006), and as a research outcome (Davidson et. al 2006, Sou 2019b). However, 
Gustafsson and Hagstrm (2018), argue that often the focus on gaps is based on the "mere 
inclusion/exclusion, rather than why a certain gap is problematic and should be filled" (p. 637). 
The lack of qualitative content about the nature of such gaps has rendered the discussion to 
represent a divide, a static state of tension with little directionality. Kimochi ga wakaranai 
however did not represent mere inclusion or exclusion, but within itself represented a whole 
new way of approaching the way affected populations were patterning and making sense of 
the past, present and the future in conjunction with the daily context they occupied. The 
endogenous discourse emerged through the shifting of focus onto the affective and the role 
the non-articulable characteristics play in the production and transmission of knowledge; thus 
helping to destabilise the fixed definitions, and give rise to the synergies between discourse, 
affects and contexts in contrast to the opaqueness induced by the processes embedded into 
the exogenous recovery narrative.  
As I have argued with the help of the empirical material in this thesis, what the development 
discourse has viewed as a gap between theory and practice, is perhaps more a process of 
establishing and preferencing a discourse that determines both the content of knowledge and 
its application into the developing context. In this way, the work of development practitioners, 
as White (1996) argues, has become a technocratic process, an epitome of practitioners 
sharing the spaces of development with those who are "being developed" without sharing 
power. As she notes, what begins "as a political issue is translated into a technical problem 
which the development enterprise can accommodate with barely a falter in its stride. 
Incorporation, rather than exclusion, is often the best means of control" (p. 7). As White 
argues, development has increasingly moved toward the sphere of technical expertise, the 
aspects of power and politics have been removed from belonging to the subjects of 
development. White's notion of technocratisation arises from the critical debates that 
emerged during the onset of the Participatory Research in Action (PRA) boom of the 1990s 
(Williams, 2004), leading to strong critiques of participation as the catch-all solution for the 
woes plaguing the development sector (Mohan and Stokke 2000, Chambers 1994, Cannon 
2008), with Cooke and Kothari (2001) going as far as arguing for participation as the 'new 
tyranny'.  
However, while there are apparent problems with their practical execution, participation and 
citizen engagement nonetheless represent the importance of including citizens in decision-
making processes as a core principle of democratic decision-making.  In relation to one of this 
main technique of development practitioners, Williams (2004) shifts the debate toward 
reclaiming the activity by asking: "if participation has gained institutional power within 
development practice, what can this power be made to do?" (p. 94), arguing that this 
relationship with the institutional structures can also function as a source of power, as it has 
the potential to bring up the potential for alternative visions and imaginaries through 
participatory processes, and raise these onto the political agenda (p. 101). This observation 
resonates with the arguments emerging from the post-disaster development contexts, 
echoing Littlejohn's (2018) statement that "always involves value judgments" in the context 
of post-disaster recovery in Japan, as well as Curato's (2018) findings on deliberation leading 
to positive outcomes in post-disaster Philippines. Williams casts the focus on the actual 
practice side of development, drawing on Mohan and Stokke's (2000) notion of a 'new 
political imaginary' for community-based participatory practices, that includes taking 
advantage of the power of the state, arguing that what is needed are genuine debates about 
political values in order to bring out denser interpretations on the nature and roles of both 
the community and the state (p. 102). Mohan and Stokke (2000) further argue that political 
opportunity structures contain both positive and negative features that can "facilitate or 
hamper collective action rather than simply being a monolithic 'other' for collective actors" 
(p. 260).  
Community-based participatory approaches to development can therefore contain the 
foundations for genuine 'best practice', reflective of the discourses and affective contexts of 
local populations. The role of the practitioners, whether it is ethnographers or development 
workers, is to maintain sensitivity and recognition toward these power positions, and open 
space for alternative interpretations, ontologies and imaginaries where power is lacking. 
While the role of practitioners is to support and provide care for populations whose capacities 
in times of adversity are reduced, they should in equal measure try to engage with the local 
populations to "create generative forms of not knowing with others, which might involve 
imagining, planning, designing, enacting, intervening or anticipating the future on an 
everyday basis" (Pink and Salazar 2017, p. 16, emphasis added). Creating knowledge with 
people rather than for them can help to destabilise the reductionist, abstract, 
representational and theoretical thinking that takes place in sociotechnical contexts 
(Markham 2017, p. 239-240). Equally, it can help to unveil the synergies of existing and 
emerging knowledge and practices in conjunction with the developing context, where 
focusing on the purposefulness of improvisation as tactical steps, strategically leading from 
the small beginnings toward a bigger purpose (Kay 2011, Hamdi 2014) can take place. What 
this means in practice is the imperative to create understandings of the future that are more 
radically anticipatory, interventionist and public (Pink and Salazar 2017), and accept a 
methodological stance of uncertainty (Pink et al. 2015) in our engagement with the contexts 
of development. Echoing Hamdi (2014) and Kay's (2011) call for reversal of normative order 
from strategic to practical, acceptance of uncertainty enables a focus on the improvisatory 
and the performative, and their operation within the imaginaries, affects and the everyday 
practices of those most affected, yet most distanced from the sociotechnical contexts, can 
provide the necessary and urgent insights into the problems that we are trying to understand 
and solve. 
Conclusions: Putting the 'community' back into the community-based approaches 
This research started with a question and a puzzle, asking if community-based approaches to 
post-disaster recovery are truly sensitive to the needs of communities, then why is it that 
outcomes of community-based and participatory processes are consistently inconsistent, 
with affected populations reporting high levels of dissatisfaction toward the recovery 
processes? As a result, authors in the field of post-disaster recovery have indicated that there 
appears to be a gap between theory and practice in community-based approaches to post-
disaster recovery, with this thesis setting out to explore why such a gap between theory and 
practice exists. A clearer understanding of community-based approaches is imperative, not 
only in the field of post-disaster recovery, but as the 'best practice' established in the field of 
development and social interventions in general. Community-based and focused approached 
today are a staple in healthcare, education, wellbeing, social support, and rehabilitation for 
instance, connecting themselves to the broader debates on public management, social justice 
and equality, but also economic discourses on efficiency and cost-benefit analyses. As the 
primary motivation of adopting such approaches is to highlight the benefits of interventions 
and development processes to communities, persistent dissatisfaction among community 
members toward the outcomes of these approaches is troubling.  
Throughout these chapters I have built the exploration of the gap between theory and 
practice around the notion of voice, and the different outcomes that voice is envisioned to 
have in community-based approaches, specifically the articulations around the lack of voice, 
chrystallised in the utterance kimochi ga wakaranai, 'they don't understand how we feel', 
that I repeatedly heard in Tohoku during my field work. I have argued that 'voice' in 
participatory and community-based approaches cannot be reduced to mere articulations of 
desires, needs and hopes, and shown how local affected populations were exploring and 
projecting their feelings about the recovery in highly affective terms in conjunction with the 
context of their daily lived experience and the material and immaterial characteristics of their 
communities. These affective elements that for the local residents were integrally involved in 
their desires to 'have a voice' in the recovery, with affects integrally emerging from the daily 
life context carrying communicative power, were however excluded from community-based 
approaches, thus reducing their effectiveness and inherent communality when reduced to 
mere articulations. The endogenous discourse that this thesis has focused on bringing to the 
surface in the empirical chapters, is not only constructed but also transmitted in conjunction 
with the affective context. The meaning of kimochi ga wakaranai as an expression and 
reflection of the lack of affective intensities and considerations in Tohoku's participatory and 
community-based recovery process has become increasingly clear throughout this research 
project.  
Kimochi ga wakaranai therefore functions as an illustration of how the duality of recovery is 
experienced by the affected populations in Tohoku. The two recoveries that I reference 
throughout the thesis are formed through the competing imaginaries between the affected 
populations and the authorities. The recoveries not only diverge in their actor, temporal 
horizons and overall objectives, but are also carried out in a stratified and sequential manner, 
where ironically the recovery emerging from the local life stories and everyday practices of 
individuals and communities, was subjected to the formal recovery that promoted itself as 
community-based/community-focused. One recovery therefore stood in the way of the other, 
leaving the affected populations in a liminal condition where they could not move backwards, 
nor forwards, but simultaneously forced to both wait and keep moving. This context forced 
local communities to exist in a state of pausing, where they were running without going 
anywhere.  
Due to this duality, I have approached the subject from the perspective of 'community', 
preferencing and accentuating the narratives and voices into post-disaster recovery that 
people felt were being unheard, in order to highlight the missing affective elements in the 
community-based recovery in Tohoku. To explore the topic further, between 2015 and 2016 
I carried out a 13-month ethnography in four locations in the Tohoku regions, affected by the 
2011 Great East Japan Earthquake and Tsunami. The data I collected from the region that has 
been analysed for this thesis consists primarily of these oral narratives, but also includes field 
visits, participatory observations, and other qualitative data that has been thematically 
analysed in chapters 4 through 7 of this thesis. The organisation of the chapters has aimed to 
emulate the main description of community-based approaches summarised for the purposes 
of this thesis in the following way, outlined in Chapter 1: the closer to the community the 
development takes place, the more chances local residents have to take part in the 
development of their habitats, thus creating a more accurate understanding of the local needs. 
By participating in the recovery, local residents in turn are argued to become empowered, 
creating more resilient communities for the future who take pride and accountability over 
their habitats. Throughout these chapters I have broken down this basic characterisation, 
looking at each of the key principles (participation, empowerment, resilience and proximity) 
in more detail, and emphasising the local endogenous meanings that reflect them.   
Chapter 4 began by focusing on the notion 'everyone's voice' and the possibilities of capturing 
it through different participatory spaces, only some of which were deemed as legitimate parts 
of the recovery. People's sense of voicelessness in the official recovery process due to this 
legitimation of spaces was visible, with the connections between the voice and people's 
everyday experiences being ignored in the process. Chapter 5 turned to the principle of 
empowerment, that is deemed to follow from participation. What I found in this chapter was 
that people were in fact becoming more empowered through the act of resignation from the 
processes of formal recovery, and finding (em)power(ment) in trying to establish the small 
alternative paths into the future that took place outside the remit of the official recovery 
process. It was these small paths that were united under a single vision for the future, aiming 
to take advantage of the possibilities awarded to these locations by the 'window of 
opportunity' that emerged from the destruction.  Chapter 6 then focused the principle of 
building more resilient communities and explored the entanglement resilience with both 
physical and non-physical means of improving safety and sense of security for the 
communities through the duality presented by anzen and anshin as representations of safety 
in Japan. Safety for the affected populations anzen was becoming increasingly rejected and 
the sense of safety instead had increasingly migrated into the sphere of anshin, emerging 
from the localised forms of sociality, and ties between individual members forged in affective 
spaces of the communities. Finally, with the focus on proximity of the recovery process, 
Chapter 7 has shown how merely moving the recovery as an administrative process closer to 
the communities is not enough when it still remains separated from the daily life in 
contemporary rural spaces where affected populations were structuring and patterning their 
lives in search of comfort and settledness.    
To understand people's feelings about the recovery (kimochi ga wakaru), it is therefore vital 
to look beyond "everyone's voice" as an aggregation of articulated opinions, views and ideas, 
but rather see voice as a common story that transcends geographical, generational, and 
cultural boundaries, through which unique individual experiences can be legitimised as 
belonging to the mutual framework of experiences, values, and commitment to a common 
future, irrespective of differing opinions, values, views and ideas. For the communities 
hearing recovery process was therefore not about agreeing or disagreeing, nor even about 
consensus on the direction of the recovery, but a story through which individual experiences 
and instances of disagreement and agreement could nonetheless exist within the boundaries 
of the common narrative. Communal voice therefore emerged not through community 
workshops and consultations that affected populations associated with the formal recovery 
process but from the process of building a narrative for the community in which a sense of 
continuity between the past, the present and the future was formed; and within which 
everyone's individual experiences of the disaster, recovery, and life in the community could 
be accommodated.  
The writing of this thesis speaks to both epistemological and methodological debates within 
post-disaster recovery, social anthropology and development fields more broadly. The thesis 
posits that in order to put the community back into the community-based approaches, we 
need to shift the 'beginnings' of development projects not only into the contexts and spaces 
of those whose lives are being developed, but also base the construction of processes and 
strategies upon the epistemological positions, knowledges and approaches of the affected 
populations themselves. As Kathleen Stewart (2007) notes that "politics starts in the 
animated inhabitation of things, not way downstream in the various dreamboats and horror 
shows that get moving" (p. 15-16), where the meanings for participation, empowerment, 
resilience and proximity do not born out of themselves, but from the ordinary attuned affects 
and intensities that do not yet inhabit verbalised or abstracted categories. We therefore need 
to travel "upstream", to explore the affective landscapes from which different expressions 
and meanings of agency, empowerment, politics and voice are constructed, performed in the 
unique social, communal and cultural settings that they are supposed to develop.  
List of references 
Abram S. (2017). Contemporary obsessions with time and the promise of the future. In 
Salazar F., Pink S., Irving A. and Sjberg J. (eds.), Anthropologies and futures: Researching 
emerging and uncertain worlds. London and New York: Bloomsbury Academic.  
Achenbach, J. (2015). Why do many reasonable people doubt science. National 
Geographic, 14(5), pp. 2-8. 
Adams, F. G., Klein, L. R., Yuzo, K., & Akihiko, S. (2007). Accelerating Japan's economic 
growth: resolving Japan's growth controversy. London and New York: Routledge. 
Agamben G. (2005). State of Exception. London: The University of Chicago Press.  
Ahmed, S. (2004). Collective feelings: Or, the impressions left by others. Theory, culture & 
society, 21(2), pp. 25-42. 
Albrecht, G. (2006). Solastalgia. Alternatives Journal, 32, pp. 34-37. 
Aldrich, D. P. (2010). Site fights: Divisive facilities and civil society in Japan and the West. 
Cornell University Press. 
Aldrich D. P. (2012). Building Resilience: Social capital in post-disaster recovery. Chicago and 
London: University of Chicago Press.  
Aldrich D. P. (2013). The role of governmental capacity and citizen's input in disaster 
management. EAI Fellows programme working paper series No. 40, May 2013.  
Aldrich D. P. and Meyer M. (2014). Social capital and community resilience. American 
Behavioral Scientist, 59(2), pp. 254-269. 
Alesch, D.J. (2005). Complex urban systems and extreme events: toward a theory of disaster 
recovery. Paper presented at the 1st International Conference on Urban Disaster Reduction. 
1820, January, Kobe, Japan.  
Alinsky, S. D. (1989). Rules for radicals: A practical primer for realistic radicals. New York: 
Vintage. 
Allison, A. (2013). Precarious Japan. Durham and London: Duke University Press. 
Allison A. (2017). Relations with dead remains in an era of living/dying alone. 26 October, 
University of Sheffield, UK.  
Anderson, M. D., Botman, D. P., & Hunt, M. B. (2014). Is Japans population aging 
deflationary? (No. 14-139). International Monetary Fund. 
Ando, M., Ishida, M., Hayashi, Y., and Mizuki, C., (2011). Interviews with survivors of Tohoku 
earthquake provide insights into fatality rate: Eos (Transactions of the American Geophysical 
Union), 46, p. 411. 
Appadurai, A., (2000). Grassroots globalization and the research imagination. Public 
culture, 12(1), pp.1-19. 
Asahi Shinbun (20.3.2013). INTERVIEW/Toshitaka Katada: Don't trust hazard maps and don't 
depend on authorities. Accessed: 
http://ajw.asahi.com/article/0311disaster/analysis_opinion/AJ201303200038 (5.4.2015).  
Ashworth, L. M. (2013). Dystopia and Global Utopias: A Necessary Step towards a Better 
World. In Vieira F. (ed.), Dystopia (n) Matters: On the Page, on Screen, on Stage, Newcastle 
upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.  
Attride-Stirling J. (2001). Thematic networks: an analytical tool for qualitative research. 
Qualitative Research, 1(3), pp. 385-405.  
Avenell, S. (2012). From fearsome pollution to Fukushima: Environmental activism and the 
nuclear blind spot in contemporary Japan. Environmental History, 17(2), 244-276. 
Avison, D., & Malaurent, J. (2016). Is theory king?: questioning the theory fetish in 
information systems. In Willcocks L., Sauer C. and Lacity M. (eds.), Formulating Research 
Methods for Information Systems. London: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Ayres L. (2012). Thematic coding and analysis. In Given L. M. (ed.), The SAGE encyclopedia of 
qualitative research methods, Thousand Oaks, London, New Delhi and Singapore: SAGE 
publications.  
Azuma, S. 2014. Japanese earthquake slogans and the persistence of wakimae 
(discernment). in Lamminp, S. & C. Rink (toim.) 2014. Demokratia, Demokrati, 
Democracy, Demokratie. VAKKI-symposiumi XXXIV 13.14.2.2014. VAKKI Publications 3. 
Vaasa, (4657) 
Bankoff, G., (2001). Rendering the world unsafe: Vulnerability as western discourse, 
Disasters 25(1), pp. 1935.  
Barber, K., Hidalgo, D.A., Haney, T.J., Weeber, S., Pardee, J. and Day, J. (2007). Narrating the 
storm: storytelling as a methodological approach to understanding Hurricane 
Katrina. Journal of Public Management & Social Policy, 13(2), pp.99-120. 
Barrios, R. E. (2017). Governing Affect: Neoliberalism and Disaster Reconstruction. Lincoln 
and London: University of Nebraska Press.  
Batliwala, S. (2007). Taking the power out of empowermentan experiential 
account. Development in practice, 17(4-5), pp. 557-565. 
Baumeister, R. F., & Newman, L. S. (1994). How stories make sense of personal experiences: 
Motives that shape autobiographical narratives. Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 20(6), pp. 676-690. 
Becker, S. L., & Reusser, D. E. (2016). Disasters as opportunities for social change: using the 
multi-level perspective to consider the barriers to disaster-related transitions. International 
journal of disaster risk reduction, 18, pp. 75-88. 
Bek, D., Binns, T., & Nel, E. (2004). Catching the development train: perspectives on top-
downand bottom-updevelopment in post-apartheid South Africa. Progress in development 
Studies, 4(1), pp. 22-46. 
Berger, R.J. and Quinney, R. (eds.) (2005) Storytelling sociology: Narrative as social inquiry. 
Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers. 
Berke P., Kartez J. and Wengner D. (2008). Recovery after disasters: Achieving sustainable 
development, mitigation and equity. Disasters, 17(2), pp. 93-109.  
Berkes F. & Ross H. (2013). Community resilience: Toward an integrated approach. Society & 
Natural Resources: An International Journal, 26(1), pp. 5-20.  
Berlant, L. (2011). Cruel optimism. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Berliner L. and Briere J. (1999). Trauma, memory, and clinical practice. In Williams L. M. and 
Banyard V. L. (eds.), Trauma and Memory, Thousand Oaks, London and New Delhi: SAGE 
publications. 
Bernard H. R. (2011). Research methods in anthropology: Qualitative and Quantitative 
approaches (fifth edition). Lanham, Boulder, New York and London: Rowman and Littlefield.  
Bhattarchyya J. (2004). Theorizing community development. Journal of the Community 
Development Society, 34(2), pp. 5-34.  
Bherer L., Dufour P. and Montambeault F. (2016) The participatory democracy turn: an 
introduction, Journal of Civil Society, 12(3), pp. 225-230 
Biel, S. (Ed.). (2001). American disasters. New York and London: NYU Press. 
Biernacki P. and Waldorf D. (1981). Snowball sampling: problems and techniques of chain 
referral sampling. Sociological methods and research, 19(2), pp. 141-163.  
Blackman, L. (2012) Immaterial bodies: Affect, embodiment. Mediation. London: Sage.  
Blackman, L. and Venn, C. (2010) Affect. Body and Society 16(1): 728.  
Bloch M. and Parry J. (1982). Death and the regeneration of life, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Blunt A and Dowling R (2006). Home: key ideas in geography. London: Routledge. 
Boano, C., 2011. Violent spaces: production and reproduction of security and 
vulnerabilities. The Journal of Architecture, 16(1), pp.37-55. 
Bonney, R., Phillips, T. B., Ballard, H. L., & Enck, J. W. (2016). Can citizen science enhance 
public understanding of science?. Public Understanding of Science, 25(1), 2-16. 
Bourque, L. B., Siegel, J. M., Kano, M., & Wood, M. M. (2006). Weathering the storm: The 
impact of hurricanes on physical and mental health. The Annals of the American Academy of 
Political and Social Science, 604(1), pp. 129-151. 
Bourque, L.B., Shoaf, K.I. & Nguyen, L.H., 1997, Survey research, International Journal of 
Mass Emergencies and Disasters 15(1), pp. 71101. 
Boyatzis R. E. (1998). Transforming qualitative information: Thematic analysis and code 
development, Thousand Oaks, London and New Delhi: SAGE Publications. 
Brennan, T. (2004). The transmission of affect. Cornell University Press. 
Broadbent, J. (2002). Comment: The institutional roots of the Japanese construction 
state. Asien, 84, pp. 43-46. 
Brown, A. J. (2018). Anti-nuclear Protest in Post-Fukushima Tokyo: Power Struggles. London 
and New York: Routledge. 
Brown, A., Franken, P., Bonner, S., Dolezal, N., & Moross, J. (2016). Safecast: successful 
citizen-science for radiation measurement and communication after Fukushima. Journal of 
Radiological Protection, 36(2), p. S82. 
Brown A., & Mackie V. C. (2015). Introduction: Art and activism in post-disaster Japan. Asia-
Pacific Journal: Japan Focus, 13(6), pp. 1-5. 
Brown, B. B., & Perkins, D. D. (1992). Disruptions in place attachment. In Place 
attachment (pp. 279-304). Springer, Boston, MA. 
Brown K. and Westaway E. (2011). Agency, Capacity and Resilience to environmental 
change: Lessons from human development, well-being and disasters. Annual Review of 
Environmental Resources, 36, pp. 321-342.  
Burgess, R. (2002). The compact city debate: A global perspective. In Burgess R. and Jenks 
M. (eds.), Compact cities: Sustainable Urban Forms for Developing Countries. London and 
New York: Routledge. 
Burgess, C. (2011). Japanese national character stereotypes in the foreign media in the 
aftermath of the Great East Japan Earthquake: Myth or reality. The Tsuda Review, 56, pp. 
23-56. 
Cabinet Office (2011). Reconstruction Design Council in Response to the Great East Japan 
Earthquake. Accessed: 
https://japan.kantei.go.jp/kan/actions/201104/14KAIGO_fukkou_e.html (3.8.2019).  
Cabinet Office (2013) Fukk kfukin (Recovery funds). Available:  
http://www.kantei.go.jp/fukkou/organization/reconstructiongrant.html (4.5.2019).  
Cannon T. (2008). Reducing people's vulnerability to natural hazards. Research paper No. 
2008/34. United Nations University, UNU-WIDER.  
Carr W. (1980) The Gap between Theory and Practice, Journal of Further and Higher 
Education, 4(1), pp.60-69 
Cartlidge, M. R. (2010). Theres no place like home: place attachment among the elderly in 
Greensburg, Kansas, Doctoral dissertation, Kansas State University. 
Chambers, R. (1994). Paradigm shifts and the practice of participatory research and 
development. IDS Working Paper 2, Brighton: IDS. 
Chamlee-Wright, E., & Storr, V. H. (2009). There's no place like New Orleans: Sense of 
place and community recovery in the Ninth Ward after Hurricane Katrina. Journal of Urban 
Affairs, 31(5), 615-634. 
Chamlee-Wright, E. (2010). The cultural and political economy of recovery: Social learning in 
a post-disaster environment. London and New York: Routledge. 
Chamlee-Wright and Storr (2011). Social capital as collective narratives and post-disaster 
community recovery. The Sociological Review, 59(2), pp. 266-282. 
Chang S. (2010). Urban Disaster recovery: a measurement framework and its application to 
the 1995 Kobe earthquake. Disasters, 34(2), pp. 303-327. 
Chester, F.M., Rowe, C., Ujiie, K., Kirkpatrick, J., Regalla, C., Remitti, F., Moore, J.C., Toy, V., 
Wolfson-Schwehr, M., Bose, S. and Kameda, J., (2013). Structure and composition of the 
plate-boundary slip zone for the 2011 Tohoku-Oki earthquake. Science, 342(6163), pp.1208-
1211. 
Chino T. and Abe K. (2013). funato-shi ni okeru fukk keikaku no sakutei katei to jmin 
sanka (Process of formulation of reconstructionpPlan and involvement of residents in 
Ofunato City). Sociology Annual Report, 42, pp. 31-42.  
Cho, A. (2014). Posttsunami recovery and reconstruction: governance issues and 
implications of the Great East Japan Earthquake. Disasters, 38(s2), s157-s178. 
City of Higashimatsushima (2011). Higashimatsushima fukkou machitsukuri keikaku (disaster 
machizukuri plan for Higashimatsushima). Accessed: 
http://www.city.higashimatsushima.miyagi.jp/index.cfm/22,746,71,html (3.3.2019).  
Cleaver F. (2001). Institutions, agency and the limitations of participatory approaches to 
development. In Cooke B. and Kothari U. (2eds.), Participation: The new tyranny?, London 
and New York: Zed Books.  
Clough, P.T. (2009) The new empiricism: Affect and sociological method. European Journal  
of Social Theory 12(1): 2262.  
Collins, C.A. and Opie, A. (2010). When places have agency: Roadside shrines as 
traumascapes. Continuum, 24(1), pp.107-118. 
Cooke, B., & Kothari, U. (Eds.). (2001). Participation: The new tyranny?. London and New 
York: Zed books. 
Cornwall, A., & Brock, K. (2005). What do buzzwords do for development policy? A critical 
look at participation,empowermentand poverty reduction. Third world quarterly, 26(7), 
1043-1060. 
Cosson, C. (2020). From a tsunami-devastated zone to an attractive fishing town: a stuy on 
Onagawas strategy for a prompt recovery. Urban Geography, 1-14. 
Coulmas F. (2012). Trust and etiquette: Some societal consequences of the Great East Japan 
Earthquake. Paper presented at the conference One Year After Japans 3/11 Disaster: 
Reforming Japans Energy Sector, Governance, and Economy, Stanford University, February 
27, 2012. 
Cox, R. and Perry, K. M. E. (2011). Like a fish out of water: Reconsidering disaster recovery 
and the role of place and social capital in community disaster resilience. American Journal of 
Community Psychology, 48(3-4), 395-411.  
Creighton, M. (1997). Consuming rural Japan: The marketing of tradition and nostalgia in the 
Japanese travel industry. Ethnology, 36(3), pp. 239-254. 
Cretney, R. M. (2016). Local responses to disaster: The value of community led post disaster 
response action in a resilience framework. Disaster Prevention and Management, 25(1), pp. 
27-40. 
Crutzen P.J. (2006) The Anthropocene. In: Ehlers E., Krafft T. (eds) Earth System Science in 
the Anthropocene. Berlin and Heidelberg: Springer.  
Cuff, D. (2009). Design after disaster. Places, 21(1), pp. 4-7.  
Curato, N., (2018). From authoritarian enclave to deliberative space: governance logics in 
postdisaster reconstruction. Disasters, 42(4), pp. 635-654. 
Curato, N., & Ong, J. (2015). INTRODUCTION TO THE SPECIAL ISSUE: Disasters Can Lift Veils: 
Five Issues for Sociological Disaster Studies. Philippine Sociological Review, 63, pp. 1-26.  
Curato, N., (2017). INTRODUCTION TO THE SPECIAL ISSUE: Sociology and the Duty to 
Reimagine Democracy. Philippine Sociological Review, 65, pp.1-18. 
Currier, J. M., & Neimeyer, R. A. (2006). Fragmented stories: The narrative integration of 
violent loss. In Rynearson E. (ed.), Violent death. London and New York: Routledge. 
Dalton, R. J. (2008). Citizenship norms and the expansion of political participation. Political 
studies, 56(1), pp. 76-98. 
Davidson, C. H., Johnson, C., Lizarralde, G., Dikmen, N., & Sliwinski, A. (2007). Truths and 
myths about community participation in post-disaster housing projects. Habitat 
international, 31(1), pp. 100-115. 
Dengler L. (2011). Tracking the destructive power of the Pacific Ocean's tsunamis. Yale 
Environment, March 22, 2011. Accessed: 
https://e360.yale.edu/features/tracking_the_destructive_power_of_the_pacific_oceans_ts
unamis (12.7.2019).  
De Neufville, J. I. (1983). Planning theory and practice: Bridging the gap. Journal of Planning 
Education and Research, 3(1), pp. 35-45. 
Dimmer, C. (2014). Evolving place governance innovations and pluralising reconstruction 
practices in post-disaster Japan. Planning Theory & Practice, 15(2), pp. 260-265. 
Dimmer C. (2013). Reconstruction in times of ageing society, decentralization and global 
environmental crisis. Kyoto Journal, 77, pp. 100-105.  
Dionisio, M. R., & Pawson, E. (2016). Building resilience through post-disaster community 
projects: Responses to the 2010 and 2011 Christchurch earthquakes and 2011 Thoku 
tsunami. Australasian Journal of Disaster & Trauma Studies, 20(2), pp. 107-115. 
Dominey-Howes, D. (2018). Hazards and disasters in the Anthropocene: some critical 
reflections for the future. Geoscience Letters, 5(1), p. 7. 
Dusinberre, M., & Aldrich, D. P. (2011). Hatoko comes home: civil society and nuclear power 
in Japan. The Journal of Asian Studies, 70(3), pp. 683-705. 
Edelman Trust Barometer (2012). 2012 Edelman Trust Barometer Executive Summary. 
Accessed: http://www.scribd.com/doc/79026497/2012-Edelman-Trust-Barometer-
Executive-Summary (4.3.2015). 
Edgington, D. W. (2017). Building back better along the Sanriku coast of Tohoku, Japan: five 
years after the 3/11disaster. Town Planning Review, 88(6), pp. 615-638. 
Edwards, D. (1997) Discourse and Cognition. London: Sage. 
Eliasoph N. (2016). The mantra of empowerment talk: an essay, Journal of Civil Society, 
12(3), pp. 247-265  
Elliott, J. R., & Pais, J. (2006). Race, class, and Hurricane Katrina: Social differences in human 
responses to disaster. Social science research, 35(2), pp. 295-321. 
Elliott, S. J., Velde, B. P., & Wittman, P. P. (2002). The use of theory in everyday practice: An 
exploratory study. Occupational Therapy in Health Care, 16(1), pp. 45-62. 
Epstein, W. (2015). Not losing to the rain: What I learned when I learned about 
Onagawa. Safety and Reliability of Complex Systems, 365-371. 
Erikson, K. (1994). A New Species of Trouble: The Human Experience of Modern Disasters. 
New York, Freudenberg: W.W. Norton.  
European Commission (2011). After Fukushima: EU Stress tests start on 1 June. Press 
Release, Brussels, 25 May 2011. Available: 
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_11_640 (8.5.2015).  
Evans A., ter Kuile C. and Williams I. (2020) This too shall pass. Collective psychology project. 
Available: https://www.collectivepsychology.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/This-Too-
Shall-Pass.pdf (5.7.2020).  
Financial Times (6.9.2013). Seoul widens ban on Japanese fish imports over radiation fears. 
Available: https://www.ft.com/content/98f7ab9e-16ca-11e3-9ec2-00144feabdc0 (accessed: 
26.5.2020).  
Fischer, M. M. (2007). Culture and cultural analysis as experimental systems. Cultural 
anthropology, 22(1), pp. 1-65. 
Foljanty-Jost, G. (2011). Bringing the citizen back in: democratic dimensions of local reforms 
in Germany and Japan. East Asia, 28(4), 313-328. 
Forbes, C. (2017). Sustaining heritage in the face of disaster: The importance of the 
intangible, from Nepal to New Zealand and Australia. Historic Environment, 29(2), p. 32. 
Fordham, M. (2007). Disaster and development research and practice: A necessary 
eclecticism?. In H. Rodrguez, E. L. Quarantelli, & R. R. Dynes (Eds.). Handbook of disaster 
research. New York: Springer.  
Forgash, R. (2011). Touring Tohoku, Serving the Nation: Volunteer Tourism in Post-Disaster 
Japan. 2011 OFFICERS AND DIRECTORS HIGH PLAINS SOCIETY FOR APPLIED 
ANTHROPOLOGY, 30. 
Foucault, M. (1998). Different spaces. In Faubio J. D. (ed.), Aesthetics, method, and 
epistemology. New York: New Press. 
Freire, P.(1970), Pedagogy of the oppressed, New York: Herder & Herder.  
Fujiki, H. (2016). Problematizing life: Documentary films on the 3.11 nuclear catastrophe. 
In Geilhorn B. and Iwata-Weickgenannt K. (eds.), Fukushima and the Arts, London and New 
York: Routledge. 
Funck C. (2007). Machizukuri, civil society, and the transformation of Japanese city planning: 
cases from Kobe. In Srensen A. and Funck C. (2007), Living Cities in Japan: Citizens' 
Movements, Machizukuri and Local Environments, London and New York: Routledge. 
Furedi, F. (2007). The changing meaning of disaster. Area, 39(4), pp. 482-489. 
Gaillard, J.C. and Gomez, C., (2015). Post-disaster research: Is there gold worth the rush?: 
Opinion paper. Jmb: Journal of Disaster Risk Studies, 7(1), pp.1-6. 
Ganuza E., Baiocchi G. & Summers N. (2016) Conflicts and paradoxes in the rhetoric of 
participation, Journal of Civil Society, 12(3), pp. 328-343  
Garcia-Lopez, G. A. (2018). The multiple layers of environmental injustice in contexts of (un) 
natural disasters: the case of Puerto Rico Post-Hurricane Maria. Environmental 
Justice, 11(3), pp. 101-108. 
Giddens, A., & Pierson, C. (1998). Conversations with Anthony Giddens: Making sense of 
modernity. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Geilhorn, B., & Iwata-Weickgenannt, K. (2016). Fukushima and the Arts: Negotiating Nuclear 
Disaster. London and New York: Routledge. 
Geller R. (2011). Shake-up time for Japanese seismology. Nature, 472, pp. 407-409.   
Genda Y. (2006). Kibgaku (hopology). Tokyo: Chuokoron Shinsha.  
George, A. L., Bennett, A., Lynn-Jones, S. M., & Miller, S. E. (2005). Case studies and theory 
development in the social sciences. Cambridge MA, London: MIT Press. 
Gerster, J. (2019). Hierarchies of affectedness: Kizuna, perceptions of loss, and social 
dynamics in post-3.11 Japan. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 41, pp. 1-37. 
Gilchrist A. (2009). A well-connected community: A networking approach to community 
development. Bristol: Polity Press.  
Gillies, J., & Neimeyer, R. A. (2006). Loss, grief, and the search for significance: Toward a 
model of meaning reconstruction in bereavement. Journal of Constructivist 
Psychology, 19(1), pp. 31-65. 
Global Network of Civil Society Organisations for Disaster Reduction (GNDR) (2015). 
Disasters are NOT natural Available: https://www.gndr.org/news/item/1499-disasters-are-
not-natural.html (12.7.2019).  
Godshalk D. (1991). Disaster mitigation and hazard management. In Drabek T. and Hoetmer 
G. (eds.). Emergency management: Principles and Practice for Local Government, 
International City Management Association, Washington DC.  
Gomez, C. and Hart, D.E., (2013). Disaster gold rushes, sophisms and academic 
neocolonialism: comments on Earthquake disasters and resilience in the global North. The 
Geographical Journal, 179(3), pp.272-277. 
Goodwin, M.H. (2006) The Hidden Life of Girls: Games of Stance, Status and Exclusion. 
Malden, MA: Blackwell.  
Government of Japan (2013). The Kamaishi Miracle. Accessed: http://mnj.gov-
online.go.jp/kamaishi.html (25.4.2015).  
Gray, R., Gleeson, B., & Burke, M. (2010). Urban consolidation, household greenhouse 
emissions and the role of planning. Urban Policy and Research, 28 (3), pp. 335-346. 
Greenberg, M. A. (2008). Emotional storytelling after stressful experiences. In S. J. Lopez 
(Ed.), Praeger perspectives. Positive psychology: Exploring the best in people, Vol. 3. Growing 
in the face of adversity (p. 145169). Praeger Publishers/Greenwood Publishing Group. 
Gregor, S. (2006). The nature of theory in information systems. MIS quarterly, 30 (3),  pp. 
611-642. 
Guest G., MacQueen K. M. and Namey E. E. (2012). Applied thematic analysis. Thousand 
Oaks: SAGE Publications.   
Guest G., Namey E. E., and Mitchell M. (2013). Collecting qualitative data: A field manual for 
applied research. Thousand Oaks, London, New Delhi and Singapore: SAGE Publications.  
Gustafsson, K., & Hagstrm, L. (2018). what is the point? teaching graduate students how to 
construct political science research puzzles. European Political Science, 17(4), pp. 634-648. 
Guyer, J.I., (2007). Prophecy and the near future: Thoughts on macroeconomic, evangelical, 
and punctuated time. American Ethnologist, 34(3), pp.409-421. 
Haas J., Kates R. and Bowden M. (1977). Reconstruction following disasters. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.  
Haddad, M. A. (2007). Transformation of Japan's civil society landscape. Journal of East 
Asian Studies, 7(3), pp. 413-437. 
Haddad, M. A. (2010). The state-in-society approach to the study of democratization with 
examples from Japan. Democratization, 17(5), pp. 997-1023. 
Hage, G. (2015). Alter-politics: Critical anthropology and the radical imagination. Melbourne: 
Melbourne University Publishing. 
Hall P. (2007). Early warning systems: Reframing the Discussion. Australian Journal of 
Emergency Management, 22(2), pp. 32-36. 
Hamdi, N. (2014). The Spacemaker's Guide to Big Change: Design and Improvisation in 
Development Practice. London and Nnew York: Routledge. 
Hartman, J. D. (2017). Glocalism: Situating global civic engagement in the local community. 
In Convergence of Contemporary Art, Visual Culture, and Global Civic Engagement (pp. 151-
169). IGI Global. 
Hashimoto, S. (2007). Neighborhood Associations and machizukuri processes. In Srensen A. 
and Funck C. (2007), Living Cities in Japan: Citizens' Movements, Machizukuri and Local 
Environments, London and New York: Routledge. 
Hawkins, R. L. (2009). Same as it ever was, only worse: Negative life events and poverty 
among New Orleans Katrina survivors. Families in Society, 90(4), pp. 375-381. 
Hemmings, C. (2005) Invoking affect: Cultural theory and the ontological turn. Cultural 
Studies 19(5): 548567.  
Hertz, R. (1960). Death and the right hand, Glencoe, IL: The Free Press. 
Hidalgo, D. A., & Barber, K. (Eds.). (2009). Narrating the Storm: Sociological Stories of 
Hurricane Katrina. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. 
Hikichi, H., Aida, J., Tsuboya, T., Kondo, K., & Kawachi, I. (2016). Can community social 
cohesion prevent posttraumatic stress disorder in the aftermath of a disaster? A natural 
experiment from the 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami. American journal of 
epidemiology, 183(10), pp. 902-910. 
Hirano, K., 2013. Difficulties in post-tsunami reconstruction plan following Japan's 3.11 
mega disaster: Dilemma between protection and sustainability. Journal of JSCE, 1(1), pp.1-
Hirowatari, S. (2009). Kib to Henkaku: ima kib o kataruto sureba (Hope and Reform: How 
We Can Now Talk about Hope). In Genda Y. and Uno S. (eds.), Social Sciences of Hope 1: 
Speaking of Hope, Institute of Social Science, University of Tokyo. Tokyo: University of Tokyo 
Press. 
Hirsch, S. F. (1994). Research on Language and Power: Talking Empowerment?, Linguistic 
Anthropology, 4(2), pp. 215-224.  
Holguin-Veras J., Taniguchi E., Ferreira F., Jaller M. and Thompson R.G. (2011). The Tohoku 
Disasters: Preliminary Findings Concerning the Post Disaster Humanitarian Logistics 
Response. Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research Board, Washington D.C., July 27, 
2011.  
Hommerich, C. (2015). Feeling disconnected: Exploring the relationship between different 
forms of social capital and civic engagement in Japan. VOLUNTAS: International Journal of 
Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations, 26(1), pp. 45-68. 
Hopson N. (2013). Systems of irresponsibility and Japan's internal colony. The Asia-Pacific 
Journal, Japan Focus, 11(52), No. 2, pp. 1-13.  
Howarth, D. (2005). Applying discourse theory: The method of articulation. In Discourse 
theory in European politics. London: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Howitt A. (2012). The Tohoku Disaster: Responding to Japan's 3/11 earthquake, tsunami, 
and nuclear disaster. Available: 
https://www.hks.harvard.edu/sites/default/files/centers/research-
initiatives/crisisleadership/files/Tohoku%20Disaster_Taubman%20Center_2012%2011%201
4_red_web_Part%201.pdf (16.7.2019) 
Hughes, C. W. (2015). An 'Abe Doctrine' as Japan's Grand Strategy: New Dynamism or Dead-
End?. Asia-Pacific Journal, Japan Focus, 13(30), pp. 1-6.  
Hultquist, C., & Cervone, G. (2018). Citizen monitoring during hazards: Validation of 
Fukushima radiation measurements. GeoJournal, 83(2), pp. 189-206. 
Huntington, R. and Metcalf, P. (1979). Celebrations of death: The anthropology of mortuary 
ritual, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Hustinx, L., Handy, F., Cnaan, R. A., Brudney, J. L., Pessi, A. B., & Yamauchi, N. (2010). Social 
and cultural origins of motivations to volunteer: A comparison of university students in six 
countries. International sociology, 25(3), pp. 349-382. 
Ichikawa K. (2015). Higashinihon daishinsai fukk shien no jissen kara umareta gakusei no 
manabi (A Study of the Impact on Student Transformation : The Great East Japan Earthquake 
and Tsunami Relief Project), Journal of Volunteer Studies, 15, pp. 143-153.  
Indrawan, M., Yabe, M., Nomura, H., & Harrison, R. (2014). Deconstructing satoyamaThe 
socio-ecological landscape in Japan. Ecological Engineering, 64, pp. 77-84. 
Ingold T. (2018). Anthropology, why it matters. Cambridge: Polity Press.  
Ishida, R., 2011. Enormous earthquake in Japan: Coping with stress using purpose-in-
life/ikigai. Psychology, 2(08), p.773. 
Ito A. (2007). Earthquake reconstruction machizukuri and citizen participation. In Srensen 
A. and Funck C. (2007), Living Cities in Japan: Citizens' Movements, Machizukuri and Local 
Environments, London and New York: Routledge. 
Iuchi K., Maly E., and Johnson L. (2015). Three years after a mega-disaster: Recovery policies, 
programs and implementation after the Great East Japan Earthquake. In V. Santiago-Fandino 
et al. (eds.), Post-tsunami hazard, Advances in natural and technological hazards research 44.  
Ivy M. (1995). Discourses of the vanishing: Modernity, phantasm, Japan. London: University 
of Chicago Press.  
Jacobs, A. J. (2011). Japan's evolving nested municipal hierarchy: The race for local power in 
the 2000s. Urban Studies Research, 2011. 
Jansen, S., 2014. On not moving well enough: temporal reasoning in Sarajevo yearnings for 
normal lives. Current Anthropology, 55(S9), pp. S74-S84. 
Japan Fisheries Agency (JFA) (2012).  Suisan fukk masut puran (Master plan for fisheries 
recovery). Available: https://www.jfa.maff.go.jp/j/press/kikaku/pdf/110628-02.pdf 
(accessed 26.5.2020).  
Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) (2011). The 2011 off the Pacific coast of Tohoku 
Earthquake -Fourth Report. Available: 
http://www.jma.go.jp/jma/en/News/2011_Earthquake_04.html (25.4.2015).  
Japan Meteorological Agency (2018). Earthquakes and Tsunamis - Disaster Prevention and 
Mitigation Efforts. Japan Meteorological Agency, March 2018. Available: 
https://www.jma.go.jp/jma/en/Publications/earthquakes_and_tsunamis_brochure.html 
(1.10.2019).  
Japan Times (25.3.2014). Suit against tsunami-hit bank fails; Kin tried to hold employer liable 
for evacuating victims to roof. Available: 
https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2014/02/25/national/suit-against-tsunami-hit-bank-
fails/#.XHzyZlP7TBI (4.3.2019).  
Jarvis, H., Pratt, A. C., & Wu, P. C. C. (2016). The Secret Life of Cities: Social reproduction of 
everyday life. London and New York: Routledge.  
Jenks, M., Burton, E., & Williams, K. (1996). The compact city: a sustainable urban form. 
London and New York: Routledge.  
Joakim, Erin. 2008. Post-Disaster Recover and Vulnerability. Ontario, Canada: University of 
Waterloo. 
Jones, D. A. (1998). A field experiment in appreciative inquiry. Organization Development 
Journal, 16(4), p. 69. 
Joskow P. and Parsons J. (2012). The Future of Nuclear Power After Fukushima. MIT Center 
for Energy and Environmental Policy Research, February 2012.  
JR East (2012). Kesennumasen funatosen BRT (basu ksoku yus shisutemu) 
(Kesennuma Line / Ofunato Line BRT (Bus High Speed Transport System)). Available: 
https://www.jreast.co.jp/railway/train/brt/system.html (5.10.2019).  
Katz, P., Scully, V. J., & Bressi, T. W. (1994). The new urbanism: Toward an architecture of 
community (Vol. 10). New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Kavedija I. (2016). Introduction: reorienting hopes. Contemporary Japan, Vol. 28 (1), pp. 1-
Kavedija, I. (2015). The good life in balance: Insights from aging Japan. HAU: Journal of 
Ethnographic Theory, 5(3), pp. 135-156. 
Kawato Y., Pekkanen R. and Tsujinaka Y. (2013). Civil Society and Triple Disasters: Revealed 
strengths and weaknesses. In Kingston J. (ed.), Natural Disasters and Nuclear Crisis in Japan. 
London and New York, Routledge. 
Kay, J. (2011). Obliquity: Why our goals are best achieved indirectly. London: Profile Books. 
Keare, D. H. (2001). Learning to clap: Reflections on top-down versus bottom-up 
development. Human Organization, 60 (2), pp. 159-165. 
Kelly W. (2012). Tohoku's futures: Predicting outcomes or imagining possibilities? The Asia-
Pacific Journal, Japan Focus, 10(10), No. 2, pp. 1-6.  
Kelman, I. (2018). Lost for words amongst disaster risk science vocabulary?. International 
Journal of Disaster Risk Science, 9(3), pp. 281-291. 
Kessler, M. (1990). Legal mobilization for social reform: Power and the politics of agenda 
setting. Law and Society Review, 24(1), 121-143. 
Kielhofner, G. (2005). A scholarship of practice: Creating discourse between theory, research 
and practice. Occupational Therapy in Health Care, 19(1-2), pp. 7-16. 
Kimura N., Matsuyaki M., Nakamura F., Miura S. and Ariyoshi R. (2018). Chshin shigaichi ni 
okeru kky kkan no shhen eria no imji to kaiy kd e no eiky ni kansuru kenky: 
Minamiikebukuro ken o ksusutadi to shite (A Study on the Effects of Public Open Spaces 
on Area Image Perception and Pedestrian Walking Behavior in City Centers: A Case Study of 
Minami Ikebukuro Park). Journal of the City Planning Institute of Japan, 53(3), pp. 341-348.  
Kimura R., Tomoyasu K., Yajima Y., Mashima H., Furukawa K. Toda Y., Watanabe K and 
Kawahara T. (2014). Hisai-sha chsa ni yoru Higashinihon daishinsai kara 3-nen-me no fukk 
shinchoku jky: fukk no teitai-kan to jtaku saiken ni okeru mayoi (Reconstruction 
Progress Situation of the Third Year from the Great East Japan Earthquake by Victims 
Questionnaire Survey: Focusing on Sense of Stagnation in Disaster Reconstruction and 
Ambivalence in Housing Reconstruction), Proceedings of the Japan Society for Safety and 
Security Studies, 24, pp. 233-243.  
Kingdon, J. W. (1993). How do issues get on public policy agendas?. In W. J. Wilson 
(Ed.), American Sociological Association Presidential Series: Sociology and the public agenda. 
Newbury Park, London, New Delhi: SAGE Publications.  
Klein, N. (2007). The shock doctrine: The rise of disaster capitalism. Macmillan. 
Klien S. (2017). Young urban migrant in the Japanese countryside between self-realization 
and slow life? The quest for subjective well-being and post-materialism. In Assman S. (ed.), 
Sustainability in Contemporary Japan: Challenges and opportunities. London and New York: 
Routledge.  
Knight J. (1997). Echoing the past in rural Japan. In Dawson A., Hockey J. and James A. (eds.), 
After writing culture: Epistemology and praxis in contemporary anthropology, London and 
New York: Routledge.  
Knight, J. (1998). Selling Mother's Love? Mail Order Village Food in Japan. Journal of 
Material Culture, 3(2), pp. 153-173. 
Kohara T. (2007). The great Heisei consolidation: A critical review. Social Science Japan, 
September 2007. Accessed: https://lex.juris.hokudai.ac.jp/csdemocracy/work/200709.pdf 
(4.10.2019).  
Koikari, M. (2019). Re-masculinizing the nation: gender, disaster, and the politics of national 
resilience in post-3.11 Japan. In Japan Forum, 31(2), pp. 143-164. 
Kroll-Smith, J., Couch, J. S., & Couch, S. R. (1991). What is a disaster?: an ecological-symbolic 
approach to resolving the definitional debate. International Journal of Mass Emergencies 
and Disasters, 9(3), pp. 355-366. 
Krzyzstof K. and Norris F. (1995). Mobilization and deterioration of social support following 
natural disasters. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 4(3), pp. 94-98.  
Lahournat, F. (2016). Reviving tradition in disaster-affected communities: adaptation and 
continuity in the kagura of Ogatsu, Miyagi Prefecture. Contemporary Japan, 28(2), pp. 185-
Leal, A. P. (2007). Participation: the ascendancy of a buzzword in the neo-liberal 
era. Development in practice, 17(4-5), pp. 539-548. 
LeBlanc, R. M. (1999). Bicycle citizens: The political world of the Japanese housewife. 
Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press. 
Lee, A. S. (2014). Theory is king? But first, what is theory?. Journal of Information 
technology, 29(4), pp. 350-352. 
Leheny, D. (2018). Empire of Hope: The Sentimental Politics of Japanese Decline. Ithaca and 
London: Cornell University Press. 
Leng, R. (2015). Japans civil society from Kobe to Tohoku: Impact of policy changes on 
Government-NGO relationship and effectiveness of post-disaster relief. Electronic Journal of 
Contemporary Japanese Studies 15. 
Leys, R. (2011) The turn to affect: A critique. Critical Inquiry 37(3): 434472. 
Library of Congress (2013). Japan: Legal Responses to the Great East Japan Earthquake of 
2011. Available: https://www.loc.gov/law/help/japan-earthquake/index.php (5.4.2019).  
Littlejohn A. (2018). The price of safety: understanding anti-seawall sentiment in post-
tsunami Japan. Leiden Anthropology Blog, 19.10.2018. Available: 
https://www.leidenanthropologyblog.nl/articles/the-price-of-safety#comments (9.10.2019).  
Lloyd-Jones, T. (2006). Mind the Gap Post-disaster reconstruction and the transition from 
humanitarian relief. A report produced for RICS by the Max Lock Centre at the University of 
Westminster. Available: 
https://www.preventionweb.net/files/9080_MindtheGapFullreport1.pdf (3.4.2019).  
Lloyd-Parry, R. (2017). Ghosts of the Tsunami. Jonathan Cape Ltd.  
Long, N. J., & Moore, H. L. (2012). Sociality revisited: setting a new agenda. The Cambridge 
Journal of Anthropology, 30(1), pp. 40-47. 
Longstaff P., Armstrong N., Perrin K., Parker W. and Hidek M. (2010). Building resilient 
communities: a preliminary framework for assessement. Naval post-graduate school, centre 
for homeland defence and security, Monterey California.  
Lpez-Marrero, T., & Yarnal, B. (2010). Putting adaptive capacity into the context of peoples 
lives: a case study of two flood-prone communities in Puerto Rico. Natural hazards, 52(2), 
pp. 277-297. 
Love, B. (2013). Treasure hunts in rural Japan: Place making at the limits of 
sustainability. American Anthropologist, 115(1), pp. 112-124. 
MacLeod, M. A., & Emejulu, A. (2014). Neoliberalism with a community face? A critical 
analysis of asset-based community development in Scotland. Journal of Community 
Practice, 22(4), pp. 430-450. 
Mainichi Shimbun (9.5.2018). Ishinomaki, Miyagi Pref. gov'ts to take Okawa elementary 
tsunami case to Supreme Court. Available: 
https://mainichi.jp/english/articles/20180509/p2a/00m/0na/018000c (4.3.2019) 
Mainichi Shimbun (26.10.2018). Tohoku Electric to scrap aging Onagawa nuke plant reactor 
over maintenance costs. Accessed: 
https://mainichi.jp/english/articles/20181026/p2a/00m/0na/027000c (26.5.2020).  
Majone, G. (2006). Agenda setting. In Goodin, R. E., Moran, M., & Rein, M. (2006). The 
Oxford handbook of public policy. Oxford Handbooks of Political Science. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.  
Maly, E. (2018). Building back better with people centered housing recovery. International 
Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 29, pp. 84-93. 
Mansuri, G., & Rao, V. (2004). Community-based and-driven development: A critical 
review. The World Bank Research Observer, 19(1), pp. 1-39. 
Markham, A. N. (2017). Remix as a literacy for future anthropology practice. In Salazar F., 
Pink S., Irving A. and Sjberg J. (eds.), Anthropologies and futures: Researching emerging 
and uncertain worlds. London and New York, Bloomsbury Publishing.  
Martini A. and Vainio A. (forthcoming). Cross-cultural communication through affect: the 
potential for post-disaster tourism in Japan. The Interface of Culture and Communication -
Special Issue in Tourism, Culture and Community, publication in 2020.  
Maskrey A. (2011). Revisiting community-based disaster risk management. Environmental 
Hazards, 10(1), pp.42-52. 
Mason, R., & Boutilier, M. (2009). The challenge of genuine power sharing in participatory 
research: The gap between theory and practice. Canadian Journal of Community Mental 
Health, 15(2), pp. 145-152. 
Mason J. (2002). Qualitative Researching. London, Thousand Oaks, and New Delhi: SAGE 
Publishing. 
Massumi, B. (2002). Parables for the virtual: Movement, affect, sensation. Durham and 
London: Duke University Press. 
Massumi B. (2011). The half-life of disaster. Guardian Opinion.  
Available: https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/apr/15/half-life-of-disaster  
(12.7.2019).  
Masud-All-Kamal, M., & Hassan, S. M. (2018). The link between social capital and disaster 
recovery: evidence from coastal communities in Bangladesh. Natural Hazards, 93(3), pp. 
1547-1564. 
Matanle, P. and Rausch, A.S. (2011). Japan's Shrinking Regions in the 21st Century: 
Contemporary responses to depopulation and socioeconomic decline. The Shrinking Regions 
Research Group, Cambria Press, 2011 
Matanle, P., Littler, J., & Slay, O. (2019). Imagining disasters in the era of climate change: is 
Japans seawall a new Maginot Line?. The Asia-Pacific Journal: Japan Focus, 17(13), pp. 1-29. 
Mathews, G. (1996). What makes life worth living?: How Japanese and Americans make 
sense of their worlds. Berkeley, Los Angeles and London: University of California Press. 
Mathie, A., & Cunningham, G. (2003). From clients to citizens: Asset-based community 
development as a strategy for community-driven development. Development in 
practice, 13(5), pp. 474-486. 
Matsunaga R., Oba T., Nakagawa D., and Morikura R. (2018). Zenkoku ni okeru tochi riy 
oyobi tochi riy kisei to saigai risuku to no kanren-sei ni kansuru keinen bunseki (Time-Series 
Analysis of Relationships between Disaster Risks and Land Use in addition to Land Use 
Control throughout Japan). Journal of the City Planning Institute of Japan, 53(1), pp. 19-26.  
Matsushima, M., & Matsunaga, Y. (2015). Social capital and subjective well-being in 
Japan. VOLUNTAS: International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations, 26(4), 
pp. 1016-1045. 
McMorran, C. (2017). From volunteers to voluntours: shifting priorities in post-disaster 
Japan. In Japan Forum, 29(4), pp. 558-582.  
Metcalf, P., & Huntington, R. (1991). Celebrations of death: The anthropology of mortuary 
ritual. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Meyer, M. A. (2018). Social capital in disaster research. In Rodrguez H., Donner W., Trainor 
J. E. (eds.), Handbook of disaster research (pp. 263-286). Springer International Publishing. 
Meyer, M. (2012). Placing and tracing absence: A material culture of the immaterial. Journal 
of Material Culture, 17(1), pp. 103-110. 
Miles M. B., Huberman A. M. And Saldaa (1994). Qualitative data analysis: A methods 
sourcebook (third edition), Thousand Oaks, London, New Delhi and Singapore: SAGE 
Publishing. 
Mileti D. (1999). Disasters by design: A reassessment of natural hazards in the United States. 
Washington D.C.: Joseph Henry Press.  
Mimura N., Yasuhara K., Kawagoe S., Yokoki H., and Kazama S. (2011). Damage from the 
Great East Japan Earthquake and Tsunami - A quick report. Mitigation and Adaptation 
Strategy for Global Change, 16, pp. 803-818.  
Miyagi Prefectural Government (2012). Ken'nai no shichson gappei no jky. (The 
municipal merger situation within he prefecture). Available: 
https://www.pref.miyagi.jp/soshiki/sichouson/zyoukyou.html (5.7.2019).  
Miyake S. and Ohtaki H. (2018). Iwate ken Noda-mura no fukk muratsukuri ni okeru ko 
chk sanka ni yoru toshi ken jigy no skatsu (Urban Park Project based on Participation 
of Primary School, Junior High School, and High School for Recovery from Disaster in Noda 
Village, Iwate Prefecture), Journal of the City Planning Institute of Japan, 53(3), pp. 445-452.   
Mochizuki, J., & Chang, S. E. (2017). Disasters as opportunity for change: Tsunami recovery 
and energy transition in Japan. International journal of disaster risk reduction, 21, pp. 331-
Mohan, G., and Stokke, K. (2000). Participatory development and empowerment: the 
dangers of localism. Third world quarterly, 21(2), pp. 247-268. 
Morrice, S. (2013). Heartache and Hurricane Katrina: recognising the influence of emotion in 
postdisaster return decisions. Area, 45(1), pp. 33-39. 
Morris J. F. (2013). Recovery in Tohoku. In Kingston J. (ed.) (2013). Natural Disaster and 
Nuclear Crisis in Japan: Response and recovery after 3/11. London and New York: Routledge.  
Morris-Suzuki, T., & Soh, E. J. (Eds.). (2017). New Worlds from Below: Informal life politics 
and grassroots action in twenty-first-century Northeast Asia. Acton: ANU Press. 
Morris-Suzuki T. (2017). Disaster Utopia: Looking back at 3/11. Japanese Studies, 37(2), pp. 
171-190.  
Mori, K., Kaiho, Y., Tomata, Y., Narita, M., Tanji, F., Sugiyama, K., and Tsuji, I. (2017). Sense 
of life worth living (ikigai) and incident functional disability in elderly Japanese: The 
Tsurugaya Project. Journal of psychosomatic research, 95, pp. 62-67. 
Mullins M.R. (2016) Neonationalism, Politics, and Religion in Post-disaster Japan. In Mullins 
M.R., Nakano K. (eds.), Disasters and Social Crisis in Contemporary Japan. London: Palgrave 
Macmillan.  
Murakami, K., Wood, D. M., Tomita, H., Miyake, S., Shiraki, R., Murakami, K., & Dimmer, C. 
(2014). Planning innovation and post-disaster reconstruction: The case of Tohoku, Japan, 
Planning Theory & Practice, 15(2), pp. 237-242. 
Murphy, A. B. (1991). Regions as social constructs: the gap between theory and 
practice. Progress in Human Geography, 15(1), pp. 23-35. 
Nagamatsu, S. (2018). Building back a better Tohoku after the March 2011 tsunami: 
Contradicting evidence. In The 2011 Japan Earthquake and Tsunami: Reconstruction and 
Restoration, Springer International Publishing. 
Nakagawa Y., and Shaw R. (2004). Social Capital: A Missing Link to Disaster Recovery. 
International Journal of Mass Emergencies and Disasters, 22(1), pp. 5-34.  
Nakahara S. (2011). Lessons learnt from the recent tsunami in Japan: necessity of 
epidemiological evidence to strengthen community-based preparation and emergency 
response plans. Injury Prevention, 17(6), pp. 361-364.  
Nakano L. (2004) (1970). Community Volunteers in Japan: Everyday stories of social change, 
London: Routledge.  
Nakano Y. (2019). Post-development in Japan: Revisiting Yoshirou Tamanoi's theory of 
regionalism. In Klein E. and Morreo C. (eds.), Postdevelopment in practice: Alternatives, 
economies, ontologies. London and New York: Routledge.  
Narayan, D. (1995). Designing community-based development. Social Development Notes; 
No. 4. World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Nateghi, R., Bricker, J.D., Guikema, S.D. and Bessho, A. (2016). Statistical analysis of the 
effectiveness of seawalls and coastal forests in mitigating tsunami impacts in Iwate and 
Miyagi prefectures. PloS one, 11(8), e0158375.  
National Institute for Population and Social Security Research (NIPSSR) (2013). Regional 
Population Projection for Japan: 2010-2040 (March 2013) [in Japanese]. Available: 
http://www.ipss.go.jp/pp-shicyoson/e/shicyoson13/t-page.asp (4.5.2019).  
National Police Agency (NPA) (2011). Heisei 23-nen (2011) Thoku chih Taiheiy oki jishin 
no higai jky to keisatsu sochi, (The 2011 off the Pacific coast of Tohoku Earthquake 
Damage Status and Measures by the Police, Public Information Document). Accessed: 
http://www.npa.go.jp/archive/keibi/biki/higaijokyo.pdf (25.4.2015).  
Neria, Y., Nandi, A., & Galea, S. (2008). Post-traumatic stress disorder following disasters: a 
systematic review. Psychological medicine, 38(4), pp. 467-480. 
Neumann, M. (2005). The compact city fallacy. Journal of planning education and 
research, 25(1), pp. 11-26. 
Nexo (2015). los desastres NO son naturales. (Disasters are not natural). Available: 
https://www.nexorrd.org/menu-2 (12.7.2019).  
NHK (2015). The Great East Japan Earthquake and - Five years on. A Survey of 1000 
Survivors. 
Accessed: http://www.nhk.or.jp/d-navi/link/shinsai5/en.html (5.10.2017).  
Nicholls R. (2009). Research and indigenous participation: critical reflexive methods, 
International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 12(2), pp. 117-126.  
Nilson, D. (1995). Disaster beliefs and ideological orientation. Journal of Contingencies and 
Crisis Management, 3(1), pp. 12-17. 
Nishimura, Y. (2014). A Tohoku Utopia? Alternative Paths After March 11, 2011. Global 
Ethnographic. Accessed: https://globalethnographic.com/index.php/a-tohoku-utopia-
alternative-paths-after-march-11-2011-2/ (8.9.2020) 
Nishiro J., Hara K., and Hirabuki Y. (2014). kibo saigai kara no fukk jigy to seibutsu tay-
sei hozen: Sendai-wan nanbu kaigan-iki no kykun (Biodiversity conservation and 
infrastructure reconstruction after a large-scale disaster: lessons from the coastal regions of 
southern Sendai Bay). Japanese Journal of Conservation Ecology, 19, pp. 221-226.  
Norris F. H., Stevens S. P., Pfefferbaum B., Wyche K.F. & Pfefferbaum R. L. (2008). 
Community resilience as a metaphor, theory, set of capacities and strategy for disaster 
readiness. American Journal of Community Psychology, 41, pp. 127-150.  
Novak, D. (2017). Project Fukushima Performativity and the Politics of Festival in Post-3/11 
Japan. Anthropological Quarterly, 90(1), pp. 225-253. 
Noy C. (2008). Sampling knowledge: the hermeneutics of snowball sampling in qualitative 
research. International Journal of social research methodology, 11(4), pp. 327-344. 
Nozawa S. (2015). Phatic spaces: sociality in contemporary Japan. Anthropological Quarterly, 
88(2), pp. 373-400.  
Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) (2014). Fukushima Press Kit. Available: http://www.oecd-
nea.org/press/press-kits/fukushima.html (25.3.2015).  
Numazaki, I., (2012). Too wide, too big, too complicated to comprehend: a personal 
reflection on the disaster that started on March 11, 2011. Asian Anthropology, 11(1), pp.27-
Obonai, A., Watanabe, T., & Hirata, K. (2014). Successful cold shutdown of Onagawa: the 
closest nuclear power station to the March 11, 2011, epicenter. Nuclear Technology, 186(2), 
280-294. 
Ogawa, A. (2004). Invited by the state: Institutionalizing volunteer subjectivity in 
contemporary Japan. Asian Anthropology, 3(1), pp. 71-96. 
Oguma E. (2013). Nobody dies in a ghost town: Path dependence in Japan's 3.11 disaster 
and reconstruction. The Asia-Pacific Journal Japan Focus, 11(44), Number 1.  
Okada, T., Howitt, R., Haynes, K., Bird, D., & McAneney, J. (2018). Recovering local sociality: 
Learnings from post-disaster community-scale recoveries. International journal of disaster 
risk reduction, 31, pp. 1030-1042. 
Okuyama, J., Funakoshi, S., Tomita, H., Yamaguchi, T., & Matsuoka, H. (2017). Mental health 
and school-based intervention among adolescent exposed to the 2011 Great East Japan 
Earthquake and tsunami. International journal of disaster risk reduction, 24, pp. 183-188. 
Oliver-Smith A. and Hoffman S. (eds.) (1999). The Angry Earth. New York: Routledge.  
Olshansky, R. B. (2009). The challenges of planning for post-disaster recovery. In Paleo U. F. 
(ed.), Building Safer Communities: Risk Governance, Spatial Planning and Responses to 
Natural Hazards.  
NATO Science for Peace and Security Series: Human and Societal Dynamics, Volume 58.  
Olshansky R. B., Johnson L. A. and Topping K. C. (2006). Rebuilding communities following 
disaster: Lessons from Kobe and Los Angeles. Built Environment, 32(4), pp. 354-374.  
Olshansky R. B., Hopkins L. D. & Johnson L. A. (2012). Disasters and recovery: Processes 
compressed in time. Natural Hazards Review, 13, pp. 173-178. 
Ozawa-de Silva, C. (2008). Too lonely to die alone: Internet suicide pacts and existential 
suffering in Japan. Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry, 32(4), pp. 516-551. 
Passerini E. (2001). Disasters as agents of social change in recovery and reconstruction. 
Natural Hazards Review, 1, pp. 67-72.  
Pateman, C. (1970). Participation and democratic theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Paton D., and Johnston D. (2001). Disasters and communities: vulnerability, resilience and 
preparedness. Disaster Prevention Management, 10, pp. 270277 
Paton, D., & Johnston, D. (2017). Disaster resilience: an integrated approach. Springfield IL: 
Charles C Thomas Publisher. 
Pekkanen, R. (2009). Japans neighborhood associations: Membership without advocacy. 
In Read B. and Pekkanen R. (eds.), Local Organizations and Urban Governance in East and 
Southeast Asia. London and New York: Routledge. 
Perkins D., Hughey J. and Speer P. (2002). Community psychology perspectives on social 
capital theory and community development practice. Journal of Community Development 
Society, 33(1), pp. 33-52.  
Perry R.W. (2007) What Is a Disaster?. In Rodrguez H., Quarantelli E. L., Dynes R. R. (eds.), 
Handbook of Disaster Research. Handbooks of Sociology and Social Research. New York: 
Springer. 
Peterman, W. (2000). Neighborhood planning and community-based development: The 
potential and limits of grassroots action. Thousand Oaks and London: SAGE Publishing.  
Picou J. and Martin C. (2006). Community Impacts of Hurricane Ivan: A Case Study of Orange 
Beach, Alabama. Natural Hazards Centre, Quick Response Report No. 190.  
Picton J. (2018). Social activism and the economics of mental health: Apolitical volunteering 
is ill-equipped to address the structural causes of depression. Open Democracy, 21.8.2018. 
Available: https://www.opendemocracy.net/en/transformation/social-activism-and-
economics-of-mental-health/ (23.9.2019).  
Pink, S., and Salazar J.F. (2017). "Anthropologies and futures: Setting the 
agenda." Anthropologies and Futures: Researching Emerging and Uncertain Worlds. London 
and New York: Bloomsbury Publishing. 
Plourde L. (2014). Cat Cafs, affective labour, and the healing boom in Japan. Japanese 
Studies, 34 (2), pp. 115-133.  
Polletta F. (2016) Participatory enthusiasms: a recent history of citizen engagement 
initiatives, Journal of Civil Society, 12(3), pp. 231-246  
Putnam, R. D. (2000). Bowling alone: Americas declining social capital. In Culture and 
politics (pp. 223-234). New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Pyles, L. (2009). Neoliberalism, INGO practices and sustainable disaster recovery: A post-
Katrina case study. Community Development Journal, 46(2), pp. 168-180. 
Quarantelli E. (1999). The disaster recovery process: what we know and do not know from 
research. Preliminary Paper #286, University of Delaware Disaster Research Center.  
Quarantelli E. (2005). Disasters, definitions and theory construction. In Perry R. and 
Quarantelli E. (eds.) (2005), What is a Disaster? New answers to old questions. XLibris 
Corporation.  
Raman, S. (2010). Designing a liveable compact city: physical forms of city and social life in 
urban neighbourhoods. Built environment, 36(1), pp. 63-80. 
Rausch, A. (2006). The Heisei dai gappei: a case study for understanding the municipal 
mergers of the Heisei era. In Japan Forum, 18(1), pp. 133-156.  
Rausch, A. S. (2012). A framework for Japan's new municipal reality: assessing the Heisei 
gappei mergers. In Japan Forum, 24(2), pp. 185-204. 
Reconstruction Agency (2015). Progress to date - 3.11. Progress Report. Available: 
http://www.reconstruction.go.jp/english/topics/Progress_to_date/index.html (25.3.2015).  
Reconstruction Agency (2017). Recovery and Reconstruction from the Great East Japan 
Earthquake (The Process and Prospects for Reconstruction). Available: 
https://www.reconstruction.go.jp/english/topics/Progress_to_date/index.html (2.8.2019).  
Reconstruction Design Council (2011a). Towards Reconstruction: Hope Beyond Disaster. 
Report to the Prime Minister of the Reconstruction Design Council on response to the Great 
East Japan Earthquake. Available: 
https://www.mofa.go.jp/announce/jfpu/2011/7/pdfs/0712.pdf (1.5.2015).  
Reconstruction Design Council (2011b). Fukkou ne no teigen - hisan no naka no kibou 
[Toward reconstruction: Hope beyond the disaster]. Report to the Prime Minister of the 
Reconstruction Design Council on response to the Great East Japan Earthquake. Available: 
https://www.cas.go.jp/jp/fukkou/pdf/fukkouhenoteigen.pdf (1.5.2015).  
Reconstruction Headquarters (2011). Basic Guidelines for Reconstruction in response to the 
Great East Japan Earthquake. Reconstruction Headquarters in response to the Great East 
Japan Earthquake, 29 July 2011 (revised 11 August 2011). Available: 
https://www.reconstruction.go.jp/english/topics/Laws_etc/20160527_basic-guidelines.pdf 
(1.5.2015).  
Reed, J., Nilsson, A., & Holmberg, L. (2009). Appreciative inquiry: research for action. 
In Handbook of Research on Information Technology Management and Clinical Data 
Administration in Healthcare (pp. 631-645). IGI Global. 
Rico, T. (2014). The limits of a heritage at riskframework: the construction of post-disaster 
cultural heritage in Banda Aceh, Indonesia. Journal of Social Archaeology, 14(2), pp. 157-
Robertson J. (1991) Native and newcomer: Remaking a Japanese city, Berkeley, Los Angeles, 
Oxford: University of California Press. 
Robinson O. (2014). Sampling in interview-based qualitative research: A theoretical and 
practical guide. Qualitative research in psychology, 11, pp. 25-41. 
Roudometof, V. (2016). Glocalization: A critical introduction. Routledge. 
Rowlands, J. (1995). Empowerment examined. Development in practice, 5(2), pp. 101-107. 
Roy, K., Sasada, K., & Kohno, E. (2014). Salinity status of the 2011 Tohoku-oki tsunami 
affected agricultural lands in northeast Japan. International Soil and Water Conservation 
Research, 2(2), 40-50. 
Roy, M. J. (2017). The assets-based approach: furthering a neoliberal agenda or 
rediscovering the old public health? A critical examination of practitioner discourses. Critical 
public health, 27(4), pp. 455-464. 
Rubin C., & Barbee D. (1985). Disaster recovery and hazard mitigation: Bridging the 
intergovernmental gap.  Public Administration Review, Vol. 45, Special Issues: Emergency 
Management: A Challenge for Public Administration, January 1985, pp. 57-63 
Rush, L. S., & Fecho, B. (2008). When figured worlds collide: Improvisation in an inquiry 
classroom. Teaching education, 19(2), pp. 123-136. 
Rushing, S. (2016). What's Left of" Empowerment" After Neoliberalism?. Theory & 
Event, 19(1). 
Sakai, M., & Inaba, K. (2014). Fostering civil society organizations for disaster relief in Japan: 
challenges and prospects for sustainable future operations. In Sakai M., Jurrins E., Zhang J., 
and Thornton A. (eds.), Disaster Relief in the Asia Pacific (pp. 70-84). London and New York: 
Routledge. 
Sakamoto M. (2012). The Rise of NGOs/NPOs in Emergency Relief in the Great East Japan 
Earthquake. Japan Social Innovation Journal, 2(1), 2012.  
Samuels R. J. (2013). 3.11 Disasters and change in Japan. IIthaca: Cornell University Press. 
Sarantou, M. (2018). Fashion Design: The Connective Role of Improvisation in New Learning 
Experiences. Universal Journal of Educational Research, 6(6), pp. 1358-1364. 
Sawai M. (2011). Who is vulnerable during tsunamis? Experiences from the Great East Japan  
Earthquake 2011 and the Indian Ocean Tsunami 2004. Accessed: 
http://www.unescap.org/sites/default/files/IDD-DRS-who-is-vulnerable-during-tsunamis.pdf 
(25.4.2015).  
Schnell S. (1999). The rousing drum: Ritual practice in a Japanese community. Honolulu: 
Honolulu: Hawaii University Press.  
Schoppa, L. J. (2006). Race for the exits: The unraveling of Japan's system of social 
protection. Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press. 
Scott, S. L., McSpirit, S., Breheny, P., & Howell, B. M. (2012). The long-term effects of a coal 
waste disaster on social trust in Appalachian Kentucky. Organization & Environment, 25(4), 
pp. 402-418. 
Sedgwick, E. K. (2003) Touching Feeling: Affect, Pedagogy, Performativity. Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press.  
Sen, A. K. (2000). Development as Freedom. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 
Shaw R. and Goda K. (2004). From Disaster to Sustainable Civil Society: The Kobe 
Experience. Disasters, 28(1), pp. 16-40.  
Shaw, V (2017). "We Are Already Living Together: Race, Collective Struggle, and the 
Reawakened Nation in Post-3/11 Japan in Chih-ming Wang and Daniel PS Goh (Eds.), 
Precarious Belongings: Affect and Nationalism in Asia. London and New York, Rowman & 
Littlefield.  
Shevaller L., Westoby P., and Connor M. (2015). Flirting with danger: practice dilemmas for 
community development in disaster recovery. Community Development, 46(1), pp. 26-42.  
Siegel J.M., Bourque L. B. and Shoaf K. I. (1999). Victimization after a natural disaster: Social 
disorganization or community cohesion? International Journal of Mass Emergencies and 
Disasters, 17(3), pp. 265-294. 
Silver, A., & Grek-Martin, J. (2015). Now we understand what community really means: 
Reconceptualizing the role of sense of place in the disaster recovery process. Journal of 
Environmental Psychology, 42, pp. 32-41. 
Simpson, L., Wood, L., & Daws, L. (2003). Community capacity building: Starting with people 
not projects. Community Development Journal, 38(4), pp. 277-286. 
Siniawer, E. M. (2018). Waste: Consuming Postwar Japan. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
Sjberg, J. (2017). Ethno Science Fiction: Projective Improvisations of Future Scenarios and 
Environmental Threats in the Everyday Life of British Youth. In Salazar J. F., Pink S., Inving A. 
and Sjberg J. (eds.), Anthropologies and Futures: Researching Emerging and Uncertain 
Worlds. London and New York: Bloomsbury Publishing.  
Slater, D. H., Keiko, N., & Kindstrand, L. (2012). Social Media, Information and Political 
Activism in Japans 3.11 Crisis. The Asia-Pacific Journal Japan Focus, 10(24), No. 1.  
Slater, D. H., Morioka, R., & Danzuka, H. (2014). Micro-politics of radiation: Young mothers 
looking for a voice in Post3.11 Fukushima. Critical Asian Studies, 46(3), pp. 485-508. 
Smith, J. S., & Cartlidge, M. R. (2011). Place attachment among retirees in Greensburg, 
Kansas. Geographical review, 101(4), pp. 536-555. 
Smits G. and Dengler L. (2011). The past matters: Lessons from history and from Japan's 
March 11 earthquake and tsunami. The Asia-Pacific Journal, Japan Focus, Vol. 9, Issue 23, No. 
Smyth, J. M., & Greenberg, M. A. (2000). Scriptotherapy: The effects of writing about 
traumatic events. In P. R. Duberstein & J. M. Masling (Eds.), empirical studies of 
psychoanalytic theories. Psychodynamic perspectives on sickness and health (p. 121160). 
American Psychological Association.  
Solnit, R. (2010). A Paradise Built in Hell: The Extraordinary Communities that Arise from 
Disaster. London: Penguin Books. 
Sone, T., Nakaya, N., Ohmori, K., Shimazu, T., Higashiguchi, M., Kakizaki, M. & Tsuji, I. (2008). 
Sense of life worth living (ikigai) and mortality in Japan: Ohsaki Study. Psychosomatic 
Medicine, 70(6), pp. 709-715. 
Sou, G. (2019a). Household selfblame for disasters: responsibilisation and 
(un)accountability in decentralised participatory risk governance. Disasters, 43(2), pp. 289-
Sou G. (2019b). Barbudans are resisting 'disaster capitalism', two years after Hurricane Irma. 
The Conversation UK, 17 July 2019. Available: http://theconversation.com/barbudans-are-
resisting-disaster-capitalism-two-years-after-hurricane-irma-119368 (31.7.2019). 
Sou, G., & Webber, R. (2019). Disruption and recovery of intangible resources during 
environmental crises: Longitudinal research on homein post-disaster Puerto 
Rico. Geoforum, 106, pp. 182-192. 
Spurrell, M. T., & McFarlane, A. C. (1993). Post-traumatic stress disorder and coping after a 
natural disaster. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 28(4), pp. 194-200. 
Statistics Bureau of Japan (2017). Statistical Handbook of Japan. Available: 
https://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/handbook/c0117.html (9.9.2019).  
Sternsdorff-Cisterna, N. (2014). On food and safety. In D. Naito, R. Sayre, H. Swanson, & S. 
Takahashi (Eds.), To see once more the stars: Living in a post-Fukushima world. Santa Cruz, 
CA: New Pacific Press. 
Straub, D. W. (2009). Editor's Comments: Why top journals accept your paper. MIS 
Quarterly, 33(3), pp. III-X. 
Stallings R. A. (2007) Methodological Issues. In Rodriguez H., Quarantelli E. L. and Dynes R. 
(2007), Handbook of Disaster Research. New York: Springer-Verlag.  
Stein M. (2004). The critical period of disasters: Insights from sense-making and 
psychoanalytic theory. Human Relations, 57(10), pp. 1243-1261.  
Stein S., Geller R., and Liu M. (2012). Review Article: Why earthquake hazard maps often fail 
and what to do about it. Tectonophysics, 562-563, pp. 1-25.  
Stewart, K. (2007). Ordinary affects. Durham and London: Duke University Press. 
Stokke, K., & Mohan, G. (2001). The convergence around local civil society and the dangers 
of localism. Social scientist, 29(11/12), pp. 3-24. 
Strmberg, D. (2007). Natural disasters, economic development, and humanitarian 
aid. Journal of Economic perspectives, 21(3), pp. 199-222. 
Suma, T. (2012). Tohoku Tourism. Current Situation and Reconstruction. Institute for 
International Studies and Training (IIST) e-Magazine. Accessed: https://www.cfiec.jp/en-
m/2012/0213-0870/ (6.4.2019).  
Suppasri A., Shuto N., Imamura F., Koshimura S., Mas E., and Yalciner A. (2013). Lessons 
learned from the 2011 Great East Japan Tsunami: Performance of tsunami 
countermeasures, coastal buildings and tsunami evacuation in Japan. Pure Applied 
Geophysics, 170, pp. 993-1018.  
Susman P., OKeefe P., and Wisner B. (1983). Global Disasters, a Radical Interpretation. in 
Hewitt K. (ed.), Interpretations of Calamities from the Viewpoint of Human Ecology. Boston: 
Allen & Unwin. 
Srensen A. and Funck C. (2007), Living Cities in Japan: Citizens' Movements, Machizukuri 
and Local Environments, London and New York: Routledge. 
Srensen, A., Koizumi, H., & Miyamoto, A. (2008). Machizukuri, civil society, and community 
space in Japan. In Daniere, A., & Douglass, M. (Eds.). (2008). The politics of civic space in 
Asia: Building urban communities. London and New York: Routledge. 
Srensen, A. (2009). Neighborhood streets as meaningful spaces: claiming rights to shared 
spaces in Tokyo. City & Society, 21(2), pp. 207-229. 
Tanida N. (1996). What happened to elderly people in the great Hanshin earthquake. BMJ 
1996, 313, p. 1133.  
Taniguchi E., Thompson R. (2013). Humanitarian Logistics in the Great Tohoku Disasters 
2011. In: Zeimpekis V., Ichoua S., Minis I. (eds.), Humanitarian and Relief Logistics. 
Operations Research/Computer Science Interfaces Series, vol 54. Springer. 
Thompson, C. S. (2008). Population decline, municipal amalgamation, and the politics of folk 
performance preservation in northeast Japan. In Coulmas F., Conrad H., Schad-Seifert A. & 
Vogt G.(eds.), The demographic challenge: A handbook about Japan, Leiden & Boston: Brill. 
Thrift, N. (2004) Intensities of feeling: Towards a spatial politics of affect. Geografiska 
Annaler 86 B(1): 5778.  
Tierney, K. (2015). Resilience and the neoliberal project: Discourses, critiques, practices
and Katrina. American Behavioral Scientist, 59(10), pp. 1327-1342. 
Tierney, K., & Oliver-Smith, A. (2012). Social Dimensions of Disaster Recovery. International 
Journal of Mass Emergencies & Disasters, 30(2). 
Tint, B. S., McWaters, V., & van Driel, R. (2015). Applied improvisation training for disaster 
readiness and response: preparing humanitarian workers and communities for the 
unexpected. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 5(1), pp. 73-
Tohoku Planning Forum (2011). List of initiatives. Available: http://tpf2.net/initiatives 
(10.4.2018).  
Town of Minamisanriku (2011). Minamisanriku chou shinsai fukkou keikaku (The 
reconstruction plan for Minamisanriku). Available: 
https://www.town.minamisanriku.miyagi.jp/index.cfm/6,303,c,html/303/fukkoukeikaku120
326.pdf (3.3.2019).  
Town of Minamisanriku (2011b). Minamisanriku ch shinzai fukk keikaku sakutei kaigi 
shiry (Materials from the foundational meetings of Minamisanriku's reconstruction plan). 
Available: https://www.town.minamisanriku.miyagi.jp/index.cfm/6,0,22,133,html 
(3.8.2019) 
Town of Onagawa (2011). Onagawa ch fukk keikaku (Reconstruction plan for Onagawa). 
Available: http://www.town.onagawa.miyagi.jp/hukkou/keikaku.html (3.3.2019).  
Town of Onagawa (2011b). Onagawa Ch fukk keikaku kchkai (public hearings on 
Onagawa's reconstruction plan). Avalable: 
http://www.town.onagawa.miyagi.jp/hukkou/goiken.html (3.8.2019).  
Town of Onagawa (2013). Overview of Onagawa community development design, first 
edition. 
Accessed: 
http://www.town.onagawa.miyagi.jp/hukkou/pdf/20140331s_machi_design_eng.pdf 
(5.3.2019).  
Traphagan J. W. (2000) "The liminal family: Return migration and intergenerational conflict 
in Japan", Journal of anthropological research, 56(3), pp. 365-385.  
Tsuchiya Y., Nakabayashi I and Otagiri R. (2014). Hisai-sha no fukk-kan kara mita 
Higashinihon daishinsai no seikatsu fukk katei: funato Kesen'numa shinchi no 3-kanen no 
hisai-sha chsa kara (The Process of Recovery and Reconstruction from the Great East Japan 
Earthquake from the Viewpoint of the sufferers Sense of Recovery: Based on Surveys of 
Sufferers in Ofunato city, Kesennuma city and Shinchi town), Proceedings of the Japan 
Society for Safety and Security Studies, 24, pp. 253-261.  
Tsujinaka, Y., & Pekkanen, R. (2007). Civil society and interest groups in contemporary 
Japan. Pacific Affairs, 80(3), pp. 419-437. 
Tsuya, N. O. (2015). Below-replacement fertility in Japan: Patterns, factors, and policy 
implications. In Low and lower fertility (pp. 87-106). Springer, Cham. 
Twigg J. (1999). The age of accountability?: Future community involvement in disaster 
reduction. Australian Journal for Emergency Management, 14(4), pp. 51-58.  
Twigg J. (2002). The Human Factor in Early Warnings: Risk Perception 
and Appropriate Communications. In Zschau J. and Kppers A. (eds.), Early warning systems 
for natural disaster reduction, Springer.  
Ubaura, M. (2018). Urban planning and reconstruction after the Great East Japan 
Earthquake. Greiving S., Ubaura M. and Teliar J. (eds.), Spatial planning and resilience 
following disasters. International and comparative perspectives. Bristol: Policy Press.  
Uchiyama, T. (2011). Bungaku teki na Granddezain wo: Fukko no Shiso toha Nanika [A 
philosophical grand design: Thoughts on recovery]. In Nobunkyo (Ed.), Fukko no Taigi: 
Hisaisya no Songen wo Fuminijiru Shin Jiyu Syugi teki Fukko ron Hihan [Justice in recovery: 
Critiques of neo-liberal approaches to recovery that trump the dignity of victims] (pp. 42
48). Tokyo: Nobunkyo. 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) (2011). Great East Japan Earthquake and 
Tsunami. Available: http://www.unep.org/tsunami/ (25.4.2015).  
United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) (2018). UN 20-year review: 
earthquakes and tsunamis kill more people while climate change is driving up economic 
losses. Available: https://www.unisdr.org/archive/61121 (1.10.2019).  
United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) (2005). Hyogo Framework for 
Action 2005-2015: building the resilience of nations and communities to disasters. United 
Nations, 2005. Available: https://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/publications/1037 (4.6.2016).  
Urquhart, C. (2012). Grounded theory for qualitative research: A practical guide. Thousand 
Oaks: SAGE Publishing. 
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) (2011a). Magnitude 9.0 - Near the East Coast of Honshu, Japan. 
Available: http://www.webcitation.org/mainframe.php (25.4.2015).  
U.S. Geological Survey (2011b). USGS Updates Magnitude of Japan's 2011 Tohoku 
Earthquake to 9.0. USGS Press Release, 14.3.2011. 
Available:https://archive.usgs.gov/archive/sites/www.usgs.gov/newsroom/article.asp-
ID=2727.html (17.2.2017).  
Van Evera, S. (1997). Guide to Methods for Students of Political Science, Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press.  
Valenzuela, V., Samarasekara, R., Kularathna, A. H. T., Perez, G., Norikazu, F., Crichton, R. and 
Motoharu, O. (2019). Comparative analysis of tsunami recovery strategies in small 
communities in Japan and Chile. Geosciences, 9(1), p. 26. 
Victoria, B. (2012). Buddhism and Disasters: From World War II to Fukushima. Asia-Pacific 
Journal, Japan Focus. 10(11), Number 7, March 2012.  
Watanabe H. and Maruyama T. (2018). 2016 nen Kumamoto jishin de no Mashiki-ch ni okeru 
hisai setai no kasetsu jtaku ik purosesu ni kansuru bunseki (The Moving Process of Evacuees 
into Temporary Housing in Mashiki after the 2016 Kumamoto Earthquake), Journal of the City 
Planning Institute of Japan, Vol.53(3), pp. 709-716.  
Watanabe K. and Mano Y. (2015). Shien katsud o kikkake to shite ki machi shita shien-sha no 
teij purosesu o tshite miru hisai chshin shigaichi ni okeru gaibu jinzai no kyoj kanky no 
kadai ni kansuru kenky: miyagiken ishinomakishi o taish to shite (The study on the issue of 
the living environment for migrants in the central city area, where was damaged by the 
earthquake, considering the process until the volunteers was settled in there: Focusing on the 
situation in Ishinomaki city, Miyagi pref.), Journal of the City Planning Institute of Japan, 50(3), 
pp. 945-952.  
Walravens T. (2017). Food safety and regulatory change since the 'mad cow' in Japan: 
Science, self-responsibility and trust. Contemporary Japan, 29(1), pp. 67-88.  
Watt, S., Higgins, C., & Kendrick, A. (2000). Community participation in the development of 
services: a move towards community empowerment. Community Development Journal, 35(2), 
pp. 120-132. 
Weber, L., & Messias, D. K. H. (2012). Mississippi front-line recovery work after Hurricane 
Katrina: An analysis of the intersections of gender, race, and class in advocacy, power 
relations, and health. Social Science & Medicine, 74(11), pp. 1833-1841. 
Weick K.E. (1993). The collapse of sensemaking in organizations: The Mann Gulch disaster.  
Administrative Science Quarterly, 38, pp. 62852.
Weine S. (2006). Testimony after catastrophe: Narrating the traumas of political violence. 
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.  
Wetherell, M. (2013). Affect and discourseWhats the problem? From affect as excess to 
affective/discursive practice. Subjectivity, 6(4), 349-368. 
Wetmore, S. B., & Theron, F. (1998). Community development and research: Participatory 
learning and actiona development strategy in itself. Development Southern Africa, 15(1), pp. 
29-54. 
White, S. C. (1996). Depoliticising development: the uses and abuses of 
participation. Development in practice, 6(1), pp. 6-15. 
White, G.F. and Haas, J.E. 1975. Assessment of Research on Natural Hazards. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.  
Williams, G., 2004. Evaluating participatory development: tyranny, power and (re) 
politicisation. Third world quarterly, 25(3), pp.557-578. 
World Bank (2012). The Great East Japan Earthquake: Learning from Megadisasters. 
Knowledge Notes, Executive summary. The World Bank 2012. Available: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/811221468043499356/Knowledge-Notes-
Executive-Summary (20.9.2016).  
Yamamoto-Mitani, N., & Wallhagen, M. I. (2002). Pursuit of psychological well-being (ikigai) 
and the evolution of self-understanding in the context of caregiving in Japan. Culture, 
Medicine and Psychiatry, 26(4), pp. 399-417. 
Yamori K. (2013). A historical overview of social representation of earthquake risk in Japan: 
fatalism, social reform, scientific control and collaborative risk management. In Joffe H. et al. 
(eds.), Cities at Risk: Living with Perils in the 21st Century. Springer.  
Yarnal, B. (2007). Vulnerability and all that jazz: Addressing vulnerability in New Orleans 
after Hurricane Katrina. Technology in Society, 29(2), pp. 249-255. 
Yun N-Y and Hamada M. (2012). Evacuation behaviors in the 2011 Great East Japan 
Earthquake. Journal of Disaster Research, 7, pp. 458-467.  
Zahran S., O'Connor Shelley T., Peek L., and Brody S. (2009). Natural disasters and social order: 
Modeling crime outcomes in Florida. International Journal of Mass Emergencies and Diasters, 
27(1), pp. 26-52.  
Zheng, Y., Venters, W., & Cornford, T. (2007). Agility, improvisation, or enacted emergence. 
International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS) 2007, 2007-12-09 - 2007-12-12. 
(Submitted) 
Zippay, A. (1995). The politics of empowerment. Social Work, 40(2), pp. 263-267. 
gerfalk, P. J. (2014). Insufficient theoretical contribution: a conclusive rationale for 
rejection?. European Journal of Information Systems, 23(6), pp. 293-599.  
Appendices 
Appendices 
Annex 1: Field Visits 
  Date Location Length of stay Purpose 
1 25 October 2015 Ishinomaki 1 Day Observation, participant recruitment 
2 15 November 2015 Matsushima 1 Day Observation, Monitor tour to Matsushima 
3 21-24 November 2015 Minamisanriku  4 Days Observation, participation in community activity, interview 
4 25 November 2015 Ishinomaki 1 Day Participant recruitment 
5 28 November 2015 Ishinomaki 1 Day Interview 
6 1 December 2015 Onagawa 1 Day Observation 
7 16 January  2016 Ishinomaki and Onagawa 1 Day Participating in Tohoku University's Disaster Tour 
8 21 January 2016 Ishinomaki 1 Day Interviews 
9 6 March 2016 Onagawa 1 Day Interviews 
10 13 March 2016 Onagawa 1 Day Interviews 
11 4 April 2016 Ishinomaki 1 Day Interviews 
12 5 April 2016 Onagawa 1 Day Participating in community activity, observation 
13 8 April 2016 Ogatsu 1 Day Observation, Interview 
14 9-11 April 2016 Minamisanriku  3 Days Observation, Interviews 
15 20 April 2016 Onagawa 1 Day Community event, Interviews 
16 16 May 2016 Ogatsu 1 Day Interviews 
17 20 May 2016 Nobiru, Higashimatsushima 1 Day Observation, Interviews 
18 11-12 June 2016 Onagawa 2 Days Tohoku University's Disaster education tour 
19 16 June 2016 Nobiru, Higashimatsushima 1 Day Interviews 
20 18 June 2016 Onagawa 1 Day Interviews 
21 21 June 2016 Onagawa 1 Day Interviews 
22 22-24 June 2016 Minamisanriku  3 Days Interviews 
23 29 June 2016 Onagawa 1 Day Interviews 
24 4 July 2016 Minamisanriku  1 Day Interviews 
25 12 July 2016 Nobiru, Higashimatsushima 1 Day Interviews 
26 24 July 2016 Onagawa 1 Day Community event  
27 5 August 2016 Nobiru, Higashimatsushima 1 Day Interviews 
28 10 August 2016 Onagawa 1 Day Interviews 
29 13-20 August 2016 Ogatsu 7 Days Community volunteering, Observations, Interviews 
30 1 September 2016 Ogatsu 1 Day Observation 
31 27 Sept.-10 Oct. 2016 Onagawa 14 Days Observations, participation in community activities, interviews 
32 6-7 October 2016 Minamisanriku  2 Days Interviews, Observation 
Annex 2: Interviewees  
2.1. Included in the study 
Number REF Pseudonym Location Type F/M Age range Language 
1 1 Mrs. Kimura Minamisanriku New Arrival F 25-34 English 
2 1 Mr. Kimura Minamisanriku New Arrival M 25-34 English 
3 3 Matsumoto Ogatsu, Ishinomaki New Arrival F 25-34 Japanese 
4 4 Mori Minamisanriku New Arrival F 25-34 Japanese 
5 5 Ikeda Onagawa Long-term Resident M 65+ Japanese 
6 6 Takeda Onagawa Long-term Resident M 65+ English 
7 7* Mrs. Shimizu Onagawa Long-term Resident F 55-64 Japanese 
8 7 Mr. Shimizu Onagawa Long-term Resident M 55-64 Japanese 
9 8 Yamada Ogatsu, Ishinomaki Long-term Resident M 15-24 Japanese 
10 9 Mrs. Ono Ogatsu, Ishinomaki Long-term Resident F 55-64 Japanese 
11 9 Mr. Ono Ogatsu, Ishinomaki Long-term Resident M 55-64 Japanese 
12 10 Tanaka Nobiru, Higashimatsushima New Arrival  F 25-34 Japanese 
13 10 Maeda Miyato, Higashimatsushima New Arrival  M 25-34 Japanese 
14 11* Shimizu Onagawa Long-term Resident F 55-64 Japanese 
15 14 Miyazaki Onagawa Long-term Resident M 65+ Japanese 
16 14* Noguchi Onagawa Long-term Resident F 55-64 Japanese 
17 15 Iwasaki Minamisanriku Long-term Resident  M 65+ Japanese 
18 16 Omori Minamisanriku Long-term Resident  M 15-24 Japanese 
19 17 Nakano Minamisanriku Long-term Resident  F 35-44 Japanese 
20 18 Miura Minamisanriku Long-term Resident  F 34-44 Japanese 
21 19* Noguchi Onagawa Long-term Resident  F 65+ Japanese 
22 20 Ito Onagawa New Arrival  M 34-44 Japanese 
23 21 Ogawa Minamisanriku Long-term Resident  M 45-54 Japanese 
24 22 Nakamura Minamisanriku Long-term Resident F 15-24 Japanese 
25 23 Kobayashi Onagawa Long-term Resident F 55-64 Japanese 
26 24 Kato Nobiru, Higashimatsushima Long-term Resident  M 65+ Japanese 
27 25 Yoshida Onagawa Long-term Resident M 45-54 Japanese 
28 26 Sasaki Nobiru, Higashimatsushima Long-term Resident M 65+ Japanese 
29 27 Anonymous ** Official M n/a Japanese 
30 29 Inoue Nobiru, Higashimatsushima Long-term Resident  M 55-64 Japanese 
31 29 Hayashi Nobiru, Higashimatsushima Long-term Resident  M 55-64 Japanese 
32 31 Anonymous ** Official M n/a Japanese 
33 32 Hashimoto Ogatsu, Ishinomaki New Arrival M 34-44 English 
34 33 Yamashita Ogatsu, Ishinomaki New Arrival F 25-34 Japanese 
35 34 Ishikawa Ogatsu, Ishinomaki Long-term Resident  F 65+ Japanese 
36 36 Fujita Minamisanriku New Arrival  M 25-34 English 
37 37 Goto Minamisanriku Long-term Resident M 34-44 Japanese 
38 38 Hasegawa Minamisanriku New Arrival F 34-44 Japanese 
39 39 Murakami Onagawa Long-term Resident F 34-44 Japanese 
40 40 Kondo Onagawa Long-term Resident M 55-64 Japanese 
41 41 Fukuda Onagawa New Arrival F 34-44 Japanese 
42 42 Okamoto Minamisanriku New Arrival F 25-34 Japanese 
43 42 Harada Minamisanriku New Arrival F 25-34 Japanese 
44 43 Wada Minamisanriku Long-term Resident F 34-44 Japanese 
45 44 Mrs. Ishida Onagawa Long-term Resident F 34-44 Japanese 
46 44 Mr. Ishida Onagawa Long-term Resident M 45-54 Japanese 
47 45 Anonymous*** Onagawa Long-term Resident M 55-64 Japanese 
48 45 Anonymous*** Onagawa Long-term Resident M 45-54 Japanese 
49 45 Anonymous*** Onagawa Long-term Resident M 34-44 Japanese 
 * The person has been formally interviewed twice     
 ** To protect official's anonymity the location will not be provided     
 *** Failure of recording makes it difficult to distinguish interviewees in the analysis    
2.2. Excluded from the study 
Number REF Location Type Reason for rejection 
1 2 Ishinomaki New Arrival (individual) Location 
2 12 Ishinomaki / Onagawa Long-term resident (individual) Location / Weak connection 
3 13 Sendai / Miyagi Official (individual) Relevance 
4 28 Ogatsu, Ishinomaki Organisation (individual) Relevance / Weak connection 
5 30 Sendai / Miyagi Organisation (Group) Relevance 
6 35 Kesennuma Organisation (individual) Location / Relevance 
2.3. Demographics of interviewees 
Interviewees by gender
Men Women
Interviewee profile
New arrival Long-term Resident Official
Interviews by location
Location Minamisanriku Onagawa Higashimatsushima Ogatsu Official
Interview inclusion rate
Accepted Rejected
Gender*  Location**  Type*  Interviews**  
Men 27 Minamisanriku 13 New Arrival 14 Accepted 39 
Women 22 Higashimatsushima 4 Long-term residents 33 Rejected 6 
  Onagawa 14 Official 2   
  Ogatsu 6     
  Official 2     
TOTAL 49  39  49  45 
* individuals 
** Interview instances 
Annex 3 
Close reading of National Reconstruction Documents 
1. Towards Reconstruction - Hope Beyond the Disaster, the Reconstruction Design Council's Report to the Prime Minister, June 2011. 
(Hereafter 'Hope beyond Recovery'). In Japanese:   
2. Basic Guidelines for Reconstruction in response to the Great East Japan Earthquake, Reconstruction Headquarters, July 2011. 
(Hereafter 'Basic Guidelines'). In Japanese:  
3. Basic Act for Reconstruction in response to the Great East Japan Earthquake, Reconstruction Headquarters, July 2011. 
(Hereafter 'Basic Law'). In Japanese: 
Summary: 
The three key documents were primarily read in English, using the official translations provided by the Japanese government that therefore fully 
reflect the original Japanese documents. The close reading of the document verified that Japan's 'Community-focused' recovery seems to follow 
the international best practice of recovery taking place as close to the affected community as possible, emphasising empowerment through 
citizen participation, with more resilient communities as the desired outcome for the overall recovery. Excerpts (both in English and Japanese) 
from the documents reflecting the principles of proximity, participation, empowerment and resilience are organised into the table below, 
accompanied by a summary of the general framing through which the principles are presented as being applied to and actioned within the 
recovery in Japan. The principles by their very nature overlap and are executed in an agglutinated manner. The categorisation of excerpts under 
specific principles in the table below is therefore an analytical tool that I have utilised to tease out a clear presentation and exemplification of 
the presence of these key principles in the documents, rather than the organisation of the documents themselves. Unsurprisingly, the main 
document outlining the principles of recovery in detail is the Hope beyond Recovery -document, and is therefore the most revealing in helping 
to understand the element of 'community-focused' recovery in reference to general participatory trends in development and recovery. The Basic 
Guidelines and the Basic Law on the other hand are more prescriptive in their language, focusing on the organisation and legal foundation to be 
established for the recovery, mainly describing the roles and responsibilities of various actors in relation to the goals of the recovery.  
Principle:  
Proximity The principle of 'Proximity' in the Japanese government's reconstruction documents is primarily framed as administrative 
proximity.  The affected municipalities are to assume the lead role in reconstruction and recovery, as they are viewed to be 
in the best position to understand local conditions and consult local populations. They are also the administrative units 
that will work directly and independently with national reconstruction frameworks. The principle of proximity is primarily 
framed as a synergy between the municipalities at the centre, functioning as the primary actors designing a recovery based 
on local needs and wishes, while being financially and legally supported by the government.  
 English Japanese 
 "Given the vastness and diversity of the disaster region, 
we shall make community-focused reconstruction the 
foundation of efforts towards recovery. The national 
government shall support that reconstruction through 
general guidelines and institutional design" (Hope 
beyond the Disaster, p. 2) 
 
 
(np.) 
"The fundamental principle for reconstruction is that 
the main actors should be the municipalities 
themselves, as it is the residents who are closest to their 
communities and understand local characteristics best. 
Each municipality must work in cooperation with 
residents, NPOs, local businesses and others to 
formulate a reconstruction plan and promote measures 
that are autonomous, comprehensive and attentive to 
detail" (Hope beyond the Disaster, p. 18) 

 

 
(p. 16) 
 "[the government should] make efforts to make 
maximum use of the abilities of municipalities, which 
are the main actors in reconstruction" (Hope beyond 
the Disaster, p. 18) 
 
(p. 16) 
 "Community needs must be prioritized when 
implementing reconstruction" (Hope beyond the 
Disaster, p. 13) 
(p. 7) 
 "Active assistance should be provided for mechanisms 
for reconstruction assistance personnel who can reside 
in the affected municipalities and engage in a wide 
range of locally inspired activities" (Hope beyond the 
Disaster, p. 19) 

 

 
 (p. 17) 
 "In principle, the main administrative actors 
accountable for the reconstruction shall be 
municipalities, for the municipalities are closest to local 
residents and best understand characteristics of the 
regions [...] The Government will present the basic 
guidelines for reconstruction and implement necessary 
institutional design and support in a responsible 
manner, in regards to finance, human resource, know-
how and other aspects with a view to meeting the 
needs of the disaster areas to help municipalities fully 
exert their capacities" (Basic Guidelines, p. 1) 

 
  

 
 
 (p. 1) 
 "It is essential that community-focused reconstruction 
utilizing local resources and focusing on uniqueness of 
each disaster area be the base line for the 
reconstruction. Simultaneously, it is indispensable that 
not only people affected by the disaster and local 
residents in disaster areas but all living now in the 
nation play their roles accordingly based on mutual 
support and solidarity" (Basic Guidelines, p. 4) 
 
 

 
 (p. 3) 
 "Promote the allocation of reconstruction assistance 
personnel who can reside in the disaster-affected 
regions, observe and care for the people affected by the 
disaster and engage in a wide range of locally inspired 
activities" (Basic Guidelines, p. 13) 

 
 
 (p. 10) 
 "[municipalities shall] promote concentration in safe 
locations when promoting town-building by the entire 
community, with due consideration to the elderly, 
children, women and the disabled and taking into 
account the characteristics of disaster-affected 
municipalities" (Basic Guidelines, p. 14) 

 
  (p. 11) 
 "The office and ministries of the Government will 
delegate responsibilities necessary for the 
implementation of reconstruction measures [...] to local 
office located in disaster areas [so as to] promptly make 
decisions and reactions to the requests from the 
disaster-affected people and local governments" (Basic 
Guidelines, p. 41-42) 

 
 

  (p. 31-32) 
 "Appropriate allocation of roles and mutual 
collaboration between the central government and 
local governments as well as mutual collaboration 
among local governments shall be assured. " (Basic 
Law, Article 2 (2)) 

 
 (Basic Act, Article 2 (2)) 
 "Local governments, based on the basic philosophy 
under Article 2 and on the basis of the Basic Guidelines 
for Reconstruction in response to the Great East Japan 
Earthquake, have the responsibility to take necessary 

  
measures for the reconstruction in response to the 
Great East Japan Earthquake in a well-planned and 
comprehensive manner" (Basic Law, Article 4) 
 
 (Basic Act, Article 4) 
Principle:  
Participation Linked with proximity, communal voice giving, engagement and participation of local residents is equally highlighted in the 
documents. Resident participation is considered vital in order for the recovery solutions to reflect the wishes of those 
whose communities are being recovered. Participation in the documents is framed through a goal-oriented lens, where the 
purpose of participation resides in the delivery of recovery outcomes and solutions that will be satisfactory to the local 
populations and will meet their needs. Importantly, there is a lack of emphasis or overt recognition toward the process of 
recovery during the recovery period, with references to the format of the process remaining superficial or vague. The 
documents do however focus on the diversity of voices, specifically focusing on gender balance in consultative and 
participatory processes, while the responsibility over the institutional framework and outlining the main principles of the 
recovery nonetheless residing within the government, thus most likely reducing the impact voices on the local level can 
have on the goals of the recovery.  
 English Japanese 
 "In order to respect the needs of local residents it is 
essential to create a system that duly reflects their 
various opinions in government administration [...] it is 
advisable to utilize town and village community 
development associations or similar bodies, comprised 
of local residents, business owners and other related 
rights holders as a means of engaging in region 
planning" (Hope beyond the Disaster, p. 18) 

 

 
 (p. 17) 
 " The utilization of consultative organizations for 
concerned parties should also be considered for the 
purposes of implementing programs [...]Municipalities 
should show to the local residents the various options 
for community development and reconstruction, 
including the merits and demerits associated with each 
  

 
option. They should then determine a direction for 
reconstruction and community development based on a 
broad range of opinions from local residents and other 
concerned parties" (Hope beyond the Disaster, p. 18).  
 
(p. 16). 
 "It would be preferable for residents of municipalities to 
participate actively in reconstruction projects." (Hope 
beyond the Disaster, p. 19) 

 
(p. 17) 
 "In the context that local residents support and learn 
from each other, it will be effective to establish a forum 
where residents will be able to discuss the future of 
their own communities" (Hope beyond the Disaster, p. 
 
(p. 19) 
 "From the standpoint of gender equality, womens 
participation will be promoted in all reconstruction 
process. Furthermore, society of harmonious 
coexistence where all people including children and 
disabled persons would be realized" (Basic Guidelines, 
p. 3) 

 
 (p. 2) 
 "Improve the environment that is likely to reflect 
opinions of women, children, youth, elderly people, the 
disabled and foreigners in the process of town-building, 
for instance, through appropriate composition of 
coordinating meetings or similar conferences" (Basic 
Guidelines, p. 14)  

 
 (p. 10)  
 "position the community focal center, which 
comprehensively provides services such as consultations 
and assistance, as a hub of exchanges in creating 

 
compact town-building to lead to re-establishment of 
regional communities" (Basic Guidelines, p. 14)  
 
 (p. 11) 
 "Support municipal efforts to promote social inclusion 
so that the people can retain linkage in communities" 
(Basic Guidelines, p. 15) 

 (p. 11) 
 "Prevent isolation of the disaster-affected people, and 
implement consultation service for women" (Basic 
Guidelines, p. 15) 
 
 (p. 12) 
 "Promote the creation of environment in which local 
governments and residents in the disaster-affected 
regions are able to communicate smoothly and 
measures to facilitate livelihood support to the people 
affected by disaster" (Basic Guidelines, p. 28) 

 
 (p. 21) 
 "[Municipalities shall] assist the development of 
community focal centers and community-building 
supports" (Basic Guidelines, p. 32) 
[...] 
  [...]  
(p. 24) 
 "[...] building an inclusive society that does not leave 
anyone out by being mindful of those who are unable to 
easily voice their views will not only lead to 
reconstruction but also to development of Japanese 
societies. For this reason, efforts by municipalities such 
as accompanying support like the method of outreach 
and creation of place to which one belongs, 

 
 
 

comprehensive and preventive supports like 
development of human resources development will be 
assisted" (Basic Guidelines, p. 32) 
 
 
  
 (p. 24) 
 "opinions of the residents in the disaster-afflicted 
regions shall be respected and opinions of a wide range 
of people including women, children and the disabled 
persons shall be taken into account" (Basic Law, Article 
2(2)) 

 
 (Basic Act, Article 2(2)) 
Principle:  
Empowerment In the documents, empowerment is closely linked with participation through a causal relationship: empowerment is 
framed as a direct result of participation. The documents highlight the importance of creating local participatory 
environments, as outlined above, that will both take advantage of and enhance local capabilities to rebuild communities 
and personal lives, thus leading to empowered positions within the recovery process. In the government's view, 
empowerment seems to relate strongly to local capacity building and skills development that will enable them to become 
integrated into the formal recovery process within the participatory environments established at the local level based on 
the institutional framework set out by the government. Aside from formal participation, capacity building as empowering 
also relates to self-responsibilisation and the improvement of individual the capabilities to carry out personal life and 
livelihood restoration.  
 English Japanese 
 "first and foremost essential to listen to the voices of 
the people who have actually been affected and provide 
them with linkage that will empower them to realize 
their aspirations" (Hope beyond the Disaster, p. 11) 

 
(p. 4) 
 "The job of accurately and promptly conveying the 
diverse wishes and ensuring communication lines to the 
appropriate locations will be borne by people who will 
lead these wishes through to fulfillment. These people 
will continue to link people to people and people to 
organizations, gradually forming a communication 
network and continuing to develop and grow as people 
who play a role in revitalizing the local community." 
(Hope beyond the Disaster, 2011, p. 11) 
 
 

 

 (p. 4) 
 "[...] consideration should be given to ways of 
empowering residents to engage in such projects to the 
greatest extent possible" (Hope beyond the Disaster, p. 
 
 
(p. 17) 
 "The scope of such projects [community relocations] will 
have to be widened to allow for local circumstances to 
be taken into account and enable relocation for other 
purposes, thus developing a system that empowers 
appropriate community development" (Hope beyond 
the Disaster, p. 16) 

 

 (p. 6) 
 "In order to work towards reconstruction by responding 
to wide range of issues related to rebuilding lives of 
people affected by disaster and reconstruction of 
disaster-afflicted regions, it is necessary to enable 
people affected by disaster and local communities to 
fully utilize their capacities" (Basic Guidelines, p. 32) 

 
 
 

 
 (p. 23-24) 
Principle:  
Resilience Resilience in the documents it framed in two ways: as physically more resilient and safer domiciles, as well as the resilience 
of socio-economic systems and human communities. The latter form of resilience is framed as emerging from processes of 
revitalisation and increasing the productivity and efficiency of local economies, and the maintenance and strengthening of 
social and communal ties within and between communities, organisations and regions. There are recognisable connections 
to social capital. The general framing reflects values of self-sufficiency and regionalism, while simultaneously through 
improving the safety of these locations through physical and technological infrastructures against environmental 
disturbances in order to reduce their impact.  
 English Japanese 
 " While preserving the strong bonds of local residents, 
we shall construct disaster resilient safe and secure 
communities and natural energy-powered region" 
(Hope beyond the Disaster, p. 2) 
 
(np) 
 "Seek to construct regions that are self-sufficient and 
which create value" (Hope beyond the Disaster, p. 13) 
 
 (p. 7) 
 We should make efforts to promote the "New Public 
Commons", through which actors may take a leading 
role in post-disaster reconstruction, including through 
public-private partnerships (PPP) that utilize private 
sector funding and knowledge, and civil society 
activities by volunteer groups, NPOs and others" (Hope 
beyond the Disaster, p. 19) 

 

 (p. 17) 
 " It is necessary for the national government to create a 
new general structure 
that will become the basis for efforts to promote the 
rebuilding of regions that are resilient to tsunami 
disasters, and also to present a concept for the 
development of such communities" (Hope beyond the 
Disaster, p. 20) 

 

 
 

(p. 18) 
 " Developing a new framework for comprehensive 
support and participation based 
on mutual-aid will provide a foundation for the future 
of Japanese society" (Hope beyond the Disaster, p. 44) 

 
(p. 45) 
  "[...] we should aim to build a society in which each and 
every citizen has his or her own place and role, and one 
that values the joy of helping others." (Hope beyond 
the Disaster, p. 44-45) 

 (p. 
 "it is of utmost importance that we engage in thorough 
research in all areas regarding this disaster as a way to 
figure out how best to develop future countermeasures 
against disasters" (Hope beyond the Disaster, p. 46) 

 
(p. 45) 
 "When faced with a large-scale disaster, the following 
concepts are all of vital importance: public-aid 
offered by the central and local governments; self-aid 
taken on by individual citizens and private corporations; 
and mutual-aid whereby individuals, corporations 
and organizations of local communities work together 
and support each other" (Hope beyond the Disaster, p. 

 

 (p. 47) 
 "[...]towards reconstruction with a future vision for the 
purpose of advancing social and economic restoration 
and rebuilding peoples lives in the disaster area as well 

 
 
as revitalizing vibrant Japan as a whole" (Basic 
Guidelines, p. 1) 
 (p. 
 "In reconstruction of the disaster areas, shaping 
disaster resilient communities will be promoted, based 
on the concept of disaster reduction which gives 
utmost priority to secure human lives even when 
disaster strikes and minimize the damage from such 
disaster" (Basic Guidelines, p. 2) 

 
  (p. 2) 
 "Support community-led efforts to enable the Tohoku 
area to be concrete models for new community-
building, such as rebuilding the regions taking into 
account the ease of living, anti-crime measures, 
landscapes, renewable energy, energy conservation, 
environment, recycling, safety and security, as well as 
enhancing regional self-efficiency and creativity [...] 
Review the regional revitalization system based on the 
outcome of support to community-led efforts 
mentioned above" (Basic Guidelines, p. 9) 

 
 

 
 
   

 (p. 7)  
 "Measures to create safe communities where 
preventive measures against natural disaster are 
effective and everyone can live with a sense of security 
for years and decades to come [...] Measures to 
promote regional culture, to maintain and strengthen 
bonds in communities as well as to create a society of 
harmonious coexistence" (Basic Law, Article 2(5) a & c) 

  
  [...] 
 
  
(Basic Act, Article 2(5)  & ) 
 "Such will be accomplished by promoting dramatic 
measures with the perspective of revitalizing vibrant 
Japan which does not limit itself to recovery from 
disaster which simply restores affected facilities to its 
original state, as well as reconstruction measures which 
aim to facilitate each individual to overcome the 
disaster and lead prosperous lives" (Basic Law, Article 2 

 

 

 
  

 
 (Basic Act, Article 2 (1))  
	Abstract
	Notes to reader
	List of images
	Introduction
	The endings and beginnings in the 'post-disaster' space
	Locating the narrator
	Organisation of the thesis
	Chapter 1
	Disasters as more than hindsight:  from technocratic analyses to local imaginations
	1.1. Disaster Gold Rush and the sociology of disasters
	1.2. The best practice for building back better: The participatory turn and disaster research
	1.3. The institutional environment for 'best practice' in Japan
	Chapter 2
	The dual spheres of recovery:  When recovery stands in the way of recovery
	2.1. From post-disaster heterotopia to 'two recoveries'
	2.2. Hierarchy of discourses
	2.3. Hearing Affect
	Chapter 3
	Methodology
	3.1. Research locations
	3.2. Data collection
	3.3. Data analysis
	Chapter 4
	Everyone's voice in recovery:  Participation in and out of the legitimate spaces
	4.1. "We've never actually been asked about the recovery"
	4.1.2. Elimination of the affective from designated spaces
	Chapter 5
	Empowerment in recovery through resignation
	5.1. "I don't expect anything from this Government anymore"
	5.1.1. 'Resignation' from disempowerment
	5.2. "Somehow I found my ikigai again"
	5.2.1. Rejecting the norm and embracing the alternative
	Chapter 6
	Between physical and social resilience:  Building 'safe and secure' communities
	6.1. "We can sleep easy now, but..."
	6.1.1. Town planning as resilience
	6.2. "Our community is wider and stronger now"
	6.2.1. Community building for resilience
	Chapter 7
	Recovery standing in the way of recovery
	7.1. Prolonged state of Gaman
	7.2. Building ochitsuku out of completion of small plans
	Chapter 8
	Finding the beginnings that count:  Deconstructing the duality of development in theory and practice
	8.1. Relationship between theory and practice
	8.2. Different beginnings, different endings
	8.3. Developing a new 'best practice'
	Conclusions: Putting the 'community' back into the community-based approaches
	List of references
	Appendices
