PhD Thesis
 Geodynamic and Seismological Investigation of the 
 South Hellenic Arc Structure 
Georgios Chatzopoulos 
Student ID: 1137510 
Dissertation submitted in partial fulfilment for the degree of  
Doctor of Philosophy 
 Department of Civil Engineering & Environmental Engineering  
Brunel University London 
September 2018 
Abstract  
This thesis examines foreshock and aftershock seismicity patterns with the accelerated 
seismic release model and the non-extensive statistical physics approach in the South 
Aegean. The convergence and subduction of the African lithosphere under the Aegean 
Sea plate creates the seismically active Hellenic Arc. Strong earthquakes occur 
frequently, with evidence of a great magnitude earthquake in the past. To evaluate and 
understand the large earthquake likelihood, the accelerated seismic release model 
(ASR) has been used as hazard estimation technique. This method uses a power law 
equation to quantify the cumulative energy release (or Benioff strain, or number events) 
from the earthquakes that occur before the large event. The mainshocks are considered 
as critical points while the foreshocks are evolution pattern of the critical phenomena. A 
theoretical model to explain the earthquake preparation process has been proposed. This 
is based on the energy conservation laws and non-extensive statistical physics. The 
analytic expressions of the proposed model indicate the existence of a common critical 
exponent in the ASR power law equation. In addition, the critical exponent is 
independent from the measured quantity and reflects the physical parameters of the 
critical area, such as the Euclidian dimension, the Guttenberg-Richer b-value and the 
extensivity of the system during the large earthquake preparation period. The evaluation 
of the proposed model has been carried out with the identification of the critical areas 
for three strong events in South Aegean with retrospective analysis.  
The two strong event aftershocks of 2013 and a swarm sequence occurred in 2016 have 
been located and relocated in order to evaluate the spatiotemporal attributes of these 
sequences. Cross sections and fault plane solution provided in the examination of the 
spatial distribution of the events. By combining the detailed aftershock and foreshock 
catalogues, it is possible to better understand the activation mechanisms. Also, the time 
differences between two continuous earthquakes (interevent time) has been examined 
with the ideas of non-extensive statistical physical. The results suggest that a 
distribution of the entropic index q could explain the extensivity of the system as the q 
value varies with time. The use of the non-extensive statistical physics has clearly 
helped to better understand the behaviour of the seismicity patterns. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was implemented through the project IMPACT-ARC in the framework of 
action ARCHIMEDES IIISupport of Research Teams at TEI of Crete (MIS380353) 
of the Operational Program "Education and Lifelong Learning" and is co-financed by 
the European Union (European Social Fund) and Greek national funds 
This work was supported by the THALES Program of the Ministry of Education of 
Greece and the European Union in the framework of the project SEISMO FEAR 
HELLARC, (MIS 380208). 
This work was supported by HELPOS  Hellenic System for Lithosphere Monitoring, 
Greece (MIS 5002697) which is implemented under the Action Reinforcement of the 
Research and Innovation Infrastructure, funded by the Operational Programme 
Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, Greece (NSRF 20142020) and 
co-financed by Greece and the European Union (European Regional Development 
Fund.   
Table of Contents  
6.1.2 What is the nature of the relationship between foreshocks and major events in South 
6.1.3 Can a generalized model of Tsallis entropy explain the accelerating-decelerating 
6.1.4 What could be the process for assessing the future earthquake hazards in South 
6.1.5 Can the hazard associated with large earthquakes in subduction zones be better 
6.2.2 Can the aftershock and the swarm type sequence characteristics be explained by 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
This thesis focus is to provide an examination of foreshock and aftershock seismicity 
patterns guided by these questions: 
 Can the hazard associated with large earthquakes in subduction zones be better 
understood? Is there a relationship between foreshock sequences and major 
earthquakes? 
 What is the nature of the relationship between foreshocks and major events in South 
Aegean? 
 Can a generalized model of Tsallis entropy explain the accelerating-decelerating 
seismicity patterns in South Aegean? 
 Can the aftershock sequences be correlated with the foreshock patterns? 
 Can the aftershock and the swarm type sequence characteristics be explained by 
complexity theories? 
 What could the process be for assessing future earthquake hazards in South 
Aegean? 
The Hellenic Arc is the most seismically active region in Europe due to the subduction of 
the oceanic African lithosphere beneath the Eurasian plate, a tectonic regime shaped faults 
capable for great magnitude earthquakes (figure1.1) (McKenzie, 1972; Le Pichon & 
Angelier, 1979; Papazachos, 1990; Papazachos, et al., 2005; Le Pichon & Kreemer, 2010; 
Giardini, et al., 2013). It is an arcuate feature extending from the Peloponnese in the 
northwest to the Crete Island in the south and Rhodes Island in the northeast (Lyon-Caen, 
et al., 1988; Papazachos, et al., 2002). Crete lies in a prominent position in the fore-arc of 
the Hellenic subduction zone. It is located on top of the shallow portion of the presently 
active region of convergence. This reason makes Crete an excellent onshore observation 
point for the internal structure of the fore-arc at various depths. 
Figure 1.1 The spatial distribution and the magnitude of earthquakes in Europe. Image from 
(Giardini, et al., 2013) 
The collision of continents is dominant in plate tectonic related features in the Hellenic 
Arc, yet not fully understood, especially in this complex region where the underlying 
structure is considered three-dimensional. Due to the plates motion there is an increased 
risk in the areas near the subduction zone to be affected by large earthquakes (figure 1.2). 
The seismic hazard is a function of the earthquake magnitude and the probability of a large 
event to occur. The development of a near real-time estimation method of the seismic 
hazard is a prominent feature of this area. This has the potential to enable the determination 
of the time dependent seismic hazard based on the study of accelerating seismicity 
phenomena at the scale of the South Aegean. The concept is that the earthquake generation 
process is a critical phenomenon, culminating in a main event that corresponds to some 
critical point (Saleur, et al., 1996; Sornette & Sammis, 1995; Bowman, et al., 1998; Rundle, 
et al., 2000). Fundamental prediction of this hypothesis is that, before it reaches the critical 
point, a regional system of faults goes through a characteristic period of accelerating 
seismicity. The increased seismic release prior to a large event can be described by a power 
law time-to-failure relation (Varnes, 1989; Bufe & Varnes, 1993). The small and medium 
events are related to the correlation length increase of the regional microfracturing 
whereas the main event represents the critical point where rupture nucleates at all scales. 
 In this thesis, the hazard estimation model has been based on the accelerating seismicity 
release model as well as on the common critical exponent criterion derived by the proposed 
model. The new approach to produce a time dependant seismic hazard model is based on 
the energy conservation law and the non-extensive statistical physics. The evaluation of the 
model has been carried out with past data catalogues that have been revised. According to 
the risk assessment flowchart (figure 1.2), the earthquake catalogues are the primary tool to 
investigate the spatiotemporal evolution of the seismicity. The accurate earthquake 
parameters estimation and the data completeness of the seismicity catalogue are necessary 
for this hazard estimation method. In addition, an investigation to evaluate the 
spatiotemporal attributes of two strong event aftershock sequences in 2013 and a swarm 
sequence that occurred in 2016 has been carried out. The earthquakes have been located 
and relocated in order to examine their spatial distribution of the events and examine the 
temporal characteristics using non-extensive statistical physics. 
Figure 1.2 The seismic risk assessment flowchart developed for this research. 
Chapter 2 Basic Theories - Literature Review  
2.1 General Geophysics  Seismology 
2.1.1 Tectonic boundary types 
The tectonic plates theory starts early in 1620, when Francis Bacon noticed and published 
the observation that there is a shape similarity between the continental shelf of west Africa 
and the east part of South America. This observation was enough to inspire different group 
of scientists to investigate the possible past locations of the continents and the relative 
motions that led to the present-day shape (Donaldson, 2016). The tectonic plates theory 
describes very well the mechanisms that shapes earths outer layers. It is considered that a 
plate can travel without experiencing significant deformation in the interior part of the plate 
due to the rigidity of materials. There are areas that have remain unchanged in terms of 
deformation since the Precambrian Eon, these areas are known as cratons (Grotzinger & 
Jordan, Thomas, 2010).  However, on the edge of these blocks there are zones where 
different interactions can occur such as volcanic activity or earthquakes. These areas are 
known as plate boundaries (Morgan, 1968; Dewey, 2016). The boundaries between the 
tectonic plates have been defined mainly by using the location of earthquakes that occur on 
areas where stress can build up and then be abruptly released (Isacks Bryan, 1968). The 
detailed mapping of epicentres on a global scale has allowed researchers to distinguish the 
number of plates. The number of lithospheric plates varies in the literature. It is broadly 
accepted that there are seven large plates and a considerable number of smaller ones.  
Regardless the classification of plates, the important aspect is than not all boundaries are 
the same type. There are three categories based on the relative motion between them 
(Morgan, 1968; Turcotte & Schubert, 2002; Fowler, 2005): 
A. Convergent lithospheric plate boundaries 
The tectonic margins shaped when two lithospheric plates move toward to each other are 
known as convergent boundaries. The expected consequence of this block approach is the 
tectonic collision of the plates. This kind of margin is considered as a destructive type 
because the colliding plates produce significant deformations in lithosphere. Usually one of 
the two plates, is submerging under the other into the mantle which consists of denser and 
more compressible materials. A progressive increase in temperature and pressure with 
depth exist in mantle. In the descending parts of the lithosphere, the materials are heated by 
the friction that is developing between the colliding rocks. The additional heat of the 
mantle helps the destruction of the subducted plate. The lithospheric part entering the 
mantle is under a gravitational force. Because the lithosphere is acting like elastic material, 
the stress is also transmitted to the surface part pulling it downwards. This act is known as 
slab pull and creates an extensive force field with normal faults (Conrad & Lithgow-
Bertelloni, 2002). In the upper part of ocean trench, there are formed some masses from 
friction forces known as accretionary prisms, mainly consisted by the top part of the sea 
floor basalt and the overlying sediments which have been detached from the sinking slab. 
Another common tectonic feature which is observed in convergent boundaries is the 
relative newformed volcanic arcs. It is very common to observe high seismicity rates in 
these regions and earthquakes at great depth. The tectonic plates can be classified in two 
categories based on the material that consist them. The first type are the oceanic plates, 
formed from oceanic floor in mid ocean ridges, with basaltic type rocks and the overlying 
sediments. The second one is the continental plates consisted by continental crust with 
granitic type masses and the analogous sediments. Depending on the approaching plates 
materials, the results of the collision can form three possible tectonic regimes:  
i. An oceanic plate approaches another oceanic plate 
ii. An oceanic plate subducts under a continental plate 
iii. A continental plate approaches another continental plate. 
B. Divergent lithospheric plate boundaries 
Harry Hess suggested that the mantles convection currents are responsible for the sea floor 
spreading in mid-ocean ridges (Hess, 1962). The sea floor spreading causes the two 
lithospheric plates move apart from each other in the divergent margins, but this discovery 
is considered as the fourth and final stage of the continental rifting process. The first stage 
of the ocean opening mechanism was a subject that drew much attention and a lot of 
scientists contributed to explain it. Among the possible contributions the most acceptable 
hypotheses are two. The one was proposed from Wilson in 1966 considering the opening of 
the continental crust as a result of tensional stress that stretch and cracked the lithosphere, 
which is consider as passive rifting since the acting force is applied by a far-field extension 
(Wilson, 1966). The other theory is introduced by Buck in 1991, which involves 
compressional forces that are developed from the upward motion of mantles magma 
(Buck, 1991). This squeeze type action is thinning the crust and move apart of the 
continental blocks which categorizes the oceanogenesis mechanism as a product of active 
rifting. Whether it is an active or a passive rifting or not, after the lithosphere is lengthened 
and thinned, the existence of normal faults shapes a tectonic graben which is known as rift 
valley. The erosion and the additional extension of the crust widens the graben and 
gradually make it deeper until it reaches seawater level and covered by water which forms 
a small basin. In the next stage the elevated mantles material is pushing away the 
lithosphere and takes its place. Due to the lower temperature occurring in the crust and 
atmosphere, the hot magma is slow cooling, solidifies and create new rocks..  The last stage 
of the spreading process, is the formation of well know mid-ocean ridge, an area where 
new ocean floor is produced and spread symmetrically and parallel on both sides of ridge 
crest.  
C. Transform plate boundaries 
The last type of plate margins can characterized by a conservative behaviour as the two 
plates that are in contact move in the same relative direction to opposite azimuth. This kind 
of motion, where the two tectonic plates have only lateral fracture and there is no change in 
the size of the plate, shapes the transform plate boundaries (figure 2.1.6a). This opposite 
direction motion is the reason for the formation of long (up to hundreds of kilometres in 
length) almost vertical angle faults like the San Andreas Fault in California, U.S.A. which 
is probably the most well-known example of transform faults. 
2.1.2 Faults  Focal Mechanisms     
A fracture in the rocks caused by brittle failure relative with a displacement is known as 
fault and its motion is related to the acting force field, which can be compressional or 
tensional (Allaby, 2013). The faults have length varies from a few centimetres to many 
hundreds of kilometres. The fracture has a direction which is measured as an azimuth on 
horizontal plane know as strike, an angle relative to the horizontal plane called dip while 
the rake is the direction of block which is related to stress field (Allaby, 2013; Aki & 
Richards, 1980). In the case of the incline faults the upper moving blocks is called the 
hanging wall and the lower one is the footwall. There are four fault categories which are 
function of angle of dip and their relative displacement (Aki & Richards, 1980). The first 
are the normal faults which are typical products of an extensional field, the hanging wall 
moves downwards in respect with the footwall, a typical dip is 45 and the rake value for 
pure normal fault is -90. The second category are the reverse faults which are developed 
from compressional stress regimes, the in this case the stress is pushing the hanging wall to 
move upwards and the expected rake values are at 90. The other category refers to the 
strike-slip type with vertical dip, while the rake 0 or 180 denotes if the fault is left or right 
lateral respectively. Usually the faults are a combination of a strike-slip fault and a normal 
or reverse fault known as oblique faults, which are typically formed by integration of 
shearing and tensional or compressional forces at the same time. The fault slip that occurs 
during an earthquake is usually calculated by P waves first-motion direction and it is 
described by the focal mechanism (or moment tensor or beachball or fault plane solution) 
which is a representation of a second order tensor with nine dipoles of forces that depends 
on the source strength and the fault orientation (figure 2.1.8) (Aki & Richards, 1980; Udias, 
1999). 
In the recent work by Thingbaijam, et al. (2017) the source parameters for various tectonic 
regimes have been estimated with the general orthogonal regression method (Fuller, 1987) 
which is considered as a more robust approach (Castellaro, et al., 2006; Lolli, et al., 2014). 
The ordinary least squares method is simple to use but the assumption that the independent 
variable has insignificant uncertainty, is a major drawback to apply in magnitude 
comparison dataset. The GOR method consider that the two variables have different 
uncertainties (Lolli & Gasperini, 2012).  
2.1.3 Elastic waves propagation and velocities 
The elastic deformations are distributed in the interior of earth with the Body waves 
consisted by the Primary (P) which is the first waves arriving to a monitoring station and 
Secondary (S) waves which comes after the Primary (Timoshenko, 1953). In the Primary 
waves the particles vibrate parallel to the travel direction, this motion that generates 
consecutive expansions and compressions in the traveling medium and for that reason they 
are also called compressional waves. In the Secondary waves the particles of the continuum 
oscillate vertical to the travel direction and due to this motion, they are known as shear 
waves. Another category of seismic waves are the Surface waves which are a product of the 
energy transfer by the P and S waves in the free surface above the medium (Udias, 1999). 
In the (Pujol, 2003; Udias, 1999) or any other seismic wave related geophysical book, it is 
described the theoretical background and assumption to derive the equations for the seismic 
wave velocities. This approach is based on taking the equation of motion for the deformed 
particles, the law of elasticity (Hooke 1660) and the strain tensor and displacement relation 
into account to obtain an equation that express the motion of the particles in an elastic 
medium. The elastic wave equation for the Primary () and Secondary () waves are: 
 = 
(+2)
(32)
        (2.1.1) 
 = 
3()
         (2.1.2) 
The  is the Lame constant, the  is the Shear modulus, the k is the Bulk modulus and  the 
density (Sheriff, 1984). 
2.1.4 Earthquake magnitudes 
 In 1902, the Italian volcanologist Giuseppe Mercalli modified the RossiForel scale and 
added two intensity levels to make the well-known Mercalli intensity scale (Tiedemann, 
1992). The first instrumental scale, well-known and still in use today, was the local 
magnitude ML presented in 1935 by the American seismologist Charles Francis Richter 
along with the contribution of the American seismologist Harry O. Wood (Richter, 1935). 
There different ways to express the magnitude of the earthquakes, most of them are based 
on the measuring the amplitude for a specific part of the seismic waves (Woessner, et al., 
2010). A scale that does not get saturated was proposed by (Kanamori, 1977; Hanks & 
Kanamori, 1979). As the previous scales measures the logarithm of the amplitude, this one 
differs because it measures the logarithm of the seismic movement (Kanamori, 1983; 
Scordilis, 2006; Woessner, et al., 2010): 
 log10(0)           (2.1.3) 
The 0 is the seismic moment the constant is 6.06 for Newton meters and 10.7 for dyne 
centimetre.  
2.1.5 Gutenberg-Richer & Omori scaling laws 
The well-known Gutenberg Richer law, that associates for an earthquake population the 
rate of appearance events with a specific magnitude, it is considered as one of the most 
important relationship in seismology (Gutenberg & Richter, 1954): 
( ) = 10        (2.1.4) 
The b-value has been studied by various independent researchers and some of the findings 
are recapitulated here: 
 At laboratory triaxial test, as the stress increases in the rocks the b-value tends to 
decrease (Scholz, 1968) 
 The b-value reflects the heterogeneity of the Earths interior (Mogi, 1962). 
 The b-value not only decreases before the fracture of specimens but also before 
large earthquakes and it can associated with critical point theory (Amitrano, 2012). 
 As the b value gets higher the more often small magnitude earthquakes occur. The 
b-value has been correlated with the fault type, the smallest values appear in reverse 
faults, the strike-slip has average values while the largest exist on normal faults  
(Schorlemmer, et al., 2005) 
 For the California region the b-value becomes higher with the increase of depth 
(Mori & Abercombie, 1997) 
 The typical b-value for aftershocks in the Aegean region has a mean value 1.0 0.2 
(Kourouzidis, 2003). Studies in Japan suggest that the b-values varies from 0.7 to 
1.4 for aftershock sequences (Guo & Ogata, 1997) 
 The small b-values in aftershock sequence might indicate that the aftershock 
sequence may have not fully released the accumulated energy (Peng, 2011).  
 The Magnitude of completeness controls the G-R law frequency magnitude 
distribution slope and the a and b-values (Wiemer & Wyss., 2000). 
Considering the Gutenberg-Richters law as the most important relation for the seismology, 
then the second most important is the Omoris law. This law explains the decay behaviour 
of the aftershock sequences as it connects the aftershock frequency () that occurred in a 
time window at time ,  N number of aftershocks with magnitude  magnitude of 
completeness and the d (days) is the time delay, a parameter that is used to apply correction 
for the missing data  (Omori, 1894; Utsu, et al., 1995; Kagan & Houston, 2005; Utsu, 1961; 
Peng, 2011):  
 F() =
                                                                                                                   (2.1.5) 
It has been proposed (Utsu T. , 1961) that modified Omoris law is modified by introducing 
the parameter p, which measures the decay rate: 
() = /( + )                                                                                                     (2.1.6) 
Utsu et al. 1995 propose that the p-values vary from 0.9 up to 1.4 being controlled by 
parameters such as the heterogeneites of the crusts materials, the build up stress and the 
temperature. A typical p-value for the aftershocks on the Aegean area is 1.0 0.2 
(Kourouzidis, 2003). Similar results have been found for the California region, mean value 
1.08 (Reasenberg & Jones, 1989; Guglielmi, 2016) and for two Nepal aftershocks 
sequences 1.01 and 0.95 (Chingtham, et al., 2016). 
2.2 Accelerated Seismic Release (ASR) 
2.2.1 Criticality  
The risk associated with the energy release of the large earthquakes inspired scientists to 
investigate the various preseismic indicators. For many years scientists have tried to predict 
earthquakes with different methods, mainly relying on the spatial and temporal variation of 
the seismic activity rate (e.g. Jones and Molnar, 1979; Papazachos, 1973). One of these 
methods supports the idea that during the large earthquake preparation process, there is an 
interval where an anomalous increase in the intermediate magnitude earthquake population 
(Accelerating Seismic Release-ASR) is observed (Papazachos & Papazachos, 2000; De 
Santis, et al., 2010; Mignan, et al., 2006; Papadopoulos & Minadakis, 2016) and others. 
The core idea of accelerated deformation theory is that on a stressed area there are some 
earthquakes usually 2 orders smaller than the large event (Bufe & Varnes, 1993) that they 
will contribute with seismic energy release to the preparation process of a large event. The 
abnormal increase of the energy flow inspired researchers to quantify this phenomenon and 
a significant number of empirical models aiming to explain the Accelerating Seismic 
Release have been proposed. Historically, the first attempt was made by Gerasimos 
Papadopoulos in 1988. His work considered the increase of foreshocks number occurred 
before large earthquakes in western Hellenic Arc region (Papadopoulos, 1988). David 
Varnes (1989) explored the subcritical extension theory, where the small cracks in rocks 
under constant pressure expand rapidly before the origin of the main fracture, with the ASR 
model (Varnes, 1989). This process describes a model that follows the critical point theory 
(Sornette & Sornette, 1990; Rundle, et al., 2000), where the small cracks behave as the 
critical phenomena while the main fracture that terminates the process acts as the critical 
point. He also proposed a differential power law equation that expresses seismic energy 
release in terms of the inverse power of the time before a large event. The combined effort 
of Bufe and Varnes in 1993 to measure the seismic energy release and predict earthquakes 
in the San Francisco bay, helped to correlate the Benioff stain release with a power law 
time to failure relation (Bufe & Varnes, 1993): 
 () =  
(  )
           (2.2.1) 
where the  is the origin time of the mainshock and  is the Benioff strain when  = . 
Since then, the ASR model has been tested and altered by various independent scientists : 
(Papadopoulos, 1986; Bowman, et al., 1998; Varnes, 1989; Bufe & Varnes, 1993; Brehm & 
Braile, 1999; Papazachos & Papazachos, 2000; Rundle, et al., 2000; Tzanis, et al., 2000; 
Bowman & King, 2001; Papazachos & Papazachos, 2001; Di Giovambattista & Tyupkin, 
2001; Di Giovambattista & Tyupkin, 2004; Papazachos, et al., 2002; Tzanis & Vallianatos, 
2003; Scordilis, et al., 2004; Papazachos, et al., 2005; Mignan, et al., 2006; Mignan, et al., 
2007; Mignan, 2008; Mignan & Di Giovambattista, 2008). Typically, the ASR analysis was 
retrospective, usually after a large earthquake, although there were few attempts for 
prediction though not all of them were successful. 
The Accelerating Seismic Release model is based on the theory that the large magnitude 
earthquakes are generated by the summary of the energy release which is produced by 
several moderate size events. Based on the observation, above the ASR idea and the power 
law time-to-failure has been correlated with critical point concept. The preparation of an 
earthquake was described as a critical phenomenon that leads to a critical point which is the 
main earthquake occurs when fracturing becomes coherently self-organized at different 
scales (Sornette & Vanneste, 1992; Rundle, et al., 2000; Sornette & Sornette, 1989; 
Sornette & Sornette, 1990). Furthermore, the Accelerating Seismic Release hypothesis has 
been associated with the phase transitions theory and spinodals lines where the fault 
failures are the product of a continuous evolving and correlated system (Rundle, et al., 
2000). This approach also considers the earthquakes as a critical phenomenon, which 
occurs when fracturing becomes coherently self-organized at different scales (Sornette & 
Vanneste, 1992; Rundle, et al., 2000; Sornette & Sornette, 1989; Sornette & Sornette, 
1990). 
2.2.2 Non-Criticality  
The lack of a sufficient physical model to explain the empirical  power law equation of 
Bufe & Varnes(1993), has inspired a number of scientists to propose their own hypotheses. 
The Accelerating Seismic Release theory has been correlated with the Coulomb static stress 
transfer (King & Bowman, 2003; Mignan, et al., 2006; Mignan, 2008; Mignan, 2012). The 
basic principle of this theory is that every event generates a stress change which is 
responsible for the triggering of the next event. The Coulomb stress changes () in the 
stress field during the preparation period (Mignan, 2008b; Mignan, 2012): 
 =  + ( + )         (2.2.2) 
where the  and  are the shear and normal stress change respectively,   the friction 
coefficient and  the pore pressure changes. The areas with positive  values 
generate new earthquakes while in the areas with negative values there is a quiescence. 
(Mignan, 2008b; Mignan, 2012). There are two techniques to estimate the stress field 
before the occurrence of the large event. The first one evolves to measure the deformation 
cause by the loading process while the second one proposed by King & Bowman(2003) is 
to estimate the stress field by reversing the faults motion (Mignan, 2008b; Mignan, 2012). 
While a number of scientists accept that the static stress transfer model behaves as a critical 
point, Mignan(2008b); Mignan(2012) supports that the preparation procedure is due the 
tectonic loading and the foreshocks are the results of this process. 
2.3 Principles of statistical physics 
Seismology, especially the part that is related with prediction and risk assessment, is 
acknowledged as a multidisciplinary science (Udias, 1999). The Brazilian-Greek physicist 
Constantino Tsallis developed a broader concept of statistical mechanics defined by 
Boltzmann-Gibbs (Tsallis, 1988) which has been applied in various dynamical systems 
including the earthquakes (Tsallis, 2009). The physicist Ludwig Boltzmanns initial 
formula was expressed for thermodynamic systems in equilibrium like ideal gases. The 
entropy is a measure of disorder, for equal probabilities it explains the possible number of 
states for a closed system with the formula: 
 =   ln  (2.3.1) 
where  is a constant (ideal gas constant R divided by Avogadro's number N =1.38065  
1023 J/K) and  is controlled by the number of states (Schmitz, 2007; Boltzmann, 1896). 
The American physicist Josiah Willard Gibbs took his formula to estimate the energy 
changes of a system into account to generalize the Boltzmanns equation (Gibbs, 1902; 
Schmitz, 2007): 
 =   
=1 ln    (2.3.2) 
    
=1 = 1   
The  is Boltzmann-Gibbs entropy, the  is a set of the stage probabilities and  is the 
total number of possible stages. 
For any two probabilistically independent subsystems 1 and 2, i.e. if the joint 
probability satisfies 
1+2 = 
1
2((, )) then the  becomes additive and 
satisfies the relation (Tsallis, 2009):  
(1 + 2) =  ()
   (2.3.4) 
with  = 1+ 2 
 (1 + 2) =    
1+22
ln 
1+21
 (2.3.5) 
() =   
=1 ln 
 , (2.3.6) 
with   =  1, 21    = ,  
Hypothetically, the BG entropy can be used on all physical systems with complex 
behaviour. Important obstacles in this theory are the systems with long-range interactions 
and multifractal boundary conditions and structures. Focusing on systems with short 
memory and smooth boundary conditions that follows the BG statistical mechanics, Tsallis 
proposed Non-Extensive Statistical Physics (NESP) (Tsallis, 1988). The associated 
generalized entropic form for the discrete case is:  
   = 
1 
,       (2.3.7) 
 with    = 1
where Sq is Tsallis entropy and q is the entropic index that represents a measure of the non-
extensivity of a system. Sq recovers SBG in the limit q  1. SBG is additive, whereas Sq 
(q1) is non-additive. For any two probabilistically independent systems 1 and 2, i.e. if 
the joint probability satisfies 
1+2 = 
1
2((, )) , Tsallis entropy Sq satisfies: 
(1+2)
(1)
(2)
+ (1  )
(1)
(2)
 (2.3.8) 
The last term on the right part of the equation (2.3.8) controls the non-additivity of the 
system. If the q has a value less than 1, then the system is over-additive which means that 
the events with small probabilities (close to 0) becomes more frequent. If the q is larger 
than 1, then the system is under-additive and the frequent events with large probability 
(close to 1) are enhanced while if the q is equal with 1 then the system is described by the 
classic Boltzmann-Gibbs additive entropy (Tsallis, 2001; Vallianatos, et al., 2015; 
Vallianatos, et al., 2018). In the Michas, et al .(2013); Papadakis, et al .(2013); Vallianatos, 
et al. (2015); Tsallis (2009) work, it is demonstrated the method to maximize the entropy Sq 
with the Lagrange multipliers in order to obtain the q-logarithmic function ln() =
(1  )1(1  1) for a continuous variable   with a probability distribution p(X) 
(figure 2.2.1). 
Figure 2.2.1 The log-log plot of the q-exponential distribution for various values of q. Image from 
(Tsallis, 2009). 
2.4 Area of study 
2.4.1 Evolution of Hellenic Arc  
The Hellenic orogeny was created and developed through geologic time through relentless 
tectonic processes. Due to its complex geometry and kinematics, it has been a study case 
that has been considered by numerous independent scientists (Dercourt, 1964; Brunn, 1956; 
Mercier, 1968; Mountrakis, 2006) and references therein, the work of whom contributes to 
the following description:  
The Hellenic orogen is divided according to orogenetic processes, which is based on the 
tectonic events that acted over a specific time period, starting in the pre-late Jurassic. In 
general, the Hellenic orogenesis consists of three arc shaped zones: the Cimmerian in the 
northern part of Greece, the Alpine in the middle part containing most of the South Aegean 
Peloponnese as well Crete island, and the Mesogean in the outer part, south from Crete 
(figure 2.4.1). The first orogenetic episode is dated to the pre-Late Jurassic, and is related to 
the convergence motions of the Cimmerian continental parts. However, so far research 
findings do not give a satisfactory conclusion about the relative plates motions. The second 
orogenesis, the Alpine, started from the Cretaceous and lasted up to the Paleogene. The 
main reason for this deformation was the convergence of the Apulian microplate to the 
Cimmerian which is responsible for the subduction Neo-Tethys. In the Alpine orogenesis 
there are two periods - the first occurred during the Cretaceous and the other one in the 
Eocene-Oligocene. The most recent orogenetic process is the Mesogean which occurred 
from Miocene to Pliocene and caused the subduction of the African plate under the 
Eurasian plate. Generally, the classification of three orogenetic zones does not mean that 
the limits of each process are strict and there are no effects in other zones.  More 
specifically in the south Aegean, after the Alpine orogenetic process, a series of new 
tectonic events took place during the place on Tertiary is responsible for the crustal 
thinning and the formation of the geological windows in the Crete and Peloponnesus that 
reveal the lower plate units.     
Figure 2.4.1 The three orogenetic belts that acted in the Hellenic region since pre-late Jurassic 
times, image from (Mountrakis, 2006). 
2.4.2 Geodynamics of Hellenic arc 
The Hellenic Arc, located in south-eastern Europe, it is a well-known example of a 
destructive boundary as there are two converging plates which submerge one under the 
other. In the Cretaceous  Paleogene period, the convergence of Apulian microplate 
towards the Cimmerian-Eurasian plate was the main reason for the closing, subduction and 
destruction of the Neo-Tethys ocean (Mountrakis, 2006). During this time period and 
parallel to the Hellenic Arc, two HP/LT metamorphic events occurred, the first in inner part 
during the Eocene and second in outer arc in Oligocene-Miocene (Mountrakis, 2006). 
Eventually the convergence of plates continued to the southern part of Greece near Crete 
and Peloponnesus and after the full subduction of the Apulian microplate in the Oligocene 
 Lower Miocene, the compressional forces folded the sediments and start to form the 
Mesogean ridge (Mountrakis, 2006). These sediments evolved to form a new accretionary 
prism. Since the Miocene-Pliocene, the area of the old accretionary prism, which formed 
from the compressional stresses during the Oligocene, was under an extensional stress 
field, which continues until today (Mountrakis, 2006). The relative phenomena of the 
expanding forces are the thinning of the crust, the formation of tectonic basins and trenches 
and the exposure of lower formations as tectonic windows. The direction of the extensive 
stress field was northeast to southwest in the upper Miocene, and since the Pleistocene is 
north-south which leads to the formation of normal, active east-west faults. A study based 
in south Aegean moment tensors by Papazachos, et al.(1999); Papazachos, et al.(2002) 
shows that, along and in the inner part of the Hellenic Arc, there is a small zone that has 
different stress field. The direction of extensional stresses in this zone is east-west to 
east/southeast which is analogous to the direction of the compressional field that acts in the 
outer part of the arc. In the outer part and along the Hellenic Arc, south from Crete, there 
are compressional forces with east-west to northeast-southwest direction that forms reverse 
faults (figure 2.4.2).  
The initial estimation of the movement rates due to the compression is due to the 
subduction of African plate (McKenzie, 1972; Le Pichon & Angelier, 1979) under the 
Eurasian. The estimated movement rate was 4 cm per year (Kilias, et al., 1994; Papazachos, 
et al., 1999; Le Pichon, et al., 1995). Recent studies using Global Position System velocity 
vectors show that the South Aegean plate is moving quickly (33 mm/year) towards the slow 
(5 mm/year) African plate (figure 2.4.3) (Reilinger, et al., 2006; Ganas & Parsons, 2009). 
Figure 2.4.2 The current stress field in the South Aegean. Image from (Mountrakis, et al., 
2012). 
Figure 2.4.3 the GPS velocity vectors for the Aegean Area. The image is from (Ganas & Parsons, 
2009) and the caption: after Nyst and Thatcher [2004] and Reilinger et al. [2006], and selected 
earthquake focal mechanisms are from the Global CMT database. 
Chapter 3 Pre-seismic signal Methodology 
 3.1 Accelerated  decelerated seismic crustal deformation. 
3.1.1 The time to failure equation 
The earthquake preparation process can be considered as a complex procedure where 
several preshock seismicity patterns occur. The extended excitation time in the large 
earthquakes makes the preshock phenomena easier to distinct. A very well observed and 
documented pattern is the one related with the accelerating seismicity. In a critically 
deformed region there is an increase in the generation of moderate magnitude earthquakes 
before the mainshock (Rundle, et al., 2000).  The second pattern, which is more difficult to 
observe, is known as seismic quiescence and in the area that is expressed there is a 
characteristic decrease in the seismicity rate (Nuannun, et al., 2005; Scordilis, 2006; 
Nuannin, et al., 2012; Papadopoulos & Minadakis, 2016; Kulhanek, et al., 2018). The 
region where the decelerating seismicity pattern takes place has been discussed by 
Kulhanek, et al. (2018); Mignan (2012). Examination of global cases that have presented 
seismicity patterns before large earthquakes show that the accelerating and decelerating 
strain are accompanied in the critical region.  The area of deceleration is located in a 
narrow part near the vicinity of the epicenter of the seismogenic region. The preshock 
seismicity patterns have been described by the term Accelerating (or Decelerating) 
Seismic Release but the term Accelerating (or Decelerating) Seismic Crustal 
Deformation seems to be more obvious as it reflects the physical process that takes place 
at the critical preshock area and this process has as results the increase-decrease of the 
seismicity. 
The energy release during the preparation period of the large earthquakes has been 
expressed by the following accelerating  decelerating seismic crustal deformation 
equation: 
()
            (3.1.1) 
or the integral form:    () =   (  )
   where    =
    (3.1.1b) 
This equation is also known as the time to failure model and it has been used by a 
considerable number of scientists: (Papadopoulos, 1986; Bowman, et al., 1998; Varnes, 
1989; Bufe & Varnes, 1993; Brehm & Braile, 1999; Papazachos & Papazachos, 2000; 
Rundle, et al., 2000; Tzanis, et al., 2000; Bowman & King, 2001; Papazachos & 
Papazachos, 2001; Di Giovambattista & Tyupkin, 2001; Di Giovambattista & Tyupkin, 
2004; Papazachos, et al., 2002; Tzanis & Vallianatos, 2003; Scordilis, et al., 2004; 
Papazachos, et al., 2005; Mignan, et al., 2006; Mignan, et al., 2007; Mignan, 2008; Mignan 
& Di Giovambattista, 2008). The cumulative Benioff strain, () has been used as a 
measure of the preshock seismicity at the time , defined as: 
 () =  
          (3.1.2) 
The  is the seismic energy of the 
 preshock and () is the number of events till time . 
The parameter  is the origin time of the mainshock and  and m are parameters which 
can be calculated by available observations. For 0<<1, an accelerated seismicity patterns 
observed, while for m>1 a decelerated pattern appears.  
The most common way to measure seismic energy is by calculating through the 
corresponding energy-magnitude of the earthquakes relation like the one proposed for the 
Aegean (Papazachos & Papazachos, 2000): 
log  = 1.5   + 4.7             (3.1.3) 
The  is the energy of the 
 earthquake with magnitude . The Benioff strain is roughly 
proportional to E and in the literature it is the most common measured quantity. The other 
measures, such as the seismic moment E1 or the number of events E0, have been also used 
to describe accelerating  decelerating seismicity patterns but not so frequently.  
The generalization of the cumulative Benioff strain () introduces a new quantity  
() =  
=1   where 0    1        (3.1.4) 
The new quantity is the generalized Benioff deformation while the  is the energy 
exponent. When the energy exponent  is equal with 0, then the quantity 0() = (< ) 
where the (< ) is the cumulative number of earthquakes till the time . A  value equal 
with  will give the well-known cumulative Benioff strain as the 1/2() = (). 
Likewise, when the  is taking the value 1, then the quantity 1()  will represent the 
cumulative energy released  ().  
3.1.2 A First principles approach  
The proposed model has been submitted and accepted in Entropy  Open Access Journal 
impact factor 2.305 (2017) (Entropy, 2018) with title: A complexity view into the physics 
of Accelerating Seismic Release Hypothesis: Theoretical principles. 
In a fault zone that goes under tectonic loading, the stress increases, the system of the faults 
has a fractal structure that obeys hierarchical scaling laws (Mandelbrot, 1983; Scholz & 
Mandelbrot, 1989; Turcotte, 1997). Considering the hierarchical scaling laws of fractures 
that takes place in the fault zone, Rundle et al. (2000) have proposed that the preparation 
process of the main shock can behave as a critical point phenomenon. As the fracturing 
becomes coherently self-organized at different scales, the system goes towards the failure 
time. This process develops upwards from below, following the energy scales of self-
organized fractures, and is eventually concentrated in the vicinity of the hypocenter of the 
main shock. The seismicity patterns that have been associated with the nucleation of strong 
earthquakes are often recorded over a fairly large earthquake epicenter area V. It should be 
noted that the earthquake epicenter can lie in both central and peripheral parts of this area. 
The size of the area V is an order of magnitude greater than that of the earthquake source 
region. The stressed crustal volume V is the area where the preparation process of large 
earthquake occurs. For example, a Mw 6.0 earthquake with a strike slip fault length 
approximately 15km, has a preparation area V about 150km2. However, in addition to the 
area V, the earthquake nucleation process should give rise to a potential earthquake source 
region called effective volume Veff which is developing with time t in as the macrofractures 
are nucleated. The maximum size L of Veff  is of the same order as that of the earthquake 
source. In the initial phase before the seismicity patterns appear, the spatial and temporal 
distribution of the seismic activity within the volume  is approximately uniform. The 
incoming tectonic elastic energy during the initial phase, flows into the volume  and it is 
released as weak earthquakes and sometimes it is possible to produce an additional 
aseismic deformation (e.g., creep). Considering that the crust is not a homogeneous 
material, it is straightforward to accept that due to the inhomogeneities of the crust, the 
elastic energy is concentrated in some subvolumes  within the volume  which leads to an 
increase of the stress inside the subvolumes. The distribution and the size of the 
subvolumes are responsible for the configuration of stress field which specifies the 
parameters of the future main shock.  
Aiming to express the energy which supports stress, the elastic energy per surface density 
which tectonically flows within the volume  is defined as 
, so the incoming energy per 
density area () is 
 . The volume density of the elastic energy which is 
seismically released as a result of the earthquake activity within effective volume  is 
defined as 
. The effective volume  is formed by the set of all the earthquake 
subvolumes  within  ( ) (figure 3.3.1), while an aseismic term () exists to 
describe the part of the inflow energy to  which is not related to the earthquake activity. 
Figure 3.1.1. The tectonically-stressed volume V. Within the volume, the seismic energy is released 
in the hierarchically distributed subvolumes  that form the potential earthquake source region Veff 
(see text).  
According to the fundamental principle of energy conservation, the total amount of energy 
in the system remains constant:  
() = 
 + ()        (3.1.5) 
or   
() = 
 +        (3.1.5a) 
where the aseismic term () is assumed as = . Building on the Voight relation (1) in 
Voight (1989) as well as the assumption suggested in equation (4) of the Di Giovambattista 
& Tyupkin (2001) work and by accepting its validity for the generalized Benioff strain 
() , the energy release is expressed in a similar way: 
()
= [
()] =  [
()
      (3.1.6) 
The equation (3.1.6) relates the rate of the generalized Benioff deformation with the 
volume density of the elastic energy released and it is similar with that used in damage 
mechanics, where the evolution of damage variable is related with the square of the strain 
(Shcherbakov & Turcotte, 2003). If L is the characteristic size of the volume , then 
()~1 and ~ where de is the Euclidean dimension of V which is de = 3 when the 
earthquake activity in embedded in a 3 dimensional space and de = 2 when it is located in 
an almost 2 dimensional surface. Hereafter the term volume has to be viewed as the 
geometrical size related with the spatial distribution of earthquake events and as mentioned 
it is the geometrical volume in case of a 3-dimensional distribution of preshocks.   
In order to proceed it is necessary to estimate the probability distribution p() of the sub-
volumes  that form the effective volume Veff with the use of the non-extensive statistical 
physics (NESP) principles in the analysis. The cornerstone of the NESP mechanics which 
is recapitulated here, is the non-additive entropy Sq  (Tsallis, 2009; Vallianatos, et al., 
2015), the entropy for a system which does not involve the mathematical addition in the 
sense that probabilities are proportional to the number of the elements, as it is in the classic 
Boltzmann-Gibbs entropy SBG. The Tsallis entropy Sq is defined as: 
 q = B
1 
  q ,        (3.1.7) 
or in equivalent form as  q = B  
   for a continuum variable x, with  =
11
  the definition of q-logarithmic function. The kB is the Boltzmanns constant, the pi 
and p(x) are the probabilities of the x, the W is the total number of microscopic 
configurations and the q is the entropic index. The last index is a measure of the non-
additivity of the system and for the particular case when q=1, the Boltzmann-Gibbs entropy 
SBG is obtained: 
  =    
=1 .        (3.1.8) 
The index q = 1 gives the well-known exponential distribution (Tsallis, 2009) while for the 
cases where q>1 and q<1 corresponding to sub-additivity and super-additivity, gives the q-
exponential distribution. Although Tsallis entropy shares a lot of common properties with 
the Boltzmann-Gibbs entropy, SBG is additive, whereas Sq for q1 is non-additive (Tsallis, 
2009). According to this property, SBG exhibits only short-range correlations while the total 
entropy of the systems depends on the size of elements. Alternatively, for q1 the Sq allows 
all-length scale correlations and seems more adequate for complex dynamical systems, 
especially when long-range correlations between the elements of the system are present. 
For a system composed of two statistically independent subsystems, 1 and 2, the 
Tsallis entropy satisfies the equation (Tsallis, 2009): 
(1, 2) = (1) + (2) +
(1)(2)   (3.1.9) 
The non-additivity is indicated by the last term on the right side of the equation (3.1.9) and 
represents the interaction between the two subsystems 1 and 2. In order to estimate the 
probability distribution p() of the seismic subvolumes , the non-extensive entropy is 
maximized under the appropriate constraints, using the Lagrange-multipliers method with 
the Lagrangian (Tsallis, 2009): 
 = =   
()()
  ( ()  1) 
1 ( ()  )
 (3.1.10) 
 The first constraint refers to the normalization condition that reads as:  () = 1
Introducing the generalized expectation value (q-expectation value), q which is defined as: 
 =  =  ()
, where the escort probability is given in (Tsallis, 2009) as: 
() =
q()
 q ()
, the extremization of Sq with the above constraints yields to the 
probability distribution of p() as (Brouers & Sotolongo-Costa, 2005; Vallianatos, et al., 
2014): 
() =  [1 
        (3.1.11) 
where  a normalization coefficient. The Q-exponential function is defined as: 
() =  {
[1+(1-Q)X]1/(1-Q)     if (1+(1-Q) X 0)
0                             if   (1+(1-Q)X<0)
.     (3.1.12) 
The normalized cumulative number of seismic subvolumes  can be obtained by integrating 
the probability density function p() as: 
(> ) =
(>)
= [1 + (
      (3.1.13) 
where N(>) is the number of events with seismic volume larger than . In the latter 
expression, if  = 2 
  leads to:  
 (> ) =  ( (
)) = [1 + (  1) (
     (3.1.14) 
which has a typical q-exponential form. 
In the frame of non-extensive statistical mechanics approach the earthquake volumes 
bigger than a given one o leads to a power law description of the distribution function and 
in such a case the cumulative distribution is: 
   (> )   (
~        (3.1.15) 
with an exponent  =   
 . Aiming to have an estimation of , the volume where the 
power law approximation of P(>) takes the value P(>) =1 is selected which leads to 
 =  (
2 . An observation is that 1 leads to 
 , in agreement with previous 
published results on earth physics processes in a broad range of scales from laboratory up 
to geodynamic one (Vallianatos, et al., 2018). It is obvious that the volume distribution p() 
could lead to an estimation of   =  ()
 which for large volumes ( i.e., 
moderate to significant events) has an asymptotic behavior  ~ 
(23)
(1)
 or Veff ~ 
where  = 
  which generalize and justify the expression introduced in Di 
Giovambattista & Tyupkin (2001). The latter expression implies that when d>0 (q>3/2 ) 
then ~
 presents a fractal distribution of earthquake volumes with a fractal dimension 
  1 <  <  , leading to 
2+1
<  < 2. The latter expression suggests that within 
non-extensive statistical physics approach the entropic index q is bounded by the Euclidean 
dimension  of the deformed system. When  = 3 , then 
<  < 2 , while for  = 2  
the q is constrained in the range 
<  < 2.  
The equation (3.16), the generalized Benioff stress rate could be expressed as follows: 
()
=  [
+1
 ]
       (3.1.16) 
When the time t approaches the time to failure  and since 
( = )  0 following the 
(Di Giovambattista & Tyupkin, 2001) equation (6), an expansion of the incoming energy 
per density area 
(t) when  approach to  is: 
 = 0 + 1 (
)+ ((
)      (3.1.17) 
From the equation (3.1.17) it is obvious that the 0 = ( = ) expresses the elastic 
energy of tectonic origin inserted into the deformed area close to the time of failure. The 
third term () presents all the high order terms in the expansion that are very small and 
could be omitted, while the parameter  is the characteristic time that defines the duration 
of main shock preparation process starting from the time where deviation of () from 
linearity appears (See figure 3.1.2).  
Figure 3.1.2. Graph of the evolution of the generalized Benioff strain ().  The initial part is 
linear and the deviation from linearity starts at t=tf-Tc defining the start of the accelerating 
deformation stage, where  is the characteristic time expressing the duration of main shock 
preparation process. 
    
() 
As the time for the mainshocks approaches, the volume where energy release observed, 
defines a singular point (Scordilis, et al., 2004) and the analyticity assumption of () as  
   leads to: 
 () = 0 (
) +  ((
)       (3.1.18) 
When the   , the ()  0 and ( =   ) = 0. Substituting equations (3.1.17) 
and (3.1.18) in to (3.1.16) to obtain:  
()
=  {
+1
1(
+1
  [0 (
  (3.1.19) 
As    then (
)  0. Taking into account that   >0 and  + 1 >  the first 
term in (3.1.19) is dominated and the integration leads to:  
() = ( = )  
(0)
(+1)
(1)+1
1+(1)
   (3.1.20) 
Which has the classic form proposed in (Bowman, et al. (1998); Varnes (1989); Bufe & 
Varnes (1993); Bowman & King (2001) where:  
() =   (  )
       with   = ( = )    (3.1.21a) 
(+1)(0)
(+1)
(1)+1
            (3.1.21b)   
 = (  1  ) + 1           (3.1.21c)    
The expression (3.1.21c) suggests that  is independent of  (01) used in the 
definition of the generalized Benioff strain () but controlled by the Euclidean 
dimension  of the deformed system and the entropic parameter q which as a measure of 
long range interactions and of the complexity of the system, controls the distribution of 
seismic subvolumes  and their fractality. It is worth mentioning that the shape of the 
acceleration curve is controlled primarily by the exponent . Therefore, two different 
sized main shocks with the same  value will have the same shaped acceleration curve 
but with different scale. 
The non-extensive statistical physics approach could be used to formulate the earthquake 
frequency-magnitude distribution (Sotolongo-Costa & Posadas, 2004). Moreover, 
Sotolonga-Costa and Posadas (2004) introduced an energy distribution function that shows 
the influence of the size distribution of fragments on the energy distribution of earthquakes, 
including the Gutenberg  Richter (GR) law as a particular case. Silva et al. (2006) revised 
the fragment-asperity model using a more realistic relationship between earthquake energy 
() and fragment size. In many recent works it is indicated that the q parameter can be used 
as a measure of the stability of an active tectonic area (Papadakis, et al., 2014; Papadakis, et 
al., 2016; Vallianatos, et al., 2018). Significant increase of q indicates strong interactions 
between the fault blocks (earthquake volumes) and implies a transition away from 
equilibrium (Vallianatos, et al., 2015; Vallianatos, et al., 2016; Vallianatos, et al., 2018). 
The models mentioned above are modified in order to formulate a frequency-magnitude 
distribution, taking the earthquake volume distribution p()  into account and introducing a 
scale law between the released relative energy (E) and the earthquake volume () as has 
been proposed ( .) in (Silva, et al., 2006) in agreement with the scaling relationship 
between seismic moment and rupture length. From equation (3.1.11) the energy distribution 
function of the earthquakes can be written as follows: 
() =  [1 
        (3.1.22)    
Since the probability of the energy is () = ()  , where () corresponds to the 
number of earthquakes with energy  and  is the total number of earthquakes, the 
normalized cumulative number of earthquakes is given as (Telesca, 2012): 
(>E)
=  ( )
            (3.1.23)  
where  (> ) is the number of earthquakes with energy greater than E. Combining 
equations (3.1.22) and (3.1.23) the following expression for the earthquake frequency-
energy distribution derived: 
(>)
= [1 
(1)
(2)
        (3.1.24) 
which for 
(q1)
(2)
)  1 suggests a scaling law (> )~
1 in agreement with the well 
known power law scaling (> )~ with  =
 (Kagan, 2010). As proposed in 
(Kanamori, 1978) the earthquake magnitude M and the released seismic energy E, are 
related as ~
log(), leading to a b-value as appeared in the Gutenberg Richter law: 
         (3.1.25) 
Figure 3.1.3 presents the dependence of the b value with q as given in equation (3.1.25). 
Substituting  = 
 into  as given by equation 3.1.21c) and taking (3.1.25) into 
account, the critical exponent is:  
 = 1   +  
= 1 +    ( 
) = 1 +  (
   1 )    (3.1.26) 
Figure 3.1.3. The b value vs q as defined in equation (3.1.25) (see text).  
These equations connect the non-extensive parameter q and the b-value of the Gutenberg 
Richter law with the  parameter of the generalized Benioff strain. Using synthetic data, 
Bufe and Varnes (1993) claimed a relationship between b-value and 1/2.  For the 
parameter , a positive definition is required ( > 0) and thus   1 <  <   1 
 . Theoretical results and experimental observation (Papadopoulos, 1986; Bowman, et al., 
1998; Varnes, 1989; Bufe & Varnes, 1993; Brehm & Braile, 1999; Papazachos & 
Papazachos, 2000; Rundle, et al., 2000; Bowman & King, 2001; Tzanis, et al., 2000; 
Papazachos & Papazachos, 2001; Di Giovambattista & Tyupkin, 2001; Di Giovambattista 
& Tyupkin, 2004; Papazachos, et al., 2002; Tzanis & Vallianatos, 2003; Scordilis, et al., 
2004; Papazachos, et al., 2005; Mignan, et al., 2006; Mignan, et al., 2007; Mignan, 2008; 
Mignan & Di Giovambattista, 2008) suggest that 1/2 = 0.25  0.30 and  = 2.3  2.4 , 
while  should be the same for different  values, in agreement with observations that 
indicate 0 = 0.3 (Papadopoulos, 1988). Substituting    0.3    2.3    =
3  or   1.3    = 2 to (3.1.21c) leads to  = 2.0  2.1.  From here on the   2.0   
will have a constant value which is in agreement with damage mechanics model where the 
evolution of damage variable is related with the square of the strain (Shcherbakov & 
Turcotte, 2003).  
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1
b value vs q
The equation (3.1.26) along with the constrain  > 0 leads to a lower bound for the b 
value and an upper bound for the q value respectively, given as: 
3(1)
  and  <  
2+1
+1
         (3.1.27) 
which for =2 and  = 3 gives  > 0.25 while for  = 2 ,  > 0.375. The maximum 
permitted value of q is qmax = 13/7 for  = 3   qmax = 9/5 for  = 2 .  For accelerating 
 < 1  and for decelerating seismicity  > 1. Applying the above values in equation 
(3.1.26) give as result the case of accelerating seismicity for  >
2+1
 which implies that 
in this case there is a lower bound in the observed q. The lower limit is introduced by the 
topological Euclidean dimension  of the space where the earthquakes are embedded. For 
 = 3 the  >
 while for  = 2 ,  >
 . Within a similar way the  <
2+1
decelerating seismicity.  Furthermore, the equation (3.1.26) for the accelerating seismicity 
with  < 1 leads to  <
 which (as approach to failure) for  = 3 leads to  < 0.5 
while for  = 2   < 0.75. The above expressions introduce a critical value for q and 
for b where a transition from deceleration to acceleration seismicity occurs. It is obvious 
that the deceleration seismicity which described by  > 1 which for  = 3  leads to  >
0.5    = 2   > 0.75. The figures 3.1.4 and 3.1.5 present the dependence of the 
m parameter with q and b, respectively.           
Furthermore, the above analysis could be applied to connect changes of m parameter to b-
value variations which have been reported as precursory effects in a number of significant 
earthquake events (Papadopoulos, 1988; Papadopoulos, et al., 2010; Papadopoulos, et al., 
2000; Kanamori, 1978). Equation (3.1.26) suggests that variations of b value are associated 
with the temporal evolution of m parameter during the main event preparation period Tc, 
following the b values changes as suggested in Wang (2006). By writing the b(t)=bo + B(t) 
where bo represents the background b-value and B(t) reflects the time dependent part of b-
value that varies during the preparation of the main earthquake event (see Figure 3.1.6) and 
substituting in (3.1.26) leads to: 
 =  +    
()    = 1 +  (
   1 )   (3.1.28) 
For =2, bo=1 and  = 3 leads to  = 3 while for  = 2,  = 1.67, both results 
describing a decelerating stage of seismicity. As the failure time tf approaches, 
observational results suggest that    0.30  0.35 , leading to () = 1/6  for  =
3  and ()  1/4 for  = 2  respectively.  
Figure 3.1.4. The dependence of m with the entropic parameter q along with the 
accelerating/decelerating stages (see text). 
Figure 3.1.5. The dependence of m with b value along with the accelerating/decelerating ranges of 
the earthquake system. 
1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9
q value
m vs q,  for =2 and de = 3 
Accelarating stageDecelerating 
stage
Critical point m0.3
0 0.5 1 1.5 2
b value 
m vs b value for =2 and de=3
Accelerating
Seismicity
Decelarating
Seismicity
Figure 3.1.6 exhibits the general pattern of the temporal variation of m parameter 
following the temporal variation of b-value as suggested in Wang (2016). Most of the time 
after the last main event, the m value varies around mo, which corresponds to the average 
bo value measured over a long-time period. As the b value increases from bo to a maximum 
value, (a seismic quiescence appears which is in agreement with Mignan & Di 
Giovambattista (2008) the parameter () increases too following the equation (3.1.27). 
After passing a maximum value mmax, starts a decreasing phase of b and m, crossing the 
value mo and approaches the transition time tc where m(tc)=1, which defines the passing 
from the deceleration to an acceleration stage. At the next step m(t) is approaching the 
value (  ) which lies in the range 0.25-0.30 and according to observations it 
suggests the final stage of the mainshock preparation. The latter is in agreement with 
(Schorlemmer & Wiemer, 2005) where b values based on seismicity over a period from 
2006 till immediately before the Tohoku earthquake, reveals a zone of low b-value (b0.5-
0.6) in and around the focal area as an indicator of highly stressed patches in the zone, in 
remarkable similarity to b values obtained in laboratory experiments (Lei, 2003). For b0.5 
the equation (3.1.26) gives m1/2 0.3 in agreement with the value m=0.240.09 given in 
Xue, et al. (2012). 
Figure 3.1.6. The pattern of the variation of b and m values with time following the mechanism of 
value preseismic changes proposed in Wang (2016). 
3.1.3 Fundamental properties of the ()  function. 
Proceeding now to study some fundamental properties of () function justified by 
empirical laws mainly presented in Papazachos & Papazachos (2000); Papazachos & 
Papazachos (2001); Papazachos, et al. (2002); Scordilis, et al. (2004); Papazachos, et al. 
(2005). The equation (3.1.21b) leads to: 
 Log  = [log 
(0)
 0
log (
) +  log(0) + (1  ) log   (1  ) log 0         (3.1.29)  
The energy of the main shock is ~00
 or  ~(log 0 + 2 log 0). 
Experimental results and theoretical estimations suggest that the preparation time has a 
very weak dependence on the magnitude of the main shock. Substituting to the equation 
(3.1.25), the scaling laws log    1.5 + ,   and log 0  0.5  +  leads to 
 log   (
+1
)  + . Since   2 and  = 0.25  0.30 that means that the 
slope is 
+1
 0.62  0.65 which is remarkably close to that observed in a number of 
works (Papazachos & Papazachos, 2000; Papazachos & Papazachos, 2001; Papazachos, et 
al., 2002; Scordilis, et al., 2004; Papazachos, et al., 2005). 
From equation (3.1.20) it is calculated the generalized Benioff strain rate 
  as: 
()
(0)
(+1)
(1)
          (3.1.30) 
According to equations (3.1.20) and (3.1.30): 
 () =    
(  )
   and     (3.1.31) 
()
= 0
1 1
()
        (3.1.32) 
 when    =  i.e., in the start of the accelerating deformation stage, it is: 
  =    
                  (3.1.33a) 
It is physically reasonable to expect a continuity of physical parameters in the transition 
from the linear to accelerated crustal deformation period and to accept that at  =    a 
continuity exists: 
(=)
= 0
         (3.1.33b)  
  is the slope of the linear part. The mean generalized Benioff rate during the 
accelerated (deformed) period  i.e., from  =     to  = :  
()

 = 
     (3.1.33c) 
The (3.1.33b) and (3.1.33c) leads to the conclusion that: 
 3  4         (3.1.34) 
Furthermore from (3.1.33a), if    then:    
. Combining the latter 
with equation (3.1.33c): 
  
              (3.1.35) 
which is exactly that proposed in Papazachos & Papazachos (2000); Papazachos & 
Papazachos (2001); Papazachos, et al. (2002); Scordilis, et al. (2004); Papazachos, et al. 
(2005). The Equation (3.1.35) could be written as:  
)   which indicates 
that if the  and the slope of the linear part of the generalized Benioff strain is estimated, 
then it is possible to estimate at least the order of magnitude of    in the time of failure. 
Assuming that the last earthquake prior the main shock appears at a time  1 =   1. 
Applying the time to failure equation (3.1.20): 
(1) =    
(  1)
or     (3.1.36a) 
    (1) =    
(1)
.     (3.1.36b) 
Even if this approach is general, the limit to the case =1/2 describing the Benioff strain 
which very commonly applied. In this case the Benioff stain of the main shock is  1
1/2 = 1
 1/2(1),  which gives:        
2 =  
2 (1)
1/2
1/2
        (3.1.37) 
Since the seismic energy is related to seismic magnitude by the relation (3.1.3), the 
equation (3.1.37) leads to: 
log [
1/2
) ] +
41/2
log (
)  3.13       (3.1.38) 
Using previously published numerical estimates by Papazachos & Papazachos (2000); 
Papazachos & Papazachos (2001); Papazachos, et al. (2002); Scordilis, et al. (2004); 
Papazachos, et al. (2005), the =1/2 can be used as an order of magnitude estimation for 
the parameter 
1/2
 106 
2/,  and assuming that the   5 years with 1/2 = 0.25 
0.30 and the last main preshock to appear at: 
 0.1   (i.e. 1  0.5), then the 
expected earthquake magnitude of the main event should be of the order of   6.3.  In 
addition, since 
 1 from equation (3.1.38) the constrain   
log [
1/2
) ]  3.13 , leads to the conclusion that the maximum expected 
earthquake in an area with background Benioff strain rate 
1/2
 =
log [
1/2
) ]  3.13        (3.1.39) 
It is obvious that the ratio 
 is a crucial parameter to define the final stage of the main 
event preparation. In Brehm & Braile (1999) a relationship is proposed between 1/2 and 
the normalized energy released Rne   which is defined as the total cumulative square root 
energy (i.e., =1/2) divided by the square root of energy released by the main shock. Thus 
 =  
()
1/2  . From the previous expressions it is obtained that  = ( 
)1/2   which 
leads to: 
1/2 =
log (
         (3.1.40) 
In which a linear relation between m-parameter and  is suggested with a positive 
slope 
log (
 (since Tc>t1). The figure 7 from Brehm & Braile (1999) reproduced here (as 
figure 3.1.7) and a red line with a slope of the order of 0.8-1.0 added in the figure seems 
that describe the majority of the data points. The latter slope permits an order of magnitude 
estimation of the ratio 
  , leading to 
= 0.05  0.1 .   
Figure 3.1.7. The m1/2 critical exponent plotted versus the logarithm of the normalized square root 
of energy released as modified from Bowman, et al., 1998. The red line is with slope close to 0.8 
(see text). 
3.2 Earthquake catalogues  
In research, the samples, or the input data in the case of a software-based analysis, are the 
primary material that will probably affect the outcome. It is unlikely to have detailed results 
if the initial findings contain artefacts. The inhomogeneities in the collection can be 
attributed to various reasons, as examples are the possible variation between materials of 
the same matter, the missing data values and the changes in the sampling methods (Smith, 
2006). Focusing on earthquake related analyses such as the accelerated deformation, it is 
important to have high quality catalogues with accurate seismic parameters. In seismology, 
the common errors in earthquake parameters catalogues are associated with the wrong 
picked arrival times, the type location method (linear-non-linear) and the lack of 
representative for the area seismic velocity model (Husen & Hardebeck, 2010). In addition, 
the seismological centres use different reporting magnitudes scales which depend on 
measuring specific parts of seismic wave characteristics (Woessner, et al., 2010). The 
magnitude scales are not consistent in all ranges, the scale gets saturated especially in large 
events and therefore a straightforward equation between the magnitude scales does not 
exist (Kanamori, 1983; Scordilis, 2006; Woessner, et al., 2010). The moment magnitude 
scale, which relays on the logarithm of the seismic moment proposed by Kanamori has a 
constant behaviour through the whole magnitude range (Scordilis, 2006; Johnston, 1996; 
Kanamori, 1977). A considerable amount of empirical approximations for converting the 
body wave and surface wave magnitude to moment magnitude have been proposed by 
various researchers (Johnston, 1996; Scordilis, 2006).   Some of the proposed relations 
have been estimated with ordinary least-squares while others have been calculated with 
Fullers General Orthogonal Regression (GOR) method (Fuller, 1987). All the possible 
earthquakes catalogues issues noted above put emphasis on the necessity to use only high 
quality and homogeneous catalogues in the accelerated seismic release method 
3.2.1 The Thales project catalogue  
One of the deliverables of Thales Technical Educational Institute of Crete project 
(Integrated understanding of SEISmicity, using innovative MethOdologies of Fracture 
mechanics along with EARthquake and non extensive statistical physics - Application to 
the geodynamic system of the HELLenic ARC. MIS: 380208) was the construction of a 
complete and homogenized in respect to magnitude catalogue for the broader area of South 
Aegean. A synopsis of the deliverable which is also published in (Kolligri, et al., 2014) is 
the following: 
 The Thales catalogue has been compilated with the seismic parameters provided by 
several seismological centres: 
 International Seismological Centre (ISC, 2018) 
 National Earthquake Information Centre of USGS ( NEIC, 2018)  
 Global Centroid Moment Tensor catalogue (CMT, 2018) 
 National Observatory of Athens (HL/National Observatory of Athens Seismic 
Network, 2018), Geophysical Laboratory of the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki 
(HT/Aristotle University of Thessaloniki Seismological Network, 2018).  
 The bulletins of the already published international and national earthquake 
catalogues (Papazachos & Papazachou, 2003; Engdahl & Villasenor, 2002; Karnik, 
1996; Pacheco & Sykes, 1992). 
In the final catalogue there were earthquakes without an original moment magnitude 
estimation, in these cases an equivalent moment magnitude was calculated based on the 
weighted mean of the converted magnitudes. The available magnitude scales ML, Ms, and 
Mb of the aforesaid sources, have been homogenized with a different process to obtain a 
unique magnitude scale. The conversion between scales has been carried out by the already 
published relations (Scordilis, 2006; Baba, et al., 2000; Papazachos & Papaioannou, 1997; 
Scordilis, et al., 2015; Scordilis, 2005; Tsampas, 2006; Duni, et al., 2010). The moment 
magnitude scale has been selected as the reference scale. The MW scale does not get 
saturated for a wider range of magnitudes compared to the other reporting scales. In 
addition, there is a straightforward relationship between moment magnitude and the 
logarithm of the seismic moment (Kanamori, 1977; Johnston, 1996; Scordilis, 2006; 
Woessner, et al., 2010).  
 The catalogue focus is on an area bounded by coordinates, longitude 19.0 to 30.0E and 
latitude 33.0 to 40.0N. The recorded earthquakes in the catalogue start from 550 BC with 
data obtain from historical documents while the events after 1910 up to the end of 2013 are 
from analogue and digital instrumental recordings. The instrumental part of the catalogue 
has been relocated with the HYPO71 earthquake location program (Lee & Lahr, 1972), the 
HYPOINVERSE 2000 algorithm (Klein, 2002) while the final relocation has been 
completed with the double-difference algorithm, HYPODD (Waldhauser, 2001). 
The relocation process has been carried out with the use of the crust models proposed by 
Karagianni, et al., 2002; Karagianni, et al., 2005. A mean error exists of approximately 0.3 
for the magnitude values and up to 30km for the epicentre location (Kolligri, et al., 2014). 
The final catalogue contains 126,907 earthquakes.  124,204 of these were shallow with 
depths less than 60km.  
The completeness of the catalogue has been estimated with the best combination between 
the maximum curvature method, the goodness of fit for 90% confidence and goodness of fit 
for 95% confidence for a square grid with 0.2 degrees size (Wiemer & Wyss., 2000; Wyss, 
et al., 1999; Mignan & Woessner, 2012). In each point of grid, the number of included 
events were set to 50. In addition, a 50 times random resampling for each point with 
replace from the dataset, a method known as bootstrapping (Efron, 1979; Efron & 
Tibshirani, 1993) has been used to calculate the error limits. In the figure 3.2.1, the 
bootstrapping boarder values are presented as grey colour dashed lines, the blue vertical 
dashed lines indicate the time periods while the horizontal ones define the Mc of each time 
period. The number of seismological networks and the digital recording instruments 
increased gradually in the past decades (Ammon, et al., 2010), and a result is the 
continuous decrease of Magnitude of completeness values with time. In the time interval 
between 1970 and 2013, there are three different time periods where the magnitude of 
completeness has decreased for the investigation area, the numerical values are presented in 
table 3.2.1 and a Magnitude of completeness map for the last time period is illustrated in 
figure 3.2.2. In this thesis the time period that is examined for accelerated seismic release, 
is the last couple of years from 2011 up to end of 2013 for the two large events occurred in 
2013 in southern and western part of South Aegean while for the 2015 event in eastern part, 
another catalogue has been used (next subchapter). 
Figure 3.2.1. The time variation of Magnitude of completeness for the Aegean region during the time period 
1960-2013. Since 1970, there are three time intervals with different Mc values as a result of the increase in 
monitoring capabilities and the number of stations (Kolligri, et al., 2014). 
 Table 3.2.1 The Mc variations in the Thales catalogue through the instrumental period (Kolligri, et 
al., 2014). 
Time Period Magnitude of 
completeness 
1972-2013 4.0 
1990-2013 3.7 
2011-2013 2.9 
3.2.2 The 2011-2013 magnitude of completeness map, calculated with the Thales project catalogue for the 
Aegean area. The Mc for the western and central part appeared to have lower values compared to the eastern 
part (Kolligri, et al., 2014).  
The Thales project catalogues covers the broader area of Aegean, but a focus has been 
made for the events located in South Aegean. Considering that the Magnitude of 
completeness has spatiotemporal variations and the catalogue completeness is crucial for 
the accelerated seismic release investigation, it is necessary to calculate the Mc values for 
the southern Aegean part having as a centre of attention the areas close to large faults. The 
calculation of Mc has been carried out by using a 0.2 degrees grid with 50 events as well as 
the best combination option in Z-map software (Wyss, et al., 2001) which compares the 
Maximum Curvature Technique and the Goodness-of-Fit Test with 90% and 95% 
confidence (Wiemer & Wyss., 2000; Wyss, et al., 1999; Mignan & Woessner, 2012). A 
new Magnitude of completeness map for the included in coordinates 33.5  37.0N and 20.0 
 30.0E rectangular has been calculated (figure 3.2.3). The spatial distribution of the Mc 
near the area of the large events (yellow stars in figure) seems to have small variation. The 
average value the western part of the investigation area is approximately 2.7. In the area 
close to the 15/06/2013 large event, the Magnitude of completeness varies between 2.4 and 
3.0 while in the broader area of the southern part it has mean value 2.7 which was 
considered as the optimal solution for the 2013 events .  
3.2.3 A detailed magnitude of completeness map for the Thales project catalogue calculated with the same 
parameters and method while this map is compiled only for the South Aegean area. The Mc for the western 
and central part, which is the focus for the 2013 events, seems to have an average Mc values around 2.7. 
An additional effort to examine the completeness of the catalogue for the selected area has 
been made by inspecting the graphical representation of the Mc calculation method. In 
figure 3.2.4 there is the average value of Magnitude of completeness for the South Aegean 
area with the best combination option in Z-map software. The white squares are the 
Gutenberg-Richer law fitting, showing the relationship between event magnitude and 
frequency while the grey colour triangles are the same fitting but with a discrete curve. The 
Magnitude of completeness for the selected area and time period is down to 2.7 and the b-
value is slightly less than one. 
3.2.4 The graphical representation of the Gutenberg- Richer law which permits the calculation of the b-value 
and the Magnitude of completeness. In the South Aegean, for the time period between 2011 and the end of 
2013, the best combination option with bootstrap fitting in Z-map software shown a b-value 0.92 and Mc 
average value down to 2.7. 
The catalogue has been checked for consistency in reporting events, whereas the validation 
process requires the inspection of cumulative number of events curve for rate changes. The 
possible variation in the number of monitoring stations could lead into different event 
sampling which can be interpreted as acceleration or deceleration. The validation procedure 
should be carried out after removing the aftershocks and swarms but without applying the 
Mc filter because the small events can provide information for the possible network 
operational changes (Wyss, et al., 2001).  The cumulative number curve obtained from the 
Thales catalogues for the South Aegean area is presented in the left part of figure 3.2.5. The 
cumulative curve is almost a straight line but there are some small slope changes after the 
large events caused by the aftershocks (figure 3.2.5a). Aiming to remove aftershocks with a 
time efficient and deterministic approach, the Reasenberg window method (Reasenberg, 
1985) has been used to apply a preliminary decluttering in the Thales catalogue. In this 
method the spatial correlation of the events is based on the magnitude of the largest event 
while the temporal correlation takes Omoris law into account (Molchan & Dmitrieva, 
1992; van Stiphout, et al., 2012). The parameters that have been applied for the 
declustering method were: the minimum and maximum time period to identify clusters was 
set to 1 and 15 days, the Omoris law exponent p1 was set to 0.95, the maximum epicentral 
error and depth was set to 5 km and 10 km and the effective cut-off magnitude and raise 
factor was set to 1.5 and 0.5. The declustered catalogue cumulative curve has been 
examined for rate changes. In Zmap software the new cumulative curve (figure 3.2.5b) has 
been separated in two equal time windows in order to inspect if there are changes in slope 
of the curve.    
The normalized frequency versus magnitude curves and the annual rate as a function of 
magnitude appears to be the same for the selected time periods. The normalized frequency 
magnitude distribution has some small fluctuations in magnitudes above 5.5 which are 
expected, as in the second time window there are the 2013 large events. The results from 
the rate change evaluation suggest that for the period 2011 to the end of 2013 there were 
not any significant changes in the recording capabilities and magnitude reporting of the 
seismic networks that contributed in the compilation of the Thales project catalogue.  
3.2.5 a) The Thales catalogue 2011 to the end of 2013 South Aegean cumulative number of events. b) the 
declustered catalogue cumulative number of events. The yellow stars are the events with magnitude larger or 
equal to 6.0 (figure obtained from Zmap). 
3.2.6 The cumulative (a) and the non-cumulative (b) annual number of events as a function of magnitude. The 
magenta o shaped points are representing the first time window (2011 -2012.5) while the blue x shaped points 
are from the second time window (2012.5- end of 2013) (figure obtained from Zmap). 
3.2.2 The NOA-IG catalogw3ue  
In 1893, the Institute of Geodynamics of the National Observatory of Athens (HL/National 
Observatory of Athens Seismic Network, 2018) known as (NOA-IG or NOA) started the 
first seismic network in Greece. The Hellenic Seismic Network with FDSN code HL and 
doi:10.7914/SN/HL initially was operating with analogue instruments. Most of the old 
seismometers have been replaced with the modern broadband ones after 2000. The NOA-
IG has a dedicated webpage (NOA, 2018) that provides automatic earthquake locations 
from the SeisComP3 software (Helmholtz Centre Potsdam, GFZ German Research Centre 
for Geosciences, 2018) as well as manual location parameters by seismologists. There is 
also other seismological related information such as the focal mechanism derived from the 
waveform inversion of moderate-strong events. The quality control of the available sensors 
is achieved with the use of the PQLX software (Incorporated Research Institutions for 
Seismology, 2018) which uses a probability density function (PDF) to calculate the 
distribution of Power Spectral Density (PSD) for the seismic noise (Mc Namara & Boaz, 
2005). To enhance its monitoring capabilities, the NOA receives waveforms in real time 
from other neighbour seismological networks and the waveforms are stored in a dedicated 
node of the European Integrated Data Archive (EIDA) hosted by NOA (ORFEUS the 
European Infrastructure for seismic waveform data in EPOS, 2018). The EIDA 
contributing networks for Greece and south-eastern Mediterranean region are the 
(HL/National Observatory of Athens Seismic Network, 2018), the (HT/Aristotle University 
of Thessaloniki Seismological Network, 2018), the (HP/Seismological Laboratory of the 
University of Patras, 2018), the (HA/Seismological Laboratory of the National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens, 2018), the (HI/Institute of Engineering Seismology and 
Earthquake Engineering, 2018), the (HC/Hellenic Seismological Network of Crete, 2018), 
the Cyprus Broadband Seismological Network (CQ/Cyprus Broadband Seismological 
Network, 2018), Strong Motion Network of the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki 
(EG/EUROSEISTEST Strong Motion Network, 2018) and the Montenegrian Seismic 
Network of the Montenegro Seismological Observatory (ME/Montenegrian Seismic 
Network of the Montenegro Seismological Observatory, 2018). 
Although the provided catalogue is not relocated with appropriate crust models, the large 
number of available recordings helps to have good estimation of the earthquake parameters. 
This catalogue has been used only to investigate the accelerated seismic release prior to the 
16/04/2015 large event. Following the same procedure as the Thales project catalogue, the 
calculation of Mc for the NOA catalogue has been carried out using the same options and 
parameters. The search grid had spacing 0.2 degrees with 50 events in each point and there 
was a 50 times bootstrapping. The best combination option in Z-map software (Wyss, et 
al., 2001) compared the fitting techniques and kept the one with better results. The 
Magnitude of completeness spatial distribution on the eastern part of the investigation area 
(figure 3.2.7) between Crete and Rhodes island (28.0 - 36.0) has Magnitude of 
completeness range from 1.9 to 2.9. The area near the large events as well as the 
Gutenberg-Richer frequency magnitude relationship fitting (figure 3.2.8) suggest an 
average Mc value 2.5.  
Figure 3.2.7 A detailed magnitude of completeness map compiled from the NOA catalogue for the South 
Aegean area. The Mc for the eastern part, which is the focus for the 2015 event, seems to have an average Mc 
values around 2.5 (figure obtained from Zmap). 
The NOA catalogue for the South Aegean limited in the time period 2011 to 16/04/2015 
has almost 15000 events (figure 3.2.9a). The catalogue has been declustered with the 
Reasenberg method with the same parameters as the ones used for the Thales catalogue.  
Figure 3.2.8 The Gutenberg- Richer law fitting for the time period is between 2011 and the April of 2015. The 
calculation methods in Z-map software shows a b-value 0.95 and Mc average value down to 2.5. 
Figure 3.2.9 The a) diagram is obtained from the NOA catalogue for 2011 to 16/04/2015 South Aegean 
cumulative number of events. The b) has the declustered catalogue cumulative number of events which have 
been used to inspect the possible variation in the sampling method. The yellow stars are the events with 
magnitude larger or equal with 6.0 (figure obtained from Zmap). 
On the declustered catalogue the cumulative number curve (figure 3.2.9b) has been 
inspected for slope changes. Two equal time windows (2011 -2013.2 and 2013.2-2015.3) 
have been used to identify the possible rate changes. The cumulative and non-cumulative 
plot of the frequency-magnitude distribution for the two time windows appears to be the 
same. The normalized frequency magnitude distribution has some small fluctuations in 
magnitudes above 5.5 which is normal, considering that in the second time window there 
are the 2013 and 2015 large events. Therefore, the conclusion is that there were not any 
significant alterations in the seismic network recording capabilities and magnitude 
reporting. 
Figure 3.2.10 The cumulative (a) and the non-cumulative (b) annual number of events as a function 
of magnitude. The magenta o shaped points are representing the first time window (2011-2013) 
while the blue x shaped points are from the second time window (2013- 16/04/2015) (figure obtained 
from Zmap). 
A final test to check the quality of the NOA catalogue have been carried out by comparing 
the cumulative number curves obtained from the NOA and the Thales catalogue. The two 
catalogues have different end day, minimum magnitude and depth limits. In order to 
compare them the maximum depth was set to 40km, the end period of NOA catalogue was 
reduced to end of 2013 and the minimum magnitude for both catalogues was set to 2.7. The 
depth limit was set to keep only the crustal events while the Magnitude of completeness of 
the Thales catalogue was the one that set the magnitude threshold in the two catalogues. 
The two cumulative curves are plot together in the figure 3.2.11. The blue line represents 
the NOA while the red the Thales catalogue. The cumulative number curves have strong 
shape similarities, there are only small changes in the slope of the NOA line after the 2013 
events. The catalogues in this test have not been declustered so it appears that the NOA 
catalogue has more events for the 2013 aftershock sequences. 
Figure 3.2.11 The cumulative number curves for the Thales (red line) and NOA (blue line) 
catalogues. Filters as the minimum magnitude 2.7 and maximum depth 40km have been applied to 
have the same number of events in the examined period 2011- end of 2013 (figure obtained from 
Zmap).  
3.2.3 The HSNC catalogue  
The HSNC has a descent earthquake database with good data completeness for the period 
the examined period from the beginning of 2008 until the end of September 2015 as it is 
presented in figure 3.2.12. The calculation of Mc has been carried out by using a 0.1 degree 
grid with 100 events as well as the best combination option in Zmap software (Wyss, et 
al., 2001). The Mc values close to Crete Island is down to 2.0 at the majority of the western 
part and it takes values between 2 to 2.7 at the central and southern part of the island, while 
the larger but still small values down to 3.0 are presented in the eastern part of the HSNC 
coverage area (Chatzopoulos, et al., 2016). Despite the fact that the network has good data 
completeness, the catalogue has not been used in accelerated seismic release research. The 
main reason is that the seismic stations have been under upgrades-changes the past years, 
which means that there are possible inhomogeneities in the reported magnitude values. In 
addition, the increase in the number of stations could give a false alarm of accelerated 
deformation as the number of the recorded events has been increased which is noticeable in 
figure 3.2.13, where the slope of the cumulative number curve changes after 2011.  
Figure 3.2.12. The Magnitude of Completeness map for close vicinity of the Crete Island area. The 
map has been composed in Z-map software with best combination option using the manual 
catalogue of the HSNC from 2008 until end of October 2015 (Chatzopoulos, et al., 2016). 
Figure 3.2.13 The cumulative number of events of the HSNC catalogue for the time window 2008 to 
mid of 2015. The yellow stars are the events with magnitude larger or equal with 6.0. (figure 
obtained from Zmap). 
3.3 Methodological Aspects 
3.3.1 The ASR software 
Aiming to test the theoretical framework and the validity of the common critical exponent 
in real data, the Thales and the NOA catalogues have been used to evaluate the seismic 
hazard in the South Aegean region with the use of the accelerating seismic release method. 
The first attempts to quantify the seismic energy release in this research have been carried 
out with the use of an old accelerated seismicity scanner which was written in Fortran code. 
This program, even though it was written in an old programming language and it was very 
small in terms of size, had a search process that was very time consuming even for a 
modern computer with a strong processor and large RAM capacity. The use of graphics in 
Fortran code is avoided as they are difficult to write. In addition, the figure creation process 
is slow and usually an external application is needed to plot the results (Padman, 2007). 
Every attempt to scan an area such as the South Aegean can last from many hours to days 
which was dependent on the number of events in the catalogue as well as the other 
searching parameters such as the grid, the search radius around a point, the maximum depth 
and the minimum number or earthquakes. For the research purposes of this thesis, a new 
GUI program which has better search algorithm, optimized for speed and has functions that 
enables to scan the area for a common critical exponent (the Fortran scanner was searching 
only in Benioff strain) has been created in the MATLAB (MATLAB-Mathworks, 2018). 
The program is divided in several script-functions assigned to carry out different tasks. The 
basic structure and commands of the new GUI software are presented in the next 
subchapter, the whole script is in appendix which has help comment lines starting with % 
(% comment).    
3.3.2 The features of the software- Brief explanation of the code   
 The procedure of executing the software as well as a summary of the most basic functions, 
commands and the reasons for using each of them will be provided. The analysis of 
accelerated seismic release first step is to execute the main.m, which is a function that 
launches a singleton pattern which is a software design pattern with one instance that 
connects all the available search parameters with the rest functions (Gamma, et al., 1994). 
The purpose of the main.m is only to prepare the research process in a visual and user-
friendly environment (figure 3.3.1). It contains mostly visual related commands and some 
code that is useful for converting-controlling the catalogue data. On the top left corner there 
are two pushbuttons designed to load a map and the earthquake catalogue. The map needs 
to be a coastline type file with two columns (x, y) that define the shape of the borderlines. 
The one that has been used in this research is obtained by (National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration , 2015). The catalogue files have five variables with the 
earthquake parameters depth, magnitude, time, longitude and latitude. The time format of 
the catalogue yyyy-mm-dd HH:MM:SS (yyyy is year with four digits, mm the month, dd 
the day etc) have been converted to a serial date number with datenum command 
(datenum-MathWorks, 2018). Both files need to be created and saved in *.mat format. In 
the appendix there is a code that enables the conversion of a tab delimited text file to a 
MATLAB catalogue compatible with the accelerated deformation software 
(catmaker.m). 
Figure 3.3.1 The analyses procedure start by launching the function main.m which is a singleton pattern 
that enables the scanner preparation with visual inspection and edit of the research parameters.   
Below the map and catalogue pushbutton there are four boxes to insert the numerical values 
of the coordinates for the search area. An additional pushbutton enables the graphical 
selection of the research rectangular.  The next option controls the catalogue events by 
applying filters such as the starting and the ending time of the excitation period as well the 
minimum magnitude and maximum depth of the events. The rest of the parameters are for 
optimizing the accelerated-decelerated seismic crustal deformation model (see below). In 
this software, the identification of the possible seismicity patterns has been carried out with 
circular shape areas. There are options that control the size of the searching area by 
customizing the number and the size of the search circles. Below these options there are 
settings to arrange the minimum number of events, the grid size and the seismicity pattern 
(acceleration or deceleration) that will be used. So far, the aforesaid options have been used 
and extensively tested by other researchers (see 3.3.1). The Bufe & Varnes (1993) work 
proposed that the seismic release can be calculated directly from the seismicity catalogues 
by converting the earthquake magnitude to energy or Benioff strain or event count. An 
option that enables to fit the data in power law sense for the different energy exponents has 
been used.  This option permits using the critical exponent  as a validation tool for the 
results. In a successful seismicity pattern identification, for all 0    1 the critical 
exponent should have similar values   0.3  for acceleration and  > 1  for 
deceleration. By pressing the RUN MODEL pushbutton, the process starts and in the 
MATLAB command window information is presented regarding the search progress as 
well as statistics for the completed iterations (figure 3.3.2). A last visual detail is a 
checkbox that enables the graphical representation of the power law fitting against the 
linear fitting (figure 3.3.3) which is a nice to have option, but it is better to use it for small 
areas as it makes the search process slow. 
Figure 3.3.2 The analysis progress as it is displayed in the MATLABs command window. From left 
to right there are the latitude of the grid point that has been scanned, the time to complete this line, 
the minimum and maximin for curvature (c) critical exponent (n) as well as the power law fit 
correlation coefficient (r). 
Figure 3.3.3 The graphical representation of the power law fitting (red line) against the linear 
fitting (black line) and with blue circles are the events.  
When all parameters are set in the main.m, the search starts by activating the 
ACCscanner.m where two for commands are responsible for the search grid (for-
MathWorks, 2018): 
% create the grid with user defined step 
for yepi=ystart:step:yend 
    for xepi=xstart:step:xend 
The scanner follows a loop in a loop sequence. The grid of the under-investigation area is 
defined by the step. The internal loop examines the longitude of the defined area between 
xstart and xend while the external loop is for the latitude. In every iteration, it searches 
for a latitude value through all the possible longitude coordinates, as the iteration is 
completed goes to next latitude value. Aiming to avoid keeping in memory unnecessary 
data and make the script faster, a series of initiation commands have been used. An 
example of the initiation process, is the matrix preparation according to the available data:   
% Initialize local model array parameters for speed 
La = length(radarray); 
CVR = zeros(1,La); 
The length command finds the largest number of elements in a vector (length-
MathWorks, 2018). In this case, the length of the radarray is the number of the search circle 
radii that have been assigned to scan in every grid point. The zeros command is used to 
create a matrix with zeros, an option that helps to have a preallocation and a constant 
matrix size which can improve code execution (zeros-MathWorks, 2018).  In this instance, 
for every iteration it creates a one row matrix with the columns number based on the search 
circles. Another example with an if expression that uses a logical operator to execute 
other commands (if-MathWorks, 2018) : 
%index the area according to a specific radius 
idx = find(D<=radarray(i)); 
% run the model if the number of events is satisfied 
if length(idx)>=min_events 
An index (idx) is created with the find command which returns the nonzero elements of 
matrix or an array of data that meet an operator defined condition  (MathWorks, 2018). In 
this example for every iteration, the find command is used to search and keep the circles 
that include events. The Euclidian distance D between the grid point and epicentre of the 
events should be less or equal to the circle radius in order to satisfy the distance criterion.  
The if statement is used to permit the indices having more than the minimum number of 
events (min_events) to execute the GetCurvature.m function that is responsible for 
fitting the data in the power law model. 
The GetCarvature.m function of the scanner is optimized to calculate the Benioff 
strain by fitting the data in a power law sense. The Benioff strain for each event is 
calculated with the use of energy-magnitude equation (3.1.3):  
log  = 1.5   + 4.7  
where  the is the energy of the ith earthquake in joules,  is the magnitude of the event 
(Papazachos & Papazachos, 2000), or as it is used in the MATLAB script code:  
Es=10.^(1.5*M) + 4.7); 
[bt,Es]=qbenioff(t,Es,ksi); 
The initial variable Es, the energy of each earthquake calculated from the magnitude M, 
becomes an input in qbenioff internal function along with time t and ksi (), the energy 
exponent. The qbenioff function uses a simple for loop to calculate the cumulative energy 
and at the same time it uses the ksi to transform the energy values into Benioff strain or 
cumulative number of events that permits to calculate the different values for the critical 
exponent . The cumulative energy (or Benioff strain or number of events) is fitted in the 
power law function pwlawfunc with the nonlinear regression solver nlinfit which 
applies the nonlinear least squares algorithm proposed by Levenberg-Marquardt (nlinfit-
Mathworks, 2018). The Levenberg-Marquardt method is a robust technique, but it may 
achieve slow converge or even not work when there are large fitting residuals (Seber & 
Wild, 2003). The robustness of the nlinfit algorithm has been enhanced based on the work 
of DuMouchel & O'Brien (1989) and Holland & Welsch (1977). The estimated residuals 
after each fitting iteration, are used with a least squares algorithm that recalculates the 
functions weights. The fitting procedure is separated in two steps aiming to avoid having 
large residuals and increasing the fitting speed. The first part involves a preliminary fitting 
with the initial values for the power law function the ones predefined in beta. The next 
step is to do a second fitting with initial values the ones obtained from the results of the 
preliminary fitting: 
%make a preliminary estimation for ACC or DCC respectively 
if model==1, beta = [2 0 0.33 max(t)]; end 
[Bf,r,J,COVB,mse] = nlinfit(t,Es/max(bs),pwlawfunc,beta); 
% fit power-law model function non-least squares case 
[Bf,r,J,COVB,mse] = nlinfit(t,Es/max(bs),pwlawfunc,[bf(1) 
bf(2) bf(3) bf(4)],statset('MaxIter',100)); 
Where r are the fitting residuals, the J is Jacobian matrix with all the first-order partial 
derivatives, COVB is the estimated variance-covariance matrix for the estimated 
coefficients and the mse is an estimation of the variance of the error. 
As mention in 3.1.1 the legacy version of the accelerated deformation software compiled 
in Fortran has an optimization method like the lsqcurvefit in MATLAB which 
assumes that the data have a least squares regression solution (lsqcurvefit-MathWorks, 
2018). The two methods nlinfit and lsqcurvefit have strong similarities in 
terms of optimization, someone can argue which is better but without a fitting comparison 
in a real study case, there is no conclusion which one is more suitable for this research. A 
series of random tests in real catalogues shown that the second method present rough fitting 
in the boundary values especial when the couple last events have a considerable magnitude 
difference with the previous ones. The lsqcurvefit solution for the time to failure 
power law equations, turns the curve upwards in the edges like a U shape. This effect is 
more noticeable in the energy versus time fitting which might be the reason for making the 
Benioff strain more popular among the scientists especially before a couple of years ago 
where the computational power and fitting algorithms were more limited.  Despite the 
craggy fitting, the legacy software has been tested for accelerating seismic patterns with the 
common critical exponent criterion and there were not any satisfactory results as the critical 
exponent was underestimated due to the fitting. A random example where the two methods 
are applied for the same events with the identical conditions and initial parameters are in 
figure 3.3.4. The blue circles are the events, the black line is the linear fitting which is used 
to calculate the curvature parameter, the red line is the power law fitting with the 
nlinfit while the blue one is for the lsqcurvefit method.  
Figure 3.3.4. The evaluation of the fitting results and the capabilities of the nlinfit (red line) 
and lsqcurvefit fitting methods for the Benioff stain exponent  = 1/2(a) and for the 
energy  = 1(b). It is clear that the second one (blue line) has a rough fitting in both cases 
(Benioff strain and Energy). 
In each step, the curvature parameter () as well as the critical exponent  for different 
radius around a point is computed. The curvature parameter is the root mean square error of 
the power low fitting against the root mean square error of the linear fitting proposed by 
Bufe & Varnes (1993). The root mean square error of the two fittings is estimated by:  
% Calculate the Power Law and Linear Fit RMSs 
RMSlin=norm(Es-LNfit);  
RMSpow=norm(Es-PLfit); 
The norm is used to find the Euclidean length (norm-MathWorks, 2018). The Es is the 
cumulative Benioff strain release (or energy of the earthquakes or the cumulative number 
of events) while the LNfit and PLfit are the linear and the power law fitting 
respective. The curvature parameters CRV is calculated by: 
% Get the curvature parameter C=(Power law fit)/(Linear fit), 
CRV=RMSpow/RMSlin; 
The optimal radius is considered to be the one with the lowest curvature parameter. 
Although the software is set to consider the one with the smallest curvature as the optimal 
radius, for the successful cases the radii that have been excluded by the software have been 
manually examined. Sometimes, at the same grid point two different size circles could give 
similar results, the size difference was small like 2-3 or less radius. If the lowest curvature 
parameter option does not filter the results, then it seems that the larger circles tend to 
miscalculate the critical time. An example from the 12/10/2013 case is presented in figure 
3.3.5. The fitting on the left diagram (a) is achieved with a 16-radius circle while the other 
one is with an 18-radius (b). The aforesaid initial criteria for the seismic pattern 
identification are satisfied for both cases, there is a common critical exponent for all  
(01), the correlation coefficient is more than 0.97 and the curvature parameter is less 
than 0.55. In this example the first fitting has 48 events while the second one has 56 as the 
search circle is larger. The curvature parameter has slightly lower value in first case which 
indicates a clearer accelerating pattern. The smaller circles were considered as better 
solutions as the critical time estimation was closer to the real one. 
Figure 3.3.5. The same search parameters with slightly larger circle in (b) gives acceptable results 
but with a miscalculation in the estimated time of the mainshock. 
An estimation of the power law fitting accuracy is checked by the correlation coefficient:  
% get correlation coefficient R^2 
Crmat = corrcoef(PLfit,Es); R = real(Crmat(1,2)^2); 
The corrcoef is used to find the correlation between the variables power law 
fitting PLfit and the cumulative quantity Es (corrcoef-MathWorks, 2018). The 
correlation coefficient accepted values are set as R 0.95. 
The inspection of the result has been carried out in Accres.m which creates or uses the 
existing singleton pattern (figure 3.3.6). This is another visual inspection window that 
enables to control the amount of the presented results by applying some filters. The 
available options are to set the accepted values for the curvature parameter, the critical 
exponent and the correlation coefficient of the power law fitting. Each grid point that has a 
fitting, regardless of the fitting results is noted with a different color on the original 
curvature critical exponent and filtered. The color scales changes according to the range of 
the results. The options that have been used to filter the result are discussed in the next 
subchapter (3.3.3). 
Figure 3.3.6 The accres.m is used to inspect the results and constrain the fitting parameters. On the 
left side there are filters as well as two small maps with the unfiltered curvature and critical 
exponent values. On the right side there is a large map showing the locations that satisfy the 
curvature critical exponent and the correlation coefficient limits.   
3.3.3 Procedure  Parameters selection 
The accelerated seismic release time to failure model and the related software have been 
used mainly as a tool to predict large events, but a large amount of researchers  has use it in 
a retrospective approach mainly after a strong earthquake, in order to examine the possible 
accelerated areas and/or establish a theoretical model (Papadopoulos, 1986; Bowman, et 
al., 1998; Varnes, 1989; Bufe & Varnes, 1993; Brehm & Braile, 1999; Papazachos & 
Papazachos, 2000; Rundle, et al., 2000; Tzanis, et al., 2000; Bowman & King, 2001; 
Papazachos & Papazachos, 2001; Di Giovambattista & Tyupkin, 2001; Di Giovambattista 
& Tyupkin, 2004; Papazachos, et al., 2002; Tzanis & Vallianatos, 2003; Scordilis, et al., 
2004; Papazachos, et al., 2005; Mignan, et al., 2006; Mignan, et al., 2007; Mignan, 2008; 
Mignan & Di Giovambattista, 2008). In this thesis framework, the accelerated-decelerated 
seismic crustal deformation software has been used a posteriori as a validation method for 
the existence and the use of the common critical exponent  to identify the preparation 
period. According to the proposed theory (3.1.2), the area which undergoes accelerated 
seismic release will have a specific time window where the critical exponent will be  
 0.3. This should occur for every energy exponent  selected in the range [0,1]. More 
specific the values 0, 1/2 and 1 were selected since they represent the cumulative number of 
events, the Benioff strain and the cumulative seismic energy respectively. In the under-
study area of South Aegean, during the period 2013-2015 three strong earthquakes 
occurred. These events were examined for power law patterns with the use of the common 
critical exponent . The strong event was excluded from the analysis, all the examined 
time windows had an end date always just a couple hours before the mainshock. The 
starting times of the three seismicity patterns were unknown. A trial and error approach 
was necessary in order to determine the initial time of any possible precursory activity. In 
the literature there two approaches. The older one supports the idea that the accelerated 
seismic release needs a large amount of time such as 15-20 or even more years (Bufe & 
Varnes, 1993; Papazachos & Papazachos, 2000; Di Giovambattista & Tyupkin, 2004; 
Tzanis & Vallianatos, 2003; Scordilis, 2006), while the most recent one identifies the 
excitation period of much shorter catalogues (De Santis, et al., 2010; Mignan, 2008b; 
Tiampo, et al., 2008; Papadopoulos & Minadakis, 2016). Considering the latest additions in 
the seismicity pattern literature, the trial and error search for the starting time was up to 10 
years before each mainshock. 
The minimum number of events that have been used to define a power law pattern varies in 
literature. In Bowman, et al., 1988 work it is stated that the accelerated seismic release 
model can predict a foreshock with a small number like 4.  Mignan uses Mmin= 6 (Mignan, 
et al., 2006) while in the research (2008) there is Bowmans later suggestion that the 
accelerated seismic release will work better with Mmin=10. Hardebeck after testing the Mmin 
= 4,6,8 and 10 found out that the minimum number of events does not affect much the 
curvature parameters, which means that the curvature parameter is not strongly influenced 
by Mmin (Hardebeck, et al., 2008). In the aforesaid research the minimum magnitude was 
set based on Bowmans proposal that takes the magnitude range into account. The use of as 
few as the proposed minimum number of events is based on the assumptions that the 
preshock catalogue has earthquakes with magnitudes 2 units smaller than the large event 
(Bufe & Varnes, 1993). This theory works only if you already know the magnitude of the 
expected mainshock. In an instance where someone is trying to identify an accelerated 
deformation process of a future event, the 2 units smaller magnitude rule could lead to 
no/or wrong results. On the other hand, using events that have small magnitudes in 
combination with low values of Mmin will also produce false alarms. In this thesis, with the 
purpose of having a balanced in terms of sensitivity accelerated seismic release fitting, the 
minimum number of events was set to 25. In the literature the minimum magnitude of the 
preshocks that can produce power law phenomena varies. The early works on accelerated 
seismic release suggest the use of moderate magnitude earthquakes while the later 
researchers De Santis, et al. (2010); Mignan (2008b); Papadopoulos & Minadakis (2016) 
have used smaller values like Mmin3.0. Within the present thesis, the minimum magnitude 
has been tested and all the available values down to the magnitude of completeness of each 
catalogue have been examined.  
 The process to identify the seismicity pattern start when the whole catalogue and a 
coastline type map have been loaded in the accelerated seismic release software (figure 
3.3.7). The Thales catalogue with seismic events for the broader Aegean area, to focus on 
the investigation area a rectangular that includes all events for longitude from 20.0 to 30.0 
and the latitude from 33.5 to 37 was selected (figure 3.3.7). The main reason for selecting 
to investigate the whole South Aegean was to evaluate with real data the identification 
capabilities of the accelerated-decelerated seismic crustal deformation software. In 
addition, the idea of searching for seismicity patterns only in the area around the epicentre 
of the mainshock could lead to biased results in the retrospective analysis as well as to the 
forecast attempts. The first couple of runs were rough estimations, aiming to check if there 
are seismicity patterns before the large earthquakes of 2013 and 2015. The area was 
scanned with large spaced square grid 0.1 degrees, a few circles have been used with 5km 
increase in size and the trial starting time was decreased by 6 months in every iteration. 
Afterwards, an additional focus has been applied in the regions where the first results 
suggest that there are seismicity patterns. In order to have enhanced resolution and detailed 
results in the accelerated decelerated seismicity crustal deformation output maps, the square 
grid size was reduced to 0.05 degrees and the size of the expanding search circles was 
increasing by 2km in each attempt. The time window had a fixed end point, while the 
starting point was defined with the trial and error approach. Initially, the iteration has been 
carried out with a narrow time window, beginning approximately 3-4 months before the 
mainshock and its size was increased by one month after every completed run. In the case 
where a time window had multiple starting points with the same results, the earlier starting 
point was used.After the identification of the possible seismic acceleration time window the 
process has been continued until there were no other positive results for more than 8-12 
months. The end and starting time are  numbers that depend on the existence of events in 
the specific time, circle size and grid point. The catalogue with the events of a successful 
seismic pattern identification may have different, smaller limits than the ones assigned in 
the software.  
Figure 3.3.7. The Thales project seismicity catalogue and the coastline for Greece have been 
loaded to the software. 
Figure 3.3.8 the catalogue was limited to the South Aegean region. Additionally, different 
magnitude and depth limits have been tested (see text). 
A similar idea occurs for the search shape and its size. In the literature the search shape 
varies, ellipses lobes and other shapes have been proposed. The actual search shape in the 
three dimensions is different, for example a circular search area is actually a cylinder as the 
surface and the maximum depth shapes upper and lower bound of the search volume. This 
observation adds another variable in the search parameters, arising the basic questions: 
which shape will work better to identify the seismicity patterns and is there a limit in the 
size? In the work of Bowman & King (2001); Tzanis & Vallianatos (2003); Mignan 
(2008b) where the spatial distribution of the preshock events is limited to small size 
(approximately 15-20km) lobe shaped areas with positive stress changes. Aiming to 
approximate the aforesaid pattern and with the assumption that the fault type and the area 
of the large event are unknown, circular shaped areas with small diameters have been used 
to include the events with the possible positive stress changes. Additionally, different depth 
limits have been tested in the seismicity pattern search. The initial idea was to use only 
crustal events with depth from 0 up to 40km but taking the aforesaid researches into 
account and with purpose to narrow the height of the cylinders, other depth limits like 10 
20 30 km have been tried. 
In order to accept the produced results a series of criteria has been applied. A grid point 
was considered that it successful identified seismicity pattern when for each of the three  
energy exponent (0, , 1) cases, there were the same: 
 time window (starting and ending time) 
 circle size as well as the number of events 
 minimum magnitude and maximum depth   
Additionally, the successful grid points should have curvature parameter C0.55 for all 
cases and the correlation coefficient of the power law fitting should be R20.97. The most 
important parameter was the critical exponent. The results should have an  with values 
between 0.25 and 0.33. 
Chapter 4 Aftershocks - swarm sequences in the front of 
Hellenic Arc 
4.1 The HSNC network 
4.1.1 HSNC monitoring area 
The Hellenic Seismic Network of Crete (HSNC) was established in the front of the 
Hellenic Arc in 2004. The main purpose of the network is to contribute to the monitoring of 
seismicity in a convergent boundary tectonic regime caused by the subduction of the ocean 
lithospheric part of the African plate (ocean floor remnants of Tethys sea) under the 
Eurasian continental shelf (McKenzie, 1972; Reilinger, et al., 2006). The recent studies of 
the GPS velocity vectors show that the South Aegean plate is moving quickly (33 mm/year) 
towards the slow (5 mm/year) African plate (Reilinger, et al., 2006; Ganas & Parsons, 
2009). The monitoring area is located within a rectangular defined by coordinates, 
longitude from 20.0 to 30.0 and latitude from 34.0 to 37.0. In this area, it is estimated that 
more than 60% of the total seismic energy in Europe is being released. Historically, there is 
evidence that earthquakes with magnitudes up to 8.3 have occurred (Papazachos, 1990). 
Based on the work by Ambraseys (2001), the relatively recent strongest shallow events that 
have occurred since 1900, have magnitudes estimated up to Ms = 7.3. 
4.1.2 Evolution of the HSNC network 
Initially the network had four Guralp CMG-40T 1 second triaxial orthogonal sensors for 
vertical and two horizontal dimensions with flat response to velocity from 1 to 100 Hz 
installed in western and central Crete. Within a time period of less than a decade (2004
2012) the seismic network expanded from four to twelve online stations (figure 4.1): 
KNDR (Koundoura Palaiochora), FRMA (Ferma Ierapetra), CHAN (Chania), KSTL 
(Kastelli Heraklion), PRNS (Prines Rethimnon), KTHR (Kythira island), TMBK (Tympaki 
Heraklion), STIA (Sitia Lasithi), KOSK (Kos island), RODP (Rodopos Kolimbari), THT2 
(Santorini island), and GVDS (Gavdos island) but with mixed broadband and short period 
sensors (Chatzopoulos, et al., 2016). Some of the original Guralp CMG-40T 1 second 
seismometers were replaced by new Guralp CMG ESPC 60 and 120 seconds seismometers 
(Hloupis & Vallianatos, 2013) which have a flat to velocity from 0.017 Hz (60 seconds) 
and 0.0083 Hz (120 seconds) to 50Hz. During the network expansion time, many changes 
have been made to increase the seismic network capabilities, in some cases by adopting 
new, more suitable location for the seismometers. In the time interval of next two years 
(2012-2014), another three short period sensors (STIA, FRMA and GVDS) were replaced 
by broadband ones and at the same time, two new stations KLMT (Kalamata) and 
HRKL(Heraklion) were added to the seismic network in order to provide a wider and better 
in quality coverage area. In the middle of 2015 two more station seismometers (PRNS and 
KSTL) were changed from short period to broadband ones, leaving only one short period 
sensor (RODP) in the network (Chatzopoulos, et al., 2016).  All 14 stations are registered to 
the International Seismological Centre (ISC, 2018) and the network is listed in the 
International Federation of Digital Seismograph Networks (FDSN, 2018) with the assigned 
permanent network codename HC. In all the networks stations, since its first operation, the 
sensors are connected with 3rd generation REF TEK 130-01 DAS digitizers (Ref Tek, 
2018) to digitize and transfer the seismic signal to the collector server (Hloupis & 
Vallianatos, 2013). In the beginning the digitizers were set to continuously record seismic 
data at 125 Hz, but eventually near the end of 2013, this number was reduced to 100 Hz 
due to enormous amount of data stored in servers after the networks expansion and also to 
be compatible with neighbour seismic network collaborators (Chatzopoulos, et al., 2016). 
At the end of 2015, aiming to increase seismic readiness and provide more knowledge-
information to scientific community, the civil protection authorities and the citizens, the 
HSNC started operating a permanent strong ground motion network in the urban 
environment of Chania and its southern basin. The network is equipped with fourteen 
sensors, mostly Trimbles Ref Tek 130 along with some Satways GSense 16bit. These 
provide a dense network with increased spatial resolution in the monitoring area. The 
analysis of the strong motion data enables the peak ground acceleration to be calculate and 
presented in shakemaps (Chatzopoulos, et al., 2018).  
4.2 Seismic signal acquisition 
4.2.1 Acquisition methods for HSNC equipment 
All the installed stations in Crete are able to communicate with the central data collection 
server by using private wired Asynchronous Digital Subscriber Lines (ADSL) Multi-
Protocol Label Switching (MPLS) lines. To prevent the loss of data packages from possible 
technical difficulties in ADSL line the HSNC has back up ISDN lines to ensure the 
minimal data loss due to connection problems. If the ADSL line is down for some reason, 
the ISDN back up mechanism does a dial-up call to access the internet and transfer the 
seismic data until the broadband connection is restored. When the HSNC started its 
operations, there was a problem in communications with distant stations that were located 
on other islands (GVDS, KTHR and THT2), because the wired lines did not exist in these 
locations or they were cost inefficient. The HSNC is using its own private satellite line for 
these remote stations, which use the iDirect satellite hubs (idirect, 2018) to communicate 
the satellite links (VSAT) (Hloupis et al., 2013). All the incoming continuous recording 
data that are transmitted from the stations digitizers (REF TEK 130) are gathered in the 
main data collection server. In this archive-dedicated server, the REF TEK Protocol 
Daemon (RTPD) is installed, which is the REF TEKs commercial software package. The 
RTPD which connects through UDP port 2543 with the DAS digitizers, uses error-
correction modules to ensure the incoming data integrity from DAS as well as from the 
other collaborating seismic networks. Additional algorithms are designed to monitor the 
conditions of each station and provide useful information regarding the GPS status, the data 
transmission delay, the RAM usage of the DAS, the input voltage and the back-up battery 
condition. The incoming data remain in this server for about 4-6 months and after that they 
are moved and stored in back-up servers. 
4.2.2 Data exchange with the other networks in the area 
The HSNC continuous monitors the South Aegean. Its operations rely on collecting seismic 
data from its 14 stations as well as from ten more stations that belong to neighbouring 
networks. At the end of 2013, in order to increase its monitoring capabilities, the HSNC 
had signed bilateral agreements with three neighbour seismic networks. The main 
collaborating network is the National Observatory of Athens that provides the stations VLI 
(Velies Lakonia), MHLO (Milos Island), APE (Apeiranthos Naxos), ZKR (Zakros Crete), 
KARP (Karpathos Island) and ARG (Archangelos Rhodes) (HL/National Observatory of 
Athens Seismic Network, 2018). The Seismological Station belongs to the Department of 
Geophysics of Aristotle University of Thessaloniki (History of the Department of 
Geophysics - AUTH, 2018) which provides the stations KRND (Kranidi Argolis) and 
NIS1(Nisyros island) (HT/Aristotle University of Thessaloniki Seismological Network, 
2018). The last collaborator is the Kandilli Observatory and Earthquake Research Institute 
(KOERI, 2018), from Bosphorus University located in Turkey  that provides 5 stations but 
due to networks needs it uses the BODT (Bodrum Mugla) and DAT (Datca Mugla) only 
(KO/Kandilli Observatory and Earthquake Research Institute, Bosphorus Univ., 2018). A 
map showing the HSNC topology of as well as the collaborating seismic networks is 
illustrated in figure 4.1.  
Figure 4.1 The spatial distribution of the HSNC stations as well as the other data exchange seismic 
network stations.   
According to the FDSN, et al. (2012), the defined international format to exchange 
seismological data is the SEED (Standard for the Exchange of Earthquake Data), that files 
contains all the information that is necessary to reproduce the seismic waveform. A 
commonly used format due to its limited size, is the miniSEED, which is a dataless SEED 
volume and a response file is needed to access the data (FDSN, et al., 2012). Aiming to 
ensure a constant exchange of seismic data, a SeisComp3 server is used. The data from 
neighbouring networks are available with the seedlink data broadcast protocol that uses 
small packets with size 512-byte miniSEED. The seismic data are available to all seedlink 
servers that are able to connect to the specific TCP IP, usually in port 18000. It is necessary 
to change the format of the data in order to feed them to RTPD collection server. The 
sl2rtpd protocol is used to transform the broadcast miniSEED data from seedlink to REF 
TEK format. 
4.2.3 Automatic Earthquake Monitoring Systems 
The automatic processing of seismic signal in the HSNC is achieved by employing two 
earthquake monitoring systems the SeisComP3 developed from Helmholtz Centre Potsdam, 
GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences and GEMPA GmbH (Helmholtz Centre 
Potsdam, GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences, 2018) and the Earthworm from 
USGS Menlo Park in the United States (Earthworm, 2018). For the purposes of the HSNC 
operations, the automatic systems have been set to run independently with data feeding 
directly from the RTPD data collection server and they process the same seismic signals in 
parallel mode. The two earthquake monitoring systems work with different automatic phase 
picking algorithms. The SeisComP3 uses as primary picker the classic short-time-average 
amplitude of a seismic signal for a moving-time window versus the long-time-average 
amplitude (STA/LTA) algorithm. The Earthworm works with the Allen algorithm, where 
the phase picker is applied  in an envelope function of the STA/LTA ratio (Olivieri & 
Clinton, 2012; Allen, 1978; Trnkoczy, 2009) The envelope function in waves is a 
smoothing technique for border values (Johnson, et al., 2011). Each of the earthquake 
monitoring systems is assigned to have increased sensitivity for a specific monitoring area 
as it has lower trigger values for specific stations. The Earthworm monitoring system is 
calibrated to identify seismic events better on onshore and in a close to Crete region while 
the SeisComP3 works better for locating earthquakes in the broader area of South Aegean. 
After detecting an event, the automatic earthquake monitoring systems create a bulletin 
with a preliminary analysis and this distributed to the in-charge analyst, the registered 
users, the collaborating networks and the local authorities. At the same time that the analyst 
is being informed about an event, a script procedure is initiated, it takes less than 5 minutes 
after the automatic detection to send the necessary waveform files to perform the manual 
analysis of seismic event (further details provided in 4.3.1). Additionally, with a view to 
informing the rest of scientific community and the public, a dedicated webpage is set up 
with all available seismic parameters (origin time, latitude, longitude, depth and magnitude) 
for the automatic and manual solution. The webpage is updated after every new event 
(HSNC, 2018) (Chatzopoulos et al., 2016).  
4.3 Earthquake data processing  
4.3.1 Seismic waveform files  
In the HSNC the manual earthquake analysis procedure is carried out by inspecting and 
phase picking in raw, REF TEK data archive format, seismic signal files. There are two 
possible ways to obtain a waveform file, the first one involves the automatic earthquake 
monitoring systems while the second one is controlled by the analyst needs. Every time one 
of the automatic systems is triggered by a possible detection, it is programmed to execute 
several scripts to aid the analysis process. If the automatic system identifies a possible 
event, a script is designed to do three basic tasks, the first job is to check and inform the 
earthquake databases, then it sends emails with the preliminary analysis to the seismic 
network users and the last task is to launch another script which is in the REF TEK data 
collection server. The script in the RTPD server execute the REF TEKs Interface Software 
Suite command arcfetch for each station. This command creates several data files (based on 
the number of stations) by copying from the archive data (continues waveforms) the 
selected time window (in HSNC the time window is set to 4 minutes length). The whole 
package of waveform files is stored in one Tape Archives file (*.tar) and it is send to the 
users with a File Transfer Protocol command (FTP). Aiming to separate the source of the 
waveform package files, different codenames are assigned related with the triggered 
automatic earthquake monitoring system. The EW_data prefix denotes that the file comes 
from an Earthworm triggering while the S3_data from a SeisComp3 triggering. The third 
option to obtain seismic signal files is available through a Graphical User Interface (GUI) 
designed for Windows operating system (figure 4.3.1). The GUI named executioner 
launches another script that runs the arcfetch command in REF TEK data collection server 
but this time with the users choice for the starting date of the time window. This non-
automatic method is used for events that have not been detected by earthquake monitoring 
systems. The GUI software has been used to bring earthquake data files after the manual 
inspection of the 24h raw waveforms for the aftershocks that have not been detected. 
Another use of the executioner program is for the cases where the initial waveform file has 
a time window that does not include the whole seismic signal, so it is necessary to bring a 
new file with the same event but with a better time window. The name of waveform files 
obtained from the GUI software had prefix data while the rest of the filename denotes the 
origin time of the event separated by underscores (Year_Month_Day_Hour_Min_Sec).  An 
example of each of the three possible data files codenames is illustrated on table 4.3.1. A 
typical waveform file has a 3500- 5200kb size which is based on the available number of 
station data files and the length of the time window. 
Table 4.1 The types of the HSNC seismic signal files. 
Origin File name 
Manual-executioner data_2015_10_21_07_26 
Automatic-Earthworm 
EW_data_2015_10_19_16_28_57 
Automatic-SeisComp3 S3_data_2015_10_21_23_11_52 
Figure 4.3.1The GUI executioner that activates a script to manually bring waveform files. This 
software has been used to collect seismic signal files for the aftershock and swarm sequences. 
4.3.2 Seismic signal analysis software  
The analysis of the preliminary manual results on the HSNC is being carried out with the 
REF TEKs commercial GUI software (COMPASS) which is compatible with all kinds of 
Windows environments. The requirements of using the software are very limited as it 
doesnt require a fast processor or a large amount of memory, for example a Pentium 4 
CPU and 30 Mb RAM (20 stations 4-minutes recording) are more than enough to run the 
software. In addition, the software is standalone and does not need an installation. The 
COMPASS is able to read and load waveforms from various types of files including the 
most common used formats such as REF TEK, SAC, SEED, ASCII, SEGY and many others.  
To use files other than SEED it is necessary to have the instrument response files that 
contain information such as location of the sensor, the orientation of the sensor components 
as well as the transfer functions and channel sensitivities. The COMPASS software is user-
friendly with a large variety of menus that allow the analyst to carry out the standard 
analysis tasks in a time efficient way. The phase picking is achieved with the use of P and S 
phase arrivals for local- regional events. The origin time is calculated as the subtraction 
between the P wave arrival times (tP) with the product of the time difference of S and P 
arrival times (tS  tP) versus the velocity ratio (VP/VS) -1. The earthquake epicentre is 
located by minimizing the differences between observed and theoretical arrival times. The 
magnitude computation for local magnitude is based on the distance from the epicentre to 
the station as well as to the logarithm of the recorded maximum seismic wave amplitude 
while for surface magnitude the waves dominant period is also needed. Except the basic 
operations, the REF TEKs seismic analysis software has various options that helps the user 
to process the seismic waveform or save it in a different format. For example, in the time 
domain menu there are options that remove the DC offset and apply different kind of 
frequency filters, mathematical tools as well as smoothing, cut signal, and decimation 
options. In frequency domain menu there are Fast Fourier Transform, Power Spectral 
Density and spectrogram diagrams, also an emulation of a seismometer to another with the 
use of transfer functions. Other useful tools are the seismic wave velocity ratio Vp/Vs 
obtained by plotting the time difference of P and S arrivals of each station in a diagram 
known as Wadati plot (Wadati, 1933) and the single station Horizontal versus Vertical 
Spectral Ratio (HVSR) which can be used on ambient vibration (Nakamura, 1989) or on 
seismic signal (Lermo & Chavez-Garcia, 1993). The main disadvantage of the software is 
that it has only two predefined travel time tables, the IASPEI 91 (Kennett & Engdahl, 
1991) and one named regional which is based on a less accurate 1D version of AK173 
model (Kennett, 2005). These travel time tables are not the most suitable for detailed 
results in the Hellenic subduction zone and they are good only for a preliminary solution. 
4.3.3 Seismic signal processing  
The first step to start the analysis procedure that will determine the earthquake parameters 
of an event, is to extract the Tape Archives file and load the seismic waveforms into the 
REF TEKs seismic analysis software. The modern monitoring instruments sense the 
ground vibrations with electromagnetic transducers and the produced output is electrical 
voltage. The analogue information of the coil-magnet, the electromotive force should pass 
through an analogue-to-digital conversion system, a digitizer so it can be converted in the 
digital seismic signal. The output of this process depends on sampling rate while during the 
conversions it is possible to have offset, gain, and non-linearity errors (Fiore, 2018) Taking 
the seismic waveforms is an analogue-to-digital product into account, before the phase 
picking procedure it is necessary to prepare the seismic waveforms. Usually a mean 
removal base line correction is used in order to align all waveforms to the same level. In the 
COMPASS there are several tools specialized to remove offset. A common used option to 
fix the DC offset is the Mean Removal tool which removes average value from the 
measured signal. Aiming to cut the unnecessary noise, a filter in the frequency domain is 
applied. The filter application is used to improve the signal to noise ratio and make the 
seismic wave phases arrivals easier to distinguish for phase picking (Bormann & Wielandt, 
2013). The REF TEKs software has different infinite impulse response (IIR) and finite 
impulse response (FIR) filters. The IIR filters are causing a time-delay in the filtered signal 
while FIR ones can produce a fake preseismic signal (Mollova, 2007) so the IIR are 
preferred. The filters are divided in four categories based on frequency signals that are 
allowed to pass through the filter (Lowpass, Highpass, Bandpass and Bandstop). Plotting 
the response curve of the amplifier versus frequency, the flat part that can pass through the 
filter is known as pass band, the rejected part is the stop band while the area between the 
pass band and the stop band is the transition band. The order of the filter is a measure of 
the response rate, which is described by an integer value, the higher the order of the filter 
the more steeply is the frequency attenuation. The class of the filter controls the shape of 
the transition region and represents the dumping factor (Fiore, 2018). Among the four basic 
types of filters, the most common used frequency filter in the HSNC is the Bandpass one. 
The second order of the filters is preferred because it is not so steep in the transition band 
and it does not significantly alter the output. Additionally, a large order filter may cause a 
phase shift of signal (Diehl, et al., 2011). An example of how a higher order filter could 
affect the outcome is illustrated in figure 4.3.2 where the same raw waveform is being 
filtered with a 2nd, 3rd and 4th order filter. It is noticeable as the order increases; the P phase 
arrival (black line) becomes less clear a fact that can cause errors in phase picking process. 
 The adopted  class is the common used Butterworth, it is an IIR active signal processing 
filter named after Stephen Butterworth who proposed a series of analogue signal processing 
filters with flat response to a specific frequency region (Butterworth 1930). The lower and 
higher cut off frequencies are set to 1 and 6 Hz and the order is 2 so the phase shift of 
signal is the minimal (figure 4.3.3). The filter parameter that controls the pass band 
frequencies has been tested in a considerable number of events and the selected ones are 
the best choice to fix the SNR for the HSNC stations. 
Figure4.3.2 The effect of a higher order filter in the seismic signal waveform. In the raw signal applied a 2nd 
,3rd and 4th order filter. The black line indicates the P phase arrival. 
Figure 4.3.3 The Butterworth filter type and the rest parameters such as order and cut-off frequencies. 
In some cases where the magnitude of the earthquake is moderate to strong and the event 
epicentre is near the research area, it is possible to proceed to the analysis without using 
filters because the SNR is sufficient enough to distinguish the phase arrivals. Most times, 
due to the long period marine noise and anthropogenic high frequency noise of the HSNC 
station location, the filters were mandatory. When filters are applied, the software copies 
and separates the waveforms that have filters by adding brackets with the filter parameters 
(figure 4.3.4).   
Figure 4.3.4 The software copies three components for each station, the raw waveforms are on the upper part 
while on the lower are the ones with the applied filters. 
4.3.4 Phase picking procedure 
Before the phase picking procedure, a visual inspection of all stations could give a good 
idea and help the analyst to understand approximately where the epicentre is and 
approximately how strong it is. The closer the earthquake is to a station the shorter the 
length between P and S phases is. The magnitude estimation is analogous to the number of 
station where the event is recorded. The second stage of the manual analysis is the phase 
picking. Selecting to work with the stations that contain a seismic signal with good signal 
to noise ratio makes the hand-picking routine easier. Visually, the P-wave arrival is 
characterized by a significant amplitude exceeds of the background noise which can be 
used for a probabilistic phase picking (Diehl, et al., 2011). Aiming to accurately define the 
beginning of the P-phase, the waveform is zoomed to a 2-5 seconds time window that 
contains a part of background noise in the left side, about in the middle is the P-wave 
arrival while in the right side are the rest of the P-phases (reflections-refractions). The P-
waves phase picking needs an additional attention in the case of large magnitude 
earthquakes. Usually the software that is used to inspect the waveform tries to fit the whole 
amplitude of the waveform on screen. In this instance, it is possible that the arrival of P-
waves could look like background noise due to scaling. A custom scaling should be used to 
stretch in a vertical sense the waveform in order to carefully inspect it.  In addition, in the 
case where a filter is applied, it will be helpful for the analyst to compare the two 
waveforms to ensure that there are no significant changes in the shape of the waveform 
(figure 3.3.5). 
Figure 3.3.5 The seismic signal with (down) and without filters(up) is inspected for alterations in the 
waveform shape form the filter application. 
The same routine is followed to mark the S-phases but this time the picking procedure has a 
certain degree of difficulty because the S-wave arrival is overlapped by the P-wave coda  
(Woessner, et al., 2010; Diehl, et al., 2011). Based on my analyses and teaching experience, 
I have determined that there is a time window that it is easier for analysts to separate the P-
wave coda with the S-wave arrival. The time window is not the same for every earthquake, 
it depends on the length of the earthquake recording and usually it can be identified by 
selecting to focus in the waveform area just a couple of seconds before the primary waves 
of the earthquakes and a few seconds after the point where the maximum amplitudes of the 
secondary waves have arrived (figure 4.3.6). This zoom technique creates a time window 
where on the left side there is a part of the background noise, the P-wave arrival, in the 
middle there is a part of the P-wave coda and the beginning of S-waves while on you right 
side there are the maximum amplitudes. Visually, the S-wave arrival is characterized by 
larger amplitudes, the waves period increases, and the shape of the recorded waves 
becomes less edgy.  
Figure 4.3.6 The zooming techique,a window that contains the P and S wave maximum amplitudes 
that helps to identify the different phase arrivals. 
The first stage of phase picking procedure is complete when in all the available the phase 
arrivals stations have been marked. The first attempt to find the epicentre and calculate the 
rest of the earthquake parameters can be carried out by executing the build in location 
algorithm. In the COMPASS software, in the Location menu, there is a GUI solution for 
using the epicentre location software in an easy way (figure 4.3.7). Most options of the 
Hypocenter Location window, are predefined by the developer. The only customizable 
features in the upper right part of windows (Settings and Limits) are minimum and 
maximum search depth, the azimuthal distance between epicentral and the nearest station to 
the event as well as the two available travel time tables. For the HSNC monitoring area of 
the South Aegean, the typical limit values for search depth are from 0 to150 kilometres and 
from 0 to 15 degrees delta from the first station. In some cases, when it is necessary to 
constrain the solution (not suitable crust model) and increase the quality of the solution, the 
values 0 to 120 kilometres in depth and 0 to 12 degrees in distance are used. When clip 
limits are set, there is only one pushbutton to calculate the earthquake parameters. In the 
left upper part of Hypocenter Location window in the Statistic tab, there are the 
channels (components) that have been used for phase picking. Usually based on seismic 
waves motions, the P arrivals are marked on Z component as they are better recorded in 
this channel, while the S arrivals on the other two horizontal ones. Next to them are the 
time residuals that are derived from phase picking, these depend on settings and the 
earthquake solution. There is the distance in Delta and kilometres from epicentre on the 3rd 
column while the 4th column Phase denotes which phase was picked by the analyst. The 
Phase column can be compared with the 1st column Channel to ensure that there is not a 
phase picked in wrong component by mistake. On the left lower part of the window 
Solution Result there are the calculated seismic parameters: origin time, latitude and 
longitude depth, while inside a parenthesis next to each parameter are the estimated errors. 
The phase picking time residuals should be as small as possible but due to the limited 
control of the software parameters, the acceptable errors for the preliminary analysis should 
be less than 1 second (figure 3.3.7). In case a channel presents an error with higher than 
the expected value, then the picked phase is re-examined. There are a few possible reasons 
capable of increasing the time residuals associated error. Excluding the primary factor, the 
human mistake, it is very often to have errors caused by a not so suitable crust model for 
the investigating area.  In some of these cases, the errors in phase picking can be close or 
above the 1 second. A relocation procedure with more accurate crust model and an 
algorithm with adjustable parameters might fix these time residuals and improve the quality 
solution. Another not so common problem but sometimes very difficult to understand, is a 
problem caused by a malfunctioning GPS. As the time accuracy of the recordings is 
dependent only on the GPS, an internal error in the chipset can cause a delay in the 
timestamp error and a drift in the timeseries. This case is identifiable only with trial and 
error method while the only solution to fix the seismic parameter estimation was to remove 
the phases from the problematic station. 
Figure 4.3.7. The GUI hypocenter solution window. On the upper part are the phases with the 
corresponding time residuals while on the lower part are the calculated earthquake parameters 
with the associated errors in parenthesis.   
A final technique to check the quality of the marked arrival times, which is independent of 
the travel time tables, is the Wadati diagram (Wadati, 1933) presented in figure 4.3.8. The 
plot is constructed by using the velocity ratio of Primary waves against the Secondary 
waves (VP/VS) for each station.  The dependent axis represents the travel time difference of 
the S and P waves (tS - tP) while the independent one has the time difference between P 
travel time and origin time (tP - t0) according to: 

0
+ 1                (4.1) 
The Wadati plot assumes the medium has one homogeneous layer but it is also valid for a 
multilayer case as long as the velocity ratio is constant (Hurukawa, 2012). This linear 
fitting is sensitive to border values and may indicate wrong information, so it is better to 
use it when there is a sufficient number of stations. The stability of the fitting will increase 
when the sensors are evenly distributed in different distances from the epicentre. Ideally for 
close distance events, there is the assumption that the velocity ratio equal with 1.73. The P 
and S wave velocities are correlated with the elastic constants such as the Young's modulus 
the Poisson's ratio the bulk modulus, the rigidity modulus the Lame's constant and the 
density (Sheriff, 1984): 
                (4.2) 
The Poisson ratio  for the crustal rocks may vary from 0.20 to 0.35, a typical value is the 
0.25 which is also observed as mean value for the Mesozoic-Cenozoic orogenetic belts 
(Zandt & Ammon, 1995). In the REF TEKs software the velocity ratio for  = 0.25 is 
represented with the green line while with black dashed lines are the best fitting based on 
observed arrivals and the observed arrivals combined with the origin time. The typical 
values for the velocity ratio in the South Aegean region based on the literature varies from 
1.65 to 1.80 (Hatzfeld, et al., 1990).  Hatzfeld et al. research in western part of the Hellenic 
arc Wadati plots suggest a VP/VS=1.780.02 (Hatzfeld, et al., 1990). Two years later, the 
De Chabalier et al. work for western Crete present similar results as they have calculated a 
velocity ratio 1.80 (De Chabalier, et al., 1992). Papazachos and Nolet have used a mean 
VP/VS=1.75 for their nonlinear tomography in the Hellenic arc (Papazachos & Nolet, 1997) 
and the same ratio have been used by Meier et al. to obtain the 1D velocity models for 
western and central Crete (Meier, et al., 2004). Nikolintaga et al. have used the first HSNC 
station recordings to obtain the 1D crust models for the South Aegean, their Wadati plots 
suggest a velocity ratio equal with 1.78 (Nikolintaga, et al., 2007). The same ratio has been 
used by Becker et al. to obtain the 1D velocity models for central Crete with recordings 
from permanent stations as well as ocean bottom seismometers (Becker, et al., 2010).    
figure 4.3.8.  The Wadati plot, the green line is VP/VS 1.73, the different colour dots are the velocity 
ratio of each station. 
4.3.5 Magnitude estimation 
The two largest seismological networks in Greece (HL,HT) are reporting all the events with 
the local magnitude (ML) which is based on S waves maximum amplitudes and the 
moderate-large events with moment magnitude (Mw) which derives from seismic moment. 
The HSNC also reports all events in local magnitude, whereas the moment magnitude is 
estimated with spectral analysis and it used only for strong-large events. To calculate local 
magnitude of the located event, an emulation is required to make all the available types of 
sensors look like the original standard seismograph. The COMPASS software has a list of  
transfer functions, that are designed to use the response files to change the raw waveforms 
from the original recorder to a standard type sensor, in this case a typical Wood Anderson 
seismometer is selected. The software has an option to control the signal to noise ratio level 
of the transformed waveform with a Hs(f)/Ha(f) Db ratio derived by subtracting the 
frequencies of the complex part of the transfer function from the standard instrument 
against the corresponding one of the original recorder. In the new emulated waveforms 
(figure 4.3.9) the local magnitude is calculated by selecting the maximum amplitudes on 
the S wave part of the earthquake with the hand tool (figure 4.3.10). The magnitudes are 
calculated for each station that has been previously used for S wave phase picking. The 
reported local magnitude of the event is defined as the average value of all the magnitudes. 
Since in the magnitude marking procedure it is required to find the maximum amplitude in 
the waveform and define the stations  instrument type, the whole process seems to be 
easier and faster than the phase picking. The software has 3 options for the sensor transfer 
functions, with A  denoting the short period instruments, C the broadband sensors while the 
middle period seismometers are noted with B (figure 4.3.10). 
Figure 4.3.9. The original recordings are emulated to look like that they are from a typical wood 
anderson seismomter and they appears in the list with the [EMU_WOOD_ANDERSON] brackets. 
Figure 4.3.10. The hand tool selection of the maximum amplitudes as well as the type of insturment 
The only difficulty that requires some attention and knowledge on the local site conditions 
magnitude calculation procedure, is that sometimes it is possible to have uneven results 
between the stations values. An example is when the distance between a station and the 
epicentre is too close due to the local magnitude estimation relationship. Approximately, in 
the moderate or large events with station-epicentral distance less than 30-40 km the local 
magnitude scale gets saturated and the determined magnitude is underestimated while for 
smaller in magnitude events, the underestimation occurs in shorter epicentral distances and 
it is possible to have negative magnitudes for very small magnitude and short distance 
events. An example is from 12/10/2013 mainshock (aftershocks also have the same 
problem) where the closest station KNDR tend to present considerable smaller local 
magnitude, 5.2 while the same time the average value from the rest of the stations is 6.2 
(figure 4.3.11a). The only solution to fix this problem was to keep the P and S arrival times 
and exclude the magnitude estimation for this station in the whole aftershock sequence. In 
some other cases the magnitude can be overestimated, especially when the stations are 
located on a hard rock with an overlaid layer of soft sediments. This is possible due to the 
different site effects caused by the seismic velocity contrasts that could amplify the seismic 
wave amplitudes. Such a case is noticeable on PRNS station that has a constant 
overestimation in magnitude for the 16/04/2015 mainshock and aftershocks, the local 
magnitude estimation (figure 3.3.11b) is considerable higher (6.95 average value of the 
station) compared to the rest of the stations which have an average value of 6.0. 
a)     b)   
Figure 4.3.11 a) A magnitude underestimation example from 12/10/2013 mainshock. b) A 
magnitude overestimation example from the 16/04/2015 mainshock 
Aiming to have a good estimation of the local magnitude, it is necessary to examine all the 
reported magnitudes to check if there is a trend and avoid having magnitudes values with 
large variations. As criterion for good reporting magnitudes the HSNC has a rule to keep 
magnitude values with a deviation of  0.3 of the mean magnitude which is determined 
after careful inspection of all the event parameters. In addition, to avoid using stations with 
constant reporting problems, there was a personal communication with the former network 
operator Ilias Papadopoulos that helped to understand which stations of the HSNC and the 
other collaborating seismic networks have magnitude reporting problems.   
4.3.6 Evaluation of HSNC reporting Magnitude  
The HSNC could be characterized as a relatively young network as it has been operating 
for less than 15 years (compared to other networks that operated in the Greece area such as 
the NOA since 1840 (Brief Historical Note - NOA, 2018) and the AUTH since 1976 
(History of the Department of Geophysics - AUTH, 2018). Although the network is 
relatively new, a lot of effort has been made from its personnel to keep up with the latest 
ideas and standards of the seismological networks. Despite the continuous hard work to 
increase the quality of the seismic network, most of the seismic stations have not been 
installed in ideal sites (underground vaults or inside boreholes) due to the limited amount of 
funds. Most of the HSNC sensors have been placed in the basement of unoccupied or low 
activity buildings (figure 4.3.12). 
Figure 4.3.12. The HSNC sensors installed in empty of low anthropogenic activity building. Images 
from the TMBK(a), KNDR(b), CHAN(c) and KTHR(d) stations.  
 The initial idea for this cost-effective choice relays on the assumption that these kinds of 
installation conditions are more than enough for estimating the earthquake parameters. This 
hypothesis is not approved by everyone, an anonymous referee from Chatzopoulos, et al., 
2016 work was interested in the magnitude reporting process and he/she asked for an 
evaluation of the reporting magnitudes values. Aiming to ensure the quality of the HSNCs 
computed magnitudes, 1500 same event magnitudes from the two aftershock sequences of 
2013 have been compared to the reported magnitudes of the two largest seismological 
centres in Greece, the NOA and AUTH (figure 4.3.13).     
Figure4.3.13 The local magnitude calculated from manual solutions of the HSNC versus the local 
magnitude of the NOA (left plot) and the AUTH (right plot). A least square line was fitted in each of 
the available dataset. In both cases a slight overestimation is observed.   
Typically, the HSNC is using the moment magnitude scale only for strong or major 
magnitude events. An additional effort to investigate the magnitude reporting quality of the 
HSNC stations has been carried out by calculating the Mw for moderate and strong events 
using only the HSNC stations and compare it with the moment magnitude results obtained 
from the NOA manual solutions catalogue.  The estimation of Mw for the strong and 
moderate events has been carried out with the Seisan earthquake analysis software ( 
EARTHQUAKE ANALYSIS SOFTWARE-SEISAN, 2018).  The seismic moment is 
correlated with the moment magnitude with the Kanamori relation (Kanamori, 1977; Hanks 
& Kanamori, 1979). The seismic moment 0 has two possible ways to be calculated, the 
spectral analysis and the waveform inversion (Stork, et al., 2014). The spectral analysis 
option has been adopted for this framework with the use of Brunes source model (Brune, 
1970). The stress drop can be found by fitting manually 3 points to separate the 
displacement spectrum in two linear parts. There is also the automatic fit option which 
seems to be more reliable from the manual fit when the residuals of the automatic spectral 
fit are less than 0.2 (Ottemller, et al., 2017). An example of the stress drops estimation 
with spectral fit is presented in figure 4.3.14. The upper curve is the signal spectrum while 
the lower one is the noise spectrum the f0 is the corner frequency that separates the 
displacement spectrum in two flat response areas. 
Figure 4.3.14 The automatic fit of the stress drop in the displacement spectrum is used to calculate 
the seismic moment which relates to the moment magnitude with the Kanamori 1977 equation. 
For the time period between the end of 2015 and the mid of 2017, the 30 most well 
recorded events from the vicinity of the South Aegean were selected to calculate the 
moment magnitude.  The comparison of the calculated moment magnitudes against the 
ones that have been reported from NOA are presented in figure 4.3.15. The results suggest 
that there is a small overestimation in larger than 5.0 magnitudes while at the same time 
there is an inadequate underestimation in the rest of the magnitude range.  
Figure 4.3.15 The moment magnitudes calculated with the HSNC stations versus the one reported 
from the NOA. 
4.4 Relocation Process  
4.4.1 The reasons to use relocation techniques   
Since its first operations the HSNC has adopted REF TEKs commercial software to define 
the initial seismic parameters. Although the software is easy to learn, user friendly and 
suitable for marking seismic wave phases, it has some limitations. One of them is that for 
the location procedure, as it uses a locator which relays on the difference between 
theoretical and picked arrival times. Normally this is not wrong with an appropriate travel 
time table but the provided regional model in the software has a generic crust model for 
subduction zones and this is not the most suitable for the Hellenic Arc. The manual 
preliminary results have a certain degree of accuracy, but this is not satisfactory for the 
HSNC which focuses on monitoring the seismically active front of the Hellenic Arc. 
Although the Hellenic subduction zone created by the convergence of the Eurasian  
African lithospheric plates, has all the typical characteristics of an ocean-ocean plate 
convergence regime, there are some challenging tectonic, morphological and geological 
settings that make the investigation more difficult. Along the boundary area, the subducting 
slab can be divided into two different segments as they have different dipping angles 
(Papazachos, et al., 2002). Geologically the South Aegean region and especially Crete, is 
characterized by continuous nappe units which construct a non-uniform material 
(Mountrakis, 1986; Kilias, et al., 1999) with different velocity layers. In addition, along the 
inner part of the Hellenic Arc there is a extensional stress field with the normal faults that 
started acting in the mid Quaternary and that formed the deep sedimentary basins 
(Papazachos, et al., 1999; Piper & Perissoratis, 2003) which add a low velocity layer in the 
upper crust. Therefore, the application of a general subduction velocity model will not fit 
well with the available data. A possible solution to increase the spatial resolution of the 
earthquake parameters is to have several local models dedicated for specific areas. Another 
obstacle is that the crust model file of the REF TEKs software is compiled in binary 
format, so it is difficult to be modified without the necessary software-developer 
knowledge.  
Aiming to satisfy the need for increased accuracy in earthquake parameters, more 
sophisticated and customizable earthquake location software has been adopted. On the one 
hand there are the linear iterative methods (will address them in section 4.4.2) while on the 
other hand the recent studies suggest the use of 3D velocity models with non-linear location 
algorithm such as the NonLinLoc (Lomax, et al., 2000; Husen & Smith, 2004; Latorre, et 
al., 2016). The nonlinear locators need more computational power (which is not a problem 
nowadays) and they dont depend on the initial solution compared to linear methods 
(Husen & Hardebeck, 2010). A major drawback of using the non-linear methods is the lack 
of a detailed 3D model. In cases where a 3D grid velocity model has not been calculated, 
the software has an algorithm that creates one based on the available 1D models. Someone 
can argue that the linear iterative methods have similar techniques to use multiple 1D crust 
files like a 3D.  
The 1D velocity models main disadvantage is that they are not suitable for large areas 
because of the possible inhomogeneities and lateral variations of the velocity (Husen, et al., 
2003). Considering the following assumptions, that the research area is small in size with 
no complex structures and large velocity changes, like the area constrained by the events of 
an aftershock sequence around a fault, then in this case the relocation procedure will have 
pretty similar results either by using a linear location method with a 1D model or by 
adopting a nonlinear algorithm with 3D model constructed from many 1D crust files.  
4.4.2 The relocation software   
A series of earthquake location software based on Geigers iterative least squares linear 
method (Geiger, 1912) with similar characteristics have been published by USGS (Klein, 
2002). Some of the well-known locators are the Hypo71 (Lee & Lahr, 1972), the 
HYPOELLIPSE (Lahr, 1989) and the Hypoinverse-2000 (Klein, 2002). The Geigers 
method assumes an arrival time function (Maochen, 2003): 
(, , , ) =  +
(  )
2 + (  )
2 + (  )
2        (4.3) 
The , ,  are the coordinates of the hypocentre while the  , ,  are the coordinates of 
the ith seismometer,  is the seismic wave velocity and  is the origin time. The 4.3 
equation is solved with the use of partial derivatives: 
0
 ()
2+()
2+()
  with  = , ,   and 
= 1.   (4.4) 
The quality of the solutions relay on the partial derivatives, the trial location as well as the 
applied constrains (Husen & Hardebeck, 2010). Another popular software from USGS is 
the HypoDD which try to estimate the travel time difference for pairs of earthquakes that 
have been recorded from the same stations (Waldhauser, 2001). In this method the 
reliability of the solution depends on spatial distribution of the earthquakes as it works 
better for close distance events as well as the location accuracy of the primary event of the 
pair (Husen & Hardebeck, 2010).  
In this research, the Hypoinverse-2000 location software has been used as the primary 
software to create relocated aftershock sequence and swarm catalogues. Most researchers 
use the HypoDD after the Hypoinverse-2000 relocation to achieve better results. Taking the 
small relocation errors from the Hypoinverse-2000 results into account as well as the 
spatial distribution of the aftershock (see Chapter 5.2), I decided not to use the HypoDD 
software. 
4.4.3 The relocation files and parameters.   
The Hypoinverse-2000 uses a number of input files. A brief description of them as well as 
the purpose and the available adjustable parameters based on the manual follows (Klein, 
2002): A typical run needs the phase file, the crust model, the station file and optionally the 
control file. All the input and output files have ASCII format. The phase file contains 
information about the phase arrival times, each phase picking which has been recorded in a 
station, it is written in a separate line. This kind of files also contains the direction of the 
first motion, the maximum peak to peak amplitude and its period and some weights for 
each phase. The control files have all the three letter commands that define the input-output 
files, the data format, the limits of the acceptable values as well as other options that are 
needed for running the program.  Some of the parameters were common for all the 
relocation procedures. The velocity ratio was set to 1.75 after examining the Wadati 
diagrams (see subchapter 5.2). The distance weighting of each station was set to start from 
the 4th iteration with cut off distance 100km. The distance weighting function is a cosine 
taper, the parameters that control the tapered window was 1 and 2, which means the 
stations with 2 * 100 distance doesnt receive weight while the ones between 100 and 200 
receive reduced weight. This option ensures that the contributing sensors to the relocation 
process have small epicentral distances. As the distance of a station-epicentre increase, the 
seismic waves attenuate, the signal becomes weaker in terms of signal to noise ratio and the 
waveform becomes longer as the P-S interval increase due to the S wave velocity which 
makes the phase picking harder. Moreover, the seismic rays from distant events may pass 
from different formations, layers that have other velocity and thickness values from the 
examined area. The same type of tapered function applies for the phase residuals in order to 
remove phases with high timing errors. The root-mean-square residual cut off was set as 2 
while the window length constants was 1 and 2. The initial values for distance and RMS 
residual weighting have been obtained through personal communication with the network 
operators of NOA and AUTH, and some small changes were applied after several tests on 
the results. The initial trial depth has been found with the trial and error approach. The 
accepted trial depth values were selected by the one that produce the smallest relocation 
errors and did not stuck the events to a specific layer of the crust model. 
 A special attention is given to the station files that contain information like the stations 
coordinates, altitude and the station delay errors. The Hypoinverse assumes that the earth is 
flat with no elevation, in order to take the lateral velocity variations and elevation delaying 
effect into account, the phase delays should be included in the station file. In each 
relocation case to fix the station timing errors, several events (50 to 100 depends on the 
available dataset) with the smallest errors and the largest number of phases have been used 
to define the station timing residuals. The events that participate in station error corrections 
must have the most accurate coordinates and gathered in a limited volume. Typically, these 
criteria are satisfied with the mainshock and the largest aftershocks because these events 
have been recorded in large distances with many P and S phases. The events that have been 
recorded with many phases from different distance stations, are more constrained and they 
are less independent in the velocity model. The station calibration process is achieved with 
a Fortran program that calculates the station timing errors. The script finds the origin time 
from the Wadati plots which mean that it is independent from the velocity model and then 
calculates the new observed travel times. The new travel times are compared with the 
theoretical ones in order to estimate that station corrections (Karakostas, et al., 2012). This 
procedure requires to run the Hypoinverse-2000, relocate the events, execute the station 
correction algorithm, apply the station corrections and start from the beginning the same 
procedure until the new obtained station corrections are very small 0.02 second. If the 
station corrections did not become inadequate after a series of iterations, then the software 
cannot converge to a solution so there is a problem in the crust model or in the picked 
phases.  
The crust file has two columns, one with the speed of P waves in km/sec and one with the 
thickness of the layer where the speed remains unchanged. In the literature there are the 1D 
crust models, the most recent are provided from the work of Meier, et al. (2004) for the 
western, southwest and southern Crete and the work of Becker, et al. (2010) for the central-
eastern part of Crete. To obtain more updated crust models, that have been used for 
relocation of the 15/06/2013 and 12/10/2013 aftershock sequences, a personal 
communication was established with Professor Karakostas V. from AUTH who has 
extensive experience in relocation techniques. The provided crust models (table 4.2) are 
from Meier, et al. (2004) but they have been modified by Professor Karakostas and they 
have been published in Chatzopoulos, et al. (2016) and Papadimitriou, et al. (2016). 
Table 4.2 The modified crust that has been used to relocate the 15/06/2013 and 12/10/2013 
aftershock sequences. 
Vp (km/sec) Depth (km)   Vp (km/sec) Depth (km) 
4.6 0   4.2 0 
5.4 1   5.7 1 
5.7 2.5   6.3 3 
6 5   6.4 8 
6.1 8   6.45 12 
6.2 11   6.5 20 
6.3 15   6.8 25 
6.6 20   7.3 30 
7 25   7.9 33 
7.5 30       
The Hypoinverse has a number of commands and files that are used to control the 
magnitude estimation. These options have not been used as the magnitudes that have been 
calculated with the REF TEK software and the Figure 4.3.13 results suggest that the 
magnitude estimations are pretty accurate. 
4.4.4 VELEST software 
In 2016 a swarm sequence occurred in the onshore part of western Crete. The sequence 
lasted about two months with having a considerable number of minor and moderate events. 
The events first location has been carried out with REF TEKs commercial software, but 
there was an obstacle for the relocation procedure. In the specific area, there were no 
records for similar type of swarm behaviour and a 1D crust model did not exist. In the 
literature there were some tomographic researches (Makris, et al., 2013; Kokinou, et al., 
2006) that could get a general idea for the interior of this area in order to derive an 
approximate velocity model, but this solution did not give any satisfactory results.  The 
station corrections keep increasing after several tries and the events after relocation stuck to 
specific velocity layers.  Instead of trying to establish a rough crust model based on the 
literature, the already proposed 1D models (Meier, et al., 2004; Chatzopoulos, et al., 2016; 
Papadimitriou, et al., 2016) for the neighbour areas have been tested. The new results were 
better than the first attempt, the horizontal and the time residual errors were small, but the 
vertical ones were considerable large. The next step was to create a 1D model with the 
VELEST version 3.3 software (Kissling, et al., 1995). The VELEST has two different 
modes, the single and the joint event solution. The second mode is used to estimate a 
minimum 1D model by taking the time residuals into account. The software is trying to 
minimize the residuals for a set of events by continuous inversion of the hypocentres, the 
station corrections and the velocity model in each iteration.  
The software parameters and options are the same provided by (Kissling, et al. (1995) user 
manual and the procedure to derive 1D models is well descripted in (Kissling, et al., 1994).  
The only parameters that have been adjusted were VELADJ from 0.2 to 0.1 which is 
responsible for the changes in the velocity model in each iteration as well as the ZADJ 
from 5 to 1 which controls the depth change in each iteration. These adjustments have been 
applied to increase the detail in the converge procedure as the 1D model estimation have 
been completed with more and smaller steps. The first relocation has been carried out with 
Hypoinverse-2000 software, the 1D crust model was the same for 12/10/2013 western 
Crete. The 462 events with the smallest relocation errors have been converted to VELEST 
phase file format with a MATLAB script. An algorithm to transform the file did not exist 
and for the purpose of this thesis one was created and provided in appendix (hyp2velest.m). 
The selected events have horizontal errors less than 1.7km and depth errors less than 3km. 
The input 1D model was the same one used in the first relocation. A series of simultaneous 
five iteration inversion with the use of the coupled hypocentre method have been 
completed before the 1D model with the smallest time residual error was derived. All the 
new 1D models as well as the best solution, have been used in Hypoinvese-2000 to carry 
out the second relocation.  Numerical results of the strongest events relocation errors before 
and after the use of model calculated from VELEST as well as the 1D velocity model are 
presented in the 5.2.4 subchapter. 
Chapter 5 Results 
5.1 Foreshock patterns  
5.1.1 Theoretical Model  
The large earthquake organization patterns that exhibit faults with scaling properties 
described by a self-organized criticality model (Bak & Tang, 1989; Bak, et al., 2002) as 
well as the recent work on earthquake properties with Tsallis entropy (Tsallis, 2009; 
Vallianatos, et al., 2015; Vallianatos, et al., 2016), were the motivation to apply the non-
extensive statistical physics approach to the earthquake occurrence. A theoretical model 
that explains the energy concentration and release in the crustal rocks has been proposed in 
section 3.1.2. The new model is a result of jointed theories, the classical first principles 
approach with the energy conservation laws that has been combined with the non-extensive 
statistical physics. Based on the NESP and the Tsallis entropy, a framework that produces 
the collective pattern of seismicity has been introduced to describe the macroscopic 
behaviour of the complex seismic systems that present strong correlations among their 
elements. 
Summarizing the results from the proposed model in subchapters 3.1.2 and 3.1.3: In 
existing published work (Bowman, et al., 1998; Varnes, 1989; Bufe & Varnes, 1993; 
Bowman & King, 2001), a power law time-to-failure equation has been used to describe the 
cumulative energy release before significant earthquakes (3.1.1b):  
() =   (  )
   where    =
The analytic expressions of the energy flow and storage inside the stressed crustal volume 
during the earthquake preparation stage demonstrate that the earthquake subvolumes 
follows a fractal distribution.  The non-extensive statistical physics approach shows that the 
entropic index q is correlated with the subvolumes and it is bounded by the Euclidean 
dimension  of the deformed system which leads to the equivalent equation (3.1.21a): 
() =   (  )
The  is equal with    for the time of failure as  =  , while the B and the critical 
exponent for the proposed model is (3.1.21b and c): 
(+1)(0)
(+1)
(1)+1
  = (  1  ) + 1   
Taking the Gutenberg-Richer law, Kanamori energy-magnitude relation and Kagan number 
of events-energy equations into account, the relation between b-value and entropic 
parameter q is derived (3.1.25): 
For a fractal dimension  = 
  and by taking the equation 3.1.25 into account, the 
critical exponent becomes (3.1.26): 
 = 1 +  (
   1 ) 
An analytic expression that connects the critical exponent  of the power law time-to-
failure model with the Tsallis entropic parameter  and the  value of Gutenberg  Richter 
law has derived. Moreover, according to the equations (3.1.21c):  = (  1  ) + 1  
the critical exponent is independent of the  (01) which have been used in the definition 
of the generalized Benioff strain (). The  is controlled by the Euclidean dimension 
 of the deformed system and the entropic parameter q which as a measure of long range 
interactions and of the complexity of the system. This leads to the conclusion that for the 
accelerated crustal seismicity patterns an   0.3 should exist for all  (01). To 
validate the aforesaid assumption, the critical exponent was tested with real numerical 
examples from South Aegean (see section 5.1.2).   
The upper and lower bound of the parameters  and  created according the geometrical 
limitations, the positive definition of m and the condition of the system (accelerating with 
<1 or decelerating with   >1). Based on the range of the  and the  values that could 
drive the system into an accelerating stage and to failure, the precursory variations of  as 
resulted by any precursory -value anomaly proposed by Wang (2016) is explained.  
It is proved in section 3.1.3 that mean generalized Benioff rate during the accelerated  
period  (3.1.34): 
 3  4  
 refers to the generalized Benioff strain rate during the linear part.  
While if the    then (3.1.35): 
   
    
Based on the literature, the associated average generalized Benioff strain rate during 
accelerating period connected with the background seismicity rate and a model to estimate 
the expected magnitude of the main shock has been proposed (3.1.38) and (3.1.39): 
log [
1/2
) ] +
41/2
log (
)  3.13    
 =
log [
1/2
) ]  3.13.       
The calculations based on Tsallis entropy and the energy conservation law, gives a new 
view on the empirical scaling laws. The results of the proposed model in section 3.1.2 and 
3.1.3 connect the empirical law parameters of the time-to-failure power-law expression 
with a unified theoretical framework based on the ideas of non-extensive statistical physics. 
5.1.2 Numerical results  
In 2013 and 2015, three strong earthquakes with moment magnitude range from 6.0 to 6.4 
and the associate foreshocks/aftershocks have been occurred in the west, east and central 
part of the Hellenic subduction zone (figure 5.1.1). The proposed theoretical model has 
been tested with two real event catalogues: the Thales and the revised catalogue of NOA. 
The Thales catalogue used for the 2013 events only since it contains no data for the 
subsequent years. The time period before the strong events was examined for precursory 
seismicity patterns using the concept of the common critical exponent in the excitation 
period.  
Figure 5.1.1 The three strong events occurred in 2013 and 2015 in the South Aegean (map data are 
managed in ArcGIS (Esri, 2018). 
The new code written in MATLAB programming environment (see section 3.3.2) was used 
to scan the South Aegean area for accelerating seismic crustal deformation. In the new GUI 
scanner, the fitting algorithm solves the power law equation with a non-linear regression 
approach which gives a better and smoother fitting in the Benioff strain, seismic energy 
release and number of event curves as it is described in section 3.3.2. In the same section it 
is described the accres.m function that has been used to filter and inspect the seismicity 
pattern results. Aiming to define the geographical area and time window (t = t  ) 
where the accelerated seismic release pattern is well identified, the aforesaid criteria 
mention in section 3.3.3 have been applied. The first couple searches have been carried out 
with a 0.1 square grid, this value was reduced to 0.05 for the areas where a seismic pattern 
has been identified. Setting the search grid half of the proposed in literature size, helped to 
have an increased spatial resolution. This method produced more accurate and better power 
law fitting results. Before every large event a time window where the critical exponent  
  0.3 for 01 has been point out. Aiming to increase further the detail of the results, 
the search grid was reduced to 0.01. The new results have even lower curvature parameter, 
most times better correlation coefficient and more accurate estimation of the critical time. 
An example from the 12/10/2013 seismicity pattern identification is illustrated in figure 
5.2.2 where the detailed search with 0.01 grid, identified a better solution.  
Figure 5.1.2 a) The results obtained by fitting a 16 km radius circle in the grid point 23.10, 35.15 
and b) the result from a 15km radius circle in the point 23.12, 35.15. 
The summary of the parameters that produce the optimal results such as the starting-ending 
time, the minimum magnitude, the maximum depth as well as the size and centre of the 
circles that have used in the successful seismic pattern identification are presented in table 
5.1.1. Most times, close to the best results grid point, there are solutions with slightly 
worse power law fitting, but with acceptable identification criteria. These happen because 
the search shape and size does not approximate exactly the critical region and by moving 
the search circle it includes or excludes some events.  Small diameter expanding circles 
have been used separated the accelerated  decelerated seismic patterns in the deformed 
region.  
Table 5.1.1 The parameters that defined the accelerated seismic pattern. 
15/06/2013 18/01/12 24/05/13 15 40 2.7 25.04 34.83 29 Thales 
12/10/2013 04/01/11 21/09/13 15 40 2.7 23.12 35.15 49 Thales 
16/04/2015 16/01/11 06/04/15 14 40 2.5 27.47 35.46 26 NOA 
In order to find the seismic pattern starting point, the trial and error method have been 
carried out up to 10 years before each mainshock. The 15/06/2013 case was an exception in 
the aforesaid approach because a previous strong event limited the search catalogue.  
According to the NOA revised catalogue, near the 15/06/2013 epicentre (34.336, 25.063 
and depth 31.8km) there was another large event in 01/07/2009 with comparable magnitude 
(ML=5.8) and coordinates (34.350, 25.400 and depth 30km) while the focal mechanisms 
were almost the same. These limited the search for the 15/06/2013 seismic pattern starting 
The figures 5.1.3, 5.1.7 and 5.1.11 present the accelerating seismic crustal deformation 
results with the use of the new software for the 15/06/2013, 12/10/2013 and 16/04/2015 
strong events respectively (see section 3.32). In each figure, from (a) to (c) there is the 
different critical exponent result: number of events, Benioff strain and seismic energy 
release respectively.  On the maps, the different coloured squares are the grid points with a 
successful solution while the red star denotes the large events. These squares are the centre 
of the search circles and their colour is based on the values denoted on a scale bar next to 
the map. The main map which in the right side, present the filtered results while the two 
small ones on the left side of the singleton are the unfiltered curvature and critical exponent 
values. These figures have been compiled using the 0.01 square grid for the whole vicinity 
of the South Aegean. As it is noticeable for all study cases, the results for the energy 
exponent  for ( = 1) are limited compare to the other two exponents. This happens 
because it is more difficult to have a good power law fitting for the energy exponent as the 
magnitude difference of the events increase much more the fitting distance between them.  
Figures 5.1.4, 5.1.8 and 5.1.12 illustrating the results obtained from the main maps (5.1.3 
figures), focused in the critical area. The inspection of the curvature- exponents results: 
number of events (a), Benioff stain (b) and seismic energy (c) suggest that there is a 
common area where the aforesaid criteria are satisfied. The events that satisfy the 
parameters from the table 5.1.1 for the foreshock seismic patterns are illustrated in figures 
5.1.5, 5.1.9 and 5.1.13 while the power law fittings for the different critical exponents are 
presented in figures 5.1.6, 5.1.10 and 5.1.14.  
In the first strong earthquake (15/06/2013), the critical region has been identified north of 
the mainshock epicentre. The excitation period was quite narrow; the power law has 
optimal fitting with an about 1.5-year time window. The Benioff strain optimal fitting is 
slightly overestimating the critical time, ten days later while the seismic energy release 
underestimates the critical time by 8 days. The second strong event (12/10/2013) has a 
more stable power law fitting with more events, lower curvature compared to the first one 
and the critical area (located at SSE) is closer to the epicentre. The preparation period was 
more than 2.5 years and the Benioff strain and seismic energy release fitting give a critical 
time few and 1 days respectively later than the actual critical time. The last strong event 
(16/04/2015) has a very good Benioff strain power law fitting, the estimated critical time is 
1 day later while the seismic energy fitting underestimates the critical time by 11 days. The 
preparation period was about 4.2 year and this seismic pattern was identified with almost 
the minimum events. 
Figure 5.1.3a) The scan results of the accelerating seismic crustal deformation for  = 0 energy exponent before the 15/06/2013 mainshock. On 
the left panel there are some search statics as well as the filters that have been applied in the main map. 
Figure 5.1.3b) The scan results of the accelerating seismic crustal deformation for  = 1/2 energy exponent before the 15/06/2013 mainshock. 
On the left panel there are some search statics as well as the filters that have been applied in the main map. 
Figure 5.1.3c) The scan results of the accelerating seismic crustal deformation for  = 1 energy exponent before the 15/06/2013 mainshock. On 
the left panel there are some search statics as well as the filters that have been applied in the main map. 
Figure 5.1.4 The filters application in the curvature parameter, critical exponent and power law 
fitting correlation coefficient for the 15/06/2013 foreshock results. The red box denotes the centre 
of the circle where the common critical exponent has the optimal fitting. 
Figure 5.1.5 The epicentres of the earthquakes that identified as the15/06/2013 strong event 
foreshocks. (figure obtained from Zmap). 
Figure 5.1.6 The power law (red) and the linear (black) fitting of events (blue circles) for  =
0(a), =1/2 (b) and =1 (c) (See section 3.3.2). 
Figure 5.1.7a) The scan results of the accelerating seismic crustal deformation for  = 0 energy exponent before the 12/10/2013 mainshock. On 
the left panel there are some search statics as well as the filters that have been applied in the main map. 
Figure 5.1.7b) The scan results of the accelerating seismic crustal deformation for  = 1/2 energy exponent before the 12/10/2013 mainshock. On 
the left panel there are some search statics as well as the filters that have been applied in the main map. 
Figure 5.1.7c) The scan results of the accelerating seismic crustal deformation for  = 1 energy exponent before the 12/10/2013 mainshock. On 
the left panel there are some search statics as well as the filters that have been applied in the main map. 
Figure 5.1.8 The filters application in the curvature parameter, critical exponent and power law 
fitting correlation coefficient for the 12/10/2013 foreshock results. The red box denotes the centre of 
the circle where the common critical exponent has the optimal fitting. 
Figure 5.1.9 The epicentres of the earthquakes that identified as the 12/10/2013 strong event 
foreshocks. (figure obtained from Zmap). 
Figure 5.1.10 The power law (red) and the linear(black) fitting of events (blue circles) for  =
0(a), =1/2 (b) and =1 (c) (See section 3.3.2) 
Figure 5.1.11a) The scan results of the accelerating seismic crustal deformation for  = 0 energy exponent before the 16/04/2015 mainshock. On 
the left panel there are some search statics as well as the filters that have been applied in the main map.  
Figure 5.1.11b) The scan results of the accelerating seismic crustal deformation for  = 1/2 energy exponent before the 16/04/2016 mainshock. 
On the left panel there are some search statics as well as the filters that have been applied in the main map. 
Figure 5.1.11c) The scan results of the accelerating seismic crustal deformation for  = 1 energy exponent before the 16/04/2016 mainshock. On 
the left panel there are some search statics as well as the filters that have been applied in the main map. 
Figure 5.1.12 The filters application in the curvature parameter, critical exponent and power law 
fitting correlation coefficient for the 15/06/2013 foreshock results. The red box denotes the centre of 
the circle where the common critical exponent has the optimal fitting. 
Figure 5.1.13 The epicentres of the earthquakes that identified as the 16/04/2015 strong event 
foreshocks (figure obtained from Zmap). 
Figure 5.1.14.  The power law (red) and the linear(black) fitting of events (blue circles) for the 
different critical exponents (See section 3.3.2). 
An attempt to evaluate the equations 3.1.38 and 3.1.39 and estimate the magnitude of the 
critical events based on the critical exponent and the seismicity pattern durations has been 
made. Considering the first event of each catalogue, which is presented in table 5.1.1, is 
approximately the point where the deviation from linearity starts (t = t  ) and the last 
event is the time  1 =   1. Taking equations (3.1.38), (3.1.39) and the values from 
table 5.1.1 into account, an estimation of the expected minimum and maximum magnitudes 
of each foreshock sequence is presented on table 5.1.2. 
Table 5.1.2 The expected large event magnitudes estimated from equation 3.1.38 and 3.1.39 
Case Mw Mm Mmax 
15/06/2013 6.0 5.31 5.88 
12/10/2013 6.4 5.58 6.23 
16/04/2015 6.1 5.7 6.55 
The maximum magnitude values for the Thales catalogue fitting result are close but they 
slightly underestimate value compared to the ones that have already occurred. In 
comparison, the NOA catalogue results are within the limits of the expected minimum and 
maximum magnitude. These estimations may vary as there is an uncertainty in the starting 
point of the seismicity pattern and the shape of the critical area.  The average Benioff strain 
value that has been used is for the whole Greece area, but it is possible that it may vary for 
the South Aegean region. The critical exponent has a crucial role in the final expected 
calculations which emphasize the importance to have an as possible as accurate calculation.  
5.2 Aftershocks and swarm sequences in South Aegean 
Two strong earthquakes with magnitude greater than 6.0 occurred in the vicinity of Crete 
Island in 2013 (figure 5.1.1). The first results of these two aftershock sequences have been 
published in (Chatzopoulos, et al., 2016). Since then, a more detailed analysis has been 
carried out and the results have been re-examined in order to improve the quality of the 
data. In the meantime, in the beginning of 2016, an onshore swarm sequence appeared in 
the western part of the island. All the events of the aforesaid sequences have been manually 
located and relocated by the author of this thesis.  
A particular effort has been made to produce complete and good quality catalogues to be 
able to analyse the spatiotemporal properties of these events. In these datasets, the classical 
seismological investigation such as Gutenberg-Richer and Omoris law, histograms and 
focal mechanism have been applied as well as the innovative theories of the non-extensive 
statistical physics.  
5.2.1 The 15/06/2013 aftershock sequence 
The first strong event with moment magnitude Mw = 6.0, occurred in the front of the 
Hellenic Arc on 15 June 2013 at 16:11:02 Universal Time Coordinated (UTC). The 
epicentre of the mainshock was located on longitude 25.045E and latitude 34.317N while 
the depth was estimated as being shallow at about 14 km (figure 5.1.1). The location of the 
earthquake was offshore, south from central Crete and the distance from nearest town 
(Tympaki) was about 85 km. A second moderate to strong earthquake with moment 
magnitude Mw = 5.8 occurred approximately 29 hours after the mainshock on 16/06/2013 at 
21:39:05 UTC.  The location of this large event has coordinates 25.092E and 34.239N, it 
was south-southeast from the mainshock while the depth of the hypocenter was shallow 
about 6.1 km. The mainshock was followed for more than 515 recorded aftershocks in a 
time period of about 23 days. In figure 5.2.1, the time histogram was set to present the daily 
rate of events with the starting point being the time of the mainshock. In the time interval 
between the strong and the second moderate-strong event, more than 210 aftershocks 
occurred, with the magnitude ranging from micro (1.92.9) to light (4.14.8), with a 
considerable number of events in minor range (3.03.9). About 24 hours after the moderate 
Mw 5.8 event, there was a sharp decrease in the aftershock rate. About 370 aftershocks 
occurred during the first 48 hours while the remaining approximately 145 events were 
distributed in a period of about 21 days. 
Figure 5.2.1a) In the diagram there is the time histogram that present the daily rate of the 
aftershock sequence after the 15/06/2013 strong event. b) The cumulative curve of the 15/06/2013 
aftershock sequence, the yellow stars denote the large events with moment magnitude Mw= 6.0 and 
5.8 (figures obtained from Zmap). 
The examination of the cumulative curve in figure 5.2.1 shows that the second large event 
noted as the yellow star near the 180th event, increased the rate of aftershocks as there is a 
small slope change in the curve. This is an indication that the second large event triggered 
another aftershock sequence. The slope of the curve has a noticeable change approximately 
in the 450 events, where the rate of cumulative numbers becomes slower until the stop of 
the sequence. In figure 5.2.2a the magnitude histogram is presented while in the b) there is 
the depth histogram. The distribution of the magnitudes suggest that the majority of the 
events had micro to minor magnitudes while the light magnitude events were limited. The 
aftershock sequence magnitudes have a normal distribution, a little skewed to the right and 
the model magnitude values are the 2.4 and 2.6. The depth histogram shows that the data 
are also normally distributed with a little positive skewedness. The majority of the events 
have been reported in depth between 4 and 17km which is near the depth values of the two 
large events (7 and 14km). 
Figure 5.2.2a) the magnitude and b) the depth histogram of the 15/06/2013 strong earthquake and 
its aftershock sequence (figures obtained from Zmap). The red lines indicate the depth of the two 
largest events. 
The magnitude versus depth and versus time are illustrated in figure 5.2.3. The a) figure 
shows that the magnitudes are well distributed in the whole depth range and there is no 
pattern that could suggest an error in magnitude estimation. Some of the events are in zero 
depth, these happens if there are not enough P and S phases or there is a problem in the 
phase picking procedure (one or more phases have picked wrong due to bad signal to noise 
ratio) or the velocity model in not suitable for this shallow depth. The 5.2.3b diagram 
shows that the maximum magnitude tend to decrease with time.  
Figure 5.2.3a) The magnitude versus depth diagram and b) the magnitude versus time diagram of 
the 15/06/2013 aftershock sequence. The circles colour and the size change with magnitude.   
Aiming to understand if this second large event is an aftershock or a new activation, the 
Omoris law, the focal mechanism of the fault as well as some other statistical parameters 
were examined. First, the catalogue was spatially and temporally limited to contain only the 
main event and the aftershocks. The Magnitude of completeness has been estimated Mc = 
2.4 with the use of best combination option in Zmap software as explained in section 3.2.1 
with 50 times bootstrapping without using the mainshock (figure 5.2.4a) and without using 
mainshock and the second largest event (figure 5.2.4b). The large events have been 
removed from these catalogues in order to examine only the aftershock characteristics. The 
b-value of the Gutenberg-Richer law for the aftershock sequence is 0.77 which might 
indicate that the aftershock sequence may have not fully released the accumulated energy 
(Peng, 2011). Typical b-values for aftershocks in the Aegean region as it is noted in section 
2.1.5, have mean value 1.0 0.2 (Kourouzidis, 2003). The magnitude of completeness has 
been used to limit the catalogue and apply the modified Omoris law. The first attempt to 
define the decay parameters for the whole aftershock sequence did not have the expected 
typical values. The fitting was poor with a large root-mean-square value almost 18 and the 
p parameter had very high value p = 2.67 compared to the typical values for aftershocks 
(see in section 2.1.7). The same fitting applied on the aftershocks after the 16/06/2013 Mw = 
5.8 event.  
Figure 5.2.4a) The Gutenberg- Richer law fitting without the mainshock obtained from the best 
method in Zmap software as descripted in section 3.2.1.  b) The same fittings  without the 
mainshock and the second largest event (figure obtain by zmap). 
In the second attempt the application of the modified Omoris law was considerably better, 
the fitting RMS was about 5.0 and the obtained p-value = 1.16 which is typical for 
aftershock sequences. The p=1.16 indicates a relative slow decay which is in agreement 
with the time histogram and the cumulative number of events (figure 5.2.1) as after 48 
hours there is a significant decrease daily rate. 
Figure 5.2.5a) the modified Omoris law fitted for the whole aftershock sequence and b) the same 
fitting for the aftershocks after the 16/06/2013 Mw = 5.8 event. (figures obtained from Zmap) 
The mainshock as well as the spatial distribution of the aftershocks are presented in figure 
5.2.6. In the same figure there are also the fault plane solution of the mainshock as well as 
the trace of the two cross sections. 
Figure 5.2.6 The spatial distribution of the 15/06/2013 aftershock sequence, the moment tensor of 
the mainshock and the trace of the two cross sections the strong and moderate magnitude events 
are denoted with a star while the smaller events indicated by circles. The size and the colour of the 
circles or the stars scales with the magnitude (map data are managed in ArcGIS (Esri, 2018)). 
The HSNC does not calculate focal mechanism yet, so the provided focal parameters are 
from the manual solution (NOA, 2018) of the NOA network (HL/National Observatory of 
Athens Seismic Network, 2018), the Global Centroid-Moment-Tensor (CMT, 2018) which 
follows the method descripted in (Dziewonski, et al., 1981; Ekstrm, et al., 2012) and the 
Helmholtz Centre Potsdam GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences (GFZ, 2018). 
The table 5.2.1 has the double couple solution for the strongest events of the 15/06/2013 
sequence. 
Table 5.2.1 The fault plane mechanism form the NOA, CMT and GFZ centres. 
Event Magnitude  
Strike 
Strike 
author 
15/06/2013 6.1 246 27 52 107 69 109 NOA 
15/06/2013 6.3 235 7 100 100 85 95 CMT 
15/06/2013 6 244 16 66 88 76 96 GFZ 
15/06/2013 4.4 282 11 -87 98 79 -91 NOA 
16/06/2013 5.8 301 74 -117 183 31 -32 NOA 
16/06/2013 6 222 7 20 112 87 97 CMT 
16/06/2013 5.8 216 13 17 110 86 103 GFZ 
18/06/2013 4.5 300 47 -118 158 50 -63 NOA 
19/06/2013 4.7 298 54 -139 181 58 -44 NOA 
19/06/2013 4.8 310 74 -114 189 29 -34 GFZ 
The focal mechanism solution of the mainshock in respect with the NOA and GFZ 
parameters and the aftershocks distribution has the fault plane solution with strike 245 
while for the dipping angle it is suggests being less than 30 degrees. According to fault 
plane and the section 2.1.3 this in not a typical reverse (dip=45 and rake=90), the smaller 
dip value 27 shows a fault type between thrust and reverse. If the dip is calculated by the 
cross section in figure 5.2.7, it is approximately 35 degrees, so it is more like a reverse 
fault. The rake59 that means the fault type is mainly reverse with a left lateral strike slip 
component (dip=90 and rake=0). The large activation that occurred 29 hours later than the 
mainshock, according to the NOA moment tensor occurred in a normal fault with a strike 
slip component while the global CMT and GFZ suggest a reverse fault. The largest 
aftershock fault plane solutions according to NOA and GFZ are on normal faults. This 
subject is examined in discussion. 
The cross sections are used to inspect the vertical distribution of the events. They are 
usually set to be parallel and perpendicular to strike of the fault in order to show the 
geometrical characteristics. In figure 5.2.7 the cross section that is vertical to the strike is 
presented. The location of the large events as well as the hypocentres of the aftershocks 
placed on the fault plane surface indicate the dipping angle of the fault. According to the 
figure 5.2.7, the dip is estimated about 35 degrees which is in good correlation with the 
moment tensor provided by the NOA seismic network.  The actual value is very difficult to 
obtain as the fault is not pure reverse, it has a strike slip component which makes the 
earthquake distribution more scatter in the vertical cross section. According to the spatial 
distribution of the events, there is only one large fault that have been activated during this 
aftershocks sequence. In figure 5.2.8 which is the parallel to strike cross section, the 
hypocentres of the aftershocks shape the fracture surface of the fault in the sense of the 
rake. The cross-section images have been adjusted to have as possible as equal vertical and 
horizontal dimensions, so the presented image is more realistic. 
Figure 5.2.7 The perpendicular to the strike cross section that reveals the vertical spatial 
distribution of the 15/06/2013 events as well as the fault geometry (figure obtained from Zmap). 
The black line denotes the dip of about 33-35 degrees. 
Figure 5.2.8 The parallel to the strike cross section that reveals the vertical spatial distribution of 
the 15/06/2013 events as well as the fault geometry (figure obtained from Zmap). The black line 
denotes the direction of rake. 
 The absence of events in the edge of the cross-sections, the very clear spatial limits is 
artificial as the earthquakes that were far from the fault were removed. The width of the 
cross sections is 15km. The fault parameters such as the length L , the width W and the 
rupture area S can be estimated from the moment magntitude (see section 2.1.3). According 
to these equations, the rupture length of the mainshock should be about 11km and the width 
of the fault about 9.5km. The NOA has created a digital fault database for the Greece area 
based on the available publication since 1972 (Ganas, et al., 2013). The faults of the 
southern part of central Crete are presented in figure 5.2.9. An attempt to correlate the fault 
parameters of the large earthquake with one of the recorded faults has been made.  
The two large events and the strongest aftershock from the HSNC catalogue as well as the 
same two large events from NOAs revised database has been placed on the map. The 
location of the orange pin with the number two inside (Mw =5.8) and the faults geometry 
from cross section in figure 5.2.7, suggest that the fault highlighted yellow colour is likely 
the one that has been activated. The relocated results of the HSNC catalogue appears to 
match to the fault GR0173 with length 10.43km obtained from Mascle, et al., 1982 which 
is similar with the results (11.3km) from  Thingbaijam, et al., 2017 equations, but the fault 
type is not very clear as the image quality from the original puplication is low. 
Figure 5.2.9 The recorded faults from NOA database denoted with red lines (Ganas, et al., 2013). 
The orange pins are the epicentres of the three largest events from the HSNC aftershock sequence 
catalogue while the green ones are from the revised solution of NOA for the 15/06/2013 event. The 
numbers on the pins denotes the order of appearance (data processed in Google Earth (Google, 
2018)). 
The relatice recent PhD thesis of Shaw (2012) mention that in these area,  there are shallow 
depth (<20km) splay reverse fauls with steep diping angle more than 30 degrees, which is 
very similar with the numbers provided from the 15/06/2013 vertical to strike cross-section. 
In order to relocate the main event as well as the aftershocks, it was necessary to calculate 
the velocity ratio VP/VS. The ratio is obtained from the slope of the Wadati diagram 
(Wadati, 1933). A script in MATLAB has been used to read the Hypoinverse-2000 input 
phase file and compute the velocity ratio for every event. Aiming to have a reliable mean 
velocity ratio, a filter has been added in the script, so the mean VP/VS been calculated with 
all the event that have been recorded in at least six stations. The arrival times have been 
normalized by the software based on the minimum P arrival time of each event, so they 
could plot in the same Wadati diagram (figure 5.2.10) and the mean velocity ratio for the 
15/06/2013 aftershock sequence is 1.7487  1.75. 
Figure 5.2.10 The Wadati plot for the 15/06/203 events that have been recorded in more than six 
stations. The mean velocity ratio has been estimated 1.7487. 
One of the important steps in the relocation procedure is to fix the station correction which 
will help to reduce the lateral velocity variations and the possible elevation delaying 
effects. During the station corrections estimation procedure, it is possible to identify 
corrections with values much higher than one second. In this case, either the station is too 
far from the epicentre, or there is a problem in the picked arrival times, or the crust model 
does not fit well. The final station file that has been used to relocate the 15/06/2013 events 
is presented in table 5.2.2. The correction applied in the relocation procedure appears to 
have typical values. The stations close to epicentre have small correction while the stations 
with much bigger distance like KNDR and CHAN have increased values. The relocation 
process results can be validated with the visual inspection of the spatial distribution of the 
earthquakes by doing cross sections also with numerical examination of the relocation 
associated errors. The root-mean-square error of the time residuals as well as the horizontal 
and vertical errors should be as low as possible. The errors of the ten strongest events are 
presented in table 5.2.3.  
Table 5.2.2 the Hypoinverse-2000 station file input file with the calculated station corrections for 
the 15/06/2013 relocation. 
Stations Latitude 
(Degrees) 
Longitude 
(Degrees) 
Altitude 
Station  
Correction (sec) 
ZKR 35 06.88N 26 13.02E 270 0.17 
TMBK 35 04.35N 24 45.97E 10 0.26 
GVDS 34 50.60N 24 03.49E 178 -0.15 
PRNS 35 20.67N 24 25.58E 232 0.03 
STIA 35 12.12N 26 05.45E 31 0.05 
KSTL 35 12.54N 25 20.25E 176 -0.06 
FRMA 35 01.12N 25 51.33E 10 -0.07 
KNDR 35 14.09N 23 37.49E 25 0.45 
HRKL 35 18.69N 25   6.10E 90 0.04 
CHAN 35 31.15N 24   2.55E 34 0.45 
Table 5.2.3 The relocation errors of the 10 largest events of the 15/06/2013 sequence.   
Date Time Magnitude 
Depth 
(sec) 
Horizontal 
error (km) 
Vertical 
error (km) 
15/06/2013 16:11:02 6.0  14.08 0.18 0.5 0.7 
16/06/2013 21:39:05 5.8  6.13 0.23 0.6 0.8 
16/06/2013 21:43:17 4.9 13.51 0.30 0.9 0.9 
19/06/2013 19:05:09 4.8 10.93 0.20 0.6 0.6 
18/06/2013 22:27:07 4.6 15.56 0.22 0.7 0.6 
16/06/2013 21:47:36 4.5 9.46 0.30 1.2 1 
22/06/2013 8:50:15 4.5 5.3 0.29 0.8 1 
15/06/2013 16:59:38 4.4 24.88 0.30 1.1 1.8 
16/06/2013 21:42:42 4.4 13.71 0.25 0.8 0.7 
16/06/2013 8:15:18 4.2 15.67 0.19 0.6 0.7 
The non-extensive statistical physics q parameter has been calculated to examine the 
temporal characteristics and scaling relations of the 15/06/2013 aftershock sequence. The 
distribution of the time differences between two continuous earthquakes is known as 
interevent time   and it is defined as:   = (j)   ()  where  =  + 1 and  is the 
number of the event. It has been proposed by Abe & Suzuki (2005); Michas, et al. (2013); 
Papadakis, et al. (2013); Vallianatos, et al. (2012) that in an earthquake population with 
consecutive event, the cumulative distribution of the spatiotemporal properties such as the 
interevent times and hypocentral distances can be explained by non-extensive statistical 
physics. More specific the cumulative distribution frequency (CDF) of the interevent times 
P(>T) or hypocentral distances can be described by a q-exponential distribution. In the Abe 
& Suzuki (2005); Michas, et al. (2013); Papadakis, et al. (2013); Vallianatos, et al. (2015); 
Tsallis (2009) work, it is demonstrated the method to maximize the entropy Sq with the 
Lagrange multipliers in order to obtain the q-logarithmic function: 
(> ) = [1 + (  1)
 [(> )] = (1  )
1(1  1) = 
while the  is a q-scaling factor. This function has been used in the 15/06/2013 aftershocks 
cumulative interevent times distribution ( > ). 
The interevent times of the aftershocks has been calculated, converted into cumulative 
interevent times along with the cumulative distribution which has been used as an input in 
for the nlinfit solver in order to estimate the  parameter. The method is 
straightforward: define the magnitude of completeness, remove the events that have smaller 
magnitudes than the Mc, select the aftershocks time window and use the cumulative 
distribution to obtain the -exponential function parameters. As Abe & Suzuki (2005) 
demonstrated, the -exponential parameters  and Tq depend on magnitude, the Magnitude 
of completeness has a crucial role in the estimation of the  entropic parameter. The q is 
larger than 1, which means that system is under-additive this has been noted before by 
Papadakis, et al. (2013); Michas, et al. (2013); Chochlaki, et al. (2018); Abe & Suzuki 
(2005); Vallianatos, et al. (2012). The q>1 means that the frequent interevent times that 
with large probability (close to 1) are enhanced as the aftershock sequence decays. A 
challenge to identify the length of the aftershock time window occurred. As the aftershock 
sequence decays with time, the last couple days the frequency-time distribution of the 
events becomes very small. In this case the exact time point where the sequence end can be 
unclear as the aftershocks are mixed with the background seismicity. In order to define the 
limit of the aftershock catalogue, different dates have been tested. During this procedure, it 
was noticed that the -value had large variations dependent on the selected time window.  
Aiming to validate if the -variations are data artefact; the magnitude of completeness has 
been re-calculated after 50 and 100 events from the end of the catalogue have been 
removed. The GR-law fit in figure 5.2.11 show that the b-value and the Mc haven not 
change in a way that could explain the dependence of the  with time. The new findings 
have been also examined with the expanding and the moving windows methods. In the 
expanding windows approach, different combinations window sizes and techniques such 
remove events from the ending point or from the starting point have been applied. The 
results from the normal expanding windows method are presented in the figure 5.2.12, 
where the time windows are having the starting point fixed, the beginning of the catalogue 
and the ending point is up to 260(a), 280(b), 300(c), 320(d), 340(e) and 360(f) events.  On 
the contrary, in figure 5.2.13 it is presented the reverse method, having fixed the end 
point, the events have been removed from the beginning of the catalogue and the number of 
remaining events are 340(a), 320(b), 300(c), 280(d), 260(e) and 240(f). In order not having 
the same window in these two methods, in the reverse mode the first window (1 to 360) 
was excluded from the search. In the figure 5.2.14 are the results from the moving window 
approach. A large window with 180 events have been selected to be statistically stable and 
have an as much possibly as accurate fitting while the overlap window was small, 25 events 
due to the limit of the catalogue. The results in the presented figures have very small fitting 
error values which are less than 0.0018 with 99% confidence. The correlation coefficient 
has been calculated with the same command in MATLAB as in section 3.3.2. 
Figure 5.2.11 The magnitude of completeness and the b-value for the 15/06/2016 aftershocks after 
removing 50 (a)and 100(b) events respectively (figures obtained from Zmap). 
Figure 5.2.12. The normal expanding time window results for 260(a), 280(b), 300(c), 320(d), 
340(e) and 360(f) events: a) q=1.400.0055 up to 0.0125, b) q=1.430.0048 up to 0.0107, c) 
q=1450.0055 up to 0.0118, d) q=1.550.0055 up to 0.0115, e) q=1.630.0052 up to 0.0106, f) 
q=1.810.0049 up to 0.0099. 
Figure 5.2.13. The reverse expanding time window results for 340(a), 320(b), 300(c), 280(d), 
260(e) and 240(f) events: a) q=1.860.0039 up to 0.0081,b) q=1.890.0029 up to 0.0060, c) 
q=1.900.0022 up to 0.0048, d) q=1.950.0020 up to 0.0044, e) q=2.060.0040 up to 0.0177, 
f) q=2.080.0041 up to 0.0177. 
Figure 5.2.14. The moving time window results, the window moves 25(a), 50(b), 75(c), 100(d), 
125(e) and 150(f) events : a) q=1.380.0051 up to 0.0137, b) q=1.450.0034 up to 0.0091, c) 
q=1.670.0030 up to 0.0081, d) q=1.760.0028 up to 0.0077, e) q=1.930.0029 up to 0.0079, 
f) q=2.150.0036 up to 0.070. 
5.2.2 The 12/10/2013 aftershock sequence  
The second strong event of the 2013 occurred in the western part of the Hellenic Arc on 12 
October 2013 at 13:11:54 UTC with moment magnitude Mw = 6.4. The epicentre of the 
mainshock was located on coordinates 23.242E and 35.21N (figure 5.1.1). In contrast to the 
first event of 2013, this hypocenter was estimated in intermediate the depth about 47 km. 
The location of the earthquake was offshore, west from western part of Crete while the 
distance from the nearest town (Kissamos) was about 45 km. This event has attracted 
interest due to the number of different foreshocks observed (Contadakis, et al., 2015; 
Vallianatos, et al., 2014). The time histogram (figure 5.2.15) as well as the cumulative 
number of events shows that the mainshock was followed by more than 350 recorded 
aftershocks in a time interval of 25 days. The time histogram was set to present the daily 
rate of events with the starting point being the time of the mainshock. It is noticeable that 
only on the first day there was a considerable amount of seismic energy released. About 
half of the aftershocks (170) occurred within the first 24h and after that the aftershock 
activity was low.  
Figure 5.2.15 a) The time histogram that present the daily rate of the aftershock sequence after the 
12/10/2013 strong event. b) The cumulative curve of the 12/10/2013 aftershock sequence, the 
yellow star denotes the large event with moment magnitude Mw= 6.4. (figures obtained from Zmap). 
The magnitude and depth distribution histograms of the 12/10/2013 aftershock events are 
illustrated in figure 5.2.16. The examination of the aftershock catalogue shows that the 
magnitudes range between micro and minor from 1.1 to 3.9, while only three of the events 
had magnitude from 4.0 to 4.1 occurred in the first 48 hours. The aftershock sequence 
magnitudes seem to have a normal distribution a little skewed to the right and the most 
common magnitude values are the 1.8 and 1.9. The depth histogram suggests that most of 
the events have been distributed normally between the 22 and 59 km depth while a large 
portion of the events are at depth shallower than the depth where the mainshock occurred. 
Figure 5.2.16a) the magnitude and b) the depth histogram of the 12/10/2013 strong earthquake and 
its aftershock sequence. The red line indicates the depth of the largest event (figures obtained from 
Zmap).  
The magnitude versus depth and versus time are illustrated in figure 5.2.17. The first figure 
(a) shows that the magnitudes are well distributed in the whole depth range while the 
largest aftershocks are located close to the mainshock and there are no patterns that could 
suggest that there is an error in the magnitude estimation. The second (b) shows that the 
maximum magnitude tends to decrease with time and events with light magnitude occurred 
only the first two days. 
Figure 5.2.17 a) The magnitude versus depth diagram and b) the magnitude versus time diagram of 
the 12/10/2013 aftershock sequence. The circles colour and the size change with magnitude.   
Omoris law has been used to examine the aftershock decay rate. The procedure to find the 
decay rate parameters was the same as the 15/06/2013 sequence (see section 5.2.1). 
Initially, the catalogue was limited spatially and temporally to contain only the main event 
and the aftershocks. The best combination option in Zmap software with 50 times 
bootstrapping estimated the Magnitude of completeness equal to 1.7 (figure 5.2.18). The 
Gutenberg-Richter law b-value of the aftershock sequence is 0.96 which is a typical for an 
aftershocks sequence (see section 2.1.5). The magnitude of completeness has been used to 
limit the catalogue and apply the modified Omoris law. The fitting was very good as the 
RMS was about 5.0 while the obtained p-value was 1.1 which is typical for aftershock 
sequences. The 12/10/2013 p-value is slightly smaller than the one obtained by the 
15/06/2013 sequence which shows the second aftershock sequence had a relative faster 
decay (figure 5.2.19). It is worth mentioning that even though the mainshock was 
considerably larger than the one of the 15/06/2013 sequence, the aftershocks of the 
12/10/2013 were fewer and they had smaller magnitudes which can be attributed to the 
intermediate depth of the mainshock. 
Figure 5.2.18. The best method comparison from the Zmap software has been used to examine the 
frequency magnitude distribution without using the mainshock. The aftershock sequence GR law 
fitting has given b-value 0.96 and the Magnitude of completeness is down to 1.7. 
Figure 5.2.19 the modified Omoris law has been applied to estimate the decay rate parameters for 
the 12/10/2013 aftershock sequence (figures obtained from Zmap). 
The mainshock as well as the spatial distribution of the aftershocks are presented in figure 
5.2.20. In the same figure the fault plane solutions of the mainshock has been placed as 
well as the trace of the two cross sections. The provided focal parameters on table 5.2.4 are 
from the manual solution (NOA, 2018) of the NOA network (HL/National Observatory of 
Athens Seismic Network, 2018), the Global Centroid-Moment-Tensor (CMT, 2018) which 
follows the method descripted in (Dziewonski, et al., 1981; Ekstrm, et al., 2012), the 
Helmholtz Centre Potsdam GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences (GFZ, 2018) 
and Centre Polynesien de Prevention des Tsunamis (CPPT, 2018). 
Figure 5.2.20. The spatial distribution of the 12/10/2013 aftershock sequence, the moment tensor of 
the mainshock (NOA, 2018) and the trace of the two cross sections. The strong event is denoted 
with a red star while the smaller events with circles. The size and the colour of the circles scales 
with the magnitude (map data are managed in ArcGIS (Esri, 2018)). 
Table 5.2.4 The fault plane solutions for the 12/10/2013 mainshock. 
Event Magnitude  
Strike 
Strike  
author 
12/10/13 6.4 50 20 -168 309 86 -70 NOA 
12/10/13 6.2 122 85 54 25 36 171 CPPT 
12/10/13 6.7 119 87 88 340 3 130 CMT 
12/10/13 6.5 128 84 96 262 8 44 GFZ 
Studying the table 5.2.4 it clear that there are some fault plane solutions with considerable 
differences between the reported fault plane solutions. To determine which is the most 
representable for the 12/10/2013 case, cross section the spatial distribution of the events 
have been examined (figures 5.2.20, 5.2.21 and 5.2.22). The strike of the faults is about 120 
(or 300) degrees, based on the location of the epicentres. If the angle of dip is calculated 
using graphical manner from the cross section in figure 5.2.21 which presents the cross 
section that is vertical to the strike, then it is estimated being around 80 degrees. 
Figure 5.2.21 The perpendicular to the strike cross section that reveals the vertical spatial 
distribution of the 12/10/2013 events as well as the fault geometry (figure obtained from Zmap). 
The black line denotes the dip around 80 degrees. 
Figure 5.2.22 The parallel to the strike cross section that reveals the vertical spatial distribution of 
the 12/10/2013 events as well as the fault geometry (figure obtained from Zmap). The black line 
denotes the direction of rake. 
In the vertical to strike cross section it is noticeable a possible second fault which will 
addressed in the discussion. According to figure 5.2.22 the spatial distribution of the events 
indicates a rake direction about 45-50. The CPPT fault plane solution explains better the 
focal mechanism so the fault is a reverse with a left lateral component (see section 2.1.3).   
The cross-section images have been adjusted to have as possible equal vertical and 
horizontal dimensions, so the presented image is more realistic. The absence of events in 
the edge of the cross-sections, the very clear spatial limits is artificial as the earthquakes 
that were far from the fault were removed. The width of the cross sections is 15km. 
According to equations from Thingbaijam, et al. (2017)  the fault length should be about 
17.3km while the width 13.1 km. An attempt to correlate the fault parameters of the large 
earthquake with one of the recorded faults in the NOA digital fault database has been made. 
In the area where the large event the strongest aftershock was occurred (figure 5.2.23) there 
is a fault (GR0265) that had similar parameters (length, strike and mechanism). Based on 
the Mascle, et al. (1982) work, this is a reverse fault is a about 19.7km which is very 
similar to the results obtain from Thingbaijam, et al. (2017) work. 
Figure 5.2.23 The registered faults in the NOA database (Ganas, et al., 2013) denoted with red lines 
while with yellows is likely the one that has been activated. The epicentres of the strong event of the 
12/10/2013 sequence is marked with a red pin with a star and its largest aftershock is with the 
yellow pin (data processed in Google Earth (Google, 2018). 
Aiming to relocate the main event as well as the aftershocks of the 12/10/2013 sequence, 
the velocity ratio VP/VS was calculated. The ratio is obtained by the same procedure as for 
the 15/06/2013 sequence (section 5.2.1). Wadati diagrams have been plotted with the 
MATLAB script for every event and the obtained mean value has been used in the 
relocation process. The same criteria has been used so that the mean VP/VS has been 
calculated with all the event that have been recorded at least in six stations. The arrival 
times has been normalized so they could plot in the same diagram (figure 5.2.23) and the 
mean velocity ratio for the 12/10/2013 sequence is 1.7459  1.75 
Figure 5.2.23 The Wadati plot obtained from the 12/10/2013 even. The mean velocity ratio has 
been estimated 1.7459. 
The station correction file that has been used to relocate the 12/10/2013 events is presented 
on table 5.2.5. The software that uses Wadati plots to compare the theoretical and observed 
arrival times has produced the station corrections that have acceptable values. Most of the 
stations close to the epicentre have small time correction while the far station such as the 
HRKL, PRNS and VLI have increased values. The root-mean-square error of the time 
residuals as well as the horizontal and vertical errors have very low values. The errors of 
the ten strongest events are presented in table 5.2.6.  
Table 5.2.5 the Hypoinverse-2000 station file input file with the calculated station corrections for 
the 12/10/2013. 
Stations Latitude 
(Degrees) 
Longitude 
(Degrees) 
Altitude 
Station 
Corrections (sec) 
MHLO 36 41.39N 24 24.10E 175 0.31 
GVDS 34 50.61N 24 05.41E 164 0.04 
PRNS 35 21.89N 24 30.09E 51 -0.31 
CHAN 35 31.15N 24 02.55E 34 0.28 
RODP 35 33.37N 23 45.28E 308 0.06 
KNDR 35 14.05N 23 37.29E 10 -0.19 
VLI 36 43.09N 22 56.22E 220 0.32 
KTHR 36 15.64N 23 00.25E 315 0.15 
HRKL 35 18.69N 25 06.10E 90 0.54 
Table 5.2.6 The relocation errors of the 10 largest events of the 12/10/2013 sequence which are 
very small in all cases. 
Date Time 
Magnitude 
Depth 
(sec) 
Horizontal 
error (km) 
Vertical 
error (km) 
12/10/2013 13:11:54 6.2  46.74 0.16 0.7 0.8 
13/10/2013 17:43:52 4.1 47.05 0.15 0.5 0.6 
12/10/2013 13:17:00 4 40.68 0.19 0.7 0.9 
12/10/2013 14:05:51 4 44.2 0.16 0.6 0.8 
19/10/2013 2:19:21 3.9 52.83 0.11 0.6 0.7 
12/10/2013 19:36:26 3.8 48.74 0.13 0.5 0.5 
16/10/2013 13:47:59 3.8 41.17 0.22 0.8 1 
13/10/2013 0:01:24 3.6 33.98 0.13 0.5 0.7 
20/10/2013 4:49:48 3.6 39.88 0.18 0.6 0.8 
12/10/2013 15:27:05 3.4 41.89 0.14 0.7 1 
The non-extensive statistical physics  parameter has been estimated to examine the 
temporal characteristics and scaling relations of the 12/10/2013 aftershock sequence. The 
cumulative interevent times (> ) of the aftershocks has been calculated to estimate the 
. Aiming to examine if there are variations in the Magnitude of completeness and 
Gutenberg-Richter b-value, the frequency-magnitude distributions have been re-plotted 
after removing 50 and 100 events from the end of the catalogue. The GR-law fit in figure 
5.2.24 show that the -value and the Mc have changed after removing 50 events from the 
catalogue. These variations have been considered when the interevent times have been 
calculated. Having in mind the -variations that have been noted in the 15/06/2013 
aftershock sequence, the  value has been computed for different time windows and the 
same techniques as the previous sequence have been applied as in section 5.2.1. The only 
difference is that due to the new Mc value, the catalogue was limited considerably, and the 
window size has been reduced. In figure 5.2.25 there are the results from the normal 
expanding windows method, starting from the beginning of the catalogue and change the 
ending point while in figure 5.2.26 there are the reverse method, having fixed the end 
point and remove event from the beginning. In the figures 5.2.27 are the results from the 
moving window approach. A large window with 150 events have been selected to be 
statistically stable and have an as accurate as possible fitting while the overlap window was 
small, with 20 events due to the limited size of the catalogue. 
Figure 5.2.24 The magnitude of completeness and the b-value for the 12/10/2016 after removing 
50(a) and 100(b) events respectively (figures obtain from Zmap). 
Figure 5.2.25. The normal expanding time window results for 160(a), 170(b), 180(c), 190(d), 
200(e) and 210(f) events: a) q=1.53 0.0023 to 0.0066, b) q=1.69 0.0021 to 0.0060, c) q=1.88 
0.019 to = 0.0053, d) q=2.02 0.017 to = 0.0044 and e) q=2.18 0.0017 to  0.0043 and f) 
q=2.41 0.0018 to  0.0044. 
Figure 5.2.26. The reverse expanding time window results for 200(a), 190(b), 180(c), 170(d), 
160(e) and 150(f) events: a) q=1.95 0.0017to  0.0044, b) q=2.02 0.013 to  0.0037, c) q=2.09 
0.0009 to 0.0025, d) q=2.22 0.0008 to 0.0032, e) q=2.29 0.016 to = 0.0047 and f) q=2.32 
0.0015 to  0.0047. 
Figure 5.2.27.  The moving time window results, time moves 20(a), 40(b), 60(c), 80(d), 100(e) and 
120(f) events: a) q=1.48 0.0027to  0.0080, b) q=1.65 0.011 to  0.0033, c) q=1.88 0.0005 to 
0.0016, d) q=2.04 0.0017 to 0.0051, e) q=2.09 0.014 to = 0.0041 and  f) q=2.24 0.0015 to  
0.0045. 
5.2.3 The 2016 Chania swarm sequence  
A swarm type sequence occurred in the western part of the Crete, with estimated starting 
time based on the first event recorded in this location on 31 January 2016 at 00:00:37 UTC 
with local magnitude ML = 1.7.  The 24-hour recording has been examined for about two 
months before the first event without been able to identify another event in the same zone. 
In the beginning the earthquakes were scattered in time with small magnitudes, not all of 
them have triggered the automatic monitoring system. Due to the small epicentral distance 
from the Chania city, these events have been used as testing material for the new strong 
ground motion networks of the HSNC (Chatzopoulos, et al., 2018). The number of events 
increased rapidly after the 05/03/2016, before this date it was not possible to 
spatiotemporally correlate them with a swarm sequence. The strongest event with Mw =4.6 
has took place before the middle of the of the swarm excitation period on 12/03/2016 at 
12:40:39 UTC. The epicentre was located on longitude 23.599E and latitude 35.366N and 
the hypocentre was approximately 16km deep. The location of the earthquake was on the 
western onshore part of Crete, 15km south-southwest from nearest town (Kissamos). The 
daily rate of events time histogram (figure 5.2.29) as well as the cumulative number of 
events shows that the sequence started with a slow release of seismic energy for the first 35 
days approximately. Afterwards, there was a sharp increase in the cumulative number. 
About 260 events occurred in the six-day period before the main event (Mw 4.6). The 
relaxation was smooth, and about 300 events were distributed evenly within a 14-day 
window. 
The magnitude and depth distribution histograms of the swarm sequence are illustrated in 
(figure 5.2.30). The examination of the aftershock catalogue shows that the magnitudes 
range between micro and minor from 1.0 to 3.9 while there were only three of the events 
that had magnitude above from 4.0. The magnitudes seem to have a normal distribution 
where was slightly skewed to the right and the most common magnitude values were the 
2.0 and 2.1. The depth histogram suggests that most events have been distributed normally 
between the 5 and 30 km depth, while there are some events at an apparent 0 km depth that 
have not relocated properly as explained in section 5.2.1. 
Figure 5.2.29 a) the time histogram present the daily rate of the 2016 Chania swarm sequence. b) 
the cumulative curve, the yellow star denotes the strong event with moment magnitude Mw= 4.6 
(figures obtained by Zmap).  
Figure 5.2.30 The magnitude (a) and the depth histogram (b) of the 12/03/2016 strong earthquake 
and its aftershock sequence. The red line indicates the depth of the largest event (figures obtained 
by Zmap). 
Figure 5.2.31 a) The magnitude versus depth diagram and b) the magnitude versus time diagram of 
the 2016 Chania swarm sequence. The circles colour and the size change as the magnitude 
increases.  
Omoris law has been used to validate if this sequence is a swarm. The decay rate 
parameters have been estimated for the events after the mainshock that occurred on 
12/03/2016. The catalogue was limited spatially and temporally to with the same procedure 
as on the previous aftershocks sequences (sections 5.2.1 and 5.2.2). The Magnitude of 
completeness and the -value have calculated for the whole swam period with the best 
combination option in Z-map software with 50 times bootstrapping as in section 3.2.1. 
These values (Mc and ) were rejected because a new estimation was carried out in the time 
interval before and after the main event, which showed a slight change in estimated 
parameters between the two-time windows. The Gutenberg-Richer law fits for the two-
time windows are illustrated in figure 5.2.32 a and b. The Magnitude of completeness and 
the -value increase from 1.9 to 2 and from 0.92 to 1.09 after the main event. The modified 
Omoris law has been applied to the aftershocks with the new Mc. The fitting was very 
good as the RMS was about 3.3 while the obtained -value was 2.7, which is a very high 
value and not typical for aftershock sequences (figure 5.2.33). The -value in the swarm 
sequences is usually high because aftershocks and swarm events occurs at the same time, so 
the decay appears to be slow (Utsu, et al., 1995). 
Figure 5.2.32 The Magnitude of completeness and b-value before(a) and after(b) the Mw=4.6 event 
12/03/2016 (figures obtained by Zmap).  
Figure 5.2.33 The modified Omoris law fitted has been applied to examine the swarm decay rate. 
The p-value is 2.7 which is an indicator that there are swarm events between the aftershocks of the 
main event (figure obtained by Zmap). 
The main event with moment magnitude Mw=4.6 and the spatial distribution of the swarm 
sequence are presented in figure 5.2.33. In the same figure has been placed the fault plane 
solution of the main event as well as the trace of the two cross sections. According to the 
NOAs moment tensor database the fault plane solution of the mainshock has strike=207 
dip=52 rake=-4 and the other plane has strike=299 dip= 87 rake=-142 (figure 5.2.33). Very 
similar results in terms of strike and rake (205 and -4 respectively) are provided from the 
(HT/Aristotle University of Thessaloniki Seismological Network, 2018) while the dip in 
this case is much steeper (81), so both suggest a left lateral strike slip fault (dip=90 and 
rake=0) with a normal component (see section 2.1.3). 
Figure 5.2.33. The spatial distribution the Chania 2016 swarm sequence, the moment tensor of the 
strongest event and the trace of the two cross sections (NOA, 2018). The strongest event is denoted 
with a star while the smaller events with circles. The size of the circles scales with the magnitude, 
the same occurs for the colour (map data are managed in ArcGIS (Esri, 2018)). 
The swarm events make it difficult to examine and understand the focal mechanism with 
the cross sections. The vertical cross section with all the swarm sequence events suggests 
an incorrect fault plane solution (figure 5.2.34). The catalogue was reduced to have only 
the events after the main earthquake, the new the cross section vertical to strike appears to 
have a dipping angle about 58-60 degrees (figure 5.2.35) 
Figure 5.2.34 The perpendicular to the strike cross section that contains all the swarm events 
(figure obtained by Zmap). 
Figure 5.2.35 The perpendicular to the strike cross section of the Chania swarm limited to only 
show the events after main earthquake. The black line denotes the dip of about 58-60 degrees 
(figure obtained by Zmap). 
The parallel to strike cross section is illustrated in figure 5.2.36, where again the swarm 
events makes difficult to examine the fracture surface and the rake. The catalogue was 
reduced to have only the events after the main earthquake (figure 5.2.37). 
Figure 5.2.36. The parallel to the strike cross section that contains all the swarm events (figure 
obtained by Zmap). 
Figure 5.2.37 The parallel to the strike cross section of the Chania swarm limited to only show the 
events after main earthquake. The black line denotes the direction of the rake (figure obtained by 
Zmap). 
An attempt to correlate the fault parameters of the large earthquake with one of the 
recorded faults in the NOA digital fault database has been made. The main event and three 
of the strongest swarm have been placed on the map (figure 5.2.38) but none of the existing 
fault (red colour) match the focal mechanism. The onshore faults from the hardcopy map 
for the western part of Crete by Mountrakis, et al. (2012) has been digitized and added in 
along with the NOA faults. The number of faults in the western part of Crete is 
considerably higher and for that reason only the ones that were close to the epicentres with 
similar strike have been digitized. According to focal mechanism and the second vertical to 
strike cross section (figure 5.2.35), if the fault plane reaches the surface, that will be about 
8-10 km east of the main event. The only possible fault that that could match the available 
data is noted with blue colour. The first fault on the left side of the Mw 4.6 epicentre is a 
reverse one and the next one on the right is too far away.  
Figure 5.2.38 The registered faults in the NOA database are the red lines (Ganas, et al., 2013), the 
epicentres of the largest events of the swarm sequence are the red pins with square and the number 
next to them is the local magnitude. The main event is the red pin with star and the faults from 
Mountrakis, et al.(2012) work are noted with yellow lines (data processed in Google Earth 
(Google, 2018)). 
In order to relocate the the Chania 2016 swarm sequence, the velocity ratio VP/VS was 
calculated. The ratio is obtained with the same procedure as for the previous aftershock 
sequences. The Wadati diagrams have been plotted with the MATLAB script for every 
event and the mean value have been used in the relocation process. The same criteria have 
been used so the mean VP/VS been calculated with all the event that have been recorded at 
least in six stations. The arrival times has been normalized so they could plot in the same 
diagram (figure 5.2.39) and the mean velocity ratio for the Chania 2016 swarm sequence is 
1.7475  1.75. The clustering pattern in the Wadati plot, where the S-P time differences are 
constrained in specific  values is because the swarm events are located in a small area 
which is very close to the HSNC stations. The P and S travel paths and travel times are 
similar for most events and  they create this image which is reflecting the distance between 
epicenters and stations. 
Figure 5.2.39 The Wadati plot obtained from the 2016 swarm sequence. The mean velocity ratio 
has been estimated 1.74751.75. 
The station corrections that have been used to relocate the 2016 Chania swarm events are 
presented on table 5.2.4. The software that use Wadati plots to compare the theoretical and 
the observed arrival times has been used with the initial crust model which is the same as 
the one used for 12/10/2013 aftershock sequence relocation and it has been used for the 1D 
minimum velocity model obtained from the VELEST software. As far as the station 
corrections are concerned, the values were acceptable for both crust models but for the 
second one seems to be more correct. The station GVDS which is considered to be relative 
close to the swarm epicentres with the first model had large corrections which indicates that 
the model did not fit well as the obtained 1D.  
Table 5.2.4 the Hypoinverse-2000 station file input file with the calculated station corrections for 
the 2016 Chania Swarm. The letters A and B denotes which values are from the old and which are 
from the modified crust model respectively. 
Station 
4 letter 
codename 
Latitude 
(Degrees) 
Longitude 
(Degrees) 
Altitude 
(meters) 
Station 
Corrections 
A (sec) 
Station 
Corrections 
 B (sec) 
GVDS 3450.61N 2405.41E 164 0.41 0.14 
PRNS 3521.89N 2430.09E 51 -0.62 -0.55 
CHAN 3531.15N 2402.55E 34 0.23 0.37 
RODP 3533.37N 2345.28E 308 0.07 0.13 
VLI 3643.09N 2256.22E 220 0.80 0.91 
KTHR 3615.64N 2300.25E 315 -0.05 -0.17 
TMBK 3504.35N 2445.97E 10 0.22 0.20 
A comparison of the 8 strongest events results obtained from initial and the new crust 
model are in table 5.2.5. The relocation associated errors for the second velocity model 
seems to be smaller for the vertical dimensions and the RMS time residuals weighting 
while for the horizontal errors it seems that there is an improvement in some cases. Table 
5.2.6 presents the 10 strongest event relocation errors from the second model which is 
presented along with the original one in table 5.2.7. 
Table 5.2.5 The comparison of the two crust model relocation errors of the 8 largest events of the 
2016 Chania sequence. 
Local 
residuals 
A (sec) 
Horizontal 
Error A 
Error in 
Depth A 
residuals 
 B (sec) 
Horizontal 
Error B 
Error in 
Depth B  
12/03/16 12:40 4.8 0.23 0.6 1.9 0.22 0.5 1.5 
12/03/16 07:49 4 0.23 2.0 0.8 0.23 1.8 0.8 
06/03/16 23:18 4 0.22 0.5 1.2 0.22 0.5 1.1 
12/03/16 15:22 3.9 0.13 0.4 1.1 0.13 0.4 0.9 
09/03/16 8:04 3.9 0.11 0.4 1.1 0.1 0.4 0.9 
07/03/16 14:25 3.9 0.19 0.5 1.4 0.18 0.5 1.1 
13/0316 13:22 3.7 0.19 1.8 1.0 0.18 1.8 0.6 
13/0316 23:26 3.7 0.21 0.6 1.3 0.18 0.5 1.0 
Table 5.2.6 The relocation errors of the 10 largest events of the 2016 Chania sequence.  The mean 
square root time residuals are less than 0.23 seconds, the horizontal errors less than 1.8km while 
the vertical ones less than 1.5km. 
Date Time 
(UTC) 
Magnitude 
Depth 
Rms time 
Residuals  
(sec) 
Horizontal 
error in (km) 
Vertical 
error in 
12/03/2016 12:40:39 4.8 16.31 0.22 0.5 1.5 
06/03/2016 23:18:16 4 20.32 0.22 0.5 1.1 
12/03/2016 7:49:59 4 21.88 0.23 1.8 0.8 
07/03/2016 14:25:15 3.9 17.23 0.18 0.5 1.1 
09/03/2016 8:04:08 3.9 17.95 0.10 0.4 0.9 
12/03/2016 15:22:23 3.9 19.21 0.13 0.4 0.9 
13/03/2016 13:22:58 3.7 22.32 0.18 1.8 0.6 
13/03/2016 23:26:32 3.7 17.97 0.18 0.5 1 
09/02/2016 21:11:14 3.6 22.6 0.21 0.6 0.6 
08/03/2016 18:25:04 3.6 22.49 0.11 0.5 0.3 
Table 5.2.7 The velocity model that has been used in the relocation of the 12/10/2013 aftershocks 
sequence (Vp A)   and the new minimum 1D model derived from VELEST software Vp B. 
Depth (km) 
(km/sec) 
(km/sec) 
0 4.2 4.34 
1 5.7 4.96 
3 6.3 6.20 
8 6.4 6.36 
12 6.45 6.40 
20 6.5 6.42 
25 6.8 6.74 
30 7.3 6.88 
33 7.9 7.95 
The non-extensive statistical physics q parameter has been estimated to examine the 
temporal characteristics and scaling relations of the Chania 2016 swarm sequence. The 
cumulative interevent times (> ) of the events has been calculated in order to estimate 
the q.  The Mc value from figure 5.2.32 b has been adopted. Having in mind the q-
variations that have been noted in the previous aftershock sequence, the q value has been 
computed for different time windows and the same techniques as the previous sequences 
have been applied (sections 5.2.1 and 5.2.2). Figures 5.2.40 provides the results from the 
normal expanding windows method, starting from 200 events, increasing by 25 up to 325 
while in the reverse method presented in figures 5.2.41, from 350 and goes down to 225 
events. In the figure 5.2.42 are the results from the moving window approach. A large 
window with 180 events have been selected to be statistically stable and have an as 
accurate as possible fitting while the overlap window was 25 events. 
Figure 5.2.40 The normal expanding time window results for 200(a), 225(b), 250(c), 275(d), 
300(e), and 325(f) events: a) q=2.02 0.0006 to  0.0017,  b) q=1.87 0.006 to  0.0016, c) q=1.81 
0.0004 to 0.0010, d) q=1.79 0.0004 to 0.0010, e) q=1.83 0.003 to = 0.0006 and f) q=1.84 
0.0003 to  0.0006.  
Figure 5.2.41 The reverse expanding time window results for 350(a), 325(b), 300(c), 275(d), 250(e) 
and 225(f) events:a) q=1.93 0.0004 to  0.0008, b) q=1.78 0.003 to  0.0007, c) q=1.78 0.0004 
to 0.0010,  d) q=1.83 0.0005 to 0.0012,  e) q=1.86 0.006 to = 0.0016 and  f) q=1.90 0.0007 
to  0.0017.  
Figure 5.2.42 The moving time window results, time incresse from up to down: q=2.17 0.0007 to 
0.0019, q=1.74 0.0007 to 0.0021, q=1.64 0.0004 to 0.0011, q=1.670.0004 to 0.0011, 
q=1.72 0.0005 to 0.0014, and q=1.94 0.0008 to 0.0022.  
The results suggest that the q-value has a significant decrease in the time interval after the 
strongest event of the swarm sequence takes place, then starts to increase again. Another 
approach to investigate this observation was to separate the available data in 12-hour time 
windows and examine the temporal attributes of the system before and after the event main 
event instead of having time windows based on the number of the events (figure 5.2.43).  
The forward expanding window has been used with two different starting points. The first 
was from the beginning of the swarm sequence and the second one was from the main 
event towards the end of the sequence. If the events before the largest activation were 
removed and the remaining events were treat as an aftershock sequence, then expanding 
windows suggest that the entropic index increases as the aftershock decays. 
Unfortunately, the first 12 hours after the main event there was not enough data to produce 
an accurate fitting in the q-exponential equation. 
Figure 5.2.43. The distribution of q index with time. The blue line is for the data with starting point 
at the beginning of the swarm sequence, the black vertical line denotes the time of the main event 
while red line is the catalogue with starting point set at the main event.  
Chapter 6 Discussion 
6.1 Seismicity patterns  
This thesis examines the seismicity patterns and provides a foundation between the 
classical physics and the modern ideas of the non-extensive statistical physics. The primary 
focus was to provide a better understanding of the hazard associated with large earthquakes 
in subduction zones. These areas exhibit frequent strong events with large amounts of 
seismic energy release from foreshocks and aftershocks. An effort to understand the large 
earthquake driving mechanism in the complex geotectonic environment of the South 
Aegean has been made with remarkable results. Several important questions mention in 
chapter 1 that could help to understand seismicity and evaluate the hazard associated with 
large earthquakes and their likelihood have been addressed. 
6.1.1 Is there a relationship between foreshock sequences and large 
earthquakes?  
 A considerable number of researchers support the observational based hypothesis, that 
many large earthquakes are preceded by accelerating-decelerating seismicity patterns (see 
section 3.1.1). The increase in the intermediate magnitude earthquake population has been 
linked by various independent researchers with the critical point theory where the large 
event is the end of a preparation process. As seismic energy flows within the fractured 
volume, it is stored in subvolumes which becomes coherently self-organized and leads to 
the large event. There is also an alternative approach which claims that foreshock patterns 
are the result of the stress loading and they does not participate in the large event 
preparation process (see section 2.2.2).  In this point of view, the energy release and storage 
procedures are ignored, and the large earthquakes are a product of the stress loading 
parameters, which limits the hazard estimation process.   
6.1.2 What is the nature of the relationship between foreshocks and 
major events in South Aegean?  
The quantification of the energy release is the cornerstone to understand these phenomena. 
The cumulative Benioff strain, which is equal to the cumulative square root of the seismic 
energy release, has been used to explain the mechanism of the seismicity patterns that have 
been observed before the large events. To estimate the cumulative Benioff strain, an 
empirical power law time-to-failure equation has been proposed by Bufe & Varnes (1993) 
and widely adopted by other scientists (see section 3.1.1).  This method has been applied in 
various cases, mainly as a prediction tool, but not all of the results had the expected 
outcome for several reasons: Since a sufficient physical model did not existed, the power 
law fitting results was filtered by statistic indexes which do not reflect the physical 
mechanism of the earthquake preparation. In addition, the increase in the number and the 
quality of the seismological stations allowed to have more accurate and complete 
catalogues. In order to understand and enhance the predictive capabilities of the accelerated 
seismic release model, different theoretical models and statistical filters have been 
proposed to increase the stability of the power law fitting (see subchapter 2.2). These 
efforts did not make the method stable enough, not many successful predictions have been 
made and the ASR approach has been criticized by Hardebeck, et al. (2008). The last 
couple years some new ideas were proposed by different researchers but without presenting 
a satisfactory model yet. To provide a new perspective to this problem, a theoretical 
framework has been developed (section 3.1.2) which explains with analytical expressions 
of the physical processes of the energy flow and storage in a stressed faulted crustal volume 
can be addressed with the novel ideas of the non-extensive statistical physics (section 
3.1.2).   
6.1.3 Can a generalized model of Tsallis entropy explain the accelerating-
decelerating seismicity patterns in South Aegean?  
The initial motivation to address the seismicity patterns as a fractal distribution and express 
with an analytic approach the seismic energy flow in an under stress crustal volume was by 
the Di Giovambattista & Tyupkin (2001) work. The idea to explain the accelerating seismic 
release with complexity and non-extensive statistical physics comes from Vallianatos, et al. 
(2015) work. As the fault systems and by extension the earthquakes (Mandelbrot, 1983; 
Scholz & Mandelbrot, 1989; Turcotte, 1997), present a fractal distribution the correlations 
between the elements of the fault system are described by long-range dependence effects 
which can be explained by the NESP ideas (Zaslavsky, 1999; Tsallis, 2001; Vallianatos, et 
al., 2018). The power-law time-to-failure equation that has been used to describe seismicity 
patterns, the generalized Benioff strain: () =  
=1  where 0    1, describes a 
fault system that obeys a hierarchical distribution. In the stressed volume, the systems 
subvolumes where the seismic energy is stored also follow a hierarchical distribution. As 
the fractal dimension of the subvolumes is a function of the non-extensive statistical 
physics entropic parameter q, which is a measure of long range interactions and of the 
complexity of the system, the subvolumes distribution in the critical area is controlled by 
the Euclidean dimension. In this case, the analytic expressions in 3.1.3 proves that  is 
defined by the Euclidean dimension and entropic parameter q and it is independent of  
(01). This leads to the conclusion that a common critical exponent  exists as a 
function of the non-extensive entropic parameter q. Since  is independent on the 
characteristic cases: number of events, Benioff stain and seismic energy release, then it can 
be used as a criterion of the power law equation stability. 
6.1.4 What could be the process for assessing the future earthquake hazards in South 
Aegean? 
 The identification of the foreshock patterns has always been a great challenge for 
researchers. The proposed method in subchapter 3.3 can be used as a new tool to estimate 
the hazard relates with future large events. In contrast with the previous versions of this 
method, this one relies more on the physical parameters such as the fractal dimension and 
the existence of a common critical exponent which is a function of the entropic parameter 
q. Although the findings help to estimate the risk in the South Aegean and to be able to 
explain the large earthquake likelihood in the specific area, there are additional aspects that 
need to be better understood. For instance, the center of the circle in each accelerating 
seismic release case presented in section 5.1.2, denotes an approximation of the areas 
where the events are nucleated before the large event. The shape of the search area is 
convenient but does not reflect the physical properties of the stressed volume. Although the 
critical areas were identified successfully, another shape is possible to improve slightly the 
results. Also, an attempt to correlate the geotectonic environment with the stressed area has 
been made. The fault plane solution provided in sections 5.2.1 and 5.2.2 for the 2013 strong 
events, suggests that the activated faults were mainly reverse or thrust. A similar type of 
fault activated in the 2015 strong event. The focal mechanisms provided by the National 
Observatory of Athens (NOA, 2018), the Global Centroid-Moment-Tensor (CMT, 2018), 
and the Helmholtz Centre Potsdam GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences (GFZ, 
2018) suggest a fault with dip between 44 and 74 degrees while the rake is about 120-130 
degrees which is a reverse fault with a right lateral strike slip component. Taking the focal 
mechanisms and locations of the critical areas into account, it is suggested that the 
foreshocks of these three cases were located in the hanging wall side of the faults (figures 
6.1.1 to 6.1.3). Another example of this observation is the 08/01/2006 Kythira Mw 6.4 
strong earthquake. According to (NOA, 2018) the fault plane solution of this event has 
strike=239 dip=49 and rake 79 degrees which was also verified by examining the spatial 
distribution of the aftershocks. The foreshock sequence has been predicted by (Tzanis & 
Vallianatos, 2003; Papazachos, et al., 2002) while the critical areas in both studies are 
located in the western part of the Kythira Island which suggest again that the nucleation 
occurred in the hanging wall of the reverse fault. It is worth to mention that in the 
12/10/2013 study case the foreshock and the aftershocks have a continuity. This suggest 
that the fault which caused the accelerating seismic crustal deformation, is in the same fault 
network with the one where the mainshocks occurred. Probably some of the aftershocks are 
in the fault plane of the foreshock fault. These results demonstrate that the proposed 
method with the common critical exponent criterion, can be used for assessing the future 
earthquake hazards in tectonically stressed areas with reverse faults like the front of the of 
the South Aegean subduction zone. 
Figure 6.1.1 Cross section of the 15/06/2013 aftershocks sequence as well as the foreshocks that 
give the best power law fitting results with the common critical exponent. The brown area 
approximates the subducting plate (figure obtained from Zmap).  
Figure 6.1.2 Cross section of the 12/10/2013 aftershocks sequence as well as the foreshocks that 
give the best power law fitting results with the common critical exponent. The green line denotes 
the fault plane of the fault activated in the critical area (figure obtained from Zmap). 
Figure 6.1.3 Cross section of the 16/04/2015 aftershocks sequence as well as the foreshocks that 
give the best power law fitting results with the common critical exponent (figure obtained from 
Zmap). 
A question that might arise from these results, has to do with the applicability of the 
proposed method in different geotectonic settings. Is it working only for reverse fault or it 
explain the nature of a strike slip motion?  Although in literature the accelerated seismic 
release model has been applied in other geotectonic environments such as the San Andreas 
transform fault (Bufe & Varnes, 1993; Bowman, et al., 1998; Bowman & King, 2001), a 
further investigation should be carried out with the use of the new proposed common 
critical exponent   to validate the limits of the method. 
6.1.5 Can the hazard associated with large earthquakes in subduction 
zones be better understand? 
 The proposed model uses the common critical exponent   as a criterion for to identify 
the seismicity patters. The critical exponent is independent from the measured quantity and 
reflects the physical parameters of the critical area, such as the Euclidian dimension, the 
Guttenberg-Richer b-value and the extensivity of the system during the large earthquake 
preparation period. The obtained results suggest that the ideas of non-extensive statistical 
physics along with the basic principles of physics, explain the physical process that leads to 
the critical point, the large earthquake which is an important step to evaluate the future 
hazard. 
6.2 Aftershock-swarm sequences   
6.2.1 Can the aftershock sequences be correlated with the foreshock 
patterns? 
The two aftershock sequences of the 2013 strong earthquakes, as well as the 2016 swarm 
events, have been identified. All the events has been located and relocated with the 
appropriate crust model (sections 4.4.3 and 4.4.4). The detailed relocation procedure was 
necessary to study the geotectonic environment and the parameters of the activated faults as 
well as to be able to apply the non-extensive statistical physics. During the investigation 
procedure, some new interesting results regarding the temporal attributes of these 
sequences come out. 
The first strong event took place in south from central Crete in the front of the Hellenic Arc 
(section 5.2.1). Within 29 hours another almost the same magnitude event occurs. These 
events have special interest as they appear to be the same fault plane according to the cross 
sections. The Omoris law fitting, the as the b-value of the Gutenberg Richter law as well 
as the cumulative number curve, suggest that the event that occurred in 16/06/2013 is not a 
large aftershock but it is a second activation (see section 5.2.1). The focal mechanism of the 
15/06/2013 presents an activation according to the NOA which is an oblique reverse fault 
while the 16/06/2013 is presented as a normal fault. These results suggest three possible 
scenarios:  
 The hanging wall of fault after the first upward motion, it has moved backwards by 
gravitational forces. 
 An overextension caused by the intense slip of the first strong event has been 
elastically healed with a second slip with an opposite direction motion.  
 A seismometer that has been used for the estimation of the second moment tensors 
for the second event and its aftershocks is miss wired. Most of the available fault 
plane solutions for these two large events, are from in the European-Mediterranean 
Seismological Centre webpage (EMSC, 2018)  presented in figure 6.2.1. According 
to the focal mechanism every reporting centre agrees that the first event occurred on 
an oblique reverse fault, while for the second large activation, there is only one out 
of the nine reported focal mechanisms suggest that the slip occurred on a normal 
fault. This evidence suggests that probably one of the NOAs stations has a defect. 
This conclusion is supported by the observation that he moment tensors estimated 
with the use of the SIVA station present opposite rake while it is the only station 
that is absent in the first strong event solution. 
Figure 6.2.1 The reported fault plane solution for the 15/06/2016(a) and the 16/06/2016 events 
(figures obtained from (EMSC, 2018)). 
The second strong event of the 2013 has occurred in a considerable greater depth. Although 
the 12/10/2013 mainshock has significant larger magnitude than the first large activation of 
the 2013 in South Aegean, it is noticeable that the number of aftershocks and the magnitude 
range have lower values compared to the 15/06/2013 event. This can be explained by the 
intermediate hypocentral depth of the events (>40), where the materials have different 
mechanical properties and the plates have uncoupled response (Ruff & Kanamori, 1983). 
The occurrence of microearthquakes at depth 45km located inside the overriding plate 
have been also mention by (Shaw, 2012). The fault plane solution and the cross section 
suggest that the 2013 Mw 6.4 has been occurred in reverse fault with very steep dipping 
angle. The examination of the vertical to strike cross section reveals some characteristic 
linear features, these hypocentres have been aligned almost perpendicular to the fault plane. 
The initial though was that this secondary fault could indicate another activation in the 
same area-fault network. The results from section 5.2.2 (magnitude vs time and cumulative 
number of events) does not show any new mainshock-aftershocks relation during the decay 
of the sequence that could explain the existence of this feature. This observation is 
enhanced if the aftershock catalogue is limited to only present the strongest earthquakes. 
Plotting the foreshocks along with the aftershocks in the same cross section (figure 6.1.2) 
gives a new perspective of the activation process. The hypocentres of the foreshocks and 
some aftershocks appear to have a continuity between them. Probably the fault that has 
been activated in the critical area before the second strong mainshock of the 2013 is related 
to the 12/10/2013 fault or it belongs to the same fault network. An interesting observation 
is that the location, the dip and the depth of the fault that activated before the 12/10/2013 
event, have similarities with the AD 365 reverse fault described by the work of Shaw 
(2012). 
The 16/04/2015 aftershocks sequence is still under investigation. About the first 600 
aftershocks have been located and relocated, but this number only corresponds to the first 
48 hours and the actual total aftershock number is larger. The reason for using this 
preliminary data is only to have a first image for this fault plane and examine the 
aftershocks-foreshocks distribution.   
6.2.2 Can the aftershock and the swarm type sequence characteristics be 
explained by complexity theories? 
It has been proposed by a number of authors (Abe & Suzuki, 2005; Michas, et al., 2013; 
Papadakis, et al., 2013; Vallianatos, et al., 2012)  that, in an earthquake population with 
consecutive events,  the cumulative distribution of the spatiotemporal properties such as the 
interevent times and hypocentral distances can be explained by the non-extensive statistical 
physics. More specifically the cumulative distribution frequency (CDF) of the interevent 
times (or hypocentral distances) can be described by a q-exponential distribution.  In the 
2013 and 2015 sequences that took place in South Aegean, the entropic index q was 
examined and found to have values larger than 1 for the interevent times of the aftershock 
sequences, which means in term of Tsallis entropy that that system is sub-additive and the 
events are strongly correlated (Papadakis, et al., 2013; Michas, et al., 2013; Chochlaki, et 
al., 2018; Abe & Suzuki, 2005; Vallianatos, et al., 2012). The q>1 shows that the frequent 
interevent times, that have large probability to occur (close to 1) are enhanced  
(Vallianatos, et al., 2018; Tsallis, 2009). Also, when the entropic index obtains values 
higher than one, then the q-exponential function behaves as an asymptotical power law 
(Abe & Suzuki, 2005). The examination of the cumulative distribution of the interevent 
times for the 2013 aftershock sequences and the 2015 Chania swarm present similar results 
(q>1) as to those report in the literature. A further examination of the q-value with different 
time window show that the q varies as the aftershock sequences decay. Different techniques 
have been used to evaluate this information which suggests that the system enhances the 
frequent interevent times in the end of the energy release process.  
A slightly different behaviour has been observed in the swarm sequence, the q-value 
decrease in a time interval after the strongest event of the swarm sequence, before it starts 
to increase again. The decrease of the entropic index in the middle of the swarm reveals 
that the rare interevent times are happen more frequently. This behaviour can be attributed 
to the parallel occurrence of aftershock and swarm events at same time. The q-value start to 
increase after the swarm type events decay, and the system has only aftershocks from the 
main activation. The quantification of the swarm events in 12 hours-time windows give 
similar results as expanding-moving window methods but in more detail. These results 
suggest that about 24 hours after the main activation, the q starts to increase with time as it 
is observed on the aftershock sequences in sections 5.2.1 and 5.22.  Separating and 
examining the interevent times with two different starting points, it shows that the system 
becomes additive during the parallel generation of swarm and aftershocks and when the 
swarms decay, the system becomes non-additive. The cumulative distribution of the 
interevent times has been investigated with small the time windows which permitted to 
observe the q-value variations. In the work of  Tsallis (1999); Tsekouras & Tsallis (2005) it 
is proposed to address the systems that cannot fully explained by the non-extensive 
statistical mechanics, with a generalized entropic function which instead of using one q 
index value, it will take the entire disruption of the q-values into account. The findings on 
the cumulative distribution of the interevent times as well as the Tsallis (1999); Tsekouras 
& Tsallis (2005) proposal suggest that the calculation of the q-value distribution in some 
systems is a more appropriate method to examine the extensivity of the system. 
6.3 Conclusions  
A theoretical model based on energy conservation law and the non-extensive statistical 
physics has been proposed to explain the foreshock seismicity patterns before the large 
events in South Aegean. The proposed model proves that the critical exponent is 
independent from the measured quantity and reflects the physical parameters of the critical 
area, such as the Euclidian dimension, the Guttenberg-Richer b-value and the extensivity of 
the system during. The evaluation of the model has been carried out with real data in 
retrospective analysis on 3 strong magnitude events. Studying additional datasets with this 
approach is a future work. 
A GUI algorithm with improved and faster power law fitting capabilities has been 
compiled for the purposes of this research. The common critical exponent with values 
between 0.25 and 0.33 has be used as a criterion to identify accelerated seismic crustal 
deformation. The identification of the critical area is approximated with a circle which 
gives good results, but it is possible a different shape to produce a slightly better 
estimation. A future approach is to try to approximate the critical area with different 
shapes. Based on the observations acquired from the results, one or more faults has been 
activated in the critical area. Trying a shape that will include the whole foreshocks fault(s) 
area could give a better estimation of the critical point parameters. This approach may 
improve the results from the proposed magnitude estimation relations. Since these 
equations are more sensitive to the critical exponent and the average Benioff strain, more 
accurate parameters additional tests are need before it can be used.  
The relocation of the aftershocks and swarm sequences permits the detailed examination of 
the spatial and temporal characteristics of the available events. The activated fault(s) in the 
critical area is(are) located close to the future shock. Using cross sections in the critical area 
made possible the examination of the foreshocks-aftershock relation.  In the reverse faults 
the critical area is located on the hanging wall of the fault. In the 12/10/2013 case, the 
foreshocks appear to be on a fault plane similar with the one descripted by Shaw (2012). A 
future work is to study more foreshock-aftershock patterns in South Aegean and compare 
the results with other subduction zones. It is also possible to validate the propose model in 
transform fault areas. 
The cumulative distribution of the temporal characteristics of the system such as the 
interevent times follows a q-exponential distribution. The aftershock sequences in South 
Aegean is sub-additive, the events have strong correlations and the high probability 
interevent times are more likely to occur. The entropic index q in the cumulative 
distribution of the interevent times, increase with time for the aftershocks sequences, the 
system becomes more correlated. As the sequence approaches to the end the events follow 
an exponential distribution which means that the system becomes more random. This is 
observed in the end of the fitting of the q-exponential plots. In contrast with aftershocks, in 
the swarm sequence the entropic index q decreases after the main event took place and then 
it increases again. A further study with more aftershocks-swarm sequences from other areas 
is necessary to examine this q-variations and better explain the changes in the complexity 
of the system with time. 
References 
Earthquake analysis software-seisan, 2018. Seisan - earthquake analysis software. [Online]  
Available at: http://seisan.info/ 
[Accessed 12 08 2018]. 
NEIC, 2018. National Earthquake Information Center. [Online]  
Available at: https://earthquake.usgs.gov/contactus/golden/neic.php 
[Accessed 09 2018]. 
Thingbaijam, K. K., Mai, P. M. & Goda, K., 2017. New Empirical Earthquake Source-Scaling Laws. Bulletin 
of the Seismological Society of America, 17(5), p. 2225  2246. 
Abe, S. & Suzuki, N., 2005. Scale-free statistics of time interval between successive earthquakes.. Physica A, 
Volume 350, p. 588  596.. 
Aki, K. & Richards, P. G., 1980. Quantitative Seismology, Vol. 1.. second ed. s.l.:University Science Books. 
Allaby, M., 2013. A Dictionary of Geology and Earth Sciences. 4th ed. s.l.:Oxford University Press. 
Allen, R., 1978. Automatic earthquake recognition and timing from single traces. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am., 
Issue 68, p. 15211532. 
Ambraseys, N. N., 2001. Reassessment of earthquakes, 19001999, in the Eastern Mediterranean and the 
Middle East. Geophysical Journal International, 145(2), pp. 471 - 485. 
Amitrano, D., 2012. Variability in the power-law distributions of rupture events, How and why doesb-value 
change. European Physical Journal - Special Topics, EDP Sciences, Volume 205, pp. 199 - 215. 
Ammon, C. J., Lay, T. & Simpson, D. W., 2010. Great Earthquakes and Global Seismic Networks. 
Seismological Research Letters, 81(6), pp. 965 - 971. 
Baba, A. B. et al., 2000. Unified local magnitude scale for earthquakes of south Balkan area. Pure Applied 
Geophysics, Volume 157, pp. 765 - 783. 
Bak, P. & Tang, C., 1989. Earthquakes as a self-organized critical phenomenon. Journal of Geophysical 
Research, Volume 635 - 637, p. 94. 
Bak, P., Christensen, K., Danon, L. & Scanlon, T., 2002. Unified scaling law for earthquakes. Physical 
Review Letters, Volume 88. 
Becker, D., Meier, T., Bohnhoff, M. & Harjes, H.-P., 2010. Seismicity at the convergent plate boundary 
offshore Crete, Greece, observed by an amphibian network. J Seismol, Volume 14, p. 369392. 
Blake, S. et al., 2008. An Introduction to: Our dynamic planet. s.l.:Cambridge University Press. 
Boltzmann, L., 1896. Gastheorie. Leipzig: Verlag von Johann Ambrosius Barth. 
Bonneau, M., Beauvais, L. & Middlemiss, F.-A., 1974. L'unite de Miamou (Crete, Grece) et sa macrofaune 
d'age Jurassique superieur (Brachiopods, Madreporaires).. Ann Soc Geol Nord 94, pp. 71-85. 
Bonneau, M. & Fleury, J.-J., 1971. Preisions sur la serie d'Ethia (Crete,Grece): Existence d'un premier flysch 
mesocretace. CR Acad Sci Paris 272, pp. 1840-1842. 
Bonneau, M. & Lys, M., 1978. Sur la presence de Permien fossilifere dans l'unite de Vatos (Crete): sa nature 
interne et l' ampleur des charriages dans l'arc egeen.. CR Acad Sci Paris 287, pp. 423--426. 
Bormann, P. & Wielandt, E., 2013. Seismic Signals and Noise. In: New Manual of Seismological Observatory 
Practice (NMSOP-2). s.l.:GFZ. 
Bowman, D. D. & King, G. C., 2001. Accelerating seismicity and stress accumulation before large 
earthquakes. 2001, 28, 01 11, pp. 4039-4042.. Geophysical Research Letters, Volume 28, pp. 4039 - 4042.. 
Bowman, D. D. et al., 1988. An observational test of the critical earthquake concept. J. Geophys. Res, 
Volume 103, p. 24359  24372.. 
Bowman, D. D. et al., 1998. An observational test of the critical earthquake concept. J. Geophys. Res, 
Volume 103, p. 24359  24372.. 
Brehm, D. J. & Braile, L. W., 1999. Refinement of the modified time-to-failure method for intermediate-term 
earthquake prediction. Journal of Seismology, Volume 3, p. 121  138.. 
Brief Historical Note - NOA, 2018. Brief Historical Note. [Online]  
Available at: 
http://www.noa.gr/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=187&Itemid=490&lang=en 
[Accessed 20 06 2018]. 
British Geological Survey, 2018. [Online]  
Available at: http://www.bgs.ac.uk/ 
[Accessed 06 2018]. 
Brooklyn College - Geology Department, 2017. Plate Tectonics, Earthquakes and Volcanoes. [Online]  
Available at: http://academic.brooklyn.cuny.edu/geology/grocha/plates/platetec16.htm 
[Accessed 11 2017]. 
Brouers, F. & Sotolongo-Costa, . O., 2005. Relaxation in heterogeneous systems: A rare events dominated 
phenomenon. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications,, 356(2-4), pp. 359 - 374. 
Brune, J. N., 1970. Tectonic stress and the spectra of seismic shear waves from earthquakes. Journal 
Geophysical Research, Volume 75, p. 4997  5009. 
Brunn, J., 1956. Contribution  ltude du Pinde septentrional et dune partie de la Macdoine occidentale.. 
Annales Gologiques du Pays Hellniques 7, pp. 1 - 358. 
Buck, W. R., 1991. Modes of Continental Lithospheric Extension. JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL 
RESEARCH, VOL. 96, pp. 20161 - 20178. 
Bufe, C. G. & Varnes, J. D., 1993. Predictive Modeling of the Seismic Cycle of the Greater San Francisco 
Bay Region. Journal of Geophysical Reseach, Volume 10, pp. 9871 -9883.. 
California State University, Sacramento State-Tectonic Basins, 2017. Tectonic Basins. [Online]  
Available at: http://www.csus.edu/indiv/k/kusnickj/geology12/tectonicbasins.html 
[Accessed 11 2017]. 
Castellaro, S., Mulargia, F. & Kagan, Y., 2006. Regression problems for magnitudes. Geophysical Journal 
International, Volume 165, pp. 913-930. 
Center for Educational Technologies, 2017. Transform boundaries. [Online]  
Available at: http://www.cotf.edu/ete/modules/msese/earthsysflr/plates4.html 
[Accessed 11 2017]. 
Chatzopoulos, G., Kouli, M., Papadopoulos, I. & Vallianatos, F., 2018. The Chania (Crete) urban strong 
ground motion network first results. 16th European Conference on Earthquake Engineering .  
Chatzopoulos, G., Papadopoulos, I. & Vallianatos, F., 2016. The Hellenic Seismological Network of Crete 
(HSNC): validation and results of the 2013 aftershock sequences. Advances in Geosciences EGU, Issue 41, 
pp. 65-72. 
Chingtham, P., Sharma, B. & Chopr, S., 2016. Statistical analysis of aftershock sequences related with two 
major Nepal earthquakes: April 25, 2015, MW 7.8, and May 12, 2015, MW 7.2. Annals of Geophysics, 
Volume 59. 
Chochlaki, K., Vallianatos, F. & Michas, G., 2018. Global regionalized seismicity in view of Non-Extensive 
Statistical Physics. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, pp. 276 - 285. 
CMT, 2018. Global Centroid-Moment-Tensor (CMT). [Online]  
Available at: http://www.globalcmt.org/CMTsearch.html 
[Accessed 09 05 2018]. 
Conrad, C. P. & Lithgow-Bertelloni, C., 2002. How mantle slabs drive plate tectonics.. Science , 207(9). 
Contadakis, M. E. et al., 2015. TEC variations over the Mediterranean before and during the strong 
earthquake (M D6.5) of 12th October2013 in Crete, Greece. Journal Physics Chemistry of the Earth,. 
corrcoef-MathWorks, 2018. corrcoef. [Online]  
Available at: https://uk.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/corrcoef.html 
[Accessed 12 08 2018]. 
CPPT, 2018. Centre Polynesien de Prevention des Tsunamis. [Online]  
Available at: http://itic.ioc-unesco.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=featured&Itemid=2441 
[Accessed 10 09 2018]. 
CQ/Cyprus Broadband Seismological Network, 2018. International Federation of Digital Seismograph 
Networks.. [Online]  
Available at: doi:10.7914/SN/CQ,  
[Accessed 09 2018]. 
Creutzburg, N. & Seidel, E., 1975. Zum Stand der Geologie des praeneogens auf Kreta. N. Jahrb. Geol. 
Palaeont. Abh., 149, pp. 363-383. 
datenum-MathWorks, 2018. datenum. [Online]  
Available at: https://uk.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/datenum.html 
[Accessed 30 07 2018]. 
De Chabalier, J. et al., 1992. A detailed analysis of microearthquakes in western Crete from digital three-
component seismograms. Geophys. J. Int., Volume 110, pp. 347-360. 
De Santis, A., Chianchini, G., Qamili, E. & Frepoli, A., 2010. The 2009 L'Aquila (Central Italy) seismic 
sequence as a chaotic process. Tectonophysics, Volume 496, pp. 44 - 52. 
Dercourt, J., 1964. Contribution  ltude gologique dun secteur du Ploponnse septentrional. Annales 
Gologiques des Pays Hellniques, 15, pp. 1 -417. 
Dewey, J. F., 2016. Marking 50 years of Wislon cyrcle. Geoscience Canada, Volume 43. 
Di Giovambattista, R. & Tyupkin, Y., 2001. An analysis of the process of acceleration of seismic energy 
emission in laboratory experiments on destruction of rocks and before strong earthquakes on Kamchatka and 
in Italy. Tectonophysics, Volume 338, pp. 339 - 351. 
Di Giovambattista, R. & Tyupkin, Y., 2004. Seismicity patterns before the M=5.8 2002, Palermo (Italy) 
earthquake: seismic quiescence and accelerating seismicity. Tectonophysics, Volume 384, pp. 243 - 255.. 
Diehl, T., Kissling, E. & Bormann, P., 2011. Tutorial for consistent phase picking at local to regional 
distances. In: New Manual of Seismological Observatory Practice. s.l.:GFZ. 
Dietz, R. S., 1961. Continent and ocean basin evolution by spreading of the sea floor. Nature, pp. 854 - 857. 
Donaldson, I., 2016. Francis Bacons comments on the power of negative observations in his Novum 
Organum, first published in 1620. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, Volume 109, p. 459460. 
DuMouchel, W. H. & O'Brien, F. L., 1989. Integrating a Robust Option into a Multiple Regression 
Computing Environment.. s.l., Proceedings of the 21st Symposium on the Interface. Alexandria. American 
Statistical Association. 
Duni, L., Kuka, S. & Kuka, N., 2010. Local relations for converting ML to Mw in southern-western Balkan 
region. Acta Geod. Geoph. Hung., Volume 45, pp. 317 - 323. 
Dziewonski, A. M., Chou , R. -A. & Woodhouse, . J. H., 1981. Determination of earthquake source 
parameters from waveform data for studies of global and regional seismicity. J. Geophys. Res., Volume 86, 
pp. 2825 - 2852. 
Earthworm, 2018. Isti. [Online]  
Available at: http://www.earthwormcentral.org/documentation3/OVERVIEW/1_History.htm#history 
[Accessed 30 05 2018]. 
Efron, B., 1979. Bootstrap methods: Another look at the jackknife. The Annals of Statistics, Volume 7, pp. 1-
Efron, B. & Tibshirani, R. J., 1993. An Introduction to the Bootstrap (Chapman & Hall/CRC Monographs on 
Statistics & Applied Probability. 1st ed. s.l.:Springer - Science + Busniess Media. 
EG/EUROSEISTEST Strong Motion Network, 2018. https://www.fdsn.org/networks/detail/EG/. [Online]  
Available at: http://euroseisdb.civil.auth.gr/ 
[Accessed 08 2018]. 
Ekstrm, G., Nettles, M. & Dziewonski, . A. M., 2012. The global CMT project 2004-2010: Centroid-
moment tensors for 13,017 earthquakes. Phys. Earth Planet. Inter.,, pp. 1 - 9. 
EMSC, 2018. Euro-Med earthquakes. [Online]  
Available at: https://www.emsc-csem.org/#2 
[Accessed 08 2018]. 
Engdahl, E. R. & Villasenor, A., 2002. Global Seismicity, 1900-1999,. In: International handbook of 
Earthquake and Engineering Seismology. s.l.:Academic Press, pp. 665 - 690. 
Entropy, 2018. Entropy  Open Access Journal. [Online]  
Available at: http://www.mdpi.com/journal/entropy 
[Accessed 09 2018]. 
Epting, M., Kudrass, H., Leppig, U. & Schafer, A., 1972. Geologie der Talea Ori/Kreta. N. Jb. Geol. Palont. 
Abh., 141(3), pp. 259 - 285. 
Esri, 2018. ArcGIS Desktop. [Online]  
Available at: http://desktop.arcgis.com/en/ 
[Accessed 07 2018]. 
Fassoulas, C., Kilias, A. & Mountrakis, D., 1994. Postnappe stacking extension and exhumation of high-
pressure/low temperature rocks in the island of Crete, Greece. Tectonics, 13, pp. 127-138. 
FDSN, 2018. International Federation of Digital Seismograph Networks. [Online]  
Available at: http://www.fdsn.org/station_book/ 
[Accessed 06 08 2018]. 
FDSN, USGS & IRIS, 2012. SEED Reference Manual.  
Fiore, J. M., 2018. Operational Amplifiers & Linear Intergrates Circuits: Theory and Application. s.l.:J. Fiore 
via dissidents. 
for-MathWorks, 2018. for. [Online]  
Available at: https://uk.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/for.html?s_tid=srchtitle 
[Accessed 14 07 2018]. 
Fowler, C. M. R., 2005. The Solid Earth An Introduction to Global Geophysics. s.l.:Cambridge University 
Press. 
Frankel, H. R., 2012. The continental drift controversy: Volume I: Wegener and the Early Debate. ed. New 
York: Cambridge University Press. 
Frisch, W., Meschede, M. & Blakey, R., 2011. Plate Tectonics Continental Drift and Mountain Building. 
s.l.:Springer. 
Fuller, W. A., 1987. Measurement Error Models. ed. s.l.:John Wiley & Sons. 
Fytrolakis, N., 1980. The geological structure of Krete. Probleme, observations and conclusions.. Habil. 
Thesis, Nat. Tech. Univ. Athens, pp. 1-147. 
Gamma, E., Helm, R., Johnson, R. & Vlissides, J., 1994. Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-
Oriented Software.. s.l.:Addison-Wesley.. 
Ganas, A., Oikonomou, I. A. & Tsimi, C., 2013. NOA faults: a digital database for active faults in Greece. 
Bulletin of the Geological Society of Greece, 47(2), pp. 518 - 530. 
Ganas, A. & Parsons, T., 2009. Three-dimensional model of Hellenic Arc deformation and origin of the 
Cretan uplift. Journal of Geophysical Research, Volume 114. 
Geiger, L., 1912. Probability method for the determination of earthquake epicentres from the arrival time 
only. Bull. St. Louis. Univ, Volume 8, pp. 60-71. 
GFZ, 2018. The Helmholtz Centre Potsdam GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences. [Online]  
Available at: https://eqarchives.wordpress.com/gfz-moment-tensors/ 
[Accessed 07 05 2018]. 
Giardini, D. et al., 2013. European Seismic Hazard Map for Peak Ground Acceleation, 10% Exceedance 
Probabilities in 50 years, s.l.: s.n. 
Gibbs, W., 1902. Elementary Principles in Statistical Mechanics. s.l.:s.n. 
Google, 2018. Google Earth. [Online]  
Available at: https://earth.google.com/web/ 
Grotzinger, J. P. & Jordan, Thomas, T. H., 2010. Understanding Earth. 6 th ed. s.l.:W. H. Freeman, ISBN 
978-1429219518. 
Guglielmi, A. V., 2016. Interpretation of the Omori law. Izvestiya, Physics of the Solid Earth, Volume 5. 
Gutenberg , B. & Richter, . C., 1954. Seismicity of the Earth and Associated Phenomena. 2nd ed. 
s.l.:Princeton University Press. 
HA/Seismological Laboratory of the National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 2018. International 
Federation of Digital Seismograph Networks. [Online]  
Available at: doi:10.7914/SN/HA 
[Accessed 20 05 2018]. 
Hanks, T. C. & Kanamori, H., 1979. A moment magnitude scale. Journal Geophysical Research, Volume 84, 
p. 23482350. 
Hardebeck, J., Felzer, K. R. & Michael, A. J., 2008. Improved tests reveal that the accelerating moment 
release hypothesis is statistically insignificant. Journal of Geophysical Research, Volume 113. 
Harrison, C. G., 2016. The present-day number of tectonic plates. Earth, Planets and Space a Springer open 
Journal, pp. 1 - 14. 
Hatzfeld, D., Pedotti, G., Hatzidimitriou, P. & Makropoulos, K., 1990. The strain pattern in the western 
Hellenic arc deduced from a microearthquake survey. Geophys. J. Int, Volume 101, pp. 181-202. 
HC/Hellenic Seismological Network of Crete, 2018. International Federation of Digital Seismograph 
Networks. [Online]  
Available at: https://doi.org/10.7914/SN/HC 
[Accessed 21 06 2018]. 
Helmholtz Centre Potsdam, GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences, 2018. SeisComP3. [Online]  
[Accessed 30 05 2018]. 
Hess, H., 1962. History of ocean basins. Petrologic Studies: A Volume in Honour of A. E. Buddington, p. 
599620. 
HI/Institute of Engineering Seismology and Earthquake Engineering, 2018. International Federation of 
Digital Seismograph Networks.. [Online]  
[Accessed 05 06 2018]. 
History of the Department of Geophysics - AUTH, 2018. History of the Department of Geophysics. [Online]  
Available at: http://geophysics.geo.auth.gr/new_web_site_2007/EN/history/historyall.html 
[Accessed 20 06 2018]. 
HL/National Observatory of Athens Seismic Network, 2018. International Federation of Digital Seismograph 
Networks.. [Online]  
Available at: https://doi.org/10.7914/SN/HL 
[Accessed 21 06 2018]. 
Hloupis, G. & Vallianatos, F., 2013. Wavelet-based rapid estimation of earthquake magnitude oriented to 
early warning,. IEEE Geosci. Remote S., Volume 10, pp. 43 - 47. 
Holland, P. W. & Welsch, R. E., 1977. Robust Regression Using Iteratively Reweighted Least-Squares.. 
Communications in Statistics: Theory and Methods, p. 813  827. 
Holmes, A., 1931. Radioactivity and Earth movement. Geological Society of Glasgow 18, pp. 559 - 606. 
HP/Seismological Laboratory of the University of Patras, 2018. International Federation of Digital 
Seismograph Networks. [Online]  
Available at: ith doi:10.7914/SN/HP 
[Accessed 05 06 2018]. 
HSNC, 2018. GAIA. [Online]  
Available at: http://gaia.chania.teicrete.gr/uk/?cat=11 
[Accessed 05 09 2018]. 
HT/Aristotle University of Thessaloniki Seismological Network, 2018. International Federation of Digital 
Seismograph Networks. [Online]  
Available at: https://doi.org/10.7914/SN/HT 
[Accessed 21 06 2018]. 
Hurukawa, N., 2012. Practical Analyses of Local Earthquakes, s.l.: Japan International Cooperation Agency. 
Husen, S. & Hardebeck, J., 2010. Earthquake location accuracy. Community Online Resource for Statistical 
Seismicity Analysis.  
Husen, S. et al., 2003. Probabilistic earthquake location in complex three-dimensional velocity models: 
Application to Switzerland. J. Geophys. Res., Volume 108. 
Husen, S. & Smith, R., 2004. Probabilistic earthquake relocation in three-dimensional velocity models. Bull. 
Seismol. Soc. Am, pp. 880-896. 
idirect, 2018. VT iDirect. [Online]  
Available at: www.idirect.net 
[Accessed 01 2018]. 
if-MathWorks, 2018. if. [Online]  
Available at: https://uk.mathworks.com/help/simulink/slref/if.html?s_tid=doc_ta 
[Accessed 30 07 2018]. 
Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology, 2018. Software Downloads  PQLX. [Online]  
Available at: https://ds.iris.edu/ds/nodes/dmc/software/downloads/pqlx/ 
[Accessed 09 06 2018]. 
Isacks Bryan, O. J. S. L. R., 1968. Seismology and the new global tectonics. Journal of Geophysical Research 
73, p. 58555899. 
ISC, 2018. International Seismological Centre. [Online]  
Available at: http://www.isc.ac.uk/ 
[Accessed 09 2018]. 
Johnson, . C. R., Sethares, W. A. & Klein, A. G., 2011. Software Receiver Design: Build Your Own Digital 
Communication System in Five Easy Steps. s.l.:Cambridge University Press. 
Johnston, A. C., 1996. Seismic moment assessment of earthquakes in stable continental regionsI. 
Instrumental seismicity. Geophysical Journal International, 124(2), pp. 381-414. 
Kagan, . Y. Y., 2010. Earthquake size distribution: Power-law with exponent =1/2?. Tectonophysics, 
Volume 490, pp. 103-114. 
Kagan, Y. Y. & Houston, H., 2005. Relation between mainshock rupture process and Omoris law for 
aftershock moment release rate. Geophys. J. Int., Volume 163, p. 1039  1048. 
Kanamori, H., 1977. The energy release in great earthquakes. Journal of Geophysical research, 82(20), pp. 
2981 - 2987. 
Kanamori, H., 1978. Quantification of earthquakes. Nature, Volume 271, pp. 411 - 414.. 
Kanamori, H., 1983. Magnitude scale and quantification of earthquakes. Tectonophysics, Issue 93, pp. 185-
Karagianni, E. et al., 2002. Rayleigh wave group velocity tomography in the Aegean area. Tectonophysics, 
Volume 358, pp. 187-209. 
Karagianni, E. et al., 2005. Shear velocity structure in the Aegean area obtained by inversion of Rayleigh 
waves. Geophysical Journal International, Volume 160, p. 127143. 
Karakostas, V., Karagianni, E. & Paradisopoulou, P., 2012. Spacetime analysis, faulting and triggering of 
the 2010 earthquake doublet in western Corinth Gulf. Nat Hazards, Volume 63, p. 1181  1202. 
Karnik, V., 1996. Seismicity of Europe and the Mediterranean. s.l.:Academy of Sciences of the Czech 
Repuplic . 
Kennett, B., 2005. Seismological Tables: ak135. Research School of Earth Sciences, The Australian National 
University.  
Kennett, B. & Engdahl, E., 1991. lASPEI 1991 SEISMOLOGICAL TABLES. Geophys. J. Int., Issue 105, pp. 
429-465. 
Kilias, A., Falalakis, G. & Mountrakis, D., 1999. Cretaceous-Tertiary structures and kinematics of the 
Serbomacedonian metamorphic rocks and their relation to the exhumation of the Hellenic Hinterland 
(Macedonia, Greece). Intern. J. of Earth Scien., 88, pp. 513-531. 
Kilias, A., Fassoulas, C. & Mountrakis, D., 1994. Tertiary extension of continental crust and uplift of 
Psiloritis metamorphic core complex in the central part of the Hellenic Arc (Crete, Greece). Geol. Rundsch., 
83, pp. 417-430. 
King, G. C. P. & Bowman, D. D., 2003. The evolution of regional seismicity between large earthquakes. 
Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, Volume 108. 
Kissling, E., Ellsworth,, W. L., Eberhart-Phillips, D. & Kradolfer, U., 1994. Initial reference models in 
seismic tomography. Journal Of Geophysical Research, Volume 99, pp. 19.635 - 19.646. 
Kissling, E., Kradolfer, U. & Maurer, H., 1995. Program VELEST USERS GUIDE - Short Introduction, s.l.: 
Institute of Geophysics and Swiss Seismological Service, ETH-Hoenggerberg. 
Klein, F. W., 2002. User's Guide to HYPOINVERSE-2000, a Fortran Program to Solve for Earthquake 
Locations and Magnitudes, s.l.: U. S. Geological Survey. 
KO/Kandilli Observatory and Earthquake Research Institute, Bosphorus Univ., 2018. International 
Federation of Digital Seismograph Networks. [Online]  
Available at: https://doi.org/10.7914/SN/KO 
[Accessed 09 2018]. 
KOERI, 2018. Kandili Observatory and Earthquake Research Institute. [Online]  
Available at: http://www.koeri.boun.edu.tr/ 
[Accessed 09 2018]. 
Kokinou, E. et al., 2006. Crustal velocity models for the wide area of Crete island in the southern Hellenic 
suduction zone. First European Conference on Earthquake Engineering and Seismology. 
Kolligri, M. et al., 2014. A homogeneous earthquake catalogue of relocated recent shallow events of the 
Hellenic arc. E.G.U. General Assembly Vienna, Austria. 
Kopp,, K.-O. & Ott, E., 1977. Spezialkartierungen in Umkreis neuer Fossilfunde im Trypali- und Tripolitsa-
Kalken West-Kretas.. N Jahrb Geol Palfiontol Mh, pp. 217-238. 
Kourouzidis , M. C., 2003. Study of seismic sequences in Greece and its contribution to earthquake 
prediction.. s.l.:Ph.D Thesis Univ. of Thessaloniki. 
Krahl, j. et al., 1983. Neue Daten zur Biostratigraphie und zur tektonischen Lagerung der Phyllit-Gruppe und 
der Trypali-Gruppe auf der Insel Kreta (Griechenland). Geol Rundsch 72, pp. 1147-1166. 
Kulhanek, O., Persson, L. & Nuannin, P., 2018. Variations of b-values preceding large earthquakes in the 
shallow subduction zones of Cocos and Nazca plates. Journal of South American Earth Sciences, Volume 82, 
pp. 207 - 214. 
Lahr, J. C., 1989. HYPOELLIPSE/version 2.0; a computer program for determining local earthquake 
hydrocentral parameters, magnitude, and first motion pattern, s.l.: U.S. Geological Survey. 
Latorre, D. et al., 2016. Assessment of earthquake locations in 3D deterministic velocity models: a case study 
from the Altotiberina Near Fault Observatory (Italy). J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth.  
Le Pichon, X. & Angelier, J., 1979. The hellenic arc and trench system: A key to the neotectonic evolution of 
the eastern mediterranean area. Tectonophysics, Volume 60, pp. 1 - 42. 
Le Pichon, X., Chamot-Rooke, N. & Lallemant, S., 1995. Geodetic determination of the kinematics central 
Greece with respect to Europe. Journal Geophysical Research, Volume 100. 
Le Pichon, X. & Kreemer, C., 2010. The Miocene-to-Present Kinematic Evolution of the Eastern 
Mediterranean and Middle East and Its Implications for Dynamics. Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci., Volume 38, 
pp. 323 - 351. 
Lee, W. H. K. & Lahr, J. C., 1972. HYPO71: a computer program for determining hypocenter, magnitude, 
and first motion pattern of local earthquakes, s.l.: U.S. Geological Survey,. 
Lei, X., 2003. How do asperities fracture? An experimental study of unbroken asperities. Earth and Planetary 
Science Letters, Volume 213, pp. 347 - 359.. 
length-MathWorks, 2018. length. [Online]  
Available at: https://uk.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/tscollection.length.html 
[Accessed 30 07 2018]. 
Lermo, J. & Chavez-Garcia, F., 1993. Site effect evaluation on using spectral ratios with only one station. 
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, VoL 83, No. 5, pp. 1574-1594. 
Lolli, B. & Gasperini, P., 2012. A comparison among general orthogonal regression methods applied to 
earthquake magnitude conversions. Geophysical Journal International, Volume 190, p. 11351151. 
Lolli, B., Gasperini, P. & Vannucci, G., 2014. Empirical conversion between teleseismic magnitudes (mb and 
Ms) and moment magnitude (Mw) at the Global, Euro-Mediterranean and Italian scale. Geophysical Journal 
International, 199(2), p. 805828. 
Lomax, A., Berge-Thierry, C., Volant, P. & Virieux, J., 2000. Probabilistic earthquake location in 3-D. 
Advances in Seismic Event Location, pp. 101-134. 
lsqcurvefit-MathWorks, 2018. lsqcurvefit. [Online]  
Available at: 
https://uk.mathworks.com/help/optim/ug/lsqcurvefit.html?searchHighlight=lsqcurvefit&s_tid=doc_srchtitle 
[Accessed 25 08 2018]. 
Lyon-Caen, H. et al., 1988. The 1986 Kalamata (South Peloponnesus) earthquake: detailed study of a normal 
fault, evidences of East-West extension in the Hellenic arc. J. Geophys. Res. , Volume 93, p. 14967  15000. 
Makris, J., Papoulia, J. & Yegorova, T., 2013. A 3-D density model of Greece constrained by gravityand 
seismic data. Geophysical Journal International, Volume 194, pp. 1 - 17. 
Mandelbrot, B. B., 1983. The fractal geometry of nature. San Francisco: Freeman. W. H. Freeman and 
Company. 
Maochen, G., 2003. Analysis of source location algorithms Part II: Iterative methods. J. Acoustic Emission, 
Volume 21, pp. 29 - 51. 
Mascle , J., Le Quellec, P., Leit, O. & Jongsma, D., 1982. Structural sketch of the Hellenic continental 
margin between the western Peloponnesus and eastern Crete. Geology, 10(2). 
MathWorks, 2018. find. [Online]  
Available at: https://uk.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/find.html?searchHighlight=find&s_tid=doc_srchtitle 
[Accessed 30 07 2018]. 
MATLAB-Mathworks, 2018. MATLAB. [Online]  
Available at: https://uk.mathworks.com/products/matlab.html 
[Accessed 25 08 2018]. 
Mc Namara, D. E. & Boaz, R. I., 2005. Seismic Noise Analysis System,Power Spectral Density Probability 
Density Function: Stand-Alone Software Package. United States Geological Survey Open File Report, NO 
20051438. 
McKenzie, D., 1972. Active Tectonics of the Mediterranean Region. The Geophysical Journal of the Royal 
Astronomical Society, Volume 30, p. 109  185. 
ME/Montenegrian Seismic Network of the Montenegro Seismological Observatory, 2018. International 
Federation of Digital Seismograph Networks. [Online]  
Available at: (DOI) https://doi.org/10.7914/SN/ME 
[Accessed 09 2018]. 
Meier, T. et al., 2004. Seismicity of the Hellenic subduction zone in the area of western and central Crete 
observed by temporary local seismic networks. Tectonophysics, Volume 383, pp. 149-169. 
Mercier, J., 1968. Etude geologique des zones Internes des Hellenides en Macedoine centrale.. Ann. 
Gologique des Pays Hllniques, 20,, pp. 1 - 739. 
Michas, G., Vallianatos, F. & Sammonds, P., 2013. Non-extensivity and long-range correlations in the 
earthquake activity at the West Corinth rift (Greece). Nonlin. Processes Geophys., Volume 20, p. 713  724. 
Mignan, A., 2008b. The stress accumulation model: Accelerating moment release and seismic hazard. 
Advances in Geophysics , Volume 49, pp. 67-201. 
Mignan, A., 2008. Non-Critical Precursory Accelerating Seismicity Theory (NC PAST) and limits of the 
power-law fit methodology. Tectonophysics, Volume 452, pp. 42 - 50. 
Mignan, A., 2012. Seismicity precursors to large earthquakes unified in a stress accumulation framework. 
Geophys. Res. Lett, Volume 39. 
Mignan, A., Bowman, D. & King, G., 2006. An observational test of the origin of accelerating moment 
release before large earthquakes. Journal of Geophysical Research, Volume 111. 
Mignan, A. & Di Giovambattista, R., 2008. Relationship between accelerating seismicity and quiescence, two 
precursors to large earthquakes. Geophysical Research Letters, Volume 35. 
Mignan, A., King, G. & Bowman, D., 2007. A mathematical formulation of accelerating moment release 
based on the stress accumulation model. Journal of Geophysical Research, Volume 112. 
Mignan, A. & Woessner, J., 2012. Estimating the magnitude of completeness for earthquake catalogs. 
Community Online Resource for Statistical Seismicity Analysis, Version: 1.0, pp. 1 - 45. 
Mogi, K., 1962. Magnitude frequency relations for elastic shocks accompanying fractures of various materials 
and some rerelated problems in earthquake. Bull. Earthquake Res. Inst. Tokyo, Volume 40, p. 831  853. 
Molchan, G. M. & Dmitrieva, O. E., 1992. Aftershock identification: methods and new approaches. Geophys. 
J. Int., Volume 109, pp. 501-516. 
Mollova, G., 2007. Effect of Digital Filtering in Data Processing of Seismi Acceleration Recors. EURASIP 
Journal on Advances in Signal Processing, p. 9. 
Morgan, J. W., 1968. Rises, trenches, great faults, and crustal blocks. Journal of Geophysics 73, p. 9591982. 
Mori , J. & Abercombie, R. E., 1997. Depth dependence of earthquake frequency-magnitude distributions in 
california: Implication for rupture initiation. Journal of Geophysical Research, p. 102. 
Mountrakis, D., Killias, A., Pavlaki, A. & Fassoulas, C., 2012. Neotectonic study of Western Crete and 
implications for seismic hazard assessment. J Virtual Explor , Volume 42, pp. 19-20. 
Mountrakis, D., 1986. The Pelagonian zone in Greece: A polyphase deformed fragment of the Cimmerian 
continent and its role in the geotectonic evolution of the Eastern Mediterranean. Journal of Geology, 94, pp. 
335 - 347. 
Mountrakis, D., 2006. Tertiary and Quaternary tectonics of Greece. Special Paper of the Geological Society 
of America, Volume 409, pp. 125 - 136. 
Nakamura, Y., 1989. A method for dynamic characteristics estimation of subsurface using ambient noise on 
the ground surface. QR Railway Tech Res. Inst., Volume 30, p. 25  33. 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , 2015. Marine Trackline Geophysical Data. [Online]  
Available at: https://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/mgg/geodas/trackline.html 
[Accessed 10 12 2015]. 
Nikolintaga, I., Karakostas, V., Papadimitriou, E. & Vallianatos, F., 2007. Velocity models inferred from P-
waves travel time curves in South Aegean. Bulletin of the Geological Society of Greece. 
nlinfit-Mathworks, 2018. nlinfit. [Online]  
Available at: https://uk.mathworks.com/help/stats/nlinfit.html 
[Accessed 11 08 2018]. 
NOA, 2018. Hellenic Seismic Network (HL). [Online]  
Available at: http://bbnet.gein.noa.gr/HL/seismicity/seismicity/last-24-hours 
[Accessed 06 09 2018]. 
NOA, 2018. Revised moment tensors. [Online]  
Available at: http://bbnet.gein.noa.gr/HL/seismicity/mts/revised-moment-tensors 
[Accessed 22 08 2018]. 
norm-MathWorks, 2018. norm. [Online]  
Available at: https://uk.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/norm.html 
[Accessed 30 07 2018]. 
Nuannin, P., Kulhanek, O. & Persson, L., 2012. Variations of b-values preceding large earthquakes in the 
Andaman-Sumatra subduction zone. Journal of Asian Earth Sciences, Volume 61, pp. 237 - 242. 
Nuannun, P., Kulhanek, O. & Persson, L., 2005. Spatial and temporal b value anomalies preceding the 
devastating off coast of NW Sumatra earthquake of December 26, 2004. Geophysical Research Letters, 32(1), 
pp. 1 - 4 . 
Obi, E., Abong, A. A. & Ogbeche, J. U., 2017. Empirical Study of the Frequency and Severity of Earthquakes 
in Taiwan. Journal of Geosciences and Geomatics, 5(4), pp. 167 - 172. 
Olivieri, M. & Clinton, J., 2012. An Almost Fair Comparison Between Earthworm and SeisComp3. 
Seismological Society of America, Volume 83, pp. 720-727. 
Omori, F., 1894. On the after-shocks of earthquakes. Journal of the College of Science Imperial University of 
Tokyo, Volume 7, pp. 111 - 200.. 
ORFEUS the European Infrastructure for seismic waveform data in EPOS, 2018. European Integrated Data 
Archive. [Online]  
Available at: https://www.orfeus-eu.org/data/eida/ 
[Accessed 06 09 2018]. 
Ottemller, . L., Havskov, J. & Voss, P., 2017. SEISAN: THE EARTHQUAKE ANALYSIS SOFTWARE FOR 
WINDOWS, SOLARIS, LINUX and MACOSX, s.l.: s.n. 
Pacheco, J. F. & Sykes, L., 1992. Seismic moment catalog of large shallow earthquajes, 1900 to 1989. 
Bullentin Seimological Society America, Volume 82, pp. 1306 - 1349. 
Padman, R., 2007. Computational Physics Self-study guide 2 Programming in Fortran 95. Michaelmas: 
University of Cambridge Department of Physics. 
Papadakis, G., Vallianatos, F. & Sammonds, P., 2013. Evidence of Nonextensive Statistical Physics behavior 
of the Hellenic Subduction Zone seismicity. Tectonophysics, Volume 608, p. 1037  1048. 
Papadakis, G., Vallianatos, F. & Sammonds, . P., 2014. A Nonextensive Statistical Physics Analysis of the 
1995 Kobe, Japan Earthquake.. Pure and Applied Geophysics, Volume 172, pp. 1923 - 1931. 
Papadakis, G., Vallianatos, F. & Sammonds, P., 2016. Non-extensive statistical physics applied to heat flow 
and the earthquake frequency-magnitude distribution in Greece. Physica A Statistical Mechanics and its 
Applications, Volume 456, pp. 135 - 144. 
Papadimitriou, E., Karakostas, V., Mesimeri, M. & Vallianatos, F., 2016. The M w6.7 12 October 2013 
western Hellenic Arc main shock and its aftershock sequence: implications for the slab properties. 
International Journal of Earth Sciences , 105(7), p. 21492160. 
Papadopoulos, G. A., 1986. Long term earthquake prediction in western Hellenic arc,. Earthquake Pred. Res, 
Volume 4, pp. 131 - 137. 
Papadopoulos, G. A., 1988. Long-term accelerating foreshock activity may indicate the occurrence time of a 
strong shock in the Western Hellenic Arc. Tectonophysics, 152(09), pp. 179 - 192. 
Papadopoulos, G. A., Charalampakis, M. & Fokaefs, A., 2010. Strong foreshock signal preceding the 
L'Aquila (Italy) earthquake (Mw6.3) of 6 April 2009. Natural Hazards and Earth System Science, 10(1), pp. 
19-24. 
Papadopoulos, G. A., Drakatos, G. & Plessa, A., 2000. Foreshock activity as a precursor of strong 
earthquakes in Corinthos Gulf, Central Greece. Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, Part A: Solid Earth and 
Geodesy, 25(3), pp. 239 - 245. 
Papadopoulos, G. A. & Minadakis, G., 2016. Foreshock Patterns Preceding Great Earthquakes in the 
Subduction Zone of Chile,, 2016, 173, 10-11, 3247-3271. Pure and Applied Geophysics, 173(10 - 11), pp. 
3247 - 3271. 
Papazachos , C. & Papazachos, B., 2001. Precursory accelerated Benioff strain in the Aegean area. Annali Di 
Geofisica, 44(04), pp. 461 - 474.. 
Papazachos, B. C., 1990. Seismicity of the Aegean and surrounding area. Tectonophysics, Volume 178, p. 
287  308. 
Papazachos, B. C. et al., 2005. Deep structure and active tectonics of the southern Aegan volcanic arc. In: F. 
M. V. G.E., ed. The South Aegean Active Volcanic Arc. s.l.:Elsevier. 
Papazachos, B. C., Karakostas, V. G., Papazachos, C. B. & Scordilis, E. M., 2002. The geometry of the 
WadatiBenioff zone and lithospheric kinematics in the Hellenic arc. Tectonophysics, Issue 319, p. 275300. 
Papazachos, B. C., Papaioannou, C. A., Papazachos, C. B. & Savvaidis, A. S., 1999. Rupture zones in the 
Aegean region. Tectonophysics, Volume 308, p. 205221. 
Papazachos, B. & Papazachos, C., 2000. Accelerated Preshock Deformation of Broad Regions in the Aegean. 
Pure appl. geophys., Volume 157, p. 16631681. 
Papazachos, B. & Papazachou, K., 2003. The earthquakes of Greece.. s.l.:Ziti Publications. 
Papazachos, C. B., Karakaisis , G. F., Scordilis, E. M. & Papazachos, B. C., 2005. Global observational 
properties of the critical earthquake model. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 95(10), p. 1841 
 1855.. 
Papazachos, C. B., Karakaisis, G. F., Savvaidis, A. & Papazachos, B. C., 2002. Accelerating Seismic Crustal 
Deformation in the Southern Aegean Area. 2002. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 92(03), 
pp. 570 - 580. 
Papazachos, C. B. & Nolet, G., 1997. P and S deep velocity structure of the Hellenic area obtained by robust 
nonlinear inversion of travel times. J. Geophys. Res, Volume 102, pp. 8349-8367. 
Papazachos, C. B. & Papaioannou, C. A., 1997. The macroseismic field of the Balkan area. J. Seismology, 
Volume 1, pp. 181 - 201. 
Peng, Z., 2011. Basic statistical seismology tutorial. [Online]  
Available at: http://geophysics.eas.gatech.edu/people/bsullivan/tutorial/StatisticalSeismology.htm 
[Accessed 2018 08 22]. 
Piper, D. J. W. & Perissoratis, C., 2003. Quaternary neotectonics of the South Aegean arc. Marine Geology, 
Volume 198, pp. 259 - 288. 
Pujol, J., 2003. Elastic Wave Propagation and Generation in Seismology. U. S. A.: Cambridge University 
Press,. 
Reasenberg, P., 1985. Second-Order Moment of Central California Seismicity, 1969-1982. Journal of 
Geophysical Research , Volume 90, pp. 5479-5495. 
Reasenberg, P. & Jones, L. M., 1989. Earthquake hazard after a mainshock in California. Science, Volume 
243, pp. 1173 - 1176.. 
Ref Tek, 2018. Refraction Technology, Inc.. [Online]  
Available at: www.reftek.com 
[Accessed 2018 08 22]. 
Reilinger, R. et al., 2006. GPS constraints on continental deformation in the AfricaArabiaEurasia 
continental collisional zone and implications for the dynamics of plate interactions. J. Geophys. Res., Volume 
Richter, C. F., 1935. An istrumental earthquake magnitude scale. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of 
America, pp. 1 - 32. 
Ruff, L. & Kanamori, H., 1983. Seismic coupling and uncouping at subduction zones. Tectonophysics, 
Volume 99, pp. 99 - 117. 
Rundle, J. B., Klein, W., Turcotte, D. & Malamud, B. D., 2000. Precursory Seismic Activation and Critical-
point Phenomena. Pure and Apprlied Geophysics, Volume 157, pp. 2165 - 2182. 
Saleur, H., Sammis, C. G. & Sornette, D., 1996. Discrete scale invariance, complex fractal dimensions, and 
log-periodic fluctuations in seismicity. J. Geophys. Res., Volume 101, pp. 17661 - 17677. 
Schmitz, J. E., 2007. The Second Law of Life: Energy, Technology, and the Future of Earth as We Know It. 
s.l.:William Andrew Publishing. 
Scholz, C. H., 1968. The frequency-magnitude relation of microfracturing in rock and its relation to 
earthquakes. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, Volume 58 , p. 399  415. 
Scholz, C. H. & Mandelbrot, B. B., 1989. Fractals in geophysics. s.l.:Basel: Birkhuser. 
Schorlemmer, D. & Wiemer, S., 2005. Microseismicity data forecast rapture area,. Nature, Volume 434. 
Schorlemmer, D., Wiemer, S. & Wyss, M., 2005. Variations in earthquake-size distribution across different 
stress regimes. Nature, Volume 437, p. 539  542. 
Scordilis, E. M., 2005. Globally valid relations converting Ms, mb and Mjma to Mw.. NATO Advanced 
Research Workshop on Earthquake Monitor and Seismic Hazard Mitigaion in Balkan Countires 11- 17. 
Scordilis, E. M., 2006. Decelerating precursory seismicity in Vrancea. Tectonophysics, Volume 420, pp. 509 - 
Scordilis, E. M., 2006. Empirical global relations converting MS and mb to moment magnitude. Journal of 
Seismology, Issue 10, pp. 225-236. 
Scordilis, E. M., Kementidou, D. & Papazachos, B. C., 2015. Local magnitude calibration of the Hellenic 
Unified Seismic Network. J. Seismology. 
Scordilis, E. M., Papazachos, C. B., Karakaisis, G. F. & Karakostas, V. G., 2004. Accelerating seismic crustal 
deformation before strong mainshocks in Adriatic and its importance for earthquake prediction. J. 
Seismology, Volume 8, p. 57  70. 
Seber, G. A. F. & Wild, C. J., 2003. Nonlinear Regression. s.l.:John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Seidel, E., 1978. Petrologie der Phyllit-Quarzit-Serie Kretas.. Habil Schr Tech Univ Braunschweig: 145 S.  
Seidel, E., Kreuzer, H. & Harre, W., 1982. A Late Oligocene/Early Miocene high pressure belt in the external 
Hellenides. Geol. Jahrb., E 23,, pp. 65-206. 
Shaw, B., 2012. Active Tectonics of the Hellenic Subduction Zone. s.l.:Springer. 
Shcherbakov, R. & Turcotte, D. L., 2003. Damage and Self-similarity in fracture. Theoretical and Applied 
Fracture Mechanics, Volume 39, pp. 245 - 258. 
Sheriff, R. E., 1984. Encyclopedic Dictionary of Applied Geophysics. s.l.:The Society of Exploration 
Geophysicists. 
Shire, S. B. & Richardson, S. H., 2011. Start of the Wilson Cycle at 3 Ga Shown by Diamonds from 
Subcontinental Mantle. Science, Volume 333, p. 434  436. 
Siedel, E., 1971. Die Pindos-Serie in West Kreta, auf der Insel Gavdos und im Kedros-Gebiet (Mittelkreta).. 
Jahrb Geol Pal/iontol Abh 137, pp. 443-460. 
Siedel, E. et al., 1981. Eo-Alpine metamorphism in the uppermost unit of the Cretan nappe system,. 
Ppetrology and geochronology : Part 2. Synopsis of high temperature metamorphics and associated 
ophiolites., pp. 351-361. 
Siedel, M., Schliestedt, M., Kreuzer, H. & Harre, W., 1977. Metamorphic rocks of Late Jurassic age as 
components of the ophiolitic melange on Gavdos and Crete (Greece). Geol Jb B28, pp. 3-21. 
Silva, R., Franca, G. S., Vilar, C. S. & Alcaniz, J. S., 2006. Nonextensive models for earthquakes. Phys. Rev. 
E, Volume 73. 
Smith, P. L., 2006. A Primer for Sampling Solids, Liquids, and Gases. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: American 
Statistical Association and the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. 
Sornette, A. & Sornette, D., 1989. Self-organized criticality and earthquakes. Europhysics Letters, Volume 9, 
pp. 197 - 202. 
Sornette, A. & Sornette, D., 1990. Earthquake rapture as a critical point: consequences for telluric precursors. 
Tectonophysics, Volume 179, pp. 327 - 334. 
Sornette, D. & Sammis, C. G., 1995. Complex critical exponents from renormalization group theory of 
earthquakes: Implications for earthquake prdictions. J. Phys, 1(5), pp. 607 - 619. 
Sornette, D. & Vanneste, C., 1992. Dynamics and Memory Effects in Rupture of Thermal Fuse Networks. 
Physical Review Letter, Volume 68, pp. 612 - 616.. 
Sotolongo-Costa, O. & Posadas, A., 2004. Fragment-asperity interaction model for earthquakes. Phys. Rev. 
Lett., 92(4). 
Stork, A. L., Verdon, J. P. & Kendall, J. -M., 2014. The robustness of seismic moment and magnitudes 
estimated using. Geophysical Prospecting, Volume 62, pp. 862 - 878. 
Theye, T., Seidel, E. & Vidal, O., 1992. Carphollite, sudoite and chloritoid in low high-pressure metapelites 
from Crete and the Peloponnesese Grecce. Eur J Mineral 4:, pp. 487--507. 
Tiampo, K., Bowman, D. D., Colella, H. & Rundle, J. B., 2008. The Stress Accumulation Method and the 
Pattern Informatics Index: Complementary Approaches to Earthquake Forecasting. Pure and Applied 
Geophysics, Volume 165, p. 693  709. 
Tiedemann, H., 1992. Disaster Prevention and Mitigation: Some Prerequisites. Disaster Prevention and 
Management: An International Journal, 1(1). 
Timoshenko, S., 1953. History of the strength of materials. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Torsvik, T. H. & Cocks, L. R. M., 2012. From Wegener until now: the development of our understanding of 
Earth's Phanerozoic evolution. GEOLGICA BLGICA, Volume 15/3, pp. 181-192. 
Trnkoczy, A., 2009. Understanding and parameter setting of STA/LTA trigger. In: New Manual of 
Seismological Observatory Practice. s.l.:s.n. 
Tsallis, C., 1988. Possible generalization of Boltzmann-Gibbs statistics. Journal of Statistical Physics, Issue 
52, pp. 479-487. 
Tsallis, C., 1999. Nonextensive statistics: Theoretical, experimental and computational evidences and 
connections. J. Phys., Volume 29, pp. 1 - 35. 
Tsallis, C., 2001. Non extensive statistical mechanics and its applications. s.l.:Springer. 
Tsallis, C., 2009. Introduction to Nonextensive Statistical Mechanics - Approaching a Complex World. 
s.l.:Springer. 
Tsampas, A., 2006. The critical earthquake model in low seismicity areas of Europe.. MSc Thesis Aristotle 
University of Thessaloniki. 
Tsekouras, G. A. & Tsallis, C., 2005. Generalized entropy arising from a distribution of q indices. Physical 
Review E, 71(4). 
Turcotte, D. L., 1997. Fractals and chaos in geology and geophysics. 2nd ed. s.l.:Cambridge. 
Turcotte, D. L. & Schubert, G., 2002. Geodynamics. s.l.:Cambridge University Press. 
Tzanis, A. & Vallianatos, F., 2003. Distributed power-law seismicity changes and crustal deformation in the 
SW Hellenic Arc.. Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences, Volume 3, p. 179  195. 
Tzanis, A., Vallianatos, F. & Makropoulos, K., 2000. Seismic and electrical precursors to the 17-1-1983, M7 
Kefallinia earthquake, Greece: Signatures of a SOC system. Physics and Chemistry of the Earth Part A: Solid 
Earth and Geodesy, Volume 25, pp. 281 - 287.. 
Udias, A., 1999. Principles of Seismology. United Kingdom : Cambridge university press. 
URAHA FOUNDATION GERMANY E.V., 2017. How earthquakes work. [Online]  
Available at: http://uraha.de/de/?p=250 
[Accessed 11 2017]. 
USGS - Historical perspective, 1999. [Online]  
Available at: https://pubs.usgs.gov/gip/dynamic/historical.html 
[Accessed 04 2018]. 
USGS - Undestanding plate motions, 2017. Undestanding plate motions. [Online]  
Available at: https://pubs.usgs.gov/gip/dynamic/understanding.html 
[Accessed 12 2017]. 
USGS, 1996. Focal Mechanism. [Online]  
Available at: https://earthquake.usgs.gov/learn/topics/beachball.php 
[Accessed 2018]. 
Utsu, T., 1961. A statistical study of the occurrence of aftershocks. Geophysical Magazine, Volume 30, p. 
521  605. 
Utsu, T., Ogata, , Y. & Matsuura, R., 1995. The centenary of the Omori formula for a decay law of 
aftershock activity. Journal of Physics of the Earth, Volume 43, p. 1  33. 
Vallianatos, F., Michas, G. & Papadakis, G., 2018. Non Extensive statistical Seismology: An overview , in 
Complexity of Seismic Time Series .Measurement and Application. 1st edition, ed. s.l.:Elsevier. 
Vallianatos, F., Baziotis, I., Udry, A. & Taylor, L., 2014. Application of non-extensive statistical physics on 
Martian nakhlites: A first-order approach on the crystal size distribution of pyroxene using Tsallis entropy. 
Eur. Phys. Let. (EPL), Volume 108. 
Vallianatos, F., Michas, G. & Papadakis, G., 2014. Non-extensive and natural time analysis of seismicity 
before the Mw6.4, October12, 2013 earthquake in the South West segment of the Hellenic Arc. Physica A-
Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, Volume 414, p. 163  173. 
Vallianatos, F., Michas, G. & Papadakis, G., 2015. A description of seismicity based on non-extensive 
statistical physics: A review. In Earthquakes and Their Impact on Society.. s.l.:Springer Natural Hazard. 
Vallianatos, F., Michas, G., Papadakis, G. & Sammonds, P., 2012. A non-extensive statistical physics view to 
the spatiotemporal properties of the June 1995, Aigion earthquake (M6.2) aftershock sequence (West Corinth 
rift, Greece). Acta Geophysica, 60(3), p. 758  768. 
Vallianatos, F., Papadakis, G. & Michas, G., 2016. Generalized statistical mechanics approaches to 
earthquakes and tectonics. Proc. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci.. 
van Stiphout, T., Zhuang, T. & Marsan, D., 2012. Seismicity declustering,. Community Online Resource for 
Statistical Seismicity Analysis, pp. 1 - 25. 
Varnes, D. G., 1989. Predicting Earthquakes by Analyzing Accelerating Precursory Seismic Activity. Pure 
applied geophysics, Volume 130, pp. 661 - 686.. 
Vine, F. J. M. D., 1963. Magnetic anomalies over oceanic ridges. Nature, pp. 947 - 949. 
Voight, B., 1989. A relation to describe rate-dependent material failure. Science, Volume 243, pp. 200 - 203. 
Wadati, K., 1933. On the travel time of earthquake waves.Part. II. Geophys. Mag. (Tokyo), Volume 7, pp. 
101-111. 
Waldhauser, F., 2001. hypoDDA Program to Compute Double-Difference Hypocenter Locations, s.l.: U.S. 
Geological Survey. 
Wang, J. H., 2016. A mechanism causing b- value anomalies prior to a mainshock. Bulletin of the 
Seismological Society of America, Volume 106, pp. 1663 - 1671.. 
Wielandt, E., 2003. Seismometry. In: K. K. Jennings, ed. International Handbook of Earthquake and 
Engineering Seismology. s.l.:Academic Press. 
Wiemer, S. & Wyss., M., 2000. Minimum magnitude of complete reporting in earthquake catalogs: Examples 
from Alaska, the Western US, and Japan. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am., 90, , 2000., Volume 90, p. 859  869. 
Wilson, J. T., 1966. Did the Atlantic close and then re-open?. Nature vol. 211, pp. 676 - 681. 
Woessner, J., Hardebeck, J. & Haukkson, E., 2010. What is an instrumental seismicity catalog. Community 
Online Resource for Statistical Seismicity Analysis, pp. 1-14. 
Wyss, M., Hasegawa, A., Wiemer, S. & Umino, N., 1999. Quantitative mapping of precursory seismic 
quiescence before the 1989, m7.1 O-sanriku earthquake, Japan. Annali di Geofisica, Volume 42, p. 851  869. 
Wyss, M., Wiemer, S. & Zuniga, R., 2001. ZMAP A tool for analyses of seismicity patterns, s.l.: s.n. 
Xue, Y., Liu, J., Yu, H. & Liu, S. Q., 2012. Seismicity characteristics of the 2011 M9.0 Tohuku earthquake 
near the East Cost of Honshu in Japan. Chinese Science Bulletin, Volume 57, pp. 886 - 893. 
Zager, D., 1972. Sedimentologie der Tripolitsakarbonate im nordlichen Mittelkreta. Dissertation, Univ 
Freiburg, pp. 1--165. 
Zandt, G. & Ammon, C. J., 1995. Continental crust composition constrained by measurements of crustal 
Poisson's ratio. Nature, Volume 374, pp. 152 - 154. 
Zaslavsky, G. M., 1999. Chaotic dynamics and the origin of statistical laws. Physics Today, Volume 52. 
zeros-MathWorks, 2018. zeros. [Online]  
Available at: https://uk.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/zeros.html 
[Accessed 30 07 2018]. 
Appendix 1 Foreshock catalogues 
Foreshocks of the 15/06/2013 strong event 
24.9550 34.7860 2012 1 18 2.8 25 10 53 51 
24.9050 34.8250 2012 3 8 3.3 9 11 16 3 
24.9465 34.8127 2012 3 11 3.2 24.5 22 16 29 
25.0416 34.7927 2012 3 16 2.9 23.1 16 11 33 
25.0550 34.9340 2012 4 9 2.8 18 17 52 50 
25.1320 34.7180 2012 4 9 2.7 14 21 26 52 
25.0890 34.7460 2012 7 7 2.8 9 17 17 11 
25.0430 34.7760 2012 7 15 2.7 1 20 0 9 
24.8943 34.7991 2012 8 7 3.3 16.7 12 57 15 
24.9010 34.7720 2012 9 16 2.8 1 5 7 49 
24.9100 34.8380 2012 10 17 2.7 0 18 10 36 
24.9940 34.8820 2012 12 18 3.4 29 3 39 1 
25.0000 34.7060 2012 12 26 2.9 9 12 30 25 
24.8990 34.7910 2013 1 1 3.0 27 15 23 59 
25.1607 34.7890 2013 1 9 2.7 7 4 8 39 
25.0000 34.7600 2013 1 12 2.7 28 8 34 21 
24.9440 34.7530 2013 1 30 3.1 13 16 8 16 
25.1870 34.8590 2013 2 9 3.0 0 21 51 20 
24.9890 34.7130 2013 3 12 2.8 6 2 42 34 
24.8790 34.8370 2013 3 18 2.7 21 9 43 21 
24.9900 34.7400 2013 4 3 2.7 29 9 57 34 
25.1900 34.8300 2013 4 7 2.7 27 13 17 41 
24.9600 34.7660 2013 4 17 3.4 20 8 4 4 
25.0090 34.7120 2013 4 17 2.9 8 10 13 44 
24.9660 34.7360 2013 4 29 2.7 10 7 20 15 
25.1980 34.8180 2013 5 10 2.9 22 10 18 59 
24.9040 34.9090 2013 5 19 2.9 15 20 51 57 
25.0770 34.7940 2013 5 20 2.7 17 12 45 29 
24.9920 34.8250 2013 5 24 2.7 8 22 27 57 
25.0453 34.3170 2013 6 15 6.0 14.1 16 11 1.8 
Foreshocks of the 12/10/2013 strong event 
23.1718 35.1507 2011 1 4 3.1 7.4 7 11 49 
23.2550 35.2073 2011 1 10 2.9 0.1 14 35 14 
23.2724 35.1960 2011 1 11 3.5 25 23 35 4 
23.0933 35.1482 2011 1 15 3.0 8.8 0 36 38 
23.1478 35.0289 2011 1 15 3.1 14.3 19 38 25 
23.1470 35.0880 2011 3 15 2.7 38 17 26 47 
23.1863 35.2418 2011 4 20 3.0 24 18 47 2 
23.2670 35.0930 2011 5 1 3.1 2 20 4 4 
23.1800 35.0900 2011 10 5 2.7 24 1 50 14 
23.0500 35.1000 2011 10 18 3.0 30 13 12 45 
23.1100 35.1800 2011 10 18 3.4 12 13 23 2 
23.0160 35.1880 2011 11 8 3.1 12 23 47 25 
23.2380 35.2260 2011 11 12 3.2 7 11 38 3 
23.1670 35.0840 2011 12 16 2.9 14 19 52 2 
23.1600 35.0600 2012 2 6 2.7 39 8 21 45 
23.1300 35.0800 2012 2 8 2.7 39 23 22 57 
23.0760 35.0230 2012 4 24 2.8 11 22 4 43 
22.9940 35.2370 2012 5 31 3.4 0 6 7 36 
23.0960 35.0690 2012 6 22 2.8 2 0 54 38 
23.0161 35.2448 2012 8 14 3.0 2.3 8 23 18 
23.2690 35.1270 2012 8 25 2.9 0 2 44 38 
23.0460 35.2340 2012 9 1 2.7 14 0 41 42 
23.1400 35.1540 2012 9 18 2.8 0 10 31 5 
23.2581 35.1243 2012 9 25 3.5 5.9 9 27 40 
23.2130 35.1940 2012 10 6 3.1 16 22 13 13 
23.0720 35.2430 2012 10 22 3.5 25 1 40 44 
22.9800 35.1720 2012 11 28 2.8 0 16 46 24 
23.1470 35.0430 2012 12 20 2.8 11 19 22 1 
23.2100 35.1300 2013 1 31 2.7 40 8 43 30 
23.1700 35.1700 2013 2 8 2.7 11 2 27 24 
23.1700 35.100 2013 2 8 2.9 22 2 31 40 
23.1840 35.0330 2013 2 8 3.3 7 2 34 55 
22.9530 35.1140 2013 3 3 2.8 7 11 56 55 
23.1540 35.0990 2013 3 31 3.0 16 5 53 59 
23.0160 35.1420 2013 3 31 3.0 17 11 0 8 
23.1040 35.0620 2013 4 23 2.7 0 17 36 35 
23.1320 35.1020 2013 5 28 3.2 6 11 12 7 
23.0430 35.1410 2013 5 31 3.3 6 4 41 39 
23.1060 35.0910 2013 6 13 3.0 14 1 56 58 
23.0230 35.2020 2013 6 24 2.7 12 2 24 29 
23.1170 35.0310 2013 7 3 3.8 24 21 3 35 
23.1230 35.0330 2013 7 13 3.4 23 23 45 13 
23.0180 35.0780 2013 8 1 2.9 0 4 3 49 
23.1480 35.2050 2013 8 7 2.7 0 0 50 55 
23.1550 35.2810 2013 8 21 2.7 5 20 46 17 
23.1870 35.0320 2013 8 30 3.0 6 17 55 35 
23.1950 35.0870 2013 9 5 3.2 0 3 48 30 
23.2020 35.0840 2013 9 8 3.2 0 6 44 57 
23.1330 35.1530 2013 9 21 3.2 0 14 46 41 
23.2425 35.4218 2013 10 12 6.2 47.4 13 11 53.6 
Foreshocks of the 16/04/2015 strong event 
27.4400 35.4400 2011 1 16 3 12 12 39 40 
27.4800 35.4000 2011 1 21 3.1 32 21 42 46 
27.5997 35.4755 2011 5 21 2.7 31.3 13 3 9 
27.5785 35.4045 2012 1 11 2.6 38.2 20 9 31 
27.4535 35.5523 2012 6 13 2.5 10 8 42 24 
27.4493 35.5513 2012 12 16 2.5 13.9 12 4 17 
27.4608 35.5317 2012 12 16 2.5 13.8 12 42 5 
27.4993 35.4817 2012 12 16 3.2 15.5 13 41 14 
27.6115 35.4583 2013 5 6 2.5 37.7 4 14 49 
27.5652 35.4330 2013 6 24 2.5 14.1 11 33 50 
27.5113 35.3642 2013 7 2 2.5 22.4 11 8 3 
27.3138 35.4963 2013 10 14 2.8 20.3 1 36 11 
27.3530 35.3740 2014 2 3 2.6 23.4 5 18 18 
27.4090 35.5268 2014 4 23 2.8 31.4 11 48 44 
27.4735 35.3660 2014 4 25 2.5 12.3 17 47 22 
27.5257 35.5617 2014 8 8 2.5 24.3 11 18 45 
27.5138 35.3732 2014 9 19 3.1 17 23 11 54 
27.5535 35.3815 2014 9 20 2.7 17.2 1 48 16 
27.3802 35.4833 2014 10 31 3.1 17.7 14 58 1 
27.4895 35.4123 2014 12 31 2.7 12.5 18 32 35 
27.3892 35.4090 2015 1 3 3 7.2 16 2 22 
27.3640 35.5053 2015 1 25 2.8 33.1 9 30 32 
27.4195 35.5397 2015 1 29 2.5 18.6 4 57 41 
27.3178 35.5033 2015 3 15 2.5 14.9 16 44 1 
27.5405 35.4330 2015 4 2 3.4 35.3 8 49 45 
27.5873 35.4142 2015 4 6 3.1 32.1 10 59 42 
26.9172 35.0435 2015 4 6 6.1 5.3 18 7 42 
Appendix 2 Aftershock- swarm catalogues 
Catalogue of 15/06/2013 sequence  
25.0453 34.3170 2013 6 15 6.0 14.1 16 11 1.8 0.5 0.7 
24.8785 34.3775 2013 6 15 3.7 26.1 16 16 29.8 1.1 1.3 
24.8968 34.3077 2013 6 15 3.9 15.5 16 20 33.2 0.8 0.6 
25.0768 34.2818 2013 6 15 3.4 15.1 16 21 50.4 1.4 1.2 
25.0825 34.3115 2013 6 15 4.5 12.6 16 23 17.0 0.7 0.6 
24.9765 34.2278 2013 6 15 4.7 9.7 16 28 56.1 0.8 0.9 
25.0250 34.4602 2013 6 15 3.4 22.2 16 39 15.4 0.8 0.9 
24.9102 34.2582 2013 6 15 3.2 3.6 16 41 5.6 0.8 1.1 
24.9192 34.2632 2013 6 15 3.3 15.6 16 42 24.5 1.3 1.1 
25.0163 34.2398 2013 6 15 3.9 7.9 16 45 48.3 0.6 0.8 
24.9787 34.2548 2013 6 15 3.7 11.2 16 47 29.9 1.0 0.6 
24.9467 34.2193 2013 6 15 3.3 12.6 16 49 13.4 1.0 0.8 
24.9877 34.2562 2013 6 15 4.5 8.2 16 51 14.0 0.9 1.0 
24.9338 34.4745 2013 6 15 3.8 21.4 16 54 16.5 1.1 0.9 
24.8082 34.2263 2013 6 15 3.2 4.5 16 56 27.5 1.1 1.5 
25.0920 34.4422 2013 6 15 4.4 24.9 16 59 37.9 1.1 1.8 
25.0947 34.3200 2013 6 15 2.8 11.5 17 5 50.5 2.1 2.0 
25.1075 34.1927 2013 6 15 3.4 7.5 17 9 29.1 0.9 1.0 
25.0593 34.2643 2013 6 15 3.9 11.3 17 10 39.4 1.0 0.7 
24.8400 34.2432 2013 6 15 2.6 8.9 17 14 21.3 1.3 1.4 
24.9973 34.2683 2013 6 15 3.0 7.7 17 19 13.8 0.8 0.8 
25.0302 34.2585 2013 6 15 4.8 8.0 17 22 6.3 0.7 0.9 
25.0032 34.2330 2013 6 15 3.9 13.6 17 24 13.2 1.4 1.5 
25.0003 34.2968 2013 6 15 3.2 13.8 17 26 22.2 2.5 3.9 
24.8818 34.1873 2013 6 15 3.2 0.0 17 28 37.6 0.9 1.1 
25.0715 34.4108 2013 6 15 3.5 12.6 17 29 21.8 1.0 1.3 
24.8805 34.2747 2013 6 15 2.7 8.4 17 38 38.0 0.8 0.8 
25.0350 34.2528 2013 6 15 2.9 11.7 17 41 26.7 1.5 0.8 
24.9835 34.2588 2013 6 15 2.9 7.6 17 44 38.0 0.5 0.7 
24.9230 34.2968 2013 6 15 2.6 11.3 17 46 59.0 0.9 0.6 
25.0393 34.2953 2013 6 15 3.1 9.5 17 52 54.4 0.6 0.6 
25.0505 34.2773 2013 6 15 3.2 9.7 17 54 21.3 0.6 0.8 
25.0030 34.4342 2013 6 15 3.2 23.4 17 55 56.4 0.8 0.7 
24.9445 34.2120 2013 6 15 3.3 9.9 17 57 50.3 1.2 1.0 
25.1038 34.2022 2013 6 15 2.6 6.6 18 0 20.8 0.9 1.0 
24.9337 34.2698 2013 6 15 2.8 8.7 18 2 9.3 1.1 1.1 
24.9948 34.3445 2013 6 15 2.8 9.1 18 5 46.3 0.9 1.1 
25.1975 34.3293 2013 6 15 3.0 12.1 18 8 14.3 1.4 0.8 
24.9890 34.2158 2013 6 15 2.6 16.1 18 12 7.1 1.4 1.8 
25.1673 34.3042 2013 6 15 2.9 12.8 18 15 41.1 0.7 0.7 
25.0083 34.2493 2013 6 15 3.3 5.1 18 16 49.0 0.5 0.6 
24.9252 34.1435 2013 6 15 3.1 16.8 18 20 26.7 1.2 1.7 
25.2465 34.3355 2013 6 15 2.5 10.6 18 22 19.4 1.6 1.6 
25.0088 34.2125 2013 6 15 3.9 8.0 18 24 50.3 0.5 0.5 
24.8027 34.3008 2013 6 15 2.7 20.3 18 27 21.8 1.8 1.4 
25.0940 34.2630 2013 6 15 3.3 7.8 18 33 36.5 0.9 1.1 
24.9672 34.2732 2013 6 15 3.0 11.0 18 36 15.0 1.1 1.3 
24.8785 34.2205 2013 6 15 2.7 9.2 18 38 41.0 1.2 1.2 
24.9963 34.2922 2013 6 15 3.3 10.4 18 41 13.8 1.4 1.2 
25.0332 34.2568 2013 6 15 3.0 11.3 18 42 34.7 1.0 0.7 
25.0065 34.2677 2013 6 15 3.2 6.6 18 43 58.6 0.6 0.8 
25.1465 34.3072 2013 6 15 2.5 9.9 18 45 21.4 1.2 1.0 
25.0648 34.3967 2013 6 15 2.8 19.9 18 46 52.9 0.9 1.2 
25.0275 34.2730 2013 6 15 3.7 7.8 19 2 5.2 0.6 0.7 
24.9093 34.2808 2013 6 15 3.2 9.2 19 3 11.6 0.8 0.9 
25.0340 34.2713 2013 6 15 4.4 8.2 19 4 4.7 0.6 0.6 
25.0592 34.2535 2013 6 15 2.6 13.7 19 10 22.9 1.0 1.2 
25.0062 34.2578 2013 6 15 3.5 11.1 19 14 3.7 1.0 0.7 
24.9012 34.2090 2013 6 15 2.7 0.1 19 17 1.2 1.8 1.9 
24.9847 34.2175 2013 6 15 3.2 8.8 19 18 34.9 0.9 0.9 
25.0592 34.1800 2013 6 15 3.5 13.7 19 21 56.4 2.5 2.3 
25.0953 34.3047 2013 6 15 3.7 11.4 19 27 41.8 0.8 0.5 
24.9555 34.2443 2013 6 15 2.5 9.5 19 31 33.8 1.0 0.8 
25.0285 34.3395 2013 6 15 3.4 15.9 19 36 7.8 0.7 0.8 
24.9408 34.4353 2013 6 15 3.2 22.5 19 37 31.0 1.0 1.2 
24.9763 34.1917 2013 6 15 2.8 3.3 19 42 11.5 1.7 2.1 
24.9925 34.1845 2013 6 15 2.6 5.7 19 53 57.3 1.7 1.6 
25.0545 34.2940 2013 6 15 2.4 10.4 20 6 21.9 2.0 1.9 
24.9640 34.3133 2013 6 15 2.6 25.2 20 12 44.2 1.2 1.4 
24.9517 34.2783 2013 6 15 3.2 7.4 20 13 40.1 0.9 1.2 
24.9712 34.2270 2013 6 15 2.8 3.1 20 15 44.5 1.0 1.2 
25.0723 34.2835 2013 6 15 2.8 8.8 20 20 24.6 0.6 0.6 
24.9175 34.1892 2013 6 15 2.5 1.5 20 22 22.3 1.0 1.2 
24.9507 34.2610 2013 6 15 2.7 13.6 20 24 42.5 1.0 1.1 
24.9217 34.2220 2013 6 15 3.0 15.5 20 25 33.8 1.5 1.3 
24.9560 34.2667 2013 6 15 2.7 7.3 20 29 36.6 1.3 1.7 
25.1232 34.2687 2013 6 15 2.3 7.8 20 36 19.8 1.0 1.2 
25.0452 34.3067 2013 6 15 3.2 10.1 20 47 22.2 0.7 0.9 
25.0168 34.2618 2013 6 15 3.3 6.8 20 48 24.1 0.7 0.7 
24.8918 34.2802 2013 6 15 3.1 13.0 20 57 4.3 1.0 0.7 
24.8642 34.2767 2013 6 15 2.9 9.6 20 57 38.0 1.8 1.6 
24.9017 34.2348 2013 6 15 2.5 15.9 21 2 17.6 1.2 0.9 
25.0197 34.2908 2013 6 15 2.7 8.0 21 5 59.4 1.1 1.1 
25.0195 34.2830 2013 6 15 3.5 8.6 21 8 22.8 0.8 0.7 
25.0330 34.3118 2013 6 15 3.5 10.7 21 14 57.5 0.5 0.6 
24.9432 34.2608 2013 6 15 2.6 8.6 21 26 27.9 0.9 0.9 
25.0465 34.4003 2013 6 15 2.5 20.8 21 31 35.4 1.7 1.7 
25.0025 34.2388 2013 6 15 2.4 8.5 21 34 14.2 1.3 1.3 
25.0402 34.3018 2013 6 15 3.3 8.7 21 37 24.7 1.8 1.6 
24.9703 34.4483 2013 6 15 2.5 22.8 21 41 46.0 1.2 0.9 
25.0722 34.3465 2013 6 15 3.9 11.8 21 51 58.0 1.1 0.7 
25.0120 34.2908 2013 6 15 3.1 8.2 21 58 9.8 0.8 0.9 
24.9397 34.2895 2013 6 15 2.5 0.5 22 7 47.1 1.7 1.8 
24.9840 34.3063 2013 6 15 2.2 11.9 22 10 25.4 1.2 0.8 
25.0300 34.2753 2013 6 15 3.1 6.9 22 19 44.5 0.5 0.7 
25.1680 34.3360 2013 6 15 2.3 9.3 22 26 15.3 1.3 1.5 
25.0678 34.2705 2013 6 15 2.8 8.7 22 27 7.9 1.0 1.0 
25.0970 34.4212 2013 6 15 2.0 10.0 22 28 39.9 5.4 7.3 
24.7937 34.2635 2013 6 15 2.6 9.6 22 43 23.0 1.6 1.4 
25.0077 34.3692 2013 6 15 2.6 20.1 22 48 34.0 1.3 0.9 
24.9027 34.2175 2013 6 15 2.6 8.6 22 53 59.7 0.9 0.9 
25.0140 34.2647 2013 6 15 3.1 9.3 22 56 4.6 0.7 0.7 
25.0022 34.2378 2013 6 15 3.2 6.0 23 5 44.9 0.8 1.1 
25.0335 34.2228 2013 6 15 2.4 13.9 23 8 45.4 2.4 2.4 
25.0482 34.2980 2013 6 15 2.8 8.9 23 9 27.2 0.7 0.7 
25.0188 34.2833 2013 6 15 2.7 10.1 23 16 21.3 0.9 0.8 
25.0973 34.2490 2013 6 15 2.5 12.7 23 17 26.0 1.3 1.1 
24.9338 34.1752 2013 6 15 2.3 4.6 23 19 60.0 0.8 1.0 
24.9378 34.2852 2013 6 15 2.5 10.4 23 29 8.0 1.3 1.2 
24.9570 34.3003 2013 6 15 2.5 10.0 23 29 56.5 1.1 1.5 
24.9797 34.2503 2013 6 15 3.1 12.8 23 30 34.6 1.4 1.0 
25.0242 34.2975 2013 6 15 3.3 10.7 23 34 5.6 0.7 0.8 
25.2108 34.3172 2013 6 15 2.6 12.0 23 37 54.9 1.5 1.0 
24.9300 34.1982 2013 6 15 2.5 0.0 23 38 50.1 3.0 2.8 
25.1112 34.2287 2013 6 15 2.3 4.3 23 47 39.2 2.0 2.4 
25.2350 34.3173 2013 6 15 2.8 16.5 23 57 31.4 1.3 1.4 
24.9845 34.2985 2013 6 16 2.4 9.1 0 6 44.0 1.0 0.8 
24.9782 34.2102 2013 6 16 2.3 6.9 0 8 13.3 0.8 0.9 
25.2137 34.3073 2013 6 16 2.8 10.1 0 12 6.0 1.2 1.3 
24.9205 34.1805 2013 6 16 2.6 5.8 0 12 37.7 1.9 2.6 
25.1558 34.4023 2013 6 16 2.2 12.0 0 25 58.5 2.2 2.7 
25.1105 34.3267 2013 6 16 2.3 11.7 0 33 11.2 1.1 0.6 
24.9353 34.2282 2013 6 16 2.8 9.3 0 40 18.3 1.3 1.1 
24.9650 34.2473 2013 6 16 2.7 11.9 0 44 31.1 0.8 0.4 
24.9485 34.3080 2013 6 16 2.9 8.8 0 46 21.3 1.1 1.0 
25.0975 34.2672 2013 6 16 2.3 11.1 0 48 14.2 0.8 0.7 
25.0363 34.2870 2013 6 16 2.5 9.5 0 49 22.1 0.8 0.7 
25.0988 34.3802 2013 6 16 4.1 20.7 0 53 38.0 0.7 0.6 
24.9827 34.2663 2013 6 16 2.4 7.3 0 58 25.1 1.4 1.1 
25.1563 34.2947 2013 6 16 2.3 18.5 0 59 14.5 1.2 1.6 
25.1140 34.2158 2013 6 16 2.1 6.6 1 0 18.9 1.5 1.5 
25.1625 34.2783 2013 6 16 2.5 10.5 1 5 13.1 1.6 1.2 
24.9547 34.2585 2013 6 16 2.8 5.7 1 6 4.2 1.5 1.1 
25.1070 34.2953 2013 6 16 2.3 7.2 1 8 25.7 1.0 1.2 
25.0673 34.2945 2013 6 16 3.5 10.4 1 10 36.2 0.4 0.5 
25.0082 34.2893 2013 6 16 2.3 8.9 1 17 52.1 1.3 0.9 
25.0278 34.4462 2013 6 16 2.3 11.3 1 23 56.2 1.7 1.3 
25.1038 34.2638 2013 6 16 2.1 15.1 1 25 13.7 1.3 2.0 
24.9172 34.2643 2013 6 16 3.4 6.9 1 29 49.4 1.6 1.6 
24.9808 34.2808 2013 6 16 2.4 14.9 1 36 9.3 0.9 0.9 
25.1832 34.2065 2013 6 16 2.3 10.5 1 37 1.5 0.7 0.6 
25.0452 34.2875 2013 6 16 2.9 12.9 2 13 38.2 0.8 0.5 
24.9563 34.1418 2013 6 16 2.1 8.7 2 17 29.0 5.4 4.3 
25.0168 34.2870 2013 6 16 2.8 11.4 2 19 43.2 0.7 0.5 
24.9698 34.2957 2013 6 16 2.8 8.8 2 29 48.9 1.0 0.9 
24.9163 34.2607 2013 6 16 2.5 7.2 2 35 3.3 1.1 1.1 
25.1252 34.1862 2013 6 16 2.1 8.8 2 37 41.3 1.1 0.8 
25.0863 34.4272 2013 6 16 2.0 15.0 2 39 46.1 1.3 1.9 
24.7835 34.3147 2013 6 16 2.3 9.2 2 42 44.7 1.5 1.9 
24.8713 34.2587 2013 6 16 2.8 4.9 2 49 56.3 1.2 1.7 
24.9883 34.2330 2013 6 16 2.2 20.7 2 58 0.1 1.4 2.1 
25.0942 34.2695 2013 6 16 2.3 10.2 3 8 41.1 1.0 1.2 
25.0585 34.3025 2013 6 16 2.9 12.2 3 18 11.9 0.8 0.7 
24.9647 34.2750 2013 6 16 2.5 9.0 3 21 25.4 1.4 1.5 
25.0427 34.4413 2013 6 16 2.7 13.6 3 25 53.3 0.9 1.2 
25.0317 34.2363 2013 6 16 2.7 4.6 3 27 7.1 0.7 0.8 
25.0282 34.2502 2013 6 16 3.0 6.2 3 30 3.3 0.6 0.6 
24.7927 34.2500 2013 6 16 2.3 10.1 3 37 3.2 1.6 1.8 
25.1472 34.3365 2013 6 16 2.2 14.3 3 40 24.1 1.3 1.6 
24.9387 34.2233 2013 6 16 2.7 15.2 3 56 24.0 1.4 1.0 
24.9607 34.2632 2013 6 16 2.4 1.8 4 1 56.6 0.8 1.5 
25.0718 34.2818 2013 6 16 2.8 13.1 4 12 7.7 1.1 0.8 
25.0402 34.2860 2013 6 16 2.6 10.9 4 20 7.6 1.2 1.2 
25.0637 34.3103 2013 6 16 4.1 8.5 4 32 49.2 0.6 0.7 
25.0475 34.3375 2013 6 16 2.9 14.0 4 59 6.6 1.5 2.1 
25.0595 34.4407 2013 6 16 3.2 21.6 5 2 58.5 0.8 0.9 
24.9512 34.4085 2013 6 16 2.1 11.5 5 19 58.0 2.0 1.4 
25.0153 34.3878 2013 6 16 2.2 14.4 5 23 7.7 1.5 2.1 
25.0950 34.3770 2013 6 16 2.0 11.0 5 34 47.3 2.1 3.7 
25.2570 34.3202 2013 6 16 2.2 9.5 5 46 59.4 2.0 3.2 
24.9948 34.2752 2013 6 16 2.4 6.5 5 57 33.9 1.4 1.6 
25.2280 34.3308 2013 6 16 2.2 10.9 6 18 45.8 1.6 2.4 
25.0438 34.3788 2013 6 16 2.0 13.3 6 22 20.5 1.2 1.7 
25.1282 34.2907 2013 6 16 2.2 5.1 6 31 42.7 1.5 2.0 
25.0967 34.2882 2013 6 16 2.3 6.4 6 33 45.0 1.9 2.7 
24.9473 34.3300 2013 6 16 2.2 4.3 6 35 59.1 1.8 3.4 
24.9035 34.2433 2013 6 16 2.8 7.9 6 58 34.6 1.6 1.8 
24.9190 34.3230 2013 6 16 2.5 14.3 7 14 41.6 2.3 2.8 
25.0387 34.3378 2013 6 16 3.5 13.5 7 26 42.6 0.7 0.6 
25.1190 34.2800 2013 6 16 2.2 4.7 7 30 46.6 1.0 1.4 
24.9715 34.2677 2013 6 16 2.2 5.7 7 38 14.8 0.8 1.0 
24.9780 34.2638 2013 6 16 2.9 6.3 7 44 49.8 0.9 0.8 
24.9303 34.2737 2013 6 16 2.5 7.8 8 13 7.2 1.1 1.1 
25.1742 34.3185 2013 6 16 2.2 5.3 8 14 22.9 1.1 1.3 
25.0733 34.3435 2013 6 16 4.2 15.7 8 15 17.8 0.6 0.7 
25.0792 34.2018 2013 6 16 2.3 8.6 8 23 46.7 0.7 0.7 
25.0042 34.2442 2013 6 16 2.5 5.4 8 38 20.2 0.6 0.7 
25.0747 34.2775 2013 6 16 3.0 11.0 9 15 23.7 0.9 1.0 
24.8662 34.3047 2013 6 16 2.3 12.1 9 21 28.4 1.2 0.8 
25.0977 34.2842 2013 6 16 3.0 11.3 9 41 53.1 0.9 0.6 
25.1025 34.2855 2013 6 16 2.4 9.3 10 4 19.5 1.2 1.6 
25.0492 34.2490 2013 6 16 2.6 10.1 10 16 21.6 0.7 0.8 
25.0888 34.2785 2013 6 16 2.3 13.3 10 26 55.0 0.7 0.7 
25.0655 34.2673 2013 6 16 2.5 9.8 10 33 17.6 1.0 1.0 
25.1115 34.3117 2013 6 16 2.2 5.3 10 48 24.1 1.0 1.1 
24.9755 34.2977 2013 6 16 2.8 11.3 11 13 54.0 1.4 0.8 
25.0513 34.2748 2013 6 16 2.3 7.7 11 25 21.0 1.1 1.3 
24.9857 34.2722 2013 6 16 2.2 21.5 11 48 52.8 2.8 4.1 
25.0550 34.3600 2013 6 16 2.6 16.9 12 15 6.7 0.7 0.5 
25.1037 34.2497 2013 6 16 2.7 13.9 12 16 20.9 1.2 1.2 
24.9707 34.2807 2013 6 16 2.7 4.7 12 21 32.4 1.3 2.0 
25.0923 34.2437 2013 6 16 3.3 9.5 12 25 37.3 1.9 2.4 
25.1217 34.2965 2013 6 16 2.7 13.8 12 29 35.3 1.4 1.3 
24.9180 34.3592 2013 6 16 2.2 19.4 12 32 14.3 1.8 2.6 
25.0898 34.2723 2013 6 16 2.5 10.3 12 56 31.1 1.1 0.9 
25.2413 34.3602 2013 6 16 2.2 0.1 13 1 38.3 2.8 2.9 
25.0373 34.2468 2013 6 16 2.2 6.9 13 20 27.1 1.0 1.0 
25.0838 34.2785 2013 6 16 3.0 8.5 13 28 4.5 0.9 0.8 
24.9693 34.3042 2013 6 16 3.1 9.6 14 1 41.7 1.1 1.3 
24.9655 34.2820 2013 6 16 2.4 15.5 14 4 58.8 1.8 1.1 
24.9648 34.2488 2013 6 16 2.4 12.6 14 36 35.3 1.3 1.0 
25.0900 34.2977 2013 6 16 3.0 7.7 14 43 3.2 1.3 1.3 
24.9100 34.2443 2013 6 16 2.5 3.1 15 5 20.9 0.7 1.0 
25.2605 34.2877 2013 6 16 2.5 6.4 15 44 56.5 1.8 2.2 
24.9412 34.2853 2013 6 16 2.6 9.1 16 49 23.7 1.3 1.1 
24.9075 34.2403 2013 6 16 2.4 4.4 17 4 39.5 1.5 2.7 
25.0172 34.4390 2013 6 16 3.0 20.4 17 10 39.3 1.0 1.0 
25.0802 34.3427 2013 6 16 2.6 19.2 17 53 40.4 1.5 2.9 
25.1032 34.4180 2013 6 16 2.2 18.6 18 4 50.1 2.3 3.8 
25.2365 34.3377 2013 6 16 2.3 14.9 18 22 28.3 2.1 2.8 
25.0978 34.3142 2013 6 16 2.5 13.3 18 54 32.3 1.3 0.9 
25.3277 34.2102 2013 6 16 2.2 21.1 19 3 5.7 3.4 5.4 
25.1533 34.3053 2013 6 16 2.2 13.7 20 6 50.3 1.8 1.8 
25.0085 34.2497 2013 6 16 2.6 7.2 20 22 15.0 0.8 0.9 
25.1117 34.3883 2013 6 16 2.7 23.2 20 56 58.6 2.1 3.3 
25.1935 34.2900 2013 6 16 2.3 11.6 21 0 13.9 1.9 1.3 
25.2150 34.2485 2013 6 16 2.2 8.5 21 2 32.7 1.8 2.4 
25.0372 34.1540 2013 6 16 2.2 16.2 21 20 23.9 1.3 1.5 
25.0148 34.2657 2013 6 16 2.3 6.6 21 26 19.9 2.2 6.3 
24.9000 34.2838 2013 6 16 2.8 1.0 21 33 42.8 1.9 2.0 
25.0635 34.2835 2013 6 16 3.3 7.4 21 35 3.3 0.8 1.1 
25.0925 34.2398 2013 6 16 5.9 6.1 21 39 4.8 0.6 0.8 
25.1032 34.2945 2013 6 16 4.4 13.7 21 42 41.7 0.8 0.7 
25.0768 34.2682 2013 6 16 4.9 13.5 21 43 17.0 0.9 0.9 
25.0700 34.2208 2013 6 16 3.6 3.8 21 46 33.4 0.7 0.8 
24.9958 34.2633 2013 6 16 4.5 9.5 21 47 36.1 1.2 1.0 
25.0313 34.2475 2013 6 16 3.7 19.2 21 51 4.1 1.2 1.7 
24.9872 34.1640 2013 6 16 3.2 26.5 21 52 0.4 2.9 5.5 
25.0172 34.4702 2013 6 16 3.1 17.8 21 54 35.3 2.0 2.5 
25.1222 34.4043 2013 6 16 3.0 21.2 21 57 13.8 2.3 2.3 
25.0837 34.2688 2013 6 16 3.1 6.5 21 58 33.8 1.1 1.1 
25.0993 34.2627 2013 6 16 2.9 8.7 22 0 8.3 0.6 0.6 
25.0108 34.3790 2013 6 16 2.9 18.6 22 1 34.7 1.8 3.1 
25.0548 34.2838 2013 6 16 3.1 10.2 22 4 16.5 1.0 0.8 
24.9145 34.2055 2013 6 16 3.2 4.6 22 5 48.5 1.3 1.5 
24.9777 34.4187 2013 6 16 2.6 9.3 22 8 56.5 1.6 2.4 
24.9823 34.2665 2013 6 16 2.7 10.6 22 11 1.4 0.6 0.7 
24.8998 34.4127 2013 6 16 2.4 16.4 22 14 5.8 1.6 2.4 
25.0977 34.2942 2013 6 16 3.2 11.9 22 15 27.2 1.2 0.8 
25.0517 34.2973 2013 6 16 3.0 8.5 22 20 36.3 0.6 0.7 
25.0790 34.3312 2013 6 16 3.2 12.8 22 21 49.4 0.7 0.6 
25.1523 34.2733 2013 6 16 3.3 9.8 22 23 50.9 1.8 1.9 
24.9528 34.2598 2013 6 16 2.5 12.0 22 28 5.6 1.4 0.7 
24.9498 34.2345 2013 6 16 2.9 5.3 22 30 25.5 1.2 1.3 
24.9105 34.1593 2013 6 16 3.3 19.9 22 31 8.7 2.8 3.7 
25.0462 34.2913 2013 6 16 2.5 9.3 22 33 14.0 0.9 0.9 
24.9593 34.2342 2013 6 16 3.0 7.6 22 34 8.0 1.2 1.6 
25.0487 34.2413 2013 6 16 2.9 7.7 22 37 59.1 0.5 0.7 
25.1308 34.3778 2013 6 16 2.4 18.6 22 41 52.6 2.1 3.4 
25.1133 34.3660 2013 6 16 2.4 15.4 22 44 1.8 1.0 0.9 
25.2478 34.3843 2013 6 16 2.5 6.4 22 48 23.3 2.1 3.1 
25.1762 34.3505 2013 6 16 2.4 15.9 22 56 33.9 0.9 0.5 
25.2507 34.2830 2013 6 16 2.5 9.5 22 57 21.6 2.2 2.7 
25.0547 34.3552 2013 6 16 2.5 15.9 22 58 42.1 1.0 0.9 
25.0613 34.2222 2013 6 16 2.8 3.5 23 3 48.7 0.9 1.1 
25.1100 34.2803 2013 6 16 2.9 7.1 23 4 58.5 1.0 1.2 
25.0053 34.3690 2013 6 16 3.1 25.5 23 5 23.8 1.7 2.4 
25.0202 34.2135 2013 6 16 2.8 4.4 23 8 31.2 1.1 1.4 
25.0427 34.3103 2013 6 16 2.7 10.1 23 10 8.3 2.5 2.9 
25.0740 34.2890 2013 6 16 2.9 10.1 23 11 11.8 0.7 0.6 
25.2075 34.3215 2013 6 16 2.7 11.1 23 13 59.9 1.1 0.8 
24.9965 34.2787 2013 6 16 3.2 14.0 23 15 0.4 1.3 1.2 
25.0750 34.2792 2013 6 16 2.6 4.0 23 16 38.0 1.2 1.4 
25.1730 34.2370 2013 6 16 2.5 12.9 23 20 41.0 1.0 0.9 
24.9397 34.3313 2013 6 16 2.9 10.0 23 22 22.3 2.0 2.9 
25.1060 34.3008 2013 6 16 2.8 11.3 23 25 3.2 1.5 1.0 
25.0252 34.2270 2013 6 16 2.5 6.2 23 26 43.0 0.8 0.9 
25.0588 34.3082 2013 6 16 2.5 8.0 23 30 40.9 0.9 1.1 
25.1035 34.2397 2013 6 16 2.3 1.4 23 33 20.8 1.1 1.8 
25.0678 34.2462 2013 6 16 3.4 13.3 23 35 27.1 0.7 0.6 
25.0192 34.2860 2013 6 16 2.9 8.1 23 40 9.3 1.4 1.4 
24.9968 34.2753 2013 6 16 3.8 5.0 23 43 35.5 1.0 1.3 
25.0298 34.2465 2013 6 16 2.8 5.0 23 51 44.5 1.1 1.4 
25.0420 34.2697 2013 6 16 3.9 8.3 23 53 35.3 1.3 1.5 
25.1903 34.2973 2013 6 16 2.3 11.7 23 57 31.5 1.6 1.0 
25.0675 34.2252 2013 6 17 2.5 5.5 0 4 7.5 1.6 2.0 
25.0558 34.1588 2013 6 17 2.2 9.9 0 5 11.4 7.6 0.9 
25.0263 34.1687 2013 6 17 2.1 7.0 0 19 47.1 3.8 4.7 
25.1290 34.2353 2013 6 17 2.5 2.4 0 21 35.5 1.0 1.1 
25.0167 34.2653 2013 6 17 2.6 2.3 0 23 32.4 1.1 2.1 
25.0282 34.2498 2013 6 17 2.3 2.1 0 28 50.4 2.1 3.8 
25.0758 34.2735 2013 6 17 2.2 2.7 0 36 58.4 4.0 9.9 
25.1133 34.3007 2013 6 17 2.4 12.7 0 38 30.1 0.9 0.9 
25.1380 34.2763 2013 6 17 2.2 2.7 0 46 5.4 1.8 2.6 
25.0332 34.2587 2013 6 17 2.1 9.9 0 48 26.2 0.8 0.7 
25.1603 34.3073 2013 6 17 2.8 11.5 0 57 56.0 0.9 0.5 
25.0958 34.2242 2013 6 17 2.3 12.3 0 59 21.7 1.3 0.9 
25.1778 34.2968 2013 6 17 2.6 12.9 1 2 6.3 2.1 2.0 
25.0062 34.4095 2013 6 17 2.5 15.3 1 3 57.4 1.1 1.0 
25.1130 34.2535 2013 6 17 3.4 12.4 1 7 53.8 1.0 0.7 
24.9375 34.1828 2013 6 17 2.4 15.2 1 15 15.6 1.0 0.7 
25.1132 34.4248 2013 6 17 2.6 21.6 1 17 40.3 10.1 4.1 
25.1297 34.2742 2013 6 17 2.9 12.0 1 20 27.7 1.0 0.7 
25.0298 34.2875 2013 6 17 2.3 9.9 1 22 54.1 1.5 1.4 
25.0105 34.2382 2013 6 17 2.6 8.2 1 28 30.2 1.1 1.1 
25.0627 34.4163 2013 6 17 2.6 9.5 1 48 58.1 0.8 1.4 
25.0170 34.3357 2013 6 17 2.4 20.4 1 51 51.5 2.1 1.5 
24.9375 34.2960 2013 6 17 3.2 14.7 1 53 43.1 0.9 0.9 
25.0828 34.2077 2013 6 17 2.3 11.6 1 57 3.6 1.3 1.1 
25.0845 34.4092 2013 6 17 2.3 11.8 2 3 47.6 1.9 1.9 
25.0478 34.4070 2013 6 17 2.0 11.1 2 12 33.6 1.4 1.5 
25.0128 34.2335 2013 6 17 2.2 3.7 2 16 50.4 1.4 2.2 
25.2157 34.4417 2013 6 17 2.9 0.0 2 18 9.4 5.1 5.9 
25.0077 34.2398 2013 6 17 2.2 11.9 2 24 6.0 3.2 3.5 
25.1662 34.4323 2013 6 17 2.1 15.0 2 30 51.1 1.8 0.2 
24.9892 34.2665 2013 6 17 2.6 5.5 2 33 33.0 1.0 1.2 
25.0137 34.3110 2013 6 17 2.3 7.4 2 34 16.4 2.2 3.5 
25.1073 34.3473 2013 6 17 3.4 12.6 2 44 35.3 0.5 0.6 
25.1305 34.2928 2013 6 17 3.9 10.2 2 55 2.3 1.0 1.2 
25.0503 34.3325 2013 6 17 2.2 16.8 3 2 18.1 2.3 4.2 
25.0172 34.2608 2013 6 17 2.6 12.3 3 18 15.6 2.5 3.5 
25.1678 34.4063 2013 6 17 2.0 22.5 3 24 2.1 2.1 3.6 
24.8957 34.3132 2013 6 17 2.7 3.5 3 37 2.7 0.7 1.1 
25.0915 34.3360 2013 6 17 2.2 15.4 3 57 6.1 2.4 3.7 
25.0872 34.2450 2013 6 17 3.9 8.8 3 58 31.1 0.9 1.2 
25.0518 34.3233 2013 6 17 2.1 17.1 4 1 28.1 7.1 8.3 
25.0325 34.2425 2013 6 17 2.1 10.5 4 3 54.7 2.2 4.2 
25.1222 34.2350 2013 6 17 2.5 4.0 4 6 22.6 2.7 4.5 
25.0740 34.2320 2013 6 17 2.6 7.2 4 16 18.0 1.1 1.3 
25.0022 34.3122 2013 6 17 2.6 14.0 4 16 59.2 2.4 3.5 
24.9507 34.4055 2013 6 17 2.1 10.5 4 28 56.0 6.2 4.0 
25.0752 34.3030 2013 6 17 2.8 8.0 4 37 9.5 2.0 2.8 
25.0695 34.2905 2013 6 17 2.6 19.8 4 44 5.8 1.6 2.1 
25.0720 34.3705 2013 6 17 2.1 18.6 4 51 59.4 1.1 1.8 
25.0977 34.2838 2013 6 17 3.2 12.8 5 2 12.2 0.8 0.9 
25.0728 34.2585 2013 6 17 3.1 8.2 5 15 11.6 0.6 0.8 
24.9405 34.1398 2013 6 17 2.5 20.1 5 23 34.8 11.1 5.4 
25.0213 34.1860 2013 6 17 2.8 9.3 5 27 0.0 0.9 1.1 
24.9823 34.2123 2013 6 17 2.1 25.8 5 42 17.0 7.7 5.0 
25.0115 34.4315 2013 6 17 1.9 10.9 5 46 8.2 2.4 4.4 
25.0325 34.3267 2013 6 17 2.0 10.1 6 10 32.8 6.8 7.2 
25.1870 34.2868 2013 6 17 2.4 19.0 6 12 35.0 2.1 3.6 
25.0937 34.2938 2013 6 17 3.2 13.7 6 46 45.0 0.6 0.7 
24.9668 34.3165 2013 6 17 2.3 10.0 7 12 9.7 4.0 2.0 
24.7332 34.2763 2013 6 17 2.8 0.1 7 13 55.0 2.5 2.4 
24.9903 34.4302 2013 6 17 2.2 23.6 7 26 31.8 2.4 5.2 
25.1613 34.3360 2013 6 17 3.8 14.7 7 34 44.6 0.8 0.9 
25.1742 34.2693 2013 6 17 3.5 11.7 7 57 34.9 0.7 0.6 
25.0383 34.2813 2013 6 17 3.0 9.9 7 58 48.4 0.7 0.8 
25.0267 34.2168 2013 6 17 2.6 4.0 8 30 23.8 1.8 2.5 
25.0168 34.3813 2013 6 17 2.2 22.0 9 5 3.2 1.0 0.8 
25.0700 34.3922 2013 6 17 2.3 14.2 9 5 55.0 1.1 2.1 
24.9387 34.3620 2013 6 17 2.9 25.9 9 40 59.7 1.5 2.2 
25.1667 34.3142 2013 6 17 3.0 12.6 10 0 13.8 0.6 0.6 
25.1363 34.3083 2013 6 17 3.5 8.3 11 7 10.2 0.6 0.7 
25.0865 34.2753 2013 6 17 2.9 5.3 11 20 38.0 0.6 0.7 
25.0808 34.2518 2013 6 17 4.0 9.7 11 36 2.5 0.8 1.1 
25.0802 34.2812 2013 6 17 2.9 11.1 11 44 25.8 0.6 0.5 
25.1810 34.2765 2013 6 17 3.0 16.8 11 46 17.8 0.8 1.0 
24.8892 34.2478 2013 6 17 2.8 8.5 11 51 52.5 1.0 0.9 
25.0948 34.2560 2013 6 17 3.6 19.9 11 52 33.9 1.3 1.6 
25.1410 34.2990 2013 6 17 2.5 10.0 12 2 18.3 1.5 1.9 
25.0807 34.2858 2013 6 17 3.2 10.7 12 6 7.2 0.7 0.9 
25.1997 34.2815 2013 6 17 2.3 13.0 12 41 3.7 1.0 1.1 
25.1128 34.2433 2013 6 17 2.7 2.5 12 44 21.8 2.0 1.9 
25.1083 34.3303 2013 6 17 2.6 0.0 13 38 22.9 3.5 5.4 
25.1377 34.2767 2013 6 17 2.6 8.8 13 39 21.0 1.3 1.6 
25.1050 34.2743 2013 6 17 2.6 9.6 13 46 42.1 1.2 1.2 
25.1250 34.2397 2013 6 17 2.6 3.7 13 48 52.1 0.9 1.2 
25.0840 34.2405 2013 6 17 2.9 7.2 13 49 33.9 1.0 1.3 
25.1317 34.3142 2013 6 17 2.4 0.1 13 54 29.5 2.8 3.1 
25.0635 34.3430 2013 6 17 2.2 0.0 14 41 47.8 3.5 4.3 
25.0673 34.3958 2013 6 17 3.1 22.5 15 5 53.9 0.8 1.0 
25.1100 34.2502 2013 6 17 2.7 1.6 15 11 25.2 1.4 1.9 
25.0820 34.2710 2013 6 17 2.9 8.9 15 13 58.0 0.6 0.8 
25.1028 34.2663 2013 6 17 4.1 9.9 15 27 7.5 0.7 0.9 
25.2980 34.2842 2013 6 17 2.7 9.9 15 42 23.0 1.3 2.0 
25.1430 34.4145 2013 6 17 2.4 22.1 15 46 47.6 1.1 1.3 
25.0498 34.2843 2013 6 17 3.2 7.8 16 0 18.9 0.8 0.9 
25.2385 34.2565 2013 6 17 2.3 15.5 16 21 13.4 1.4 1.3 
25.1258 34.3238 2013 6 17 2.4 11.8 17 20 23.4 2.4 2.5 
25.2118 34.3913 2013 6 17 2.6 14.7 17 41 41.5 1.1 1.5 
25.1528 34.1968 2013 6 17 3.3 4.0 18 5 29.0 1.2 1.5 
25.1242 34.2880 2013 6 17 2.5 10.7 18 14 26.9 1.0 1.2 
25.2453 34.3180 2013 6 17 2.9 11.0 18 25 16.5 1.8 1.8 
25.0558 34.2490 2013 6 17 4.0 9.6 19 8 53.1 0.7 0.7 
25.2045 34.2270 2013 6 17 2.3 18.4 19 29 7.8 1.2 1.4 
24.9682 34.4112 2013 6 17 2.0 16.3 19 36 22.5 2.2 3.9 
25.0967 34.2215 2013 6 17 2.9 8.2 19 36 48.8 1.4 1.7 
25.1407 34.3052 2013 6 17 2.3 16.7 20 18 57.5 1.6 1.3 
25.0872 34.2398 2013 6 17 2.6 4.3 20 20 10.6 2.3 3.5 
25.0647 34.1660 2013 6 17 2.3 1.0 20 43 56.7 0.7 1.0 
25.0730 34.4215 2013 6 17 2.1 14.9 21 4 48.7 0.9 2.0 
25.0373 34.2618 2013 6 17 2.9 9.4 21 50 44.0 1.2 1.5 
25.1493 34.2318 2013 6 17 2.5 5.0 23 15 55.8 1.0 1.6 
25.2380 34.3257 2013 6 17 2.3 15.2 23 35 59.6 1.6 1.2 
25.2273 34.2757 2013 6 17 2.3 13.0 23 44 35.9 0.7 0.8 
25.0032 34.3118 2013 6 18 2.2 8.5 0 4 0.8 0.9 1.4 
25.1970 34.3063 2013 6 18 2.6 4.0 0 17 35.6 1.6 2.5 
25.1668 34.3112 2013 6 18 2.4 11.8 0 39 4.2 1.1 0.9 
25.0522 34.4400 2013 6 18 2.0 15.1 0 45 22.2 1.8 5.8 
25.1335 34.4540 2013 6 18 2.3 2.1 4 24 41.5 1.5 4.1 
25.1132 34.2307 2013 6 18 2.7 6.3 4 55 15.6 0.7 1.1 
25.2010 34.2118 2013 6 18 2.6 4.7 4 59 6.5 2.2 4.1 
25.0840 34.3392 2013 6 18 2.3 4.3 5 31 41.2 1.0 1.8 
24.9572 34.3972 2013 6 18 2.5 13.0 5 51 54.8 1.2 2.0 
25.1405 34.3635 2013 6 18 1.9 0.1 7 15 17.6 3.3 4.6 
25.0197 34.4162 2013 6 18 2.8 6.3 8 25 22.5 1.3 2.6 
25.0155 34.1947 2013 6 18 2.9 4.2 15 6 16.6 0.8 1.3 
24.9202 34.3942 2013 6 18 2.3 15.0 16 2 57.4 1.7 4.7 
25.0548 34.2207 2013 6 18 2.8 14.7 18 46 33.1 0.9 1.0 
25.0617 34.3530 2013 6 18 2.0 14.4 19 29 40.9 1.4 2.8 
25.0877 34.2335 2013 6 18 2.7 12.6 20 40 52.0 4.3 4.0 
25.0672 34.3108 2013 6 18 4.6 15.6 22 27 7.1 0.7 0.6 
25.0177 34.2043 2013 6 18 3.9 12.2 22 33 14.6 0.9 1.0 
25.0567 34.2413 2013 6 18 3.0 8.5 22 35 43.5 0.7 1.0 
25.0867 34.2612 2013 6 18 3.5 5.6 22 39 29.9 0.5 0.7 
25.1693 34.3687 2013 6 18 2.0 0.0 22 48 4.7 3.6 4.9 
25.0258 34.2743 2013 6 18 2.3 13.8 23 4 23.0 1.8 2.9 
24.9050 34.1762 2013 6 18 2.5 17.0 23 11 25.5 1.8 2.2 
25.0938 34.2450 2013 6 18 3.6 7.4 23 15 57.1 0.8 1.1 
24.9548 34.2383 2013 6 18 2.0 9.6 23 20 17.4 3.3 2.7 
25.1260 34.2373 2013 6 18 2.5 11.7 23 22 58.7 1.1 0.8 
25.0660 34.2472 2013 6 18 2.4 21.1 23 26 8.4 1.8 2.8 
25.0308 34.2320 2013 6 18 2.3 7.3 23 27 7.6 2.2 4.0 
24.9467 34.3292 2013 6 18 2.0 8.5 23 32 30.8 1.9 5.3 
25.0268 34.2470 2013 6 18 3.4 1.9 23 36 18.2 0.7 1.0 
25.0528 34.2420 2013 6 18 3.4 7.5 23 46 34.3 0.6 0.8 
25.1937 34.2868 2013 6 18 2.4 15.6 23 55 13.8 2.1 2.2 
25.1303 34.2770 2013 6 19 3.9 9.7 0 0 13.8 0.9 1.4 
24.9907 34.2183 2013 6 19 3.4 2.8 0 1 38.0 1.0 1.4 
24.9593 34.2583 2013 6 19 2.9 8.2 0 2 51.2 0.6 0.9 
25.1148 34.3435 2013 6 19 2.4 17.6 0 6 11.5 1.5 2.4 
25.2485 34.3333 2013 6 19 2.3 19.8 0 12 39.7 0.6 1.0 
24.9582 34.3457 2013 6 19 2.4 11.1 0 23 28.4 0.9 1.7 
25.0957 34.3133 2013 6 19 2.5 16.9 0 24 52.9 1.0 1.0 
25.1938 34.2807 2013 6 19 2.0 12.0 0 40 1.7 1.8 1.8 
25.0913 34.2322 2013 6 19 2.3 2.1 0 48 55.5 1.2 1.9 
25.0705 34.4027 2013 6 19 1.9 9.1 0 56 22.0 2.7 0.4 
25.1553 34.3477 2013 6 19 1.8 5.3 2 20 14.6 2.3 0.8 
24.9857 34.2747 2013 6 19 2.4 23.4 2 46 54.0 1.3 2.0 
25.1352 34.2507 2013 6 19 2.5 8.3 3 15 48.7 2.2 3.5 
25.0652 34.2475 2013 6 19 3.6 6.3 4 32 57.6 0.8 1.1 
25.1495 34.3135 2013 6 19 2.6 15.3 4 40 52.3 2.2 1.9 
24.9660 34.2567 2013 6 19 3.3 1.3 7 6 52.4 1.0 1.6 
25.1998 34.3012 2013 6 19 2.6 7.8 9 36 52.4 1.6 2.1 
25.0622 34.3008 2013 6 19 2.5 8.5 9 55 13.4 1.5 2.7 
25.2947 34.2385 2013 6 19 2.7 1.0 12 54 29.1 1.5 2.6 
24.9977 34.2483 2013 6 19 3.0 5.9 14 22 57.0 0.6 0.7 
25.0305 34.3692 2013 6 19 2.4 18.2 14 52 40.3 2.0 3.9 
25.0233 34.3037 2013 6 19 4.8 10.9 19 5 9.5 0.6 0.6 
24.8947 34.2248 2013 6 19 2.7 6.7 19 10 0.1 1.3 1.6 
25.0150 34.2795 2013 6 19 2.7 7.7 19 17 17.9 1.1 1.4 
24.9022 34.2065 2013 6 19 2.6 16.2 19 24 31.1 1.3 2.0 
24.9393 34.2485 2013 6 19 2.5 7.5 19 47 47.4 0.8 1.0 
25.0135 34.2792 2013 6 19 2.6 7.5 19 54 14.3 0.7 0.9 
24.9692 34.2302 2013 6 19 2.5 4.1 20 3 12.0 1.4 1.7 
24.9980 34.2587 2013 6 19 2.4 7.6 20 28 49.7 0.8 1.1 
25.3823 34.3135 2013 6 19 2.3 2.6 23 10 43.2 2.2 3.3 
24.9877 34.2880 2013 6 20 2.0 11.0 0 30 45.0 1.7 3.0 
25.1013 34.3607 2013 6 20 1.9 3.1 1 12 25.0 2.1 7.4 
25.0635 34.2757 2013 6 20 1.8 4.9 1 30 24.5 1.1 1.8 
25.1093 34.2602 2013 6 20 2.5 7.8 4 48 16.3 1.6 2.0 
25.0623 34.2652 2013 6 20 3.6 10.8 18 9 47.9 0.7 0.9 
24.9462 34.2907 2013 6 20 2.7 21.3 21 20 17.9 2.3 1.4 
25.0990 34.2580 2013 6 20 2.2 12.5 22 30 14.3 1.9 1.8 
25.0760 34.2195 2013 6 21 2.4 6.4 0 50 32.1 1.5 1.7 
25.1932 34.2302 2013 6 21 2.2 9.5 1 56 41.7 1.6 2.1 
25.0242 34.2372 2013 6 21 2.7 8.0 23 45 14.8 1.3 1.2 
25.1027 34.3172 2013 6 22 2.4 7.7 3 47 46.9 0.7 1.0 
25.1177 34.3825 2013 6 22 2.9 17.8 7 27 57.1 1.3 1.6 
24.9947 34.2207 2013 6 22 4.5 5.3 8 50 14.6 0.8 1.0 
24.9560 34.2437 2013 6 22 2.9 10.9 8 55 46.1 1.4 1.8 
24.9912 34.3117 2013 6 22 2.1 13.1 9 38 14.8 1.8 3.0 
25.0937 34.2815 2013 6 22 2.7 8.7 15 16 30.7 1.2 1.7 
25.0448 34.2833 2013 6 22 3.0 9.1 17 47 38.0 0.7 0.8 
25.0490 34.2673 2013 6 22 2.7 2.5 22 10 12.2 1.5 2.8 
25.0365 34.2975 2013 6 23 2.2 13.2 1 17 35.5 1.5 2.4 
25.1103 34.1868 2013 6 23 2.5 0.0 2 22 56.8 1.3 1.2 
25.1057 34.2153 2013 6 23 3.5 8.8 2 57 45.7 0.6 0.8 
25.0617 34.1382 2013 6 23 2.4 8.8 5 41 15.4 2.0 3.2 
25.0882 34.2243 2013 6 23 2.7 1.5 10 22 27.8 1.0 1.3 
25.0110 34.3522 2013 6 23 2.4 12.8 11 16 16.5 0.6 0.7 
25.0042 34.3215 2013 6 23 2.3 11.8 15 52 3.5 2.0 1.4 
25.0398 34.3427 2013 6 23 2.2 14.9 16 35 51.2 0.9 1.0 
25.1053 34.3127 2013 6 23 2.3 19.1 16 42 44.5 2.0 3.7 
25.0888 34.2325 2013 6 23 2.0 10.1 22 40 12.2 1.7 3.3 
25.0248 34.3658 2013 6 24 1.6 9.1 1 53 58.0 1.0 2.1 
25.1092 34.1787 2013 6 24 2.3 0.1 15 11 59.1 2.1 2.4 
24.8922 34.2763 2013 6 24 2.7 21.7 19 13 24.4 0.7 1.0 
24.9890 34.2595 2013 6 25 2.2 9.9 5 54 34.9 1.1 1.4 
25.0402 34.3125 2013 6 25 2.6 1.4 9 34 18.0 2.6 4.8 
25.1137 34.4097 2013 6 25 3.3 23.1 19 25 16.4 1.0 1.5 
24.9288 34.1782 2013 6 25 1.9 6.0 23 33 0.4 1.3 1.4 
24.9403 34.2578 2013 6 26 2.5 6.2 9 49 8.4 0.8 1.0 
25.0613 34.3220 2013 6 26 2.6 11.4 18 44 50.2 0.9 0.8 
24.9632 34.2488 2013 6 26 3.1 7.3 19 43 28.7 1.5 1.8 
25.0693 34.1827 2013 6 26 3.4 8.2 20 33 21.1 1.4 1.3 
25.0567 34.2588 2013 6 26 2.5 5.8 21 7 17.0 0.7 0.8 
25.0297 34.2563 2013 6 26 1.3 13.3 21 31 20.7 1.8 1.9 
25.0872 34.3445 2013 6 27 2.3 11.1 13 7 50.1 1.7 2.5 
25.1037 34.2512 2013 6 27 2.4 8.0 22 51 5.9 1.5 1.8 
24.9192 34.2902 2013 6 28 2.0 10.5 1 55 3.0 1.2 1.4 
25.0042 34.4617 2013 6 28 2.5 16.4 7 13 0.7 1.9 2.1 
25.1155 34.3508 2013 6 28 1.7 3.9 15 44 56.0 1.7 5.0 
25.0157 34.2767 2013 6 30 2.8 9.8 10 55 56.0 0.6 0.7 
25.0000 34.2860 2013 6 30 2.0 5.9 15 5 30.1 0.7 0.8 
25.0285 34.2327 2013 6 30 2.6 2.3 19 57 40.6 0.8 1.0 
25.1323 34.1660 2013 6 30 2.6 5.7 23 55 50.4 1.0 1.2 
25.1255 34.2510 2013 7 1 3.1 6.2 22 56 41.1 1.4 2.3 
25.3002 34.2992 2013 7 1 2.2 8.7 23 27 22.3 1.5 2.1 
25.0800 34.2227 2013 7 2 2.3 19.4 6 11 30.6 1.3 1.6 
24.9530 34.2435 2013 7 2 2.5 4.2 7 42 8.2 1.1 2.2 
25.0742 34.2223 2013 7 2 2.9 5.8 11 13 40.0 1.5 1.9 
25.0420 34.4528 2013 7 3 2.2 26.2 0 34 13.8 1.3 1.0 
25.0128 34.1848 2013 7 3 1.9 12.4 1 43 18.2 1.5 1.6 
24.9138 34.4613 2013 7 5 3.4 25.9 5 51 1.2 1.6 2.2 
24.9847 34.3058 2013 7 7 2.2 8.5 4 45 1.4 0.8 0.9 
25.3800 34.2392 2013 7 9 2.6 5.9 3 25 34.6 2.4 3.1 
Catalogue of 12/10/2013 aftershock sequence  
23.2425 35.4218 2013 10 12 6.2 47.4 13 11 53.6 0.7 0.8 
23.2735 35.3002 2013 10 12 4.0 42.8 13 17 0.4 0.7 0.9 
23.2673 35.3815 2013 10 12 3.1 55.9 13 19 32.9 0.8 0.9 
23.2717 35.2677 2013 10 12 3.3 50.0 13 21 3.3 0.7 0.5 
23.3313 35.3212 2013 10 12 3.3 38.6 13 21 54.8 0.5 0.7 
23.2800 35.2665 2013 10 12 3.0 46.8 13 23 57.7 0.7 0.8 
23.3818 35.4432 2013 10 12 2.9 51.2 13 24 44.9 1.0 1.0 
23.2823 35.3793 2013 10 12 2.7 49.8 13 26 22.0 0.7 0.4 
23.2768 35.4247 2013 10 12 2.7 42.8 13 28 20.3 1.0 1.3 
23.3148 35.3832 2013 10 12 2.9 47.4 13 29 39.4 0.6 0.6 
23.3857 35.4405 2013 10 12 2.6 48.7 13 32 1.5 0.8 0.8 
23.3412 35.4387 2013 10 12 3.1 38.3 13 33 11.1 0.7 0.9 
23.3695 35.3643 2013 10 12 2.9 51.5 13 34 53.9 0.8 0.8 
23.3130 35.3412 2013 10 12 3.2 58.5 13 35 17.1 0.7 0.7 
23.3148 35.2522 2013 10 12 2.4 40.9 13 38 8.7 0.7 0.9 
23.3570 35.3397 2013 10 12 3.0 41.7 13 40 36.5 0.6 0.7 
23.3438 35.3853 2013 10 12 2.8 43.4 13 44 57.6 0.7 0.9 
23.3212 35.3445 2013 10 12 2.1 43.4 13 47 30.5 0.6 0.7 
23.3380 35.2648 2013 10 12 2.0 57.0 13 51 48.8 1.1 1.3 
23.3260 35.3223 2013 10 12 2.0 49.2 13 53 14.0 1.0 1.2 
23.3617 35.3787 2013 10 12 3.3 42.6 13 55 28.3 0.6 0.7 
23.3237 35.3417 2013 10 12 1.8 58.2 13 57 56.0 2.1 2.8 
23.3855 35.4317 2013 10 12 2.8 41.3 14 1 46.5 0.8 1.0 
23.3513 35.3657 2013 10 12 2.4 35.3 14 2 56.6 0.5 0.7 
23.3568 35.3592 2013 10 12 2.1 37.6 14 5 25.8 0.6 0.9 
23.3477 35.4263 2013 10 12 4.0 43.7 14 5 50.7 0.6 0.8 
23.3697 35.4183 2013 10 12 1.8 57.2 14 11 1.2 0.7 0.8 
23.3157 35.1660 2013 10 12 2.0 66.2 14 12 8.6 0.9 0.9 
23.3110 35.3902 2013 10 12 2.9 46.1 14 14 45.0 0.6 0.7 
23.3997 35.4072 2013 10 12 3.0 58.1 14 15 3.4 0.7 0.8 
23.3418 35.3267 2013 10 12 2.9 38.5 14 16 54.2 0.7 0.9 
23.2532 35.3367 2013 10 12 2.1 45.6 14 21 2.0 0.7 1.0 
23.2988 35.3803 2013 10 12 2.1 52.6 14 23 16.0 1.2 1.5 
23.2575 35.2427 2013 10 12 2.4 30.7 14 26 8.4 0.9 1.3 
23.3797 35.3878 2013 10 12 1.9 66.7 14 29 11.6 0.7 0.8 
23.3362 35.3602 2013 10 12 2.4 39.1 14 32 28.5 1.4 1.6 
23.2362 35.3355 2013 10 12 1.8 25.9 14 36 10.4 0.9 0.7 
23.3998 35.4038 2013 10 12 2.0 55.4 14 37 25.2 0.9 1.0 
23.3520 35.3780 2013 10 12 2.5 37.9 14 38 31.8 0.8 1.1 
23.3537 35.3850 2013 10 12 2.0 52.8 14 40 7.5 0.7 0.9 
23.3402 35.3872 2013 10 12 2.1 40.5 14 42 45.4 0.8 1.2 
23.3005 35.2810 2013 10 12 2.0 57.0 14 44 8.7 1.0 1.2 
23.3683 35.3490 2013 10 12 2.0 49.1 14 46 23.2 1.1 1.2 
23.3447 35.3882 2013 10 12 2.0 36.5 14 47 21.3 1.0 1.5 
23.3148 35.2985 2013 10 12 1.9 51.6 14 49 46.6 1.2 1.4 
23.3815 35.4050 2013 10 12 1.8 41.8 14 52 55.4 0.7 1.0 
23.3570 35.4318 2013 10 12 1.7 38.2 14 54 9.5 0.7 1.1 
23.2995 35.3145 2013 10 12 2.3 37.2 14 55 59.5 0.8 1.1 
23.3643 35.4508 2013 10 12 2.1 56.3 14 56 22.6 1.2 1.3 
23.2748 35.3337 2013 10 12 3.2 35.7 14 57 7.6 0.7 0.8 
23.3428 35.3462 2013 10 12 2.0 32.8 15 0 19.7 1.0 1.4 
23.3062 35.3867 2013 10 12 1.9 42.7 15 1 12.4 0.6 0.9 
23.4467 35.3432 2013 10 12 1.9 65.7 15 3 36.9 0.9 0.8 
23.2585 35.2997 2013 10 12 1.9 51.5 15 5 29.5 0.6 0.8 
23.3328 35.3573 2013 10 12 2.0 41.4 15 5 52.3 0.6 1.0 
23.3660 35.4113 2013 10 12 2.0 36.8 15 10 2.1 0.8 1.0 
23.3148 35.3625 2013 10 12 2.0 43.4 15 11 24.0 0.9 1.1 
23.3280 35.3728 2013 10 12 2.8 42.2 15 11 58.1 0.6 0.8 
23.3388 35.4177 2013 10 12 2.8 41.7 15 13 41.9 0.6 0.8 
23.3843 35.4160 2013 10 12 2.4 48.3 15 14 27.3 0.6 0.7 
23.3223 35.2813 2013 10 12 2.3 43.6 15 14 54.7 0.6 0.9 
23.3968 35.4048 2013 10 12 2.0 44.6 15 18 28.9 0.7 1.0 
23.3435 35.2952 2013 10 12 2.0 55.9 15 20 6.9 1.0 1.1 
23.3320 35.3380 2013 10 12 1.9 52.4 15 23 22.6 0.9 1.1 
23.3000 35.3997 2013 10 12 3.4 42.5 15 27 5.2 0.7 0.9 
23.3485 35.4062 2013 10 12 1.9 51.7 15 34 3.4 0.8 0.9 
23.3740 35.2955 2013 10 12 1.9 62.6 15 34 35.0 1.0 1.0 
23.3568 35.3060 2013 10 12 1.8 53.4 15 36 40.7 0.8 0.9 
23.3032 35.3300 2013 10 12 2.1 39.1 15 47 49.7 0.6 0.9 
23.3237 35.3327 2013 10 12 1.9 58.6 15 49 53.9 1.3 1.6 
23.3250 35.3953 2013 10 12 1.9 45.4 15 55 56.1 0.7 1.1 
23.2715 35.3868 2013 10 12 2.0 40.0 16 5 55.0 1.1 1.5 
23.2802 35.2313 2013 10 12 2.0 45.0 16 8 33.5 2.9 4.3 
23.3217 35.2447 2013 10 12 2.1 56.1 16 14 9.9 0.7 0.8 
23.3500 35.3367 2013 10 12 1.9 33.2 16 15 42.3 0.9 1.3 
23.4215 35.4115 2013 10 12 1.9 39.1 16 19 47.6 0.7 0.9 
23.3508 35.3110 2013 10 12 1.8 47.9 16 25 0.8 1.2 1.5 
23.3520 35.4190 2013 10 12 2.1 42.5 16 31 2.6 0.6 0.9 
23.4422 35.4210 2013 10 12 1.8 51.9 16 33 43.8 1.2 1.3 
23.3840 35.2605 2013 10 12 1.9 51.6 16 37 6.0 1.3 1.4 
23.3742 35.3425 2013 10 12 2.1 41.1 16 45 32.3 0.9 1.2 
23.3112 35.4135 2013 10 12 2.7 40.8 16 52 13.2 0.6 0.8 
23.3892 35.4388 2013 10 12 2.5 42.3 17 15 13.9 0.6 0.7 
23.3645 35.3400 2013 10 12 2.1 51.2 17 21 23.8 0.8 0.8 
23.2830 35.3122 2013 10 12 2.0 51.2 17 27 11.8 0.9 1.0 
23.4358 35.4582 2013 10 12 1.8 25.7 17 49 45.6 0.8 1.3 
23.4107 35.4440 2013 10 12 2.0 39.1 17 53 8.8 0.6 0.8 
23.3443 35.3797 2013 10 12 1.8 51.0 18 0 50.8 0.8 0.9 
23.3410 35.3913 2013 10 12 2.3 36.8 18 6 27.1 1.2 1.6 
23.3548 35.2840 2013 10 12 1.7 60.7 18 8 54.2 1.0 1.3 
23.3437 35.4452 2013 10 12 1.9 34.4 18 15 29.0 0.8 1.2 
23.4025 35.4628 2013 10 12 2.2 46.6 18 22 0.1 1.0 1.2 
23.3662 35.3997 2013 10 12 2.0 38.2 18 46 34.8 1.0 1.3 
23.3195 35.3228 2013 10 12 2.4 52.2 19 3 30.0 0.7 0.8 
23.3448 35.4257 2013 10 12 2.0 41.6 19 10 5.3 1.0 1.5 
23.3957 35.4260 2013 10 12 1.9 43.1 19 21 55.4 1.0 1.5 
23.3278 35.4347 2013 10 12 2.1 42.6 19 26 34.6 1.2 1.6 
23.3255 35.4165 2013 10 12 3.8 48.6 19 36 26.3 0.5 0.5 
23.3443 35.4783 2013 10 12 2.3 58.3 19 41 12.7 0.9 1.0 
23.3503 35.3072 2013 10 12 1.9 55.9 19 42 40.0 0.9 1.1 
23.3577 35.4558 2013 10 12 2.2 39.4 19 44 37.3 1.0 1.4 
23.3203 35.3730 2013 10 12 1.9 27.0 19 46 35.7 1.0 1.0 
23.4675 35.4692 2013 10 12 1.7 62.6 20 13 8.8 1.2 1.7 
23.3137 35.2223 2013 10 12 1.9 53.8 20 16 45.7 0.6 0.8 
23.3477 35.3457 2013 10 12 2.0 35.6 20 23 39.1 0.7 0.8 
23.2630 35.1938 2013 10 12 2.0 45.0 20 31 6.3 3.6 5.7 
23.3327 35.4100 2013 10 12 3.0 40.4 20 54 28.8 0.8 1.0 
23.3560 35.4293 2013 10 12 1.8 36.0 21 1 2.7 1.1 1.7 
23.3778 35.3318 2013 10 12 1.9 29.5 21 1 51.5 1.4 0.8 
23.2143 35.2597 2013 10 12 2.4 52.7 21 8 6.8 0.7 0.8 
23.2818 35.2995 2013 10 12 2.0 52.3 21 21 57.5 0.7 0.8 
23.2913 35.4020 2013 10 12 2.3 36.7 21 42 40.8 0.7 1.0 
23.2690 35.3180 2013 10 12 2.1 35.0 21 47 15.3 0.6 0.8 
23.3477 35.3408 2013 10 12 2.4 43.3 21 48 22.9 0.6 0.8 
23.3378 35.3883 2013 10 12 2.6 45.3 21 58 11.8 0.6 0.7 
23.3902 35.4043 2013 10 12 2.5 39.8 22 16 44.2 0.5 0.7 
23.3122 35.4347 2013 10 12 2.1 46.2 22 17 49.1 0.8 1.1 
23.3365 35.4167 2013 10 12 1.8 39.9 22 41 56.6 0.7 1.1 
23.4777 35.4410 2013 10 12 1.7 55.5 22 45 26.8 1.2 1.3 
23.3520 35.4055 2013 10 12 2.4 41.7 22 50 14.5 1.3 1.9 
23.3480 35.4255 2013 10 12 1.7 43.2 22 57 22.1 1.1 1.7 
23.4230 35.3200 2013 10 12 2.3 41.2 23 0 20.6 0.5 0.7 
23.2983 35.1915 2013 10 12 1.8 51.3 23 7 1.2 1.3 1.4 
23.3838 35.4138 2013 10 12 1.7 39.1 23 7 54.1 0.8 1.2 
23.3478 35.3892 2013 10 12 3.3 43.7 23 14 5.6 0.5 0.6 
23.3452 35.3880 2013 10 12 1.9 35.6 23 27 52.1 1.1 1.5 
23.3727 35.4443 2013 10 12 1.8 38.9 23 45 58.3 1.1 1.8 
23.3737 35.3887 2013 10 12 2.1 34.0 23 47 2.0 0.7 1.0 
23.3138 35.3452 2013 10 13 3.6 36.4 0 1 23.6 0.5 0.7 
23.3712 35.3703 2013 10 13 1.7 34.3 0 12 1.0 0.7 1.1 
23.4358 35.4730 2013 10 13 1.6 54.0 0 24 17.9 0.7 0.8 
23.2680 35.3393 2013 10 13 1.8 40.5 0 30 11.5 0.9 1.4 
23.3793 35.4635 2013 10 13 2.2 48.1 0 30 36.5 0.9 0.9 
23.3593 35.2943 2013 10 13 1.7 54.6 0 43 41.4 1.1 1.5 
23.2933 35.3202 2013 10 13 1.6 38.0 0 46 26.9 0.8 1.4 
23.3078 35.3087 2013 10 13 1.9 38.1 0 46 57.2 0.6 1.0 
23.2853 35.3918 2013 10 13 1.7 28.4 1 48 30.0 1.1 0.8 
23.3900 35.4543 2013 10 13 1.7 42.5 2 2 21.1 0.6 1.0 
23.3603 35.3530 2013 10 13 1.9 33.8 2 7 12.1 0.8 1.1 
23.3775 35.3612 2013 10 13 1.8 35.6 2 20 17.9 0.9 1.1 
23.3865 35.4408 2013 10 13 1.7 36.1 2 38 18.3 1.1 1.4 
23.2795 35.2173 2013 10 13 1.8 55.3 2 39 32.9 1.7 2.1 
23.2793 35.3002 2013 10 13 1.9 47.5 2 40 54.8 0.6 0.8 
23.4027 35.4572 2013 10 13 1.8 50.9 2 42 50.0 0.8 0.8 
23.2990 35.4108 2013 10 13 2.5 41.2 3 2 23.7 0.7 1.0 
23.3422 35.3930 2013 10 13 1.6 20.7 3 11 23.7 0.7 1.4 
23.3198 35.2755 2013 10 13 1.7 61.1 3 15 11.4 1.4 1.6 
23.2590 35.2710 2013 10 13 2.5 46.2 3 17 19.5 0.5 0.7 
23.2550 35.2283 2013 10 13 1.8 45.0 3 18 52.4 3.4 5.4 
23.3502 35.4217 2013 10 13 3.2 47.3 3 43 12.8 0.5 0.5 
23.2700 35.2833 2013 10 13 1.9 44.3 3 55 53.9 0.7 1.1 
23.2840 35.2275 2013 10 13 1.7 65.1 4 22 59.2 1.6 1.9 
23.3130 35.3720 2013 10 13 2.0 47.3 4 53 54.5 1.1 1.3 
23.3600 35.3908 2013 10 13 1.6 49.7 5 1 55.0 0.8 0.9 
23.3617 35.3227 2013 10 13 1.8 47.9 5 2 49.9 1.4 0.8 
23.3300 35.4195 2013 10 13 2.4 34.8 6 19 49.8 1.3 1.4 
23.3278 35.3885 2013 10 13 1.9 37.4 6 39 28.0 1.0 1.3 
23.2660 35.3647 2013 10 13 1.7 42.6 6 57 21.3 0.6 1.1 
23.3007 35.4382 2013 10 13 1.7 37.2 7 1 42.5 0.8 1.5 
23.3250 35.3658 2013 10 13 1.9 52.1 7 4 20.4 1.0 1.1 
23.3548 35.3957 2013 10 13 1.7 31.4 7 42 31.1 1.0 1.5 
23.3632 35.3830 2013 10 13 1.7 42.3 8 56 36.4 0.6 0.9 
23.3580 35.4318 2013 10 13 1.9 47.5 10 23 43.7 0.9 1.0 
23.3452 35.4183 2013 10 13 2.0 33.6 10 52 33.0 1.2 1.7 
23.1968 35.2672 2013 10 13 1.9 29.1 11 12 22.1 1.2 0.8 
23.4248 35.4133 2013 10 13 1.9 29.0 11 32 51.3 1.0 0.6 
23.3338 35.4057 2013 10 13 1.8 31.4 11 58 1.3 1.4 2.3 
23.3362 35.3383 2013 10 13 2.0 48.1 12 0 3.8 0.8 1.0 
23.3540 35.4590 2013 10 13 1.7 47.0 12 15 3.9 1.0 1.6 
23.3435 35.4133 2013 10 13 1.8 20.9 12 55 15.3 0.6 1.2 
23.3765 35.3333 2013 10 13 1.8 57.1 13 3 6.3 0.9 1.1 
23.3993 35.3515 2013 10 13 2.0 31.1 14 10 48.5 0.5 0.7 
23.2312 35.2675 2013 10 13 1.9 30.3 14 46 57.1 1.6 2.6 
23.3637 35.2203 2013 10 13 2.0 51.1 14 49 58.6 1.1 1.1 
23.2987 35.3192 2013 10 13 2.1 39.4 14 50 46.8 0.8 1.0 
23.3337 35.3653 2013 10 13 1.9 18.2 14 53 52.9 0.5 1.0 
23.2430 35.1985 2013 10 13 1.9 55.8 15 1 55.4 0.7 1.0 
23.2498 35.2470 2013 10 13 2.0 43.0 16 18 50.8 0.6 1.1 
23.3405 35.3298 2013 10 13 2.1 41.6 16 22 57.9 0.9 1.3 
23.3393 35.3250 2013 10 13 1.9 62.0 16 48 47.3 1.3 1.5 
23.3535 35.4095 2013 10 13 1.9 27.9 17 1 7.7 0.8 0.6 
23.3050 35.3750 2013 10 13 4.1 47.8 17 43 51.8 0.5 0.6 
23.3872 35.3978 2013 10 13 2.3 36.5 17 50 34.8 0.6 0.8 
23.3455 35.3708 2013 10 13 2.2 54.1 18 23 50.1 0.9 1.0 
23.3600 35.4355 2013 10 13 2.7 49.2 19 18 19.7 0.7 0.7 
23.3647 35.3202 2013 10 13 1.8 53.2 19 22 14.6 0.6 0.7 
23.3820 35.2390 2013 10 13 1.9 52.9 20 4 21.3 0.8 0.8 
23.3793 35.4490 2013 10 13 1.7 32.6 21 52 7.4 1.6 2.5 
23.3798 35.3683 2013 10 13 1.9 55.4 21 59 18.9 0.9 1.0 
23.2837 35.3842 2013 10 13 1.8 43.8 22 25 54.0 1.4 2.3 
23.3308 35.3390 2013 10 14 1.8 34.3 0 26 26.9 1.1 1.6 
23.3470 35.3443 2013 10 14 2.5 38.6 0 34 54.8 0.6 0.8 
23.3950 35.3615 2013 10 14 1.9 36.8 1 9 52.3 0.7 0.9 
23.3360 35.2573 2013 10 14 1.8 55.9 3 52 44.2 1.2 1.5 
23.4062 35.4033 2013 10 14 1.7 42.3 5 51 26.9 0.7 1.1 
23.3315 35.3978 2013 10 14 2.9 47.3 7 11 59.0 0.9 1.0 
23.3553 35.3918 2013 10 14 1.8 16.9 7 54 46.0 1.4 2.9 
23.3903 35.4222 2013 10 14 2.0 45.6 8 0 58.9 0.8 1.1 
23.4000 35.3810 2013 10 14 2.2 44.8 8 16 57.1 0.7 0.9 
23.3258 35.3527 2013 10 14 1.9 17.2 8 24 5.2 0.6 1.2 
23.2982 35.3695 2013 10 14 1.9 23.8 9 24 23.2 1.6 2.5 
23.2902 35.4225 2013 10 14 2.0 49.0 10 35 42.7 1.5 1.6 
23.3468 35.3445 2013 10 14 1.8 20.1 11 5 28.6 0.6 1.1 
23.3690 35.4188 2013 10 14 1.8 45.5 12 5 10.4 0.9 1.3 
23.3508 35.4267 2013 10 14 2.0 35.2 12 57 50.7 0.5 0.8 
23.2077 35.1673 2013 10 14 1.9 45.0 13 11 48.2 3.7 6.4 
23.2860 35.3993 2013 10 14 1.7 44.3 13 14 16.3 0.8 1.4 
23.3852 35.4167 2013 10 14 2.1 46.6 13 21 43.9 1.0 1.3 
23.3383 35.3333 2013 10 14 1.8 53.0 15 21 36.2 0.8 1.0 
23.3430 35.3388 2013 10 14 1.8 47.2 17 2 45.0 0.7 0.9 
23.2478 35.3308 2013 10 14 1.7 40.6 19 2 24.6 0.9 1.5 
23.3500 35.3933 2013 10 14 2.0 40.3 20 2 6.6 0.9 1.1 
23.3547 35.3740 2013 10 14 1.6 15.6 20 5 9.3 0.9 2.1 
23.2165 35.1683 2013 10 14 1.9 55.4 20 11 17.1 0.9 1.3 
23.3383 35.3702 2013 10 14 1.7 34.0 21 54 1.1 1.0 1.5 
23.3370 35.3687 2013 10 14 1.7 20.7 23 10 11.9 0.8 2.0 
23.2042 35.2902 2013 10 15 2.0 64.8 0 0 50.5 0.9 1.1 
23.3500 35.3453 2013 10 15 1.5 27.7 2 6 0.1 0.8 1.1 
23.3635 35.1890 2013 10 15 1.6 68.9 2 37 16.8 1.0 1.0 
23.3877 35.3497 2013 10 15 1.7 34.6 3 17 17.9 0.6 0.9 
23.3665 35.3037 2013 10 15 2.5 39.0 4 46 10.9 0.5 0.6 
23.3122 35.3605 2013 10 15 1.8 30.2 5 5 11.1 1.0 1.4 
23.3612 35.3958 2013 10 15 1.7 43.4 7 7 19.8 0.6 0.9 
23.3673 35.3323 2013 10 15 2.0 35.3 8 42 18.0 2.0 2.8 
23.3743 35.2210 2013 10 15 1.5 60.9 8 47 29.8 1.0 0.8 
23.3925 35.3630 2013 10 15 1.4 59.1 10 4 13.8 1.0 1.3 
23.3043 35.3983 2013 10 15 1.6 32.9 10 22 40.0 1.2 1.8 
23.3187 35.3988 2013 10 15 1.4 32.6 11 6 13.4 1.2 2.0 
23.3752 35.4088 2013 10 15 1.5 55.2 12 20 31.1 1.0 1.2 
23.3382 35.3628 2013 10 15 1.5 15.6 12 25 39.4 0.7 1.5 
23.3167 35.3878 2013 10 15 1.8 45.6 15 1 27.4 1.2 1.9 
23.3482 35.3985 2013 10 15 1.9 53.7 15 17 39.9 1.0 1.1 
23.2300 35.2857 2013 10 15 1.9 42.9 15 47 38.1 0.9 1.6 
23.2947 35.3227 2013 10 15 1.9 26.5 17 4 40.6 0.7 1.1 
23.2650 35.3093 2013 10 15 1.8 43.9 19 9 42.5 0.7 1.2 
23.2283 35.3233 2013 10 15 1.8 33.1 19 16 45.7 1.2 2.0 
23.3345 35.4217 2013 10 15 1.6 44.1 22 16 58.1 0.6 1.0 
23.2637 35.1527 2013 10 15 2.1 29.6 23 50 30.0 1.7 1.0 
23.4610 35.4347 2013 10 16 2.9 53.3 1 49 6.9 1.2 1.3 
23.3880 35.4048 2013 10 16 1.7 31.1 3 27 41.7 0.8 1.8 
23.4047 35.4593 2013 10 16 2.7 43.5 4 5 12.5 0.6 1.0 
23.3603 35.4122 2013 10 16 2.4 45.7 4 10 56.7 0.7 1.3 
23.3053 35.3467 2013 10 16 2.3 41.0 7 59 5.3 1.2 2.0 
23.2755 35.2212 2013 10 16 2.1 34.0 9 31 32.0 0.8 1.2 
23.3577 35.2733 2013 10 16 2.1 45.9 11 28 50.7 0.8 1.0 
23.3867 35.4042 2013 10 16 3.8 41.0 13 47 59.5 0.8 1.0 
23.1873 35.3042 2013 10 16 1.8 46.6 16 11 5.5 2.2 3.4 
23.3568 35.2993 2013 10 16 2.2 57.5 20 15 19.5 1.3 1.5 
23.3818 35.4387 2013 10 16 2.5 38.1 22 8 53.8 0.6 0.8 
23.3255 35.3598 2013 10 17 2.2 27.6 3 15 51.7 1.0 1.4 
23.2403 35.2390 2013 10 17 2.2 29.8 5 1 31.5 0.8 0.5 
23.3442 35.3690 2013 10 18 2.2 36.1 1 57 47.2 0.5 0.8 
23.3703 35.3435 2013 10 18 2.0 52.5 6 58 18.6 0.9 1.0 
23.2892 35.2228 2013 10 18 2.7 51.9 11 42 42.8 0.6 0.7 
23.3332 35.3978 2013 10 18 1.9 27.5 14 5 18.8 1.3 1.0 
23.3510 35.3390 2013 10 18 1.8 27.6 14 51 43.9 0.6 0.8 
23.4485 35.4313 2013 10 18 2.3 47.4 15 26 40.5 1.0 1.1 
23.3205 35.3605 2013 10 18 2.2 37.4 18 28 7.8 0.7 0.9 
23.3795 35.4175 2013 10 18 2.9 48.4 19 34 9.0 0.7 0.7 
23.3743 35.3922 2013 10 18 1.9 58.0 19 54 27.7 1.2 1.3 
23.2860 35.3200 2013 10 19 1.9 43.5 0 33 51.5 0.6 1.0 
23.2605 35.4180 2013 10 19 3.9 51.4 2 19 21.1 0.6 0.7 
23.2830 35.3740 2013 10 19 2.7 47.5 2 45 33.2 0.6 0.6 
23.3408 35.4373 2013 10 19 3.2 39.5 3 39 58.6 0.6 0.9 
23.2717 35.3305 2013 10 19 1.8 32.8 4 41 29.9 1.0 1.6 
23.3745 35.3722 2013 10 19 1.9 51.6 4 55 8.5 0.7 0.8 
23.4005 35.3302 2013 10 19 1.8 29.5 5 4 5.3 0.7 0.4 
23.2330 35.2007 2013 10 19 1.9 47.1 7 13 39.2 1.3 2.2 
23.4835 35.4812 2013 10 19 2.3 48.3 13 44 37.1 0.9 0.7 
23.3140 35.4140 2013 10 19 1.7 39.7 17 39 21.0 0.6 0.9 
23.3272 35.3978 2013 10 19 1.7 26.3 19 42 15.7 1.1 1.7 
23.3558 35.3845 2013 10 19 1.9 46.0 20 23 10.5 0.7 1.0 
23.3550 35.3520 2013 10 20 3.6 40.1 4 49 48.1 0.6 0.8 
23.2588 35.3422 2013 10 20 3.0 45.6 6 20 35.3 0.7 0.8 
23.2527 35.2742 2013 10 20 2.1 40.5 7 21 0.8 0.8 1.0 
23.4023 35.3265 2013 10 20 2.0 35.0 8 58 6.2 1.7 2.6 
23.3175 35.3472 2013 10 20 2.3 52.4 17 51 56.5 0.8 0.6 
23.3490 35.3890 2013 10 20 3.0 44.3 22 54 40.3 0.5 0.7 
23.3845 35.4242 2013 10 21 2.8 42.8 2 35 31.8 0.5 0.7 
23.3792 35.3672 2013 10 21 1.5 34.3 16 13 17.9 0.9 1.3 
23.2813 35.1582 2013 10 21 1.6 27.8 17 47 5.4 2.2 2.1 
23.3735 35.3668 2013 10 21 1.3 28.7 18 20 41.6 0.8 0.5 
23.3888 35.4115 2013 10 21 1.4 56.9 18 31 39.4 1.4 1.6 
23.3468 35.4048 2013 10 21 1.8 48.0 18 44 1.3 0.6 0.7 
23.3222 35.3803 2013 10 21 2.0 42.7 23 15 47.5 1.0 1.3 
23.2742 35.3293 2013 10 22 1.3 63.6 0 3 58.6 0.9 1.1 
23.3933 35.4177 2013 10 22 1.1 20.3 0 40 18.1 1.8 4.1 
23.4060 35.4470 2013 10 22 1.3 47.3 1 26 56.6 1.5 1.6 
23.3607 35.4330 2013 10 22 1.9 38.0 3 11 40.7 1.1 1.4 
23.3367 35.4413 2013 10 22 1.6 54.0 16 18 10.9 1.1 1.4 
23.4062 35.3833 2013 10 22 1.4 40.8 23 7 29.7 1.0 1.4 
23.3180 35.3297 2013 10 22 1.3 48.2 23 10 19.1 1.3 1.6 
23.3775 35.3558 2013 10 23 2.2 29.5 2 33 3.9 0.9 0.6 
23.3168 35.2243 2013 10 23 1.8 30.4 4 12 24.7 1.2 1.6 
23.3793 35.4345 2013 10 23 2.1 41.4 19 14 13.3 0.7 1.1 
23.3470 35.3958 2013 10 24 1.8 12.6 1 59 4.5 0.9 3.2 
23.3020 35.3798 2013 10 24 2.0 32.2 3 6 53.0 0.9 1.5 
23.3960 35.4370 2013 10 24 2.0 42.1 3 13 33.9 0.9 1.3 
23.3640 35.4032 2013 10 24 2.5 17.1 5 32 37.4 0.9 1.7 
23.3597 35.3748 2013 10 24 2.0 30.3 5 56 33.4 0.7 1.0 
23.2718 35.3737 2013 10 24 1.9 11.5 15 8 13.9 0.7 2.2 
23.3400 35.3817 2013 10 24 2.1 17.6 15 30 53.2 0.9 1.8 
23.2088 35.2192 2013 10 24 2.1 56.3 15 50 49.8 1.6 2.4 
23.3667 35.3617 2013 10 24 1.8 26.5 18 47 25.9 0.7 1.0 
23.2420 35.1208 2013 10 25 2.1 29.3 9 19 26.1 1.3 0.8 
23.3462 35.3787 2013 10 25 1.8 37.1 11 10 42.5 0.8 1.2 
23.2717 35.3082 2013 10 25 2.1 42.4 17 10 4.0 0.7 1.0 
23.3070 35.4073 2013 10 26 2.2 48.1 10 37 17.8 1.8 2.0 
23.3517 35.4207 2013 10 27 2.5 33.5 0 47 39.4 0.5 0.7 
23.2768 35.2077 2013 10 27 2.3 25.1 8 5 48.8 0.9 0.9 
23.3285 35.4065 2013 10 28 2.8 43.7 0 32 40.0 0.7 0.9 
23.4403 35.4235 2013 10 28 1.6 45.9 1 47 53.5 0.6 0.8 
23.3868 35.4558 2013 10 28 1.5 37.4 1 58 18.2 1.0 1.6 
23.3597 35.4578 2013 10 28 1.5 40.0 6 54 53.1 1.0 1.5 
23.3222 35.2015 2013 10 28 1.8 25.1 9 46 31.0 0.7 0.8 
23.3350 35.4262 2013 10 28 1.5 30.6 10 10 8.1 1.2 2.0 
23.3570 35.4158 2013 10 28 1.4 29.6 13 17 14.2 0.9 0.6 
23.2328 35.3490 2013 10 28 1.4 30.2 17 23 6.7 1.4 2.5 
23.4277 35.4635 2013 10 28 1.2 5.3 17 43 7.3 0.4 2.0 
23.4108 35.3707 2013 10 28 1.7 43.0 22 16 42.9 1.2 0.9 
23.3412 35.3280 2013 10 29 1.5 43.4 1 21 6.0 0.7 1.1 
23.3917 35.4303 2013 10 29 1.7 40.7 11 17 7.1 0.9 1.3 
23.3930 35.3595 2013 10 29 1.3 38.7 11 25 10.3 0.6 0.8 
23.3712 35.3015 2013 10 29 3.1 37.2 14 14 46.0 0.8 0.9 
23.2712 35.2600 2013 10 29 1.3 42.3 17 51 53.4 0.9 1.4 
23.3257 35.3815 2013 10 29 1.5 52.0 21 19 33.7 1.5 0.9 
23.2677 35.2628 2013 10 30 1.5 37.3 5 32 52.7 0.8 0.9 
23.2855 35.2930 2013 10 30 1.7 35.3 8 42 17.0 0.6 0.9 
23.3368 35.3713 2013 10 30 2.4 55.6 11 51 12.3 0.7 0.8 
23.2970 35.3138 2013 10 30 1.5 41.8 17 4 1.5 0.7 1.0 
23.2562 35.3375 2013 10 30 3.2 42.9 18 35 11.5 0.8 1.2 
23.3558 35.3705 2013 10 30 2.2 44.6 18 36 45.4 0.9 1.1 
23.3190 35.4120 2013 10 31 1.6 34.1 22 25 16.1 0.7 1.2 
23.3468 35.3435 2013 10 31 1.9 46.7 23 19 31.7 0.8 1.0 
23.3202 35.3238 2013 11 1 2.1 45.0 4 20 13.3 0.8 1.2 
23.2860 35.3357 2013 11 1 1.9 50.6 7 13 29.7 1.1 1.2 
23.3982 35.4767 2013 11 1 2.1 40.1 16 16 55.1 1.0 1.5 
23.3128 35.3317 2013 11 1 2.2 47.8 20 20 52.0 0.8 1.0 
23.3752 35.4273 2013 11 1 1.8 20.4 20 39 21.9 0.9 1.7 
23.3853 35.4368 2013 11 2 1.6 31.9 18 45 36.5 0.6 0.9 
23.2995 35.4108 2013 11 2 1.3 28.2 19 47 59.6 0.9 0.5 
23.3013 35.2335 2013 11 2 1.4 40.0 22 34 32.6 0.7 1.1 
23.3000 35.2455 2013 11 2 1.8 30.9 23 41 21.9 1.2 1.7 
23.2927 35.3250 2013 11 3 1.5 27.7 6 26 56.9 1.6 1.2 
23.2955 35.3732 2013 11 3 1.4 17.1 10 18 43.8 0.9 2.6 
23.3602 35.3640 2013 11 3 1.5 25.6 10 44 15.2 0.5 0.8 
23.4022 35.4295 2013 11 3 1.2 64.1 12 7 25.5 1.8 2.0 
23.2840 35.3872 2013 11 3 1.8 56.9 17 34 28.8 1.1 1.5 
23.4218 35.4602 2013 11 4 3.1 36.8 6 30 56.2 0.7 0.9 
23.4058 35.4103 2013 11 4 1.8 48.2 6 37 5.8 0.7 0.7 
23.2437 35.3323 2013 11 4 1.8 49.4 6 57 58.9 0.8 1.1 
23.4030 35.3467 2013 11 4 2.5 44.6 9 26 50.2 0.6 0.9 
23.3265 35.2655 2013 11 4 1.7 60.2 10 59 41.6 2.0 1.2 
23.2790 35.3403 2013 11 4 1.8 23.1 20 16 50.7 0.7 1.6 
23.3967 35.3647 2013 11 5 2.9 37.5 22 3 43.5 0.7 0.9 
23.4198 35.4005 2013 11 8 3.0 36.8 0 6 50.5 0.7 0.9 
23.2555 35.3170 2013 11 8 1.6 45.3 21 4 13.6 1.4 2.6 
Catalogue of Chania 2016 swarm sequence 
23.5638 35.3675 2016 1 31 1.7 16.1 0 0 38.0 0.4 1.3 
23.6197 35.3682 2016 2 1 3.1 19.7 2 11 51.6 0.5 1.4 
23.6345 35.3600 2016 2 1 3.1 22.9 2 19 57.2 0.5 0.4 
23.6145 35.3528 2016 2 1 2.0 25.2 2 26 58.1 0.7 1.2 
23.6422 35.3458 2016 2 2 2.4 12.5 6 57 5.7 0.7 2.8 
23.6095 35.3618 2016 2 3 2.0 18.9 20 15 12.6 0.4 1.4 
23.6085 35.3733 2016 2 5 3.0 13.8 2 52 27.8 0.6 2.0 
23.6522 35.3592 2016 2 5 2.2 29.2 2 53 24.5 0.8 1.2 
23.6375 35.3702 2016 2 8 2.5 19.0 10 35 5.1 0.5 1.0 
23.6428 35.3745 2016 2 8 1.9 14.6 10 49 54.4 0.7 1.9 
23.6303 35.3933 2016 2 8 2.5 14.8 12 0 52.7 0.6 1.9 
23.6290 35.3878 2016 2 8 3.4 16.7 16 15 29.8 0.8 2.5 
23.6263 35.3727 2016 2 8 1.4 15.0 16 19 33.8 0.6 4.2 
23.6245 35.3900 2016 2 8 1.5 21.1 16 20 34.2 1.3 2.0 
23.6352 35.3808 2016 2 8 1.8 21.2 16 29 58.8 0.8 1.4 
23.6375 35.3697 2016 2 8 1.4 28.6 16 31 6.8 1.1 1.6 
23.6268 35.3888 2016 2 8 2.1 18.2 16 41 50.1 0.4 1.2 
23.6587 35.3738 2016 2 8 1.5 27.7 17 0 24.9 0.8 1.3 
23.6547 35.3760 2016 2 8 1.9 27.9 17 2 50.5 0.9 1.4 
23.6282 35.3607 2016 2 8 2.1 24.9 17 19 28.0 0.6 0.4 
23.6160 35.3790 2016 2 8 1.4 23.6 18 6 1.1 0.6 0.6 
23.6122 35.3803 2016 2 8 2.1 16.1 20 53 20.1 0.6 1.7 
23.6290 35.3872 2016 2 9 2.0 19.2 0 2 35.9 0.4 0.9 
23.6213 35.3875 2016 2 9 2.1 18.8 1 20 22.1 0.6 1.8 
23.6270 35.3900 2016 2 9 1.8 20.1 9 43 42.5 0.4 0.8 
23.6425 35.3827 2016 2 9 2.7 20.0 10 28 20.8 0.8 2.2 
23.6323 35.3923 2016 2 9 1.9 18.0 12 19 19.2 0.6 1.4 
23.6377 35.3752 2016 2 9 3.0 19.7 12 20 2.7 0.4 0.9 
23.6573 35.3912 2016 2 9 1.8 25.3 12 21 20.1 0.9 0.8 
23.6520 35.3853 2016 2 9 1.9 23.4 13 5 14.4 0.9 1.3 
23.6122 35.3797 2016 2 9 1.7 16.0 15 59 55.0 0.5 1.7 
23.6457 35.3483 2016 2 9 1.9 29.2 17 45 41.6 0.7 1.1 
23.6270 35.3940 2016 2 9 2.1 15.7 18 17 59.0 0.6 1.8 
23.6252 35.3740 2016 2 9 3.4 17.3 18 31 29.3 0.4 1.4 
23.6453 35.3852 2016 2 9 1.5 13.7 18 34 38.7 0.7 5.1 
23.6217 35.3723 2016 2 9 2.0 19.0 19 36 35.4 0.5 1.6 
23.6188 35.3550 2016 2 9 1.7 25.8 20 49 55.9 0.8 1.3 
23.6332 35.3663 2016 2 9 1.6 24.4 20 52 25.2 1.3 1.8 
23.6353 35.3600 2016 2 9 1.9 31.1 20 52 58.6 0.8 0.6 
23.6345 35.3715 2016 2 9 3.6 22.6 21 11 13.7 0.6 0.6 
23.6178 35.3390 2016 2 9 2.1 27.8 21 12 57.2 0.8 1.2 
23.6555 35.3807 2016 2 9 2.0 23.3 21 17 10.3 0.6 0.5 
23.6348 35.3603 2016 2 9 1.8 21.9 21 21 13.9 1.2 2.0 
23.6110 35.3612 2016 2 9 2.2 17.9 21 47 41.3 0.8 2.4 
23.6477 35.3823 2016 2 9 1.8 12.0 22 4 15.4 0.5 1.2 
23.6157 35.3673 2016 2 9 1.6 4.2 22 34 38.1 0.5 1.9 
23.6520 35.3515 2016 2 9 1.7 26.5 23 47 28.4 1.3 2.1 
23.6170 35.3870 2016 2 9 2.0 18.1 23 59 41.1 0.7 2.1 
23.6613 35.3917 2016 2 10 2.1 23.2 6 8 31.2 0.6 0.5 
23.6722 35.3742 2016 2 10 1.6 32.7 9 21 40.3 0.8 0.5 
23.6510 35.3900 2016 2 10 2.1 16.2 9 26 16.6 0.6 2.1 
23.6460 35.3762 2016 2 10 2.7 26.1 9 26 48.5 0.6 0.7 
23.6278 35.3803 2016 2 10 2.0 20.0 13 43 31.1 0.5 1.2 
23.6172 35.3688 2016 2 10 2.2 17.4 15 4 34.2 0.8 4.6 
23.6305 35.3625 2016 2 10 2.5 23.6 15 8 9.6 0.6 0.5 
23.6225 35.3825 2016 2 10 2.0 20.2 15 25 59.1 0.8 4.2 
23.5533 35.3458 2016 2 10 2.2 10.5 22 24 23.6 1.3 0.6 
23.6263 35.3680 2016 2 11 1.7 17.0 16 8 39.5 1.2 7.6 
23.6455 35.3937 2016 2 11 2.2 19.0 22 7 0.7 0.5 1.4 
23.6360 35.3695 2016 2 11 1.7 0.0 22 10 21.2 0.5 1.0 
23.6425 35.3965 2016 2 12 1.9 15.6 5 14 16.8 0.4 1.3 
23.6122 35.3890 2016 2 12 2.2 19.1 23 15 30.3 0.6 1.8 
23.5897 35.3553 2016 2 14 1.5 16.9 2 47 6.7 0.9 6.0 
23.6258 35.3768 2016 2 16 2.7 16.9 4 0 37.1 0.5 1.7 
23.6163 35.3640 2016 2 16 2.1 6.0 20 28 40.3 0.4 1.7 
23.6333 35.3645 2016 2 17 2.2 19.5 0 53 16.4 0.5 1.7 
23.6318 35.3863 2016 2 17 1.9 18.3 4 42 13.7 0.4 1.2 
23.6435 35.3628 2016 2 17 1.9 25.7 15 48 20.2 0.8 1.3 
23.6265 35.3735 2016 2 17 2.0 17.7 23 53 47.4 0.5 1.7 
23.6253 35.3550 2016 2 18 1.6 24.7 0 13 45.2 1.0 1.4 
23.6723 35.3762 2016 2 22 1.7 23.8 13 59 31.5 0.6 0.6 
23.6235 35.3932 2016 2 24 1.8 18.1 21 52 33.1 1.6 1.2 
23.6318 35.3650 2016 2 26 1.6 23.9 21 59 33.5 0.9 0.9 
23.6402 35.3953 2016 2 27 2.1 22.0 10 12 41.5 0.7 0.6 
23.6385 35.3765 2016 2 28 1.6 22.7 2 9 46.1 0.7 0.7 
23.6338 35.3743 2016 2 28 2.5 17.3 20 50 48.4 0.7 1.5 
23.6387 35.3578 2016 3 1 1.7 25.3 23 4 31.2 1.0 1.7 
23.6347 35.4045 2016 3 2 1.7 21.0 1 28 0.6 0.5 1.2 
23.6565 35.3913 2016 3 3 1.9 14.9 16 1 27.4 0.4 1.3 
23.6425 35.3972 2016 3 3 2.5 21.8 21 25 32.3 0.6 0.6 
23.6365 35.3718 2016 3 5 2.7 22.8 23 5 2.4 0.4 0.4 
23.6138 35.3582 2016 3 5 1.6 20.4 23 13 47.9 0.9 1.4 
23.6525 35.3440 2016 3 5 1.7 31.5 23 30 6.2 0.8 0.6 
23.6503 35.4030 2016 3 6 2.1 22.0 8 28 24.2 0.6 0.3 
23.6077 35.3677 2016 3 6 2.8 11.2 8 29 34.7 0.7 1.9 
23.6243 35.3595 2016 3 6 1.5 21.7 8 31 52.9 1.1 1.2 
23.6635 35.3735 2016 3 6 1.6 23.8 8 33 50.9 0.7 0.6 
23.6907 35.3910 2016 3 6 1.7 25.0 8 47 41.2 0.5 0.4 
23.6403 35.3827 2016 3 6 1.6 21.8 8 53 49.6 0.6 0.6 
23.6385 35.3840 2016 3 6 2.2 20.3 11 23 1.1 0.5 1.1 
23.6355 35.3992 2016 3 6 2.6 22.6 11 51 15.9 0.4 0.2 
23.6630 35.3880 2016 3 6 1.7 25.0 12 31 57.1 0.6 0.3 
23.6210 35.3637 2016 3 6 1.6 15.5 13 35 29.6 0.4 1.5 
23.6400 35.3725 2016 3 6 1.8 16.4 18 28 23.3 1.2 4.2 
23.6280 35.3800 2016 3 6 2.0 18.1 18 52 8.0 0.6 1.9 
23.6347 35.3927 2016 3 6 4.0 20.3 23 18 16.1 0.5 1.1 
23.6475 35.3975 2016 3 6 3.3 21.9 23 22 49.7 0.6 0.3 
23.6482 35.3837 2016 3 6 2.2 17.5 23 25 19.7 0.5 1.1 
23.6187 35.3643 2016 3 6 2.0 22.7 23 25 58.8 0.9 0.9 
23.6255 35.3903 2016 3 6 2.2 21.3 23 32 34.0 0.7 0.7 
23.6583 35.3703 2016 3 6 2.0 24.3 23 33 6.1 0.7 0.6 
23.6125 35.3773 2016 3 6 1.9 9.0 23 36 29.0 1.2 8.6 
23.6078 35.3790 2016 3 6 2.1 20.7 23 37 39.9 0.5 1.0 
23.6310 35.3668 2016 3 6 2.0 25.4 23 38 10.8 0.6 0.6 
23.6350 35.3683 2016 3 6 2.0 25.3 23 39 46.9 0.8 0.7 
23.6407 35.3528 2016 3 6 1.8 21.7 23 42 50.1 0.9 0.9 
23.6137 35.3608 2016 3 6 1.8 22.9 23 43 45.6 1.4 1.4 
23.6287 35.3668 2016 3 6 1.9 23.9 23 46 27.9 0.6 0.6 
23.6307 35.3910 2016 3 6 1.9 22.4 23 59 12.2 0.7 0.7 
23.6473 35.3923 2016 3 7 2.4 23.8 0 1 48.8 0.7 0.3 
23.5960 35.3652 2016 3 7 2.0 10.1 0 2 42.7 0.5 2.7 
23.6133 35.3535 2016 3 7 2.1 23.1 0 9 17.7 1.2 1.2 
23.6162 35.3897 2016 3 7 1.8 16.3 0 10 54.5 0.4 1.3 
23.6043 35.3642 2016 3 7 2.6 14.6 0 19 14.9 0.4 1.2 
23.6388 35.3672 2016 3 7 1.8 21.1 0 21 37.0 0.7 0.8 
23.5983 35.3482 2016 3 7 1.6 4.0 0 23 5.2 1.3 6.2 
23.6162 35.3837 2016 3 7 2.8 16.5 0 27 7.3 0.4 1.0 
23.6298 35.3680 2016 3 7 2.8 22.6 0 27 18.3 0.6 0.3 
23.6183 35.3842 2016 3 7 2.0 13.9 0 32 37.4 0.5 1.8 
23.6292 35.3710 2016 3 7 2.4 18.3 0 33 22.4 0.6 1.4 
23.6243 35.3745 2016 3 7 2.1 16.8 0 37 3.7 0.5 1.4 
23.6103 35.3788 2016 3 7 2.0 18.3 0 37 57.4 0.4 1.1 
23.6163 35.3757 2016 3 7 1.9 11.5 0 38 20.3 0.4 1.6 
23.6427 35.4112 2016 3 7 2.0 21.2 0 39 23.2 1.7 0.6 
23.6017 35.3590 2016 3 7 2.1 18.5 0 41 15.9 2.1 2.5 
23.5857 35.3545 2016 3 7 3.4 15.4 0 41 45.5 1.0 1.5 
23.6575 35.4178 2016 3 7 1.6 21.8 0 50 13.8 1.7 0.5 
23.6722 35.4160 2016 3 7 1.5 19.3 0 57 45.0 3.1 2.1 
23.6765 35.4365 2016 3 7 2.2 21.5 1 0 13.2 2.5 0.6 
23.6218 35.3535 2016 3 7 1.9 2.8 1 0 54.9 1.4 2.6 
23.6703 35.4267 2016 3 7 2.0 23.8 1 5 17.4 2.8 0.7 
23.6347 35.4083 2016 3 7 2.1 18.3 1 10 37.5 1.8 1.1 
23.6410 35.4167 2016 3 7 2.2 20.7 1 18 36.9 1.1 0.7 
23.6220 35.3807 2016 3 7 3.5 17.9 1 27 26.9 1.2 1.2 
23.6142 35.3822 2016 3 7 2.5 16.3 1 28 34.9 1.6 1.5 
23.6410 35.4197 2016 3 7 1.8 18.7 1 33 20.6 1.6 0.9 
23.6460 35.3943 2016 3 7 2.1 21.4 1 41 37.5 1.7 0.7 
23.6577 35.4333 2016 3 7 1.9 23.2 1 47 43.4 1.7 0.4 
23.6325 35.4028 2016 3 7 1.9 18.9 1 53 22.7 1.4 0.9 
23.6940 35.4343 2016 3 7 2.0 24.3 2 4 47.5 2.3 0.5 
23.6152 35.3782 2016 3 7 1.7 15.5 2 9 35.3 1.6 2.0 
23.6412 35.4022 2016 3 7 2.4 19.1 2 19 0.7 1.2 1.0 
23.6427 35.4050 2016 3 7 1.9 21.4 2 21 20.3 1.5 0.5 
23.5997 35.3348 2016 3 7 1.5 5.9 2 30 58.9 1.0 1.9 
23.5992 35.3465 2016 3 7 1.5 18.2 2 45 17.4 1.0 3.3 
23.6450 35.3737 2016 3 7 1.9 15.6 2 49 29.6 0.5 1.7 
23.6485 35.4025 2016 3 7 1.8 15.1 2 58 52.5 0.5 1.4 
23.6285 35.3830 2016 3 7 2.0 24.0 3 0 0.5 1.5 1.4 
23.6292 35.3882 2016 3 7 2.9 19.9 3 6 2.5 0.5 1.0 
23.6065 35.3793 2016 3 7 1.7 17.9 3 14 50.2 0.5 1.4 
23.6215 35.3533 2016 3 7 2.3 23.2 3 18 46.5 0.9 0.8 
23.6120 35.3953 2016 3 7 1.8 19.8 3 38 58.7 2.2 1.9 
23.6398 35.4043 2016 3 7 3.3 20.5 3 39 42.4 0.4 0.8 
23.6028 35.3768 2016 3 7 1.5 15.3 3 50 29.2 0.7 2.4 
23.6040 35.3745 2016 3 7 2.0 14.3 4 1 19.1 0.7 2.7 
23.6065 35.3628 2016 3 7 2.0 16.9 4 4 50.2 0.9 3.0 
23.6415 35.3838 2016 3 7 1.9 16.7 4 6 26.0 0.6 1.7 
23.6747 35.3773 2016 3 7 1.9 25.5 4 28 31.0 0.8 0.7 
23.6675 35.3828 2016 3 7 2.0 24.3 4 32 57.4 1.2 1.0 
23.6212 35.3598 2016 3 7 1.7 17.4 4 34 6.2 1.2 4.0 
23.6415 35.3895 2016 3 7 2.5 18.5 4 49 55.2 0.5 1.1 
23.6167 35.3713 2016 3 7 2.8 23.5 4 50 33.4 1.0 0.5 
23.5995 35.3663 2016 3 7 2.0 17.3 5 12 6.8 0.5 1.4 
23.6282 35.3805 2016 3 7 2.3 19.5 5 16 21.1 0.7 1.6 
23.6375 35.3828 2016 3 7 1.9 16.4 5 28 55.8 2.2 2.0 
23.6135 35.3947 2016 3 7 2.2 20.1 7 2 13.9 0.4 0.8 
23.6427 35.3668 2016 3 7 1.9 23.8 9 0 42.9 1.3 1.2 
23.6585 35.3970 2016 3 7 2.1 10.4 9 3 38.5 0.7 2.7 
23.6365 35.3763 2016 3 7 1.8 22.7 9 4 13.6 0.7 0.7 
23.6562 35.3855 2016 3 7 2.4 25.4 10 29 39.8 0.8 0.5 
23.6622 35.3972 2016 3 7 2.7 20.5 10 29 49.5 0.4 0.8 
23.6563 35.4000 2016 3 7 2.4 23.2 10 45 9.0 0.7 0.6 
23.6593 35.3983 2016 3 7 2.2 24.2 11 10 54.7 0.7 0.6 
23.6667 35.3768 2016 3 7 1.9 25.3 12 49 11.6 0.6 0.5 
23.6242 35.3887 2016 3 7 3.9 17.2 14 25 15.2 0.5 1.1 
23.6363 35.3672 2016 3 7 2.3 18.2 14 29 3.1 0.4 1.0 
23.6533 35.3958 2016 3 7 2.0 18.6 14 31 59.4 0.4 1.1 
23.6217 35.3875 2016 3 7 2.2 18.3 14 45 42.8 0.6 1.7 
23.6268 35.3927 2016 3 7 3.5 18.6 15 19 45.6 0.5 1.1 
23.6132 35.3688 2016 3 7 2.1 16.6 15 34 10.5 0.8 2.8 
23.6342 35.3768 2016 3 7 2.2 25.6 16 2 20.2 1.0 1.0 
23.6308 35.3428 2016 3 7 2.0 23.4 16 9 32.4 2.0 0.9 
23.6488 35.3953 2016 3 7 2.0 22.3 16 22 8.3 0.8 0.7 
23.6550 35.3882 2016 3 7 2.1 12.8 16 30 50.5 0.5 1.7 
23.6368 35.3942 2016 3 7 2.0 15.0 16 51 6.7 0.7 2.1 
23.6367 35.3893 2016 3 7 3.0 16.5 17 13 59.5 0.4 1.0 
23.6052 35.3543 2016 3 7 2.2 18.9 17 28 58.9 0.9 2.9 
23.6332 35.3732 2016 3 7 1.9 10.9 18 5 32.0 2.2 4.1 
23.6378 35.3910 2016 3 7 3.2 19.6 18 46 44.5 0.4 0.9 
23.6112 35.3773 2016 3 7 2.1 19.1 18 49 42.5 0.7 2.0 
23.6278 35.4193 2016 3 7 2.1 19.8 19 45 7.0 1.6 0.9 
23.6468 35.4167 2016 3 7 2.6 23.3 19 47 13.8 1.5 0.5 
23.6370 35.3937 2016 3 7 2.1 13.1 20 20 46.7 0.4 1.3 
23.6300 35.3598 2016 3 7 2.1 9.5 20 31 10.4 0.5 2.8 
23.6183 35.3597 2016 3 7 1.9 11.4 20 32 18.7 0.7 2.8 
23.6430 35.4027 2016 3 7 2.5 23.1 22 48 0.4 2.0 0.7 
23.6200 35.3987 2016 3 7 1.8 21.3 22 53 58.1 2.1 0.9 
23.6143 35.3827 2016 3 7 1.8 17.8 23 37 28.4 1.9 2.0 
23.6555 35.4012 2016 3 8 2.2 16.5 0 2 6.2 1.7 1.1 
23.6637 35.3938 2016 3 8 2.1 19.4 0 2 20.9 1.8 1.0 
23.6473 35.4265 2016 3 8 1.7 21.3 0 57 18.9 1.9 1.0 
23.6462 35.3975 2016 3 8 1.8 17.3 2 55 6.1 1.9 1.8 
23.6323 35.3582 2016 3 8 2.2 17.8 4 32 58.7 0.6 1.8 
23.6322 35.4000 2016 3 8 2.3 17.3 5 14 16.0 0.6 1.4 
23.6418 35.3778 2016 3 8 2.4 16.2 5 52 12.7 0.5 1.2 
23.6177 35.3615 2016 3 8 1.7 13.8 7 20 52.2 0.8 3.3 
23.6222 35.3683 2016 3 8 2.3 20.2 7 47 7.2 0.7 1.6 
23.5768 35.3482 2016 3 8 1.7 10.9 8 28 20.3 0.4 2.1 
23.6275 35.3958 2016 3 8 2.5 20.5 8 41 50.3 0.4 0.8 
23.6437 35.3880 2016 3 8 2.2 21.7 9 3 4.3 1.0 0.9 
23.6533 35.3935 2016 3 8 2.1 18.7 9 12 31.8 0.4 1.1 
23.6415 35.3817 2016 3 8 2.2 23.3 12 20 20.3 1.2 1.1 
23.6197 35.3592 2016 3 8 2.1 20.8 15 26 19.7 0.6 0.6 
23.6337 35.3825 2016 3 8 2.8 23.4 15 43 2.4 0.6 0.3 
23.6222 35.3935 2016 3 8 2.0 23.6 15 48 28.0 0.8 0.8 
23.6477 35.3857 2016 3 8 2.3 19.6 17 41 16.8 0.4 0.9 
23.6412 35.3908 2016 3 8 3.6 22.5 18 25 3.7 0.5 0.3 
23.6453 35.3675 2016 3 8 1.9 26.5 18 39 27.2 0.6 0.6 
23.6530 35.3705 2016 3 8 1.4 25.0 18 42 48.3 2.1 0.5 
23.6328 35.3553 2016 3 8 2.0 17.0 18 45 40.1 0.8 2.0 
23.6403 35.3850 2016 3 8 2.1 15.1 19 8 4.1 0.4 1.0 
23.6553 35.3893 2016 3 8 3.1 21.5 19 15 28.9 0.6 0.6 
23.6223 35.3965 2016 3 8 2.5 18.6 19 33 33.0 0.4 0.8 
23.6383 35.3970 2016 3 8 3.0 18.3 19 33 37.5 0.5 1.1 
23.6363 35.3993 2016 3 8 1.9 21.2 19 47 59.1 0.5 0.5 
23.6302 35.4035 2016 3 8 2.1 19.1 20 2 9.4 0.4 0.8 
23.6177 35.3658 2016 3 8 2.3 15.8 20 8 58.2 0.4 1.0 
23.6217 35.3847 2016 3 8 2.1 18.5 20 17 41.8 0.5 1.4 
23.6377 35.3880 2016 3 8 2.4 22.9 20 21 16.9 0.9 0.8 
23.6255 35.3850 2016 3 8 1.9 20.1 20 55 42.5 0.4 1.1 
23.6223 35.3720 2016 3 8 2.1 14.1 21 16 35.7 0.5 1.4 
23.6447 35.3832 2016 3 8 2.1 22.6 23 40 59.6 0.7 0.7 
23.6125 35.3863 2016 3 9 2.6 15.6 0 2 54.6 0.6 1.4 
23.5980 35.3838 2016 3 9 2.4 17.9 0 20 3.5 0.6 1.3 
23.6307 35.3845 2016 3 9 2.4 13.9 1 1 56.5 0.5 1.4 
23.6262 35.4158 2016 3 9 1.5 15.2 1 28 59.0 1.4 1.1 
23.6320 35.3840 2016 3 9 1.5 19.5 2 36 7.9 0.8 2.3 
23.6395 35.4078 2016 3 9 1.9 17.4 3 54 36.3 0.4 1.0 
23.6110 35.3900 2016 3 9 1.7 19.4 4 42 50.4 0.6 1.4 
23.6383 35.3912 2016 3 9 1.8 17.6 6 53 31.3 0.4 1.2 
23.6428 35.4142 2016 3 9 1.7 20.4 7 16 28.6 0.4 1.0 
23.6098 35.3792 2016 3 9 3.9 18.0 8 4 8.0 0.4 0.9 
23.6313 35.3888 2016 3 9 2.2 22.1 8 9 50.8 0.5 0.5 
23.6358 35.3912 2016 3 9 2.0 16.4 8 38 12.2 0.4 1.1 
23.6290 35.4010 2016 3 9 2.4 20.5 12 7 45.2 0.6 1.2 
23.6513 35.3967 2016 3 9 2.5 24.2 12 12 32.3 0.9 0.5 
23.6080 35.3613 2016 3 9 2.0 17.8 14 34 28.7 0.6 1.8 
23.6178 35.3698 2016 3 9 1.8 21.8 19 20 51.3 1.3 0.6 
23.6272 35.3947 2016 3 9 2.1 16.5 23 9 50.1 0.4 1.1 
23.6265 35.3940 2016 3 9 2.5 17.1 23 12 32.0 0.4 1.0 
23.6333 35.4082 2016 3 9 2.3 20.0 23 33 8.0 1.5 1.1 
23.6472 35.4268 2016 3 9 2.0 22.1 23 39 50.9 2.1 0.6 
23.6345 35.4163 2016 3 9 2.2 22.0 23 42 44.7 1.6 0.5 
23.6387 35.4123 2016 3 9 2.2 17.7 23 48 11.9 2.3 1.5 
23.6352 35.3628 2016 3 10 1.7 24.1 0 31 29.8 2.2 0.9 
23.6287 35.3595 2016 3 10 1.7 15.1 1 3 15.4 3.8 5.5 
23.6228 35.3465 2016 3 10 1.6 4.4 1 28 48.8 0.7 1.8 
23.6660 35.4342 2016 3 10 2.4 20.2 1 31 59.2 1.2 0.7 
23.6580 35.4082 2016 3 10 2.1 21.0 1 43 50.2 1.4 0.5 
23.6255 35.3828 2016 3 10 2.2 16.3 2 2 58.8 2.2 2.6 
23.6110 35.3985 2016 3 10 1.7 19.7 2 46 42.2 1.7 1.1 
23.6458 35.4093 2016 3 10 2.1 21.2 3 6 11.1 1.4 0.5 
23.5943 35.3422 2016 3 10 1.8 0.0 3 8 24.8 1.4 1.6 
23.6523 35.3957 2016 3 10 2.5 21.5 3 9 38.6 1.4 0.5 
23.6045 35.3478 2016 3 10 2.0 13.1 3 13 9.2 2.3 3.6 
23.6718 35.4167 2016 3 10 3.1 25.3 3 33 0.3 1.7 0.5 
23.5807 35.3385 2016 3 10 2.7 17.0 3 33 44.3 2.0 3.0 
23.5932 35.3502 2016 3 10 1.6 5.9 3 58 42.5 1.0 1.9 
23.6387 35.3817 2016 3 10 1.8 9.7 4 35 41.7 0.4 2.5 
23.6608 35.3935 2016 3 10 2.7 18.7 4 42 2.0 0.5 0.9 
23.6255 35.3917 2016 3 10 2.6 16.5 5 18 28.1 0.5 1.2 
23.6212 35.3792 2016 3 10 2.0 14.1 5 25 0.8 0.4 1.6 
23.6360 35.3802 2016 3 10 2.0 23.0 5 29 59.4 0.9 0.8 
23.6425 35.3895 2016 3 10 3.2 22.0 5 46 1.9 0.6 0.3 
23.6477 35.3683 2016 3 10 1.9 24.5 5 56 37.0 1.2 1.1 
23.6685 35.3752 2016 3 10 1.9 23.5 6 38 0.4 0.7 0.6 
23.6517 35.3733 2016 3 10 1.9 22.6 6 47 19.0 1.0 0.9 
23.6470 35.3928 2016 3 10 2.4 23.1 7 1 51.3 0.8 0.4 
23.6455 35.3857 2016 3 10 2.0 21.6 7 10 38.1 0.9 0.8 
23.6297 35.3893 2016 3 10 1.9 21.3 7 38 48.4 0.7 0.7 
23.6525 35.4290 2016 3 10 2.1 21.6 8 3 34.7 1.5 0.4 
23.6402 35.3558 2016 3 10 1.8 27.7 8 40 0.7 2.5 0.9 
23.6250 35.3712 2016 3 10 1.6 19.4 9 6 19.6 2.0 2.0 
23.6382 35.3817 2016 3 10 2.2 22.9 10 14 45.3 0.9 0.8 
23.6425 35.3885 2016 3 10 1.9 23.7 10 28 5.0 0.6 0.5 
23.6580 35.3697 2016 3 10 1.9 26.6 10 55 15.8 0.9 0.8 
23.6315 35.3800 2016 3 10 2.1 16.2 11 37 56.0 0.4 1.1 
23.6448 35.3745 2016 3 10 2.3 22.4 12 38 58.6 0.6 0.3 
23.6177 35.3832 2016 3 10 2.6 21.9 12 56 20.6 0.6 0.3 
23.6298 35.3847 2016 3 10 2.1 25.6 14 51 38.1 0.8 0.8 
23.6380 35.3875 2016 3 10 2.0 16.0 15 47 35.0 0.4 1.1 
23.6145 35.3807 2016 3 10 2.1 18.8 15 49 58.6 0.5 1.2 
23.6405 35.3553 2016 3 10 1.7 23.3 15 56 19.4 0.6 0.6 
23.6378 35.3930 2016 3 10 2.7 23.1 16 2 8.5 0.5 0.3 
23.6483 35.3935 2016 3 10 3.0 19.4 17 51 23.3 1.2 1.0 
23.6213 35.3885 2016 3 10 2.0 17.8 17 58 41.3 1.7 1.4 
23.6430 35.4160 2016 3 10 2.1 22.7 18 42 58.6 2.1 0.7 
23.6380 35.4122 2016 3 10 1.8 18.6 19 29 36.1 1.5 0.9 
23.6427 35.3958 2016 3 10 2.1 18.4 19 33 30.2 1.7 1.2 
23.6543 35.4093 2016 3 10 1.7 16.1 20 8 49.9 0.4 1.1 
23.6345 35.3773 2016 3 10 1.7 11.9 20 42 13.1 0.6 1.6 
23.6440 35.3937 2016 3 10 2.1 17.2 22 36 32.8 0.3 0.8 
23.6255 35.3647 2016 3 10 2.4 14.4 22 40 28.0 0.5 1.5 
23.6207 35.3767 2016 3 10 2.3 14.8 23 3 57.2 0.5 1.4 
23.6175 35.3845 2016 3 11 1.8 12.0 1 9 27.5 0.6 1.6 
23.6320 35.4007 2016 3 11 1.9 16.7 1 36 37.4 1.2 1.0 
23.6390 35.3948 2016 3 11 1.8 21.0 3 17 56.7 0.7 0.6 
23.6312 35.3960 2016 3 11 1.6 11.4 3 21 11.0 0.9 3.2 
23.6400 35.3947 2016 3 11 2.0 20.1 3 32 55.6 0.4 0.7 
23.6170 35.3960 2016 3 11 2.6 19.0 4 57 0.5 1.9 1.7 
23.6283 35.3970 2016 3 11 2.5 19.4 7 0 43.9 0.5 1.1 
23.6385 35.3838 2016 3 11 2.3 18.2 7 28 3.0 0.5 1.0 
23.6148 35.3888 2016 3 11 1.8 13.4 7 30 7.2 0.4 1.5 
23.6240 35.4068 2016 3 11 1.6 16.4 8 45 45.9 0.6 1.4 
23.6390 35.3892 2016 3 11 2.1 17.1 9 14 53.7 0.3 0.8 
23.6420 35.3873 2016 3 11 2.2 22.2 9 21 49.8 0.8 0.8 
23.6255 35.3917 2016 3 11 2.2 19.3 10 5 36.3 0.4 0.8 
23.6235 35.3933 2016 3 11 2.3 17.3 11 13 6.2 0.4 0.8 
23.6227 35.3898 2016 3 11 1.7 17.4 16 32 31.2 0.5 1.3 
23.6325 35.3770 2016 3 11 2.7 22.4 19 3 14.6 0.9 0.5 
23.6257 35.3975 2016 3 11 1.6 16.6 19 48 2.0 0.5 1.2 
23.6440 35.3983 2016 3 11 2.6 23.7 21 51 49.0 0.9 0.5 
23.6315 35.3683 2016 3 11 1.7 22.2 22 19 9.8 1.4 1.4 
23.6218 35.3910 2016 3 11 2.4 20.1 22 36 20.8 0.5 1.0 
23.6078 35.3838 2016 3 11 1.9 9.1 22 56 30.4 0.5 3.2 
23.6200 35.3808 2016 3 11 2.8 19.0 23 59 47.3 1.5 1.5 
23.6323 35.3663 2016 3 12 2.6 21.0 0 0 9.2 1.3 0.8 
23.6520 35.4243 2016 3 12 2.0 22.7 0 1 31.3 2.0 0.6 
23.6403 35.3902 2016 3 12 1.4 13.1 0 11 32.8 2.4 3.3 
23.6387 35.4212 2016 3 12 2.2 22.8 0 22 15.4 2.1 0.7 
23.6662 35.4347 2016 3 12 1.8 24.1 0 55 35.9 1.9 0.5 
23.6018 35.3753 2016 3 12 2.4 15.9 1 26 49.0 1.3 1.8 
23.6122 35.3850 2016 3 12 2.0 17.6 1 40 47.7 1.9 2.1 
23.6080 35.3745 2016 3 12 3.0 16.0 1 44 4.0 0.9 1.2 
23.6330 35.3953 2016 3 12 1.8 19.0 2 11 2.2 1.7 1.1 
23.6122 35.4047 2016 3 12 1.8 13.4 3 3 22.8 1.4 1.3 
23.6140 35.3888 2016 3 12 2.1 16.8 5 0 26.1 0.5 1.2 
23.6385 35.4067 2016 3 12 1.8 17.5 5 13 16.4 0.4 0.9 
23.6257 35.3977 2016 3 12 4.0 21.9 7 49 59.1 1.8 0.8 
23.6198 35.4085 2016 3 12 2.2 18.0 7 56 17.9 1.3 0.8 
23.6467 35.4255 2016 3 12 2.0 23.1 8 7 52.8 1.6 0.4 
23.6220 35.3985 2016 3 12 2.1 18.8 8 18 26.4 1.3 0.9 
23.6373 35.4150 2016 3 12 2.8 22.2 9 55 31.5 2.0 0.7 
23.6655 35.4237 2016 3 12 2.6 25.1 9 59 3.2 1.4 0.4 
23.6477 35.4042 2016 3 12 2.8 23.3 10 10 54.9 1.5 0.5 
23.6393 35.4247 2016 3 12 2.3 17.6 10 12 27.2 1.5 0.8 
23.6122 35.3595 2016 3 12 2.1 13.5 10 17 36.3 0.7 2.2 
23.6180 35.3910 2016 3 12 1.9 13.0 10 19 33.2 2.3 2.6 
23.6457 35.3868 2016 3 12 1.7 22.5 10 29 16.4 1.1 1.0 
23.6115 35.3683 2016 3 12 2.4 23.8 10 44 39.7 0.8 0.4 
23.6260 35.3937 2016 3 12 2.2 15.8 10 47 31.5 0.5 1.2 
23.6395 35.3968 2016 3 12 3.0 19.7 11 18 8.0 0.4 0.9 
23.6152 35.3767 2016 3 12 2.1 14.1 11 35 10.5 0.5 1.5 
23.6423 35.3808 2016 3 12 2.7 21.8 11 38 6.8 0.5 0.5 
23.6583 35.3968 2016 3 12 2.5 17.9 11 39 38.6 0.5 1.0 
23.6078 35.3612 2016 3 12 2.0 11.7 11 44 51.4 0.7 1.9 
23.6365 35.3880 2016 3 12 2.4 24.0 11 49 14.4 0.8 0.4 
23.6163 35.3902 2016 3 12 2.1 14.9 12 12 0.3 0.5 1.2 
23.5992 35.3665 2016 3 12 4.8 16.3 12 40 39.5 0.5 1.5 
23.6103 35.3772 2016 3 12 2.7 18.0 12 47 15.2 0.7 1.5 
23.6240 35.3857 2016 3 12 1.9 19.5 12 56 57.9 0.8 1.7 
23.6367 35.4042 2016 3 12 2.4 19.5 13 13 16.1 1.4 1.1 
23.6177 35.3638 2016 3 12 1.8 2.8 13 14 45.4 0.5 1.3 
23.6110 35.3662 2016 3 12 2.8 19.8 13 27 18.1 0.5 1.2 
23.6097 35.3630 2016 3 12 2.4 22.5 13 49 59.4 0.6 0.3 
23.6270 35.3915 2016 3 12 2.5 14.7 13 59 9.6 0.5 1.2 
23.6252 35.3937 2016 3 12 2.7 17.0 14 8 5.3 0.4 1.0 
23.6270 35.3860 2016 3 12 3.4 19.7 14 14 35.2 0.4 0.8 
23.6125 35.3922 2016 3 12 2.2 17.9 14 18 40.0 0.4 1.1 
23.6297 35.3728 2016 3 12 1.9 21.6 14 28 14.1 1.0 1.0 
23.6218 35.3990 2016 3 12 2.4 20.5 14 34 10.7 0.4 0.9 
23.5972 35.3752 2016 3 12 3.2 16.8 14 37 15.3 0.5 1.3 
23.6237 35.3877 2016 3 12 1.6 5.6 14 51 13.4 0.5 1.8 
23.6037 35.3865 2016 3 12 2.7 21.0 15 5 53.0 0.7 0.5 
23.6178 35.3927 2016 3 12 2.3 20.1 15 14 24.6 0.7 1.6 
23.6053 35.3695 2016 3 12 2.6 13.8 15 18 25.3 0.7 2.1 
23.6320 35.3750 2016 3 12 3.9 19.2 15 22 23.7 0.4 0.9 
23.6052 35.3773 2016 3 12 2.5 17.6 15 28 25.1 0.6 1.4 
23.6030 35.3695 2016 3 12 2.2 1.0 15 47 17.8 0.7 1.4 
23.6178 35.3827 2016 3 12 2.0 11.7 16 3 26.5 0.4 1.2 
23.6607 35.4023 2016 3 12 2.3 16.4 16 11 47.9 1.4 1.3 
23.6112 35.3793 2016 3 12 2.9 12.4 16 26 26.9 1.6 2.7 
23.6395 35.3903 2016 3 12 2.6 17.7 16 29 14.9 1.4 1.3 
23.6570 35.3933 2016 3 12 1.8 17.5 16 40 7.4 1.9 1.8 
23.7010 35.4387 2016 3 12 2.3 24.9 16 53 42.1 1.8 0.4 
23.6228 35.3717 2016 3 12 2.3 19.2 16 59 31.1 1.5 1.5 
23.6172 35.3717 2016 3 12 2.0 11.1 17 4 24.0 1.6 3.1 
23.6420 35.4167 2016 3 12 2.3 17.1 17 9 15.8 1.4 1.2 
23.6245 35.3740 2016 3 12 2.5 25.1 17 9 37.8 1.5 0.6 
23.6440 35.4228 2016 3 12 2.6 20.7 17 24 8.6 1.3 0.8 
23.6300 35.3788 2016 3 12 1.7 9.9 17 25 59.6 2.9 7.4 
23.6485 35.4275 2016 3 12 2.5 24.6 17 37 40.4 1.7 0.5 
23.6113 35.3948 2016 3 12 2.5 18.2 18 4 51.3 1.7 1.6 
23.6408 35.3820 2016 3 12 3.1 23.7 18 14 6.0 1.1 0.6 
23.6078 35.3848 2016 3 12 2.3 16.1 18 25 48.1 0.5 1.4 
23.6090 35.3680 2016 3 12 1.7 2.1 19 4 22.0 0.7 1.7 
23.6605 35.4060 2016 3 12 2.0 15.4 19 12 14.9 0.6 1.6 
23.6025 35.3897 2016 3 12 2.2 17.9 19 33 20.8 0.5 1.2 
23.6090 35.3897 2016 3 12 2.4 16.7 20 1 55.2 0.5 1.2 
23.6237 35.3925 2016 3 12 2.4 22.9 20 2 15.6 0.6 0.3 
23.6148 35.3992 2016 3 12 2.6 14.5 20 21 12.3 0.5 1.3 
23.5895 35.3712 2016 3 12 1.9 15.1 20 24 51.9 0.5 2.0 
23.6570 35.3830 2016 3 12 3.3 18.7 20 35 38.0 0.5 1.1 
23.6415 35.4022 2016 3 12 1.9 20.1 20 43 20.1 0.6 1.5 
23.6395 35.3863 2016 3 12 2.5 15.8 20 44 21.9 0.4 1.0 
23.6208 35.3768 2016 3 12 2.5 19.4 20 45 4.6 0.5 1.1 
23.6123 35.3883 2016 3 12 3.0 20.4 20 59 50.5 0.4 0.8 
23.6677 35.3687 2016 3 12 1.9 13.0 21 7 44.5 1.7 6.2 
23.5912 35.3697 2016 3 12 1.8 9.5 21 19 22.8 0.7 5.3 
23.6567 35.3837 2016 3 12 2.1 25.4 21 27 51.6 1.3 1.2 
23.6375 35.3818 2016 3 12 1.8 7.1 21 51 21.8 0.4 1.2 
23.6235 35.3653 2016 3 12 1.7 12.8 22 7 43.8 0.5 2.1 
23.6612 35.3982 2016 3 12 2.0 21.5 22 9 3.8 0.9 0.8 
23.6178 35.3565 2016 3 12 2.1 11.2 22 26 30.5 0.7 2.9 
23.6430 35.3800 2016 3 12 2.4 15.1 23 31 44.5 0.5 1.3 
23.6445 35.3887 2016 3 12 2.7 15.2 23 33 33.0 0.6 1.5 
23.6283 35.3713 2016 3 13 2.1 11.0 0 48 41.2 0.6 2.1 
23.5955 35.3503 2016 3 13 2.0 17.1 0 52 57.1 0.9 3.0 
23.6497 35.3843 2016 3 13 2.0 8.4 1 37 34.3 0.5 3.8 
23.6345 35.3880 2016 3 13 2.1 22.9 2 17 36.9 0.7 0.7 
23.6390 35.3838 2016 3 13 2.4 17.3 2 23 49.3 0.5 1.2 
23.6178 35.3775 2016 3 13 2.8 13.0 2 26 21.7 0.6 1.6 
23.6295 35.3803 2016 3 13 2.2 16.8 2 31 35.6 0.6 1.3 
23.6265 35.3947 2016 3 13 2.5 16.4 2 41 7.6 0.5 1.2 
23.6015 35.3935 2016 3 13 2.1 14.4 2 43 15.6 0.5 1.9 
23.6252 35.3920 2016 3 13 1.9 15.3 3 5 30.6 0.5 1.5 
23.6110 35.3758 2016 3 13 2.1 16.1 3 51 33.4 0.5 1.2 
23.6445 35.3870 2016 3 13 2.3 15.6 4 17 50.2 0.4 0.9 
23.6193 35.3892 2016 3 13 1.7 16.4 4 27 53.5 0.4 1.3 
23.6190 35.3878 2016 3 13 2.0 20.4 4 38 7.0 0.6 1.4 
23.6242 35.3720 2016 3 13 2.2 12.8 4 54 58.0 0.5 1.5 
23.6282 35.3925 2016 3 13 1.9 18.6 5 14 49.4 0.6 1.6 
23.6273 35.4000 2016 3 13 1.9 14.6 5 23 14.4 0.4 1.2 
23.6373 35.3947 2016 3 13 1.8 18.5 5 41 8.1 0.4 1.1 
23.6017 35.3713 2016 3 13 1.5 10.2 5 48 3.9 0.7 4.1 
23.6130 35.3855 2016 3 13 1.7 12.2 5 50 35.4 0.8 3.1 
23.6035 35.3938 2016 3 13 1.7 12.7 5 53 15.6 0.8 3.2 
23.5972 35.3613 2016 3 13 1.9 11.5 6 4 29.3 0.6 2.5 
23.6142 35.3730 2016 3 13 2.6 22.1 6 6 1.4 0.6 0.3 
23.6072 35.3697 2016 3 13 1.9 17.5 6 14 32.3 0.4 1.3 
23.6430 35.3855 2016 3 13 1.8 15.3 6 23 43.8 0.4 1.3 
23.6723 35.3988 2016 3 13 1.8 21.4 6 47 36.1 0.5 0.5 
23.6312 35.3945 2016 3 13 2.7 22.6 6 49 6.2 0.6 0.3 
23.6027 35.3760 2016 3 13 2.0 18.9 7 28 38.8 0.8 2.4 
23.6435 35.3868 2016 3 13 2.1 23.7 7 39 25.8 1.3 1.2 
23.6192 35.3995 2016 3 13 2.0 16.7 7 48 34.3 0.5 1.5 
23.6237 35.3997 2016 3 13 1.8 15.4 8 9 50.0 0.5 0.8 
23.6363 35.3987 2016 3 13 2.3 17.9 8 11 12.4 0.5 0.8 
23.6593 35.4015 2016 3 13 2.1 22.1 8 26 7.9 0.7 0.6 
23.6340 35.3810 2016 3 13 1.9 13.4 8 35 49.6 0.7 2.7 
23.6467 35.3953 2016 3 13 2.7 23.8 8 39 56.4 0.6 0.3 
23.6327 35.3937 2016 3 13 2.3 23.1 9 31 37.8 1.0 0.9 
23.6248 35.3848 2016 3 13 2.4 15.4 9 32 48.4 0.5 1.2 
23.6328 35.3878 2016 3 13 2.1 22.2 9 59 48.7 0.7 0.6 
23.6207 35.3872 2016 3 13 1.7 18.0 10 40 38.9 0.5 1.4 
23.6300 35.3702 2016 3 13 2.4 17.9 10 48 4.9 0.6 1.5 
23.6240 35.3970 2016 3 13 2.0 20.5 10 58 59.4 0.5 1.1 
23.6290 35.3847 2016 3 13 2.2 19.7 11 25 49.9 0.4 0.9 
23.6183 35.3830 2016 3 13 2.1 15.9 11 55 23.1 0.4 1.0 
23.6068 35.3830 2016 3 13 2.5 20.4 12 1 5.3 0.7 1.4 
23.6060 35.3778 2016 3 13 2.3 22.2 12 1 43.7 1.0 0.6 
23.6282 35.3835 2016 3 13 2.3 23.4 12 7 44.3 0.7 0.3 
23.6087 35.3617 2016 3 13 2.8 20.2 12 13 39.5 0.5 1.1 
23.6627 35.3990 2016 3 13 2.1 20.6 12 14 31.4 0.5 1.0 
23.6465 35.3947 2016 3 13 2.1 22.0 12 23 13.9 0.8 0.4 
23.6553 35.4030 2016 3 13 1.7 22.9 12 27 47.3 0.7 0.7 
23.6248 35.4017 2016 3 13 1.4 18.9 13 9 3.0 3.7 3.1 
23.6427 35.4018 2016 3 13 1.9 20.6 13 14 4.8 1.5 0.8 
23.6508 35.4157 2016 3 13 3.7 22.3 13 22 58.0 1.8 0.6 
23.6502 35.4108 2016 3 13 3.1 23.2 13 58 25.2 1.7 0.6 
23.6222 35.3958 2016 3 13 2.4 17.8 14 2 23.7 0.4 0.9 
23.6395 35.3828 2016 3 13 1.9 16.9 14 8 55.6 0.4 1.2 
23.6315 35.3923 2016 3 13 2.7 19.9 14 25 30.7 0.5 0.9 
23.6345 35.4018 2016 3 13 2.5 20.1 14 46 39.2 0.4 0.9 
23.6337 35.3958 2016 3 13 2.4 17.2 15 32 13.2 1.2 1.2 
23.6092 35.3912 2016 3 13 2.0 16.8 15 40 59.3 0.6 1.9 
23.6338 35.3822 2016 3 13 1.9 12.4 17 10 18.9 0.4 1.2 
23.6398 35.3863 2016 3 13 1.9 13.0 20 7 23.2 0.7 1.9 
23.6147 35.3917 2016 3 13 2.3 16.8 20 31 54.7 0.5 1.2 
23.6095 35.3810 2016 3 13 2.7 14.3 20 32 9.2 0.4 1.1 
23.6462 35.3865 2016 3 13 2.1 17.4 20 32 54.9 0.4 1.0 
23.6130 35.3972 2016 3 13 2.1 18.8 20 47 34.7 0.6 1.3 
23.6043 35.3908 2016 3 13 2.0 18.3 20 54 24.2 0.6 1.4 
23.6200 35.3907 2016 3 13 2.0 16.1 20 57 37.2 0.4 1.0 
23.6305 35.3830 2016 3 13 2.0 17.1 21 3 42.9 0.6 1.6 
23.6212 35.3657 2016 3 13 1.9 15.6 21 26 34.2 0.7 1.8 
23.6150 35.3763 2016 3 13 3.5 18.4 21 32 34.7 0.4 0.9 
23.6370 35.3917 2016 3 13 2.0 18.9 21 42 9.5 0.4 0.9 
23.6050 35.3867 2016 3 13 2.6 15.1 21 44 10.3 0.7 1.8 
23.5922 35.3970 2016 3 13 1.8 15.2 21 47 28.6 0.5 1.3 
23.6390 35.4050 2016 3 13 2.0 16.3 22 42 16.2 0.5 1.3 
23.6198 35.3807 2016 3 13 2.4 16.6 22 44 4.7 0.5 1.2 
23.6320 35.3828 2016 3 13 2.9 14.7 22 46 15.3 0.5 1.3 
23.6117 35.3970 2016 3 13 2.5 16.3 22 48 15.4 0.6 1.5 
23.6438 35.4058 2016 3 13 2.3 18.9 23 23 54.8 0.4 0.9 
23.6593 35.3917 2016 3 13 3.7 18.0 23 26 32.2 0.5 1.0 
23.6305 35.3732 2016 3 13 2.3 16.5 23 30 10.3 0.5 1.2 
23.6400 35.3908 2016 3 13 2.3 18.9 23 30 43.2 0.6 1.3 
23.6202 35.3760 2016 3 13 2.1 18.0 23 34 31.8 0.5 1.3 
23.6350 35.3840 2016 3 14 1.6 18.3 0 1 47.6 0.8 2.3 
23.6228 35.3875 2016 3 14 2.1 13.7 0 33 7.3 0.4 1.1 
23.6288 35.3835 2016 3 14 2.1 14.1 0 34 54.3 0.5 1.3 
23.6102 35.3838 2016 3 14 2.3 16.9 0 37 22.8 0.5 1.2 
23.6473 35.3837 2016 3 14 2.2 18.4 0 51 49.5 0.4 0.9 
23.6058 35.3770 2016 3 14 1.8 11.9 1 34 51.1 0.6 1.7 
23.6303 35.3733 2016 3 14 1.7 18.1 2 6 5.7 0.6 1.8 
23.6325 35.3873 2016 3 14 2.1 16.7 3 22 0.5 0.5 1.3 
23.5993 35.3628 2016 3 14 2.7 15.1 3 51 11.4 0.7 1.9 
23.6187 35.3722 2016 3 14 1.9 8.8 4 4 44.0 0.4 2.9 
23.6128 35.3975 2016 3 14 1.6 20.7 4 6 3.7 0.9 2.1 
23.6320 35.3992 2016 3 14 2.2 16.1 4 32 41.0 0.5 1.3 
23.6342 35.4075 2016 3 14 2.4 19.9 5 7 8.1 0.4 0.8 
23.6270 35.4018 2016 3 14 2.5 18.4 5 15 38.5 0.4 0.9 
23.6053 35.3818 2016 3 14 1.6 7.8 5 26 6.1 0.8 1.2 
23.6212 35.3613 2016 3 14 2.1 7.7 6 22 25.7 0.4 1.2 
23.6328 35.3860 2016 3 14 2.8 17.7 6 33 7.5 0.6 1.3 
23.6370 35.4268 2016 3 14 2.0 18.9 7 49 9.8 1.8 0.9 
23.6395 35.4158 2016 3 14 2.1 17.5 9 3 55.6 0.6 1.4 
23.6063 35.3928 2016 3 14 2.4 16.7 11 39 56.8 0.6 1.4 
23.6277 35.3997 2016 3 14 2.8 17.3 11 59 55.7 0.5 1.0 
23.6407 35.4010 2016 3 14 2.1 18.4 12 19 4.8 0.4 1.1 
23.6093 35.4018 2016 3 14 2.4 15.2 12 49 53.5 0.5 1.2 
23.6318 35.3893 2016 3 14 2.2 13.5 14 11 19.8 0.4 1.5 
23.6067 35.4077 2016 3 14 2.0 17.5 15 11 6.0 0.4 1.0 
23.6305 35.3918 2016 3 14 3.1 16.4 16 14 18.8 0.4 0.9 
23.6283 35.3900 2016 3 14 2.5 18.4 18 18 13.1 0.6 1.4 
23.6263 35.3900 2016 3 14 2.5 18.3 22 29 19.2 0.7 1.6 
23.6307 35.3930 2016 3 15 2.2 16.0 1 42 22.9 1.4 1.2 
23.6428 35.4245 2016 3 15 2.2 18.9 1 58 25.2 1.6 0.8 
23.6050 35.3813 2016 3 15 3.0 16.5 2 34 59.3 0.4 0.9 
23.6345 35.3972 2016 3 15 2.6 16.9 2 40 3.9 0.6 1.4 
23.6403 35.3867 2016 3 15 2.5 16.4 3 45 57.9 0.5 1.3 
23.6218 35.4052 2016 3 15 2.4 15.5 3 59 18.8 0.5 1.1 
23.6433 35.3845 2016 3 15 2.6 17.9 4 34 35.2 0.5 1.0 
23.6075 35.3933 2016 3 15 2.6 16.0 5 45 27.2 0.5 1.2 
23.6092 35.4068 2016 3 15 2.4 14.8 5 46 25.4 0.8 2.0 
23.6095 35.4037 2016 3 15 2.5 15.2 5 52 29.4 0.4 1.1 
23.6163 35.3872 2016 3 15 2.1 17.1 6 0 34.6 0.4 0.9 
23.6220 35.3920 2016 3 15 2.2 12.1 6 18 30.9 1.0 2.8 
23.6157 35.4005 2016 3 15 2.5 15.3 6 27 42.4 0.7 1.8 
23.6513 35.4002 2016 3 15 2.1 24.4 7 49 37.5 1.1 0.9 
23.6173 35.4018 2016 3 15 2.3 14.5 8 35 41.5 0.6 1.5 
23.6252 35.3883 2016 3 15 2.0 17.3 12 24 40.6 0.4 1.1 
23.6030 35.3920 2016 3 15 2.3 18.1 13 51 57.2 0.4 0.9 
23.6228 35.3828 2016 3 15 2.0 19.1 13 57 54.0 0.4 1.0 
23.6047 35.3923 2016 3 15 1.9 15.9 14 53 44.9 0.5 1.2 
23.6095 35.3958 2016 3 15 1.9 16.1 15 14 30.5 0.6 1.8 
23.6265 35.3997 2016 3 15 3.0 20.0 15 34 59.9 0.4 0.9 
23.6032 35.4108 2016 3 15 1.9 12.2 16 28 40.5 1.5 1.7 
23.6402 35.4378 2016 3 15 1.6 18.5 17 20 59.7 1.9 1.2 
23.6318 35.4030 2016 3 15 2.4 18.6 18 21 16.0 0.4 0.8 
23.5950 35.3890 2016 3 15 1.5 16.3 18 47 46.1 0.6 2.1 
23.5940 35.3747 2016 3 15 1.7 17.6 19 33 30.0 0.5 1.7 
23.6095 35.4053 2016 3 15 2.9 18.2 19 48 0.0 0.4 0.9 
23.5977 35.3867 2016 3 15 1.5 17.3 20 0 51.5 0.6 1.9 
23.6308 35.3827 2016 3 15 2.2 16.3 20 20 25.7 0.7 2.2 
23.6157 35.4002 2016 3 15 1.6 19.5 20 38 11.7 0.7 1.7 
23.6008 35.3970 2016 3 15 1.5 17.7 21 17 28.5 0.5 1.2 
23.5915 35.3602 2016 3 15 1.8 12.4 21 41 46.0 0.5 1.7 
23.5902 35.3882 2016 3 15 1.8 18.2 23 10 50.6 0.4 1.0 
23.6622 35.4380 2016 3 16 1.4 19.2 0 23 53.4 2.1 1.2 
23.6147 35.4040 2016 3 16 1.6 14.8 1 12 22.5 2.0 1.8 
23.6147 35.3987 2016 3 16 2.0 17.8 1 27 10.7 1.4 1.3 
23.6212 35.4182 2016 3 16 1.6 18.4 1 43 32.7 1.3 0.8 
23.6118 35.3943 2016 3 16 1.8 15.2 2 20 7.9 1.1 1.0 
23.5915 35.3438 2016 3 16 1.6 9.5 2 26 24.9 1.1 3.1 
23.5987 35.4127 2016 3 16 1.7 13.9 2 57 57.1 2.5 2.3 
23.6488 35.3908 2016 3 16 1.4 17.8 3 39 56.0 0.6 1.6 
23.6113 35.4003 2016 3 16 1.8 16.6 4 5 29.4 0.6 1.3 
23.6128 35.3892 2016 3 16 1.9 12.4 4 15 14.3 0.4 1.3 
23.5845 35.3895 2016 3 16 2.0 18.7 4 29 32.3 0.4 1.0 
23.6088 35.3885 2016 3 16 3.0 18.1 4 56 25.4 0.5 1.1 
23.6103 35.3873 2016 3 16 1.8 15.4 5 2 0.8 0.5 1.4 
23.6158 35.4028 2016 3 16 2.4 19.7 5 2 44.6 0.4 0.8 
23.5920 35.3742 2016 3 16 1.6 11.3 5 48 38.4 0.8 3.3 
23.6132 35.3982 2016 3 16 2.5 12.3 6 34 15.7 0.6 1.8 
23.6462 35.3898 2016 3 16 1.6 14.5 7 25 14.9 0.5 1.6 
23.6127 35.3953 2016 3 16 2.3 16.0 9 26 2.7 0.4 0.9 
23.6240 35.3928 2016 3 16 2.1 18.4 10 1 47.3 0.5 1.5 
23.6202 35.3953 2016 3 16 1.8 16.9 10 53 27.8 0.5 1.5 
23.6095 35.3885 2016 3 16 1.9 15.6 11 34 10.0 0.6 2.1 
23.6107 35.3858 2016 3 16 2.0 15.2 14 30 12.0 0.5 1.4 
23.6038 35.3895 2016 3 16 2.6 14.7 14 43 51.7 0.4 1.1 
23.5957 35.3943 2016 3 16 2.4 16.7 14 45 29.4 0.4 1.0 
23.6208 35.3768 2016 3 16 1.8 8.0 15 50 45.4 0.8 2.1 
23.6152 35.3967 2016 3 16 2.2 15.6 16 4 57.3 0.5 1.4 
23.6312 35.4163 2016 3 16 1.9 18.3 16 25 36.4 1.9 1.1 
23.6082 35.4040 2016 3 16 2.7 16.1 17 54 7.3 1.5 1.2 
23.6173 35.3607 2016 3 16 1.8 18.8 19 2 33.3 0.6 1.8 
23.6093 35.3870 2016 3 16 2.0 11.5 19 21 23.1 0.6 2.2 
23.6038 35.3947 2016 3 16 2.2 16.5 19 32 12.9 0.5 1.2 
23.5830 35.3822 2016 3 16 1.9 19.8 20 7 30.6 0.8 2.5 
23.6043 35.3942 2016 3 16 1.7 12.7 21 1 35.2 0.8 2.9 
23.5868 35.3920 2016 3 16 2.6 17.1 21 21 12.3 0.5 1.1 
23.6228 35.3640 2016 3 16 2.5 10.8 23 16 28.9 0.5 1.5 
23.6100 35.3663 2016 3 16 1.7 13.0 23 37 3.1 0.7 2.9 
23.6108 35.3970 2016 3 17 2.0 17.3 0 25 55.0 1.5 1.1 
23.6180 35.3740 2016 3 17 1.6 12.7 1 32 19.2 2.1 3.8 
23.5877 35.4168 2016 3 17 1.8 16.2 1 32 47.4 1.8 1.9 
23.6000 35.3918 2016 3 17 1.7 14.8 4 24 3.2 0.5 1.8 
23.6488 35.3832 2016 3 17 3.4 20.9 12 37 44.1 0.6 0.5 
23.6087 35.3925 2016 3 17 2.3 17.6 13 19 31.9 0.4 0.9 
23.6078 35.3872 2016 3 17 2.0 16.4 14 8 19.7 0.5 1.2 
23.6042 35.3802 2016 3 17 2.0 22.4 14 14 11.4 0.6 0.6 
23.6055 35.3782 2016 3 17 2.0 15.8 15 32 11.5 0.4 1.4 
23.5968 35.3472 2016 3 17 1.7 9.4 17 7 45.1 1.0 3.3 
23.6375 35.3765 2016 3 17 1.9 18.5 19 25 2.3 0.4 1.1 
23.6310 35.3932 2016 3 17 2.1 18.1 19 30 9.9 0.5 1.0 
23.6527 35.3840 2016 3 17 2.2 18.2 20 21 41.6 0.4 0.9 
23.6105 35.3957 2016 3 17 2.8 15.4 20 52 8.4 0.6 1.4 
23.6043 35.3908 2016 3 17 2.1 15.2 22 30 3.1 0.5 1.2 
23.6203 35.3917 2016 3 17 2.1 15.9 22 30 27.9 0.5 1.3 
23.6140 35.3613 2016 3 17 1.8 11.0 22 54 19.0 0.5 2.3 
23.6430 35.3840 2016 3 17 2.0 18.1 23 1 10.5 0.4 0.9 
23.6253 35.3847 2016 3 17 1.8 17.0 23 41 13.4 0.6 1.4 
23.6233 35.3945 2016 3 18 1.7 15.6 1 3 25.1 0.4 1.3 
23.6273 35.3733 2016 3 18 1.8 10.7 1 7 54.8 0.5 1.7 
23.6025 35.3830 2016 3 18 2.1 15.9 1 38 43.3 0.4 1.0 
23.6095 35.3805 2016 3 18 2.1 15.4 1 45 16.8 0.5 1.5 
23.5998 35.3713 2016 3 18 2.0 14.1 2 40 1.3 0.5 1.4 
23.6358 35.3923 2016 3 18 2.0 15.7 5 15 47.4 0.5 1.3 
23.5860 35.3773 2016 3 18 2.3 20.9 7 27 35.4 0.4 0.4 
23.6187 35.3658 2016 3 18 2.1 16.0 12 55 57.2 0.6 1.5 
23.5935 35.3548 2016 3 18 1.9 19.1 12 57 28.6 0.4 1.4 
23.6143 35.3805 2016 3 18 2.4 17.7 15 30 48.3 0.4 1.0 
23.5925 35.3698 2016 3 18 1.9 11.9 20 56 20.3 0.5 1.5 
23.6300 35.3787 2016 3 18 2.2 12.6 21 56 46.2 0.5 1.6 
23.6307 35.3893 2016 3 19 2.0 13.4 1 26 28.0 0.5 1.7 
23.5970 35.4000 2016 3 19 2.4 16.5 1 36 49.7 0.6 1.5 
23.6045 35.3972 2016 3 19 1.9 19.2 1 41 27.6 0.5 1.1 
23.6500 35.4428 2016 3 19 2.3 17.9 2 33 33.8 2.0 0.9 
23.5960 35.3995 2016 3 19 2.3 18.8 6 17 47.6 0.6 1.2 
23.6375 35.3778 2016 3 19 1.9 13.8 7 59 44.6 0.4 1.6 
23.6238 35.3805 2016 3 19 1.9 11.1 8 6 48.4 0.7 2.1 
23.6362 35.3880 2016 3 19 2.6 18.8 9 36 39.7 0.4 0.9 
23.6115 35.4082 2016 3 19 2.2 14.5 10 37 40.0 0.5 1.4 
23.6150 35.3915 2016 3 19 2.9 15.6 11 28 39.5 0.6 1.6 
23.6322 35.3852 2016 3 19 1.8 18.4 17 7 20.7 1.7 1.7 
23.6527 35.4025 2016 3 19 2.1 18.2 18 55 59.9 0.5 1.4 
23.6223 35.3800 2016 3 19 1.8 16.6 22 10 30.1 0.7 1.8 
23.6393 35.3928 2016 3 20 1.9 17.9 1 16 39.4 1.3 1.2 
23.6333 35.3788 2016 3 20 1.8 16.6 2 47 26.0 1.3 1.2 
23.5962 35.3540 2016 3 20 1.9 18.5 6 49 14.9 0.6 1.6 
23.6077 35.4047 2016 3 20 1.7 18.7 7 13 40.1 0.6 1.2 
23.6193 35.3995 2016 3 20 2.3 23.9 7 40 40.5 0.7 0.3 
23.6468 35.3763 2016 3 20 1.8 25.7 7 50 9.4 0.9 0.9 
23.6177 35.3407 2016 3 20 1.7 14.6 9 22 51.6 0.5 1.7 
23.6563 35.3677 2016 3 20 2.0 20.4 10 45 49.3 0.9 0.9 
23.6218 35.3827 2016 3 20 1.6 23.1 10 53 18.4 0.7 0.7 
23.6223 35.4065 2016 3 20 1.9 19.0 14 8 13.8 0.4 0.9 
23.5818 35.3507 2016 3 20 1.9 18.9 15 32 2.9 0.5 1.2 
23.6027 35.3663 2016 3 20 1.7 23.0 20 38 29.8 1.3 1.3 
23.6607 35.3760 2016 3 20 1.8 13.2 20 39 42.9 0.5 1.4 
23.6095 35.3712 2016 3 20 1.6 0.0 21 8 59.8 0.6 1.1 
23.6140 35.3870 2016 3 21 2.0 19.3 3 49 16.9 0.5 1.0 
23.6230 35.3547 2016 3 21 1.6 19.9 22 43 58.9 1.0 3.0 
23.6313 35.4048 2016 3 22 1.5 19.5 2 50 20.9 1.3 1.1 
23.6598 35.3622 2016 3 22 1.0 18.9 3 29 55.0 0.6 1.6 
23.5817 35.3920 2016 3 22 1.8 16.3 3 37 12.5 0.4 1.1 
23.6413 35.3960 2016 3 22 1.9 18.2 3 39 44.2 0.5 1.1 
23.5728 35.3823 2016 3 22 1.6 20.8 3 54 56.5 0.5 1.5 
23.6652 35.3822 2016 3 22 1.9 22.0 4 53 18.7 0.6 0.6 
23.6160 35.3588 2016 3 22 1.9 19.4 6 1 2.8 0.5 1.3 
23.6200 35.3722 2016 3 22 2.2 20.2 9 32 58.0 0.4 1.0 
23.6125 35.3933 2016 3 22 2.9 18.3 16 21 20.8 1.5 1.5 
23.6010 35.4142 2016 3 22 1.7 18.6 18 7 6.8 2.1 1.8 
23.5745 35.3702 2016 3 22 1.8 18.4 22 7 8.0 2.0 2.4 
23.5883 35.3630 2016 3 23 2.3 18.1 15 53 7.5 1.2 1.1 
23.5623 35.3658 2016 3 23 1.8 12.8 21 54 36.5 2.1 4.1 
23.6140 35.3710 2016 3 24 2.3 16.9 6 56 51.0 1.8 1.8 
23.6263 35.4070 2016 3 24 1.6 11.1 21 43 30.2 3.5 5.2 
23.6565 35.3777 2016 3 25 1.5 0.0 2 48 33.5 1.0 1.3 
23.6452 35.4055 2016 3 25 1.4 17.7 6 29 11.0 1.9 1.7 
23.6212 35.3732 2016 3 25 1.5 24.9 6 37 3.0 2.3 0.6 
Appendix 3 MATLAB code 
%catmaker.m 
%this code creates a catalogue compatible for the  
%accelerated deformation scanner  
clear all; close all; clc; 
%get the text tab delimited file  
filename = 'C:\Users\Gehas-Office\Desktop\cat_2014.txt'; 
delimiter = '\t'; 
formatSpec = '%q%q%f%f%f%f%[^\n\r]'; 
fileID = fopen(filename,'r'); 
dataArray = textscan(fileID, formatSpec, 'Delimiter', delimiter, 'TextType', 
'string', 'EmptyValue', NaN,  'ReturnOnError', false); 
fclose(fileID); 
%assign each colomn the correct parameter  
t1 = cellstr(dataArray{:, 1}); 
t2 = cellstr(dataArray{:, 2}); 
y = dataArray{:, 3}; 
x = dataArray{:, 4}; 
d = dataArray{:, 5}; 
m = dataArray{:, 6}; 
clearvars filename delimiter formatSpec fileID dataArray ans; 
%connect the date with time in one column 
ta=[t1 t2]; ta=join(ta); 
%convert date time in serial date format  
t=datenum(ta,'dd/mm/yyyy HH:MM:SS'); 
clearvars t1 t2 ta 
%create the catlogue and sort it base on date 
cat =[t d m x y]; 
cat=sortrows(cat,1,'ascend'); 
t=cat(:,1)' ;d=cat(:,2)';m=cat(:,3)';x=cat(:,4)';y=cat(:,5)'; 
%save the catalogue as MATLAB file 
save ('newcat.mat', 'd','m','t','x','y' ) 
%hyp2velest.m 
clear all; close all; clc  
%get hypo71 phase file and make it velest input phase file 
filename = 'C:\Users\Gehas-Office\Documents\MATLAB\relocation\sw_pl.txt'; 
formatSpec = '%4s%4s%11s%5s%12s%[^\n\r]'; 
fileID = fopen(filename,'r'); 
dataArray = textscan(fileID, formatSpec, 'Delimiter', '', 'WhiteSpace',... 
    '', 'TextType', 'string',  'ReturnOnError', false); 
dataArray{1} = strtrim(dataArray{1});dataArray{2} = strtrim(dataArray{2}); 
dataArray{3} = strtrim(dataArray{3});dataArray{4} = strtrim(dataArray{4}); 
dataArray{5} = strtrim(dataArray{5});fclose(fileID); 
inicat = [dataArray{1:end-1}]; 
%empty some memory 
clearvars filename formatSpec fileID dataArray ans; 
%get the hypo71 location file, this version support up to 50 phases per event 
filename = 'C:\Users\Gehas-Office\Documents\MATLAB\relocation\hypsum.out'; 
%set the format of the saved output - open, read, close file 
formatSpec = '%2s%2s%2s%3s%2s%6s%3s%6s%4s%*1s%5s%7s%[^\n\r]';  
fileID = fopen(filename,'r'); 
dataArray = textscan(fileID, formatSpec, 'Delimiter', '', 'WhiteSpace',...  
'','TextType', 'string',  'ReturnOnError', false); 
fclose(fileID); 
%assign columns to variables   
yy = (dataArray{:, 1});mm = (dataArray{:, 2});dd = (dataArray{:, 3});hh 
=(dataArray{:, 4}); 
min =(dataArray{:, 5});sec = (dataArray{:, 6});La= str2double(dataArray{:, 7}); 
at =str2double( dataArray{:, 8});Lo= str2double(dataArray{:, 9});ng= 
str2double(dataArray{:, 10}); 
Depth= (dataArray{:, 11}); 
%empty some memory 
clearvars filename formatSpec fileID dataArray ans; 
%change coordinate system to decimal degrees  
x1=Lo; x2=ng./60;x=x1+x2; 
y1=La; y2=at./60;y=y1+y2; 
%get the header 
frm=('%2s%2s%2s%0s%2s%2s%0s%5s%1s%2.4f%0s%2.4f%1s%5s'); 
for re=1:length(yy) 
head(re,:)=sprintf(frm,yy(re),mm(re),dd(re),'',hh(re),min(re),'',... 
   sec(re),'',y(re),'N  ',x(re),'W',Depth(re));  
%Keep or remove stations from the list 
names=['VLI';'PRNS';'KTHR';'TMBK';'CHAN';'RODP';'GVDS';""];     % station list  
[kn1,kn2]=size(names);       % the size of station list used for the iterations 
    for kn=1:kn1                           % up to Number of stations 
Findstation=strcmp(inicat(:,1), names(kn,:));   % logical find the stations =1   
Newsta(:,kn)=Findstation;  
Newsta= sum(Newsta,2); Newsta=logical(Newsta); 
catal=inicat(Newsta,:); 
%add 1st line space for header 
catal(2:end+1,:) = catal(1:end,:);catal(1,:) = ''; 
%find gaps   
gap=strcmp(catal(:,1),'');lg= find(gap==1); 
lg=lg+1;lop1=length(lg); 
for r=1:lop1-1 
    n=lg(r);catal(n+1:end+1,:) = catal(n:end,:); 
catal(n,1) = (head(r,:));catal(n,2:end) = ''; 
lg=lg+1; 
%remove the first line  
catal=catal(2:length(catal),:);lg2=strcmp(catal(:,1),''); 
icat = find(lg2==1);icat=icat-1;ee=length(head); 
clearvars kn kn1 kn2 Findstation Newsta Depth mm names lop1 dd at ng r n head 
clearvars yy y2 y1 y frm x2 x1 x sec lg lg2 La  Lo gap  hh inicat min re 
%prepare new variables 
mov=1; catalogue=[]; 
for i=1:ee 
fincat2=[];fincat1=[];fincat3=[];fincat4=[]; 
%get 1 event phases only  
cc=catal(mov:icat(i),:);cc=sortrows(cc,2,'ascend');cc=sortrows(cc,1); 
[m,m1]=size(cc);mov=mov+m+1; 
% remove second S phase 
for dtc=length(cc):-1:2 
chi=strcmp(cc(dtc,1),cc(dtc-1,1));    chi2=strcmp(cc(dtc,4),''); 
    if chi==1 && chi2==1 
    ccc(dtc,1) =0;  
        ccc(dtc,1) =1; 
ccc(1,1)=1; 
%ccc(length(ccc)+1,1)=1;ccc=logical(ccc);cc=cc(ccc,:);ccc=[]; 
nfile(1,1)=cc(1,1); 
for k=1:length(cc)-1 
    ch=strcmp(cc(k+1,5),'');%find if phase is P or S 
if ch==1  % P phase 
nfile(2,1+k+k)= cc(k+1,1)+'P0';nfile(2,k+k+2)=cc(k+1,4); 
else      % P phase 
 nfile(2,1+k+k)=cc(k+1,1)+'S0';   nfile(2,k+k+2)=cc(k+1,5); 
%start setting the velest phase file format 
%find how long is the file and set tittle  
con=length(nfile);fincat(1,1)=cc(1,1);frm=('%1s'); 
%every 6 phases go a new line 
%line 1 = header 
%line 2  
for it1=3:2:14 
if it1 <con 
fict1= sprintf(frm,nfile(2,it1),'',nfile(2,it1+1)); 
fict1=''; 
fincat1=strcat(fincat1,fict1); 
fincat(2,1)=fincat1; 
fincat1=[]; 
%line 3  
if con>14 
for it2=15:2:26 
if it2 <con 
fict2= sprintf(frm,nfile(2,it2),'',nfile(2,it2+1)); 
fict2=''; 
fincat2=strcat(fincat2,fict2); 
fincat(3,1)=fincat2; 
check2=strcmp(fincat(3,1),''); 
if  check2==1 
  fincat = fincat(1:2,:);  
fincat2=[]; 
% line4  
if con>26 
for it3=27:2:38 
if it3 <con 
fict3= sprintf(frm,nfile(2,it3),'',nfile(2,it3+1)); 
fict3=''; 
fincat3=strcat(fincat3,fict3); 
fincat(4,1)=fincat3; 
check3=strcmp(fincat(4,1),''); 
if  check3==1 
fincat = fincat(1:3,:);  
fincat3=[]; 
%line 5  
if con>38 
for it4=39:2:50 
if it4 <con 
fict4= sprintf(frm,nfile(2,it4),'',nfile(2,it4+1)); 
fict4=''; 
fincat4=strcat(fincat4,fict4); 
fincat(5,1)=fincat4; 
check4=strcmp(fincat(5,1),''); 
if  check4==1 
        fincat = fincat(1:4,:);  
fincat4=[]; 
%put every itteration in an appending catalogue  
catalogue=[catalogue;fincat]; 
%add blank line below event 
catalogue(length(catalogue)+1)=''; 
%controllers for catal startstop 
clearvars nfile fincat fincat1 fincat2 fincat3 fincat4 
%main.m 
function varargout = main(varargin) 
% MAIN MATLAB code for main.fig 
% Begin initialization code - DO NOT EDIT 
gui_Singleton = 1; 
gui_State = struct('gui_Name',       mfilename, ... 
    'gui_Singleton',  gui_Singleton, ... 
    'gui_OpeningFcn', @main_OpeningFcn, ... 
    'gui_OutputFcn',  @main_OutputFcn, ... 
    'gui_LayoutFcn',  [] , ... 
    'gui_Callback',   []); 
if nargin && ischar(varargin{1}) 
    gui_State.gui_Callback = str2func(varargin{1}); 
if nargout 
    [varargout{1:nargout}] = gui_mainfcn(gui_State, varargin{:}); 
    gui_mainfcn(gui_State, varargin{:}); 
% End initialization code - DO NOT EDIT 
% --- Executes just before main is made visible. 
function main_OpeningFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles, varargin) 
% This function has no output args, see OutputFcn. 
% hObject    handle to figure 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% varargin   command line arguments to main (see VARARGIN) 
 % Choose default command line output for main 
handles.output = hObject; 
 % Update handles structure 
guidata(hObject, handles); 
 % UIWAIT makes main wait for user response (see UIRESUME) 
% uiwait(handles.figure1); 
handles.cat = []; 
% load initial Greek map 
handles.map = load('maps/GREECE.mat'); 
PlotMap(handles.axes1,handles.map); 
FixMapAxis(handles.axes1,hObject,handles); 
% --- Outputs from this function are returned to the command line. 
function varargout = main_OutputFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% varargout  cell array for returning output args (see VARARGOUT); 
% hObject    handle to figure 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Get default command line output from handles structure 
varargout{1} = handles.output; 
% --- Executes on button press in Open_Catalog. 
function Open_Catalog_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to Open_Catalog (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
[FileName,PathName,FilterIndex] = uigetfile('*.mat'); 
if FileName~=0 
    full_path = [PathName FileName]; 
    % load the original catalogue 
    handles.cat = load(full_path); 
    % plot the catalogue 
plot(handles.axes1,handles.map.coastline(:,1),handles.map.coastline(:,2),'k'); 
    hold on 
PlotEqs(handles.axes1,handles.cat.x,handles.cat.y,handles.cat.m,handles.cat.d); 
    FixMapAxis(handles.axes1,hObject,handles); 
    grid on, box on 
    hold off 
    % set initial coordinates for analysis 
    set(handles.edit2, 'String',min(handles.cat.x)); 
    set(handles.edit3, 'String',max(handles.cat.x)); 
    set(handles.edit4, 'String',min(handles.cat.y)); 
    set(handles.edit5, 'String',max(handles.cat.y)); 
    str = sprintf('Catalog:%s, %d events',FileName,length(handles.cat.t)); 
    set(handles.mapTitle, 'String',str); 
    % set the analysed scat catalogue, according to initial coordinates 
    handles.scat.t = handles.cat.t; 
    handles.scat.x = handles.cat.x; 
    handles.scat.y = handles.cat.y; handles.scat.m = handles.cat.m; 
handles.scat.d = handles.cat.d; 
    % keep a variable for the filename 
    [pathstr,name,ext] = fileparts(full_path);    handles.file_name = name; 
    % update GUI data 
    guidata(hObject, handles); 
function edit2_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit2 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'String') returns contents of edit2 as text 
%        str2double(get(hObject,'String')) returns contents of edit2 as a double 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function edit2_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit2 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: edit controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
function edit3_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit3 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'String') returns contents of edit3 as text 
%        str2double(get(hObject,'String')) returns contents of edit3 as a double 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function edit3_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit3 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: edit controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
function edit4_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit4 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'String') returns contents of edit4 as text 
%        str2double(get(hObject,'String')) returns contents of edit4 as a double 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function edit4_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit4 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: edit controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
function edit5_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit5 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'String') returns contents of edit5 as text 
%        str2double(get(hObject,'String')) returns contents of edit5 as a double 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function edit5_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit5 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: edit controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
% --- Executes on button press in pushbutton2. 
function pushbutton2_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to pushbutton2 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
[FileName,PathName,FilterIndex] = uigetfile('*.mat'); 
if FileName~=0 
    handles.map = load([PathName FileName]); 
    x = handles.map.coastline(:,1); 
    y = handles.map.coastline(:,2); 
    plot(handles.axes1,x,y,'k'), grid on, box on 
    guidata(hObject, handles); 
% --- Executes on selection change in popupmenu3. 
function popupmenu3_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to popupmenu3 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: contents = cellstr(get(hObject,'String')) returns popupmenu3 contents as 
cell array 
%        contents{get(hObject,'Value')} returns selected item from popupmenu3 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function popupmenu3_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to popupmenu3 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: popupmenu controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
% --- Executes on button press in checkbox1. 
function checkbox1_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to checkbox1 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
 % Hint: get(hObject,'Value') returns toggle state of checkbox1 
 % --- Executes on button press in pushbutton3. 
function pushbutton3_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to pushbutton3 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
 if ~isempty(handles.cat) 
    data=getrect(gca); 
    xi=[data(1) data(1)+data(3) data(1)+data(3)  data(1)        data(1)]; 
    yi=[data(2) data(2)         data(2)+data(4)  data(2)+data(4) data(2)]; 
    in = inpolygon(handles.cat.x,handles.cat.y,xi,yi); 
    handles.scat.t = handles.cat.t(in); handles.scat.x = handles.cat.x(in); 
    handles.scat.y = handles.cat.y(in); handles.scat.m = handles.cat.m(in); 
    handles.scat.d = handles.cat.d(in); guidata(hObject, handles); 
    set(handles.edit2, 'String', data(1)); 
    set(handles.edit3, 'String',data(1)+data(3)); 
    set(handles.edit4, 'String', data(2)); 
    set(handles.edit5, 'String', data(2)+data(4)); 
    rectangle('Position',data,'LineWidth',2) 
    guidata(hObject, handles); 
    disp('PLEASE LOAD CATALOG FIRST') 
function edit6_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit6 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'String') returns contents of edit6 as text 
%        str2double(get(hObject,'String')) returns contents of edit6 as a double 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function edit6_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit6 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: edit controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
% --- Executes on selection change in popupmenu4. 
function popupmenu4_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to popupmenu4 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: contents = cellstr(get(hObject,'String')) returns popupmenu4 contents as 
cell array 
%        contents{get(hObject,'Value')} returns selected item from popupmenu4 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function popupmenu4_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to popupmenu4 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: popupmenu controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
% --- Executes on selection change in popupmenu5. 
function popupmenu5_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to popupmenu5 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: contents = cellstr(get(hObject,'String')) returns popupmenu5 contents as 
cell array 
%        contents{get(hObject,'Value')} returns selected item from popupmenu5 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function popupmenu5_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to popupmenu5 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: popupmenu controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
% --- Executes on selection change in popupmenu6. 
function popupmenu6_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to popupmenu6 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: contents = cellstr(get(hObject,'String')) returns popupmenu6 contents as 
cell array 
%        contents{get(hObject,'Value')} returns selected item from popupmenu6 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function popupmenu6_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to popupmenu6 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: popupmenu controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
% --- Executes on button press in checkbox2. 
function checkbox2_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to checkbox2 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hint: get(hObject,'Value') returns toggle state of checkbox2 
% --- Executes on button press in pushbutton4. 
function pushbutton4_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to pushbutton4 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
if isempty(handles.cat) 
    disp('PLEASE LOAD CATALOG FIRST'); 
    return 
rads = str2num(get(handles.edit6, 'String')); 
step = str2num(get(handles.edit8, 'String')); 
model = get(handles.popupmenu5,'Value'); 
Mcut = str2num(get(handles.edit11, 'String')); 
Dcut = str2num(get(handles.edit12, 'String')); 
min_events = str2num(get(handles.edit13, 'String')); 
from = (get(handles.edit9, 'String')); 
to = (get(handles.edit10, 'String')); 
switch get(handles.popupmenu4,'Value'); 
    case 1 
        ksi = 0.0; 
    case 2 
        ksi = 0.5; 
    case 3 
        ksi = 1.0; 
switch get(handles.checkbox2,'Value'); 
    case 0 
        plotmode = ''; 
    case 1 
        plotmode = 'plot'; 
% load data according to edit controls 
GetAreaFromEdits(hObject,handles); 
% load selected period 
[ti,xi,yi,mi,di] = LoadEqs(handles.scat.t',... 
    handles.scat.x',handles.scat.y',... 
    handles.scat.m',handles.scat.d',from,to,0); 
 % find EQs according to filter 
[ti,xi,yi,mi,di] = FindEQs(ti,xi,yi,mi,di,mi>=Mcut & di<=Dcut); 
% Run The model 
[centx,centy,FCur,Fn,FTc,FK,FA,FR] = ACCScanner(ti',xi',yi',mi',di',... 
    rads,step,ksi,min_events,model,plotmode); 
% set file  name 
if model == 1 
    acc_name = sprintf('%s_%s-%s_M%d_D%d_Q%d_ACC.mat',handles.file_name, 
datestr(min(ti),... 
        'yyyy'),datestr(max(ti),'yyyy'),Mcut *10,max(rads),ksi *10); 
if model == 2 
    acc_name = sprintf('%s-%s_M%d_D%d_Q%d_DEC_%s.mat', datestr(min(ti),... 
        'yyyy'),datestr(max(ti),'yyyy'),Mcut *10,max(rads),ksi 
*10,handles.file_name); 
 % save filename 
catalog = handles.scat; 
save(acc_name,'catalog','ti','xi','yi','mi','di','rads','ksi','Mcut','Dcut','min_
events',... 
    'centx','centy','FCur','Fn','FTc','FK','FA','FR'); 
function edit8_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit8 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'String') returns contents of edit8 as text 
%        str2double(get(hObject,'String')) returns contents of edit8 as a double 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function edit8_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit8 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: edit controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
function edit9_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit9 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'String') returns contents of edit9 as text 
%        str2double(get(hObject,'String')) returns contents of edit9 as a double 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function edit9_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit9 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: edit controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
function edit10_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit10 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'String') returns contents of edit10 as text 
%        str2double(get(hObject,'String')) returns contents of edit10 as a double 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function edit10_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit10 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: edit controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
 function edit11_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit11 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'String') returns contents of edit11 as text 
%        str2double(get(hObject,'String')) returns contents of edit11 as a double 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function edit11_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit11 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: edit controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
function GetAreaFromEdits(hObject,handles) 
d(1) = str2double(get(handles.edit2, 'String'));d(2) = 
str2double(get(handles.edit3, 'String')); 
d(3) = str2double(get(handles.edit4, 'String'));d(4) = 
str2double(get(handles.edit5, 'String')); 
data(1) = d(1);data(2) = d(3);data(3) = d(2)-d(1);data(4) = d(4)-d(3); 
xi=[data(1) data(1)+data(3) data(1)+data(3)  data(1)        data(1)]; 
yi=[data(2) data(2)         data(2)+data(4)  data(2)+data(4) data(2)]; 
in = inpolygon(handles.cat.x,handles.cat.y,xi,yi); 
handles.scat.t = handles.cat.t(in);handles.scat.x = handles.cat.x(in); 
handles.scat.y = handles.cat.y(in);handles.scat.m = handles.cat.m(in); 
handles.scat.d = handles.cat.d(in); 
% plot the catalogue 
plot(handles.axes1,handles.map.coastline(:,1),handles.map.coastline(:,2),'k'); 
hold on 
PlotEqs(handles.axes1,handles.scat.x,handles.scat.y,handles.scat.m,handles.scat.d
rectangle('Position',data,'LineWidth',2); 
FixMapAxis(handles.axes1,hObject,handles) 
grid on, box on 
hold off 
drawnow 
guidata(hObject, handles); 
function edit12_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit12 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'String') returns contents of edit12 as text 
%        str2double(get(hObject,'String')) returns contents of edit12 as a double 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function edit12_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit12 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: edit controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
function edit13_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit13 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'String') returns contents of edit13 as text 
%        str2double(get(hObject,'String')) returns contents of edit13 as a double 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function edit13_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit13 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: edit controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
% --- Executes on button press in pushbutton6. 
function pushbutton6_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to pushbutton6 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
system('accres.m'); 
% --- Executes on button press in pushbutton7. 
function pushbutton7_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to pushbutton7 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
accres(); 
%ACCScaner.m 
%Accelerated Deformation Scanner 
function [centx,centy,FCur,Fn,FTc,FK,FA,FR] = ACCScanner(t,x,y,m,d,... 
    radarray,step,ksi,min_events,model,plotmode) 
md = {'ACCELERATED' 'DECELERATED'}; 
disp('=============================') 
fprintf('Scanning %s regions  please wait... \n%s - %s 
\n',char(md(model)),datestr(min(t)),datestr(max(t))) 
fprintf('Mmin: %.2f, Dmax: %.2f, ksi: %.2f\n',min(m),max(d),ksi); 
disp('=============================') 
% initialize the output parameters with empty matrices 
centx=[]; centy=[]; FCur=[]; Fn=[]; FTc=[]; FA=[]; FK=[]; FR = []; 
% validate if the input exist 
if isempty(m), 
    disp('ERROR DATA NOT FOUND') 
    return 
% set the start parameters for scanner 
xstart = floor(min(x)); xend = ceil(max(x)); ystart = floor(min(y)); yend = 
ceil(max(y)); 
Lr = length(radarray); 
% create the grid with user defined step 
for yepi=ystart:step:yend 
    for xepi=xstart:step:xend 
         % Set the distances from epicenter 
        xp =(xepi-x)*85; yp =(yepi-y)*111; D = sqrt(xp.^2+yp.^2); 
        % Initialize local model array parameters for speed 
        La  = length(radarray); 
        CVR = zeros(1,La); nR = zeros(1,La); Tc  = zeros(1,La); b  = zeros(1,La); 
        K   = zeros(1,La); A  = zeros(1,La); R = zeros(1,La); 
         % Run the model 
        for i=1:Lr 
            % index the area according to a spesific radius 
            idx = find(D<=radarray(i)); 
            % run the model if the number of events is satisfied 
            if length(idx)>=min_events 
                [K(i),A(i),Tc(i),nR(i),b(i),CVR(i),R(i)] = 
GetCurvature(t(idx),m(idx),model,ksi,plotmode); 
        % set the minimum value of C(Rc)as best criteria 
        if ~isempty(min(CVR(CVR>0))) 
            I = find(CVR~=0 & CVR==min(CVR(CVR>0.0))); 
            %set outpouts 
            centx = [centx; xepi]; centy = [centy; yepi]; FCur = [FCur; 
CVR(I(1))]; 
            Fn = [Fn; nR(I(1))]; FTc = [FTc; Tc(I(1))]; FA = [FA; A(I(1))]; 
            FK = [FK; K(I(1))];   FR = [FR; R(I(1))]; 
    % dislay every iteration statistics 
    if ~isempty(FCur) 
    disp(sprintf('line: %4.1f, %5.2f s, C:[%.2f-%.2f], n:[%.2f-%.2f],r:[%.2f-
%.2f]',... 
        yepi,toc,min(FCur),max(FCur),min(Fn),max(Fn),min(FR),max(FR))) 
%display the search is finished and play a sound 
fprintf('DONE\n') 
finsound 
%GetCurvature.m 
function [K,A,Tc,n,b,CRV,R] = GetCurvature(T,M,model,ksi,plotmode) 
% remove all warning for speed 
warning off all 
% convert time to elepsed time 
N = length(T);t=zeros(N-1,1); 
for i=1:N 
    t(i)= daysact(T(1),T(i))*86400; 
% Get the cummulative benioff strain release of the data 
Es=10.^((1.5*M) + 4.7); 
[bt,Es]=qbenioff(t,Es,ksi); 
% create the model function K + A(tc - t)^n 
pwlawfunc = @(p,t) p(1) + p(2)*(p(4) - t).^p(3); 
% Apply least square fitting 
q=polyfit(t,Es,1); LNfit=polyval(q,t,Es); 
%make a preliminary estimation for ACC or DCC respectively 
if model==1, beta = [2 0 0.33 max(t)]; end 
if model==2, beta = [1 0 3 max(t)];end 
% fit power-law model function non least squares case 
[bf,r,J,COVB,mse] = nlinfit(t,Es/max(Es),pwlawfunc,beta); 
[bf,r,J,COVB,mse] = nlinfit(t,Es/max(Es),pwlawfunc,[bf(1) bf(2) bf(3) 
bf(4)],statset('MaxIter',100)); 
PLfit = pwlawfunc(bf,t)*max(Es); 
% get correlation coefficient R^2 
Crmat = corrcoef(PLfit,Es);R = real(Crmat(1,2)^2); 
% Calculate the Power Law and Linear Fit RMSs 
RMSlin=norm(Es-LNfit); RMSpow=norm(Es-PLfit); 
% Get the curvature parameter C=(Power law fit RMS)/(Linear fit RMS), 
CRV=RMSpow/RMSlin; 
% Set the output fit parameters 
K = bf(1); A = bf(2); Tc = bf(4); n = real(bf(3)); b=real(q(1)); c = q(2); 
% Plot if plotmode is set 
if(strcmpi(plotmode,'plot')==1) 
    pdate = addtodate(min(T),mean(Tc)/3600/24,'day'); 
    plot(t,Es,'o','markersize',5), hold on 
    plot(t,LNfit,'k','LineWidth',2) 
    plot(t,PLfit,'r','LineWidth',2) 
    %legend('Cum. En. Release',... 
     legend('Event',... 
        sprintf('LS: b=%5.1e,c=%5.1e',b,c),... 
        sprintf('PL: K=%.2f,A=%5.1e,n=%.2f,\nTc=%.1e (%s),\nCRV=%.2f,r=%.3f',... 
        K,A,n,Tc,datestr(pdate,'dd-mmm-yyyy'),CRV,R),'Location','NorthWest') 
    xlabel('Elapsed Time (sec)') 
    if ksi==0.0,    ylabel('N(t)'), end 
    if ksi==0.5,    ylabel('BS(t)'), end 
    if ksi==1.0,    ylabel('E(t)'), end 
    hold off 
    drawnow 
% bring back all warnings 
warning on all 
function [Et,Es] = qbenioff(t,e,q) 
N = length(e);Es =zeros(1,N);Et = t;E = 0.0; 
for i=1:N 
    E = E + e(i)^q;    Es(i) = E; 
%     end 
Es=Es'; 
%accres.m 
function varargout = accres(varargin) 
% ACCRES MATLAB code for accres.fig 
% Begin initialization code - DO NOT EDIT 
gui_Singleton = 1; 
gui_State = struct('gui_Name',       mfilename, ... 
                   'gui_Singleton',  gui_Singleton, ... 
                   'gui_OpeningFcn', @accres_OpeningFcn, ... 
                   'gui_OutputFcn',  @accres_OutputFcn, ... 
                   'gui_LayoutFcn',  [] , ... 
                   'gui_Callback',   []); 
if nargin && ischar(varargin{1}) 
    gui_State.gui_Callback = str2func(varargin{1}); 
if nargout 
    [varargout{1:nargout}] = gui_mainfcn(gui_State, varargin{:}); 
    gui_mainfcn(gui_State, varargin{:}); 
% End initialization code - DO NOT EDIT 
% --- Executes just before accres is made visible. 
function accres_OpeningFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles, varargin) 
% This function has no output args, see OutputFcn. 
% hObject    handle to figure 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% varargin   command line arguments to accres (see VARARGIN) 
 % Choose default command line output for accres 
handles.output = hObject; 
% load initial greec map 
handles.full_path=[]; 
handles.map = load('maps/GREECE.mat'); 
PlotMap(handles.axes1,handles.map);FixMapAxis(handles.axes1,hObject,handles); 
PlotMap(handles.axes2,handles.map);FixMapAxis(handles.axes2,hObject,handles); 
PlotMap(handles.axes3,handles.map);FixMapAxis(handles.axes3,hObject,handles); 
 handles.mat = []; 
set(handles.edit1,'String',sprintf('%.2f',get(handles.slider1,'Value'))); 
set(handles.edit2,'String',sprintf('%.2f',get(handles.slider2,'Value'))); 
set(handles.edit3,'String',sprintf('%.2f',get(handles.slider3,'Value'))); 
set(handles.edit4,'String',sprintf('%.2f',get(handles.slider4,'Value'))); 
% Update handles structure 
guidata(hObject, handles); 
% UIWAIT makes accres wait for user response (see UIRESUME) 
% uiwait(handles.figure1); 
% --- Outputs from this function are returned to the command line. 
function varargout = accres_OutputFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles)  
% varargout  cell array for returning output args (see VARARGOUT); 
% hObject    handle to figure 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Get default command line output from handles structure 
varargout{1} = handles.output; 
% --- Executes on button press in pushbutton1. 
function pushbutton1_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to pushbutton1 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
[FileName,PathName,FilterIndex] = uigetfile('*.mat'); 
if FileName~=0 
    handles.full_path = [PathName FileName]; 
      % load the original catalogue 
    handles.mat=load( handles.full_path); 
    set(handles.textFile,'String',FileName); 
        guidata(hObject, handles); 
        if ~isempty(handles.mat) 
        % set texts 
        SetInfolabels(hObject,handles,handles.mat);        
        CalculateResults(hObject, handles); 
% update GUI data 
guidata(hObject, handles); 
% --- Executes on slider movement. 
function slider1_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to slider1 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'Value') returns position of slider 
%        get(hObject,'Min') and get(hObject,'Max') to determine range of slider 
set(handles.edit1,'String',sprintf('%.2f',get(handles.slider1,'Value'))); 
CalculateResults(hObject, handles); 
guidata(hObject, handles); 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function slider1_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to slider1 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: slider controls usually have a light gray background. 
if isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor',[.9 .9 .9]); 
% --- Executes on slider movement. 
function slider2_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to slider2 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'Value') returns position of slider 
%        get(hObject,'Min') and get(hObject,'Max') to determine range of slider 
set(handles.edit2,'String',sprintf('%.2f',get(handles.slider2,'Value'))); 
CalculateResults(hObject, handles); 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function slider2_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to slider2 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: slider controls usually have a light gray background. 
if isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor',[.9 .9 .9]); 
% --- Executes on slider movement. 
function slider3_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to slider3 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'Value') returns position of slider 
%        get(hObject,'Min') and get(hObject,'Max') to determine range of slider 
set(handles.edit3,'String',sprintf('%.2f',get(handles.slider3,'Value'))); 
CalculateResults(hObject, handles) 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function slider3_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to slider3 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: slider controls usually have a light gray background. 
if isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor',[.9 .9 .9]); 
% --- Executes on slider movement. 
function slider4_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to slider4 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'Value') returns position of slider 
%        get(hObject,'Min') and get(hObject,'Max') to determine range of slider 
set(handles.edit4,'String',sprintf('%.2f',get(handles.slider4,'Value'))); 
CalculateResults(hObject, handles); 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function slider4_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to slider4 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: slider controls usually have a light gray background. 
if isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor',[.9 .9 .9]); 
% --- Executes on button press in pushbutton2. 
function pushbutton2_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to pushbutton2 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
set(handles.slider1,'Value',0); 
set(handles.slider2,'Value',0.6); 
set(handles.slider3,'Value',0.28); 
set(handles.slider4,'Value',0.38); 
set(handles.edit5,'String','0.95'); 
guidata(hObject, handles); 
SetInfolabels(hObject,handles,handles.mat); 
CalculateResults(hObject, handles); 
function  SetInfolabels(hObject,handles,mat) 
if ~isempty(handles.mat) 
    set(handles.text1,'String',sprintf('Total data length: %d 
events',length(mat.ti))); 
    set(handles.text2,'String',sprintf('-par: %.1f, Mc: %.1f, Dc: 
%.1f',mat.ksi,mat.Mcut,mat.Dcut)); 
    set(handles.text3,'String',sprintf('Curvative Range: [%.2f - 
%.2f]',min(mat.FCur),max(mat.FCur))); 
    set(handles.text4,'String',sprintf('Critical Exponent Range: [%.2f - 
%.2f]',min(mat.Fn),max(mat.Fn))); 
set(handles.edit1,'String',sprintf('%.2f',get(handles.slider1,'Value'))); 
set(handles.edit2,'String',sprintf('%.2f',get(handles.slider2,'Value'))); 
set(handles.edit3,'String',sprintf('%.2f',get(handles.slider3,'Value'))); 
set(handles.edit4,'String',sprintf('%.2f',get(handles.slider4,'Value'))); 
function edit3_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit3 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'String') returns contents of edit3 as text 
%        str2double(get(hObject,'String')) returns contents of edit3 as a double 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function edit3_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit3 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: edit controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
function edit4_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit4 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'String') returns contents of edit4 as text 
%        str2double(get(hObject,'String')) returns contents of edit4 as a double 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function edit4_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit4 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: edit controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
function edit1_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit1 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'String') returns contents of edit1 as text 
%        str2double(get(hObject,'String')) returns contents of edit1 as a double 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function edit1_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit1 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: edit controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
function edit2_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit2 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'String') returns contents of edit2 as text 
%        str2double(get(hObject,'String')) returns contents of edit2 as a double 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function edit2_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit2 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: edit controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
% --- Executes on button press in pushbutton3. 
function pushbutton3_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to pushbutton3 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
if isempty(handles.full_path) 
    disp('PATH NOT FOUND'); 
    return 
 [pathstr,name,ext] = fileparts(handles.full_path); 
[FileName,PathName] = uiputfile([name '.png'],'Save file name'); 
if isequal(FileName,0) || isequal(PathName,0) 
    disp('User Selected Cancel') 
    saveDataName = fullfile(PathName,FileName); 
    axes(handles.axes1); 
set(gcf,'PaperPositionMode','auto') 
    print(saveDataName,'-dpng','-r0') 
% saveas(gca, saveDataName);  
function CalculateResults(hObject, handles) 
Cr = [get(handles.slider1,'Value') get(handles.slider2,'Value')]; 
Nr = [get(handles.slider3,'Value') get(handles.slider4,'Value')]; 
R = str2double(get(handles.edit5,'String')); 
if ~isempty(handles.mat) 
PlotGUIRes(handles,handles.map,handles.mat.ti,handles.mat.xi,handles.mat.yi,handl
es.mat.mi,handles.mat.di,... 
        handles.mat.centx,handles.mat.centy,handles.mat.FCur,handles.mat.Fn,... 
        handles.mat.FTc,handles.mat.FK,handles.mat.FA,handles.mat.FR,... 
       1,Cr,Nr,R,1) 
   FixMapAxis(handles.axes3,hObject,handles); 
function edit5_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit5 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
% Hints: get(hObject,'String') returns contents of edit5 as text 
%        str2double(get(hObject,'String')) returns contents of edit5 as a double 
% --- Executes during object creation, after setting all properties. 
function edit5_CreateFcn(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to edit5 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    empty - handles not created until after all CreateFcns called 
% Hint: edit controls usually have a white background on Windows. 
%       See ISPC and COMPUTER. 
if ispc && isequal(get(hObject,'BackgroundColor'), 
get(0,'defaultUicontrolBackgroundColor')) 
    set(hObject,'BackgroundColor','white'); 
% --- Executes on button press in pushbutton4. 
function pushbutton4_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to pushbutton4 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
CalculateResults(hObject, handles); 
% --- Executes on button press in pushbutton5. 
function pushbutton5_Callback(hObject, eventdata, handles) 
% hObject    handle to pushbutton5 (see GCBO) 
% eventdata  reserved - to be defined in a future version of MATLAB 
% handles    structure with handles and user data (see GUIDATA) 
%FindEQs.m 
function [T,X,Y,M,D]=FindEQs(t,x,y,m,d,condition) 
r = find(condition);  
T = t(r); X = x(r); Y = y(r); M = m(r); D = d(r);  
%finsound.m 
%play a sound 
amp=10 ; fs=700; duration=2;freq=50; 
values=0:1/fs:duration; 
a=amp*sin(2*pi* freq*values); 
sound(a) 
%FixMapAxis.m 
function FixMapAxis(ax,hObject,handles) 
idx = find (handles.map.coastline(:,1)~=Inf);x = handles.map.coastline(:,1); 
y = handles.map.coastline(:,2); 
axis(ax,[ min(x(idx))-1 ... 
    max(x(idx))+2 ... 
    min(y(idx))-2 ... 
    max(y(idx))+1]) 
guidata(hObject, handles); 
%LoadEqs.m 
function [t,x,y,m,d] = LoadEqs(tt,xx,yy,mm,dd,date_from,date_to,cut_off) 
from = datenum(date_from); to = datenum(date_to); N = length(tt);  
% calculate length 
k = 0;  
for i=1:N     
    if tt(i)>=from && tt(i)<=to && mm(i)>=cut_off        
       k = k+1; 
% fill arrays  
t = zeros(1,k); x = zeros(1,k); y = zeros(1,k);  
m = zeros(1,k); d = zeros(1,k);  
for i=1:N     
    if tt(i)>=from && tt(i)<=to && mm(i)>=cut_off 
       t(k) = tt(i); x(k) = xx(i); y(k) = yy(i);  
       m(k) = mm(i); d(k) = dd(i); k = k+1; 
fprintf('Loaded: %d events\n',length(m) 
%PlotEqs.m 
function PlotEqs(chart,x,y,m,d) 
N = length(m); 
fprintf('Ploting %d Earthquakes...\n',N) 
cl1 = 'b'; 
plot(chart,x,y,'o','MarkerSize',3,'MarkerEdgeColor',cl1,'MarkerFaceColor',cl1);  
box on 
drawnow 
%PlotGUIRes.m 
function 
PlotGUIRes(handles,map,t,x,y,m,d,centx,centy,FCur,Fn,FTc,FK,FA,FR,defmodel,Cr,Nr,
SquareR,plottype) 
% Get the original full catalog 
c = handles.mat.catalog; 
[ti,xi,yi,mi,di] = FindEQs(c.t,c.x,c.y,c.m,c.d,c.t>=max(t) & c.m>=5.8  & 
c.t<=max(t)+100); % c.t<=max(t)+8 
% Set filter  
Rth = SquareR; 
idx1 = find(FCur>=Cr(1) & FCur<=Cr(2) & FR>=Rth);idx2 = find(Fn>=Nr(1) & 
Fn<=Nr(2) & FR>=Rth); 
idx3 = find(Fn>=Nr(1) & Fn<=Nr(2) & FCur>=Cr(1) & FCur<=Cr(2) & FR>=Rth); 
% Set axis handles  
ax1 = handles.axes1; ax2 = handles.axes2; ax3 = handles.axes3; 
% set point size  
squaresize = 55; 
% Plot results  
if plottype==1 
    scatter(ax1,centx,centy,squaresize,FCur,'filled','s') 
    hold(ax1,'on'); 
    PlotMap(ax1,map); 
    plot(ax1,xi,yi,'kp','Markersize',16,'MarkerFaceColor','r'); 
    title(ax1,sprintf('Oiginal C(R_{c})\\in [%.2f-%.2f]',min(FCur),max(FCur))); 
    colorbar('peer',ax1); 
    hold(ax1,'off'); 
    FixMapAxis(ax1,handles) 
    scatter(ax2,centx,centy,squaresize,Fn,'filled','s'); 
    hold(ax2,'on'); 
    PlotMap(ax2,map); 
    plot(ax2,xi,yi,'kp','Markersize',16,'MarkerFaceColor','r'); 
    title(ax2,sprintf('Original n(R_{c})\\in [%.2f-%.2f] ',min(Fn),max(Fn))); 
    colorbar('peer',ax2); 
    hold(ax2,'off'); 
    FixMapAxis(ax2,handles) 
    scatter(ax3,centx(idx3),centy(idx3),squaresize,Fn(idx3),'filled','s'); 
    hold(ax3,'on'); 
    PlotMap(ax3,map); 
    h = plot(ax3,xi,yi,'kp','Markersize',16,'MarkerFaceColor','r'); 
    title(ax3,sprintf('Filtered C(R_{c})\\in [%.2f-%.2f],n(R_{c})\\in [%.2f-%.2f] 
',Cr(1),Cr(2),Nr(1),Nr(2))); 
    legend(ax3,h,sprintf('%s -- %s',datestr(min(ti)),datestr(max(ti)))) 
    colorbar('peer',ax3); 
    hold(ax3,'off'); 
    FixMapAxis(ax3,handles) 
function FixMapAxis(ax,handles) 
idx = find (handles.map.coastline(:,1)~=Inf); 
x = handles.map.coastline(:,1);y = handles.map.coastline(:,2); 
axis(ax,[ min(x(idx))-2 ... 
    max(x(idx))+3 ... 
    min(y(idx))-3 ... 
    max(y(idx))+2]) 
%PlotMap.m 
function PlotMap(axis,map) 
plot(axis,map.coastline(:,1),map.coastline(:,2),'k') 
grid(axis,'on') 
box(axis,'on') 
