Microsoft Word - Corrected thesis 124 May 19 FINAL.doc
Citizen	Social	Science:	a	critical	investigation	
A	thesis	submitted	to	the	University	of	Manchester	for	the	degree	of	Doctor	of	
Philosophy	in	the	Faculty	of	Humanities	
Alexandra	Albert	
Applied	Social	Research,	School	of	Social	Sciences,		
The	University	of	Manchester	
Table	of	Contents	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature22 
Chapter	8.	The	transformative	capacities	of	citizen	social	science	-	a	discussion
8.2	Implications	of	citizen	social	science	for	the	individual	participants	.	200 
9.3	The	transformative	and	developmental	value	of	citizen	social	science220 
Appendix	4:	Mass	Observation	Probe	1		Wording	of	Directives	Analysed273 
Appendix	7:	Empty	Houses	Probe	2	-	Walking	Interviews	discussion	guide282 
Word	count:	76,	566
List	of	Figures	and	Tables	
Table	4.2	Metadata	on	directives	from	the	second	wave	of	the	Mass	Observation	Project	that	were	
Figure	5.2	Participants	in	Our	Manchester	project	discussing	photographs	brought	in	for	community	
Figure	6.1:	screenshot	from	Mass	Observation	website	informing	those	interested	in	writing	for	the	
Figure	6.2:	screenshot	from	Mass	Observation	website	informing	those	interested	in	writing	for	the	
Figure	6.3:	FAQ	on	the	Mass	Observation	website	about	the	respect	given	to	participants	privacy	in	
Abstract  
Abstract	
Citizen	 social	 science	 is	 an	 emerging,	 multi-sited,	 socially	 structured	 practice	 for	 social	
research.	 As	 an	 innovative	 form	 of	 coproduction	 and	 participatory	 research,	 it	 involves	
engaging	citizens	in	conducting	social	research.	To	date,	when	citizen	social	science	has	been	
theorised,	 the	 focus	 has	usually	 only	 been	on	 its	 potential	 as	method:	 as	 a	 form	of	 crowd-
sourced	 data	 collection,	 and	 in	 a	 context	 of	 increasing	 technological	 advancements	 in,	 and	
possibilities	 for,	data	gathering.	 Just	 like	citizen	science,	which	 involves	 the	public	 in	 large-
scale	 collective	 volunteer	 science	 projects,	 citizen	 social	 science	 presents	 both	 a	 challenge	
and	an	opportunity.	It	can	challenge	the	ways	in	which	social	science	research	is	undertaken,	
raising	questions	around	who	can	collect	data,	who	can	analyse	 it,	 and	how	 it	 can	be	used.	
The	 possibilities	 of	 citizen	 social	 science	 bring	 into	 focus	 issues	 of	 data	 quality,	 diverging	
motivations,	 claims	 of	 expertise	 and	 skills,	 and	 the	 relationship	 between	 data	 collection,	
analytical	 frameworks,	 and	 social	 realities.	 There	 is	 the	 potential	 for	 the	 flattening	 of	
hierarchies	in	the	social	research	process	as	knowledge	is	made	together.	
The	 thesis	 seeks	 to	 understand	 how	 citizen	 social	 science	works	 in	 practice.	 It	 reports	 on	
three	 social	 science	 probes	 using	 citizen	 social	 science-based	 approaches:	 i)	 a	 secondary	
analysis	 of	 Mass	 Observation	 Archive	 data,	 ii)	 a	 study	 involving	 citizens	 reporting	
observations	of	empty	houses,	and	iii)	a	community	based	history	project	about	perceptions	
of	the	changing	nature	of	a	local	area.	The	research	sets	out	three	key	facets	of	citizen	social	
science:	 the	challenges	 for	research	design	and	execution,	 the	ethical	 issues	raised,	and	 the	
potential	 for	 data	 use.	 The	 thesis	 elaborates	 on	 them	 as	 new	 evidence	 of	 the	 practices,	
processes	and	challenges	of	citizen	social	science.		
The	 findings	 suggest	 that	 citizen	 social	 science-based	 methods	 can	 be	 disruptively	
transformative:	for	the	individual	participant	in	terms	of	how	they	can	become	engaged	with	
the	 issues	raised	by	the	research;	 for	the	discipline,	 in	the	way	that	 it	allows	seeming	 non-
experts	to	be	involved	in	the	analysis	of	data,	as	well	as	its	generation;	and,	moreover	policy	
makers	are	beginning	to	take	such	data	seriously.	Overall,	the	research	highlights	how	citizen	
social	 science	 can	 be	 an	 exercise	 in	 the	 collective	 sociological	 imagination	 and	 collective	
experimentation.	It	presents	an	opportunity	for	the	transformation	of	social	science	research,	
beyond	 just	 an	 instrumental	 methodological	 innovation,	 but	 there	 are	 challenges	 and	
limitations.		
Declaration  
Declaration	
I,	Alexandra	Albert,	declare	that	that	no	portion	of	the	work	referred	to	in	the	thesis	has	been	
submitted	in	support	of	an	application	for	another	degree	or	qualification	of	this	or	any	other	
university	or	other	institute	of	learning.	
Copyright	Declaration  
Copyright	Declaration	
i.				The	author	of	this	thesis	(including	any	appendices	and/or	schedules	to	this	thesis)	owns	
certain	copyright	or	related	rights	in	it	(the	Copyright)	and	she	has	given	The	University	of	
Manchester	certain	rights	to	use	such	Copyright,	including	for	administrative	purposes.	
ii.				Copies	of	this	thesis,	either	in	full	or	in	extracts	and	whether	in	hard	or	electronic	copy,	
may	be	made	only	in	accordance	with	the	Copyright,	Designs	and	Patents	Act	1988	(as	
amended)	and	regulations	issued	under	it	or,	where	appropriate,	in	accordance	with	
licensing	agreements	which	the	University	has	from	time	to	time.	This	page	must	form	part	of	
any	such	copies	made.	
iii.				The	ownership	of	certain	Copyright,	patents,	designs,	trade	marks	and	other	intellectual	
property	(the	Intellectual	Property)	and	any	reproductions	of	copyright	works	in	the	thesis,	
for	example	graphs	and	tables	(Reproductions),	which	may	be	described	in	this	thesis,	may	
not	be	owned	by	the	author	and	may	be	owned	by	third	parties.	Such	Intellectual	Property	
and	Reproductions	cannot	and	must	not	be	made	available	for	use	without	the	prior	written	
permission	of	the	owner(s)	of	the	relevant	Intellectual	Property	and/or	Reproductions.	
iv.				Further	information	on	the	conditions	under	which	disclosure,	publication	and	
commercialisation	of	this	thesis,	the	Copyright	and	any	Intellectual	Property	University	IP	
Policy	(see	http://documents.manchester.ac.uk/display.aspx?DocID=24420,	in	any	relevant	
Thesis	restriction	declarations	deposited	in	the	University	Library,	The	University	Librarys	
regulations	(see	http://www.library.manchester.ac.uk/about/regulations/)	and	in	The	
Universitys	policy	on	Presentation	of	Theses.	
Acknowledgements  
Acknowledgements	
To	my	supervisors	for	all	their	advice,	comments,	support	and	encouragement.	Particular	
thanks	for	Monika	for	the	warmth,	inspiring	Skype	conversations	as	well	as	introducing	me	to	
the	possibilities	of	walking	seminars	in	the	Lakes.		
Particular	thanks	to	Kingsley	for	the	continual	support,	advice	and	motivation	to	get	to	the	
To	Liz	for	being	a	thoroughly	thought	provoking	and	helpful	internal	reviewer.		
To	Kate	and	Tom	for	the	inspiration	to	sign	up	to	this	in	the	first	place.	
To	Susan	and	Yes	Elf		I	really	dont	know	where	Id	be	without	you		from	pacing	it	out	and	
stomps	round	the	block,	to	rants	and	curry	and	beer	and	POSTITS		never	forget	the	postits	
To	Will	for	my	sanity;	the	Lads	for	Friday	wines	and	all	kinds	of	goodness;	and	of	course	to	
Dan	for	also	being	a	wonderful	sounding	board	and	source	of	humour	and	groundedness	
throughout.	To	Camilla	for	gigs,	walks,	fresh	air,	miraculous	swim	spots	and	constant	calm	
and	support.		
To	Gabi		its	been	quite	some	adventure.	Long	may	it	continue	
To	Bruce	Wayne	and	Katniss	Everdeen	for	their	consistent	distractions.	To	Soundcloud	for	
access	to	all	the	incredible	artists	who	motivated	me	to	finish	my	chapters	and	kept	me	
company	in	the	dead	of	night;	and	all	the	various	jelly	moulding	locations	which	tested	the	
boundaries	of	acceptable	workplaces		particular	shout	outs	to	Redbridge	Park	and	Ride,	
Ljubljana	airport,	the	bullet	train,	Emirates	Airlines,	and	most	of	all	the	Pendolinos	for	their	
comforting	rocking	and	tilting.	Lets	not	forget	the	Megabus	either		my	newfound	office	of	
choice.		
To	Muki,	Christian,	Nadia,	Alice	and	all	at	ExCiteS	for	the	unwavering	support,	good	humour	
and	inspiration	in	the	final	year.		
To	JP	for	bearing	with	me	so	calmly	in	the	final	stint.	And	lastly	to	my	parents	and	family	for	
all	the	love,	support,	ceaseless	generosity	and	motivation	to	get	to	the	end.	
Chapter	1:	Introduction  
Chapter	1:	Introduction	
Lets	create	a	nation	of	social	scientists	Social	scientists	must	create	a	
culture	in	which	individuals	regularly	observe,	analyse	and	interpret	
their	own	data.	
Geoff	Mulgan,	29th	September	2017,	THE	Opinion	
Why	arent	we	asking	people	as	part	of	citizen	sociology	to	go	out	and	
collect	ethnographic	information,	like	images	or	sounds	that	they	can	
then	add	together	to	develop	a	data	set	that	could	be	interesting	for	
sociological	analysis?	We	could	also	ask	the	public	to	help	analyse	the	
data.	
Deborah	Lupton,	2nd	February	2016,	International	Journal	of	Social	Research	
Methodology	podcast		
It	is	odd	that	the	field	in	which	citizenship	is	so	actively	under	scrutiny	
does	not	involve	citizens	en	masse	in	the	interpretations	it	produces.	
Gerben	Moerman,	3rd	January	2015,	Time	for	citizen	science	in	the	social	sciences,	
Social	Theory	Applied	
1.1	What	is	citizen	social	science?	
This	thesis	investigates	citizen	social	science,	which	is	an	emerging,	multi-sited,	
socially	structured	practice	for	social	research.	As	an	innovative	form	of	coproduction	
and	action	based	research,	it	involves	engaging	volunteer	citizens	in	conducting	social	
research.	To	date,	when	citizen	social	science	has	been	theorised,	the	focus	has	
usually	been	on	its	potential	as	method:	as	a	form	of	crowd-sourced	data	collection,	
and	in	a	context	of	increasing	technological	advancements	in,	and	possibilities	for,	
data	gathering.	Citizen	social	science	presents	both	a	challenge	and	an	opportunity	to	
social	science	research.	It	challenges	the	ways	in	which	social	science	research	is	
undertaken,	raising	questions	around	who	can	collect	data,	who	can	analyse	it,	and	
Chapter	1:	Introduction  
how	it	can	be	used.	The	possibilities	of	citizen	social	science	can	entail	questions	
about	data	quality,	diverging	motivations,	claims	to	expertise	and	power,	purpose	and	
skill.	It	brings	into	focus	issues	of	the	relationship	between	data	collection,	analytical	
frameworks,	and	social	realities.	There	is	the	potential	for	a	flattening	of	hierarchies	
in	the	social	research	process	as	knowledge	is	made	together.	
In	many	ways,	citizen	social	science	is	not	so	dissimilar	from	community	based	
participatory	research	(Purdam,	2014;	Richardson,	2014;	Goodson	and	Phillimore,	
2012).	Citizen	social	science	methods	have	the	potential	to	generate	valuable	data	
and	add	to	the	tool	kit	of	social	science	methods,	but	as	with	all	methods	there	are	
challenges	and	limitations,	particularly	around	issues	of	response	rates,	public	
engagement,	anonymity,	ethics,	data	quality	and	data	use.	Citizen	social	science	
raises	important	questions	about	the	methods	of	participation	and	data	collection	in	
the	social	sciences,	as	well	as	our	conceptualisations	of	the	social.	However,	what	
constitutes	the	public,	citizens,	the	social	and	social	science	are	extremely	complex	
and	divergent	questions.	This	thesis	explores	the	contested	enactments	of	these	
phenomena	in	conceptual	debates	about	and	emergent	practices	of	citizen	social	
science.	
1.2	Why	now?		
Citizen	social	science	appears	to	be	an	emergent	phenomenon;	this	thesis	argues	it	
has	a	particular	practical,	ethical	and	material	history	that	needs	to	be	acknowledged.	
More	specifically,	four	key	issues	stand	out	as	contextually	relevant	to	the	study	of	
citizen	social	science.		
Firstly,	the	rise	of	interest	in,	and	focus	on,	the	citizen	science	movement,	which	can	
be	charted	predominantly	in	the	natural	and	environmental	sciences,	has	raised	
questions	about	the	role	of	the	public	in	participating	in	scientific	research.	Much	
interest	and	attention	has	been	given	to	the	huge	innovative	potential	for	knowledge	
production	(Heiss	and	Matthes,	2017,	p.	23)	of	citizen	science	to	generate	data,	or	
gain	access	to	previously	hard-to-obtain	data,	and	to	enable	citizens	to	contribute	to	
doing	science	and	solving	scientific	problems.	The	2014	European	Union	White	Paper	
Chapter	1:	Introduction  
on	Citizen	Science	(Serrano	Sanz	et	al.,	2014)	stated	that	citizen	science	encompasses	
a	wide	range	of	activities	carried	out	by	several	actors	at	multiple	levels.	They	found	
massive	and	occasional	virtual	interactions	on	a	global	scale	as	well	as	regular,	
proactive	and	continuous	involvement	in	local	environments.	The	authors	also	
highlighted	the	fact	that	there	is	no	single	definition	of	citizen	science	but	rather	a	
series	of	definitions	that	reveal	the	dynamics	of	this	research	approach	which	is	
continually	evolving	and	implies	new	collaborative	activities	and	shared	objectives	
between	the	main	stakeholder	groups	(Serrano	Sanz	et	al.,	2014,	p.11).	There	are	
different	theories	as	to	why	we	are	currently	seeing	a	resurgence	of	interest	in	citizen	
science.	Haklay	(2013),	for	example,	suggests	this	could	be	due	to	a	current	increase	
in	the	value	of	scientific	knowledge	and	higher	educational	attainment	more	broadly.	
However,	while	the	history	of	the	emergence	and	genealogies	of	citizen	science	is	an	
interesting	and	important	topic,	today,	the	very	practices	and	challenges	of	citizen	
science,	and	specifically	citizen	social	science,	are	a	more	pressing	issue	for	inquiry,	
as	new	generations	of	researchers	adopt	these	methods.		
Secondly,	the	locations	in	which	we	might	find	social	science	methods	have	multiplied	
(Elliot	and	Purdam,	2015;	Savage,	2013).	There	is	a	friction	between,	one	the	one	
hand,	calls	for	a	more	reflexive	modernization	(Beck,	1992),	and,	on	the	other	hand,	a	
seemingly	endless	desire	for	bigger	and	better	and	faster	data	in	real	time.	The	
concept	of	reflexive	modernization	suggests	that	traditional	objective	accounts	of	
science	should	be	replaced	by	a	more	inclusive	science	that	institutionalizes	self-
doubt,	self-interrogation	and	self-reflexivity	(Bckstrand,	2003).	These	calls	sit	
alongside	a	renewed	interest	in	academic	debates	around	public	sociology	(Burawoy,	
2005),	and	the	social	shaping	of	data	infrastructures	(Gray,	2016).	Social	research	
methods	are	being	invented	and	circulated	outside	of	the	academy,	something	that	
has	led	some	to	argue	that	social	research	methods	are	being	democratised	(Adkins	
and	Lury,	2009).	Research	methods	and	the	social	are	both	changing;	the	social	is	
being	remade	in	those	new	methods.		
Thirdly,	in	recent	years,	social	scientists	have	proposed	that	their	disciplines	may	be	
undergoing	a	transformation,	as	the	resources	and	techniques	of	social	research	are	
being	redistributed	among	a	variety	of	agencies	inside	and	outside	the	university	
Chapter	1:	Introduction  
(Marres,	2012;	Adkins	and	Lury,	2009;	Whatmore,	2009;	Savage	and	Burrows,	2007).	
Whether	or	not	this	is	a	new	phenomenon,	or	has	in	many	ways	always	been	the	case	
(Callon	et	al.,	2009),	the	question	remains	of	how	to	come	to	terms	with	the	
reconfiguration	of	research	cultures	and	the	active	participation	of	social	actors	in	
social	research	(Marres,	2012).	One	way	to	do	so	is	to	think	more	creatively	about	
method	and	what	it	might	help	us	to	achieve	(Gane,	2012).	Gane	draws	on	Mills	
(1959)	work	on	the	sociological	imagination	as	a	way	out	of	the	situation	of	knowing	
capitalism	(Thrift,	2005)	that	Savage	and	Burrows	(2007)	discuss	in	their	article	on	
the	coming	crisis	of	empirical	sociology.	In	many	ways,	this	is	the	premise	on	which	
this	thesis	is	based,	to	think	creatively	about	method	and	to	explore	the	potential	of	
citizen	social	science	for	social	research.	
Lastly,	it	is	possible	to	chart	the	emergence	of	citizen	social	science	in	the	context	of	
the	advent	of	critical	data	studies,	analysis	of	online	participation	(Cantijoch	et	al.,	
2015;	Gibson	and	Cantijoch,	2013),	civic	data	initiatives	and	the	participatory	turn.		
The	self-tracking	movement	(Nafus	and	Sherman,	2014)	or	the	quantified-self	
movement	(Lupton,	2016),	in	addition	to	work	around	citizen	sensing	(Gabrys,	2014)	
and	participatory	sensing	(Nold,	2017),	are	all	directly	related	to	the	context	in	which	
citizen	social	science	emerges.	The	changing	power	relations	between	citizen,	data	
and	the	State,	make	for	new	responsibilities	and	opportunities	for	participation	in	
data	generation	and	interpretation	in	the	neo-liberal	context	(Stewart	and	Lucio,	
2017).	Citizen	social	science	prompts	many	questions	about	the	state	of	social	science	
methods	today	and	our	understanding	of	the	social	and	how	it	is	made,	as	well	as	
affording	capacities	to	collect	new	data,	to	document	the	undocumented,	and	to	tackle	
intractable	social	issues.			
1.3	Could	citizen	social	science	transform	social	science	research?	
The	work	of	this	thesis	builds	on	and	contributes	to	the	existing	literature	on	citizen	
social	science,	by	helping	to	conceptualise	the	emergent	phenomenon	and	to	explore	
its	potential,	as	well	as	its	practical	realities.	The	thesis	makes	use	of	facet	
methodology	(Mason,	2011),	and	its	gemstone	metaphor,	where	the	facets	allow	the	
key	qualities	of	the	stone	to	shine		with	the	stone	it	is	its	purity,	and	capacity	to	
Chapter	1:	Introduction  
refract	light		with	citizen	social	science	it	is	a	hidden	potential	to	transform	the	
epistemological	politics	of	social	science.			
Citizens	now	have	the	possibility	to	be	fieldworkers	of	their	own	lives.	This	can	be	
extended	to	examine	the	value	of	citizens	collecting	data	on	the	world	around	them	
for	social	science	research	(Purdam,	2014).	Professional	social	science	does	much	
innovative	work	on	methods,	but	until	recently	the	reasons	for	the	transformation	in	
the	nature	and	location	of	social	science	methods	and	their	broader	sociological	
effects	have	been	of	marginal	interest	(Savage	and	Burrows,	2007).	The	notion	of	
citizen	social	science	raises	questions	from	the	outset	about	what	data	is,	who	can	
collect	it	and	to	what	uses	it	can	be	put.		
This	is	not	a	problem,	so	much	as	an	exploration	of	whether	the	adoption	of	social	
research	techniques	by	a	variety	of	social	actors	can	be	made	to	work	for	rather	than	
against	social	research,	to	renew	it	and	reconfigure	it	(Marres,	2012;	my	emphasis).	
The	aim	of	studying	the	practices	and	processes	of	citizen	social	science	is	to	explore	
how	the	circulation	of	social	research	techniques	across	social	life	can	be	rendered	
productive	for	social	science	(Lury	and	Wakeford,	2012,	p.16-17).	Furthermore,	the	
thesis	aims	to	engage	critically	with	the	method	of	citizen	social	science	and	the	
affordances	and	capacities	mobilised	in	and	through	it,	and	to	resist	a	purely	
instrumental	framing	Savage	(2013);	this	is	the	overall	aim	of	the	work	of	this	thesis.	
In	many	ways	citizen	social	science	can	be	seen	to	emerge	from	both	the	rise	of	citizen	
science,	and	a	period	of	methodological	experimentation	and	data	politics	
surrounding	the	issues	of	causality	and	description	in	the	natural	sciences	(Savage,	
2016).	This	thesis	conceptualises	and	frames	citizen	social	science	in	the	context	of	a	
renewal	of	interest	in	the	politics	of	method	in	the	social	sciences	(Lury	and	
Wakeford,	2012;	Bscher,	Urry	and	Witchger,	2010;	Adkins	and	Lury,	2009;	Rabinow	
and	Marcus,	2009;	Savage	and	Burrows,	2007;	Thrift,	2005).	This	thesis	seeks	to	bring	
social	science	methods	to	bear	on	the	emergent	phenomenon	of	citizen	social	science	
to	explore	its	potential	for	social	science	research.	
Chapter	1:	Introduction  
Citizen	social	science	appears	to	occupy	an	unusual	place	in	relation	to	the	social	
sciences		in	terms	of	justifying	the	role	of	the	social	sciences,	citizen	social	science	is	
often	brought	back	in	as	a	central	defence	of	the	discipline,	precisely	because	of	how	it	
reinstates	the	human	in	the	research	(and	data)	process.	But	citizen	social	science	is	
marginalised	and	othered	by	those	who	then	need	to	defend	the	importance	and	
value	of	social	science.	Perhaps	this	is	one	contributing	factor	to	it	not	being	given	
much	attention	in	the	literature	previously;	another	may	be	the	significant	body	of	
work	being	undertaken	on	participatory	research,	in	particular	Participatory	Action	
Research	(PAR)	and	coproduction.		
1.4	Positioning	the	research		
Being	accountable	for	research	strategies	and	methods	orients	researchers	to	the	
communities	they	seek	to	be	part	of	and	the	conversations	they	want	to	contribute	to.	
One	starting	point	is	the	ways	that	researchers	conceptualize	the	world	and	what	it	is	
made	up	of	(ontology)	and	how	the	world,	or	put	another	way,	the	object	of	research,	
can	be	known	(epistemology)	(Kimbell,	2013).	In	this	way,	clarifying	the	
epistemological	positioning	of	the	thesis	from	the	outset,	allows	for	a	clearer	
presentation	of	the	work	of	the	thesis.	
Since	citizen	social	science	is	emergent	and	fast	evolving,	a	multi-sited	practice,	and	a	
socially	structured	phenomenon,	it	is	necessary	to	clearly	position	and,	as	far	as	
possible,	set	the	boundaries	of	the	research	presented	in	the	thesis.	The	larger	part	of	
the	contextualising	work	of	the	thesis	is	undertaken	in	the	review	of	the	literature	in	
chapter	2,	and	in	the	scoping	work	presented	in	chapter	3.	However,	a	study	of	citizen	
social	science	raises	challenges	as	the	approach	can	span	different	ways	of	seeing	the	
social	world,	and	within	that,	different	understandings	of	the	social,	of	data,	and	of	
social	research	methods.		
Much	attention	is	being,	and	has	been	given,	to	the	proliferation	of	instruments	and	of	
practices	of	social	analysis	across	social	life	in	the	form	of	social	media	platforms,	
digital	analytics,	and	the	so-called	internet	of	things,	and	so	on	(Nold,	2017;	Marres,	
2014;	Gabrys,	2014;	Gibson	and	Cantijoch,	2013).	Social	actors,	practices	and	events	
Chapter	1:	Introduction  
are	increasingly	and	explicitly	oriented	towards	social	analysis,	and	are	actively	
involved	in	it.	This	raises	many	questions	about	the	ways	in	which	technology	
participates	in	the	representation	and	doing	of	social	life.	Marres	(2014)	charts	the	
deep-seated	oppositions	between	science	and	culture,	and	between	technology	and	
democracy,	but	also	the	ways	in	which	digital	culture	and	digital	practices	cut	across	
and	unsettle	these	distinctions.	Engaging	with	technology	and	practicing	culture	are	
becoming	more	and	more	entangled.	Expert	practices	of	data	capture,	analysis	and	
visualisation	are	closely	associated	with	citizen	initiatives	focused	on	inclusion,	
advocacy	and	cultural	expression.		
This	thesis	explores	the	broader	conceptualisation	and	potential	of	citizen	social	
science	as	an	idea	and	practice,	rather	than	through	the	devices,	per	se,	which	might	
enable	its	emergence.	The	thesis	draws	on	the	position	of	the	Social	Life	of	Methods	
(Savage,	2013;	Law	et	al.,	2011)	that	sees	the	questions	of	method	as	raising	
fundamental	theoretical	questions	about	the	limits	of	knowledge	itself,	and	to	reflect	
on	new	ways	of	understanding	the	relationship	between	the	cultural,	social,	and	
material	(Savage,	2013,	p.18).	Using	such	a	position	allows	for	a	focus	on	the	
affordances	and	capacities	of	citizen	social	science,	which	are	mobilized	in	and	
through	methods	themselves.	
The	thesis	delineates	a	series	of	social	research	probes	to	explore	the	method	and	
how	it	works	in	practice	in	different	contexts.	Social	research	probes	are	a	method	for	
developing	a	richly	textured	but	fragmented	understanding	of	a	setting	or	situation	
(Boehner	et	al.,	2012,	p.	198).		Probes	as	method	were	selected	precisely	because	of	
the	ways	in	which	they	upend	the	existing	roles	of	researcher	and	subject	in	social	
research,	and	are	the	basis	for	a	more	interventionist	study,	which	urges	participants	
to	consider	their	activities	from	unfamiliar	perspectives,	and	to	provoke	reflections,	
diffractions	and	illuminations	on	the	core	values	and	practices	of	the	social	sciences	
(Boehner	et	al.,	2012).	Chapter	4	sets	out	the	methods	used	to	explore	the	key	facets	
of	citizen	social	science	in	more	detail.		Savage	(2010,	p.	248)	identified	that	new	data	
sources,	working	on	the	basis	of	whole	populations,	allow	the	public	to	be	enrolled	
into	data	generation	processes	in	active	ways.	However,	he	also	stated	we	need	to	
remind	ourselves	that	rather	than	being	new,	this	is	a	return	to	the	tradition	of	Mass-
Chapter	1:	Introduction  
Observation	and	the	various	field	research	activities	of	the	mid-twentieth	century,	all	
of	which	emphasised	how	the	public	could	research	themselves	through	projects	of	
writing	and	observing.	The	potential	innovations	of	the	approach	of	the	thesis	lie	
precisely	in	recognising	the	prior	establishment	of	the	Mass	Observation	project,	as	
an	early	form	of	citizen	social	science,	and	probing	it	in	novel	ways.	The	subsequent	
combination	of	this	probe	with	insights	from	the	probes	into	two	new	projects,	shed	
light	on	the	affordances	and	capacities	of	citizen	social	science.		
To	do	such	a	positioning	justice,	requires	the	use	of	facet	methodology	(Mason,	2011).	
Facet	methodology	assumes	that	the	world		and	what	we	seek	to	understand	about	it	
	is	not	only	lived	and	experienced,	but	is	multi-dimensional,	contingent,	relationally	
implicated	and	entwined	(see	chapter	4).		As	Mason	(2011,	p.83)	notes,	the	main	
concern	of	facet	methodology	is	to	create	flashes	of	insight	about	an	entwined	
problematic,	rather	than,	for	example,	a	more	descriptive,	maximum	coverage,	
summary	of	findings	logic.	This	is	coherent	with	the	ways	in	which	social	research	
probes	help	to	shed	light	on	settings	of	interest,	to	open	up	a	conversation	and	to	
challenge	assumptions	of	replicability,	objectivity	and	generality	(Boehner	et	al.,	
2012).	Thus	the	probes	into	different	forms	of	citizen	social	science	help	to	create	
flashes	of	insight	into	how	citizen	social	science	works	in	practice.	
1.4.1	Researcher	identity	
I	approached	this	thesis	as	a	social	researcher	with	an	active	and	dynamic	interest	in	
the	question	of	what	distinguishes	different	forms	and	types	of	sociality	and	why	
these	differences	matter.	This	is	consistent	with	my	research	interests	in	participatory	
methods	and	policy	analysis,	and	in	particular	the	politics	of	the	research	process.	
Citizen	social	science	is	a	way	in	which	to	examine	this		the	tension	between	filling	
and	plugging	a	data	gap	on	the	one	hand,	and	a	space	or	opportunity	for	reflection	on	
the	other.	Exploring	citizen	social	science	entails	a	chance	to	open	up	the	research	
process,	and	a	chance	to	ask	questions	about	who	is	allowed	to	collect	data,	who	is	the	
researcher,	and	who	can	do	what	with	the	data.		
Chapter	1:	Introduction  
Positionality	and	reflexivity	in	the	approaches	of	this	thesis	are	set	out	in	more	depth	
in	the	chapter	on	facet	methodology	(Chapter	4).	However,	discussions	of	standpoint	
theory	and	scientific	self-reflexivity	have	made	it	clear	that	outsiders	do	not	
necessarily	have	a	more	objective	vision	of	their	object;	but	neither	do	they	always	
have	a	worse	perspective	(Steinmetz,	2005,	p.	p.46).	There	are	also	practical	
advantages	to	locating	criticism	of	the	social	sciences	within	the	social	sciences	
(Burawoy,	2005).	Researchers	are	more	likely	to	be	exposed	to	their	own	disciplines	
orthodoxies,	internal	conflicts,	and	hegemonic	imagined	histories	as	part	of	their	
professional	training	(Steinmetz,	2005,	p.46).	However,	there	is	also	a	risk	that	the	
power	structure	of	the	field	they	are	examining	has	its	own	set	of	norms	which	places	
pressure	on	the	researcher,	and	subjects	them	to	systematic	blindness,	self-
censorship,	and	pressures	to	intellectual	conformity.	This	thesis	attempts	to	address	
this	challenge,	particularly	in	the	way	it	presents	an	analysis	that	shows	
accountability	and	awareness	that	research	practices	are	not	innocent	endeavours	
(Haraway,	1988),	and	that	the	researcher	is	internal	to	the	processes	being	studied.	
This	calls	for	a	heightened	awareness	of	the	knowledge	practices	and	knowledges	
that	come	to	be	generated	with	research.	It	requires	acknowledgement	and	
consideration	of	the	different	situated	knowledges	(Harraway,	1988)	that	are	
produced.	The	probes,	as	noted	above,	allow	for	this	to	happen	by	opening	up	the	
relationship	between	researcher	and	subject.	
1.5.	Research	Questions	
The	contextualising	of	citizen	social	science,	as	set	out	above,	necessarily	gives	rise	to	
a	series	of	research	questions.	The	key	research	question	this	thesis	seeks	to	answer	
is	how	does	citizen	social	science	work	in	practice?	This	has	a	dual	focus.	On	the	one	
hand	it	speaks	to	the	fact	that	citizen	social	science	is	an	emergent	phenomenon	and	
theorizing	its	practices	and	potential	must	first	of	all	take	stock	of	how	it	is	being	
practiced.	On	the	other	hand,	citizen	social	science	is	emergent	in	the	sense	that	its	
potential	is	being	shaped,	and	theorising	it	must	be	done	with	the	ambition	of	
exploring	its	potential,	as	well	as	the	ideologies	and	values	that	drive	innovation	in	
practice.	The	research	presented	in	this	thesis	both	accounts	for	this	normative	
dimension,	whilst	also	intervening	and	probing	the	social	research	process,	urging	
Chapter	1:	Introduction  
participants	in	the	probes	to	think	about	experiences	from	unfamiliar	perspectives	
(Boehner	et	al.,	2012).	The	sub-questions	that	follow	on	from	this	core	question	are:		
1) What	challenges	are	raised	in	terms	of	research	design	and	execution?		
2) What	ethical	issues	are	raised	and	how	might	these	be	addressed?		
3) How	can	the	data	generated	in	citizen	social	science	approaches	be	used?	By	
whom?	
4) How	are	citizen	social	science	projects	reconfiguring	knowledge	production	
processes?	What	are	the	potential	effects	of	this	process?		
These	sub-questions	develop	from	the	literature	(see	chapter	2)	and	the	key	facets	
chapter,	and	are	explored	and	addressed	in	the	empirical	chapters	5	to	8.	The	
approach	of	this	thesis	identifies	and	analytically	polishes	(Mason,	2011)	the	
multiple	facets	of	citizen	social	science,	to	generate	flashes	of	insight	into	the	
practices	and	processes	and	potentials	of	citizen	social	science.	It	makes	conceptual	
and	empirical	contributions	to	understanding	how	citizen	social	science	works	in	
practice,	building	on	the	emergent	body	of	work	on	the	subject	so	far.		
The	social	research	probes	presented	in	this	thesis	generate	multiple	insights	and	
illuminations	into	the	inherent	tensions	in	citizen	social	science	and	social	research	
more	broadly.	They	are	an	attempt	at	infrastructuring,	to	use	a	design	term	(Karasti	
and	Syrjnen,	2004;	Disalvo	et	al.	2014;	Le	Dantec,	2012),	for	a	deeper	and	shared	
understanding,	and	a	more	contested	way	of	understanding	the	social.	They	aim	to	
create	a	more	agile	form	of	knowledge	that	is	inherently	political	and	challenging	in	
its	practice.		
1.6.	Thesis	Structure	
The	thesis	is	divided	into	nine	chapters:	chapter	2	examines	how	citizen	social	science	
has	been	conceptualised	in	the	academic	literature.	It	contextualises	citizen	social	
science	in	the	rise	of	citizen	science	as	an	approach	for	public	involvement	in	science,	
predominantly	in	the	natural	and	environmental	sciences.	It	reviews	how	citizen	
social	science	might	be	undertaken,	by	examining	the	significant	body	of	work	on	
methods	in	the	social	sciences,	in	particular	the	social	life	of	methods	and	
Chapter	1:	Introduction  
methodological	approaches	to	everyday	life.	The	literature	review	highlights	who	
citizen	social	science	might	be	for,	contextualising	such	an	approach	in	the	work	on	
participation	and	publics	in	the	social	sciences.	It	demonstrates	a	practical,	ethical	
and	material	history	behind	citizen	social	science.	This	gives	rise	to	the	need	for	
scoping	work	to	be	undertaken	to	determine	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science;	
this	is	presented	in	chapter	3.	Such	scoping	work	is	informed	by	a	desk-based	review	
of	projects	that	could	be	conceived	as	citizen	social	science,	active	participation	in	the	
citizen	science	community,	and	a	series	of	22	practitioner	interviews	about	the	
potential	of	citizen	social	science.	The	chapter	draws	out	some	of	the	key	tensions	and	
insights	into	citizen	social	science	that	inform	the	design	of	the	research	strategy	of	
the	thesis.			
Chapter	4	presents	the	research	strategy	and	methods	of	the	thesis.	It	argues	that	
facet	methodology	(Mason,	2011),	which	draws	on	a	gemstone	metaphor,	can	be	
effectively	applied	to	understand	the	phenomenon	of	citizen	social	science;	it	is	a	
productive	orientation	in	researching	the	multi-dimensionality	of	lived	experience.	
The	facets	of	this	gemstone	are	explored	in	more	depth	using	social	research	probes	
as	methods,	to	open	things	up,	and	to	provide	flashes	of	insight	(Mason,	2011)	from	
multiple	perspectives.	Thus	facet	methodology	can	be	seen	as	an	orientation	for	a	
methodology	that	allows	flexibility	and	for	the	researcher	to	engage	in	a	deeper	
immersion	alongside	social	research	probes.	Social	research	probes,	as	explained	
above,	provoke	reflections	on	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science,	to	understand	its	
dynamics	and	complexity.			
Chapters	5		7	present	an	analysis	of	three	social	research	probes	into	the	key	facets	
of	citizen	social	science.	They	draw	attention	to	the	challenges	citizen	social	science	
creates	for	research	design	and	execution,	particularly	in	terms	of	data	generation	in	
different	types	of	citizen	social	science	projects	(Chapter	5).		They	highlight	the	
ethical	issues	raised	by	citizen	social	science	approaches	and	explore	how	these	might	
be	addressed	(Chapter	6).	They	demonstrate	how	citizen	social	science	raises	the	
question	of	what	counts	as	data	and	who	is	to	say,	drawing	attention	to	the	politics	of	
data	and	data	use	(Chapter	7).			
Chapter	1:	Introduction  
The	implications	of	the	social	research	probes	are	discussed	in	chapter	8,	specifically	
the	implications	for	individual	participants	in	citizen	social	science,	the	implications	
of	citizen	social	science	for	social	science	research,	and	also	the	implications	of	citizen	
social	science	for	society	more	broadly.	These	are	set	out	and	problematised	
respectively	in	the	three	sections	of	chapter	8.		
The	thesis	concludes	by	reflecting	on	the	original	research	question	of	how	citizen	
social	science	works	in	practice	(Chapter	9).	It	also	offers	reflections	on	how	citizen	
social	science	is	perceived	to	be	epistemologically	distinct	from	other	participatory	
approaches	in	the	social	sciences,	and	the	transformative	and	developmental	value	of	
citizen	social	science,	and	thereby	the	role	of	citizen	social	science	in	the	future	of	
social	science	research.		In	particular,	it	reflects	on	the	potential	of	citizen	social	
science	for	collective	experimentation	and	action,	and	as	a	way	to	merge	collective	
and	faster	knowledge	production.		
How	we	do	social	science,	what	social	science	is,	what	its	role	and	impact	in	society	is,	
is	enacted	through	its	methods.	While	the	survey	and	the	interview	constituted	the	
opinionated	individual	subject	of	modernity,	and	the	pervasive	datafication	of	the	last	
decades	has	produced	the	doing	subject	(Ruppert	et	al.,	2013),	citizen	social	science	
has	the	potential	to	constitute	reflexive	subjects,	engaged	in	knowledge	production	
about	social	orders	in	a	complex	world,	as	they	enact	those	very	orders	and	worlds.	
This	has	the	potential	to	open	a	broader	space	for	contestation	of	troublesome	issues,	
such	as	housing,	and	communities	in	deprived	areas,	as	will	be	shown	by	the	
empirical	work	of	the	thesis.	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	
of	the	literature	
2.1	Introduction	
As	noted	in	the	previous	chapter,	citizen	social	science	is	primarily	conceived	of	as	a	
method	to	mobilise	and	engage	volunteer	participants	in	conducting	social	research	
(Cantijoch	et	al.,	2015).	The	review	of	the	literature	presented	in	this	chapter,	
examines	how	citizen	social	science	might	be	done,	drawing	on	and	distinguishing	
citizen	social	science	from	existing	methods	and	approaches	in	social	science	
research,	most	notably	co-production	and	participatory	action	research	(PAR).	The	
review	serves	to	contextualise	citizen	social	science	and	to	draw	out	the	history	of	
this	seemingly	emergent	methodological	phenomenon,	dispelling	myths	or	
assumptions	about	what	citizen	social	science	might	be,	and	where,	or	indeed	what,	it	
arises	from.	
The	chapter	is	divided	into	six	sections,	to	contextualise	citizen	social	science	within	
social	science	methods,	and	to	explicate	the	practical,	material	and	ethical	context	in	
which	citizen	social	science	is	located.	The	second	section	examines	how	citizen	social	
science	has	been	conceptualised	in	the	academic	literature;	the	third	section	reflects	
on	the	politics	of	social	science	methods	and	how	citizen	social	science	might	be	done;	
and	the	fourth	section	examines	the	issues	surrounding	everyday	expertise	and	how	
these	have	been	accounted	for	in	the	literature.	The	fifth	section	of	this	chapter	seeks	
to	answer	the	question	of	who	citizen	social	science	might	be	for,	drawing	on	the	
academic	literature	on	publics	and	participation	in	social	science	research,	to	
highlight	the	potential	politics	behind	citizen	social	science.	The	literature	
demonstrates	an	ethical,	practical,	and	material	history	behind	citizen	social	science	
and	the	transformative	and	emancipatory	claims	behind	its	emergence.	
2.2	How	has	citizen	social	science	been	conceptualised?		
The	academic	literature	on	citizen	social	science	is	in	relative	infancy	in	comparison	
to	its	counterpart	in	the	natural	and	environmental	sciences,	citizen	science,	which	is	
growing	and	consolidating	into	a	global	movement	(Vohland	et	al.	2018).	Citizen	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
social	science	is	generally	conceived	of	as	a	method,	whereby	citizens	collect	data	on	
the	world	around	them	for	social	science	research	(Purdam,	2014;	Richardson,	2014).	
Citizen	social	scientists	have	a	deeper	level	of	participation	than	simply	volunteering	
to	give	an	interview,	join	a	focus	group	or	respond	to	a	survey,	instead	recording	
what	they	see	around	them	as	they	go	about	their	usual	daily	activities	(Purdam,	
2014).	Conceptualisations	of	citizen	social	science	tend	to	converge	around	notions	of	
mass	participation	and	data	collection	at	scale,	where	members	of	the	public	assist	
with	research,	and	record	their	beliefs	and	opinions	at	volume	(Procter	et	al.,	2013).	
In	this	sense,	citizen	social	science	is	perceived	as	having	the	very	pragmatic	goal	of	
securing	scalable	human	effort	for	the	analysis	of	large	datasets	(Housley	et	al.,	2014).	
This	relates	to	the	growing	body	of	work	that	explores	crowdsourcing	and	
participatory	sensing	in	more	detail	(Nold,	2017;	Solymosi	et	al.,	2017;	Gabrys,	2014;	
Quercia,	2013	Salesses	et	al.,	2013).	Crowdsourcing	becomes	citizen	social	science	
when	managed	within	a	framework	of	social	scientific	research	(Dadich,	2014).	
Purdam	(2014)	also	draws	on	the	links	between	citizen	social	science	and	
crowdsourcing,	suggesting	that	a	crowdsourced	data	methodology	is	potentially	a	
powerful	tool	for	social	science	research.		
Cohen	(2017)	conceptualises	citizen	social	science	in	and	against	a	background	of	
volunteered	information,	crowdsourcing	and	participatory	mapping	of	the	
intellectual	commons.	He	suggests	that	citizen	social	science	has	begun	by	repeating	
the	project	of	classical	social	science,	namely	to	found	itself	on	the	principles	of	
natural	science	(2017,	p.4).	However,	whilst	it	is	possible	for	amateur	naturalists	to	
develop	a	distinct	community	of	practice	around	spotting	and	identifying	flora	and	
fauna,	Cohen	(2017)	draws	attention	to	how	un-natural	it	is	to	pretend	to	observe	the	
social	world	as	a	natural	science	experiment.	He	suggests	it	is	not	only	un-natural	but	
also	misses	the	qualities	of	the	scientific	method.	Cohens	critique	strikes	at	a	key	
tension	that	citizen	social	science	gives	rise	to,	between	sourcing	more	data	on	a	mass	
scale,	and	a	more	democratic	project	of	opening	up	social	science	research.			
Citizen	social	science	has	the	potential	to	go	beyond	methods,	to	provide	a	basis	for	
forging	a	new	relationship	between	the	social	science	academy	and	society	(Housely	
et	al.,	2014).	There	is	a	sense	here	of	the	potential	of	citizen	social	science	as	a	means	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
for	engaging	with	different	audiences	in	the	production	of	knowledge.	However,	in	
many	cases,	citizen	social	science	approaches	focus	on	instrumental	attempts	to	
develop	data	sets	for	use	by	others	in	more	expert	roles.	
Citizen	social	science	is	also	beginning	to	be	explored	and	delineated	in	the	political	
sciences,	particularly	around	engaging	the	public	in	policy	research	in	a	context	of	
increasing	expectations	of	government	and	public	services	at	a	time	of	pressure	on	
public	spending,	to	major	crises	of	urban	and	environmental	sustainability	
(Richardson,	2014,	p.83).	However,	much	of	the	framing	of	citizen	social	science	in	
this	context	is	based	on	Cohns	(2008)	definition	of	citizen	science	as	contributory	
projects		designed	by	scientists	and	for	which	members	of	the	public	primarily	
contribute	data		and	on	Bonney	et	al.s	(2009)	model	of	citizen	science,	as	
contributory	projects	of	researcher-driven	data-collection.		
Citizen	social	science	as	an	approach	clearly	links	with	the	phenomenon	of	citizen	
science	(Purdam,	2014),	and	with	methods	of	participatory	research,	such	as	
participatory	action	research	and	coproduction,	and	as	will	be	explored	in	the	
following	sections.	The	references	to	citizen	social	science	in	the	academic	literature	
tend	to	come	from	citizen	science	(Heiss	and	Matthes,	2017;	Darg	et	al.,	2016)	and	the	
environmental	sciences	(Irwin,	1995).	Citizen	social	science	is	referred	to	in	the	
citizen	science	literature	as	having	a	huge	innovative	potential	for	knowledge	
production	(Heiss	and	Matthes,	2017)	by	cooperating	with	citizens	to	enable	access	to	
both	large-scale	data	and	hidden	data	which	are	collected	in	situ.	In	spite	of	this,	
social	science	research	projects	which	experiment	with	the	idea	of	citizen	science,	are	
still	hard	to	find	(Heiss	and	Matthes,	2017,	p.	24).	Dobreva	and	Azzopardi	(2014)	
support	the	claim	that	the	humanities	are	still	only	moderately	present	in	citizen	
research,	and	mainly	involve	crowdsourcing	activities,	which	fall	under	the	
contributive	project	type	(see	Shirk	et	al.s	(2012)	typology	of	Public	Participation	in	
Scientific	Research	(PPSR)).	In	this	way,	whilst	there	appears	to	be	much	reference	to	
the	potential	of	citizen	social	science	in	the	literature,	there	are	less	critical	reflections	
on	its	practical	realities,	due	to	its	emergent	and	fast	evolving	nature.	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
2.2.1	Citizen	science	and	the	links	to	citizen	social	science	
In	the	natural	and	environmental	sciences,	we	have	seen	a	consistent	development	of	
the	citizen	science	movement.	This	typically	involves	the	collection,	and	sometimes	
the	processing,	of	datacarried	out	by	nonprofessional	scientists	in	the	context	of	a	
scientific	project	(Pettibone	et	al.,	2017;	Stevens	et	al.;	2014;	Haklay,	2013;	Cohn	
2008;	Silvertown	2009).	Many	citizen	science	projects	have	developed	as	a	result	of	
the	opportunities	provided	by	Information	Communication	Technologies	(ICT)	
(Kullenberg	and	Kasperowski,	2016),	and	particularly	pervasive	computing,	as	well	
as	a	more	general	movement	towards	crowdsourcing	and	crowdfunding,	where	work	
and/or	funding	is	obtained	from	the	multiple	sources	of	a	large	group	of	people	or	
online	community,	namely	from	the	crowd.	
There	are	many	examples	of	citizen	science	projects	that	recruit	citizens,	for	example,	
to	monitor	local	animal	populations	(such	as	the	Great	Backyard	Bird	Count1	by	
Cornell	Lab	of	Ornithology,	its	UK	counterpart	of	the	Big	Garden	Birdwatch	run	by	the	
RSPB2),	or	local	air	quality,	(as	in	Mapping	For	Changes	Breath	Clean	project3	or	the	
Kosovo	Science	for	Change	project4),	or	to	classify	big	datasets,	(as	in	the	Galaxy	Zoo	
project5).	However,	often	the	involvement	of	participating	citizen	scientists	is	
limited	to	specific	phases	of	the	data-collection	process	(see	chapter	3,	section	3.4).	
Despite	the	fact	that	citizen	science	is	better	documented	than	citizen	social	science,	
debate	still	remains	about	what	actually	constitutes	citizen	science,	predominantly	
owing	to	the	significant	levels	of	variation	in	size,	task	and	output	amongst	projects.	
Raddick	et	al.	(2009,	p.1)	state	that	citizen	science	involves	volunteers	from	the	
general	public,	or	beyond	the	core	science	team,	in	scientific	investigations	as	data	
collectors	or	analysts.	They	also	draw	attention	to	the	way	in	which	citizen	science	
has	moved	to	a	web-enabled	mode	of	operations	and	expanded	into	new	and	
1	http://gbbc.birdcount.org/	
2	https://www.rspb.org.uk/get-involved/activities/birdwatch/	
3 http://mappingforchange.org.uk/projects/breathe-clean/ 
4	http://www.citizenscienceks.org/	
5	http://www.galaxyzoo.org/	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
innovative	domains.	Haklay	(2013),	Cohn	(2008),	and	Silvertown	(2009),	define	
citizen	science	as	non-professionals	voluntarily	participating	in	science	activities	such	
as:	data	collection,	analysis	and	dissemination	of	a	scientific	project.	Citizen	science	
takes	a	broad	approach	to	the	production	of	science,	which	includes	experts	and	non-
experts	alike,	with	the	residual	principle	that	anyone	can	participate	in	the	
production	of	scientific	knowledge.			
Resisting	a	specific	articulated	definition	of	citizen	science	might	also	be	seen	as	
advantageous	to	numerous	different	participants	and	groups	to,	as	expounded	by	
Haklay	(2013).	It	is	worth	noting	the	different	narratives	that	can	be	told	about	the	
genealogy	of	citizen	science,	as	these	too	can	be	traced	with	citizen	social	science.		For	
example,	Haklay	(2013,	p.	7)	suggests	that	citizen	science	can	only	exist	in	a	world	
where	science	has	been	professionalised	because	otherwise,	any	person	who	is	
involved	in	a	scientific	project	would	simply	be	considered	a	contributor	and	
potentially,	a	scientist.	This	draws	attention	to	the	power	relations	at	play	in	the	
professionalization	of	the	process	of	producing	scientific	knowledge.	Silvertown	
(2009)	charts	the	professionalization	of	the	role	of	the	scientist	in	the	late	nineteenth	
and	throughout	the	twentieth	century,	noting	that	in	the	Darwin	era,	almost	all	
science	was	citizen	science	albeit	done	mostly	by	affluent	scientists.		This	is	
particularly	interesting	in	terms	of	the	positioning	of	citizen	social	science	since	it	
suggests	that	the	concept	can	only	exist	in	a	context	where	those	who	can	produce	
knowledge	in	the	social	sciences	are	determined	by	the	institutions	and	industry.	The	
point	here	is	not	to	tell	one	particular	story	about	citizen	social	sciences	genealogy	
but	to	also	examine	the	relevant	literature	that	might	be	useful	in	framing	citizen	
social	science	and	exploring	its	practicalities.	
Citizen	science	has	been	dominated	by	natural	science	since	some	attributes	of	
research	projects	are	ideally	suited	to	citizen	science.	This	is	because	of	the	intensive	
nature	of	data	collection,	the	need	for	quantitative	measurements	or	observations,	
and	also	for	well	designed	protocols	that	are	easy	to	learn	and	execute	(Gommerman	
and	Monroe,	2012,	p.	2).	In	this	sense,	it	is	understandable	that	much	of	citizen	
science	is	with	non-human	subjects,	and	non-qualitative	work,	working	outside	a	
policy	context	or	without	direct	policy	engagement	(Richardson,	2014).	Whilst	there	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
are	often	big	differences	between	projects,	for	instance	when	it	comes	to	power	
relations,	or	the	determination	of	goals	and	outcomes,	there	is	hope	that	this	
rediscovery	of	citizen	science	might	lead	to	a	renewed	mutual	interest,	and	perhaps	
understanding,	between	scientists	and	the	general	public	(Stevens	et	al.,	2014).	
McQuillan	(2014)	sets	out	a	claim	for	the	countercultural	potential	of	citizen	science,	
characterising	the	emergence	of	citizen	science	as	diverse	activities	that,	by	contrast,	
are	mainly	seeking	validation	from	orthodox	science.	However,	McQuillan	gives	
examples	of	citizen	science	projects	that	open	up	all	parts	of	the	scientific	method	to	
participation	and	have	a	commitment	to	social	justice,	suggesting	that	citizen	science	
can	become	more	countercultural	if	it	is	prepared	to	question	the	hegemony	of	
science.	By	acknowledging	provisional	knowledges,	McQuillan	(2014,	p.)	suggests	
that	citizen	science	has	the	opportunity	to	build	a	strong	complement	to	orthodox	
science	rather	than	experiencing	its	own	experiential	and	reflective	aspects	as	a	
source	of	anxiety.	Kullenberg	(2015)	also	analyses	citizen	science	as	a	resistance	
practice,	and	finds	that	citizen	science	can	be	a	very	successful	resistance	practice,	
suggesting	it	might	be	successful	as	a	scientific	method	as	long	as	it	is	able	to	produce	
novel	facts	that	still	adhere	to	scientific	methods	and	standards	and	remains	
connected	to	the	established	institutions	of	science.	However,	it	is	possible	to	
question	how	resistant	an	approach	it	really	is,	if	it	has	to	obey	traditional	histories	of	
power	and	knowledge?	
2.2.2	Citizen	science	and	participation	
The	citizen	science	literature	gives	much	attention	to	participation	in	scientific	
research,	which	is	relevant	to	the	discussion	here.	Considerable	work	has	been	done	
to	develop	typologies	of	participation	rather	than	precise	definitions	(Haklay,	2018;	
2013),	as	are	set	out	in	the	following	chapter	on	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	
science.	Haklay	(2018:	p.	61)	warns	that	participation	in	citizen	science	is	a	complex	
and	multifaceted	issue	that	requires	attention,	research	and	theorisation.	Shirk	et	
al.s	(2012)	typology	of	Public	Participation	in	Scientific	Research	(PPSR)	is	useful	
here	to	distinguish	the	different	types	of	participation	in	citizen	science	projects.	
Shirk	et	al.	describe	contributory	projects,	which	are	generally	designed	by	scientists	
and	for	which	members	of	the	public	primarily	contribute	data.	They	also	describe	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
collaborative	projects,	which	are	generally	designed	by	scientists	and	for	which	
members	of	the	public	contribute	data	but	also	may	help	to	refine	project	design,	
analyse	data,	or	disseminate	findings.	Finally,	they	describe	co-created	projects,	
which	are	designed	by	scientists	and	members	of	the	public	working	together,	and	for	
which	at	least	some	of	the	public	participants	are	actively	involved	in	most	or	all	
steps	of	the	scientific	process.	In	this	sense,	most	frequently,	citizen	science	projects	
are	contributory	projects	(Bonney	at	al.,	2009)	and	it	is	much	less	frequent	to	see	
fuller	participation	on	the	part	of	citizens	in	the	development	of	research	questions,	
data	analysis	and	being	credited	in	publications	(Mueller	et	al.,	2012).	People	who	
participate	in	a	scientific	study	without	playing	some	part	in	the	study	itself		for	
example,	volunteering	in	a	medical	trial	or	participating	in	a	social	science	survey		
are	not	included	in	definitions	of	citizen	science.	At	the	same	time,	the	core	issue	of	
who	is	a	scientist	is	left	deliberately	unspecified.	Haklay	(2013)	suggests	that	this	is	
because	it	is	easier	to	identify	professional	scientists	as	those	that	are	employed	to	
carry	out	scientific	work	or	investigation,	but	in	terms	of	unpaid	scientists,	the	
situation	is	more	complex.		Many	will	not	define	or	identify	themselves	as	scientists	
even	if	they	are	carrying	out	significant	work	within	the	scientific	frameworks	of	data	
collection	and	interpretation.	Others	will	use	the	qualification	of	amateur	scientist	to	
describe	themselves,	or	a	similar	definition	such	as	bird	watcher,	which	is	arguably	
an	attraction	for	some	participants.	However,	for	Haklays	(2013)	purposes,	scientists	
are	all	the	active	participants	in	a	scientific	project.	
Conrad	and	Hitchleys	(2011)	review	of	citizen	science	literature	suggests	that	the	
citizen	science	process	involves	citizens	in	science	as	researchers	(Kruger	and	
Shannon,	2000),	and	has	also	been	referred	to	as	community	science	(Carr,	2004).	
Their	review	also	states	that	citizen	science	can	include	Community	Based	Monitoring	
(CBM),	a	process	where	concerned	citizens,	government	agencies,	industry,	
academia,	community	groups,	and	local	institutions	collaborate	to	monitor,	track	and	
respond	to	issues	of	common	community	[environmental]	concern	(Whitelaw	et	al.,	
2003).	CBM	can	also	be	used	to	refer	to	community-based	management,	where	
citizens	and	stakeholders	are	included	in	the	management	of	natural	resources	
(Keough	and	Blahna,	2006).	In	this	sense,	the	focus	of	more	recent	citizen	science	is	
on	a	potential	greater	sense	of	equality	between	citizens	and	scientists	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
(Lakshminarayanan,	2007),	not	just	the	traditional	perception	of	scientists	using	
citizens	as	data	collectors	(Conrad	and	Hitchley,	2011).	Nevertheless,	a	critique	to	be	
levelled	against	citizen	science	is	that	it	could	be	yet	another	discourse	to	engage	
people	in	becoming	data	producers.		Wiggins	(2012)	and	Silvertown	(2009)	note	that	
modern	citizen	science	differs	from	its	historical	forms	primarily	in	the	access	for,	
and	subsequent	scale	of,	public	participation.		
Irwins	(1995)	work	associates	the	term	citizen	science	with	science	that	focuses	on	
the	concerns	of	citizens,	as	well	as	citizens	contextual	knowledges	generated	outside	
formal	scientific	institutions.	Irwin	draws	on	Mulkays	(1991,	p.	xix)	perception	of	
sociologys	ultimate	task	as	being	not	reporting	neutrally	the	facts	about	an	objective	
social	world,	but	as	that	of	engaging	actively	in	the	world	in	order	to	create	the	
possibilities	of	alternative	forms	of	social	life.	This	relates	to	Bordieus	(2003)	notion	
of	public	sociology	as	both	a	traditional	public	sociology,	where	the	sociologist	makes	
connections	to	public	issues,	but	also	an	organic	public	sociology,	created	in	close	
connection	with	the	public	(Burawoy,	2018).		This	also	resonates	with	Burawoys	
(2005)	claim	for	a	public	sociology	to	be	brought	into	sociology	to	engage	multiple	
publics	in	multiple	ways.	The	concept	of	actively	engaging	with	the	world	is	clearly	a	
task	for	the	sociologist,	which	is	every	bit	as	fraught	as	that	presented	to	the	scientist,	
since	it	involves	a	reappraisal	of	knowledge	structures	and	relationships	to	external	
groups	(Irwin,	1995).	Arguably	Irwins	work	provides	a	preliminary	delineation	of	
citizen	social	sciences	potential,	articulated	in	the	context	of	environmental	sciences.	
However,	as	Mahr	et	al.	(2018:	p.101)	note,	citizen	science	practitioners	and	scholars	
from	the	social	sciences	and	humanities	sometimes	still	appear	to	be	disconnected.	
They	suggest	that	setting	up	self-reflective	and	multi	perspective	citizen	science	
projects	might	hold	the	key	to	finally	overcoming	old	distinctions,	not	only	between	
experts	and	laypeople,	but	also	between	the	sciences	and	humanities	(Mahr	et	al.,	
2018:	p.101).	In	this	way,	the	literature	on	citizen	science	suggests	that	there	is	much	
potential	for	citizen	social	science	as	an	approach,	although	a	gap	can	be	identified	in	
terms	of	a	delineation	of	the	affordances	and	capacities	of	how	citizen	social	science	
works	in	practice.	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
2.2.3	Coproduction	and	Participatory	Action	Research		
Purdam	(2014)	and	Richardson	(2014)	link	citizen	social	science	to	more	
participatory	and	action	forms	of	research	and	co-production	in	the	form	of	
community	based	participatory	research	where	user	knowledge	and	insight	and	also	
engagement	and	iteration	are	central.	There	are	also	many	similarities	between	
approaches	to	coproduction	and	citizen	science	(Holmes	et	al.,	2017).	The	origins	of	
coproduction	as	a	term	can	be	traced	to	the	use	of	participatory	methods	in	town	and	
regional	planning	(Bell	and	Pahl,	2018);	and	the	provision	of	public	services	(Barker,	
2010;	Ostrom,	1990).	Coproduction	builds	on	older	ideas	about	participatory	action	
research	(Holmes	et	al.,	2017;	Lewin,	1946)	and	knowledge	exchange	(Flinders	et	
al.,	2016;	Beal	et	al,	1986).	Furthermore,	there	is	a	growing	body	of	literature	that	
argues	for	a	wider	role	for	various	publics	in	scientific	research	as	coproducers	of	
knowledge	(Richardson,	2014;	Armstrong	and	Alsop,	2010;	Martin,	2010;	Nutley	et	
al.,	2007).	
Coproduction	is	becoming	an	increasingly	popular	term	in	policymaking,	governance,	
and	research	(Filip	et	al.,	2017;	Holmes	et	al.,	2017;	Durose	et	al.,	2011),	particularly	
in	terms	of	a	shift	towards	a	deeper	or	more	complex	form	of	impact	(Flinders	et	al.,	
2016).	Policymakers	could	develop	and	implement	more	effective	public	involvement	
interventions	by	paying	attention	to	a	number	of	interrelating	dynamic	constituents	
that	structure	and	foster	the	public's	legitimacy,	credibility,	and	power	(Boivin	et	al.,	
2014).	In	coproduction,	practitioners	and	potential	research	users	are	drawn	into	all	
stages	of	the	research	process	(Jung	et	al,	2012;	Burns	et	al,	2014).	In	this	way,	
coproduction	promises	to	be	transformative,	not	solely	in	research	terms,	but	in	
social	terms,	by	engaging	citizens	and	thereby	potentially	generating	a	renewal	of	
democracy	(Flinders	et	al.,	2016).	However,	it	is	still	not	entirely	clear	what	
coproduction	really	means	(Holmes,	2017),	and	in	the	case	of	health	care,	it	is	not	
always	evident	what	counts	as	coproduction,	specifically	in	terms	of	what	is	being	
produced,	nor	under	what	circumstances	(Filip	et	al.,	2017);	the	implications	for	
participants	are	not	clear	either.	There	is	such	widespread	support	for	the	rhetoric	of	
coproduction	that	there	is	a	risk	of	failure	to	acknowledge	the	tensions	that	arise	
when	professionals	and	lay	people	work	together	(Boivin	et	al.,	2014)	or	how	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
broader	societal	inequalities	may	have	negative	consequences	for	researchers,	
participants	and	the	research	itself	(Flinders	et	al.,	2016).		
Coproduction	can	be	perceived	to	have	emerged	as	a	potential	solution	to	an	argued	
relevance	gap	in	research	and	to	the	demands	of	impact	(Durose	et	al.,	2011),	since	
coproduction	in	research	aims	to	put	principles	of	empowerment	into	practice.	This	
entails	working	with	communities	and	providing	opportunities	to	learn	and	reflect	
from	their	experience.	However,	there	is	a	need	to	study	coproduction	in	and	of	itself,	
above	the	focus	of	research	in	which	it	is	used	(Holmes	2017);	in	other	words,	studies	
of	coproduction	in	action.		
Another	area	in	which	this	is	happening	is	the	field	of	participatory	action	research	
(PAR),	which	draws	on	a	model	of	community	organising	that	builds	the	capacity	and	
expertise	of	people	experiencing	an	issue	firsthand	(Friere,	1996).	Arguably	PAR	is	a	
research	style,	an	orientation	to	inquiry	(Reason	and	Bradbury,	2013),	and	not	a	
method	or	a	procedure	for	research.	It	involves	a	series	of	commitments	to	observe	
and	problematise	through	practice	a	series	of	principles	for	conducting	social	
enquiry	(McTaggart,	1996,	p.248).	PAR	is	an	approach	that	seeks	to	actively	engage	
participants	in	the	research	process,	from	research	design	to	dissemination.	It	
challenges	not	only	the	status	of	researchers	as	experts,	but	also	raises	questions	
about	how	knowledge	is	generated	(Tolman	and	Brydon-Miller,	2001);	it	questions	
the	power	dynamics	in	the	research	process.	
PAR	research	is	messy,	with	research	questions	generated	by	the	participants,	and	
with	the	overall	aim	of	making	a	practical	difference	to	participants.	However,	few	
PAR	projects	fully	involve	participants	in	the	entire	research	process,	potentially	for	
practical	or	ethical	reasons	(Cahill,	2007).		It	is	difficult,	in	practical	terms,	to	strictly	
adhere	to	the	basic	tenet	of	fully	collaborative	research,	in	which	the	community	
under	study	is	engaged	in	every	step	of	the	research	process	(Wiggins,	2012).	
Furthermore,	PAR	projects	focus	predominantly	on	collecting	and	presenting	
information	to	inform	and	mobilise	collective	action,	rather	than	on	theory	
development,	which	can	create	tensions	for	academic	researchers,	with	other	needs	
or	requirements.	It	also	raises	particular	ethical	questions	about	the	approach.	In	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
many	ways,	PAR	is	not	research,	but	a	form	of	activism	to	affect	change	(Cahill,	2007).	
Arguably	the	body	of	literature	that	accounts	for	the	practices	of	PAR	sets	out	its	
place	at	the	limits	of	what	could	be	suggested	to	be	research,	and	what	could	be	
considered	to	be	action.	
2.3	Social	science	methods	
The	thesis	attempts	to	situate	citizen	social	science	within	the	context	of	social	
science	research	methods.	It	is	therefore	necessary	to	reflect	on	the	current	state	of	
methods	in	social	science	research	and	to	better	understand	the	particular	history	of	
their	development.	Furthermore,	in	the	context	of	exploring	the	potential	of	citizen	
social	science	as	an	approach,	it	is	important	to	discuss	what	constitutes	social	
science.	In	order	to	understand	the	potential	of	citizen	social	science,	is	important	to	
contextualise	this	in	discussion	of	what	constitutes	social	science	as	a	discipline.	A	
useful	starting	point	is	Peter	Winchs	scrutiny	of	its	central	features.	Winch	(1958)	
suggests	that	the	nature	of	the	questions	asked	in	the	social	sciences	is	more	akin	to	
philosophy	than	science.	He	explains	that	the	division	between	the	conceptual	
problems	and	empirical	inquiries	reaches	much	further	into	the	supposedly	
empirical	parts	of	the	research	process	than	most	social	scientists	imagine.	For	
example,	in	the	case	of	housing	studies,	as	Allen	(2009)	elucidates,	the	appearance	of	
solving	an	empirical	problem	is	only	superficial	and	is	seriously	misleading	
(Hutchinson	et	al.,	2008).	In	this	way,	housing	and	the	issue	of	empty	houses,	are	both	
a	conceptual	and	an	empirical	issue,	as	probe	2	into	the	Empty	Houses	Project,	
explores	(see	chapter	5-8).	Furthermore,	solutions,	such	as,	gathering	more	data	
about	the	issues	are	at	times	superficial.		
Winch	(1958)	suggested	that	before	we	can	try	to	explain	concepts	and	actions,	we	
have	to	identify	them	correctly.	This	can	only	be	done	by	seeing	how	they,	and	the	
concepts	they	are	associated	with,	fit	within	a	way	of	life.	So	what	is	crucial	is	the	
correct	identification	and	description	of	concepts	and	activities.	Winch	is	of	the	
opinion	that	once	we	pay	sufficient	attention	to	description	and	identification,	we	will	
be	less	interested	in	explanation.	Instead	of	viewing	concepts	as	theories	which	
explain	actions,	Winch	asks	us	to	treat	them	as	constituting	the	terms	within	which	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
people	carry	on	their	lives	(Sharrock	and	Anderson,	2008).	Thus	if	the	very	idea	of	
social	science	is	about	the	rich	thick	description	(Crabtree	et	al.,	1998;	Geertz,	
1973)	of	the	concepts	and	activities	of	social	life,	what	are	the	implications	for	citizen	
social	science?		
Savage	(2009)	identified	a	descriptive	turn	in	sociology,	and	explored	how	such	a	turn	
impacted	on	the	empirical	work	of	the	discipline.	This	work	serves	to	reflect	on	the	
common	concern	for	a	refusal	of	explanation,	and	a	shared	preference	for	describing	
processes,	whether	this	is	as	patterns,	clusters,	assemblages,	sequences,	or	
associations	(cf.	Adkins	and	Lury,	2009).	Savage	(2009)	proposed	contextualising	
descriptive	sociology	in	the	tortuous	relations	of	the	discipline	to	the	natural	
sciences	and	the	humanities.	The	use	of	the	descriptive	in	Sociology,	Savage	
suggested,	is	indicative	of	a	shift	away	from	the	humanities	(which	he	largely	
identifies	with	literature	and	history,	and	the	use	of	narrative	within	these	
disciplines),	and	a	move	towards	the	natural	sciences	(Adkins	and	Lury,	2009).	Such	
debates	raise	questions	about	what	sort	of	data	might	be	produced	in	citizen	social	
science	and	how	might	it	be	used.	
2.3.1	Knowing	politicisation	of	measurement	and	value	
Methods	in	and	of	themselves	are	not	neutral.	In	many	ways,	as	the	following	section	
notes,	methods	have	their	own	social	life	(Savage,	2013;	Ruppert	et	al.,	2013)	as	their	
efficacy	and	value	changes	over	time.	Thus	they	do	not	just	describe	society,	but	help	
to	create	it	anew.	They	are	implicated	in	making	changes	to	the	social	world	itself.	
Social	facts	are	not	neutral	statements	just	out	there	to	be	collected.	Social	facts	are	
constructed	(Latour	and	Woolgar,	1979)	and	therefore	the	implications	for	citizen	
social	science	are	such	that	the	notion	of	collecting	and	counting	is	called	into	
question.	Social	facts	cannot	be	objectively	collected	or	counted	(and	Latour	and	
Woolgars	work	shows	neither	can	scientific	facts)	and	the	concept	of	citizen	social	
science	further	problematizes	the	process	of	knowledge	production	in	the	social	
sciences,	as	it	asks	who	is	to	be	involved	and	how,	in	the	construction	of	social	facts.		
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
Adkins	and	Lury	(2012,	pp.21-22)	draw	attention	to	the	central	question	of	
participation	and	partiality,	suggesting	that	the	nature	and	characteristics	of	
partiality		of	the	taking	part,	or	participation		or	partisanship	(Latour	and	Weibel,	
2005;	Rogers	and	Marres,	2002)	rather	than	representativeness	may	be	a	crucial	
judgment	of	entities	in	relation	to	the	use	of	measures.		In	this	way,	the	dynamic	
composition	of	social	scientific	objects	becomes	available	for	sociological	analysis,	in	
ways	that	make	visible	the	ontological	as	well	as	epistemological	commitments.		
Stengers	(2003)	use	of	constructivism	takes	this	notion	further,	in	the	way	in	which	
she	tries	to	get	away	from	the	binary	alternative	of	socially	constructed	or	objectively	
true	scientific	practices	and	objects.	Stengers	(2003)	approach	focuses	on	what	she	
calls	an	ecology	of	practices.	She	examines	how	particular	practices		the	practices	
of	science,	in	particular		impinge	upon	and	relate	to	other	practices	that	
simultaneously	exist.	This	means	that	the	question	of	what	science	discovers	about	
the	world	cannot	be	separated	from	the	question	of	how	science	impinges	upon	the	
world.	This	is	interesting	when	considering	the	potential	of	citizen	social	science	and	
its	implications	for	social	science	research,	particularly	given	Laws	(2003)	
problematizing	of	the	notion	of	method.	Law	(2003,	p.7)	highlights	the	failure	(or	
refusal)	to	understand	the	logic,	the	character	and	the	politics	of	the	project	of	
knowing.	In	this	way,	citizen	social	science	gives	rise	to	many	complex	questions	
about	the	nature,	and	politics,	of	social	science,	and	social	science	methods.		
Law,	Ruppert	and	Savage	(2011,	pp.	1-2)	argue	that	methods	are	doubly	social:	
methods	are	social	because	they	are	constituted	by	the	social	world	of	which	they	are	
a	part	but	are	also	social	because	they	also	help	to	constitute	that	social	world.	It	is	
useful	to	reflect	on	the	positioning	and	arguments	surrounding	the	social	life	of	
methods	as	these	have	much	to	bear	on	conceptualising	citizen	social	science.	The	
work	exploring	the	social	life	of	methods	seeks	to		
unpick	 the	 hegemony	 of	 the	 positivist	 assemblage	 not	 only	 through	 a	
critical	engagement	with	the	agency	of	social	research	methods,	but	also	
through	 expanding	 the	methodological	 repertoires,	 through	 recognizing	
the	 increasing	problems	of	positivist	 frameworks	 to	order	and	organize	
proliferating	data	sources.	
(Savage,	2013,	p.17)		
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
Savage	draws	on	Strathern	(1992)	and	others,	to	suggest	that	questions	of	method	
can	best	be	tied	up	with	issues	of	making	explicit,	what	might	otherwise	be	implicit.	
In	this	way,	the	Social	Life	of	Methods,	then,	is	an	exploration	of	the	changing	
historical	boundaries	between	the	implicit	and	the	explicit,	and	explores	the	
mechanisms	and	devices	that	can	produce	formal	knowledge.	It	does	not	and	should	
not	assume	that	the	contrast	with	this	formal	knowledge	is	any	more	necessarily	tied	
up	with	domination	than	implicit	realms	of	social	life,	but	it	does	recognize	that	the	
stakes	and	affordances	which	may	be	generated	by	such	formal	methods	have	the	
capacity	to	generate	distinctive	forms	of	agency.	Savage	(2013,	p.17)	notes	that		
the	 question	 of	 method	 as	 raising	 fundamental	 theoretical	 questions	
about	 the	 limits	 of	 knowledge	 itself,	 and	 to	 reflect	 on	 new	 ways	 of	
understanding	the	relationship	between	the	cultural,	social,	and	material.	
Framing	citizen	social	science	in	the	wider	context	of	thinking	around	social	life	of	
methods	allows	for	a	richer	understanding	of	citizen	social	science	as	a	method,	and	
the	complexities,	affordances,	and	challenges	that	ensue.		
2.3.2	Methodological	experimentation	
Citizen	social	science	has	been	articulated	as	a	method	for	gathering	data	to	be	used	
in	social	science	research	and	to	enhance	our	understanding	of	the	social	and	to	
potentially	help	solve	intractable	social	issues.	However,	the	locations	in	which	we	
might	find	social	science	methods	have	multiplied	(Elliot	and	Purdam,	2015;	Savage	
2013):	they	are	being	invented	and	circulated	outside	of	the	academy,	which	some	
argue	has	led	to	the	democratisation	of	social	research	methods	(Adkins	and	Lury,	
2009).		Furthermore,	this	expansion	of	the	use	of	social	science	methods	has	
happened	against	a	backdrop	of	renewed	interest	in	the	politics	of	method	in	the	
social	sciences	(Lury	and	Wakeford,	2012;	Bscher,	Urry	and	Witchger,	2010;	Adkins	
and	Lury,	2009;	Rabinow	and	Marcus,	2009;	Savage	and	Burrows,	2007;	Thrift,	2005).		
The	disciplinary	structures	of	the	academy	mean	it	is	difficult	for	it	to	handle	an	
emergent	phenomenon,	such	as	digital	sociality,	or,	indeed,	new	contexts	which	
require	new	methods,	such	as	citizen	social	science.	Whilst	Marres	(2014)	examines	
the	issue	of	digital	sociality,	the	same	may	be	applied	to	citizen	social	science	-	the	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
interesting	question	is	how	to	deal	with	this	challenge	and	what	responses	are	
possible	(Marres,	2014).		
Mills	(1959)	clearly	stated	that	it	is	not	possible	to	apply	a	method	as	if	it	were	
indifferent	to	the	problem	it	seeks	to	address,	but	that	method	must	rather	be	made	
specific	and	relevant	to	the	problem.	Mills	(1959,	p.83)	claimed	that	no	method	
should	be	used	to	delimit	the	problems	that	we	take	up,	if	for	no	other	reason	than	
the	most	interesting	and	difficult	issues	of	method	usually	begin	where	established	
techniques	do	not	apply.	Gane	(2012)	interprets	this	as	a	challenge	to	think	
creatively	about	sociological	methods	in	the	face	of	the	complexities	of	the	empirical	
worlds	with	which	we	are	engaged.	
Mair	et	al.	(2013)	note	a	reconfiguration	of	the	technical	practices	of	social	scientists,	
in	a	reflexive	move,	into	objects	of	inquiry,	in	addition	to	the	development	of	
methodological	experimentation	in	the	area	of	the	social	studies	of	social	scientific	
research	practices.	It	is	to	this	notion	of	methodological	experimentation	that	the	
work	of	this	thesis	responds.		It	attempts	to	contextualise	and	situate	the	
conceptualisation	of	citizen	social	science	within	it	(see	the	following	for	further	
examples:	Fisher	and	Marcus,	1986;	Bourdieu	and	Wacquant,	1992;	Evans	and	Foster,	
2011;	Mason,	2011;	Back	and	Puwar,	2012;	Gane,	2012).	Furthermore,	Lury	and	
Wakeford	(2012)	challenge	the	claims	of	Savage	and	Burrows	(2007)	that	empirical	
research	in	academic	social	science	is	in	crisis,	by	emphasising	that	the	methods	of	
social	research	have	always	been	distributed.	Lury	and	Wakefords	(2012)	work	
suggests	that	methods	are	a	means	by	which	the	social	world	is	not	only	investigated,	
but	may	also	be	engaged.		
Such	efforts	resonate	with	the	significant	body	of	work	on	mobile	methods	(Bscher	
et	al.,	2017)	and	moving	methods	(Bscher,	2018),	which	foregrounds	mobility,	
rather	than	seeing	it	as	a	constituent	of	larger	social	processes	(Hannam,	et	al.;	2006).	
The	emergence	of	mobile	methods	combine	and	re-orientate	traditions	such	as	
ethnography	with	the	use	of	new	technologies	such	as	the	smart	phone	(Bscher	and	
Urry,	2009;	Bscher,	et	al.,	2011;	Fincham,	McGuinness,	and	Murray	2010;	Hein	et	al.,	
2008).	All	of	these	developments	stem	from	prioritizing	the	specificities	of	mobility	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
itself,	and	mark	a	contrast	with	studies	in	which	mobility	is	treated	as	an	incidental	
part	of	a	wider	phenomenon	(Faulconbridge	and	Hui,	2016).		
In	established	fields	of	social	inquiry,	such	as	sociology	and	anthropology,	and	in	
disciplines	such	as	art,	design	and	architecture,	efforts	are	underway	to	reinvent	ways	
of	researching	social	life	(Marres	et	al.,	2018).	Such	conceptualisations	of	social	
research	methods	as	experimentation	and	reinvention	are	useful	when	trying	to	
contextualize	citizen	social	science,	since	they	draw	attention	to	the	wealth	of	
research	in	the	social	sciences	that	is	not	conventionally	drawn	upon	in	delineations	
of	citizen	science,	and	citizen	social	science.	They	are	not	only	useful	but	therefore	
necessitate	a	more	creative	approach	to	the	use	of	methods	in	the	empirical	work	of	
the	thesis.	The	use	of	social	research	probes,	adapted	from	culture	probes,	serve	to	
experiment	with,	and	illuminate	how	citizen	social	science	might	work	in	practice.	
2.4	Everyday	expertise	
In	citizen	science,	Irwin	(1995)	draws	our	attention	to	Raymond	Williams	profound	
commitment	to	democracy	and	to	the	authentic	diversity	and	complexity	of	any	
people	(Williams,	1989,	p.305)		which	potentially	offers	an	uplifting	and	positive	
incentive	to	consider	the	relationship	between	citizens	and	scientific	expertise.	
Williams	work	emphasises	the	need	to	begin	any	analysis	of	the	everyday	from	the	
perspective	of	citizens	rather	than	(as	happens	so	often)	from	the	higher	rationality	
of	scientists	and	elite	groups.	In	this	way,	Irwin	draws	attention	to	the	possibility	of	
switching	perspectives	and	constructing	a	citizens	view	of	science	rather	than	a	
scientists	view	of	citizens.	Irwin	(1995,	p.5)	suggests	that	Williams	work	therefore	
offers	us	a	means	of	turning	the	usual	accounts	of	the	public	understanding	of	
science	on	their	head	and,	in	so	doing,	of	establishing	a	more	symmetrical	
relationship	between	public	and	formal	expertise.	In	this	way,	concern	for	
democratic	ideology,	extends	beyond	public	decisions	and	into	a	series	of	wider	
questions	about	everyday	understanding	and	control.	This	is	particularly	useful	when	
attempting	to	explore	the	power	dynamics	at	play	in	citizen	social	science	in	more	
detail.	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
Irwin	(1995,	p.6)	goes	on	to	claim	that	there	have	been	a	number	of	important	
developments	in	our	grasp	of	technical	expertise	and	its	relationship	to	everyday	
expertise		developments	which	may	suggest	a	greater	need	for	humility	(see	
Jasanoff,	2007;	2003).	Irwin	draws	attention	to	the	flaws	in	statements	about	
scientific	democracy	and	public	understanding	of	science	since	they	entail	an	
implicit	judgement	of	superiority	in	every	context	of	the	scientific	view	of	the	world	
(Irwin,	1995,	p.6).	Whilst	there	remains	a	general	lack	of	agreement	as	to	the	
desirability	of	including	lay	perspectives	in	expert-led	processes	(Tsouvalis	and	
Waterton,	2012),	Irwin	(1995,	p.	7)	claims	that	there	will	be	no	sustainability	
without	a	greater	potential	for	citizens	to	take	control	of	their	own	lives,	health	and	
environment.	Thus,	in	order	for	this	to	occur,	some	careful	thought	about	the	
relations	between	technical	expertise,	citizen	needs	and	contemporary	culture	needs	
to	take	place.		
As	mentioned	above,	the	nature	of	including	different	perspectives	in	the	research	
process	necessarily	gives	rise	to	questions	of	expertise	and	expert	knowledge.	
Stengers	(2005,	p.160)	called	for	researchers	to	invent	more	apparatuses	such	that	
the	citizens	of	whom	scientific	experts	speak	can	be	effectively	present	[and]	
participate	in	the	invention.		Whatmore	(2009)	responded	to	this	call	for	the	
redistribution	of	expertise	with	specific	relation	to	environmental	knowledge	
controversies	in	Science,	Technology	and	Society	(STS).	Whatmore	encouraged		
diversifying	the	publics	with	whom	scientists	collaborate	on	matters	that	
concern	them,	and	on	the	terms	on	which	they	do	so[This]	should	also	
involve	 redistributions	 of	 environmental	 expertise	 in	 which	 the	
inventiveness	 of	 social	 scientists	 comes	 to	 the	 fore	 in	 the	 design	 and	
conduct	of	research	practices	that	stage	more	and	different	opportunities	
for	new	knowledge	polities	to	emerge.		
(Whatmore,	2009,	p.	596)	
In	the	context	of	citizen	social	science,	this	reasoning	recognises	that	expertise	in	
citizen	social	science	is	dispersed	in	a	way	that	is	different	from	traditional	forms	of	
social	science,	and	presents	space	to	engage	with	ideas	of	experiential	expertise	
(Durose	et	al.,	2011;	Collins	and	Evans	2007)	and	the	ways	in	it	can	enhance	research,	
potentially	through	methods	of	coproduction.	Notions	of	valuing	mundane,	everyday	
social	inquiry	to	scaffold	for	a	more	bottom	up	social	science	are	explored	in	the	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
social	research	probes	of	the	thesis	(see	chapter	5).	Furthermore,	citizen	social	
science,	drawing	attention	to	different	situated	knowledges	(Haraway,	1988),	allows	
for	quality	insights,	and	reflects	on	how	the	expert	position	is	not	a	monopoly	of	truth	
and	insight	(see	chapter	6).	Allen	(2009)	argued	for	a	valuing	of	the	lived	experience	
to	challenge	the	inherent	hierarchies	of	knowledge	in	the	research	process	in	relation	
to	housing	studies.	He	argues	that	housing	studies	fail	to	recognize	the	
epistemological	value	of	lived	experience	and	the	local	knowledge	that	is	
constituted	through	it.		
Hymes	(1996)	describes	ethnography	as	an	explicit	and	elaborated	form	of	the	
everyday	practice	of	contextual	learning:	our	ability	to	learn	ethnographically	is	an	
extension	of	what	every	human	being	must	do,	that	is	learn	the	meanings,	norms,	
patterns	of	a	way	of	life	(Hymes,	1996,	p.13).	This	raises	questions	about	
observational	expertise.	Is	everyone		innately		to	some	extent	a	social	scientist	
already,	even	when	not	enrolled	in	formal	social	science	work?	Are	people	already	
fieldworkers	of	their	own	lives,	generating	descriptive	sociological	data	as	they	go	
about	their	daily	lives?	Or	does	the	professionalization	of	observational	techniques	
constitute	a	different	category	of	sociological	data	that	means	that	this	is	not	the	case	
and	people	need	to	be	trained	in	formal	and	distinct	sociological	ways	of	analysising	
and	collecting	data?	What	is	the	value	of	the	data	that	non-experts	can	generate	in	
their	observations	of	everyday	life,	as	they	go	about	making	sense	of	the	world	
around	them?	These	are	questions	that	are	explored	in	the	empirical	work	of	this	
thesis.	
Suchman	(2011)	suggests	that	societys	everyday	practices	of	ordering	and	rendering	
the	social	world	intelligible	are	an	integral	part	of	our	subject	matter	(Garfinkel,	
2002).	In	this	way,	social	science	methods	are	radically	reflexive.	Suchman	(2011,	
p.22)	also	suggests	that	our	own	work	of	making	sense	of	the	world	relies	upon	the	
same	basic	competencies	through	which	its	intelligibility	is	collectively	enacted	in	the	
first	place.	So	method	and	theory	are	not	the	exclusive	province	of	the	social	
scientist.		Such	suggestions	have	important	implications	for	citizen	social	science	as	
an	approach,	signifying	the	potential	of	citizen	social	science	to	enable	wider	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
engagements	with	method	and	theory,	beyond	the	confines	of	the	academy	(see	
chapter	5	for	further	discussion).		
It	is	worth	noting	that	just	because	citizens	live	and	experience	their	everyday	lives,	it	
does	not	mean	they	can	necessarily	offer	privileged	insight	into	it,	in	a	way	that	can	
produce	usable	evidence	to	inform	understanding	and,	for	example,	policy	making.	
Social	scientists	also	have	everyday	lives.	Revealing	the	complexities,	dynamics,	
causalities	and	tipping	points	of	everyday	life	is	a	methodological	and	epistemological	
challenge.	As	the	review	of	debates	on	lived	practice	and	the	performativity	of	
method	above	illuminates,	it	is	not	something	that	comes	easy	to	sociologists,	let	
alone	untrained	citizens.	
It	is	not	possible	to	discuss	questions	of	expertise,	and	the	challenges	to	power	
relations	and	politics	without	reference	to	the	work	of	Michel	Foucault	(1977,	1979).		
Savage	(2013,	p.12)	suggests	that	Foucaults	work	opened	up	new	sensitivities	to	the	
performative	role	of	expertise	bound	up	in	methods.	The	idea	of	citizen	social	science	
and	citizen	volunteer	observers	collecting	data	for	use	in	social	science	research	
raises	a	debate	about	validity	and	objectivity	(Purdam,	2014).	However,	citizens	are	
central	to	an	exploration	of	everyday	life	since	they	create	intelligibility	(as	Suchman	
argues	above)	that	can	constitute	accounts	and	data	as	they	go	about	their	daily	
lives.		If	citizen	social	science	is	to	be	a	useful	approach	in	the	social	sciences	in	
Mulkays	sense	of	engaging	actively	in	the	world	in	order	to	create	the	possibilities	of	
alternative	forms	of	social	life	(Mulkay	1991,	p.	xix),	citizens	need	to	have	a	more	
expanded	role	in	social	science	research,	working	in	collaboration	with	trained	social	
scientists	in	all	aspects	of	the	research	process,	beyond	just	data	collection.	Whilst	
this	may	pose	challenges,	it	is	clear	that	there	are	genuine	opportunities	for	the	
involvement	of	citizens	in	the	analysis	of	data	as	well	as	research	design	in	robust	
social	science	research.	Recognised	forms	of	social	science,	from	statistical	analysis	to	
participant	observation,	involve	serious	commitment	and	engagement	in	analysis	
before,	during	and	after	doing	the	research.	Why	exclude	citizens	from	that	form	of	
social	science?		
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
Expertise	in	social	understanding	is	a	practice	that	matures	over	time	not	a	science	
open	to	expertise	in	any	academic	sense	of	that	word.	Thus,	there	is	and	can	be	no	
elite	of	independent	experts	in	(the	genuine	content	of)	social	science	(Hutchinson	et	
al.,	2008,	p.13).	This	highlights	an	important	issue,	namely	that	we	are	all	practical	
experts	in	the	process	of	practicing	everyday	life.	However,	it	is	undeniable	that	
ethnographic	participant	observation	and	sociological	analysis	are	something	that	
has	to	be	learnt,	and	it	is	difficult	to	learn.	It	involves	a	distinctive	method	that	
critically	generates	field	notes	and	reflection,	and	an	existential	transformation	of	the	
self	into	a	research	tool.	This	is	what	makes	it	social	research.	In	other	words,	it	is	
important	to	distinguish	here	between	everyday	practices	of	reading	the	social	world,	
and	social	research.	When	do	accounts	of	lived	lives	become	data?			
The	key	question	of	how	to	assess	the	quality	of	information	provided	by	everyday	
analysts	in	terms	of	how	good	or	bad	it	is	and	whether	it	is	misinformation	or	
disinformation	has	been	explored	in	the	field	of	crisis	response.	Palen	et	al.s	(2011)	
work	on	everyday	analysts	leads	them	to	suggest	that	peoples	assessment	of	
information	helpfulness	and	credibility	is	a	function	of	the	everyday	analytic	skills	
they	employ	during	mass	emergencies.	However,	Palen	et	al.	(2011,	p.53)	explain	that		
in	safety-	and	time-critical	situations,	 the	major	concern	with	respect	 to	
yielding	 some	authoritative	 control	 to	 crowd	sourcing,	 for	 example,	 is	
an	unrealistic	attachment	to	the	ideal	of	accuracy.		
Palen	et	al.	(2011)	explore	helpfulness	of	information	as	an	alternative	ambition	for	
working	with	everyday	analysts,	and	delineate	the	fact	that	helpfulness	is	not	an	
inherent	quality	of	information.	Helpfulness	is	instead	constructed	by	context,	where	
consumersand	even	providers	of	informationrecognize,	explicitly	or	otherwise,	
that	it	is	often	relative	to	what	is	needed.	This	is	a	crucial	distinction	in	understanding	
the	helpfulness	of	information	in	mass	emergency	settings.	In	their	research,	Palen	et	
al.	(2011)	take	the	discussion	away	from	good	and	bad	in	terms	of	the	quality	of	the	
data,	and	show	how	actionable	helpfulness	is	achievable	through	a	range	of	features	
with	respect	to	information	and	source.	They	suggest	that	this	also	helps	to	lend	
power	to	people	by	enhancing	their	abilities	to	be	everyday	analysts.	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
In	this	sense,	the	importance	of	Palen	et	al.s	(2011,	p.55)	work	is	the	call	for	a	
fundamentally	different	perspective	to	emergency	response	that	accepts	that	
information	gathering	and	processing	activities	must	be	more	socially	distributed	
and	the	task	of	the	researcher	becomes	one	of	facilitation	of	this	process.	Such	a	
perspective	builds	on	the	view	that	people	are	already	endowed	with	analytical	
abilities	(Shapiro,	1994)	and	that	they	work	best	in	terms	of	decision	making,	within	
a	confined	or	demarcated	environment,	in	which	the	information	available,	or	time	in	
which	to	make	a	decision,	is	limited	-	a	bounded	rationality		and	even	more	so	in	
times	of	mass	emergency	(Simon,	1996).	It	is	worth	noting	the	vital	conclusion	that		
the	 mistake	 authorities	 and	 researchers	 often	 make	 when	 considering	
technology	 solutions	 in	 the	 emergency	 space	 is	 that	 the	 standard	 for	
helpful	information	must	be	accuracy.		
(Palen	et	al.,	2011,	p.55).		
Much	can	be	learnt	from	this	work	in	the	development	of	a	citizen	social	science	
approach.	Whilst	the	situation	of	an	emergency	response	is	in	many	respects	far	from	
the	everyday	life	referred	to	earlier	in	this	section,	it	is	possible	to	argue	that	this	
bounded	rationality	is	true	for	all	aspects	of	human	life;	the	problem	during	mass	
emergencies	is	that	we	tend	to	resist	the	idea	even	more	(Simon,	1996).		In	this	way,	
(Palen	et	al.,	2011)s	work	assists	in	considering	that	information	produced	by	
members	of	the	public	is	more	accurate	than	we	might	presume,	and	that	questions	of	
data	quality	frequently	leveled	at	citizen-generated	data,	are	not	straightforward.	
Furthermore,	such	issues	necessitate	the	use	of	a	method	to	study	citizen	social	
science	in	practice	that	recognises	the	and	embraces	the	differentiated	nature	of	
expertise.	
2.5	Who	is	citizen	social	science	for?	
Many	positive	moves	towards	the	opening	up	of	research	and	policy	knowledge	are	
hampered	by	divides	within	the	scientific	community	on	approaches	to	public	
participation	(Richardson,	2014).	One	issue	is	around	who	has	the	power	to	define	
such	concepts.	Another	is	around	the	porosity	of	boundaries	between	roles	and	the	
fact	that	people	do	not	necessarily	only	occupy	one	role	at	any	one	time.	As	
Richardson	(2014,	p.	33)	notes,		
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
even	 setting	 firm	boundaries	between	scientists	or	 researchers,	 and	 the	
public	 or	 communities,	 is	 a	 troublesome	 proposal	 For	 example,	 some	
individuals	span	boundaries	between	worlds	or	roles,	such	as	academic-
activists	or	pracademics.		
The	use	of	the	term	public	here	broadly	includes	people	or	groups	of	people	who	are	
primarily	based	outside	recognised	academic	institutions.	The	thesis	does	not	explore	
notions	of	citizenship	in	great	depth,	instead	focusing	on	the	concept	of	participation	
and	participants.	Not	addressing	some	questions	of	citizenship	risks	criticism,	as	it	
leaves	out	some	aspects	of	power,	rights	and	responsibilities.	However,	a	focus	on	
participation-related	aspects	of	citizen	social	science	directs	attention	to	the	critical	
practices	of	engagement,	opening	the	framing	to	consider	involvement	of	participants	
(including	non-citizens,	such	as	unregistered	migrants,	tourists,	visitors).		
Exploring	participatory	or	public	social	science	is	an	extremely	well	developed	area	
of	social	research.	It	is	worth	reflecting	here	on	what	the	term	citizen	adds	to	the	
conceptualisation	of	citizen	social	science	set	out	above.	Arguably	use	of	the	term	
citizen	is	contextually	relevant	to	many	other	aspects	of	social	life	that	seek	to	re-
engage	with	the	citizen	in	a	neo-liberal	context	(Stewart	and	Lucio,	2015).	
Furthermore,	there	is	a	strong	rhetoric	around	the	notion	that	participation	is	an	
inherently	positive	thing.	A	normative	(or	ethical)	rationale	for	participation	
understands	participation	as	a	public	good,	as	the	right	thing	to	do	(Tsouvalis	and	
Waterton,	2012;	Chilvers,	2008).	Instrumental	rationales	for	participation,	on	the	
other	hand,	view	participation	as	a	better	way	to	achieve	particular	ends.	It	could	also	
be	argued	that	the	discourse	of	participation	is	seemingly	authoritarian,	with	
participation	being	alluded	to	as	the	new	tyranny	(Cooke	and	Kothari,	2001).		
There	is	a	large	corpus	of	work	in	the	social	sciences	that	focuses	on	conceptualising,	
theorising	and	exploring	the	limitations	and	challenges	of	participation.	Tsouvalis	and	
Waterton	(2012,	pp.	112-13)	chart	the	history	of	the	participatory	turn	in	the	
European	context	suggesting	a	progressive	trend,	moving	away	from	instrumental	
forms	of	participation	towards	new	forms	that	privilege	the	co-production	and	
coevolution	of	knowledges	between	scientific	and	lay	actors.	This	is	interesting	since	
they	highlight	a	strange	confluence	at	which	processes	of	public	participation	and	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
deliberation	have	almost	become	orthodoxy,	whilst	simultaneously	great	scepticism	
is	being	pronounced	about	them	(2012,	pp.	112-13).	Tsouvalis	and	Waterton	also	
draw	attention	to	the	apparent	paradox	between	the	optimistic	portrayal	of	
participatory	practices	in	the	natural	and	managerial	sciences,	but	the	intensely	
disillusioning	portrayal	of	public	participation	in	the	social	and	political	sciences.		
In	exploring	the	terms	citizenship,	participation	and	publics,	the	question	of	who	is	
citizen	social	science	for?	arises	and	what	publics	are	being	engendered	and	
produced	through	citizen	social	science?	Frequently	this	notion	of	publics	falls	
through	the	cracks	and	is	not	given	due	attention.	Irwin	and	Wynnes	(1996)	
relational	focus	on	both	the	operation	of	scientific	expertise	or	institutions,	and	
different	publics	is	useful	since	they	interpret	both	science	and	the	general	public	
as	diverse,	shifting	and	often	diverging	categories.	They	call	for	a	rethinking	and	
reconceptualization	of	the	relationships	between	science	and	the	public	so	as	to	
attempt	to	make	progress	at	the	level	either	of	understanding	or	practical	
intervention.		
An	assessment	of	the	literature	on	mobile	methods	is	advantageous	since	this	is	a	
participatory	mode	of	inquiry	within	the	growing	sociological	fields	of	mobile	
(Bscher	et	al.,	2010)	and	inventive	(Lury	and	Wakeford,	2012)	methods.	This	
literature	denotes	concepts	of	moving	along	with	publics,	moving	in	with	them,	
and	being	moved	by	things	that	happen	along	the	way,	and	being	moved	to	act	on	
insights,	which	would	be	beneficial	to	examine	in	relation	to	citizen	social	science.	
They	also	advocate	experimental	methods,	from	ethnomethodological	breaching	
experiments	and	artistic	interventions	to	experimental	implementations	of	
prototype	technologies,	which	raises	questions	about	the	responsibilities	and	
temporalities	of	social	science	and	social	scientific	engagement	in	social	change.	
There	remains	a	tension	in	the	literature	on	participation	between	initiatives	
designed	specifically	for	the	inclusion	of	public	rationalities,	social	factors	or	local	
knowledge,	which	are	then	directed	in	such	a	way	that	they	often,	paradoxically,	deny	
the	possibility	of	those	non-scientific	rationalities	and	factors	being	articulated	
(Tsouvalis	and	Waterton;	2012).	This	is	a	significant	issue	that	cannot	be	easily	
Chapter	2.	The	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		a	review	of	the	literature  
resolved	and	which	has	the	potential	to	continue	to	exist	in	a	citizen	social	science	
approach	unless	it	is	genuinely	collaborative.	Furthermore,	Peterson	(2001,	p.136)	
calls	for	an	ethic	that	appreciates	the	intense	and	distinctive	ethical	character	of	
personal	relationships	without	making	them	the	only	locus	of	moral	insight	and	
responsibility.	A	feminist	care	ethic	makes	relationships	central	to	epistemology	and	
ethics.	Peterson	goes	on	to	suggest	that	feminist	ethics	make	relationships,	rather	
than	principles,	rules,	or	rights,	central	to	moral	thinking.	Building,	maintaining,	and	
improving	relationships	constitute	primary	ethical	objectives	(Peterson,	2001,	
p.138).	This	clearly	builds	on	Haraways	(1988)	concept	of	situated	knowledges		
that	all	of	the	knowledge	on	which	moral	decisions	are	based	is	partial,	and	always	
limited	because	it	is	contextual,	and	located	in	specific	times	and	places,	and	from	
specific	perspectives.	
2.6	Conclusion		
As	noted	in	the	introduction	chapter,	social	scientists	have	proposed	that	their	
disciplines	may	be	undergoing	a	transformation,	as	the	resources	and	techniques	of	
social	research	are	being	redistributed	among	a	variety	of	agencies	inside	and	outside	
the	university	(Marres,	2012;	Adkins	and	Lury,	2009;	Whatmore,	2009;	Savage	and	
Burrows,	2007).	The	question	remains	of	how	to	come	to	terms	with	the	
reconfiguration	of	research	cultures	and	the	active	participation	of	social	actors	in	
social	research	(Marres,	2012).	The	review	of	the	literature	presented	in	this	chapter	
points	to	the	potential	of	thinking	creatively	about	method	(Gane,	2012)	and	for	
collective	experimentation	to	invoke	the	collective	sociological	imagination	(Wright-
Mills,	1959).			
This	chapter	has	presented	an	ethical,	practical	and	material	history	behind	citizen	
social	science.	It	has	also	demonstrated	that	citizen	social	science	cannot	be	fully	
examined	without	the	use	of,	and	a	more	profound	understanding	of,	social	science	
methods	and	the	ensuing	debates	about	measurement,	value	and	description.	
Without	the	former,	citizen	social	science	becomes	something	else,	as	the	scoping	
work	presented	in	the	following	chapter	on	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science	
argues.		
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	
science	
3.1	Introduction	
The	previous	chapter	presented	a	practical,	ethical,	and	material	history	of	citizen	
social	science.	However,	it	is	also	necessary	to	examine	the	ways	in	which	citizen	
social	science	is	emerging	and	being	practiced.	This	chapter	charts	the	messy	world	of	
citizen	social	science,	by	examining	different	types	of	projects	currently	in	existence.	
Some	do	not	conceive	of	themselves	as	citizen	social	science,	but	they	exhibit	
characteristics	that	fit	the	criteria	developed	in	this	study.	They	are	included	to	
enable	discussion	of	the	broad	range	of	citizen	social	science	activities.	In	many	ways,	
these	projects	are	enacting	citizen	social	science	as	a	new	form	of	knowledge	
production.	This	chapter	identifies	and	describes	a	core	set	of	these	projects	and	
identifies	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science,	that	is,	the	practices,	motivations	and	
methodologies	that	characterise	these	projects	as	citizen	social	science.	This	is	
designed	to	serve	three	main	purposes:	firstly,	to	enable	a	deeper	understanding	and	
contestation	of	the	newly	emerging	citizen	social	science	movement;	secondly,	to	
identify	key	issues	that	require	further	investigation;	and	thirdly	to	develop	a	concept	
for	a	citizen	social	science	that	produces	genuinely	new	ways	of	knowing	the	social	
world.	
This,	however,	is	not	a	straightforward	task.	Due	to	the	complex	nature	of	identifying	
and	knowing	what	an	emergent	phenomenon	like	citizen	social	science	is,	this	
chapter	constitutes	an	experiment	in	different	ways	of	categorising	examples	of	it,	as	
a	way	to	identify	its	core	challenges,	and	tensions.	Even	the	term	emergent	
phenomenon	is	not	without	its	own	particular	troubles,	given	that	the	Mass	
Observation	project,	which	forms	the	basis	of	one	of	the	probes	of	the	thesis,	as	set	
out	in	chapter	4	on	social	research	probes	as	method,	and	in	the	empirical	chapters	5	
	8,	was	initially	set	up	in	1937.	With	such	an	early,	arguably	proto-citizen	social	
science	project	in	its	ancestry,	citizen	social	science	has	had	an	already	lengthy	
period	of	emergence.		
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
This	chapter	focuses	on	the	articulated	possibilities	of	citizen	social	science,	its	
potential	and	normative	ideals,	as	set	out	by	practitioners	in	the	field.	This	is	
necessary	as	a	form	of	scoping	exercise	to	better	understand	the	ways	in	which	the	
concept	of	citizen	social	science	is	already	being	used	in	the	field,	and	to	thereby	
inform	the	design	of	the	empirical	work	presented	in	this	thesis.	In	many	ways,	the	
phenomenon	is	more	widespread	than	the	label,	and	research	is	being	carried	out	
into	the	ways	that	engage	volunteer	citizens	as	co-researchers	in	social	research.	This	
is	the	linchpin	criterion	for	the	review	of	projects	aiming	to	draw	out	the	key	facets	of	
this	emerging	phenomenon.	The	chapter	examines	how	people	are	doing	citizen	
social	science	without	necessarily	calling	it	such.	It	is	these	key	facets	that	will	then	be	
probed	for	in	the	three	empirical	chapters	of	the	thesis.	This	chapter	also	aims	to	
scrutinise	and	include	another	set	of	situated	knowledges	in	citizen	social	science,	
namely	those	of	practitioners	already	undertaking	projects,	which	could	be	
considered	to	be	citizen	social	science.	This	is	so	as	to	offer	up	for	contestation	an	
understanding	of	citizen	social	science	from	multiple	perspectives.	It	also	allows	for	
some	early	reflections	on	the	potential	impact	of	the	articulation	of	citizen	social	
science	set	out	in	this	thesis,	and	the	mechanics	behind	claiming	the	existence	of	
citizen	social	science.		
The	second	section	of	the	chapter	accounts	for	the	approach	used	for	the	scoping	
work	of	this	chapter	to	draw	out	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science.	The	third	
section	reviews	how	citizen	science	has	been	conceptualised	to	assess	the	usefulness	
of	such	attempts	for	framing	citizen	social	science.	Reflections	from	active	
participation	in	the	citizen	science	community	form	the	basis	of	such	analyses.	These	
are	then	brought	to	a	review	of	a	number	of	types	of	projects	that	could	be	conceived	
of	as	citizen	social	science	in	the	fourth	section	of	the	chapter.	This	section	aims	to	
assess	the	key	characteristics	of	such	projects	and	the	ways	in	which	other	projects	
are	approaching	the	concept	of	citizen	social	science.	Lastly,	an	analysis	of	twenty-
four	practitioner	interviews	is	presented	to	explore	the	key	tensions	in	the	potential	
of	citizen	social	science,	as	articulated	by	those	that	are	undertaking	citizen	social	
science	in	practice.	It	is	these	tensions	that	inform	the	research	design	presented	in	
Chapter	4,	and	that	are	probed	for	in	the	empirical	chapters	of	the	thesis,	chapters	5-
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
3.2	Identifying	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science		
Much	of	the	ethos	of	Do-It-Yourself,	or	indeed	Do-It-Together,	science	is	based	on	
action	and	discovery	by	doing.	However,	in	order	to	try	to	make	sense	of	the	messy	
terrain	of	citizen	social	science,	some	background	scoping	work	was	necessary.	This	
scoping	work	then	informed	the	research	design	of	the	facet	methodology	and	social	
research	probes	which	are	discussed	in	the	following	chapter	(4).	This	scoping	work	
was	comprised	of	three	complementary	perspectives:	participant	observation	in	
numerous	events,	workshops	and	conferences	in	the	citizen	science	community	over	
the	course	of	the	PhD;	a	desk	based	review	of	projects	that	could	be	conceived	to	be	
citizen	social	science	to	compare	and	contrast	the	ways	in	which	such	projects	
present	themselves;	and	a	series	of	twenty-four	semi-structured	interviews	with	
relevant	practitioners	in	the	field.	The	approaches	used	to	develop	each	of	these	
perspectives	are	set	out	in	more	detail	below.		
Throughout	the	course	of	the	PhD	research,	I	attended	and	participated	in	over	
twenty	different	types	of	events	organised	within,	and	beyond,	the	citizen	science	
community.	These	included	international	consolidation	events	such	as	the	European	
Citizen	Science	Association	(ECSA)	General	Assembly	in	November	2015	in	
Barcelona,	the	ECSA	conference	in	June	2016	in	Berlin,	and	the	ECSA	conference	in	
June	2018	in	Geneva,	where	I	attended	as	a	researcher	in	the	field.	I	also	attended	
workshops	and	other	events	on	citizen	science	and	citizen	social	science,	such	as	the	
Swarm/Nominet	Trust	hackathon6	in	September	2014	in	London,	or	the	citizen	
science	safari	in	November	2015,	in	Barcelona,	where	I	attended	as	a	participant	
without	much	prior	knowledge	of	the	field.	I	also	participated	in	citizen	science	
projects,	as	a	volunteer,	such	as	for	the	citizen	science	day	at	the	Museum	of	Science	
and	Industry	in	February	2016	in	Manchester,	or	as	part	of	the	Cloudy	With	a	Chance	
of	Pain7	project	at	the	citizen	science	event	as	part	of	the	Manchester	Day	in	June	
2016.	I	have	also	submitted	data	and	participated	as	a	citizen	scientist	in	numerous	
citizen	science	projects,	from	offline	projects	such	as	Bioblitzes,	to	online	projects	
such	as	Galaxy	Zoo,	and	Fix	My	Street.	My	immersion	in	the	citizen	science	
6	http://swarm.gd/swarm/citsocsci-nominet-trust/	
7	https://www.cloudywithachanceofpain.com/the-project 
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
community,	thus	involved	participation	in	different	roles	within	projects	and	
community	events,	and	the	reflections	from	such	activities	will	be	presented	in	the	
section	below.	
Concurrent	with	participating	in	and	exploring	the	citizen	science	community,	I	also	
undertook	a	review	of	existing	projects	that	could	be	considered	citizen	social	
science,	even	if	they	did	not	necessarily	use	that	term.	This	review	discussed	the	
commonalities	and	differences	in	the	approaches	used	in	the	projects,	explored	why	
they	could	be	seen	to	be	forms	of	citizen	social	science	and	what	doing	so	brings	to	
our	understanding	of	what	might	constitute	citizen	social	science.	The	main	criterion	
for	identifying	projects	was	that	research	was	being	carried	out	into	the	ways	that	
engaged	volunteer	citizens	as	co-researchers	in	social	research.		Projects	were	
selected	as	relevant	based	on	how	they	presented	their	aims,	as	well	as	from	
recommendations	from	informal	discussions	and	as	recommended	from	the	
practitioner	interviews.	A	snowball	approach	to	sampling	(Noy,	2008)	was	taken	to	
adding	projects	to	the	list	for	review.	Once	differentiating	characteristics	between	
projects	started	to	repeat	themselves,	I	determined	that	obtaining	three	different	but	
valid	examples	for	each	category,	or	type	of	project,	would	be	sufficient	for	explaining	
that	type	of	project.	
As	mentioned	above,	a	series	of	twenty-four	informal	semi-structured	interviews	also	
informed	this	chapter.	These	were	undertaken	with	a	range	of	practitioners	and	
academics	that	were:	working	in	the	area	of	citizen	science	(and	had	knowledge	
about	citizen	social	science),	who	were	undertaking	citizen	(social)	science	projects,	
or	who	demonstrated	a	relevant	knowledge	or	perspective	on	the	notion	of	citizen	
social	science.		The	aim	of	these	interviews	was	to	shed	light	on	how	others	
conceptualise,	practice	or	envisage	citizen	social	science.	The	interview	guide	can	be	
found	in	Appendix	2	of	this	thesis.		Practitioners	were	identified	through	desk	
research	and	informal	conversations.	A	list	of	interviewees	can	be	found	in	Appendix	
3	of	this	thesis.	Due	to	the	undefined	and	emergent	nature	of	the	phenomenon,	a	
snowball	sampling	approach	(Noy,	2008)	was	used	to	continue	to	identify	relevant	
practitioners	and	experts	in	the	areas	of	citizen	science	and	citizen	social	science.	This	
approach	stopped	when	insights	began	to	repeat	themselves.	The	twenty-four	
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
interviews	were	semi-structured,	and	ranged	freely.	They	were	documented	in	notes	
produced	during	and	after	the	interviews.		
It	is	worth	noting	the	inherent	problems	with	notion	of	expert	in	this	context,	
particularly	given	how	the	substantive	subject	area	of	citizen	social	science	in	itself	
raises	many	questions	around	expertise	(see	chapters	5		8).	The	literature	on	expert	
interviews	draws	attention	to	debates	about	what	constitutes	an	expert,	the	
differences	between	the	various	forms	of	expert	interviews	and	their	role	in	research	
design	(Turner,	2001;	Bogner	et	al.	2009;	Flick,	2014).	The	interviews	undertaken	for	
the	purposes	of	this	part	of	the	thesis	focused	on	opening	up	a	discussion	around	how	
citizen	social	science	might	be	understood	as	an	emergent	phenomenon,	where	it	
could	be	argued	that	no	experts	exist	yet.	Bogner	et	al.	(2009,	p.1)	state	that:	
talking	to	experts	in	the	exploratory	phase	of	a	project	is	a	more	efficient	
and	 concentrated	 method	 of	 gathering	 data	 than,	 for	 instance,	
participatory	observation	or	systematic	quantitative	surveys.	Conducting	
expert	 interviews	 can	 serve	 to	 shorten	 time-consuming	 data	 gathering	
processes,	 particularly	 if	 the	 experts	 are	 seen	 as	 crystallization	 points	
for	 practical	 insider	 knowledge	 and	 are	 interviewed	 as	 surrogates	 for	 a	
wider	circle	of	players.	
The	interviewees	for	the	scoping	research	presented	here	were	selected	on	the	basis	
of	their	practicing	an	approach	to	participatory	civic	data	collection	and	analysis,	or	
similar	approaches	that	involved	participants	as	social	data	producers	and/or	
analysts	in	some	form.	They	were	very	much	perceived	to	be	crystallization	points	
as	Bogner	et	al.	(2009)	suggest.	The	aim	of	these	interviews	was	also	to	discuss	the	
practical	experiences	of	people	running	such	projects,	rather	than	for	specific	
experts	to	make	claims	as	to	what	constitutes	citizen	social	science	or	not.		
3.3	Reflections	from	participation	in	the	citizen	science	community	
Citizen	social	science	appeared	to	be	a	relatively	new	term	in	the	citizen	science	
community	that	was	not	necessarily	widely	referred	to.	Where	it	was	used	directly		
such	as	during	a	Swarm/Nominet	Trust	event	in	September	2014,	the	event	had	a	
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
hackathon8-style	approach	and	aimed	to	find	technological	solutions	to	social	issues.	
In	the	European	Union	Citizen	Science	community,	there	was	very	little	use	of	the	
terms	citizen	social	science	or	much	engagement	with	the	social	sciences	more	
broadly.	In	June	2016,	the	European	Citizen	Science	Association	organised	a	
conference	in	Berlin;	one	of	the	conference	streams	focussed	on	citizen	
science	Studies		Engaging	with	the	participatory	turn	in	the	co-production	of	science	
and	society.	In	many	ways	this	panel	revealed	the	scale	of	interest	of	public	
participation	in	science,	which	is	different	from	Public	Understanding	of	Science	
(PUS)	in	the	1980s,	or	science	for	the	people	in	the	1970s.	The	discussions	during	the	
session	also	drew	attention	to	the	different	modes	of	participation	and	reflections	on	
epistemologies,	and	the	social	history	and	studies	of	science.	Questions	were	raised	
about	the	necessity	of	opening	up	a	new	area	around	citizen	science	studies	to	reflect	
on	such	issues	further	(Mahr	et	al.,	2018).	Whilst	such	discussions	highlighted	some	
of	the	more	social	aspects	of	citizen	science,	they	were	still	far	from	a	delineation	of	
citizen	social	science	and	what	might	constitute	it.	
In	January	2017	I	started	a	four-month	internship	at	the	United	Nations	Educational,	
Scientific	and	Cultural	Organisations	(UNESCO)	headquarters	in	Paris,	in	their	
Science	and	Human	Sciences	division,	working	specifically	on	the	launch	of	an	online	
platform	and	offline	project	called	the	Inclusive	Policy	Lab9.	The	lab	works	on	the	
emerging	issues	of	the	co-creation	of	knowledge	and	its	translation	into	inclusive	and	
equity-weighted	policies.	It	aims	to	support	the	implementation	of	the	Sustainable	
Development	Goals	(SDGs)	pillar	on	inclusive	development.	During	this	internship,	I	
noted	the	framing	of	participatory	methods	for	data	collection	and	generation	in	the	
International	Development	sector	to	be	predominantly	around	small	data	for	
sustainable	development	(Best,	2015).	The	United	Nations	University	for	Computing	
and	Society10	suggests	that	Small	Data	empowers	individuals	and	local	actors	with	
actionable	insights	while	also	assisting	national	stakeholders	with	a	better	
8	A	hackathon	is	a	design	event	in	which	computer	programmers,	and	others	involved	in	software	
development,	collaborate	intensively	on	software	projects.	The	goal	of	a	hackathon	is	to	create	usable	
software	or	hardware	with	the	goal	of	creating	a	functioning	product	by	the	end	of	the	event.	
Hackathons	tend	to	have	a	specific	focus,	which	can	include	the	programming	language	used,	the	
operating	system,	an	application,	an	API,	or	the	subject	and	the	demographic	group	of	the	
programmers.	
9 http://en.unesco.org/inclusivepolicylab/ 
10	http://cs.unu.edu/	
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
understanding	of	the	complex	and	diverse	social	phenomena.	They	suggest	that	Small	
Data	can	be	sourced	informally	and	dynamically	via	the	crowd,	leveraging	grassroots	
contributors,	citizen	generated	data,	and	social	media	(Best,	2015;	Thinyane,	2017).	
Such	a	framing	reveals	a	focus	on	notions	of	empowerment,	and	bottom-up,	citizen	
generated	data.		
Having	discussed	the	problematic	provenance	of	citizen	social	science	from	citizen	
science	(see	chapters	1	and	2),	the	aim	here	is	not	to	suggest	that	citizen	social	
science	is	analogous	with	citizen	science.	However,	it	is	useful	to	examine	the	ways	in	
which	citizen	science	has	been	typologised,	so	as	to	shed	light	on	how	the	wide	
variety	of	citizen	social	science	projects	might	also	be	grouped	and	categorised.	There	
are	many	typologies	of	citizen	science	offered,	for	example,	by	Cooper	et	al.	(2007),	
Wilderman	(2007),	Bonney	et	al.	(2009),	Wiggins	and	Crowston	(2011),	Haklay	
(2013),	and	Kasperowski	et	al.	(2017).	These	classifications	highlight	aspects	such	as	
the	level	of	informal	science	education	needed,	the	involvement	of	participants	in	
various	aspects	of	research	activity,	the	purpose	of	the	project,	or	the	main	forms	
such	projects	take.	Haklays	(2013)	typology	of	participation	in	citizen	science	
provides	a	grading	of	categories,	from	crowd	sourcing	at	level	1,	to	distributed	
intelligence	at	level	2,	to	participatory	science	at	level	3,	to	extreme	citizen	science	
at	level	4	(see	figure	1	below).	The	typology	can	be	used	across	the	range	of	citizen	
science	activities,	and	one	project	should	not	be	classified	only	in	one	category.	For	
example,	in	volunteer	computing	projects,	most	of	the	participants	will	be	at	the	
bottom	level,	while	participants	that	become	committed	to	the	project	might	move	to	
the	second	level	and	assist	other	volunteers	when	they	encounter	technical	problems.	
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
Figure	3.1	Levels	of	participation	and	engagement	in	citizen	science		
Source:	Haklay,	2013	
Haklay	stipulates	that	the	aim	of	this	particular	typology	is	to	reduce	the	inherent	
value	judgement	about	participation	that	is	common	in	many	of	the	other	typologies	
of	participation,	particularly	for	example	that	of	Arnsteins	(1969)	ladder	of	citizen	
participation	in	the	planning	processes	in	the	United	States.	Arnsteins	ladder	shows	a	
series	of	rungs	from	placation	(informing	the	public)	to	involving	the	public	in	
decision-making,	with	a	strong	moral	value	judgement	around	public	involvement	in	
decision	making	being	a	good	thing	(my	emphasis).	As	Nold	(2017)	notes,	these	
categorisations	frame	the	field	as	a	polarity	between	research	driven	by	scientists	or	
by	the	public.	My	reflections	from	participating	in	the	citizen	science	community	and	
my	experiences	during	my	internship	at	UNESCO	suggest	that	such	categorisations	
are	messy	and	not	straightforward,	with	such	a	polarity	being	one	way	in	which	to	
frame	the	approach,	but	by	no	means	the	only	one.	
Since	its	initial	development	in	2013,	Haklays	typology,	as	set	out	in	figure	3.1.	above,	
has	been	modified	to	resemble	more	of	an	escalator	model	of	engagement	in	citizen	
science,	as	shown	in	Figure	2.	below.	The	aim	of	developing	the	typology	into	an	
escalator	model	is	to	reflect	the	variety	of	citizen	science	journeys	that	participants	
undertake	when	they	take	part	in	a	citizen	science	project.	Thus,	participants	can	
enter	at	a	level	that	matches	their	needs,	interests,	and	abilities,	all	the	while	being	
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
encouraged	to	move	beyond	their	entry	point	and	move	up	the	escalator.		The	
escalator	model	shows	smaller	and	smaller	numbers	of	people	who	are	involved	in	
more	difficult,	detailed	or	bottom-up	citizen	science.	This	links	to	Kasperowski	and	
Hillmans	(2018)	work	around	the	inherent	tensions	in,	and	diversity	amongst,	
different	epistemic	cultures	in	citizen	science	projects.		
Figure	3.2	The	Doing	It	Together	Science	(DITOs)	escalator	model	of	engagement		
Source:	DITOS	Description	of	Action		
The	escalator	model	comes	from	the	Horizon	2020	EU	funded	project	Doing	It	
Together	Science	(DITOS)	which	takes	place	from	2016-201911.	The	project	frames	
citizen	science	as	empowering	citizens	in	exploring,	measuring	and	experimenting	
with	the	world	around	them.	It	argues	that	citizens	have	a	major	role	to	play	in	
addressing	the	challenges	to	a	sustainable	future.	The	project	suggests	that	it	is	by	
'doing	science	together'	that	resources	and	expertise	can	be	combined	to	raise	
awareness,	build	capacity,	and	innovative	lasting	solutions	grounded	in	society.	As	a	
European-wide	project,	Doing	It	Together	Science	seeks	to	promote	a	step	change	in	
the	way	the	public	is	engaged	with	science	and	innovation.	It	aims	to	move	from	a	
model	in	which	scientific	research,	innovation,	and	problem-solving	is	mainly	driven	
by	scientific	institutions,	to	one	that	is	based	on	active	public	participation	in	the	
scientific	process.	The	Doing	It	Together	Science	activities	constitute	an	attempt	to	
move	beyond	more	traditional	approaches	of	engagement	(e.g.	hearings,	public	
meetings	or	non-interactive	exhibits)	into	direct	engagement	that	builds	upon	hands-
on	Do-It-Yourself	(DIY),	grassroots,	and	frugal	innovation	initiatives.	The	aim	is	that	
11 http://www.togetherscience.eu 
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
this	move	will	be	done	in	a	way	that	enables	people	from	all	walks	of	life	to	contribute	
at	a	level	of	participation	that	is	interesting	to	them,	and	also	suits	their	lifestyle.	
Nold	(2017,	p.	61)	notes	that	a	key	feature	of	citizen	science	is		
the	prevalence	of	models	and	taxonomies	that	attempt	to	locate	the	axes	
of	participationand	map	a	continuum	of	knowledge	and	empowerment	
between	laypeople	and	scientists	along	a	linear	scale.		
Nold	suggests	that	these	models	and	taxonomies	conflate	participants	engaging	in	
increasingly	complex	scientific	tasks	with	increasing	levels	of	citizen	empowerment.	
Cornwall	(2008,	p.281)	calls	for	a	focus	on	the	practices	of	participation,	on	what	
people	participate	in	and,	as	a	corollary,	who	participates	in	which	activities	and	at	
which	stages	in	the	process,	rather	than	on	the	cosmetic	rhetoric	that	abstracts	and	
idealises	participation.	Cornwall	(2008:	p.281)	further	suggests	that	this	reclaiming	
of	participation		
would	 also	 help	 provide	 a	 way	 of	 distinguishing	 feel-good	 talk	 of	
participation	 that	 has	 little	 substance	 to	 it	 in	 practice,	 from	 forms	 of	
genuine	 delegated	 control	 that	 enable	 people	 to	 exercise	 a	 meaningful	
part	in	making	the	decisions	that	affect	their	lives.	
These	reflections	highlight	the	way	in	which	typologies	which	focus	on	participation,	
such	as	those	prevalent	in	citizen	science,	are	problematic	and	in	many	instances	
reduce	complex	boundary	blurrings	into	static,	clear	and	simple	categories.		
Green	(2010)	suggests	that	the	problem	is	that	participation	is	often	approached	via	
notions	of	Habermas	communicative	action	(Habermas,	1984)	where	participation	is	
seen	as	a	universal	good.	Green	(2010,	p.1245)	suggests	that	this	theorisation	means	
that	the	researchers	focus	on	abstract	advice	on	participation,	rather	than	carrying	
out	empirical	studies,	so	that		
neither	 proponents	 nor	 critics	 of	 participation	 have	 paid	 adequate	
attention	 to	 what	 actually	 happens	 when	 so	 called	 participatory	
approaches	are	carried	out	by	real	people	in	real	places.		
This	idealisation	and	abstraction	of	participation	leads	to	the	citizen	featuring	as	a	
highly	specified	yet	black-boxed	entity,	whose	practices	are	largely	unknown	(Nold,	
2017).	Whilst	the	field	of	citizen	social	science	is	not	as	developed	as	that	of	citizen	
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
science,	there	are	some	interesting	reflections	that	can	be	drawn,	particularly	for	the	
social	sciences,	where	participation	and	participatory	methods	have	long	been	a	topic	
of	research,	debate	and	attention.	
On	the	basis	of	these	critiques	of	typologies	of	citizen	science,	it	is	worth	giving	
consideration	to	the	Ten	Principles	of	citizen	science	(ECSA,	2015)	that	have	been	
published	in	twenty-six	different	languages	by	the	members	of	the	European	Citizen	
Science	Association	(ECSA)	Working	Group	"Sharing	Best	Practice	and	Building	
Capacity".	These	ten	principles	of	citizen	science	constitute	good	practice	in	citizen	
science,	regardless	of	the	academic	discipline	or	country	in	which	it	is	applied.	They	
constitute	a	move	away	from	the	notion	of	a	fixed	typology,	as	unpacked	above,	and	
comprise	a	more	adaptable	conceptualisation	of	citizen	science	that	is	based	on	
practices	rather	than	abstract	advice.	
In	the	spirit	of	conceiving	of	citizen	science	as	a	flexible	concept,	which	can	be	
adapted	and	applied	within	diverse	situations	and	disciplines,	the	question	remains	
of	how	to	create	cohesion	and	identify	a	common	purpose	globally,	whilst	also	
supporting	and	enhancing	the	independence,	creativity	and	bottom-up	nature	of	
citizen	science.	The	series	of	statements,	which	set	out	what	the	citizen	science	
community	believes	underlie	good	practice,	were	developed	by	networks	such	as	the	
European	Citizen	Science	Association	(Europe),	the	Citizen	Science	Association	
(global),	and	the	Australian	Citizen	Science	Association	(Australia).	Such	networks	
provide	forums	through	which	to	exchange	knowledge	and	ideas,	identify	shared	
goals	and	build	partnerships	together.	In	this	way,	the	Ten	Principles	provide	a	
starting	point	for	discussion	and	debate,	and	challenge	practitioners	and	their	current	
working	practices.	The	Ten	Principles	are	set	out	in	Table	3.1.	below.		
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
1.	 Citizen	science	projects	actively	involve	citizens	in	scientific	endeavour	that	
generates	new	knowledge	or	understanding.	
Citizens	may	act	as	contributors,	collaborators,	or	as	project	leader	and	have	a	meaningful	
role	in	the	project.		
2.	 Citizen	science	projects	have	a	genuine	science	outcome.		
For	example,	answering	a	research	question	or	informing	conservation	action,	
management	decisions	or	environmental	policy.		
3.	 Both	the	professional	scientists	and	the	citizen	scientists	benefit	from	taking	part.		
Benefits	may	include	the	publication	of	research	outputs,	learning	opportunities,	personal	
enjoyment,	social	benefits,	satisfaction	through	contributing	to	scientific	evidence	e.g.	to	
address	local,	national	and	international	issues,	and	through	that,	the	potential	to	influence	
policy.		
4.	 Citizen	scientists	may,	if	they	wish,	participate	in	multiple	stages	of	the	scientific	
process.		
This	may	include	developing	the	research	question,	designing	the	method,	gathering	and	
analysing	data,	and	communicating	the	results.		
5.	 Citizen	scientists	receive	feedback	from	the	project.		
For	example,	how	their	data	are	being	used	and	what	the	research,	policy	or	societal	
outcomes	are.		
6.	 Citizen	science	is	considered	a	research	approach	like	any	other,	with	limitations	
and	biases	that	should	be	considered	and	controlled	for.	
However	unlike	traditional	research	approaches,	citizen	science	provides	opportunity	for	
greater	public	engagement	and	democratisation	of	science.		
7.	 Citizen	science	project	data	and	meta-data	are	made	publicly	available	and	where	
possible,	results	are	published	in	an	open	access	format.	
Data	sharing	may	occur	during	or	after	the	project,	unless	there	are	security	or	privacy	
concerns	that	prevent	this.		
8.	 Citizen	scientists	are	acknowledged	in	project	results	and	publications.		
9.	 Citizen	science	programmes	are	evaluated	for	their	scientific	output,	data	quality,	
participant	experience	and	wider	societal	or	policy	impact.		
10.	 The	leaders	of	citizen	science	projects	take	into	consideration	legal	and	ethical	
issues	surrounding	copyright,	intellectual	property,	data	sharing	agreements,	
confidentiality,	attribution,	and	the	environmental	impact	of	any	activities.		
Table	3.1	Ten	principles	of	citizen	science			
Source:	European	Citizen	Science	Association,	2015:	https://ecsa.citizen-science.net/engage-us/10-
principles-citizen-science	
An	examination	of	the	Ten	Principles	of	Citizen	Science	highlights	the	way	in	which	
citizen	science	is	a	flexible	concept,	which	can	be	adapted	and	applied	within	diverse	
situations	and	disciplines.	This	approach	to	developing	principles	for	working	
practices	can	assist	in	thinking	about	the	practices	of	doing	citizen	social	science.		
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
Observations	of,	and	participation	in	activities	within	the	citizen	science	community	
revealed	that	citizen	social	science	was	not	really	talked	about	or,	if	it	was,	it	was	
predominantly	from	the	perspective	of	the	natural	and	environmental	sciences,	with	
a	lack	of	acknowledgement	of,	and	in-depth	consideration	of,	developments	in	social	
science	methods	and	approaches.	However,	it	is	important	to	note	that	citizen	science	
resists	hard	definitions,	so	as	to	allow	for	multiple	perspectives	and	approaches	to	
support	each	other	under	one	banner,	which	may,	or	may	not,	lead	to	advantageous	
funding	opportunities	in	terms	of	citizen	sciences	relationship	to	policy.	It	is	
therefore	necessary	to	examine	how	citizen	social	science	might	work	in	practice,	and	
the	experiences	of	those	participating	in	such	approaches.	What	are	the	challenges	
and	opportunities	of	such	an	approach	in	practical	terms,	rather	than	just	from	an	
idealised	and	potentially	abstracted	perspective?		
The	following	section	sets	out	a	desk	based	review	of	projects	that	could	be	conceived	
of	as	citizen	social	science,	as	an	experiment	in	categorising	them	into	different	key	
aspects.		
3.4	Types	of	citizen	social	science	projects	
As	stated	above,	a	review	of	a	number	of	projects	that	could	be	seen	to	be	producing	a	
form	of	citizen	social	science,	was	undertaken	as	part	of	the	scoping	work	to	inform	
the	research	design	of	this	thesis.	The	list	of	projects	is	a	selection	of	the	most	
relevant	projects	to	exemplify	each	different	category	or	type	of	project,	and	was	
developed	throughout	the	four-year	life	span	of	the	PhD	research.	From	an	
examination	of	citizen	science	platforms	such	as	Zooniverse	and	Scistarter,	it	was	
apparent	that	such	platforms	listed	very	few	projects	under	the	heading	of	social	
science	(see	image	3.1	below),	or	there	were	more	projects	listed	as	being	social	
science	(see	image	3.2	below),	but	the	projects	listed	were	not	immediately	apparent	
as	social	science.	This	raises	questions	around	what	could	be	considered	to	be	citizen	
social	science	and	what	are	the	key	facets	of	such	an	approach.	
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
Figure	3.3	Social	science	projects	on	Zooniverse.org		
Source:	Zooniverse,	accessed	on	16th	August	2017	
An	examination	of	the	social	science	tab	of	the	Zooniverse	platform	(see	image	3.1.)	
revealed	two	possible	projects	to	participate	in	at	the	time	of	access.	One,	the	Plastic	
Tide	project	uses	drone	imagery	and	machine	learning	algorithms	to	create	a	
program	to	auto-detect,	measure	and	monitor	levels	of	plastics	and	marine	litter	on	
beaches.	The	participant	is	asked	to	tag	plastics	and	litter	in	the	images	to	directly	
teach	the	projects	computer	program	to	monitor	plastics.	The	overall	aim	is	to	help	
researchers	find	out	how	much	plastic	litter	ends	up	on	beaches.	The	other	project	
available,	Measuring	the	ANZACs,	is	a	transcription	project	to	explore,	analyze,	and	
digitize	original	World	War	I	personnel	files	from	Archives	New	Zealand.		
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
Figure	3.4	Social	science	projects	on	Scistarter.com		
Source:	scistarter,	Accessed	on	16th	August	2017	
An	examination	of	the	Scistarter	platform	(see	image	3.2)	revealed	a	greater	number	
of	projects	under	the	social	science	tab	(37	at	the	time	of	access)	with	most	projects	
focussing	on	issues	in	the	environmental	and	climate	sciences,	or	a	plethora	of	
projects	focussed	on	participant	transcription	and	digitisation	of	existing	archival	
data;	and	some	projects	on	focussed	on	noise	mapping.	Given	the	focus	on	
environmental	data,	it	is	debateable	whether	or	not	these	projects	could	be	conceived	
of	as	social	science,	giving	rise	to	reflections	about	what	constitutes	social	science.		
The	table	3.2	below	sets	out	a	review	of	types	of	projects	that	could	be	conceived	of	as	
citizen	social	science.	Each	project	reviewed	was	classified	according	to	how	and	
when	it	was	instigated,	the	nature	of	the	data	collected	in	the	project,	and	the	type	of	
citizen	social	science	the	project	was	classified	as	undertaking.	Compiling	such	a	table	
allowed	for	an	assessment	of	the	nature	of	these	types	of	project,	to	try	to	understand	
in	more	detail	some	of	the	commonalities	and	differences	in	the	way	in	which	such	
projects	operate.	The	overall	aim	was	thus	to	identify	and	delineate	the	key	facets	of	
citizen	social	science.	It	is	these	key	facets	that	drive	the	empirical	work	of	the	thesis,	
and	become	the	key	aspects	probed	for	in	chapters	5		8.		
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
These	projects	can	be	grouped	according	to	different	factors,	but	predominantly	
around	how	participants	in	the	projects	generate	data,	and	ultimately	who	the	project	
articulated	that	it	is	aimed	for		be	it	the	participants	themselves,	or	the	organisation	
driving	the	project,	or	another	entity	such	as	a	researcher,	or	policy	maker.	Whether	
projects	can	be	categorised	as	citizen-generated	social	science	projects,	or	citizen-
generated	projects,	that	may	or	may	not	be	social	science,	the	question	remains	of	
when	do	they	become	social	science,	does	this	matter	and	who	is	to	say?		
Rather	than	solely	focussing	on	the	extent	to	which	the	citizen	is	involved	in	
participating	in	all	aspects	of	the	project,	perhaps	another	useful	way	to	categorise	
citizen	social	science	projects	is	around	the	type	of	data	generated.	This	also	links	to	
the	critique	of	typologies	of	participation	in	citizen	science,	as	set	out	earlier	in	this	
chapter,	and	the	shift	in	the	aim	of	categorising	projects	in	this	way	to	focus	on	the	
practices	involved,	rather	than	on	the	ideal	of	participation.		See	Appendix	1	for	the	
full	list	of	projects	reviewed.	
[BLANK PAGE]
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science
Type	of	project	 Description	 Examples	
Citizen	generated	data	 Citizen-generated	data	can	be	defined	as	data	that	is	produced	directly	by	people	
and	their	organisations	to	monitor,	demand	or	drive	change	on	the	issues	that	
affect	them.	Citizen	generated	data	can	be	useful	in	terms	of	complementing	
official	data	sources,	plugging	existing	data	gaps	or	supplementing	official	
reporting	when	data	quality	is	insufficient.	Projects	focussed	on	creating	citizen	
data	often	entail	aims	towards	empowerment,	and	engaging	citizens	in	political	
processes	that	might	otherwise	seem	removed	from	their	lives.	This	is	a	broad	
category	of	project.	Some	projects	have	more	of	a	focus	on	enumeration	and	
voice	building;	these	have	more	of	a	community	building	focus.	Other	projects	
are	focussed	on	participants	using	sensors	to	collect	data	that	helps	them	find	
out	more	about	issues	they	care	about.	
Most	citizen	generated	projects	are	instigated	by	NGOS	and	other	small	
organisations,	working	collaboratively	with	the	citizens	involved.	
Datashift	(1);	Tenison	
Road	(2);	Safecast	(3);	
Slumdwellers	International	
(4);	Fix	My	Street	(5);	The	
Bristol	Approach	(7);	
&wider	(8).		
Citizen	generated	(online)	
archive		
Projects	categorised	at	a	citizen-generated	archive	are	ones	where	anyone	can	
send	in	memories,	reflections	or	more	specific	data	requested,	to	be	catalogued	
and	potentially	stored	in	an	online	archive.	Projects	seem	to	have	a	consistent	
theme	linked	to	collective	memory,	and	more	specifically	heritage.	Such	projects	
tend	to	be	orchestrated	on	an	ad	hoc	basis	by	individuals	or	groups	who	are	
motivated	to	generate	an	archive	on	a	particular	issue	or	around	a	particular	
place.		
Mass	Observation	(6);	
Citizen	Heritage	(11);	
Election	Leaflets	(13);	
Pride	of	Place	LGBTQ	
Heritage	project	(15);	
Harkive	(19);	Rave	
Preservation	Project	(20);	
Underfall	Boatyard	Sharing	
Memories	project	(21).	
Participatory	Action	Research	 Participatory	Action	Research	projects	actively	engage	participants	in	the	
research	process.	Such	projects	are	necessarily	messy,	with	frequent	changes	in	
direction	over	time.		Particularly	passionate	researchers,	who	care	deeply	about	
the	cause	or	people	they	are	working	with,	often	instigate	participatory	action	
research	projects.	They	also	tend	to	create	strong	relationships	with	people	
immersed	in	a	process	to	help	change	their	circumstances.	It	is	through	the	
interactions	between	participants	that	they	believe	that	knowledge	is	generated.	
The	aim	of	such	projects	is	to	affect	change,	which	sometimes	calls	into	question	
the	research	aspect	of	participatory	action	research.	
Focus	E15.	
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science
Crowdsourcing	 Crowdsourcing	project	tend	to	take	a	less	formalised	approach	than,	for	
example,	the	citizen	generated	data	projects	defined	above.	The	projects	are	
more	focussing	on	harnessing	the	energy	of	volunteer	participants	to	undertake	
a	particular	task	whether	that	is	observing	something	or	analysing	data	online.	
They	are	potentially	more	speculative	in	nature,	rather	than	having	specific	
research	outcomes.		
Hush	City	App	(10);	No	
Second	Night	Out	(16);	
Crowd	Sourcing	on	Mental	
Health	(17);	Harkive	(19);	
Transcribe	Bentham	(24);	
Satelite	Sentinel	(25);	
Slavery	from	Space	(26);	
Walkonomics	(27);	Street	
Link	(28);	Scenic	or	not	
(29).	
Citizen	generated	project	for	
citizens	
Citizen	generated	projects	for	citizens	tend	to	be	organised	and	run	by	citizens,	
without	necessarily	having	a	specific	research	or	policy	focus.	They	are	
instigated	by	motivated	individuals	and	do	not	necessarily	have	research	
outcomes.		
Hollaback	(12);	Mood	
Notes	(14);	Everyday	
Sexism	(18).	
Participatory	Mapping	 Participatory	mapping	projects	entail	working	with	local	individuals,	community	
groups	and	other	interested	people	who	want	to	understand,	improve	and	to	
map	the	information	that	is	important	to	them.	Projects	tend	to	be	instigated	by	
local	individuals	or	community	groups	approach	an	organisation	with	
experience	in	participatory	mapping	to	develop	a	project	together.	
Hackney	Wick	Community	
(22);	Mapfugees	(23).	
Table	3.2	Types	of	citizen	social	science	projects	
The	projects	in	this	table	represent	an	experiment	in	categorising	different	types	of	projects	that	could	or	could	not	be	seen	to	be	
forms	of	citizen	social	science,	or	at	least	are	examples	of	citizen	generated	data	that	is	not	obviously	citizen	science.	Such	categorising	
raises	questions	for	a	conception	of	citizen	social	science,	particularly	in	terms	of	the	element	of	social	science	in	the	projects.	This	
gives	rise	to	a	need	to	instigate	more	examples	of	citizen	social	science	in	practice,	to	better	understand	the	challenges	for	research	
design	and	execution;	the	ethical	issues	raised,	and	how	data	generated	by	such	an	approach	might	be	used.		
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
3.4	Practitioners	articulations	of	citizen	social	science		
This	section	delineates	the	ways	in	which	people	who	are	involved	in	projects	that	
could	be	considered	to	be	citizen	social	science,	understand	and	describe	what	it	is	
that	they	are	doing.	The	views	set	out	in	this	section	are	a	conceptualisation	of	the	
potential	of	citizen	social	science	by	people	who	are	perceived	to	have	some	prior	
knowledge	of	the	issues	involved	in	undertaking	them.	The	interviews	highlight	how	
citizen	social	science	is	a	wide-ranging,	diversely	understood	phenomenon	that	
speaks	to	communities	both	within	and	outside	of	the	academy,	and	has	been	co-
opted	for	a	range	of	different	purposes.	The	following	sub	sections	draw	out	some	key	
aspects	of	citizen	social	science	and	some	tensions	raised	by	practitioners	around	
them.		The	views	and	responses	are	set	out	and	grouped	thematically.		The	categories	
were	produced	based	on	a	synthesis	and	analysis	of	the	interview	notes.	These	
statements	reflect	a	sense	of	uncertainty	around	the	precise	definition	of	citizen	
social	science.	Taken	together,	the	evidence	also	indicates	an	enthusiasm	for	the	
potential	of	citizen	social	science	to	generate	data,	empower	participants	and	tackle	
intractable	social	issues.		
3.4.1 Multiple	definitions	-	core	motivations	
Citizen	social	science	was	perceived	to	be	a	multi-faceted	term	with	a	plurality	of	
motivations,	including	many	different	approaches	within	it,	with	no	consistent,	fixed	
definition.	One	interviewee	perceived	citizen	social	science	to	be:	
an	 experiment	 at	 the	 borders	 of	 community	 crowdsourcing,	 citizen	
science	and	social	innovation.		
(Head	of	Research	Development,	Nominet	Trust,	September	2014)	
These	articulations	of	citizen	social	science	drew	attention	to	the	multiple	definitions	
and	varied	motivations	for	pursuing	such	an	approach		that	it	is	not	only	one	of	data	
collection	but	also	potentially	to	drive	social	change,	or	as	an	alternative	to	official	
statistics	collected	by	government.	One	practitioner	referred	to	their	perception	of	
the	links	between	citizen	social	science	and	design	thinking,	and	the	ways	in	which:	
design	can	be	used	to	provoke	reactions,	and	to	experiment	or	try	things	
out,	 compared	 to	 the	 more	 solutions-focussed	 conceptions	 of	
participatory	 research.	 Through	 such	 a	 design	 thinking	 approach	 to	
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
citizen	 social	 science,	 people	 are	 able	 to	make	 sense	 of	 issues	 together,	
and	how	best	to	tackle	them.		
(Research	Associate,	Open	Lab,	February	2016)	
This	articulation	highlights	notions	of	working	things	out	together,	which	a	citizen	
social	science	approach	could	offer.	Other	practitioners	located	citizen	social	science	
within	the	realms	of	design	or	prototyping,	with	a	maker	approach	to	addressing	
social	challenges.	The	suggestion	is	that	human-computer-interaction	(HCI)	or	design	
research	focuses	on	the	user	experience,	which	is	not	necessarily	a	focal	point	for	the	
social	sciences.	Another	practitioner	suggested	that:	
more	attention	could	be	given	in	the	social	sciences	to	the	literature	and	
methods	around	design	thinking,	particularly	around	the	affordances	that	
devices	 provide,	 as	 well	 as	 how	 they	 are	 used	 and	 incorporated	 in	
everyday	life.		
(HCI	Researcher,	High	Wire	Lancaster,	August	2016)	
In	the	field	of	Science	and	Technology	Studies	(STS)	much	attention	is	given	to	
devices	and	the	ways	in	which	they	interact	with	and	impact	on	those	operating	
them.	This	is	most	prevalent	in	the	work	on	citizen	sensing,	mentioned	in	the	
previous	section	on	types	of	citizen	social	science	projects.	The	same	interviewee	
suggested	that	citizen	social	science	is:	
an	 approach	 to	 involving	 users,	 or	 the	 public,	 in	 collecting	 their	 own	
information,	as	citizen	sociologists,	about	where	they	think	devices	could	
be	improved,	and	how	those	devices	might	benefit	them	in	their	everyday	
lives.		
(HCI	Researcher,	High	Wire	Lancaster,	August	2016)	
The	articulation	of	the	concept	of	citizen	sociologists	is	interesting	here	and	
questions	could	be	raised	about	how	to	do	develop	such	a	role	and	what	challenges	
and	opportunities	might	be	entailed.	It	also	drew	attention	to	the	experiences	and	
practices	of	the	participant	rather	than	necessarily	the	researcher,	or	the	technology	
used	in	such	an	approach.		
Another	tension	that	arose	from	the	interviews	was	around	the	motivations	for	
undertaking	citizen	social	science,	and	whether	such	a	practice	entailed	the	
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
engagement	of	participants	in	a	community	of	practice	or	a	community	of	interest.	
One	practitioner	suggested	that:	
citizen	social	science	 is	a	collaborative	community	of	practice,	rather	than	a	
community	of	interest,	typical	of	citizen	science	platforms	such	as	Zooniverse.		
(Head	of	Research	Development,	Nominet	Trust,	September	2014)	
The	distinction	between	a	community	of	practice	and	a	community	of	interest	
highlighted	the	perceived	potential	for	citizen	social	science	as	an	approach	that	
brings	together	people	with	a	common	concern	or	passion	to	learn	how	to	do	
something	better	as	they	interact	regularly	(Lave	and	Wenger,	1998;	Lave,	1991).	The	
suggestion	is	that	the	learning	that	takes	place	in	a	community	of	practice	is	not	
necessarily	intentional.	Practitioners	interviews	focussed	on	the	ideals	of	the	project	
of	citizen	social	science,	and	maintaining	open,	not	fixed,	definitions	of	the	
phenomenon	so	as	to	not	pigeonhole	it.		
3.4.2 Measurement	-	narratives		
Practitioners	reflected	on	the	purpose	of	undertaking	citizen	social	science,	
questioning	whether	a	project	is	focused	on	data	collection,	and	thereby	potentially	
counting	something,	or	is	it	more	focussed	on	enumeration	and	gathering	evidence	or	
narratives	to	potentially	hold	someone	or	something	to	account?	This	also	alludes	to	
the	difference	between	data	collection	and	data	analysis	that	some	practitioners	
referred	to.	One	practitioner	highlighted	a	tension	between	the	notion	of	recording	
data,	information	and	accounts,	and		
recording	 for	 some	 specific	 purpose,	 such	 as	 to	 improve	 community	
relationships	on	a	housing	estate,	or	to	improve	the	quality	of	life	on	the	
estate.		
(Human	Experience	Designer,	Microsoft	Research,	UK,	January	2016)	
Another	practitioner	described	citizen	social	science	as:	
an	 approach	 to	 equipping	 people	 to	 tell	 the	 stories	 that	 will	 make	 a	
difference,	as	a	form	of	citizen	journalism,	to	hold	things	to	account.		
(Professor,	ExCiteS,	UCL,	October	2015)	
The	sharing	of	stories	or	personal	observations	is	vitally	important,	particularly,	for	
example,	in	a	crisis	response	situation,	to	better	understand	the	involvement	of	many	
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
different	actors	and	perspectives.	One	practitioner	referred	to	a	duty	to	record	and	
gather	the	stories,	or	histories,	in	this	instance	of	those	who	may	have	played	a	role	
in	responding	to	a	crisis,	such	as,	for	example,	the	way	in	which	the	Safecast	project	
came	about	to	monitor,	collect,	and	openly	share	information	on	environmental	
radiation	in	the	wake	of	the	March	11,	2011	earthquake,	and	subsequent	tsunami	
which	struck	Japan	and	the	subsequent	meltdown	of	the	Fukushima	Daiichi	Nuclear	
Power	Plant.	This	led	to	reflections	about	whether	it	necessarily	takes	a	crisis	to	
trigger	the	creation	of	a	successful	citizen	social	science	project,	and	what	constitutes	
a	successful,	or	indeed	unsuccessful,	project.	One	of	the	underlying	notions	of	citizen	
social	science,	as	suggested	by	practitioners,	was	its	potential	to	create	active	
research	subjects	and	to	engender	a	sense	of	awareness	raising	about	the	process	of	
participating	in	social	science	research	amongst	the	participants	themselves.		
Practitioners	also	raised	expressions	of	concern	over	the	quality	of	the	data	produced	
when	non-experts	are	involved	in	data	collection.	One	practitioner	referenced	the	
potential	of	citizen	social	science	as	a	form	of	citizen	ethnography	or	crowd	sourced	
sociology,	which	does	not	necessarily	need	to	use	digital	technology.	Consideration	
was	given	to	the	links	between	technology	and	the	production	of	sociological	
knowledge.	Some	practitioners	reflected	on	how	to	use	apps	to	collect	sociological	
information	with	endless	possibilities,	so	as	to	develop	large-scale	data	sets	of	
ethnographic	information	such	as	images	or	sounds,	to	provide	rich	descriptions	that	
the	public	could	also	be	asked	to	help	analyse.	It	is	important	to	acknowledge	here	
that	this	is	already	happening	at	an	extremely	large	scale	in	commercial	research	
(Thrift,	2011;	Savage	and	Burrows,	2007)	(see	chapter	1	and	chapter	2,	section	2.3).	
However,	one	practitioner	noted	that		
much	 like	mapping	 projects,	 whilst	 the	 potential	 to	map	 everything,	 or	
capture	 everything,	 is	 clearly	 already	 there,	 the	 potential	 to	 analyse	 the	
data,	or	indeed	to	make	sense	of	it,	beyond	some	basic	computer	learning,	
is	still	not	within	grasp.		
(Project	lead,	Smarter	Manchester,	August	2015)	
This	will	be	discussed	in	more	detail	in	chapters	8	and	9.	Practitioners	reflected	on	
the	type	of	data	produced	through	citizen	social	science	and	the	way	in	which	some	
projects	might	focus	on	measurement	and	others	on	producing	different	sorts	of	
narratives	around	a	particular	issue.	
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
3.4.3 Method	-	movement	
This	category	came	about	from	the	perceived	tension	in	practitioners	articulations	
about	citizen	social	science	being	a	method	for	data	collection,	versus	its	potential	to	
have	a	more	long	lasting	impact	and	affect	social	change.	In	many	ways,	reflected	in	
this	category	are	the	tensions	between	undertaking	research	and	the	ensuing	action	
that	might	take	place,	debates	which	are	played	out	in	the	field	of	action	research,	and	
participatory	action	research.	
Some	practitioners	reflected	on	the	blurring	of	boundaries	between	tools	and	
questions,	between	personal	lives	and	bigger	issues,	meaning	that:	
it	 is	 not	 easy	 or	 straightforward	 to	 determine	 the	 boundaries	 between	
science	and	the	social,	since	these	are	not	clear	or	distinct.	
(Professor,	ExCiteS,	UCL,	October	2015)	
However,	practitioners	suggested	that	the	power	lies	in	defining	what	counts	as	
scientific	data	in	the	first	place.	Questions	were	raised	about	the	sufficient	amount	of	
science	or	social	science	in	a	project,	with	one	practitioner	suggesting	that:		
such	 a	 question	 is	 bound	 to	 an	 imagined	 category	 of	 what	 science,	 or	
social	science,	is.	However	the	reality	is	that	projects	do	not	operate	like	
this;	 they	 do	 not	 follow	what	we	 think	 of	 as	 science,	 and	 the	 particular	
constraints,	or	fixed	methods	of	science.		
(Human	Experience	Designer,	Microsoft	Research,	UK,	January	2016)	
This	is	problematic	in	the	sense	that	the	methods	and	approaches	of	science	and	especially	
social	science	are	hugely	varied.	Further	questions	were	raised	about	professionalism	and	
expertise,	and	who	can	determine	what	constitutes	citizen	social	science	or	not.	An	
interviewee	asked:	
does	a	professional	 researcher	need	 to	be	 involved	 in	 a	project	 for	 it	 to	be	
considered	 as	 citizen	 science?	 The	 Oxford	 English	 Dictionary	 (OED)	 states	
that	usually	citizen	science	activities	are	led	by	professional	scientists.	
(Citizen	Science	Manager,	Natural	History	Museum,	November	2015)	
The	same	interviewee	questioned	whether	or	not	a	project	has	to	be	research	or	
entail	some	sort	of	scientific	endeavour	to	be	considered	citizen	science	or	citizen	
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
social	science?	When	probed	about	the	meaning	of	research,	the	interviewee	went	
on	to	suggest:	
this	 means	 a	 project	 needs	 to	 have	 some	 form	 of	 pre-defined	 research	
question.		
(Citizen	Science	Manager,	Natural	History	Museum,	November	2015)	
Many	practitioners	referred	to	citizen	social	science	as	a	method,	but	specifically	one	
linking	notions	of	public	sociology	with	questions	of	social	justice.	This	raises	
questions	about	whether	citizen	social	science	is	necessarily	a	practice	committed	to	
social	justice.	One	practitioner	suggested	that	citizen	social	science	could	be	
conceived	of	as		
a	method	for	participatory	research,	to	access	hard-to-reach	communities,	
and	one	that	allows	for	greater	reflexivity	around	the	experience	of	others	
participating	 in	 citizen	 social	 science,	 from	 the	 co-researchers,	 to	 other	
participants	and	contributors.		
(Research	Fellow,	MICRA,	August	2015)	
Some	practitioners	also	acknowledged	how	citizen	social	science	could	address	the	
issue	of	research,	or	consultation	fatigue,	and	its	potential	to	re-inspire	people	to	
participate	in	research.	Other	practitioners	reflected	on	the	notion	of	citizen	social	
science	as	being	focussed	on	the	ends	rather	than	the	means:	
Is	 citizen	 social	 science	 a	 method	 and	 approach	 to	 increasing	 our	
knowledge	and	understanding	of	the	world	around	us?	Does	this	fulfil?	Or	
is	 it	more	about	the	means,	and	the	process	of	participation	in	a	project,	
that	allows	for	the	potential	for	participants	to	reflect	on	their	actions.		
(Professor,	CMIST,	December	2015)	
Some	practitioners	also	suggested	that	citizen	social	science	should	be	judged	by	its	
means,	rather	than	its	ends,	so	as	to	avoid	critiquing	the	approach	too	instrumentally,	
and	not	understanding	it	in	a	more	holistic	way.			
3.4.4 Participation	-	engagement		
This	category	of	reflections	sets	out	how	people	are	recruited	to	a	project	and	the	
reasoning	behind	this		in	other	words	whether	someone	voluntarily	participates	in	a	
project	for	a	variety	of	different	reasons,	or	whether	they	are	actively	targeted	and	
engaged	and	mobilised	to	take	part.	This	tension	played	out	in	the	ways	in	which	
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
some	practitioners	articulated	their	thoughts	around	the	underlying	purpose	of	
citizen	social	science.	One	interviewee	suggested:	
Citizen	social	science	is	worth	pursuing	to	create	real	public	engagement	
and	participation	in	tackling	social	challenges.	In	this	sense,	citizen	social	
science	adopts	a	community	development	approach,	in	terms	of	building	
up	communities	of	place	or	communities	of	interest,	and	in	trying	to	solve	
specific	 social	 problems,	 or	 specific	 issues	 in	 which	 participants	 had	 a	
shared	interest.		
(Head	of	development	research,	Nominet	Trust,	September	2014)	
The	same	interviewee	suggested	that:	
In	 its	 idealised	 form,	 citizen	 social	 science	 is	 a	 participatory	 approach	
with	experimentation,	iteration	and	community	feedback,	so	as	to	ensure	
engagement	 beyond	 purely	 outsourcing	 data	 generation,	 or	 data	
collection.		
(Head	of	development	research,	Nominet	Trust,	September	2014)	
In	this	sense	citizen	social	science	is	perceived	to	have	potential	as	something	beyond	
just	the	mobilisation	of	people	for	data	collection,	as	potential	for	meaningful	
engagement	in	tackling	social	issues.	
Questions	were	raised	about	the	extent	to	which	citizen	social	science	actually	widens	
participation,	and	the	nature	of	who	participates	in	such	projects.	One	interviewee	
questioned:			
Do	citizen	social	science	projects	only	cater	for	some	sections	of	society	
and	which	parts	of	the	population	are	missed	out?		
(Professor,	ExCiteS,	UCL,	October	2015)	
These	questions	have	implications	for	the	extent	to	which	citizen	social	science	can	be	
seen	to	be	a	democratisation	of	social	science,	as	well	as	the	power	dynamics	at	play	
in	knowledge	production	processes.		Reflecting	on	citizen	science,	one	interviewee	
questioned	this	notion	of	democratisation,	stating:		
Its	 quite	 hard	 to	 connect	 people	 with	 policy	 issues	 eg	 clean	 water,	 or	
where	food	comes	from.	Citizen	science	does	to	some	extent	democratise	
science	 because	 if	 you	 participate	 youre	 engaging	 with	 the	 issues	 and	
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
collecting	 data	 Its	 a	 starting	 point,	 and	 the	 starting	 point	 is	 actually	
pretty	 low	 eg	 on	 understanding	 biodiversity.	 Should	 people	 be	worried	
about	the	loss	of	a	species?	Its	quite	hard	for	people	to	see	the	knock	on	
effect	of	 things.	Citizen	 science	 is	 about	being	hands	on	and	discovering	
something	for	yourself.	Its	not	necessarily	direct	behavioural	change	but	
it	might	make	you	care	a	bit	more.	
(Citizen	Science	Manager,	Natural	History	Museum,	November	2015)	
This	practitioner	refers	to	participation	in	citizen	science	as	a	starting	point	towards	
engaging	more	meaningfully	in	some	of	the	wider	policy	issues.	They	refer	to	citizen	
science	as	a	means	of	self-discovery	and	the	first	step	towards	awareness	raising	and	
caring	about	issues	a	bit	more,	which	may	eventually	lead	to	change	further	down	
the	line.	This	is	an	interesting	reflection	on	the	potential	of	citizen	social	science	to	
engender	a	sense	of	personal	discovery	and	sensitising	to	a	particular	issue	through	
participation	and	engagement.	
Citizen-generated	data	is	perceived	as	a	useful	complement	to	institutional	data,	but	
not	a	replacement	for	it.	It	can	highlight	issues	that	are	important	to	people	and	add	
their	views	to	higher-level	policy	debates.	It	also	has	the	potential	to	empower	
people,	giving	them	a	way	to	engage	with	politics	and	political	processes	that	might	
seem	far	removed	from	their	daily	lives.	Some	practitioners	referred	to	the	notion	of	
not	just	involving	people	in	research,	but	allowing	them	to	shape	the	future.	One	
practitioner	raised	complaints	about	the	tokenistic	nature	of	some	participation	
projects,	and	reflected	on	the	necessary	conditions	to	prevent	the	perpetuation	of	
inequalities	in	such	participatory	approaches.	Another	called	for:	
greater	consideration	of	the	potential	to	create	power	differentials	in	the	
process	of	selecting	who	can	participate.	What	we	need	is	more	structural	
debates	 around	 public	 engagement	 and	 the	 way	 in	 which	 public	
engagement	approaches	have	the	potential	to	legitimise	the	failings	of	the	
welfare	state,	by	placing	a	greater	burden	on	the	individual.		
(Research	Fellow,	MICRA,	August	2015)	
In	this	sense	there	was	a	tension	arising	in	the	way	in	which	citizen	social	science	was	
talked	about,	between	the	potential	for	data	collection,	which	potentially	places	a	
greater	burden	on	participants,	and	more	meaningful	engagement	in	projects	with	
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
the	potential	to	engender	empowerment	and	awareness	raising	of	wider	issues.	This	
is	discussed	further	in	chapter	8	(see	section	8.4).	
3.4.5 Data	use	-	impact	
An	important	theme	that	came	up	in	the	interviews	was	around	the	potential	purpose	
of	citizen	social	science	and	what	the	data	generated	could	be	used	for.	Discussions	
ranged	from	whether	citizen	social	science	stems	from	an	ideological	belief	in	the	
importance	of	citizen	involvement	in	decision-making,	and	the	democratic	project;	or	
whether	the	project	of	citizen	social	science	could	be	a	way	of	mobilising	citizens	to	
obtain	social	data	on	the	cheap.	Another	suggestion	was	around	the	mobilisation	of	
citizens	to	collect	data	for	campaigning,	or	to	affect	social	change.	Depending	on	the	
nature	of	the	project	that	practitioners	interviewed	were	involved	with,	some	also	
raised	points	around	the	use	of	citizen	generated	data	in	policy.	In	this	sense,	those	
practitioners	who	work	in	policy	tended	to	frame	the	potential	impact	of	citizen	social	
science	as	being	one	in	which	a	specific	gap	in	the	data	might	be	plugged.	Other	
practitioners	focused	on	the	potential	of	a	citizen	social	science	approach	as	a	form	of	
co-creation,	in	which	participants	might	be	more	involved	in	the	research	design	
process,	as	well	as	the	data	analysis,	and	any	other	outputs	or	outcomes	from	the	
project.	Interviews	with	practitioners	on	this	subject	highlighted	the	divergent	views	
about	the	ways	in	which	data	and	policy	can	come	together.		
Some	practitioners	reflected	on	the	potential	impact	of	citizen	social	science,	
suggesting	that:	
it	 raises	 awareness	 about	 the	 seemingly	 small	 or	 unconsidered	
connections	between	things.		
(Citizen	Science	Manager,	Natural	History	Museum,	November	2015)	
Some	practitioners	warned	of	the	need	to	be	careful	when	mobilising	the	term	
activism	in	academia,	especially	given	the	complex	provenance	of	such	a	term,	and	
the	lack	of	clarity	around	what	specifically	the	term	entails.	However,	practitioners	
suggested	that	data	activism,	or	indeed	participating	in	data	collection	and	
interpretations	could	be	seen	as	a	form	of	resistance,	or	challenge	to	the	traditional	
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
orthodoxies	in	social	science	research,	and	as	a	potential	way	in	which	to	affect	social	
change.	In	this	way,	the	potential	impact	of	citizen	social	science	can	be	seen	to	be	
around	renegotiating	the	relationship	between	society,	individual	and	the	state.		
3.5	Conclusion	
The	tensions	set	out	above	reflect	the	ways	in	which	practitioners,	and	those	beyond	
the	academy,	conceptualise	citizen	social	science	and	what	its	potential	impact	might	
be.	These	discussions	with	practitioners	draw	out	the	key	facets	and	tensions	of	
citizen	social	science.	They	highlight	how	those	involved	in	this	emerging	
phenomenon	describe	what	it	is	they	are	doing,	and	perceive	the	potential	of	citizen	
social	science.		They	resonate	with	broader	trends	in	reflexive	and	methodological	
debates	in	social	science	in	that	explore	the	potential	of	public	involvement	in	social	
science	research.	
As	noted	in	the	introduction	and	literature	review	chapters,	citizen	social	science	is	
an	emerging	and	fast	evolving	phenomenon.	From	the	scoping	work	presented	in	this	
chapter,	it	should	also	be	clear	how	it	is	both	an	empirical	reality	that	is	observable,	
and	an	epistemological,	ethical,	political	opportunity	for	a	transformation	of	social	
science.	This	chapter	has	drawn	out	some	key	aspects	of	the	emergent	phenomenon	
of	citizen	social	science	through	an	evaluation	of	existing	projects	that	could	be	
considered	to	be	citizen	social	science,	in	addition	to	an	analysis	of	the	way	in	which	
practitioners	reflect	on	and	conceptualise	it.	These	key	facets	are	the	aspects	that	
inform	the	research	design	of	the	thesis,	as	set	out	in	the	following	chapter,	which	
delineates	the	social	research	probes	as	method	for	examining	how	citizen	social	
science	works	in	practice.		
This	chapter	built	on	the	assessment	of	projects	already	in	existence,	which	could	be	
conceived	of	as	undertaking	a	form	of	citizen	social	science.	It	combined	those	
insights	with	the	ways	in	which	others	conceptualise	citizen	social	science,	based	on	
the	practitioner	interviews	as	explored	above.	This	chapter	also	built	on	the	review	of	
the	literature	as	set	out	in	chapter	2,	which	delineated	how	citizen	social	science	is	
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
framed	in	the	academic	literature,	as	well	as	the	academic	literature	in	which	citizen	
social	science	has	been	contextualised	for	the	purpose	of	this	thesis.		
In	many	ways,	these	key	facets	reflect	the	idea	that	citizen	social	science	involves	the	
opening	up	of	the	traditional	social	science	research	process,	and	necessarily	
challenges	the	traditional	power	dynamics	at	play	in	social	science	research.	Whether	
or	not	this	thus	constitutes	the	democratisation	of	social	science	research	is	an	issue	
that	still	needs	to	be	explored	more	fully,	it	is	not	one	that	this	thesis	can	answer,	but	
the	explorations	of	tensions	that	citizen	social	science	generates	around	these	key	
facets	in	the	chapters	to	come	will	provide	some	insights	that	will	allow	us	to	qualify	
that	question	further.		
Whilst	this	scoping	aspect	of	the	research	was	necessary	to	chart	the	messy	terrain	of	
citizen	social	science,	it	is	also	possible	to	reflect	that	it	raises	more	questions	than	
can	be	answered	in	this	thesis.	In	the	development	of	this	thesis,	this	approach	of	
question-raising	became	the	norm,	for	the	larger	part.	In	some	ways,	this	can	also	be	
seen	to	be	a	strength	of	the	thesis,	to	examine,	reflect	on,	and	probe	for	the	multiple,	
complex	and	exciting	aspects	of	this	emergent	phenomenon	of	citizen	social	science.		
The	scoping	work	presented	in	this	chapter	gives	rise	to	the	research	questions,	
which	drive	the	empirical	work	of	the	thesis.		The	key	research	question	this	thesis	
seeks	to	answer	is	how	does	citizen	social	science	work	in	practice?	This	has	a	dual	
focus.	On	the	one	hand	it	speaks	to	the	fact	that	citizen	social	science	is	an	emergent	
phenomenon	and	theorizing	its	practices	and	potential	must	first	of	all	take	stock	of	
how	it	is	being	practiced.	On	the	other	hand,	citizen	social	science	is	emergent	in	the	
sense	that	its	potential	is	being	shaped,	and	theorising	it	must	be	done	with	the	
ambition	of	exploring	its	potential,	as	well	as	the	ideologies	and	values	that	drive	its	
innovation	in	practice.		
The	sub-questions	that	follow	on	from	this	core	question	are	firstly,	what	challenges	
are	raised	in	terms	of	research	design	and	execution?	As	highlighted	in	the	
practitioner	interviews,	if	citizen	social	science	has	the	potential	to	be	a	different	
approach	to	engaging	citizens	in	generating	data,	it	is	necessary	to	practically	reflect	
Chapter	3.	Scoping	work:	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science  
on	what	this	means	for	the	research	process,	and	the	challenges	such	an	approach	
might	throw	up.	
Secondly,	what	ethical	issues	are	raised	and	how	might	these	be	addressed?	Citizen	
social	science	as	an	approach	appears	to	have	much	potential	in	terms	of	generating	
new,	or	previously	unobtainable	data,	but	at	what	ethical	cost?	In	many	ways	citizen	
social	science	is	perceived	to	have	possibilities	as	an	ethical	method	that	flattens	
hierarchies,	and	opens	up	the	research	process.	However,	what	are	the	experiences	of	
the	participants	in	such	projects,	and	what	ethical	issues	do	they	raise?	Furthermore,	
what	solutions	could	be	offered	to	such	issues,	and	how	might	they	be	addressed?		
Thirdly,	many	of	the	practitioners	discussed	the	potential	use	of	the	data	generated	
by	citizen	social	science	approaches.	How	practically	can	the	data	generated	in	citizen	
social	science	be	used	and	by	whom?		
Lastly,	it	is	necessary	to	step	back	and	consider	the	over-arching	impact	of	such	an	
approach	on	the	ways	in	which	research	is	undertaken	and	knowledge	is	produced.	
This	gives	rise	to	a	fourth	sub-question	of	how	are	citizen	social	science	projects	
reconfiguring	knowledge	production	processes?	What	is	the	potential	of	this	process?	
What	are	the	risks?	The	analysis	of	the	scoping	work	presented	above	creates	foci	for	
the	probes,	as	will	be	set	out	in	the	following	chapters	on	facet	methodology	and	
social	research	probes	as	method.	The	next	chapter	presents	the	methods	used	to	
explored	citizen	social	science	in	practice		namely	social	research	probes		and	the	
justification	for	their	use,	drawing	on	Masons	(2011)	delineation	of	Facet	
Methodology.	
Chapter	4.	Facet	methodology	and	social	research	probes	as	method  
Chapter	4.	Facet	methodology	and	social	research	probes	as	
method	
Social	scientists	need	to	re-imagine	themselves,	their	methods	and	their	worlds	if	
they	are	to	work	productively	in	the	21st	century	where	social	relations	appear	
increasingly	complex,	elusive,	ephemeral	and	unpredictable.	
(Law	and	Urry,	2004,	p.390)	
What	matters	then	is	that	the	methods	used	by	sociologists	examining	everyday	life	
are	fit	for	purpose.		
(Neal	and	Murji,	2015,	pp.815-6)	
4.1	Introduction	
This	chapter	outlines	a	facet	methodology,	focused	on	three	main	objectives.		The	first	
objective	relates	to	developing	a	way	in	which	to	empirically	study	citizen	social	
science.	The	second	objective	relates	to	problematising	citizen	social	science,	so	as	to	
enable	insight	into	how	citizen	social	science	works	in	practice.	The	third	objective	is	
to	highlight	and	reflect	on	tensions	in	citizen	social	science	more	broadly.	The	chapter	
then	sets	out	the	methods	used	to	explore	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science		
namely	social	research	probes		as	an	adaptation	from	cultural	probes	(Gaver	et	al.,	
1999;	2001;	2004)	to	ensure	they	are	fit	for	purpose	(Neal	and	Murji,	2015)	to	deal	
with	the	complexities	of	the	phenomenon	of	citizen	social	science.	
The	chapter	is	divided	into	six	sections:	the	next	section	sets	out	the	facet	
methodology	(Mason,	2011),	which	is	used	in	the	thesis	as	an	overarching	
epistemological	approach.	The	third	section	positions	the	methodology	and	examines	
the	privileged	position	of	the	researcher.	The	fourth	section	presents	the	tools	of	the	
thesis,	namely	social	research	probes,	adapted	from	design.	The	fifth	section	sets	out	
the	rationale	for	the	specific	probes	undertaken	as	the	empirical	work	of	the	thesis,	
and	how	these	were	arrived	at,	before	a	detailed	delineation	of	the	specific	methods	
and	approaches	used	for	each	of	the	three	probes.		
In	keeping	with	the	reflexive	approach	taken	throughout	this	thesis,	the	sections	that	
account	for	the	methods	used	are	written	in	the	first	person,	in	order	to	more	directly	
and	coherently	set	out	how	such	methods	were	used.	In	using	the	first	person,	I	can	
describe	the	actions	I	took	and	decisions	I	made	as	directly	as	possible,	without	
adding	another	level	of	abstraction.	
4.2	Facet	methodology		
Facet	methodology	(Mason,	2011)	is	a	methodological	approach	designed	to	engage	
critically	with	new	forms	of	data	and	knowledge.	Facet	methodology	is	based	on	the	
metaphor	of	the	gemstone;	on	a	diamond,	the	facets	make	the	key	qualities	of	the	
stone	able	to	shine.	With	the	stone	this	entails	its	purity,	and	capacity	to	refract	light;	
with	citizen	social	science,	it	can	be	seen	to	be	its	hidden	potential	to	transform	the	
epistemological	politics	of	social	science.	The	aim	of	using	facet	methodology	is	to	
stimulate	active,	critical	and	reflexive	engagement	with,	in	the	instance	of	this	thesis,	
citizen	social	science.	The	main	concern	of	facet	methodology	is	to	create	flashes	of	
insight	about	an	entwined	problematic,	rather	than,	for	example,	a	more	descriptive,	
maximum	coverage,	summary	of	findings	logic	(Mason,	2011,	p.83).	Facet	
methodology	assumes	that	the	world		and	what	we	seek	to	understand	about	it		is	
not	only	lived	and	experienced,	but	is	multi-dimensional,	contingent,	relationally	
implicated	and	entwined	(see	section	1.4	of	chapter	1).		
Adopting	a	facet	methodology	means	adopting	a	pluralist	disposition	in	relation	to	
method,	and	it	requires	an	investigative	epistemology	(Mason,	2011;	2007).		This	is	
interpreted	as	being	greedy	in	the	search	for	data,	knowledge	and	insight	so	as	to	not	
rule	out	a	potential	data	source	in	an	a	priori	way.	Mason	(2011,	pp.83-84)	further	
suggests	that,	concurrent	with	data	collection,	researchers	need	to	be	
epistemologically	and	ethically	astute	and	critical	in	how	different	forms	of	data	can	
(or	cannot)	be	used	in	different	kinds	of	knowledge	claims.	For	the	purposes	of	this	
thesis,	this	methodological	approach	allowed	for	a	way	in	which	to	analyse,	compare	
and	contrast	three	noticeably	different	projects	and	thereby	to	probe	for	the	key	
practices,	processes,	opportunities	and	tensions	of	how	citizen	social	science	works	in	
practice.	Facet	methodology	entails	the	idea	that	researchers	carve	(or	grind)	facets	
of	a	gemstone	that	can	use	many	forms	of	method	and	data,	bringing	together	
different	epistemological	perspectives	in	innovative	ways	(Davies	and	Heaphy,	2011).	
Facets	involve	different	lines	of	enquiry,	and	different	ways	of	seeing,	with	the	aim	of	
creating	a	strategically	illuminating	set	of	facets	in	relation	to	specific	research	
concerns,	and	questions	around	how	citizen	social	science	works	in	practice.	
Mason	(2011,	p.84)	suggests	that	facets	are	always	simultaneously	epistemological	
and	substantive,	so	facet	methodology	is	not	any	kind	of	approach	to	methods	alone,	
mixed	or	otherwise.	In	this	way,	in	order	to	engage	effectively	with	the	emergent	
phenomenon	of	citizen	social	science,	it	is	necessary	to	select	from	a	broad	palette	of	
methods	and	data,	and	to	refashion	them	into	hybrids,	or	create	new	versions,	such	as	
the	probes	set	out	in	section	seven	of	this	chapter,	whilst	maintaining	a	sense	of	
epistemological	awareness	of	the	impact	of	doing	so.	It	also	means	being	able	to	
engage	imaginatively	with	the	many	ways	in	which	research	is	done.		
4.3	The	privileged	position	of	the	researcher		
In	positioning	the	research,	and	the	role	of	the	researcher	within	it,	it	is	crucial	to	
recognise	that	there	is	no	exterior	observational	point	or	situation	as	such.	The	thesis	
is	an	attempt	to	take	seriously	that	there	are	different	situated	knowledges,	and	that	
we	need	to	infrastructure	social	science	for	contestation	and	multiple	perspectives	
(Karasti	and	Syrjnen	2004,	Ehn	2008,	Bjrgvinsson	et	al.	2010,	Hillgren	et	al.	2011,	
Bjrgvinsson	et	al.	2012,	Le	Dantec	2012,	Disalvo	et	al.	2014).	The	concept	of	situated	
knowledges	(Haraway,	1988)	locates	knowledge	in	the	specific	circumstances	in	
which	it	was	produced,	exploring	how	those	circumstances	shaped	it.	It	can	be	traced	
back	to	1970s	Feminism	(Hardy,	2010;	Peterson,	2001;	Rose,	1997;	Harding,	1991;	
1987).		As	we	will	see	in	chapters	5	-8,	questions	of	expertise	are	central	here.	As	
such,	particular	standpoints	or	intersections	become	privileged	places	of	knowledge	
production,	precisely	due	to	their	specificity	and	partiality.	Researchers	and	
participants	are	simultaneously	both	knowers	and	known,	meeting	at	the	intersection	
of	their	life	experiences	and	their	own	subjective	knowledge	(Hardy,	2010).		In	this	
way,	it	is	necessary	to	recognise	the	privileged	position	of	the	researcher	in	
undertaking	this	thesis,	researching	a	subject	that	they	are	also	inherently	implicated	
in	shaping.	
The	thesis	is	written	from	my	perspective	as	a	researcher	trained	in	traditional	social	
science	methods,	and	embedded	in	traditional	role	within	a	university.	Mauthner	and	
Doucet	(2003,	p.421)	state	that	the	choices	we	make	in	our	research	with	regard	to	
ontological	and	epistemological	positioning,	methodological	and	theoretical	
perspectives,	and	the	adoption	of	particular	research	methods,	are	bound	up	not	only	
with	our	personal	or	academic	biographies,	nor	are	they	motivated	exclusively	by	
intellectual	concerns.	In	this	way,	the	interpersonal,	political	and	institutional	
contexts	in	which	researchers	are	embedded	also	play	a	key	role	in	shaping	these	
decisions	(Bell	and	Newby,	1977;	Bell	and	Roberts,	1984).	As	a	researcher,	there	
were	many	facets	of	the	gemstone	that	were	new	to	me:	I	was	new	to	Manchester,	the	
city	where	the	larger	part	of	this	thesis	research	took	place,	new	to	citizen	science,	
and	new	to	citizen	social	science	as	an	approach.	In	these	ways,	it	is	possible	to	relate	
the	multifaceted	gemstone	to	my	own	experiences	as	a	researcher	undertaking	this	
doctoral	research.	
It	is	important	here	to	acknowledge	the	pragmatic	starting	point	for	the	research	in	
this	thesis		the	PhD	proposal	was	a	CASE	PhD	meaning	that	it	was	developed	in	
partnership	with	the	Mass	Observation	Archive	Trust,	which	led	to	the	framing	of	the	
first	empirical	probe	on	Mass	Observation	as	a	form	of	proto-citizen	social	science.	
The	second	and	third	probe	were	developed	solely	by	me,	in	the	case	of	the	Empty	
Houses	project,	and	in	conjunction	with	a	community	development	worker,	in	the	
case	of	the	Our	Manchester	project	(see	sections	3.6.2	and	3.6.3).		In	this	sense	my	
role	as	researcher	was	very	much	an	attempt	to	be	a	process	pragmatist,	which	
Harney	et	al.	(2016,	p.318)	describe	as	an	engaged	practitioner,	skilled	in	the	art	of	
relationship	building,	listening,	collaborating	and	acting	with	others.	They	suggest	
the	process	pragmatist	can	have	significant	implications	for	the	place	and	role	of	the	
university,	its	academics	and	students	since	in	this	model,	academics	and	students	
can	be	seen	as	part	of	broader	social	alliances	whose	members	work	together	to	
explore	shared	concerns,	formulate	solutions	and	act	upon	those	ideas	(Harney	et	al.,	
2016,	p.	318).		
The	thesis	draws	attention	to	the	position	of	the	researcher	in	the	research	process,	
whilst	also	trying	to	highlight	the	many	multiple	perspectives	that	make	up	the	
complexity	of	the	social	world.	The	thesis	simultaneously	attempts	to	highlight	the	
modes	of	analysing,	shaping,	controlling	and	manipulating	it,	without	being	reductive	
of	it,	and	all	the	while	trying	to	infrastructure	for	the	expression	and	consideration	of	
different	situated	knowledges	in	the	social	sciences,	and	more	agile	knowledge.	The	
thesis	is	an	attempt	to	position	the	analysis	in	such	a	way	as	to	speak	to,	explore,	and	
shed	light	on,	all	these	different	levels	of	reflection	and	forms	of	knowledge	
production,	and	their	impact	on	the	potential	transformation	of	social	science	
research,	hence	the	use	of	Facet	Methodology	as	a	methodological	approach	for	doing	
4.4	Social	research	probes	as	method		
In	more	practical	terms,	the	research	strategy	of	this	thesis	uses	social	research	
probes	to	focus	on	the	particular	opportunities	and	tensions	drawn	out	of	the	
literature	and	practitioner	framing	of	citizen	social	science.	As	set	out	in	the	
introduction,	citizen	social	science	gives	rise	to	many	age-old	issues	and	questions	in	
the	social	sciences,	particularly	around	issues	such	as	reflexivity,	expertise,	and	power	
dynamics	in	the	social	research	process.	The	social	research	probe,	which	is	inspired	
from	design	thinking,	and	particularly	the	work	of	Gaver	et	al.	(1999;	2004)	and	
Boehner	et	al.	(2012),	is	an	information	seeking	method	designed	to	develop	a	richly	
textured	understanding	of	a	complex	and	dynamic	setting	or	situation.		Gaver	et	al.,	
(1999;	2001,	2004)	originally	conceived	of	cultural	probes	as	a	design	process,	as	part	
of	an	EU-funded	project,	Presence,	at	the	Royal	College	of	Art.	The	aim	was	to	increase	
the	presence	of	older	people	in	their	local	communities	using	new	technology.	In	
material	form,	the	Cultural	Probes	consisted	of	packets	of	provocative	information	or	
items	that	set	various	tasks	for	volunteer	participants	in	the	project.	The	responses	to	
these	provocations	became	prompts	for	the	designers	to	respond	to	accordingly.	The	
social	research	probes	used	in	this	thesis	build	on	the	recommended	adaptations	of	
Boehner	et	al.	(2012)	to	these	initial	cultural	probes.	Boehner	et	al.	(2012,	p.199)	
suggest	that	probes	upend	the	existing	roles	of	researcher	and	subject,	and	could	be	
used	to	provoke	reflections	on	the	core	values	and	practices	of	the	social	sciences	
(2012,	p.	200).	Furthermore,	they	suggest	that	probe	tasks	could	be	the	basis	for	
more	interventionist	studies	in	which	participants	are	urged	to	think	about	their	
orientations	and	activities	explicitly,	or	from	unfamiliar	perspectives	(2012,	p.200).	
The	social	research	probe,	as	used	in	this	thesis,	is	a	method	to	study	a	method.	Its	
use	aims	for	some	objectivity	whilst	acknowledging	the	subjectivity	of	the	researcher,	
and	how	this	impacts	on	the	research	site.		
Such	an	approach	aims	to	open	up	possibilities,	rather	than	converging	towards	
singular	truths	(Boehner	et	al.,	2012,	p.185).	Probes	act	as	a	way	to	understand	
phenomena	from	within		thereby	locating	the	practices	of	citizen	social	science	
within	the	different	settings	they	inhabit.	Crabtree	et	al.	(2003,	p.4)	suggest	that	
probes	allow	us	to	develop	a	more	comprehensive	understanding	of	the	life-worlds	
of	our	users.	Probes	produce	situated	and	idiosyncratic	clues,	rather	than	
authoritative	accounts	of	research,	that	embrace	subjective	engagement,	particularity	
and	ambiguity	(Boehner	et	al.,	2012,	p.200).	A	probe	also	allows	for	dialogic	exchange	
and	the	fostering	of	a	two-way	relationship	between	researcher	and	participants,	
thereby	enabling	an	examination	of	how	citizen	social	science	works	in	practice.	In	
this	way,	social	research	probes	are	designed	to	explore	in	more	detail	the	different	
facets	of	the	citizen	social	science	gemstone.	
Probes	are	prompts	and	not	a	script	for	engagement,	with	the	instructions	being	
carefully	worded	to	allow	for	a	degree	of	openness	and	improvisation.	The	onus	is	on	
the	participants	to	make	sense	of	the	instruction	and	thereby	to	work	out	the	probe	
(Graham	et	al.,	2007).	This	outcome	has	been	framed	as	the	value	of	uncertainty,	
which	it	undoubtedly	is,	but	it	also	is	an	approach	that	places	this	working	out	at	the	
heart	of	an	ongoing	iterative	process.	Probes	engender	interpretation,	forcing	a	
situation	that	requires	subjective	understandings	(Gaver	et	al.,	2004;	Graham	et	al.,	
2007).	Furthermore,	as	Boehner	et	al.	(2012,	p.200)	note,	rather	than	being	
assimilated	to	notions	of	replicability,	objectivity	and	generality,	the	probes	could	
operationalise	a	challenge	to	such	assumptions.		Crabtree	et	al.	(2003,	p.7)	suggest	
that	with	probes	there	seems	to	be	an	inherent	problem	of	confusing	just	what	the	
data	is	and,	with	that,	just	what	the	focus	of	analysis	is.	They	suggest	that	it	is	not	so	
much	the	material	artefacts	of	the	probes,	such	as	the	tapes,	the	photos,	the	booklets	
and	diaries,	etc.,	but	rather,	the	situated	character	of	everyday	life	that	should	be	the	
focus	of	analysis.	Whilst	some	have	advocated	the	use	of	a	form	of	creative	
assemblage	of	things,	people,	ideas,	social	collectivities	and	institutions,	to	reveal	a	
micropolitics	of	social	research	and	inquiry	(Nold,	2017;	Fox	and	Alldred,	2015),	there	
is	still	a	lack	of	clarity	over	the	precise	analytical	approach	to	be	used.	However,	the	
analytical	approaches	used	for	each	probe	are	set	out	in	more	detail	in	the	sections	of	
this	chapter	(see	sections	4.5.1;	4.5.2	and	4.5.3	respectively).		
The	main	reasoning	for	using	probes	is	three-fold.	Firstly,	probes	operate	at	the	
intersection	of	traditional	research	methods	and	everyday	life.		They	originate	in	
design,	but	can	be	applied	to	the	social	sciences.	Furthermore,	they	promote	
collaboration,	working	to	actively	involve	users	in	the	design	and/or	research	process	
(Crabtree	et	al.,	2003).	Probes	offer	a	bridge	between	qualitative	and	quantitative	
approaches,	as	well	as	challenging	old	roles	and	approaches.	Graham	et	al.	(2007,	
pp.35-36)	question	how	do	we	respond	when	everyday	life	is	being	sustained	and	
even	lived	through	what	we	are	researching?	How	do	we	approach	analysis	when	
personal	data	generation	is	continual	and	almost	effortless?	How	do	we	interpret	
disparate	data	distributed	across	time	and	place?	Probes	offer	a	way	of	thinking	
through	how	to	answer	these	questions.			
Secondly,	in	probing	everyday	life,	probes	humanise,	focussing	on	the	user	or	
research	subjects	experience,	something	often	lacking	in	discourse	around	
datafication	where	an	emphasis	is	put	on	data	rather	than	on	people	per	se.	As	
Graham	et	al.	(2007,	p.33)	warn,		
probes	not	only	generate	bland	accounts	of	peoples	 individual	 lives	but	
intensely	 personal	 and	 sympathetic	 ones.	 If	 we	 are	 not	 careful,	 in	 our	
willingness	 to	 theorise	 (or	 over-eagerness	 not	 to)	 the	 individual	 dies,	
the	 human	 gets	mummified	 in	 a	 raft	 of	 facts	 and	models,	 numbers	 and	
statistical	explanations,	sketches	and	prototypes,	claims	about	order	and	
ordinariness.		
In	many	ways,	probes	intrinsically	avoid	this,	because	they	are	(sometimes)	quite	
difficult	to	make	sense	of	and	are	inherently	participatory,	and	therefore	messy	and	
human.	
Crucially,	and	thirdly,	probes	open	up	dialogue.	They	use	uncertainty,	inspiration,	
interpretation	and	provocation.	Probes	use	uncertainty	to	subvert	the	traditional	
relations	between	researcher	and	researched,	by	allowing	space	for	both	to	work	
things	out	together,	as	a	joint	and	effortful	enterprise	(Graham	et	al.,	2007,	p.34).	
This	idea	of	working	something	out	together	is	an	interesting	aspect	of	the	analytical	
approach	in	this	thesis	and	will	be	reflected	on	in	more	detail	in	the	empirical	
chapters	(chapters	5-7)	and	the	discussion	chapter	(8).	Probes	inherently	engender	
reflexivity,	both	in	the	standard	social	science	sense	of	reflection	or	contemplation	
and	in	the	more	precise,	if	more	mundane,	ethnomethodological	sense	of	making	
actions	accountable	(as	the	actions	they	observably	are)	(Graham	et	al.,	2007,	p.35).	
Crabtree	et	al.	(2003,	p.8)	note	that	many	of	the	methods	implicated	in	the	
administration	of	cultural	and	informational	probes	are	thoroughly	ethnographic	in	
character:	tied	to	an	array	of	analytic	methods,	the	use	of	diaries,	notebooks,	cameras,	
and	the	like	has	a	long	history	in	ethnographic	research.	The	social	research	probe	is	
an	attempt	to	elicit	a	deeper	or	more	enlightening	response	to	a	question	(Graham	et	
al.,	2007).		
There	are	divergent	views	around	the	interpretation	of	what	probes	produce.	
Ethnographers	(and	ethnomethodologists)	dismiss	the	value	of	generating	abstract,	
decontextualised	models	from	social	data	(Graham	et	al.,	2007;	Crabtree	et	al.,	2003).	
Other	social	scientists	promote	the	need	to	generate	models	and	constituent	themes	
from	social	data	in	order	to	promote	understanding	of	difficult,	slippery	phenomena.	
Gaver	et	al.	(2004)	reflect	on	the	ways	in	which	probes	provoke	and	undermine	
certainty,	with	the	data	generated	from	them	challenging	our	interpretations,	the	
interpretations	of	others	and	our	own	changing	perceptions.	In	this	way,	probe	
materials	often	serve	as	triggers	for	analysis,	and	in	asking	people	to	administer	
them,	we	transform	participants	into	active	enquirers	into	their	everyday	lives,	rather	
than	passive	subjects	of	research	(Crabtree	et	al.,	2003,	p.7).		Participants	are	given	
the	opportunity	to	co-define	or	discover	what	might	count	as	data.	This	draws	
attention	to	the	ways	in	which	probes,	in	and	of	their	own	right,	are	a	form	of	citizen	
social	science	that	serve	as	a	form	of	intervention	in	everyday	life,	prompting	
participants	to	ask	questions	and	participate	in	the	research	process.	Probes	can	be	a	
readily	accessible	and	reflexive	way	to	generate	dialogue	between	researcher	and	
researched	that	is	highly	attuned	to	the	practical	circumstances	and	needs	of	both	
parties.	In	this	way,	and	in	keeping	with	what	both	Crabtree	et	al.	(2003)	and	Fennel	
et	al.	(1989)	advocate,	probes	should	be	systematic,	open-minded	and	openly	
reported	to	allow	those	reading	the	analysis	to	decide	for	themselves	how	to	treat	the	
results.	The	presentation	of	the	empirical	work	of	the	thesis	in	chapters	5		7	is	an	
attempt	to	do	so.	
4.5	Probes	rationale	
Developing	a	series	of	probes	to	explore	citizen	social	science	in	practice	involved	a	
necessarily	pragmatic	approach	(Harney	et	al.,	2016),	and	thus	the	probes	are	
iterative,	exploratory,	experimental,	and	opportunistic.		The	rationale	for	designing	
the	probes	in	this	thesis	stemmed	initially	from	seeking	to	explore	how	citizen	social	
science	works	in	practice	at	the	different	levels	of	Haklays	(2013)	typology	of	
participation	in	citizen	science.	As	stated	in	in	the	literature	review	(Chapter	2),	
crowdsourcing	is	presented	as	a	predominant	type	of	citizen	social	science,	where	
citizens	are	mobilised	to	collect	data	at	scale.	The	literature	also	highlights	the	
potential	for	a	more	participatory	form	of	citizen	social	science,	in	which	citizens	are	
involved	not	just	in	the	data	collection	processes,	but	also	in	the	research	design	and	
data	analysis	of	particular	issues.		
Table	4.1	below	illustrates	the	type	of	citizen	social	science,	and	sets	out	the	rationale	
for	devising	and	selecting	the	specific	probes.	The	rationale	for	each	probe	builds	on	
the	key	facets	that	were	drawn	out	from	the	literature	review	(chapter	2)	and	from	
the	scoping	work	(chapter	3).	They	each	have	a	particular	aspect	of	citizen	social	
science	they	are	probing	for,	as	well	as	a	substantive	and	a	conceptual	focus.		
Table	4.1.	Rationale	for	probing	the	specific	aspects	of	the	three	projects	
Probe	 Mass	Observation	Probe	 Empty	Houses	Probe	 Our	Manchester	Probe	
Type	of	citizen	
social	science	
Mass	observation	and	participation	in	
recording	the	everyday	
Crowdsourcing	social	data	to	fill	a	data	gap	 Coproduced	project	to	challenge	
narratives	about	the	impact	of	
migration	on	place	
Level	on	Haklay	
(2013)	typology	
Level	1/2	 Level	1/2	 Level	3/4	
Probing	
intervention	
Directives	asking	Mass	Observers	about	their	
experiences	of	participating	in	Mass	
Observation	
Instructions	asking	people	to	send	in	
observations	of	empty	houses.	
Interview	topic	guide.	
Prompts	for	collective	reminiscing	
and	mapping.	
Data	 Random	sample	of	responses	to	4	directives	
in	2nd	wave	of	the	project.	
Interviews	with	archivists	and	librarians.	
Field	notes	from	visits	to	the	archive.	
Pilot	project	to	explore	how	such	an	
approach	might	work	in	practice.		
Media	campaign	to	raise	awareness	about	
the	project.	
Data	submitted	to	official	project.	
Walking	interviews	to	unpack	the	
challenges	and	opportunities	to	reporting.	
Policy	and	practitioner	interviews	to	better	
understand	how	the	data	might	be	used,	
and	contextual	issues	with	the	subject	of	
empty	houses.	
Recordings	and	notes	from	launch	
events	and	training	sessions.	
Informant	interviews	with	Stephen,	
the	community	development	
worker	coproducing	the	project.		
Field	notes	and	observations	
throughout	the	project.	
Video/audio	recorded	interviews	
undertaken	by	participants.	
Photos	and	recordings	from	ESRC	
Festival	of	Social	Science	event.	
Substantive	probe	 For	the	reflections	of	Mass	Observers	on	
doing	citizen	social	science.		
Data	produced	in	the	project.	
Mobilising	citizens	to	send	in	observations	
of	empty	houses	in	their	local	area.		
Citizen	involvement	in	pressing	policy	
issue.	
Coproduced	project	to	better	
understand	the	impact	of	migration	
on	place.	
Data	in	place.	
Conceptual	probe	 Reflexivity	and	writing	ourselves.	
Transformative	social	science.	
Knowledge	production	processes.		
Engaged	citizen.	
Transformative	social	science.	
Knowledge	production	processes.	
Citizen	social	science	as	a	socially	
committed	approach.	
Transformative	social	science.	
Knowledge	production	processes.	
[BLANK PAGE]
The	following	sections	delineate	the	specific	methods	used	in	the	three	probes.	
4.5.1	Mass	Observation	-	Probe	1	
This	section	details	the	probe	into	the	Mass	Observation	Project	(MOP)	as	an	early	
form	of	citizen	social	science.	In	particular,	the	probe	focused	on	the	experiences	of	
the	Mass	Observers	in	participating	in	the	project,	their	motivations	and	practices,	as	
well	as	the	nature	of	the	relationship	between	those	organising	and	running	the	
project,	and	those	participating	as	observers	or	social	researchers	in	the	project.		
Background	to	the	Mass	Observation	Project	
Mass	Observation,	was	originally	set	up	in	1937	by	Tom	Harrisson,	Humphrey	
Jennings	and	Charles	Madge,	and	was	initially	referred	to	as	Anthropology	at	Home	
in	a	letter	to	the	New	Statesman	announcing	its	existence.	The	aim	of	the	project	at	the	
outset	was	to	encourage	people	to	speak	for	themselves	(Mass	Observation,	1937,	
pp.37-42),	by	asking	participants	to	record	their	experiences,	thoughts,	and	
observations	of	what	society	looked	like	to	them.	Mass	Observation,	in	its	current	
form,	seeks	out	lay	observations	of	social	life	through	a	volunteer	panels	responses	to	
directives,	sent	out	three	times	a	year.	It	is	funded	by	University	of	Sussex	and	the	
Mass	Observation	Archive	Trust	funds.	The	project	also	frequently	collaborates	with	
researchers	who	are	asked	to	make	a	contribution	to	the	costs	of	the	project.	
The	Mass	Observation	project	was	very	much	part	of	the	project	of	constituting	social	
science	as	a	public	making	endeavour,	with	a	sense	of	the	individual	as	part	of	the	
mass	collective	effort.	Mass-Observation's	mission	was	to	liberate	'facts'	about	what	
people	did	and	said	in	order	to	'add	to	the	social	consciousness	of	the	time'.	
Summerfield	(1985,	p.440)	suggests	that	a	major	part	of	Madge	and	Harrisson's	
motivation	stemmed	from	their	belief	that	this	social	consciousness	was	being	stifled	
or	distorted	by	those	with	power	in	the	1930s	(particularly	political,	commercial,	and	
media	power),	and	that	its	release	would	lead	to	social	change.	Rather	than	seeing	
people	as	passively	led	by	the	mass	media,	Mass	Observation	instead	saw	a	huge	gulf	
between	mass	media	representations	and	the	experience	and	understanding	of	the	
4.5.1	Mass	Observation	-	Probe	1		
world	in	everyday	life	(Highmore,	2002,	p.60).		The	first	phase	of	the	Mass	
Observation	project	sought	to	show	how	the	collection	of	individual	accounts	of	
everyday	life	could	contribute	to	a	mass	consciousness	raising	that	would	challenge	
the	grand	narratives	and	media	representation	of	the	time.		
The	initial	aims	of	the	project	were	to	challenge	the	media	representation	of	the	
people,	and	to	increase	self	and	thereby	societal	awareness	about	the	narrative	
power	of	the	press	(Highmore,	2002,	p.145).	Harrison	and	Madge	hoped	that	by	
encouraging	people	to	look	more	closely	at	their	social	environment,	they	would	
therefore	contribute	to	an	increased	general	social	consciousness	to	counteract	the	
tendency	so	universal	in	modern	life	to	perform	all	our	actions	through	sheer	habit,	
with	as	little	consciousness	of	our	surroundings	as	though	we	were	walking	in	our	
sleep	(Madge	and	Harrison;	1937,	pp.29-30).	The	initial	framing	of	the	Mass	
Observation	project	was	such	that	Madge	and	Harrison	(1937,	pp.29-30)	intended	for	
Mass	Observation	to	work	as	a	new	research	method,	making	use	of	not	only	the	
trained	scientific	observer,	but	of	the	untrained	observer,	the	man	in	the	street.	They	
suggested	that	the	project	was	ideally	about	the	observation	by	everyone	of	everyone,	
including	themselves.	The	nature	of	how	such	intentions	played	out	in	practice	are	
discussed	in	some	detail	in	the	empirical	work	presented	in	chapters	5	and	6.	
The	Mass	Observation	project	can	be	credited	with	attempting	to	bridge	the	gap	
between	elites	(both	political	and	intellectual)	and	the	masses	(Casey	et	al.,	2014),	
charting	an	interest	in	the	public	social	sciences,	as	well	as	encouraging	wider	public	
engagement	with	social	science.	In	many	ways,	the	project	constituted	a	turning	point	
in	social	science	methods.	Yet,	despite	these	bold	claims,	the	Mass	Observation	
project	was	subjected	to	significant	funding	constraints	in	a	context	of	post-war	
British	politics	and	culture.	Social	research	shifted	away	towards	the	narrower	
analysis	of	consumer	choice,	which	arguably	is	what	Big	Data	largely	is,	and	Mass	
Observation	became	a	market-research	firm	in	1949.	It	was	then	re-launched	in	1981	
with	a	focus	on	developing	a	panel	of	volunteer	observers	who	would	respond	to	
directives,	or	open-ended	questions,	three	times	a	year.	Mass	Observation	continues	
to	exist	in	this	current	format	today	(Lindsey	and	Bulloch;	2014).		In	this	way,	a	
qualitative	longitudinal	social	data	resource	was	created,	with	an	emphasis	on	
4.5.1	Mass	Observation	-	Probe	1		
subjectivity	and	self-	representation,	so	as	to	contribute	to	an	understanding	of	
everyday	life	and	change	in	the	late	20th	and	early	21st	century.		Sheridan	et	al.	
(2000,	p.84)	note	that	this	phase	developed	further	the	reflexive	accounts	by	
ordinary	people	of	their	own	experiences	and	observations	and	represents	a	
different		more	contemporary		view	of	ethnography	than	the	more	positivist	
aspects	of	parts	of	the	first	phase.		In	this	way,	it	is	important	to	draw	attention	to	the	
two	contrasting	phases	of	the	Mass	Observation	project,	and	the	way	in	which	the	
project	developed.	
Data	from	probe	1	
A	selection	of	responses	to	four	directives	in	the	second	wave	of	the	project	were	
analysed,	so	as	to	better	understand	the	experiences	of	the	Mass	Observers	in	
participating	in	the	project	from	the	perspective	of	their	own	writings	about	their	
experiences.		These	particular	directives	were	selected	because	they	asked	Mass	
Observers	specifically	about	their	experience	of	participating	in	the	project,	a	
perspective	that	has	not	specifically	been	considered	before	in	the	literature	on	Mass	
Observation	or	the	wider	social	research	methods	literature	(Pollen	2013;	Savage,	
2009;	Bhatti,	2006).	
In	order	to	better	understand	Mass	Observations	operational	complexities,	I	also	
undertook	an	in-depth	semi-structured	interview	with	a	manager	and	an	archivist	of	
the	archive.	The	knowledge	and	expertise	of	the	archivists	forms	an	important	part	of	
the	historical	meta-data	available	to	researchers	(Lindsey	and	Bulloch,	2014).	This	
interview	uncovered	the	particular	challenges	of	collecting,	storing	and	maintaining	
the	Mass	Observation	data	in	greater	depth	than	previously	published,	as	well	as	the	
nature	of	the	relationship	between	Mass	Observers	and	those	running	the	project,	
from	the	perspective	of	those	administering	the	data.	I	was	unable	to	undertake	an	
interview	with	the	director	of	the	project,	despite	several	attempts	to	contact	her.	
However,	I	attended	the	Mass	Observation	50th	Anniversary	conference	in	July	2017,	
and	in	addition	to	presenting	my	work,	I	was	able	to	attend	a	discussion	session	with	
the	director,	which	was	framed	as	a	conversation	session,	and	many	general	questions	
about	the	project	were	asked.	I	annotated	the	discussion	and	these	notes	formed	part	
of	data	of	the	probe.	In	the	empirical	work	of	the	thesis	in	chapters	5	-7	this	
4.5.1	Mass	Observation	-	Probe	1		
discussion	is	referred	to	as	In	conversation	with	the	director	of	the	MOP.	Finally,	field	
notes	and	observations	from	visiting	the	archive	to	extract	the	accounts	of	the	Mass	
Observers,	were	recorded	and	analysed	so	as	to	build	up	a	holistic	description	of	Mass	
Observation	as	a	form	of	citizen	social	science,	and	so	as	to	better	account	for	how	the	
project	works	in	practice.		
There	is	relatively	little	overarching	data,	or	meta-data,	on	the	Mass	Observation	
project,	such	as	systematically	collected	data	on	who	the	panel	of	observers	are,	their	
socio-economic	factors,	and	other	relevant	details	about	participants,	as	Lindsey	and	
Bulloch	(2014)	note,	despite	the	fact	that	Mass	Observation	writing	has	been	re-used	
and	re-analysed	by	multiple	researchers	over	time	(May,	2015;	Lindsey	and	Bulloch,	
2014;	Pollen,	2013;	Savage,	2009	to	list	but	a	few).	Table	4.2.	below	shows	the	year	
the	selected	directives	took	place,	the	title,	number	of	Mass	Observers	the	directives	
were	sent	to,	and	the	response	rates	for	each	relevant	directive.		Whilst	a	dedicated	
project	has	recently	taken	place	to	open	up,	and	make	the	Mass	Observation	meta-
data	more	readily	useable,	this	information	was	not	available	in	advance	of	the	
current	analysis,	and	up	until	this	point,	the	general	Mass	Observation	metadata	is	
relatively	hard	to	come	by.	The	project	created	a	searchable,	downloadable	database	
for	people	wanting	to	identify	available	writing	from	writers	contributing	to	the	Mass	
Observation	Project	1981	onwards.	It	is	a	resource	that	provides	potential	users	of	
the	MOP	archive	with	information	about	the	biographical/demographic	
characteristics	and	writing	behaviours	of	individual	Mass	Observation	Project	
writers.			
4.5.1	Mass	Observation	-	Probe	1		
Directive	
Date	 Title	
Maile
d	out	
Responses	
Response		
Rate	(%)	
32	 Summer	1990	 Your	views	on	MO	 1222		 576	 47	
Autumn/	
Winter	1993	
The	title	Mass	
Observation	
533		 365	 68	
73	 Autumn	2004	
Being	Part	of	
research	
500	 205	 41	
90	 Autumn	2010	
Special	
Questionnaire	
473	 195	 41	
Table	4.2	Metadata	on	directives	from	the	second	wave	of	the	Mass	Observation	Project	that	were	
analysed	
Sampling	of	probe	1	
A	subsample	of	10%	of	the	responses,	selected	with	a	systematic	sampling	approach	
using	every	tenth	response	in	a	randomly	ordered	data	list	of	responses	to	each	
directive,	provides	a	glimpse	of	the	variety	of	responses	in	the	project.	This	sampling	
approach	is	not	without	its	limitations,	and	owing	to	the	richness	and	scale	of	the	
data,	there	is	a	serious	possibility	that	some	of	the	more	interesting	responses	have	
not	been	captured	by	this	sampling	method.	Table	4.2	above	sets	out	the	directives	
from	the	second	wave	of	the	project	that	were	selected	for	analysis.	Further	data	on	
Mass	Observers	experience	of	participating	in	the	project	can	be	found	in	many	other	
directive	responses,	since	the	questions	are	open-ended	and	participants	are	free	to	
write	about	any	topics	they	chose;	however,	these	four	directives	are	the	most	overtly	
relevant	to	the	question	of	the	Mass	Observers	positionality	in	the	project,	and	how	
they	reflect	on	this	issue	and	the	types	of	epistemologies	that	are	produced.	An	
example	of	the	exact	wording	of	a	directive	is	shown	in	Figures	4.1	and	4.2	below.	The	
full	wording	of	the	directives	used	can	be	found	in	Appendix	4.		
4.5.1	Mass	Observation	-	Probe	1		
Figure	4.1	Precise	wording	of	MO	Summer	Directive	1990:	Your	views	
Figure	4.2	Precise	wording	of	MO	Autumn/Winter	Directive	1993:	The	title	Mass	Observation	
Each	citation	in	the	empirical	chapters	(5-7)	is	consistently	referenced	to	show	the	
individual	participants	Mass	Observation	(MO)	number,	gender,	age,	which	directive	
they	responded	to	and	the	year	in	which	the	directive	was	issued.	For	example,	
(W640,	Female,	65,	Title	MO,	1993).			
4.5.1	Mass	Observation	-	Probe	1		
Analysis	of	probe	1	
A	reflexive,	inductive	and	emic	approach	was	used	to	analyse	the	data	generated	by	
the	Mass	Observation	probe,	drawing	on	thematic	analysis	(TA),	a	qualitative	data	
analysis	technique	used	for	identifying,	analysing	and	interpreting	patterned	
meanings	or	themes	in	qualitative	data	(Braun	and	Clark,	2013,	p.79).	TA	has	been	
advocated	as	a	phenomenological	method	(Guest	et	al.,	2012,	Joffe,	2011);	however,	
Braun	and	Clark,	(2013,	p.79),	in	contrast,	emphasise	the	theoretical	flexibility	and	
independence	of	TA,	and	identify	it	as	just	an	analytic	method,	rather	than	a	
methodology,	which	most	other	qualitative	approaches	are.		
Braun	and	Clarke	(2006)	suggest	that	there	are	six	phases	of	thematic	analysis,	which	
can	be	summarized	as	follows:		
1) Familiarisation	with	the	data:	this	includes	immersion,	and	intimate	familiarity	
with	the	data,	by	reading	and	re-reading	it,	as	well	as	noting	down	initial	
analytic	observations.	
2) Coding:	this	is	a	common	element	of	many	approaches	to	qualitative	analysis,	
as	Braun	and	Clarke	(2012)	note.	It	involves	labelling	important	aspects	of	the	
data	according	to	their	relevance	to	the	research	question	guiding	the	analysis.	
3) Searching	for	themes:	this	is	the	active	construction	and	collation	of	meaningful	
patterns	in	the	data	that	are	relevant	to	the	research	question.	
4) Reviewing	themes:	the	patterns	or	themes	are	checked	to	ensure	they	work	
together	to	tell	a	compelling	story	about	the	data,	the	themes	and	the	
relationship	between	themes.		
5) Defining	and	naming	themes:	the	themes	are	then	named	according	to	their	
main	constitutive	part		i.e.	what	makes	them	what	they	are.	
6) Writing	up:	the	themes	are	then	written	through	and	interlaced	to	make	up	the	
analytic	narrative.	Useful	quotations	or	data	extracts	are	also	used	in	support	
of	telling	a	coherent	story	about	the	data.		
I	undertook	these	stages	of	analysis,	and	the	write-up	is	presented	in	the	empirical	
work	of	chapters	5		7.	The	directive	responses	in	the	sample	were	systematically	
reviewed	and	grouped	according	to	the	emergent	themes,	ideas,	and	concepts.	These	
4.5.1	Mass	Observation	-	Probe	1		
components	were	then	reviewed	and	re-evaluated,	regrouping	as	necessary,	and	
gradually	refined	and	linked	to	other	conceptual	categories.		
In	any	qualitative	study,	there	is	a	danger	of	turning	sociological	terminology,	and	the	
sociological	rendering	of	rich,	emotive,	individual	'writing'	or	'material',	into	the	
'rational'	'scientific'	language	of	'data'	as	Lindsey	and	Bulloch	(2014)	highlight.	
Therefore	the	analysis	presented	of	this	probe	tried	to	maintain	something	of	the	
messy	richness	of	the	data,	so	as	to	try	not	to	remove	its	detail,	variety	and	vitality	
(Casey	et	al.,	2014;	Braun	and	Clark,	2013;	Smart,	2011;	Savage,	2010).	I	sought	to	
achieve	this	by	coding	and	analysing	the	directive	responses,	and	attempting	to	hold	
them	in	dialogue	with	each	other	(Thomas,	2002;	Pollen,	2013),	and	the	analysis	of	
the	interviews	with	the	archivists	and	librarians	of	the	project,	in	conjunction	with	
the	other	data	types	of	the	probe,	such	as	contextual	data	and	field	notes.	
Ethics	of	probe	1	
This	probe	used	secondary	data	in	the	form	of	the	Mass	Observers	responses	to	the	
project,	and	therefore	did	not	have	any	immediate	impact	on	the	data	or	participants	
in	the	project.	Participants	responses	were	already	anonymised	due	to	the	way	in	
which	data	is	handled	at	the	Mass	Observation	Archive,	and	therefore	the	identities	of	
the	Mass	Observers	were	protected.	
The	probe	received	ethical	approval	from	the	University	of	Manchester	Ethics	
Committee.		I	was	then	able	to	travel	to	the	Mass	Observation	Archive,	located	at	the	
Keep,	at	the	University	of	Sussex,	where	I	met	with	the	archivists	and	librarians	to	
discuss	my	approach	to	the	project.	As	the	PhD	was	a	CASE	PhD,	and	my	partner	
organisation	was	the	Mass	Observation	Archive	Trust,	negotiating	access	to	the	
archive	and	the	data	was	straightforward.	I	was	able	to	develop	a	good	working	
relationship	with	those	at	the	Keep,	and	access	the	data.	
The	responses	to	the	Mass	Observation	project	are	stored	in	boxes	in	the	archive	
room	at	the	Keep.	In	order	to	be	able	to	analyse	the	responses,	it	was	necessary	to	
scan	all	the	responses	to	the	four	directives	from	the	second	wave	of	the	project	that	I	
4.5.2	Empty	Houses	-	Probe	2		
was	interested	in,	as	they	exist	solely	on	the	paper	on	which	they	were	submitted	to	
the	project	by	the	Mass	Observers.	In	digitising	the	responses	by	scanning	them	at	the	
Keep,	I	was	able	to	generate	digitised	copies	of	the	responses,	which	I	was	then	able	
to	give	back	to	the	Mass	Observation	Project	after	I	had	finished	my	analysis.		The	
responses	were	stored	under	password	protection	and	in	keeping	with	the	university	
guidelines	about	data	storage.		
4.5.2	Empty	Houses	-	Probe	2	
The	Empty	Houses	Probe	aimed	to	explore	notions	of	crowdsourcing	social	data	using	
Haklays	(2013)	typology	of	participation.	In	this	sense,	the	project	did	not	aim	to	
question	whether	empty	houses	exist,	but	to	explore	how	citizens	might	be	engaged	
in	identifying	empty	houses,	and	thereby	potentially	assisting	in	tackling	a	pressing	
policy	issue.		
Background	to	the	issue	of	Empty	Houses	
In	its	2018	report,	Empty	Homes	in	England,	the	charity	Empty	Homes	made	several	
recommendations	on	how	to	bring	more	empty	homes	back	into	use.	The	
recommendations	included	that	Local	authorities	should	have	an	empty	homes	
strategy	for	their	area,	with	the	aspiration	to	reduce	the	number	of	long-term	empty	
homes;	that	Local	authorities	should	take	a	casework	approach	with	owners	of	long-
term	empty	properties	to	encourage,	advise	and	support	them	to	bring	homes	back	
into	housing	use.	Employing	dedicated	empty	homes	staff	can	ensure	that	the	council	
is	able	to	act	on	information	about	empty	homes,	and	build	up	expertise	in	working	
with	owners,	including	taking	enforcement	action	where	necessary.	Furthermore,	
another	recommendation	was	that	Local	authorities	with	concentrations	of	long-term	
empty	homes	should	look	at	how	they	can	support	community-	based	neighbourhood	
regeneration	approaches	(Wilson	et	al.,	2018).	Whilst	such	recommendations	do	not	
specify	the	sources	of	information	on	empty	homes,	or	the	types	of	community-based	
neighbourhood	regeneration	approach,	it	is	clear	that	the	issue	of	empty	houses	is	a	
pressing	issue.	
4.5.2	Empty	Houses	-	Probe	2		
Charitable	organisations	such	as	the	Empty	Homes	Agency12	have	analysed	the	
publicly	available	data	on	empty	homes	in	the	UK.	Their	analysis	raises	questions	
around	whether	the	measures	and	ways	in	which	the	official	figures	are	collected	are	
the	most	effective	ways	in	which	to	generate	an	understanding	of	the	reality	of	the	
empty	houses	situation	in	the	UK.	The	Empty	Homes	Agency	has	been	campaigning	to	
tackle	the	issue,	by	both	providing	data	analysis	and	reports	on	the	issue	of	empty	
homes,	using	the	official	statistics,	as	well	as	launching	media	campaigns	such	as	
Empty	Homes	week13	to	raise	awareness	about	the	issue	and	to	provide	suggestions	
of	what	can	be	done.		
Other	organisations,	such	as	the	Empty	Homes	Network14,	has	its	roots	in	the	Local	
Authority	Empty	Houses	network	and	works	on	the	issue	of	empty	houses,	but	mainly	
in	a	capacity	to	support	practitioners.	The	Empty	Homes	Network	is	the	successor	to	
the	National	Association	of	Empty	Property	Practitioners	(NAEPP),	established	in	
May	2001	to	support	people	involved	in	delivering	empty	property	strategies.	It	was	
launched	by	empty	property	practitioners	with	the	support	of	government	ministers,	
the	Housing	Corporation	and	the	Empty	Homes	Agency.		Primarily,	the	Empty	Homes	
Network	aims	to	foster	mutual	support	and	understanding	amongst	Empty	Property	
Practitioners,	and	to	promote	policies	and	practices	which	offer	effective	responses	to	
the	challenges	presented	by	empty	property.	
An	approach	to	crowdsourcing	data	on	empty	houses	is	not	new		for	example	George	
Clarke,	the	British	architect	and	TV	presenter,	mounted	a	large	scale	public	campaign	
in	2011	to	raise	awareness	about	the	issue	of	empty	houses	and	to	encourage	people	
to	send	in	their	observations	of	empty	houses	either	online,	or	via	a	hotline	(Clarke,	
2011).		His	show	The	Great	British	Property	Scandal	(2011,	transmitted	on	Chanel	
4),	and	its	BBC	counterpart	The	Empty	Homes	Show	(2011),	both	explored	the	depth	
of	the	housing	crisis	and	what	can	be	done	about	empty	homes.	Furthermore,	In	April	
2012	the	Coalition	Government	appointed	George	Clarke	as	its	independent	empty	
homes	advisor.	His	role	involved	promoting	bringing	empty	homes	back	into	use;	
12	http://www.actiononemptyhomes.org	
13	http://www.emptyhomes.com/empty-homes-week.html	
14	http://www.ehnetwork.org.uk	
4.5.2	Empty	Houses	-	Probe	2		
raising	public	awareness	of	the	benefits	of	bringing	empty	homes	back	into	use	and	
encouraging	people	to	report	empty	homes	in	their	area;	encouraging	councils,	
housing	associations	and	voluntary	groups	to	identify	innovative	and	good	ideas	and	
sharing	this	across	communities;	challenging	Government	and	other	public	bodies	to	
ensure	publicly-owned	homes	are	not	left	empty;	and	exploring	whether	current	
plans	for	demolition	in	councils	could	be	scaled	back	(Wilson	et	al.,	2018;	DCLG,	
2012).	
Most	local	authorities	have	a	specific	team	dedicated	to	the	issue	of	empty	homes,	
with	these	teams	running	their	own	campaigns.	Furthermore,	every	local	authority	
website	has	a	page	with	specific	information	about	how	to	deal	with	empty	houses	
and	the	opportunity	to	report	any	empties.	The	official	data	on	empty	houses	is	
calculated	via	council	tax	payments	and	crosschecked	with	data	from	the	Land	
Registry	(Empty	Houses	Agency,	2016).	The	Empty	Homes	Agencys	analysis	draws	
attention	to	issues	such	as	the	potential	misclassification	of	derelict	properties,	and	
undercounting	due	to	exemptions	from	council	tax	payments	or	under-utilised	
properties	not	counting	as	vacant	for	council	tax	purposes.	
The	aim	of	the	Empty	Houses	probe	was	not	to	duplicate	these	previous	efforts,	but	to	
probe	the	process	of	reporting	an	empty	house	to	better	understand	the	participants	
perspectives	in	the	process	and	to	prompt	an	examination	of	the	barriers	and	
obstacles	to	reporting,	since	many	of	the	campaigns	mentioned	are	ongoing	and	with	
mixed	success.	Furthermore,	it	became	apparent	during	the	interviews	undertaken	
with	the	practitioners	and	policy	makers,	as	detailed	below,	that	there	have	been	a	
range	of	historic	projects	on	the	issue	of	empty	houses	and	how	to	tackle	them,	but	
they	have	not	been	re-examined.	The	lack	of	systematic	evaluation	of	such	projects	
means	that	there	is	a	growing	field	of	unevaluated	projects,	and	a	lack	of	attempts	to	
find	out	why	certain	approaches	have	proved	more	successful	than	others.		
4.5.2	Empty	Houses	-	Probe	2		
Data	from	probe	2			
The	empty	houses	probe	consisted	of	the	following	different	aspects	and	stages:	
a) pilot	project	to	explore	how	such	an	approach	might	work	in	practice		
b) campaign	to	raise	awareness	about	the	project	
c) data	collection	window	
d) walking	interviews	to	unpack	the	challenges	and	opportunities	to	reporting	
e) policy	and	practitioner	interviews	to	better	understand	how	the	data	might	be	
used,	and	contextual	issues	with	the	subject	of	empty	houses	
It	is	worth	noting	that	the	probe	was	iterative	and	required	modification	as	it	
developed.	Since	there	were	not	many	data	submissions	to	the	project,	it	became	
necessary	to	undertake	a	series	of	walking	interviews	to	unpack	some	of	the	barriers	
and	issues	with	participating	in	the	project,	and	to	shed	light	on	the	practice	of	
observing	and	reporting	empty	houses.	
a) Pilot	project		
A	pilot	stage	of	the	project	was	run	for	two	weeks,	and	responses	were	sought	from	
five	participants,	selected	at	random,	in	order	to	determine	the	wording	of	the	
instructions	and	to	see	what	sort	of	data	was	submitted.	The	results	were	monitored	
and	the	categories	and	wording	of	the	instructions	altered	appropriately.	The	
instructions	were	then	set	up	on	a	Wordpress	blog	page	as	per	the	screenshot	of	the	
blog	in	Figure	4.3.		
4.5.2	Empty	Houses	-	Probe	2		
Figure	4.3	Probe	instructions	for	reporting	empty	houses	
Source:	https://emptyhousesproject.wordpress.com	
b) Campaign	to	raise	awareness	about	the	project		
In	order	to	generate	as	much	interest	and	awareness	about	the	project	as	possible	I	
developed	a	systematic	promotional	campaign.	I	used	social	media	platforms	such	as	
Twitter	and	Facebook	to	regularly	promote	the	project.	I	started	conversations	on	
Twitter,	intervened	in	other	discussions	and	linked	the	project	to	different	posts	that	
were	relevant	to	the	aims	of	the	project.	I	also	directly	messaged	housing	and	
homelessness	organisations	and	campaigners,	commenting	on	their	posts	and	
sharing	news	articles	and	relevant	events	via	social	media	platforms.	
I	also	sent	out	emails	to	university	lists	and	contacts	about	the	project,	asking	if	
people	had	noticed	any	empty	houses	in	their	local	area	and	to	send	their	
observations	in	to	the	project.	I	printed	flyers	and	distributed	them	in	public	places,	
on	public	notice	boards	and	in	cafes/bars	and	other	social	spaces	across	the	city.	
In	terms	of	other	forms	of	media,	I	wrote	blog	posts	for	the	Policy@Manchester	blog,	
outlining	the	keys	issues	around	empty	houses	and	what	can	be	done	with	them,	and	
for	the	Big	Issue	North,	in	the	Why	Dont	We	column.	I	appeared	on	a	local	
television	station	Thats	Manchester	TV	for	their	Big	Debate	show	to	discuss	the	
4.5.2	Empty	Houses	-	Probe	2		
project	and	the	issues	surrounding	empty	houses.	There	was	also	a	news	feature	on	
the	same	station	about	the	project,	with	the	aim	of	trying	to	encourage	people	to	send	
in	observations	of	empty	houses	in	their	local	area.		
To	further	generate	interest	in	the	project,	and	add	to	data	collection	on	the	state	of	
the	housing	sector	in	Greater	Manchester,	I	attended	many	events,	discussions,	
workshops	and	conferences	related	to	housing	and	homelessness	in	the	Greater	
Manchester	area.	I	informed	and	liaised	with	the	Greater	Manchester	Housing	Action	
Network,	a	newly	formed	group	of	activists	trying	to	raise	awareness	and	undertake	
action	around	housing	issues	in	the	Greater	Manchester	area,	to	try	to	get	more	
support	from	housing	activists	working	on	related	issues.	I	received	a	variety	of	
replies	from	people	offering	to	help	document	the	project,	to	others	offering	
information	on	different	sorts	of	data	available,	or	also	to	talk	about	existing	projects	
that	were	taking	place.	I	also	observed	and	intervened	in	many	debates	on	social	
media,	thereby	observing	how	others	represent	housing	issues	via	these	media,	and	
adding	to	the	returns	from	the	probe.	
Setting	up	and	running	the	Empty	Houses	project	gave	rise	to	reflections	around	
expertise	and	control	of	knowledge,	particularly	in	terms	of	the	media	campaign,	and	
how	I	almost	became	a	representative	for	an	important	policy	area	when	I	was	by	no	
means	an	expert	in	prior	to	the	project	(see	Chapters	5		8).	
c) Data	submitted	to	the	project	
The	project	was	initially	open	for	a	period	of	three	months.	A	total	of	20	responses	
were	submitted	to	the	project	in	that	time.	The	project	remained	open	for	a	further	
month	in	an	attempt	to	allow	for	further	submissions	to	the	project.	The	data	was	
collated	via	the	online	Google	form	(see	figure	4.4)	and	then	downloaded	and	stored	
on	a	password	protected	hard	drive.		
4.5.2	Empty	Houses	-	Probe	2		
Figure	4.4	The	online	Google	form	for	reporting	empty	houses	online	via	the	project	website	
d) Walking	interviews	
Despite	a	relatively	extensive	campaign	to	promote	the	Empty	Houses	project	and	to	
ensure	that	information	about	the	issues	and	how	best	to	report	were	in	the	public	
domain,	the	project	only	received	20	submissions.	Therefore	I	decided	to	adapt	the	
probe	by	undertaking	a	series	of	walking	interviews	with	people	who	had	already	
submitted	data	or	who	were	involved	in	housing	activism,	to	better	understand	the	
barriers	to	reporting	and	any	issues	participants	may	have	had.	These	people	were	
selected,	rather	than,	for	example,	those	who	had	not	participated	in	the	project,	as	
the	aim	was	to	better	understand	how	participants	had	gone	about	observing	and	
reporting	empty	houses,	and	any	barriers	they	might	have	experienced	in	doing	so.	In	
this	way,	the	walking	interviews	became	a	rich	data	source,	allowing	for	a	clearer	
4.5.2	Empty	Houses	-	Probe	2		
understanding	of	the	process	of	reporting	empty	houses,	and	thereby	participating	in	
citizen	social	science.	Furthermore	the	walking	interviews	allowed	for	dialogue	and	
reflections	on	the	approach,	beyond	simply	setting	up	the	project	and	my	own	
participant	observations	of	doing	so,	since	these	walking	interviews	were	a	form	of	
working	it	out	together	with	the	interviewees.	
There	is	a	long	history	in	ethnography	of	researchers	walking	alongside	participants	
in	order	to	observe,	experience,	and	make	sense	of	everyday	practices	(for	example	
Evans	and	Jones,	2011;	Carpiano,	2009;	Anderson,	2004;	Kusenbach,	2003;	Reed,	
2002);	and	develop	live	methods	(Back	and	Puwar,	2012;	Clark	and	Emmel,	2010)	and	
mobile	methods	(Bscher	et	al.,	2010;	Buscher	and	Urry	2009).	Walking	interviews	
were	preferable	over	static	interviews	in	this	instance	for	a	number	of	reasons:	the	
method	allows	participants	to	potentially	have	a	greater	degree	of	control	over	the	
research	process,	particularly	in	deciding	where	to	take	the	researcher	(Clark	and	
Emmel,	2010).	Also	the	participant	can	show,	rather	than	describe,	the	environments	
the	researcher	is	interested	in,	placing	events,	stories	and	experiences	in	their	context	
which	can	act	as	a	prompt	to	participants	and	help	participants	to	articulate	their	
thoughts.	It	can	act	as	a	method	to	engage	with	our	identities	as	reflected	in	our	
surroundings	(Crivellaro	et	al.,	2015).	In	this	way,	the	participants	narratives,	told	in	
their	lived	environment,	can	add	detail	to	the	researchers	understanding	and	insight.	
In	many	ways,	the	route	of	the	walk,	and	the	environment	of	the	locations	walked	
through,	becomes	a	form	of	elicitation	process,	prompting	further	areas	of	discussion	
and	questioning	that	might	not	have	happened	in	a	fixed	interview	setting.	Rather	
than	an	individual	activity,	the	walks	can	be	seen	as	as	collective,	relational	and	
dynamic	endeavors	(Suchman,	2000),	aimed	at	creating	collective	experiences	and	
opportunities	for	dialogue	(Crivellaro	et	al.,	2015).	This	means	walking	interviews	can	
provide	opportunities	for	the	serendipitous	and	the	unanticipated	things	to	occur,	as	
well	as	throwing	up	issues	of	contradiction,	factors	which	are	also	the	case	in	static	
interviews,	but	which	are	more	likely	to	come	to	the	fore	in	walking	interviews.		
Eight	walking	interviews	were	undertaken.	Demographic	details	of	the	participants	
are	shown	in	table	4.3	below.	Participants	were	recruited	based	on	whether	or	not	
they	had	shown	interest	in	the	project	and	potentially	already	submitted	data,	or	were	
4.5.2	Empty	Houses	-	Probe	2		
involved	in	different	housing	related	projects	or	were	activists	working	to	affect	
change	in	relation	to	housing	in	Manchester.	Participants	were	asked	if	they	had	
potentially	noticed	any	empty	houses	in	their	local	area.	I	then	asked	them	to	lead	me	
there,	allowing	them	to	chose	the	route	and	to	raise	awareness	about	any	issues	or	
topics	as	we	walked.	The	walking	interviews	generally	lasted	for	about	one	hour	and,	
as	the	interview	progressed,	the	conversations	developed	into	more	in-depth	
discussions	around	whether	the	activity	we	were	undertaking	could	be	considered	to	
be	social	science	and	what	participants	understood	by	the	term	citizen	social	science.	
The	interviews	were	recorded	and	transcribed	for	analysis.	The	process	of	recording	
was	easier	than	expected,	owing	to	the	quality	of	the	sound	recorder	used	(a	Zoom	
H4)	and	no	significant	issues	of	inaudible	recordings	occurred.	
No.	 Age	 Gender	 Occupation	 GM	Area	
1.	 35	 M	 Software	developer	 Ancoats	
2.	 33	 F	 Postgraduate	researcher	 Whalley	Range	
3.	 34	 M	 Third	sector	worker	 Withington	
4.	 40	 F	 Social	policy	researcher	 Kersal	
5.	 26	 F	 Housing	Charity	worker		 Stretford	
6.	 30	 M	 Postgraduate	researcher	 Longsight	
7.	 24	 M	 Housing	Activist	 Levenshulme	
8.	 22	 M	 Housing	Activist	 Rusholme	
Table	4.3.	Demographic	information	of	walking	interview	participants	
Two	interviewees	who	were	approached	to	be	interviewed	declined	to	take	part,	
giving	the	reason	of	having	a	busy	schedule	and	not	being	available	in	Manchester	
during	the	period	in	which	the	walking	interviews	were	taking	place	(these	are	not	
included	in	table	4.3	above).		
4.5.2	Empty	Houses	-	Probe	2		
e) Policy	and	practitioner	interviews	
In	order	to	probe	further	into	the	different	perspectives	and	types	of	knowledge	
about	the	issues	of	housing	and	empty	houses,	and	the	processes	of	identifying	empty	
houses,	I	undertook	a	series	of	nine	one-hour	long,	semi-structured	interviews	with	
housing	practitioners	and	housing	policy	officials.	These	are	listed	in	table	4.4	below.		
In	the	instances	in	which	I	approached	potential	interviewees,	I	emailed	them	to	ask	
whether	they	would	be	willing	to	participate	and	acted	according	to	their	responses.	
In	some	instances	potential	interviewees	approached	the	Empty	Houses	Project,	
either	via	social	media,	email	or	via	the	blog	page,	asking	questions	about	the	project.	
In	responding	to	such	queries	I	was	able	to	establish	a	dialogue	with	them	and	to	then	
propose	an	extended	conversation	either	face-to-face	where	possible,	or	over	the	
phone/Skype	as	an	alternative.		In	most	instances,	the	interviews	were	conducted	
over	the	phone,	or	via	Skype.	Where	they	were	conducted	face	to	face,	they	were	
recorded	and	transcribed.	Those	conducted	over	the	phone	or	Skype	were	not	
recorded,	but	instead	I	took	extensive	notes	during	the	conversations.	These	
interviews	enabled	a	deeper	understanding	of	the	issues	surrounding	empty	houses	
more	broadly,	as	well	as	shedding	light	on	how	the	data	generated	from	the	project	
might	be	used,	and	any	other	issues	surrounding	the	processes	of	identifying	and	
reporting	observations,	beyond	those	discussed	in	the	walking	interviews.	
No.	 Organisation/Individual	 Type	of	organisation/	Role	of	
individual	
1.	 Empty	Homes	Agency	 Campaigning	charity	
2.	 A	sense	of	place	 Community	campaigner	
3.	 Empty	Homes	Network	 National	association	
4.	 Student	Union	 Student	Union	
5.	 Generation	Rent	 Housing	activist	group	
6.	 Local	Authority	research	team	&	Empty	
Houses	team	
Local	authority	
7.	 Homelessness	Charter		 Local	councillor	
8.	 Empty	Houses	campaigner	 Ex-Empty	Houses	Agency	
9.	 Greater	Manchester	Housing	Action	
Network	
Network	of	housing	activists	
Table	4.4.	Empty	Houses	probe		policy	and	practitioner	interviewees	
4.5.2	Empty	Houses	-	Probe	2		
Sampling	of	probe	2	
It	is	not	possible	to	define	the	target	population	with	such	a	crowdsourcing	social	
data	approach	to	citizen	social	science.	Therefore,	a	convenience	sampling	approach	
(Etikan	et	al.,	2016)	was	taken,	on	the	basis	that	anyone	and	everyone	was	invited	to	
submit	their	observations	of	empty	houses	to	the	project.	Convenience	sampling	
differs	from	purposive	sampling	in	that	expert	judgment	is	not	used	to	select	a	
representative	sample	of	elements	(Battaglia,	2011).	Rather,	the	primary	selection	
criterion	relates	to	the	ease	of	obtaining	a	sample.		
Analysis	of	probe	2		
To	analyse	the	data	from	the	probe,	I	used	a	process	of	thematic	analysis	to	draw	out	
themes,	and	review	them,	before	then	going	back	to	draw	out	the	themes	in	more	
detail	and	depth	and	richness.	At	the	appropriate	stages	of	the	probes	where	
interviews	were	undertaken,	I	transcribed	the	interviews,	generating	transcripts	that	
were	then	set	out	coherently,	thoroughly	read	and	digested.	I	wrote	memos	as	I	read	
and	coded	the	data	using	open,	and	selective	coding,	following	the	stages	
recommended	by	Braun	and	Clarke	(2006)	as	set	out	in	section	4.5.1	above.	I	did	not	
use	specific	software	such	as	MAXQDA	or	NVivo	to	analyse	the	data	as	I	preferred	to	
code	the	data	by	hand	using	my	own	coding	systems	and	processes.	I	was	able	to	
check	some	of	the	wider	contextual	issues	and	preliminary	themes	in	some	of	the	
interviews	with	policy	and	housing	practitioners.	These	transcripts,	in	conjunction	
with	my	field	notes	and	observations,	were	systematically	reviewed	and	grouped	
according	to	the	emergent	themes,	ideas,	and	concepts.	These	components	were	then	
re-evaluated,	regrouping	as	necessary,	and	gradually	refined	and	linked	to	other	
conceptual	categories.	The	aim	of	this	approach	was	to	hold	the	data	themes	and	
emergent	notions	and	theories	in	a	consistently	dialogic	relationship	(Thomas,	2002;	
Pollen,	2013)	by	combining	analysis	of	the	interviews	and	observations,	in	
conjunction	with	other	data	types,	and	contextual	data	and	field	notes.		
Ethics	of	probe	2	
Probe	2	received	approval	from	the	University	of	Manchester	Ethics	Committee.	
People	submitting	to	the	project	were	able	to	leave	their	name	and	email	if	they	
4.5.2	Empty	Houses	-	Probe	2		
wanted	to	be	contacted	again.	The	project	website	explained	that	participation	was	
based	on	consent-first.	If	they	did	so	they	were	sent	an	information	sheet	about	the	
project,	which	acted	as	post-hoc	consent.	This	will	be	discussed	in	more	detail	in	
chapter	6.	This	data	was	securely	stored	on	an	encrypted	hard	drive,	separately	to	the	
data	on	empty	houses.	However,	the	main	aim	of	the	project	was	to	gather	
geographically	locatable	data	in	the	form	of	postcodes.	I	also	provided	clear	contact	
information	on	the	website	should	anyone	have	any	questions	or	issues	they	wanted	
to	raise	about	the	project.		
During	the	pilot	there	was	much	discussion	with	those	that	piloted	submissions	
around	issues	to	do	with	the	potential	for	inciting	civil	disobedience	and	also	around	
some	of	the	wording	of	the	project,	as	I	had	framed	the	notion	of	reporting	empty	
houses	as	being	part	of	peoples	daily	activities.	However,	some	pilot	respondents	did	
not	agree	with	this,	suggesting	that	an	aspect	of	being	out	of	the	ordinary	was	
necessary.	The	wording	of	the	instructions	was	modified	to	reflect	these	discussions.	
There	is	also	a	very	real	potential	for	researcher	bias	in	terms	of	how	I	framed	the	
wording	of	the	instructions	for	reporting	empty	houses,	and	also	how	my	inexpert	
perceptions	may	have	affected	how	respondents	provided	their	data.	For	this	reason	
the	pilot	was	particularly	important	to	mitigate	some	way	towards	such	issues	of	bias.	
Such	issues	will	be	discussed	in	more	detail	in	the	empirical	chapters	5-7,	and	also	in	
the	discussion	chapter	(8).	
In	the	case	of	the	walking	interviews,	I	anonymised	the	interview	transcripts	to	
protect	the	interviewees,	and	any	data	on	empty	houses	that	we	observed	on	our	
walks	were	added	to	the	project.	One	of	the	issues	with	walking	interviews	is	that	the	
research	site	is	mobile	and	on	the	move.	While	the	process	of	investigation	was	
anticipated	and	planned,	the	usually	messy,	unpredictable	and	serendipitous	nature	
of	empirical	realities	also	redefined	the	terms	of	the	research	and	subsequent	
representation	in	the	write	up	(Marcus,	1998),	as	new	questions,	threads	and	insights	
were	closed	and	opened	up	along	the	way.	The	Empty	Houses	probe	highlighted	that	
a	range	of	complex	ethical	issues	arise	when	doing	citizen	social	science,	even	at	a	
low	level	of	engagement	(see	Chapter	6).		
4.5.3	Our	Manchester	-	Probe	3		
4.5.3	Our	Manchester	-	Probe	3	
The	third	probe	examined	how	the	Our	Manchester	project	worked	in	practice,	and	
how	it	developed	and	evolved	from	November	2015	to	the	end	of	the	summer	of	
2017.	The	aim	of	the	coproduced	Our	Manchester	project	was	to	document	the	impact	
of	migration	on	notions	of	community	and	place	in	Moss	Side,	Manchester	from	1950s	
to	the	present.	The	project	was	jointly	developed	with	a	community	development	
worker	in	Moss	Side,	as	an	in	depth	collaboration,	with	the	aim	of	capturing	everyday	
life	in	Moss	Side	as	an	alternative	to	the	narratives	perpetuated	in	the	media,	or	held	
in	state	archives.		The	probe	aimed	to	explore	coproduced	citizen	social	science,	at	the	
higher	level	of	Hakalys	(2013)	typology	of	participation	in	citizen	science,	exploring	
citizen	social	science	as	a	more	socially	engaged	approach,	where	the	participants	had	
a	greater	involvement	in	the	research	design	stage	and	other	aspects	of	the	research	
process	beyond	data	collection.	
Background	to	Our	Manchester	and	Moss	Side,	Manchester	
Moss	Side	holds	a	particular	place	in	the	geographic	and	social	imaginary	of	race	in	
Britain.		Slum	clearance,	race	riots,	guns	and	gangs	frame	commonly	held	
assumptions	about	Moss	Side.	According	to	the	2011	Census,	nearly	19,000	people	
lived	in	Moss	Side	ward	(Office	of	National	Statistics,	2016).	Perhaps	the	most	
surprising	information	available	from	the	census	was	the	migration	history	of	people	
living	in	Moss	Side,	with	46%	of	residents	born	abroad.		
Moss	Side	lies	approximately	one	mile	south	of	Manchester	city	centre	along	an	
arterial	road	running	from	the	centre	to	the	South	Manchester	suburbs	and	the	
airport.	It	is	bordered	to	the	east	by	the	university	district	with	two	large	higher	
education	institutions,	a	science	park	and	major	teaching	hospitals.	Moss	Side	
remains	an	area	of	high	unemployment	and	deprivation	(Hudson	et	al.,	2007),	despite	
seeing	substantial	regeneration	activity	(Rahman,	2010).	It	also	became	notorious	in	
the	early	1990s	as	a	centre	of	gang	and	gun	crime,	with	sensationalist	media	
reporting	making	comparisons	with	South	Central	Los	Angeles	and	other	US	black	
4.5.3	Our	Manchester	-	Probe	3		
ghettoes.	As	Taylor	et	al.	(1996)	argue,	such	stories	were	a	gross	over-exaggeration	
of	the	actual	extent	of	gun	crime.		
The	latest	version	of	the	Neighbourhood	Profile,	available	on	the	Manchester	City	
Council	website,	states	that	the	population	living	in	Hulme,	Moss	Side	and	Rusholme,	
is	characterized	by	a	higher	than	average	proportions	of	people	aged	16-24	years;	and	
a	higher	than	average	proportion	of	people	whose	ethnicity	is	not	'White	UK'	and	who	
cannot	speak	English	well	or	at	all	(Neighbourhood	Profile	Report,	2016).	According	
to	a	Mosaic	report	from	2015,	the	authors	estimate	over	60%	of	households	in	Moss	
Side	are	likely	to	contain	people	whose	social	circumstances	suggest	that	they	may	
need	high	or	very	high	levels	of	support	to	help	them	manage	their	own	health	and	
prevent	them	becoming	high	users	of	acute	healthcare	services	in	the	future.	
Residents	from	the	area	wanted	to	develop	a	project	at	the	newly	refurbished	
community	centre	in	the	middle	of	Moss	Side,	that	recognised	this	reputation	and	the	
stigmatising	effect	it	has	had	on	the	neighbourhood	and	by	association	the	people	
who	live	there.			
Furthermore,	according	to	a	2015	Mosaic	Profile,	Moss	Side	has	an	aging	population,	
with	a	large	percentage	of	the	elderly	coming	from	the	wave	of	Afro-Caribbean	
immigrants	that	came	to	Manchester	in	the	1950s.	In	addition,	there	are	a	large	
number	of	refugees	living	in	NASS	housing	and	new	immigrants	from	Africa	(there	is	
a	large	Somali	population)	and	the	Middle	East	(e.g.	Libyan	diaspora)	(MacGregor	and	
Pardoe,	2018).	The	area	is	also	home	to	a	large	number	of	families	in	private	rental	or	
housing	association	properties.	MacGregor	and	Pardoe	(2018)	also	note	that	although	
it	is	a	highly	transient	area,	with	a	loss	of	social	capital	in	recent	years		which	they	
define	as	a	loss	of	connections	within	and	between	communities,	and	with	external	
change-makers	-	there	is	also	a	strong	core	of	active,	long	term	residents	who	take	
part	in	residents	associations,	faith	groups	and	other	community-based	
organisations.	
4.5.3	Our	Manchester	-	Probe	3		
Informants	
I	was	introduced	to	Stephen	(name	changed),	a	community	development	worker	in	
Moss	Side	in	November	2015	by	a	colleague,	Peter	(name	changed),	who	had	
previously	undertaken	research	about	the	private	rental	sector	in	Manchester.	My	
colleague	Peter	mentioned	that	Stephen	was	looking	to	do	a	project	to	develop	
interest	in	the	new	community	centre	that	he	was	refurbishing	in	Moss	Side.	There	
were	also	frequent	meetings	and	discussions	in	many	different	contexts	(from	the	
social	centre,	to	the	pub,	to	Manchester	Metropolitan	University,	to	formal	and	
informal	meetings)	to	establish	trust	and	connections	with	Stephen.	The	life	course	of	
the	project	was	slow		it	took	the	best	part	of	six	months	to	establish	a	solid	working	
relationship	with	Stephen	as	a	basis	of	trust	and	connection	needed	to	be	established	
before	proceeding	with	developing	and	shaping	a	project.	Following	three	brief	
meetings	with	Stephen	to	discuss	our	respective	aims	and	interests,	as	well	as	
suggested	approaches,	Stephen	organised	a	launch	meeting,	where	he	invited	
colleagues,	contacts	in	the	community,	friends,	and	anyone	else	he	thought	might	be	
interested	in	participating	in	the	development	of	a	project.		
Data	from	probe	3	
The	following	types	of	data	were	collected	during	the	Our	Manchester	probe:	
a) Recordings	and	notes	from	launch	events	and	training	sessions	
b) Informant	interviews	with	Stephen	
c) Field	notes		
d) Video	interviews	undertaken	by	participants	
e) Photos	and	recordings	from	ESRC	Festival	of	Social	Science	event	
A	brief	chronology	of	the	project,	including	key	stages	and	events,	number	of	
attendees	and	dates	of	these	is	shown	in	Table	4.5	and	reflected	on	in	more	detail	
below.	It	is	worth	noting	that	the	methods	used	and	approaches	taken	developed	and	
changed	as	the	project	went	on.	This	is	reflected	on	in	more	detail	in	chapter	9	
(section	9.6),	the	conclusion	to	the	thesis.		
4.5.3	Our	Manchester	-	Probe	3		
Date	 Stage	of	project	
or	event	
Aim	and	who	involved	 No.	of	
attendees	
March		June	
Meetings	to	
discuss	project	
development	
Meetings	with	Stephen	to	discuss	how	to	
develop	a	citizen	social	science	project.		
In	attendance:	Stephen,	Peter	and	AA	
30th	June	
Community	
launch	event		
Event	to	announce	the	intention	of	doing	a	
project	with	the	community,	to	generate	
interest	in	the	project	and	to	recruit	
participants.	
In	attendance:	Stephen,	AA	and	community	
members		
July	2016	
Thematic	
Workshop		
Workshop	to	develop	themes;	areas	of	interest	
and	title	of	Our	Manchester	project.	
In	attendance:	Stephen,	Peter,	AA,	and	
participants	
July	2016	
Ethics	and	
consent	
workshop	
Training	workshop	to	discuss	ethics	and	
consent	
In	attendance:	Stephen,	Peter,	AA,	and	
participants	
August		
November	
Drop-in	sessions	
at	the	social	
centre	
For	local	residents	to	find	out	more	about	the	
project,	to	share	accounts	and	narratives,	and	
to	donate	photos	or	other	artefacts	that	
residents	might	want	to	bring	in.	Also	for	
participants	in	the	project	to	discuss	any	issues	
they	might	be	having	with	undertaking	the	
interviews.	
In	attendance:	Stephen,	AA,	participants	
October	-
November	
Preliminary	
resident	
interviews	
Semi-structured	interviews	with	local	
residents	that	were	filmed	or	recorded	to	share	
experiences	of	living	in	the	community	from	
1950s	to	the	present	and	how	the	area	may	
have	changed.		
In	attendance:	Stephen,	participants	
November	
Community	
event	to	discuss	
project	
Community	event	where	local	residents	were	
invited	to	share	food,	see	photos	some	
residents	had	donated	of	the	area,	review	
4.5.3	Our	Manchester	-	Probe	3		
developments	 participatory	map	of	some	of	the	key	
buildings/places	that	had	come	out	of	some	of	
the	preliminary	interviews,	and	to	discuss	the	
project,	show	videos	and	photos	collected	and	
generate	more	interest	in	the	project.		
In	attendance:	Stephen,	AA,	and	participants	
December	
2016		
December	
Project	on-going	
Community	development	worker	and	other	
residents	who	had	participated	in	the	project	
continued	to	have	discussions	and	meetings	at	
the	centre	to	share	memories	and	accounts	of	
how	Moss	Side	had	changed.		
In	attendance:	Stephen	and	participants	
Not	known.	
Table	4.5	Stages	of	Our	Manchester	project	chronologically	
Project	development	meetings	
I	initially	met	with	Stephen	three	times	to	discuss	how	we	might	best	work	together	
to	undertake	a	project	of	mutual	interest	to	us	both.	Initially	Stephen	was	keen	to	do	a	
project	that	would	generate	interest	in	the	newly	refurbished	social	centre	he	was	
running,	and	bring	some	of	the	local	residents	to	the	centre	to	spend	time	together.	In	
these	meetings,	we	discussed	our	ideas	and	intentions	with	the	project,	our	mutual	
views	about	community	work,	the	role	of	research	and	other	issues	that	may	have	
been	of	concern	to	us.	The	project	was	jointly	developed	and	shaped	by	both	our	
interests;	the	balance	of	interests	and	power	was	a	continually	negotiated	process	
through	discussion	and	communication	(see	chapters	5-7).		
Community	launch	event	
Stephen	organised	a	launch	event	for	the	project,	with	the	aim	of	generating	interest	
in	it,	and	recruiting	participants	to	work	with	us	to	take	the	project	forward.	The	
launch	event	was	held	at	the	social	centre	and	lasted	an	hour.	Stephen	promoted	the	
event	amongst	his	contacts	and	networks	in	the	area,	and	the	event	had	twenty	
attendees.	Stephen	and	I	presented	our	initial	ideas	for	a	project	to	the	attendees	and	
asked	for	feedback,	ideas	and	whether	any	of	those	present	would	want	to	get	
4.5.3	Our	Manchester	-	Probe	3		
involved	in	developing	the	project	with	us.		The	shaping	of	the	project	was	undertaken	
collectively	with	the	participants	in	the	events	that	followed	the	initial	launch	event.	
Thematic	workshop	
Following	the	launch	event,	those	interested	in	being	more	actively	involved	in	the	
project	were	invited	to	attend	a	workshop	to	identify	a	number	of	areas	of	interest	for	
the	project.		Eight	local	residents	attended	the	workshop,	and	a	wide-ranging	
discussion	at	the	meeting	entailed	the	sharing	of	the	experiences	of	participants	and	
their	families.		These	included	coming	to	the	UK,	schooling	and	racism,	
supplementary	schools,	youth	clubs	and	community	centres	as	well	as	changes	
through	clearance	and	regeneration.		The	presentation	of	information	about	
migration	and	diversity	in	the	area	led	to	further	discussions	about	ways	to	make	the	
project	inclusive	of	those	who	now	live	in	Moss	Side.		The	following	areas	of	
investigation	were	identified	with	the	aim	of	capturing	stories,	recollections,	
reflections	and	memorabilia	to	enable	re-telling	of	accounts	and	experiences:	
 Arrival:	coming	to	Moss	Side,	to	England	
 Settling	down:	finding	somewhere	to	live,	work	and	choosing	schools,	building	a	
community	
 Growing	up:	schooling	(both	state	and	supplementary,	youth	clubs	and	
community	centres,	churches)	
 Shocks:	major	events	(may	include	housing	clearances	in	Moss	Side	and	then	in	
the	regenerated	Hulme,	1981	riots,	guns	and	gangs	as	well	as	more	personal	
experiences)	
 Moving	on:	places	that	family	members	moved	to,	their	reasons	and	experiences	
after	moving	of	Moss	Side	and	where	they	went	to	
 Ageing	in	place:	the	experiences	of	older	people	living	in	Moss	Side	now	
The	aim	of	these	investigations	was	to	gather	accounts	of	the	experiences	of	people	
currently	resident	in	Moss	Side	about	the	ways	in	which	the	area	may	have	changed.	
4.5.3	Our	Manchester	-	Probe	3		
The	interview	topic	guide	can	be	found	in	Appendix	9	and	the	interviewer	check	list	
in	Appendix	10.	
Ethics	and	consent	workshop	
A	training	session	at	the	community	centre	on	ethics	and	consent	was	arranged	with	
the	same	eight	participants	from	the	thematic	workshop,	at	the	end	of	the	latter	
workshop.	Of	the	eight	participants	who	attended	the	thematic	workshop,	four	were	
able	to	make	the	training	workshop.	However,	three	new	residents	attended	the	
training	workshop.	The	aim	of	the	workshop	was	to	discuss	interview	skills,	ethics,	
consent	and	also	data	storage.	At	this	stage	of	the	project,	it	was	envisaged	that	
participants	would	attend	the	training	workshop,	so	as	to	become	citizen	social	
scientists,	and	for	them	to	go	out	into	their	neighbourhood	to	interview	friends,	
relatives,	neighbours	and	other	members	of	the	community	to	gather	accounts	of	how	
the	area	may	have	changed	from	the	1950s	to	the	present.	The	community	
development	worker	led	a	discussion	at	the	training	workshop	about	how	best	to	
store	and	make	use	of	the	data.	It	was	proposed	that	an	archive	of	the	accounts	could	
be	created	and	hosted	at	the	community	centre,	so	that	the	recordings	would	be	
available	to	listen	to	when	visiting	the	centre.	An	example	of	a	participant	consent	
form	can	be	found	in	Appendix	8.	
Drop-in	sessions	
Drop-in	sessions	were	held	at	the	community	hub	every	two	weeks	for	the	four	
month	duration	of	the	project,	as	an	opportunity	to	meet	interested	people,	to	share	
accounts	or	stories	about	Moss	Side	past	and	present,	and	to	generate	interest	in	the	
project,	as	well	as	to	contribute	to	the	use	and	dynamism	of	the	newly	refurbished	
community	centre	itself.	These	sessions	were	also	an	opportunity	for	the	participants	
of	the	training	workshop,	or	the	citizen	social	scientists,	to	meet	with	me	to	discuss	
any	issues	they	might	have	faced	in	carrying	out	the	interviews.	Attendance	varied	
week	on	week,	from	around	two	to	ten	people,	depending	on	what	activities	and	
events	were	taking	place	at	the	social	centre	on	that	particular	day.	On	days	when	
attendance	was	low,	I	helped	Stephen	with	tasks	and	odd	jobs	around	the	centre,	and	
we	discussed	issues	around	his	work	and	other	projects	developing	at	the	centre.	
Participants,	and	the	people	they	interviewed,	were	also	encouraged	to	bring	in	any	
documents,	photos	or	memorabilia	of	the	past	and	present	lives	of	Moss	Side.	These	
4.5.3	Our	Manchester	-	Probe	3		
were	collected	by	either	Stephen	or	myself,	and	stored	in	the	office	of	the	social	
centre.		
Preliminary	resident	interviews	
Five	in-depth	semi-structured	interviews	were	undertaken	by	participants	over	the	
course	of	the	project.	These	were	recorded	in	residents	homes	or	at	the	community	
centre	and	lasted	for	about	an	hour.	These	were	either	filmed	or	audio	recorded,	and	
the	recordings	were	stored	at	the	community	centre,	on	the	office	computer.		
Community	event	to	discuss	project	developments	
A	community	social	event	was	held	at	the	community	centre	in	November	2016	to	
share	some	of	the	images	community	members	had	contributed	to	the	project,	to	
gather	more	accounts	and	stories	and	to	display	some	of	the	recorded	interviews,	
using	laptops	and	headphones	for	attendees	to	listen	in	to.	This	event	involved	a	
gathering	in	the	relocated	community	centre,	with	hot	food	and	drinks	provided	and	
an	exhibition	of	many	of	the	materials	gathered	so	far,	including	a	form	of	living	map	
of	the	area.		
Figure	4.4	Living	map	in	social	centre	in	Moss	Side	
Source:	Author,	November	2016	
4.5.3	Our	Manchester	-	Probe	3		
I	ensured	that	the	event	coincided	with	the	Economics	and	Social	Research	Council	
(ESRC)	Festival	of	Social	Science	programme	of	events.	This	meant	that	the	Our	
Manchester	community	event	formed	part	of	the	wider	national	programme	of	events	
during	one	week	in	November	2016,	and	thus	was	widely	promoted	beyond	the	
previous	networks	and	realms	of	the	Our	Manchester	project.	The	aim	of	this	event	
was	also	to	discuss	the	way	in	which	the	project	was	developing,	to	generate	interest	
in	the	project	and	to	gather	attendees	views	on	how	the	project	might	develop	
further.	The	event	was	informal	and	people	were	invited	to	drop	in	and	have	a	chat	
and	some	food	over	four	hours	of	a	Friday	afternoon	in	mid-November	2016.		
Project	ongoing	
The	project	initially	ran	for	a	period	of	six	months	over	the	summer	of	2016	whilst	the	
community	hub	was	being	refurbished,	with	a	view	to	having	a	permanent	
installation	or	display	boards	up	in	the	centre	when	it	opened	fully	in	the	autumn	
2016.	The	project	was	thus	designed	in	such	a	way	as	to	be	able	to	continue	for	as	
long	as	there	was	interest	in	gathering	accounts	and	displaying	the	stories	and	
experiences	of	those	in	the	area.	My	period	of	fieldwork	and	participation	in	the	
project	ended	at	the	end	of	December	2016,	when	I	relocated	to	a	different	country.	
However,	communication	with	Stephen,	via	email,	and	occasional	visits	when	I	
returned	to	Manchester,	led	me	understand	that	the	project	had	continued,	and	that	
Stephen	and	other	participants	intended	to	carry	out	further	interviews	as	part	of	the	
project.		
Sampling	for	probe	3	
The	sampling	approach	to	the	Our	Manchester	probe	was	based	on	opportunity	
sampling.	This	means	that	it	uses	the	knowledge	and	attributes	of	the	researcher	to	
identify	a	sample,	for	example,	using	a	researcher's	local	knowledge	of	an	area	on	
which	to	base	a	study,	or	using	a	researcher's	past	experiences	to	contact	participants	
or	gatekeepers	(Mason,	2002).	Opportunity	sampling	is	often	employed	by	social	
researchers	studying	covert	or	hard-to-access	groups	of	people,	objects	or	events	
(Shipman,	1997).	In	the	instance	of	the	Our	Manchester	probe,	opportunity	sampling	
releases	researchers	from	relying	on	structural	institutions	in	society	to	identify	
samples,	and	allowed	for	active	engagement	to	with	the	social	world	proactively	
4.5.3	Our	Manchester	-	Probe	3		
(Brady,	2011).	However,	in	the	instance	of	Our	Manchester,	Stephen,	with	whom	I	
coproduced	the	project,	had	a	crucial	role	in	terms	of	recruiting	participants	to	the	
project.	In	many	ways,	he	acted	as	a	form	of	gatekeeper	and	his	role	is	discussed	in	
more	detail	in	chapters	5-7.	
Analysis	of	probe	3	
A	reflexive,	inductive	and	emic	approach	was	used	to	analyse	the	data	generated	by	
the	Our	Manchester	probe.	I	undertook	participant	observation	of	the	practices	and	
processes	developing	during	the	project.	Participant	observation	necessarily	requires	
a	complex	learning	process	to	help	understand	the	situated	nature	of	the	structuring	
of	social	relations	(Lave	and	Wenger,	1991).	Participant	observation	allows	us	to	
make	sense	of	peoples	lives	in	terms	of	the	taken	for	granted	categories	of	
understanding	and	social	processes	that	are	meaningful	to	people	in	everyday	life.	
The	analysis	of	the	Our	Manchester	probe	entailed	reading,	and	re-reading	of	my	field	
notes	from	the	many	meetings	and	events	that	took	place	at	the	social	centre,	as	well	
as	reflections	on	my	discussions	and	experiences	in	participating	in	co-producing	the	
project.	Where	more	lengthy	interviews	took	place,	these	were	recorded	and	
transcribed,	and	analysed	for	key	themes	or	issues	coming	out	of	them.	Thematic	
analysis	(TA)	(Braun	and	Clark,	2013)	was	used	where	possible	to	make	sense	of	the	
themes	coming	out	of	the	different	data	types	generated	during	the	probe	into	the	Our	
Manchester	project.	
Ethics	of	probe	3	
The	probe	received	ethical	approval	from	the	University	of	Manchester	Ethics	
Committee.	Gaining	access	to	the	community	development	worker	was	quite	a	long	
process	of	getting	to	know	each	other,	discussing	ideas	and	spending	time	together	in	
different	contexts	to	respond	to	many	questions	around	our	mutual	aims,	what	would	
happen	to	the	data	and	what	I	would	do	after	the	project.	I	was	able	to	obtain	verbal	
consent	from	the	community	development	worker	that	I	was	able	to	spend	more	time	
observing	and	participating	in	the	daily	activities	of	the	social	centre	he	was	involved	
in	refurbishing.	I	adhered	to	the	University	lone	worker	policy	and	ensured	that	I	
4.6	Conclusion		
informed	my	supervisors,	or	someone	responsible	as	a	point	of	emergency	contact,	
that	I	was	going	to	work	in	the	field.		
All	data	collected	during	this	probe	was	anonymised	and	informants	names	were	
changed	to	maintain	a	level	of	anonymity.	I	transcribed	the	interviews	I	undertook	
with	key	informants,	and	stored	under	password	protection	on	an	encrypted	hard	
drive.	However,	in	terms	of	the	video	and	audio	recorded	interviews	that	were	
undertaken	as	part	of	the	project	by	the	participants	themselves,	and	any	photos	or	
other	memories	that	were	given	to	the	project,	these	were	all	stored	at	the	community	
centre	that	Stephen,	the	community	development	worker,	ran.	The	ethical	issues	
raised	in	the	course	of	the	project,	particularly	around	control	and	gatekeeping	are	
explored	in	more	detail	in	chapter	6,	which	analyses	the	probes	to	shed	light	on	the	
politics	of	method	and	ethics	in	citizen	social	science.		
4.6	Conclusion	
This	chapter	sought	to	expand	upon	and	justify	the	use	a	facet	methodology	as	a	way	
in	which	to	empirically	study	citizen	social	science.	Facet	methodology,	drawing	on	a	
gemstone	metaphor	to	encapsulate	citizen	social	science,	allows	for	reflections	on,	
and	the	generation	of	flashes	of	insight	(Mason,	2011),	into	its	practices	and	
processes.	Facet	methodology	allows	for	the	opening	up	of	approaches,	and	for	the	
researcher	to	be	creative	in	carving	out	facets	into	the	citizen	social	science.		
The	review	of	the	literature	in	chapter	2	drew	attention	to	how	citizen	social	science	
is	framed	and	conceptualised	in	the	literature.	This	was	further	unpacked	in	the	
presentation	of	the	scoping	work	as	set	out	in	chapter	3,	which	examined	how	
practitioners	undertaking	what	could	be	considered	to	be	citizen	social	science,	
conceive	of	its	potential.	It	is	these	key	aspects,	or	facets,	of	citizen	social	science	that	
informed	the	research	design	and	social	research	probes	presented	in	this	chapter.	
The	probe	approach,	stemming	from	design,	and	adapted	from	cultural	probes	(Gaver	
et	al.,	1999;	2001;	2004),	for	use	in	social	science	research,	allows	for	a	more	detailed	
exploration	of	key	facets	and	tensions	in	citizen	social	science,	by	probing	and	
intervening	in	the	way	in	which	it	operates	in	practice.	The	motivation	for	their	use	
4.6	Conclusion		
was	that	social	research	probes	allow	deeper	insights	into	the	emergent	
epistemological	politics	of	citizen	social	science.	The	specific	methods	and	tools	used	
for	each	of	the	three	probes	were	presented	above.	These	included	the	
comprehensive	features	of	how	each	probe	was	set	up	and	run,	the	different	types	of	
data	collected,	and	any	ethical	issues	or	considerations	that	were	adhered	to.	The	
limitations	and	challenges	of	such	an	approach	are	reflected	on	in	the	conclusion	to	
the	thesis	(see	section	9.6).	The	next	three	chapters	detail	the	analysis	of	the	probes	
and	how	they	assist	in	documenting	and	generating	insights	into	how	different	types	
of	citizen	social	science	work	in	practice.		
5.1	Introduction		
Chapter	5.	Facet	1:	The	challenges	of	research	design	and	
execution	
5.1	Introduction	
It	has	been	suggested	that	little	attention	has	been	paid	to	non-expert	citizens	
engagements	with	data,	or	what	Couldry	and	Powell	(2014,	p.2)	describe	as	what	
actual	social	actors,	and	groups	of	actors,	are	doing	under	these	conditions	[of	
datafication]	in	a	variety	of	places	and	settings.	Furthermore,	research	into	everyday	
engagements	with	data	is	still	limited	(Kennedy	and	Hill,	2018).	However,	a	
sociological	focus	on	everyday	encounters	with	data	can	unveil	how	the	process	of	
data	generation	in	citizen	social	science	is	experienced,	translated	and	adapted	(Neal	
and	Murji,	2015).		Such	a	focus	on	data	is	necessarily	up	close,	personal	and	messy	
(Kennedy	and	Hill,	2018),	in	contrast	to	the	distance	at	which	quantification	and	big	
data	operate	(Porter,	1995;	Crawford,	2013).	It	has	the	potential	to	generate	first-
hand	accounts,	and	shed	light	on	lived	experiences,	and	generate	data	to	fill	data	gaps	
and	potentially	tackle	intractable	social	issues.	Much	of	the	current	focus	of	this	field	
is	around	data,	or	citizen	generated	data	approaches,	rather	than	on	the	people	that	
produce	it	as	exemplified	by	the	projects	set	out	in	the	key	facets	chapter	(3).		
If	social	science	methods	are	multi-sited	(Savage,	2007),	how	do	we	position	
ourselves	when	looking	at	these	multiple	locations	(see	the	literature	review)	and	
epistemologies	(see	the	key	facets	chapter)?	This	first	empirical	chapter	contrasts	the	
challenges	for	research	design	and	execution	from	the	perspective	of	the	researcher	
with	reflections	and	data	on	the	experiences	of	participants	of	undertaking	and	
interpreting	the	research	execution	in	citizen	social	science.	It	is	important	to	
acknowledge	that	citizen	social	science	is	differentiated	by	nature,	and	the	roles	
within	it	are	not	so	clearly	demarcated	as	this	presentation	of	perspectives	suggests.	
However,	this	approach	allows	for	the	research	question	to	be	explored,	and	to	better	
understand	the	different	roles	and	perspectives	in	citizen	social	science.	In	this	way,	it	
holds	these	different	perspectives	together,	sheds	lights	on,	and	discusses	the	
tensions	such	a	positioning	invokes.	The	chapter	sets	out	the	empirical	work	from	the	
5.1	Introduction		
probes	and	the	ways	in	which	such	issues	and	tensions	were	worked	out	together,	
drawing	on	Taylor	et	als	(2015)	concept	of	data	in	place	to	illuminate	the	varieties	
of	motivations	and	approaches	in	citizen	social	science,	and	the	conflicts	between	
them.	The	concept	of	data	in	place	(Taylor	et	al.,	2015)	is	useful	to	unpack	how	
participants	generate	data	in	citizen	social	science,	and	the	unobtrusive	or	indeed	
burdensome	nature	of	citizen	social	science.	Taylor	et	al.	(2015,	p.2863)	call	for	a	
reconceptualisation	of	data	that	accounts	for	the	ways	in	which	it	is	contingent	on	
very	particular	circumstances.	They	also	call	for	a	perspective	on	data	that	doesnt	
presume	an	intrinsic	generality,	but	that	acknowledges	precisely	its	place	in	and	
amongst	other	worldly	things.	The	concept	of	data	in	place	is	useful	as	it	helps	to	
draw	out	ideas	of	data	coming	into	being	through	growing	and	shifting	relations	with	
the	context	in	which	it	is	created,	with	those	creating	the	data,	and	the	environment	
in	which	it	is	created.	This	first	empirical	chapter	focuses	on	the	challenges	citizen	
social	science	raises	for	research	design	and	execution,	and	reflects	on	the	context	in	
which	the	data	is	generated.		
This	chapter	therefore	draws	on	an	analysis	of	all	three	probes		one	into	the	Mass	
Observation	Archive	data,	one	involving	citizens	reporting	observations	of	empty	
houses,	and	one	examining	a	community	based	history	project	-	to	assess	the	
challenges	for	research	design	and	execution	that	citizen	social	science	raises.	It	
provides	a	detailed	focus	on	the	facet	of	research	design	and	execution	in	the	citizen	
social	science	gemstone	(Mason,	2011).	The	second	section	examines	the	challenges	
of	citizen	social	science	for	research	design	for	the	researcher.	The	third	section	
examines	the	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	research	execution,	from	the	
perspective	of	the	participants,	particularly	in	terms	of	observational	expertise,	bias	
and	endogenous	social	analysis.	The	ways	in	which	people	seem	to	be	undertaking	
social	science	research	anyway,	even	if	they	do	not	consider	it	as	such,	present	
challenges	for	the	design	and	execution	of	citizen	social	science;	these	practicalities	
are	concluded	upon	in	the	final	section	of	the	chapter.		
5.2				The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	the	researcher		
5.2				The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	the	researcher	
If	methods	allow	for	reflections	on	new	ways	of	understanding	the	relationship	
between	the	cultural,	social	and	material	(Savage,	2013,	p.18),	how	does	this	impact	
on	questions	of	research	design	for	data	generation	in	citizen	social	science?		
5.2.1	Designing	for	data	generation	
Citizen	social	science	involves	the	engagement	of	citizens	in	generating	data	to	be	
used	in	social	science	research.	This	section	sheds	light	on	the	specific	wording	and	
framing	of	the	tasks	in	the	particular	forms	of	citizen	social	science	that	are	probed	
for,	and	the	challenges	for	research	design.	It	looks	at	how	data	is	generated	in	each	of	
the	three	probes.		
Firstly,	it	is	useful	to	consider	the	nature	of	the	directives	in	the	Mass	Observation	
probe.	Whilst	seeming	open-ended,	the	nature	of	the	wording	of	the	directives	is	
carefully	chosen	to	provoke	responses	from	the	Mass	Observers	writing	for	the	
project.	The	specific	wording	of	the	directives	of	the	Mass	Observation	Project	is	set	
out	in	the	methods	chapter	(4),	and	Appendix	4,	but	interviews	with	the	archivists	
and	librarians	of	the	project	reveal	the	pragmatic	and	strategic	approach	to	designing	
the	directives,	and	the	particular	attention	given	to	the	phrasing	of	the	directives	to	
elicit	specific	responses:		
The	very	 first	directives	were	very	personal	and	supposed	to	open	up	a	
dialogue.	Each	directive	has	its	own	history	around	whos	inspired	it	and	
why	it	was	developed.	Some	directives	are	deliberately	experimental	and	
some	are	entirely	written	by	the	commissioner.	It	also	needs	to	satisfy	the	
user	 so	 its	 now	 a	 collaboration,	 and	 the	 aim	 is	 to	 keep	 the	 directives	
open-ended.	Often	autobiographical	questions	are	at	the	beginning	of	the	
directive,	and	open-ended	questions	at	the	end	to	try	to	draw	people	in.	
Its	a	very	structured	way	to	get	people	to	write	about	themselves.	Often	I	
would	 also	write	 a	 little	 scenario	 to	 draw	 people	 in	 	 like	what	 advice	
would	 you	 give	 to	 someone	 whos	 confronting	 having	 to	 have	 an	
abortion?	 Rather	 than	 What	 do	 you	 think	 about	 abortion?	 	 its	 about	
trying	to	get	people	to	be	reflexive	and	to	think	about	themselves.	
(In	conversation	with	director	of	the	MOP,	July	2017)	
5.2				The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	the	researcher		
As	the	directors	comment	showed,	reflexivity	was	actively	sought	out	and	
engineered	into	the	directives,	so	as	to	get	participants	to	think	about	themselves.	
The	ordering	of	different	types	of	questions	allowed	for	a	more	effective	engagement	
of	the	Mass	Observer,	with	the	autobiographical	questions	placed	at	the	beginning	of	
the	directive,	and	the	open-ended	questions	at	the	end	to	draw	people	in.	The	
questionnaires	used	in	the	Mass	Observation	project	were	referred	to	as	directives	
because	they	directed	the	attention	of	the	Mass-Observers	to	the	subject	area	which	
Mass-Observation	was	studying.	The	director	also	mentioned	the	commissioner,	
often	a	researcher	or	independent	organisation,	which	would	collaborate	with	those	
working	at	the	Mass	Observation	Archive	to	develop	a	specific	directive	on	a	topic	
they	were	interested	in,	to	be	able	to	use	the	data	(see	chapter	7).	Her	comment	here	
draws	attention	to	the	ways	in	which	the	design	of	the	directives	in	the	Mass	
Observation	project	entails	a	collaboration	between	the	commissioner	as	the	user	of	
the	responses	generated,	the	project	director	and	managers,	and	effectively	the	Mass	
Observers	themselves.	Many	similarities	can	be	drawn	between	the	design	and	aims	
of	the	directives	and	the	nature	of	social	research	probes	as	a	method	for	prompting	
or	directing	participants	to	reflect	on	their	own	perspectives,	and	to	consider	other	
perspectives.	
The	director	of	the	project	highlighted	how	they	learnt	from	the	Mass	Observers	
about	what	works	and	what	does	not:	
The	 responses	 to	 the	 early	 directives	 were	 really	 short,	 but	 you	 learnt	
from	 the	 people	 who	 write,	 about	 what	 works	 or	 not.	 I	 always	 warn	
commissioners	 that	 there	 might	 be	 no	 one	 responding	 	 but	 you	 can	
always	 trust	 that	 the	Mass	Observers	 commitment	 to	writing	overrides	
the	 topic	 that	 theyre	 writing	 about	 	 they	 have	 a	 strong	 sense	 of	
belonging	and	sharing	and	commitment	to	the	project.		
(In	conversation	with	director	of	the	MOP,	July	2017)	
The	director	of	the	project	highlights	the	commitment	and	strong	sense	of	belonging	
of	the	Mass	Observers	to	write	for	the	project.	In	many	ways,	the	project	organisers	
look	to	the	Mass	Observers	to	better	understand	how	to	phrase	the	directives,	and	
what	types	of	questions	or	terminology	would	engage	them	most.		
5.2				The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	the	researcher		
There	appears	to	be	a	dialogic	relationship	between	those	writing	for	the	Mass	
Observation	project,	and	those	running	the	project;	it	is	different	to	simply	taking	
part	in	a	survey	or	other	more	traditional	social	science	research	methods.	The	
particular	way	in	which	the	project	played	out	in	practice	can	be	summarised	by	the	
non-traditional	relationship	between	the	researcher	and	the	research	participants.		
Furthermore,	some	Mass	Observers	appeared	to	have	an	individual	relationship	with	
the	project	organisers,	despite	not	necessarily	knowing	them	personally.	Many	
responses	were	addressed	to	the	director	of	the	project	at	the	time	of	the	response.	
When	asked	how	they	would	describe	their	relationship	with	the	Mass	Observers,	
one	archivist	responded:	
as	a	friend,	and	as	more	of	an	intimate	relationship,	like	a	diary	but	with	
the	historical	culture	of	knowing	that	it	will	be	read	
(Interview	with	archivist	and	project	librarian,	May	2016).		
This	description	suggests	a	much	more	familiar	and	close	relationship	between	the	
Mass	Observers	and	the	project	organisers,	one	that	developed	over	time	and	which	
became	dialogic	in	the	way	that	the	Mass	Observers	can	feedback	through	their	
responses,	their	thoughts	and	feelings	about	the	project	itself,	the	wording	of	the	
questions,	as	well	as	their	thoughts	on	the	topic	at	hand.		
In	this	way,	questions	then	arise	about	how	to	design	for	the	generation	of	data	in	a	
project	when	the	relationship	between	the	respondents	or	Observers	does	not	play	
out	along	distinct	lines	of	researcher	and	researched.	The	director	of	the	Mass	
Observation	project	reflected	on	this	statement:	
Once	 you	 escape	 from	 the	 anxiety	 of	 representativeness	 and	 see	 Mass	
Observers	 not	 as	 data	 subjects,	 but	 as	 windows	 into	 worlds	 or	
rapporteurs,	youre	a	lot	more	free	to	do	things.	
(In	conversation	with	director	of	the	MOP,	July	2017)	
The	director	of	the	Mass	Observation	project	reflects	on	how	there	are	different	ways	
of	seeing	the	output	of	the	project.	The	data	that	is	being	made	by	the	Mass	
Observers	is	perceived	to	open	windows	or	observations	of	the	social	world.	This	
reveals	how	the	data	is	not	so	much	about	the	social	world	but	of	the	social	world.	
5.2				The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	the	researcher		
The	term	data	generation	has	been	given	preference	over	the	use	of	the	term	
data	collection	since	the	latter	is	not	an	accurate	reflection	of	what	takes	place	in	
citizen	social	science.	Citizen	social	science	arguably	recognises	the	role	of	
participants	in	generating	data	to	be	used	in	social	science	research.		
There	are	links	here	to	probe	two	into	the	Empty	Houses	Project,	where	participants	
were	encouraged	to	send	in	observations	of	empty	houses	in	their	local	area,	in	an	
attempt	to	tackle	a	pressing	policy	issue.	The	project	was	designed	in	such	a	way	that	
the	criteria	for	identifying	an	empty	house	were	intentionally	left	unspecified.	
Participants	were	asked	to	note	the	postcode	or	location	of	the	empty	house	as	
precisely	as	possible;	they	were	also	asked	to	state	why	they	thought	it	might	be	
empty,	and	if	possible,	how	long	they	thought	it	might	have	been	empty	for.	Lastly,	
they	were	asked	whether	or	not	they	had	previously	reported	the	house	as	empty	to	
the	council,	and	to	include	any	other	information	that	they	thought	might	be	relevant	
(see	figure	4.4	in	the	methods	chapter	for	detail).		
These	criteria	could	be	problematic,	however.	As	noted	in	the	previous	chapter	on	
the	methods	used	in	the	thesis,	the	Empty	Houses	project	did	not	generate	many	
responses	(20	in	total	over	a	period	of	four	months).	This	prompted	the	
undertaking	of	a	series	of	walking	interviews	to	better	understand	the	process	of	
reporting	empty	houses.	In	particular,	the	interviews	included	a	question	to	
interviewees	about	the	criteria	for	identifying	empty	houses.	Some	interviewees	
listed	visual	signs	that	may	signify	that	a	house	has	not	been	lived	in	for	some	
time,	such	as	broken	blinds,	blocked	access	to	the	front	door,	or	rubbish	and	
abandoned	household	items	in	front	of	the	house,	as	exemplified	in	image	5.1	
below.		
5.2				The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	the	researcher		
Figure	5.1.	Potentially	empty	house	 	
Source:	Authors	own.	Image	taken	during	Walking	Interview	8,	January	2017	
This	photo,	taken	by	the	author	during	a	walking	interview	in	January	2017,	
highlights	some	of	the	challenges	of	identifying	an	empty	house	and	interpreting	
the	image.	Whilst	the	rubbish	and	debris	deposited	in	front	of	the	house	suggest	a	
certain	level	of	neglect,	it	is	possible	that	this	is	part	of	a	process	of	refurbishment	
and	the	house	is	not	in	fact	a	long	term	empty	house	at	all.	In	many	ways,	the	
walking	interviews	became	a	form	of	working	out	together,	between	researcher	
and	participants,	how	to	identify	and	interpret	empty	houses.	
With	the	third	probe	into	the	Our	Manchester	project,	a	co-produced	community	
history	project,	the	questions	and	aspects	of	the	project	that	participants	had	to	
respond	to,	did	not	develop	in	the	same	way,	due	to	the	more	participatory	type	of	
citizen	social	science	that	the	probe	was	exploring.		Part	of	the	design	of	the	probe	
was	that	it	was	to	be	coproduced	with	Stephen	(name	changed),	the	community	
development	worker,	and	participants	self-tasked,	under	the	leadership	or	
influence	of	Stephen.	As	reported	in	the	methods	chapter	(see	chapter	4)	a	
5.2				The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	the	researcher		
workshop,	undertaken	in	August	2016	with	participants	at	the	social	centre,	
discussed	the	themes	that	might	be	interesting	to	interview	residents	about.	Eight	
local	residents	attended	the	workshop,	and	a	wide-ranging	discussion	at	the	
meeting	entailed	the	sharing	of	the	experiences	of	participants	and	their	families.		
These	included	coming	to	the	UK,	schooling	and	racism,	supplementary	schools,	
youth	clubs	and	community	centres	as	well	as	changes	through	clearance	and	
regeneration.	The	topics	then	became	the	focus	of	a	series	of	interviews,	
undertaken	by	members	of	the	community,	to	gather	accounts	of	the	experiences	
of	people	currently	resident	in	Moss	Side	about	the	ways	in	which	the	area	may	
have	changed.		
A	subsequent	training	workshop	took	place,	in	which	those	wanting	to	participate	
in	the	project	were	invited	to	discuss	issues	around	ethics	and	consent	of	the	
project,	and	how	these	interviews	might	take	place	in	practice.	An	interview	guide	
was	developed	around	the	themes	discussed	from	the	previous	workshop,	with	
questions	around	the	general	theme	of	whats	Moss	Side	for	you	now?	However,	
during	the	discussions	around	the	development	of	these	questions,	participants	
stated	that	they	did	not	want	to	have	a	standardised	approach	since	different	
interviewees	might	want	to	talk	about	different	things.	Owing	to	the	interests	and	
positionality	of	the	community	development	worker	who	was	co-producing	the	
project,	the	nature	of	the	tasking	in	the	Our	Manchester	project	was	more	akin	to	
research	as	a	mobilising	tool,	connecting	peoples	stories,	memories	and	
identities	to	a	new	setting.	In	a	preliminary	meeting	about	setting	up	the	project,	
with	Stephen	and	Peter	(name	changed),	the	colleague	who	had	introduced	me	to	
Stephen,	they	reflected	on	the	nature	of	Moss	Side	and	how	the	area	had	changed	
since	Stephen	had	lived	there:		
Peter:	 The	narrative	 of	 race	 inequality	 is	 very	much	 about	 things	 being	
denied	 because	 of	 racism.	 Jobs,	 education	 etc	 	 theyre	 all	 stories	 of	
denial	 so	 theres	 a	 sort	 of	 reparations	 attitude	 whereby	 the	 systems	
disadvantaging	certain	people		and	people	are	gaining	in	confidence	in	
handling	 and	 navigating	 the	 system.	 The	 [social]	 centre	 is	 inter-
generational	 and	 aimed	 at	 those	 who	 havent	 found	 that	 confidence	 to	
navigate	the	system.		
Stephen:	Yeah	and	thats	what	were	trying	to	sort	out	You	get	me?	Were	
just	not	entirely	sure	how	to	do	thisor	where	to	start.	People	dont	seem	
5.2				The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	the	researcher		
to	 recognise	 that	 stigma.	 So	maybe	by	 getting	 them	 to	 tell	 their	 stories,	
and	getting	their	voices	heard,	we	can	get	their	stories	out	there?		Start	to	
tell	it	like	it	is		you	get	me?	We	need	to	meet	people	where	theyre	at	too	
	not	pulling	them	back	to	our	agenda.	How	do	we	do	that?		
(Project	development	meeting	10th	June	2016)	
As	Stephen	alludes	to	above,	the	point	of	telling	stories,	and	getting	people	to	
articulate	their	accounts	is	to	validate	the	telling	of	other	stories	and	presenting	
other	perspectives.	The	participants,	who	were	interested	in	the	history	of	their	
residential	area,	and	understanding	peoples	experiences	of	how	the	area	may	
have	changed,	designed	the	research,	in	conjunction	with	Stephen.	Stephen	
identified	himself	as	an	activist	and	had	clear	intentions	to	put	the	research	to	use	
(see	chapter	7).	The	challenge	for	research	design	that	such	aims	presented,	was	
how	to	design	the	project	in	such	a	way	as	to	illicit	open	and	broad	accounts,	and	
to	meet	people	where	theyre	at,	rather	than	constraining	participants	to	the	set	
agenda	of	a	project.	As	such	the	Our	Manchester	probe	explored	a	plurality	of	
accounts,	voices	and	narratives	rather	than	a	singular	history	of	the	area	being	
written	and	upheld,	and	perpetuated.	Through	many	of	the	discussions	during	the	
initial	phase	of	the	project,	participants	agreed	that	the	aim	of	articulating	such	
stories	and	accounts	of	residents	was	to	facilitate	a	different	presentation	of	Moss	
Side,	the	area	in	which	they	lived,	based	on	the	experiences	of	the	residents	living	
there.	In	many	ways,	parallels	can	be	drawn	between	the	approach	of	the	Our	
Manchester	project	and	that	of	the	Mass	Observation	project,	particularly	in	
relation	to	how	Sheridan	et	al.	(2000)	present	a	reading	of	the	Mass	Observation	
project	as	presenting	participants	personal	anthropologies.		
5.2.2	Piggybacking	on	a	habit	with	a	chore	
All	three	probes	demonstrated	a	commitment	amongst	the	participants	to	the	
projects,	and	an	appetite	to	take	part.	This	was	particularly	pronounced	in	the	Mass	
Observation	project,	where	one	of	the	archivists	noted	that	even	in	times	of	financial	
crisis,	people	continued	to	write	about	issues	that	were	important	to	them	and	send	
their	responses	to	the	project,	despite	a	very	uncertain	future	for	the	Mass	
Observation	Project	(Interview	with	archivist	and	project	librarian,	May	2016).	In	
5.2				The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	the	researcher		
many	ways	writing	for	the	Mass	Observation	Project	is	a	more	committed	and	
engaged	practice	than,	for	example,	reporting	on	empty	houses,	or	other	observations	
of	daily	life	that	are	submitted	via	social	media	platforms.	The	archivists	of	the	project	
reflected	on	the	nature	of	participating	in	the	project	by	submitting	responses:	
I	see	it	as	a	form	of	ownership	through	participation		its	not	just	like	a	
Gallup	poll	response.	People	participate	in	Mass	Observation	and	then	see	
Victoria	Wood	 in	Housewife	49	and	 they	 feel	a	connection	 to	 that.	 Its	a	
club	in	a	way.	
(Interview	with	archivist	and	project	librarian,	May	2016)	
The	distinction	here	between	the	particular	type	of	participation	in	the	Mass	
Observation	project	and	participating	in	a	survey	or	more	recognised	forms	of	social	
research	draws	attention	to	the	nature	of	writing	for	the	project.	It	is	a	more	
committed	practice,	a	club	over	which	participants	are	perceived	to	feel	ownership.	
The	archivist	noted	how	seeing	a	link	between	a	television	programme	about	one	of	
the	Mass	Observers	(housewife	49),	played	by	actress	and	comedian	Victoria	Wood,	
and	writing	for	the	project	engendered	a	sense	of	community	and	inclusion	in	the	
club	which	is	relatively	far	removed	from	perceptions	of	participating	in	more	
conventional	forms	of	social	research	such	as	a	survey	or	focus	group.	
The	Empty	Houses	probe	revealed	how	walking	interviewees	were	committed	to	the	
project	and	felt	involved	as	citizens	in	trying	to	tackle	the	issue	of	homelessness,	but	
also	needed	shared	end-goals	or	motivations	to	take	part	for	shared	common	good.	As	
one	interviewee	commented:	
I	would	want	to	participate	when	you	know	theres	a	practical	benefit,	like	if	
it	serves	people	in	the	community,	but	youve	got	to	wonder	why	people	take	
part.	Does	everyone	have	a	shared	end	goal		which	I	think	there	would	need	
to	be		like	for	a	common	good?	
(WI3,	December	2016)	
This	walking	interviewee	queried	the	practical	benefits	of	participating	in	the	project,	
and	whether	there	might	be	a	shared	end	goal	motivating	people	to	take	part.	
Another	walking	interviewee	presented	a	different	perspective,	alluding	to	their	
involvement	as	a	citizen	to	act	on	it:	
5.2				The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	the	researcher		
I	think	Im	also	really	into	fixing	the	things		the	housing	that	we	have	at	the	
moment	and	shifting	the	focus	on	that	rather	instead	of		you	know	the	focus	
on	building,	building,	building,	you	know		lets	see	what	we	have	now		and	
maybe	we	have	tons	of	empty	houses	that	could	be	renovated	enough		and	
its	also	a	way	of	saving	space	instead	of	building	so	many	new	things		so	in	
that	way,	I	feel	involved	as	a	citizen	to	act	on	it		yeah.		
(WI4,	December	2016)	
This	walking	interviewee	drew	attention	to	the	feeling	of	a	citizens	duty	to	
participate	in	attempting	to	tackle	the	issue	of	empty	houses.	This	notion	of	duty	
links	to	some	of	the	reflections	by	Mass	Observers	about	their	duty	to	record	their	
observations	for	the	project	and	thereby	to	serve	the	wider	research	community	and	
beyond.	
The	question	arises	of	what	it	means	to	take	part	in	citizen	social	science,	and	
whether	observing	and	reporting	empty	houses	is	something	that	people	do	anyway	
or	whether	it	necessarily	needs	to	be	a	more	conscious	form	of	participation	and	
practice.	In	the	Empty	Houses	probe,	the	walking	interviewees	discussed	what	taking	
part	in	the	project	means	for	them.	As	one	interviewee	stated:	
I	walk	around	to	clear	my	head	every	so	often		but	I	dont	think	this	is	
part	 of	 my	 daily	 activity	 	 I	 mean	 Id	 be	 really	 bored	 with	 doing	
something	online	like	that	Zooniverse	stuff,	but	Id	be	quite	happy	doing	
empty	 houses	 	 its	 like	 walking	 around	 maybe	 with	 a	 purpose	 or	
something?	Although	it	would	have	to	be	practical		I	wouldnt	want	to	do	
it	in	the	rain.	
(WI6,	December	2016)	
This	interviewee	drew	attention	to	the	difference	between	online	participation	in	
citizen	science	projects,	such	as	those	that	can	be	found	on	the	Zooniverse	
platform,	and	walking	around	with	a	purpose	recording	observations	of	empty	
houses.	They	were	clearly	keen	to	participate	in	the	latter	even	if	it	is	not	part	of	
their	daily	activities.	Another	interviewee	reflected	with	a	contrasting	suggestion	
on	the	notion	of	participating	in	citizen	social	science	being	part	of	ones	daily	
activities:	
Can	you	piggyback	on	habit	with	a	chore?	I	guess	this	is	the	only	way	to	
embed	a	practice	in	social	life.	Im	not	sure	I	buy	into	the	idea	that	like		
5.2				The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	the	researcher		
well	that	you	can	just	tap	into	something	that	people	do	anyway.	It	has	to	
be	like		more	of	a	committed	practice	or	something?		
(WI5,	December	2016)	
This	interviewee	reflected	on	the	issue	of	whether	it	is	possible	to	incorporate	a	
chore	in	the	sense	of	data	collection,	within	someones	habits	or	routine.	They	
also	drew	attention	to	the	notion	of	just	tap[ping]	into	something	that	people	do	
anyway,	a	potentially	problematic	notion	in	the	sense	that	it	hints	at	a	form	of	
exploitation	of	those	practicing	the	chore.	Another	interviewee	commented:		
Yeah	just	this	lack	of	awareness	to	at	all	consider	reporting	on	it		and	
if	 its	your	habit,	you	go	out	of	 the	house,	you	go	 to	work	and	you	go	
back,	then	its	also	your	routine.	How	would	you	like	to	disrupt	this?	I	
think	 it	 needs	 to	 be	 disrupted	 or	 you	 dont	 noticeits	 not	 active	
observing?	 So	 yeah,	 I	 mean	 when	 you	 just	 say	 its	 not	 a	 burden	 so	
possibly	 just	 the	 activity	 so	 just	 stand	 here	 and	 walk	 by	 and	 have	 a	
magic	app	and	just	click	it	and	say	ok	heres	an	empty	house	boom	So	
your	data	is	collectedbut	I	think	for	me	it	would	be	more	the	burden	
of	what	happens	to	the	data.	
(WI7,	December	2016)			
This	distinction	between	active	and	passive	observation	highlights	a	level	of	
reflexivity	about	what	it	is	that	participants	are	actually	doing	when	they	report	
their	observations	of	empty	houses	to	the	project.	The	interviewee	also	reflected	
on	the	challenges	of	disrupting	ones	everyday	routine	by	asking	people	to	
actively	observe	and	report	data.	Whilst	dismissing	the	sense	of	this	being	a	
burden	on	the	participant	in	practical	terms,	the	interviewee	suggested	that	the	
weight	of	responsibility	is	transferred	to	considering	how	the	data	will	be	used.	
Data	use	in	citizen	social	science,	and	the	complexities	surrounding	this,	is	
considered	in	more	detail	in	chapter	7.	
As	stated	above,	the	Our	Manchester	probe	focussed	on	engaging	local	residents	to	
participate	in	the	project	about	their	local	area,	rather	than	any	sense	of	mass	
participation	or	the	crowdsourcing	of	local	knowledge	on	a	larger	scale.	The	project	
was	localised,	focussing	on	residents	in	Moss	Side,	Manchester,	although	the	actual	
scale	of	the	project	was	never	really	a	topic	for	discussion	with	Stephen,	the	
community	development	worker	leading	the	project.	The	project,	from	the	outset,	
was	an	engagement	of	participants	to	undertake	active	roles	in	the	project,	such	as	to	
5.3	The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	participants		
go	out	and	interview	other	residents	in	Moss	Side	about	their	experiences	of	how	the	
area	had	changed.	In	this	way,	discussions	about	routines,	everyday	practices,	and	the	
burden	of	participation	are	not	so	relevant,	since	an	active	engagement	and	
commitment	to	the	project	was	sought	from	the	start.		
5.3	The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	participants	
This	sections	sets	out	the	experiences	and	reflections	of	the	participants	in	the	three	
projects,	which	gave	rise	to	a	series	of	challenges	in	terms	of	the	execution	of	these	
types	of	citizen	social	science.		
5.3.1	The	challenges	of	interpreting	the	questions	
In	the	Mass	Observation	probe,	one	Mass	Observer	commented	on	the	challenges	of	
interpreting	the	directives,	stating:		
I	do	hope	I	get	the	right	idea.	Its	so	easy	to	misread	them.		
(D1559,	Female,	Your	Views	on	MO,	1990)	
Another	Mass	Observer	did	not	consider	himself	to	be	a	research	subject,	only	
responding	to	an	invitation	to	record	their	observations	and	thoughts:			
I	 dont	 feel	 as	 though	 Im	 taking	 part	 in	 social	 research.	 Of	 course,	 in	
reality,	 I	 am,	 but	 unlike	 the	 pointed,	 aforementioned	 questionnaires	
where	 there	 may	 be	 much,	 for	 the	 recipient,	 at	 stake,	 here	 he/she	 has	
much	greater	 say	and	control	over	 the	response.	One	 isnt	 concerned	or	
compromised,	only	invited. 
(A3072,	Male,	40,	Being	Part	of	Research,	2004)	
In	the	Special	Questionnaire,	a	directive	issued	in	2010	by	the	Mass	Observation	
project,	Mass	observers	were	asked	what	they	got	out	of	writing	for	the	project.	One	
Mass	Observer	responded:		
It	makes	me	think	as	clearly	as	I	can	and	looking	back	at	nearly	30	years	
of	contributions	Im	fascinated	by	my	answers		
(D996F,	SQ,	2010)	
5.3	The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	participants		
The	suggestion	of	this	Mass	Observer	that	they	are	fascinated	by	their	own	
responses	highlights	how	they	are	reflecting	on	their	own	observations	and	
responses	almost	from	a	new-found	distance	of	the	observer.	Responding	to	the	same	
question,	another	mass	observer	writes:		
It	 is	 cathartic,	 eye-opening,	 makes	 me	 question	 myself,	 my	 thoughts,	
feelings	 and	 how	 I	 express	 myself,	 who	 I	 am,	 what	 I	 am.	 Although	 an	
eccentric,	 isolated,	cat	 loving	 technophobe	was	something	 I	knew	about	
myself	already,	I	certainly	had	not	realised	just	how	much	my	disabilities	
and	illness	control	my	life.	I	just	get	such	a	buzz	from	writing	for	MO,	its	a	
great	sense	of	pride.		
(H4611F,	SQ,	2010)		
Through	the	humour	of	this	observers	account,	it	is	possible	to	notice	how	she	highly	
values	the	opportunity	for	reflecting	on	her	reactions,	thoughts,	feelings	and	herself,	
and	even	her	own	health.	Another	Mass	Observer	responds	to	the	same	question	in	
the	Special	Questionnaire,	about	what	they	think	they	get	out	of	writing	for	Mass	
Observation,	in	the	following	way:		
It	 clarifies	my	 thinking	 on	 issues.	 Sometimes	 it	makes	me	 consider	my	
attitudes/opinions	 on	 issues	 I	 havent	 consciously	 thought	 about	 for	 a	
while,	if	ever.	
(M1201F,	SQ,	2010)	
This	Mass	Observer	seems	to	enjoy	being	directed	to	think	about	previously	
unconsidered	issues.	However,	some	were	anxious	that	their	writing	is	incorrect	or	
not	what	is	being	sought	after:		
I	sometimes	feel	as	if	what	I	am	writing	is	too	bland,	down-to-earth,	but	is	
that	what	youre	looking	for?		
(B1814,	Male,	Your	Views	on	MO,	1990)		
One	Mass	Observer	reflects	on	the	nature	of	the	data	produced	in	more	detail	when	
he	writes	that	the	Mass	Observation	is:		
an	exercise	in	the	capture	of	a	type	of	raw	data	which	would	arise	through	
no	 other	 channel	 apart	 perhaps	 from	 a	 private	 diary	 which	 would	
crystallise	my	 thoughts	 and	 feelings	 as	 accurately	 as	 I	 can,	 not	 to	 please	
anyone,	or	 to	 try	and	achieve	an	outcome	of	 some	specific	nature,	but	 to	
record	how	I	see	particular	issues,	and	how	I	feel	about	them,	or	to	record	
things	 from	 my	 past	 which	 are	 being	 asked	 about.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	
consider	anyones	feelings	in	making	these	responses.	
	(C3006,	Male,	46,	Being	Part	of	Research,	2004)	
5.3	The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	participants		
This	response	highlights	this	Observers	reflection	on	the	data	produced	in	the	
project,	between	perceptions	of	capturing	raw	data	in	large	volumes	that	would	not	
be	collected	by	other	means	on	the	one	hand,	and	the	subjective	limitations	of	his	
writing	practice	on	the	other.	The	Mass	Observers	documenting	of	their	experiences,	
observations	and	thoughts,	blurs	the	boundaries	between	observers	and	observed,	
between	the	subjective	and	the	objective.	This	Mass	Observer	comments	about	the	
lack	of	need	to	consider	anyones	feelings,	drawing	attention	to	his	perception	of	
writing	as	a	personal	task	untrammelled	by	emotions,	and	subjective	feelings.	
What	to	report	and	what	not,	the	granularity	of	it,	the	perspective	taken,	all	produce	
different	data	and	it	only	becomes	data	in	the	analysis.	The	Mass	Observers	
reflections	make	this	visible	and	sometimes	almost	seem	to	observe	this	themselves;	
yet	how	does	one	analyse	this?		Furthermore,	how	open-endedness	is	done	and	how	
choice	is	then	performed	becomes	an	interesting	question	and	challenge	in	terms	of	
research	design	in	citizen	social	science.	The	idea	that	open	questions	will	allow	
reality	and	different	perspectives	to	be	expressed	assumes	that	there	is	an	
independent	reality	and	perspective	out	there	to	be	obtained.	In	many	ways	it	could	
be	seen	to	create	a	form	of	vacuum	in	a	world	made	in	and	through	social	relations	
and	interaction.	Thus	Mass	Observers	have	to	create	their	own	rules	from	responding	
to	the	directives.	
Walking	interviewees	in	the	Empty	Houses	probe	also	noted	difficulties	with	the	
interpretation	of	the	task,	and	questioned	what	the	criteria	for	observing	an	
empty	house	might	be.	As	one	interviewee	stated:	
My	boyfriend	used	to	live	next	to	an	empty	house	that	I		it	took	me	a	
year	to	realise	that	it	was	empty	basically	[laughter]		just	because	I	
thought	it	was	just	wild	plants	and	bushes	aroundbut	really	the	day	I	
realised	it	was	empty	I	just	realised	you	couldnt	even	access	the	front	
door		 but	 its	 just	 not	 something	 I	 think	 of	 at	 all	 	 because	 it	 just	
doesnt	make	any	sense	to	have	an	empty	house	when	you	think	about	
it		so	I	never	really	think	this	could	be	empty	if	I	see	something.		
(WI4,	December	2016)	
This	walking	interviewee	admitted	to	not	even	noticing	an	empty	house	for	the	
best	part	of	a	year,	and	questioning	the	logic	of	an	empty	house,	which	does	not	
5.3	The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	participants		
even	make	sense	to	them.	Thus,	they	never	consider	a	house	to	be	empty,	even	
when	they	might	see	potentially	visible	signs	of	neglect.	The	same	interviewee	
continued	reflecting	on	the	matter:	
Other	 things	would	 be	windows		 and	 rubbish	 on	 the	 floor	 and	 not	
look	looked	after	and	cared	for		and	litter		but	the	thing	is	theres	a	
difference	 between	 empty	 and	 inhabited	 	 or	 like	 how	 empty	 is	
empty?	Because	for	example	you	would	see	some	curtains	that	people	
would	 have	 put,	 even	 if	 the	 house	 is	 uninhabited	 	 so	 its	 like	 still	
signs	 of	 habitation	 in	 a	 way	 	 like	 putting	 curtains	 at	 the	 window	
which	is	why	I	dont		you	know		it	kind	of	blurs	a	line.	
(WI4,	December	2016)	
In	this	sense,	the	tasking	of	data	generation	in	the	Empty	Houses	Project	was	
equally	open-ended	and	the	interpretation	of	the	task	was	left	for	participants	to	
interpret	themselves.		
I	dont	really	notice	[empty	houses]	unless	there	are	very	clear	visual	
signs.	 But	 you	 cant	 see	whether	 theyre	 like	 	 I	mean	what	 are	 the	
signs	of	an	empty	house?	Is	 it	being	boarded	up?	Or	 is	 it	not	noticing	
people	coming	and	going?	And	I	think	that	lots	of		most	of	the	people	
on	 the	 actual	 estate	 kind	 of	 know	 each	 other	 so	well	 that	 they	move	
around	spaces	so	confidently	that	you	perhaps		even	if	there	was	an	
empty	 house	 behind	 where	 theyre	 moving,	 I	 dont	 know	 if	 youd	
notice	it		if	that	makes	sense?	
	(WI5,	December	2016)		
This	walking	interviewee	questions	the	visible	signs	of	an	empty	house	and	how	
to	identify	one.	They	mention	the	ways	in	which	people	move	around	which	might	
mask	the	fact	that	there	is	actually	an	empty	house.		The	issue	of	identifying	an	
empty	house	is	far	from	straightforward	and	in	problematised	further	in	section	
5.3.2	below.	The	tensions	of	the	different	positivist	and	constructivist	approaches	
to	mapping	empty	houses	are	highlighted	in	the	walking	interviews,	drawing	
attention	to	the	need	for	social	science	training	for	participants,	and	for	citizen	
social	science	projects	to	be	designed	very	carefully,	building	capacity,	rather	than	
testing	it.		
5.3	The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	participants		
5.3.2	Observational	expertise	and	critical	distance	
Hymes	(1996)	describes	ethnography	as	an	explicit	and	elaborated	form	of	the	
everyday	practice	of	contextual	learning:	our	ability	to	learn	ethnographically	is	an	
extension	of	what	every	human	being	must	do,	that	is	learn	the	meanings,	norms,	
patterns	of	a	way	of	life	(Hymes,	1996,	p.13).	This	raises	questions	about	
observational	expertise.	Is	everyone	to	some	extent	already	a	social	scientist,	even	
when	not	enrolled	in	formal	social	science	work?	Are	people	already	fieldworkers	of	
their	own	lives,	generating	descriptive	sociological	data	as	they	go	about	their	daily	
lives?	Or	does	the	professionalisation	of	observational	techniques	constitute	a	
different	category	of	sociological	data	that	means	that	this	is	not	the	case	and	people	
need	to	be	trained	in	formal	and	distinct	sociological	ways	of	analysing	and	collecting	
data?		
This	section	discusses	the	ethnomethodological	notion	that	members	are	analysts	of	
social	order	and	they	have	to	fit	their	own	actions	into	that	order.	In	this	way,	and	at	
some	basic	level,	we	are	all	analysts	of	the	social;	but	there	are	subsequent	multiple	
layers	of	professionalization,	expertise,	standardisation,	and	institutionalisation.	This	
is	a	challenge	for	research	design	and	execution	in	citizen	social	science	in	terms	of	
dealing	with	observation	data	specifically	and	the	potentially	new	ways	of	seeing	
that	participating	in	citizen	social	science	can	engender.	
The	analysis	of	the	data	in	the	Mass	Observation	Probe	revealed	that	many	of	the	
Mass	Observers	viewed	their	role	in	participating	in	the	project	as	being	one	of	
recording	vital	knowledge	for	historical	posterity,	contributing	to	social	and	historical	
legacy	and	this	constitutes	a	source	of	pride	for	many	of	them.	As	one	participant	
stated:	
Whoever	uses	 these	archives	 in	 the	 future,	will	not	be	observing	us,	we	
shall	eventually	all	be	dead.	No,	they	are	reading	about	the	social	history	
of	 our	 times.	 Imagine	 finding	 a	 diary	 written	 in	 the	 mid-nineteenth	
century,	 when	 you	 read	 it	 you	 are	 not	 observing	 the	 writer,	 you	 are	
taking	 yourself	 back	 to	 being	 in	 their	 era	 and	 seeing	 how	 people	 lived	
then.	
(W640,	Female,	65,	Title	MO,	1993)	
5.3	The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	participants		
The	Mass	Observer	writing	this	is	almost	entirely	effacing	their	own	subjectivity	for	a	
view	onto	the	social	history	of	their	time.	This	is	in	contrast	to	the	valued	opportunity	
for	self-reflection	mentioned	in	other	responses.	Another	Mass	Observer	commented:	
I	 like	 to	 think	 that	my	 contribution	 adds	 to	 our	 social	 history,	 that	my	
views/thoughts/feelings	 are	 being	 left,	 albeit	 anonymously,	 for	 future	
generations	to	read,	to	get	a	glimpse	of	how	people	my	age	felt	at	certain	
times	in	their	lives,	about	their	own	lives	and	recollections	and	reactions	
to	what	was/is	going	on	in	the	world	generally.	
(K798,	Female,	60,	SQ,	2010)	
In	many	ways,	the	responses	of	many	of	the	Mass	Observers	in	the	project	acted	as	a	
form	of	proxy	observer,	providing	a	view	onto	the	minutiae	of	everyday	events	that	
might	not	be	possible	to	directly	observe	in	more	conventional	social	research	
methods.		Mass	Observers	seemed	to	see	their	contributions	as	a	lens	onto	the	world.	
They	were	realistic	about	what	they	are	doing,	or	at	least	they	have	a	sense	that	they	
are	both	observer	and	observed.	The	probe	into	the	Mass	Observation	project	
revealed	the	ways	in	which	citizen	social	science,	unlike,	for	example,	citizen	sensing	
projects,	opens	up	a	space	for	reflection	in	the	data	generation	process.		
One	Mass	Observer	comments	on	their	contributions	to	the	project	as	unique	
experiences,	which	are	valuable	precisely	because	they	are	personal	to	the	
contributor:		
I	 prefer	 themes	 involving	my	 own	 experience	 	 because	 I	 feel	 I	 have	 a	
unique	(if	sometimes	rather	trivial)	contribution	to	make.	 In	discussing	
wider	issues,	which	have	a	wide	coverage	in	the	media,	I	feel	there	is	little	
to	add		unless	I	have	been	personally	involved.	
(T2003F,	Your	Views	on	MO,	1990)	
This	Mass	Observer	reflects	on	how	they	feel	like	they	can	contribute	observations	
based	on	their	own	personal	experiences,	rather	than	more	objective	observations	of	
something	they	have	no	experience	of.		
Another	Mass	Observer	reflected	on	the	nature	of	the	data	they	produce	in	writing	for	
the	project:	
5.3	The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	participants		
There	 is	 in	 this	 directive	 a	 chance	 that	 perhaps	 the	writer,	myself,	 can	
perhaps	put	something	down,	that	doesnt	shock	him	but	does	shock	the	
person	who	reads	 it	 I	would	hate	 to	have	someone	reading	 it,	namely	
you	 or	 whoever	 reads	 the	 directives	 when	 they	 are	 returned,	 being	
shocked	by	what	Ive	put	down.	I	should	add,	that	to	me,	what	Ive	written	
isnt	shocking,	just	the	truth,	in	the	simplest	way	I	can	put	it.	
(S2067M,	Your	Views	on	MO,	1990)	
This	Mass	Observers	reflections	reveal	how	he	views	his	responses	as	an	expression	
of	his	own	personal	truths,	even	if	they	risk	being	subject	to	misinterpretation	as	
shocking.	It	is	also	worth	noting	in	this	response	how,	as	is	frequently	the	case	in	
many	of	the	Mass	Observation	responses,	the	Mass	Observer	directly	addresses	the	
reader,	or	director	of	the	project,	who	they	assume	reads	their	responses.		
Many	Mass	Observers	were	dismissive	of	the	quality	of	their	writing	referring.	One	
MO	stated:		
Ive	 not	 previously	 considered	my	 rather	minor	 contribution	 to	M.O.	 as	
taking	part	in	social	research	but	I	suppose,	to	some	it	must	be.		
(C2203,	Male,	52,	Being	Part	of	Research,	2004).		
In	some	responses,	Mass	Observers	displayed	a	sense	of	not	thinking	too	objectively	
about	what	they	are	being	asked	to	do,	but	to	just	get	on	with	submitting	their	
responses:		
I	 can	 ramble	 on	 about	most	 things	 though	whether	 its	 of	 any	 value	 is	
another	matter	
(M2451,	Female,	Your	Views	on	MO,	1990).	
Some	Mass	Observers	do	not	necessarily	want	to	reflect	on	broader	issues	of	which	
they	do	not	have	direct	experience,	which	is	in	contrast	to	others	who	value	this	
opportunity	to	reflect	on	previously	unconsidered	topics:	
I	 think	 I	 prefer	 to	 write	 about	 my	 own	 experience,	 religion,	 the	
environment,	 the	 elderly,	 in	 living	 in	 the	world	 today	 etc.	 I	 do	 not	 take	
much	 interest	 in	 the	 wider	 issues	 some	 of	 which	 are	 beyond	 my	
comprehension.	
(G1513,	Female,	Your	Views	on	MO,	1990)	
Some	Mass	Observers	suggested	in	their	responses	that	they	found	their	views	to	be	
worthless,	or	that	they	lacked	confidence	in	the	face	of	perceived	expertise	in	doing	
5.3	The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	participants		
research.	On	the	other	hand,	another	Mass	Observer	was	both	self-confident	in	her	
views	and	self-deprecating.	She	reflected	practically:	
My	opinion	about	 life	 is	as	good	as	anyone	elses	so	why	not	air	 it	 to	all	
and	sundry.	They	can	always	recycle	 the	paper	and	make	papier	mach	
puppets	out	of	it	if	the	content	isnt	good	enough.		
(C1191,	Female,	49,	Being	Part	of	Research,	2004)	
This	Mass	Observer	commented	on	the	potential	to	recycle	the	paper	she	wrote	her	
directive	response	on,	if	the	quality	of	her	response	is	not	deemed	to	be	appropriate.	
The	probe	showed	the	very	endogenous	sociological	analysis	citizens	carry	out,	as	
part	of	living	social	lives	is	an	important	source	of	these	frictions.		
In	probe	2	into	the	Empty	Houses	project,	some	participants	suggested	they	did	not	
feel	comfortable	reporting	on	empty	houses	because	they	found	them	hard	to	identify	
and	assumed	that	some	prior	knowledge	or	expertise	was	required.	There	is	a	sense	
from	the	walking	interviews	that	participants	did	not	feel	qualified	to	report	and	that	
they	are	not	experts	in	this	area	and	therefore	their	knowledge	does	not	count,	or	is	
not	of	sufficient	quality.	This	links	to	some	of	the	Mass	Observers	responses	
analysed	above	that	demonstrated	an	apparent	lack	confidence	in	the	face	of	
perceived	expertise,	or	a	concern	to	be	seen	as	intrusive	or	nosey.	An	analysis	of	
the	walking	interviews	clearly	highlights,	however,	that	citizens	do	know	a	lot	
about	empty	houses	-	that	it	is	a	complex	concept,	a	private	matter,	a	political	
matter,	a	socially	sensitive	fact,	something	that	needs	to	have	something	done	
about	it,	but	that	it	is	not	simple.	The	very	nature	of	the	Empty	Houses	probe,	and	
the	way	in	which	it	was	adapted	to	include	a	dialogic	exchange	between	the	
researcher	and	the	participants	in	the	form	of	the	walking	interviews,	brings	
these	issues	to	light.	As	one	interviewee	commented:	
Its	very	unclear	whats	empty	or	not	and	its	unclear	what	we	can	do	about	it,	
and	why	would	we	do	 something?	 I	 dont	 feel	 very	 good	 at	 spotting	 empty	
houses	-	its	maybe	bad	that	I	havent	spotted	any.	
(WI4,	December	2016)	
5.3	The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	participants		
Walking	interviewees	discussed	different	types	of	observation	and	how	to	identify	an	
empty	house,	actively	engaged	in	attempting	to	identify	an	empty	house,	and	
discussed	different	criteria	and	approaches	to	identification.	As	one	interviewee	
described:	
I	 think		on	most	sites	here	and	there	you	see	maybe	a	property	that	 is	
empty	but	I	dont	give	much	thought	to	 it.	 I	guess	 just	when	its	close	to	
my	house	I	walk	past	it	and	I	see	it	and	its	kind	of	an	odd	from	the	normal	
so	 I	 would	 guess	 this	 is	 now	 	 yeah	 maybe	 	 I	 dont	 know	 if	 its	
interesting	 but	 it	 kind	 of	 stands	 out	 as	 theres	 a	 fence	 around	 it	 and	
nobodys	 in	 there	 and	 I	 dont	 know	whats	 in	 there.	 I	would	 notice	 this	
house	 and	 I	 would	 see	 it	 as	 kind	 of	 this	mystery	 place.	 I	 dont	 know	 if	
mysterious	place	is	a	good	description	but	then	I	guess	at	some	point	you	
also	get	used	to	 it	since	.	No	 just	 thinking	but	 like	compared	to	maybe	
even	in	the	UK	you	get	more	used	to	seeing	this	rather	than	when	I	was	
living	somewhere	else	and	there	was	an	empty	house		Im	just	thinking	
about	what	the	eye	gets	used	to	when	you	walk	around	a	city.		
(WI2,	December	2016)	
The	interviewee	reflected	on	what	the	eye	gets	used	to	when	making	the	same	
journeys	or	navigating	a	familiar	city	in	the	same	way	on	a	regular	basis.		They	
commented	on	how	they	initially	observed	it	as	odd	from	the	normal	but	then	got	
used	to	seeing	a	potentially	empty	house	on	their	street,	characterised	it	neutrally	as	
a	mystery	place	and	then	did	not	give	it	much	further	attention.	Parallels	can	be	
drawn	here	between	the	walking	interviews	and	the	reflective	directive	responses	of	
the	Mass	Observation	project.	The	interviewee	perceived	the	practice	of	observation	
to	be	a	solitary	or	individual	experience	of	just	walking	around	the	city	in	which	they	
live.	Another	walking	interviewee	expands	on	this	notion	that	doing	citizen	social	
science	with	others	is	what	makes	it	social	science	as	opposed	to	just	making	sense	of	
everyday	life,	reflecting:	
AA:	 So	 then	 with	 the	 Empty	 Houses	 Project	 specifically,	 would	 you	
consider	that	to	be	social	science?		
WI6:	I	think	itfor	me	would	depend	on	the	purpose	of	it	really.	If	it	was	
just	 me	 doing	 it,	 then	 probably	 not.	 But	 if	 Id	 been	 tasked	 to	 do	 it	 -	
probably,	or	if	I	was	doing	it	for	a	reason		then	yes?	Yeah	But	if	it	was	
just	me	noticing		then	thats	just	me	noticing.		
AA:	 So	 how	 does	 it	 become	 social	 science	 or	 what	 changes	 it?	 Whats	
different?		
WI6:	I	guess	if	theres	some	structure		or	if	its	just	thematic	or	if	its	for	
a	purpose	then	maybe	that	would	count	as	social	science.	But	 if	 its	 just	
5.3	The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	participants		
me,	 me	 in	my	 own	 head	 like	 ohhh		 I	 wonder	 if	 there	 are	 any	 empty	
houses	where	I	live?	Then	not	really	-	cos	thats	just	me	thinking	about	it?		
(WI6,	Empty	Houses	Probe,	December	2016)	
This	walking	interviewee	refers	to	the	difference	between	personal	subjective	
noticing	of	empty	houses	and	when	these	observations	are	bound	up	in	a	more	
structured	and	purposeful	action.	They	also	contrast	the	notion	of	solitary	or	
individual	observations	versus	the	collective	activity	of	participating	in	a	project.	This	
is	interesting	in	terms	of	the	similarity	to	the	Mass	Observers	reflections	on	their	
participation	in	the	project	as	set	out	above,	where	they	value	the	space	for	personal,	
solitary	reflection	but	on	topics	which	are	structured	and	part	of	a	formal,	organised,	
wider	project.		
Its	 weird	 that	 its	 my	 local	 area	 but	 I	 never	 actually	 go	 to	 some	 of	 these	
places.	 I	 guess	 people	 have	 set	 routines	 or	 patterns	 about	 how	 they	move	
through	space	or	their	local	area	or	city.	
(WI3,	December	2016)	
These	reflections	from	the	walking	interviews	of	the	Empty	Houses	probe,	highlight	
the	ways	in	which	drawing	on	everyday	observations	to	generate	data	is	not	
straightforward,	and	that	participants	are	aware	of	the	issues	associated	with	
observation	data.	The	affordances	of	citizen	social	science	here	appear	to	be	the	way	
in	which	such	an	approach	values	the	everyday,	mundane	social	inquiry,	which	has	the	
potential	to	scaffold	it	to	come	together	as	a	bottom	up	social	science.		
In	the	probe	into	the	Empty	Houses	project,	a	walking	interviewee	reflected	on	
some	of	the	issues	around	subjectivity	and	observation	data	(see	chapter	2):	
People	 arent	 neutral	 like	 local	 authorities	 are	 supposed	 to	 be,	when	
its	 actually	 a	 profession,	well	 actually	 even	 if	 its	 complicated		 but	
still	you	have	to	be	neutral,	and	its	just	people	arent	I	guess	Im	just	
very	 suspicious	 of	 people	 which	 is	 very	 bad	 to	 say	 this	 but	 yeah,	
people	 arent	 neutral	 observers	 -	 they	 all	 have	 their	 own	 intentions	
and	 interests,	 and	 they	 didnt	 sign	 a	 contract	 to	 do	 work.	 Its	 not	
professional	but	 they	will	need	to	put	professional	standards	on	 it	or	
have	 professional	 people	 to	 double	 check	 everything	 done	 by	 the	
people.	
(WI4,	December	2016)	
5.3	The	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	for	participants		
Here	the	walking	interviewee	adhered	to	mainstream	scientific	notions	of	
professional	quality	standards	in,	and	responsibility	for,	data	collection.	The	
question	remains	of	how	to	verify	the	data	quality	of	the	empty	houses	
submissions.	The	interviewee	also	drew	attention	to	the	ethnomethodological	
notion	that	members	are	analysts	of	social	order	instructions	and	they	have	to	fit	
their	own	actions	into	that	order.	Thus,	at	some	basic	level,	we	are	all	analysts	of	
the	social,	but	then	there	are	layers	and	layers	of	professionalization,	expertise,	
standardisation,	institutionalisation,	power,	politics	and	interests.		The	question	
remains	of	whether	citizen	social	science	forges	new	connections,	and	
horizontalises	the	analysts.	The	probes	suggest	that	it	depends	very	much	on	
exactly	how	citizens	are	positioned,	and	how	they	position	themselves.	The	
details	of	how	the	projects	are	organised	matters	immensely.		
Figure	5.2	Participants	in	Our	Manchester	project	discussing	photographs	brought	in	for	community	
event	and	sharing	as	part	of	the	project	
Source:	Author,	November	2016	
5.4	Roles	in	the	research	process	-	finding	a	place	in	data		
In	probe	3	into	the	Our	Manchester	project,	this	was	a	topic	that	was	discussed	with	
Stephen.	He	reflected	on	the	data	produced	from	the	project:		
Data	is	only	collected	when	they	want	to	do	something	to	you,	not	for	you.	
(Stephen	interview,	November	2016)	
Who	they	is	remains	unclear	in	the	interview,	but	this	is	an	interesting	distinction	
since	it	suggests	that	the	data	produced	in	the	Our	Manchester	project	is	not	
perceived	to	be	data	as	such.		Arguably,	this	could	be	due	to	pressures	to	produce	
data	for	governance	and	policy	reporting,	so	it	is	perhaps	not	surprising	that	Stephen	
is	sensitive	to	what	more	data	is	or	should	be.	However,	he	goes	on	to	reflect	on	what	
is	taking	place	with	the	Our	Manchester	project:	
Its	not	about	 information.	 Its	about	so	much	more	than	that.	Questions	
need	to	be	asked	all	 the	time		 its	not	about	 just	waiting	until	 theres	a	
crisis.	 Its	 about	 trying	 to	be	preventative	 too	by	 constantly	 asking	how	
people	are	doing,	checking	in	and	discussing		connecting.	Its	not	about	
filling	 in	a	 load	of	 forms	or	 ticking	boxes	and	 thinking	 that	demands	or	
data	are	static	or	fixed	in	time.	Theyre	not.	There	needs	to	be	a	holistic,	
live,	adaptable	system	of	constant	negotiation	and	discussion	so	we	can	
meet	the	different	needs	and	interests	of	the	people	in	the	community.	
(Interview	with	Stephen,	November	2016)	
In	many	ways,	the	type	of	citizen	social	science	probed	for	in	the	Our	Manchester	
project	has	the	potential	to	provide	the	sort	of	data	Stephen	refers	to	here,	to	meet	
the	different	needs	and	interests	of	the	people	in	the	community.	However,	it	raises	
challenges	in	terms	of	how	to	design	a	project	to	deliver	data	for	this	as	per	Stephens	
quote	above.	
5.4	Roles	in	the	research	process	-	finding	a	place	in	data	
Participants	are	clearly	aware	of	the	challenges	entailed	in	analysing	and	making	
sense	of	data,	and	the	ways	in	which	the	data	is	inextricably	bound	in	the	context	in	
which	it	was	produced.	Many	citizen	science	projects	attempt	to	use	citizens	as	data	
collectors	on	similarly,	although	maybe	not	quite	so	complex	topics,	which	reveals	
friction	points.	The	probes	show	the	very	endogenous	sociological	analysis	citizens	
5.4	Roles	in	the	research	process	-	finding	a	place	in	data		
carry	out	as	part	of	living	social	lives	is	an	important	source	of	these	frictions.	It	thus	
follows	that	citizen	social	science	gives	rise	to	another	challenge	for	research	design	
and	execution	in	terms	of	designing	projects	that	allow	for	different	situated	
knowledges	(Haraway,	1998),	analyses	and	contestations	of	the	social.	
The	roles	and	expectations	of	the	different	participants	were	blurred	and	at	times	
perhaps	confusing	when	undertaking	the	probes.	This	was	particularly	a	challenge	in	
the	Our	Manchester	project	in	terms	of	the	questioning	of	the	role	of	the	trained	or	
professional	researcher	in	this	project.	Many	of	my	field	notes	reflected	on	this	issue:		
I	keep	thinking	a	lot	about	my	own	position	as	a	researcher		what	is	my	
role	 in	 the	 project?	 I	 keep	 feeling	 like	 Im	 holding	 back	 in	 meetings,	
resorting	 to	 and	 almost	 hiding	 behind	 the	 method	 of	 research,	 or	
interviewing,	 asking	 the	questions	 rather	 than	 stating	my	views.	Which	
becomes	problematic	when	being	 grilled	by	 Stephen	 as	he	 tries	 to	 suss	
out	who	I	am	and	what	my	views	are	as	he	tries	to	move	things	forward	
with	the	project.		
(Field	notes,	Our	Manchester	probe,	June	2016)	
There	was	a	struggle	in	the	probe	into	the	Our	Manchester	project	in	terms	of	roles,	
particularly	in	terms	of	who	was	driving	the	project	and	concern	for,	or	lack	thereof,	
adhering	to	particular	methods	and	processes.	At	times	Stephen	appeared	to	act	as	a	
form	of	gatekeeper	of	the	project,	rather	than	a	coproducer	working	towards	the	
same	goal.		The	project	necessarily	required	a	commitment	to	maintain	it	and	an	
active	practice	to	keep	it	going,	as	well	as	to	find	solutions	to	potential	problems,	and	
ensure	that	the	processed	continued	to	work.		
In	probe	1,	a	Mass	Observer	reflected	on	their	role:	
Does	analysis	mean	imposing	your	own	structures	on	the	world,	and	does	
what	 I	 do	 instead	 of	 analysis	mean	 that	 I	 am	 receiver/observer	 rather	
than	a	controller?		
(O2349F,	Your	Views	on	MO,	1990)	
This	Mass	Observer	considered	the	ways	in	which	they	are	a	form	of	transmitter	or	
observer	of	the	everyday,	but	they	also	perceive	the	difference	between	observation	
and	analysis,	and	the	blurred	role	of	the	Mass	Observer	in	the	project,	somewhere	
5.4	Roles	in	the	research	process	-	finding	a	place	in	data		
between	researcher	and	researched.	In	many	ways,	and	as	suggested	above,	citizen	
social	science	entails	a	reconfiguration	of	traditional	roles	in	the	research	process	and	
some	participants	are	tentative	about	its	implications.	
In	many	instances	people	appear	to	undertake	endogenous	research	practices	even	if	
they	do	not	consider	what	they	are	doing	to	be	social	research,	since	that	is	perceived	
as	the	preserve	of	the	so-called	experts.		Furthermore,	this	raises	questions	about	
what	is	it	about	social	science	that	makes	it	a	skilful	and	expert	activity,	and	how	that	
is	practiced	in	a	way	that	makes	it	difficult	to	do,	even	though	all	members	of	social	
life	are	social	analysts.	Citizen	social	science	produces	tensions	between	notions	of	
inclusion	of	all	social	actors	in	the	generation	of	information	about	the	everyday,	and	
the	notion	that	many	of	the	participants	do	not	necessarily	feel	entitled,	or	
empowered,	to	participate	in	the	analysis	of	this	information	or	in	the	interpretation	
of	what	it	means.	Many	participants	were	only	too	aware	of	the	complexities	of	this	
part	of	the	research	process.			
This	distinction	was	reflected	on	in	the	walking	interviews	in	the	Empty	Houses	
probe.	When	asked	whether	the	activities	of	the	probe	could	be	considered	to	be	
social	science,	one	walking	interviewee	reflected:	
AA:	Do	you	consider	this	to	be	social	science?			
WI3:	If	Im	honest	no.	Because	its	just	my	observations	about	the	world	
around	me,	but	then	also	due	to	my	personality,	 Im	quite	an	inquisitive	
by	 nature	 kind	 of	 person,	 so	 	 but	 would	 I	 call	 it	 social	 science?	 No	
because	lots	of	the	things	Ive	defined		well	talked	about,	have	no	kind	
of	definitions,	no	kind	of	framework		theyre	just	observations.	
AA:	So	when	does	it	become	social	science?		
WI3:	 I	 guess	when	 theres	more	 of	 a	 framework	 that	 says	what	 is	 and	
what	isnt	because	when	you	were	asking	what	the	benefits	of	this	kind	
of	 data	 would	 be,	 I	 mentioned	 that	 there	 needs	 to	 be	 some	 kind	 of	
common	good	or	outcome	or	output	in	the	end	that	serves	a	population	
or	a	group	in	the	community		but	I	guess	unless	there	was		unless	that	
was	 pre-defined,	 or	 organically	 there	 was	 a	 group	 of	 people	 that	 had	
come	 together	 for	 a	 purpose,	 I	wouldnt	 necessarily	 think	 it	was	 social	
science		cos	its	just	you	using	your	senses	I	guess.			
(WI3,	Empty	Houses	Probe,	December	2016)	
This	walking	interviewee	reflected	on	the	need	for	a	structure	or	framework	into	
which	their	observations	of	empty	houses	could	be	inserted	and	ordered.	They	
5.5	Conclusion		
distinguish	between	unstructured	observations	that	are	just	using	your	senses	and	
the	more	formalised	framework	entailed	in	their	perception	of	social	science.	This	
distinction	is	interesting,	particularly	given	the	nature	of	the	Empty	Houses	project,	
whereby	reporting	observations	of	empty	houses	could	be	considered	to	be	less	of	a	
reflexive	activity,	than	recording	observations	of	public	events,	or	other	issues,	for	the	
Mass	Observation	project,	where	such	observations	obtained	by	just	using	your	
senses	are	actively	embraced.	At	the	same	time,	it	highlights	how	probably	any	fact	
thus	observed,	is	actually	a	constructed	fact,	and	much	more	ambiguous	and	
contextual	than	the	idea	of	observation	suggests.	An	empty	home	is	many	things,	as	
discussed	by	the	walking	interviewees.	The	participant	quoted	above	did	not	
necessarily	consider	their	observations	of	the	world	around	them	to	be	social	
science,	as	they	are	just	unmediated	observations	and	lack	a	framework	or	
structure	with	which	to	categorise	and	classify	them.	It	raises	the	question:	who	
gets	to	do	social	science?	Or	who	gets	to	create	such	frameworks	or	structures	
and	how?		
5.5	Conclusion	
Citizen	social	science	methods	draw	attention	to	the	relationship	between	
scholarly	social	science	knowledge	and	endogenous	social	competence,	between	
reflection	and	expertise.	The	probes	set	off	the	inevitable	hierarchy	in	the	research	
process	that	means	that	roles	are	complex	and	responsibilities	in	the	research	
process	are	spread.	The	practicalities	of	doing	citizen	social	science	raise	challenges	
for	research	design	and	execution,	as	demonstrated	above,	that	make	it	difficult	for	
citizens	to	find	a	place	in	data,	and	for	researchers	to	design	projects	that	facilitate	
that	process.	The	probes	were	designed	to	examine	and	provoke	projects	operating	
on	different	levels	of	Haklays	(2013)	typology	of	participation	in	citizen	science	
projects	(see	chapters	2		4),	which	groups	projects	around	four	levels	of	
participation,	from	crowdsourcing	at	Level	1,	through	to	extreme	citizen	science,	or	
collaborative	science,	at	Level	4.	As	a	project	required	greater	levels	of	participation	
and	commitment,	different	challenges	for	research	design	and	execution	became	
more	prominent.		
5.5	Conclusion		
The	probes	make	many	of	the	complexities	of	data	generation	tangible,	sometimes	in	
unexpected	ways.	They	reveal	how	the	data	is	not	so	much	about	the	social	world	
but	of	the	social	world.	The	probes	highlight	the	situated	nature	of	observation	data,	
that	all	data	is	data	in	place,	and	context	dependent.	Citizen	social	science	can	
operate	to	generate	different	situated	knowledges	by	locating	data	in	the	context	in	
which	it	is	produced,	but	it	very	much	depends	on	how	the	project	is	designed.	The	
question	remains	of	what	is	it	about	social	science	that	makes	it	a	skillful	and	expert	
activity,	and	how	is	that	practiced	in	a	way	that	makes	it	difficult	to	do,	even	though	
all	members	of	social	life	are	social	analysts	(see	Winch,	1958;	Savage	and	Burrows,	
2007;	Thrift,	2011	for	further	discussion).	
Citizen	social	science	can	work	to	problematise	traditional	modes	of	expert	data	
analysis;	the	analysis	above	shows	the	difficulty	of	participants	to	find	a	place	in	the	
relationship	between	endogenous	social	analysis	and	scientific	approaches.	
However,	the	practices	and	processes	of	citizen	social	science	appreciate	the	
emerging,	crosscutting	connections	between	the	expert	practices	of	data	capture,	
analysis	and	visualisation	on	the	one	hand,	and	citizen	initiatives	on	inclusion,	
advocacy	and	cultural	expression	(Marres,	2014).	Citizen	social	science,	at	its	best,	
does	this	by	allowing	or	encouraging	participants	to	call	into	question	the	classic	type	
of	technocratic	reason	and	expert-led	forms	of	research	and	governance.	However,	
this	can	engender	ethical	issues	that	are	explored	in	more	detail	in	the	following	
chapter	(6),	which	also	offers	ways	to	address	them.		
6.1	Introduction		
Chapter	6.	Facet	2:	Relational	ethics	and	the	politics	of	
method	
6.1	Introduction	
Undertaking	citizen	social	science	raises	challenges	for	research	design	and	
execution,	particularly	since	such	an	approach	blurs	the	boundaries	between	the	
roles	and	responsibilities	of	researcher	and	researched,	as	set	out	in	the	previous	
chapter.	Chapter	5	highlighted	the	difficulty	of	participants	to	find	a	place	in	the	
relationship	between	endogenous	social	analysis	and	scientific	approaches.	It	also	
highlighted	the	challenges	of	designing	projects	that	facilitate	the	process	of	finding	a	
place	within	that.	This	chapter	focuses	on	the	tension	that	exists	between	the	
possibilities	of	citizen	social	science	and	its	practical	ethical	realities,	and	the	
necessity	for	on-going	dialogue	and	adjustments	in	ethical	research	practices.	This	is	
not	new	or	unfamiliar	discourse;	its	importance	is	heightened,	however,	particularly	
when	considering	the	practical	realities	of	citizen	social	science.	
If	methods	are	performative	and	social	facts	are	not	just	out	there	to	be	collected,	
what	ethical	issues	arise	from	doing	citizen	social	science,	and	how	might	these	be	
addressed?	This	question	stems	from	the	literature	reviewed	in	chapter	2	that	
suggested	that	other	social	actors,	beyond	the	academy,	could	be	included	in	
undertaking	social	science	research	(Marres,	2012).	Citizen	social	science,	as	set	out	
in	chapter	3	on	the	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science,	necessarily	generates	new	data	
publics,	and	certain	tensions	arise,	particularly	in	terms	of	the	ethical	issues	that	
citizen	social	science	raises.	As	Tiidenburg	(2018,	pp.477-8)	notes,	all	methods	
questions	are	ethics	questions		most	basically,	a	method	is	nothing	more	or	less	
than	a	means	of	getting	something	done.	Every	choice	about	how	to	get	something	
done	is	grounded	in	a	set	of	moral	principles	(Markham,	2006).	It	is	thus	necessary	to	
consider	the	ethical	implications	in	methods	of	defining	field	boundaries;	accessing	
participants;	sampling;	collecting,	organising,	analysing,	and	archiving	information;	as	
well	as	representing	participants	in	writing;	framing	knowledge;	and	maintaining	
6.1	Introduction		
professional	autonomy	(Tiidenburg,	2018;	Mauthner	et	al.,	2012;	Markham,	2006).	
Reflections	on	such	implications	are	set	out	in	the	sections	below.		
This	chapter	takes	an	innovative	approach	to	the	ethical	challenges	and	affordances	
of	citizen	social	science	as	it	asks	participants	about	their	experiences	of	participating	
in,	and	their	ethical	perspectives	on	the	probes;	it	is	a	form	of	relational	ethics.	Austin	
(2012)	suggests	that	relational	ethics	is	a	contemporary	approach	to	ethics	that	
situates	ethical	action	explicitly	in	relationships.	Interpersonal	and	societal	
relationships	are	influenced	by	the	dynamics	of	power.	A	relational	approach	to	
ethical	action	underscores	the	need	to	address	issues	of	power	and	vulnerability.		
Banks	et	al.	(2013)	consider	everyday	relational	ethics	as	a daily	practice	of	
negotiating	the	ethical	issues	and	challenges	that	arise	through	the	life	of	citizen	
social	science	projects.		They	suggest	that	this	way	of	constructing	the	ethical	is	to	
see	the	moral	agent	not	just	as	an	impartial	deliberator,	but	also	as	an	embedded	
participant	with	situated	and	partial	relationships,	responsibilities,	values	and	
commitments	that	frame	and	constrain	ways	of	seeing,	judging	and	acting	in	
particular	situations.	In	this	way,	I	strove	to	become	embedded	in	the	communities	I	
was	researching,	and	to	adopt	a	reflexive	approach	to	developing	the	probes	in	each	
context.	Thus	the	ethical	is	present	in	ways	of	being	as	well	as	acting,	and	in	
relationships	and	emotions,	as	well	as	conduct	(Banks	et	al.,	2013,	p.266).	In	
problematising	this	issue,	citizen	social	science	can	play	a	crucial	role	in	allowing	
participants	to	take	part	in	a	discussion	about	the	ethics	and	values	of	knowledge	
production.		
At	this	juncture	the	limitations	of	the	discourses	and	categories	of	research	ethics	
become	visible.	To	discuss	the	blurring	of	boundaries,	I	choose	to	stay	with	the	
dichotomies	of	researcher	and	participant.	This	is	designed	to	illuminate	the	
blurring	from	two	traditionally	differentiated	positions.	Thus	I	will,	firstly,	examine	
the	ethical	issues	for	the	researcher;	then	those	raised	by	the	participants	in	citizen	
social	science.	The	concept	of	relational	ethics	is	used	in	the	third	section	to	draw	
attention	to	the	mobilisation	of	the	locus	of	ethical	practice,	and	to	destabilise	it	from	
being	fixed	on	the	researcher.	The	aim	is	therefore	to	open	up	both	the	research	
process	and	the	ways	in	which	ethical	positions	are	formed.		
6.2	Ethical	issues	raised	for	the	researcher		
6.2	Ethical	issues	raised	for	the	researcher		
Opening	up	the	traditional	research	process	to	citizen	participation	means	that	in	
taking	on	the	role	of	volunteer	observer,	citizens	become	part	of	the	production	
process	in	a	more	applied	and	directed	way	(Elias,	1991;	Purdam,	2014).	In	effect,	
they	become	researchers	of	a	sort	in	their	own	right.	Flinders	et	al.	(2016,	p.261)	
state	that	co-production	is		a	risky	method	of	social	inquiry.	It	is	time-consuming,	
ethically	complex,	emotionally	demanding,	inherently	unstable,	vulnerable	to	
external	shocks,	subject	to	competing	demands	and	it	challenges	many	disciplinary	
norms.	If	this	is	true	of	many	participatory	methods,	is	citizen	social	science	special	
in	this	regard?		
The	possibilities	of	citizen	social	science	can	entail	the	flattening	of	hierarchies	in	the	
research	process	as	knowledge	is	made	together.	However,	this	creates	new	tensions	
in	terms	of	ethics	and	the	reproduction	of	inequalities,	and	the	conflicting	stances	or	
perspectives	of	ethical	practice.	It	can	blur	the	roles	of	researcher,	participant,	and	
research	subject.		In	mobilising	people	in	their	everyday	lives	and	activities,	to	
voluntarily	record	data	to	be	used	in	social	science	research,	citizen	social	science	is	
reliant	on	people	creating	knowledge	together	by	way	of	their	everyday	practices.	
Participants	subscribe	to	different	codes	of	ethics	to	academic	ethical	practice.	In	this	
process,	it	could	be	intimidating	and	antithetical	for	people	to	adhere	to	the	ethical	
practices	of	University	taught	social	science	-	which	draws	attention	to	the	politics	of	
knowledge	making.	Citizen	social	science	brings	together	academics	and	non-
academics	with	potentially	opposing	methodological,	paradigmatic,	epistemological	
and	ontological	perspectives	and	practices.	This	makes	it	quite	difficult	to	agree	on	
the	need	for,	and	content	of,	reasonable	practices	and	sufficient	standards	for	ethical	
research.	In	this	sense,	opening	these	processes	up	and	making	them	more	
participatory	is	necessarily	political.	Ethics	approval	is	important	and	can	help	
researchers	reflect	and	refine	their	methods.	The	procedure	for	obtaining	ethical	
approval	prompts	reflections	on	different	aspects	of	the	process,	and	this	was	a	useful	
starting	point.		
6.2	Ethical	issues	raised	for	the	researcher		
Tiidenburg	(2018)	warns	of	the	grey	areas	that	researchers	may	find	themselves	in,	
where	their	individual	sense	of	what	is	right	and	wrong;	their	disciplines	
conventions;	the	legal	and	institutional	conditions	of	approval	may	at	times	clash	or	
collapse.	Institutional	ethical	guidelines	tend	to	place	the	locus	of	practice	and	
responsibility	on	the	individual	researcher	to	ensure	that	all	aspects	of	the	guidelines	
are	followed	to	a	satisfactory	level.	Passing	university	ethics	committees	is	often	a	
matter	of	procedure,	where	a	written	form	that	best	explains	the	potential	risks	of	the	
research	and	suggested	ways	to	mitigate	them,	can	fix	the	ethical	stances	taken	in	
relation	to	a	particular	position	that	is	then	the	researchers	responsibility	to	
maintain.	Most	institutional	ethical	guidelines	are	based	on	the	human	as	a	
biomedical	subject,	with	social	science	research	ethics	being	layered	on	top.	However,	
the	procedures	of	passing	university	ethics	committee	reviews	can	sensitise	
researchers	to	the	risks,	issues,	potential	harms,	and	consequences	of	a	project.	This	
necessarily	engenders	a	degree	of	reflection,	reflexivity	and	relational	ethics	to	be	
written	in.	
However,	citizen	social	science	necessarily	challenges	this	fixing	of	ethical	
responsibility	on	the	researcher	to	ensure	consent,	anonymity,	and	control	as	far	as	
possible	in	the	design	of	the	project,	as	this	section	shows.	Whilst	many	of	the	ethical	
challenges	in	participatory	research	are	common	to	social	research	generally	
(informed	consent,	anonymity,	issues	of	ownership	of	data	and	findings)	(Banks	et	al.,	
2013),	the	dynamic,	complex	and	value-based	nature	of	citizen	social	science	and	
community-based	approaches	to	research	gives	them	particular	prominence.	The	
following	subsections	reflect	on	the	specific	issues	raised	for	the	researcher	in	
undertaking	citizen	social	science.		
6.2.1	Consent	
As	set	out	in	chapter	4,	informed	consent	with	participants	was	negotiated	differently	
in	each	probe.	In	terms	of	the	Probe	1	Mass	Observation	Project,	a	clear	set	of	
instructions	on	the	Mass	Observation	website	explains	how	volunteers	can	write	for	
the	project,	what	they	are	signing	themselves	up	for	and	thereby	what	they	are	
6.2	Ethical	issues	raised	for	the	researcher		
consenting	to	be	part	of.	Mass	Observers	are	also	required	to	fill	out	a	copyright	form	
(as	reflected	in	Figure	6.1	below).		
Figure	6.1:	screenshot	from	Mass	Observation	website	informing	those	interested	in	writing	for	the	
project	about	publishing	and	copyright	issues	
Source:	Mass	Observation	website:	http://www.massobs.org.uk/write-for-us/faq	
With	the	Empty	Houses	probe	(2),	the	online	form	stated	that	participants	
contributions	are	anonymised	and	they	will	not	be	identified.	Participants	submitting	
to	the	project	were	able	to	leave	their	name	and	email	if	they	wanted	to	be	contacted	
again.	If	they	did	so	they	were	sent	an	information	sheet	about	the	project,	which	
acted	as	additional	post-hoc	informed	consent.	On	this	basis,	participation	assumed	
consent.	However,	the	main	aim	of	the	project	was	to	gather	geographically	locatable	
data	in	the	form	of	postcodes,	rather	than	more	personal	information	about	the	
participants.		
Setting	up	and	running	the	Empty	Houses	project	gave	rise	to	reflections	around	
expertise	and	control	of	knowledge,	particularly	in	terms	of	the	media	campaign,	and	
how	I	almost	became	a	representative	for	an	important	policy	area	in	which	I	was	by	
no	means	an	expert	prior	to	the	project.	The	Empty	Houses	probe	highlighted	that	a	
range	of	complex	ethical	issues	arise	when	doing	citizen	social	science,	even	at	a	low	
level	of	engagement.		
6.2	Ethical	issues	raised	for	the	researcher		
In	probe	3	into	the	Our	Manchester	project,	informed	consent	to	participate	in	the	
project	was	particularly	hard	to	obtain,	predominantly	because	the	aims	and	goals	of	
the	project	kept	changing,	and	negotiating	informed	consent	from	participants	was	
not	solely	the	responsibility	of	the	researcher.	This	was	further	complicated	by	the	
fact	that	much	of	the	data	collected	in	the	project	was	photos,	images,	video	and	audio	
recordings,	as	well	as	other	objects,	making	the	anonymisation	of	the	data	almost	
impossible.	Lomax	(2015)	and	Sweetman	(2009)	comment	on	the	ways	in	which	the	
visual,	by	its	very	nature,	may	make	participants	visible	in	the	films,	photographs	and	
visual	material	produced,	rendering	traditional	ethical	mores	of	anonymity	and	
confidentiality	almost	impossible	to	guarantee.	This	gives	rise	to	a	tension	between	
the	ethical	requirement	to	protect	respondents	from	being	identified	and	the	political	
and	epistemological	aims	of	participatory	approaches	predicated	on	giving	voice	
(Allen,	2009;	Gallacher	and	Gallagher,	2008;	Amin,	2007).		
During	the	development	of	the	Our	Manchester	project,	a	training	workshop	was	held	
in	July	2016	with	project	participants,	Stephen,	the	community	development	worker,	
and	myself	to	discuss	issues	of	ethics	and	consent.	One	participant,	Alice,	a	
community	worker	who	ran	a	specific	lunch	club	for	elderly	people	in	the	community	
in	the	social	centre	where	the	project	was	based,	stated	divergent	views	on	the	
importance	of	obtaining	informed	consent	from	all	participants	in	the	Our	
Manchester	project,	as	reflected	in	field	notes	from	the	event:	
Interesting	discussions	about	consent		Alice	really	pushed	me	on	that	
Alice	used	the	term	data	protection	a	lot	and	also	really	pushed	Stephen	
about	this.	It	was	an	interesting	discussion	though,	as	Stephens	view	was	
more	aligned	to	 the	 idea	that	 if	photos	are	already	 in	 the	public	domain	
theyre	anyones	business.	He	was	 referring	 to	Facebook	as	being	 in	 the	
public	domain.	But	Alice	and	I	tried	to	explain	to	him	that	the	copyright	of	
certain	images	might	be	owned	by	someone,	who	might	not	have	been	the	
person	who	 uploaded	 those	 images	 onto	 Facebook	 so	 its	 important	 to	
check.	After	quite	an	intense	discussion,	we	started	to	try	to	work	out	the	
best	 process	 for	 dealing	 with	 any	 images	 or	 object	 that	 people	 might	
bring	in.	Would	a	consent	form	they	could	sign	when	bringing	in	photos	
or	 objects	 be	 best?	 A	 consent	 form	would	 be	 good	 for	 the	 video/audio	
recorded	 interviews	 but	what	 happens	when	people	 bring	 in	 their	 own	
photos	to	discuss	their	memories?	Stephen	didnt	seem	too	worried	either	
way.	 He	 just	wanted	 the	 project	 to	 get	 going	 now	 he	 had	 some	 time	 to	
focus	on	it.	He	wanted	people	down	at	the	centre,	taking	an	interest	and	
6.2	Ethical	issues	raised	for	the	researcher		
getting	 involved,	 sharing	 photos	 and	 other	 things	 they	 might	 think	 to	
bring	in.		
(Field	notes,	Our	Manchester	probe,	August	2016)		
Divergent	views	amongst	participants	and	project	organisers,	as	well	as	from	the	
researcher,	meant	that	the	negotiation	of	informed	consent	in	the	project	was	more	
complex	than	the	institutional	ethical	guidelines	or	a	written	consent	form	catered	for.	
My	naivety	in	assuming	that	a	written	consent	form	would	suffice	is	also	worth	
noting.	Whilst	consent	was	acknowledged	to	be	important,	the	practicalities	of	
negotiating	it	were	of	less	interest	to	the	community	development	worker	than	the	
institutionalised	researcher.	In	many	ways,	how	consent	was	negotiated	and	
discussed	in	the	probes	demonstrated	consent	as	a	surface	to	show	more	complex	
negotiations	of	power	and	control.		
6.2.2	Recruitment	of	participants		
The	three	probes	revealed	how	recruitment	of	participants	occurred	via	an	open	
voluntary	process,	rather	than	any	specific	strategy	to	attract	a	certain	sample	or	type	
of	participant.		Recruitment	and	participation	is	a	challenge	for	all	social	research.		
For	example,	many	local	authority	surveys	have	very	low	response	rates.	Participants	
recruitment	was	based	on	accessibility,	and	on	who	wanted	to	participate,	rather	
than	any	specific	sampling	strategy.	Perhaps	this	could	be	perceived	as	a	weakness	in	
the	citizen	social	science	approach;	however,	accessibility	and	the	notion	of	openness	
	that	anyone	can	participate	-	is	an	overriding	ideal	with	citizen	social	science.		
Purdam	(2014)	notes	that	the	volunteer	observer	methodology	may	encounter	issues	
in	terms	of	the	type	of	people	who	volunteer	and	any	preconceptions	they	may	have.	
However,	the	methodology	is	based	on	ethically	approved	research	design	and	on	
following	a	protocol	and	set	of	instructions,	as	was	explored	in	the	previous	chapter	5	
on	how	data	is	generated	in	citizen	social	science.		
In	the	Our	Manchester	probe,	issues	around	recruitment	of	participants,	access	and	
trust	took	a	particularly	interesting	turn.	The	roles	in	the	project	were	not	very	clear,	
making	negotiations	around	such	issues	more	complicated.		However,	it	is	worth	
noting	that	this	was	very	much	part	of	the	nature	of	that	sort	of	project	on	the	higher	
levels	of	Haklays	(2013)	typology	of	participation,	so	a	feature	of	the	process	of	a	
6.2	Ethical	issues	raised	for	the	researcher		
more	extreme	participation	project.	It	took	many	meetings	with	Stephen	to	discuss	
shared	ideas	and	values	before	the	project	could	go	ahead.	In	terms	of	actually	
recruiting	participants,	the	nature	of	the	topic	and	the	issues	on	which	the	project	
was	based,	entailed	a	greater	level	of	consideration	about	how	best	to	enrol	
participants	in	the	project,	and	much	of	the	locus	of	ethical	practice	was	outside	of	the	
researchers	remit.	Whilst	the	different	roles	and	responsibilities	were	frequently	
explained	throughout	the	project,	they	were	not	strictly	adhered	to,	which	added	to	
many	of	the	challenges	of	undertaking	the	Our	Manchester	project.	In	an	interview	
with	Stephen,	the	community	development	worker	with	whom	the	project	was	
developed,	in	November	2016,	he	reflected:	
Participants	need	to	be	able	to	waffle	on,	and	to	feel	comfortable	in	who	theyre	
talking	to.	They	also	need	to	be	able	to	trust	who	theyre	talking	to,	to	not	use	the	
stories	theyre	telling	against	themyou	know?	Things	need	to	be	privateThere	
are	issues	around	privacy	so	like	theres	no	way	the	project	would	work	if	you	
was	going	round	doing	the	interviewingpeople	wouldnt	feel	comfortable	with	
you	cos	they	dont	know	you,	you	get	me?	So	they	wont	be	trusting	you	with	their	
stories	right?	
	(Stephen	interview,	Our	Manchester	Probe,	November	2016)	
Stephens	reflections	on	the	difficulties	of	recruiting	participants	to	the	project,	and	
also	in	encouraging	people	to	share	their	stories	and	to	talk	about	their	experiences	
of	living	in	the	area	and	how	this	might	have	changed	from	the	1950s	to	the	present,	
demonstrates	his	awareness	of	the	challenges	of	the	project.	Furthermore,	the	
dynamics	and	relations	that	existed	between	the	different	actors	meant	that	
recruiting	participants,	building	trust	and	gaining	access	entailed	further	layers	of	
discussions	and	decisions,	beyond	the	remit	of	the	researcher.	It	is	possible	to	reflect	
and	question	whether	it	is	really	the	case	that	participants	would	not	be	willing	to	
make	their	stories	public.	Perhaps	they	would	not	want	to	or	even	think	of	telling	the	
institutional	researcher,	whereas	someone	they	know	they	would	be	able	to	relate	it	
to,	and	they	would	be	happy	to	let	it	be	public.		In	this	sense,	what	is	at	stake	here	is	
more	the	relation	of	the	telling	and	the	understanding	of	shared	knowledge	about	the	
place	and	the	context.	
6.2	Ethical	issues	raised	for	the	researcher		
6.2.3	Covert	measures	
In	citizen	social	science,	a	potential	issue	for	the	researcher	is	how	to	enable	the	
ethical	usage	of	covert	measures.	This	was	more	of	an	issue	raised	in	the	Mass	
Observation	probe	and	the	Empty	Houses	probe,	both	of	which	aimed	to	engage	
participants	to	record	their	observations	of	specific	occurrences,	to	be	used	in	social	
science	research.	The	ethics	and	validity	of	covert-based	research	methods	have	been	
discussed	and	debated	(Purdam,	2014;	Calvey,	2008;	Spicker,	2011;	Webb	et	al.,	
1999).	However,	as	Purdam	(2014)	and	Bloor	and	Wood	(2006)	note,	where	justified,	
these	methods	are	not	prohibited	or	deemed	unacceptable	by	research	councils	and	
professional	bodies	such	as	the	British	Sociological	Association	in	the	UK	(ESRC,	
2010;	BSA,	2002).	Guidance	from	the	UK	Social	Research	Association	(SRA,	2003)	
highlights	that	data	gathered	from	observations	of	public	places	are	available	for	
research	use	without	prior	consent.	 
Arguably	transparency	and	accountability	when	recruiting	participants	is	an	issue	in	
any	research	rather	than	a	specific	issue	with	citizen	social	science.	Whilst	Purdam	
(2014)	and	Lyon	(2001)	amongst	others,	reflect	on	how	the	observer	role	for	citizens	
could	raise	concerns	about	issues	of	surveillance,	it	is	possible	to	suggest	that	
participants	were	not	acting	as	spies	so	much	as	being	motivated	observers	and	data	
collectors,	as	reflected	on	in	the	previous	chapter.	Purdam	(2014)	likens	this	to	being	
an	eyewitness	to	a	crime	or	a	witness	in	a	court	trial	or	participating	in	a	
neighborhood	watch	scheme,	rather	than	any	specific	incitement	to	surveillance	or	
spying.	This	is	something	that	participants	in	the	walking	interviews,	and	also	in	the	
probe	into	the	Mass	Observation	Project,	reflect	on,	and	it	is	detailed	in	the	section	
below	on	issues	raised	by	participants.		
In	the	probe	into	the	Mass	Observation	project	the	language	to	describe	the	project	to	
potential	participants,	references	the	notion	of	going	public	and	suggests	a	level	of	
discretion	about	being	a	Mass	Observer	(see	Figure	6.2	below).	
6.2	Ethical	issues	raised	for	the	researcher		
Figure	6.2:	screenshot	from	Mass	Observation	website	informing	those	interested	in	writing	for	the	
project	about	how	to	talk	about	being	a	Mass	Observer	
Source:	Mass	Observation	website:	http://www.massobs.org.uk/write-for-us/faq	
In	many	ways	an	interesting	tension	arose	here	between	the	notions	of	opening	up	
social	science	for	all	to	participate,	and	the	notion	of	covert	observation,	where	many	
of	the	Mass	Observers	have	not	identified	themselves	as	such	or	come	out	about	
their	role.		
The	approach	to	citizen	social	science	adopted	in	the	Our	Manchester	probe	also	
raised	questions	around	the	roles	involved	in	such	an	approach,	particularly	the	
positionality	of	the	researcher	in	the	project,	the	role	of	the	academy,	the	role	of	the	
university	in	community	activism,	as	well	as	the	expectations	of	the	academy	on	
communities	and	third	sector	organisations.	When	Stephen	introduced	me	to	people	
in	the	community	or	talked	about	the	project,	he	always	referred	to	me	as	being	from	
the	University	of	Manchester,	thereby	setting	me	up	as	a	representative	of	the	
university	rather	than	an	interested	independent	researcher.	There	appeared	to	be	
some	reticence	from	the	people	present	to	work	with	a	representative	of	the	
University,	owing	to	the	way	in	which	previous	projects	had	developed. 
As	previously	argued,	citizen	social	science	can	blur	the	boundaries	between	
researcher	and	researched	and	so	the	responsibility	for	ethical	practice	necessarily	is	
dispersed	and	spread	amongst	the	participants,	not	just	lead	by	the	researcher.	
6.3	Ethical	issues	for	Participants		
Whiteman	(2015,	pp.14-15)	suggests	recourse	to	the	authority	of	the	individual	
researcher	to	be	an	anchoring	move	like	any	others,	configuring	the	self	strategically	
rather	than	as	an	authentic	point	of	access	to	an	ethical	truth.	She	argues	that	new	
orderings	can	only	be	generated	in	the	face	of	the	rejection	of	the	ultimate	authority	
of	proceduralised	ethics	and	the	evident	complexity	of	ethical	maneuvering	in	
research.	This	highlights	the	different	perspectives	of	different	ethical	practices	and	
what	their	ethics,	values	and	priorities	are.	Institutional	ethical	guidelines	instil	a	
particular	type	of	ethical	interrogation	into	the	research,	which	gets	confounded	in	
the	practical	realities	of	doing	citizen	social	science.		
6.3	Ethical	issues	for	Participants		
This	section	examines	the	ethical	issues	raised	by	participants	in	citizen	social	
science,	which	include	anonymity,	voice	and	representations	of	truths,	and	the	
meaningfulness	of	participation.	Whilst	similar	to	those	raised	for	the	researcher	in	
citizen	social	science,	as	delineated	above,	they	do	not	map	on	to	each	other	directly.	
6.3.1	Participants	Anonymity	
Anonymity	was	an	important	issue	to	many	participants	in	the	citizen	social	science	
probes.	All	the	responses	to	the	Mass	Observation	project	are	anonymised,	the	Mass	
Observers	are	given	an	identification	number	and	on	each	directive,	they	are	
reminded	not	to	include	identifying	details	as	far	as	possible.			
6.3	Ethical	issues	for	Participants		
Figure	6.3:	FAQ	on	the	Mass	Observation	website	about	the	respect	given	to	participants	privacy	in	
participating	in	the	project	
Source:	Mass	Observation	website:	http://www.massobs.org.uk/write-for-us/faq	
In	the	Mass	Observation	probe,	some	of	the	observers	likened	their	experience	of	
writing	for	the	project	to	a	form	of	confession.	One	Mass	Observer	conversely	warns		
your	 care	 for	 anonymity	 may	 be	 otiose;	 big	 companies	 and	 terrorists	
have	instant	access	even	to	mothers	maiden	name	
	(A1292,	Female,	71,	Being	Part	of	Research,	2004)		
However,	in	the	Special	Questionnaire	issued	in	Autumn	2010,	Mass	Observers	are	
asked	directly	about	their	thoughts	on	the	importance	of	anonymity.	Some	suggest	
that	anonymity	allows	Mass	Observers:	
to	be	more	frank	
(J3887,	Female,	SQ,	2010)	
and	to:	
		 write	exactly	what	I	feel	without	fear	of	any	consequences.		
(G4530,	Male,	SQ,	2010)		
In	this	way	anonymity	acts	as	a	form	of	protection:		
sometimes	 I	 write	 very	 personal	 stuff	 and	 need	 to	 feel	 secure	 in	 my	
privacy	for	protection	
(K798,	Female,	SQ,	2010)	
6.3	Ethical	issues	for	Participants		
Anonymity	also	allows	for	honesty	and	can	be	liberating	(M1201,	Female,	SQ,	2010).	
Anonymity	is	clearly	an	important	issue	for	participants,	especially	if	they	are	sharing	
personal	accounts	and	experiences.	Another	Mass	Observer	expands	on	this	by	
suggesting	that	anonymity	is	only	important	during	her	lifetime:		
[Anonymity]	is	very	important	to	me,	while	I	am	alive,	as	I	dont	want	to	
face	comeback	from	people	who	disagree	with	my	views.	Once	I	have	died	
I	do	not	mind	if	my	words	are	in	my	own	name.	
(B4527,	Female,	SQ,	2010)	
Privacy	and	being	private	is	another	ethical	issue,	which	is	asked	about	directly	in	the	
Directive	on	Being	Part	of	Research.	Mass	Observers	reflect	on	the	limitations	or	not	
of	what	they	would	be	willing	to	write	about	in	a	directive	response.		
In	the	Empty	Houses	probe,	participants	submitting	information	to	the	project	were	
given	the	option	of	leaving	their	email	and	other	information	if	they	wanted	to	be	
contacted	by	the	project	or	to	receive	further	information	about	the	Empty	Houses	
project;	however,	the	data	was	entirely	anonymous.	Two	participants	did	this	and	
were	subsequently	contacted	to	see	if	they	might	want	to	participate	in	the	walking	
interviews,	which	one	of	them	accepted	to	do.	
In	many	ways	anonymity	challenges	the	very	idea	of	citizen	social	science		if	in	
citizen	social	science	everyone	is	a	researcher,	or	has	the	potential	to	be,	how	can	you	
be	an	anonymous	researcher	and	do	ethical	research?	This	does	not	seem	to	be	
possible	in	current	conventions.	In	this	way,	citizen	social	science,	by	its	very	nature,	
has	to	make	citizens	participants	and	not	researchers.		
6.3.2	Participants	voice	and	representations	of	truths	
Participants	in	the	probes	also	raised	concerns	about	voice	and	representation	and	
how,	through	participating	in	citizen	social	science,	they	can	have	a	voice,	an	
interesting	contrast	to	the	concerns	for	anonymity	set	out	in	the	previous	section.	
Voice,	understood	as	a	value	for	social	organisation	(Couldry,	2010),	involves	taking	
into	account	agents	practices	of	giving	an	account	of	themselves	and	their	conditions	
6.3	Ethical	issues	for	Participants		
of	life.	However,	it	is	a	problematic	concept	as	Amin	(2005)	clearly	articulates	and	
risks	being	shrouded	in	paternalistic	overtones.	There	is	a	sense	in	which	writing	for	
the	Mass	Observation	project	provided	a	valued	opportunity	for	participants	to	voice	
their	reflections	on	their	own	lives,	as	well	as	other	issues	or	subjects	around	them.	In	
the	Mass	Observation	probe,	many	Mass	Observers	make	references	to	the	way	the	
project	gives:	
		 fantastic	information	about	the	average	Joe,	
(B3133,	Male,	20,	Being	Part	of	Research,	2004)		
or	highlights:	
	 how	one	common	person	felt	in	his	lifetime.	
(E4111,	Male,	70,	SQ,	2010)	
Another	Mass	Observer	reflects	on	the	title	of	the	project	and	the	way	in	which	the	
project	allows:	
for	 ordinary	 people	 to	 have	 their	 say	 untrammelled	 by	 political	 or	
financial	restraints. 
(C2053,	Female,	51,	Title	MO,	1993) 
Any	specification	of	how	to	define	the	ordinary	person	is	not	expanded	upon	in	this	
directive	response,	but	the	use	of	the	term	alludes	to	the	perceived	hierarchy	in	the	
research	process,	and	more	broadly	the	ways	in	which	histories	and	narratives	are	
told.	This	same	Mass	Observer,	some	11	years	later	makes	another	comment	to	
similar	effect	when	asked	about	being	part	of	research:	
History	 is	written	by	the	winners	and	about	top	dogs.	The	rest	of	us	get	
little	mention.	So	it	is	rare	and	important	that	some	of	us	should	have	our	
say	and	 for	 it	 to	be	preserved	 for	others	 to	read.	A	 lot	of	 it	may	be	 tosh	
(but	then	so	is	the	official	version),	but	it	provides	a	rawer	alternative	to	
the	history	books.	 
(C2053:	Female,	51,	Being	Part	of	Research,	2004)	
This	Mass	Observers	reflections	drew	attention	to	the	question	of	who	can	
participate	in	citizen	social	science,	who	can	generate	data	and	who	can	be	
6.3	Ethical	issues	for	Participants		
represented		the	Mass	Observation	project	allows	for	a	rawer	alternative	to	the	
history	books.	It	is	a	resource	in	which	researchers	can	find	real	peoples	ideas	
(B786,	Female,	70,	Being	Part	of	Research,	2004)	and	where	they	can	learn	from	it	
and	to	remember	that	real	people,	just	like	us,	were	a	part	of	it.	(C2053,	Female,	51,	
Being	Part	of	Research,	2004).	The	reflections	of	the	Mass	Observers	suggest	they	are	
clearly	aware	of	the	hierarchy	in	the	research	process.	One	Mass	Observer	expanded	
on	this	in	terms	of	the	potential	analysis	of	the	data:		
Mass	 Observation	 is	 a	 record	 of	 peoples	 actual	 experience	 	 as	 such	 I	
think	it	 is	valuable.	 I	know	that	the	material	 is	 looked	at	by	researchers,	
and	perhaps	our	writings	are	 translated	 into	a	 form	with	checkboxes	 to	
create	 findings	 but	 I	 would	 hope	 that	 the	 researchers	 who	 use	 the	
archive	have	a	more	flexible	approach.	
(B3010,	Female,	40,	Being	Part	of	Research,	2004)	
The	Mass	Observers	reflected	on	how	the	data	they	generate	would	be	analysed.	This	
particular	response	drew	attention	to	the	fact	that	at	times,	actually	the	relationship	
between	the	researcher	and	researched	is	not	blurred.	The	Mass	Observers	are	very	
much	aware	of	the	hierarchies	in	the	research	process,	and	of	who	gets	to	decide	how	
participants	accounts	are	represented.		Findings	is	put	in	quotation	marks	to	
suggest	that	this	Mass	Observer	was	aware	of	the	particular	nature	of	the	material	
generated	in	the	project.	She	also	contrasted	the	translation	of	the	Mass	Observers	
writing	into	a	form	with	checkboxes	with	a	more	flexible	approach.			
In	the	Our	Manchester	probe,	Stephen	states	early	on	in	discussions	about	the	project,	
the	community	needs	a	voice	because	they	cant	represent	themselves	
(Stephen	meeting,	Our	Manchester	probe,	June	2016).		
Stephen	suggested	that	in	some	ways	the	community	around	the	social	centre	where	
he	works	lack	an	ability	to	articulate	and	represent	their	requirements;	they	need	a	
voice.	He	perceived	the	Our	Manchester	project	as	a	potential	opportunity	to	support	
such	a	voice	to	be	developed,	through	his	enabling	participants	to	raise	their	needs	
and	to	help	residents	to	help	themselves.	However,	during	the	course	of	the	project,	at	
6.3	Ethical	issues	for	Participants		
times	Stephen	performed	a	gatekeeping	role,	determining	who	had	access	to	whom	
and	what,	and	when.		
In	discussion	with	one	of	the	participants	in	the	project,	Adam	(name	changed),	an	
older	resident	in	the	area	who	had	brought	in	some	of	his	photos	to	the	community	
event	in	the	social	centre	in	November	2016,	reflected	on	the	project:		
Its	 not	 about	 the	 truth	 	 its	 about	 telling	 your	 version	 of	 events	 so	
working	 with	 people	 to	 talk	 about	 whats	 important	 to	 them	 and	 the	
issues	 that	matter	 to	 them	 todayThe	project	 speaks	 to	 loads	of	 issues	
about	how	our	area	has	been	stigmatized	and	framed	in	a	particular	way.	
These	 photos	 we	 bring	 in	 and	 memories	 we	 share	 	 theyre	 not	
factswere	not	claiming	them	to	be	facts	cos	no	photos	are	the	facts	are	
they?	Its	all	about	the	discussions	and	sharing	of	memories	and	stuffthe	
discussions	 that	 are	 sparked	 by	 the	 photos	 themselvesthats	 whats	
important.		
(Adam,	community	event	discussion,	Our	Manchester	probe,	November	2016)	
In	this	way,	Adam	reflected	on	what	the	project	is	trying	to	do	in	terms	of	sharing	
memories	of	the	local	area,	and	challenging	external	perceptions	of	how	the	area	has	
been	represented.	He	saw	the	photos	and	data	in	the	project	as	a	means	of	starting	a	
conversation	and	trying	to	get	at	the	heart	of	issues,	rather	than	the	facts	in	any	
objective	sense.	The	conversation	continued:	
AA:	do	you	 think	 there	are	any	ethical	 issues	 in	 terms	of	using	peoples	
photos?		
Adam:	 I	 guess	 there	 are	 questions	 around	 how	 to	 define	 and	
conceptualise	community	here?	Whos	excluded	and	included?	Who	can	
have	 a	 say?	 But	 its	 an	 interesting	 oneI	was	 keen	 to	 share	my	 photos	
with	 the	project	as	 Im	always	 losing	my	photos	and	rubbish	at	keeping	
them	 in	 order	 or	 even	putting	 them	 in	 albums	or	 anything.	 Its	 like	 Im	
losing	my	 private	 archivesso	 sharing	my	 photos	with	 the	 project	 and	
opening	 them	 up	 and	 making	 them	 public	 might	 mean	 that	 they	 last	
longer?	
(Adam,	community	event	discussion,	Our	Manchester	probe,	November	2016)	
Adam	saw	his	participation	in	the	Our	Manchester	project	as	a	way	of	prolonging	his	
memories	and	experiences,	by	sharing	them	and	making	them	public.	This	links	to	the	
ways	in	which	many	of	the	Mass	Observers	in	the	probe	viewed	their	responses	as	
contributing	to	a	social	history	of	their	times	as	a	form	of	voice	and	representation.	
However,	Couldry	and	Powell	(2014,	p.4)	warn	that	the	daily	practices	of	grappling	
6.3	Ethical	issues	for	Participants		
with	data	and	with	the	consequences	of	data	analyses	generate	new	questions	about	
what	and	whose	power	gets	exercised	through	such	practices,	and	to	what	degree	
such	exercises	of	power	are	satisfactorily	made	accountable.		
6.3.3	Meaningfulness	of	participation	
Whilst	some	participants	were	happy	to	contribute	by	collecting	data,	other	
participants	seemed	to	question	the	meaningfulness	of	participating	in	citizen	
social	science.	The	probe	into	the	Mass	Observation	project	revealed	how	some	of	
those	writing	for	the	project	find	value	in	participating	as	it	gives	them	an	
opportunity	to	reflect	on	their	lives	or	on	previously	unconsidered	topics	(see	chapter	
5).	However,	some	of	the	walking	interviewees	in	the	Empty	Houses	probe	raised	
the	issue	of	whether	participating	in	the	project	was	in	fact	working	for	free:		
I	like	the	idea	but	theres	a	danger	of	turning	people	into	just	working	
for	free.	It	depends	who	it	is	actually	serving	and	what	the	purpose	of	
the	project	is	and	what	impact	it	has	on	peoples	lives.		
(WI4,	Empty	Houses	probe,	December	2016)	
This	interviewee	draws	attention	to	the	ways	in	which	citizen	social	science	can	
potentially	mask	the	human	labour,	and	the	work	that	contributing	to	it	entails.		
The	same	interviewee	argued	for	a	role	for	citizens	or	non-experts	in	the	analysis	
of	the	data,	not	just	its	collection,	stating:		
I	was	putting	myself	in	the	shoes	of	a	citizen	social	scientist	andwith	
everything	that	Im	involved	with,	I	want	to	know	the	bigger	picture	
Could	citizens	not	be	scientists	too?	If	youre	going	to	include	citizens,	
they	should	be	given	the	power	to	produce	their	own	analysis,	not	just	
their	own	data.	Otherwise	they	just	end	up	doing	the	scientists	job	for	
free	 -	 and	 its	 the	 really	 dull	 part	 of	 the	 jobWe	 have	 this	 view	 of	
science	 and	 social	 science	 as	 top	 down,	 where	 the	 scientist	 knows	
everything	 and	 science	 gives	 people	 tools	 to	 read	 the	 worldfrom	
above.	But	I	guess	its	limited	this	way.	The	analysis	that	goes	with	the	
data	 collection	 is	 more	 social	 science.	 If	 people	 just	 collect	 the	 data	
theres	 nothing	 in	 it	 for	 themif	 its	 just	 about	 reporting	 stuff,	 its	 a	
really	dull	job	isnt	it? 
(WI4,	Empty	Houses	probe,	December	2016)	
6.3	Ethical	issues	for	Participants		
This	walking	interviewee	suggested	that	the	top-down	process	of	collecting	data,	
for	scientists	to	use,	is	a	really	dull	job,	since	it	is	the	analysis	of	the	data	where	
the	meaningful,	and	interesting,	part	of	the	research	process	takes	place.	
Another	interviewee	questioned	the	ethics	of	mobilising	non-experts	to	collect	
data	for	researchers:		
If	 Im	 entirely	 honest,	 its	 a	 cheap	way	 to	 get	 people	 to	 do	 stuffits	
about	 getting	 people	with	 less	 skills	 to	 do	 something	 you	 dont	 have	
time	for.	But	then	theres	something	like	the	Mass	Observation	Project	
which	 seems	 less	 badbecause	 its	 respecting	 peoples	 views	 more	
than	getting	them	to	do	the	donkey	work.		
(WI6,	Empty	Houses	probe,	December	2016)	
The	same	interviewee	reflected	that:	
It	 often	 seems	 to	 be	 about	 getting	 people	 who	 arent	 experts	 to	 do	
things	that	experts	dont	have	time	to	doits	not	like	its	meaningful		
(WI6,	Empty	Houses	probe,	December	2016)	
These	reflections	draw	attention	to	how	the	process	of	participating	in	citizen	
social	science	is	perceived	to	be	meaningful	in	varying	degrees	by	the	participants	
who	are	concerned	to	better	understand	how	the	data	they	help	to	produce	will	
be	used.	(see	chapter	7).		
Richardson	(2014)	warns	of	the	risks	of	exploitation	if	citizens	are	merely	
research	assistants	rather	than	privileged	respondents.	This	has	been	a	critique	of	
citizen	science,	which	fails	to	provide	a	sufficiently	empowering	process	for	citizen	
participants,	since	citizens	are	not	fully	involved	in	all	aspects	of	the	research	process,	
and	professionals	or	academics	retain	overall	control	(Mirowski,	2017).	However,	
such	forms	of	data	gathering	are	not	to	be	dismissed	as	they	can	play	important	roles,	
as	exemplified	by	numerous	citizen	science	projects.	Bonney	et	al.	(2009,	p.18)	
suggests	that	most	projects	labelled	citizen	science	fall	into	the	contributory	project	
model	of	researcher-driven	data-collection	projects,	where	scientists	ask	the	
question,	determine	the	protocols,	do	the	analysis,	and	members	of	the	public	collect	
relevant	data.	Cohn	(2008)	argues	that	many	undertake	the	work	unpaid	as	an	
6.4	Addressing	the	ethical	issues	of	citizen	social	science		
everyday	volunteering	activity,	which	could	potentially	raise	further	ethical	questions	
around	the	placing	of	a	form	of	responsibility	and	pressure	on	the	citizen.	However,	
citizens	may	choose	to	participate	in	the	collection	of	data	for	research	as	a	civic	act,	
which	in	itself	is	part	of	the	wider	goal	of	strengthening	democracy	through	civic	
participation.	
6.4	Addressing	the	ethical	issues	of	citizen	social	science	
The	possibilities	of	citizen	social	science	can	entail	the	flattening	of	hierarchies	in	the	
research	process	as	knowledge	is	made	together.	However,	this	creates	new	tensions	
in	terms	of	ethics	and	the	reproduction	of	inequalities,	and	the	conflicting	stances	or	
perspectives	of	ethical	practice.	It	can	blur	the	roles	of	researcher,	participant,	and	
research	subject	(see	chapter	5,	section	5.3),	but	a	hierarchy	in	the	research	process	
remains.		
The	previous	two	sections	have	shown	how	ethical	considerations	overlap	and	
diverge	between	those	participating	in	citizen	social	science	at	whatever	level	or	in	
whatever	role.	However,	since	the	possibilities	of	citizen	social	science	suggest	a	
flattening	of	hierarchies	in	the	traditional	research	process,	citizen	social	science	can	
necessitate	a	relational	ethical	practice	that	is	worked	out	together	on	the	ground	
(Heimer,	2012).	This	is	to	avoid	the	same	inequalities	being	reproduced	despite	the	
opening	up	of	the	traditional	research	process	and	the	blurring	of	boundaries	
between	researcher	and	researched.		
The	politics	of	method	(see	section	2.3	of	the	literature	review),	and	the	power	
dynamics	within	that,	are	reflected	upon	in	the	Mass	Observation	probe.	In	an	
interview	with	the	director	of	the	project,	she	remarked:		
We	 cant	 pretend	 there	 arent	 power	 dynamics	 at	 play	 	 especially	 the	
power	of	those	in	the	university	who	are	entrusted	with	these	accounts.	
Its	vital	to	remember	that	the	Mass	Observers	arent	data	subjects.	They	
arent	them	Theyre	us	We	need	to	bear	in	mind	that	the	person	next	to	
you	might	be	a	professor	of	history	or	graduate	student.	Or	they	might	be	
a	Mass	Observer	
(Interview	with	Mass	Observation	Project	director,	June	2017)	
6.4	Addressing	the	ethical	issues	of	citizen	social	science		
This	reminder	that	anyone	might	happen	to	be	a	Mass	Observer	raises	the	question	of	
who	participates	in	citizen	social	science,	and	draws	attention	to	the	differentiated	
nature	of	expertise.	The	Mass	Observations	directors	reflections	above	are	both	
reassuring	and	in	some	ways	unsettling,	alluding	to	a	sense	of	not	knowing	who	
might	be	observing	whom.	The	comment	also	draws	attention	to	the	implicit	power	
relations	at	play	in	the	research	process.		
In	many	ways,	there	is	a	misalignment	between	the	normative	research	culture	of	
university	taught	and	professional	ethics	practice,	and	the	practical	realities	of	doing	
citizen	social	science.	This	is	best	evidenced	in	the	Our	Manchester	probe	(2),	where	
in	many	ways	I	tried	to	impose	an	institutional	ethical	perspective,	which	was	not	
always	appropriate	for	the	needs	of	the	project.	Undertaking	the	Our	Manchester	
project	revealed	that	what	is	important	in	the	academy	is	not	necessarily	what	is	
important	on	the	ground.	Differences	between	the	normative	research	culture	of	
the	academy	and	the	practical	realities	of	undertaking	co-produced	citizen	social	
science	manifested	in	the	way	in	which	ethics	and	consent	were	arguably	not	seen	
as	particularly	important	by	some	participants	in	the	Our	Manchester	project	and	
by	the	community	development	worker,	with	whom	I	coproduced	the	project.	
There	was	a	stark	difference	between	my	concerns	of	the	professional	or	
institutional	researcher	and	those	of	the	community	development	worker	as	
reflected	in	my	field	notes	of	the	Our	Manchester	project:		
Im	 spending	 so	much	 time	 as	 a	 trained	 researcher	worrying	 about	 the	
ethics	and	consent	forms	and	whats	to	be	done	with	the	data,	and	how	to	
tell	people	about	that	and	how	to	frame	the	project.	But	Stephens	super	
relaxed,	 doesnt	 really	 care	 about	 so	many	of	 those	 issues	 and,	 perhaps	
much	to	my	annoyance,	 is	quite	happy	to	go	with	 the	 flow	and	see	how	
the	 project	 develops.	 Perhaps	 one	 of	 the	 biggest	 issues	 Im	 facing	with	
this	project	is	that	it	consistently	totally	fails	to	go	according	to	plan	and	I	
never	know	what	will	have	happened	when	I	get	to	the	centre	and	catch	
up	with	everyone	there.	I	was	worried	nothing	had	happened	as	Stephen	
had	been	ill	and	so	had	been	off	sick	for	a	week	or	two,	but	when	I	got	in	I	
discovered	 hed	 reordered	 all	 the	 researcher	 packs	 I	 did,	 taken	 out	 the	
consent	 forms	 and	 also	 been	 going	 round	 talking	 to	 people,	 testing	 out	
questions	and	linking	things	up.	He	was	more	interested	in	getting	things	
happening	rather	than	sticking	to	what	wed	agreed.		
(Field	notes,	Our	Manchester	Probe,	October	2016)	
6.4	Addressing	the	ethical	issues	of	citizen	social	science		
The	field	notes	from	the	Our	Manchester	project	demonstrated	how	the	notion	of	
consent	is	a	surface	for	the	particularly	complex	issues	of	relationships	and	power	
and	responsibility	in	this	form	of	citizen-led	citizen	social	science.	
Suddenly	 it	 seems	 like	 the	Our	Manchester	project	 is	back	on	again	and	
Stephen	 refers	 to	 it	 as	 his	 baby.	 There	was	 a	 fair	 amount	 of	 discussion	
about	whether	the	findings	from	it	could	be	fed	into	a	strategy	discussion	
for	the	future	coordination	of	these	types	of	spaces.	It	also	seems	to	be	a	
very	 fluid	 project,	which	 broadly	 covers	many	 of	 the	 aims	 Stephen	 has	
with	the	centre	and	where	hes	at	now,	in	terms	of	combatting	isolation	in	
ageing	 people	 in	 the	 community.	 But	 its	 a	 question	 of	 how	 to	 actually	
make	 it	happen.	 Im	wondering	whether	 I	 should	help	with	some	of	 the	
interviews,	to	get	the	ball	rolling.	Or	whether	its	never	going	to	actually	
start/get	 off	 the	 ground?	 Its	 like	 we	 keep	 talking	 about	 it,	 and	 the	
discussions	 go	 round	 and	 round	 but	 nothing	 actually	 happens.	 I	
potentially	need	to	project	manage	 it	more	or	at	 least	 to	push	harder	to	
get	it	sorted	and	to	work	within	the	given	time	frame.	I	stated	to	Stephen	
when	he	asked	that	it	needs	to	be	done	by	Christmas	at	the	latest.		
(Field	notes,	meeting	with	Stephen,	Our	Manchester	Probe,	October	2016)	
These	field	notes	from	the	Our	Manchester	project	demonstrated	my	reflections	on	
my	role	in	the	project	and	the	challenges	of	maintaining	the	relationship	with	
Stephen,	who	sometimes	adopted	a	gatekeeper	role,	in	terms	of	the	developments	of	
the	project.	These	field	notes	also	shed	light	on	the	complications	of	pursuing	a	
citizen	social	science	approach	when	the	roles	remain	unclear,	and	it	is	hard	to	know	
who	is	in	control,	although	this	could	be	argued	to	be	consistent	with	the	complexities	
of	undertaking	coproduced	research	(see	section	2.2.3	of	the	literature	review).	
Richardson	(2014)	discusses	how	citizen	social	science	and	other	community	based	
participatory	research	approaches	argue	for	a	deconstruction	of	power	in	the	
research	process.	A	commitment	to	equality	in	the	relationship	between	citizens	or	
community	researchers	and	professional	scientists	is	seen	as	crucial,	which	is	not	
always	the	case	in	citizen	science	and	Public	Participation	in	Scientific	Research	
(PPSR).		Such	framings	for	approaches	retain	power	and	control	over	science	for	
professional	scientists,	and	within	academic	institutions;	all	the	hallmarks	of	an	
academic	elite-dominated	model	are	implied	by	the	PPSR	schema	(Richardson,	2014,	
p.37).	Richardson	(2014)	also	highlighted	the	importance	of	a	commitment	to	the	
values	and	principles	of	empowerment	and	participation,	and	equality	in	relationship	
between	academics	and	non-professional	researchers,	something	that	was	strived	for	
6.4	Addressing	the	ethical	issues	of	citizen	social	science		
in	the	probes	in	this	thesis,	but	something	that	was	not	always	achievable.	However,	
the	extent	to	which	citizen	social	science	successfully	challenges	the	privileged	
position	of	the	researcher,	and	to	what	extent	many	of	the	initial	imbalances	of	
power	and	inequalities	are	inadvertently	reproduced	in	the	process	of	doing	
citizen	social	science,	remains	to	be	seen.			
The	limitations	of	many	claims	about	ethics	are	that	they	risk	fixing	such	claims	and	
anchoring	them	in	specific	stances	(Whiteman,	2017).	Citizen	social	science	has	the	
potential	to	dislodge	this	anchoring	because	it	opens	up	the	roles	in	traditional	social	
science	research	and	blurs	the	boundaries	between	researchers	and	researched.	The	
authentic	locus	of	ethical	practice	is	mobile	and	a	shared	responsibility.	The	probes	
specifically	examined	the	ethical	issues	that	are	raised	when	the	traditional	roles	in	
the	research	process	are	opened	up	and	reconfigured.	In	this	way,	ethical	practice	a	
form	of	relational	ethics	(Banks,	2013;	Austin,	2012;	Whatmore,	1997);	it	is	a	practice	
of	negotiation	and	discussion.		
In	many	ways	the	three	probes	constituted	a	form	of	working	it	out	together;	even	
the	probe	into	the	Mass	Observation	project,	in	the	ways	in	which	the	participants	
make	sense	of	and	interpret	the	directives,	and	the	particular	dialogic	relationship	
they	had	with	the	project	managers,	and	director.	Each	probe	is	an	acknowledgement	
of	the	situated,	contextual	nature	of	knowledge	production,	which	aims	for	a	more	
agile	knowledge.	However,	whilst	this	very	much	reflects	the	possibilities	of	citizen	
social	science,	the	practical	realities	are	still	somewhat	removed	from	this.	The	
question	remains	of	how	to	get	away	from	the	value-laden	assumption	that	greater	or	
more	democratic	participation	is	best?		
Implicit	in	the	potential	of	citizen	social	science	is	the	notion	that	participants	in	the	
research	are	empowered	to	understand	a	mechanism	that	is	normally	kept	hidden	
from	them.	However,	the	analysis	of	the	probes	in	this	thesis	suggests	that	rather	
than	any	form	of	democratisation	of	social	science	research,	citizen	social	science	can	
entail	more	of	a	process	of	working	out	together		as	in	the	case	of	the	walking	
interviews	in	the	Empty	Houses	probe,	and	in	the	case	of	Our	Manchester	probe,	the	
participants	actually	were	not	as	concerned	about	the	ethical	issues	and	standards	of	
6.4	Addressing	the	ethical	issues	of	citizen	social	science		
the	normative	research	practice.	This	is	particularly	true	in	the	Empty	Houses	probe,	
where	the	walking	interviews	constitute	a	form	of	doing	together,	a	form	of	
committed	or	engaged	social	practice	in	reporting	empty	houses	together.	In	this	way,	
the	data	generated	from	these	interviews	is	dialogic,	reflecting	an	active	dialogue	
between	the	participants	and	the	researcher,	trying	to	make	sense	of	the	processes	
and	practices	of	citizen	social	science,	and	discussing	it	whilst	walking.	This	practice	
draws	attention	to	the	notion	of	different	situated	knowledges,	and	the	quality	of	
insights,	and	that	an	expert	position	should	not	be	a	monopoly	on	truth	and	insight.		
Arguably,	undertaking	ethical	social	science	research	is	a	complicated	process,	with	
many	questions	of	expertise,	power,	professionalization	and	standardisation	are	
raised,	as	the	probes	demonstrate.	
The	experience	of	asking	the	walking	interviewees	to	reflect	on	something	they	had	
not	necessarily	considered	before	gave	rise	to	interesting	methodological	challenges.	
Asking	the	walking	interviewees	directly	in	such	ways	engaged	citizens	in	citizen	
social	science	unequivocally	and	immediately.	The	delineations	of	what	constitutes	a	
probe,	as	presented	in	chapter	4,	suggest	that	this	is	very	much	part	of	the	process	of	
urging	participants	to	consider	unfamiliar	perspectives,	and	to	re-examine	activities	
in	new	ways.	However,	the	very	act	of	undertaking	such	interviews,	drew	attention	to	
how	citizen	social	science	intrinsically	prompts	an	opening	up	of	research	and	a	
sense	of	working	it	out	together	as	referred	to	above.	This	links	to	some	of	the	
reflections	of	the	Mass	Observers	about	their	enjoyment	of	writing	directive	
responses	since	the	open-ended	questions	encouraged	them	to	think	about	
previously	unconsidered	topics.	When	asked	whether	they	considered	participating	
in	the	Empty	Houses	Project	to	be	citizen	social	science,	the	same	walking	
interviewee	continued:		
WI3:	 So	 I	 think	 its	 related	 a	 lot	 to	 different	 strategies	 for	 participation	
but	 I	 think	 thenot	 the	missing	 link,	but	 the	problem	with	 it	 is	 that	 its	
got	social	science	within	the	kind	of	title	which	immediately	challenges	
notions	of	social	science	and	its	almost	undone	itself	before	its	begun.	
Whereas	 maybe	 a	 name	 change	 would	 make	 it	 a	 lot	 easier	 to	 you	
knowutilise	 in	 a	 practical	 sensebecause	 arguing	what	 social	 science	
is	is	such	a	large	and	unfathomable	area,	I	really	wouldnt	go	thereand	
its	not	 that	useful	necessarily	so	 if	 its	a	very	practical	way	then	yes	 I	
think	and	I	dont	think	a	person	whos	looking	at	citizen	social	science	
should	 be	 scared	 about	 having	 a	 framework	 but	 maybe	 	 putting	 a	
framework	 immediately	 links	 it	 to	 expertise	 and	 kind	 of	 the	
6.4	Addressing	the	ethical	issues	of	citizen	social	science		
professionalism	of	the	method	but	it	doesnt	then	mean	that	its	taken	
out	of	the	control	of	the	citizen	cos	theyve	then	got	the	choice	to	take	
part	and	theyre	the	ones	collecting	the	data	so	if	that	makes	sense?		
(WI3,	Empty	Houses	probe,	December	2016)	
These	reflections	on	citizen	social	science	as	an	approach	are	noteworthy	in	the	way	
in	which	they	draw	attention	to	the	tension	between,	on	the	one	hand,	a	framework	
into	which	to	put	ones	observations	that	formalises	the	approach	and	almost	
professionalises	it,	as	the	walking	interviewee	alluded	to.	On	the	other	hand,	the	
opportunity	for	participants	to	report	how	they	want,	with	the	control	over	the	data	
remaining	in	the	hands	of	the	participant.	This	walking	interviewee	reflected	on	how	
the	very	title	of	citizen	social	science	is	potentially	misleading	in	its	allusion	to	social	
science	and	yet	they	call	for	the	adoption	of	a	framework	to	formalise	the	
submissions	to	the	project.	Another	walking	interviewee	reflected	on	similar	issues:		
AA:	What	do	you	understand	by	citizen	social	science?		
WI5:	 I	 suppose	 it	 stems	 from	my	 idea	 of	 citizen	 social	 science	 stems	
from	my	 idea	 of	 kind	 ofsocial	 arts	 and	 participatory	 arts	 projectsso	
thats	kind	ofor	participatory	research	methods.	And	its	all	a	bit	in	a	
bit	of	a	tied	up	mess.	And	so	I	kind	of	think	of	them	as	overlapping,	and	
every	project	 is	different	and	you	 take	a	different	approach	and	you	all	
kind	 of	 every	 project	 will	 have	 a	 different	 emphasis	 on	 a	 different	
community	which	suits	that	community	or	doesnt	or	whatever	but	its	
about	I	guess	 in	 theory,	 to	my	mind,	 its	about	 identifying	a	particular	
group	 of	 citizens	 ordinarily	 who,	 whether	 theyre	 lumped	 together	 by	
way	 of	 socio-demographic	 or	 some	 shared	 interest	 or	 some	 shared	
geographical	 location	 where	 theres	 a	 kind	 of	 a	 two-way	 thing	 where	
youre	 either	 making	 art	 or	 making	 research,	 and	 theyre	 doing	
something	 which	 essentially	 enriches	 their	 life,	 whether	 its	 their	 local	
community,	 their	 local	space,	or	even	in	terms	of	giving	them	skills	or	a	
way	to	spend	time	with	other	people.	So	yeah	I	guess	Ive	always	thought	
of	citizen	social	science	as	being	part	of	thatyeah.		
AA:	And	in	terms	of	the	empty	houses	project,	specifically,	do	you	see	that	
as	social	science?		
WI5:	The	empty	houses	project?	It	is	It	is		
(WI5,	Empty	Houses	Probe,	December	2016)	
This	walking	interviewees	reflections	on	what	constitutes	citizen	social	science	can	
be	seen	to	encompass	the	nature	of	all	three	probes	in	this	thesis,	and	focuses	on	the	
empowering	and	enriching	aspects	of	participating	in	citizen	social	science.	The	
walking	interviewee	commented	on	the	ways	in	which	each	citizen	social	science	
project	may	differ	from	one	to	the	next,	and	is	tailored	to	the	particular	contextual	
6.5	Conclusion		
requirements	of	the	aims	of	the	project.	According	to	the	interviewee	these	varied	
and	bespoke	projects	can	still	be	identified	as	social	science	in	their	approach	but	
with	an	overall	experience	of	doing	something	together.		
6.5	Conclusion		
The	possibilities	of	citizen	social	science	can	entail	the	flattening	of	hierarchies	in	the	
social	research	process	as	knowledge	is	made	together.	However,	this	creates	new	
tensions	in	terms	of	ethics	and	the	reproduction	of	inequalities,	and	the	conflicting	
stances	of	ethical	practice.	Participants	can	subscribe	to	different	codes	of	ethics	to	
academic	ethical	practice,	which	draws	attention	to	the	politics	of	knowledge	making	
and	the	difficulties	of	agreeing	on	the	need	for,	and	content	of,	reasonable	practices	
and	sufficient	standards	for	ethical	research.		
This	chapter	has	explored	the	ethical	considerations	of	mobilising	citizens	to	generate	
data	for	social	science	research.	It	has	set	out	the	ethical	issues	raised	in	the	practices	
and	processes	of	citizen	social	science,	and	shed	light	on	the	ways	in	which	traditional	
roles	in	the	research	process	are	being	reconfigured.		The	analysis	of	the	probes	
revealed	how	ethical	practice	in	citizen	social	science	is	a	practice	of	negotiation	and	
discussion,	a	form	of	relational	ethics	(Whatmore,	1997;	Austin,	2012;	Banks,	2013)	
and	shared	responsibility	amongst	participants.	It	has	drawn	attention	to	the	
inequalities	in	ethical	education	and	training;	citizen	social	science	is	a	messy,	non-
linear	relationship	between	people.	The	opening	up	of	roles	in	the	research	process	is	
not	inherently	democratic.		
A	key	point	that	this	chapter	serves	to	highlight	is	that	an	ethical	practice	of	citizen	
social	science	requires	on-going	dialogue	and	an	adjustment	of	ethical	practices	in	the	
process.	Perhaps	too	obvious	a	point	but	the	more	participatory	the	type	of	citizen	
social	science	being	undertaken,	the	greater	the	need	for	relational	ethics,	and	one	in	
which	all	participants	are	involved	in	setting	the	ethical	terms	of	the	project.	There	
are	clearly	variances	between	different	communities	of	ethical	practice	and	it	is	
unreasonable,	or	potentially	inappropriate,	to	assume	that	all	participants	will	
approach	the	research	mechanism	that	is	newly	opened	up	to	them	in	the	same	way	
6.5	Conclusion		
as	academic	researchers.	However,	citizen	social	science	necessarily	requires	
openness,	flexibility,	and	reflexivity	in	a	more	prominent	way	than	other	research	
practices,	and	thus	is	also	conducive	to	ethical	reflexivity.		
This	chapter	has	explored	the	notion	of	citizen	social	science	as	a	form	of	open	social	
science,	where	an	expert	position	should	not	be	a	monopoly	on	truth	and	insight.	It	
also	reflected	on	how	many	pre-existing	inequalities	can	be	reproduced	under	the	
apparent	banner	of	opening	up	the	traditional	roles	of	the	research	process.		The	
analytical	advantage	of	such	an	approach	is	to	allow	for	a	consistent	probing	for	what	
happens	when	citizens	are	involved	in	a	more	participatory	way	in	the	traditional	
roles	in	the	research	process.	The	chapter	revealed	that	the	ethical	issues	which	
citizen	social	science	gives	rise	to	are	not	so	different	from	those	raised	when	doing	
traditional	social	science	research,	or	from	those	raised	when	undertaking	
participatory	social	research.	The	concept	of	relational	ethics	serves	to	highlight	the	
necessity	for	redistributing	the	locus	of	ethical	practice	amongst	all	those	who	
participate	in	citizen	social	science,	rather	than	focusing	the	responsibility	solely	on	
the	researcher.		
The	following	chapter	(8),	the	third	and	final	empirical	chapter,	explores	the	potential	
uses	of	the	data	generated	by	a	citizen	social	science	approach	and	the	possibilities	
and	challenges	associated	with	that.	Indeed,	how	the	data	might	be	used	was	
something	of	particular	concern	to	walking	interviewees	in	the	Empty	Houses	probe,	
but	also	in	other	ways	in	the	probe	into	the	Mass	Observation	project	and	the	Our	
Manchester	project.		
7.1	Introduction		
Chapter	7.	Facet	3	-	Data	use	and	its	discontents	
7.1	Introduction	
If	citizen	social	science	entails	the	generation	of	data	for	social	science	research,	it	is	
also	necessary	to	consider	how	the	data	generated	can	be	used	at	the	interface	of	
social	science	and	policy.	Having	an	impact	on	policy	makers	is	a	challenge	many	
social	researchers	and	the	wider	public	face.	Harney	et	al.	(2016,	p.317)	note	that	
there	are	new	agendas	called	impact,	public	engagement	and	co-production,	all	of	
which	urge	us	to	use	our	knowledge	for	social	benefit	and	to	produce	knowledge	
through	collaborations	with	the	wider	community.	Citizen	social	science	is	perceived	
to	assist	in	addressing	such	agendas,	as	set	out	in	the	key	facets	chapter	(see	chapter	
3).	However,	an	analysis	of	the	attitudes	to	data	use	from	the	three	probes	of	the	
thesis	(one	reusing	Mass	Observation	Archive	data;	one	involving	citizens	reporting	
observations	of	empty	houses;	and	one	examining	a	community	based	history	
project)	problematises	this.	Moreover	policy	and	impact	agendas	have	performative	
dimensions	that	further	problematise	this	(Oman,	2017).	Policy	narratives	not	only	
represent	the	world	but	enable	actors	to	intervene	in	and	perform	roles	within	it	
(Felt	and	Wynne,	2007;	Law	and	Mol	2002).	In	this	way,	questions	of	data	use	are	far	
from	straightforward.	
This	chapter	examines	how	citizen	generated	data	can	be	used	and	by	whom.	It	also	
reflects	on	the	quality	of	the	data	produced	and	how	it	could	be	used	to	inform	
policy	decisions.	Quality	is	a	term	that	is	frequently	brought	into	discussions	about	
citizen-generated	data.	This	chapter	focuses	on	how	different	social	actors	view	the	
potential	use	of	citizen	social	science	data,	and	explores	how	such	an	approach	can	
assist	in	tackling	a	pressing	social	issue,	such	as	homelessness	in	the	case	of	the	
Empty	Houses	probe	2,	and	tackling	social	isolation	and	access	to	services	in	the	case	
of	the	Our	Manchester	probe	3.	In	a	policy	context	there	appears	to	be	much	interest	
in	the	potential	of	citizen	social	science	to	generate	data	to	be	used	to	inform	policy	
on	a	range	of	different	issues	(Richardson,	2013,	2014),	and	in	participants	as	a	
future	resource,	as	demonstrated	by	the	traction	participatory	and	citizen	science	
7.1	Introduction		
approaches	have	had	in	the	international	development	sector	(Haklay	et	al.,	2014).	
Citizen	social	science	is	perceived	to	be	a	strategic	tool	for	gathering	data	in	a	time	of	
constrained	resources.	This	raises	important	questions	about	whom	ultimately	
citizen	social	science	is	for	and	who	benefits	from	its	articulation,	linking	to	wider	
debates	about	the	idea	of	an	emancipatory	social	science.	
The	previous	chapter	examined	the	ethical	issues	arising	from	a	citizen	social	science	
approach,	both	in	terms	of	the	issues	raised	for	the	researcher,	and	for	the	
participants.	It	demonstrated	that	the	fixing	of	the	locus	of	ethical	practice	on	the	
researcher,	as	is	the	case	in	many	conventional	social	science	research	approaches,	
necessarily	does	not	always	work	for	citizen	social	science	and	new	challenges	are	
posed.	This	is	particularly	the	case	given	the	ways	in	which	the	possibilities	of	citizen	
social	science	entail	the	flattening	of	hierarchies	in	the	research	process.	However,	
the	analysis	of	the	different	probes	highlights	how	a	hierarchy	in	the	research	process	
always	remains,	and	thus	citizen	social	science	requires	a	relational	ethical	approach,	
in	which	the	ethical	responsibilities	are	shared	amongst,	and	negotiated	between,	
those	participating.	The	ethos	of	working	it	out	together	is	very	much	present	in	
citizen	social	science,	as	is	discussed	in	chapter	6.		
Each	of	the	three	probes	of	this	thesis	examined	a	different	type	of	citizen	social	
science	and	therefore	this	chapter	considers	data	usage	in	each	probe	separately,	
rather	than	providing	a	cross-probe	analysis	as	in	the	previous	two	empirical	
chapters.	It	is	necessary	to	drill	down	separately	into	the	particular	facets	on	data	
usage	that	each	probe	generates,	rather	than	switching	between	data	types	and	
probes	under	a	thematic	heading.	This	allows	for	a	closer	inspection	of	the	
affordances	and	capacities	of	the	different	forms	of	citizen	social	science	probed	for,	
and	in	the	ways	such	different	types	of	knowledge	and	data	can	be	used.	Thus,	the	
chapter	is	structured	into	three	sections:	reflections	on	probe	1	and	the	use	of	the	
Mass	Observation	data	as	a	rich	longitudinal	qualitative	data	source	provide	a	
grounding	in	the	second	section.	A	discussion	of	the	usability	of	the	data	generated	in	
the	Empty	Houses	probe	(2)	highlights	the	difficulties	of	making	citizen	social	science	
data	policy	relevant;	this	is	presented	in	the	third	section.	The	utility	of	the	data	
generated	in	the	Our	Manchester	probe	(3)	questions	how	the	community	might	be	
Use	of	Mass	Observation	Data		
able	to	use	of	citizen	social	science	data	for	the	community	and	attempts	to	tackle	
social	isolation.	This	is	presented	in	the	fourth	section	of	the	chapter. 
7.2 	Use	of	Mass	Observation	Data	
Mass	Observation	project	respondents	and	directive	makers	develop	a	new	form	of	
scientific	enquiry,	working	together.	Reflections	on	motivations,	practices	of	
observation,	analysis	and	interpretation	are	an	integral	part	of	the	interaction.	In	
making	data,	questions	about	data	arise.	What	counts	as	data?	What	does	the	data	
capture	and	what	escapes	capture?	The	probe	into	the	Mass	Observation	project	
revealed	how	data	is	never	about	the	social	world	but	of	the	social	word.	
Reflecting	on	the	potential	uses	of	the	Mass	Observation	data	as	a	rich	longitudinal	
qualitative	data	resource	raises	challenges	in	terms	of	doing	justice	to	the	potential,	
and	complexities,	of	the	project.	There	is	an	inherent	messiness	to	the	data,	
rendering	it	seemingly	hard	to	use.	It	is	notable	how	some	researchers	have	warned	
of	the	difficulty	of	using	Mass	Observation	documents	as	research	materials	(Pollen,	
2013;	Lyndsey	and	Bulloch,	2014;	Savage,	2007)	owing	to	its	particularly	distinctive	
research	method.	Pollen	suggests	that	inconsistency,	heterogeneity	and	even	
incoherence	are	part	of	the	world	we	live	in.	The	mixed	and	disruptive	methods	of	
Mass	Observation	provide	a	unique	means	of	access	to	that	experience	(Pollen,	2013,	
p.18).		Savage	(2007)	suggests	that	the	advantages	of	having	a	messy	qualitative	
dataset	should	be	seized	upon,	and	Sheridan	et	al.	(2000,	p.	285)	note	the	importance	
of	retaining	some	of	that	messiness	in	accounts	of	the	Mass	Observation	Project	lest	
they	become	simply	straightjackets	that	fracture	the	integrity	of	the	reality	they	
purport	to	represent.	In	addition	to	the	messiness	of	the	data	in	its	own	right,	
practical	issues	such	as	legibility	of	handwriting	and	the	material	properties	of	the	
data,	are	worth	bearing	in	mind	when	considering	how	to	make	use	of	the	project	
data.			
In	an	interview	with	the	archivists	of	the	project,	one	of	the	main	challenges	of	the	
project	surfaced.	Researchers	tend	to	approach	the	project	with	preconceived	ideas	
Use	of	Mass	Observation	Data		
about	the	data	that	will	be	produced	and	how	the	data	can	be	used.	A	Mass	
Observation	project	archivist	explained:	
One	 of	 the	 main	 challenges	 is	 actually	 working	 with	 the	 researchers.	
Often	they	arrive	with	a	pre-conceived	answer	that	 they	want	people	to	
write	and	what	they	can	do	with	the	responses	once	they	come	in.	So	the	
challenge	 is	 to	 unpack	 the	 researchers	 questions	 and	 to	 formulate	
questions	 in	 a	 way	 that	 doesnt	 alienate,	 for	 example,	 all	 the	 male	
respondents.	But	weve	got	thirty	something	years	of	experience	in	this	so	
we	hope	 the	researchers	might	 take	advice	some	of	our	advice	 that	you	
cant	know	how	Mass	Observers	will	respond.		
(Interview	with	archivist	and	project	librarian,	May	2016)	
The	archivist	and	project	librarian	draw	attention	to	how	Mass	Observation	is	a	
unique	resource	for	researchers,	but	one	that	requires	a	level	of	understanding	of	the	
specificities	of	the	project,	its	aims,	and	the	context	in	which	it	was	set	up,	in	order	to	
be	able	to	consider	using	the	data.	Whilst	careful	questionnaire	design	is	an	
important	part	of	any	social	research	process,	it	is	interesting	that	researchers	
perceive	the	Mass	Observation	project	in	a	different	light.	
As	explored	in	chapter	5	on	the	practices	and	processes	of	generating	data,	and	the	
challenges	for	research	design,	the	Mass	Observers	highly	value	the	open-ended	
nature	of	the	questions.	They	are	free	to	write	as	much	or	as	little	as	desired,	making	
writing	for	Mass	Observation	in	many	ways	quite	a	pleasant	escape	(G4530,	Male,	
21,	SQ,	2010)	and	therefore	almost	a	luxury	opportunity	for	self-reflection,	and	to	
step	back	from	the	duties	of	the	everyday.	Another	Mass	Observer	wrote:		
In	 writing	 this	 reply	 I	 feel	 I	 was	 mostly	 conscious	 of	 a	 space	 to	 think	
through	something	for	myself	and	that	it	may	be	read	by	someone	else	or	
used	in	research	seemed	almost	incidental.	
(B3154,	Female,	41,	Being	Part	of	Research,	2004)	
An	opportunity	for	self-reflection	is	one	of	the	key	motivations	for	participating	in	the	
project	for	some	Mass	Observers,	above	consideration	for	how	the	data	might	be	
used.	Another	Mass	Observer	saw	participation	in	the	project	as	a	very	private	
experience	(G4530,	Male,	21,	SQ,	2010),	that	is,	like	writing	a	diary	or	school	
assignment.	Another	Mass	Observer	expanded	on	this	stating: 
Use	of	Mass	Observation	Data		
I	think	I	write	mainly	for	myself	and	if	someone	else	is	interested	enough	
and	capable	of	putting	 it	 into	context	with	other	pieces	of	 information	 to	
help	make	sense	of	this	world	we	live	in	then	that	is	a	bonus.		
(B1426,	Male,	69,	Being	Part	of	Research,	2004)	
This	Mass	Observer	articulated	that	his	main	motivation	for	participating	in	the	
project	was	to	write	for	himself;	he	also	reflected	on	the	challenges	of	using	what	he	
has	written,	in	conjunction	with	other	responses	to	help	make	sense	of	this	world	we	
live	in.	This	links	to	previous	discussions	about	the	expertise	involved	in	data	
analysis	in	social	research	(see	chapters	2	and	5).	
Another	Mass	Observer	stated	that	writing	for	Mass	Observation	is:	
good	for	the	soul	because	it	makes	me	think,	and	thinking	makes	me	face	
up	to	what	I	am.	
(K2241,	Male,	61,	Your	Views	on	MO,	1990)		
Participation	in	the	Mass	Observation	project	can	provide	an	opportunity	not	only	for	
self-reflection,	but	also	to	reflect	on	previously	unconsidered	topics,	which	many	
participants	seemed	to	value	highly.	Participation	in	the	Mass	Observation	project	is	
different	to,	for	example	survey	questions	and	traditional	forms	of	social	research,	
since	the	discursive	directive	is	capable	of	eliciting	long	reflective	essays	on	a	subject	
in	a	way	a	more	structured	questionnaire	cannot	(Sheridan	et	al.,	2000).	In	this	way,	
in	making	data,	questions	about	data	arise	and	reflecting	on	data	use	in	the	Mass	
Observation	Project	is	a	problematic	notion.	The	Mass	Observers	reflections	seem	to	
make	this	visible,	and	sometimes	they	almost	seem	to	observe	this	themselves,	and	
yet,	how	does	one	analyse	this?	
In	the	Special	Questionnaire	issued	in	2010,	participants	were	asked	if	the	fact	that	
some	directive	themes	are	commissioned	by	researchers	mattered	to	them;	they	
were	also	asked	whether	they	noticed	any	difference	between	those	directives	that	
are	commissioned,	and	those	written	by	the	project	managers	themselves.	Some	
respondents	were	positive	about	the	notion	that	their	responses	might	be	used	for	
research.	One	Mass	Observer	responded:	
Use	of	Mass	Observation	Data		
I	do	like	the	idea	of	my	words	helping	someone	with	their	research,	but	I	
take	them	all	seriously.		
(B4527F,	SQ,	2010)	
This	Mass	Observer	suggested	they	view	their	role	of	observing	as	important	and	
non-trivial,	and	they	feel	positive	about	their	directive	responses	being	useful	for	
researchers,	even	if	they	refer	to	their	contributions	as	simply	my	words.	
Another	Mass	Observer	commented	to	similar	effect:	
I	like	the	idea	of	providing	material	for	researchers;	this	makes	well	
considered	replies	even	more	important.	
(D996F,	SQ,	2010)	
This	Mass	Observers	response	suggested	they	felt	positively	towards	the	notion	
of	 the	 material	 they	provide	being	used	by	researchers,	and	that	 it	gave	 them	
even	 more	 incentive	 to	 think	 carefully	 about	 their	 responses.	 	 Another	 also	
stated:	
I	 like	 the	 fact	 that	 some	of	 our	directives	 are	 commissioned	 for	 I	 know	
that	they	definitely	will	be	used.	
(H1806M,	SQ,	2010)		
This	Mass	Observers	response	links	to	some	of	the	walking	interviewees	
comments	discussed	in	chapter	6	about	knowing	that	responses	or	data	
submitted	will	be	used	and	that	therefore	the	act	of	responding,	or	reporting	
ones	observations,	has	purpose.	Another	Mass	Observer	stated	in	response	to	
the	Special	Questionnaire:	
No	I	am	pleased	to	help.	I	like	anything	that	helps	me	to	reflect	on	my	own	
life,	and	also	that	is	of	help	to	others.		
(E4556M,	SQ,	2010)	
The	responses	also	revealed	some	of	the	motivations	behind	the	positive	attitude.	The	
responses	suggested	Mass	Observers	like	to	know	that	their	responses	might	be	used	
by	researchers,	in	addition	to	what	they	might	get	out	of	writing	for	the	project	in	
terms	of	an	opportunity	to	reflect	on	particular	issues,	or	indeed	their	own	lives.	
Another	Mass	Observer	stated,	in	response	to	the	Special	Questionnaire	question:	
What	do	you	think	you	get	out	of	writing	for	MO?:		
Use	of	Mass	Observation	Data		
I	know	as	a	historian,	how	important	MO	is	as	a	social	voice.	I	couldnt	do	
the	research	 that	 I	enjoy	without	 it.	The	pleasure	 that	 I	derive	 from	the	
knowledge	 that	 I	may	be	able	 to	help	other	historians	understand	what	
today	is	like	is	really	important	to	me.	
(E4556M,	SQ,	2010)	
In	this	way,	it	is	significant	for	some	Mass	Observers	to	know	that	other	researchers	
use	their	directive	responses.		This	Mass	Observer	viewed	the	project	at	a	social	
voice	to	enable	historians	to	better	understand	the	current	context.	However,	there	
are	some	dissenting	perspectives.	A	small	number	of	respondents	were	more	critical	
about	commissioned	research.	One	Mass	Observer	also	suggested	that	
with	 commissioned	 themes,	 I	 do	 feel	 slightly	 that	 I	 am	 doing	 their	
research	for	them	and	feel	rather	less	committed.	
(W2322M,	SQ,	2010)	
This	comment	is	an	interesting	reflection	on	the	importance	of	the	Mass	Observers	
own	personal	motivations	for	participating	and	writing	for	the	project.	Another	Mass	
Observer	reflected	on	the	question:	what	factors	do	you	imagine	would	stop	you	
taking	part	in	Mass	Observation?	by	describing	the	pleasure	of	participating:	
I	cant	imagine	that	I	would	stop	taking	part	in	MO	because	I	didnt	have	
time	or	 inclination	because	you	can	write	as	much	as	you	 like,	 and	 it	 is	
quite	a	pleasant	escape	to	write	for	MO.	If	the	directives	became	things	I	
simply	didnt	have	anything	to	write	about	then	I	would	stop	taking	part.	
Equally,	 if	 I	 felt	 the	 information	 was	 going	 to	 be	 used	 in	 some	 way	
commercially,	or	that	commercial	interests	were	dictating	the	directives.		
(G4530M,	SQ,	2010)		
This	Mass	Observer	reflected	on	how	the	commercial	use	of	his	responses	might	
make	him	reconsider	his	participation	in	the	project.	This	is	particularly	interesting	
given	the	fact	that	the	first	wave	of	the	project	became	a	market	research	
organisation	in	the	1950,	before	stopping	due	to	lack	of	funding	in	1951.		
Questions	of	quality	and	validity	of	the	data	are	problematic	with	regards	to	Mass	
Observation.	The	project	archivist	and	librarian	note	that:	
The	 project	 can	 be	 called	 upon	 by	 lots	 of	 different	 disciplines.	 The	
commissioning	of	directives	is	usually	done	by	social	scientists,	and	then	
they	use	the	data	from	that	commission	for	their	specific	projects,	but	it	
Use	of	Mass	Observation	Data		
then	 gets	 put	 back	 into	 the	 pot	 for	 reuse	 by	 historians	 and	 others	 for	
whatever	theyre	up	to.	Theres	now	an	increasing	interest	in	reusing	the	
data	in	social	science.	This	is	now	almost	becoming	of	interest	to	writers	
who	 are	 seeing	 it	 as	 part	 of	 a	 longitudinal	 project	 with	 a	 legacy	 since	
1937.	
(Interview	with	archivist	and	project	librarian,	May	2016)	
The	question	of	the	re-use	of	qualitative	data	is	a	topic	of	ongoing	debate	in	the	social	
sciences,	particularly	since	it	is	a	means	of	examining	patterns	and	processes	of	
historical	change	(Moore,	2007;	Savage,	2007)	and	generating	an	investigative	
epistemology	(Oman,	2017;	Mason	2007)	to	examine	how	knowledge	is	produced	
and	policy	agendas	formed	over	time.		
Owing	to	the	creative	methods	of	Mass	Observation,	it	had	a	complex	relationship	
with	the	academy	and	there	is	considerable	debate	about	the	methodological	and	
epistemological	nature	of	the	project	(Bhatti,	2006),	particularly	in	terms	of	the	status	
of	autobiographical	directive	responses	in	generating	sociological	theory	generally,	
and	the	representativeness,	accuracy	and	relevance	of	the	data	generated	in	the	
project	(see	Busby,	2000,	and	Sheridan	et	al.,	2000,	for	an	overview).	The	second	
wave	of	the	project	was	not	subjected	to	the	same	methodological	dismissal	as	the	
first	wave	(Pollen,	2013).	Purbrick	(2007,	p.168)	suggests	that	Mass	Observation	was	
invested	with	new	authority	because	of	two	fundamental	intellectual	shifts:	the	re-
evaluation	of	signs	of	subjectivity	in	academic	practice	as	the	only	source	material	of	
social	life	that	we	have	and,	additionally,	the	embracing	of	the	interpretive	role	of	
informants	as	mediations	of	subjectivity,	performances	of	identity.	For	these	
authors,	subjectivity	is	not	so	much	a	source	of	bias	or	error.	It	is	embraced	and	
valued	as	a	form	of	emotional	richness	(Shaw,	1994)	that	researchers,	informed	by	
new	approaches	to	the	interpretation	of	qualitative	social	and	historical	data,	can	
analyse.	Furthermore,	the	project	appears	to	be	entering	a	phase	in	which	its	
experimental	approaches	are	highly	valued,	with	Adkins	(2018)	reframing	Mass	
Observation	as	a	site	for	speculative	research.		
7.3	Usability	of	Empty	Houses	Data	and	the	Policy	Interface		
7.3	Usability	of	Empty	Houses	Data	and	the	Policy	Interface		
This	section	presents	the	analysis	from	the	Empty	Houses	probe	in	relation	to	
questions	of	the	usability	of	the	data	generated	in	the	project.	The	elements	that	
constituted	the	probe	were	not	only	the	project	itself,	where	people	could	send	in	
their	observations	of	empty	houses	to	the	online	website,	and	the	walking	interviews	
to	explore	the	practices,	affordances	and	challenges	of	actually	observing	and	
reporting.	The	probe	also	included	a	series	of	nine	interviews	with	policy	
representatives	and	other	practitioners	and	campaigners	who	may	have	been	
interested	in	using	the	data	generated	by	the	project.	These	multiple	data	sources	are	
reflected	on	below.			
How	the	data	from	the	Empty	Houses	probe	might	be	used	was	an	issue	of	primary	
concern	for	walking	interviewees,	who	wanted	to	know	who	would	be	using	their	
observations	and	to	what	ends.	It	was	also	an	issue	that	very	much	affected	their	
motivation	and	desire	to	participate	in	the	project	and	some	stated	it	as	a	potential	
deal	breaker,	when	asked	about	what,	for	them,	may	constitute	a	barrier	to	
participating	in	the	project.	The	information	on	the	Empty	Houses	Project	blog15,	as	
well	as	much	of	the	campaign	surrounding	the	project	stated	that	the	aim	was	to	
work	with	local	authorities,	charities	and	other	interested	organisations	and	
individuals,	to	try	to	bring	empty	properties	identified	back	into	use.	This	was	also	
the	information	that	was	given	to	the	walking	interviewees.		
However,	how	the	data	was	to	be	used	and	by	whom,	was	a	topic	of	discussion	in	the	
walking	interviews,	as	a	way	to	probe	and	explore	together	options	and	approaches	
and	ideas	for	using	the	data.	Interviewees	drew	attention	to	the	importance	of	
knowing	how	the	data	they	might	help	generate	might	be	used: 
AA:	So	you	were	saying	earlier	youd	want	to	know	what	the	data	was	
going	to	be	used	for?		
WI6:	 If	 it	was	 a	 random	 thing,	 youd	want	 to	 know	 the	 purpose	 of	 it.	 I	
would	anyway.	Because	its	not	a	particularly	fun	thing	to	do	So	yes	are	
you	doing	it	for	a	purpose	oryes	I	would	want	to	know	yeah.	But	again	
maybe	thats	my	nature?	
15	https://emptyhousesproject.wordpress.com	
7.3	Usability	of	Empty	Houses	Data	and	the	Policy	Interface		
(WI6,	Empty	Houses	probe,	December	2016)	
This	walking	interviewee	articulated	the	importance	of	knowing	the	purpose	of	the	
project,	and	therefore	how	the	data	they	participated	in	generating,	might	be	used.	
Another	walking	interviewee	reflected	in	more	detail:	
AA:	Do	you	think	knowing	what	the	data	would	be	used	for	is	important?		
WI1:	Yeah	I	think	so	yeah.	I	mean	thats	it.	Cos	if	you	dont	knowI	mean	I	
wouldnt	 know	what	happens	 to	 it.	 So	 if	 the	 council	 is	 taking	 in	 all	 that	
data,	what	could	we	say?	You	may	not	want	to	know	about	that.	 I	mean	
people	 could	 be	 using	 the	 data	 illegally	 or	 in	 a	 way	 that	 is	 actually	
technically	helping	them		
(WI1,	Empty	Houses	probe,	December	2016)	
This	interviewee	drew	attention	to	the	ways	in	which	not	knowing	about	how	the	
data	submitted	to	the	Empty	Houses	project	might	be	used,	and	by	whom,	might	
affect	participants	likelihood	to	report.	This	response	also	highlights	the	politics	of	
data	use,	and	how	the	data	might	be	used	to	very	different	ends.		Another	
interviewee	suggested	that	the	data	could	be	useful	to	chart	trends	over	time,	or	at	
least	that	the	data	might	be	symptomatic	of	bigger	issues: 
AA:	Do	you	think	people	could	use	that	information?		
WI4:	 No	 definitely	 Its	 definitely	 important	 forthe	 council,	 or	 for	
communities	in	generaljust	because	you	can	also	spot	if	its	a	symptom	
of	something	bigger,	a	bigger	problemkind	of	follow	the	tendencies	and	
follow	 some	 patterns	 throughout	 the	 years	 of	 are	 there	 more	 maybe	
empty	houses	in	that	year	and	less	in	another	year	and	then	act	on	it	just	
to	house	people.	
(WI4,	Empty	Houses	probe,	December	2016)	
This	interviewee	construed	use	of	the	data	on	empty	houses	from	the	project	as	
something	that	the	council	should	do,	in	many	ways	enacting	the	expectations	the	
local	authority	interviewees	articulated	that	they	could	not	meet,	as	will	be	set	out	
below.	This	conception	of	data	use	by	the	council	is	in	contrast	to	the	comment	of	
Walking	Interviewee	1	above,	who	drew	attention	to	the	possibilities	of	using	the	
data	for	ones	own	benefit,	or	using	the	data	illegally		though	the	latter	was	not	
expanded	upon	further.	
7.3	Usability	of	Empty	Houses	Data	and	the	Policy	Interface		
One	walking	interviewee	suggested	a	possible	way	to	use	the	data	would	be	for	
community	groups	or	grassroots	initiatives	to	hold	officials	in	government	to	account:	
AA:	So	that	idea	of	doing	something	with	the	data	and	not	just	collecting	
itand	active	resistance	was	interesting?		
WI5:	Yeah	I	mean	I	dont	think	it	always	has	to	be	about	resistancebut	I	
think	theres	definitely	a	difference	between	handing	over	data	to	help	a	
local	authority	or	the	government	or	whatever	and	having	a	community	
come	 together	 to	 collect	 data	 to	 basically	 affect	 change	 and	 also	 to	 say	
basically	hang	on	government	Are	you	lying	to	us?	Which	obviously	Im	a	
great	fan	of	doing	that		
(WI5,	Empty	Houses	probe,	December	2016)	
This	walking	interviewee	contrasted	the	handing	over	of	data	to	a	local	authority	to	
act	on,	with	a	community	coming	together	around	a	project	to	challenge	official	
narratives	and	to	hold	official	decision	makers	to	account.	In	this	way,	participants	in	
the	Empty	Houses	probe	were	concerned	about	the	ways	in	which	the	data	might	be	
used.	
The	policy	and	practitioner	interviews,	conducted	as	part	of	the	Empty	Houses	probe,	
shed	light	on	a	different	perspective.	Interviews	with	members	of	the	local	authority,	
as	well	as	with	housing	practitioners	on	the	one	hand,	highlighted	the	ways	in	which	
citizen	generated	data	could	be	used	to	supplement	existing	data	sets,	to	bring	a	more	
nuanced	understanding	to	the	official	statistics,	and	eventually	as	a	way	to	try	to	
bring	empty	houses	back	into	use.	On	the	other,	interest	in	the	data	generated	by	the	
project	was	also	shown	by	property	developers,	and	other	organisations	and	
individuals,	with	more	commercially	minded	interests.		
The	approach	adopted	in	the	Empty	Houses	project,	whereby	citizens	are	encouraged	
to	send	in	observations	of	empty	houses	in	their	local	area,	is	not	a	new	approach.	
Every	local	authority	in	England	has	an	area	on	its	website	where	people	can	report	
empty	houses,	in	a	very	similar	format	to	the	Empty	Houses	Project.	Some	local	
authorities	even	have	a	dedicated	empty	houses	team	that	are	focussed	on	trying	to	
manage	information	about	empty	houses	and	where	possible	to	bring	them	back	into	
use.	The	Empty	Houses	teams	work	with	the	official	data	on	empty	houses,	which	is	
7.3	Usability	of	Empty	Houses	Data	and	the	Policy	Interface		
indicated	via	council	tax	payments.	Interviewees	from	the	research	team	and	empty	
houses	team	at	a	local	authority	explained:		
Interviewee	1:	On	the	empty	homes	in	particular,	so	our	indication	of	an	
empty	 home	 is	 usually	 through	 council	 tax.	 So	 if	 theres	 no	 council	 tax	
being	paid	or	is	it	discounted?	It	depends	whos	being	paid	
Interviewee	2:	It	used	to	be	a	discount	but	then	the	classification	changed	
for	council	tax	so	we	actually	use	that	for	the	base	for	them	so	weve	got	
the	historical	one,	but	weve	also	got	 the	 land	registry	one	so	weve	got	
the	 information	 that	 we	 had	 and	 weve	 got	 an	 empty	 homes	 list	 for	
Manchester.	 All	 the	 other	 authorities	will	 have	 the	 same	 sort	 of	 list.	 So	
across	Greater	Manchester	 youll	 have	 something	 like	20,000	 long	 term	
empty	homes.	 So	 theres	 long	 term	empty	homes	 that	have	been	empty	
for	 over	 6	 months.	 And	 the	 normal	 ones	 that	 are	 sort	 of	 part	 of	 the	
functioning	market	that	are	less	than	6	months.	So	we	have	a	list.	At	the	
moment	 since	 the	 classification	 changes	 theres	 about	 1,600	 long	 term	
empty	homes	so	 theyre	 the	real	 core	ones	 that	we	need	 to	sort	or	deal	
with.	
(Interview	with	local	authority	team	members,	January	2017)	
The	official	way	to	determine	if	a	house	is	empty	is	via	council	tax	payments,	which	
can	be	cross	checked	with	Land	Registry	data	which	is	available	to	the	empty	houses	
team.	These	statistics	can	then	be	added	to	by	reports	of	empty	houses	on	local	
authority	websites	or,	for	example,	from	the	Empty	Houses	Project.	However,	as	the	
interview	with	members	of	the	research	team	and	empty	houses	team	of	a	local	
authority	confirmed,	reporting	rates	on	local	authority	websites	were	low.	
Furthermore,	an	interview	with	the	Empty	Houses	Network	confirmed	the	lack	of	
clarity	surrounding	this	data	and	how	it	is	used:	
Some	local	authorities	have	forms	on	their	website	that	you	can	fill	in	to	
report	an	empty	house,	but	 its	unclear	who	actually	reports	and	whats	
done	with	the	information	when	people	do	report.	
(Interview	with	the	Empty	Houses	Network,	November	2016)	
The	interviewees	suggested	that	there	was	the	possibility	of	crosschecking	
submissions	to	the	Empty	Houses	project	with	the	official	statistics,	calculated	by	
council	tax	payments	and	thereby	attempting	to	validate	the	data.	The	question	of	the	
lack	of	clarity	in	terms	of	how	the	data	might	be	used	is	an	important	one	for	
participants,	as	set	out	above.	
7.3	Usability	of	Empty	Houses	Data	and	the	Policy	Interface		
When	asked	about	the	role	of	citizen	generated	data,	one	local	authority	interviewee	
responded:		
AA:	So	would	you	say	there	is	a	role	for	citizen	generated	data	or	citizen	
collected	data?	Would	you	use	it?			
Interviewee	1:	Definitely	Definitely	The	point	 that	 Im	making	 is	 that	 I	
dont	 think	 citizens	 understand	 that	 its	 their	 role,	 despite	 errrI	
particularly	remember	Eric	Pickles	talking	about	that,	that	when	they	did	
the	 first	 round	 of	 cuts	 in	 local	 government,	 thats	 what	 the	 politicians	
thought	 they	 could	 drive.	 So	 basically	 instead	 of	 the	 nanny-state,	 if	 you	
like,	thats	how	Tories	would	define	us,	the	nanniesand	instead	of	the	
nanny-state	 doing	 stuff,	 what	 they	 wanted	 was	 citizens	 to	 pick	 up	 the	
litter,	 to	make	 sure	 the	 houses	werent	 empty,	 to	 look	 after	 the	 elderly	
neighbour,	to	clear	the	snow	out	of	the	front	pathall	those	things.	And	I	
think	citizens	think	its	our	job.	
Interviewee	2:	Yeah	massively.			
(Interview	with	local	authority	team	members,	January	2017)	
This	comment	highlights	the	mismatch	in	expectations	between	what	policy	makers	
expect	of	citizens		to	collect	data	and	participate		and	their	perception	of	citizens	
not	seeing	this	as	their	responsibility.	Participants	in	the	walking	interviews	were	
precisely	concerned	about	how	the	data	might	be	used,	and	therefore	were	reticent	to	
participate.	The	notion	of	citizen	responsibility	for	data	generation	links	to	comments	
made	by	the	Mass	Observers	about	their	sense	of	duty	to	write	for	the	project.	It	also	
links	to	comments	in	the	walking	interviews	of	the	Empty	Houses	probe,	about	
participants	considering	it	their	duty	to	participate.	Later,	Interviewee	2	added:	
But	to	answer	your	question,	when	people	tell	us,	we	definitely	act	on	it.	
The	problem	is,	that	because	of	our	capacity,	we	are	very	much	reliant	on	
people	 telling	us.	 So	 if	 they	dont,	 or	 they	 just	 kind	of	moan	 about	 it	 to	
themselves,	or	we	dont	know	about	it,	then	we	cant	deal	with	it.	Because	
we	 just	dont	have	enough	capacity	 to	do	 these	kind	of	 surveys	 that	we	
used	to	do	in	the	past.		
(Interview	with	local	authority	team	members,	January	2017)	
The	local	authority	interviewees	drew	attention	to	the	importance	of	citizen-
generated	data	in	a	context	of	constrained	resources.	They	referred	to	the	good	old	
days	when	they	had	the	resources	to	do	surveys	on	empty	properties	in	each	ward,	
and	develop	a	list	of	the	top	twenty	empty	properties	(Interview	with	local	authority	
team	members,	January	2017).	One	of	the	interviewees	reflected	on	this:	
7.3	Usability	of	Empty	Houses	Data	and	the	Policy	Interface		
Interviewee	1:	We	used	to	go	out	and	look	for	them	We	just	dont	have	
the	capacity	for	it	now	
(Interview	with	local	authority	team	members,	January	2017)	
In	many	ways,	the	views	presented	here	around	data	use	constitute	the	perspective	of	
citizen	generated	data	as	a	way	to	help	cover	the	lack	of	research	budget	available	to	
the	local	authority	in	a	time	of	constrained	resources.	Manchester	City	Council	has	
had	over	a	third	(37%)	cut	from	its	budget	between	2010	and	2016	due	to	spending	
decisions	taken	by	central	government.	These	cuts	have	brought	about	increasing	
levels	of	poverty	and	homelessness	in	Manchester,	and	the	pressures	on	local	service	
delivery	are	acute	(MacGregor	and	Pardoe,	2018;	Etherington	and	Jones,	2017).	
The	language	and	tone	of	the	interview	with	the	local	authority	research	team	and	
empty	homes	team	members	was	particularly	entrepreneurial,	with	empty	houses	
being	viewed	very	much	in	financial	terms,	with	the	incentive	to	ensure	they	do	not	
remain	long	term	empty	to	avoid	any	form	of	drain	on	local	authority	resources.	The	
local	authority	interviewees	suggested	an	awareness	of	a	mismatch	between	public	
perceptions	of	the	responsibility	of	dealing	with	the	issue	of	empty	houses	versus	the	
perception	of	the	local	authority	about	what	should	be	done,	and	by	whom.	
Interviewee	1	explained:	
Interviewee	 1:	 What	 Im	 finding	 quite	 interesting	 in	 this	 is	 that	 the	
perception	 of	 these	 issues	 is	 very	 different	 from	 our	 perception	 as	 a	
public	 agency.	 So	 we	 look	 at	 that	 and	 we	 see	 the	 economic	 missed	
opportunity,	 we	 see	 that	 its	 a	 problem	 in	 a	 neighbourhood,	 all	 those	
kinds	of	things.	But	obviously	people	walk	past	and	think	well	thats	none	
of	my	business.	Its	someone	elses	home.	
(Interview	with	local	authority	team	members,	January	2017)	
These	reflections	on	the	differences	in	perception	of	the	problem	of	empty	houses	
are	interesting	in	the	lack	of	reporting	in	the	Empty	Houses	probe.	Later	in	the	
interview,	interviewee	1	continues:	
Interviewee	 1:	 You	 see	 the	 other	 thing	 that	 from	 a	 social	 research	
perspective	always	makes	me	wonder	 is	 theres	 lots	 and	 lots	of	 social	
issues,	but	I	think	that	most	people	think	that	its	somebody	elses	job	to	
deal	with	it.	
Interviewee	2:	Yeah	
Interviewee	1:	And	basically	the	thing	that	people	are	less	aware	of	now	
is	that	public	services	are	so	cash	strapped	that	actually	were	not	doing	
half	of	 the	 things	 that	we	might	have	been	doing	 in	 the	past.	You	know	
our	revenue	budget	has	been	cut	by	more	than	half.	
Interviewee	2:	Yep	
7.3	Usability	of	Empty	Houses	Data	and	the	Policy	Interface		
Interviewee	1:	So	as	you	can	probably	tell	from	what	Im	saying,	the	kind	
of	whole	rough	sleeping	and	begging	agenda	is	on	its	kind	of	top	of	my	
mind	because	weve	 just	concluded	a	big	review	about	 it.	But	again,	you	
kind	of	go	out	there	and	talk	to	people	on	the	street	and	their	perception	
of	whether	 anybodys	 doing	 anything	 about	 it	 or	why	people	 are	 rough	
sleeping	 etc	 is	 completely	 different	 from	what	 were	 facing	 as	 a	 public	
sector	agency.	
(Interview	with	local	authority	team	members,	January	2017)	
Interviewee	1	here	clearly	articulates	the	mismatch	in	perception	as	to	who	is	
considered	responsible	for	trying	to	tackle	social	issues	such	as	homelessness	and	
rough-sleeping.	It	would	seem	that	even	though	the	potential	is	there	to	crowdsource	
data	on	empty	houses,	by	mobilising	citizens	to	send	in	their	observations,	and	the	
local	authority	is	keen	to	use	such	data,	the	reality	is	more	complex.	It	is	more	
complex	from	the	perspective	of	the	citizens	participating	in	generating	the	data,	who	
are	concerned	about	the	ways	in	which	the	data	might	be	used.	It	is	also	complex	in	
terms	of	actually	putting	the	data	to	use	from	the	perspective	of	the	local	authority,	
who	state	their	desire	to	draw	on	citizen	generated	data,	but	who	also	acknowledge	
the	challenges	of	clarifying	the	roles	and	responsibilities	for	tackling	certain	social	
issues,	such	as	homelessness	and	empty	houses.	
The	policy	and	practitioner	interviews,	conducted	as	part	of	the	Empty	Houses	probe,	
highlighted	yet	another	different	perspective.	Rather	than	focussing	on	data	use	per	
se,	the	Empty	Homes	Agency	saw	data	as	a	can	opener	or	basis	from	which	to	be	
able	to	start	asking	questions:	
Our	report	suggests	that	we	have	a	higher	proportion	of	empty	houses	in	
the	Northbut	of	course	theres	a	difference	between	those	that	are	long	
term	empty		such	as	those	left	empty	for	over	six	months,	and	those	that	
are	short	term	empty	for	less	than	that.	The	official	statistics	are	probably	
an	 undercount	 and	 its	 worth	 remembering	 that	 they	 dont	 include	
properties	 that	 have	 been	 removed	 from	 the	 Council	 Tax	 valuation	 list	
because	they	are	derelict	and	uninhabitableso	in	terms	of	what	uses	the	
data	can	be	put	to,	Id	say	the	best	use	is	as	a	can	opener	or	starting	point	
for	 asking	 questions	 about	whats	 really	 going	 on	here.	 It	 can	 also	 be	 a	
way	for	people	to	start	asking	questions	about	whats	happening	in	their	
area.	
(Empty	Homes	Agency	interview,	August	2016)	
Rather	than	focussing	on	the	use	of	the	data	on	empty	houses	per	se,	the	comments	
above	emphasised	the	ways	in	which	the	data	could	be	used	as	a	means	to	start	a	
7.3	Usability	of	Empty	Houses	Data	and	the	Policy	Interface		
conversation	about	the	current	state	of	affairs,	and	potentially	even	as	a	tool	for	
people	to	use	to	question	what	specifically	might	be	happening	locally	to	them.	The	
comments	made	by	the	representative	of	the	Empty	Homes	Agency	link	to	Walking	
Interviewee	5s	comments	about	using	citizen	generated	data	to	hold	people	in	
positions	of	power	to	account.		
In	an	interview	with	an	empty	housing	campaigner,	who	had	set	up	and	ran	his	own	
charity	to	try	to	bring	empty	houses	back	into	use,	he	highlighted	some	of	the	issues	
around	the	politics	of	data	on	empty	houses:	
	 Council	figures	are	always	showing	a	downwards	trend	in	terms	of	empty	
houses.	I	managed	to	get	an	article	in	the	local	paper	saying	to	people	you	
know	your	neighbourhood	best		tell	us	where	the	empties	are	
(Interview	with	empty	houses	campaigner,	February	2017)	
This	housing	campaigner	described	how	he	attempted	to	encourage	participants	and	
local	residents	of	an	area	to	submit	observations	of	empty	houses	since	they	know	
[their]	neighbourhood	best.	He	alluded	to	the	politics	surrounding	the	official	
figures,	which	could	be	perceived	to	mask	the	reality	of	the	number	of	empty	houses	
in	a	particular	area.	The	same	campaigner	reflected	on	the	sources	of	data	on	empty	
houses	in	another	area	of	the	UK,	in	Liverpool,	and	also	on	the	respective	roles	and	
responsibilities	for	collecting	data	in	this	area:	
Liverpool	is	all	Labour	and	everyones	sustaining	themselves	on	the	belief	
that	 all	will	 be	 fine	 and	 its	 all	 good.	 But	 its	 not	 fine	 at	 all.	 Now	weve	
ended	up	getting	 the	best	data	 from	people	who	give	a	shit	because	 its	
about	the	money.	The	city	council	 is	quite	lazy.	Councils	have	the	power	
to	do	something	about	it	but	arent	keen	to	use	these	powers.	
(Interview	with	empty	houses	campaigner,	February	2017)	
This	interviewee	suggested	he	had	received	the	best	data	on	empty	houses	that	his	
organisation	could	use	to	bring	houses	back	into	use,	from	those	incentivised	by	
money		namely	property	developers	who	he	suggested	were	interested	in	buying	up	
empty	properties,	to	refurbish	them,	and	sell	them	off	for	profit.	The	interviewee	also	
questioned	the	motivations	and	role	of	some	local	authorities	to	affect	the	situation,	
highlighting	the	political	nature	of	the	data	and	the	context.		
Another	empty	housing	campaigner	reflected	on	the	value	of	data	on	empty	houses:	
7.4	Utility	of	Our	Manchester	Data	for	the	Community		
Its	 worth	 reflecting	 on	 what	 the	 information	 about	 empty	 houses	 [is]	
worth.	 There	 are	 the	 legal	 and	 criminal	 aspects,	 with	 a	 long	 history	 of	
squatting	 organisations	 making	 FOI	 requests	 on	 empty	 houses	 data.	
Theres	 also	 for	 example	 tracing	 agents	 who	 work	 for	 property	
developersand	 then	 theres	 also	 programmes	 such	 as	 Heir	 Hunting	 	
you	know	that	BBC	programme	where	they	cant	find	the	beneficiaries	of	
peoples	wills	so	firms	go	out	and	try	to	locate	the	beneficiaries	and	take	a	
cut	of	the	inheritance	Whilst	the	local	authority	is	the	main	organisation	
in	position	and	guaranteed	to	do,	or	at	least	be	entrusted	to	do,	something	
of	social	value.	And	hopefully	the	local	authority	isnt	going	to	be	abusing	
the	empty	houses	information.		
(Empty	houses	network	interview,	November	2016)	
Again,	this	interviewee	drew	attention	to	the	politics	and	power	relations	at	play	with	
data	on	empty	houses,	and	its	usage.	In	the	interview	with	the	local	authority,	one	of	
the	interviewees	expanded	on	this,	and	framed	the	issue	in	a	slightly	different	way:		
Interviewee	2:	Yeah	its	a	really	 important	point	that	I	think	as	a	team	
weve	 become	 more	 responsive	 rather	 than	 pro-active,	 because	 the	
teams	got	smaller	but	our	remits	got	wider.	So	we	dont	focus	on	empty	
homes	with	the	five	officers;	we	cover	the	private	rented	sector	now,	and	
various	things.	So	the	empty	homes	issue	has	not	gone	away;	its	just	been	
contained.	 So	 when	 you	 start	 seeing	 something	 reduced,	 you	 start	
thinking	 well	 theres	 another	 focus	 for	 the	 city	 council	 and	 officers	
timeSo	 we	 tend	 to	 focus	 onour	 priorities	 change	 over	 time,	 so	 if	
people	 arent	 being	 responsive	 and	 reporting	 stuff,	 it	 becomes	 less	 of	 a	
priority	and	less	of	an	issue.	
(Interview	with	local	authority	team	members,	January	2017)	
This	comment	highlighted	the	ways	in	which	attention	to	the	issue	of	empty	houses	
comes	in	and	out	of	focus	for	the	local	authority	depending	on	whether	or	not	people	
report	empties	as	an	issue.	An	analysis	of	the	Empty	Houses	probe	suggests	that	the	
usability	of	the	data	on	empty	houses	is	more	as	a	means	to	enable	a	dialogue	with	
those	responsible	for	putting	the	data	to	good	use,	as	a	form	of	empowering	citizens	
and	holding	policy	makers	to	account.	
7.4	Utility	of	Our	Manchester	Data	for	the	Community		
The	nature	of	the	different	types	of	data	being	generated	in	the	Our	Manchester	
project	and	their	potential	impact	highlights	the	way	in	which	this	type	of	citizen	
7.4	Utility	of	Our	Manchester	Data	for	the	Community		
social	science	can	have	multiple	purposes		to	tackle	isolation	both	in	terms	of	the	
data	generated,	and	the	process	of	generating	it),	to	inform	service	provision	and	
delivery,	to	contribute	to	the	re-writing	of	the	history	of	a	particular	area	or	
community,	to	challenge	stigma	and	stereotypes,	to	unpack	traditional	roles	in	the	
research	process.	
In	an	interview	with	Stephen,	the	community	development	worker	who	co-produced	
the	Our	Manchester	project,	in	November	2016,	he	stated	that	the	project	is	crucial	as:	
it	 informs	 my	 work	 and	 informs	 what	 needs	 to	 be	 done	 to	 get	 people	
access	to	services.	Its	a	major	thing	and	it	has	to	happen	Its	not	so	much	
about	 information	 though	 if	 you	 get	 what	 I	 mean?	 Its	 about	 so	 much	
more	than	that.	
(Interview	with	Stephen,	November	2016)	
Stephen	expanded	on	this,	stating	that:	
collecting	data	without	it	having	impact	is	a	big	no	no.	But	people	are	
getting	used	to	 the	 fact	 that	 this	 is	happening	and	so	 they	dont	want	
to	 do	 the	 surveys	 again	 or	 get	 involved	 in	 research.	 But	 at	 the	 same	
time	 there	 are	 all	 these	 surveillance	 systems	 taking	 peoples	 info	
without	 them	 really	 realising	 it.	 Do	 you	 get	 me?	 Like	 Facebook	
Theres	all	this	politics	thats	being	ignored 
(Interview	with	Stephen,	November	2016)	
These	reflections	about	the	nature	of	the	different	types	of	data	being	collected	and	
their	potential	impact	highlights	the	way	in	which	this	type	of	citizen-led	citizen	social	
science	can	seemingly	have	multiple	purposes.	Stephen	also	drew	attention	to	the	
importance	of	making	use	of	the	data	collected	and	doing	something	meaningful	for	
participants:	
People	are	not	interested	in	doing	meaningful	things	for	other	people,	so	
this	is	a	way	to	do	that	for	them.	Its	a	broad	way	around	the	issue,	not	tick	
boxes	 etc	 and	 it	 ensures	 that	people	participate	 in	 the	project	 and	have	
some	form	of	ownership	over	it.	
(Interview	with	Stephen,	November	2016)	
Stephen	emphasised	the	way	in	which	participants	can	take	part	in	the	Our	
Manchester	project,	and	potentially	feel	a	sense	of	ownership	over	what	comes	out	of	
the	project,	over	the	questions	that	are	asked	and	the	accounts	and	narratives	that	are	
told.	This	is	perceived	to	be	more	meaningful	than	the	tick	box	exercises	of	other	data-
7.4	Utility	of	Our	Manchester	Data	for	the	Community		
gathering	approaches	used	on	the	community	that	Stephen	is	clearly	disillusioned	
and	frustrated	with.	In	another	interview	with	Stephen	later	that	month,	he	reflected:		
data	is	only	collected	when	they	want	to	do	something	to	you,	not	for	you. 
(Interview	with	Stephen,	November	2016)	
Who	they	are	remained	vague	in	the	interview	but	the	comment	highlighted	the	
power	dynamics	at	play	in	the	traditional	research	process,	with	the	perception	that	
data,	and	the	results	that	ensue	from	its	collection,	is	done	to	(my	emphasis)	the	
community	in	contrast	to	the	potential	for	more	community	co-produced	approaches	
being	done	for	or	by	(my	emphasis)	the	community.	The	probe	revealed	what	data	is	
politics	means	in	practice	(Durose	et	al.,	2018;	Kitchin	and	Lauriault,	2014;	Taylor	et	
al.,	2014;	Kitchin	et	al.,	2011),	and	how	data	done	by	the	community	is	a	means	of	
counting	and	holding	others	to	account,	of	challenging	perceptions	of	places	and	
areas.	
During	the	community	event	to	discuss	the	Our	Manchester	project	in	November	
2016,	two	of	the	participants	who	acted	as	community	reporters,	and	did	much	of	the	
filming	of	the	interviews	with	residents,	reflected	on	how	the	data	generated	in	the	
project	might	be	used:	
Dan:	Its	sound	because	Stephens	been	giving	me	all	these	opportunities	
to	learn	and	develop	my	filming	skills	and	so	Ive	been	able	to	put	these	
skills	into	practice	with	the	Our	Manchester	project.		
Jimmy:	Stephen	doesnt	half	have	expectations	on	people	thoughto	take	
things	seriously	and	grab	 those	opportunities	and	run	with	 them.	But	 it	
means	 you	 develop	 high	 standards	 in	 response	 to	 those	
expectationsand	now	Im	not	happy	with	the	state	of	them	interviews	I	
did	with	him.	I	want	to	keep	editing	them	to	make	sure	the	quality	is	top	
notch	so	they	can	be	used	properlyin	the	community	for	like	the	sharing	
of	experiences	and	creating	 links	through	the	centre	and	that	and	also	
for	Stephens	work	in	community	development.		
Dan:	Yeah	Even	us	 just	going	round	 them	peoples	houses	and	chatting	
for	 a	 bit	 and	 asking	 some	 questions	 and	 thatthats	 doing	 something	
right	there	
(Dan	and	Jimmy,	community	reporters,	community	event,		
November	2016)		
Dan	and	Jimmy	(names	changed)	suggested	that	even	the	act	of	carrying	out	the	
interviews	in	local	residents	homes	to	ask	them	about	their	experiences	of	moving	to	
7.4	Utility	of	Our	Manchester	Data	for	the	Community		
Moss	Side,	and	how	the	area	has	changed,	is	a	form	of	making	use	of	the	data.	Adam,	
another	participant,	in	the	Our	Manchester	project,	who	had	submitted	photos	and	
talked	me	through	them	during	the	community	event	in	November	2016	reflected:	
I	dont	care	how	the	photos	get	used	as	such.	Theyre	my	memories,	what	
little	things	Ive	got	to	remind	me	of	the	days,	and	whats	been	going	on	
since	 then.	 I	 chose	 to	 share	 them	with	you	as	you	were	asking	 for	 stuff.	
And	me	coming	down	here	and	chatting	to	you	and	conjuring	up	all	these	
memorieswell	thats	an	experience	isnt	it?	If	you	can	find	some	use	out	
of	 all	 thatthen	 so	 be	 it	 Im	 just	 happy	 coming	 down	 here	 and	
sharingmaybe	find	out	what	the	others	been	up	to,	their	views	on	stuff.	
Im	not	thinking	so	much	about	use	
(Adam,	participant,	community	event,	November	2016)	
Adam	questioned	how	and	whether	the	photos	he	submitted	to	the	Our	Manchester	
project	might	be	of	use.	His	interest	lay	in	sharing	the	memories	and	experiences	of	
living	in	the	local	area,	rather	than	in	how	the	data	might	be	used.		This	raises	
questions	about	the	nature	of	data	itself,	and	how	issues	around	data	use	push	at	the	
boundaries	of	citizen	social	science	in	this	more	participatory	form	of	approach.	
The	Our	Manchester	project	explored	a	plurality	of	accounts,	voices	and	narratives	
rather	than	a	single	voice	or	history	of	the	area	being	written	and	upheld.	These	local	
data,	little,	analogue	data	constitute	forms	of	urban	intelligences	(Mattern,	2016)	that	
can	reflect	and	shape	the	people	that	generate	them,	the	relationships	they	help	to	
create,	and	the	places	they	are	about.	In	this	way,	the	Our	Manchester	project	can	be	
conceived	of	as	a	miniature,	localised,	and	non-longitudinal	version	of	Mass	
Observation,	particularly	in	its	approach	to	generating	intelligences	(Mattern,	2016)	
about	people	and	place	and	social	relations.	
An	affordance	of	citizen	social	science	is	that	it	can	allow	for	aspects	of	agency	in	the	
research	process,	whereby	participants	develop	different	situated	knowledges	for	
contesting	the	social.	The	coproduced	type	of	citizen	social	science	probed	for	in	the	
Our	Manchester	project,	appeared	to	be	a	socially	committed	and	engaged	approach	
to	doing	research.	Stephen	reflected	on	this	in	the	Our	Manchester	probe,	when	he	
stated	in	an	interview:		
7.4	Utility	of	Our	Manchester	Data	for	the	Community		
Im	an	activist	in	my	own	wayyou	get	me?	Community	work	is	by	its	
very	 thing	about	 resistance.	You	wont	get	nowhere	without	 standing	
up	to	things	and	getting	things	done	in	your	own	way.	Cos	a	lot	of	the	
time	our	interests	arent	being	taken	seriously	by	the	powers	that	be.	
So	you	know,	Ive	got	to	plug	the	gaps,	and	I	do,	I	plug	the	gaps	in	my	
own	maverick	way.	
(Stephen	interview,	Our	Manchester	probe,	October	2016)	
Stephen	viewed	his	role	in	the	project,	and	in	the	community	more	broadly,	as	a	
form	of	activism,	and	an	attempt	to	stand	up	to	things	and	get	things	done	in	your	
own	way.	He	highlighted	how	the	project	was	part	of	his	work	to		plug	the	gaps	
in	terms	of	understanding	the	needs	of	the	community,	but	he	does	so	in	his	own	
maverick	way,	as	required	by	the	situation	and	context	of	the	community	in	
which	he	works.	
The	probe	into	the	Our	Manchester	project	raised	many	questions	around	the	role	of	
the	professional	researcher,	and	traditional	social	science	research	methods,	in	more	
participatory	citizen	social	science.	In	many	ways	the	opportunity	to	share	personal	
truths	and	reflections,	rather	than	contributing	to	a	more	formalised	framework	of	
empirical	social	science	was	not	an	issue	in	the	Our	Manchester	probe.	Stephen	was	
not	concerned	about	issues	such	as	data	quality	or	whether	or	not	the	project	
constituted	social	science.	In	an	interview	with	Stephen	he	explained	how	he	
conceived	of	the	project:	
I	 think	 the	project	would	work	best	 if	 theres	a	designated	space	where	
people	 could	 go	 and	 get	 their	 issues	 off	 their	 chestyou	 get	 me?	 And	
whether	 its	 confidential	 or	 not,	 the	 choice	 is	 up	 to	 them.	 This	was	 the	
initial	idea	behind	developing	the	community	centre	on	[this]	street	way	
back	when.		Its	also	about	timing		people	can	choose	when	they	want	to	
come	 and	 get	 involved	 	 you	 get	 me?	 Thats	 why	 this	 actual	 physical	
space	 is	 so	 important,	 and	 you	 knowits	 also	 part	 of	 the	 idea	 behind	
having	a	website	etc	with	a	forum	or	comments	section	is	that	people	can	
also	log	in	from	their	homes	and	connect	or	kind	of	share	their	stuff	that	
way	too. 
(Stephen	interview,	Our	Manchester	probe,	3rd	November	2016)	
In	developing	the	Our	Manchester	project,	Stephen	intended	to	create	space,	both	a	
physical	and	potentially	an	online	space,	where	people	could	communicate	and	share	
their	stories,	accounts	and	experiences.	Links	can	be	drawn	here	to	chapter	5,	and	the	
7.5	Conclusion		
notion	of	finding	a	place	for	the	project,	and	a	place	in	which	people	can	share	their	
accounts.	That	this	might	constitute	data	that	could	be	used	comes	secondary.	
At	another	meeting	at	the	community	centre	a	week	later,	Stephen	voiced	his	
frustrations	that	they	should	be	getting	paid	to	run	a	project	like	Our	Manchester,	
rather	than	the	community	just	getting	on	and	doing	it	(meeting	November	2016).	
Undertaking	the	Our	Manchester	project	was	considered	to	be	a	crucial	aspect	of	
Stephens	work	as	a	community	development	worker	to	inform	his	understanding	of	
the	needs	of	the	community	and	issues	around	access	to	services.	Yet	it	is	not	
recognised	as	such,	being	seen	mainly	as	a	self-instigated	community	engagement	
activity.	This	highlights	the	politics	of	method,	voice	and	representation.	
7.5	Conclusion	
As	seen	in	the	previous	three	sections,	the	citizen	social	science	probes	of	this	thesis	
provide	opportunities	but	also	raise	challenges	to	the	notion	of	using	participatory	
approaches	to	data	generation.	The	data	generated	is	messy	and	biased	and	personal,	
making	the	simple	plugging	of	a	data	gap	a	far	from	straightforward	possibility.	But	it	
is	also	unique	and	otherwise	uncollected.	The	nature	of	the	data	generated	means	
that	it	is	not	necessarily	easy	to	use.	Citizen	social	science	can	disrupt	notions	of	data	
collection	and	data	use	to	solve	social	problems,	opening	up	space	for	a	knowledge	
commons	of	many	multiple	diverse	knowledges,	as	a	form	of	collection	of	urban	
intelligences	(Mattern,	2016).	Both	the	Mass	Observation	probe,	and	the	Our	
Manchester	probe,	gathered	a	plurality	of	narratives,	accounts,	documents	and	
artefacts	of	participants.		The	Empty	Houses	project	attempted	to	generate	more	
useful	data,	but	the	probe	revealed	the	complexities	of	using	such	an	approach	in	the	
context	of	homelessness	and	housing.	
As	mentioned	above,	there	is	an	inherent	politics	associated	with	the	data	generated	
in	citizen	social	science,	and	thus	its	usage.	Adkins	and	Lury	(2011)	suggest	that	
sociology	might	benefit	from	a	period	in	which	there	is	an	explicit	and	knowing	
politicization	of	measurement	and	valuation	(see	chapter	2,	section	2.3.2).	It	is	
7.5	Conclusion		
necessary	to	acknowledge	debates	about	measurement	in	the	social	sciences,	
particularly	in	discussions	about	methods.	Ruppert	and	Savage	(2012)	draw	attention	
to	the	ways	in	which	the	labour	involved	in	the	analysis	of	such	data	could	be	carried	
out	by	amateurs	as	well	as	professionals,	volunteers	as	well	as	paid	analysts.	They	
hypothesize	that	the	possibility	of	a	new	politics	of	measurement	may	be	linked	to	the	
formation	of	constituencies	of	informational	gatekeepers,	organizers	and	interpreters	
who	may	be	only	loosely,	or	not	at	all	attached	to	formal	organizations	and	companies.	
Arguably	such	speculations	are	playing	out,	and	being	debated,	in	the	field	of	digital	
sociology,	which	is	engendering	a	re-engagement	with	fundamental	sociological	
questions	and	a	reconfiguration	of	knowledge	frameworks	(Marres,	2017).	
Furthermore,	a	politics	of	measurement	is	also	taking	place	in	citizen	science,	
particularly	in	the	field	of	Earth	Observation,	for	example,	and	Citizen	Observatories,	
community-based	environmental	monitoring	and	information	systems,	where	earth	
observation	systems	are	enhanced	with	citizen-generated	observations,	and	mobile	
and	web	technologies.	
This	chapter	has	drawn	on	an	analysis	of	the	three	probes,	and	has	problematised	
and	discussed	the	notion	of	data	use	in	citizen	social	science.	It	examined	each	probe	
individually	to	see	how	the	data	generated	in	these	three	different	types	of	citizen	
social	science	is	used,	as	well	as	how	participants,	practitioners	and	policy	makers	
envisage	using	the	data	in	the	future.	Citizen	social	science	has	the	potential	to	
disrupt	policy	and	to	disrupt	official	definitions	of	data	quality,	calling	into	question	
what	data	is,	and	for	whom.	Arguably	the	ideals	and	possibilities	of	citizen	social	
science	are	not	just	about	the	collection	of	more	data	for	realist	analysis,	but	are	
focused	on	the	creation	of	a	knowledge	commons	(Hess	and	Ostrom,	2007)	where	all	
can	contribute	to	a	richer,	more	contested	understanding	of	the	everyday,	and	to	
different	situated	knowledges	(Rose,	1997;	Haraway,	1988).		
In	a	policy	context	there	appears	to	be	much	interest	in	the	potential	of	citizen	social	
science	to	generate	data	to	be	used	to	inform	policy	(Richardson,	2013;	2014),	and	in	
participants	as	a	future	resource,	as	demonstrated	by	the	traction	participatory	and	
citizen	science	approaches	have	had	in	the	international	development	sector.	Citizen	
social	science	is	perceived	to	be	a	strategic	tool	for	gathering	data	in	a	time	of	
7.5	Conclusion		
constrained	resources.	This	raised	important	questions	about	whom	ultimately	
citizen	social	science	is	for	and	who	benefits	from	its	articulation;	it	also	links	to	
wider	debates	about	the	idea	of	an	emancipatory	social	science.	The	probes	revealed	
how	citizen	social	science	has	the	potential	to	disrupt	policy	and	to	disrupt	official	
definitions	of	data	quality.	In	this	way,	questions	of	data	use	in	citizen	social	science	
are	not	straightforward.		
8.1	Introduction		
Chapter	8.	The	transformative	capacities	of	citizen	social	
science	-	a	discussion	
8.1	Introduction	
The	previous	chapter	examined	how	the	data	produced	though	a	citizen	social	science	
approach	might	be	used	and	by	whom;	it	focused	on	how	different	social	actors	view	
the	potential	use	of	citizen	social	science	data,	and	explored	how	such	an	approach	
can	assist	in	tackling	a	pressing	social	issue,	such	as	homelessness	in	the	case	of	the	
Empty	Houses	probe,	and	tackling	social	isolation	and	access	to	services	in	the	case	of	
the	Our	Manchester	probe.	It	built	on	the	elucidation	of	challenges	of	citizen	social	
science	based	methods	for	research	design	and	execution	(see	chapter	5);	and	on	the	
consideration	of	a	relational	ethics	approach	to	the	ethical	issues	raised	by	citizen	
social	science	(chapter	6).		
This	chapter	brings	together	the	three	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science	to	discuss	
the	affordances	and	capacities	that	arise,	as	well	as	the	tensions,	and	implications.	It	
reflects	on	the	effects	of	citizen	social	science,	and	how	it	can	reconfigure	knowledge	
production	processes.	Facet	methodology	uses	a	gemstone	metaphor	to	examine	
different	facets	of	a	phenomenon	(Mason,	2011),	so	in	this	instance,	the	previous	
three	empirical	chapters	have	examined	different	facets	of	citizen	social	science,	
namely	the	challenges	for	research	design	and	execution;	ethical	issues	raised;	and	
lastly	how	the	data	generated	from	citizen	social	science	projects	might	be	used,	and	
by	whom.	Whilst	these	facets	are	seemingly	disparate,	and	involve	different	ways	of	
seeing,	using	such	a	methodological	approach	aims	to	create	a	strategically	
illuminating	set	of	insights	(Mason,	2011)	into	citizen	social	science	as	a	whole,	and	
contribute	to	debates	about	the	politics	of	method.	
The	discussion	is	structured	in	the	following	way:	it	begins	by	establishing	the	
implications	of	citizen	social	science	for	individual	participants,	and	how	
opportunities	for	reflection	and	meaning	making	can	affect	the	individual.	The	third	
section	looks	at	how	citizen	social	science	entails	challenges	and	potential	for	social	
8.2	Implications	of	citizen	social	science	for	the	individual	participants		
science	research.	The	fourth	section	entails	a	discussion	of	the	potential	of	citizen	
social	science	to	transform	our	understanding	of	the	social,	and	thereby	society.	
These	considerations	of	the	differentiated	implications	of	citizen	social	science	for	the	
individual,	social	science	research,	and	wider	society,	serve	to	clarify	the	
transformative	capacities	of	citizen	social	science	as	a	method	in	practice.		
8.2	Implications	of	citizen	social	science	for	the	individual	
participants	
Citizen	social	science	is	perceived	as	a	mobilising	tool	to	engage	mass	participation,	
generating	data	on	a	widespread	scale	(see	chapters	2	and	3).	However,	there	is	a	
need	to	move	beyond	the	assumption	that	participation	must	be	mass-based.	Instead,	
a	range	of	different	practices	could	be	constructed	that	address	peoples	knowledge,	
experience	and	passions	to	spot	problems,	design	policies,	work	on	drafts	or	
participate	in	implementation	(Noveck,	2016).	This	necessarily	involves	
acknowledging	the	distributed	expertise	of	a	wide	variety	of	different	actors	and	
participants,	beyond	the	confines	of	academia.	It	is	the	knowledge-building	aspects	of	
crowdsourcing	that	are	frequently	missed	out	in	discussions	about	its	potential	
(Noveck,	2016).	It	is	these	aspects	that	can	enable	the	location	of	missing	information,	
the	generation	of	alternate	hypotheses,	the	undertaking	of	tasks,	and	more	generally	
focus	peoples	attention	on	an	issue.	Methods	are	performative	and	participation	
necessarily	affects	people	and	the	world	being	generated	through	them	(Oman,	2017;	
2016;	Law,	2007).	Furthermore,	citizen	social	science	appears	to	be	disruptively	
transformative	of	the	boundary	between	participation	and	expertise,	rather	than	
between	different	types	of	lay	and	expert	perspectives	in	doing	social	science.	
8.2.1	Opportunities	for	reflection		
The	probes	revealed	the	dual	affordances	of	citizen	social	science	to	generate	
opportunities	for	reflection,	as	well	as	the	generation	of	new	data.	The	probes	show	
how	participants	are	invited	or	engaged	in	data	generation	in	different	ways	in	the	
forms	of	citizen	social	science	probed	for.	Reflection	is	an	inherent	part	of	the	
directive	responses	in	the	Mass	Observation	probe	that	have	been	analysed,	since	the	
8.2	Implications	of	citizen	social	science	for	the	individual	participants		
directives	were	selected	on	the	basis	of	whether	they	asked	participants	about	the	
process	of	taking	part	in	Mass	Observation,	and	participants	thoughts	on	that.	
Reflection	is	also	inherent	in	the	ways	in	which	the	walking	interviews	were	
conducted	in	the	probe	into	the	Empty	Houses	project.	The	probes	were	designed	to	
allow	participants	to	contribute	to	the	process	and	to	trigger	a	dialogue	and	
collaboration	to	translate	the	meaning	of	the	data	generated	in	the	probes	(Crabtree	
et	al.,	2003).	The	approaches	of	the	probes	encouraged	participants	to	reflect	on	and	
articulate	important	personal,	social	and	technological	features	of	their	everyday	
lives	(Crabtree	et	al.,	2003),	their	personal	anthropologies	(Sheridan	et	al.,	2000)	
(see	chapter	5,	section	5.2.1),	and	to	work	it	out	together	(see	chapters	6	and	7).	
The	probes	necessarily	stimulate	an	acknowledgement	of	different	situated	
knowledges	(Haraway,	1998;	Rose,	1997),	or	more	specifically	that	knowledge	is	
partial.	A	walking	interviewee,	from	the	probe	into	the	Empty	Houses	project,	
indicated:	
by	doing	it,	it	makes	you	think	more	about	it.	
(WI6,	December	2016)	
This	walking	interviewee	suggested	that	participating	in	citizen	social	science	can	
affect	the	individual	by	engendering	a	greater	level	of	reflection	about	an	issue,	and	
the	generation	of	active	research	subjects	as	suggested	by	a	practitioner	in	chapter	
3,	and	distinctive	forms	of	agency	(Savage,	2013).	Arguably	participation	always	
affects	those	who	take	part	as	they	come	to	terms	with	what	is	around	them,	and	even	
if	it	does	not	transform	participants	into	researchers,	there	is	still	the	potential	for	
new	ways	of	seeing	and	for	new	epistemologies	to	be	produced.	Another	walking	
interviewee	in	the	Empty	Houses	probe	reflected	on	this	suggesting	that	such	an	
approach	is:	
		 a	form	of	awareness	raising	rather	than	a	data	collection	method.		
(WI5,	December	2016)	
In	participating	in	the	project,	there	was	a	sense	from	the	walking	interviews	that	
being	tasked	to	spot	empty	houses	enabled	participants	to	re-engage	with	their	local	
environment	or	to	see	it	in	a	new	light,	and	to	generate	meaningful	knowledge	about	
place.	Participation	can	allow	for	greater	reflection,	and	a	more	engaged	and	
potentially	critical	approach	to	data	generation;	but	why	is	this	good	or	important?	
8.2	Implications	of	citizen	social	science	for	the	individual	participants		
Citizen	social	science	can	also	introduce	experiences	and	personal	stances	into	social	
science	in	ways	that	other	methods	cannot.	Gross	(2007,	p.	751)	suggests	that	
whenever	new	knowledge	arises	the	perceived	amount	of	non-knowledge	increases	
at	least	proportionally.	This	is	linked	to	the	notion	that	every	state	of	knowledge	
opens	up	even	more	notions	of	what	is	not	known	(Krohn,	2001,	p.	8141).	Thus,	it	is	
argued	that	new	knowledge	gives	a	person	more	possibilities	to	identify	new	
unknowns,	a	potentially	positive	affordance	of	citizen	social	science	as	an	approach.		
There	is	a	continued	confusion	and	conceptual	conflation	around	reflexivity	in	social	
science	discourse.	Slack	(2000)	draws	attention	to	the	problematic	and	pervasive	
nature	of	reflexivity	in	sociology,	calling	for	a	reflexivity	of	practical	actions.	He	
suggests	that	sociologists	have	sought	to	manage	reflexivity	as	opposed	to	
recognising	that	it	is	an	essential	feature	of	members'	accounts.	Lynch	(1993,	pp.	26-
27)	however,	argues	that	reflexivity	is	an	unavoidable	feature	of	the	way	actionsare	
performed,	made	sense	of	and	incorporated	into	social	settings.	This	literature	
focuses	on	reflexivity	in	sociology,	rather	than	necessarily	on	how	to	engender	
reflexivity	amongst	those	who	might	not	consider	themselves	to	be	experts.		The	
probes	suggest	that	the	particular	type	of	reflexivity	engendered	is	a	combination	of	
the	performance	of	social	order,	as	in	ethnomethodological	accounts,	and	a	matter	of	
critical	reflection	as	discussed	above.		
If	social	science	expertise	involves	a	certain	level	of	critique,	prompting	those	who	
would	not	consider	themselves	of	be	experts,	to	think	more	about	the	process,	citizen	
social	science	opens	the	research	process	up	to	others	to	reflect	on.	The	question	
remains	of	whether	citizen	social	science	forges	new	connections,	and	
horizontalises	the	analysts.	The	probes	suggest	that	it	depends	very	much	on	
exactly	how	citizens	are	positioned,	and	how	they	position	themselves.	The	
detail	of	how	the	projects	are	organised	matter	immensely.	This	necessarily	means	
citizen	social	science	cannot	be	a	matter	of	simply	tapping	into	peoples	everyday	
activities.	Participation	in	citizen	social	science	has	to	be	a	burden	rather	than	a	form	
of	piggybacking	on	peoples	insights	as	they	go	about	their	daily	activities,	or	the	
repurposing	of	peoples	knowledge	in	a	top	down	fashion.	This	burden	is	
transformative,	in	the	way	that	doing	social	science	makes	you	see	the	world	
8.2	Implications	of	citizen	social	science	for	the	individual	participants		
differently.	Such	methods	afford	encounters	and	explorations	of	our	relationship	
with	current	and	historical	authority,	while	constituting	new	experiences	in	the	life	
repertoire	of	[participants]	(Crivellaro	et	al.,	2015,	p.9).	Such	explorations	enable	
publics	to	constitute	their	own	sense	of	agency	(Fowler	and	Biekart,	2008;	Boyte,	
2005),	and	are	a	step	towards	the	building	of	collective	capacities	that	are	in	dialogue	
with	the	institutions	that	can	actualize	civic	will	(Crivellaro	et	al.,	2015,	p.9).		Such	
suggestions	link	to	the	reflections	of	participants	in	both	Mass	Observation	and	the	
Empty	Houses	project	who	considered	the	difference	between	the	solitary	experience	
of	reporting	and	the	collective	club	of	Mass	Observation,	or	the	notion	of	reporting	
for	a	common	purpose	(see	chapter	5.3).	
However,	Richardson	(2014,	p.42)	warns	that	well-intentioned	attempts	to	recognise	
the	value	of	peoples	lived	experience	and	experiential	expertise	could,	perversely,	
reinforce	the	exclusion	of	citizen	researchers	from	professionals.	This	is	problematic	
for	citizen	social	science	in	the	sense	that	it	draws	attention	to	the	tensions	around	
notions	of	expertise.	Professional	researchers	do	not	simply	rely	on	their	own	
experiences	for	data.	As	Richardson	(2014,	p.42)	notes,	thoughtful	speculation	is	an	
analytical	skill	which	has	the	potential	to	be	transformed	into	scientific	analysis	using	
data.	Furthermore,	in	Powells	(2018)	data	walks,	designed	to	allow	for	reflection	on	
the	design	of	smart	cities,	she	highlights	how	particular	discourses	of	data	seemed	to	
frame	a	calculative	exercise	of	citizenship,	where	people	were	able	to	develop	their	
own	expertise	and	perspective	in	relation	to	the	ways	that	processes	of	datafication	
influence	their	spaces	of	everyday	engagement	(Powell,	2018,	p.7).	This	relates	to	the	
challenges	citizen	social	science	raises	for	research	design	and	execution,	as	
presented	in	chapter	5,	particularly	in	terms	of	the	difficulties	for	participants	to	find	
a	place	between	endogenous	social	research	practices	and	scientific	analysis.	
If	participants	are	not	involved	in	critical	analysis	and	other	parts	of	the	research	
process	beyond	data	generation,	they	will	only	ever	be	participants,	and	not	co-
researchers.	Furthermore,	they	are	often	aware	of	this,	in	terms	of	knowing	that	they	
are	not	neutral	observers;	they	are	inherently	aware	of	their	own	bias.	At	best	
citizen	social	science	offers	participants	an	opportunity	to	reflect	upon	and	shape	
what	data	matters	to	them,	what	data	should	be,	and	how	data	shapes	our	lives.	At	
8.2	Implications	of	citizen	social	science	for	the	individual	participants		
worst	it	leads	to	relativist	angst	that	nothing	can	truly	be	known	about	the	social	
world	in	which	we	live.		
8.2.2	Indistinct	roles	and	responsibilities	
Citizen	social	science	reconfigures	roles	and	responsibilities	in	the	research	process,	
and	makes	participants	more	aware	of	the	issues	at	stake.	However,	the	complexities	
associated	with	defining	and	understanding	what	constitutes	terms	such	as	the	
public,	communities,	citizens,	non-professionals,	lay	people	must	not	be	overlooked	
(Richardson,	2014,	p.	33).	The	power	to	define	these	concepts,	and	the	roles	
associated	with	them	are	not	clearly	demarcated	or	defined.	It	is	also	important	to	
note	that	some	individuals	will	have	roles	which	traverse	boundaries,	and	such	roles	
are	not	as	clearly	demarcated	as	we	might	be	led	to	believe.				
Citizen	social	science	opens	up	the	potential	for	greater	citizen	involvement	but	also	
blurs	the	roles	between	researcher	and	researched.	The	experience	of	participating	
depends	very	much	on	the	context	of	how	a	project	was	set	up.	The	politics	of	co-
production	have	been	under-acknowledged,	and	how	a	set	of	broader	societal	
inequalities	may	have	negative	professional	consequences	for	researchers	or	
participants	(risks),	or	may	prevent	research	from	achieving	its	desired	effects	of	
genuinely	promoting	egalitarian	social	outcomes	(limits)	(Flinders	et	al.,	2016,	p.	
261).	The	power	dynamics	of	citizenship	are	changing	but	many	citizens	are	aware	of	
this,	especially	in,	for	example,	the	Mass	Observation	Project,	but	also	in	the	Empty	
Houses	Project,	where	participants	were	concerned	about	how	the	data	would	be	
used	and	therefore	did	not	want	to	report,	and	to	a	certain	extent	the	Our	Manchester	
Project,	where	participants	wanted	to	challenge	the	narratives	told	about	their	
neighbourhood.	Citizen	social	science	creates	new	responsibilities	for	participants	
and	researchers	alike.	If	the	notable	distinction	between	expert	from	non-expert	in	
social	science	research	is	critique,	the	probes	show	that	participants	are	very	much	
aware	of	critical	perspectives	and	willing	to	offer	them.	However,	the	way	that	
traditional	social	science	is	done,	with	critical	analysis	being	the	preserve	of	the	
trained	expert,	means	that	many	participants	do	not	feel	that	it	is	their	role	to	do	the	
analysis.		
8.3	Implications	of	citizen	social	science	for	social	science	research		
Citizen	social	science	can	rearrange	the	power	dynamics	of	citizenship;	it	can	also	
create	a	burden	on	the	individual	participants	by	risking	legitimising	the	failings	of	
the	welfare	state.	Narratives	of	duty	to	take	part,	and	to	do	your	bit	necessarily	
place	a	greater	burden	on	the	individual,	and	raise	questions	about	the	supposed	
emancipatory	potential	of	participatory	methods	such	as	citizen	social	science.	It	is	
crucial	to	recognise	that	in	many	instances	of	citizen	social	science	based	approaches,	
the	power	dynamics	are	not	equal;	nor	are	they	really	trying	to	be	in	terms	of	
crowdsourcing	approaches.	Clarity	from	the	outset,	as	far	as	possible,	is	necessary	to	
mitigate	against	the	blurring	of	roles	in	the	research	process.	If	citizen	social	science	
based	approaches	can	be	articulated	as	operating	predominantly	at	one	level	of,	for	
example,	Haklays	(2013)	typology	of	participation,	or	indeed	with	consideration	of	
Arnsteins	(1969)	ladder	of	participation,	this	can	help	to	clarify	the	particular	roles	
and	responsibilities	of	those	involved.		
8.3	Implications	of	citizen	social	science	for	social	science	research		
Citizen	social	science	has	the	potential	to	constitute	reflexive	subjects,	engaged	in	
knowledge	production	about	social	orders	in	a	complex	world,	as	they	enact	those	
very	orders	and	worlds.	Suchman	(2011)	suggests	that	societys	everyday	practices	of	
ordering	and	rendering	the	social	world	intelligible	are	an	integral	part	of	our	subject	
matter	(Garfinkel,	2002).	In	this	way,	social	science	methods	are	radically	reflexive.	
Suchman	(2011:	p.22)	also	suggests	that	our	own	work	of	making	sense	of	the	world	
relies	upon	the	same	basic	competencies	through	which	its	intelligibility	is	
collectively	enacted	in	the	first	place.	And	so	method	and	theory	are	not	the	
exclusive	province	of	the	social	scientist.		If	this	is	the	case,	what	are	the	implications	
for	social	science	research?	
Citizen	social	science	can	open	up	a	broader	space	for	contestation	of	troublesome	
issues,	such	as	housing,	and	communities	in	deprived	areas,	as	demonstrated	in	
Chapter	5		7.	The	approach	to	citizen	social	science,	as	developed	in	the	Our	
Manchester	project,	involves	a	questioning	of	the	norms	in	wider	society	and	the	way	
in	which	knowledge	is	produced.	This	links	to	debates	on	the	importance	of	being	
able	to	validate	data	in	citizen	science	projects,	so	that	participants	and	researchers	
8.3	Implications	of	citizen	social	science	for	social	science	research		
might	be	able	to	use	the	data	generated	to	make	a	robust	case	for	change.	In	the	
Empty	Houses	probe,	it	is	possible	to	validate	the	data	with	official	data	on	empty	
houses.	However,	the	question	of	data	validation	in	Mass	Observation,	and	also	in	the	
Our	Manchester	project	is	far	more	complex.  	
The	affordances	of	citizen	social	science,	in	terms	of	what	such	an	approach	allows	
for,	are	that	it	can	lead	to	an	opening	up	of	traditional	social	research	processes	to	
include	the	situated	knowledges	(Haraway,	1988)	of	participants.	In	many	ways	this	
returns	to	the	debates	raised	in	the	review	of	the	literature	in	chapter	2,	around	Palen	
et	al.s	(2011)	concept	of	actionable	helpful	information	and	bounded	rationalities.	
However,	questions	remain	around	whether	bounded	rationalities	are	adequate	in	a	
world	where	complexity	rules	in	risky	ways.		
Citizen	social	science	has	the	potential	to	reframe	social	science	methods	with	respect	
for	the	personal	truths	as	a	strong	complement	to	orthodox	social	science.	This	is	
not	to	say	that	personal	truths	are	epistemologically	ground	truths,	but	rather	they	
are	valuable	situated	knowledges	(Haraway,	1988)	as	well	as,	or	additional	to,	
empirical	phenomena.	It	is	both	a	respect	for,	and	a	challenge	to,	traditional	social	
science	methods,	and	questions	the	monopoly	on	truth	and	insight	of	the	expert	
position.	It	is	therefore	about	valuing	the	potential	quality	of	the	different	situated	
knowledges	produced.	
Citizen	social	science	can	sit	alongside	the	academy	and	alongside	other	disciplines,	
as	a	complementary,	alongside	rather	than	counter-hegemonic	approach	to	doing	
social	science	together	(McQuillan).	Giddens	(1990,	p.15)	idea	of	the	double	
hermeneutic	and	reflexive	role	of	sociology	as	a	description	of	society	that	
iteratively	shapes	it,	suggests	that	this	could	be	a	transformative	engagement,	not	in	
the	sense	of	a	revolutionary	transformation	of	social	science	and	society,	but	a	more	
gentle,	but	pervasive	socialisation	of	everything,	from	everyday	life	to	science	and	
engineering.	Socialisation	in	this	context	refers	to	the	ways	in	which	everything	can	be	
perceived	to	be	socially	structured.	However,	how	transformative	is	a	
complementary	citizen	social	science	that	moves	alongside	existing	approaches?	
Does	it	change	how	we	do	social	science	together	in	ways	that	can	transform	
societies?		
8.3	Implications	of	citizen	social	science	for	social	science	research		
By	acknowledging	provisional	knowledges,	citizen	social	science	has	the	opportunity	
to	build	a	strong	complement	to	orthodox	science	rather	than	experiencing	its	own	
experiential	and	reflective	aspects	as	a	source	of	anxiety	(McQuillan,	2014).	
Richardson	(2014)	draws	attention	to	the	importance	of	not	displacing	one	form	of	
knowledge	and	expertise	with	another,	integrating	lived	experience	as	a	form	of	data	
in	the	method,	rather	than	personal	experiences	substituting	for	a	method.	The	
affordances	of	citizen	social	science	are	the	ways	in	which	such	an	approach	values	
the	everyday,	mundane	social	inquiry,	which	has	the	potential	to	scaffold	together	as	
a	more	bottom	up	social	science.		
As	reiterated	in	the	previous	empirical	chapters,	the	practical	realities	of	undertaking	
citizen	social	science	do	not	always	live	up	to	its	normative	ideals.	Adkins	(2017,	
p.117)	calls	for	the	adoption	of	alternative	stances	towards	sociological	data,	that	is,	
to	recordings	of	social	life.	She	posits	that	such	stances	might	comprise	one	element	
of	a	speculative	research	agenda.	In	this	way	she	positions	the	Mass	Observation	
materials	as	a	set	of	recordings	of	events	in	time	which,	when	placed	in	proximity	
with	the	present,	will	disclose	social	change	(Adkins,	2017,	p.123).	She	questions	
whether	this	data	should	simply	be	understood	as	recordings	of	the	past,	which	can	
be	called	on	to	produce	then/now	narratives	and	accounts	of	social	change.	Are	
alternative	stances	towards	this	data	possible?	And	if	so	what	might	such	alternatives	
look	like?	Citizen	social	science	has	the	potential	to	be	transformative	of	social	
science	because,	in	politics	of	measurement	debates,	it	highlights	the	need	for	an	
alternative	stance	towards	data	that	respects	personal	truths	and	other	eventful	
temporalities	and	recordings	of	social	life.	
It	is	useful	to	bring	the	discussion	back	to	Winch	(1958)	here,	and	his	reflections	on	
the	everydayness	of	understanding.	It	is	possible	to	suggest	that	citizen	social	
science	should	perhaps	drop	the	science	aspect	of	its	title,	as	suggested	by	a	walking	
interviewee	above.	Winchs	line	of	thinking	about	the	very	idea	of	social	science,	
suggests	that	there	is	and	can	be	no	elite	of	independent	experts	in	(the	genuine	
content	of)	social	science.	We	are	all	practical	expertsas,	very	roughly,	we	are	all	
experts	in	the	practical	use	of	the	English	language	(Hutchinson	et	al.,	2008).	In	this	
8.3	Implications	of	citizen	social	science	for	social	science	research		
sense,	social	study	is	above	all	something	that	we	do	most	of	the	time,	as	humans.	The	
social	studies,	unlike	the	social	sciences,	not	only	begin	but	also	end	with	non-
academics,	with	(competent)	members	of	society.	In	this	sense	citizen	social	science	is	
an	acknowledgement	that	expertise	in	everyday	life	is	differentiated	and	spread,	
rather	than	a	binary	scale,	and	this	has	great	potential	for	social	science.	With	this	
insight,	social	science	could	be	transformed	along	a	spectrum	of	different	directions,	
from	augmenting	the	evidence	base	for	social	science	through	citizen	data	collection	
to	mainstreaming	and	democratising	social	theory	and	method.	It	could	introduce	
citizen	perspectives	into	a	social	science	focused	on	researching	issues	and	structures,	
and	a	collective-scientific	search	for,	and	contestation	of	normative	ideas	of	better,	
alternative	forms	of	social	life.	These	might	be	more	sustainable,	equal,	and	fair	forms	
of	social	life.	In	this,	citizen	social	science	is	unlike	participatory	action	research,	
which	tends	to	maintain	some	of	these	false	distinctions	of	expertise.		
What	does	good	and	better	look	like?	A	plurality	of	voices	and	perspectives	is	
necessary	in	defining	what	better	means	and	in	contesting	the	social	and	how	it	
is	made.	This	relates	to	the	probe	into	the	Empty	Houses	project	which	was	
designed	to	generate	citizen	data	on	empty	houses,	to	complement,	or	potentially	
contest,	the	official	statistics	on	empty	houses,	so	as	to	ask	questions	about	the	
processes	of	data	generation,	with	the	aim	of	making	the	data	potentially	more	
meaningful	to	participants.	This	argument	relates	to	the	critique	of	the	privileged	
position	of	the	researcher	-	the	researcher	is	the	one	that	normally	always	gets	to	do	
the	interesting	bit	(the	analysis).	Some	participants	reflected	on	this,	stating	that	
they	would	like	to	be	involved	in	analysis	too,	whereas	other	participants	were	
content	to	just	be	involved	in	data	collection,	as	raised	in	the	probe	into	the	Empty	
Houses	project,	particularly	through	the	walking	interviews.	Ruppert	and	Savage	
(2012)	endorse	a	critical	engagement	in	the	politics	of	these	new	forms	of	data	and	
analysis,	not	an	internal	politics	but	one	that	engages	with	the	various	communities	of	
analysts	and	interpreters	to	provide	reflexive	accounts	of	enacting	versions	of	the	
social	world.	For	example,	this	may	involve	engagement	in	a	new	politics	of	
measurement	that	brings	into	question	the	assumption	that	popular,	anonymous	
and	collective	analyses	are	infallible	or	transparent.	It	could	also	involve	analysis	of	
the	underlying	normativities	of	unbiased	or	neutral	analyses.		
8.3	Implications	of	citizen	social	science	for	social	science	research		
The	probe	into	the	Our	Manchester	project	revealed	that	the	more	participatory	the	
form	of	citizen	social	science,	the	further	away	it	moves	from	traditional	social	
science,	and	the	greater	the	focus	on	data	use	in	terms	of	advocacy,	relationship	
building,	and	articulating	the	particular	needs	or	requirements	of	a	community.	The	
focus	thus	moves	further	way	from	data	as	such,	and	closer	to	agency	and	affecting	
change.		Links	can	be	drawn	here	to	the	walking	interviews	in	the	Empty	Houses	
probe.	This	also	resonates	with	Mulkays	(1991,	p.	xix)	call	for	sociologys	ultimate	
task	as	being	not	as	that	of	reporting	neutrally	the	facts	about	an	objective	social	
world,	but	as	that	of	engaging	actively	in	the	world	in	order	to	create	the	possibilities	
of	alternative	forms	of	social	life	(my	emphasis).		
This	aim	of	creating	possibilities	of	alternative	forms	of	social	life	has	a	distinctly	
utopian	edge	to	it.	Levitas	(2013)	begins	her	analysis	of	utopia	as	method	by	quoting	
H.	G.	Wells,	who	agued	that	utopias	are	the	proper	and	distinctive	method	of	
sociology.	Whilst	she	acknowledges	the	different	context	in	which	she	writes,	
compared	to	Wells	in	1906,	Levitas	(2013,	p.xi)	suggests	that	utopia	facilitates	
genuinely	holistic	thinking	about	possible	futures,	combined	with	reflexivity,	
provisionality	and	democratic	engagement	with	the	principles	and	practices	of	those	
futures.	Furthermore,	she	argues	that	the	reconstitution	of	society	in	imagination	
and	in	reality	is	pressing	need,	given	the	current	challenges	facing	society	(Levitas,	
2011,	p.xi).	We	need	better	methods	in	social	science	research,	and	greater	scope	to	
make	sense	of	amount	of	data	being	produced.	The	creation	of	data	appears	to	be	
happening	at	an	extremely	large	scale	in	commercial	research	(Thrift,	2011;	Savage	
and	Burrows,	2007).	The	pressing	need	of	the	current	context	is	to	have	methods	that	
build	capacity	to	make	sense	of	and	to	analyse	it.	Felt	and	Wynne	(2007,	p.	77-	78)	
argue	that	under	appropriate	conditions,	citizens	can	thus	be	participants,	critics	and	
knowledge-creators	in	an	extended	model	of	knowledge-production	and	collective	
reasoning.	
Citizen	social	science	needs	to	be	conceptualised	and	framed,	in	the	context	of	a	
renewal	of	interest	in	the	politics	of	method	in	the	social	sciences.	The	position	
presented	by	the	work	on	the	Social	Life	of	Methods	highlights	how	questions	of	
8.4	Implications	of	citizen	social	science	for	society		
method	raise	fundamental	theoretical	questions	about	the	limits	of	knowledge	itself	
and	reflect	on	new	ways	of	understanding	the	relationship	between	the	cultural,	
social,	and	material	(Savage,	2013,	p.18). Furthermore,	such	a	positioning	returns	to	
the	crisis	of	imagination	that	Gane	(2012,	p.158)	reflects	on,	the	fetishisation	of	
readymade	quantitative	and	qualitative	methods	that	is	more	apparent	now	than	it	
was	when	Mills	wrote	The	Sociological	Imagination	in	the	late	1950s.	The	
implications	of	citizen	social	science	present	an	opportunity	for	engaging	the	
collective	sociological	imagination	and	opening	social	science	methods	up	to	public	
involvement	is	an	opportunity	for	a	more	committed	or	socially	engaged	practice	that	
enables	citizens	to	connect	private	troubles	and	public	histories.		
There	are	opportunities	for	social	science	research	in	this	period	of	experimentation	
with	measurement	and	value	(Adkins	and	Lury,	2011).	Adkins	and	Lury	(2011,	p.11)	
suggest	that	there	is	something	to	be	gained	for	sociology	from	a	period	in	which	
there	is	an	explicit	and	knowing	politicization	of	measurement	and	valuation.	This	
question	returns	us	to	the	issue	of	a	possible	politics	or	ethics	of	measurement,	and	
links	to	why	citizen	social	science	is	important	to	consider	now,	in	the	current	context.		
8.4	Implications	of	citizen	social	science	for	society	
It	has	been	suggested	that	citizen	social	science	has	the	potential	to	provide	a	basis	
for	forging	a	new	relationship	between	the	social	science	academy	and	society	
(Housely	et	al.,	2014).	There	is	a	sense	of	the	potential	of	citizen	social	science	as	a	
means	for	engaging	with	different	audiences	in	the	production	of	knowledge,	beyond	
instrumental	attempts	to	develop	data	sets	for	use	by	others	in	more	expert	roles.	In	
relation	to	citizen	science,	Couvet	and	Prevot	(2015)	discuss	the	different	roles	of	
citizen	science	depending	on	the	reciprocal	relationships	between	the	research	
community	and	civil	society.	They	suggest	that	beyond	collecting	and	interpreting	
data,	citizen	science	initiatives	can	also		
forge	new	relationships	between	volunteers	and	the	natural	world	and	
its	 conservation,	 and	 also	 stimulate	 social	 relationships	 between	
8.4	Implications	of	citizen	social	science	for	society		
citizens,	 scientists	 and	 decision-makers	 to	 underpin	 renewal	 in	
biodiversity	 governance.	 Such	 renewal	 could	 speak	 to	 the	 need	 to	
connect	 a	 mode	 of	 knowledge	 where	 science	 monopolizes	 'the	 truth'	
and	an	alternative	mode,	where	the	experiential	knowledge	in	the	civil	
society	is	mobilized.	
Arguably	the	implications	of	citizen	social	science	for	society	have	the	potential	to	
play	out	along	these	lines,	particularly	since	citizen	social	science	values	a	bottom	up	
social	inquiry	that	acknowledges	experiential	knowledge,	as	discussed	earlier	in	this	
chapter.	Furthermore,	an	increasing	involvement	of	stakeholders	can	lead	to	
participative	inquiry	at	a	bigger	scale,	hence	to	participatory	action	research	
(Chevalier	and	Buckles,	2013;	Reason,	1994).	Citizen	social	science	serves	as	a	
potential	way	to	trigger	and	engender	an	inquiring	society.	By	abandoning	the	
distinction	between	producers	and	consumers	of	(social)	scientific	knowledge,	
movements	such	as	citizen	science	and	citizen	social	science	attempt	to	bring	about	
an	inquiring	society,	where	participation	in	(and	scrutiny	of)	scientific	research	is	
open	to	all	(Dennis,	2017).	Questions	can	be	raised	about	the	extent	to	which	it	is	
possible	to	realise	such	an	idealistic	vision.	How	possible	it	is	to	design	for	an	
inquiring	society?	Can	it	be	enacted	or	performed?	The	probes	presented	in	the	
empirical	work	of	the	thesis	suggest	that	an	inquiring	society	can	be	designed	for,	and	
that	the	asking	of	questions,	and	engaging	the	sociological	imagination,	is	a	potential	
effect	of	participating	in	citizen	social	science.		
Returning	to	the	notion	of	utopia	as	method,	Buscher	(2017)	argues	that	utopia	
creates	rich	ground	for	contestation,	as	one	persons	utopia	can	be	anothers	dystopia,	
and	innovative	visions	followed	through	produce	unintended	consequences.	In	the	
current	context	of	the	ruins	of	late	capitalism,	social	scientists	have	been	advocating	a	
turn	to	collective	experimentation	(Felt	and	Wynne,	2007).	Citizen	social	science	
based	methods	have	the	potential	to	contribute	towards	a	period	of	collective	
experimentation	and	contestation	of	the	social.	This	necessarily	goes	beyond	notions	
of	creating	a	knowledge	commons	(Hess	and	Ostrom,	2007),	which	arguably	risks	
remaining	stuck	in	a	wisdom	of	crowds	argument.	Felt	and	Wynne	(2007,	p.	11)	
observe	that	the	narratives	and	imaginaries	in	the	science	and	governance	domain	
8.5	Conclusion		
urgently	need	to	be	subjected	to	more	critical,	open	reflection,	especially	in	the	light	
of	the	global	economic,	scientific	and	political	changes	besetting	early	21st	century	
Europe.	They	argue	that	it	is	in	the	realisation	of	diversity	and	multiplicity,	and	in	
the	robust	and	distributed	character	of	publics,	their	capacities	and	imaginations,	that	
we	may	justly	conceive	robust	and	sustainable	pathways	for	the	future	(Felt	and	
Wynne,	2007,	p.	12).	The	implications	of	citizen	social	science-based	methods	are	that	
they	might	contribute	towards	acknowledging	the	distributed	nature	of	expertise,	
and	allow	for	a	wider	range	of	publics	to	participate	in	contesting	the	social	and	how	
it	is	made.		
8.5	Conclusion	
This	chapter	has	discussed	the	three	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science,	as	explored	in	
the	empirical	work	of	the	thesis,	and	attempted	to	draw	out	the	implications	that	
arose	in	the	process.	It	has	discussed	how	citizen	social	science	is	reconfiguring	
knowledge	production,	and	the	potential	effects	of	this	for	individuals,	social	science	
research,	and	society.	The	process	of	participating	in	citizen	social	science	and	
generating	data	constitutes	a	form	of	meaning	making	and	therefore	is	an	
epistemology,	a	politics	and	an	ethics.	Citizen	social	science	can	allow	for	
opportunities	for	people	to	reflect	on	social	life,	social	orders	and	social	structures.	In	
allowing	for	such	opportunities,	citizen	social	science	can	challenge	the	top	down	
approach	to	data	collection	and	generation,	potentially	providing	more	valid	research	
questions	and	an	opportunity	for	sharing	personal	truths		or	acknowledging	
different	situated	knowledges	(Haraway,	1998).	This	has	the	potential	to	scaffold	
towards	a	more	bottom-up	social	science	that	values	mundane,	everyday	inquiry.	
The	discussion	set	out	in	this	chapter	explored	how	citizen	social	science	adds	to	the	
repertoire	of	methods	in	the	social	sciences	and	does	so	at	a	particularly	crucial	time	
when	so	much	of	the	focus	has	been	on	bigger,	faster	data	in	real	time.	Citizen	social	
science-based	methods	can	be	disruptively	transformative:	for	the	individual	
participant	in	terms	of	how	citizens	can	become	engaged	with	the	issues	raised	by	the	
research;	for	the	discipline,	in	the	way	that	it	acknowledges	and	values	differentiated	
expertise;	and,	moreover	policy	makers	are	beginning	to	take	such	data	seriously.	
8.5	Conclusion		
Jasanoff	(2007)	suggested	that	science	fixes	our	attention	on	the	knowable,	leading	to	
an	over-dependence	on	fact-finding	and	that	we	need	disciplined	methods	to	
accommodate	the	partiality	of	scientific	knowledge	and	to	act	under	irredeemable	
uncertainty,	what	she	calls	technologies	of	humility.	These	technologies	compel	us	to	
reflect	on	the	sources	of	ambiguity,	indeterminacy	and	complexity;	they	also	allow	us	
to	overlook	them	(Oman,	2017).	There	are	calls	for	the	supplementation	of	science	
with	the	experiential,	with	personal	truths	and	modes	of	knowing	that	are	often	
pushed	aside	in	expanding	scientific	understanding	and	technological	capacity	
(Jasanoff,	2007)	and	how	that	is	emerging	in	disaster	situations	(Bscher	et	al.,	2017).		
In	this	way	citizen	social	science	allows	us	to	improve	our	methods	so	that	they	might	
serve	us	better,	by	generating	and	allowing	for	the	asking	of	important	questions	
about	knowledge	production,	engaging	in	reflections	on	the	politics	of	knowledge	
production.	In	particular,	it	prompted	the	asking	of	important	questions	in	social	
science	methods	around	the	nature	of	data,	who	is	allowed	to	collect	it,	who	can	
analyse	it	and	how	such	data	can	be	used.	Whilst	such	questions	are	exploratory	and	
should	be	recognised	as	valuable	outcomes	in	their	own	right,	they	should	also	only	
be	ignored	at	peril.		
9.1	Introduction		
Chapter	9.	Conclusion	
9.1	Introduction		
This	thesis	argues	that	citizen	social	science	is	a	valid	concept	and	tool	of	enquiry	
which	can	take	multiple	forms,	but	one	that	ultimately	is	of	greatest	value	when	it	
operates	at	small	scale.	The	thesis	key	argument	is	that	the	value	of	citizen	social	
science	lies	more	in	its	developmental	power	and	the	new	networks	of	human	
connection	it	builds	among	participants,	than	in	the	data	it	yields	for	social	science	
inquiry.	The	thesis	tied	together	theory	and	in-depth	empirical	work	to	argue	that	
citizen	social	science	is	a	distinctive	approach	that	highlights	the	politics	of	method,	
and	has	a	highly	transformative	potential	impact	as	it	enrols	participants	in	reflecting	
on,	and	recognising	different	situated	knowledges.			
The	thesis	examined	citizen	social	science	based	methods	using	three	research	
probes:	1)	a	secondary	analysis	of	Mass	Observation	Archive	data;	2)	a	study	
involving	citizens	reporting	observations	of	empty	houses;	and	3)	a	community	based	
history	project	about	perceptions	of	a	local	area.		These	were	selected	and	designed	
on	the	basis	of	speaking	to	different	levels	of	Haklays	(2013)	typology	of	
participation	in	citizen	science.	The	research	posed	the	question	of	how	citizen	social	
science	works	in	practice.	This	had	a	dual	focus.	On	the	one	hand	it	spoke	to	the	fact	
that	citizen	social	science	is	an	emergent	phenomenon	and	theorizing	its	practices	
and	potential	must	first	of	all	take	stock	of	how	it	is	being	practiced.	On	the	other	
hand,	citizen	social	science	is	emergent	in	the	sense	that	its	potential	is	being	shaped,	
and	theorising	it	must	be	done	with	the	ambition	of	shaping	its	potential,	as	well	as	
the	ideologies	and	values	that	drive	innovation	in	practice.		
The	thesis	also	sought	to	think	creatively	about	method	and	to	explore	the	effects	and	
potential	of	citizen	social	science	for	social	research.	It	reported	on	how	a	
conceptualisation	of	citizen	social	science,	that	situates	it	within	social	studies	of	
social	science,	and	uses	social	science	theory	and	methods	to	examine	it,	works	in	
9.1	Introduction		
practice.	It	sought	to	open	up	a	site	for	critical	reflection	on	the	concept	of	citizen	
social	science,	so	as	to	be	able	to	draw	out	implications	of	its	future	use.		
A	review	of	the	literature	delineated	how	citizen	social	science	is	primarily	conceived	
of	as	a	method	to	engage	volunteer	participants	in	conducting	social	research.	It	also	
examined	how	citizen	social	science	might	be	done,	drawing	parallels	between,	and	
distinguishing	citizen	social	science	from,	existing	methods	and	approaches	in	social	
science	research,	most	notably	participatory	research	and	co-production.	The	review	
likewise	questioned	who	citizen	social	science	might	be	for,	and	set	out	the	practical,	
ethical	and	material	history	behind	citizen	social	science.		
The	key	facets	chapter	charted	an	outline	of	the	citizen	social	science	landscape,	
drawing	together	a	body	of	scoping	work	to	highlight	the	key	facets	of	such	a	
phenomenon	to	inform	the	research	strategy	of	the	thesis.	The	literature	review	and	
key	facets	chapters	generated	a	series	of	sub-questions	that	followed	on	from	the	
core	question.	They	were:		
1) What	challenges	are	raised	in	terms	of	research	design	and	execution?		
2) What	ethical	issues	are	raised	and	how	might	these	be	addressed?		
3) How	can	the	data	generated	in	citizen	social	science	approaches	be	used?	By	
whom?	
4) How	are	citizen	social	science	projects	reconfiguring	knowledge	production	
processes?	What	are	the	potential	effects	of	this	process?		
Using	social	research	probes	as	method,	and	facet	methodology	to	analyse	the	
findings	from	the	three	divergent	probes,	the	empirical	chapters	5		7	mapped	out	the	
tensions	and	possibilities	of	how	citizen	social	science	works	in	practice.	These	
chapters	suggested	that	citizen	social	science	creates	new	responsibilities	for	
individual	citizens,	and	researchers,	and	policy	makers	alike.	If	citizen	social	science	
is	to	be	a	useful	approach	in	social	science	research	in	the	sense	of	engaging	actively	
in	the	world	in	order	to	create	the	possibilities	of	alternative	forms	of	social	life	
(Mulkay,	1991),	citizens	need	to	have	a	more	expanded	role	in	social	science	
research,	working	in	collaboration	with	trained	social	scientists	in	all	aspects	of	the	
9.1	Introduction		
research	process,	beyond	just	data	generation.	Whilst	this	may	pose	challenges,	it	is	
clear	that	there	are	genuine	opportunities	for	the	involvement	of	citizens	in	the	
analysis	of	data,	as	well	as	research	design,	in	robust	social	science	research.	
Recognised	forms	of	social	science,	from	statistical	analysis	to	participant	
observation,	involve	serious	commitment	and	engagement	in	analysis	before,	during	
and	after	doing	the	research.	Why	exclude	citizens	from	that	form	of	social	science?	
Chapter	5	set	out	the	main	challenges	that	were	raised	in	terms	of	research	design	
and	execution	from	the	probes	into	different	types	of	citizen	social	science.	It	
presented	a	false	binary	in	terms	of	highlighting	the	challenges	for	the	researcher,	
and	then	the	ways	in	which	participants	expressed	their	experiences	of	interpreting	
the	questions	in	the	execution	of	the	projects.	The	probes	drew	attention	to	the	
relationship	between	scholarly	social	science	knowledge	and	endogenous	social	
competence,	between	reflection	and	expertise.	The	probes	set	off	the	inevitable	
hierarchy	in	the	research	process	that	means	that	roles	are	complex	and	
responsibilities	in	the	research	process	are	spread,	something	which	probe	3	into	the	
Our	Manchester	project,	in	particular,	generated	new	insights	on.	The	practicalities	of	
doing	citizen	social	science	raised	challenges	for	research	design	and	execution	that	
make	it	difficult	for	citizens	to	find	a	place	in	data,	between	endogenous	social	
practices	and	social	scientific	analysis,	and	for	researchers	to	design	projects	that	
facilitate	that	process.	
Chapter	6	explored	the	ethical	issues	raised	in	the	different	types	of	citizen	social	
science	probed	for,	and	how	might	these	be	addressed.	The	analysis	presented	drew	
attention	to	the	ways	in	which	consent	and	anonymity	become	surfaces	for	complex	
issues	around	power	relations	in	the	research	process.	It	also	highlighted	the	
possibilities	that	citizen	social	science	can	entail	in	terms	of	the	flattening	of	
hierarchies	in	the	social	research	process	as	knowledge	is	made	together.	However,	
this	created	new	tensions	in	terms	of	ethics	and	the	reproduction	of	inequalities,	and	
the	conflicting	stances	of	ethical	practice.	Participants	can	subscribe	to	different	
codes	of	ethics	to	academic	ethical	practice,	which	drew	attention	to	the	politics	of	
knowledge	making,	and	the	difficulties	of	agreeing	on	the	need	for,	and	content	of,	
reasonable	practices	and	sufficient	standards	for	ethical	research.		A	key	point	that	
9.1	Introduction		
this	chapter	served	to	highlight	is	that	an	ethical	practice	of	citizen	social	science	
requires	on-going	dialogue	and	an	adjustment	of	ethical	practices	in	the	process.	
Furthermore,	the	more	participatory	the	type	of	citizen	social	science	being	
undertaken,	the	greater	the	need	for	relational	ethics,	and	one	in	which	all	
participants	are	involved	in	setting	the	ethical	terms	of	the	project.	
Chapter	7	investigated	how	the	data	generated	in	the	different	types	of	citizen	social	
science	probed	for	might	be	used,	and	by	whom.	The	analysis	focused	on	how	
different	social	actors	view	the	potential	use	of	citizen	social	science	data,	and	
explored	how	such	an	approach	can	assist	in	tackling	a	pressing	social	issue,	such	as	
empty	houses	in	the	case	of	the	Empty	Houses	probe,	and	tackling	social	isolation	and	
access	to	services	in	the	case	of	the	Our	Manchester	probe.	In	a	policy	context	there	
appears	to	be	much	interest	in	the	potential	of	citizen	social	science	to	generate	data	
to	be	used	to	inform	policy,	and	in	participants	as	a	future	resource,	as	demonstrated	
by	the	traction	participatory	and	citizen	science	approaches	have	had	in	the	
international	development	sector	(Best,	2015;	Holland,	2013).	Furthermore,	citizen	
social	science	can	be	perceived	to	be	a	strategic	tool	for	gathering	data	in	a	time	of	
constrained	resources.	This	raised	important	questions	about	whom	ultimately	
citizen	social	science	is	for,	and	who	benefits	from	its	articulation;	it	also	links	to	
wider	debates	about	the	idea	of	an	emancipatory	social	science.	The	probes	revealed	
how	citizen	social	science	has	the	potential	to	disrupt	policy	and	to	disrupt	official	
definitions	of	data	quality.	In	this	way,	questions	of	data	use	in	citizen	social	science	
are	not	straightforward.		
The	empirical	chapters	suggested	that	citizen	social	science	can	reconfigure	
knowledge	production	processes,	by	opening	them	up	to	social	actors	operating	
outside	of	the	confines	of	the	academy.	However,	the	empirical	chapters	also	
demonstrated	that	this	does	not	necessarily	entail	greater	levels	of	participation,	and	
a	hierarchy	in	the	research	process	remains.	Chapter	8	discussed	how	these	
affordances	and	capacities	of	citizen	social	science	occurred,	drawing	on	the	
opportunities	and	challenges	of	the	empirical	chapters,	and	highlighted	the	potential	
of	this	process	to	reconfigure	of	knowledge	production.	It	specified	the	implications	
of	citizen	social	science-based	approaches	for	individual	participants,	for	
9.2	Citizen	social	science	as	an	epistemologically	distinct	approach		
methodological	experimentation	in	social	science	research,	and	for	society	in	terms	of	
the	potential	for	reinstating	the	collective	sociological	imagination.	These	discussions	
are	expanded	upon	in	the	following	sections	of	this	chapter	which	set	out	the	key	
contributions	of	the	thesis.	
9.2	Citizen	social	science	as	an	epistemologically	distinct	approach		
The	empirical	work	allowed	for	a	theoretical	positioning	of	citizen	social	science	
beyond	simply	a	method	for	gathering	more	data.	The	empirical	work	sought	to	
explore	how	citizen	social	science	worked	in	practice	in	three	different	forms.	The	
probes	enacted	citizen	social	science	as	a	new	form	of	knowledge	production.	The	
empirical	work	of	the	thesis	described	a	core	set	of	these	projects	and	identified	key	
facets	of	citizen	social	science,	that	is,	the	practices,	motivations	and	methodologies	
that	characterise	these	projects	as	citizen	social	science.	This	is	designed	to	serve	
three	main	purposes:	firstly,	to	enable	a	deeper	understanding	and	contestation	of	
the	newly	emerging	citizen	social	science	movement;	secondly,	to	identify	key	issues	
that	require	further	investigation;	and	thirdly	to	develop	a	concept	for	a	citizen	social	
science	that	produces	genuinely	new	ways	of	knowing	the	social	world.	Citizen	social	
science	generates	new	responsibilities	for	all	involved,	and	rearranges	the	power	
dynamics	of	the	research	process.	It	also	demonstrates	that	however	research	is	
undertaken,	there	is,	it	seems,	always	a	hierarchy	of	some	form	in	the	research	
process.	This	impacts	on	the	truths	that	are	told.		The	conceptual	implications	that	
arise	from	this	tension	are	important,	as	expounded	in	probe	3	into	the	Our	
Manchester	project,	which	revealed	the	implications	of	gatekeepers	on	the	truths	and	
narratives	created.	This	thesis	has	sought	to	shed	light	on	the	tension	between	the	
neoliberal	agenda	of	citizen	social	science,	and	the	supposed	opening	up	of	the	
research	process	that	is	actually	inherently	undemocratic.		
The	thesis	also	makes	conceptual	contributions	in	the	ways	in	which	it	seeks	to	
acknowledge	the	differentiated	nature	of	expertise.	It	is	disruptively	transformative	
of	the	boundary	between	participation	and	expertise,	rather	than	between	different	
types	of	lay	and	expert	perspectives	in	doing	social	science.	The	probes	documented	
in	the	thesis	revealed	the	complexities	and	tensions	of	a	move	towards	creating	a	
9.2	Citizen	social	science	as	an	epistemologically	distinct	approach		
nation	of	amateur	social	scientists	or	surrounding	notions	of	citizen	sociologists	
(see	chapter	1).	Framing	citizen	social	science	in	this	way	aligned	it	more	closely	with	
the	ways	in	which	coproduction	and	Participatory	Action	Research	(PAR)	have	been	
theorised.	Thus,	whilst	the	work	of	this	thesis	locates	citizen	social	science	within	the	
wider	literature	on	participatory	methods	in	social	science,	it	also	marks	citizen	social	
science	out	as	epistemologically	distinct	from	existing	approaches	such	as	co-
production	and	PAR.	This	is	conceptually	important	since	citizen	social	science	is	
more	frequently	articulated	as	stemming	from	citizen	science	and	the	natural	
sciences.		
Citizen	social	science,	similar	to	coproduction	and	participatory	research	methods,	
appears	to	occupy	an	unusual	place	in	relation	to	the	social	sciences		in	terms	of	
justifying	the	role	of	the	social	sciences,	citizen	social	science	is	often	brought	back	in	
as	a	central	defence	of	the	discipline,	precisely	because	of	how	it	reinstates	the	citizen	
in	the	research	(and	data)	process.	But	citizen	social	science	is	marginalised	and	
othered	by	those	who	then	need	to	defend	the	importance	and	value	of	social	
science.	Perhaps	this	is	one	contributing	factor	to	it	not	being	given	much	attention	in	
the	literature	previously;	another	may	be	the	significant	body	of	work	being	
undertaken	on	participatory	research,	in	particular	PAR	and	co-production.		
The	thesis	draws	together	the	theorising	of	citizen	science,	co-production,	PAR	and	
methodological	experimentation	in	social	sciences.	The	literature	on	PAR	suggests	it	
is	more	of	a	values-based	approach,	than	a	method	necessarily.	There	is	a	growing	
body	of	literature	that	argues	for	a	wider	role	for	various	publics	in	scientific	research	
as	co-producers	of	knowledge	(Durose	et	al.,	2018;	Richardson,	2017;	Purdam,	2014;	
Richardson,	2014;	Goodson	and	Phillimore,	2012;	Armstrong	and	Alsop,	2010;	
Martin,	2010;	Nutley	et	al.	2007).	As	is	often	stated	in	this	literature	on	co-production,	
it	is	a	risky,	time-consuming,	ethically	complex,	emotionally	demanding	method	of	
social	inquiry	that	challenges	many	disciplinary	norms	(Flinders	et	al.,	2016).	The	
social	research	probes	presented	as	the	empirical	work	in	chapters	5-7,	and	
discussed	further	in	chapter	8,	support	this,	as	demonstrated	in	the	practical,	ethical	
and	material	challenges	of	citizen	social	science	these	chapters	set	out.		
9.3	The	transformative	and	developmental	value	of	citizen	social	science		
	Whilst	similar	to	such	approaches,	citizen	social	science	differs	epistemologically,	
particularly	in	the	way	in	which	it	seeks	to	disrupt	the	boundary	between	expertise	
and	participation,	and	to	recognise	different	situated	knowledges,	rather	than	
necessarily	maintain	false	distinctions	of	expertise.	The	work	of	the	thesis	argues	that	
citizen	social	science	is	distinct	from	citizen	science	and	seeks	in	many	ways	to	argue	
against	citizen	social	science	being	submerged	in	the	ever	expanding	coverage	of	
different	approaches	and	projects,	under	the	same	banner	of	citizen	science.	
Furthermore,	the	extensive	empirical	work	of	thesis	demonstrates	that	a	model	of	
citizen	social	science	which	simply	apes	that	of	citizen	science,	does	not	work.		
Ultimately	there	are	many	divergent	and	differing	forms	of	citizen	social	science	that	
can	be	construed	to	operate	under	the	same	banner,	but	what	unites	them	is	a	value-
laden	approach	to	including	citizens	in	the	process	of	undertaking	social	research.	
Whilst	there	appears	to	be	much	reference	to	the	potential	of	citizen	social	science	in	
the	literature,	there	are	less	critical	reflections	on	its	practical	realities,	due	to	its	
emergent	and	fast	evolving	nature.	Furthermore,	it	is	possible	to	continue	discussing	
these	epistemological	differences	forever,	and	particularly	as	similar	debates	are	
playing	out	in	the	field	of	Citizen	Science.	What	is	of	interest	here,	and	what	the	thesis	
sought	to	do,	was	to	explore	how	citizen	social	science	works	in	practice,	particularly	
where	people	are	carrying	out	such	activities	without	any	reference	to	such	semantic	
distinctions	and	methodological	approaches.	
9.3	The	transformative	and	developmental	value	of	citizen	social	
science	
The	empirical	work	of	the	thesis	has	demonstrated,	and	subsequently	chapter	8	
discussed,	how	citizen	social	science	can	bring	a	transformative	momentum,	both	for	
the	individual	participants	and	for	the	discipline	of	social	science	and	for	society.	The	
process	of	participating	in	citizen	social	science	and	generating	data	can	constitute	a	
form	of	meaning	making	and	therefore	is	an	epistemology,	a	politics	and	ethics.	
9.3	The	transformative	and	developmental	value	of	citizen	social	science		
Furthermore,	the	work	of	the	thesis	extends	conceptualisations	of	citizen	social	
science	as	method,	towards	opening	it	up	to	think	creatively	about	method	and	to	
contribute	towards	forms	of	collective	experimentation,	and	ways	in	which	to	engage	
the	collective	sociological	imagination.	Due	to	the	complex	nature	of	identifying	and	
knowing	what	an	emergent	phenomenon	like	citizen	social	science	is,	the	scoping	
work	and	probes	reflected	on	in	the	empirical	work	of	the	thesis,	constitute	an	
experiment	in	different	ways	of	categorising	examples	of	it,	as	a	way	to	identify	its	
core	challenges,	tensions	and	controversies.	The	conceptual	implications	of	the	thesis	
are	to	have	drawn	on	the	pre-existing	proto	citizen	social	science	project	of	Mass	
Observation,	and	to	have	elucidated	the	affordances	and	challenges	of	such	an	
approach	in	conjunction	with	two	further	potential	forms	of	citizen	social	science.	
Citizen	social	science-based	methods	can	be	disruptively	transformative:	for	the	
individual	participant	in	terms	of	how	citizens	can	become	engaged	with	the	issues	
raised	by	the	research.	It	can	be	disruptively	transformative	for	social	science	
research	in	the	way	that	it	acknowledges	the	differentiated	nature	of	expertise,	and	
allows	seeming	non-experts	to	be	involved	in	the	analysis	of	data,	as	well	as	its	
generation.	Overall,	the	research	highlights	how	citizen	social	science	can	engage	with	
the	collective	sociological	imagination,	and	presents	an	opportunity	for	the	
transformation	of	social	science	research,	beyond	just	an	instrumental	
methodological	innovation.	In	this	sense,	the	methodological	and	empirical	
contributions	of	the	thesis	are	such	that	they	demonstrate	that	the	adoption	of	social	
research	techniques	by	a	variety	of	social	actorscan	be	made	to	work	for	rather	than	
against	social	research	(Marres;	2012,	pp.83-4;	my	emphasis).	In	many	ways,	this	is	a	
return	to	the	tradition	of	Mass-Observation	and	the	various	field	research	activities	of	
the	mid-twentieth	century,	all	of	which	emphasised	how	the	public	could	research	
themselves	through	projects	of	writing	and	observing.	The	potential	innovations	of	
the	approach	of	the	thesis	lie	precisely	in	recognising	the	prior	establishment	of	the	
Mass	Observation	project,	as	an	early	form	of	citizen	social	science,	and	probing	it	in	
novel	ways.	The	subsequent	combination	of	this	probe	with	insights	from	the	probes	
into	two	new	projects,	shed	light	on	the	affordances	and	capacities	of	citizen	social	
science.	
It	is	this	transformative	and	developmental	value	of	citizen	social	science	that	sets	it	
apart	from	citizen	science	approaches	which	often	tend	to	focus	on	large	scale	more	
instrumental	applications	of	the	method.	whilst	it	is	important	to	state	that	a	
crowdsourcing	approach	to	data	collection	does	not	warrant	significant	criticism,	
arguably	the	real	value	of	citizen	social	science	is	in	its	transformative	and	
developmental	impact.		
Citizen	social	science	produces	tensions	between	notions	of	inclusion	of	all	social	
actors	in	the	generation	of	information	about	the	everyday,	and	the	notion	that	many	
of	the	participants	do	not	necessarily	feel	entitled,	or	empowered,	to	participate	in	the	
analysis	of	this	information	or	in	the	interpretation	of	what	it	means.	Many	
participants	were	only	too	aware	of	the	complexities	of	this	part	of	the	research	
process,	as	demonstrated	in	the	empirical	work	presented	in	chapter	5	(section	5.4).	
The	probes	suggest	that	the	particular	type	of	reflexivity	engendered	is	a	combination	
of	the	performance	of	social	order,	as	in	ethnomethodological	accounts,	and	a	matter	
of	critical	reflection.	Furthermore,	if	social	science	expertise	involves	a	certain	level	of	
critique,	prompting	those	who	would	not	consider	themselves	of	be	experts,	to	think	
more	about	the	process,	citizen	social	science	opens	the	research	process	up	to	others	
to	reflect	on.	The	question	remains	of	whether	citizen	social	science	forges	new	
connections,	and	horizontalises	the	analysts.	The	probes	suggest	that	it	depends	
very	much	on	exactly	how	citizens	are	positioned,	and	how	they	position	
themselves.	The	detail	of	how	the	projects	are	organised	matter	immensely.	This	
necessarily	means	citizen	social	science	cannot	be	a	matter	of	simply	tapping	into	
peoples	everyday	activities.	Participation	in	citizen	social	science	has	to	be	a	burden	
rather	than	a	form	of	piggybacking	on	peoples	insights	as	they	go	about	their	daily	
activities,	or	the	repurposing	of	peoples	knowledge	in	a	top	down	fashion.	This	
burden	is	transformative,	in	the	way	that	doing	social	science	makes	you	see	the	
world	differently.		
9.4	Citizen	social	science	and	the	links	to	ethnographic	approaches		
9.4	Citizen	social	science	and	the	links	to	ethnographic	approaches		
The	thesis	constitutes	an	initial	study	to	reflexively	engage	with	citizen	social	science	
based	approaches.	It	has	demonstrated	how	people	can	be	mobilised	to	voluntarily	
contribute	to	social	science	research,	and	that	valuable	data	can	be	produced	through	
such	approaches,	which	might	otherwise	not	have	been.	Moreover,	policy	makers	and	
other	social	change	advocates	recognised	the	value	of	the	data	and	are	beginning	to	
take	it	seriously.	Participants	can	feel	empowered	and	this	has	the	potential	to	leave	a	
legacy	of	engagement.			
The	thesis	has	mapped	the	affordances,	capacities	and	tensions	of	citizen	social	
science;	it	has	set	out	both	normative	ideals	of	what	citizen	social	science	might	be,	
and	an	empirical	exploration	of	three	different	types	of	citizen	social	science	to	show	
how	it	works	in	practice.	The	thesis	has	highlighted	how	despite	the	ideals	of	citizen	
social	science	being	about	the	flattening	of	hierarchies	in	social	science	research,	and	
the	opening	up	of	social	research	techniques	to	a	wide	variety	of	actors,	ultimately	a	
hierarchy	of	some	kind	remains,	and	can	be	reproduced.	This	impacts	on	the	truths	
that	are	told	and	not	told.	Whilst	it	is	possible	to	design	for	a	more	shared	
understanding	of	the	social,	and	for	potential	contestations	of	understandings	of	the	
social,	this	cannot	be	construed	as	a	democratisation	of	social	science.		It	is	an	attempt	
to	open	up	the	research	process	but	it	does	not	necessarily	always	engender	
participation.	
However,	if	the	value	of	citizen	social	science	lies	in	the	qualitative	insights	it	can	
offer	into	lived	human	experience,	and	the	acknowledgement	and	recognition	of	
different	situated	knowledges,	links	can	also	be	drawn	to	social	anthropology,	and	in	
particular	ethnographic	approaches	and	participant	observation.	There	are	parallels	
between	the	values	and	aims	of	citizen	social	science,	and	notions	of	more	classical	
ethnographic	approaches	that	seek	to	shed	light	on	everyday	life.	Arguably,	citizen	
social	science	based	approaches	allude	to	notions	of	good	ethnography,	and	to	the	
means	to	study	with	people,	not	to	make	studies	of	them	(Ingold,	2017,	p.	23).	Ingold	
(2017)	suggests	that	participant	observation	should	be	understood	as	educational,	as	
a	way	of	learning	that	can	be	transformative.	Participant	observation,	in	short,	is	not	
9.5	The	role	of	citizen	social	science	within	social	science		
a	technique	of	data	gathering	but	an	ontological	commitment.	And	that	commitment	
is	fundamental	to	the	discipline	of	anthropology	(Ingold,	2017,	p.23).	In	this	sense,	
observation	is	a	way	of	participating	attentively,	and	thus	a	way	of	learning.	Linked	to	
the	transformational	impact	of	citizen	social	science,	as	discussed	above,	participating	
in	citizen	social	science	necessarily	engenders	a	level	of	reflexivity	and	critical	
reflection	which,	in	some	instances	as	demonstrated	by	the	first	probe	into	the	Mass	
Observation	project,	is	highly	valued	by	participants.		
9.5	The	role	of	citizen	social	science	within	social	science		
Looking	ahead,	it	is	possible	to	reflect	on	and	question	the	future	role	of	citizen	social	
science	within	the	social	sciences.	As	citizen	social	science	develops,	and	greater	
clarity	is	set	out	about	the	challenges	and	opportunities	of	its	approach	in	practice,	it	
has	the	potential	to	grow	in	importance	and	utility.	As	previously	discussed	in	
chapter	8	(section	8.	3)	the	aim	of	articulating	citizen	social	science	in	this	way	in	this	
thesis	is	primarily	focused	on	rescuing	the	primacy	of	social	science	methods	but	not	
throwing	away	the	existing	expertise.	The	findings	from	the	probes	suggest	that	the	
practices	and	processes	of	citizen	social	science	can	be	rendered	productive	for	social	
science	research.	
Exploring	how	citizen	social	science	works	in	practice	also	allows	for	a	more	fertile	
engagement	with	questions	of	description	and	expertise	currently	going	on	in	the	
natural	sciences	(Savage,	2016).	As	the	thesis	has	sought	to	demonstrate,	citizen	
social	science	can	be	seen	to	emerge	from	both	the	rise	of	citizen	science,	and	this	
data	politics	of	the	issues	of	causality	and	description,	to	which	Savage	refers.	Citizen	
social	science	needs	to	be	conceptualised	and	framed,	in	the	context	of	a	renewal	of	
interest	in	the	politics	of	method	in	the	social	sciences	(Lury	and	Wakeford,	2012;	
Busher	et	al.,	2010;	Adkins	and	Lury,	2009;	Rabinow	and	Marcus,	2009;	Burrows	and	
Savage,	2007;	Thrift,	2005).	This	thesis	has	brought	social	science	methods	to	bear	on	
the	emergent	phenomenon	of	citizen	social	science	to	explore	its	potential	for	social	
science	research.	However	as	shown	in	the	probes,	context	is	everything,	and	more	
9.5	The	role	of	citizen	social	science	within	social	science		
work	needs	to	be	done	to	shed	light	on	how	citizen	social	science	works	in	practice	in	
different	contexts,	disciplines,	and	sectors.	
It	is	also	important	to	note	that	citizen	social	science	can	add	to	the	toolkit	of	methods	
in	social	science.	Nevertheless,	to	do	citizen	social	science	properly	requires	
significant	energy,	time	and	resources,	as	the	empirical	work	of	the	thesis	has	shown.	
It	is	far	from	a	quick	and	easy	approach	to	gathering	data	on	the	cheap.	The	real	
contribution	of	such	an	approach	is	its	transformative	impact,	and	thus	for	citizen	
social	science	to	continue	to	be	a	meaningful	approach	for	social	science,	it	should	
resist	the	urge	to	increase	its	data	yield.	The	latter	is	one	of	the	myriad	of	directions	
in	which	citizen	science	appears	to	be	going.		
As	discussed	in	chapter	8,	(section	8.	4)	citizen	social	science	provides	the	potential	
for	forge	new	relations	between	the	academy	and	society.	It	values	bottom	up	social	
inquiry	that	acknowledges	experiential	knowledge.	Citizen	social	science	also	
constitutes	a	way	in	which	to	trigger	an	inquiring	society.	In	this	sense	it	has	the	
potential	to	impact	on	the	development	of	a	civil	society	as	form	of	social	capital.	
Furthermore,	there	is	much	scope	for	citizen	social	science	in	a	policy	environment,	
and	particularly	one	which	is	focused	on	the	impact	agenda,	as	a	tool	in	a	post-
austerity	context	of	constrained	resources.	The	affordances	of	citizen	social	science	
here	appear	to	be	the	way	in	which	such	an	approach	values	the	everyday,	mundane	
social	inquiry,	which	has	the	potential	to	scaffold	it	to	come	together	as	a	bottom	up	
social	science.		
Citizen	social	science	has	the	most	beneficial	implications	for	social	science	research,	
since	it	is	possible	to	argue	that	our	methods	are	not	fully	cut	out	to	deal	with	the	
level	of	complexity	and	volume	of	problems	currently	facing	society.	Collective	action	
and	experimentation	is	needed	to	try	to	tackle	such	far-reaching	issues	together.	
Citizen	social	science	offers	a	potential	way	in	which	to	engage	collective	and	faster	
knowledge	production.	We	need	better	methods	in	social	science	research,	and	
greater	scope	to	make	sense	of	amount	of	data	being	produced.	The	creation	of	data	
appears	to	be	happening	at	an	extremely	large	scale	in	commercial	research	(Thrift,	
2011;	Savage	and	Burrows,	2007).	The	pressing	need	of	the	current	context	is	to	have	
9.5	The	role	of	citizen	social	science	within	social	science		
methods	that	build	capacity	to	make	sense	of	and	to	analyse	it.	Felt	and	Wynne	(2007,	
p.	77-	78)	argue	that	under	appropriate	conditions,	citizens	can	thus	be	participants,	
critics	and	knowledge-creators	in	an	extended	model	of	knowledge-production	and	
collective	reasoning.	In	this	sense,	citizen	social	science	has	the	potential	to	play	a	
crucial	role	in	social	science	in	terms	of	transforming	social	science	methods	for	the	
better.	
Citizen	social	science	has	the	potential	to	be	transformative	of	social	science	because,	
in	politics	of	measurement	debates,	it	highlights	the	need	for	an	alternative	stance	
towards	data	that	respects	personal	truths	and	other	eventful	temporalities	and	
recordings	of	social	life.	Participation	in	the	research	process	offers	new	perspectives	
and	insights	and	ways	of	understanding	and	contesting	the	social	and	for	researching	
intractable	social	research	questions,	but	it	is	not	without	its	challenges	and	
limitations.	Multiple	questions	can	be	raised	around	the	complexities	of	data	quality,	
and	analysis,	as	well	as	expertise	in	citizen	social	science.		
Citizen	social	science	needs	to	be	conceptualised	and	framed,	in	the	context	of	a	
renewal	of	interest	in	the	politics	of	method	in	the	social	sciences.	The	position	
presented	by	the	work	on	the	Social	Life	of	Methods	highlights	how	questions	of	
method	raise	fundamental	theoretical	questions	about	the	limits	of	knowledge	itself	
and	reflect	on	new	ways	of	understanding	the	relationship	between	the	cultural,	
social,	and	material	(Savage,	2013,	p.18). Furthermore,	such	a	positioning	returns	to	
the	crisis	of	imagination	that	Gane	(2012,	p.158)	reflects	on,	the	fetishisation	of	
readymade	quantitative	and	qualitative	methods	that	is	more	apparent	now	than	it	
was	when	Mills	wrote	The	Sociological	Imagination	in	the	late	1950s.	The	
implications	of	citizen	social	science	present	an	opportunity	for	engaging	the	
collective	sociological	imagination	and	opening	social	science	methods	up	to	public	
involvement	is	an	opportunity	for	a	more	committed	or	socially	engaged	practice	that	
enables	citizens	to	connect	private	troubles	and	public	histories.		
Citizen	social	science	allows	us	to	improve	our	methods	so	that	they	might	serve	us	
better,	by	generating	and	allowing	for	the	asking	of	important	questions	about	
knowledge	production,	engaging	in	reflections	on	the	politics	of	knowledge	
9.6	Limitations	of	the	thesis	and	its	approach		
production.	In	particular,	it	prompted	the	asking	of	important	questions	in	social	
science	methods	around	the	nature	of	data,	who	is	allowed	to	collect	it,	who	can	
analyse	it	and	how	such	data	can	be	used.	Whilst	such	questions	are	exploratory	and	
should	be	recognised	as	valuable	outcomes	in	their	own	right,	they	should	also	only	
be	ignored	at	peril.		
9.6	Limitations	of	the	thesis	and	its	approach	
The	thesis	started	by	presenting	the	argument	that	citizen	social	science	is	a	fast	
evolving,	multi-sited,	socially-structured	phenomenon.	Therefore,	any	attempts	to	
conceptualise	it	and	study	it	empirically	will	necessarily	be	limited.	There	is	also	a	
case	to	be	made	that	now	much	of	the	action	is	in	the	digital	sphere	in	which	human	
interventions,	in	the	form	of	visits,	writing	letters,	data	assemblage,	campaigning,	and	
blogs	operate.	However,	it	is	necessary	to	delineate	the	key	facets	of	a	kind	of	classic	
citizen	social	science,	as	set	out	in	the	empirical	work	of	this	thesis,	before	moving	on	
to	examine	the	more	recent	developments	in	the	nature	of	social	science.	This	is	
particularly	true	given	the	emergent	nature	of	citizen	social	science	in	the	literature.		
As	Savage	(2010)	argued	in	his	work	on	Identities	and	Social	Change,	the	rise	of	
popular	social	science	between	the	30s	and	50s	was	part	of	the	development	of	a	
technocratic	middle	class	identity,	and	appealed	to	generally	well	embracing	a	kind	of	
Fabian,	leftist,	political	vision		see	also	Mulgans	comments	quoted	at	the	very	
beginning	of	the	thesis.	The	kind	of	citizen	social	science	presented	here	harks	back	to	
older	traditions,	such	as	those	associated	with	Booth	and	Rowntree	and	the	
Sociological	Society.		
In	the	spirit	of	opening	up	a	method,	the	main	methodological	contribution	of	this	
thesis	lies	in	how	it	attempted	to	use	a	citizen	social	science-based	approach	to	study	
citizen	social	science	itself	in	practice.	This	produced	many	critical	progressive	
insights,	whilst	attempting	to	refuse	any	endeavours	to	essentialise	or	pigeonhole	it.	
The	key	facets	of	citizen	social	science,	probed	for	and	set	out	in	the	empirical	
chapters	of	the	thesis,	provide	an	initial	elucidation	of	the	opportunities	and	
challenges	of	citizen	social	science	based	approaches,	in	terms	of	research	design,	
9.6	Limitations	of	the	thesis	and	its	approach		
ethics	and	data	use.	The	methodological	contribution	of	the	thesis	is	in	its	having	set	
out	an	articulation	of	citizen	social	science	to	add	to	the	repertoires	of	methods	that	
can	permit	social	scientists	to	seize	the	future	with	some	confidence,	by	including	a	
wide	variety	of	social	actors,	and	their	differentiated	expertise,	in	the	social	research	
process.		
Owing	to	the	emergent	nature	of	citizen	social	science,	some	experimentation	was	
necessary.	The	probes	allowed	for	insights	into	particular	projects,	and	facet	
methodology	enables	for	the	drawing	across	of	such	insights,	to	generate	a	
strategically	illuminating	set	of	reflections.	However,	a	more	systematic	approach	to	
understanding	the	motivations	and	experiences	of	participants	in	citizen	social	
science	might	be	a	fruitful	avenue	for	future	research,	and	this	is	all	the	more	pressing	
an	issue	for	future	inquiry,	as	new	generations	of	researchers	adopt	these	methods.	
The	use	of	facet	methodology	to	create	a	strategically	illuminating	set	of	insights	into	
citizen	social	science	has	its	advantages	and	disadvantages.	Facet	methodology	
(Mason,	2011)	is	an	orientation,	and	was	used	to	treat	citizen	social	science	as	the	
gemstone,	whose	facets	were	explored	in	more	depth	using	a	series	of	three	social	
research	probes.	Mason	(2011)	described	facet	methodology	in	a	clear	fashion	using	
a	gemstone	metaphor	that	marks	out	the	theoretical	basis	for	its	use.	However,	there	
is	no	roadmap	or	blueprint	for	undertaking	a	facet	methodology	research,	which	
shows	how	a	researcher	could	overcome	some	of	the	practical	challenges	of	its	use.	
The	social	research	probes,	presented	in	the	empirical	chapters	5-7,	enabled	the	
study	of	citizen	social	science	as	a	method.	They	were	designed	to	speak	to	different	
levels	of	Haklays	(2013)	typology	of	citizen	science,	which	draws	on	Arnsteins	
(1969)	ladder	of	participation.	Arguably	much	of	the	focus	of	their	work	is	material,	
and	in	this	sense,	the	thesis	has	been	an	attempt	to	understand	how	people	make	
knowledge	about	the	social.	With	the	use	of	the	probes	come	some	limitations,	
however,	particularly	since	a	probe	can	be	used	as	a	form	of	objective	tool,	but	not	in	
a	traditional	or	necessarily	conventional	way.	Their	use	aimed	for	some	objectivity,	
whilst	acknowledging	that	the	subjectivity	of	the	researcher,	which	does	impact	on	
the	research	site.			
9.7	Conclusion		
In	researching	citizen	social	science,	I	have	also	become	an	active	shaper	of	it.	In	this	
sense,	the	thesis	is	not	an	entirely	objective	work.	Chapter	4	argued	that	citizen	social	
science	is	an	emergent	phenomenon	that	is	not	easily	demarcated	and	bounded,	and	
thus	requires	a	more	creative	methodological	approach.	However,	the	probes	were	
small-scale,	and	limited	in	scope	and	sample	size.	Furthermore,	much	like	the	stated	
limitations	of	facet	methodology,	there	are	minimal	recommendations	for	how	to	
analyse	and	make	sense	of	the	data	produced	in	cultural	and	social	research	probes,	
since	much	of	the	focus	is	on	the	process	itself.		
9.7	Conclusion		
In	conclusion,	the	thesis	has	examined	the	possibilities	of	citizen	social	science	based	
methods,	and	revealed	how	citizen	social	science	exceeded	the	dominant	view	of	it	as	
a	new	means	of	creating	data.	Rather,	citizen	social	science	enables	the	detailed	
examination	of	participation.	It	considered	how	the	data	produced	in	such	an	
approach	is	an	epistemology,	and	a	politics,	not	just	a	method	or	realist	tool	for	
analysis.	The	thesis	concludes	that	citizen	social	science	has	greater	potential	as	a	
transformative	practice	that	emphasises	the	collective	sociological	imagination,	than	
as	its	current	default	as	an	instrumental	methodological	innovation	for	collecting	yet	
more	social	data.	As	noted	in	the	contribution	to	knowledge,	participation	in	the	
research	process	offers	new	perspectives	and	ways	of	understanding	and	contesting	
the	social,	as	well	as	for	researching	intractable	social	research	questions,	but	it	is	not	
without	its	challenges	and	limitations.	
References		
References	
Akins,	L.		And	Lury,	C.	(2009).	What	is	the	Empirical?	European	Journal	of	Social	
Theory.	12:	1,	pp.	5		20.	
Adkins,	L.	(2017).	Sociology's	Archive:	Mass-Observation	as	a	Site	of	Speculative	
Research.	In:	Wilkie,	A.,	Savransky,	M.	and	Rosengarten,	M.	(eds)	(2017).	Speculative	
research:	the	lure	of	possible	futures.	London:	Routeledge.	
Adkins,	L.	and	Lury,	C.,	(2011).	Introduction	to	Special	Measures,	The	Sociological	
Review.	Vol.59:	2,	pp.	5-23.	
Allen,	C.	(2009).	The	fallacy	of	'Housing	Studies':	philosophical	problems	of	
knowledge	and	understanding	in	housing	research.	Housing	Theory	and	Society.	26:1,	
pp.	53-79.	
Amin,	A.	(2005).	Local	Community	on	trial	Economy	and	Society.	34:	4,	pp.	612-633.	
Amoore,	L.	and	Piotukh,	V.	eds	(2016).	Algorithmic	Life:	Calculative	devices	in	the	age	
of	big	data.	London:	Routeledge.	
Anderson,	J.	(2004).	Talking	whilst	walking:	a	geographical	archaeology	of	
knowledge.	Area,	36,	pp.	254	-	261.	
Armstrong,	F.	and	Alsop,	A.	(2010).	Debate:	co-production	can	contribute	to	research	
impact	in	the	social	sciences.	Public	Money	and	Management.	30:	4,	pp.	20810.	
Arnstein,	S.	(1969).	'A	Ladder	of	Citizen	Participation'.	Journal	of	the	American	
Planning	Association.	35:	4,	pp.	216		224.	
Austin,	W.	(2012).	Relational	ethics.	In:	Given,	L.	(eds)	The	SAGE	Encyclopedia	of	
Qualitative	Research	Methods.	Thousand	Oaks:	SAGE	Publications.		
Back,	L.	and	Puwar,	N.	(2012).	A	manifesto	for	live	methods:	provocations	and	
capacities.	The	Sociological	Review.	Special	Issue:	Sociological	Review	Monograph	
Series:	Live	Methods.	Vol.	60:	S1,	pp.	6-17.	
Backstrand,	K.	(2003).	Civic	Science	for	Sustainability:	Reframing	the	Role	of	Experts,	
Policy-Makers	and	Citizens	in	Environmental	Governance.	Global	Environmental	
Politics.	Vol.	3:	4,	pp.	24-41.		
Banks,	S.,	Armstrong,	A.,	Carter,	K.,	Graham,	H.,	Hayward,	P.,	Henry,	A.,	et	al.	(2013).	
Everyday	ethics	in	community-based	participatory	research.	Contemporary	Social	
Science.	Vol.	8:	3,	pp.263-277.	
References		
Barker,	A.	(2010).	Co-production	of	local	public	services.	Local	Authorities	and	
Research	Councils	Initiative.	Retrieved	23	October	2018,	from:		
https://www.rcuk.ac.uk/documents/innovation/larci/co-production-
summaryreport-pdf	
Battaglia,	M.	(2001).	"Convenience	Sampling"	in	Paul	J.	Lavrakas	(ed.)	Encyclopedia	of	
Survey	Research	Methods.	Thousand	Oaks:	Sage.		
Beal,	G.,	Dissanayake,	W.	and	Konoshima,	S.	(eds)	(1986).	Knowledge	generation,	
exchange,	and	utilization.	Boulder,	CO:	Westview	Press.	
Beck,	U.	(1992).	Risk	Society:	Towards	a	New	Modernity.	London:	Sage	Publications.	
Bell,	C.	and	Newby,	H.	(eds)	(1977).	Doing	Sociological	Research.	London:	Allen	and	
Unwin.	
Bell,	C.	and	Roberts,	H.	(eds)	(1984).	Social	Researching:	Politics,	Problems,	Practice.	
London:	Routledge	and	Kegan	Paul.	
Bell,	D.	and	Pahl,	K.	(2018).	Co-production:	towards	a	utopian	approach.	International	
Journal	of	Social	Research	Methodology.	Vol.	21:	1,	pp.	105-117.	
Best,	M.	(2015).	Small	Data	and	Sustainable	Development.	In:	International	Conference	
on	Communication/Culture	and	Sustainable	Development	Goals:	Challenges	for	a	new	
generation.	Chiang	Mai-Thailand.	
Bhatti,	M.	(2006).	When	Im	in	the	garden	I	can	create	my	own	paradise:	Homes	and	
gardens	in	later	life.	The	Sociological	Review.	Vol.	54:	2,	pp.	318-341.	
Bjrgvinsson,	E.,	Ehn,	P.	and	Hillgren,	P.	(2010).	Participatory	design	and	
democratizing	innovation,	in	Proc.	11th	Bienn.	Particip.	Des.	Conf.,	ACM,	New	York,	
pp.	4150.	
Bjrgvinsson,	E.,	Ehn,	P.	and	Hillgren,	P.	(2012).	Agonistic	participatory	design:	
working	with	marginalised	social	movements,	CoDesign.	Vol.	8:	2-3,	pp.127144.	
Bloor,	M.	and	Wood,	F.	(2006).	Covert	Research	in	(ed)	Keywords	in	Qualitative	
Methods.	London:	Sage.	
Boehner,	K.,	Gaver,	W.	and	Boucher,	A.	(2012).	Probes.	In	Lury,	C	and	Wakeford,	N.	
(eds)	(2012).	Inventive	Methods:	the	happening	of	the	social.	Oxon:	Routeledge.	
Bogner	A.,	Littig	B.,	and	Menz	W.	(2009).	Introduction:	Expert	Interviews		An	
Introduction	to	a	New	Methodological	Debate.	In:	Bogner	A.,	Littig	B.,	Menz	W.	(eds)	
Interviewing	Experts.	Research	Methods	Series.	Palgrave	Macmillan,	London.	
References		
Boivin,	A.,	Lehoux,	P.,	Burgers,	J.	and	Grol,	R.	(2014).	What	Are	the	Key	Ingredients	for	
Effective	Public	Involvement	in	Health	Care	Improvement	and	Policy	Decisions?	A	
Randomized	Trial	Process	Evaluation.	The	Millbank	Quarterly.	Vol.	92:	2.	
Bonney,	R.,	Ballard,	H.,	Jordan,	H.,	McCallie,	E.,	Phillips,	T.,	Shirk,	J.,	and	Wilderman,	C.	
(2009).	Public	participation	in	scientific	research:	Defining	the	field	and	assessing	its	
potential	for	informal	science	education.	In	A	CAISE	Inquiry	Group	Report,	Center	for	
Advancement	of	Informal	Science	Education	(CAISE),	Washington,	DC	(Technical	
Report).	
Bordieu,	P.	(2003).	Firing	Back:	Against	the	Tyranny	of	the	Market	2.	London:	Verso.	
Bordieu,	P.	and	Warquant,	L.	(1992).	An	Invitation	to	Reflexive	Sociology.	Cambridge:	
Polity	Press.		
Boyte,	H.	(2005).	Everyday	Politics:	Reconnecting	Citizens	and	Public	Life.		
Pennsylvania:	University	of	Pennsylvania	Press.	
Brady,	A.	(2011).	Opportunity	Sampling	in	Victor	Jupp	(ed)	The	SAGE	Dictionary	of	
Social	Research	Methods.	London:	Sage.	
Braun,	V.	and	Clarke,	V.	(2006).	Using	thematic	analysis	in	psychology.	Qualitative	
Research	in	Psychology.	Vol.	3,	pp.77-101.	
Braun,	V.	and	Clarke,	V.	(2012).	Thematic	analysis.	In	Cooper,	H.	(Ed.),	The	Handbook	
of	Research	Methods	in	Psychology.	Washington,	DC:	American	Psychological	
Association.	
Braun,	V.	and	Clarke,	V.	(2013).	Successful	qualitative	research:	A	practical	guide	for	
beginners.	London:	Sage.	
British	Sociological	Association	(2003)	Statement	of	Ethical	Practice.	
www.britsoc.org.uk/about/ethic.htm	
Burns,	D.,	Hyde,	P.,	Killett,	A.,	Poland,	F.	and	Gray,	R.	(2014).	Participatory	
organizational	research:	Examining	voice	in	the	co-production	of	knowledge.	British	
Journal	of	Management.	Vol.	25:	1,	pp.13344.	
Burawoy,	M.	(2005).	For	a	Public	Sociology:	2004	Presidential	Address	to	the	
American	Sociological	Association.	American	Sociological	Review,	Vol.	70:	1,	pp.	428.	
Burawoy,	M.	(2018)	Making	sense	of	Bordieu.	Catalyst.	Vol.	2:1,	pp.	1-23.	
Burrows,	R.	and	Savage,	M.	(2014).	After	the	crisis?	Big	Data	and	the	methodological	
challenges	of	empirical	sociology.	Big	Data	&	Society,	Vol.	1:	1,	pp.16.		
Busby,	H.,	(2000).	Writing	about	Health	and	Sickness:	An	Analysis	of	Contemporary	
References		
Autobiographical	Writing	from	the	British	Mass-Observation	Archive.	Sociological	
Research	Online.	Vol.	5:	2.	
Bscher,	M.	(2017).	The	Mobile	Utopia	Experiment.	In:	Southern,	J.;	Rose,	E.	and	
OKeeffe,	L.	Mobile	Utopia:	Art	and	Experiments.	Exhibition	Catalogue.	Available	at:	
http://eprints.lancs.ac.uk/89471/AMCataloue_inners_lok.pdf	
Bscher,	M.	(2018).	Moving	Methods.	In	Lury,	C.;	Fensham,	R.;	Heller-Nicholas,	A.;	
Lammes,	S.;	Last,	A.;	Michael,	M.;	Uprichard,	M.	(2018)	International	Handbook	of	
Interdisciplinary	Methods.	London:	Routledge.	
Bscher,	M.,	Kerasidou,	X.,	Petersen,	K.	and	R.	Oliphant	(2017).	Networked	Urbanism	
and	Disaster.	In	Freudendal-Petersen,	M.	and	Kesselring,	S.	(eds).	Networked	Urban	
Mobilities.		Routledge,	New	York.	
Buscher,	M.,	Sheller	M.	and	Tyfield,	D.	(2016).	Mobility	intersections:	social	research,	
social	futures,	Mobilities,	Vol.	11:	4,	pp.	485-497.	
Bscher,	M.	and	Urry,	J.	(2009.)	Mobile	Methods	and	the	Empirical.	European	Journal	
of	Social	Theory.	Vol.	12:	1,	pp.	99116.	
Bscher,	M.,	Urry,	J.	and	Witchger,	K.	(eds)	(2010).	Mobile	Methods.	London:	
Routeledge.	
Cahill,	C.	(2007).	Participatory	data	analysis.	In	S.	Kindon,	R.	Pain,	and	Kesby,	M.	(eds).	
Participatory	action	research	approaches	and	methods:	connecting	people,	
participation	and	place.	Routledge	studies	in	human	geography.	London:	Routledge.	
Callon,	M.,	Lascoumes,	P.	and	Barthe,	Y.	(2009).	Acting	in	an	Uncertain	World:		An	
Essay	on	Technical	Democracy.	Cambridge,	MA:	MIT	Press.	
Calvey,	D.	(2008).	The	art	and	politics	of	covert	research.	Sociology.	Vol.	42:	5,	pp.	
905918.	
Cantijoch,	M.,	Galandini,	S.	and	Gibson,	R.	(2015).	Its	not	about	me,	its	about	my	
community:	A	mixed-method	study	of	civic	websites	and	community	efficacy.	New	
Media	and	Society.	Vol.18:	9,	pp.	1896-1915.	
Carpiano,	R.	(2009).	Come	take	a	walk	with	me:	the	go-along	interview	as	a	novel	
method	for	studying	the	implications	of	place	for	health	and	well-being.	Health	&	
Place,	Vol.	15,	pp.	263-272.	
Carr,	A.	(2004).	Why	do	we	all	need	community	science?	Society	and	Natural	
Resources,	Vol.	17,	pp.	841849.	
Casey,	E.,	Courage,	F.	and	Hubble,	N.	(2014)	Special	Section	Introduction:	Mass	
References		
Observation	as	Method.	Sociological	Research	Online.	Vol.	19:	3,	22.	
Chevalier,	J.	and	Buckles,	D.	(2013).	Participatory	Action	Research:	Theory	and	
Methods	for	Engaged	Inquiry.	London:	Routledge.	
Chilvers,	J.	(2008).	Environmental	risk,	uncertainty,	and	participation:	mapping	an	
emergent	epistemic	community.	Environment	and	Planning	A.	Vol.	40,	pp.	2990-3008.	
Clark,	A.	and	Emmel,	N.	(2010).	Realities	Toolkit	#13:	Using	walking	interviews.	ESRC	
National	Centre	for	Research	Methods	Toolkit	Series.	
Clarke,	G.	(2011).	Help	George	tackle	Britains	empty	houses	crisis.	Accessed	on	
05/12/18	at:	http://georgeclarke.com/help-george-tackle-britains-empty-homes-
crisis/	
Cohen,	P.	(2017).	Our	Kind	of	Town?	Critical	Cartography	and	the	Struggle	for	a	Just	
City.	Navigations.	Spring	2017.	
Cohn,	J.	(2008).	Citizen	science:	Can	volunteers	do	real	research?	Bio	Science,	Vol.	58:	
3,	pp.	192-107.	
Collins,	H.	and	Evans,	R.	(2007).	Rethinking	Expertise.	Chicago:	University	of	Chicago	
Press.	
Conrad,	C.	and	Hilchey,	K.	(2011).	A	review	of	citizen	science	and	community-based	
environmental	monitoring:	issues	and	opportunities.	Environmental	monitoring	and	
assessment.	Vol.	176:	1-4,	pp.27391.		
Cooke,	B.	and	Kothari,	U.	(2001).	Participation:	The	New	Tyranny?	London:	Zed	Books.	
Cooper,	C.		Dickinson,	J.,	Phillips,	T.,	and	Bonney,	R.	(2007).	Citizen	science	as	a	tool	for	
conservation	in	residential	ecosystems.	Ecology	and	Society.	Vol.	12:	2,	p.	11.	
Cornwall,	A.	(2008).	Unpacking	Participation:	models,	meanings	and	practices.	
Community	Development	Journal.	Vol.	43:	3,	pp.	269283.	
Couldry,	N.	(2006).	Culture	and	citizenship:	The	missing	link?	European	Journal	of	
Cultural	Studies,	Vol.	9:	3,	pp.	321340.	
Couldry,	N.	(2010).	Why	Voice	Matters.	London:	Sage.	
Couldry,	N.	and	Powel,	A.	(2014).	Big	Data	from	the	bottom	up.	Big	Data	&	Society	Vol.	
1:	2.	
Couvet,	D.	and	Prevot,	AC.	(2015).	Citizen-science	programs:	Towards	transformative	
biodiversity	governance.	Environmental	Development.	Vol.	13:	pp.	3945.	
Crabtree,	A.,	Hemmings,	T.,	Rodden,	T.,	Cheverst,	K.,	Clarke,	K.,	Dewsbury,	G.,	Hughes,	
J.	and	Rouncefield,	M.	(2003).	Designing	with	care:	Adapting	cultural	probes	to	inform	
References		
design	in	sensitive	settings.	Proceedings	of	OzCHI	2003,	Brisbane,	Australia.	
Crabtree,	A.,	Nichols,	D.,	O'Brien,	J.,	Rouncefield,	M.	and	Twidale,	M.	(1998).	The	
contribution	of	ethnomethodologically-informed	ethnography	to	the	process	of	
designing	digital	libraries.	Cooperative	Systems	Engineering	Group	Technical	Report	
Ref:	CSEG/5/98	
http://www.comp.lancs.ac.uk/computing/research/cseg/98_rep.html	
Crawford,	K.	(2013).	Algorithmic	illusions:	the	hidden	biases	of	Big	Data.	Santa	Clara,	
CA:	Strata.	
Crivellaro,	C.,	Comber,	R.,	Dade-Robertson,	M.,	Bowen,	S.,	Wright,	P.,	Olivier,	P.	(2015).	
Contesting	the	City:	Enacting	the	Political	Through	Digitally	Supported	Urban	Walks	
CHI	2015,	April	18	-	23,	2015,	Seoul,	Republic	of	Korea.	
Dadich,	A.	(2014).	Citizen	social	science:	a	methodology	to	facilitate	and	evaluate	
workplace	learning	in	continuing	interprofessional	education.	Journal	of	
Interprofessional	care,	Vol.	28:	3,	pp.1949.		
Darg,	D.,	Szalay,	A.	and	Raddick,	J.	(2016).	Citizen	Social	Science.	The	Institute	for	Data	
Intensive	Engineering	and	Science	Annual	Symposium.	Accessed	online	on	09/12/18	
at:	http://idies.jhu.edu/presentation/citizen-social-science/	
Davies,	K.	and	Heaphy,	B.	(2011).		Interactions	that	Matter:	Researching	Critical	
Associations.	Methodological	Innovations	Online,	Vol.	6:	3,	pp.	516.	
DCLG	Press	Release,	11	April	2012.	George	Clarke	appointed	empty	homes	advisor.	
Accessed	online	05/12/18:	https://www.gov.uk/government/news/george-clarke-
appointed-empty-homes-adviser	
Dennis,	P.	(2017)	Trust	yourself:	how	the	citizen	science	movement	proposes	a	
radical	rethink	of	the	relationship	between	scientists	and	the	public.	LSE	Impact	Blog.	
March	13th	2017.	Accessed	online	on	10/12/18	at:	
http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2017/03/13/trust-yourself-how-the-
citizen-science-movement-proposes-a-radical-rethink-of-the-relationship-between-
scientists-and-the-public/	
Disalvo,	C.,	Lodato,	T.,	Jenkins,	T.,	Lukens,	J.	and	Kim,	T.	(2014).	Making	public	things:	
How	HCI	design	can	express	matters	of	concern,	in	CHI	2014	Conf.	Hum.	Factors	
Comput.	Syst.,	ACM,	New	York,	pp.	23972406.	
Dobreva,	M.	and	Azzopardi,	D.	(2014).	Citizen	Science	in	the	Humanities:	A	Promise	
for	Creativity.	Proceedings	of	the	9th	International	Conference	on	Knowledge,	
References		
Information	and	Creativity	Support	Systems,	Limassol,	Cyprus,	November	6-8,	2014.	
Doucet,	A.	and	N.	Mauthner	(2002).	Knowing	Responsibly:	Linking	Ethics,	Research	
Practice	and	Epistemology,	in	M.	Mauthner,	M.	Birch,	J.	Jessop	and	T.	Miller	(eds)	
Ethics	in	Qualitative	Research.	London:	Sage.	
Durose,	C.,	Beebeejaun,	Y.,	Rees,	J.,	Richardson,	J.	and	Richardson,	L.	(2011).	Towards	
Co-production	in	research	with	communities,	Swindon:	AHRC.	
Durose,	C.,	Richardson,	L.	and	Perry,	B.	(2018).	Craft	metrics	to	value	co-production.	
Nature,	Vol.	562,	pp.	32-33.	
Economic	and	Social	Research	Council	(ESRC)	(2010).	Framework	for	Research	Ethics.	
Swindon:	Economic	and	Social	Research	Council.		
Ehn,	P.	(2008).	Participation	in	Design	Things,	in	Proceeding	PDC	08	Proc.	Tenth	
Anniversary	Conference	Participatory	Design	2008,	Indiana	University,	Indianapolis,	
IN,	pp.	92101.	
Elias	N	(1991).	What	is	Sociology?	London:	Hutchinson.	
Elliot,	M.	and	Purdam,	K.	(2015).	Exploiting	new	forms	of	data.	In:	Halfpenny,	P.	and	
Procter,	R.	(eds)	(2015)	Innovations	in	Digital	Research	Methods.	London:	SAGE	
Publications.	
Empty	Houses	Agency.	(2016).	Empty	homes:	why	do	some	areas	have	high	levels?	
London:	Empty	Homes.	
Etherington,	D.	and	Jones,	M.	(2017).	Devolution,	Austerity	and	Inclusive	Growth	in	
Greater	Manchester:	Assessing	Impacts	and	Developing	Alternatives.	Accessed	Online	
05/12/18	at:	https://www.mdx.ac.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0030/368373/Greater-
Manchester-Report.pdf	
Etikan,	I.,	Abubakar	Musa,	S.,	and	Sunusi	Alkassim,	R.	(2016).	Comparison	of	
Convenience	Sampling	and	Purposive	Sampling.	American	Journal	of	Theoretical	and	
Applied	Statistics.	Vol.	5:	1,	pp.	1-4.	
European	Citizen	Science	Association(ECSA)	(2015).	Ten	Principles	of	Citizen	Science.	
Available	at:	https://ecsa.citizen-science.net/engage-us/10-principles-citizen-science	
Evans,	J.	and	Foster,	J.	(2011).	Metaknowledge.	Science.	Vol.	331:	6018,	pp.	721-725.	
Evans,	J.	and	Jones,	P.	(2011).	The	walking	interview:	Methodology,	mobility	and	
place.	Applied	Geography,	Vol.	31.	pp.	849		858.	
Faulconbridge,	J.	and	Hui,	A.	(2016).	Traces	of	a	Mobile	Field:	Ten	Years	of	Mobilities	
Research.	Mobilities.	Vol.	11,	pp.	1-14.	
References		
Felt,	U.	and	Wynne,	B.	(2007).	Taking	European	Knowledge	Society	Seriously:		
Report	of	the	Expert	Group	on	Science	and	Governance	to	the	Science,	Economy	and	
Society	Directorate,	Directorate-General	for	Research,	European	Commission.	
Directorate-General	for	Research	Science,	Economy	and	Society:	European	
Commission.	
Fennel,	G.,	Phillipson,	C.	and	Evers,	H.	(1989).	The	Sociology	of	Old	Age.	Milton	Keynes:	
Open	University	Press.	
Fisher,	M.	and	Marcus,	G.		(1986).	Anthropology	as	Cultural	Critique:	An	Experimental	
Moment	in	the	Human	Sciences.	Chicago:	University	of	Chicago	Press.	
Filip,	A.,	Renedo,	A.,	Marston,	C.	(2017).	The	co-production	of	what?	Knowledge,	
values,	and	social	relations	in	health	care.	PLoS	Biol.	Vol.	15:	5,	e2001403.	
Fincham,	B.,	McGuinness,	M.	and	Murray,	L.	(eds)	(2010)	Mobile	Methodologies.	
Basingstoke:	Palgrave	Macmillan.	
Flick,	U.	(eds)	(2014).	An	Introduction	to	Qualitative	Research	Edition	5.	London:	Sage	
Publications.	
Flinders,	M.,	Wood,	M.	and	Cunningham,	M.	(2016).	The	politics	of	co-production:	
risks,	limits	and	pollution.	Evidence	&	Policy.	Vol	12:	2,	pp.	26179.	
Foucault,	M.	(1977).	Discipline	and	Punish:	The	Birth	of	the	Prison.	London:	Allen	Lane.	
Foucault,	M.	(1979).	A	History	of	Sexuality	Vol.	1.	London:	Allen	Lane.	
Fowler,	A.	and	Biekart,	K.,	(eds)	(2008).	Civic	Driven	Change:	Civic	Imagination	in	
Action.	The	Hague:	The	Hague	Institute	of	Social	Studies.	
Fox,	N.	and	Alldred,	P.	(2015),	Inside	the	research-assemblage:	New	materialism	and	
the	micropolitics	of	social	inquiry.	Sociological	Research	Online	20:	2,	p.6.	
Friere,	P.	(1996).	Pedagogy	of	the	Oppressed	(Trans:	Myra	Bergman	Ramos).	London:	
Penguin.	
Gabrys,	J.	(2014).	Programming	Environments:	Environmentality	and	Citizen	Sensing	
in	the	Smart	City.	Environment	and	Planning	D:	Society	and	Space.	Vol.	32:	1,	pp.	30-48.	
Gallacher,	L-A.	and	Gallagher,	M,	(2008).	Methodological	immaturity	in	childhood	
research:	Thinking	through	participatory	methods.	Childhood.	Vol.	15,	pp.	499-516.	
Gane,	N.	(2012).	Measure,	value	and	the	current	crises	of	sociology.	Sociological	
Review.	Vol.	59:2,	pp.	151-173.	
Garfinkel,	H.	(2002).	Ethnomethodology's	Program:	Working	Out	Durkheim's	Aphorism.	
Lanham:	Rowman	and	Littlefield.	
References		
Gaver,	W.,	Dunne,	A.,	and	Pacenti,	E.	(1999).	Cultural	Probes.	Interactions	Vol.	6:	1,	pp.	
21-29.	
Gaver,	W.,	Hooker,	B.	and	Dunner,	A.	(2001).	The	Presence	Project.	London:	Royal	
College	of	Art.	
Gaver,	W.,	Boucher,	A.,	Pennington,	S.,	and	Walker,	B.	(2004).	Cultural	probes	and	the	
value	of	uncertainty.	Interactions:	New	Visions	of	Human-Computer	Interaction.	Vol.	
11:	5,	pp.	53-56.	
Geertz,	C.	(1973).	The	Interpretation	of	Cultures.	New	York,	NY:	Basic	Books.	
Gibson,	R.	and	Cantijoch,	M.	(2013).	Conceptualizing	and	measuring	participation	in	
the	age	of	the	internet:	Is	online	political	engagement	really	different	to	offline?	
Journal	of	Politics.	Vol.	75:	3,	pp.	701-716.	
Giddens,	A.	(1990).	The	consequences	of	modernity.	Cambridge:	Polity.	
Gommerman,	L.,	and	Monroe,	M.	(2012).	Lessons	learned	from	evaluations	of	citizen	
science	programs.	Gainseville,	FL,	USA:	University	of	Florida.	
Goodson,	L.	and	Phillimore,	J.	(2012).	Community	research	for	participation:	from	
theory	to	method.	Bristol:	The	Policy	Press.	
Graham,	C.,	Rouncefield,	M.,	Gibbs,	M.,	Vetere,	F.	and	Cheverst,	K.	(2007).	How	probes	
Work.	OzCHI	2007	Proceedings,	OzCHI,	28-30	November,	Adelaide,	Australia.	
Gray,	J.	(2016)	Is	it	time	for	institutions	to	ensure	data	infrastructures	are	more	
responsive	to	their	public?	LSE	Blog	accessed	online	07/10/2016:	
http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2016/10/07/it-is-time-for-
institutions-to-ensure-data-infrastructures-are-more-responsive-to-their-publics/	
Gray,	J.,	Lmmerhirt,	D.	and	Bounegru,	L.	(2016).	Changing	What	Counts:	How	Can	
Citizen-Generated	and	Civil	Society	Data	Be	Used	as	an	Advocacy	Tool	to	Change	Official	
Data	Collection?	Available	at	SSRN:	https://ssrn.com/abstract=2742871	
Green,	M.	(2010).	Making	Development	Agents:	Participation	as	Boundary	Object	in	
International	Development.	Journal	of	Development	Studies.	Vol.	46:	7,	pp.	1240
1263.	
Gross,	M.	(2007).	The	unknown	in	process:	dynamic	connections	of	ignorance	non-
knowledge	and	related	concepts.	Current	Sociology.	Vol.	55,	pp.	742759.		
Guest,	G.,	MacQueen,	K.	and	Namey,	E.	(2012).	Applied	thematic	analysis.	Thousand	
Oaks,	CA:	Sage.	
Habermas,	J.	(1984).	The	Theory	of	Communicative	Action.	Boston:	Beacon	Press.	
References		
Haklay,	M.	(2018).	Participatory	Citizen	Science.	In	Hecker,	S.,	Hacklay,	M.,	Bowser,	A.,	
Makuch,	Z.,	Vogel,	J.,	and	Bonn,	A.	(2018).	Citizen	Science:	Innovation	in	Open	Science,	
Society	and	Policy.	London:	UCL	Press.	
Haklay,	M.	(2013)	Citizen	science	and	volunteered	geographic	information:	overview	
and	typology	of	participation,	in	Sui,	D.,	Elwood,	S.	and	Goodchild,	M.	(eds)	
Crowdsourcing	Geographic	Knowledge:	Volunteered	Geographic	Information	in	Theory	
and	Practice.	Springer,	Berlin.	
Hannam,	K.,	Sheller,	M.	and	Urry,	J.	(2006).	Editorial:	Mobilities,	Immobilities	and	
Moorings,	Mobilities.	Vol.	1:1,	pp.1-22.	
Haraway,	D.	(1988).	Situated	Knowledges:	The	Science	Question	in	Feminism	and	the	
Privilege	of	Partial	Perspective.	Feminist	Studies.	Vol.	14:	3,	pp.	575-599.	
Harding,	S.	(1987).	The	Science	Question	in	Feminism.	Ithaca:	Cornell	University	Press.	
Harding,	S.	(1991).	Whose	Science?	Whose	Knowledge?	Buckingham:	Open	University	
Press.	
Hardy,	K.	(2010).	Proletaria	de	la	Vida:	Sex	Worker	Organising	in	Argentina.	PhD.	
Queen	Mary,	University	of	London.	
Harney,	L.,	McCurry,	J.,	Scott,	J.	and	Wills,	J.	(2016).	Developing	'process	pragmatism'	
to	underpin	engaged	research	in	human	geography.	Progress	in	Human	Geography.	
Vol.	40:	3,	pp.	316-333.	
Heimer,	C.	(2012)	Wicked	ethics:	Compliance	work	and	the	practice	of	ethics	in	HIV	
research	Social	Science	&	Medicine.	Vol.	98,	pp.	371-378.	
Hein,	J.,	Evans,	J.	and	Jones,	P.	(2008).	'Mobile	methodologies:	Theory,	technology	and	
practice'.	Geography	Compass.	Vol.	2:	5,	pp.	1266-1285.	
Heiss,	R.	and	Matthes,	J.	(2017).	Citizen	Science	in	the	Social	Sciences:	A	Call	for	More	
Evidence	GAIA	26/1(2017):	pp.	22	26.	
Hess,	C.	and	Ostrom,	E.	(eds)	(2007)	Understanding	Knowledge	as	a	Commons:	From	
Theory	to	Practice.	Cambridge	MA:	MIT	Press.		
Hester,	M.,	Donovan,	C.	and	Fahmy,	E.	(2010).	Feminist	epistemology	and	the	politics	
of	method:	surveying	same	sex	domestic	violence,	International	Journal	of	Social	
Research	Methodology,	Vol.	13:	3,	pp.	251-263.	
Highmore,	B.	(2002).	The	Everyday	life	reader.	Abingdon:	Routeledge	
Hillgren,	P-A.,	Seravalli,	A.	and	Emilson,	A.	(2011).	Prototyping	and	infrastructuring	in	
design	for	social	innovation.,	CoDesign.	Vol.	7:	3/4,	pp.	169183.	
References		
Holland,	J.	eds	(2013).	Who	Counts?	The	power	of	participatory	statistics.	Rugby:	
Practical	Action	Publishing	Ltd.	
Holmes,	B.	(2017)	On	the	co-production	of	research:	why	we	should	say	what	we	mean,	
mean	what	we	say,	and	learn	as	we	go.	LSE	Impact	Blog.	Accessed	at	:	
http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2017/09/21/on-the-co-production-of-
research-why-we-should-say-what-we-mean-mean-what-we-say-and-learn-as-we-
Holmes,	B.,	Best,	A.,	Davies,	H.,	Hunter,	D.,	Kelly,	M.,	Marshall,	M.,	and	Rycroft-	Malone,	
J.	(2017).	Mobilising	knowledge	in	complex	health	systems:	a	call	to	action.	Evidence	&	
Policy.	Vol	13	no	3,	pp.	53960.	
Housley,	W.,	Procter,	R.,	Edwards,	A.,	Burnap,	P.,	Williams,	M.,	Sloan,	L.,	Rana,	O.,	
Morgan,	J.,	Voss,	A.	and	Greenhill,	A.	(2014).	Big	and	broad	social	data	and	the	
sociological	imagination:	A	collaborative	response.	Big	Data	&	Society.	Vol.	1:	2,	pp.1
Hudson,	M.,	Phillips,	J.,	Ray,	K.	and	Barnes,	H.	(2007).		Social	cohesion	in	diverse	
communities.	York:	Joseph	Rowntree	Foundation.	
Hughes,	C.	and	Cohen,	R.	(2010).	Feminists	really	do	count:	the	complexity	of	feminist	
methodologies.	International	Journal	of	Social	Research	Methodology.	Vol.	13:	3,	pp.	
189-196.	
Hulme,	Moss	Side	&	Rusholme	Neighbourhood	Mosaic	Profile	2015.	Accessed	Online	
on	05/12/18	at:	
www.manchester.gov.uk/download/downloads/id/24337/mosaic_profile.pdf	
Hutchinson,	P.,	Read,	R.	and	Sharrock,	W.	(2008).	There	is	no	such	thing	as	a	social	
science.	London:	Routeledge.	
Hymes,	D.	(1996)	Ethnography,	linguistics,	narrative	inequality:	toward	and	
understanding	of	voice.	London:	Taylor	&	Francis	
Ingold,	T.	(2017)	Anthropology	contra	ethnography.	Hau:	Journal	of	Ethnographic	
Theory.	Vol,	7:	1,	pp.	2126.	
Irwin,	A.	(1995)	Citizen	Science:	A	Study	of	People,	Expertise	and	Sustainable	
Development	London:	Routeledge	
Irwin,	A.	and	Wynne,	B.	(1996)	Misunderstanding	Science?	The	Public	Reconstruction	
of	Science	and	Technology	Cambridge:	Cambridge	University	Press	
Jasanoff,	S.	(2003)	Technologies	of	Humility:	Citizen	Participation	in	Governing	
References		
Science.	Minerva.	Vol.	41:	pp.223244.	
Jasanoff,	S.,	(2007).	Technologies	of	Humility.	Nature.	Vol.	450:	33.	
Joffe,	H.	(2011).	Thematic	analysis.	In	D.	Harper	and	A.	R.	Thompson	(eds),	Qualitative	
methods	in	mental	health	and	psychotherapy:	A	guide	for	students	and	practitioners.	
Chichester:	Wiley.	
Jung,	T.,	Harrow,	J.	and	Pharoah,	C.	(2012).	Co-producing	research:	Working	together	
or	falling	apart.	Centre	for	Charitable	Giving	and	Philanthropy	(CGAP),	briefing	note	8.	
Karasti,	H.	and	Syrjnen,	A.-L.	(2004).	Artful	infrastructuring	in	two	cases	of	
community	PD,	in	Proc.	37th	Annu.	Hawaii	Int.	Conf.	Syst.	Sci.	2004,	ACM,	New	York,	
pp.	2030.	
Kasperowski,	D.	and	Hillman,	T.	(2018.)	The	epistemic	culture	in	an	online	citizen	
science	project:	Programs,	antiprograms	and	epistemic	subjects.	Social	Studies	of	
Science.	Vol.	48:	4,	pp.	564588.	
Kasperowski,	D.,	Kullenburg,	C.	and	Mkitalo,	A.	(2017).	Embedding	Citizen	Science	in	
Research:	Forms	of	engagement,	scientific	output	and	values	for	science,	policy	and	
society.	SocArXiv.	February	27.	Online	at:	https://osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/tfsgh/	
Kennedy,	H.	and	Hill,	R.	(2017).	The	Feeling	of	Numbers:	emotions	in	everyday	
engagements	with	data	and	their	visualisation.	Sociology.	Vol.	52:	4,	pp.	830-848.	
Keough,	H.	and	Blahna,	D.	(2006).	Achieving	integrative,	collaborative	ecosystem	
management.	Conservation	Biology.	Vol.	20,	pp.	13731382.	
Kimbell,	L.	(2013)	An	inventive	practice	perspective	on	designing.	PhD.	Lancaster	
University.	
Kitchin,	R.,	Dodge,	M.	and	Perkins,	C.	(2011).	Power	and	Politics	of	Mapping.	In:	The	
Map	Reader:	Theories	of	Mapping	Practice	and	Cartographic	Representation.	Wiley,	
Chichester,	pp.	387-394.	
Kitchin,	R.	and	Lauriault,	T.,	(2014).	Towards	Critical	Data	Studies:	Charting	and	
Unpacking	Data	Assemblages	and	Their	Work.	In	Eckert,	J.,	Shears,	A.	and	Thatcher,	J.	
(eds)	Geoweb	and	Big	Data.	Nebraska:	University	of	Nebraska	Press.	
Krohn	W.	(2001).	Knowledge	societies.	In	Smelser	N.,	and	Baltes	P.	(eds)	
International	Encyclopaedia	of	the	Social	and	Behavioural	Sciences.	Oxford:	Blackwell.	
Kruger,	L.	and	Shannon,	M.	(2000).	Getting	to	know	ourselves	and	our	places	through	
participation	in	civic	social	assessment.	Society	and	Natural	Resources.	Vol.	13,	pp.	
461478.	
References		
Kullenberg,	C.	(2015).	Citizen	Science	as	Resistance:	Crossing	the	Boundary	Between	
Reference	and	Representation.	Journal	of	Resistance	Studies.	Vol.	1	pp.	50-77.	
Kullenberg	C,	and	Kasperowski,	D.	(2016).	What	Is	Citizen	Science?		A	Scientometric	
Meta-Analysis.	PLoS	ONE.	Vol.	11:	1,	e0147152.		
Kusenbach,	M.	(2003).	Street	phenomenology:	the	go-along	as	ethnographic	research	
tool.	Ethnography.	Vol.	4,	pp.	455-485.	
Lakshminarayanan,	S.	(2007).	Using	citizens	to	do	science	versus	citizens	as	scientists.	
Ecology	and	Society.	Vol.	12:	2,	pp.	1123.	
Lash,	S.	(2007).	Power	after	hegemony:	Cultural	studies	in	mutation.	Theory,	Culture	&	
Society.	Vol.	24:	3,	pp.	5578.	
Latour,	B.,	(2004).	Politics	of	Nature.	Cambridge,	MA:		Harvard	University	Press	
Latour,	B.	and	Weibel,	P.,	(2005).	Making	Things	Public:	Atmospheres	of	Democracy.	
Cambridge,	MA:	MIT	Press.		
Latour,	B.	and	Woolgar,	S.	(1979).	Laboratory	Life:	The	Social	Construction	of	Scientific	
Facts.	Beverly	Hills:	Sage.	
Lave,	J.	(1991).	Situating	learning	in	communities	of	practice.	Perspectives	on	socially	
shared	cognition.		Vol.	2,	pp.	63-82.	
Lave,	J.	and	Wenger,	E.	(1991).	Situated	Learning:	legitimate	peripheral	participation.	
NY,	US:	Cambridge	University	Press.	
Lave,	J.,	and	Wenger,	E.	(1998).	Communities	of	practice:	Learning,	meaning,	and	
identity.	Cambridge:	Cambridge	University	Press.	
Law,	J.	(2007).	Making	a	mess	with	method.	In:	Outhwaite,	W.and	Turner,	S.	(eds)	The	
Sage	Handbook	of	Social	Science	Methodology.	London:	Sage.	
Law,	J.,	Ruppert,	E.	and	Savage,	M.	(2011).	The	double	social	life	of	methods.	Working	
Paper	Series:	Working	Paper	No.	95.	Milton	Keynes:	ESRC	Centre	for	Research	on	
Socio-Cultural	Change	(CRESC).	
Law,	J.	and	Urry,	J.	(2004).	Enacting	the	social.	Economy	and	Society.	Vol.	33:	3,	pp.	
390-410.		
Le	Dantec,	C.	(2012).	Participation	and	Publics:	Supporting	Community	Engagement,	
in	Proceedings	of	the	SIGCHI	Conference	on	Human	Factors	in	Computing	Systems.	
ACM,	New	York.	pp.	13511360.	
Levitas,	R.	(2013).	Utopia	as	method:	the	imaginary	reconstitution	of	society.	
Basingstoke:	Palgrave	Macmillan.	
References		
Lewin,	K.	(1946).	Action	research	and	minority	problems.	Social	Issues	2,	4,	pp.	3446.	
Lindsey,	R.	and	Bulloch,	S.	(2014).	A	Sociologist's	Field	Notes	to	the	Mass	Observation	
Archive:	A	Consideration	of	the	Challenges	of	're-Using'	Mass	Observation	Data	in	a	
Longitudinal	Mixed-Methods	Study.	Sociological	Research	Online.	Vol.	19:	3,	p.	8.	
Lomax,	H.	(2015).	Seen	and	heard?	Ethics	and	agency	in	participatory	visual	research	
with	children,	young	people	and	families.	Families,	Relationships	and	Societies.	Vol.	4:	
3,	pp.	493502.	
Lupton,	D.	(2016).	The	Quantified	Self.	Cambridge:	Polity	Press.	
Lury,	C.	and	Wakeford,	N.	(eds)	(2012).	Inventive	Methods:	the	happening	of	the	social.	
Oxon:	Routeledge.	
Lynch,	M.,	(1993).	Scientific	practice	and	ordinary	action:	Ethnomethodology	and	social	
studies	of	science	Cambridge:	Cambridge	University	Press	
Lynch,	M.	(2000).	Against	Reflexivity	as	an	Academic	Virtue	and	Source	of	Privileged	
Knowledge.	Theory,	Culture	and	Society.	Vol.	17:	3,	pp.	26-54.	
Lyon,	D.	(2001).	Surveillance	Society:	Monitoring	Everyday	Life.	Oxford:	Oxford	
University	Press.	
MacGregor,	S.	and	Pardoe,	S.	(2018).	Talking	Rubbish	in	Moss	Side:	Exploring	the	
problem	of	litter	in	the	streets	and	alleys	of	a	deprived	neighbourhood	with	a	large	
student	population.		Accessed	online	05/12/18	from:	
https://www.uppingit.org.uk/rubbish-research/	
Madge,	C.,	and	Harrisson,	T.	(1937).	Mass	Observation.	London:	Frederick	Muller	Ltd.	
Mahr,	D.,	Gbel,	C.,	Irwin,	A.	and	Vohland,	K.	Watched	or	being	watched:	Enhancing	
productive	discussion	between	the	citizen	sciences,	the	social	sciences	and	the	
humanities.	In	Hecker,	S.,	Hacklay,	M.,	Bowser,	A.,	Makuch,	Z.,	Vogel,	J.,	and	Bonn,	A.	
(2018).	Citizen	Science:	Innovation	in	Open	Science,	Society	and	Policy.	London:	UCL	
Press.	
Mair,	M.,	Greiffenhagen,	C.	and	Sharrock,	W.	(2013).	Social	studies	of	social	science:	a	
working	bibliography.	National	Centre	for	Research	Methods	Working	Paper	08/13.	
Marcus,	G.	(1998).	Ethnography	through	Thick	and	Thin.	Princeton:	Princeton	
University	Press.		
Markham,	A.	(2006).	Method	as	ethic,	ethic	as	method.	Journal	of	Information	Ethics.	
Vol.	15:	2,	pp.	3755.	
Marres,	N.	(2012).	Experiment:	the	experiment	in	living.	In	Lury,	C.	and	Wakeford,	N.	
References		
(eds)	(2012).	Inventive	Methods:	The	Happening	of	the	Social.	Abingdon:	Routeledge.	
Marres,	N.	(2014).	Technology	and	Culture	are	becoming	more	entangled.	LSE	Impact	
Blog.	Accessed	online	on	10/12/18	at:	
	http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2014/12/03/philosophy-of-data-
science-noortje-marres/	
Marres,	N.,	Guggenheim,	M.	and	Wilkie,	A.	(eds)	(2018).	Inventing	the	Social.	
Manchester:	Mattering	Press.	
Martin	S.	(2010).	Co-production	of	social	research:	Strategies	for	engaged	scholarship.	
Public	Money	and	Management.	Vol.	30:	4,	pp.	211-218.	
Mason,	J.	(2002).	Sampling	and	selection	in	qualitative	research.	In	Qualitative	
Researching,	2nd	edition.	London:	Sage.	
Mason,	J.	(2007).	Re-using	qualitative	data:	on	the	merits	of	an	investigative	
epistemology,	Sociological	Research	Online.	Vol.	12:	3.	
Mason,	J.	(2011).	Facet	Methodology:	the	case	for	an	inventive	research	orientation.	
Methodological	Innovations	Online.	Vol.	6:	3,	pp.	75-92.	
Mass	Observation	(1937).	Mass	Observation,	introduction	by	Julian	Huxley	London:	
Frederick	Muller.	
Mattern,	S.	(2016).	Public	In/Formation,	Places	Journal,	November	2016.	Accessed	
10	Jan	2018	at:	https://doi.org/10.22269/161115	
Mauthner,	M.	(2012).	Accounting	for	our	part	of	the	entangled	webs	we	weave:	
Ethical	and	moral	issues	in	digital	data	sharing,	in	Tina	Miller,	Maxine	Birch,	Melanie	
Mauthner	and	Julie	Jessop	(eds.),	Ethics	in	Qualitative	Research.	London:	Sage.	
Mauthner,	N.	and	Doucet,	A.	(2003).	Reflexive	Accounts	and	Accounts	of	Reflexivity	in	
Qualitative	Data	Analysis.	Sociology.	Vol.	37:	3,	pp.	413431.	
May,	V.	(2016).	When	Recognition	Fails:	Mass	Observation	Project	Accounts	of	Not	
Belonging.	Sociology.	Vol.	50:	4.	
McQuillan,	D.	(2014).	The	Countercultural	Potential	of	Citizen	Science.	Journal	of	
Media	and	Culture.	Vol.	17:	6.	
McTaggart,	R.	(1996).	Issues	for	participatory	action	researchers.	In	O.	Zuber-Skerritt	
(ed.)	New	Directions	in	Action	Research.	London:	Falmer	Press.	
Mills,	C.	W.	(1959).	The	Sociological	Imagination.	Oxford:	Oxford	University	Press.	
Mirowski,	P.	(2017).	Against	citizen	science.	Aeon	Magazine	20th	November	2017.	
Accessed	online	on	05/12/18	at:	https://aeon.co/essays/is-grassroots-citizen-
References		
science-a-front-for-big-business	
Moerman,	G.	(2015).	Time	for	citizen	science	in	the	social	sciences.	Social	Theory	
Applied.	Accessed	online	on	10/12/18	at:		
https://socialtheoryapplied.com/2015/01/03/time-citizen-science-social-sciences/	
Moore,	N.	(2007).	(Re)Using	Qualitative	Data?	Sociological	Research	Online	12	(3)1.	
Mueller,	M.,	Tippins,	D.,	and	Bryan,	L.	(2012).	The	future	of	citizen	science.	Democracy	
and	Education.	Vol.	20:	1,	pp.1-12.	
Mulgan,	G.	(2017).	Lets	create	a	nation	of	social	scientists	THE	Opinion.	Accessed	
online	on	10/12/18	at:	https://www.timeshighereducation.com/opinion/lets-create-
nation-social-scientists	
Mulkay,	M.	(1991).	Sociology	of	Science:	A	Sociological	Pilgrimage.	Philadelphia:	Open	
University.	
Narfus,	D.	and	Sherman,	J.	(2014)	This	One	Does	Not	Go	Up	to	11:	The	Quantified	Self	
Movement	as	an	Alternative	Big	Data	Practice.	International	Journal	of	
Communication.	Vol.	8,	pp.	17841794.	
Neal,	S.	and	Murji,	K.	(2015).	Sociologies	of	Everyday	Life:	Editors	Introduction	to	the	
Special	Issue.	Sociology.	Vol.	49:5,	pp.	811-819.	
Nold,	C.	(2017).	Device	Studies	of	Participatory	Sensing:	Ontological	Politics	and	Design	
Interventions.	PhD.	University	College	London.		
Noveck.	B.	(2016).	Could	crowdsourcing	expertise	be	the	future	of	government?	The	
Guardian.	Accessed	online	on	11th	January	2018:	
https://www.theguardian.com/science/political-science/2016/nov/30/could-
crowdsourcing-expertise-be-the-future-of-government	
Noy,	C.	(2008).	Sampling	knowledge:	the	hermeneutics	of	snowball	sampling	in	
qualitative	research.	International	Journal	of	Social	Research	Methodology.	Vol.	11:	4,	
pp.	327-344.	
Nutley,	S.,	Walter,	I.	and	Davies,	H.	(2007).	Using	evidence.	How	research	can	inform	
public	services.	Bristol:	The	Policy	Press.	
Office	for	National	Statistics;	National	Records	of	Scotland;	Northern	Ireland	Statistics	
and	Research	Agency.	(2016).	2011	Census	aggregate	data.	UK	Data	Service	(Edition:	
June	2016)	
Oman,	S.	(2016).	Measuring	National	Wellbeing:	What	Matters	to	You?	What	Matters	
to	Whom?	In:	White	S.,	Blackmore	C.	(eds)	Cultures	of	Wellbeing.	Palgrave	Macmillan,	
References		
London.	
Oman,	S.	(2017).	All	being	well:	cultures	of	participation	and	the	cult	of	measurement.	
PhD.	University	of	Manchester.	
Ostrom,	E.	(1990)	Governing	the	Commons:	The	Evolution	of	Institutions	for	Collective	
Action.	Cambridge:	Cambridge	University	Press.		
Palen,	L.,	Vieweg,	S.	and	Anderson,	K.	(2011).	Supporting	Everyday	Analysts	in	
Safety-	and	Time-Critical	Situations.	The	Information	Society.	Vol.	27:	1,	pp.5262.		
Peterson,	A.	(2001).	Being	Human:	Ethics,	Environment,	and	Our	Place	in	the	World.	
Berkeley:	University	of	California	Press.	
Pettibone,	L.,	Vohland,	K.,	Ziegler,	D.	(2017).	Understanding	the	(inter)disciplinary	
and	institutional	diversity	of	citizen	science:	A	survey	of	current	practice	in	Germany	
and	Austria.	PLoS	ONE.	Vol.	12:	6,	e0178778.		
Pollen,	A.	(2013).	Research	Methodology	in	Mass	Observation	Past	and	Present:	
Scientifically,	about	as	valuable	as	a	chimpanzees	tea	party	at	the	zoo?	History	
Workshop	Journal.	History	Workshop	Journal.	Vol.	75:	1,	pp.	213235.	
Porter,	T.	(1995).	Trust	in	Numbers:	The	Pursuit	of	Objectivity	in	Science	and	Public	
Life.	Princeton:	Princeton	University	Press.	
Powell,	A.	(2018).	Constructing	Big	Data:	The	Data	Walkshop	and	Radical	Bottom-up	
Data	Knowledge	in	Ethnography	for	a	Data-Saturated	World	(2018)	edited	by	
Hannah	Knox.	Manchester:	University	of	Manchester	Press.	
Procter,	R.,	Housley,	W.,	Williams,	M.	et	al.	(2013).	Enabling	Social	Media	research	
through	citizen	social	science.	In:	ECSCW	2013	Adjunct	Proceedings,	3,	Cyprus.			
Purbrick,	L.	(2007).	The	Wedding	Present:	Domestic	Life	beyond	Consumption.	
Aldershot:	Ashgate.	
Purdam,	K.	(2014).	Citizen	social	science	and	citizen	data?	Methodological	and	ethical	
challenges	for	social	research.	Current	Sociology.	Vol.	62:	3,	pp.	374392.	
Quercia,	D.	(2013).	Urban:	crowdsourcing	for	the	good	of	London.	In	Proc.	of	the	22nd	
Int.	World	Wide	Web	Conf.,	Rio	de	Janeiro,	Brazil,	1317	May	2013,	pp.	591592.	
Rabinow,	P.	and	Marcus,	G.	(2009)	Designs	for	an	anthropology	of	the	contemporary.	
Durham,	North	Carolina:	Duke	University	Press.	
Raddick,	M.,	Bracey,	G.,	Carney,	K.,	Gyuk,	G.,	Borne,	K.,	Wallin,	J.	and	Jacoby,	S.	(2009).	
Citizen	Science:	Status	and	Research	Directions	for	the	Coming	Decade.	Astro2010:	
The	Astronomy	and	Astrophysics	Decadal	Survey,	Position	Papers,	no.	46.	
References		
Rahman,	T.	(2010).	True	Blues,	Blacks	and	in-betweens:	Urban	Regeneration	in	Moss	
Side,	Manchester.	PhD.		University	of	Manchester.	
Reason,	P.	and	Bradbury,	H.	(eds)	(2013).	The	Sage	Handbook	of	Action	Research:	
Participative	Inquiry	and	Practice.	(2nd	Edition).	London:	Sage.		
Reed,	A.	(2002).	City	of	details:	interpreting	the	personality	of	London.	Journal	of	the	
Royal	Anthropological	Institute,	8,	127-141.	
Richardson,	L.	(2013).	Putting	the	Research	Boot	on	the	Policymakers	Foot:	Can	
Participatory	Approaches	Change	the	Relationship	between	Policymakers	and	
Evaluation?	Social	Policy	and	Administration.	Vol.	47:	4,	pp.	483500.	
Richardson,	L.	(2014).	Engaging	the	Public	in	Policy	Research:	Are	Community	
Researchers	the	Answer?	Politics	and	Governance.	Vol.	2:	1,	pp.	32-44.	
Richardson,	L.	(2017).'Participatory	evaluation',	in	B.	Greve	(ed)	Handbook	of	social	
policy	evaluation.	Cheltenham:	Edward	Elgar.	
Rogers,	R.	and	Marres,	N.,	(2002).	French	scandals	on	the	web,	and	on	the	streets:	
stretching	the	limits	of	reported	reality.	Asian	Journal	of	Social	Science.	Vol.	30:	2,	pp.	
339353.	
Rose,	G.	(1997).	Situating	knowledges:	positionality,	reflexivities	and	other	tactics.	
Progress	in	Human	Geography.	Vol.	21:	3,	pp.	305-320.	
Ruppert,	E.	and	Savage,	M.	(2012).	Transactional	politics.	The	Sociological	Review.	Vol.	
59:	2,	pp.73-92.	
Ruppert,	E.,	Law,	J.	and	Savage,	M.	(2013).	Reassembling	social	science	methods:	The	
challenge	of	digital	devices.	Theory,	Culture	&	Society.	Vol.	30:	4,	pp.	2246.	
Salesses,	P.,	Schechtner,	K.,	Hidalgo,	CA,	(2013)	The	collaborative	image	of	the	city:	
mapping	the	inequality	of	urban	perception.	PLoS	ONE	8,	e68400.	
Savage,	M.	(2007).	Changing	Social	Class	Identities	in	Post-War	Britain:	Perspectives	
from	Mass-Observation.	Sociological	Research	Online.	Vol.	12:	3,	p.	6	.	
Savage,	M.,	(2009).	Contemporary	sociology	and	the	challenge	of	descriptive	
assemblage.	European	Journal	of	Social	Theory.	Vol.	12:1,	pp.	155174.	
Savage,	M.,	(2010).	Identities	and	Social	Change	in	Britain	since	1940:	The	Politics	of	
Method.	Oxford:	Clarendon.	
Savage,	M.	(2016).	Epilogue:	From	the	Coming	Crisis	to	the	Green	Shoots	of	
Recovery?	In:	McKie,	L.	and	Ryan,	L.	(2016)	An	End	to	the	Crisis	of	Empirical	
Sociology?	Trends	and	Challenges	in	Social	Research.	Abingdon:	Routeledge.	
References		
Savage,	M.	(2013).	The	Social	Life	of	Methods:	A	Critical	Introduction.	Theory,	Culture	
and	Society.	Vol	30:	4,	pp.321.	
Savage,	M.	and	Burrows,	R.,	(2007).	The	coming	crisis	of	empirical	sociology.	
Sociology.	Vol.	41:	5,	pp.	885899.		
Serrano	Sanz,	F.,	Holocher-Ertl,	T.		Kieslinger,	B.,	Sanz	Garca,	F.	and	Silva,	C.	(2014).	
European	Union	White	Paper	on	Citizen	Science	for	Europe.	European	Commission:	
Socientize	Consortium.	
Shapiro,	D.	(1994).	The	limits	of	ethnography:	Combining	social	sciences	for	CSCW.	In	
Proceedings	of	CSCW	1994,	pp.41728.	New	York:	ACM	Press.	
Sharrock,	W.	and	Anderson,	R.	(2008).	Understanding	Peter	Winch.	Inquiry.	Vol.	28:	1-
4,	pp.119122.		
Shaw,	J.	(1994).	Intellectual	Property,	Representative	Experience	and	Mass	Observation.	
Mass	Observation	Archive	Occasional	Paper	No	9,	Brighton.	
Sheridan,	D.,	Street	B.	and	Bloome,	D.	(2000).	Writing	Ourselves:	Mass-Observation	and	
Literary	Practices.	New	Jersey:	Hampton	Press	Inc.	
Shipman,	M.	(1997).	The	Limitations	of	Social	Research,	4th	edition.	New	York:	
Longman.	
Shirk,	J.,	Ballard,	H.,	Wilderman,	C.,	Phillips,	T.,	Wiggins,	A.,	Jordan,	R.,	McCallie,	E.,	
Minarchek,	M.,	Lewenstein,	B.	Krasny,	M.	and	Bonney,	R.	(2012).	Public	participation	
in	scientific	research:	a	framework	for	deliberate	design.	Ecology	and	Society.	Vol.	17:	
2,	p.	29.	
Silvertown,	J.	(2009).	A	new	dawn	for	citizen	science	Trends	in	Ecology	and	Evolution	
Vol.	24:	9,	pp.	467471.	
Simon,	H.	(1996).	The	sciences	of	the	artificial.	Cambridge,	MA:	MIT	Press.	
Slack,	R.	(2000).	Reflexivity	or	Sociological	Practice:	A	Reply	to	May.	Sociological	
Research	Online.	Vol.	5:	1.	
Social	Research	Association	(SRA)	(2003)	Ethical	Guidelines.	London:	Social	Research	
Association.	
Solymosi,	R.,	Bowers,	K.	and	Fujiyama,	T.	(2017).	Crowdsourcing	Subjective	
Perceptions	of	Neighbourhood	Disorder:	Interpreting	Bias	in	Open	Data.	The	British	
Journal	of	Criminology.	Vol.	58:	4,	pp.	944967.	
Spicker,	P.	(2011).	Ethical	covert	research.	Sociology.	Vol.	45:	1,	pp.	118133.	
Steinmetz,	G.	(2005).	The	Politics	of	Method	in	the	Human	Sciences:	Positivism	and	Its	
References		
Epistemological	Others.	Durham:	Duke	University	Press.	
Stengers,	I.	(2003).	Cosmopolitiques	Paris:	Editions	La	Decouverte.	
Stengers,	I.	(2005).	Deleuze	and	Guattaris	last	enigmatic	message.	Angelaki.	Vol.	10,	
pp.	15168.	
Stevens,	M.,	Vitos,	M.,	Altenbuchner,	J.	Conquest,	G.	Lewis,	J.	and	Haklay,	M.	(2014).	
Taking	Participatory	Citizen	Science	to	Extremes.	IEEE	Pervasive	Computing.	Vol.	13:	
2,	pp.	20-29.	
Stewart,	P.	and	Lucio,	M.	(2017).	Research,	participation	and	the	neo-liberal	context:	
the	challenges	of	emergent	participatory	and	emancipatory	research	approaches.	
Ephemera:	Theory	and	politics	in	organisation.	Vol.	17:	3,	pp.	533-556.	
Strathern,	M.	(1992).	After	Nature:	English	Kinship	in	the	Late	Twentieth	Century.	
Cambridge:	Cambridge	University	Press.	
Suchman,	L.,	(2000).	Human	Machine	Reconfigurations	Plans	and	Situated	Actions,	
Cambridge	University	Press.	
Suchman,	L.	(2011).	Practice	and	its	Overflows:	Reflections	on	Order	and	Mess.	
TECNOSCIENZA	Italian	Journal	of	Science	&	Technology	Studies.	Vol.2:	1,	pp.	21-30.	
Summerfield,	P.	(1985).	Mass-Observation:	Social	Research	or	Social	Movement?		
Journal	of	Contemporary	History.	Vol.	20:	3,	pp.439-452.	
Sweetman,	P.	(2009).	Just	anybody?	Images,	ethics	and	recognition.	In	J.	Gillett	(ed)	
Just	anybody,	Winchester:	Fotonet/The	Winchester	Gallery,	7-9.	
Taylor,	A.	Lindley,	S.,	Regan,	T.	and	Sweeney,	D.	(2014).	Data	and	life	on	the	street.	Big	
Data	&	Society.	JulyDecember	2014:	pp.	17.	
Taylor,	A.	Lindley,	S.	Regan,	T.,	Sweeney,	D.,	Vlachokyriakos,	V.,	Grainger,	L.	and	Lingel,	
J.	(2015).	Data-in-Place:	Thinking	through	the	Relations	Between	Data	and	
Community.	HCI	for	Civic	Engagement	CHI	2015,	April	18	-	23	2015,	Seoul,	Republic	of	
Korea.		
Taylor,	I.,	Evans,	K.	and	Fraser,	P.	(1996).	A	Tale	of	Two	Cities:	Global	Change,	Local	
Feeling,	and	Everyday	Life	in	the	North	of	England.	A	Study	of	Manchester	and	Sheffield.	
London:	Routledge.	
Thinyane,	M.	(2017).	Investigating	an	Architectural	Framework	for	Small	Data	
Platforms.	In	Data	for	societal	challenges	-17th	European	Conference	on	Digital	
Government.	ECDG	2017,	pp.	220227.	
Thomas,	J.	(2002).	Dianas	Mourning:	A	peoples	history.	Wales:	University	of	Wales	
References		
Press.	
Thrift,	N.	(2005).	Knowing	Capitalism.	London:	Sage	Publications.	
Thrift,	N.	(2011).	Lifeworld	Inc.:	and	what	to	do	about	it.	Environment	and	Planning	D:	
Society	and	Space.	Vol.	29,	pp.	5-26.	
Tiidenburg,	K.	(2018).	Ethics	in	Digital	Research.	In	Uwe	Flick	(eds.)	(2018).	The	SAGE	
Handbook	of	Qualitative	Data	Collection.	London:	Sage.	
Tolman,	D.	L.,	and	Brydon-Miller,	M.	(2001).	From	subjects	to	subjectivities:	a	
handbook	of	interpretive	and	participatory	methods.	Qualitative	studies	in	psychology.	
New	York:	New	York	University	Press.	
Tsouvalis,	J.	and	Waterton,	C.	(2012).	Building	participation	upon	critique:	The	
Loweswater	Care	Project,	Cumbria,	UK.	Environmental	Modelling	&	Software.	Vol.	36,	
pp.	111-121.	
Turner,	S.	(2001).	What	is	the	problem	with	experts?	Social	Studies	of	Science.	Vol.	31:	
1.		pp.	123-49.	
Vohland,	K.,	Gbel,	C.,	Shirk,	J.	and	Oliver,	J.	Preface	in	Hecker,	S.,	Hacklay,	M.,	Bowser,	
A.,	Makuch,	Z.,	Vogel,	J.,	and	Bonn,	A.	(2018).	Citizen	Science:	Innovation	in	Open	
Science,	Society	and	Policy.	London:	UCL	Press.	
Webb,	E.,	Campbell,	D.,	Schwartz,	R.	and	Sechrest,	L.	(1999).	Unobtrusive	Measures.	
London:	Sage.	
Whatmore,	S.	(1997).	Dissecting	the	Autonomous	Self:	Hybrid	Cartographies	for	a	
Relational	Ethics.	Environment	and	Planning	D:	Society	and	Space.	Vol.	15:	1,	pp.	37-53.	
Whatmore,	S.	(2009).	Mapping	knowledge	controversies:	science,	democracy	and	the	
redistribution	of	expertise.	Progress	in	Human	Geography.	Vol.	33:	5,	pp.	587598.	
Whitelaw,	G.,	Vaughan,	H.,	Craig,	B.,	and	Atkinson,	D.	(2003).	Establishing	the	
Canadian	Community	Monitoring	Network.	Environmental	Monitoring	and	Assessment.	
Vol.	88,	pp.	409418.	
Whiteman,	N	(2015)	Intellectual	property	and	the	construction	of	un/ethical	
audiences.	In:	Halbert,	D,	David,	M	(eds)	SAGE	Handbook	of	Intellectual	Property.	
London	and	Thousand	Oaks:	SAGE.		
Whiteman,	N.	(2017).	Accounting	for	ethics:	towards	a	de-humanised	comparative	
approach.	Qualitative	Research.	Vol.	18:	4,	pp.	383-399.	
Wiggins,	A.	(2012).	Crowdsourcing	Scientific	Work:	A	Comparative	Study	of	
Technologies,	Processes,	and	Outcomes	in	Citizen	Science.	The	School	of	Information	
References		
Studies-	Dissertations.	Paper	72.		
Wiggins,	A.,	and	Crowston,	K.	(2011).	From	Conservation	to	Crowdsourcing:	A	
Typology	of	Citizen	Science.	In	Proceedings	of	the	Forty-fourth	Hawai'i	International	
Conference	on	System	Science	(HICSS-44).	Koloa,	HI.	
Wilderman,	C.	(2007).	Models	of	community	science:	Design	lessons	from	the	field.	In	
C. McEver,	R.	Bonney,	J.	Dickinson,	S.	Kelling,	K.	Rosenberg,	and	J.	L.	Shirk	(eds.)
(2007)	Citizen	science	toolkit	conference.	Ithaca:	Cornell	Laboratory	of	Ornithology.
Wilkie,	A.,	Savransky,	M.	and	Rosengarten,	M.	(eds)	(2017).	Speculative	research:	the
lure	of	possible	futures.	London:	Routeledge.
Willliams,	R.	(1989).	Resources	of	Hope.	Collection	of	writings	edited	by	Gable,	R.
London:	Verso.
Wilson,	W.,	Cromarty,	H.	and	Barton,	C.	(2018).	Empty	Housing	(England).	House	of
Commons	Library	Briefing	Paper.	Number	3012,	13	June	2018.
Winch,	P.	(1958).	The	idea	of	a	social	science	and	its	relation	to	philosophy.	London:
Routeledge.
[BLANK PAGE]
Appendices
Appendix	1:	Potential	citizen	social	science	projects	reviewed	
Projects	
No.	 Name	 Description	 How	and	when	instigated	 Data	collected	 Type	of	CSS	
1.	 Datashift	
http://civicus.o
rg/thedatashift	
DataShift	is	an	initiative	that	builds	
the	capacity	and	confidence	of	civil	
society	organisations	to	produce	and	
use	citizengenerated	data	to	
monitor	sustainable	development	
progress,	demand	accountability	and	
campaign	for	transformative	change.	
DataShift	is	a	global	movement	to	
empower	a	broad,	multistakeholder	
platform	for	sharing	skills,	strategies	
and	technologies	to	identify	and	
document	existing	citizen	reporting	
mechanisms,	data	gaps	and	
perceived	needs.	Sustained	support	
and	development	of	these	
mechanisms	encourages	
responsiveness	to	local	contexts,	
facilitates	sharing	and	uptake	
between	groups,	and	builds	a	
scalable	methodology	for	mobilising	
citizen	monitoring	resources.	
DataShift	is	an	initiative	of	Civicus,	the	
World	Alliance	for	Citizen	
Participation,	in	partnership	with	
Wingu	and	Open	Institute.	Between	
2014-2016,	The	Engine	Room	worked	
with	Civicus	to	scope,	design,	organise	
and	launch	DataShift.	The	Engine	
Room	managed	the	initial	phase	of	
the	initiatives	direct	support	work	in	
pilot	countries	in	partnership	with	
Wingu	and	other	organisations,	
commissioned	research	into	
opportunities	and	challenges	for	
citizen-generated	data	use,	and	
provided	overall	strategic	input.	
Citizen	generated	data		so	
data	that	people	or	their	
organisations	produce	to	
directly	monitor,	demand	or	
drive	change	on	issues	that	
affect	them.	
The	data	is	actively	given	by	
citizens,	providing	
representations	of	their	
perspectives,	and	an	
alternative	to	datasets	
collected	by	governments	or	
international	institutions.	
Citizen	
generated	data	
2.	 Tenison	Road	
http://tenisonr
The	project	was	intended	to	
illustrate	how	data	can	be	thought	
about	in	deeper	and	more	
The	Tension	Road	project	is	a	project	
initiated	by	members	of	the	Human	
Experience	&	Design	group	working	
An	enormous	amount	of	
different	data	types	were	
collected	during	the	project,	
Citizen	
generated	data	
Appendix	1:	Potential	citizen	social	science	projects	reviewed		
No.	 Name	 Description	 How	and	when	instigated	 Data	collected	 Type	of	CSS	
oad.com	 meaningful	ways.	It	aims	to	show	
how	data	might	come	to	matter	in	
real-world	places	and	how	it	might	
be	put	to	use.	At	all	levels,	the	project	
is	intended	to	be	a	common	exercise	
in	collectively	working	through	the	
things	that	are	important	to	a	street,	
and	discovering	new	ways	to	
participate	and	engage	in	social	life.	
at	Microsoft	Research.		
The	project	was	launched	in	October	
2013	and	ran	for	two	years.			
The	project	was	designed	by	
Microsoft	research.	However,	the	
intention	was	for	it	to	be	a	community	
run	project	with	the	aim	of	exploring	
what	data	means	to	real	people	living	
and	working	on	streets	such	as	
Tenison	Road.	
from	air	quality	readings,	to	
votes	and	ballots,	to	wildlife	
and	plant	surveys,	to	other	
forms	of	visually	
representative	data.	The	
different	types	of	data	were	
collected	in	a	data	log	which	
is	documented	on	the	project	
website.	
3.	 Safecast	
https://blog.sa
fecast.org	
Safecast	is	a	global	volunteer-
centered	citizen	science	project	
working	to	empower	people	with	
data	about	their	environments.	
Safecast	monitors,	collects,	and	
openly	shares	information	on	
environmental	radiation	and	other	
pollutants.	
Safecast	embraces	open-source	and	
open-data	methodologies,	along	with	
new	fabrication	technologies,	such	as	
3D	printing,	laser-cutters,	and	on-
demand	fabrication	of	components.	
They	promote	rapid,	agile,	and	
iterative	development,	and	benefit	
from	having	a	technically	skilled	pool	
of	collaborators	around	the	globe.	
Safecast	was	formed	in	response	to	
the	devastating	earthquake	and	
tsunami	which	struck	eastern	Japan	
on	March	11,	2011,	and	the	
subsequent	meltdown	of	the	
Fukushima	Daiichi	Nuclear	Power	
Plant.		
Safecast	was	established	by	Sean	
Bonner	(Los	Angeles),	Joi	Ito	
(Boston/Dubai/Tokyo)	and	Pieter	
Franken	(Tokyo),	with	a	successfully	
overfunded	kickstarter	campaign	and	
a	few	private	donations	to	help	fund	
equipment.	
Safecast	collects	radiation	
and	other	environmental	
data	from	all	over	the	world.	
Data	is	collected	primarily	
via	the	Safecast	sensor	
network.	Measurements	are	
taken	free	of	charge.	Each	
data	contributor	is	free	to	
measure	areas	they	consider	
worthwhile.	Safecast	data	is	
published	under	a	CC0	
designation,	a	public	domain	
designation	and	means	the	
data	is	free	and	open	for	
anyone	to	use	under	any	
circumstance.		
Citizen	
generated	data	
4.	 Shack/	Slum	
Dwellers	
International	
(SDI)	
The	SDI	is	a	network	of	community-
based	organizations	of	the	urban	
poor	in	33	countries	in	Africa,	Asia	
and	Latin	America.	In	each	country	
In	1996,	federations	of	the	urban	poor	
and	their	support	NGOs	gathered	in	
South	Africa.	These	federations	had	
been	working	in	urban	informal	
Enumerations,	settlement	
profiles	and	mapping.	
Informal	settlements	in	cities	
and	towns	in	over	30	
Citizen	
generated	data	
Appendix	1:	Potential	citizen	social	science	projects	reviewed		
No.	 Name	 Description	 How	and	when	instigated	 Data	collected		 Type	of	CSS	
http://sdinet.o
where	federations	operate,	they	
mobilise	around	core	SDI	practices	
and	principles	to	build	voice	and	
collective	capacity	in	urban	poor	
communities.	This	is	known	as	our	
Know	Your	Community	work.	
Organised	federations	throughout	
the	SDI	network	profile,	map,	and	
enumerate	their	settlements	to	
gather	invaluable	planning	data	and	
catalyse	community	action	and	
partnerships.	This	is	known	as	Know	
Your	City	work.	The	KYC	website	
combines	hard	data	and	rich	stories	
from	urban	poor	communities	in	224	
cities	across	the	Global	South.	
Federations	use	their	data	and	
collective	capacity	to	co-produce	
solutions	for	slum	upgrading.	These	
projects	make	up	the	third	category	
of	work	-	Improve	Your	City	-	and	are	
supported	by	SDI's	Urban	Poor	Fund	
International.	
settlements		defending	communities	
against	evictions	and	working	to	gain	
access	to	basic	amenities		for	what	
ranged	from	few	years	to	over	a	
decade.	In	some	cases,	federations	
had	begun	to	take	on	a	more	
proactive	role,	entering	into	
negotiations	with	local	and	national	
governments	to	address	these	critical	
issues.	During	this	meeting	in	1996	it	
was	agreed	that	an	international	
network	would	be	created,	Slum	/	
Shack	Dwellers	International	(SDI),	
with	representation	from	urban	poor	
federations	from	countries	across	
Asia,	Africa	and	Latin	America.	
countries	collect	and	analyse	
data	about	their	settlements	
to	influence	resource	flows	
and	development	priorities,	
to	mitigate	against	disaster	
and	conflict	and	to	make	
poor	communities	vocal	and	
visible.	When	these	
settlements	federate	at	the	
city,	national	and	global	level	
this	data	has	incredible	value	
for	bottom-up	policy	
formulation	and	
developmental	agenda	
setting.		
5.	 Fix	My	Street	
https://www.fi
xmystreet.com	
FixMyStreet	is	an	independent	
website,	built	by	the	charity	My	
Society	to	make	it	easier	to	report	
problems	in	the	community.	
FixMyStreet	send	reported	issue	to	
the	people	whose	job	it	is	to	fix	it.	
FixMyStreet	covers	the	whole	of	the	
UK.	Councils	read	or	act	on	
FixMyStreet	reports.	Councils	have	
The	project	was	initiated	by	My	
Society	in	2007.	My	Society	is	a	not-
for-profit	social	enterprise,	based	in	
the	UK	and	working	internationally.	
My	Society	Limited	is	a	project	of	UK	
Citizens	Online	Democracy,	a	
registered	charity	in	England	and	
Wales.	The	site	was	initially	funded	by	
the	Department	for	Constitutional	
More	than	25,000	problems	
have	been	reported	in	the	UK	
since	its	launch	in	
February	2007.	My	Society	
believes	that	strong	
democratic	accountability	
and	a	thriving	civil	society	
are	vital	to	common	welfare,	
and	that	these	cannot	survive	
Citizen	
generated	data	
Appendix	1:	Potential	citizen	social	science	projects	reviewed		
No.	 Name	 Description	 How	and	when	instigated	 Data	collected		 Type	of	CSS	
the	option	to	integrate	directly,	so	
report	details	can	be	directly	placed	
into	their	systems,	saving	them	time	
and	money.		
Affairs	Innovations	Fund	and	built	by	
My	Society,	in	conjunction	with	the	
Young	
Foundation.		
where	people	do	not	engage	
with	government	and	
communities.		
6.	 Mass	
Observation	
Project	
http://www.m
assobs.org.uk	
The	project	is	compiled	of	two	parts:	
1)	called	the	Mass	Observation	
Movement	from	1937-1950s;	and	2)	
The	Mass	Observation	Project,	1981-
ongoing.	In	its	current	format	the	
aim	is	to	encourage	a	national	
writing	panel.	Since	it	began,	almost	
4,500	people	have	volunteered	to	
write	for	the	Project.	Many	of	these	
writers	have	been	corresponding	
over	several	years,	making	the	
Project	rich	in	qualitative	
longitudinal	material.	
The	Archive	results	from	the	work	of	
the	social	research	organisation,	Mass	
Observation.	This	organisation	was	
founded	in	1937	by	a	group	of	people,	
who	aimed	to	create	an	'anthropology	
of	ourselves'.	They	recruited	a	team	of	
observers	and	a	panel	of	volunteer	
writers	to	study	the	everyday	lives	of	
ordinary	people	in	Britain.	This	
original	work	continued	until	the	
early	1950s.	The	original	Mass	
Observation	idea	of	a	national	panel	
was	revived	from	the	Archive	in	1981.	
Through	the	press,	television	and	
radio,	new	volunteer	writers	or	'Mass	
Observation	correspondents'	were	
recruited	from	all	over	Britain.	The	
Mass	Observation	Project	also	collects	
material	about	everyday	life	through	
the	12th	May	Diary	Project	and	other	
projects	and	partnerships.	
There	are	currently	around	
450	volunteer	participants	
on	the	Mass	Observation	
writing	Panel.	These	writers	
(often	known	as	Observers)	
respond	to	Directives,	or	
open-ended	questionnaire,	
sent	to	them	by	post	or	email	
three	times	a	year.	The	
Directives	contain	two	or	
three	broad	themes	which	
cover	both	very	personal	
issues	and	wider	political	and	
social	issues	and	events.	The	
Project	solicits	in-depth	
accounts	(both	opinion	and	
experience)	of	everyday	life:	
stories,	memoirs,	lists,	
letters,	diagrams,	drawings,	
maps,	diaries,	photographs,	
press	cuttings,	confessions,	
reports	on	people,	places	and	
events,	across	a	wide	variety	
of	topics.	
Citizen	
generated	
archive	
7.	 The	Bristol	
Approach	
The	Bristol	Approach	is	people-led	
and	issue-led.	It	provides	a	set	of	
tools	and	a	way	of	working	that	helps	
different	groups		from	councils	and	
Working	with	innovation	company	
Ideas	for	Change	and	Bristol	City	
Council,	KWMC	crafted	The	Bristol	
Approach	based	on	the	latest	smart	
The	approach	operates	using	
a	range	of	sensors		usually	a	
mix	of	new	and	old	
technology		and	meshing	it	
Citizen	
generated	data	
Appendix	1:	Potential	citizen	social	science	projects	reviewed		
No.	 Name	 Description	 How	and	when	instigated	 Data	collected		 Type	of	CSS	
http://www.br
istolapproach.o
businesses,	to	schools	and	
community	organisations		to	tackle	
the	pressing	issues	in	their	
community.	The	Bristol	Approach	
believes	that	all	people,	whatever	
their	background,	should	be	able	to	
imagine,	design	and	build	the	future	
they	want	to	see		for	themselves	
and	their	city.	
cities	research	and	insights	from	a	
20-year	history	of	supporting	people	
to	shape	their	communities.		
with	the	wider	resources	and	
knowhow	that	already	exists	
in	that	community.	The	
Bristol	Approach	Framework	
works	in	5	key	ways:	
engaging	people	in	creative	
ways;	working	with	people	to	
co-design	solutions;	
collaborating	with	people	of	
different	disciplines	and	
backgrounds;	supporting	
people	to	develop	skills	using	
storytelling	to	make	sense	of	
data.	
8.	 &wider	
http://www.an
dwider.com	
&wider	have	simple	cost	effective	
diagnostic	tools	which	use	workers	
mobile	phones	to	track	and	
encourage	improvement	in	labour	
practices	along	the	supply	chain.	
These	tools	offer	real	time	results	
and	can	also	be	used	to	support	
particular	suppliers,	and	offer	an	
early	warning	system	when	used	
across	the	supply	base.	&wider	are	
not	a	tool	development	company,	but	
a	company	focused	on	using	
whatever	tools	work	to	make	
participation	effortless	and	easy	for	
workers	themselves.	The	tools	are	
collaboratively	designed	and	tried	
and	tested	by	workers,	to	make	
worker	participation	easier.	
Lea	Esterhuizen	founded	&Wider	in	
2014	to	help	bridge	the	significant	
data	gap	on	working	conditions	in	
global	supply	chains.	
&wider	have	a	series	of	tools	
to	further	their	work:	
ENGAGE	gives	workers	a	
channel,	or	rating	tool,	to	
report	working	conditions,	
suppliers	clarity	on	their	
workers	lives,	and	retailers	
supply	chain	transparency.		
ENHANCE	values	workers	
input	into	what	should	
happen	next,	on	how	work	
and	productivity	could	
change	for	the	better.	It	
generates	concrete	
suggestions	from	workers	for	
employers.	It	uses	a	short	
mobile	survey,	where	
workers	report	on	which	
Citizen	
generated	data	
Appendix	1:	Potential	citizen	social	science	projects	reviewed		
No.	 Name	 Description	 How	and	when	instigated	 Data	collected		 Type	of	CSS	
small	adjustments	can	be	
made	that	will	immediately	
improve	productivity.	
Suppliers	then	get	a	snapshot	
of	their	workers	priorities	
for	a	more	productive	
workplace.	ENABLE	offers	a	
complete	listening	loop	
across	the	entire	workforce,	
24/7.	This	helps	suppliers	to	
consider	suggestions	and	
priorities	from	workers,	and	
develop	a	series	of	possible	
changes	or	improvements.	
These	can	then	be	taken	back	
to	the	workforce.	
9.	 Focus	E15	
https://focuse
15.org	
Between	September	2015	and	April	
2016,	a	participatory	action	research	
project	was	undertaken	in	the	
London	Borough	of	Newham,	
examining	the	experiences	of	those	
facing	potential	or	actual	
homelessness.	The	findings	from	the	
participatory	action	research	reflect	
extremely	high	levels	of	hidden	
homelessness;	serious	physical	and	
mental	health	issues	arising	or	being	
exacerbated	as	a	result	of	insecure	
housing,	and	an	apparently	systemic	
attempt	to	remove	vulnerable	people	
from	the	borough.	
The	Focus	E15	campaign	was	born	in	
September	2013	when	a	group	of	
young	mothers	were	served	eviction	
notices	by	East	Thames	Housing	
Association	after	Newham	Council	cut	
its	funding	to	the	Focus	E15	hostel	for	
young	homeless	people.	Dr	Kate	
Hardy,	University	of	Leeds,	and	Dr	
Tom	Gillespie,	University	of	Sheffield,	
instigated	the	participatory	action	
research	aspect	of	the	campaign.	
A	structured	interview	tool,	
using	questions	designed	to	
elicit	both	quantitative	and	
qualitative	data,	offering	the	
opportunity	to	provide	more	
narrative	information,	was	
designed	in	collaboration	
between	housing	
campaigners	who	are	at	the	
forefront	of	hearing	stories	of	
homelessness	in	Newham	
(Focus	E15)	and	the	authors.	
64	structured	interviews	
were	undertaken	with	
participants	who	approached	
Newham	Council	to	address	a	
Participatory	
Action	
Research	
Appendix	1:	Potential	citizen	social	science	projects	reviewed		
No.	 Name	 Description	 How	and	when	instigated	 Data	collected		 Type	of	CSS	
housing	or	homelessness	
need	within	the	last	year.	
10.	 Hush	City	App	
http://www.op
ensourcesound
scapes.org/hus
h-city/	
By	using	Hush	City	app	participants	
can	be	as	active	members	of	a	
soundscape	and	citizen	science	
research	project	to	map	and	evaluate	
urban	quiet	areas	so	as	to	contribute	
to	protecting	them.	The	Hush	City	
app	aims	to	crowdsource	quiet	spots	
and	share	of	them	with	the	Hush	City	
community.	
Dr	Antonella	Radicchi	ran	the	project	
as	a	non-profit	project.	The	first	
version	of	the	Hush	City	app	was	
developed	in	the	framework	of	the	
Beyond	the	Noise:	Open	Source	
Soundscapes	project	(2016-2018),	
which	validated	a	novel	mixed	
methodology	to	identify,	assess	and	
plan	everyday	quiet	areas	in	cities,	
by	implementing	the	
soundscape	approach,	the	citizen	
science	paradigm	and	open	source	
technology.	The	second	version	of	the	
Hush	City	app	was	developed	in	the	
framework	of	the	project:	Hush	City	
Mobile	Lab	(2018-2020).	
Participants	identify	and	
access	quiet	areas	in	their	
city	or	in	other	cities	
worldwide,	shared	by	the	
Hush	City	users.	They	can	
filter	the	quiet	areas	
according	to	their	sound	
levels,	descriptors	used	to	tag	
them,	perceived	quietness,	
visual	quality	and	
accessibility,	as	perceived	by	
the	users	who	crowdsourced	
the	quiet	areas;	and	engage	
in	gaming	activities.	They	can	
also	review	their	personal	
surveys	and	delete	them	if	
they	are	no	longer	happy	
with	them.	They	can	also	
provide	feedback	on	the	
Hush	City	project.	
Crowdsourcing	
11.	 Citizen	
Heritage	
http://linkis.co
m/citizenherit
age.com/kbfbZ		
The	project	investigates	how	digital	
technologies	enable	citizens	of	local	
areas	to	document	and	share	
memories	and	records	of	their	
collective	past.		
In	parallel,	we	are	studying	other	
digital	tools	for	citizen	engagement	
developed	by	GLAM	institutions	
(Galleries,	Libraries,	Archives	and	
The	project	is	supported	by	the	
Australian	Research	Council	
(Discovery	Project:	DP140101188)	
and	aims	to	advance	heritage	theory	
and	practice,	with	new	understanding	
of	the	production	and	application	of	
innovative	digital	technologies.	It	was	
set	up	by	researchers	at	the	
University	of	Melbourne	
The	main	focus	is	on	the	
development	and	study	of	
PastPort	(currently	
undergoing	early	testing),	a	
mobile	webapp	for	residents	
and	visitors	of	Port	
Melbourne	in	inner	
Melbourne	(City	of	Port	
Phillip),	an	area	of	rich	and	
Citizen	
generated	
online	archive		
Appendix	1:	Potential	citizen	social	science	projects	reviewed		
No.	 Name	 Description	 How	and	when	instigated	 Data	collected		 Type	of	CSS	
Museums),	heritage	bodies	and	local	
government	custodians.	The	project	
explores	how	such	digital	
experiences	can	be	made	more	
readily	accessible	to	people	and	how	
they	enrich	the	lived	experience	of	
local	places,	creating	an	ongoing	
relationship	between	past	and	
present.	
disparate	urban	history.	
12.	 Hollaback	
http://www.ih
ollaback.org/	
The	aim	of	the	project	is	to	work	
together	to	better	understand	street	
harassment,	to	ignite	public	
conversations,	and	to	develop	
innovative	strategies	to	ensure	equal	
access	to	public	spaces.	The	project	
believes	that	what	specifically	counts	
as	street	harassment	is	determined	
by	those	who	experience	it.			
Hollaback	is	a	network	of	local	
activists	around	the	world.		A	non-
profit	movement	to	end	street	
harassment	powered	by	local	activists	
in	92	cities	and	32	countries.	
Use	of	a	smartphone	to	
document,	map,	and	share	
incidents	of	street	
harassment.	Users	are	
encouraged	to	speak	up	
when	they	see	harassment	by	
quickly	documenting	it	in	a	
short	post	(photo	optional)	
and	sharing	it	to	a	publicly	
viewable	map.		
Citizen	
generated	
project	for	
citizens	
13.	 Election	
leaflets	
https://electio
nleaflets.org	
The	project	is	an	online	archive	of	
political	leaflets.	Their	belief	is	that	
There	are	loads	of	stories	hidden	in	
election	leaflets,	and	the	project	can	
help	find	them.	
The	project	started	in	April	2009	and	
was	originally	"The	Straight	Choice",	
derived	from	a	leaflet	in	the	
controversial	by-election	in	
Bermondsey	in	1983	which	has	
become	the	type	specimen	of	
accusations	of	dodgy	campaigning.	
The	site	was	renamed	
"ElectionLeaflets.org"	in	August	2010.	
Election	Leaflets	is	run	by	a	group	of	
volunteers.	It	is	currently	being	
supported	by	Unlock	Democracy,	the	
campaign	for	democracy,	rights	and	
During	the	2010	election	
there	were	over	6,000	
leaflets	added	to	the	archive	
providing	a	valuable	
resource	for	journalists,	
campaigners	and	
investigations.	Members	of	
the	public	photograph	and	
classify	election	leaflets.	They	
photograph	what	comes	
through	their	doors	at	
election	time.	The	
ElectionLeaflets.org	analysis	
Citizen	
generated	
online	archive	
Appendix	1:	Potential	citizen	social	science	projects	reviewed		
No.	 Name	 Description	 How	and	when	instigated	 Data	collected		 Type	of	CSS	
freedoms	and	Democracy	Club.	
Election	Leaflets,	Unlock	Democracy	
and	Democracy	Club	are	independent	
and	not	affiliated	to	any	political	
party.	
team	check	and	tidy	
categorising	election	leaflets	
as	they	come	in.	
14.	 Moodnotes	
http://moodno
tes.thriveport.c
Moodnotes	is	an	app	intended	to	
help	journal	and	capture	your	mood	
and	improve	your	thinking	habits.	
Moodnotes	aims	to	empower	
participants	to	track	their	mood	over	
time,	to	avoid	common	thinking	
traps,	and	to	develop	perspectives	
associated	with	increased	happiness	
and	well-being.	Moodnotes	is	
grounded	in	the	scientifically-
supported	content	of	cognitive	
behaviour	therapy	(CBT)	and	
positive	psychology.	
Moodnotes	is	collaborative	effort	
between	Thriveports	clinical	
psychologist	founders	(creators	of	
MoodKit)	and	ustwo	studio	(creators	
of	the	award-winning	game	
Monument	Valley).	
Moodnotes	encourages	users	
to	track	their	mood	and	try	to	
identify	what	influences	it.		
Citizen	
generated	
project	for	
citizens	
15.	 Pride	of	Place	
LGBTQ	
Heritage	
project	
https://histori
cengland.org.u
k/research/inc
lusive-
heritage/lgbtq-
heritage-
project/	
A	project	to	explore	and	celebrate	
the	relationship	between	lesbian,	
gay,	bisexual,	transgender	and	queer	
(LGBTQ)	history	and	the	country's	
historic	buildings	and	spaces.	The	
researchers	work	with	community	
groups,	LGBTQ	advisory	groups	and	
the	general	public,	using	crowd-
sourcing	as	a	technique	for	people	
across	England	to	name	important	
'queer'	buildings	and	places.		Pride	of	
Place	recognises	that	LGBTQ	heritage	
needs	to	be	identified,	recorded,	
understood,	cared-for,	and	
Pride	of	Place	is	a	Historic	England	
initiative	led	by	a	team	of	historians	
and	scholars	at	Leeds	Beckett	
University's	Centre	for	Culture	and	
the	Arts.	
Images,	archive	materials	
and	stories	that	focus	on	the	
range	of	places	and	spaces	
lived,	loved,	worked	and	
played	in	by	LGBTQ	people	
through	the	centuries.	
Citizen	
generated	
archive	
Appendix	1:	Potential	citizen	social	science	projects	reviewed		
No.	 Name	 Description	 How	and	when	instigated	 Data	collected		 Type	of	CSS	
celebrated,	as	part	of	our	national	
identity.	
16.	 No	Second	
Night	Out	
(NSNO)	
http://www.no
secondnightout
.org.uk/	
The	No	Second	Night	Out	project	
aims	to	dramatically	increase	the	
proportion	of	new	rough	sleepers	
who	are	prevented	from	spending	a	
second	night	out	on	Londons	streets.	
When	people	are	helped	off	the	
streets	by	outreach	teams	and	into	
the	assessment	hub,	after	a	
comprehensive	assessment	an	offer	
is	made	so	that	they	do	not	need	to	
return	to	rough	sleeping.	The	options	
considered	are	wide-ranging	and	
researched	thoroughly.	This	often	
includes	helping	the	person	return	to	
their	home	area;	whether	this	is	
within	London,	the	rest	of	the	UK,	or	
abroad	because	most	often	this	is	
where	someone	will	be	eligible	to	
access	services	immediately.	The	
team	based	at	the	hub	provide	new	
rough	sleepers	with	assistance	to	
access	support	and	accommodation	
in	their	home	areas,	advocating	with	
housing	providers	in	those	areas	and	
providing	the	practical	support	for	
people	to	return	closer	to	home	
where	it	is	safe	to	do	so.	This	is	in	
line	with	existing	London	and	
national	protocols	and	guidance	for	
reconnection	
The	Mayor	of	London	has	committed	
to	end	rough	sleeping	in	London.	To	
deliver	this	commitment	he	
established	the	London	Delivery	
Board	(LDB)		a	partnership	body	
chaired	by	the	Mayors	Housing	
Advisor	that	brings	together	central	
London	boroughs,	government	
departments,	the	voluntary	sector	
and	key	stakeholders.	The	outcome	
the	LDB	is	seeking	to	deliver	is	that	no	
one	will	live	on	the	streets	of	London	
and	no	individual	arriving	on	the	
streets	will	sleep	out	for	a	second	
night.	
A	rough	sleeping	referral	
phoneline	has	been	set	up	to	
encourage	and	enable	the	
public	to	make	referrals	of	
rough	sleepers.	The	aim	of	
the	phoneline	is	as	a	tool	to	
engage	the	public	to	be	the	
eyes	and	ears	on	the	street,	
thereby	increasing	the	
chances	of	getting	to	new	
rough	sleepers	as	quickly	as	
possible.	
Crowdsourcing	
Appendix	1:	Potential	citizen	social	science	projects	reviewed		
No.	 Name	 Description	 How	and	when	instigated	 Data	collected		 Type	of	CSS	
17.	 Crowd	
Sourcing	on	
Mental	Health	
https://www.r
edensiemit.org
/home-en.html	
The	initiative	Tell	us	involves	
citizens	in	the	research	of	mental	
illnesses.	This	approach	not	only	
focuses	on	symptoms,	but	also	offers	
people	the	opportunity	to	outline	the	
development	of	anxiety	in	context	
with	their	individual	lives.	Through	
the	platform,	people	could	share	
their	open	questions	and	problems	
for	a	period	of	two	months	(16	April	
2015	until	16	June	2015).	
The	Austrian	Ludwig	Boltzmann	
Society	launched	the	first	
crowdsourcing	project	on	mental	
health	in	Europe	on	16	April	2015	to	
ensure	that	what	is	researched	
matches	the	needs	of	society.	
The	project	collected	
subjective	data	that	
contributes	to	the	
improvement	of	available	
treatment	programmes.	The	
Tell	us	project	also	asks	
participant	what	questions	
about	mental	health	does	
research	need	to	answer?	
Crowdsourcing	
18.	 Everyday	
Sexism	
project	
http://www.ev
erydaysexism.c
The	Everyday	Sexism	Project	exists	
to	catalogue	instances	of	sexism	
experienced	by	women	on	a	day	to	
day	basis.	The	Everyday	Sexism	
project	aims	to	take	a	step	towards	
gender	equality,	by	proving	wrong	
those	who	tell	women	that	they	cant	
complain	because	we	are	equal.	It	is	
a	place	to	record	stories	of	sexism	
faced	on	a	daily	basis,	by	ordinary	
women,	in	ordinary	places.	
Laura	Bates	founded	the	Everyday	
Sexism	Project.	She	writes	for	the	
Guardian	women's	blog	each	week	
about	women's	experiences	of	sexism.	
Stories,	accounts,	anecdotes	
and	any	other	information	
about	peoples	experiences	of	
everyday	sexism.	Tweets	&	
online	accounts	of	instances	
of	everyday	sexism.	People	
can	submit	their	stories	
annonymously	online	or	
tweet	at	the	
@everdaysexism.		
Citizen	
generated	
project	for	
citizens	
19.	 Harkive	
Harkive	is	an	annual,	online	music	
research	project	that	gathers	stories	
from	people	around	the	world	about	
how,	where	and	why	they	listened	to	
music	on	a	single	day.	Since	
launching	in	2013,	the	project	has	
gathered	over	10,000	stories.	The	
intention	is	that	these	stories	help	
contribute	to	the	furtherance	of	
knowledge	and	study	of	popular	
Craig	Hamilton,	a	research	fellow	at	
Birmingham	City	University,	founded	
the	project	in	2013.	
Harkive	is	interested	in	the	
How,	Why	and	Where.	The	
project	seeks	to	hear	about	
participants	listening	
experience,	which	is	much	
more	than	a	list	of	songs.	The	
project	is	equally	interested	
in	the	devices,	technology,	
services	and	formats	used,	as	
the	places,	locations,	
Citizen	
generated	
online	archive		
Appendix	1:	Potential	citizen	social	science	projects	reviewed		
No.	 Name	 Description	 How	and	when	instigated	 Data	collected		 Type	of	CSS	
music	culture.	 journeys	and	situations	
participants	find	themselves	
in	whilst	listening.		
20.	 Rave	
Preservation	
Project	
http://www.ra
vepreservation
project.com/#t
The	project	aims	to	preserve	original	
Underground,	Rave,	Club,	Disco,	and	
any	other	underground	memorabilia.	
As	the	years	go	by,	old	rave	flyers	
and	rave	posters	are	lost,	damaged,	
thrown	away,	and	recycled.	This	
project	is	to	ensure	rave	flyers	and	
rave	posters	are	curated	and	stored	
in	a	healthy	environment.	
Matthew	Johnson	started	The	Rave	
Preservation	Project	in	2013.	Johnson	
has	amassed	a	collection	of	over	
40,000	pieces	of	rave	memorabilia	
from	the	mid-80s,	90s	and	early	
2000s.	Including	duplicates,	there	are	
over	250,000	pieces	stored	in	the	
archive.	
Flyers	are	donated	to	the	
project.	They	are	then	
categorised	by	location,	and	
sorted	alphabetically	by	the	
project.	Once	rave	flyers,	
rave	posters,	and	other	
memorabilia	is	in	the	care	of	
the	Rave	Preservation	
Project	they	are	sorted	
alphabetically,	by	event.	
Then	an	envelope	with	the	
event	information	is	created	
for	safe	storage	and	
archiving.	Each	envelope	is	
organized	by;	Event,	Country,	
State	or	Province,	then	City	
or	Town.	The	envelopes	are	
then	added	to	storage	
containers,	and	stored	safely.	
The	memorabilia	is	also	
digitised,	and	once	scanned	
all	is	shared	with	the	world	
on	the	project	website.	
Citizen	
generated	
online	archive		
21.	 Underfall	
Boatyard	
Sharing	
Memories	
project	
With	support	from	the	Oral	History	
Society,	the	project	involved	training	
10	volunteers	to	interview	and	
record	memories	of	Underfall	Yard.	
The	recordings	are	shared	in	the	
visitor	centre	and	through	Vimeo.		
The	oral	history	project	developed	as	
part	of	the	heritage	lottery	fund	bid	to	
restore	the	Underfall	Yard.	The	
Underfall	Boat	Yard	is	owned	and	
managed	by	the	Underfall	Yard	Trust.		
The	data	aimed	to	gather	
memories	and	stories	about	
the	Underfall	Yard	through	
Oral	History	interviews	in	
order	to	record	the	history	of	
the	site.	It	aimed	to	produce	
Citizen	
generated	
online	archive		
Appendix	1:	Potential	citizen	social	science	projects	reviewed		
No.	 Name	 Description	 How	and	when	instigated	 Data	collected		 Type	of	CSS	
http://www.un
derfallyard.co.u
k/about/projec
content	for	the	new	visitor	
centre	and	interpretation	of	
the	site	(listening	posts,	web	
content,	themed	tours).	
22.	 Hackney	Wick	
Community	
http://mappin
gforchange.org.
uk/projects/ha
ckney-wick-
community-
Mapping	for	Change	ran	a	series	of	
workshops,	focused	group	meetings	
and	field	days	to	work	with	the	
community	and	develop	an	on-line	
community	map.	Attendees	included	
schools,	senior	citizens,	local	
organisations	and	other	residents.	
The	community	were	able	to	use	the	
map	as	a	tool	for	communication	
with	the	various	stakeholders	
involved	in	development	and	
regeneration	programmes,	local	
service	providers	and	the	community	
as	a	whole.	The	map	enabled	all	
community	members	to	be	informed,	
have	their	say	and	get	involved.	The	
community	were	able	to	use	the	
information	as	a	tool	for	negotiation	
within	the	2012	legacy	framework	in	
a	bid	to	ensure	focal	elements	were	
not	forgotten,	but	instead	were	
integrated	into	new	developments.	
Mapping	for	Change	instigated	the	
project	with	the	Hackney	Wick	
community	in	2012.	Mapping	for	
Change	works	to	provide	benefit	to	
individuals	and	communities	from	
disadvantaged	or	marginalised	
groups,	along	with	the	organisations	
and	networks	that	support	those	
communities,	where	the	goal	is	to	
create	positive	sustainable	
transformations	in	their	environment.	
They	also	support	individuals	from	
the	aforementioned	groups	to	gain	
access	to	higher	education	at	UCL,	to	
study	fields	connected	with	their	
work.	
Participants	were	asked	to	
map	create	maps	in	
collaboration	with	the	
community,	and	to	share	
information	about	the	places	
that	matter	to	them.	The	
maps	can	be	used	to	share	
views	on	planned	
developments;	
document	local	history;	
identify	nearby	events	and	
activities;	and	contribute	
information	about	an	
environmental	issue.	
Participatory	
Mapping	
23.	 Mapfugees	
https://mapfug
ees.wordpress.
In	collaboration	with	refugees	the	
project	created	detailed,	multi-
lingual	maps	of	the	refugee	camps	in	
Grande-Synthe	and	Calais	to	improve	
the	delivery	of	aid	and	services	and	
The	project	started	in	December	2015	
to	collaboratively	produce	maps	of	
refugee	camps.		
All	the	content	of	the	maps	
was	collected	and	edited	in	
collaboration	with	the	
residents	of	the	camp.	There	
was	no	publicly	accessible	
Participatory	
Mapping	
Appendix	1:	Potential	citizen	social	science	projects	reviewed		
No.	 Name	 Description	 How	and	when	instigated	 Data	collected		 Type	of	CSS	
com/mapfugee
the	safety	and	comfort	of	the	
residents.	The	projects	goal	is	to	
empower	refugees	and	humanitarian	
helpers	to	help	turn	the	camps	into	
better,	more	safe	and	comfortable	
places.	
repository	of	information	on	
the	semi-permanent	yet	
continuously	changing	home	
for	thousands	of	people.	The	
existing	maps	from	NGOs	and	
public	facilities	are	
customized	for	specific	
purposes	which	did	not	
necessarily	align	with	the	
perception	and	needs	of	the	
camp	residents.	These	needs	
include	street	names,	
signposting	and	rapid	
updates	of	free	wifi	hotspots	
and	mobile	charging	stations.	
24.	 Transcribe	
Bentham	
http://blogs.uc
l.ac.uk/transcri
be-bentham/	
Transcribe	Bentham	is	a	
participatory	initiative	which	is	
based	in	the	Bentham	Project	at	
University	College	London.		Its	aim	is	
to	engage	the	public	in	the	online	
transcription	(or	typing)	of	original	
and	unstudied	manuscript	papers	
written	by	Jeremy	Bentham	(1748-
1832),	the	great	philosopher	and	
reformer.		At	the	latest	count,	
volunteers	have	transcribed	more	
than	20,000	pages	of	Benthams	
writings.	
The	project	was	launched	in	2010.	It	
is	hosted	by	the	Bentham	Project	in	
the	Faculty	of	Laws,	University	
College	London,	in	collaboration	with	
UCLs	Centre	for	Digital	Humanities,	
UCL	Library	Services,	UCL	Digital	
Media	Services	and	UCL	Research	IT	
Services.	
Volunteers	transcribe	the	
original	works	of	Jeremy	
Bentham.	Transcripts	
created	by	volunteers	feed	
into	work	on	The	Collected	
Works	of	Jeremy	Bentham,	
which	are	produced	by	
researchers	at	the	Bentham	
Project	at	University	College	
London.		This	is	the	definitive	
resource	for	anyone	
interested	in	studying	
Benthams	philosophy.		
Volunteer	transcriptions	give	
Bentham	Project	editors	a	
head-start	in	producing	an	
edited	and	annotated	text	
Crowdsourcing	
Appendix	1:	Potential	citizen	social	science	projects	reviewed		
No.	 Name	 Description	 How	and	when	instigated	 Data	collected		 Type	of	CSS	
ready	for	publication.	
25.		 Satelite	
Sentinel	
http://www.sa
tsentinel.org/	
SSP	is	the	first	sustained	public	effort	
to	systematically	monitor	and	report	
on	potential	hotspots	and	threats	to	
human	security	in	near	real-time.	
SSP	synthesizes	evidence	from	
satellite	imagery,	data	pattern	
analysis,	and	ground	sourcing	to	
produce	reports.	DigitalGlobe	
satellites	passing	over	Sudan	capture	
imagery	of	possible	threats	to	
civilians,	detect	bombed	and	razed	
villages,	or	note	other	evidence	of	
pending	mass	violence.	The	Enough	
Project	then	releases	reports	to	the	
press	and	policymakers	by	notifying	
major	news	organizations	and	a	
mobile	network	of	activists	on	
Twitter	and	Facebook.	
SSP	launched	on	December	29,	2010.	
It	was	funded	primarily	by	Not	On	
Our	Watch,	a	federally	registered	
charity,	founded	by	Don	Cheadle,	
George	Clooney,	Matt	Damon,	Brad	
Pitt,	David	Pressman	&	Jerry	
Weintraub.	
Mapping	of	reported	threats	
using	google	maps.	Satellite	
imagery	from	DigitalGlobe	
which	is	analysed	to	report	
on	Crisis	Tracking	and	
Documentation,	so	evidence	
of:	Bombardment	and	
Attacks;	Early	Warning	of	
Attacks	on	Civilians;	
Evidence	of	Apparent	Mass	
Graves;	Evidence	of	Forced	
Displacement;	Tracking	
Compliance	in	the	Sudans;	
Village	Razings	
Crowdsourcing	
26.		 Slavery	from	
Space	
https://www.z
ooniverse.org/
projects/ezzjc
w/slavery-
from-space	
Slavery	from	Space	is	a	University	of	
Nottinghams	Rights	Lab	project	that	
analyses	satellite	images	to	identify	
signs	of	human	activity	associated	
with	slavery	with	distinctive	aerial	
signatures,	e.g.	brick	kilns,	to	help	
monitor	progress	towards	UN	
Sustainable	Development	Goal	8.7.	
Information	can	then	be	passed	onto	
local	non-governmental	
organisations	(NGOs)	and	
government	officials	to	support	
lobbying	and	action	on	the	ground,	
The	first	project	started	in	2017,	by	
The	Rights	Lab,	which	is	a	wider	
initiative	by	the	University	of	
Nottingham	to	put	an	end	to	slavery	
around	the	world.	
Volunteers	tag	geo-reference	
satellite	images	for	the	
presence	or	absence	of	
specific	features,	for	
investigation	on	the	ground.		
Crowdsourcing	
Appendix	1:	Potential	citizen	social	science	projects	reviewed		
No.	 Name	 Description	 How	and	when	instigated	 Data	collected		 Type	of	CSS	
and	also	help	policy	makers	reach	
more	educated,	evidence-based	
decisions.	As	well	as	improving	our	
understanding	of	modern	slavery,	it	
is	hoped	that	crowdsourcing	will	
engage	the	online	community	and	
raise	awareness	of	modern	slavery	
27.	 Walkonomics	
https://twitter.
com/walkono
Walkonomics	is	a	mobile	application	
that	enables	urban	pedestrians	to	
find	walking	route	to	any	destination	
through	tree-filled	streets	and	parks.	
It	combines	open	data	and	
crowdsourcing	to	rate	and	map	
pedestrian-friendliness	of	streets	
and	urban	areas.	
Adam	Davies	and	Carsten	Moeller	
launched	Walkonomics	in	2011.	
Walkonomics	ratings	are	
automatically	generated	from	
open	data	and	refined	using	
peoples	reviews.	The	
WalkoBot	is	an	automatic	
system	that	rates	the	
walkability	of	streets	by	
interpreting	public	
datasets.		Local	users	area	
also	invited	to	add	their	own	
ratings.	Once	enough	local	
users	have	added	their	
ratings,	any	errors	or	
inaccuracies	should	be	
cancelled	out.	
Crowdsourcing	
28.	 Street	Link	
http://www.st
reetlink.org.uk	
StreetLink	is	a	website	that	enables	
the	public	to	alert	local	authorities	in	
England	about	rough	sleepers	in	
their	area.	This	service	offers	the	
public	a	means	to	act	when	they	see	
someone	sleeping	rough	and	is	the	
first	step	someone	can	take	to	ensure	
rough	sleepers	are	connected	to	the	
local	services	and	support	available	
to	them.	The	service	is	funded	by	
StreetLink	is	a	non-profit	organisation	
managed	and	delivered	by	Homeless	
Link	in	partnership	with	St	Mungos.	
StreetLink	was	developed	in	the	
second	half	of	2012	and	launched	that	
December.	In	its	first	five	years,	the	
service	has	received	over	92,000	
alerts	about	people	sleeping	rough	
and	passed	the	information	on	to	local	
authorities	and	outreach	teams.	It	is	
People	are	asked	to	give	as	
much	detail	as	possible	about	
the	location	-	they	can	use	
the	map	on	the	app	to	
pinpoint	the	location	and	
include	description	of	things	
seen	nearby.		
People	are	also	asked	to	give	
the	time	of	the	day	the	
person	was	seen,	and	to	try	
Crowdsourcing	
Appendix	1:	Potential	citizen	social	science	projects	reviewed		
No.	 Name	 Description	 How	and	when	instigated	 Data	collected		 Type	of	CSS	
Government	and	is	part	of	their	
commitment	to	end	rough	sleeping.	
principally	funded	by	the	UK	
Government	(Ministry	of	Housing,	
Communities	and	Local	Government),	
with	additional	funding	from	the	
Greater	London	Authority	(GLA)	and	
the	Welsh	Government.		
to	include	as	many	
identifying	details	as	possible	
such	as	name,	age,	gender	
etc.	People	also	asked	to	note	
what	the	person	theyre	
concerned	about	is	doing.	For	
example,	if	StreetLink	is	
alerted	to	someone	when	the	
person	is	sleeping/	bedded	
down	then	that	will	help	the	
outreach	team	find	them	
more	easily.	
29.		 Scenic	or	Not	
http://scenicor
not.datascience
lab.co.uk		
Scenic-Or-Not	is	a	website	and	online	
game	that	crowdsources	ratings	of	
scenicness	for	geotagged	
photographs	across	Great	Britain,	
The	website	comprises	217,000	
images	covering	nearly	95%	of	the	
1km	grid	squares	of	Great	Britain.	As	
of	August	2014,	the	Scenic-Or-Not	
dataset	contained	1.5	million	votes.		
This	site	was	originally	built	by	The	
Dextrous	Web	(now	Dextrous	Digital)	
for	My	Society.	My	Society	wanted	to	
gather	a	freely	available	nationwide	
dataset	of	scenicness,	to	use	for	
mapumental.	The	Data	Science	Lab	at	
Warwick	Business	School	now	hosts	
the	site.	They	are	researching	how	
scenicness	impacts	on	human	
wellbeing.	
ScenicOrNot	served	up	a	
series	of	random	images,	
each	representing	one	square	
kilometre	of	Great	Britain,	
and	invited	users	to	rate	
them	(the	images	were	
sourced	from	the	Geograph	
project,	an	open	source	
repository).	The	results	fed	
into	a	database	of	
scenicness.	ScenicOrNot	
collected	permits	anyone	to	
download	the	data,	under	an	
Open	Data	Licence,	for	their	
own	ends.	
Crowdsourcing		
[BLANK PAGE]
Appendix	2:	Practitioners	interviews	discussion	guide	
Introduction,	purpose	of	study,	recording,	anonymity	etc.	
1. What	do	you	think	about	citizen	science	and	such	initiatives	as	Galaxy	zoo?	In	what
context	have	you	come	across	it?	What	sort	of	methods	and	data	do	you	use?
2. How	would	you	define	citizen	science?	Who/what	has	influenced	your	work?
3. What	are	the	areas	in	which	citizen	science	makes	sense	&	areas	where	it	doesnt?	Are
there	examples	of	where	citizen	science	has	achieved	positive	outcomes?
4. How	would	you	measure	success	in	citizen	science?	Direct,	indirect,	diffuse	impact?
5. How	can	citizens	be	engaged	in	meaningful	way?	Are	there	any	specific	issues	around
ethics?
6. How	do	you	conceive	of	expertise	in	this	area?
7. How	can	you	connect	this	science	with	academic	science	&	how	can	you	assess	the
rigour	of	such	science?	What	methods	do	you	see	as	robust	&	why?
8. Whats	the	future	of	citizen	science?
9. How	do	you	think	social	science	is	changing	with	the	increase	in	citizen-generated	data
&	what	can	be	termed	as	big	data?	What	role	can	citizens	have	in	social	science?
10. Can	you	see	ways	in	which	citizen	science	methods	could	be	used	in	social	science?
11. What	do	you	think	of	the	historical	Mass	Observation	data	where	citizens	volunteered
to	record	and	submit	reports	on	the	world	around	them?
12. What	sort	of	social	issues	could	be	researched	using	citizen	social	science	based
methods?
13. What	are	the	challenges/risks	posed	to	social	science	eg	competing	voices,	objectivity,
data	access,	ethics,	professionalization,	funding,	peer	review?
14. Evidence	gaps/limitations.	Are	you	aware	of	other	research	looking	into	citizen	social
science	or	any	other	relevant	projects	that	I	should	know	about?
Appendix	3:	Practitioner	interviews		
Appendix	3:	Practitioner	interviews	
List	of	practitioner	interviews	
No.	 Role	 Organisation/Project	 Date	of	interview	
1.	 Head	of	development	
research		
Nominet	Trust	 September	2014	
2.	 Lecturer	 Goldsmiths	University;	Kosovo	
Science	for	Change		
October	2014	
3.	 Research	Fellow	 Manchester	Institute	for	
Collaborative	Research	on	Ageing	
(MICRA)	
August	2015	
4.	 Project	Lead	 Smarter	Manchester	 August	2015	
5.	 Researcher	 The	Near	Miss	Project,	The	Creative	
Exchange	
Lancaster	University	
August	2015	
6.	 Community	Organiser	 Cycle	Hack	UK	 September	2015	
7.	 Campaigner;	Associate	
Professor	
Leeds	University	 September	2015	
8.	 Co-Founder	 Safecast	 September	2015	
9.	 Professor	 Extreme	Citizen	Science	Research	
Group	(ExCiteS),	University	College	
London	
October	2015	
10.	 Digital	Sociologist	 Cambridge	University	 October	2015	
11.	 Citizen	Science	Manager	 Natural	History	Museum	 November	2015	
12.	 Professor	 Cathie	Marsh	Institute	for	Social	
Research	(CMIST)	
December	2015	
13.	 Research	Associate	 Cathie	Marsh	Institute	for	Social	
Research	
December	2015	
14.	 Human	Experience	Designer	 Microsoft	Research,	UK	 January	2016	
15.	 Project	organiser	 Dormant	Things	project	 February	2016	
16.	 Research	Associate	 Open	Lab,	Newcastle	University	 February	2016	
17.	 Programme	Manager	 European	Citizen	Science	Association	 May	2016	
18.	 Welcome	Trust	Impact	
Fellow	
Welcome	Trust	 May	2016	
19.	 Researcher	 Doing	It	Together	Science	(DITOS)	
project	
July	2016	
20.	 HCI	researcher	 High	wire	Lancaster	 August	2016	
21.	 Senior	Lecturer	 Morgan	Centre	for	Research	into	
Everyday	Lives	
November	2016	
22.	 Programme	Manager	 UNESCOs	Inclusive	Policy	Lab	 January	2017	
23.	 Project	Manager	 Tekiu	 January	2017	
24.	 Senior	Lecturer	 Philosophy,	Linguistics	and	Theory	
of	Science,	University	of	Gothenburg	
April	2017	
Appendix	4:	Mass	Observation	Probe	1		Wording	of	Directives	Analysed		
Appendix	4:	Mass	Observation	Probe	1		Wording	of	Directives	Analysed	
Summer	1990	Directive	
Autumn/Winter	Directive	1993	
Autumn	2004	Directive	
Appendix	5:	Empty	Houses	Probe	2:	Participant	information	sheet		
Appendix	5:	Empty	Houses	Probe	2:	Participant	information	sheet	
Empty Houses Project Participant Information Sheet 
Thank	 you	 for	 your	 participation	 in	 this	 project	 on	 Empty	Houses.	 Please	 take	 the	
time	to	read	the	following	information	carefully.		Please	contact	us	if	there	is	anything	
that	is	not	clear	or	if	you	would	like	more	information.			
Who	is	conducting	the	research?	
This	project	is	part	of	research	undertaken	by	Alexandra	Albert,	a	PhD	student	at	the	
University	of	Manchester	and	Lancaster	University,	for	her	PhD	project.	The	PhD	is	
funded	by	the	Economic	and	Social	Research	Council.	
Title	of	the	Research		Empty	Houses		
What	is	the	aim	of	the	research?	
The	aim	of	the	project	 is	to	 investigate	how	to	collect	data	on	houses	that	no	one	is	
living	in,	and	which	may	have	been	left	empty	and	disused.	Such	information	is	often	
difficult	to	capture.		
What	are	you	being	asked	to	do?	
You	are	being	asked	to	send	us	information	that	you	may	have	observed	during	your	
daily	activities.	When	you	return	home	you	are	asked	to	send	us	any	information	on	
any	empty	houses	that	you	may	have	observed	that	you	think	have	been	left	empty	or	
are	disused	in	your	local	area.	You	are	specifically	asked	not	to	go	out	of	your	way	to	
collect	such	information.	You	are	also	asked	specifically	not	to	speak	to	anyone	you	
would	not	normally	speak	to.	If	anyone	asks	you	about	the	project	please	direct	them	
to	Alexandra	Albert:	Alexandra.albert@manchester.ac.uk	
Whats	in	it	for	you?	
The	aim	of	the	project	is	for	it	not	to	be	a	burden	on	you.	Please	do	not	go	out	of	your	
way	to	find	empty	houses.	The	aim	of	the	project	is	to	see	what	data	can	be	collected	
as	citizens	go	about	their	daily	lives.	Reporting	the	observations	you	have	made	may	
end	up	putting	you	in	touch	with	like-minded	people,	as	well	as	being	an	opportunity	
to	reflect	on	your	local	environment	and	your	daily	activities.		
What	happens	to	the	data	collected?	
The	 researcher	 will	 anonymise	 the	 data	 the	moment	 they	 receive	 it.	 This	 includes	
removing	any	data	that	may	identify	other	people	in	the	observations	that	are	sent	in.	
The	 data	 will	 be	 then	 be	 stored	 on	 the	 University	 of	 Manchester	 servers	 for	 the	
duration	of	 the	project	 for	analysis	by	the	researcher.	Research	material	will	not	be	
shared	with	anyone	else	beyond	the	confines	of	the	project.		
Anonymity	and	Privacy		
All	personal	information	will	be	anonymised	and	stored	securely	at	the	University	of	
Manchester	with	access	restricted	to	the	researcher.	Your	real	name	will	not	be	used	
in	 the	 reporting	 of	 findings	 from	 the	 project,	 or	 any	 future	 works	 related	 to	 this	
research.	 All	 data	 that	 may	 identify	 anyone	 else	 in	 the	 project	 will	 also	 be	
annonymised.		
Risks	
If	 the	 instructions	 for	 participants	 are	 followed	 closely	 there	 should	 be	 no	 risks	 to	
participants	that	might	be	incurred	as	participants	go	about	their	daily	lives.	However,	
should	 any	 incident	 arise	 that	 you	 do	 not	 feel	 comfortable	 with,	 please	 contact	
Alexandra	Albert:	Alexandra.albert@manchester.ac.uk	
What	happens	if	I	do	not	want	to	take	part	or	if	I	change	my	mind?	
It	is	up	to	you	to	decide	whether	or	not	to	take	part.	If	you	are	happy	to	take	part	you	
will	be	given	this	information	sheet	to	keep	and	be	asked	to	sign	a	consent	form	when	
participating	in	research	interactions.	You	are	free	to	withdraw	at	any	time	without	
giving	a	reason	and	without	detriment	to	yourself.		
Contact	for	further	information:		
Alexandra	Albert:	alexandra.albert@manchester.ac.uk	
If	there	are	any	issues	regarding	this	research	that	you	would	prefer	not	to	discuss	with	members	of	
the	research	team,	please	contact	the	Research	Practice	and	Governance	Co-ordinator	by	either	writing	
to	'The	Research	Practice	and	Governance	Co-ordinator,	Research	Office,	Christie	Building,	The	
University	of	Manchester,	Oxford	Road,	Manchester	M13	9PL',	by	emailing:	Research-
Governance@manchester.ac.uk,	or	by	telephoning	0161	275	7583	or	275	8093.	
Appendix	6:	Empty	Houses	Probe	2		Consent	form		
Appendix	6:	Empty	Houses	Probe	2		Consent	form									
Consent Form for Empty Houses project  
Please initial the boxes next to each sentence and then, if you are happy to proceed, sign 
below. 
1. The researcher has given me my own copy of the information sheet, which I 
have read and understood. 	
2. The researcher has given me the opportunity to ask questions about the project 
3. I agree to take part in this research. Taking part will involve participating in 
providing data on empty houses which will be stored on the University of 
Manchester servers. 
4. I understand that my name and any other personal information about me will not 
be used in any publications and reports of findings arising from this project and 
that my data will be anonymised. 
5. I understand that my words or personal information may be quoted in 
publications, reports, web pages and other research outputs but that my real 
name and any other personal information will not be used.	
6. I understand that I am free to withdraw at any time without giving any reason 
and without detriment to myself.  
Participant Name BLOCK 
LETTERS:. 
Signed:  
 Date:. 
Researcher 
I, the researcher, confirm that I have discussed with the participant the contents of the 
information sheet. 
Signed:  Date:.		
Appendix	7:	Empty	Houses	Probe	2	-	Walking	Interviews	discussion	guide		
Appendix	7:	Empty	Houses	Probe	2	-	Walking	Interviews	discussion	guide	
1) You	have	pointed	out	some	of	these	empty	buildings		what	makes	you	think	
they	are	empty?	
2) Were	you	aware	of	empty	houses	before	I	mentioned	the	project?	What	did	
you	think	of	empty	houses?		
3) What	did	you	think	about	your	observations	of	them?	Prompt	for	what	to	do	
with	observations.	
4) Who	might	use	such	information?	Any	issues	with	that?	
5) Any	issues	with	reporting?	Technically	and	socially?	Was	there	anything	you	
felt	uncomfortable	doing?	
6) Are	there	any	other	issues	that	might	be	affecting	the	success	of	the	project?		
7) What	do	you	think	of	the	Empty	Houses	project?	Are	there	any	improvements	
that	could	be	made	or	issues	with	it?	
8) Do	you	consider	it	to	be	social	science?	
9) Were	you	aware	of	the	term	citizen	social	science?	What	does	it	mean	to	you?	
Appendix	8:	Our	Manchester	probe	3		consent	form		
Appendix	8:	Our	Manchester	probe	3		consent	form	
Please initial the boxes next to each sentence and then, if you are happy to proceed, sign 
below. 
5. The researcher has given me my own copy of the information sheet, which I 
have read and understood. 	
6. The researcher has given me the opportunity to ask questions about the project 
7. I agree to take part in this research. Taking part will involve participating in 
providing data which will be recorded  
8. I understand that my real name will not be used in any publications and reports 
of findings arising from this project and that my data will be anonymised 
7. I understand that my words or personal information may be quoted in 
publications, reports, web pages and other research outputs but my real name 
will not be used 	
8. I understand that I am free to withdraw at any time without giving any reason 
and without detriment to myself.  
Participant Name BLOCK 
LETTERS:. 
Signed:  
 Date:. 
Researcher 
I, the researcher, confirm that I have discussed with the participant the contents of the 
information sheet. 
Signed:  Date:.		
Appendix	9:	Our	Manchester	probe	3		Interviewer	topic	guide		
Appendix	9:	Our	Manchester	probe	3		Interviewer	topic	guide	
Interviewee	biographical	information:		
Name:		
Date:		
Community:	
Do	you	feel	part	of	a	community	in	this	area?	
Do	you	feel	part	of	a	community	within	your	ward	[like	a	religious	community,	demographic	
community,	community	of	interest]?	
Are	there	any	tensions	in	the	community?	
Do	you	have	a	good	relationship	with	your	neighbours?	
Change	over	time:	
How	has	the	community	changed	over	the	time	you	have	been	in	the	area?	
How	has	this	affected	your	experiences	in	the	area?	
Try	to	keep	the	questions	as	open	as	possible		Tell	me	about		
Themes	to	cover:	
 Arrival:	coming	to	Moss	Side,	to	England	
 Settling	down:	finding	somewhere	to	live,	work	and	choosing	schools,	building	a	community	
 Growing	up:	schooling	(both	state	and	supplementary,	youth	clubs	and	community	centres,	
churches	
 Shocks:	major	events	(may	include	housing	clearances	in	Moss	Side	and	then	in	the	regenerated	
Hulme,	1981	riots,	guns	and	gangs	as	well	as	more	personal	experiences)	
 Moving	on:	places	that	family	members	moved	to,	their	reasons	and	experiences	after	moving	of	
Moss	Side	and	where	they	went	to	
 Ageing	in	place:	the	experiences	of	older	people	living	in	Moss	Side	now	
Informal	social	contact:	
Are	there	any	locations	in	your	community	where	you	meet	friends	informally,	like		particular	cafes,	
restaurant,	park	or	public	space?	Why	do	you	like	to	go	there?	
How	do	you	keep	in	touch	with	your	friends	and	family?	Visits,	phone	call,	email,	skype,	text	messages,	
twitter,	letters	etc.?	
Final	question:	Before	we	finish,	are	there	any	other	issues	or	areas	we	haven't	discussed	that	you	want	
to	raise?	
	THANK	YOU	
Appendix	10:	Our	Manchester	probe	3		Interviewer	check	list		
Appendix	10:	Our	Manchester	probe	3		Interviewer	check	list	
- Recorder		make	sure	its	fully	charged	or	that	phone	battery	is	full.	Think
about	where	to	place	the	recorder/phone	so	that	it	picks	up	the	most	amount
of	talking.
- Interview		think	about	location	of	the	interview		somewhere	quiet	&	where
the	interviewee	is	comfortable	&	relaxed.	Tell	them	about	the	project.	Give
them	the	information	sheet	to	read	&	then	the	consent	form	to	sign.
- Research	Diary		after	each	interview	take	a	few	moments	to	reflect	on	the
experience	and	to	note	down	any	thoughts	about	it,	what	worked	and	any
issues	you	might	have	faced.	Try	to	do	this	as	soon	as	possible	after	the
interview.	Also	select	three	most	interesting	points	that	the	interviewee	made
during	the	interview.
- Data		be	sure	to	come	back	to	the	centre	on	Great	Western	Street	to
download	the	interview	recordings	on	to	the	laptop.	Darrell	and	Alex	can	help
with	this.	Also	drop	off	signed	consent	forms	in	folder	in	office.
Any	problems:	
Alex	on:		 or	email:	
Stephen	on	 or	email:	
Peter	on	 or	email:	
Alex	will	also	be	at	the	centre	regularly	to	discuss	any	problems	face	to	face.	
Appendix	11:	Publications		
Appendix	11:	Publications	
Academic	journal	articles:	
Albert,	A.	and	Buscher,	M.	(under	development)	The	very	idea	of	Citizen	Social	
Science.	Theory,	Culture	and	Society.	
Albert,	A.	(under	development).	The	barriers	and	opportunities	to	participation	in	the	
Empty	Houses	Project:	crowdsourced	citizen	social	science	for	more	socially	robust	
knowledge.	Special	Issue	of	Palgrave	Communications	on	Citizen	Social	Science:	
active	citizenship	vs.	Data	commodification.	
Albert,	A.	(under	development).	Observing	the	observers:	Mass	Observation	data	and	
the	changing	relationship	between	researcher	and	researched.	Sociological	Review.	
Sturm,	U.,	Schade,	S.,	Ceccaroni,	L.,	Gold,	M.,	Kyba,	C.,	Claramunt,	B.,	Haklay,	M.,	
Kasperowski,	D.,	Albert,	A.,	Piera,	J.,	Brier,	J.,	Kullenberg,	C.	and	Luna,	S.	(2017).	
Defining	Principles	for	mobile	apps	and	platforms	development	in	citizen	science.	
Research	Ideas	and	Outcomes	3:	e21283.	
Book	chapters:	
Soledad,	Luna,	S.,	Gold,	M.,	Albert,	A.,	Ceccaroni,	L.,	Claramunt,	B.,	Danylo,	O.,	Haklay,	
M.,	Kottmann,	R.,	Kyba,	C.,	Piera,	J.,	Radicchi,	A.,	Schade,	S.	and	Sturm,	U.	(2018).	
Developing	mobile	applications	for	environmental	and	biodiversity	citizen	science:	
considerations	and	recommendations.	London:	Springer.	
Gilmore,	A.,	Arvanitis,	K.	and	Albert,	A.	(2018).	'Never	mind	the	quality,	feel	the	
width':	big	data	for	quality	and	performance	evaluation	in	the	arts	and	cultural	sector	
and	the	case	of	'Culture	Metrics	in	Eds.	Giovanni	Schiuma	and	Daniela	Carlucci	
(2018).	Big	Data	in	the	Arts	and	Humanities:	Theory	and	Practice.	London:	CRC	Press.	
Policy	reports:	
Doing	It	Together	Science	(DITOS)	project	deliverable	D6.6	Innovation	Management	
Plan:	Making	Citizen	Science	Work	(2018)	for	the	European	Commission,	as	part	of	
Horizon	2020	funded	DITOS	project.	At	UCL	Discovery:	
http://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/10063266/	
DITOS	D6.8	(2019)	Communication,	Dissemination	and	Exploitation	Plan.	For	the	
European	Commission,	as	part	of	Horizon	2020	funded	DITOS	project.	
DITOS	Research	Insight	(2018)	Use	of	Soft	Systems	Methodology	to	understand	the	
use	of	Citizen	Science	in	UK	Environmental	Policy,	published	internally	as	part	of	
Horizon	2020	funded	DITOS	project.	
