This thesis has been submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for a postgraduate degree 
(e.g. PhD, MPhil, DClinPsychol) at the University of Edinburgh. Please note the following 
terms and conditions of use: 
 This work is protected by copyright and other intellectual property rights, which are 
retained by the thesis author, unless otherwise stated. 
 A copy can be downloaded for personal non-commercial research or study, without 
prior permission or charge. 
 This thesis cannot be reproduced or quoted extensively from without first obtaining 
permission in writing from the author. 
 The content must not be changed in any way or sold commercially in any format or 
medium without the formal permission of the author. 
 When referring to this work, full bibliographic details including the author, title, 
awarding institution and date of the thesis must be given. 
Creating the Stalinist other: 
Anglo-American historiography of Stalin and Stalinism, 
1925-2013 
Ariane M. M. Galy 
Doctor of Philosophy 
The University of Edinburgh 
Declaration: 
I declare that the work contained within has been composed by me 
and is entirely my own work. No part of this thesis has been 
submitted for any other degree or professional qualification. 
Signed
Abstract 
The Western historiography of Stalin and Stalinism produced in the period 1925 
to the present day is a strikingly varied body of work in which the nature of 
Stalin, his regime and his role within his regime have been and continue to be the 
subject of debate. This characteristic is all the more striking when we consider 
that from the earliest years of the period under study there has been a general 
understanding of the nature of the Stalinist regime, and of the policies and leader 
which have come to define it.  
This thesis analyses the principal influences on research which have led to 
this body of work acquiring such a varied nature, and which have led to an at 
times profoundly divided Western, and more specifically Anglo-American, 
scholarship. It argues that the combined impact of three key formative influences 
on research in the West over the period of study, and their interaction with each 
other, reveal recurring themes across the whole historiography, while also 
accounting for the variety of interpretations in evidence. The first impact 
identified is the lack of accessibility to sources during the Soviet period, which 
posed a constant and real obstacle to those in the West writing on Stalin and 
Stalinism, and the impact of the removal of this obstacle in the post-Soviet era.  
The second is the influence of wider historiographical trends on this body of 
work, such as the emergence of social history. Finally the thesis argues that 
evolving Western attitudes to Stalin and Stalinism over this period have played a 
key role in constructions of Stalin and his regime, demonstrating an on-going 
historical process of the othering of Russia by the West. The extent and nature of 
this othering in turn provide a central line of enquiry of the thesis. Tightly 
intertwined with all three impacts has been the changing global political context 
over the period in question which provides the evolving and influential contextual 
backdrop to this study, and which has given this body of work a deeply political 
and personal character. 
Table of Contents 
Acknowledgements                 page v 
Introduction               
1.  Western historiography of Stalin and Stalinism: research questions       
2.  Russia under Western eyes            
3.  Scholarship to date                                                          
4.  Thesis structure  
5. Chapter summary                                                         
1. Trotsky versus Stalin: the first Stalinist other, 1925-1946                     
1.1  Introduction                                                                                              
1.2  Machiavellian, brutal and crude: depictions of Stalin                              
1.3  On Stalinism                                                                                             
1.4  Exiles and migrs: writing on Stalinism in the 1930s and 1940s           
1.5  Conclusion: Trotskyism and the Stalinist other                                        
2. Conflict of the Two Worlds: Stalinism as the totalitarian other 
 in the early Cold War                       
2.1  Introduction: the Cold War                                                                       
2.2  The totalitarian other                        
2.3 Scholarship and politics: writing on Stalinism in a Cold War context      
2.4 The Stalinist totalitarian other in Western historiography        
2.5  Conclusion              
3. The God that Failed: Khrushchevs secret speech and British 
Communist historiography of Stalin and Stalinism          
3.1  British Communists in context: the rise and fall of the CPGB       
3.2  The secret speech             
3.3  Before 1956: Stalin and Stalinism through British Communist eyes       
3.4  True democracy has been restored: the CPGB responds to the 20
Congress                 
3.5  To leave error unrefuted is to encourage intellectual immorality:  
The Reasoner                  
3.6  Beyond 1956               
3.7  Conclusion               
4. Morality and blame: the revisionist debates of the 1980s       
4.1  Introduction: the rise of social history in the 1960s and 1970s      
4.2  Revisionism and the new cohort in the study of Stalinism       
4.3  History with the politics left out?          
4.4  Whose fault? Stalinism and the locus of blame        
4.5  Blame and the moral dimension of the revisionist debates       
4.6  Conclusion: the revisionist debates and Western attitudes towards       
Stalin and Stalinism 
5. Friction in the archives: revolutions and counter-revolutions  
in the post-91 historiography of Stalin and Stalinism       
5.1  The Archival Revolution           
5.2  The conceptual counter-revolution and its critics         
5.3  New era, old agendas? Soviet-era scholarship in a post-Soviet world   
5.4  History with the politics left in: post-Soviet scholarship on Stalin        
and the Terror              
5.5  Stalin and the West in the post-Soviet world: the modernity debate      
5.6  Conclusion                        
6. Stalin in biographical writing 1932-2013: a case study of the 
historiography of the young Stalin         
6.1  Introduction: official Soviet versions of Stalins youth  
published in the West             
6.2  The two Sosos 
6.3  Emigrs, exiles and socialists: the early works, 1932-1947 
6.4  From the Cold War to Perestroika 
6.5  The young Stalin in the post-Soviet era 
6.6  Young Stalin and the West 
6.7  Conclusion 
Conclusion 
Bibliography 
Acknowledgements 
Over the course of this research project I have been fortunate enough to receive 
support, help and encouragement from many people along the way. First and 
foremost my biggest and most heartfelt thanks must go to my supervisors at 
Edinburgh, Dr Iain Lauchlan and Dr Luke March. I have been incredibly lucky to 
work with such knowledgeable scholars and to have benefited from a productive 
and happy working dynamic from the start. I am deeply grateful for all the time 
and energy they have put into their supervision of my PhD, and for the good 
humour and positivity that have characterised it. I could not have asked for better 
and I hope that we will continue to cross paths well beyond the end of this 
project. I am also grateful to Prof. Donald Bloxham, whose thoughts and advice 
during the writing up period informed the articulation of some of the key ideas of 
the thesis. More generally the School of History, Classics and Archaeology at 
Edinburgh has provided me in both my undergraduate and postgraduate studies 
with a vibrant and inspiring setting in which to pursue my historical interests. 
Special thanks to Dr Adam Budd for his enthusiasm and support for both my 
MSc and PhD research projects and to Niko Ovenden for being such a helpful 
and friendly source of contact and advice throughout my graduate studies. The 
National Library of Scotland has been my second home during the last 5 years 
and I would like to thank the librarians and curators there for all their help during 
this time. I am also grateful for the inclusivity and friendship of my 
contemporaries at CRCEES in Glasgow, who have been kind enough to include 
me in many academic and social events over the last few years. It has been a real 
pleasure to have such a great network of Russianists nearby and I hope this only 
marks the beginning of long and fruitful connections and friendships.  
Outside of the academic fold, I am forever indebted to my family and 
friends for their support  and patience  during the PhD. When my own has 
occasionally dipped, their enthusiasm for my pursuit of this project has kept me 
on track. I am especially grateful to my parents, Jean-Pierre Galy and Darya 
Hoare, for everything they have done for me, not only in the last four years but 
throughout my life. Oliver Hoares support has gone far beyond the avuncular 
call of duty and I have been deeply touched by his faith in my chosen path. 
Friends in London, and especially the old Edinburgh gang, have amazed me with 
their endless enthusiasm and support of my historical endeavour. I am 
particularly indebted to Olivia Banbury for being the rare kind of friend who 
embodies that time-honoured accolade BFF, to (Dr) Georgie Hallett for her 
humour-filled empathy with the highs and lows of a doctoral project, and to Ollie 
and Rosie Leach for just being brilliant. On the Scottish side the Gibson clan, and 
especially Iain and Rosalie, have provided constant and deeply appreciated 
encouragement. In Edinburgh special thanks are due to my fellow members of 
(the I like to think infamous) Book Club who are, as a group and individually, a 
great source of friendship, silliness and bad fiction  the perfect antidote to 
academic work. It is impossible to adequately thank Jonathan Gibson, my other 
half, here. His general brilliance has been an inspiration for the last five years and 
I could not have done this PhD without him.  
Without the support of three of these people in particular I would not have 
started, let alone completed, this project. Oliver, Mum and Jonny, this thesis is 
dedicated to you with love and enormous gratitude. Thats the good news. The 
bad news is, youve got to read it now
Introduction 
1. Western historiography of Stalin and Stalinism: research 
questions 
 The Western historiography of Stalin and Stalinism produced in the 
period from 1925, when Stalin first emerged in an English language 
work on early Soviet politics, to the present day reveals that research 
on this subject has generated a strikingly varied body of work in 
which the nature of Stalin, his regime and his role within his regime 
have been and continue to be the subject of much debate. This 
characteristic is all the more striking when we consider that from the 
earliest years of the period under study, there was a general (if not 
always entirely specific) understanding of the nature of the Stalinist 
regime and the policies and leader that to define it.
 This thesis 
analyses the principal influences on this historiography, reflective of a 
varied and at times deeply divided scholarship in the West. In doing 
so, it assesses the impact of what can be considered key formative 
influences on research on Stalin and Stalinism in the West over the 
period of study. Tightly intertwined with these impacts was the 
changing global political context, which provides the evolving 
contextual backdrop to this study.  
The particularities of the conception of a socialist Soviet Union, 
Stalins accession to power and the resulting global political and 
diplomatic context directly affected many of the lives of those who 
wrote about Stalin and Stalinism, and these often deeply personal and 
ideological experiences have provided a central character to the 
historiography from the outset: the first works published in the West 
on Stalin and Stalinism were almost without exception written by 
socialists who had become alienated in some way from the Stalinist 
 See Chapters 1 and 6 specifically regarding early understanding of the nature of 
the Stalinist regime. 
regime. 
 Often these were migrs or exiles from the Soviet Union, 
such as Leon Trotsky. Later, the experience of the Cold War provided 
the context for the formation of extreme views on the danger of 
communism and the ideological and physical threat of the Soviet 
Union to the Western world. Western Communists on the other hand 
lived in a world of persecution where their ideological beliefs became 
their key defining feature, and the absolute epicentre of their lives and 
identities. The post-Soviet period and the experience of observing 
Russias faltering transition towards a capitalist democracy from the 
West has provided a radically different but no less influential 
experience to those writing on the Soviet Union at this time. 
Within this changing global setting, the first of three major 
identifiable impacts on the historiography was the lack of 
accessibility to sources during the Soviet period, which posed a 
consistent obstacle to those in the West writing on Stalin and 
Stalinism. For decades information was pieced together from a variety 
of sources such as the Soviet press, personal testimonies (usually 
from exiles or escapees) and Soviet foreign policy information, from 
which more or less could be gleaned on the inner workings of the 
Stalinist regime and life under it. In a feat of resourcefulness and 
tenacity this did not deter those who wished to pursue research in this 
area, and some extraordinarily well-documented pieces of work 
emerged from the Soviet period despite its source limitations.
 This is not necessarily unique to this body of work. For example the earliest 
studies on the Holocaust were written by those who had experienced it, and who 
based their works on personal experience. Academic scholarship on the subject 
developed slightly later. With thanks to Pertti Ahonen for his insights on this topic. 
 An obvious example is Robert Conquests The Great Terror: Stalins purge of the 
thirties (London, 1968) which was the first major work to detail the great purges 
and Stalins terror. Conquest was able to combine two kinds of sources, which he 
termed official and unofficial. The former were those published in the Soviet 
Union, such as official comment (the work was published after Nikita Khrushchevs 
1956 secret speech) and publications, which through their varying levels of 
concealment and falsification provided a multi-dimensional source, informing 
Conquest of both facts, and the process of falsification. The latter were testimonies 
of individuals who had escaped the Soviet Union to the West. These included 
political defectors who became memoirists for example. Conquest wrote in more 
detail about his sources and the challenges associated with working with some of 
these in his bibliographical notes to the book. See R. Conquest, The Great Terror, 
pp.565-571 
Nevertheless, there were huge gaps left by the shortage of sources, 
and this lack of information combined with a degree of conjecture 
needed to fill in the blanks can account for some of the most 
important debates in the field that occurred from the 1960s onwards. 
The confrontational and at times bitter nature of these arguments is 
further accounted for when we consider that this conjecture was 
framed by the atmosphere of extreme ideological tension during the 
Cold War, an event which covers much of the period of study. It was 
only with the advent of perestroika and the eventual archival 
revolution of the post-Soviet era that access to archival and other 
documentation, as well as people and their histories, became 
possible.
Simultaneously, writing on Stalin and Stalinism in the West 
was inevitably influenced by wider historiographical trends. The 
impact of the emergence of social history from the 1960s, and cultural 
history in the late 1980s onwards, provoked not only a change in 
research focus but also deep divisions within the field of Soviet 
studies as scholars from different generations attempted to come to 
terms with each others methods of research and interpretation. This 
was particularly well exemplified by the debates that occurred as the 
revisionists of the 1980s clashed with totalitarian-model scholars and 
earlier revisionists of the early Cold War period. These 
historiographical trends manifested themselves not only in writing on 
Stalinism but also in writing on Stalin himself. The development of 
psychohistorical writing in the 1970s and wider changes in 
 The one archival source which became available to researchers after the Second 
World War was the Smolensk Archive. This was a collection of documents taken 
from the Smolensk Party Archive by the Germans after they invaded the Soviet 
Union in June 1941. The USA obtained these documents (about 500 files) during 
the post-war occupation of Germany. The documents were used by several US 
government and intelligence agencies before being made available to scholars. 
Access, when granted, led to some ground-breaking publications such as Merle 
Fainsods Smolensk Under Soviet Rule (Cambridge, Mass., 1959), which 
documented the way in which regional leaders disobeyed orders from the Kremlin, 
arguing that in the regions the regime was disorganised, and faced resistance and 
rebellion from peasants and workers. This was a radical departure from what had 
previously been perceived to be a highly efficient and deeply ingrained regime. 
Despite the so-called archival revolution, there is still relatively little new 
information available on the earliest period of Stalins life, when he was a child and 
adolescent (see Chapter 6) or on his personal life and private thoughts. 
biographical writing, for instance, all influenced the ways in which 
Stalin was depicted, and changed ideas about which areas of his life 
were deemed most interesting or significant. Yet taking into 
consideration the wider conditions of the creation of the 
historiography, such as the particularities of source accessibility, for 
instance, how important were these trends in the formation of the 
historiography: did they drive it, or did they merely provide an extra 
push towards political, ideological and interpretative paradigm shifts 
in a changing global context?  
The final impact on this historiography to be analysed in this 
thesis is one that has been largely neglected as a key formative 
influence on Western writing on Stalin and Stalinism. One function 
that the historiography performs is that of a prism through which we 
are able to observe the evolution of Western attitudes to Stalin and his 
regime  and to a degree, by extension, Western attitudes towards 
Russia and the Soviet Union  over the entire period of study. This in 
turn can lead us to question how the West has constructed Stalin and 
Stalinism in relation to itself over the period of study and whether we 
are able to observe the emergence of a Stalinist other. The process 
of othering in Western (and especially European) discourse has been 
particularly studied in colonial and post-colonial studies.
 Implicit in 
the concept of othering is the formation of an identity not only for the 
other but for the self too. The latter is what the former is not and is 
not what the former is: both identities become dependent on these 
 On Eurocentrism and othering in colonial and post-colonial studies see for 
example D. Chakrabarty, Provincializing Europe: postcolonial thought and 
historical difference (Princeton, 2000); H. K. Bhabha, The Location of Culture 
(New York, 1994) and R. Young, White Mythologies: Writing History and the West, 
(London, 1990). Chakrabarty largely focuses on the impact of Eurocentrism on the 
social sciences, while Bhabha examines hybridity, mimicry, ambivalence and 
difference in the way the colonised have resisted the coloniser. He argues that 
hybridisation and colonial hybridity, as a cultural form, produced ambivalence in 
the colonial masters and as such altered the authority of power. Youngs work is a 
critical analysis of post-colonial theory that asks whether History is simply a history 
of the West, and whether a non-Eurocentric history is possible. 
constructions.
 One particularly well-known variant borne from this 
notion is Orientalism, a term coined by Edward Said in the 1970s to 
describe the prejudiced ideological construction of the Orient, which 
he argued had become hegemonic in Western thinking, and from 
which certain parallels may be able to be drawn in this thesis with 
Western constructions of Russia and the Soviet Union.
 This thesis 
will consider as a conceptual basis for othering the process through 
which the West constructs Stalin and Stalinism as its other by 
highlighting the latters perceived undesirable and inferior 
characteristics, be they immoral, threatening, backward or dangerous, 
for example. As explained by Sybille Reinke de Biutrago, this usually 
happens through the utilisation of images and various discursive 
means, typically interwoven. In writing, this is particularly done 
through stylistic means that are applied to compare, liken or 
distinguish, to convince, empower or devalue  in short, to construct 
relations between self and other in various ways.
 Reinke de Biutrago 
also highlights that existing images of the other may be added to and 
adjusted. New images can also be created, but there must be some 
link to a memory or to existing perspectives or ideas for those new 
images to be able to take hold; 
 this notion is particularly relevant in 
relation to the process of tracing the evolution of Western 
representations of Stalin and Stalinism.  
 There is a huge theoretical body of work on the other/self nexus across the 
psychological, historical, philosophical and anthropological disciplines. Iver B. 
Neumann provides an excellent account of the uses of the other in world politics. 
He identifies four paths in this usage: the ethnographic path, the psychological path, 
the continental philosophical path and the Eastern excursion. See I. B. Neumann, 
Uses of the other: the East in European identity formation (Manchester, 1999), 
pp. 1-20. 
 E. Said, Orientalism (London, 1978). Three principal patterns were identified by 
Said in Western discourse on the Orient: the exaggeration of difference, thin and 
repetitive forms of intellectual analysis based on previously-made prejudiced 
analysis and assumptions, and the assumption of Western superiority. For an 
account of the reverse process, that is Russias othering of Europe, see I. B. 
Neumann, Russia and the idea of Europe: a study in identity and international 
relations (London, 1996). 
 S. Reinke de Biutrago, Introduction: Othering in International Relations: 
Significance and Implications in S. Reinke de Biutrago (ed.), Portraying the Other 
in International Relations: Cases of Othering, Their Dynamics and the Potential for 
Transformation  (Newcastle, 2012), p. xiv 
 Ibid. 
2. Russia under Western eyes 
Some of the earliest forms of this process in the relationship between 
Russia and the West can be traced back to the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries. During the second half of the fifteenth century, 
faced with the Turkish threat from the East, the term Europe had 
become a synonym for the Christian world.
 It was Russias religious 
and political affiliations with Islam which led to the emergence of the 
notion of Russia as a definitive other from Europe, as its Christian 
status was deemed questionable.
 Iver B. Neumann states that the 
substitution of the terms Scythians, Tatars and Kalmyks for the 
catch-all term Russian made its debut as part of European 
constructions of Asiatic and barbarous Russia in this early 
period.
 Sixteenth century accounts of English travellers to Russia 
reinforced the idea of Russian life as crude and inhuman, despite the 
magnificence of the tsars court. One British sixteenth century 
traveller wrote of the true and strange face of the tyrannical 
statewithout true knowledge of God, without written law, without 
common justice, which was heavy and grievous to the poor 
oppressed people. 
 Another described how the cruelty of Ivan the 
Terrible bred a general hatred, distress, fear and discontent 
throughout Russia.
 Descriptions of the courts opulence provided a 
stark contrast: our men began to wonder at the majesty of the 
emperorhaving on his head a diadem or crown of gold, apparelled 
 I. B. Neumann, Russia as Europes Other (Florence, 1996), p. 37. This paper 
gives a concise yet comprehensive account of the evolution of Europes othering of 
Russia from the fifteenth century onwards.  
 Gerard Delanty has suggested that this principal political polarisation of 
Christendom versus Islam had in reality very little to do with the idea of Europe but 
that it nevertheless influenced the future history of the notion to a great extent. G. 
Delanty, Inventing Europe: Idea, Identity, Reality (London, 1995), p.29 
 Neumann, Russia as Europes Other, pp.38-39 
 G. Fletcher, Of The Russe Commonwealth  in L. E. Berry and R. O. Crummey 
(eds.), Rude and Barbarous Kingdom: Russia in the Accounts of Sixteenth-Century 
English Voyagers (Madison, 1968), p.109 
 J. Horsey, Travels in Berry and Crummey, Rude and Barbarous Kingdom, 
p.270 
with a robe of goldsmiths work, and in his hand he held a sceptre 
garnished and beset with precious stones.
 Another visitor 
highlighted  the lavishness of the royal banquets, describing his table 
served all in gold and silver, and so likewise on other tables there 
were set bowls of gold set with stone, worth by estimation four 
hundred pounds sterling one cup.
The eighteenth century saw the regular use of the term 
barbarians to describe Russians, amid fears that they were at the 
gate and unlikely to ever be rid of their barbarian state. At the same 
time, an identity was formed of Russia as a learner from Europe. 
These two constructions emerged in large part due to Peter the Great, 
whose behaviour led him to be considered a barbarian but one who 
nevertheless showed a will to shed his barbarianism and learn from 
Europe.
 One British commentator stated that Peter was extremely 
curious and diligent and has further improved his Empire in ten years 
than any other ever was, in ten times that space.
 His successes were 
seen as all the more admirable when considering the backwardness 
and barbarity of his subjects, described by one eighteenth century 
writer as  [c]reatures with the Names of Men but with Qualities 
rather Brutal than Rational.
 A further differentiating construction of 
this time was the denomination of Russia as the North. Neumann 
points out that Pushkins famous window on the West statement 
about St Petersburg was taken from a letter by Count Francesco 
Algarotti in 1739 that actually read: I am at length going to give you 
some account of this new city, of this great window lately opened in 
the north, thro which Russia looks into Europe.
 After the Great 
Northern War of 1700-1721 the defeated Sweden withdrew to 
Scandinavia and Finland, separating it from Russia and Poland and 
 R. Chancellor, The First Voyage to Russia in Berry and Crummey, Rude and 
Barbarous Kingdom, p. 24 
 A. Jenkinson, A Voyage to Russia in 1557 in Berry and Crummey, Rude and 
Barbarous Kingdom, p.54 
 Neumann, Russia as Europes Other,  pp. 25-26 
 As cited in M. S. Anderson, Britains Discovery of Russia, 1553-1815 (London, 
1958), p.76 
 Ibid., p.79 
 As cited by Neumann, Russia as Europes Other, p.27 
dissolving the idea of the North. Russia was thus no longer seen as 
one of the component of states making up the Baltic region.
was an important moment as it led to a reconstruction of the 
coordinates of Europe that eventually resulted in the East/West divide 
in the following century, a distinction that became and remains 
hugely significant.
Ideas of Russian barbarianism and difference continued to be 
propagated in the nineteenth century. The best-selling Marquis de 
Custines Letters from Russia (also published as Russia in 1839) 
provided damning verdicts that put considerable distance between 
Russians and Europeans:  
I do not blame the Russians for being what they are; I blame 
them for pretending to be what we are. They are still 
uncultivated and this state at least leaves the ground for clear 
hope. But I see them constantly possessed by the desire to ape 
other nations, and they ape as the apes do, mocking what they 
copy. So I think: these are men who have forsaken savagery 
and missed civilization, and I remember the pitiless aphorism 
of Voltaire or Diderot, now forgotten in France: The Russians 
have gone rotten without ever ripening.
While the Marquis de Custine still referred to Russia as the north 
throughout his letters, he also employed the word Orientals to 
describe Russians, and his usage of both terms could serve to 
illustrate the nineteenth century transition from the idea of Russia as a 
 The Great Northern War was fought by Russia, Denmark-Norway and Saxony - 
Poland against Sweden, in order to challenge the latters supremacy in the Baltic 
region.  
 Neumann, Russia as Europes Other, pp.27-28. For a more in depth analysis of 
the transition between North and East, and Western Enlightenment perceptions of 
Eastern Europe and the East generally see M. Confino, Re-Inventing the 
Enlightenment: Western Images of Eastern Realities in the Eighteenth Century, 
Canadian Slavonic Papers, Vol. 36, Nos. 3-4 (September-December 1994), pp. 
505-522.  
 Marquis de Custine, Letters from Russia (London, 1991), p.57. The book is a 
collection of letters written by Astolphe, Marquis de Custine as he travelled through 
Russia in the 1830s, published upon his return to France. As Iain Lauchlan points 
out, the fact that de Custine was a devout Catholic, fervent republican and had been 
inspired to write the book by Polish migr nationalists goes some way in 
explaining the general tone, lack of accuracy and hostility in his descriptions of 
Russia. See I. Lauchlan, Russian Hide-and-Seek: The Tsarist Secret Police in St 
Petersburg, 1906-1914 (Helsinki, 2002), p.34 
northern to an Eastern state as a long-term consequence of the Great 
Northern War. This transition to the Eastern other most closely 
resembles the constructions of Stalin that emerge in biographical 
writing on him as an Asiatic, although in the earlier years these were 
as often made by Russians as by Westerners.
 As the nineteenth 
century progressed, strategic tensions were high in Europe, and the 
key development in Europes construction of Russia, through wars 
such as the Russo-Turkish war of 1828-1829, was to accept and 
recognise it as a legitimate power and player in Europe. This meant 
that on the one hand Russia was seen as a component of Europe. On 
the other hand,, it was also still considered a barbarian (albeit a 
powerful one) at the gate, grasping for hegemony while Europe was 
itself trying to redefine the idea of the European power-balance so 
that the Europeanness which inclusion in it conferred on Russia could 
be relativised.
Following an initially generally positive reaction in the West 
to the 1917 Revolution in Russia, particularly prominent 
constructions of the Soviet Union by the West emerged over the 
course of the twentieth century. In the interwar period, there were 
three principal influences on these. The first was racialist discourse, 
which ranked different races against each other. Previously, Russians 
had been classed as Asiatic and thus not European but in the 
twentieth century a more extreme branch of this discourse developed 
(and which bore Nazism) that excluded Slavs from humankind 
altogether.
 The second somewhat different influence looked to 
Russia as a land of the future. This was particularly well exemplified 
in the work of the British socialist economists Sydney and Beatrice 
Webb, who saw the Soviet experiment as an effort to attain a higher 
 See Chapter 6 
 Neumann, Russia as Europes Other, pp. 15-16. For more on the Wests 
historical relationship with Russia see M. Malia, Russia Under Western Eyes: From 
the Bronze Horseman to the Lenin Mausoleum (Cambridge, Mass. and London, 
1999). Malia traces the relationship between the two from the eighteenth century, 
aiming to define Russias position within Europe, rather than emphasising the 
polarity between them. 
 Ibid., pp.12-13 
level of civilisation, one in which the many problems of the capitalist 
and Christian West could be eradicated. 
 Finally, the USSRs 
socialist economic organisation was seen as a credible successor to 
the capitalist economy, as this was still a time when commentators 
could support capitalism yet acknowledge the possibilities of a 
socialist alternative. Inter-war Russia was seen as a part of Europe, 
albeit an errant one. 
The aftermath of the Second World War and the advent of the 
Cold War led these previous influences on Western constructions of 
the Soviet Union to be subsumed by two catch-all constructions: the 
first was the authorised version of USSR, which saw it as an Asiatic 
and barbarian political power that had availed itself of the opportunity 
offered by the Second World War to intrude into Europe by military 
means. The second saw the USSR as the deliverer of Europe from the 
scourge of Nazism and as a model for Europe to emulate with a 
politico-economic model that could have an evolutionary, 
invigorating potential on Europe.
 In both cases, it is clear that these 
models of the Soviet Union represented what Europe and the West 
were emphatically not.  
Presently, we are observing post-Soviet Russia in transition, 
though towards what is becoming less and less clear. There has been a 
resurgence of the learner identity of the Soviet Union in 
international relations discourse, especially in the decade immediately 
following the collapse of the Soviet Union, as the Western world 
watched expectantly for Russia to make obvious steps towards a 
 For example, see S. Webb and B. Webb, Is Soviet Communism a New 
Civilisation? (London, 1936). 
 Neumann, Russia as Europes Other, p.13.  Ronald G. Suny also states that 
through the inter-war years the Soviet Union offered many Western intellectuals a 
vision of a preferred future outside and beyond capitalism. However, he suggests 
that within this hope and faith in the USSR and communism, there were already 
seeds of disillusionment and despair. See R. G. Suny, Reading Russia and the 
Soviet Union in the twentieth century: how the West wrote its history of the 
USSR in R. G. Suny (ed.), The Cambridge History of Russia: Volume III The 
Twentieth Century (Cambridge, 2006), p.12  
 Neumann, Russia as Europes Other, pp.8-9 
capitalist democracy.
 This has been highlighted by James D. J. 
Brown, who has argued that there is a clear pattern of Orientalism in 
contemporary Western discourse on Russia.
 In 2013, however, there 
is an increasing sense that concerns over freedom of speech, human 
rights, political corruption and the state of democracy in Vladimir 
Putins Russia are strengthening rather than weakening the Wests 
construction of Russia as its ideological and political other.  
This brief overview of some of the ways in which the West 
has differentiated itself from Russia and the Soviet Union serves to 
illustrate that one of the principal themes of this study does not take 
place in a historical vacuum. This thesis seeks to determine to what 
extent the historiography of Stalin and Stalinism is a manifestation of 
this on-going process from the early 1930s onwards, and in what 
form. 
3. Scholarship to date 
This study therefore aims to fill a gap in our understanding of the 
main influences on Western writing on Stalin and Stalinism and to 
help assess the Wests changing attitudes towards it over this period. 
To date, historiographical studies of this body of work have not 
examined these three suggested major impacts in conjunction, nor 
examined their relationship with each other and the wider global 
context. The majority of the surveys of the historiography currently 
published are analyses of its outcomes rather than of the conditions of 
its creation, be that through advances in empirical research, or 
changes in principal areas of research within the field. This approach 
has often been combined with a particular focus on the totalitarian 
and revisionist debates of the 1970s and 1980s. As a result, there is 
 Neumann states that this attempted transition would make Russia appear less of a 
threat.  Neumann, Russia as Europes Other pp.5-6 
J. D. J. Brown, A Stereotype, Wrapped in a Clich, Inside a Caricature: Russian 
Foreign Policy and Orientalism, Politics: 2010 Vol. 30 (3), pp. 149-159 
little to present in terms of previous literature relating to the key 
influences on the creation and evolution of this specific body of work 
as set out in this thesis. 
Instead, an overview of the literature shows that three patterns 
have emerged in historiographical surveys published to date that, 
while related to the themes of this thesis, demonstrate the lacuna in 
analysis of the field that this study aims to fill. The first of these 
patterns is the aforementioned focus on the outcomes of research. 
Alter Litvin and John Keeps survey of both Western and Russian 
historiography of Stalin and Stalinism, for example is a 
comprehensive summary of the evolution of this body of work and 
especially how it relates to the release of documentation from the 
Soviet Union and, later, Russia.
 Focusing largely on the outcome of 
scholarly investigation into Stalin and his regime, the authors are 
principally concerned with the current state of knowledge that has 
resulted from this research to date. Keep, for instance, looks 
individually at the fruits of research on politics and government, 
gender and foreign policy. The second part of the work, entitled 
Wrestling with Revisionism: recent Western writing on Stalinism, 
suggests that those changes that occurred in the field from the 1970s 
are still having a relevant impact and require our attention. However, 
they are only addressed in terms of the knowledge produced by 
research, rather than in the context of its production. Similarly, this 
approach is employed in the other principal historiographical surveys 
published to date. David L. Hoffmanns Introduction to Stalinism: 
The Essential Readings deals with interpretations of Stalinism and 
provides a succinct overview of the principal trends that have 
dominated the historiography, focusing on the Cold War era, during 
which he writes that the debates on what caused Stalinism were 
highly politicised, and revisionism gave way to post-revisionism 
when the historical profession turned away from social history 
towards cultural history. Yet Hoffmans focus remains largely on the 
 Alter Litvin and John Keep, Stalinism: Russian and Western views at the turn of 
the millennium (Oxon, 2005). 
outcomes of these changes rather than the dynamics behind them, 
exemplified by his emphasis on what recent work on Stalinism has 
revealed or demonstrated.
 Similarly, Mark Sandle has provided a 
detailed historiographical survey of the field in the post-Soviet era 
through a review of some of the literature published on the Soviet 
Union since 1985. Once again, there is a clear focus on social and 
political historical debate and on the outcomes of research. For 
instance, Sandle suggests that the relationship between state and 
society stands out as the key issue in post-Soviet historiography, and 
he examines the relative merits of social history (coinciding with 
wider historiographical developments), as well as some of the 
criticisms aimed at social historians.
 Sandles article stands out for 
his appraisal of post-Soviet historiography, as yet still a relative 
rarity, but as with Litvin and Keep, and Hoffman, Sandles analysis 
remains focused on the nature of research and interpretation, rather 
than the influences leading to, and on, that research.  
The second theme to emerge is the contextual examination of 
the creation of the historiography in relation to Western writing on the 
Soviet Union generally, rather than specifically in relation to Stalin 
and Stalinism. This is reflected again in Sandles article, which 
focuses on the Western historiography of the entire Soviet period. A 
 D. L. Hoffman, Introduction: Interpretations of Stalinism in David L. Hoffman 
(ed.), Stalinism: The Essential Readings (Oxford, 2003), pp.4-5. The rest of this 
volume consists of chapters on aspects of Stalinism itself rather than the 
historiography and are excerpts from publications that Hoffman has collected as the 
essential readings on Stalin. These include Martin Malias The Soviet Tragedy, 
Stephen Kotkins Magnetic Mountain, Sheila Fitzpatricks Everyday Stalinism, and 
Moshe Lewins Grappling with Stalinism. The choice of extracts also provides an 
insight into what are considered to be essential readings, and therefore those 
which have contributed particularly salient accounts of different aspects of 
Stalinism. Hoffman also features Oleg Khlevnyuks The Objectives of the Great 
Terror, 1937-1938, which is published in J. Cooper, M. Perrie and E. A. Rees 
(eds.), Soviet History 1917-53: essays in honour of R. W. Davies (Basingstoke, 
1995). Christopher Read has included a similar historiographical chapter The Stalin 
Years: A Reader. It also provides a brief overview of the principal currents of 
research and the interpretations and knowledge they have generated. The rest of the 
volume is a series of excerpts from previous publications, also including 
Khlevnyuk, Fitzpatrick, and Kotkin, amongst others, writing on a range of topics 
from industrialisation and collectivisation to the Terror to the early Cold War 
period. See Christopher Read (ed.), The Stalin Years: A Reader (Basingstoke, 
2003), pp. 1-22 
 M. Sandle, New Directions, New Approaches, Old Issues. Recent Writing on 
Soviet History, The Historical Journal, Vol.38, No.1, 1995, pp.231-248 
much denser and more inclusive account of the development of 
Western historiography on the Soviet Union has been written by 
Ronald G. Suny, which looks at the evolution of Western writing over 
the course of the twentieth century, highlighting the influence of the 
changing global political context and of evolving historiographical 
trends of this period.
 Suny, for instance, touches on the question of 
the West writing about its other, stating that  
In the Western academy the Soviet Union was most often 
imagined to be an aberration of the normal course of modern 
history, an unfortunate detour from the rise of liberalism that 
bred its own evil opposite, travelling its very own Sonderweg 
that led eventually (or inevitably) to collapse and ruin.
He notes the difficulties faced by scholars in trying to write a 
balanced narrative in those conditions of heightened ideological 
tensions and suggests that while much valuable research was 
undertaken during the twentieth century by those either deeply 
committed to, or deeply against, Soviet communism, a studied 
neutrality was difficult (though possible) in an environment in which 
one's work was always subject to political judgement.
 In this way 
Suny highlights how important Western attitudes to Soviet 
communism have been to the changing nature of scholarship on this 
subject, as well as the impact of the global context on these attitudes. 
This has been similarly examined in great detail by David C. 
Engerman, whose book Know Your Enemy is a rich and detailed 
account of the relationship between the US State and academia during 
this period. It has greatly contributed to our understanding of the 
R. G. Suny, Reading Russia and the Soviet Union in the twentieth century: how 
the West wrote its history of the USSR in R. G. Suny (ed.), The Cambridge 
History of Russia: Volume III The Twentieth Century (Cambridge, 2006). Sunys 
introductory article was well-received in the field as a penetrating and insightful 
overview of this body of work and the conditions of its creation. Mark B. Smith 
commented that it provides excellent context for readers of the volume while 
experts have the pleasure of an original literature review. See M. B. Smith, 
Review: The Cambridge History of Russia. Volume 3: The Twentieth Century by 
Ronald Grigor Suny,The Slavonic and East European Review, Vol. 87, No. 3 (July 
2009), pp. 564-567, p. 565 
 Suny, Reading Russia and the Soviet Union in the twentieth century, p.6  
 Ibid., p.6 
intricate and deeply intertwined nature of academia and politics in the 
USA and the impact of the tense and difficult relationship between 
the USA and the Soviet Union on the production and outcome of 
scholarship during the Cold War era.
 The third theme to emerge in previous scholarship relevant to 
this study relates to Western attitudes to Russia in the field of political 
science and, more specifically, in the forum of contemporary 
international relations, where clear othering processes have been 
identified in Western discourse. Browns convincing argument that 
there are clear Orientalist tendencies in mainstream Western discourse 
on Russian foreign policy suggests that the process of othering Russia 
is on-going in the West. Brown bases his analysis on the application 
of three principal tenets of Saids Orientalism to this discourse.
first is the amplification of difference between the West and its other 
through crude stereotypes and caricatures based on ethnic typology. 
The second is the portrayal of the region as a degenerate divergence 
from Western norms, most specifically in regard to its people, who 
are generally seen as backward and inferior.
 The West, in turn, sees 
its own role as that of a committed rectifier of these inferiorities, 
which it aims to fulfil by imposing its own more advanced socio-
economic model on the East. The third feature of Orientalist discourse 
Brown highlights is that of a thin and oft-repeated form of intellectual 
analysis, based on a narrow set of convictions that have become the 
foundation for thinking on the Orient. All analyses of the region have 
therefore become repetitive and unimaginative.
 Browns article 
demonstrates that applied to Russia rather than the Orient, these 
patterns are clear in a sizeable amount of Western discourse on 
 D. C. Engerman, Know Your Enemy: The Rise and Fall of Americas Soviet 
Experts (New York, 2009). 
 In Saids analysis the other was of course the Orient. The perpetuation of the 
concept of the West becomes dependent on this stark East-West divide.  Brown, 
A Stereotype, Wrapped in a Clich, 
Inside a Caricature, p.150 
 As well as backward, people from the Orient are presented as prone to 
irrationality, inefficiency, the inability to learn from mistakes and a chronic inability 
to govern themselves. As a result, power is the only language they understand. 
Brown, A Stereotype, Wrapped in a Clich, Inside a Caricature, p.151 
 Ibid., p.152 
Russian foreign policy. He is able to identify a strong emphasis on the 
marked difference between Russian and Western foreign policy and 
on the danger it presents, arguing that, despite the fall of communism 
in the Soviet Union, Western scholarship continues to represent 
Russia as a threatening other pursuing a qualitatively different mode 
of behaviour.
 Russias inscrutable foreignness is then reinforced 
through the usage of shared language to describe it.
 Brown also 
demonstrates the Wests assumption of its own superiority over 
Russia when engaging in international politics, and its persistence in 
seeing Russia as a pupil, which is once again a manifestation of 
Russia as a learner from Europe.
 Finally, Brown suggests that 
overall very little imaginative or innovative research is undertaken in 
Western scholarship on this topic and that instead it retains at its core 
the idea that there is a specifically Russian mind-set or pattern of 
behaviour to which the country inevitably reverts, guided by some 
primordial instinct that has been indelibly imprinted upon its national 
character by the weight of geography and history.
 By following the 
three tenets of Saids Orientalism methodically, Brown has been able 
to identify clear parallels in Western discourse on Russian foreign 
policy. Similarly, Neumann has written some excellent work on 
Russia as Europes other historically and throughout the twentieth 
century that has already been drawn upon here to demonstrate the 
historical manifestation of this process. As a political scientist with a 
focus on international relations and identity formation, Neumann is 
principally concerned with the current state of Russo-European 
Ibid., p. 154 
 Brown notes that a striking example of this is the constant re-use of Churchills 
statement that Russias actions are a riddle, wrapped in a mystery, inside an 
enigma and the use of medical metaphors to describe Russians, such as genetically 
different. Ibid., p. 154  
 Brown recognises the instances when the Wests assessments of Russian 
behaviour and policy have been relatively accurate, though in these cases he takes 
issue with the method which is employed to describe or assess these. For example, 
he considers the Wests observation that Russias foreign policy is fixated with 
security, sovereignty and the pursuit of national interest as legitimate. However, he 
is dubious about the disparaging suggestions that have described this approach as 
anachronistic, un-European or so backward that it is rooted in a different historical 
era. See pp.154-155 
 Ibid., p.155 
political relations, but the depth of his work on Russia as Europes 
other demonstrates that this process is on-going and deserves closer 
attention in other fields of study.
These books and articles, the most in-depth historiographical 
analyses published to date, exemplify the lack of investigation into 
the simultaneous impact of the three key influences  source 
accessibility, historiographical trends and Western attitudes to Russia, 
bound together by the larger global context  on the creation of the 
Western body of work specifically relating to Stalin and Stalinism 
over the period of study.
4. Thesis structure  
This thesis therefore seeks to contribute to our knowledge of this 
subject by examining the historiography of Stalin and Stalinism in 
practice, that is its interaction with the world around it, in order to 
 Neumann, Russia as Europes Other  
 Other surveys of this kind include David Shearer, From Divided Consensus to 
Creative Disorder: Soviet History in Britain and North America, Cahiers du Monde 
Russe, Vol.39, No. 4, (Octobre  Dcembre 1998), pp.559-591, which through a 
chronological examination of the development of the field provides information on 
shifts in thematic foci of research, highlighting which scholars have focused on 
which areas. A common form of historiographical survey on this topic is that found 
at the start of works on Stalin and Stalinism. These differ somewhat from a more 
general survey in that they serve a specific purpose of framing their authors 
research. Examples of this can be found in Robert Service, Stalin: A Biography, 
Macmillan, London, 2004; Hiroaki Kuromiya, Stalin (Harlow, 2005) and J. Arch 
Getty, The Origins of the Great Purges: The Soviet Communist Party Reconsidered, 
1933-1938 (Cambridge, 1985). These often brief overviews aim to highlight how 
the work fits in with the historiography and its contribution to the field. Kuromiyas 
biography of Stalin, for instance, focuses on what he considers to be the most 
important aspect of Stalin but one that to date had been neglected by his 
biographers: that Stalin lived by politics alone. Service provides a brief survey of 
previous scholarship, particularly the evolution of the biographical aspect of writing 
on Stalinism, summarising the various approaches to Stalin throughout the period, 
from the hagiographical accounts of the pre-Cold War period, to the increasingly 
popular books that focus on the psychotic characteristics of Stalinism. According 
to Service, his biography of Stalin constitutes a comprehensive account of all facets 
of Stalin, as leader, administrator, theorist, writer, comrade, husband and father. In 
his introduction to The Origins of the Great Purges Getty examines previous 
interpretations of the purges, and uses his historiographical survey to introduce a 
new line of enquiry, one which he writes is only one possible unexplored approach 
to the Great Purges: the structural and factional struggles within the party apparatus 
in the 1930s.
 In turn, he writes, this should provide a new understanding of the 
origins of the purges, therefore using (as have Service and Kuromiya) the 
historiographical overview not only as an introductory tool for the reader, but also 
most importantly one in which to place their own new research, shaping the survey 
specifically to frame the subject at hand. 
reveal the dynamics, influences and events which have led to its 
creation. 
This thesis does not, and indeed cannot, encompass all of the 
material relating to Stalin and Stalinism that has been written and 
published in the West since 1925. It does not intend to be a 
comprehensive survey of the entirety of this body of work, a task that 
would be impossible within the time and space limitations of a 
doctoral thesis.  
The most obvious boundary of the thesis is the origins of the 
material, since it is concerned mostly with Anglo-American 
scholarship. This is, firstly, due to the size of this body work: it gives 
ample material from which to undertake detailed historiographical 
research. Secondly, the particularity of the Anglo-American 
relationship with the Soviet Union during the twentieth century and 
beyond has led to a historiography reflective of the deep complexity 
of relations between the two. As a result, this body of work provides a 
valuable tool with which to evaluate the extent and nature of othering 
of the Soviet Union by the West over this period, a principal line of 
enquiry of this study. However, the boundary is not entirely rigid. 
Throughout the thesis, where relevant and necessary, works by 
French and Soviet migr writers have also been included, such as 
those of Leon Trotsky, Henri Barbusse and Boris Souvarine. This has 
mostly occurred when examining the pre-Cold War period, when the 
majority of foundational writing on Stalin was being published in the 
West (in English, French and German) by writers of these origins. As 
the twentieth century progressed, the academic Soviet Studies field in 
the USA and the UK expanded greatly, resulting in the volume and 
dominance in the West of Anglo-American writing on this subject. 
This study has been constructed as a series of case studies that 
examine specific areas within the Anglo-American historiography 
that I have considered either to have been neglected, or that would 
benefit from review, most notably in relation to the Wests othering 
of Stalinism. As a result, the thesis does not deal with some of the 
more obvious writers, topics and themes that would otherwise be 
considered essential to a more general study on Western research and 
writing on Stalinism. It does not, for example, deal with the literature 
surrounding Stalin during the Second World War, a vast and complex 
topic that branches out beyond the more familiar political, social and 
economic spheres of Stalinism into military and diplomatic history, 
and that is tightly intertwined with the histories of the other warring 
nations. Similarly, it does not deal with biographical writing on the 
adult Stalin in the second half of the twentieth century, instead 
choosing to focus on biography of the child and adolescent Stalin, an 
under-researched area which reveals much about changing Western 
attitudes towards the man and his regime. 
Indeed, the thesis examines six areas of the historiography that 
allow novel insights into the ways in which Stalin has been written 
about in the West, the conditions of the creation of this writing, and 
the influences on it. In particular, these areas stand out thanks to their 
value in helping to assess the extent and nature of the construction of 
a Stalinist other within this body of work. They have been arranged 
into a chronological structure, which allows us to observe the 
evolution of several key aspects of writing on Stalin over the period 
of study, notably the concept of the Stalinist other and the 
repercussions of the highly influential shifting global political 
context.  
Chapter 1 focuses on the most influential early works on 
Stalin in order to determine the initial extent and nature of this 
othering before the ideological shift of the Cold War, which stretches 
over much of the rest of the period of study and the extent of whose 
influence is a question that has dominated many of the 
historiographical surveys we already have. With many of these works 
being written by migr or exiled socialist writers, the conditions 
under which they emerged provide an illuminating insight into the 
foundations of Western writing on Stalin and his regime. The analysis 
of the works in Chapter 2 aims to provide a new angle on totalitarian 
model writing, a phase of early Cold War Soviet Studies that 
dominates many discussions on past approaches to Stalinism, but 
about which there have been few new insights. By focusing on 
language, the usage of the term totalitarian and the concepts on 
which the constructions of the Stalinist other were hinged at this time, 
the approach and conclusions presented in this chapter show that there 
are still important new findings to be discovered from this part of the 
historiography.  
The source material in Chapter 3 departs from what can be 
considered as scholarly historiography by examining British 
communist reactions to Stalinism before, during and after Nikita 
Khrushchevs 1956 secret speech, as presented in British communist 
journals, books and press. This departure is justified when we 
consider that, to date, examinations of Anglo-American writing on 
Stalin and Stalinism during the early Cold War have been largely 
confined to those of individuals ideologically opposed to 
communism. By examining British communist writing on Stalinism 
in these varied forums, this chapter not only helps to construct a more 
nuanced and inclusive picture of British writing on this subject during 
the Cold War, but also allows a unique insight into the emergence and 
development of an othering process, as British communists reacted to 
the revelations of Khrushchevs speech.  
As with Chapter 2, Chapter 4 revisits familiar ground in novel 
ways through its examination of the totalitarian model versus social 
history debates that occurred in the 1980s. Within the framework of 
enquiry of this thesis, new insights can be gleaned from these 
discussions about the changing concepts on which the othering of 
Stalinism was hinged as the Cold War progressed. Chapter 5 assesses 
the major themes of post-Soviet writing on Stalinism, a necessary 
inclusion when we consider the dramatic shift in interpretative 
paradigms and source accessibility which occurred after the end of the 
Cold War and the eventual collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.  
Finally, Chapter 6 provides a case study of biographical 
writing on Stalin. By focusing specifically on writing on the young 
Stalin over the entire period of study, this chapter allows us to chart 
and interpret the shifting Western foci on different aspects of Stalins 
youth, how these have been linked to his adult personality and 
leadership, and their part in the construction of Stalin as the other. 
As this thesis seeks to understand the creation and evolution 
of the Western historiography of Stalin and Stalinism, it is helpful to 
define these terms. Western is predominantly used in this study to 
refer to the large body of work produced by Anglo-American 
scholarship, but at times will also encompass migr and other 
European writing, as well as official Soviet literature on Stalin 
published in the West, when it has been necessary and relevant to do 
What is meant by the historiography of Stalin himself is 
largely self- evident: it encompasses biography, both personal and 
political, but can also refer to any works concerning the interaction 
between the man and his regime, for example the examination of his 
correspondence in the post-Soviet era, used to determine his day to 
day involvement in the running of the regime.
 Stalinism is a more 
complex term. At a general level, Stalinism can be understood as the 
system of governance of all sectors of life put in place by Stalin and 
with which he governed the Soviet Union while he was Secretary 
General. However, the intricacies and the complexity of this system, 
its omnipresence in both the public and private spheres and its deep 
and wide-ranging consequences make its limitations difficult to 
identify. Robert C. Tucker has addressed issues with the usage of the 
term Stalinism, since he himself was one of the first to employ it. 
According to Tucker, the most notable (and perhaps most debatable) 
of these is that it is unclear what the referent to this term is: unlike 
Lenin, Tucker believed that Stalin did not produce a substantial body 
of theory which led to the ism of Leninism. For Tucker, a politico-
cultural approach was the most helpful in defining Stalinism. Firstly, 
it cannot be separated from the man himself. This does not mean 
psychologising history but rather illuminating Stalins drive for 
despotic power, the way he went about it and the uses he made of it. 
 See Chapter 5  
Secondly, Stalinism must be seen in cultural terms: Stalin in the post-
Lenin 1920s stood for Russian national Bolshevism, by which 
Tucker meant Bolshevik revolutionism in Stalin's special 
understanding of it and the great Russian chauvinism that Lenin 
belatedly perceived in him in 1922.
 Finally, while Tucker did not 
reject a social history of Stalinism, any attempts to understand it had 
to include all spheres of life (socio-economic, cultural, intellectual 
and so on) with the state as the prime actor. Without taking into 
account these elements in this politico-cultural perspective, he 
suggested that we cannot understand what happened after Stalin took 
power.
 Hoffmann has proposed a more straightforward definition of 
Stalinism: a set of tenets, policies, and practices instituted by the 
Soviet government during the years in which Stalin was in power, 
1928-1953. It was characterised by extreme coercion employed for 
the purpose of economic and social transformation and the abolition 
of private ownership and free trade. Hoffmann recognised the 
complexities of attempting to define it and noted that the range of 
phenomena included under the name of Stalinism alerts us to the fact 
that not all aspects of Stalinism can be explained by a single cause.
There are many varying definitions and understandings of Stalinism. 
However, Hoffmanns provides a good basis for the term, as long as 
there remains an implicit understanding of its complexities and 
subtleties, as suggested by both him and Tucker. This thesis therefore 
considers as historiography of Stalinism to be all work concerned 
with any and all aspects of the regime, its nature, execution and 
 R. C. Tucker, The Stalin Period as an Historical Problem, The Russian Review, 
Vol.46, No. 4, October 1987, pp.424-427, p. 425. Although Tucker doesnt call for 
a psychologising of history, he has given particular attention in his work to the 
psychology of power as a way of understanding totalitarianism. He felt the study 
of Stalin as an individual was an essential part of understanding the regime. See, for 
example, R. C. Tucker, The Soviet Political Mind: Stalinism and Post-Stalin 
Change (London, 1972), especially the chapters The Dictator and Totalitarianism 
and Several Stalins. Also see The Decisive Trifle section in R. C. Tucker, Stalin 
as Revolutionary 1879-1929: A Study in History and Personality (London, 1973). 
Tuckers politico-cultural approach to Stalinism is particularly in evidence in his 
book R. C. Tucker, Stalinism: Essays in Historical Interpretation (New York, 
1977). 
 Ibid. 
 Hoffmann, Introduction in Hoffman (ed.), Stalinism, pp.1-2 
repercussions, across all spheres of life: it is the very variety of 
definitions and understandings of Stalinism that is at the very centre 
of this study. 
5. Chapter summary 
As highlighted in the previous section when addressing the value 
of each chosen case study, these have been organised into six 
chapters.  Chapter 1 examines the historiography in the period 
1925-1947, when the first works on Stalin and his regime began 
to be published in the West. There was a focus on biographical 
writing during this period, and this chapter seeks to examine who 
was writing about Stalin and why. The most comprehensive 
works published in this period were biographies by Stalins 
opponents, notably Boris Souvarine, Leon Trotsky and Isaac 
Deutscher. Other works, such as those of Henri Barbusse and 
Bertram D. Wolfe, were important in other ways: for example, 
Barbusse was a supporter of Stalin and provided an alternative 
perspective, and Wolfes work in particular helps us to gauge to 
what extent the nature of Stalinism was understood in the West at 
this time. This chapter seeks to define the nature of these earliest 
constructions of Stalin and Stalinism and what informed them in 
an era when Stalin was still alive, and before the West and the 
Soviet Union became embroiled in the Cold War. Further, as 
many of these works were written by anti-Stalinist socialists 
estranged from the Soviet Union, it addresses the question of how 
these early writings presented some of the first forms of othering 
Stalinism in the West. 
Chapter 2 examines a neglected aspect of the creation of the 
totalitarian-model historiography on Stalin and Stalinism during the 
early Cold War, in which Stalinism became synonymous with 
totalitarianism. Moving away from previous analyses of the nature of 
Soviet totalitarianism and its interpretation in Western scholarship, 
this chapter seeks to understand specifically how the term 
totalitarianism became central to constructions of the Stalinist and 
Soviet other during this period, in what ways this manifested itself in 
writing on Stalinism at this time and the extent to which this tied in 
with the wider political context and discourse. The chapter explores 
the method in which certain common ideas, such as that of the two 
worlds of East and West and the danger and deviancy of the Soviet 
Union, were systematically reinforced across Western scholarship, 
while simultaneously constructions of totalitarianism as an extension 
of a Russian tradition of leadership also emerged. 
Chapter 3 examines British communist reactions to Nikita 
Khrushchevs 1956 secret speech, providing a case study to help our 
understanding of the development of Western Communist 
historiography on Stalin during this eventful period. The chapter 
investigates how Stalin and Stalinism were thought of and written 
about by British communists before 1956, mainly through portrayals 
in the Daily Worker, the official paper of the communist Party of 
Great Britain (CPGB), but also in works written about Stalins Soviet 
Union by British communists. The chapter goes on to analyse the 
ways in which British communists related their socialist beliefs, their 
party and their individual selves to the realities of Stalinism exposed 
by Khrushchev and how this, in turn, manifested itself in the way in 
which they wrote about Stalin and his regime. This study sheds new 
light on a neglected aspect of the historiography and provides an 
additional dimension to what has historically been a dominant focus 
on the work of historians and political scientists ideologically 
opposed to the regime. While much of the writing by Western 
communists at this time was non-academic, by examining these 
works, this chapter allows us to build a far more complete and 
inclusive picture of the way in which Stalin was being written about 
in the West and to understand the development of the historiography 
outside of the confines of Cold War Anglo-American academia, and 
mentality. Through the analysis of the British communist reactions to 
the 1956 secret speech, the chapter also examines the process through 
which an ideological alignment became an ideological opposition, as 
a particular faction of the CPGB sought to distance and differentiate 
itself and socialism from what they perceived to be the moral and 
ideological stain of Stalinism. 
Chapter 4 examines the impact of social historys appearance 
in the field of Soviet studies, and specifically the impact of 
revisionism on the way in which Stalinism was constructed by 
scholars during the 1980s. It does so predominantly through an 
analysis of the debates that occurred in The Russian Review in 1986 
and 1987, where totalitarian-model scholars and early revisionists, 
such as Peter Kenez, Stephen F. Cohen and Robert Conquest, as well 
as later revisionists debated in a lively and at times aggressive manner 
the role that social history should take in the research and 
interpretation of Stalinism. A new examination of these debates 
reveals the centrality of the notions of morality and of the locus of 
blame, not only in relation to Stalinism itself but also in relation to 
perceptions of how scholarship on the subject was undertaken. On the 
surface, the arguments in The Russian Review appear to be concerned 
with the role of social history in the study of Stalinism. However, the 
dominant themes of the debates were in fact the moral condemnation 
of Stalinism and the allocation of blame for the regime. This chapter 
argues that the totalitarian model scholars and early revisionists 
engaged in these debates were primarily concerned with the 
importance of highlighting the immoral and evil character of the 
regime and Stalins own responsibility for this. The revisionists 
reticence to do so with similar determination, and their criticisms of 
earlier scholarship on this subject, in turn not only led to these 
arguments acquiring an often bitter nature but also to the revisionists 
acquiring an immoral quality of their own in the eyes of their earlier 
counterparts. In this way, this chapter sheds new light on the nature of 
these debates by revealing both their strongly moral foundations and 
the nature, resilience and strength of the Stalinist totalitarian other of 
the early Cold War era.  
Chapter 5 examines the changes in research and interpretative 
frameworks that have occurred in the post-Soviet period, not only due 
to the new release of information during the archival revolution but 
also due to the cultural turn in the historical profession that displaced 
social history, the shifting global context which saw the end of the 
Cold War, and the Soviet Union becoming a historical notion. This 
chapter asks whether previous arguments and interpretations of 
Stalinism have withstood these changes, and while conditions have 
changed (there is more available information, collaborations with 
Russian archivists and historians have developed, as has a greater 
self-awareness in the field of past interpretative patterns, for 
example), whether many old agendas remain. Similarly it questions 
whether, despite the advent of social and then cultural history, there 
has been a return to a politics-centred view of Stalinism, manifested 
in the large amount of research once again being undertaken on 
Stalins role in his regime, as well as the way in which Stalinism itself 
was carried out from within the Kremlin. Finally, this chapter 
assesses whether  the end of the Soviet Union has meant that Western 
scholarship on Stalin and Stalinism still defines them, as it has done 
both historically and throughout this period of study, as the definitive 
other to the West.  
Finally, Chapter 6 is a case study of biographical writing on 
Stalin, undertaken through an analysis of writing on the young Stalin 
(defined as his childhood and adolescence, before he became a 
revolutionary). This chapter examines the way in which a body of 
work can develop from scratch, from the first primary sources 
onwards, providing a detailed example of the evolution of a particular 
body of work on a specific subject. In this case, it enables us to note 
the origins of certain depictions of Stalin, such as Trotskys famous 
characterisation of Stalin as mediocre, and questions whether the 
way in which the young Stalin was depicted is connected to the way 
he was perceived as an adult and leader.
 At the same time, the 
evolution of this body of work can help to identify the reflection of 
changing trends in biographical writing over the course of the period 
 The latter having been examined in Chapter 1 
of study, such as the development of psychohistory in the 1970s, or 
the increasing focus on the private lives of individuals as a wider 
biographical trend. This examination of the historiography of the 
young Stalin seeks to understand to what extent information from, 
and characteristics of, Stalins childhood and adolescence have been 
used to present or reinforce him as the other, notably in terms of his 
Georgian ethnicity, and what importance this period and these 
elements of his life have been given over the period of study in 
attempts to understand Stalin himself. Finally, the case study aims to 
illustrate the themes of the thesis over its entire chronological period 
by assessing how the changing political Soviet and Western context 
deeply affected the historiography of this part of Stalins life. It 
evaluates the impact of the lack of source availability on the 
development of one body of work and the extent to which personal 
convictions once again show themselves to be central to its creation 
and evolution.  
Chapter 1 
Trotsky versus Stalin: the first Stalinist other, 1925-
1. Introduction 
In 1925, Max Eastman published a book entitled Since Lenin Died.
In it Eastman, an American Trotskyist, examined the struggle for 
power that was occurring within the Communist Party of the Soviet 
Union (CPSU) after Lenins death. It was the first publication in the 
West to deal with Stalins character and political style: Eastman was 
one of the only people outside the Soviet Union to get hold of parts of 
Lenins so-called testament, a letter written before his death in 
which he had suggested a reorganisation of power within the party, 
including the removal of Stalin from his position as Secretary 
General.
 Lenin had, in a post-script to the letter, expressed concern at 
Stalins rudeness, and his mishandling of the suppression of Georgian 
dissent. Consequently Eastmans analysis of the testament and the 
ensuing struggle necessarily led to him addressing the question of 
Stalin.  
Western-published works focusing predominantly on Stalin 
started to appear in the period 1930-1932. The first of these was 
written by Boris Bazhanov, Stalins assistant in the Politburo from 
1923 until 1925, who had escaped the USSR in 1928 and settled in 
 1946 marks the end of this particular historiographical period, since the Cold War 
begins in 1947 and paradigms shift dramatically. However certain books in this 
chapter were published after this in the late 1940s. There is an inevitable delay 
between events and experiences, writing about them and eventual publication, 
which accounts for the occasional overlap in this study of works into the next era as 
defined by the structure of the thesis. 
 M. Eastman, Since Lenin Died (London, 1925). 
 Only the Encyclopaedia Britannica online names Eastman as one of the 
individuals to get hold of the testament outside of the Soviet Union.  See (last 
accessed 29/04/2013): http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/335969/Lenins-
Testament. The Marxist Internet Archive has a short biography for Eastman in their 
Max Eastman online archive and direct links to many transcripts of his works, 
including Since Lenin Died. See (last accessed 29/04/2013):  
http://www.marxists.org/archive/eastman/index.htm 
http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/335969/Lenins-Testament
http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/335969/Lenins-Testament
http://www.marxists.org/archive/eastman/index.htm
Paris. Like Eastman, Bazhanov wrote an account of the power 
struggle and the inner workings of the Politburo in the 1920s, only he 
focused much more closely on Stalin himself and the direction in 
which he was taking the Soviet state as early as the late 1920s. It was 
intended as a warning to the West of the danger of Stalin. The book 
was first published in French in 1930 under the title Avec Staline dans 
le Kremlin.
 In 1931 Lev Nussimbaum, an Azeri Jew by birth, 
published a biography of Stalin in German under the pseudonym 
Essad-Bey entitled Stalin: The Career of a Fanatic.
 Nussimbaum 
had fled when Bolsheviks overran Baku after the 1917 revolution. He 
was a renowned fantasist (for example, he regularly altered his own 
identity: he converted to Islam in Berlin in 1923, and later became 
sympathetic to the Nazi regime) but his book, and its depiction of the 
mysterious and dangerous Caucasian Stalin, was popular.
 Finally, the 
most influential work of these years was a memoir written by Stalins 
Georgian schoolmate Joseph Iremashvili, entitled Stalin Und Die 
Tragdie Georgiens, published in 1932. A first phase of the Western 
historiography of Stalin and Stalinism began with the publication of 
these works, and ended when relations between the USSR and the 
West became so tense as to dramatically impact on Western writing 
on Stalin and Stalinism for decades thereafter. Common traits 
emerged in these initial interpretations and approaches, as did patterns 
in the formative influences on these responses. These traits have been 
largely understudied and will be assessed here through an analysis of 
 D. W. Doyle, Bazhavov and the Damnation of Stalin (Athens, Ohio, 1990), pp.vii-
viii. Avec Staline dans le Kremlin was never translated into English. Towards the 
end of his life, Bazhanov wrote his memoirs, which were in part an updated, revised 
and substantially different account of Stalin than the 1930 book, in the sense that 
Bazhanov no longer had to protect friends inside and outside the USSR and 
revealed far more detail than he had in the original work. Doyles book is the only 
English translation of this later version of the book, already published in Russian, 
German, Italian and French between 1976 and 1979. The original Russian version 
was entitled Vospominaniia byvshevo pomoshnika Stalina and was published in 
Germany in 1976. 
 Essad-Bey, Stalin: The Career of a Fanatic (London, 1932). This is the first 
English version, with the original German version published a year earlier. 
 T. Reiss, The Orientalist: In Search of a Man Caught Between East and West 
(London, 2005), p. xxii. Reiss biography is the first time Nussimbaums life has 
been researched in detail. It uncovers the mystery of his many pseudonyms and 
identities.  
writing on Stalin himself and on Stalinism both as a term and as a 
regime.  
There were many works written in the West on Stalin during this 
period, with a noticeable increase in numbers during and after the 
Second World War when Stalins relevance to the West increased 
dramatically, and many of these will be examined to a greater or 
lesser extent in this chapter. However, there are but a few which have 
remained particularly historically significant for their influential 
interpretations of Stalin and Stalinism, and as important sources for 
their depth and scope of analysis, are still used as references today. As 
a result, they provide several new insights into why and how Stalin 
and Stalinism were being written about in this period. These are 
principally the works of Boris Souvarine, Isaac Deutscher and Leon 
Trotsky. 
2. Machiavellian, brutal and crude: depictions of Stalin 
Part of the interest of the works of this period lies in the ways in 
which these authors wrote about Stalin himself, since these were men 
who had followed Lenin but now found themselves estranged from 
the socialist nation they had supported and of which Stalin was now 
leader. Through their respective descriptions of Stalin key common 
characteristics emerged and, in turn, an analysis of these depictions of 
Stalin reveals a pattern of othering in which Stalin was systematically 
differentiated from, and subordinated to, the authors. 
This first process becomes apparent by the authors repeated 
derogatory depictions of Stalin as a method of differentiating 
themselves from him. They most notably do this by highlighting his 
mediocre and unremarkable, yet deceitful and sly, character. The first 
instances of this can be found in Eastmans work: the speeches and 
articles of Stalin, Bukharin, Kamenev and Zinoviev denouncing 
Trotsky would be thrown out of a prize essay contest in a school for 
defective children.
 This idea was also particularly well exemplified 
by Trotsky, whose interpretation of Stalins character is clear even 
from the index of the book: vindictiveness of, domineering will of, 
provincialism, not an orator, not a writer.
 Trotsky wrote 
throughout his book extensively and derisively on Stalins character: 
Koba's political provincialism is most instructively exemplified by 
his relations with the foreign centre, or rather, by the absence of any 
relations at all with it
, Articles under Stalin's signature do not arrest 
anyone's attention: they are devoid of personality, barring crudity of 
exposition
, Such attributes of character as slyness, faithlessness, 
the ability to exploit the lowest instincts of human nature are 
developed to an extraordinary degree in Stalin and, considering his 
strong character, represent mighty weapons in a struggle.
  Similarly 
Souvarines Stalin was defined by four main characteristics: his will 
to power was disproportionate to his will to know (the same 
expression is used by Trotsky), his narrow realism, combined with a 
lack of appreciation of theory or general ideas, a religious education 
overlaid with a travesty of Marxism and lastly an oriental dexterity 
in intrigue, unscrupulousness, lack of sensitiveness in personal 
relations, and scorn of men and human life.
  Souvarines Stalin was 
extremely close to Trotskys: he was not a man of ideas but one with 
small aptitude for intellectual work. He was neither sophisticated 
nor refined and throughout his revolutionary years he remained 
provincial.
 Deutscher similarly highlighted Stalins lack of 
remarkability, stating from the start that What was striking in the 
General Secretary was that there was nothing striking about him and 
that he had an almost impersonal personality.
 These 
 Eastman, Since Lenin Died, p.51 
 L. Trotsky, Stalin: An Appraisal of the Man and His Influence (London, 1947), p. 
 Ibid. p. 40 
 Ibid. p. 183 
 Ibid. p.393 
 B. Souvarine, Stalin. A Critical Survey of Bolshevism (London, 1939), p. 115 
 Ibid. p.34 
 I. Deutscher, Stalin: A Political Biography (London, 1949), p.273. This is 
something that Tucker has suggested was a case of mistaking historical appearance 
characterisations of Stalin may owe something to Karl Marxs similar 
description of Napoleon III: the class war in France created 
circumstances and relationships that enabled a grotesque mediocrity 
to strut about in a heros garb.
However, for Deutscher this apparent nature of Stalin was part of 
an image that was cultivated and whose purpose was to conceal the 
real character, thoughts and intentions of the man. This is made 
apparent by Deutschers repeated implications that Stalins outward 
persona was a deception: His bearing seemed of the utmost 
modesty, This [his ability to listen] was one of his qualities which 
seemed to indicate any lack of egotism, In the Politburo when 
matters of high policy were under debate, he never seemed to impose 
his views on his colleagues, and finally:  
To party audiences he appeared as a man without personal 
grudge and rancour, as a detached Leninist, a guardian of the 
doctrine who criticised others only for the sake of the cause. 
He gave this impression even when he spoke behind the 
closed doors of the Politbureau.
Indeed, the reinforcement of Stalins lack of remarkability and 
his general inferiority was matched only by the emphasis on his 
cruelty and duplicity, highlighting his danger and untrustworthiness. 
Eastman described Stalins approach to discrediting Trotsky during 
the battle for power as a campaign of falsification where Trotskys 
words were snatched violently out of context and in which he had 
figuratively walked up and hit Trotsky over the head with a club. He 
was dishonest and he fell back upon brutality in order to beat 
Trotskys clear arguments.
 Trotskys own descriptions included 
Undoubtedly characteristic of Stalin is personal, physical cruelty, 
for reality, since Stalin had his own political and theoretical ideas, and some 
personal qualities that affected his political style and policies, which were out of 
the ordinary. See R. C. Tucker, Several Stalins in R. C. Tucker (ed.), The Soviet 
Political Mind: Stalinism and Post-Stalin Change (London, 1972), p.110. 
Nevertheless, this was Deutschers Stalin from the vantage point of the late 1940s 
before the benefit of historical distance might influence him otherwise. 
 K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (London, 1926), p. 17 
 Deutscher, Stalin, pp.274-275 
 Eastman, Since Lenin Died, pp. 57-60 
what is usually called sadism
, complaints about his 'poisonous 
cynicism', his rudeness and his vengefulness, occur many, many times 
during Koba's life.
 Stalins ethnicity was in large part to blame for 
what Trotsky saw as distinctly non- Russian characteristics.
Souvarine drew direct comparisons between Stalin and Machiavelli, 
referring to the cheating and duplicity which characterised them both: 
On all points an intuitive Machiavellism guided him, often in its 
lowest form. The art of disguising his thoughts has no more secrets 
for him, his power of dissimulation equals his knowledge of 
provocation.
 Souvarines Stalin was Machiavellian, brutal and 
crude. For Deutscher, as for Souvarine and Trotsky, Stalin was 
deceitful, untrustworthy and insecure. He used chicanery and 
trickery to rule and aspired to be the sole spiritual leader of his 
generation, in part because his vanity had been hurt by the 
intellectual elite not noticing him from the off.
Key characteristics were therefore identified and repeatedly 
reinforced by each author: Stalin was determined, sly, bold and 
ambitious. These facets of his personality were as close as the authors 
got to conceding any qualities to Stalin. More prominent was Stalin as 
a spiteful, provincial, unrefined and mediocre bureaucrat.
  In this 
way, they explicitly differentiated Stalin from themselves and from 
the intended path of socialism in the Soviet Union. In Trotskys case 
especially Stalin was repeatedly subordinated: Trotsky wrote that 
Stalins intellect remained immeasurably inferior to his will
, with 
this point of intellect seemingly crucial. His repeated attacks on 
Stalins shortcomings in these areas provided a method by which to 
 Trotsky, Stalin., p. 414 
 Ibid., p. 18. Koba was Stalins revolutionary pseudonym. 
 Ibid., p.3. For how Stalins ethnic origins have been treated in the historiography 
see Chapter 6. 
 Ibid., p.585 
 Ibid., p.361 and p.364 
 Tucker recognised the bureaucrat Stalin as the most famous and influential 
counter-representation of the man, although believes that Trotsky made a mistake: 
according to Tucker, Stalin was able to recognise the rising of the bureaucracy and 
carve out an essential place for himself within it. This, he says, is the sign of 
formidable political talent. Tucker, Several Stalins, p.107 
 Trotsky, Stalin, p.51 
elevate himself above Stalin, despite having lost against him in the 
power struggle. Trotsky appeared to ask his reader to not only ask but 
to be outraged at how an unsophisticated, unintelligent yob such as 
Stalin  [h]is thinking is too slow, his associations too single-
trackedWhen he desires to produce forceful effect he resorts to vile 
expressions
   could have taken a place that was, in Trotskys 
opinion, rightfully his.
 This replicated the emphasis on these traits in 
Deutscher and Souvarines works, and this implicitly but clearly 
differentiated Stalin not from only the author but also from Lenin and 
socialism.  
The second strand of othering in evidence more closely 
resembles the Orientalist model and its tendency to emphasise 
specific national or regional traits perceived as innate and 
unchanging. It is predominantly present in Deutschers systematic 
comparisons of Stalin to previous Russian leaders. Writing towards 
the end of Stalins life in 1949, and with the majority of the Stalinist 
regime to reflect upon, Deutscher found similarities in the autocratic 
rule and characteristics of many of them, including Nicholas I, Peter 
the Great, Alexander I, and Ivan the Terrible.
 He likened, for 
example, the Stalin of the Second World War years to Ivan the 
Terrible raging against the boyars, whereas the earlier 
industrialisation push made him look more like Peter the Great's 
direct descendant: was he not building industrial Russia in a way 
similar to that in which Peter the Great built his St Petersburg, on the 
swamps and on the bones of the builders?.
 He remarked on the 
similarity of Stalins ferocious spirit of empire building to that of 
the early tsars and believed that events now followed a path familiar 
from the history of Russian autocracy.
 These comparisons suggest 
that Deutschers Stalin was not a historical aberration but a 
continuation of a Russian political tradition of leadership largely 
disconnected from the socialist revolution he was meant to be the 
 Ibid., p.66 
 Deutscher, Stalin , pp.355-361 
 Ibid. p.360 
 Ibid. p.360 and p.355 
vanguard of. As Tucker has pointed out, Deutschers Stalin was not a 
Marxist theorist or a man of ideas. He was principally a pragmatist 
concerned with making things work.
 This did not mean that 
Deutscher maintained a neutral stand regarding Stalins character. 
Despite the unremarkable nature of his private life, beyond reproach 
or suspicion
, Deutschers Stalin was hardly inoffensive, not least 
due to these perceived similarities with some of Russias past leaders. 
Deutscher, however, clearly expressed that Stalin was not a surprise, 
nor someone out of the ordinary: for example, his chicanery and 
trickery were the methods by which rulers of all ages and countries 
had held their people in subjection.
 Stalin was not unique; he was 
an almost predictable leader of Russia.
Deutscher, Trotsky and Souvarine were not alone in writing 
on Stalin in the West during this period and so not all works were 
written by anti-Stalinists or socialists who were trying to distance 
themselves from his regime. On the pro-Stalin front there were a 
number of publications, such as that of the French communist writer 
Henri Barbusse, which conveyed adoration of their subject, providing 
a striking contrast to the anti-Stalinists and a revelatory insight into 
the way in which Soviet sympathisers and loyal communists viewed 
Stalin at this time: Stalin was a man of simple and humble needs and 
manner, who was kind and gentle, but also brilliant.
 In this way we 
see what the anti-Stalinists perceived as Stalins provincialism and 
mediocrity depicted instead as desirable traits of simplicity and 
humility. His deceitfulness and slyness became cleverness and 
brilliance. Barbusses text, for instance, was dense with these 
alternative depictions: the young revolutionary Stalin was able, 
through his simple manner, to relate to, and talk with, the workers 
around him: This sort of genius of his for putting himself on a level 
 Tucker, Several Stalins, p.108.  
 Deutscher, Stalin, p. 274 
 Ibid. p.361 
 See Chapter 6 for comment on the works that discuss Stalins Georgianness in 
biographical writing. 
 Official Soviet biographies and works on Stalin and Stalinism were also being 
published in the West during this period. See Chapter 6. 
with his audience is the real reason for the confidence which he 
inspired in the people.
 Yet putting oneself on a level does not 
mean lowering oneself or humbling oneself or becoming stupidly 
familiar. Very far from it.
 He was softly spoken  violent language 
was for him a prohibited weapon
  with a wonderful intuition
loved to laugh and was a family man. According to Barbusse, Stalin 
laughed like a child, concluding that [p]eople who laugh like 
children love children'.
 Thus Barbusses Stalin was intelligent and 
humorous, but also modest and low-key.  
Barbusse did acknowledge that Stalin could be severe, even 
ruthless, towards incompetence and inexorable in dealing with 
treachery or sabotage. As with the other seemingly undesirable 
characteristics, this intolerance was presented as more of a virtue than 
a fault and as a necessary trait in a great leader. Indeed, the statement 
was immediately followed by a but: But a whole series of cases 
may be quoted in which he warmly intervened in favour of men who 
seemed to him to have been accused without sufficient proof.
Barbusse responded to critics of Stalin by stating that the case was 
simply that He is leader for the same reason that he is successful: 
because he is right and recounted telling Stalin that in some countries 
he was seen as acting merely according to his fancy and as a 
bloody tyrant. Stalins response was to lean back in his chair and 
burst into his hearty working-man's laugh.
 Barbusses Stalin was 
so definitively not the tyrant he had been portrayed to be that it was 
veritably hilarious to claim otherwise. 
Somewhere between the anti-Stalinists and Barbusse were 
authors such as Bertram D. Wolfe, who was an American scholar of 
German origin and who, for the first half of his adult life, was a 
 H. Barbusse, Stalin: A new world seen through one man (London, 1935), p.11. 
Quotes will be taken from this, the first English edition, unless stated otherwise. 
 Ibid., p.11  
 Ibid. p. 12 
 Ibid. p.19 
 Ibid. p.292 
 Ibid. p.86 
 Ibid. p.157 
socialist and supporter of the Bolsheviks as well as a founding 
member of the American Communist Party. Later in life he drifted 
right and became a leading anti-communist during the Cold War. 
However, at the time he wrote his book Three Who Made a 
Revolution, the Second World War had just ended and he sought to 
understand the three personalities at the centre of events in the USSR:  
Lenin, Stalin and Trotsky. The book was first published in 1948 and 
represented a turning point in the historiography of Stalin: after 
Trotskys book, it was the first to systematically compare and 
critically examine previous historiography in order to consolidate the 
information into the most valid picture possible. Nevertheless, it 
becomes clear that when it came to Stalins personality, Wolfe was 
somewhat defeated by the lack of information available to him. His 
research into Stalins character was beset with obscurities and 
contradictions at every step, and he remarked that: 
When one writes of a still living man it would surely seem a 
simple matter to put moot points up to him, and then, since no 
man is to be fully trusted as to his own opinion of himself, to 
check his answers against records, the testimony of 
neighbours, friends, associates, opponents. But in Stalin's case 
this is not as simple as it sounds. The versions he himself has 
dictated sometimes contradict each other concerning even 
elementary facts.
Despite these obstacles, Wolfe conducted a thorough analysis of the 
works that were more readily available to him, such as the Stalin 
biographies that had been written to date (official and authorised 
works, as well as those of the Georgian memoirists), which led him to 
exclaim: Strange fact: in none of Stalin's biographies does he come 
to life
 A description of Stalins personality was confined to the 
statement that he was the subject of an amazing cult that leaves no 
room for fallibility, or common humanity, though Wolfe was still left 
 See Wolfes biography B. D. Wolfe, A Life In Two Centuries: an autobiography 
(New York, 1981). 
 B. D. Wolfe, Three Who Made A Revolution  A Biographical History (New 
York, 1948), p. 405 
 Wolfe, Three Who Made A Revolution, p. 405 
confused by the overall portrait of Stalin the man and found the 
mystery surrounding him ever thickening.
 This sentiment was in 
fact replicated in much of the war and post-war Western biographical 
writing on Stalin.  While Wolfe had been a socialist, Stalins 
increased direct relevance to the West as a result of the war generated 
a spate of writing in which Westerners became concerned with trying 
to understand exactly who he was. The biographical writings of the 
time betrayed a residual wartime anxiety and the unease of the West 
with the rising power of the Soviet Union and with the man at its 
helm. These works were attempts to decipher who Stalin was, what 
drove him, and what his intentions were. In the simplest of terms, 
they were trying to ascertain whether he was a goody or a baddy.
The variety of the content of these works demonstrates that in 
this period in the West Stalin could still be both hero and villain. It is 
clear through Barbusses work that supporters of the Soviet Union 
saw Stalin as a heroic figure and to some he was even a kind of demi-
 This was perfectly illustrated in the closing sentences of 
Barbusses The Man at the Wheel chapter, which were heavily 
laden with religious terminology:  
Although you do not know him, he knows you and is thinking 
of you. Whoever you may be, the finest part of your destiny is 
in the hands of that other man, who also watches over you, 
and who works for you  the man with a scholars mind, a 
workmans face, and the dress of a private soldier.
 Ibid. pp.405-406 
 See for instance, D. M. Cole, Josef Stalin: Man of Steel (London, 1942) H. C. 
ONeill, Men of Destiny - Being studies of the Four who rode the War and made 
this precarious landfall (London, 1953); Duranty, Stalin & Co: The Politnuro  the 
Men who run Russia (London, 1949); J. T. Murphy, Stalin: 1879-1944 (London, 
1945); Y. Delbars, The Real Stalin (London, 1953) F. Owen, The Three Dictators: 
Mussolini, Stalin, Hitler (London, 1940). 
 See Chapter 3 for a closer analysis of communist writing on Stalin in the West 
and specifically in Great Britain. 
 Ibid., p.297. Aside from the official works published abroad there are other 
Western examples of pro-Stalin writings from this period, although they differ 
stylistically from Barbusse. For example see B. Webb and S. Webb, Soviet 
Communism: dictatorship or democracy? (London, 1936) and by the same authors 
Soviet Communism: A New Civilisation (London, 1935). See also J. T. Murphy, 
Stalin: 1879-1944.  
Building on Reinke de Buitragos identification of positive elements 
in othering, Barbusses work can be seen to manifest positive 
othering, a process whereby positive content far outweighs, or 
entirely eclipses, negative content. Barbusse, for instance explicitly 
elevated Stalin above any other being, differentiating him and giving 
him, as we have seen, an almost divine status, the distinction being 
therefore that Stalin possessed such a wealth of positive attributes 
(and nearly none that were negative) that he was also unlike the self.
  In this way, the negative aspects highlighted in conventional 
othering are replaced by their opposite, yet there remains a key 
differentiation between the self and the other. Barbusse did not in any 
respect liken himself to Stalin or claim to possess similar traits but 
instead reinforced Stalins extra-ordinary skills and character: This 
leader, who had fathomed the secrets of success and had brought them 
to such a pitch of perfection
, [Stalins] lightening-like promptness 
and sureness of action, as well as the God-like attributes that have 
already been quoted.
All of these depictions of Stalin suggest that the most decisive 
anti-Stalinists of this period were those who were or had been 
sympathetic to Trotsky. Wolfe, whose own political views were 
ambivalent, wavered noticeably in the middle, unable to decipher the 
true character of the man. For Souvarine and Deutscher, however, 
Trotsky provided first-hand experience of Stalin, as well as his close 
relations with, and in-depth knowledge of, the Soviet political scene. 
They, in turn, used this to propagate and develop those ideas of Stalin 
not only as a mediocrity but also as a brutal, untrustworthy and 
destructive leader. In doing so, Stalin as the ideological and 
 Indeed a cult of personality could be understood as an extreme form of positive 
othering. 
 Barbusse, Stalin, p. 86 
 Ibid., p.86. Jean Relinger, a biographer of Barbusses wrote that from their very 
first meeting Barbusse was won over by Stalin, using the word conquis: Barbusse 
was conquered by Stalin. This indeed seems accurate if only by the ensuing tone of 
Barbusses book, which at times reads like a romantic ode to Stalin. See J. Relinger, 
Henri Barbusse: crivain combatant (Paris, 1994), p.208 
intellectual other formed the basis of these three historically 
influential works. 
Nevertheless, it was not only the works by the anti- Stalinists 
that demonstrated othering of Stalin by the West. As highlighted by 
Reinke de Buitrago, othering is not solely manifested through 
negative representations: the difference between the self and the other 
can also be described with more positive content, such as admiration 
for certain achievements, or at least some level of recognition and 
toleration. Positive and negative content can vary, and many cases 
show a mlange of elements in a complex relationship.
 This mix 
was in particular reflected in the wartime and post-war literature, 
through which we understand that the experiences of the war and the 
decade following led Stalin to be seen as a component part of an 
impressive and powerful, although not yet necessarily highly 
threatening, other (the Soviet Union). H.C. ONeill, David M. Cole, 
Walter Duranty and Wolfe were all concerned with the little-known 
man at the head of the Soviet Union and, in turn, were both positive 
and negative in their assessments of him. Duranty, for example, 
described Stalin at once as hard and cruel as well as patient, 
determined and eager.
 Cole described him on the one hand as a 
loyal friend and generous colleague, yet acknowledged that Woe 
betide them if they do not [work for the general good of the State]; a 
former friendship with Stalin will not save them from trial and the 
firing squad.
3. On Stalinism 
An analysis of how these works approached Stalinism as a regime 
reveals further patterns of othering, some of which again contain 
elements of Orientalist discourse. In the first instance, the most often 
repeated characterisation of Stalinism was as a break from Marxism-
 Reinke de Biutrago, Introduction: Othering in International Relations: 
Significance and Implications, p.xv 
 Duranty, Stalin & Co., pp.36-38 
 Cole, Josef Stalin, p. 129 
Leninism, and from Trotskyism, and these are particularly well 
reflected in the works of Souvarine, Wolfe and Trotsky. Souvarine, 
for instance, explicitly stated this by describing Stalins leadership as 
a travesty of Marxism, but also expressed it in the way he wrote 
about the purges, the scale of persecution by the regime and the 
development of the cult of personality. Souvarines biography of 
Stalin was first published in French in 1935, with the first English 
edition appearing in 1939. The English edition contained a post-script 
that dealt with events up to 1937, to the extent to which Souvarine 
was able to observe them.
 From his vantage point Souvarine stated 
that the year 1937 will be less held in honour as the twentieth 
anniversary of October and the conclusion of the second Five Year 
Plan than in dishonour as the culminating phase of an autocratic terror 
unprecedented in human memory.
 Despite the closeness of these 
events, Souvarine was able to offer his own analysis of the situation. 
He did so in part by noting several key phases in the rise of Stalin: the 
political defeats of Trotsky in 1923, of Zinoviev in 1925, of their 
coalition in 1927, of Bukharin in 1929. He believed that these all 
strengthened the dictatorship although, according to him, these 
defeats, which were followed by harsh reprisals against any remaining 
opponents, were the culmination of earlier developments.
 Souvarine 
saw the Kirov murder as a turning point, believing Stalin to be 
responsible though also stating it was an accidental outcome of a 
conflict between factions in high Soviet society, a rivalry between 
two cliques, one of which had been able to arm or guide the hand of a 
 This is in contrast to Deutschers later work in which the purges and Stalinism 
were extensively examined. 
 Ibid., p.598. Even at this early stage Souvarine was able to identify a scale of 
persecution that is surprising, in part thanks to a pamphlet that had been published 
(and then swiftly removed from circulation) revealing the number of condemnations 
made by tribunals up until 1929. Speculating on the figures beyond this, and with 
the help of estimations by escaped prisoner I. Solonevich, (who counted a minimum 
of five million people detained in concentration camps, without including those in 
the prisons, exiled or banished) Souvarine estimates that approximately ten million 
people were at that time suffering punishment at the hands of the regime, to speak 
only of the living. See Souvarine, Staline, 1935, p. 534 
 Souvarine, Stalin, p. 597 
young and fanatical communist.
 For Souvarine, the point at which 
the nature of the leadership was no longer the one that Lenin and the 
Bolsheviks had worked towards was Stalins fiftieth birthday 
celebrations on the 21
 December 1929. He described the 
extraordinary spectacle:  
According to the incense burners of his entourage, all human 
and some superhuman virtues were incarnate in Stalin. His 
modesty, courage and devotion were paralleled by his 
knowledge and wisdom. He was the organiser of the 
Bolshevik Party, the leader of the October Revolution, the 
head of the Red Army, and victor in the Civil War as well as 
in foreign war. He was moreover, the leader of the world 
proletariat. The man of action proved himself as great as the 
theorist, and both are infallible; there is no instance of a 
mistake made by Stalin.
Souvarine observed these developments: the changes in attitude 
towards the leader, the propagation of cult-like literature, the giving 
of the name of Stalin to not only towns, but now also countless 
schools, factories and barracks.
 He repeated those qualities afforded 
to Stalin with irony and in inverted commas throughout the book: 
The 117 executions ordered by the 'great and beloved leader' after the 
crime Stalin the adored, But during the interval 'the greatest 
man of our planet' as he is pleased to hear himself called.
Souvarines awareness of the cultish nature of Stalins regime is clear. 
As for the changes occurring, he remarked that ten years previously 
 Ibid.  pp.598-599. The apparition of this theory here is noteworthy since the idea 
of the origins of the purges being found in the struggles and factions within the 
party is later developed by the revisionist J. Arch Getty. However, for Souvarine the 
purges originated in circumstances of inside squabbling with Stalin still being held 
directly responsible for the Kirov murder, for the mass killings and for the 
repressions that followed, whereas in Gettys work Stalins direct responsibility was 
diminished. See J. A. Getty, The Origins of The Great Purges - The Soviet 
Communist Party Reconsidered, 1933-1938 (Cambridge, 1985). 
 Souvarine, Stalin, p.xiii. Souvarine also indicates a notable change from 1928 of 
the biographical information released in official Soviet literature. For example, 
instead of Stalins father being a peasant from the village of Didi-Lolo, he becomes 
a boot operative from Tiflis and the information was elaborated to portray Stalin 
as a writer, politician, soldier, statesman and even as a thinker and theorist. See 
p.xii 
 Ibid. p.xiii 
 Ibid. pp.598-599 
there had been celebrations to mark the jubilee of Lenin, the real 
initiator of Bolshevism, the actual founder of the Communist Party, 
the authentic victor of October, the true creator of the Soviet State.
It was an intimate gathering, the record of it a modest pamphlet of 
30 pages. Souvarines reporting of these events is important to 
understanding his Stalinism: it stood well apart from Lenin and 
Bolshevism. It was not a natural continuation of what Lenin had 
started: between 1920 and 1930 a profound change had come over 
the Russian Revolution.
  Souvarine believed Stalinism to be a 
radical departure from what came before, and Stalin himself was at 
the centre of it. This idea was echoed in the other works. For example, 
according to Wolfe, the decisive turning points of the regime that 
distanced it from the revolution were all marked by changes in the 
way in which the history of the revolution, the Soviet Union and 
Stalin were reported.  As Souvarine had, he marked 1929 as the first 
year of Stalins absolute rule, the beginning of the cult which 
required the bringing of every moment of his past into accord with his 
present infinite glory. This was followed by 1935, the year when 
Beria, then head of the Georgian Secret Police, went to work on the 
streamlining of the new history
, then by the aforementioned purge 
years of 1936-1938, which altered the way in which memoirs were 
written. The next watershed was the year 1938, when Stalin himself 
took over the task of writing history in the originally anonymous 
official History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, which 
now forms Volume XV of Stalin's Collected Works; and the year 
1946, when those Collected Works began to appear with biographical 
and other notes under Stalin's own supervision.  
 Ibid. p.xiv 
 Ibid. p.xiv 
 When writing about streamlining the new history Wolfe was referring to Berias 
On the History of the Bolshevik Organisations in Transcaucasia, which rewrote this 
history to give Stalin a leading role in the development of the Transcaucasian social 
democratic movement. On this subject and the notion of rewriting history to glorify 
Stalin, see  A. Knight, Beria and the Cult of Stalin: Rewriting Transcaucasian Party 
History, Soviet Studies, Vol.43, No.4, 1991, pp. 749-763 
Wolfes Stalinism shows awareness, even before Stalins 
death, of the extent to which the Soviet government was reworking 
and rewriting the history of its leader, and of its revolution. His 
Stalinism was one of deceit, with an almighty cult at its centre which 
cultivated falsity and brutality. For Wolfe, as we understand through 
his use of Abel Enukidzes story, these two elements were completely 
intertwined: the epicentre of Stalinism was the desperation of Stalin 
to be more than he was.
 This, in turn, led to the desperation of those 
around him to offer alternative histories, to glorify their leader far 
beyond that which was natural, with no guarantee whatsoever that this 
would save them from meeting an untimely end. It was this 
historiographical break, which Wolfe termed How History is Made 
that provided the first decisive break from Lenin, stating that all 
memoirs, Party documents and reports of pre-revolutionary days that 
were written while Lenin was alive have had to be ignored, explained 
away, supplanted, suppressed, destroyed, before a new version could 
be established.
Trotskys use of the term Stalinism in his biography of 
Stalin - written during the 1940s, in the last few years of his life when 
he had watched the Stalinist regime unfold - can help to understand 
one of the most influential ways in which the regime has been 
interpreted. It provided an efficient method by which Trotsky was 
also able to distance Stalinism from Leninism, Marxism and 
Trotskyism. Throughout the book, the term Stalinism was often used 
to compare the regime with other political regimes or theories  a 
trend repeated in the other works examined in this chapter  and most 
 Following the enumeration of these historiographical milestones, Wolfe 
illustrated in human terms the significance of these events through the fate of Abel 
Enukidze, an old friend and colleague of Stalins. After an ill-fated but well 
intentioned effort at a biography of Stalin in celebration of the leaders fiftieth 
birthday, Enukidze found himself on trial for (correctly, it seems) implying that 
Stalins role in the Baku underground social democratic movement in Georgia was 
not as important or as influential as Stalin had apparently desired it to be portrayed 
as. He was obliged to retract his memoirs, and to admit them to be incorrect. Beria 
accused him of falsifying the history of the Bolshevik organisations in 
Transcaucasia deliberately and with hostile intent. Less than three years later 
Enukidze was shot for being a mortal enemy of the people. See Wolfe, Three Who 
Made a Revolution, p.444 
 Wolfe, Three Who Made a Revolution, p.437 
often in relation or in contrast to Trotskyism. In the book index, 
Stalinism is solely referenced in the format of Stalinism and 
Bolshevism, Stalinism and Fascism or Stalinism and Trotskyism 
and finally for Stalinism the reader should see Stalin.
 In the 
context of these comparisons Stalinism was ultimately pitched against 
Bolshevism: one either supported one or the other since Trotsky saw 
Stalin as executing a triumph over Bolshevism. It was following this 
triumph that those who had previously been critical of Bolshevism, 
such as the Webbs, the Wellses and the Laskis, had now become 
fellow - travellers of Stalinism.
 For Trotsky adhering to Stalinism 
required turning your back on Bolshevism: the former was not a 
theoretical continuation of the latter, nor were there fundamental 
similarities between Stalinism, Fascism and Nazism. Indeed, Trotsky 
stated that the difference between the social base of Stalins counter 
revolution and the social base of the reactionary movements headed 
by Mussolini and Hitler ran parallel to the difference between 
dictatorships of the proletariat, however distorted by Thermidorean 
bureaucracy and the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, the difference 
between a workers state and a capitalist state.
 As for comparisons 
between Lenin and Stalin these were, he wrote, simply indecent.
The differences Trotsky established between Trotskyism and 
Stalinism in his writings indicate that he fundamentally disagreed 
with most, if not all, aspects of Stalinism. He was theoretically 
opposed to the notion of Socialism in One Country and the rise of the 
bureaucracy as a ruling class, and he believed Stalin to be an inferior 
politician, intellectual and man. The differences between Trotskyism 
and Stalinism were the essence of Trotskys writings. Outside of the 
 Trotsky, Stalin, p. 511 
 Ibid.  p.335. Beatrice and Sidney Webb were British economists and socialists 
who were lifelong supporters of the USSR. Herbert George Wells was an English 
author, socialist and pacifist, who met with Stalin and who supported some of the 
work occurring in the Soviet Union. Harold Laski was also a British economist and 
a Marxist who defended the Soviet Union. All were involved in the British Labour 
Party.  
 Ibid. p.336 
 Ibid. p.336 
context of differentiation, the word Stalinism was barely used: 
Stalinism was the ultimate other. 
Yet for all their similarities, there were some notable 
differences between Trotskys and Deutschers interpretations of 
Stalinism, and it was these that led Deutscher to conclusions that 
eventually isolated him from the Trotskyists and pro-Stalinists alike. 
Deutscher, while starting out a Trotskyist, came to see Stalinism 
differently. After objecting to Trotskys 1938 attempt to launch a 
successor to the morally dead Third International, he began 
searching for the answer to why Stalin had succeeded in acquiring 
power and why history had taken the course it had
. Deutscher 
concluded that the degeneration of the revolution had been present 
already when Lenin and Trotsky were in positions of leadership and 
power. Further, and even more controversially, he did not see 
Stalinism as a Thermidorian bureaucracy - as it was described by 
Trotsky  subverting and arresting the revolutionary development but 
as a bureaucratised revolution itself carrying through that 
development though in distorted form, with the barbarous means and 
semi-primitive outlook of its native surroundings.
 It was through 
the development of these theories that Deutscher became so isolated 
during the first decade of the Cold War: the Stalinists damned him for 
maintaining his Marxist ideals and views on the debasement of the 
revolution. The Trotskyists denounced Deutscher for stating that 
however truncated and disfigured they were, the brutally realised 
achievements of Stalin were in fact revolutionary.
Deutschers tracing of the evolution of the purges and his 
search to understand how they were able to occur are one of the first 
instances in the historiography of an attempt to understand the 
 D. Horowitz, Introduction, in D. Horowitz (ed.), Isaac Deutscher: the Man and 
His Work (London, 1971), p.11 This book is a collection of articles on the life and 
work of Isaac Deutscher, written by close friends and colleagues, and his wife 
Tamara Deutscher. 
 Ibid., pp. 11-12 
 Ibid. p.12 
process itself, and it created links between Stalinism and Leninism.
Tracing the origins of the purges back to the early 1920s before Stalin 
was even in power clarified one of the ways in which Deutscher 
deviated from the Trotskyists: for him the concept of purging the 
party was not a creation of Stalins, even if he ultimately changed its 
nature dramatically and gave the concept an entirely new meaning. 
The consequence of this was to give Lenin and Trotsky a certain 
amount of responsibility for what came after. In this sense, he saw 
Stalinism as a deviation from Leninism but did not construct it as the 
definitive other. However, by looking at differences between 
Stalinism and Trotskyism, the traditional socialist perspective and 
Nazism, Deutscher more explicitly summarised Stalins departure 
from the traditional Marxist outlook: 
It is easy to see how far Stalin drifted away from what had 
hitherto been the main stream of Socialist and Marxist 
thought. What his socialism had in common with the new 
society, as it had been imagined by Socialists of nearly all 
shades, was public ownership of the means of production and 
planning. It differed in the degradation to which it subjected 
some sections of the community and also in the recrudescence 
of glaring social inequalities amid the poverty which the 
revolution inherited from the past. But the root difference 
between Stalinism and the traditional Socialist outlook lay in 
their respective attitudes towards the role in the transformation 
of society.
On the other hand, we have seen that Deutscher drew repeated 
comparisons between Stalin and past Russian leaders. This 
demonstrates a dual othering process: firstly, Stalin himself was also 
compared with previous leaders, indicating an Orientalist tendency in 
 Amongst the works of this period it is Deutschers which provides the most 
thorough examination of the process through which the purges developed, looking 
back to 1921 to determine their origins and applying his idea of the degeneration of 
the revolution occurring when Lenin and Trotsky were still in a position of 
leadership and power. Deutscher identifies five key moments which led to the 
ultimate purges of the late 1930s. See Deutscher, Stalin: 1921 origins of the purges, 
pp.233-234; in 1923, p.259; on the eve of collectivisation, p.313, pp.316-317; in the 
early thirties, p.350; after the assassination of Kirov, p.357. Deutscher also 
dedicates over ten pages to the purges of 1936-1937, pp.372-385. 
 Deutscher, Stalin: A Political Biography, p. 343 
Deutschers analysis.
 In Saids Orientalism this is represented by 
historical generalisations based on a common character, which do not 
account for unique contexts and individuals, and by the idea of the 
Orient being unchanging and unchangeable. As a result of this, the 
West has no need to alter its own intellectual models of 
interpretation.
 Deutschers comparisons suggest that there was a 
general Russian style of leadership and that it was unlikely to change, 
repeating itself through time, right up to and including Stalin. 
Secondly, Deutschers theoretical analysis of Stalinism led him to a 
systematic differentiation of Stalinism from Marxism, if not to a 
certain degree from Leninism. This reinforcement of the idea of the 
others deviation from the better self (here understood as Marxist or 
Bolshevik) therefore rendered it at once inferior and dangerous. This 
was a process which replicated two of the main dogmas of  
Orientalism, as defined by Said, in which the Orient was firstly 
systematically defined as the aberrant, undeveloped, inferior other to 
the rational, developed, humane, superior West, and secondly that 
the Orient, as a result of its inferior, backward and unchanging nature, 
was fundamentally something to either be fearedor to be 
controlled.
In one sense, this first Stalinist other emerged still connected to 
Bolshevism and Marxism, since it was often expressed as a deviation 
from these ideologies rather an entity with which they had no 
common ground. However, Trotsky, Souvarine and Deutscher all 
explicitly distinguished Stalin and Stalinism from these. Their 
understanding of the regime enabled them to draw comparisons with 
their own ideological beliefs, and their aversion to Stalin led them to 
construct him as an other. The process through which they achieved 
this has manifested itself in the constant reassertion of his inferior and 
 Deutscher himself was after all not Russian and in this sense may have 
differentiated himself from Stalin not only ideologically but also through national 
identity. 
 See Brown, A Stereotype, Wrapped in a Clich, Inside a Caricature, p. 152 and 
Said, Orientalism, p. 72, pp.104-105 and especially pp.239-240 
 Said, Orientalism, p.300 and p.301 
undesirable traits, and of his break from Marxism and Leninism in 
theoretical matters and matters of practical leadership. 
As well as these individuals distancing themselves from Stalin, by 
highlighting the economic and industrial successes of Stalins Soviet 
Union, other works of this time demonstrated othering of Stalinism. 
However, these were more consistent with the constructions identified 
by Neumann in Western othering of Russia during this period, 
notably as a legitimate consideration for a post-capitalist world. There 
was a radical chic in celebrating Russia, perhaps best exemplified by 
the British socialist economists Sydney and Beatrice Webb in their 
works on Stalinist Soviet Union: We do not think that the Party is 
governed by the will of a single person; or that Stalin is the sort of 
person to claim or desire such a position
, Stalin is now universally 
considered to have justified his leadership by success; first by 
overcoming the very real difficulties of 1925; then in surmounting the 
obstacle of the peasant recalcitrance in 1930-1933; and finally in the 
successive triumphs of the Five-Year plan. The Webbs celebrated the 
Soviet Union as a progressive land of plenty.
 Walter Duranty, the 
Anglo-American journalist and great supporter of Stalin, also wrote 
of Stalinisms success: the fact remains that the [First Five-Year] 
plan laid the firm foundation of a large-scale modern industry in 
Russia
. David M. Cole summarised these varying interpretations of 
early Stalinism of this period particularly well, stating that The future 
historians of twentieth-century Russia will characterize the years 
1928-1934 as the era of Socialist Construction or as the age of 
Bolshevik ruthlessness, according to their own political 
convictions.
 Beatrice Webb and Sydney Webb, Soviet Communism: A New Civilisation,  Third 
Edition ( London, 1944), p. 334 
 Ibid., p. 340 
 Duranty Stalin & Co., p. 61. Duranty was the New York Times Moscow 
correspondent in the 1920s and 1930s. He was pro-Stalin and is known for 
whitewashing the regime, ignoring the famine and the show trials in his reporting. 
See S. J. Taylor, Stalins Apologist: Walter Duranty  the New York Times man in 
Moscow (New York, 1990). 
 Cole, Josef Stalin, p.71 
4. Exiles and migrs: writing on Stalinism in the 1930s and 
1940s 
Coles statement was apt. Indeed, the first and most striking common 
aspect of the works written on Stalin during this period relates to their 
authors and their experiences with the 1917 revolution and the Soviet 
Union, revealing much about the motives impelling these men to 
write about Stalin. The earliest example of this is Eastman, who at the 
time of writing Since Lenin Died had spent the two years leading up 
to Lenins death in the Soviet Union.
 Bazhanov had escaped the 
USSR, but his activities were closely watched by Stalin. He was the 
victim of several assassination attempts during his life and never 
married, fearing his frequent denunciations of the Stalinist regime 
would leave either him or his wife without a spouse, victims of the 
Stalins vengeance.
 Bazhanovs entire life, and his writings, were 
dedicated to raising awareness of the horrors of Stalinism and its 
threat to the West.
 Nussimbaums mother had been part of the 
underground social democratic movements in Baku before the 1917 
revolution, the very same movement that Stalin had been a key 
provocateur in. Nussimbaum was bitter towards his mother, who he 
felt had poisoned his life. However, many of his personal letters 
reveal a displaced bitterness expressed instead towards Stalin: He 
took my homeland away from me, the house, everything.
Souvarines, Deutschers and Trotskys political lives were also 
inextricably linked to the Soviet Union. Souvarine was born in Kiev 
in 1895 but his family moved to Paris, and he later became a 
 See the Max Eastman online archive: 
http://www.marxists.org/archive/eastman/index.htm 
 Doyle, Bazhanov and the Damnation of Stalin, pp.viii-ix 
 Ibid., p.ix. For example in 1940 Bazhanov spent time in Finland raising a small 
force of Russian prisoners to help the Finnish army fight off the Red Army. 
 As quoted in Reiss, The Orientalist, p. 21 
http://www.marxists.org/archive/eastman/index.htm
journalist for the socialist Press. He was actively involved in the 
Comintern: in 1919 he became secretary to the Committee of the third 
International, and a year later became a member of the Comintern. He 
travelled to Moscow and stayed there for several years until he was 
expelled in 1924 because he aligned himself with Trotsky. When he 
returned to Paris the next year, he set up an oppositional communist 
group but eventually also came into conflict with Trotsky, and broke 
with him in 1929.
 Trotsky, possibly the most high profile and 
outspoken anti-Stalinist of the time, and indeed the most recognisable 
anti-Stalinist in history, was also a Socialist, Bolshevik and Leninist, 
who was exiled abroad after losing the battle for power against Stalin. 
Trotsky eventually settled in Mexico where he continued to write on 
his nemesis and his regime before his assassination in 1940.
Trotsky, 
as Stalins opponent in the struggle for power after Lenins death, has 
continued to be at the forefront of debate and interest not only due to 
his role and activities during the 1917 Revolution but also thanks to 
his prolific writing.
 Deutscher too was directly involved in Soviet 
communism. Around 1926, at the age of nineteen, he joined the 
Polish Communist Party, but he began to voice criticisms of the 
Partys programme and role as he grew uneasy with the state of the 
revolution in Russia, which he felt was succumbing to the chauvinism 
and backwardness of its national environment. He was expelled from 
the party in 1932, and during the next year he joined the Trotskyist 
 Dekker & Nordemann BV, The Two Russian Revolutions: The Libraries of Leon 
Bernstein and Boris Souvarine, Catalogue 26, Dekker & Nordemann BV 
(Amsterdam, 1980), p.9 
 Indeed, interest in Trotskys life and works is in evidence through the volume of 
works dedicated to Trotsky and his ideas: some of the earliest works on Trotsky can 
be dated back to as early as 1920 - Roger Lvys Trotsky for example - right up to 
the most recent by Robert Service See R. Lvy, Trotsky, (Paris, 1920) and R. 
Service, Trotsky (London 2009). Lvys book is a history of the Marxist revolution 
in Russia from 1877 until 1919 and Trotskys role within it. Lvy was a Socialist 
and supporter of Trotsky, who Lvy here described as an energetic and 
distinguished but perhaps idealistic intellectual. Interest does not seem to have 
waned: we can infer from the blurb of Services book, inviting his reader to 
discover a new Trotsky, one who was not only a persecuted victim of Stalin but a 
Revolutionary practitioner, theorist, factional chief, sparkling writer, ladies man 
(e.g., his affair with Frieda Kahlo), icon of the Revolution, anti-Jewish Jew, 
philosopher of everyday life, grand seigneur of his household, father and hunted 
victim, that Trotsky re-examined, reinterpreted and to an extent rebranded is just as 
engaging for a modern audience. 
opposition, attempting to generate resistance on the left to the trials 
and terror occurring in Soviet Russia.
All three wrote their works on Stalin only after they had 
become estranged from the regime. Souvarine withdrew from politics 
and in 1935 published one of the earliest and most influential works 
published on Stalin in the West in French under the title Staline: 
Aper u histori ue du bolch visme .
 Souvarines book is a 
particularly interesting historiographical work because it was written 
after the beginnings of collectivisation and the Five Year Plans, but 
before the Great Purges of the late 1930s and the rolling momentum 
of the public trials. It is one of the pioneering works on Stalin for the 
wealth of information it contains and for being one of the first 
complete works on the man, his career and his regime.
 Trotsky too 
was abroad, exiled in Mexico, as he wrote his biography of Stalin. 
First published in 1947, Stalin: An Appraisal of the Man and His 
Influence had still been a work in progress when Trotsky was 
assassinated in 1940 by an apparent courier who stabbed him with a 
pick axe. There was a tragic symbolism, Deutscher said, in the fact 
that the blood from Trotskys head splattered the sheets of paper on 
which he had written his account of Stalins career.
 By the time he 
came to write about Stalin, Deutscher too had become politically 
remote. Despite having left the Party, when it came to joining 
Trotskys calls for a Fourth International in 1938, Deutscher had 
baulked. His rejection of Stalinism and his divergence from 
Trotskyism led him to be an isolated but eventually influential 
historian. He wrote his biography of Stalin in the late 1940s, and it 
was eventually published in 1949. 
There are two principal ways in which the works of these 
authors are unique in the historiography of Stalin and Stalinism. The 
first is that these writers were publishing works while the regime was 
 Horowitz, Introduction, p.11 
 Dekker & Nordemann BV, The Two Russian Revolutions, p.9 
 Duranty described Souvarine as one of Stalins least friendly biographers. See 
Duranty, Stalin & Co, p.34         
 Deutscher, Stalin, p. 385 
still in existence, and quite aside from the way in which they are 
analysed in this study, they are an indication of the remarkable 
awareness that those who had been involved in the Soviet Union had 
of events within it once Stalins regime gained momentum. Secondly, 
these writers were not historians, nor political scientists by profession. 
Rather, they were spurred on to research and write on Stalin by the 
evolution of their own experiences and political convictions, moulded 
by their reactions to the Stalinist regime and drawing on those sources 
and resources that they could access in order to write their histories. 
As a result, their source material almost all stems from personal 
experience and direct access to people, events and literature from 
within the Soviet Union. Trotsky, for instance, mostly drew on first-
hand experience. He knew Stalin, Lenin and all of the Bolsheviks and 
Party members well. He had attended meetings up until the late 
1920s, and he understood the dynamics of the party.
 As Peter 
Beilharz highlights, Trotsky relied heavily on personal reminiscences 
and employed the first person throughout the book, underlining his 
personal involvement and familiarity with the subject at hand. In fact, 
the depth of Trotskys knowledge led him to provide excessive detail 
on quite trivial matters, which often overpower the narrative and his 
analysis.
The young Isaac Deutscher was regarded by the Polish 
Communist Party of which he was a member as a rising star, an 
intellectual with a firm grip of theory, destined to be a key figure in 
the party. As part of the grooming process he was sent to visit 
Moscow in 1931. But rather than strengthening his dedication to 
communism, the trip weakened it. Deutscher had already developed 
some misgivings about trends and practices within his own party. 
When he arrived in Moscow and spent time with party members 
there, he was able to grasp the extent of the passion and bitterness of 
the inner party struggle. Furthermore, in visiting Russia in the 
 Trotsky was expelled from the Politburo in 1926 and from the Party in 1928. 
 P. Beilharz, Trotsky as Historian, History Workshop, No. 20 (Autumn, 1985), 
pp.36-55 p. 46 
aftermath of collectivisation, Deutscher became dimly aware of acute 
social tensions.
 A biographical article on Deutscher stated that even 
before the Russian journey he had started to gather material for his 
first book.
 This was not the Stalin biography but a publication on 
the Jozef Pilsudski regime, and it suggests that Deutscher was 
gathering sources both in Poland and on his first trip to Russia. In 
Poland he read the opposition paper which Trotsky had begun 
publishing in 1929, the Bulletin Oppozitsii, in which he found his own 
apprehensions about Stalin being echoed. David Singer dates the start 
of Deutschers admiration for Trotsky to this period.
  For a brief 
period in the mid-1930s, just around the time that the public trials 
began in Russia, Deutscher joined the Polish Socialist Party, anti-
Stalinists who fought hard to denounce the regime. Deutscher was 
living and fighting against Stalinism as it occurred, aware of what 
was happening inside the Soviet Union. In 1939 he left Poland and 
settled in London. 
 It was not until 1947 that he began the manuscript for his 
Stalin biography, but it was finished only eighteen months later. It 
had been so quick to write because Deutscher had all the data at his 
fingertips. He had been in the thick of opposition in Poland and had 
remained acutely aware of all the events in the Soviet Union, their 
scale and significance. Like Trotsky, Deutschers sources were his 
own experiences and involvement in the events themselves, his 
extensive theoretical knowledge and his wide reading. His 
bibliography contains many secondary sources of political histories of 
the Second World War and of the nations involved. He read memoirs, 
the Soviet press and court reports from the trials. The amalgamation 
 D. Singer, Armed with a Pen in D. Horowitz (ed.), Isaac Deutscher: the Man 
and His Work, (London, 1971), pp.27-28. Unfortunately, Deutscher did not leave 
much in the way of autobiography or memoirs. However, the essays in this book 
provide a clear and reliable account of his life, as told by those closest to him. 
 Ibid. pp.28-29 
 Ibid. p.31 
of this information allowed him to write one of the most 
comprehensive pre- Cold War works on Stalin and Stalinism.
Souvarines work was also informed by direct involvement 
with the Communist party. After the First World War, Souvarine 
became the international affairs secretary to the Committee for the 
Third International. Souvarine was thorough in his bibliographical 
references. The first French edition of his work on Stalin contained a 
bibliography of no less than twenty five pages containing hundreds of 
sources from inside and outside the Soviet Union. Yet this did not 
even include the sources he used relating to general history and pre-
Bolshevik theoretical works. Nor did it contain the biographies of 
revolutionaries of other schools of thought, nor statistical information, 
diplomatic texts, legislative documentation, monographs, nor the 
innumerable pamphlets, journal and press articles which were of use 
to the author.
  While Trotsky had not yet written his biography of 
Stalin, Souvarine referenced many of his articles published from the 
early 1920s through to the 1930s, which covered Trotskys time as a 
member and then non-member of the party.
 Souvarines 
bibliography indicates that he read as widely and as thoroughly as it 
was possible. The sheer volume of his named sources indicates that 
he was able to access the information he needed at this time in order 
 Deutscher, Stalin, pp.571-575. The bibliography notes only the sources to which 
Deutscher directly refers to in the text. 
 B. Souvarine, Staline: Aperu Historique Du Bolchvisme (Paris, 1935), p. 545. 
The bibliography is a mix of primary and secondary sources: he referenced 
hundreds of press and journal articles from, among many others Pravda, 
Leningradskaia Pravda, Isvestia and Troud in the Soviet Union, and the New York 
Times Magazine and Foreign Affairs, The Asiatic Review and LEurope Nouvelle 
journals. He used the Baku police records detailing Stalins arrests, Bakinski 
Rabochi, and articles published in honour of Stalins fiftieth birthday. His 
secondary sources were equally varied and numerous: they ranged from theoretical 
works, such as Lenins complete Works (which Souvarine describes as the main 
source for the study of Bolshevism), to memoirs of Stalins old Georgian 
schoolmates, such as those of Joseph Iremashvili, Stalin Und Die Tragdie 
Georgiens, perhaps the most important source for information regarding Stalins 
early life. 
 These include articles from Pravda, Bulletin de lOpposition and Bulletin 
Communiste, as well as works such as his Works, Ma Vie  Essai dautobiographie 
[My Life  Autobiographical Essay] (1930) and La Revolution Permanente [The 
Permanent Revolution] (1931). See Souvarines bibliography in the 1935 French 
edition, pp.545-574 
to produce one of the earliest complete Western works on Stalin and 
Stalinism.
It is clear then that at this stage the major works being 
published in the West were being written by individuals who were in 
some way ideologically or personally invested in the Soviet Union. 
This is also true of other notable works on Stalin which emerged 
during this period, although this personal affiliation was not always 
the result of alienation or opposition. Henri Barbusse was at the 
opposite end of the spectrum to Souvarine and Trotsky. A French 
novelist, journalist and left-wing activist who rose to fame after the 
publication of his graphic anti-war novel Le Feu, which Barbusse 
based on his own experiences fighting in the First World War. He 
also became known for his tireless and vocal defence of the Stalinist 
regime. He joined the Bolshevik Party in Moscow, and later became a 
member of the French Communist Party. A long standing supporter of 
Stalin and the Soviet Union, where he spent a considerable amount of 
time, his biography of Stalin Staline: Un Monde Nouveau Vu A 
Travers Un Homme was published in 1935, the year he died.
Barbusse and the previous three authors represent the extremes of 
pro- and anti-Stalinism, and yet they share the common characteristic 
of being ideologically and politically tied to Stalin and his regime. 
 Souvarine., Staline , pp. 545-574. 
 There are two good biographies of Barbusse in French. The first is written in a 
style not dissimilar to that which Barbusse uses in his Stalin biography, and is 
highly sympathetic to the author: P. Baudorre, Barbusse: Le Pourfendeur de la 
Grande Guerre (Paris, 1995). The second is a more objective work: J. Relinger, 
Henri Barbusse: crivain combatant (Paris, 1994). Additionally Annette Vidal, 
Barbusses faithful secretary, penned her memoirs in A. Vidal,  Henri Barbusse  
Soldat de la Paix (Paris, 1953).  It is not surprising that Barbusses admiration for 
Stalin and the Soviet Union only grew with each visit: as Relinger and Baudorre 
report, and as verified by Vidals memoirs, at each visit he was treated like a guest 
of the highest order; he was granted repeated access to the highest ranked members 
of the Party, Stalin included. Inevitably this adoration meant that Barbusse simply 
repeated what he was being told, and as a result he became one of the most vocal 
and passionate representatives of Stalinism in the West. However, as Relinger 
highlights, this does not mean that Barbusses work lacks historical significance: in 
seeking to disprove the accusations of the West against Stalinism, and especially 
those of France, his writings give an invaluable insight into the dialogue, or at least 
the sentiment, in the West towards the Soviet Union at this time. See Relinger, 
Henri Barbusse, p.109.  
5. Conclusion: Trotskyism and the Stalinist other 
We have seen that in most of the cases examined here these early 
works on Stalin stemmed from personal political conviction rather 
than academic exercise or wider international political issues, 
although the latter do start to play a certain part in writing on Stalin 
after the Second World War. Trotsky, Souvarine and Deutscher all 
began by supporting the Bolsheviks, yet Trotskys loss of power and 
the anti-Stalinism that followed provided those who developed doubts 
about Stalin with an alternative belief to follow, which, importantly, 
did not require a total break from socialism. Since Lenin Died was a 
denunciation of Stalin and defence of Trotsky. Eastman believed that 
Stalins actions in the power struggle could be explained by Stalins 
own awareness of his lack of Trotskys many desirable traits. He saw 
Trotsky bringing to the battle all the powers of his personality, his art 
of objective and concise thinking, his mastery of Marxism, and of the 
method of Lenin, his sensitivity to political facts, and his great literary 
skill.
 In the face of this, Stalins only weapon was his brutality, 
and he used it to deceive and ultimately defeat Trotsky.
  In later 
years, Trotskyism became central to constructions of the Stalinist 
other in the works of Souvarine and Deutscher. Although Souvarine 
wrote his book on Stalin before Trotsky, we know that he initially 
adhered to Trotskyism, and through the depth of his research was able 
to expose the problems with Stalinism as early as 1935, before even 
the most intense period of the purges had occurred. Deutschers 
reflective effort to understand the success of Stalin eventually led to 
his isolation from both Marxists and Trotskyists, but it was Trotsky 
who allowed him to place his early apprehension about Stalinism into 
an interpretative and conceptual framework. The evolution of Wolfes 
feelings towards Stalin was clearer by the time he came to write Three 
Who Made a Revolution: he was a communist still, but he had turned 
away from the Soviet Union.  
 Eastman, Since Lenin Died, p.59 
 Ibid. 
Thus, Souvarine and Deutschers stance, which produced two 
of the most influential Western works on Stalin and Stalinism of this 
period, stemmed from the opportunity presented to them by Trotskys 
theoretical distancing from Stalinism, even if they later diverged from 
one another. Wolfes work also came from a deviation from his 
original ideological stance. He did not suggest a particular allegiance 
to Trotsky; nevertheless, Trotskys works were heavily referenced in 
his book as he sought to expose the problems of Stalinism. It was 
therefore Trotskys thought and work which provided the basis for the 
first self to the Stalinist other in Western publications. For 
Souvarine, Deutscher and Trotsky, Stalin and his regime epitomised 
everything which they were not and did not believe in, and their 
reassertions of his personal and political deviancy, inferiority and 
threat represented a clear process of this othering. In the Stalinist 
camp, Barbusses and the Webbs positive othering also constructed 
Stalin as an other, only in this case one that could be elevated to a 
higher, godlike plane: he was a dynamic, positive and benevolent 
force who not only watched over his people and protected them, but 
who also drove his country forwards. 
Ultimately all of the individuals writing at this time were in 
some way directly affected by Stalin and his regime, and many were 
above all immeasurably bound in their writings by their own personal, 
political and theoretical engagement with Stalin and Stalinism. It is 
through these very first works that the Stalinist other first emerged in 
Western historiography: Stalin was mediocre and unremarkable, yet 
also Machiavellian, cunning and cruel. There was already an 
awareness of the violent and tyrannical nature of his regime, which 
was presented as a gross deviation from Leninism and one which bore 
little resemblance to the socialism that he had envisaged. This 
emergent basic understanding of the nature of Stalinism as brutal and 
repressive and headed by a sly and ruthless leader has largely 
remained intact. Yet with the advent of the Cold War in 1947, the 
terms within which Stalin and his regime were researched and 
constructed in the West began to shift dramatically.
Chapter 2 
Conflict of the Two Worlds: 
Stalinism as the totalitarian other in the early Cold 
1. Introduction: the Cold War 
From the end of the Second World War, the foundations of Western 
scholarship on Stalin and Stalinism altered radically. The key to 
understanding the resulting shift in the basis of the constructions of 
Stalin and his regime from the period covered in the previous chapter 
can predominantly be found in the impact of the unique context 
provided by the ensuing Cold War. There have been some thorough 
evaluations of the ways in which the notion of totalitarianism has 
been used by scholars in the West in their assessments of the how and 
why of Stalinism during the Cold War, notably by David D. Roberts 
and Abbott Gleason. Roberts, for instance, explored at length the 
variety of ways in which Stalinist totalitarianism has been interpreted 
in relation to Marxism, Leninism and a specific Russian model of 
history, while Gleason similarly looked at the interaction of Western 
scholars with this term, providing a more succinct summary of the 
evolution of this process over the Cold War period.
 Ronald Suny has 
also given a concise assessment of the impact of the Cold War and the 
simultaneous emergence of modernisation theory on the field during 
this period.
 Further, there exists a vast body of work dedicated to the 
 Conflict of the Two Worlds is the title of George Kennans first chapter in 
Russia and the West Under Lenin and Stalin, in which he examined how the Soviet 
Union and Western countries were focused on entirely different conflicts in 1917 
and 1918. In the Soviet Union the Bolsheviks were concerned with the Revolution, 
whereas the Western nations were entirely consumed by the First World War. See 
G. Kennan, Russia and the West Under Lenin and Stalin (London, 1961). 
 D. R. Roberts, The Totalitarian Experiment in Twentieth-Century Europe: 
Understanding the poverty of great politics (New York, 2006), pp. 213-270 and A. 
Gleason Totalitarianism: the Inner History of the Cold War (Oxford, 1995), pp. 
121-142 
 Suny, Reading Russia and the Soviet Union in the Twentieth Century, pp. 28-32 
notion of totalitarianism itself that explores its contexts and meanings, 
which have evolved over the twentieth century and beyond. With 
these assessments already providing a vast and rich source of 
information on Cold War totalitarian historiography, this chapter aims 
to shed light on one specific aspect of it within the field of Soviet 
studies: the construction of Stalinism as the totalitarian other. 
2. The totalitarian other 
The construction of the totalitarian other, Stalinist or otherwise, did 
not begin in the West with the advent of the Cold War. At least a 
decade earlier there were manifestations of this process in other 
forms. For example, Philip Williamsons analysis of English 
Christian responses to totalitarianism in the 1933-1940 period 
demonstrates how in public political and religious discourse in pre-
wartime Britain the possibility of subordination to totalitarianism 
(here principally Nazism) was seen by many influential conservative 
Christians as unchristian, weak and morally wrong. This, in turn, 
hugely influenced popular opinion towards supporting the war, 
suggesting that well before the Cold War the idea and threat of the 
totalitarian other was being constructed and deployed to strong 
effect.
 Later, during the war, Winston Churchill also pitched the fight 
against totalitarianism as the fight for Christian civilisation, in terms 
reminiscent of some of the earliest forms of othering of Russia by 
Christian Europe outlined in the Introduction: Here in this strong 
City of Refuge which enshrines the title-deeds of human progress and 
is of deep consequence to Christian civilisation. . .; here ... we await 
undismayed the impending assault.
 Tom Lawsons study of the 
response of the Church of England to Nazism highlights, too, how 
Nazism and Soviet communism were already in the 1930s seen as 
innately similar in their totalitarian brutality and as a threat to the 
 P. Williamson, Christian Conservatives and the Totalitarian Challenge, 1933-40, 
The English Historical Review, Vol. 115, No. 462 (Jun., 2000), pp. 607-642 
 As quoted by Williamson in Christian Conservatives and the Totalitarian 
Challenge, 1933-40, p.607 
Christian world. The war with Nazism was a war for Christianity 
and, as a result, so was war against Stalinism.
From the 1940s to the 1960s, however, a political and 
ideological concept of totalitarianism came to the fore and became 
embedded in Western scholarship, framing how Stalinism would be 
studied and interpreted; this was reflected in an exclusive focus on the 
political sphere, named the totalitarian-model of interpretation. The 
opening line of Abbott Gleasons Totalitarianism stated that 
Totalitarianism was the great mobilizing and unifying concept of the 
Cold War.
 Implicit in this statement was that the West was being 
mobilized and unified against the great totalitarian other, exemplified 
in many of the works on totalitarianism published in the Cold War 
era, which strove to highlight the striking differences between 
totalitarianism and Western liberal democracy. An example of this 
can be found in The Origins of Totalitarian Democracy (1952), where 
Israeli historian Jacob Talmon coined the terms totalitarian 
democracy and political Messianism. Talmon defined the 
totalitarian democratic school as based upon the assumption of a sole 
and exclusive truth in politics. He called this political Messianism 
because it suggested a preordained, harmonious and perfect scheme of 
things to which men are irresistibly driven and at which they are 
bound to arrive. It recognises ultimately only the political sphere of 
existence, and widens the scope of politics to embrace the whole of 
human existence. It treats all human thought and action as having 
social significance and therefore as falling within the orbit of political 
action. Its political ideas are not a set of pragmatic precepts or a body 
of devices applicable to a special branch of human endeavour. They 
are an integral part of an all-embracing and coherent philosophy. As a 
 T. Lawson, The Church of England and the Holocaust: Christianity, Memory and 
Nazism, (Woodbridge, 2006), p.6. Lawson explains that, as it was in the 1950s, the 
totalitarian concept was employed by inter-war Anglicans as a means of equating 
the Nazi and Soviet dictatorships as the epitome of all that was abhorred in the 
modern world. The British Christian community had had a diverse reaction to the 
1917 Revolution, but Stalinisms naked atheism nevertheless remained its most 
significant feature, and as a result it created considerable alarm. See Lawson, The 
Church of England and the Holocaust, p.46 
 Gleason, Totalitarianism, p.3 
result, politics is defined as the art of applying this philosophy to the 
organization of society, and the final purpose of politics is only 
achieved when this philosophy reigns supreme over all fields of life. 
 Talmon clearly differentiated this from Western liberal democracy, 
which, on the other hand, assumes politics to be a matter of trial and 
error, and regards political systems as pragmatic contrivances of 
human ingenuity and spontaneity. It also recognises a variety of 
levels of personal and collective endeavour, which are altogether 
outside the sphere of politics. The difference between the two is how 
they think of politics. Both affirm the supreme value of liberty. But 
whereas one (liberal democracy) finds the essence of freedom in 
spontaneity and the absence of coercion, the other (totalitarian 
democracy) believes it to be realised only in the pursuit and 
attainment of an absolute collective purpose. According to Talmon, 
the problem that arises for totalitarian democracy is the paradox of 
freedom, and he questioned whether human freedom is compatible 
with an exclusive pattern of social existence, even if this pattern aims 
at the maximum of social justice and security. The paradox of 
totalitarian democracy, which is not present in liberal democracy, was 
in its insistence that they are compatible.
In 1951, Hannah Arendt, a German Jewish intellectual who 
had escaped to New York at the start of the war, argued in her hugely 
influential book The Origins of Totalitarianism that totalitarianism 
had been borne of the collapse of the fabric of 19
 century society, 
replaced by a mass society in which the state emerged as the only 
force that exerted influence on it. Arendt argued that the taste for 
freedom and striving for distinctive identity has been lost in modern 
society, making it susceptible to the extremes of totalitarianism. What 
characterised the masses from whom totalitarian leaders derived their 
support was their lack of political commitment and what Arendt 
called their radical loss of self-interest.
 Totalitarian parties 
 J. Talmon, The Origins of Totalitarian Democracy (London, 1952), pp. 1-2 
 Talmon, The Origins of Totalitarian Democracy, p.2 
 H. Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (London, 1967), p.316 
exploited the desire for unity and economic advantage, along with the 
pathologies of isolation and superfluity, and employed terror to 
destroy any lived relations outside the totalitarian web. The most 
extreme version of this world, in which associations and relationships 
between individuals (be they affective, political, economic or 
otherwise) were entirely obliterated and replaced by the sole 
relationship between the individual and the state, were concentration 
camps.
Though highly influential, Arendts model did not fit the 
Soviet example particularly well. In 1956 Carl Friedrich and 
Zbigniew Brzezinski offered a new definition of totalitarianism in 
which they attempted to adapt Arendts ideas to the Soviet variant, 
basing their notion of Soviet totalitarianism on the Stalinist regime. 
Friedrich himself had previously defined totalitarian society as resting 
on five key principles in a seminal essay in 1953, described by 
Engerman as a touchstone for future scholarship.
 These five 
aspects were an official ideology, a single mass party consisting of  a 
relatively small percentage of the total population passionately 
dedicated to the ideology, a monopoly of means of combat, a 
monopoly of all means of mass communication and finally a system 
of terroristic police control.
 This definition was later elaborated 
when Friedrich collaborated with his student Zbigniew Brzezinski. 
Total control over the economy was added as a sixth element, 
constituting what was referred to as the six-point syndrome.
Friedrich and Brzezinskis conclusions came from an analysis of the 
world around them, and their theory of totalitarianism was founded on 
Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism, p.392. For a summary of Arendts main 
points see J. McGowan, Hannah Arendt: An Introduction (Minneapolis, 1998), 
pp.15-18 
 Engerman, Know Your Enemy, p.207 
 C. J. Friedrich, The Unique Character of Totalitarian Society, in C. J. Friedrich 
(ed.),  Totalitarianism: Proceedings of a Conference Held at the American 
Academy of Arts and Sciences March 1953 (Cambridge, Mass., 1954), pp.52-53 
 C. J. Friedrich and Z. K. Brzezinski, Totalitarian Dictatorship and Autocracy 
(Cambridge, Mass., 1956), pp.11-10. Leonard Schapiro wrote that syndrome was 
an apt term for a syndrome, in its normal meaning, signifies the concurrence of 
certain symptoms which together constitute the disease. See L. Schapiro, 
Totalitarianism (London, 1972), p.18 
their observations of Italian, German and Soviet societies under the 
inter-war and wartime regimes and, in regards to the USSR, also 
during the post-war years. Despite the totalitarian umbrella, Friedrich 
and Brzezinski did not equate fascism with communism, making the 
distinction that while the two were basically alike, they are 
obviously not wholly alike.
  Nevertheless, they recognised these six 
fundamental, defining characteristics that were distinctive not only for 
the fact of their symbiotic existence in these societies, but for their 
presence in all three, which had emerged in this unprecedented and 
unique form during the same period. Totalitarianism was depicted as 
a static state, in which society was non-existent. While this 
theorisation was resisted by many for its lack of accounting for clear 
societal dynamics and, in the case of the USSR, the changes occurring 
after Stalins death that contested the idea of a static and 
unchangeable system, it nevertheless had a huge impact on Cold War 
scholarship on the Soviet Union.  
This makes their construction of the totalitarian other 
particularly relevant to this study. Friedrich and Brzezinski 
highlighted the extent to which totalitarianism was entirely different 
from Western democratic models, remarking that even in diplomatic 
behaviour the democratic states are thus confronted with a pattern of 
behaviour completely at variance with their own and suggesting that 
totalitarianism was so pervasive and wide-reaching as to alter the 
norms by which individuals of totalitarian states interacted with 
others.
 For Friedrich and Brzezinski there could be no peaceful 
coexistence of a totalitarian dictatorial regime and the rest of the 
world since one principal threat of these regimes was their 
expansionism and their aspirations to a world-wide proletarian 
revolution: peaceful coexistence of the nations peopling this world 
presupposes the disappearance of the totalitarian dictatorshipsany 
 Friedrich and Brzezinski, Totalitarian Dictatorship and Autocracy, p.7 
 They were referring specifically here to Ribbentrop greeting George VI with a 
resounding Heil Hitler and the distribution by the Soviet contingent of 
revolutionary literature to military German bystanders at Brest-Litovsk. Friedrich 
and Brzezinski, Totalitarian Dictatorship and Autocracy, p.58 
relaxation of the vigilance required to face such ideological 
imperialists as the totalitarians is likely to result in disasters such as 
the Second World War or worse.
 In Friedrich and Brzezinskis 
work, totalitarian regimes were not only excluded from the world, 
but they also removed the possibility of peace. This suggests that it 
was the elimination of these regimes  deemed expansionist and 
aggressive  on which peace depended, with no allowances being 
made for the role of the formation and repercussions of Western 
foreign policy. 
During this period therefore  and with some manifestations in the 
wartime period  both public and academic discourse on 
totalitarianism used many of the same terms to highlight notions 
central to totalitarianism, most notably coercion, terror, threat and 
danger as the opposite of the Western liberal democratic model and 
its basic tenets of freedom, peace and democracy. In this way they 
provided a theoretical and conceptual basis for the othering of the 
Stalinist Soviet Union on which totalitarian-model Sovietologists 
were able to build. 
3. Scholarship and politics: writing on Stalinism in a Cold 
War context 
As the world emerged from the Second World War, political tensions 
between the West and the Soviet Union became a dominant influence 
on the foundations of scholarship on Stalin and Stalinism, 
dramatically shifting those on which Trotsky and his contemporaries 
had built their work. With the collapse of the Grand Alliance, wartime 
support and sympathy for the USSR had given way to a powerful idea 
of the danger of communism, and the notion of totalitarianism 
entered everyday public and political discourse. On March 12th 1947, 
US president Harold Truman enunciated the Truman Doctrine, in 
which he asked Congress to come to the aid of Greece. It was this 
 Ibid., p.68 
speech that also ensured that the term totalitarian became 
entrenched not only in American foreign and political policy, as a key 
notion in setting the terms of U.S global interest, but also in Western 
consciousness:
To ensure the peaceful development of nations, free from 
coercion, the United States has taken a leading part in 
establishing the United Nations. The United Nations is 
designed to make possible lasting freedom and independence 
for all its members. We shall not realize our objectives, 
however, unless we are willing to help free peoples to 
maintain their free institutions and their national integrity 
against aggressive movements that seek to impose upon them 
totalitarian regimes. This is no more than a frank recognition 
that totalitarian regimes imposed upon free peoples, by direct 
or indirect aggression, undermine the foundations of 
international peace, and hence the security of the United 
States.
Earlier in the speech, Truman had also stated that the very existence 
of the Greek state was threatened by the terrorist activities of several 
thousand armed men, led by Communists, who defy the government's 
authority at a number of points, particularly along the northern 
boundaries. This speech in effect marked the beginning of the Cold 
War, which over the next four decades saw the relationship between 
the Eastern Bloc and the Western democracies stretched to breaking 
point. The notion of totalitarianism, as set out by Truman, and 
elaborated by historical and political theorists, became the foundation 
on which scholarship on Stalin and Stalinism was built and defined 
for many years to come: the formative influences on publications in 
the West became increasingly politicised, and scholarship was no 
 Prior to this, the term had been coined by Benito Mussolini describing his 
aspirations for the Fascist Partys control over Italy, but by the 1930s it was being 
used to describe not only Italys but also Germany and Russias goal of 
extinguishing private life beyond state control. It was then used by the Frankfurt 
School to enumerate totalitarian tendencies in modern capitalist societies, but when 
certain members of the school emigrated to the United States, they found that their 
definition competed with a staunchly anti-Soviet one promoted by the anti-Stalinist 
Left. It was only with the Truman Doctrine that the term moved beyond the 
precincts of the left and into the public sphere. See Engerman, Know Your Enemy, 
pp.206-207 
 Transcript of the enunciation of the Truman Doctrine (last accessed 30/04/2013): 
http://www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/harrystrumantrumandoctrine.html   
http://www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/harrystrumantrumandoctrine.html
longer predominantly written by exiled Socialists but by professional 
Sovietologists living and working in a world of acute ideological and 
political tensions between the Soviet Union and the West.
As in the previous period, the scholars whose works feature in 
this chapter were writers of their time and were deeply affected by the 
political climate in which they lived and worked. For example, many 
of the most influential individuals in the study of totalitarianism and 
the Soviet Union were European Jews who had been persecuted, and 
who had often been displaced, fleeing their home towns and 
countries. Arendt was a German Jew born in Hanover in 1906. She, 
her mother and her husband had made a long and extremely difficult 
journey to New York to escape Jewish persecution in Europe in 1941. 
It was the discovery two years later of the horrors of Auschwitz and 
her search to understand how it could have occurred that eventually 
resulted in The Origins of Totalitarianism, published in 1951 after six 
years of research and writing.
 Talmon, born in 1916, described the 
experience of growing up as a Polish Jew in the border town of Rypin 
as a unique context in which he was differentiated in terms of his 
religion, yet shared the same nationalist desires of his non-Jewish 
neighbours for a Poland free of German occupation. The influence of 
this time on Talmons later writing on political Messianism is most 
strikingly in evidence when he described the particular condition of 
Rypins Jews pushing them increasingly towards political awareness 
and even radicalisation: They [the Jews] were caught between two 
Messianic flames, one blowing from Moscow, the other from 
 In his analysis, Lawson suggested that after the German surrender Nazism was 
swiftly replaced by Stalinism as the enemy of Christian civilisation. This did not 
require a reconceptualization of the enemy: Stalin replaced Hitler, and the similarity 
between the two regimes was such for the Anglican Church that even their 
emblematic institutions were directly compared: the Soviet state was seen to rest on 
the methods of the Gestapo. See Lawson, The Church of England and the 
Holocaust, p.134 
 J. McGowan, Hannah Arendt: An Introduction (Minneapolis, 1998), pp. 1-8 
Jerusalem, the vision of world revolution and the myth of the 
nation.
In Sovietology, the convergence of these troubled and often 
traumatic personal lives with the increasing Cold War tension led to a 
scholarship defined both by individual experience and political 
context. Alfred G. Meyer wrote that it was difficult for the later 
revisionists in Soviet history to understand the profound effect that 
the hysteria of the Cold War of the 1940s and 1950s had on the 
profession at this time. Teaching was highly politically charged, and 
it was a time when scholars self-censored their facts, findings and 
conclusions, not because they doubted their own work, but in order 
not to discredit themselves politically.
 One of the principal critiques 
by the late revisionists of the totalitarian model was this political bias: 
they felt that to the old Sovietologists, scholarship had become more 
about fulfilling the needs of the US government (who pumped 
research funding into Soviet studies) by turning out the necessary 
anti-communist propaganda, than about providing truthful and 
objective research on the subject.
 It is perhaps too strong to call the 
early works on Stalinism Western propaganda, yet it is beyond doubt 
evident that the impact of the Cold War on Western governments and 
academic institutions helped to create a rigid interpretative framework 
within which scholarship on Stalinism developed.
Within this context, the lines between state and academia 
repeatedly became blurred, and there were instances of scholars 
simultaneously occupying roles in both spheres. There are several 
examples of this: George Kennan established the first US 
 As quoted by A. Dubnov, Priest or Jester? Jacob L. Talmon (1916-1980) on 
history and intellectual engagement, History of European Ideas, Vol.34, No. 2, 
June 2008, pp. 133-145, p. 135 
 A. G. Meyer, Coming to Terms with the Past...And with One's Older 
Colleagues, The Russian Review, Vol.45, Issue 4, October 1986, pp.401-408, 
pp.403-404 
 S. Fitzpatrick, Revisionism in Soviet History, History and Theory, Vol.46, Issue 
4, pp.77-91, pp.80-81 
 Nevertheless, despite the dominance of the totalitarian model of scholarship in the 
period 1947-1970, there was never one entirely unifying thought in the West. E.H. 
Carr for instance was uncomfortable with much of the work of his contemporaries. 
See Chapter 4. 
ambassadorship in Moscow in the 1930s and later, through an article 
entitled The Sources of Soviet Conduct published in the Foreign 
Affairs journal, he effectively spelled out what would become the US 
containment strategy in regards to the USSR. This remained at the 
centre of Western Cold War policy for the next 40 years and became 
central to scholarship on the Soviet Union. While he was active on the 
US diplomatic and political scene, he was also an academic and was a 
founding member of the Kennan Institute for Advanced Russian 
Studies, established in the 1970s, a component of the Wilson Centre. 
The institute itself, however, was constantly pulled between 
scholarship and relevance.
 Zbigniew Brzezinski also occupied dual 
roles in academia and politics. Born into a family of the Polish 
nobility, Brzezinski was deeply influenced by the rise of the Nazis 
and the Second World War, after which his family could no longer 
safely return to Soviet-rule Poland. Indeed, he has said that The 
extraordinary violence that was perpetrated against Poland did affect 
my perception of the world, and made me much more sensitive to the 
fact that a great deal of world politics is a fundamental struggle.
Sovietologist at Colombia from the 1960s, Brzezinskis policy work 
eventually took over from his academic work: by the mid-1970s he 
had become a policy pundit, before being recruited as an advisor by 
Jimmy Carter, writing policies which mainly focused on increasing 
the stresses on the Soviet system.
From the 1970s onwards, Richard Pipes too was heavily 
involved in US government consultations on the Soviet Union, 
leading part of a competitive analysis project commissioned by the 
CIA, Team B. It set out to evaluate conflicting interpretations of 
 Engerman, Know Your Enemy, pp.249-250. Engerman writes that the institute had 
partly been intended to celebrate the broad humanistic study of Russia, but there 
was little in the way of humanistic orientation in the early years: the first 
conferences and visiting fellows tended to be made up of historians and social 
scientists whose research themes and discussions leant heavily towards policy.  
 Al Jazeera, One on One: Zbigniew Brzezinski (last accessed 8/07/2013): 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=03ApSE6mgHE 
 Engerman, Know Your Enemy, p. 5 and p.263. For a closer look at Brzezinskis 
work with Carter see G. A. Andrianopoulos, Kissinger and Brzezinski: The NSC 
and the Struggle for Control of US National Security Policy (London, 1991). 
the Soviet stance in the world today, and, in particular in Pipes case, 
Soviet strategic objectives.
 Later, when Ronald Reagan became 
president, he recruited Pipes as his Soviet expert on the National 
Security Council staff. Pipes role lasted two years, during which his 
work made a considerable impact: he contributed, for instance, to 
parts of Reagans Westminster Speech, most notably, he says himself, 
the passage on Marxism in which Reagan described the situation in 
the USSR: 
I sent essentially one paragraph about Marxism to explain 
what was happening in the Soviet Union. I was astonished 
when it was used because somehow you didnt expect Ronald 
Reagan to say yes, Marx was right. But he was right in a 
certain sense, (and these phrases are in the speech) that when 
the political system is out of step with the socio-economic 
base you'll find yourself in a revolutionary situation and you 
face a great crisis; but this applies to them and not to us.
There was a clear interaction between the US state, academic interests 
and work on the USSR. The situation in the USA at this time 
demonstrates an extreme example of the strong mutual influence that 
can occur between state and academia. Its complexity was 
symptomatic of the world in which it occurred, its repercussions 
wide-ranging and deep for the field of Soviet studies as well as for US 
policy, since who the State recruited (for instance, Pipes and his anti-
 Ibid., pp.279-280 
 R. Pipes, Ash Heap of History: President Reagans Westminster Address 20 
Years Later - Remarks by Dr. Richard Pipes, 3 June 2002 (last accessed 
29/05/2012): 
http://www.reagansheritage.org/reagan/html/reagan_panel_pipes.shtml. The 
passage from Reagans speech that Pipes was referring to was: In an ironic sense 
Karl Marx was right. We are witnessing today a great revolutionary crisis, a crisis 
where the demands of the economic order are conflicting directly with those of the 
political order. But the crisis is happening not in the free, non-Marxist West, but in 
the home of Marxist-Leninism, the Soviet Union. It is the Soviet Union that runs 
against the tide of history by denying human freedom and human dignity to its 
citizens. It also is in deep economic difficulty. The rate of growth in the national 
product has been steadily declining since the fifties and is less than half of what it 
was then. See R. W. Reagan, Address to Members of the British Parliament, June 
8 1982 as cited on 20 Years Later: Reagans Westminster Speech (last accessed 
29/05/2012): http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2002/06/reagans-
westminster-speech 
http://www.reagansheritage.org/reagan/html/reagan_panel_pipes.shtml
http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2002/06/reagans-westminster-speech
http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2002/06/reagans-westminster-speech
Soviet stance) in turn influenced policy.
 Pipes, like Arendt and 
Talmon, was Jewish. His family fled occupied Poland and the Nazis 
in 1939, arriving in the USA in 1940, where they settled indefinitely. 
Pipes himself attributes this experience as one of the most formative 
of his life.
 What is most striking about Pipes influence on policy at 
this time is his default anti-Russian stance. Pipes himself 
acknowledges that he has often been accused of Russophobia. 
Defending himself against this, he has stated that he has immense 
respect for Russian intellectuals and for Russian culture, arguing that 
I would hardly have devoted my life to studying a people I 
disliked.
 However, his view on Russian political life, most 
influential in his dealings with the US government on their Soviet 
policy as well as being the subject of his academic work, was that 
Russians are an intensely personal people who have never succeeded 
in translating their warm human feelings into the impersonal relations 
required for the effective functioning of social and political 
institutions. 
 Hence he believes that they require a strong hand to 
regulate their public lives.
 He dislikes this feature of Russian life 
and dislikes the people who implement it, including Russians who 
hold a public post.
In the UK, while the links between academia and state were 
not so deeply politicised, there are also examples of crossovers 
between the spheres. For instance, Robert Conquest studied at Oxford 
during the 1930s after which he crossed over into the governmental 
sphere.
 His career has been varied and his activities have been both 
 This has been exemplified brilliantly in Engermans Know Your Enemy, the focus 
of which is the dynamics between US state policy and its demands on academic 
research on the USSR during this period and beyond.  
 R. Pipes, Vixi: Memoirs of a Non-Belonger (New Haven, 2003), pp.33-41 
 Ibid., p.63 
 Ibid., p.62 
 Ibid., p.62 
 Ibid., p.62 
 As with Harvard, Oxford had traditionally been a stronghold for more traditional 
forms of Sovietology. For example, Leonard Schapiro attended around the same 
time as Conquest. Conquests work, however, was a particular strand of totalitarian 
model scholarship, one which he dubbed Kremlinology: the study of personal 
politics in the highest reaches of the Soviet party and government, as opposed to 
political science. In focusing on power and leadership, Conquest purposefully and 
governmental and academic: during the Second World War he 
worked for the British military intelligence, and after the war he 
worked in the secret Information Research Department, a major front 
in the propaganda war against the Soviets. It was only after this, in 
1956, that Conquest started working as a freelance historian and 
writer, during which time he wrote his most recognised and 
influential work The Great Terror: Stalins Purge of the Thirties.
At the same time as the Cold War developed, another 
historiographical trend influenced Western thought: the 
modernisation paradigm. Modernisation theory proposed that 
societies would progressively assume greater control over nature and 
human suffering through developments in science, technology, mass 
education, economic growth and urbanisation. Liberal modernisation 
theory was elaborated in the West in opposition to Marxism and 
claimed that the best road to modernity lay through capitalism, with 
no necessary transcendence to post-capitalist socialism.
 While the 
modernisation paradigm proposed a universal developmental pattern, 
it differed from the totalitarian model scholarship, which was built on 
clear differences between Stalinism and liberal democracies. As a 
result, it provoked a less drastic opposition to Soviet communism, 
which despite its totalitarian characteristics displayed high levels of 
industrialisation, and health and educational improvements. In this 
sense, it at times provided a kind of moderator to the sometimes 
extreme othering of the totalitarian-model scholarship, and its 
influence can be seen in many of the works that even through the 
othering process recognised the successes of Stalinism.
determinedly did not dwell on social dimensions, a process criticised by the first 
wave of revisionists emerging simultaneously during 1960s. 
 A. Brown, Poet and Scourge, The Guardian, Saturday 15 February 2003. This is 
the most extensive biographical account of Conquest currently to be found. 
However, as a press article it lacks references, and in an interview with RFE/RL 
radio on 10 December 2008 Conquest stated that in the article Brown had made 
quite a lot of mistakes, but made no indication of what these were.  
 Suny, Reading Russia and the Soviet Union in the twentieth century, p.29. As 
Suny points out, Marxism may also be understood as a theory of modernisation, 
complete with its own theory of history that reached beyond capitalism to socialism. 
 Again, this is an example of Reinke de Biutragos suggestion that the process of 
othering does not necessarily indicate the absence of the attribution of positive 
This multi-faceted context is crucial to understanding how 
Western writing on Stalin shifted from the previous period: from the 
late 1930s onwards totalitarianism as a concept and as a reality was at 
the forefront of Western consciousness. It presented a direct threat, 
both ideologically and physically, to Western nations, and with such 
strong links between academia and government, especially in the 
United States, it became the linchpin of othering of the Soviet Union 
by the West. 
4. The Stalinist totalitarian other in Western historiography 
The period 1947-1953, which Engerman describes as the heyday of 
totalitarianism in public political discourse, marked the birth of 
totalitarian-model scholarship in the Soviet studies field.
USSRs actions during this period  the cultural rejection of anything 
non-Soviet, the Sovietisation of Eastern Europe and the creation of 
the Peoples Republic of China (for which Stalin was widely 
credited), for example  reinforced the notion that the USSR was a 
totalitarian state: it could not be changed from within, it was a direct 
threat to global security and US interests, the state dominated and 
even effaced society, and it was expansionist.
 While politicians 
clearly had need for this term, it quickly became as crucial to 
academic writing on the Soviet Union. While even after Stalins death 
it remained a central term in policy discussions, the Soviet 
totalitarianism being referred to was largely that of the Stalinist 
characteristics to the other, and indeed this can go so far as to express admiration of 
the other in certain situations. In this case, the totalitarian-model scholars recognise 
and admire many of the industrial, educational and health-sector developments 
under Stalin, which ties in with the modernisation paradigm and suggests it was 
one, although not the dominating, influence on this historiography. 
 Engerman, Know Your Enemy, p. 206 
 Ibid., p.206. Suny also points out that the usual language used by Americans to 
describe the other great superpower was consistently negative: aggressive, 
expansionist, paranoid, corrupt, brutal, monolithic and stagnant. Exchange students 
going to the USSR for a year of study routinely spoke of going into and out of 
the Soviet Union, as if into and out of a prison, instead of the conventional to and 
from used for travel to other countries. Suny suggests that language itself 
reproduced the sense of Russias alien nature, its inaccessibility and opaqueness. 
Suny, Reading Russia and the Soviet Union, p.38 
regime.
 As a result, usage of the term totalitarianism became a tool 
with which to construct the Stalinist other in Western scholarship 
during this period. 
The two principal interpretations of the origins of Stalinist 
totalitarianism that emerged during this period stated that it was either 
a complete break from what came before 1917 (and stemming from 
this are two further interpretations that see Stalin as either a 
continuation or a break from Bolshevism/Leninism) or that Stalins 
regime was a continuation of a previous Russian tradition of 
leadership. Despite the debates that occurred around these issues, both 
interpretations contain common points on which othering was hinged. 
A common theme across both interpretations was the 
depiction of the Soviet Union and the West as two worlds. George 
Kennans Russia and the West Under Lenin and Stalin (1961) 
exemplified a clear pattern of this method of othering and was 
replicated in many works of this period. In this study of Russian and 
Western relations in the period 1917-1945, Kennan was clear that 
Stalin and his regime represented a definitive other to the West. He 
reinforced this otherness by making systematic reference to the two 
worlds, communist and non-communist and, like Friedrich and 
Brzezinski, isolated Stalinist Soviet Union from the rest of the world. 
The repeated use of this concept reinforced the idea of it being an 
outsider, and distinctly separate from the West: rendered even more 
difficult the problem which Soviet power in Russia presented for the 
outside world, Against this background [of Stalins lack of 
transparency in foreign relations], even the nature of the antagonism 
between the two worlds tended to become blurred, It has been my 
hope that  [these] general reflections would help us to understand 
what it was that happened in the relations between Soviet Russia and 
the outside world, and how all this operated to produce the enormous 
disharmony of the present day which we refer to as  the cold war.
 R. Dallek, How We See the Soviets in M. Garrison and A. Gleason (eds.), 
Shared Destiny: Fifty Years of Soviet-American Relations (Boston, 1985), p. 93 
 Kennans preoccupation lay with harmonious relations with the 
Soviet Union, deemed impossible with Stalin due to his 
Machiavellian and duplicitous character. Kennans Stalin was close to 
Trotskys: he was insecure, vain, jealous and vengeful, yet also 
manipulative, shrewd and clever, and the combination of these traits 
led Stalin to become the leader he was. Kennan, however, also stated 
that Stalins character was characteristic of the Caucasian mountain 
race, which gave him an inordinate touchiness, an endless 
vindictiveness, and inability of ever forgetting an insult or a slight, 
but great patience and power of dissimulation in selecting and 
preparing the moment to settle the score.
 This kind of regional 
generalisation is reminiscent of Saids Orientalism, and since the 
totalitarian-model of interpretation placed the responsibility for 
Stalins regime largely in his own hands, this characterisation was 
central to Kennans construction of the Stalinist other. 
Nevertheless, unlike Friedrich and Brzezinski, just a few years 
later Kennan suggested that coexistence should be encouraged and 
that it should be the Wests goal to find ways to live with the Soviet 
Union, influencing it, even if this has to be done at the expense of 
our chances for destroying it entirely.
 Robert Conquest similarly 
stated that while it could not be said that political democracy or 
freedom of thought in the Western model were flourishing in the 
Soviet Union, there was still hope that it might evolve in the right 
direction.
 This Orientalist construction of the West as reformer of 
the Soviet Union suggested that Western liberal democracies 
considered themselves a superior system that could influence or 
rectify the deviant Soviet Union. Nevertheless, Western observers of 
the early Cold War period still clearly implied that the ideal solution 
would be its destruction.  
 Kennan, Russia and the West under Lenin and Stalin, p. 258 and p. 260  
 Ibid., p.248 
 G. Kennan, On Dealing with the Communist World (New York), 1964, p. 5. 
While this was published ten years after Stalins death, Kennan associates some of 
the most difficult aspects of dealing with the Soviet Union to the Stalinist era. 
 R. Conquest, Common Sense About Russia  London, 1960), p.16 
The distinction between a necessary peaceful coexistence of 
these two worlds  within which a certain level of containment of 
the USSR was nonetheless desired  was repeated regularly in other 
works of this period. Sigmund Neumann partially blamed Europe for 
having pushed Russia out of the Western world and described the 
Soviet Union and the West as two worlds.
 Merle Fainsod also 
referred to the West as the outside world, and in Adam Ulams work 
the confines of the free world must be protected, since this was 
where the proper aims of politics and freedom had been 
developed.
Ulam also emphasised the vast space between Western and 
Stalinist realities: such were the horrors of Stalinism that they could 
not even be adequately described or imagined by even the most 
arduous Western attempts to depict [them]. These attempts to do so 
had been rendered feeble and ineffective by the 1956 revelations.
This was echoed by Conquest who highlighted the differences 
(Conquests emphasis) between Soviet and Western political life as of 
the utmost importance in any attempt to understand Soviet life. 
Without them, Western observers were likely to fall into democratic 
reflexes, as a result of which their work would be practically 
worthless because of this imaginative failure.
A more obvious method of othering can be found in Fainsods 
How Russia is Ruled, a cornerstone for the totalitarian-model 
scholarship for its rigorous account of the totalitarian regime in place 
under Stalin. Here the otherness of the Stalinist regime was 
systematically reinforced by differentiation through comparison to 
Western democracies and their methods of administration and 
governance: Soviet public administration exhibits attributes which 
sharply differentiate it from the administrative systems prevailing in 
 S. Neumann, Permanent Revolution: Totalitarianism in the Age of International 
Civil War, Second Edition (London, 1965), p.11 
  M. Fainsod, How Russia is Ruled (Cambridge, Mass., 1953), p.115; A. Ulam, 
The New Face of Soviet Totalitarianism (Cambridge, Mass., 1963), pp.65-67 
 Ibid., p.183. Ulam also also states that Stalinism is the clear antithesis of 
liberalism. See Ulam, The New Face of Soviet Totalitarianism, p. 44 
 Conquest, Common Sense About Russia, p.71 
Western constitutional democracies, The problem of erecting 
safeguards against the abuse of administrative power is therefore 
conceived differently from its counterpart in Anglo-American 
constitutional systems with their heritage of devotion to personal 
liberty, Soviet public administration replaces Western constitutional 
restraints on administration by a formidable proliferation of central 
controls of a variety and on a scale without parallel in the West, The 
Soviet collective labor agreement is a very different instrument from 
its Western counterpart.
However, even more noticeable in Fainsods work was the 
profoundly Russian character of this Soviet totalitarianism, which is 
much more closely connected to the historical othering of Russia by 
the West, as set out in the Introduction, and to the Orientalist 
approach. For all of Fainsods insights into the subtleties and 
particularities of how communism developed under Stalin, he 
ultimately believed that Stalinism was more or less born of the tsarist 
forms of leadership. Fainsod himself stated that it would be erroneous 
and shallow to say that the Russian is congenitally destined to be 
governed despotically or that there is some mystic substance in the 
Russian soul which breeds submission before authority.
 Yet in the 
following paragraph he went on to state that the frame of analysis 
must include as well those distinctive characteristics of the Russian 
historical legacy that have left the Russian people badly prepared for 
self-government.
 Indeed, Fainsods account of Stalinist 
totalitarianism was deeply historical:  it took root in the method of 
rule established by the tsars, on which the Bolsheviks then built their 
own organisational and leadership structure. In examining the early 
pre-1917 organisation of Bolshevism, Fainsod suggested that the 
organisational conception that embodied Bolshevism was an 
incarnation of the elitist ideal, which had been created by the tsarist 
system and that now manifested itself in a kind of upside-down mirror 
 Fainsod, How Russia is Ruled, pp.327-329 and p.433 
 Ibid., p. 3 
 Ibid., p.4 
image of the tsarist autocracy:  by the time the revolution came about, 
the small proletariat was dominated by an even smaller Marxist 
intelligentsia, which was highly authoritarian and elitist, and it was 
from here that communist totalitarianism stemmed. For Fainsod, the 
experience of totalitarianism in the Soviet Union had fundamentally 
Russian origins.
While not a direct replication of the Orientalist strand present 
in Deutschers systematic comparison of Stalins leadership to that of 
the Russian tsars, Fainsods insistence that Bolshevism was based on 
the same elitist principles of tsarist rule and that this itself led to full-
blown totalitarianism indicates a common strand of thought, only now 
constructed around the more contextually relevant issue of 
totalitarianism. In turn, this was a strong assertion by Fainsod of the 
unchanging character of Russian leadership: while tsarism, 
Bolshevism and Stalins totalitarianism could be clearly defined by 
varying characteristics and historical contexts, the latter two only 
existed as a germination of the former, evolved within a specific 
context. While early on in the book he remarked that Kennan was 
right to suggest that totalitarianism was a disease to which all 
humanity is in some degree vulnerable, Fainsod also admitted to 
insisting that Bolshevism has an organic connection with the Russian 
past.
 Despite his statement that cultural determinism carries the 
same dangers as other forms of determinism
, this specifically 
Russian connection was what led Fainsod to construct and reinforce 
Stalinist totalitarianism as a clear other to the West, both historically 
and politically. 
The idea of Bolshevism mimicking tsarism and eventually 
leading to Stalinist totalitarianism showed up in many Cold War 
 See Fainsod, How Russia is Ruled, especially the chapter entitled Bolshevism 
before 1917 where Fainsod concluded that it was from this elitist tradition that 
totalitarianism emerged in the Soviet Union. Gleason gave an excellent summary of 
this point in Gleason, Totalitarianism, pp.122-123, highlighting that Fainsod came 
close to stating that Communism is [Tsarism] turned upside down or that tsarist 
maximalism created Bolshevism. 
 Fainsod, How Russia is Ruled, p.3 
 Ibid., p.3 
publications. Sigmund Neumann, for instance, suggested that in 
many respects, Soviet Russia was czarism, its symbols reversed and 
its ruling elite changed  a pyramid upside down and that it inherited 
the Okhrana of imperial rule and its general Asiatic feature.
Neumanns work was overall in keeping with historical and 
Orientalist constructions of Russia, in particular regarding the 
character of Soviet totalitarianism as rooted in the peculiar 
conditions of Eurasian Russia possessing a fundamentally Asiatic 
character, ensuring that the centuries-old dualism of western and 
eastern influences is still alive. In the 1930s, Neumann wrote, the 
Bolshevist Revolution in Russia still preserved her oriental 
character.
 Richard Pipes, too, argued that there was economic, 
social, and political continuity in Russia from the fifteenth century 
through to the Soviet Union. This was exemplified in Russia Under 
the Old Regime where Pipes analysis of the tsarist system led him to 
Bolshevism and then eventually Stalinist totalitarianism. For instance, 
he believed that the tsarist model of a police state was put together by 
the Bolsheviks as soon as they took power and that it was 
progressively perfected as a tool for repression. Eventually under 
Stalins dictatorship it attained a level of wanton destructiveness 
never before experienced in human history.
 Earlier in the twentieth 
century certain experimental policies by the tsarist government had 
even overstepped the boundaries of police regime and moved into the 
even more sinister realm of totalitarianism.
 Walt W. Rostow also 
saw a Russian character consistent in both tsarist and Stalinist rule 
which, he suggested, existed because the national characteristics of a 
society, created by a very long process, are bound to leave their mark 
on its political techniques  even when political rule is arbitrarily 
imposed.
 While he differed from the Orientalist model in that he 
 Neumann, Permanent Revolution, p.11 
 Ibid., p.11 
 R. Pipes, Russia Under the Old Regime (London, 1974), pp.317-318 
 Ibid., p.312 
 W. W. Rostow, in collaboration with Alfred Levin, and with the assistance of 
others at the Centre for International Studies, Massachussetts Institute of 
Technology, The Dynamics of Soviet Society (London, 1953), p.126. 
saw the possibility for change, and did not consider Russian history to 
be static, he saw Stalinism as an extreme version of autocracy in 
which analogies between Stalin, Peter the Great and Ivan the Terrible 
were real enough.
It is therefore evident that the interpretative model which 
suggested that Stalinism was a natural successor to tsarism presented 
a tool for reinforcing Stalinism and the Soviet Union as the other. The 
model that saw Stalinism as a break also demonstrated a form of 
othering, although not as strongly. This was exemplified in the work 
of Harvard teacher Michael Karpovich, who taught Russian 
intellectual history at Harvard from 1927 until his retirement in 
1957.
 He focused on pre-1917 history, regarding what had followed 
1917 as unfamiliar, too contemporary for historical judgement and 
lacking in reliable sources.
 For Karpovich, Russian history as he 
knew and taught it ended in 1917: the Soviet Union was not a 
continuation of what had come before. He believed in a difference 
between authoritarianism and totalitarianism: the former being the 
kind of regime found in tsarist Russia, and the latter being the Soviet 
regime. The difference was to be found in the attempt by the Soviet 
state to usurp the inner life of its subjects. It wanted not only their 
external acquiescence, but also that of their minds and hearts, an 
unprecedented dimension (as were many other dimensions of the 
Soviet regime) in the governing of Russia. Karpovich also articulated 
a key theory of the totalitarian model scholarship: that the Soviet 
government was a direct extension of Bolshevik ideology, which 
itself represented a qualitative break from the previous Russian 
 Ibid., p.130. This is the closest interpretation to Deutschers in this respect. 
 Between 1940 and 1958 Karpovich supervised thirty PhDs amongst which, in the 
late 1940s and early 1950s, were Nicholas V. Riasanovsky, Robert V. Daniels, 
Richard Pipes and Martin Malia  some of the leading Sovietologists of the Cold 
War era. N. G. O Pereira, The Thought and Teachings of Michael Karpovich, 
Russian History, Vol. 36, 2009, pp. 254-277, pp.269-270 
  Pereira, The Thought and Teachings of Michael Karpovich, p.257. The 
influence of Karpovich on his favourite student Martin Malia is also evident in 
Malias work, which echoes this notion. Although a prominent Cold War 
Sovietologist who taught at Harvard and then Berkeley, Malias most significant 
work was not published until the 1990s. See Chapter 5. 
intellectual history.
 Stalinism and Bolshevism were a new, 
totalitarian (not authoritarian) other, not just of Europe but also of pre 
-1917 Russia. 
But it was the reinforcement of the notion of Stalinism as an 
extreme version of tsarist autocracy (leading to totalitarianism) - as 
barbaric and threatening, and as being of another world - that bore 
striking similarities to the historical processes of Western othering of 
Russia highlighted in the Introduction.
 For Pipes, as for Fainsod, 
Conquest, Deutscher and Neumann, this distinctly Russian Stalinist 
totalitarianism left an enduring stain on the Soviet Union, enabling 
them to continue to other it long after Stalinism had come to an end.
5. Conclusion 
It is clear, then, that expressed both explicitly and implicitly many of 
the works published during the early Cold War period systematically 
presented Stalinist totalitarianism as the other, reflecting both the 
political and personal experiences of many of the individuals writing 
at this time. The works of this era focused particularly on the coercive 
and terroristic methods of communist rule under Stalin, as well as the 
threat of such a state, constructing and reinforcing the notion of the 
two worlds, opposites and opponents. The basis for these 
constructions can be found in writings on totalitarianism around this 
period, such as those of Talmon and Brzezinski, but also in the 
general political context which had immeasurable influence on 
 Pereira, The Thought and Teachings of Michael Karpovich, p.267 and p.268 
 This was also represented in the admiration that many travellers of previous 
centuries felt when visiting Russia, where they were impressed by the tsarist 
palaces, finery and so on. In relation to Stalinism, this became admiration for 
industrial and educational successes. 
 Kennan, Pipes and Conquest all saw Stalinism as an enduring and key component 
part of Soviet communism, and as a result the Soviet Union still manifested a 
milder form of this affliction and could never be trusted, or be an ally of the West, 
such were their differences. This was the dominant theme of articles they wrote and 
lectures they gave especially in the late 1960s when there were moves towards 
dtente. In Pipes case this was also true in his advisory roles to the US government. 
For examples of this see Engerman, Know Your Enemy, pp.271-276. For an 
overview of debates on whether the post-Stalinism Soviet Union was authoritarian 
or totalitarian, see Gleason, Totalitarianism, pp. 205-208 
scholarship on Stalinism around this period, particularly in the USA. 
At the same time, the development of the idea of Stalinism as a 
continuation of a Russian tradition of leadership demonstrates a 
pattern of Orientalist-style analysis, reinforcing the notion of the 
unchanging national Russian character. More specifically, the 
suggestion by some scholars that Bolshevism and eventually 
totalitarian Stalinism were in fact tsarism turned upside-down 
reveals the extent of this perceived similitude. During this era, 
totalitarianism represented the ultimate antithesis to the West, and in 
Western historiography on Stalin and Stalinism, totalitarianism 
provided a new tool with which Western scholars were able to 
construct the Stalinist and Soviet other. 
 While the basis of these othering constructions shifted 
considerably since the pre- Cold War period, there was continuity in 
the strong personal links between those writing and their subject 
matter that provided a central character to the historiography. The 
previous chapter highlighted the way in which Trotsky and his peers 
work was informed by their theoretical isolation from Stalin, and 
estrangement from the Soviet Union (or in the case of pro-Stalinists, 
such as Barbusse, their strong personal allegiance). In the early 1950s 
and 1960s, many writers on totalitarianism  such as Talmon, 
Brzezinski and Arendt, for example  were informed by their own 
personal trauma borne of the Second World War and Jewish 
persecution, and their many social, cultural, economic and political 
repercussions. These soon collided with the Western anti-Soviet 
mentality of the Cold War era, and in the USA especially, as 
academics and politicians worked side by side on foreign policy, the 
resulting scholarship on the Soviet Union become deeply intertwined 
with political discourse on totalitarianism and its Soviet variant. This 
explains why, while in the wider profession social history was 
beginning to take hold from the 1960s, the focus in Sovietology 
 This is not to say this was a one-way process. Indeed both blocs sought to 
differentiate themselves from one another during the Soviet, and especially the Cold 
War, periods. 
remained firmly on the political sphere for around another decade, 
rendering temporarily powerless wider historiographical trends as a 
key formative influence on scholarship, evidence of the strength of 
the influence of political life on academia at this time. This has given 
scholarship on Stalinism of this time a unique and complex nature, 
highlighting once again the deep roots of this historiography and the 
construction of the Stalinist other in the most momentous events of 
the twentieth century and in the experiences of those who lived 
through them. 
Chapter 3 
The God that Failed: 
Khrushchevs secret speech and British communist 
historiography of Stalin and Stalinism
1. British communists in context: the rise and fall of the 
The Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB) was established in 
London in the summer of 1920, merging several smaller Marxist 
groups together. One of the major components of the new party was 
the British Socialist Party, the largest Marxist group before the 
Russian Revolution that had been affiliated with the Labour Party. 
With the support of the Comintern, the CPGB tried to affiliate with 
the Labour Party several times in its history and, although coming 
close to achieving this in 1945, was always unsuccessful.
 Supported 
by Lenin, the CPGB functioned as a section of the Comintern, from 
which it drew large amounts of funding.
The CPGB adhered to the Cominterns Moscow line and by 
doing so accepted a practice of democratic centralism in which the 
authority of the international over its constituent parties was explicitly 
established. This was most obvious during the Second World War 
when the CPGB reversed its policy several times as the war 
 The expression The God that Failed is used by Hobsbawm in his autobiography, 
in which he wrote that he was repelled by ex-communists who after 1956 turned 
The God that Failed into Satan in order to free themselves from his service. He 
was alluding to the collection of essays by the same name, published in 1949, of six 
Western communists who charted their conversion to, and subsequent rejection of, 
communism. See E. Hobsbawm, Interesting Times: A Twentieth-Century Life 
(London, 2003), p. 217 and A. Koestler et al., The God That Failed, edited by R. 
Crossman (New York, 1972).  
 Communist Party of Great Britain History Section, Marxists Internet Archive 
(last accessed 09/07/2013): 
http://www.marxists.org/history/international/comintern/sections/britain/history.htm 
 Communist Party of Great Britain Archive, (last accessed 09/07/2013) : 
http://www.communistpartyarchive.org.uk/9781851171354.php 
http://www.marxists.org/history/international/comintern/sections/britain/history.htm
http://www.communistpartyarchive.org.uk/9781851171354.php
progressed, first strongly opposing the war and then, upon the 
German invasion of the Soviet Union, reversing this stance on the 
premise that this was now a war between Fascism and the Soviet 
Union.
 After the war, the CPGB suffered greatly from the revelations of 
Khrushchevs 1956 secret speech, losing thousands of members and 
eventually irreparably splitting through the creation of the New Left.
In its latter years and most notably due to the politics of the Cold 
War, the CPGB suffered a number of crises in which members were 
strongly divided over Soviet national and international policy. 
Following the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union and amongst 
growing fractiousness the CPGB was dissolved at the 43
 Party 
Congress in November 1991. Its largest component, the 
Eurocommunists (who had sought to develop communism in ways 
more aligned with Western countries and less with the desires and 
goals of the Soviet Union), went on to form an alternative to the 
communist political party, the think tank Democratic Left.
 Ibid. 
 There is a substantial body of work on the creation of the New Left which was an 
important development in British Communist (and general British) history and 
political thinking, and which came about as a result of the speech. After the split in 
reactions to the 1956 secret speech within the CPGB, the New Left movement was 
born. Individuals adhering to the New Left were socialists with no official fixed 
agenda but who called for an array of reforms that were all intended to help make 
socialism a living force in Britain. There are several excellent accounts of the crisis 
within the CPGB which led to the creation of the New Left and an exploration of 
what it signified to former members of the CPGB. See for example: M. Kenny, 
Communism and the New Left in G. Andrews, N. Fishman and K. Morgan  (eds), 
Opening the Books: Essays on the Social and Cultural History of British 
Communism, Pluto (London, 1995); J. Saville, The 20
 Congress and the British 
Communist Party, Socialist Register, 1976, pp.1-23; W. Thompson, The Good Old 
Cause: British Communism 1920-1991 (London, 1992), pp.108-111;  M. Kenny, 
The First New Left - British Intellectuals After Stalin (London, 1995). Especially 
useful is the chapter The Rise and Fall of the First New Left. Finally, Margot 
Heinemann gave a succinct survey of the events of 1956 as seen from within the 
Party in M. Heinemann, 1956 and the Communist Party, The Socialist Register, 
1976, pp.43-57. 
 Thompson, The Good Old Cause, pp. 215-217.  Additional useful histories of the 
CPGB include H. Pelling, The British Communist Party: A Historical Profile 
(London, 1975); J. Eaden and D. Renton, The Communist Party of Great Britain 
since 1920 (Basingstoke, 2002). 
2. The secret speech and the creation of a Stalinist other 
When Nikita Khrushchev delivered his secret speech to a closed 
room at the 20
 Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet 
Union in February 1956 the repercussions for the Soviet Union and 
communists worldwide were severe. For the first time it was 
acknowledged that there had been grave errors committed by Stalin 
and by those working close to him for the duration of the Stalinist 
regime, most notably during the trials and purges of the 1930s. 
Collective leadership had been abandoned, and a cult of the 
individual had developed in its place. Khrushchevs speech seemed 
to pave the way for change in the Soviet Union and initiated a period 
of de-Stalinisation, which sought to rectify some of the errors of the 
past. Wrongly convicted enemies of the state were released from 
camps and exile, and the government endeavoured to once again 
establish a genuine socialist leadership.  
The Western capitalist nations felt vindicated: communism was 
indeed the evil other they had supposed it to be.
 But there were 
severe repercussions for the lives of non-Soviet communists, living in 
countries where their political and ideological convictions were 
deemed dangerous and worthy of persecution and where they 
themselves represented the other. This chapter analyses how this 
affected the way in which Stalin and Stalinism were written about by 
non-Soviet communists, and specifically by British communists in the 
period immediately after the speech, in order to provide a more 
complete and inclusive assessment of Western writing on Stalin and 
Stalinism during this period than is possible by solely examining Cold 
War scholarship. In particular it aims to answer the question of 
whether in this aspect of the historiography of Stalin and Stalinism an 
othering process begins in the aftermath of 1956, as some British 
 One British Communist reported that his neighbours were laughing their heads 
off at the revelations. Another, a university lecturer from Scotland, replied when 
asked about his colleagues reaction to the Stalin business that Theyre not saying 
much, but theyre all thinking: Lets see you talk yourself out of this one. See 
The Case for Socialism, The Reasoner, Second Number, September 1956, p.2 
communists attempted to distance themselves from the regime they 
had once supported. 
Examining the reaction of British communists to the revelations 
of Khrushchevs speech within the context of this thesis provides a 
fresh insight into what has been a well-documented crisis within the 
British left. Indeed, placed within the conceptual framework of  the 
Western othering of Stalinism, exploring the nature of British 
communist alignment with Stalin before 1956, the immediate 
response to the secret speech and its aftermath allows  us to gain 
increased understanding of the ways in which Stalin and his regime 
were othered by those who had been ideologically aligned with him. 
In a first instance, and as the following section will demonstrate, 
through analyses of not only books but also press materials , this was 
a case of positive othering. From 1956 however, examining British 
communist work as well as press materials allows us to chart the 
evolution of this othering from a form of adulation to one of 
opposition. It provides a unique opportunity to observe the process 
through which Stalin became the other in the eyes of those who had 
previously aligned themselves with him. It further allows us to build a 
more complete picture of Western othering of Stalin during this 
period by broadening the scope of enquiry beyond those ideologically 
opposed to communism, providing a more nuanced and inclusive 
account of Western attitudes towards Stalin and Stalinism during this 
period. 
3. Before 1956: Stalin and Stalinism through British 
communist eyes 
There is surprisingly little academic, historical or even contemporary 
writing published on Stalin by CPGB members in the period prior to 
1956.
 In order to understand the nature of British communist 
interpretations of Stalin and Stalinism before 1956  and therefore 
understand how these interpretations evolved after 1956  works 
principally relating to the trials of the 1930s are particularly 
informative, as are articles from the daily newspaper of the CPGB, 
the Daily Worker. This paper was originally set up as the official 
organ of the CPGB in 1930. In 1946, ownership was formally 
transferred to a non-party cooperative, the Peoples Press Printing 
Society (PPPS). The paper nevertheless remained the acknowledged 
voice of the CPGB until after the fall of the Soviet Union.
 It provides 
valuable insight on CPGB members views on Stalin and Stalinism, 
which often were not being put to paper in published works. The 
departure from only examining what might be considered 
historiography proper is justified when we consider that by providing 
access to otherwise largely unpublished opinions, the Daily Worker 
 Most of the professional academic historians of the CPGB were part of the 
Historians Group of the Communist Party, and were historians of Britain making 
huge headway on subjects such as British labour history, the social history of the 
British Revolution in the seventeenth century and the social history of ideas, namely 
plebeian ideology. Hobsbawm summed up well what he saw as the particular 
achievements of this group of historians in E. J. Hobsbawm, The Historians' Group 
of the Communist Party in M. Conforth (ed.),  Rebels and Their Causes: Essays in 
Honour of A.L. Morton (London, 1978), pp.44-45. In an interview in 1978 for 
Visions in History Hobsbawm also explained how constrained Communist 
historians were by the twentieth century, and how this affected what they 
researched: Before '56, we were obviously very constrained about twentieth-
century history, and most of us didn't tackle it. I'll tell you honestly that one reason 
i'm primarily a nineteenth century historian and have been very careful not to push 
even my labor history much beyond 1914 is that when I became a labor historian 
you couldn't really be an orthodox Communist  and write publicly about, say, the 
period when the Communist party was active because there was an orthodox belief 
that everything had changed in 1920 with the founding of the CP. See P. Thane and 
E. Lunbeck, Interview with Eric Hobsbawm in H. Abelove, B. Blackmar, P. 
Dimock and J. Schneer (eds.),  Visions of History by MARHO, The Radical 
Historians Organization (Manchester, 1983), pp.33-34. Hobsbawm went on to say, 
however, that he had not actually believed everything had changed in 1920, but it 
was probably impolite and possibly unwise to say so in public, and the only 
significant constraints were probably internal, moral ones. See Thane and Lunbeck, 
Interview with Eric Hobsbawm, p.34 
 See K. Morgan, The Communist Party and the Daily Worker 1930-56 in G. 
Andrews, N. Fishman and K. Morgan (eds), Opening the Books: Essays on the 
Social and Cultural History of British Communism (London, 1995), p. 142. Morgan 
considered it to be an incomparable source for the partys day-to-day outlook and 
political culture.  
constitutes a vital element of the British communist historiography of 
Stalin and Stalinism.
Daily Worker articles of the 1930s, the defining decade of 
Stalinism, are revelatory about British communist perceptions of the 
USSR. In 1936 the Soviet Union, with the second Five Year Plan 
over halfway along, continued its impressive and relentless drive 
towards becoming a powerful, industrialised super-power. 
Simultaneously the purges and show trials were approaching their 
apex. Nevertheless, coverage on Stalin at this time was entirely 
positive and focused on industrial, economic and standard of life 
achievements. Keen to show the benefits of socialism, advances in 
industrialisation and quality of life in the Soviet Union were widely 
reported in the Daily Worker. This is exemplified, for instance, by 
articles reporting that a British delegation who had visited the USSR 
was particularly astounded with what the Soviet Union is doing for 
children
, or attributing excellent harvests to the success of 
collective farming.
 Other articles reported on working conditions - a 
testimonial from a British print worker who went to Russia as part of 
the Trade Union delegation stated that Actual monetary wages 
compare very favourably with the wages of London print workers, at 
400-450 roubles a month and suggested that working conditions in 
the Soviet Union were as good, or better than those found in 
London.
 To the CPGB it was becoming more and more clear every 
day how well people live in the country of the Soviets.
 At the height of its popularity, the circulation figures for the paper were 120 000 
but they declined steadily to 63 000 by April 1956. Morgan, The Communist Party 
and the Daily Worker 1930-56, p.152. This article gives an excellent appraisal of 
the lifecycle of the paper, and the dynamics between its staff, its readers and the 
CPGB. 
 Russia's Work on Child Health 'Best in World', Daily Worker, Thursday 2 July 
1936, p.5 
 Bumper Harvest in Russia 'Granary', Daily Worker, Saturday 11 July 1936, p.5 
 J. A. Course, Printing in Russia As I Saw It, Daily Worker, Friday 23 October 
1936, p.7 
 Moscow A Blaze of Light, Daily Worker, Saturday 7 November 1936, p.1. This 
article, relating the mood and state of the USSR, was published on the eve of the 
nineteenth anniversary of the Revolution. It stated that a happy bustle is evident 
everywhere in the country and that it was no surprise that every Soviet wants to 
celebrate the October festival as his own personal and most beloved holiday. 
Other British communist publications similarly focused on the 
successes of Stalinism. Early in Stalins rule, for example, Andrew 
Rothstein (another founding and prominent member of the CPGB) 
had published a pamphlet entitled Russias Socialist Triumph in 
which he extolled the virtues of the Five Year Plans. For Rothstein, 
while there were many reasons to admire the achievements of Soviet 
Russia which even the capitalists are forced to acknowledge, the 
most wonderful reason of all was the way in which Russian workers 
rebuilt production and economic life generally to pre-war levels 
with hardly any outside help.
 To Rothstein, as to most communists, 
perhaps the most impressive aspect of the Stalinist Soviet Union was 
the huge technological and industrial advances being made and the 
perceived success of the economy. Rothsteins pamphlet is awash 
with tables and figures detailing investments, national income, 
metallurgy, transport, education and literacy levels.  
As well as the industrial and economic successes of Stalinism, 
The Daily Worker and other British communist publications also 
reflected British communists perceptions of the trials at this time. 
Harry Pollitt, then Secretary of the CPGB, wrote: 
This is not time for sentiment - the sacrifices of certain 
leaders before the Revolution are nothing to the sacrifices of 
the people of the Soviet Union to build a Socialist State as a 
bulwark of peace for the people of the world () In the face 
of unparalleled sacrifice the Russian people have established 
their power, have achieved miracles in Socialist construction 
that have aroused the admiration of the world. And all the 
time in their midst a poisonous gang, lustful for power to 
wreck Socialism has been at work. () It is not a question of 
what these men did in 1905, it is what they were doing in 
1936 - conspiring with Hitler, Fascist agents, fomenters of the 
assassination of the best sons of the Soviet Union.
Another article referred to the judicial system of the Soviet Union as 
mild for letting Trotsky escape abroad and not face the 
 A. Rothstein, Russias Socialist Triumph: The Exposition of the Soviet Five Year 
Plan of Socialist Construction (London, 1929), p.5  
 No Time Now For Sentiment - Sacrifices of the People, Daily Worker, Friday 
28 August 1936, p. 3 
consequences of his actions, as well as those for whom he was the 
whipper-in: Zinoviev and Kamenev.
 And when in November 1936 
Stalin gave a speech on the new constitution for the Soviet Union (to 
be adopted that December), the Daily Worker reported that It was a 
speech that will live through history. It showed clearly the shallow 
nature of many of the criticisms from bourgeois observers. For the 
Soviets and for the rest of the world it opened up new perspectives of 
democracy and freedom.
 The content of these articles was mirrored 
by British communist books of the time. Barrister Dudley Collard, for 
example, wrote an account of Karl Radeks trial as witnessed by 
Collard himself, who had travelled to the Soviet Union.
 Despite 
stating his intention to provide an impartial account of the trial, 
Collard nevertheless wrote that he  wanted to clear up the 
misunderstandings which have arisen about the conduct of political 
trials in the Soviet Union, and which are so detrimental to the good 
relations which should exist between this country and the U.S.S.R..
He believed that the principal reason why many Britons felt unease at 
these trials was due to the way in which they were reported by the 
British press and that many accounts were entirely distorted, 
perhaps due to miscommunications, but also due to hostility towards 
the Soviet Union, and to the taste of the Press for sensationalism.
J. R. Campbell, another prominent and public face of the 
CPGB, similarly regarded the representation of the Soviet Union as a 
dictatorship of the Party as a travesty which is unfortunately accepted 
 K. Radek, How Trotsky's "terror centre" was started, Daily Worker, Friday 4 
September 1936, p.7 
Stalin Speech: Constitution is a Beacon For All, Daily Worker, Friday 27 
November 1936, p.1 
 Radek was tried along with several others, as part of the Trial of the Sixteen in 
January 1937. It was the second show trial, following that of Zinoviev and 
Kamenev. 
 D. Collard, Soviet Justice and the Trial of Radek and Others (London, 1937), 
pp.9-10. Collard was leader of the CPGBs Legal Group during the 1930s. 
 Collard, Soviet Justice and the Trial of Radek and Others, p.83. Collard then gave 
an account of some of the British reporting of the trial, including quotes by the 
Morning Post, Manchester Guardian. Daily Herald, and the Daily Express, which 
all reported the trial extremely negatively, alluding to raised voices, harsh methods 
of investigation and high emotion. Collard stated that none of these events occurred 
as described by the Press, if they occurred at all. See pp.83-85 
by friends, as well as enemies.
 He extolled the virtues of the Soviet 
Socialist state: planned economy has eliminated unemployment, 
State medical service is the admiration of doctors all over the world, 
and the educational system has evoked the enthusiasm of all who are 
interested in progressive educational developments.
 He believed 
that it was undoubtedly correct that those on trial had betrayed the 
revolution. 
Like Campbell and Collard, Rothstein also wrote about the 
trials though most specifically on those of 1930-31, when the 
Mensheviks were tried for counter-revolution. Rothsteins Wreckers 
on Trial gave another insight into how early the CPGB toed the 
Soviet Party line, and he made his stance clear: the Mensheviks had 
degenerated into espionage, corruption, wrecking and sabotage, a 
fact which was revealed in all its ugly details through the trials.
the end Rothstein warned: The pages which follow throw a flood of 
light on the bitter and relentless hostility of the Imperialists to the 
U.S.S.R. All friends of the Soviet Union, and in the first instance the 
working-class, dare not forget this.
 Later, Willie Thompson 
recounted how the CPGB expressed its collective approbation and 
enthusiasm for these proceedings, illustrated by representative quotes 
from the Daily Worker, and one from Russia Today: No true friend 
of the Soviet Unioncan feel other than a sense of satisfaction.
Articles on Stalins death in 1953 provide insight into how 
Stalin was seen and written about as a man and as a leader. When 
news of Stalins illness first reached the public sphere, the Daily 
Workers headlines reflected the worry and anxiety with which 
 J. R. Campbell, Soviet Policy and Its Critics (London, 1939), p.15 
 Ibid., p. 9 
 Ibid., p.273 
A. Rothstein, Foreword in A. Rothstein (ed.), Wreckers on Trial: A Record of 
the Trial of the Industrial Party, held in Moscow, Nov.-Dec. 1930 (London, 1931), 
p.VI. With the exception of Rothsteins Foreword, the book is a day-by-day account 
of the statements given by the defendants (Ramzin, Laritchev, Kalinnikov, 
Charnovsky, Kuprianov, Fyedotov, Ochkin, Sitnin), comments from Rothstein on 
their appearance and manner, as well as the final verdict and sentencing 
 Rothstein, Foreword in Rothstein, (ed.), Wreckers on Trial, p.VIII 
 The two Daily Worker quotes are: The criminals have received their well-
merited sentences and It is the enemies of socialism and peace who have perished. 
We should not mourn. Thompson, The Good Old Cause, pp.59-60 
communists worldwide met the news. On the front page, an editorial 
from the 5
 March 1953 entitled May He Recover stated that In all 
countries of the world, peace loving people are fervently hoping that 
Joseph Stalin will completely recover from the grave illness with 
which he is now stricken.
While the possibility of the death of Stalin himself formed 
part of the dismay, this was also a particularly politically unstable 
time when many had been awaiting peaceful discussions to take place 
between Churchill, Stalin and Eisenhower: Stalin had, in the previous 
few months, agreed to meet with the two Western leaders in order to 
discuss a peace agreement between the three powers. So recently after 
the Second World War the repeated references to Stalins role during 
the war suggest that in 1953 his position as a leader was steeped in 
memories of the conflict and its resolution. Stalin was not simply a 
socialist hero, but also a war hero. This idea was particularly well 
illustrated by this editorial, which, after announcing Stalins illness, 
moved on to predominantly report on the importance of his role in the 
Because in the end, the Soviet army smashed the Nazis 
utterly, the war was shortened by many months, if not by 
years. Hundreds of thousands of Britons are alive today 
because the Soviet army tore the guts out of the German 
army, as Mr Churchill expressed it.
It is clear that for the British communists Stalins positive role was 
only cemented by the Second World War, intensifying their 
admiration for him and leading them to further negate any claims of 
wrongdoing, brutality and coercion. This was highlighted in the same 
editorial: For in spite of the violent propaganda of hate which the 
capitalist Press directed against the Soviet leader, the average man 
rejects as bogus the cunningly built-up picture of Stalin as a would-be 
world conqueror.
 May He Recover, Daily Worker, Thursday 5 March 1936, p.1 
 May He Recover, Daily Worker, Thursday 5 March 1936, p.1 
  May He Recover, Daily Worker, Thursday 5 March 1936, p.1. This was also 
reflected in some of the quotes printed by the Daily Worker, as spoken by British 
Upon Stalins death, the tone of adulation persisted. The Daily 
Worker dedicated a two page supplement to Stalin, a biography not 
dissimilar in tone and content to the official Soviet biographies 
detailing Stalins illustrious life as revolutionary and leader.
 On the 
same day that the biographical supplement was published, Pollitt 
himself wrote an article for the Daily Worker entitled Eternal Glory 
to Stalin, the final paragraph of which concluded with an emotional 
goodbye to Stalin: 
With tear-blinded eyes and a grief we have not the 
language at our command to describe, we swear that 
our Communist Party, and our Daily Worker, will do 
all in their power to pick up that banner of national 
independence that Comrade Stalin spoke about in his 
speech to the 19th Congress, hold it proudly aloft, and 
never allow it to be sullied by any power in the world. 
ETERNAL GLORY TO THE MEMORY OF JOSEPH 
STALIN
This statement contained language similar to that found in Soviet 
press, literature and propaganda, and it is undoubtedly surprising to 
witness such emotive language laden with religious connotations 
coming from British communists. This suggests a level of absorption 
of Soviet official language and methods of expression in regards to 
Stalin that provides a stark contrast to other sections of the 
historiography, emphasised by the communists being ideologically 
diametrically opposed to the totalitarian-model writers also publishing 
at this time.
workers, on Stalins illness and subsequent death:  I am shocked and grieved at the 
news of Stalin's illness, especially at a time when the peace of the world is in 
balance and when Stalin's Christmas offer for a peace meeting with the Three 
Powers seems to be getting a response', was the reaction of a shop steward from 
Motherwell. See All Walks of Life Saddened at the News, Daily Worker, 
Thursday 5 March 1936, p.1 
 A. Rothstein,, Stalin: Story of a Great Servant of Mankind who Belongs to the 
Ages, Daily Worker, Saturday 7 March 1936, Supplement II. Rothstein was a 
relatively prolific writer on the USSR and Stalin during the Soviet period, 
especially when compared to the scarcity of other CPGB members historical or 
contemporary writings on Stalin and Stalinism during the Soviet period. 
 H. Pollitt, Eternal Glory to Stalin, Daily Worker, Saturday 7 March 1953, p.2 
 Other headlines and articles from Daily Worker provide us with further insight 
into the esteem in which Stalin was held by the CPGB: Stalin's Name will Live in 
Men's Hearts, 'Mourning in Factories' and When he Saved Britain. In this last 
It also represents a form of the positive othering process, an 
example of which can be found in the works of Barbusse a few years 
earlier. Stalin was elevated to a status which set him apart from other 
men, and the Soviet Union was often represented as a superior nation 
to Great Britain. This has been exemplified by the comparisons in 
worker pay and conditions, and by the very fact of it being a socialist 
state. Writing about the experience of being a communist in the 
1940s, Eric Hobsbawm explained these apparently extreme 
sentiments, highlighting how, as for the writers of the pre-Cold War 
era, their lives were inextricably bound to Stalins Soviet Union:  
At the time it would not have struck any of us as surprising 
that the last words of a dying Party member should be for the 
Party, for Stalin and for the comrades (in those days among 
foreign communists the thought of Stalin was as sincere, 
unforced, unsullied by knowledge and universal as the 
genuine grief most of us felt in 1953 at the death of a man 
whom no Soviet citizen would have wanted, or dared, to call 
by a pet name like Uncle Joe in Britain or Big whiskers 
[baffone] in Italy.).
Similarly John Saville explained that socialism in the USSR and the 
Stalinist regime became so attractive over the decades following the 
1917 revolution because of the establishment of the Comintern in 
which a shared belief was developed that communists were part of a 
world movement that would achieve, through disciplined leadership, 
revolutionary goals and aims. As time progressed and Stalins Five 
Year Plans were underway with positive results yielded, there was 
much which could support these ideas and ideals.
 According to 
Saville, there was a low level of awareness of the true nature of the 
Stalinist regime because there were so few Trotskyists in Great 
article Stalin is again credited with saving the lives of Britons: 'But for Stalin a 
great many of us might be dead. And it may be we owe him our freedom'. All three 
are headlines from Daily Worker, Saturday 7 March 1953, pp. 2-3. From the 9
March onwards there is a column dedicated to Stalin that appears on and off eight 
times over the following weeks, entitled What Stalin Meant to Humanity. The first 
of these was called Man Who Set Women Free.
 It is clear from these articles that 
Stalin enjoyed the same level of public, and private, adulation that he had come to 
expect and require from his own people. 
 Hobsbawm, Interesting Times, p. 134 
 Saville, The Communist Experience: A Personal Appraisal, Socialist Register, 
1991, pp.1-27, pp.3-4 
Britain and those that were there were intellectually feeble. 
Consequently, there were very few within the labour movement who 
appreciated what was happening inside the USSR. Saville believed 
that if war hadnt arrived in 1939, debates over the trials of 1936-8 
would have led to a clearer understanding of the oppressive and 
bloody regime that Stalin presided over.
 As it was ,however, the 
CPGB continued to support and admire the Stalinist regime 
throughout the 1930s and the war years up to, and in some cases 
beyond, the 1956 secret speech.  
The Daily Worker articles present the reality of British 
communist belief in Stalin, and Stalinism, at the very apex of his 
power. They provide an insight into how different aspects of 
Stalinism were all seen through the same positive and adulatory lens: 
Stalin himself, healthcare, education, working conditions, 
collectivisation, the general mood and happiness of the population, 
perceived popular support for the Stalinist regime and finally the very 
basis of the political system, the constitution. There is not a large 
body of work by British communists on Stalinism in this period, but 
these few we have together with the Daily Worker articles, provide a 
realistic record of how Stalin and Stalinism were thought about and 
written about at this time, and constitute an important part of the 
Western historiography of Stalin and Stalinism.  
This British communist historiography in the period before 1956 
was therefore largely based on the Party political line: under the 
umbrella of the Comintern, the CPGB supported everything that 
Stalin did. It promoted him and his regime not only through the works 
of members of the CPGB, but also through the Daily Worker. 
Stalinism was not only the realisation of a socialist state: it was an 
enormously successful one to be admired, and whose enemies it was 
right to destroy. In the post-war years, Stalin was seen as the architect 
of this admirable nation but also a saviour and a hero whose death 
provoked grief as well as fear for a peaceful future. It is these 
 Ibid., p.4 
ideological and practical elements which drove the pre-1956 British 
communist historiography of Stalin and Stalinism to take shape as 
what was a clear opposite to the Anglo-American Sovietological 
works being simultaneously published at this time. 
4. True democracy has been restored: the CPGB responds 
to the 20
 Congress 
The 20
 Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union took 
place in late February 1956, and its impact on supporters of Soviet 
communism was huge. A British communist wrote in July 1956 that 
The 20
 Congress and the no-longer secret report of Kruschov has 
given rise to the greatest crisis of Socialist thought since the birth of 
Marxism.
 The party lost thousands of members in its immediate 
aftermath, some of whom for which the speech not only led them to 
re-evaluate Stalinism, but also to radically change their ideological 
and political positions.
Yet the CPGB failed to engage in honest discussion about the 
revelations. In the public sessions of the Congress, Khrushchev and 
Anastas Mikoyan had already addressed the negative impact of the 
cult of the individual and the lack of collective leadership under 
Stalin. The general understanding gained from these sessions was that 
de-Stalinisation was an active and important process and that the 
mistakes and errors of the Stalin years were responsible for the 
repressive acts that had so outraged the non-communist world.
These were already important developments and paved the way for all 
communists to begin reassessing their interpretations of Stalinism. 
Nevertheless, the Daily Worker put a positive spin on things and 
reported on these initial speeches with enthusiasm and positivity. 
 K. Hughes, Where Do We Stand Now?, The Reasoner, First Number, July 
1956, p.20 
 Willie Thompson believed that the numerical loss of members was not the 
greatest blow to the CPGB  it was in fact the loss of some of its most energetic and 
imaginative talents in both the trade union and the intellectual spheres. Thompson, 
The Good Old Cause, p.110 
 Saville, The 20th Century Congress and the British Communist Party, pp.1-2 
They were something to be proud of in the face of capitalist criticism. 
Writing on the 25
 February, George Matthews published an article 
in the Daily Worker entitled Its Not a Sign of Weakness to Admit 
Mistakes, in which he declared that rather than indicate the weakness 
of the CPSU, the admission of mistakes pointed to a strong party and 
one which could only be strengthened by the publicising of past 
mistakes and by the effort made to correct them. In the end, he 
concluded, There is not the faintest shadow of a doubt that after the 
20th Congress the Soviet people and the Party which leads them will 
astonish the world with their deeds.
 Acknowledgement of these 
public speeches and the information they contained about Stalin was 
therefore immediate, as was acceptance of their content. Writing in 
1976, Saville still did not know whether the leaders of the CPGB 
knew the content of the secret speech in the days immediately after it 
took place although he suspected that they must have, since other 
foreign delegates did.
  Matthews article certainly showed an 
unwillingness to engage with the real issue at hand: not whether the 
CPSU was stronger for admitting its mistakes but what the true nature 
of Stalinism was, as revealed by Khrushchev. How had it been able to 
occur, and how could the CPGB have unquestionably supported it?  
 In the weeks that followed, nothing much was made by the 
official CPGB channels of the contents of the secret speech, creating 
the catalyst for the eventual Party split. On March 13
 the Daily 
Worker printed a transcript of a speech Pollitt had just made on the 
 Congress, in which he acknowledged that some CPGB members 
were concerned about Stalin. He addressed this issue by stating that it 
 G. Matthews, It's Not a Sign of Weakness to Admit Mistakes, Daily Worker, 
Saturday 25 February 1956,  
 Indeed he wrote that it was clear that some foreign delegates knew about the 
secret speech and its content before or soon after they returned home. He added that 
there is no doubt at all that leading members of the CPGB knew the main facts of 
the secret speech by the middle of April at the latest. See Saville, The 20th Century 
Congress and the British Communist Party, p.2. This article also provides a useful 
account of how quickly the content of the speech was reported in foreign press, 
notably in Germany and in Russia itself. By the very beginning of March for 
instance, the East German vice-premier Walter Ulbricht was already stating that 
Stalin had done severe damage to the Soviet state and CPSU. 
was certain that Stalin made mistakes in judgement and policy; 
however, only a man who does nothing never makes mistakes, but 
this does not mean Comrade Stalin did not make a leading 
contribution in peace and war alike, to the development of the Soviet 
Union.
 A few days later, on March 19
, an article entitled That 
Khrushchov Speech may have led readers to believe the secret 
speech was finally to be acknowledged and addressed. In fact the 
article principally referred to meetings throughout the Soviet Union 
being held to help respond to some of the problems highlighted by the 
 Congress. It addressed the secret speech, but only insofar as it 
was acknowledged as having raised issues about the cult of the 
individual and lack of collective leadership, with some (vaguely 
alluded to) undesirable outcomes: 
This period of arbitrary rule resulted in many serious mistakes 
and injustices. It led to the Soviet Union being unprepared for 
the Nazi attack. Steps have now been taken to restore justice. 
Innocent people who had been convicted have been 
rehabilitated, while proper control by the Party and the 
Government has been established over the work of the State 
security agencies () And whatever the hostile capitalist 
Press may say, this frank discussion of past mistakes is the 
triumphant proof of the soundness of the Soviet Union and 
that, after a lapse of 20 years, true democracy has been 
restored.
It was here that the problems of the CPGB truly began. There 
is little doubt that by this point the leaders of the CPGB had a good 
idea of the contents of the secret speech, and they were not being 
addressed in a way which was felt to be adequate by many members. 
It became increasingly apparent to many of these members that there 
was a crucial and critical moral and political problem with many 
layers and dimensions that needed to be engaged with by communist 
parties everywhere. Yet this problem was not being engaged with 
 Pollitt: Soviet Congress has Helped Peace, Daily Worker, Tuesday 13 March 
1956, p.1  continued on p.3 
 S. Russell, That Khrushchov Speech, Daily Worker, Monday 19 March 1956, 
p.1- continued on p.3 
within the principal forum for discussion that the CPGB possessed.
By the summer of 1956, with discontent growing among members 
and still no adequate public discussion on the contents of the speech, 
it became increasingly obvious to Thompson, Saville and others that 
there was never going to be a serious debate permitted within the 
confines of party publications and forums.
 This ended up being the 
catalyst for change, at least for Thompson and Saville. In July of that 
year, Thompson and Saville launched the first of three issues of a 
discussion journal called The Reasoner. It was considered sin to 
discuss party matters in non-official channels, and the publication of 
this unauthorised discussion journal was met with the extreme 
disapproval of CPGB leaders. Eventually it led to Thompson and 
Saville resigning after multiple discussions with the leaders 
confirmed to them that free discussion was not going to be permitted, 
that critical letters were being refused publication in Party 
publications and that the crisis of the Party would go on. They felt the 
Party, then, was wholly discredited.
5. To leave error unrefuted is to encourage intellectual 
immorality:
The Reasoner 
As a result of the creation of The Reasoner, British communist 
historiography of Stalin and Stalinism greatly evolved over a 
relatively short period of time in the months immediately following 
Khrushchevs speech. The responses recorded within the journal, and 
 Saville provides a good account of this period, and the issues it contained for 
CPGB members in Saville, The 20
 Congress and the British Communist Party.  
 Saville, The 20
 Congress and the British Communist Party, pp.5-6 
 See Saville, The 20
 Congress and the British Communist Party. Later, as 
Thompson looked back on his membership, he said that he, like many others at the 
time, had a paradoxical relationship to the party: while he adhered to its ideology, 
he was also repelled by the alien and schematic manner and matter of its thinking. 
For him at least (as for Saville), leaving it did not induce the total, intellectual and 
psychic rupture it did for some. See Kenny, Communism and the New Left, p.197 
 This Marx quote is used as an epigraph on the front page of each issue of The 
Reasoner. 
indeed the very fact of its creation, allow us to identify and 
understand how an othering process of Stalinism by British 
communists developed and evolved during this period. The principal 
purpose of The Reasoner was to provide the opportunity to discuss 
revelations about Stalinism. Through the letters and articles published 
within it, it is clear that this led to a deviation from the positive 
othering of Stalinism displayed by the Daily Worker and other 
publications before 1956, and in its immediate aftermath. 
The othering of Stalinism began to manifest itself in the letters 
and articles published in the first issue of The Reasoner. In this 
edition there began the identification of the negative aspects of 
Stalinism, of the gulf between myth and reality and of Stalinism as a 
deviant form of socialism.
 Most strikingly, notions of morality, 
responsibility and blame were prominent from the outset: our moral 
and political reactions have been so feeble.the weakening of the 
moral basis of our political life necessarily makes less vigorous our 
practical judgements and our practical activity, the shock and moral 
turmoil engendered by the revelations were the result of our general 
failure to apply a Marxist analysis, our irrational approach to the 
Soviet Union have brought some socialists to the point of doubting 
our integrity.
 By highlighting the moral shortcomings of these 
individuals manifested through their support of Stalinism, these self-
flagellating statements implied the moral deviancy of Stalinism itself.  
This was further exemplified by a letter from the first issue in 
which the author focused on the relationship of the CPGB to 
Stalinism, both before and since 1956. Having himself resigned from 
the party after not being able to stomach the Stalinist methods of 
leadership of the post-war period, he heavily criticised the CPGBs 
members relationship with Stalinism: you became a generation of 
irresponsible political innocents, relying on the loyalty of your 
members and the solidarity of the working-class  to cover your 
political nakedness when you made nonsense of all previous analyses 
 Taking Stock, The Reasoner, First Number, July 1956, pp. 4-5 
 Ibid., p.4 
and policies by overnight changes in the 'line'; You saw every 
question through Stalinist blinkers and presented every situation in 
the same way and  Worst of all, you tampered with your own 
conscience so that honest human dealings with political opponents 
and even with your friends - indeed the very idea of 'conscience' itself 
- appeared to you to be 'bourgeois claptrap.
These damning words were exactly the kind of honest and 
open correspondence that the editors of The Reasoner had wanted to 
encourage. Emerging alongside more direct references to morality, 
responsibility and blame was the notion that Stalinism was now 
inextricably linked to the very meaning of what it was to be, and to 
have been, a communist (British or otherwise) at this time: Stalinism 
was not wrong things about which we could not know, but 
distorted theories and degenerate practices about which we knew 
something.
 Similarly, other articles highlighted where the 
responsibility of the Party as a whole, and most especially of its 
leadership, lay in the Stalin business.
 It was blamed for not being 
vigilant and attentive enough to the problems of Stalinism and for not 
being self -critical enough.
 It was also responsible for seeming to 
represent Russian rather than British interests,
 and some called for a 
new kind of party altogether to avoid similar situations in the future: 
Plain English, common-sense, the right of publication within the 
party, differing views: a Communist Party of a new type  thats 
whats needed.
 The notion of apportioning blame, either to 
themselves or the Party, was a central theme in the content of The 
Reasoner. Implicit in this process was the notion that supporting 
 J. McLeish, An Open Letter from a Premature Anti-Stalinist, The Reasoner, 
First Number, July 1956, p.19 
 E. P. Thompson, Through the Smoke of Budapest, The Reasoner. Final 
Number, November 1956, Supplement pp.6-7 
 This term was used regularly in inverted commas in many of the articles and 
letters across the three editions of The Reasoner, suggesting that this is how it was 
referred to within the party. 
 R. L. Meek, What Should We Do About The Reasoner, The Reasoner, Second 
Number, September 1956,  pp.8-9 
 Ibid., p.8 
 R. Cocker, Needed  A Party of a New Type, The Reasoner, First Number, July 
1956, p.32 
Stalinism was wrong, morally questionable and against the values for 
which they stood and for which someone must be held responsible. In 
this way, for the first time, the British communists writing in The 
Reasoner attempted to place themselves not only as different and 
apart from Stalinism, but also as against it. 
Across all three editions, more familiar patterns of othering 
emerge including the emphasis on Stalinism as a theoretical deviation 
from socialism. Stalinism was seen as the corrupter of British 
communism, which had accepted it and welcomed it into its fold.
Measures had to be taken, Thompson wrote, to eradicate Stalins 
degenerate theory and practice from the CPGB, which had lost the 
ingredient of humanity.
 It was the destroyer of the first Socialist 
Revolution, thanks to the torture, death and slander [of] many of its 
own best sons.
  An American socialist assessment of Stalinism 
stated that it was quite incompatible with socialism,
 and while 
Thompson wrote that Stalinism was not wrong things, he 
nonetheless listed all of the things that were indeed wrong with it: 
the theory of the intensification of the class struggle, the theory of the 
dictatorship of the proletariat, the military vocabulary employed, the 
attitude to discussion, the theory of the Party and the mechanical 
theory of human consciousness.
Within this, an emphasis on the differences between Russian 
and British communism emerged. For example, regret was expressed 
that the CPGB did not root itself more deeply in British life and 
interpret creatively British democratic traditions and that it confused 
the true principles of internationalism with a servile attitude to the 
 J. McLeish, An Open Letter from a Premature Anti-Stalinist, The Reasoner, 
First Number, July 1956, p.19 
 E. P. Thompson, Through the Smoke of Budapest, The Reasoner, Final 
Number, November 1956, Supplement p.1 and pp.4-5 and p.6 
 The Case for Socialism, The Reasoner, Second Number, September 1956, p.5 
 After the Twentieth Congress, American Socialist Journal, July-August 1956, 
as reproduced in An American Assessment of the Stalin Era, The Reasoner, 
Second Number, September 1956, p. 38 
 Thompson, Through the Smoke of Budapest, pp. 5-6. Thompson writes that 
while all these theories are not altogether wrong () they are wrong enough to 
have brought our movement into international crisis. 
Soviet Union.
 Thompson described the military language of 
Stalinism as strange and offensive to the ears of the British working 
class.
 John McLeish wrote that British communists had been 
compromised and even humiliated by the exposure of Stalinism in 
our midst and that a large number of party members were waiting for 
a public disavowal of Stalinism in our Party before applying for re-
admission.
 The emphasis on our enabled McLeish to stress the 
importance of creating separate, incompatible identities for British 
communism and Stalinism, with the latter as an intruder in, and 
infector of, the former. Finally, and perhaps most surprisingly in this 
context, there is one strong example of Orientalist-style othering in 
the American assessment of Stalinism, which stated that Stalinism 
incorporated methods of oriental despotism  murder, mendacity, 
duplicity, brutality, and above all arbitrariness, a fact that was no 
accident in the governing apparatus of a backward, primitive 
society.
In 1956 the Daily Worker and The Reasoner represented the 
opposite of one another. The on-going official stance of the CPGB 
was expressed in the Daily Worker: it ignored the need for discussion 
and refused to acknowledge the need to understand deeply and 
thoroughly the events of the last decades which had occurred in the 
Soviet Union. On the other hand, The Reasoner provided a platform 
for discussion, as it sought to understand Stalinism: understand its 
theoretical and practical dimensions and how it went wrong. Perhaps 
most importantly, its readers sought to acknowledge their own 
personal shortcomings in supporting the regime and the CPGB 
leadership. In this way, it began to distance itself from Stalinism, and 
through the publication of letters and articles over the course of its 
three issues, a construction of Stalin as a moral and theoretical other 
emerged. Most strikingly within this, and what the very existence of 
 E. P. Thompson, Reply to George Matthews, The Reasoner, First Number, July 
1956, p.12 
 Thompson, Through the Smoke of Budapest, p.5 
 McLeish, An Open Letter from a Premature Anti-Stalinist, pp.18-19 
 After the Twentieth Congress, pp.38-39 
The Reasoner demonstrates, is that for the British communists 
Stalinism was inextricably linked with their own individual selves. 
Their desire to understand, write about, question and debate the nature 
of Stalinism came from a personal need to comprehend how they 
could have followed such a regime with approval and remained in a 
Party despite some of their own, albeit deeply buried, reservations.
The writings of some British communists, and in particular Saville, 
Thompson and Hobsbawm, indeed suggest that being a communist in 
Great Britain in the 1950s was a deeply personal affair. For example, 
Hobsbawm felt it was in some ways a personal destiny: 
Some of us even felt that it [communism] had recruited 
us as individuals. Where would we, as intellectuals, 
have been, what would have become of us, but for the 
experiences of war, revolution and depression, fascism 
and anti-fascism, which surrounded us in our youth?
In a world where tensions between communist and capitalist states 
were acute, conviction and steely determination had been required to 
stand ones communist ground. As a result, when Khrushchevs 
speech came to light, the implications for these British communists 
were enormous, and during the year following the speech, they lived 
on the edge of the political equivalent of a collective nervous 
breakdown.
 There are numerous accounts of the dramatic split of 
the CPGB after the speech not only because for many it delegitimized 
 Hobsbawm noted that from time to time there were ideological and intellectual 
disagreements between the Partys leadership and its members but he also 
suggested that all efforts were made to either ignore or overcome these differences. 
See Hobsbawm, Interesting Times, p.134.  The fact that some British communists 
may have at times had doubts about Stalins leadership was also highlighted by a 
letter from Doris Lessing published in The Reasoner in which she wrote that  The 
facts are that, up to the 20
 Congress, if those of us who knew what was going on  
and it was perfectly possible to know if one kept ones mind open and read the 
plentiful evidence available  if we had said what we thought, in the only place 
open to us, the capitalist press, we would have been cast out by the party and 
branded as traitors, and inevitably isolated by bitterness and recrimination from a 
world movement in which we believed and of which we wished to remain a part. 
D. Lessing, A Letter To The Editors, The Reasoner, September 1956, p.12 
 Hobsbawm, The Historians' Group of the Communist Party, p.26 
 Hobsbawm, Interesting Times, p. 206. This quote comes from a section where 
Hobsbawm described the memory and the mood of that period, the pain of losing it 
and the pain of clinging to it. See pp.203-208. 
belief in communism, but also because of the way this development 
was handled by the CPGB. The Party lost over 7,000 members, and 
these events changed the way in which Stalin was written about by 
these and other British communists.
It is clear from their subsequent writing that until the 1956 
speech Thompson, Saville and Hobsbawms ideas on Stalin and 
Stalinism were largely aligned to those of the CPGB, as manifested in 
the Daily Worker and other non-press publications. Indeed, all three 
have written of their allegiance and adherence to party principles prior 
to the speech. For Saville, it was: 
an organisation one was proud to belong toI was fortunate 
enough to be of the generation that established the Communist 
historians group and for ten years we exchanged ideas and 
developed our Marxism into what we hoped were creative 
channels.
He and Thompson, close friends, allies and eventual co-editors of The 
Reasoner were deeply committed party members.
 Hobsbawm 
perhaps best summed up the centrality of the CPGB in the lives of its 
members:  
The Party (we always thought of it in capital letters) had the 
first, or more precisely the only real claim on our lives. Its 
demands had absolutely priority. We accepted its discipline 
and hierarchy. We accepted the absolute obligation to follow 
'the line' it proposed to us, even when we disagreed with it, 
although we made heroic efforts to convince ourselves of its 
intellectual and political 'correctness' in order to 'defend it', as 
we were expected to.
Consequently, the 1956 historiography was partly an attempt by these 
individuals to atone for their actions by engaging in a thorough 
 Saville, The 20
 Congress and the British Communist Party, p.16.  
 Saville, The Communist Experience: A Personal Appraisal, p.21 
 Saville, The 20th Century Congress and the British Communist Party, p.7 
 Hobsbawm,  Interesting Times, p.134 
analysis of how Stalinism, and their support of it, were able to occur. 
It is a historiography of personal convictions and ideological belief, 
and in the end for some it appears also to be have been a catharsis. 
The Reasoner was borne of Saville and Thompsons own desire to 
understand what went wrong and to provide a platform for others to 
do so also. They were not atoning for their belief in socialism, for this 
remained their ideological position (and this fact only deepened the 
necessity for understanding), but for belief in the leadership of their 
Party, and in Stalinism, and to this end they constructed Stalinism as 
the other of their own socialism. 
6. Beyond 1956 
In the years following 1956, there is evidence to suggest that the 
notions of morality and deviancy from socialism remained central to 
British communist writing on Stalin and Stalinism.  There are 
examples of this in articles published in The New Reasoner, the 
British journal that took over from The Reasoner.
 Saville himself 
continued to write of the intellectual degeneracy of Stalinism,
much later he wrote that in its Anglo-Saxon version, Marxismis a 
morality that does not accept ethical justification for unpleasant deeds 
that have to be done.
 Another article in The New Reasoner written 
as a letter to Thompson spoke of the moral revulsion the author felt 
towards the Party.
 The resilience of the moral question was further 
demonstrated in the publication by the journal of a 1955 internal party 
memorandum by Imre Nagy, the Hungarian communist politician 
executed by the Soviets for treason in 1958. In it he wrote that it was 
not compatible with public morality to have in positions of 
leadership individuals who had been responsible for the torture and 
murder of innocent people and asked Can one speak of the morality 
 The New Reasoner was published 1957-1959 and was also edited by Thompson 
and Saville. 
 J. Saville, A Note on Dogmatism, The New Reasoner, Volume One, Number 1, 
Summer 1957, pp. 78-82, p. 78 
Saville, The Communist Experience: A Personal Appraisal, p. 20 
 H. Hanson, An Open Letter to Edward Thompson, The New Reasoner, Volume 
One, Number 2, Autumn 1957, pp.79-91, pp.79-80 
of public life when the battle of opinions is waged with such 
depraved tools.
 Twenty years later Malcolm MacEwan, former 
Daily Worker features editor, wrote of members being unable to 
stomach passing off the mistakes of Stalininism as the cult of the 
individual,
 while Margot Heinemann wrote  of the Stalinist 
perversion of socialism.
 Much later again, in the 1990s, Hobsbawm 
wrote that Lenin, the older Bolsheviks and not to mention Marx 
would have been outraged at the kind of system Stalin had been 
trying to achieve.
 Hobsbawm also demonstrated the strength of the 
memory of the events of 1956. In 2002 he described the year of 1956 
as traumatic, writing that: 
Even after practically half a century my throat contracted as I 
recall the almost intolerable tensions under which we lived 
month after month, the unending moments of decision about 
what to say and do on which our future lives seemed to 
depend, the friends now clinging together or facing one 
another bitterly as adversaries, the sense of lurching, 
unwillingly but irreversibly, down the scree towards the fatal 
rock-face.
Referring to the way in which the CPGB had revered Stalin, Willie 
Thompson, historian and CPGB member, wrote in 1992 that  
At a distance of more than fifty years it is impossible to read 
this material - and the Left Book Club examples were more 
restrained than the newspaper articles and pamphlets - without 
a feeling of shame that individuals who were in other aspects 
of their lives humane and upright could have lent their 
intelligence and energies to such abomination.
 I. Nagy, internal party memorandum, autumn 1955, published in On 
Communism, pp.54-55 as cited in The New Reasoner, Volume One, Number 5, p. 
88. The extract bears the heading Imre Nagy: Murdered, June, 1958. 
 M. MacEwan, The Day The Party Had To Stop, The Socialist Register, 1976, 
pp.24-42. p.26 
 M. Heinemann, 1956 and the Communist Party, p. 56 
 E. Hobsbawm, Age of Extremes: The Short Twentieth Century 1914-1991 
(London, 1994), p. 393 
 Hobsbawm, Interesting Times, p.205 
 Thompson, The Good Old Cause, pp.60-61 
More recent Marxists historians in the West have continued to 
strongly differentiate Stalinism from socialism. For example, Tony 
Cliffs theory of state capitalism suggests that Stalinism was not 
socialism, but in fact a form of capitalism,
 and Chris Harman 
distinguished between socialism as embodied by Stalinism, and that 
of classical Marxism.
 The necessity for socialists to distinguish 
themselves from the Stalinist other has continued to strongly prevail.  
7. Conclusion 
The articles and works examined in this chapter demonstrate how 
Khrushchevs 1956 secret speech precipitated a fast and dramatic 
evolution of British communist writing on Stalin and Stalinism, from 
the positive othering of the pre-1956 era in the Daily Worker and 
other works to the split in the Party as many members attempted to 
come to terms with the revelations of the speech. While this split has 
been well documented, the analysis in this chapter of the evolving 
way in which Stalin and his regime were conceptualised and 
redefined by British communists during this period has shed a new, 
more encompassing light on Western attitudes towards Stalin. 
Without examining these accounts, an analysis of Western othering of 
Stalinism would, as other surveys of Western attitudes to Russia have 
previously done, remain largely confined to that of anti-communist 
individuals, neglecting the important and relevant information  that 
can be found within the materials examined in this chapter.  Most 
specifically, it has highlighted that notions of morality and deviancy 
became central to the way in which many British communists 
attempted to come to terms with Stalinism and with their own actions 
 See T. Cliff, State Capitalism in Russia (Chicago, 1988). Cliff believed that in 
order to fulfil his desire to overtake Western powers, Stalin effectively closely 
copied capitalist methods, making Stalinism much closer to capitalism than to 
socialism, suggesting that it was in fact a form of capitalism. 
 C. Harman, The Twentieth Century: An Age of Extremes or An Age of 
Possibilities in K. Flett and D. Renton (eds.), The Twentieth Century: A Century of 
Wars and Revolutions? (London, 2000), p. 225.  
and beliefs. This was manifested in the othering of Stalinism, only as 
opposed to the works examined in the other chapters of this study, 
this occurred within a socialist framework through a reinforcement of 
the idea of it as a deviant and degenerate form of socialism, instead of 
a deviancy from capitalist democracy. The question of personal moral 
responsibility both implicitly and explicitly suggested that Stalinism 
was immoral, dangerous and wrong and that coming to terms with 
their own shortcomings was a process through which British 
communists hoped to erase from themselves and socialism the stain 
of Stalinism.  
These writings also demonstrate the deep chasm between the 
works of the Western Sovietologists and those of British communists, 
made especially striking by the fact of them being written during the 
same period.
 And while the two may seem to operate and develop 
independently of each other, the works of these British communists 
would in fact deeply affect the totalitarian-model school in other 
ways, impacting on the direction in which Western scholarship on 
Stalin and Stalinism would develop. Indeed, the gulf between British 
communist writing and that of the totalitarian model scholars 
becomes all the more relevant to the historiography of Stalin and 
Stalinism when we consider the future impact on the field of British 
communist historians work on social history. Hobsbawm highlighted 
the huge leaps forward they had made in this area, and for him there 
was little doubt that they can largely be credited with the rise of 
social history in Britain as a field of study, especially with what is 
 This is well exemplified by Hobsbawm later arguing that Stalinism was not 
totalitarian. Totalitarianism, as defined by Hobsbawm, was that it stood for an all-
embracing centralised system that not only imposed total physical control over its 
population but, by means of its monopoly of propaganda and education, actually 
succeeded in getting its people to internalise its values. He stated that the sense of 
establishing a form of deification of the leader Stalin was certainly to an extent 
successful. In every other respect, however, the regime was not totalitarian: It did 
not exercise effective 'thought control', let alone ensure 'thought conversion', but in 
fact depoliticised the citizenry to an astonishing degree. He felt that the majority of 
the population was left untouched by Marxist-Leninist official doctrine since it had 
no apparent relevance to them. See Hobsbawm, Age of Extremes, pp.393-394 
termed history from below.
 In particular, they were greatly 
concerned with plebeian ideology, the theory underlying the actions 
of social movements: it was, wrote Hobsbawm, still largely 
identified with historians of this provenance, for the social history of 
ideas was always (thanks largely to Hill) one of our main 
preoccupations.
 The origins of the work and thought of the 
displacers of the totalitarian-model vision in the field of Soviet 
studies in the West  the social historians and their revisionism  can 
be found in the works of the Marxist historians of the 1950s and 
1960s, which provided radically new interpretative frameworks 
within which all future social historians could work.  
 In particular he gives the examples of Hilton, Hill, George Rude, E.P. Thompson, 
Raphael Samuel and himself. 
 Hobsbawm, The Historians' Group of the Communist Party, p.44 
Chapter 4 
Morality and blame: the revisionist debates of the 1980s 
1. Introduction: the rise of social history in the 1960s and 
1970s 
The first two decades of the Cold War had seen the emergence of a 
public political and academic discourse focused on the totalitarian 
nature of Stalinism that had set the Soviet Union apart from the 
Western democracies. By the mid-1960s, however, the post-war 
generation of baby boomers had grown up into adolescence and 
young adulthood in a world of nuclear and ideological threat  one in 
which Soviet communism was evil and Western countries were the 
defenders of freedom and democracy. However, a consequence of 
living with constant reminders of ideological as well as physical 
threat was the emergence of a largely anti-war generation and one 
which eventually would turn on its governments to fight for exactly 
what their states were fighting against: where Soviet communism had 
been seen as the ultimate threat, it was now being perceived by some 
as an alternative way of coping with the problems that the West was 
dealing with at this time.  
Increasing doubts about the purpose of the Vietnam War and 
the way in which the USA carried it out also came to the fore during 
this period, and there were, in particular, two significant issues for its 
critics: the first was that no one ever had a clear or credible idea of 
why the United States was so committed to it. Secondly, it appeared 
to show the US as an aggressor, not as a country that only responded 
to direct threats to its existence, as standard Cold War ideas 
suggested.
 This was especially exemplified by the student unrest of 
 C. Read,  The Stalin Years: A Reader (Basingstoke, 2003), p.13 
1968, itself a symptom of a wider generational malaise.
 This malaise 
spread through all spheres of life, but most of all through those areas 
which were particularly politicised, notably academia.  
One way in which this manifested itself was in a new focus on 
the social sciences.
 Despite originating in the nineteenth century, the 
social sciences, and especially their role in historiography, did not 
come to the fore until after the Second World War.
 The disasters of 
the first four decades of the twentieth century compelled scholars to 
attempt an understanding of these crises that ranged across not only 
the political but also social, economic and culturally orientated 
disciplines.
 One of the most influential of the academic journals 
which emerged in the twentieth century was the French Annales, 
which had been founded by Lucien Febvre and Marc Bloch in 1929.
 For a social and political history of the 1968 revolts see M. Kurlansky, 1968: The 
Year That Rocked the World (London, 2005). For a transnational history perspective 
on the events of 1968 in Europe see M. Klimke and J. Scharloth (eds.), 1968 in 
Europe: A History of Protest and Activism, 1956-1977 (New York, 2008). For a 
month by month account of events around the world in 1968 with accompanying 
photographs see T. Ali and S. Watkins, 1968: Marching in the Streets, (London, 
1998).  Richard Pipes gives an account of how this malaise manifested itself at 
Harvard in his memoirs; his disapproval of the unrest and resulting changes at the 
institution is tangible. See R. Pipes, Vixi: Memoirs of a Non-Belonger (New Haven 
and London, 2003), pp.107-110 
 An early example of this is the work of E. H. Carr. Although a scholar of the early 
Cold War era, Carr differed from the Sovietologists of his era in his interpretations 
of Soviet communism in that he was uncomfortable with the wider political and 
academic discourse on the Soviet Union occurring around this time. Carrs political 
stance was quite clearly far more aligned with the mood of the 1960s and the 
changes in approach in Soviet studies. Carr was committed to democratic socialism, 
to greater equality than was found in most capitalist societies and believed in public 
control and planning of the economic process and a stronger state exercising 
remedial and constructive functions. See Suny, Reading Russia and the Soviet 
Union in the twentieth century, p. 33. In an article on Carr, Isaac Deutscher wrote: 
If he had chosen to epitomize his work in some epigrammatic motto he might have 
opened his History in the Churchillian manner with the following text: 'How 
Russian Society Collapsed Through the Folly and Ineptitude of its Old Ruling 
Classes and Through the Utopian Dreams of its Bolshevik Revolutionaries, and 
How These Revolutionaries in The End saved Russia by Giving up Their Quixotic 
Delusions and Learning Arduously and Painfully the ABC of Statecraft.' See I. 
Deutscher, Mr. E. H. Carr as Historian of Soviet Russia, Soviet Studies, Vol.6, No. 
4, April 1955, pp. 337-350, p. 340. Despite being so often described as a 
Realpolitiker par excellence, his ideas led him to his own Utopia, albeit a vague, 
undefined one, of which he said: I suppose I should call it socialist. See T. 
Deutscher, E. H. Carr  A Personal Memoir, New Left Review 137 (Jan.  Feb 
1983), pp.78-86, p.86 
 For an overview of the emergence of the social sciences during the Enlightenment 
see J. Harvey, History and the social sciences in S. Berger, H.  Feldner and K. 
Passmore, (eds.), Writing History: Theory and Practise (London, 2010), p.82 
  Harvey, History and the social sciences, p.100 
In the Preface to the first issue addressed to their readers, Febvre and 
Bloch stated we have long been aware of the wrongs that can be 
caused by a divorce that has now become conventionalWe aim to 
challenge these very devastating schisms.
 The divorce to which they 
referred was the separation of different disciplines in the study of the 
past: their principal concern with the historical profession was the 
overwhelming majority of historians placing the state, politics and 
great men at the centre of research of the past without drawing on 
other equally relevant disciplines, such as economics, geography, 
anthropology, or sociology, for instance.
 The promotion of social 
sciences was far reaching and finally gave a voice to social history in 
a traditionally political history and political science dominated sphere.  
It was not until the 1960s and 1970s, however, that social 
history truly came into its own with the appearance of academic 
journals such as The Journal of Social History (1967), Social History 
(1974), German Geschichte und Gesellschaft [History and Society] 
(1975), and History Workshop Journal (1976).
 The rise of the social 
sciences meant that there was increasing academic interest in moving 
away from traditional narrative orientated, state-focused studies of the 
past, as had been exemplified in Soviet studies by the totalitarian- 
model of interpretation.  
In the 1960s, the increasing general focus on the social 
sciences took hold of the Annales, and more generally historians 
increasingly looked upon history as a science, one that could be 
studied, like all sciences, quantitatively.
 Within this new focus on 
 M. Bloch and L. Febvre, Preface: To Our Readers Annales dhistoire 
conomique et sociale 1 (1929), 1-2 as cited  in A. Budd (ed.), The Modern 
Historiography Reader: Western Sources (London, 2009),  pp.188-189 
 The Annales historians advocated not only an international, multidisciplinary 
approach to history but also more radically one that was a break from the traditional 
view of history as moving across a one-dimensional time from the past to the future. 
As an alternative, they stressed the relativity and multi-layering of time. See G. G. 
Iggers, Historiography in the Twentieth Century: From Scientific Objectivity to the 
Postmodern Challenge (Hanover, 1997), p.51 
 Ibid., p.100 
 Ibid., pp.59-60. Prominent Annalistes of this period include Jacques Le Goff, 
Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, Georges Duby and Franois Furet. For a comment on 
the role of the social sciences in the historical profession around this time, see  J. Le 
data, results and the desire to approach history as a pure science, an 
important concept was implicit: that it was possible for the practice of 
writing history to be relatively objective and be a documentation of 
the facts of the past as presented by scientific quantitative research.
2. Revisionism and the new cohort in the study of Stalinism 
In the field of Soviet studies, the rise of social history in the wider 
profession and the changing global context manifested themselves 
through a rejection of the Cold War totalitarian-model paradigm and 
through a reassessment of interpretations: firstly of the 1917 Russian 
Revolution and then of Stalinism.
 It was becoming clear that the 
totalitarian model of interpretation could not account for the dramatic 
changes to the Soviet system that occurred under Nikita Khrushchev. 
These changes, which traditional Sovietology could not have 
expected nor predicted, forced the profession to re-evaluate its 
previously established conventional wisdom. From the late 1960s 
Goff, Is Politics Still the Backbone of History? in F. Gilbert and S. R. Graubard, 
Historical Studies Today (New York, 1972), p.338 
 This kind of research had a primarily social science focus, with the use of 
demographic data becoming more widespread, for instance. For an example of this 
in studies on Stalinism see Sheila Fitzpatricks extensive use of data, and literature 
relating to data and quantitative research in S. Fitzpatrick, Education and social 
mobility in the Soviet Union 1921-1934 (Cambridge, 1979).  This may help to 
explain Fitzpatricks call for objectivity in the field in the 1980s. See, for example 
S. Fitzpatrick, Afterword: Revisionism Revisited, The Russian Review, Vol. 45, 
No. 4, October 1986, pp. 409-413. On the nature of social history more specifically, 
see E. J. Hobsbawm, From Social History to the History of Society in F. Gilbert, 
and S. R.  Graubard, Historical Studies Today (New York, 1972), p. 3. Incidentally, 
Hobsbawm here also quoted G. M. Trevelyans expression History with the 
politics left out, referring to the second type of social history Hobsbawm identified, 
which also appears in the title of Geoff Eleys Russian Review article cited in this 
chapter. See G. M.  Trevelyan, English Social History ( London, 1944), as quoted 
by Hobsbawm, From Social History to the History of Society, p.3 
 Read states that the underlying reassessment of the Russian revolution centred on 
suggesting that the October revolution was not a simple coup from above and that 
Lenin and the Bolsheviks did have a certain amount of popular support. The 
deformations of the early Soviet regime were thought by some to not be the 
inevitable result of the application of Marxist principles but the result of the 
conditions under which the regime was born, notable economic collapse, civil war 
and political intervention by all of Russias neighbours and all the great powers. 
Most revisionists challenged the continuity theory and were careful to distinguish 
Leninism from Stalinism. See Read, The Stalin Years, p.13 
significant modifications in interpretation were underway.
 These 
were the beginnings of revisionism. 
Advocating a social history based approach, the revisionist 
movement in the Western historiography of Stalinism took place 
predominantly in the 1970s and 1980s and provoked the most 
impassioned, lively and at times aggressive debates observed in the 
field to date. The debates centred on the question of the place and 
prominence of politics and society in the study of Stalinism. Where 
Sovietologists had focused exclusively on the primacy of the state as 
an organ that exercised complete control and terror over the 
dominated masses, revisionists called for increased research into 
social processes and dynamics and into the interaction of state and 
society, arguing that the latter was far from an inert mass but in fact a 
complex and dynamic body.  
Two waves of revisionism can be identified. First generation 
revisionists included Moshe Lewin, Stephen F. Cohen, Alec Nove 
and Robert C. Tucker. While they still supported the centrality of 
politics and ideology to the study of Stalinism, they called for greater 
breadth in the field and highlighted the necessity for studies of Soviet 
society. It is Lewin who is often regarded as the doyen of the first 
wave of revisionism. Discussing the publication of Lewins first work 
in the 1960s after the domination of the totalitarian model, Nick 
Lampert described it as having the quality of a revelation. Lewins 
works enabled readers to understand, for the first time, the complex 
nature of the relationship between political and social developments 
in the Soviet Union. They were appreciated not only for these 
revelations after years of Sovietology dominated by political bias 
(and, as Lampert points out, the prevailing ignorance of the West 
about Soviet society) but also for the multi-dimensionality of his 
research and publications.
 Stephen F. Cohen, an early revisionist himself, provides a short history of the 
emergence of revisionism in Soviet history in S. F. Cohen, Rethinking the Soviet 
Experience - Politics and History Since 1917 (Oxford, 1985). 
 See N. Lampert, Preface in N. Lampert, and G. T.  Rittersporn, Stalinism: Its 
Nature and Aftermath. Essays in Honour of Moshe Lewin (London, 1992), p.ix 
For example, Lewins collection of essays The Making of the 
Soviet System was an in-depth exploration of the Soviet life 
examining aspects of Soviet society that had largely been 
unaddressed. It attempted to piece together the lives and times of the 
Soviet people in ways that had not been done before. Despite this 
being one of Lewins social-history orientated works, its multi-
dimensionality is evident. While pleading for increased scholarship 
on the social history of the Soviet Union, Lewin did not discount the 
importance of political history in Soviet and Stalinist history: 
The Soviet social system and its political regime are far from 
being sufficiently well known or understood. Facile 
assessments abound but too many errors are being committed, 
too many assessments were and are shallow, not just for the 
good of scholarship but also for the good of politics and for 
the well-being of our little planet.
Both Lewin and Cohen argued against the continuity between 
Bolshevism and Stalinism, and Tuckers analysis of the reality and 
depth of post-Stalin change led him to conclude that Bolshevism had 
no longer existed in the Soviet Union since Stalins ascent to power 
and that post-Stalin change had in fact been a movement to 
reconstitute the political system of Bolshevism.
The second generation revisionists were lumped into a group 
widely referred to as the new cohort, a term coined by Sheila 
Fitzpatrick in 1986 that caught on despite being largely rejected by 
those who were meant to be a part of it.
 This was mainly because 
 See M. Lewin, The Making of the Soviet System: Essays In The Social History of 
Interwar Russia (London, 1985), p.4 
 Lewin was the first revisionist to challenge the idea of continuity between 
Leninism and Stalinism, arguing that Stalinism was a system in its own right 
because it radically reformulated the aims and strategies of the original founders to 
form something new. See M. Lewin, Lenins Last Struggle (London, 1969); S.  F. 
Cohen, Bolshevism and Stalinism in R. C. Tucker (ed.), Stalinism: Essays in 
Historical Interpretation (New York, 1977) and Tucker, The Soviet Political Mind, 
p. ix. For Tuckers work on the importance of Stalins personality to Stalinism see 
R. C. Tucker, The Decisive Trifle in C. Ward (ed.), The Stalinist Dictatorship 
(London, 1998). See also S. F. Cohen, Rethinking the Soviet Experience for first-
generation revisionism. 
 Second generation revisionists include Sheila Fitzpatrick, J. Arch Getty, 
Roberta Manning, Lynne Viola and Gbor T. Rittersporn. While their research 
between them they held a variety of stances on the question of how 
research in the field should proceed.
 Indeed, a generally-applied 
term such as revisionist was in this case misleading. It suggested a 
uniform interpretation of a revised area of scholarship by a group of 
historians unified in their interpretation and conclusions. In the case 
of the historiography of Stalin and Stalinism, this could not have been 
further from the truth. Certainly, this revisionism had been true to its 
name: it had in every case been a reappraisal and reinterpretation of 
previous scholarship, its methods and ideas. However, beyond this it 
was so diverse that it acquired many subdivisions advocating different 
methodologies and interpretations.  
The term revisionist has tended to denote anyone who was 
not of the totalitarian model school, a large umbrella under which 
smaller clusters, or individual scholars, must be sought out.
Nowhere was this lack of cohesion more obvious that in the 1986 and 
1987 discussions which took place in The Russian Review.
 Sheila 
Fitzpatricks article New Perspectives on Stalinism, which 
suggested removing politics from the study of Stalinist society, 
agendas varied, they extended the questioning of the totalitarian model to the 
prewar Stalin era, to include the period of the purges, and advocated a politically 
disengaged scholarship. See R. Manning, State and Society in Stalinist Russia, 
The Russian Review, Vol. 46, No. 4, October 1987, pp. 407-411, p. 408 
 Fitzpatrick first used it in the article which provoked such lively discussion in the 
two Russian Review issues. See S. Fitzpatrick, New Perspectives on Stalinism, 
The Russian Review, Vol. 45, No. 4, October 1986, pp. 357-373 
 There are some identifiable groups within the new cohort scholars. Getty, for 
instance, chose to go to Boston because Manning, one of the earlier second wave 
revisionists, was working there. Getty has said that she encouraged him to think 
outside of the box and have the confidence to say whatever it was he had to say and 
see what happens. See Interview with Professor J. Arch Getty by Dr James 
Harris, The History Faculty website, 
http://www.thehistoryfaculty.com/Audio/hfc0034jag002.mp3 . Manning and Getty 
later edited a book together which examined the social dimensions of key events. 
See J. A. Getty and R. Manning, (eds.), Stalinist Terror: New Perspectives 
(Cambridge, 1993).   
 These two issues of The Russian Review have acquired a certain notoriety. 
Engerman notes that Fitzpatricks article became a lightning rod for criticism from 
all sides, the result of which was to produce few new perspectives; instead it 
deepened political divisions with the field. Engerman, Know Your Enemy, pp.306-
307. Matthew Rendle has called the debates infamous and bitter. See M. Rendle, 
Post-Revisionism: the Continuing Debate on Stalinism, Intelligence and National 
Security, Vol. 25, No. 3, June 2010, pp.370388, p.372. Mark Sandle stated that the 
discussion was prolonged, and at times heated. Sandle, New Directions, New 
Approaches, Old Issues, p.232 
http://www.thehistoryfaculty.com/Audio/hfc0034jag002.mp3
provoked a lively, impassioned and at times belligerent discussion 
between a number of prominent scholars of the field.
 These 
discussions provide an illuminating and accurate representation of the 
state of flux of, and the conflict in, the field at this time.
 While each 
of the participants found some points in common with a colleague - if 
not so often with Fitzpatrick - these sixteen articles demonstrated the 
variety of positions held during this period on the subject of research 
into Stalinism. The historians themselves addressed this issue in the 
1987 edition of The Russian Review. Roberta Manning and Jerry F. 
Hough, for instance, highlighted the varying interpretations of 
Stalinism present not only in the debates between totalitarian-model 
historians, but equally between those within the revisionist 
movement.
 Hough identified five separate types of attacks on the 
totalitarian model, highlighting the contrasts and similarities between 
them, while Manning examined the differences between the first and 
second generation revisionists.
 Here she drew attention to the 
relative ideological proximity held by the first-generation revisionists 
 The article in question is Fitzpatrick, New Perspectives on Stalinism. 
Fitzpatricks line of scholarship can to an extent be linked to her upbringing and 
postgraduate years. Indeed, it is not surprising that Sheila Fitzpatrick felt 
underwhelmed by her time as a postgraduate at Oxford, formerly a stronghold of 
totalitarian-model scholarship. The daughter of a radical journalist and historian, 
she counts her father as the most influential person in her life. Fitzpatrick met E.H. 
Carr in the late 1960s and, though he was in Cambridge, he became a sort of mentor 
to her, though she does not credit him with influencing her work. Instea,d it is given 
to her upbringing, for having already instilled in her by the time she met him her 
anti-anti-communist and anti-moralising stance. Leonard Schapiro, another 
influential totalitarian-model scholar, became more of a mentor to her during her 
Oxford years, but later became a critic of her work, deeming her not anti-Soviet 
enough. See M. David-Fox,  P. Holquist, A. M. Martin, S. Fitzpatrick, From the 
Editors: An Interview with Sheila Fitzpatrick, Kritika, Vol. 8, No. 3, Summer 
2007, pp.479-286, pp.. 480-481.  
 As well as Fitzpatrick, taking part in the discussions were, with greatly varying 
views on the how research into Stalinism should proceed, Stephen F. Cohen, Alfred 
G. Meyer, Peter Kenez, and Geoff Eley (providing an immediate response to 
Fitzpatricks article in the 1986 volume); and Gbor T. Rittersporn, , J. Arch Getty, 
Roberta T. Manning, William Chase, Robert Conquest, Alec Nove, Hiroaki 
Kuromiya, Daniel R. Brower, Robert C. Tucker, Lynne Viola and Jerry F. Hough 
(providing comment on Fitzpatricks article as well as the other four 1986 articles, 
in the 1987 volume). See The Russian Review, Vol. 45, No. 4, October 1986 and 
The Russian Review, Vol. 46, No. 4, October 1987. 
 J. F. Hough, The "Dark Forces", the Totalitarian Model, and Soviet History, The 
Russian Review, Vol. 46, No. 4, October 1987, pp. 397-403. 
 Hough, The "Dark Forces", the Totalitarian Model, and Soviet History, pp.398-
such as Lewin, Cohen and Tucker to the traditional Sovietologists  
(they continued to use a top-down interpretative framework ) as 
compared with the later second-generation revisionists, of which she 
considered herself part, and who were by now beginning to produce a 
much more detailed, complex, and nuanced view of Stalinism.
Those named as members of the new cohort were keen to 
point out the lack of accuracy in placing them all under the same 
umbrella. William Chase rejected the suggestion that he was part of 
this group at all, rebuking Peter Kenez for having stated in 1986 that 
he was, and for being a critic of the revisionist school [who] does not 
know who belongs to the group. 
 Hiroaki Kuromiya noted that 
insofar as I can judge, no single view on Stalinism unites the new 
cohort and that some of the commentators on Fitzpatricks article had 
misrepresented the cohort as a cabal of Fitzpatrickists. He 
commented that she would have legitimate reason to declare  la 
Marx that she was not a Fitzpatrickist.
 Manning also stated that the 
second generation of revisionists were by no means confined to the 
new cohort named in the 1986 discussions and that in fact many 
disagreed with Fitzpatricks suggestion of practising pure social 
history in research on Stalinism.
 Finally, Lynne Viola found herself 
surprised to learn that she was part of this cohort and rejected her 
apparent membership on the grounds that there was no clearly 
identifiable cohort and that she agreed with some of the previous 
criticism levelled against it in the 1986 discussions.
 R. Manning, State and Society in Stalinist Russia, The Russian Review, Vol. 46, 
No. 4, October 1987, pp. 407-411, p. 408 
 W. Chase, Social History and Revisionism of the Stalinist Era, The Russian 
Review, Vol. 46, No. 4, October 1987, pp.382-385, p. 382. Peter Kenez had stated 
that Chase was one of the self-consciously revisionist group of historians of the 
Stalin era. See P. Kenez, Stalinism as Humdrum Politics, The Russian Review, 
Vol. 45, No. 4, October 1986, pp.395-400, p.395 
 H. Kuromiya, Stalinism and Historical Research, The Russian Review, Vol.46, 
No. 4, October 1987, pp. 404-406, p.404 
 Manning, State and Society in Stalinist Russia, pp. 407-408 
 L. Viola, In Search of Young Revisionists, The Russian Review, Vol. 46, No. 4, 
October 1987, pp.428-431. The editor of the journal also highlighted that of the six 
supposed members of the new cohort every single one was quick to point out that 
they did not belong to any cohort, whilst perhaps forgetting that a cohort is often a 
grouping associated with age rather that an association that one may or may not 
 Aside from a manifest disapproval of the term new cohort, 
there was a striking and as yet unstudied feature of the discussions 
found in the two issues of The Russian Review that was concerned not 
with the content of work published in this period but rather the way in 
which the new cohorts work was received by older scholars. 
Indeed, the overtly negative and at times hostile reactions to the new 
revisionist agenda suggest that these debates provided a vector 
through which notions of responsibility, blame and morality were 
able to be both implicitly and explicitly expressed in relation to both 
Stalin and his regime and new scholarship on Stalinism.  
3. History with the politics left out?
The question at the centre of these articles appeared to be, on the 
surface at least, based on the role, scope and nature of social history 
in the context of research on Stalin and Stalinism, constructed as 
responses to Fitzpatricks article in the 1986 issue. This was 
exemplified in a first instance by the immediate responses to the 
article in the same issue.
 Stephen F. Cohen, for example, was deeply 
concerned that Fitzpatricks suggested new agenda would lead to the 
new cohort closing one or both eyes to a major dimension of that 
social reality  the prolonged mass terror of the Stalin years,
 stating 
that that Terror was also a social phenomenon, from which social 
processes associated with collectivization, industrialisation, 
urbanization, and upward mobility could not be separated.
 Geoff 
Eley too was concerned that the desire of revisionists to drive a 
chose to join. See From the Editor, More Controversy, The Russian Review, Vol. 
46, No. 4, October 1987, pp. 375-378, p. 375 
 This is taken from the title of Geoff Eleys article in the 1986 issue of The 
Russian Review. See G. Eley, History With The Politics Left Out  Again?, The 
Russian Review, Vol. 45, No.4, October 1986, pp. 385-394 
 The editor had invited the responses of the other four scholars for them to be 
published alongside Fitzpatricks article. See From the Editor, Controversy, The 
Russian Review, Vol. 45, No. 4, October 1986, p. v 
 S. F. Cohen, Stalins Terror as Social History, The Russian Review, Vol.45, No. 
4, October 1986, pp.375-384, p. 378 
 Ibid., pp.380-381 
polemical wedge between themselves and the older literature 
threatens to close their access to some basic insights and suggested 
that by neglecting the overall context of the coercive state and 
political culture of Stalinism revisionists would be discarding the 
baby of analysis with the bathwater of the model.
 He concluded 
that unless Fitzpatrick and her revisionists came to terms with the fact 
that the social history of Stalinism begins in the explosive juncture 
of cultural archaism, societal transformation and statist 
bureaucratisation, then the idea that Stalinism had some social as well 
as political dynamics would remain a banal discovery.
 Peter Kenez 
stated that the revisionists view of Stalinism as humdrum politics 
and of the Soviet government  being just like any other government 
operating in difficult circumstances was utterly contrary to all 
evidence.
 He concluded his damning assessment of revisionism by 
stating [t]o me, the revisionists views are so outlandish that I 
wonder what makes them see the past the way they do. To that I have 
no answer at all.
The 1987 issue produced a greater balance of responses, at the 
centre of which remained the question of the place and scope of social 
history in the study of Stalinism. Daniel R. Brower, for example, 
suggested that the methods of structural social history ought to 
remain secondary in the study of that period.
  William Chase 
focused on the problem of producing pure social history on a period 
where any studies on societal changes and social mores, attitudes, 
behaviours and relations must necessarily deal with state policies and 
politics in general. As a result, despite his support for the introduction 
of social history to the field, Chase had trouble supporting 
Fitzpatricks desire to see scholars write social history devoid of 
politics.
 Robert Conquest discussed the implicit distortion of the 
 Eley, History With the Politics Left Out  Again?, p.390 
 Ibid., p.394 
  Kenez, Stalinism as Humdrum Politics, pp.396-397 
 Ibid., p. 400 
 D. R. Brower, Stalinism and the View from Below, The Russian Review, 
Vol.46, No. 4, October 1987, pp. 379-381, p. 380 
  Chase, Social History and Revisionism of the Stalinist Era, pp. 383-384 
broader picture engendered through neglecting politics and more 
specifically the Terror, and J. Arch Getty asked how social historians 
could possibly neglect the state and still produce a reliable picture of 
society.
 Hiroaki Kuromiya discussed the importance of the Terror to 
the study of Stalinism, agreeing to its centrality while stating that he 
was inspired by Fitzpatricks research agenda.
 Similarly, Manning 
and Viola advocated a social history approach that did not neglect 
politics or the Terror.
 Gbor T. Rittersporn provided a defence of 
Fitzpatricks work against Cohen and Kenezs critical articles, asking 
What is the context of terror if not the working of the system  the 
ultimate subject of the new cohort?.
 Chase best expressed the 
crux of the debate when he stated that 
Getty, Rittersporn, Manning, Solomon, Viola and Fitzpatrick 
do not write social history as that term is understood and 
applied by historians of western Europe and America. 
Fitzpatricks work on cultural revolution and on education and 
social mobility are often cited as examples of social history, 
but in reality they are studies of selected socio-political 
processes and the attendant state-society relationships.
The apparent principal drive of these articles, and a common point to 
all, was therefore the discussion of the extent to which politics could 
be left out of the study of Stalinism, with the majority of the 
participants suggesting that while a social history of Stalinism was 
undoubtedly necessary, as was an eventual revisionism in the field in 
the years following traditional Sovietology, it was necessary that 
politics and the Terror remain part of that history.
 R. Conquest, Revisionizing Stalins Russia, The Russian Review, Vol. 46, No. 
4, October 1987, pp. 386-390 and J. A. Getty, State, Society and Superstition, The 
Russian Review, Vol. 46, No. 4, October 1987, pp. 391-396  
 Kuromiya, Stalinism and Historical Research. p. 404 
 Manning, State and Society in Stalinist Russia, pp. 418-420 and Viola, In 
Search of Young Revisionists, pp. 428-431. 
 G. T. Rittersporn, History, Commemoration and Hectoring Rhetoric, The 
Russian Review, Vol. 46, No. 4, October 1987, pp. 418-423, p. 422 
 Chase, Social History and Revisionism of the Stalinist Era, p. 383 
 The problem of creating stringent separations between types of history, especially 
when examining a phenomenon with such wide ranging impacts as Stalinism, has 
been highlighted for example by Ludmila Jordanova when discussing the 
difficulties we face when attempting to divide history: Do we regard these as levels 
4. Whose fault? Stalinism and the locus of blame 
These articles, however, suggest more than just concern with defining 
the interpretative framework for scholarship on Stalinism: the 
responses to a suggested removal or subordination of politics in social 
history research unveiled a clear and fundamental moral dimension to 
the argument.  
In a first instance, this was manifested by unease with where 
to place responsibility and blame for Stalinism if Stalin, politics and 
the Terror were to be removed from consideration.
 Kenez, for 
instance, suggested that the revisionists claim that - because the 
Bolsheviks possessed neither a well-functioning Party machinery nor 
an extensive coercive apparatus - society consented to this form of 
government was an extraordinary leap which absolve[s] the 
leadership from responsibility for mass murder.
 He argued that, 
whatever the factions and disorganisation within the Party apparatus, 
these were hardly an excuse for the millions that were murdered, 
suggesting that according to him the appropriate placing of blame was 
an endeavour more important than finding a possible explanation for 
the Terror.
 In 1987 Alec Nove, too, discussed the question of 
Stalins responsibility, arguing that while he most likely did not will 
of analysis, as complimentary aspects of a society or as distinct phenomena? What 
do you do about the fact that the boundaries between them are evidently blurred, 
and yet they seem to be 'right', or 'natural' or 'obvious' categories?. See L. 
Jordanova, History in Practise (London, 1996), p. 41 
 Work on Stalinism before the arrival of the new cohort demonstrates why 
totalitarian model scholars or first generation revisionists had so much trouble with 
the new directions suggested. See, for example, R. C. Tucker (ed.), Stalinism: 
Essays in Historical Interpretation (New York, 1977).  Although the first wave of 
revisionism was well underway by this stage, the chapters in Tuckers volume 
demonstrate the centrality of Stalin himself, and the politics he practised, to 
conceptualisations of Stalinism in the 1960s and 1970s. Other examples include 
Conquest, who saw Stalins personal motives as explanation for the purges. See R. 
Conquest, The Great Terror: Stalins Purges of the Thirties (London, 1968). 
 Kenez, Stalinism as Humdrum Politics, p.397. Here Kenez is particularly 
referring to an article by Manning in which she concluded that in 1937 in Belyi 
rayon (a Russian district) the state government of the countryside was dependent on 
the consent of the governed.  
 Ibid., p.397 
the Terror and that he could not have been personally involved in 
every single daily decision made by the Kremlin, Getty was wrong to 
suggest that Stalin was not involved with the arrests of Politburo 
members.
 He concluded that while social history research into the 
1930s was highly desirable, the field must not turn the revolution 
from above into a revolution by consent, or Stalin into a pawn of 
radicals, or caricature the past efforts of historians to understand the 
complexities of this period.
 Tucker too was cautious about 
removing Stalins role from Stalinism. Discussing the difficulties of 
using the term Stalinism, he asked whether it signified the sum of 
Stalins deeds while in power, or the events of his time in power.
This concern with defining Stalinism points to another instance of 
questioning where the blame for it lay. Tucker suggested that Stalin 
himself could not be removed from the equation: his character was 
central to the regime. To take it into account was to illuminate the 
mans drive for despotic power, the ways he went about obtaining it, 
and the uses he made of it.
 To omit Stalin would be a sure formula 
for blundering in the forest of facts of the 1930s and beyond, 
including Cold War and post-war foreign relations.
Providing the most balanced and least combative response of 
the 1986 articles to Fitzpatricks article, Alfred G. Meyer highlighted 
this preoccupation in placing the blame for Stalinism in the correct 
place. Stating that all attempts to exorcise the past or part of it implied 
celebrating, glorifying or whitewashing some part of it, he 
addressed the locus of blame in regards to migr and samizdat 
writers, Khrushchevs discourse on Stalin and Stalinism, and 
Solzhenitsyns work, which he suggested all in some way attempted 
to free a certain party from guilt.
 The revisionists presented 
 A. Nove, Stalinism: Revisionism Reconsidered, The Russian Review, Vol. 46, 
No.4, pp.412-417, p.416 
 Ibid., p. 417 
 R. C. Tucker, The Stalin Period as an Historical Problem, The Russian Review, 
Vol. 46, No. 4, pp. 424-427, p. 425 
 Ibid., p. 425 
 Ibid., p. 425 
 For instance, in the case of Khrushchev, Meyer stated that in blaming Stalin for 
excesses he sought to exculpate the Party. If the Party is accused, it takes blame 
something of a mirror image to these: by demonstrating that Stalin 
was not as much in control as the totalitarianism school asserted, they 
were to some extent absolving him from blame for some of the 
cruellest episodes of the Stalinist era. This does not, of course, lessen 
the pains of these episodes, but places the blame elsewhere.
 Meyer 
recognised that neither the totalitarian school nor the revisionists 
denied that terrible things had happened under Stalin; their argument 
was only over who is to be blamed for them.
The defensive responses of the revisionists in the face of 
Kenezs criticism in particular demonstrate the contentiousness of this 
issue. Getty pointed out that as early as page 9 of my book, I gave 
Stalin primary responsibility for these events [the Terror and the 
purges]. No western scholarship has suggested otherwise.
Kuromiya stated that [o]f course, Stalin is to be blamed; however 
revisionist research was less concerned with blaming Stalin than with 
explaining how and why dreadful things happened and in what 
contexts.
 He concluded by asking [d]oes such an interest stem from 
the concern to whitewash Stalinist politics or exorcise the ghost of 
Stalin? I think not.
 Rittersporn warned of the limits of 
commemorative historiography, noting that every commentator on 
the Fitzpatrick article in 1986 had suggested that writing on the 1930s 
must preserve the memory of the epochs atrocities and condemn 
those who perpetrated them.
 Manning commented that by extending 
the questioning of the totalitarian thesis to the pre-war Stalin era, 
including the period of the purges, revisionists eschewed the political 
goals espoused by many American Soviet specialists who are unable 
away from the people. When Solzhenitsyn accused ethnic aliens, it freed Russian 
people of guilt. Finally, whenever Soviet migr or samizdat attempted to come to 
terms with the various horrors of Stalinism (the purges, collectivisation etc), they 
identified a culprit and implicitly excused someone else. A. G. Meyer, Coming to 
Terms with the PastAnd with Ones Older Colleagues,  The Russian Review, 
Vol. 45, No.5, October 1986, pp.401-408, p. 404 
 Ibid. 
 Ibid., p.405 
 Getty, State, Society, and Superstition, p.394 
 Kuromiya, Stalinism and Historical Research, p.406 
 Ibid., p.406 
 Rittersporn, History, Commemoration and Hectoring Rhetoric, p. 418 
to conceive of scholarship other than an enterprise undertaken to 
indict and/or rehabilitate particular individuals or movements.
Manning also criticised Fitzpatrick for suggesting that only the state 
or society were capable of shaping the historical process, therefore 
implying that responsibility for the regime could only lie in one of 
those two places.
 She defended second generation revisionists 
against accusations of seeking to rehabilitate Stalin, arguing that 
only by adequately and thoroughly testing the totalitarian model in 
detailed studies of events, social strata and levels of government 
could it be determined whether Stalin all by himself in all instances 
determined everything.
 Finally, Viola responded to accusations of 
absolving Stalin by stating that not only was she not in the business 
of absolution, but she also had not worked on the era of the purges.
A central characteristic of the debate on social history was 
therefore an urgent concern with the question of whether or not the 
revisionists work would in some way absolve the political 
leadership, and Stalin himself, of the horrors of Stalinism, and the 
revisionists responses to this concern.  
5. Blame and the moral dimension of the revisionist debates 
What does this preoccupation with the locus of blame tell us about the 
nature of these discussions? Writing on the concept of blame, D. 
Justin Coates and Neal A. Tognazzini suggest that blaming involves 
evaluating. When we blame others, we see them as having dropped 
below some standard that we accept (or perhaps that we think they 
should accept), whether of excellence, morality or respectful 
relationships. Coates and Tognazzini note that the judgements made 
are tinged with normativity and because of this they carry a certain 
force: they are the sorts of judgements we would rather not have made 
 Manning, State and Society in Stalinist Russia, pp. 407-408 
 Ibid., p.409 
 Ibid., p.410 
 Viola, In Search of Young Revisionists, p.430 
about us.
 The moral character of blame has been highlighted by 
others. T. M. Scanlon defined blame as an action taken to indicate 
something about the person being blamed that impairs ones 
relationship with them, and to understand that relationship in a way 
that reflects this impairment. In most cases, to decide that a person is 
worthy of blame, they must have behaved wrongly and in a way that 
is considered to fall below normative moral standards.
 Angela M. 
Smith supported this idea when she argued that moral protest is the 
crucial element of blame, suggesting that there are two distinct but 
related aims to it: the first is to register the fact that the person 
wronged did not deserve to be treated in this way by challenging the 
moral claim implicit in the wrong-doers action. The second is to 
prompt moral recognition and acknowledgement of this fact on the 
part of the wrong-doer and/or the moral community.
 Finally, George 
Sher has also emphasised the primacy of the moral dimension in 
placing blame, arguing that when we blame someone we imply that 
their actions have been morally defective.
The moral character of allocating blame and its centrality to 
that process is clearly manifested in these debates, both in regards to 
Stalin and to the work of the revisionists. This was firstly exemplified 
by those concerned with the whitewashing of Stalins regime by the 
new cohort.
 Kenez suggested, for instance, that denying the 
 D. J. Coates and N. A. Tognazzini, The Contours of Blame in D. J. Coates and 
N. A. Tognazzini (eds), Blame: Its Nature and Norms (New York, 2013).   
 T. M. Scanlon, Moral Dimensions: Permissibility, Meaning, Blame (Cambridge, 
Mass. and London, 2008), pp.122-124 
 A. M. Smith, Moral Blame and Moral Protest in Coates and Tognazzini (eds.), 
Blame, p. 41, p.43 
 G. Sher, In Praise of Blame (New York, 2006). Sher highlights however that 
there is also a type of nonmoral blame, such as when we blame the collapse of a 
bridge on rusted support beams for instance. Moral and nonmoral blame can also 
overlap, for instance when we blame a student for their bad grades or a reckless 
driver for their own injuries. This involves a criticism, which is both similar and 
different to moral blame. See Sher, In Praise of Blame, p.ix.  
 The anthropologist Mary Douglas made an interesting point on general 1950s 
mentality, which could perhaps in be some part related to the use of blame in the 
articles of the totalitarian model and first generation revisionists and the defence of 
their own objectivity (see Kenezs article for instance). She suggested that in the 
late 1950s there was a mood of rejoicing that nuclear power would usher in 
permanent prosperity for the world, and this mood accounted for why the difference 
between them and us appeared to be a cognitive problem, a matter of knowing the 
importance of state intervention in the life of society meant that, 
consciously or unconsciously, they de-demonize Stalin and his 
Politburo.
 On the subject of the inevitable moral dimension of 
research on Stalinism, he went on to question the moral integrity of 
the revisionists, commenting that [i]f the stress on terror betrays a 
certain moral sensibility, so does the denial of its significance.
our understanding of the attribution of blame, Cohen and Meyers 
accusations of revisionism obscuring and minimizing the Terror and 
placing the blame elsewhere than on Stalin implied that not only was 
Stalin to blame for the horrors of Stalinism, and therefore morally 
defective, but the revisionists themselves were too for absolving 
 The choice to publish these frank and at times bitter criticisms 
of Fitzpatrick and the new cohort also suggests that they sought 
recognition from, and a challenge by the field of these shortcomings, 
constituting an appeal to the moral community, as described by 
Smith. 
In their application to both Stalinism and to revisionist 
scholarship, the dual dimensions of morality and blame continued to 
manifest themselves in the responses to the 1986 articles. On the one 
hand, we have seen that the new cohort were quick to reject any 
claims that they were removing responsibility from Stalin, thereby 
refuting the inferiority of their own moral standards. On the other 
real causes of things. Science meant that people felt able to recognise real danger, 
backed by the authority of valid experiment and theory. Because of this, blaming 
behaviour went to the real causes instead of being deflected to the constitution-
supporting function it performed elsewhere.  The line of reasoning implied real 
blaming was possible. As a result real blame was so guaranteed by its objective 
basis in knowledge that it could not be harnessed to the sordid work of ideology. 
M. Douglas, Risk and Blame: Essays in Cultural Theory (London and New York, 
1992), p.7 
 Kenez, Stalinism as Humdrum Politics, p. 396 
 Ibid., p. 399 
 Cohen, Stalins Terror as Social History, p. 378 and Meyer, Coming to Terms 
with the PastAnd with Ones Older Colleagues, p.404. Cohen had earlier been 
more explicit in his moral condemnation of the second generation of revisionists, 
writing that Probably it is best to leave final moral judgement to Soviet writers () 
But for Western historians now to obscure those profound and enduring tragedies, 
however admirable their scholarship () is to return to the anticold-war but deeply 
flawed scholarship of E. H. Carr, the British historian whose voluminous and 
valuable writings grew into tacit justification for the whole Stalin era. See Cohen, 
Rethinking the Soviet Experience, p.34 
hand, they were highly critical of the moralising tendency present in 
the criticisms of their work. In her immediate response to the 1986 
critics, for instance, Fitzpatrick commented that one of the ways in 
which dealing with the Terror should be avoided was the repetition of 
familiar data cited from familiar secondary sources, framed by 
restatement of familiar moral judgements that might as well also be 
put in quotation marks. There is something of this in Cohens 
commentary.
 She also noted the problems with counter-
moralizing, meaning a consistent but generally unacknowledged 
effort to divert blame for terror from the regime. Acknowledging that 
counter-moralising was a trap for revisionists, she highlighted that it 
implied acceptance of the terms of debate set by the moralisers 
(presumably here she is referring to Cohen and Kenez in particular), 
together with a degree of cautious defiance of their intimidatory 
tone. This was no-win situation for the revisionists and no good for 
scholarship in general. What was important was making the 
distinction between counter-moralising and the critical examination of 
sources and data.
 In 1987 Chase also turned accusations of scholarly 
shortcomings back on the critics, suggesting that since Cohen and 
Kenez misrepresented the revisionists work one must conclude that 
 Fitzpatrick, Afterword: Revisionism Revisited. This reply to the 1986 responses 
on her original article was invited by the editor, and published in the same issue. 
Fitzpatrick was invited to provide another response to the 1987 articles, but she 
chose to let her original article stand for itself. See From the Editor, More 
Controversy, p. 378. 
 Fitzpatrick, Afterword: Revisionism Revisited, pp.410-411. Fitzpatrick noted 
that she was not referring to the work of Theodore von Laue, the only revisionist 
scholar whose argument dealt primarily and directly with the question of blame in 
connection with Stalin. von Laue was indignant at the judgements made of Stalin by 
the West, and was keen to find the correct moral place of Stalin. See T. H. von 
Laue, Why Lenin? Why Stalin? A Reappraisal of the Russian Revolution, 1900-1930 
(London, 1966) and especially T. H. von Laue, The World Revolution of 
Westernization: The Twentieth Century in Global Perspective (New York, 1987). 
Here von Laue stressed the importance of trying to understand Stalinism despite its 
horrors. To do this, he wanted to understand whether Stalins crimes (which he 
places in inverted commas) were all his own responsibility, or whether they were 
the responsibility of all the forces at work during his lifetime. See von Laue, The 
World Revolution of Westernization, p.101. Paul Hollander has also suggested that 
von Laues vision of Stalin was inseparable from his view of Russia as the 
underdog and eternal victim, which produced Stalin as a tough-minded redeemer of 
his victimized nation. See P. Hollander, The Survival of the Adversary Culture: 
Social Criticism and Political: Social Criticism and Political Escapism in American 
Society (New Brunswick, 1991), pp. 61-62 
what they were really doing was using their commentaries to reaffirm 
their hatred of Stalinism and sublimating their moral indignation with 
that system into an unjust condemnation of those who seek to clarify 
our understanding.
 Referring to Cohens criticisms, Getty 
commented that it was surely possible to write about important 
specialised subjects, such as education, factory workers, social 
mobility and even the workings of Party organisations, without 
putting statements of moral outrage, however justified, on every page 
and without making these topics mere subsets of the Great Terror.
Getty reserved his harshest criticisms for Kenez, however, the most 
frightening parts of whose remarks were his defence of demonology 
as a historical method and his explicit proposal for an ethics test in 
Soviet history, concluding that one does not need demonology to 
comprehend history and society.
 Kuromiya similarly stated that 
Kenez clearly demonstrated his wish to keep the study of Stalinist 
politics in the realm of demonology, revealing his desire to impose 
his own interests and interpretations upon other histories.
 Even 
more alarming than this however was what Getty termed Kenezs 
obsession with measuring the moral quality of authors and their 
studies of the Stalin era, finding his remarks offensive, insulting, and 
unscholarly.
 On the same subject, Kuromiya noted that while it was 
necessary to be sensitive to the moral dimensions of the subject, such 
an unwarranted allegation on the part of well-established senior 
scholars would only help intimidate the less established historians and 
drive them out of the field.
Stemming from the debate on the role of social history in 
studies of Stalinism, the notion of morality thus became central to 
these arguments on two levels. Firstly it related to the immorality of 
Stalinism and the need for its recognition, without which Stalin and 
 Chase, Social History and Revisionism of the Stalinist Era, p. 385 
 Getty, State, Society, and Superstition, p.394 
 Ibid., p.395 
 Kuromiya, Stalinism and Historical Research, p.405 
 Getty, State, Society, and Superstition, p.395 
 He likened it to re-creating the self-dekulakisation of non-kulaks on the 
academic front. Kuromiya, Stalinism and Historical Research, p. 406 
the leadership would be absolved of responsibility. Secondly, it 
related to the immorality of the revisionists work in reducing or 
removing the focus from the political dimensions of Stalinism, and 
the Terror. In turn, the revisionists responses to this accusation also 
acquired morality as a central theme. 
6. Conclusion: the revisionist debates and Western attitudes 
towards Stalin and Stalinism 
As Rittersporn pointed out, To a large extent, this debate is not about 
Soviet history, but about Western mentalits
; indeed, these debates 
are revelatory about the way in which Stalin and Stalinism were 
viewed at this time. In a wider sense, these articles are an insight into 
shifting definitions of the nature, and level of responsibility, of 
something deemed bad or evil at this time. The introduction of 
revisionist ideas in which Stalin himself might not be solely 
responsible for the dynamics and actions of the Stalinist state and for 
which bureaucratic forces and tensions could partly be to blame (as 
Getty was arguing in The Origins of the Great Purges
) were 
reminiscent of the idea of the banality of evil Hannah Arendt had 
controversially expressed in 1963 after witnessing the trial of Adolph 
Eichmann, an SS officer whose job it had been to organise the 
deportation and evacuation of many European Jews under Nazi rule.
For Arendt, Eichmann had been a totally ordinary man fulfilling his 
role as a functionary. He became so involved in the task at hand and 
the daily banality of completing this task that he completely lost track 
of what was right and wrong.
 Eichmanns evil was banal because it 
was borne of completely mundane anxieties and considerations. 
Arendt argued that Himmler had capitalised on this particular kind of 
 Rittersporn, History, Commemoration and Hectoring Rhetoric, p. 420.  
 J. A. Getty, The Origins of the Great Purges: The Soviet Communist Party 
Reconsidered, 1933-1938, (Cambridge, 1985). 
 H. Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil (London, 
1963). 
 McGowan, Hannah Arendt, pp.9-10 
individual: an ordinary man who would sacrifice his beliefs, his 
honor, and his human dignity in order to protect his wife, children, 
salary and pension.
 The problem for those judging Eichmann at his 
trial was that he was not an obvious monster: the trouble with 
Eichmann was precisely that so many were like him, and that the 
many were neither perverted nor sadistic, that they were, and still are, 
terrifyingly normal.
 In the early 1970s, the notion of the ordinary 
individual being capable in certain circumstances of abhorrent acts 
had been exemplified in the astounding results of Philip Zimbardos 
Stanford Prison Experiment which highlighted how quickly notions 
of human compassion and equality could disintegrate.
 None of the 
revisionists claimed that Stalin was an ordinary man, yet the idea that 
multiple processes, stresses, tensions and dynamics at work in the 
Party and the leadership led to the Terror, the purges and the extreme 
nature of Stalinism share common ground with Arendts analysis of 
the banality of evil, and the results of the Zimbardos experiment. 
Shifting notions of where the responsibility for violence and coercion 
lay, and the responses to these shifts, were at the heart of the Russian 
Review debates. 
  We have seen in the previous chapters that the concepts of 
inferiority, danger, difference, deviancy, and indeed morality had all 
been central to the constructions of the Stalinist other. Thanks to the 
debates in the Russian Review examined here, we can see that through 
the clashes between scholarly generations it generated, the period of 
revisionism produced a construction of the Stalinist other in which 
morality and blame became the dominant hinges on which this 
construction was made. This has been exemplified in this chapter in 
two ways. The first, representing a typical pattern of othering, was the 
recognition and reinforcement by all, revisionists and non-revisionists 
alike, that there were undeniable and grave moral failings in the 
Stalinist regime and that Stalin himself was at least largely if not 
 McGowan, Hannah Arendt, p.10 
 Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem, p.253 
 See the official website for the experiment: http://www.prisonexp.org/ 
entirely responsible for these. Stalinism remained the other in this 
period through its failure to live up to the Wests moral standards and 
was universally reinforced as such in the debates.  
An unexpected outcome of this was that by diminishing 
Stalins responsibility, or seeming to neglect these grave moral 
failings, the new cohort revisionists by extension also took on an 
immoral quality in the eyes of their critics. Their neglect or refusal to 
attribute the locus of blame to where the older scholars demanded it 
be placed meant that they, as well as Stalinism, were presented as the 
other in these debates. For example, Cohen, Kenez, Meyer and 
Conquest were at pains to point out the differences between their own 
research agendas, interpretative paradigms and moral integrity, and 
those of the revisionists. It is a most striking characteristic of these 
debates that the same concepts of morality and blame were used to 
construct both Stalin and Stalinism, and the new cohort revisionists. 
This demonstrates how significant the Western construction of the 
Stalinist other was to the totalitarian model scholars and some first 
generation revisionists, as well as the deep effects of the global 
context of this period, itself once again in a state of change and 
upheaval. It is for this reason that what began as a discussion on the 
place of social history in the field of Soviet studies acquired such a 
passionate, argumentative, controversial and at times bitter nature.  
As social history became displaced by cultural history in the 
wider profession from the late 1980s onwards, and as the Soviet 
Union disintegrated in 1991, to what extent have these themes, and 
those of the previous periods examined in this thesis, persisted in 
post-Soviet writing on Stalin and Stalinism?
 From the 1980s onwards, the revisionists faced another external challenge as 
historiography as a whole experienced the cultural turn. This movement, which 
took hold from the 1980s, first came to the fore in the 1960s when it was suggested 
that historical research could benefit from the integration of anthropological 
dimensions. This meant including subjects that historians had hitherto taken for 
granted, but studied little: the family, childrens education, attitudes to birth, 
adolescence and death, for example. One of the first historians to use 
anthropological approaches in their research, Keith Thomas, suggested that this, 
together with an enhanced method of historical explanation that would provide 
historians with new techniques, would allow a historian to ask intelligent questions 
of his material and more likely come up with intelligent answers. As quoted in D. 
Gentilgore, Anthropological Approaches in S.  Berger, H.  Feldner, and K. 
Passmore (eds.), Writing History: Theory and Practise (London, 2010) p.166. By 
the late 1970s and early 1980s, a paradigm shift had taken place in historiography 
where cultural history became the most desirable and acceptable way to practicee 
history. The kind of social history practiced by the revisionists (and by social 
science historians within the historical profession), which investigated social 
processes such as social mobility and group dynamics, often with the use of 
quantitative data alongside empirical research, was no longer deemed sufficient. 
Historians were now working on incorporating anthropological dimensions into 
their research. In her article on history and anthropology in the 1980s, Natalie Z. 
Davis identifies four ways in which anthropological works can be of use to 
historians: close observation of living processes of social interaction; interesting 
ways of interpreting symbolic behavior; suggestions about how the parts of a social 
system fit together; and material from cultures very different from those which 
historians are used to studying. See N. Z. Davis, The Possibilities of the Past, 
Journal of Interdisciplinary History, Vol. 12, No. 2, The New History: The 1980s 
and beyond (II) (Autumn, 1981), pp. 267-275, p. 267. Putting into practice these 
benefits, history writing began to focus on the smaller details of everyday life and 
the anthropological origins of these elements: this also became known as 
microhistory. The microhistorians had several methodological criticisms of social 
science history, namely that the latter deprived the past of its qualitative aspects and 
left it without a human face. In an attempt to remedy this, microhistorians rejected 
the social sciences focus on anonymous structures and processes. See Iggers, 
Historiography in the Twentieth Century, pp.116-117. Gentilgore states that if we 
consider previous kinds of dominant histories, such as economic, political or social 
as macrohistory, microhistory provided a way of small-scale data, now considered 
to be a necessary part of the historiography of a subject, to relate to the larger-scale 
 macrohistory. Furthermore it allowed a new way of describing and analysing the 
micro-macro link. See Gentilgore, Anthropological Approaches, p.178. 
Chapter 5 
Friction in the archives: revolutions and counter-
revolutions in the post-Soviet historiography of Stalin 
and Stalinism  
1. The Archival Revolution 
The advent of glasnost and perestroika in the late 1980s and the 
eventual demise of the Soviet Union in 1991 created several 
important interpretative and contextual shifts which impacted the 
Western historiography of Stalin and Stalinism. 
 Firstly, the end of  
the Cold War meant the end of the ideological warfare between 
Russia and the West which had become so central to scholarship on 
Stalin and Stalinism, and on the Soviet Union. Secondly, the opening 
of the Soviet archives provided researchers of Russia and of the 
Soviet bloc with access to documentation on a level that had been 
until then unfathomable. Thirdly, there was now an end to Soviet 
communism, creating a closed rather than continuous historical 
narrative. 
 From the Russian perspective, Mark Sandle noted that it was the advent of 
glasnost which sparked off the first sustained public questioning of the Stalinist 
orthodox interpretation of Russian and Soviet history in the Soviet Union. M. 
Sandle, New Directions, New Approaches, Old Issues: Recent Writings on Soviet 
History, The Historical Journal, Vol.38, Issue 1, 1995, pp.231-348, p.231 
 For writing on post-Soviet Russian historiography of Stalin and Stalinism, John 
Keep has written particularly incisively. See, for instance, A. Litvin,and J. Keep, 
Stalinism: Russian and Western views at the turn of the millennium (New York, 
2005), which provides an excellent survey of much of  past and present Soviet and 
Western historiography on Stalinism; J. Keep, Stalinism in Post-Soviet Historical 
Writing in K. McDermott, and J. Morison (eds.), Politics and Society Under the 
Bolsheviks: Selected Papers from the Fifth World Congress of Central and East 
European Studies (Warsaw, 1995), which looks at thematic developments in 
Russian historiography of Stalinism, such as foreign policy, social history and 
political history. Another article of note is that of Andreas Langenohl, which 
discusses themes of interaction between historiography, public discourse and 
expectation in Russia around the archival revolution. See A. Langenohl, History 
between Politics and Public: Historiography, Collective Memory, and the 'Archival 
Revolution' in Russia, Kritika, Vol.1, No. 3, Summer 2000 (New Series), pp. 559-
569. For further reading on the subject of Russian historiography of Stalinism from 
the Gorbachev era onwards, the following books and articles have been of use: O. 
An assessment of publications since 1991 suggests the emergence 
of some general themes in the structure and production of works on 
Stalinism. In the first instance, sudden access to vast amounts of 
documentation has changed the way in which works on Stalin and 
Stalinism have been formatted, placing the document as the central 
element to the work, rather than the scholarly argument. Secondly, the 
collaboration of Russian and Western scholars and Western 
institutional collaboration with the archives themselves have emerged 
as significant trends, as exemplified by the works published in the 
Annals of Communism series.
 This series exemplifies both trends but 
is especially useful in demonstrating the new usage of documents. 
Many of the books contain an introduction in which the editors set out 
contexts and questions as well as their own conclusions as to what the 
documents demonstrate; the documents are only accompanied by 
short explanatory paragraphs. While the introductions set out 
specifically what the editors believe can be gained from the 
documents, and while they may not alter the actual concepts and ideas 
being discussed, these works provide an illustration of the 
development of a noticeable trend of using the documents as the 
principal actor.  This to a certain extent can remove from focus the 
main ideas and arguments that to date had been the most prominent 
elements of the works, suggesting that access to these documents has 
Khlevniuk, Stalinism and the Period after the 'Archival Revolution', Kritika, 
Vol.2, No.2, Spring 2001 (New Series), pp. 319-327; A.  Nove, Glasnost in Action 
 Cultural Renaissance In Russia (Chicago, 1989); R. W. Davies, Soviet History in 
the Gorbachev Revolution (London, 1989); J. Shapiro, The Perestroika of History 
in the Soviet Union, Slovo, Vol.2.1, 1989; P. Bou, Gorbachev and History in S. 
White, (ed.), New Directions in Soviet History (Cambridge, 1991); C. Merridale, 
Redesigning History in Contemporary Russia, Journal of Contemporary History, 
Vol.38,  No.1, Redesigning the Past (Jan., 2003), pp.13-28. 
 The Annals of Communism series encapsulates all of these new trends. It is a long-
term project by Yale University Press aiming to publish selected and previously 
inaccessible documents from the state and party archives in a narrative that 
develops a particular topic in the history of Soviet and international communism. 
The idea is that these documents are not chosen for their support of a particular 
interpretation but for their particular historical importance or their general value in 
deepening understanding and facilitating discussion. See the About the Series 
blurb found on the inside of each Annals of Communism book. The series is also 
built on collaboration between Western and Russian scholars and between Yale and 
the Russian archives. Finally, it demonstrates an on-going diversity of topics. For a 
candid account of the birth of this project see J. Brent, Inside the Stalin archives: 
discovering the new Russia (Melbourne, 2008). 
in some cases allowed historians to strip back on argumentative 
content, to present the documents, comment on them, but ultimately 
let them speak for themselves.
 Since there had been little accessible 
archival data, and little scholarly interaction between Russia and the 
West until glasnost, these were all radically new ways of acquiring 
and publishing information from the Soviet era in the post-Soviet 
world, and they help us to understand to what ends this 
documentation has been used and the variety of research the archives 
have enabled.  
The archival revolution refers not only to the gradual opening of 
the Russian state archives from the late 1980s onwards but also to the 
general increase in access to local records, oral testimonies, and 
private documents throughout the Soviet Union.
 Since the early 
1990s, part of Stalins personal collection, fond 558, has been made 
available in the Russian State Archive of Social and Political History 
(RGASPI) and more recently online in the form of the Stalin Digital 
Archive (SDA). The variety and volume of official papers in this fond 
 For example, in Stalinism as a Way of Life Lewis Siegelbaum and Andrei Sokolov 
intend the documents to illustrate that while the State certainly coerced society, the 
action also occurred in reverse. See L. Siegelbaum and A. Sokolov, (eds.), Stalinism 
as a Way of Life: A Narrative in Documents (New Haven, 2000), p.26. In Soviet 
Culture and Power, Katerina Clark and Evgeny Dobrenko state that the documents 
call for a reassessment of the role of the Politburo in the cultural sphere, arguing 
that it occupied a much greater role than has been previously suggested. See K. 
Clark, and E. Dobrenko (eds.), Soviet Culture and Power: A History in Documents, 
1917-1953 (New Haven, 2007), p.x. Works dealing with correspondence also 
demonstrate this pattern; see, for example, R. W. Davies, O. V. Khlevniuk, E. A. 
Rees, L. P. Kosholeva and L. A. Rogovaya (eds.), The Stalin-Kaganovich 
Correspondence 1931-36 (New Haven, 2003); A. Dallin and F. I.  Firsov (eds.), 
Dimitrov and Stalin 1934-1943. Letters from the Soviet Archives (New Haven, 
2000) and L.T. Lih, O.V. Naumov and O. V. Khlevniuk (eds.), Stalin's Letters to 
Molotov 1925-1936 (New Haven, 1995). Outside of the Annals series, there are 
similar examples of this structure. See for example P. R. Gregory, Lenin's Brain 
and Other Tale from the Secret Soviet Archives (Stanford, 2008) and P. Boobyer, 
The Stalin Era (London, 2000).  
 There are several useful accounts of the process of opening the archives. See, for 
example, A. Litvin, Coping with the Legacy of Stalinism: recent Russian Writing 
in A. Litvin and J. Keep, Stalinism: Russian and Western views at the turn of the 
millennium (New York, 2005), pp.3-31 which gives an excellent overview of the 
chronology of the archival revolution and an overview of some of the kinds of 
documents that became available. Also see J. Keep, Stalinism in Post-Soviet 
Historical Writing in K. McDermott and J. Morison, Politics and Society Under the 
Bolsheviks: Selected Papers from the Fifth World Congress of Central and East 
European Studies (Warsaw, 1995) and R. W. Davies, Soviet History in the Yeltsin 
Era (Basingstoke and New York, 1997), especially pp. 90-95 
have revolutionised research on Stalins leadership. They document 
his foreign policy, his industrialisation and collectivisation policies, 
and his economic policy over the course of his time in power. 
Correspondence between Stalin and his closest colleagues  Lazar 
Kaganovich, Lavrenti Beria, Nikolai Yezhov and Vyacheslav 
Molotov, for example  reveal the communications which decided 
arrests, torture, and executions during the period of the purges.
documents also include hundreds of annotated memos, manuscripts 
and speeches passed between Stalin and his colleagues, which have 
helped to understand the extent of Stalins decision-making in all 
matters of government over the course of the regime.
 Some files of 
the NKVD were also declassified in the State Archive for the Russian 
Federation (GARF), allowing access to hundreds of thousands of 
documents on the organisation, deployment and action of the police 
over the course of the Soviet period. 
As well as allowing access to the information contained in fond 
558, the accessibility of a huge variety of documents in the many 
Soviet archives, both in Moscow and locally, have allowed research 
to occur on all aspects of life under Stalinism, from local party 
activity to music and film. The displacement of social history by 
cultural history in the wider historical profession has been facilitated 
in the field of Soviet studies by the declassification of personal 
records, such as memoirs, diaries and correspondence that have 
 Revelations included, for example, confirmation that Stalin and the Politburo had 
orchestrated the Katyn massacre. The most crucial discovery relating to the purges, 
however, was the NKVD order no. 0047 of July 30, 1937 , which revealed that it 
was indeed Stalin who had ordered the arrest, imprisonment and execution of tens 
of thousands of criminals and kulaks. Nicolas Werth has written a thorough 
account of the context, content and repercussions of order no.0047. See N. Werth, 
The NKVD Mass Secret Operation n 00447 (August 1937  November 1938) , 
Online Encyclopaedia of Mass Violence, 24 May 2010 (last accessed 19/03/2013):  
http://www.massviolence.org/The-NKVD-Mass-Secret-Operation-no-00447-
August-1937 
 See J. A. Gettys introduction to, and information on, the Stalin Digital Archive 
site itself: www.stalindigitalarchive.com. The RGASPI archive contains tens of 
thousands of documents relating to all aspects of Stalins leadership (the SDA alone 
currently contains 28 000 documents), as well as biographical information and 300 
books from Stalins personal library, many of which are annotated by him. The 
SDA has also made available on the site works from the Annals of Communism 
series, which have all been born from access to the new documentation available in 
the Russian archives. 
http://www.stalindigitalarchive.com/
enabled researchers to begin to construct a picture of everyday 
Stalinism: the reality of life during the Stalinist regime, how Soviet 
citizens lived, worked and played, as well as how they viewed and 
interacted with the state. 
There have been some thorough surveys of the theoretical and 
methodological changes in research on Stalinism resulting from the 
archival revolution.
 Yet there are questions which have emerged 
from the analysis of the impact of this event on post-Soviet 
historiography that require further attention: what hopes were 
established by scholars for the field at the outset of this event? How 
have works on Stalin and Stalinism changed since the archival 
revolution? Have the archives allowed for a greater diversification of 
the field, and has a new common research agenda emerged in the 
twenty years since the collapse of the Soviet Union? And, finally, 
what does post-Soviet research tell us about Western attitudes 
towards Stalin and Stalinism? 
2. The conceptual counter-revolution and its critics 
Writing from the early post-Soviet period shows that the archival 
revolution encouraged retrospective, and introspective, tendencies, as 
scholars reflected on the state of their field. These tendencies are most 
noticeable in the 1990s when some scholars sought to revisit the past 
historiography. In anticipation - and sometimes trepidation - of the 
potential revelations that might arise from the archives, they 
 John Keep has written on the value and some of the revelations of each of these 
categories in Litvin and Keep, Stalinism, pp. 17-26 
 Particularly useful of these surveys are: D. Shearer, From Divided Consensus to 
Creative Disorder: Soviet History in Britain and North America, Cahiers du Monde 
Russe, Vol.39, Nbr.4, Octobre - Decembre 1998, pp. 559-591, which provides an 
extremely thorough survey of the historiography of Stalin and Stalinism up to 1998, 
including examining emerging themes such as nationality and ethnicity. Also see D. 
Beer, Origins, Modernity and Resistance in the Historiography of Stalinism, 
Journal of Contemporary History, Vol.40, No. 2, April 2005, pp.363-379, which is 
a review article dealing with conceptual issues of modernity and resistance. Finally 
Kuromiya provides some insights into post-archival revolution historiography on 
three areas (Stalin and the Terror, Stalin and ideology and Stalin and society) in H. 
Kuromiya, Stalin and his Era, The Historical Journal, Vol.50, No.3, 2007, pp.711-
724. For a particularly comprehensive account, see Suny, Reading Russia and the 
Soviet Union in the twentieth century, pp. 5-64 
questioned the direction in which it would travel in a post-Soviet era. 
Previously central notions such as morality and the use of the 
totalitarian model of interpretation in the study of Stalinism remained, 
for a time at least, at the fore, while alongside them new issues 
relating to the usage of archival material emerged.  
The concern with the moral issue was exemplified in 
Catherine Merridales survey of developments in the field between 
1989 and 1991 in which she suggested that the principal issue in the 
field in 1993 was that it was still impossible to not find oneself in a 
moral swamp when discussing the purges.
 In the works she had 
reviewed for the article, Merridale noted that the Stalinist period 
emerged as one of total gloom under which nothing was gained. 
While this notion lent itself to popular acceptance, the question at 
hand was in fact much more difficult. The question of morality, 
passionately debated in the 1986 and 1987 Russian Review articles, 
remained for Merridale the most important and largest obstacle for the 
field to overcome. For the future she predicted that many Stalinisms 
would emerge, as historians battled to understand it. Merridale hoped 
above all for scholarly integrity, that historians of Russia will at last 
enter a debate with their colleagues which is not overwhelmingly 
predicated on judgements about good and evil, individual dictatorship 
and totalitarianism.
 The resilient contentiousness of this issue was 
demonstrated when over a decade later Conquest stated that One of 
the strangest notions put forward about Stalinism is that, in the 
interests of objectivity we must be  wait for it  non-judgemental. 
But to ignore or downplay the realities of Soviet history is itself a 
 In this article she focuses predominantly on works by Tucker, Roy Medvedev and 
Walter Laqueur. Although these works were not based on archival documents, they 
used as source material privately held papers and memoirs which until glasnost had 
remained hidden. The works Merridale reviews are J. Hughes, Stalin, Siberia and 
the crisis of the New Economic Policy (Cambridge, 1991); W. Laqueur, The 
Glasnost Revelations (London, 1991); R. Medvedev, Let History Judge: the origins 
and consequences of Stalinism, Revised and expanded edition. Edited and translated 
by George Shriver (New York, 1989); Y. Rapaport, The Doctors Plot: Stalins Last 
Crime (London, 1991); R. C. Tucker, Stalin in Power: The Revolution From Above 
1928-1941 (London, 1991) and A. Wood, Stalin and Stalinism (London, 1991). 
 C. Merridale, Review: Glasnost and Stalin: New Material, Old Questions, The 
Historical Journal, Vol. 31, Issue 1, March 1993, pp.233-243, p.240 
judgement and a very misleading one.
 In his memoirs, Richard 
Pipes also defiantly stated that he felt no need to apologise for having 
expressed judgement of historical phenomena since he was not 
dealing with inevitable natural phenomena but with the consequences 
of deliberate human actions that, as such, were open to moral 
condemnation.
As well as underlining the on-going moral issue, the opening 
of the archives at once reignited arguments for and against 
totalitarian-model frameworks, and produced hopes for a new kind of 
scholarship that would turn its back on the old totalitarian versus 
revisionist argument. Steve Smith highlighted this in 1994 when he 
criticised the field for being largely - indeed depressingly - 
unadventurous, returning time and time again to the same questions.
This situation had been created by a desire to debunk myths of 
Sovietology and pressure to produce research and publications to 
specific institutional requirements in the quest for tenure and high 
ratings in research assessment rankings.
 Stephen Kotkin, having 
noted a post-Soviet return to politics-focused research, also wanted 
the blunt instrument of the totalitarian model to be cast aside in 
order to be able to study how the goals and techniques of social 
welfare, as well as their accompanying terrain of social identities, 
helped constitute forms of power and resistance that existed under a 
variety of political regimes.
 For Kotkin, Stalinism was more than 
simply a history of dictatorship and non-capitalism, and he suggested 
that the microstructures and microprocesses of welfare needed to be 
 R. Conquest, The Great Terror: A Reassessment (London, 2008), p. xxviii 
 R. Pipes, Vixi: Memoirs of a Non-Belonger (New Haven, 2003), pp.242-243 
 S. Smith, Writing the History of the Russian Revolution after the Fall of 
Communism, Europe-Asia Studies, Vol.46,  no. 4, 1994, pp.563-578. The article 
predominantly focuses on interpretations of the Russian Revolution in Anglo-
American scholarship, but a number of Smiths comments about the use of 
documentation, and the historiographical developments of the study of the Russian 
Revolution, can be applied to the study of the Soviet era, including Stalinism, as a 
whole. 
 Smith, Writing the History of the Russian Revolution after the Fall of 
Communism, p.425 
 S. Kotkin, 1991 and the Russian Revolution: Sources, Conceptual Categories, 
Analytical Frameworks, The Journal of Modern History, Vol. 7,  No.2, June 1998, 
pp.384-425, p. 425 
examined with finer analytical tools than those used to date.
Merridale too criticised writing on Stalinism for remaining as yet too 
focused on the Terror: whatever the focus of the historian, the purges 
themselves remain a major obstacle to lucid analysis.
Yet despite the call to abandon totalitarian and politics-
focused research, the opening of the archives has also led some 
scholars to debate the problems associated with the usage of social 
history. In particular, the issue of fragmentation in historiography 
has emerged as an on-going concern. The term can be understood as 
the process in which cultural and social historians overspecialise and 
fragment histories, which leads to breaking things down. This 
results in very specialised and specific studies, the idea being that 
eventually, accumulated, these would piece together to create the 
bigger picture. Criticism of this process suggested that this method of 
analysis leads to the existence of social history for its own sake and 
that by removing it from the larger structural context it becomes 
peripheral and, while interesting, unable to engage with the wider, 
more substantive issues: For some, social or cultural histories have 
missed the point; in looking for the needle, they have missed the 
haystack. Omitting or ignoring the state, politics, and ideology 
distorts the picture and creates a one-sided, deficient picture of what 
happened.'
The issue of fragmentation (although not necessarily referred 
to using this specific term) had already been addressed in the Russian 
Review debates of 1986 and 1987 when many scholars reacted 
strongly against the notion of studying Soviet society without taking 
into account the influence of the state.
 In the post-Soviet period, 
these concerns endured.  For example, while introducing an article by 
 Ibid. 
 Merridale, Review: Glasnost and Stalin: New Material, Old Questions, p.240 
 Sandle,New Directions, New Approaches, Old Issues. Recent Writings on  
Soviet History, p. 232. Sandle points to the Russian Review debates of 1986 and 
1987 as an example of this. 
 See Chapter 4. This was particularly evident in the articles by Geoff Eley, Robert 
Conquest, William Chase, Daniel R. Brower, Peter Kenez, Stephen F. Cohen.  See 
The Russian Review, Vol. 45, No. 4, October 1986 and Russian Review, Vol.46, No. 
4, October 1987.  
Sheila Fitzpatrick in 1993, the editor of the Russian Review revisited 
the debates of the late 1980s, attempting to ascertain whether they 
continued to be relevant.
 The place and the limitations of social 
history in the study of Stalinism remained at the forefront: 
Fitzpatrick's findings do not negate all previous scholarship on the 
politics of Stalinism, they simply put it in a much more complex 
setting and remind us that "society" develops with laws of its own 
even when the heavy hand of the state asserts itself most vigorously. 
 In the same year, writing on post-Soviet scholarship on the Soviet 
Union, Dominic Lieven also broached the issue, writing that as with 
most historical schools, the social historians provide many new and 
useful insights. The danger only comes if they threaten to monopolize 
the field.
 Mark Sandle also questioned whether it was right that 
social and cultural historians had been criticised for generating the 
fragmentation process and whether these new directions (i.e. studies 
of history from below) illuminate or obfuscate research. According 
to Sandles conclusion, one of the most positive outcomes to date 
(1995) was the willingness of researchers to use the vast new variety 
of sources available to them, not only from the national archives and 
national press but also from local archives, local press, interviews, 
songs, folklore and cinema. This compelled historians to re-examine 
and rethink the old politico-historical narratives, and to consider how 
far existing interpretations were generated in the knowledge of later 
events.
The trepidation demonstrated by some in the face of the 
archival revolution has also manifested itself through the issue of 
 This time the article in question was S. Fitzpatrick, How the Mice Buried the 
Cat: Scenes from the Great Purges of 1937 in the Russian Provinces, Russian 
Review, Vol. 52, No. 3, July 1993, pp.299-320 
 A. W., From the Editor: Is a Social History of Stalinist Russia Possible?, 
Russian Review, Vol. 52, No. 3, July 1993, pp.1-3, p. 3 
 D. Lieven, Western Scholarship on the Rise and Fall of the Soviet Regime: The 
View from 1993, Journal of Contemporary History, Vol.29, No.2, April 1994, pp. 
195-227, p. 200 
 Sandle, New Directions, New Approaches, Old Issues. Recent Writings on 
Soviet History, p.248. Sandle writes that this is especially relevant to 
interpretations of NEP, widely viewed as a relatively pluralistic and liberal calm 
before the Stalinist storm. 
archival fetishism.
 For example, Getty noted that while it helps the 
historian that the Soviet government recorded everything they did, the 
official language of these texts does not begin to illuminate the 
cruelty and suffering inflicted on the Soviet people, meaning we are 
always at risk of presenting a terrible human drama in humdrum 
bureaucratic language.
 Getty set out another less obvious issue: 
that the move from a paucity to an embarrassment of riches for the 
historians of the Soviet era has meant that historians have had to pick 
and choose which documents they use and run the risk of leaving 
something important out. Indeed for Getty, the main obstacle with the 
publication of The Road to Terror, for instance, was whether they 
would publish, and then find a vital piece of information that either 
supported or contradicted their findings.
 However , Getty did not 
mention the principal problem highlighted by many others: the 
reliability of the sources. Alter Litvin and John Keep have noted that 
one of the key problems of historians working with the Soviet 
documents is to determine how reliable and authentic they are, and 
this view is echoed around the field through a general awareness that 
the content of the sources should not and cannot be taken at face 
value. Smith was already warning of this fetishisation in 1994, 
although for him it was more a question of restricting creativity and 
innovative thinking in the field rather than a question of reliability of 
the sources.
 Kotkin also referred to the retreat into archival 
fetishism as one of the two paths younger scholars in the field have 
taken, the other being that of the familiar polemics of totalitarian 
versus revisionist models, or social versus political history. 
 It is 
noteworthy, however, that while in 2007 Hiroaki Kuromiya still 
identified taking archival documents at face value as a real problem 
 Kotkin, 1991 and the Russian Revolution, p.387 
 J. A. Getty and O. V. Naumov, The Road to Terror: Stalin and the Self-
Destruction of the Bolsheviks, 1932-1939 (New Haven, 1999), p. xi 
 Getty and Naumov, The Road to Terror, p. xi-xii 
 Smith, Writing the History of the Russian Revolution after the Fall of 
Communism, p.567. Smith wrote that in the face of this archival revolution it was 
time to turn away from the inevitably influential master narrative. 
 Kotkin, 1991 and the Russian Revolution, p.387 
within the field, in 2001 Oleg Khlevniuk felt that researchers had 
already overcome their main obstacle: to remove unrealistically high 
expectations of what would be found in the archives, suggesting that 
this ability to have overcome archival over-expectation and to use 
these sources as historians would have used previously accessible 
sources has to be considered one of the most important results of the 
decade.
Therefore in the early post-91 period the balance between 
careful use of documentation, social and political history, their 
interpretative frameworks and their limitations proved central to 
reactions to the archival revolution in the 1990s and to the suggestion 
of possible directions for future research on Stalinism. 
3. New era, old agendas? Soviet-era scholarship in a post-
Soviet world 
While the archival revolution has had a clear and tangible impact on 
the way in which works on Stalin and Stalinism have been researched 
and structured, the question of the evolution of interpretative 
paradigms in the post-Soviet era remains complex. Smith, Kotkin and 
Merridale called for a move away from old arguments between social 
and political historians. But have old agendas and research themes 
persisted? And if so, have new ones been able to emerge alongside 
them? Access to documentation might have been expected to displace 
some previously made assertions about the Stalinist regime, such 
were the varying and at times radically different interpretations put 
forward during the Soviet era.  In fact, the post-1991 pattern largely 
suggests that, far from forcing some scholars to abandon earlier 
conclusions, the new source material has in part been used to 
reinforce old agendas.  
In works where the document has taken precedence, this idea 
leads to the question of the extent to which the editors were also the 
 H. Kuromiya,, Stalin and his Era, pp.722-724 and Khlevniuk, Stalinism and the 
Period after the 'Archival Revolution', pp.319-320 
secondary authors of these works. As editors themselves have 
pointed out, due to the enormous volume of information now 
available, they are obliged to be selective. Nevertheless, the notion 
that using archival documents helps to remove the possibility of bias 
or agenda-pushing is deeply questionable. The problem lies in 
whether the documents dictate the content and direction of the edited 
volume, or if it is the editors careful choices which reflect the 
realities which they are hoping to demonstrate. The claim, for 
example, by the Annals of Communism series that it does not promote 
certain interpretations is reflected in the variety of subjects on which 
it has published and of editors who have contributed to the collection. 
At the same time, amongst works from both within and out-with this 
series, there are examples of the editors clearly using documents to 
promote the same arguments they had in the Soviet period. For 
example, in his 1985 work The Origins of the Great Purges Getty 
made what were perceived as controversial claims that the Terror was 
not minutely planned by Stalin but was in fact the result of 
bureaucratic tensions within the Party that led to many unanticipated 
outcomes. After his post-1991 archival research, Getty identified 
some errors from his previous analysis. In an interview in 2009 he 
stated that he was wrong to suggest that there was no communication 
between local police and the State. He in fact found that not only did 
they interact, but they also competed for power. 
 However, it is clear 
from the The Road to Terror, that Getty used the archival documents 
that became available to him to further develop the ideas he presented 
in Origins. In The Road to Terror Getty states that allocating all 
blame on Stalin for the Terror, as had been widely done until that 
point, amounted to coming perilously close to falling into the literary 
genre of fairytales, complete with an evil and all-powerful sorcerer 
 Interview with Professor J. Arch Getty by Dr James Harris, The History Faculty 
website.  The interview is broadcast as an audio recording  (last accessed 
02/03/2013). HTML: 
http://thehistoryfaculty.podbean.com/2009/08/13/interview-with-professor-j-arch-
getty/ 
http://thehistoryfaculty.podbean.com/2009/08/13/interview-with-professor-j-arch-getty/
http://thehistoryfaculty.podbean.com/2009/08/13/interview-with-professor-j-arch-getty/
working against virtuous but powerless victims.
 According to 
Getty, it was not only a top-down police operation but a question of 
people denouncing those all around them: while Stalin certainly 
started the violence, he could not be seen as the sole causing factor.
To what extent does this suggest Getty has used the archives 
to continue to push his argument? According to Getty, because of the 
nature of the sources, the book focuses on the Politburo and the 
nomenklatura elite that supported it.
 These selected documents 
certainly support Gettys argument: they are chosen from plenum 
speeches of the Central Committee, Politburo and nomenklatura 
correspondence, but also suicide notes from denounced party 
members, Politburo resolutions, Stalin speeches, and arrest orders of 
Party members. They reflect well the tensions within the party. This is 
particularly well exemplified by the Secret Central Committee letter 
on the Kirov assassination, dated 18
 January 1935. For Getty, 
despite the fact that it turned the heat up on present and former 
dissidents, the letter was not a call for terror.
 Getty suggests instead 
 Getty and Naumov, The Road to Terror, p.570. Getty and Naumov did not want 
to ask what caused the terror?, since they believed this would invite simplified 
answers, pointing towards a type of causality which makes the event seem 
preordained. Rather, wrote Getty, the questions they have asked in this work are: 
What made the terror possible, and what did they think they were doing? He 
believed the documents provide solid evidence of the many facets of the 
phenomenon, including the tradition of party discipline, corporate mentality and 
self-interest of the nomenklatura elite, political relations and struggles among 
numerous groups within the party, elite anxiety and perceptions of state-society 
relations, and, last but not least, the 'Stalin factor'. See Getty and Naumov, The 
Road to Terror, p.571 
 Ibid., p.571 
 Ibid., p.583. The archival sources used by Getty and Naumov in this book are 
principally from the Russian Centre for the Preservation and Study of Documents of 
Recent History (RTsKhIDNI), which was the former Central Party Archive of the 
Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the Central Committee of the Communist Party 
(TsPA IML pri TsKhSD). As a result, the majority of the sources here are internal 
political records of the upper Communist Party (which as a result do not deal 
comprehensively for example with foreign policy, agricultural or industrial affairs 
or cultural matters). See p. 27 
 For instance, it states that The teaching of party history to members of the party 
ought to be raised to a level worthy of the party. This includes the study of each and 
every antiparty group in the history of our party, its methods of struggling against 
the party line, its tactics, and  all the more so  the study of the tactics and fighting 
methods of our party in its struggle against antiparty groups, tactics and methods 
which made it possible for our party to overcome and crush these groups. See 
Getty and Naumov, The Road to Terror, pp.148-150. This is taken from Document 
28: Secret Central Committee letter on the Kirov assassination, 18 January 1935. 
that this document implies that Kirovs alleged assassins (Zinoviev 
and his followers) had been captured and had therefore been dealt 
with. Further, he notes that a party purge did not happen until nearly 
five months later.
 A letter relating to an incident which might 
otherwise be thought of as a vital piece of documentation regarding 
the start of the Terror is used by Getty to demonstrate why it is not.
There are similar instances of pre-1991 agendas being 
continued in Fitzpatricks Everyday Stalinism. Fitzpatricks Soviet era 
work centred on the notion that society was not an inert mass, 
terrorised and suppressed by the Stalinist regime. While she agreed 
that there were many victims of the regime, Soviet society was also 
dynamic, responsive and interactive, and many benefited from the 
Stalinist state. Her most controversial notion, perceived by some as 
reducing the significance of coercion and the Terror, was that certain 
social elements  such as grievances, pressures, sources of support 
and response  must have shaped the States policy, put it under 
pressure, constrained and modified some its actions.
In her later post-Soviet work there is a continuation of these 
ideas, supported by the documentation she found in the archives. 
Everyday Stalinism, for instance, examines the daily lives of those 
living in the USSR of the 1930s. It is not a study of how or why the 
Terror occurred; its focus is entirely on the daily experiences of the 
Homo Sovieticus who emerged during the Stalinist era, and 
specifically during the era of the Terror. The complexity of life at this 
time, illuminated by Fitzpatricks research, helps to support her 
earlier interpretations of life under Stalinism. Indeed, Fitzpatrick 
 Getty and Naumov, The Road to Terror, p.150 
 Indeed, if one were arguing for Stalins involvement in the murder, some contents 
of the document could clearly be interpreted differently: for example, only five 
months later a purge of the party began, a close enough proximity to establish a 
possible link between Stalin orchestrating the Kirov murder in order to begin the 
purge. While Getty does state that the leadership chose to politicise the murder and 
to interpret it as a political conspiracy, it is clear from the use of this document that 
its purpose is to support Gettys argument that Stalin was not involved with the 
Kirov assassination, and one of the repercussions of this was that Stalin was not 
solely responsible for the Terror. This suggests that the editors agenda provided the 
interpretative framework for the archival material, rather than the other way around. 
 Fitzpatrick, New Perspectives on Stalinism, The Russian Review, Vol. 45, No.4, 
October 1986, pp.357-353 
seeks to understand what normal (for, she says, it was neither 
normal by their or our standards) life was in Stalinist 1930s. The 
picture she has built throughout the work, thanks to archival 
materials, demonstrates the complexity of this society, a far cry from 
the inert, brutalised masses the totalitarian-model school had depicted.  
While her account undoubtedly highlighted the extreme 
difficulties of life under Stalinism (and this indeed was part of the aim 
of the work) Fitzpatricks sources  archival documents, press 
articles, interviews
  also bring to life the society she had 
determinedly argued existed, in the face of much criticism, in the 
1980s, supporting her previous assertion that there was more to the 
state-society relationship than Cold War Sovietology had suggested.
Fitzpatricks research into these many layers of societal activity, and 
the picture she constructs of society under Stalin demonstrate how she 
has utilised the archival revolution to develop and strengthen her 
argument that the interaction between state and society was not only a 
one way, top down persecution (though it was this too), but that 
society could exert influence on, and provoke anxiety for the State 
itself, even if at the origin the State had created the conditions for this 
to occur. 
  In Everyday Stalinism, Fitzpatrick has used information from archival 
documentation from RGASPI and GARF, other state archives, such as RGAE 
(which deals with documentation relating to the economy) and RGVA (which deals 
with war documentation), as well as some local archives, such as those in 
Novosibirsk and Sverdlovsk. She has also drawn on many Russian newspapers and 
journals of the 1930s.  
 For instance, her depictions of the many people who were obliged to live a double 
life in order to conceal any potentially damaging aspects of their past help to 
demonstrate this: these individuals constructed separate private and public personas, 
but the lines were blurred, and the desire to become the public persona could result 
in the internalisation of that persona. The efforts, strategies, denunciations and fears 
of discovery associated with this process created a whole sub-culture of its own: the 
building of a new life, wrote Fitzpatrick, was sometimes a complex effort of the 
whole family, using many different ploys, and the psychological strain of 
concealment has often been emphasized by those who took part it in it. For 
Fitzpatrick, the most important consequence for the state of having so many 
potential enemies stigmatised for a variety of reasons was the concealment on a 
large scale of social origin and identity. This, she said, was the aspect that weighed 
most heavily on the political leadership, who assumed that a person stigmatized was 
automatically the enemy. See S. Fitzpatrick, Everyday Stalinism: Ordinary Life in 
Extraordinary Times: Soviet Russia in the 1930s (Oxford, 1999), pp.132-138 
It was not only the revisionists who continued to argue their 
Soviet-era positions, and indeed the totalitarian-model scholars also 
continued to fight their corner. For example, Robert Conquest has 
continued to develop his earlier account and interpretation of 
Stalinism. His influential 1968 book The Great Terror had interpreted 
the purges as a means for Stalin to acquire absolute power. He did so 
by using a particular, specific form of despotism, sacrificing the 
nation and the Party.
  With the opening of the archives, and the end 
of the Soviet Union, Conquest published a 40
 anniversary edition of 
the book. It is clear not only from his suggestion for an updated title 
for the  new edition (I told you so, you fucking fools
), but also 
from its content that Conquest remains dedicated to his initial 
findings: though inviting some amendments on a few points, the 
periods history as given here has been substantially validated.
defended his position that Stalin was the principal architect of the 
terror:  
the nature of the whole purge depends in the last analysis on 
the personal and political drives of StalinIf Stalins personal 
drives were the motive force of the Purge, it is also true that 
his ability to conceal his nature was the rock on which all 
resistance to the Purge foundered. His opponents could not 
believe that he would either wish to, or be able to, do what he 
For Conquest, the new documentation only confirmed that the 
revolution of the Purges still remains, however we judge it, above all 
Stalins personal achievement.
Martin Malia too stuck to his long-held views on the centrality 
of ideology to the Stalinist regime. In 1990 Malia had published an 
 Conquest, The Great Terror, p.479  
 Brown, Scourge and Poet. It is unknown whether this anecdote was one of the 
many mistakes Brown made in his article. (see  Chapter 2, footnote 38) 
 R. Conquest, The Great Terror: A Reassessment, p.vii 
 Ibid., p.53 
 Ibid., p.70. It is interesting, however, that Conquest does not use any archival 
documentation directly in the 2008 edition of the book, despite it having an 
additional select bibliography. This bibliography instead mainly cites works 
published after 1991, many of which have themselves made use of the archives. 
article anonymously in the American journal Daedalus which 
predicted that the Soviet Union could not survive perestroika and 
glasnost. He argued that in a system such as the Soviet one ideology 
was the key:
Once this ideology is fundamentally questioned by the 
elite, the regime cannot survive. Malia likened the ideological belief 
in the Soviet Union by its ruling elite to myth-making, suggesting that 
once the mythical foundations were questioned, the regime 
collapsed.
 Eschewing the opposing view of many revisionists, Malia 
was one of few in the field who emphatically believed that reform 
was not possible. Demonstrating the tenacity of the idea of the 
centrality of ideology, he noted that communism is not reforming, it 
is disintegrating.
 One of his major works, The Soviet Tragedy, not 
published until 1994, was the long-awaited result of a lifetimes work.
  It reflected what Malia had fundamentally felt throughout his life 
and career and was the result of a long development of his own theory 
on the nature and course of Russian and European history: the key to 
understanding the Soviet regime was ideology, and especially the 
primacy of ideology and politics over social and economic factors. 
Like Karpovich, as well as Pipes and other totalitarian-model 
scholars, he believed Stalinism to be the natural successor to 
 Z., To The Stalin Mausoleum, Daedalus, Vol. 119, No. 1, Eastern Europe... 
Central Europe... Europe (Winter, 1990), pp.295-344 
 V. Tismaneanu, Tyranny and Myth, Journal of Democracy 6.1 (1995), pp.169-
173, pp.169-170. Tismaneanu uses the term mythocracy to describe myth as the 
basis of the Soviet system. 
 Z., To The Stalin Mausoleum, p.336 
 Malias research was partly influenced by his first early encounters with Russians 
while in the US Navy language school during the Second World War.  Thanks to 
the specific wartime conditions, he was able to engage in frank conversation  often 
helped, he said, by a certain amount of vodka  with the Soviet officers he met. It 
was they who told him about the events occurring in the Soviet Union, such as the 
forced labour camps, and the terror. As a result before he had seriously studied 
Russian history, Martin was well insulated against any illusions about Soviet 
realities. After demobilisation, Malia began his postgraduate study at Harvard, 
where his chief mentor was Michael Karpovich, and the primacy of ideology in 
Malias work is a legacy of Karpovichs teaching. See N. Riasanovksy, D. 
Engerman and H. McLean, In memoriam: Martin E. Malia, Professor of History, 
Emeritus, Berkeley, 1924-2004 (last accessed 01/03/2013): 
http://www.universityofcalifornia.edu/senate/inmemoriam/martinemalia.htm    
http://www.universityofcalifornia.edu/senate/inmemoriam/martinemalia.htm
Bolshevism.
 In the opening sentences of The Soviet Tragedy he 
stated that 
The negative fact of Sovietism emerged only progressively, as 
the dictatorship of the proletariat turned first into the 
dictatorship of the Party and then into the dictatorship of 
Stalin, and finally as the resulting totalitarian system expanded 
into a global, threatening super-power
Richard Pipes similarly continued to argue for the continuity 
between Leninism and Stalinism, with the latter being an unavoidable 
product of the former, the two retaining the same ideological and 
political foundations. Pipes work on the Soviet Union began in the 
fifties, but it was not until the early nineties that he published a two-
volume history of the Russian revolution. Here, in the face of years of 
revisionism in the field, Pipes stood his ground. In his 2005 book A 
Concise History of the Russian Revolution he stated: 
In theory, one can conceive a Trotsky, Bukharin, or Zinoviev 
grasping the torch from the dying Lenin and leading the 
Soviet Union in a different direction than Stalin. What one 
cannot conceive is how they could have been in a position to 
do so, given the realities of the power structure at the time of 
Lenins illness. By throttling democratic impulses in the Party 
in order to protect his dictatorship, and by imposing on the 
Party a top-heavy command structure, Lenin ensured that the 
 Pereira,The Thought and Teachings of Michael Karpovich, p.272. See also M. 
E. Malia, The Soviet Tragedy: A History of Socialism in Russia, 1917-1991, The 
Free Press, New York, 1994. Pereira highlights that Malia was Karpovichs 
favourite student and this respect and affection was reciprocated: after Karpovichs 
death, Malia referred to him as his beloved master who would be long and deeply 
mourned. This affection towards Karpovich as a teacher and a scholar was shared 
by many of his doctoral students, with many descriptions highlighting his fairness, 
balance, gentle liberalism and high level of involvement and support of his 
students work to be found. See Pereira, The Thought and Teachings of Michael 
Karpovich, p.272 and  P.E. Mosely, M. E. Malia,  W. H. Chamberlin and D.  von 
Mohrenschildt, Michael Karpovich, 1888-1959, The Russian Review, Vol.19, 
No.1, January 1960, pp.56-76. There is a similar tone in Pereira, The Thought and 
Teachings of Michael Karpovich.  
 M. Malia, The Soviet Tragedy: A History of Socialism in Russia, 1917-1991 (New 
York, 1994), p.2 
 See Pipes two-volume history of the Russian Revolution: R. Pipes, The Russian 
Revolution 1899-1919 (London, 1990) and R. Pipes, Russia Under the Bolshevik 
Regime 1919-1924 (London, 1994). There is also his prcis of the works: R. Pipes, 
A Concise History of the Russian Revolution (London, 1995). For a specific 
example, see his defence of the continuity theory on pp.400-402.  
man who controlled the central party apparatus controlled the 
Party and through it the state. And that man was Stalin.
Writing about the unlikelihood of a new orthodoxy based on the 
work of social and cultural historians gaining any funding or 
patronage leverage in American institutions, Dominic Lieven aptly 
summed up Pipes position when he commented that from behind 
Harvard's mighty ramparts Richard Pipes, formidable scholar and 
crusader, can thunder his message with complete disdain for the 
pressures of government and fashionable opinion.
  It is clear, then, that regardless of all the research directions 
this new era might have afforded researchers, old constructions, 
interpretations and agendas remain. The works of these scholars, 
whose careers have spanned both the Soviet and post-Soviet eras, 
demonstrate the tenacity of pre-archival revolution, and pre-
revisionism, interpretations of Stalinism. They have utilised new 
access to source material not to radically reassess their findings, but to 
consolidate them and push them forwards into the new era.  
4. History with the politics left in: post-Soviet scholarship on 
Stalin and the Terror 
As exemplified by writing in the early 1990s, some scholars had been 
concerned that too much attention was still being given to the Terror 
in the late 1980s and very early 1990s, yet in 2011 Oleg Khlevniuk 
wrote that in the post-Soviet period The history of terror and the 
Gulag deserves detailed analysis, as it occupies the most significant 
place in the historiography of Stalinism.
As a project that sets out to 
publish on diverse and wide-ranging topics, the Annals of 
Communism series can help to assess whether the field has moved 
away from terror-centric research. Out of the 30 published or soon to 
 Pipes, A Concise History of the Russian Revolution, p.402 
 Lieven, Western Scholarship on the Rise and Fall of the Soviet Regime: The 
View from 1993, p.201 
 O. Khlevniuk, Stalinism and the Stalin Period after the Archival Revolution, 
p. 322 
be published works of the Annals of Communism series, over half 
(18) relate to the Stalinist period.
 This is not necessarily surprising: 
after all, the Stalinist regime was in place for the majority of the 
Soviet period and has as a period arguably elicited the most interest. 
Are post-Soviet works principally concerned with the Terror within a 
totalitarian model framework, as feared by Merridale and Smith in the 
early 1990s? There is undoubtedly still a certain amount of focus on 
the Terror, on Stalin himself and his leadership, which is evident in 
several ways.
 Firstly, the opening of the archives has allowed prominent 
topics such as the Terror to be reassessed more accurately, justifying a 
continuing focus on them in research. This has been particularly well 
exemplified by the work of Paul Gregory and Stephen Wheatcroft. 
Gregorys re-examination of Stalinist state organisation has allowed a 
far more accurate and complete understanding of the way in which 
the dictatorship orchestrated repression and the Terror than had been 
previously possible. Thanks to the archival revolution there are now 
enough chinks in this armour [the unavailability of sources] to write 
such an account.
 Wheatcroft too has challenged previous 
scholarship on Stalinism through new information found in the 
archives, stating that when secret archives become available for the 
first time it would be remarkable indeed if there were no radical 
challenges to the traditional view of history.
 For example, 
Wheatcroft has argued that archival materials demonstrate that the 
1932-1933 famine was not provoked by the Soviet authorities and 
that the suggestion that they had not taken any steps to improve the 
 See the Annals of Communism website which give details of the projects:  
http://www.yale.edu/annals/index.htm 
 P. R. Gregory, Terror by Quota: State Security from Lenin to Stalin (An Archival 
Study) (New Haven and London, 2009), p.3. See also P. Gregory, P. Schrder and 
K. Sonin, Dictators, Repression and the Medien Citizen: An Eliminations model 
of Stalins Terror (Data from the NKVD Archives) (London, 2006) and P. R. 
Gregory and N. Naimark (eds.), The Lost Politburo Transcripts: From Collective 
Rule to Stalins Dictatorship (New Haven and London, 2008). 
 S. G. Wheatcroft (ed.), Challenging Traditional Views of Russian History  
(Basingstoke and New York, 2002), p. 3. This volume is a series of essays which 
challenge traditional approaches to topics relating to pre-revolutionary, Stalinist and 
post-Stalinist Russia. 
situation was incorrect. Indeed, through newly acquired data on grain 
harvests at this time, he and Robert Davies argue that it was the 
amount of grain available in those years, rather than its distribution, 
that was the immediate cause of the famine. This challenged the 
traditional view that Stalin deliberately withheld grain, and especially 
Conquests argument that the famine of 1933 was deliberately carried 
out by terror as demonstrated by the figures on the millions of tons of 
available grain reserves.
Correspondence made available from the opening of the archives 
has also been widely used  especially in the Annals series  to 
attempt to determine the nature and scope of Stalins leadership. This 
has been done by using the letters and telegrams written between 
Stalin and some of his colleagues. For instance, Dimitrov and Stalin 
1934-1943: Letters from the Soviet Archives  examines Stalins role 
in the Comintern, where Dimitrov was Secretary General from 1934 
until 1943. It concludes that overall Stalin was a sphinx in the 
affairs of the Comintern: the highest authority, but who was often 
brief in his attentions to Comintern business, delegating decisions to 
others or making short scribbling instructions, even where major 
policy change was occurring.
  The Stalin-Kaganovich 
Correspondence 1931-36 examines correspondence between Stalin 
and Lazar Kaganovich, one of Stalins most highly trusted deputies. 
This project aims to understand the dynamics of power, and how 
Stalin governed his country through the watershed years of 
collectivisation, mass industrialisation, and the beginnings of 
repression. Finally, Stalin's Letters to Molotov 1925-1936 similarly 
seeks to examine the dynamics between Stalin and his colleagues, as 
well as the scope and nature of the role he actually played in the 
running of the Soviet Union at this time. From Stalins 
correspondence with Molotov, the editors conclude that Stalin was 
 As cited in R. W. Davies and S. G. Wheatcroft, The Soviet Famine of 1932-33 
and the Crisis in Agriculture in Wheatcroft, Challenging Traditional Views of 
Russian History, p. 69.  
 Davies et al. (eds.), The Stalin-Kaganovich Correspondence 1931-36 (New 
Haven, 2003). 
completely engrossed in foreign affairs during this period and was 
generally totally consumed by politics.
As well as through the continuing volume of research being done 
on the Terror and Stalins leadership, the focus on the political aspect 
of Stalinism has also manifested itself in an interest in Stalinist 
ideology, rejecting the argument that Stalin had little political thought 
worth writing home about  a tendency which is also a manifestation 
of the influence of the cultural historical approach, as it seeks to 
understand the way in which Stalin thought. Erik van Ree, for 
instance, has argued that, far from having no doctrine at all, Stalinist 
ideology contained a strong inner coherence that ultimately took the 
form of a curious brand of revolutionary patriotism in which 
Stalinism remained part of the Marxist and revolutionary nationalist 
universe imported from Western Europe in the nineteenth century.
David Brandenberger too has looked at the primacy of ideology in 
Stalinism, arguing that Stalin used Russian national heroes, myths and 
imagery to mobilize popular support during the Second World War. 
This national bolshevism ended up eclipsing proletarian 
internationalism as the central tenet of Stalinist ideology. The most 
intriguing repercussion of this, argued Brandenberger, was that this 
ideological coup was the catalyst for the formation of a mass sense 
of national identity within Russian-speaking society between the late 
1930s and early 1950s, the most cruel and difficult years of the 
Soviet period, but which has also persisted throughout and beyond 
the Soviet era.
The interest in Stalin himself has also acquired renewed vibrancy, 
with the publication of several biographies of Stalin which emphasise 
his centrality to the regime, as well as the idea of him as an evil and 
 The view of Stalin as entirely consumed by politics was echoed a couple of years 
later by Hiroaki Kuromiya in his short biography of Stalin. See H. Kuromiya, Stalin 
(Harlow, 2005). Kuromiya also used new archival documents, including those 
relating to the Stalin-Kaganovich correspondence, in his source material. 
 E. van Ree, The Political Thought of Joseph Stalin (London, 2002), p. 17 
 D. Brandenberger, National Bolshevism: Stalinist Mass Culture and the 
Formation of Modern Russian National Identity, 1931-1956 (Cambridge, Mass. and 
London, 2002), p.2 and p.9 
all-powerful leader. The overall concern with understanding the 
nature and scope of Stalins role in the running of the regime indicates 
that Stalin himself, both on a professional and personal level, is still 
considered by many to be central to the history of this period and that 
the appetite for research into this topic has not waned despite the 
advent of social and cultural history.  For example, Simon Sebag 
Montefiores bestseller Stalin: The Court of the Red Tsar portrays 
Stalin as the evil red tsar: brutal, cruel, yet fascinating, idiosyncratic 
and enigmatic. He was a man who played sinister psychological 
games with his courtiers and the architect of the horrors of his 
regime. In a somewhat paradoxical juxtaposition, the archives have at 
once allowed Montefiore to engage with the everyday tendency of 
cultural history (in this case relating to the Kremlin and its most 
central characters) while promoting an image of Stalin borrowed from 
the pre-revisionist era.
 Robert Services Stalin biography similarly 
depicts Stalin as the evil genius, a despot and warlord who was also 
intellectually adept,  and who, for example, at times had challenged 
Lenin and who was a voracious reader.
 There is perhaps something 
to be said for the commercial value of these Stalin-centric works, and 
the general publics fascination with horrible histories, and with 
cruel, evil leaders. What makes them tick? What unusual foibles or 
faiblesses of the terrible dictators can we uncover? Montefiores book 
was perhaps so commercially successful thanks to all the small, 
unlikely, curious human pieces of information it offered. 
 S. S. Montefiore, Stalin: The Court of the Red Tsar (London, 2003). Montefiores 
sources are predominantly from the RGASPI fond 558 Stalin archive, and from 
GARF.  From these he has especially drawn on the correspondence and diaries of 
many of the characters which made up Stalins court. He has also used materials 
from NKVD confessions and testimonies and his own interviews with some of these 
characters and their families and friends. 
 R. Service, Stalin: A Biography (London, 2004). See for example p. 94 where 
Service states that Stalin was not a blindly obedient Leninist while Lenin was 
alive, and pp. 560-570 where Service details some of Stalins many intellectual 
interests. 
Montefiores book is packed full of human detail. See, for example, the candid 
picture of a shirtless Molotov holding a tennis racket, accompanied by a caption 
explaining that, the second most important leader after Stalin, he was dominated by 
his wife, to whom he wrote passionate love letters (p. 135). Stalin is revealed as 
green-fingered (p.107) and sometimes affectionate (here in particular relating to a 
letter to Molotov in which he wrote I could cover you with kisses in gratitude, this 
And yet, despite this wealth of new material helping researchers 
to construct a more complete version of Joseph Stalin, there have 
been no startling new revelations about his life or character, nor any 
radical departures from the Stalin depicted in the first biographies of 
the 1930s and 1940s. Stalin remains an enigma, since he left no 
personal diaries or particularly personal correspondence. He also 
remains the powerful, brutal, mysterious and unforgiving leader he 
has always been portrayed to be. These characteristics are so 
ingrained that they have not been revised nor challenged in the post-
Soviet era, only built upon, expanded and brought to life with those 
everyday details that have more recently become available.  The focus 
on different aspects of Stalins life may have shifted in this era, but 
the fundamental interpretation of Stalins character has remained 
largely static.
 The release of Stalins correspondence, of the 
documents detailing the minutiae of his leadership and of the 
memoirs and diaries of those around him have ensured a renewed 
focus on Stalin and his leadership by scholars of the post-Soviet era. 
This demonstrates the resilience of some of the characteristics of the 
totalitarian-model, although the issue of morality seems largely to 
have been removed in favour of a more candid and/or documentary-
for his action in Ukraine during collectivisation. p.39). Yezhov is described in the 
book blurb as a murderous bisexual dwarf who receives a colourful description 
pp.150-151,  and who has part four of the book  relating to the purges  assigned 
to him through the title Slaughter: Yezhov the Poison Dwarf, 1937-1939 (p. 173). 
The depiction of Stalin as the brilliant but evil leader is also present in his book 
Monsters in which 101 sinister individuals are presented. Stalin, along with Henry 
VII, Lucrezia Borgia and Hitler, is on the front cover. He is described as A master 
of brutal repression, subtle conspiracy and political manipulation, this cobblers son 
became both the supreme pontiff of international Marxism and the most successful 
Tsar in history. Stalin and the Bolsheviks, along with his great foes Hitler and the 
Nazis, brought more misery and tragedy to more people than anyone else in 
history. S. S. Montefiore, Monsters: Historys Most Evil Men and Women 
(London, 2008), p. 206 
As well as the works by Service and Montefiore, Hiroaki Kuromiya and Mikl s 
Kun have both written biographies of Stalin, and works on Stalin and his inner 
circle include those by Yoram Gorlizki and Oleg Khlevniuk. The book on the 
Stalin-Kaganovich correspondence also contains an analysis of Stalins personality 
and leadership style. It stated that he was one dimensionally emotional (angry), and 
had uncommon leadership capability. Robert C. Tucker, who wrote the forward for 
this volume concluded that what ignited Stalin's anger was when a speech or action, 
directly or indirectly, negated Stalins lifelong search for glory: this contradicted his 
image of himself as the leader of genius that he needed to be, and not the 
catastrophic one that he was. See Davies et al. (eds), The Stalin-Kaganovich 
Correspondence 1931-36, p.xiii 
style approach to the details of Stalins leadership and political 
regime.  
One notable exception to this is The Black Book of Communism, 
which has examined in small and torturous detail the crimes 
committed in the name of communism, arguing that the level of its 
criminality and destruction have been diminished due to the shadow 
of Hitlers Nazism.
 In his foreword to the book, Martin Malia 
suggested that a moral approach focused on the criminality of Soviet 
communism was now needed in order to yield a truer understanding 
of it, an approach endorsed and adopted by the books lead author 
Stphane Courtois, giving the book a strong tone of moral indignation 
and judgement.
Yet despite the tenacity of some aspects of the totalitarian-model 
of interpretation and of pre-Soviet era revisionist agendas, there has 
unquestionably been a vast increase in the scope of research.  While 
the focus remains to an extent on Stalin and the advent of the Terror, 
its wider social and cultural repercussions and dynamics are also now 
being given due attention. There has been, for example, a noticeable 
increase in ethnicity, nationality and regional studies of societies 
within the USSR.
 There has also been a notable growth in research 
on everyday life under Stalinism, a result of the increasing influence 
of cultural history. While we have seen that Fitzpatrick had long 
argued the existence of a dynamic and deeply complex society during 
this period, this was one of the areas most lacking in our 
understanding of Stalinism, especially regarding the interaction of 
 S. Courtois, Introduction: the crimes of communism in S. Courtois et al., The 
Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression (Cambridge, Mass. and 
London, 1999), p. 3 and p. 27. Courtois is the lead author of the book. 
 Ibid., and M. Malia, Foreword in Courtois et al., The Black Book of 
Communism, p. v. Kuromiya has noted that Nicholas Werth, a major contributor to 
the book who wrote the section on Soviet communism, publicly disassociated 
himself from some of the conclusions drawn by Courtois. See H. Kuromiya, 
Review Article: Communism and Terror, Journal of Contemporary History, Vol. 
36, No. 1 (Jan., 2001), pp. 191-201, p. 192.  
 Khlevniuk gives a comprehensive summary of these in Khlevniuk, Stalinism and 
the Stalin Period after the Archival Revolution, p. 322. In 2001 Rittersporn also 
suggested additional future areas that would benefit from research, notably Stalinist 
penal policy and concepts of crime and criminality, and the framework of Soviet 
violence. See  G. Rittersporn, New Horizons: Conceptualizing the Soviet 1930s, 
Kritika, Vol.2, No.2, Spring 2001 (New Series), pp.307-318, p. 310-311 
state and society. Since the archival revolution, it is one which has 
been developed considerably:  Orlando Figes, Fitzpatrick and Lynne 
Viola have all published works detailing everyday Stalinism, 
examining the reality of life under the regime, its impact on 
individuals and social groups and the way in which these groups 
themselves reacted to Stalinism.
 The archival revolution has 
therefore also allowed historians to fulfil some of what Merridale and 
Smith had hoped for: an increase in research on Stalinism that does 
not focus solely on the Terror or on the political leadership.
5. Stalin and the West in the post-Soviet world: the 
modernity debate 
Over the course of the Soviet period, clear patterns have emerged that 
suggest that Western writers and scholars used various concepts on 
which to hinge their constructions of the Stalinist, and Soviet, other.  
Since the Soviet Union became a historical object as of 1991, 
 See O. Figes, The Whisperers: private life in Stalins Russia (London, 2007); S. 
Fitzpatrick, Stalins Peasants: Resistance and Survival in the Russian Village after 
Collectivization (Oxford, 1994); S. Fitzpatrick, Everyday Stalinism: Ordinary Life 
in Extraordinary Times: Soviet Russia in the 1930s, (Oxford, 1999); L. Viola (ed.), 
Contending with Stalinism: Soviet power & popular resistance in the 1930s (Ithica, 
2002); S. Davies and J. Harris (eds.), Stalin: A New History  (Cambridge, 2005). 
 There are still opposing views as to the nature of state-society interaction borne 
from evidence found in the archives. This is highlighted by Hiroaki Kuromiya who 
stated that this new research (that of Fitzpatrick, Viola and Davies, for example) has 
meant that the concepts of resistance to and rebellion against the Stalinist state have 
become legitimate parts of the history of this era, and they reflect the apparent 
realities described in newly available documentation. However, others (for example 
Jochen Hellbeck, Igal Halfin and especially Kotkins work Magnitogorsk, Magnetic 
Mountain. See also further along in this chapter) have found that many Soviet 
citizens strove towards the true Soviet identity as prescribed by the Stalinist regime 
that was dedicated to the good of the public, and to the extinction of a private 
sphere independent of the public. This means that the regime had achieved what it 
desired: there was no longer a private sphere as the Soviet citizen was incorporated 
heart and mind into the public sphere. The Soviet citizen learnt how to speak, act, 
look and importantly think Bolshevik. These two interpretations have been termed, 
respectively, the resistance school and the subjective school. See Kuromiya, 
Stalin and his era, pp.722-723. These are of course two extremes of interpretation, 
and Kuromiya admits so himself: applied to specific aspects of the state-society 
relationship, they can seem apt, but to apply them to the general makes them less 
useful and less representative. Nevertheless, the emergence of such schools 
demonstrates that research into this area has grown so much as to necessitate 
nomenclature to distinguish between schools of thought. 
however, it has become more difficult to identify patterns of othering 
specific to Stalin and Stalinism in Western historiography. 
Constructions of the Stalinist other have at times become absorbed in 
the umbrella terms of Soviet Communism or the Soviet system 
that encompass the revolution, Stalinism and its legacy as scholars 
moved beyond trying to understand what Stalinism was to 
understanding how it happened.
 For example, replacing totalitarianism as the key 
characteristic of the Soviet Union, Pipes post-Soviet work on the 
Revolution highlighted the centrality of the notions of failure and 
tragedy. He articulated the idea of Soviet communism as a 
fundamentally flawed system when he wrote of the incontrovertible 
failure of the Russian Revolution in 1991 and the unfolding tragedy 
borne of the 1917 Revolution.
 Pipes felt many times that he wanted 
to admonish the protagonists of this revolution and make them stop 
and think as they rushed towards catastrophe.
 The notion of tragedy 
was so central to Malias thinking that his history of socialism in 
Russia is entitled The Soviet Tragedy. He emphasised that rather than 
going wrong at any given point, such as at Stalins accession to 
power, the revolution was doomed to fail from the very beginning: 
indeed, he suggested that scholars had been asking futile and 
misguided questions as to how and when the revolution had gone 
wrong, when it fact it had been wrong from the start.
 However, 
Malias work has also shown the resilience of a more obvious pattern 
of othering the Soviet Union when he emphasised the primacy of 
ideology in building the socialist state: the ideological basis of Soviet 
Oleg Khlevniuk suggests that in attempting to answer this question scholars now 
concentrate on the development of functional theoretical insights that can mesh 
with concrete historical research. See Khlevniuk, Stalinism and the Stalin Period 
after the Archival Revolution, p.321 
 R. Pipes, A Concise History  of the Russian Revolution, p.xvi. It seems implicit 
that while the Leninist origins of the failure and tragedy of the Soviet 
experiment may in some interpretations be highlighted, these two terms largely 
relate to the Stalinist period. Indeed, Suny states that post-Soviet scholars and 
journalists looking back on seventy four years of Soviet socialism tend to see the 
horrors of Stalinism as the emblem of the Leninist hubris. See Suny, Reading 
Russia and the Soviet Union in the twentieth century, p.62 
 Ibid., p.xvi 
 Malia, The Soviet Tragedy: A History of Socialism in Russia, 1917-1991, p.10 
socialism was that it should be in every respect non-capitalist. This 
interpretation set Stalinism, and the resulting Soviet system, as the 
clear inferior and antithesis of Western capitalism. For Malia, this 
meant that Stalinism produced a sickly, grim version of modernity 
and one that was a very poor imitation of the real thing, 
counterproductive in almost every sphere: economically, culturally 
and morally.
 As a result, todays Russia  might be industrial and 
urban but this did not mean it partook in the full complex of 
modernity, describing Russias industrial sector as being essentially 
non-competitive in the modern world market and comparing it to 
some Third world country exporting raw materials.
 The question of the nature of Stalinist modernity is at the 
centre of two of the strongest trends in post-91 writing on Stalinism. 
On the one hand, neo-traditionalist scholars argue that Stalinism 
was an alternative form of modernity based on archaicizing 
phenomena, such as petitioning, patron-client networks, the 
mystification of power and its projection through display, although 
this was not a return to traditional Russian aspects of society and 
state.
On the other hand, the question of Stalinist modernity has at 
times led to a kind of rapprochement between Stalinism and the 
 M. Malia, The Soviet Tragedy, p. 511. Malia gives a damning criticism of his 
field throughout the book for repeatedly emphasising social elements to the 
detriment of the centrality of ideology, and therefore misunderstanding the Soviet 
system. See Malia, The Soviet Tragedy, in particular pp.7-14 
 Ibid., p.509 
 See S. Fitzpatrick, Introduction in S. Fitzpatrick (ed.), Stalinism: New directions 
(London, 2000), p.11. For an excellent example of discussion on this question and 
of neo-traditionalist analysis, see Terry Martins article on Soviet primordialism and 
nationality, T. Martin, Modernization or Neo-traditionalism? Ascribed Nationality 
and Soviet Primordialism in D. L. Hoffman and Y. Kotsonis (eds.), Russian 
Modernity: Politics, Knowledge, Practises (Basingstoke, 2000). An edited version 
of this article also appears in S. Fitzpatrick (ed.), Stalinism: New directions 
(London, 2000). Michael David-Fox has also analysed the nature and terms of the 
debates between the neo-traditionalists and modernity school scholars, suggesting 
that a way past the current impasse between the two would be a transnational 
history approach to the question of Soviet modernity.  In post-Soviet Western 
scholarship, he links the neo-traditional approach to Fitzpatricks earlier social 
history based revisionism, while suggesting that the modernity groups 
preoccupation with ideology and politics has created a break from social history as 
understood in the 1970s and 1980s.  See M. David-Fox, Multiple Modernities vs. 
Neo-Traditionalism: On Recent Debates in Russian and Soviet History, Jahrbcher 
fr Geschichte Osteuropas, Neue Folge, Bd. 54, H. 4 (2006), pp. 535-555, p.549  
West, characterised by arguments of the modernity school (this 
school, represented by scholars such as Kotkin and Hoffmann for 
example,  generally suggests that the stereotype of modernity based 
exclusively on Western experience is inadequate, and points to the 
Soviet example as an important alternative form), which have 
suggested similarities between Stalinism and Western capitalism. 
Like Malia, Kotkin has placed ideology at the centre of the Soviet 
socialist experiment. Kotkins study of Magnitogorsk led him to 
believe that Stalinism had constructed a socialism that was the anti-
world to capitalism.
 Socialism derived its entire identity from 
capitalism and competed with it in every sphere, even when the 
USSR started to be at a disadvantage. Socialisms attempts to match 
capitalist modernity failed, and it was this which propelled it towards 
its own, dramatic, self-liquidation.
 In this sense, Stalinism was 
clearly an other of the capitalist democracies. However, Kotkin also 
highlights that the construction of Magnitogorsk in particular, and 
Stalinism more generally, nevertheless demonstrated a way of 
thinking and a set of practices that shared a great deal with other 
industrial countries, all of which developed forms of social regulation 
and the welfare state.
Similarly, David L. Hoffmann has argued that while the 
history of modern Russia has been written as a history distinct from 
that of the West
, not all elements of Stalinist culture were derived 
from socialist ideology, suggesting that Stalinist culture contained 
ideas, concerns and debates that were common to modern European 
culture more generally. In fact, he wrote, the very notion of 
reshaping societies was a defining feature of European modernity.
 Kotkin, Magnetic Mountain: Stalinism as civilization (Berkeley, 1995), p. 360 
 Ibid. 
 Ibid., p.366 
 D. L. Hoffman, European Modernity and Soviet Socialism in D. L. Hoffman 
and Y. Kotsonis (eds.), Russian Modernity: Politics, Knowledge, Practises 
(Basingstoke, 2000), p.245 
 D. L. Hoffman, Stalinist Values: The Cultural Norms of Soviet Modernity, 1917-
1949 (Ithaca, 2003), p.7. Hoffman suggests that many features of Stalinist culture 
reflected the ambitions of nineteenth- and twentieth-century leaders and social 
reformers to manage and mobilize their populations in ways unique to the modern 
Arguing against the primacy of ideology, as suggested by Malia and 
Kotkin, Hoffmann stated that it would be wrong to draw too sharp a 
distinction between modern politics and socialist ideology since 
socialism itself was one of the many ideological products of European 
modernity.
These perceived similarities between Soviet and Western 
modernity are illustrative of a change in which a comparative 
framework with the West can provide the possibility for a deeper, 
more encompassing but not necessarily differentiating analysis of the 
Soviet system, and they are unique to the post-Soviet era. This can be 
related to the Soviet Union becoming a historical notion, leading to a 
fundamental change in the context of Western-Soviet relations. The 
historiographical trends that have emerged in the post-Cold War era 
leading to works such as Francis Fukuyamas The End of History and 
the Last Man or Samuel P. Huntingtons The Clash of Civilizations 
and the Remaking of World Order, for instance, focus on 
civilisations and the ways in which they are relating to, and 
interacting with, each other in the current era.
 The scholarship 
produced since the end of the Cold War and the demise of Soviet 
socialism suggests there has been little need to continue to reinforce 
Stalinism, totalitarianism and socialism as the other in Western 
historical writing. While in a post-9/11 world we might have expected 
the kinds of ideas on clashing civilisations present in Huntingtons 
work to resonate more loudly, trends in writing on Stalin and 
Stalinism are in fact more reflective of Fukuyamas argument that 
liberal democracy would become the only form of government for all 
states. Indeed, politicisation of scholarship on Stalin and his regime 
had become redundant in a world where the West has been awaiting 
era. Examples of this include the spread of bureaucracy and state control, efforts to 
manage and mobilise the population, scientism and attempts to rationalise and 
categorise society, and the rise of mass politics. See Hoffman, European Modernity 
and Soviet Socialism, p.245 
 Ibid., p.257 
 F. Fukuyama, The End of History and The Last Man (London, 1992) and S. P.  
Huntington, The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order (London, 
1996).   
Russias own transition to this method of government. New 
discussions on Stalinist modernity relate to this idea too: they are now 
less about the clash of civilisations, and more about the demise of a 
previously othered civilisation and the effects of this demise on a 
relationship which had previously been based on a clash. However, as 
Putins Russia looks increasingly unlikely to adopt a liberal 
democracy in line with the Wests expectations in terms of freedom 
of speech and human rights, for instance, there is a real possibility 
that the notion of clashing civilisations may once again become 
central and, in turn, shift the focus of writing on Stalinism and the 
entire Soviet era in coming years. 
The emergence of the term civilisation applied to Stalinism 
highlights the cultural, rather than political or social, approach to 
Stalinism that has appeared since 1991. For example, both Kotkin and 
Igal Halfin look closely at the culture of Stalinist civilisation, and it 
is this cultural historical approach that has allowed them to argue for 
the importance of mentalities, belief systems and self- identity 
formation in shaping the experience of the Terror and of the Stalinist 
regime.
 For example, Kotkin suggested in Magnetic Mountain that 
Stalinism was not just a political system, let alone the rule of an 
individual. It was a set of values, a social identity, a way of life.
exemplified this most saliently in his chapter Speaking Bolshevik, 
in which he demonstrated the extent to which this act had become 
second nature to Soviet citizens.
 Knowing how to speak Bolshevik 
to publicly display loyalty to the state at all times - was the only way 
to succeed, or even get by under Stalinism. Without this ability, 
Soviets were functionally illiterate, and living under Stalinist rule 
 The roots of the kind of emphasis on mentalities exemplified by Halfin and 
Kotkin can be found in the work of Annales school historians (see Chapter 4) who 
researched the history of mentalities in the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s. Rather than 
emphasising the impact of events and processes on history, they considered the 
attitudes of ordinary people towards everyday life - mentalits- to be equally if not 
more influential on history as economic, social and environmental structures. See P. 
H. Hutton, The History of Mentalities: The New Map of Cultural History in S. 
Clark (ed.), The Annales School: Critical Assessments, Vol. II (London, 1999). 
 Kotkin, Magnetic Mountain, p.23 
 Ibid., pp. 198-237 
would be difficult and dangerous.
 Halfin has used a similar 
approach, focusing on the notions of identity and culture in his 
examination of the ways in which the identity of Soviet communists 
was so invested and imbedded in the Soviet experiment that they 
became complicit in their own demise under Stalin. Through his 
analysis of the autobiographies of communists on trial in the Soviet 
Union during the show trials, Halfin argues that, once embedded in 
the tissue of power, the messianic dreams that structured the 
Communist discourse and provided it a frame of moral reference that 
set standards of conformity could not be easily curbed, even when 
their most horrific implications began to assert themselves.
This new focus in research on Stalin goes beyond the 
examination of political and social systems, and even beyond outward 
social behaviours and the everyday Stalinism that, for example, 
Fitzpatrick had revealed. These attempts at defining the belief 
systems, identities and culture attached to Stalinism are an attempt to 
get inside the communist soul (a term Halfin uses in his work) in 
order to understand how it was perceived, understood, experienced, 
supported, survived (or not) and resisted by those who lived through 
it. This, in turn, leads to a far greater understanding of how the 
Stalinist regime was able both to function in an everyday capacity, 
and to become what it did. 
 Ibid., pp.219-220 
 I. Halfin, Terror in My Soul: Communist Autobiographies on Trial (Cambridge, 
Mass. and London, 2003), p.6. See also his later work I. Halfin, Red 
Autobiographies: Initiating the Bolshevik Self (Seattle, 2011), on self-representation 
in Bolshevik culture. For a further examination of the importance of mentalit and 
culture under Stalinism and during the Terror, see I. Lauchlan, Checkist Mentalit 
and the Origins of the Great Terror in J. Harris (ed), The Anatomy of Terror: 
Political Violence under Stalin (Oxford, 2013) in which Lauchlan examines the 
political police as a the source of a belief system oriented to the defence of the 
revolution. He argues that the cultic nature of the Cheka, combined with popular 
participation in the struggle against the enemy, produced the sort of centrally 
directed mob rule of the 1936-1938 Terror.  
6. Conclusion 
Writing in 1995, Mark Sandle observed that despite the intense 
activity around the archives, no dominant paradigm in writing on 
Stalin and Stalinism had yet emerged. From 2013 it seems that this is 
also largely the case. There are several reasons why this may be: 
firstly, scholars who passionately defended their interpretations of 
Stalinism during the Soviet period have continued to do so well after 
the opening of the archives, using new documentation carefully to 
support their ideas, be they Sovietologists or revisionists.  
While there has been a continued focus on the Terror and 
Stalins role in the running of the regime, the new post-91 generation 
of researchers of Stalinism have used the vast amounts of information 
released from the archives to research such a wide range of aspects of 
it, and achieved such an expansion of our knowledge and 
understanding of these aspects, that it would be impossible to state 
that an identifiable orthodoxy on the question of what happened 
during Stalins reign has emerged. The breadth of expansion of the 
field has, for now at least, precluded the possibilities for a consensus, 
as the realities of everyday Stalinism, nationality, ethnicity, 
economy, culture and modernity and all other aspects of life under the 
Stalinist regime are being vigorously investigated, thanks to the 
documentation released during the archival revolution.   
As the Soviet Union became a historical notion, so the context 
of Western-Soviet relations changed. The scholarship produced since 
the end of the Cold War and the demise of Soviet socialism suggests 
there has been little need to reinforce Stalinism, totalitarianism and 
socialism as the other in historical writing, since such politicisation of 
scholarship has become redundant. Iver B. Neumanns identification 
of a political learner identity constructed by Europe for Russia in the 
post-Soviet era, and Browns identification of strong Orientalist 
tendencies in Western international relations discourse on Russia, are 
not replicated as clearly in historical writing.
Nevertheless, some resilient patterns of othering remain. In 
some cases they seem to be a hangover from the Cold War era (as we 
have seen, for example, in the works of Malia, Pipes and Conquest). 
In other cases, the demise of the Soviet Union has made way for 
similar learner identity writing as proposed by Neumann, although 
in the case of historians of the Soviet Union its central character 
seems not to patronise, but rather to analyse why the democratisation 
process has been so problematic, often highlighting the negative role 
the imposition of Western values and expectations has played in 
international relations and in Russia, both during and after the Soviet 
period.
Therefore, twenty years after the disintegration of the Soviet 
Union, the field of Soviet studies, and specifically that of research 
into Stalin and Stalinism, presents itself as a field in which a 
multitude of interpretations, approaches and agendas are developing. 
Although there has been some clarity reached on certain issues thanks 
to the opening of the archives (for instance, there is a general 
understanding thanks to the NKVD order no. 00447 that Stalin 
ordered the purges), what has emerged from the archival revolution is 
a field of ever expanding scope in which individual scholars are able 
to pursue research on virtually any aspect of Stalinism they choose. 
This accounts for both the tenacity of Soviet-era agendas and the 
continued focus on the Terror, Stalin and his leadership, as well as the 
diversification of the field into new areas of cultural history, social 
history, nationality and ethnicity.  
 Neumann, Russia as Europes Other and Brown,  A Stereotype, Wrapped in a 
Clich, 
Inside a Caricature. 
 See, for example, R. Service, Russia: Experiment with a people (London, 2002). 
Services analysis partly concludes that democracy and marketisation have 
spectacularly failed the Russians (p.336).  See also D. Priestland, The Red Flag: 
Communism and the Making of the Modern World  (London, 2010). For a post-91 
analysis, see especially pp. 556-575. 
Set against the backdrop of the previous periods examined in 
this study, the historiography of this period demonstrates at once a 
continuation of, and a break from, what came before. Where in the 
previous periods clear trends in writing and interpretation emerged 
that were hinged on Western perceptions of Stalin and Stalinism, the 
post-Soviet era proposes a multitude of foci , interpretations and 
accounts of Stalinism, suggesting a confused, or at least disjointed, 
perception of Stalinism by the West. On the one hand, it remains for 
some the Stalinist totalitarian other, whilst to others it more closely 
resembled Western capitalist modernity. Yet what is striking about 
this period is that despite the huge wealth of information now 
available relating to Stalin and his regime, and the variety of 
explorations constantly adding layers and nuances to our 
understanding of them, our very basic perception of their nature has 
not shifted. There has been very little alteration since those first 
publications in the 1930s to the basic facts that the regime was 
coercive and violent, and that Stalin himself  an enigmatic and 
ruthless leader - was in large part, if not entirely, responsible for it. 
This has persisted in the post-Soviet era. As a result, the continued 
and indeed revived research on Stalin and his leadership and this 
largely universal acceptance of the nature of his regime suggest that 
previous perceptions of Stalin and Stalinism as the immoral, deviant, 
dangerous antithetical others of the West persist. However, the 
commonalities in the articulation of these perceptions in the new 
scholarship still remain to be seen. 
Chapter 6 
Stalin in biographical writing 1932-2013: a case study of 
the historiography of the young Stalin 
1. Introduction: official Soviet versions of Stalins youth 
published in the West 
It is perhaps because Stalin was already 46 when he came to power 
that the study of his very early life, before his days as a revolutionary 
in Georgia when he was a young boy and an adolescent, may seem a 
comparatively poor historiographical area. In fact, a closer 
examination of biographical works published on Stalin in the West 
from the early 1930s until the present day does much to displace this 
assumption: the historiography surrounding Stalins early life is rich 
and varied and often full of conflicting information. This is 
particularly evident when comparing both official and unofficial 
versions of Stalins youth published in the West. 
Official Soviet versions of Stalins life were published by the 
Kremlin while Stalin was in power, and they serve as a useful basis 
for comparison with what was being published inside and outside of 
the Soviet Union. They also provided information for Western writers 
on Stalin and Stalinism, if only at times through their lack of accuracy 
and transparency, and indeed were often referred to in these terms by 
those writers. In 1938 Stalins first official biography was produced 
and published by the Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute.
 His early life was 
covered in the two short opening paragraphs of the book. It stated his 
date of birth, the name, social status and professions of his parents 
 The Marx-Engels Institute in Moscow was founded in 1919 under the instruction 
of Lenin. It housed books, documents and archival materials relating to Marxism. In 
1931 it was merged with the Lenin Institute, and became the Marx-Engels-Lenin 
Institute, which then became the Institute of Marxism-Leninism. Today it is 
absorbed into the RGASPI archive in Moscow. 
and the dates at which he began and finished the various stages of his 
education.
 While the biography went on to thoroughly recount his 
adult life as a revolutionary and politician, any further details of his 
childhood were omitted. This official biography was not the only 
work to keep the subject of Stalins early life to a minimum: it is 
difficult to find anything written or approved by Stalin that addressed 
his youth in any depth. In the instances where it was written about, 
there are large discrepancies between what was being stated and what 
we now know about Stalins early life in Gori and in the Theological 
Seminary of Tiflis.  
Stalins own and approved accounts of his childhood depict a 
poor but stable and contented early life: he was born Joseph 
Vissarionovich Djugashvili on 21 December 1879 in the Georgian 
town of Gori. His father Vissarion (Beso) was a Georgian cobbler, 
and his mother Ekaterina (Keke) came from a family of bound 
peasants. Together the three of them lived a simple, poor and 
relatively quiet life.
 The official biographies were highly 
representative of the regime during which they were written. There 
are common characteristics amongst them: the information they 
contained about Stalins childhood was sparse, although 
unsurprisingly more plentiful regarding his Seminary days since it 
was then that he discovered Marxism. They all stated the same key 
dates and basic facts about Stalins birth date and place and provided 
only the most basic information about his parents. The work of the 
Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute, Joseph Stalin  A Short Biography, and 
the earlier pamphlet put together by several of Stalins colleagues 
(Kaganovich, Voroshilov, Ordzhonikidze and Enukidze) under the 
title The Life of Stalin  A Symposium, are especially sparse on 
information regarding Stalins early life. Similarly to the Marx-
 The Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute, Joseph Stalin  A Short Biography (London, 
1940), p.9 
 See The Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute, Joseph Stalin  A Short Biography 
(London, 1940), p.9 ; Various, The Life of Stalin  A Symposium (London, 1930), 
p.1;  J. Stalin, Works, v.1 (Moscow, 1952), p.415 
Engels-Lenin Institute biography, The Life of Stalins first page 
simply states:  
Joseph Vissarionovich Stalin (Djugashvili), Georgian by 
nationality, was born in 1879 in the town of Gori, Tiflis 
Province. His father, of peasant origin from the Didi-Lilo 
village, Tiflis Province, was a worker in the Adelkhanov boot 
factory in Tiflis.
Stalin and his sympathisers rarely elaborated beyond this, and it was 
just as rare that anyone should press him on the subject. The only 
recorded occasion of him addressing the question of his childhood 
directly was during his interview with the German journalist Emil 
Ludwig. At a time when all information about Stalin was heavily 
checked and edited by his entourage and by himself, the Ludwig 
interview was published almost exactly as it had happened, with only 
a couple of minor stylistic corrections.
 This work is of particular 
relevance in the historiography of Stalins childhood because it was 
the only time he was questioned directly in a public forum about his 
early youth. Ludwig asked him: What led you to become a rebel?  
Was it, perhaps, because your parents treated you so badly? Stalin, 
somewhat surprisingly, did not dodge the question: 
No. My parents were uneducated people, but they did not treat 
me badly by any means. It was different in the theological 
seminary of which I was then a student. In protest against the 
humiliating regime and the Jesuitical methods that prevailed 
in the seminary, I was ready to become, and eventually did 
become, a revolutionary, a believer in Marxism as the only 
genuinely revolutionary doctrine.
 It was no accident that so little information was offered: throughout 
his entire life, Stalin barely revealed any details of his childhood, 
though the reasons for this can still only be speculative. Public 
 Various, The Life of Stalin, p.1 
 M. Kun, Stalin: An Unknown Portrait  (Budapest, 2003), p.45. Kun states that 
Stalin had enjoyed the interview and for this reason it remained largely unedited, 
making it the best of his interviews. 
 Joseph Stalin, An Interview with the German author Emil Ludwig (Moscow, 
1932), p.11 
knowledge of an unhappy childhood, and the psychological damage it 
may have done to him, could have given him a vulnerability or 
inspired a loss of confidence he did not want and could ill afford. 
Aside from the difficulties of his family life, Stalin might have further 
wanted to conceal the fact that his upbringing and education were 
entirely based around the Orthodox Church. Although it was no secret 
that his mother was religious, he never publicly alluded to the faith he 
had as a boy.
 This aspect of his childhood was certainly glossed over 
in the official biographies. For example, in both Life of Stalin, and 
Joseph Stalin: A Short Biography Stalins attendance to the Church 
School in Gori was only mentioned within a biographical chronology 
detailing key dates of his early life, and no further details were given.
It was only when describing Stalins time at the Theological 
Seminary of Tiflis that the official biographers gave more detail, since 
this was the time that marked the beginning of Stalins life as a 
Marxist and a revolutionary. Stalin himself described life in the 
Seminary as his reason for joining the Georgian social-democratic 
circles, and this is reflected in these official biographies. Where his 
childhood was only afforded a few sentences, his time in the 
Seminary was highlighted: it did not touch on the more personal 
aspects of his youth, but instead highlighted in Soso Djugashvili the 
virtues that the Soviet people would want out of their leader and 
successor to Lenin: belief in Marxism and rejection of the Church and 
Imperial institutions. The Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute dedicated two 
pages to life in the Seminary, emphasising that it was a hotbed of 
underground political activity and that The Jesuitical regime in the 
seminary aroused in Stalin a burning sense of protest, which 
intensified his revolutionary sentiments, so that at the age of fifteen 
he became a revolutionary.
 It described how in 1897 Stalin became 
 Robert Service also suggests that Stalin was fastidious in the extreme about 
ensuring no details of his childhood be made public, on account of not wanting to 
shine a light on his Georgian origins, nor on his unhappy childhood and religious 
upbringing. See Service, Stalin, p.13 
 See Various, The Life of Stalin, p.1 and The Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute, Joseph 
Stalin, p. 9 
 The Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute, Joseph Stalin,  p.10 
the leader of the Marxist circles in the Seminary and how in August 
1898 he officially joined the Tiflis organisation of the Russian Social-
Democratic Labour Party, becoming a member of the Messameh 
Dassy Group, the first Georgian Social-Democratic organisation, 
which in the period between 1893 and 1898 played a certain positive 
part in the propagation of Marxist ideas.
 Once again, the Emil 
Ludwig interview was quoted, in which Stalin asserted that he joined 
the revolutionary movement at the age of fifteen, having become 
acquainted with the works of Marx and Engels.
 The work written by 
Stalins colleagues also goes into slightly more depth, although does 
not date the beginning of Stalins interest in Marxism until 1897, 
which is no doubt closer to the truth.
 Indeed, aged fifteen Stalin 
was, depending on whose dates you followed, either still at Gori 
Church School or in his first year of the Seminary. Mikls Kun 
suggests that at this point Stalin had not even taken the entrance exam 
for the Tiflis Seminary and that there is not a single authentic source 
verifying that Soso had been in any way connected to the small group 
of Russian Marxists working in Georgia before his arrival in Tiflis.
This certainly seems to be the case: there were no references in the 
Georgian memoirs of the young Soso having any links outside of Gori 
or his small group of friends from the town, and no biographers since 
have unearthed any information proving otherwise. At this time, the 
works of Darwin, Marx and Plekhanov were incredibly difficult to 
acquire and the works of Lenin almost impossible to come by. 
Furthermore, fellow Seminarists, such as Iremashvili, indicated that 
from his third year onwards at the Seminary, Soso began to 
voraciously devour all kinds of books on nature, politics, economics 
and history, which he had smuggled into the seminary and read by 
candlelight. Prior to this period, however, there is no evidence of this 
kind of activity.
 Yet, as Kun highlighted, these small issues were of 
 Ibid., pp.10-11 
 Joseph Stalin, Stalins Kampf, p.18 
 Various, The Life of Stalin, p.1 
  Kun, Stalin, p.37 
 Ibid., p.37 
no concern to the official Stalin historian: their aim was not to recount 
a truer version of events, but to create a myth that would strengthen 
Stalin and his regime.
 In both the official works mentioned above, 
Stalin was expelled from the Seminary for propagating Marxism.  
How far were these biographical writings not only influenced 
by the particularities of the Stalinist regime, but also by wider trends 
in biographical writing?  The official and sympathetic biographies 
published on Stalin in the West are reminiscent of ur-biographies, as 
described by Hermione Lee.
 These primal forms of biography, 
such as biblical stories and other very early accounts of lives, contain 
all the information about births, dates, lives and deaths of subjects and 
emphasise certain features while entirely ignoring others. They often 
present amazing facts without any qualification or demurral, and 
they want to impress the reader with the sense of a personality or an 
event of importance. All are interested in the effects of a life on 
others, whether disciples, victims, a nation, or posterity.
  Equally, 
such facts and omissions were present in the official Stalin 
biographies: there was a clear lack of information on family life, yet a 
high emphasis on revolutionary activity at a young age. For example, 
Lavrenti Beria stated that Stalin led eight revolutionary circles while 
still a teenager, but no explanation of how he achieved this under the 
conditions at the Seminary was given. The hugely varying official 
accounts of Stalins early revolutionary activities all hoped to impress 
a sense of his heavy involvement in the social-democratic circles 
during this period.
 Ibid., p.37 
 H. Lee, Biography: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford, 2009), p.21 
 Lee, Biography, pp.19-22  
 See L. Beria, On the History of the Bolshevik Organisations in Transcaucasia 
(London, 1939). As well as the official Soviet biographical information published 
on Stalin, sympathisers of Stalins also wrote biographies that similarly emphasised 
his happy childhood and high level of revolutionary activity during his Seminary 
days. See, for example, E. Yaroslavsky, Landmarks in the Life of Stalin (London, 
1942); I. Montagu, Stalin: A Short Biography (London, 1942), which was published 
by the Communist Party of Great Britain. In Montagus work Soso was a very 
happy, handsome and clever child. See also H. Barbusse, Staline: Un Monde 
Nouveau Vu A Travers Un Homme (Paris, 1935) in which the Djugashvili are all 
flatteringly, if not romantically, depicted. Stalins mother is described as having a 
beautiful, serious face and black eyes, so black that they seemed to overflow into 
However, it is the unofficial versions of Stalins life which 
reveal much about the lives and times of those writing about Stalin 
and the changing Western approaches to him as a man and as a leader. 
The examination of the evolution of the Western historiography of the 
young Stalin provides a case study for biographical writing on Stalin 
over the whole period of study that assesses the changing ways in 
which Stalin himself has been viewed by the West. Within this, the 
extent of the impacts of the key influences on writing set in this thesis 
can also be evaluated.  
2. The two Sosos 
The historiography of the young Stalin begins with the publication in 
Germany in 1932 of Joseph Iremashvilis book Stalin Und Die 
Tragdie Georgiens, which provided the most vital of the early 
sources of biographical information on Stalin specifically relating to 
his very early years, and which became a foundation for the 
biographical works which came later.
 Iremashvili was born in Gori 
dark bruises on the skin around them (p.11) and his father as a good man...he did 
really everything he possibly could for him [Stalin] (p.11). The adolescent Stalin 
[when he] grew taller, he was rather frail in appearance; his features were very 
delicate and he had an intellectual head with abundant thick hair, as black as ink. 
The slimness of youth accentuated the Georgian oval of his face and the somewhat 
languid eye of his race. This young militant presented a mixture curious enough 
because it was almost perfect, of the intellectual and the worker. Not very tall, 
narrow-shouldered, with a long face, a small bear, rather heavy eyes and a thin 
straight nose, and with his flat cap worn a little to one side on his plentiful black 
hair - that is what he was like then, this conqueror of multitudes, this upsetter of 
worlds. (p. 18). 
Joseph Iremashvili, Stalin Und Die Tragdie Georgiens (Berlin, 1932). Despite 
Iremashvilis deportation, his account of his and Stalins childhood and adolescence 
is relatively measured. However, despite appearing objective and balanced, it must 
be viewed with the conditions of its creation in mind. Boris Souvarine, for example, 
states that the book is often contradictory and untrue although it is noteworthy that 
he nevertheless still uses Stalin Und Die Tragdie Georgiens as a source on Stalins 
childhood.  Iremashvilis book has only been translated into Russian from the 
German. Otherwise comprehensive referencing and sizeable quotations can be 
found in English in the following works: Trotsky, Stalin: An Appraisal of the Man 
and his Influence (London, 1947); H. Montgomery Hyde, Stalin: The History of A 
Dictator (London, 1971); E. Ellis Smith, The Young Stalin: The Early Years of an 
Elusive Revolutionary (London, 1968) 
around the same time as Stalin, and they became friends and 
playmates from a young age. Keke, Stalins mother, even went so far 
as to call him her other Soso, because he was such a frequent a 
visitor to the Djugashvili home.
 The two Sosos went to the same 
school, sang in the same choir, and eventually both of them ended up 
at the Theological Seminary of Tiflis. Having been firm friends in 
their childhood, the young men continued to be on amicable terms 
throughout their time at the Seminary. Afterwards, Iremashvili 
became a schoolteacher ,as Stalin embarked upon his revolutionary 
career. Edward Ellis Smith claimed that Iremashvili even ended up 
teaching Stalins firstborn son, Yasha, before the 1917 Revolution.
Yet even the oldest of his friends could not escape Stalins 
persecutions: as early as May 20
 1921, Iremashvili was arrested by 
the Bolshevik secret police operating in the Caucasus under Stalins 
direction. Later, Iremashvilis sister Aneta personally saw Stalin on 
the matter of her brothers imprisonment, and in one of his few acts of 
compassion Stalin released his old friend. However, this was not the 
end of the affair: Stalin then despatched another old schoolmate to try 
and recruit Iremashvili to the Bolshevik cause. He refused and, along 
with sixty-one other Georgian prisoners, was subsequently deported 
to Germany on October 11, 1922.
Iremashvilis account was a detailed look at the Djugashvili 
household and gave unparalleled insight into what life there might 
have been like. Iremashvili was warm about Ekaterina (Keke), 
Stalins mother: he described her as a loving and attentive mother and 
friendly to Stalins schoolmates. Soso was lanky, sinewy and 
freckled, with an aquiline nose. His face was narrow, elongated and 
pockmarked. His eyes were dark, bold and vivid. He was also a 
Iremashvili, Stalin Und Die Tragdie Georgiens, p.10. Soso was the young Joseph 
Djugashvilis nickname.  
 Ellis Smith, The Young Stalin, p.25. Smiths book continued the work of Wolfe 
and his contemporaries by critically analysing the available primary sources. 
Through his own assumptions and judgements he managed to produce an entire 
volume on the young Stalin. However, it was very similar to what had come before 
and did not provide any vital new information. 
 Ellis Smith, The Young Stalin, pp.24-25 
typical school bully: he was physically stronger than other boys and 
confident that he would win any fist fight. He dared his fellow pupils 
to disagree with him.
 Of Vissarion (Beso), Stalins father, he gave a 
rare physical description: he was a heavy-set man of imposing 
appearance, with thick black eyebrows and a black bristling 
moustache, who habitually wore the conventional Georgian tchoka, 
blue trousers thrust into knee-length boots, and a fur cap. He 
described him as heartless, violent and a drunk. Beso habitually drank 
away his wages, so much so that the responsibility of the rent as well 
as supporting the family as a whole eventually fell solely upon Keke. 
He mercilessly beat his son and wife.
Along with this rare insight into the Djugashvili home, one of 
the most important contributions that Iremashvilis work made to 
knowledge of this time of Stalins life was by giving account of life in 
the Seminary at the very time when Soso was evolving into a young 
Marxist revolutionary. Iremashvilis recollections of the monotony 
and austerity of those days has provided a vivid image of what life 
was like within the Seminary walls and how such an atmosphere was 
conducive to Stalin becoming involved in the underground social-
democratic movement. Seminary life was sad and monotonous. The 
Seminarists felt like prisoners and were despondent and sullen. 
Whenever youthful temperament manifested itself, it was swiftly 
suppressed by the monks. There was a strong anti-Georgian feeling 
instated by the Rectors: all Georgian literature and newspapers were 
forbidden, and the Tsarist police often carried out inspections to 
ensure this rule was being adhered to.
 This period of Stalins life, 
and specifically the elements that characterised his time in the 
Seminary, are of particular significance since it was this experience 
that actively drove him into the arms of the Marxist underground 
movement: 
Iremashvili, Stalin Und Die Tragdie Georgiens, pp.11-12 
 Iremashvili, Stalin Und Die Tragdie Georgiens, p.12 
 Ibid., pp. 16-17. We can only speculate as to whether this anti-Georgian feeling 
initiated Stalins later own apparent desire to suppress his Georgian-ness.  
In protest against the humiliating regime and the Jesuitical 
methods that prevailed in the seminary, I was ready to 
become, and eventually did become, a revolutionary, a 
believer in Marxism as the only genuinely revolutionary 
doctrine. 
For its ground-breaking insight into the Djugashvili household 
and life at the Theological Seminary, and also because of his 
credentials as a contemporary of Stalin, Iremashvilis memoir has 
been used in the works of a range of biographers from the 1930s until 
the present day. Even after the opening of the archives in the 1990s, 
this important testimony of Stalins early life by his childhood friend 
has remained a vital and irreplaceable primary source. Given Stalins 
later extreme reticence to make any of these details public, this 
memoir has been a rare and essential source to those investigating 
Stalins youth, and the detail with which it reported was in stark 
contrast to the official publications that were being released inside 
and outside of the Soviet Union while Stalin was in power.
3. Emigrs, exiles and socialists: the early works, 1932-1947 
Iremashvilis book was especially significant in this historiography as 
from it there stemmed several other accounts of Stalins early years in 
the period preceding the Cold War. Reflecting the trend in the larger 
historiography, those writing about the young Stalin in this era, and 
especially in the period preceding the Second World War, were 
migrs, exiles, escapees and socialists who had become estranged 
from Stalins Soviet Union. Focusing specifically on Stalins youth 
reveals the way in which this particular facet of biography on Stalin 
 Stalin, An Interview with the German author Emil Ludwig, p.11. This is also in 
Stalin, Stalins Kampf,  p.19 
 Iremashvili was not the only classmate of Stalins to publish a memoir in this 
early period: Gori classmate Domentii Gogokhia and Seminary classmate Gregorii 
Glurdzhidze also wrote about Stalins childhood, and these accounts are used by 
Emilian Yaroslavsky, Eugene Lyons, Leon Trotsky, Boris Souvarine and Bertram 
D. Wolfe.  However, copies of these works are impossible to come by in the UK, 
and there are no copies in the Lenin Library in Moscow, nor in the Hoover 
Institution. 
was built upon from the small amounts of information offered by 
Iremashvili and the other Georgian memoirs over the course of the 
period of study. As the period moved through and beyond the Second 
World War, an increasing number of Western socialist and non-
socialist writers also began writing on Stalin. As this thesis has 
already shown, this was largely due to an increased concern with the 
nature of Stalin as leader of the USSR. 
The first issue faced by writers on Stalin in the West in this 
period, and one replicated throughout the majority of the period of 
study, was the problem of source accessibility and reliability, with the 
only available sources being the Georgian memoirs and the official 
biographies. Leon Trotsky and Bertram D. Wolfe were the first to 
employ a systematic and productive analysis of these few first-hand 
sources available to them in order to construct an accurate picture of 
Stalins childhood. Trotskys writings make an important contribution 
to the historiography of Stalins childhood, principally because his 
method for examining the facts around Stalins childhood provided a 
comprehensive comparison of sources. Trotsky himself remarked of 
this method that while it may have been an inconvenient way of doing 
things, the epoch of lies in which he found himself left him no 
choice: one of the principal aims of the gigantic factory of lies that 
was the Kremlin was to manufacture a new biography for Stalin, and 
as a result all sources had to be held up for analysis.
 Trotsky did this 
by referencing, amongst others, the official biographies, Iremashvilis 
and other Georgian memoirs, Boris Souvarine and Emil Ludwig, 
relying heavily on Iremashvili, who he believed to provide the most 
reliable and complete source of information.
 Boris Souvarine too 
referenced Iremashvili and the accounts of a couple more of Stalins 
schoolmates, but was similarly disparaging about them. Iremashvilis 
book, for instance, was too suspect to be accepted by serious persons 
without confirmation of the contents.
 As a result, his chapters on 
 Trotsky, Stalin, p.xiv 
 Ibid., p.5 
 Souvarine, Stalin, p.3 
the young Soso in Gori and at the Theological Seminary were short 
and did not provide any new information.  
Similarly, Bertram D. Wolfes later biography was, after 
Trotskys, the earliest example of a consolidation of all previous 
historiography, which was critically examined in detail in order to 
attempt to construct the most likely version of the events of Stalins 
childhood and youth. Wolfe also directly tackled the question of the 
highly conflicting information found in official and non-official 
literature, explaining where the methodological difficulties lay in 
trying to piece together this part of Stalins life (or indeed any part of 
his personal life). He called all previous works  those of Trotsky, 
Lavrenti Beria, Emilian Yaroslavsky and the Georgian memoirists   
shadowy and insubstantial
 and believed the official biographies 
were more notable for what they left out than what they put in. Wolfe 
was one of the first writers on Stalins life to acknowledge the 
problem of sources in the Soviet Union, identifying one of the 
principal challenges facing the historian of the Soviet Union as 
finding relevant documentation that had not been locked away or 
destroyed; the mountains of documents, general histories, party 
histories, memoirs that Wolfe described as banned or burnt.
tackled another main challenge to the historian: 
In the Soviet Union, state agencies are the sole publisher, 
entrust the task, direct the writing, dictate the approach, the 
conclusions, censor, edit, correct, publish, market at wholesale 
and retail, purchase for schools, libraries and institutions, 
reward, recall, condemn, replace, destroy. Account after 
account has received the imprimatur and been declared 
official, only to be publicly denounced, or quietly withdrawn 
in favour of a different version within a year.
This is a valuable insight into the ever increasing awareness in the 
West of the nature of the Stalinist regime. Wolfe was writing in the 
1940s, after the Second World War, after the Terror and not so long 
 Wolfe, Three Who Made A Revolution, p. 405 
 Wolfe, Three Who Made a Revolution, p.405 
 Ibid., p. 406 
before Stalins death. His book suggests that by this time for writers 
who had links with the Soviet Union, who had researched, lived or 
worked there, the mystery surrounding the nature of the regime had 
started to lose its hold. Wolfes acknowledgement of the difficulties 
facing a biographer of Stalin is the first example of a Western-born 
historian engaging with this historiography and its context. His 
analysis was deepened by his attempt to construct a complete picture 
of Stalins childhood and youth, not simply by picking the parts out of 
biographies to whose authors he was politically sympathetic, but by 
holding all the accounts up against each other, and trying to deduce 
the most likely version of events. In this way, he analysed the 
accounts of Trotsky, Iremashvili, Ludwig, Yaroslavsky, Beria, 
Barbusse, The Marx-Lenin-Engels Institute, the various authors of 
Life of Stalin  A Symposium, as well as other Georgian memoirists 
and Stalins own Collected Works. Wolfes deductions are mostly 
expected: he discounted, or used highly selectively and cautiously, 
those accounts that were clearly extensively edited and severely 
biased, and ended up largely relying on Iremashvili. 
Wolfes early foray into a critical analysis of the 
historiography of Stalins youth provided a key turning point in 
reporting this period of Stalins life: no longer would a simple 
collation of all the primary sources be adequate. They would have to 
be analysed, compared, and assessed for bias, editing and censorship. 
An analysis of Stalin and his rule began to take shape, not simply as a 
statement of facts, but as a line of questioning as to how and why this 
man came to be the type of leader he was. Here, in effect, we see the 
apparition of the secondary sources on Stalins early life, and key 
themes emerged in the depiction of Stalin during this period. These 
emergent themes demonstrate the continuity between constructions of 
Stalin as an adult and as a child in this era. As highlighted in Chapter 
1, the adult Stalin was at once mediocre, coarse, unsophisticated, yet 
also sly, Machiavellian, determined and cruel. These themes were 
repeated in writing on Soso as a schoolboy and young Seminarist, 
who was in turn unremarkable, a bully, and in whom was deeply 
ingrained the sense of inferiority and resentment of the Georgian 
people. 
Trotskys influential construction, for example, of Stalin as 
dull, talentless and mediocre was at the centre of his biographical 
writing, and this method of constructing Stalin as the inferior other 
manifested itself just as clearly in his writing on the young Soso 
Djugashvili as it did on the adult Stalin: according to Trotsky, far 
from the brilliant young boy his sympathisers chose to portray him as, 
he was in fact neither the talented singer, artist, sportsman or student 
he had been claimed to be, and he went on to become none of these in 
his adult life.
 He was, in actual fact, an entirely average schoolboy. 
Robert Service suggested that these ideas were in fact commonplace 
amongst Stalins political opponents at the time  Mensheviks and 
Socialist-Revolutionaries  many of whom could see nothing more to 
Stalin than his adequate administration skills.
 Similarly, as a 
supporter of Trotskys theory regarding Stalins mediocrity, 
Souvarine had also developed this angle in his writing on the young 
Stalin: His reading and the teaching at school provided him with the 
rudiments of education: neither have left visible traces in his writings 
and speeches. In that, he was unlike any other notable revolutionary 
of modern times.
 Souvarine went on to assert that there was no 
great mystery to Stalin, and certainly nothing of interest hidden in his 
childhood. The regime he went on to create was not the fruit of early 
meditation, or of a great premeditated plan.
Iremashvili was the first to note how Besos brutality affected 
the young Soso: the boy soon began to extend his hatred and thirst for 
vengeance against his father to all those who had, or could have, any 
power over him.
 During the 1940s, further interpretations of Stalins 
early life, and the role that it might have played in his adult character 
 Trotsky, Stalin, p.11 
 Service, Stalin, p.4 
 Ibid., p.4 
 Ibid., p.5 
 Iremashvili, Stalin Und Die Tragdie Georgiens, p.12 
and the nature of his regime, also began to emerge. For instance, 
Eugene Lyons wrote in 1940: 
Consider how many torturing resentments young Soso had 
been born into and acquired. He was in the lowest stratum of a 
conquered and despised race. As soon as they were old 
enough to know anything, boys in Transcaucasia knew that 
they hated the Russian gendarmes, soldiers, and gold-braided 
officers. These Russians personified oppression.
Throughout his chapter on Stalins youth, Lyons accentuated these 
feelings of hatred and frustration, which were bred in Georgian boys 
like Soso, describing the feuds and vendettas they were constantly 
involved in, even within their own families. He wrote that, in a 
culture of fierce resentments, young boys cultivated an inner pride, 
the secret pride of persecuted people, which sustained them. To this 
must be added Sosos private hatred of his unhappy home, of his 
fathers brutality, of his own crippled arm and of his mediocrity in 
school.
 In this way Lyons consolidation of all the negative 
elements of Sosos young life were for the first time brought together 
with the intention of demonstrating that Stalins psychological 
tendencies could possibly have their roots in this early part of his life. 
Deutscher similarly provided an early amateur psychoanalysis, 
though he focused on the social aspect of Sosos negative feelings. 
Sosos sense of inferiority, against which, according to Lyons, he 
cultivated his secret pride of persecuted people, was what shaped 
him and later spurred him on:  Soso felt socially inferior and, though 
bright and with common sense, he was not refined, imaginative or an 
intellectual. In this way, wrote Deutscher, he differed from his peers, 
such as Lenin and Trotsky. Soso was the son of peasants, and even in 
the Church he would not have climbed far. He took this sense of 
inferiority with him to the Socialist underground and beyond. 
 E. Lyons, Stalin: Czar of All The Russias (London, 1940), p. 27 
 Ibid., p. 27 
 Deutscher, Stalin, p.26 
Many of these works are also the first references to Stalins 
physical deformities, such as his pockmarked face and withered arm. 
Trotsky noted his pockmarks, webbed toes and withered left arm, as 
recorded by Souvarine and some official police records, although 
surprisingly found these of little interest.
 Deutscher also pointed out 
the childhood origins of these physical attributes, writing that after 
falling ill with smallpox at the age of six his face remained 
pockmarked and, shortly after developing an ulcer on his left hand, 
he could no longer bend his arm at the elbow.
 Lyons depicted him 
as the unhandsome, sulking, handicapped boy of Kekes heart.
Wolfe wrote that the smallpox attack left Stalins swarthy skin oily 
and pockmarked and that his other distinctive marks were the 
joining together of two toes of one foot, and some accounts reported 
that his left arm was slightly atrophied.
 Trotsky and Wolfe 
disagreed on the origins of the withered arm. Trotsky believed it to be 
the result of alcoholic heredity on his fathers side, further proven 
by the webbed toes.
 Wolfe disagreed, calling this statement pure 
speculation, suggesting instead that it was only mildly incapacitated, 
probably due to a childhood attack of infantile paralysis.
 In yet 
another suggestion, Deutscher attributed it to blood poisoning 
resulting in an ulcer on his left hand, an illness which, like the 
smallpox, had nearly killed the young Soso.
 Lyons claimed Stalin 
was born with his left arm partially paralysed and two toes grown 
together unnaturally.
 Yet while all these works refer to Stalins 
deformities, they are not given extensive attention and do not seem to 
form a key part of the construction of the young Stalin. 
 Trotsky, Stalin, p.6. These deformities might have been expected to provide 
Trotsky with another point on which to belittle Stalin. However, he remarked that 
they are scarcely of passing interest and that the atmosphere of his home, and his 
parents characters were much more important. 
 Deutscher, Stalin, p.3 
 Lyons, Stalin, p.24 
 Wolfe, Three Who Made A Revolution, 408. 
 Trotsky, Stalin,  
 Ibid., p.408 
 Deutscher, Stalin, pp. 2-3 
 Lyons, Stalin, pp.22-23 
Much more prominent is the way in which, by its inevitable 
focus on his ethnic origins, the historiography of Stalins childhood 
also relates to the constructions of Stalin as the Georgian, Asiatic or 
non-Russian other. In this period, Trotsky, for instance, saw little of 
the Georgians gaiety, sociability and forthrightness in Stalins 
character.
 Instead, he considered the notion of Asiatic as applied to 
Stalin, stating that Leonid Krasin, the first to call Stalin an Asiatic, 
was referring to that blending of grit, shrewdness, craftiness and 
cruelty which has been considered characteristic of the statesmen of 
Asia. Bukharin, he wrote, later shortened this appellation to Genghis 
Khan.
 However, Trotsky stated that due to its location, Gori and 
therefore Stalin were not technically Asiatic, despite the latters 
propensity towards those characteristics deemed typical. Instead, 
Trotsky likened Stalins temperament to that found in the 
Mediterranean countries and the Balkans, characterised by a rare 
combination of the more common lazy shiftlessness and explosive 
irascibility with the more uncommon cold natures, in whom phlegm 
is combined with stubbornness and slyness.
 In this respect, Stalin 
may not have been Asiatic, but he was certainly not Russian. Later in 
the book, however, Trotsky described Stalins method of rule 
(specifically relating to the cult of personality) as demonstrating that 
his ambition had acquired an untutored Asiatic cast intensified by 
European technique, again removing any Russianness from Stalins 
method of leadership.
 Deutscher too highlighted Stalins Eastern 
origins, even if he later compared Stalin to previous Russian 
leaders.
 Keke, for example, possessed the infinite patience and 
submissiveness of the eastern peasant woman
 and Gori was a place 
where both in legend and in reality Georgians had fought against 
Russians.
 Eugene Lyons presents the clearest example of depicting 
 Trotsky, Stalin, p.3 
 Ibid., p.1.  
 Ibid., p. 3 
 Ibid., p.393 
 See Chapter 1. 
 Trotsky, Stalin, p.5. 
 Ibid., p.5 
Stalin through emphasis on his Asiatic character, stating that A dark-
visaged, pock-marked, slow-moving Asiatic dominates the landscape 
of world affairs to-day.
 He was further described as an Asiatic 
despot, although for Lyons this meant he remained true to the 
ancient Russian pattern, rather than differentiating him from 
Russians,
 and Stalins Georgian heritage meant he had been born 
into a slothful society shot through with hatreds.
 The Georgians 
were tough, crafty, patient, and their historical submission to the 
despised Russians was deeply ingrained in Stalins whole 
personality.
 As well as demonstrating these common themes in 
biographical writing on the child and adult Stalin, these biographies 
also demonstrate a turn away from the ur-biographical style of the 
official publications, more in keeping with wider historiographical 
trends of the twentieth century. The twentieth centurys overarching 
trend in biographical writing distanced itself from the earlier kind of 
eulogistic account based on highly selective and often inaccurate 
information. In the previous century, the biographers task had been 
to narrate a great life. He or she was an ally of reputation, and even of 
legend, something distinctly recognisable in the official works. 
However, non-official works during the Soviet period worked to 
establish a more reliable and complete picture of Stalin and were 
consequently more aligned with biographical trends. This was partly 
due, in the first half of the twentieth century at least, to a notably 
adverse reaction to Victorianism: an age of anti-heroism that aimed to 
 Lyons, Stalin, p.13 
 Ibid., p.15 
 Ibid., p.25 
 Ibid., p.31. In these biographies there is also some discussion about whether one 
of Stalins parents was in fact Ossetian. Lyons, for instance, claimed that it was 
Stalins mother who was Ossetian, whereas Trotsky suggested it was more likely 
his father, the latter being the more common suggestion. In both cases it is made 
clear that this could be where Stalins bad temperament came from, as the Ossetians 
were seen to be not Georgian and therefore possessing none of their good qualities. 
Instead they were seen as coarse and uncouth mountain people. See Lyons, Stalin, 
p. 29 and Trotsky, Stalin, p. 3. Service also mentions the possibility of Beso being 
Ossetian in Service, Stalin, p. 18 as does Kun in Kun, Stalin, p. 10. Montefiore 
suggests Beso was indeed Ossetian. See S. S. Montefiore, Young Stalin (London, 
2007), pp.16-17. 
expose a subjects most innermost life and thoughts and with it their 
weaknesses.
 This was manifested in these biographies by attempts 
to understand Stalins nature and temperament by delving into his 
youth. There was also a moral dimension to biographical writing in 
the nineteenth century and the first half of the twentieth century, 
which saw an emphasis on the strengths and failings of personalities, 
in a way which seeks to allocate blame for certain events or 
decisions.
 This tendency is clearly present in biographical writing 
on the young Stalin, where Trotsky, Deutscher and their 
contemporaries have identified in Soso the same characteristics they 
ascribed to the adult Stalin in their damning assessments of his 
personality, ideology, leadership and regime. 
4. From the Cold War to Perestroika 
The period from 1947 to perestroika encompassed enormous changes 
within the Soviet Union, as well as in terms of its relations with the 
West. Yet Stalins death in 1953 at the height of the Cold War, the 
ensuing process of de-Stalinisation, the Khrushchev and Brezhnev 
eras and the Cold War itself in fact had little impact on the 
historiography of Stalins youth. This for the most part did not stop 
Western historians and political scientists from tackling the issue of 
Stalin and Stalinism. However, the global political context meant that 
during the Cold War the focus shifted strongly towards understanding 
the nature of Stalinism as a regime, the Stalinist leadership and Soviet 
communism more generally. This was exemplified by the extreme 
politicisation of the field in the early Cold War era, its focus on 
Stalinism as totalitarianism and the later debates within the field 
relating to the nature of the regime and its leadership that emerged 
from the revisionist challenge.
 M. Pachter, The Biographer Himself: An Introduction in M. Pachter (ed.), 
Telling Lives: The Biographer's Art (Washington, 1979), p.13 
 B. Caine, Biography and History  (London, 2010), p. 41 
 An exception to this was Edward Ellis Smith who attempted to piece together 
Stalins early life.  Yet despite Smiths efforts resulting in an entire volume on the 
As a result, there were only three notable works relating to the 
biography of the young Stalin (and indeed of the adult Stalin) 
published throughout this whole period. The first two were those of 
Svetlana Allilueva, Stalins daughter. Twenty Letters to A Friend and 
Only One Year, which provided for the first time in thirty or so years 
a relatively viable primary source on Stalins childhood.
 Alliluevas 
works have been used extensively as sources by historians since their 
publication, as they gave an unprecedented first-hand, candid account 
of the man behind the politician: not Stalin as a leader so much as 
Stalin as a father, husband, son and friend. Svetlanas accounts were, 
apart from the Ludwig interview, the only record of Stalin himself 
referring to his parents: 
He sometimes told me about his childhood. Fights, coarseness, 
were not unusual in the poor, half literate family, in which the 
head of the household drank. The mother would beat the boy, 
her husband would beat her.
Perhaps her most valuable contribution to the development of ideas 
surrounding her fathers youth, however, was her claim that he was 
never religious, even as a youngster and that the result of this was that 
the effects that his religious education had on him were the reverse of 
those intended: extreme scepticism of everything heavenly, of 
everything sublime. The result was total materialism, the cynical 
realism of an earthly, sober, practical and low view of life.
Allilueva believed that, instead of acquiring faith, Stalin came to be 
two-faced, a hypocrite and a bigot, and it is to his religious education 
that she linked much of what came later: 
young Stalin, it failed to offer any new information or methods not already present 
in the works that had been published in the pre-Cold War era. See Ellis Smith, The 
Young Stalin. 
 S. Allilueva, Only One Year (London, 1969) and Twenty Letters To A Friend 
(London, 1968).  Allilueva escaped the Soviet Union and only published her 
memoirs once she was safely in the United States. 
 Allilueva, Only One Year, p.340 
 Ibid., p.341 
I am convinced the parochial schools in which he spent more 
than ten years played an immense role, setting my father's 
character for the rest of his life, strengthening and intensifying 
inborn traits.
The accounts of Stalins innermost family life that were offered by 
Allilueva in both her books and her own interpretation of the role of 
his youth in the formation of his character were key contributions to 
this historiography. Her recollections of her fathers few stories of his 
childhood helped to legitimise the memories of the Georgian 
memoirists and provided a rare account of Stalin himself speaking, to 
the best of our knowledge, truthfully about his parents. 
In addition to Alliluevas books, a Georgian memoir on 
Stalins childhood was published in Paris in 1979: Joseph 
Davrichewys Ah Ce  uon rigolait bien avec mon copain Staline. 
Davrichewy provided an invaluable source for many of the same 
reasons as Iremashvili had: he grew up with Soso Djugashvili in Gori, 
went to school with him, played with him and knew the Djugashvili 
family well. His memoirs also contained an added layer of interest: 
Davrichewys father Damian, the police chief of Gori when the boys 
were young, had been rumoured to be Stalins biological father. 
Davrichewy addressed this issue early on in his book, stating that he 
could neither confirm nor deny the claims and that it remained Kekes 
secret. He did state, however, that it was more than intimate relations 
which linked my father to the very pretty Kato Djugashvili, who, by 
the way, was no man-eater.
 It is clear that Davrichewy was not 
ashamed of the possibility that he might be Stalins half-brother: he 
happily entertained the claims, and perhaps through this cryptic 
sentence about Keke and Damians relations he hoped to continue to 
propagate the mystery, as well as the second-hand fame it afforded 
him. This suggestion is further supported by Davrichewy highlighting 
 Ibid., p.341 
 For more recent writing on the question of Stalins paternity, see for example 
Montefiore, Young Stalin ,pp. 20-22 and Service, Stalin, p.17 
 J. Davrichewy, Ah Ce  uon rigolait bien avec mon copain Staline (Paris, 1979),  
p. 11 
how different Beso and Soso were, heavily hinting that something 
was amiss. He wrote of their opposite personalities and physical 
appearance - weak and bland versus strong and measured - and 
Besos rumoured impotence, concluding that never before have we 
seen a sheep father a lion. It was a mystery, and it still remains 
unexplained.
 His overall description of Beso was as a puny, 
brutal little man, insipid, with a temper, and most especially, 
jealous.
 As with Iremashvili, Davrichewy described the heavy 
drinking and the beatings that characterised Besos interactions with 
his family. As for Soso, Davrichewy depicted him as a typical young 
boy who enjoyed romping around with his friends and being 
mischievous, but also recounted how pious, though also volatile, Soso 
 Physically, he was described only in terms of not resembling 
his father.  
Allilueva and Davrichewys new insights into Stalins early 
life helped to complete a picture otherwise completely hidden by 
Stalin himself and to corroborate Iremashvili depictions of Besos 
brutality. Assuming their accuracy, they also exposed Stalins lie to 
Ludwig that his parents did not mistreat him. The tracing of this one 
element from Stalins childhood  his fathers brutality provided a 
highly illustrative and summarising example of the influence and 
challenges presented by the drip feed of information from the Soviet 
Union. From Iremashvili to Allilueva, it took forty years filled with 
conjecture and conflicting information to corroborate just one key fact 
from Stalins childhood.
The trend for employing psychohistory in historical writing that 
occurred in the 1960s and 1970s is also reflected in the historiography 
 Ibid., p. 28 
 Ibid., p.26 
 Ibid., p.47: He was very religious.Sometimes, after committing a bad deed or 
blaspheming, as he often did, he would spend hours being silent and still. In these 
moments, we preferred to leave him alone as at the slightest joke he would become 
angry and fight.  
 One other work of note published in the late 1970s was Boris Bazhanovs 
memoirs (see Chapter 1), which were a more complete account of the early Stalinist 
regime than he had previously written in his 1930 book Avec Staline dans le 
Kremlin. See Doyle, Bazhanov and the Damnation of Stalin. 
of this period.
 As we have seen, Lyons and Deutscher made some of 
these first forays into Stalins psychology, but it was not until 1974 
that Robert C. Tuckers Stalin as Revolutionary made a first 
concerted attempt to understand Stalins mind and the origins of the 
brutality of his rule. Tucker suggested that it was in response to 
Besos drunken violence that Stalin developed the vindictiveness that 
would characterize him later in life
 and that Kekes unconditional 
admiration for her son meant that Soso grew up taking such 
admiration as his due, expecting to be idolized and to be worthy of 
 Tucker believed that comprehending Stalin meant understanding 
that for him people were classed either as friends or enemies. If a 
given individual was neither friend nor foe, he was still potentially 
one or the other, and for Stalin this was always a fact of cardinal 
significance.
 The roots of this defining feature of Stalins mental 
world were to be found in his childhood. According to Tucker, 
character and culture coalesced and reinforced each other in this way 
of perceiving others: Soso was a gifted and unusually sensitive boy 
who had been scarred by early experiences, including his fathers 
brutality. He had emerged as a hardened, vigilant youngster with a 
self-idealizing tendency, on the one hand, and a vengeful streak and 
indomitable will to fight and to win, on the other.
 Combined with 
the Georgian setting of his childhood and its Russifying overseers, 
these elements gave Stalin a ready-made hostile division of people 
into friends and enemies, together with such cultural traditions as the 
blood feud.
Tucker also highlighted that in his adult life Stalin actively tried to 
repress his Georgian mannerisms. He did this, for instance, by 
 See, for example, B. B. Wolman (ed.), The Pyschoanalytic Interpretation of 
History (New York, 1971) ,which exemplifies this trend in a series of essays which 
tackle specific historical subjects through a psychoanalytical approach  (including 
Stalin), as well as the challenges of merging the historical and psychoanalytic 
disciplines.  
 R. C. Tucker,  Stalin as Revolutionary 1879-1929: A Study in History and 
Personality (London, 1974), p. 73 
 Ibid., p.76 
 Ibid., p.425 
 Ibid., p.425 
 Ibid., p.425 
speaking Russian in a low, monotonous voice, which he further 
softened at points when his Georgian accent would be the most 
noticeable.
 It was perhaps his attitude towards Yakov, his son from 
his first marriage, which showed most explicitly how little he enjoyed 
being reminded of his Georgian origins. When Yakov arrived in 
Moscow and joined his fathers household in the 1920s after being 
brought up in Georgia, he was a living reminder of Stalins past. He 
looked and dressed like a Georgian and had trouble speaking Russian. 
Probably for this reason Stalin disapproved of him, and of him 
coming to Moscow.  He was so contemptuous of him that when 
Yakov, in despair over his fathers hostility, attempted to commit 
suicide, Stalin ridiculed him for bungling the attempt, exclaiming: 
Ha He couldnt even shoot straight.
 Tuckers psychological 
analysis of Stalin attributed this contempt towards Yakov as a 
manifestation of the repressed feelings of shame and self-contempt 
that he felt about being Georgian, feelings that he could not bear to 
feel in regards to himself and so experienced as disdain for his son.
Daniel Rancour-Laferriere similarly took a psychohistorical 
approach, describing his study of Stalin as a psychoanalytic 
investigation of selected and attested behaviors in Stalin, from 
childhood to old age.
 Searching Stalins childhood for clues to his 
later personality, Rancour-Laferriere identified a fascination with the 
idea of beating as central to Stalins psychology and leadership. He 
recognised this as a lifelong need to beat his opponents, which 
stemmed from the beatings inflicted on him by his father.
manifested itself, for example, in Stalins fascination with Lenins 
formulaic question Who will beat whom?, as well as in the beat the 
 Ibid., p.432 
 As quoted in Tucker, Stalin as Revolutionary, p.433. Allilueva  also writes of this 
episode, stating that My nurse later told me that my father treated him worse than 
ever before, heaping contempt on him for being a weakling. Allilueva, Twenty 
letters to a friend, p.170 
 Tucker, Stalin as Revolutionary, p.434 
 D. Rancour-Lafferiere, The Mind of Stalin: A Psychoanalytic Study (Ann Arbor, 
1988), p.7 
 Ibid., pp. 36-40 
kulak mentality which he enthusiastically took up.
 Rancour-
Laferriere believed that Stalins literal and metaphorical obsession 
with beatings was a clear example of displacement of private motives 
from family objects to public objects.
 Philip Pomper also employed 
a psychohistorical approach to Stalins childhood, suggesting that he 
was a compound social victim, thanks to being a member of a 
humiliated minority in the Russian Empire, the son of a useless father 
and downtrodden mother, a dutiful and gifted child suffocated by 
the Seminary and a romantic youth who looked to the past for his 
value but who ultimately was forced to choose the future.
Psychiatrists such as Gustav Bychowski gave weight to these 
psychohistorical interpretations . Bychowski, for instance, suggested 
that due to his crude and tyrannical father Stalin had learned early 
how to hate and how to suppress hostility until the opportune 
moment and that his suppressed hatred for his father transferred 
itself to persons in power and to all authority.
 He highlighted how 
Stalins physical ailments would have added to his sense of inferiority 
and that the domination of Russians over Georgians would have 
added further mortifications.
 Stalins time at the Seminary drove 
him to further develop a personality in which dissimulating his 
hatred, and biding his time in anticipation of revenge in the future, 
became dominant features.
Thus, while Alliluyeva and Davrichewy 
offered the only factual information about the young Stalin during the 
Cold War period, a psychohistorical approach allowed new links to be 
created between Stalins childhood and his later psychology. 
 Ibid., p. 38 
 Ibid., p.39 
 P. Pomper, Lenin, Trotsky and Stalin: the intelligentsia and power (New York, 
1990), pp.154-155. See pp.153-164 for Pompers full analysis of the psychological 
effects of Stalins childhood. 
 G. Bychowski, Joseph V. Stalin: Paranoia and Dictatorship in Wolman, The 
Pyschoanalytic Interpretation of History, p.125 
 Ibid., p.125. Citing Alfred Adler, Bychowski suggested that Stalins physical 
disabilities could be seen as an organic inferiority that played an important part in 
distortion of personality through the mechanics of psychological overcompensation. 
 Ibid., p.126 
5. The young Stalin in the post-Soviet era 
Like all aspects of research on Stalin and Stalinism, writing on 
Stalins youth has benefited from the opening of the archives, 
allowing the picture to become ever more complete. The detailed, 
animated and occasionally humorous accounts we find today of 
Stalins youth, such as that of Simon Sebag Montefiores Young 
Stalin, are in some ways not so far removed from those of 
Davrichewy and Iremashvili who, drawing on personal experiences, 
were able to write lively and accessible works.
There has been a notable shift away from dwelling on the young 
Sosos physical attributes, or his Asiatic character. Instead, and 
perhaps due to the disintegration of the Soviet Union and an 
increasing awareness of the many nationalities which composed it, 
post-Soviet biography of Stalin points towards a renewed interest in 
Stalins Georgian origins and how they might have accounted for his 
character and style of leadership. It is impossible to know Stalins 
feelings on his origins since he never revealed them, though accounts 
of those around him, and Tuckers earlier analysis, suggest that he 
seemed concerned not to make them a defining characteristic. 
Lavrenti Berias son, Sergo, for instance, recalled in his 2001 memoir 
that while Stalin liked Georgian songs  and indeed often sang them 
in the company of other Politburo members  read Georgian and 
knew the countrys history well, he had in fact ceased to love 
Georgia. Sergo Beria believed that Stalin saw himself in the lineage 
of Peter the Great and Ivan the Terrible and ostentatiously emphasised 
the priority of Russia and his reverence for Russian history. Beria also 
pointed out that Stalin chose traditional Russian names for his 
children: 
 Yakov, Vassili, and Svetlana.  
In 1991 Ronald G. Suny published a probing article that reviewed 
the psychohistorical evaluations of Stalin published to date in which 
  See Montefiore, Young Stalin.  This is also true of the chapters dealing with 
Stalins childhood and adolescence in recent biographies. See for example Service, 
Stalin, pp.13-42; Kun, Stalin, pp.3-36 
 S. Beria, Beria, My Father: Inside Stalins Kremlin (London, 2001), p.137 
he suggested that by the time Stalin entered the revolutionary 
movement he was not a fully formed figure capable of carrying out 
the purges or the Terror. However, he had  
acquired deep social hostilities to the repression that hindered his 
advance, a determination to resist what he perceived as injustice, 
and the ability to create a tight, loyal following around him. Other 
contexts and experiences would intervene to shape and reshape 
the young Georgian rebel into the Russified author of Stalinism.
Similarly, maintaining a focus on the importance of Stalins ethnicity 
to his later leadership, Alfred Rieber has used literature on identity 
formation in order to explore the relationship between Stalin's 
struggle to transform and present his own self and his solution to the 
central problem of the Bolshevik revolution: how to construct a 
centralized polyethnic state on a proletarian class base. Rieber has 
constructed Stalin as a man of the borderlands in order to do this, 
examining Stalins representation of self and identity formation 
during his early years, and ways in which the specific social and 
cultural conditions of the Caucasus may have shaped his beliefs, 
attitudes and politics in those formative years. In addition to these two 
aspects, Rieber also undertook a rereading of his political writings as 
a function of the transformation of his persona within the 
revolutionary movement in order to gain insights into his subsequent 
policies as the leader of the Soviet Union. It is the concept of Stalin as 
a man of the borderlands that Rieber uses as the unifying theme to 
link these three aspects of his approach to the question.
importance of Stalins early years and Georgian origins is key to 
Riebers understanding of Stalin as a leader, and he suggested that 
Stalin created the state in his own image, and as an extension of 
himself, with the three aspects represented as the proletariat as the 
dominant class, the ethno-cultural region as the territorial unit, and 
 R. G. Suny, Beyond Psychohistory: the young Stalin in Georgia, Slavic Review, 
Vol. 50, No. 1 (Spring, 1991), pp. 48-58, p. 58 
 A. J. Rieber, Stalin, Man of the Borderlands, The American Historical Review, 
Vol. 106, No. 5 (Dec.,  2001), pp. 1651-1691, p. 1654.  
Great Russia as the political centre of the state. Only Stalin, through 
his own personal understanding of the interaction between these three, 
could control, adjust and run this state.
 Erik van Ree too has 
highlighted the importance of those formative years in Georgia to 
Stalins later political doctrine, and especially his nationalities policy, 
having become acquainted with the milieu of Georgian revival even 
before he moved to Tbilisi, during his years as a young boy in Gori. 
Similarly to the focus his ethnicity, writing in the post-Soviet era 
has shown a continuing interest in the direct links between the 
psychology of Stalin, his method of rule and their relation to his 
childhood experiences through the continued practice of 
pyschohistory. This has been done by directly linking Stalins violent, 
difficult and at times religious upbringing to his later career. For 
instance, Montefiore stated that Stalin had learnt violence from an 
early age at home, in the face of his fathers behaviour,
Kuromiya has highlighted the similarities between the young Soso 
and adult Stalin, notably his patience and hard work, but also his lack 
of capability for kindness or compassion towards others or animals, 
and his inability to accept authority.
 Kun suggested that in terms of 
psychology, the blame for Stalins sudden and dramatic changes of 
mood between depression and euphoria in adulthood lies with the use 
of slapping as a pedagogical device as used not only by Beso, but 
also by Keke.
 Service noted that He had known no fairness from 
his father; he would show none to those contemporaries who got in 
 Ibid., p. 1691 
 van Ree, The Political Thought of Joseph Stalin, pp. 58-72 The Georgian revival, 
championed by the Georgian writer Ilya Chavchavadze, aimed for the rebirth of 
Georgia as a cultural nation which in the long run would create the conditions for 
Georgian independence. Chavchavadze believed all Georgians regardless of social 
class should be moulded into a homogenous community, structured around an axis 
of shared cultural values. Van Ree suggests that while still living in Gori, Stalin was 
a frequent visitor to a bookshop owned by a member of  Chavchavdzes society, 
and that by publishing his own writing in Chavchavdzes journal Iveriia Stalin 
demonstrated that he felt close to the formers brand of nationalism. See van Ree, 
The Political Thought of Joseph Stalin, p.59 
 Montefiore, Young Stalin, p.23 
 Kuromiya, Stalin, p. 2 
 Kun, Stalin, p.12 
his way.
 While Service stated that Stalins upbringing did not 
determine his career, and a lot more had to happen before 
psychological settlement occurred, he nevertheless suggested that 
without the childhood experienced by Joseph there would have been 
no Stalin. For the tree to grow there had to be a seed.
These shifts in emphasis in writing also reflect wider biographical 
trends which came to the fore in the 1990s. Indeed these trends 
proposed that far greater understanding of particular institutions and 
forms of social change could be gained by analysing how they had 
been understood and negotiated by particular individuals. For many 
historians, therefore, biography has been increasingly seen to provide 
a unique lens through which the relative power of political, economic, 
cultural, social and generational processes on the life chances of 
individuals could be assessed, or to provide a prism that enabled later 
historians to see how particular individuals understood and 
constructed themselves and made sense of their lives and their 
society.
 This is particularly well reflected in the case of Rieber and 
his search of Stalins childhood for an explanation of the way in 
which Stalin viewed Soviet communism and his role within it.  
The moral dimension of earlier twentieth century biography, 
which sought to identify strengths and failings of individuals, has also 
given way to a more encompassing form of analysis that focuses on 
personality rather than character. The idea of character had 
previously provided a framework for allocating praise or blame in 
accordance with the behaviour and the underlying characteristics of a 
person. It also suggested the possibility of emulation. Personality, by 
contrast, involves a far stronger emphasis on intellectual and 
emotional qualities and suggests the possibility of a psychological 
rather than a moral approach.
 As with the wider historiography of 
Stalin and Stalinism, the centrality of morality in writing on Stalin 
himself decreased significantly after the collapse of the Soviet Union, 
 Service, Stalin, p.21 
 Ibid., pp.21-22 
 Caine, Biography and History , p.23 
 Ibid., p. 42 
and a psychohistorical-type approach to his youth and ethnic origins 
has instead acquired prominence. 
6. Young Stalin and the West 
How does the evolution of the historiography of the young Stalin 
reflect the changing Western attitudes towards Stalin and Stalinism 
identified in the previous chapters? The historiography of Stalin 
written in the West in the period prior to the Cold War was primarily 
concerned with Stalins suitability as a successor to Lenin, and this 
trend was reflected in both the official and non- official works on the 
young Stalin examined in this chapter. The official works published 
in the West sought to conceal an unhappy childhood and elevate 
Stalins credentials as a revolutionary and Marxist-Leninist by 
focusing only on these parts of his career. Sympathetic biographers 
such as Barbusse romanticised Stalins childhood while also 
reinforcing his Soviet communist leadership qualifications. However, 
the non-official works published in the West on the young Stalin were 
almost all written by individuals who had in some way become 
alienated from the Soviet Union and who were writing biographical 
works on Stalins whole life to date. This was certainly the case for 
Trotsky, Souvarine and Deutscher. As a result, most works published 
on Stalin in the West at this time were by migr, exiled or 
disenchanted socialists and were largely exercises in assessing 
Stalins suitability, or lack thereof, as successor to Lenin. There was 
very little middle ground: those writing about Stalin were either 
unwaveringly supportive or anti-Stalinist socialists. It was these same 
authors who wrote about Stalins childhood, as they attempted to 
create a complete biographical work on Stalin, and similar themes on 
personality emerged in both their constructions of the young and adult 
Stalin. In these, he continued to be their other, intellectually, 
ideologically physically and ethnically. 
The intense anti-Soviet drive of the Cold War era writing on 
the Soviet Union and Stalinism meant the focus shifted away from 
Stalin as a man and onto the nature of Stalinism as a system and as a 
regime. Stalin himself did remain central to scholarship, especially 
during the 1950s and 1960s, but the emphasis moved primarily onto 
the level of his control and involvement in governing the Soviet 
Union. After Khrushchevs 1956 secret speech, this was especially 
true regarding his role in the purges and the Terror. This shift was 
reflected in the lack of biographical writings on Stalin during this 
period and in the vast amount of scholarship published on Stalinism 
generally at this time, especially in the USA. The revisionist 
movement of the late 1960s, and overall Western scholarship to the 
end of the Cold War, continued this trend: any major shifts in focus 
occurred within the parameters of the study of Stalinism and Stalins 
involvement in it but did not reignite an interest in the life of Stalin. 
This made all the more uncharacteristic of this era the appearance of 
two first-hand accounts of Stalins life, including references to his 
childhood by his daughter Svetlana Alliluyeva and Joseph 
Davrichewy. For the first time in decades further corroboration of 
stories of Stalins troubled upbringing and loathing for the Seminary 
had become possible. 
 In the post-Soviet era, the disintegration of the Soviet Union 
and access to new archival documentation have engendered a revival 
in Stalin-centric works. In biographical writing on the young Stalin, 
the most noticeable trend has been in searching Stalins Georgian 
origins for insights into his later political policies and practices. While 
this has not been so evident in more general writing on Stalin and 
Stalinism in this era, it nonetheless ties in with the larger trend 
identified in writing on Stalin, which stems from the archival 
revolution, focusing on his method of leadership.  
7. Conclusion 
This biographical body of work is informative and representative both 
of biographical writing on Stalin and of the wider historiography of 
Stalin and Stalinism, in several ways. The historiography of Stalins 
early years is composed of works by professional historians as well as 
memoirists, journalists and biographers whose lives and times were 
strongly reflected in the way the historiography developed over the 
Soviet period and beyond. These accounts demonstrate how the 
historiography of the young Stalin has evolved through the gradual 
release of information, wider biographical trends and changing 
Western attitudes towards Stalin and Stalinism. The lack of new 
and/or verifiable information on Stalins youth over the course of the 
Soviet period has resulted in one of the key characteristics of this part 
of the historiography: most accounts written during the Soviet period 
are at best tentative, and at worst entirely contradictory. Until the 
1960s, there was only one primary source  Joseph Iremashvilis 
memoir - which gave a detailed and first-hand account of Stalins 
early life; everything that followed either worked to try and establish 
how much of this was accurate, or worked to present an altogether 
different picture. The issue of source availability in writing on 
Stalinism during the Soviet period is saliently represented in the 
evolution of the historiography of the young Stalin.  
Western attitudes to Stalin have again been central to the 
creation and development of writing in this area. Trends in 
biographical writing have also been reflected throughout the period of 
study, though perhaps not as strongly as they might due to the high 
impact of the lack of sources and the changing global context which 
compelled Western writers to delve into Stalins childhood. In the 
post-Soviet period, there is still a demand for more information on 
Stalin, not only as a politician but also as a man. As a result, there is a 
continuing interest in researching and writing on this subject, 
reflected in the large amount of on-going research into all aspects of 
the Stalinist era. And yet it cannot be said that a radically new, 
different or amended Stalin - or Stalins - has emerged since the 
opening of the archives. Rather, there has been a piecing together of a 
more complete Stalin. This is also represented in writing on the young 
Stalin: it has taken seventy odd years for a relatively realistic and 
corroborated, but not dramatically altered, account of the life of the 
young Soso, and of the significance of this time, to emerge. 
Conclusion 
Initial historical interpretations and approaches to Stalin and 
Stalinism emerged in the period 1925-1947, while Stalin was still 
alive and before the Cold War began. In the 1920s and 1930s analyses 
stemmed from personal political convictions, rather than academic 
exercise or wider international political issues, although the latter 
started to play a certain part in writing on Stalin after the Second 
World War. Leon Trotsky, Boris Souvarine and Isaac Deutscher all 
began by supporting the Bolsheviks, yet it became clear that 
Trotskys loss of power combined with his hostility towards Stalin 
offered similarly disillusioned communists with an alternative belief 
to follow and one which crucially did not require an ideological break 
from socialism. It was Trotskys thought and work that provided the 
basis for the first self to the Stalinist other in Western publications 
by presenting Stalin and Stalinism as a personal and ideological other. 
For many of the writers in this period, Stalin and his regime 
epitomised everything that they were not, and their reassertions of his 
personal and political deviancy, inferiority and threat presented a 
clear process of this othering. On the other hand, the positive accounts 
by writers such as Barbusse also constructed Stalin as an other, only 
in this case he was to be elevated to God-like status: he was a 
dynamic, positive and benevolent force who not only watched over 
his people and protected them, but who also drove his country 
forward. All of the individuals writing at this time were in some way 
directly affected by Stalin and his regime, and they were above all 
bound inextricably in their writings by their own personal, political 
and theoretical engagement with Stalin and Stalinism. It was in these 
works that the Stalinist other first emerged in Western historiography.  
From the late 1940s, the foundations of Western scholarship 
on Stalin and Stalinism altered radically, and the notion of 
totalitarianism occupied centre stage. There have been some 
thorough evaluations of the ways in which the notion of 
totalitarianism has been used by scholars in the West in their 
assessments of the how and why of Stalinism during the Cold War, 
notably by David D. Roberts and Abbott Gleason, and there exists a 
vast body of work dedicated to the notion of totalitarianism itself, 
which explores its contexts and meanings, evolved over the twentieth 
century and beyond. With these assessments already providing a vast 
and rich source of information on Cold War totalitarian 
historiography, this thesis aimed to shed light on one specific aspect 
of this within the field of Soviet studies, arguing that, in both explicit 
and implicit ways, many of the works published during the early Cold 
War period systematically presented Stalinist totalitarianism as the 
other, which, in turn, provided an additional tool with which to other 
Soviet communism. The works of this era focused particularly on the 
coercive and terroristic methods of communist rule under Stalin, as 
well as the threat of such a nation, constructing and reinforcing the 
notion of the two worlds: East and West, opposites and opponents. 
The basis for these constructions is found in writings on 
totalitarianism around this period, such as those of Jacob Talmon and 
Zbigniew Brzezinski, but also in the general political context which 
had immeasurable influence on scholarship on Stalinism, particularly 
in the USA. At the same time, the simultaneous development of the 
idea of Stalinism as a continuation of a Russian tradition of leadership 
showed a pattern of Orientalist-style analysis, reinforcing the notion 
of the unchanging national Russian character. More specifically, the 
suggestion by some scholars that Bolshevism and eventually 
totalitarian Stalinism were in fact tsarism turned upside-down 
demonstrated the extent of this perceived similitude. During this era, 
totalitarianism represented the ultimate other to the West, and in 
Western historiography on Stalin and Stalinism totalitarianism 
provided a new tool with which Western scholars were able to 
construct the Stalinist, and Soviet, other.  
In the same period, Nikita Khrushchevs 1956 secret speech 
had severe repercussions for the lives of Western communists living 
in countries where their political and ideological convictions were 
deemed dangerous and worthy of persecution and where they 
themselves represented the other. This study has examined the impact 
of this event on the way in which Stalin and Stalinism were written 
about by non-Soviet communists in the West and specifically by 
British communists in the period immediately after the speech. The 
analysis in Chapter 3 demonstrated how Khrushchevs speech 
precipitated a fast and dramatic evolution of British communist 
writing on Stalin and Stalinism, from the positive othering of the pre-
1956 era in the Daily Worker newspaper and other works, to the split 
in the Party, as many members attempted to come to terms with the 
revelations of the speech. The notions of morality and deviancy were 
central to the way in which many British communists attempted to 
deal with the revelations about Stalinism and with their own actions 
and beliefs. This manifested itself through distancing their own 
beliefs from Stalinism within a socialist framework, through a 
reinforcement of the idea of Stalinism as a deviant and degenerate 
form of socialism. The prominence of the notion of personal moral 
responsibility in this section of the historiography both implicitly and 
explicitly suggested that Stalinism was immoral, dangerous and 
ideologically erroneous and that coming to terms with their own 
shortcomings was a process through which British communists hoped 
to erase the stain of Stalinism from both themselves and from 
socialism.  
A public political and academic discourse focusing on the 
totalitarian nature of Stalinism, setting the Soviet Union apart from 
the Western democracies, emerged in the first two decades of the 
Cold War. As the Cold War progressed and social history acquired 
increased prominence, the conflict over the validity of revisionism in 
the Russian Review editions examined in Chapter 4 suggests that the 
concepts of morality and blame dominated the process of 
construction of the Stalinist other at this time. This was exemplified 
in two ways: firstly through a typical pattern of othering based on the 
recognition and reinforcement by all, revisionists and non-revisionists 
alike, that there were undeniable and grave moral failings in the 
Stalinist regime and that Stalin himself was at least largely if not 
entirely responsible for these. Stalinism remained the other in this 
period through its failure to live up to the Wests moral standards and 
was universally reinforced as such in the debates.  An unexpected 
secondary outcome of this was that by being seen to diminish Stalins 
responsibility, or seeming to neglect these moral failings, the new 
cohort revisionists by extension also took on an immoral quality in 
the eyes of their critics. Their neglect or refusal to attribute the locus 
of blame for Stalinism to where the older scholars demanded it be 
placed meant that they, as well as Stalinism, were presented as 
immoral in these debates. Stephen Cohen, Peter Kenez, Alfred Meyer 
and Robert Conquest, for example, were at pains to point out the 
differences between their own research agendas, interpretative 
paradigms and moral integrity, and those of the revisionists. The most 
striking characteristic of these debates uncovered in this chapter was 
therefore that the same concepts of morality and blame were used to 
define Stalin, Stalinism and the new cohort revisionists. This 
demonstrated how significant the Western construction of the 
Stalinist other was to the totalitarian model scholars, and some first 
generation revisionists, as well as the deep effects of the global 
context of this period, once again in a state of change and upheaval.  
 The advent of glasnost and perestroika in the late 1980s, and 
the eventual demise of the Soviet Union in 1991, created several 
important interpretative and contextual shifts that impacted the 
Western historiography of Stalin and Stalinism. While there has been 
a continued focus on the Terror and Stalins role in the running of the 
regime, the new post-91 generation of researchers of Stalinism have 
used the vast amounts of information released from the archives to 
research such a wide range of aspects, and achieved such a diverse 
expansion of our knowledge and understanding of these aspects, that 
it is impossible to state that an identifiable orthodoxy on the question 
of what happened during Stalinism has emerged. This study has 
suggested that the breadth of this expansion of research has, for now 
at least, precluded the possibilities for a consensus on the realities of 
everyday Stalinism, as nationality, ethnicity, economy, culture and 
modernity and all other aspects of life under the Stalinist regime are 
being vigorously investigated, thanks to the documentation released 
during the archival revolution. The principal character of the post-
Soviet historiography is that for the time being it has none: set against 
the backdrop of the previous periods examined in this study, it 
demonstrates both continuity and change. Where in the previous 
periods clear trends in writing and interpretation emerged that were 
hinged on Western perceptions of Stalin and Stalinism, the post-
Soviet era proposes a multitude of foci, interpretations and accounts 
of Stalinism, suggesting, in turn, a multitude of perceptions of 
Stalinism by the West. On the one hand, it remains for certain 
scholars the Stalinist totalitarian other, while for others it more 
closely resembled Western capitalist modernity. For some it is neither 
of these. Nevertheless, this thesis suggests that continued and indeed 
revived research on Stalin himself and his leadership, and the largely 
universal acceptance of the nature of Stalins regime, indicates that 
previous perceptions of Stalin and Stalinism as the immoral, deviant, 
dangerous antithetical others of the West do in fact persist, only the 
common nature of their articulation across the new scholarship still 
remains to be seen.  
Nevertheless, these interpretations do highlight two current 
trends which are particularly relevant to the Wests construction of 
the Stalinist other. The first, with its roots in the totalitarian era, and 
more latterly expressed by the neo-traditionalist school, suggests that 
the study of Stalinism is important because the West needs to 
understand the enemy other in order to protect itself from it and in 
order to define itself against it. The second trend can be linked back to 
Arendts notion of the banality of evil, then the work of the 
revisionists on the role of social and bureaucratic pressures on the 
course Stalinism took, and finally the modernity schools argument of 
similarities between capitalism and Stalinism. In this case, it is not 
only the enemy the West must be vigilant of: it must also be aware of 
itself and the dangers inherent in its own cultures, societies and 
polities. Both cases demonstrate the on-going relevance of research 
on Stalinism to the West: in the former, the identification and 
understanding of the Stalinist other is a necessary tool in identity 
formation, as well as in protecting the Western way of life. The latter 
allows the West to acknowledge its own weaknesses and internal 
threats and to work towards preventing any potential deviation from 
the course of liberal democracy.  
In consolidating these era-specific findings, themes common 
to the entire historiography have emerged. Firstly, this study suggests 
that Western attitudes to Stalin and Stalinism have been central to the 
creation of this historiography. Throughout the Soviet period, 
Western constructions have been hinged on specific concepts which, 
in turn, have been used to create the Stalin(ist) other, demonstrating a 
clear continuation of the historical process of othering outlined in the 
Introduction. In the era leading up to the Cold War, Stalin and 
Stalinism were held up against socialism and Marxism-Leninism and 
were depicted as the most deviant form of these. In the Cold War 
period, a fresh angle on the old totalitarian debate revealed that the 
term itself, and its usage as the defining characteristic of Stalinism, 
were systematically used to create a great distance between Stalinism, 
the Soviet Union and the West and to render Stalinism inferior and 
deviant in comparison to Western liberal democracy. Even within the 
socialist world, once the facts of Stalinism emerged from 
Khrushchevs speech,  it was during this period defined as deviant 
and immoral, both in relation to its actions in the name of socialism 
and in relation to its general character. In the later Cold War period, 
morality and blame became the central concepts on which debates as 
to the nature of Stalinism were hinged and allowed totalitarian-model 
scholars to continue constructing Stalin and Stalinism as the evil 
totalitarian other. In the post-Soviet era, however, there has been a 
break from this pattern, with no clear identifiable method of othering 
Stalinism in relation to the West, demonstrating the impact of the end 
of the Cold War and the removal of the perceived Soviet threat on 
writing on Stalin and Stalinism. This aspect of the historiography has, 
in effect, provided a prism through which Western attitudes to Russia, 
the Soviet Union, Stalin and his regime have been measured 
throughout the period of study. This, in turn, has shown that the 
historical process of othering Russia by Europe and later by the USA 
outlined in the Introduction had continued throughout the twentieth 
century. 
A principal characteristic of this overarching trend in writing 
has been the use of key concepts when discussing Stalin and 
Stalinism in the West. Across the entire period of study, notions of 
immorality, deviancy and difference have been crucial to the way in 
which Stalin and Stalinism have been constructed by the West. As 
exemplified by the analysis in this thesis of both Soviet and British 
socialists writing on Stalin and his regime, the idea of Stalinism being 
a deviant or degenerate form of Socialism, for instance, prevailed in 
writing by socialists, whether they were writing in the 1930s and 
1940s or in the second half of the century. Writers of the totalitarian-
model persuasion saw Stalinism as morally degenerate and as a 
deviant form of civilisation in the face of Western liberal democracy. 
This was reflected in both their writings during the early years of the 
Cold War and in the revisionist period, where their argument acquired 
such strength as to attribute these characteristics by extension to the 
revisionists themselves. In this latter period, the question of the locus 
of blame for Stalinism also became central to the question of, 
morality. In the post-Soviet period morality and moral judgements 
have appeared less central to writing on Stalin and Stalinism, 
although, as Kershaw suggested in the case of Nazism, it is difficult 
to write about the realities of Stalinism without some level of moral 
engagement, often manifested through the use of words such as 
criminality or barbarous.
 One, albeit extreme, example of this 
 Ian Kershaw suggests that while the explicit extreme morality present in early 
post-war writing on Nazism is no longer in evidence, there has remained a latent 
moral element to scholarship on the subject. This, he says, is present in the works of 
all serious scholars on the subject (and Germans above all) and is manifested by the 
language they employ: terms such as criminality and barbarity demonstrate their 
detestation for Nazism. Kershaw also raises an important point, which could well be 
applied to scholarship on Stalinism: while historians generally try, with varying 
resilience of moral judgement in writing on Stalinism can be found in 
The Black Book of Communism, which bases its entire analysis on 
moral and criminal judgement.
This commonality helps to explain the lack of major 
alterations to Western understanding of Stalin and Stalinism 
throughout the period of study. Neither a new Stalin nor a new 
Stalinism have emerged, including in the post-Soviet period when the 
field of Soviet studies acquired a renewed vibrancy thanks to the 
opening of the archives. These continuities are striking and 
remarkable in a body of work whose dominant characteristic is its 
hugely diverse and at times contradictory nature. Instead a more 
complete, but not radically altered, picture of the man and his regime 
has emerged. This thesis shows that our basic perception of the nature 
of Stalin and Stalinism has not dramatically shifted since the first 
substantial works of the 1930s. Throughout the entire period of study 
it has remained consistent: Stalinism was coercive and violent, but 
also vigorously productive. Its immorality and deviancy too have 
been central to this characterisation. This is not to say there have not 
been vast leaps made in the depth of our knowledge. What was learnt, 
especially in the latter half of the period of study, thanks to the 
revisionists work, for example, was that society under Stalinism was 
far more dynamic and complex than had previously been assumed. 
Our knowledge of Stalinism has acquired many layers of detail and 
degrees of success, to eschew moral judgement, doing so with Nazism and Hitler is 
clearly an impossibility. See I. Kershaw, The Nazi Dictatorship: Problems and 
Perspectives of Interpretation (London, 1993), pp.14-16. There is a body of work 
dedicated to the study of Hitler, Stalin and their regimes in a comparative 
perspective.  See, for example, Alan Bullocks biographical work on the two 
leaders: A. Bullock, Hitler and Stalin: Parallel Lives (London, 1998), and his 
lecture for the German Historical Institute London Annual Lecture, A. Bullock, 
Personality and Power: The Strange Case of Hitler and Stalin (London, 1995). See 
also M. Geyer and S. Fitzpatrick (eds.), Beyond Totalitarianism: Stalinism and 
Nazism Compared (New York, 2009); I. Kershaw and M. Lewin, Stalinism and 
Nazism: Dictatorships in Comparison (Cambridge, 1977). Edward Acton has also 
questioned whether there is a case for comparing the two and given a thorough 
overview of the historiography of the subject in E. Acton, Nazism and Stalinism: A 
Suitable Case for Comparison? (Shaftesbury, 1998). All of these works commonly 
argue that there is much to contrast as well as to compare between the two regimes; 
however, there was enough common to both to have generated a need for 
comparison. 
 Courtois et al., The Black Book of Communism. See Chapter 5. 
nuance, and the scope of research continues to grow. Yet these basic 
characteristics of the regime itself, and Stalins role within it, have 
remained largely constant and unchallenged, continuing to provide 
the common foundations of even greatly varying interpretations of its 
more complex characteristics. Where challenges have been made, 
such as J. Arch Gettys argument that the purges were a largely 
bureaucratic phenomenon, for instance, they have not become the 
accepted version of events by the majority, even if debates are on-
going as to the scope of Stalins responsibility for key crimes.
Stalin himself has remained an enigma, but the fundamental 
perception of his character has not changed since the 1930s: he was 
brutal, crude and sly, and the principal architect of his eponymous 
regime. We now know more about how his childhood may have 
affected him psychologically, about his daily life in the Kremlin and 
his relationships with the rest of the leadership; yet core conceptions 
of his private and political personality have remained unchanged. 
Instead, these basic characteristics of both the man and his regime 
have been used in changing ways by the West as the foundations on 
which to construct the Stalinist other. This has been illustrated in 
particular in this thesis through the case study of biographical writing 
on the young Stalin: over the course of 70 years, the young Soso and 
the basic facts and questions around his early life have remained 
largely unchanged. It is only the changing focus of Western 
scholarship on different aspects of his early life  his relationship with 
parents and his Georgian origins for example  which has led to a 
wider variety of interpretations on the significance of his youth and 
ethnic origins. This lack of radical new interpretations of Stalin 
himself seems unlikely to change, since all evidence presented to date 
 See Getty, Origins of the Great Purges for his examination of the Terror and 
purges as a bureaucratic phenomenon.  For arguments about Stalins role in the 
Kirov murder, for example, see R. Conquest, Stalin and the Kirov Murder (London, 
1989) and A. Knight, Who Killed Kirov?The Kremlins Greatest Mystery (New 
York, 1999) who both argue that Stalin was the primary culprit, and entirely 
complicit. For arguments that suggest that Stalin did not order the murder (but did 
use it to his advantage) see M. E. Lenoe, The Kirov Murder and Soviet History 
(New Haven and London, 2010) and Getty and Naumov, The Road to Terror, pp. 
72-76 
suggests that these perceptions are accurate. Yet there are still many 
unknowns: with little personal correspondence, no memoirs or 
diaries, it is difficult to unearth new information that might enlighten 
us further, if indeed at all, on his private experiences, feelings and 
thoughts about his life, his regime and the world around him.  
Wider historiographical trends have also shown themselves to 
be important to the creation of this historiography. The evolution of 
biography as a genre and the advent of social history, for instance, 
have impacted on the way in which Stalin and Stalinism have been 
depicted. Indeed, by tracing research on the life of young Stalin, it has 
become clear that despite all the particularities of source accessibility 
and Western attitudes, trends in biographical writing nevertheless 
manifested themselves throughout the period of study: from early 
eulogistic accounts, to the anti-hero depictions, to pyschohistorical 
investigations, leading finally into the contemporary style which aims 
to expose all facets of an individual, from their public lives to the 
most intimate parts of their private lives. From the 1970s, the 
increasing prominence of social history in the wider profession found 
its way into the field of Soviet studies and provoked the most 
passionate debates in the field to date, as old and new scholarship 
came to blows over the very nature of Stalinism, and Stalins role 
within it. In the post-Soviet period, the everyday detail of cultural 
history has remained a focus in writing on Stalin and Stalinism. Yet 
there also seems to be an incidental character to the presence of these 
trends in the historiography during the Stalinist and early Cold War 
periods: this thesis has clearly demonstrated that those writing about 
Stalin and Stalinism in those eras were strongly compelled to do so by 
personal and political motivations, and the changing interpretations 
and representations of Stalin and his regime have been largely 
explained by the circumstances in which that writing occurred.  
However, the development of psychohistory had a clear 
impact on biographical writing on Stalin during the later Soviet 
period and laid the foundations for strong connections between his 
early years and his later policies to be made in the post-Soviet era. 
Similarly important was the rise of social and cultural history, whose 
impact on research into Stalin and his regime has been immeasurable.
A more consistent and sustained impact has been the lack of 
source accessibility over the course of the Soviet period, and the 
elimination of this obstacle in the post-Soviet era. As highlighted in 
the Introduction, there was during the majority of the period under 
study virtually no new release of information from the Soviet Union, 
and the information which did become available did so extremely 
gradually and irregularly. The first primary source on Stalin himself 
was Joseph Iremashvilis memoir, and, aside from the Smolensk 
Archive acquired after the Second World War, sources on the inner 
workings of the Stalinist regime thereafter largely came in a drip-feed 
of newspaper articles, testimonies of escapees, foreign policy 
observations and the reworking and reinterpretation of these same bits 
of information. Once again, the young Stalin case study has 
highlighted this trend, bringing to the fore not only the impact of the 
lack of source accessibility, but also of the problem of the accuracy, 
reliability and corroboration of the sources that did become available 
in a drip-feed from the Soviet Union. 
This partly explains why accounts and interpretations of 
Stalinism vary so noticeably during the Soviet period: a little 
conjecture was necessary in order to complete the picture, and this 
conjecture could take many forms. A statement made by Conquest 
exemplifies this. Made within the context of a criticism of the 
revisionists use of sources, and what he perceived to be their 
unwillingness to engage with any sources they considered to be anti-
Stalinist, Conquest suggested that writing about Soviet history was a 
case of wringing out the truth from the sources:  
It relies on attention to detail, on common sense reasoning, on 
a developed 'feel' for history and chronology, on familiarity 
with human behaviour, and on ever enlarging stores of 
information. The crux is: 'judgement' is needed, it is a delicate 
matter, and no simple or mechanical criteria for validating or 
rejecting evidence are of any real use.
With this degree of rather subjective feel, common sense and 
intuition required in the place of solid evidence, it is clear why 
Western historiography on Stalin and Stalinism developed such 
varying interpretations of the regime. This thesis has demonstrated 
that these interpretations have been so resilient as to be largely 
unaffected by the eventual release of large amounts of documentation 
from the archives in the post-Soviet period, and in this way have 
continued to be central to the way in which Stalin and Stalinism are 
currently interpreted and written about in the West.  
On the other hand, the now vast amount of information 
available to researchers of Stalin and Stalinism has broken the pattern 
that saw specific interpretative trends emerging periodically 
throughout the twentieth century. Twenty years after the opening of 
the archives, and aside from a general acceptance of the nature of 
Stalins regime, there has been no overall orthodoxy to emerge. 
Nevertheless, after the rise of social and cultural history and their 
impact on research on Stalinism from the 1970s onwards, this thesis 
has shown that there has been a renewed focus on the political aspects 
of Stalinism, notably the role of Stalin himself and the nature of his 
leadership. Similarly, research has increased on the way in which the 
regime functioned, and how decisions were made, most especially 
during the defining eras of Stalinism, such as industrialisation, 
collectivisation and the Terror.  
All three of these influences  Western attitudes to Russia, 
historiographical trends and source accessibility  reflect the huge 
impact of the changing global political context on writing on Stalin 
and Stalinism over the course of the period of study. The twentieth 
century was awash with events that constantly changed and 
challenged the relationship between the two blocs. Stalins rise to 
power and his ensuing regime, the Second World War, the Cold War 
 Conquest, Revisionizing Stalins Russia, p.388 
and the eventual collapse of the Soviet Union each provided shifting 
interpretative frameworks within which observers, researchers and 
writers in the West placed their writing on Stalin and his regime. This 
thesis suggests that Western attitudes to Stalin and Stalinism were 
immeasurably shaped by the political context at any given time over 
the period of study. In the 1930s and 1940s, Stalinism had alienated 
many socialists, both Soviet and Western, and those who ended up 
outside of the Soviet Union were able to publish works on Stalin and 
his regime that otherwise would not have been able to be published 
while he was still alive. For instance, this was the case for 
Iremashvili, Deutscher and Trotsky.  
In the immediate aftermath of the Second World War, there 
was an increase in writing on Stalin in the West that was mainly 
concerned with his life and character and that reflected a growing 
curiosity and concern with the man at the helm of this emergent 
super-power. When the post-war climate evolved into the Cold War, 
the global political context became the most influential determinant of 
Western attitudes to the Soviet Union, and to writing on Stalinism. 
The academic and political worlds became tightly intertwined, 
especially in the USA, and the totalitarianism of Soviet communism 
and its threat to Western liberal capitalist democracy became central 
to research.  
Yet, as the Cold War progressed through the era of the 
Vietnam War, the context shifted, and the notion of capitalism as the 
only viable ideological position was increasingly challenged in the 
West. This malaise spread through all spheres of life, and in different 
forms, and was most notably publicly manifested in the 1968 student 
uprisings. In the academic world, this expressed itself with a retreat 
from politics-centred research and a vastly increased focus on the 
social sciences. In the historiography of Stalin and Stalinism, the 
impact of this change was considerable. Social historians challenged 
the totalitarian-model scholars and called for new ways of examining 
Stalinism, leading to intense debates steeped in moral judgement. 
Despite these difficult times in scholarship on Stalin and his regime, 
the advent of social and then cultural history greatly expanded the 
breadth of knowledge and research in the field.  
And yet, within all these changes, one constant remained, 
itself also a product of the particularities of the Soviet Union and its 
relationship not only with the West, but also with its own past: source 
access remained strictly limited, not only in terms of archival 
document access, but also in terms of access to the Soviet Union itself 
and its people. So while interpretative frameworks changed greatly 
over the course of the period of study, the information available to 
researchers itself changed very little during the Soviet period. It was 
not until the Soviet Union collapsed that both of these elements 
shifted into new territory: Soviet communism, and with it the Cold 
War, came to an end  and this final shift of political context in this 
period of study led to the long hoped-for archival revolution. 
In attempting to answer how these contexts, and their direct 
impact on individuals writing on Stalin and Stalinism, manifested 
themselves in the historiography, this thesis has highlighted certain 
aspects of the politics of knowledge of this field: the contexts, 
arguments, conflicts and processes which affect the production, 
dissemination and reception of knowledge in a field or discipline.
This notion is in itself not universally accepted, and there have been 
scholars across many fields and disciplines who reject it, arguing that 
their work is the fruit of their own scholarly impartiality, critical 
faculty, good judgement and the usage of tried-and-tested scholarly 
methods. 
 However, it is clear that the field of Soviet studies has 
been particularly susceptible to the emergence of a politics of 
knowledge, the considerable impact of which on the historiography of 
Stalin and Stalinism has formed a principal line of enquiry in this 
study. This study has highlighted that this politics of knowledge is 
manifested in the overall historiography by a continuous othering of 
 Zachary Lockman gives a concise introduction to the concept of the politics of 
knowledge in his examination of Orientalism in studies of the Middle East. See Z. 
Lockman, Contending Visions of the Middle East: The History and Politics of 
Orientalism (Cambridge, 2010), pp.2-7 
 Ibid., p. 4 
Stalin and Stalinism by the West, but is expressed in different forms, 
and is based on different premises, as we move through the period of 
study. As a result of these various and varying experiences and 
contexts, and while the Stalinist regime has been on a basic level 
understood as repressive and violent, there has been and remains a 
high level of lively debate relating to key elements of Stalin and 
Stalinism, such as the nature of the regime and Stalins role within it.  
More questions have inevitably arisen from this study, in 
particular relating to the Wests constructions of Stalin as the other. A 
line of enquiry that deserves closer attention is how Stalin might have 
been used as a proxy for representing other forms of Western anxiety 
in the evolving global context. In the early years of writing on Stalin 
by the backward-looking Trotsky school, was Stalin simply a 
contemporary Napoleon, betrayer of the revolution, yet still a 
legitimate hero to some? Did the totalitarian-model scholars see him 
as another Hitler, the embodiment of pure evil and a much more 
disturbing figure than the tinpot dictator of the previous era? In 
todays post-9/11 world, could links be made between neo-
traditionalist constructions of Stalin as the true believer, the sincerity 
of evil and the Wests anxieties about religious fundamentalism? Is 
Stalin the Bin Laden of current Western scholarship? An answer to 
these questions would require a systematic and comparative analysis 
of scholarship on all the personalities and themes they concern. The 
conclusions of this potential line of enquiry may help us to further 
understand how the West has viewed and defined the Russian, Soviet 
and Stalinist other.
 Furthermore, a wider, complementary and 
comparative analysis of Western historiography which is neither 
American nor British would help to develop a wider-reaching and 
more nuanced understanding of the Wests othering of Russia. 
 With thanks to Iain Lauchlan for sharing his thoughts on this matter from his 
current research: I. Lauchlan, Seven Psychopaths: Joseph Stalin and the 
Personification of Evil (unpublished work in progress, 2013).  
In the meantime, the purpose of this thesis has been to shed 
new light on the conditions that led to the emergence of trends, 
themes and patterns in the large and varied body of work we now 
have on Stalin and Stalinism in the West. In this way it hopes to have 
made a valuable contribution to our understanding of the complex 
ways in which the West has constructed and continues to construct 
Stalin and Stalinism in scholarship, both in relation to its own identity 
and to the changing historical, political and historiographical context 
in which it has found itself over the period of study, and in which it 
continues to find itself today. 
Bibliography 
1. Books 
Acton, E., Nazism and Stalinism: A Suitable Case for Comparison? 
(Shaftesbury, 1998). 
Ali, T. and Watkins, S., 1968: Marching in the Streets (London, 
1998). 
Allilueva, S., Twenty Letters To A Friend (London, 1968). 
Allilueva, S., Only One Year (London, 1969). 
Anderson, M. S., Britains Discovery of Russia, 1553-1815 (London, 
1958). 
Andrianopoulos, G. A., Kissinger and Brzezinski: The NSC and the 
Struggle for Control of US National Security Policy (London, 1991). 
Arendt, A., Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil 
(London, 1963). 
Arendt, A., The Origins of Totalitarianism (London, 1967). 
Barbusse, H., Staline: Un Monde Nouveau Vu A Travers Un Homme 
(Paris, 1935). 
Barbusse, H., Stalin: A new world seen through one man (London, 
1935). 
Baudorre, P., Barbusse: Le Pourfendeur de la Grande Guerre (Paris, 
1995). 
Berger, S., Feldner, H. and Passmore, K. (eds.), Writing History: 
Theory and Practise (London, 2010). 
Beria, L., On the History of the Bolshevik Organisations in 
Transcaucasia (London, 1939). 
Beria, S., Beria, My Father: Inside Stalins Kremlin (London, 2001). 
Berry, L. E. and Crummey, R. O. (eds.), Rude and Barbarous 
Kingdom: Russia in the Accounts of Sixteenth-Century English 
Voyagers (Madison, 1968). 
Bhabha, H. K., The Location of Culture (New York, 1994). 
Boobyer, P., The Stalin Era (London, 2000). 
Brandenberger, D., National Bolshevism: Stalinist Mass Culture and 
the Formation of Modern Russian National Identity, 1931-1956 
(Cambridge, Mass. and London, 2002). 
Brent, J., Inside the Stalin archives: discovering the new Russia, 
(Melbourne, 2008). 
Budd, A. (ed.), The Modern Historiography Reader: Western Sources 
(London, 2009). 
Bullock, A., Personality and Power: The Strange Case of Hitler and 
Stalin (London, 1995). 
Bullock, A., Hitler and Stalin: Parallel Lives (London, 1998). 
Caine, B., Biography and History (London, 2010). 
Campbell, J. R., Soviet Policy and Its Critics (London, 1939). 
Chakrabarty, D., Provincializing Europe: postcolonial thought and 
historical difference (Princeton, 2000). 
Clark, K. and Dobrenko, E. (eds.), Soviet Culture and Power: A 
History in Documents, 1917-1953 (New Haven, 2007). 
Clark, S. (ed.), The Annales School: Critical Assessments, Vol. II 
(London, 1999). 
Cliff, T., State Capitalism in Russia (Chicago, 1988). 
Coates, D. J. and Tognazzini, N. A. (eds.), Blame: Its Nature and 
Norms (New York, 2013).   
Cohen, S. F., Rethinking the Soviet Experience: Politics and History 
Since 1917 (Oxford, 1985). 
Cole, D. M., Josef Stalin: Man of Steel (London, 1942). 
Collard, D., Soviet Justice and the Trial of Radek and Others 
(London, 1937) 
Conquest, R., Common Sense About Russia (London, 1960). 
Conquest, R., The Great Terror: Stalins purge of the thirties 
(London, 1968). 
Conquest, R., Stalin and the Kirov Murder (London, 1989).  
Conquest,R., The Great Terror: A Reassessment (London, 2008). 
Cooper, J., Perrie, M., and Rees, E. A. (eds.), Soviet History 1917-53: 
essays in honour of R. W. Davies (Basingstoke, 1995). 
Courtois, S. et al., The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, 
Repression (Cambridge, Mass. and London, 1999). 
Custine, Marquis de, Letters from Russia (London, 1991). 
Dallin, A. and Firsov, F. I. (eds.), Dimitrov and Stalin 1934-1943: 
Letters from the Soviet Archives (New Haven, 2000). 
Davies, R. W., Soviet History in the Gorbachev Revolution 
(Basingstoke and London, 1989). 
Davies, R. W., Soviet History in the Yeltsin Era (Basingstoke and 
New York, 1997). 
Davies, R. W., Khlevniuk, O. V., Rees, E. A., Kosholeva, L. P., and 
Rogovaya, L. A. (eds.), The Stalin-Kaganovich Correspondence 
1931-36 (New Haven, 2003). 
Davies, S., and Harris, J. (eds.), Stalin: A New History (Cambridge, 
2005). 
Davrichewy, J., Ah Ce  uon rigolait bien avec mon copain Staline 
(Paris, 1979). 
Dekker & Nordemann BV, The Two Russian Revolutions: The 
Libraries of Leon Bernstein and Boris Souvarine, Catalogue 26, 
Dekker & Nordemann BV (Amsterdam, 1980). 
Delbars, Y., The Real Stalin (London, 1953). 
Delanty, G., Inventing Europe: Idea, Identity, Reality (London, 1995). 
Deutscher, I., Stalin: A Political Biography (London, 1949). 
Douglas, M., Risk and Blame: Essays in Cultural Theory (London 
and New York, 1992). 
Doyle, D. W., Bazhanov and the Damnation of Stalin (Athens, Ohio, 
1990). 
Duranty, W., Stalin & Co.: The Politburo  the Men who run Russia 
(London, 1949). 
Eaden, J., and Renton, D., The Communist Party of Great Britain 
since 1920 (Basingstoke, 2002). 
Essad-Bey, Stalin: The Career of a Fanatic (London, 1932). 
Eastman, M., Since Lenin Died (London, 1925). 
Ellis Smith, E., The Young Stalin: The Early Years of an Elusive 
Revolutionary (London, 1968). 
Engerman, D. C., Know Your Enemy: The Rise and Fall of Americas 
Soviet Experts (New York, 2009). 
Fainsod, M., How Russia is Ruled (Cambridge, 1953). 
Fainsod, M., Smolensk Under Soviet Rule (Cambridge, Mass., 1959). 
Figes, O., The Whisperers: private life in Stalins Russia (London, 
2007). 
Fitzpatrick, S., Education and social mobility in the Soviet Union 
1921-1934 (Cambridge, 1979). 
Fitzpatrick, S., Stalins Peasants: Resistance and Survival in the 
Russian Village after Collectivization (Oxford, 1994). 
Fitzpatrick, S., Everyday Stalinism: Ordinary Life in Extraordinary 
Times: Soviet Russia in the 1930s (Oxford, 1999). 
Fitzpatrick, S. (ed.), Stalinism: New directions (London, 2000). 
Friedrich, C. J. and Brzezinski, Z. K., Totalitarian Dictatorship and 
Autocracy (Cambridge, Mass., 1956). 
Fukuyama, F., The End of History and the Last Man (London, 1992). 
Getty, J. A., The Origins of the Great Purges: The Soviet Communist 
Party Reconsidered, 1933-1938, (Cambridge, 1985). 
Getty, J. A. and Manning, R. T. (eds.), Stalinist Terror: New 
Perspectives (Cambridge, 1993). 
Getty, J. A., and Naumov, O.V., The Road to Terror: Stalin and the 
Self-Destruction of the Bolsheviks, 1932-1939 (New Haven, 1999). 
Geyer, M. and Fitzpatrick, S. (eds.), Beyond Totalitarianism: 
Stalinism and Nazism Compared (New York, 2009). 
Gleason, A., Totalitarianism: the Inner History of the Cold War 
(Oxford, 1995). 
Gorlizki, Y. and Khlevniuk, O., Cold Peace: Stalin and the Soviet 
Ruling Circle, 1945-1953 (Oxford, 2005). 
Gregory, P., Schrder, P., and Sonin, K., Dictators, Repression and 
the Medien Citizen: An Eliminations Model of Stalins Terror 
(Data from the NKVD Archives) (London, 2006). 
Gregory, P. R., Lenin's Brain and Other Tale from the Secret Soviet 
Archives (Stanford, 2008). 
Gregory, P. R. and N. Naimark, N. (eds.), The Lost Politburo 
Transcripts: From Collective Rule to Stalins Dictatorship (New 
Haven and London, 2008). 
Gregory, P. R., Terror by Quota: State Security from Lenin to Stalin 
(An Archival Study) (New Haven and London, 2009). 
Halfin, I., Terror in My Soul: Communist Autobiographies on Trial 
(Cambridge, Mass. and London, 2003). 
Halfin, I., Red Autobiographies: Initiating the Bolshevik Self (Seattle, 
2011). 
Harris, J. (ed.), The Anatomy of Terror: Political Violence under 
Stalin (Oxford, 2013). 
Hobsbawm, E., Age of Extremes: The Short Twentieth Century 1914-
1991 (London, 1994). 
Hobsbawm, E., Interesting Times: A Twentieth-Century Life (London, 
2003). 
Hoffman, D. L., and Kotsonis, Y. (eds.), Russian Modernity: Politics, 
Knowledge, Practises (Basingstoke, 2000). 
Hoffman, D. L., Stalinist Values: The Cultural Norms of Soviet 
Modernity, 1917-1949 (Ithica, 2003). 
Hollander, P., The Survival of the Adversary Culture: Social Criticism 
and Political: Social Criticism and Political Escapism in American 
Society (New Brunswick, 1991). 
Huntington, S. P., The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of 
World Order (London, 1996). 
Iggers, G. G., Historiography in the Twentieth Century: From 
Scientific Objectivity to the Postmodern Challenge (Hanover, 1997). 
Iremashvili, J., Stalin Und Die Tragdie Georgiens (Berlin, 1932). 
Jordanova, L., History in Practise (London, 1996). 
Kennan, G., Russia and the West Under Lenin and Stalin (London, 
1961). 
Kennan, G., On Dealing with the Communist World, Published for the 
Council on Foreign Relations by Harper & Row (New York, 1964). 
Kenny, M., The First New Left - British Intellectuals After Stalin 
(London, 1995). 
Kershaw, I. and Lewin, M., Stalinism and Nazism: Dictatorships in 
Comparison (Cambridge, 1977). 
Kershaw, I., The Nazi Dictatorship: Problems and Perspectives of 
Interpretation, Third Edition (London, 1993). 
Klimke, M., and Scharloth, J. (eds.), 1968 in Europe: A History of 
Protest and Activism, 1956-1977 (New York, 2008). 
Knight, A., Who Killed Kirov?The Kremlins Greatest Mystery (New 
York, 1999). 
Koestler, A. et al., The God That Failed, edited by R. Crossman (New 
York, 1972). 
Kotkin, S., Magnetic Mountain: Stalinism as civilization (Berkeley, 
1995). 
Kun, M., Stalin: an unknown portrait (Budapest, 2003). 
Kurlansky, M., 1968: The Year That Rocked the World (London, 
2005). 
Kuromiya, H., Stalin (Harlow, 2005). 
Lampert, N. and Rittersporn, G. T., Stalinism: Its Nature and 
Aftermath. Essays in Honour of Moshe Lewin (London, 1992).  
Lauchlan, I., Russian Hide-and-Seek: The Tsarist Secret Police in St 
Petersburg, 1906-1914 (Helsinki, 2002). 
Lawson, T., The Church of England and the Holocaust: Christianity, 
Memory and Nazism (Woodbridge, 2006). 
Lazitch, B. and Drachkovitch, M. M., Biographical Dictionary of the 
Comintern. New, Revised, and Expanded Edition (Stanford, 1986). 
Lee, H., Biography: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford, 2009). 
Lenoe, M. E., The Kirov Murder and Soviet History (New Haven and 
London, 2010). 
Lvy, R., Trotsky  (Paris, 1920). 
Lewin, M., Lenins Last Struggle (London, 1969). 
Lewin, M., The Making of the Soviet System: Essays In The Social 
History of Interwar Russia (London, 1985). 
Lih, L. T., Naumov, O. V., and Khlevniuk, O.V. (eds.), Stalin's 
Letters to Molotov 1925-1936 (New Haven, 1995). 
Litvin, A., and Keep, J., Stalinism: Russian and Western views at the 
turn of the millennium (London,  2005). 
Lwenhardt, J., Ozinga, J. R., and van Ree, E., The Rise and Fall of 
the Soviet Politburo (London, 1992).  
Lyons, E., Stalin:  Czar of All The Russias (London, 1940). 
Malia, M., The Soviet Tragedy: A History of Socialism in Russia, 
1917-1991 (New York, 1994). 
Malia, M., Russia Under Western Eyes: From the Bronze Horseman 
to the Lenin Mausoleum (Cambridge, Mass. and London, 1999). 
Marx, K., The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (London, 
1926). 
McGowan, J., Hannah Arendt: An Introduction (Minneapolis, 1998). 
Montagu, I., Stalin: A Short Biography (London, 1942). 
Montefiore, S. S., Stalin: The Court of the Red Tsar (London, 2003). 
Montefiore, S. S., Young Stalin (London, 2007). 
Montefiore, S. S., Monsters: Historys Most Evil Men and Women 
(London, 2008). 
Montgomery Hyde, H., Stalin: The History of A Dictator (London, 
1971). 
Murphy, J. T., Stalin: 1879-1944 (London, 1945). 
Neumann, S., Permanent Revolution: Totalitarianism in the Age of 
International Civil War, Second Edition (London, 1965) 
Neumann, I. B., Russia and the idea of Europe: a study in identity and 
international relations (London, 1996) 
Neumann, I. B., Russia as Europes Other (Florence, 1996). 
Neumann, I. B., Uses of the other: the East in European identity 
formation (Manchester, 1999). 
Nove, A., Glasnost in Action  Cultural Renaissance In Russia 
(Chicago, 1989). 
ONeill, H. C., Men of Destiny - Being studies of the Four who rode 
the War and made this precarious landfall (London, 1953). 
Owen, F., The Three Dictators: Mussolini, Stalin, Hitler (London, 
1940). 
Pachter, M.(ed.), Telling Lives: The Biographer's Art (Washington, 
1979). 
Pelling, H., The British Communist Party: A Historical Profile 
(London, 1975). 
Pipes, R., Russia Under the Old Regime (London, 1974). 
Pipes, R., The Russian Revolution 1899-1919 (London, 1990). 
Pipes, R., Russia Under the Bolshevik Regime 1919-1924 (London, 
1994) 
Pipes, R., A Concise History of the Russian Revolution 
(London,1995). 
Pipes, R., Vixi: Memoirs of a Non-Belonger (New Haven, 2003). 
Pomper, P., Lenin, Trotsky and Stalin: the intelligentsia and power 
(New York, 1990). 
Priestland, D., The Red Flag: Communist and the Making of the 
Modern World (London, 2010). 
Rancour-Lafferiere, D., The Mind of Stalin: A Psychoanalytic Study 
(Ann Arbor, 1988). 
Read, C. (ed.), The Stalin Years: A Reader (Basingstoke and New 
York, 2003). 
Reiss, T., The Orientalist: In Seach of a Man Caught Between East 
and West (London, 2005). 
Relinger, J., Henri Barbusse: crivain combatant (Paris, 1994). 
Roberts, D. R., The Totalitarian Experiment in Twentieth-Century 
Europe: Understanding the poverty of great politics (New York, 
2006) 
Rostow, W. W., in collaboration with Alfred Levin, and with the 
assistance of others at the Centre for International Studies, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, The Dynamics of Soviet 
Society (London, 1953). 
Rothstein, A., Russias Socialist Triumph: The Exposition of the 
Soviet Five Year Plan of Socialist Construction (London, 1929). 
Said, E., Orientalism (London, 1978). 
Scanlon, T. M., Moral Dimensions: Permissibility, Meaning, Blame 
(Cambridge, Mass. and London, 2008). 
Schapiro, L., Totalitarianism (London, 1972). 
Service, R., Russia: Experiment with a people (London, 2002). 
Service, R., Stalin: A Biography (London, 2004). 
Service, R., Trotsky  (London, 2009). 
Sher, G., In Praise of Blame (New York, 2006). 
Siegelbaum, L., and Sokolov, A. (eds.), Stalinism as a Way of Life: A 
Narrative in Documents (New Haven, 2000). 
Souvarine, B., Staline: Aperu historique du bolchvisme (Paris, 
1935). 
Souvarine, B., Stalin: A Critical Survey of Bolshevism (London, 
1939). 
Stalin, J., An Interview with the German author Emil Ludwig 
(Moscow, 1932). 
Stalin, J., Stalins Kampf: Joseph Stalin's Credo, Written By Himself 
(London, 1940). 
Stalin, J, Works, v.1 (Moscow, 1952). 
Talmon, J., The Origins of Totalitarian Democracy (London, 1952). 
The Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute, Joseph Stalin  A Short Biography 
(London, 1940). 
Thompson, W., The Good Old Cause: British Communism 1920-1991 
(London, 1992). 
Trotsky, L., Stalin: An Appraisal of the Man and His Influence 
(London, 1947). 
Tucker, R. C. (ed.), The Soviet Political Mind: Stalinism and Post-
Stalin Change (London, 1972). 
Tucker, R. C., Stalin As Revolutionary, 1879-1929: A Study in 
History and Personality (London, 1974). 
Tucker, R. C. (ed.), Stalinism: Essays in Historical Interpretation 
(New York, 1977). 
Ulam, A., The New Face of Soviet Totalitarianism (Cambridge, 
1963). 
van Ree, E., The Political Thought of Joseph Stalin: A study in 
twentieth-century revolutionary patriotism (London, 2002). 
Various, The Life of Stalin  A Symposium (London, 1930). 
Vidal, A., Henri Barbusse: Soldat de la Paix (Paris, 1953). 
Viola, L., (ed.), Contending with Stalinism: Soviet power & popular 
resistance in the 1930s (Ithica, 2002). 
von Laue, T. H., Why Lenin? Why Stalin? A Reappraisal of the 
Russian Revolution, 1900-1930 (London, 1966). 
von Laue, T. H., The World Revolution of Westernization: The 
Twentieth Century in Global Perspective (New York, 1987). 
Ward C., (ed.), The Stalinist Dictatorship (London, 1998). 
Webb, S. and Webb, B., Soviet Communism: A New Civilisation 
(London, 1935). 
Webb, S. and Webb, B., Is Soviet Communism a New Civilisation? 
(London, 1936). 
Webb, S. and Webb, B., Soviet Communism: dictatorship or 
democracy? (London, 1936). 
Webb, S., and Webb, B., Soviet Communism: A New Civilisation, 
Third Edition (London, 1944). 
Wheatcroft, S. G. (ed.), Challenging Traditional Views of Russian 
History  (Basingstoke and New York, 2002). 
Wolfe, B. D., Three Who Made A Revolution  A Biographical 
History (New York, 1948). 
Wolfe, B. D., A Life In Two Centuries: an autobiography (New York, 
1981). 
Wolman, B. B. (ed.), The Pyschoanalytic Interpretation of History 
(New York, 1971). 
Yaroslavsky, E., Landmarks in the Life of Stalin (London, 1942). 
Young, R., White Mythologies: Writing History and the West 
(London, 1990). 
2. Articles and book chapters 
Beer, D., Origins, Modernity and Resistance in the Historiography of 
Stalinism, Journal of Contemporary History, Vol.40, No. 2, April 
2005, pp.363-379 
Beilharz, P., Trotsky as Historian, History Workshop, No. 20 
(Autumn, 1985), pp.36-55 
Bloch, M. and Febvre, L., Preface: To Our Readers Annales 
dhistoire  conomi ue et sociale 1 (1929), 1-2, cited in Budd, A. 
(ed.), The Modern Historiography Reader: Western Sources (London, 
2009). 
Bou, P., Gorbachev and History in White, S. (ed.), New Directions 
in Soviet History (Cambridge, 1991). 
Brower, D. R., Stalinism and the View from Below, The Russian 
Review, Vol.46, No. 4, October 1987, pp. 379-381 
Brown, J. D. J., A Stereotype, Wrapped in a Clich, Inside a 
Caricature: Russian Foreign Policy and Orientalism, Politics: 2010, 
Vol. 30 (3), pp. 149-159 
Bychowski, G., Joseph V. Stalin: Paranoia and Dictatorship in 
Wolman, B. B. (ed.), The Pyschoanalytic Interpretation of History 
(New York, 1971). 
Chancellor, R., The First Voyage To Russia in Berry, L. E. and 
Crummey, R. O. (eds.), Rude and Barbarous Kingdom: Russia in the 
Accounts of Sixteenth-Century English Voyagers (Madison, 1968). 
Chase, W., Social History and Revisionism of the Stalinist Era, The 
Russian Review, Vol. 46, No. 4, October 1987, pp.382-385 
Coates, D. J. and N. A. Tognazzini, N. A., The Contours of Blame 
in Coates, D. J. and Tognazzini, N. A. (eds.), Blame: Its Nature and 
Norms (New York, 2013).   
Cohen, S. F., Bolshevism and Stalinism in Tucker, R. C. (ed.), 
Stalinism: Essays in Historical Interpretation (New York, 1977). 
Cohen, S. F., Stalins Terror as Social History, The Russian Review, 
Vol.45, No. 4, October 1986, pp.375-384 
Confino, M., Re-Inventing the Enlightenment: Western Images of 
Eastern Realities in the Eighteenth Century, Canadian Slavonic 
Papers, Vol. 36, Nos. 3-4 (September-December 1994), pp. 505-522 
Conquest, R., Revisionizing Stalins Russia, The Russian Review, 
Vol. 46, No. 4, October 1987, pp. 386-390 
Courtois, S., Introduction: the crimes of communism in Courtois, S. 
et al., The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression 
(Cambridge, Mass. and London, 1999). 
Cox, M., Trotsky and His Interpreters; or, Will the Real Leon 
Trotsky Please Stand Up?, Russian Review, Vol. 51, No. 1 
(Jan.1992), pp.84-102 
Dallek, R., How We See the Soviets in Garrison, M. and Gleason, 
A. (eds.), Shared Destiny: Fifty Years of Soviet-American Relations 
(Boston, 1985). 
David-Fox, M., Multiple Modernities vs. Neo-Traditionalism: On 
Recent Debates in Russian and Soviet History, Jahrbcher fr 
Geschichte Osteuropas, Neue Folge, Bd. 54, H. 4 (2006), pp. 535-555 
David-Fox, M., Holquist, P., Martin, A. M. and Fitzpatrick, S., From 
the Editors An Interview with Sheila Fitzpatrick, Kritika, Vol. 8, No. 
3, Summer 2007, pp.479-286 
Davies, R. W. and Wheatcroft, S. G. The Soviet Famine of 1932-33 
and the Crisis in Agriculture in Wheatcroft, S. G. (ed.), Challenging 
Traditional Views of Russian History (Basingstoke and New York, 
2002). 
Davis, N. Z., The Possibilities of the Past, Journal of 
Interdisciplinary History, Vol. 12, No. 2, The New History: The 
1980s and beyond (II) (Autumn, 1981), pp. 267-275 
Deutscher, I., Mr. E. H. Carr as Historian of Soviet Russia, Soviet 
Studies, Vol.6, No. 4, April 1955,   
pp. 337-350 
Deutscher, T., E. H. Carr  A Personal Memoir, New Left Review 
137 (Jan.  Feb 1983), pp.78-86 
Eley, G., History With The Politics Left Out  Again?, The Russian 
Review, Vol. 45, No.4, October 1986, pp. 385-394 
Fitzpatrick, S., New Perspectives on Stalinism, The Russian Review, 
Vol. 45, No.4, October 1986, pp. 357-353 
Fitzpatrick, S., Afterword: Revisionism Revisited, The Russian 
Review, Vol. 45, No. 4, October 1986, pp. 409-413 
Fitzpatrick, S. How the Mice Buried the Cat: Scenes from the Great 
Purges of 1937 in the Russian Provinces, Russian Review, Vol. 52, 
No. 3, July 1993, pp. 299-320 
Fitzpatrick, S., Revisionism in Soviet History, History and Theory, 
Vol.46, Issue 4, December 2007, pp.77-91 
Fletcher, G., Of The Russe Commonwealth in Berry, L. E. and 
Crummey, R. O. (eds.), Rude and Barbarous Kingdom: Russia in the 
Accounts of Sixteenth-Century English Voyagers (Madison, 1968). 
Friedrich, C. J., The Unique Character of Totalitarian Society, in 
Friedrich, C. J. (ed.), Totalitarianism: Proceedings of a Conference 
Held at the American Academy of Arts and Sciences March 1953 
(Cambridge, Mass., 1954). 
From the Editor, Controversy, The Russian Review, Vol. 45, No. 4, 
October 1986, pp. v-vii 
From the Editor, More Controversy, The Russian Review, Vol. 46, 
No. 4, October 1987, pp. 375-378 
Gentilgore, D., Anthropological Approaches in Berger, S., Feldner, 
H. and Passmore, K. (eds.), Writing History: Theory and Practise 
(London, 2010). 
Getty, J. A., State, Society and Superstition, The Russian Review, 
Vol. 46, No. 4, October 1987, pp. 391-396 
Hanson, H., An Open Letter to Edward Thompson, The New 
Reasoner, Volume One, Number 2, Autumn 1957, pp.79-91 
Harman, C., The Twentieth Century: An Age of Extremes or An Age 
of Possibilities? in Flett, K. and Renton, D. (eds.), The Twentieth 
Century: A Century of Wars and Revolutions? (London, 2000). 
Harvey, J., History and the social sciences in Berger, S., Feldner, 
H., and Passmore, K. (eds.), Writing History: Theory and Practise 
(London, 2010) 
Heinemann, M., 1956 and the Communist Party, The Socialist 
Register, 1976, pp.43-57 
Hobsbawm, E. J., From Social History to the History of Society in 
Gilbert, F., and Graubard, S. R. Historical Studies Today ( New York, 
1972) 
Hobsbawm, E. J., The Historians' Group of the Communist Party in 
Conforth, M., (ed.), Rebels and Their Causes: Essays in Honour of 
A.L. Morton (London, 1978). 
Hoffman, D. L., European Modernity and Soviet Socialism in 
Hoffman, D. L., and Kotsonis, Y. (eds.), Russian Modernity: Politics, 
Knowledge, Practises (Basingstoke, 2000). 
Hoffman, D. L., Introduction: Interpretations of Stalinism in 
Hoffman, D. L. (ed.), Stalinism: The Essential Readings (Oxford, 
2003). 
Horowitz, D., Introduction in Horowitz, D. (ed.), Isaac Deutscher: 
the Man and His Work (London, 1971). 
Horsey, J., Travels in Berry, L. E. and Crummey, R. O. (eds.), Rude 
and Barbarous Kingdom: Russia in the Accounts of Sixteenth-Century 
English Voyagers (Madison, 1968). 
Hough, J., The "Dark Forces", the Totalitarian Model, and Soviet 
History, The Russian Review, Vol. 46, No. 4, October 1987, pp. 397-
Hutton, P. H., The History of Mentalities: The New Map of Cultural 
History in Clark, S. (ed.), The Annales School: Critical Assessments, 
Vol. II (London, 1999). 
Jenkinson, A., A Voyage to Russia in 1557 in Berry, L. E. and 
Crummey, R. O. (eds.), Rude and Barbarous Kingdom: Russia in the 
Accounts of Sixteenth-Century English Voyagers (Madison, 1968). 
Keep, J., Stalinism in Post-Soviet Historical Writing in McDermott, 
K., and Morison, J. (eds.), Politics and Society Under the Bolsheviks: 
Selected Papers from the Fifth World Congress of Central and East 
European Studies (Warsaw, 1995). 
Kenez, P., Stalinism as Humdrum Politics, The Russian Review, 
Vol. 45, No. 4, October 1986, pp. 395-400 
Kenny, M., Communism and the New Left in Andrews, G., 
Fishman N., and Morgan, K., (eds), Opening the Books: Essays on the 
Social and Cultural History of British Communism (London, 1995). 
Khlevniuk, O., Stalinism and the Period after the 'Archival 
Revolution', Kritika, Vol.2, No.2, Spring 2001 (New Series), pp. 
319-327 
Knight, A., Beria and the Cult of Stalin: Rewriting Transcaucasian 
Party History, Soviet Studies, Vol.43, No.4, 1991, pp. 749-763 
Kotkin, S., 1991 and the Russian Revolution: Sources, Conceptual 
Categories, Analytical Frameworks, The Journal of Modern History, 
Vol. 7, No.2, June 1998, pp.384-425 
Kuromiya, H., Stalinism and Historical Research, The Russian 
Review, Vol.46, No. 4, October 1987, pp. 404-406 
Kuromiya, H., Review Article: Communism and Terror, Journal of 
Contemporary History, Vol. 36, No. 1 (Jan., 2001), pp. 191-201 
Kuromiya, H., Stalin and his Era, The Historical Journal, Vol.50, 
No.3, 2007, pp.711-724 
Lampert, N., Preface in Lampert, N. and Rittersporn, G. T., 
Stalinism: Its Nature and Aftermath. Essays in Honour of Moshe 
Lewin (London, 1992) 
Langenohl, A., History between Politics and Public: Historiography, 
Collective Memory, and the 'Archival Revolution' in Russia, Kritika, 
Vol.1, No. 3, Summer 2000 (New Series), pp. 559-569 
Lauchlan, I., Checkist Mentalit and the Origins of the Great Terror 
in Harris, J. (ed.), The Anatomy of Terror: Political Violence under 
Stalin (Oxford, 2013). 
Lauchlan, I.,  Seven Psychopaths: Joseph Stalin and the 
Personification of Evil (unpublished work in progress, 2013).  
Le Goff, J., Is Politics Still the Backbone of History? in Gilbert, F. 
and Graubard, S. R., Historical Studies Today (New York, 1972). 
Lieven, D., Western Scholarship on the Rise and Fall of the Soviet 
Regime: The View from 1993, Journal of Contemporary History, 
Vol.29, No.2, April 1994, pp. 195-227 
MacEwan, M., The Day The Party Had To Stop, The Socialist 
Register, 1976, pp.24-42 
Manning, R., State and Society in Stalinist Russia, The Russian 
Review, Vol. 46, No. 4, October 1987, pp. 407-411 
Malia, M., Forward in Courtois, S. et al., The Black Book of 
Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression (Cambridge, Mass. and 
London, 1999). 
Martin, T., Modernization or Neo-traditionalism? Ascribed 
Nationality and Soviet Primordialism in Hoffman, D. L., and 
Kotsonis, Y. (eds.), Russian Modernity: Politics, Knowledge, 
Practises (Basingstoke, 2000). 
Merridale, C., Review: Glasnost and Stalin: New Material, Old 
Questions, The Historical Journal, Vol. 31, Issue 1, March 1993, 
pp.233-243 
Merridale, C., Redesigning History in Contemporary Russia, 
Journal of Contemporary History, Vol.38, No.1, Redesigning the Past 
(Jan., 2003), pp.13-28 
Meyer, A. G., Coming to Terms with the Past...And with One's Older 
Colleagues, The Russian Review, Vol.45, Issue 4, October 1986, 
pp.401-408 
Morgan, K., The Communist Party and the Daily Worker 1930-56 in 
Andrews, G., Fishman, N., and Morgan, K. (eds), Opening the Books: 
Essays on the Social and Cultural History of British Communism 
(London, 1995). 
Mosely, P. E., Malia, M. E., Chamberlin, W. H., von Mohrenschildt, 
D., Michael Karpovich, 1888-1959, The Russian Review, Vol.19, 
No.1, January 1960, pp.56-76 
Nagy, I., Internal party memorandum, autumn 1955, published in 
On Communism, pp.54-55 as cited in The New Reasoner, Vol. 1, 
No. 5, p. 88 
Nove, A., Stalinism: Revisionism Reconsidered, The Russian 
Review, Vol. 46, No.4, pp.412-417 
Pachter, M., The Biographer Himself: An Introduction in Pachter, 
M.(ed.), Telling Lives: The Biographer's Art (Washington, 1979). 
Pereira, N. G. O., The Thought and Teachings of Michael 
Karpovich, Russian History, Vol. 36, 2009, pp. 254-277 
Reinke de Biutrago, S., Introduction: Othering in International 
Relations: Significance and Implications in Reinke de Biutrago, S. 
(ed.), Portraying the Other in International Relations: Cases of 
Othering, Their Dynamics and the Potential for Transformation 
(Newcastle Upon Tyne, 2012). 
Rendle, M., Post-Revisionism: the Continuing Debate on Stalinism, 
Intelligence and National Security, Vol. 25, No. 3, June 2010, 
pp.370388 
Rieber, A. J., Stalin, Man of the Borderlands, The American 
Historical Review, Vol. 106, No. 5 (Dec.,  2001), pp. 1651-1691 
Rigby, T. H., Stalinism and the Mono-Organizational Society in 
Tucker, R. C. (ed.), Stalinism: Essays in Historical Interpretation 
(New York, 1977).   
Rittersporn, G. T., History, Commemoration and Hectoring 
Rhetoric, The Russian Review, Vol. 46, No. 4, October 1987, pp. 
418-423 
Rittersporn, G. T., New Horizons: Conceptualizing the Soviet 
1930s, Kritika, Vol.2, No.2, Spring 2001 (New Series), pp.307-318 
Rothstein, A., Foreword in Rothstein, A., (ed.), Wreckers on Trial: 
A Record of the Trial of the Industrial Party, held in Moscow, Nov.-
Dec. 1930 (London, 1931). 
Sandle, M., New Directions, New Approaches, Old Issues. Recent 
Writing on Soviet History, The Historical Journal, Vol.38, No.1, 
1995, pp.231-248 
Saville, J., A Note on Dogmatism, The New Reasoner, Vol. 1, No. 
1, Summer 1957, pp. 78-82 
Saville, J., The 20
 Congress and the British Communist Party, 
Socialist Register, 1976, pp.1-23 
Saville, J., The Communist Experience: A Personal Appraisal, 
Socialist Register, 1991, pp.1-27 
Shapiro, J., The Perestroika of History in the Soviet Union, Slovo, 
Vol.2.1, 1989 
Shearer, D., From Divided Consensus to Creative Disorder: Soviet 
History in Britain and North America, Cahiers du Monde Russe, 
Vol.39, No. 4, (Octobre  Decembre 1998), pp.559-591 
Singer, D., Armed with a Pen in Horowitz, D. (ed.), Isaac 
Deutscher: the Man and His Work (London, 1971) 
Smith, A. M., Moral Blame and Moral Protest in Coates, D. J. and 
Tognazzini, N. A. (eds.), Blame: Its Nature and Norms (New York, 
2013).   
Smith, M. B., Review: The Cambridge History of Russia. Volume 3: 
The Twentieth Century by Ronald Grigor Suny, The Slavonic and 
East European Review, Vol. 87, No. 3 (July 2009), pp. 564-567 
Smith, S., Writing the History of the Russian Revolution after the 
Fall of Communism, Europe-Asia Studies, Vol.46, No.4, 1994, 
pp.563-578 
Suny, R. G., Beyond Psychohistory: the young Stalin in Georgia, 
Slavic Review, Vol. 50, No. 1 (Spring, 1991), pp. 48-58 
Suny, R. G., Reading Russia and the Soviet Union in the twentieth 
century: century: how the West wrote its history of the USSR in 
Suny, R. G. (ed.), The Cambridge History of Russia: Volume III The 
Twentieth Century (Cambridge, 2006). 
Thane, P. and Lunbeck, E., Interview with Eric Hobsbawm in 
Abelove, H., Blackmar, B., Dimock, P., and Schneer, J. (eds.),  
Visions of History by MARHO, The Radical Historians Organization 
(Manchester, 1983) 
Tismaneanu, V., Tyranny and Myth, Journal of Democracy 6.1 
(1995), pp.169-173 
Tucker, R. C., Several Stalins in Tucker R. C. (ed.), The Soviet 
Political Mind: Stalinism and Post-Stalin Change (London, 1972). 
Tucker, R. C., The Stalin Period as an Historical Problem, The 
Russian Review, Vol. 46, No. 4, pp. 424-427 
Tucker, R. C., The Decisive Trifle in Ward C., (ed.), The Stalinist 
Dictatorship (London, 1998) 
Viola, L., In Search of Young Revisionists, The Russian Review, 
Vol. 46, No. 4, October 1987, pp.428-431 
W, A., From the Editor: Is a Social History of Stalinist Russia 
Possible?, Russian Review, Vol. 52, No. 3, July 1993, pp.1-3 
Williamson, P., Christian Conservatives and the Totalitarian 
Challenge, 1933-40, The English Historical Review, Vol. 115, No. 
462 (Jun., 2000), pp. 607-642 
Z. [Martin Malia], To The Stalin Mausoleum, Daedalus, Vol. 119, 
No. 1, Eastern Europe... Central Europe... Europe (Winter, 1990), 
pp.295-344 
Daily Worker: 
1936: 
Russia's Work on Child Health 'Best in World', Daily Worker, 
Thursday 2 July 1936, p.5 
Bumper Harvest in Russia 'Granary', Daily Worker, Saturday 11 
July 1936, p.5 
No Time Now For Sentiment - Sacrifices of the People, Daily 
Worker, Friday 28 August 1936, p. 3 
Radek, K., How Trotsky's "terror centre" was started, Daily Worker, 
Friday 4 September 1936, p.7 
Course, J. A., Printing in Russia As I Saw It, Daily Worker, Friday 
23 October 1936, p.7 
Moscow A Blaze of Light, Daily Worker, Saturday 7 November 
1936, p.1 
Stalin Speech: Constitution is a Beacon For All, Daily Worker, 
Friday 27 November 1936, p.1 
May He Recover, Daily Worker, Thursday 5 March 1953, p.1 
All Walks of Life Saddened at the News, Daily Worker, Thursday 5 
March 1953, p.1 
Rothstein, A., Stalin: Story of a Great Servant of Mankind who 
Belongs to the Ages, Daily Worker, Saturday 7 March 1953, 
Supplement II 
Pollitt, H., Eternal Glory to Stalin, Daily Worker, Saturday 7 March 
1953, p.2 
Jeffrey, N., Man Who Set Women Free, Daily Worker, Monday 9 
March 1953, p.2 
Palme Dutt, R., He Showed the Way to Independence, Daily 
Worker, Tuesday 10 March 1953, p.2 
Simple Tributes from the People: I Told My Children of Stalin.  See 
Daily Worker, Wednesday 11 March 1953, p.2 
Matthews, G., It's Not a Sign of Weakness to Admit Mistakes, Daily 
Worker, Saturday 25 February 1956, p. 2 
Pollitt: Soviet Congress has Helped Peace, Daily Worker, Tuesday 
13 March 1956, p.1  continued on p.3 
Russell, S., That Khrushchov Speech, Daily Worker, Monday 19 
March 1956, p.1- continued on p.3 
The Reasoner: 
After the Twentieth Congress, American Socialist Journal, July-
August 1956, as reproduced in An American Assessment of the 
Stalin Era, The Reasoner, Second Number, September 1956, pp. 37-
Cocker, R., Needed  A Party of a New Type, The Reasoner, First 
Number, July 1956, pp.31-32 
Hughes, K., Where Do We Stand Now?, The Reasoner, First 
Number, July 1956, p.20 
Lessing, D., A Letter To The Editors, The Reasoner, Second 
Number, September 1956, p.12 
Meek, R. L., What Should We Do About The Reasoner, The 
Reasoner, Second Number, September 1956, pp. 8-10 
McLeish, J., An Open Letter from a Premature Anti-Stalinist, The 
Reasoner, First Number, July 1956, pp.18-20 
Taking Stock, The Reasoner, First Number, July 1956, pp.4-6 
The Case for Socialism, The Reasoner, Second Number, September 
1956, pp.1-7 
Thompson, E. P., Reply to George Matthews, The Reasoner, First 
Number, July 1956, pp. 11-15 
Thompson, E. P., Through the Smoke of Budapest, The Reasoner. 
Final Number, November 1956, Supplement, pp. 1-7 
3. Web sources 
Brown, A., Poet and Scourge, The Guardian, Saturday 15 February 
2003 (last accessed 19/04/2013): 
http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2003/feb/15/featuresreviews.guardi
anreview23 
Communist Party of Great Britain Archive (last accessed 
06/08/2012): 
http://www.communistpartyarchive.org.uk/9781851171354.php  
Interview with Professor J. Arch Getty by Dr James Harris, The 
History Faculty website.  The interview is broadcast as an audio 
recording (last accessed 02/03/2013): 
http://thehistoryfaculty.podbean.com/2009/08/13/interview-with-
professor-j-arch-getty/ 
Lenins Testament in Encyclopaedia Britannica (last accessed 
29/04/2013) 
http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/335969/Lenins-
Testament 
Communist Party of Great Britain History Section, Marxist Internet 
Archive (last accessed 09/07/2013): 
http://www.marxists.org/history/international/comintern/sections/brita
in/history.htm 
Max Eastman online archive (last accessed 29/04/2013): 
http://www.marxists.org/archive/eastman/index.htm 
Pipes, R., Ash Heap of History: President Reagans Westminster 
Address 20 Years Later - Remarks by Dr Richard Pipes, 3 June 
2002, (last accessed 29/05/2012): 
http://www.reagansheritage.org/reagan/html/reagan_panel_pipes.shtm
Reagan, R. W., Address to Members of the British Parliament, June 
8 1982 as cited on 20 Years Later: Reagans Westminster Speech 
(last accessed 01/02/2013): 
http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2002/06/reagans-
westminster-speech  
http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2003/feb/15/featuresreviews.guardianreview23
http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2003/feb/15/featuresreviews.guardianreview23
http://www.communistpartyarchive.org.uk/9781851171354.php
http://thehistoryfaculty.podbean.com/2009/08/13/interview-with-professor-j-arch-getty/
http://thehistoryfaculty.podbean.com/2009/08/13/interview-with-professor-j-arch-getty/
http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/335969/Lenins-Testament
http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/335969/Lenins-Testament
http://www.marxists.org/history/international/comintern/sections/britain/history.htm
http://www.marxists.org/history/international/comintern/sections/britain/history.htm
http://www.marxists.org/archive/eastman/index.htm
http://www.reagansheritage.org/reagan/html/reagan_panel_pipes.shtml
http://www.reagansheritage.org/reagan/html/reagan_panel_pipes.shtml
http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2002/06/reagans-westminster-speech
http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2002/06/reagans-westminster-speech
Riasanovksy, N., Engerman, D. and McLean, H., In memoriam: 
Martin E. Malia, Professor of History, Emeritus, Berkeley, 1924-
2004 (last accessed 03/07/201): 
http://www.universityofcalifornia.edu/senate/inmemoriam/martinema
lia.htm  
Truman Doctrine enunciation transcript (last accessed 22 May 2012): 
http://www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/harrystrumantrumandoctri
ne.html   
Werth, N., The NKVD Mass Secret Operation n 00447 (August 
1937  November 1938), Online Encyclopedia of Mass Violence, 24 
May 2010 (last accessed 19/03/2013): 
http://www.massviolence.org/The-NKVD-Mass-Secret-Operation-no-
00447-August-1937 
http://www.universityofcalifornia.edu/senate/inmemoriam/martinemalia.htm
http://www.universityofcalifornia.edu/senate/inmemoriam/martinemalia.htm
http://www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/harrystrumantrumandoctrine.html
http://www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/harrystrumantrumandoctrine.html
http://www.massviolence.org/The-NKVD-Mass-Secret-Operation-no-00447-August-1937
http://www.massviolence.org/The-NKVD-Mass-Secret-Operation-no-00447-August-1937
	PhD coversheet April 2012
	AGalyFULLFINALTHESIS with corrections
