Microsoft Word - Final PhD Thesis Giulia Morieri.docx
Two Types of Calcium Signalling in 
Legume-Rhizobia Symbiosis 
A thesis submitted to the University of East Anglia 
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
Giulia Morieri 
John Innes Centre 
Norwich, September 2010 
Copyright  2010 G. Morieri 
This copy of the thesis has been supplied on the condition that anyone who consults it is 
understood to recognise that its copyright rests with the author and that no quotation 
from the thesis, nor any information derived therefrom, may be published without the 
authors prior, written consent.  
To my family
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ABSTRACT 6 
ACKNOLEDGEMENTS 7 
LIST OF TABLES 9 
LIST OF FIGURES 10 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 12 
CHAPTER 1. GENERAL INTRODUCTION 15 
NITROGEN AVAILABILITY: A GLOBAL PROBLEM 15 
SYMBIOTIC NITROGEN FIXATION 15 
BRIEF OVERVIEW OF LEGUME-RHIZOBIUM SYMBIOSIS 17 
EARLY STEPS OF LEGUME-RHIZOBIUM SYMBIOSIS: A MOLECULAR COMMUNICATION 17 
FLAVONOIDS 17 
NOD FACTOR 18 
NOD FACTOR RECOGNITION IN THE PLANT 22 
RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASES 23 
LECTIN NUCLEOTIDE PHOSPHOHYDROLASE 24 
EARLY PLANT RESPONSES TO NOD FACTORS 25 
MEMBRANE DEPOLARIZATION AND PH CHANGE 25 
CALCIUM RESPONSES IN NOD FACTOR SIGNALLING 26 
CALCIUM SIGNALLING IN PLANT CELLS 26 
ION FLUXES 27 
CALCIUM SPIKING 29 
GENES INVOLVED IN THE ACTIVATION OF CALCIUM SPIKING 33 
LRR RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE 33 
ION CHANNELS REQUIRED FOR CALCIUM SPIKING 34 
THE ROLE OF THREE NUCLEOPORINS PROTEINS REQUIRED FOR CALCIUM SPIKING 36 
PHOSPHOLIPID SIGNALLING 36 
GENES INVOLVED IN THE PERCEPTION OF CALCIUM SPIKING 37 
A CALCIUM/CALMODULIN-DEPENDENT PROTEIN KINASE                                                        38 
TRANSCRIPTION FACTORS TRANSDUCE THE SIGNAL DOWNSTREAM OF CCAMK 38 
ROOT HAIR DEFORMATION 39 
BACTERIAL INFECTION 42 
NODULE FORMATION 45 
PLANT HORMONES 45 
MYCORRHIZAL SYMBIOSIS 47 
RESEARCH OBJECTIVE OF THIS THESIS 50 
CHAPTER 2. MATERIALS AND METHODS 51 
PLANT MATERIAL 51 
BACTERIAL STRAINS 51 
MEDIA 51 
ANTIBIOTICS 52 
CHEMICALS 52 
PLANT GROWTH CONDITIONS 53 
M. TRUNCATULA SEED STERILISATION AND PLANT GROWTH 53 
L. JAPONICUS SEED STERILISATION AND PLANT GROWTH 53 
PREPARATION OF NOD FACTOR 54 
NOD FACTOR EXTRACTION FROM LIQUID MEDIUM 54 
HPLC ANALYSIS AND MASS SPECTROMETRY QUANTIFICATION OF NOD FACTOR 54 
BIOLOGICAL ESTIMATION OF NOD FACTOR ACTIVITY 56 
PHYSIOLOGICAL TECHNIQUES 57 
ROOT HAIR DEFORMATION 57 
ENOD11-GUS INDUCTION ASSAY 57 
CALCIUM IMAGING WITH OREGON GREEN 58 
PLANT PREPARATION 58 
DYE PREPARATION 58 
NEEDLE PREPARATION 58 
MICROINJECTION 59 
IMAGING BY EPIFLUORESCENT MICROSCOPE 59 
CALCIUM IMAGING WITH THE CAMELEON SYSTEM YC 2.1 59 
CALCIUM IMAGING WITH THE NUCLEAR-TARGETED CAMELEON NUPYC2.1 60 
AGROBACTERIUM RHIZOGENES-MEDIATED ROOT TRANSFORMATION 60 
CALCIUM IMAGING 61 
MOLECULAR BIOLOGICAL TECHNIQUE 61 
RNA EXTRACTION AND DNASEI TREATMENT 61 
QUANTITATIVE RT-PCR 62 
CHAPTER 3. ANALYSIS OF THE EFFECT OF NOD FACTOR STRUCTURE ON CALCIUM FLUX 63 
INTRODUCTION 63 
RESULTS 70 
ANALYSIS OF NOD FACTOR-INDUCED CALCIUM FLUX IN ROOT HAIR CELLS USING YC 2.1 70 
TITRATION OF CALCIUM INFLUX AND CALCIUM SPIKING USING YC 2.1 73 
ANALYSIS OF CALCIUM FLUX INDUCTION BY NODFL NOD FACTOR 75 
ANALYSIS OF CALCIUM FLUX INDUCTION BY NODL NOD FACTOR 79 
DISCUSSION 80 
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS OF CALCIUM RESPONSES IN INFECTION MUTANTS                                                        83 
INTRODUCTION 83 
RESULTS 86 
ANALYSIS OF CALCIUM FLUX USING MICROINJECTION OF OREGON GREEN 86 
TITRATION OF CALCIUM FLUX USING MICROINJECTION OF OREGON GREEN 88 
ANALYSIS OF CALCIUM FLUX IN M. TRUNCATULA MUTANTS LACKING INFECTION THREADS 90 
ANALYSIS OF CALCIUM RESPONSES IN MT RIT1 AND LJ NAP1-1, AND PIR1-1 MUTANTS 95 
DISCUSSION 100 
CHAPTER 5. L. JAPONICUS SYMRK-14 FORMS NODULES BUT IS IMPAIRED FOR CALCIUM SPIKING 107 
INTRODUCTION 107 
RESULTS 112 
LJSYMRK-14 IS IMPAIRED FOR NOD FACTOR-INDUCED CALCIUM SPIKING 112 
DISCUSSION 119 
CHAPTER 6. LNP IS A NEW COMPONENT REQUIRED FOR NOD-FACTOR SIGNALLING IN L. JAPONICUS 127 
INTRODUCTION 127 
RESULTS 134 
ANTISENSE SUPPRESSION OF LNP EXPRESSION RESULTS IN A NOD
 AND MYC
 PHENOTYPE          134 
EXPRESSION OF NIN IS IMPAIRED IN LNP ANTISENSE LINE 138 
LNP IS REQUIRED FOR ACTIVATION OF NOD FACTOR-INDUCED CALCIUM SPIKING 140 
THE 5D LNP ANTISENSE LINE IS DEFECTIVE FOR CALCIUM FLUX 142 
ROOT HAIR DEFORMATION IS NORMAL IN LNP ANTISENSE LINE 144 
DISCUSSION 146 
CHAPTER 7. GENERAL DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 155 
THE NOD FACTOR SIGNALLING PATHWAY IN NODULATION 155 
A LINK BETWEEN CALCIUM SPIKING AND BACTERIAL INFECTION 158 
A ROLE FOR CALCIUM FLUX IN INFECTION THREAD INITIATION 160 
SYMRK FUNCTION: A BRANCH POINT 162 
ACTIVATION OF CORTICAL RESPONSES 163 
CONCLUSIONS 165 
REFERENCES 166 
Two Types of Calcium Signalling in Legume-Rhizobia Symbiosis 
By Giulia Morieri 
John Innes Centre, Norwich, UK 
A thesis submitted to the University of East Anglia 
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
Abstract 
The legume-Rhizobium symbiosis results in the formation of nitrogen-fixing nodules. 
Bacterial infection occurs through the formation of a tunnel-like structure called an 
infection thread. The rhizobially-made Nod factor is essential for the establishment of this 
symbiosis. When Nod factor is added to legume root hair cells two calcium responses are 
observed: a rapid influx of calcium in the root hair tip and periodic calcium oscillations in 
and around the nuclear area. The role of these calcium responses in the infection of 
legume by rhizobial has been studied in this thesis. The function of the calcium flux was 
investigated in Medicago truncatula. Structurally-modified Nod factors produced by 
rhizobial mutants that are unable to infect roots successfully via infection threads, were 
impaired for induction of calcium flux. M. truncatula and L. japonicus infection mutants 
were also tested for the calcium flux response. Together the results point towards a key 
role for the Nod factorinduced calcium flux during infection thread initiation. In order to 
study whether root hair calcium spiking is essential for cortical nodule organogenesis, 
Nod factor-induced calcium spiking was tested in the Lotus japonicus symrk14 har1-1 
mutant. Inoculation of this mutant results in the formation of nodules that are not 
infected by mean of infection threads. The lack of infection thread and the huge 
reduction of calcium spiking in the symrk14-har1-1 mutant shows a link between calcium 
spiking and bacterial infection. Finally, the role of the Lectinnucleotide 
phosphohydrolase (LNP) in the Nod factor signalling pathway was investigated. The LNP 
antisense line blocked for nodule formation was found to be defective for Nod factor-
induced calcium spiking, calcium flux and NIN gene expression, thus revealing a novel 
component of the Nod factor signalling pathway.   
ACKNOLEDGEMENTS 
Over the last four years I relied on the help and support of many people. First of 
all, I would like to thank my supervisors Allan and Giles. From the very first moment to 
the very end Allan has given me constant, dedicated and enthusiastic support. I have 
really appreciated all the time he spent thoroughly correcting my reports, publications 
and presentations. His tutoring on how to write and present scientific results has been 
indispensable. I should also thank him for giving me the opportunity to continue my 
research projects during my last year of PhD. I would like to thank Giles for being always 
available to discuss my results even when, as Deputy Director of JIC, his schedule was 
extremely busy. I consider myself extremely lucky to have had the opportunity to have 
both Allan and Giles as my supervisors. Giless high work efficiency and his creative 
thinking together with the deep biology understanding and the constructive criticism of 
Allan have been a perfect formula for the supervision of my PhD. I also would like to 
thank my advisor Liam Dolan for his support and scientific advice. 
Jongho Sun and Ward Capoen taught me the difficult technique of root hair 
microinjection and always made sure the epifluorescent microscope was working well 
when I need it A special thanks goes to Anne Edward, she is simply amazing, always 
helpful at anytime. I would like to thank Marij Frederix for her knowledge on 
microbiology and for sharing with me the ups and downs of the PhD journey. Allan 
Williams helped me initially during the extraction of Nod factor and, together with Andy 
Stanger, helped me get started in the lab and made feel welcome. Thanks also to Sibylle 
Hirsh, Hale Tufan, Graham McGrann, Yiliang Ding, Fang Xie, Myriam Charpentier, Tatiana 
Vernie, Enrico Gobbato, Ben Miller and Christian Rogers for their advice on molecular 
biology techniques. 
I acknowledge the European Union for the Marie Curie PhD fellowship, via the 
NODPERCEPTION network, which supported me during my study at the John Innes 
Centre. I would like to thank Julie Cullimore (Toulouse, France) for coordinating the 
network, organising six meetings and providing superb training for all PhD and postdoc of 
the network. It has been very enjoyable being part of the network and meeting and 
discussing with top scientists from across Europe. I would like to thank Alessandra Lillo 
(Wageningen, Netherlands) for sharing this experience with me and for our long 
discussions. I am indebt with Eduardo Andres Martinez (Grenoble, France) for 
synthesising the invaluable NodL Nod factor used in this thesis. I am very grateful to our 
collaborators Jens Stougaard (Aarhus, Denmark), Sonia Kosuta, Krzysztof Szczyglowski 
(Ontario, Canada) and Marilynn Etzler (Davis, USA). 
I found working at the prestigious John Innes Centre an enriching experience, the 
top level of science and technology provided has been fantastic. I would like to thank all 
the media kitchen ladies who prepared the media required, saving me lots of time, and 
the horticultural staff, especially Lesley Phillips for taking such good care of my plants.  
A big thank go to my family. My father Virgilio and my mum Angela gave me an 
invaluable encouragement and constant support. They represent an everlasting 
inspiration for my future and without their trust on me I would not have arrived so far. I 
also would like to thank my brothers, Mario Luca and Giancarlo, and my sister Diana for 
putting up with a very far big sister. 
I express my gratitude to all my friends and particularly Sibylle Hirsh and Hale 
Tufan, their deep friendship has made my stay in Norwich a very enjoyable and wonderful 
experience.  
Last, but not least, I would like to thank Patrick Middleton, for our long scientific 
discussions, for his scientific and technical help, for his constant moral support and 
encouragement, for his patience, his friendship and, most of all, for his love.  
Giulia Morieri 
September 2010, Norwich. 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table                                                                                                                                                 Page 
number                                                                                                                                            number                                                                                             
2.1  Bacterial strains 51 
2.2 Growth media used for bacterial and plant growth  52 
2.3 Gradient of acetonitrile 55 
2.4 Quantification of extracted Nod factors 56 
2.5 Primers used for qPCR determination with L. japonicus cDNA 62 
5.1 Number of nodules formed (S. Kosuta, personal communication) and number 
of root hair cells positive for calcium spiking in L. japonicus mutants 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure                                                                                                                                               Page 
number                                                                                                                                            number                                                                                             
1.1  Structure of Nod factors from S. meliloti and M. loti   21 
1.2 Model of Nod factor signalling in root hair cell 22 
1.3 Morphology of root hairs responding to Nod factor and rhizobia 41 
1.4 Topology of an intracellular infection thread 44 
2.1 Chromatogram of the intensity of the most intense ion with a mass between 
1000 and 1700, at different retention time 
3.1 Structure of the lipooligosaccharide Nod factors assayed in this study 69 
3.2 Tip and cell areas selected for the analysis of Nod factor-induced calcium 
changes in root hair cells 
3.3 Analysis of calcium flux in root hair tip and cell area in M. truncatula plants 
expressing YC 2.1 
3.4 Titration curve for calcium flux and calcium spiking induced by Nod factor 
extracted by S. meliloti in M. truncatula plants expressing YC 2.1 
3.5 nodFL and nodL Nod factors do not induce calcium flux 76 
3.6 Dose response curves for calcium flux and calcium spiking induced by 
different Nod factors on wild-type M. truncatula 
3.7 LCO, IV, C18:1, S (equivalent to nodFL Nod factor) induced calcium flux only in 
2 of 16 cells treated at 1 M concentration 
4.1 Example of a calcium trace, obtained after microinjection with Oregon Green 
and Texas Red presenting a background noise 
4.2 Titration curve of Nod factor-induced calcium flux in root hair cells 
microinjected with Oregon Green and Texas Red 
4.3 Example of a calcium trace of a root hair microinjected with Oregon Green 
and Texas Red and treated with 10 pM Nod Factor scored positive for Nod 
factor-induced calcium flux 
4.4 Changes in intracellular calcium in M. truncatula wild-type, hcl, nin, bit-1 and 
rit-1 root hairs imaged using ratiometric fluorescence of Oregon Green and 
Texas Red 
4.5 Induction of Nod factor-induced calcium flux in the hcl mutant 94 
4.6 Dose response curves for M. truncatula hcl-1 with nodL and wild-type Nod 
factor (shown for comparison) 
4.7 Actin Cytoskeleton of Root Hairs, visualized by Alexa-Phalloidin staining or 
Expression of the 35S:GFP-ABD2-GFP F-Actin Reporter in Transgenic Roots 
(modified form Yokota et al. 2009) 
4.8 Nod Factorinduced calcium influx and calcium spiking in L. japonicus nap1-1, 
pir1-1, and nap1-1/pir1-1 mutants (modified form Yokota et al. 2009) 
4.9 Root hair phenotype of M. truncatula rit-1 and L. japonicus nap1 mutants 106 
5.1 Schematic structure of SYMRK protein and relative position of the amino acid 
changes in the symrk-14 and symrk-13 alleles 
Figure                                                                                                                                               Page 
number                                                                                                                                            number                                                                                             
5.2 Nodulation phenotype of the L. japonicus har1-1 and symrk-14/har1-1   
(S. Kosuta, personal communication) 
5.3 Changes in cytoplasmic calcium concentration in mutants of L. japonicus after 
the addition of Nod factor (100 nM) 
5.4 Original traces showing changes in cytoplasmic calcium concentration in 
mutants of L. japonicus after the addition of 100 nM Nod factor 
5.5 Root hair cells of wild-type L. japonicus expressing cameleon NupYC2.1. 118 
5.6 Nuclear calcium oscillation in response to M. loti Nod factor monitored in L. 
japonicus wild type and symRK-14 and symRK-14/har1-1 roots expressing 
cameleon NupYC2.1 
6.1 Nucleotide reaction pathway inside the synaptic space during 
neurotransmission process.  
6.2 Phylogenetic tree of various apyrase-related proteins (Image taken from 
Navarro-Gochicoa et al., 2003) 
6.3 5D, 5R and 3O LNP antisense line have reduced level of LNP  
(N. Roberts, personal communication) 
6.4 Root nodule phenotype of the L. japonicus 5D LNP antisense line 137 
6.5 The L. japonicus 5D LNP antisense line does not induce NIN expression after 
Nod factor treatment (100 nM) 
6.6 The L. japonicus 5D LNP antisense line is defective for Nod factor-induced 
calcium spiking 
6.7 Nod factor-induced calcium influx is absent in the L. japonicus 5D LNP 
antisense line 
6.8 Root hair response after Nod factor application or M. loti inoculation in Vector 
control and 5D antisense line plants 
6.9 Model proposed for Nod factor signalling pathway 154 
7.1 Key positional signalling diagram 157 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
Abbreviations Definitions 
2-APB 2-amino-ethoxydipheylborate  
ABA Abscisic acid 
ADP Adenosine 5-diphosphate 
AM Arbuscular Mycorrhiza 
amu atomic mass unit 
AVG L-a-(2-aminoethoxyvinyl) glycine 
ATP Adenosine 5-triphosphate 
BHQ 2',5'-di(tert-butyl)-1,4-benzohydroquinone 
BNM Buffered nodulation medium 
bv. Biovar 
cDNA Complementary deoxyribonucleic acid 
CaM calmodulin 
CCaMK Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase 
CCD Charge-coupled device  
CFP Cyan fluorescent protein 
cm Centimetre 
CPA Cyclopiazonic acid  
CT Threshold cycle  
dpi Days post inoculation 
DC Direct current  
Db Dolicus biflorus 
DWA water agar medium 
EPS Exopolysaccharides 
F1  First filial generation 
F2 Second filial generation 
Fix- Non-nitrogen fixation minus 
FP Fahraeus Plant (medium) 
FRET   Fluorescence resonance energy transfer 
g Gram 
GFP Green fluorescent protein 
G-protein Guanine nucleotide binding protein 
GUS -glucuronidase 
h hour 
HPLC High Performance Liquid Chromatography 
IP3   inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate 
IT Infection thread 
LCO Lipo-chito-oligosaccharide 
Abbreviations Definitions 
LNP lectin nucleotide phosphohydrolase 
LRR Leucine rich repeat 
Lj Lotus japonicus 
M Molar 
mg Milligram 
min Minutes 
ml Millilitre 
mM Millimolar 
mRNA Messenger RNA 
Mt Medicago truncatula 
mV milliVolt 
MW Molecular weight 
Myc- Mycorrhization minus 
nm Nanometre 
Nod- Non-nodulating 
NUP Nucleoporin 
PCR Polymerase chain reaction 
PA phosphatidic acid 
PLC Phospholipase C 
PLD Phospholipase D 
Ps Pisum sativum 
qPCR Quantitative Polymerase chain reaction 
ROS Reactive oxygen species 
RNA Ribonucleic acid 
RNAi RNA interference 
rpm Revolutions per minute 
RT-PCR Reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction 
Sec Seconds 
SERCA sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium channel ATPases  
spp. species 
SYM Symbiosis 
Sr Sesbania rostrata 
X-glcA  5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-beta-D-glucuronide sodium salt 
YC yellow cameleon 
YFP yellow fluorescent protein 
WT Wild type 
g Microgram 
l Microlitre 
M MicroMolar 
m Micrometre 
PUBLICATIONS 
During the course of this thesis the following manuscripts have been published (or are 
being prepared) based on data presented: 
CHAPTER 3 
Morieri G, Martinez EA, Oldroyd GED, Downie JA (In preparation). Nod factor-induced 
calcium flux during rhizobial infection in Medicago truncatula.  
CHAPTER 4 
Miyahara A, Richens J, Starker C, Morieri G, Smith L, Long S, Downie JA and  Oldroyd GED 
(2010). Conservation in function of a SCAR/WAVE component during infection thread and 
root hair growth in Medicago truncatula. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 23:1553-1562. 
Yokota K, Fukai E, Madsen LH, Jurkiewicz A, Rueda P, Radutoiu S, Held M, Hossain MS, 
Szczyglowski K, Morieri G, Oldroyd GE, Downie JA, Nielsen MW, Rusek AM, Sato S, Tabata 
S, James EK, Oyaizu H, Sandal N, Stougaard J (2009). Rearrangement of actin cytoskeleton 
mediates invasion of Lotus japonicus roots by Mesorhizobium loti. Plant Cell 21: 267-284. 
CHAPTER 5 
Kosuta
, Held M, Hossain MS, Morieri G, MacGillivary A, Johansen,  Antoln-Llovera M 
C, Parniske
M, Oldroyd GED, Downie JA, Karas B, Szczyglowski K (in revision). Mutations in 
the conserved GDPC motif of Lotus japonicus SYMRK block constitutive ectodomaim 
cleavage and reveal a predominantly epidermal function of the receptor in symbiosis.  
CHAPTER 6 
Morieri G, Roberts NJ, Kalsi G, Rose A, Stiller J, Gresshoff PM, Oldroyd
GED, Downie JA, 
Etzler ME (In revision). Rhizobial and mycorrhizal symbioses in Lotus japonicus require 
Lectin nucleotide phosphohydrolase, which acts upstream of calcium signaling.  
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
CHAPTER 1  
General introduction 
Nitrogen Availability: a Global Problem 
The growth of plants is limited by the availability of nutrients, including nitrogen, 
which is essential for the synthesis of amino and nucleic acids. Legumes are rich in 
protein and have long been known to increase soil fertility. Because many soils around 
the world are usually poor in nitrogen, early agricultural systems usually used co-
cultivation or rotation of a legume with a cereal crop in order to restore soil fertility and 
provide a balance diet of protein and carbohydrate (e.g., bean/maize in the Americas, 
soybean/rice in Asia and lentil, chickpea/wheat, barley in Mesopotamia). 
Nowadays, agriculture is highly reliant on industrial nitrogen fertilizer to maximize 
crop production by enhancing the amount of nitrogen in soils. It is estimated that at least 
one third of the food that is required to sustain the present world population depends on 
industrially produced nitrogen fertilizer (Smil, 1997), albeit that several environmental 
and economical problems are associated with the production and use of nitrogen 
fertilizer. Up to 50% of fossil fuel consumption in agriculture is used for production, the 
transport and application of nitrogen fertilizer. In addition, around 50% of the applied 
nitrogen is lost into the soil-aquatic systems (Mosier, 2004) and this is responsible for 
increasing plant and algal blooms that are now a global problem. The rising cost of fossil 
fuels is causing an increase of the cost of nitrogen fertilizers. This, together with the need 
for improved sustainability, is making alternative sources of nitrogen a future challenge. 
Symbiotic Nitrogen Fixation 
Despite its abundance in the atmosphere, atmospheric di-nitrogen is not 
accessible to plants. Nitrogen must first be fixed or combined with oxygen or hydrogen in 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
order to be used by plants. Some fixation occurs in lightning strikes, but biological 
nitrogen fixation is accomplished by bacteria. These bacteria contain the nitrogenase 
enzyme which combines gaseous nitrogen with hydrogen to release ammonia. In the 
course of evolution, legumes and some other plants have developed a symbiotic 
relationship with nitrogen-fixing bacteria in order to access nitrogen from the 
atmosphere. Nitrogen fixation in free-living bacteria is limited by availability of carbon 
and by the inhibition by oxygen of the nitrogenase enzyme. These symbioses result in the 
formation of specialized plant organs, called nodules. Inside the plant nodules, bacteria 
are provided with a perfect environment for nitrogen fixation and this is characterised by 
carefully regulated oxygen and carbon supply.  
Nitrogen-fixing root nodules can be formed by two major plant-bacteria 
interactions: the Rhizobium and the Frankia symbioses. These two microsymbionts are 
considerably different (Pawlowski and Bisseling, 1996). Frankia are Gram positive 
filamentous and branching bacteria. They interact with eight different families of 
dicotyledonous plants, mostly tree and woody shrubs, collectively called actinorhizal 
plants (Pawlowski K, 2008). Rhizobia include eleven genera of unicellular Gram negative 
bacteria such as Rhizobium, Sinorhizobium, Mesorhizobium and Bradyrhizobium. They 
interact almost exclusively with legumes and one non-leguminous Parasponia sp. The 
legume family (Leguminosae), with more than 18 000 species and 650 genera, is the third 
largest angiosperm family (Soltis et al., 1995). It has three subfamilies, the Mimosoideae, 
Papilionoideae and the Caesalpinoideae. Many important crop species are legumes, 
examples are: soybean (Glycine max), common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris), chickpea (Cicer 
arietinum), pea (Pisum sativum) and lentils (Lens culinaris). Phylogenetic analysis suggests 
that within the legumes, nodulation evolved independently at least on three separate 
occasions (Doyle, 1998). Despite the differences between Rhizobium and Frankia 
symbioses, phylogenetic analysis of these nodulating lineages revealed that they are 
closely related, indicating a common evolutionary basis of root nodulation symbioses 
(Soltis et al., 1995).   
Certain cyanobacteria can enter specific interactions with members of the 
Gunneraceae. However, because the cyanobacteria colonize existing glandular tissue of 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
the plant without creating novel organs, this is usually not considered a real form of 
bacterial endosymbiosis (Gualtieri and Bisseling, 2000). 
Brief Overview of Legume-Rhizobium Symbiosis 
The legumeRhizobium symbioses start with a molecular dialogue between 
legumes and rhizobia. Rhizobia perceive plant-made compounds known as flavonoids and 
this perception induces the bacteria to release lipochitooligosaccharide molecules called 
Nod factors (Spaink et al., 1991; Denarie et al., 1996; Long, 1996). Nod factors are 
perceived by the plant and act as signalling molecules triggering many of the plant 
responses necessary for the formation of a nitrogen fixing nodule. In the cortex, Nod 
factors activate cortical cell division forming a developing nodule, called a nodule 
primordium. At the same time, in the epidermis of many legumes, root hair cells deform, 
upon Nod factor perception, in such a way to entrap the bacteria within a curl, thereby 
forming an infection pocket. From the centre of the curl, bacterial infection starts through 
the formation of a tunnel-like structure called an infection thread. The infection thread 
crosses several cell layers until it reaches the cortex where it delivers the bacteria into the 
developing nodule. Rhizobia are, thus, released from the infection thread to inside the 
plant cell, where they differentiate into nitrogen-fixing forms, termed bacteroids. 
Bacteroids enclosed by a plant-derived membrane differentiate to form symbiosomes, 
defined as the cellular structures capable of nitrogen fixation. 
Early Steps of Legume-Rhizobium Symbiosis: a Molecular 
Communication 
Flavonoids 
The first step in the molecular dialogue between the plant and the bacteria is the 
detection by rhizobia of flavonoids and related molecules that are secreted from the 
legume roots. Several studies have shown in last decades that flavonoids are plant 
secondary metabolites playing a role in nodulation (Peters et al., 1986). Flavones and 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
isoflavones, a subclass of flavonoids, are diverse molecules, with a wide range of 
structures and function, and are synthesized via the phenylpropanoid pathway. 
Approximately 30 of them have been shown to induce nod genes in rhizobia (Hungria et 
al., 1992; Smit et al., 1992; Begum et al., 2001; Cooper, 2007).  
The rhizobial regulatory protein NodD recognises and interacts with the 
appropriate flavonoids and then induces the transcription of nod genes required for Nod 
factor synthesis (Fisher and Long, 1993). NodD proteins bind to the promoter elements of 
nod genes to trigger their transcription. However, it has long been discussed whether 
flavonoids form a complex with NodD on the DNA or bind to NodD promoting its 
interaction with DNA. There is no direct biochemical evidence for flavonoid
binding to 
NodD although it has been observed that flavonoids stimulate an increase in DNA binding 
of S. meliloti NodD1 to nod gene promoters (Peck et al., 2006).  
In addition to the activation of nod gene expression, flavonoids also play a pivotal 
role concentrating rhizobia at the root surface by inducing strong chemotactic and 
growth responses (Rolfe and Gresshoff, 1988; Stougaard, 2000). There is increasing 
evidence that flavonoids contribute to nodulation once the bacteria have entered the 
plant root and exogenous flavonoids are no longer available (Subramanian et al., 2007). 
M. truncatula and soybean plants suppressed for endogenous flavonoid production 
abolishes nodulation (Subramanian et al., 2006; Wasson et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2009). 
Later in nodule development, flavonoids also regulate auxin transport during the 
initiation of the nodule primordium (Wasson et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2009). Indeed, 
recent work has shown that flavonoid-deficient roots only nodulated when supplemented 
with two flavonoids: a nod gene inducer and an auxin transport inhibitor (Zhang et al., 
2009). Hence, flavonoids can play multiple roles at different stages of nodulation during 
the legumeRhizobium symbiosis with a key function in the induction of Nod factor signal 
production. 
Nod Factor 
Nod factor is a highly potent bacterially-derived signalling molecule that can be 
active at picomolar concentrations (Long, 2001). The structure of Nod factor is 
characterized by a backbone of four or five -1,4-linked N-acetylglucosamine residues 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
with an N-linked fatty acyl chain attached the non-reducing end (Figure 1.1A) (Lerouge et 
al., 1990; Denarie et al., 1996; Downie and Walker, 1999). Modifications of this basic 
structure determine which legume species will be nodulated by a given rhizobial strain 
(Lopez-Lara et al., 1996; Corvera et al., 1999; Pacios Bras et al., 2000; Perret et al., 2000; 
Rodpothong et al., 2009). Hence, for example, the length and saturation of the acyl chain 
is different in the Nod factors made by Sinorhizobium meliloti (which nodulates alfalfa) 
compared from those of Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. viciae (which nodulates pea and 
vetch). S. meliloti Nod factors carriy an O-linked sulphate group at the reducing end, 
whereas R. leguminosarum bv. viciae releases a mixture of four Nod factors in which a 
tetrameric or pentameric sugar backbone carries a C18:1 or C18:4 N-linked acyl group and 
an O-acetyl group on the acylated sugar (Spaink et al., 1991). Nod factor released by 
Mesorhizobium loti (which nodulates Lotus spp.) carries a lipid C18 chain, a methyl and 
carbamoyl residue at the reducing terminal, and an acetylated fucose at the non-reducing 
terminal of pentamer of N-acetyl-glucosamine (Figure 1.1B). It is this diversity in Nod 
factor structure that largely defines specificity between symbiotic partners (Perret et al., 
2000). 
Nod factor production is dependent on functions of the rhizobial nod genes. The 
nodABC genes are essential for the production of the Nod factor backbone (the N-
acylated chitin) (Figure 1.1A) but are not involved in defining the bacterial host range as 
they can be functionally exchanged between rhizobial strains (Denarie et al., 1996). In the 
Medicago symbiont, S. meliloti , nodE, nodF, nodL, nodH, nodP, and nodQ are host-
specific nod genes. The O-sulphate group at the reducing glucosamine residue require the 
combined function of nodH, nodP, and nodQ (Figure 1.1) and is essential in determining 
the specificity between S. meliloti and Medicago hosts. (Schwedock and Long, 1990; 
Roche et al., 1991). The absence of the host-specific nod genes can modify the host range 
of S. meliloti (Denarie et al., 1996). For example, nodH mutants, which produce the Nod 
factor lacking the O-sulfate group, lose their ability to nodulate Medicago sativa, but 
become able to nodulate Vicia sativa (Faucher et al., 1989). S. meliloti nodE and nodF 
determine the attachment of the appropriate C16:2 N acyl group, while nodL is required 
for the O-acetyl modification (Figure 1.1) (Demont et al., 1993; Bloemberg et al., 1994). 
Mutations in these genes delayed and reduced nodulation of Medicago spp. by S. 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
meliloti, but the mutants still elicited morphological responses associated with nodulation 
(Debelle et al., 1986; Swanson et al., 1987; Ardourel et al., 1994). nodF/nodL double 
mutants exhibited a more severe phenotype: they are not capable of infecting and 
penetrating into the legume hosts (Ardourel et al., 1994). Nevertheless, these mutants 
were still able to induce cortical cell division, revealing that the Nod-factor structural 
requirements are more stringent for bacterial entry than for the induction of the nodule 
primordia (Ardourel et al., 1994). Infection threads are normally preceded by the 
formation of cytoplasmic bridges traversing the central vacuole in outer cortical cells, 
called pre-infection threads. Van Brussel et al. (1992) and Spaink et al. (1991), showed 
that in vetch both pre-infection-threads and nodule cell division required C18:4 Nod 
factors. Purified C18:1 Nod factors, normally released by R. leguminosarum bv. viciae nodE 
mutant, did not induce pre-infection-threads or nodule cell division (Spaink et al., 1991; 
van Brussel et al., 1992), suggesting that pre-infection-thread formation requires high 
Nod factor structure specificity as observed for bacterial infection. In M. loti the 
acetylfucose decoration of the Nod factor was found to play a significant role during 
infection thread initiation and bacterial entry into the root hair cells but dispensable for 
root hair curling and cortical cell division (Rodpothong et al., 2009). These findings, 
together with other investigations, uncoupled the earlier Nod factor responses from 
bacterial infection. Thus, before the Nod factor receptors were actually been cloned, the 
possibility was raised of two specificities for Nod factor recognition: a low-stringency 
recognition would be required for earlier stages of the symbiosis, while a high-stringency 
recognition would be necessary for bacterial infection (Spaink et al., 1991; Firmin et al., 
1993; Ardourel et al., 1994; Geurts et al., 1997; Walker and Downie, 2000; Oldroyd and 
Downie, 2004). The question that still remains open is whether these two phases of Nod 
factor recognition would be accomplished by two different receptors: a signalling and an 
entry receptor as defined by Ardurel and associates (1994), or by a single-receptor 
complex able to induce two or more output responses depending on the structure of the 
binding ligand (Oldroyd et al., 2001a).   
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
Figure 1.1. Structure of Nod factors from Sinorhizobium meliloti (A) and Mesorhizobium 
loti (B).   
The Nod factor backbone of -1-4-linked N-acetylglucosamine residues carrying a linked 
N-acyl group is common for all rhizobial strains and requires nodABC genes, while the 
number and types of substituent groups can vary. (A) Nod factor from S. meliloti (which 
nodulates Medicago spp.) carries an O-sulfate group at the reducing end which requires 
nodHPQ. The appropriate attachment of the N-acyl group is nodEF-dependent and the 
attachment of the O-acetyl group at the nonreducing end requires nodL. (B) The Nod 
factor released by Mesorhizobium loti (which nodulates Lotus spp.) is a pentamer of N-
acetyl-glucosamin containing a lipid C18 chain, a methyl and carbamoyl residue (Cb) at the 
reducing terminal, and an acetylated fucose (AcMeFuc) at the non-reducing terminal of 
end (modified from Oldroyd and Downie, 2004). 
Nod Factor Recognition in the Plant
Several plant processes associated with nodulation 
Nod factors released from rhizobia. 
concentrations as low as picomolar, suggesting that plants must have high
factor receptors. With the use of genetic approac
induction of these plant responses
Figure 1.2. Model of Nod factor signalling in root hair cell.
Nod factor is thought to be perceived by two receptor
MtLYK3?/ LjNFR1 formed by extracellular LysM domain and intracellular kinase domain. A 
second receptor-like kinase found to be involved in Nod factor signalling is 
MtDMI2/LjSYMRK containing leu
bind LNP. The signal generated at the plasma membrane is then transduced to the 
nucleus through an unidentified secondary messenger probably produced by 
phospholipase C (PLC) and Phospholipase D (PLD). In the nuclear envelope, cation 
channel MtDMI1/LjPOLLUX
NENA are all required for the induction of nuclear calcium spiking. CCaMK, NSP1, NSP2, 
MtIPD3/LjCYCLOPS and ERN
into expression of gene required 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction
Nod Factor Recognition in the Plant 
everal plant processes associated with nodulation depend on plant perception of 
released from rhizobia. Nod factors can induce responses in the host plant at 
concentrations as low as picomolar, suggesting that plants must have high
factor receptors. With the use of genetic approaches several 
plant responses induced by Nod factor have been identified.
Model of Nod factor signalling in root hair cell. 
Nod factor is thought to be perceived by two receptor-like kinase 
NFR1 formed by extracellular LysM domain and intracellular kinase domain. A 
like kinase found to be involved in Nod factor signalling is 
SYMRK containing leu-rich repeat regions. Nod factor has been also shown to 
LNP. The signal generated at the plasma membrane is then transduced to the 
nucleus through an unidentified secondary messenger probably produced by 
phospholipase C (PLC) and Phospholipase D (PLD). In the nuclear envelope, cation 
POLLUX, LjCASTOR and the nucleoporins Lj
are all required for the induction of nuclear calcium spiking. CCaMK, NSP1, NSP2, 
CYCLOPS and ERN are proposed to decode and transduce the calcium signal 
into expression of gene required for nodulation (e.g. ENOD11). 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
depend on plant perception of 
Nod factors can induce responses in the host plant at 
concentrations as low as picomolar, suggesting that plants must have high-affinity Nod 
several genes involved in the 
induced by Nod factor have been identified. 
like kinase MtNFP/LjNFR5 and 
NFR1 formed by extracellular LysM domain and intracellular kinase domain. A 
like kinase found to be involved in Nod factor signalling is 
rich repeat regions. Nod factor has been also shown to 
LNP. The signal generated at the plasma membrane is then transduced to the 
nucleus through an unidentified secondary messenger probably produced by 
phospholipase C (PLC) and Phospholipase D (PLD). In the nuclear envelope, cation 
LjNUP133, LjNUP85 and 
are all required for the induction of nuclear calcium spiking. CCaMK, NSP1, NSP2, 
are proposed to decode and transduce the calcium signal 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
Receptor-Like Kinases  
Mutant screens with L. japonicus, M. truncatula, and P. sativum have identified 
legume mutants lacking all Nod-factor-induced plant responses due to mutations in the 
receptors responsible for the perception of Nod factor. In L. japonicus two genes, NFR1 
and NFR5, encoding transmembrane receptor-like kinases with an intracellular 
serine/threonine protein kinase domain, were found (Figure 1.2) (Madsen et al., 2003; 
Radutoiu et al., 2003). Both receptor-like kinases contain two or three extracellular lysin 
motifs (LysM) in the extracellular domains, which are predicted to bind peptidoglycans 
(Bateman and Bycroft, 2000). Although no direct binding of Nod factor to NFR1 or NFR5 
has been reported several lines of evidence suggest that NFR1 and NFR5 are involved in 
Nod factor perception. First, it is known that the LysM binds to the peptidoglycan N-
acetylglucosamine- N-acetylmureine backbone which is chemically similar to the N-
acetylglucosamine Nod factor backbone (Steen et al., 2003). Second, it has been 
demonstrated that NFR1 and NFR5 generate specificity in Nod factor recognition 
(Radutoiu et al., 2007), because M. truncatula and Lotus filicaulis expressing LjNFR1 and 
LjNFR5 gain the ability to be nodulated by L. japonicus-specific M. loti. Third, domain 
swaps and amino acid substitutions highlighted the essential role of the LysM domains, 
particularly the LysM2 domain of NFR5, in determining Nod factor specificity (Radutoiu et 
al., 2007). The topology of these receptors and the lack of the kinase activation loop of 
NFR5 suggested that the activation of NFR5 kinase is achieved by forming a complex with 
NFR1 where NFR1 would supply the kinase activation domain and trigger signalling events 
(Schenk and Snaar-Jagalska, 1999; Huse and Kuriyan, 2002; Madsen et al., 2003; Radutoiu 
et al., 2003). Recent work has shown that the presence of the Nod factor receptors NFR1 
and NFR5 is not sufficient to determine the infection phenotype of Lotus spp. Addition of 
LjNFR1 and LjNFR5 to L. pedunculatus roots inoculated with M. loti did not restore the 
infection phenotype. In addition, chimeric receptors containing the extracellular regions 
of L. pedunculatus NFR1 and NFR5 and the corresponding L. japonicus kinase domain did 
not complement the L. japonicus nfr1-1 or nfr5-2 mutants or the double mutant nfr1-
1nfr5-2, suggesting that additional signals independent of Nod factor may be required for 
the initiation of infection threads (Bek et al., 2010). Recently, the LysM receptor kinase 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
gene family containing 17 members have been identified in L. japonicus (Lohmann et al., 
2010). 
Similarly, mutational screens in M. truncatula and P. sativum identified the LjNFR5 
orthologues MtNFP and PsSYM10, respectively (Walker et al., 2000; Amor et al., 2003; 
Madsen et al., 2003; Arrighi et al., 2006). As observed in the Ljnfr5 mutant, the M. 
truncatula mutants nfp and the P. sativum sym10 are completely deficient for all Nod 
factor-induced responses. In M. truncatula there are several homologues of LjNFR1: nine 
new families of LysM-Receptor-like-kinases have been identified revealing at least 17 
genes. Most of these are expressed in roots or nodules, suggesting that several of these 
receptor may be involved in nodulation (Arrighi et al., 2006). Mutations or RNA 
interference of two of these, LYK3 and LYK4, led to specific defects in S. meliloti infection, 
though the induction of earlier Nod factor responses was unaffected (Limpens et al., 
2003; Smit et al., 2007). Work on a weak lyk3 allele has showed that the recognition of 
the O-acetyl modification of the S. meliloti Nod factor is probably mediated by LYK3 (Smit 
et al., 2007) (Figure 1.2) This evidence is consistent with the previously proposed two-
receptor model (Ardourel et al., 1994) in which a low-stringency receptor (NFP) induces 
early Nod factor responses, while bacterial infection requires a high-stringency Nod factor 
receptor (LYK3). 
Lectin Nucleotide Phosphohydrolase  
Despite several pieces of evidence implicating receptor-like kinases as candidates 
for Nod Factor perception, little information is available on possible alternative or 
additional candidates for Nod factor perception. A lectin, isolated originally from roots of 
the legume Dolichos biflorus (Quinn and Etzler, 1987), was found to catalyse the 
hydrolysis of nucleoside diphosphates and triphosphates (Etzler et al., 1999) and was 
therefore named lectin nucleotide phosphohydrolase (LNP). Using a competitive 
binding assay, Etzler et al. (1999) showed that LNP binds to Nod factors produced by the 
rhizobial strain that nodulates Dolichos biflorus and that Nod factor binding induced its 
phosphohydrolase activity in vitro. The observation that antiserum to LNP of D. biflorus 
and Glycine max inhibited both root hair deformation and nodule formation revealed that 
this protein plays a role in nodulation (Etzler et al., 1999; Day et al., 2000). Corroborating 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
these finding, it was shown that rhizobia induced the expression of an LNP gene in G. 
max, and that the overexpression of LNP enhances nodulation (Day et al., 2000; McAlvin 
and Stacey, 2005). Recent work has shown that silencing LNP in Glycine soya reduced 
nodulation, and more interestingly that the addition of ADP to silenced roots restored the 
wild type phenotype (Govindarajulu et al., 2009). Although these data highlight the 
importance of LNP in nodulation, the role for LNP as a Nod factor receptor remains 
controversial. 
Early Plant Responses to Nod Factors 
Purified Nod factors can elicit many of the early responses associated with 
nodulation (Oldroyd and Downie, 2004), such as membrane depolarization, pH change, 
calcium influx, calcium spiking and root hair deformation, indicating that Nod factor alone 
is sufficient for the activation of several events necessary for successful nodulation.   
Membrane Depolarization and pH Change 
One of the first responses elicited by Nod factors is a rapid and transient 
depolarization across the plasma membrane of root hair cells and it is associated with a 
transient extracellular, and sustained intracellular, alkalinization (Ehrhardt et al., 1992; 
Kurkdjian, 1995; Felle et al., 1996). Voltage clamp studies have shown that S. meliloti cell-
free filtrates, and nanomolar concentrations of purified Nod factor, triggered a transient 
depolarization of the membrane potential of 10 to 15 mV in alfalfa root hair cells. This 
membrane depolarization started approximately 30 to 60 seconds after Nod factor 
addition, reaching a maximum within 10 min (Ehrhardt et al., 1992). This work also 
showed that Nod-factor-induced membrane depolarization is specific, as it was not 
observed in root hairs of the non-legume tomato, and occured in a dose-dependent 
manner reaching its maximun effect between 10
 and 10
 M Nod factor (Ehrhardt et al., 
1992). Kurkdjian et al, (1995) showed that the repolarisation of the plasma membrane 
involves two steps. During the first fast phase which occurs 30 to 60 seconds after the 
addition of Nod factor, the membrane potential recovers to about one-half the value of 
the total depolarization and remains stable for a few minutes. Unlike the first phase, the 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
second phase is slower lasting about 15 minutes (Kurkdjian, 1995). With improved 
instrument sensitivity, Felle et al, (1996) reported that the depolarization response was 
induced only 15 seconds after Nod factor application (Felle et al., 1996). Given that 
unsulphated Nod molecules and synthetic N,N',N'',N'''-tetraacetylchitotetraose were 
unable to induce depolarization and root hair deformation, it was found that Nod factor 
specificity is required for these responses (Kurkdjian, 1995).  
Nod factors (10 nM) induced a rapid (within 15 seconds) cytoplasmic alkalinisation 
of 0.2 to 0.3 pH units in alfalfa root hair cells altering intracellular and extracellular pH 
(Felle et al., 1996). Curiously, non-sulphated Nod factor, which is unable to induce root 
hair deformation (Schultze et al., 1992) and membrane depolarization (Felle et al., 1996), 
could trigger the cytoplasmic alkalinisation as well as the sulphated Nod factors, 
suggesting independent Nod factor perception systems for the induction of these 
responses (Felle et al., 1996).    
Calcium Responses in Nod factor Signalling 
Calcium Signalling in Plant Cells 
In eukaryotes, calcium represents one of the most ubiquitous secondary 
messengers involved in signal transduction. Calcium regulates several cellular activities 
linking a range of external stimuli to their physiological responses. In plants, many abiotic 
and biotic external stimuli such as depolarization of root hair-transmembrane potential, 
touch, cold shock, red light, pathogen perception, treatment of some cells with auxin, 
cytokines, gibberelic acid and abscisic acid have been shown to induce increases of free 
cytoplasmic calcium (Sanders et al., 2002). Calcium current (net calcium flux) is required 
to maintain the growth of expanding cells, such as root hair cells, cells in the elongation 
zone (White, 1998) and elongation of pollen tubes (Franklin-Tong et al., 1993; Malho et 
al., 1994; HoldawayClarke et al., 1997). Calcium oscillations have been observed in 
stomatal guard cells (McAinsh et al., 1995; Allen et al., 2001). When the roots begin to 
sense a water shortage in the soil, abscisic acid (ABA) is released. ABA binds to receptors 
in the guard cells plasma membranes, which causes the concentration of free calcium to 
increase in the cytosol due to influx from outside the cell, and release of calcium from 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
internal stores such as the endoplasmic reticulum and vacuoles (Kim et al., 2010). ABA-
induced calcium transients result in stomatal closure, preventing water loss.  
Calcium has also an essential function in Nod factor signalling (Figure 1.2). 
Addition of Nod factors to root hair cells triggers two different calcium responses: a rapid 
influx of calcium ions and cytosolic calcium oscillations around the nucleus. 
Ion Fluxes 
Within one minute of Nod factor addition Felle et al. (1999) observed a rapid 
calcium influx followed by the efflux of chloride, an efflux of potassium ions and an 
alkalinisation of the cytoplasm in alfalfa root hairs. The use of stationary ion-selective 
extracellular electrodes revealed that the chloride efflux was induced in response to 
elevated cytosolic calcium and was responsible for the membrane depolarization 
(Kurkdjian, 1995; Felle et al., 1998). Corroborating this observation, pharmacological 
studies demonstrated that the increase in cytoplasmic calcium is necessary for chloride 
efflux and membrane depolarization (Felle et al., 1999a). It was also suggested that 
potassium might operate as a charge balance, in order to stop the depolarization and 
start a repolarization though a H
 pump, and that a charge balance could be provided by 
potassium efflux and re-polarization (Felle et al., 1998).  
Rapid increases in cytosolic calcium concentrations have also been observed using 
calcium-sensitive dyes. Application of 1 nM Nod factor to root segments loaded with the 
calcium indicators Fura-2 or Fluo-3 induced, within seconds, an increases in intracellular 
free calcium concentration (Gehring et al., 1997). In Vicia sativa root hairs, an apical 
calcium rise of 6- to 10-fold was measured using acid loading of Indo-1 (de Ruijter et al., 
1998). In Phaseolus vulgaris root hairs microinjected with dextran-linked Fura-2, a rapid 
change in cytoplasmic calcium levels from 400 nM to 1500 nM was induced in the apical 
region, within 5 to 10 minutes after the addition of Nod factors (Cardenas et al., 1999). 
With the use of an ion-selective intracellular electrode, rapid calcium increase have also 
been observed in Medicago sativa root hairs one to two minutes after the application of 
Nod factors from S. meliloti (Felle et al., 1999a). In M. sativa, growing root hairs showed a 
steep calcium gradient going from approximately 170 nM at the basal region to around 
790 nM at tip. Addition of Nod factor decreased cytoplasmic calcium within 10 m of the 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
tip and increased calcium behind the tip within 5 minutes in growing root hairs, whereas 
in non-growing root hairs without a tip-to-base cytosolic calcium gradient, cytoplasmic 
calcium increased at the root tip as well as at the root hair base (Felle et al., 1999b). The 
partial dissipation of the calcium gradient observed in growing root hairs was a specific 
reaction to Nod factors as it was not observed when cells were treated with 
chitotetraose. It was  suggested that response to Nod factors depends on the 
development stage of the root hairs and that changes in cytosolic calcium could have 
different functions in Nod-factor signalling: changes of cytosolic calcium concentration in 
the tip of the root hair could be associated to root hair deformation, whereas the 
increase in calcium behind the tip might be required for the amplification of the Nod 
signal to induce downstream events (Felle et al., 1999b). 
In root hairs of pea microinjected with Oregon Green, treatment with 10 nM Nod 
factor from R. leguminosarum. bv viciae induced an increase in cytoplasmic calcium 
levels, whereas, chitin oligomers of four or five N-acetylglucosamine residues were 
inactive even when added at 1 M (Walker et al., 2000). A different result was obtained 
in Glycine max where addition of both Nod factor and chitooligomers at nanomolar 
concentration elicted an increase of cytosolic calcium (Muller et al., 2000). These 
contrasting results could be explained by two major limitations presented in the latter 
work: first, the investigation was performed on suspension-cultured soybean cells rather 
than living root hair cells tested with microinjection analysis; second, the calcium imaging 
system used was based on aequorin, a photoprotein binding calcium which does not 
allow the detection of calcium changes at the single cell level.   
In M. truncatula, microinjection of root hair cells with two dyes (Oregon Green, 
calcium sensitive and Texas Red, calcium insensitive dye) revealed that a Nod factor-
elicited calcium flux was located in the tip of root hair and had a biphasic characteristic 
consisting of a rapid and immediate elevation in cytoplasmic calcium concentration 
followed by slow decrease in calcium levels. Nod factor analogues, such as sulphated 
chitotetraose and unsulfated NodH
Non factor, failed to induce this calcium response. 
(Shaw and Long, 2003). Calcium flux was also observed in L. japonicus root hair cells after 
addition of 10 nM Nod factor form M. loti. The characteristic of this calcium flux in terms 
of shape and lag phase were found to be variable from cell to cell (Miwa et al., 2006b).  
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
Calcium Spiking 
In addition to the calcium flux response, Nod factors trigger oscillations in 
cytosolic calcium concentrations around the nucleus, termed calcium spiking (Figure 
1.2). Calcium spiking was originally observed in M. sativa root hair cells by Ehrhardt et al., 
in 1996. These regular oscillations, with a mean period of 60 seconds were induced 
approximately ten minutes after the root hairs were exposed to Nod factor and lasted up 
to three hours (Ehrhardt et al., 1996). The observation that a nodulation mutant and non-
legumes (tomato) lacked this response suggested that calcium spiking provides a specific 
signal required for Nod factor signal transduction. Furthermore, chitin oligomers and an 
unsulphated Nod factor carrying a C18:4 fatty acyl chain produced by R. leguminosarum 
failed to induce calcium spiking in alfalfa, suggesting that structural features of the 
signalling molecules are required to cause calcium oscillations. It was also shown that the 
calcium elevation was associated with the nuclear area, suggesting that the calcium 
stores or the channels that mediate calcium release are localized in this region (Ehrhardt 
et al., 1996). Ratiometric measurements with Fura-2 allowed a more accurate 
measurement of calcium levels and showed that calcium spiking in the nuclear area 
consisted of increases of approximately 500 nM calcium (Ehrhardt et al., 1996).  
The finding that calcium oscillations are involved in nodulation in alfalfa has 
spurred, in the last decade, many laboratories to further investigate this response in 
several legumes. A variety of reports showed that calcium spiking occurs in P. vulgaris 
(Cardenas et al., 1999), pea (Walker et al., 2000), M. sativa (Ehrhardt et al., 1996), M. 
truncatula (Wais et al., 2000; Miwa et al., 2006a; Sieberer et al., 2009), L. japonicus 
(Harris et al., 2003; Miwa et al., 2006b) and S. rostrata (Capoen et al., 2009) revealing 
that calcium spiking is common in legumes. In P. vulgaris, the repeated cytosolic calcium 
fluctuations were detected in the perinuclear region after 10-15 min exposure with Nod 
factors by using fluorescent dye with laser scanning confocal microscopy (Cardenas et al., 
1999). In contrast to alfalfa and M. truncatula (Shaw and Long, 2003), studies on calcium 
spiking in pea revealed that chitin oligomers were capable of inducing calcium spiking in 
wild type but not in nodulation mutant (Walker et al., 2000). The observation that chitin 
oligomers can induce calcium spiking but fail to trigger root hair deformation (Walker et 
al., 2000) suggests that these two responses are activated by independent mechanisms. 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
In addition, it was shown that addition of S. meliloti but not R. leguminosarum, to M. 
truncatula root hair cells, caused similar calcium spiking to that induced by Nod factor 
(Wais et al., 2002). Interestingly, when S. meliloti nod genes were introduced in R. 
leguminosarum or even in E. coli, calcium spiking could be restored (Wais et al., 2002). 
Similarly to animal cells (Meyer and Stryer, 1988), a typical spike of the Nod-
factor-induced calcium oscillation is characterised by a rapid (1-4 seconds) increase in 
cytosolic calcium, and is followed immediately by a more gradual decline (approximately 
30 seconds (Ehrhardt et al., 1996). The first part implicates the opening of calcium 
channels, while the second phase requires the activity of a calcium ATPase or calcium 
antiporter to control the movement of calcium against the electrochemical gradient, from 
the cytoplasm into either an internal store or extracellular space. Once initiated, spikes 
occur repeatedly for up to three hours with an average frequency of 60-100 seconds, 
depending on the position of the root hair cells along the root (Miwa et al., 2006a). With 
the use of a nucleoplasmin-tagged cameleon, recent work has demonstrated that calcium 
spiking occurs within the nuclear compartment (Sieberer et al., 2009). The initial rapid 
increase of calcium concentration observed in each spike was associated with the nuclear 
envelope(Sieberer et al., 2009), consistently with the nuclear envelope location of the 
cation channels and nucleoporins required for the initiation of calcium spiking (Kanamori 
et al., 2006; Charpentier et al., 2008; Groth et al., 2010). 
Unlike the Nod-factor-induced calcium flux, calcium spiking starts with a lag of 
approximately 10-20 minutes after Nod factor application. The reason for this lag 
between Nod factor addition and calcium spiking induction is still an unresolved question. 
Interestingly, while high concentrations (> 10
 M) of Nod factors induce calcium flux 
followed by calcium spiking, low concentrations (< 10
 M) trigger calcium spiking but not 
calcium influx (Shaw and Long, 2003). Furthermore, Nod factor-like chitin oligomers can 
activate calcium spiking without the induction of the calcium flux (Walker et al., 2000). In 
M. truncatula, Nod factor lacking the reducing end sulphate group, purified from bacteria 
lacking the nodH gene, induced calcium spiking at 10 nM, but failed to induce the calcium 
flux response (Wais et al., 2002; Shaw and Long, 2003). Thus, in both P. sativum and M. 
truncatula, Nod factor-like molecules induce calcium spiking without the induction of 
calcium flux (Walker et al., 2000; Shaw and Long, 2003). This evidence suggests that while 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
calcium spiking requires a low stringency of Nod factor perception, a high concentration 
of specific Nod factor structure is required to elicit the calcium influx. This is consistent 
with the two receptor model proposed on the bais of genetic analysis in which a low 
stringency receptor would be required for early Nod factor response while a second 
receptor, with higher structural stringency, would be involved in the initiation of bacterial 
infection. Indeed, a model has been proposed in which calcium spiking and other early 
Nod factor responses, such as root hair deformation, are induced by low Nod factor 
concentrations released during the first contact between the legume root and rhizobia, 
whereas calcium flux would be generated by high Nod factor concentrations found in the 
root hair curl where the rhizobia are trapped and start replicating. The calcium flux 
induced by such high Nod factor concentrations would then drive the formation of 
infection threads (Miwa et al., 2006b). Although addition of Nod factor to root hair cells 
induces calcium flux followed by calcium spiking, this model predicts that calcium flux 
occurs later than the calcium spiking response. Indeed, it has been shown calcium ion 
influx can be induced in root hair cells that are already spiking (Walker et al., 2000; Shaw 
and Long, 2003).  
In support for such a model several lines of evidence showed that calcium flux and 
calcium spiking are two separable responses. The spatial distribution of calcium flux and 
calcium spiking is different: while calcium spikes originate in the nuclear area and 
propagate as a wave outward, calcium flux begins at the cell tip and moves towards the 
nucleus (Ehrhardt et al., 1996; Cardenas et al., 1999; Walker et al., 2000; Shaw and Long, 
2003). Additional evidence showing that calcium influx and calcium spiking are separate 
responses come from genetic analysis. Mutation of the receptor-like kinase gene 
DMI2/SYMRK/SYM19, in the cation channel genes DMI1/POLLUX/SYM8, CASTOR and 
nucleoporin genes NUP85 and NUP133 block calcium spiking but not calcium flux (Walker 
et al., 2000; Shaw and Long, 2003; Kanamori et al., 2006; Miwa et al., 2006b; Saito et al., 
2007). These observations indicate that calcium influx and calcium spiking are 
independent of one other and, thus, may be involved in activating different (but possibly 
overlapping) responses. 
In order to identify the molecular components involved in the Nod factor calcium 
signalling pathway, various inhibitors which are known to block calcium signalling in other 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
eukaryotes have been tested for the effects on nodulation calcium signalling. Calcium 
ions can enter into the cytoplasm either from outside the cell through the cell membrane 
via calcium channels, or from some internal calcium stores. To identify the calcium 
channel and calcium pumps causing calcium spiking, several inhibitors have been tested 
for their effect on calcium spiking. These studies revealed that Nod-factor-induced 
calcium spiking is inhibited by 2-amino-ethoxydipheylborate (2-APB), an inhibitor of both 
IP3-mediated and store depletion-mediated calcium release; by caffeine, an inhibitor of 
IP3-receptor calcium channels and an agonist of ryanodine receptor calcium channels; by 
Cyclopiazonic acid (CPA), an inhibitor of type IIA calcium ATPases in plants; by 2,5-Di-t-
butyl-1,4-benzohydroquinone (BHQ), an inhibitor of mammalian 
sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium channel ATPases (SERCA); by the 
phospholipase C inhibitor U-73122 and by the phospholipase D inhibitor n-butanol (Miwa 
Thesis 2006, unpublished data, (Engstrom et al., 2002)). Interestingly, pharmacological 
antagonists that interfere with intracellular ion channel and calcium pump such as 2-APB, 
CPA and TMB-8, are also efficient blockers of Nod factor-elicited ENOD11 gene expression 
(Charron et al., 2004). Moreover, the addition of the calcium chelator EGTA and the 
calcium channel blocker La
, completely inhibited MtENOD12 induction by Nod factor 
(Pingret et al., 1998). These observations further demonstrate that Nod-factor-induced 
calcium spiking is required for the activation of early nodulin genes. 
One of the advantages of calcium oscillations is the availability of both amplitude 
and frequency, which could provide the opportunity for multiple signals to be generated 
by calcium in the same cells. Indeed, it has been shown that the nature of the calcium 
oscillations encodes information that can define the outcome of the downstream 
response (Dolmetsch et al., 1998; Allen et al., 2001; Evans et al., 2001; Oldroyd and 
Downie, 2006). Recently, different calcium spiking signatures have been shown to 
correlate with different modes of bacterial infection. In S. rostrata root infection by 
rhizobia can occur intercellularly at cracks caused by lateral root emergence. At lateral 
root bases cells Nod factor trigger faster and more symmetrical calcium oscillation 
compared to those induced during root hair invasion. However, when levels of jasmonic 
acid were raised or when ethylene was decreased calcium spiking slowed down in 
frequency. Interestingly, these different calcium oscillations were associated with an 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
activation of intracellular root hair invasion by rhizobia, indicating that intracellular 
invasion of root hairs is linked with a very specific calcium signature (Capoen et al., 2009). 
Genes Involved in the Activation of Calcium Spiking 
Calcium spiking plays an essential role in the Nod-factor-induced signalling 
pathway and it is likely to act as a secondary messenger to transduce the Nod factor 
signal. Mutant screens have identified a diversity of components necessary for the 
induction of calcium oscillation. In addition to the LysM receptor-like kinases (see above), 
a leucine-rich repeat (LRR) receptor-like kinase (Endre et al., 2002; Stracke et al., 2002),  
two cation channels (Ane et al., 2004; Imaizumi-Anraku et al., 2005; Edwards et al., 2007; 
Riely et al., 2007; Charpentier et al., 2008), and three nucleoporins (Kanamori et al., 2006; 
Saito et al., 2007; Groth et al., 2010) are required for the activation of calcium spiking 
(Wais et al., 2000) (Figure 1.2). Furthermore, biochemical and pharmacological 
investigations revealed that phospholipid signalling pathways are linked to Nod factor 
signalling (den Hartog et al., 2001; Engstrom et al., 2002; Charron et al., 2004; Sun et al., 
2007). 
LRR Receptor-Like Kinase 
In addition to the LysM receptor-like kinases, a second type of receptor-like kinase 
containing three LRR motifs in the extracellular domain, a transmembrane domain and an 
intracellular protein kinase, is involved in the Nod factor signal transduction pathway 
(Figure 1.2) (Endre et al., 2002; Stracke et al., 2002). The relevance of this LRR receptor-
like kinase in nodulation has been reported in M. sativa (MsNORK), P. sativum (PsSym19), 
M. truncatula (DMI2), L. japonicus (LjSymRK) and S. rostrata (SrSymRK) (Endre et al., 
2002; Stracke et al., 2002; Capoen et al., 2005). Moreover, the orthologues of this 
receptor-like kinase CgSymRK and DgSymRK have been shown to be essential for 
nodulation in the actinorhizal plants Casuarina glauca and Datisca glomerata, suggesting 
that genetic mechanisms are conserved between the two types of root nodule symbiosis 
(Gherbi et al., 2008; Markmann et al., 2008). This gene is essential for nodulation and 
very highly-conserved among legumes, though the function of the protein is not yet fully 
understood. LRR have been shown to mediate specific protein-protein interaction (Jones 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
and Jones, 1997) and it has been proposed that SYMRK might interact with an 
unidentified extracellular protein and mediate the phosphorylation of some components 
yet to be identified. Indeed, it has been shown that in DMI2, the M. truncatula 
orthologue of SYMRK, interacts with HMGR1, a key enzyme in synthesis of mevalonate 
and that the interaction requires the cytosolic active domain of DMI2 (Kevei et al., 2007). 
LRR receptor-like kinase is not thought to be a Nod-factor receptor because 
SYMRK mutants show some responses to Nod factor, including root hair deformation 
(Stracke et al., 2002). Unlike the LysM receptor-like kinases, which are known to be 
required for all Nod-factor-induced responses, this LRR receptor-like kinase is necessary 
for the activation of calcium spiking and early nodulin gene expression, but is not 
essential for the induction of calcium flux, suggesting a bifurcation in the Nod factor 
signalling pathway immediately downstream of the LysM receptor kinases, with one 
branch leading to calcium spiking and one branch leading to the calcium flux (Catoira et 
al., 2000; Wais et al., 2000; Shaw and Long, 2003; Miwa et al., 2006b). Furthermore, 
partial suppression of DMI2 and SrSymRK using RNA interference demonstrated a 
function for these genes at later stages of the symbiosis, during bacterial release and 
symbiosome formation (Limpens et al., 2003; Capoen et al., 2005). Corroborating these 
findings, the receptor-like kinase is expressed in roots prior to infection and is expressed 
in the preinfection zone of M. truncatula nodules (Limpens et al., 2003; Bersoult et al., 
2005). 
Ion Channels Required for Calcium Spiking 
Characterisation of the M. truncatula mutant dmi1, defective for calcium spiking, 
expression of nodulin genes and cortical cell division (Catoira et al., 2000; Wais et al., 
2000), revealed that the DMI1 gene encodes a protein with similarity to a ligand-gated 
cation channel in archea (Ane et al., 2004). Based on predicted structural similarities with 
MthK, a calcium-activated potassium channel from Methanobacterium 
thermoautotrophicuman, it was suggested that SYM8, the pea orthologous of DMI1, 
forms a tetrameric channel of a predicted structure similar to the archaebacterial ion 
channel but containing a different filter region (Edwards et al., 2007). Similarly, in L. 
japonicus, two proteins, POLLUX, the DMI1 orthologoue, and CASTOR, were found to 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
have structural matches to the calcium-gated potassium channel MthK (Imaizumi-Anraku 
et al., 2005). In addition, the finding that DMI1 interferes with calcium release from 
internal endoplasmic reticulum stores in yeast supported the hypothesis that SYM8/DMI1 
regulates calcium channels (Figure 1.2)(Peiter et al., 2007). 
Using electrophiological studies, recent work showed that CASTOR is a cation 
channel permeable to potassium (Charpentier et al., 2008). The lack of expression of 
POLLUX in a cell-free system precluded similar studies with POLLUX, but POLLUX was 
found to complement a yeast mutant deficient for potassium import. In addition, POLLUX 
was also able to complement the nodulation deficiency of the castor-12 mutant 
(Charpentier et al., 2008). These observations, together with the finding that CASTOR and 
POLLUX share identical filter sequences provide support for the hypothesis that POLLUX is 
also a cation channel (Charpentier et al., 2008). Contradictory studies have been reported 
in the literature on the localisation of CASTOR and POLLUX. Imainuzi-Anraku et al, (2005) 
firstly reported that CASTOR and POLLUX were localised in the plastid, whereas the M. 
truncatula POLLUX orthologue, DMI1, was shown to be the nuclear membrane (Riely et 
al., 2007).  In recent work, an extended analysis of the sub-cellular localization of CASTOR 
reported that this protein is localised in the nuclear envelope of L. japonicus cells 
(Charpentier et al., 2008), consistent with the nuclear-localised calcium spiking. How 
CASTOR and POLLUX contribute to the generation of calcium oscillations remains unclear. 
The influx of potassium triggered by the opening of these channels could compensate for 
the loss of positive charge induced during each spike by the activation of calcium 
channels. Alternatively, or simultaneously, the movement of potassium ions across the 
membrane generated by CASTOR and POLLUX could change the nuclear membrane 
potential, which in turn, could activate voltage-dependent calcium channels on the same 
membrane, similarly to what has been described in mammals (Stehno-Bittel et al., 1995; 
Edwards et al., 2007; Charpentier et al., 2008). Although several pieces of evidence have 
been reported on potassium channels, the molecular identities of the calcium channels 
required for Nod-factor-induced calcium oscillation remain obscure. 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
The Role of Three Nucleoporins Proteins Required for Calcium Spiking 
Exchange of macromolecules between cytoplasm and nucleus occur thorough 
nuclear pore complexes, formed by more than 30 nucleoporins (NUP) and other 
components (Suntharalingam and Wente, 2003). Interestingly, in L. japonicus, three 
genes, NUP133, NUP85 and NENA, encoding three nucleoporins have been found to be 
required for the generation of calcium spiking (Figure 1.2) (Kanamori et al., 2006; Saito et 
al., 2007; Groth et al., 2010). Recent work showed that NENA interacts with NUP85 in 
yeast and that NENA, like NUP133, localises to the nuclear rim of epidermal cells 
(Kanamori et al., 2006; Groth et al., 2010). The nuclear pore complex allows the 
movement of small molecules and the selective facilitated transport of large proteins and 
RNAs (Suntharalingam and Wente, 2003), and it is believed that ions, as calcium, can 
freely translocate through the nuclear pores (Bootman et al., 2009). Thus, it has been 
proposed that NUP133, NUP85 and NENA could allow secondary messengers into the 
nucleoplasm or, alternatively, they might interfere with the localisation of potassium 
channels and other proteins required for Nod-factor-induced calcium spiking (Oldroyd 
and Downie, 2008; Groth et al., 2010). Support for this idea comes from evidence 
showing that  nuclear pore complexes mediate the localization of proteins to the inner 
nuclear membrane (Suntharalingam and Wente, 2003). Further investigations are 
required to clarify the role of symbiotic NUP proteins in the generation of calcium spiking. 
Phospholipid Signalling  
In mammalian cells, calcium mobilisation from intracellular stores is 
predominantly regulated by the secondary messenger, inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3), 
which can cause the release of calcium from intracellular stores by activating IP3 and 
Ryanodine-receptors (Berridge et al., 2003). Despite the absence of homologues for 
animal IP3 and ryanodine receptor channels in plants (McAinsh and Pittman, 2009), it has 
been shown that two inhibitors of IP3-activated channels, TMB-8 and 2-APB, inhibited 
expression of ENOD11, and that 2-APB can also block calcium spiking, suggesting a 
conserved mechanism of calcium spiking in both mammals and plant systems (Figure 1.2).  
Phospholipid signalling in animals involves phospholipase C (PLC), that converts 
phosphatidylinositol 4,5-biphosphate into diacylglycerol and IP3 (Oldroyd and Downie, 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
2004); phospholipase D (PLD), that hydrolyses phosphatidylcholine to form phosphatidic 
acid (PA), releasing the soluble choline. Studies with pharmaceutical inhibitors indicate 
that PLC and PLD are involved in Nod-factor-induced calcium spiking and expression of 
Nod-factor-induced gene expression (Pingret et al., 1998; Engstrom et al., 2002). PLC is 
activated through heterotrimeric G-proteins induced by G-protein-coupled receptors. 
Interestingly, the heterotrimeric G-protein agonist mastorparan can induce root hair 
deformation (den Hartog et al., 2001), DMI3-dependent nodulation gene expression 
(Pingret et al., 1998) and calcium spiking (Sun et al., 2007). In addition, levels of PLC and 
PLD were both found to be increased by Nod factor (den Hartog et al., 2001; den Hartog 
et al., 2003). The calcium oscillations induced by mastoparan are similar to those induced 
by Nod factor, albeit occurring throughout the cell and showing a slower release of 
calcium and a higher variability in the lag, and spiking period (Sun et al., 2007).  
Remarkably, mastoparan was able to induce calcium spiking and ENOD11 in the 
nodulation mutant nfp, dmi1 and dmi2 carrying mutation in genes required for Nod-
factor-induced calcium spiking and gene expression (Charron et al., 2004; Sun et al., 
2007). These observations suggested that mastoparan and Nod factor function on 
different sets of calcium channels or that equivalent calcium channels are differentially 
triggered by the two molecules (Sun et al., 2007). Therefore, it was proposed that 
mastorpan could either induce calcium spiking that is mechanistically unrelated to the 
Nod-factor-induced calcium spiking or could induce components of the Nod factor 
signalling pathway that are downstream of NFP, DMI1 and DMI2 (Sun et al., 2007). 
Although further studies are necessary to discriminate between these possibilities, these 
results provide further evidence for a function for phospholipids signalling in nodulation. 
Genes Involved in the Perception of Calcium Spiking 
In order to perceive the signals generated during calcium spiking and to translate 
the calcium signals into downstream events such as gene expression, a cell must be 
provided with calcium sensors and calcium effectors. Recent discoveries, in the Nod 
factor signalling pathway, have found a calcium and calmodulin-dependent protein kinase 
and at least three transcription factors required for activation of gene expression 
downstream of calcium spiking. 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
A Calcium/Calmodulin-Dependent Protein Kinase as a Decoder of Calcium 
Oscillations 
A calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CCaMK) essential for nodulation 
has been identified in M. truncatula (DMI3), L. japonicus (LjCCaMK ), and P. sativum 
(PsSYM9) (Figure 1.2) (Levy et al., 2004; Mitra et al., 2004b). Mutations in this gene block 
ENOD gene expression but not calcium spiking or activation of calcium flux (Catoira et al., 
2000; Wais et al., 2000; Shaw and Long, 2003; Miwa et al., 2006b). CCaMK is formed by a 
serine/threonine kinase domain, an autoinhibitory domain, that overlaps with a 
calmodulin (CaM)-binding domain, and three EF-hand motifs. Calcium can bind CCaMK 
either as the free ion to the three EF-hand domains or complexed with CaM. The binding 
of free calcium ions activates autophosphorylation increasing the binding of CaM, which 
in turn triggers substrate phosphorylation (Patil et al., 1995; Takezawa et al., 1996; 
Ramachandiran et al., 1997; Gleason et al., 2006). Removal of the inhibitory domain of 
MtCCaMK or a point mutation in the autophosphorylation site of LjCCaMK can induce the 
autoactivation of the nodulation signalling pathway leading to the formation of 
spontaneous nodules and early nodulin gene induction in the absence of the symbiotic 
rhizobia (Gleason et al., 2006; Tirichine et al., 2006b). These results clearly demonstrated 
the essential role of CCaMK in the Nod factor signalling pathway.  
Recent work identified two genes proteins: IPD3, in M. truncatula, and CYCLOPS, 
orthologoue in L. japonicus, which interact with CCaMK in the nucleus (Messinese et al., 
2007; Yano et al., 2008). The lack of homology to functionally characterized proteins did 
not allow the function of this protein to be predicted. Nevertheless, it has been 
hypothesised that IPD3/CYCLOPS might act downstream of CCAMK transferring the 
calcium signals to transcriptional factor or, alternatively it might function as a modulator 
of CCAMK (Capoen and Oldroyd, 2008). 
Transcription Factors Transduce the Signal Downstream of CCAMK 
Spontaneous nodulation and nodulin gene expression induced by activated 
CCaMK depend on the GRAS family transcriptional factors NSP1, NSP2, and the 
transcriptional factors NIN and ERN (Schauser et al., 1999; Gleason et al., 2006; 
Heckmann et al., 2006; Marsh et al., 2007; Middleton et al., 2007; Vernie et al., 2008). 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
This strongly argues that NIN, NSP1, NSP2 and ERN-1 are on a linear pathway 
downstream of CCaMK with respect to gene regulation and induction of nodule 
morphogenesis. Recent work has shown that NSP1 and NSP2 form a complex that is 
associated with promoters of early nodulin genes, as ENOD11 and NIN, and that NSP2 
also interacts with the kinase domain of CCaMK, linking CCaMK and gene induction 
(Figure 1.2) (Hirsch et al., 2009). In addition, ERN1 and two close homologues, ERN2 and 
ERN3, have been shown to associate with the ENOD11 promoter close to the NSP1 
binding site (Andriankaja et al., 2007; Middleton et al., 2007). Thus, it has been proposed 
that NSP1, NSP2, ERN1, ERN2 and ERN3 act together to regulate temporally and spatially 
the expression of early nodulin genes (Hirsch et al., 2009), although interactions between 
ERN proteins and NSP1, NSP2 have not yet been described.  
Root Hair Deformation 
Nod factor has the challenging task to reprogramme the developmental stage of 
root hairs from cells involved in absorption of water and nutrients, to a suitable host for 
bacterial infection. This transformation occurs through several stages. Initially, Nod factor 
induces several cytoplasmic changes in root hair cells which include: changes in rates of 
cytoplasmic streaming, nuclear movements, changes in the shape of the vacuole, and 
shifts in the position of the endoplasmic reticulum towards the tip of root hair cells (Allen 
and Bennett, 1996; Miller et al., 2000). Such alterations of the cytoarchitecture are 
accompanied by changes of the actin and microtubule cytoskeleton (Cardenas et al., 
1998; de Ruijter et al., 1999; Weerasinghe et al., 2003; Vassileva et al., 2005; 
Weerasinghe et al., 2005). In at least four species, bean (Phaseolus vulgaris), alfalfa 
(Medicago sativa), common vetch (Vicia sativa) and L. japonicus, treatment of root hairs 
with Nod factor leads to rapid, within three to five minutes, changes in the 
polymerization pattern of actin  (Cardenas et al., 1998; Weerasinghe et al., 2005). In 
growth-arresting root hairs (those that show root hair deformation in response to Nod 
factor) endoplasmic microtubules were observed to disappear shortly after Nod factor 
addition, but they reformed within 20 minutes (Sieberer et al., 2005). Nod factor was 
shown to trigger fragmentation of long actin bundles extending into the root hair apical 
tips, and subsequent accumulation of fine bundles of filaments in the apical/subapical 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
region was also observed in responding root hairs (Cardenas et al., 1998; de Ruijter et al., 
1999; Weerasinghe et al., 2005; Yokota et al., 2009).  
All these cytoskeleton modification are associated and are probably responsible 
for the root hair deformation induced by Nod factor, eventually trapping the bacteria 
within a curl. Thus, the Nod-factor-induced disintegration of the actin cytoskeleton in the 
apical region of root hairs is associated with the arrest of root hair tip growth occurring 
within 10 minutes and followed by swellings of root hair tip (Figure 1.3) (Cardenas et al., 
1998). A few hours later, Nod factors induce re-initiation of root hair tip growth via the 
formation of a branch-like outgrowth (Figure 1.3). In order to entrap the rhizobia root 
hair curling occurs. Local application of Nod factor has been shown to induce root hair 
curling towards the point of application on root hair cells of M. truncatula (Esseling et al., 
2003). Thus, it has been proposed that Nod factor-secreting rhizobia lead to the 
continuous reorientation of the root hair tip until it form a tight curl, usually referred to 
as a shepherd's crook (Esseling et al., 2003). 
Several morphological changes to Nod factor have been widely described in the 
literature, although the genetic components behind such developmental changes remain 
to be determined. Pharmacological studies suggested that phospholipid signalling is likely 
to play a role during root hair deformation. Treatment of root hair cells with mastoparan, 
a G-protein agonist, was shown to induce root hair deformation (den Hartog et al., 2001). 
Moreover application of inhibitors of the PLC, inhibited root hair deformation, suggesting 
that components of the phospholipids signalling, such as PLC might be involved in the 
induction of the deformation of root hairs (den Hartog et al., 2001). 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
Figure 1.3. Morphology of root hairs responding to Nod factor and rhizobia. 
The initial response to Nod factor, observed within one hour, is an arrest of root hair 
growth and swelling of the root hair tip. Subsequently, Nod factor induce a new 
outgrowth commonly referred as root hair deformation. In the presence of rhizobium 
cells, root hairs curl in order to entrap the bacteria within a curl (root hair curling). 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
Bacterial Infection 
Bacterial infection starts when rhizobia growing in the rhizosphere remain entrapped 
between two cell walls, e.g. within the curl of a root hair cell. In order to facilitate the 
entry of rhizobia into the plant root, the plant develops a tunnel-like structure, called an 
infection thread, which permits the bacteria to cross several cell layers and eventually 
reach the nodule primordium in the inner cortex. It is still an open question how the 
infection threads start. Rhizobial mutants producing modified Nod factor structures are 
unable to form infection threads. These observations led to the idea that a high 
stringency of Nod factor structure is required for the initiation of the infection thread 
(Ardourel et al., 1994; Walker and Downie, 2000). Nevertheless, it is clear that Nod factor 
alone is unable to trigger the initiation of infection threads. Recent work has shown that 
the presence of the Nod factor receptors NFR1 and NFR5 is not sufficient to determine 
the infection phenotype of Lotus spp. Addition of LjNFR1 and LjNFR5 to L. pedunculatus 
roots inoculated with M. loti did not restore the infection phenotype. In addition, 
chimeric receptors containing the extracellular regions of L. pedunculatus NFR1 and NFR5 
and the corresponding L. japonicus kinase domain did not complement the L. japonicus 
nfr1-1 and nfr5-2 mutants and the double mutant nfr1-1nfr5-2, suggesting that additional 
bacterial molecules independent of Nod factor are required for the initiation of infection 
threads (Bek et al., 2010). The presence of rhizobia is, thus, indispensable for the 
formation of this process and it is possible that a threshold of high Nod factor 
concentration released by the entrapped microcolony of rhizobial cells is necessary to 
trigger the initiation of the infection thread (Walker and Downie, 2000; Brewin, 2004). A 
calcium flux induced by such a high Nod factor concentration have been also 
hypothesised to drive initiation of the infection thread (Miwa et al., 2006b). 
Several decades ago, ultrastructural studies revealed that the infection thread 
initiates as an invagination of the plant cell wall and this occurs as a consequence of 
degradation of plant cell walls and subsequent extension of the tubular structure (Jordan 
et al., 1963; Ridge and Rolfe, 1985). It has been observed that the nucleus of the root hair 
cells, normally linked to the tip by microtubules, probably in order to direct the deliver of 
new wall material to the growing apex of uninfected cells (Lloyd et al., 1987), moves 
toward the base of the root hairs after bacterial infection. This relocation of the nuclei 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
allows the delivery of new cell wall material to be directed at the tip of the infection 
thread (Rae et al., 1992). The progression of infection threads through the cortex seems 
to be guided by the reactivation of inner cortical cells induced by Nod factor, and this 
involves centralisation of the nuclei and formation of anticlinal transvacuolar cytoplasmic 
strands, also referred to as pre-infection threads (Rae et al., 1992; van Brussel et al., 
1992). These responses are also induced in the outer cortex but in this region the 
centralisation of nuclei and the formation of cytoplasmic bridges are followed by the 
activation of cell division which will eventually lead to the formation of the nodule 
primordia. 
Infection threads have a unique and remarkable topology in which bacteria remain 
topologically exterior to the plant cells (Figure 1.4A). Inside the infection thread, bacterial 
cells are embebbed in a plant extracellular matrix and are surrounded by the tubular 
structure defined by a layer of cell wall material and a layer of plasma membrane (Figure 
1.4B). Using of fluorescent-tagged (GFP) derivatives of S. meliloti it has been shown that 
bacterial cell divisions occur only in the growing apex of the infection thread filled with 
one or two column of longitudinally aligned bacteria (Gage et al., 1996). Based on the 
dimension of rhizobial cells (approximately 1 m in length) it has been estimated that 
only 100-150 bacterial cells contribute to the propagation of the infection thread (Gage, 
2002). Confocal microscopic analysis has shown that infection thread growth is a 
discontinuous process with gaps between the file of bacteria. A bacteria free zone was 
observed at the tip of the growing infection thread suggesting that progression of the 
infection thread does not require bacterial contact (Fournier et al., 2008). Crossing 
epidermal and cortical cells infection threads branch and ramify in a tree-like network 
with a direction of growth that changes as the nodule develops (Monahan-Giovanelli et 
al., 2006). 
Although several infection threads are generated at the epidermis, only 1-5% of them 
reach the nodule primordia (Vasse et al., 1993). In addition, if the bacterial symbiotic 
partner does not provide the plant with the correct signals, growth of the infection 
thread stops. For example, infection threads aborts within the root hair cells after 
inoculation with exopolysaccharide deficient S. meliloti mutants (Gonzalez et al., 1996; 
Pellock et al., 2000). Microarray analysis of M. truncatula plants inoculated with 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
succinoglycan deficient S. meliloti revealed that exopolysaccharide provides a signal that 
enables the host to be successfully infected by increasing its translation capacity, by 
altering its metabolic activity and by preparing it for invasion (Jones et al., 2008; Jones 
and Walker, 2008). These findings indicate that that the infection thread process is 
carefully regulated by both the plant and bacterial symbiotic partners. 
A different type of infection observed in some legume is the intercellular infection 
thread, where bacteria gain access to the interior of the plant root by cracks resulting 
form lateral root protrusion. Sesbania rostrata is a tropical legume that can grow in both 
dry and waterlogged condition. In dry conditions the rhizobia infect the plant thorough 
root hairs with a similar mechanism as that observed for vetch, Lotus, and Medicago 
species. In contrast, in waterlogged conditions infection of S. rostrata occurs via crack 
entry and, leads to the formation of cortical infection pockets by eliciting local cell death, 
(D'Haeze et al., 2003). Interestingly, intercellular infection threads are less stringent for 
Nod factor structure compared to intracellular infection observed in alfalfa, M. 
truncatula, L. japonicus, pea and beans (Goormachtig et al., 2004). Nevertheless, Nod 
factor production within the infection thread is necessary for proper development of 
intercellular bacterial infection (Den Herder et al., 2007). 
Figure 1.4. Topology of an intracellular infection thread. 
A. Cartoon of tunnel-like structure intracellular infection (Infection thread) filled with 
column of rhizobia which are topologically exterior to the plant. The infection starts in the 
root hair cells and cross several cortical cell layer. B Traverse section of an infection 
threads filled with extracellular matrix and delimited by cell wall and plasma membrane 
(modified after Brewin, 2004). 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
Nodule Formation 
Bacterial infection eventually results in the formation of nitrogen-fixing root 
nodules. At least, two different types of nodule development can be observed in 
legumes. Alfalfa, M. truncatula and pea form ovular indeterminate nodules, whereas 
the nodules found in Lotus and bean are spherical and are defined as determinate 
nodules. In indeterminate nodules, cortical cell division occurs in the inner cortex, where 
the nodule primordia are formed and this leads to the formation of nodules characterised 
by a persistent uninfected meristem responsible for nodule growth. Thereafter, the 
nodule is formed by a meristem at the tip and this promotes the development of an 
infection zone, a nitrogen fixation zone and a senescence zone. Thus indeterminate 
nodules grow by division of meristematic cells and the infection thread has to constantly 
deliver bacteria into recently divided cells just behind the meristematic zone (Libbenga 
and Harkes, 1973). In contrast, in determinate nodules the cortical cell divisions occur in 
the outer cortex and the nodules develop from a meristem which undergoes a limited 
number of cell divisions. During the early stage of nodule development the cells of the 
nodule meristem are infected. Thus, the determinate nodule grows through cell 
expansion, rather than cell division, and the bacterial infection spreads primarily by 
division of already infected cells (Rolfe and Gresshoff, 1988). Hence, although the two 
model legumes M. truncatula and L. japonicus share many genetic components of the 
Nod factor signalling pathway required for nodulation, it is worth remembering that 
these two species undergo two remarkably different type of nodule development. 
Plant Hormones 
There is increasing evidence that plant hormones play a crucial role in nodulation. 
Several studies have shown that auxins, cytokinins, gibberellins and brassinosteroids 
positively regulate different stage of nodulation. One of the first line of evidence showing 
the importance of auxin in nodulation come form studies demonstrating that an auxin 
transport inhibitors induce the formation of pseudonodules and the expression of 
ENOD40, a gene associated with induction of nodule primordia (Hirsch et al., 1989; Fang 
and Hirsch, 1998). Recent investigations have found that a mutation in the L. japonicus 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
LHK1 gene encoding a cytokinin receptor leads to the spontaneous formation of nodules 
in the absence of rhizobia (Tirichine et al., 2007); A LHK1 loss-of-function mutant was 
normal for bacterial infection but failed to form nodule primordia, indicating an essential 
role for cytokinins in nodule organogenesis in the cortex (Murray et al., 2007).  
In contrast, plant hormones such as abscissic acid, jasmonic acid, ethylene and 
salicylic acid play a negative role, inhibiting nodulation. For example, various levels of 
nodulation are differently regulated by ethylene. Ethylene inhibits the early plant 
responses including the initiation of calcium spiking and expression of ENOD gene 
(Oldroyd et al., 2001b). Thus, it has been suggested that ethylene inhibits the Nod-factor 
signalling pathway upstream of calcium spiking, affecting the sensitivity of the plant to 
Nod factor (Oldroyd et al., 2001b; Oldroyd and Downie, 2008). Ethylene is also known to 
regulate the number and the position of nodules. The M. truncatula skl mutant, defective 
for perception of ethylene, was initially identified as a supernodulation mutant producing 
approximately tenfold more nodules than wild type plants and displayed a random 
distribution of nodules which are normally located opposite to the protoxylem poles 
(Heidstra et al., 1997; Penmetsa and Cook, 1997; Penmetsa et al., 2003). Bacterial 
infection was also affected by ethylene. Similarly to the lhk1 mutant, infection threads in 
the skl mutant grew in an uncontrolled fashion throughout the cortex (Penmetsa and 
Cook, 1997; Murray et al., 2007). Interestingly, in S. rostrata ethylene inhibited 
intracellular root hair infection but promoted intercellular infection via crack entry 
(Goormachtig et al., 2004). Hence, ethylene globally regulates almost each step of the 
nodule formation either in the epidermis and the cortex.  
Recent work has shown that ABA, similarly to ethylene and jasmonic acid (Oldroyd 
et al., 2001b; Sun et al., 2006), inhibits calcium spiking, gene expression, bacterial 
infection and nodule formation (Ding et al., 2008). Given the high capability of hormones 
to positively or negatively affect nodulation, it is likely that an equilibrium of positive and 
negative hormones tightly controls the fate of nodule development. It is worth 
remembering that hormones are all induced in response to environmental stress such as 
pathogen, herbivore attack and drought. Hence, by sensing environmental change 
surrounding the plant, hormones might have the ability to promote or inhibit nodulation. 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
Mycorrhizal Symbiosis 
Most terrestrial plants interact of a wide diversity of endophytic fungi, of which 
the best studied are those that form arbuscular mycorrhiza. A mycorrhiza is a symbiotic 
association between a fungus and the roots of a plant. The relationship between 
mycorrhizae and plants is very widespread among terrestrial vascular plants: 
approximately 80% of all land flowering plants (Angiosperm) are able to associate with 
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (Newman and Reddell, 1987). The mycorrhizal association is 
a diverse and ancient symbiosis. Fossil evidence suggests that this symbiosis initiated 460 
million years ago (Wilkinson, 2001), almost 400 million years earlier than the root nodule 
symbiosis. In the arbuscular mycorrhiza endosymbiosis, the fungus inhabiting the root 
cortical cells transfers mineral nutrients, particularly phosphorus, from the soil to the 
cortical cells, where this is exchanged with carbon provided by the plant (Harrison, 2005). 
Phosphorus is an essential mineral nutrient and in many soils is limiting for plant growth 
(Holford, 1997). It has been demonstrated that improvements in phosphorus acquisition 
have a significant impact on plant growth, health, and subsequently on plant biodiversity 
and ecosystem productivity (van der Heijden et al., 1998). Unlike rhizobia, the arbuscular 
mycorrhizal fungi are obligate biotrophs and depend entirely on the plant to provide 
them with carbon. Consequentially, studies of these organisms have been limited by the 
inability to grow arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in the absence of the plant, and in 
comparison with other groups of fungi, relatively little is known about them. Until now, 
there have been approximately 150 species of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi described and 
the identification of new species is ongoing (Kramadibrata et al., 2000; Harrison, 2005). 
Mycorrhizae have been classified into two groups: ectomycorrhizae and 
endomycorrhizae. The ectomycorrhizae belong predominantly to Basidiomyces and form 
associations with woody Angiosperms and Gymnosperms. These fungi grow around the 
root as a mycelial sheath with some limited intercellular hyphal penetration, whereas 
endomycorrhizae, develop extensive intracellular fungal growth. The internal hyphae 
form highly branched haustoria, called arbuscules (Latin for tree). Thus, the fungi that 
form this type of symbiotic interaction are known as arbuscular mycorrhizae. Unlike 
rhizobium-legume symbioses, arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi are not restricted to interact 
with specific plant hosts. Nevertheless, some fungus-plant combinations have better 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
colonisation rates and differences in compatibility are becoming apparent. Thus, there 
may be levels of specificity that are not yet appreciated (Pearson and Jakobsen, 1993; 
Smith et al., 2004).  
The establishment of arbuscular mycorrhizal symbioses, like the rhizobium-
legume symbioses, starts with a chemical signal exchange between the root and 
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus which occur prior to their physical interaction. In one of 
the first stages of host recognition, plant release into their root exudates biological 
molecules, called strigolactones (Akiyama et al., 2005). Strigolactones are perceived by 
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and stimulate arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi to switch from 
asymbiotic to presymbiotic growth, which is marked by induced branching of hyphae 
from germinating fungal spores (Buee et al., 2000) and elevated energy metabolism 
(Besserer et al., 2008). As a result of the strigolactone perception, the fungus, in turn, 
triggers the production of diffusible signalling molecules, which are perceived by the 
plant root in the absence of direct physical contact (Kosuta et al., 2003). An hypothesized 
diffusible compound (called Myc factor) is likely to be perceived by an arbuscular 
mycorrhiza-specific receptor in epidermal cells (Oldroyd et al., 2009). It has been shown 
that a diffusible signal from arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi can induce a transient cytosolic 
calcium increase in host plant cells (Navazio et al., 2007). The rapid elevation in cytosolic 
calcium was induced in response to the culture medium of spores of Gigaspora margarita 
germinated in the absence of a plant partner (Navazio et al., 2007). Recently, imaging of 
yellow cameleon indicator revealed that mycorrhizal fungi induce repetitive calcium 
oscillations around the nuclei of root hair cells with a signature that differs from Nod-
factor-induced calcium spiking (Kosuta et al., 2008). Fungus separated from the plant root 
by a cellophane membrane elicits expression of ENOD11 gene in M. truncatula, a Nod 
factor-inducible gene encoding a putative cell wall protein (Kosuta et al., 2003). 
Arbuscular mycorrhiza differ profoundly to the rhizobium-legume symbiosis in 
terms of developmental changes induced in the plant, mechanisms of fungal or rhizobial 
infection and profile of genes activated by the two endosymbionts (Kistner et al., 2005).  
Nevertheless, surprisingly, several components of the Nod factor signalling pathway are 
also required for mycorrhizal association. Thus, these two different symbioses share the 
same symbiosis signalling (Sym) pathway, also referred as common signalling pathway 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
including DMI2/SYMRK, DMI1/Pollux, Castor, NUP133, NUP85 and CCaMK (Oldroyd and 
Downie, 2004; Oldroyd and Downie, 2006). The fact that root nodule and arbuscular 
mycorrhizal symbioses have conserved early-signalling genes supports the model that 
nodulation genes have been recruited from the more ancient arbuscular mycorrhiza 
symbiosis. 
Once in contact with the plant root, the fungus forms an appressorium on the root 
epidermis through which it enters the root. Before infection, the epidermal cell 
assembles a transient intracellular structure with a novel cytoskeletal organization 
defines as prepenetration apparatus (Genre et al., 2005) that resembles the pre-infection 
thread structure observed in legume-rhizobia symbiosis (Parniske, 2008). After 
colonisation of the root surface, fungal hyphae enter through a cleft into the exodermis 
that opens between an exodermal cell and a cell of the outermost cortical layer (Harrison, 
1998; Demchenko et al., 2004; Parniske, 2004). Inside the cortex, fungal hyphae continue 
to grow until they reach and penetrate the cell wall of an inner cortical cell. Subsequently, 
further differentiation yields highly ramified fungal hyphae, termed arbuscules (Harrison, 
1997, 2005). In parallel, arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi also develop extensive hyphae 
outside the plant root. The intraradical and extraradical hyphae constitute a filamentous 
network that bridges rhizosphere and plant roots and consequently facilitates bi-
directional nutrient transfer where soil nutrients move to the plant and plant 
photosynthesis flow to the fungus (Jakobsen, 1995; Harrison, 1997; Cavagnaro et al., 
2001). 
CHAPTER 1. General Introduction 
Research Objective of This Thesis 
Calcium plays an essential role in legume-rhizobia symbiosis. The focus of this 
work was to investigate the role of Nod-factor-induced calcium flux and calcium spiking in 
the infection of M. truncatula and L. japonicus by rhizobia. First, a system to record and 
analyze Nod factor-calcium flux in M. truncatula root hair expressing yellow cameleon 2.1 
was established and used to assess the effect of different Nod factor structure on calcium 
flux (Chapter 3). Secondly, M. truncatula and L. japonicus mutants affected for infection 
thread growth were tested for Nod-factor-induced calcium flux (Chapter 4). Third, the 
relationship between root hair calcium spiking and nodule organogenesis was 
investigated using a novel allele of the L. japonicus SYMRK, in Chapter 5. Fourth, the role 
of the L. japonicus LNP in the Nod factor signalling pathway was tested using calcium and 
genetic analysis (Chapter 6).  The results presented in this thesis will provide new insight 
into the molecular signalling cascade that drives the infection and nodule formation in 
legume-rhizobia symbiosis. 
This work was part of the NODPERCEPTION Marie Curie Research Training 
Network (MCRTN) involving eight partners from six European countries 
(http://medicago.toulouse.inra.fr/NODPERCEPTION/index.htm). The research project 
concerned the establishment of the agronomically and ecologically important legume-
rhizobia symbiosis. Its major aim was to identify the molecular mechanisms of Nod factor 
perception through an integrated and multidisciplinary research project using the model 
legume M. truncatula. 
Chapter 2. Materials & Methods 
Chapter 2 
Materials and Methods 
Plant Material  
Medicago truncatula genotype Jemalong A17 was used as wild type. The L416 line 
of M. truncatula transformed with pMtENOD11-GUS (Charron et al., 2004) was provided 
by David Barker (INRA, Toulouse, France). The M. truncatula hcl-1, bit-1, nin and rit-1 
mutants were provided by G. E. Oldroyd (JIC, Norwich, UK). Wild-type Lotus japonicus 
accession Gifu B-129 (Stougaard and Beuselinck, 1996) was obtained from J. Stougaard. 
All L. japonicus mutants used in this study were generated in L. japonicus gifu B-129. 
Seeds along with the source and the original description of the mutants were provided by 
J. Stougaard, K. Szczyglowski and M. Etzler.  
Bacterial Strains 
All strains used are listed in Table 2.1.  
Table 2.1. Bacterial strains. 
Strain Lot no. Plasmid Resistance Description Source 
S. meliloti 
D4594 pMH682 Str, Kan, 
S. meliloti 1021 exo7::Tn5 
carrying nodD3 and syrM 
on pMH682 for 
overproduction  of Nod 
factor  
Obtained from A. 
Downie 
M. loti R7A X197 - - Wild type (Sullivan & 
Ronson, 1998) 
Media 
The composition of the growth media used for plant and bacterial growth are 
given in Table 2.2. 
Chapter 2. Materials & Methods 
Table 2.2. Growth media used for bacterial and plant growth.  
Solutions Composition (1L) 
Rhizobium complete 
medium  (TY) 
5 g Difco tryptone, 3 g Difco yeast extract, 1.325 g CaCl2 (15 g agar for 
solid medium). 
Rhizobium minimal 
medium (Y) 
0.1 g MgSO4 7H2O, 0.22 g CaCl2 6H2O, 0.22 g K2HPO4, 0.02 g FeCl3, 1.1 g L-
glutamate acid Na salt, 0.75 mg biotin, 0.75 mg aneurine HCl (Thiamine), 
0.75 mg D,L-pantothenic acid Ca salt, 10 g agar, pH 6.8. 
Water agar (DWA) 1.5 % Bacto agar, pH was adjusted with 1 M KOH to pH 5.7. 
Fahraeus plant 
medium (FP) 
0.1 g CaCl2 2H2O, 0.12 g MgSO4 7 H2O, 0.1 g KHPO4, 0.15 g Na2HPO4 
12H2O, 5 mg Ferric citrate, 2.86 mg H3BO3, 2.03 mg MnSO4  4H2O, 0.22 mg 
ZnSO4 7H2O, 0.08 mg CuSO4 5H2O, 0.08 mg H2MoO4 H2O, 0.5% Lab M agar 
(for FP solid medium), pH 6.3-6.7. 
Buffered nodulation 
medium (BNM) 
390 mg MES [2-(N-morpholino)-ethane sulphonic acid], 344 mg 
CaSO4.2H2O, 122 mg MgSO4.7H2O, 68mg KH2PO4, 4.6 mg ZnSO4 7H2O, 3.1 
mg H3BO3, 8.45 mg MnSO4 H2O, 0.25 mg Na2MoO4 2H2O, 0.016 mg CuSO4 
5H2O, 0.025 mg CoCl2 6H2O, 18.65 mg Na2EDTA, 13.9 mg FeSO4 7H2O, 11.5 
g (for BNM solid medium), pH 6.5. 
F1 compost Scotts Levington F1 compost is a low-nitrogen and high-phosphorous 
containing compost designed for year-round propagation of sensitive 
subjects and where control of growth is required, e.g. in Brassicas, for 
steady, controlled growth (Scotts, Bramford, Suffolk, UK). 
Antibiotics 
Antibiotics were used for growth selection of S. meliloti. Stock solutions of 
antibiotics were dissolved in water followed by sterilisation through filtration with a 0.2 
m filter. Tetracycline was dissolved in ethanol. The final concentrations of antibiotics 
used for S. meliloti were kanamycin 50 g/ml; tetracycline 5 g/ml; spectinomycin 200 
g/ml.  
Chemicals 
Oregon Green-dextran Mr 10,000 and Texas Red-dextran Mr 10,000 dyes were 
supplied by Molecular Probes (Eugene, USA). All other chemical compounds were 
supplied by Sigma-Aldrich Company Ltd. (Poole, UK), unless stated. Synthetic Nod factor 
equivalent to nodL Nod factor (LCO IV, C16:2, S) and nodF nodL Nod factor (LCO IV, C18:1, S) 
were kindly provided by Eduardo Andres (CNRS, Grenoble, France). 
Chapter 2. Materials & Methods 
Plant growth conditions 
M. truncatula seed sterilisation and plant growth 
Seeds of M. truncatula were scarified using sandpaper and sterilised in 0.1% 
sodium hypochlorite solution for two-three minutes and washed five times with sterile 
water. The seeds were then left to imbibe for one-two hours at room temperature or 
overnight at 4C. Subsequently, seeds were left overnight in plates with water agar (DWA) 
medium at 4C in the dark. The plates were then placed upside down at room 
temperature for one day. Seedlings with 1-2 cm long roots were transferred to Fahraeus 
nitrogen-free plant agar medium (Fahraeus, 1957) agar (FP) plate containing 0.1 M L--
(2-aminoethoxyvinyl glycine (AVG). AVG was added in order to prevent the inhibition of 
nodulation by ethylene accumulation in the roots. The region of the plates containing the 
roots was wrapped in black plastic and the plates were incubated vertically in a controlled 
environment (20C/15C, day/night cycles of 18/6 h with 32% relative humidity, 300 mol 
light intensity).  
Plants grown in the greenhouse were germinated on agar as described above and 
transferred to soil (John Innes Number 2 compost). The plants were grown in a 
greenhouse, watered twice daily and additional light was provided during the winter. For 
the first two-three days a clear glass lid was placed on top of the pots to protect the 
plants from drying out. 
L. japonicus seed sterilisation and plant growth 
Seeds of L. japonicus were scarified, sterilised and imbibed as described above 
except that were soaked in sodium hypochlorite solution for 15-20 minutes. Imbibed 
seeds were grown for two days on DWA water agar medium, in dark and placed upside 
down to allow the roots to grow vertically. Subsequently, seedlings with similar root 
lengths (0.5-2 cm) were selected, and transferred to FP agar medium. Filter paper (grade 
0860; Schleicher and Schll, UK) was placed between the agar and the roots to prevent 
the roots growing into the agar. The roots were then covered by another filter paper to 
keep them moist. The Petri dishes were incubated in a vertical position in a controlled 
Chapter 2. Materials & Methods 
environment (see condition above) and the region of the Petri dish containing the roots 
was covered with black plastic.  
Plants grown in the greenhouse were planted into small plastic pots in Scotts 
Levington F1 compost (Scotts, Bramford, Suffolk, UK) or terragreen sand. For the first 
two-three days a clear glass lid was placed on top of the pots to protect the plants from 
drying out. 
Preparation of Nod Factor 
Nod Factor Extraction from Liquid Medium 
S. meliloti 1121 pMH682 was grown for two days on a TY agar plate. One colony 
was then transferred into 100 ml of Y medium containing 0.75 mg/L Thiamine, 0.75 mg/L, 
0.75 mg/L Biotin, 0.75 mg/L DL-Pantothenic acid, 0.75 mg/L Calcium salt, 0.11 g/100ml 
NaGlu, as described on Table 2.2 and 0.1% Mannitol, and was cultured at 300 rpm at 28C 
for two days. A 10 ml inoculum was then added to three flasks containing 700 ml of Y 
medium containing 0.3% Mannitol and 0.5 M Luteolin. The flasks were shaken for two 
days at 28C. The bacterial cultures were then centrifuged at 9000 rpm for 60 minutes at 
5C, and the clear supernatant was pumped through a C18 column (Sep-Pak) at a flow 
rate of 10 ml/min. The C18 column was sequentially eluted with 2.5ml of each of 20%, 
40%, 60%, 80% methanol and 4 ml of 100% methanol. The fractions were analysed using 
root hair deformation assays and ENOD11-GUS induction as described below. The 80% 
methanol fraction retained the highest activity and this fraction was used for further 
analysis. 
HPLC Analysis and Mass Spectrometry Quantification of Nod 
Factor (Performed by Lionel Hill, Metabolic Biology 
Department) 
To analyze the Nod factor eluted from the Sep Pak column, 10 l of the fraction 
eluted with 80% methanol was diluted five times in water and then applied to a 100 mm 
X 2 mm 3  Luna C18(2) reverse phase HPLC column (Phenomenex) using a linear 
Chapter 2. Materials & Methods 
gradients of acetonitrile indicated in Table 2.3 versus 0.1% formic acid in water, at 30C 
with a flow rate of 280 l per minute. 
Table 2.3. Gradient of acetonitrile 
Time % Acetonitrile 
20 95 
25 95 
The sample was analysed using a Thermo DecaXPplus ion trap (equipped with a 
Surveyor HPLC system), collecting full Mass data in negative mode using electrospray 
ionization. MS2 data were taken at 35% collision energy, 4.0 atomic mass unit (amu) 
isolation width and with dynamic exclusion, to ensure that as many ions as possible were 
sampled. Spray chamber conditions were 350C capillary temperatures, 50 units sheath 
gas, 5 units aux gas, 5.0kV. For the quantification of extracted Nod factor, several 
dilutions of the extracted Nod factor were prepared and the major natural Nod factor 
(1143.7amu in negative mode) was quantified to prepare a calibration curve. The 
standard (LCO IV C16:2 S) was diluted to fall somewhere in the middle of the curve, and the 
major Nod factor was analysed (1101.7amu). Comparison of this standard with the curve 
gives the dilution of extract that matches standard, and hence the concentration of the 
extract. Other Nod factors were quantified relative to the major Nod factor of 1143.7 
amu. This quantification method was a backwards version of the normal process of 
calibration, where dilution series of the standard rather than the extract would have been 
run. This method was chosen because a large amount of extract Nod factor and a low 
amount of standard Nod factor were available. The quantification of the Nod factors 
peak-areas, in extracted ion chromatograms derived from the full spectra MS data, were 
integrated using the Qualbrowser software and are reported in Table 2.4. Peaks identities 
were confirmed using data dependent MS2 spectra. The Sm IV C16:2, S, Ac Nod factor 
concentration in the 80% methanol extract was estimated to be 1.09 mM (Figure 2.1, pick 
D). The Nod factor extract was kept at -20 C.  
Table 2.4. Quantification of extracted Nod factors.
Picks Retention Time 
(min) 
A 14.84 
B 15.53 
C 15.78 
D 16.5 
E 16.98 
Figure 2.1. Chromatogram of the intensity of the most intense ion with a mass between 
1000 and 1700, at different retention
Biological Estimation of Nod Factor A
Nod factor was analyzed by ENOD11
factor extract was diluted in BNM medium to make a 10
of 10
 to 10
. Strong induction of ENOD11 was observed after 4 hours of incubation 
with an appropriate 
with the fraction diluted to 10
to 10
Chapter 2. Materials & Methods
Quantification of extracted Nod factors. 
Retention Time Mass 
(amu) 
area Identity 
1304.6 58740588 Sm V C16:2, S 
1346.7 346551312 Sm V C16:2, S, Ac 
1101.5 108339602 Sm IV C16:2, S 
1143.6 752783376 Sm IV C16:2, S, Ac 
1145.5 159803210 Sm IV C16:1, S, Ac 
1173.7 57224734 Sm IV C18:1, S, Ac 
hromatogram of the intensity of the most intense ion with a mass between 
different retention time (see Table 2.4. for identification of peaks).
Biological Estimation of Nod Factor Activity 
Nod factor was analyzed by ENOD11-GUS induction assay
factor extract was diluted in BNM medium to make a 10-fold dilution series of the range 
. Strong induction of ENOD11 was observed after 4 hours of incubation 
with an appropriate positive control. ENOD11-GUS was induced in 
with the fraction diluted to 10
 and a weak response was observed in the sample diluted 
Chapter 2. Materials & Methods 
Concentration 
0.085 
 0.502 
0.157 
 1.090 
 0.231 
 0.083 
hromatogram of the intensity of the most intense ion with a mass between 
(see Table 2.4. for identification of peaks).  
assays (see below). The Nod 
fold dilution series of the range 
. Strong induction of ENOD11 was observed after 4 hours of incubation 
induced in M. truncatula roots 
and a weak response was observed in the sample diluted 
Chapter 2. Materials & Methods 
Physiological Techniques 
Root Hair Deformation  
Seedlings with root length of about 1 cm were germinated and grown for two 
days were transferred to Farhraeus slides filled with FP liquid medium. About one hour 
later Nod factor was added to a final concentration of 10 nM. For estimation of Nod 
factor activity following purification several dilutions were prepared. For treatment with 
rhizobia, M. loti R7A was grown for two days under agitation at 28C in 5 ml TY liquid 
culture. Seedlings were inoculated with a 1x10
 dilution of the M. loti culture. After Nod 
factor/M. loti was added, samples were left in the dark at room temperature for 
approximately 24 hours. Root hairs were examined under the light microscope and root 
hair deformation was scored without prior knowledge of the treatment to the seedlings 
(Nod factor or M. loti treatment or absence of Nod-factor or M.loti). Roots containing 
branching root hair cells were considered positive for this response. Images were taken 
using an inverted microscope with a digital camera. 
ENOD11-GUS Induction Assay 
Seedlings of M. truncatula ENOD11-GUS transgenic plants (Charron et al., 2004) 
were transferred into liquid BNM containing several dilution of S. meliloti extracted Nod 
factor for four hours. Subsequently, roots were imbibed in a solution containing 1 mM 
EDTA, pH 8.0, 50 mM Sodium Phosphate buffer pH 7.0, 0.05% v/v Triton X-100 to which 2 
mM X-glcA (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-beta-D-glucuronide, sodium salt, Melford 
Laboratories Ltd) was added from a stock of 500 mM X-glcA in dimethylformamide. Roots 
were incubated at 37C overnight in dark before counting the number of blue stained 
roots for each treatment. 
Chapter 2. Materials & Methods 
Calcium Imaging with Oregon Green 
Plant Preparation 
Seedlings of M. truncatula or L. japonicus were prepared as described above. A 
small chamber was made on a large cover glass using high vacuum grease (Dow Corning 
GMBH, Wiesbaden, USA) and the chamber was filled with 100 l of liquid FP medium 
Seedling with 2-3 cm long root were placed into this well. The seedlings were incubated 
at room temperature for at least 20 min before microinjection.  
Dye Preparation 
Oregon Green 488 BAPTA-1-dextran 10,000 MW and Texas Red-dextran 10,000 
MW (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, U.S.A.) were dissolved in sterile water to a final 
concentration of 5 mM. Texas Red (calcium insensitive dye) was used as a reference to 
eliminate the background fluctuation. For each experiment, 1 l 5x injection buffer (0.75 
M KCl, 0.45 M HEPES, pH 7.0) was added to 4 l of dye solution. Due to the higher 
fluorescence of Texas Red, 0.4 l aliquots of Texas Red were added to 3.6 l of Oregon 
Green, and then 1 l 5x injection buffer was added to the mixed dye solution. The 
solution of dye was spun at 12,000 rpm in a microcentrifuge for one minute to remove 
any particulate matter and the upper solution was used for microinjection. 
Needle Preparation 
Thin needles for microinjection were made using Borosilicate Glass Capillaries 
(1B120F-4; World Precision Instruments Inc.) and a computer-controlled electrode puller 
(model 773; Campden Instruments Ltd.). The optimized setting for pulling very thin 
needles was a heat intensity setting of about 16 and a pulling force setting of about 50. 
The tips of these needles were examined under the light microscope and only needles 
with thin tips were selected for use in injection.  
Chapter 2. Materials & Methods 
Microinjection 
The microinjection system was essentially the same as that described by Wais et 
al. (2000). The needle was first loaded with about 0.2 l of dye solution containing 
Oregon Green and Texas Red using a long thin pipette tip (Microloader; Eppendorf) and 
then the needle was back-filled with 10 l of 1 M KCl. The large cover glass containing a 
seedling was placed on the inverted epifluorescence microscope for microinjection. The 
reference electrode was placed into the FP medium in the bath. The needle was 
controlled by an electro-manipulator (PatchMan NP2; Eppendorf) and the tip of the 
needle was targeted to the apex of the growing root hair cells. The precise position of the 
needle tip was monitored by measuring the voltage through the needle. When the tip 
was in the cytoplasm, the voltage was slightly changed. Then dyes were injected into the 
root hair cell by iontophoresis using a direct current (DC) set at 10 nA. Injection 
proceeded until cells dimly fluoresced when viewed under illumination from a 100 W 
mercury bulb through a GFP filter block. After microinjection, root hairs were left at least 
20 min before Nod-factor addition and only cells showing active cytoplasmic streaming 
were used for analysis. Nod factors, isolated from the reverse phase C18 column, and 
other compounds were added directly to the incubation chamber at the concentrations 
stated in the text.  
Imaging by Epifluorescent Microscope 
Fluorescence was imaged using a Nikon TE2000U inverted microscope coupled to 
a Hamamatsu Photonics digital CCD camera. The excitation wavelength was 488 nm and 
an 11 nm bandpass was selected using an Optoscan Monochromator (Cairn Research, 
Faversham, Kent, UK). An emission filter of 545 ( 15) nm was used for Oregon Green 
fluorescence. For dual dye imaging, an image splitter (Cairn Research, Faversham, Kent, 
UK) with optimised polychromatic mirror was used to monitor both Oregon Green and 
Texas red fluorescence and each image was sequentially collected every five seconds with 
a 1 s exposure using MetaFluor software. For imaging of Texas Red, an excitation 
wavelength of 570 nm was used and the fluorescence was monitored with an emission 
filter of 620 ( 20) nm. After taking a series of images, the ratiometric traces were 
calculated by dividing Oregon Green fluorescence by that of Texas Red at each time point. 
Chapter 2. Materials & Methods 
Derivative traces represent the change in fluorescence intensity of Oregon Green/Texas 
Red from one point to the next (xn+1
xn). Traces were generated using Microsoft Excel. 
Calcium Imaging with the Cameleon System YC 2.1 
Seeds of the M. truncatula YC 2.1 transgenic line were germinated and placed in a 
small chamber filled with 100 l of liquid FP as described above. Intracellular calcium 
concentrations were analyzed by calculating FRET using measurements of fluorescence of 
CFP and YFP. This was done using an epifluorescence microscope. A Nikon 20x or 40x 
working lens was used for imaging. The CFP component of YC2.1 was excited with a 
wavelength of 437 nm and an 11 nm bandpass using an Optoscan Monochromator (Cairn 
Research, Faversham, Kent, UK). Emitted fluorescence was separated by an image splitter 
with a dichroic mirror 515 nm, and then passed through an emission filter of 485 ( 20) 
nm for CFP fluorescence or 535 ( 15) nm for YFP fluorescence. Images were collected 
every five seconds with a 200 to 900 milliseconds exposure and analyzed using MetaFluor 
software. Values were exported into Excel (Microsoft), converted to a ration between YFP 
and CFP fluorescence, and plotted against time. 
Calcium Imaging with the Nuclear-Targeted Cameleon 
NupYC2.1 
Agrobacterium rhizogenes-Mediated Root Transformation 
The nucleoplasmin-cameleom YC2.1 (NupYC2.1; kindly provided by D. Barker, 
INRA-CNRS, France) was introduced into L. japonicus gifu wild type roots, in symRK-14 
and symRK-14/har1-1 roots by hairy root transformation as described (Diaz et al., 2005) 
using the Agrobacterium rhizogenes strain AR1193. Plants were grown in plates 
containing B5 medium (Gamborg et al., 1968) for at least 21 days after inoculation before 
calcium imaging experiments. 
Chapter 2. Materials & Methods 
Calcium Imaging 
For calcium imaging experiments using NupYC2.1 plants transformed by hairy root 
transformation were transferred to plates containing Fahraeus agar medium 5-10 days 
before calcium analysis. Filter paper (grade 0860; Schleicher and Schll, UK) was placed 
between the agar and the roots to prevent the roots growing into the agar. The roots 
were then covered by another filter paper to keep them moist. The Petri dishes were 
incubated in a vertical position in a controlled environment (20C/15C, day/night cycles 
of 18/6 h) and the region of the Petri dish containing the roots was covered with black 
plastic.  
For microscopic observation on an inverted epifluorescent microscope, plants 
were placed into a chamber, made on a large cover glass using high vacuum grease (Dow 
Corning GMBH, Wiesbaden, Germany), and filled with liquid Fahraeus medium. Roots 
with high fluorescence level in root cell nuclei were selected, excised with a scalpel and 
transferred to a smaller chamber containing 100 ul of liquid Fahraeus medium. After 
addition of Nod factor at a final concentration of 100 nM changes in nuclear calcium 
concentrations were analyzed by calculating FRET using measurements of fluorescence of 
CFP and YFP as described by Miwa et al., (2006a). Images were collected every five 
seconds and analyzed using MetaFluor software. Values were exported into Excel 
(Microsoft), converted to a ration between YFP and CFP fluorescence, and plotted against 
time. 
Molecular Biological Technique 
RNA Extraction and DNaseI Treatment 
For each sample, total RNA was extracted from approximately 100 mg root tissue 
using the RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturers protocol. The 
RNA was eluted, first with 30 l Rnase free water. Isolated total RNA was treated with 
Turbo DNase (Ambion) and quantified with NanoDrop ND-1000 Spectrophotometer 
(NanoDrop Technologies).  Quality of RNA was measured using QIAxcel system (Qiagen, 
Ltd., Surrey, UK). 
Chapter 2. Materials & Methods 
Quantitative RT-PCR 
cDNA was prepared from 0.5-1 g of total RNA using the SuperScript II first-
strand synthesis system for RT-PCR (Life Technologies, Invitrogen) using oligo(dT) primers 
according to the manufacturers protocol. Quantitative RT-PCR was performed using a 
CFX96 Real-Time System (BIO-RAD) and using SYBR Green Master Mix (Sigma). Each 10 l 
PCR reaction contained 4 l total cDNA 1:20, 5 l SYBR Green Master Mix, (Sigma) and 0.5 
l of each primer (10 M, designed to amplify a fragment of 50-150 bp). An initial 
denaturation step of 95C for 4 min was followed by 40 cycles of 94C for 30 seconds, 
60C for 30 seconds, and 72C for 30 seconds. At the end of the reaction, the samples 
were heated at 72C for ten minutes. Reactions were undertaken in 96-well white 
Microplates (Biorad). The Polyubiquitin gene was used as internal positive control. 
Primers are shown in Table 2.5. Results were expressed as a threshold cycle (CT) value. 
Gene expression was normalized to that of the reference gene subtracting the CT value of 
the NIN gene from that of the POLYUBIQUITIN gene to give a CT. Fold induction was 
calculated by normalizing the data for each time series to that of the untreated sample 
taken at zero hour. Thus, the CT value for treated sample was subtracted from the CT 
of the untreated samples to give a CT value. The data were plotted as 2
-CT
. The data 
from three technical replicates of at least three biological repetitions were plotted using 
standard deviation. 
Table 2.5. Primers used for qPCR determination with L. japonicus cDNA. 
Gene Forward primer 
5-sequence-3 
Reverse primer 
5-sequence-3 
nin ccaagcagcagtgaatgaga aggagcccaagtgagtgcta 
polyubiquitin 
 atgcagatcttcgtcaagaccttgac acctcccctcagacgaagga 
Reference gene primer from Imaizumi-Anraku et al., 2005.  
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
CHAPTER 3 
Analysis of the Effect of Nod factor Structure on Nod 
factor-Induced Calcium Flux  
Introduction 
Calcium is a highly versatile intracellular signal that controls many different 
cellular processes. The calcium-signalling system achieves this versatility by operating in 
many different ways to regulate cellular processes that function over a widely differing 
time scale. For example, at the synaptic junction calcium induces exocytosis in 
microseconds, whereas calcium operates over minutes or even hours to trigger events 
such as gene transcription and cell proliferation (Berridge et al., 2003). How calcium 
transduces so many different signals leading to specific cellular responses is still 
unknown. Recently, studies in animal and plant cells suggest that a calcium signal 
provides information to the cell through its temporal and spatial distribution, and the 
magnitude of the signal (Dolmetsch et al., 1998; Li et al., 1998; Allen et al., 2001; Berridge 
et al., 2003). Different external signals trigger unique calcium changes characterised by 
specific parameters in terms of magnitude, spatial and temporal distribution. Each of 
these distinct calcium responses is generally referred as a calcium signature (or a code) 
(Luan, 2009).  
In legume-rhizobia symbioses, upon recognition of the bacterial Nod factors, root 
hair cells, which normally function in water and nutrients absorption, reprogramme their 
development to accommodate the rhizobia inside the plants. In order to trigger such a 
change, Nod factors induce several responses such as root hair deformation, activation of 
phospholipase C and phospholipase D (den Hartog et al., 2001), gene induction (Journet 
et al., 1994; Cook et al., 1995; Charron et al., 2004) and cortical cell division (Truchet et 
al., 1991). When added to the legume roots, Nod factors induce at least two different 
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
calcium responses. One is a rapid influx of calcium (calcium flux) and the second consists 
of oscillations in the cytosolic calcium concentration, called calcium spiking.  
Within the first minutes of addition, Nod factors can induce a movement of 
calcium ions into the cell cytoplasm. This triggers a number of events such as the 
activation of anion channels through which the cells lose chloride rapidly, causing 
membrane depolarisation (Ehrhardt et al., 1992), followed by a cytoplasmic alkalinisation 
(Felle et al., 1996). The membrane depolarisation is then stopped by a charge balance 
due to a potassium efflux. Repolarisation of the plasma membrane is fuelled by a proton 
pump (Felle et al. 1998) and occurs in two phases: an initial fast phase occurring within 30 
to 60 seconds and a slower phase lasting for variable times up to approximately 15 
minutes (Kurkdjian, 1995). Nod factor-elicited calcium flux has been observed in several 
different legumes including M. sativum (Ehrhardt et al., 1996), M. truncatula (Shaw and 
Long, 2003), Phaselus vulgaris (Cardenas et al., 1999), Pisum sativum (Walker et al., 
2000), Lotus japonicus (Miwa et al., 2006b) and Vicia sativa (de Ruijter et al., 1998), which 
demonstrates that this response is common, though the time of induction and the 
duration of the calcium flux is variable (Oldroyd and Downie, 2004). 
After 10-15 minutes the legume root hair cells respond to Nod factor by showing 
repetitive oscillations in the cytosolic calcium concentration (calcium spiking). A typical 
spike is characterised by a rapid (1-4 seconds) increase in perinuclear calcium, and is 
followed immediately by a more gradual decline of calcium (approximately 30 seconds). 
The first part implicates the opening of calcium channels while the second phase 
implicates the activity of a calcium ATPase or calcium antiporter to control the movement 
of calcium against the electrochemical gradient, from the cytoplasm and nucleoplasm 
into either an internal store or extracellular space. Once initiated, spikes occur repeatedly 
for one-two hours with an average frequency of 60-100 seconds, depending on the 
position of the root hair cells along the root (Ehrhardt et al., 1992; Miwa et al., 2006a; 
Sieberer et al., 2009). These oscillations have been reported in alfalfa (Ehrhardt et al., 
1996), M. truncatula (Wais et al., 2000), pea (Walker et al., 2000), P. vulgaris (Cardenas et 
al., 1999) and L. japonicus (Harris et al., 2003), suggesting calcium spiking is a common 
feature in root nodule symbiosis.  
Both calcium influx and calcium spiking are induced by Nod factor, but, it is clear 
that calcium influx and calcium spiking can be uncoupled by different experiment 
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
conditions. While high concentrations (> 10
 M) of Nod factors induce calcium flux 
followed by calcium spiking, at low concentration (< 10
 M) no calcium influx is observed 
but calcium spiking is induced (Shaw and Long, 2003). Moreover, in P. sativum the chitin 
oligomers N,N,N,N-tetraacetylchitotetraose (CT4) and the N,N,N,N-
pentaacetylchitotetraose (CT5), which represent the two unsubstituted backbones of 
Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. viciae Nod factor, induced calcium spiking but not calcium 
flux (Walker et al., 2000). In M. truncatula, Nod factor lacking the sulphate group on the 
reducing end (purified from bacteria lacking the nodH gene) induced calcium spiking at 10 
nM, but failed to induce reproducibly the calcium flux (Shaw and Long, 2003). Thus, in 
both P. sativum and M. truncatula, Nod-factor-like molecules induce calcium spiking 
without the induction of calcium flux (Walker et al., 2000; Shaw and Long, 2003). This 
evidence suggests that while calcium spiking requires a low stringency of Nod factor 
perception, a high concentration of specific Nod factor structure is required to elicit the 
calcium influx. The spatial distribution of calcium flux and calcium spiking is also different: 
while calcium spikes originate in the nuclear area and propagate as a wave outward, 
calcium flux begins at cell tip and moves towards the nucleus (Shaw and Long, 2003). 
Additional evidence showing that calcium influx and calcium spiking are separate 
responses comes from genetic analysis. Mutations in the receptor-like kinase 
DMI2/SYMRK, in the cation channels DMI1/POLLUX, CASTOR and nucleoporins NUP85 
and NUP133 block calcium spiking but not calcium flux (Shaw and Long, 2003; Kanamori 
et al., 2006; Miwa et al., 2006b; Saito et al., 2007). These findings indicate that calcium 
influx and calcium spiking are independent of one other and may, thus, be involved in 
triggering different (but possibly overlapping) responses (Oldroyd and Downie, 2004). 
Whereas several studies have shown that calcium spiking is required for Nod 
factor-induced gene expression and nodulation (Wais et al., 2000; Charron et al., 2004; 
Miwa et al., 2006a), the function of the calcium flux response remains uncertain. Analysis 
of infection thread initiation in vetch by nodulation mutants of R. leguminosarum first 
suggested a role for ion influx in the formation of infection threads (Walker and Downie, 
2000). In those experiments the role of nodO in stimulating infection thread development 
in vetch and pea was investigated. nodO is a R. leguminosarum nodulation gene that 
encodes a secreted protein (Economou et al., 1990) involved in pea and vetch nodulation. 
This protein binds to calcium and forms cation-selective channels that allow the 
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
movement of monovalent cations (K
 and Na
) across the membrane (Sutton et al., 1994). 
These experiments showed that the double mutant nodE nodO was severely impaired in 
its ability to form normal infection threads. It induced strong root hair deformation and 
formed many infection foci, yet infection threads were seldom initiated. This strain 
exhibited a number of novel infection-related events such as intracellular accumulation 
of bacteria at the base of the root hair and enlarged infection threads. NodE is required 
for the synthesis of the appropriate C18:4 acyl groups to the Nod factor (Spaink et al., 
1991) and in nodE mutants a C18:1 acyl group is present. Interestingly, the single nodE and 
nodO mutants displayed infection phenotypes similar to wild type suggesting that a 
NodO-induced ion flux across the membrane may compensate for an infection defect 
associated with inappropriate Nod factor production (Walker and Downie, 2000). These 
results demonstrated that the initial entry of bacteria into root hairs does not require 
host specific substitution on the Nod factor. However, additional specificity, which can be 
determined by either by a modified acyl group (NodE) or by NodO encoding a secreted 
pore-family protein, is necessary for growth of a properly directed infection thread.  
Based on the observations that high concentrations of Nod factor are required to 
induce the calcium flux and that a calcium-binding protein, forming a cation channel, can 
stimulate for infection thread growth (Sutton et al., 1994; Walker and Downie, 2000), 
Miwa et al. (2006) suggested that calcium flux plays a role in infection thread initiation. 
The model of Miwa et al. (2006) proposes that during the early stages of nodulation, low 
levels of Nod factor can induce root hair deformation, calcium spiking and initiate the 
accumulation of rhizobia in infection foci. As a result, the Nod factor levels in the foci rise, 
and this induces a calcium flux that can drive infection thread initiation (Miwa et al., 
2006b). The observations that calcium flux can be induced in cells that are already spiking 
(Walker et al., 2000; Shaw and Long, 2003) are consistent with this model, which 
proposes that normally rhizobia induce calcium spiking prior to calcium flux. 
Infection thread formation is dependent on rhizobial genes such as nodF and 
nodL. A S. meliloti mutant carrying mutations in these genes was compromised for 
infection thread formation (Ardourel et al., 1994). The nodL and the nodF nodL double 
mutants produced Nod factor with a modified structure. S. meliloti Nod factor normally 
has a backbone of four -1,4-linked N-acetylglucosamine residues with an N-linked fatty 
acyl chain of 16 carbons (with one to three double bounds) attached to the non-reducing 
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
end, a sulphate group at the reducing end and a O-acetyl group on the non-reducing 
terminal sugar (Figure 3.1A) (Lerouge et al., 1990; Denarie et al., 1996; Downie and 
Walker, 1999). The Nod factor released by the nodF nodL  mutant lacks the acetate group 
at the non-reducing terminal sugar and carries an acyl chain of 18 carbons and one 
double bond (Figure 3.1B), whereas S. meliloti carrying a mutation in only nodL lacks the 
acetate group at the non-reducing terminal sugar (Figure 3.1C) but carries the C16 acyl 
chain. The aim of this chapter was to test the Nod factors structures produced by nodL 
and nodF nodL  mutants for induction of calcium flux. For this purpose, I first established 
a system to reproducibly test and analyse calcium flux.  
The Nod factor-induced changes in intracellular calcium have been observed using 
various imaging techniques. The early calcium flux in alfalfa root hairs was shown using 
calcium selective microelectrodes inside and outside the cell (Felle and Hepler, 1997; 
Felle et al., 1999b). Rapid increases in cytosolic calcium concentration have also been 
observed using calcium-sensitive dyes. The protein aequorin, developed in Arabidopsis 
(Johnson et al., 1995), works well for analyzing calcium changes in response to salt stress, 
osmotic stress, cold stress and circadian cycle in whole plants (Plieth, 2001), but its 
luminescent intensity is too weak to analyze calcium changes in single cells. Thus, 
calcium-sensitive fluorescent dyes have been microinjected into the plant cell cytoplasm 
to analyze calcium changes in single cells such as guard cells (Gilroy et al., 1991; Grabov 
and Blatt, 1998; McAinsh et al., 1990; Schroder and Hagiwara, 1990) and root hair cells 
(Ehrhardt et al., 1996; Walker et al., 2000). This approach has provided a tool to detect 
and study following cytoplasmic calcium changes, which are not recorded by the 
microelectrode recording technique. Nod factor-induced calcium spiking was originally 
described in alfalfa using calcium indicator dyes. After that, different calcium-sensitive 
dyes have been used for recording calcium responses in different legumes. Increases in 
root hair calcium were observed in Vicia sativa using acid loading of Indo-1 (De Ruijter et 
al., 1998), in P. vulgaris and Vigna unguiculata root hairs using microinjected dextran-
linked Fura-2 (Gehring et al., 1997; Cardenas et al., 1999), and M. sativa, M. truncatula, P. 
sativum and L. japonicus using micro-injected dextran-linked Oregon green (Ehrhardt et 
al., 1996; Wais et al., 2000; Walker et al., 2000; Shaw and Long, 2003; Miwa et al., 2006b). 
Calcium Green and other single wavelength dyes allow periodicity to be observed, but a 
ratio-imaging technique using Dextran-coupled fluorescent calcium-insensitive dye has 
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
been developed to unambiguously identify singular and repetitive changes in 
cytoplasmatic calcium ion concentration, independent from local changes in cytoplasmic 
volume. Therefore, a single wavelength calcium-sensitive dye (Oregon Green-dextran) 
has been coinjected with a calcium insensitive dye (Texas Red-dextran) for monitoring 
both calcium flux and calcium spiking (Shaw and Long, 2003; Miwa et al., 2006b). 
Microinjection of calcium-sensitive dyes has provided much information on the relative 
position within the cell of these changes in calcium concentration. However, due to the 
limitation of this technique, the analysis of calcium changes in nodulation signalling has 
been limited to young, growing root hair cells. 
The Yellow Cameleon (YC) calcium reporter, which has been used to analyse 
changes in calcium in transgenic animals (Miyawaki et al., 1997, 1999), can overcome the 
limitation of microinjection, allowing the non-destructive and single-cell analysis of 
calcium in single cells. This yellow cameleon is a chimeric protein composed of a cyan 
fluorescent protein (CFP) and yellow fluorescent protein (YFP), linked by calmodulin and 
calmodulin-binding peptide. Calcium binding induces a conformational change in the 
cameleon proteins, which increase the efficiency of fluorescent resonance energy 
transfer (FRET) from CFP to YFP. Thus, as the calcium concentration increases, 
fluorescence from YFP increases while fluorescence from CFP decreases. This cameleon 
system has been successfully applied to Arabidopsis plants to study cytoplasmatic calcium 
in guard cells (Allen et al., 1999), and to analyze calcium dynamics in pollen tubes (Iwano 
et al., 2004). M. truncatula seedlings expressing the calcium-sensing yellow cameleon YC 
2.1 have been used to study the Nod Factor-induced calcium spiking (Miwa et al., 2006a; 
Sieberer et al., 2009). Only one trace showing calcium flux was reported in that work, but 
a proper analysis of calcium flux using different concentrations of Nod factor had not yet 
been described using the cameleon calcium reporter assay.  
Here, I have established a system to record and analyze calcium flux in M. 
truncatula root hair expressing yellow cameleon 2.1 and I have used this to assess the 
effect of different Nod factor structure on the induction of calcium flux. 
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
Figure 3.1. Structure of the lipooligosaccharide Nod factors assayed in this study.  
A, S. meliloti wild type Nod factor has a backbone of four -1,4-linked N-
acetylglucosamine residues with an N-linked fatty acyl chain of 16 carbons with one to 
three double bounds, a sulphate group on the reducing sugar and an O-acetyl group on 
the non-reducing terminal sugar. B, The Nod factor made by the nodF nodL mutant lacks 
the acetate group and carries a fatty acyl chain of 18 carbons and one double bond. C, 
Nod factor released by S. meliloti carrying a mutation in nodL only lacks the acetate group 
at the non-reducing terminal sugar (modified from Oldroyd and Downie 2004).  
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
Results 
Analysis of Nod factor-Induced Calcium Influx in Root Hair Cells 
Using M. truncatula Plants Expressing YC 2.1. 
To examine calcium flux in response to Nod factor, a seedling was mounted in a 
small bath (100 l) of FP medium, set on an epifluorescence microscope. One l of Nod 
factor was added to the liquid in the incubation bath to give the final desired 
concentration of Nod factor. Images of CFP and YFP were taken up to 30 minutes after 
Nod factor addition. Ratio values of YFP/CFP were plotted over time for treated plants. 
Wild type plants expressing YC 2.1 showed an increase in fluorescence prior to induction 
of calcium spiking. The calcium flux originates at the tip of the root hair cell (Shaw and 
Long, 2003). Therefore in order to determine whether an increase of calcium 
concentration was indeed a calcium flux, fluorescence imaged at the tip and at the shaft 
of the root hair were taken for each cell and compared to each other. The tip area was 
included around 10 m from the tip of the root hair toward the base of the root hair cell, 
whereas the shaft area included the part of the root hair cell protruding from the root 
(Figure 3.2). Only those cells showing a calcium increase in the area of the root hair cell 
protruding from the root as well as the root hair tip were considered positive for calcium 
flux. In most cases the tips of root hair cells displayed a higher increase in fluorescence 
compared to the cell area (Figure 3.3A). However, in some case the fluorescence increase 
from the tip area was similar to the fluorescence increase in the cell area (Figure 3.3B). 
These cells were considered positive for Nod factor-induced calcium flux because both tip 
and cell area exhibits increase in fluorescence, whereas cells that showed calcium flux 
only in the tip (Figure 3.3C) or cell area were not considered positive. Representative 
calcium traces defective for calcium flux did not show increase in calcium either in tip or 
in the cell area (Figure 3.3D).  Addition of water to the chamber containing the seedling 
did not induce any change in YFP/CFP fluorescence (data not shown). 
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
Figure 3.2. Tip and cell areas selected for the analysis of Nod factor-induced calcium 
changes in root hair cells. 
Figure 3.3. Analysis of calcium flux in root hair tip and cell area in 
expressing YC 2.1. 
The ratio YFP/CFP (relative units) 
seconds intervals for > 30 minutes. Traces from the tip (red) and cell area (black) were 
analysed for each root hair cell. A, Representative traces of root hair cell showing a 
stronger increase in calcium in
cell showing similar increase of calcium in tip and cell area. Traces C show an increase of 
calcium in the tip area but not in the cell. D, Representative negative trace for calcium 
flux. Only those cells showing a significant increase in calcium in the tip and in the cell 
area were selected positive for calcium flux (A, B). The dotted horizontal lines indicate 
calcium flux observed in tip (red) and in the cell (black). Nod factor was added (vert
black line) at 10 nM (A,B), 1 nM (C) and 0.1 nM (D).
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure 
Analysis of calcium flux in root hair tip and cell area in 
(relative units) was plotted against time. Images were taken at 5 
seconds intervals for > 30 minutes. Traces from the tip (red) and cell area (black) were 
analysed for each root hair cell. A, Representative traces of root hair cell showing a 
stronger increase in calcium in the tip compared to the cell area.  B, Traces of a root hair 
cell showing similar increase of calcium in tip and cell area. Traces C show an increase of 
calcium in the tip area but not in the cell. D, Representative negative trace for calcium 
hose cells showing a significant increase in calcium in the tip and in the cell 
area were selected positive for calcium flux (A, B). The dotted horizontal lines indicate 
calcium flux observed in tip (red) and in the cell (black). Nod factor was added (vert
black line) at 10 nM (A,B), 1 nM (C) and 0.1 nM (D). 
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
Analysis of calcium flux in root hair tip and cell area in M. truncatula plants 
was plotted against time. Images were taken at 5 
seconds intervals for > 30 minutes. Traces from the tip (red) and cell area (black) were 
analysed for each root hair cell. A, Representative traces of root hair cell showing a 
the tip compared to the cell area.  B, Traces of a root hair 
cell showing similar increase of calcium in tip and cell area. Traces C show an increase of 
calcium in the tip area but not in the cell. D, Representative negative trace for calcium 
hose cells showing a significant increase in calcium in the tip and in the cell 
area were selected positive for calcium flux (A, B). The dotted horizontal lines indicate 
calcium flux observed in tip (red) and in the cell (black). Nod factor was added (vertical 
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
Titration of Nod Factor-Induced Calcium Influx and Calcium 
Spiking in M. truncatula Root Hair Cells Expressing YC 2.1. 
Calcium flux has been previously studied using microinjection of calcium sensitive 
dyes, but a titration of Nod factor concentration for the activation of the calcium flux has 
not yet been described. To analyse the responsiveness of YC plants to Nod factor for 
induction of calcium flux, I assayed the number of root hair cells that triggered calcium 
flux at concentrations of Nod factor ranging from 10
 M to 10
M (Figure 3.4A). A 
minimum of 10 root hair cells from at least 3 different seedlings was tested for each 
concentration of Nod factor. Cytoplasmic calcium spiking initiated 5 to 18 minutes after 
Nod factor addition and persisted throughout the experiment (>30 minutes). At high Nod 
factor concentrations, ranging from 10
M to 10
M, most of the cells were positive for 
calcium flux response: at 1 M, 100 nM and 10 nM Nod factor, 15 of 16 cells (3 plants), 16 
of 17 cells (3 plants) and 15 of 16 root hair cells (4 plants) were positive for calcium flux, 
respectively. When Nod factor was added at 1 nM, only 4 of 15 cells showed calcium flux 
in 3 plants tested, whereas 0 of 10 root hair cells showed a calcium flux after addition of 
0.1 nM Nod factor. The concentration at which 50% of root hairs showed a calcium flux 
was about 3  10
 M. A typical trace lacking a calcium flux is shown in Figure 3.3D.  
Calcium spiking was also analysed with wild-type Nod factor using different 
concentrations of Nod factor ranging from 10
 M to 10
 M (Figure 3.4B). Oldroyd et al. 
(2001) previously showed a similar titration curve using microinjection of root hair cells 
with the calcium sensitive dye Oregon Green. The concentration at which 50% of root 
hairs show calcium spiking was 7  10
 M. As previously reported by Shaw and Long 
(2003), induction of calcium spiking required a lower concentration of Nod factor; the 
concentration of Nod factor required for calcium flux is in the region of 4000 fold higher 
then that required for calcium spiking.  
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
Figure 3.4. Titration curve for calcium flux and calcium spiking induced by Nod factor 
extracted by S. meliloti in M. truncatula plants expressing YC 2.1. 
Multiple cells from wild-type plants were assessed for their calcium flux (A) and calcium 
spiking (B) response to different concentrations of Nod factor. The percentage of cells 
that showed calcium flux (A) and calcium spiking (B) is indicated. A minimum of 10 cells 
from at least three different plants were tested for each concentration of Nod factor 
plotted. Grey dotted lines indicate concentration at which 50% of root hairs showed 
calcium flux. 
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
Analysis of Calcium Flux Induction by nodFL Nod Factor 
In order to study the role of calcium flux in infection thread growth, I analysed the 
induction of calcium flux using a synthetic Nod factor (kindly synthesised by E. Martinez, 
CERMAV-CNRS, France) structurally similar to that (Figure 3.1) released by the S. meliloti 
nodF nodL  mutant, which is compromised for infection thread formation (Ardourel et al., 
1994). The nodF nodL double mutant can induce root hair deformation and can form 
infection foci in root hairs, but the infection threads abort at a very early stage (Ardourel 
et al., 1994). Synthetic Nod factor lipochitooligosaccharide IV, C18:1, sulphate (LCO, IV, 
C18:1, S), which carries a C18:1 N-acyl group and lacks the acetate group (equivalent to nodF 
nodL  Nod factor), did not induce calcium flux when added at 10 nM although, as 
expected (Oldroyd et al., 2001a), it induced calcium spiking (Figure 3.5B). LCO IV, C18:1, S is 
less active at inducing calcium spiking than wild-type Nod factor (Oldroyd et al., 2001a). 
Therefore, I tested if a similar reduction in activity was observed for the induction of 
calcium flux. Even using a 100 times greater concentration (1 M) of LCO IV, C18:1, S (nodF 
nodL Nod factor), most of the cells were still defective for calcium influx (Figure 3.6A): 
only two of 16 root hair cells showed calcium flux. A trace showing calcium flux induced 
by 1 M of LCO IV, C18:1, S is shown in Figure 3.7. No difference was observed in the type 
of calcium flux induced in cells stimulated by low or high Nod factor concentration. 
Calcium spiking was also analysed using different concentrations of nodF nodL Nod 
factor. As previously shown (Oldroyd et al., 2001a) nodF nodL  Nod factor was less active 
in inducing calcium spiking compared to wild type Nod factor (Figure 3.6B). The 
concentration at which 50% of root hairs show calcium flux was 8  10
 M, compared to 
7  10
 M for wild type Nod factor. This indicates that nodF nodL  Nod factor was 
approximately 1000 time less active than wild-type Nod factor for induction of calcium 
spiking. 
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
Figure 3.5. nodFL  and nodL Nod factors do not induce calcium flux.  
Change of intracellular calcium in wild-type M. truncatula root hairs treated with 10 nM 
Nod factor equivalent to that produced by wild type (A), the nodF nodL mutant (B) and 
nodL mutant (C). Root hairs were imaged using cameleon. The black vertical line indicates 
addition of Nod factor. The horizontal dashed black line shows calcium flux. The numbers 
indicate number of cells with calcium flux/total number of cells analysed with each Nod 
factor. A minimum of three plants has been tested in each treatment. The traces show 
data of changes in fluorescence of ratio of YFP:CFP fluorescence (arbitrary units).  
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
Figure 3.6. Dose response curves for calcium flux and calcium spiking induced by different 
Nod factors on wild-type M. truncatula.  
Multiple cells from wild type plants were assessed for their calcium flux (A) and calcium 
spiking (B) responses to different concentrations of wild type Nod factor (square, shown 
for comparison), synthetic nodL Nod factor (triangle) and synthetic nodFL Nod factor 
(circle). The percentage of cells that showed calcium flux (A) and calcium spiking (B) is 
indicated. A minimum of ten root hair cells from at least three different plants were 
tested for each in each treatment. 
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
Figure 3.7. LCO, IV, C18:1, S (equivalent to nodFL Nod factor) induced calcium flux only in 
2 of 16 cells treated at 1 M concentration.  
The ratio YFP/CFP was plotted against time. Images were taken at 5 seconds intervals for 
> 30 minutes. Traces from the tip (red) and cell area (black) were analysed. The dotted 
horizontal lines indicate calcium flux observed in tip (red) and in the cell (black).  
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
Analysis of Calcium Flux Induction by nodL Nod Factor 
The inability of the nodFL Nod factor to induce calcium flux could be due to the lack 
of the acetyl group or to the presence of the C18:1 instead of the C16:2 acyl group. To test 
this, I analysed the induction of calcium flux by LCO IV, C16:2, S (equivalent to that formed 
by a nodL mutant, synthesised by E. Martinez, CERMAV-CNRS, France), which lacks the 
acetyl group but carries a wild-type acyl group (Figure 3.1C). No calcium flux was induced 
by LCO IV, C16:2, S (nodL) Nod factor (10 nM) (Figure 3.5C). It required a 100-fold higher 
concentration of the nodL Nod factor than the wild type Nod factor to induce a calcium 
flux (Figure 3.6A). The concentration at which 50% of root hairs show calcium flux was 5  
 M, compared to 3  10
 M for wild type Nod factor. The nodL mutant can induce 
infection thread formation although at a lower level then wild type. Wild-type Sm IV Nod 
factor (C16:2, Ac, S) induced calcium flux before calcium spiking in almost all of the cells 
tested (10 nM, Figure 3.5A).  
Different concentrations of nodL Nod factor were also tested for induction of 
calcium spiking. Calcium spiking was normal for nodL Nod factor (Figure 3.6B). The 
concentration at which 50% of root hairs showed calcium flux was 5  10
 M. This was 
similar to the 7  10
 M found for 50% activity with the wild type Nod factor. These 
results are consistent with the previous report showing a titration of calcium spiking for 
different concentrations of wild type and nodL Nod factor using microinjection technique 
(Oldroyd et al., 2001a).  
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
Discussion 
Calcium flux is one of the earliest responses induced by Nod factor in root hair 
cells. In this present study, I showed that Nod factors equivalent to those produced by S. 
meliloti nodF nodL and nodL mutants affected for infection were greatly decreased for 
induction of calcium flux. These observations provide support for the hypothesis that 
calcium flux is required during the formation of infection threads (Miwa et al., 2006b). 
The Nod factor released by the nodF nodL bacterial mutant is unable to induce infection 
thread formation (Ardourel et al., 1994). Here, I show that the synthetic LCO IV, C18:1, S 
Nod factor, structurally equivalent to Nod factor released by nodF nodL  bacterial mutant 
was defective for calcium flux even when Nod factor was added at micromolar 
concentrations. As previously shown, LCO IV, C18:1, S was less active at inducing calcium 
spiking than wild-type Nod factor (Oldroyd et al., 2001a).  
The Nod factor released by the nodF nodL bacterial mutant lacks the acetate 
group on the non reducing terminal sugar and carries a C18:1 fatty acyl chain instead of the 
C16:2 of wild type Nod factor. To determine which of these structural changes was 
responsible for the lack of calcium flux I tested LCO IV, C16:2, S (equivalent to that formed 
by a nodL mutant), which lacks the acetyl group but carries a wild-type acyl group and I 
found that it was affected for induction of calcium flux. This indicates that plant 
recognition of the acetate group at the non-reducing terminal sugar in the Nod factor 
structure is a key element required for the induction of calcium flux. The synthesis of Nod 
factor carrying a C18:1 fatty acyl chain and carrying the acetate group at the non reducing 
terminal sugar (equivalent the Nod factor released by the S. meliloti nodF mutant) is 
technically very difficult therefore it was not possible to test the induction of this Nod 
factor for induction of calcium flux. The results showing that 10 nM of nodL and nodFL 
Nod factors induce calcium spiking but not calcium flux support that calcium spiking and 
calcium flux are two different and separable responses.  
The Nod factor equivalent to that produced by nodL mutant was shown to be 
normal for the induction of calcium spiking, but reduced and delayed for the growth of 
infection threads (Ardourel et al., 1994). These results suggest that, when calcium spiking 
is induced normally but calcium flux is not, the plant can still induce infection thread 
formation but the process is reduced and delayed. This is the case of the infection 
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
phenotype induced by nodL Nod factor. However, when both calcium responses are 
abolished, as we observed with nodFL Nod factor, no infection threads are formed. Taken 
together, these results suggest that the two calcium responses induced by Nod factor, 
calcium flux and calcium spiking, are both required for the initiation of infection thread 
growth.  
In this study, I used cameleon calcium sensor to observe calcium spiking and 
singular rises in cytoplasmic calcium concentration resulting from exposure to Nod factor. 
Titration curves of calcium spiking using different concentration of wild type, nodFL and 
nodL Nod factor obtained using cameleon imaging were similar to previous titration 
curves recorded using microinjection of the calcium-sensitive dye Oregon green (Oldroyd 
et al., 2001a). This is consistent with previous comparisons of the two calcium imaging 
techniques (Miwa et al., 2006a).  
In summary, a key novel observation is that LCO IV, C16:2, S, equivalent to that 
formed by a nodL mutant, is greatly reduced for induction of the calcium flux. Previous 
observations (Oldroyd et al., 2001a) showed that this Nod factor is wild-type for induction 
of calcium spiking. Thus, there is a link between Nod factor structure, calcium flux, and 
the lack of initiation of normal infection. Earlier publications suggested a role for calcium 
influx in the infection of legume by rhizobia, but such a role was only based on the 
observations that a high concentration of Nod factor is required to induce calcium flux 
and that a calcium-binding protein forming a cation channel can stimulate infection 
(Walker and Downie, 2000). The results presented in this chapter provide the missing link 
by directly showing that Nod factor released by bacterial mutants unable to infect 
legumes are impaired for calcium flux. These results strongly suggest that calcium flux 
correlates with infection thread formation.  
Downstream of calcium spiking, several components have been identified and 
shown to be required for the expression of early nodulation genes. On the other hand, 
genes induced downstream of calcium flux are still unknown. The only evidence we have 
are the results here presented with the structurally modified Nod factors which correlate 
calcium flux with the formation of infection threads. However, a future challenge is the 
identification of genes induced downstream of calcium flux. These results have shown 
that the nodL mutant Nod factor induces calcium spiking in the same way as wild type 
Nod factor across a range of concentrations. However, at 10 nM, nodL Nod factor induces 
CHAPTER 3. Calcium Flux & Nod Factor Structure  
no flux, whereas wild type Nod factor induces 100% flux. This opens the opportunity to 
do a microarray to identify genes expressed by 10 nM wild type Nod factor but not 
induced by 10 nM nodL Nod factor. These future experiments could identify genes 
specifically induced by calcium flux and reveal exciting new events in the infection of 
legume by rhizobia. 
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
CHAPTER 4 
 Analysis of Nod Factor-Induced Calcium Responses 
in the Medicago truncatula and Lotus japonicus 
Mutants Affected for Infection Thread Formation  
Introduction 
Several lines of evidence suggest that calcium spiking is central to the Nod factor 
signalling pathway and is essential for the expression of early nodulin genes required for 
nodulation. Pharmacological antagonists shown to block Nod factor-elicited calcium 
spiking are also efficient inhibitors of early nodulin gene induction (Charron et al., 2004). 
Moreover, several nodulation mutants, as M. truncatula (Mt) nfp/ L. japonicus (Lj) nfr5, Lj 
nfr1, Mtdmi2/Ljsymrk, Mtdmi1/Ljpollux, castor, Ljnup85 and Ljnup133, are also impaired 
for induction of calcium spiking and are unable to trigger gene expression of early nodulin 
genes (Wais et al., 2000; Amor et al., 2003). 
Although several genes have been identified to be required for the induction of 
calcium oscillations, so far the only nodulation mutants affected for induction of calcium 
flux are the Nod-factor receptor mutants nfp in M. truncatula and nfr1 and nfr5 in L. 
japonicus, which are defective for all Nod factor-induced responses. The absence of 
nodulation mutants compromised for calcium flux has kept the role of this calcium 
response unclear. It has been previously suggested that calcium flux could play a role 
during the formation of infection thread by rhizobia (Miwa et al., 2006b). Analysis of 
infection threads induced by the nodFL and nodL S. meliloti mutants revealed that Nod 
factor structural specificity is required for the initiation and development of infection 
threads. The results presented in Chapter 3 show that the synthetic Nod factors, 
chemically equivalent to those produced by the nodFL and nodL S. meliloti mutants, were 
greatly reduced for the ability to induce calcium flux. These data support the hypothesis 
that calcium flux is required for infection thread growth. The formation of infection 
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
threads is dependent on plant genes such as HCL, NIN, and BIT-1. The plant mutants hcl, 
nin and bit-1 are unable to develop infection threads when inoculated with S. meliloti 
(Limpens et al., 2003; Marsh et al., 2007; Smit et al., 2007).  
The genes L. japonicus NAP1 (for Nck-associated protein 1) and PIR1 (for 121F-
specific p53 inducible RNA) have been recently characterised (Yokota et al., 2009; 
Miyahara et al., 2010). NAP1 and PIR1 were found to be essential for infection thread 
formation and colonisation of L. japonicus roots by its bacterial symbiont, M. loti (Yokota 
et al., 2009). NAP1 and PIR1 were previously shown to be involved in actin 
rearrangements (Li et al., 2004). The first observable events after adding purified 
bacterial Nod factor to roots occur in root hairs within minutes; changes in rates of 
cytoplasmic streaming, nuclear movements, and changes in the shape of the vacuole are 
all observed. Within ten minutes, the endoplasmic reticulum shifts position towards the 
tip of the root hair (Allen and Bennett, 1996; Miller et al., 2000). This alteration of the 
cytoarchitecture is accompanied by changes of the actin and microtubule cytoskeleton 
(Cardenas et al., 1998; de Ruijter et al., 1999; Weerasinghe et al., 2003; Vassileva et al., 
2005; Weerasinghe et al., 2005). In at least four species, bean (Phaseolus vulgaris), alfalfa 
(Medicago sativa), common vetch (Vicia sativa) and lotus, treatment of root hairs with 
Nod factor leads to rapid changes (within three to five minutes), in the polymerization 
pattern of actin (Cardenas et al., 1998; Weerasinghe et al., 2005). In growth-arresting 
root hairs, those that show root hair deformation in response to Nod factor, endoplasmic 
microtubules disappear shortly after Nod factor addition, but reform within 20 minutes 
(Sieberer et al., 2005). Nod factor was shown to trigger fragmentation of long actin 
bundles extending into the root hair apical tips, and subsequently fine bundles of 
filaments accumulate in the apical/subapical region in responding root hairs (Cardenas et 
al., 1998; de Ruijter et al., 1999; Weerasinghe et al., 2005). Nod-factor signalling elicits 
several other early responses in compatible host root-hair cells, including membrane 
depolarisation, ion fluxes across the membrane in the tip of the root hairs, and calcium 
spiking around the nuclear area (Ehrhardt et al., 1992; Ehrhardt et al., 1996; Felle et al., 
1998, 1999a; Walker et al., 2000; Shaw and Long, 2003). The temporal relationship 
between Nod factor-induced actin rearrangement and calcium responses and how these 
responses are mechanically linked is still unknown.  
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
When infected with M. loti, the nap1 and pir1 mutants developed an excess of 
uncolonised nodule primordia, indicating that these two genes were not necessary for 
the initiation of nodule organogenesis per se. Nevertheless, the formation of infection 
threads and their subsequent progression into the root cortex were significantly impaired 
in these mutants. Root hair cells of the nap1 and pir1 mutants were short and had mostly 
transverse or web-like actin filaments, while, in wild-type root hairs, bundles of actin 
filaments were mainly longitudinal. Consistent with these observations, differences in the 
temporal and spatial organisation of actin filament were also observed between wild-
type and mutant root hairs after Nod factor treatment (Yokota et al., 2009). 
The availability of mutants that induce root hair deformation but lack infection 
thread growth allowed an analysis of calcium responses in mutants predicted to retain 
initial Nod factor perception but possibly lack the subsequent Nod factor signalling that 
could lead to initiation of infection. The available mutants would also enable an analysis 
of the relationship between actin rearrangement and calcium responses.  
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
Results 
Analysis of Calcium Flux Using Microinjection of Oregon Green 
and Texas Red 
Microinjection of cells with calcium sensitive dyes, as Oregon Green, allow an 
accurate recording of changes in cytoplasmic calcium levels and is  commonly used to 
analyse calcium responses in animal and plant cells. However, cytoplasmic streaming can 
influence the changes in fluorescence recorded using Oregon Green because it is a single 
wavelength dye. Unlike calcium spiking, calcium flux is a unique event which occurs a few 
minutes after the addition of Nod factor, and, because of this, it can be easily confused 
with a non-specific increase in recorded fluorescence. Co-injection of Oregon Green with 
a calcium insensitive reference dye greatly reduces non-specific signals. Therefore, 
ratiometric analysis of the fluorescence derived from the two dyes has been developed 
and used for analysis of Nod factor-induced calcium flux in M. truncatula and L. japonicus 
root hair cells (Shaw and Long, 2003; Miwa et al., 2006b). 
Although, ratiometric analysis with Oregon Green and Texas Red provide a better 
analysis of calcium flux compared to single wavelength dye, the baseline fluorescence of 
untreated cells can present sporadic increases in fluorescence, generally called 
background noise, which make difficult the analysis of specific calcium response to Nod 
factor. Calcium flux is known to originate at the tip of root hair cells (Shaw and Long, 
2003). Therefore, in order to prevent confusion in the analysis of calcium changes after 
Nod factor addition, the fluorescence obtained from the tip and the cell was compared 
for each cell microinjected. These data were analysed in the same way as described for 
analysis of calcium flux using yellow cameleon in Chapter 3. Figure 4.1A shows an 
example of a calcium trace, obtained after microinjection with Oregon Green and Texas 
Red. This trace shows background noise in the baseline fluorescence prior to and after 
the addition of Nod factor. Thus, based on this trace it is difficult to establish if this cell is 
positive for Nod factor-induced calcium flux. Nevertheless, when this trace is compared 
with the fluorescence of the tip of the root hair (Figure 4.1B) it is clear that this root hair 
is positive for calcium flux, which was induced within one minute of the addition of Nod 
factor.  
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
Figure 4.1 Example of a calcium trace, obtained after microinjection with Oregon Green 
and Texas Red presenting a background noise. 
The ratio Oregon Green/Texas Red (OG/TR) was plotted against time. Images were taken 
at 5 seconds intervals for 30 minutes. Trace A represents calcium changes in cell area. 
Based on this trace it is difficult to establish weather this cell is positive for Nod factor-
induced calcium flux. However when this is compared with the fluorescence of the tip of 
the root hair (B), it is clear that this root hair is positive for calcium flux. Dashed lines 
indicate calcium flux. Addition of water to the chamber containing the seedling did not 
induce any change in Oregon Green/Texas Red fluorescence (data not shown). 
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
Titration of Nod factor-induced Calcium Flux Using 
Microinjection of Oregon Green and Texas Red 
Calcium flux has been observed in root hair cells treated with 10 and 1nM of Nod 
Factor, but a titration curve of calcium flux in root hair microinjectected with calcium 
sensitive dye, over a wide range of Nod factor concentration has not been shown. To 
assay the responsiveness of M. truncatula plants for calcium flux, several root hair cells 
were microinjected and tested for this response after addition of Nod factor 
concentrations ranging from 10
 to 10
 M. For each root hair cell, calcium levels from 
tip and cells were analysed. A minimum of 10 cells from at least three different plants 
were tested for each concentration of Nod factor. The concentration at which Nod-
factor-induced calcium flux in 50% of the root hair tested was 5 10
 M. Curiously, as 
shown in Figure 4.2 the titration curve never reached 0% cells responding. 
Concentrations of Nod factor ranging from 10
 to 10
 M appeared to trigger calcium 
flux in approximately 25% of the root hair cells tested. Such a high baseline of the 
titration curve observed with microinjection was not observed using yellow cameleon 
(Figure 3.4A). The cameleon calcium sensor provides a better ratiometric analysis 
(YFP/CFP) compared to the ratiometric analysis of Oregon Green and Texas Red (Oregon 
Green/ Texas Red), in which the amount of the two dyes can vary in each microinjection. 
As a result, the calcium traces recorded with yellow cameleon are typically very flat with 
low background noise. This suggests that the background noise observed with 
microinjection is probably causing a false detection of calcium flux in approximately 25% 
of the root hair cells tested. Indeed, most of the root hair cells (6 of 8) that were found to 
be positive for calcium flux at low Nod factor concentrations (10
 to 10
 M) showed 
some noise in the fluorescence baseline before Nod factor addition. An example of a 
trace showing calcium flux in the tip and the cell area of a root hair treated with 10 pM 
Nod factor is shown in Figure 4.3. 
Figure 4.2. Titration curve of Nod facto
microinjected with Oregon Green and Texas Red.
Multiple cells from wild
different concentrations of Nod factor. The percentage of cells that showed calcium
is indicated. A minimum of 10 cells from at least three different plants were tested
each concentration of Nod factor.
Figure 4.3 Example of a calcium trace of a root hair microinjected with Oregon Green and 
Texas Red and treated with 10 pM Nod
calcium flux. 
The ratio Oregon Green/Texas Red (OG/TR) was plotted against time. Images were taken 
at 5 seconds intervals for 30 minutes. The dashed horizontal lines indicate calcium flux 
observed in the cell (black)
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants
Titration curve of Nod factor-induced calcium flux in root hair cells 
microinjected with Oregon Green and Texas Red. 
Multiple cells from wild-type plants were assessed for calcium 
different concentrations of Nod factor. The percentage of cells that showed calcium
A minimum of 10 cells from at least three different plants were tested
each concentration of Nod factor. 
Example of a calcium trace of a root hair microinjected with Oregon Green and 
Texas Red and treated with 10 pM Nod Factor scored positive for Nod factor
The ratio Oregon Green/Texas Red (OG/TR) was plotted against time. Images were taken 
at 5 seconds intervals for 30 minutes. The dashed horizontal lines indicate calcium flux 
(black) and in the tip (red) area. 
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
induced calcium flux in root hair cells 
e plants were assessed for calcium response induced by 
different concentrations of Nod factor. The percentage of cells that showed calcium flux 
A minimum of 10 cells from at least three different plants were tested for 
Example of a calcium trace of a root hair microinjected with Oregon Green and 
Factor scored positive for Nod factor-induced 
The ratio Oregon Green/Texas Red (OG/TR) was plotted against time. Images were taken 
at 5 seconds intervals for 30 minutes. The dashed horizontal lines indicate calcium flux 
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
Analysis of Calcium Flux in M. truncatula Mutants Lacking 
Infection Threads 
Several legume genes have been identified as being required for calcium spiking but 
not for calcium flux. The mutants dmi1/pollux, dmi2/symrk, castor, nup85, nup133, nena 
and cyclops are all defective for calcium spiking but retain calcium flux (Shaw and Long, 
2003; Miwa et al., 2006b; Groth et al., 2010). However, genes required for calcium flux 
but not for calcium spiking have not yet been identified. As calcium flux has been 
proposed to be involved in infection thread formation, such mutants might be defective 
for growth of infection threads. Good candidates to be tested for this phenotype are the 
Nod-factor-receptor mutants. Several genes have been identified as potential Nod-factor-
receptors. In fact, there appears to be redundancy in predicted Nod factor receptor 
genes. The hcl mutant is compromised for root hair curling and infection thread 
formation. It has been suggested that HCL could be a Nod factor receptor required for 
infection thread growth (Smit et al., 2007). If this is the case, and if calcium flux is 
required for infection thread growth, one might expect the hcl mutant to be 
compromised for calcium flux. In the hcl mutant 16 of 24 root hair cells tested in 11 
plants were positive for induction of flux in response to 10 nM Nod factor (Figure 4.4B). 
When the same Nod factor concentration was added to wild-type plants, eleven of 
twelve root hairs induced calcium flux in 6 plants (Figure 4.4A). Chi square analysis 
revealed that although fewer cells were positive for calcium flux, this reduction was not 
statistically significant. To further asses the responsiveness of the hcl mutant for calcium 
flux, Nod factor concentrations of 10
and 10
 M were tested for calcium flux in 
this mutant. At these concentrations there was no difference between calcium flux 
response in the hcl mutant and wild type plants (Figure 4.5).  
In Chapter 3 I showed that one hundred times more nodL Nod factor than wild-type 
Nod factor was required to induce calcium flux in wild-type plants (Figure 3.6A). HCL has 
been proposed to be the Nod-factor receptor that recognises structural specificity of Nod 
factors (Smit et al., 2007) and so the hcl-1 mutant was tested for induction of calcium flux 
by Nod factor lacking the nodL-determined acetate on the non reducing terminal sugar. 
Calcium flux was similarly induced by nodL and wild-type Nod factor in the hcl mutant 
(Figure 4.6). Chi square analysis of the data collected at each Nod factor concentration 
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
revealed that the number of root hair cells positive for calcium flux induced by nodL Nod 
factor, in the hcl-1 mutant, was not significantly different from calcium flux induction by 
the wild type Nod factor (p 0,05) at any concentration point. These results suggest that, 
for the induction of calcium flux, the hcl-1 mutant is unable to discriminate the structural 
differences between wild-type and nodL Nod factor. This is consistent with previous 
findings indicating that the HCL receptor is able to recognize Nod factor structure 
specificity (Smit et al., 2007). 
The observation that the hcl mutant was not blocked for calcium flux indicates that 
mutation of this gene is not sufficient to block this response and suggests that other 
genes must be involved in the induction of calcium flux. Thus, other M. truncatula 
mutants compromised for infection thread growth were analysed. The nin mutants 
undergo excessive root hair curling, but are impaired in infection and fail to form nodules 
following inoculation with S. meliloti (Marsh et al., 2007). As previously shown, this 
mutant showed normal calcium spiking (Marsh et al., 2007). Calcium flux was observed in 
only 6 of 13 root hair cells tested (4 plants). Compared to wild type plants a significant 
reduction (p 0,05) in the number of root hair cells showing calcium flux was observed 
(Figure 4.4C).  
The infection mutant bit-1 was also tested for calcium flux. BIT-1 encodes ERN, a 
transcription factor that is necessary for nodulation. Mutation in this gene blocks the 
initiation of the infection thread (Middleton et al., 2007). The bit-1 mutant was positive 
for calcium spiking, but compromised for Nod-factor induced calcium flux: 6 of 13 root 
hairs was positive for calcium flux whereas in wild type 11 of 12 root hairs tested 
exhibited calcium flux, (Figure 4.4D). Chi square analysis of the data collected with the 
bit-1 infection mutants revealed that the number of root hairs positive for calcium was 
significantly reduced compared to wild type plants (p 0,05). These results show that 
despite showing normal calcium spiking, both the infection mutants nin and bit-1 may be 
reduced for calcium flux responses compared to wild type plants.  
The GRAS transcriptional factor NSP2 acts downstream of CCAMK and is required 
for nodule organogenesis (Gleason et al., 2006). Mutation in this gene causes absence of 
infection and cortical cell division following inoculation with S. meliloti (Oldroyd and Long, 
2003). The M. truncatula mutant nsp2-2 was tested for induction of calcium flux. Twelve 
out of 15 root hair cells exhibited calcium flux in 7 different nsp2-2 plants (Figure 4.4 F). 
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
Chi squared analysis revealed no significant difference between the number of cells 
positive for calcium flux in the nsp2-2 mutant compared to wild-type. As previously 
reported, calcium spiking was normal in the mutant plants (Oldroyd and Long, 2003). 
Figure 4.4. Changes in intracellular calcium in 
and nsp2-2 root hairs imaged using rat
Nod factor was added as indicated to a final concentration of 1
ratio (arbitrary units) of fluorescence of Oregon Green (calcium sensitive
Red (calcium-insensitive dye) 
Representative traces are shown for wild
nsp2-2 (F). The horizontal black line 
significant transient increase in 
of root hair positive for calcium flux divided for the total number of root hair cell tested 
for each mutant is reported next to each trace. In parenthesis is indicated the number of 
plants tested. 
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants
Changes in intracellular calcium in M. truncatula wild-
root hairs imaged using ratiometric fluorescence of Oregon Green and Texas 
Nod factor was added as indicated to a final concentration of 10 nM to seedlings and the 
(arbitrary units) of fluorescence of Oregon Green (calcium sensitive
insensitive dye) was calculated every 5 seconds for more than 40 minutes. 
Representative traces are shown for wild-type (A), hcl (B), nin (C)
(F). The horizontal black line indicate region of the trace where there is a 
significant transient increase in cellular calcium at the root tip and cell area.
of root hair positive for calcium flux divided for the total number of root hair cell tested 
for each mutant is reported next to each trace. In parenthesis is indicated the number of 
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
-type, hcl, nin, bit-1, rit-1 
of Oregon Green and Texas 
0 nM to seedlings and the 
(arbitrary units) of fluorescence of Oregon Green (calcium sensitive-dye) and Texas 
d every 5 seconds for more than 40 minutes. 
(C), bit-1 (D), rit-1 (E) and 
indicate region of the trace where there is a 
and cell area. The number 
of root hair positive for calcium flux divided for the total number of root hair cell tested 
for each mutant is reported next to each trace. In parenthesis is indicated the number of 
Figure 4.5. Induction of Nod factor
Multiple cells of the 
by different concentrations of Nod factor. 
for wild-type (blue diamonds) is presented in Figure 4.2. 
showed calcium flux 
tested for each concentration o
Figure 4.6. Dose response curves for 
factor (shown for comparison)
Multiple cells from the 
different concentrations of 
For comparison calcium flux response induced by wild type 
shown. The percentage of cells that show calcium flux is indicated. 
at least three different
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants
Induction of Nod factor-induced calcium flux in the hcl
the hcl mutant (red circles) were assessed for calcium 
different concentrations of Nod factor. For comparison the titration curve observed 
type (blue diamonds) is presented in Figure 4.2. The percentage of cells that 
is indicated. At least 10 cells from at least three different plants were 
for each concentration of Nod factor. 
Dose response curves for M. truncatula hcl-1 with 
(shown for comparison).  
the hcl mutants were assessed for their calcium flux response to 
different concentrations of LCO IV, C 16:2, S (equivalent to nodL Nod factor (red squares)
For comparison calcium flux response induced by wild type Nod factor
The percentage of cells that show calcium flux is indicated. 
at least three different plants were tested for each concentration of Nod factor.
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
hcl mutant. 
mutant (red circles) were assessed for calcium response induced 
For comparison the titration curve observed 
The percentage of cells that 
At least 10 cells from at least three different plants were 
with nodL and wild-type Nod 
mutants were assessed for their calcium flux response to 
Nod factor (red squares). 
Nod factor (red circles) is 
The percentage of cells that show calcium flux is indicated. At least 10 cells from 
for each concentration of Nod factor. 
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
Analysis of Calcium Responses in the Mt rit1 and Lj nap1-1, 
pir1-1, and nap1-1/pir1-1 Mutants  
 Screening of mutagenised M. truncatula and L. japonicus populations identified an 
unusual class of mutants showing both aberrant symbiotic and trichome phenotypes 
(Tansengco et al., 2003; Ooki et al., 2005). Our collaborators (Yokota et al.) characterised 
the nap1 and pir1 mutants and cloned the corresponding genes that encode proteins that 
are most likely involved in the assembly of F-actin filaments (Yokota et al., 2009). nap1 
and pir1 mutants were identified as small nitrogen-starved plants when grown on 
nitrogen-deficient nutrient medium. Inoculation of plants carrying nap1-1 and pir1-1 
alleles with M. loti triggered the formation of small white nodules. The empty nodules 
formed on nap1 and pir1 roots suggested that the infection process might be perturbed 
in these mutants. To investigate this possibility, our collaborators examined nap1-1 and 
pir1-1 roots following inoculation with M. loti. A significantly decreased number of 
infection threads was observed in mutants compared with wild-type although nap1 and 
pir1 mutants were capable of forming some infection threads extending through the root 
hair. Nevertheless, wild-type-looking infection threads were very rarely observed (Yokota 
et al., 2009). 
 The function of NAP and PIR proteins has been investigated in detail in 
animals, protists, and Arabidopsis. Both proteins are part of the SCAR/WAVE complex 
that mediates actin dynamics. In root hairs of nap1-1 and pir1-1 in mutants, actin 
filaments were significantly more transverse and less longitudinally aligned (Yokota et al., 
2009). In wild type plants, Nod factor caused a rapid rearrangement of actin filaments, 
characterised by an accumulation of actin bundle in the tip of the root hair treated for 30 
minutes with Nod factor. In the nap1-1 and pir1-1 mutants no accumulation of diffuse 
actin was observed (Figure 4.7, modified form Yokota et al., 2009). 
Nod factorinduced calcium influx coincides temporally and spatially with actin 
rearrangement and was, hence, proposed to be involved in the rapid reorganisation of 
actin in responding root hairs (Sanchez et al., 1991; de Ruijter et al., 1999). Calcium influx 
and calcium spiking were therefore measured in nap1-1 and pir1-1 mutants to investigate 
the relationship between the early electrophysiological and cellular changes observed in 
root hairs. Ratios of fluorescence of Oregon Green to Texas Red were determined after 
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
Nod factor application (Miwa et al., 2006b), and, surprisingly, as seen in Figure 4.8, no 
significant differences in calcium influx or calcium spiking were observed between the 
wild type and the nap1-1 or pir1-1 mutants. These results suggest that the genes NAP1 
and PIR1 are not required for the induction of Nod factor-induced calcium influx and 
calcium spiking.  
An alternative explanation is that NAP1 and PIR1 are redundant in function for the 
activation of calcium responses. To test this possibility, the induction of calcium 
responses in the double mutant nap1-1/ pir1-1 was analysed. The double mutant nap1-1/ 
pir1-1 developed empty nodules upon inoculation with M. loti, and, occasionally, a few 
pink nodules were found (Yokota et al., 2009). This was associated with the impairment in 
the initiation and/or progression of infection threads (Yokota et al., 2009). The overall 
growth of the double mutant was affected to the similar extent as observed in the 
corresponding single mutants (Yokota et al., 2009).  When the double mutant was tested 
for Nod factor-induced calcium responses no differences were seen in calcium spiking or 
calcium influx (Figure 4.8) (Yokota et al., 2009). This suggests that Nod factorinduced 
actin rearrangement mediated in L. japonicus by NAP1 and PIR1 act downstream or in 
parallel to calcium influx and spiking. 
During the course of this work I analysed calcium responses in the rit-1 (Root hair 
Infection and Trichome) mutant. The rit-1 mutant also has a phenotype characterised by 
short thick root hairs. Infection of this mutant with S. meliloti results in arrested growth 
of infection threads and few nodules are formed (Miyahara et al., 2010). I assessed the 
ability of this mutant to induce Nod factor-induced calcium spiking and calcium flux. 
When Nod factor (10 nM) was added to root hairs of the rit-1 mutant, Nod factor induced 
normal calcium spiking. 24 of 30 root hair cells showed calcium spiking in 10 plants 
tested. However, when tested for induction of calcium flux, only 4 of 12 root hair cells 
tested were positive for this response (Figure 4.4E). Thus, rit-1 was normal for calcium 
spiking, but appeared to be compromised for induction of calcium flux. This suggests that 
RIT-1 may play a role in the response to calcium flux. Recently, the rit-1 mutant has been 
found to carry a chromosomal translocation between chromosome 3 and chromosome 4, 
disrupting the normal function of RIT1, which is the putative orthologues of the L. 
japonicus NAP1 gene (Miyahara et al., 2010). This left me with the difficulty of reconciling 
the results obtained with the L. japonicus nap-1 mutant, normal for calcium flux (Figure 
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
4.8), with that of the M. truncatula rit-1 mutant showing a significant decrease of 
induction of calcium flux (Figure 4.4 E). 
Given the discordance between the responsiveness for calcium flux in the 
orthologous mutant rit-1 and nap1, rit-1 was tested for calcium flux at higher Nod factor 
concentration. When the concentration of Nod factor was increased from 10 nM to 100 
nM, 4 out of 10 root hairs (7 plants) showed influx in the rit-1 mutant, whereas, in wild 
type, 9 of 10 cells (4 plants) were positive for flux indicating that even at high 
concentration of Nod factor the rit-1 mutant was impaired for initiation of calcium flux. 
Chi square analysis revealed that the number of root hairs positive for calcium was 
significantly reduced compared to wild type plants (p 0,05). Further comments on the 
different ability to induce calcium flux observed in the Mt rit-1 and Lj nap-1 mutants are 
provided in the discussion section of this Chapter. 
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
Figure taken from our collaborators (Yokota et al., 2009). 
Figure 4.7. Actin Cytoskeleton of Root Hairs, visualized by Alexa-Phalloidin Staining or 
Expression of the 35S:GFP-ABD2-GFP F-Actin Reporter in Transgenic Roots (from our 
collaborators Yokota et al., modified form Yokota et al. 2009). 
(A) Wild-type root hair before Nod factor application, phalloidin. (B) Wild-type root hair 
30 minutes after Nod factor application. Note the zone of diffuse actin accumulation at 
the tip of the root hair (arrowhead), phalloidin. (C) pir1-1 root hair 30 minutes after 
application of Nod factor, phalloidin. (D) nap1-1 root hair 30 minutes after application 
of Nod factor, phalloidin. Bars = 20 m. 
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
Figure 4.8. Nod Factorinduced calcium influx and calcium spiking in L. japonicus nap1-1, 
pir1-1, and nap1-1/pir1-1 mutants (modified from Yokota et al. 2009).  
Calcium levels were monitored in individual root hairs of the wild type and nap1-1, pir1-1, 
and nap1-1/pir1-1 mutants following addition of 100 nM M. loti Nod factor (black vertical 
line). The ratios (arbitrary units) of fluorescence of Oregon Green (calcium sensitive) to 
Texas Red (calcium insensitive) were recorded every 5 s for >30 minutes. The number of 
cells showing calcium spiking or calcium influx is shown in the inset table as a fraction of 
the total number of cells analysed (with the total number of plants tested in 
parentheses). Solid bars indicate region of the trace where there is a significant transient 
increase in cellular calcium in the root tip and cell area, and the open bars indicate the 
parts of the traces showing nuclear associated calcium spiking. 
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
Discussion 
In this Chapter, the induction of calcium flux in microinjected root hairs of M. 
truncatula and L. japonicus wild type plans and infection mutants was analysed. As 
described in Chapter 3, the analysis of calcium flux was based on a comparison among 
cytoplasmic calcium levels recorded in the cell and tip of root hairs. This method was 
particularly useful to distinguish specific singular increases in calcium level from non-
specific increases in background fluorescence, often observed in traces of microinjected 
root hair cells. Nevertheless, approximately 25% of root hair cells always show calcium 
flux even when they were treated with 100 to 1 pM Nod factor. At these concentrations 
calcium flux was not observed when analysed with yellow cameleon (Chapter 3). Given 
that most of the traces positive for calcium flux at the lowest Nod factor concentrations 
showed some background noise before the addition of Nod factor, it is likely that they are 
false positives, probably due to increases in the background fluorescence.  
The baseline fluorescence of traces obtained with yellow cameleon are much less 
noisy. A possible explanation for this difference is that and the perforation of cell wall 
and plasma membrane, and the injection of dyes into the cell cytoplasm could cause 
induce changes in resting calcium levels. However, it is important to point out that only 
root hair cells showing an active cytoplasmic streaming were analysed for calcium 
responses. In addition, the ratio of YFP/CFP calculated with yellow cameleon produces a 
much better ratio than the Oregon Green/Texas Red ratio used in injection experiments, 
in which the amount of each dye can vary for each injection. I believe that the difference 
between the ratiometric accuracy is responsible for the great amount of noise observed 
using injection. 
Previously, the only two genes shown to be required for Nod factor-induced 
calcium flux were genes encoding the putative Nod factor receptor NFP in M. truncatula 
(Amor et al., 2003) and NFR-1 and NFR-5 in L. japonicus (Radutoiu et al., 2003). HCL 
encodes the LYK3 receptor. A weak allele of this gene blocks infection thread growth and 
it has been suggested that HCL is the Nod factor receptor required for infection thread 
growth (Smit et al., 2007). Therefore, the hcl-1 mutant was predicted to be defective for 
Nod factor-induced calcium flux. The data show that in the hcl mutant a lower number of 
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
root hair cells induced calcium flux compared to wild-type plants. However, more than a 
half of the root-hairs tested were positive for calcium flux. This indicates that mutation of 
the HCL gene is not sufficient to block this response. This suggests that other genes must 
be required for the induction of calcium flux. Indeed, there seems to be a redundancy of 
different LYKs genes in M. truncatula. MtLYK2, for example, is also in the NFR1-LYK3 
syntenic region, groups together with LYK3 and NFR1 in a phylogenetic tree, and is 80% 
identical and 90% similar to MtLYK3 (Limpens et al., 2003; Smit et al., 2007). Thus, Nod 
factor-induced calcium flux observed in the hcl mutant could be explained by redundancy 
function of LYK3-like genes in the induction of calcium flux. 
Analysis of calcium flux with Nod factor equivalent to those from nodL and wild-
type Nod factor in the hcl mutant revealed that, when the HCL gene is mutated, the plant 
loses its ability to discriminate between the two Nod factor structures for the induction 
of calcium flux. This is consistent with previous findings indicating that the HCL receptor 
is able to recognize Nod factor structure specificity (Smit et al., 2007). hcl-4 is a weak 
allele of HCL that controls infection in a manner dependent on Nod factor structure. The 
number of nodules formed on hcl-4 roots is reduced more than forty fold when 
inoculated by S. meliloti nodF nodE mutant, and nodules are completely absent after 
inoculation with the S. meliloti nodL mutant, indicating that MtLYK3 is involved, directly 
or indirectly, in recognition of Nod factors during infection. The observation that the hcl 
mutant is unable to discriminate between wild type and nodL Nod factor reinforces the 
finding that LYK3 acts in a Nod factor structure dependent fashion. 
NAP1 and PIR1 encode proteins involved in actin rearrangement. Fundamental 
processes of legume-Rhizobium symbiosis, such as root hair deformation and formation 
of infection threads, depend on dynamic rearrangements of the microtubule and actin 
networks of the cytoskeleton. A significant cytoskeletal reorganisation is associated with 
the initial swelling and subsequent re-initiation of polar root hair tip growth, as well as 
with the initiation and subsequent inward oriented extension of infection threads. 
Indeed, in the nap1 and pir1 mutants Nod factor failed to trigger actin bundle 
accumulation, normally observed in the tip of root hair cell after 30 minutes of 
application, and root hair deformation (Yokota et al., 2009). Our results show that the 
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
nap1 and pir1 mutants were normal for both calcium flux and calcium spiking, indicating 
that NAP1 and PIR1 are not required for these responses and suggest that Nod factor
induced actin rearrangement mediated in L. japonicus by NAP1 and PIR1 act downstream 
or in parallel to calcium influx and spiking. 
Nod factor-induced calcium flux and calcium spiking are initiated within 20 minutes 
of the addition of Nod factor whereas the NAP1- and PIR-mediated rearrangements were 
first observed 30 minutes after Nod factor addition. Thus, I can not role out the possibility 
that calcium responses occur upstream of the actin rearrangement mediated by NAP1 
and PIR. Nevertheless, this seems unlikely given the evidence suggesting that calcium 
spiking, calcium flux and root hair deformation are three independent events induced by 
Nod factor. 1. Mutants blocked for the induction of calcium spiking or calcium flux were 
found to be positive for root hair deformation (Esseling et al., 2004; Miwa et al., 2006b); 
2. Initiation of cytoskeletal changes, such as actin remodelling start three to six minutes 
after Nod factor addition (Allen and Bennett, 1996; Cardenas et al., 1998; Esseling et al., 
2003, 2004) whereas calcium spiking is normally induced later (15-20 minutes after Nod 
factor application). 3. Low Nod factor concentrations trigger calcium spiking and root hair 
deformation but not calcium flux (Shaw and Long, 2003; Miwa et al., 2006b) or the 
calcium fluxassociated alkalinization measured using microelectrodes (Felle et al., 1998; 
Radutoiu et al., 2003). The observations reported in this chapter are consistent with the 
calcium responses occurring in parallel with the NAP1- and PIR1-induced cytoskeletal 
changes required for the Nod factor-induced deformation of root hairs, although I cannot 
exclude the possibility of a low level or localised change in calcium that cannot be 
measured in root hairs using existing techniques. 
Calcium influx has been suggested to occur at the initial stage of infection 
thread formation when a high concentration of Nod factor is generated by the growing 
bacteria entrapped in the infection focus, (Miwa et al., 2006b). In nap-1 and pir-1 
mutants, the rare infection threads that did form underwent rapid disintegration, and 
very few infection threads were able to extend to the base of the epidermal cell. The 
lack of infection thread formation within the root cortex suggested that NAP1 and PIR1 
are essential for the progression of the infection process beyond the root epidermis 
(Yokota et al., 2009). Thus, it is possible that calcium flux play a role upstream of NAP1 
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
and PIR1 during the formation of the infection threads and this could explain the 
results showing that NAP1 and PIR1 are required for the development of infection 
threads but are not required for induction of calcium influx.  
M. truncatula nin, bit-1 and rit-1 mutants are defective for infection thread 
growth. Here, I found that these genes are required for calcium flux but not for calcium 
spiking as the mutants nin, rit-1, and bit-1 were impaired for induction of calcium flux 
but normal for induction of calcium spiking. Conversely, in L. japonicus, mutations in 
NIN (Miwa et al., 2006b) and RIT-1 (orthologous NAP1) resulted in plants that did 
induce calcium flux, whereas I observed that mutation in the orthologous M. 
truncatula genes reduced calcium flux compared to wild-type when Nod factor was 
added at 10 nM. Among all the infection mutants tested for calcium flux the rit-1 
mutant was the most impaired for this response. Because of the discrepancy in the 
results obtained between the rit-1 and nap1 mutants, the responsiveness to higher 
Nod factor concentration for calcium flux was tested in the rit-1 mutant. When Nod 
factor was added at 100 nM, significantly fewer root hairs were positive for calcium 
flux compared to wild type plants, confirming that the rit-1 mutant is compromised for 
calcium flux. Corroborating this observation, if, as discussed above, approximately 25% 
of the root hairs positive for calcium flux are due to the background noise, the number 
of root hairs positive for a specific calcium flux in the rit-1 mutant would be almost 
zero.  
One of the common phenotypic characteristics of L. japonicus nap1 and M. 
truncatula rit-1 mutants is the arrested trichome development. The elongated, 
filamentous trichomes are visible on the sepals, the abaxial midribs of leaves, and leaf 
stalks of wild type plants. By contrast, trichome formed in the sepals, leaves leafs, and 
leaf stalks on the nap1 and rit-1 mutants are distinctively shorter and deformed (Yokota 
et al., 2009) Miyara et al., 2010, in press). Root hair development is also affected in the 
Lotus and Medicago mutants, although a difference between the nap1 and rit-1 mutants 
was observed for the root hair cells phenotype. In the nap1 mutant the root hair 
phenotype was rather subtle. Its severity in terms of length and number of root hairs 
formed varied substantially even between individuals of the same genotype, precluding 
quantification (Yokota et al., 2009). Reduced root hair development was observed in old 
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
root hairs in the upper part of the root of the nap1 seedlings, whereas the young root 
hairs that are selected for injection were not much different from wild type (Figure 4.9). 
In contrast, the root hairs of the M. truncatula rit-1 mutant showed a much more severe 
phenotype. Root hairs along the length of the root (including root hairs selected for 
injection experiments) were typically short and thick (Figure 4.9). This difference in the 
root hair phenotype indicates that mutations in Medicago RIT-1 and orthologous Lotus 
NAP1 have a different effect on the development of young root hair cells. Infection 
threads are polar growing structures like trichomes, root hairs and pollen tubes. 
Therefore, it is possible to speculate that Medicago RIT-1 and the Lotus NAP1 genes 
might play slightly different roles during the formation of infection thread and this could 
reflect the different calcium flux responses observed in the two species. Indeed, the 
development programme of infection thread and nodule in L. japonicus and M. 
truncatula are very different. L. japonicus develops determinate nodules, characterised 
by the absence of persistent meristems, whereas M. truncatula develops indeterminate 
nodules with continuous meristem growth. The function of infection thread in legume 
species developing determinate nodules, such as Lotus, is to deposit bacteria at the site 
of cortical division, whereas infection threads of indeterminate nodules, as in M. 
truncatula, must reach the inner cortical cortex where cell division originating in the 
pericycle lead to the development of persistent meristem. The rare infection threads 
formed in L. japonicus plants carrying the mutant nap1 allele underwent rapid 
disintegration, and only sporadically infection threads that extended to the base of 
epidermal cells were observed. The total lack of infection thread formation within the 
root cortex suggested that NAP1 is essential for the progression of infection process 
beyond the root epidermis (Yokota et al., 2009). At this late development stage of 
infection thread it is very likely that L. japonicus and M. truncatula undergo two different 
developmental processes. Therefore, may not be so surprising to find that orthologous 
protein involved in infection thread formation induce different responses in the two plant 
species. Nevertheless, it is worth remembering that the mutation which was induced by 
fast neutron mutagenesis in the M. truncatula rit-1 mutant involves a complex 
rearrangement (Miyahara et al., 2010) and, as a consequence, it is possible that more 
than one gene is mutated in the M. truncatula rit-1 mutant. To confirm the reduction of 
calcium flux in the M. truncatula rit-1 mutant other alleles should be tested.  
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
Nod factor is known to induce early nodulin gene expression, cortical cell divisions 
and promote nodule morphogenesis (Spaink et al., 1991; Truchet et al., 1991). Gene 
expression changes induced by Nod factor are abolished in the Nod factor signalling 
mutants nfp, dmi1, dmi2, dmi3, nsp1, nsp2 and bit-1 (Catoira et al., 2000; Mitra et al., 
2004a; Marsh et al., 2007; Middleton et al., 2007). An activated CCAMK is sufficient to 
induce the formation of spontaneous nodules in the absence symbiont bacteria in both 
M. truncatula and L. japonicus (Gleason et al., 2006; Tirichine et al., 2006a). In M. 
truncatula this depends on the transcriptional factors NSP1 and NSP2, NIN and BIT-1 
(Gleason et al., 2006; Marsh et al., 2007; Middleton et al., 2007). This strongly argues that 
NFP, DMI1, DMI2, DMI3, NSP1, NSP2 and BIT-1 are on a linear pathway with respect to 
gene regulation and induction of nodule morphogenesis. The finding that mutations in 
NFP, DMI1 and DMI2 block calcium spiking and that antagonist of calcium spiking also 
block gene induction clearly indicates that calcium spiking is central to this pathway.  
The BIT and NIN genes, were found to be required for efficient induction of 
calcium flux. One possible explanation is that NIN and BIT, activated by the calcium 
spiking signalling pathway are also recruited at a later stage to play a role in the induction 
of calcium flux during the formation of infection thread. This is consistent with earlier 
reports showing that most of the genes (e.g. CCAMK) that take part in the Nod factor 
signalling pathway are also required for infection thread formation upon rhizobial 
infection (Catoira et al., 2000; Kistner et al., 2005).  
CHAPTER 4. Calcium flux in Mt and Lj infection mutants 
Figure 4.9. Root hair phenotype of M. truncatula rit-1 and L. japonicus nap1 mutants. 
Root hair cell microinjected with Oregon Green and Texas Red are shown. The root hairs 
of M. truncatula rit-1 are short and thick, whereas the L. japonicus nap1 mutant has root 
hair cells similar to wild type.  
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
Chapter 5 
Lotus japonicus symrk-14 Forms Nodules but Is 
Severely Impaired for Nod Factor-Induced Calcium 
Spiking 
Introduction 
Calcium oscillations play an important role in several biological processes in 
animals and plants. In animals, calcium modulates diverse cellular activities ranging from 
fertilisation to cell death (Berridge et al., 2000). In plants calcium oscillations have been 
shown to regulate stomatal aperture (Allen et al., 2000), circadian clock (Dodd et al., 
2007) and legume-rhizobia symbiosis (Ehrhardt et al., 1996). In legume-rhizobia 
symbioses perception of the bacterially-derived Nod factor by the plant leads to the 
induction of calcium oscillation around the nucleus which last for several hours (Ehrhardt 
et al., 1996). Mutation in many of several genes required for nodule formation, as the 
genes encoding the Nod factor receptors NFR1 and NFR5, the LRR-receptor kinase 
SYMRK, the ion channel-like proteins CASTOR and POLLUX, and the nucleoporins NUP85 
NUP133 and NENA, are required for  Nod factor-induced calcium spiking. A plant-specific 
calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase (CCaMK) encoded by DMI3 in M. truncatula and L. 
japonicus is likely decode the Nod factor-generated calcium spiking signal (Levy et al., 
2004; Mitra et al., 2004b; Tirichine et al., 2006b). A single amino-acid replacement in the 
kinase domain or an autoactive CCaMK, containing only the kinase domain, is sufficient to 
induce expression of early nodulin genes and is responsible for the spontaneous 
nodulation phenotype observed in absence of Sinorhizobium meliloti (Gleason et al., 
2006; Tirichine et al., 2006b; Tirichine et al., 2006a). Pharmacological antagonists shown 
to block Nod factor-elicited calcium spiking are also efficient inhibitor of early nodulin 
gene induction (Engstrom et al., 2002; Charron et al., 2004). All together this evidence 
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
clearly indicates that calcium spiking is central to the Nod factor signalling pathway that 
activates nodulation. 
Nod-factor perception by the plant induces two parallel responses: one in the 
epidermis and one in the root cortex (Oldroyd and Downie, 2008). In the epidermis, Nod 
factor is necessary for bacterial infection via infection thread growth, while in the cortex, 
Nod-factor perception induces cortical cell division and nodule morphogenesis. Analysis 
of legume mutants with defects in components of Nod factor signalling highlighted 
differences between induction of epidermal responses and induction of cortical cell 
divisions. Recently, Madsen at al., showed that inoculation of the double mutants 
carrying the gain-of-function CCAMK and a mutation in one of the genes required 
upstream of calcium spiking, but downstream of Nod factor receptors, resulted in 
infected nodules. This suggests that activation of calcium spiking is not directly required 
for bacterial infection. The L. japonicus gain-offunction allele snf-2 encoding the 
cytokinin receptor LHK1 leads to the formation of spontaneous nodules (Murray et al., 
2007; Tirichine et al., 2007). Inoculation of the double mutant snf2 ccamk did not resulted 
in the formation of infected nodules (Madsen et al., 2010). These results indicate that 
activation of CCAMK, which is likely to occur through calcium spiking, is not only required 
for nodule organogenesis but is also required for bacterial infection. Whether Nod factor-
induced calcium spiking plays a role in the epidermal and/or cortical programme is still an 
area of debate.  
Mutation in either L. japonicus NUP85 or NUP133 blocked Nod factor-induced 
calcium spiking, but some cortical cell divisions occurred (Kanamori et al., 2006; Saito et 
al., 2007). Inoculation of nup133-2, nup133-3, and nup133-4 with M. loti revealed a 
temperature-sensitive nodulation deficiency: when inoculated at 26C, nup133-2, 
nup133-3, and nup133-4 did not form nodules, whereas at permissive temperatures 
(22C) they developed small ineffective nodules. The root nodules formed, were 
ineffective and electron microscopy showed that rhizobia were not released from 
infection threads. Analysis of ion fluxes using a calcium-sensitive dye revealed that 
calcium all four allelic nup133 mutants were deficient for Nod factor-induced calcium 
spiking (Kanamori et al., 2006). Similarly, nup85-1 and nup85-2 mutants failed to induce 
calcium spiking in response to Nod factor addition (Miwa et al., 2006b; Saito et al., 2007). 
Nevertheless, these mutants do form a few effective nodules (Szczyglowski et al., 1998; 
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
Kawaguchi et al., 2002; Kistner et al., 2005). Recently an other L. japonicus mutant 
carrying a mutation the a nucleoporin gene NENA has been identified. Similarly to nup85 
and nup133, the nena mutant form nodules in a temperature dependent fashion and is 
impaired in perinuclear calcium spiking (Groth et al., 2010). These results suggest a 
situation in which nodule morphogenesis appears to occur in the absence of calcium 
spiking, pointing toward the possibility that it may be possible to break the link between 
calcium spiking and nodule morphogenesis.  
Microinjection of L. japonicus root hairs is laborious and technically demanding, so 
this technique does not lend itself to identification of rare or old uninjecteable cells that 
might induce calcium spiking. Therefore, given the few number of nodules formed in the 
nup mutants, it is possible that occasional nodulation events are due to the occasional 
activation of calcium spiking, not observed in the microinjection assays. However, an 
unresolved challenge is to explain the NUP133/NUP85-dependent calcium spiking 
mounted by wild-type plants 10 min after Nod-factor application and the intriguing lack 
of calcium spiking in nup133 and nup85 mutants carrying weaker alleles that 
unexpectedly initiate nodule development albeit at reduced frequency (Kanamori et al., 
2006; Miwa et al., 2006b; Saito et al., 2007). 
L. japonicus har1 mutants respond to inoculation with Mesorhizobium loti by 
forming an excessive number of nodules due to genetic lesions in the HAR1 
autoregulatory receptor kinase gene (Krusell et al., 2002; Nishimura et al., 2002). 
Autoregulation controls the extent of nodulation events in the roots and, thus, serves to 
preserve the homeostasis of the nitrogen-fixing symbiosis. Screening for suppressors of 
the L. japonicus har1-1 hypernodulation phenotype identified, among many mutant lines, 
two alleles of L. japonicus SYMRK:  symrk-14 and symrk-13 (Murray et al., 2006).  
SYMRK is a transmembrane leucine-rich-repeat-receptor-kinase containing an 
extracellular leucine-rich-repeat region (LRR), a transmembrane domain and an 
intracellular protein kinase (Figure 5.1) (Endre et al., 2002; Stracke et al., 2002). This gene 
is essential for nodulation and is very highly-conserved among legumes, though the 
function of the protein is not yet fully known. Given that LRR have been shown to 
mediate specific protein-protein interaction (Jones and Jones, 1997) and that Lotus 
SYMRK is identical to RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE (RLK) (Stracke et al., 2002), it has been 
proposed that SYMRK might interact with an unidentified extracellular protein and 
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
mediate the phosphorylation of some components yet to be identified. Indeed,  recent 
work showed that DMI2, the M. truncatula orthologous of SYMRK, interacts with HMGR1, 
a key enzyme in synthesis of mevalonate and that the interaction required the cytosolic 
active domain of DMI2 (Kevei et al., 2007).  SYMRK is not thought to be a Nod factor 
receptor as SYMRK mutants do show some responses to Nod factor, including root hair 
deformation (Stracke et al., 2002) and calcium flux (Miwa et al., 2006b).  
Most SYMRK mutations (e.g. symrk-13/har1-1) completely block nodulation and 
mycorrhization. However, a novel allele was identified during the screening for 
suppressors of the L. japonicus har1-1 hypernodulation phenotype; symrk-14 contains a 
single amino acid change (Proline to Threonine) in the GDPC motif just upstream of the 
leucine rich repeat (Figure 5.1). The symrk-14/har1-1 mutant was reduced for nodules 
and was also defective for mycorrhization, although it had a more subtle nodulation 
defect. Root hairs of the symrk-14/har1-1 mutant responded to inoculation with M. loti 
by extensive root hair deformation and initiation of nodule primordia. The symrk-
14/har1-1 mutant formed a higher number of nodule primordia/white bumps that did 
not develop into nodules compared to har1-1 mutant, and was, hence, classified as a 
 hyperinfected mutant (Murray et al., 2006).  
The intriguing location of the symrk-14 mutation and its unique symbiotic 
phenotype spurred our collaborators (S. Kosuta and K. Szczyglowski) to further 
characterise this mutant. Analysis of bacterial infection in symrk-14/har1-1 mutant 
revealed that bacterial infection thread formation in the mutant was blocked (S. Kosuta, 
personal communication). Thus, symrk-14/har1-1 mutant showed a very interesting 
phenotype. The mutant does not form symbiotic relationships with arbuscular 
mycorrhiza, and it does not form infection threads with symbiotic rhizobia; therefore it is 
a loss-of-function mutant. Surprisingly, however, the symrk-14/har1-1 mutant forms 
nodules (Murray et al., 2006). This ability to nodulate without root hair infection threads 
enabled me to use this mutant to ask the question: is root hair calcium spiking required 
for nodule organogenesis?  
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
Figure 5.1. Schematic structure of SYMRK protein and relative position of the amino acid 
changes in the symrk-14 and symrk-13 alleles. 
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
Results 
Ljsymrk-14 is Impaired for Nod Factor-Induced Calcium Spiking 
Screening for suppressors of the L. japonicus har1-1 hypernodulation phenotype 
identified two alleles of L. japonicus SYMRK:  symrk-14 and symrk-13 (Murray et al., 
2006).  Both symrk-14 and symrk-13 mutants failed to form symbiotic relationships with 
arbuscular mycorrhiza. The symrk-13 mutant was also completely defective for nodule 
formation whereas the symrk-14 mutant formed nodules (Murray et al., 2006).  
The phenotype of the symrk-14 mutant was further characterised by our 
collaborator (S. Kosuta et al.). Analysis of infection threads revealed that symrk-14/har1-
1, such as symrk-13/har1-1, did not form infection thread after inoculation with M. loti (S. 
Kosuta, personal communication). The symrk-14/har1-1 mutant produced fewer nodules 
but more nodule primordia than the har1-1 mutant (Figure 5.2A), giving a total 
nodulation events (nodule primordia plus nodules) not statistically different from har1-1 
plants, (Figure 5.2B). The observation that the symrk-14/har1-1 mutant is strongly 
defective for infection thread formation indicates that symrk-14 is a loss-of-function 
mutant.  
This mutant provided a tool to test if root-hair calcium spiking is required for 
nodulation, independently of infection thread growth. Calcium spiking was tested in root 
hair cells of the symrk-14 mutant using microinjected Oregon Green. In order to maximize 
nodulation, the experiments were carried out in the high nodulation background har1-1. 
Surprisingly, as shown in Figure 5.3, 5.4 and in Table 5.1, the symrk-14 mutant completely 
failed to show calcium spiking. None of the 38 root hair cells tested in 16 plants of the 
symrk-14/har1-1 mutant were positive for calcium spiking although these mutants 
formed 25.5 nodules per plant 21 days post inoculation. The single har1-1 mutant was 
used as a positive control; this mutant formed 52.2 nodules per plant 21 day post 
inoculation (Figure 5.2 and Table 5.1) and was positive for induction of Nod factor-
induced calcium spiking: seven of eight root hair cells tested in five different plants 
displayed calcium spiking (Figure 5.3, 5.4 and Table 5.1). The null mutant symrk-13/har1-
1, which is completely defective for nodulation, was used as a negative control. As 
expected, this allele blocked calcium spiking. None out of 8 root hair cells showed calcium 
spiking (6 plants tested, Figure 5.3, 5.4 and Table 5.1).  
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
Analysis of the original traces of calcium level recorded in the symrk-14/har1-1 
mutant revealed that about one third of the traces had a high variation in fluorescence 
(calcium) background observed also in the absence of Nod factor (Figure 5.4 and Table 
5.1). Ten of 38 root hair cells showed a noisy background while the remaining 28 root 
hair cells tested had quiet traces (Figure 5.4 and Table 5.1). The traces represent ratios of 
Oregon green (calcium-sensitive dye) and Texas red (calcium-insensitive dye) both co-
injected in root hair cells, so there seem to be real changes occurring in calcium levels in 
some cells (the noisy ones), but not what we would call calcium spiking. Calcium spiking is 
a specific type of signalling event characterised by regular oscillations that form spikes. 
The spike refers to the shape of the calcium elevation, a very sudden increase in calcium 
followed by a more gradual decline. Secondly, calcium spiking consist in repetitive 
calcium oscillations which last for several hours, the repetitive nature of these oscillations 
and their regular period represent clear marks of calcium spiking. A third feature is the 
presence of a lag time between addition of bacteria or Nod factor and initiation of 
calcium spiking. The calcium noise observed in the L. japonicus symrk-14/har1-1 root 
hair cells did not exhibit any of these three hallmarks of calcium spiking (Figure 5.4). 
 Microinjection of symrk-14/har1-1 root hairs was more difficult compared to 
wild-type, symrk-13/har1-1, or har-1 mutants, indicating an enhanced touch response of 
this mutant. Cells tended to burst very easily when the needle was taken away from the 
root hair cell after an injection. For this reason a more delicate microinjection and finer 
needle were made in order to microinject root hair cells without damage. Only the root 
hair cells showing good cytoplasmic streaming were selected for calcium analysis. Thus, 
all the 38 cells tested were carefully selected cells showing active cytoplasmic streaming. 
The symrk-13/har1-1 and har1-1 mutants were similar to wild type in terms of these 
observations (noise, bursting, injectability). Even considering the noisy traces of symrk-14 
mutant, none of the root hairs tested showed activation of calcium spiking after Nod 
factor treatment.  
Microinjection of root hairs has the disadvantage that only a limited number of 
cells can be analysed. To analyse a larger number of cells, the nuclear-targeted cameleon 
(NupYC2.1) (Sieberer et al., 2009) was introduced into wild-type Gifu, symRK-14 and 
symRK-14 /har1-1 roots via Agrobacterium rhizogenes-mediated transformation. Root 
hairs with high fluorescence levels in root cell nuclei were selected (Figure 5.5). In the 
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
wild-type, regular calcium spiking was observed in 63 out of 285 epidermal cells 
examined (Figure 5.6a). In addition, a few calcium spikes, as illustrated in Figure 5.6b, 
were also detected in 16 cells. The symRK-14 mutant has a similar nodulation phenotype 
to that observed with the symRK-14 /har1-1 mutant. Inoculation with M. loti resulted in 
the formation of fewer nodules but more nodule primordia than wild-type plants and no 
infection threads were formed (S. Kosuta, personal communication). When transgenic 
roots of the symRK-14 mutant were analysed for calcium spiking using Nup-YC2.1, only 2 
cells (out of 376) showed clear calcium spiking (Figure 5.6c) and, in addition, a few 
calcium spikes, as shown in Figure 5.6d, were observed in 10 cells. Few calcium spikes 
were also observed in 3 of 115 cells in the symRK-14 /har1-1 mutant (Figure 5.6e). The 
occasional calcium spiking was previously reported with one of the weak alleles (dmi2-2) 
of orthologue gene in M. truncatula (Wais et al., 2000).  
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
Figure kindly given by Sonja Kosuta, personal communication. 
Figure 5.2. Nodulation phenotype of the L. japonicus har1-1 and symrk-14/har1-1  
(S. Kosuta, personal communication). 
A. Histograms of nodule primordia and nodule number formed on har1-1 and symrk-
14/har1-1 21 days after inoculation with M. loti. B. Histograms of total nodulation 
events (nodules plus nodule primordia) in har1-1 and symrk-14/har1-1 (A), 21 days 
after inoculation with M. loti. Error bars represent Standard Deviation. 
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
Figure 5.3. Changes in cytoplasmic calcium concentration in mutants of L. japonicus after 
the addition of Nod factor (100 nM).  
Data are presented as derivative traces representing the change in fluorescence intensity 
of Oregon Green/Texas Red from one point to the next (xn+1
xn). The traces show 
representative cells for the three mutants of L. japonicus; har1-1 (A), har1-1/symrk-13 (B) 
and har1-1/symrk-14 (C and D).  
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
Figure 5.4. Original traces showing changes in cytoplasmic calcium concentration in 
mutants of L. japonicus after the addition of 100 nM Nod factor.  
Data present the original traces of the mutants of L. japonicus root hair cells har1-1 (A), 
har1-1/symrk-13 (B) and har1-1/symrk-14 (C and D) from Figure 5.3. 
Table 5.1. Number of nodules formed per plant per each mutant 21 day post inoculation 
(S. Kosuta, personal communication) and number of root hair cells positive for calcium 
spiking/total number of root hairs tested in L. japonicus mutants. A minimum of three 
plants for each mutant were tested for calcium spiking experiments 
Figure 5.5. Root hair cells 
Figure 5.6. Nuclear calcium oscillation in response to 
japonicus wild type 
NupYC2.1 
Changes in nuclear calcium were recorded following the addition of 100 nM Nod factor 
(vertical line) in L. japonicus
14/har1-1 (e) epidermal cells. The ratio YFP/CFP was plotted against time. Images were 
taken at 5 seconds intervals for > 30 minutes. The traces show representative cells 
positive for calcium spiking (a and c) and representative cells showing a few spikes (b, d
and e). A minimun of 10 roots from 10 different wt and 
tested. Four roots from three different 
of epidermal cells positive for calcium oscillation divided by the total number of ce
tested and the relative percentage is indicated next to each trace. 
Root hair cells of wild-type L. japonicus expressing cameleon NupYC2.1
Nuclear calcium oscillation in response to M. loti Nod factor monitored in 
 and symRK-14 and symRK-14/har1-1 roots expressing cameleon 
Changes in nuclear calcium were recorded following the addition of 100 nM Nod factor 
L. japonicus wild type Gifu (a and b), symRK-14
(e) epidermal cells. The ratio YFP/CFP was plotted against time. Images were 
taken at 5 seconds intervals for > 30 minutes. The traces show representative cells 
positive for calcium spiking (a and c) and representative cells showing a few spikes (b, d
and e). A minimun of 10 roots from 10 different wt and symRK
tested. Four roots from three different symRK-14/har1-1 plants were tested. The number 
of epidermal cells positive for calcium oscillation divided by the total number of ce
tested and the relative percentage is indicated next to each trace. 
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
expressing cameleon NupYC2.1.  
Nod factor monitored in L. 
roots expressing cameleon 
Changes in nuclear calcium were recorded following the addition of 100 nM Nod factor 
14 (c and d) and symRK-
(e) epidermal cells. The ratio YFP/CFP was plotted against time. Images were 
taken at 5 seconds intervals for > 30 minutes. The traces show representative cells 
positive for calcium spiking (a and c) and representative cells showing a few spikes (b, d 
symRK-14 mutant plants were 
plants were tested. The number 
of epidermal cells positive for calcium oscillation divided by the total number of cells 
tested and the relative percentage is indicated next to each trace.  
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
Discussion 
Mutational analysis has identified several genes required for both calcium spiking 
and nodule formation in the Nod factor signalling pathway and this led to the idea that 
calcium spiking plays a central role in nodule formation. However, three Lotus japonicus 
mutants, nup85 nup133 and nena, form nodules despite being impaired in Nod-factor-
induced calcium spiking. Microinjection of symrk-14/har1-1 root hair cells with Oregon 
Green/Texas Red revealed that although the symrk-14/har1-1 mutant forms nodules to 
the same extent as wild-type, calcium spiking was not induced after addition of Nod 
factor. One explanation was that only a small proportion of root hair cells are capable of 
inducing calcium spiking. This would have been similar to what was proposed for the 
nup85 and nup133 mutants which were nodulated but showed no calcium spiking. 
Microinjection of L. japonicus root hairs does not lend itself to identification of rare cells 
that might induce calcium spiking. Hence, either a lack of requirement for calcium spiking 
or calcium spiking induced occasionally in some cells, possibly among cell types where 
root-hair calcium measurements are not possible using the microinjection approach, 
could be responsible for the occasional infection and nodulation events found with these 
mutants. In addition, the possibility that calcium spiking occurs in other cells or other cell 
types (e.g. root epidermal not-hairs cells, cortical cells developing into root hair cells) 
could not be excluded.  
To analyse a larger number of cells, and to analyse different types of epidermal 
cells (e.g. root epidermal not-hairs cells and old root hair) the nuclear-targeted cameleon 
(NupYC2.1) (Sieberer et al., 2009) was introduced into wild-type Gifu, symRK-14 and 
symRK-14/har1-1 roots via Agrobacterium rhizogenes-mediated transformation. This 
analysis revealed occasional Nod-factor-induced calcium spiking in the symRK-14 mutant. 
Calcium spiking was observed in two of nearly 400 cells in the symrk-14 mutant 
corresponding to about a fortyfold reduction compared with wild-type plants. These 
results suggest that in roots containing thousands of cells, tens of cells may be able to 
spike, activate CCAMK and nodule organogenesis in the cortex. Thus, calcium spiking 
occasionally induced in few root hair cells could explain the nodule organogenesis events 
observed in the symRK-14 mutant. No clear calcium spiking was observed in the symrk-
14/har1-1 with 3 of 115 cells showing a few spikes. The total number of root hair cells 
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
tested with this mutant was considerably lower than the total number of root hair cells 
tested in the symRK-14 mutant. Therefore it is possible that by doubling the number of 
cells tested  cells positive for calcium spiking could be found.  
Using transgenic L. japonicus wild-type plants expressing NupYC2.1, 22% of the 
cells tested responded to 100 nm Nod factor with calcium spiking. When the same 
concentration of Nod factor was added to microinjected root hair cells of L. japonicus 
wild-type plants, 87% cells were positive for spiking. The root hairs selected for 
microinjection of L. japonicus were typically young with an active cytoplasm streaming 
and were close to the tip of the seedlings. Root hair cells imaged using NupYC2.1 included 
a heterogeneous group of long and short root hairs, and non-root hair epidermal cells. I 
considered the possibilities that 1. Non-root hair epidermal cells might be less responsive 
to Nod factor for calcium spiking than root hair cell and 2. That young root hair cells with 
active cytoarchitecture might be more responsive to Nod factor for calcium spiking than 
root hair cells not showing an active cytoarchitecture. Neverthess I found that 1. by only 
considering root hair cells (and not not-root hair epidermal cells), the percentage of cells 
positive for spiking was 19.5% and 2. That even by considering only those root hair cells 
with active cytoarchitecture (by selecting the root hairs with the nucleus in close 
proximity to the tip) 25.7% of cells were positive for spiking. Thus, the type of cells did 
not seem to be a determining factor in the reduction of cell positive for calcium spiking. A 
considerable difference between the two techniques was the age of the plant tested. 
Calcium imaging using NupYC2.1 was performed in transgenic plants grown on plate for 
at least 21 days, while 2 days old seedling were used for microinjection. This difference 
together with the use of hairy roots rather than seedling roots might have had an 
impact in the responsiveness of root hair cells to Nod factor. 
Microinjection experiments revealed that root hair cells of the symrk-14/har1-1 
were more sensitive to touch. This is consistent with the Esseling et al. (2004) observation 
that DMI2 alleles in M. truncatula, M. sativa and L. japonicus are hypersensitive to touch. 
At this regard, interestingly, it has been proposed that involvement of SYMRK in 
reduction of touch sensitivity of root hairs (Esseling et al., 2004) may rely on the N-
terminal extracellular domain (Markmann et al., 2008) where the SYMRK-14 mutation 
occur. This could easily explain the particular hypersensitivity to touch of the symrk-14 
mutant. One could argue that the microinjection is damaging the root hair so much that 
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
they are unable to spike. However, given the hypersensitive to touch of the symrk-
14/har1-1 root hair cells, a more delicate microinjection with finer needles was 
performed in order to not damage the symrk-14/har1-1 root hair cells. Only 
microinjected cells showing active cytoplasmic streaming were selected for calcium 
analysis. Therefore, in all cells tested for spiking no cell damage was observed which 
could have prevented cells to spike.  
Analysis of calcium levels with microinjection of Oregon Green/Texas red also 
shows that symrk-14/har1-1 root hair cells had a high degree of background noise. The 
'noise' was not dissimilar to that which Wais et al. (2000) noted in some of the cells 
carrying a weak allele of the M. truncatula ortholog of SYMRK, DMI2. dmi2-2 (P1) is a 
weak allele of DMI2 and the mutant shows some initiation of nodule primordia and some 
mycorrhizal invasion. P1 also had noisy calcium that looks similar to symrk-14/har1-1, 
except that it sometimes (20%) showed spiking. Occasional low-amplitude calcium 
increases before addition of Nod factor was also observed in M. truncatula dmi2-1 and 
dmi2-3 mutants (Shaw and Long, 2003). However, it was concluded that the dmi2 mutant 
was blocked for calcium spiking. It is possible that, in the noisy mutants symrk-14 and 
dmi2, the noise itself is sufficient to trigger nodule morphogenesis, however fluctuations 
in basal calcium are present before Nod factor addition either in the symrk-14/har1-1 
mutant and in the M. truncatula DMI2 alleles (Wais et al., 2000; Shaw and Long, 2003). 
Moreover, if variable calcium levels were sufficient to trigger nodule morphogenesis, we 
would expect to see some spontaneous nodulation in symrk-14/har1-1 mutant, but this is 
not the case. When nuclear calcium concentrations were monitored with NupYC2.1, 
noisy calcium levels were not observed. Given the touch-sensitivity of the symrk 
mutant, it is possible that the stress caused by the microinjection of the root hair cells 
altered the resting calcium levels generating a noisy calcium signature. An alternative 
explanation is that the noise background observed with microinjection derived by calcium 
fluctuations in the cytoplasm, which can not be detected by nuclear-targeted YC 2.1.  
An interpretation of the results showing that nodule morphogenesis occurs with 
few root hair calcium spiking could be that calcium spiking is not essential for signalling in 
nodulation. However, this interpretation is inconsistent with several other pieces of data 
suggesting the opposite. The observation that antagonists that block calcium spiking also 
block expression of genes downstream in the Nod factor signalling pathway and the 
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
observation that mutations that block calcium spiking also block all signalling events 
downstream of calcium spiking clearly suggest that calcium spiking plays an important 
role in Nod factor signalling. It will be of interest to determine whether the symrk-
14/har1-1 is normal for Nod factor induction of early nodulin genes, such as NIN, 
downstream of calcium spiking. 
One possibility is that SYMRK is required for the integrity of root hairs, but has less 
of a requirement in other cells. In this way, a partially functional SYMRK-14 allele might 
cause impairment of calcium spiking in root hairs (possibly even as an indirect effect) but 
not in other cell types. If this occurred it might be possible to induce nodule 
morphogenesis but essentially no infections. There are various modifications of such a 
model; for example cells other than root hairs might express a protein that helps stabilise 
the SYMRK protein, or lack a protease so it is more degraded in root hairs. However, 
further experiments have to be done in order to test such a hypothesis. 
Interestingly, all mutants lacking calcium spiking also lack infection threads. It is 
still not known how infection thread growth is regulated during signalling. The mutant 
symrk-14/har1-1 is very strongly defective for infection thread formation. However, 
interestingly, bacteria do get in as intercellular infection threads have been observed 
between infected cortical cells (S. Kosuta, personal communication). The lack of 
intracellular infection threads and calcium spiking in the symrk-14 root hair cells suggests 
that calcium spiking is necessary for root hair infection. Therefore, I postulate that Nod 
factor signalling, including calcium spiking, is required each time the infection thread 
enters a new cell. Because in har1-1 symRK-14 calcium spiking is absent in root hair cells, 
infection threads can not start in these cells. Nevertheless, uncolonised nodule primordia 
with patches of bacteria at the surface observed in the symrk-14/har1-1 mutant suggest 
that the bacteria are entering by alternative means. Infection threads are by definition 
intracellular. Although intercellular infection may occur (i.e. crack entry), in the symrk-
14/har1-1 and symrk-14 mutants, the bacteria do not enter the epidermis by way of an 
infection thread. What we see in the symrk-14/har1-1, symrk-14 and other infection 
mutants, is that once the bacteria get to the cortex, they are able to enter the cells, 
sometimes forming infection threads in the cortex. This suggests two possibilities: 1. that 
entry requirements in the cortex may be less stringent than for epidermal cells and may 
not require calcium spiking, and/or 2. that the requirement for calcium spiking in cortical 
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
cells may be less stringent than in epidermal cells. We cant role out the possibility that 
calcium spiking occurs in cortical cells where it could triggers infection thread formation 
among these cells. 
I considered the possibility that the lack of infection thread formation in symrk-14 
might be a result of the heightened touch-sensitivity described by Esseling et al. (2004). 
Esseling et al. (2004) show that dmi2 root hairs curl in response to Nod factor, but stop 
when the tip meets the shank of the root hair, preventing a true shepherd's crook from 
forming. In symrk-14, the root hairs curl excessively (often twice around e.g. 720 
degrees), which would not be possible if the root hairs stopped when the tip touched the 
shank. Despite the double curl, the bacteria aren't properly entrapped, which may be why 
infection threads are so rare in this mutant. In this case, SYMRK may have a specific role 
in microcolony formation, as was proposed for hcl (another excessive root hair curling 
mutant) (Catoira et al., 2001; Smit et al., 2007). The data indicating that symbiotic entry 
of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi is also blocked in the symrk-14 mutant suggests a specific 
role of SYMRK in intracellular accommodation of symbiotic microbes. 
Based on these observations, I propose a model with a dual pathway downstream 
of the initial Nod factor perception at epidermal cells. Nod factor perceptions by specific 
receptors would trigger calcium spiking in root hair cells which is essential for formation 
of intracellular infection thread. In parallel, Nod factor perception activates secondary 
signals that are essential for outer cortex colonisation. Nod factor effect in cortical cells 
are generated from a distance because it is very unlikely that Nod factor moves through 
symplastic or apoplastic as they are immobilized in the plant cell walls (Goedhart et al., 
2000). Thus, Nod factor probably generates secondary signals that, together with signals 
coming from the epidermis, drive the development of nodules. Plausible mediators of 
these primary cortical invasion events are cytokinins and auxin. There is increasing 
evidence showing that cytokinins and auxin play important role in the activation of 
cortical responses. It has been known for decades that auxin transport inhibitors can 
induce the formation of pseudonodules and the expression of ENOD40, a gene associated 
with nodule primordia (Hirsch et al., 1989; Hirsch and Fang, 1994; Fang and Hirsch, 1998; 
Mathesius et al., 2000). Moreover, rhizobia, or even to E. coli transformed in order to be 
able to make transzeatine (a cytokinin) can activate nodulations in legumes (Cooper and 
Long, 1994). Furthermore, a cytokinin-responsive promoter has been found to be induced 
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
during the development of nodule meristem. In addition, genetic studies in L. japonicus 
and M. truncatula have highlighted the crucial role of cytokinin in nodulation. Mutation in 
a Lotus histidine kinase (LHK1) which functions as a cytokinin receptor (Tirichine et al., 
2007) leads to spontaneous nodulation, whereas loss-of-function mutation in LHK1 
(Murray et al., 2007) or RNAi-mediate downregulation of its ortholog in M. truncatula 
(Gonzalez-Rizzo et al., 2006) causes a dramatic reduction in nodule formation. lhk1 
mutants are normal for the initiation of bacterial infection, but the are unable to form 
nodule primordia (Murray et al., 2007). This, together with our results showing that the 
symrk-14/har1-1 mutant induces nodule primordia without epidermal bacterial infection, 
indicates that the ability to form nodule primordia is not essential for bacterial infection. 
SYMRK could be a branch point in the signalling leading to epidermal versus cortical 
processes. Recognition by the extracellular domain of some unknown rhizobial signals 
might be essential for the activation of epidermal responses such as a proper root hair 
deformation, calcium spiking and bacterial infection whereas cortical responses are 
maybe less stringent for this external interaction. In this way, a mutation in the 
extracellular GDPC domain, such as the SYMRK14 mutation, would prevent activation of 
epidermal responses whereas cortical responses would be triggered. 
Plant leucine-rich repeat-receptor like kinases (LRR-RLKs) connect the plant cell to 
the surrounding environment; outside stimuli are perceived by the extracellular LRR 
domain and are converted into cellular responses by the intracellular kinase. SYMRK is a 
LRR-RLK required for symbiotic association of legumes with nitrogen-fixing rhizobia and 
phosphate-acquiring arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. Recently, it has been shown that 
SYMRK is also required for actinorhizal symbiosis in the tree Casuarina glauca (Gherbi et 
al., 2008) and in the cucurbit Datisca glomerata with actinobacteria of the genus Frankia, 
revealing a common genetic basis for the forms of plant root endosymbiois (Markmann et 
al., 2008). RNAi-mediated silencing of SYMRK blocked nodulation and arbuscular 
mycorrhizal symbiois in Casuarina glauca and in Datisca glomerata. These reports also 
show that CgSYMRK could restore root endosymbiois in Lotus symrk mutants (Gherbi et 
al., 2008). Introduction of SYMRK from rice and tomato, containing only two LRR 
domains, was sufficient to restore arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis but not nodulation in 
Lotus symrk mutant (Markmann et al., 2008). These results, thus, revealed that SYMRK is 
an essential component of the genetic basis for both plant-fungal and plant-bacterial 
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
endosymbiois and is conserved between legumes and actinorhiza-forming plants (Gherbi 
et al., 2008). 
Here, I presented a new SYMRK allele with a novel symbiotic phenotype: normal 
nodulation and blocked or aborted rhizobial and mycorrhizal infection. The SYMRK-14 
mutation causes a single amino acid change, P to T, in the GDPC motif just upstream of 
the LRR region which is thought to be important for protein-protein interactions. 
Phylogenetic analysis indicated that the GDPC motif is highly-conserved in LRR-RLKs of 
evolutionarily-divergent land plants, including the moss Physcomitrella patens and the 
liverwort Marchantia polymorpha, but is absent from those of more distant plant 
relatives such as green and brown algae, and volvox (Sonja Kosuta, personal 
communication). The requirement of the GDPC motif for root endosymbiosis and the fact 
that the mycorrhizal symbiosis coincides with the appearance of land plants (Wilkinson, 
2001), indicate that the GDPC motif may have been vital for the evolution of both 
arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis and the transition of plants to a terrestrial lifestyle 
(Sonja Kosuta, personal communication).  
Although studies (Esseling et al., 2004; Capoen et al., 2005; Gherbi et al., 2008; 
Markmann et al., 2008) have recently given new insight into the function of SYMRK, it 
remains unclear what signal is perceived by the extracellular domain of SYMRK. The 
ability of L. japonicus SYMRK to restore nodulation of Medicago with S. meliloti indicates 
that SYMRK is not directly involved in determining the legume-rhizobium specificity 
(Markmann et al., 2008). An attractive possibility is the proposed involvement of SYMRK 
in processes such as reduction of touch sensitivity of root hairs (Esseling et al., 2004). In 
this regard, it is interestingly to note that it has been proposed that the involvement of 
SYMRK in reduction of touch sensitivity of root hairs may rely on the N-terminal 
extracellular domain of SYMRK (Markmann et al., 2008) and this is the region where the 
SYMRK14 mutation occurs. Such a function could explain why this protein is required, and 
has been selected, for the establishment of endosymbiois with arbuscular mycorrhizal 
fungi, rhizobia and actinorhiza bacteria. Although very different from each other, 
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi, rhizobia and actinorhiza bacteria all have to overcome the 
touch sensitivity of root hair cells to successfully penetrate and infect cortical cells.  
In summary, symrk14 data indicate that residual calcium spiking in the epidermis 
may be sufficient to induce nodule organogenesis and also supports the corollary, that 
CHAPTER 5. SYMRK-14 
infection threads in the epidermis are associated with calcium spiking. The study of 
nodulation-defective mutants has shown that it is possible to separate epidermal 
responses form cortical responses: bacterial infection can take place in the absence of 
nodule organogenesis (Murray et al., 2007), and conversely nodule organogenesis can be 
accomplished without of bacterial infection (Gleason et al., 2006; Tirichine et al., 2006b). 
Here, an additional example where nodule morphogenesis can form without bacterial 
infection is shown. Coming back to the original question: is calcium spiking in root hairs 
really a good indicator of nodule morphogenesis? These results suggest that even when 
calcium spiking is induced in a small number of epidermal cells nodule morphogenesis 
can be initiated. The lack of infection threads and calcium spiking in the symrk-14 and 
symRK-14/har1-1 mutant suggests that calcium spiking in the epidermis is more closely 
associated with induction of infection rather than with cortical cell division. It will be now 
essential to understand how the Nod factor-signalling pathway is transduced from the 
epidermal to the cortical cells to discover the mechanism that underpins the coordination 
of nodule morphogenesis with rhizobial infection in legumes. 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
CHAPTER 6 
 Lectin-Nucleotide Phosphohydrolase (LNP) Is a New 
Component Required for Nod-Factor Signalling in 
Lotus japonicus 
Introduction 
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is not only an energy source but also a signalling 
molecule (Roux and Steinebrunner, 2007; Liu et al., 2008). Two groups of enzymes have 
the ability to hydrolyze ATP: ATPases and apyrases. There are substantial differences 
among these enzymes. The ATPases have high substrate specificity and hydrolyze ATP to 
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and orthophosphate. They use the energy stored in ATP for 
various processes including metabolism, protein phosphorylation and ion transport. In 
contrast, apyrases (nucleotide phosphohydrolases [NTPases]) have low substrate 
specificity and are insensitive to ATPase inhibitors. Apyrases are highly active, nonenergy-
coupled enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of different nucleoside triphosphates (NTPs) 
and nucleoside diphosphates yielding nucleoside-monophosphates and orthophosphates 
(Komoszynski and Wojtczak, 1996).  
Apyrases can be dived into two major categories: ecto-apyrases and endo-
apyrases. Ecto-apyrases have an extracellular catalytic domain whereas endo-apyrases 
have an intracellular catalytic domain (Komoszynski and Wojtczak, 1996). Apyrases are 
found in all prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms (Steinebrunner et al., 2003).  For 
instance, in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) two endo-apyrase, encoded by the GDA1 
and YND1 genes, mediate the turnover of GTP to GMP and are required for the N- and O- 
glycosylation of proteins in the Golgi lumen (Abeijon et al., 1993; Gao et al., 1999). In 
animals, several studies have highlighted the important regulatory roles of apyrases in 
the control of signalling events, such as  neurotransmission (Edwards et al., 1992; 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
Komoszynski and Wojtczak, 1996; Nedeljkovic et al., 2005), blood platelet aggregation 
(Marcus and Safier, 1993), and ATP-mediated immunoresponses (Idzko et al., 2007).  
Interestingly, ecto-apyrases function in animals in neurotransmission at the 
synaptic junction. In the nervous system ATP acts as an excitatory neurotransmitter 
(Burnstock, 2007). In many synaptic contacts formed in the in central nervous system, 
ATP is released from neurons where it interacts with P2 purinoreceptors (Figure 6.1). 
These receptors have a high affinity for ATP and ADP, but a much lower affinity for AMP. 
Extracellular ATP is rapidly hydrolysed by the conjugated action of the nucleotidases: 
Apyrase and ATPase. These enzymes have recently been purified and characterised 
(Kukulski and Komoszynski, 2003). Whereas ATPase catalyses the hydrolysis of ATP to 
ADP (Heine et al., 1999), apyrases hydrolyse ATP and ADP equally well directly to 
adenosine monophosphate (AMP). Since AMP has much lower affinity for the P2 
purinoreceptors, the receptor stimulation is broken. Subsequently, 5-nucleotidase, an 
enzyme abundant in the synaptic space, hydrolyzes AMP to adenosine (Todorov et al., 
1997). Adenosine is a more potent neurotransmitter and neuromodulator than ATP, it 
penetrates cell membranes where it is phosphorylated, restoring the cellular ATP pool. 
Adenosine also has the effect of stimulating adenyl cyclase, causing an increase in the 
secondary messenger cyclic AMP (cAMP) (Komoszynski and Wojtczak, 1996). Thus, 
apyrases have the role of reducing one signal (ATP) contributing to the generation of an 
alternative signal (adenosine), consequently controlling the levels of adenine nucleotides, 
and the duration and extent of their respective receptor activation. 
In plants, apyrases have been implicated in numerous different systems. For 
example, it has been shown that apyrases from pea are involved in plant phosphate 
nutrition (Thomas et al., 1999). A yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) phosphate-transport 
mutant was complemented by an ecto-apyrase from pea (Pisum sativum) and the 
overexpression of this gene significantly increased the amount of phosphate uptake 
(Thomas et al., 1999). These transgenic lines also displayed higher resistance to toxins 
suggesting an additional role of apyrase in toxin resistance (Thomas et al., 2000). 
Moreover, the finding that  the same pea apyrase copurified with the cytoskeleton led to 
the hypothesis that apyrase plays a role in mRNA transport along the cytoskeleton 
(Shibata et al., 1999). It is also know that Calmodulin and Casein Kinase II regulates a pea 
nuclear endo-apyrase (Hsieh et al., 2000).  Riewe at al. (2008) have shown that a potato-
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
specific apyrase is localised to the apoplast and is involved in gene expression, growth 
and development (Riewe et al., 2008). In Arabidopsis, single T-DNA knockout mutants of 
two ecto-apyrase genes (AtAPY1 or AtAPY2) did not exhibit a discernible phenotype, 
while the double mutant displayed complete inhibition of pollen germination, revealing a 
role of apyrase in the sexual reproduction of plants (Steinebrunner et al., 2003; Wolf et 
al., 2007).  
Ecto-apyrases were first implicated to have a role in nodulation when a unique 
lectin (Lectin-nucleotide phosphohydrolase, LNP), originally isolated from the legume 
root Dolichos biflorus (Quinn and Etzler, 1987), was shown to be an apyrase and to bind 
Nod factor (Etzler et al., 1999). Preincubation of LNP with Nod factors that are recognised 
by its carbohydrate-binding site resulted in an increase in the Vmax of this enzyme 
showing that Nod factor binding increased the catalytic activity of the apyrase (Etzler et 
al., 1999). Subsequent studies showed that Db-LNP localises predominately in the root 
hair cell surface of young roots and that Db-LNP redistributes to the tips of the root hair 
cells after exposure to Nod factor (Kalsi and Etzler, 2000). Root hair cells are known to be 
receptive to Nod factor and so this finding is consistent with a role for Db-LNP in Nod 
factor perception. Further evidence for Db-LNP being involved in nodulation comes from 
studies of roots treated with antiserum against Db-LNP that caused nodulation and root 
hair deformation to be inhibited (Etzler et al., 1999).  
The finding that LNP is involved in nodulation in D. biflorus has stimulated recent 
research on this protein in legumes and now cloned genes and sequences are available 
from alfalfa (Medicago sativa), Medicago truncatula, Lotus japonicus, soybean (Glycine 
soya), and pea (Pisum sativum) (Roberts et al., 1999; Day et al., 2000; Cohn et al., 2001; 
Shibata et al., 2001). Phylogenetic analysis revealed that these sequences fall into the 
legume-specific clade containing Db-LNP and another clade that contains two Arabidopsis 
apyrase-like proteins and a second apyrase identified in D. biflorus, Db-apyrase-2 (Roberts 
et al., 1999) (Figure 6.2.). Roberts et al. (1999) have shown that the legume-specific 
alfalfa and pea proteins have a carbohydrate binding activity and, hence, can be referred 
to as LNPs. It has been proposed that the nodulation-implicated apyrase came into being 
following a gene duplication event (Roberts et al., 1999). 
In M. truncatula the identification of apyrases and the analysis of their putative 
role in nodulation are shown by two separate reports which gave contradictory results. 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
Cohn et al. (2001) identified four putative apyrase genes MTAPY1, 2, 3 and 4; two of 
which (MTAPY1 and MTAPY4) are inducible within 3 to 6 hours after inoculatation with 
Sinorhizobium meliloti, while mRNA levels of MTAPY2 and MTAPY3 remained unaffected 
by rhizobial inoculation. MTAPY1 was not expressed in roots of two symbiotic mutants 
dmi1 and pdl even after inoculation with S. meliloti suggesting a role for apyrases early in 
nodulation (Cohn et al., 2001).  Navarro-Gochicoa et al. (2003) characterised six apyrase-
like genes in M. truncatula. Comparison with the M. truncatula sequence revealed that 
two of the clones corresponded to MTAPY2 and MTAPY4 (Cohn et al., 2001), two other 
clones represented new genes, whereas the remaining two clones were identical in either 
the 5 or 3 moiety to MTAPY1. Inspection of the cluster containing MTAPY1 in the TIGR 
M. truncatula Gene Index database (Quackenbush et al., 2001) suggested that MTAPY1 
cDNA originally identified by Cohn at al. (2001) probably represents a chimera produced 
during the 3- and 5 RACE used to obtain this clone. Given the clear separation of the M. 
truncatula genes and their encoded proteins into two phylogenetic classes, Mt-apyrase 
genes were renamed as genes APY1 (the legume-specific class) and genes APY2  (legume-
non specific class). APY1 is multigene family which include MtAPY1;1 (corresponding to 3 
moiety of MTAPY1), MtAPY1;2 (new gene), MtAPY1;3 (corresponding to 5 moiety of 
MTAPY1 and 3of MTAPY3), MtAPY1;4 (corresponding to Mtapy4) and MtAPY1;5 (new 
gene) (Navarro-Gochicoa et al., 2003). In contrast to what was observed by Cohn et al. 
(2001), Navarro-Gochicoa et al. (2003) saw a transient induction of the APY1 mRNA in 
wild type after inoculation with S. meliloti nodA mutant (incapable of forming symbiosis), 
as well as in the M. truncatula nodulation defective mutant, dmi1. Analysis of induction 
of apyrase mRNA at 6 hours in other symbiotic mutants (dmi2, dmi3, hcl and nsp) did not 
exhibit any clear differences in the expression of the apyrase genes in any of the 
symbiotic mutants. All together the results of this second report indicate that APY1 genes 
are not induced specifically by rhizobia or rhizobial Nod factor. 
Soybean also contains at least two apyrases: an endo-apyrase found in the Golgi 
apparatus, GS50; and an ectoapryase localised in the plasma membrane, GS52 (Day et al., 
2000). When applied to roots, antibodies against GS52 blocked nodulation, while those 
against GS50 had no effect. RT-PCR supports the hypothesis that only GS52 is important 
in nodulation, as this gene, but not GS50, is up-regulated after treatment with the 
bacterial symbiont (Day et al., 2000). Recent work has shown that silencing GS52 reduced 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
nodulation, and, more interestingly, the addition of ADP to silenced roots restored the 
wild type phenotype (Govindarajulu et al., 2009). When the soybean GS52 gene is 
expressed in L. japonicus the frequency of infection events increases and the number of 
nodules doubles (McAlvin and Stacey, 2005). Perhaps not surprisingly, based on these 
observations, GS52 is orthologous to the LNP in the D. biflorus and Pisum sativum, 
whereas GS50 belongs to the subfamily of apyrase which includes apyrases from 
Arabidopsis thaliana and the apyrase-2 from D. biflorus (Day et al., 2000). 
This chapter examines the role of a L. japonicus apyrase that shows homology to 
DbLNP. Our collaborators (Roberts NJ, Kalsi G., Rose A., Stiller J., Gresshoff P. and Etzler 
M.) have silenced LjLNP using antisense technology  these plants are unable to form 
nodules. Clearly, LNP is key to nodulation, the observation that DbLNP binds Nod factor 
suggests that LNP is involved in the Nod factor signalling pathway, however evidence of 
LNP being actually required for Nod factor signalling has not yet been found. Here, we 
prove that LNP is indeed a component of the Nod factor signal transduction pathway, 
being essential for Nod factor-induced calcium spiking and calcium influx, and for 
associated downstream gene induction. 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
Figure 6.1. Nucleotide reaction pathway inside the synaptic space during 
neurotransmission process.  
Hydrolysis of receptor-bound ATP, catalysed by apyrase, release the P2 receptor and 
AMP. 5-nucleotidase further hydrolyze AMP producing Adenosine. Adenosine penetrates 
into the cells and activates Adenosine cyclase realising cAMP. Figure modified from 
Komoszynski and Wojtczak (1996). 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
 Image taken from Navarro-Gochicoa et al., (2003). 
Figure 6.2. Phylogenetic tree of various apyrase-related proteins of M. truncatula 
(MtAPY), Arabidopsis (At), potato (St), soybean (Gs), D.biflorus (Db), pea (Ps), L. 
japonicus (Lj), chicken, human, bovine, mouse, and yeast. Image taken from 
Navarro-Gochicoa et al., (2003). 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
Results 
Antisense Suppression of LNP Expression Results in a Nod- and 
Myc- Phenotype (Roberts et al., Personal Communication) 
To investigate the role of LNP in L. japonicus during nodulation, our collaborators 
chose to induce post-transcriptional silencing of LNP using an antisense gene construct 
driven by the constitutive 35S promoter. Using Agrobacterium tumefaciens and a pBIN19 
binary plasmid vector (Bevan, 1984), L. japonicus were transformed with a constructs 
carrying the 5 (nucleotides 1-719) and 3 (nucleotides 536-1383) cDNA, inserted in 
antisense orientations between the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter and 
terminator sequence.  
Immunoblotting by Roberts et al. (personal communication) showed the depletion 
of LNP in uninoculated 8-day old roots from LNP three of the transformed antisense lines, 
named 5D, 5R and 3O (generated using the 5 or 3 constructs). The three LNP 
transformed antisense lines had a substantially reduced level of immunoreactive 
material. In comparison, the vector control had approximately wild type levels of LNP 
(Figure 6.3A).  
Previously it has been shown that LNP is present in the surface of epidermal cells 
and root hairs (Etzler et al., 1999). To examine the specific effect of LNP antisense 
suppression on the level of LNP on surface, our collaborators employed whole mount 
confocal immunofluorescence microscopy. This analysis revealed that the surface of the 
roots of lines 5D, 5R and 3O lines had no detectable LNP in comparison to the wild type 
and vector control antisense line (Figure 6.3 B-M). The agreement of the results obtained 
by confocal immunofluorescence microscopy and immunoblot analyses shows that 
expression of root surface LNP was successfully suppressed in the transgenic lines.  
Three weeks after inoculation with M. loti, the stable LNP antisense lines did not 
form any nodules (Roberts at al., personal communication, Figure 6.4). The observation 
that the 5D LNP antisense line inhibited for LNP production is unable to form nodules 
when inoculated with M. loti strongly indicates that L. japonicus LNP is necessary for 
nodulation. This is consistent with the observation that RNAi-mediated silencing of GS52, 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
orthologous of LjLNP, results in severe suppression of nodule formation (Govindarajulu et 
al., 2009).  
The inability of many early nodulation mutants (nod
) to form symbioses with 
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (Harrison, 2005) prompted Roberts at al., to investigate the 
ability of the 5D 5R and 3O antisense lines to be colonised by these fungi. Excessive 
fungal hyphal branching was observed on the epidermal cells of LNP
 lines compared to 
wild type and vector control 15 days after inoculation, however fungal hyphae were 
unable to invade the epidermis of the LNP silenced roots (Roberts at al., personal 
communication). These results show that the LNP antisense lines are unable to establish 
symbiotic association with mycorrhizal fungi and they show that this block is, primarily, at 
the epidermal cell surface. 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
Figure from N. Roberts et al., personal communication. 
Figure 6.3. 5D, 5R and 3O LNP antisense line have reduced level of LNP (N. Roberts, 
personal communication). 
(A) Immunoblot analysis of LNP from wild type, control vector and transgenic 
antisense line using antiserum prepared against recombinant LNP.  The single 
immunoreactive band corresponds to approximately 46 kDa, the predicted size of Lj-
LNP. (B-M) Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy was performed using 
preimmunization serum (B, C); or anti-LNP serum (D-M); on whole mounts of fixed 7-
day old uninoculated roots from the following L. japonicus lines, (B-E) wild type; (F,G) 
vector control; (H,I) 5D; (J,K) 5R; (L,M) 3O. Scale bar = 50 m 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
Figure 6.4. Root nodule phenotype of the L. japonicus 5D LNP antisense line. 
Nodules were formed in wild type plants (A and D) and vector control (B and E) three 
weeks after inoculation with M. loti. No nodules were observed in the 5D LNP antisense 
line (C and F). Scale bar = 10 mm (A-C) and 5 mm (D-F). 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
Expression of NIN is Impaired in LNP Antisense Line 
The lack of nodulation in the LNP antisense lines suggested that LNP may play a 
role in the Nod factor signalling pathway. Although there is evidence showing that Db-
LNP binds to Nod factor, it has not yet been tested if LNP is involved in the transduction 
of the Nod factor signal. In L. japonicus, transcription of NIN is induced after a few hours 
of Nod factor treatment. The transcript abundance of this gene represents a useful 
indicator of Nod factor signalling. The observations that the induction of NIN requires 
genes necessary for the activation and the decoding of calcium oscillations (NFR1, NFR5, 
DMI1, DMI2, DMI3, NSP1 and NSP2) provides strong evidence for a causal link between 
calcium spiking and NIN induction (Radutoiu et al., 2003; Imaizumi-Anraku et al., 2005; 
Miwa et al., 2006b; Marsh et al., 2007). To test if LNP is required for NIN induction, NIN 
expression was assayed in the 5D LNP antisense line after Nod factor treatment. NIN 
transcript levels in the 5D LNP antisense line were not significantly induced after 12, 24 
or 48 hours of Nod factor treatment (Figure 6.5). In contrast, in the wild type, and 
antisense vector control seedlings, NIN was clearly induced 24 hours after Nod factor 
addition (Figure 6.5). These data indicate that LNP is required for full transcriptional 
activation of NIN suggesting that LNP is a component of the Nod factor signalling 
pathway. 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
Figure 6.5. The L. japonicus 5D LNP antisense line does not induce NIN expression after 
Nod factor treatment (100 nM). 
Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of NIN expression in 5D LNP antisense line, wild type and 
vector control plants at 0, 12, 24 and 48 hours after Nod factor treatment. Polyubiquitin 
was used as internal control. All data are from three technical replicates of at least three 
biological repetitions. Mean values  SD are shown. 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
LNP is Required for Activation of Nod factor-Induced Calcium 
Spiking 
In L. japonicus the perception of Nod factor by NFR1 and NFR5 leads to the 
generation of calcium oscillation around the nucleus. Perception of calcium spiking by a 
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase is then associated with induction of early 
nodulin genes necessary for nodulation (Oldroyd and Downie, 2004; Gleason et al., 2006; 
Hirsch et al., 2009). To determine if LNP is required for Nod-factor-induction of calcium 
spiking, calcium signalling was analysed in the 5D LNP antisense line. The 5D line was 
completely defective for Nod factor induced calcium spiking: no cells showed calcium 
spiking in 43 root hairs tested on 13 plants. In contrast, wild-type plants and the empty 
vector control plants, treated in parallel to the antisense line, were positive for Nod 
factor-induced calcium spiking showing calcium spiking in 30 out of 36, and 30 out of 38 
root hair cells tested respectively (Figure 6.6). These data indicate that LNP, like NFR1, 
NFR5 and components of the symbiosis signalling pathway is required for Nod factor-
induced calcium spiking and are consistent with the observation that LNP is required for 
NIN induction. 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
Figure 6.6. The L. japonicus 5D LNP antisense line is defective for Nod factor-induced 
calcium spiking. 
Roots of wild-type, vector control plants and 5D LNP antisense line were treated with 
100 nM M. loti Nod factor (black vertical bar). Data are presented as derivative traces 
representing the change in fluorescence intensity of Oregon Green/Texas Red from one 
point to the next (xn+1
xn). The number of cells showing calcium spiking is shown as a 
fraction of the total number of cells analysed (with the number of total plants tested in 
parentheses). 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
The 5D LNP Antisense Line is Defective for Calcium Flux 
LNP may act either as a Nod factor receptor, such as NFR1 and NFR5, or as a 
component of the signalling pathway shared by rhizobia and mycorrhizal fungi, such as 
SYMRK, NUP133, NUP85, CASTOR and POLLUX, downstream of the Nod factor receptor. 
To discriminate between these possibilities I exploited the observation that nfr1 and nfr5 
mutants are completely defective for all Nod factor-induced responses, while symRK, 
nup133, nup85, castor and pollux mutants are defective for calcium spiking and gene 
induction but show some Nod factor responses, such as Nod factor-induced calcium 
influx and root hair deformation (Miwa et al., 2006b). Thus, the 5D LNP antisense line 
was tested for Nod factor-induced calcium influx. In wild type, the calcium influx response 
is induced within the first few minutes of Nod factor application. Using the dual-dye 
pseudo-ratiometric calcium imaging system, a rapid rise in cytosolic free calcium was 
detected in L. japonicus in response to Nod factors (Miwa et al., 2006b). As the calcium 
influx response is localised  in the tip of the root hair (Shaw and Long, 2003), changes in 
intracellular calcium were analysed in the cells and in the tip of every root hair tested as 
described in Chapter 4; only those cells which induced a significant transient increase in 
tip calcium and in the shaft area of root hair cells were considered positive for influx. No 
perceptible changes in cytoplasmic calcium concentration in the 5D LNP antisense line 
were observed (n= 26 cells tested from ten plants), whereas wild-type plants and the 
empty vector control plants clearly showed calcium flux (n= 15 and 10 cells tested 
respectively, Figure 6.7). These results provide evidence that LNP acts upstream of both 
Nod factor-induced calcium spiking and the calcium influx responses.  
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
Figure 6.7. Nod factor-induced calcium influx is absent in the L. japonicus 5D LNP 
antisense line.  
Calcium levels were monitored in individual root hairs of wild-type, vector control and 
5D LNP antisense plants after addition of 100 nM Nod factor (black vertical line). Ratios 
(arbitrary units) of fluorescence of Oregon Green (calcium sensitive dye) and Texas Red 
(calcium insensitive dye) were calculated every 5 s for > 30 min. Black dashed lines 
indicate calcium flux. The number of cells showing calcium influx is shown in the inset 
table as a fraction of the total number of cells analysed (with the total number of plants 
tested in parentheses). 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
Root Hair Deformation Is Normal in LNP Antisense Line 
The finding that the silencing of LNP resulted in the absence of calcium spiking, 
calcium influx and NIN expression, together with the evidence showing that LNP binds 
Nod factor (Etzler et al., 1999) suggests that LNP could play a role in the perception of 
Nod factor, upstream of the common symbiosis signalling pathway in a position shared 
with NFR1 and NFR5. If this is true and if LNP is, indeed, a Nod factor receptor it would be 
expected that the antisense line would completely lack all Nod factor responses. Root 
hair deformation is one of the first observable responses to Nod factor. Most of the Nod-
factor signalling mutants show some root hair deformation after addition of Nod factor. 
The only mutants that do not show any root hair deformation responses to Nod factor 
are the the Nod factor receptor mutants nfr-1 and nfr-5 (Radutoiu et al., 2003). This is 
why it has been proposed that the induction of root hair deformation is on a separate 
pathway from induction of early nodulation gene expression and calcium spiking (Miwa 
et al., 2006b). The LNP antisense line was tested for the root hair deformation response 
upon M. loti inoculation or Nod factor treatment. Surprisingly, root hair deformation was 
similarly induced in LNP and vector control antisense lines (Figure 6.8). This result 
indicates that the 5D LNP antisense line is able to perceive and respond to Nod factor, 
suggesting that LNP acts downstream of the Nod factor receptors NFR1 and NFR5. 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
Figure 6.8. Root hair response after Nod factor application or M. loti inoculation in Vector 
control and 5D antisense line plants. 
Vector control root hairs ([A]) to [C]) of uninoculated plants [A], plants treated with 10 
nM Nod factor [B] and seedling inoculated with M. loti [C]. ([D] to [E]) 5D LNP antisense 
root hairs cells of uninoculated plants [D], plants treated with 10 nM Nod-factor [E] and 
seedling inoculated with M. loti [F]. Arrows indicate root hair deformation. Scale bars: 50 
m ([A] and [D]), 10 m ([B], [C] [E] and [F]). 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
Discussion 
LNP was initially identified based on its Nod factor binding showing preferential 
binding to Nod factor relative to chitin. The localisation of LNP to legume root hair cells 
(Etzler et al., 1999), its rhizobial-induced accumulation at root hair tips (Kalsi and Etzler, 
2000) and the ability of LNP antiserum to interfere with nodulation (Etzler et al., 1999) all 
pointed to a function for LNP in nodulation signalling. Subsequent studies in soybean 
revealed that the LNP orthologue GS52 plays a key role in nodulation. Day et al. (2000) 
reported that GS52 mRNA levels increased significantly upon inoculation with B. 
japonicus and that GS52 antiserum blocked soybean nodulation. More recently, knock-
down of GS52 was shown to significantly decrease the formation of mature nodules 
(Govindarajulu et al., 2009). Moreover, transgenic expression of soybean apyrase GS52 
doubled nodule number and increased root infection by M. loti in L. japonicus (McAlvin 
and Stacey, 2005).   
If LNP is necessary for nodule formation, what likely roles exist for this protein in 
nodulation? In this chapter I investigated the role of the L. japonicus LNP in the Nod 
factor signalling pathway necessary for the early stage of nodulation. The results 
presented in this chapter support the hypothesis that LNP is required for nodulation. Our 
collaborators have shown that knock-down of LNP with antisense technology suppressed 
completely the formation of nodules and infection by rhizobia (Roberts et al., personal 
communication) and the phenotype observed with antisense silencing of Lj-LNP was 
much stronger than that induced by GS52 RNAi resulting in the formation of numerous 
small empty nodules on soybean. The complete absence of nodule morphogenesis in the 
5D LNP antisense line suggests that in L. japonicus cortical responses may have a higher 
stringency for expression of LNP compared to Glycine soya or that there may be 
redundancy in Glycine for LNP orthologues. Alternatively, the antisense may have been 
more effective at preventing the production of LNP in L. japonicus than the RNAi on 
soybean. 
During the early stage of nodulation bacterially-derived Nod factor induces 
oscillation of cytoplasmic and nucleoplasmic calcium which is followed by induction of 
genes required for nodulation. The results in this chapter show that LNP is necessary for 
activation of calcium spiking and for induction of NIN. Previously reported genes of L. 
japonicus required for the induction of calcium spiking are genes that encode for the Nod 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
factor receptors NFR1 and NFR5, SYMRK located in the plasma membrane, the cation 
channels CASTOR and POLLUX in the nuclear membrane and the nucleoporin NUP85, 
NUP133 and NENA (Radutoiu et al., 2003; Imaizumi-Anraku et al., 2005; Kanamori et al., 
2006; Miwa et al., 2006b; Saito et al., 2007; Groth et al., 2010). All of these genes are also 
required for the establishment of the symbiosis with arbuscolar mycorrhizal fungi 
(Radutoiu et al., 2003; Imaizumi-Anraku et al., 2005; Kanamori et al., 2006; Saito et al., 
2007). The commonality of these genes suggests an evolutionary conserved pathway, 
called the common symbiosis signalling pathway. The results showing that LNP is required 
for induction of calcium spiking and downstream gene induction could be explained by 
either LNP sharing a position in the Nod factor signalling pathway with the NFR1 and 
NFR5, or by LNP being downstream of the NFR1 and NFR5 in the common symbiosis 
signalling pathway.  
Mutations in the Nod factor receptors block all Nod factor responses including 
calcium flux, calcium oscillations and root hair deformation (Radutoiu et al., 2003), 
whereas mutants symrk, castor, pollux, nup85 and nup133 are unable to induce calcium 
oscillations but are positive for Nod factor-induced calcium influx and root hair 
deformation (Miwa et al., 2006b). These phenotypes were assessed in the LNP antisense 
line. The observation that antisense knockdown of LNP abolished induction of calcium 
influx, together with the previous finding that LNP binds Nod factor support the 
hypothesis of LNP being a Nod factor receptor. However, the LNP antisense line was 
positive for root hair deformation, indicating the root hair cells could perceive Nod factor. 
Kalsi and Etzler (2000) reported that pre-treatment of roots with anti-LNP serum inhibited 
root hair deformation. I used a system for growing L. japonicus plants between filter 
papers (Miwa et al., 2006b), which allows a very sensitive analysis of root hair 
deformation. Differences in the sensitivity of the methods used for growing root hairs 
and testing root hair deformation might explain the different results obtained. 
Alternatively, it is possible that the presence of a very low amount of LNP in the antisense 
line which has been detected in the immunoblot (Figure 6.3) is sufficient to trigger root 
hair deformation but not calcium spiking. If that is the case, a more efficient knock-down 
of LNP with RNAi might be expected to block this response. The observation that the 5D 
LNP antisense line is positive for root hair deformation indicates that LNP plays a role in 
the Nod factor signalling pathway downstream of NFR1 and NFR5 (Figure 6.8). A possible 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
experiment to confirm this observation is to test whether the redistribution to root hair 
tip of LNP induced by Nod factor is observed in the nfr1 or nfr5 mutants. 
The finding that LNP is a peripheral membrane protein (Kalsi and Etzler, 2000) 
suggests that if LNP functions also in Nod factor perception it would most likely do so in 
association with other membrane proteins, perhaps as a part of a receptor complex. L. 
japonicus NFR1 and NFR5 genes are LysM-type serine/threonine receptor kinases 
(Madsen et al., 2003; Radutoiu et al., 2003) and SYMRK gene is a leucine-rich repeat-
receptor-like kinase (Stracke et al., 2002). LNP may form a receptor complex with one or 
more of these gene products and enhance the Nod factor signal required for induction of 
calcium influx and calcium oscillations. 
The results suggest that hydrolysis of extracellular ATP catalysed by LNP may be 
required for the Nod factor-induced calcium influx, calcium spiking and gene induction 
(Figure 6.8). To understand how extracellular ATP could play a role in nodulation we 
should first examine what we know about the biological function of extracellular ATP. In 
the last two decades reports of ATP in the extracellular matrix of multicellular organisms 
(Sedaa et al., 1990) and in the extracellular fluid of unicellular organisms (Boyum and 
Guidotti, 1997) have stimulated research into the role of ATP outside of the cell. In animal 
cells, extracellular ATP plays an important role in cellular signalling. It binds purinergic 
receptors and triggers signalling cascades that lead to diverse responses. There are two 
main families of purinoceptor (P1 and P2). P1 receptors are activated by adenosine (P2 are 
not) and are coupled with heterotrimetric G proteins. P2 receptors are divided into two 
classes, ligand-gated non selective cation channels (P2X receptors) and G-protein-coupled 
receptors (P2Y receptors). P2X receptors activate at higher extracellular ATP 
concentrations (M) than P2Y (nM; (Khakh, 2001)). Purinoceptors can contribute directly 
or indirectly to calcium signal transduction pathways, by functioning through calcium 
permeability of P2X channels or via downstream effects of the P2Y-coupled G-protein. 
Purinoceptors are involved in a variety of physiological functions ranging from 
neurotransmission to cell death (for review, see (Ralevic and Burnstock, 1998; Burnstock 
and Williams, 2000). In animal cells, extracellular ATP is ubiquitously used for cell-to-cell 
communication. The low concentration of extracellular ATP that exists in an "aura" 
surrounding resting cells signals the presence of neighbouring living cells. Transient 
increases in concentration of extracellular ATP can contribute to basic physiological 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
signalling, specifically in the nervous and vascular systems, whereas larger increases in 
extracellular ATP concentration are associated with cell death and function as a key 
"danger" signal in inflammatory processes (Trautmann, 2009).  
Plants are able to sense and respond to extracellular nucleotides. In Arabidopsis, 
various nucleoside triphosphates and diphosphates (approximately 1 mM) triggered 
plasma-membrane depolarisation in root hairs (Lew and Dearnaley, 2000). Extracellular 
ATP (> 1mM) inhibited root gravitropism, decreased auxin transport, stimulated auxin 
accumulation in root tips and increased sensitivity of roots to exogenous auxin implying 
that extracellular ATP inhibits root gravitropism by inhibition of auxin transport (Tang et 
al., 2003). Hormones like auxin and cytokinin are positive regulators of nodulation (Hirsch 
et al., 1989; Hirsch and Fang, 1994; Fang and Hirsch, 1998; Mathesius et al., 2000; van 
Noorden et al., 2007). It has been proposed that accumulation of auxin can modulate 
flow of cytokinin and this can change the localised  levels of cytokinin, which could trigger 
nodule formation in the cortex (Oldroyd and Downie, 2008). If extracellular ATP inhibits 
auxin transport, the ATP quenching activity of ecto-apyrase LNP, may indirectly affect 
nodulation by modulating auxin levels. 
Extracellular ATP is one of the primary chemical signals indicating stress 
conditions. Mechanical stimulation (touch, shear stress and stretch), osmotic shock, and 
hypoxia can trigger ATP release in a diversity of animals cells (Ostrom et al., 2000; 
Gerasimovskaya et al., 2002). In plants, touch and osmotic stresses are also able to induce 
ATP release (Jeter et al., 2004) and are associated with elevated cytoplasmic calcium 
concentrations (Knight et al., 1991; Knight et al., 1997). Release of ATP could be from 
damaged cells or as a result of cell death. In this respect, a role in defence signalling could 
be involved. It has been suggested that, as microbes can release ATP and other purines, 
extracellular ATP could act as a signalling agent in plant-microbe interactions at the 
epidermis (Demidchik et al., 2003). Indeed, chitin, a known elicitor of plant defence 
responses, induces an increase of extracellular ATP that correlates with high ROS activity 
(Kim et al., 2006). Previous studies indicate that rhizobia might be initially recognised as 
intruders that somehow evade or overcome the plant defence response and several plant 
defence responses are induced during root nodule ontogeny (Parniske et al., 1990; Vasse 
et al., 1993; Gamas et al., 1998). However, it remains unclear how legumes regulate plant 
defence responses during the symbiosis with rhizobia.  The finding that the apyrase LNP is 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
required during early stage of for nodulation suggest a mechanism for legumes to avoid 
plant defence responses during symbiosis with rhizobia. Legume specific apyrases, by 
decreasing the amount of extracellular ATP, could prevent the induction of plant immune 
responses during nodulation. However, the mechanism behind this remains unclear. 
Interestingly, a recent report showed that Nod factor induces a rapid and specific 
transient increase in intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels, whereas chitosan 
(a fungal elicitor) or ATP induced a sustained increase of ROS in the root hair tip 
(Cardenas et al., 2008). It has been proposed that regulating ROS production at the right 
time and place, allows rhizobia to enter the host plant without triggering a hypersensitive 
response (Cardenas et al., 2008). However, it still not fully understood how the precise 
regulation ROS production occurs. Extracellular ATP has been reported to induce changes 
in intracellular levels of ROS (Song et al., 2006), and indeed Cardenas et al. (2008) showed 
that extracellular ATP modulates intracellular levels of ROS. After exposure to Nod factor, 
LNP redistribution and ROS production both occur at the root hair tip (Cardenas et al., 
1998), suggesting that these two processes, may be mechanistically linked.  Therefore, 
possibly, LNP, by controlling the extracellular amount of ATP, might regulate and shape 
the transient intracellular ROS changes in root hair cells responding to Nod factor. This 
may be a mechanism for the symbiont to avoid defence reactions that could be triggered 
by elevated and sustained levels of ROS. The specificity of this transient increase, not 
observed by chitosan treatment, might be due to the ability of Nod factor to bind LNP 
and activate his ATP hydrolytic activity. If LNP, by modulating extracellular ATP levels, is 
indirectly responsible of the transient increase of ROS induced by Nod factor it would be 
interesting to see whether Nod factor could induce a transient ROS increase in an LNP 
knockdown plant. 
Recently, it has become clear that extracellular ATP also regulates plant viability 
(Chivasa et al., 2005) and growth (Kim et al., 2006; Roux and Steinebrunner, 2007; Wu et 
al., 2007a). Extracellular ATP was found in the interstitial spaces between plant epidermal 
cells (M. truncatula), mainly at the regions of actively growing cells, suggesting a role for 
extracellular ATP during plant cell growth (Kim et al., 2006). Recent evidence has shown 
that in plants, as in animals, an increase in cytoplasmic calcium is a downstream 
consequence of extracellular ATP (Demidchik et al., 2003; Hanley et al., 2004; Jeter et al., 
2004; Liu et al., 2008; Zeng et al., 2008; Demidchik et al., 2009; Yip et al., 2009). In the 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
immune system, the activation of T-cell by antigens triggers ATP release which activate 
the P2X7 receptor. As a result, calcium influx is facilitated and this, in turn, induces T-cell 
activation events through the activation of the nuclear factor of stimulated T cell and 
interleukin-2 transcription (Yip et al., 2009). In macrophages, ATP triggers oscillations in 
cytosolic calcium and activate transcription of IL-6 (Hanley et al., 2004). In neurons, 
membrane depolarisation elicits ATP release, acting through a highly sensitive P2Y 
receptor/IP3-mediated signalling pathway to mediate the propagation of intercellular 
calcium oscillation responsible for cell-cell communication and cell migration (Liu et al., 
2008; Zeng et al., 2008). In plants, Demidchik et al. (2003) first showed that ATP could 
trigger an increase in intracellular calcium levels using transgenic Arabidopsis expressing 
aequorin. Jeter et al. (2004) indicated that ATP-induced increases in calcium levels were 
coupled to downstream gene expression in stress and wound responses. In a process 
essential for cell elongation and polar root hair growth, calcium-dependent ATP release 
increased production of reactive oxygen species, which in turn activated calcium influx 
from extracellular stores (Foreman et al., 2003; Kim et al., 2006; Demidchik et al., 2009). 
According to our results one could speculate that extracellular ATP may have an 
inhibitory effect on induction of calcium responses such as calcium influx and calcium 
spiking induced by Nod factor, although no evidence for this in assays of calcium spiking 
and calcium influx was observed (Sarah Shailes, G. Oldroyd and A. Downie unpublished 
data). 
These considerations implie that cells have cellular mechanisms to release ATP 
and sense its presence. In animals, anion channels, ABC transporters or exocytosis 
contribute to the released of ATP. ATP is released from plant cells by plasma membrane 
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) proteins (Thomas et al., 2000; Roux and Steinebrunner, 2007), 
vesicular efflux (Kim et al., 2006) and wounding (Jeter et al., 2004). How plants perceive 
extracellular ATP remains unknown. There are no equivalents to animal purinoreceptors 
evident in higher plant genomes (Tang et al., 2003; Kim et al., 2006; Fountain et al., 
2008), although inhibitors of purinoreceptors (PPADS and suramin) attenuate the ATP 
effect on cytosolic calcium concentrations in Arabidopsis (Demidchik et al., 2003). The 
antagonistic effects of PPADS and suramin suggested the existence of P2 equivalents in 
plant cells. In order to elucidate the molecular basis for the perception of ATP and its role 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
in nodulation, the effects of antagonists of purinergic receptors on Nod factor signalling 
could be tested. 
Addition of exogenous 100 M ADP to RNAi GS52 transgenic roots partially 
rescued nodule formation (Govindarajulu et al., 2009). It would be interesting to know 
whether addition of ADP to the 5D LNP antisense line could restore induction of calcium 
spiking and nodule formation. Our results indicate that the presence of LNP is required 
for calcium spiking, however it is still unclear whether the ATP hydrolytic activity itself 
or/and the Nod factor binding property of LNP are necessary for induction of calcium 
responses. A possible way to test this would be to add exogenous apyrase and see 
whether the hydrolysis of ATP by the exogenous apyrase could restore induction of 
calcium spiking. 
The LNP antisense lines also lost their ability to associate with mycorrhizal (Myc) 
fungi (Roberts et al., personal communication). This phenotype defective for 
mycorrhization (Myc
) is a characteristic of some of the early Nod
  L. japonicus mutants of 
symbiotic genes like SYMRK (Stracke et al., 2002), CASTOR and POLLUX (Imaizumi-Anraku 
et al., 2005), NUP133 (Kanamori et al., 2006), NUP85 (Saito et al., 2007), SYM15 
(Demchenko et al., 2004) and has been interpreted to suggest that these two symbiotic 
pathways may share common components that function early in the plant response to 
these symbionts. 
Analyses of seven early Myc
 mutants of L. japonicus (Novero et al., 2002; 
Demchenko et al., 2004; Kistner et al., 2005) identified various steps of fungal 
colonisation  of roots. In all the early Myc
 L. japonicus mutants identified so far fungal 
hyphae have been observed to enter between epidermal cells but the intracellular 
penetration of epidermal or outer cell layers is blocked (Demchenko et al., 2004). In the 
symrk mutant, fungal hyphae formed appressoria and balloon like deformations but the 
subsequent fungal entry in cells of epidermis and exodermis was aborted, blocking the 
intracellular passage (Demchenko et al., 2004; Kistner et al., 2005). Attachment of fungal 
hyphae and appressoria formation were observed on the root surface of the LNP 
antisense line but intercellular or intracellular entry in the epidermal cells was not 
observed. LNP may act upstream of other identified L. japonicus symbiotic genes which 
play a role in the establishment of the mycorrhizal symbiosis. The very late colonisation 
by Glomus intraradices at a very low frequency was observed in the roots of LNP 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
antisense lines. A similar result was reported with the L. japonicus Myc
mutants in which 
the mutants had greatly reduced numbers of colonised roots but the subsequent 
development of the successful mycorrhizae appeared to be normal (Wegel et al., 1998; 
Kistner et al., 2005). These results suggest that LNP may play a role in events leading to 
the epidermal cell entry of fungal hyphae but is not required following successful 
invasion.  
Several publications suggested a role for LNP in early stages of nodulation, but the 
mechanism by which LNP is involved in such a role was unknown. The results in this 
chapter provide the missing link by directly showing that LNP is a new component in the 
Nod factor signalling pathway. LNP is required for induction of calcium spiking, calcium 
influx and NIN expression, but not for root hair deformation. Taken together these results 
indicate that LNP is in a unique position in the Nod factor signalling pathway, 
downstream of genes encoding for the Nod factor receptor NFR1 and NFR5 but upstream 
of SYMRK, cation channels, nucleoporins (Figure 6.9). The finding of LNP being a new 
component in the Nod factor signalling pathway is consistent with earlier reports of Nod 
signal enhancement of apyrase enzyme activity (Etzler et al., 1999). Therefore, I propose 
that LNP may have a crucial role in determining the amount of extracellular ATP which 
can trigger calcium influx and calcium oscillations essential for nodulation. 
In addition, we showed that L. japonicus LNP is also required for symbiotic 
association with mycorrhizal fungi, indicating that LNP is part of the common symbiosis 
pathway shared by nodulation and mycorrhization (Figure 6.9). Considering the apparent 
function for LNP in Nod factor signalling, I propose an analogous role for LNP during 
induction of calcium oscillations induced by fungal signals. Similarly to nodulation, LNP 
may be involved in the recognition and signalling of the Myc Factor. This would imply that 
the Myc factor released by mycorhhizal fungi is structurally similar to the rhizobially-
made Nod factor. The data suggest that LNP plays an important role in quenching the 
signalling effect of extracellular ATP. This hypothesis would be consistent with the 
findings of Jeter et al. (2004), who showed that extracellular ATP is involved in stress-
mediated plant responses. Thus, the ability to control extracellular ATP levels by LNP 
could allow fine control of cellular responses both beneficial (e.g. calcium influx and 
calcium oscillation) and detrimental (e.g. defence responses) to infection by both 
rhizobial bacteria and mycorrhizal fungi.  
Figure 6.9. Model proposed for 
Mutations in NFR1 and 
Nod factor-induced calcium influx, calcium spiking, and root hair deformation. LNP is Nod 
factor-binding phos
triphosphate (ATP) into adenosine 5'
pirophosphates (PPi). Knockdown of 
root hair deformation. Mutations in 
NUP85 and NENA blocked calcium spiking but not calcium influx; this, together with the 
observation that calcium spiking can be induced at low levels of Nod
influx cannot, shows that calcium influx is
fact that root hair deformation is induced by low concentrations of Nod factors that do 
not induce calcium influx shows that the observed calcium influx cannot be required for 
root-hair deformation. Mutations 
calcium spiking or calcium influx. The 
symRK/dmi2, nup133, nup85 
mycorrhization (Kistner et al. 2005) and, therefore
Model proposed for Nod factor signalling pathway.  
and NFR5/NFP encoding the predicted Nod factor receptor blocked 
induced calcium influx, calcium spiking, and root hair deformation. LNP is Nod 
binding phosphohydrolase that catalyse the hydrolysis of adenosine 5'
triphosphate (ATP) into adenosine 5'-monophosphate (AMP) plus inorganic 
). Knockdown of LNP blocked calcium influx, calcium spiking but not 
root hair deformation. Mutations in POLLUX/DMI1, CASTOR, 
blocked calcium spiking but not calcium influx; this, together with the 
observation that calcium spiking can be induced at low levels of Nod
influx cannot, shows that calcium influx is a separate response from calcium spiking. The 
fact that root hair deformation is induced by low concentrations of Nod factors that do 
not induce calcium influx shows that the observed calcium influx cannot be required for 
hair deformation. Mutations in CCAMK, CYCLOPS, and NIN
calcium spiking or calcium influx. The LNP antisense line, 
symRK/dmi2, nup133, nup85 and ccamk mutants are defective for early stages of 
mycorrhization (Kistner et al. 2005) and, therefore, are placed on a common pathway. 
CHAPTER 6. LNP 
encoding the predicted Nod factor receptor blocked 
induced calcium influx, calcium spiking, and root hair deformation. LNP is Nod 
phohydrolase that catalyse the hydrolysis of adenosine 5'-
monophosphate (AMP) plus inorganic 
blocked calcium influx, calcium spiking but not 
, SYMRK/DMI2, NUP133, 
blocked calcium spiking but not calcium influx; this, together with the 
observation that calcium spiking can be induced at low levels of Nod-factor but calcium 
a separate response from calcium spiking. The 
fact that root hair deformation is induced by low concentrations of Nod factors that do 
not induce calcium influx shows that the observed calcium influx cannot be required for 
NIN do not block either 
antisense line, pollux/dmi1, castor, 
mutants are defective for early stages of 
, are placed on a common pathway.  
CHAPTER 7. General Discussion and Conclusions 
Chapter 7 
General Discussion and Conclusions 
The Nod Factor Signalling Pathway in Nodulation 
A complex biological process lasting up to several weeks sits behind the 
development of a nitrogen-fixing root nodule. Cells from both the root epidermis and root 
cortex participate at the establishment of this structure, which will eventually enhance 
the overall plant growth, because nitrogen will be provided to the plant by the nitrogen-
fixing bacteroids in symbiosomes within the nodule. Nod factors are essential signalling 
molecules required for nodulation. Some of the plant responses associated with 
nodulation can be induced by Nod factors released by rhizobia. Thus, events such as root 
hair deformation, root hair curling and expression of genes associated with nodule 
formation, cortical cell divisions and pre-infection thread structures all, remarkably, 
depend on the plant perception of Nod factor.  
Until a decade ago, very little was known about the molecular components in 
legume involved in Nod factor signalling. In the last decade, the use of mutants screens, 
the ongoing genomic sequencing of model legumes M. truncatula and L. japonicus, and 
advances in molecular genetic techniques have allowed the identification of several genes 
responsible for Nod factor responses. The Nod-factor signalling identified so far involves 
the Nod factor receptors NFP/NFR5 and NFR1, the LRR-receptor-like kinase DMI2/SYMRK, 
the cation channels DMI1/POLLUX and CASTOR, nucleoporins NUP133, NUP85 and NENA, 
all required upstream of calcium spiking. Downstream of calcium spiking the calcium 
calmodulin-dependent kinase CCAMK, IPD3/CYCLOPS and the transcription factors NSP1, 
NSP2, ERN1, ERN2, ERN3 and NIN are required for nodulin gene expression.  
In this thesis, the identification of a new Nod factor signalling component was 
presented. Antisense suppression of LNP in L. japonicus blocked Nod factor-induced 
calcium spiking, Nod factor-induced calcium flux and Nod factor-induced NIN expression 
without blocking root hair deformation. Thus, LNP is upstream of calcium spiking and 
calcium flux and sits in a unique position of the Nod factor signalling pathway upstream of 
CHAPTER 7. General Discussion and Conclusions 
DMI2/SYMRK, DMI1/POLLUX, CASTOR, NUP133, NUP85 and NENA, but downstream the 
Nod factor receptors NFP/NFR5 and NFR1. LNP may be involved in the formation of a Nod 
factor receptor complex required for the activation of downstream signalling events such 
as calcium spiking and gene induction. The observation that legume-mycorrhizal fungal 
interactions is also blocked in the LNP antisense line suggests that LNP may have a similar 
function in the mycorhizal and rhizobial symbioses, thus suggesting a structural similarity 
between Myc and Nod factors. In addition we should not forget that LNP is a 
phosphohydrolase that can catalyse the hydrolysis of ATP. The finding that both 
nodulation and mycorrhization are blocked in the LNP antisense line points toward the 
possibility that ATP plays a role during legume-rhizobia and legume-mycorrhizal fungal 
interactions. ATP has been shown to be released by plant defence elicitors (Kim et al., 
2006), and so it is possible that LNP by reducing ATP, suppresses plant defence response 
and allows nodulation or mycorrhization to occur (Figure 7.1).  
Figure 7.1. Key positional signalling diagram (see next page).   
Nod factor is perceived in the epidermis by two receptor-like kinase NFP/NFR5 and 
LYK3?/NFR1 Nod factor receptors. Subsequently, root hair deformation, including root 
hair branching and root hair curling are induced. The Nod-factor-binding 
phosphohydrolase LNP is involved in Nod factor signalling and, through the hydrolysis of 
ATP, it might suppress defence response in order to promote nodulation. LNP is required 
for induction of calcium flux which is suggested to play a role, later, during formation of 
infection threads. The second receptor-like kinase DMI2/SYMRK, containing leu-rich 
repeat regions, might play multiple roles during Nod factor signalling. SYMRK might have 
a key role during the touch response that contributes to entrap the bacteria within the 
shepherd crook structure. At the same time, SYMRK may induce cortical cell division by 
interacting with HMGR1, involved in the synthesis of cytokinins. Through SYMRK the Nod 
factor signal is tranduced from the plasma membrane to the nuclear envelope where 
cation channels DMI1/POLLUX, CASTOR and the nucleoporins, NUP133, NUP85 and 
NENA, are localized and required for the induction of nuclear calcium spiking. CCAMK, 
NSP1, NSP2, IPD3/CYCLOPS and ERN are proposed to decode and transduce the calcium 
signal into expression of gene (ex. ENOD11) necessary for the entrapment of bacteria 
within the root hair curl and the subsequent initiation of infection. In the cortex 
activation of CCAMK, possibly by cortical calcium spiking, will lead to the induction of 
genes required for cortical cell division which is associated with increases in cytokinins. 
CHAPTER 7. General Discussion and Conclusions 
CHAPTER 7. General Discussion and Conclusions 
A Link Between Calcium Spiking and Bacterial Infection 
Although several advances have been made in the identification of the molecular 
components of the Nod factor signalling pathway, the downstream effects of the 
signalling cascade leading to the nodulin genes expression such as ENOD11, are yet not 
fully understood. The finding that autoactivation of CCAMK lead to the formation of 
spontaneous nodules, which is dependent on NSP1, NSP2, ERN1 and NIN (Gleason et al., 
2006; Marsh et al., 2007; Middleton et al., 2007), highlighted the importance of this 
pathway for cortical nodule organogenesis. As CCAMK has been proposed to decode 
calcium spiking, these results led to the idea that calcium spiking is required for nodule 
formation. Nevertheless, the results reported in this thesis point also toward a role for 
calcium spiking during bacterial infection. In Chapter 5, I showed that the symrk14-har1-1 
mutant is impaired in Nod factor-induced calcium spiking in root hair cells even though it 
does form nodules. Interestingly, the phenotype of the symrk14 mutant was severely 
compromised for infection thread formation. The impairment of calcium spiking and the 
lack of infection thread formation suggests a link between calcium spiking and infection 
thread initiation. Upon inoculation with rhizobia, the root hairs of the symrk14 mutant 
curled extensively, often twice around e.g. 720 degrees, but failed to entrap the bacteria 
within a curl (S. Kosuta, personal communication). This inability to entrap the bacteria, 
implies that SYMRK is likely to have a specific function in the entrapment of rhizobia 
within the shepherds crook. SYMRK could be involved in such a function, directly and/or 
indirectly, through the activation of the Nod factor signalling pathway involving calcium 
spiking.  
The dmi1, dmi2 and dmi3 mutants were originally shown to respond to Nod factor 
with root hair swelling but not with root hair branching or root hair curling (Catoira et al., 
2000; Wais et al., 2000). In contrast Esseling et al. (2004) reported that all the dmi 
mutants showed root hair curling after spot application of Nod factor. Despite the ability 
to deform in response to Nod factor, none of these mutants can entrap rhizobia within a 
curl (Catoira et al., 2000). Not only the dmi mutants (and the corresponding Lotus 
mutant), but all the M. truncatula and L. japonicus mutants carrying mutations in the 
genes involved in the Nod factor signalling pathway, are unable to form the shepherds 
crook structure (Schauser et al., 1998; Stracke et al., 2002; Amor et al., 2003; Oldroyd and 
Long, 2003; Radutoiu et al., 2003; Imaizumi-Anraku et al., 2005; Miwa et al., 2006b; Marsh 
CHAPTER 7. General Discussion and Conclusions 
et al., 2007; Middleton et al., 2007; Saito et al., 2007). These pieces of evidence support a 
critical role of the Nod factor signalling pathway for initiation of bacterial infection (Figure 
7.1). 
In order to envisage the output of this signalling cascade it would be essential to 
understand the function of the genes induced by this, such as ENOD11. ENOD11, like 
ENOD12 (one of the first identified early nodulin genes), encodes a proline-rich cell wall 
protein expressed during pre-infection and infection stages of nodulation in root and 
nodule tissue (Journet et al., 2001). Following inoculation with S. meliloti, the MtENOD11 
promoter is first induced after three to six hours in epidermal tissues where successful 
infections occur one to two days later. At later stages, activation of the MtENOD11 
promoter correlated with presence of infection threads in both roots and nodules 
(Journet et al., 2001). ENOD11 and ENOD12 are characterised by an overall low tyrosine 
content, which is normally involved in mechanical strengthening of cell wall (Journet et al., 
2001). It has been proposed that the induction ENOD11 and ENOD12 results in the 
presence of significant quantities of ENOD11 and ENOD12 in the root hair cell wall. This 
could modify the cell wall in such a way as to loosen the cell wall rigidity and, therefore, 
facilitate entrapment of rhizobia in infection pocket and the subsequent penetration of 
bacteria, required for the initiation of infection thread (Figure 7.1)(Scheres et al., 1990; 
Journet et al., 2001). Ultrastructural studies have revealed that infection threads initiate 
as invaginations of the plant cell wall and occur as a consequence of degradation of the 
plant cell wall and subsequent extension of the tubular structure (Jordan et al., 1963; 
Ridge and Rolfe, 1985). 
It is noteworthy that, not only ENOD11 and ENOD12, but many of the genes 
upregulated by Nod factor and rhizobia encode proteins that are targeted to cell wall and 
extracellular matrix (Brewin, 2004), representing good candidates for the remodelling of 
cell walls during infection thread initiation and development. This, together with the 
observation that most of the mutations in the Nod factor signalling pathway affect 
infection thread growth suggest a link between calcium spiking and bacterial infection. 
The results showing that the symrk14-har1-1 mutant forms many nodules but is impaired  
for calcium spiking and infection thread formation, gave strong support for calcium 
spiking being essential for initiation of infection thread and perhaps being more 
specifically involved during the entrapment of bacteria within the shepherds crook 
CHAPTER 7. General Discussion and Conclusions 
structure in the epidermis (Figure 7.1). Calcium spiking is also induced during 
mycorrhization (Kosuta et al., 2008). Interestingly all the components of the common 
signalling pathway shared by nodulation and mycorrhization are required for fungal 
infection. It is possible that calcium spiking in both nodulation and mycorrhization is 
necessary for the entry of the microbes into the root. 
In L. japonicus the gain-of-function alleles snf1 and snf2 encoding the calcium 
calmodulin-dependent kinase CCaMK, and the cytokinin receptor LHK1, respectively, lead 
to the development of spontaneous empty nodules. Using double and triple mutants 
containing the gain-offunction snf1 and snf2 mutants recent work has shown that genes 
upstream of calcium spiking and downstream of Nod factor receptors are required for 
nodule organogenesis and only indirectly for infection. The symrk mutation, for example, 
did not block the formation of pink infected nodules in the symrk snf1 double mutant 
(Madsen et al., 2010), suggesting that SYMRK is not directly required for bacterial 
infection. These results are therefore in contrast the role of SYMRK and calcium spiking 
during infection. Nevertheless, the same work also showed that inoculation of the double 
mutant snf2/ccamk did not result in the formation of infected nodules (Madsen et al., 
2010), thus revealing that activation of CCaMK, which is likely to occur through calcium 
spiking, does not play only a role in the induction of nodule organogenesis but is also 
essential for bacterial infection.  
A Role for Calcium Flux in Infection Thread Initiation 
Calcium flux has been also proposed to be involved in the initiation of infection- 
thread formation (Miwa et al., 2006b). The results presented in Chapter 3 and 4 support 
this hypothesis. Inoculation of M. truncatula roots with the nodF nodL mutant results in 
the formation of enlarged infection foci where the bacteria accumulate but are not able to 
initiate the infection thread (Ardourel et al., 1994). The results presented in Chapter 3 
show that the LCO, IV, C18:1, S Nod factor, structurally equivalent to that made by the nodF 
nodL mutant, was severally impaired for calcium flux induction even when applied at high 
concentration. These results suggest that the nodF nodL mutant cannot initiate infection 
thread because the Nod factor that is released by this mutant is not able to induce 
calcium flux. Thus, even if the concentration of this Nod factor increases as a result of the 
CHAPTER 7. General Discussion and Conclusions 
accumulation of bacteria in the infection foci, calcium flux is not induced and therefore 
infection can not initiate. 
A great reduction in the number of infection threads was also observed after 
inoculation of M. truncatula roots with the nodL mutant, although a few infection threads 
were oberved (Ardourel et al., 1994). The LCO, IV, C16:2, S Nod factor, structurally 
equivalent to that released by the nodL mutant, was also impaired for induction of 
calcium flux. A 100-fold higher concentration of the nodL Nod factor than the wild type 
Nod factor was required to induce a calcium flux. However when nodL Nod factor was 
added at micromolar concentration calcium flux was normally induced. The few infection 
threads observed in this mutant could be generated where the bacteria releases high 
concentration of Nod factor which is able to trigger calcium flux. The different ability of 
the nodL and nodF nodL Nod factors to trigger calcium flux is correlated with the different 
ability of these mutants to form infection threads. In addition, the Nod factor equivalent 
to that released by the S. meliloti nodF nodL mutant that is completely defective for 
infection threads, was greatly reduced for both calcium flux and calcium spiking. The Nod 
factor equivalent to that released by the S. meliloti nodL mutant that is reduced, but not 
entirely defective, for infection thread formation, was reduced for induction of calcium 
flux but normal for calcium spiking. These findings point toward the possibility that both 
calcium flux and calcium spiking responses are required for infection thread formation. 
When calcium flux is reduced, but calcium spiking is normal (as observed with nodL Nod 
factor) infection threads can form but the process is reduced, and delayed. However, 
when both calcium responses are abolished no infection threads are formed, as seen with 
the nodF nodL  mutant. It is possible that calcium spiking in epidermal cells below to the 
infected root hair may be associated with the formation of pre-infection threads and may 
be required for the progression of the infection in different cells. 
Plant mutants defective for infection thread formation, such as nin, bit-1, and rit-1, 
were somewhat reduced for induction of calcium flux (Chapter 4), providing evidence for 
a link between calcium flux and infection thread formation. Therefore, based on the 
results proved in Chapter 3, 4 and 5, I speculate that both calcium flux and calcium spiking 
play a role during bacterial infection. Calcium spiking might be involved through the 
induction of ENOD11 in the formation of root hair shepherds crook entrapping bacteria 
within a curl, whereas the calcium flux is likely to be induced by high Nod factor 
CHAPTER 7. General Discussion and Conclusions 
concentration released by the rhizobia once they are trapped and start replicating within 
the infection pocket. Thus, calcium flux might play a role during the invagination of the 
cell wall, required for the initiation of the tubular infection structure (Figure 7.1). 
Mechanical stimulation by the replicating rhizobia is likely to contribute to such a process. 
A recent work has shown that mechanical stimulations of roots of Arabidopsis thaliana, 
expressing yellow cameleon 3.6, induces transient cytoplasmic calcium increase which 
regulates the production of reactive oxygen species and apoplastic and cytoplasmatic pH 
changes (Monshausen et al., 2009). It is possible that a Nod factor-dependent calcium flux 
together with a rapid calcium increase induced by mechanical stimulations might 
stimulate the invagination of cell wall and plasma membrane necessary for the initiation 
of infection thread. 
SYMRK Function: a Branch Point 
Several studies have shown that DMI2/SYMRK is required not only for the 
formation of nodules formed during legumeRhizobium symbiosis but also for the 
formation of nodules formed during the actinorhizaFrankia association (Endre et al., 
2002; Gherbi et al., 2008; Markmann et al., 2008). Moreover, this gene is also necessary 
for the plant symbiosis with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (Stracke et al., 2002). These 
findings suggest that SYMRK might have a function independent of Nod factor perception. 
Esseling at al. (2004) have shown that, in M. truncatula, DMI2 is involved in touch 
response. Such a function is likely to be essential not only for the legumeRhizobium 
symbiosis, but also for actinorhizaFrankia association and symbiosis with arbuscular 
mycorrhizal fungi. Thus, it is possible that SYMRK mediates a Nod factor-independent 
touch response during these three different symbioses, possibly through the leucine rich 
repeat (LRR) extracellular domain whose function is still unclear (Figure 7.1). 
Nevertheless, it is known that SYMRK is indispensable for the induction of 
responses triggered by Nod factor, such as calcium spiking, ENOD11 gene activation and 
cortical cell division, indicating that SYMRK must also have a Nod factor-dependent 
function upstream of calcium spiking. Curiously, the symrk-14 mutation in the 
extracellular domain just upstream of the LRR, abolished calcium spiking but not cortical 
cell division, indicating that, initiation of calcium spiking depends on the integrity of the 
extracellular domain. Although no biochemical evidence has shown the binding of SYMRK 
CHAPTER 7. General Discussion and Conclusions 
with Nod factor receptors containing LysM domain, it is possible that the extracellular 
domain of SYMRK could possibly be also involved in binding with NFP/NFR5 or NFR1. 
Putative alternative interactors of SYMRK are components of the phospholipid pathway, 
such as G-protein required for activation of PLC and PLD, previously predicted to 
contribute to Nod factor signalling. Recently, it has been shown that the intracellular 
kinase domain of DMI2 interacts with HMGR1, an enzyme involved in the mevalonate 
synthesis pathway leading to the production of different array of isoprenoid compounds, 
including cytokinins (Kevei et al., 2007). Several lines of evidence have indicated a key role 
of cytokinins during activation of cortical cell division and nodule organogenesis. Thus, it is 
possible that SYMRK, through the interaction of HMGR, activates cortical cell divisions. 
The observation that the symrk14 mutant is normal for cortical cell division suggests that 
the point mutation in the extracellular domain does not interfere with this function and 
further suggests that the SYMRK-dependent cortical cell division is independent of root 
hair calcium spiking. Hence, SYMRK might play several roles in nodulation. The 
extracellular domain is likely to be involved in the activation of Nod factor-dependent 
calcium spiking and, as previously suggested, in Nod factor-independent touch response 
(Markmann et al., 2008). Together these responses are likely to be essential for initiation 
of bacterial infection. At the same time, SYMRK through the Nod factor-dependent 
interaction of the intracellular domain with HMGR1, and possibly through interaction with 
other proteins, could lead to the activation of cortical cell divisions. Thus, in this model, 
SYMRK would represent a branching point for epidermal and cortical responses (Figure 
7.1). 
Activation of Cortical Responses 
The observations that autoacitive CCAMK leads to nodule organogenesis in the 
absence of bacterial infection and that spontaneous nodulation depends on components 
of the Nod factor signalling pathway such as NFP, DMI1, DMI2, DMI3 NSP1 and NSP2 
suggest that one of the outputs of the Nod-factor-signalling pathway is nodule 
organogenesis. Thus, the downstream responses of the Nod factor signalling cascade 
involving calcium spiking are not only the bacterial infection occurring in the epidermis, 
but also cortical nodule organogenesis. How can the Nod factor signalling pathway induce 
such two different outputs? I believe that the activation of the Nod factor signalling 
CHAPTER 7. General Discussion and Conclusions 
pathway has different effects in distinct cell types and/or in response to different stimuli. 
Indeed, signalling pathways can induce different downstream effects depending on cell 
type. For example, in animals, pathologically increased JNK/cJun signalling stimulates 
apoptosis in neurons, and this can result in neurodegeneration, but triggers proliferation 
in other cell types, thereby causing cancer (Davis, 2000). Thus, in nodulation, it is possible 
that, for example, different combination of CCAMK and transcriptional factors such as NSP 
and ERN proteins might induce ENOD11, and other genes required for activation of 
infection thread, in the epidermis, whereas a different combination of transcriptional 
factors might induce ENOD40, and other genes required for nodule organogenesis, within 
the cortex.  
An outstanding question that remains to be answered is how the Nod factor signal 
reaches the cortex from the epidermis. During the early stage of nodulation, cortical cell 
division is induced by Nod factor before the bacteria have fully penetrated the root cortex 
(Libbenga and Harkes, 1973). CCAMK is believed to be essential for the activation of 
cortical cell division, however it is not known how CCAMK is activated within the cortex. 
Calcium spiking has been reported in root hair cells and in cortical cells below the 
epidermis (Miwa et al., 2006a). Hence, calcium spiking occurring in cortical cell might 
activate CCAMK and, thereby, cortical cell division (Figure 7.1). However, it remains to be 
established whether and how calcium spiking can be induced in deeper cortical cell layers 
once it is induced in the root hairs. A future challenge will be to understand how the Nod 
factor signalling pathway can be induced in different cell types during the different stages 
of nodulation.  
CHAPTER 7. General Discussion and Conclusions 
Conclusions 
 Calcium plays an essential role in biological systems. Analysis of calcium 
responses has the potential to unravel molecular mechanism behind many biological 
processes. In this thesis, the analysis of calcium responses in the two model legumes M. 
truncatula and L. japonicus has given insight into the Nod-factor signalling pathway that 
leads to the formation of nitrogen-fixing root nodules. In M. truncatula calcium flux was 
found to have the same Nod factor structure stringency required for infection thread 
formation (Chapter 3). M. truncatula mutants compromised for bacterial infection were 
affected for induction of calcium flux suggesting that calcium flux is required for initiation 
of bacterial infection (Chapter 4). The different Nod-factor specificity found to be required 
for calcium flux and not for calcium spiking will open the opportunity to use microarrays 
to identify genes specifically induced by the calcium flux. Identification of genes 
downstream of calcium flux will elucidate the function of calcium flux during legume 
infection. The system developed for the analysis of Nod-factor-induced calcium flux 
described in this thesis will facilitate further studies on calcium flux using either yellow 
cameleon transgenic plants or microinjection of calcium sensitive dyes. 
Calcium spiking analysis in the L. japonicus symrk14 mutants has shown a 
remarkable example where nodule morphogenesis occurs even if only a small number of 
root hairs is able to spike, and, more interestingly, the absence of infection threads gave 
strong support to the hypothesis that calcium spiking is essential for bacterial infection 
(Chapter 5). These results also suggest that the SYMRK-dependent calcium spiking 
involves the extracellular domain of SYMRK providing new insight into SYMRK function. 
Finally, the work presented in Chapter 6 has added knowledge concerning nodule 
symbiosis, through the identification of a new component of the Nod factor signalling 
pathway in L. japonicus. The phosphohydrolase LNP act upstream of both calcium spiking 
and calcium flux, but downstream of the Nod factor receptor, unrevealing a new position 
of the Nod factor signalling pathway. This gene is also required for the mycorrhization 
indicating that LNP is part of the common signalling cascade shared by rhizobium-legume 
symbiosis and mycorrhizal fungus symbiosis. Further analysis on the specific role of LNP 
will help our understanding on the symbiotic interaction between plant and rhizobia. 
Revealing the molecular mechanism behind the formation of a nitrogen-fixing nodule will 
hopefully enable us to improve the sustainability of crop plants in nitrogen-poor soils.  
References 
References 
Abeijon, C., Yanagisawa, K., Mandon, E.C., Hausler, A., Moremen, K., Hirschberg, C.B., 
and Robbins, P.W. (1993). Guanosine diphosphatase is required for protein and 
sphingolipid glycosylation in the golgi lumen of Saccharomyces-Cerevisiae. J. Cell 
Biol. 122: 307-323. 
Akiyama, K., Matsuzaki, K., and Hayashi, H. (2005). Plant sesquiterpenes induce hyphal 
branching in arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. Nature 435: 824-827. 
Allen, G.J., Chu, S.P., Harrington, C.L., Schumacher, K., Hoffmann, T., Tang, Y.Y., Grill, E., 
and Schroeder, J.I. (2001). A defined range of guard cell calcium oscillation 
parameters encodes stomatal movements. Nature 411: 1053-1057. 
Allen, G.J., Chu, S.P., Schumacher, K., Shimazaki, C.T., Vafeados, D., Kemper, A., Hawke, 
S.D., Tallman, G., Tsien, R.Y., Harper, J.F., Chory, J., and Schroeder, J.I. (2000). 
Alteration of stimulus-specific guard cell calcium oscillations and stomatal closing 
in Arabidopsis det3 mutant. Science 289: 2338-2342. 
Allen, N.S., and Bennett, M.N. (1996). Electro-optical imaging of F-actin and endoplasmic 
reticulum in living and fixed plant cells. Scanning Microsc. Suppl. 10: 177-186; 
discussion 186-177. 
Amor, B.B., Shaw, S.L., Oldroyd, G.E., Maillet, F., Penmetsa, R.V., Cook, D., Long, S.R., 
Denarie, J., and Gough, C. (2003). The NFP locus of Medicago truncatula controls 
an early step of Nod factor signal transduction upstream of a rapid calcium flux 
and root hair deformation. Plant J. 34: 495-506. 
Andriankaja, A., Boisson-Demier, A., Frances, L., Sauviac, L., Jauneau, A., Barker, D.G., 
and de Carvalho-Niebel, F. (2007). AP2-ERF transcription factors mediate Nod 
factor-dependent Mt ENOD11 activation in root hairs via a novel cis-regulatory 
motif. Plant Cell 19: 2866-2885. 
Ane, J.M., Kiss, G.B., Riely, B.K., Penmetsa, R.V., Oldroyd, G.E., Ayax, C., Levy, J., 
Debelle, F., Baek, J.M., Kalo, P., Rosenberg, C., Roe, B.A., Long, S.R., Denarie, J., 
and Cook, D.R. (2004). Medicago truncatula DMI1 required for bacterial and 
fungal symbioses in legumes. Science 303: 1364-1367. 
Ardourel, M., Demont, N., Debelle, F., Maillet, F., de Billy, F., Prome, J.C., Denarie, J., 
and Truchet, G. (1994). Rhizobium meliloti lipooligosaccharide nodulation factors: 
different structural requirements for bacterial entry into target root hair cells and 
induction of plant symbiotic developmental responses. Plant Cell 6: 1357-1374. 
Arrighi, J.F., Barre, A., Ben Amor, B., Bersoult, A., Soriano, L.C., Mirabella, R., de 
Carvalho-Niebel, F., Journet, E.P., Gherardi, M., Huguet, T., Geurts, R., Denarie, 
J., Rouge, P., and Gough, C. (2006). The Medicago truncatula lysine motif-
receptor-like kinase gene family includes NFP and new nodule-expressed genes. 
Plant Physiol. 142: 265-279. 
Bateman, A., and Bycroft, M. (2000). The structure of a LysM domain from E-coli 
membrane-bound lytic murein transglycosylase D (MltD). J. Mol. Biol. 299: 1113-
1119. 
Begum, A.A., Leibovitch, S., Migner, P., and Zhang, F. (2001). Specific flavonoids induced 
nod gene expression and pre-activated nod genes of Rhizobium leguminosarum 
References 
increased pea (Pisum sativum L.) and lentil (Lens culinaris L.) nodulation in 
controlled growth chamber environments. J. Exp. Bot. 52: 1537-1543. 
Bek, A.S., Thygesen, M.B., Duus, J., Petersen, B.O., Thirup, S., James, E., Jensen, K.J., 
Stougaard, J., and Radutoiu, S. (2010). Improved characterization of Nod factors 
and genetically based variation in LysM receptor domains identify amino acids 
expendable for Nod factor recognition in Lotus spp. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 
23: 58-66. 
Berridge, M.J., Bootman, M.D., and Roderick, H.L. (2003). Calcium signalling: dynamics, 
homeostasis and remodelling. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 4: 517-529. 
Bersoult, A., Camut, S., Perhald, A., Kereszt, A., Kiss, G.B., and Cullimore, J.V. (2005). 
Expression of the Medicago truncatula DMI2 gene suggests roles of the symbiotic 
nodulation receptor kinase in nodules and during early nodule development. Mol. 
Plant-Microbe Interact. 18: 869-876. 
Besserer, A., Becard, G., Jauneau, A., Roux, C., and Sejalon-Delmas, N. (2008). GR24, a 
synthetic analog of strigolactones, stimulates the mitosis and growth of the 
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus Gigaspora rosea by boosting its energy metabolism. 
Plant Physiol. 148: 402-413. 
Bevan, M. (1984). Binary Agrobacterium vectors for plant transformation. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 12: 8711-8721. 
Bloemberg, G.V., Thomasoates, J.E., Lugtenberg, B.J.J., and Spaink, H.P. (1994). 
Nodulation protein NodL of Rhizobium-leguminosarum O-acetylates lipo-
oligosaccharides, chitin fragments and N-acetylglucosamine in-vitro Mol. 
Microbiol. 11: 793-804. 
Bootman, M.D., Fearnley, C., Smyrnias, I., MacDonald, F., and Roderick, H.L. (2009). An 
update on nuclear calcium signalling. J. Cell Sci. 122: 2337-2350. 
Boyum, R., and Guidotti, G. (1997). Glucose-dependent, cAMP-mediated ATP efflux from 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Microbiology-Uk 143: 1901-1908. 
Brewin, N.J. (2004). Plant cell wall remodelling in the rhizobium-legume symbiosis. Crit. 
Rev. Plant Sci. 23: 293-316. 
Buee, M., Rossignol, M., Jauneau, A., Ranjeva, R., and Becard, G. (2000). The pre-
symbiotic growth of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi is induced by a branching factor 
partially purified from plant root exudates. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 13: 693-
Burnstock, G. (2007). Physiology and pathophysiology of purinergic neurotransmission. 
Physiol. Rev. 87: 659-797. 
Burnstock, G., and Williams, M. (2000). P2 purinergic receptors: modulation of cell 
function and therapeutic potential. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 295: 862-869. 
Capoen, W., and Oldroyd, G. (2008). How CYCLOPS keeps an eye on plant symbiosis. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105: 20053-20054. 
Capoen, W., Goormachtig, S., De Rycke, R., Schroeyers, K., and Holsters, M. (2005). 
SrSymRK, a plant receptor essential for symbiosome formation. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA 102: 10369-10374. 
Capoen, W., Den Herder, J., Sun, J.H., Verplancke, C., De Keyser, A., De Rycke, R., 
Goormachtig, S., Oldroyd, G., and Holsters, M. (2009). Calcium spiking patterns 
and the role of the calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase CCaMK in lateral root 
base nodulation of Sesbania rostrata. Plant Cell 21: 1526-1540. 
References 
Cardenas, L., Martinez, A., Sanchez, F., and Quinto, C. (2008). Fast, transient and specific 
intracellular ROS changes in living root hair cells responding to Nod factors (NFs). 
Plant J. 56: 802-813. 
Cardenas, L., Vidali, L., Domnguez, J., Prez, H., Snchez, F., Hepler, P.K., and Quinto, C. 
(1998). Rearrangement of actin microfilaments in plant root hairs responding to 
Rhizobium etli nodulation signals. Plant Physiol. 116: 871-877. 
Cardenas, L., Feijo, J.A., Kunkel, J.G., Sanchez, F., Holdaway-Clarke, T., Hepler, P.K., and 
Quinto, C. (1999). Rhizobium nod factors induce increases in intracellular free 
calcium and extracellular calcium influxes in bean root hairs. Plant J. 19: 347-352. 
Catoira, R., Timmers, A.C., Maillet, F., Galera, C., Penmetsa, R.V., Cook, D., Denarie, J., 
and Gough, C. (2001). The HCL gene of Medicago truncatula controls Rhizobium-
induced root hair curling. Development 128: 1507-1518. 
Catoira, R., Galera, C., de Billy, F., Penmetsa, R.V., Journet, E.P., Maillet, F., Rosenberg, 
C., Cook, D., Gough, C., and Denarie, J. (2000). Four genes of Medicago truncatula 
controlling components of a nod factor transduction pathway. Plant Cell 12: 1647-
1665. 
Cavagnaro, T.R., Smith, S.E., and Dickson, S. (2001). Backseat driving? Accessing 
phosphate beyond the rhizosphere-depletion zone. Trends Plant Sci. 6: 194-195. 
Charpentier, M., Bredemeier, R., Wanner, G., Takeda, N., Schleiff, E., and Parniske, M. 
(2008). Lotus japonicus CASTOR and POLLUX are ion channels essential for 
perinuclear calcium spiking in legume root endosymbiosis. Plant Cell 20: 3467-
3479. 
Charron, D., Pingret, J.L., Chabaud, M., Journet, E.P., and Barker, D.G. (2004). 
Pharmacological evidence that multiple phospholipid signaling pathways link 
rhizobium nodulation factor perception in Medicago truncatula root hairs to 
intracellular responses, including Ca
 spiking and specific ENOD gene expression. 
Plant Physiol. 136: 3582-3593. 
Cohn, J.R., Uhm, T., Ramu, S., Nam, Y.W., Kim, D.J., Penmetsa, R.V., Wood, T.C., Denny, 
R.L., Young, N.D., Cook, D.R., and Stacey, G. (2001). Differential regulation of a 
family of apyrase genes from Medicago truncatula. Plant Physiol. 125: 2104-2119. 
Cook, D., Dreyer, D., Bonnet, D., Howell, M., Nony, E., and Vandenbosch, K. (1995). 
Transient induction of a peroxidase gene in Medicago truncatula precedes 
Infection by Rhizobium meliloti. Plant Cell 7: 43-55. 
Cooper, J.B., and Long, S.R. (1994). Morphogenetic rescue of Rhizobium meliloti 
nodulation mutants by trans-zeatin secretion. Plant Cell 6: 215-225. 
Cooper, J.E. (2007). Early interactions between legumes and rhizobia: disclosing 
complexity in a molecular dialogue. J. Appl. Microbiol. 103: 1355-1365. 
Corvera, A., Prome, D., Prome, J.C., Martinez-Romero, E., and Romero, D. (1999). The 
nolL gene from Rhizobium etli determines nodulation efficiency by mediating the 
acetylation of the fucosyl residue in the nodulation factor. Mol. Plant-Microbe 
Interact. 12: 236-246. 
D'Haeze, W., De Rycke, R., Mathis, R., Goormachtig, S., Pagnotta, S., Verplancke, C., 
Capoen, W., and Holsters, M. (2003). Reactive oxygen species and ethylene play a 
positive role in lateral root base nodulation of a semiaquatic legume. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 100: 11789-11794. 
Davis, R.J. (2000). Signal transduction by the JNK group of MAP kinases. Cell 103: 239-
References 
Day, R.B., McAlvin, C.B., Loh, J.T., Denny, R.L., Wood, T.C., Young, N.D., and Stacey, G. 
(2000). Differential expression of two soybean apyrases, one of which is an early 
nodulin. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 13: 1053-1070. 
de Ruijter, N.C.A., Bisseling, T., and Emons, A.M.C. (1999). Rhizobium Nod factors induce 
an increase in sub-apical fine bundles of actin filaments in Vicia sativa root hairs 
within minutes. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 12: 829-832. 
de Ruijter, N.C.A., Rook, M.B., Bisseling, T., and Emons, A.M.C. (1998). Lipochito-
oligosaccharides re-initiate root hair tip growth in Vicia sativa with high calcium 
and spectrin-like antigen at the tip. Plant J. 13: 341-350. 
Debelle, F., Rosenberg, C., Vasse, J., Maillet, F., Martinez, E., Denarie, J., and Truchet, G. 
(1986). Assignment of symbiotic developmental phenotypes to common and 
specific nodulation (Nod) genetic-loci of Rhizobium-Meliloti. J. Bacteriol. 168: 
1075-1086. 
Demchenko, K., Winzer, T., Stougaard, J., Parniske, M., and Pawlowski, K. (2004). 
Distinct roles of Lotus japonicus SYMRK and SYM15 in root colonization and 
arbuscule formation. New Phytol. 163: 381-392. 
Demidchik, V., Nichols, C., Oliynyk, M., Dark, A., Glover, B.J., and Davies, J.M. (2003). Is 
ATP a signaling agent in plants? Plant Physiol. 133: 456-461. 
Demidchik, V., Shang, Z.L., Shin, R., Thompson, E., Rubio, L., Laohavisit, A., Mortimer, 
J.C., Chivasa, S., Slabas, A.R., Glover, B.J., Schachtman, D.P., Shabala, S.N., and 
Davies, J.M. (2009). Plant extracellular ATP signalling by plasma membrane 
NADPH oxidase and Ca
 channels. Plant J. 58: 903-913. 
Demont, N., Debelle, F., Aurelle, H., Denarie, J., and Prome, J.C. (1993). Role of the 
Rhizobium meliloti nodF and nodE genes in the biosynthesis of lipo-
oligosaccharidic nodulation factors. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 20134-20142. 
den Hartog, M., Musgrave, A., and Munnik, T. (2001). Nod factor-induced phosphatidic 
acid and diacylglycerol pyrophosphate formation: a role for phospholipase C and 
D in root hair deformation. Plant J. 25: 55-65. 
den Hartog, M., Verhoef, N., and Munnik, T. (2003). Nod factor and elicitors activate 
different phospholipid signaling pathways in suspension-cultured alfalfa cells. 
Plant Physiol. 132: 311-317. 
Den Herder, J., Vanhee, C., De Rycke, R., Corich, V., Holsters, M., and Goormachtig, S. 
(2007). Nod factor perception during infection thread growth fine-tunes 
nodulation. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 20: 129-137. 
Denarie, J., Debelle, F., and Prome, J.C. (1996). Rhizobium lipo-chitooligosaccharide 
nodulation factors: signaling molecules mediating recognition and morphogenesis. 
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 65: 503-535. 
Diaz, C.L., Gronlund, M., Schlaman, H.R.M., and Spaink, H.P. (2005). Induction of hairy 
roots for symbiotic gene expression studies. Lotus Japonicus Handbook: 261-277. 
Ding, Y., Kalo, P., Yendrek, C., Sun, J., Liang, Y., Marsh, J.F., Harris, J.M., and Oldroyd, 
G.E.D. (2008). Abscisic acid coordinates nod factor and cytokinin signaling during 
the regulation of nodulation in Medicago truncatula. Plant Cell 20: 2681-2695. 
Dodd, A.N., Gardner, M.J., Hotta, C.T., Hubbard, K.E., Dalchau, N., Love, J., Assie, J.M., 
Robertson, F.C., Jakobsen, M.K., Goncalves, J., Sanders, D., and Webb, A.A.R. 
(2007). The Arabidopsis circadian clock incorporates a cADPR-based feedback 
loop. Science 318: 1789-1792. 
Dolmetsch, R.E., Xu, K., and Lewis, R.S. (1998). Calcium oscillations increase the 
efficiency and specificity of gene expression. Nature 392: 933-936. 
References 
Downie, J.A., and Walker, S.A. (1999). Plant responses to nodulation factors. Curr. Opin. 
Plant Biol. 2: 483-489. 
Doyle, J.J. (1998). Phylogenetic perspectives on nodulation: evolving views of plants and 
symbiotic bacteria. Trends Plant Sci. 3: 473-478. 
Economou, A., Hamilton, W.D., Johnston, A.W., and Downie, J.A. (1990). The Rhizobium 
nodulation gene nodO encodes a Ca
-binding protein that is exported without N-
terminal cleavage and is homologous to haemolysin and related proteins. EMBO J. 
9: 349-354. 
Edwards, A., Heckmann, A.B., Yousafzai, F., Duc, G., and Downie, J.A. (2007). Structural 
implications of mutations in the pea SYM8 symbiosis gene, the DMI1 ortholog, 
encoding a predicted ion channel. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 20: 1183-1191. 
Edwards, F.A., Gibb, A.J., and Colquhoun, D. (1992). ATP receptor-mediated synaptic 
currents in the central-nervous-system. Nature 359: 144-147. 
Ehrhardt, D.W., Atkinson, E.M., and Long, S.R. (1992). Depolarization of alfalfa root hair 
membrane potential by Rhizobium meliloti Nod factors. Science 256: 998-1000. 
Ehrhardt, D.W., Wais, R., and Long, S.R. (1996). Calcium spiking in plant root hairs 
responding to Rhizobium nodulation signals. Cell 85: 673-681. 
Endre, G., Kereszt, A., Kevei, Z., Mihacea, S., Kalo, P., and Kiss, G.B. (2002). A receptor 
kinase gene regulating symbiotic nodule development. Nature 417: 962-966. 
Engstrom, E.M., Ehrhardt, D.W., Mitra, R.M., and Long, S.R. (2002). Pharmacological 
analysis of nod factor-induced calcium spiking in Medicago truncatula. Evidence 
for the requirement of type IIA calcium pumps and phosphoinositide signaling. 
Plant Physiol. 128: 1390-1401. 
Esseling, J.J., Lhuissier, F.G.P., and Emons, A.M.C. (2003). Nod factor-induced root hair 
curling: continuous polar growth towards the point of Nod factor application. 
Plant Physiol. 132: 1982-1988. 
Esseling, J.J., Lhuissier, F.G.P., and Emons, A.M.C. (2004). A nonsymbiotic root hair tip 
growth phenotype in dulation NORK-mutated legumes: implications for 
nodulation factor-induced signaling and formation of a multifaceted root hair 
pocket for bacteria. Plant Cell 16: 933-944. 
Etzler, M.E., Kalsi, G., Ewing, N.N., Roberts, N.J., Day, R.B., and Murphy, J.B. (1999). A 
Nod factor binding lectin with apyrase activity from legume roots. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 96: 5856-5861. 
Evans, N.H., McAinsh, M.R., and Hetherington, A.M. (2001). Calcium oscillations in 
higher plants. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 4: 415-420. 
Fahraeus, G. (1957). The infection of clover root hairs by nodule bacteria studied by a 
simple glass slide technique. J. Gen. Microbiol. 16: 374-381. 
Fang, Y.W., and Hirsch, A.M. (1998). Studying early nodulin gene ENOD40 expression and 
induction by nodulation factor and cytokinin in transgenic alfalfa. Plant Physiol. 
116: 53-68. 
Faucher, C., Camut, S., Denarie, J., and Truchet, G. (1989). The NodH and NodQ host 
range genes of Rhizobium meliloti behave as avirulence genes in R. 
leguminosarum bv viciae and determine changes in the production of plant-
specific extracellular signals. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 2: 291-300. 
Felle, H.H., and Hepler, P.K. (1997). The cytosolic Ca
 concentration gradient of sinapis 
alba root hairs as revealed by Ca
-selective microelectrode tests and fura-dextran 
ratio imaging. Plant Physiol. 114: 39-45. 
References 
Felle, H.H., Kondorosi, E., Kondorosi, A., and Schultze, M. (1996). Rapid alkalinization in 
alfalfa root hairs in response to rhizobial lipochitooligosaccharide signals. Plant J. 
10: 295-301. 
Felle, H.H., Kondorosi, E., Kondorosi, A., and Schultze, M. (1998). The role of ion fluxes in 
Nod factor signalling in Medicago sativa. Plant J. 13: 455-463. 
Felle, H.H., Kondorosi, E., Kondorosi, A., and Schultze, M. (1999a). Elevation of the 
cytosolic free [Ca
] is indispensable for the transduction of the Nod factor signal 
in alfalfa. Plant Physiol. 121: 273-280. 
Felle, H.H., Kondorosi, E., Kondorosi, A., and Schultze, M. (1999b). Nod factors modulate 
the concentration of cytosolic free calcium differently in growing and non-growing 
root hairs of Medicago sativa Planta 209: 207-212. 
Firmin, J.L., Wilson, K.E., Carlson, R.W., Davies, A.E., and Downie, J.A. (1993). Resistance 
to nodulation of cv Afghanistan peas is overcome by NodX, which mediates an O-
acetylation of the Rhizobium leguminosarum lipo-oligosaccharide nodulation 
factor. Mol. Microbiol. 10: 351-360. 
Fisher, R.F., and Long, S.R. (1993). Interactions of nodD at the nod box - nodD binds to 2 
distinct sites on the same face of the helix and induces a bend in the DNA. J. Mol. 
Biol. 233: 336-348. 
Foreman, J., Demidchik, V., Bothwell, J.H.F., Mylona, P., Miedema, H., Torres, M.A., 
Linstead, P., Costa, S., Brownlee, C., Jones, J.D.G., Davies, J.M., and Dolan, L. 
(2003). Reactive oxygen species produced by NADPH oxidase regulate plant cell 
growth. Nature 422: 442-446. 
Fountain, S.J., Cao, L.S., Young, M.T., and North, R.A. (2008). Permeation properties of a 
P2X receptor in the green algae Ostreococcus tauri. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 15122-
15126. 
Fournier, J., Timmers, A.C.J., Sieberer, B.J., Jauneau, A., Chabaud, M., and Barker, D.G. 
(2008). Mechanism of infection thread elongation in root hairs of Medicago 
truncatula and dynamic interplay with associated rhizobial colonization. Plant 
Physiol. 148: 1985-1995. 
Franklin-Tong, V.E., Ride, J.P., Read, N.D., Trewavas, A.J., and Franklin, F.C.H. (1993). 
The self-incompatibility response in Papaver rhoeas is mediated by cytosolic-free 
calcium. Plant J. 4: 163-177. 
Gage, D.J. (2002). Analysis of infection thread development using GFP- and DsRed-
expressing Sinorhizobium meliloti. J. Bacteriol. 184: 7042-7046. 
Gage, D.J., Bobo, T., and Long, S.R. (1996). Use of green fluorescent protein to visualize 
the early events of symbiosis between Rhizobium meliloti and alfalfa (Medicago 
sativa). J. Bacteriol. 178: 7159-7166. 
Gamas, P., de Billy, F., and Truchet, G. (1998). Symbiosis-specific expression of two 
Medicago truncatula nodulin genes, MtN1 and MtN13, encoding products 
homologous to plant defense proteins. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 11: 393-403. 
Gamborg, O.L., Miller, R.A., and Ojima, K. (1968). Nutrient requirements of suspension 
cultures of soybean root cells. Exp. Cell Res. 50: 151-158. 
Gao, X.D., Kaigorodov, V., and Jigami, Y. (1999). YND1, a homologue of GDA1, encodes 
membrane-bound apyrase required for Golgi N- and O-glycosylation in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 21450-21456. 
Gehring, C.A., Irving, H.R., Kabbara, A.A., Parish, R.W., Boukli, N.M., and Broughton, 
W.J. (1997). Rapid, plateau-like increases in intracellular free calcium are 
References 
associated with Nod-factor-induced root-hair deformation. Mol. Plant-Microbe 
Interact. 10: 791-802. 
Genre, A., Chabaud, M., Timmers, T., Bonfante, P., and Barker, D.G. (2005). Arbuscular 
mycorrhizal fungi elicit a novel intracellular apparatus in Medicago truncatula root 
epidermal cells before infection. Plant Cell 17: 3489-3499. 
Gerasimovskaya, E.V., Ahmad, S., White, C.W., Jones, P.L., Carpenter, T.C., and 
Stenmark, K.R. (2002). Extracellular ATP is an autocrine/paracrine regulator of 
hypoxia-induced adventitial fibroblast growth - Signaling through extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase-1/2 and the Egr-1 transcription factor. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 
44638-44650. 
Geurts, R., Heidstra, R., Hadri, A.E., Downie, J.A., Franssen, H., vanKammen, A., and 
Bisseling, T. (1997). Sym2 of pea is involved in a nodulation factor-perception 
mechanism that controls the infection process in the epidermis. Plant Physiol. 
115: 351-359. 
Gherbi, H., Markmann, K., Svistoonoff, S., Estevan, J., Autran, D., Giczey, G., Auguy, F., 
Peret, B., Laplaze, L., Franche, C., Parniske, M., and Bogusz, D. (2008). SymRK 
defines a common genetic basis for plant root endosymbioses with arbuscular 
mycorrhiza fungi, rhizobia, and Frankia bacteria. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105: 
4928-4932. 
Gleason, C., Chaudhuri, S., Yang, T.B., Munoz, A., Poovaiah, B.W., and Oldroyd, G.E.D. 
(2006). Nodulation independent of rhizobia induced by a calcium-activated kinase 
lacking autoinhibition. Nature 441: 1149-1152. 
Goedhart, J., Hink, M.A., Visser, A., Bisseling, T., and Gadella, T.W.J. (2000). In vivo 
fluorescence correlation microscopy (FCM) reveals accumulation and 
immobilization of Nod factors in root hair cell walls. Plant J. 21: 109-119. 
Gonzalez-Rizzo, S., Crespi, M., and Frugier, F. (2006). The Medicago truncatula CRE1 
cytokinin receptor regulates lateral root development and early symbiotic 
interaction with Sinorhizobium meliloti. Plant Cell 18: 2680-2693. 
Gonzalez, J.E., Reuhs, B.L., and Walker, G.C. (1996). Low molecular weight EPS II of 
Rhizobium meliloti allows nodule invasion in Medicago sativa. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA 93: 8636-8641. 
Goormachtig, S., Capoen, W., James, E.K., and Holsters, M. (2004). Switch from 
intracellular to intercellular invasion during water stress-tolerant legume 
nodulation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101: 6303-6308. 
Govindarajulu, M., Kim, S.Y., Libault, M., Berg, R.H., Tanaka, K., Stacey, G., and Taylor, 
C.G. (2009). GS52 ecto-apyrase plays a critical role during soybean nodulation. 
Plant Physiol. 149: 994-1004. 
Groth, M., Takeda, N., Perry, J., Uchida, H., Draxl, S., Brachmann, A., Sato, S., Tabata, S., 
Kawaguchi, M., Wang, T.L., and Parniske, M. (2010). NENA, a Lotus japonicus 
homolog of Sec13, is required for rhizodermal infection by arbuscular mycorrhiza 
fungi and rhizobia but dispensable for cortical endosymbiotic development. Plant 
Cell 22: 2509-2526. 
Gualtieri, G., and Bisseling, T. (2000). The evolution of nodulation. Plant Mol. Biol. 42: 
181-194. 
Hanley, P.J., Mussett, B., Renigunta, V., Limberg, S.H., Dalpke, A.H., Sus, R., Heeg, K.M., 
Preisig-Muller, R., and Daut, J. (2004). Extracellular ATP induces oscillations of 
intracellular Ca
 and membrane potential and promotes transcription of IL-6 in 
macrophages. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101: 9479-9484. 
References 
Harris, J.M., Wais, R., and Long, S.R. (2003). Rhizobium-induced calcium spiking in Lotus 
japonicus. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 16: 335-341. 
Harrison, M.J. (1997). The arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis: An underground association. 
Trends Plant Sci. 2: 54-60. 
Harrison, M.J. (1998). Development of the arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis. Curr. Opin. 
Plant Biol. 1: 360-365. 
Harrison, M.J. (2005). Signaling in the arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis. Annu. Rev. 
Microbiol. 59: 19-42. 
Heckmann, A.B., Lombardo, F., Miwa, H., Perry, J.A., Bunnewell, S., Parniske, M., Wang, 
T.L., and Downie, J.A. (2006). Lotus japonicus nodulation requires two GRAS 
domain regulators, one of which is functionally conserved in a non-legume. Plant 
Physiol. 142: 1739-1750. 
Heidstra, R., Yang, W.C., Yalcin, Y., Peck, S., Emons, A.M., vanKammen, A., and 
Bisseling, T. (1997). Ethylene provides positional information on cortical cell 
division but is not involved in Nod factor-induced root hair tip growth in 
Rhizobium-legume interaction. Development 124: 1781-1787. 
Heine, P., Braun, N., Heilbronn, A., and Zimmermann, H. (1999). Functional 
characterization of rat ecto-ATPase and ecto-ATP diphosphohydrolase after 
heterologous expression in CHO cells. Eur. J. Biochem. 262: 102-107. 
Hirsch, A.M., and Fang, Y.W. (1994). Plant hormones and nodulation - What's the 
connection? Plant Mol. Biol. 26: 5-9. 
Hirsch, A.M., Bhuvaneswari, T.V., Torrey, J.G., and Bisseling, T. (1989). Early nodulin 
genes are induced in alfalfa root outgrowths elicited by auxin transport inhibitors. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86: 1244-1248. 
Hirsch, S., Kim, J., Munoz, A., Heckmann, A.B., Downie, J.A., and Oldroyd, G.E.D. (2009). 
GRAS proteins form a DNA binding complex to induce gene expression during 
nodulation signaling in Medicago truncatula. Plant Cell 21: 545-557. 
HoldawayClarke, T.L., Feijo, J.A., Hackett, G.R., Kunkel, J.G., and Hepler, P.K. (1997). 
Pollen tube growth and the intracellular cytosolic calcium gradient oscillate in 
phase while extracellular calcium influx is delayed. Plant Cell 9: 1999-2010. 
Holford, I.C.R. (1997). Soil phosphorus: its measurement, and its uptake by plants. Aust. J. 
Soil Res. 35: 227-239. 
Hsieh, H.L., Song, C.J., and Roux, S.J. (2000). Regulation of a recombinant pea nuclear 
apyrase by calmodulin and casein kinase II. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Gene Struct. 
Expression 1494: 248-255. 
Hungria, M., Johnston, A.W.B., and Phillips, D.A. (1992). Effects of flavonoids released 
naturally from bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) on NodD-regulated gene-transcription in 
Rhizobium leguminosarum bv phaseoli. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 5: 199-203. 
Huse, M., and Kuriyan, J. (2002). The conformational plasticity of protein kinases. Cell 
109: 275-282. 
Idzko, M., Hammad, H., van Nimwegen, M., Kool, M., Willart, M.A.M., Muskens, F., 
Hoogsteden, H.C., Luttmann, W., Ferrari, D., Di Virgilio, F., Virchow, J.C., and 
Lambrecht, B.N. (2007). Extracellular ATP triggers and maintains asthmatic airway 
inflammation by activating dendritic cells. Nat. Med. 13: 913-919. 
Imaizumi-Anraku, H., Takeda, N., Charpentier, M., Perry, J., Miwa, H., Umehara, Y., 
Kouchi, H., Murakami, Y., Mulder, L., Vickers, K., Pike, J., Downie, J.A., Wang, T., 
Sato, S., Asamizu, E., Tabata, S., Yoshikawa, M., Murooka, Y., Wu, G.J., 
Kawaguchi, M., Kawasaki, S., Parniske, M., and Hayashi, M. (2005). Plastid 
References 
proteins crucial for symbiotic fungal and bacterial entry into plant roots. Nature 
433: 527-531. 
Jakobsen, I. (1995). Transport of phosphorus and carbon in VA mycorrhizas. Mycorrhiza: 
Structure, function, molecular biology and biotechnology: 297-324. 
Jeter, C.R., Tang, W.Q., Henaff, E., Butterfield, T., and Roux, S.J. (2004). Evidence of a 
novel cell signaling role for extracellular adenosine triphosphates and 
diphosphates in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 16: 2652-2664. 
Johnson, C.H., Knight, M.R., Kondo, T., Masson, P., Sedbrook, J., Haley, A., and 
Trewavas, A. (1995). Circadian oscillations of cytosolic and chloroplastic free 
calcium in plants. Science 269: 1863-1865. 
Jones, D.A., and Jones, J.D.G. (1997). The role of leucine-rich repeat proteins in plant 
defences. Adv. Bot. Res. 24: 89-167. 
Jones, K.M., and Walker, G.C. (2008). Responses of the model legume Medicago 
truncatula to the rhizobial exopolysaccharide succinoglycan. Plant Signal. Behav. 
3: 888-890. 
Jones, K.M., Sharopova, N., Lohar, D.P., Zhang, J.Q., VandenBosch, K.A., and Walker, 
G.C. (2008). Differential response of the plant Medicago truncatula to its symbiont 
Sinorhizobium meliloti or an exopolysaccharide-deficient mutant. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA 105: 704-709. 
Jordan, D.C., Grinyer, I., and Coulter, W.H. (1963). Electron microscopy of infection 
threads and bacteria in young root nodules of Medicago sativa. J. Bacteriol. 86: 
125-137. 
Journet, E.P., Pichon, M., Dedieu, A., Debilly, F., Truchet, G., and Barker, D.G. (1994). 
Rhizobium meliloti Nod factors elicit cell-specific transcription of the ENOD12 gene 
in transgenic alfalfa Plant J. 6: 241-249. 
Journet, E.P., El-Gachtouli, N., Vernoud, V., de Billy, F., Pichon, M., Dedieu, A., Arnould, 
C., Morandi, D., Barker, D.G., and Gianinazzi-Pearson, V. (2001). Medicago 
truncatula ENOD11: A novel RPRP-encoding early nodulin gene expressed during 
mycorrhization in arbuscule-containing cells. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 14: 737-
Kalsi, G., and Etzler, M.E. (2000). Localization of a Nod factor-binding protein in legume 
roots and factors influencing its distribution and expression. Plant Physiol. 124: 
1039-1048. 
Kanamori, N., Madsen, L.H., Radutoiu, S., Frantescu, M., Quistgaard, E.M., Miwa, H., 
Downie, J.A., James, E.K., Felle, H.H., Haaning, L.L., Jensen, T.H., Sato, S., 
Nakamura, Y., Tabata, S., Sandal, N., and Stougaard, J. (2006). A nucleoporin is 
required for induction of Ca
 spiking in legume nodule development and essential 
for rhizobial and fungal symbiosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103: 359-364. 
Kawaguchi, M., Imaizumi-Anraku, H., Koiwa, H., Niwa, S., Ikuta, A., Syono, K., and Akao, 
S. (2002). Root, root hair, and symbiotic mutants of the model legume Lotus 
japonicus. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 15: 17-26. 
Kevei, Z., Lougnon, G., Mergaert, P., Horvath, G.V., Kereszt, A., Jayaraman, D., Zaman, 
N., Marcel, F., Regulski, K., Kiss, G.B., Kondorosi, A., Endre, G., Kondorosi, E., and 
Ane, J.M. (2007). 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase1 interacts 
with NORK and is crucial for nodulation in Medicago truncatula. Plant Cell 19: 
3974-3989. 
Khakh, B.S. (2001). Molecular physiology of P2X receptors and ATP signalling at synapses. 
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2: 165-174. 
References 
Kim, S.Y., Sivaguru, M., and Stacey, G. (2006). Extracellular ATP in plants. Visualization, 
localization, and analysis of physiological significance in growth and signaling. 
Plant Physiol. 142: 984-992. 
Kim, T.H., Bohmer, M., Hu, H.H., Nishimura, N., and Schroeder, J.I. (2010). Guard cell 
signal transduction network: advances in understanding abscisic acid, CO2, and 
 signaling. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 61: 561-591. 
Kistner, C., Winzer, T., Pitzschke, A., Mulder, L., Sato, S., Kaneko, T., Tabata, S., Sandal, 
N., Stougaard, J., Webb, K.J., Szczyglowski, K., and Parniske, M. (2005). Seven 
Lotus japonicus genes required for transcriptional reprogramming of the root 
during fungal and bacterial symbiosis. Plant Cell 17: 2217-2229. 
Knight, H., Trewavas, A.J., and Knight, M.R. (1997). Calcium signalling in Arabidopsis 
thaliana responding to drought and salinity. Plant J. 12: 1067-1078. 
Knight, M.R., Campbell, A.K., Smith, S.M., and Trewavas, A.J. (1991). Transgenic plant 
aequorin reports the effects of touch and cold-shock and elicitors on cytoplasmic 
calcium. Nature 352: 524-526. 
Komoszynski, M., and Wojtczak, A. (1996). Apyrases (ATP diphosphohydrolases, EC 
3.6.1.5): Function and relationship to ATPases. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1310: 233-
Kosuta, S., Chabaud, M., Lougnon, G., Gough, C., Denarie, J., Barker, D.G., and Becard, 
G. (2003). A diffusible factor from arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi induces symbiosis-
specific MtENOD11 expression in roots of Medicago truncatula. Plant Physiol. 131: 
952-962. 
Kosuta, S., Hazledine, S., Sun, J., Miwa, H., Morris, R.J., Downie, J.A., and Oldroyd, 
G.E.D. (2008). Differential and chaotic calcium signatures in the symbiosis 
signaling pathway of legumes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105: 9823-9828. 
Kramadibrata, K., Walker, C., Schwarzott, D., and Schussler, A. (2000). A new species of 
Scutellospora a with a coiled germination shield. Ann. Bot. 86: 21-27. 
Krusell, L., Madsen, L.H., Sato, S., Aubert, G., Genua, A., Szczyglowski, K., Duc, G., 
Kaneko, T., Tabata, S., de Bruijn, F., Pajuelo, E., Sandal, N., and Stougaard, J. 
(2002). Shoot control of root development and nodulation is mediated by a 
receptor-like kinase. Nature 420: 422-426. 
Kukulski, F., and Komoszynski, M. (2003). Purification and characterization of NTPDase1 
(ecto-apyrase) and NTPDase2 (ecto-ATPase) from porcine brain cortex 
synaptosomes. Eur. J. Biochem. 270: 3447-3454. 
Kurkdjian, A.C. (1995). Role of the differentiation of root epidermal-cells in nod factor 
(from Rhizobium meliloti)-induced root-hair depolarization of Medicago sativa. 
Plant Physiol. 107: 783-790. 
Lerouge, P., Roche, P., Faucher, C., Maillet, F., Truchet, G., Prome, J.C., and Denarie, J. 
(1990). Symbiotic host-specificity of Rhizobium meliloti is determined by a sulfated 
and acylated glucosamine oligosaccharide signal. Nature 344: 781-784. 
Levy, J., Bres, C., Geurts, R., Chalhoub, B., Kulikova, O., Duc, G., Journet, E.P., Ane, J.M., 
Lauber, E., Bisseling, T., Denarie, J., Rosenberg, C., and Debelle, F. (2004). A 
putative Ca
 and calmodulin-dependent protein kinase required for bacterial and 
fungal symbioses. Science 303: 1361-1364. 
Lew, R.R., and Dearnaley, J.D.W. (2000). Extracellular nucleotide effects on the electrical 
properties of growing Arabidopsis thaliana root hairs. Plant Sci. 153: 1-6. 
References 
Li, W.H., Llopis, J., Whitney, M., Zlokarnik, G., and Tsien, R.Y. (1998). Cell-permeant 
caged InsP(3) ester shows that Ca
 spike frequency can optimize gene expression. 
Nature 392: 936-941. 
Li, Y.H., Sorefan, K., Hemmann, G., and Bevan, M.W. (2004). Arabidopsis NAP and PIR 
regulate actin-based cell morphogenesis and multiple developmental processes. 
Plant Physiol. 136: 3616-3627. 
Libbenga, K.R., and Harkes, P.A.A. (1973). Initial proliferation of cortical cells in 
formation of root nodules in Pisum sativum Planta 114: 17-28. 
Limpens, E., Franken, C., Smit, P., Willemse, J., Bisseling, T., and Geurts, R. (2003). LysM 
domain receptor kinases regulating rhizobial Nod factor-induced infection. 
Science 302: 630-633. 
Liu, X.X., Hashimoto-Torii, K., Torii, M., Haydar, T.F., and Rakic, P. (2008). The role of 
ATP signaling in the migration of intermediate neuronal progenitors to the 
neocortical subventricular zone. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105: 11802-11807. 
Lloyd, C.W., Pearce, K.J., Rawlins, D.J., Ridge, R.W., and Shaw, P.J. (1987). Endoplasmic 
microtubules connect the advancing nucleus to the tip of legume root hairs, but F-
actin is involved in basipetal migration Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton 8: 27-36. 
Lohmann, G.V., Shimoda, Y., Nielsen, M.W., Jorgensen, F.G., Grossmann, C., Sandal, N., 
Sorensen, K., Thirup, S., Madsen, L.H., Tabata, S., Sato, S., Stougaard, J., and 
Radutoiu, S. (2010). Evolution and regulation of the Lotus japonicus LysM receptor 
gene family. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 23: 510-521. 
Long, S.R. (1996). Rhizobium symbiosis: Nod factors in perspective. Plant Cell 8: 1885-
1898. 
Long, S.R. (2001). Genes and signals in the Rhizobium-legume symbiosis. Plant Physiol. 
125: 69-72. 
Lopez-Lara, I.M., BlokTip, L., Quinto, C., Garcia, M.L., Stacey, G., Bloemberg, G.V., 
Lamers, G.E.M., Lugtenberg, B.J.J., ThomasOates, J.E., and Spaink, H.P. (1996). 
NodZ of Bradyrhizobium extends the nodulation host range of Rhizobium by 
adding a fucosyl residue to nodulation signals. Mol. Microbiol. 21: 397-408. 
Luan, S. (2009). The CBL-CIPK network in plant calcium signaling. Trends Plant Sci. 14: 37-
Madsen, E.B., Madsen, L.H., Radutoiu, S., Olbryt, M., Rakwalska, M., Szczyglowski, K., 
Sato, S., Kaneko, T., Tabata, S., Sandal, N., and Stougaard, J. (2003). A receptor 
kinase gene of the LysM type is involved in legume perception of rhizobial signals. 
Nature 425: 637-640. 
Malho, R., Read, N.D., Pais, M.S., and Trewavas, A.J. (1994). Role of cytosolic-free 
calcium in the reorientation of pollen-tube growth. Plant J. 5: 331-341. 
Marcus, A.J., and Safier, L.B. (1993). Thromboregulation - multicellular modulation of 
platelet reactivity in hemostasis and thrombosis. FASEB J. 7: 516-522. 
Markmann, K., Giczey, G., and Parniske, M. (2008). Functional adaptation of a plant 
receptor-kinase paved the way for the evolution of intracellular root symbioses 
with bacteria. PLoS Biol. 6: 497-506. 
Marsh, J.F., Rakocevic, A., Mitra, R.M., Brocard, L., Sun, J., Eschstruth, A., Long, S.R., 
Schultze, M., Ratet, P., and Oldroyd, G.E. (2007). Medicago truncatula NIN is 
essential for rhizobial-independent nodule organogenesis induced by autoactive 
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase. Plant Physiol. 144: 324-335. 
Mathesius, U., Charon, C., Rolfe, B.G., Kondorosi, A., and Crespi, M. (2000). Temporal 
and spatial order of events during the induction of cortical cell divisions in white 
References 
clover by Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. trifolii inoculation or localized cytokinin 
addition. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 13: 617-628. 
McAinsh, M.R., and Pittman, J.K. (2009). Shaping the calcium signature. New Phytol. 181: 
275-294. 
McAinsh, M.R., Webb, A.A.R., Taylor, J.E., and Hetherington, A.M. (1995). Stimulus-
induced oscillations in guard-cell cytosolic-free calcium. Plant Cell 7: 1207-1219. 
McAlvin, C.B., and Stacey, G. (2005). Transgenic expression of the soybean apyrase in 
Lotus japonicus enhances nodulation. Plant Physiol. 137: 1456-1462. 
Messinese, E., Mun, J.H., Yeun, L.H., Jayaraman, D., Rouge, P., Barre, A., Lougnon, G., 
Schornack, S., Bono, J.J., Cook, D.R., and Ane, J.M. (2007). A novel nuclear 
protein interacts with the symbiotic DMI3 calcium- and calmodulin-dependent 
protein kinase of Medicago truncatula. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 20: 912-921. 
Meyer, T., and Stryer, L. (1988). Molecular Model for receptor-stimulated calcium 
spiking. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85: 5051-5055. 
Middleton, P.H., Jakab, J., Penmetsa, R.V., Starker, C.G., Doll, J., Kalo, P., Prabhu, R., 
Marsh, J.F., Mitra, R.M., Kereszt, A., Dudas, B., VandenBosch, K., Long, S.R., 
Cook, D.R., Kiss, G.B., and Oldroyd, G.E. (2007). An ERF transcription factor in 
Medicago truncatula that is essential for Nod factor signal transduction. Plant Cell 
19: 1221-1234. 
Miller, D.D., Leferink-ten Klooster, H.B., and Emons, A.M. (2000). Lipochito-
oligosaccharide nodulation factors stimulate cytoplasmic polarity with longitudinal 
endoplasmic reticulum and vesicles at the tip in vetch root hairs. Mol. Plant-
Microbe Interact. 13: 1385-1390. 
Mitra, R.M., Shaw, S.L., and Long, S.R. (2004a). Six nonnodulating plant mutants 
defective for Nod factor-induced transcriptional changes associated with the 
legume-rhizobia symbiosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101: 10217-10222. 
Mitra, R.M., Gleason, C.A., Edwards, A., Hadfield, J., Downie, J.A., Oldroyd, G.E., and 
Long, S.R. (2004b). A Ca
/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase required for 
symbiotic nodule development: gene identification by transcript-based cloning. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101: 4701-4705. 
Miwa, H., Sun, J., Oldroyd, G.E., and Downie, J.A. (2006a). Analysis of calcium spiking 
using a cameleon calcium sensor reveals that nodulation gene expression is 
regulated by calcium spike number and the developmental status of the cell. Plant 
J 48: 883-894. 
Miwa, H., Sun, J., Oldroyd, G.E., and Downie, J.A. (2006b). Analysis of Nod-factor-
induced calcium signaling in root hairs of symbiotically defective mutants of Lotus 
japonicus. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 19: 914-923. 
Miyahara, A., Richens, J., Starker, C., Morieri G, Smith, L., Long, S.R., Downie, J.A., and 
Oldroyd, G.E.D. (2010). Conservation in function of a SCAR/WAVE component 
during infection thread and root hair growth in Medicago truncatula. Mol. Plant-
Microbe Interact. 
Monahan-Giovanelli, H., Pinedo, C.A., and Gage, D.J. (2006). Architecture of infection 
thread networks in developing root nodules induced by the symbiotic bacterium 
Sinorhizobium meliloti on Medicago truncatula. Plant Physiol. 140: 661-670. 
Monshausen, G.B., Bibikova, T.N., Weisenseel, M.H., and Gilroy, S. (2009). Ca
regulates reactive oxygen species production and pH during mechanosensing in 
Arabidopsis roots. Plant Cell 21: 2341-2356. 
References 
Mosier, A.R. (2004). Agriculture and nitrogen cycle. (Scientific Commitee on Problems 
and the Enviroment (SCOPE)). 
Muller, J., Staehelin, C., Xie, Z.P., Neuhaus-Url, G., and Boller, T. (2000). Nod factors and 
chitooligomers elicit an increase in cytosolic calcium in aequorin-expressing 
soybean cells. Plant Physiol. 124: 733-739. 
Murray, J., Karas, B., Ross, L., Brachmann, A., Wagg, C., Geil, R., Perry, J., Nowakowski, 
K., MacGillivary, M., Held, M., Stougaard, J., Peterson, L., Parniske, M., and 
Szczyglowski, K. (2006). Genetic suppressors of the Lotus japonicus har1-1 
hypernodulation phenotype. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 19: 1082-1091. 
Murray, J.D., Karas, B.J., Sato, S., Tabata, S., Amyot, L., and Szczyglowski, K. (2007). A 
cytokinin perception mutant colonized by Rhizobium in the absence of nodule 
organogenesis. Science 315: 101-104. 
Navarro-Gochicoa, M.T., Camut, S., Niebel, A., and Cullimore, J.V. (2003). Expression of 
the apyrase-like APY1 genes in roots of Medicago truncatula is induced rapidly 
and transiently by stress and not by Sinorhizobium meliloti or Nod factors. Plant 
Physiol. 131: 1124-1136. 
Navazio, L., Moscatiello, R., Genre, A., Novero, M., Baldan, B., Bonfante, P., and 
Mariani, P. (2007). A diffusible signal from arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi elicits a 
transient cytosolic calcium elevation in host plant cells. Plant Physiol. 144: 673-
Nedeljkovic, N., Banjac, A., Horvat, A., Stojiljkovic, M., and Nikezic, G. (2005). 
Developmental profile of NTPDase activity in synaptic plasma membranes isolated 
from rat cerebral cortex. Int. J. Dev. Neurosci. 23: 45-51. 
Newman, E.I., and Reddell, P. (1987). The distribution of mycorrhizas among families of 
vascular plants. New Phytol. 106: 745-751. 
Nishimura, R., Hayashi, M., Wu, G.J., Kouchi, H., Imaizumi-Anraku, H., Murakami, Y., 
Kawasaki, S., Akao, S., Ohmori, M., Nagasawa, M., Harada, K., and Kawaguchi, 
M. (2002). HAR1 mediates systemic regulation of symbiotic organ development. 
Nature 420: 426-429. 
Novero, M., Faccio, A., Genre, A., Stougaard, J., Webb, K.J., Mulder, L., Parniske, M., 
and Bonfante, P. (2002). Dual requirement of the LjSYM4 gene for mycorrhizal 
development in epidermal and cortical cells of Lotus japonicus roots. New Phytol. 
154: 741-749. 
Oldroyd, G.E., and Downie, J.A. (2004). Calcium, kinases and nodulation signalling in 
legumes. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 5: 566-576. 
Oldroyd, G.E., Mitra, R.M., Wais, R.J., and Long, S.R. (2001a). Evidence for structurally 
specific negative feedback in the Nod factor signal transduction pathway. Plant J 
28: 191-199. 
Oldroyd, G.E.D., and Long, S.R. (2003). Identification and characterization of nodulation-
signaling pathway 2, a gene of Medicago truncatula involved in Nod factor 
signaling. Plant Physiol. 131: 1027-1032. 
Oldroyd, G.E.D., and Downie, J.A. (2006). Nuclear calcium changes at the core of 
symbiosis signalling. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 9: 351-357. 
Oldroyd, G.E.D., and Downie, J.M. (2008). Coordinating nodule morphogenesis with 
rhizobial infection in legumes. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 59: 519-546. 
Oldroyd, G.E.D., Engstrom, E.M., and Long, S.R. (2001b). Ethylene inhibits the Nod factor 
signal transduction pathway of Medicago truncatula. Plant Cell 13: 1835-1849. 
References 
Oldroyd, G.E.D., Harrison, M.J., and Paszkowski, U. (2009). Reprogramming plant cells 
for endosymbiosis. Science 324: 753-754. 
Ooki, Y., Banba, M., Yano, K., Maruya, J., Sato, S., Tabata, S., Saeki, K., Hayashi, M., 
Kawaguchi, M., Izui, K., and Hata, S. (2005). Characterization of the Lotus 
japonicus symbiotic mutant lot1 that shows a reduced nodule number and 
distorted trichomes. Plant Physiol. 137: 1261-1271. 
Ostrom, R.S., Gregorian, C., and Insel, P.A. (2000). Cellular release of and response to 
ATP as key determinants of the set-point of signal transduction pathways. J. Biol. 
Chem. 275: 11735-11739. 
Pacios Bras, C., Jorda, M.A., Wijfjes, A.H., Harteveld, M., Stuurman, N., Thomas-Oates, 
J.E., and Spaink, H.P. (2000). A Lotus japonicus nodulation system based on 
heterologous expression of the fucosyl transferase NodZ and the acetyl 
transferase NoIL in Rhizobium leguminosarum. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 13: 
475-479. 
Parniske, M. (2004). Molecular genetics of the arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis. Curr. 
Opin. Plant Biol. 7: 414-421. 
Parniske, M. (2008). Arbuscular mycorrhiza: the mother of plant root endosymbioses. 
Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 6: 763-775. 
Parniske, M., Zimmermann, C., Cregan, P.B., and Werner, D. (1990). Hypersensitive 
reaction of nodule cells in the glycine sp Bradyrhizobium japonicum symbiosis 
occurs at the genotype-specific level. Bot. Act. 103: 143-148. 
Patil, S., Takezawa, D., and Poovaiah, B.W. (1995). Chimeric plant calcium/calmodulin-
dependent protein-kinase gene with a neural visinin-like calcium-binding domain. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92: 4897-4901. 
Pawlowski, K., and Bisseling, T. (1996). Rhizobial and actinorhizal symbioses: What are 
the shared features? Plant Cell 8: 1899-1913. 
Pawlowski K, N.W. (2008). Comparison between actinorhizal and legume symbiosis. 
(Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands). 
Pearson, J.N., and Jakobsen, I. (1993). Symbiotic exchange of carbon and phosphorus 
between cucumber and 3 Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. New Phytol. 124: 481-488. 
Peck, M.C., Fisher, R.F., and Long, S.R. (2006). Diverse flavonoids stimulate NodD1 
binding to nod gene promoters in Sinorhizobium meliloti. J. Bacteriol. 188: 5417-
5427. 
Peiter, E., Sun, J., Heckmann, A.B., Venkateshwaran, M., Riely, B.K., Otegui, M.S., 
Edwards, A., Freshour, G., Hahn, M.G., Cook, D.R., Sanders, D., Oldroyd, G.E.D., 
Downie, J.A., and Ane, J.M. (2007). The Medicago truncatula DMI1 protein 
modulates cytosolic calcium signaling. Plant Physiol. 145: 192-203. 
Pellock, B.J., Cheng, H.P., and Walker, G.C. (2000). Alfalfa root nodule invasion efficiency 
is dependent on Sinorhizobium meliloti polysaccharides. J. Bacteriol. 182: 4310-
4318. 
Penmetsa, R.V., and Cook, D.R. (1997). A legume ethylene-insensitive mutant 
hyperinfected by its rhizobial symbiont. Science 275: 527-530. 
Penmetsa, R.V., Frugoli, J.A., Smith, L.S., Long, S.R., and Cook, D.R. (2003). Dual genetic 
pathways controlling nodule number in Medicago truncatula. Plant Physiol. 131: 
998-1008. 
Perret, X., Staehelin, C., and Broughton, W.J. (2000). Molecular basis of symbiotic 
promiscuity. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 64: 180-201. 
References 
Peters, N.K., Frost, J.W., and Long, S.R. (1986). A plant flavone, luteolin, induces 
expression of Rhizobium meliloti nodulation genes. Science 233: 977-980. 
Pingret, J.L., Journet, E.P., and Barker, D.G. (1998). Rhizobium nod factor signaling. 
Evidence for a G protein-mediated transduction mechanism. Plant Cell 10: 659-
Plieth, C. (2001). Plant calcium signaling and monitoring: pros and cons and recent 
experimental approaches. Protoplasma 218: 1-23. 
Quackenbush, J., Cho, J., Lee, D., Liang, F., Holt, I., Karamycheva, S., Parvizi, B., Pertea, 
G., Sultana, R., and White, J. (2001). The TIGR Gene Indices: analysis of gene 
transcript sequences in highly sampled eukaryotic species. Nucleic Acids Res. 29: 
159-164. 
Quinn, J.M., and Etzler, M.E. (1987). Isolation and characterization of a lectin from the 
roots of Dolichos-Biflorus. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 258: 535-544. 
Radutoiu, S., Madsen, L.H., Madsen, E.B., Jurkiewicz, A., Fukai, E., Quistgaard, E.M.H., 
Albrektsen, A.S., James, E.K., Thirup, S., and Stougaard, J. (2007). LysM domains 
mediate lipochitin-oligosaccharide recognition and NFR genes extend the 
symbiotic host range. EMBO J. 26: 3923-3935. 
Radutoiu, S., Madsen, L.H., Madsen, E.B., Felle, H.H., Umehara, Y., Gronlund, M., Sato, 
S., Nakamura, Y., Tabata, S., Sandal, N., and Stougaard, J. (2003). Plant 
recognition of symbiotic bacteria requires two LysM receptor-like kinases. Nature 
425: 585-592. 
Rae, A.L., Bonfantefasolo, P., and Brewin, N.J. (1992). Structure and growth of infection 
threads in the legume symbiosis with Rhizobium leguminosarum. Plant J. 2: 385-
Ralevic, V., and Burnstock, G. (1998). Receptors for purines and pyrimidines. Pharmacol. 
Rev. 50: 413-492. 
Ramachandiran, S., Takezawa, D., Wang, W., and Poovaiah, B.W. (1997). Functional 
domains of plant chimeric calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase: 
Regulation by autoinhibitory and visinin-like domains. J. Biochem., Tokyo 121: 
984-990. 
Ridge, R.W., and Rolfe, B.G. (1985). Rhizobium sp degradation of legume root hair cell-
wall at the site of infection thread origin. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 50: 717-720. 
Riely, B.K., Lougnon, G., Ane, J.M., and Cook, D.R. (2007). The symbiotic ion channel 
homolog DMI1 is localized in the nuclear membrane of Medicago truncatula 
roots. Plant J. 49: 208-216. 
Riewe, D., Grosman, L., Fernie, A.R., Wucke, C., and Geigenberger, P. (2008). The 
potato-specific apyrase is apoplastically localized and has influence on gene 
expression, growth, and development. Plant Physiol. 147: 1092-1109. 
Roberts, N.J., Brigham, J., Wu, B., Murphy, J.B., Volpin, H., Phillips, D.A., and Etzler, M.E. 
(1999). A Nod factor-binding lectin is a member of a distinct class of apyrases that 
may be unique to the legumes. Mol. Gen. Genet. 262: 261-267. 
Roche, P., Debelle, F., Maillet, F., Lerouge, P., Faucher, C., Truchet, G., Denarie, J., and 
Prome, J.C. (1991). Molecular-basis of symbiotic host specificity in Rhizobium-
Meliloti - NodH and NodPQ genes encode the sulfation of lipo-oligosaccharide 
signals. Cell 67: 1131-1143. 
Rodpothong, P., Sullivan, J.T., Songsrirote, K., Sumpton, D., Cheung, K., Thomas-Oates, 
J., Radutoiu, S., Stougaard, J., and Ronson, C.W. (2009). Nodulation gene mutants 
References 
of Mesorhizobium loti R7A-nodZ and nolL mutants have host-specific phenotypes 
on Lotus spp. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 22: 1546-1554. 
Rolfe, B.G., and Gresshoff, P.M. (1988). Genetic-analysis of legume nodule initiation. 
Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. 39: 297-319. 
Roux, S.J., and Steinebrunner, I. (2007). Extracellular ATP: an unexpected role as a 
signaler in plants. Trends Plant Sci. 12: 522-527. 
Saito, K., Yoshikawa, M., Yano, K., Miwa, H., Uchida, H., Asamizu, E., Sato, S., Tabata, S., 
Imaizumi-Anraku, H., Umehara, Y., Kouchi, H., Murooka, Y., Szczyglowski, K., 
Downie, J.A., Parniske, M., Hayashi, M., and Kawaguchi, M. (2007). 
NUCLEOPORIN85 is required for calcium spiking, fungal and bacterial symbioses, 
and seed production in Lotus japonicus. Plant Cell 19: 610-624. 
Sanchez, F., Padilla, J.E., Perez, H., and Lara, M. (1991). Control of nodulin genes in root-
nodule development and metabolism. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. 
42: 507-528. 
Sanders, D., Pelloux, J., Brownlee, C., and Harper, J.F. (2002). Calcium at the crossroads 
of signaling. Plant Cell 14 Suppl: S401-417. 
Schauser, L., Roussis, A., Stiller, J., and Stougaard, J. (1999). A plant regulator controlling 
development of symbiotic root nodules. Nature 402: 191-195. 
Schauser, L., Handberg, K., Sandal, N., Stiller, J., Thykjaer, T., Pajuelo, E., Nielsen, A., and 
Stougaard, J. (1998). Symbiotic mutants deficient in nodule establishment 
identified after T-DNA transformation of Lotus japonicus. Mol. Gen. Genet. 259: 
414-423. 
Schenk, P.W., and Snaar-Jagalska, B.E. (1999). Signal perception and transduction: the 
role of protein kinases. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1449: 1-24. 
Scheres, B., Vandewiel, C., Zalensky, A., Horvath, B., Spaink, H., Vaneck, H., Zwartkruis, 
F., Wolters, A.M., Gloudemans, T., Vankammen, A., and Bisseling, T. (1990). The 
ENOD12 gene-product is involved in the infection process during the pea 
rhizobium interaction. Cell 60: 281-294. 
Schultze, M., Quicletsire, B., Kondorosi, E., Virelizier, H., Glushka, J.N., Endre, G., Gero, 
S.D., and Kondorosi, A. (1992). Rhizobium-meliloti produces a family of sulfated 
lipooligosaccharides exhibiting different degrees of plant host specificity. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89: 192-196. 
Schwedock, J., and Long, S.R. (1990). ATP sulphurylase activity of the Nodp and Nodq 
gene-products of Rhizobium-meliloti. Nature 348: 644-647. 
Sedaa, K.O., Bjur, R.A., Shinozuka, K., and Westfall, D.P. (1990). Nerve and drug-Induced 
release of adenine nucleosides and nucleotides from rabbit aorta. J. Pharmacol. 
Exp. Ther. 252: 1060-1067. 
Shaw, S.L., and Long, S.R. (2003). Nod factor elicits two separable calcium responses in 
Medicago truncatula root hair cells. Plant Physiol. 131: 976-984. 
Shibata, K., Abe, S., and Davies, E. (2001). Structure of the coding region and mRNA 
variants of the apyrase gene from pea (Pisum sativum). Acta Physiol. Plant. 23: 3-
Shibata, K., Morita, Y., Abe, S., Stankovic, B., and Davies, E. (1999). Apyrase from pea 
stems: Isolation, purification, characterization and identification of a NTPase from 
the cytoskeleton fraction of pea stem tissue. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 37: 881-888. 
Sieberer, B.J., Timmers, A.C., and Emons, A.M. (2005). Nod factors alter the microtubule 
cytoskeleton in Medicago truncatula root hairs to allow root hair reorientation. 
Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 18: 1195-1204. 
References 
Sieberer, B.J., Chabaud, M., Timmers, A.C., Monin, A., Fournier, J., and Barker, D.G. 
(2009). A nuclear-targeted cameleon demonstrates intranuclear Ca
 spiking in 
Medicago truncatula root hairs in response to rhizobial nodulation factors. Plant 
Physiol. 151: 1197-1206. 
Smil, V. (1997). Global population and the nitrogen cycle. Sci. Am. 277: 76-81. 
Smit, G., Puvanesarajah, V., Carlson, R.W., Barbour, W.M., and Stacey, G. (1992). 
Bradyrhizobium-japonicum-Nodd1 can be specifically induced by soybean 
flavonoids that do not induce the nodyabcsuij operon. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 310-318. 
Smit, P., Limpens, E., Geurts, R., Fedorova, E., Dolgikh, E., Gough, C., and Bisseling, T. 
(2007). Medicago LYK3, an entry receptor in rhizobial nodulation factor signaling. 
Plant Physiol. 145: 183-191. 
Smith, S.E., Smith, F.A., and Jakobsen, I. (2004). Functional diversity in arbuscular 
mycorrhizal (AM) symbioses: the contribution of the mycorrhizal P uptake 
pathway is not correlated with mycorrhizal responses in growth or total P uptake. 
New Phytol. 162: 511-524. 
Soltis, D.E., Soltis, P.S., Morgan, D.R., Swensen, S.M., Mullin, B.C., Dowd, J.M., and 
Martin, P.G. (1995). Chloroplast gene sequence data suggest a single origin of the 
predisposition for symbiotic nitrogen-fixation in angiosperms. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA 92: 2647-2651. 
Song, C.J., Steinebrunner, I., Wang, X.Z., Stout, S.C., and Roux, S.J. (2006). Extracellular 
ATP induces the accumulation of superoxide via NADPH oxidases in Arabidopsis. 
Plant Physiol. 140: 1222-1232. 
Spaink, H.P., Sheeley, D.M., van Brussel, A.A., Glushka, J., York, W.S., Tak, T., Geiger, O., 
Kennedy, E.P., Reinhold, V.N., and Lugtenberg, B.J. (1991). A novel highly 
unsaturated fatty acid moiety of lipo-oligosaccharide signals determines host 
specificity of Rhizobium. Nature 354: 125-130. 
Steen, A., Buist, G., Leenhouts, K.J., El Khattabi, M., Grijpstra, F., Zomer, A.L., Venema, 
G., Kuipers, O.P., and Kok, J. (2003). Cell wall attachment of a widely distributed 
peptidoglycan binding domain is hindered by cell wall constituents. J. Biol. Chem. 
278: 23874-23881. 
Stehno-Bittel, L., Luckhoff, A., and Clapham, D.E. (1995). Calcium-release from the 
nucleus by InsP3 receptor channels. Neuron 14: 163-167. 
Steinebrunner, I., Wu, J., Sun, Y., Corbett, A., and Roux, S.J. (2003). Disruption of 
apyrases inhibits pollen germination in arabidopsis. Plant Physiol. 131: 1638-1647. 
Stougaard, J. (2000). Regulators and regulation of legume root nodule development. 
Plant Physiol. 124: 531-540. 
Stracke, S., Kistner, C., Yoshida, S., Mulder, L., Sato, S., Kaneko, T., Tabata, S., Sandal, 
N., Stougaard, J., Szczyglowski, K., and Parniske, M. (2002). A plant receptor-like 
kinase required for both bacterial and fungal symbiosis. Nature 417: 959-962. 
Subramanian, S., Stacey, G., and Yu, O. (2006). Endogenous isoflavones are essential for 
the establishment of symbiosis between soybean and Bradyrhizobium japonicum. 
Plant J. 48: 261-273. 
Subramanian, S., Stacey, G., and Yu, O. (2007). Distinct, crucial roles of flavonoids during 
legume nodulation. Trends Plant Sci. 12: 282-285. 
Sun, J., Miwa, H., Downie, J.A., and Oldroyd, G.E.D. (2007). Mastoparan activates 
calcium spiking analogous to nod factor-induced responses in Medicago 
truncatula root hair cells. Plant Physiol. 144: 695-702. 
References 
Sun, J.H., Cardoza, V., Mitchell, D.M., Bright, L., Oldroyd, G., and Harris, J.M. (2006). 
Crosstalk between jasmonic acid, ethylene and Nod factor signaling allows 
integration of diverse inputs for regulation of nodulation. Plant J. 46: 961-970. 
Suntharalingam, M., and Wente, S.R. (2003). Peering through the pore: Nuclear pore 
complex structure, assembly, and function. Dev. Cell 4: 775-789. 
Sutton, J.M., Lea, E.J., and Downie, J.A. (1994). The nodulation-signaling protein NodO 
from Rhizobium leguminosarum biovar viciae forms ion channels in membranes. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91: 9990-9994. 
Swanson, J.A., Tu, J.K., Ogawa, J., Sanga, R., Fisher, R.F., and Long, S.R. (1987). Extended 
region of nodulation genes in Rhizobium meliloti 1021 .1. Phenotypes of Tn5 
insertion mutants. Genetics 117: 181-189. 
Szczyglowski, K., Shaw, R.S., Wopereis, J., Copeland, S., Hamburger, D., Kasiborski, B., 
Dazzo, F.B., and de Bruijn, F.J. (1998). Nodule organogenesis and symbiotic 
mutants of the model legume Lotus japonicus. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 11: 
684-697. 
Takezawa, D., Ramachandiran, S., Paranjape, V., and Poovaiah, B.W. (1996). Dual 
regulation of a chimeric plant serine/threonine kinase by calcium/calmodulin. 
Plant Physiol. 111: 155-155. 
Tang, W.Q., Brady, S.R., Sun, Y., Muday, G.K., and Roux, S.J. (2003). Extracellular ATP 
inhibits root gravitropism at concentrations that inhibit polar auxin transport. 
Plant Physiol. 131: 147-154. 
Tansengco, M.L., Hayashi, M., Kawaguchi, M., Imaizumi-Anraku, H., and Murooka, Y. 
(2003). Crinkle, a novel symbiotic mutant that affects the infection thread growth 
and alters the root hair, trichome, and seed development in Lotus japonicus. Plant 
Physiol. 131: 1054-1063. 
Thomas, C., Sun, Y., Naus, K., Lloyd, A., and Roux, S. (1999). Apyrase functions in plant 
phosphate nutrition and mobilizes phosphate from extracellular ATP. Plant 
Physiol. 119: 543-551. 
Thomas, C., Rajagopal, A., Windsor, B., Dudler, R., Lloyd, A., and Roux, S.J. (2000). A role 
for ectophosphatase in xenobiotic resistance. Plant Cell 12: 519-533. 
Tirichine, L., James, E.K., Sandal, N., and Stougaard, J. (2006a). Spontaneous root-nodule 
formation in the model legume Lotus japonicus: A novel class of mutants 
nodulates in the absence of rhizobia. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 19: 373-382. 
Tirichine, L., Sandal, N., Madsen, L.H., Radutoiu, S., Albrektsen, A.S., Sato, S., Asamizu, 
E., Tabata, S., and Stougaard, J. (2007). A gain-of-function mutation in a cytokinin 
receptor triggers spontaneous root nodule organogenesis. Science 315: 104-107. 
Tirichine, L., Imaizumi-Anraku, H., Yoshida, S., Murakami, Y., Madsen, L.H., Miwa, H., 
Nakagawa, T., Sandal, N., Albrektsen, A.S., Kawaguchi, M., Downie, A., Sato, S., 
Tabata, S., Kouchi, H., Parniske, M., Kawasaki, S., and Stougaard, J. (2006b). 
Deregulation of a Ca
/calmodulin-dependent kinase leads to spontaneous nodule 
development. Nature 441: 1153-1156. 
Todorov, L.D., MihaylovaTodorova, S., Westfall, T.D., Sneddon, P., Kennedy, C., Bjur, 
R.A., and Westfall, D.P. (1997). Neuronal release of soluble nucleotidases and 
their role in neurotransmitter inactivation. Nature 387: 76-79. 
Trautmann, A. (2009). Extracellular ATP in the immune system: more than just a "danger 
signal". Sci. Signal. 2: pe6. 
References 
Truchet, G., Roche, P., Lerouge, P., Vasse, J., Camut, S., Debilly, F., Prome, J.C., and 
Denarie, J. (1991). Sulfated lipo-oligosaccharide signals of Rhizobium-Meliloti elicit 
root nodule organogenesis in alfalfa. Nature 351: 670-673. 
van Brussel, A.A.N., Bakhuizen, R., Vanspronsen, P.C., Spaink, H.P., Tak, T., Lugtenberg, 
B.J.J., and Kijne, J.W. (1992). Induction of preinfection thread structures in the 
leguminous host plant by mitogenic lipooligosaccharides of Rhizobium. Science 
257: 70-72. 
van der Heijden, M.G.A., Klironomos, J.N., Ursic, M., Moutoglis, P., Streitwolf-Engel, R., 
Boller, T., Wiemken, A., and Sanders, I.R. (1998). Mycorrhizal fungal diversity 
determines plant biodiversity, ecosystem variability and productivity. Nature 396: 
69-72. 
van Noorden, G.E., Kerim, T., Goffard, N., Wiblin, R., Pellerone, F.I., Rolfe, B.G., and 
Mathesius, U. (2007). Overlap of proteome changes in Medicago truncatula in 
response to auxin and Sinorhizobium meliloti. Plant Physiol. 144: 1115-1131. 
Vasse, J., Debilly, F., and Truchet, G. (1993). Abortion of infection during the Rhizobium 
meliloti-alfalfa symbiotic interaction is accompanied by a hypersensitive reaction. 
Plant J. 4: 555-566. 
Vassileva, V.N., Kouchi, H., and Ridge, R.W. (2005). Microtubule dynamics in living root 
hairs: transient slowing by lipochitin oligosaccharide nodulation signals. Plant Cell 
17: 1777-1787. 
Vernie, T., Moreau, S., de Billy, F., Plet, J., Combier, J.P., Rogers, C., Oldroyd, G., Frugier, 
F., Niebel, A., and Gamas, P. (2008). EFD is an ERF transcription factor involved in 
the control of nodule number and differentiation in Medicago truncatula. Plant 
Cell 20: 2696-2713. 
Wais, R.J., Keating, D.H., and Long, S.R. (2002). Structure-function analysis of nod factor-
induced root hair calcium spiking in rhizobium-legume symbiosis. Plant Physiol. 
129: 211-224. 
Wais, R.J., Galera, C., Oldroyd, G., Catoira, R., Penmetsa, R.V., Cook, D., Gough, C., 
Denarie, J., and Long, S.R. (2000). Genetic analysis of calcium spiking responses in 
nodulation mutants of Medicago truncatula. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97: 13407-
13412. 
Walker, S.A., and Downie, J.A. (2000). Entry of Rhizobium leguminosarum bv.viciae into 
root hairs requires minimal Nod factor specificity, but subsequent infection thread 
growth requires nodO or nodE. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 13: 754-762. 
Walker, S.A., Viprey, V., and Downie, J.A. (2000). Dissection of nodulation signaling using 
pea mutants defective for calcium spiking induced by Nod factors and chitin 
oligomers. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97: 13413-13418. 
Wasson, A.P., Pellerone, F.I., and Mathesius, U. (2006). Silencing the flavonoid pathway 
in Medicago truncatula inhibits root nodule formation and prevents auxin 
transport regulation by rhizobia. Plant Cell 18: 1617-1629. 
Weerasinghe, R.R., Bird, D.M., and Allen, N.S. (2005). Root-knot nematodes and 
bacterial Nod factors elicit common signal transduction events in Lotus japonicus. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102: 3147-3152. 
Weerasinghe, R.R., Collings, D.A., Johannes, E., and Allen, N.S. (2003). The distributional 
changes and role of microtubules in Nod factor-challenged Medicago sativa root 
hairs. Planta 218: 276-287. 
References 
Wegel, E., Schauser, L., Sandal, N., Stougaard, J., and Parniske, M. (1998). Mycorrhiza 
mutants of Lotus japonicus define genetically independent steps during symbiotic 
infection. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 11: 933-936. 
White, P.J. (1998). Calcium channels in the plasma membrane of root cells. Ann. Bot. 81: 
173-183. 
Wilkinson, D.M. (2001). Mycorrhizal evolution. Trends Ecol. Evol. 16: 64-65. 
Wolf, C., Hennig, M., Romanovicz, D., and Steinebrunner, I. (2007). Developmental 
defects and seedling lethality in apyrase AtAPY1 and AtAPY2 double knockout 
mutants. Plant Mol. Biol. 64: 657-672. 
Yano, K., Yoshida, S., Muller, J., Singh, S., Banba, M., Vickers, K., Markmann, K., White, 
C., Schuller, B., Sato, S., Asamizu, E., Tabata, S., Murooka, Y., Perry, J., Wang, 
T.L., Kawaguchi, M., Imaizumi-Anraku, H., Hayashi, M., and Parniske, M. (2008). 
CYCLOPS, a mediator of symbiotic intracellular accommodation. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA 105: 20540-20545. 
Yip, L., Woehrle, T., Corriden, R., Hirsh, M., Chen, Y., Inoue, Y., Ferrari, V., Insel, P.A., 
and Junger, W.G. (2009). Autocrine regulation of T-cell activation by ATP release 
and P2X(7) receptors. FASEB J. 23: 1685-1693. 
Yokota, K., Fukai, E., Madsen, L.H., Jurkiewicz, A., Rueda, P., Radutoiu, S., Held, M., 
Hossain, M.S., Szczyglowski, K., Morieri, G., Oldroyd, G.E., Downie, J.A., Nielsen, 
M.W., Rusek, A.M., Sato, S., Tabata, S., James, E.K., Oyaizu, H., Sandal, N., and 
Stougaard, J. (2009). Rearrangement of actin cytoskeleton mediates invasion of 
Lotus japonicus roots by Mesorhizobium loti. Plant Cell 21: 267-284. 
Zeng, Y., Lv, X.H., Zeng, S.Q., Tian, S.L., Li, M., and Shi, J. (2008). Sustained 
depolarization-induced propagation of [Ca2+](i) oscillations in cultured DRG 
neurons: The involvement of extracellular ATP and P2Y receptor activation. Brain 
Res. 1239: 12-23. 
Zhang, J., Subramanian, S., Stacey, G., and Yu, O. (2009). Flavones and flavonols play 
distinct critical roles during nodulation of Medicago truncatula by Sinorhizobium 
meliloti. Plant J. 57: 171-183. 
