Microsoft Word - Nick Harrop Completed PhD Thesis 20100915 latest.doc
Aligning Global and Local Aspects  
A National Information Programme 
for Health : 
Developing a Critical and Socio-Technical 
Appreciation 
Submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the award of 
Doctor of Philosophy  
at the 
University of Central Lancashire. 
STEPHEN NICHOLAS HARROP MB.ChB. MBA, FRCS, FCEM. 
VO L U M E   1   :   I N T R O D U C T I O N   &   K E Y   L I T E R A T U R E 
D E C L A R A T I O N 
I declare that : 
This thesis is my own work and has not previously been submitted for the award of a 
higher degree, at either the University of Central Lancashire or elsewhere. 
Whilst registered as a candidate for the research degree, I have not been a registered 
candidate or enrolled student for another award of the University or any other academic 
or professional institution 
No material contained in the thesis has been used in any other submission for an 
academic award and is solely my own work. 
No part of the thesis has been produced in collaboration with any other individual or 
academic institution. 
Signature of Candidate _______________________________________________________ 
Type of Award               _______________________________________________________ 
Department                    _______________________________________________________ 
A B S T R A C T 
Introduction 
Written by a full-time clinician, this thesis explores an example of Big IT in 
healthcare, the National Programme for IT in the United Kingdom National Health 
Service. It is unique in exploring the interaction between people and information 
technology in the healthcare workplace, from an engaged standpoint within one of the 
National Programmes implementation sites, in order to provide a critical and a socio-
technical appreciation. 
The National Programme (a global intervention in the NHS context) will be 
implemented locally, in every NHS institution and in each part of each institution. Its 
global aspect is essentially rational, eliminating local considerations. Its local aspects 
are occasioned and situated in a fluid, essentially social context. The tension between 
the global and the local is mirrored, every time a healthcare professional interacts with a 
patient, in the interplay between a standard intervention and a non-standard situation. 
Background and Purpose of the Thesis 
A substantial consensus is developing, that the National Programme has under-
estimated the importance of the socio-technical dimension. The purpose of the thesis is 
to develop an approach that will equip clinicians and managers at implementation sites 
to understand and comment critically but constructively, on the design, implementation 
and evaluation of information systems, so they can promote the successful assimilation 
of the National Programme for IT at their own place of work from a socio-technically-
informed position. 
Methodological Approach and Setting 
The body of the thesis is a set of five case studies which deploy developments of 
Checklands Soft Systems Methodology (NIMSAD : Jayaratna, 1994 ; Multiview : 
Avison & Wood-Harper, 1990) within Pawson & Tilleys (1997) Realistic Evaluation 
framework. The case studies, conducted in an ordinary NHS Trust hospital, examine the 
mechanisms and context within which the new information systems proposed by the 
National Programme might be expected to promote the Trusts five most important 
strategic goals. 
Driven by the practice of information systems implementation, itself intimately bound 
up with, and inseparable from, the evaluation, the design and the strategic purpose of 
the information system, the thesis develops an approach that brings to life the complex 
implementation context through the eyes and the concerns of operational clinicians as 
well as strategic managers.  
Findings 
These two ideal typical groups face in different directions from the centre of an 
uncomfortable middle ground that stands between the Department of Health and the 
patient. 
Where managers epitomise a generalised accounting relationship with the Department 
of Health as the sponsor of healthcare, provided to consumers, clinicians represent a 
specific professional accountability to each individual patient. These responsibilities 
depend on different forms of social organisation, requiring different orientations of 
information systems.  
The implementation of the centrally-driven National Programme represents, at the same 
time, a cost and a problem. 
To become a source of strategic benefits and a solution to strategic problems, the 
Programme needs to be influenced, if not driven, by the people whose responsibility for 
the direct delivery of care to patients could be facilitated by information systems. The 
systems required by this orientation towards the operational delivery of health care are 
different from those suited to the description of activity to an external audience, for 
strategic accounting purposes. 
Using the same data processing infrastructure of networks and computers, two 
differently orientated forms of system are integrated in a technical sense only. 
Functionally, they are fundamentally intractable to integration within a single rationale. 
The first form of system requires the input of data by one distinct group, operational 
clinicians, so that another distinct group, managers, can manipulate abstract quantities 
according to formal rules, to generate and test a theory of strategy and operations. The 
computer is a central intermediary between these two groups. Data flow is emphasised 
at the expense of data entry. 
The second form of system enables the practice of a collaborative team, whose 
members interact efficiently and often opportunistically, to effect the direct delivery of 
care to patients. The computer is an adjunct to collective sense-making in a fluid clinical 
situation, where the basis for assumptions is perpetually de-stabilised as new events and 
information merge. Data entry is secondary to the collaborative care of patients. 
Local Messages of General Importance 
The key message from the thesis to an NHS Trust is that two different appreciations of 
information systems are precariously balanced. The first is the planners detached 
appreciation of the Trust as a structured set of discrete functional units, groups and 
processes, integrated by information technology whose primary function is to process 
data. The second is the practitioners appreciation of the Trust as a complex of 
intersecting workplaces where information technology connects individual clinicians to 
their personal tasks, and to each other, by supporting a highly-contextualised form of 
communication. 
Local implementation of information technology needs to be oriented towards the fluid 
and ambiguous definition of information-related tasks and roles, necessitated by the 
reality of clinical collaboration. It must take account that the need to accumulate and 
distribute data, to describe the clinical service to the outside world, is accompanied by a 
need to support clinical communication that underpins the actual delivery of a high 
quality clinical service, driven by the vocational and professional motivations of front-
line clinicians. 
Policy Implications 
The policy implication of the thesis for future Big IT projects in healthcare is that the 
assumptions of information policy in the National Health Service during the period, 
1998-2010 now require reappraisal. In particular, the process of clinical engagement, 
which in the National Programme has mediated the relationship between government, 
clinicians and the computer industry, must accommodate a richer appreciation of the 
clinician : as a participant in a complex task environment rather the operator of an 
information machine. 
The findings of the thesis will be useful in the context of a policy shift, from a model 
based on central procurement of standard information systems, to one based on local 
procurement. The National Programme and its associated programme of clinical 
engagement need to be brought, from stakeholder events and representative meetings, 
into the heart of the clinical workplace. 
A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S 
I am indebted to Professor Alan Gillies for his friendly encouragement and his 
knowledgeable and thoughtful supervision during the conception and gestation of this 
project. 
A similar debt is also due to Professor Trevor Wood-Harper (Manchester Business 
School), for his skilful guidance and succinct advice at crucial stages. 
Dr. Russell Gurbutt provided expert advice during the phases of familiarisation with 
qualitative research methods and analysis of data. 
I have also been grateful to Dr. Phil Baugh, at the transition from Enrolment, for his 
advice on the preparation of the Registration Document. 
Dr. Beverley Ellis gave me huge encouragement during my preliminary studies in 
Health Informatics. This continued during the research, enabling me to participate in a 
variety of fora which have included the Primary Healthcare Informatics Group of the 
British Computer Society and the Informatics Development Programme sponsored by 
Connecting for Health. 
The thesis was examined by Professor Trisha Greenhalgh and Dr. Steve Willcocks. I 
very much appreciated their encouraging and constructive comments at the viva stage of 
the thesis and I have taken care to develop the minor amendments they suggested. 
I extend my sincerest thanks to the colleagues at work who spared time to contribute 
their personal insights during the research interviews, and to the managers who have 
facilitated my work. This applies especially to Philip Graham, who has generously 
welcomed my work when others might have resented interference. 
Last of all, my family. My wife, Hilary has patiently tolerated and supported my mental 
absence from the household during the research, as she has throughout the most 
demanding stages of my career. Chris and Sarah have pursued their own university 
education during the preparation of this work. I hope that they will discover, at some 
appropriate stage in their lives, the same combination of the academic with the useful, 
purposeful and practical that I have attempted here. 
If a dedication is in order, it is to them and to my second family of colleagues and 
workmates whose quality of life at work will be influenced in no small way by the 
information systems they will use. 
T A B L E   O F   C O N T E N T S 
V O L U  M E   O N E 
I N T R O D U C T I O N   A N D   K E Y   L I T E R A T U R E 
C H A P T E R   O N E  
1.1.1 : Understanding the Situation of Concern that confronts  
1.2.4 : Research Findings : Chapter Five - Developing a Diagnostic and 
1.2.5 : Research Findings : Chapter Six  Applying the Diagnostic and 
C H A P T E R   T W O  
Understanding Professional Practice in terms of  
2.1.4 : Strategies and Interactions : Implementing the National Programme.51 
C H A P T E R   T H R E E  
3.1.3 : Organisational and Procedural Clarity :  
3.1.4 : Management Information from Operational Systems :   
Making Information Technology At Home in the Clinical Workplace...100 
3.2.5 : The Decline of Positivist Science and the  
3.2.8 : Antipositivist Social Theory (Structuration and Actor Network 
3.2.9 : Critical Realism : A Unifying Paradigm   
3.3.1 : Towards a Taxonomy of Information Systems Models and 
Four Areas of Application : Competency Areas in Information Systems .172 
Interpretive Models, emphasising the Process of Structuring :  
Critical Models, Stressing the Ambiguity of Identities,  
Critical Models Exploring the Inter-Sectoral Distribution of Power :  
Critical Models Relating to the Control and Facilitation of Work : 
3.3.5 : Modelling the Problem Solving Methodology in Soft   
V O L U M E   T W O 
R E S E A R C H 
C H A P T E R   F O U R   
4.1   :   R I G O U R   v e r s u s   R E L E V A N C E  
What Distinguishes Good Quality Qualitative Research  
Assuring the Accuracy of Findings : Triangulation and Respondent 
4.4.2 : Quality Criteria for Interpretive Case Studies  
4.4.3 : Quality Criteria for Realistic Case Studies : Healy and Perry (2000) 294 
C H A P T E R   F I V E  
D E V E L O P I N G A   D I A G N O S T I C    
A N D   T H E R A P E U T I C A P P R O A C H  
5.1 : NIMSAD Stage 1   :     
U N D E R S T A N D I N G    
T H E   S I T U A T I O N   O F   C O N C E R N  
5.1.2 : Understanding the Situation of Concern from the IT Managers 
Intervening Conditions : National Programme Offerings Seem More 
5.2 : NIMSAD Stage 2   :   D I A G N O S I S Widening Understanding : 
5.3 : NIMSAD Stage 3   :    
P R O G N O S I S   O U T L I N E  
Strategies and Interactions : Creating Responsive  
Outcomes : A Plan to Improve Capacity  
5.4 : NIMSAD Stage 4   :    
P R O B L E M S  
5.5 : NIMSAD Stage 5   :    
N O T I O N A L   S Y S T E M S  
5.5.5 : Using Deetz Framework  
5.6 : NIMSAD Stage 6   :    
C O N C E P T U A L   /   L O G I C A L   D E S I G N  
5.6.2 : Using Multiview to Understand Mechanisms  
5.6.4 : The Problem Situation : Information Systems Change Seen as 
5.6.5 : Interpretive Scheme : Understanding Tasks and Computer Use as 
5.7 : NIMSAD Stage 7   :    
P H Y S I C A L   D E S I G N  
5.7.3 : Using the ETHICS Component of Multiview to Pinpoint  
5.8 : NIMSAD Stage 8   :    
I M P L E M E N T A T I O N  
C H A P T E R   S I X  
A P P L Y I N G T H E   D I A G N O S T I C    
A N D   T H E R A P E U T I C   A P P R O A C H  
6.2   :   A I M I N G   T O   P E R F O R M    
6.3   :   A I M I N G   T O   P R O V I D E    
6.4   :   T H E   P R O V I D E R   O F   C H O I C E    
 xviii 
V O L U M E   T H R E E 
R E F L E C T I O N S   A N D   C O N C L U S I O N S 
C H A P T E R   S E V E N  
7.1   :   R E F L E C T I O N S   O N    
7.2   :  R E F L E C T I O N S   O N    
7.3   :   R E F L E C T I O N S   O N    
7.4   :   R E F L E C T I O N S   O N     
7.5   :   A C A D E M I C   C O N T R I B U T I O N S    
C H A P T E R   E I G H T  
8.4.2 : The Problem Solvers : An External Implementation Consultancy  
8.4.3 : Interpreting the Vision Project in Terms of Strategic Benefits 
8.4.4 : The Problem Solving Process : A Clinical Engagement Programme .554 
8.5.1 : The Problem Situation : The Vision Project as a Regulated 
8.5.3 : Interpreting the Information System  
8.6.4 : The Problem Solving Process - Strengths and Weaknesses of the 
8.7.4 : The Problem Solving Process : Recognising Supportive as well as 
8.9   :   S U M M A R Y    O F    
C H A P T E R   N I N E  
9.1   :   T H E   S u p e r V i s i o n    F R A M E W O R K   A P P L I E D   T O     
9.1.3 : The Mechanism : an Interaction between the Problem Solver, the 
Perspectives on the Service Provider as an Instrument of Government 
9.2   :   T H E   N H S   A S   A N   E P I T O M E     
9.3   :   F O U R   P E R S P E C T I V E S    O N    
9.4   :   P O L I C Y   I M P L I C A T I O N S    
9.4.3 : Management Information from Operational Systems is   
an Obvious but Insufficient Primary Rationale  
for Planners and Managers  to provide Clinical Staff with Healthcare 
9.4.5 : Secure and Confidential Information, Shared Throughout the NHS.604 
9.5   :   A   N E W   A P P R O A C H     
9.5.2 : Microstructures :  
C H A P T E R   T E N   
C H A P T E R   O N E 
O U T L I N E   O F   T H E   T H E S I S 
1.0   :   I N T R O D U C T I O N 
This thesis is about the NHS and one of its hospitals, its information systems and the 
people who make them work. 
My purpose in undertaking this research has been to understand better how an 
information system for my workplace needs to be designed, implemented and evaluated. 
I have wanted to acquire this knowledge in an organised fashion by pursuing a course of 
academic study, under the supervision of acknowledged experts. 
Demonstrations of healthcare information systems necessarily take place outside the 
immediate work environment. The representative of a producer demonstrates a scenario 
of his own imagination and the various functional accomplishments of hardware and 
software are shown to advantage. The focus is on the machine. 
Demonstrations of this kind never convey the pressures generated by the tasks and 
circumstances of real practice. The demonstrators capacity to direct attention to a 
scenario in which his machine is central always seems to negate the audiences effort to 
comprehend the machine in the context of a bad day at work. Potential users need a way 
to frame their expectations and understanding, of an information system and its 
implementation, in order to bring clarity to their appreciation and assist their informed 
contribution to its development. 
1.0.1 : Why Research into NHS Information Systems ? 
Information Technology is important to me : first as a practising clinician, whose 
satisfaction at work stems from working with colleagues and treating patients, and is 
hindered by inefficient processes and interfaces between clinical disciplines ; second, as 
a service manager, faced with the need to develop a departments resources in 
negotiation with external decision makers. 
In 1985, newly appointed as consultant in an Accident & Emergency Department in a 
large hospital, my ambitions for my department were to create an environment for safe 
and efficient clinical practice, and to emulate the best practice of teaching hospitals by 
developing my departments capacity to teach and train young professionals, develop its 
clinical methods and services and produce useful clinical audit and research projects. 
As the departments de facto manager at the time, I wanted to develop its resources by 
demonstrating its successes and the challenges it faced, especially those due to 
inadequate resources. In order to make the business case for the staff my department 
needed, I had to manage a budget and demonstrate the optimum use of my existing 
resources. The immediately available computing resource was my own 32 Kilobyte 
BBC microcomputer with external data storage on tape cassettes.  
I used this computer to build and manipulate databases. When the opportunity arose, I 
replaced this with an Amstrad 1 megabyte computer that cost me 1,000. The main 
strength of this computer was its word processing function. 
Over time, the need has intensified to compete for scarce resources and to produce 
information for a variety of audiences. I have seen information as the key to winning 
arguments, and an information system as fundamental to the acquisition, storage, 
retrieval and organisation of information. 
Early published reports of computers in Accident & Emergency Departments (Yates, 
1982 ; Gray et al., 1982) cited the following functions : 
 Patient register, demographics, secular pattern of attendance and disposal 
 Utilisation of resources 
 Categorised account of activity 
 Skeleton clinical summary. 
The information stored was used for planning, research and communication of 
rudimentary information between the A&E department and the patients General 
Practitioner. 
Later developments of computers in Accident & Emergency Departments introduced : 
 Patient tracking 
 Crude clinical diagnostic coding 
 Timing of critical process events to promote dissolution of transfer delays from 
A&E to wards. 
DeDombal (1982) described a computer programme which was later refined to produce 
Bayesian statements about the likelihood of alternative diagnoses for patients with 
abdominal pain, with an explicit intention (DeDombal, 1995: personal communication) 
to force and rely upon a prescribed model of examination. My own anecdotal 
experience of this system was that the examination required was not feasible or 
tolerated by female patients, given the conditions of overcrowding and lack of privacy 
that prevailed in my department at the time. 
My own departments first computer system was introduced in 1992, in the context of 
the NHS Resource Management Initiative (Brennan, 2005 ; ch.7), amid long queues for 
service and for hospital admission after service, stressed patients, and harassed staff. Its 
shortcomings included slow processing, an unfriendly user interface, laborious access to 
limited clinical information, and the irrelevance to clinical work of the Resource 
Management information that was to be supplied by clinical staff. 
During my career, several technical developments have expanded the potential of 
computers to assist work in a major clinical department of a large hospital. These 
include : 
 Processing speed & storage capacity 
 Graphic User Interface 
 Mouse, pointing, touchscreen 
 Portability 
 Networking / World WideWeb 
 Infra-red network 
 Website design (database driven) 
 Database design (web access) 
 Distributed access to documents, images and applications 
 Distributed construction of clinical records. 
In this way, computers have become better along a single, technical axis of 
evaluation. It will be argued in the body of the thesis that this necessary improvement is 
not sufficient for computers and information systems to blend in with the realities of 
work. 
Technical developments have been paralleled by several changes in the social 
environment of clinical practice, resulting in an altered relationship between doctors 
(and clinical professionals in general), managers and patients. 
These include the increasing demands made by users of all forms of public service, to 
be respected as sovereign consumers, and the more confident expectation, of a 
knowledgeable and articulate section of the public, to be emancipated from the thrall of 
the professional. In the meantime, a less articulate section of the public still needs help 
from professional doctors and nurses, whose orientation is towards engagement with the 
individual needs of an identified patient, rather than a distanced and anonymous, 
procedural relationship between corporation and client. 
Change in the relationship between professionals and the public has drawn impetus 
from a series of events that have refocused medical ethics. The Bristol (Kennedy, 1991) 
and Alder Hey (Redfern M et al., 2001) Inquiries marked the expulsion of paternalism 
and benevolence from the relationship between professional and patient, and demanded 
a focus on justice and respect for individual autonomy. The rights of the citizen to 
privacy have led, through the Data Protection Act (United Kingdom. Office of Public 
Sector Administration, 1998) and the Caldicott Report (Caldicott, 1997) to restrictions 
on the circulation and storage of data identifiable to an individual. Nevertheless, the 
Climbie Inquiry (Lord Laming, 2003) has demonstrated the need for professionals to 
identify and communicate extensively about the most vulnerable members of the 
community. 
Alongside these contradictions, and fears of a digital divide (Kvasny & Keil, 2006), 
the internet has allowed an explosion of information, appearing to erode the 
professionals monopoly of arcane knowledge. The development of Evidence Based 
Medicine and clinical guidelines has been synergistic with a general strengthening of 
professional accountability as well as the elimination of unjustified, idiosyncratic and 
unproductive clinical practice. Professionals are having to reappraise their social niche 
as a consequence of these developments. 
Information systems have the potential to mediate these altered relationships. Their 
introduction is occurring in an environment characterised by constrained resources, high 
public expectations, political and managerial scrutiny of clinical services and 
organisational flux. 
There seem, to me, to be three challenges at the start of this research : to articulate what 
is required from information systems in the NHS ; to ensure that suppliers satisfy users 
needs rather than promote gratuitous technical refinements ; and to ensure that that users 
operate information system accurately so that the information that circulates is reliable. 
It is also necessary to appreciate that clinicians use computers in a demanding clinical 
environment. 
1.0.2 : Wider Organisational Relevance 
The introduction of IT to an individual hospital or department is likely to be relevant to 
the wider context of the National Programme for IT in the NHS. This is a massively 
ambitious public sector IT programme within an archetypal public sector organisation. 
Because the NHS is made up individual sub-units, an inquiry situated in one of these 
can be relevant to the entire organisation.  
By 2009, the NHS IT programme has evolved through three phases : 
Information for Health (United Kingdom. NHS Executive, 1998) proposed visionary 
change, centred on the promises that information systems will be integrated and 
management information will be derived from operational systems. Electronic records 
were to ensure the secure and reliable transmission of all the information needed for any 
patients management during a crisis. 
Developed as the National Programme for IT, it focused on technical issues and central 
procurement, rather than relevance to public health gain or workplace efficiency. 
Providing 21st Century Support for the NHS (United Kingdom. Department of Health, 
2002) was characterised by a centrally driven project agenda, ruthless technical 
interoperability standards and central procurement. Its National Systems Architecture 
was built around a national communications network and the development of electronic 
records, electronic prescribing and electronic booking of appointments. 
As Connecting for Health, the IT programme has concentrated on Integrated Care 
Records : records integrated around patients rather than institutions. 
In each of these phases, there has been an underlying risk, expressed in the balance 
between technology push and clinical pull approaches to the introduction of new 
information systems to the NHS (Wyatt, 1996). 
On the one hand, technology push represents the imposition of available but potentially 
unsuitable tools without adequate regard for the carefully elicited needs of the host 
community. On the other hand, clinical pull represents the tendency to drive 
expectations in advance of what can be provided, so that perfection becomes the enemy 
of what is good enough.  
In the NHS, the commitment to introduce technology on a mass scale threatens 
disproportionately to favour technology push over information pull. The challenge will 
be to get the balance as good as it can be, and to show how it can be made better in 
future. 
This implies a social and a critical, rather than a technical account of the project. 
1.0.3 : Wider Theoretical Relevance 
Information systems are pervasive. The National Programme of IT is a major 
intervention in a large (public) organisation. It is an example of globalism in practice. A 
standard idea is to be introduced to a wide array of non-standard environments.  
The nature of social structure and the linkages it entails is of considerable interest in 
social theory as well as the theory of information systems. Social structure is not only a 
constraint on social organisation and behaviour but can also constitute a resource to 
enable social action (Giddens, 1984).  
Alongside the opposition of technology push and information pull is a second 
opposition, between constraining and enabling technology. We need to understand, 
better than we do at present, how computers fit into the clinical workplace. The thesis 
will develop a socio-technical perspective, contrary to the idea that the implementation 
of new information systems is a technical accomplishment of managers and trainers. It 
will be suggested that critical appraisal and learning about their situation by people in 
the workplace is fundamental to workplace commitment and successful assimilation.  
The proposed investment in the National Programme is huge. It deserves careful 
investigation to ensure that its implementation will succeed according to the broadest 
range of criteria. Because people are a crucial part of the NHS and of any information 
system, it will be necessary to place alongside the rigorous application of hard, 
scientific reason an equivalent, soft approach that takes due account of the non-
rational aspects of social enterprise. Alongside the socio-technical discussion, the thesis 
will develop ideas based on critical theory. 
1.0.4 : Research Question 
My research question is : 
How can I equip myself and colleagues to understand and comment critically but 
constructively, on the design, implementation and evaluation of information systems, 
so that we can promote the successful assimilation of the National Programme for IT 
at our own place of work ? 
1.0.5 : Research Aims 
The aim of the research is to develop a way of understanding how I and others at my 
place of work can best construct an understanding of information systems in terms of 
our contribution to the workplace rather than the Head Office. 
This will help my research to be relevant and influential at my own place of work. 
However, I expect the findings to be useful in comparable contexts, where the detail of 
individuals and events may be different but fundamental similarities emerge. 
It is hoped that the research can also be relevant and interesting to academic community 
by contributing insights from the detailed study of the particular and the specific aspects 
of a local site. These cannot be accessed by a detached observer, with no commitment to 
a system of values, who is only interested in mass effects and generalities. They can 
only be accessible to a researcher who is both deeply engaged with the politics of the 
site yet agnostic between the various streams of commitment that can be discerned.  
1.0.6 : Practical and Theoretical Implications 
The practical implication of the research will be to enable me to act as a resource for 
colleagues who will not have studied the issues relating to the design, implementation 
and evaluation of information systems in the same depth. The outcomes will be of 
practical local value inasmuch as they will stem from local inquiry and investigation. 
The theoretical implications will stem from the experience of putting academic theory 
into practical use within a problem situation identified in the real world of people, 
relationships, imperatives and pressures. 
1.0.7 : End Point 
The implementation of the National Programme so far has been an extended process 
rather than a discrete event. It is likely  that no new information system will be 
introduced within my own limited sphere of influence during the period of this research. 
The end point will be my enhanced understanding of relevant issues, derived from 
engagement with literature, derivation of a conceptual framework, acquisition of 
empirical data from the workplace, comparison between empirical data and the 
framework, and the formulation of credible conclusions and useful recommendations. 
These will assist local preparedness and practical action when the time to implement the 
National Programme finally arrives. 
1.0.8 : Research Objectives 
The research objectives will be constructed around the NIMSAD framework of 
Jayaratna (1994).  
I have chosen this framework for its reflective approach towards each successive, 
deliberate step in the progress from the inception to the conclusion of the research 
project. This puts it in contrast with the simple and unreflective procedural sequence of 
a prescribed method. 
The NIMSAD framework contains the following phases : 
1. Enter and understand the research setting 
2. Make a Diagnosis : structure understanding 
3. Define a Prognosis Outline : identify the desired impact of IT 
4. Identify Problems : issues impeding the desired impact 
5. Identify Notional systems to help overcome these impediments  
6. Formulate a Conceptual-Logical Design : identify what elements need to 
be created and integrated  
7. Formulate a Physical Design : identify how relevant elements should be 
put together 
8. Implement an action plan. 
By providing a sequence of numbered steps, NIMSAD creates direction towards 
conclusion of the project but accommodates the influence of what has been done 
already, what is to be done later, and what is happening now, upon what is being done 
The essential departure from a prescribed method is that, whilst the phases of NIMSAD 
outlined above can be followed strictly in the sequence given, their primary purpose is 
to provide orientation, so that the researcher can identify what he is doing at any time 
and situate this within the wider framework.  
I plan to use NIMSAD in two ways. 
First, I will use NIMSAD in this present chapter, to develop my own plan to understand 
and engage with the research task, of understanding the juxtaposition of the NHS and 
the National Programme for Information Technology, seen as a problem situation. 
Second, in Chapter Five of the thesis, I plan to use NIMSAD in a more concrete way to 
shape the fieldwork phase of the research. I intend to develop a diagnostic and 
therapeutic approach that is tuned to understand the task of implementing the National 
Programme in the researchers own local workplace. 
I will then apply, in Chapter Six, the approach derived in Chapter Five, to specific 
aspects of the local situation in my own hospital. 
1.1   :   U S I N G   N I M S A D   T O   P L A N   T H E   R E S E A R C H 
1.1.1 : Understanding the Situation of Concern that confronts the Researcher 
The essential aspect of the situation is the following equation : 
I want to understand what counts as improvement, how it is intended that information 
systems shall be agents of improvement, and how that agency is to be assured.  
1.1.2 : Performing the Diagnosis 
NIMSAD describes a mutually constitutive relationship between three elements : a 
Problem Solver, a Problem Situation and a Problem Solving Methodology. 
The problem solver is my self as a researcher. The problem situation places me in 
relationship with my need to understand how information systems are designed, 
implemented and evaluated, so that, when I or my colleagues are confronted with an 
information system, we will be able to form a reasoned, critical appraisal, relevant to the 
local situation. 
NIMSAD suggests itself as an approach towards a problem solving methodology, 
through its use of systems concepts and through the reflections it encourages, upon each 
of the three elements. 
IT + NHS = Better NHS 
The first stage in diagnosis in NIMSAD is the conceptual / logical model (DM 1) of 
the researchers problem situation (Figure 1.1). 
Figure 1.1 : DM 1, The Researchers View of Himself, as a Participant in a 
Problem (Research) Situation  
The second stage is the physical model (DM 2) of the researchers problem 
situation (Figure 1.2). 
In the physical model, the researcher can see that technology is being inserted into a set 
of relationships between people, organisational structures, processes and tasks (See 
Problem 
Solver (PSo) 
Reflections on 
PSi, PSM and 
PSos own 
mode of 
reasoning 
Problem 
Situation (PSi) 
P So Wants to understand 
design, implementation, 
evaluation 
Problem Solving 
Methodology (PSM) 
NIMSAD offers a way 
forward 
Jayaratna, 1994 : p.59) . This is happening under the watchful gaze of a variety of 
audiences : for example, strategic managers in the NHS generally, managers in the 
National Programme for IT, patients and their representatives, future users of the new 
technology. 
Figure 1.2 : DM 2, The Researchers Model of the Problem Situation he is 
Studying 
People 
Tasks Processes 
Structures 
Technology 
Audiences : eg. managers, 
front line users 
1.1.3 :  Prognosis Outline : the Desired Future State 
My desired future state is to understand how the strategic set of interconnected people, 
structures, processes and tasks, represented by the National Programme and those 
charged with its local implementation, needs to influence and be influenced by each of 
the multiple instances of an operational set of interconnected people, structures, 
processes, tasks and technology, at the workplace (Figure 1.3). 
Figure 1.3 : The Desired Future State ; The Researcher Wants To Give Future 
Users A More Articulate Voice In Their Dialogue With Information Systems 
Planners. 
One Strategic Set 
People 
Processes Tasks 
Structures 
People 
Processes Tasks 
Structures 
TECHNOLOGY 
Many Operational Sets 
Balance of 
Influence 
1.1.4 :  Problems 
The chief problem in the way of progress is that an information system cannot be  
comprehended in isolation from the continuing stream of events that surround its use. 
This is especially the case for the planners who perform strategic tasks (eg. 
implementation) or inhabit strategic processes and structures. However, information 
system users at the operational level also need a structure within which to understand 
and express their own needs. 
1.1.5 : Notional System 
One way to deal with the gap in understanding identified above is to ignore it. The 
implementation process is considered at a hard mechanical level only. Progress of the 
implementation system is monitored and controlled by a supervisory system (Figure 
1.4). 
Figure 1.4 :  A Hard Model Of Implementation And Control 
Implementation Process 
Project 
Management 
If the gap in understanding remains open, the actions of the project management team 
are unlikely to reflect accurate diagnosis or to have a rational basis. 
An alternative, soft systemic approach is suggested in Figure 1.5, below :   
Figure 1.5 : A Soft Model of Implementation 
1.1.6 : Conceptual / Logical Design 
The conceptual / logical design links the success of the National Programme and its 
implementation to the development of understanding and discourse between parties. A 
meeting of minds (Figure 1.6) can take many forms and need not result immediately in 
agreement. Conflict may be inevitable and can be fostered as long as it is constructive. 
One strategic set 
Many operational 
 A Meeting of 
Minds 
 A Way of 
Understanding 
A Way of 
Understanding 
A Way of 
Understanding 
The meeting of minds will be brought about by using models and concepts from the 
academic literature. 
Figure 1.6 : Conceptual / Logical Design. Applying the Literature to the 
Researchers Situation of Concern 
One strategic set 
Many operational 
 A Meeting of 
Minds 
 A Way of 
Understanding 
A Way of 
Understanding 
A Way of 
Understanding 
IT + NHS = Better NHS 
This situation will come 
about 
Through this class of 
interactions 
MODELS AND 
CONCEPTS FROM 
LITERATURE 
1.1.7 : Physical Design 
The conceptual / logical design will have identified components from literature to 
construct a way of understanding the design, implementation and evaluation of 
information systems so that strategic and operational managers and end users can 
participate on the most equitable terms. 
The physical design will assemble these components coherently to construct, in chapter 
five, a diagnostic and therapeutic approach that can be applied, in chapter six, to the 
problem situation that I, as a researcher, wish to help alleviate. This is the problem 
situation of an NHS Trust where the National Programme is to be implemented. 
1.1.8 : Implementation 
The application of the diagnostic and therapeutic approach to the problem situation 
experienced by the Trust will constitute the body of the research.  
1.2   :   O V E R A L L   S T R U C T U R E   O F   T H E   T H E S I S 
The structure of the thesis is now presented in broad outline. Chapter three and the 
subsequent chapters of the thesis are then explained in greater detail. 
Chapter 1 is this introductory chapter. 
Chapter 2 : Policy Background to the NHS and NHS Information Systems. This 
presents the backdrop to immediate concerns in relation to information systems 
within the NHS. As such, it provides a preliminary basis, for the design and 
focus of information systems in the NHS, that can be compared with the 
outcome of the proposed research. 
Chapter 3 : Literature Review. The information systems literature is explored, 
distinguishing between informatics as a technical science with roots in 
engineering and informatics as an essentially social and political discipline. 
Chapter 4 : Research Approach and Objectives : The research will take present 
case studies and interviews. It will be identified as action research.  
Chapter 5 : Research Findings. 
Chapter 6 : Analysis of Research Findings. 
Chapter 7 : Reflections on the Problem Situation, the Problem Solving Process, 
the Researcher as Problem Solver, the Research Process and the Strengths and 
weaknesses of the Research. 
Chapter 8 : The Practical Outcomes of the Research. 
Chapter 9 : Policy Implications. 
Chapter 10 : Conclusion of the Thesis. 
1.2.1 : Policy Review : Chapter Two 
This chapter explains the rationale for the National Programme and sets it in the context 
of wider political and societal concerns. 
1.2.2 : Literature Review : Chapter Three 
Four sets of oppositions emerge from this review of relevant literature. 
The problem situation is first presented as the insertion of technology into a mechanistic 
organisational structure. The relationship between structure and action is discussed and 
the problem situation is then presented, not as the insertion of technology but the 
appropriation of technology by people doing their jobs. 
Problem solvers are discussed in terms of opposed positivist, interpretivist and critical 
paradigms. Critical Realism is then discussed as a potential means of their unification. 
The problem solving methodology is initially modelled on the clear conceptual 
separation of definite entities, proposed by the seventeenth century philosopher, Rene 
Descartes. He is placed in opposition with a twentieth century philosopher, Maurice 
Merleau-Ponty, for whom entities define each other and, therefore, cannot be 
conceptually separate ; only interdependent and contingent. 
The problem solving methodology is discussed in practical terms, ordered around 
aspects of information systems strategy, their design and development, their 
implementation and their evaluation. A variety of individual methodologies are 
discussed but the principal theme to emerge is that method as theory is opposed against 
method as practice. Process is set against improvisation. 
Overarching these themes is the opposition between globalism and localism. Globalism 
represents the hierarchical supremacy of one idea over its rivals. Issues are viewed from 
the standpoint of the structured whole, considered as a closed system.  
Localism tests every idea against the detail of a local context. Global causes 
(interventions) produce global effects (outcomes) but the expression and intensity of 
effect are mediated by contextual factors, whose essence and variability are local. The 
global intervention loses its systemic integrity because its various points of contact with 
separate local sites constitute boundary objects, made ambiguous by membership of 
both the global intervention and the local site.  
Rather than cementing the global intervention and each local site as modules of a 
greater, physically intersecting whole, in fixed, hierarchical relationship, boundary 
objects mark points of coalescence and dissolution between closed systems that have 
now become open to each other, by virtue of functional intersections. These render 
system boundaries fluid and hierarchical relationships uncertain because the 
intersections are contingent, provisional and bi-directional. 
1.2.3 : Research Approach : Chapter Four 
The research approach will be developed in chapter four of the thesis.  
1.2.4 : Research Findings : Chapter Five - Developing a Diagnostic and 
Therapeutic Approach to the Local Problem Situation 
Chapter Five of the thesis will apply NIMSAD once more ; this time, to construct a  
diagnostic and therapeutic approach to the practical situation.  
Chapter section 5.1 presents a first background understanding of the situation of 
concern, based on an interview with the Trusts IT Manager. There is a perceived need 
to introduce information systems. The need and relevance of information systems is 
unclear. 
In section 5.2, this understanding is widened by discussion with members of the Trusts 
Executive Team. Two distinct systems of activity are identified : the IT delivery system 
and the business delivery system. The problem situation is seen to contain several 
constituencies (managers, clinicians, patients ; information systems users and suppliers) 
and a mix of hard, institutional (National Programme for IT, external regulators, the 
Trust ) and soft, social (clinical practice) structures. This chapter reports activity under 
NIMSADs phase of diagnosis. 
Section 5.3 explores the Trusts future direction, to which information systems are 
expected to contribute. This is NIMSADs desired future state. The IT delivery 
System needs to be more closely aligned with the business delivery system. The new 
Chief Executive has brought about a distinct climate shift, from static organisational 
reporting in a command and control environment towards dynamic organisational 
learning in an organisational development environment. The business delivery system 
is, in effect, being transformed into an organisational development system.  
The desired future state is to integrate the IT delivery system with organisational 
development. IT will satisfy organisational development needs in the broadest sense, 
including changes in clinical processes and methods resulting from organisational 
development activities. The outcome will be to deliver the Trust-Wide Objectives which 
encapsulate the Chief Executives organisational transformation agenda. 
Section 5.4 identifies problems. NIMSAD refers to entities that are either missing or 
mal-aligned. This chapter identifies the need to establish a conscious link between the 
Trusts IT delivery system and its Business Delivery System. From a functional 
perspective, this implies the stronger definition of purpose for these two systems, of 
which the former switches its focus from technology to information and the latter from 
the steady state of business delivery to the more dynamic and adaptive state implied by 
organisational development. Reflection from other perspectives deepens and broadens 
this analysis. 
Section 5.5 identifies strategies, in the form of notional systems which, if they were 
brought into existence, would address the problems identified in the previous chapter, 
making it easier to attain the desired future state, where the Trusts information 
systems were more closely aligned with the Chief Executives Trust-Wide Objectives. 
The relevant systems reflect agenda definition, values alignment, conflict surfacing and 
agenda critique. 
Section 5.6 reflects on the problem solver, the problem situation and the problem 
solving methodology and brings together conceptual understandings of the design, 
implementation and evaluation of information systems that reflect the propensity for 
technology to be translated from the designers conception of use into the users 
personal relationship with his own practical situation. This represents the conceptual / 
logical design phase in NIMSAD. The chapter suggests a plane of cleavage between, 
on the one hand, groups, processes and technology and, on the other, individuals, tasks 
and technology. The two positions separated by the cleavage plane represent 
fundamentally opposed philosophical positions with practical significance. 
Section 5.7 situates the conceptual / logical model described in section 5.6 within the 
wider activities of information systems design. The components identified in the last 
chapter are now presented as a unified whole. The model is then placed amid specific 
zones of interest, originally identified as relevant to design, but incidentally relevant to 
strategy, implementation and evaluation. 
1.2.5 : Research Findings : Chapter Six  Applying the Diagnostic and Therapeutic 
Approach to the Local Problem Situation 
The final phase in NIMSAD is implementation, putting the physical design to work in 
the real world. Chapter Six applies the concepts and model developed in the three 
preceding sections to a set of case studies to illustrate, in their practical context, issues 
relevant to the design, implementation and evaluation of information systems to be 
provided under the National Programme.  
1.2.6 : Reflections and Conclusions : Chapter Seven 
Section 7.1 will reflect on the research process. 
Section 7.2 will present my critical reflections on the problem situation represented by 
the introduction of the National Programme. 
Section 7.3 will reflect on my own intellectual development as a problem solver 
during the research journey. 
Section 7.4 will review the problem solving methodology. 
Section 7.5 will present the contributions and limitations of the research. 
Section 7.6 will suggest the direction of future research. 
1.2.7 : The Practical Outcome of the Research : Chapter Eight 
Chapter eight will present a review of the practical outcomes of the research project as 
an internal consultancy document for the Trust where the research was conducted. 
1.2.8 : The Policy Implications of the Research : Chapter Nine 
Chapter nine will present the implications of the research for future policy relating to 
large scale information systems in the NHS. 
1.2.9 : Conclusion of the Thesis 
Chapter ten closes the thesis and summarises briefly the intellectual journey it 
represents. 
C H A P T E R   T W O 
P O L I C Y   O V E R V I E W 
2.0   :   I N T R O D U C T I O N 
The purpose of this chapter is to appreciate the expectations of the information systems 
institutional sponsors.  
The expectations of these corporate strategists and planners represent a global view and 
vision of the NHS. The public-funded provision of local information systems is 
expected to be coherent with this vision and with the overall framework provided by 
NHS policy and NHS information policy. 
Section 2.1 outlines NHS information policy and the National Programme for IT. 
Section 2.1.0 explains NHS information policy since 1998. Section 2.1.1 briefly 
summarises information initiatives prior to 1998. Section 2.1.2 summarises the policy 
context of the National Programme. Section 2.1.3 explains the areas of public concern 
that have influenced thinking about the programme. Sections 2.1.4 and 2.1.5 explain the 
programmes implementation and success. 
Section 2.2 presents brief conclusions. 
2.1   :   N H S   I N F O R M A T I O N   P O L I C Y    
A N D   T H E   N A T I O N A L   P R O G R A M M E   F O R   I T 
2.1.0 : NHS Information Policy since 1998 
The White Paper, The New NHS, Modern, Dependable (United Kingdom. Department 
of Health, 1997) set out the plans of a newly elected government for healthcare in the 
United Kingdom. Its associated information strategy, Information for Health (United 
Kingdom. NHS Executive, 1998) provided an overall verdict on the previous (1992) 
strategy (section 1.33). 
While it did deliver some important national infrastructure, the previous 
strategywas over-concerned with management information, and failed to 
address the real needs of the NHS for information to help clinicians and 
managers to deliver more effective healthcare and improved population health.  
Information for Health (section 1.3) committed to a clinical focus in the form of : 
 lifelong electronic health records for every person in the country  
 round-the-clock on-line access to patient records and information about best 
clinical practice, for all NHS clinicians  
 genuinely seamless care for patients through GPs, hospitals and community 
services sharing information across the NHS information highway  
 fast and convenient public access to information and care through on-line 
information services and telemedicine  
 the effective use of NHS resources by providing health planners and managers 
with the information they need.  
It was based on the following principles (section 1.30) : 
 information will be person-based  
 systems will be integrated  
 management information will be derived from operational systems  
 information will be secure and confidential  
 information will be shared across the NHS.  
The principal innovation within Information for Health was the patient-based Electronic 
Record, subdivided as follows : 
2.10 Electronic Patient Record (EPR) describes the record of the periodic care 
provided mainly by one institution. Typically this will relate to the healthcare 
provided to a patient by an acute hospital. EPRs may also be held by other 
healthcare providers, for example, specialist units or mental health NHS Trusts. 
2.11 The term Electronic Health Record (EHR) is used to describe the concept 
of a longitudinal record of patients health and healthcare  from cradle to grave. 
It combines both the information about patient contacts with primary healthcare 
as well as subsets of information associated with the outcomes of periodic care 
held in the EPRs 
Systems integration was to occur at six levels (section 2.64) : 
1. Clinical Administrative Data (Patient Administration Systems) 
2. Integrated clinical diagnosis and treatment support (Departmental systems 
integrated with Patient Administration Systems) 
3. Clinical activity support (Electronic ordering, results reporting and prescribing, 
multi-professional care pathways) 
4. Clinical knowledge and decision support (knowledge bases, embedded 
guidelines, rules, electronic alerts, expert systems support) 
5. Speciality specific support (specialist clinical modules, document imaging) 
6. Advanced multi-media and telematics. (Telemedicine, Picture Archiving and 
Communications Systems). 
Information for Health had cast the information strategy for the NHS as a national 
programme for local implementation, focused around the delivery of Local Health 
Improvement Plans, themselves geared towards the delivery of National Service 
Frameworks  addressing key health challenges.  
In contrast, Delivering 21st Century IT support for the NHS (United Kingdom. 
Department of Health, 2002) focused on the nationally co-ordinated delivery of 
 National Service Frameworks were announced  in The New NHS, Modern Dependable and provide a 
comprehensive ideal model of management and standards for a variety of medical conditions. 
infrastructure in the form of ruthless standardisation (ibid: para. 1.2.1) at a technical 
level, national arrangements for procurement (recapturing the market from its suppliers) 
and clearly defined channels of centralised responsibility and authority : in other words, 
a national programme for national implementation. A local process of implementation 
became a global one. Local functional sensitivity gave way to national technical 
uniformity. 
The resulting National Systems Architecture (ibid.: p.2). introduced electronic 
prescribing, electronic booking of appointments and electronic records, and supported 
these with the N3 National Network that was to form the spine for the national 
electronic distribution of patients confidential medical data. Respecting the important 
issue of confidentiality, access constraints, authentication procedures and encryption 
were given development priority.  
Subsequently, the National Programmes delivery arm has been named, Connecting for 
Health ; recognising that tight project-management had lent an undesirably self-centred 
aspect to the Programme and re-asserting its purpose as an instrument of wider change. 
A national local ownership programme (NLOP) has been launched, to strengthen the 
engagement of the broader NHS with the ICT programme. 
In this form, the programme has reverted to a national programme for local 
implementation, focused on the integration of clinical services and records around the 
individual patient. However, the decisions about what is to be implemented locally have 
now been taken in isolation from a clinically led view of health improvement or a 
locally led view of the way local elements of healthcare ought best to interact . 
Chantler, Clarke and Granger (2006) have described the content of the IT programme in 
terms of its technical infrastructure. 
The aim has been to build a national broadband network that can handle vast volumes of 
data traffic without degradation. Information is modelled around a national data spine, 
to which a summary care record for every patient is linked. The summary care record is 
populated with information fed from more detailed, local records held by individual 
healthcare providers, or in each patients personal health webspace [My 
HealthSpace]. 
The spine also manages the exchange of digitally stored X rays and other images, 
electronic prescriptions and pathology results, and outpatient or other appointments. The 
ability to integrate to enable a single, immediately updatable record to be available 
irrespective of the location in which the patient is treated is a core goal of the National 
Programme, as is the ability to integrate electronically all the disparate elements of 
healthcare provision which constitute the patients journey through the processes of 
treatment for a given condition such as a cancer. 
Additional to the spine, Bacon and Pugh (2006) identify the replacement of local 
systems at hospitals and GP practices throughout the NHS with centrally selected 
software as the second principal component of the National Programme. They maintain 
that : The fundamental error made when setting up the programme was to assume that 
centralised procurement of national systems would be more efficient than local decision 
making guided by national standards. .. Central selections mean that all local 
ownership of such systems is lost  this makes the systems even more difficult to 
deploy. 
2.1.1 : Background - Information Initiatives Prior to 1998 
Since the 1960s, the Patient Administration System (PAS) of each hospital has 
recorded and administered hospital activity in terms of in-patient and out-patient 
episodes. It is essentially a clerical function but also contains, for each episode, a 
diagnostic code that indicates broadly the clinical purpose of the activity undertaken.  
As emerged in the Bristol Inquiry (Kennedy, 2001 : Annexe A, paras. 57-67), coding 
and the maintenance of PAS are back room, administrative functions, carried out in 
isolation from front-line clinical activity, essentially for planning purposes. Having no 
relevance apparent to clinicians, their execution has tended to be correspondingly poor 
(Kennedy, 2001 : Ch.6 : paras 26-27). However, extracts from each hospitals PAS are 
published in NHS Hospital Episode Statistics and are used to compare one hospitals 
performance with another. In this sense, the figures intended for planning are published 
over the heads of clinicians, purporting to compare clinical performance. Public 
debate over health services is founded on fallible representations, whose relation to the 
truth is not necessary but only coincidental. 
The NHS information initiatives which preceded Information for Health are described 
by Brennan (2005 ; ch.7). They include Hospital Information Support Systems (HISS), 
the Resource Management Initiative (RMI) and Clinical Audit. All of these have or had 
the potential to refer back to the Patient Administration System (PAS). Brennan paints a 
picture of a market for NHS information systems that had suffered provider capture. 
HISS were intended to integrate the different administrative systems that existed to 
manage different parts of the hospital (eg. X Ray, pathology, A&E, pharmacy) in the 
sense that the output of any of these systems could be processed in a central system such 
as PAS.  
Brennan (2005 : p.54-62) and Perrin (1998) explain how the Resource Management 
Initiative (RMI) resulted from efforts to assemble information about the costs of capital 
assets, human resource and clinical procedures with the number of patients treated and 
their severity of illness. Coding structures were revised and the level of detail available 
was enriched. This was to allow efficiency comparisons, first between hospitals and 
subsequently between individual clinical firms. 
Brennan explains that HISS was implemented independently and sporadically by 
individual NHS hospitals, purchasing solutions from a variety of providers whose 
systems were electronically incompatible with each other. However, departmental 
systems had often been supplied by different manufacturers and their functional 
integration required manual transcription of output from one system to another. 
Despite their promise, both HISS and RMI have suffered from the incompatibility of 
their component information systems. 
2.1.2 : The Policy Context of the National Programme 
Electronic information systems are central to the e-government strategy, outlined in 
Transformational Government (United Kingdom. HM Government Cabinet Office, 
2005 ; p.3-4). Here, the aim is to transform and modernise public services, making 
them responsive to personal needs as well as improving their economic efficiency and 
eliminating process steps that confer no added value. 
The Wanless Report (Wanless, 2002) to the Chancellor of the Exchequer made 
recommendations which instigated the National Programme for IT and provided a 
foundation for subsequent health policy.  
Wanless' terms of reference asked him "to determine the resources needed for high-
quality service". The result was "the Review's vision of such a service in 2022". 
To achieve parity over the next 20 years would require "a very substantial increase in 
resources for health and social care" as well as radical reform. Both would need support 
from a major programme of effective investment in IT. Funds intended to purchase IT 
resources must be ring-fenced against diversion for other purposes. The proliferation of 
incompatible IT systems would need to halt. 
Wanless interim report (Wanless, 2001) had identified chronic underfunding, 
inefficient spending, and lack of capacity contributing to health outcomes below the 
European average. 
Productivity improvement would stem from better use of information, reduced 
bureaucracy, clinical as well as financial effectiveness, successive devolution of 
responsibility for direct care from one sector of the workforce to another, better 
integration of social care with health care, and better recognition of inter-relationships 
between resources in the system. 
Public funding of healthcare need not be equated with public-sector provision. To take 
greater responsibility for their personal health the public needed information on health 
matters, and to make informed choices when seeking healthcare, they needed improved 
information about health outcomes. 
In making his recommendations, Wanless pointed to the need for a full information base 
about health inequalities and the relationship between socio-economic need and health 
need. 
The United Kingdom House of Commons Public Administration Select Committee 
(2003) identified a prevailing measurement culture in the NHS, characterised by 
centripetal reporting of summary information to assure the confidence of an external 
public or parliamentary audience. They wished public services to develop a 
performance culture characterised by the capacity of an internal organisational 
audience, to generate organisational learning from its own informational resources.  
In the same vein, the Gershon Efficiency Review (Gershon, 2004), advocated the 
recycling of resource, from unproductive supervision to the facilitation and 
emancipation of front-line interactions in all sectors of public service. A key aim within 
efficient reconfiguration at the level of service delivery was to maximise the productive 
time of public service professionals in the front-line.  
2.1.3 : Intervening Factors  
The Unstable NHS Environment  
The National Programme and the NHS each emerge from their respective background in 
policy, for NHS information and for the NHS itself. The evolution of NHS information 
policy has not been closely aligned with the rather unstable shifts in policy for the NHS 
itself. The ideal of freely flowing information is opposed by a countervailing concern 
for individual privacy. Sweeney and Griffiths (2002 : p. 95) summarise four phases in 
healthcare policy since 1983 (Table 2.1). 
Over time, these phases have been associated with various policy shifts, from strong, 
centralised control structures emanating from the Griffiths letter (Griffiths, 1983) to the 
devolution of earned autonomy to NHS Foundation Trusts ; from the introduction of 
an NHS internal market in Working for Patients (United Kingdom. Department of 
Health, 1989).to its abolition in The New NHS (United Kingdom. Department of Health, 
1997) and then reverting to a system of Payment by Results and contested service 
provision in The NHS Modernisation Plan (United Kingdom. Department of Health, 
2004). 
At the same time, the NHS landscape has been transformed by various structural 
reorganisations and by the emergence of new forms of service provision, such as call 
centres (NHS Direct), nurse-led Walk-In Centres, GP Out of Hours collaboratives and 
polyclinics. 
Table 2.1 : Phases in NHS Policy ; policy instruments and associated information 
strategies 
Phase Policy Instrument Information Strategy 
The First Way : 
Managerial command with 
a focus on control.  
Griffiths Letter. Local integration of 
information about activity, 
manpower and finance : 
increasing precision of 
accounting. 
The Second Way :  
The purchaser-provider 
split ; developing market 
forces. 
Working for Patients. Getting Better with 
Information. 
The Third Way : 
Integrating cooperation and 
competition : attempting to 
get the best of both worlds. 
The New NHS and The 
NHS Plan. 
Information for Health 
followed by Delivering 21st 
Century Support for the 
The Fourth Way : 
Understanding the health 
service as a complex 
adaptive system ; post-
normal healthcare. 
The NHS Improvement 
Plan. 
National Programme for IT 
re-branded Connecting for 
Health : National Local 
Ownership Programme 
instigated. 
The regulatory framework has included the emergence of clinical governance, 
encouraging the adoption of evidence based best practice guidelines, enshrined in the 
National Service Frameworks and guidelines which emanated from governance 
structures (The Commission for Health Improvement and the National Institute for 
Clinical Excellence - NICE) announced in The New NHS. 
The White Paper, The New NHS, required the local elaboration of Health Improvement 
Plans, linked to National Service Frameworks (NSFs). In turn local information 
strategies (LIS) were to be linked to the delivery and monitoring of these frameworks. 
The same White Paper imposed a statutory duty of quality on the NHS. In The NHS 
Plan, the announcement of new funding for the NHS was accompanied by renewed 
emphasis on efficiency and it is only in the Darzi review (Lord Darzi, 2008) that all 
healthcare providers will now be required by law to produce Quality Accounts just as 
they publish financial accounts (ibid : p.11). Darzi expects that Every provider of 
NHS services should systematically measure, analyse and improve quality. They will 
need to develop their own quality frameworks, combining relevant indicators defined 
nationally, with those appropriate to local circumstances. This will include quality 
measures that reflect the visions for improved services that are at the core of this 
Review (p.50). 
To summarise the policy factors for the NHS itself that have intervened during the 
evolution of NHS information policy, the financial survival of individual institutions 
seems set to become a distinct local preoccupation, alongside the need to identify each 
institutions contribution towards the improvement of the nations health. Provider 
differentiation and proliferation can enhance access, but communication between 
providers is key to promote co-ordination, avoid conflict of information provision and 
inefficient duplication of resource consumption. Incentive payments based on tariff 
rather than market costs reinforce the need, not only to measure what is done, but also to 
 Now, after various transitions, the Care Quality Commisssion. 
do it more efficiently. This often entails more efficient communication, not only within 
organisational boundaries, but across collaborative interfaces. 
Policy for NHS information contains the contradiction that information will be shared 
across the NHS but will also be secure and confidential. It has been easier to develop 
technical controls on authorship and access to information than to clarify how 
information access and use blend with users individual and collective work. 
The Caldicott report (1997) was a response to the intensification of NHS accounting 
procedures and the demand for wider circulation of information about treatments given 
to individual patients. Alongside the Data Protection Act (United Kingdom. Office of 
Public Sector Information, 1998) it constitutes the foundation for the restrictive rules of 
information governance within the NHS.  
The Data Protection Act states that data must be: 
 fairly and lawfully processed 
 processed for limited purposes 
 adequate, relevant and not excessive 
 accurate 
 not kept longer than necessary 
 processed in accordance with the data subject's rights 
 secure 
 not transferred to countries without adequate protection. 
Despite these safeguards, the technical programme has encountered professional and 
public scepticism over the National Programmes ability to maintain the confidentiality 
of sensitive patient information. Therefore, detailed security arrangements have been 
made, to limit users access to any patients electronic record. This has been 
accompanied by careful arrangements to allow individual patients to opt out of 
electronic records or to control the most sensitive aspects of their content. 
Mason (1986) refers to four public policy challenges of the information age : 
accuracy, privacy, property [ownership] and access.  
These concerns are to be addressed by the NHS Information Commissioner. He has set 
out his view of NHS electronic care records (United Kingdom. Information 
Commisioners Office, undated), in which he notes the concern of some individuals that 
their information should not be shared widely, even within the NHS. He expects 
patients to have the right to opt out of sharing, to have access to the shared component 
of their record, and to have some limited editorial rights over the content or visibility of 
this component. 
The Commissioner expects that access will be controlled according to the legitimacy 
of the readers relationship with the patient, determined by their role in that patients 
health care. Patients, or managers on their behalf, will have rights and responsibilities to 
audit access to records. Information will not be shared outside the NHS without the 
explicit consent of the patient, unless allowed or required by law. 
Against this background, the public inquiry into the death of Victoria Climbie (Lord 
Laming, 2003) highlighted the failure of communication and coordination of services 
around a vulnerable individual. Discussion within the inquiry highlighted the ethical 
tension between the surveillance of groups and individuals, for the protection of their 
health, and the invasion of their personal privacy (Judd, 2002). Arguments for the free 
flow of patient related information encounter objections based on personal privacy and 
the control of unauthorised access. 
Clinical Risk and Safety 
In the 1990s, a series of high profile medical failures in the NHS (Smith, 1998 : 
Berwick, 2001) began to stimulate the institutionalised control of clinical safety, 
previously the responsibility of the individual doctor. 
An Organisation with a Memory (Donaldson, 2000) was intended to spearhead actions 
and activities which would minimise litigation costs by eliminating adverse events 
through systematic reporting and recording, and formal inquiry into the most serious 
events. 
Ham (2008) has commented on the (United Kingdom Healthcare Commission, 2008) 
report, Learning from Investigations, concluding that the proactive organisational 
leadership and learning envisaged in An Organisation with a Memory are still lacking.  
Doctors, managers and patients share a common concern for the safety of healthcare. 
Leape (1994) reported that 180,000 people die each year [in the USA] partly as a result 
of iatrogenic injury, the equivalent of three jumbo jet crashes every 2 days.  
In the United States, the Institute of Medicine document,  To Err Is Human : Building A 
Safer Health System (Kohn et al., 1999) challenged healthcare providers to set and 
measure performance against their own proactive standards, and to represent themselves 
through performance measures against which patients can make informed market 
choices.  
Leape and Berwick (2005) report that this challenge has been taken up, not only by 
healthcare provider institutions but also by external agencies representing government, 
insurance payors and accrediting bodies. They expect electronic records to help in 
setting safety goals (eg. a 90% reduction in hospital acquired infections, a 50% 
reduction in medication errors, a 90% reduction in errors associated with high-harm 
medications). The message is mobilize pressure for change and then demonstrate 
change by setting and measuring numerical targets and performance indicators. 
Berwick (1996) has stressed two points. The first of these is that any practice of 
measurement is better than none. Reinertsen (1998) stresses that organised data are 
pivotal to the managers ability to marshal commitment towards change. Berwick and 
Nolan (1998) exhort doctors to see themselves as key leaders in improving healthcare 
and medical systems.  
Nelson et al. (1998) provide examples of industrial methods (statistical process control 
(SPC) charts) applied to clinical practice. These methods require the continuous 
retrieval of specific data to monitor previously identified measures of process or 
outcome. Mohammed et al. (2001) use the Bristol and Shipman scandals to demonstrate 
how Shewharts forgotten lessons might have been applied prospectively to identify 
Shipmans performance anomalies and intervene earlier. 
Berwicks (1996) second point is that performance indicators only measure the 
operation of the unreconstructed system. Effective change is not change in a system, 
but stems from change of a system. By inference, effective change is radical change. 
Clearly, the measurement and monitoring of safety needs to be complemented by an 
organisational framework that supports organisational learning and reconstruction. By 
measuring, rationalising around consensus (Clemmer et al., 1998) and purposefully 
redesigning new systems of activity, Berwick (1998) and Nolan (1998) show how it is 
possible to build an organisational learning dynamic around measures of performance. 
For Chang and Powell (1998), the key transition to be made in support of Business 
Process Re-engineering and Total Quality Management is the cultural transition from a 
culture of command and control to a culture which empowers leadership, teamwork, 
entrepreneurship and the capacity to manage the risks of change. 
The argument, then, is that variation ought to take a place alongside control as an 
organisational safeguard. Alongside order, a degree of disorder is also healthy. Strategic 
pre-planning cannot identify all contingencies and tight control must not preclude 
emergent responses. 
Reason (2000) has argued, Most managers of traditional systems attribute human 
unreliability to unwanted variability and strive to eliminate it as far as possible. In high 
reliability organisations, on the other hand, it is recognised that human variability in the 
shape of compensations and adaptations to changing events represents one of the 
system's most important safeguards.  
Likewise, the Actor Network Theorist, John Law (2003) presents an analysis of the 
public inquiry into a fatal train crash, allegedly caused because a train driver passed a 
signal at danger. Guilt, initially located at a distinct site (the driver) was quickly 
dissipated within the complex of (generic) man and machine (train, signalling 
apparatus). The alternative ascription of blame to a discrete system that ought to have 
been more tightly defined and controlled also failed. 
Law uses the evidence of the inquiry to argue that systems and control events are 
human constructions, assembled from fluid relationships whilst external contextual 
variables are assumed to be held constant. For Law, this assumption is not feasible and 
adding complexity to the relations that make up a system to strengthen those relations 
may actually dissolve those relations in practice  systems are never failsafe 
 they may  dissolve themselves from within as they attempt to increase 
their reliability. It is not possible to construct the world as a comprehensive set of 
immutable rules. 
The inquiry heard how an internally cohesive rule set, governing the standard design of 
signals, had to be adapted to contingent events : the signal would have been invisible 
against the background of another structure if it had been constructed strictly according 
to the standard. Other examples were cited to show that the continuity and safety of 
railway operations depended on continuous human improvisation, using general rules 
and the particular context to assemble a conclusion about required action.  
It follows from these ideas that clinicians will require information systems to facilitate, 
rather than control or eliminate, their individual judgements in order to practise in ways 
that are not only safe, effective and based on best evidence, but also attuned to the 
peculiarities of the patient and the clinical situation as Sackett et al. (1996) endorse. 
Transparent Clinical Methods 
Consumers demands for transparency, the need to meet escalating demand by up-
skilling of professionals, and the ambitions of non-medical professionals themselves 
have conspired with complementary concerns over issues of patient safety, clinical 
effectiveness, control and economic efficiency to drive the standardisation of clinical 
practice, manifest as clinical protocols, National Service Frameworks and care 
pathways.  
Understanding Professional Practice in terms of Power and Emancipation 
Following the Bristol inquiry, closed medical audit procedures became multidisciplinary 
audit meetings, open to managers (Kennedy, 2001 : Final Report ; Recommendations, 
para.143). The inception of Clinical Governance (Scally & Donaldson, 1998) 
consolidated a shift in the balance of power between the Department of Health (via the 
Chief Medical Officer), the General Medical Council and the British Medical 
Association.  
Adler et al. (2008) suggest that there is a general tendency, epitomised within 
healthcare, changing the relationship between professionals and their clients (patients) 
or subservient professions. Procedures are codified and their basis in evidence made 
transparent. The professionals role is no longer to possess and apply arcane knowledge 
but to obtain, compare and explain sources of knowledge to the patient. 
The governments appointed Patient Czar and chairman of the NHS Care Record 
Development Board has made several observations on the relationship between 
professionals and the public (Cayton, 2005). In the first of these, he sees 
professionalism as deriving, not from the benevolent intentions of a class or college of 
practitioners, but from the manifest control of a process which ensures that 
professionals do good and do no harm.  
In his second observation, the Patients Czar has neatly reflected the conflict between 
the normalising and constraining tendency of managerialism and the need for an 
empowered form of craft or professional practice. Speaking about the NHS Care 
Records Board, he says : 
Much of the arguments that flow back and forward are between those who have a 
technical, utilitarian, instrumental understanding of clinical practice and those of us 
who argue that technology exists to support humanity not to control it. The difference is 
between those who look to standardise clinical practice and those who look for a 
personalised and consistent approach to care. 
In his third observation, the Czar, sees professionalism not as a state in subject/object 
relationship between a profession and a client population but as an interaction between 
individual practitioners and individual patients. This interaction has three 
characteristics. The first is an empathic involvement between equals. The second is a 
form of expertise characterised less by the possession of knowledge than by its 
thoughtful application. The third is a mutuality within the professional relationship 
which supersedes professional autonomy and enhances accountability.  
The Czars fourth observation is to remove the professional from the authoritative role 
of independent expert to that of a link between the patient and a wider corpus of other 
professionals and their knowledge. 
2.1.4 : Strategies and Interactions : Implementing the National Programme 
Chantler, Clarke and Granger (2006) conclude, Perhaps the greatest challenge to 
successful implementation to improve the quality and efficiency of health care is the 
human processes that need to change to accommodate the IT revolution  Above 
all will be the need to provide sufficient training for staff, especially clinicians, to use 
the new systems.  
It seems that, at some stage, everybody will be uniformly persuaded to accept the 
National Programmes information products as supplied, and will comply with the 
requirements of their use. If this is to be the case, people in the NHS will respond to the 
Programme, rather than the Programme responding to people. 
The implementation of the NHS IT programme is directed by NHS Connecting for 
Health in The National Programme for IT Implementation Guide (United Kingdom. 
NHS : Connecting for Health, 2006). The Guide distinguishes (p. 34) between the 
practice and the purpose of implementation. 
The National Programme for IT Implementation Guide (p.31) states, projects 
implementing National Programme products would usually be delivered as part of a 
wider integrated change programme. The Integrated Service Improvement Programme 
(ISIP) is developing an integrated approach to service improvement and benefits 
management. Safety, support for service improvement and confidentiality are 
identified as objectives for a programme which will be business led, to maximise 
value in recent investments in IT. It will address first those areas identified in local 
planning processes as most in need of the information products to be implemented. The 
programme will support patient pathways and maximise effective use of clinician 
time (ibid. page 34).  
Implementation of the Programme will be locally driven and led and centrally 
supported (p.34). Internal consistency is to be assured through information standards 
and the use of PRINCE2 project management methodology (United Kingdom. Office of 
Government Commerce, 2009). PRINCE2 [PRojects IN Controlled Environment] 
emphasises definition, documentation and librarianship, planning, communication, 
coordination, risk management and control, to ensure efficiency, accountability and 
good governance in the deployment of public resources. The control function restricts 
shifts in contractual, technical or business assumptions during the project. 
A report by the National Audit Office [NAO] (United Kingdom. Comptroller and 
Auditor General, 2006) stated (p. 6), The Department of Health and NHS Connecting 
for Health should provide greater clarity to organizations and staff in the NHS as to 
when the different elements of the Programme will be delivered. NHS Connecting for 
Health should ensure that it has a robust engineering-based timetable for delivery, 
which it is confident its suppliers are capable of achieving. It identified significant 
challenges for the National Programme. 
 Ensuring that the IT suppliers continue to deliver systems that meet the needs of 
the NHS, and to agreed timescales without further slippage 
 Ensuring that NHS organisations can and do fully play their part in 
implementing the Programmes systems 
 Winning the support of NHS staff and the public in making the best use of the 
systems to improve services. 
These ideas express faith in a hierarchy of conditions which, if met, will result in the 
successful delivery of the National Programme Intervention and its intended Outcomes. 
Paragraph 4.1 stated : A key lesson from many unsuccessful IT projects in the past is 
that the NHS needs to see the Programme as a business change programme with clear 
goals and benefits rather than an IT project. Success therefore requires : 
 Engagement of NHS managers and clinicians to win their support for the overall 
vision and purpose of the Programme and the benefits it will deliver 
 The NHS to articulate its business change priorities and users to shape their 
business processes accordingly 
 Commitment by the local NHS to install the IT systems and use them to improve 
services 
 Sufficient capability to implement effectively, including training the NHS staff 
that will use the systems. (NAO Report : p. 35).  
Protti (2003) has identified local clinician involvement as a key source of support for 
clinical information systems projects and criticises the National Programme for its 
tendency to keep clinicians at arms length until technical development have been well 
advanced.  
In England, Wider engagement and mobilisation of the NHS was not started until it 
was judged that procurement had reached a sufficient stage of maturity to be able to 
communicate its outcome in a meaningful and efficient way. It was concerned that to 
have done so earlier might have raised expectations which were either speculative or 
may not have been met. NHS Connecting for Health also faced severe resource 
constraints on undertaking such activities. (United Kingdom. Comptroller and Auditor 
General, 2006 : p. 35). By this stage, an extensive Output Based Specification had been 
developed with input from clinicians, which described in full what the successful 
suppliers were required to build (Chantler, Clarke & Grainger 2006). 
2.1.5 : Outcomes : Progress with the National Programme 
Progress with NPfIT was expressed by Chantler, Clarke and Granger (2006) in terms of 
numbers of registered users, numbers of e-mails sent every day, the numbers of PACS 
systems installed every week and number of images stored. Electronic booking of 
appointments (Choose and Book) had been implemented to facilitate patient choice 
as well as the electronic booking of first hospital outpatient appointments by general 
practitioners. The programme had failed to meet its target of universal electronic 
 Picture Archiving and Communications System : allows electronic storage, retrieval and shared viewing 
of medical images (x rays, scans etc.). 
booking by the end of 2005, but its performance has now improved with 62 percent of 
general practitioners using the service and 10,000 patients benefiting daily. 
These claims about the extent of penetration tell us nothing about the nature of any 
benefit derived. Neither do they explore the success or otherwise of the relationship 
between the NHS and its new IT systems.  
2.2   :   C O N C L U S I O N 
The policy and evaluation outlined here provide a preliminary grounding for 
prescriptions about information systems for the NHS. 
The National Programme is presented as a global technical project, to be progressed as 
an exercise in project management, alongside a political process of clinical 
engagement, to drive acceptance by a potentially reluctant organisation. 
The research-based part of the thesis will explore the non-technical factors associated 
with the use of information systems in an NHS hospital. The emergent arguments will 
assist deeper understanding of clinical engagement, not as an exercise in political 
manipulation but as an inquiry into the local individual and organisational concerns that, 
if satisfied, might convert passive and reluctant acceptance into eager and avid 
assimilation.  
The froth of engagement, enthusiasm and anticipation urgently needs to be given 
substance. The research will shed light on the nature of the socio-technical factors that 
are, as will be seen, held important for successful implementation of the National 
Programme. 
An understanding of these factors will help in closing the conceptual gap between the 
intervention of new information systems in the NHS and the realisation of benefits. 
The next chapter of the thesis is a literature review which follows Jayaratnas (1994) 
separation of a problem situation, problem solvers and a problem solving methodology. 
C H A P T E R   T H R E E 
L I T E R A T U R E   R E V I E W 
3.0   :   I N T R O D U C T I O N 
3.0.0 : Approach to the Review 
The review has been conducted from an engaged (Van der Ven, 2007) rather than a 
strategic position. I have worked reflexively from inside my own research situation, 
answering questions as they emerged from literature and from the research, by reference 
to newer or newly relevant literature.  
My aim has been to expand iteratively two complementary and interacting 
understandings : of the technical information systems field and of the clinical, social and 
political situation to which information systems are to be introduced. 
With a different aim, to synthesise a set of affirmative statements about a clearly 
defined issue, my approach would have been to convert a clearly stated research 
question into a search strategy and to apply this to several bibliographic databases. 
Papers would have been assessed for relevance and methodological quality and the 
results from the most relevant and methodologically robust papers would have been 
synthesised to identify areas of relative certainty and uncertainty. 
I could not apply this approach to the aim of understanding the field of information 
systems in a context yet to be researched, or of understanding the reasons why they 
might succeed in some situations and not in others. I was not in a position to decide, 
prospectively, what I was looking for or how I would recognise it when I found it. My 
approach had to be exploratory and selective.  
I specifically avoided surveys of nurses attitudes to computers, accounts of the 
monitoring of biochemical and physiological signals and investigations into the impact 
of computers on the dynamics of consultation in general practice. 
I explored veins of relevant literature as they became salient to emerging insights. I 
identified key authors and topics, making these the object of limited, highly focused 
searches using bibliographic databases and internet search engines, consistent with the 
spirit of an informatics research project. As I identified key journals, I hand searched 
their archives for relevant papers. 
My starting point was Walshams (1993) study of information systems in organisations. 
This was the earliest worked example I could find of a series of non-positivist case 
studies. It led me immediately into the realms of philosophy and sociology. 
Walshams work was based on Giddens (1984) structuration theory and both works led 
to a study of social theory and political philosophy and their application to information 
systems. 
I traced the co-ordinated emergence of information systems as a post-technical 
discipline to a conference held in Manchester in 1985. The various papers which 
constituted the conference proceedings (Mumford E et al., 1985) identified a cadre of 
authors whose work might be traced forward from that point, and a set of philosophical 
positions and methodological approaches that have informed the subsequent 
development of the information systems literature. 
I was able to find evidence of formal methodological contributions to the introduction 
of information systems to the NHS ; for example, those described in Checkland & 
Scholes (1990). However, these tended to deal with social and political issues at the 
level of formal organisational structure rather than with practical issues at the level of 
the workplace.  
An exception was Mumfords (1995 : part 4) case studies of a participative consultative 
approach to the deployment of information systems in individual NHS workplaces. 
These described the process of consultation with front-line clinicians but did not 
illuminate what its like, to use information systems in a clinical environment. 
It has not been possible to summarise the massive and sprawling literature as if it were a 
compact and coherent whole. My approach has been to present a series of different 
aspects of the literature and to arrange these in a way consistent with the themes that 
have emerged and with the structure suggested by the literature itself. 
3.0.1 : Situation 
The National Programme (later, Connecting for Health) has been dubbed, The biggest 
computer programme in the world . Ever  (Brennan, 2005). Its task has been to 
introduce to the National Health Service an interoperable Electronic Health Record, 
associated with the development of e-Prescribing and e-Booking of appointments. 
The EHR Impact study (European Union, 2009) investigated The Socio-Economic 
Impact of Interoperable Electronic Health Record (EHR) and e-Prescribing Systems in 
Europe and Beyond. A tributary study (European Union, 2008) investigated The 
Socio-economic Impact of Scotlands Emergency Care Summary+. This report 
(Extended Executive Summary ; p.39) identifies two not to miss opportunities. These 
are, first, to use interoperability as the prime driver of benefits and, second, to organise 
productive dialogue between users and ICT [Information and Communications 
Technology] experts. 
A team of nine authors (Car et al., 2008) was commissioned by the NHS Connecting for 
Health Evaluation Programme to report on The Impact of e-Health on the Quality and 
Safety of Healthcare in the form of a systematic overview and synthesis of the 
literature. In their words (p.24) : 
 Interoperability is defined as the ability to exchange, understand and act on patient and other health 
information and knowledge among linguistically and culturally disparate clinicians, patients and other 
actors, within and across jurisdictions, in a collaborative manner. EHRI distinguishes between three levels 
of interoperability, which are potential interoperability, limited connectivity and extended actual 
connectivity. (European Union, 2009) 
+ The Emergency Care Summary is a frequently-refreshed read only summary of a patients currently 
prescribed medications and life-long health care events. Although capable of future extension, its initial 
ambitions have been limited but participation has been more or less universal amongst General Practices 
throughout Scotland. It is perceived to be useful to A&E Departments, GP Out of Hours Services and 
NHS 24, the Scottish equivalent of NHS Direct, through which callers can receive telephone advice to 
guide their actions during health emergencies. 
Most technological innovations fail to realise their potential and this unfortunately has 
also been true with respect to the history of e-Health applications. 
Major factors contributing to these failures  which may in some cases be spectacular  
include the lack of appreciation and attention paid to the human factors issues during 
product development and socio-technical factors that subsequently enable innovations 
to diffuse and embed themselves into healthcare organisations 
A team of five authors (Greenhalgh et al., 2009) received funding from the Medical 
Research Council, the National Institute for Health Research and the UK Department of 
Health Connecting for Health Evaluation Programme, and has produced a systematic 
literature review of the literature pertaining to electronic patient records. 
They begin their review by stating the claims for the potential of electronic patient 
records to form the cornerstone of a modernised health service and immediately 
balance these with reference to the frequency with which electronic patient records 
systems fail. They attach importance to appreciating situated micropractices in 
different clinical settings and the hidden work of those close to the patient and they 
point to the reported success of home grown clinical information systems relative to 
systems designed remote from the workplace. 
3.0.2 : Background 
The supporting infrastructure for the National Programme has centred on the 
construction of the N3 National Network and the data spine It has been shaped by the 
incapacity of any single supplier, to handle the volume of traffic implied by such a 
structure.  
England has been divided in to clusters of Strategic Health Authorities, to whom 
consortia of businesses have tendered to supply off the shelf products. In the case of 
secondary care, these have contained best of breed electronic record systems, usually 
designed for non-NHS markets. 
Implementation has been focused on national procurement arrangements, the 
development of interoperability standards and a process of clinical engagement, in 
which the general population of the NHS is to be recruited by national and local early-
adopter product champions. 
In 2007, a group of computer scientists, engineers and informaticians wrote an open 
letter (Anderson, undated) to the Health Select Committee, to question the wisdom of 
continuing NPfIT without an independent assessment of its technical viability. 
The letter challenged the Programmes technical architecture, project plan and detailed 
design, questioning its present and future fitness for purpose, its capacity for the volume 
of traffic envisaged, and its conformity with confidentiality guidance.  
It also cited the absence of precedent for a project on this scale, the exit of suppliers 
from the market, and the delicate nature of support from healthcare staff. 
When the internal market, proposed for the NHS in the 1990s, required improved 
accounting procedures to manage contracts, service plans, budgets, costing and pricing 
mechanisms and internal trading, Bunch (1992) questioned a pervasive assumption that 
the advent of cheap and sophisticated information systems will allow anyone to find out 
anything about anyone anywhere. Instead of a massive, omniscient machine, What is 
required in the NHS is for each part of the organisation to be really clear about what it 
needs to know and to obtain this information in the simplest way possible. 
Bunch proposed that a successful information strategy must have clear objectives and 
support organisational change. He distinguished a bureaucratic, administered 
organisation with divided accountability from a pro-active, managed organisation, 
characterised by teamwork and shared accountability. He also proposed that the 
accuracy and validity of the data collected would be suspect unless when possible, 
those requiring the information should be responsible for collecting the data. 
Driven by the information requirements of external agencies, there was a tendency for 
the information needs of managers to overshadow those of clinicians. Managerial 
accounting was supported by retrospective data analysis. Concurrent clinical control 
required information in real time. 
Bunch set five strategic information objectives : information requirements definition, 
technical standards, data standards, information governance standards and training. To 
obtain a realistic managerial understanding, Bunch asserted that hospital information 
systems must focus on the clinical coalface.  
For Bunch, as a clinical manager, the motivation for front line clinical staff stemmed 
from mutual accountability within the workplace and a shared appreciation of 
managers data needs.  
Mumford (1991) recognised specifically the need for relevance in clinical information 
systems. The subsystems used by each group must, therefore, be able to provide the 
information that each group regards as essential in furthering its work mission and 
major work interests. If this does not happen, these systems will probably fall into 
disuse. 
Mumford identified the following sources of relevance : pay and promotion, esteem of 
colleagues, job satisfaction, relevance to personal goals, and direct design input by 
future users. To moderate the discourse between managers and staff, it is essential to 
understand how staff, collectively, view work priorities before starting to design a 
system to produce management information.  
3.0.3 : Analysis 
The letter to the Health Select Committee was followed by a themed edition of the 
Journal of Information Technology, published in September, 2007. This edition 
contained the following contributions : Randell (2007), Brennan (2007), Clegg & 
Shepherd (2007), Currie & Guah (2007), Mark (2007) and Cordella (2007). 
Randell (2007) presents a computer scientists reactions to NPfIT and identifies 
centralisation and mass procurement as major sources of risk. He argues that the 
concentration of data at the level of a national data spine can be a threat to reliability 
and security because the consequences of any individual technical failure are vastly 
amplified. 
Brennan (2007) comments that individual examples of successful, hospital-wide 
integration projects have not been replicated widely across the NHS. One cause is the 
distance between IT companies and potential users in the NHS, separated by their 
agency relationship with NPfIT as a proxy customer. He identifies three major themes 
that are not addressed adequately : 
1. Clarity of NPfITs purpose 
2. The potential of IT to reduce risk, enhance patients safety and re-engineer 
clinical service delivery 
3. The use of intelligent IT to support the patients journey along the care 
pathway. 
Brennan relates these themes to an overriding technical element in the value system of 
the National Programme and the misconception, that the National Programme is just 
about electronic records. The architecture of the National Programme favours central 
rather than local aggregation of data. The emphasis has been to develop the spine in 
advance of integration focused sensitively on local patterns of information exchange, 
necessary for the safer, more joined up care that the Programme ought to support. 
The local exchange of patients demographic identifiers, health services utilisation 
records and personal clinical records, aggregated centrally, depends on participants 
access to a local integration hub (the community Patient Administration System), with 
which all subsidiary systems have to be compatible. NHS institutions have been 
reluctant to write off costs sunk in their existing legacy systems, or to incur the 
further costs of new systems without clarity as to the direct institutional benefits.  
In addition, the concept of using intelligent IT to support the patients journey along 
the care pathway runs up hard against the complexity of healthcare transactions, 
around a single patient with potentially multiple comorbidities, in relation with multiple 
NHS providers, all at different stages of IT implementation and integration.  
Clegg and Shepherd (2007) argue the need to change the mindset which has presented 
the National Programme as a technology project. They frame six main lessons 
around the following themes : 
1. Performance : major IT projects risk major failure. 
2. Need : it is hard to establish the business case for technology-led projects. 
3. A systems view : the context of introduction places diverse individuals in 
differentiated roles. No one person or discipline can assemble a complete picture 
of need or future operation. 
4. Ownership : technology led programmes and conceptually led Business Processs 
Re-engineering projects encounter failure more often than those led by users 
own perceptions of need. 
5. Project Management : needs to be focused on delivery of service, not on 
implementation of technology. 
6. Senior Management : enlightened junior managers are powerless if senior 
managers perpetuate a techno-centric culture. 
In their view, the National Programme is especially vulnerable to failure because of : 
 High political profile and risk-averse culture 
 Mismatch of competence and experience with location and need 
 No salient measures of implementation outcomes 
 Complexity in terms of professional groups, organisational boundaries and 
dispersal of organisational components. 
For Clegg and Shepherd, a techno-centric project has the merit, that it can efficiently 
deliver the technical IT agenda. Its major fault is that it cannot adequately define what 
outcomes the IT agenda is to support. The National Programme needs to be seen as 
supporting specific service outcomes rather than its own implementation. Its success 
needs to be measured in terms of service outcomes. The Senior Management of the 
National Programme needs to include senior end-users who can direct service-centred 
organisational learning. 
Currie and Guah (2007) point to conflicting institutional logics which both fuel and 
inhibit changes in the governance systems and working practices of healthcare 
practitioners. They identify that the National Programme is seeking to engage 
clinicians and other stakeholders by presenting the National Programme in a fashion 
divorced from a clear understanding of the healthcare system in terms of the pressures 
to which it must constantly adapt. 
These pressures include : 
 The organisational field : complexity manifest by evolving organisational 
structures and policies  
 Institutional logics : formal and informal interpretations of societal, 
organisational and local imperatives 
 Governance systems : authority systems exerted by or on behalf of managers, 
professionals and patients. 
The organisational response is mediated by sets of ideas and beliefs, for example, the 
primacy  of  patients interests  or  the need to balance individual against societal 
interests ; as well as material resources, including constrained finance and scarce human 
resource. 
Mark (2007) asks, whose needs is government serving in its implementation of the 
National Programme. The topic of modernisation, she says, has given way to that of 
transformation in the rhetoric of government statements on public services.  
Where the former emphasises fitness for purpose, the latter stresses responsiveness, 
to the needs of clinical users and their patients. Yet the pace of technical 
implementation has been forced ahead of stakeholder engagement and appears as a 
control-oriented response to political pressures to demonstrate value for money and 
the accomplishment of delivery against deadlines. This is not, primarily, a purposeful 
response to the needs of patients. 
Where modernisation carries a general sense, transformation has a sense of 
individualised consideration. Delivering equipment to support the National Network, 
Choose and Book, electronic prescribing or electronic records against deadlines does 
not give sufficiently clear a sense of the transformed process in which clinical users 
and patients will interact and be satisfied. Yet, if the purpose is to satisfy the 
information needs expressed within organisational structures, the National Programme 
has to cope with the constant flux of their reorganisation. Mark identifies the unstable 
political environment and the changing location, role and status of the medical 
record as key inhibitors of transformational change. 
Mark sees the National Programme as a mix of rule based work which depends on 
some actor to enforce compliance and normative work which relies on cultural and 
moral force. Expressed elsewhere as objectified disembodiment and embodied 
subjectivity, this distinction may not have been recognised or balanced within the 
National Programme, sufficient to balance the needs of government, managers, 
professionals and patients, and command the confidence of patients and the wider NHS. 
Mark suggests that Government can easily explain delays in the delivery of the National 
Programme in terms of the systemic incapacity of suppliers. This tendency belies the 
complex dependency within the National Programme. For example, doctors and 
patients representatives have been slow to agree on the content of the summary 
electronic record held on the spine, or the manner of storage patients and the public 
will allow for their personal data. Given this complexity, it has been difficult to arrive at 
clear statements of functional need within the Programme. 
Cordella (2007) relates the National Programme to the wider context of e-Government 
and New Public Management (NPM). NPM is a reaction to the failings of traditional, 
bureaucratic public administration to achieve goals of efficiency and accountability and 
pursues these ends through decentralisation and marketisation.  
He suggests that democratic values of equality and impartiality are being neglected. 
Competition can provide a lever for redesign and reform, in the relationship between 
government, public services and people, to enhance efficiency and effectiveness without 
loss of equity. However, Cordella argues, competition favours the strong and 
disadvantages the weaker citizen.  
The bureaucratic form of government has a particular strength in its capacity for rule-
based impartiality, equality and social justice, gained through the elimination of non-
rational considerations. Rather than eliminate bureaucracy, e-Government ought to be 
directed towards facilitating the swifter, accurate conduct of its machination. 
In contrast, NPM focuses on a set of narrowly defined results rather than the 
embodiment of values. Transparency and efficiency run ahead of effectiveness. Service 
identity, values and character are sacrificed to minimise cost. This leads to a bias in 
service provision which favours those best equipped by wealth and power of expression 
to manipulate market conditions to their own advantage. The effective discrimination 
is heightened when IT is used to mediate NPM because of the digital divide which 
privileges those who can access and use IT resources and disadvantages those who 
cannot.  
Where market organisation expands the scope of choice, it may also expand the volume 
and cost of transactions before a choice is made. Bureaucracy is inherently a strategy to 
simplify decision making through rules, so that the internal efficiency of the machine is 
maximised. However, Cordella acknowledges the difficulty of aligning the internal rule 
sets of discrete government organisations when it is sought to integrate common aspects 
of their disparate functions. 
The analysis provided here reflects concerns about the logical and technical structure of 
the National Programme and its viability, as well as its relationship with broader 
political and societal goals. It does not address the factors that influence the willingness 
and capacity of clinicians in the front line of healthcare, to contribute data input. 
In contrast with the contributions related to the organisation and delivery of the 
technical programme, and its political and policy aspects, Randell (2007) and Eason 
(2007) address socio-technical issues. 
Randell (2007) stresses the socio-technical aspect of information systems as important 
for reliability and security. He equates the engagement of users, by training and 
convincing them to use unfriendly systems, with bullying.  
Eason (2007) describes the National Programme as a massive example of .. [an] 
attempt to implement pre-defined technical systems into existing organisations. 
Standard technical systems are seen by the Programme as a way to communicate 
between disparate teams representing individual socio-technical systems.  
If local socio-technical systems design work is neglected, It is likely that the 
emergent behaviour of healthcare staff will serve to minimise the impact of the 
systems.  
Eason asks, Is it possible to have a centralised information technology programme and 
local socio-technical design ? 
To begin to answer this question, Eason reports emergent socio-technical system 
responses to three applications : PACS, Choose and Book and Electronic Healthcare 
Records Systems. Five patterns of response were evident : 
1. Successful adoption in the case of PACS. 
2. Partial use of Choose and Book and electronic records, with continued reliance 
on existing, tried and tested paper-based routines. 
3. Workarounds : especially in relation to intrusive access security controls ; 
password sharing. 
4. Stress, failure and delay : when a Choose and Book system was implemented 
and found to be incompatible with the Patient Administration System. 
5. New forms of organisation : forced or enabled by the new technology. 
From these findings, Eason concludes that users restrict their use of IT systems to 
minimise the disruption of existing routines, unless they can see that prescribed use 
carries clear benefits and no major interference with organisation or working practices.  
In the absence of a shared and informed approach by the local user community that 
might enable them to get a collective benefit from the new technical facilities in the 
interests of patient care, Eason concludes that there will be a range of ad hoc 
responses .. that will probably marginalise the effects of the new system. He 
continues, Some of these responses may be useful to individual users but they may 
equally be dysfunctional for the system as a whole. 
Eason proposes an approach with five elements : 
1. A standing socio-technical systems committee, representative of all local 
stakeholders. 
2. Focus on the potential of new technology to assist healthcare delivery. 
3. Use modelling in simulated scenarios. 
4. Phased implementation with technical configuration customised to local needs. 
5. Post implementation review aimed to develop new understanding. 
The overall conclusion Eason draws is that the principal factor inhibiting local socio-
technical systems design is the strategic decisions made over the over-arching 
coordination of the technical programme and the form of the implementation 
programme. He identifies three loci of decision making.  
The first is the National Programme. The second is the Trust : the NHS has policies it 
wants to see implemented at Trust level and, at Trust level, decisions are being taken 
about IT policies that make sense in the Trust. The third, de facto locus of decision 
making is identified at the individual or health team level, when users decide what to 
use or not to use of the electronic facilities that are offered. 
3.0.4 : The Further Structure of the Literature Review 
Greenhalgh et al. (2009 : p.731) identify the essence of the electronic record as a 
property that is not intrinsic but one which is situated in the relationship between the 
record and other factors. 
Our starting point was that however defined, the EPR is socially and organisationally 
embedded. That is, it is used by people in particular social contexts, for particular 
social acts. 
Following Jayaratna (1994), the message of the present literature review, and of the 
thesis as a whole, will be that these other factors are to be understood in terms of the 
problem situation in which the electronic record and other aspects of the information 
system make their contribution, the problem solvers who contend with the problem 
situation as it confronts them, and the problem solving methodology constituted by 
problem solvers behaviour in relation to the electronic record. 
These three elements, identified separately and distinctly, elude singular definition for 
two reasons. First, they appear differently from differently situated vantage points. 
Second, at any time and in any place, they are each mutually-constitutive and 
inseparable abstractions from the same integrated whole. 
Despite this, for the sake of clarity the remainder of the literature review will be 
presented as three distinct topic reviews, followed by a concluding section.  
Section 3.1 will deal with the Problem Situation. It will discuss electronic patient 
records, integrated systems, standardised clinical methods, and the concept of 
Management Information from Operational Systems. It will then place information 
systems in the context of the clinical workplace and will discuss the process of 
information systems change and the concept of clinical engagement. 
Section 3.2 will discuss the Problem Solver in terms of four approaches to thinking 
(positivist, interpretivist, critical and recursive) and their philosophical origins. This 
section will end by presenting critical realism as a suitable framework for the discussion 
of information systems.  
Section 3.3 will consider different forms and examples of the Problem Solving 
Methodology. It will begin with a critique of models and methodologies. Then it will 
begin to develop a taxonomy of models and methodologies, based on the dominant 
paradigm espoused and the area of information systems competency (strategy, design & 
development, implementation, evaluation) to which the methodology is applied. As it 
develops, the taxonomy will take account that the object of modelling can be the 
problem situation, the problem solver or the problem solving methodology. 
This section will continue by distinguishing between hard and soft approaches to the 
problem solving methodology, as it applies to each of the four competency areas. The 
section will end with a brief discussion of three evaluation approaches, of which the last 
is based on critical realism. 
Section 3.4 will present conclusions as to the choice of methods and approaches to be 
carried forward into the research. 
3.1   :   T H E   P R O B L E M   S I T U A T I O N 
3.1.0 : Introduction 
A simple, preliminary statement of the problem situation is that information systems 
are, for various reasons, to be introduced into the United Kingdom Healthcare system.  
Haux (2005) has provided a 20 year retrospective account of development in health 
information systems. First, he points to the continued co-existence of paper-based and 
computer-based systems of data recording, storage and retrieval.  
Second, he identifies the tendency to standardise clinical processes and develop 
interoperable patient-centric records. 
Third, against a background of departmental, institutional and global information 
systems, trans-institutional and trans-national health care, and multi-lingual and 
multinational healthcare delivery, it has become possible to use data from Hospital 
Information Systems for planning as well as clinical administrative purposes, enhancing 
quality management and control, healthcare planning and research. An emerging 
interest in strategic information management and change management has begun to 
overshadow technical aspects of information systems design and development. 
Continuing technical developments remain relevant : for example, radio frequency 
identification and ubiquitous computing environments and, especially, the ability to 
store and retrieve images alongside text. 
Fourth, he points to the increasing use of health data by patients and their agents, 
assisted by the development of medical bibliographic databases and search engines and 
the internet.  
Three themes emerge : 
First, the primary objectives of the National Programme are : to introduce electronic 
records to overcome the deficiencies of paper-based systems; to integrate systems so 
that data can flow freely and so that organisational discontinuities do not impinge on the 
experience of patients ; and to produce management information from operational 
systems.  
Second, healthcare and its organisation are complex, fraught with risk and suffer 
criticisms of inefficiency, inaccessibility and unresponsiveness. Information systems 
carry hopes of increased organisational and procedural clarity, improved control of 
clinical practice and resource utilisation.  
Third, to understand the problem situation beyond the strategic purpose of information 
systems in healthcare, however, we need to understand that the introduction of 
information systems to the clinical workplace is a process of change. We need to 
understand information systems in relation to the clinical workplace and the people who 
work there. 
3.1.1 : Electronic Records 
Six Assumptions 
Greenhalgh et al. (2009) identify six assumptions about (electronic) medical records 
that have not been upheld by the empirical literature. Thus : 
a) A medical record is more than a container for data, it is an organiser, 
providing data with context and meaning. 
b) The integration of electronic records into clinical work is not seamless and 
unproblematic. Bridging the gap between the conceptual model and the 
reality of practice requires human intellectual effort. 
c) Electronic records will not necessarily increase the effectiveness and 
efficiency of clinical work. Secondary data users benefit from better 
accessible data but clinical work is often made less efficient. 
d) Electronic records will not, themselves, drive changes in interactions 
between staff and between staff and patients. They will support change but 
this will need people to take the lead. 
e) Electronic systems will not necessarily eliminate paper. Paper offers a 
unique level of ecological flexibility. 
f) The benefits of an electronic record system do not continue to grow as more 
and more elements are absorbed into a single structure. Smaller, local EPR 
systems may often (though perhaps not always) be more efficient and 
effective than large, global ones. 
Structured Medical Records 
The Royal College of Physicians of London (Mann & Williams, 2003) has engaged in a 
project to standardise the format and content of the medical record, as a pre-condition 
for the successful development of electronic patient records. 
The plan recognises primary and secondary functions of the medical record. Primary 
functions provide an aide-memoire and a means of communication between parties to 
the patients shared management. Secondary functions provide information for a variety 
of accounting, audit, research and planning purposes and serve as a defence against 
litigation or hostile criticism. 
Accumulation and Co-ordination 
Berg (1999a) ascribes two major, active roles to the medical record : accumulation and 
co-ordination.  
As accumulation, the record stores and orders a symbolic account of actions and events. 
Complex activities, consisting of the multiple, independent contributions of a dispersed 
group of people are collapsed into an over-simplified and unrealistically problem-free 
conceptualisation of reading, writing and the record. 
As coordination, the record itself mediates the way professional colleagues interact, 
organises aspects of the way they work, and influences clinical decisions through the 
content it conveys. Crucially, it can transform a remark or request into a legally-
formulated instruction and can determine what counts as the basis for action. 
Precomputed ideas about task dependencies are inscribed as a subtext in the design 
of the structured record and intended to influence the way activities are undertaken. The 
records ability to mediate these actions is enhanced or diminished by its form and the 
way its appearance changes as successive entries are made.  
Berg says that co-ordination requires a form of active work that cannot be pre-
computed. The record has to be kept up to date and completed properly. Any 
standardising intention makes demands on practice, risking that compliance will fail 
because the benefits of compliance are absent (enjoyed elsewhere) or not appreciated 
(potentially enjoyed locally but undervalued). 
Finally, the structure and form of the record tend to shape and filter what can be 
communicated. The communications the record affords or forbids reflect the balance of 
influence between designers, managers and users.  
Record Keeping as the Construction of Meaning 
Berg (1996) contends that writing the medical record involves contemplation, making 
sense and planning. It is an attempt by an accountable writer to structure the response of 
a critical reader. Reading involves appreciating a situation, obtaining information from 
the patient and, sometimes, other sources, and comparing this with the record. The 
informational meaning of the clinical record or computer screen extends beyond the 
written symbols and is situated somewhere between record and reader. Every fresh 
reading of the record is occasioned by the readers need to make active sense of an 
immediate situation and is developed in conjunction with the patient or some other 
source of further information, corroboration or clarification. 
As people write in records and other people read them, they, themselves, are 
constructing events actively. Action is more than a reflex response to the symbols that 
represent the text.  
Bad Reasons for Good Records 
Electronic records have the potential to impose unsuitable structure onto clinical data 
capture in order to serve planning purposes. It will be vital to balance the disciplined 
and the improvisational content of the record. 
Heath & Luff (1996) show that reading, writing, and editing the medical record are 
processes that extend beyond a simple dialogue between an individual and a document. 
The record and its related practices are not individual but social and tacitly 
conventional. The writer makes significant assumptions, about the contribution of the 
readers clinical knowledge and experience to the emergence of meaning from the text, 
and about his future behaviour, anticipating that any future reader will clarify recent 
content by reference to past record entries. 
Heath & Luff believe that the development of electronic records must take account, that 
writing and reading the medical record take place in an unstable context. Activities, 
circumstances and alternative demands for attention fluctuate from moment to moment 
or from place to place. Record keeping and its desirable disciplines are subject to 
compromise against these competing elements. It is undesirable for an electronic 
structure to restrict statements to a limited range that cannot accurately express what the 
clinician wishes to convey to the record. This can be a consequence when the balance is 
struck imperfectly between the primary and the secondary functions of the record.  
They argue that secondary purposes are bad organisational reasons for good clinical 
records. Developers of medical record systems must take fully into account the wider 
context in which the dialogue between the immediate user and the record occurs. 
Electronic Records as the Driver of Change 
The authors of the EHR IMPACT study (European Union, 2009) outline the future 
goals and potential of interoperable electronic patient records : to increase the number 
of users, to extend functionalities, to expand interoperability and to utilise more current 
system functions. They state that The EHR IMPACT cases show that interoperability 
is a prime driver of benefits from EHR and e-Prescribing systems. Benefits rely on 
access to information regardless of place and time. Interoperability will be crucial to 
some time-critical clinical situations and, more frequently, to the automation and 
abolition of data transcription tasks. 
Car et al. (2008) avoid a techno-centric view that treats electronic records as a 
commercial end in itself and they relate the potential benefits to a concern for the 
quality and the safety of clinical services.  
Anticipated quality benefits include more effective treatments and new forms of service 
delivery that are relevant, acceptable, efficient and equitable. Anticipated safety benefits 
include the reduction of clinical error, using electronic information systems to intervene 
in vulnerable, high risk processes and to render the healthcare setting more amenable to 
good clinical practice. 
However, they draw attention to the vast gap between theoretical [face valid] and 
empirically demonstrated benefits  A contributing factor to this gap between 
theoretical and empirical factors is that many of the applications developed are not fit 
for purpose. 
In particular, they cite, first, clinically irrelevant prompts from clinical decision 
support systems and advice and support not appropriate to the knowledge and 
experience of the user or to the clinical situation and the constraints on alternative 
practice. Second, they cite the cross-cutting issue of the socio-techno-cultural 
dimensions of developing and implementing e-Health applications, under which 
category, they include human factors, ergonomics, the user interface and peoples 
readiness for change. 
The Perversity of People and the Persistence of Paper 
Laerum, Ellingsen and Faxvaag (2001) found that only a small proportion of the total 
functionality of an information system, widely deployed across Norwegian hospitals, 
was used. Their findings suggest that the continuing coexistence of alternative paper 
systems and the convenience of electronic system use were potent factors distinguishing 
the designers ideal from users actual use of the system.  
People do not automatically conform with rules. Structure is used flexibly, in 
conformity with the immediate circumstances and the purpose in hand. 
Harper et al. (1997) illustrate how the practical use of documents by medical 
practitioners can sometimes be fundamentally at odds with organisational aims and 
purposes. Anaesthetists were to use a structured proforma, to record information about 
patients preoperative condition, for retrospective audit and clinical risk stratification.  
Those who bothered to use the form tended to complete only the parts that were relevant 
in this particular case of this operation for this patient and to use the form in such a 
way as to transform a form designed for general purposes into one that is useful for 
specific purposes. A paper record afforded ad hoc modification of its formal structure, 
allowing annotations foreign to the categories expected by its design. (I dont need to 
record that, but I need somewhere to write this ).  
Limits to the Benefits of Integrated Records 
Berg (1999b) is critical of grand ambitions as a basis for information systems. 
Formalising medical practice or eliminating paper are insufficient aims in themselves. 
Instead, we need to focus on the accumulating and coordinating actions of medical 
records and information systems that we tend to overlook.  
Berg recognises that clinical work is essentially pragmatic and fluid. It is subject to a 
constant emergence of contingencies. He bridles at the idea of formalising complex 
sets of interactions into a set of rules, whether as a care pathway or a process model. It 
is not necessary for the designer to expropriate decision making from the individual 
clinician. The role structures and turn-taking formalised in models of this type of work 
as imagined are not sufficiently replicated in work as performed. 
The affordances an electronic record allows or makes happen stem from, shape and 
are shaped by the interaction between the record and human actors. Computer screens 
and paper documents actively constitute many of the tasks performed in the clinical 
environment. We need to understand more than how to replicate a paper form in the 
structure of an electronic document. Rather, we need to understand how information 
resources contribute to what Berg calls articulation work. Articulation work is the 
invisible and under-valued effort, invested in documents and forms, that binds one 
network of demands, resources and actions to another.  
3.1.2 : Integrated Systems 
The National Programme for IT has focused on the integration of self-contained 
information systems by virtue of technical standards that support data transfer across 
electronic interfaces and hubs. 
This is not the same as supporting the behavioural contribution of organisational sub-
units towards the systemic coherence of a larger, collective whole.  
In this sense, integration implies the alignment of local priorities with those of the 
collective. Although the subordination of the local to the general interest can appear to 
facilitate progress in the institutionally preferred direction, it can also carry the cost that 
an important organ of the systemic organism is forced to function sub-optimally. This is 
a potential source of organisational pathology rather than organisational health. The 
terms of integration, potentially brutal, need to be sensitive to this risk. 
Pinelle & Gutwin (2006) draw attention to the internal fragmentation and complex 
variety hidden within a healthcare organisation. The image of a tightly integrated 
organisation is less useful than one in which authority structures and quasi-
autonomous, operational units are in a loosely-coupled relationship, adapted to the 
nature and needs of an organisation whose end product is the transformation of people 
rather than the production of commodities. 
Interdependence and integration are low. Functional differentiation is high. 
Collaboration tends to be discretionary, the natural state of relationships is fluid and the 
rate of change is rapid. Hierarchy is undermined by contingency and the resulting need 
for individual staff members to act autonomously. Within the envelope of organisational 
cohesion, participants have different goals, values and frames of reference. 
These factors limit the capacity of electronic records and clinical pathways to automate 
co-ordination and the requisite aim is to facilitate collaboration. 
Ellingsen & Monteiro (2003) present a study of an integrated electronic patient record 
system in Norwegian hospitals. They note the prevalent concept of health information 
systems organised around and subordinated efficiently to a single, dominant rationale. 
Arguments for integration of information systems tend to deprecate redundancy and 
fragmentation of information. Ellingsen and Monteiro suggest, these attributes may 
have positive value in the collaborative workplace. As examples of poorly integrated 
systems, they cite Patient Administration Systems, X Ray and Pathology systems, 
electrocardiogram images and electronic document scanners. 
Ellingsen & Monteiro (2006) discuss integration in terms of horizontal integration 
between participants in the management of an individual patient and in broadly 
synonymous terms of integrated care, shared care and continuity of care. Then 
they quickly move to discuss the introduction of a standard IT system to integrate 
activity and information flows across multiple sites within a pathology department. 
Alongside the technical issues (such as interfacing, data standards, legacy systems), the 
problem of integration lies deeper than the failure of an integrating process. The generic 
product collides with individual local adaptations, such that a local setting is no longer 
local, but dependent on design decisions in other settings  the lack of success 
with (seamless or tight) integration in hospitals is neither accidental nor transient.  
The generic laboratory system did not fit individual laboratory units. The problem 
could not be solved by generalising individual adaptations to suit all parties, since 
congruity with the biochemistry laboratory set the stage for incongruity in the 
microbiology lab. Integration had been promoted at the expense of usefulness as 
judged in the wards and clinics where pathology results were needed to guide patients 
treatment. The authors conclude that the problems intransigence is immanent and 
that integration is not an event but a granular set of discrete, carefully considered 
interventions. 
From the analysis these authors provide, it appears necessary to accept dissensus rather 
than consensus, as a necessary concept for information systems design. 
Martin et al. (2006) demonstrate that the dependability of an information system is not 
an absolute quantity. It is situated in local organisational and workplace practices. 
Integration, therefore, implies more than the simple elision of electronic systems, 
achieved through technical and data standards. It requires the working practices of each 
of the organisational zones brought together by the integrated system to be understood 
and respected fully during the related process of people integration. Peoples thinking 
and practices at work are not centred solely and unified around the information system, 
but around the other considerations that come into play during daily work in diverse 
settings. 
3.1.3 : Organisational and Procedural Clarity : Standard Approaches  
to Differentiated Situations 
Organisational and procedural clarity entail the perception and abstraction of salient 
data from the general mass, and their encoding in a process of description. (Checkland 
& Holwell, 1998: p.86-92 refer to these selected data as capta). The manufacture of 
meaning is an active, inherently biased, human process and not a pure revelation of 
inherent meaning. Coding and decoding break the continuity between the world and our 
view of the world (Tsoukas, 1997). Well-codified processes and procedures have clarity 
but codification is made transparent by explaining, in clear terms, the distinction 
between the peculiarity of the observed instance and the supposed features of an ideal 
case. A critical view reduces an absolute distinction between order and disorder to a 
preference for one form of order over another, less suited to a particular contingency.  
Crocker, Johnson and King (2009) see care pathways as a means to manage processes, 
resources and performance towards time-limited access targets. They see the primary 
need as, therefore, to agree rules of syntax and semantics so that information systems 
can communicate. However, the paper also recognises the spread of audiences 
(clinicians, information systems developers, commissioners, patients) for whom care 
pathways are being developed and the variation in rigidity (clarity of task sequencing) 
between one pathway and another. The paper does not stress the intelligent human 
judgements that ought to operate throughout the pathways application to particular 
contingencies. These judgements are needed to confirm the continuing suitability of 
generic best practice for a real patient whose semantic fit with the pathway may 
only be approximate.  
The tendency to seek organisational transparency and control through formalised 
clinical methods has stimulated Berg (1997) to elaborate on the problems of the 
protocol.  
Protocols represent the effort of one individual or group to determine the practice of 
others. They exert a political, constraining effect under the guise of explicit rationality. 
This may be necessary for safety in some circumstances and beneficial to the training of 
novices but the fundamental premise may be at odds with the actual working of the 
experienced clinical mind.  
Berg is sceptical of the tendency to perceive and describe the management of patients 
trajectories as constituted by a sequence of individual, formally rational decisions. The 
clinician is expected to compare the patient with a prior store of clinical knowledge. The 
act of comparison is assumed neutral but is, in fact, a human construction. In other 
words, it is a social rather than a scientific accomplishment because data are framed 
within a human judgement about their veracity or validity. This is necessary to avoid 
harm to patients from blind adherence in the face of contrary factors. 
First, protocols suffer from dissonance between the clinical situation as imagined and 
the contingencies that surround the situation as performed (Nemeth, Cook & Wears, 
2007). Formalised regimes are insensitive to the individual case, and cater poorly for 
emergent issues, not anticipated at the time of prescription. 
Second, protocols perpetuate the illusion of the single answer. They unrealistically 
imagine a standard patient in a standard context. Third, they deliberately filter out 
the characteristics of the clinical situation that are hardest to describe in order to 
construct standard dimensions. Their resulting clarity and transparency is, therefore, a 
construction rather than the purported distillation of a scientific truth. Their use is 
aligned more closely with accountability than with sensitivity to clinical nuance. 
Berg concedes that protocols provide a useful substrate for reflection and organisational 
learning if they are held to represent what could be, rather than what is or ought to be 
the case. Their formulation ought to recognise more than the perspective of a single 
profession or stakeholder cadre. He acknowledges their value as a coordinating device 
when seen as a resource rather than a rigid constraint. 
The thrust of Bergs argument is to recognise the undeniable presence of protocols in 
the environment of accountable clinical practice. Navely hard-wired into the texture of 
information systems, they will constrain and diminish effective clinical practice. 
Incorporated with a fully informed understanding of the workplace, and used 
intelligently as resources, they offer useful affordances in the form of enhanced 
delegation and professional, as opposed to managerial, control.  
Berg & Timmermans (2000) argue that standard practice has no intrinsic authority that 
makes it universal. It becomes universal when its effectiveness in minimising 
uncertainty encourages people to conform. Minimising uncertainty means making a 
selected, desirable state more certain, at the cost that some other potentially desirable 
state is made less certain. Simple, model order is actively assembled from complexity 
through the sacrifice of alternative regimes of order. 
The ability to conform is the ability actively to rationalise the interpretation of the rule 
with the interpretation of the situation at hand. Berg & Timmermans call this active 
process articulation work and argue that rules and structuring processes are most 
successful when their writ is circumscribed. Lesser rules can lead to more stable 
performance. 
Ellingson, Monteiro & Munkvold (2007) contrast the conception of standardisation as 
uniformity imposed from a divorced position against an alternative conception, 
constructed around sensitivity to contingencies and the needs of service recipients. 
The former conception sees work practice as defective and dismisses the roots of 
current practice which influence the feasibility and desirability of change.  
In the latter conception, it is an adaptation of one set of norms to another. Rather than 
following clear plans, care delivery frequently takes the form of stepwise explorations 
with high degrees of uncertainty. 
Electronic systems offer efficiency through the application of a single set of pre-
ordinate rules to multiple situations : for example, to link a clinical message, a clinical 
decision support tool and a resource allocation code. The problem then arises, that even 
the highest common factor of description sacrifices precise relevance to any specific 
situation for generality of application, in a way incompatible with deliberate, careful, 
stepwise exploration.  
3.1.4 : Management Information from Operational Systems :  
The Provisional Nature of Information 
Proudlove and Boaden (2005) have suggested that the information systems to be 
provided by the National Programme ought to integrate data from multiple sources in 
order to provide the information required for the operational control and management of 
hospital beds and patients length of stay. In assuming that information is immutable, 
they have ignored the social process by which information is constituted according to 
the context of the specific occasion where it is needed. 
There is an inherent assumption, that what is controlled and accounted in these 
procedures has a tangible reality. For example, Clarke et al. (2006) have demonstrated 
the practical difficulties in accounting the supply of acute hospital beds against 
emergency demand. They show how the evidence of bed availability from the direct 
observation that beds are currently occupied is defeasible by comparison with 
information not contained in the bed statement.  
The perception of supply resulted from a social process of balancing contingent factors. 
A bed could become vacant if its occupant became a focus of attention and if a 
consensus was reached, that arguments promoting his continued care in hospital could 
no longer withstand the conflicting need to provide beds for newcomers. The 
assignment of patients to categories is shown to be flexible, ambiguous and determined 
by contingent rather than intrinsic factors.  
Hartswood et al. (2003) also describe how the matching of patients with clinical and 
administrative categories is sensitive to the balance of prevailing pressures. The 
category used to describe a patient is carefully selected in order to negotiate and 
expedite a clinical decision. It is chosen to reinforce and retro-fit an accommodation 
with an overall clinical situation, rather than for absolute correspondence between the 
patient and the model contained in the category.  
These findings demonstrate the risk, inherent in the mechanical transmission of coded 
data from one context of meaning to another, that the meaning implied in the first 
intended context is incomplete or misleading in the next.  
Hospital Discharge Summaries are written at the end of a hospital attendance for the 
dual purpose of onward clinical communication and clinical coding. Winthereik & 
Vikkelso (2005) have illustrated the conflict between the administrative accounting 
function of the document, potentially strengthened by standardisation and electronic 
presentation, and the clinical coordinating function, needing expressive power and 
detail. 
The issue lies in the balance of structured fields and codes needed for accounting, and 
the free text needed to support nuanced communication. The coded description of the 
episode submitted for accounting is a clear instruction, to be believed and processed 
mechanistically. The clinical communication is an invitation to a professional colleague 
to apply his own skills to areas of uncertainty, assisted by other knowledge not 
conveyed or even known by the author. 
Tightly structured as a form, the discharge letter is intended itself to express certainty 
and to structure the readers administrative response. Loosely structured as a letter, it 
affords the opportunity to construct a coherent narrative thread and allows the 
expression of any doubt or uncertainty surrounding a given statement, projecting and 
protecting the writers own clinical competence against criticism or litigation. 
Winthereik & Vikkelso state, a piece of information in one material setting is not 
identical with a piece of information in another  Sender and receiver are 
embedded within organisations that are not uniform, rational frames of action, but 
complicated, conflict-ridden and ambiguous.  
3.1.5 : Information Systems in the Clinical Workplace 
The language of Management Information from Operational Systems suggests a 
distinction between information systems that serve control, planning and accounting 
functions, and linked systems which support the work of the clinical shop floor. 
To understand the introduction of information systems to the clinical workplace, we 
must understand the social organisation and the nature of the clinical workplace as a 
complex environment where multiple rationales and punctuated routines collide in a 
way that is chaotic but never random. 
Understanding the Clinical Workplace 
The emergency department of a hospital is an area where the continuity of tasks is 
constantly punctuated by gaps between the initiation and completion of sub-tasks. 
Several accounts (Coiera and Tombs, 1998 ; Spencer et al. , 2004 ; Woloschynowych et 
al., 2007) highlight the opportunistic interruptive and inefficient nature of 
communication in hospital emergency departments.  
Intensity of work, multiplicity of concurrent tasks and the frequency of interruption 
challenge human concentration and interfere with meticulous attention to detail. There 
is a strong tendency in this environment to communicate immediately and to prefer 
modalities which support synchronous rather than asynchronous communication and 
acknowledgement (Coiera and Tombs, 1998). 
Often, one individual functions as a communications hub (Fairbanks, Bisantz & 
Sunm, 2007 ; Wolshynowych et al., 2007) but the intensity of communication and 
interruption remains generally high. Some roles initiate more communications than they 
receive, or vice versa.  
Too much communication may threaten clinical efficiency and safety as much as too 
little. Parker and Coiera (2000) argue that intensive communication exhausts the 
memory of human processors of information. Memory saturation endangers accurate 
performance of critical tasks, yet drives clinicians anxiety to off-load by 
communicating more intensively. Asynchronous means of communication, for example, 
written notes, require the author to trust the recipient. Synchronous communication 
generates immediate acknowledgement. It dissipates the anxiety of the communicator, 
albeit at the expense of the recipient. 
Yan Xiao et al. (2007) discuss the use of communal whiteboards in the clinical 
environment as a repository for individuals to dump symbols for people, conditions 
and events until others are ready for them to be communicated. The individual can read 
the display at his own convenience and conversation can focus on clarification rather 
than primary description.  
The whiteboards designed features were supplemented by vernacular symbols and 
icons that were meaningless out of context but succinctly enriched the information 
available for exchange when interpreted against a shared understanding of that specific 
workplace. The shared display provided an external representation to assist the 
individuals internal processing of the situation and set out the common ground 
(Coiera, 2000) of understanding between individuals.  
Coiera (2000) distinguishes between computational and conversational paradigms. 
The conversational paradigm cannot be collapsed into the computational paradigm 
and automated. There is a continuum that allows some tasks better to be aligned with 
one paradigm ore the other  
The distinction between the two paradigms allows debate as to whether the interruptive 
and informal channels of communication in the clinical workplace represent a 
fundamental technical inefficiency that needs to be rectified by technology, or whether 
they are a fact of life that must be fully acknowledged in a deconstructed conception 
that fits more accurately with the chaotic and ad hoc organisation of work as 
performed.  
Reddy and Dourish (2002) in an intensive care unit, demonstrate that the conduct of 
clinical work and the assembly of information, to describe, document and coordinate it, 
are not continuous, synchronised or parallel streams of activity. Their rhythms interact 
chaotically. New information may be known before earlier information has been 
communicated.  
In this environment, information has to be interpreted in context, as a social act. Rather 
than a commodity, owned by one person and transferable to another, it is relational, 
centred in Coieras (2000) common ground between individuals in dialogue.  
There seem to be two general objectives for communication in the clinical workplace : 
to eliminate unnecessary communication and interruption and to understand fully the 
nature of the communication that is necessary. Communicated information is not 
contained by either the human interlocutor or the computer, but is situated in a 
communicative space between the two. 
Reddy, Dourish and Pratt (2006) examine the concept of time in relation to work in the 
clinical setting. When work is modelled as a system, the model implies the classical 
concept from physics, of continuous, absolute, fluid time. In contrast, observed work is 
oriented and made relative towards specific events and occasions that punctuate the 
days routine. The smooth temporal trajectory of clock time is pitted against the 
lumpy and interfering temporal rhythms of work time. Finally, the collective 
orientation towards work time is contrasted with each individuals orientation towards 
his own personal deadlines.  
Deadlines and salient events during the working day constitute temporal horizons, in 
relation to which tasks become increasingly urgent and pared down as the deadline 
approaches. A temporal horizon may be a consultants ward round, the end of a shift, 
a planning meeting or an impending deterioration in the condition of an individual 
patient. Data, acquired, reported and stored are absolutely valid with regard to the point 
in absolute clock time when they were sampled but are invalidated by the flux of events. 
That is to say, the validity of data is only relative to temporal rhythms and horizons 
which are not absolute but constructed socially.  
Making Information Technology At Home in the Clinical Workplace 
Berg (2001) argues that technical design failures exist alongside failure of adequate 
socio-technical appreciation. Success or failure of IT implementation is judged by 
many competing and conflicting criteria from many perspectives. Design, 
implementation and evaluation are inseparable when considered from a socio-technical 
standpoint. Organisations, work practices and technology dynamically shape each other, 
long after the technology has been designed and installed. The social and the political 
are as important as the technical aspects of design, implementation and evaluation and 
criteria may vary over time, even at a single site. 
Success or failure cannot be treated as static attributes and assessed or predicted by 
pre-determined criteria. They are emergent states such that an information system can 
be seen to be succeeding or failing in some of its attributes, under given circumstances 
at a particular time or place. 
Berg dismisses three myths. First, an information system is not simply rolled out as 
a technical intervention. Implementation needs to be part of a mutual and carefully 
managed adaptation between the host organisations work procedures and the new 
technology.  
Second, implementation needs to be managed as a process of organisational 
development, in which procedures and motivations are carefully and respectfully 
reconsidered. Crucially, Berg argues, attempts to extinguish variation in practice by 
formalising routines can impede less visible but equally essential interactions between 
people, procedures and documents. Tasks that seem to be executed in a highly variable 
way are actually fine-tuned to match a context that is highly variable. These ideas 
threaten the concepts of process maps and care pathways. 
More than token user participation is needed if deep understanding of the workplace is 
to be imported into design, implementation and evaluation. However, user participation 
needs sensitive coordination. 
Bergs third myth is that implementation and organisational redesign can be planned. 
The process is an emergent one. Especially in a clinical context, the complexity of 
influences and contingencies requires a culture of organisational learning rather than 
command and control. 
Heath, Luff and Svensson (2003) present a 25-year review, of papers published in a 
single Journal (Sociology Of Health And Illness), whose central theme is that the 
shaping of practice by technology is reciprocated by the social shaping of technology.  
They contrast institutionalisation, represented by the penetration and diffusion of 
technology into the places, structures and processes of a healthcare organisation, with 
technology made at home within the social practices of the workplace, where 
individuals interact with tasks and each other.  
Institutionalisation pursues goals of accounting and accountability, the facilitation of 
diagnosis and organisational diagnostic categories, clinical communication and the 
organisation, co-ordination and amplification of clinical resources. The organisational 
benefits are thus expressed as outcomes.  
To be at home technology has to gain coherence and consistency with the prevailing 
culture and values of the workplace but this is not a sufficient condition. Technology 
gains significance and relevance through every day activities and ordinary experience. 
The other benefits of the technology are expressed in terms of peoples relationships 
with their individual tasks and their collaborators. 
3.1.6 : The Process of Information Systems Change 
Lessons from Failure 
Scott et al. (2005) comment of the implementation of electronic patient records in the 
Kaiser Permanente Healthcare system in the United States. Several factors were 
inimical to the success of the new system. 
The new system was a done deal. Clinicians were sidelined at the strategy formulation 
phase. The compliant culture of the workforce led to the systems acceptance at face 
value during the planning phase but the system, once implemented, generated conflict 
between managerial data requirements and clinicians professional ethics. Assumptions 
were unrealistic : for example, that the clinical consultation commences with a known 
diagnosis or that non-standard patients will fit standard templates. Accounting functions 
interfered with clinical. The system was difficult to navigate and made simple clinical 
tasks difficult. In contrast to these organisational and human factors, the technical 
performance of the system was not reported as an issue. 
Fitzgerald and Russo (2005) have compared the initial, unsuccessful implementation of 
the London Ambulance Services Computer Aided Despatch System (LASCAD) with 
its later, successful implementation. Table 3.1.1 summarises their analysis. 
Table 3.1.1 : Analysis of factors affecting the London Ambulance Service 
Computer-Aided Despatch System implementation (adapted from Fitzgerald and 
Russo (2005). 
 Initial, failed 
implementation 
Later, successful 
implementation 
Project Organisation Lack of project 
competence or adherence 
to explicit methodology. 
Over ambitious project 
timetable. 
Awareness of failure. 
Competence and conscious 
use of (PRINCE) 
methodology. 
Relaxed project 
timetable. 
Learning from failure. 
Information System Complex. Simple, incremental. 
Supporters Determined Chief 
Executive. 
Demoralised staff. 
Charismatic Chief 
Executive actively 
engaged and motivated 
staff on their own terms. 
Environment Political drive for 
widespread NHS reform. 
Adverse industrial 
relations climate. 
Public Inquiry findings 
gave new Chief Executive 
ammunition to withstand 
political pressures for 
rapid progress.  
Improved industrial 
relations. 
Although Fitzgerald and Russo (2005) point to the ability of an inspirational, 
charismatic, powerful and politically adroit figure, these attributes will not turn bad 
systems design and implementation into good. 
Beynon-Davies (1999) has also analysed the initial failure of LASCAD and notes that 
the subsequent public inquiry had found, the computer system did not fail in a 
technical sense.  
He uses the term, error, to denote divergence from a set of principles of best 
practice. Development errors hinge around the selection and adherence to a design 
and development methodology. Errors of use stem from mismatch between strictures 
on human behaviour, embedded within computer and software design, and human 
factors which interfere with prescribed interactions between man and machine.  
His account describes the roles, processes, events and rules around which LASCAD was 
initially constructed. He then examines the escalation of factors which culminated in the 
systems collapse.  
These factors included the prevalence of user-errors, the uncritical application of 
decision rules by the computer, the invalidity of key assumptions embedded in the 
system design (eg that users will log events on the computer as they happen) and the 
recruitment of system noise.  
System noise escalated when the system generated automatic error alerts because 
anticipated actions and events had not occurred. These required the attention of human 
operators who had not been able to cope with the volume of primary signals from the 
computer.  
Failure of human response allowed the computer to recycle each primary request for an 
ambulance between operators. More than one ambulance was then deployed to a given 
incident, whilst other calls were unsupplied. Staff lost confidence in the computers 
instructions and began to disengage from the computer and from the human roles 
constructed around the assumptions of the software designer. 
As sources of failure, Beynon-Davies identifies the absence of a demonstrable and 
unitary power structure within the NHS at a macro level, and the industrial relations 
atmosphere between managers and the managed at the micro level.  
But do information systems in healthcare only fail if industrial relations are poor ? 
Certainly, there are political and ethical challenges alongside the technical, that might 
be harder to negotiate if relations are poor to start with. This is not where matters end.  
A report by the Wellcome Trust and the Nuffield Trust (Singleton, Pagliari, & Detmer, 
2009) acknowledges the ethical difficulties raised by electronic health records alongside 
the more prosaic conflict between the multiple definitions of the electronic record as a 
personal record, an institutional record, a longitudinal record or a population database.  
The report identifies seven key requirements for Electronic Health Records : clear 
vision and purpose for their application, semantic interoperability, the ability to 
accumulate knowledge, the ability to disseminate knowledge through decision support, 
the provision of workforce education and training, a programme to ensure innovation 
and continuous improvement of healthcare quality, and a parallel programme to 
disseminate experiential learning about the impact of electronic health records on 
quality, efficiency, safety and patient experience. 
Last, the report points (p.11) to the disconnect between technical, regulatory and 
sociotechnical debates and a danger of delivering a fixed IT solution to a changing 
business problem. (p.42). The group recommended that EHRs [Electronic Health 
Records] are embedded within complex sociotechnical and organisational systems. 
Their implementation requires strategies and tactics  appropriate for complex 
adaptive systems. 
Greenhalgh et al. (2008) take up this last point, stating : shared electronic records are 
not plug in technologies. They are complex innovations that must be accepted by 
individual patients and staff and embedded in organisational and system level 
routines. 
Deployment versus Introduction of Information Systems 
Maguire and Ojiako (2007) point out the fundamental difference between information 
systems introduction and deployment. Deployment is a centralised, technical task, 
aiming to ensure the straightforward integration of new with existing information 
systems. In contrast, introduction is a distributed activity, aiming to ensure minimum 
disruption in any individual workplace. Introduction has several dimensions. 
The first of these is the management of change. They say that staff impacted by change 
should be encouraged to understand the implications of that change. The people 
operating an information system need to be fully aware of its rationale and its rationale 
has to be congruent with the local rationale of situated work practice. 
The second dimension is the management and training of the human resource. 
Showing staff how to use the system does not guarantee that they fully understand what 
the system is for or why they should use it. 
Third, Maguire and Ojiako point to the need for NHS organisations to have an IT 
strategy that aligns the IT programme with the strategic direction of the parent 
organisation. It developments must be seen to support broader objectives than merely 
the diffusion of IT. 
Fourth, the organisational environment is a dimension where the patient focused culture 
of the clinical workplace must be fully appreciated, as well as the local human resources 
profile and the skills of prospective users. This appreciation must exist in the context of 
a clear understanding of the relevant systems of human activity and their boundaries. 
The fifth dimension recognises the need to incorporate user perspectives into the design 
rationale. 
The sixth dimension is the concept of systems introduction, contrasted with deployment 
as above. This is essentially the practice of working out what an information system 
needs to do at that particular workplace, to preserve and project the values and norms 
that ought to exist there. Maguire and Ojiako suggest that the traditional systems 
development lifecycle approach is likely to be inappropriate to the needs of a large and 
complex organisation working in a turbulent environment where agility and change are 
endemic.  Large and complex organisation such as the NHS need to appreciate 
that smaller projects with the potential to deliver benefits in a shorter timescale should 
be given more prominence. 
Their final dimension of importance is Return on Investment, reflecting the idea that all 
parties need to know what the information system is for, and why it is relevant. 
Maguire and Ojiako draw several important conclusions, related to the extension of 
organisational-informational relationships beyond organisational boundaries, the need to 
use as well as capture information from information systems, and to the rapid pace of 
change that can threaten a massive capital investment with redundancy. It is these 
factors that require information systems projects to be small, multiple and agile instead 
of monolithic. 
User Resistance  
One goal of clinical engagement is to minimise resistance by information system 
users. Resistance should not be equated uncritically with deviance from organisational 
goals. 
Diegeling and Carr (2004) detect a shift of focus away from critical managerial success 
factors, attributes and traits as universally effective characteristics and towards 
management of meaning in which managers have sought to colonise or rectify local 
culture, viewed as a faulty component of organisation.  
Both of these approaches implicitly locate power, influence and authority in the upper 
levels of hierarchy. Ideas from ethnomethodology and symbolic interactionism, 
challenge this belief, arguing that power and its concomitants are situated within the 
flux of discourse between organisational actors.  
In their view, the appropriate discourse, in terms of leadership in health reform, needs to 
focus on the issue of authorisation. Authorisation stems from the elements of local 
social structure or culture as well as from organisational hierarchy. 
Agents of change need to place themselves in a sensitive and recursive relationship with 
the multiple undercurrents of local culture, constituted by the separate ideologies and 
power relations between one professional group and another. 
These authors argue that discourse about health care process reform and teamwork 
ought to be given a concrete foundation by disaggregating work. Issues are 
crystallised when a specific clinical condition is discussed, as in the design, operation 
and evaluation of specific clinical pathways. 
Vardi and Wiener (1996) distinguish between organisational misbehaviours intended to 
benefit self, to injure others or the organisation, or to benefit the organisation. 
Misbehaviour intended to benefit the organisation is associated with strong 
identification with the values of the organisation and high cohesion between the 
individual and his immediate peers. The question is : why, when strategic managers 
have decided that information systems will be valuable, might front line users decide 
otherwise ? 
The anticipated or actual use by managers of an information system can be a potent 
factor inhibiting clinical engagement. For example, Doolin (2004) describes the 
introduction of a case mix management system to a hospital in New Zealand where it 
was intended to compare the performance of individual clinicians. 
Knowledge that their performance was under scrutiny was expected to be a powerful 
disciplinary influence upon the clinicians (Foucault, 1977) to eliminate variance in 
performance between peers. Within a devolved management structure of clinical 
directorates, it was attempted to construct the interests of doctors as congruent with 
those of management. This involved translating the notion of patient care in terms of 
effectiveness and efficiency. 
Doolin found that some doctors, faced with incongruity between the information 
produced and their own perceptions, began to interrogate the system to discover 
systemic explanations for variance and support claims for enhanced resources. Others 
disengaged completely, citing this incongruity and suggesting plausible alternatives to 
explain the reported variances and nullify the need to alter practice. With no clear 
incentives to participate, and no forum for organisational learning, the casemix system 
fell into disuse. 
Timmons (2003) has examined nurses resistance to the introduction of IT in hospitals. 
Some of the studies he cites point to a poor fit between people, tasks and technology 
whilst others point to the use of opportunities to push back against a perceived inequity 
of power relations, between nurses and doctors or between nurses and the managers 
who were able to define the information requirements. 
Timmons finds that resistance tends not to be generalised or orchestrated, but is located 
within individual instances of interaction between a person and a machine. Neither is it 
translated into positive action.  
Nurses rejection of a system for care planning tended to arise from incompatibility 
between assumptions built into the computer model and necessary patterns of local, 
multidisciplinary practice. 
Attempts to minimise use derived from users preference for and reversion to their pre-
existing paper system ; the absence of evidence that information input was used ; and a 
tendency to batch input according to convenience. 
Criticism tended to be based on technical performance and ergonomic shortcomings and 
on the cost of use, in terms of time and work increased rather than abated.  
A more fundamental set of criticisms also emerged. The idealised clinical method 
embedded in the care planning system interfered with users reflexive choice of their 
own method. The care planning system generalised a standard image of the patients 
needs, remote from any actual patient, and limited description to categorisation. 
Established to measure the quantity of clinical practice, the machine imposed its own 
degradation of practice quality. These findings are incorporated and augmented by 
Urquhart and Currell (2005). 
Timmons (2003) concludes that resistance is not an irrational deviation from acceptable 
norms. It is not sited with the deviant user, but found at the interface between system 
design .. and nursing culture and practice.  
In this vein, Ojiako, Maguire et al. (2010) observe that the implementation of the 
Choose and Book [e-booking of appointments] system has failed due to the inability of 
project sponsors to appreciate the complex and far-reaching softer implications of the 
implementation . In England, electronic booking of appointments has been 
driven by alternative policies and rhetorics : to utilise spare capacity across the NHS, to 
stimulate competition between providers, to empower patients and to enhance 
accessibility. In addition to clear-cut technical failures that have damaged confidence in 
the systems reliability, implementation to further these conflicting policy aims has been 
divorced from insight into the ways doctors and patients in the NHS want or need to 
work, in relation with each other and with the wider NHS.  
Majeed (2003) believes that electronic booking has been introduced in a form that has 
been irrelevant to clinical practice and patients expressed preferences for improved 
services. He believes it is less important to provide information for performance 
management by managers than to facilitate clinical practice. In his view, clinicians 
priorities are to improve the flow of clinical information between health professionals, 
to develop integrated electronic health records, and to make information (about patients, 
clinical activity and health services) accessible, all supported by improvement in the 
performance of the electronic infrastructure. 
3.1.7 : Clinical Engagement 
Within the National Programme, there is a clear consensus that clinical engagement is 
vital to its success. The objectives of clinical engagement are not clear. The minimum 
requirement appears to be to persuade clinical end-users to accept the technology 
programme to be implemented. 
The authors of the EHR IMPACT study (European Union, 2009) state (p.36), 
Engagement is working with users and stakeholders so they can participate in the 
design, development, requirements and constraints of e-Health  Dealing with 
positions, propositions, concerns and requirements distinguishes engagement from 
consultation  Effective engagement also enables users to adapt to changes at 
their own pace, with the ICT [Information and Communications Technology] following 
suit. 
Newell et al. (2000) show how the spread of an organisational innovation is encouraged 
by manipulating the influential and the impressionable.  
Innovation diffusion is conventionally assumed to fail at the stages of implementation 
and usage. Newell et al. focus on the preceding stages, where the agenda of problems, 
ideas and expectations is formulated, and candidate technologies identified. Both 
suppliers and eager user-adopters create peer pressure to adopt an innovation without 
fully understanding why it is necessary or how it will result in benefits. 
Sold as a bundled set of solutions or as a black box full of commodified ideas, 
the information system is not inherently relevant or congruous with the host 
organisation. It has to be made so through an active process of unbundling and 
reintegration. Many organisations lack and fail to appreciate the multidisciplinary 
resources needed to perform these tasks.  
One way to manipulate the influential and the impressionable is to employ incentives. 
Benson (2002a) sees implementation of information systems in secondary care as a 
transaction that can be sweetened in this way. The same author (2002b) emphasises 
technical challenges -systems architecture and scalability - as primary obstacles to the 
transfer of information technology from primary to secondary care. 
The need to persuade acceptance suggests a mismatch between the products on offer 
and what clinicians intuitively recognise as something they need and can use.  
Martin et al. (2006) illustrate the gulf in mutual understanding that divides the dramatis 
personae during the planning and implementation of an information system in a UK 
hospital. The supplier and the corporate analyst have a clear conception of the way the 
system will be used, that is ill-aligned with the ways its future users understand their 
own work.  
In effect, the new information system is to be compared with work. In this context, 
Nemeth, Cook & Wears (2007) make a distinction between work as imagined and 
work as performed. 
The message is that the implementation of an information system is not principally a 
matter of engineering acceptance by manipulating people, ideas and values. Clinical 
engagement ought to be an exploration of work practice and the potential for practice 
to be revised, aimed at organisational learning and deep understanding rather than 
superficial description. This entails appreciating situated micropractices in different 
clinical settings (Greenhalgh et al., 2009) and comparing these with the strategic goals 
of the information systems institutional sponsors. 
3.2   :   P R O B L E M   S O L V E R S 
3.2.0 : Introduction 
The immediate problem solvers are characterised by the things they know from their 
experience and by the ways they think and know. Jayaratna (1994) uses the term, 
personal mental construct. Mitroff and Linstone (1993) refer to the technical, 
organisational and personal perspectives of organisational stakeholders. Checkland 
(1999) talks about their world view (Weltanschauung). 
Hirschheim (1985) charted five phases in the evolution of scientific and social theory 
relevant to information systems. Positivism, its refinement as logical positivism and its 
decline into post positivism had been interrupted by the more or less sequential 
developments of anti-positivism and contemporary criticism. The five phases are best 
envisaged in two parallel streams (Table 3.2.1). 
Subsequently, the most conspicuous advance has been an emergent understanding of 
social structure in relation to information technology, of the social construction of 
technology and of computer supported co-operative work. These epistemologies have 
carried with them an understanding that attributes and qualities are not inherent in 
objects but situated in systemic relationships between objects.  
Systems thinking, the understanding of objects in systemic, co-constructive relationship, 
has roots in hermeneutics, phenomenology, symbolic interactionism and 
ethnomethodology. The analysis of structural relations in the social milieu has been 
conducted at an increasingly granular level. The concept of structure as a stable state 
has given way to the concept of structuring as a fluid, dynamic and iterative process, 
such that alternative accounts of relationships between entities and events can be 
equivalent. 
Table 3.2.1 : Evolution of Scientific and Social Theory (Hirschheim, 1985) 
Positivism  
Unity of scientific method. 
Search for constant conjunction between cause 
and effect (laws). 
Phenomenalism : knowledge depends on 
observation.  
Asocial, value-free process. 
Based on logic and mathematics. 
Logical Positivism (Logical Empiricism) 
Search for networks of verifiable statements. 
Physicalism : knowledge depends on 
hypothesis, derived from reproducible 
observation or deduction from first principles.  
Communities agree on what has, or has not, 
been observed. 
Post-Positivism 
Methods of physical science fail in relation to 
social activity. 
Social phenomena better explained in terms of 
social conventions than absolute laws. 
Method of investigation determined by goals 
of investigation. 
The absence of a uniquely appropriate mode of 
investigation allows employment of plural 
modalities. 
Anti-Positivism 
Perceptual apparatus filters 
understanding and knowledge. 
Perceptual apparatus is socially and 
historically conditioned. 
Individuals and events are inseparable 
from surrounding context. 
Individuals exercise choice and 
freedom of action. 
Action is based on perception rather 
than direct stimulus. 
Contemporary Criticism 
Process of knowledge acquisition 
filters what is known. 
Tacit values underpin statements of 
purported fact. 
A political dimension hides behind the 
rational. 
Methods are inseparable from goals. 
3.2.1 : Ways of Knowing and Understanding 
Becker and Niehaves (2007) address five fundamental epistemological questions 
(questions about knowledge and ways of knowing). The questions are summarised, with 
slight modification of language, in Table 3.2.2. 
Table 3.2.2 : Fundamental Epistemological Questions (Becker and Niehaves, 2007) 
Question Optional Answers for This Question 
Ontology  
(the kinds of 
things we can 
know about) 
Real things :  
(exist independent 
from human 
cognition) 
Concepts :  
(products of the 
human mind) 
Conceptual  
(appearances of real 
things) 
Impact of 
knowing 
No impact on the 
thing known 
 Knowing modifies 
the thing known 
Basis of truth Correspondence Consensus Semantic  
(ability of language 
to convey ideas 
beyond its logical 
content) 
Derivation of 
knowledge 
Direct experience 
(Empiricism) 
Thought, divorced 
from experience 
(Rationalism) 
Intellectual 
processing of 
experience 
Methodology : 
means of access to 
knowledge 
Induction, from 
individual to general 
statements 
Deduction, from 
general to 
individual 
statement 
Hermeneutic 
understanding 
3.2.2 : Linear Thinking - Positivism, Interpretivism and Criticism 
The Four Paradigms of Burrell and Morgan 
The Information Systems literature has tended to organise discussion around four 
mutually exclusive (positivist, interpretivist, radical structuralist and radical humanist) 
paradigms (Figure 3.2.1) defined by Burrell and Morgan (1979). Chua (1986), referred 
to the dubious distinction between the radical structuralist and humanist paradigms, 
and Orlikowski and Baroudi (1991) followed her example in collapsing these into a 
single, critical paradigm.  
Burrell & Morgan demarcated the four paradigms by the intersection of an objective / 
subjective axis, describing the nature of science, and a regulation / radical change 
axis, to describe the nature of society. 
Figure 3.2.1 : Four Paradigms (Burrell & Morgan, 1979) 
Regulation   
Radical Change   
O bjective   S ubjective   
Functionalist   Interpretive   
Radical Humanist   Radical Structuralist   
Empirical Evidence for the Paradigms 
From field studies of information systems design and development in the printing and 
aviation industries, Hirschheim and Klein (1989) have developed three empirical 
perspectives from the Burrell and Morgan framework. Unable to find evidence of the 
fourth, radical humanist paradigm in practice, they have suggested how it might be 
elaborated through Habermas critical social theory (see Lyytinen & Klein, 1985). 
Paradigm Wars, Pragmatism and Paradigm Pluralism 
Rather than interpret the four paradigms as distinct categories with distinctive rules of 
assignment, Goles & Hirschheim (2000) regard the paradigm boundaries as fuzzy and 
permeable. This provides complementary insights from alternative positions, affords 
richer discourse and allows them to select the approach and methodology most suited 
to a particular research question.  
The Positivist, Interpretive and Critical Paradigms in Detail 
Orlikowski and Baroudi (1991) characterise each of the paradigms in turn, in terms of 
the way each treats the nature of knowing, the nature of being and the relationship 
between theory and practice. For each paradigm, they supply their assessment. 
Characterising The Positivist Paradigm 
Orlikowski and Baroudi (1991) characterise positivism as follows : 
Knowing :  Knowing is a state. It does not alter the thing known. Immutable facts 
and universal laws can be discovered and this general knowledge can be applied to 
explain, predict and control a specific situation. 
Being : Entities are independent from human cognition. The observer and the observed 
have separate, independent existence. The observed entity can be dissected into 
identifiable components. These can be understood separately and individually. The 
relationships between them can be explained, predicted and controlled. 
Theory and Practice : Theory focuses on each immutable, individual identity. The 
practical impact is to isolate individual identity and negate its local context. 
Assessment of the Positivist Paradigm : The positivist approach emphasises validity, 
rigour and replicability. Contextual influences are ignored and the status quo is 
privileged. The ritualistic methodology of positivist science limits the scope of valid 
findings. It does not afford understanding of non-deterministic or reciprocal 
relationships. 
Characterising The Interpretive Paradigm 
Orlikowski and Baroudi characterise the interpretive paradigm as follows : 
Knowing : Knowing is an active human process. Knowing and the thing known shape 
each other. Knowing is heavily modulated by contextual factors. The process of 
modulation can be understood, in terms of concurrent but not necessarily causal 
influences. 
Being : Entities impinge on human consciousness. Their impact cannot occur without 
the agency of a conscious human observer. The entity and its relationship with the 
human observer are both irreducible. The relationship is conditioned by social 
participation. 
Theory and Practice : The theoretical focus is on the social and cultural terms of 
engagement between observer and observed. The practical impact is to emphasise 
contextual influences over individual identity. 
Assessment of the Interpretive Paradigm : The interpretive approach illuminates the 
social rules and meanings that make social practices possible. It ignores external 
factors which underpin social rules and meanings. It also ignores side-effects 
(unintended consequences) of social action which affect social relationships. This 
approach emphasises social cohesion over social conflict. It does not attempt to explain 
how social order came about, or how it is likely to change over time. 
Characterising The Critical Paradigm 
Orlikowski and Baroudi characterise the critical paradigm as follows : 
Knowing : The contextual modulators of knowing have specific historical and 
geographical origins. The relevant influences are material rather than moral. Mutual 
shaping of the knowing and the known could have a different outcome if material 
conditions were altered. 
Being : The form of being is restricted by material constraints. Being cannot be isolated 
from material conditions of existence. Material conditions of existence can be altered by 
human action. Social participation occurs within a framework of unequal / asymmetric 
power relationships. 
Theory and Practice : Theory is focused on inequality of influence (domination) and 
what is left out (alienated) as a consequence. The practical impact is to challenge the  
basis for action and to promotes change in material conditions. 
Assessment of the Critical Paradigm : The critical approach illuminates the 
relationship between the whole and its parts. It affords central importance to external 
(historical, social, economic, political) factors influencing local effects and emphasises 
effects of social and behavioural differentiation rather than social uniformity. 
3.2.4 : Recasting Burrell and Morgan in a Critical Light 
Deetz (1996) has criticised Burrell and Morgan for equating objective with the 
methodology of natural science and pejoratively associating subjective with lack of 
rigour. The boring and misleading subjective-objective problem is, for Deetz the 
most problematic legacy of Burrell and Morgans analysis. 
In Deetz view, the Burrell and Morgan matrix is less useful as a taxonomy than as a 
means to focus attention and stimulate the right questions. Its dimensions foster 
less interesting and productive conflicts and developments than are possible. The 
centre of understanding should not be the faulty psychological distinction between an 
interior (subjective) and an exterior (objective) world of consciousness, but language. 
Loaded with personal and collective cultural experience, language reflects a world view 
that is not neutral but situated. The ideas contained in this world view have elite or a 
priori status. Many of these fail to withstand challenge during discourse and are 
superseded by emergent ideas. For Deetz, this is a more useful and intellectually 
robust distinction than between subjective and objective. Equally the distinction, 
between a reproductive (consensus) orientation towards the existing hierarchy of 
ideas and social structure and a productive (dissensus) orientation towards the 
disruption of this hierarchy, is more useful than distinctions between structure and 
radical change or order and conflict (Figure 3.2.2). 
Figure 3.2.2 : Deetz Revision of Burrell and Morgan 
3.2.5 : The Decline of Positivist Science and the Emergence  
of Interpretive and Critical Epistemologies 
The history of the information systems discipline is described in terms of its origins in a 
technical and technocratic literature and the political struggle for the emancipation of an 
interpretive and critical literature, focused on the relationship between information 
technology and people. The purpose of this section is to explain the loss of confidence 
in science as a paragon of knowledge acquisition and to establish the validity of a social 
and humanistic approach. 
Consensus 
 Normative Interpretive   
A priori Emergent 
 Critical Dialogic   
Dissensus 
Rationalism, Functionalism, Empiricism 
According to Monod (2004 ; p.111) positivism contains at least three traditions: 
rationalism, functionalism and empiricism. 
Monod associates rationalism with Leibniz belief, that concepts can be independent 
from experience. This is the pure reason on which Kant focused his Critique of Pure 
Reason. He then explains that functionalism is a development in sociology from 
rationalism, in which society is seen as an organism, whose individual members actions 
are directed by the welfare of the whole. Neither rationalism nor functionalism makes a 
direct appeal to sense experience.  
In contrast, empiricism represents the trend in philosophy that rejected dogma in the 
face of tangible experience and visible evidence. 
Logical Positivism (Logical Empiricism) 
Logical positivists (logical empiricists) are associated with their correspondence theory 
of truth. Their quest was for a stable foundation (verification principle) to verify 
statements by correspondence with previously observed facts (Hughes and Sharrock, 
1990 ; p.44). By rejecting any statement which was neither true from first principles nor 
verifiable through direct observation they intended to ensure that distinctions between 
 Humes fork famously stated, If we take in our hand any volume ; of divinity or school metaphysics, 
for instance; let us ask, Does it contain any abstract reasoning concerning quantity or number ? No. Does 
it contain any experimental reasoning concerning matter of fact and existence ? No. Commit it then to the 
flames : for it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion. (Hughes and Sharrock p.28). 
categories were uncontaminated by human judgements and preferences. This left them 
unable to deal with moral and ethical issues (Crotty, 1998 ; p.23-26). 
Mingers (2004a) explains the three elements of their stance : 
 Observation and perception provide a direct, unproblematic mirror on nature 
 Constant conjunction of events does not constitute proof of a cause and effect 
mechanism 
 A set of particular observations can support the formulation of universal laws 
that can then allow confident deductive predictions.  
The Crisis in Physics 
Monod (2004) explains that the classical science of Galileo and Newton had relied on 
the twin doctrines of objectivity (the observer-independence of true statements, which 
depended on Descartes sharp separation of self [subject] from surroundings [object]) ; 
and causality (the inference of deterministic laws from the predictable repeatability of 
a consequence from an event). 
In the early 20th century, science encountered a crisis when both of these fundamentals 
became untenable. Discoveries in quantum physics now established that definite 
knowledge could only be approximated.  
Heisenbergs uncertainty principle implied that quantum physicists could only define 
states of matter and energy in relation to each other, and in terms of probabilities rather 
than certainties. 
The quantum physicists were forced to abandon the idea that science was objective : 
their results depended on the apparatus used and were, therefore, observer-dependent. 
This meant that real things could not be defined independently of the observer and his 
perceptual apparatus. Bohrs complementarity principle meant that truth could no 
longer be defined by correspondence between observation and theory. Alternative 
descriptions of physical reality could be equally valid. 
Post Positivism  
Hirschheim (1985) tells us that post-positivism is not a particular school of thought 
with any agreed set of propositions. Arguing the case for research in non-functionalist 
paradigms, Hirschheims fundamental thought is to do away with the physical science 
model as the only accepted vehicle for knowledge acquisition. Some of post-
positivisms roots are traced in the following, for which sources are Crotty (1998 ; p.31-
37), Hughes & Sharrock (1990 ; p.76-82, 91-92, 171-180), Robinson & Groves (2004, 
p.113), Mingers (2004a) and Klein & Herskovitz (2007). 
 Popper  
Poppers ideas are outlined by Collinson & Plant (2006 : p. 236-240). Popper has 
overturned the logical empiricists twin doctrines, substituting hypothetico-deductive 
bold conjecture for induction and falsification for verification.  
 Pragmatism : Pierce and Dewey 
Mingers (2004a ; p.90) identifies and outlines two positions in reaction to the theory-
laden nature of empirical observation. The first of these, pragmatism, considers science 
to be essentially a practical activity, aimed at producing useful knowledge that helps in 
a practical way, rather than understanding the true nature of the world. The relevant 
principle is consensus rather than correspondence. 
 Kuhn 
Mingers second position corresponds with Kuhns challenge to Poppers suggestion 
that science proceeds in an evolutionary manner through the consequences of 
falsification. From this position, truth is that which is accepted by a scientific 
community rather than correspondence to some external reality (Mingers, 2004a ; 
p.90). 
The newcomer to science learns how to accept, work and think within the idioms 
already established in their particular scientific discipline. He is drawn into a specific 
set of norms, values and beliefs, a particular world view and a ritualised set of methods 
which, together, constitute the paradigm within which knowledge is recognised and 
construed. Scientists follow social convention rather than rationality, adhering closely to 
the current paradigm whilst hostile evidence accumulates. A new paradigm is 
established when hostile evidence has accumulated to the point of crisis. 
 Lakatos, Feyerabend 
Lakatos argues that any given research programme contains a nucleus of established 
theory, surrounded by newer hypotheses, each of whose contribution to the stability of 
the overall programme is negligible. In contrast, Feyerabend suggests the observed 
practice of science owes more to showmanship than to rational integrity. 
Kuhn, Lakatos and Feyerabend have attacked scientific practice on grounds of human 
behaviour rather than philosophical principle. The philosophical principle at stake is 
whether the goal of certain knowledge is attainable.  
 Quine 
On Poppers view, the mental model of empirical experience remains fixed and 
mutability is concentrated in the mental model of anticipated experience that constitutes 
the theory under test. On Quines view, mutability is more evenly divided. Quine 
proposes twin theses (Klein and Herskovitz, 2007 ; p.116-120).  
The holism thesis situates any theory of interest against a substantial background in 
other theory, with which it is bundled. This leaves the theorist free to choose what 
statements to revise and what ones to hold fast.  
The under-determination thesis allows that any set of data can be fit by many 
different [mutually inconsistent] theories .. we are never in a position to know that 
any of these theories is the truth. 
Quines twin theses allow us to choose between competing modifications to theory, 
according to our chosen interpretation of empirical experience. Quine allows the belief 
that science and its findings represent a process of social construction rather than natural 
discovery. 
Antipositivism 
Anti-positivism, as explained by Burrell and Morgan (1979 : p.5), rejects the stance that 
the observer can achieve mental separation from the observed. Klein and Lyytinen 
(1985) have argued that a scientistic, engineering approach is insufficient foundation 
for an information systems discipline focused on computing as fundamentally a social 
activity.  
Pettigrew (1985) stresses the requirement to understand the emergent, situational and 
holistic features of an organism or process in its context, rather than to divide the world 
into limited sets of dependent and independent variables, isolated from their context. 
Respect for this principle distinguishes a craft process from merely the application of 
a formal set of techniques and rules.  
 Phenomenology and Hermeneutics 
Boland (1985) makes a neat distinction between how things work, identified by 
positivist science, and what things are, identified by phenomenology. Boland argues 
that phenomenology is the preferred foundation for the study of information systems. 
Phenomenology takes the stance that significance is not intrinsic to the things we 
experience. Instead, we assemble significance in a process which involves our own 
intellectual apparatus.  
Boland then explains the relationship of phenomenology with hermeneutics (the 
problem of the study and interpretation of texts) and makes the central claim, that 
the use, design and study of information systems is best understood as a hermeneutic 
process. The texts to which Boland refers were originally religious texts, written in an 
ancient language, centuries previously. That is, to interpret symbols and signs.  
As (Butler, 2002) puts it, this was to explain the intentions of the Gods. To do this 
requires a structure and an understanding of norms, values and beliefs and tradition, 
crucially imparted through language. 
The text is meaningless without a reader. Its interpretation relies on the reader to 
construct its significance. Geographical, historical and linguistic separation preclude 
any corroboration of the readers interpretation by the original author. Therefore, there 
can be no absolute or definitive interpretation. Interpretation cannot be determined by 
rules, only by convention, agreed or disputed between members of the interested 
community. 
Textual interpretation, knowledge acquisition and social change are mediated by 
language. Boland (1985) states, Information systems are data becoming information in 
consciousness; organizations are socially constructed through language; and our 
reasoning about both these processes takes place in dialogue.  
 Symbolic Interactionism 
Symbolic Interactionists investigate the ways in which human responses to verbal, non-
verbal and situational cues arise from behaviour which is knowledgeable, and 
situationally aware, rather than from reflex responses to symbols with fixed, inherent 
meaning. They understand the content of human communication as a negotiated 
phenomenon : 
 People act towards things on the basis of the meanings they attribute to them. 
 Meaning is derived from and arises from social interaction with others. 
 Meaning is received and modified through an interpretive process by the 
recipient (Crotty, p.72). 
 Ethnomethodology 
Giddens (2001 : p.689) describes ethnomethodology as the study of how people make 
sense of what others say or do in the course of day-to-day social interaction. It is 
concerned with the ethnomethods by means of which human beings sustain 
meaningful interchanges with one another. 
Ethnomethodology is thus a natural descendent of symbolic interactionism.  
Contemporary Criticism 
Richardson & Robinson (2007) refer to the mysterious case of the missing [ie critical] 
paradigm. Brooke (2002d) highlights the following variants of critical information 
systems theory : 
 Critical Systems Theory, using systems thinking and Soft Systems Methodology 
to identify and eliminate power asymmetry 
 Critical Realism, examining the impact of power relationships and resistance as 
contextually determined mechanisms on workplace relations and the outcomes 
of an IT intervention 
 Critical Post Modernism, challenging the modernist concept of continual 
progress towards a remote ideal by challenging the ideal itself. 
The separation between the interpretive and the critical paradigms is conceptual rather 
than real, and not all interpretive authors (eg. Walsham, 1993, Doolin, 1998) have been 
able to avoid critical contamination of their interpretive perspective. 
The uniting concept is constructionism, defined by Crotty (1998 ; p.42) as the view 
that all knowledge, and therefore all meaningful reality as such, is contingent upon 
human practices, being constructed in and out of interaction between human beings and 
their world, and developed and transmitted within an essentially social context. 
Contemporary criticism, according to Hirschheim (1985), focuses on three principal 
weaknesses of logical positivism : 
 Dependence on theory : theory-laden language distorts social exchange 
 Dependence on deduction : limits the basis from which ideas can be developed 
 Actual practice of science subverts espoused values : focus on scientific ritual 
rather than the quality of knowledge produced. 
Lyytinen and Klein (1985) regard information systems and their design as opportunities 
for a powerful elite to exploit both computers and people for instrumental purposes. The 
intrusion of power is the point of departure of a critical from an interpretive reading of 
information systems. 
Stahl (2005) identifies an agonist view of society and a critical intention to change the 
status quo as defining characteristics of critical research.  
In the critical paradigm (Brooke, 2002a, 2002b, 2002c), the individual is emancipated 
from the collective. The balance of importance afforded to salient issues differs 
according to contingency. Generalities are deconstructed into sets of events whose 
relationship is a matter of coalescence rather than consequence. Critique challenges 
ideas which are salient to individuals but are presented as if they ought to be the 
dominant concern of all parties under all circumstances. Hierarchies of ideas are 
identified, the language of their expression is questioned and underlying assumptions 
are exposed and challenged by alternative perspectives.  
Brooke (2002a) outlines three major tasks for critical research : 
 To investigate the nature of phenomena at local levels 
 To critique taken for granted assumptions 
 To develop relevant knowledge and practical understanding that enables change. 
Brooke (2002c) summarises the critical project in terms of power, resistance and 
emancipation. The discovery and elimination of distorted communication is a prelude 
to emancipation. Various authors (for example : Mumford, 1995 ; Varey, Wood-Harper 
& Wood, 2002 ; Stahl, 2006) have been concerned to inject an ethical dimension into 
information systems design and to develop a critical information systems ethics. 
Ethical Information Systems 
It is a moral challenge for those engaged in the implementation of information systems 
to identify the ethical basis for the actions they take. As Walsham (1996) argues, an 
ethical basis for action goes beyond issues of duty to the client and to professional 
colleagues (Oz 1992) or to the data subject (Mason, 1986). 
Walsham identifies four problematic ethical issues for Information Systems : 
 Conflicts between duties and good means / ends 
 Good Information Systems practice 
 What sort of person should I be ? 
 Rights of groups. 
Each of these issues derives ultimately from the idea that each issue in the relevant 
argument has an absolute rationale, independent from personal situation or perspective. 
The political and irrational aspect stems from the ways these different issues are 
experienced, balanced and disputed by individuals. Wood-Harper et al. (1998) 
demonstrate how these perspectives are knitted together in an ethical conflict web by 
mapping the stakeholders in the Problem Situation against the issues most salient to 
them, the dominant ethical perspective from which they view these issues, and the 
alternative perspectives which might apply.  
Wood-Harper, Corder & Byrne (1999) provide a practical example of this mapping and 
propose four principles of ethically situated information systems development. These 
are paraphrased as follows : 
 Priority of ethical over technical reasoning  
 Priority of discretion over direction 
 Even distribution of ethical benefits and risks 
 Ethical stance explicit at all stages. 
Moral arguments, based on asymmetry of power and influence between individuals and 
communities of people, have counterparts in the relations between ideas. These operate 
at an abstract level but become highly practical when translated into expensive clusters 
of machinery to affect the conduct of work. This is even more the case when the work in 
question is healthcare.  
3.2.6 : Positivist, Interpretive and Critical Social Theory 
Positivist Social Theory : Comte and Durkheim 
Comte and Durkheim are credited with the positivist project, to discover an 
intellectually rigorous science of society based on naturalistic laws (Hughes and 
Sharrock p. 93). 
Durkheims project was to demonstrate the coercive force of social facts by making 
and correlating statistical observations. For example, Durkheim made correlations 
between categories of people in social groups and rates of suicide. Then he deduced 
categories of suicide and used his observations to deduce conclusions. His conclusions 
became more robust as corroborative evidence was accumulated. 
Durkheims urge to treat social facts as things reflects a concern for explanations 
which focus on social structure as an extrinsic constraint on human agency. 
Interpretive Social Theory : Weber 
Crotty (1998 ; p.67-71) explains that Weber, like Durkheim sought rigorous 
explanations for regularities in social behaviour.  
Where Durkheim had aimed to identify social laws with coercive effect, external to 
the individual, Weber was concerned to identify how these effects were exerted through 
human agency in the form of human behaviour and motivation at the level of the 
individual. Weber developed the formulation of ideal types : a method to caricature 
the outcome of persons acting under a common motivation and choosing suitable 
means to the ends they have in view (Crotty, 1998 : p.70). 
Weber distinguished social behaviour directed towards traditional social hierarchy, 
emotional affiliation or common values from conduct directed towards rational goals. 
Whilst interested in social structure, he was also interested in the social norms, values 
and beliefs that hold social structure together. 
Walsham (1993 p.5) states, Interpretive methods of research start from the position that 
our knowledge of reality, including the domain of human action, is a social construction 
by human actors. He continues by associating context, processes of change and the 
intellectual processes of human actors in the social construction of meaning. 
The interpretive paradigm contains major strands focused on hermeneutics, 
phenomenology and symbolic interactionism (Walsham, 1995).  
Critical Social Theory : Marx, Habermas, Foucault 
Burrell and Morgan (1979 ; p. 284) describe the purpose of criticism : to reveal society 
for what it is, to unmask its essence and mode of operation and to lay the foundations 
for human emancipation through deep-seated social change. It is an overtly political 
philosophy, in that it stresses the need to follow the logic of ones philosophical and 
social analysis with practical action of a radical kind. 
 Marx  
Practical action of a radical kind is redolent of Marx. The philosophers have only 
interpreted the world in different way. The point is to change it. (see Crotty, 1998 ; 
p.117 : Warburton, 1998 ; p.186). For Marx, human social action was not determined by 
the existence of universal social laws with Durkheims coercive force, but by the 
historically rooted material conditions of production (Warburton, 1998 ; Ch. 19). 
Materialism replaced idealism : In direct contrast to German philosophy, which 
descends from heaven to earth, here we ascend from earth to heaven .. we begin with 
real, active men .. Life is not determined by consciousness, but consciousness by life 
(see Crotty, 1998 ; p.117). 
The legacy of Marx has been to question what it is commonly stated ought to be the 
case, to begin from what empirically and patently is the case, and then to work towards 
a radically reappraised conception of what ought to be the case.  
 Habermas 
Lyytinen and Klein (1985) and Hirschheim and Klein (1989) have based their critical 
perspective on the theory developed by Jurgen Habermas. 
Following Habermas Theory of Communicative Action, Lyytinen and Klein (1985) 
distinguish first between purposive-rational action, oriented to success, and 
communicative action, oriented to agreement. 
Second, they distinguish between social interaction and asocial, instrumental action. 
Instrumental action is solely oriented to success or purpose.  
When social interaction is purposeful or success oriented, using decision rules and 
empirical technical knowledge, it is termed, strategic. Strategic action can be 
overt or covert. 
If social interaction is oriented to agreement, it is termed, communicative.  
Communicative action may be oriented towards understanding, ie. to determine the 
premises on which a particular proposition is based. If these premises are challenged 
and debated, communicative action assumes the form of discourse. 
Lyytinen and Klein say that Habermas rejects scientistic attempts to define the 
universe as a set of facts, which are independent of the observer and his or her action. 
They then describe how Habermas distinguishes between three knowledge interests 
(Table 3.2.3) : 
Table 3.2.3 : Habermas Knowledge Interests 
 Foucault 
Brooke (2002b) suggests that the critical perspective has become unduly identified with 
a single individual (Habermas) and that the perspective can usefully be enriched, 
especially in relation to the twin themes of emancipation and power, by reference to an 
alternative oeuvre, that of Michel Foucault.  
Technical  purposive, rational, control oriented ; cause and effect ; scientific 
method. 
Practical communicative : understanding of values and norms ; hermeneutic, 
socially constructed understanding. 
Emancipatory  discursive ; power and unwarranted constraints  reflection, criticism of 
assumptions. egalitarian distribution of effort and reward between 
stakeholders.  
As explained by Giddens (2001 ; p.675-676), Foucaults central theme is the role of 
discourse in power and control within society. Communication is conducted in forms of 
expression biased towards the interests of one or other elite. Discourses become a 
powerful tool to restrict alternative ways of thinking or speaking. Knowledge becomes 
a force of control. 
 Comparing Habermas and Foucault 
For Brooke (2002b), the first point of comparison is between Habermas normative 
concept of an ideal speech situation and Foucaults position, situated in the context 
of the economic relations of production and networks of linguistic signification.  
Habermas envisages progress towards the elimination of instrumental and strategic 
communication and the establishment of a purely rational basis for communication and 
complete mutual understanding. In contrast, Foucault sees that power pervades all social 
relations and all communication is distorted, because it disguises the concerns of an 
elite as norms and matters of neutral fact.  
For example, Saravanamuthu (2002a) considers Business Process Re-engineering (the 
management fad of the 1990s .. for maximizing efficiency and returns) to represent 
a sinister and cynical form of coercive practice in which managements dominant 
economic rationality, threatening the balance of employment and unemployment, and 
the quality of work and its content, is disguised by the rhetoric of the sovereign 
consumer (or, in the case of the NHS, patients choice). 
Brookes second point of comparison arises from the greater detail in Foucaults 
analysis of power. That is sensitive to juridical (repressive rules and mechanisms of 
power) and microphysical (methods of domination and the exercise of power) forms 
of power. 
Doolin (1998) amplifies Foucaults concept of disciplinary power. According to 
Foucault, Doolin states, power is exercised from within the social body. His 
disciplinary power operates by enhancing the calculability of individuals. It is 
constantly exercised by surveillance, observation and comparative measures that 
reference the norm. Disciplinary power relies on the individual constantly to compare 
his personal actions against what can be made visible against the background of societal 
or organisational norms.  
Information Technology is one way this visibility can be established and awareness of 
this potential can colour the way IT is integrated with other norms and values in the 
social context of its use. Doolin illustrates this point with an example of a hospital 
casemix system and its impact on the behaviour of clinicians. 
Stahl (2004) uses a market metaphor for the situation where, as Foucault would see 
things, the outcome of discourse is determined by the distribution of social, technical 
and other capital. In contrast, for Habermas, the ethical and egalitarian conduct of 
discourse should ensure that the best argument will win in all circumstances where 
internal inhibitions or external constraints on expression can be eliminated and 
contentious validity claims openly tested for authenticity.  
3.2.7 : Recursive Thinking - The Systems Approach 
The three positivist, interpretive and critical approaches suggest a linear and uni-
directional engagement between the understander and the understood. The fourth 
approach, now considered, alters completely the terms and direction of this engagement.  
In a systemic understanding, neither element can be conceptualised separately from 
the other. Each element reflects aspects of the other and is defined reciprocally or 
recursively (Greenhalgh, 2009) by the other. 
Characterising The Systems Approach 
Applying the approach of Orlikowski and Baroudi (1991) to Checkland (1993), 
Checkland & Scholes, 1990), Checkland & Holwell, 1998) we can characterise the 
systemic approach as follows : 
Knowing : Positive, interpretive and critical modes of knowing are in recursive 
relationship with each other. There is no absolute and authoritative knowledge. Instead, 
knowing consists of the construction of alternative insights, equally defensible, 
equally contestable and equally useful (Checkland, 1993 : p.283). 
Being : Being is always in relation to  some other entity or concept 
(Checkland & Holwell, 1998: p.110).   
Theory and Practice : Theory is focused on parallel strands of rational, cultural and 
political modes of thinking. The practical impact is to present alternative constructions 
of any given situation for comparison, contrast and iterative re-modelling (Checkland & 
Scholes, 1990 : p.27-53). 
Assessment of Systemic Thinking : Systems Thinking considers entities as 
constituents of a larger whole. It is concerned with the mutual influence 
(communication), potential inequalities in influence (hierarchy and control) and in the 
behaviours of the collective whole that cannot be anticipated from knowledge of its 
constituent parts (emergence) (Checkland, 1993 : p.75). 
Philosophical Background to Systems Thinking 
Checkland (1993 : p.74) describes the failure of reductive, scientific methods to the 
solution of complex, ill structured problems :  
"the inability of reductionist science to cope with various forms of complexity. 
Systems thinking is an attempt, within the broad sweep of science, to retain 
much of that tradition but to supplement it by tackling the problem of irreducible 
complexity via a form of thinking based on wholes and their properties which 
complements scientific reductionism." 
 Analytic Reduction : Descartes 
This section begins paradoxically with Descartes conceptual separation of his mind 
(which certainly exists because he is thinking) from his body (which his radical 
scepticism continues to doubt) and all other physical realities. Descartes subsequently 
extended this separation to divide each of the difficulties that I was examining into as 
many parts as might be possible and necessary in order best to solve it. (Discourse on 
Method : see Checkland, 1999 ; p.45-47). 
 Inquiring Systems : Leibniz, Locke, Kant, Hegel, Singer, Churchman 
Churchman (1971) identifies five kinds of inquiring system relevant to the question, 
whether human processes of thinking could be replicated in an intelligent machine. The 
five types of inquiring system are explained by Checkland (1981 ; p.258-261), Mason & 
Mitroff (1973), Mitroff (1973), Ulrich (2004) and Malmsjo (2006), as well as by 
Churchman himself. The individual philosophers to whom they are ascribed are also 
explained by Collinson & Plant (1987), Richardson & Courtney (2004), Robinson & 
Groves (2004). Each kind of inquiring system describes a different mode of thinking 
for the problem solver. 
A Leibnizian inquiring system is an internally consistent set of rules, arguments and 
procedures, founded on a proposition which is neither open to debate nor susceptible to 
proof or falsification. 
A Lockean inquiring system is one whose propositions are founded on consensus, 
between those experiencing a phenomenon, about the interpretation to be assigned.  
A Kantian inquiring system reflects the realisation that human cognitive processes are 
interposed between the thing itself and the individuals appreciation. A different 
cognitive lens will produce a different appreciation. 
A Hegelian inquiring system makes progress towards complete rational understanding 
by iteration through three stages. A proposition (thesis) was to be followed by a counter 
proposition (antithesis). The two competing propositions were then to be reconciled 
(synthesis). Hegels theme is, in fact, an ever expanding wholeness. 
Hegel believed that the state was an expression of complete rationality. Its members fell 
into four ideal types. 
The Citizen was governed passively by the laws of the state and had no concept of 
liberty. 
The Person was, in contrast, fully conscious of liberty. 
The Victim was completely self-absorbed, isolated from and irrelevant to the tide of 
historical events. 
 Monod and Boland (2007) provide a brief summary of Kants adjudication in the Critique of Pure 
Reason, that The Critique is not in error when it teaches us to take the object in two different senses : as 
appearances, and as the thing in itself.  Kant used the Greek noumenon to denote the thing in itself, 
independent of observation and unknowable. He used the term, phenomenon to denote the 
appearance constructed in the human mind from empirical sense experience. Access to the noumenon 
was achieved only through the phenomenon. 
The Hero was fully aware, able to exert influence and change things for the better and 
able to participate fully in the historical moment, uninhibited and unconstrained. 
A Singerian inquiring system follows Hegels tradition by arguing that each alternative 
philosophical tradition can be swept into a progressively comprehensive whole, 
whose boundaries and horizons expand infinitely to accommodate each new element. 
The mood of the project is heroic : not directed but carried forward by ideas as they 
emerge. Its corollary is that what ought to be the case can, through well-informed 
human endeavour, be brought within the realm of what is the case. 
 Extension to Inquiring Systems : Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty 
Bennetts and Wood-Harper, (2003) have proposed an extension to Churchmans 
inquiring systems in order to incorporate hermeneutics and phenomenology, choosing 
Maurice Merleau-Ponty (see Collinson and Plant 1987 ; p.245-249 : Macann, 1993 ; 
ch.4) as the relevant epitome. It is for his attack on Cartesian dualism however that 
Merleau-Ponty is best known. (Macann, 1993 ; p.195).  
Others (eg Winograd & Flores, (1986): Ciborra (1998, 1999, 2006), Ciborra & Hanseth 
(1998), Butler (1998), Butler & Murphy (2007), ODonnell and Henricksen (2002)) 
have depended on Heidegger to provide the conceptual basis of their own ideas. 
Macann (1993) sets out the respective phenomenological projects of Husserl, Heidegger 
and Merleau-Ponty. An introductory reading of Heidegger is also presented by Wrathall 
(2005). 
Husserls project was to understand the intellectual processes through which experience 
is constructed from reality. By bracketing the factors contributed to current 
experience by past experience, he could appreciate the essential structure of the 
phenomenon. 
In this, Husserl was influenced by Dilthey, who believed that human understanding 
reflects a world view grounded not in the intellect but in life. The events in life are 
ephemeral. The world view is provisional and contingent on the tide of past events. 
History, for Dilthey, is an immense field of ruins (Crotty, 1998 ; p.94).  
Husserls effort to strip away perception from reality still owes a debt to Descartes and 
the first point of departure from this tradition is made by Heidegger, in association with 
Gadamer. 
For Gadamer, interpretation of experience is conditioned by language, itself conditioned 
by the preservation amid the ruins of time of its traditions by a community that has 
built the language around its own common experiences, traditions and prejudices 
(Crotty, 1998 ; p.94). Gadamers concept of understanding as a fusion of horizons 
suggests partially intersecting islands of historically effected consciousness, each 
separately conditioned by its unique prior exposure to experience, tradition and 
language.  
Heideggers departure from Husserl stems from his own belief that we are thrown 
into a world that is already present and which is bounded by time. Experience is 
inseparable from contingent effects. When we use a tool, we are using it in order to 
a specific purpose. Place and time bear heavily on existence in a way that defies the 
concept of clear and distinct ideas. In Macanns words (1993 ; p.87) there can be no 
free-floating apprehension or comprehension of the world or of entities located in the 
world.  
In Heideggers view, technology, such as a hammer or an information system, is just an 
object of contemplation (present at hand) until it comes into being by virtue of being 
used (ready to hand). Present at hand, it represents the necessary aspect of its own 
being. Ready to hand, it now represents an actual aspect of its being but this state has 
come about through the users projection, on to the tool, of the future possibility of 
being, represented by the fusion of horizons, shared by the user and the technology. 
In practical terms, this must mean that a designer cannot construe an information system 
to be for a purpose conceived in isolation from the context of the user and the 
possibilities for his own self-fulfilment. 
Merleau-Ponty takes things further. It is impossible to take a Gods eye view of the 
world because our capacity for experience is centred in a body, itself situated in a 
restricted zone of time and space. Merleau-Pontys investigations in physiology and 
clinical psychology confirm that movements and actions are organised at a pre-verbal 
level before they are expressed in language.  
The emphasis now falls upon embodied action rather than disembodied purpose, and 
upon the succession of the present moment rather than, as for Heidegger, the future 
possibility of existence. The practical significance of Merleau-Pontys thought is to shift 
the problem solvers attention : away from the purpose of technology, defined in a way 
that expands or restricts human potential, and on to the interaction of the technology 
user with the technology and his concurrent activities, in a fluid context constituted by 
an endless succession of present moments. 
3.2.8 : Antipositivist Social Theory (Structuration and Actor Network Theories) 
Structuration Theory 
Giddens (1984) rejects structuralist assumptions that peoples conduct is governed by 
mechanical laws, motivations and constraints ; and with functionalist explanations 
that suggest that people are passive in a teleological or homeostatic way, to maintain the 
internal stability of a society (or an organisation) and maintain its viability against 
extraneous threats. He argues (p.1), it is a weakness of these conceptions of society, that 
they emphasise the social whole over its individual parts (i.e., its constituent actors, 
human subjects).  
What he thinks matters is neither the experience of the individual actor, nor the 
existence of any form of societal totality [i.e. social structure], but social practices 
ordered across space and time (p.2).  
Giddens thinking is influenced by the ideas contained in phenomenology, symbolic 
interactionism and ethnomethodology. The central theme is social reflexivity. People 
do social action consciously (discursive consciousness), sub-consciously (practical 
consciousness) or unconsciously, but, in each case, knowledgeably, interacting with a 
specific situation (1984 ; p. 4-7, 22-23).  
For Giddens, people in social groups and societies are never completely powerless 
against stronger agents. Power within social systems .. presumes regularized 
relationships of autonomy and dependence between actors .. But all forms of 
dependence offer some resources whereby those who are subordinate can influence the 
activities of their superiors. This is what I call the dialectic of control in social systems. 
(1984 ; p.16).  
Contrary to Durkheim, "Structure is not 'external' to individuals : as memory traces, and 
as instantiated in social practices, it is in a certain sense more 'internal' than exterior to 
their activities .. " (1984, p.25). 
As conscious social actors, individuals in a social situation deploy their own resources 
to adjust the balance of power. The resources they use include the interpretive 
schemes they use to link communication with meaning (signification) ; the 
authoritative and allocative resources which permit and facilitate the exercise of 
power and rights within unequal relationships (of domination) ; and the social norms 
and values which mediate between constraints or the sanction of action and ideas of 
what is permissible (legitimation). 
Actor Network Theory 
Where structuration theory treats different social and organisational groups as 
homogeneous, Latour (2005) makes the point that sociologists interested in conflict 
have tended to underestimate the number of actors.  
Actor Network Theory (see essays by Law, Latour, Mol, and Callon in Law and 
Hassard, 1999) affords equal explanatory power to inanimate (actants) as to human 
actors. Actors may be members simultaneously of multiple networks of commitment 
and may shift affiliation between these.  
Law (Law & Hassard, 1999 : p.3-9) emphasises relational materiality (entities come 
into being through their relationships with other entities) and performativity (coming 
into being is a process rather than an event). The consequent fractionality implies that 
coming into being is coming into being-in-the-world and can have multiple forms 
according to the variety of contingent effects. 
Callon (1986) explains how networks are stabilised through four moments of 
translation : 
1. Problematisation : A convinces B that Bs action requires As resources. 
2.  Interessement: A prevents B from considering any alternative resources. 
3. Enrolment : A sets the conditions under which B will receive resources. 
4. Mobilisation : As relationship with B is replicated in other instances of B. 
Translation is a process before it is a result. The result is not necessarily permanent. 
As a result of successful translation, A has succeeded in recruiting multiple instances 
of B to his prescribed routine. The network remains stable until the final moment, 
Traduction, when instances of B begin to respond to other networks of commitment 
whose stability will be equally transient. 
Latour (2005) explains that, as technology diffuses, it encounters the intersection of 
actor networks, each with its own social culture. In this way, when the insertion of 
technology is replicated from one local site to another, each local actor is differentiated 
by the unique constellation of actor networks to which he also belongs. 
Inanimate objects contain the inscribed assumptions of one actor or group within the 
network, about the characteristics or future behaviour of other actors or groups, to 
whom they are linked by the inanimate object in question in the process of enrolment.  
As actants, technology (for example, computers and software) becomes a vehicle for 
powerful stakeholders to project their own assumptions onto the behaviour of multiple 
communities of less influential users, across the lifetime of the capital investment. 
Technology becomes a device for the powerful to stabilise the network around their 
own preferences. 
However, the theory also explains how distance, time, human interpretation and local 
priorities modulate the assumptions, inscribed by the systems author, about the 
systems ideal operation, when it is transplanted from the context of design into 
successive and differentiated host communities.  
Latour (2005) reassembles the social by addressing five sources of uncertainty. 
First, a given position (such as a person about to perform an action) can be reached from 
an infinite variety of antecedent positions. Second, there is no point motivation : 
action is the resultant of multiple forces. Third, the relationship between actor and role 
(or information system and context) is not considered as a cause and effect hierarchy, 
but as an equitable exchange. Fourth, the field of interest is not the frozen relationship 
but the surrounding processes of association and dissociation. Finally, these processes 
are not inevitable chains of consequence, but result from human behaviour, contingent 
on local circumstances. 
Latour then performs three moves. To begin, he localises the general. The general, 
abstract idea is brought down to the level of a specific location and context. Second, he 
redistributes the local. Idea, location and context are made inseparable. Finally, he 
connects sites. At different times and places, analogous patterns of association can 
have different outcomes. Latour asks himself how similarities and difference between 
outcomes can be explained. 
Finally, Latour makes three observations and questions how they come about. First, 
agency is transported across distance and time by connectors. He wants to know what 
they are and how they work. Second, there are different kinds of agency. Some forms 
are inert intermediaries and others are active mediators. He wants to know how they 
act. Finally, different connectors are not continuous with each other. He wants to 
know how they come together and what happens when they come together. 
3.2.9 : Critical Realism : A Unifying Paradigm  
for the Information Systems Discipline ? 
Denzin and Lincoln (2000, page 165) propose a post-positive paradigm, in whose 
critical realist ontology, apprehension of reality can only be imperfect and 
probabilistic.  
Mingers (2004a) has suggested that critical realism can provide a consistent and 
coherent underpinning philosophy for Information Systems as a significant step 
towards resolving the multiple strands of Information Systems theory. 
For different reasons related to their different perspectives, Monod (2004), a physicist, 
and Klein (2004), a social theorist take issue with this claim.  
Critical realism accepts the reality of entities whose existence cannot be observed 
directly, but which can offer plausible insights into the relationship between an event 
such as an information system and the successful or unsuccessful outcome of its 
application.  
As Mingers explains (2004a ; p.92), critical realism locates the conditions of knowledge 
in the structure of reality rather than in the intellectual apparatus of the observer. It asks 
the (transcendental) question, Given a particular empirical observation, what can the 
world be like to allow this to occur ?. The method of critical realism is neither 
induction nor deduction but retroduction. Instead of believing in a structure of 
physical laws, critical realists look for generative mechanisms and the positive or 
negative interference of extraneous factors p.(94-95). 
Possible answers to the transcendental question operate at two distinct levels. 
At the level of ontological realism things are held to exist whether or not we know 
about them. They are not altered by our knowledge of them.  
Where nave realism stops short at this point, critical realism proceeds to take full 
account that knowing is an individual act of intellectual processing. At the level of 
epistemological relativism, this means that we have separate reality from 
representation. 
Critical realists expand the idea of causation, giving it complex content and rendering its 
components susceptible to analysis. The relationships between the components of 
causation are not necessary but contingent. The components are real. They can be 
augmented, vitiated or unaffected by each other, and by changes in the actual external 
conditions in which the empirical observation occurs. 
Mingers Thesis 
Empiricists cannot observe without introducing the effects of their observational 
apparatus (p.90). Conventionalists (with beliefs based on social convention rather than 
verification or falsification) only know what can be expressed within the current 
orthodoxy. Neither approach deals adequately with the central position of politics in 
social research, manifest in the theory-laden aspect of language in social discourse. 
Critical realism takes account, first, that many attributes are only intelligible within the 
context of a social institution or practice. Second, many activities and social institutions 
(for example, language) exist, and have their own system of implicit values, before we 
deploy them for our own purposes. 
Nevertheless, critical realism also has to take into account that social structures do not 
exist in isolation from the activities they govern, nor from social actors conceptions of 
what they are doing. Unlike laws of natural science, social structures, are not universal 
but are situated in space and time. Where natural science deals with closed systems, 
social systems are interactive and open, and cannot be artificially closed for the purpose 
of experiment.  
Critical realism allows investigation to go beyond description and to invite speculation 
on explanations at a granular and correspondingly rigorous level. Second, it admits 
social as well as physical explanations of observed phenomena. Third, it recognises that 
observations are fallible and requires a detailed account of the assumptions and 
limitations of the intellectual framework that underpins observation and interpretation. 
Monods Critique 
Monods (2004) chief objection to Mingers is that contemporary physics has progressed 
beyond the notions of objectivity and causality, enshrined in the outdated physics of 
Galileo and Newton that critical realism purports to overcome. The twin fundamentals 
of classical science (objectivity and the correspondence theory of truth) have been 
deposed by two new principles.  
First, the deterministic concept of cause and effect has been superseded by a broader 
conception, that the relationship between events can take more than one form 
(conditions of possibilities). 
 In other words, they refer to a particular place and occasion. 
Second, the idea that scientific truth was accessible through the progressive refinement 
of a single, definitive method has given way to the appreciation that different scientific 
methods provide different scientific truths. 
Kleins critique 
Klein (2004) argues that critical realism does not sufficiently acknowledge the 
developments in contemporary criticism. He needs critical realism to take account of 
four philosophical intellectual turns that have influenced contemporary philosophy 
and the science of Information Systems. 
The first two of these are Kants Copernican Revolution : the understanding that what 
we perceive and what exists are separated by the limitations of our own cognitive 
apparatus ; and Kuhns understanding that the politics of science can be as influential as 
its methods in shaping beliefs. 
The third is the linguistic turn that has followed Wittgensteins exposure of the 
complex link between language and meaning that impregnates neutral communication 
with prior theory.  
The last is the double hermeneutic in social science : through their own theoretical 
lens, social scientists observe and interpret the behaviour of knowledgeable social actors 
who are, themselves, observing and interpreting the world around them. Once again, 
social scientists observations of social actors are inevitably conditioned and loaded 
with prior theory which must be made explicit before conclusions can be drawn. 
Klein argues (p.130-132) that critical realism specifies the kinds of things that can exist 
in the world less efficiently and less comprehensively than interpretivism. Critical 
realisms post- positive roots limit its scope to statements that are susceptible to 
falsification. Therefore, it cannot address social values, norms or ethical questions. 
Then, Klein suggests that critical realism is not based on realism at all. Answers to the 
transcendental question (what must the world be like for this a given empirical 
observation to have been brought about ?) are based on theoretical constructs.  
Where the vocabulary of critical realism is restricted to mechanisms, interpretivism 
has a richer vocabulary of human intention or a priori theory constructs such as 
structuration theory, instrumental reason, communicative distortion, forms of social 
control, etc. (p.134). 
For Klein, three issues restrict the usefulness of critical realism. First, critical realism is 
critical only in opposition to the verification principle of logical positivism. Second, 
critical realism requires awareness of the double hermeneutic when it is applied to the 
social sphere. Third, critical realism is uncritical of the ethical issues addressed in 
critical theory. 
Despite these shortcomings, Klein acknowledges that critical realism has the capacity to 
be enriched by incorporating the four philosophical turns Klein has identified, and 
their most recent developments.  
Mingers defence  
Mingers (2004b) accuses Monod of translating questions about what exists into 
questions about the limitations of our knowledge of what exists. He insists that we can 
believe in real things, yet appreciate that what we know about them is conditioned by 
our own personal cognitive apparatus. 
To Monods concern is that there can be no knowledge without a knower, whose 
perceptions influence what is known. Mingers retaliates that knowledge must be 
knowledge of something.  
To Monods contention that cause and effect are outdated concepts, Mingers responds 
that critical realism recognises the complex nature of causality and can recruit other 
traditions outwith positivism to reinforce its exploratory and explanatory power. These 
other traditions illuminate both aspects of the double hermeneutic : the researchers 
own cognitive filter, which modulates his perception of empirical observation ; and the 
understanding of the relationship, between social actors and the social, cultural and 
power structures of the world they inhabit, that go beyond the conscious self-
understanding of individual subjects.  
In response to Klein, Mingers insists that critical realism has indeed engaged with the 
four turns Klein indicates. It can derive knowledge of generative mechanisms from 
non-positivist perspectives. In consequence of its access to the critical as well as the 
interpretive paradigm, critical realism can, after all, satisfy Kleins concerns about its 
ability to deal with non-rational (norms, values and ethical beliefs) as well as rational 
factors. 
3.3   :   T H E   P R O B L E M   S O L V I N G   M E T H O D O L O G Y 
3.3.0 : Introducing Methodologies and Models 
Iivari, Hirschheim & Klein (2001a) distinguish between a methodology and the 
techniques it contains. The methodologies evident in the Information Systems literature 
map to a smaller number of approaches. In turn, these map to the four paradigms 
identified theoretically by Burrell and Morgan (1979) and empirically by Hirschheim 
and Klein (1989). 
Jayaratna (1994 ch.2) appreciates the context purpose of methodology, to place a 
construction on the problem situation, and its content purpose, to help solve the 
problem itself. He recognises that the purpose of each design step, intended to produce a 
change of state in the problem situation, is more important than the step itself. Jayaratna 
identifies several important aspects of methodology : 
 An emphasis on structuring rather than structure 
 The rationale behind the structuring process 
 The nature of the embedded model 
 Philosophical assumptions underpinning the methodology 
 The characteristics of the methodology creator versus the characteristics of the 
methodology user. 
Jayaratna (p.43) distinguishes between a methodology and a framework. Methodology 
authors have tended to present their successes and understate their failures. Their claims 
need to be tested against a methodology-independent framework that can help us to 
understand the area of problem solving, understand the structure, steps, form and nature 
of the methodology, and frame our conclusions. 
He defines methodology as an explicit way of structuring ones thinking and actions. 
Methodologies contain models and reflect particular perspectives of reality based on 
their embedded philosophical paradigms. A methodology must show what steps to 
take, how those steps are to be performed and, most importantly, the reasons why the 
methodology user must follow those steps and in the suggested order. 
On the other hand, a conceptual framework is a meta- level model through which a 
range of concepts, models, techniques, methodologies can either be clarified, compared, 
categorised, evaluated and/or integrated. A methodology differs from a conceptual 
framework in that a methodology always implies a time-dependent order of thinking 
and/or action stages. 
Taylor, Moynihan and Wood-Harper (1998) discuss the advantage of using a 
methodology to embed quality assurance and to enforce discipline and clarity of 
expression in writing, coding and documentation. Substitution of evolutionary formal 
design processes by trial and error and rapid development methods risks a lack of co-
ordination, standards and documentation that create problems for the subsequent 
support of the new system.  
The disadvantages of methodology use include time, effort and overhead costs. A 
methodology can be inflexible and impose steps, sometimes, without convincing 
evidence of need. The methodology overhead has to be balanced against the local and 
the organisational benefit. There is a danger that methodology is used to satisfy the 
requirements of external regulators, auditors and inspection authorities instead of 
responding carefully to the ways n which information technology will be used (Horton 
& Wood-Harper, 2006). 
The standard design methodology for government information systems in the United 
Kingdom is SSADM (Structured Systems Analysis and Design Methodology). It 
embodies a series of mandatory steps that must be recorded in detail for the purpose of 
project control.  
Wastell (1996) describes the results. The methodology becomes a fetish : a self-
sufficient surrogate that represents psychologically and substitutes a real experience. 
SSADM generates mountains of paperwork for review. Developers become so 
absorbed in technique that end users are sidelined. Wastell identifies a tendency to 
over-rely on the structure, to let the method think for thempeople get bogged 
down.they lacked the confidence to say look were getting into too much detail 
here, . For many users, the methodology is rather a means of social defence 
(Fitzgerald, 1998 refers to the comfort-factor), in an environment of accountability, 
risk and stress, than a positive tool for successful design.  
Fitzgerald (1997) distinguishes between methodology in theory and methodology in 
use. Experienced designers tended not to use methodologies rigorously. This was not 
because they were ignorant of their existence but because they used the methodologies 
in a conscious and deliberate fashion, adapting their approach to the situation in hand.  
On this view, methodology is either a barrier or a bridge between a designer/theorist and 
a practical design problem. The specialised activities within a formal methodology can 
become institutionalised as a core competence of the IT developer and contribute to 
what Flynn and Jazi (1998) call the user-developer gap. 
Kautz et al. (2007) identify diversity, knowledge and structure, operating at 
successive organisational levels, as persistent problems that confront information 
systems developers and require specific responses. They say that the diversity of 
challenges needs to be reduced through the division of labour and by formalisation and 
specialisation of roles. This requires knowledge, local and special, to be acquired and 
disseminated through constant communication and negotiation. Structured approaches 
to organisational and technical problem solving need to be applied pragmatically 
alongside a well-developed situational awareness. 
Models 
A difference has been suggested above, between prescribed methodologies and the 
things that happen in practice. The methodology is a model for behaviour. 
Jayaratna (1994 ; p.242) defines a model as a complete and coherent set of concepts 
which can underpin our understanding and actions. 
Where a mimetic model reduces physical structure, a conceptual model, simplifies 
conceptual structure. In either case, a model is only a selective representation and never 
completely is the thing it purports to represent.  
A model may be a physical object in its own right. As such, it may represent a physical 
reality or an idea. The physical model is distinct from the individual responses it elicits, 
in people with different prior experiences and personal conceptual apparatus.  
These responses are neither inherent in the model nor pre-programmed into the human 
psyche. They are evoked by a mental model, of a thing or a situation, shaped by a blend 
of individual personal interpretation and social convention.  
A textual or visual representation of the mental model may be more or less successful in 
expressing the mental model itself, simply because linguistic theory interposes a pre-
verbal phase of cognition between sensory experience and expression. 
A Critique of Models and Methodologies 
Ciborra (1998) argues that we have been solving problems longer than we have been 
making models and constructing methodologies. Flexible infrastructures are more useful 
and more realistic than master plans. Formalistic methods have the severe limitation, 
that they are constructed from post-rationalisation of past experience, and deployed 
before the problem is defined. 
In Ciborras view, the reductive method of science distances the model builder from 
reality. Abstraction is mistaken for reality. We come to believe the model and ignore 
the interface between the model and the messier aspects of reality it ignores. 
In other words, a model is an idealised form of a poorly structured world. We must 
beware of imputing formal properties to an ideal proposition. We need to treat the 
model sceptically and retain the ability to see things as they are. Rather than idealise 
and behave as if the situation is the model, we ought to focus on the things that do not 
fall together in a neat plan. A model ought not to be a substitute for careful 
improvisation. 
We can conclude, from Ciborras argument here, that a good model or methodology is 
not like a magic wand but is an aid to careful and conscious navigation through the 
problem situation.  
Planned action is idealised action. Elsewhere, and Ciborra (1999 ; Ciborra & Hanseth, 
1998) argues that planned action, without regard for current context, is neither a usual 
nor a successful strategy. Successful navigation through the problem situation is what 
he terms, "improvisation". Technology is both understood and misunderstood as a 
"tool". 
Misconstrued, a tool has a distinct purpose and can be well adapted for that particular 
purpose. This works well when the stereotyped task is simple and well defined. 
Properly understood, a tool is a resource, able to be deployed for the unpredicted needs 
of the moment and whose improvised use is not limited by preconceptions about its 
purpose. Such preconceptions occur when we see technology as "a distinct source of 
representation" (Ciborra, 2006), limiting its potential application to what has been 
anticipated in advance of experience. 
Hughes and Wood-Harper (2000) present four propositions about information systems 
development methodologies, each from the situated perspectives of system developers, 
then from those of their industrial clients. 
First, methodology users vary in their experience (from novice to expert : Benner, 
1984). This affects whether they use the methodology as a resource ready to hand or 
present at hand : whether it is incorporated into action fluidly, expertly and intuitively, 
appropriate to the task or whether adherence to the methodology is seen as an end in 
itself, relegating the primary task to the background.  
Second, methodology users apply a process of sense making (Jayaratnas mental 
construct and the interplay of problem situation, problem solver and problem solving 
methodology) that mediates the conversion of a methodology in theory to a 
methodology in action. 
Third, methodologies are tailored to the contingencies of a situation. Action is tuned 
primarily to the pace of the problem situation rather than to the stringencies of an 
externally-stipulated plan. 
Finally, the comfort factor aspect of methodology use can prioritise defensive practice 
and transparency over relevance to the task in hand. 
These four propositions are not only highly relevant to the use of methodologies and 
models in the Information Systems field. They are also highly relevant to the use of 
decision support tools (clinical pathways, prescribing support) in clinical medicine and 
to their agency in the enrolment of clinicians in the actor networks of managers, policy 
makers, pressure groups and politicians. 
3.3.1 : Towards a Taxonomy of Information Systems Models and Methodologies 
Lyytinen (1987) recognises three issues in the development and use of information 
systems : 
 Balance of economic-rational and human factors 
 Approach to design and development and choice of paradigm 
 Definition, attainment and ethical validity of IS goals. 
Three Categories  
Mingers (2003) states that all methods (methodologies) have in common the basic 
mechanism of modelling, but  differ in terms of what they model (ontology), 
how they model (epistemology), and why they model (axiology).  
He classifies methods, therefore, as follows : 
 What the method purports to do : eg. Soft Systems Methodology is a method to 
explore different world views relevant to a real world situation and contrast 
them in a process of debate 
 What it assumes to exist (ontology) 
 How it is represented (epistemology) 
 Four dimensions of axiology : What kinds of information should be provided ; 
Where should information come from ; Who is the information for (analyst, 
facilitator, participant in the problem situation) ; What is the information for  
(eg. to learn about and improve a problematic situation by gaining agreement 
on feasible and desirable changes) ? 
Having classified a given methodology as above, Mingers can then map its approach to 
appreciation, analysis, assessment and action onto the matrix shown in Table 3.3.1.  
Table : 3.3.1 : Analysis of Methodology (Mingers, 2003) 
 Appreciation 
Analysis of Assessment of Action to 
Material 
(positivist) 
physical 
circumstances 
underlying 
causal 
structure 
alternative 
physical and 
structural 
arrangements 
select and test 
alternatives 
Personal 
(interpretive) 
individuals 
beliefs, 
meanings, 
emotions 
differing 
perceptions, 
personal 
rationality 
alternative 
conceptualisations 
and construction 
generate 
accommodation 
and consensus 
Social 
(critical) 
social 
practices, 
power 
relations 
distortions, 
conflicts, 
interests 
ways of altering 
existing structures 
generate 
empowerment 
enlightenment 
Mingers own categories (material, personal, social) correspond broadly with the 
positivist / functionalist, interpretive and critical paradigms, discussed earlier. 
Four Areas of Application : Competency Areas in Information Systems 
Iivari, Hirschheim and Klein (2001b) identify four competency areas whose 
understanding assists the process of aligning IT with the organisation and its people, 
in contrast with the more instrumental and manipulative concept of fitting. 
The first of these is the organisational alignment of IT (focusing on fit between IT and 
the social and organisational context rather than organisational objectives. Second, they 
identify the construction of user requirements. The third area is the implementation of 
IT within an organisation. Finally, they identify the evaluation and assessment of IT 
artefacts. 
3.3.2 : Modelling the Problem Situation 
Positivist Models, Suggesting Material Structure and Function 
One approach to the problem situation is to reduce it to the intervention of information 
technology into the organisational structure of the NHS.  
Mintzberg (1993) presents an organisational model which emphasises internal 
functional differentiation. Its spine contains the strategic apex, the middle line and 
the operating core, flanked by the techno-structure and the support services. 
Where the strategic apex is concerned with the detection of trends in the external 
environment, the formulation of policy and the strategic redeployment of material, 
human and financial resources, the role of the middle line is to create and maintain 
structures of communication which assure the realisation of apical policy through the 
productions of the operating core. The middle line is responsible to promote efficient 
liaison between elements of production, supervise their problem-free interaction, to 
detect when things are going wrong and to restore stability. 
The techno-structure, in an NHS organisation, is constituted by the professional systems 
of knowledge, skills and values that underpin the physical delivery of healthcare that 
occurs after the patient has been assimilated by the administrative and clerical functions 
of the operating core. Support services ensure the integrity of plant and the continuity 
and resilience of business and clinical processes. 
Where Mintzbergs model appears closed against external influences, Beers (1972) 
cybernetic, viable systems model explicitly incorporates organismic sensitivity to the 
external environment. 
This model contains a vertical hierarchy of repeating horizontal structures. Operations 
and management sectors are demarcated at each successive level, sensitive to each 
other, to the external environment (eg labour market, commodity supply and demand). 
and to external regulation. Horizontal units are linked vertically, exclusively through 
management sectors.  
A third model, due to Leavitt (See Jayaratna, 1994 : p.59) portrays an organisation as an 
encounter between people and structures, tasks and technology. The intervention and 
implementation of new technology can be understood and evaluated at any 
organisational level through its impact on these elements. 
Interpretive Models, emphasising the Process of Structuring : Structuration 
Theory 
Walsham (1993) discards organisational metaphors built around the structural and 
functional conceptions of organisation as machine or as organism in favour of those 
which present the organisation as a culture or a political system (see Morgan, 1997 ; 
ch.6,7).  
In his analysis, the content of change is secondary to the context and process of change. 
He aligns (p.60) context with theories based on social structure and function, and 
process with social theories based on individuals and interactions. Then he uses 
Giddens (1984) structuration theory as an analytic bridge to establish context-
process linkage. 
Structuration theory (Figure 3.3.1) links Walshams context of action (social 
structure) and process (content of social (inter)action) through modalities. 
Communication, use of power and permissive sanction (aspects of process/interaction) 
are linked respectively to structures of signification, domination and legitimation 
(aspects of context/structure) by their respective modalities (interpretive schemes, 
allocative and authoritative resources, and cultural norms) (Giddens, 1984 ; p.29 : 
Walsham, 1993 ; p.61).  
Figure 3.3.1 : Structuration Theory : the Duality of Structure and (inter)Action 
through Modalities. 
Critical Models, Stressing the Ambiguity of Identities, Relationships and 
Hierarchies : Actor Network Theory 
The National Programme has represented the intention to introduce a standard 
information technology to multiple non-standard sites. Walsham (2001) applies Actor 
Network Theory to studies of global technology transfer, at individual, group and 
organisational levels, across geographical and cultural boundaries.  
Doolin and Lowe (2002) argue that Actor Network Theory is a valuable adjunct to 
critique because of its power to demonstrate the ambiguity of identities, relationships 
and hierarchies. 
Hanseth et al (2004) argue that structuration theory provides powerful insights into 
interpersonal or intersectoral relationships but is less powerful than Actor Network 
Structure Structures of 
Signification 
Structures of 
Domination 
Structures of 
Legitimation 
Modalities Interpretive 
Scheme 
Facility Norm 
(Inter) Action Communication 
Power Sanction 
Theory to address the fluid relationship, between information technology as designed 
and information technology in the situated and occasioned context of use.  
Critical Models Exploring the Inter-Sectoral Distribution of Power : Power Circuit 
Theory 
The expansion of governing influence across geographical and administrative 
boundaries is a global aim that is only partially relinquished when power is devolved 
from the centre within a tight framework of accountability. Regulation, to suppress 
contingency and expunge unacceptable variation in practice, is used by centralised 
authority to extinguish local social organisation and behaviour and assert a model which 
is basically colonial. 
However, Silva (2007) recognises that events and interpretations of events are situated 
in the context of surrounding conditions (place, time, history of surrounding events) and 
occasioned as special rather than general occurrences. Even power is relational : not 
possessed by any individual but present in the direct and the indirect or symbol-
mediated relationships between individuals.  
Silva distinguishes between rules (social structure) which determine individual 
behaviour, the interpretation of rules which enables individual action (choice of 
behaviour), and power. Power, the non-rational basis of rules, operates overtly to lay 
down rules but also operates covertly to modify or implicitly discipline individual 
choice. Choice is intrinsic, where power to modify choice is an extrinsic influence on 
the individual. For Silva, information systems are key instruments of control and 
they can radically change work tasks which will impact workers identity. 
To explore the relationship between information systems and power, Silva assesses the 
relative merits of four approaches : 
 Phenomenology and Hermeneutics 
 Critical Theory 
 Structuration Theory 
 Power Circuit Theory. 
Phenomenology and Hermeneutics highlights power derived from the ability to 
influence other peoples interpretation of things and events but it does not lead to a 
concrete theory of power that can help researchers in gathering concrete data capable of 
depicting a rich picture of the power phenomenon.  
Critical Theory holds, according to Silva that technological artefacts are the result of 
political struggles, so they are the carriers of specific interests. This is a move beyond 
establishing the source of power in its ability to modify action, and towards the 
exploration the effects of power. Silva points out that Lyytinen and Klein (1985) 
specifically identify user resistance, alienation and lack of use as negative effects of 
power. 
Structuration Theory is criticised by Silva for two principal shortcomings. First, it 
operates at a rarefied, meta-theoretical level, unencumbered by local data. Second, its 
focus on the mutual constitution, dissolution and reconstitution of social structure and 
social action tends to overshadow enduring background relationships, dominated by 
powerful influence. This is especially the case when IT artefacts are present as carriers 
of specific interests to perpetuate the prior outcomes of political struggles.  
Having criticised these first three approaches, Silva now seeks, in Power Circuit 
Theory, a theoretical framework to provide analytical concepts on power that are 
linked to data. Power is not possessed by an individual but comes into being each time 
a relationship between individuals is instantiated. There are three circuits : episodic, 
social and systemic. 
 Episodic circuit, actor A has power over the actions of actor B. Power is 
translated in four moments. 
5. Problematisation : A convinces B that Bs action requires As resources. 
6.  Interessment: A prevents B from considering any alternative resources. 
7. Enrolment : A sets the conditions under which B will receive resources. 
8. Mobilisation : As relationship with B is replicated in other instances of B. 
 Social circuit : A has capacity to exercise power and discretion not to use power. 
Bs choices are limited by the possibility that A might exercise power. 
 Systemic circuit : A determines the societal goals that will direct Bs efforts.  
Silva concludes that power circuit analysis excels over the other approaches cited 
because it provides specific and detailed insight into the operation of power and 
political action within the social processes of information systems implementation. 
Critical Models Relating to the Control and Facilitation of Work : Operative and 
Supportive Information Systems 
Cecez-Cecmanovic et al. (2002) make a distinction between information systems that 
support the subordination of one interest by another, and systems that support the fullest 
expression of each individuals personal professional motivation (Table 3.3.2). 
Table 3.3.2 : Critical Comparison of Information Systems Rationale (Cecez-
Cecmanovic et al., 2002) 
Perspectives Ontological Assumptions 
 Work is where the individual is 
subordinated to the collective 
goal, idealised as a system. 
Work is where each 
individuals personal goals and 
motivations are realised.  
Individual 
Perspective 
Power is openly distributed. A 
dominant individual or elite 
expresses Instrumental and 
Strategic rationalities. 
Individuals express personal, 
Substantive Rationality. 
Collective 
Perspective 
There are hidden asymmetries of 
rhetoric, information and power. 
The language and content of 
discourse are value laden. 
Communication is distorted 
and rationality is only Quasi-
Communicative.  
There are no hidden agendas. The 
collective allows uninhibited 
expression to all parties and there 
is Communicative Rationality. 
Malmsjo (2006) distinguishes operative from supportive information systems. 
Operative information systems support hard, formal processes of positivist reasoning 
which treats information as a transmissible commodity with physical properties 
independent from individual experience. On this view, information can be assembled, 
stored, processed, delivered and retrieved.  
Supportive information systems support soft processes of anti-positivist reasoning, 
whereby individuals continuously construct and refine a mental model. On this view, 
information is an individualistic process, based on comparison of new information from 
the external environment with prior learning.  
According to Malmsjo, operative and supportive types of information system differ 
according to the characteristics, shown in Table 3.3.3. 
Table 3.3.3 : Operative and Supportive Types of Information System 
Operative Systems 
Supportive Systems 
necessity information is necessary for 
the process to continue 
the process can continue without 
the information supplied by the 
supportive system 
users information roles are tightly 
coupled with occupational 
roles 
similar information roles may be 
performed by a variety of 
occupational roles 
purpose system purpose is evident and 
formalised 
system purpose is not precisely 
defined 
information 
availability 
the information contained in 
the system is available 
nowhere else 
the information contained in the 
system can also be found from 
other sources 
3.3.3 : Modelling the Problem Solver 
Hard and Soft Models of the Problem Solver 
Checkland and Holwell (1998 ; p.41-49) identify Herbert Simon and Sir Geoffrey 
Vickers as contrasting epitomes of the problem solver. Simons hard, functionalist 
approach is characterised by analysis and decisive choice between binary alternatives in 
definite and permanent relationship. Vickers soft, appreciative approach represents a 
perpetual accommodation between competing and conflicting pressures in which the 
relationship between one idea and another is fluid and open to modification by other 
ideas. 
In Checklands terminology, hard problems are concrete and well defined. They are 
amenable to rational analysis through a pre-ordinate methodology. The paradigm is 
decision making. In contrast, soft problems are ill-defined and have substantial social 
and political undercurrents. The paradigm is navigation between competing scenarios : 
more an exploratory approach than an explicit plan, and the associated methodology 
tends to be an emergent one. 
Systems and Systems Thinking 
Checkland (1981 ; p.72-86) explains that systems thinking deals with sets of interacting 
elements and considers these sets as irreducible, self-contained wholes. In this way of 
thinking, entities are not considered to exist independently and are defined only in 
relation to each other. In particular, "Systems thinking is founded upon two pairs of 
ideas, those of the emergence and hierarchy, and communication and control." 
(Checkland, 1999 ; p.75). 
Hierarchy refers to the ability of one subsystem to achieve primacy over another. 
Emergence refers to the ability of the assembly to achieve effects that cannot be 
predicted from the individual properties of its members. 
Systems are considered to have an internal dynamic. Stability is maintained through 
communication between interacting elements. Some actions and interactions are self-
reinforcing, accelerating departure from an original state (positive feedback). Control 
negates this tendency, through hierarchy (the capacity of one element to override 
another) and the damping effect of one interaction upon another (negative feedback). 
The natural state of a system is one of more or less damped oscillation rather than 
complete stability. The intervention of delay (inertia), between the initiation of the 
conditions for interaction and the interaction itself, can affect the amount and the rate of 
change, and the direction of departure or return towards the original state. 
When the systems environment is neglected, the system is treated as a closed system, 
impervious to the effects of external events. In contrast, an open system is highly 
sensitive to the effects of external events, modulated by passage across the system 
boundary.  
Chaos refers to the tendency of some systems to experience dramatic shifts of state. 
However, this term does not imply randomness, the complete absence of order. Any 
state of a chaotic system is ambiguous : it can be reached from more than one set of 
antecedent conditions (path dependency) and its transition from this state to the next is 
contingent on the alternative behaviours of its sub-systems. This uncertain tendency 
interferes with an observers ability to predict events within the system. 
Systems with large numbers of elements and interactions are complex, in distinction 
from simple systems. Complex systems are often chaotic and the chaotic tendency is 
increased by openness to environmental effects. Openness to the environment and the 
flexible nature of the distinction, between what is to be incorporated within and what is 
to be excluded by the system boundary, create problems for a universally valid 
definition of any given instance of a system. 
When complexity contains observable regularities it is chaotic. The infinitely 
numerous potential states cluster around a smaller range of stable zones or attractors. 
Variables can be relatively few, but each contains a statistical range of values. McBride 
(2005) explains chaos theory as follows : 
 Chaotic behaviour does not indicate a lack of order. Rather, the order is 
difficult or impossible to describe in simple terms  
 Chaotic systems react significantly to ..  (changes in their external 
environment)  .. and shift between a number of semistable states. It is the -
study of this fluid behaviour that gives rise to significant insights. 
 Variables associated with the system do not repeat values although they remain 
within a fixed, definable space. 
 The complex interactions between actors and technology that occur in the 
development of IS strategies and the development of organizational changes in 
response to information systems may be open to interpretation within a chaos 
theory framework. 
The observation that variables cluster within a fixed, definable space is summarised in 
the concept of a strange attractor. Over time, values of the variable can move abruptly 
from one strange attractor to another. This effect is conditioned by what has happened 
already, either within the system or within the context in which the system is set. 
Because of this, a given state of the system, social or physical, can be reached from a 
variety of starting conditions, yet the same starting conditions can result in a variety of 
final states. Tiny influences can have profound effects. Sequence and correlation 
between events do not necessarily imply causation. 
Problem Solver as Systems Thinker 
Senge (1990) appreciates systems thinking (the fifth discipline) as the integrating 
factor that establishes coherence between four other disciplines. This approach to 
systems thinking aims to identify the point of leverage where a small scale 
intervention can have a significant and worthwhile systemic effect on the efficiency of 
an organisation. 
Senges own expression of the five disciplines is amplified by Bell and Wood-Harper 
(2003). 
 IS : Information Systems. 
Personal Mastery establishes control over events and constraints by virtue of clear 
vision and commitment to results. Mental Models allow participants to be aware of 
their own personal perceptual apparatus and the perspectives of others so that they can 
become aware of alternative mental models. The rich pictures and CATWOE 
components of SSM fall within this category. Shared Vision expresses destiny and 
aspiration. The vision is developed by ensuring that all relevant voices and ideas are 
taken equitably into consideration. Team Thinking entails thinking beyond personal 
boundaries and interests to consider issues in wider context. The result is the growth of 
mutual confidence, honest disclosure and organisational capacity to act differently. 
Seen as the keystone for these four disciplines, Systems Thinking enables each 
individual whole, defined by its own boundary, to be seen as part of a larger whole. 
There is a continual, critical awareness of boundaries and a willingness to reset these 
inwards or outwards without losing sight of the bigger picture or neglecting local 
detail. Seeing local issues in their systemic context is key to the anticipation of systemic 
consequences from local action. 
Checkland notes that Churchman had discussed inquiring systems in an ontological 
sense as if they existed in concrete form. Senges treatment of systems appears similar. 
Checkland carefully points out that, in his own conception, systems thinking, the 
characteristic activity of the systems thinker, is conducted in an epistemological sense, 
as a way of conceptualising a situation metaphorically, using the language of systems, 
without implying the existence of any system in concrete or tangible form.  
As an entity, a system is itself defined in relation to the other entities that constitute its 
environment. The distinction between the system and its environment is not real 
(independent from human cognition). Instead, it is an artificial, human construct and 
depends on human perceptual apparatus. Cordoba (2009) provides a critical account, 
showing the political and ethical importance of the system boundary. The setting or 
definition of a systems boundary is, therefore, open to challenge.  
Problem Solver as Social Critic and Emancipator 
Heinz Klein has been a leader in the application of emancipatory critical theory to 
information systems. The European Journal of Information Systems (anonymous, 2009) 
has invited papers describing Kleinian Information Systems. Table 3.3.4 shows 
conventional theses about information systems and the Kleins own antitheses. 
Table 3.3.4 : Kleinian Information Systems 
Dimension Thesis Kleins Antithesis 
functionalist 
focus on implementing a 
system 
focus on changing organisational 
relationships 
axiological technical-economic 
considerations are paramount 
ethical considerations are paramount 
emergent the information system has a 
self-contained rationale 
the system emerges as an adaptation to 
the social and political constraints of an 
organisation 
semantical the information system 
merely processes data 
the information system communicates 
meaning which reflects a world view 
Hellenic an information system serves 
the interests of an elite 
an information system can deliver 
democracy through enlightenment 
3.3.4 : Modelling the Problem Solving Methodology in Positivist Terms 
(i) Hard Approaches to Organisational Alignment of IT (Strategy) 
A traditional, positivist or functionalist conception of management information systems 
is provided by Gorry and Scott-Morton (1989), shown in Figure 3.3.2. This framework 
deals with different levels of control (strategic, operational, management) and different 
intensities of data structure. 
Figure 3.3.2 : Gorry & Scott-Morton Framework for Management Information 
Systems 
In this framework, various activities are labelled as varieties of formalistic business 
transaction with no negotiated or political content. The framework presupposes that the 
information system will be integrated within the host organisation without encountering 
problems related to the human component of information systems, yet such problems 
can lead to expensive systems being rejected by users and gradually extruded from 
operational use. Relevant examples from the NHS are provided by Maguire and Ojiako 
(2007), cited earlier.  
Rahimi Vimarlund and Timpka (2009) advise that merely implementing a hospital 
information system will not automatically increase organisational efficiency. Benefits 
are realised when workflows and processes are re-engineered around the new 
information system. Users need time to assimilate the change. Legacy hardware must be 
compatible with the new software and staff have to be educated to encourage them to 
use the system.  
Despite their hard orientation, these authors also acknowledge important socio-
technical issues that hard methodologies usually ignore. They say that end users can 
help developers to understand their every day work practices and feed back early 
implementation lessons. They can develop their own appreciation of the new system as 
a useful tool in their every day working life. 
 Project and Programme Approaches 
Differences between project and programme approaches are set out in Managing 
Successful Programmes (United Kingdom Office of Government Commerce, 1999). 
Thus (ibid : p.12-13), A project has a definite start and finish point, with the aim of the 
delivery of an output that may be a product, service or specific outcome. A programme 
has a vision of the end-state, but no clearly defined path to get there  There are 
inherent tensions between the pressures on projects to complete to time and on budget 
and the need to achieve the wider goals of the programme. The contrast is developed 
further in Table 3.3.4 (ibid : p.13). 
Meanwhile, the document continues (p.37), The fundamental purpose of a programme 
is to transform the organisation in some way, to do things differently, or to do different 
things. The programmes Vision Statement describes the desired outcome of this 
transformation.  
Table 3.3.4 : Contrasting Projects and Programmes 
Project Management Programme Management 
Intense, focused : outputs 
driven. 
Concerned with broadly defined change objectives. 
Closely-bounded, relatively 
certain objectives. 
Multiple, complex activities with fluid and uncertain 
relationships. 
Manages delivery of specific 
product, service or outcome. 
Synergistic. Net benefit exceeds sum of individual 
project benefits. 
Benefits represent an abrupt 
change in state for the host 
organisation at end of project. 
Co-ordinates impact, benefits and deliverables from 
multiple component projects. Changes continue to 
evolve after individual projects conclude. Programme 
conclusion marked by achievement of organisational 
transformation rather than project. termination 
(ii) Hard Models of Design and Development 
 Functionalist Models : SASS and SSADM 
The functionalist conception of requirements construction is provided by DeMarco 
(1979) in Structured Analysis and Systems Specification (SASS). In this methodology, 
business processes and data flows are analysed at progressively more granular levels 
(functional decomposition : Figure 3.3.3) and then rationalised.  
The outcome of the methodology is dictated by the plain logic of business transactions. 
Social and political elements, that might intrude from a new system - implications for 
jobs, redundancy or redeployment - or from the impact of new information systems on 
the nature and quality of work, are deleted from the design discourse. 
Figure 3.3.3 : Functional Decomposition in SASS (DeMarco, 1979). 
Universal Modelling Language [UML] (Booch, Rumbaugh & Jacobson, 1999) 
associates a de-contextualised, ideal typical actor, and his associated role, with a 
specific function of the information system in a use case. The language provides a 
convenient notation to describe entities, their attributes, relationships and state-changes, 
as well as complex sequences of events, activities and combinations of activities. 
The archetype of information systems design methodology in the United Kingdom 
public sector is Structured Systems Analysis and Design Methodology (SSADM). Not 
surprisingly, it and the related PRINCE (Projects in Controlled Environment) project 
methodology are intended to safeguard probity and control in the use of public funds.  
In PRINCE (United Kingdom : Office of Government Commerce, 2009), a technically 
complex project is broken into stages with controls and milestones so that risk in any 
stage is carefully controlled before moving to the next stage. For each stage, a technical, 
a business and a user co-ordinator are appointed. The stage is not concluded and 
progress to the next stage cannot occur, until all three co-ordinators have signed off. 
However, the complex negotiations that can confront the user co-ordinator are not 
guided by the methodology. 
SSADM itself contains a similar cascade of modelling steps, each completed before the 
next begins (Table 3.3.5).  
The opening feasibility study is conducted along rational-economic lines. The social and 
political analysis of change is eliminated from consideration and relegated to a 
relatively late stage of the implementation process. As Checkland and Holwell (1998 ; 
p. 121-124) point out, the strategic business need for the system and its affordability by 
the organisation are settled before there is a clear understanding of the operational 
problems that interfere with business efficiency, and the reconfigurations of people and 
processes that a new system might support. 
Table 3.3.5 : SSADM Modules, Stages and Activities 
Feasibility 
Study 
Stage 0  
Overview. Data Flow Diagrams and high level Logical Data 
Structures, describing the present business.  
Requirements 
Analysis 
Stage 1  
Data Flow Diagrams and Logical Data Structures used to produce 
detailed logical models of current system.  
Stage 2  
Identification of future business system options, supported by 
development of relevant Data Flow Diagrams and high level 
Logical Data Structures. The preferred option is chosen. 
Requirements 
Specification 
Stage 3 More detailed development of Data Flow Diagrams and 
Logical Data Structures for the preferred option.  
Development of Entity Life Histories (eg, new patient, diagnosed 
patient, treated patient, discharged patient). 
Logical System 
Specification  
Stage 4 selection of best option to classify, store and circulate data.  
Stage 5 detailed analysis of transactions to be undertaken by people 
operating the new system. 
Physical Design  
Stage 6 configuration of hardware and programmes.  
(iii) Hard Models of Implementation 
Lyytinen and Robey (1999) argue that, to succeed in implementing their information 
systems, organisations have to convert barriers to learning into gateways to learning 
and organisational problem solving and abandon three myths. The barriers include 
interdepartmental rivalries and isolation as well as unwillingness to declare and learn 
from error. The myths are : 
 Technical fix : technique and technology are sufficient to create organisational 
improvement 
 Silver bullet : intervention can be successful without prior diagnosis 
 Organisational restructuring : changing structures without changing interactions, 
dialogues and discourses is sufficient. 
Bygstad et al. (2010) define big bang, stakeholder, technical and socio-
technical ideal-typical patterns to describe the integration of new information systems 
with the existing technical, organisational and human context. Each has specific 
strengths, weaknesses and risks that undermine any universal preference.  
The distinction is useful to identify alternatives to an unreflective, big bang 
implementation and to direct attention to potentially neglected aspects of 
implementation. 
 Information Systems Success 
The DeLone and McLean success model (2003) is shown in Figure 3.3.4. The model 
contains links between seven dimensions of success which, together, are held by its 
authors to define the information systems fitness for purpose. 
Figure 3.3.4 : DeLone and McLean Success Model 
This model is useful because it places the quality of a good information system 
alongside the twin needs, to provide intelligence for performance management 
(information quality) and the need to assist performance itself (service quality). For the 
front line user, it represents usefulness (intention to use and actual use) and usability 
(user satisfaction). 
However, information systems exist amid an organisational and political culture that can 
be modelled and shaped (Oliver and Memmott, 2006). The collaborative workplace may 
be local or dispersed across a wide geographical area. The model ignores these aspects. 
Despite its plausibility, Van der Meijden et al. (2003) could not encompass within the 
DeLone and McLean model all the dimensions of success or failure they could identify 
from an extensive literature review of clinical information systems.  
The model neglected four arguments. The organisational structure to deliver the 
information strategy was ineffective unless linked clearly with the overall structure of 
the organisation. The workforce needed to be adequately informed and engaged. 
Successful systems reflected designers adequate understanding of work practices. 
Task-structure fit was an important factor in the success of electronic clinical activity 
recording and coding and for computerised entry of physicians orders. 
Expanding the concept of task-structure fit, Joshi & Rai (2000) link the quality of an 
information system to users job satisfaction through three pathways. The primary, 
direct pathway provides information that is accessible and fit for the users purpose. It is 
supported by two subsidiary pathways. The role conflict pathway reflects the 
alignment of computer-related tasks. The role ambiguity pathway reflects the 
accessibility of information that assists task clarity. 
 Critical Success Factors 
Bowns, Rotherham & Paisley (1999) were commissioned by the United Kingdom 
Office of Public Management to undertake a literature review of factors critical to the 
success of NHS information systems projects. Table 3.3.6 shows the factors they 
identify. 
Table 3.3.6 : factors critical to the success of NHS information systems projects 
(Bowns, Rotherham & Paisley, 1999) 
Organisation 
Culture Enabling, adaptive culture. Decentralised decision making. Sensitive 
influence by managers rather than attempted control of professionals. 
Strategy Alignment of business, human resource and information strategies. 
Aware of gap between government policy and organisational practices. 
Project 
Management 
roles 
Decisive role to initiate the project. Continuing supervision during 
implementation. Encouragement of user involvement and users 
readiness to change work practices. 
Organisational 
change 
Association of new information systems with new work practice. 
Phased familiarisation with information technology eg through use of 
e-mail. Realistic timescale for implementation, maturity and 
evaluation. Flexibility of information system to meet users evolving 
needs. Adequate financial resource. 
Human 
resources 
Overcome clinicians scepticism of information systems projects. 
Overcome job insecurity. Identify practical, clinical as opposed to 
financial incentives. Adequate training. 
Stages Adoption , implementation, post-implementation stages. 
Environment 
Political Avoid excessive central guidance. 
Technical Scepticism in the face of suppliers performance claims. 
Commercial Distribution of risk between purchaser and supplier. Realistic approach 
to quality control of in-house development. 
Legris et al. (2003) examine a factor model of information technology acceptance, 
finding that, although many factors could be isolated, categorised and correlated with 
technology acceptance, the predictive and explanatory power of the model was severely 
restricted. Here, technology acceptance is isolated from individual experiences and 
occasions of use, and is reduced to the status of a quantity, rather than understood as a 
succession of superficially similar events, encountered by people acting under subtly 
different sets of demands, constraints and choices. 
Berg (1999a) believes it is impossible to consider analysis, design, implementation or 
evaluation in isolation from each other. IT and work practices generate each other. 
Rather than present prescriptions for success in the form of critical success factors, 
Berg thinks it is better to provide useful perspectives which assist understanding but fall 
short of rules. 
 Information Systems Failure 
Several authors (Sauer, 1993; Beynon-Davies, 1999; Fitzgerald and Russo, 2005) cite 
the classification of information systems failure due to Lyytinen and Hirschheim (1987).  
 Correspondence failure failure to fulfil predefined design objectives 
 Process failure failure to produce a system within the 
prescribed time scale and budget 
 Interaction failure failure to gain implementation or satisfy the 
 Expectation failure failure to address salient problems, important 
to a specific stakeholder group. 
Sauer (1993 ; p.24-26) criticises the concept of expectation failure because it fails to 
indicate clearly the causes of failure, or to prioritise the focus of remedial action. He 
regards the four categories of failure as potentially salvageable flaws, whose 
uncontrolled accumulation leads to terminal loss of political support at various 
organisational levels. He restricts the term, failure to the loss of support sufficient to 
bring about the projects termination. (p.27).  
Sauer (1993, p.100) arranges the project organisation, the information system and its 
supporters into a triangle of dependences between the system, its supporters and the 
project organisation. Later Sauer argues that information systems failure is not simply a 
failure of systematic problem-solving, but also stems from uncontrollable environmental 
or contextual factors, to which the three elements of the triangle have been unable to 
adapt. If the contextual problems continue to impose themselves, then the situation 
may become less and less satisfactory, leading the supporters ultimately to a negative 
evaluation and a determination to terminate all support (Sauer, 1993 ; p. 318-320). 
Project supporters encounter constraints which limit their tolerance of setbacks or their 
ability to meet the costs of all expectations. 
Heeks, Mundy and Salazar (1999) have examined the topic of failure in Healthcare 
Information Systems. Their ITPOSMO analysis of success or failure hinges on the 
degree of correspondence between design assumptions and local realities at the point of 
deployment. The seven dimensions of analysis are : Information, Technology, 
Processes, Objectives and values, Staffing and skills, Management and structures and 
Other resources. 
These authors pose questions for future research which focus on : the pressures which 
force managers into one rational choice compared with another ; barriers to adoption of 
best practice ; and techniques to close the gap between design conception and local 
reality. 
 Deployment Challenges 
Pinelle and Gutwin (2006) identify four deployment challenges for information 
systems in loosely-coupled organisations. 
 Central authority is limited. Persisting practices are difficult to eradicate in 
favour of the new system. 
 Role-related perspectives come into conflict. It is difficult to disseminate a 
unitary concept of the new systems value that is relevant in plural sites. A new 
system may challenge existing power relationships and dependencies between 
authority structures or operational units, in ways that will be perceived 
differently according to the advantage likely to be gained or lost. 
 Critical mass is difficult to achieve because of high autonomy and low 
interdependence between the detailed internal processes of operational units. 
Variations in uptake between sites limits the overall effectiveness of the system 
as an integrating device. 
 The distribution of effort and benefit within the global information system is 
unequal. This is especially acute in a fast-paced clinical environment if the new 
approach to a high-volume procedure (such as electronic note-making) 
consumes disproportionate time. 
These challenges accentuate the costs of information systems deployment in healthcare. 
Pinelle and Gutwin make the following recommendations : 
 Use focus groups to confront differences and build consensus 
 Direct development from the operational unit upwards 
 Identify local product champions 
 Align roles and responsibilities to eliminate role-conflict 
 Identify and address inequities early. 
 Managed Implementation : Maturity Models 
Maturity models, discussed by Gillies (1998a) and by Wainwright and Waring (2000) 
facilitate the staged implementation of a business intervention that would, otherwise, be 
too great a change to be accommodated. 
Gillies (1998b) GP Information Maturity Model (GPIMM) assesses the depth of 
penetration of IT into a given general practice. It assigns a maturity level according to 
explicit criteria and then advises managerial intervention required for transition to next 
level (Table 3.3.7). 
In the form proposed by Gillies and Howard (2003), a maturity model approach assesses 
the level of penetration by technology within the host community, considered as a 
discrete entity. It simplifies the web of interactions within the socio-technical system by 
matching organisational core competences, role based contributions and developmental 
stages in a single matrix. The emphasis is shifted from strategies to fit a pre-
determined information system into a stable environment, onto the process of aligning 
an information system with organisational change. 
Table 3.3.7 : Information Maturity Model (Gillies, 1998b) 
Level Designation 
Summary Description 
0 Paper based no computer system 
1 Computerised computers used by clerical / administrative staff 
2 Computerised Primary  
Health Care Team 
computers used by healthcare professionals 
3 Coded limited use of codes 
4 Bespoke locally agreed coding policies and protocols 
5 Paperless paper records to all intents and purposes abandoned 
 Technology Use Mediation 
Davidson & Chiasson (2005) describe factors that mediated the use of information 
technology in a clinical context (Table 3.3.8). These factors operated during each of 
four distinct implementation phases. 
Table 3.3.8 : Technology Use Mediation (Davidson & Chiasson, 2005) 
Implementation 
Phase 
Context IT Mediation 
Establishment 
Staff are introduced 
to the technology and 
shown how it is to be 
used. 
Concerns over cost 
and quality of 
clinical decision 
making, especially in 
relation to lab use 
and prescribing. 
Functions presented 
at a conceptual level. 
Pre-defined order 
sets and pathways. 
Automated alerts 
challenged some 
clinical decisions. 
Appeared convenient 
to use. 
Reinforcement 
Assistance in use, 
encouragement, 
troubleshooting. 
Nurses willing to 
enter data on behalf 
of doctors. 
Strong medical 
hierarchy. Significant 
accommodation of 
doctors preferences 
and convenience. 
Generic screens 
populated with local 
data and prepared for 
differentiated use. 
Some functions 
disabled on grounds 
of workflow 
hindrance. 
Peer to peer 
coaching. 
Adjustment 
Refinement of 
technology, or 
operating procedures 
or clinical processes. 
Legacy systems in 
pathology were 
regarded as state of 
the art. 
Nurses & technicians 
able to consolidate 
lab requests to avoid 
duplication but not 
willing to 
countermand 
physicians 
electronic orders. 
Construction of 
interfaces. 
Lab requests held in 
abeyance to allow 
time for duplicate 
requests to emerge 
and be eliminated. 
Clinical referees 
monitored operations 
and suggested 
revised procedures. 
Nurses & therapists 
empowered to 
introduce local 
variation to standard 
pathways. 
Episodic Change 
eg. New system 
release, 
abandonment, 
replacement. 
Emergence of cross-
disciplinary disease 
management groups. 
Expansion of clinical 
data repository. 
Support from 
managers interested 
in clinical 
effectiveness. 
(iv) Hard Models of Evaluation 
 Dimensions of Quality 
Garvin (1984) contrasts various tangible dimensions of industrial quality, all of which 
take the usefulness and correctness of design specification as given. However, he was 
unable to account for all aspects of quality without invoking a hermeneutic 
(transcendent, innate) dimension, intractable to deeper description or rational analysis.  
Thus, information systems and clinical service quality may be defined along the axes 
shown in Table 3.3.9. 
Table 3.3.9 : Garvins Quality Dimensions related to Clinical Information Systems 
Axis Content 
Product axis Enables predictable outcome of care 
User axis Accessible and relevant, satisfies users preferences 
Manufacturing axis Clinical processes are efficient 
Values axis Responds to concerns for safety and confidentiality of patients, 
and rationality of evidence-based clinical methods 
Transcendent Quality The totality of the patients experience 
 Metrics 
Aggelidis and Chatzoglou (2008) identify user satisfaction, usage and economic 
evaluation as principal approaches to evaluation. They argue that the efficiency, 
productivity and effectiveness of the personnel depend to a large extent on the quality of 
information systems used by organisations and that measurement of users 
satisfaction with information systems may be the most effective of these three 
evaluation methods. 
 Health Technology Assessment 
The primary tool of Health Technology Assessment is the meta-analysis of randomised 
controlled trials. The related methodology of evidence based medicine (Greenhalgh, 
1997 : p.8-11) posits a standard patient or setting, a technology and one or more 
comparators, and one of more functional or economic outcomes. The paradigm is 
reductive and has little power to explain variation in outcomes from similar 
interventions or how to turn an unsuccessful outcome into a successful one. 
Health Technology Assessment (United Kingdom : National Institute for Health 
Research, undated) assesses whether the technology works, for whom, at what cost, and 
how it compares with the alternatives. Walley (2007) explains the goals of Health 
Technology Assessment : to identify relevant technology, define research questions, 
investigate in ways that are useful to policymakers, clinicians and patients, compare 
costs, effectiveness and wider impact in the real world (ie cost- and clinical-
effectiveness) of new technology against established best practice or current NHS 
practice, and to disseminate findings. 
The preferred methodological approach is usually randomised controlled, but very 
pragmatic, trials but Walley recognises the inevitable trade-off between the need for 
rigour and generalisability on the one hand and context-specificity and immediacy on 
the other. 
 Benefits Realisation 
The benefits realisation approach places the implementation and evaluation processes in 
systemic relationship. Thus Managing Successful Programmes (United Kingdom Office 
of Government Commerce, 1999) states: To ensure that benefits are eventually 
realised, they must be positively managed from the start. The successful realisation of 
benefits requires active monitoring of programme and project deliveries (ibid : p.37-
Managing Successful Programmes (p.39-41) identifies the potential scope of 
programme benefits and subjects these to four critical tests of benefit. There must be a 
precise, comprehensible description of the benefit, a noticeable change in the pattern of 
business delivery, a location of benefit within the organisation and a plan to measure 
benefit and its achievement.  
In addition (p.44), the benefits management strategy compares predicted improvement 
with the need for improvement as perceived by those stakeholders to whom the strategic 
group attaches importance. A rational planning approach is adopted to identify 
programme performance indicators, assign responsibilities, and to identify key 
interventions and their organisational consequences and the feasibility of given actions. 
 Randomised Controlled Trials 
Wyatt and Wyatt (2003) suggest the approach to evaluation depends on the prioritised 
list of questions the evaluation is to answer. They suggest three options. 
A Before & After design measures or describes the status quo ante and compares the 
situation after implementation. This type of evaluation is open to bias because there is a 
tendency to afford greater scepticism to the results of negative than to positive 
outcomes. 
A controlled Before & After design compares the development over time of at least two 
completely comparable environments, of which at least one is excluded from the 
intervention. 
The gold standard is a Randomised Controlled Trial. This is carefully designed to 
eliminate the effects of chance, bias and confounding. For some information system 
applications, for example, computer-aided prescribing, it may be feasible to  allocate 
some patients at random, to be treated with or without the agency of the information 
system. 
In each of these instances, the purpose of the study is to test the validity of the 
prediction, that detectable effects will be brought about by the intervention concerned.  
Multiple factors defeated the attempt of Littlejohns, Wyatt & Garvican (2003), to, 
evaluate the biggest medical informatics project in Africa in a randomised controlled 
trial, whose end points were to be improvements in patient care and the management 
efficiency of hospitals.  
Variables that could not be controlled between hospitals ranged from the stability of the 
local electricity supply, concurrent local service developments (new pharmacy and 
laboratory systems), the rate of progress in staff training and external pressures on the 
best prepared hospitals to implement their systems in advance of the trial as a whole.  
The trial had to be downgraded to a before and after design. No significant difference 
was found, in the quantitative outcome values identified, between index hospitals and 
controls but this form of evaluation was incapable of distinguishing the attributes of the 
system from confounding organisational and contingent factors. 
The authors state that the analysis of randomised controlled trials becomes more 
complex as the number of variables examined increases and the boundary of the system 
under trial is expanded to incorporate them, yet the various models available suggest 
that the net must be cast widely to incorporate all factors relevant to success or failure. 
In respect of information systems, randomised controlled trials face changes in 
technology, the clinical environment, the nature of the information that is relevant, and 
the lifetime of the concerns that information systems are required to address. 
When Hunt, Haynes, Hanna et al. (1998) attempted a systematic review of computer-
based clinical decision support systems, no common measure of effect was considered 
to be justified for meta-analysis of the trial results. There was too much variety in the 
systems and trials reported. Meta analysis depends on adequate volume of well-
designed trials, testing highly similar interventions, in similar settings, tested against 
similar, well-specified outcomes. Conclusions on the measured utility of an information 
system in an idealised, controlled setting are difficult to transpose to the real setting, 
where users perceptions of its usefulness and usability influence their intention to use 
the equipment and, therefore, its efficacy. 
Findings such as these have led Greenhalgh et al. (2008) towards the stance that :  
because of the complexity of the innovation, the dynamic and contingent nature of the 
implementation process, and the shifting environmental context, (political, economic, 
technological), complex service level innovations are inherently unpredictable and that 
the search for reproducible effect sizes, mediators, and moderators is likely to 
prove fruitless  The best we can do is to explain what is happening as we observe 
it and reflect on it in a theory driven way. Our goal (which contrasts with that of many 
programme evaluators) was thus interpretation rather than prediction  An 
evaluation approach that aims for interpretation and understanding rather than 
prediction and effect sizes can generate important insights about the mechanisms of 
success or failure in complex change programmes. (Greenhalgh, 2008) 
3.3.5 : Modelling the Problem Solving Methodology in Soft  
(Interpretive and Critical) Terms 
Iivari and Lyytinen (1998) refer to a Scandinavian tradition, defined by anti-
positivism, user participation and action-orientation. Hirschheim, Iivari and Klein 
(1997) and Iivari, Hirschheim and Klein (2000) focus on five non-functionalist 
approaches. The Trade Union approach, focused on distributive bargaining between 
management and trades unions, and the Professional Work Practice approach, which 
distinguishes between the theory and the practice of information systems professionals, 
need not be developed here. The remaining three approaches are more relevant. 
They are : 
 The Interactionist Approach 
 Speech Act Theory  
 Soft Systems Methodology. 
 The Interactionist Approach 
Kling (1980) distinguished six perspectives on computing in organisations. The 
rational and structural perspectives focused respectively on the formal ends and tasks to 
be facilitated through computing (Mingers material category). The human relations 
perspective dealt with the reciprocal impact of computer use and management-employee 
relations (Mingers personal category). Two further perspectives represented the 
political and class-political aspects of organisations (Mingers social categories). The 
interactionist perspective focused on the interaction between people and computers. 
Kling and Scacchi (1982) distinguished between discrete-entity and web models of 
computing activity. Wood-Harper and Wood (2005) associate discrete-entity analysis 
with a positivist perspective and consider the interpretive and critical perspectives as 
variants of web analysis. 
Discrete-entity analysis sets out to establish sources of compatibility and to rectify 
sources of incompatibility without understanding what these sources are or how they 
operate. Kling and Scacchi (1982) identified two major manifestations of this approach : 
the substitution of computer processes for human activity and an aggregation 
approach to development which progressively added new functional capabilities around 
a core technology. 
Web analysis examines the interaction between people and technology as part of a 
larger social and technical mosaic in which the development and use of the focal 
technology is embedded. This approach favours relevance over functionality and took 
a view of relevance which emphasised the individual organisation member over the 
organisation itself. Each individual organisation member was visualised within a 
production lattice of relationships with other individuals and with technologies. Even 
organisations are seen as involved in a larger matrix of social and economic relations. 
Horton, Davenport and Wood-Harper (2005) identify five Big Ideas from Klings 
legacy which, if ignored would constitute obstacles to progress.  
First, the existence of multiple points of view forces an interpretive stance and serves 
to challenge the social neutrality of computer technology.  
Second, the introduction of computers forces social choices and brings their analysis 
into the real domain of time, place and demonstrable social relations so that the 
operation of power and its consequences can be demonstrated.  
Third, the concept of a production lattice shifts the emphasis from the user as the 
source of implementation failure onto the analyst who fails to appreciate the users 
perspective.  
Fourth, Socio-Technical Interaction Networks (of social, economic and political 
interactions) offer a potential basis for advance modelling of the implementation 
situation by deconstructing organisations to reveal what is going on under the surface. 
Klings fifth Big Idea is to identify institutional regimes of truth. These are 
statements about the social world that function as true. They include balance sheets 
and lists of comparative performance indicators and any other descriptor of well-being 
that is used as a building block for discourse within an organisation.  
Institutional truth regimes present only a subset of reality. They can form a basis for 
apparently rational argument but can leave other important facets of reality neglected. 
When, as Zuboff (1998) discovered, employees use computers to informate rather 
than automate their work, they are adducing information that they can use to challenge 
institutional truth regimes. 
 The Speech Act Theory Approach 
This approach, with its arcane vocabulary, is explained by Esa and Lyytinen (1996) and 
by Iivari and Lyytinen (1998). An information system is said to enable acts of 
communication or speech acts, intended to change peoples beliefs, material 
conditions or actions. 
Where other models have focused on the speaker, the Esa and Lyytinen model (3.3.5) 
gives equal prominence to the hearer, who must first understand the speech act and 
its illocutionary content (the speakers expectations of the hearers actions) then accept 
its validity before engaging in mutual commitment with the speaker.  
Figure 3.3.5 : Speech Act Theory : (from Esa and Lyytinen, 1996) 
Context Mutual 
Commitment 
 Effects 
Speaker 
performs 
instrumental or 
speech action 
expressed in 
speech act 
Speaker 
Performs a 
speech act 
Hearer 
Understands the 
speech act 
Hearer  
Accepts the 
speech act 
If action 
needed 
Negotiation about illocutionary 
meaning 
 Negotiation about validity 
claims 
Hearer  
performs 
instrumental or 
speech action 
expressed in 
speech act 
The hearers understanding and acceptance are determined by current and prior aspects 
of context and influenced by factors derived from the hearers own personal experience.  
Speech Act Theory can help us to understand the implementation and presence of 
information systems as a discourse between organisational actors, where the design of 
information systems reflects expectations and exchanges between one group of actors 
and another, as well as exchanges between the world appreciated by the user and the 
world represented within the computer. Its framework has the potential to allow 
exploration of the non-rational as well as the rational aspects of organisational 
communication, both at the stages of information systems planning and operational 
computer use. 
 Soft Systems Methodology 
The development of Soft Systems Methodology (Figure 3.3.6) is described in detail by 
Checkland (1981) and Checkland and Scholes (1990). As a key feature of the 
methodology, Root Definitions of Relevant Systems are defined through the acronym, 
CATWOE :  
 Customers : those who benefit or suffer in the Problem Situation. 
 Actors : those who perform the actions which constitute the Problem Situation, 
or will perform in the reconstructed situation. 
 Transformation : the changes that will transform the Problem Situation into a 
better one. 
 Weltanschauung : the world view of participants in the Problem Solving 
Process. It is determined by the way each separate participant fuses his 
developing interpretation of the Problem Situation with his prior knowledge and 
experience and it has cultural and technical dimensions. 
 Ownership : those whose actions will make or break the transformation project. 
 Environment : influences (for example, the economic climate, legislation, 
technical constraints) outside the span of control of participants that will limit 
participants freedom of action or discretion. 
Figure 3.3.6 : Soft Systems Methodology (Original 7 Stage Model due to 
Checkland and Scholes 1990 ; p.27 
Soft Systems Methodology lays special stress upon the T and the W of CATWOE. The 
aim is to name and then to model a notional system that will transform the problem 
situation. The nature of the transformation to be effected is as much a politically as a 
rationally-defined entity and it is necessary to diagnose and construct the world view 
responsible for this prescription. Part of the modelling process depends on the 
identification on the remaining components of CATWOE, described above. 
Soft Systems Methodology has evolved from the formal set of seven programmatic 
steps shown in Figure 3.3.6, to the looser, recursive plan of Figure 3.3.7, based on 
parallel streams of logic-based (hard, unproblematic) and cultural (soft, negotiable, 
politically complex) analysis.  
Soft Systems Methodology
1 Situation 
considered 
problematic
7 Action to 
improve the 
problem 
situation
2 Problem 
Situation 
expressed
5 Comparison 
between Conceptual 
Models and Real 
World
6 Suggest 
systemically 
desirable, culturally 
feasible change
3 Root 
Definitions 
of Relevant 
Systems
4 Conceptual Models 
of Systems described 
in Root Definitions
the real world
Figure 3.3.7 : Soft Systems Methodology ; Social and Rational Streams of Analysis 
(Checkland and Scholes 1990 ; p.29 
Checkland and Holwell (1998 ; p.10) emphasise that information systems are, 
essentially, systems of purposeful human activity, assisted by information technology. 
The need for information and information technology cannot be understood in isolation 
from the activity system it is to support.   
The stream of cultural analysis is explored through analyses one, two and three 
(Checkland and Scholes, 1990 ; p.29 , p.44-53).  
"Analysis One identifies the dramatis personae of the problem situation : the client 
who wants the situation to change, the problem solver who will bring change about, and 
the people who will be affected by change. Their responses will make or break the 
change programme and the problem solver will need to recruit them as problem 
owners who will commit themselves to the discovery of a successful solution to the 
problem situation.  
Analysis Two examines the roles, values and norms which explain the behaviour and 
actions of clinicians, managers and patients in the problem situation. These factors will 
influence the deployment of the National Programme and the use of its products. 
Analysis Three is concerned with the way power is expressed within the problem 
situation. 
Soft Systems Methodology uses rich pictures (Checkland & Scholes, 1990 ; p.45-47) 
to express the structure, process and climate of the problem situation and to catalyse 
discussion and debate within the problem solving team. Where a decision making 
algorithm shows the logical (syntactical) connections between isolated components, a 
rich picture invites a negotiable understanding of each component in terms of its 
(paradigmatic) relationship with the other components of the systemic whole.  
(i) Soft Approaches to Organisational Alignment of IT (Strategy) 
Greenhalgh et al. (2008) contrast the technology push model (centrally driven, 
rationalistic, oriented to pre-defined, relatively inflexible goals), which had constituted 
the predominant change model applied to the introduction of shared care records in 
NHS primary care, with a socio-technical change model [that] would transform the 
[shared care records] programme substantially.  
They say, Emphasis would need to shift from project management (that is, running a 
circumscribed initiative with a predefined, measurable goal by working systematically 
and solving problems along the way) to programme management (that is, bringing 
together multiple elements in iterative and adaptive ways against an ever changing 
background context, towards a more abstract goal  This goal needs to be 
continually redefined and negotiated throughout the innovation journey but is better 
able to transcend system shocks (such as shifts in technology specification or prevailing 
information technology policy). 
Effectively, this is a proposal for an emergent approach towards fitting the IT 
programme carefully into relationship with the contemporary, formal programmes of 
change that form its context. It is also a shift in emphasis from the structural aspect to 
the (social and political) process aspect of programme theory, which contains informal, 
local as well as formal management agendas. 
As an example of an emergent approach to strategy, Levary (1997) argues that the IT 
programme needs to be geared to align with organisational development, business 
process reconfiguration and the physical re-design of the clinical workspace, but he also 
places the design of the emergency department, to maximise patient satisfaction and the 
enablement of staff performance, in systemic relationship with the design of its IT 
system.  
The bases upon which issues are negotiated and decided are not rational but social and 
political in their nature. Greenhalgh et al. (2008) continue : The skills of project 
management relate to planning, organising, monitoring, adjusting, documenting and 
reporting. Those of programme management include negotiation, sense-making, 
synthesis and, above all, situational judgement. 
 Communicative and Emancipatory Aspects of Information Systems 
The skills in question are open to the critique, based on Habermas Theory of 
Communicative Action (Lyytinen & Klein. 1985), suggested by Hirschheim, Klein and 
Lyytinen (1996). The context of change is presented in terms of positivist, interpretivist 
and critical orientations, The process of change. is described in terms of three 
domains (technology, language and organisation) (Figure 3.3.8). 
The control orientation corresponds with a positivistic view of the world, oriented 
towards control, predictability and planned decision making. A control orientation 
results in the use of language and organising capabilities to direct technology towards 
given ends. A strategic approach manipulates people in exactly the same way, as if 
they were things. The communicative and discursive orientations correspond with 
interpretive and critical approaches. 
Figure 3.3.8  :  Hirschheim, Klein and Lyytinen (1996) framework. 
ORIENTATIONS 
Control Sense-Making Argumentation 
DOMAINS Instrumental Strategic Communicative Discursive 
Technology     
Language     
Organisation     
The resulting matrix provides a critical mirror to reflect the posture of a given 
organisation by defining nine ideal types of strategic setting for context-process 
interaction. 
(ii) Soft Approaches to Design and Development 
 Multiview Methodology 
The authors of this methodology take the stance (Wood Harper, 1985 ; p.175) that a 
methodology cannot be separated from the problem situation and the analysts intention 
and beliefs. The three elements stand in systemic relationship with each other. 
Multiview is, par excellence, a recursive methodological approach. 
Multiview is described variously by Wood-Harper (1985), Antill and Avison (1985), 
Avison & Wood-Harper (1990), Bell & Wood-Harper (1998, 2003). It explicitly 
incorporates Soft Systems Methodology (Checkland, 1981,1999) and the ETHICS 
approach to human-centred job design (Mumford, 1995). The methodology requires the 
analyst / researcher to compare his own stance towards those in the problem situation 
against four ideal-types, modelled on the framework developed by Hirschheim and 
Klein (1989).  
From an original project to bridge the gap between social and technical informatics 
(Wood-Harper, Antill and Avison, 1985), the methodology has also developed as a 
bridge between functionalist, interpretive and critical paradigms and between 
Habermas technical, communicative and emancipatory knowledge interests.  
A revised form [Multiview2] is developed by Avison, Wood-Harper et al. (1998), 
Vidgen, (2002), Vidgen et al.. (2002), Avison & Wood-Harper (2003). In this more 
explicitly hermeneutic form, the problem solving approach is not pre-defined but 
emerges, from problem solvers comparison of the problem situation against their 
interpretive scheme. This lends sense and orientation to engagement. The 
methodology is thus contingent as well as emergent. 
The original form of Multiview is shown in Figure 3.3.9. 
As Multiview has been revised and developed, its presentation as a set of sequential 
steps (Bell and Wood-Harper, 1998; 2003), has given way to their treatment as 
aspects (Basden, 2002, Basden & Wood-Harper, 2006) of a holistic project (Avison. 
Wood-Harper et al., 1998). 
Figure 3.3.9 : The Original Form of Multiview  
The closed system, suggested by the triad of problem situation, problem solver and 
problems solving methodology, has been made into a more complex, open system by 
the revised methodologys adoption of unbounded systems thinking (Mitroff and 
Linstone 1993) : the problem situation is recognised to contain a variety of stakeholders, 
each of whose idiosyncratic Technical, Organisational and Personal perspectives has 
roots in antecedent historical episodes, salient for that person. These perspectives can 
align in a consensual, Lockean way but are equally likely to conflict in Kantian or 
Hegelian (dialectic) fashion. 
Analysis of the 
Problem Situation 
(Soft Systems 
Methodology) 
Information 
Modelling  
(Data Flows, 
Entity 
Relationships) 
Human-Centred 
Job Design 
(ETHICS) 
Human Computer 
Interface 
Technical Design 
and Development 
Figure 3.3.10 Avison, Wood-Harper et al. (1998) shows the revised form of Multiview 
[Multiview2], where the original form constitutes an interpretive scheme, through 
which the problem solvers can organise their world view in order to navigate rather 
than problem solve their way through the problem situation. 
Figure 3.3.10 : Multiview Methodology : Revised Form (Avison, Wood-Harper et 
al. 1998)  
Figure 3.3.11 shows how the revised form of Multiview relates to Checklands twin 
streams of analysis (compare Figure 3.3.7). 
Figure 3.3.11 : How Multiview reflects Checklands Twin Streams of Analysis 
(Avison & Wood-Harper, 1993) 
Figure 3.3.12 shows how the authors place their interpretive scheme in the context of 
structuration theory. 
Figure 3.3.12 : Multiview Reconciled with Structuration Theory (Avison, Wood-
Harper et al., 1998) 
 Socio-Technical Design : ETHICS 
The ETHICS methodology (Mumford 1995) represents a commitment to the ethical 
stance that sees people at work as ends in themselves and not as means to managerial 
ends. It counters the economic rational goals of management by asserting a humanistic 
commitment to peoples control over their own lives at work. It takes the socio-
technical stance, that technology can only succeed when it is mutually congruent with 
the social structures and routines of the workplace. 
Thus, alongside the need for economic efficiency, pursued through automated data 
transmission, and the wish to provide the best information for accurate management, it 
is a key ethical imperative to allow the future users of an information system to 
participate in the design of the information systems that will profoundly influence the 
quality of their working lives. 
ETHICS identifies the following components of job satisfaction : 
 problem solving of a challenging kind 
 freedom to plan own work 
 ability to work independently of others 
 ability to see a job through from start to finish 
 understanding how a job fits into the work of the department as a whole 
 being able to check own work and correct mistakes. 
When staff are treated as means to information ends, the quality of data management is 
likely to be poor because the data are not seen as relevant by the group that inputs or 
accesses them. The subsystems used by each group must, therefore, be able to provide 
the information that each group regards as essential in furthering its work mission and 
major work interests. If this does not happen, these systems are likely to fall into disuse. 
Mumford (1991) identifies the following sources of relevance : pay and promotion, 
esteem of colleagues, job satisfaction, relevance to personal goals, and direct design 
input by future users. It is essential to understand how staff view work priorities before 
starting to design an information system.  
Participation includes users involvement in comprehensive analysis and work redesign. 
ETHICS requires end-users of information systems to accomplish four tasks : 
 identify the problem they would like their information system to tackle 
 specify their information needs 
 set objectives for their system 
 redesign jobs and departments so that the total system can work more efficiently 
and achieve the organisational mission. 
Unless a high degree of organisational democracy is feasible, the purpose of the 
information system is likely to have been fixed before ETHICS is deployed (Mumford 
1997, also Kawalek & Wood-Harper, 2002). Hirschheim (1994) and Saravanamuthu 
(2002b) have criticised ETHICS for too ready an acceptance of managers perception 
that resource constraints will prevent the complete realisation of information systems 
users needs. 
(iii) Soft Approaches to Implementation 
 Understanding Information Systems Change as a Punctuated Equilibrium 
Leavitts model (See Jayaratna, 1994 : p.59) portrays an organisation as an encounter 
between people and structures, tasks and technology(Figure 3.3.13). 
Figure 3.3.13 : Leavitt Model 
Lyytinen and Newman (2008) provide a punctuated socio-technical change model of 
information systems change. Figure 3.3. 14 is derived from their model. The model is 
conceptually rich but centres around the Leavitt model, expressive of fundamental, 
deep structure at the level of management or the workplace. Continuity is 
punctuated when critical incidents cause upheaval. Gaps then appear as (any of 
the) components of the Leavitt model become misaligned and are only closed when 
relationships are reconfigured. 
Figure 3.3.14 : Punctuated Socio-Technical Change Model (after Lyytinen and 
Newman, 2008)  
 Implementation as Technology Transfer 
In the case of organisations involving people, a purely mechanical conception of 
systems is inadequate. The concern is with people and their capacity for judgement, 
intuition, interpretation, collaboration and conflict. Concepts from the physical world 
are only metaphors for the social. 
Individuals 
Processes 
Structures  
(and Groups) 
Tasks Technology 
Critical Incident 
Individuals 
Processes 
Structures  
(and Groups) 
Tasks Technology 
Morgan (1997 ch.8) represents organisations as flux and transformation. Plsek and 
Greenhalgh (2001) use the term complex adaptive systems to describe this metaphor, 
stating, To cope with escalating complexity in health care we must abandon linear 
models, accept unpredictability, respect (and utilise) autonomy and creativity, and 
respond flexibly to emerging patterns and opportunities.  
The organisational image of flux and transformation is reflected in Checklands (1999) 
model of an appreciative system. Checkland sees the Problem Situation as the flux of 
events and ideas unfolding through time. As ideas and events unfold, human actors 
within the appreciative system take actions which, themselves, affect the flux of ideas 
and events. 
Their appreciation of the unfolding situation is conditioned by social values and norms 
(standards) which evolve according to past and current appreciation of the situation 
(Figure 3.3.15). 
Figure 3.3.15 : An Appreciative System (Checkland, 1999) 
Actor Network Theory contains the belief that technologies and artefacts enshrine the 
ideas and intentions inscribed by their authors. When ideas and intentions traverse 
space and time they encounter and are translated by people whose receptivity is 
conditioned and modulated by their individual experiences and perspectives, as well as 
by the culture in which they coexist with other people. Artefacts are not neutral but are 
active (actants) in the mediation between authors and recipients, whose alignment of 
(enrolment) with inscribed ideas is not necessarily complete. 
Figure 3.3.16 reconciles Actor Network Theory  with the theory of appreciative 
systems and shows how artefacts and ideas traverse the spaces between one 
environment and another against the background of elapsing time. In the appreciative 
units which constitute each given environment, imported ideas and artefacts encounter 
and interact with individual people, aligned differently with others according to their 
roles and responsibilities, who have their own prior personal experience and current 
concerns.  
Figure 3.3.16 : Extending the Idea of Appreciative Systems : The Translation of 
Ideas and Artefacts Between Appreciative Systems 
Artefacts Ideas 
Artefacts Ideas 
 Implementation as Technology Adoption 
Andreu and Ciborra (1996) explain the nature of organisational learning required for 
organisations to develop the core capabilities that confer strategic advantage. The 
issues are illustrated in Figure 3.3.17. Core capabilities are valuable, rare, difficult to 
imitate and have no strategically equivalent substitute.  
Figure 3.3.17 : Technology Adoption Model due to Andreu and Ciborra (1996)  
Practices 
Capabilities 
New Resource 
Capabilities 
Strategic Loop 
Capability Loop 
Routinisation Loop 
Business 
Mission 
Explicit 
Management 
Actions 
Tacit 
Workplace 
Adaptation 
Organisational Context and Boundary 
Competitive Environment 
These authors loosely tie the development of core capabilities to lower level, generic 
capabilities through path dependent, idiosyncratic transformation processes in which 
newly-adopted resources are used and combined in workplace routines.  
Developing these capabilities involves organisational learning on two fronts. On the 
strategic front, there is learning about the way resources are supposed to be combined 
and used efficiently, to meet the challenges of the external business environment. The 
neglected second front aims to relate the acquisition of new resources to the 
establishment of new capability. This requires exploration of the substantial tacit aspects 
of the organisational routines and work practices in which new resources are 
incorporated.  
The distinction between the two fronts is summarised in the distinction between work 
as imagined and work as performed (Nemeth, Cook & Wears, 2007). Overall, it is 
not possible to codify all the steps that contribute to the development of a core 
capability, because of this tacit dimension. 
Specific clinical examples include the efforts described by Dourish (2003), to design 
flexibility into placeless documents (i.e. electronic patient records), and the case 
described by Jensen (2006), in which the scenario envisaged by the designer of a nurse-
call system was completely at odds with the systems actual use during the routines of 
work on a real ward, because the role identified by the designer to a designated nurse 
was diffused in practice between the nurse and her colleagues according to the 
contingencies of the surrounding situation. 
Greenhalgh et al. (2004, 2008) describe the use of a Diffusion of Innovation Model to 
assess the introduction of shared electronic records in primary care (Table 3.3.10). The 
model contains a mix of hard and soft elements. Thus, critical success factors 
(organisational antecedents for innovation, communication/influence, wider 
environment) and evaluation criteria (material properties of the technology, attributes as 
innovation) are combined with elements of the change process (implementation and 
routinisation process) and indicators of organisational maturity (concerns of potential 
adopters, organisational readiness for innovation, communications between 
implementation sites). 
Table 3.3.10 : Technology Adoption Model (after Greenhalgh, 2008) 
Elements of the 
Model 
Expansion 
Material 
Properties of the 
Technology 
Includes key functionality and works smoothly & efficiently under 
real conditions of use. 
Attributes as 
Innovation 
Observable (benefit is immediately apparent). 
Better than existing. 
Simple to operate. 
Fits in (with cultural values and ways of working). 
Trialable (can be withdrawn from use).  
Customisable (can be modified and reintroduced). 
Concerns of 
Potential 
Adopters 
Before adoption (costs & benefits of use). 
During early use (how to operate, when to use). 
During established use (scope to customise). 
Table 3.3.10 (continued). 
Communication 
and Influence 
Peer pressure, product championship, propaganda. 
Organisational 
Antecedents for 
Innovation 
Local capacity for leadership, organisational learning and tolerance 
of risk. 
Slack resource. 
Ability to measure effect of change. 
Linkage Early and ongoing dialogue between change agents, developers and 
end-users. 
Sharing of learning within and between institutions. 
Wider 
Environment 
External environment supports or mandates change. 
(iv) Soft Approaches to Evaluation 
An important dimension of the soft approach is the emergence of the methodology 
from a process of learning about the problem situation.  
Thus, the model shown in Figure 3.3.18 (Smithson and Hirschheim, 1998) balances 
efficiency and effectiveness zones against an understanding zone, where the focus 
of evaluation is related to psychological and social relationships between individuals, 
social groups and technology. 
Figure 3.3.18 : Smithson and Hirschheim Evaluation Model for Information 
Systems 
Similarly, Lundell and Lings (2003) argue that the means of evaluation must reflect the 
capacity of the evaluated object to evolve. The context of evaluation affects the 
approach to evaluation. The terms used in evaluation may be interpreted differently 
according to context. 
Insight develops with experience in the field. Application and understanding are linked 
iteratively through learning. 
Their doubly-grounded (2G) frameworks essential feature is that evaluation concepts 
and their relationships are not defined a priori but emerge during the process of 
analysis. The primary (strategic) grounding is in data derived from the internal 
environment of the wider organisation and its external strategic and regulatory context. 
The secondary (pragmatic) grounding is in the dynamics of IT in the workplace. 
Evaluation is inherently a social process, whose politically loaded motivations require a 
critical approach.  Serafeimidis and Smithson (2000) explain that a positivist approach 
to evaluation, exemplified by cost-benefit analysis, addresses technological and 
accounting aspects at the expense of organisational and social aspects. Accordingly, it 
fails to address the elements of uncertainty, risk and context dependencies, based on 
human and social factors, that can threaten the realisation of business benefits. They 
identify several purposes, served by evaluation : 
 Assessment of organisational worth 
 Ranking alternatives 
 Diagnosis to guide planning and control 
 Input to strategy formulation 
 Value to organisational learning 
 Political support and legitimation of the investment 
 Understand the social, cultural and political relationship between an information 
system project and the people in the organisation. 
The variety of evaluation purposes invites a mode of evaluation that is relevant to the 
purpose in hand. Positivist forms of evaluation are limited in their organisational 
relevance. When the focus of evaluation is the success of the information systems 
project as an organisational transformation, the interpretive approach is better suited to 
illuminate the dynamics of the process of change, within the context of change. 
In contrast with the positivist tone of conventional Health Technology Assessment 
approaches, Kazanjian and Green (2002) propose a comprehensive health technology 
assessment framework that incorporates a critical theory perspective, focused on 
inclusivity and equity. Their framework asks : who should be involved in decisions on 
health technology adoption and who is affected by these decisions : what contribution 
does the technology make and what gap does it fill, whose well-being will be affected 
and by how much, and what will be the impact of the technology in different contexts of 
well-being ? The major dimensions of the framework are : the population at risk, the 
population impact, economic concerns, the social, ethical, legal and political context, 
and the role, quality, sources and convergence of the scientific evidence. 
Although Serafeimidis and Smithson (2003) argue the need for business driven forms of 
evaluation, they go on to argue that this must be sensitive to the informal evaluations of 
stakeholders, and the integration of evaluation with the wider organisation and its goals. 
They focus on four evaluation orientations : control, sense-making, learning and 
exploration (Figure 3.3.19).  
Figure 3.3.19 : Four Evaluation Orientations (Serafeimidis and Smithson, 2003) 
Ammenwerth et al. (2003) identify three main problem areas for evaluation : the 
complexity of the evaluation object, the complexity of the evaluation project and the 
motivation for evaluation. 
They propose a framework for evaluation studies of healthcare information systems. 
 Identification & motivation of relevant stakeholders 
 Consensus on evaluation aims and precise specification of the evaluand 
 Methodological steps (planning, execution and analysis of the study) 
 Elaboration of suitable evaluation questions and criteria 
 Selection of appropriate evaluation methods and tools 
 Specification of study protocol and report format 
 Approach to the problem of the moving target : evolving changes in the 
evaluation object, the evaluation context and the motivation for evaluation, 
drifting during the lifetime of the evaluation. 
Organisational Impact of  
Information Systems 
tactical strategic 
consensus/clarity : 
attainable objectives 
control social learning  
Perception of 
Objectives dissensus/ambiguity : 
problematic 
objectives 
sense making exploratory 
Ammenwerth et al. (2004) suggest that evaluation has been undervalued as an activity 
necessary for reflective academic and organisational practice, challenge and reflective 
learning. They advocate the development of theoretical grounding and expertise in 
evaluation and the development of good practice guidelines. At the same time, they 
recognise that evaluation must be free from external pressures and conflict of interest 
and allow the choice of the most appropriate methodology for the specific evaluation 
question, context and motivation. 
Where Ammenwerth et al (2003) outline a sequence of functional steps, Klecun & 
Cornford (2005) base their evaluation framework on human perspectives and 
organisational context as well as system functions. Each dimension is addressed at the 
levels of structure, process and outcome. Their critical framework acknowledges the 
mixture of rational, social and political aspects of organisations and organisational 
change. 
Developing this framework, they enunciate five principles, summarised as follows : 
 Critical-emancipatory intent : allows rich organisational diagnosis and harnesses 
enrichment of working and social lives to the long-term sustainability of 
organisational goals 
 Evaluation reflects social, material and historical conditions : allows challenge 
of current practices and power structures and ties data generation to 
organisational learning 
 Critically-informed methods : allows the purposes and choice of evaluation 
method to be reviewed, revised and refined, ensures important issues are not 
suppressed and generates evaluation findings relevant to organisational well-
being 
 Evaluation must capture enactment : encourages iterative and reflexive treatment 
of evaluation data. Implications for change are driven by the way people and 
technology interact and by the illumination of unexpected outcomes 
 Evaluation is fundamentally reflexive : questioning assumptions, beliefs and 
findings. The resultant organisational learning stimulates engagement and 
augments the dynamic for change and improvement. 
3.3.6 : Three Specific Evaluation Methodologies 
Constructivist Evaluation : Fourth Generation Evaluation 
Guba and Lincoln (1989) have sought to expand the scope of evaluation in education 
from successively refined normative (therefore, ideal) positions into a fourth 
generation plan of constructivist evaluation.  
They have identified three antecedent generations. First Generation evaluation took 
the form of simple performance measurements. Second Generation evaluation took 
the form of description, in terms of relevance to prescribed need and congruence 
between achievements and objectives. Third Generation evaluation focused on the 
judgement of emergent need, with three variants : decision-oriented evaluation relied on 
the timely production of advice ; goal-free evaluation provided information about 
effects of use ; Connoisseur evaluation assessed conformance with relevant and 
current, expert-defined values. 
Connoisseur evaluation of information systems abstracts features frequently 
incorporated in reportedly successful information systems. Insight is gained through the 
limited lens of what has been considered important in the design of each individual 
system represented in the evaluation. 
Fourth Generation Evaluation is sceptical of pre-ordinate criteria, prescribed by experts, 
and proposes a plan of responsive, constructivist evaluation. This relies on the 
hermeneutic-dialectical circle, in which claims (of benefit), concerns (about harm) 
and issues (unresolved controversy), are analysed, interpreted and negotiated iteratively 
with and between the stakeholders whose views are sought. 
Critical Systems Heuristics 
The principal themes of Critical Systems Heuristics (Ulrich, 2005) are the sources 
motivation, power, expertise and legitimation that are and ought to be evident in the 
processes of (information systems) design, implementation and evaluation.  
Critical Systems Heuristics has the potential to focus a contructivist plan of evaluation. 
At the same time, it can contribute to realist evaluation because of the constructivist 
component contained in that methodology. 
Critical Realism : Realistic Evaluation 
Pawson & Tilley (1997 : p.xii-xiii) propose Realistic Evaluation, describing what is 
real as what is situated in place and time, firmly rooted in the here and now. Its 
properties are not self-evident but need qualification, clarification, and reconciliation 
with their context. They emerge from the interplay of Individual, Institution, Structure 
and Agency. 
These authors define Realism as an outlook which stresses the mechanics of 
explanation, recognises the impact of the evolving context and espouses explicit theory, 
linking Context and Mechanism with Outcomes of Intervention. They state that their 
approach is Realistic because it is purposeful and informs practice as well as theory, 
capable of translation into policy and decision making, and locally relevant, able to 
inform local practice.  
As they argue (ch.2), the rigour of positivist evaluation is defeated by the practical 
limitations on experimental design, imposed by contextual flux and complexity, and by 
the inconsistency of the empirical results obtained. Context-free findings from social 
inquiry can never be locally relevant. 
Pragmatic evaluation is focused on the production of useful results : usefulness implies 
a constituency and pragmatic evaluation is, therefore, a political rather than a rational 
exercise.  
Constructivist evaluation, the construction and arbitration of consensual understanding 
(Guba & Lincoln, 1989 : ch.7), depends also, unrealistically, upon the construction of a 
restricted parliament who will agree explicit, power-free rules of engagement in order to 
develop an opinion that is inevitably parochial and qualified by participants limited and 
conditioned perspectives. 
A pluralist approach to evaluation, combining methodological rigour, political nous and 
empathy with multiple, situated perspectives, founders on the restricted nature of the 
resources available to address an unrestricted scope of inquiry.  
Realistic evaluation is claimed as an advance on all of these approaches because it goes 
beyond statements about whether social interventions work, to explore how they work. 
Pawson and Tilley reject sequential explanations that link cause and effect directly. 
Instead, they require generative explanations that provide deeper insight into what the 
world might be like for an intervention to produce a given outcome. Generative 
explanations involve the specification of mechanisms, susceptible to contextual 
modification (accentuation, negation). They are concerned to know what works for 
whom, in what circumstances (op cit. p. 144).  
The aim of the methodology is thus to posit conjectured configurations of intervention, 
context, mechanism of effect and outcome and then to test these discursively with 
informants from the problem situation. This involves iterative teaching and learning, 
in which the researcher explains his reasoning to the informant and then modifies his 
reasoning in the light of the information received. At the same time, the authors remain 
open to empirical evidence from other sources (p.116). 
Evidence accumulates in the form of middle range theories which transcend the 
immediately parochial but make no claim to universality (p.116). Similarities in the 
findings from disparate intervention sites allow abstraction of theory towards a higher 
level of generality. Differences in the findings from similar sites invite the refinement of 
theory specification. The accumulated evidence can assist the policy cycle when policy 
makers are drawn into the teaching and learning cycle as a source of testable theory, 
which takes the form of an explicit or reconstructible context-mechanism-outcome 
pattern configuration (p.201-202). 
The insight provided is expressed in terms of emergent arguments, rooted in context and 
complexity, rather than simplifications, abstractions or a priori theorems. 
Realistic Evaluation is emerging as an approach to health information systems 
Examples are provided by Redfern, Christian & Norman (2003), Byng, Norman & 
Redfern (2005) and Oroviogoicoechea and Watson (2009). 
3.4   :   C O N C L U S I O N  
One task of this review has been to develop a taxonomy to organise the many strands of 
a diverse literature. The taxonomys principal distinction has been between hard 
approaches based on positivist and soft, non-positivist (interpretive and critical) 
paradigms. A recursive paradigm has also been recognised. This places elements in 
systemic and mutually constitutive relationship and contrasts with the linear logic of 
argument, from one position to the next, evident in those examples from the other 
paradigms when the aim has been to describe and affirm one position, to explain the 
reasons for that position or to assert an alternative rationale to justify a different 
position. 
These paradigms have been applied to the problem situation, the problem solver and the 
problem solving methodology. 
The review has not succeeded in demonstrating a clear distinction between the recursive 
and the other non-positivist paradigms. There are significant zones of overlap between 
the recursive and the interpretive and critical paradigms. These soft approaches reflect 
a joint orientation towards understanding rather than affirmation of the status quo. They 
reflect the critical insight, that understanding is always situated.  
The reviews approach to the Problem Situation has been to obtain evidence describing 
actual information systems projects in the field of healthcare but to pay special attention 
to papers which reflect on what people are doing and thinking when they are using 
information systems.  
The problem situation has been described in terms of the intervention of information 
systems in a large organisation. Problematic aspects of the problem situation can be 
understood as the interaction between the intervention and its accommodation within a 
social and organisational culture. Both the description of the intervention and the 
understanding of its host context relate to a status quo that can be appraised critically in 
terms of alternative possibilities. Description, understanding and critique all occur from 
a detached standpoint. In contrast, an emergent appreciation is one that develops during 
situated experience in the problem situation as it is instantiated and occasioned. 
Rather than attempt an approach to the Problem Solver based, as suggested by Burrell & 
Morgan (1979), on the invidious comparison from a positivist position, between 
objective and subjective accounts of the nature of science, the researcher has preferred 
to follow Deetz (1996), whose point of departure is a critical world view. This leads him 
to begin with the distinction between a priori and emergent arguments, the latter also 
being consistent with an orientation towards understanding. 
What is at stake for the present researcher is not an order/conflict or a stability/radical 
change perspective, but the question whether the discourse about information systems in 
a healthcare setting ought to be oriented towards unitary consensus, focused on the need 
for Management Information from Operational Systems, or whether it ought to give 
equal validity to divergent perspectives. Are we to integrate data processing systems 
around a single, dominant rationale or are we to develop a looser parliament of more 
sophisticated strands of communication ? 
Hard descriptive, problem solvers assemble ostensibly neutral statements about the 
problem situation and present these as being free from human interpretation or ideology. 
Soft problem solvers can use structuration theory to provide an interpretive 
understanding of the problem situation in terms of different internal cultures and the 
interplay of social agency and social structure but tends to subordinate a local to a 
global big picture.  
This denial of local detail is avoided when the big picture is understood as a fluid, 
non-hierarchical mosaic of interlocking local problem situations. Actor Network Theory 
allows the critical problem solver to interpret the problem situation as a collection of 
local sites with specific peculiarities of history, context, culture and future possibilities.  
The emergent problem solver is equipped by Soft Systems Methodology (Checkland, 
1981, 1999) and its off-shoots, NIMSAD (Jayaratna, 1994) and Multiview (Avison & 
Wood-Harper, 1990), to experience from within, the systemic relationship between the 
problem solver, the problem situation, his own personal intellectual apparatus and the 
problem solving methodology which flows from the interplay between these elements. 
In regard to the Problem Solving Methodology, the taxonomy has applied, first positivist 
then non-positivist approaches to each in turn of the competency areas of information 
systems strategy, design & development, implementation and evaluation. 
The strategy, design and development, implementation and evaluation of information 
systems have significant social and political ramifications alongside the rational 
simplicity of primary arguments based on the strategic context of an organisation. 
However, the content of work and its immediate operational context in the social 
workplace also present influences which affect the practical use of information 
technology, in ways that can differ substantially from the designers intentions. 
By focusing on the technology and the analysis of clinical or business processes, hard 
problem solvers risk ignoring the people who will make or break the new system, by 
failing to use it in the manner intended. The task of the problem solver is to engage 
future users in a consensus that supports the new system by using a soft approach, 
aimed at comprehending and challenging the status quo.  
To achieve this fruitfully, problem solvers will need to break down the corporate big 
picture into a detailed understanding of the multiple, varied sites and occasions where 
the relationship, between people and their information systems, is instantiated and re-
defined. A stronger consensus will emerge if multiple and potentially conflicting local 
pictures are not subordinated prematurely to the corporate view but are given full 
expression, as a set of equally valid, parallel understandings. It will be necessary to 
explore dissensus before conflicting issues can be settled safely through the exercise of 
organisational power and discipline. 
The researchers overall orientation has been to explore and understand what might 
work, why and under what circumstances, rather than attempt explanation, prediction 
and control from a general set of absolute propositions. 
This is a critical realist orientation but it has been argued in the debate between Mingers 
(2004 a,b) and Klein (2004), that interpretive and critical, hermeneutic modes of 
understanding are well suited to provide insights into the question, what must the 
world be like for an information system to succeed ?. The literature reviewed here 
suggests that there is a critical issue of congruence between work as designed and work 
as it is understood and performed on repeated occasions which are dissimilar as well as 
similar. 
A users choice, when and how to make use of the information system, represents an 
informal evaluation. The review gave specific mention to three formal evaluation 
approaches : Fourth Generation Evaluation (Guba & Lincoln, 1997), evaluation based 
on Critical Systems Heuristics (Ulrich, 2005), and Realistic Evaluation (Pawson & 
Tilley, 1997). 
The first of these evaluation approaches, despite its hermeneutic-dialectic 
methodology, is oriented towards general conclusions and summary consensus. The 
second is moral in tone, aimed to make progress from what is the case towards what 
ought to be the case. 
The third approach, Realistic Evaluation, has been chosen as a foundation for the 
present research because of its pragmatic orientation towards the empirical reality that 
information systems succeed in some settings but fail in others : for reasons that may 
not be intrinsic to the particular artefact but relational, between the artefact and the user 
in a specific context. 
In Heideggers terms, information systems are provided by corporate strategists as 
ready to hand. They are used as present at hand by front line staff who understand 
them in hermeneutic and recursive relationship with the task in hand. That relationship 
is carried in a mind which is, in turn, carried by a body whose experience and history 
are peculiarly situated. This insight places Merleau-Ponty in opposition to Descartes, 
the champion of disembodied, objective thought. 
Equally, it places the strategic deployment of information systems in opposition to their 
improvised use in the workplace, as Ciborra (1998, 1999) argues. The model 
described by Andreu and Ciborra (1996) is particularly effective in expressing this 
opposition. 
Jayaratna (1994) has provided a precedent for using Leavitts model in a modified form. 
As an heuristic, it is open to further modification to take account of the opposition 
between objective and hermeneutic thinking. Such a modification would distinguish 
between the role of information technology in mediating the objective relationship 
between organisational processes and management structures, compared with the 
mediation of the hermeneutic relationship between an individual and the tasks he has to 
perform in the context of a fluid and complex working environment. 
There are various candidate methodologies to elucidate the mechanisms, operating in 
context, that intervene between the intervention of an information system and its 
strategic outcomes. They include structuration and Actor Network theories. The authors 
of Multiview acknowledge (Avison, Wood-Harper et al., 1988) the debt of their own 
methodology to these theories and Multiview, like NIMSAD, has the advantage that it 
emphasises the relationship between the information system user as a problem solver, 
the context of use as a problem situation, and the users accommodation, between the 
information technology and his situated and occasioned tasks, as a problem solving 
methodology. 
These selected methodologies and approaches will be exploited in chapter five. 
The next chapter will develop my approach to the field research. 
Aligning Global and Local Aspects  
A National Information Programme 
for Health : 
Developing a Critical and Socio-Technical 
Appreciation 
Submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the award of 
Doctor of Philosophy  
at the 
University of Central Lancashire. 
STEPHEN NICHOLAS HARROP MB.ChB. MBA, FRCS, FCEM. 
VO L U M E   2   :   R E S E A R C H 
C H A P T E R   F O U R  
R E S E A R C H   M E T H O D O L O G Y 
4.0   :   I N T R O D U C T I O N 
This chapter explains the choices I made during the design of the research. It explains 
how the research was performed. 
Section 4.0 introduces the debate over rigour versus relevance in research about 
information systems. 
Section 4.1 explains my choice of genre. This is Action Research, chosen for its 
capacity to combine academic rigour with practical relevance. 
Section 4.2 explains how rigour is assured in the qualitative methods used in Action 
Research, so that the findings produced can be accurate, and also credible because they 
are valid and reliable. 
Section 4.3 explains the options from which I made my choice to select case study as 
the research vehicle that best supports an action research approach. 
Section 4.4 explains the design and conduct of the research in detail. 
Fitzgerald & Howcroft (1998) discuss the researchers stance vis a vis the available 
research approaches : 
The Isolationist approach eschews all other than the preferred approaches.  
The Supremacist approach assumes there is an inherently best approach, 
regardless of the research problem. 
The Integrationist approach forces methodologies with different paradigmatic 
bases into an inappropriate synthesis. 
The Pluralist approach deconstructs the research problem and applies 
thoughtfully, the most appropriate paradigm and methodology to each emergent 
aspect of the whole. 
The latter approach entails thinking at four levels :  
 Ontological 
 Epistemological 
 Axiological 
 Methodological. 
At each of these levels, it is possible to identify a hard, positivist and a contrasting, 
soft pole of a dichotomy. Rather than adopt, at each level, a position polarised at one 
or the other extreme, the researcher should position himself at the point on the 
intervening continuum best suited to the problem and constraints that, together, 
constitute the research situation. 
Fitzgerald & Howcroft equate hard with positivist and soft with interpretive or 
critical paradigms. However, Weick et al. (2005), like Checkland and Holwell (1998 : 
p.41-49) distinguish between problem solving and sense-making paradigms. Interpretive 
theories can then be said to describe the elements around which sense is made and 
critical theories challenge their hidden content of power, inequality and coercion. 
Weick et al. (2005) emphasise that sense making organises flux. It is a continuous, 
not a static process. The sense-maker selects elements for attention from the amorphous 
mass of proto-information that constitutes his environment. The researchers double 
hermeneutic task is to make sense of how the people he is studying are making sense of 
their own fluid situation. Sense-making is a distributed process. Each person and 
event in the problem situation is a source of data from which others, exposed to their 
own, fluid data environment, will share the collective, sense-making task. The goal of 
sense-making is explanation that is plausible in its context, rather than the discovery of 
eternal truth. The outcome of plausible sense making is contingent and provisional. 
The methods chosen will be oriented towards  the paradigm (sense-making) that is 
appropriate to that goal, as shown in Table 4.0.1.  
The goal of the present research is not to make confident predictions of the outcome of 
an information systems intervention, with factors of success or failure identified and 
controlled in isolation from events. Instead, it is to identify plausible accounts of 
observed reality that provide useful knowledge and insights that illuminate the context 
and the mechanisms that link the intervention to its outcomes.  
Table 4.0.1 : Contrasting Research Polarities 
Paradigm Decision Making Sense-Making 
Goal Confident predictive theory Plausible explanation 
Ontology Idealism  Realism  
Epistemology Modernist : hierarchy of clear 
and distinct ideas ; progress 
towards accurate discovery of 
truth. Positivism 
Post-Modernism : 
contingency, equivalence of 
alternative explanations. 
Hermeneutics and 
Phenomenology, Critical 
Realism  
Axiology (espoused 
values) 
Absolute Truth. Rigorous 
identification and calculation 
of facts 
Consistency with observed 
reality. Pragmatic 
identification of a satisfactory 
way forward 
Methodology Deduction, Verification, 
Correspondence theory of 
truth 
Induction, Falsification, 
Retroduction, scepticism, 
Holism, Under-determination 
4.1   :   R I G O U R   v e r s u s   R E L E V A N C E 
I N   I N F O R M A T I O N   S Y S T E M S   R E S E A R C H 
This section contrasts rigour with relevance in information systems research.  The 
information systems literature has evolved against a contest between proponents of 
rigorous scientific method and those of other approaches likely to provide more relevant 
results.  
Research is relevant if it resonates with issues (that ought to be) important to the reader 
and if the original research setting is sufficiently similar to the readers own situation for 
the study findings to be generalised (translated or extrapolated) there. Research is all the 
more relevant if it results in worthwhile change. 
Benbasat & Zmud (1999) argue that most IS academic research today [i.e.1999] lacks 
relevance to practice. They give five explanations for the lack of relevance in 
Information Systems research, all of which hinge around the academic obsession with 
rigorous method at the cost of practical application to real world problems. 
To be relevant, they argue, research must focus on the practical implementation of ideas 
and allow for contextual differences that are important to individual readers. Research 
must : 
 address the practical concerns of practitioners in the field of application 
 produce knowledge and prescriptions they can use 
 refer to technologies and business issues before they have become obsolete 
 be readable and enjoyable by a wide audience. 
To be applicable, they said that research must :  
 be capable of influencing practice 
 present theory in context and enable the researcher to make prescriptions and 
be proactive 
 develop frames of reference to organize phenomena and provide contingency 
approaches to managerial action 
 be both rigorous and relevant. 
Benbasat & Zmud summarise their requirements : to make prescriptions and be 
proactive and to develop frames of reference to organize phenomena and provide 
contingency approaches to managerial action.  
Lee (1999) argues that natural science is the wrong paradigm for Information Systems 
research. Where natural science pursues the goal of truth in formal propositions and 
produces knowledge about what the world is, inquiry in professions, for example, 
medicine, pursues the goal of effectiveness in actions and produces knowledge about 
how to intervene in the world and change it in order to satisfy real-world needs. 
Davenport and Markus (1999) suggest that rigour and relevance can be balanced along 
an economists indifference curve (impact frontier). Research needs to be modelled 
on the needs of clinical Information Systems practice rather than the methodological 
preferences of journals, academic faculties or funding institutions. Lyytinen (1999) goes 
one stage further than this, arguing that Information Systems research ought not to 
assume practice but is needed to identify practice and the elements .. relevant in 
understanding and changing that practice. 
Relevance, therefore, is not simply a matter of correspondence between a study setting 
and the readers own situation. Relevance has a clinical dimension, requiring a study 
also to have implications for action. It must combine knowledge of the model case with 
specific local insight, careful diagnosis and prescription for local action. The 
prescription is not relevant if not taken by the patient. 
4.2   :   A C T I O N   R E S E A R C H 
4.2.0 : Introduction - General Characteristics of Action Research 
This section focuses on Action Research as the preferred approach to inquiry in the 
Information Systems field. 
According to Bryman (1989 ; p.170), Action Research allows a variety of paradigms 
and qualitative methods that can, but need not, be complemented by quantitative 
methods.  
Baskerville (1999) explains that action research focuses holistically on complex social 
structures and processes, and on their response to intervention. Action research takes an 
interventionalist and an interpretivist stance, such that the researcher seeks, through his 
own perceptual apparatus and through that of those involved in the problem situation, to 
understand rather than to predict the events it contains. Researchers both observe and 
participate in the phenomena under study.  
The focus is on specific local (idiographic) detail, not on generalisation. Action 
research accommodates qualitative data and has foundations in phenomenology and 
hermeneutics and post-positivism.  
Action research has quality criteria of its own but ultimately depends also on the 
properties of the underpinning qualitative methods employed.  
Baskerville and Wood-Harper (1998) state, Action research methods are highly clinical 
in nature, and place IS researchers in a helping role within the organizations which are 
being studied. Baskerville (1999), identifies the following characteristics of Action 
Research : 
 Orientation towards action and change 
 Problem focus 
 Organic process 
 Collaboration among participants as well as between participants and the 
researcher. 
Baskerville describes four major characteristic of information systems research 
(paraphrased) : 
 Dual commitment to practical problem solving and expansion of scientific 
knowledge  
 Help understand the complex and multivariate nature of the social setting  
 Collaboration between the researcher and others in the problem setting 
 Primary focus on understanding change processes in social systems.  
Baskervilles ideal social setting for Action Research is one where : 
1. The researcher is actively involved, with expected benefit for both researcher 
and organization 
2. the knowledge obtained can be immediately applied, there is not the sense of 
the detached observer, but that of an active participant wishing to utilize any 
new knowledge based on an explicit, clear conceptual framework 
3. the research is a (typically cyclical) process linking theory and practice. 
For Mumford (2001), the distinguishing features of Action Research are a combination 
of practical problem solving with theoretical relevance. Understanding of the Problem 
Situation engenders suggestions for improvement. Lessons from practical actions to 
implement these ideas inform contributions to the theory of change management.  
4.2.1 : Is Action Research Just Consultancy ? 
Gill and Johnson (1997, p.62-63) contrast between action research and consultancy. The 
key elements of contrast are the relationship between the client and the analyst, the 
analysts role in diagnosis and the origin of a prescription for action.  
In consultancy, the consultant and the client are in vertical relationship. Diagnosis is not 
explored in depth and the consultants role in diagnosis is minimal. The consultants 
methodology is an off the shelf package, originating outside the problem situation. 
The consultant is not involved in the implementation of his proposals. 
Action research places the client and the researcher in a horizontal partnership. The 
action researcher introduces explicit academic concepts, structure and challenge to 
explore the detail of diagnosis and refine its accuracy. The action researchers 
methodology is determined by his interaction with the client and the emerging data and 
he is closely involved in the implementation of his ideas. 
For Baskerville (1999), action research and consulting differ in terms the five 
dimensions shown in Table 4.2.1. 
McKay and Marshal (2001) refer to the dual imperative which distinguishes action 
research from consultancy. Action research is distinguished from consultancy by its 
contribution to a research agenda, focused on new learning about the theoretical 
framework, over and above its contribution to problem solving action.  
Table 4.2.1 : The Difference Between Action Research and Consulting (after 
Baskerville, 1999) 
 Action research Consulting 
Motivation scientific prospects, perhaps 
epitomized in scientific 
publications. 
commercial benefits, including 
profits and additional stocks of 
proprietary knowledge about 
solutions to organisational 
problems. 
Commitment to the client, and to the research 
community for the production 
of scientific knowledge. 
to the client alone. 
Approach Collaboration is essential in 
action research because of its 
idiographic assumptions. 
typically values its "outsiders," 
unbiased viewpoint, providing 
an objective perspective on the 
organizational problems. 
Foundation for 
recommendations 
theoretical framework. suggests solutions that, in the 
consultants experience, proved 
successful in similar situations. 
Essence of the 
organisational 
understanding. 
founded on practical success 
from iterative experimental 
changes in the organization. 
independent critical analysis of 
the problem situation. 
4.2.2 : Is there an Approved, Standard Form of Action Research ? 
Baskerville and Wood-Harper (1998) identify different sub-forms of action research in 
Table 4.2.2. 
Table 4.2.2 : Characteristics Analysis of Action Research Forms (from Baskerville 
& Wood-Harper, 1998) 
 Process 
Model 
Structure Typical  
Researcher 
Involvement  
Primary Goals  
Canonical  
Action 
Research 
iterative rigorous collaborative Organisational 
Development / Scientific 
Knowledge 
Prototyping 
iterative rigorous collaborative 
/ facilitative 
System Development 
Soft Systems 
Methodology 
iterative fluid facilitative Organisational 
Development / System 
Development 
Action  
Science 
reflective fluid facilitative Organisational 
Development / Scientific 
Knowledge 
Participant 
Observation 
reflective fluid expert Scientific Knowledge 
Action  
Learning 
reflective fluid expert Training 
Multiview 
linear rigorous any System Development 
ETHICS 
linear rigorous facilitative Organisational 
Development / System 
Development 
Clinical  
Fieldwork 
linear fluid facilitative Organisational 
Development / Scientific 
Knowledge 
Process 
Consultation 
linear rigorous expert Organisational 
Development 
These authors point out that ethnography, case study and Action Research each refer to 
a genre rather than a homogeneous approach. Each genre contains different sub-forms 
with different models, structures and goal sets. They argue that rigour in action research 
does not stem from the goals but from the processes pursued. This leads them to 
contrast the extant account, of the six major characteristics of Action Research, with 
their own, revised account (Table 4.2.3). 
Table 4.2.3 : Extant and Revised accounts of Action Research Characteristics 
(after Baskerville & Wood-Harper, 1998) 
To conclude this section, it is noted that a researchers dogged allegiance to a given 
brand of Action Research, with goals specified in advance of diagnosis, is less 
Extant Focus : Goal Characteristics Revised Focus: Process Characteristics 
Aim to increase understanding of an 
immediate social situation 
Acknowledge and explore complex, 
multivariate nature of social setting 
Assist practical problem solving and 
expand scientific knowledge 
Make highly interpretive assumptions 
about observations. Intervene in the 
problem setting 
Performed collaboratively and enhances 
the competencies of the respective actors 
Participatory Observation : the social 
setting is observed and experienced from 
within 
Understand change processes in social 
settings 
Understand change processes in social 
settings 
Use data feedback in cyclical processes Allow linear, single-pass process. Allow 
participative form of observation to 
provide main source of accuracy 
Perform within mutually acceptable 
ethical framework 
Ethical imperative applies to all research 
and is not a defining feature exclusive to 
Action Research 
important than the actual steps taken in relation to diagnosis and action within the 
problem situation.  
4.2.3 : Sources of Rigour in Action Research 
To assess the quality of Action Research studies in Information System, Lau (1999) has 
synthesised a framework with four dimensions : 
 Conceptual foundations : aims, theoretical basis, philosophical paradigm and 
variety of action research undertaken 
 Study design : technical stages of the action research project 
 Research process : problem diagnosis, action interventions, reflective learning, 
iterative nature of the study, general lessons learnt 
 Role expectations : relative roles of the researcher and the participants, 
development of participants competencies, ethical issues to be addressed. 
For Baskerville and Pries-Heje (1999) validity can be enhanced by a rigorous, reliable 
approach to theory formulation, for which they adopt the Discovery of Grounded 
Theory (Glaser & Strauss, 1967) as a model. 
Baskerville and Pries-Heje establish only partial resonance between Action research and 
Grounded Theory. They set a balance between inquiry and action which allows some 
givens to be deduced from the Problem Situation taken at face value and they concede, 
Action research and grounded theory cannot be completely integrated. The field of 
study is too limited and goal-directed to permit full use of a comparative method like 
grounded theory. 
Baskerville (1999) makes several suggestions to enhance rigour. First, the approach 
must be appropriate for the research question of interest to an audience that accepts 
post-positivist learning. Second, there should be a client-system infrastructure  a 
formal research agreement that establishes the consent of participants to disclosure of 
research findings and sets what Bell and Wood-Harper (2003) call the terms of 
reference that delineate the researchers authority and freedom of action. Third, the 
researcher must establish the explicit theoretical foundations that form the basis of his 
diagnosis. Fourth, although Baskerville cites a variety of data collection methods, any 
chosen method should be carefully planned (and executed).  
Baskerville then states that the researcher must rely on the people in the problem setting 
for key knowledge and avoid assuming the authoritative role of the external 
consultant. The researcher and his collaborators within the problem situation must then 
continue action, reflection and learning until the immediate problem situation is 
relieved. Finally, the temptation to generalise findings must be tempered with an 
interpretation of the extent of similar settings to which the theory can be expected to 
apply. 
Avison, Baskerville and Myers (2001) state, the rigour of many (Action Research) 
studies in IS can be improved.. the findings have frequently been emphasised at the 
expense of the process. 
These authors consider that rigour can stem from attention to three aspects of control : 
initiation (the study is driven by a practical problem rather than a research agenda) ; 
authority (the researchers freedom of action within the Problem Situation and his 
power to instigate change are made clear) ; and the degree of formalisation which pins 
down terms of reference, lines of authority, reporting relationships etc. 
Davison, Martisons & Kock (2004) have laid down five principles of canonical action 
research. The first is that the researcher and client should agree that the action research 
format is appropriate and that the findings of the action research will be implemented. 
Second, the process is cyclical, iterating between examination of theory and 
observations in the field. Third, the theoretical framework of the research is explicit. 
Fourth, change is brought about. Finally, reflection produces learning about the problem 
situation and the theoretical framework. 
4.2.4 : Doing Action Research 
Baskerville (1999) recognises a diagnostic and a therapeutic phase of action 
research. The latter phase is then expanded so that a cyclic model with five phases 
results : 
1. Diagnosis 
2. Action planning 
3. Action taking 
4. Evaluating 
5. Specifying learning. 
The learning specified will have three forms. First, new knowledge will emerge about 
the deviation of the actual from the anticipated outcome of intervention : what will need 
to be done differently on a future occasion. Second, critical self appraisal will alert the 
action team to its own organisational norms and the way these will need to change. 
Third, theoretical knowledge will result from the confirmation or modification of the 
theoretical framework, prompted by the outcomes of action. 
Shah, Eardley and Wood-Harper (2007) express the five phases of the cycle as analyse, 
plan, execute, evaluate and capture learning or move on to next project. The cycle is 
applied in turn to four stages of entry by the researcher or academic research team into 
the host organisation, iterating as necessary. The four stages of entry are, negotiation 
with the executive board (preparation), networking and formation of the project team, 
the creation of a climate for change (institutionalisation of the project) and the inception 
of the pilot project. 
At the strategic level, the action learning cycle is applied to the establishment of 
collaboration between the academic and the business institution, the initiation of the 
action research and the implementation of organisational learning resulting from the 
research. 
At the tactical level of the host organisation, the cycle is applied to the planning and to 
the co-ordination of the research, and to the harvesting of the action learning. It is also 
applied to the building of the action research teams, the supervision of the action 
research, its monitoring and to the process of reflecting on the action research. 
At the operational level, it is applied to the research process itself : the conduct of 
interviews, the collection of action research data, its analysis and the feedback of action 
research results to the operational team. 
4.2.5 : Conclusions on Action Research 
The last example shows the extent to which action research can be scaled up in a large 
organisation, given ample resources. However, the appeal of action research to this 
researcher stems from its diagnostic and therapeutic or helping orientation on a less 
ambitious scale. 
The appeal stems also from the orientation towards thoughtful diagnosis in advance of 
expert prescription. 
This chapter has established that action research is unique in its capacity for 
organisational relevance but extends beyond consultancy because of its contribution to 
academic theory and to the researchers participation in worthwhile change, as opposed 
to pontification about a future desired state. 
The rigour of action research can be enhanced by attention to each next deliberate step, 
both in the planning and execution of the research itself and in the conduct of the 
specific research methods used. 
Thus, where some aspects of rigour relate to the nature and conduct of Action Research 
described above, other aspects relate to the individual qualitative methods used within 
the Action Research process. These are now discussed. 
4.3   :   R E S E A R C H   M E T H O D S 
4.3.0 : Introduction 
Research in a clinical setting tends to equate rigour with a scientific paradigm and 
quantitative methods. The research goal is then to produce, as its outcome, an accurate 
set of findings from which reliable and relevant conclusions can be drawn as a basis for 
future action. 
When we distinguish between the procedures and the outcome of research, it is clear 
that the quality of good research must derive from the researchers clear idea of what 
he wants to find out, reflected in the adoption of research methods and procedures 
capable of answering the research question posed. Methods suitable to evaluate a 
rational and quantifiable hypothesis are not directly transferable, to the problem 
situation of a researcher who wants to explore what the world must be like for an 
information system to succeed. 
In the latter case, it is necessary to take account of individualistic perspectives, 
reflecting partial and divergent rather than general and convergent viewpoints. The 
setting is social and political rather than natural and rational. Where the focus is to 
explore and understand, rather than to measure, the appropriate methods are those of 
qualitative inquiry.  
The quality of research conducted using these methods is judged on the basis of : a 
clearly specified research question ; the selection of a research approach capable of 
providing relevant and useful information ; careful and deliberate attention to sampling 
of respondents ; data collection and documentation ; data corroboration ; data analysis ; 
data presentation ; and inferences and conclusions that are well-argued in terms of the 
data. 
4.3.1 : Assessing the Quality of Qualitative Research 
The quality of research conducted using these methods is judged on the basis of : a 
clearly specified research question ; the selection of a research approach capable of 
providing relevant and useful information ; careful and deliberate attention to sampling 
of respondents ; data collection and documentation ; data corroboration ; data analysis ; 
data presentation ; and inferences and conclusions that are well-argued in terms of the 
data. 
Silverman (2005; p.228-229), specifies four quality criteria for qualitative research :  
 The research helps to build a useful social theory 
 The researcher anticipates the readers scepticism 
 The research methods and approach are carefully argued 
 The research makes a contribution to practice and policy by providing 
practitioners, clients and/or policymakers with new insight. 
What Distinguishes Good Quality Qualitative Research from Anecdote ? 
(Pope Ziebland & Mays, 2000) comment on this issue. Qualitative research is 
distinguished from anecdote by its self-conscious, reflective and reflexive approach to 
systematic data collection and analysis in relation to an explicit line of inquiry. They 
say, Good qualitative analysis is able to document its claim to reflect some of the truth 
of a phenomenon by reference to systematically gathered data  poor quantitative 
analysis is anecdotal, unreflective, descriptive without being focused on coherent line of 
inquiry  good qualitative analysis relies on the skill, vision and integrity of the 
researcher doing that analysis  
The Contribution of Explicit Theory 
Rigorous procedure is complemented by the use of explicit theory.  Hence, coherence 
between the phenomenon of interest and its local and historical background are 
achieved (Walsham, 1993) through tight reasoning, based on explicit theory, to 
establish the relationship between the empirically observed context, its interpretation by 
key situational actors and the processes of change in the Problem Situation. 
Relativist and Realist Quality Criteria 
Mays & Pope (2000) differentiate relativist and (subtle-) realist quality criteria.   
 Relativist (anti-realist) criteria for quality (Mays & Pope, 2000) 
 New theory 
 Novel claims 
 Credible account 
 Description sufficient for competent performance in the culture studied 
 Findings transferable to other settings 
 Reflexivity. 
Reflexivity describes the researchers self-conscious awareness of several factors : the 
limitations of his own intellectual apparatus ; their filtering effect on his appreciation of 
the problem situation and the people in it ; his own impact on the social setting, its 
dynamics and the disclosures it will afford ; and the implications of all these 
considerations for a careful and self-conscious approach to each next, deliberate 
research step. Reflexivity extends into data collection, interpretation and reporting. 
 Realist criteria (Mays & Pope, 2000) 
 triangulation 
 validation by respondents  
 clear description of data collection and analytic methods 
 reflexivity 
 negative cases 
 unbiased presentation of multiple perspectives. 
4.3.2 : Credibility 
Mays & Pope (1995) discuss rigour in qualitative research in terms of purposive, non-
random sampling ; reliability based on systematic, meticulous data analysis ; and 
validity. 
For Silverman (2006, Ch.8) the overarching criterion of qualitative research is 
credibility.  
Findings are credible as far as they are supported by the data. There are clear links 
between the data, their interpretation and the researchers conclusions. The researcher 
provides sufficient information for the reader to judge whether the research findings can 
be generalised to his own situation. 
Credibility has two components, reliability and validity. Silverman uses the image of a 
thermometer (2006 ; p.282) A reliable instrument that measures consistently but 
inaccurately. One that is valid produces, on repeated measurement of the same signal, a 
range of values that cluster around a true value. 
4.3.3 : Reliability 
Tests of Reliability in the Different Paradigms 
In the positivist paradigm, the observed effects will be reproduced whenever the 
experimental context is replicated. 
In the scientific realist paradigm, the observed effects will be promoted, inhibited or 
radically different if the context differs sufficiently or if the people studied exercise 
different choices according to their personal perceptions and previous experiences. 
The constructivist (interpretetivist) and critical theory paradigms offer explanation or 
critique but do not extend to prediction of future events. Reliability is determined by the 
quality of the analytic theoretical framework and by the strength of circumspect 
argument that associates the analytic framework with the various concordant and 
discordant sources of data acquired. 
Silverman (2006, ch.8) distinguishes between the data and the researchers inferences 
from those data. The research is reliable to the extent that the link between inference 
and data is better than tenuous (i.e. inference is minimal). The reader needs to be able 
to distinguish between the analysis that emerges from the data (the emic analysis) and 
the researchers own theoretical framework (the etic analysis). 
One way to promote reliability is for more than one researcher to analyse the data (inter-
rater reliability), and then to compare the analysis, inviting a further analyst to 
adjudicate any difference of interpretation. To minimise the gap between statement and 
inference (minimal inference), the researcher should present any given phrase or 
sentence in sufficient context to allow accurate interpretation (Silverman, 2006 ; p.287). 
Silverman also advocates careful attention to inflection, hesitation and other nuances of 
speech during interview transcription and interpretation. 
For Silverman (2005 ; p.228), the research design must be carefully argued and data 
transcripts must be available for inspection and assessment of reliability. Theoretical 
assumptions have to be clear and the theoretical models employed, discussed. The 
research processes must be adequately documented. The strengths and weaknesses of 
data and methods must be discussed. Changes made to the research design must be 
documented. 
4.3.4 : Validity 
Silverman (2005 ; p.210) equates validity with truth. This requires critical 
investigation of all the researchers data instead of simply selecting anecdotal quotes 
that match the researchers preconceptions. 
Anecdote is avoided by providing exemplary instances of behaviour and by explaining 
in advance why some instances are to be included and others not. Tables of abstracted 
data lose contact with the original research interview or transcript Silverman 
(Silverman, 2005 ; p.211). The researcher needs to show how any given quote is 
representative. 
Assuring the Accuracy of Findings : Triangulation and Respondent Validation 
Triangulation refers to the corroboration of one data item by another. Keen & Packwood 
(1995) state, Case studies often use triangulation to ensure the validity of findings.  In 
triangulation all data items are corroborated from at least one other source and normally 
by another method of data collection. 
Mays & Pope (1995) discus validity in terms of triangulation, contradictory (deviant) 
cases and the researchers ability to provide information sufficient for the reader to 
understand the research setting and come to his own conclusions, about the relevance of 
local findings to his own situation. To this, they add coherence with established theory 
and frameworks of understanding. 
Denzin and Lincoln (2000, p.119) add :   triangulation, reflects an attempt to 
secure an in-depth understanding of the phenomenon in question.  Objective reality can 
never be captured.  Triangulation is not a tool or a strategy of validation, but an 
alternative to validation. 
Respondent validation occurs when the researcher presents his findings to his 
informants for ratification or refutation. 
Silverman (2005, p.212) dismisses triangulation and respondent validation as flawed 
methods. He takes issue with the idea that the truth of interpretation depends on 
correspondence between findings from different methodologies, and challenges the 
view that the opinions and statements of respondents constitute a yardstick of truth.  
Silverman (2006 ; p.292) says, the major problem with triangulation as a test of 
validity is that, by counterposing different contexts, it ignores the context-bound and the 
skilful character of social interaction .. . Here he is adopting the logical empiricist 
position, that the findings from one reliable method need not be refuted by apparently 
contradictory findings from another. Neither are they necessarily verified when the 
results of two or more methods converge. 
Instead, Silverman (2005, p.212) relies on five strategies : 
 The refutability principle 
 The constant comparative method 
 Comprehensive data treatment 
 Deviant-case analysis 
 Using appropriate tabulations 
The refutability principle holds that relationships are provisional : they can never be 
proved, only not yet refuted. The constant comparative method involves the assembly of 
conclusions from a small data set and then revising these conclusions in the light of 
further data in successive iterations. Comprehensive data treatment means making sure 
that every single item of data has been taken into consideration so that there can be no 
question that data have only been considered selectively. Deviant-case analysis means 
deliberately looking for the data that contradict the current hypothesis. 
Appropriate tabulation (for examples, Miles & Huberman, 1994) only promotes validity 
if it has an explicit rationale. Under certain circumstances, tabulation can assist validity. 
Silverman does not appear to suggest that validity depends on tabulation. 
4.3.5 : Conclusions on Qualitative Research Methods 
Quality in qualitative research derives from the researchers clear idea of what he wants 
to find out, followed by careful and deliberate attention to sampling, data collection and 
corroboration, data documentation, data analysis, data presentation, inference from the 
data and conclusions that are well-argued in terms of the data.  
In contrast with experimental, scientific research, the research design may undergo 
modification in response to information and knowledge acquired during the research. 
The outcome of the research may be a theory that is robust against attempts at 
refutation. Alternatively, it may be a credible set of statements, the test of whose 
relevance is their correspondence with the experience, intuition, understanding and 
openness to persuasion of the audience.  
Scientific research aims carefully to recognise and eliminate or minimise, contextual 
influences that will confound scientific findings. This is impossible in settings where the 
intervention of interest occurs in a setting whose history and characteristics are beyond 
manipulation. Contextual influences must be taken fully into account and cannot be 
marginalised. 
On the other hand, bias can be managed. The researcher needs to be fully aware of his 
own prior conditioning, values and beliefs that he will bring to the research context and 
its interpretation. He has the choice, to try and set these to one side or to bring these 
fully into focus and contrast his own world-view with that emerging from the research. 
Triangulation and respondent validation are established strategies to assure the accuracy 
of research findings through correspondence with an assumed unique, discoverable 
truth. This is a positivist assumption and these strategies are not compatible with a 
paradigm that suggests that truth is not a remote, discoverable entity but situated, as 
a good enough basis for social action, in the values, beliefs and historical experience 
of a social group. 
Qualitative research need not emulate science strictly in its exact criteria of credibility. 
Instead it has rigorous criteria of its own that reflect its parent realistic and interpretive 
paradigms. 
Table 4.3.1 summarises the factors of validity and reliability in a credible study. 
Table 4.3.1 : Factors of Validity and Reliability in a Credible Study 
 Validity Reliability 
Research 
design 
Carefully argued, adapted to 
emergent understanding. 
Modelled around an explicit 
theoretical framework. Data 
collection methods are 
sufficiently sensitive to provide 
answers to the questions posed. 
The research steps are clearly 
described so that another 
researcher could approach the 
problem in the same way with a 
reasonable expectation of 
reproducing the same results. 
However, the interpretive 
paradigm departs from the 
scientific because it rejects the 
idea that a unique truth can be 
approached and discovered 
through a meticulous process of 
inquiry.  
Sampling Purposive sampling of data 
sources, chosen to corroborate or 
challenge each other. 
The researcher can justify his 
choice of data sources. 
Table 4.3.1 (continued) 
 Validity Reliability 
Data collection 
corroboration 
The influence of the researcher 
on the research setting is 
minimised. The research reflects 
the values of the host 
community, not his own. 
Statements reflect the sincere 
beliefs of those questioned and 
are not a reflection of what 
people think the researcher wants 
to hear.  
Researchers sensitivity to 
nuance and capacity to explore 
uncertainty of interpretation by 
eliciting further information and 
clarification. 
Constant comparison between 
emergent data and the 
researchers own developing 
understanding of the research 
setting.  
Cross-checking of apparently 
secure conclusions by search for 
deviant cases / conflicting 
opinion. 
documentation 
Careful transcription of recorded 
material. 
Tape recording of interviews. 
Preservation of transcripts. 
Table 4.3.1 (continued) 
 Validity Reliability 
Data analysis The grounds for summarising a 
statement in a short phrase or 
category are well thought out, 
not arbitrary. 
Careful transcription by the 
researcher himself. Awareness 
that computer assisted 
transcription has limitations that 
interfere with the researchers 
reflection on the data during 
transcription. 
presentation 
Allows reader to distinguish 
between data, analytic 
framework and authors 
interpretation. 
Statements of interest are 
adequately contextualised when 
reproduced in the report. 
Inferences 
from data 
 minimal inference. 
Conclusions Research conclusions are 
surrounded by sufficient 
contextual detail to focus the 
readers understanding and 
appreciation. The reader can then 
safely judge whether the results 
and conclusions are relevant to 
other contexts. 
Linked to data and inferences 
through clear, defensible 
argument. 
4.4   :   C H O I C E   O F   S T U D Y   V E H I C L E 
4.4.0 : Introduction 
This section sets out the choices available to a researcher when deciding the form his 
study ought to take. It explains the choice of case study as the preferred vehicle and 
identifies characteristics of a model case study.  
4.4.1 : Five Traditions of Qualitative Inquiry 
Cresswell (1998) identifies five traditions of qualitative inquiry, aimed at 
understanding rather than measurement. Each has a different focus, plan of data analysis 
and narrative form. These are described in Table 4.4.1, adapted from Cresswell (1998) : 
p.65) : 
Table 4.4.1 Five Traditions of Qualitative Inquiry  
 Biography Phenomen-
ology 
Grounded 
Theory 
Ethnography Case Study 
Focus 
Life of an 
Individual 
Invariate 
structure of 
experience 
Theory 
development 
Cultural 
Description 
Interpretation 
In-depth 
Analysis 
Analysis 
Stories, 
epiphanies, 
historical 
content 
Statements, 
meanings, 
themes, 
general 
description 
Highly 
specific plan 
of data 
organisation 
Description, 
analysis, 
interpretation 
Description, 
themes, 
assertions 
Narrative 
Detailed 
picture of 
individuals 
Description 
of the 
essence of 
experience 
Theory or 
theoretical 
model 
Description 
of cultural 
behaviour 
In-depth 
study of the 
case or 
cases 
Biography 
Biography focuses on the interaction between a single individual and surrounding 
people and events, over (a limited period of) his lifetime. The individual and his 
context, of people and events, are shown to influence each other. The biographer 
explores the significance of these events and relationships for people in his own, 
contemporary context. 
Grounded Theory 
Strauss and Corbin (1990 ; p.23) explain : Grounded theories are inductively 
discovered by careful collection and analysis of qualitative empirical data. That is, this 
method does not begin with a theory, and then seek proof. Instead it begins with an area 
of study and allows the relevant theory to emerge from that area. 
In the phase of open coding, discrete events, happenings and phenomena are 
identified and labelled in categories. Rules are developed so that category assignment 
is always consistent. As this phase proceeds, the rules of category assignment become 
more explicit through the development of criteria known as the properties of each 
category. Dimensions are also developed to describe the volume, frequency and 
intensity of each property. 
Care is taken to allow the concepts to emerge from the data, through the researchers 
critical reflections and through constant comparison between one idea or information 
source and another. Especially, the researcher uses respondents own jargon (in vivo 
codes) as category labels and explores its meaning by seeking respondents own 
explanations. The researchers own preconceptions are excluded.  
Each conclusion from this process is treated as a fallible hypothesis, tested by seeking 
statements that challenge the conclusions drawn so far in relation to each category. 
There is an active search for deviant cases that will challenge rather than corroborate 
emerging inferences. Eventually, further inquiry ceases to add new insight. The 
category has now become saturated and that line of inquiry can be closed. 
In the phase of axial coding, ideas are arranged in clusters under broad headings. The 
first cluster is the central phenomenon. It is surrounded by other clusters, representing 
causal conditions, intervening conditions and context. The reactions of people 
and social groups to these sets of influences are grouped in the cluster labelled actions 
and interactions. These have implications or consequences for the community in 
question or for others. 
The final phase of selective coding completes the detail of residual uncertainties and 
the grounded theory is then presented as a story. 
Phenomenology 
Phenomenology recognises that the observers own mental apparatus presents a barrier 
between the outside world and the observers internal perception.  
Cresswell (1998, p.33, 55, 147-150) explains a phenomenological study as follows. 
A typical study begins by suggesting why the researcher is interested in a particular 
phenomenon and suggests that it may possess an essential structure. The 
philosophical perspective of a phenomenological study is outlined (as in the literature 
review of the present thesis).  
Interview transcripts are broken down into individual statements (horizontalisation), 
then translated into clusters of meaning, expressed as psychological or 
phenomenological concepts. These are constructed into textural, then structural 
descriptions : respectively, a synthesised account of what was experienced, then how it 
was experienced. The researcher finally reflects on what he has learned about the 
philosophical basis of the study. 
Phenomenology attaches equal worth to the multiple perspectives that can emerge 
during such a study. Although this places a counterpoise against the researchers own 
perspective, the act of questioning and drawing inferences from responses is an 
extension of the researchers own intellectual bias and limitations. He must be 
constantly aware of this potential constraint on the content that emerges from the 
enquiry, and sensitive to the new knowledge that might be revealed. 
Ethnography 
Ethnography focuses on the language, practices and tools employed by a distinct 
community, and on the values, norms and beliefs that constitute its culture. These are 
explored from within the society in question. 
The researcher becomes a participant in the daily lives of those he studies, aiming. to 
understand a culture through the experience of living under the conditions experienced 
by the community. The verbal testimony of individuals is constantly compared with 
other sources and with the researchers own carefully documented observations. 
In classical ethnography, participation is prolonged (deep immersion). Baskerville and 
Wood-Harper (1998) use the term, participatory observation when presence within the 
problem situation is less intensive. 
Mays & Pope (1995) distinguish four classes of observer and observation technique 
(Table 4.4.2): 
Table 4 4.2 : Classes of Observer and Technique (Mays & Pope, 1995) 
Complete participant covert observation 
Participant as observer overt observation, those observed are 
aware of the observer 
Observer as participant mainly questions and little sustained 
observation 
Complete observer experimental design, no participation 
Silverman (1998) criticises the tendency for ethnographic research to rely on interviews 
to elicit how people see things and prefers to focus instead on how people do 
things. As an ethnographer, he is interested to focus on practice in situ, looking at how 
organisations are routinely enacted. 
Case Study 
Yin (1989 p.13-14), defines a case study as : an empirical inquiry that investigates a 
contemporary phenomenon within its real-life context, especially when the boundaries 
between phenomenon and context are not clearly evident. 
Yin goes on to say that, where the phenomenon and its context are inextricable, case 
study inquiry  
 copes with the technically distinctive situation in which there will be many 
more variables of interest than data points, and as one result 
 relies on multiple sources of evidence, with data needing to converge in a 
triangulating fashion, and as another result 
 benefits from the prior development of theoretical propositions to guide data 
collection and analysis. 
Bryman (1989 : ch.6) establishes close correspondence between action research and 
case study, on the basis of the contextual familiarity and description necessary for both 
forms. In particular, the "case" tends to be situated in a location or community of human 
activity. Key events, activities and personalities tend to be important, but incidental to 
the identity of the case.  
A case study can embody multiple qualitative and quantitative methods. Case studies 
usually comprise a number of emphases and there is a strong emphasis on context. Case 
studies do not aim to infer findings from a sample to a population or to generate laws, 
but they provide an understanding of organisational functioning and provide a degree of 
theoretical insight. They can also serve to illustrate an instance where theory or parts of 
theory are confirmed. Finally, many action research projects are in fact special kinds of 
single case study."  (pages 178-9). 
Case study can draw on any of the qualitative traditions identified by Cresswell (1998), 
as well as on quantitative data. In particular, participative observation is often supported 
by examination of documents (which may extend from simple reading and citation to 
detailed statistical analysis of content) and by qualitative interviews. 
Britten (1995) describes three interview genres : 
In a structured interview, standard, closed questions are asked in standard fashion so 
that the instrument of inquiry does not vary from respondent to respondent. Answers 
may be constrained in the form of multiple choices to fit pre-determined categories. 
Nuance is not explored. The interview questions are completely led by the researcher. 
In a semi-structured interview, open-ended questions define the area of interest and 
invite the respondent to answer freely. Several issues may be addressed in this way 
during the interview. The scope of the interview is broad and depth of exploration is 
correspondingly less. 
In an in-depth interview, the scope of the interview is relatively confined compared with 
a semi-structured interview but probing and confirmatory questions explore the detail of 
responses in greater depth. The later questions in each sequence are determined by what 
the interviewee says. 
Keen & Packwood (1995) believe,  
Case studies using qualitative methods are most valuable when the question 
being posed requires an investigation of a real-life intervention in detail, where 
the focus is on how and why the intervention succeeds or fails, where the 
general context will influence the outcome and where the researchers asking the 
questions will have no control over events. As a result, the number of relevant 
variables will be far greater than can be controlled for, so that experimental 
approaches are simply not appropriate  The case study is an alternative 
approach - in effect, a different way of thinking about complex situations which 
takes the conditions into account, but is nevertheless rigorous and facilitates 
informed judgements about success or failure. 
They explain that a case study does not describe a discrete event so much as a rich 
texture of ideas, events and processes in which multiple perspectives are given explicit 
expression.  
Often an intervention is ill-defined, at least at the outset, and so cannot easily 
be distinguished from the general environment.  Even where it is well-defined, 
an intervention may not be discrete but consist of a complex mix of changes that 
occur over different timescales  Any intervention will typically depend for 
its success on the involvement of several different interested groups.  Each 
group may have a legitimate but different interpretation of events; capturing 
these different views is often best achieved by using interviews or other 
qualitative methods within a case study design. 
The intervention at the heart of the case study can be difficult to separate from its own 
ramifications. Even when a case study is planned over a prolonged timescale, it is not 
clear at the outset whether an intervention will be fully implemented by the end of a 
study period  accounts of major computer system failures show this. Yet study of these 
failures may provide invaluable clues to future success. 
Stake (2000) distinguishes between instrumental case studies, contributing to the 
refinement of a generalisation, and intrinsic case studies with a hermeneutic, 
intention, to understand whats going on. 
Van der Ven (2007 ; p.ix) uses the term, engaged scholarship, to describe an 
exploratory approach to case study that proceeds from the perspective of one informant  
to the next. 
4.4.2 : Quality Criteria for Interpretive Case Studies in Information Systems 
Markus and Lee (1999) point out the need to develop evaluation criteria which respect 
the nature, the differences between and the sources of rigour within, the qualitative, 
interpretive and case study traditions. 
Accordingly, Klein and Myers (1999) present seven interdependent principles for 
conducting and evaluating interpretive field studies in information systems. In this 
category, they include ethnography and those aspects of case study which depend on 
data from participative observation. 
Overarching the other six principles is the hermeneutic foundation of interpretive 
research and the attempt to understand phenomena through the meanings people assign 
to them. The fundamental principle is the hermeneutic circle in which, citing 
Gadamer, they say,  .. the movement of understanding is constantly from the whole 
to the part and back to the whole .. The harmony of all details with the whole is the 
criterion of correct understanding. 
The remaining six principles are outlined below : 
1. Contextualisation : subject matter (must) be set in its social and historical 
context so that the intended audience can see how the current situation under 
investigation emerged. 
2. Interaction : understanding results from the exchange of interpretations 
between the researcher and other participants in the Problem Situation. 
3. Abstraction / Generalisation : the attempt to relate particulars .. to very 
abstract categories ; unique instances can be related to ideas and concepts 
that apply to multiple situations. 
4. Dialogical Reasoning : the researcher must identify explicitly the 
fundamental philosophical roots of the research, both to his readers and to 
himself ; must identify what type of interpretivism (he) prefers, identify its 
philosophical roots, and relate the particular strengths and weaknesses of the 
preferred philosophical direction to the purpose of the work.  
5. Multiple Interpretations : where dialogical reasoning requires the researcher 
to confront the implications of his own pre-conditioned values and 
judgements, as the necessary starting point of our understanding, multiple 
interpretations recognises the scope for dissensus as well as consensus 
between the interpretations of different participants. 
6. Suspicion : of the grounds for belief, assent, trust and attention, 
demonstrated in a given social setting. 
Two important issues arise from the hermeneutic origin of these seven principles. First, 
the authors identify that hermeneutic interpretation can never be detached from 
contamination by historically-conditioned, socially constructed systems of value. The 
principles of dialogical reasoning and multiple interpretations deliberately acknowledge 
this and require the researcher to be aware constantly of the prejudices which are 
shaping his and their current understanding. 
Second, where validity in positivist experimental research stems from statistical 
similarity between the study setting and the situations to which the study findings are 
extrapolated, they reiterate Walshams (1993, p.15) argument that validity in 
interpretive studies stems from the plausibility and the cogency of the logical reasoning 
used in describing the results from the cases and in drawing conclusions from them. 
By making use of Deetz (1996) schema, we can take this argument one stage further by 
ensuring that Walshams plan of cogent and logical reasoning derives validity from 
each of Deetz four quadrants : from correspondence between formal arguments in the 
functionalist quadrant ; from cultural understanding in the interpretive quadrant ; 
from ethical exploration in the critical quadrant ; and from the free expression of 
uncensored argument in the dialogical quadrant. 
Klein & Myers (1999) principle of suspicion tacitly establishes a link with the critical 
tradition, where there is a constant awareness of the sources and effects of distorted 
communication stemming from power asymmetry and resistance towards what they 
call the restrictive and alienating conditions of the status quo. 
4.4.3 : Quality Criteria for Realistic Case Studies : Healy and Perry (2000) 
Healy and Perry (2000) detect a gap in the literature that fails to supply criteria for 
validity and reliability within the paradigm of scientific realism. 
Table 4.4.1 is adapted from their account and serves to summarise a plan of critical 
appraisal for qualitative studies.  
They begin by contrasting their validity criteria for realistic case studies against those 
normally produced for positivist research. They also comment on validity criteria for 
two other paradigms, constructivism and critical theory. 
Table 4.4.1 : Validity Criteria for Critical Appraisal of Studies in Different 
Paradigms (adapted from Healy & Perry, 2000) 
 Positivism Constructivism Critical 
Theory 
Realism 
Suitability 
Paradigm 
Things that are not 
defined by human 
perception. 
People who reflect and make choices. 
Consistency 
Paradigm 
Internal 
consistency of 
context-
independent ideas. 
Explicit 
interpretive 
framework and 
assumptions. 
Explicit 
critical 
framework and 
assumptions. 
Argument 
demonstrated 
with reference 
to context. 
Perspective Single, neutral, 
perspective ignores 
individual human 
perspectives. 
Takes account 
of multiple 
perspectives 
with the 
intention of 
understanding.  
Takes account 
of multiple 
perspectives 
with the 
intention of 
emancipation. 
Takes account 
of multiple 
perspectives to 
demonstrate 
contingency. 
Rigour of 
Method 
Carefully 
constructed 
apparatus and 
procedures limit 
error, eliminate 
chance effects and 
ensure accuracy of 
measurement. 
Research conclusions can be traced back through 
quotations, transcripts, documented observations, 
original documents etc. 
Continuous search for corroborating statements / 
data sources (triangulation). Alternatively, 
continuous sceptical search for contradictory 
(deviant) sources. 
Adherence to canonical features of specific 
methods. 
Focus Hypothesis Testing 
and Deduction 
from Theory.  
Explores the 
terms of social 
practice and 
moral 
arguments. 
Explores the 
ethical basis of 
social practice 
and moral 
arguments. 
Induction, 
Hypothesis 
Development 
and Theory 
Building. 
Construct 
Validity 
The quantity 
measured 
accurately reflects 
the quality it 
represents. 
Concepts are labelled from 
individual or collective, but non-
universal human perspectives. 
There is no yardstick of validity 
in these paradigms.  
Rigorous link 
between 
concept and 
label. Explicit 
rules 
determine 
category 
membership. 
Category label 
describes all 
aspects of 
category. 
4.4.4 : A Model Case Study 
Healy and Perry (2000) describe the conduct of a realistic case study. After preliminary 
literature review and interviews, the researcher they describe drew up an initial 
theoretical model which he then used as the basis for further in-depth interviews with a 
carefully selected, non-random sample of respondents. He triangulated the emerging 
picture with evidence from documents and further interviews. Finally, he compared his 
interview transcripts and presented a theory in the form of a narrative. 
That researcher explicitly outlined the criteria that could be used to judge the quality of 
his own research. First, he defended his choice of realism as the appropriate paradigm in 
which to conduct his research. Second, he carefully described the local and historical 
context in which the events described in the research happened. 
Contrary to Constructivism, this Realistic researcher did not confirm real status on his 
own perceptions but used these as a comparator for the multiple perspectives of other 
informants.  
He gave transparency to his conclusions by establishing an audit trail backwards 
through quotations, interview transcripts and a database of interviews, respondents, key 
quotes and category codes. Also, he described key procedures for case selection and 
data analysis and he described how he established rapport in his interviews without 
introducing bias. The validity of constructs was established through their comparison 
with existing literature and the text of transcripts. 
4.5   :   D E S I G N   A N D   C O N D U C T   O F   T H E   S T U D Y 
4.5.0 : Introduction 
Having discussed theoretical aspects of qualitative research, it is now time to explain, 
step by step, how the research was designed and conducted. I defined my terms of 
reference, considered my status within the organisation of interest, developed my plan 
of study and sought ethical approval. I then sought and gained the consent of those I 
wished to contribute information.  
I constructed the research around qualitative interviews. These required me to make 
efficient use of respondents limited time and elicit their information without imposing 
my own. I spent many hours, faithfully transcribing the tape recording of each 
interview. Finally, I had to develop a treatment of the transcripts that would accurately 
reflect the information received in a set of balanced arguments, grounded in those data.  
Aware at all stages that I might encounter multiple perspectives and rhetorics, I took 
care to set aside any pre-conceived ideas of my own, about the detail of their content. 
4.5.1 : Terms of Reference 
At the outset of the study, I defined my own terms of reference. These were, to prepare 
for the introduction a new information system within my own department by 
understanding the potential impact of a new information system from an understanding 
of interactions between front line users in the Emergency Department and their existing 
information systems. 
After presentation of preliminary plans to an academic audience, I was advised to 
extend my terms of reference to include a focus on the evaluation of information 
systems within the National Programme. 
At a later stage, I sought approval from the Chief Executive of the hospital, to interview 
board-level executive officers about their information requirements and their 
expectations from new information systems. The Chief Executive requested me to make 
my research as relevant as possible to the Trusts evolving IT programme and its 
implementation. 
It was only at the end of the study period that the Trust began to develop the detail of a 
plan to upgrade its existing information systems. At this stage, I was able to contribute 
some of my findings to the planning team. 
4.5.2 : The Research Setting 
The research was conducted in a standard NHS Trust Hospital with approximately 600 
beds. It provides a 24 hour emergency service and it balances this provision with the 
fulfilment of contracts for prescribed volumes of elective in-patient work. There is a 
tension between these two streams of clinical activity. 
The district served by the Trust contains pockets of significant urban deprivation and 
many emergency patients present with a diagnostic label that describes only 
inadequately the complex medical and social problems they face. 
Distant from any metropolitan setting, the Trust depends on a relatively stable 
workforce of nurses but, at the same time, experiences difficulty recruiting to all of its 
nursing posts. Various initiatives have been pursued to recruit abroad but there is a 
significant gap between actual and target establishments. 
There is a similar gap between the Trusts actual and target medical establishment. It 
is normal in the NHS for the medical workforce to be more mobile than its nurses, 
except for consultants who tend to remain in post for the rest of their career. 
Although the Trust has an excellent industrial relations history, the recruitment gap 
places strains on individual staff and wards. 
The research was centred in the Trusts Accident & Emergency (A&E) Department. 
This department accepts undifferentiated patients with a wide variety of clinical and 
social problems, which vary in their acuity, urgency and complexity. It organises urgent 
management and streams patients into the hospitals differentiated, speciality wards. 
Where hospital clinics and GP surgeries operate appointments systems, access to A&E 
is open. Efforts to create order are constantly undermined by new disorder. 
An A&E department is a microcosm of the Trust and the NHS, because of the 
multiplicity of its interfaces and the variety of its patients. All the operational problems 
and deficiencies of the Trust and the Primary Care network concentrate their effect on 
this department, whether through a chronic shortage of beds or through patients 
perceived difficulties in obtaining access to primary care services. 
This has meant, on protracted occasions, that the A&E Department has maintained its 
own proper function whilst also accommodating substantial numbers of demanding 
patients for long periods after the completion of their emergency care. 
Problems with the flow of patients in the hospital at large are thus reflected in, and 
compound, the problem of flow through the limited accommodation in A&E. For the 
departments doctors and nurses, there is a perpetual tension between the management 
of flow and the careful management of each individual patient. 
The principal constraints and challenges faced by the Trust include its financial limit, 
the need to respond to government imposed performance targets, the need to maintain 
public confidence in its services, the need to manage its limited beds and the need to 
recruit, retain and develop its workforce. 
The ethos of work in the Trust is a blend of professional focus on the individual patient, 
respect for organisational hierarchy and the cohesion of small workgroups who aim to 
maintain professional standards under conditions which are often non-standard. Causes 
of sub-optimal conditions include parsimonious establishments and staff absences that 
can place unwelcome strain on those present. 
The principal element of the Trusts clinical governance is its clinical management 
structure, of divisions and directorates. This is supplemented by clinical audit and 
research and development functions but the intensity of these functions is less than 
would be encountered in the academic environment of a metropolitan teaching hospital.  
The emphasis is constantly on the management of performance against the financial and 
measured targets of each individual administrative unit. The link between clinical audit 
projects and service improvement initiatives is relatively weak. Little development 
activity has tended to take place across the interfaces between individual directorates or 
divisions. As the research reached its conclusion, this situation began to show signs of 
changing. 
4.5.3 : The Status of the Researcher 
Throughout the study, I have been employed as a full time clinical consultant in 
Emergency Medicine, working evening and weekend shifts as well as daytime work. I 
have also frequently attended the department at night to respond to individual medical 
emergencies or to a diffuse an overall situation when queues have developed beyond the 
ability of rostered staff to cope. 
My role as a senior clinician has also required me to attend a variety of planning and 
clinical governance meetings as well as, specifically, meetings to plan the development 
of new information systems. 
I have thus been, in all senses, a full participant in the clinical service and in the 
planning of support for its delivery and governance. The nature of my clinical 
workplace is to require significant collaboration and mutual sensitivity between doctors, 
nurses and managers. Immersed deeply in the overall culture of the hospital, I have also 
been aware of its heterogeneity and the need to understand the multiple perspectives it 
contains. These derive from each members employment group (managerial, clerical, 
clinical) and level of seniority or span of responsibility within that group. 
4.5.4 : Form of Study 
I framed the study around several choices : of paradigm (science, interpretation, 
critique), of tradition (biography, grounded theory, phenomenology, ethnography, case 
study), of methodology (watching and observing people, talking to people, reading 
about them and their activities), and of technique (form of observation/participation, 
interview structure, mode of documentary analysis). 
I had to plan to contain my study within my available time and resources, and to 
propose a form of study that would not present ethical difficulty to a senior medical 
practitioner who might be drawn into complex decision making as a result of his 
presence and expected availability to staff in the clinical environment. 
The need for patients to consent was avoided by limiting the study to NHS staff.  
The form of study proposed was an interpretive and critical case study, based on 
qualitative interviews which would not be highly structured. 
4.5.5 : Ethical Approval 
The study received approval from the Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Health in the 
University of Central Lancashire. The research proposal was also submitted via the 
COREC process and the Blackpool, Fylde and Wyre Local NHS Research Ethics 
Committee advised, this project is not one which is required to be ethically reviewed 
under the terms of the Governance Arrangements for Research Ethics Committees in the 
4.5.6 : Consent to Participate 
All those interviewed gave written consent to be interviewed, and for their transcripts to 
be quoted in an academic publication. I informed participants in planning meetings of 
my interest and intention to publish and they gave their collective, verbal consent. 
4.5.7 : The Impact of Research Ethics on the Research 
Alongside the formal research ethics procedures, it is necessary to consider how ethical 
issues affect the conduct of the research. 
Research in the NHS is governed by ethical arrangements which place the safety, 
autonomy, privacy and confidentiality of patients above the search for knowledge. 
Given that the implementation of information systems in the Trust had not proceeded as 
far as electronic patient records, it was not necessary to intrude into individual doctor-
patient consultations.  
Nevertheless, the governance structure of research ethics in the NHS discourages non-
consensual participation in research both by patients and by NHS staff. Explicit 
statements in the ethics approval form identify the potential harms to both groups and 
the proposed measures to avoid these. When disclosures are likely to be sensitive, it is 
necessary to be explicit about formal consent by staff to participate and about the 
security of tapes and transcripts.  
I was aware that the findings of the research might have consequences for the 
reputations of the managers and other participants in the research project, for the Trust 
and its reputation, and for the success or otherwise of its information programme which 
represented a huge capital investment. 
This translated into a professional responsibility for the confidentiality of his informants 
and to avoid causing harm through inappropriate attribution or disclosure of findings. 
My resources and experience did not allow me to adopt a high organisational profile as 
a researcher and I was wary of intruding in managerial affairs, beyond the authority of 
my slowly emerging findings. 
A sense of duty to communicate findings to the managers and clinicians involved, soon 
after interviews had been completed, conflicted with an equally felt duty : to process the 
research data in a careful, reflexive and reflective way and to construct a robustly 
coherent, credible and rigorously defensible set of narratives before releasing findings 
that might otherwise mislead. 
Although doctor-patient consultations were excluded from the research, and interviews 
took place outside the clinical setting, I found myself in a quandary over the dual role I 
held as a consultant in the department where much of the research took place.   
First, my status as a senior clinician had the potential to impact on the veracity of my 
interview subjects. In part this was mitigated by my having built, over time a mature, 
friendly and mutually respectful relationship with the hospitals staff in general.  
Aware that some interviewees might inhibited by my status as a senior organisational 
figure, I avoided selecting individuals myself. Instead, I requested head nurses, in the 
manner suggested by Mumford (1995), to brief groups of staff from different grades and 
to invite the election, by peers, of individuals who would relate personal experience but 
also reflect the consensus of their colleagues. 
Whilst these procedures helped to dispel any sense of coercion to participate, the 
general formality of NHS ethics approval and governance structures favoured a plan of 
explicit, written consent and an opportunity for cooling off between the invitation to 
participate and the actual interview. The formal nature of these additional procedures 
tended to distance me from, rather than helping me to join in, the research situation 
with its inhabitants. 
Second, it was not feasible for me to abandon my medical consultant role to act purely 
in a research capacity when present on the shop floor. My starting point was already 
that of the ethnographer who has gone native. It was necessary for me to consider how 
to set boundaries around my own stock of experience in order not to commit the 
cardinal sin of the full participant, loss of objectivity. 
For a researcher seeking positivist credentials, doing research to a community, this 
would have been a significant problem. For a researcher in the hermeneutic-
phenomenological tradition, doing research with that community, the issue is not 
objectivity (comparison of observation with ideal truth) but reflexivity (the recursive 
exchange of influence between the social context of the research and the researchers 
comprehension of the emerging reality of the research situation). Reflexivity allowed 
me to regard myself as one of my own informants, able sceptically to test my own 
inside knowledge and preconceptions against the conclusions emerging from other 
data, and vice versa.  
This sceptical treatment elevated the status of my inside knowledge and personal 
experience, allowing me to regard as valid testimony, observations and insights that 
would otherwise have been regarded as anecdote. 
4.5.8 : Study Participants 
Interviews were conducted in four batches over a period of 15 months, between Spring, 
2006 and Summer, 2007. 
Batch 1 interviews explored the ways nurses in the Emergency Department (the ED) 
used that departments information system. One use of the information system was to 
manage the flow of patients through the department. 
Batch 2 interviews assessed the information and organisational requirements to manage 
the flow of patients through the hospital. 
Batch 3 interviews assessed the organisational preoccupations and information 
requirements of board level executives and their associated managers. 
Batch 4 interviews were conducted to complement the managerial and nursing 
perspectives already gained, by eliciting those of consultant level medical staff who 
were associated with specific clinical and organisational initiatives. 
Tables 4.5.1 (a-d) outline the characteristics of those interviewed and the rationale for 
their selection. 
I have been concerned to avoid the identification of individual informants through their 
unique job titles. Because of this, the indicative attributions of interview extracts cited 
in the research report (chapters five and six) do not always concord precisely with the 
identities shown in the left hand column of the tables. 
Table 4.5.1 (a) : Characteristics of those interviewed in Batch 1 
Interviewee Responsible to Special Interest 
Healthcare Assistant 
Staff Nurse #1 Performance of simple tasks within a 
loosely-controlled team structure 
Healthcare Assistant 
Staff Nurse #1 Performance of simple tasks within a 
loosely-controlled team structure 
Staff Nurse #1 Sister #3 Management of clinical activity 
within a sub-unit of the ED 
Staff Nurse #2 Sister #3 Management of clinical activity 
within a sub-unit of the ED 
Sister #1 Sister #3 Supervision of junior nurses and 
supporting staff throughout the ED as 
a whole 
Sister #2 Sister #3 Supervision of junior nurses and 
supporting staff throughout the ED as 
a whole 
Sister #3 ED Nurse Manager Supervision of junior nurses and 
supporting staff throughout the ED as 
a whole 
ED Nurse Manager  Nursing professional discipline and 
standards of practice within the ED 
and associated Medical Admissions 
ED Clinical Director  Medical professional discipline and 
standards of practice within the ED 
and associated Medical Admissions 
Table 4.5.1 (b) : Characteristics of those interviewed in Batch 2 
Interviewee Responsible to Special Interest 
ED Business Manager Director of 
Operations 
Operational performance against 4 
hour target for transit through ED 
Bed Manager ED Business 
Manager 
Timely matching of waiting patients 
with vacant beds 
Discharge Co-
ordinator 
ED Business 
Manager 
Timely discharge of patients from 
occupied beds ; diversion of ED 
patients away from ward-based care 
and into community-based care 
Directorate Assistant ED Business 
Manager 
Investigation of service complaints 
and 4 hour target breaches 
Ward Sister Divisional Nursing 
Officer 
Clinical procedures and processes of 
ward-based patient care 
Director of Operations Chief Executive Operational performance against 4 
hour target for transit through ED 
Director of Planning 
and Performance 
Chief Executive Operational performance against 4 
hour target for transit through ED 
Table 4.5.1 (c) : Characteristics of those interviewed in Batch 3 
Interviewee Responsible to Special Interest 
IT Manager Director of Finance  Responsible to implement key 
deliverables within the National 
Programme 
Information Officer IT Manager Information storage, retrieval and 
representation 
Director of Finance Chief Executive Board level responsibility for 
Information, and for the Trusts 
financial balance 
Deputy Chief 
Executive 
Chief Executive Board level responsibility for 
Business Planning and Operations 
Director of Planning & 
Performance 
Deputy Chief 
Executive 
Compliance with external direction 
and assembly and interpretation of 
business information 
Deputy Medical 
Director #1 
Medical Director Patient Safety and Risk Management 
Deputy Medical 
Director #2 
Medical Director Medicines management : safe 
prescribing and dispensing 
Divisional Director 
(Consultant) 
Medical Director / 
Deputy Chief 
Executive 
Development of services, service 
quality and business plans across a 
range of directorates, including 
Emergency Medicine 
Table 4.5.1 (d) : Characteristics of those interviewed in Batch 4 
Interviewee Responsible to Special Interest 
Deputy Medical 
Director #2 
Medical Director Medicines management : safe 
prescribing and dispensing 
Consultant #1 Medical Director Innovative development of clinical 
services for Stroke patients 
Consultant #2 Medical Director Cardiothoracic Surgeon, proactive in 
publishing of clinical outcomes by 
named surgeons 
Consultant # 3 Medical Director Emergency Physician at start of 
consultant career, facing significant 
structural change in service provision 
Consultant #4 Medical Director / 
Chief Executive 
Orthopaedic Surgeon with interest in 
a new field of surgery and its 
outcomes : nominated by Chief 
Executive and Medical Director to 
lead local  engagement of consultants 
with the National Programme 
4.5.9 : Conduct of Interviews 
An interview is a direct interaction with the respondent and there is potential for the 
social dynamic of the interview to generate selective disclosure or an account that the 
interviewee thinks the researcher wants to hear. At other times, the speaker may 
genuinely believe what he is saying and may be unaware of his own tacit assumptions 
and bias. 
Each interview was structured sufficiently to focus on the basic topics the researcher 
wished to explore, and to manage efficiently the limited time the interviewee could 
spare. Interviews lasted between 30 and 60 minutes. This allowed time for disclosure 
and in-depth probing, and for the interviewee to develop his own themes without the 
interviewer imposing his own ideas. 
I aimed to adopt an empathic rather than an inquisitorial style of questioning, to 
encourage honest rather than censored disclosure. 
Each episode in the interview began with open ended questions to invite explanation, 
rather than confirmation or denial of a proposition. Later questions in each phase invited 
elaboration and continued disclosure or amplification. Reflective comments were 
sometimes made at this stage in order to maintain rapport, to project empathy, close 
psychological distance, challenge answers without alienating the interviewee, and 
maintain the flow of information. 
Towards the close of each phase, if necessary for understanding, direct questions were 
used to confirm a tentative conclusion. Alternatively a summary, of the conclusion 
reached from listening, was offered for confirmation. 
As each topic became exhausted, I resumed control and directed the interviewee into a 
fresh topic. 
4.5.10 : Data Capture 
Each interview was tape recorded. I carefully transcribed each recording, statement by 
statement, frequently rewinding to verify what I had heard and ensuring that every word 
was reproduced accurately. Tapes were destroyed after transcription, but each informant 
was invited to read the transcript of their own interview in order to rectify any possible 
misrepresentation. 
4.5.11 : Ancillary and Corroborative Data Sources 
Documentary data sources included policy and guidance documents freely available 
within the NHS, the reports and other documents submitted by the IT Manager to the 
Trust Board, team briefing and other materials issued by the Chief Executive and other 
Executive Directors. My participative observation of practice in various settings took 
place either as a participant-as-observer in a senior clinical and clinical-managerial role 
in my own work setting or, in other settings, as an observer-as-participant with a 
declared interest in information systems research. 
4.5.12: Data Treatment and Interpretation 
Deciding what to do with the data 
Procedures to construct a grounded theory or a phenomenology (the irreducible 
structure of the phenomenon) were identified in section three of this chapter. These 
procedures share the goal of establishing the best possible approximation to absolute, 
discoverable truth. The outcome is a robust theory without, necessarily, a prescription 
for action. 
The diagnostic and therapeutic intent of action research need not prescribe action from 
an expert position. Its more modest aim is to help those in the problem situation (itself 
a mosaic of intersecting problem situations, seen from different perspectives) to 
determine their own way forward, on the basis of perspectives opened up by the 
researcher. To be helpful, these perspectives also need to be critical. 
To achieve this purpose, the aim of data treatment is to identify themes that originate in 
the data, are coherent with the situated context from which the data have been derived, 
and are as consistent with a conflict perspective as they are with consensus. 
Deciding how to do it 
Pope, Ziebland & Mays (2000) describe framework analysis as an alternative to 
grounded theory. Where grounded theory insists on the emergence of theory from the 
data alone, framework analysis allows the incorporation of a priori concepts, derived 
from experience of the research environment, gained by the researcher or others, outside 
the immediate context of the research activity. Framework analysis contains the 
following stages : 
1. Familiarisation : reading and re-reading the data. 
2. Thematic analysis : continuous comparison of each transcript with a priori and 
emergent themes. 
3. Indexing : themes are identified by shorthand codes and each transcript is 
annotated according to the themes it represents. 
4. Charting : Each emerging theme is represented on a chart, showing the location 
of representative excerpts from each interview transcript. Each interviewee or 
sub-set of interviewees from the overall sample is represented on a similar chart, 
displaying the themes identified to that individual or cluster. 
5. Mapping and Interpretation : This process is guided by the initial research 
objectives and by the themes which have merged during (2) and the subsequent 
stages. The charts are used to assemble concepts, to show how each concept 
varies between individuals or situations, and to show how concepts are related. 
Having set out with the intent, to isolate individual words, phrases of paragraphs of text 
to confidently identified, quasi-algebraic categories from which I would be able to 
deduce and construct logical arguments, I identified, as principal a priori themes, five 
well-publicised strategic issues for the Trust.  
My definition of emergent themes underwent frequent and iterative revision as I 
examined more and more data, such that the sequence of completed analytic steps gave 
way to a more direct process of written argumentation, represented by successive 
drafting and repeated re-drafting of the material which will be presented in chapter six. 
In practice, I could only understand emerging data items in relation to an emerging, 
overall interpretation of the data. 
I could only appreciate the statements that constituted the data in relation to their 
surrounding context, within and between transcripts. The fundamental aspect of my 
approach was to engage intensively in continuous comparison between text fragments 
and passages, themes emerging from these data, new learning about the field acquired 
as the research progressed and, finally, my own personal knowledge of the field. I 
considered the latter to be essential if I were to have realistic confidence in the 
credibility of my own emerging conclusions. 
I recognised that hypotheses suggested by any given interview need not be refuted by 
contradictory statements from another. I expected that plural perspectives were just as 
likely to diverge as to converge. I deliberately sought evidence of multiple, independent 
perspectives that need not be reconciled, as well as seeking deviant cases that might 
modify any emerging consensus between convergent statements. I was sensitive to 
different managerial and clinical rhetorics, so that I could make distinctions and 
recognise the multiple realities of stakeholders in specific situations. 
C H A P T E R   F I V E 
D E V E L O P I N G 
A   D I A G N O S T I C   A N D   T H E R A P E U T I C 
A P P R O A C H 
T O   T H E   P R O B L E M   S I T U A T I O N 
5.0   :   I N T R O D U C T I O N 
This chapter uses the stages suggested in NIMSAD (Jayaratna, 1994) to build a 
diagnostic and therapeutic approach to the advent of the National Programme, seen 
initially as a solution without a clearly-defined parent problem, in an NHS hospital, 
interpreted as a multi-layered organisation with multiple goals. 
Somehow, the Information Technology delivery system and the business delivery 
system need to be aligned. This is as much a social as a rational or technical problem. It 
highlights the need for equitable organisational discourse, yet the well-articulated 
intentions of information systems suppliers and the upper levels of management are not 
matched by an explicit comprehension, by users, of their own requirements from their 
future information systems. 
The purpose of the diagnostic and therapeutic framework to be developed in this chapter 
is to help identify and better align, the needs of the information systems future users 
with those of its corporate sponsors.  
The framework developed in this chapter will then be demonstrated by application in 
Chapter Six.  
5.1 : NIMSAD Stage 1   :    
U N D E R S T A N D I N G   T H E   S I T U A T I O N   O F   C O N C E R N 
Meeting the IT Manager 
5.1.0 : Section Summary and Introduction 
The introduction of information systems is mandated centrally through NHS policy for 
information. The National Programme is perceived at the point of implementation as a 
source of costs. The business and clinical value of meeting these costs needs to be 
identified. 
This section introduces the IT Manager so that we can understand, through his eyes, the 
problem of implementing the National Programme locally. The Situation of Concern 
is that the National Programme for IT is to be implemented in a large hospital within the 
The section will review the IT Managers current Implementation Plan in the form of 
tasks and milestones. The Implementation Plan is a rational model of the Intervention 
which the implementation of the National Programme represents. It forms a template for 
a sequence of problem-solving decisions. 
The IT Manager is expected to present an IT strategy and to plan an ordered sequence of 
steps. These have to be assimilated by the managers who will approve and execute his 
plans, and on the clinicians who will use the systems successfully.  
Because of this, the section will provide an alternative view of the IT Managers 
situation, using an approach derived from Soft Systems Methodology. This view will 
take the form of a Rich Picture.  
The Rich Picture is not a definitive map, capable of only one interpretation. It depicts 
elements in association but it is expected that the nature of the association between 
elements will depend on the interpretations of disparate individuals with different 
technical, organisational and personal or professional perspectives. 
As such, the Rich Picture represents the potential for social dissonance as well as 
social cohesion. It sets out not a problem for solution but a complex Problem Situation 
in which it will be necessary, sometimes in succession and sometimes simultaneously, 
to make a set of pragmatic accommodations. 
5.1.1 : Entering the Situation of Concern 
The first key feature of the Situation is the cost of the information programme against 
the background of the Trusts commitment to recover from a 22M financial shortfall. 
Against this background, the IT managers proposals are likely to be tested through the 
comparison of infrastructure costs with costed benefits which might result if key 
activities can be made better.  
Table 5.1.1 shows the projected cost of the IT Managers proposed programme  
Table 5.1.1 : Projected Local Costs of the IT Programme 
Financial Year Revenue Capital 
Current 
Quantified 
Benefits 
(recurrent) 
2006/07 Identified Identified  
2007/08 190k 1,648k  
2008/09 
Cumulative - 225k  
1,000k 450k 
2009/10 
100k 
Cumulative - 325k 
1,000k  
The second key feature, therefore, is the interface between the National Programme and 
the Trusts own goals, strategic direction and business plan.  
The third key feature follows in the form of the risk, that benefits cannot be identified to 
justify capital expenditure, or that anticipated benefits might not be realised. 
At present, progress is measured against project implementation milestones, of the kind 
shown in Table 5.1.2, and against the original six levels of integration contained in 
Information for Health. 
Table 5.1.2 Project Schedule for the Local IT Implementation Programme 
Time Line System/functionality 
Project 
Electronic Records Management Feasibility study 
Technical Infrastructure Review capability 
Pathology Review current system 
Radiology Implement new system 
Infection Control Implement new system 
2007 Q1 
Cancer e-Prescribing Implement new system 
Digital Dictation Feasibility study 
e-Prescribing Option Appraisal 
Pharmacy Automation Feasibility study 
Scheduling  18 weeks Feasibility study 
ChooseandBook v2 Implement National Solution 
BVH Wireless Network Implement 
2007 Q2 
Sterile Services  Track and Trace Implement National Solution 
PACS Central Store Implement National Solution 
H@N Communications Implement new system 
2007 Q3 
Urgent Care Centre Implement new system 
Clinical Modules  LE2.2 on current PAS  
includes Order Communications and Results 
Reporting 
Implement 2007 Q4 
Implement Scheduling for 18 weeks. Implement 
2008 Q1 Total Bed Management Solution Feasibility study 
2008 Q3 Clinical Modules  LE3.5  with reference 
PAS, includes Maternity functionality. 
Feasibility study  and Implement 
2009 Q2 Clinical Modules  LE3.5  extended 
functionality 
Feasibility study  and Implement 
2009 Q4 Clinical Modules  LE4.0  with clinical 
documentation, Theatres, Pharmacy and e-
Prescribing 
Feasibility study  and Implement 
Although the IT manager is the only person for whom IT is a sole responsibility, he is 
directly accountable to the Director of Finance, for whom complete recovery of 
revenues is a major concern, and he is also supported, and accountable to the Trust 
Board, via the governance structure indicated in Table 5.1.3. 
Table 5.1.3 : Governance of the Local IT Programme 
TRUST 
BOARD 
Organisation Strategy. Ensuring the 
Trust makes best use of IM&T to drive 
the overall organisation strategy. 
INFORMATION GOVERNANCE 
COMMITTEE 
Senior Responsible Officer 
Making strategic investment decisions. 
Defining the strategic direction of the 
Trust with regard to IM&T. Defining 
and monitoring the Operation Plan for 
the Trust. Establishing frameworks to 
achieve the programme. Lead in the 
governance of IM&T and establishing 
values and behaviour required. Ensuring 
benefits are stated and ultimately 
delivered. 
IG Programme Board 
Programme 
Manager 
Business 
Change 
Managers 
Programme/ 
Project 
Office 
Leading, Managing and Monitoring the 
Programme through to the delivery of 
the new capabilities and the realisation 
of benefits.. 
Coordinating the work of the 
programme. 
Handling risks and issues  
Projects 
Local 
Health 
Economy 
National 
Led through recognised Project 
Management Methodologies (Prince II). 
Relevant Project Executives and Project 
Managers responsible for the delivery of 
the Projects and Benefits. Handles 
Project Issues and Risks. 
The link between the purchase and introduction of IT resources, and the realisation of 
benefits by the Trust is not clear. What is happening when benefits are being realised, 
how is IT helping, what are the priorities, and how are IT systems to be made 
unobtrusive when they are introduced ? 
However, he is also influenced externally by the central structure of Connecting for 
Health, through the Strategic health Authority and its Chief Information Officer. 
Therefore, the IT managers responsibilities include a mix of local and national, 
internally and externally-driven initiatives which need to be made coherent with each 
other, and with the overall development of the Trust. 
A variety of local IT projects are intended to contribute to these aims : 
 Full N3 local compliance 
 PC Replacement Scheme 
 Radiology Information System 
(RIS)  integrated to PACS 
 PACS central store integration 
 Wireless Networking to support 
Hospital at Night. 
 Maternity functionality 
 Infection Control systems 
 Emergency and Unscheduled Care 
 Track and Trace (Blood Products 
and Sterile Services) 
 e-Prescribing 
 Whole Systems Bed Management 
 Additional Choose and Book 
compliance 
 Scheduling (incl. Diagnostics) 
 Electronic Records Management 
(incl. Document Management) 
 Digital Dictation 
Table 5.1.4 shows the main areas of development within the IT managers plan, their 
costs and their contingencies. 
Table 5.1.4 : Local IT Development Areas and Costs 
Interfaced Current Est. Cost Financial Year Notes 
System 
Yes No 
Capital 
,000 
Revenue 
,000 
Radiology X  Project Started 2006/07 Identified within Radiology Budgets 
Electronic Records 
Management  Document 
Management 
X  23 0 Feasibility Study 
Pathology X  150 20 150,000 
Infection Control  X Project funded elsewhere 
Part of the Pathology Modernisation and 
300k capital bid 
Cancer e -Prescribing  X Project funded elsewhere Funded through the Cancer Network 
Digital Dictation X  0 0 Feasibility Study 
e-Prescribing   0 0 Feasibility Study. Will form part of LE4.0 
18 weeks  scheduling X  450 45 High Priority 
ChooseandBook v2.0 
compliance 
Bid for funding to Executive 
Directors 
Part of Operational Services 
Technical Infrastructure 
review 
Wireless Infrastructure   200 20 Essential enabling infrastructure 
Sterile Services  Track and 
Trace 
X  Project funded elsewhere 
Estimated to cost 300k in hardware  
funded via Estates Capital 
PACS Central Store X  Central funding allocated 100k of central funding allocated 
Hospital at Night 
Communications 
X  250 45 
Hospital at night communications study to 
be performed first. 
Urgent Care Centre X  Project funded elsewhere Part of UCC Project 
PC Replacement Scheme X  250 0  
Clinical modules LE2.2 X  300 60 
2007/08 
PID required. This includes Ordering and 
Results 
Whole  systems Bed 
Management 
X  150 35 
Review in 2007/08 for implementation in 
2008/09 
Clinical modules LE3.5  
reference solution, PAS and 
Maternity included 
X  600 (450) Note: 450k (revenue benefit) 
PC Replacement Scheme X  250 0 
2008/09 
Clinical modules LE3.5  
extended functionality 
X  250 0 Will form extended part of LE3.5 Project 
PC Replacement Scheme X  250 0  
Clinical modules LE4.0  
advanced functionality 
X  500 100 
2009/10 
Requires PID for firm cost estimates 
5.1.2 : Understanding the Situation of Concern from the IT Managers perspective 
In the previous section, we looked at what had to be done. The task had a self-contained 
aspect which provided little insight into its relevance, the relationships to be established 
or the reasons why others might want to associate or dissociate themselves. 
Phenomenon of Interest : IT and Business Strategies Disconnected 
The phenomenon of interest is the implementation of the National Programme at the 
level of an NHS Trust. The Trusts IT strategy is reactive and disconnected from its 
business strategy. 
This makes it difficult for the IT manager to align his development plan with specific 
aspects of the Trusts plans : 
I'm trying to take the Trusts IM&T strategy and fit it with the goals of the 
organisation and look at what systems we need to develop to support these 
goals. (IT Manager) 
how we get from multiple agendas at different timescales, based on 
when there's an opportunity, to this integrated timeline that is taking us to an 
integrated system. (IT Manager) 
This is my plan, but what's the plan? (IT Manager) 
Causal Conditions : IT Not Seen as Instrumental to Broader Goals 
Isolated from the mainstream of the business agenda, the IT agenda commands 
insufficient support from the executive and the general workforce. 
We seem to go, here is a wonderful system.  The IT manager and his team will 
get it working. Nobody will dispute that they get the systems working, but 
whether people are actually signed up to what it really means etc is difficult. 
(Executive Director #2) 
Context : Uncertain Needs and Unstable Planning Assumptions 
Aside from these factors, progress is hindered by other, external as well as internal 
factors. 
The external factors include delays within the National Programme, such that promised 
products are not forthcoming, and uncertainty over the finance available for 
implementation. 
Financial constraint also operates internally : 
I am identifying possibly 1.6 million worth of capital. Now, that, at the 
moment, is nowhere near agreed. (IT Manager) 
In contrast,  
"Every target is important and it's very easy for people to say, well yes we must 
do all of these, but they all conflict against each other at that monetary level. 
(IT Manager) 
The end result for the IT Manager is that many sub-projects are vulnerable to financial 
and other forms of insecurity. Dependence on uncertain factors renders delivery of the 
programme lumpy and it just keeps bunching up. 
Constant refocusing of attention is required as planned action gives way to opportunism, 
and related events proceed asynchronously and chaotically : 
I think one of the problems that we've got is that it's like a supertanker and 
flotillasEveryone, cancer networks, theyre all trying to dart around.  
They react quicker, they get pots of money, it's the usual thing that we get, you 
know, there's are pot of money at the year endI'm not so sure that we look 
at the benefits realisation in as much detail as we shouldWe're working to 
multiple agendas. (IT Manager) 
Intervening Conditions : National Programme Offerings Seem More Expensive 
Than Relevant 
As well as facing problems of definition in relation to the business plan, the local IT 
strategy is hampered by the absence of suitable products from the National 
Programmes repertoire. 
A lot of the things scheduled for this year should have been completed before.  
There are two issues for that.  The national programme is not delivering. The 
finance is not available. (IT Manager) 
 the systems we've been offered so far, and have not implemented 
have not met the basic functional requirement needs of our front-end users and 
have not met the basic functional requirement needs of our reporting users. 
What has been offered gives us less functionality than we currently have 
one reason, from my point of view, it could not produce a contract dataset and, 
therefore, we could not have submitted a contract dataset to the centre. 
(Information Officer) 
Strategies and Interactions : Forge Ahead With Infrastructure 
In the absence of a clinical and business lead, the IT strategy is focused on specific 
technical interventions rather than on IT solutions to specific clinical or business 
problems faced by the Trust. Lack of a clearly stated need interferes with users 
commitment to systems which, at a technical level, are introduced competently : 
I have a driven agenda that [tells me to implement e-prescribing] but 
what I can facilitate in e-prescribing is to make sure there's an infrastructure in 
place. So a big part of what we're doing next year, there's a wireless network to 
provide wireless connectivity. I can keep improving the technology at will, based 
on the amount of money that is made available and that's my contribution to e-
prescribing. Somebody else needs to contribute the other side of e-prescribing, 
which is related to business change. (IT Manager)   
Consequences : An IT Programme Without a Purpose 
The IT departments technical perspective is isolated from the mainstream clinical and 
business agendas. The IT department can provide infrastructure at will, given a 
programme budget, but there is a clear risk that the infrastructure provided will have no 
useful application if specific requirements are not specified by end users. As a result, it 
is difficult to focus the resource provided, and the outcome is an attempt to second-
guess the plans of others, and to cover all bases. 
In a similar vein, it is difficult to attach business or clinical meaning to the concepts 
entailed in covering all bases. These include : 
things like 18 weeks scheduling, and clinical modules including order 
communications s and results reporting. (IT Manager) 
In turn, it is also difficult to respond to external drivers, such as the mandated 
implementation of e-prescribing, other than to supply infrastructure in advance of a 
business or clinical need, clearly stated at the level of the user. 
5.1.3 : Initial Conclusions on the Situation of Concern 
In contrast with the extracts from the IT Managers plan, shown above, Figure 5.1.1 
presents the IT Managers Rich Picture. 
Figure 5.1.1 : The IT Managers Rich Picture 
The IT Manager at the centre of the picture is under scrutiny by the Chief Executive of 
the Trust and by the Regional Information Manager responsible for the implementation 
of the National Programme (Information for Health) at regional level. 
I know MY 
plan, 
Whats THE 
plan ?
Not Engaged
Organisational 
and Clinical 
Goals ???
?  ??? 
Stop   Go 
Functionality
This needs 
Strong Project 
Leadership
Infrastructure
The IT Manager wants to be proactive within a clear, coherent framework of 
organisational and clinical goals. Without this clarity, he has been forced to react to 
various incoherent developments. 
The supply of finance to the IT project is indirect and precarious. The IT Manager can 
channel infrastructure and functionality from the technical resources at his disposal 
but cannot convert these into productive clinical application. 
To do this, he has to engage with clinical colleagues. They, themselves, need to 
understand their own potential contribution to the assimilation of IT resources which 
may not appear immediately or necessarily relevant to the work they do. 
5.2 : NIMSAD Stage 2   :   D I A G N O S I S 
Widening Understanding : Meeting the Chief Executive and Members of the 
Executive Team 
5.2.0 : Section Summary and Introduction 
This short section introduces the Chief Executive and his team, then places the National 
Programme into perspective amongst their chief concerns. 
Two distinct systems can be identified in the NIMSAD DM 1 level of diagnosis (Figure 
5.2.1) : the IT delivery system and the business delivery system. 
Examined at the NIMSAD DM 2 level of diagnosis, the problem situation contains 
several constituencies (managers, clinicians, patients ; information systems users and 
suppliers) and a mix of hard, institutional (National Programme for IT, external 
regulators, the Trust) and soft, social (clinical practice) structures (Table 5.2.1). 
Figure 5.2.1 : NIMSAD DM 1 : Conceptual / Logical Diagnosis 
IT Delivery 
System 
Business 
Delivery 
System 
Available 
IT Products 
IT Products 
Deployed 
Available 
IT Products 
Information 
Inputs 
Business 
Outputs 
Resource 
Inputs 
Information 
Outputs 
External 
Regulators 
Table 5.2.1 : DM 2 : Physical Diagnosis 
Element Content 
Information 
Technology 
Programme 
Machine procurement / selection procedure Delivery 
Maintenance Training 
Trust Executive & 
Managers 
Financial management 
Performance management 
Economic efficiency 
Customer (patient) satisfaction 
Employee satisfaction 
Clinical practice Clinical Effectiveness, Patient Safety 
Information for external consumption  
for organisational learning  
for routine clinical communication 
Clinical Machine 
Users 
Use consistent / not consistent with design assumptions 
Use integrated / not integrated with clinical processes 
Patients Data security, access to care, continuity of care 
5.2.1 : The Chief Executive and Executive Team 
During the two year period, 2005-2007, the Trust experienced several major changes. 
The arrival of a new Chief Executive was associated with changes in occupancy of 
senior executive roles which included : 
 Medical Director 
 Director of Finance 
 Director of Human Resource 
 Director of Planning and Performance. 
The defining characteristics of the new Chief Executives reign have been to tackle 
aggressively a 22M financial deficit and to commit to the achievement of a challenging 
access target (the 18 Week Target, or 18 Weeks) a year in advance of requirements. 
These objectives have been seen as fundamentally necessary to the Trusts bid to earn 
quasi-autonomous, foundation status. Amongst the Trusts measurable achievements 
have been : 
 Opening of a new sub-regional centre for cardiology and cardiac surgery 
 Closure of a satellite hospital and concentration of surgical services  
 Closure of some medical beds to trim capacity 
 Ring-fencing of surgical beds to maintain throughput 
 Abolition of overspill, by medical patients into surgical beds 
 Reduction in length of stay 
 Reduction of cancelled operations. 
This year has been incredibly tough in terms of getting some of those deliverables 
in terms of pulling out money but there are some wins out there : for example 
surgical beds. The number of cancelled operations that we've had this year 
compared with last is significantly less. We are talking about major differences in 
terms of where we were performance wiseWe don't have, as a result of the 
way that were using our surgical beds, the amount of medical outliers we had, we 
did have the worst preoperative length of stay in the country.in the last 18 
months our average length of stay has come down from around six days to four 
days. Any indicator you wanted to take seemed to show an excess of medical beds 
compared with anywhere else in the countrythat was a hurdle we had to get 
over. From a clinical best practice perspective it has improved dramatically and 
then there has been a saving on the other side. (Executive Director #2) 
5.2.2 : Putting the National Programme into Perspective 
Figure 5.2.2 provides one of many possible Rich Pictures of the National Programme. 
It offers one understanding for discursive purposes, from a perspective within the 
Problem Situation, rather than a definitive verdict from a universal perspective. 
The central panel of the picture shows the additive relationship between the National 
Programme for IT (depicted by the Connecting for Health icon) and the NHS. 
Electronic Records, eBooking and e-Prescribing are being metaphorically parachuted 
into the NHS without a clear understanding of the way they are to be assimilated. At 
this stage, the various components of the picture are presented as uncomplicated 
discrete entities. 
Figure 5.2.2 : A Rich Picture of the National Programme 
Reported by the Chief Executive (bottom left) and manipulated externally by the 
Department of Health and the Secretary of State (top left), the NHS is seen as an 
homogeneous whole whose behaviour can be abstracted and reduced to measures of 
performance. This provides a symbolic level of understanding and allows formalistic 
comparisons of quantities to be contested between adversarial positions. 
The Chief Executive occupies an uncomfortable middle ground, between his 
generalised accounting relationship with the Department of Health as the sponsor of 
healthcare and a specific accountability to each individual patient as the consumer. 
The alternative understanding, represented on the right, suggests a web of complex 
interactions between people with varied roles and activities, replicated in every NHS 
institution. At the focus of each interaction is an individual patient. The purpose, nature 
Programme
Measure, 
compare 
Minister 
e-Booking 
e-Prescribing 
e-Records 
and precedence of these activities, involving managers, clinical professionals and 
patients, is at the core of the relationship between the National Programme and the 
5.2.3 : Conclusions on Diagnosis 
In summary, the implementation of the National Programme has been only one item 
within the overall agenda set by the Chief Executive. The question remains, how is IT to 
be made relevant to the Trust ? 
On the one hand, IT can be used to consolidate the acquisition of information that can 
be reported externally. On the other hand, it can be used to maximise the Trusts 
productive capacity. 
5.3 : NIMSAD Stage 3   :   P R O G N O S I S   O U T L I N E 
Future Direction : Trust Wide Objectives 
5.3.0 : Section Summary and Introduction 
This section indicates the general direction of developments in the Trust, to which IT 
will contribute. 
The IT delivery System, identified in the last section, needs to be more closely aligned 
with the business delivery system (Figure 5.3.1). Appointed in Autumn, 2005, a new 
Chief Executive has brought about a distinct climate shift, from static organisational 
reporting in a command and control environment towards dynamic organisational 
learning in an organisational development environment. Anorganisational development 
system is growing up alongside and subsuming the business delivery system.  
The desired future state is to integrate the IT delivery system with both business 
delivery and  organisational development. IT will satisfy organisational development 
needs in the broadest sense, including changes in clinical processes, roles and methods 
resulting from organisational development activities and organisational learning. The 
outcome will be to deliver the Trust-Wide Objectives which encapsulate the Chief 
Executives organisational transformation agenda. 
Figure 5.3.1 : Prognosis Outline 
New IT 
satisfies 
OD needs 
IT Delivery 
System 
Business    Organisational 
Delivery    Development 
                  System 
Chief 
Executives 
Transformation 
Agenda 
Delivers Trust 
Objectives 
5.3.1 : The Transformation Agenda 
Central Phenomenon : Organisational Development 
The focus of interest in this section is the Trusts Organisational Development strategy. 
The Chief Executive has sought to redefine the corporate ethos through engagement 
with the workforce. The resulting Organisational Development initiative has been 
termed, The Blackpool Way. 
.about using and empowering our workforce to further improve the quality of 
services to patients. (Executive Director #3) 
Within this programme, and under the Chief Executives leadership, the following 
corporate goals have been developed by the Trusts staff : 
 To perform in the top ten percent of trusts on all performance measures 
 To offer Best Value for Money to the Taxpayer 
 To be the Hospital of First Choice for the Community 
 To be a Great Place to Work. 
Figure 5.3.2 summarises these aspirations in a second Rich Picture that establishes a 
conceptual link, between high level service planning goals and the day to day detail of 
clinical service delivery. 
Figure 5.3.2 : Trust Wide Objectives 
Causal Conditions : Need to become Financially Stable 
Decentralisation of the NHS power structure has required NHS Trusts to qualify for 
Foundation Status. To earn autonomy and become fit for foundation, the Chief 
Executive and his team have had to pass rigorous tests of the Trusts financial stability 
and ability to meet quality and efficiency criteria.  
The immediate imperative is to get the Trust onto a sound financial footing. 
(Executive Director #3) 
Together, we  ve 
developed the Blackpool 
It  s the Vic 
for me, every 
time  
Top 10 
Performer 
Great Place 
to work  
Best Value for Money to 
the Taxpayer 
Intervening Conditions : Mandated Delivery of an IT Programme 
There are four main pillars in the national strategy. (IT Manager) 
As part of the wider NHS, the Trust is expected to implement four specified National 
Programme deliverables (N3 Network infrastructure, Choose and Book, e-Prescribing, 
Electronic Records). 
Context : Payment by Results and Contested Service Provision 
 Constrained NHS funds : concern for financial efficiency 
 Service revenues related by tariff payments to commodified outputs (Payment 
by Results) : concern for financial stability and recovery of revenues. 
 Proliferation of service provision forms and contested service provision : 
concern for service quality and outcomes 
 Shift of emphasis from externally-imposed targets to locally- relevant 
Standards for Better Health  
 Concept of quality which encompasses operational efficiency, clinical 
effectiveness, patient safety and the regulation of medical professionals. 
By achieving service costs below the national tariff level of reimbursement, it will now 
be possible for the Trust to make an operating surplus. This will require the Trust to 
recoup revenues accurately and for clinical services to avoid unnecessary expenditure. 
However, the Trust will also need to take proactive steps to ensure that patients prefer it 
to other providers of the same or similar services. 
If the Trust is to do anything else it has to be on that sound financial footing. 
Following on from that, weve got to start to appreciate the world were 
operating in now. (Executive Director #3) 
We are in an environment which is more and more competitive.  The reality is, 
we're heading to a point where the NHS, really, will be a commissioning 
organisation which will commission services from whichever provider can offer 
it at the best value for money and to the highest standard.  And we've got 
to realise that the future of the Trust as an organisation depends on our being 
able to thrive in that competitive environment. And that brings a whole host of 
different information needs which we've not really previously addressed. 
(Executive Director #3) 
I think all of the targets, even 18 weeks, are almost irrelevant  You might 
squeak in under 18 weeks, you might have a waiting time of 171/2 weeks and hit 
the national target, but if the next hospital down the road is dealing with people 
in 3 weeks,  they will go to the other hospital anyway. (Executive 
Director #3) 
Strategies and Interactions : Creating Responsive Clinical Management Structures 
Key to the realisation of the Trusts objectives is the capacity of managers and senior 
clinicians to translate them into a coherent programme of concrete organisational 
change. 
An organisational development culture, in which information is interpreted and 
considered by the Trusts internal information audience, is developing alongside the 
traditional reporting culture which has focused on the delivery of information for 
external consumption. 
The development of the Trusts business strategy has been facilitated by the creation of 
an infrastructure of directorates and divisions for joint planning between managers and 
clinicians belonging to related business groups. Information acquired and assembled is 
presented to a maturing information audience in increasingly coherent detail : 
There's a lot of stuff at the moment that Monitor [the Foundation Trust 
regulator] is  pushing :  what they call service line reporting. (Executive 
Director #2)  
The aim is to integrate information about activity, finance and use of human and other 
resources at subdivisional rather than global organisational level. 
By sharing a proportion of the Trusts operating surplus with each contributing clinical 
business unit, the Trusts Executive Directors hope to incentivise continuous 
improvement. 
If we become a Foundation Trust, one of the things we can do in terms of 
retention of surpluses is to say to people,  you come up with savings early 
and you get to use them. (Executive Director #2) 
Outcomes : A Plan to Improve Capacity to Achieve Organisational Goals 
The desired outcomes are encapsulated in the achievement of financial stability and the 
realisation of the Chief Executives Trust-Wide Objectives, reiterated here : 
 Top Ten Performer against all Key Performance Indicators 
 Value for Money for the Taxpayer 
 Great Place to Work 
 Hospital of Choice for the Local Community. 
In terms of Soft Systems Methodology, the roots of the problem situation which help 
define the desired future state are as follows : 
 Customers : Monitor, other external regulators of the Trusts business. 
 Actors : Trust Executives 
 Transformation : Become solvent and transform constrained budgets into 
operating surpluses that can be shared with clinical units. Meet and exceed 
externally imposed targets. Adopt standards and compete with other providers. 
Generate ethos of continuous improvement. 
 World View : Organisational Development culture ; development of the Trust 
as a learning organisation. Trust wide Objectives 
 Ownership : Clinicians 
 Environment : Flux and instability.  
o Finite appointments to key posts. 
o Volatile trading environment, new competitors, Patient Choice. 
o Financial regime (Payment by Results). 
5.3.2 : Conclusions on Prognosis Outline 
The essence of successful local implementation of the National Programme will be to 
establish its synergy with the most salient aspects of the Trusts agenda. These include 
its 18 Week Target ; the creation and maintenance of workforce stability so that 
production is not disrupted by morale issues (strikes, staff turnover, staff absence) ; 
the establishment of a preference by patients to be treated at this and not at some other 
hospital ; and the establishment of control by the newly-designated Foundation Trust 
over its own destiny. 
The intended outcome is that the IT programme should be accurately aligned with the 
organisational changes required by the Chief Executives Trust-Wide Objectives and by 
the need for the Trust to recover its revenues under Payment by Results, make a year on 
year operating surplus and survive in an evolving context of shifting and competitive 
business relationships. 
As these requirements evolve, so must the information systems, so that the information 
they provide can remain relevant to corresponding changes in information needs. 
Figure 5.3.3 summarises the central issue : the need to establish relevance and synergy 
between new information systems, external expectations and the Trusts direction of 
travel, and to ensure their goodness of fit with the people who will use them. 
Figure 5.3.3 : Fitting the IT Programme into the Bigger Picture 
5.4 : NIMSAD Stage 4   :   P R O B L E M S 
Absence of Elements, Alignment of Elements 
5.4.0 : Section Summary and Introduction 
This section begins by identifying the need to establish a conscious link between the 
Trusts IT delivery system and its Business Delivery System.  
From a functional perspective, this implies the stronger definition of purpose for these 
two systems, of which the former switches its focus from technology to information and 
the latter from the steady state of business delivery to the more dynamic and adaptive 
state implied by organisational development. 
Weeks       
Top  Ten   
Performer     
Value  for Money   
First Choice for Patients       
The Blackpool Way 
Great place to work       
How are we       
going to fit       
these  in ?       
Reflection from other perspectives deepens and broadens this analysis. 
The desired future state identified in the last section was one where new information 
systems were reconciled with the Chief Executives Trust-Wide Objectives. These 
epitomised a twin challenge : to represent the Trust statistically to a critical audience of 
external regulators and to create a happy workforce in an efficient, hospital, popular 
with patients. 
In the first case, the Trusts clinicians are required to supply data input to computers 
which will then generate information outputs required by the Trusts regulators. The 
doctrine of Management Information from Operational Systems is an attempt to 
camouflage information supply to managers by clinicians, in the guise of information 
systems, ostensibly useful to clinicians but with a twist. The twist is that, to provide the 
information managers need, the information systems must be used rigorously by 
clinicians with other things on their minds. 
In the second case, a key organisational development ideal is to generate within the 
workforce an exemplary local culture (Oliver & Memmott, 2006 : ch.14). The 
Blackpool Way will be characterised by individual autonomy, empowerment, mutual 
respect and accountability. 
The expression of this ideal takes our thinking about the problem situation beyond 
rational problem solving, where the marshalled facts lead to unequivocally right 
deductions, and into the social and political realm of life in an organisation. 
A key component of the NIMSAD approach is to reflect on the problem situation, the 
problem solving methodology and, crucially, the problem solvers own intellectual 
stance towards all three of these components. 
This activity comes naturally at the point where the gap is contemplated, between the 
problem situation as understood at the diagnosis stage and the desired future state. 
The four ideal types of analytic stance (Figure 5.4.1) identified by Avison and Wood-
Harper (1990 ; p.270) provide a useful framework within which to conduct this 
reflection and the question of absent and mis-aligned elements which underpins the 
problems stage of NIMSAD can usefully be discussed from each of these standpoints 
in turn. 
Figure 5.4.1 : Alternative Analytic Stances (Avison & Wood Harper, 1990) 
5.4.1 : Functionalist Perspective 
The problem of specific interest from this perspective is the absence of conscious 
integration between IT development and organisational development (Figure 5.4.2). 
The impetus for the National Programme is centrally driven. IT needs assessment has 
not been developed in the manner envisaged in Information for Health, where IT 
developments were expected to be tied into local Health Improvement Plans.  
Figure 5.4.2 : NIMSAD Stage 4 Problems in 2006 
Delivery 
System 
Organisational 
Development 
System 
NPfIT  
Project 
Delivery  
Trust  
Objectives 
Conscious 
National 
Standard Systems 
Local Initiative 
The dominant driver is for the Trust to recover reimbursement for clinical activity 
within an externally driven accounting framework. Increasingly, this is related to the 
need to achieve targets and standards within a framework of performance management 
and to demonstrate the quality of the Trusts services (Figure 5.4.3). 
Figure 5.4.3 : NIMSAD Stage 4 Problems in Transition, 2006-2008 
Through a series of lean initiatives, the Trust has begun to dig beneath the surface of 
structures and processes to focus on people and tasks. The contribution of IT systems to 
the facilitation of clinical work is not yet clear and is being led by the systems that are 
available rather than by an independent assessment of IT needs. Earned autonomy has 
allowed the (Foundation) Trust to disengage from the National Programme for the time 
Delivery 
System 
Organisational 
Development 
System 
Trust  
Objectives 
Business Needs 
Better Defined 
than Clinical 
Needs  
Local Initiative 
 Finance, 
Performance, 
Quality 
Intensified Drivers 
 Business 
Information 
Needs 
Assessment 
being and to engage with non-standard providers, better able to supply what the Trust 
believes it needs. This has released the Trust from central prescription of its information 
systems but nevertheless leaves it exposed to a supplier-led market (Figure 5.4.4). 
Figure 5.4.4 : NIMSAD Stage 4 Problems in 2008 
Delivery 
System 
Organisational 
Development 
System 
Supplier- 
Market  
Trust  
Objectives 
Business Needs 
Better Defined 
than Clinical 
Needs  
Supplier-Defined 
Systems 
Local Initiative 
 Finance, 
Performance, 
Quality 
Intensified Drivers 
 Business 
Information 
Needs 
Assessment 
 Clinical 
Information 
Needs 
Assessment 
Pre-empt 
In either case, the system supplier is apt to pre-empt a user-led needs assessment 
because he has developed a product in isolation from the specific user environment 
where it will be deployed. 
5.4.2 : Interpretive Perspective 
In this perspective, the introduction of the information system is taken as a given. The 
relevant persona in Avison & Wood-Harpers typology is the facilitator, whose role is 
to align the perspective of the managers responsible to drive the projects 
implementation with the perspectives of those who will be affected by its introduction. 
This consideration introduces, at minimum, a distinction between managers and end-
users, i.e. clinicians. The facilitator will deploy change-management strategies to 
assure the implementations smooth landing in the host environment. Clinical 
Engagement is an essential component of this strategy. The terms of engagement tend 
to be tacit rather than explicit, within an ethos of corporate unity. 
The interpretive perspective recognises that the intrinsic merits of the new information 
system are insufficient for its problem-free adoption. Acceptance is situated in a 
fusion of horizons : between the perceptual framework through which those in the host 
environment consider their own fluid situation, and the framework through which they 
interpret the intrinsic attributes of the information system itself, as they first appear. 
The role of the facilitator is to promote mutual accommodation between the 
information technology and its human users. The desired position is one that allows the 
technology to be flexible and has the least negative impact on the ease with which the 
most important tasks of the users job role are undertaken (Figure 5.4.5). A distinction 
is drawn, between user-friendly technology that is irrelevant to the users most salient 
tasks and technology that is instrumental in assisting those tasks. 
Figure 5.4.5 : Mutual Adaptation between New Information Systems and Future 
Information Systems Users. 
Figure 5.4.5 suggests the need to soften change management activities so that they take 
adequate account of future users needs, especially when the operation of information 
systems is not the primary focus of users professional activity. 
Users perceptions of their own needs is likely to reflect systems of norms, values and 
beliefs. Change management activities must respect these elements of local 
organisational culture in order to be successful. 
Systems 
adapt to 
People 
People 
adapt to 
Systems  
Desirable Direction of Travel 
Change 
management 
activities 
Change 
Management 
activities 
Information 
Systems Design 
activities 
5.4.3 : Emancipatory Perspective 
The emancipatory perspective highlights alternatives to any current argument, 
deliberately undermining every confidently held position so that it can be refined in the 
light of richer argument.  
Figure 5.4.6 provides a sketch map of organisational discourse related to information 
systems in the NHS. 
Figure 5.4.6 : A Sketch Map of the NHS Information Systems Discourse. 
By focusing anywhere on this diagram, the reader is immediately aware that attention 
has been diverted from some other important centre. 
Patients 
Managers Clinicians 
Patients 
Providers Pathology 
Quality 
Finance Performance 
At the top of the diagram, three sets of beneficiaries are identified. At bottom left, the 
focus is on three measures of organisational fitness. At bottom right, a focus on the 
pathology recalls information systems such as cancer registries, geared to compare 
provider performance or patient outcomes in relation to a given pathology. A focus on 
the provider neglects the patient but provides information necessary for organisational 
integrity and continuity. The third, complementary focus is on the patient, placed at the 
centre of concern. 
5.4.4 : Radical Structuralist Perspective 
In this fourth perspective, attention turns to the relative positions of three sets of actors : 
patients, doctors (standing for clinicians in general) and managers (Table 5.4.1). 
Table 5.4.1 : Permutations on Power Relationships between Patients, Doctors and 
Managers 
For patients, the advent of new information systems in the NHS has the potential to 
widen lay access to arcane medical knowledge, transforming the patients position of 
 Patient Doctor Manager 
Pre-Griffiths Grateful client 
Expert Professional Acolyte 
Administrator 
Post-Thatcher Sovereign 
consumer 
Accountable 
Professional 
Policy pawn 
Post-Bristol Fully-engaged 
participant 
Information conduit Impresario 
dependence on the professional, and helping to realise Wanless ideal of a fully-
engaged public.  
By assisting access and retrieval of best evidence by clinicians, new information 
systems ought to shorten the lead time before evidence-based best practice becomes 
generally adopted. The enhanced visibility of best evidence is a challenge to the 
professional. He is no longer, from the patients or the managers perspective, the fount 
of all wisdom. His role is now to be good at finding out and conveying specific 
information, tailored to the patients individual requirements.  
For managers, the earned autonomy of Foundation Trust status represents a release 
from subservience, to the professional elite or to tightly-managed, central performance 
targets, and the opportunity to lead the locally sensitive development of each individual 
organisation. 
5.4.5 : Conclusions on Problems 
From a functionalist perspective, there needs to be closer alignment between 
information needs assessment and organisational development. This is less easy than it 
might be if the information system is specified nationally whist the organisational 
development plan is allowed to evolve locally. 
The Trusts temporary withdrawal from the National Programme only means that the 
development of IT systems can, in principle, remain more or less remote from the Trust, 
in the hands of suppliers, pre-empting users own assessment of their needs from an 
information system. It is possible that an individual supplier might want to work with 
the Trust to tailor its offering towards specific local needs but, as a trader in the market 
place, it will need to restrict special development costs in favour of general applicability 
to unspecified future customers. From this perspective, customisation is just an 
instrument of market penetration. 
From an interpretive perspective, a better understanding of the user perspective is 
needed in order to further the implementation of the information system as an 
organisational given. Where user-responsiveness is a political necessity from a 
functionalist standpoint, the interpretive perspective can provide insight into 
organisational norms, values and beliefs. To be adopted successfully, the new 
information system will have to be congruent with the social and political culture of the 
workplace  
These considerations go beyond the stance of managers towards clinicians, most likely 
to produce effective collaboration between these two sectors. The impact of computer 
use upon the primary focal activities of care-giving is likely to be an equally important 
determinant of success, even when the primary driver of the new information systems 
operates at the strategic level. At this level, the discourse of finance, performance and 
quality is naturally dominant. 
The emancipatory perspective surfaces other strands of discourse which might 
otherwise be overshadowed. The perspective of the patient is placed alongside those of 
the manager and the information system user. The overall efficacy of resource 
utilisation is placed alongside the agendas represented by efficient patient journeys and 
clinically effective pathways of care. 
Finally, the radical structuralist perspective can refer specifically to the broader societal 
balance of power and accountability, to assess the potential impact of new information 
systems on relationships between managers, professionals and patients.  
5.5 : NIMSAD Stage 5   :   N O T I O N A L   S Y S T E M S 
A Way to Frame Organisational Discourse  
5.5.0 : Section Summary and Introduction 
This section sets out to identify strategies, in the form of notional systems which, if 
they were brought into existence, would address the problems identified in the 
previous section, making it easier to attain the desired future state, where the Trusts 
information systems were more closely aligned with the Chief Executives Trust-Wide 
Objectives. 
The argument so far has been that the new information systems to be provided within 
the National Programme for IT need to be made relevant to the business goals of the 
Trust, encapsulated in the Chief Executives Trust-Wide Objectives and the wider 
organisational development and quality agendas. 
In the last section, it was noted that business information needs are more clearly 
expressed than front-line users clinical objectives for their information systems (Figure 
5.5.1).  
It was also noted that different perspectives are available to complement a purely 
functional appreciation of an information system. Bridging the gap between the 
problem situation presently experienced and the desired future state requires a way to 
appreciate needs from all of these perspectives.  
Figure 5.5.1 : Supplier-Defined Systems Can Overpower Users Needs Unless The 
Latter Are Clearly Defined 
The purpose of this section is to suggest notional systems : sets of aligned elements 
that achieve together what no element could achieve on its own, to assist the 
appreciation of information systems in terms of their contribution to desired or desirable 
organisational outcomes.  
5.5.1 : Functionalist (Expert) Perspective : Agenda Alignment 
The Trusts intended progress towards an interim EPR (Electronic Patient Record) 
solution is mapped in Figure 5.5.2. 
 Supplier- 
Market  
Supplier-Defined 
Systems 
 Clinical 
Information 
Needs 
Assessment 
Pre-empt 
The first notional system to emerge is, therefore, a formal implementation project 
whose lower level activities, labelled people, process and technology, form the 
focus of interest. 
Figure 5.5.2 : EPR Roadmap 
Where the technology work stream will allow one electronic data repository to 
communicate with another, detailed ideas about the purpose of interoperability will be 
identified in the associated people and process work streams.  
It follows that a contrasting notional system could be desirable if it brought together 
people, processes and technology.  
The relevant notional system (Figure 5.5.3) contains people who are using the Leavitt 
model to understand more deeply why they need information systems and how 
information systems will help them. It is an agenda definition system. 
Figure 5.5.3 : Agenda Definition. Aligning Technology with People and Tasks as 
well as with Structures and Processes,  
People 
Tasks Processes 
Structures 
Technology 
People considering the relevance of 
information systems to the strategic 
and operational issues that concern 
Deepening 
Understanding 
Deepening 
Understanding 
Deepening 
Understanding 
The Leavitt model considers groups of people as structures within an organisation and 
relates them to organisational processes through technology. However, it goes beyond 
this and also considers people as individuals, intimately concerned with the individual 
tasks that constitute their own job role. The model thus identifies a second set of 
relationships, between (individual) people, tasks and technology. 
The model, the people using it and their deepening understanding, of the way the 
models components interact in their working lives of others as well as their own, 
constitute a system to allow a fuller appreciation of the way the proposed information 
systems will contribute to the alleviation of fundamental operational as well as strategic 
concerns. 
Where the people activities in Figure 5.5.2 hinge around preparing people to accept 
pre-ordained change (technology push), the focus in Figure 5.5.3 is on the 
identification of changes that people assessing the relevance of their new information 
systems need to be enacted (information pull).  
A major source of relevance is in the capacity of information systems to enable 
fundamental changes in business processes. It is to be remembered that business 
processes take place in the context of a physical, built environment that is not easy to 
change.  
Further, although human resource management aims to create flexibility within the 
workforce, many demarcations which might be overcome locally are reinforced by 
professional structures established beyond local control, for example in Deanery 
training programmes and the moderating influence, beneficial to patients, of the Royal 
Colleges on the expansion by individuals of their scope of professional practice. 
5.5.2 : Interpretive (Facilitator) Perspective : Values Alignment 
The facilitator perspective balances the (change management) activities that 
implement pre-ordained change with activities intended to satisfy the need for change 
felt by individual and groups of organisational actors (information systems design 
activities). For the sake of simplicity, the two major protagonist groups are clinicians 
and managers. 
The relevant notional system is a values alignment system (Figure 5.5.4) that can 
identify the bases of clinicians locally felt needs and compare them with managers 
strategic intentions. Consensus is built on points of convergence between these agendas. 
The terms of discourse influence the way common ground is structured and understood 
and influence the way each protagonist group moderates its expectations. 
Figure 5.5.4 : A Values-Alignment System 
Influence over the terms of discourse is not necessarily shared equally by these two 
groups and the language in which discourse is conducted can be biased towards the 
ideology of either party. An additional emancipator perspective is needed, to counter 
this tendency. 
Managers 
Horizon 
Fused 
 Horizon 
Managers and 
Strategic 
Expectations 
Users 
Operational 
Needs 
Terms of 
Discourse 
Users 
Horizon 
5.5.3 : Emancipatory Perspective : Conflict Surfacing 
Where the facilitator perspective furnishes a notional system to identify points of 
convergence between managerial and clinical agendas, the emancipator perspective 
offers a rich set of controversial topic areas from which to challenge assertions and 
argue an alternative appreciation of the information systems relevance (Figure 5.5.5). 
Guba and Lincoln (1997 ; p.72-74) refer to claims, concerns and issues. 
Figure 5.5.5 : A Conflict-Surfacing System. 
Terms of Discourse 
Critically Evaluated 
and Refocused 
Patients 
Managers Clinicians 
Patients 
Providers Pathology 
Quality 
Finance Performance 
People considering the relevance of information 
systems from a broad range of sub-perspectives 
Claims, 
Concerns, 
Issues 
5.5.4 : Radical Structuralist (Warrior) Perspective : Agenda Critique 
Finally, the warrior perspective (Figure 5.5.6) can specifically and critically address 
the ethical perspective of what an information system ought to contribute towards an 
intensification or levelling of power relationships between managers, professionals 
(clinicians) and patients. 
Figure 5.5.6 : A System to Assess Power Relations Between Patients, Clinicians and 
Managers  
People participating in this system are critically evaluating the impact of information 
systems on themselves as well as on the other parties in this triangular relationship. 
Patients 
Managers Clinicians   
People considering the relevance of information systems to power 
relations between managers, professionals (clinicians) and patients 
Patients, 
Clinicians, 
Managers 
Information 
Systems 
5.5.5 : Using Deetz Framework to Organise the Four Perspectives of  
Avison and Wood-Harper 
Deetz framework (Table 5.5.1) helps to organise the four perspectives. 
Table 5.5.1 : Organising Avison and Wood-Harpers Four Perspectives around 
Deetz Framework 
Agenda definition, usually by an organisational elite, sets an agenda from a privileged 
perspective. Successful implementation requires agreement by the workforce to the 
minimum extent represented by compliance. This in turn requires sufficient alignment 
between managerial and workforce values to moderate the emergent yes, but 
arguments of the workforce in favour of some higher system of values, for example 
patient safety. 
Conflict surfacing allows full expression of polar opposite, emergent yes buts so that 
no voices are privileged or suppressed. Full expression of dissensus ought to result in a 
synthesis of ideas from which progress can be made. Impasse is a less defeatist term to 
describe the alternative than deadlock, opening the door to lateral thinking. 
Consensus 
Agenda Definition 
Values Alignment 
a priori Agendas 
Agenda Critique 
Conflict Surfacing 
Emergent Agendas 
Dissensus 
One form of dissensus is to argue that the wrong set of ideas is being privileged and that 
another set should be given a priori status. This has happened within the National 
Programme, where the emphasis has shifted from integrated Hospital Information 
Support Systems (HISS) to patient-oriented electronic records. 
5.5.6 : Conclusions on Notional Systems 
Future users of information systems in the NHS are confronted by the carefully argued 
statements of managers, about the contribution of information systems to managers 
strategic intentions, and by managers belief that the systems they install will function 
as anticipated, to produce the outcomes managers desire.  
They also face sellers insistence, that their product accurately meets needs that users 
lack a critical capacity of their own to express. If these needs are not met, there is a clear 
risk that information systems will not meet managers needs because they have not met 
users needs. 
To make a broad assessment of a new information systems potential contribution 
requires identification of the various agendas it must serve. Some of these are explicitly 
stated from the outset but others may not be. An agenda definition system is a 
response to this problem. 
The purchase and introduction of an information system together constitute an act with 
social and political as well as technical aspects. A values alignment system maps the 
territory shared between the horizons of managers and those of future users. Information 
from the activity of this system could helpful in allowing users to articulate their own 
agenda. 
A conflict surfacing system serves to prevent premature consensus between managers 
and users by positing alternatives to the first intuitions of both parties.  
Finally, a system for agenda critique specifically addresses the effect of new 
information systems on power relations between managers, professionals and patients. 
The systems proposed here complement each other. They are similar inasmuch as they 
bring together people from different parts of the Trust who might not otherwise meet as 
equals in a problem-structuring and problem-solving forum. The principal point of 
difference between the four models is the conceptual model around which participants 
structure the relevant discussion in each of the four instances. 
5.6 : NIMSAD Stage 6   :   C O N C E P T U A L   /   L O G I C A L   D E S I G N 
Selecting Useful Concepts from the Academic Literature  
5.6.0 : Section Summary and Introduction 
This section reflects on the problem solver, the problem situation and the problem 
solving methodology and brings together conceptual understandings of the design, 
implementation and evaluation of information systems that reflect the propensity for 
technology to be translated from the designers conception of use into the users 
personal relationship with his own practical situation. 
The section focuses on the user rather than the sponsor of the information system. 
Preliminary reflection about the problem situation, in which the Trusts managers wish 
to implement successful information systems, reminds us that this is a social and a 
political rather than a technical enterprise. Normative implementation methodologies 
suffer from the shortcoming that they provide no insight into why or how their 
prescriptions work.  
When we reflect on the problem solver, it is apparent that we can either treat individuals 
or groups within the Trust, or any of its functional departments, or any of its services, as 
disembodied entities that will be linked together by information systems or we can treat 
them as things in the world, inseparably bound to their own train of historical events 
and local features.  
Reflecting on the problem solving process, we are aware that a tools use as imagined 
or designed tends to be different from its use when it comes alive in the hands of the 
practical user and is translated or absorbed into the practical situation. 
This section brings together conceptual understandings of information systems design, 
implementation and evaluation that explicitly or implicitly acknowledge this tendency. 
Their own use sets the stage for an approach to implementation that will focus on a 
close understanding of the user rather than the sponsor of the information system. 
In particular, the user is considered as somebody whose primary role is more than 
merely to operate a computer when key events occur. The users principal role is to 
initiate or participate in those events. 
5.6.1 : Using Realistic Evaluation to Position Other Concepts 
The assembly of concepts relevant to the introduction of new information systems to an 
NHS hospital will furnish insights into the contextually-influenced mechanisms 
which, as Realistic Evaluation postulates (Figure 5.6.1) , provide the meat in the 
sandwich between the intervention of information systems and their intended outcomes. 
Figure 5.6.1 : What might be going on when an information system succeeds or 
fails ? 
Consistent with the doctrine of Management Information from Operational Systems, 
the most important mechanism is that information systems are used by clinical users 
in the immediate clinical environment to produce local clinical outcomes. Operational 
users (clinicians) perceive information systems directly as helping or hindering their 
work. 
We are going to examine 
Mechanisms more closely 
Intervention : 
Information 
Systems 
Outcomes 
required by 
Planners 
Mechanism : People 
use information 
systems. These help 
or hinder work 
T1------T2 
The Context 
evolves over time. Context 
Clinicians problem situation places them in intimate contact with clinical work and 
the clinical workplace. This is a collaborative environment where they seek to generate 
individual and collective outcomes. The latter contribute to, but are not necessarily 
identical with planners (managers) desired outcomes. 
5.6.2 : Using Multiview to Understand Mechanisms in Realistic Evaluation 
Although developed as an approach to information systems design, Multiview is well 
suited to the exploration of the mechanisms we are interested to explore. As Figure 
3.3.9 shows, Multiview considers problem solvers, the problem situation, the way they 
collectively or individually perceive the problem situation (their interpretive scheme) 
and an emergent approach to the problem situation (the problem solving 
methodology). 
Multiview has been chosen as an epitome for information systems design because it 
recognises the different interests of various stakeholders in the information systems 
application, to a problem situation experienced differently from the specific 
perspectives of each. The problem situation is defined differently for each stakeholder 
and has developed out of antecedent historical episodes that are salient for that person. 
Stakeholders are not considered as if contemplating the problem situation from a 
position of isolation. Instead, they are intimately involved in it, to the point that the 
problem situation is part of the personal experience of the world that distinguishes each 
stakeholder from other individuals. In turn, this individuality distinguishes each 
persons relationship with the information system from the generic. 
The design (problem solving) approach is not pre-defined but emerges from the 
engagement of problem solvers with the problem situation and with the interpretive 
scheme that lends sense and orientation to engagement. 
5.6.3 : Problem Solvers 
Figure 5.6.2 illustrates the operations and financial managers who are working out how 
to align new information systems with the performance management of the Trusts 
clinical operations, along with the clinical managers who are there to provide a clinical 
perspective on the management task.  
Figure 5.6.2 : Problem Solvers and their individual technical, organisational and 
personal (professional) perspectives 
Consensus 
Agenda Definition 
Values Alignment 
A priori Agendas 
Agenda Critique 
Conflict Surfacing 
Emergent Agendas 
Dissensus 
Dependent on the maturity of the planning group is its ability to combine the activities 
of values alignment, conflict surfacing and agenda critique alongside the initially 
defined agenda. 
5.6.4 : The Problem Situation : Information Systems Change Seen as Technology 
Adoption 
The mechanism, interposed by Realistic Evaluation between the intervention and its 
outcomes, is now restated as the technologys active assimilation by its users. 
Technology has been assimilated when its use has become second nature rather than a 
deliberate effort of attention. Assimilation entails the translation of ideas contained 
(inscribed) in the designers conception of the technology, into the conceptual scheme 
of the user at work.  
The technology adoption model (Andreu and Ciborra, 1996) contains the concept of 
assimilation in the idea of routinisation (Figure 5.6.3). This crucial concept 
complements and moderates the conventional notion, that implementation is a 
successful strategic accomplishment of managers who intervene by manipulating the 
responses of a passive community.  
In the wider context, the planners shown above focus on the instrumental relationship of 
the information system with the Trusts business mission, as it might be expressed in the 
core capabilities represented by Chief Executives Trust-Wide Objectives. 
To achieve the business mission, the information system must support the more basic 
capabilities that support the core capabilities. Specific managerial interventions will 
promote the closer interactions of groups, and the streamlining of processes to enhance 
their efficiency and satisfy performance targets. 
The processes concerned contain the specific tasks, performed by individuals, time after 
time but under circumstances which are always fresh and different from previous 
occasions, when other things were going on or treatment was being given to a prior 
patients with a different antecedent history. 
Figure 5.6.3 : Technology Adoption Model 
Practices 
Capabilities 
New Resource 
Capabilities 
Strategic Loop 
Capability Loop 
Routinisation Loop 
Business 
Mission 
Explicit 
Management 
Actions 
Tacit 
Workplace 
Adaptation 
Organisational Context and Boundary 
Competitive Environment 
The point of interest in this model is where the new technology is incorporated into the 
tacit routines of work practice. These are behaviours and activities that are extruded 
from descriptions of process but undeniably occur, as pragmatic responses by 
individuals to the unfolding situation that surrounds them. 
5.6.5 : Interpretive Scheme : Understanding Tasks and Computer Use as 
Embodied Activities 
The interpretive scheme is modelled in the plane of cleavage between the halves of the 
modified Leavitt model (Figure 5.6.4). 
Figure 5.6.4 : The Plane of Cleavage 
The cleavage plane separates the strategic relationship between processes, groups and 
technology from the operational relationship between technology, individuals and tasks. 
Technology 
Structures 
(and Groups) 
Processes 
Technology 
Individuals 
Tasks 
Plane of Cleavage 
For the Trust to be a Top Ten Performer and provide Great Value for Money to the 
Taxpayer, managers need to think in terms of groups, processes and the form of 
technology that Malmsjo (2006) has termed operative. 
In contrast, for the Trust to be The Provider of Choice for the Local Community and 
to be A Great Place to Work, they need to think about individual interactions between 
patients, care-givers and the form of technology that Malmsjo calls supportive. The 
question of Management Information from Operational Systems hinges on the 
compatibility of these two forms of information system, not in technical sense of 
interoperability but in the sense of the division of attention between computer and care-
giving at key moments. 
The figures of Rene Descartes and Maurice Merleau-Ponty in Figure 5.6.5 represent the 
opposed conceptions of identity that characterise the two sides of the cleavage plane.  
On the one side, entities are so clearly distinguished that they have no individuality. The 
generic group is placed in apposition with the generic process and the generic 
technology. Individuals are absorbed into the structure of groups and processes, treated 
as immutable wholes that can be measured, monitored and manipulated. 
On the other side of the cleft, entities and related entities constitute each other and 
cannot be teased apart. The task, the individual performing the task and the technology 
supporting the task are held to contribute defining features to each other from one 
moment to another as the problem situation is transformed during the constant flux of 
events and ideas (Checkland, 1999 ; pp.A50-A55). The individual and the task are to 
be considered as specific instances, identified by location and time.  
The practical significance of these ideas is framed within the intersection of patients 
trajectories through healthcare. 
Figure 5.6.5 : Cartesian and Hermeneutic Phenomenological Paradigms 
Technology   
Structures 
(and Groups)   
Processes   
Technology   
Individua ls   
Tasks   
Plane of Cleavage   
Mind and body are clear 
and distinct ideas 
There is no disembodied experience 
5.6.6 : The Problem Solving Methodology 
The problem solving methodology that stems from this point of interest is to consider 
critical moments when the technology comes into contact with individuals and the tasks 
of clinical care-giving (Figure 5.6.6). 
Figure 5.6.6 : Management Information from Operational Systems, derived when 
Individual Clinicians encounter Critical Moments in Day to Day Work 
Critical moments represent, simultaneously, opportunities to provide Management 
Information from Operational Systems and individual instances of coalition between 
an individual clinician, a task or sequence of tasks, and the information technology that 
contributes to the environment of clinical practice. 
The Patients 
Trajectory
Management 
Information 
Operational 
Systems
Management 
Information 
Operational 
Systems
Management 
Information 
Operational 
Systems
Critical 
Moments
First 
Assessment
Episode 
Closure
Patient 
Patient 
Patient 
Critical Moments are not just key steps in a process. They are occasions when more 
than one patient is being looked after or when one task impinges on another.  
5.6.7 : Conclusions on Conceptual / Logical design 
This section has shifted the emphasis from the strategic purpose of information systems 
to the users who will operate these systems in the clinical environment. In turn, it also 
serves to focus attention onto prevailing conditions in the user environment that favour 
an information systems spontaneous assimilation rather than the success-oriented work 
of manipulating a system into place. 
Understanding information systems change as embodied activity draws attention to the 
constant occurrence of critical moments when the information technology suddenly 
becomes obtrusive and the relationship between the individual user, the task and the 
technology is thrown into relief. 
5.7 : NIMSAD Stage 7   :   P H Y S I C A L   D E S I G N 
Using the MULTIVIEW Methodology to Assemble the Selected Concepts 
5.7.0 : Section Summary and Introduction 
This section situates the conceptual / logical model described in section 5.6 within the 
wider activities of information systems design. The components identified in the last 
section are now presented as a unified whole. The model is then placed amid specific 
zones of interest, originally identified as relevant to design, but incidentally relevant to 
implementation and evaluation. 
5.7.1 : Assembling the Model 
Figure 5.7.1 shows the components of the logical / conceptual model, now identified as 
mutually constitutive elements of a Multiview model, specific to the situation of present 
interest. 
Figure 5.7.1 : The Assembled Multiview Model 
    Consensus 
  Agenda Definition 
  Values Alignment 
  A priori  Agendas 
    Agenda Critique 
  Conflict Surfacing 
  Emergent Agendas 
    Dissensus 
Practices 
Capabilities 
New  Resource 
Capabilities 
  Strategic Loop 
Capability Loop 
Routinisation  Loop 
Business  
Mission 
Explicit  
Management  
Actions 
Tacit  
Workplace 
  Adaptation 
Organisational Context and Boundar y 
Competitive Environment 
Technology 
Structures  
(and Groups) 
Processes 
  Technology 
Individua ls 
Tasks 
Plane of Cleavage 
PROBLEM SOLVERS   PROBLEM SITUATION   
INTERPRETIVE 
SCHEME     
PROBLEM SOLVING 
METHODOLOGY     
The Patient  s  
Trajectory 
Management  
Information  
Operational  
Systems 
Management  
Information  
Operational  
Systems 
Management  
Information  
Operational  
Systems 
Critical  
Moments 
First  
Assessment 
Episode  
Closure 
Patient  
# 2 Patient  # 3 Patient  # 4 
5.7.2 : Putting the Model Into Context 
Figure 5.7.2 displays the different views contained in the originators first version of 
Multiview. The two fields of greatest relevance to this study are highlighted. 
Figure 5.7.2 : Major Components of Multiview as Originally Formulated 
Stakeholder Analysis :  
Use of Soft Systems Methodology to explore social and political 
aspects of the systems purpose 
Technical Analysis : 
Understanding Data Flows and Entity Relationships 
Socio-Technical Design : 
Use of ETHICS methodology to align managerial-economic and 
humanistic job-design objectives 
Design of Human-Computer Interface 
Technical Design and Development 
In the Stakeholder Analysis, stakeholders are able to participate on more or less equal 
terms in debate over the information systems purpose or fitness of purpose. In the 
Socio-Technical Design, attention falls onto the systems fitness for use. Future 
operational users are invited to contribute to the alignment of managerial-economic and 
humanistic job-design objectives, again on more or less emancipated terms, using 
ETHICS methodology.  
5.7.3 : Using the ETHICS Component of Multiview to Pinpoint the Focus of 
Attention 
The ETHICS methodology is summarised in the following 15 steps : 
1  Why Change ? 
2  Boundaries : Limits of Remit 
3  Current Systems and Practices 
4  Improved Systems and Practices 
5  Which Departments ? 
6  What do they do ? 
7  What should they be doing ? 
8  Job satisfaction needs (questionnaire)  
 knowledge fit 
 psychological fit 
 efficiency fit 
 task structure fit  
 ethics fit 
9  Future analysis 
10 Efficiency vs Job Satisfaction objectives 
11 New Working Practices 
12 Technical Options 
13 Detailed Work Design   
14 Implementation 
15 Evaluation 
Within step 8, the fit between the technology and the structure of tasks performed by 
people pinpoints the point of entry for the investigation to be undertaken. 
5.7.4 : Conclusions on Physical Design 
The assembled conceptual model is now ready to be deployed within the concrete, real 
world epitomised by the Trust. 
5.8 : NIMSAD Stage 8   :   I M P L E M E N T A T I O N 
Applying the Assembled Concepts in the Problem Situation 
The final phase in NIMSAD is implementation, putting the physical design to work in 
the real world. Chapter Six, which now follows, does this by presenting five 
explorations which relate information systems and the people who use them, to the 
Trusts salient strategic objectives.  
C H A P T E R   S I X 
A P P L Y I N G 
T H E   D I A G N O S T I C   A N D   T H E R A P E U T I C   
A P P R O A C H 
W I T H I N   T H E   P R O B L E M   S I T U A T I O N 
6:0   :   I N T R O D U C T I O N 
Each section of this chapter applies the diagnostic and therapeutic approach to an 
important preoccupation within the Trust. The first section represents the overarching 
preoccupation for the Trust : to remain viable by maintaining financial stability. The 
second to fifth sections each address one of the Chief Executives Trust Wide 
Objectives. 
6.1 : A C H I E V I N G    F I N A N C I A L   S T A B I L I T Y 
6.1.0 : Introduction 
The Trusts Business Mission is to provide healthcare under the terms of an agreement 
with the commissioning bodies. At the heart of the arrangement is the translation of 
human activities and utilisation of resources into a restricted set of commodities which 
can be traded for money. The Trusts financial stability depends on its core capability, 
to retrieve reimbursement by : 
being able to describe what it is that we do in a way that our 
Commissioners would recognise and be willing to pay for.  
(Executive Director #1) 
The Trusts problem situation in this respect contains the need for explicit managerial 
actions that will close the gap between work practices and the capacity to furnish this 
description.  
In effect, the gap to be closed is between the tasks performed by individuals and the 
groups and processes involved in reimbursement. The effective conduct of tasks, 
focused on data generation to support reimbursement but conducted at the clinical level, 
needs to be robust against the tacit workplace adaptation that occurs when a new 
resource is incorporated within the routines of productive social activity. 
6.1.1 : Reporting and Processing Data to Achieve Reimbursement 
Three extended interview extracts are now presented in order to describe the structure 
through which the Trust reports its activity to its internal and external information 
audiences in order to receive reimbursement and stimulate improved production. The 
open and in vivo codes derived are then assembled into the axes suggested by Strauss 
and Corbin (1990) in order to provide an organised analysis. 
Extract A : Interview 02 : Information Officer 
Spells is predominantly used around SLA [service level agreement] 
monitoring. Weve gone through a series of currencies if you like for our 
service level agreements with our Commissioners over time. 
Spells are around in patient data.  So patients are admitted into the hospital and 
discharged from the hospital.   
The base data that is stored in are what are called finished consultant episodes, 
so a patient will be admitted to hospital under a consultant or the consultant's 
team.  They may then transfer to another consultant for a different period of 
their care. 
Each one of those is generating a finished consultant episode and that's how 
things are stored, historically, within the patient administration system. 
Eventually, the patient will be discharged.  Now, in 80 to 90 % of all admissions, 
we only have one finished consultant episode.   
What happens if the patient goes through a series of finished consultant 
episodes is you have a period from admission to final discharge and that is what 
we call the district spell or hospital provider spell which can contain any 
number of finished consultant episodes between a single admission and a 
single discharge. 
The reason they've moved contract monitoring if you like and the base currency 
for all of that into spells is that some organisations could be seen to falsely 
inflate their number of finished consultant episodes and therefore generate 
more income by transferring patients unnecessarily between consultants. 
But Data is still stored within the system as finished consultant episodes. There 
are national pieces of software that we are given which will group those into 
spells.   
So it will go through all our finished consultant episodes in the period and give 
us our spell-based data. 
Within our system we actually hold a spell number, which we can use to create 
our own spell-based data as well. 
each patient has a unique key.  They will then have any number of in patient 
episodes linked to that.  They will have any number of outpatient attendances or 
non attendances linked to that.  They will each have a series of events linked to 
that.  They will each have A&E attendances linked to that. (02/127-186) 
Extract B : Interview 01 (Executive Director # 2) 
Now what we are actually paid on is not based on the single episode, we are 
paid for what is known as the spell.  The spell can have multiple episodes within 
it and it goes into a piece of software called the spell converter and that churns 
out the price of what should have been paid on the other side. 
Now, the problem with that is that that data, we try and match back to, for 
argument's sake, a particular specialty, say trauma orthopaedics and you might 
find that someone who was admitted, arguably through A&E with fractured 
neck of femur, and has a whole raft of other problems as well, we are actually 
only being paid for that fractured neck of femur. 
Now, at the moment, you might have a situation where that patient was 
effectively booked onto the system under one consultant, and was never moved 
from being under that consultants care, but had another procedure done to 
them, and that's what are paid for. 
When we turn that data round and say to everyone, this is what you did last 
month, let's try and understand that better and see if we can make the whole 
system work, everyone says, oh, Dr X. isn't a surgeon .  That doesn't work 
Were stuck with having to churn stuff through the spell converter, otherwise 
we won't get paid  That's going to take an awful lot of hard work and 
feedback loops and all sorts of things to make that even close to everyone 
saying, yes okay we know it comes out as a something else through the 
spell converter, but we do believe that we are getting paid for all the 
procedures that we've undertaken. 
So the way the system has been developed actually has already become 
disconnected from the front line and from a clinical understanding. 
so there's an awful lot of man hours that go into that, just that process of 
trying to make it so that - the management product if you like - at the end is 
understandable from a clinical perspective in terms of, why do I only earn X.. 
Well, it's all entirely understandable when you can take people through it, but, 
we don't help ourselves, quite frankly. (01/116-167) 
Now, I know that we've been sending the GP a letter to say that this is what 
we've done, but it has not gone onto PAS and we haven't been able to bill for 
it. (01/526-528) 
Extract C : Interview 102 (Executive Director #1) 
Now coding is the lifeblood if you like of our information.  Clinical coders put 
what has happened to the patient onto the system.  We have a relatively small 
number of coders for the number of patients we see, which produces the issue of 
a high workload.  Also, in terms of the quality of clinical information they have 
to go on to make their clinical coding decision, there can be problems in terms 
of incomplete or delayed discharge summaries.  It can be hard to get the 
diagnosis, or to get the primary and secondary diagnoses in the right order, or 
the tertiary diagnosis and the right detail, so they have to do a lot of digging in 
their limited time. (102/188-196) 
Analysis of Interview Extracts 
Central Theme : Accounting and Being Paid 
The central theme of interest is getting paid for all the procedures that we've 
undertaken by reporting clinical activity into a mechanism of activity analysis 
and tariff reimbursement. The way the system has been developed actually has 
already become disconnected from the front line and from a clinical 
understanding. 
Causal Conditions : Dancing to the Commissioners Tune 
The Trust is in an arms length, provider relationship with a commissioning 
Primary Care Trust. The Provider Trust is forced to adopt the accounting 
framework imposed by the commissioners in order to recover revenues. 
The bargain with the commissioner is known as a service level agreement. 
The tale of sickness, injury and care is reduced and reified as activity, 
provided at an agreed price. 
Context : The Arcane Jargon of Episodes and Spells 
Accounting is conducted in a language of episodes and spells. Spells 
constitute the base currency for the bargain between the commissioner and 
the provider.  
Spells are focused on a consultant and relate to his period of contact with a 
patient during admission. During a single admission (spell), a patients care may 
be transferred from one consultant to another, correctly generating more than 
one episode.  
The Trust is reimbursed for spells rather than episodes. Episodes are 
focused on the patient and his period of contact with the Trust between 
admission and discharge from the hospital. Information on episodes is stored in 
the Trusts Patient Administration System. 
The Patient Administration System organises data around a Patient Unique Key 
in terms of outpatient attendances, in-patient episodes and finished consultant 
episodes. One patient episode can represent several finished consultant episodes. 
Spells are calculated by software (the spell-converter) owned by the 
commissioners. Base data are transferred electronically from the Trusts 
Patient Administration System and the spell converter churns out the price.  
Intervening Conditions : Coding and Decoding Accounts of Clinical 
Practice 
Information on episodes is supplied to the Patient Administration System by 
clinical coders. These are clerical staff who extract, from clinical documents, 
data about the patients diagnosis and the revenue-earning procedures that have 
been provided.  
Coding is the life blood of our data. If there is more than one diagnosis, coders 
have to get the diagnosis or get the primary and secondary diagnoses in the 
right order, or the tertiary diagnosis in the right detail. 
Coders rely principally on discharge flimsies filled out by junior doctors at the 
time the patient leaves hospital.  
The primary purpose of the discharge flimsy is to notify the patients GP that the 
admission has taken place and has terminated. Prepared for this primary, clinical 
purpose, it is then used for an unrelated, accounting process. Expressed in 
clinical vernacular, rather than the formal language of clinical coding, the 
information contained is potentially misleading for the secondary purpose and 
clarification has to be sought elsewhere. 
The quality and organisation of clinical information in clinical case notes can be 
poor. The discharge summaries (flimsies) that provide the coders principal 
substrate are often incomplete or delayed. The nature of hospital notes and 
record keeping is such that coders have to do a lot of digging. Coders process 
a high workload in limited time. 
It is important for the Trust and its coding staff to capture clues about complex 
cases, such as the fractured neck of femur (with) a whole raft of other problems 
(who has) another procedure done to them. Because a single spell can 
contain more than one finished consultant episode, coders have to identify such 
complex spells completely. 
To do this properly, they depend on the completeness of data documented 
clearly in the case notes, or reported to the Patient Administration System. When 
a patient is moved from the care of one consultant to another, there needs to be 
an audit trail for the coder to follow. If the patient is never moved from being 
under that consultants care, there is no audit trail for the coder to follow. 
Strategies & Interactions  : Checking and Maintining Probity 
The language of spells is intended to inhibit the inefficient and exploitative 
shuffling of patients between consultants by Trusts in order to inflate their 
account of income-generating spells. 
Legitimate consultant transfers may result from inaccurate screening and 
direction by GPs (for whom the Trust is not responsible) or from pathologies or 
co-morbidities (which the Trust cannot prevent) that emerge during an 
accurately-directed admission. 
However, commissioners monitor the account of activity to make sure that 
Trusts do not falsely inflate their number of finished consultant episodes or 
generate more income by transferring patients unnecessarily between 
consultants.  
The Trust is driven by twin needs : to avoid impropriety and to review its 
remuneration against its reported activity, to adopt its own internal audit process.  
It is possible for the Trusts information department to reconstruct a sample of 
spells from constituent episodes using the spell identifier and the patient 
unique key to cross-match a table of information. This is a checking strategy, 
adopted for lack of confidence in the ostensible information, provided by the 
primary accounting process. Anomalies are sometimes glaring Dr. X isnt a 
surgeon   
Outcome : Running at a Loss 
Inaccurate data have a triple cost. 
First, an awful lot of man hours that go into that i.e., the need to monitor a 
defective information process. 
Second, the opportunity to recoup revenues is lost. The Trust cannot account 
accurately for all of the episodes and expenditures within every spell and is in 
doubt over whether it is retrieving all its entitled earnings. The accountants 
bottom line is that if the data have not gone onto PAS  we havent been 
able to bill for it. 
Third, the coding process produces information anomalies that only become 
visible when the information is presented to senior clinicians, whose clinical 
behaviour and performance managers are seeking to influence. Clinicians 
confidence, in managers and management information, is dented when a surgical 
operation is credited to a physician. 
6.1.2 : Management Information from Operational Systems 
The reporting of clinical activity into the accounting structure represents one example 
where the clinician required to contribute information into the accounting system is also 
required to fulfil the clinical requirements arising at that moment.  
From a managerial perspective, the choice of expressions used to describe clinical 
activity is fundamentally important : 
Coding will be more important still with Payment by Results.  We've got to 
ensure that, when we're coding, we're making the most sensitive codings for the 
income. Aside from the clinical aspects of coding, if a patient has, in effect, three 
or four different things done which have different codes, we have to make sure 
that we're extracting the one which gives us the best income.  You only receive 
the income based on one code, so we've got to make sure that the primary code 
that is pulled out is the one that gets the best income. (Executive Director #2) 
The structural process of reporting is shown in Figure 6.1.1, where the dotted line 
represents the interface between the clinical process, where coding is at the margin, and 
the managerial process, where it is central. 
Figure 6.1.1 : Reporting Clinical Activity into an Accounting Control Structure  
From the clinical perspective, it is equally important for the groups of clinicians and 
coders to align their activities better : 
Our operations are not coded properly.  They are not even paid correctly in 
terms of their complexity. I visited the coding department the other day. The 
OPCS coding for the operations performed  is very poor.  It doesn't 
reflect reality at all. We are trying to improve our coding because, with Payment 
   One or more 
serial or 
parallel patient 
episodes   
Admis s ion   Discharge   
Discharge   
Flimsy   
Coding   
Patient Administration System   
Spell Converter   
Operational (Clinical) System   
M a nagement Information   
by Results, we will be funded by what we do. At present, our coding is poor and 
we are not receiving what we are due. (Orthopaedic Consultant) 
 having been through trying to get our payments through Payment by 
Results right, we have some enormous issues occurring  A classic one is 
[a particular kind of high cost operation]. If you call it [operation X] it goes 
through one code and if you call it [operation Y] it codes through another code 
and which one you call it is desperately important because for one you get paid 
for the operation, but if the code is taken down the other route you only get a 
default payment. You have to call it [operation X], because if you call it 
[operation Y] you don't get paid for it. (Consultant Surgeon) 
For this reason, it appears easy to achieve the alignment of values at a representative, 
group level between the clinical culture of patient-oriented processes and the clerical 
culture of reporting and accounting. Whilst seeking to establish compatibility between 
these cultures it will also be necessary to recognise incompatibilities that limit complete 
reconciliation and to understand why and how they do so. Thus : 
In [one surgical speciality] for example they are trialling coding their own 
procedures. They felt that the coding and the [data fed back by the Trust] was 
inaccurate and affecting their payment by results. (Performance Manager) 
The only way of being accurate is to code it as you write the operation notes. I 
have some colleagues who would disagree, but I think we should be coding 
strictly at the time of the operation. (Orthopaedic Consultant) 
6.1.3 : Applying the Diagnostic and Therapeutic Model  
Problem Situation 
Within the Trusts problem situation, it is a core capability for managers to report 
activity accurately and gain reimbursement. Underpinning this is the capability to 
capture activity from the working practices of clinicians. The technology deployed to 
achieve this capture is crude. It is merely the completion of a discharge flimsy on self-
copying paper. One copy goes to the GP, a second copy goes to the coding department 
and the third remains in the patients notes. 
Explicit managerial action has tended to be limited to asserting periodically the need for 
doctors to fill this flimsy conscientiously and exhorting better compliance.  
Completion of the flimsy is located within the process shown in Figure 6.1.1 but there is 
clearly a difference between the procedure as imagined, compared with the procedure as 
performed in the overall task context.  
Problem Solvers 
Agenda Definition 
The fact that the Trusts revenues depend on the accurate coding of clinical activity 
provide a clear agenda for the Chief Executive. 
Values Alignment 
Clinicians realise this and some are willing to promote the coding of their clinical 
activity as it is performed. Managers are beginning to succeed in persuading senior 
clinicians to align their values around a business imperative presented by the NHS 
Payment by Results financial regime. Even so, some senior clinicians appear less 
willing to engage and code it as you write it in the operation notes, for reasons which 
could be attitudinal or practical.  
Conflict Surfacing 
Clinical staff write their communications in relative ignorance of clinical coding 
structures, so that coders have to do a lot of digging in their limited time. Equally, 
coders are relatively ignorant of clinical issues, so that it can be hard to  get the 
primary and secondary diagnoses in the right order. 
Whist clinicians criticise the quality of coders work, for example, The OPCS coding 
for the operations performed  is very poor.  It doesn't reflect reality at all  
we are not receiving what we are due, coders criticise clinicians for the quality of 
clinical information they have to go on. 
Agenda Critique 
The model serves to remind us that finding the most sensitive codings for the income 
is a deliberate act, for which the mental effort required might be a distraction from other 
aspects of the clinicians primary role. It suggests that the alternative to solving the 
problems presented by coding as a secondary process might be approached by bringing 
the relevant people and procedures together more closely in time and place rather than 
relying on information technology as the sole mediator.  
Interpretive Scheme 
The discharge flimsy represents the technology at the heart of the adapted Leavitt 
model. The model helps us to situate the flimsy between two groups (managers and 
clinicians) and two processes (clinical and administrative).  
The interpretive scheme suggests that we should consider a systemic improvement in 
work design (Senges (1990) concept of leverage), by investigating, with staff, how 
the discharge flimsy mediates or interferes between an individual clinician and his 
concurrent clinical tasks and paperwork, and between collaborating clinicians and their 
shared commitment to a single patient.  
Problem Solving Methodology 
The problem solving methodology has been to focus on a system to convert information 
about the clinical management of a patient into organisational currency. There has not 
been a balancing focus on the overall preoccupations of the individual clinician when 
completing the flimsy. 
6.1.4 : Achieving Financial Balance : Lessons from the Model  
This part of this chapter has described the building of consensus between managers and 
representative senior clinicians around the need to describe clinical activity to an 
external regulator, in order to achieve complete reimbursement.  
In terms of agenda setting, the overarching imperative, to present an account of activity 
to obtain reimbursement and revenues, is inescapable. In terms of agenda alignment, the 
design of a new information system must ensure that needs of clerical data retrieval 
converge with those of clinical note keeping. 
We also need to understand better the practical as well as the attitudinal conflicts that, 
despite the imperative of better clerical and accounting information, prevent compliance 
in the production of the discharge flimsy and other parts of the clinical record on which 
coding depends. Their elimination, will be assisted through the improved construction 
of the primary clinical record and by understanding its completion in relation to 
simultaneous clinical activities and responsibilities.  
Agenda critique would present alternatives to the a priori assumption that the 
presentation of clinical data for the benefit of a remote group of secondary clerical users 
(coders) ought to be a primary concern for clinicians, for which a technical solution 
would be the re-design of the clinical record, to facilitate and partially automate the 
coding process. 
Aspects of the status quo to be considered for change include a continuing review of the 
culture that subordinates clerical to clinical effort, a review of the spatial and temporal 
separation of coding from clinical procedures and an exploration of the strengths and 
weaknesses of coded compared with more expressive forms of record. 
6.2   :   A I M I N G   T O   P E R F O R M   I N    
T H E   T O P   T E N   P E R C E N T 
6.2.0 : Introduction 
Performance improvement depends on an organisations capacity to learn how to 
change, on the basis of sound evidence. The twin requirements are for reliable data and 
the right kind of group to interpret the data. 
Where the quality of data available is at issue, the specification of data required to 
provide rich and informative texture needs to be complemented : by attention to the 
conditions interposed between the intention to collect data, and the action of data 
collection itself. 
6.2.1 : Problem Situation 
Despite its acquisition of foundation status, with earned autonomy, the Trust will 
need in future to compete in a climate of contested service provision. It is a core 
capability for the Trust (and a mark of institutional prowess) to excel in the published 
performance ratings, on measures of quality as well as cost. 
For this reason, it is a core capability for the Trust to respond quickly to output and 
performance signals. It must develop its capacity for organisational learning and 
continuing performance improvement. It must also develop the capacity to generate 
accurate signals that truly reflect the performance they purport to describe. 
An explicit managerial action has been to develop the structure of divisions and 
directorates so that performance information can be translated into the modified 
organisation of clinical practice : 
a proper performance management process whereby we are sharing 
information with each directorate on a regular basis about their performance. 
Now, that might be about the range of outpatients and inpatient waiting times :  
The information that is available  I don't think we have shared that 
enough with directorates (Executive Director #3) 
The intention has been to broaden the plane along which the meeting of minds can 
occur, between the managerial and the clinical perspective, deepening the level of 
inquiry and debate over the organisation of clinical services and devolving 
accountability and authority into a clinically-led management structure : 
We have the clinical directors meeting once a month. What I want to see, and 
what we are developing, is a performance management process which will give 
as a lot more time to discuss the management issues within each individual 
directorateWhat I would like to see is the development of a divisional 
structure within the Trust which will enable the executive directors to deal with 
four or five divisions, that is much easier to manage and then have performance 
meetings with them on a regular basis, allowing divisions to manage their own 
patch -their own directorates- themselves on a similar sort of basis, regularly 
meeting to discuss performance in detail. (Executive Director #3) 
Clinicians engagement and the associated organisational learning are to be supported 
by the development of Better Information Groups : 
Better Information Groups at directorate level, where the clinicians and 
the managers and the senior nursing staff come together and will look at what 
the information is telling them, partly from the financial point of view about 
whether we are coding things correctly, but also from the point of view of 
clinical quality. As I mentioned, we want to improve things like mortality rates, 
readmission rates and those sorts of things. (Executive Director #3) 
6.2.2 : Problem Solvers 
Agenda Definition 
Presented as a core capability and enshrined within the Chief Executives Trust Wide 
Objectives, the ambition to be a Top Ten Performer represents a clearly identified 
agenda. The supporting aim is to capture data to measure key aspects of performance 
and clinical quality. 
Values Alignment 
Potential conflict of interest between the clinical and the accounting rationale is 
resolved by aligning values around a broader appeal to the benefit of patients and the 
concept of quality : 
 We exist as an organisation for the benefit of patients and if we lose sight of 
that, whether or not were balancing the books or hitting the four-hour target, 
it does not matter. (Executive Director #2) 
I've talked about being in the top 10% of providers. There is a very clear goal 
for us over the next annual healthcare ratings, to try and achieve a rating of 
"excellent" for quality of services. (Executive Director #3) 
Conflict Surfacing 
Despite the formation of Better Information Groups, the Trusts development of its 
information audience of managers and clinicians has been hindered by conflict over 
anomalies in the information produced : 
We spent a long time arguing about whether the data were robust or not 
instead of identifying where the issues were. (Performance Manager) 
It seems that the Trust needs to complement its advance, in developing its capacity to 
understand and learn from data, by developing its understanding of the process of data 
acquisition and the barriers to accurate data entry. It is questionable whether Better 
Information Groups are capable of resolving issues directly because the relatively senior 
clinicians involved are not those to whom the task of data capture is routinely assigned. 
Agenda Critique 
Efforts to stimulate clinical performance improvement through measurement and the 
deployment of incentives could be complemented by information system interventions 
that help to facilitate and redirect the clinical effort. This can be achieved at an 
operational or at a more dramatic, strategic level : 
A lot of it is efficiency, trying to make sure that the patient gets the right 
management in a timely fashion and not interventions that aren't required 
 At what point in that process are people adding value? (Divisional 
Clinical Director). 
Certainly, having an unscheduled care centre next to an A&E immediately 
increases your options because, within the unscheduled care centre, you've got 
two or three or more options that that patient can be attended to without being 
an A&E attendance. (Divisional Clinical Director). 
6.2.3 : Interpretive Scheme 
The interpretive scheme separates an accounting culture, focused on technology used to 
measure the performance of groups and processes, from a clinical culture where 
technology might assist chains of interactions that link clinicians and their individual 
tasks around individual patients. 
In the former instance, one executive interviewed suggested initially that inferences 
could be drawn by examining measured performance data in successively finer detail, 
but went on to recognise that the measured data only provided part of a bigger picture : 
In terms of drilling into the information, a lot of that is an additional exercise. 
The information system itself produces the detail of how many patients have 
breached [the performance target], then getting into the cause is another 
exercise added on. (Executive Director #3) 
[The routine reports are] useful in pointing to areas that we should focus 
attention onwe need to dig deeper into the data and understand what's 
going on because the data will only give you part of the picture. (Performance 
Manager) 
An early contribution from Better Information Groups has been to provide a forum in 
which groups of managers and clinicians can explore and begin to rectify discrepancies 
between the situation reported and clinicians own experience : 
The Better Information Groups came out of frustration I guess, whereby we as 
a planning department, or my colleague in the information department, might be 
producing information, say for a performance management meeting within a 
division, and we would put it on the table and they would say, What? We don't 
agree with this   the view was that we needed to establish these local 
information groups or Better Information Groups to identify what the divisions 
needed and what did they want and whether they had confidence in that 
information. Because we can still produce what they wanted but if they didnt 
have confidence in it that would undermine everything were trying to do. 
(Performance Manager) 
The challenge has been to find a technology (that is to say, a means) by which clinical 
staff will contribute to the accurate recording of their own activity  
6.2.4 : Problem Solving Process 
One factor promoting the entry of data to measure performance is the equitable 
distribution of benefits, such that those providing management information from their 
operational systems also derive information they can use themselves : 
If youre going to put an IT system in, say we've got the ORMIS system in 
theatres, then people have to have some buy into that so that everybody's got to 
be getting something out of it. Now, there is a lot of benefit in that in terms of 
being able to see theatre lists coming up in advance, knowing who's going to be 
doing them, anaesthetising them, you can plan them better because you've got 
average operating time, for individual surgeons.  You can generate log books 
for everybody.  You can monitor theatre utilisation.  So everybody's getting 
something out of it and that is synergy. (Divisional Clinical  Director)   
 Operating Room (operating theatre) Management Information System. 
The personal incentive emphasised here is, nevertheless, related to measurement and 
planning, rather than the execution of individual healthcare tasks or individual 
engagement with identified colleagues.  
When the researcher visited an operating theatre to see the ORMIS system in action, he 
was made aware that the incentive of collaboration between colleagues can override a 
commitment to a distant recipient of data. The responsibility to call for the next patient 
on the operating list, and log that this had been done, was inconsistently shared between 
staff of different disciplines, rather than reserving a rigid division of labour.  
Staff members often left their personal log-in active so that others could perform this 
and other computer functions swiftly, in passing from one non-computer task to another. 
This unplanned use of the computer as a vehicle for collaboration had anomalous 
consequences for the information system as a whole : 
  in management terms, you need to be sure you information is accurate 
and that requires the right people to enter the right information on the right 
place, and to understand what they're entering And sometimes it's not entirely 
clear what its being collected for  (A&E Consultant). 
At this stage, it's almost a hindrance to me in some ways because we have 
password-based systems. Fortunately, as a consultant, its not too often that I 
have to write down blood results myself, which means, whenever I do, my 
password has expired, so I'm there looking for someone who's got a valid 
password that can get me on the system. (Consultant Anaesthetist). 
One of the anaesthetists recently got blamed for cancelling loads of patients 
but what happened was that his ORMIS login was being used by lots of different 
people to enter data for any number of different reasons. (Consultant Surgeon) 
6.2.5 : Performing in the Top Ten Percent ; Lessons from the Model 
The question of Top Ten performance has been addressed at the level of explicit 
managerial action in three ways. By redistributing part of the Trusts operating surplus 
to the areas generating the best performance, the incentive is provided to improve the 
acquisition of management data. Clinical Directorates have been reorganised, to 
generate organisational learning from the data produced. Better Information Groups 
have been convened, to inquire how the information produced for planning and decision 
making can better reflect clinical actuality.  
Better Information Groups need to investigate the ways information systems can 
combine the means to measure clinical activity with the means to help the people 
engaged in production to recognise and manage their own situation as fluently as 
possible. 
The interpretive scheme of the model hints at a glass ceiling, separating the groups of 
planners from the individuals on whom they depend for the input of performance data at 
the margin of their clinical tasks. The planners are analytic information users who drill 
deeper into the organisational data about the past performance of processes but 
recognise that the data will only give you part of the picture. The front-line staff who 
supply data to the analytic machine are also documenting and exchanging information 
for some more immediate purpose. 
At the planning level, it is accepted that the stringencies of information governance 
require many data inputs to be identified to an individual and accountable password 
holder. At the operational level, the technology-related procedures required by clinical 
governance are shown to be vulnerable to routines of practice based on collaboration 
between colleagues in direct contact with each other. 
Password procedures, designed to limit access and allow attribution of data input, 
hinder clinicians fluent collaborative work. Illicit password sharing illustrates a 
pragmatic adaptation of the intended procedures to support the way clinicians work 
together fluently. As a result, the information available to planners who are not in the 
know is flawed because the assumed link between the data and its author is lost, in the 
conflict between the logic designed into the system and the tacit logic of people working 
together and sharing some aspects of their jobs with others. 
At this point, the emphasis of the problem solving methodology shifts from 
concentration of the management information that is to be acquired from operational 
systems, on to the primary clinical activities that surround the acquisition of data. 
Instead of suggesting in data quality, the outcome of data acquisition, we ought now to 
be interested in opportunities to align better the process of data capture with primary 
clinical processes. These come together at the critical point epitomised by a clinician, 
engaged in the task of clinical documentation during and within the context of 
immediate and wider clinical responsibilities. 
6.3   :   A I M I N G   T O   P R O V I D E   V A L U E   F O R   M O N E Y    
T O   T H E   T A X P A Y E R 
6.3.0 : Introduction 
The provision of Best Value for Money to the Taxpayer hinges around maximising 
valued outputs and minimising monetary inputs. There has been huge interest in the 
development of integrated care pathways to organise resources efficiently around the 
patient. 
Care pathways are intended to establish an agenda of control, continuity and coherence 
between otherwise isolated events in a patients management ; breaking down the 
insularity of individual institutions, departments or people, aligning effort around 
combined economic and clinical values, and promoting collaborative efficiency through 
collective awareness of an organising principle. 
They are also intended to help managers to monitor the efficiency of care delivery ; help 
nurses and other non-medical staff to anticipate medical decision making ; eliminate 
unproductive and potentially inaccurate decision making by delegates ; and help 
medical staff to co-ordinate their activities with those of colleagues. To patients, care 
pathways offer insight into the principal stages and procedures of their management 
and, perhaps, the opportunity to plan their affairs around their management. 
The widespread adoption of the care pathway approach is expected to shift attention 
from waiting lists for individual services towards the overall continuity of management 
for any given patient across disparate functional units. 
We should be using the information system to schedule that patient's pathway 
right from the beginning, so, if we get a referral from a patient for, you know, a 
hernia or something, we should be able to say, quite simply, at each stage in the 
pathway, what is going to happen, right upfront to the patient, so they know 
when they're going to have the procedure done and where it's going to be done. 
(Executive Director #3) 
6.3.1 : Problem Situation 
Amongst the Trusts core capabilities, one is to meet the requirement to provide timely 
access to its resources. A specific target is to provide a first definitive treatment within 
18 weeks of first presentation. It is, therefore, a necessary supporting capability to 
monitor, the actual trajectory of a patient for each of the Trusts product lines (cancer, 
stroke etc.) against an ideal standard.  
It's absolutely critical we have some kind of system which logs what's 
happening to people right along the pathway, what interventions have been 
given and I just think that the moment , that sort of stuff is not there. (Executive 
Director #3) 
An explicit managerial action is thus to design, for each of the Trusts product lines 
(cancer, stroke etc.), a clinical pathway that will minimise decision making and 
eradicate redundant steps and duplicated effort. A second such action is to develop the 
capacity to monitor the operation of those parts of the pathway where information is 
presently lacking : 
When we were told that the patient pathway for Cancer had to be completed 
within 62 days, from referral to treatment, we put a lot of work into pathways, 
actually mapping out what the current patient pathways were, identifying where 
there was duplication and taking that out of the system to streamline the whole 
process. (Executive Director #3) 
 we're in a situation at the moment where, for instance, we have 
relatively good information on inpatient and outpatient waiting times, who is on 
the list etc, but when you look at diagnostics, that's very patchySo on the 
whole area of diagnostics, just to enable us to manage the waiting list, we need 
some IT development. (Executive Director #3) 
Monitoring depends on capture of sentinel pathway events through routine workplace 
practices :  
The whole 18 week thing is based on patient pathways and again we are not 
very good at producing information which shows what is happening along the 
patient pathway  one of the things we've got to do for the 18 weeks, for 
instance, is identify when the patients receive their first definitive treatment. 
Well, in our systems at the moment, we don't flag that up. (Executive Director 
It will be necessary to devise data collection procedures that can withstand tacit 
workplace adaptation i.e. the improvised application of a specified monitoring 
structure. 
6.3.2 : Problem Solvers 
Agenda Definition 
Care pathways represent a clearly identified agenda for the Chief Executive in the 
context of a performance-managed institution :  
If you take the biggest single operational challenge I mentioned, the 18 week 
referral to treatment target (Executive Director #3) 
Values Alignment 
It has not been difficult to align managerial-economic and clinical values around the 
clearer specification of processes, relaxation of clinical roles, delegation and the 
elimination of unnecessary consultations and investigations : 
We have done some work in our department with a system called musculo-
skeletal pathways. We have developed several pathways, in collaboration with 
primary care,  that's a good way of organising an outpatient clinic and a 
good way of triaging [streaming and prioritising] patients. The pathways are 
managed by a group of GPs and extended scope practitioners and 
physiotherapists. they decidewhere the patient will fit best for each 
pathology and we have designed several pathways for each joint and I think that 
has the potential to be developed. (Orthopaedic Consultant) 
trying to ensure speedy flow through the system, trying to make it more 
efficient  decreasing the number of times patients are reviewed without 
added valuesee patients sooner, get early referrals  manage them 
before they become a real crisis  adopt treatment modalities that may 
improve outcomes. A lot of it is efficiency, trying to make sure that the patient 
gets the right management in a timely fashion and no interventions that aren't 
required. (Divisional Clinical Director) 
One consultant has initiated three interventions to integrate the management and 
prevention of stroke, which lend themselves to the pathway approach. These are centred 
around : the coordination of immediate investigation to discover patients who can 
benefit from delivery of thrombolytic treatment in the emergency phase ; rapid access 
to carotid artery surgery for patients who have suffered a minor stroke (TIA), 
heralding the risk of major stroke ; and rehabilitation for patients who have survived 
stroke with major disability. Economic efficiency is thus aligned with clinical benefit : 
If they are thrombolysed [ie. definitive treatment with a clot-dissolving drug] 
within an hour the outcome is much, much better. And our challenge then is to 
deliver that service to those patients as they come through the door. (Stroke 
Consultant) 
We hope to start a rapid access TIA clinic in the next few months and the plan 
there will be to see all patients who have a TIA within seven days of their event, 
aiming for the ones who require it to have their carotid endarterectomy [surgical 
operation] within two weeks of their event. From Department of Health data, 
providing that service would prevent around about 11 strokes per year in this 
district. (Stroke Consultant) 
They would come up to the TIA clinic, they would be assessed electively and 
we'd say, Yes we think clinically this is a TIA. Go upstairs and have a Doppler 
ultrasound scan and then if that was positive, they would be seen by the 
vascular surgeons, probably later that day and be booked in for their 
endarterectomy, subject to the CT scan that they might have that day or later 
on. (Stroke Consultant) 
youve got a 30% absolute reduction in stroke risk from a TIA operated 
within two weeks, compared to the advantage disappearing to zero after three 
months. (Stroke Consultant) 
You're trying to maximise the number of people who can get home to an 
independent life. (Stroke Consultant) 
The alignment of values around the care pathway for stroke carries forward from the 
dialogue between managers and clinicians into the dialogue between one clinical 
discipline and another : 
I work closely with the vascular surgeons and we've developed the TIA clinic 
together. From their point of view, if they can feel that they are getting the 
patients and can operate on them within the time window where they will have 
maximum benefit. (Stroke Consultant) 
Conflict Surfacing 
Nevertheless, areas of potential conflict between problem solvers can also be defined, 
centred on incompatibility between different strands of institutional logic.  
First, the norms of control, predictability and maximally efficient resource utilisation 
encounter the need for flexibility, responsiveness and tolerance of risk : 
Youre not working with a set number of patients but with the influx of 
patients as they come through as emergencies. Some weeks you may have many 
more than other weeks  (Stroke Consultant) 
The challenge for the vascular surgeons is to have space on their operating 
lists for an unpredictable workload.  [One week] there are no patients and 
they have reserved the slot  or two slots. That might be three hours 
operating time that they suddenly have to fill. (Stroke Consultant) 
Second, efficient working practice may need to leapfrog the institutionally-preferred 
Choose and Book mechanism that has been a major pillar of the National 
Programmes National Systems Architecture. 
The TIA clinic will be very dependent on IT. What we hope to do is to have a 
rapid referral system, direct from the GP surgery, where they would e-mail the 
referral.  This can't go through Choose and Book because it's a very time 
dependent, emergency referral. (Stroke Consultant) 
Agenda Critique 
In terms of agenda critique, care pathways represent an outright rejection of one a priori 
rationale and the substitution of another. 
The care pathway approach departs from the conventional, institutionally oriented 
mapping of several competing patients to one single resource and, instead, maps 
multiple resources contributing to the care of a single patient. 
Despite the attraction of the patient-focused paradigm, pragmatic limitation of access to 
scarce resources thus lends continuing validity to the original, resource-based paradigm. 
Problem Solvers : Summary 
Table 6.3.1 applies structuration theory to show the kind of relationships, between the 
content of clinical activity, the context of clinical activity and the processes to be 
supported by an information system contributing to Value for Money to the Taxpayer. 
Although the table appears to align elements within a unitary framework, suggesting the 
cohesive organisational culture that ought to characterise an efficient institution, it also 
contains elements where cohesion is likely to break down in conflict. Not all cases of 
the same condition are equally time-critical, so that the adjudication of priority between 
a stroke and cancer case requiring the same diagnostic resource may depend on a 
professionally informed appreciation of the specific patients concerned. 
Table 6.3.1 : Structuration Theory Applied to the Stroke Pathway 
Structures of 
Signification 
Structures of Domination Structures of 
Legitimation 
18 Week Target. 
Clinical Pathways, Patient 
Journeys. 
External Regulators, 
Performance Measurement 
and Management. 
Time critical nature of 
benefit from some 
treatments. 
Interpretive scheme Resources : allocative Values, norms, beliefs 
Capacity of diagnostic 
services.  
Resources : authoritative 
Indicators of organisational 
well-being, variance of 
performance from 
standards, time-limited 
targets.  
Mortality and morbidity 
from stroke. 
Authority to deploy 
diagnostic and theatre 
resources. 
Authority to adjudicate 
competing and disparate 
needs. 
Efficiency, Clinical 
Effectiveness, Evidence 
Based Practice, for stroke 
patients. 
Equity of access to scarce 
diagnostic resources for 
non-stroke (eg cancer) 
patients. 
Communication Use of Power Sanction 
Summary measures and 
statistics add urgency to the 
pace of each individuals 
management.  
Clinical colleagues consult 
and intervene when the 
urgency of a given case 
appears greater than is 
being afforded by the 
natural availability of 
scheduled resources. 
Managers use mix of 
anxious inquiry and 
congratulation. 
Professionals adjudicate 
distribution of scarce 
resources between 
competing pathways. 
Patients anxiety is 
reduced, treatment effect is 
maximised, resources are 
accurately directed and 
planning is enhanced when 
well-designed care 
pathways are efficiently 
administered. 
6.3.3 : Interpretive Scheme 
Groups and Structures, Processes and Technology 
Figure 6.3.1 illustrates the care pathway concept in principle.  With care pathways as 
embedded structure, Information Technology will enable the manager with the stop 
watch to monitor and control the process that takes each patient in turn from the queue 
and passes him through a sequence of resources. 
Figure 6.3.1 : Care Pathway as Structure, Group and Process Linked by 
Technology 
Care Pathways in Theory
Weeks
Tasks, Individuals and Technology 
In contrast (figure 6.3.2), each resource in the pathway is also part of one or more other, 
cross-cutting networks of demand, each with its own queue.  Each individual 
practitioners commitment to the care pathway is a compromise with his commitment to 
tasks generated within other pathways and each task is related, not to a species of queue 
but to an individual patient with particular characteristics that require the adjudication of 
need. The pathways gatekeeper is surrounded by the existing technology of referral : 
paper-based forms and the telephone, augmented occasionally by face to face contact.  
Figure 6.3.2 : Care Pathway as Individuals and Tasks, Linked by Technology 
6.3.4 : Problem Solving Methodology 
The model of a care pathway imagines a single patient who accesses each separate 
resource in sequence. Management Information is acquired at each milestone in the 
patients progress. As figure 6.3.3 shows, the problem solving methodology must take 
account that, in some clinical environments, an individual clinicians attention may be 
spread between several patients, each at different stages on one or another pathway. 
Figure 6.3.3 : Care Pathways and the Patients Journey 
Clinician   
Clinician 
Decision Making   
Pathway 
Management 
Tasks   
Clinical 
Tasks   
Resource 
Factors   
Patient 
Factors   
The Patient  s 
Trajectory 
Management 
Information 
Operational 
Systems 
Management 
Information 
Operational 
Systems 
Management 
Information 
Operational 
Systems 
Critical 
Moments 
First 
Assessment 
Episode 
Closure 
Patient 
Patient 
Patient 
Pathway   Patient   
In the lower half of figure 6.3.3, it is shown that the link between the patient and the 
pathway is the individual clinician (clinician #1). This clinicians attention is divided 
between tasks related to pathway management and tasks that are oriented towards 
clinical work in a team of practitioners. The team may be concentrated or dispersed. 
Care pathways offer the prospect that efficiency can be introduced through the 
elimination of a referral or decision-making step, in which clinician #2 is consulted. 
There is an opportunity to bypass time-consuming and error-prone human judgement, 
using best evidence criteria as the basis for automated decision making. This point 
holds, even when clinicians #1 and 2 are one and the same person. 
However, figure 6.3.3 also shows that the determination made by clinician #2 is 
contingent on patient factors (differences between the ideal type of patient envisaged by 
the pathway and the patient with non-standard characteristics) and resource factors 
(factors such as competition from other sources of demand) which moderate the 
patients own priority to receive the scarce resource. 
Because of these considerations, the problem solving methodology to manage care 
pathways using information technology represents the need for accurate choice between 
valid opportunities to predict and automate the outcome of clinical decision making, and 
equally valid occasions when it is preferable to allow human agency to recognise and 
adjudicate contingencies. As an abstraction for the sake of measurement and 
description, care pathways tend to model a closed system. In contrast : 
Theyre trying to impose clinical pathways on what is a highly complex, open 
system. (Consultant Surgeon : contribution during planning meeting). 
6.3.5 : Value for Money ; Lessons from the Model 
Monitoring the 18 week target will be simplified if we can specify each patients 
management in advance in a care pathway, capture every relevant event and compare 
the intervals between events with challenging standards. 
The scope for tacit workplace adaptation, or improvised use of this specified plan 
arises when patients present with ambiguous symptoms. One problem will be to 
establish the conventions that will give selected individuals the authority to put the 
patient on the pathway, given the consequences for observed performance, wasted 
resources and possible adverse patient outcomes if the patient is categorised incorrectly.  
As was shown in Table 6.3.1, conflict can exist within a cohesive structure and human, 
professional adjudication is necessary to resolve incommensurable issues that cannot be 
codified in a decision mechanism. 
The control function of the pathway, allowing one organisational group to monitor the 
processes of another, is thus set against the need to provide individual clinicians with 
the means to assemble rapidly the information they require to make an adjudication, 
often in concert with another professional colleague who might be remote. 
The favoured information model is to represent resources clustered around the 
individual patient in order to redress the balance of power between the individual 
patient and the institution providing care. This is insufficient because an institution that 
delivers Value for Money also has to manage its resources tightly. This also means 
representing patients from different pathways clustered around a single, scarce resource. 
Care pathways may be better seen as an organising principle or a rationale, rather than a 
fixed structure. Contemporary social theory (structuration theory, Actor Network 
Theory) reminds us that the association between pathway elements is fluid and happens 
because sufficient conditions come about time after time, rather than because they 
necessarily must. When the ability of human actors to recognise and adjudicate 
contingencies is adequately recognised, collective awareness of the care pathway can 
become a validating factor that generates the opportunity to use a given resource, 
instead of a constraint that demands its use when contingent factors suggest otherwise. 
The practical relevance of this argument is that guidelines and pathways might be most 
effectively presented as opportunities to link one action with another (Giddens (1984) 
interpretive schemes and structures of legitimation), rather than as fixed constraints, 
forcing the users next action (Giddens (1984) structures of domination). 
6.4   :   T H E   P R O V I D E R   O F   C H O I C E   F O R    
T H E   L O C A L   C O M M U N I T Y 
6.4.0 : Introduction 
In the climate of contested service provision, a viable hospital must command the 
confidence of the patients and the community it serves. When patients complain about 
their hospital experience, many complain about their length of stay in the Emergency 
Department before being admitted onto a ward. An efficient process of emergency 
admission is central to the patients own goals. 
An obvious response to long waits within the Emergency Department is to intensify 
activity there. However, the biggest challenge to efficient work in the Emergency 
Department world-wide has been the phenomenon of exit block, caused by the 
inability of the hospitals wards to assimilate patients, long after the conclusion of their 
immediately urgent need for assessment, investigation and intervention. The 
consequence of exit block is the diversion of Emergency Department staff and 
workspace, away from the immediate needs of emergency arrivals and towards the 
continuing needs of patients not yet accommodated on wards. 
For the Trust to be the provider of choice for the local community in an emergency, the 
hospitals managers must eliminate exit block from the Emergency Department by 
carefully managing its economy of beds. Its frontline professional staff must be 
attentive to the needs of their patients. 
6.4.1 : Problem Situation 
Responding to public concern over the distress of patients, waiting on trolleys in 
corridors to be admitted to a ward, the Department of Health has offset a previously 
dominant concern with waiting lists for elective patients by instituting a four hour 
target for the transit of patients through the Emergency Departments of all of its 
hospitals.  
The new target has been made a measure of performance, not only for the Emergency 
Department but also for the Chief Executives of the Trust and its commissioning 
Primary Care Trusts. 
Already fundamental to the Trusts business mission, the need to generate flow 
through the hospitals beds has become even more salient. A better response to the 
needs of emergency patients is aligned with maximising the productive value of limited 
resources and reducing the costs of in-patient stay. 
Explicit managerial actions, projecting bed management as a core capability have 
been to develop the supporting capabilities, to manage beds and to develop the capacity 
of clinical directorates and divisions for organisational learning towards the adjustment 
of hospital routines and redistribution of beds. 
There remains the need, to control length of hospital stay and match differentiated beds 
with differentiated need.  
The systematic gathering and maintenance of intelligence about bed-state - the match 
or mis-match between demand and supply of beds - has been seen as key to the control 
of flow through the hospital. This need is reflected throughout the health economy : 
There is a bed management issue, but a lot of that relates to the discharge of 
patients farther down the line, not only in this hospital but within the community 
hospitals as well. Thats not just from a health perspective, thats from a social 
services perspective as well. (Associate Director of Operations). 
Viewed analytically and reductively, the essential capabilities have been to provide : 
 a continuous data representation of the admissions queue and its different 
streams 
 a continuous data representation of occupied and vacant beds across the hospital 
 a continuous comparison between the these representations 
 an operational bed management team to acquire the necessary data and manage 
the hour to hour matching of patients from competing admission streams with 
the limited and continuously evolving availability of beds 
 a tactical group to meet at set intervals during the day, to anticipate and respond 
to mismatch 
 a strategic group to manage the redistribution of resources between 
organisational stakeholders. 
Figure 6.4.1 shows the intended outcomes of bed management. 
Figure 6.4.1 : Intended Outcomes of Bed Management  
The analytic and reductive view is elegant because of its apparent simplicity. However, 
it is an abstraction that excludes an understanding of the workplace and its practices, 
that form the setting where new technology is to be adopted and made routine. 
The Admissions, Transfers, Discharges (ADT) module of the hospital information 
system appeared to promise a vehicle to collect and display data about the bed state of 
each individual ward. It was, therefore, made available to all wards and staff were 
exhorted to use it : 
Modified Organisational 
Behaviour by Clinicians and 
Support Staff 
Strategic Reconfiguration / 
Redistribution of Hospital Beds 
between Specialities 
Hour to Hour Matching of Supply 
with Demand for Beds 
Continous 
Comparison of 
Admissions Queue 
with Available Beds 
Breach Analysis 
Outliers (ie. 
Medical Patients in 
Surgical Beds) 
Strategic Relationship with Social 
Services 
a notice round the wards to say how important it was to keep that 
updated. And he'd listed all the reasons, very valid reasons to do it. (Bed 
Manager). 
Electronic recording and a shared display of data did not provide the anticipated 
benefits : 
That system is there. The reason it doesn't work is because people don't use it 
and therefore if you were to look at the intranet now and look at the bed state 
report, you will find that a ward that may have 24 beds has currently got 27 
patients on it and the reason for that is, some of the patients that have been 
admitted have been put on the system, but the discharges haven't, and that then 
as a tool is meaningless.  Whereas, if those patients were being admitted and 
discharged on the system appropriately, at the flick of a button, we would also 
see exactly how many beds there were in the hospital, where they were, and 
therefore the bed management effort, instead of having to ascertain the 
information in the first place, would be about actually getting the people into the 
beds.  So I don't think we use that as well as we could. (ExecutiveDirector #3). 
I mean it's so out of date where it's frustrating, I also have to look at the 
repatriation of patients to other hospitals. So, say I'm chasing for a patient to go 
to - let's say, Hull - and they are still on my paperwork and I check on the ward 
and they didn't go yesterday type of thing, so I phone the hospital and say, "can 
you take patient A ? and they say, "Yes. We have done  and yet they're still  
on that ward   So, it's well out of date really, and they went something like 4 
o'clock the previous day, and that's just one example out of many. (Bed 
Manager). 
The resulting situation is that bed management meetings are more a matter of 
assembling a collective mental picture of the current state of play from vague and 
conflicting cues, rather than calculating an accurate forecast of events from definitive, 
synchronised data : 
We do three bed meetings per day and each meeting is chaired by an Associate 
Director of Operations and we take it in turns to be responsible for a day. At 
that meeting we get information about the current state of play and the number 
of beds that are expected (to become vacant) at that moment and how many are 
likely to come up later.  (Associate Director of Operations). 
You know, going to a meeting and kind of half guessing and nobody being 
really sureWe talk about : elective admissions ; how many we think there 
are that day  and I use the term loosely, think   (Associate Director of 
Operations). 
The management information required is supposed, within the ethos of the National 
Programme, to be derived from operational systems. Ultimately, these depend on the 
capacity of front-line clinical professionals to supply clerical data during their daily 
round of clinical tasks and work practices.  
The wards seem completely incapable of doing that  completely incapable. 
(Associate Director of Operations). 
Ostensibly, there is a major potential for an electronic information system to acquire and 
disseminate bed state information. If clinicians can supply the information, managers 
can process and interpret it to achieve the smooth flow of patients through the hospital. 
it would be great, though, if we didn't have to phone for bed states, 
because it's time consuming. (Bed Manager). 
A bed manager described the intensity of communication entailed by her work in the 
following interview extracts :  
Extract 1 
We're looking at patients' admissions to the hospital from different areas, 
looking at the elective patients coming in for planned surgery and the 
emergency patients coming in through A&E. Also from home, through GP's, 
clinics, and from other hospitals, repatriation patients - and making sure that 
there's a safe flow, and prioritising the patients - making sure that there's a 
steady flow  - and prioritising the right patients, making sure that they're all 
safely admitted.  
Most of the time we're on the phone- really- because the phone's stuck to your 
ear because you're trying to find information out constantly throughout your 
shift. You phone around the wards to find out what discharges are coming up. 
You're phoning the wards to make sure they're getting the surgicals, getting the 
electives in. All areas are constantly bleeping you throughout the day. You can 
easily have forty bleeps in a morning. So you're constantly on the phone , 
answering these bleeps - requests for beds from different areas - you know, as 
well as the electives, there's theatres might suddenly need a bed to go to, so 
your'e constantly trying to get information and giving information.  
We get people bleeping to request a bed. We're talking all clinics - medical , 
surgical, orthopaedics. A&E will bleep us to say there's  patients in A&E that 
need to be moved. MAU will bleep us for beds - or have you got any yet, or- that 
bed that's come up on that ward - can you make it a side room ? We get 
bleeped erm it might be infection control asking, can we move this patient to 
another area because they may be needing a side room that type of 
thing.They'll bleep us if the patient's on a ward, they need to go to another 
ward : they're on a medical ward and they need to go to surgical and vice versa. 
They bleep us to see if they can move a patient that's an outlier - a medical on a 
surgical ward, to see if they can get them onto a medical ward.  
Extract 2 
You're taking them away from their work. Sometimes you phone up and they 
say, You've got to talk to the nurse in chargebecause if you get 
inaccurate information, they'll say, you should have talked to the person in 
charge So you're dragging them away and then they'll say, well you can't 
talk to me now, I'm just doing the medicines, so you'll have to talk to me 
again."  
Extract 3 
Sometimes by the time we collect that information, it can change very quickly 
like this morning, when I said on MAU there's one GP referral, XXXX said, 
well that's two now. That happened within two minutes, you know what I mean. 
So as far as I'm concerned, that's what I aim for , absolutely accurate 
information. But it's only as good as the information we're given. 
Table 6.4.1 provides a summary of the three extracts. 
Table 6.4.1 : Conceptual Analysis of  Interview Extracts 1,2 & 3 
Central 
Interest 
Brokering requests for beds and information about beds. 
Absolutely accurate information.  
Admissions discharges, transfers. 
Cause Elective, emergency.  
Streams : A&E. home, GP's, clinics, other hospitals, repatriation.  
Move a patient that's an outlier. 
Context Collective prioritising.  
Individually safe.  
That bed that's come up on that ward - can you make it a side room ? 
Intervening Taking them away from their work. 
You can't talk to me now I'm just doing the medicines.  
Inaccurate information. 
Strategies & 
Interactions 
Phone around.  
Find out.  
Find information out constantly throughout your shift.  
Trying to get information. 
Giving information. 
Discharges are coming up.  
Chasing for a patient to go. 
Consequences Constantly on the phone. 
The phone's stuck to your ear by the time we collect that information. 
Forty bleeps in a morning.  
Out of date - change very quickly. 
Only as good as the information we're given. 
Central Focus : Brokering Requests for Beds 
The focus falls on the brokering of requests for beds and information about beds, in 
order to co-ordinate admissions discharges and transfers of patients into, between and 
away from wards. The bed manager is trying to obtain and provide absolutely accurate 
information.  
Causal Factors : Multiple Streams of Demand 
The need arises because of different, competing classes of patient (elective, emergency) 
and different admission streams, (through A&E. Also from home, through GP's, 
clinics, and from other hospitals, repatriation patients). Wards and patients needs are 
also differentiated and it is often necessary to move a convalescent patient to the wrong 
kind of ward, to accommodate a new patient on the right kind of ward. This generates a 
later need to move a patient that's an outlier, to restore host beds to the parent 
speciality and allow correct care to resume.  
Context : Fluid Situation and Provisional Data 
The bed managers goal of absolutely accurate information is compromised by the 
provisional nature of the information that is available. Beds are not vacant but 
discharges are coming up. The job is one of actively searching, phoning around, 
not simply getting but trying to get information and finding information out 
constantly throughout your shift. The need to deal with provisional information means 
checking to see whether it has become definite. This can amount to chasing for a 
patient to go when the process appears to need driving. 
Intervening Factors : Asymmetrical Priorities and Dependency 
The principal intervening factor is that the bed manager depends on clinical ward staff 
for the information essential to her role. Her requests for information, about patients and 
their readiness for discharge, from ward staff is seen as an intrusion : youre taking 
them away from their work. Direct care for patients is given priority, so you can't talk 
to me now, I'm just doing the medicines. A second factor is that information from the 
ward is imparted in the context of other knowledge. If the bed manager asks the wrong 
person, she gets inaccurate information  you should have asked me. 
Strategies & Interactions : Prioritising Requests 
These activities take place in the context of a collective ethos where the needs of one 
patient have to be prioritised against those of the next. Nevertheless, each individual 
patient must be managed safely, making sure that there's a safe flow, and prioritising 
the patients - making sure that there's a steady flow  - and prioritising the right patients, 
making sure that they're all safely admitted. Finally, some patients require seclusion, 
resulting in requests such as that bed that's come up on that ward - can you make it a 
side room ?. 
Consequences 
The consequence is a labour intensive jumble of information requests and exchanges. 
The bed manager is constantly on the phone - the phone's stuck to your ear. As well 
as interrupting the duties of ward staff who can be correspondingly reluctant to co-
operate, the bed manager herself can be interrupted by forty bleeps in a morning.  
The task of comparing information about demand and the supply of beds cannot be 
construed as a simple one of analysis and deduction. Effort is consumed in the 
construction of impressions about a situation in constant flux. Events have already 
marched on by the time we collect that information. In consequence, the bed manager 
feels that she and her team are only as good as the information we're given. 
6.4.2 : Problem Solvers 
Agenda Definition 
The bed management agenda is clearly stated in terms of the smooth management of the 
patients trajectory as a smoothly-flowing process, set against a model of capacity 
management (Figure 6.4.2) : 
Figure 6.4.2 : Process Model of the Patients Journey 
Values alignment 
The fulfilment of this agenda requires clinical professionals to support the managerial 
goal of smooth process flow. Motivating factors include an appeal both to pragmatic as 
well as idealistic values. Idealistically, the aim has been to : 
give the patient an experience where they feel that they've been dealt 
with quickly and efficiently. (Executive Director #3) 
Pragmatically, it has been possible to identify anomalous conditions that run counter to 
professional as well as managerial expectations : 
Internal Delay, 
Discontinuity 
Demand 
Outflow 
Physical 
Capacity 
Patient In 
Patient Out 
the situation where surgically trained nurses are having to provide care 
to medical patients.  (Executive Director #3) 
 we may actually still have 10 patients down there who have already had 
a decision to admit and, therefore, A&E itself has, in effect, become an inpatient 
ward.  (Executive Director #3) 
You end up where they're all in the wrong places  :  like orthopaedic could end 
up taking a couple of surgicals - we try not to do it but we have to sometimes. 
We have orthopaedics on a surgical ward. So a surgical ward might have 
surgical outliers but this is because of so many medical outliers.  
...but this happens because the medical outliers are on the surgical wards. 
So you could have a surgical ward, say 34, they could have ten medical outliers, 
they could have three orthopaedic outliers, they could have an ENT outlier, so 
then we struggle getting the electives in.     (Bed Manager) 
Conflict Surfacing 
The question emerges, whether the apparent complete incapability of ward staff, to 
supply the information required by bed managers, might result from the perversity of 
front-line staff or from reasons which ought to be respected and given prominence in a 
more comprehensive appreciation of the differentiated needs of differentiated 
stakeholders : 
Theyve got to be given a benefit of doing that. I can see why they dont do it 
because, as soon as they declare a bed, they get another patient. If they dont fill 
that bed state in, in a timely manner, they get one or two hours breathing space. 
So, theyre human  (Associate Director of Operations) 
They dont declare the beds do they ? I know, as a student, Ive noticed that. 
They dont declare the beds because they want a bit of a break.  (A&E Staff 
Nurse) 
For a senior nurse in charge of a ward, requests for bed state information are only part 
of a continuing stream of clinical and non-clinical information requests. Her 
participation in the cast of actors providing bed state information depends on competing 
responsibilities and distractions that are difficult to control : 
I've shut myself in the bathroom to write my case notes before now because I 
just get constantly interruptedit's endless, the interruptions. (Ward 
Sister) 
For the nurse on the ward, the request for bed state information represents yet another 
task to be accommodated in an over-busy routine. An information system that allows 
key tasks to be consolidated has greater appeal than one that adds to the proliferation of 
tasks. 
They've been trialling some kind of system to identify delayed discharges and 
the problem with that is, you have to enter the information every single time you 
do it and there's no way of saving that information. So you're typing in the same 
patient's details every time you have to do it  on the next day. (Ward 
Sister) 
Agenda Critique 
The critical aspect relates to the focus of data collection and exchange, to control the 
movement of patients as objects in a managed process. Information supplied by the 
ward team would enable the bed management team to identify each existing patient 
accurately to each occupied bed, and each waiting patient immediately to each vacated 
bed : 
we could be more organised at [the] four oclock [bed meeting] because 
wed know who was coming in and whereyou dont know whos here, you 
dont know whos arrived, you dont know whether theyre in the PCAU, you 
dont know whether they are in A&E. They might not have hit the hospital. They 
would know because theyve taken them at one central point, for every 
speciality. (Assistant Director of Operations) 
The critical alternative is to focus information management on communication between 
members of a clinical team. There are two aspects to be considered. 
First, the team needs to take periodic stock of its shared situation. It needs to construct 
its own work around a particular group of patients and any special features that identify 
a given patient for special attention. Such features are identified in the wards 
communications book. 
Second, having identified any patient for special attention, at least one member of the 
team then needs to enter or analyse specific detail within the medical record. 
I'm interested in looking at a more thorough documentation process. We tend 
to repeat a lot of what we write in care plans and case notes, and we have a lot 
of different points of information. The communication book is part of it , it all 
amalgamates together  There are things in the communication book that 
won't be written in the case notes, for instance, and there's things that will be 
written in communication but will not be written in care plans. I need to look at 
some kind of system where we can make this all a little bit easier really. (Ward 
Sister) 
6.4.3 : Interpretive Scheme 
Groups & Structures and Processes 
The doctrine of Management Information from Operational Systems implies the 
provision of information by one group (clinicians) so that it can be used by another 
group (managers) within administrative processes. The distribution of information effort 
and benefits is asymmetrical. 
Management Information from Operational Systems represents an accounting paradigm, 
where individual, discrete events are assembled into a logical structure, to allow 
confident, unproblematic action. Aspirations for a new information system for bed 
management reflect this paradigm : 
When we go to the bed meeting it will be extremely useful, because we will 
know exactly how many patients are on the way, well know at any one time how 
many beds were going to createwed know how many are coming in and 
then we can work out how many are likely to come up for overnight. (Associate 
Director of Operations) 
If the IT was absolutely accurate, and our bed state was linked into 
itand it automatically updated our bed state, that would be great. So if it 
automatically - we didn't have to do anything - it would just do that. (Bed 
Manager) 
When you look at the bed state information that we have on the intranet, we 
have a good system in the sense that if everybody kept it up to date we would 
know that we had a live bed state at any point during the day.  As a patient was 
admitted or discharged from a ward, we wouldn't need bed managers checking 
up whether the bed was there, the system would automatically tell us. (Executive 
Director #3) 
The conceptual model of the bed management process is shown in Figure 6.4.3. 
Figure 6.4.3 : Conceptual Model of Bed Management 
Patient in 
A ccident &   
E mergency 
becom es 
Referred 
Patient   
M  anagem ent   
Vacated on 
W  ard   
System    
Module   
Patient 
matched 
with Vacant 
B  ed   
Patient 
transferred 
to   Vacant 
B  ed   
Vacant Bed 
becom es 
O ccupied 
Tim e taken to effect transfer   
Control :   
Oversight by Operations Manager   
delay 
Technology 
Technology intervenes between structures and groups (the bed management structure, 
bed managers, ward staff) and processes (ward processes, the bed management process). 
It also intervenes between individuals and their respective tasks. 
In the former instance, the technology is the Admissions Discharges Transfers Module. 
Staff enter the data required when they get round to it, or when their competing tasks 
allow. 
In the latter case, staff also divide their attention between the patients and the recording 
of information, either in the communications book or in patients case notes. Here, the 
technology is pen and paper. 
It is not the form of technology that helps constitute a plane of cleavage, but the way it 
is applied. On the one side, technology is used by members of one group to collect 
values of data variables so that members of another group can act on the logical 
message conveyed. On the other, it is used to record statements that individuals will 
interpret and compare with information from patients, colleagues and other sources, as 
they determine their own basis for action. 
Tasks and Individuals 
Individuals use the technology represented by the communications book and casenotes 
to determine the tasks that need to be allocated and performed. Some tasks are clearly 
delineated :  
Whether they need bloods to be taken, whether they need particular types of 
preparation   (Ward Sister) 
Others need clarification and the communications book prompts staff to discuss issues 
with patients and determine the actions to be taken.  
We need to understand what are their home circumstances, whether they've got 
care coming in, that kind of thing. (Ward Sister) 
 how they've been or,  you know, have they been in any pain, are they 
settled, what hygiene needs have been attended to. (Ward Sister) 
6.4.4 : Problem Solving Methodology 
The process of producing Management Information from Operational Systems 
envisages specific data flows, triggered by specific actions. When these actions are 
identified to a specific formal role, they constitute a task identifiable to an individual, in 
priority relation with all of the other tasks associated with that role. 
The Admissions Discharges Transfers (ADT) module is used most reliably where a 
clerical officer is constantly on duty with a specific role, to operate the electronic 
register : 
on medical admissions, they tend to be much more aware of the need to 
electronically transfer these patients. They have somebody manning the desk 24 
hours a day specifically directed to update the admissions and discharge 
process.  (Discharge Co-ordinator) 
When clerical support is incomplete, the responsibility to supply information to the 
ADT module is diffused amongst staff who have other priorities : 
We do very well during the hours that the ward clerk's there, because she does 
that and that's probably one of her priorities. And there are certain members of 
staff who do it very well and there are a couple of the auxiliaries who make sure 
it's kept up to date, particularly after hours and during the nightAt other 
times, I think there's a sense that people don't see it as a priority. (Ward Sister) 
The conceptual model of bed management was shown in Figure 6.4.3. However, the 
opportunities to undertake the associated computer interactions do not arise from the 
representation of work in the scheme shown, but from the overall content of work itself. 
The opportunities are affected by institutional pressures to complete all treatments 
within a specified window of time, the priorities presented by a sick patient, the 
presence of other patients and the constraints imposed by limited resources.  
Resource constraints in particular alter the coupling between data provision tasks and 
the individuals identified to perform them : 
The first thing that I do when I come on duty, apart from handover, is to look at 
staffingI've got two people on maternity leave and four people on long 
term sick out of a staff of 25. Quite a high proportionIf there's me and 
another nurse, we tend to split our duties into two teams, each with half of a 
ward. So, if there are only two of us, I will start giving out the medications at 
this point and making sure the insulins have been given prior to breakfast. If 
there are three of us, then I tend to do more of the administrative roles, but 
focusing mainly on the discharges. (Ward Sister) 
Information supply competes with other accountable priorities. Often multiple sets of 
actions have to be set in train more or less simultaneously at critical moments 
throughout the working day, each focused around the same patient and each with its 
own information requirement. The documentation of tasks performed is often separated 
physically as well as conceptually from their execution : 
You can't not give medications out. (Ward Sister) 
There is a clear policy  around dispensing of pharmaceuticals, etc. have 
we arranged transportation, do the relatives know, make sure we're not 
discharging them with a cannula in situ. (Discharge Co-ordinator) 
If they are discharging late in the day : that is when the staffing tends to be the 
lowest, that's when the pressure's on  they're just concentrating on what they 
feel is the most importantthe final piece in the jigsaw... the electronic 
discharge, is an afterthought - I'll do that later, when I've got five minutes. 
(Discharge Co-ordinator) 
There's a tendency for nurses to want to get all their patient care done, and 
then come out of that environment and document their case notes and do all the 
clerical side. (Ward Sister) 
Table 6.4.2 is condensed from an interview extract to identify the activities that form 
the main professional activities of the ward nurses and amplifies the concept of critical 
moments.   
The message from Table 6.4.2 is that the simple concept of a patients journey (or 
trajectory) is complicated when multiple tasks coincide for the same patient or when 
multiple patients are present, each at similar or different stages of their own journeys. 
Journeys intersect when, for example, drug rounds or doctors ward rounds occur. They 
are intermingled when a task for one patients journey has been started but cannot be 
completed yet, and the time has to be filled by attention to uncompleted tasks for other 
patients. 
Table 6.4.2 : Main Professional Activities of Ward Nurses 
Figure 6.4.4 should be compared with Figure 6.4.5. Where Figure 6.4.4 epitomises the 
idea of resources clustered around the patients journey, seen from the perspective of a 
manager or the patient himself, Figure 6.4.5 illustrates the reality of the problem 
situation for staff on the ward. The latter case is characterised by extremely fluid 
associations : between the index patient in the centre of the picture, the other patients on 
the ward, their respective physical journeys through the ward; their parallel, 
Ongoing treatment : sterile procedures, technical procedures and 
cleaning up mess and soiling 
Bed Making. 
Meals and Feeding. 
Assistance with dressing. 
Assistance with personal hygiene. 
Any particular investigations they're having that day.  
Managing diets.  
Care planning : assessing patients functional capacity, dependence 
and need for nursing support with activities of daily living. 
Prescriptions : making sure that patients emerging needs are 
adequately reflected in doctors prescriptions. 
Liaison with relatives and investigating patients home circumstances. 
Drug Rounds. 
Clinical 
Management 
of Patients 
Ward rounds. 
Organise ambulance transport. 
Organise various clinic and therapy appointments. 
Get the doctors to write a prescription sheet, and a discharge letter 
form. 
Get hold of relatives : Inform relatives. 
Speak to residential care if they're in residential care. 
Activities 
associated with 
Patients 
Discharge 
And liaise with the bed management as well. 
Off duty.  
Organising training.  
Sickness absence interviews.  
Appraisals. 
Checking out e-mails.  
Management 
Duties of 
Senior Nurse 
Actioning safety notices. 
metaphorical journey through the process and tasks of care, and the doctors and nurses 
who are constantly shifting between patients, tasks and the data gathering devices. 
Figure 6.4.4 : Process Model :  a Patients Journey 
Figure 6.4.5 : Problem Situation Model : Multiple Patients at Different Stages on 
Multiple Journeys. 
Sick Patient
Well Patient
In the situation shown by Figure 6.4.5, the chief need is not for a means to report 
progress to an external efficiency monitor but a means to enhance internal 
communication and cohesion within the clinical team : 
I need accurate and clear management plans from the doctors . That would be 
very helpful because we can then work towards - I seem to be focusing on 
discharges, but that is a large part of what we do - but with a clear accurate 
management plan you can work towards an identified discharge date. 
Particularly in medicine, that is quite often difficult to do, because you could 
have a patient come in with MI for instance, with expected length of stay 5 days. 
But, during that time, they might suddenly develop some other problem which 
will then need investigating. So the discharge date gets reviewed on a regular 
basis. (Ward Sister)  
6.4.5 : Provider of Choice : Lessons from the Model 
To contribute to the Trusts business mission, the information system must withstand 
tacit adaptation, of which an extreme example is the failure by one group of staff to 
supply information required by another. 
The root causes of this challenge to the information systems success cannot be 
attributed wholly to the perversity of unreliable staff. They are not located by individual 
blame or by faults in systematic design of roles and transactions.  
Instead, they emerge as consequences of neglecting what Law (2000) has termed the 
fluidity and dislocation of relationships which change from moment to moment.  
The relationships are fluid and dislocated because they are conceptual rather than 
concrete. Individual components participate in multiple sets of relationships, 
simultaneously or in rapid alternation. Once again, structuration and Actor Network 
theories suggest that any set of relationships looks permanent because components fall 
into alignment, time after time. Connections between components are not necessary 
consequences of physical factors, but contingent. They last only as long as the right 
contextual factors operate and they are reconstituted whenever similar situations occur. 
This case study began with the concept of a community, focused on a single, 
comprehensive rationale, eliminating or minimising human participation in the 
assembly and transmission of data during the process of bed management.  
The supply of Management Information from Operational Systems is likely to depend 
on the ability of less ambitious, smaller scale systems to support individuals, juggling 
multiple tasks in an overcrowded routine. Such systems will, in the words of Law 
(2000) be partially connected, multiply ordered, ambiguous and not very coherent. 
The ideal should not always be to eliminate human agency but, often, to support it. 
6.5   :   A   G R E A T   P L A C E   T O   W O R K 
6.5.0 : Introduction 
A Great Place to Work is underpinned by the Chief Executives vision of the 
Blackpool Way. Developed with staff, this vision aims to engender an atmosphere of 
mutuality and collaboration between individuals, groups and the various subunits of the 
institution. Their efforts are aligned towards common ends, oriented towards the needs 
of patients and the stability of a challenging workplace. 
Clear, simple rules and routines, amenable to control allow people to share a clear 
understanding of what is going on around them and anticipate further action. However, 
as rules, they represent constraints or structures of domination (Giddens  (1984).  
In A Great Place to Work, the simplicity of constraining rules is balanced by their 
enabling stimulating opportunities to solve more or less challenging problems, from an 
understanding of basic principles and an appreciation of contingent factors (Giddens 
interpretive schemes, norms and structures of legitimation).  
The ability to use their own intellectual faculties provides satisfaction both for the 
managers and the clinicians who work in the service. It assists the delivery of the 
service, to standards of quality and outcomes that can attract appreciation from service 
consumers and from external regulators.  
A Great Place to Work thus accommodates a diversity of perspectives within a whole 
whose harmony can tolerate dissonant themes without disintegrating. Whenever 
possible, the issues represented by different perspectives are aligned. If they cannot be 
aligned, they are heeded, balanced and traded-off rather than negated, one by another.  
This part of the chapter visits a particular workplace, the Accident & Emergency 
department of the Trust, to develop these ideas through an understanding of the 
interplay between clinical staff and their information system. 
6.5.1 : The Problem Situation 
The business mission of the Accident & Emergency Department is to satisfy high 
public expectations and a pattern of demand that is prone to random surges, within tight 
financial constraints. It caters for patients at all ages and with every kind and intensity 
of immediately urgent illness or injury. 
As there is no control over patients pattern of attendance, the department is in a state of 
constant tension, between the efforts of staff to create order and stability and the 
unpredicted arrival of the next patient, who might present with any of a variety of 
challenging clinical conditions. Par excellence, Accident & Emergency is where model 
order and contingency meet head on. 
It is a core capability of the department to manage each patient safely within the 
government-imposed four hour target interval. A range of other capabilities support 
this, including the ability to know, at any time, how long any particular patient has been 
present.  
Capabilities which support local control include knowing which patients are in the 
department, where in the department they are and what stage in their trajectory they 
have reached. These capabilities support the safety of each patient and the timeliness of 
his management but they also support the deployment of resources from busy to even 
busier parts of the department. Senior clinicians need to manage the flow of patients 
within the department and across its interfaces with admitting wards. 
Capabilities which support response to the patient include the ability to record clinical 
information about history and clinical findings, to request diagnostic investigations and 
receive the results and to refer to evidence-based decision support tools which facilitate 
rather than expropriate the clinicians role. 
Capabilities which support external control include the ability to trace, retrospectively, a 
patients entire journey through the department, supporting clinical audit, quality control 
and clinicians personal professional development activities, as well as the management 
of litigation and complaints. 
An explicit managerial action has been to respond locally to global NHS initiatives in 
the form of World Class Commissioning and Advancing Quality. Both of these 
initiatives are intended to promote and measure compliance with evidence-based 
clinical methods. 
In Spring, 2009, the Trust announced its decision to purchase an Interim Clinical 
Solution because the information products offered by the National Programme are 
thought not to be developed sufficiently to support its burgeoning information 
requirements. 
In April, 2009, the Emergency Departments senior clinicians and managers were 
invited by the IT Department to comment upon a Draft Output Based Specification, 
assembled by a team of external information systems consultants from the best of the 
best Emergency Department information system specifications.  
The Trusts intention is to go to the international market place to identify a supplier who 
has already developed a product capable of meeting the Output Based Specification. 
This product will have been developed elsewhere and will represent a new resource that 
will be absorbed into the working practices of the Emergency Department.  
In the timescale allowed it was not possible to explore, during the specification stage, 
the human, organisational or social factors that might influence the practical feasibility 
of the systems future operation, by users in our own department, in the fashion 
intended by its designers. 
To any extent that work practice might fall at odds with the preconceived purpose and 
operation of the information system, its assimilation into the workplace will represent 
tacit workplace adaptation. 
For this reason, the present research, undertaken in anticipation of such an event, has 
gained particular relevance and it is hoped that the findings will assist the evaluation of 
the new system, during and after its successful introduction. 
6.5.2 : Problem Solvers 
Agenda Identification 
The Output Based Specification has been collated by an external expert team who have 
studied similar specifications for an extensive range of hospital information systems, 
from the UK and elsewhere. The specification, whose main components are summarised 
in Table 6.5.1, is a hybrid of these various contributions and identifies outcomes that 
will be produced if the information system is operated properly in a technical sense.  
Table 6.5.1 :Interim Clinical Solution ; Principal Components 
Strategic Functions 
 Information Reporting, 
Analysis & Audit. 
 Bed management, 
capacity monitoring 
and planning. 
 Integrated Care 
Pathways / Planning.   
 Scheduling. 
Clinical Functions 
 Accident, Emergency & 
Urgent Care. 
 Orders Processing.  
 Results Reporting. 
 ePrescribing / Drug 
Administration. 
 Clinical Documentation 
(Assessment, History, 
Observations and 
Correspondence). 
 Decision Support.  
Administration 
 Ambulatory care 
management. 
 Rostering. 
Values Alignment 
The values of managers and clinicians are in a state of balance around the departments 
patients. There is an explicit acceptance that the hospital is a managed environment, 
where clinical goals must fall into line with the economic rational goals of managers.  
However, in a busy department where the pace of activity is fast and human resource 
and physical workspace are constrained, it is necessary to ensure that every member of 
the team can recognise the opportunity to contribute the knowledge and skills the 
situation demands. Table 6.5.2 uses structuration theory to summarise the social and 
cultural context which surrounds the Output Based Specification .  
Table 6.5.2 : Structuration Theory used to organise the aligned values of Clinicians 
and Managers. 
Structures of 
Signification 
Structures of Domination Structures of 
Legitimation 
Four Hour Target, 
breaches, clinical 
exceptions. 
Clinical Pathways, Patient 
Journeys. 
External Regulators, NHS 
Complaints Procedure, 
Performance Measurement 
and Management. 
Patients needs for safety, 
comfort and reassurance. 
Interpretive scheme Resources : allocative Values, norms, beliefs 
Funded Establishment. 
Deployment of staff from 
quiet to busy areas. 
Resources : authoritative 
Indicators of organisational 
well-being, variance of 
performance from 
standards : time-limited 
targets.  
Measurement of Workload 
and Case Mix, Recovery of 
Revenue. 
Authority to deploy human 
and material resources. 
Authority to assign own 
tasks. 
Efficiency, Clinical 
Effectiveness, Evidence 
Based Practice.  
Interventions are necessary 
rather than exhaustive. 
Needs are prioritised, 
within and between 
patients. 
Balance of autonomy and 
control. 
Communication Use of Power Sanction 
Summary measures and 
statistics. 
Managers use mix of 
anxious inquiry and 
congratulation. 
Professionals use balance 
of attention, between the 
low volume, high intensity 
category of patients and 
high volume, low intensity 
category. 
Workspace congestion is 
eased when patients pass 
swiftly and smoothly 
through the department.  
Patients are happier, less 
demanding. 
Conflict Surfacing 
Four areas of conflict are identified. First, the needs and priorities presented by patients 
and appreciated by clinicians do not always allow immediate compliance with the 
expectations of managers. There is a conflict between between computing and care-
giving : 
Its very difficult to get away from that computer and Im not blaming the 
computer, if we didnt have it I dont think it would work, and that can 
sometimes get frustrating when  I like going and admitting the patient  you 
sort of lose your patient care. (A&E Staff Nurse #1). 
The second conflict, illustrated in Figure 6.5.1 is between clinical practice traded as an 
economic commodity, and clinical practice as thoughtful and careful communication. 
Figure 6.5.1 : Is clinical Practice Just An Economic Commodity ? 
A Scan is just a 
Commodity provided 
by the XRay People. 
This Patient needs 
Youre not ordering a 
Scan. Youre requesting 
my Opinion
A third conflict arises between a rational portrayal of clinical activity as a linear 
sequence of discrete steps based on a single, imaginary patient (Figure 6.5.2), and an 
experiential understanding of interlinked situational appreciation and action that defies 
sequential analysis and recognises multiple simultaneous commitments (Figure 6.5.3). 
Figure 6.5.2 : Tracking the Patient Across Interfaces in a Linear Sequence of 
Events 
Open Local 
Presence #1 
Clinical 
Activity : Area 
Close 
Presence #1 
Open Local 
Presence  #2 
Clinical 
Activity : Area 
Close Local 
Presence #2 
Hospital 
Presence 
Close 
Hospital 
Presence 
Figure 6.5.3 : Elements of Clinical Activity  
The fourth area of conflict identified relates to the different purposes for which 
information is recorded in a clinical record (Figure 6.5.4). 
In the first instance shown in Figure 6.5.4, the accountant benefits from the 
accumulating and organising functions of the medical record. He accepts the record as 
an explicit statement of facts that can be entered and calculated in a formal system of 
mathematical logic. Data structures and record formats are rigidly defined. Codes and 
categories are considered to be unambiguous. 
In the second instance, the matching of an entity to a chosen category is recognised to 
be a human intellectual effort rather than a straightforward, axiomatic representation of 
the signified by a signifier. Clinical diagnosis and decision making are shown as 
consensual social activities in distinction from mathematical operations. The 
Assessment, 
Investigation, 
Intervention   
X Ray, 
Pathology, 
Pharmacy   
Consultation   
Referral   
Guidelines,   
Policies,   
Procedures   
Negotiation &   
Decisio n 
Making   
Consult Prior   
Hospital / GP Record   
Write a Record 
Assessment, 
Investigation, 
Intervention   
X Ray, 
Pathology, 
Pharmacy   
Consultation   
Referral   
Guidelines,   
Policies,   
Procedures   
Negotiation &   
Decisio n 
Making   
Consult Prior   
Hospital / GP Record   
Write a Record 
Assessment, 
Investigation, 
Intervention   
X Ray, 
Pathology, 
Pharmacy   
Consultation   
Referral   
Guidelines,   
Policies,   
Procedures   
Negotiation &   
Decisio n 
Making   
Consult Prior   
Hospital / GP Record   
Write a Record 
implementation of clinical decisions is assisted by the co-ordinating function of the 
medical record.  
Figure 6.5.4 : Describing Clinical Activity for Different Purposes  
Describe, 
explain, 
justify 
Tell me 
about our 
patient 
Let me measure 
your performance 
Investigate ? 
Intervene ? 
Refer ? 
Lets work out whats going on 
In the third instance illustrated by Figure 6.5.4, any practitioner may be called to give an 
account of his actions or omissions, to a patient, his family or his legal representatives. 
The record is carefully written with this possibility in mind and conscious effort is made 
to construct a defensible narrative that will maintain the impression of competence. 
Generations  of  doctors  have  been  taught, If you havent written it, you havent done 
it  (Mann & Williams, 2003). The practitioners need to defend himself against 
alternative representations drives the expansion rather than the condensation of ideas in 
the medical record and promotes multiple individual entries by the various contributors 
to clinical care, rather than a single, brief composite account. 
Agenda Critique 
The favoured information model for the National Programme is a patient-centric 
Electronic Patient Record. This represents an ideology that suggests the interests of the 
patient ought to be paramount under all circumstances. Although it is hard to argue 
otherwise, at least two alternative ideological stances can be identified alongside the 
patient-centric argument.  
Patient Centric Data Model 
In this model, a single patient is treated for no, one or many diseases at no, one or many 
institutions. The paradigm is patient-focused care. 
Disease Centric Data Model 
This model supports the need to accumulate knowledge about the effective management 
of individual diseases. The paradigm is evidence based medicine. 
In a disease-centric information model, such as might support a cancer or a trauma 
network, a single disease affects many patients and is treated at one or many 
institutions.  
Institution Centric Data Model 
Patients depend for their treatment upon financially viable institutions. The proposed 
introduction of internal trading between directorates favours a third, institution-centric 
form of data model. The paradigm is institutional efficiency. In this model, many 
patients are treated by one (sub)institution for many different diseases. 
6.5.3 : Interpretive Scheme 
Processes, Groups and Structures and Technology 
Figure 6.5.5 highlights the conflict between the metaphor of an evenly flowing 
production process and the reality of the clinical situation. 
Figure 6.5.5 : Processes, Groups and Structures and Technology 
The image of a production process suggests a pre-conceived plan, insulated from 
contingencies, conducted by one group and monitored through its own accounting 
process by another, controlling group. The behaviour of the production team is expected 
Let me measure 
your performance 
Managers : Accounting and 
Performance Management 
Processes 
Clinicians : 
Clinical Processes 
to be efficiently invariant. Figure 6.5.5 suggests that interruptions and contingencies are 
pervasive in clinical practice. Order and disorder are evenly balanced. 
Shortly after the introduction of the four hour target, the departments clinical staff was 
supplemented by navigators with a specific, restricted role and a limited interest in the 
overall needs of any given patient. This was to micro-manage performance by ensuring 
that all events were recorded as they occurred and to maintain the pace of each 
individual patients management. The outcome did not contribute to A Great Place to 
Work but generated conflict. Navigators were focused on accelerating the management 
of the patient nearest breaching the four hour target. Clinical staff were aware of 
clinical, as well as performance, priorities : 
They [navigators] would keep an eye on times. They would keep an eye for 
blood results to come back, that a patient was ready for review. Then theyd go 
and speak to the doctor. But because they didnt know what was going on in the 
rest of the department, sometimes the nurse in charge might feel that, although 
its time for that patient to be reviewed, theres another poorly patient that we 
cant get an intravenous cannula in and we need that doing as a priority : that 
will only take a few minutes and then you can go and see the patient again. And 
that was where the doctors would feel they were under pressure  they 
were getting very agitated. And then that became a whole issue that they felt that 
patient care was being compromised. (A&E Staff Nurse #1) 
Individuals, Tasks and Technology 
The computer information system is intended to help make the Trust A Great Place to 
Work by providing a vehicle for communication between members of the collaborating 
team (Figure 6.5.6). The shared contribution and display of information is intended to 
help individuals gain a clear and immediate picture of their shared situation, and plan 
their own contributions without excessive prompting or intrusive supervision. By 
providing access to external reference sources, the computer provides a partial antidote 
to the inexperience of junior staff members and facilitates their supervision by senior 
staff. 
Figure 6.5.6 : Individuals, Tasks and Technology 
Wheres My 
Next Patient ?
Whats the 
Usual 
Procedure 
for this ?
Has Mrs. X been 
treated yet ?
Because the shared display is distributed across terminals on a network, it provides a 
window onto the problem situation, for individuals outwith the team, whose own 
problem situation overlaps and, crucially, for anyone trying to gain a rapid overview of 
the entire problem situation from any of its geographically separate sectors. 
"The information system can make my job easier  I can get a picture of 
what the Accident and Emergency department is like if I am on the Clinical 
Decisions Unit for any length of time. I've a feeling for the demand that's there 
because it can impact on how quickly we need to move people around from 
Clinical Decisions. So it is particularly useful from an activity point of view. It 
provides me with the trigger for the four hour target which I can quickly glance 
at to know what the status of patients management is, which again is useful 
because if it's blank it tells me that we've got a problem because the patients are 
not being seen and they're not anywhere near to being processed, as I would 
say, through the emergency system.  If they're waiting for review it indicates 
that they're reasonably well on with the management of that case and I can do 
that away from the department just as well as I can do it from within the 
department. (Nurse Manager)  
Im always thinking one step ahead. As soon as you see a patient whose a 
surgical patient, Im thinking, are there any beds, what will they need ? (A&E 
Staff Nurse #1) 
It's like a window into A&E for us. What will happen then is that we will liaise 
with the staff nurse on obs ward, or minor injuries [these are subsections of the 
Accident & Emergency Department], depending where these patients are, are 
we going to be needed to see these patients, does M or C need to come and do 
an assessment, or is there no point because theyre in the fracture clinic at the 
moment. So it's really the logistics around the day to day work  From that 
perspective, it's very useful to us, and works well. (Discharge Co-ordinator)  
You couldn't physically be in all areas at once. I could quickly scan on the 
computer and notice that, for example, there is a child with a head injury in 
minor injuries at three o'clock in the morning. That would make me want to 
know, why is a five-year-old child in the department at three o'clock in the 
morning with a head injury. I'd pick up things from the computer system that 
otherwise I might have missed, and I could activate social services and things 
like that. It was (emphasis) a very useful tool. (Senior A&E Sister) 
A key implication of this interpretive scheme for the problem solving methodology is to 
realise that data are supplied to the information system by clinicians who are 
collaborating primarily with colleagues in their own local, fluid problem situation, and 
only secondarily in the problem situation that managers face. Managers depend upon 
clinicians for data but the clinicians have their own reasons to supply data to the 
computer and they have other means to supply data to each other.  
In situations of low risk, the data presented by the computer are regarded as a definitive 
basis for independent action within the parameters of a given occupational role :  
If theyre busy doing something else, then I can seeit will say, on the 
screen, requires nursing Kardex [card index of patients] and ECG, so if shes 
busy, I know that I will need to go and do observations on that patient, do an 
ECG and then I can say, Ive done that lady in number five. You need to go and 
ask her the questions to write in the Kardex, so I can be getting on with work 
whilst shes busy with someone else. (Health Care Assistant) 
Where risks are higher, the computer is only safely used as one source of information 
amongst others. The users reading of the situation is more careful and takes account 
of other information from the context. Direct communication with other people allows 
specific information to be selected and reinforced, over and above the expressive 
capacity of the screen display or printout : 
You need to take a handover from an ambulance crew  for that information 
we cant just stop verbally communicating about each patient. You need to 
gather information yourself I think. I dont think it could help with the 
ambulance handover. (A&E Staff Nurse #2) 
That's the problem, because that conversation that you have with that nurse 
then highlights - you know - what they need on discharge, when they need to see 
their GP, what medications they need to go home on.  It's very important.  That's 
part of the discharge process I don't know whether the computer - I wouldn't like 
to see that interaction go between the doctor and the nurse. (Senior A&E 
Sister) 
If you do handovers, you should really walk around the beds, so you can 
actually physically see the patients, because then you will notice a physical 
deterioration in their condition. But people tend to do it standing at the 
computer. If youre looking at a computer, you are not looking at a patient. 
(A&E Sister #2) 
In other circumstances, individual staff obtain and exchange information without using 
the shared computer display of the electronic information system at all :  
You can just know by looking in your cubicles. You can keep a track of where 
your patients are, where theyre going, and it doesnt mean that you have to be 
fixed to that screen to know that. You can go back and have done five different 
things with different patients and have discharged two and know about that and 
take them off , and know that someones in xray without having to keep changing 
something all the time. (A&E Staff Nurse #2) 
Even though these examples show how the electronic information system enhances to 
collaborative work within the clinical team, they also show that individuals within the 
clinical team display a significant level of independence from the electronic information 
system in formulating their individual and collective interpretation of the situation. 
The partial independence of individuals from the computer display creates problems for 
the nurse maintaining operational control of a busy clinical area, whilst other nurses and 
doctors go about the tasks of caring and curing. The computer display helps an 
individual to store data until attention can or need be given, and complements face to 
face communication. 
The nurse in charge of that area would be near a computer all the time. Or 
could only do trivial tasks  not get tied up with a major bed change. Apart from 
the computer there does need to be somebody around that area taking charge, 
for example when an ambulance comes in, so when you say that it looks as if 
were stuck behind the computer, sometimes we are updating the notes as well, 
co-ordinating whats going on in the area (A&E Staff Nurse #1) 
If youre in charge of majors and youve got 20-25 patients, you get it into 
your head that, if you leave that computer, everything will just go all to pot 
around you, so you literally need one person to stay there and coordinate that 
area, and they will make sure that everythings clicked on , but as soon as that 
nurse goes away, because somebody else doesnt know whats going on, they 
cant just automatically take over. (A&E Sister #2) 
Often when it is busy and when Im in charge of the assessment area I 
sometimes write myself a list of  jobs because sometimes theres that many  you 
dont want to forget anything  sometimes you just scribble on a piece of 
paper. (A&E Staff Nurse #1) 
For the doctor to say, Right Im going to see this patient, and the nurse in 
charge of the area should be able to tell them a little bit about the patient as well 
 just a brief background because theyve admitted the patient as well, or they 
have liaised with the nurse thats admitted them, and then when the doctor 
comes out of there, he should say immediately to the nurse in charge, I want 
whatever, and then the nurse can be doing that whilst theyre writing up their 
notes. (A&E Staff Nurse #1) 
6.5.4 : Problem Solving Methodology 
The fourfold essence of the problem solving methodology is, first, to understand that 
participants in the problem situation supply data to map a representation of clinical 
events onto the trajectory of patients passing through a physical place and a 
metaphorical process. Second, it is to understand that the clinical problem situation is 
different from the managerial. Third, it is to explore how the act of data supply fits in 
with the other actions the participant is undertaking at the time. This is Mumfords 
(1995) task structure fit. Finally, the form of a given message dictates its value to an 
individual recipient. 
The problem solving methodology,  summarised in Figure 6.3.4, was developed  in 
section 6.4 by imagining the clinical workplace in terms of a collaborating team of 
doctors and nurses (and other healthcare professionals), dividing their attention between 
multiple patients at various stages of their individual trajectories or patient journeys.  
Figure 6.5.7 represents exactly the same the same set of ideas as Figure 6.3.4  but at a 
lower level of abstraction. This figure is simply the mapping of real clinical activities 
(Figure 6.5.3) onto their rationalisation or metaphorical interpretation as an aggregated 
process (Figure 6.5.2). However, the mapping is extremely flexible because any clinical 
activity can take place at any stage in the imagined process : 
When the department gets busy, the process goes (IT Manager in 
conversation  during clinical secondment) 
Figure 6.5.7 : Clinical Activity in the Context of the Patients Managed Presence 
Figure 6.5.7 is intended to illustrate how, during the flow of time between the 
registration of a given patients presence and its closure, any clinician may be engaged 
in any of a cluster of related activities, for that or for many other patients. The focus 
falls upon an opportunity to provide data when a task is undertaken, rather than at a 
fixed point in a constructed process. 
Flexibility in the relationship between data provision and the model process is 
mirrored in the relationship between clinical staff and their operational information 
system, from which they are supposed to supply management information. 
Enter 
Open Presence 
Close Presence 
Assessment, 
Investigation, 
Intervention   
X Ray, 
Pathology, 
Pharmacy   
Consultation   
Referral   
Guidelines,   
Policies,   
Procedures   
Negotiation &   
Decisio n 
Making   
Consult Prior   
Hospital / GP Record   
Write a Record 
Assessment, 
Investigation, 
Intervention   
X Ray, 
Pathology, 
Pharmacy   
Consultation   
Referral   
Guidelines,   
Policies,   
Procedures   
Negotiation &   
Decisio n 
Making   
Consult Prior   
Hospital / GP Record   
Write a Record 
Assessment, 
Investigation, 
Intervention   
X Ray, 
Pathology, 
Pharmacy   
Consultation   
Referral   
Guidelines,   
Policies,   
Procedures   
Negotiation &   
Decisio n 
Making   
Consult Prior   
Hospital / GP Record   
Write a Record 
The two major dimensions of Management Information from Operational Systems are 
process efficiency and resource effectiveness. Each clinical activity is an opportunity to 
contribute data towards one of these streams. 
Process Efficiency 
Management of process efficiency, considered in Figure 6.5.8, depends on the 
registration of key process events and the measurement of elapsed intervals. 
Three instances are shown in Figure 6.5.8. In the first instance, the index event happens 
before it is registered. Whenever there is a delay, between the transfer of a patient and 
the registration of the transfer, the Emergency Departments reported performance 
against the four hour target is downgraded and its externally perceived efficiency is 
compromised.  
The departments actual efficiency is compromised whenever a delay in communication 
prolongs the chain of events between a patients admission and his transfer or discharge.  
In the second, model instance shown in Figure 6.5.8, registration is simultaneous with 
the index event. The information system provides a display, replicated on each terminal, 
of patients in the queue, their presenting problem and the length of time elapsed since 
registration. A doctor selects the next patient from the displayed queue and adds his 
own name next to that of the patient by selecting an option from a pick list. 
Figure 6.5.8 : The Registration of Management Information from Operational 
Systems 
This action can be, and in observed practice often is, performed on the doctors behalf 
by a third party. In contrast with a case note entry, this is not a medico-legally 
accountable statement and the informal ethos of a collaborative environment lends itself 
The event is 
registered before 
it happens 
The event is 
registered when 
it happens 
The event is 
registered after 
it has happened 
The Clinical 
Event 
REGISTRATION  
of the Clinical 
Event 
to this practice. Whoever registers the event, it is automatically date- and time-stamped 
by the computer. 
The third instance is a deliberate departure from the model instance and occurs when the 
team of doctors, each at his own pace picking the next patient in sequence from a 
common pool, has fallen behind the influx of patients. The queue is escalating, 
treatment spaces are exhausted and flow through the department has stagnated. The full 
screen of patients names with no doctors names appended is an overwhelming 
challenge for each individual doctor who considers the situation in isolation from his 
colleagues. Under these conditions, the shift leader needs to intervene. 
The shift leaders response is to assign to each doctor his personal list of patients to 
work through, and use the shared computer display to append doctors names to patients 
in advance of their being seen. Control and responsibility are distributed equitably 
between individuals. Work is distributed according to each participants competence 
and ability and everyone can see who will take responsibility for each patient. 
This departure is a switch from an operative to a supportive (Malmsjo, 2006) mode of 
the computers role. The computer is used to re-establish internal control by creating, 
for care-givers within the problem situation, a shared and better detailed awareness of 
what now needs to happen. This benefit outweighs the consequence of incorrect 
conclusions suggested to a mechanism of external control, about the time a patient 
contact occurred or about any important time relationships, between this and other 
relevant events.  
Resource Effectiveness 
Management of resource effectiveness involves finding out what presences were opened 
and closed for each patient, how they were related to each other, and what key 
investigations and interventions were provided, for each overall trajectory. Collection of 
the required management data is a secondary result of data recording for their own 
salient purposes by clinicians ; either collaborating in their own collective problem 
situation or actively constructing a personal narrative, for secondary purposes related to 
individual clinical accountability.  
Task Structure Fit 
Table 6.5.3 shows how the act of data supply fits in with the other actions the 
participant is undertaking at the time. 
Table 6.5.3 : Supplying Management Information from Operational Systems 
Critical moment Opportunity Management 
information from 
operational systems 
Registration (clerk). 
Signify to the clinical 
team that another 
patient has joined the 
queue to be assessed 
and treated. 
Catalogue of all 
attendances, each 
linked to an identified 
patient. Obtain a 
mandatory dataset: 
crude activity analysis. 
Make a clinical 
assessment (clinician). 
Display a message that 
can be read by any 
authorised staff 
member. 
Coded explanation of 
attendance can be 
matched against final 
coded diagnosis and 
outcomes. 
Table 6.5.3 (continued) 
Request an 
investigation 
(clinician). 
Broadcast an indication 
that investigation 
requested / completed/ 
result available. 
Provide a detailed sub-
message that can be 
read by any authorised 
staff member. 
Coded catalogue of all 
investigation requests, 
each identified to an 
individual patient and 
attributable to an 
identified author or 
clinical team. 
Order / perform an 
intervention (clinician). 
Broadcast indication 
that investigation 
requested / completed/ 
result available. 
Provide a detailed 
message that can be 
read by any authorised 
staff member. 
Coded catalogue of all 
interventions, each 
identified to an 
individual patient. 
Consult a reference 
source (clinician). 
Download a document. 
Complete on-line a 
structured, condition-
specific record with an 
embedded guideline. 
This may be a clinical 
pathway document. 
Control assumes record 
synchronous with 
activity. 
Read or write a clinical 
record or letter 
(identifiable, 
accountable clinician). 
Individuals ensure free 
text is sufficiently 
explicit for clinical 
coding as well as 
continuity of care. 
Alternatively, 
intelligent text contains 
embedded codes at the 
required level of detail. 
Coded summary of case 
notes. Important to 
capture the most 
sensitive code for the 
work done. 
Move a patient to 
another treatment space 
or ward (clinician or 
clerk). 
Update a shared display 
of beds and patients. 
A more or less accurate 
time-space map of the 
patients physical 
journey. Control 
assumes record 
synchronous with 
movement. 
Find my next patient 
(clinician). 
Read off that patients 
physical location from 
the displayed list : 
check inconsistencies 
with immediate 
colleagues. 
Timed log of every 
movement between 
treatment locations for 
every patient. 
Table 6.5.3 (continued) 
Take /assign 
responsibility for a 
given patient or list of 
patients (identifiable, 
accountable clinician).  
Broadcast an indication 
that a named doctor has 
assumed responsibility 
for an identified patient. 
Signify that other 
doctors can focus on 
other patients. 
Compare demand 
against satisfaction by 
measuring patients 
time in system before 
responsibility assigned 
as proxy for time in 
system before 
responsibility 
effectively undertaken. 
Find out the state of 
play for any individual 
patient or for the 
department as a whole. 
Read off that patients 
progress against model 
from the displayed list. 
Check inconsistencies 
with immediate 
colleagues. 
Enhance concurrent, as 
opposed to 
retrospective, control. 
Make the business case 
for enhanced resource. 
Capture every 
attendance at 
Registration. Obtain 
information about case 
mix and resource 
consumption each time 
a case note entry is 
made. 
Capture resource 
intensity as well as 
volume of clinical care. 
Add evidence of health 
benefit by including 
details of diagnosis or 
change in physiological 
status during treatment. 
Answer a complaint 
under the NHS 
Complaints Procedure. 
Read off a time line of 
significant events from 
an event record. 
Reconstruct the clinical 
reasoning of each 
individual involved, 
from case notes. 
Review Xrays and 
results of blood tests. 
Find out what else was 
going on in the 
Department at the same 
time, that might have 
interfered with optimal 
management. 
Reconstruct a 
defensible narrative of 
events, judgements and 
actions. 
Place in context of 
contemporary events. 
The Nature of the Transmitted Message 
The construction of individual personal narratives by participants in the same clinical 
problem situation creates two difficulties for Management Information from 
Operational Systems. The first is that the coder has to extract information from (a 
summary of) multiple record entries made by plural participants. Clinicians and coders 
use different forms of expressive language and do not usually meet. 
The second difficulty is that transmitted data represent only part of the message 
understood by the transmitter and interpreted by the receiver. Transmitted data represent 
a mix of certain events and uncertain contingencies. The statement, Dr.X amputated a 
leg carries an implication to the receiver that the leg ought (or ought not) to have been 
amputated.  
Additional data will be irrelevant to an accounting process but could be profoundly 
important in another context. The author will always want to be succinct but, depending 
on the purpose of the message, will also want to add other data to ensure the correct 
inference at the receiving end. 
Figure 6.5.9 expands Figure 6.5.3 to show how the basic elements of clinical activity 
result in the contribution, by various participants, of multiple, more or less carefully 
constructed but potentially accountable, indelible case note entries, each attributable to a 
single, identifiable author. The data to be recorded represent a complex clinical situation 
to three kinds of audience. 
Figure 6.5.9 : Constructing an Accountable Clinical Record 
The first audience is the accountant who will equate clinical outputs with financial 
inputs and draw inferences about Value for Money. The second is the community of 
professional colleagues who will collaborate in the patients continuing care. The third 
audience is the legal representative of a potentially dissatisfied patient. 
Reimbursement, 
Value for Money Complaints, Litigation 
Assessment,       
Investigation,       
Interventio       n               
X Ray,       
Pathology,       
Pharmacy               
Consultation               
Referral               
Guidelines,               
Policies,               
Procedures               
Negotiatio   n &               
Decision       
Making               
Consult Prior               
Hospital / GP Record               
Multiple       
Record       
Entries               
Uniquely Identifiable,       
Authorship               
Private, Individual       
Accountability               
Composite       
Clinical       
Record               
                Clinical Continuity, 
Clinical Audit, 
Clinical Research 
6.5.5 : A Great Place to Work : Lessons from the Model 
The Emergency Department is a battleground between two paradigms. Model order and 
control are pitted against contingency and autonomy of action. The two paradigms are 
represented, respectively by Malmsjos (2006) operative and supportive forms of 
information system. The first is oriented towards ideal behaviour and is potentially 
defeated by the careful improvisation of users. The second is designed to promote this 
kind of conscious engagement in the problem situation. 
The Output Based Specification of the information system prescribes desirable 
functionalities from an uncritical standpoint. The basis for this standpoint is revealed 
when it is analysed through the lens of a formal social theory. Structuration theory is 
one such theory and is useful to compare the content of the information system 
intervention (action), the cultural and political context it represents, and the link 
between the context and the process of action. 
The distinction between patient-centric, disease centric and institution-centric 
alignments of the data model is not unimportant but the principal areas for discursive 
argumentation during the design and evaluation of an information system for the 
Emergency Department include the following. 
First, the conflict between computing and care-giving is reflected in the distinction 
between the operative and the supportive orientation of the information system. 
Where the operative form allows the clinical problem situation to be monitored by an 
external audience, the supportive form assists internal participants in experiencing and 
responding to their problem situation, enhancing performance rather than control. 
Second, the clinical problem situation is different from the managerial problem 
situation. Since information systems are sponsored by strategic managers, it is natural to 
expect them to favour the operative function. However, managerial ends are brought 
about by participants in the clinical problem situation and greater leverage (Senge, 
1990) is likely if the supportive orientation is favoured. 
Third, the task for Management Information from Operational Systems is less to 
conceal data supply to secondary users within primary tasks than to consider how the 
disparate tasks undertaken by an individual are best linked by an information system 
that best replicates the way individuals organise the critical episodes that punctuate their 
working day.  
Finally, the form and the value of a message are mediated by the purpose of the 
message. Three types of message each reflect a different balance between code and 
nuance. An accounting message is definitive and is expressed in a simple code. A 
clinical communication is more nuanced but can be made succinct and efficient through 
the partial replacement of text by code. Finally, a defensive message is essentially 
argumentative and must be fully expressive.  
It is unlikely that all three forms of message can be accommodated in a single, 
comprehensive information structure. It is more likely that a successful information 
system will incorporate a substantial element of human agency to provide integration, 
rather than rely extensively on automated data flows.  
Aligning Global and Local Aspects  
A National Information Programme 
for Health : 
Developing a Critical and Socio-Technical 
Appreciation 
Submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the award of 
Doctor of Philosophy  
at the 
University of Central Lancashire. 
STEPHEN NICHOLAS HARROP MB.ChB. MBA, FRCS, FCEM. 
VO L U M E   3   :   R E F L E C T I O N S   A N D   C O N C L U S I O N S 
C H A P T E R   S E V E N 
R E F L E C T I O N S 
7.0   :   I N T R O D U C T I O N 
The present research began with my intention to develop an information system that 
would equip me to promote change in the resources and operational environment of a 
clinical department in an ordinary NHS hospital. This has required me to understand the 
design, implementation and evaluation of information systems generally. 
The Emergency Department is an interesting environment because it represents the 
NHS in microcosm, by virtue of its position at the cross roads between primary and 
secondary care, the variety of its case mix and the number of its interfaces with other 
disciplines. In this sense, a relatively parochial study has potential relevance to the NHS 
as a whole, itself an epitome of a complex service-oriented organisation. 
In the event, my own local scope became absorbed within the wider, fluid environment 
provided by the Trust as a parent organisation and by the Trusts own anticipated 
involvement as recipient of the National Programme for IT. 
My eventual research question was : How can I equip myself and colleagues to 
understand and comment critically but constructively, on the design, implementation 
and evaluation of information systems, so that we can promote the successful 
assimilation of the National Programme for IT at our own place of work ? 
At the start of the research, I identified three challenges, To promote successful 
implementation, we needed to understand, in greater depth, how computers fit into the 
clinical workplace, in order better to articulate,  what is required from information 
systems in the NHS and more successfully ensure that information systems meet users 
needs. 
The third challenge was to ensure that users operate information systems accurately, so 
that the information that circulates can be reliable. 
At the end of the research, I have concluded that a reliable description of clinical 
and business activity, however important to support business and consumer 
decisions, is a necessary but insufficient rationale to provide information systems 
in the NHS. It is equally important for information systems to contribute to 
effective clinical practice. These two distinct contributions operate in 
fundamentally different ways. 
Section 6.1 described the supply of financial information by the Trust to an external 
regulator, on terms dictated by the regulator. The Trust is portrayed as a homogeneous 
entity in relation to the wider business environment of the NHS. 
Section 6.2 focused on the measurement of performance against mandated targets and 
on securing the compliance of staff with efforts to obtain Better Information. 
Section 6.3 presented alternative views of care pathways : first as a control for 
organisational performance, efficiency and resource utilisation. ; second as a source of 
conflict when two internally consistent streams of logic, converging on a single 
contested resource, such as a theatre or a scanner, require flexibility, responsiveness and 
tolerance of risk. Reference to structuration theory allowed the care pathway to be 
construed either as an interpretive scheme supporting structures of signification or 
domination, or as a set of norms supporting a structure of legitimation. 
Section 6.4 revolved around three groups of people whose activities profoundly affect 
the ability of the Emergency Department to deliver its service. This section repeated the 
theme of competition from several streams converging on the hospitals limited 
complement of beds.  
The central character was the bed manager, conducting information about beds from the 
ward to the hospital management team in their periodic bed meetings. The aspiration 
was for automated information transfer to provide a continuous, mechanically 
recalculated summary of the bed state from certain evidence. The reality was the need 
for those attending the bed meeting to assemble, from uncertain evidence, a collective 
impression of the bed situation and to decide individual tasks and their urgency. 
The needs of the bed management team were set against those of the team of nurses, 
also making sense of their collective situation and adjusting tasks, roles and priorities 
to its contingencies. Once again, one stream of logic, the requirement to supply 
information to the machine, competed with another, the need to prioritise attention to 
patients. 
Section 6.5 completed the transition from a focus on technology intervening between 
groups and processes, to an understanding of technology in systemic relationship with 
individuals and the personal tasks that contribute to the collective effort. This was a 
transition from a strategic to an emancipatory orientation (Hirschheim, Klein & 
Lyytinen, 1996) of the information system (and, by association, the parent organisation) 
towards the people it contains. 
For the healthcare assistant, technology empowered and enabled her to identify her next 
task without prompting. For the supervisory nurse, it facilitated oversight of a poorly-
staffed environment and stimulated lateral thinking based on past knowledge and 
experience : she could draw inferences from the information provided by the computer 
and confirm these by visiting a specific site to inspect and inquire directly from patients 
and colleagues. For the middle grade nurse, communication took place between 
individuals as well as through the computer. The reality of the situation was never a 
single statement but an assembly of ideas.  
At the conclusion of the research, it is appropriate to reflect on a number of topics. 
In section 7.1, I reflect on the research process : what I have done, how I went about the 
research, what succeeded, what might have succeeded better, what I have learnt and 
what are the implications for future research practice. 
In section 7.2, I reflect on alternative constructions of the problem situation faced by the 
NHS and its National Programme for IT.  
In section 7.3, I reflect on the mental apparatus I have brought to bear on my research 
topic. This is Jayaratnas mental construct and I use Jayaratnas headings to structure 
my own discussion. 
Section 7.4 employs the same structure to reflect on the approach to the National 
Programmes implementation as a problem solving process. In particular, it reflects on 
the process of implementation as a rational, goal-driven project, compared with the 
alternative construction as a process of exploration and understanding. 
Section 7.5 presents the academic contributions and limitations of the research under the 
headings, theory, methodology and practice. 
Section 7.6 suggests the direction of future research. 
7.1   :   R E F L E C T I O N S   O N   T H E   R E S E A R C H   P R O C E S S 
What I have done 
I have investigated the introduction of new information systems to the NHS, as reflected 
in my own place of work, with the intention to inform my own appreciation and that of 
colleagues, of the new information systems that would eventually arrive.  
Expecting to provide a single, definitive and coherent picture for the reader to 
contemplate, I have actually provided a mosaic of perspectives, from which the reader 
will assemble his own conclusions, based on his own knowledge, and experience and on 
the other components of Jayaratnas mental construct. 
How I went about the research 
I began with a clear mental model of the research process as a structured activity, 
consisting of distinct steps. 
I chose an interesting and worthwhile research topic and formulated a research question, 
to be set within the context of established knowledge as disclosed by a literature review. 
I intended to investigate this question by the rigorous application of a formal research 
methodology that could be repeated by any other researcher who might wish to replicate 
the results of the study to validate its findings.  
Data would be gathered, analysed and interpreted and then presented in a way that made 
their meaning clear and unambiguous. Data analysis was to be carried out as a formal 
procedure using coding systems and tables to isolate textual fragments from interview 
transcripts, group these under coded headings according to explicit rules and then to 
separate these further under a smaller number of headings in order to present a coherent 
story. The presentation of data would be accompanied by a clear account of the research 
setting and the conditions under which the research had been conducted. 
The research findings would then be compared with the prior literature to distinguish 
between what was known already and what new knowledge had been added. 
Qualified by an appraisal of the strengths and limitations of the research, its findings 
would then be translated into recommendations for new research and for altered 
practice.  
Each step in the argument would follow logically from the preceding, so that my 
conclusions would be well-grounded in the data. Having examined the object of the 
research with a reliable tool, meticulously applied, I would be confident that I had 
abstracted as reliable a description of the truth as could be discovered. Accurate 
description would allow confident, expert prediction. 
What succeeded ? 
To accomplish this investigation, my first task was to examine the policy literature of 
the NHS to understand the preliminary arguments for the provision of new information 
systems and for the National Programme. This was undertaken in chapter two. 
In chapter three, I explored extensively the literature describing the content and the 
context of the proposed change. I explored the alternative problem solving approaches 
suggested by the information systems literature and investigated their origins in the 
philosophy and literature of social science. Finally, I investigated models of change 
related to information systems, emphasising models of change as a social and political 
process. 
My next task was divided into four stages. The first of these was to identify and 
comprehend the various traditions and techniques of social research, described in 
chapter four.  
The second stage was to deploy and analyse the mental model of the research process 
that presented those traditions and techniques as an instrument through which to display 
and describe what was to be discovered. This was begun in chapter five. Section 5.1 
provided a clear understanding of the problem situation as experienced by one person, 
the IT manager. I asked questions, analysed the responses and assembled the multiple 
issues and concerns the IT manager expressed as a rich picture of his problem situation. 
The salient theme was that the IT project was not clearly related to the business needs of 
the Trust. 
The third stage of this task was for me to synthesise my analytic understanding with an 
understanding of the context in which the research was to take place and to conduct 
further interviews to explore the issues surrounding information technology, relevant to 
those interviewed. This stage of the task is represented by sections 5.2 and 5.3 of the 
research.  
The practical outcome was a rational and unitary description of the Trusts business 
needs, derived from interviews with members of the Trust Executive. The learning 
outcome in research terms was that the technique of eliciting and recording responses 
remained much the same, whilst the questions posed and the choice of subsequent 
interviewees were determined by responses elicited from previous questions and by an 
active scepticism, that any individuals responses could represent the only construction 
of the topic.  
The fourth stage was to evaluate my chosen approach against an external comparator. 
Section 5.4 resulted from the appreciation that the account of a coherent, rational and 
unitary situation, obtained in section 5.3, needed to be set against a model that 
represented the research setting as a messy social and political environment, 
characterised by discontinuity rather than continuity of ideas and by a conflict between 
the business needs of managers and the practical needs of front-line clinicians. 
What might have been more successful ? 
This approach placed my self and my research in conceptually separate positions, 
separated by the research approach and isolated from the context in which the research 
was conducted. This separation was carried through into the initial plan of data analysis. 
The initial plan was to effect a progressive regionalisation of the data. Each isolated 
data fragment was assumed, on a positivist basis, to contain its own intrinsic meaning. 
Coded quanta of meaning could be tabulated and assembled into larger, discrete clusters 
from which a logical structure would emerge. 
In the event, I could only understand each data fragment in context. The meaning of 
each data fragment was not intrinsic at all but relational : its meaning was derived from 
three sources acting in systemic relationship. 
The first of these was the surrounding text of the parent interview transcript. The second 
was my progressive understanding of that transcript and its emerging themes, 
developing over time through repeated reading. The third was my emerging 
understanding of the overall problem situation and its different aspects, derived from the 
understanding of each transcript in relation to the others. 
On the basis of this realisation, my task could be re-cast in terms of desirable outcomes 
rather than process steps. The means to perform this was provided by Jayaratnas 
NIMSAD. 
Section 5.1 thus represents my entry to and preliminary understanding of the research 
topic as a set of claims, concerns and issues situated in a historical and a geographical 
context. I find myself, therefore, interested in a problem situation rather than a problem 
in isolation. 
Section 5.2 represents my constructive interaction with the problem situation 
(Jayaratnas diagnosis), to which I am in danger of importing my own prejudices 
unless these are carefully eliminated or acknowledged and actively compared with 
alternative perspectives. Section 5.3 represents the identification of problems.  
Up to this point, my plan of research was descriptive and rational. Section 5.4 
recognised the social and political aspects of the research context and the consequent 
need for an approach that would accommodate critique alongside description. In section 
5.5, I recognised that the salient task for the Trust was to develop organisational 
discourse so that implementation of supplier-defined business systems would not pre-
empt adequate expression of clinical users needs. Sections 5.6 and 5.7 then identified 
concepts and models from the available literature and applied these to construct a 
diagnostic and therapeutic model through which to develop the discourse. 
What have I learned ? 
My initial approach had been to place myself, metaphorically, eyeball to eyeball with 
my field of interest and to observe this through the intervening medium of  a 
methodology.  My eventual approach corresponded with Stakes (2000 ; p.445) advice, 
to put your best intellect into the thick of what is going on, experiencing the research 
situation from within. 
Although I have used NIMSAD in a deliberately methodical way, for clarity of 
explanation, Jayaratnas approach in NIMSAD is to place the research situation, the 
researcher and the research approach in systemic relationship with each other, so that 
the attributes of each emerge from the researchers appreciation of the others. 
Jayaratna allows the eight stages recognised in NIMSAD to be followed as a time-
ordered sequence of methodological steps but does not regard this as necessary or even 
desirable (Jayaratna, 1994 : p.232). Ciborras (1998) paper, cited in section 3.3.0, 
provided a crucial insight by showing that method is a derived concept and that 
improvisation is the primary mode of real being in the world. 
The approach taken in Multiview (Avison, Wood-Harper et al., 1998) is to place an 
interpretive scheme at the heart of the triangular relationship between the problem 
situation, the problem solver and the emergent problem solving approach.  
Although the interpretive scheme is specifically oriented towards information systems 
design, it is only a small leap of imagination to substitute an alternative. Jayaratnas 
eight stages provide an immediate candidate. 
Implications for future research practice 
Applying the new understanding to the research process afforded by these emergent 
approaches allowed the research to escape from ritual and domination by technique and 
to focus on the careful construction of a series of situated descriptions. These were 
prepared from the testimony of those who inhabited the situations identified.  
This approach allowed the quality of the research to be judged less by the researchers 
rigorous adherence to a strict set of methodological steps and rather by the 
improvisatory skill (Ciborra 1998) with which appropriate techniques had been applied 
within an emerging relationship between the research situation, the researcher and the 
emergent research approach. 
7.2   :  R E F L E C T I O N S   O N   T H E   P R O B L E M   S I T U A T I O N 
By 2010, the National Programme for IT has become vulnerable to a stringent economic 
climate, the impending possibility of a change of government and its failure to deliver 
the anticipated systems and benefits on time. 
In contrast, the pressures for NHS institutions to adapt to the fluid policy environment 
have intensified. The drive to shift resources from secondary to primary care is forcing 
NHS Trust hospitals to reappraise their service profiles. The payment by results system 
makes it imperative for Trusts to code and capture their revenues accurately and the 
impact of the Darzi review has been to intensify a focus on the accuracy, relevance and 
timeliness of service delivery.  
The NHS Trust where the present research has been conducted exemplifies the 
continuing belief that, despite loss of confidence in the ability of the National 
Programme, to deliver the information systems the NHS needs, the urgency has become 
pressing, to invest in new information systems to support the most important strategic 
organisational aims and objectives. 
During the course of the research, the accounting of planning and performance has been 
superseded by efforts towards active organisational learning in the form of lean 
initiatives and the reconfiguration of internal organisational structures. 
The substance of the National Programme for IT has been its focus on interoperability 
standards and central procurement. The Programme has drawn a balance between 
globalism and localism, manifest in debates about the aggregation of electronic patient 
records at a local, an intermediate or a national level. The issue has been settled 
substantially by the pragmatic consideration, that no single supplier could manage the 
volume of traffic implied by integration at the national level. The National Programme 
for IT has been fragmented and dispersed between a small number of clusters and 
consortia of local service providers (Brennan, 2005 : Ch.10).  
The prime strength of the National Programme has been its co-ordinating power. Its 
major weaknesses have included the inertia of a giant, bureaucratic structure, coupled 
with its capacity to inhibit local initiative and its inherent insensitivity to local 
circumstances.  
A global intervention imposes formal structure on multiple, differentiated local realities. 
In so doing, it demonstrates authoritys biased preference, for aspects of local reality 
that are congruent with the intervention, and its tendency to dismiss aspects that are 
potentially incongruous and problematic. 
A further weakness of the National Programme has been its susceptibility to capture by 
extraneous political events. e-Booking (Choose and Book) has been harnessed to the 
policy of contested service provision instead of being geared to facilitate the effortless 
transaction between a patient, a referring doctor and an appointments clerk (Maguire & 
Ojiako, 2010). 
In contrast, Picture Archiving and Communications (PACS) (in Information for Health 
but not in the National Programmes National Systems Architecture) has been 
effortlessly assimilated into clinical practice (Eason, 2007) because it solved practical 
workplace problems, facilitating the availability of XRay films and reports and allowing 
remote consultation through shared access. 
To the extent that the National Programme, with its philosophy of Management 
Information from Operational Systems, has privileged the needs of secondary data users 
(IT linking organisational groups and structures around processes), it has neglected the 
needs of individual care-givers (IT linking individuals and their tasks), recording their 
personal account of patients and interactions. These needs are additional to those of 
clinicians communicating face to face within the direct clinical team and to those of 
clinicians communicating in an extended team, where face to face contact is not 
feasible. 
The relevant example from the present research was the case of bed management, 
described in section 6.4. Here, information supply required by a central (global) 
function, maintenance of an on-line bed state, conflicted with the local priorities of care-
giving. Inputs were batched instead of being synchronised with the events they were to 
describe. Decisions made on the basis of information from the machine had anomalous 
consequences. The ideal of  absolutely accurate information, available  at the push of 
a button could not be realised in practice.  
The Wanless report reflected a certainty that information systems were necessary for the 
NHS to provide maximally efficient healthcare. As Pawson and Tilley (1997 : p.31-34) 
argue, the successionist logic of a simple cause and effect relationship is insufficient to 
explain the connection between an intervention (in this case, new information systems) 
and its outcomes. To explain how the connection is to be made requires a deeper 
account of generative causation, more sensitive to the problematic aspects this case 
illustrates. 
The problem that confronts any information system which uses one group strategically 
(Hirschheim, Klein & Lyytinen, 1996) to meet the data requirements of another is the 
problem of data quality : rubbish in, rubbish out It is as if the information systems 
weakest component is the staff who enter the data during their day to day work. 
The thesis has cast a critical light on this suggestion and generated an appreciation that 
the measured outcomes of work depend on the coherence of IT with the social 
organisation and tasks of the workplace, as they are adapted to the fluid situation. 
The oft-repeated prescription, to connect information systems with strategic outcomes, 
has been clinical engagement. However, clinical engagement during product 
development has been held at arms length (Protti, 2003). Clinicians have eventually 
been invited to become product champions for pre-structured, 'off the shelf' products. 
In that role, they are opinion leaders in favour of the planned change rather than 
leaders in understanding the organisational realities that hinder consensus. Attention is 
focused on the machine and the creation of political support. 
If clinicians have not been engaged with the National Programme (and some of them 
have), they are certainly engaged with the practicalities of day to day clinical practice 
and its accomplishment. The National Programme could have been led by this 
engagement.  
Suppose, instead of a strategic, instrumental orientation, focused to administer the 
prescription of e-booking, e-prescribing and electronic patient records, as an imagined 
cure for organisational symptoms, the National Programme had taken one of the 
alternative orientations identified by Hirschheim, Klein and Lyytinen (1996). 
An interpretive, sense-making orientation would have unearthed and explored the 
social and cultural foundations for diagnosis and consensus between managers and 
clinicians in relation to IT systems instead of relying on economic rational foundations. 
Enthusiasm for standardised clinical methods and clinical pathways reflects deeper 
values such as the autonomy of the practitioner who, knowing the overall plan, can 
intervene in ways that are orthodox and safe and that remain within the practitioners 
competence, without waiting for a formal instruction. Had the expansion of human 
resource been a primary aim, attention could have been directed to identify all the other 
ways in which information systems in the clinical workplace could contribute to this 
goal. Standard, structured clinical methods would then have been a resource as well as a 
constraint for action. 
A discursive, argumentative orientation might have taken a Foucauldian turn, 
accepting asymmetry of power between managers and clinicians as inevitable, then 
seeking to identify and mitigate sources of asymmetry based on Giddens (1984) 
facultative (material resources controlled by managers) or authoritative 
(knowledge) resources, controlled by clinicians. 
The alternative would have been to follow the direction set by Habermas and developed 
by Klein, exposing potential sources of conflict and to exploring these fully and 
equitably before taking conclusive action. Here, the researcher wishes to emphasise 
conflict in terms of poorly-aligned ideas rather than polarised conflict between 
personalities or power groups. 
Had a systemic approach been adopted, the primary focus would not have been on 
persuading the patient to accept the prescribed system. Instead it would have 
concentrated on careful diagnosis before the specification of a remedy. 
For example, alongside the need for effective bed management, to alleviate pressures in 
the Emergency Department, the rich picture would also have revealed individual 
clinicians on the ward balancing the competing priorities of multiple patients in a 
complex task environment, as in Figure 6.4.5. The world view (Checklands 
Weltanschauung) would have been that it is better to consolidate tasks than to allow 
them to proliferate and the desired transformation would have been to convert a 
complex task environment into one less complex, where more could be achieved for less 
effort, using the information system as a lever.  
The feasible and desirable systemic response would not have been to add yet another 
task (bed reporting) to an already pressured environment but to facilitate and condense 
the various tasks associated with admitting and discharging a patient from the ward, in a 
way that incorporated the new task invisibly. 
Within the National Programme and its implementation sites, understanding of the 
problem situation has tended to focus on the outcomes required by the upper echelons of 
policy making and management. The explicit managerial action has been to promote 
the political aspects of clinical engagement without equivalent attention to practical 
aspects that might better have reflected the reality and requirements of the clinical 
workplace. 
7.3   :   R E F L E C T I O N S   O N   T H E   P R O B L E M   S O L V E R 
Perceptual Process 
The Wanless report prescribed investment in information technology as a remedy for 
organisational ills. Trained in medicine, I have learned to equate expertise with 
technique, based on rigorous, scientific thinking and method. Safe, defensible practice 
is based on accurate measurement and description and on prediction, deduced from 
established facts. 
It has been disconcerting to learn, in section 3.2.4, that the scientific model has feet of 
clay, even though the dominant mode of clinical scientific discovery is through 
Poppers attempted refutation of bold conjectures in randomised controlled trials. 
Facts are only provisional. They survive as facts only because they have not yet been 
disproved. 
My training in medicine has also taught me that medicine is an art as well as a science. 
Its claim to be an art stems from the capacity to explore, with patients, their bases for 
belief and behaviour and to adapt technique to circumstances. 
Currently, good medical practice is characterised as reflective practice, comparing 
what is done with what could or ought to be done. One learning outcome from the 
research has been to remind me that reflection focused on the refinement of technique 
ought also to be complemented by interpretive and critical modes of reflection. Bases of 
belief and behaviour can be explored and identified in the interpretive tradition, and 
exposed to ethical challenge in the critical tradition.  
The science of information systems is heavily indebted to social science, where 
understanding is often understanding of the understanding of others (the double 
hermeneutic). Critical realism recognises the importance of this understanding because 
the ideas and beliefs of others affect the material conditions of our own existence. 
As recipients of new information systems, people in the NHS are being asked, in a 
process of clinical engagement, how the information systems are to be introduced. To 
answer this question properly, they need to understand their own understanding of why 
they need such systems and how the context of their use is likely to impact on the 
production of benefits. 
Values and Ethics 
Section 3.3.5 introduced the topic of an organisations orientation towards its people 
(Hirschheim, Klein & Lyytinen, 1996). An organisation represents as much a collective 
of ideas as of people. Its internal conflicts are better understood as conflicts between 
ideas rather than, necessarily, between personalities. 
A strategic / instrumental orientation is to treat people and ideas as objects, whose 
meaning is restricted to their relationship with a dominant ideology such as economic 
efficiency, clinical effectiveness or defensibility of practice. 
An expert practitioner must beware of this restriction and remember that an 
interpretive sense-making orientation can still be biased towards the terms of 
understanding dominated by elite decision makers. 
Consciousness of an emancipatory orientation towards discursive argumentation 
allows people and ideas to be treated as ends in themselves, with unlimited potential for 
release of meaning in adaptive relationship with circumstances. 
Motivations and Prejudices 
Motivations and prejudices represent visions of change and defence against change. 
There is a tension between control and resilience. 
The implication of an emancipatory orientation for information systems, organisation 
structures or clinical decision tools such as clinical pathways is that their integration can 
tend to be oriented towards control.  
If such systems are to remain relevant, their internal consistency has to be moderated by 
sensitivity to contingent events. Their resilience will then depend on permissive zones 
of inconsistency or articulation (Berg 1999a,b ; Berg & Timmermans, 2000). 
Articulation allows individual elements to adapt to the impact of external events without 
disrupting the internal cohesion of the fluid whole. It is a form of paradoxically 
invisible (Berg & Timmermans, 2000) work that is performed, essentially, by human 
agents, interposed between the designed system of work and the contingencies that 
could not be anticipated in the design process. 
Reasoning Ability 
Section 3.2.6 gave a brief account of Churchmans (1976) inquiring systems. A 
Leibnizian system was an internally consistent set of rules. A Lockean system was 
based on convention, social learning and operation within social norms. A Kantian 
system took account that different conclusions might be drawn from the same evidence 
according to the ethical or cognitive filter brought to bear. A Hegelian system pitted one 
set of Kantian conclusions against another in a cycle of thesis, antithesis and synthesis. 
Finally, a Singerian system was progressively inclusive, sweeping in ideas about 
possibilities and potential, to contrast what is with what could or ought to be. 
Experiences 
These ways of contemplating the world from a detached position were then 
complemented by the insistence of Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty, that our appreciation 
is always an experiential one. The world is there before we are and we appreciate it only 
through beliefs and language that are impregnated by the ideas and experiences of our 
predecessors.  
Knowledge and Skills 
The researcher has acquired knowledge of a variety of models and techniques related to 
information systems strategy, design and development, implementation and evaluation. 
The associated skill is to apply this knowledge in a way that is contextually sensitive, 
ethical and aware of the undercurrents of conflict between general and unitary (global) 
pronouncements and the peculiarities of a particular (local) situation or occasion. In a 
world that is always there before we arrive, these sets of knowledge and skills are 
always in relation to   some situation or context. 
Structuring Processes and Methodologies 
Section 3.3.10 made the point that structured methodologies represent processes of 
abstraction and improvisation.  
Abstraction provides the selective emphasis and punctuation that constitute the 
methodology and distinguish the theory from the actuality of practice. 
Improvisation represents the methodology users fluent accommodation between his 
perception of the fluid problem situation, within which the methodology is applied, and 
the pattern offered by the methodology considered as a whole. 
Roles 
Avison and Wood-Harper (1990 : p.270) suggest the four roles of the expert, the 
facilitator, the emancipator and the class warrior as alternative archetypes of the 
information systems analyst. Each of these has a different ethical stance in relation to 
people in the problem situation, as contemplated externally. The expert and the class 
warrior represent competing definitions of duty. The facilitator is a utilitarian. The 
emancipator is a promoter of individual autonomy. 
To complement these portrayals of the analyst, I wish to suggest two metaphors to 
describe the information system user. 
The tame lion describes the user whose energy, actions and potential are captured, 
controlled and restricted by a dominant agent  the lion tamer. The lion is just a part of 
the lion tamers strategic problem situation. 
In contrast, the juggler is an autonomous performer (a problem solver). This metaphor 
alludes to Heideggers hermeneutic circle (see Crotty 1998 : p.98). 
The juggler and the props he will juggle with - balls, Indian clubs or flaming torches - 
(the elements of the problem situation) initially represent two clear and distinct ideas. 
Suddenly, the scene is thrown into action as the performer leaps into the 
hermeneutic circle and the elements assume a systemic relationship. 
Now, the man and the tools of his trade are inseparable from each other and from the 
fluid action of juggling (the problem solving methodology), a continuous, iterative 
accommodation between appreciation of the dynamic situation and formulation of the 
next in a sequence of fluent actions, each of which transforms the situation anew. 
Models and Frameworks 
Section 3.2.9 set out the case for critical realism as a unifying paradigm for information 
systems. As a framework for thinking, critical realism pursues a model of cause and 
effect which is generative (Pawson & Tilley, 1997 : pp.33-34) because it adds content 
in the form of context-sensitive mechanisms, to otherwise vacuous, sequential cause 
and effect relationships, eschewed by logical positivists. The associated methodology is 
neither induction nor deduction but retroduction (Mingers, 2004a), posing the 
question, what might the world be like for this set of events to have occurred ? 
We can turn this question around and ask, could this set of events have occurred in a 
world like mine ? Readers of clinical papers are encouraged to ask themselves whether 
the population and setting described in a clinical study are sufficiently similar to their 
own situation for the results to be generalised. Clinical researchers are encouraged to 
ask, is intervention A better than intervention B, in producing outcome X, in a patient 
like mine ? 
Even though a silo mentality tends to be disparaged in favour of a unitary, corporate 
appreciation of organisational needs, it remains highly relevant for any future user of an 
information system to ask : what must an information system be like, to succeed in the 
world as I appreciate it ? ; and should I appreciate the world in more than one way ?. 
7.4   :   R E F L E C T I O N S   O N    
T H E   P R O B L E M   S O L V I N G   P R O C E S S 
The problem solving process within the Trust, as within the National Programme, has 
been to institute a process of clinical engagement. Institutionally prominent individuals 
have been recruited as the implementation teams ambassadors to the wider 
organisational public. Their role is to generate enthusiasm for the project and to explain 
the process of implementation and the organisational benefits that will accrue. Their 
activities are reported with appropriate journalistic comment in the organisational 
media, with the effect that the authentic views of the figurehead can become difficult to 
distinguish from organisational propaganda.  
Perceptual Process 
The natural assumption behind the process of clinical engagement is that the 
introduction of the new information system will be an organisational good because its 
intended strategic effects will be benign and dramatic. 
However reasonable this assumption, it glosses over any understanding of the 
understanding of the global or their local problem situation by the new information 
systems future recipients and users. 
The researcher has been motivated by the theme that future users need to have this 
understanding in order to comment and contribute usefully to the process of 
organisational dialogue clinical engagement ought to represent. Sections 6.4 and 6.5 of 
the research contribute by shifting attention from organisational administration onto the 
preoccupations and concerns of the clinical workplace. 
Values and Ethics 
The Trusts organisational development strategy, The Blackpool Way, outlined in 
section 5.4.0, represented the willingness of its executive management to reappraise 
their relationship with the workforce. The Trust needs to encourage a clear 
understanding by future users, of their own local problem situation alongside the 
corporate perspective if it is to avoid regressing towards an orientation that is 
instrumental and strategic (Hirschheim, Klein & Lyytinen, 1996).  
Sections 6.3.2 and 6.5.2 of the research employed the framework from structuration 
theory to illuminate the social context of a congruent implementation and afford an 
interpretive and sense-making orientation. 
The implementation of the local information programme provides one opportunity to 
develop a similar understanding of the social context in pursuit of a discursive, 
argumentative orientation towards the emancipatory release of its human potential. 
Sections 4 (Provider of Choice) and 5 (Great Place to Work) of chapter six placed the 
values of efficient production in the context of humanistic values such as the ability to 
organise ones own work in the context of a team effort within a managed environment.  
Motivations and Prejudices 
The information programme represents a highly visible disbursement of public funds, 
for which named officials will be held to account. There is a clear tension between the 
need for financial probity and control, to ensure that correct steps are taken and that 
project milestones are accomplished within the budgets and timescales, and the need to 
ensure that the capital investment produces effects that are demonstrable, relevant and 
worthwhile.  
If only for this reason, it is imperative to pave the way, during implementation, for a 
positive evaluation at the conclusion of the implementation process.  
The message from the critical realist approach to evaluation is that a general evaluation 
of the new information system will result from the sum of immediate, experiential 
evaluations, based on individual occasions and situations, made by users as they interact 
with their information systems. These evaluations constitute users understanding of 
their information systems. Part of the implementation task is to understand this 
understanding. 
Reasoning Ability 
Because the implementation is as much a social as a technical accomplishment, the 
information project needs to be conducted in a fashion that combines technique and 
rationality (Leibnizian reasoning) with sensitivity to local social and cultural 
conventions (Lockean reasoning). 
Each appreciation of the information system takes place in the context of a situated 
point of view and opens the way for new appreciations to be developed (Kantian 
reasoning). For example, section 6.3.3 presented alternative appreciations of the care 
pathway concept, from the different ethical standpoints of the operations manager 
(efficiency) and the resource gatekeeper (equity).  
By synthesising alternatives and showing how even the resulting resolution is only 
partial (Hegelian reasoning) horizons are widened further. Section 6.3.3 also shows how 
a synthesis between the values of the operations manager and the resource gatekeeper 
for imaging might be confounded by a new conflict with the resource gatekeeper for 
theatres. 
The desire to make progress towards the ideal of absolute knowledge may be 
impracticable. Although progress is made by critique, critical realism reminds us that 
local effects of place and time always have the potential to intrude on general 
propositions. 
Experiences 
The new information systems are to be relevant and instrumental to major strategic 
objectives and to local operational improvements, both seen as remote but attainable 
ideals. However, sections 6.4.4 and 6.5.3 stress that they are also to be relevant to the 
experience of conducting clinical work, where the care-givers primary focus is not on 
the information machine but on the patients to be treated and the tasks that surround this 
activity. 
Clinical engagement thus needs support as much from an experiential as a 
contemplative appreciation. In an experiential appreciation, attributes of the information 
system such as user satisfaction cannot be seen as pertaining to the information system 
alone but to each new instance of the interplay between three factors. 
The first of these is the problem situation. This is always a specific instance of a 
particular situation and occasion, when model order and contingency collide as in 
section 6.4.4. 
The second is the user as a participant in a problem situation, of which the information 
system itself is only one component. The second half of section 6.5.3 describes the 
clinician receiving auditory and visual cues from colleagues and from the work 
environment as well as from the information system.  
The third is the users problem-solving approach to the problem situation. As in section 
6.5.4, when the department gets busy, the process goes. The users of the information 
system are aware of processes, pathways and information flows as routines but are not 
bound by these. Instead, they deploy them fluently in an improvised fashion, in order to 
adapt to the contingent needs of the problem situation. 
Knowledge and Skills 
Where the knowledge and skills required for contemplative appreciation involve 
abstraction, generalisation and prediction, those required for an experiential 
appreciation diverge in the opposite direction, seeking specific detail, difference from 
the norm and retrospection. 
These two forms of appreciation are complementary and represent different approaches 
to structuring and methodology formation. 
Structuring Processes and Methodologies 
Abstraction is the selection of special detail from the general. It follows that a residue of 
detail remains and that selection can be conditioned by criteria. Models of 
implementation and clinical engagement in practice can, therefore, have no absolute 
validity. Their validity is qualified by the criteria on which abstraction is based and can 
only derive from their repeated usefulness in practice. The authors of Multiview 
(Avison, Wood-Harper et al., 1998) argue that each problem situation is historically 
determined and its participants have specific technical, organisational and personal 
characteristics that cannot be ignored as a generic methodological approach would. 
Ciborra (1998a) points out that methodology is an abstraction from the performance of 
problem solving and that improvisation, applying what is ready to hand to the 
realisation of future possibilities for the present problem situation, ought to occupy our 
attention because it is the fundamental and the empirically observable model of actual 
practice (Ciborra, 1999).  
Roles 
Awareness of the various political and ethical (expert, facilitator, emancipator, 
class warrior) stances towards the information systems future users, that have been 
suggested for the information systems analyst, can help the product champion to subject 
his own role in clinical engagement to critical appraisal. 
An emancipators argumentative, discursive orientation towards information system 
users has inherent ethical strength but its practical value may be enhanced if it is allied 
to an empathic appreciation of the participant in the clinical problem situation.  
Models and Frameworks 
The theme of this section has been to promote the process of diagnosis over the 
administration of a remedy for organisational ills. 
At the same time, the researchers orientation is towards realism rather than idealism. If 
the idealist branch of critique points to alternative possibilities of emancipation, the 
realist question is always,  what  might  the  world  be  like  for  these  positions  to  be 
attained ? (Mingers 2004a). 
Pawson and Tilley (1997 : pp.31-34) argue that simple (successionist) models of cause 
and effect provide limited explanatory detail to inform this question. Generative 
accounts (conditions of possibility : Monod, 2004) of causation, based on the 
interplay between mechanisms and context of operation, provide greater insight.  
Highly structured models and frameworks based on the delivery of material outputs or 
broadly-defined organisational transformations adopt an orientation towards 
information systems users which is instrumental and strategic (Hirschheim, Klein & 
Lyytinen, 1996). 
A diagnostic approach requires a different, empathic orientation. This is also a 
therapeutic approach. Its components include interpretive sense-making and 
discursive argumentation. 
The inclusion of Multiview within a Realistic Evaluation framework thus provides the 
process of clinical engagement with a diagnostic dimension that a programmatic 
approach overlooks.  
The approach described here is highly flexible. A substantial part of the research 
process was to find appropriate ways to model the problem situation, the problem solver 
and the problem solving methodology. Modelling of form allowed exploration of 
content.  
After Checkland (Checkland & Scholes, 1990), the problem situation and the people it 
contained were modelled in terms of its social and political as well as its descriptive and 
rational content.  
The problem solver was modelled in four guises, representing two alternative a priori 
positions (the expert and warrior perspectives of Avison & Wood-Harper, 1990), 
one emergent perspective based on a unitary synthesis of emergent arguments (the 
facilitator) and a contrasting emergent perspective based on the incompatibility 
between arguments and the exploration of difference.  
The use of these alternative perspectives contributed an interpretive scheme and enabled 
prescription of action (the problem solving methodology) to be supported by the 
diagnosis and critique of organisational relationships. 
7.5   :   A C A D E M I C   C O N T R I B U T I O N S   A N D    
L I M I T A T I O N S   O F   T H E   R E S E A R C H 
7.5.1 : Theory 
Ontology 
The research has been influenced by the critical realist belief that the world contains 
discoverable things that produce observable effects when they interact with other things 
under the influence of surrounding factors. 
The research has also recognised the social constructivist belief that people understand 
their situation, location and history in terms of ideas. 
Ideas are socially constructed when they reflect prior personal and (shared) cultural 
experience. An idealist ontology becomes a critical idealist ontology when it is realised 
that ideas and explanations of ideas rely on fallible understanding : defensible but also 
relative and never absolute.  
Nevertheless, this understanding influences the way people adapt and react to their 
situation. Their behaviour and its effects are directly observable and are not, themselves, 
affected by the observers understanding, means of investigation or powers of 
description, even if the deficiencies of these three elements limit the observers capacity 
to express and understand fully that which has been observed. 
In this way, the research has also recognised that the limited apparatus we bring to bear 
reduces these observable things to ideas. Given different apparatus we might develop 
different but equally defensible ideas. Yet, these alternative ideal constructions are 
equally capable of producing real effects 
Critical realism thus recognises the compatibility of alternative scientific, interpretive 
and critical views of the world and, therefore, as argued by Mingers (2004a,b : see also 
Monod, 2004 and Klein, 2004), can provide an underpinning philosophy for 
information systems generally and clinical information systems in particular. 
In conformity with critical realism, the research has also been influenced by the belief 
that sequence is a necessary but insufficient to link the intervention of an information 
system with its outcome. Causation is better explained by generative than sequential 
mechanisms, generative mechanisms being susceptible to modulation by identifiable 
contextual factors. The critical component of critical realism presents contextual 
modifiers as local, situated and occasioned rather than universals. 
This means that the general outcome of a global intervention, such as a National 
Programme for Information Technology, has to be understood as the summation of local 
effects, generated in myriad, differentiated sites on multiple occasions, spread over 
time.  
Local effects call into question the relationship between man and machine. The research 
has distinguished between the view of man and machine, abstracted from the real world 
into separate zones of Cartesian space, and the view derived from Heidegger and 
Merleau-Ponty, that Being is nothing unless it is Being in the World, where the world 
is an endless succession of nows, each deeply situated in past and surrounding events 
that not only limit but also enable, the spectrum of future possibilities : that is to say, 
the next thing the information system might be used for, by an individual, immersed in 
one problem situation which will rapidly merge into another. 
Epistemology 
The strategy, design, implementation and evaluation of information systems have 
conventionally reflected a hierarchy of clear and distinct, hard ideas. 
The research has demonstrated the coexistence of hard and soft strands of thinking 
as intimately related aspects of an irreducible whole. It has recognised that information 
systems represent a hard, rationalistic and reductive intervention in an organisational 
context with soft, cultural aspects that value both the quality and the quantity of 
clinical care and that value computing alongside care-giving. The different balance of 
values that exists in different parts of the organisation confers a political aspect 
alongside the cultural. 
The positivist epistemology of clear and distinct ideas, that allows the concept of 
structure, rigidity and the determination of social behaviour in a system of rules and 
regulations, has been accommodated alongside an epistemology that negates any kind of 
determination. 
This is the antipositivist epistemology of hermeneutics and phenomenology, 
ethnomethodology and symbolic interactionism that has led Giddens (1984) to develop 
the concept of structuration : the regular association and dissociation of social structural 
elements that enable, as well as constrain, the actions of knowledgeable social actors as 
they navigate their fluid and dynamic situation. 
The concept of Actor Networks is a further development of these epistemologies, 
emphasising the flattening of hierarchy, the equal influence of inanimate objects 
alongside people, the simultaneous membership by individual elements of multiple sets 
of associations, and the inscription of rules and regulations by the systems originating 
actors, to regulate the behaviour of the systems diverse groups of recipients.  
The research has illustrated the uneasy relationship between computing and care-giving, 
understood from the positivist perspective as a conflict between clear and distinct ideas. 
Actor Network Theory affords an opportunity to complement and deepen this 
understanding from an interpretive and critical perspective. 
Previously, Walsham (1993) has deployed structuration theory (Giddens, 1984) to 
expose critically, social relationships at the level of processes and groups. The focus has 
fallen on some aspect of the IT system (strategy, design and development, 
implementation or evaluation), epitomising social action in an organisational context, 
linked by an appreciation of the fluid and dynamic nature of social structure. 
In the present research, the focus has fallen on the individual, spanning more than one 
network of relationships as he navigates constantly from one overlapping moment of 
demands, constraints and contingencies to another. We have understood how staff in the 
clinical workplace switch affiliation fluently between the formal, context-free rules 
inscribed in the information system and their informal, cultural commitment to the 
emergent priorities dictated by ongoing events in the workplace. 
Walsham (1993) was concerned with the use of communication, power and sanction to 
mediate the power-laden relationship between organisational groups during relatively 
slow process cycles. Here, we have been more interested in the emergent balance of 
ideas as they have affected individuals, conducting tasks during relatively rapid, minute 
to minute changes of context. 
The research has illustrated the difference between a conceptual-logical diagnosis based 
on a user, confronted with a device to enter and display clinical data, and one based on a 
doctor or a nurse, confronted by multiple patients at different stages on multiple patient 
journeys and by a collaborative working environment.  
In the first case, the user has been presented in a closed relationship with the data 
device, through which, in terms of Actor Network Theory, the user was enrolled by 
the management cadre to provide Management Information from Operational Systems. 
The primary concept has been the machine.  
In the second case, the user has been presented in an open-systemic relationship with 
the patient-oriented context of clinical work and has derived information from visual 
and auditory cues and word of mouth exchanges, as well as through the agency of the 
machine. The machines prescribed use is translated into the overall context of the 
preoccupied user. The primary concept has been the user. 
Axiology 
The situated individual understanding described above is open to modification when 
alternative aspects of context are thrown into focus. This allows ideas that were not 
initially privileged to gain expression (Deetz 1996). The present research represents a 
liberal and emancipatory (Kleinian : see Table 3.3.3) stance that can challenge and resist 
the existing balance of ideas in order to explore fresh possibilities.  
The research has drawn attention to alternative constructions of clinical engagement. 
From a managerial perspective, clinicians will be engaged in committing themselves 
emotionally, intellectually and practically to the successful implementation of the 
information systems project, intended to provide Management Information from 
Operational Systems. From a clinical perspective, computing will fit snugly with care-
giving.  
On the one hand, engagement can be seen as the strategic and manipulative winning of 
clinicians hearts and minds towards the successful emplacement of the equipment in 
general terms. On the opposite hand, the prognosis outline ought to be that the new 
equipment will inherently appeal to the practical values that appeal to each individual 
clinician, on each specific occasion when he or she turns towards and away from the 
machine. 
7.5.2 : Methodology 
The critical realist approach focuses on contextually modulated, generative mechanisms 
that link an intervention with its outcomes. In the form of the Realistic Evaluation 
framework (Pawson & Tilley, 1997), this approach requires the researcher to construct 
an account of the generative mechanisms he suspects might be at work and then to test 
these ideas in consultation with the stakeholders he will interview. 
Pawson & Tilley suggest an explicit way to construct their emerging account in terms of 
Context, Mechanism, Outcome configurations. 
The present research has demonstrated how the Multiview approach, essentially a social 
constructivist approach, can structure the exploration and addition of detail to the 
configuration of Context and Mechanism, within a critical realist framework. 
Multiview expresses the Context as a complex of nested and intersecting problem 
situations, in which problem solvers with different orientations pursue individual and 
collective agendas. In the research, this context was represented by a specific, simplified 
model of technology assimilation in a large organisation (Andreu & Ciborra 1996). 
Within any region or level of the Context as described above, Multiview has allowed 
the researcher to construct Mechanisms in terms of four elements : a local problem 
situation, the actors within the local problem situation (represented as ideal 
argumentative types), a way of presenting aspects of the problem situation (the 
interpretive scheme) and the way problem solvers are observed to interact 
constructively and productively within the local problem situation to produce effective 
outcomes (the emergent problem solving methodology or process). 
The authors of Multiview derived their ideal typical models of the analyst-problem 
solver from empirical work by Hirschheim and Klein (1989). Their warrior 
perspective derived from the industrial relations climate at a particular point in history. 
Although the point has not been developed fully here, the research has also shown that 
the four archetypes can also be constructed from a different foundation, in Deetz 
(1996) criticism of Burrell & Morgan (1979).  
Multiview allows problem solvers to construct the world view through which they 
experience their problem situation. This is afforded by a specific interpretive scheme, 
which provides five aspects, sometimes expressed in terms of social analysis, social 
design, technical analysis, human-computer interaction and technical design (Vidgen et 
al., 2002 : p.32). 
The research has shown how Multiview, initially intended as a design methodology, can 
be adapted for another purpose by replacing the suppliers lens and substituting one 
more suited to the specific situation.  
In this case, the interpretive lens has switched between only two aspects, contrasting a 
world view consisting of clear and distinct ideas and an alternative world view in which 
elements fall into systemic relationship as parts of an irreducible whole. 
Deployment of the Andreu and Ciborra (1996) model has focused attention on the way 
that the strategic decision to implement an information system depends for its success 
on the ability of operational, front line clinical users to reconcile the demands of 
computer use with those of their surrounding work. 
Through its use of the Andreu and Ciborra model in association with the interpretive 
lens afforded by the researchers own modification of Jayaratnas (1994 : p.59) 
modification of the Leavitt model, the research has illustrated the opposition between a 
view of the new information system from the top of the organisation and an alternative 
view from the operational, grass roots level. 
At the top of the organisation, it is seen as a specifically aligned tool, instrumental to 
process change and the delivery of strategic information from one administrative 
structure or group to another. At the operational, grass roots level, it is seen as a 
resource, absorbed and used flexibly, in relation to other resources and people, by 
individuals, to accomplish the tasks of care-giving within a local, clinical problem 
situation. 
The research has identified the need to reconcile two world-views, represented 
respectively by an operative system that supplies management information from 
operational systems and a supportive system (Malmsjo, 2006) that assists individual 
action as well as cooperative interactions, within the direct or the extended healthcare 
team in relation to any given patient. 
It has identified that the transformation to be accomplished by such a system is the 
mediation between one world view that constructs the user as a conduit for data that 
links an operational work environment to a control environment, and another that 
constructs him as a team member who is constantly sampling the task environment from 
a mix of data sources and using the computer as only one of several communication 
channels.  
7.5.3 : Practice 
The scope and scale of the research were limited by the resources I could bring to bear 
as a single-handed, self-funded novice researcher. Contact with respondents has been 
limited by the informal status of the research and by my need to attend to the demands 
of a full-time clinical post, with a demanding on-call commitment. 
To provide detail from a wider range of implementation sites within the Trust would 
have been, in effect, to initiate the information project before it had become a reality for 
anyone other than the myself. 
The research has been based on interviews in which various people in the Trust have 
explained how information systems contributed to their life at work or might do so. 
More detail might have emerged from a combination of interview-based research with 
triangulation against a detailed and deliberate participant observation.  
Silverman (1998) pays greater attention to what people can be observed to do in practice 
than to how people see things. Direct participant-observation was not feasible for a 
senior clinician, whose presence in the study field was sufficient at any time to bring 
him out of the research role and into the direct clinical management of a patient.  
Silverman (2006 : p.230, 260-265) demonstrates the richness of information available 
from the analysis of intonation, gesture and concurrent activity as adjuncts to its literal 
interpretation of naturally occurring talk. His first cited example refers to a person being 
asked awkward questions on television. The second refers to a small team of controllers 
managing operations of the London Underground from static workstations. 
Video recording of interactions between staff, patients and computers would, in the 
particular research environment studied, have encountered sensitivities about 
confidentiality and consent for patients as well as for staff. Static video recording would 
have failed to display many of the actions of highly mobile staff. The presence of a 
camera operator following individual staff members would have been intrusive and 
would not have been tolerated by all staff or all patients. Whilst these techniques have 
the potential to add significant depth of detail to the findings of interview-based 
research, they are just not feasible in every context. 
In the event, I consider that the interviews I have undertaken supply sufficient 
information to demonstrate the modification and improvised application of Multiview to 
relate particulars  to very abstract categories so that unique instances can be 
related to ideas and concepts that can apply to multiple situations (Klein & Myers, 
1999) that typify the need for computing in the clinical workplace, the alignment of 
local values with computing, the scope for an alternative a priori rationale for 
computing and the surfacing of conflict between computing and care-giving.  
The research has also respected the process characteristics set out by Baskerville & 
Wood-Harper (1998). It has acknowledged and explored the complex, multivariate 
nature of the social setting and made highly interpretive assumptions about 
observations, modelled around a rigorously defensible framework of ideas. The research 
represents an explicit intention to intervene in the problem setting by providing a 
framework around which future users of the information system can develop their 
appreciation. This framework has allowed the change process to be understood in its 
social setting. 
Although participant observation has not been employed as a formal research technique 
in the present research, Baskerville and Wood-Harper require only that the social setting 
be observed and experienced from within. My status as a full time clinical professional 
has allowed me to exercise the lesser role of participative observer, as well as 
allowing me to function, from my own circumscribed professional position, as a full 
participant.  
As a novice, it was not reasonable for me to expect the Trust Executive to promise that 
the findings of my research would be acted upon. In that sense, the research has not 
fulfilled the first of the five principles of canonical action research laid down by 
Davison, Martinsons & Kock (2004). The fourth principle has not been fulfilled because 
the organisation is only just preparing its programme to bring change about.  
However, the research process has fulfilled the other criteria by iterating between 
examination of theory and observations in the field. Its theoretical framework has been 
explicit. This reflective chapter addresses the last requirement, that learning about the 
problem situation and the theoretical framework should occur. 
The research has respected the other quality criteria identified by Klein & Myers (1999) 
for interpretive case studies. The social and historical context is explained. 
Interpretations have been exchanged between the researcher and participants in the 
problem situation. The philosophical basis of the work has been discussed thoroughly in 
the literature review, such that the researchers initial functionalist inclination has been 
modified during the course of the research. There has been a deliberate appreciation of 
multiple interpretations of the problem situation and the researcher has remained 
suspicious of his own interpretations, seeking refutation as well as confirmation through 
his choice of respondents and a deliberate search, following Deetz (1996), for dissensus 
as well as consensus between the content of one interview and another. 
Although I have been able to bring together a set of relevant concepts, relevant to a 
putative information systems project and to demonstrate how they can be applied to five 
real-life concerns within the Trust, it is a limitation of the research that it was conducted 
before the Trust had announced its information programme to its clinical staff.  
The research approach developed here will not produce its most useful findings until it 
has been thrown into a relationship with groups of individuals, who realise fully that 
they are faced with the imminent prospect of an actual information system that will be 
funded and then either designed or purchased off the shelf. 
That is to say, the research approach needs to be evaluated in a real problem situation, 
with problem solvers who are clinicians and managers with limited informatics skills. 
Without the critical capacity and conceptual framework to express their own situation, 
these internal problem solvers or problem owners will be ill-equipped to express the 
relationship between the information system and their work that will best help them to 
provide high quality healthcare to patients.  
The primary purpose of the research has been to provide the means to enable situated 
learning to take place, about the relationship between a new information system project 
and the context in which it is to be enacted. Confidence, in the ability of the research 
approach developed here to deliver this learning, stems from the action research 
orientation of one of the major components of the approach (Multiview) and its 
demonstrated success in other settings. 
7.6   :   D I R E C T I O N S   F O R   F U T U R E   R E S E A R C H 
In their study of the impact of e-Health on the quality and safety of healthcare, Car et 
al. (2008 ; p.23) state : There is need for further research encompassing design, 
implementation and adoption considerations in relation to e-Health innovations and 
There is very little rigorous evidence demonstrating that these technologies actually 
improve either the quality or the safety of healthcare.  
The reasons they identify include : 
1. Weakness of experimental design 
2. Unrealistic research timescales 
3. Nave assumptions that these technologies will be effective in all contexts 
4. Failure to involve end-users 
5. Failure to pay adequate attention to socio-technical factors. 
These authors recognise an important objective, to allow a detailed appreciation of 
relevant contextual factors that might help better understand the reasons for the success 
or failure of the intervention to emerge and also, where found to be successful, to allow 
an assessment of the likely generalisability of the intervention to be made. 
Amongst their recommendations, Car et al. include (p.32) the development of a 
methodological toolkit to facilitate evaluation of e-Health applications throughout all 
aspects of the development and deployment life cycle of these technologies.  
Greenhalgh et al. (2009) identify three areas where no more research will be useful : 
1. Simplified experimental studies based on functionalist and determinist 
assumptions that imply cause and effect relationships between interventions and 
outcomes 
2. Poorly-contextualised attitudinal surveys 
3. Under-theorised studies of failed or successful EPR projects. 
The present research has opened up the way to respond to each of these criticisms. It has 
shown how Multiview can be applied and adapted, within a constructive plan of 
research, based on critical realism and Realistic Evaluation.  
The approach developed in the research can supplement experimental research on 
healthcare information systems, aimed to test hypotheses about their effectiveness in 
unrealistically controlled situations, because it can provide useful local learning, about 
what works for whom in what circumstances (Pawson & Tilley, 1997 : p.144, 213). 
The approach focuses on context before it makes recommendations for change and it 
provides a theoretical basis to understand, in depth, the contextually conditioned, 
operation of generative mechanisms that can underpin accounts of success or failure. 
Whichever methodology might be chosen from the toolkit suggested by Car et al., it 
must never be allowed to become a hammer that makes everything else look like a 
nail. Instead, the future research need is for an approach that develops the researchers 
critical understanding of the problem situation, so that the research methodology can 
become a device that opens up, rather than restricting, deep and critical insight into the 
problem situation. 
How should such research be focused ? Greenhalgh et al. (2009) identify seven key 
research areas which include : 
1. Appreciating situated micro-practices : the hidden work of those close to 
the patient 
2. A systematic review is needed on how information systems in health care and 
comparable settings might be co-designed in the workplace (i.e. on the proactive 
application of interpretivist and recursive approaches to maximise the socio-
technical fit of such systems  we found very few published studies in 
which a sense-making or soft-systems approach was used prospectively in action 
research or comparable participatory designs. 
3. The dramatic differences in success between off the shelf (commercially 
developed) and home-grown EPR systems  whether, and in what 
circumstances, small is beautiful. 
4. Unsanitised accounts that disclose the realpolitik of EPR projects 
5. The mismatch between what is known about EPR in organisations and what 
many policymakers assume is known. 
The first of these areas, in effect, addresses Bergs articulation work. Articulation 
work is the situated micro-practice required from users to overcome the disconnect, 
between information system use in designers theory and information system use in 
work practice, situated where doctors and nurses interact with each other to treat 
patients. The present research has distinguished between information technology 
applied to the relationships between groups and processes, and its relationship with the 
tasks of individuals in a collaborative work situation.  
The second area depends on the further development of studies which, like the present 
research, incorporate methodological approaches, such as Multiview and NIMSAD, 
with a debt to Soft Systems Methodology and a primarily sense-making motivation.  
In the third area, the suggestion that small is beautiful will yield more informative 
answers is better addressed by the question, why ? rather than whether. The present 
research has been influenced by the idea, from Actor Network Theory, that each 
individual within the problem situation is simultaneously a member of other networks, 
from at least some of which the other actors in the problem situation are excluded. Put 
simply, the conflict between computing and care-giving needs to be explored in 
research oriented towards conflict-surfacing before the foundation can be laid for a 
genuine consensus and an effective accommodation between these two polarities. 
This leads us in to the fourth area, of unsanitised accounts that disclose the realpolitik 
of EPR projects, where the ideas from Soft Systems Methodology, reproduced in 
NIMSAD and Multiview can provide a framework for a rich account of the social, 
political and socio-technical issues that accompany the logical and rational aspects of 
project and programme management. 
Finally, all of these areas contribute to the fifth, which is the mismatch between what is 
known about electronic patient records in organisations and what many policymakers 
assume is known. The combination of Realistic Evaluation and Multiview developed 
in the present research provides a potentially powerful vehicle to pursue this aim. 
C H A P T E R   E I G H T 
K E Y   M E S S A G E S   F O R   T H E   T R U S T 
8.0   :   I N T R O D U C T I O N 
This document presents research, conducted in the Trust, to address the question, How 
can I equip myself and colleagues to understand and comment critically but 
constructively, on the design, implementation and evaluation of information systems, 
so that we can promote the successful assimilation of the National Programme for IT 
at our own place of work ? 
My intention throughout has been to generate insights that can usefully influence the 
development of information systems at my own place of work. Initially, this took a 
departmental perspective but, as the research has progressed, it has assumed a broader, 
more comprehensive scope. This concluding chapter of the thesis summarises the key 
messages I wish to convey to readers in the Trust where the research took place. 
This summary can be regarded by the Trust as an internal consultancy document. In 
fact, it is more than this because it brings to bear an explicit methodological framework 
that has been developed in the environment where it will be applied, to assist the 
production of practical answers to important business questions. The combination of 
clinical, managerial and theoretical perspectives it offers entitles the document to be 
regarded as an example of practically oriented Action Research. 
It is probably the first clinically initiated example of action research directed at the 
implementation of the National Programme in a hospital. As action research, it is 
focused on understanding from a position embedded in the implementation environment 
instead of simple observation from the sidelines. Where the purpose of much research is 
to attempt to predict or specify conditions for success or failure, the purpose of this 
work is to assist those involved in practical problem solving to navigate their way 
towards successful implementation. 
In the Spring of 2010, the Trust is now on the brink of translating its Vision project 
into concrete reality. Of the four information systems competency areas (strategy, 
design and delivery, implementation and evaluation), implementation and evaluation are 
now the principal challenges. 
The Trust will be expected to evaluate its information project in order to justify its 
capital cost and demonstrate probity in the use of public funds.  
However, the project will be a visible example for the wider National Health Service : 
first because of its aim to create the first truly paperless hospital in the United Kingdom 
and, second, because it represents the first procurement of an information system from a 
supplier outside the limited list of those contracted to the various clusters of the 
National Programme for Information Technology. It is, therefore, critical to the 
reputation and well-being of the Trust that the outcome of the evaluation process should 
be considered successful. 
 The Vision Project is the soubriquet of the Trusts interim clinical solution to the National 
Programmes inability to deliver products that will meet the information requirements of NHS policies 
that have raced ahead of the National Programme. 
8.1   :   E X E C U T I V E   S U M M A R Y 
I have developed a framework (SuperVision) that will contribute to the continuous 
formative evaluation of the Vision project, from within as opposed to external, 
summative evaluation. The framework derives from efforts to link both the theory of 
information systems and the Chief Executives Trust Wide Objectives with practical 
aspects of organisational management and clinical activity. 
The Vision project is a visible capital and organisational development project as well as 
an IT project. Its cost, internal complexity, external dependencies and visibility to the 
wider NHS render it vulnerable. 
The project has been managed by an external consultancy and an internal 
implementation team. It is seen as a potential enabler of strategic benefits which are 
necessary for the Trusts future resilience and competitiveness in an environment which 
is expected, in the short to medium term, to be stringent. Clinical Engagement has been 
seen as crucial to the projects success. 
Initially, the project has been managed as an exercise in duly diligent, regulated 
procurement. Engaged clinicians have assisted as judges of the best-compliant system, 
judged against an Output Based Specification, supplied by a limited number of 
competitors from a world-wide market place. 
A major theme has been the control of processes and procedures in response to 
regulatory targets and the drive towards evidence based medicine and the transparency 
of both the clinical and administrative dimensions of health care. Accordingly, the 
implementation process has centred around the elaboration and rationalisation of 
process maps which model the trajectory of a single, idealised patient along a unitary 
view of an idealised process. The clinical and the administrative aspects of control are 
not always clearly separated.  
The risk from this approach is that behaviour at work is forced into conformity with a 
model of practice in theory instead of allowing a realistic accommodation between 
theory and practice, that takes account of the contingencies the model does not 
anticipate. 
A key element of the SuperVision model is to look critically at the way issues are seen 
by those involved. 
At its simplest, the distinction is between two views of the world. The first sees 
processes and procedures executed by one group and monitored by an external group 
through the agency of information technology. The second sees individuals working 
within a team, communicating, experiencing and understanding their personal and 
mutual situation through other modalities as well as IT, so that they can adjust their 
tasks to a dynamic understanding of a situation in flux. 
Clinical work will be enhanced if the workforce and its supervisors take a 
comprehensive view of quality that respects equally, each of its various dimensions. 
Clinical communication needs to be interpreted in terms of information received, 
interpreted, communicated and understood, rather than in simple data processing terms. 
The information system ought to be a springboard for individual initiative in support of 
the collective effort rather than an impersonal device to support controls assurance. 
These insights support a revised view of the project as an effort to appreciate the 
dynamic relationship between clinicians and clinical work. To understand the potential, 
for staff not to comply with the disciplines imposed by a new information system based 
on a theoretical refinement of collective practice, is to understand the conflict between 
computing and care-giving. The corollary is to ensure that the design and 
implementation of the information system minimises this. 
In turn, this entails understanding how clinical staff deploy a variety of rules and social / 
professional conventions to determine, from instant to instant, how to draw the balance 
between attention to patients, to each other and to the computer as a device to support 
information sharing as well as data capture. 
The way forward is to distinguish between operative information systems (that enable 
strategic control) and supportive information systems (that facilitate individual, 
personal contribution) and to explore the implications of the distinction fully before 
attempting a compromise between the two. 
To support the emerging consensus, that socio-technical factors are crucial to the 
acceptance of new information systems, we need to understand better, what these 
factors are. The modelling of process needs to be complemented by a focus on the 
modelling of an individual and at least two aspects of his work.  
The first of these is the way tasks coincide during the routines of a typical working day. 
The second is the way individuals have to balance their commitments between 
computing and care-giving according to the evolving needs of a dynamic clinical 
situation.  
These points are summarised in Table 8.1.1. 
Table 8.1.1 : Summary : SuperVision in Practice 
The structure of this report is outlined in the next section. 
Practical Recommendations are summarised in Section 8.9. 
Management 
Framework : 
Situation Background Analysis Recommendation 
Research 
Framework : 
Problem 
Situation 
Visible and 
Vulnerable 
Project 
A Regulated 
Procurement 
Strategic 
Benefits 
depend on 
Individuals, 
Tasks and 
Technology 
Appreciate the 
dynamic 
relationship 
between 
clinicians and 
clinical work 
Problem 
Solvers 
External 
Implementation 
Consultancy 
and Internal 
Implementation  
Judges of the 
Compliant 
System 
Four Kinds of 
Relationship 
between 
Managers and 
Clinicians 
Explore Conflicts 
between 
Computing and 
Care-giving 
Way of 
Looking at 
Things 
Enabler of 
Strategic 
Benefits 
Controlling 
Functional 
Processes and 
Procedures 
Process Views 
versus Context 
Rationalise and 
Automate vs 
Support 
Knowledgeable 
Action 
Way Forward Clinical 
Engagement 
Programme 
Process 
Mapping 
Understanding 
and Facilitating 
Quality, 
Clinical 
Communication 
and Personal 
Initiative  
Distinguish 
between 
Supportive and 
Operative 
Functions of 
Information 
Systems 
8.2   :   O U T L I N E 
The Structure of this Report 
This report is structured as follows : 
Section 8.3 explains the SuperVision framework. 
Sections 8.4  8.7 consecutively present a discussion in the Trusts preferred form, 
outlining the Situation, the Background, my Analysis and my Recommendations.  
Section 8.8 sketches out the way forward for the future. 
Section 8.9 summarises practical recommendations. 
8.3   :   T H E   S u p e r V i s i o n   F R A M E W O R K 
8.3.1 : Two Problems facing Evaluation 
First, a variety of factor models purport to account for the success or failure of 
information systems in simple cause and effect terms, but do not explain how or why 
these factors operated. Factor theories identify conditions  executive commitment, 
supportive infrastructure, ownership, performance management  that are associated 
with information systems success or failure, but may not predict either outcome 
strongly. 
Second, an attempt to explain successful or unsuccessful implementation on a cause and 
effect basis is likely to be confounded by characteristics of the Trust that are not shared 
by other institutions or susceptible to control or elimination.  
8.3.2 : A Realistic Approach to Evaluating the Vision Project 
Such factors may be regarded as the contextual conditions that influence the other 
mechanisms that operate in a successful or failed information systems programme and 
that the realistic approach to evaluation sets out to identify.  
Realistic Evaluation is a form of evaluation that avoids sequential cause and effect 
assumptions and asks instead, what mechanisms were at work in the Trust, to generate 
the outcomes observed from the implementation of a new information system, and what 
were the contextual factors that influenced (augmented, mitigated) their effect ? 
8.3.3 : Structuring Answers to Business Questions 
We need a careful way forward, to provide a credible basis to answer this and other 
important business questions related to the Vision Project. Such a way forward is 
provided by the Multiview methodology. 
This methodology recognises that the problem of implementing and evaluating the 
Vision Project is situated in a particular environment. It is a problem situation, whose 
clear structure is clouded by the contest between values (for example, clinical and 
economic values). Local contextual issues tend to dictate, rather than adapt to, a solution 
that is appropriate locally rather than unique, general and universal. 
Multiview is designed to provide a defensible way forward, through a complex problem 
situation where multiple interested parties each tend to make sense of the situation in 
their own way.  
Participants in the Vision Project are would-be developers of the information system. 
They are, collectively, problem solvers. 
Multiview allows Problem Solvers to be characterised in terms of two kinds of ideas 
and two kinds of argument. 
Primary ideas are formed before the problem situation is entered. They may be reliable 
or fallible. In contrast, emergent ideas are more reliable because they are formed from 
the evidence acquired during exposure to the problem situation. 
Arguments are collections of valid ideas. They may converge with other arguments in a 
consensual process. Alternatively, they may diverge without immediately negating each 
other. 
We can recognise four stances towards the problem situation. 
 Agreement before debate 
 Disagreement precluding debate 
 Debate steered towards agreement 
 Debate exploring differences. 
Problem solvers cannot solve the problem situation in any unique sense because the 
problem situation is complex and has no unique definition. We can only hope to provide 
a comprehensive way of describing its many aspects.  
These aspects are both rational and social or political. That is to say, some sets of ideas 
converge in a rational sense. Other sets of ideas diverge and compete. The competition 
of ideas constitutes the political aspect and this aspect should not be reduced to a clash 
of personalities, interest groups or power centres. 
Prescription for the problem situation is not sensible without an accurate plan of 
investigation and diagnosis. To provide a comprehensive way of describing its many 
aspects, we need, as problem solvers, to develop a way of looking at things. 
The way we look at things and, therefore, the way we understand or interpret what we 
are doing, underpin a knowledgeable and careful engagement with the specifics of the 
problem situation that constitutes our problem solving process. This kind of 
understanding approach cannot be provided by a formal, pre-ordinate type of 
methodology because such methodologies deal in generalities rather than specifics. 
8.3.4 : Son of Multiview : SuperVision 
The hybridisation of Multiview with Realistic Evaluation promotes the critical, realistic 
and cumulative developmental intentions of both these approaches.  
It especially fulfils the formative intention of Multiview, which places implementation 
and evaluation in systemic rather than sequential relationship. 
This is fundamentally important for a large capital project, spread across the many 
sectors of a complex organisation, each of whose implementation phases must inform 
the next. 
Given that the Trusts information systems project has been named Vision, it seems 
appropriate to Christen the approach to evaluation and careful nurturing of the project 
suggested here, SuperVision. However, there should be no doubt that SuperVision 
fully acknowledges its parentage. 
8.4   :   S I T U A T I O N 
8.4.1 : The Problem Situation : A Project to Deliver Benefits 
The driving force behind the Vision Projects implementation will no longer be the 
National Programme for Information Technology. It will be the Trusts need, as an 
institution, to survive the harsh economic stringencies that are expected to prevail in the 
next three year planning cycle, whilst conforming to constraints dictated externally. 
Prime amongst these is the Darzi Review and the associated QuIPP (Quality, 
Innovation, Productivity and Prevention) initiative (United Kingdom, Department of 
Health, 2010a). 
The problem situation contains a relationship between Top Management, the middle 
management Implementation Team and the Front Line Staff of clinicians who are 
responsible not only to supply data to the information system but also to provide direct 
clinical care to patients (Figure 8.4.1). 
Figure 8.4.1 : The Problem Situation 
It is the responsibility of Top Management to navigate the Trust through its external 
environment. This is the context of the problem situation and its chief features in 2010 
are the looming economic recession and the Darzi Review of the NHS.  
The strategic benefits to be derived from new information technology are ultimately 
geared to assist this navigation. 
Front Line 
Staff
Strategic Benefits
Realised 
through IT
CONTEXT : 
Darzi Review 
of NHS
Recession
Management
Implementation 
HOW ?
Something to 
do with us
Strategic Pressures
The Vision Project cannot be considered in isolation from the environment in which it is 
to be implemented. Indeed, the QuIPP process is seen in the Trust as an overall 
envelope for synergy between Vision and other corporate enablers.  
These include imminent capital schemes (of which the building of a new Urgent Care 
Centre is one), the Trusts Blackpool Way organisational development strategy and its 
business change programme : of continuous improvement, focused on realisation of 
identified benefits and led by empowered managers and clinicians who will be 
encouraged to work across functional and disciplinary boundaries. 
The Vision Project is thus destined to be just one component of a controlled 
organisational upheaval and its implementation is to be instrumental to the successful 
navigation of a wider problematic situation. The nature of the controlled upheaval will 
be manifest in changes in the internal organisation of individual services, at the 
interfaces between services and in the corresponding governance structures. 
8.4.2 : The Problem Solvers : An External Implementation Consultancy and an 
Internal Implementation Team 
Responsibility to deliver the successful Vision Project has been delegated by the Trust 
Board to an Implementation Team, assisted by an expert team of  external analysts. 
The Implementation Team intervenes between the Trust Executive Team and the future 
front-line users of the new information system. 
8.4.3 : Interpreting the Vision Project in Terms of Strategic Benefits Realisation 
A defensible strategy for implementation will be provided by the Office of Government 
Commerce document, Managing Successful Programmes. This document builds on 
the structured and controlled management of projects provided by the PRINCE 
methodology. It is intended to overcome parochial thinking within an individual 
component project and to promote understanding of the broader enterprise.  
Managing Successful Programmes (p.37-38) states :  
Benefits management provides the programme with a target and a means of 
monitoring achievement against that target on a regular basis. The information 
provided by programme management indicates whether the programme is a success. 
To ensure that benefits are eventually realised, they must be positively managed 
from the start. The successful realisation of benefits requires active monitoring of 
programme and project deliveries. 
8.4.4 : The Problem Solving Process : A Clinical Engagement Programme 
Benefits realisation will be monitored and controlled by the project team. The project 
documentation indicates that factor theory will be invoked, to identify conditions - such 
as the commitment of senior managers, provision of supportive infrastructure, 
establishment and dissemination of ownership or the imposition of stretch targets  
that have been associated with success in well-managed programmes elsewhere. 
A key factor for the successful implementation of the NHSwide information 
programme is believed to be clinical engagement. The Implementation Board contains 
one principal and several supporting clinical champions for the project. 
8.5   :   B A C K G R O U N D 
8.5.1 : The Problem Situation : The Vision Project as a Regulated Procurement 
In Spring, 2009, unable to provide information required by a variety of stakeholders, 
and with no proven solution yet available from the National Programme, the Trust 
Executive authorised the initiation of a tendering process to procure an interim clinical 
solution (information system) from a non-National Programme supplier. 
An external consultancy was employed to oversee the procurement process according to 
the regulations of the European Union, manage procurement risk and ensure due 
diligence as a defence against reprisals from any disappointed participant in the 
procurement competition.  
8.5.2 : Problem Solvers : Judges of the Best-Compliant System 
In Summer, 2009, as part of the procurement process, the consultancy prepared an 
Output Based Specification and representative groups of clinicians and managers were 
assembled to consider and approve the various sections of this document in short 
meetings, conducted on the margins of their primary clinical or managerial duties. 
Amendments were reported back to the consultancy. 
This process was completed promptly within a narrow timescale of a few weeks. Two 
providers remained in the competition and site visits were conducted in the late Summer 
of 2009, so that a small group of clinicians and managers could see the systems in situ 
and speak to clinicians in the host sites. 
The rules of the procurement process required the implementation team and its clinical 
advisors to award the contract to the supplier who emerged with the highest marks in a 
formally-scored test of their ability to supply the Output Based Specification. 
In the Autumn of 2009, the group and the procurement consultants met on two pairs of 
consecutive days : on the first occasion, to conduct final interviews with the two 
supplier-teams and, on the second, to score the match between the systems as they had 
been witnessed and the Output Based Specification document. 
Those making the adjudication included middle managers from key clinical departments 
and two clinical consultants, selected for their interest in the project rather than for their 
access to the opinions of clinical colleagues. 
8.5.3 : Interpreting the Information System as a set of Functional Processes and 
Procedures 
The clinically relevant chapter headings of the Output Based Specification were as 
follows : 
 Orders Processing 
 Results Reporting 
 Electronic Prescribing  
 Emergency Access and Unscheduled Care 
 Scheduling 
 Clinical Documentation - Clinical Noting and Clinical Correspondence 
 Decision support 
 Integrated Care Pathways and Care Planning. 
8.5.4 : The Problem Solving Process 
At the close of 2009, the Trusts Change Management Facilitator and a senior member 
of the Planning and Performance staff began to meet groups of junior and intermediate 
grade doctors and nurses, with an analyst employed by the successful contractor, to 
introduce the implementation project and gain a preliminary understanding of current 
processes and data flows.  
8.5.5 : The Problem Solving Methodology-Process Mapping 
The implementation methodology adopted so far has been for the supplier of the new 
information system to engage clinicians in process mapping. Agreed maps of current 
clinical processes will be used by participating groups of clinicians to agree rationalised 
maps of future process configurations. 
This activity has taken place against the background of an unrelated programme of 
lean initiatives, also intended to engage clinicians in process reconfiguration. Local 
instigators have changed their posts and the impetus has not been carried forward. The 
lean initiatives, also facilitated by external consultants, have been difficult to co-
ordinate with the activities of the implementation analysts, owing to the analysts 
location in another country, their limited availability to the Trust and the unrelated, 
scheduled commitments of these two sets of external advisors. 
8.6   :   A N A L Y S I S 
8.6.1 : Diagnosing the Problem Situation 
A key component of the Multiview methodology, described earlier, is to identify a 
repertoire of lenses through which parties can agree to look at things together. Two 
such lenses are provided here. 
The first lens, provided by modern organisational thinking is an impersonal lens that 
rationalises and organises the division of labour into organisational processes, groups 
and structures, mediated by technology : in the present case, information technology.  
The second lens, provided by post-modern, critical thinking recognises that 
organisations and processes are ideal rather than physical structures, and that any real 
substance they possess is constituted by the individuals and their personal tasks that can 
be observed empirically. It is a person-oriented lens. 
Looking at the problem situation through the person-oriented lens (Figure 8.6.1) 
focuses our attention onto the realisation of strategic benefits through the triangular 
relationship between front line staff, their information technology and the tasks involved 
in their clinical work.  
Figure 8.6.1 : Diagnosing the Problem Situation 
Strategic Benefits
CONTEXT : 
Darzi Review 
of NHS
Recession
Management
Implementation 
Will be realised 
through
The tasks involved 
in clinical work
Front Line 
Staff
Information 
Technology
Relationship
Front line staff perform tasks, of which some are clinical and others are informational. 
They organise their tasks to promote their own individual and collective efficiency as a 
team. Finally, they sometimes organise their tasks around an individual patient, for 
example, writing a discharge note, prescribing take home medications and planning 
after-care ; and at other times they provide similar tasks for a cohort of patients, as on a 
ward round. 
8.6.2 : Problem Solvers 
SuperVision identifies four stances : 
a) Agreement Before Debate (Agenda Definition) 
The agenda for change is initially defined by the organisational sponsors of the project. 
The benefits to be realised are expressed in their terms, as strategic, economic-rational 
benefits, summarised as Quality, Finance and Performance. 
The recession will impact on the Trusts ability to afford its present operating costs, 
mandating the rationalisation of processes and information flows. The costs associated 
with paper-based transactions are a clear candidate for elimination. The Trust has 
aspirations to be the UKs first paperless hospital. 
The Darzi Review will require hospitals to publish quality accounts to complement 
their financial accounts. In the short term, quality accounts will centre around 
performance metrics for a few key conditions : for example, readmission within 30 days 
of discharge after treatment for femoral neck fracture. 
The Trust will be required to assemble various metrics to describe performance and its 
improvement. One set of potential evaluation criteria relates to the ability of the 
information system to capture these metrics. 
b) Disagreement Precluding Debate (Critique) 
For staff on the wards, data capture to supply financial and quality accounting is not the 
primary activity. Staff want to practise their clinical speciality and do their best for their 
patients. There is a tension between computing and care-giving. The quality that is 
measured through accounting techniques provides only an image of what is actually 
done that patients or professionals themselves value. 
Greenhalgh et al. (2008) warn : 
Much debate about the SCR [summary care record] is currently couched in the 
discourse of benefits realisation [institutions are] expected to develop and 
apply formal metrics to measure the number of lives saved, adverse reactions averted, 
duplicate tests avoided, or patients empowered per pound invested in the programme). 
This approach assumes not only that developing and applying meaningful metrics in 
this area is possible but also that such metrics can be established in advance and used 
to performance manage the public bodies charged with implementing the programme. 
Both assumptions are highly questionable.  
The message here is to promote a concept of quality that goes beyond detached 
observation, measurement and recording of the patient as a clear and distinct idea 
separate from the clinician. It is to promote the contribution of information technology 
to the clinicians closer, more careful and more successful engagement that situates 
the clinician, the patient, the clinical problem as it is interpreted by both parties, and the 
clinicians intentions, in a systemic relationship.  
c) Debate Steered Towards Agreement (Aligning Values) 
The values of the executive and the workforce are aligned around the Trust Wide 
Objectives : 
 Financial Stability 
 Top Ten Performer 
 Value for Money 
 Provider of Choice 
 Great Place to Work. 
These were developed by staff in support of the Chief Executives drive to rebuild the 
Trusts corporate ethos. 
The financial security of the employing institution, faced with a 20m deficit, and the 
Improving Working Lives initiative were motivators for staff to collaborate with 
managers. The need to avoid loss of patients to other providers was a motivator for the 
executive team to project the aspiration of staff to deliver a high quality clinical service. 
Financial stability requires accurate financial and activity accounting.  
Better Information Groups are regarded as pivotal to the collection of activity and 
performance data that are fit for purpose, to support the Trusts aspiration to be a Top 
Ten Performer, but these groups have to influence the clinicians who are expected to 
input the data that coders can process. 
This means that the organisational learning from Better Information Groups has to be 
translated into efforts on the wards, not only to manage attitudes and behaviours but 
also to ensure that the new information systems make it as easy as possible for staff to 
capture high quality data as they go about their clinical duties. 
In that sense, the information system is only as good as the organisational sub-structures 
in which it is implanted. 
d) Debate Exploring Differences (Surfacing Conflict) 
The Trust is a happy place to work and politicised conflict between organisational 
groups is neither overt nor actively suppressed. 
The issue lies in the conflicts and contradictions inherent in a complex workplace. This 
is a conflict between equally legitimate ideas and values, when judged in isolation from 
contingency. 
The effectiveness of control and resource scheduling breaks down when demand is 
varied and variable, diverse and lumpy. Stress can become acute when the resource the 
clinician has to control and deploy between competing streams of demand is himself. 
Things are fitted in, to accommodate some new and pressing need as it arises and care 
has to be taken to avoid the opportunity cost, perhaps paid by another patient in a 
different queue. Individual rules, processes and procedures are bent to accommodate 
the new need, often related to some other set of rules, processes and procedures but 
sometimes related to a form of collaborative common-sense that is not codified.  
In the collaborative workplace, task-related roles and identities may change hands 
rapidly. Values are adjusted according to the situation and the occasion. Data have no 
absolute value but are interpreted in the light of other data. This makes it difficult to 
comprehend any patient or clinical situation fully on the basis of a brief or coded 
description. 
All of these issues need to be understood in detail before procedural rules can be safely 
inscribed in the costly, and therefore permanent, intervention in the workplace the 
information system represents. Semantic rules are required to allow integrated systems 
to exchange data across electronic interfaces but the distinction between transmitted 
data and interpreted understanding necessitates a level of play in the system that is 
afforded only by human judgement.  
The aim of implementation ought to be to ensure that the information system receives a 
better than lukewarm reception by staff who are neutrally tolerant (Figure 8.6.2). A 
positive evaluation depends for permanence on its re-enactment every time a member of 
staff interacts with the machine. We need to understand, by reference to specific 
examples rather than generalisations, how an individual care-giver, on an individual 
occasion, appreciates the machine as instrumental in the convenient accomplishment or 
administration of care-giving.  
Figure 8.6.2 : Conflict Surfacing  Exploring Differences 
Personal convenience is one aspect of Improved Working Lives but another is the 
scope to project  personal values that contribute to the quality of the clinical service. 
Quality is a diffuse concept, better described in terms of aspects rather than 
ingredients and their weighted importance. One potential source of conflict derives from 
the various guises and manifestations of clinical quality that might be preferred by one 
group or another. 
Computing can get in 
the way of Caregiving
You mean, giving 
quality care so that 
patients benefit 
Quality comes in 
several different 
forms
None of us objects to using the 
computer
computer 
helps me 
to 
8.6.3 : Interpreting Clinical Activity 
Process views of clinical activity generalise the individual, focused solely on a uniform 
production process, designed around a single, passive, ideal typical unit of product. 
They present a limited model, from which a limited range of alternative responses can 
be deduced in the form of procedural rules (Figure 8.6.3). The process model 
deliberately eliminates the contingencies to which an individual in the clinical situation 
may have to adapt. Not least amongst these contingencies are those produced by the 
patient himself. 
Figure 8.6.3 : Modelling Context Alongside Process 
A context view recognises that the clinical situation contains multiple patients at 
different stages on multiple differentiated clinical pathways, and they ignore that the 
clinician responsible for a given patient in a ward, an Emergency Department or any 
other fluid and dynamic situation in which varied services are provided to a 
Sick Patient
Well Patient
Patient In 
Patient Out 
Two Process Views
A Context View
differentiated clientele, has simultaneous responsibilities and preoccupations towards 
other patients and other processes.  
Processes and groups are useful concepts around which to organise an ideal theory of 
practice and activity but their reality is rooted in the frequently repeated, task related 
actions of individuals. The model they represent is a model of regularities observed over 
time, rather than a real and absolute structure. The model is more useful and valid as a 
comparator than a representation of actual practice. It is probably most valid in certain 
controlled laboratory environments and least valid in the Emergency Department, where 
disruption of routine is the norm. 
From an operational view of the world, polarised towards the needs of front-line users, 
practice is realistic, occasioned and contingent. Actions are shaped equally by the 
process events and roles contained in the ideal model and by intercurrent events, not 
identified in the model. Any notional, process-related role may be shared between 
individuals and a single individual may possess more than one role. Progress is made by 
facilitating individual effort and removing barriers to collaboration.  
The focus is on individuals, working in concert with other individuals, to manage 
multiple patients at different stages on multiple pathways. The required transformation 
is for the activities of individuals to be made as fluent as possible, through the 
elimination of interruptions, delays and duplication in the sequence of personal tasks. 
Technology is only one of the sources of data from which members of the clinical team 
assemble the information to guide their work. 
From a critical standpoint, the balance between these two views of the world cannot be 
set prospectively. It must vary according to the external factors or the surges in clinical 
activity that affect different clinical environments, at different times, in different ways. 
8.6.4 : The Problem Solving Process - Strengths and Weaknesses of the Process 
Mapping Approach 
Process maps like the one shown in Figure 8.6.4 deploy the impersonal lens to 
demarcate roles and responsibilities within the process and show the process steps and 
dependencies in a logical sequence. 
Figure 8.6.4 : A Process Map 
Sick Patient
Well Patient
Patient In 
Patient Out 
Process maps show individual roles in relation to a single patient, considered as a unit 
of product. Their strength is that they provide a model to rationalise and control 
aspects of productive activity but their weakness is that they present only a limited 
description of the total situation in which any process step is carried out.  
Taking the alternative view, through the person-oriented lens, suggests that the analysis 
of tasks into an orderly, abstract structure of sequential steps that might be taught to a 
novice provides only a limited description of the interaction between an individual, a 
situational context and fluent, expert action. 
There is a danger that an information system, if constructed around the de-
contextualised analysis of processes and role demarcations, may downgrade expert 
performance, limit individual resilience and restrict compliant behaviour, instead of 
allowing creative adaptation to the reality of any emerging situation. We need 
information systems that facilitate excellence and avoid restricting behaviour to the 
lowest common denominator. 
8.6.5 : Quality 
Excellence is the ultimate expression of quality. The various aspects of clinical service 
quality (Table 8.6.1) facilitated by a new information system might underpin different 
evaluations by different groups, leaving aside ergonomic and technical aspects of the 
electronic machinery. A successful implementation will not merely mean having the 
information system installed and in (partial) use (possibly tolerated rather than fully 
assimilated) in as many different areas and locations of practice as possible. 
This table presents one model of quality, derived from the literature on information 
systems, which is capable of development with any of the information systems 
disparate user groups, to explore statements of the form, this information system 
helped (or hindered) me, to [deliver some aspect of a quality service]. 
Table 8.6.1 : Aspects of Clinical Quality (derived from Garvin, 1984) 
Product based 
Providing clinical 
care that is fit for 
purpose 
 Making an accurate diagnosis. 
 Providing evidence based treatment. 
 Finding and following an approved practice guideline. 
 Prescribing correctly. 
 Documenting and Communicating well-co-ordinated 
clinical management. 
User based 
Responding to 
Patients as service 
users 
 Access : helping patients to access the next stage in 
their management. 
 Acceptability : accommodating patients needs 
alongside service needs. 
 Relevance : providing the service response that best 
suits the patients need. 
Manufacturing 
based  
Making it easy to 
practise efficiently 
and safely 
 Responding to complaints and litigation. 
 Recognising clinical error and recalling the patient. 
 Supervising safe and effective clinical management 
and discharge. 
 Finding my next task / where I am most needed. 
 Planning care which is orthodox, safe and effective. 
Values based 
Outcomes that 
reflect the Trust 
Wide Objectives 
 Financial Stability. 
 Top Ten Performer. 
 Value for Money. 
 Provider of Choice. 
 Great Place to Work. 
Transcendent 
Providing Customer 
Delight 
 Doing something for a patient that left them visibly 
and favourably impressed. 
8.6.6 : Clinical Communication 
One fundamental task within the quality matrix is clinical communication and 
documentation. It is expected that information technology will enhance clinical 
communication and information sharing. 
However, these activities are fundamentally different from data processing and data 
storage. This is because data have inherent meaning, albeit restricted.  
In contrast, information has contextual meaning. The data supplied become information 
when they are interpreted by a recipient in the context of other data available from the 
recipients memory existing knowledge, or present surroundings. 
We need to distinguish between the ease of data entry and transmission, and the mental 
task of assembling and decoding information to provide a defensible account at the level 
of detail required for a specific clinical purpose. 
8.7   :   R E C O M M E N D A T I O N 
There is a general consensus in the information systems literature and among the key 
players in the Vision Project, that user consultation is crucial to successful 
implementation. There is an equal consensus that socio-technical factors are important. 
However, it is not obvious how these ought to be identified and converted from 
potentially destructive problems into useful clues towards successful implementation. 
What remains missing is an insight into the events and circumstances that surround the 
operational use of information systems, on successive occasions by individuals. Without 
this insight, designers and planners expectations (information system use in theory) 
will lack a requisite foundation in regularities of users behaviour that can be observed 
in the workplace (information system use in practice). 
This is less likely to arise from an idealised model of process than from an appreciation 
of the way an individual clinicians tasks coincide repeatedly during the course of a bad 
day at work. 
8.7.1 : Recasting the Problem Situation 
Figure 8.7.1 shows how the problem situation can be re-cast in terms of front-line staff. 
The strategic benefits that enable Top Management to navigate the strategic problem 
situation are won when the Front-Line Staff derive operational benefits that enable them 
to navigate their own clinical problem situation. 
Within the context of demands, constraints and choices set by the expectations of 
politicians, policy makers, planners, patients and the public, clinicians apply the scripted 
routines of clinical practice in a way that is far from mechanical : it is knowledgeable 
and more or less carefully adapted to the play of surrounding events. 
The way users deviate from model use of the information system, for example by 
batching their interactions, is a response to the problem situation as it pertains at the 
time and, as such, represents a problem solving methodology. The quality of the 
information system affects the operational capacity of its users and this, in turn, 
alleviates or exacerbates the problematic situation. 
Figure 8.7.1 : The Problem Situation Recast 
8.7.2 : Accommodating Different Forms of The Problem Solver 
Because a complex organisation contains multiple strands of interest, commitment and 
logic, it cannot be reflected accurately in a single strand of thought. Both design and 
evaluation ought to take account of the emergent ideas developed as the specifics of the 
situation are encountered, as well as the primary ideas that exist before organisational 
debate is entered and. Both sets of ideas lead to arguments that can diverge away from 
consensus as well as converging towards it. 
Information 
Technology
Wheres My 
Next Patient ?
Whats the 
Usual 
Procedure 
for this ?
Has Mrs. X been 
treated yet ?
Individuals Tasks
CONTEXT : The Demands, Constraints 
and Choices Surrounding Work
OUTCOMES : 
Operational 
Benefits
INTERVENTION :
Strategic 
Benefits
Depend 
Of the four problem solving stances that have been presented, the first three are 
essentially descriptive and affirmative. Only the last, emergent and critical perspective 
adequately questions the status quo and illuminates the alternative possibilities for an 
organisation facing financial stringency and the need for a radical review of 
organisational structures and practices, assisted by information systems. 
8.7.3 : Analytic and Systemic Interpretations of the Organisation 
Should we interpret the Trust and its information needs in analytic or systemic terms ? 
The analytic approach eliminates individuality and groups cases according to their 
common characteristics. It is a convenient way to order and reduce a confused situation. 
It results in rules and generalisations, constructed around an ideal case. Because it is 
impersonal and context-free, this approach favours automation and uncritical data 
processing. On this view, systems integration is simply a matter of constructing the right 
rules (syntax). 
The systemic approach takes a realistic stance towards organisational and situational 
complexity. It recognises the real case as a balance between general and contingent 
factors. Striking the balance defies absolute regulation and favours solutions that are 
defensible rather than uniquely and exclusively rational.  
Instead of eliminating human agency it mandates its preservation, as an essential factor 
in the active construction of information from an assembly of transmitted and contextual 
data. On this view, systems integration is a matter of understanding critically, the 
various conventions and their interplay that surround this activity.  
We should remain aware of these two polarities as primary ideas and regard each as 
having its place in the design and evaluation of an information system, that must help 
demonstrate the Trusts capability to the outside world but contribute directly and 
organically to the capabilities of the people who work within its confines.  
8.7.4 : The Problem Solving Process : Recognising Supportive as well as 
Operative Functions of Information Systems 
For this reason, it is useful to distinguish in an evaluation between the operative 
functions of the information system, that assert, monitor and measure the process view, 
providing Management Information from Operational Systems or asserting pre-
configured plans of patients clinical management, and the supportive functions that 
reflect an empathic understanding of the users situation and enable his adaptive 
response to its evolving aspects  the things that make one instance of a user and an 
information system different from another in a similar, but not identical, context. 
Where the operative function serves to minimise unacceptable variation of process, 
the supportive function accepts that non-standard situations require non-standard, 
improvisatory responses, albeit guided by conventions or models of practice that are 
performed in ways that combine defensibility with fluency. 
The clinical situation, illustrated in Figure 8.7.2, combines model order with 
contingency. Information systems have the capacity to enforce practice and constrain 
processes within prescribed boundaries. It is argued here, that strategic benefits from the 
information system will derive from its operational impact, permitting individuals to 
respond and adjust their tasks to a fluid and dynamic situation. 
Management Information from Operational Systems implies an emphasis on the 
relevance of information systems to the clinical workplace. However, this is not enough.  
Figure 8.7.2 : Managing the Problem Situation From Within 
As well as being relevant, information systems need to be accessible and acceptable to 
the staff who will use them. They ought to contribute to efficient and effective clinical 
practice by drawing together the related tasks of clinical care in order to mitigate the 
conflict between computing and care-giving. 
Wheres the 
Prescription ?
Here, 
with Me 
Cant tell you
(had a Stroke)
Bleep, Bleep
Wheres the 
Patient ?
Moved on, 
Mate 
Have I written 
your drugs 
correctly ?
Trying to 
Concentrate
Patients 
coming
Patients 
coming
Bleep, Bleep
Symptoms 
dont add 
How do 
I treat ?
The Clinical Problem Situation
Assessment, 
Investigation, 
Intervention   
X Ray, 
Pathology, 
Pharmacy   
Consultation   
Referral   
Guidelines,   
Policies,   
Procedures   
Negotiation &   
Decisio n 
Making   
Consult Prior   
Hospital / GP Record   
Write a Record 
Operative
functions of 
Information 
System
Supportive
functions of 
Information 
System
Bringing together the 
related tasks of 
clinical care
Management 
Information from 
Operational Systems
Between registration and the patients discharge, the system has to provide a mechanism 
to collect Management Information from Operational Systems in the form of financial 
and activity codes to support the Trusts financial stability. It has to collect information 
about the pacing of clinical management along evidence-based clinical pathways to 
support the Trusts claim to be a Top Ten performer. 
To provide Value for Money, it has to allow people to negotiate between the different 
pathway rules that steer patients from various streams to the same resource but it also 
has to balance the rules that maximise the availability of the resource to any given 
pathway against the rules that ensure the optimal efficiency of its overall utilisation. 
To be the Provider of Choice, the Trust needs an information system that can manage its 
beds to match demand with supply. The vacation of a bed and the electronic reporting of 
this event are more likely to coincide if reporting is linked intimately to one or more 
fundamental tasks associated with transfer or discharge from the ward, such as the 
preparation of a clinical continuity document or discharge summary, than if this is seen 
as a stand alone task that can be batched after other more important tasks have been 
completed. 
Functions like bed management and resource scheduling cannot be subsumed within a 
logical hierarchy, as if all the strands of organisational logic could be integrated through 
alignment in a single, convergent and consensual stream. To be a Great Place to Work, 
the Trust has to appreciate the limits of automation. This means giving equal expression 
to varied strands of logic whose mutual coherence is limited. Systems integration 
requires a human element, to assess and respond to contingencies that cannot be 
anticipated in a set of rules. 
Equally, to be a Great Place to Work, the Trust needs its information system, as much as 
possible, to put the user in control of his own working day. This means a minimising the 
need for the constant interruption of one professional by another, establishing rules as 
reference resources rather than constraints and allowing documents to be visible 
simultaneously in more than one location. 
In a Great Place to Work, people communicate with each other as colleagues. They are 
free to interpret their own situation without undue domination by a single authority. 
Information from the computer is complemented and sometimes contradicted by 
evidence from the users own eyes and ears as well as from their colleagues. The 
information system is a resource to support both teamwork and individual 
accountability. It supports the prioritisation and delegation of tasks and the processes of 
delegation and referral. 
8.8 : L O O K I N G   T O   T H E   F U T U R E 
The model presented in Figure 8.8.1 presents a form of evaluation that avoids 
generalities and focuses on understanding the specifics of the situation and the occasion. 
The model is intended to be used in successive iterations, as in the ALTAR project 
described by Shah, Eardley and Wood-Harper (2007), where learning from each 
implementation phase of an information system in a large organisation was played into 
the next, by actors at successive levels of operation, management and strategic policy 
making. 
Figure 8.8.1 : Putting SuperVision To Work 
The fluid characteristics of the clinical workplace provide the context that influences the 
production of operational benefits, considered as the mechanism that allows strategic 
outcomes to emerge from the intervention of the new information system. 
The realisation of operational benefits, to users themselves, will reinforce a positive 
evaluation, every time a front-line user interacts with the information machine. 
Although an evaluation will be influenced by the operational reliability and technical 
performance of the electronic machine and by the physical and operational 
characteristics responsible for its ergonomic evaluation, this will not be the only 
mechanism at work.  
There are likely to be three key sources of operational benefits from the new 
information system. 
CONTEXTINTERVENTION : 
New Information 
Systems
OUTCOME : 
Strategic
realised. 
MECHANISMS : 
What worked, 
for Whom,
In What Context ?
What were the Operational
Who benefited ?
What factors promoted / hindered benefits realisation ?
What factors influenced benefits definition ?
CONTEXTINTERVENTION : 
New Information 
Systems
OUTCOME : 
Strategic benefits 
MECHANISMS : 
What worked, 
for Whom,
In What Context ?
What were the Operational benefits ? 
Who benefited ?
What factors promoted / hindered benefits realisation ?
What factors influenced benefits definition ?
 Use Multiview to Model 
Problem Situation etc. at 
Various Organisational 
Levels.  
 Avoid Premature 
Synthesis.  
 Compare and Contrast 
Models instead. 
The first of these will be its impact on users capacity to provide a quality service to 
patients, and adopting a comprehensive description of quality, such as that offered in 
Table 8.7.1, that can accommodate the Trust Wide Objectives. 
The second will be the systems ability to support genuine clinical communication as 
distinct from data processing for accounting. 
The third will be the systems impact on the liberty and facility of each individual to 
recognise and make his next required task, in contribution to the collective effort and in 
conformity with the opportunities as well as the constraints presented by a well 
managed clinical environment. 
The point at issue is not to understand whether a given implementation has succeeded or 
failed but how clinical staff at the patient interface have balanced the requirements of 
computing and care-giving, given the characteristics of the problem situation presented 
by the clinical workplace.  
8.9   :   S U M M A R Y    
O F   P R A C T I C A L   R E C O M M E N D A T I O N S 
 The Front Line 
The Vision project will affect everybody. All front line staff need to adopt a critical and 
introspective stance towards the analysis of their own work patterns. This is different 
from time and motion study. It is about the way individuals working in teams construct 
their work from moment to moment. 
To understand how new information systems will improve their own working lives as 
well as the efficiency of the parent organisation, individuals need to understand, from 
their own reflection, how their personal tasks cluster at key moments during a working 
day that is typical rather than an ideal.  
This recommendation applies to administrative and clerical staff but it applies most 
intensely to clinical staff, who have to combine computing with the multiple, varied and 
simultaneous tasks of care-giving as part of a team. 
 The Implementation Team 
Process mapping is a valuable technique that brings people from the same workplace 
together to examine their work routines critically. Process maps focus on what is done 
rather than what any given individual does.  
The distinction appears to be subtle but it is profound. 
It is contended here, that information systems benefit patients and institutions because 
they benefit individual front line staff. A positive evaluation is the summation of the 
experience of each individual using the information system, on each successive 
occasion, under the circumstances that prevail at that time. The individuals focus 
during use is not on the computer but on the task in hand and its relationship with all the 
other things the individual is trying to accomplish at the same time, possibly for other 
patients. 
For this reason, process mapping activities need to be complemented by a form of 
analysis that recognises that any individual, at any time, is likely to be managing 
multiple patients at multiple stages on multiple pathways. 
 Strategic Managers 
The Vision Project has been labelled, a corporate enabler. The current capital 
development of the Urgent Care Centre is an example where there are opportunities to 
integrate services, streamline clinical pathways and develop new kinds of jobs.  
To the extent that events can be planned, as opposed to evolving organically and 
sometimes coinciding, the Vision Project is an opportunity to bind together the different 
strands of organisational development, workforce planning, business process re-
engineering and new building (figure 8.9.1). 
Figure 8.9.1 : Using Multiview to place IT Design in the context of Organisational 
Activities 
Manage the 
Stakeholders
Project & 
Develop the 
Vision
Alliances & Alignments,
Project & Programme 
Control 
Design
Hard Projects & 
Programmes
Design
Soft Negotiations
Organisational 
Development
Problem 
Solving 
Methodology
Problem 
Situation
Problem 
Solvers
Interpretive 
Scheme
C H A P T E R   N I N E 
P O L I C Y   I M P L I C A T I O N S 
9.0   :   I N T R O D U C T I O N 
Since the submission of this thesis, the Labour government responsible for the National 
Programme has been defeated and a new, Conservative and Liberal Democrat coalition 
government has taken its place. The National Programme seems unlikely to escape 
reappraisal. My examiners have encouraged me to assess the policy implications of the 
thesis for future Big IT programmes.  
Two important publications have emerged since submission. The new governments 
first white paper on health, Equity and Excellence: Liberating the NHS, (United 
Kingdom Department of Health, 2010b) was published in July, 2010. The independent 
evaluation of the Summary Care Record and HealthSpace programmes (Greenhalgh et 
al., 2010) was published in May, 2010. 
Also in July, 2010, the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Education announced 
the decommissioning of the ContactPoint childrens database which had been 
established in response to the challenges epitomised in the Climbie Inquiry (Lord 
Laming, 2003).  
There are significant areas of overlap between the issues relating to the care of 
vulnerable children and the care of patients, to whom clinicians and society have also 
traditionally acknowledged a duty of care. 
9.0.1 : The Structure of This Chapter 
This chapter is constructed as follows : 
In section 9.1, the SuperVision framework, identified in chapter eight is populated with 
reference to the outgoing governments e-Government strategy document, 
Transformational Government Enabled by Technology (United Kingdom, HM 
Government Cabinet Office, 2005). This strategy was the intervention intended to bring 
about identified policy outcomes. 
The intervention had to rely on identifiable mechanisms for its effect. The mechanisms 
can be understood best in terms of the government as a problem-solving collective, the 
problem situation to which the strategy, Transformational Government, was a response, 
and the problem solving methodology, the strategy itself. 
The mechanisms concerned operated in the world rather than in isolation. In other 
words, they operated in a context. This was the then governments world view of the 
citizen, coupled with its world view of the public service as a policy instrument. 
Section 9.2 moves the discussion from the general case, of policy for e-government 
enabled by (information) technology, to the specific case of government policy for the 
NHS and for NHS information. 
Section 9.3 presents the perspectives of government, the National Programme for IT, 
provider organisations and patients towards the current policy environment. 
Section 9.4 reviews key elements of NHS information policy. 
Section 9.5 proposes a new approach to the National Programme, based on small, quasi-
autonomous structures rather than a tightly integrated mega-structure. 
Section 9.6. proposes a new model form of clinical engagement. 
Section 9.7 draws the chapter to its conclusion. 
9.1   :   T H E   S u p e r V i s i o n   F R A M E W O R K     
A P P L I E D   T O    
T R A N S F O R M A T I O N A L   G O V E R N M E N T 
9.1.1 : The Intervention 
Transformational Government Enabled by Technology was the outgoing governments 
intervention (as a problem solver) in a particular problem situation. The intervention 
was a massive overhaul of government IT infrastructure, within a broader overhaul of 
the organisation of public services and other arms of policy implementation.  
9.1.2 :  The Policy Outcome 
The intended policy outcome was to be the assurance of national economic productivity, 
social justice and public service reform. Public services were to become more 
responsive and more efficient. 
9.1.3 : The Mechanism : an Interaction between the Problem Solver, the Problem 
Situation and the Problem Solving Methodology 
The mechanism operating between the intervention and its desired policy outcomes was, 
in effect, an interaction between the problem solver, the problem situation and the 
problem solving methodology : a Big IT programme. 
The Problem Situation 
The problem situation was defined by the perceived need for transformational 
government enabled by IT. This was the need to improve the efficiency of 
transactional public services (eg taxation, administration of public functions : e.g. 
hospital appointments) and the effectiveness of transformational public services (eg 
health and social care). The transformation to be enabled was to structure new systems 
around the customer of public services instead of around the product of service.  
To these ends, there was to be a substantial improvement in the availability of 
information for management and a lifting of heads away from the self-serving 
drudgery of bureaucratic paperwork, towards the achievement of benefits for the users 
of public services : 
Modern government  both in policy making and in service delivery  relies on 
accurate and timely information about citizens, businesses, animals and assets. 
Information sharing, management of identity and of geographical location, and 
information assurance are therefore critical. (Transformational Government : para 
Many systems and processes are still paper-based and staff-intensive. The underlying 
assumption is that customers will fill in forms and staff will process them by routine 
rather than by risk-managed exception. (Transformational Government : para 14) 
The Problem Solving Methodology : Big IT 
Modern governments see technology as a strategic asset and not just as a tactical 
tool. (Transformational Government : para 4) 
Information Technology was to be deployed as a strategic resource to improve matching 
between differentiated need, supply and demand for transformational services 
(choice, competition, contested service provision), and to develop customer-centred 
forms of service provision. Standardisation would enable the simplification and sharing 
of service delivery methods between different public services. Data protection and 
measures to protect the security of personal information and identity would mitigate the 
risks of national scale data structures. 
9.1.4 : The Context for the Mechanisms Operation 
The context for the mechanisms operation was the Governments view of the citizen 
and the service provider 
Perspectives on the Citizen 
Without defining them explicitly, Transformational Government aimed to cater for 
three citizen constituencies :  
 The articulate, IT capable citizen 
 The vulnerable citizen or victim 
 The criminal offender. 
Perspectives on the Service Provider as an Instrument of Government Policy 
These implicit perspectives on the citizen translated into three perspectives on the 
service provider as an instrument of government policy, reflecting orientations towards :  
 Emancipation and Empowerment : of the articulate citizen 
 Protection : of the vulnerable (eg a victim of systematic child abuse) 
 Control and Dominance : of the criminal, defined as a significant deviant from 
the norm (eg. a potential child murderer, a serially homicidal doctor). 
9.2   :   T H E   N H S   A S   A N   E P I T O M E    
O F   T H E   P U B L I C   P O L I C Y   A R E N A 
The NHS epitomises the challenges faced by all public services in the United Kingdom 
at present. It is expected to match differentiated need, supply and demand. Its 
transformational service aspect caters for changes in peoples health, well-being and 
potential, whilst its transactional aspect caters for patients as the incidental objects of 
stepwise administrative processes. The health service sets great value on data protection 
and measures to protect the security of personal information. Standard arrangements 
have been proposed or introduced to provide electronic booking of appointments and 
electronic prescriptions. There is also an institutional enthusiasm for standard pathways 
of management for individual clinical conditions. It is hugely important to identify 
patients correctly in order to ensure that the right patient gets the right treatment. 
Equally, it is essential to protect the identity and confidentiality of individuals. 
As articulate citizens, patients are to be emancipated and empowered by the policies of 
both governments. This emancipation extends to ownership by the patient of at least 
part of his own medical record. When a patients significant deviation from the norm of 
health becomes frank illness, it was the outgoing governments plan that the records of 
all patients should be available throughout the NHS, in case any patient became ill far 
from home. The status of the potentially vulnerable patient has become a matter for 
societal concern. As a general object of social control, it was the plan for his personal 
data to be shared between interacting medical, social and educational services but it was 
also argued that, as an individual with the same rights as the most articulate citizen, his 
right to individual confidentiality and privacy was to be preserved. 
9.3   :   F O U R   P E R S P E C T I V E S    
O N   T H E   P O L I C Y   E N V I R O N M E N T   O F   T H E   N H S 
9.3.1 : Present Government Perspective 
Table 9.1 summarises the Government level view of the present situation. 
Table 9.1 : Problem Solvers :  UK Government 
Problem Situation Problem Solving 
Methodology 
Interpretive Scheme 
Stringent economic 
climate, demanding public 
with high expectations 
from tax-funded public 
services, political 
preference for big society 
and small government. 
White Paper Liberating 
the NHS. 
The NHS will scrutinised 
and held accountable 
through its capacity to 
generate information for 
defined audiences 
(Monitor, Care Quality 
Commission). 
This central accountability 
will be complemented by 
accountability to 
individual patient 
preferences, as money 
follows patients to their 
preferred providers. 
Choice, Contested 
provision, Payment by 
Results ; Devolved, 
centrally-regulated 
commissioning by GP 
consortia. 
An Information 
Revolution. 
Enable choice & Drive 
accountability : centrally 
and to patients. 
Centrally mandated 
information flows 
continue.  
In addition : 
Internet resources, 
Patient Reported Outcome 
Measures, 
Transparency / candour  
comparative information at 
clinical team level.  
Patients will have control 
of own record : able to 
share with third parties. 
Third party advisors on 
choice.  
Anonymised research 
databases. 
The problem situation faced by the new government includes the countrys state of near 
bankruptcy, necessitating an efficiency saving by the NHS of 15-20 billion by the end 
of 2013-2014 (United Kingdom, Department of Health, 2010c). A demanding public 
continues to express high expectations from tax-funded public services, and the 
government has expressed its policy in terms of big society and small government. 
This philosophy proposes that a market empowers individual patients more efficiently 
than an organised hierarchy. The same philosophy transfers the ownership, control and 
custody of personal data from institutions to individuals and to any third parties with 
whom they might wish to share their data. 
The governments problem solving methodology is its white paper. Liberating the NHS 
announces (para 3.4) the cessation of time-oriented process targets and the adoption of 
clinically credible and evidence-based measures that clinicians themselves use. It will 
continue the policy of contested provision and Payment by Results, outlined by the 
previous government in The NHS Modernisation Plan (2004). Providers will face 
continued independent scrutiny by Monitor and the Care Quality Commission. Strategic 
Health Authorities and Primary Care Trusts are to be abolished and the commissioning 
of provider services will be devolved, within a National Commissioning Framework, 
from Primary Care Trusts to General Practice Consortia. 
The relevant interpretive scheme  the world-view or way of looking at things  is an 
Information Revolution that will enable choice and drive accountability : centrally 
and to patients.  
The form of centrally mandated summary information flows will change, but not the 
requirement to confirm compliance with standards set externally. In future, Monitor will 
oversee economic regulation. The Care Quality Commission will exert other forms of 
governance, partly based on Patient Reported Outcome Measures. Summary 
information will be presented at the level of the individual clinical team.  
Patients are to have access to similar information, published by other interested agencies 
with access to the centrally submitted returns but will also have access to internet 
resources that will help them to understand their own conditions and the associated 
clinical best practice. 
9.3.2 : National Programme Perspective 
Table 9.2 summarises the view at the level of the National Programme. 
Table 9.2 : Problem Solvers : National Programme 
Problem Situation Problem Solving 
Methodology 
Interpretive Scheme 
Six worlds : 
political, commercial, 
technical, clinical, 
personal (societal), 
academic (Greenhalgh et 
al., 2010) 
Centrally determined 
Standards and 
Procurement.  
Clusters of providers 
pool expertise to supply 
national level 
infrastructure as well as 
generic, best of breed 
systems from limited 
market, to replace local 
systems. 
Clinical Engagement. 
Person-based information, 
integrated systems, 
electronic records, 
Management Information 
from Operational Systems, 
secure and confidential 
information flows. 
National Systems 
Architecture. 
NHS Direct (On-Line) 
NHS Choices 
HealthSpace 
National Care Records 
Service. 
At the National Programme level, the problem situation that problem solvers face 
represents the social and cultural interplay of the six worlds, identified by Greenhalgh 
et al. (2010) : political, commercial, technical, clinical, personal and academic. 
In the political world, the unitary structure of a national programme, in which a single 
political entity is furnished by a tiny number of commercial suppliers, is placed in 
apposition with a plural NHS where differentiated forms of provision are presently 
being encouraged to proliferate.  
In the commercial world, companies who have invested now wish to profit by selling 
their products to the market. The inherent risk is that suppliers pre-empt clinicians own 
appreciation of their needs.  
The clinical world is seen as an information-rich environment where computers can 
automatically transfer and disperse information, minimising human agency and 
enabling strategic goals. 
The personal world refers to the patient and I prefer to designate a societal world to 
locate the issues, of confidentiality, privacy, information governance and ownership of 
the medical record, that concern not only individuals but also the broadest social groups. 
The academic world exists to identify and enlighten zones of incomplete 
understanding, within and between these other worlds. 
The problem solving methodology for the National Programme has included : 
 Centrally determined Standards and Procurement : both of infrastructure 
(national networks and databases) and systems to replace the existing systems of 
individual Trusts. Bacon & Pugh (2006) have argued the economic case for the 
local, rather than the national commissioning of replacement systems.  
 Clusters of providers which pool expertise to supply national level 
infrastructure as well as generic, best of breed systems from limited market, to 
replace local systems. 
 Clinical Engagement, whereby clinical champions are appointed to span the 
boundaries between Greenhalghs six worlds and to recruit the commitment of 
clinical colleagues to support the introduction of information systems and the 
strategic goals they inscribe.  
The world-view (interpretive scheme) of the National Programme has been 
constructed in terms of integrated systems, electronic records, Management Information 
from Operational Systems, secure and confidential information flows, and a consent 
model for the storage, use and dissemination of personal information. A National 
Systems Architecture has developed electronic records, e-prescribing and electronic 
booking of appointments, complemented by the National Electronic Library for Health, 
HealthSpace (where patients can browse their own medical record and store their own 
information) and various NHS-branded sources of health information for professionals 
and the public. 
In this world view, all of these resources appear problem-free. They are there, ready to 
be used and people can be trained or helped towards complete, accurate and committed 
participation in prescribed forms of computer use. 
9.3.3 : Service Provider Perspective 
The view at the level of the service provider is set out in table 9.3. 
Table 9.3 : Problem Solvers : Service Providers 
Problem Situation Problem Solving 
Methodology 
Interpretive Scheme 
Downward pressure on 
organisational costs. 
Need to generate mandated 
information returns in the 
new forms required by 
Liberating the NHS. 
Contested provision. 
Need to use summary 
information as a basis for 
organisational learning. 
Local IT programmes 
independent from other 
programmes of 
organisational change. 
Local expertise in 
technical informatics not 
supported by equivalent 
expertise in social 
informatics. 
Commission useful and 
usable information 
systems. 
Local clinical champions 
span organisational and 
cultural boundaries 
between the six worlds. 
Information systems seen 
as a source of immediate 
and concrete costs, 
compared with remote and 
uncertain benefits. 
The dominant feature of the problem situation faced by service providers is the 
downward pressure on organisational costs, required by an external economic regulator 
and intensified at present by the economic climate. Contested provision will heighten 
both the insecurity of revenues and the need to develop local capacity, to generate 
information and to respond to information, in a process of organisational learning. 
Phased out as national indicators, the time-limited waiting list targets, which have 
driven the enthusiasm of non-clinical NHS planners and managers towards structured 
models of clinical care (clinical pathways), are likely to persist as locally important 
indices of access and institutional competitiveness. They will be supplemented by the 5-
10 nationally mandated quality statements which NICE will develop over the coming 
five years, applicable to every patient assigned to each of 150 diagnoses (United 
Kingdom Department of Health, 2010b : para. 3.12-3.13). These will serve as local 
indices of clinical effectiveness and Value for Money and feed into the providers 
quality accounts. 
The limited responsiveness of nationally mandated IT providers to local priorities is a 
second important feature of service providers problem situation, allowing the suppliers 
of systems to pre-empt local specification of information systems users needs. Local 
expertise in technical informatics is not supported by equivalent expertise in social 
informatics. As a result, users needs are inadequately expressed and service providers 
can only purchase information systems from a supplier-driven market. 
In a climate of contested service provision, NHS service providers need to adapt in an 
agile fashion to ensure their own survival. They need information systems that not only 
provide third party monitors with summary reports and feed intensive local 
organisational learning but also help clinical teams to work as productively as possible. 
Providers problem solving methodology will overlap with that of the National 
programme inasmuch as local clinical champions will lead the clinical engagement 
that is intended to facilitate clinicians acceptance of pre-specified information systems. 
Clinical champions will exercise their ambassadorial role between managers and 
clinical colleagues by virtue of their capacity to span boundaries : between their own 
organisation, the National Programmes officers and the commercial providers of 
information systems. Their advocacy for the institutional aspects of the project will be 
one-sided unless it also provides the conduit for an articulate presentation, to the 
commercial world, of front-line users own world.  
For the local information programme not to be interpreted primarily as a source of costs, 
it is crucial to incorporate it within a broader world view. Its inescapable context is the 
wider concerns of the parent provider institution. These include the soft debates about 
the organisations place within an interdependent health economy, compared with its 
struggle for survival in a contested environment, as well as the hard debates which 
link the various concurrent projects and programmes likely to be to be present in any 
provider organisation whose building and capital programmes and management 
structures have not yet reached their final perfection. Hand in hand with the introduction 
of new IT and new business processes goes the reconfiguration of roles and jobs and the 
whole is supported by an overall programme of organisational development (figure 
8.9.1). 
9.3.4 : Patients Perspective 
Table 9.4 presents a Patients perspective. 
Table 9.4 : Problem Solvers : Patients 
For patients, the problem situation is characterised by poor access to my general 
practitioner, intensified by policies which have rewarded the accumulation of large 
practice populations. General practitioners operate appointment systems and can ration 
short notice (emergency) appointments in their own surgeries.  
A variety of alternative providers of different services have sprung up. Within the NHS, 
these include NHS Direct call centres, Walk-in Centres and GP Out of Hour Centres. As 
a result, many members of the public are bewildered by choice. 
It has been useful for policy makers to mobilise public anxiety and loss of confidence in 
healthcare providers in order to drive change, both in clinical practice and organisation 
and in the emotional affiliation of the general public with their traditional providers. 
Problem Situation Problem Solving 
Methodology 
Interpretive Scheme 
Poor access to my GP 
Bewildered by choice. 
Dented confidence in 
public-funded healthcare 
inflamed by politicians and 
pressure groups. 
Variable commitment to 
maintenance of a personal, 
patient-held record. 
Comparison websites and 
word of mouth inform 
mobility between 
providers. 
Safety, convenience and 
personal cost of healthcare. 
Personal ownership of health data is encouraged through patient-held records and 
MyHealthSpace. Patients vary both between individuals and over time. The intensity of 
current health experience influences personal commitment and capacity to maintain the 
patient-editable portion of a personal health record, so that these factors cannot be taken 
for granted . 
Politicians and pressure groups have emphasised the safety and convenience of 
healthcare as the battleground for change in the quality as well as the efficiency of state-
funded healthcare. The personal cost of healthcare is minimised by the social solidarity 
enshrined in the founding principles of the NHS. 
The policy of the last government as well as the new coalition has been to encourage 
public use of comparison websites to inform mobility between providers on a rational 
basis. Members of the public will also base their choices on more socially constructed 
forms of word of mouth exchanges : of personal preference and experience, between 
individuals.  
9.4   :   P O L I C Y   I M P L I C A T I O N S   O F   T H E   R E S E A R C H 
9.4.1 : Should Information be Person Based ? 
The first promise of Information for Health was, information will be person based.  
Patients do not exist as such until there is a health problem and a care-giver. At that 
point, a complex relationship comes to life, between each of these three elements and an 
aspect of an information system. The NHS needs patient-centric information systems to 
be complemented by institution-centric systems, which enable organisational learning 
about the care-giving institution to be translated into effective and possibly radical 
organisational change, and disease-centric systems that enable the refinement of clinical 
knowledge and methods. 
9.4.2 : The Concept of Integrated Systems Needs Radical Reappraisal. 
When Information for Health promised integrated systems, it addressed the salient 
problem that there were too many providers, of too many information systems that 
could not exchange data across incompatible electronic interfaces. 
The concept of integrated systems now needs radical reappraisal : radical, because data 
processing functions are relatively easy to reduce to a closed system of electronic 
interfacing rules with general effect but the integration of interactions between people 
and the demands, constraints and choices within any given situation is a complex, open 
system, whose primary component is a human judgement, made in a specific context. 
The reappraisal of systems integration is, therefore, radical in a second sense : 
integration at the electronic level is safely regarded as a logistical outcome but 
integration at the human, social level can only be a deliberative process, determined 
immediately by the technical aspects of the problem situation on a given occasion, 
influenced secondarily by ethical, legal and procedural externalities, and often 
negotiated with other occupants of the problem situation. The level of justifiable 
confidence in likely outcomes, shared between participants in the clinical situation 
determines whether a patient can be passed safely from one process step to the next. 
The third reason to reappraise the concept of integrated systems is that the codified and 
commodified information they are supposed to distribute is not information at all. It is 
no more than data.  
Data represent a situation stripped of context and nuance by the sender and interpreted, 
in at least partial ignorance of the senders knowledge and intentions, by the receiver. 
We need to distinguish more clearly between the data that can be transferred uncritically 
from one sink to the next and the information which is actively constructed in the 
clinical environment, by people with access to other data. 
9.4.3 : Management Information from Operational Systems is  
an Obvious but Insufficient Primary Rationale for Planners and Managers  
to provide Clinical Staff with Healthcare Information Systems. 
The dissolution of Big Government in favour of Big Society has its parallel in the 
orientation of managers and planners towards the clinical workforce.  
Current policy for health is to eliminate unnecessary external control of local activity. 
To enable the representation of performance to the outside world and score 
satisfactorily on planners key performance indicators, clinicians within the production 
system will need information systems that enable the thing in itself : the capacity to 
work fluently and autonomously and pull work along the healthcare production chain. 
9.4.4 : Electronic Records 
To date, the National Programme has concentrated on the feasibility of patient-owned 
records and the use of the Summary Care Record to facilitate clinicians decision 
making, when patients cannot provide a complete oral account of their own medical 
history and management plan. 
A major challenge for clinical engagement will be for clinicians to switch from 
unstructured, paper records to more structured, electronic forms. Amongst the 
implications are the following :  
 The clinician, the planner/manager and the patient can all be expected to have 
conflicting claims on the purpose of the record and it cannot be assumed that 
these will be reconciled easily 
 The form of the record will dictate whether the designers theory of its use will 
correspond with its use in practice  
 The goodness of fit between the accounting and the clinical collaborative 
functions of the record will affect the fluency of clinical work and the patients 
experience of clinical care 
 The difference, between the data suitable for logistic, accounting purposes and 
the more expressive forms of communication needed to support safe clinical 
activity, may mean that information is not a free good. Strategic gains in the 
form of reduced head count, from the automated abolition of data processing 
tasks, may be diluted by the need to re-deploy back-room coding staff into new 
forms of clerical activity nearer the point of clinical care.  
Policy, legislation and ethics related to medical records need to take account that : 
 Patients see the medical record as a repository for their confidential medical data 
 Clinicians see the medical record as a place to describe, explain and justify their 
own actions and to record the outcomes of their personal practice, within the 
transformational aspect of public service 
 Planners and Managers see the record as a source of data for accounting, within 
the transactional aspect of public service. 
9.4.5 : Secure and Confidential Information, Shared Throughout the NHS 
Information for Health promised that secure and confidential, person-based information 
would be shared across the NHS. It emphasised data distribution and ignored the critical 
question of data input. 
Data distribution implies the mechanical organisation of data within an inherently 
stable, internally consistent, closed system. It implies a single clinician, describing some 
aspects of a single patient to an anonymous third party, represented by a machine. 
Clinicians do not distribute data to an impersonal machine as their primary task. They 
communicate on a human level, with each other and with patients, who can consent to 
specific actions when the occasion requires. When they receive data, they browse from 
one source to the next. The integrating factor not the machine but the reader. 
Clinical communication takes place within a social system which is open to external 
cues that nuance the matter communicated, alter the conditions for communication and 
introduce complexity. It implies a total situation, in a busy surgery, clinic or ward, 
where clinicians, faced with multiple patients at multiple stages on a variety of patient 
journeys, consult a variety of electronic resources and communicate with other 
clinicians, directly as well as through the data machine.  
The implication for  Connecting for Health is that a change of emphasis is 
required : to look beyond electronic compatibility between data processing 
systems, and to focus on the detailed nature and context of clinical communication. 
The programme should now be re-designated, Communicating for Health. 
9.5   :   A   N E W   A P P R O A C H    
T O   T H E   N A T I O N A L   P R O G R A M M E 
9.5.1 : The National Programme as a Mega Structures 
The success of the National Programme has been to establish the standards necessary 
for electronic interfacing, to establish national databases and to enhance massively, 
workplace access to computers.  
In turn, for example, access to national databases allows reception staff to identify a 
patients GP from minimal information. Clinicians are better equipped to access the 
British National Formulary from the bedside or to refer to any of number of clinical 
guidelines or knowledge repositories such as TOXBASE (the National Poisons 
Information Service database) or the National Library for Health.  
Access to local databases enables staff to identify their own tasks as well as enhancing 
operational control and audit by supervisory staff. PACS (Picture Archiving and 
Communication System) is a special form of local database, from which images can be 
disseminated locally or internationally through electronically compatible, intermediate 
channels. Despite this, the remote interpretation of images often raises questions which 
cannot be resolved without reference to the original patient. 
The first significant failure of the National Programme has been to create conditions for 
provider-capture of the market for the products that clinicians will use. The supplier is 
able to place limits on what is feasible to alter within the purchased specification. The 
urge is to achieve transfer of risk, from the supplier to the local clinicians, through the 
signing of acceptance agreements, within the time-scale set for the project.  
A market with a single consumer (the National Programme) and an oligopoly of 
providers is destined to fail in its twin purpose, of efficiently matching demand, supply 
and price, and disaggregating decision making by sovereign consumers with 
differentiated profiles of need. 
Bacon & Pugh (2006) have suggested a policy of local procurement according to 
national standards. This policy would develop the market. It would create pressure for 
information systems accurately to reflect users needs and for software and data models 
to be resilient to the natural tendency of people, to improvise rather than follow 
prescribed routines of computer use. 
An inventory of required functionalities will not be enough. A policy of local 
procurement will require clinicians to develop a plan of understanding and expression 
that will enable their critical appraisal of information systems in the context of clinical 
work. 
The National Programmes second major shortcoming has been in taking a step too far 
by shifting custody of the medical record from the general practitioner to an anonymous 
electronic megastructure. There is a parallel with information policy to protect 
vulnerable children. 
Announcing the decommissioning of the ContactPoint childrens database the 
Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Education stated : 
Instead of a database containing millions of childrens details, accessed by hundreds 
of thousands of practitioners, we are examining the case for a more proportionate 
approach to supporting front line professionals to help protect vulnerable children from 
harm it was disproportionate and unjustifiable to hold records on every child in 
the country, making them accessible to large numbers of people. Accordingly, we are 
exploring the practicality of a new national signposting service which would focus on 
helping practitioners find out whether another practitioner was working or has 
previously worked, in another authority area, with the same child. (United Kingdom : 
House of Commons Hansard ; Ministerial Statements for July 22nd. 2010). 
The introduction of electronic patient records has been mired in controversy over the 
appropriate (opt-in vs opt-out) national-level consent model for access to the summary 
care record, because patients have feared the intrusion of anonymous third parties on 
random occasions. The role-based access controls intended to assure confidentiality 
have been designed without a clear understanding that collaborating clinicians often act 
as each others proxies, so that many information-related roles are highly ambiguous. 
Because of this, the construction of rule sets may prove unmanageably complex.  
The National Programme has envisaged a strategic treatment of the patient as an 
information subject within a national data processing system. It ought to have treated 
the patient at a more human level, as a participant in equitable clinical discourse with a 
clinician. 
9.5.2 : Microstructures : Bringing the National Programme Down to Earth 
The images of a unitary NHS and a unitary information programme have provided a 
useful label on the can, a succinct representation of the megastructure to the outside 
world. However, the simplicity of expression has failed in both cases to convey the 
complex, open and chaotic nature of the whole system that is represented.  
The can is a can of worms. The whole system is a writhing mass of interacting sub-
systems with different orientations and different purposes, each aligned with the whole 
but never, necessarily, fully aligned with its neighbours. There is no absolute, rigid and 
static structure of relationships. They are fluid and dynamic, even if there is a strong 
tendency for similar alignments to recur, time after time. The source of stability over 
time is not physical but social : a result of human agency, based on values, beliefs and 
organisational policies that are susceptible to the-influence of events. Ethics and 
malleable social conventions contribute to stable and resilient structures alongside 
automated, inflexible, mechanistic rules. 
These observations argue for a concept of integration, whether of social or computer 
systems, that is focused locally, on a small scale. Integration is not automated but 
performed by members of identified practice communities who understand their own, 
as well as each others business intimately. 
The NHS and its National Programme for IT encapsulate complex aggregations of 
individual interactions between structures on a smaller scale. Every interaction 
represents at least two individuals or groups, each with more than one commitment. 
There is necessarily a mutual commitment but this is limited by the force of each partys 
other, asymmetrical commitments, external to the relationship. 
As a concrete example, the architects of the Choose and Book system have assumed a 
mutual and symmetrical commitment, by appointments officers and GPs, to the 
concept of patient choice. Despite this, the design has ignored important aspects of the 
relationship between enacting the political philosophy of choice and other events 
within the GP consultation, even if it has successfully aligned booking with other 
aspects of hospital administration. 
In a political climate that rejects Big government in favour of Big Society, the use of 
information technology as a wholesale arm of e-government is less important than its 
role in facilitating individual interactions between clinicians and patients. To be 
successful instruments of policy, information systems in the NHS now need to be 
closely aligned with the actuality of clinical practice, where ethical goals are achieved 
through the alternation of disciplined and improvisory deployment of rules. Big 
Society favours a form of electronic record lodged near to the patient rather than in a 
national repository and it favours an occasioned model of consent for access to the 
medical record, similar to the consent a patient gives before an operation. 
9.6 :  N E W   M O D E L   C L I N I C A L   E N G A G E M E N T 
Clinical engagement has been proposed as a political means, to recruit clinicians to help 
manoeuvre an apparently self-justified information juggernaut into place, to support the 
strategic goals of the NHS megastructure.  
These goals are only achievable through the operation of interacting microstructures, 
constituted and mediated by people in the front line of clinical activity, in countless 
contacts between patients and clinicians. 
9.6.1 : A New Model of Change 
The model of change required in New Model Clinical Engagement is shown in table 
9.5 : 
Table 9.5 : The Change Model Implicit in New Model Clinical Engagement 
9.6.2 : A Shift in Emphasis 
New model clinical engagement will transform an emphasis on mass data flows into a 
concentration on the place of information inputs and information access in the clinical 
context. The soft discourse that negotiates the purpose and orientation of information 
systems will adequately reflect the voices of front line clinical teams who will need to 
reflect closely on personal experience of data input and data access in busy clinical 
settings. The hard discourse about the information model at the heart of a clinical 
information system will shift from a model of data transfer, to a broader appreciation of 
the way clinicians actively assemble their working understanding in their own specific 
clinical situation and align data input with primary clinical tasks. 
9.6.3 : Representation Out, Participation In 
It is difficult to develop this debate in an assembly of representative clinicians from 
different workplaces, especially if their brief is restricted to comment on aspects of the 
human computer interface that might impede acceptance. It needs clinicians and 
Old Change Model New Change Model 
Linear, programmatic. 
Goal-oriented. 
Reductive. 
Impact of context is eliminated from goal 
definition. 
Recursive, exploratory. 
Learning-oriented. 
Emergent. 
Impact of context is fully acknowledged as 
goals emerge from exploration of 
consensus and dissensus. 
managers from the same workplace to place this aspect of planning and problem solving 
in the wider context of their own specific organisation, where the IT development 
programme sits alongside its building programme, its clinical management structure and 
its human resource programme. 
9.7   :   C O N C L U S I O N S   O N   P O L I C Y 
Government and policy control the relationship between the state, powerful, interested 
groups and the individual. Applied to healthcare, these three elements map out in two 
triangular relationships. 
First, they map onto the relationship between, respectively, the governance structure of 
the NHS, the institutions of the NHS and the individual patient.  
Second, they map onto the relationship between the governance structure of NHS 
institutions, the commercial IT sector and the individual healthcare worker.  
Within the first relationship, government faces an ethical dilemma : whether to apply a 
utilitarian ethic to the establishment of national scale databases, so that all are subject to 
the same regime in case any is at risk ; or whether to accept a higher risk for the 
unidentified, special individual to assure the privacy of the general individual. 
Transformational Government presented information technology as the enabler of 
change aimed to emancipate the individual from the political mass. The impact in the 
case of healthcare has been to create an information mega-structure, designed to cater 
for an assumed need and remote from the individual and the needs actually expressed. 
The political philosophy of Big Society corresponds with the future cutting down to 
size of Big government and Big IT. The future it implies includes data structures 
nearer to the patient and to the health professionals he is most likely to encounter : in his 
own locality rather than some remote town or city.  
Plans in the new white paper, to transfer the commissioning of healthcare to consortia of 
GPs, will create an obvious demand for data flows across practice boundaries for 
strategic and transactional purposes as consortia grow, consolidate and become remote 
from communities.  Patients will continue to need the focus to fall on the provision, to 
the professionals on whom they rely, of IT resources that facilitate operational 
communication on a human scale, within the context of the physical delivery of 
healthcare.  
Within the second relationship, Transformational Government implied that the 
technology could be taken for granted as defined, supplied and put into place. It 
overlooked the reality that change is brought about by people who assimilate technology 
in order to achieve specific goals and navigate specific constraints, within specific 
work situations on specific occasions.  
It has been easy for front-line healthcare staff to be sidelined during the development of 
the relationship between an NHS institution and a commercial provider. After design, 
purchase and testing, it is only in the implementation phase that representative 
individuals are recruited in a significant way as agents of  pre-determined change. The 
terms of the relationship need to alter. 
To assure the efficient delivery of effective, useful and usable information technology, 
capability building programmes must take account that genuine transformation of public 
services is not achieved directly by enabling the transactional data flows that process 
people and data. It is only achieved directly by enabling the transformational 
activities of those at the front line of service delivery.  
Capability building programmes must avoid concentrating on the manipulation of 
clinicians attitudes towards the new machines and instead must enable suppliers, 
institutional change agents and teams of clinicians themselves, in multiple workplaces, 
to appreciate and articulate the working context in which the technology is to be made 
at home as a guest rather than a proprietor. 
New model clinical engagement with the IT programme is, therefore, not an 
occasional activity, where prominent individuals represent the IT programme to the 
workforce and vice versa. It is a more intense and local activity, where front line teams 
participate in continuous quality improvement activities that clearly demonstrate the 
actual and effective introduction of information and communications technology, to 
solve immediately relevant, locally identified, operational problems. It takes place 
within the wider context of a local programme to reconfigure services and develop the 
capabilities of people to fulfil new clinical, informational and organisational roles.  
It also requires a stimulus for commercial providers to develop their own capability, to 
engage with clinicians and develop their products in close and responsive partnership 
with the clinical teams who will use them. This will lead to products that are highly 
customised by end-user teams, with maximum control over the process exerted locally 
rather than in the technical department of the software house.  
The policy that moderates the two triangular relationships places rhetorical emphasis on 
the patient but the preference demonstrated in practice has been for the establishment of 
accounting structures over the facilitation of front-line clinical communication that 
underpins the patients relationship with the NHS and its clinicians. Accounting 
structures can underpin and drive organisational learning but learning has to be 
implemented, in the form of better clinical practice. This requires better IT support for 
workplace documentation and communication. 
In constructing a relationship between the governance structure of the NHS, the 
institutions of the NHS and the general patient, the National Programme for IT has 
isolated the individual patient from context with his care-givers and the situations where 
care is given. 
The Programme has exemplified the careful construction of an effective relationship 
between the governance structures of NHS institutions and the commercial sector but 
this has yet to be paralleled in a similar, responsive relationship between the commercial 
sector and the teams of individuals who interact on a daily basis, at the clinical front 
line, where the policy outcomes of government interventions are created. 
C H A P T E R   T E N  
C O N C L U S I O N   O F   T H E   T H E S I S 
The effectiveness of clinical engagement is presently limited by clinicians opportunity 
and capacity to convey the complexity of information systems practice in the clinical 
situation. The purpose of the present thesis has been to recruit the contribution of the 
academic world in the form of models and conceptual approaches that can equip 
clinicians, independent from external agencies - consultancies and commercial 
providers - so that they can express their perspectives to best effect themselves, 
alongside those of planners, managers and patients. 
Review of the literature has uncovered contrasting depictions of the NHS, the National 
Programme and the individual clinical workplace, as problems for research to be 
conducted about and problem situations for research to be conducted within. 
In the first instance, the only product can be theory. In the second, we come closer, if 
not to solving real, important problems in the world, then, at least, to assisting their 
negotiation in ways that are defensible even if they are not absolute. 
The research, conducted in the context where the National Programme is to be 
implemented, has similarly highlighted the contrast in importance, between the 
circulation of data about the workplace and the more chaotic exchange of information 
within the work situation. It reminds us that the NHS, the National Programme and the 
individual clinical workplace are not inert things which can be manipulated, physically 
or intellectually, in a strategic way. They are, fundamentally, collections of people and 
groups with commitments, to rules, social conventions and ethical value systems, that 
are not amenable to calculation and planning because they are situated and occasioned 
in regions of experience whose horizons only fuse partially. Together, they represent a 
problem situation that can only be approached successfully from within. 
The intellectual journey represented by this thesis is from an initial position, stating and 
affirming a particular world view and aligning all other world views around it. The 
position reached is one where it is possible to comprehend and tolerate plural accounts 
of the same situation without the urge to effect an immediate reconciliation. 
This is a move from a stance founded on a stable belief, about what the world is like, 
to a stance that can adjust to a broader range of speculations, about what the world 
could be like,  for a given set of events to occur, in the world as it is being 
appreciated, by different groups and individuals, in different ways that can be 
investigated and understood. 
R E F E R E N C E S  
Adler PS et al. (2008). Professional work: the emergence of collaborative community. 
Organization Science , 19 ; 2 : (359-376). 
Aggelidis VP, Chatzoglou PD (2008). Methods for evaluating hospital information 
systems: a literature review. EuroMed Journal of Business, 3 (1) 99-118. 
Ammenwerth E et al. (2003). Evaluation of health information systems: problems and 
challenges. International Journal Of Medical Informatics, 71 : (125-135). 
Ammenwerth E et al. (2004). Visions and strategies to improve evaluation of health 
information systems reflections and lessons based on the HIS_EVAL workshop in 
Innsbruck. International Journal Of Medical Informatics 73 : (479-491). 
Anderson R et al. (undated) Open Letter to the Health Select Committee . 
http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~rja14/Papers/temp.doc. (accessed 18.Nov.2009). 
Andreu R, Ciborra C (1996). Organisational learning and core capabilities 
development: the role of IT. Journal of Strategic Information Systems , 5 (111-127). 
Anonymous (2009) Call for papers : Special Issue on the Kleinian approach to 
Information System Research. European Journal of Information Systems . 
Avison DE, Baskerville R, Myers M (2001). Controlling action research projects. 
Information, Technology & People , 14 ; 1 : (28-45). 
Avison DE, Wood-Harper AT (1990). Multiview an Exploration in Information Systems 
Development . Blackwell Scientific : Oxford.  
Avison DE, Wood-Harper AT (2003). Bringing Social and Organisational Issues into 
Information Systems Development: the story of Multiview. In Clarke S et al., Socio-
technical and human cognition aspects of information systems. Information Science 
Publishing : London. 
Avison DE, Wood-Harper AT et al. (1998). A further exploration into information 
systems development: the evolution of Multiview2. Information, Technology & 
People, 11 ; 2 : (124-139). 
Bacon R, Pugh J (2006). Information Technology in the NHS: what next ?. House of 
Commons. London. 
Basden A (2002). The critical theory of Herman Dooyeweerd. Journal of Information 
Technology , 17 : (257-269). 
Baskerville R (1999). Investigating information systems with action research (tutorial) 
Communications of the Association for Information Systems , 2 ; Article 19, October.  
Baskerville R, Pries-Heje J (1999). Grounded action research: a method for 
understanding IT in practice. Accounting, Management & Information Technologies , 9 
: (1-23). 
Baskerville R, Wood-Harper AT (1998). Diversity in information systems action 
research methods. European Journal of Information Systems 7 : (90-107). 
Becker J, Niehaves B (2007). Epistemological perspectives on IS research: a 
framework for analysing and systematizing epistemological assumptions. Information 
Systems Journal , 17 : (197-214). 
Beer S (1972). The Brain of the Firm . Allen Lane : London.  
Bell S, Wood-Harper T (1989). Rapid Information Systems Development: A Non-
Specialists Guide to Systems Analysis and Design in an Imperfect World . McGraw-
Hill : London.  
Bell S, Wood-Harper T (2003). How to set up Information Systems a non-specialists 
guide to the Multiview approach . Earthscan : London.  
Benbasat I, Zmud R (1999). Empirical research in Information Systems: the practice of 
relevance. MISQ , 23 ; 1 : (3-16). 
Benner P (1984). From novice to expert : excellence and power in clinical nursing 
practice. Menlo Park, Calif., London : Addison-Wesley. 
Bennetts PDC, Wood-Harper T (2003). Extensions to Churchmanian inquiring systems 
in order to support learning in organisations and group support environments. 7th 
Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems (p.1663-1673). Adelaide, South 
Australia.  
Benson T (2002a). Why general practitioners use information systems and hospital 
doctors do not  Part 1: incentives. BMJ 325 (1086-1089). 
Benson T (2002b). Why general practitioners use information systems and hospital 
doctors do not  Part 2: scalability. BMJ, 325 (1090-1093). 
Berg & Timmermans (2000). Orders and their others: on the constitution of 
universalities in medical work. Configurations, 8 : (31-61). 
Berg M (1996). Practices of reading and writing: the constitutive role of the medical 
record in medical work. Sociology of Health & Illness , 18 ; 4 : (499-524). 
Berg M (1997). Problems and promises of the protocol. Soc.Sci.Med. , 44 ; 8 : (1081-
Berg M (1999a). Accumulating and coordinating: occasions for information 
technologies in medical work. Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 8 : (373-401). 
Berg M (1999b). Patient care information systems and health care work: a socio-
technical approach. International Journal of Medical Informatics , 55 : (87-101). 
Berg M (2001). Implementing information systems in healthcare organisations: myths 
and challenges. International Journal of Medical Informatics , 64 : (143-156). 
Berwick DM (1996). A primer on leading the improvement of systems. BMJ , 312 : 
(619-622). 
Berwick DM (1998). Developing and testing changes in care. Annals of Internal 
Medicine , 128 (651-656). 
Berwick DM (2001). Not again  Preventing errors lies in redesign-not exhortation. 
BMJ , 322 : (247-248). 
Berwick DM, Nolan TW (1998). Physicians as leaders in improving healthcare. 
Annals of Internal Medicine , 128 (289-292). 
Beynon-Davies P (1999). Human error and information systems failure: the case of the 
London Ambulance Service computer-aided despatch system project. Interacting with 
Computers , 11 ; 6 : (699-720). 
Boland RJ (1985). Phenomenology: a preferred approach to information systems. in 
Mumford E et al. (Eds.) : Research Methods in Information Systems. Proceedings of the 
IFIP WG 8.2 Colloquium Manchester Business School, 1-3 September,1984. (p.193-
201). North-Holland : Amsterdam, New York, Oxford.  
Booch G, Rumbaugh J, Jacobson I  (1999).   The Unified Modelling Language . 
Addison Wesley : Reading MA.  
Bowns I, Rotherham G, Paisley S (1999). Factors associated with success in the 
implementation of information management and technology in the NHS. Health 
Informatics Journal , 5 : (136-145). 
Brennan S (2005). The NHS IT Project The biggest computer project in the 
worldever . Radcliffe : Oxford.  
Brennan S (2007). The biggest computer programme in the world ever Hows it 
going?. Journal of Information Technology , 22 ; 3 : (202-211). 
Britten N (1995). Qualitative interviews in medical research. BMJ , 311 : (251-25). 
Brooke C (2002a). Critical research in information systems: issue 1. Journal of 
Information Technology , 17 : (45-47). 
Brooke C (2002b). What does it mean to be critical in IS research?. Journal of 
Information Technology , 17 : (49-57). 
Brooke C (2002c). Critical research in information systems: issue 2. Journal of 
Information Technology , 17 : (179-183). 
Brooke C (2002d). Critical perspectives on information systems: an impression of the 
research landscape. Journal of Information Technology , 17 : (271-283). 
Bryman A (1989). Research Methods and Organization Studies . Unwin Hyman : 
London.  
Bunch C (1992). Developing a hospital information strategy: a clinician's view. BMJ , 
304 : (1033-1036). 
Burrell G, Morgan G (1979). Sociological Paradigms and Organisational Analysis . 
Heinemann : London.  
Butler T (1998). Towards a hermeneutic method for interpretive studies in information 
systems. Journal Of Information Technology , 13 : (285-300). 
Butler T, Murphy K (2007). Understanding the design of information technologies for 
knowledge management in organizations: a pragmatic perspective. Information 
Systems Journal , 17 : (143-163). 
Bygstad et al. (2010) Four integration patterns: a socio-technical approach to 
integration in IS development projects. Information Systems Journal, 20 : (53-80). 
Byng R, Norman I, Redfern S (2005). Using realistic evaluation to evaluate a practice-
level intervention to improve primary healthcare for patients with long-term mental 
illness. Evaluation 11 ; 1 : (69-93). 
Caldicott F (1997). The Caldicott Committee: Report on the review of patient-
identifiable information. The Department of Health : London.  
Callon M (1986). Some elements of a sociology of translation : domestication of the 
scallops and the fishermen of St.Brieuc Bay. In Law J. Power, action and belief: a new 
sociology of knowledge ?. London : Routledge (196-223). 
Car J et al. (2008). The impact of e-health on the quality and safety of healthcare. 
Report for the NHS Connecting for Health Evaluation Programme. London : Imperial 
College, Edinburgh : Edinburgh University. 
Cayton H (2005). Some thoughts on medical professionalism and regulation. Defining 
and Developing Professionalism Conference. Association for the Study of Medical 
Education, 28th. April, 2005.   
Chang LJ, Powell P (1998). Towards a framework for business process re-
engineeering in small and medium-sized enterprises. Information Systems Journal , 8 
(199-215). 
Chantler C, Clarke T, Grainger R (2006). Information technology in the English 
National Health Service. JAMA , 18 : (2255-2258). 
Checkland P (1999). Soft Systems Methodology: A 30 Year Retrospective.  
Wiley : Chichester.  
Checkland P, (1981). Systems Thinking, Systems Practice . Wiley : Chichester.  
Checkland P, Holwell S (1998). Information, Systems and Information Systems .  
Wiley : Chichester.  
Checkland P, Scholes J (1990). Soft Systems Methodology in Action .  
Wiley : Chichester.  
Chua WF (1986). Radical developments in accounting thought. The Accounting 
Review , LXI ; 4 : (601-632). 
Churchman CW (1971). The Design of Inquiring Systems . Basic Books : New York.  
Ciborra C (2006). Imbrication of representations: risk and digital technologies. 
Journal of Management Studies , 43 ; 6 : (1341-1356). 
Ciborra CU (1998). Crisis and foundations: an inquiry into the nature and limit of 
models and methods in the information systems discipline. Journal of Strategic 
Information Systems , 7 : (5-16). 
Ciborra CU (1999). Notes on improvisation and time in organisations. Accting., 
Mgmnt. & Info Tech. , 9 : (77-94). 
Ciborra CU, Hanseth O (1998). From tool to Gestell agendas for managing the 
information infrastructure. Information, Technology & People , 11 ; 4 : (305-327). 
Clarke K, Hughes J, Rouncefield M, Hemmings T (2006). When a Bed is not a Bed: 
Calculation and Calculability in Complex Organisational Settings. in Clarke K, 
Hardstone G, Rouncefield M, Summerville I (Eds.) Trust in Technology a 
sociotechnical perspective . Springer :Netherlands.  
Clegg C, Shepherd C (2007). The biggest computer programme in the world ever : 
time for a change in mindset?. Journal of Information Technology , 22 ; 3 : (212-221). 
Clemmer TP et al. (1998). Cooperation: the foundation of improvement Annals of 
Internal Medicine , 128 (1004-1009). 
Coiera E (2000). When conversation is better than computation. Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association , 7 ; 3 : (277-286). 
Coiera E, Tombs V (1998). Communication behaviours in a hospital setting: an 
observational study. BMJ , 316 : (673-676). 
Collinson D, Plant K (2006). Fifty Major Philosophers . Routledge : Oxford.  
Cordella A (2007). e-Government: towards the e-bureaucratic form. Journal of 
Information Technology , 22 ; 3 : (265-274). 
Cordoba J-R (2009). Critical reflection in planning information systems: a contribution 
from critical systems thinking. Information Systems Journal , 19 : (123-147). 
Cresswell JW, (1998). Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design choosing among five 
traditions . Sage : London.  
Crocker T, Johnson O, King S (2009). The suitability of care pathways for integrating 
processes and systems in healthcare. Transforming Government: People, Process and 
Policy. 3 (3) (289-301). 
Crotty M (1998). The Foundations of Social Research . Sage : London.  
Currie WL, Guah M (2007). Conflicting institutional logics: a national programme for 
IT in the organisational field of healthcare. Journal of Information Technology, 22 ; 3 : 
(235-247). 
Davenport T, Markus L (1999). Rigor vs. Relevance revisited: Response to Benbasat 
& Zmud. MISQ , 23 ; 1 : (19-23). 
Davidson E, Chiasson M (2005). Contextual influences on technology use mediation: a 
comparative analysis of electronic medical record systems. European Journal of 
Information Systems, 14 (6-18). 
Davison RM, Martinsons MG, Kock N (2004). Principles of canonical action 
research. Information Systems Journal , 14 : (65-86). 
De Lone WH, McLean ER (2003). The De Lone and McLean Information Systems 
Success model: a ten year update.  Journal of Management Information Systems , 19 ; 
4 :  (9-30). 
DeDombal FT (1982). The computer in emergency care. in Wilson DH, Marsden AK 
(Eds.) Care of the Acutely Ill and Injured. Proceedings of the Fifth International 
Conference of Emergency Surgery, Brighton, 1981 . Wiley : Chichester.  
Deetz S (1996). Describing differences in approaches to science: rethinking Burrell 
and Morgan and their legacy. Organization Sciences , 7 ; 2 : (191-207). 
DeMarco T (1979). Structured Analysis and System Specification . Yourdon : New 
York.  
Denzin NK, Lincoln YS (2000). Handbook of Qualitative Research . Sage : Thousand 
Oaks.  
Diegeling P, Carr A (2004) Leadership for the systematisation of health care: the 
unaddressed issue in health care reform. Journal of Health Organisation & 
Management, 18 (6) : (399-414). 
Donaldson L (2000). An organisation with a memory: Report of an expert group on 
learning from adverse events . The Stationery Office : London.  
Doolin B (1998). Information technology as disciplinary technology: being critical in 
interpretive research on information systems. Journal Of Information Technology , 13 : 
(301-311). 
Doolin B (2004). Power and resistance in the implementation of a medical 
management information system. Information Systems Journal , 14 ; 3 : (343-362). 
Doolin B, Lowe A (2002). To reveal is to critique: actor network theory and critical 
information systems research. Journal of Information Technology , 17 : (69-78). 
Dourish P (2003). The appropriation of interactive technologies: some lessons from 
placeless documents. Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 12 : (465-490). 
Downs C, Clare P, Coe I (1991). Structured Systems Analysis and Design Method : 
Applications and Context . Prentice-Hall : Englewood Cliffs NJ.  
Eason K (2007). Local sociotechnical systems development in the NHS national 
programme for information technology. Journal of Information Technology , 22 ; 3 : 
(257-264). 
Ellingson G, Monteiro E & Munkvold G, (2007). Standardisation of work: co-
constructed practice. The Information Society, 23 : (309-326). 
Ellingson G, Monteiro E (2003). A patchwork planet: integration and cooperation in 
hospitals. Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 12 : (71-95). 
Ellingson G, Monteiro E (2006). Seamless integration: standardisation across multiple 
local settings. Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 15 : (443-466). 
Esa A, Lyytinen K (1996). in Dignum F et al.(Eds.)  Communication modelling - the 
language/action perspective. Proceedings of the First |International Workshop on 
Communication Modelling, Tilburg, The Netherlands, 1-2 July, 1996 . Springer.  
European Commission (2009) : Report on the socio-economic impact of interoperable 
electronic health record (EHR) and e-prescribing systems in Europe and beyond. 
Fairbanks R, Bisantz AM, Sunm M (2007). Emergency department communication 
links and patterns. Annals of Emergency Medicine , 50 ; 4 : (396-406). 
Fitzgerald B (1998). An empirically-grounded framework for the information systems 
development process. Information & Management , 34 : (317-328). 
Fitzgerald B (1998). The use of information systems development models in practice: a 
field study. Information Systems Journal , 7 : (201-212). 
Fitzgerald B, Howcroft D (1998). Towards dissolution of the IS Research debate: from 
polarisation to polarity. Journal Of Information Technology , 13 ; 4 : (313-326). 
Fitzgerald B, Russo NL (2005). The turnaround of the London Ambulance Service 
computer-aided despatch system (CAD). European Journal of Information Systems , 
14 : (244-257). 
Flynn DJ, Jazi MD (1998). Constructing user requirements: a social process for a 
social context. Information Systems Journal , 8 : (53-83). 
Foucault M (1977). Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison . Penguin : London.  
Garvin DA (1984). What does product quality really mean?. Sloan Management 
Review , 26 : (25-43). 
Gershon P (2004). Releasing resources to the front-line: independent review of public 
sector efficiency, HM Treasury, HMSO : London 
Giddens A (1984). The Constitution of Society . Polity Press : Cambridge.  
Giddens A (2001). Sociology. Polity Press : Cambridge.  
Gill J, Johnson P (1997). Research Methods for Managers . Chapman : London.  
Gillies A (1998). Computers and the NHS: an analysis of their contribution to the past, 
present and future delivery of the National Health Service. Journal of Information 
Technology , 13 : (219-229). 
Gillies A (1998). Information and IT for primary care (ch.7). Radcliffe : Oxford.  
Gillies A, Howard J (2003). Managing change, process and people: combining a 
maturity model with a competence approach. TQM & Business Excellence , 14 ; 7 : 
(797-805). 
Glaser BG, Strauss AL (1967). The discovery of grounded theory . Aldine : Chicago.  
Goles T, Hirschheim R (1996). The paradigm is dead long live the paradigm: the 
legacy of Burrell and Morgan. Omega , 28 : (249-268). 
Gorry GA Scott-Morton GS (1989). A framework for management information 
systems. Sloan Management Review , 13 ; 1 : (56-79). 
Gray RH, Clarkson DMcG, Jones DHA, Smith PHS (1982). A microcomputer based 
record system in an accident unit. in Wilson DH, Marsden AK (Eds.) Care of the 
Acutely Ill and Injured. Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference of Emergency 
Surgery, Brighton, 1981 . Wiley : Chichester.  
Greenhalgh T (1997). How to Read a Paper . BMA Publishing : London.  
Greenhalgh T et al. (2004) Diffusion of innovations in service organisations: 
systematic review and recommendations. The Milbank Quarterly, 82 ; 4 : (581-626). 
Greenhalgh T et al. (2008) Introduction of shared electronic records: multi-site case 
study using diffusion of innovation theory. BMJ 337; a1786 doi: 10.1136/bmj a1786. 
Greenhalgh T et al. (2009). Tensions and paradoxes in electronic patient record 
research: a systematic review using the meta-narrative method. The Milbank Quarterly, 
87 ; 4 : (729-788). 
Greenhalgh T et al. (2010). The Devils in the Detail final report of the independent 
evaluation of the Summary Care Recordand HealthSpace programmes. University 
College London : London 
Griffiths ER (1983). Letter to the Secretary of State (The Griffiths Inquiry Report) . 
London : DHSS.  
Guba EG, Lincoln YS (1997). Fourth Generation Evaluation . Sage : London.  
Ham C (2008). Quality failures in the NHS. BMJ , 336 : (340-341). 
Hanseth O, Aanestad M, Berg M (2004). Actor Network Theory and Information 
Systems. Whats so special?. Information, Technology & People , 17 ; 2 : (116-123). 
Harper RHR, et al. (1997). Towards the paperless hospital ?. British Journal of 
Anaesthesia , 78 : (762-767). 
Hartswood M, Proctor R, Rouncefield M, Slack R (2003). Making a case in medical 
work: implications for the electronic medical record. Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work , 12 : (241-266). 
Healy M, Perry C (2000). Comprehensive criteria to judge validity and reliability of 
qualitative research within the realism paradigm. Qualitative Market Research , 3 ; 3 : 
(118-126). 
Heath C, Luff P (1996). Documents and professional practice: bad organisational 
reasons for good clinical records. Proceedings of the Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work (p.354-363). ACM Press : Boston.  
Heath C, Luff P, Svensson MS (2003). Technology and medical practice. Sociology of 
Health & Illness , 25 : (75-96). 
Heeks R, Munday D, Salazar A (1999). Why Health Care Information Systems 
Succeed or Fail. Information Systems for Public Sector Management : Working Paper 
Series . Institute for Development Policy and Management, University of Manchester.  
Hirschheim R, Iivari J, Klein HK (1997). A comparison of five alternative approaches 
to information systems development. Australian Journal of Information Systems , 5 ; 1  
Hirschheim R, Klein HK (1989). Four paradigms of information systems 
development. Communications of the ACM , 32 ; 10 : (1199-1216). 
Hirschheim R, Klein HK (1994). Realizing emancipatory principles in information 
systems development: the case for ETHICS. MISQ , March,1994 : (83-109). 
Hirschheim R, Klein HK, Lyytinen K. (1996). Exploring the intellectual structures of 
information systems development: a social action theoretic analysis. Accting., Mgmnt. 
& Info Tech. , 6 ; 1/2 : (1-64). 
Hirschheim RA (1985). Information systems epistemology: an historical perspective. 
in Mumford E et al. (Eds.) : Research Methods in Information Systems. Proceedings of 
the IFIP WG 8.2 Colloquium Manchester Business School, 1-3 September,1984. (p.193-
201). North-Holland : Amsterdam, New York, Oxford. 
Horton K, Davenport E, Wood-Harper T (2005). Exploring sociotechnical interaction 
with Rob Kling: five big ideas. Information, Technology & People , 18 ; 1 : (50-67). 
Hughes J, Sharrock W (1990). The Philosophy of Social Research . Longman : UK.  
Hughes J, Wood-Harper AT (2000). An empirical model of the information systems 
development process: a case study of an automotive manufacturer. Proc. 10th 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems, 1999. 
Hunt DL, Haynes RB, Hanna SE et al. (1998) Effects of computer-based clinical 
decision support systems on physician performance and patient outcomes: a systematic 
review. JAMA, 280 (15) (1339-1346). 
Iivari J, Hirschheim R, Klein HK (2001a). A dynamic framework for classifying 
information systems development methodologies and approaches. Journal of 
Management Information Systems , 17 ; 3 : (179-218). 
Iivari J, Hirschheim R, Klein HK (2001b). Towards more professional information 
systems development: ISD as knowledge work. Global Cooperation in the New 
Millennium The 9th. European Conference on Information Systems Bled, Slovenia, 
June27-29, 2001 (p.1025-1036).  
Iivari J, Lyytinen K (1998). Research on information systems development in 
Scandinavia: unity in plurality. Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems , 10 ; 
1&2 : (135-186). 
Jayaratna N (1994). Understanding and Evaluating Methodologies NIMSAD a systemic 
framework . McGraw-Hill : Maidenhead.  
Jensen CB (2006). The wireless nursing call system: politics of discourse, technology 
and dependency in a pilot project. Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 15 : (419-
441). 
Joshi K, Rai A (2000). Impact of the quality of information products on information 
system users job satisfaction: an empirical investigation. Information Systems Journal 
10 (323-345). 
Judd T (2002). Climbie: Call for children to be on national database. The 
Independent, 16th. March, 2002 , : 
http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/crime/climbie-call-for-children-to-be-on-
national-database-654169.html 
Kautz K, Madsen S, Norbjerg J (2007) Persistent problems and practices in information 
systems development. Information Systems Journal, 17 : (217-239). 
Kawalek P, Wood-Harper T (2002). The finding of thorns: user participation in 
enterprise system implementation. The DATABASE for Advances in Information 
Systems , 33 ; 1 : (13-22). 
Kazanjian A, Green C (2002). Beyond effectiveness: the evaluation of information 
systems using a comprehensive health technology assessment framework Computers in 
Biology and Medicine, 32 : (165-177). 
Keen J, Packwood T (1995). Case study evaluation. BMJ , 311 : (444-446). 
Kennedy, I. (2001). Learning from Bristol: The Report of the Public Inquiry into 
Childrens Heart Surgery at Bristol Royal Infirmary 19841995. Her Majestys 
Stationer, London, UK. 
Klecun E, Cornford T (2005) A critical approach to evaluation. European Journal of 
Information Systems, 14 : (229-243). 
Klein EE, Herskovitz PJ (2007). Philosophy of science underpinnings of prototype 
validation: Popper vs. Quine. Information Systems Journal , 17 ; 1 : (111-132). 
Klein HK (1985). The poverty of scientism in information systems.in Mumford E et 
al. (Eds.) : Research Methods in Information Systems. Proceedings of the IFIP WG 8.2 
Colloquium Manchester Business School, 1-3 September,1984. (p.193-201). North-
Holland : Amsterdam, New York, Oxford. 
Klein HK (2004). Seeking the new and the critical in critical realism: dj vu?. 
Information and Organization , 14 : (123-144). 
Klein HK, Myers MD (1999). A set of principles for conducting and evaluating 
interpretive field studies in information systems. MISQ , 23 ; 1 : (67-94). 
Kling R (1980). Computing as Social Action. Advances in Computers , 19 : (249-
327). 
Kling R, Scacchi W (1982). The web of computing. Advances in Computers , 21 : (1-
Kohn KT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson MS. (1999). To Err Is Human: Building a Safer 
Health System  . National Academy Press :  Washington, DC.  
Kvasny L, Keil M (2006). Crossing the digital divide: a tale of two US cities 
Information Systems Journal , 16 : (23-53). 
Laerum H, Ellingsen G, Faxvaag A (2001). Doctors use of electronic medical records 
systems in hospitals: cross sectional survey. BMJ, 323 : (1344-1348). 
Latour B (2005). Reassembling the Social: an introduction to Actor Network Theory . 
Clarendon : Oxford.  
Lau F (1999). Towards a framework for action research in information systems 
studies Information, Technology & People , 12 ; 2 : (148-175). 
Law J (2003). Ladbroke Grove, Or How to Think about Failing Systems. Manuscript. 
http://www.comp.lancs.ac.uk/sociology/papers/law-ladbroke-grove-failing-systems.pdf. 
Law J, Hassard J (1999). Actor Network Theory and after . Blackwell : Oxford.  
Leape L (1994). Error in Medicine. JAMA , 272 : (1851-1857). 
Leape L, Berwick DM (2005). Five Years After To Err Is Human What Have We 
Learned?. JAMA , 293 : (2384-2390). 
Lee AS (1999). Rigor vs Relevance in MIS Research: beyond the approach of 
positivism alone. MISQ , 23 ; 1 : (29-33). 
Legris P et al. (2003). Why do people use information technology? A critical review of 
the technology acceptance model. Information & Management 40 : (191-204). 
Levary R (1997). Re-engineering hospital emergency rooms: an information systems 
approach. International Journal of Health Care Quality Assurance. 10 (5) (179-191). 
Littlejohns P, Wyatt JC, Garvican L (2003). Evaluating computerised health 
information systems: hard lessons still to be learnt. BMJ 326 (860-863). 
Lord Darzi  (2008). High Quality Care for All NHS next stage review final report (CM 
7432). The Stationery Office : London.  
Lord Laming (2003). The Victoria Climbie Inquiry: Report of an Inquiry by Lord 
Laming (Cmnd 5730). The Stationery Office : London  
Lundell B, Lings B (2003). The 2G method for doubly grounding evaluation 
frameworks. Information Systems Journal 13 (375-398). 
Lyytinen K (1987). Different perspectives on information systems: problems and 
perspectives. ACM Computing Surveys , 19 ; 1 : (5-46). 
Lyytinen K (1999). Empirical research in Information Systems: on the relevance of 
practice in thinking of IS research. MISQ , 23 ; 1 : (25-28). 
Lyytinen K, Hirschheim R (1987). Information systems failures: a survey and 
classification of the empirical literature. Oxford Surveys in Information Technology, 4 : 
(257-309). 
Lyytinen K, Newman M (2008). Explaining information systems change: a punctuated 
socio-technical change model. European Journal of Information Systems , 17 : (589-
613). 
Lyytinen K, Robey D (1999). Learning failure in information systems development. 
Information Systems Journal, 9 : (85-101). 
Lyytinen KJ, Klein HK (1985). The critical theory of Jurgen Habermas as a basis for a 
theory of information systems. in Mumford E et al. (Eds.) : Research Methods in 
Information Systems. Proceedings of the IFIP WG 8.2 Colloquium Manchester Business 
School, 1-3 September,1984. (p.193-201). North-Holland : Amsterdam, New York, 
Oxford.  
Macann C (1993). Four Phenomenological Philosophers Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre, 
Merleau-Ponty . Routledge : London.  
Maguire S, Ojiakwu O (2007). Interventions for information systems introduction in 
the NHS. Health Informatics Journal , 13 : (283-302). 
Majeed A (2003). Ten ways to improve information technology in the NHS.  
BMJ 326 : (202-206).  
Malmsjo A (2006). A sketch of a methodology for designing supportive information 
systems. Kybernetes , 35 ; 6 : (880-898). 
Mann R, Williams J (2003). Standards in medical record keeping. Clinical Medicine , 
3 ; 4 : (329-332). 
Mark A (2007). Modernising healthcare: is the NPfIT fit for purpose?. Journal of 
Information Technology , 22 ; 3 : (248-256). 
Markus L, Lee AS (1999). Special issue on intensive research in information systems: 
using qualitative, interpretive and case methods to study information technology-
foreward (sic). MISQ , 23 ; 1 : (35-38). 
Martin D, Hartswood M, Slack R, Voss A (2006). Achieving dependability in the 
configuration, integration and testing of healthcare technologies. Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work , 15 : (467-499). 
Mason RO (1996). Four ethical issues of the information age. MISQ , March,1996 : 
(4-12). 
Mason RO, Mitroff I (1973). A program for research on management information 
systems. Management Science , 19 ; 5 : (475-487). 
Mays N, Pope C (1995). Qualitative research: rigour and qualitative research. BMJ , 
311 : (109-112). 
Mays N, Pope C (2000). Qualitative research in healthcare: assessing quality in 
qualitative research. BMJ , 320 : (50-52). 
McBride N. Chaos theory as a model for interpreting information systems in 
organizations Information Systems Journal, 16 : (233 254). 
McKay J, Marshall P (2001). The dual imperatives of action research. Information, 
Technology & People , 14 ; 1 : (46-59). 
Miles MB, Huberman AM (1994). Qualitative Data Analysis . Sage :London.  
Mingers J (2003). A classification of the philosophical assumptions of management 
science methods. Journal of the Operational Research Society. 54 : (559-570). 
Mingers J (2004a). Real-izing information systems: critical realism as an underpinning 
philosophy for information systems. Information and Organization , 14 : (87-103). 
Mingers J (2004b). Critical realism and information systems: brief responses to Monod 
and Klein. Information and Organization , 14 : (145-153). 
Mintzberg H (1993). Structure in Five: Designing effective organizations .  Prentice-
Hall : Englewood Cliffs, NJ. US. 
Mitroff I (1973). Systems, Inquiry and the Meanings of Falsification. Philosophy of 
Science , 40 ; 2 : (255-276). 
Mitroff I, Linstone H (1993). The Unbounded Mind, Breaking the Chains of Traditional 
Business Thinking . Oxford University Press : New York.  
Mohammed AM, Cheng KK, Rouse A, Marshall T (2001). Bristol, Shipman and 
clinical governance: Shewharts forgotten lessons. Lancet , 357 : (463-467). 
Monod E (2004). Einstein, Heisenberg, Kant and conditions of possibilities. 
Information and Organization , 14 : (105-121). 
Monod E, Boland RJ (2007). Special issue on philosophy and epistemology : a Peter 
Pan syndrome?. Information Systems Journal , 17 : (133-141). 
Morgan G (1997). Images of Organization . Sage : London.  
Mumford E (1991). Need for relevance in management information systems: what the 
NHS can learn from industry. BMJ , 302 : (1587-90). 
Mumford E (1995). Effective Systems Design and Requirements Analysis: The ETHICS 
Approach to Computer Systems Design . MacMillan : London.  
Mumford E (1997). The reality of participative information systems design: 
contributing to stability in a rocking boat. Information Systems Journal , 7 : (309-322). 
Mumford E (2001). Advice for an Action Researcher. Information, Technology & 
People , 14 ; 1 : (12-27). 
Mumford E et al. (Eds.) (1985). Research Methods in Information Systems. Proceedings 
of the IFIP WG 8.2 Colloquium Manchester Business School, 1-3 September,1984. 
(p.193-201). North-Holland : Amsterdam, New York, Oxford. 
Nelson EC et al. (1998). Building measurement and data collection into medical 
practice. Annals of Internal Medicine , 128 ; 6 : (460-466). 
Nemeth CP, Cook RI, Wears RL (2007). Studying the technical work of emergency 
care. Annals of Emergency Medicine , 50 ; 4 : (384-6). 
Newell S, Swan JA, Galliers RD (2000). A knowledge-focused perspective on the 
diffusion and adoption of complex information technologies: the BPR example. 
Information Systems Journal , 10 ; 3 : (239-259). 
Nolan TW (1998). Understanding medical systems Annals of Internal Medicine ,  
128 : (293-298). 
ODonnell D, Henriksen LB (2002). Philosophical foundations for a critical evaluation 
of the social impact of IT. Journal Of Information Technology , 17 ; 2 : (89-99). 
Ojiako U, Maguire S, Koh L, Grainger T, Wainwright D (2010). Softer perspectives on 
enhancing the patient experience using IS/IT. International Journal of Healthcare 
Quality Assurance. 23 ; 2 : (187-208). 
Oliver J, Memmott C (2006). Growing Your Own Heroes the commonsense way to 
improve business performance. Oak Tree Press : Cork.  
Orlikowski WJ, Baroudi JJ (1991). Studying information technology in organisations: 
research approaches and assumptions. Information Systems Research , 2 ; 1 : (1-28). 
Oroviogoicoechea C, Watson I (2009). A quantitative analysis of the impact of a 
computerised information system on nurses clinical practice using a realistic evaluation 
framework. International Journal of Medical Informatics 78 : (839-849). 
Oz E (1992). Ethical standards for information systems professionals, a case for a 
unified code. MISQ , 16 : (423-433). 
Parker J, Coiera E (2000). Improving clinical communication. Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association , 7 ; 5 : (453-461). 
Pawson R, Tilley N (1997). Realistic Evaluation . Sage : London.  
Perrin J (1998). Resource Management in the NHS . Chapman & Hall.  
Pettigrew AM (1985). Contextualist research and the study of organisational change 
processes. in Mumford E et al. (Eds.) : Research Methods in Information Systems. 
Proceedings of the IFIP WG 8.2 Colloquium Manchester Business School, 1-3 
September,1984. (p.53-79). North-Holland : Amsterdam, New York, Oxford.  
Pinelle D, Gutwin K (2006). Loose coupling and healthcare organisations: deployment 
strategies for groupware. Computer Supported Co-operative Work, 15 537-572. 
Plsek P, Greenhalgh T (2001). The challenge of complexity in health care. BMJ, 323: 
(625-628). 
Pope C, Ziebland S, Mays N (2000). Qualitative research in health care: analysing 
qualitative data. BMJ , 320 : (114-116). 
Protti D (2003) Local Clinician Involvement in clinical information systems: luxury or 
necessity? A review of two international experiences. British Journal of Healthcare 
Computing , 20 ; 10 : (28-30). 
Proudlove NC, Boaden R (2005). Using operational and information systems to 
improve in-patient flow in hospitals.  Journal of Health Organization and 
Management , 19 ; 6 : (466-477). 
Rahimi B, Vimarlund V, Timpka T (2009). Health information system 
implementation: a qualitative meta-analysis. Journal of Medical Systems, 33 (359-
368). 
Randell B (2007). A computer scientists reactions to NPfIT. Journal of Information 
Technology , 22 ; 3 : (222-234). 
Reason J (2000). Human error: models and management. BMJ, 320 : (768-770). 
Reddy M, Dourish P (2002). A finger on the pulse: temporal rhythms and information 
seeking in clinical work. CSCW 02, November 16-20, 2002, New Orleans, Louisiana, 
USA (p.344-353). .  
Reddy M, Dourish Paul (2002). A finger on the pulse: temporal rhythms and 
information seeking in medical work. Proceedings of ACM CSCW 02 .  ACM Press. 
Reddy MC, Dourish P, Pratt W (2006). Temporality in medical work: time also 
matters. Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 15 : (29-53). 
Redfern M et al. (2001). The Royal Liverpool Childrens Inquiry Report. The Stationery 
Office; London.  
Redfern S, Christian S, Norman I (2003) Evaluating change in healthcare practice: 
lessons from three studies. Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice, 9 ; 2 : (239-
249). 
Reinertsen (1998). Physicians as leaders in the improvement of healthcare systems. 
Annals of Internal Medicine , 128 : (833-838). 
Reynolds M (2007). in Bob Williams and Iraj Imam (Eds.) : Systems Concepts in 
Evaluation: an Expert Anthology.  EdgePress/American Evaluation Association. 
Richardson H, Robinson B (2007). The strange case of the missing paradigm: a review 
of critical information systems research 1991-2001. Information Systems Journal , 17 : 
(251-270). 
Richardson SM, Courtney JF (2004). A Churchmanian theory of knowledge 
management system design. Proceedings of the 37th. Hawaii International Conference 
on Systems Sciences, 2004 . 
Robinson D, Groves J (2004). Introducing Philosophy . Icon Books : Thriplow, 
Cambridge.  
Sackett DL, Rosenberg WC, Muir Gray JA, Haynes WB, Richardson WS (1996). 
Evidence based medicine: what it is and what it isnt. BMJ , 312 : (71-72). 
Saravanamuthu K (2002a). Information technology and ideology. Journal Of 
Information Technology , 17 : (79-87). 
Saravanamuthu K (2002b). The participatory lacuna in information systems design. 
Journal Of Information Technology , 17 : (79-87). 
Sauer C (1993). Why Information Systems Fail a case study approach . Alfred Waller : 
Oxfordshire.  
Scally G, Donaldson L (1998) Looking forward: clinical governance and the drive for 
quality in the new NHS. BMJ , 317 : (61-65). 
Scott JT et al. (2005). Kaiser Permanentes experience of implementing an electronic 
medical record: a qualitative study BMJ, 331 : (1313-1316). 
Senge P (1990). The Fifth Discipline. Century Business : London.  
Serafeimidis V, Smithson S (2000). Information systems evaluation in practice: a case 
study of organisational change. Journal of Information Technology, 15 ; 2, (93-105). 
Serafeimidis V, Smithson S (2003). Information systems evaluation as an 
organisational institution  experience from a case study. Information Systems Journal, 
13 (251-274). 
Shah H, Eardley A, Wood-Harper T (2007). ALTAR: achieving learning through 
action research. European Journal of Information Systems , 16 : (761-770). 
Silva L (2007). Epistemological and theoretical challenges for studying power and 
politics in information systems. Information Systems Journal , 17 : (165-183). 
Silverman D (1998). Qualitative Research: meanings or practices. Information Systems 
Journal , 8 : (3-20). 
Silverman D (2005). Doing Qualitative Research (2nd. Ed.) . Sage : London.  
Silverman D (2006). Interpreting Qualitative Data (3rd. Ed.) . Sage : London.  
Singleton P, Pagliari C, Detmer DE (2009). Critical Issues for Electronic Health 
Records Considerations from an expert workshop. Wellcome Trust and Nuffield Trust  
London. 
Smith R (1998). All changed, changed utterly. BMJ , 316 : (1917-1918). 
Smithson S, Hirschheim R (1998). Analysing information systems evaluation : another 
look at an old problem. European Journal of Information Systems , 7 : (158-174). 
Spencer R, Coiera E, Logan P (2004). Variation in communication loads on clinical 
staff in the emergency department. Annals of Emergency Medicine , 44 ; 3 : (268-273). 
Stahl BC (2004). Ethics and research on information technology . Journal of 
Technology and Human Interaction , 1 ; 2 : (i-viii). 
Stahl BC (2004). Whose discourse? A comparison of the Foucauldian and 
Habermasian concepts of discourse in critical IS research. Proceedings of the Tenth 
Americas Conference on Information Systems, New York .  
Stahl BC (2005). Ethics and research on information technology . Journal of 
Technology and Human Interaction , 1 ; 2 : (i-viii). 
Stake R (2000).  Case Studies in Denzin NK, Lincoln YS (2000). Handbook of 
Qualitative Research . Sage : Thousand Oaks.  
Strauss A, Corbin J (1990). Basics of Qualitative research: Grounded theory 
procedures and techniques . Sage : Newbury Park.  
Sweeney K, Griffiths F (Eds.) (2002). Complexity and Healthcare an introduction . 
Radcliffe : Oxford.  
Taylor MJ, Moynihan EP,Wood-Harper AT (1998). End-user computing and 
information systems methodologies. Information Systems Journal , 8 : (85-96). 
Timmons S (2003). Nurses resisting information technology. Nursing Inquiry , 10 ; 4: 
(257-269). 
Tsoukas H (1997). The tyranny of light. Futures, 29 : 9 ; (827-843). 
Ulrich W (2004). In memory of C. West Churchman (1913-2004) : reminiscences, 
retrospectives, reflections. Journal of Organisational Transformation and Social 
Change , 1 ; 2-3 : (199-219). 
Ulrich W (2005). A brief introduction to critical systems heuristics (CSH). . 
http://www.ecosensus.info/about/index.html. [last retrieved on 15.Nov,2009]. 
Alternatively, http://wikinator.com/files/Ulrich05a.pdf. 
United Kingdom, Commission for Healthcare Audit and Inspection (2008). Learning 
from Investigations . The Stationery Office : London.  
United Kingdom, Comptroller and Auditor General (2006). The National Programme 
for IT in the NHS. Report by the Comproller and Auditor General (HC 1173). National 
Audit Office ; London : The Stationery Office.  
United Kingdom, Department of Health (1989). Working for Patients (CM 555). The 
Stationery Office : London.  
United Kingdom, Department of Health (1997). The new NHS modern and dependable 
(Cm3807). The Stationery Office : London.  
United Kingdom, Department of Health (2000). The NHS Plan: A Plan for Investment, 
A Plan for Reform. (Cm 48181). The Stationery Office : London. 
United Kingdom, Department of Health (2002). Delivering 21st century IT support for 
the NHS: national strategic programme. London : The Stationery Office 
United Kingdom, Department of Health (2004). The NHS Improvement Plan (Cm 
6268). The Stationery Office : London.  
United Kingdom, Department of Health (2010a). The NHS Quality, Innovation, 
Productivity and Prevention Challenge: an introduction for clinicians. 
http://www.dh.gov.uk/prod_consum_dh/groups/dh_digitalassets/@dh/@en/@ps/docum
ents/digitalasset/dh_ 113807.pdf (accessed 2nd. April, 2010). 
United Kingdom, Department of Health (2010b). Equity and Excellence Liberating the 
NHS (Cm 7881). The Stationery Office : London. 
United Kingdom, Department of Health (2010c). Revision to the Operating Framework 
for the NHS in England 2010/11. http://www.dh.gov.uk/publications. 
United Kingdom, HM Government Cabinet Office (2005). Transformational 
Government enabled by technology (Cm6683). The Stationery Office : London.  
United Kingdom : House of Commons Hansard (2010) :  Ministerial Statements for July 
22nd.  
United Kingdom, House of Commons Public Administration Select Committee (2003). 
Public Administration Fifth Report . 
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200203/cmselect/cmpubadm/62/6202.htm. 
(accessed 17th. November, 2009). 
United Kingdom, Information Commissioners Office (undated). The Information 
Commissioners view of NHS Electronic Care Records .  
United Kingdom, National Institute for Health Research (undated). Webpage. What is 
Health Technology Assessment ? http://www.hta.ac.uk/about/whatishta.shtml (accessed 
1.December, 2009).  
United Kingdom, NHS Connecting for Health (2006). The national Programme for IT 
Implementation Guide Ver.4.1 . http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk (accessed 
1.December, 2009). 
United Kingdom, NHS Executive (1998). Information for Health (HSC 1998/168). 
Leeds, NHS Executive. 
United Kingdom, Office of Government Commerce (2009). An Introduction to 
PRINCE2: Managing and Directing Successful Projects . The Stationery Office : 
London.  
United Kingdom, Office of Government Commerce (1999). Managing Successful 
Programmes. The Stationery Office : London. 
United Kingdom, Office of Public Sector Information (1998). Data Protection Act .  
Urquhart C, Currell R (2005). Reviewing the evidence on nursing record systems. 
Health Informatics Journal , 11 ; 1 : (33-44). 
Van der Meijden MJ, Tange HJ, Troost J, Hasman A (2003). Determinants of success 
of inpatient clinical information systems. Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, 10 : (235-243). 
Van der Ven A (2007). Engaged Scholarship. Oxford University Press. 
Vardi Y, Wiener Y (1996). Misbehaviour in organizations: a motivational framework. 
Organization Science , 7 ; 2 : (151-165). 
Varey R, Wood-Harper T, Wood B (2002). A theoretical view of management and 
information systems using a critical communications theory. Journal Of Information 
Technology , 17 : (229-239). 
Vidgen R (2002). End-user computing and information systems methodologies. 
Information Systems Journal , 12 : (247-261). 
Vidgen R, Avison D, Wood B, Wood-Harper T (2002). Developing Web Information 
Systems . Butterworth-Heinemann : Oxford.  
Wainwright D, Waring T (2000). The information management and technology 
strategy of the UK National Health Service determining progress in the NHS acute 
hospital sector. International Journal of Public Sector Management , 13 ; 3 : (241-
259). 
Walley T (2007). Health Technology Assessment in England: assessment and 
appraisal. Medical Journal of Australia, 187 ; 5 : (283-285). 
Walsham G (1993). Interpreting Information Systems in Organizations . Wiley : 
Chichester.  
Walsham G (1995). The emergence of interpretivism in IS research. Information 
Systems Research , 6 ; 4 : (376-394). 
Walsham G (1996). Ethical theory, codes of ethics and IS practice. Information 
Systems Journal , 6 : (69-81). 
Walsham G (2001). Making a World of Difference: IT in a Global Context . Wiley : 
Chichester.  
Wanless D (2001). Securing our future: taking a long-term view, an interim report. 
Public Inquiry Unit, HM Treasury : London. 
Wanless D (2002).Securing our future health: taking a long-term view. Final report. 
London: HM Treasury. 
Warburton N (1998). Philosophy : The Classics . Routledge : Oxford.  
Wastell DG (1996). The fetish of technique: methodology as a social defence. 
Information Systems Journal , 6 : (25-40). 
Weick KE et al. (2005). Organizing and the process of sensemaking. Organization 
Science , 16 ; 4 : (409-421). 
Winograd T, Flores F (1986). Understanding Computers and Cognition . Ablex 
Publishing Intellect, Norwood, NJ.  
Winthereik BR, Vikkelso S (2005). ICT and integrated care: some dilemmas of 
standardising inter-organisational communication. Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work , 14 : (43-67). 
Wolocshynowycz M et al. (2007). Communication patterns in a UK Emergency 
Department. Annals of Emergency Medicine , 50 ; 4 : (407-413). 
Wood-Harper AT (1985). Research Methods in Information Systems: Using Action 
Rsearch. in Mumford E et al. (Eds.) : Research Methods in Information Systems. 
Proceedings of the IFIP WG 8.2 Colloquium Manchester Business School, 1-3 
September,1984 (p.161-180). North-Holland : Amsterdam, New York, Oxford.  
Wood-Harper AT et al. (1998). How we profess: the ethical systems analyst. 
Communications of the ACM , 39 ; 3 : (69-77). 
Wood-Harper AT, Antill L, Avison DE (1985). Information Systems Definition: The 
Multiview Approach . Blackwell Scientific : Oxford.  
Wood-Harper AT, Corder S, Byrne B (1999). Ethically situated information systems 
development. Australian Institute of Computer Ethics Conference, July,1999, Lilydale. 
Wood-Harper T, Wood B (2005). Multiview as social informatics: past, present and 
future. Information, Technology & People , 18 ; 1 : (26-32). 
Wrathall M (2005). How to Read Heidegger . Granta : London.  
Wyatt JC (1996). Commentary : Telemedicine trials-clinical pull or technology push? 
BMJ , 313 : (1380-1381). 
Wyatt JC, Wyatt SM (2003) When and how to evaluate health information systems?. 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, 69 : (251-259). 
Yan Xiao (2007). What whiteboards in a trauma center operating suite can tell us about 
emergency department communication. Annals of Emergency Medicine , 50 ; 4 : (387-
395). 
Yates DW (1982). The value of a computerised A&E record card. in Wilson DH, 
Marsden AK (Eds.) Care of the Acutely Ill and Injured. Proceedings of the Fifth 
International Conference of Emergency Surgery, Brighton, 1981 . Wiley : Chichester.  
Yin RK (1989). Case Study Research: Design and Methods . Sage : Newbury Park.  
Zuboff S (1988). In the age of the smart machine. New York : Basic Books.  
