Microsoft Word - Jesus Caesar Final hardbound version
Jesus Caesar: 
A Roman Reading of John 18:2819:22 
Rev Laura J. Hunt, MTS 
Supervised by 
Dr Catrin H. Williams & Dr Kathy Ehrensperger 
Submitted in partial fulfilment for the award of the degree of  
Doctor of Philosophy by Research 
University of Wales Trinity Saint David. 
In memory of my father, James Rhen Vance 
duo corda habuit, quod duo linguas percalluit, Americam Belgicamque 
(adapted from Aulus Gellius, Attic Nights 17.17.1) 
Thesis Abstract 
Latin use in inscriptions shows evidence of intersections between Roman and Greek 
languages and culture during the first century CE. Although the provenance for the Gospel 
of John is not definitively determined, this evidence is present in each proposed location as 
well as in the text of the Gospel itself (e.g.,  in 18:28, 33 and 19:9). This suggests, 
based on Umberto Ecos semiotics, that the Roman cultural encyclopaedia could shed light 
on the Gospel of John, particularly in the Roman trial narrative for a Roman-aware audience. 
Some words in particular intersect with important Roman concepts: , , 
  and . The phrase    in John 19:5, when analysed from a Roman 
perspective, seems sufficiently close to hic vir, hic est from Vergils Aeneid (6.791) to mark 
it as a literary allusion. An exegetical analysis of John 18:2819:22, the passages most 
imprinted with Latin words and Roman concepts, reveals a Roman Pilate who tests the 
loyalty of both Jesus and the Jews to Caesar. This exegesis, furthermore, provides the data 
for a social-scientific reading of the passage which constructs a superordinate identity for 
Romans (and, although outside the main focus of this thesis, for Jews as well). It also 
conveys a hidden transcript that creates honour for the marginalized Jesus-believers and calls 
those with power to become vulnerable for the sake of Gods empire. Although others have 
looked at empire in the Gospel of John, and some have made connections between specific 
verses and the Roman cultural encyclopaedia (e.g., 19:2), no one has noted the literary 
allusion in 19:5 nor offered an in-depth and sustained Roman reading of the trial narrative. 
Acknowledgements 
Anyone who has engaged in research knows the immense value of libraries and those who 
work in them. It is no exaggeration to say that without the libraries of Moody Theological 
Seminary, the University of Michigan, Spring Arbor University and the Milan Public Library 
this thesis could not have been written. Special thanks to Joe Cataio from Crowell Library 
in Chicago and Kami Moyer from White Library in Spring Arbor who worked miracles to 
get me any book or article I asked for, no matter how obscure, Joe for the first couple of 
years and Kami for the last several. Thank you as well to Andrea Schultz who tirelessly 
renewed hundreds of books by hand for me, and to Micah Jelinek who regularly added to 
the Moody Michigan collection based on my book requests. Finally, I am so incredibly 
grateful to the many people working in the ILL system at Milan Public Library and the book 
request system at Buhr Shelving Facility in Ann Arbor. Your tireless, faithful work was a 
mainstay of my research, and your smiles when I picked books up were a regular source of 
encouragement. I appreciate you more than you could know. 
The ideas presented in this thesis percolated over a period of years and therefore are 
infused with the influence of the key scholars I interacted with during that time. Two in 
particular stand out. J. Brian Tucker encouraged my early ideas and provided an environment 
where I, and they, could grow. He has been a gracious exemplar of a scholar, and a source 
of encouragement throughout. More directly involved in this work, Catrin Haf Williams has 
been the best of all possible supervisors. I enjoy our time together, yet she has drawn me on 
to more and better work than I knew I could accomplish. She is knowledgeable, insightful 
and unfailingly kind. I gratefully acknowledge my indebtedness and take full responsibility 
for any and all shortcomings. 
To my children, I love you each and all. Kevin, thank you especially for the weekly 
writing meetings that encouraged me and kept me on track. And finally, last because you are 
not least, Doug, thank you for your steadfast, 1 Corinthians 13 kind of love.
Table of Contents 
Abbreviations 
All abbreviations in this work follow The SBL Handbook of Style: For Biblical Studies and 
Related Disciplines, edited by Billie Jean Collins, Bob Buller, and John F. Kutsko, 2nd 
edition (Atlanta: SBL Press, 2014). They are reproduced, with some additions and 
corrections: 
AB Anchor Bible 
ABD Anchor Bible Dictionary. Edited by David Noel Freedman. New York: 
Doubleday, 1992. 
ABRL Anchor Bible Reference Library 
AE Anne pigraphique 
AGJU Arbeiten zur Geschichte des antiken Judentums und des Urchristentums 
(Ancient Judaism and Early Christianity) 
AJP American Journal of Philology 
AnBib Analecta Biblica 
AnBoll Analecta Bollandiana 
ANRW Austieg und Niedergang der Rmischen Welt: Geschichte und Kultur 
Roms im Spiegel der neueren Forschung. Part 2, Principat. Edited by 
Hildegard Temporini and Wolfgang Haase. De Gruyter: Berlin, 1972 
APF Archiv fr Papyrusforschung 
BBB Bonner biblische Beitrge 
BDAG Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament and Other Early Christian 
Literature. Frederick W. Danker, Walter Bauer, William F. Arndt, and F. 
Wilbur Gingrich. 3rd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000. 
BDF A Greek Grammar of the New Testament and Other Early Christian 
Literature. Friedrich Blass, Albert Debrunner, and Robert Walter Funk. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961. 
BDR Grammatik des neutestamentlichen Griechisch. Friedrich Blass, Albert 
Debrunner, and Friedrich Rehkopf. 15th edition. Gttingen: Vandenhoeck 
& Ruprecht, 1979. 
BECNT Baker Exegetical Commentary on the New Testament 
BETL Bibliotheca ephemeridum theologicarum Lovaniensium 
BGU Aegyptische Urkunden aus den kniglichen staatlichen Museen zu Berlin, 
Griechische Urkunden. 9 vols. Berlin: Weidmann, 1895-1937. 
Bib Biblica 
BibInt Biblical Interpretation 
BibInt Biblical Interpretation Series 
BNTC Blacks New Testament Commentaries 
BTB Biblical Theology Bulletin 
BZ Biblische Zeitschrift 
BZNW Beihefte zur Zeitschrift fr die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft 
CAH Cambridge Ancient History  
CBET Contributions to Biblical Exegesis and Theology 
CBQ Catholic Biblical Quarterly 
CdE Chronique dgypte 
ChLA Chartae latinae antiquiores. Edited by Albert Bruckner and Robert 
Marichal et al. 49 Vols. Dietikon-Zurich: Graf, 1954-98. 
CII See CIJ 
CIJ Corpus inscriptionum judaicarum 
CIL Corpus inscriptionum latinarum 
CLA Codices latini antiquiores 
CLSCC Cognitive Linguistic Studies in Cultural Contexts 
ClQ Classical Quarterly 
CNT Commentaire du Nouveau Testament 
ConBNT Coniectanea Neotestamentica or Coniectanea Biblica: New Testament 
Series 
C.P. Collected Papers. Charles Sanders Peirce. 
CP Classical Philology 
C. Pap. Jud. Corpus papyrorum Judaicarum 
CPL Corpus papyrorum latinarum 
CPR Corpus papyrorum Raineri 
DELG Dictionnaire tymologique de la langue grecque: histoire des mots. Pierre 
Chantraine. 4 vols. Paris: Klincksieck, 1968-77. 
DHA Dialogues dhistoire ancienne 
DLNT Dictionary of the Later New Testament and Its Developments. Edited by 
R. P. Martin and P. H. Davids. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 
1997. 
DNTB Dictionary of New Testament Background. Edited by Craig A. Evans and 
Stanley E. Porter. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2000. 
EAGLL Encyclopedia of Ancient Greek Language and Linguistics. Edited by 
Georgios K. Giannakis. 2013. Online. Access provided by University of 
Wales Trinity Saint David. 
EAH The Encyclopedia of Ancient History. Edited by Roger S Bagnall et al. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2013. 
ELL Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics. Edited by Keith Brown. 2nd 
ed. Oxford: Elsevier, 2006. Online. Access provided by the University of 
Michigan. 
ETL Ephemerides theologicae Lovanienses 
ExAud Ex auditu 
ExpTim Expository Times 
HBT Horizons in Biblical Theology 
Historia Historia: Zeitschrift fr alte Geschichte 
HSCP Harvard Studies in Classical Philology 
HThKNT Herders Theologischer Kommentar zum Neuen Testament 
HTR Harvard Theological Review 
HTS Harvard Theological Studies 
HvTSt Hervormde teologiese studies 
IAph2007 Inscriptions of Aphrodisias. Edited by Joyce Reynolds, Charlotte 
Rouech, and Gabriel Bodard. 2007. Online: 
http://insaph.kcl.ac.uk/iaph2007 
IBS Irish Biblical Studies 
ICC International Critical Commentary 
IEph Die Inschriften von Ephesos 
IG Inscriptiones graecae 
IGLS Inscriptions grecques et latines de la Syrie 
IGR Inscriptiones graecae ad res Romanas pertinentes 
ILS Inscriptiones latinae selectae 
IMagnMai Die Inschriften von Magnesia am Mander 
JAAR Journal of the American Academy of Religion 
JBL Journal of Biblical Literature 
JEA Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 
JHS Journal of Hellenic Studies 
JRA Journal of Roman Archaeology 
JRS Journal of Roman Studies 
JSJ Journal for the Study of Judaism in the Persian, Hellenistic, and Roman 
Periods 
JSNT Journal for the Study of the New Testament 
JSNTSup Journal for the Study of the New Testament Supplement Series 
JSOTSup Journal for the Study of the Old Testament Supplement Series 
JSP Journal for the Study of the Pseudepigrapha 
JTS Journal of Theological Studies 
KTAH Key Themes in Ancient History 
L&N Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament: Based on Semantic 
Domains. Edited by Johannes P. Louw and Eugene A. Nida. 2nd ed. New 
York: United Bible Societies, 1989. 
LCL Loeb Classical Library 
LD A Latin Dictionary: Founded on Andrews Edition of Freund's Latin 
Dictionary. Charlton T. Lewis and Charles Short. Oxford: Clarendon, 
1879. Online. Perseus Digital Library. 
LDAB Leuven Database of Ancient Books. Edited by Willy Clarysse et al. 
http://www.trismegistos.org/ldab/index.php. 
LNTS Library of New Testament Studies 
LS A Greek-English Lexicon. Henry George Liddell and Robert Scott. 9th ed. 
Oxford: Clarendon, 1968. 
MH Museum Helveticum 
MP3 Le fichier Mertens-Pack3. Edited by Marie-Hlne Marganne and David 
Linotte. This database is a continuation of previous editions of The Greek 
and Latin Literary Texts from Greco-Roman Egypt. Roger Ambrose Pack. 
2nd ed. (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1965). The numbering 
system used in this second edition has been taken over and expanded for 
the online database, but the numbers from the first edition (1952) are 
different. These last are not referenced in this thesis. 
http://promethee.philo.ulg.ac.be/cedopalMP3/indexanglaisMP3.aspx.  
NA28 Nestle-Aland Novum Testamentum Graece Greek-English New Testament. 
Edited by Barbara Aland et al. 28th ed. Stuttgart: Deutsche 
Bibelgesellschaft, 2012. 
NCB New Century Bible 
Neot Neotestamentica 
NewDocs New Documents Illustrating Early Christianity. Edited by Greg H. R. 
Horsley and Stephen Llewelyn. North Ryde, NSW: The Ancient History 
Documentary Research Centre, Macquarie University, 1981- 
NICNT New International Commentary on the New Testament 
NIDNTT New International Dictionary of New Testament Theology. Edited by 
Colin Brown. 4 vols. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975-1978. 
NIGTC New International Greek Testament Commentary 
NovT Novum Testamentum 
NovTSup Supplements to Novum Testamentum 
NTL New Testament Library 
NTS New Testament Studies 
NTTSD New Testament Tools, Studies, and Documents 
O. Bodl. Greek Ostraca in the Bodleian Library at Oxford and Various Other 
Collections 
xviii 
OCCL The Oxford Companion to Classical Literature. Edited by M. C. 
Howatson. 3rd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011. Online. Access 
provided by University of Wales Trinity Saint David. 
OCD The Oxford Classical Dictionary. Edited by Simon Hornblower, Antony 
Spawforth, and Esther Eidinow. 4th ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2012. Online. Access provided by University of Wales Trinity Saint 
David. 
OCM Oxford Classical Monographs 
ODB The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium. Edited by Alexander P. Kazhdan. 
Oxford University Press, 2005. Online. Access provided by Spring Arbor 
University. 
ODCC The Oxford dictionary of the Christian Church. Edited by F. L. Cross and 
E. A. Livingstone. 3rd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005. 
ODE Oxford Dictionary of English. Edited by Stevenson, Angus. 3rd ed. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010. Online. Access provided by 
University of Wales Trinity Saint David. 
ODLT The Oxford Dictionary of Literary Terms. Chris Baldick. 3rd ed. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2008. Online. Access provided by University of 
Wales Trinity Saint David. 
OEAGR The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Greece and Rome. Edited by 
Michael Gagarin. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010. Online. Access 
provided by University of Wales Trinity Saint David. 
OLD Oxford Latin Dictionary. Edited by P. G. W. Glare. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1982. 
O. Wilck. Griechische ostraka aus Aegypten und Nubien 
PC Brills New Pauly: Antiquity Volumes. Hubert Cancik and Helmuth 
Schneider. Brill Online, 2006. Access provided by University of Wales 
Trinity Saint David. 
PCPhS Proceedings of the Cambridge Philological Society 
P. Masada Masada II: The Yigael Yadin Excavations 1963-1965 
P. Oxy. The Oxyrhnchus Papyri 
P. Ross. 
Georg. 
Papyri russischer und georgischer 
P. Lond. Greek Papyri in the British Museum 
PSI Papiri greci e latini: Pubblicazioni della Societ Italiana per la Ricerca 
dei Papiri Greci e Latini in Egitto 
P. Thad Papyrus de Thadelphie 
PTSDSSP Princeton Theological Seminary Dead Sea Scrolls Project 
P. Wisc. The Wisconsin Papyri 
R&T Religion and Theology 
RB Revue biblique 
RBPH Revue Belge de philologie et dhistoire / Belgisch tijdschrift voor filologie 
en geschiedenis 
REG Revue des tudes grecques 
ResQ Restoration Quarterly 
RevPhil Revue de philologie 
RGRW Religions in the Graeco-Roman World 
RSR Revue de science religieuse 
SBL Society of Biblical Literature 
SEG Supplementum epigraphicum graecum 
SEP The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Edward N. Zalta. Stanford: 
Stanford University, 2011. http://plato.stanford.edu/ 
SJ Studia Judaica 
SNTA Studiorum novi testamenti auxilia 
SNTSMS Society for New Testament Studies Monograph Series 
SP Sacra pagina 
SR Studies in Religion/Sciences religieuses 
TANZ Texte und Arbeiten zum neutestamentlichen Zeitalter 
TAPA Transactions of the American Philological Association 
THEMAM Textes, histoire et monuments de l'Antiquit et du Moyen Age 
THKNT Theologischer Handkommentar zum Neuen Testament 
TLG Thesaurus Linguae Graecae Digital Library. Edited by Maria C. 
Pantelia. University of California, Irvine. http://www.tlg.uci.edu 
TM Trismegistos. Edited by Mark Depauw. 
http://www.trismegistos.org/index.html. 
TSAJ Texte und Studien zum antiken Judentum 
UBS5 The Greek New Testament. Edited by Barbara Aland et al. 5th ed. 
Stuttgart: Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft, 2014. 
USQR Union Seminary Quarterly Review 
VTSup Supplements to Vetus Testamentum 
WGRWSup Writings from the Greco-Roman World Supplement Series 
WTJ Westminster Theological Journal 
WUNT Wissenschaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament 
WW Word & World 
ZPE Zeitschrift fr Papyrologie und Epigraphik 
ZTK Zeitschrift fr Theologie und Kirche 
Translations of Aristides are from Aristides, P. Aelius. The Complete Works: Volume II. 
Orations XVII-LIII. Translated by Charles A. Behr. Leiden: Brill, 1981. 
Translations of John Malalas are from The Chronicle of John Malalas. Translated by 
Elizabeth Jeffreys, Michael Jeffreys, and Roger Scott. Byzantina Australiensia 4. 
Melbourne: Australian Association for Byzantine Studies, 1986. 
Translations of Philo are from The Works of Philo: Complete and Unabridged. Translated 
by C. D. Yonge. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1995. 
Table of Figures 
Figure 1. Cultural units for king and world within some of the cultural encyclopaedias 
Figure 28: The structure of the Johannine trial narrative according to various scholars ... 267 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John 
Die Rezeption der uerung eines anderen ist nicht nur ein hermeneutisches, sondern 
grundlegend immer auch ein ethisches Problem. Wie verhalte ich mich zu einem Anderen?.1 
Alkier proposes that Umberto Ecos semiotic theory addresses this issue by positing an 
interpretation of the text that, on the one hand, always points back to an outside world that 
prompted the creation of the text, but that, on the other hand, continues to correct itself 
through an interpreting community.2 
The social presence of the Roman empire in the world outside the Gospel of John 
has been emphasized, for example in Warren Carters work.3 However, the Roman presence 
in the Eastern Mediterranean in the first century CE also affected language use. On the one 
hand, Latin words and some Latin grammatical constructions entered the vocabulary and 
impacted the syntax of Koine Greek. Additionally, the presence of Romans in 
administration, law, the army and commerce made knowledge of the Roman cultural 
encyclopaedia important for provincial retainers. These cultural and linguistic resources, 
therefore, may have been available to the composer(s) of the Gospel of John. The text itself, 
in John 18:2819:22, references a Roman setting and raises Roman concerns, such as 
rebellion (John 18:36, 40) and the legitimation of authority (19:11-12). Thus, more work is 
needed to hear not what the text says about Roman power, but what it says to those embedded 
in Roman culture. 
In New Testament scholarship, however, Roman culture is often eclipsed by Greek. 
When Wayne Meeks wrote The Prophet-King in 1967, he proposed that surveys of 
Johannine sources should include geographically, the whole Mediterranean world and 
1 Stefan Alkier, Ethik der Interpretation, in Der eine Gott und die Welt der Religionen: Beitrge zu 
einer Theologie der Religionen und zum interreligisen Dialog, ed. Markus Witte (Wrzburg: Religion & 
Kultur, 2003), 21-41 (23). 
2 Alkier, Ethik, 26-32. The word community will be used in this thesis to designate such an 
interpretive community (see Section 1.2.2, especially n. 48), without taking a position on its cohesiveness, 
either geographical or ideological (Section 7.1.4). 
3 Warren Carter, John and Empire: Initial Explorations (New York: T&T Clark, 2008), x. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
chronologically  the Roman-Hellenistic period.4 He then listed the possibilities for 
dominant influences as Jewish or Hellenistic, Palestinian or Diaspora 
traditions.5 Thus, although Roman is not only referenced but prioritized in his 
terminology, it is almost absent from his discussion.6 He only mentions Roman traditions 
with reference to the question of who is sitting at the  in the trial scene (John 19:3), and 
he does so only  propos historical verisimilitude.7 Meekss work is highlighted in this 
discussion only as a representative example of this phenomenon.8 Indeed, despite the 
ostensible presence of the Roman empire in the term Greco-Roman, when it is used the 
Greco often eclipses the Roman.  
Some scholars, rather than omitting attention to the Roman empire, have specifically 
focused on it. The present thesis agrees with these empire studies (see Section 1.1) in so 
far as they recognize the Roman empire as an inescapable presence in the first and second 
century CE Mediterranean world. It argues that Roman culture and the Latin language must 
be added among the traceable influences on the text of the Gospel of John. This chapter will 
start by situating this assertion within current discussions, first within the category of empire 
studies. These have raised important questions about Johns engagement vis  vis the Roman 
4 Wayne A. Meeks, The Prophet-King: Moses Traditions and the Johannine Christology, ed. W. C. 
van Unnik, NovTSup 14 (Leiden: Brill, 1967), 30, emphasis mine. 
5 Meeks, Prophet-King, 30. 
6 See, similarly, Jerome H. Neyrey, The Gospel of John, ed. Ben Witherington, III, The New 
Cambridge Bible Commentary (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 30. 
7 Meeks, Prophet-King, 74. The authorship of John is beyond the scope of this study, and the use of 
John throughout the thesis should not be construed as implying that authorship is singular or known. 
8 See also, for example, Christopher Stanleys chapter on citation technique in Greco-Roman 
literature that only looks at Strabo, Longinus, Heraclitus and Plutarch [Paul and the Language of Scripture: 
Citation Technique in the Pauline Epistles and Contemporary Literature (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1992), 267-91]. They are called the Greco-Roman writers examined here, despite being exclusively 
Greeks writing in Greek (273). For an example of an author who addresses both Greek and Roman elements 
in his study, see David Aune, Religion, Greco-Roman, DNTB 917. Others who use the adjective Greco-
Roman without obscuring the Roman include Alan Culpepper who uses the term in his discussion of John 6:1 
and calls  a Greco-Roman name. Given that the name is Roman and the language is Greek this seems 
to be a perfect designation [Anatomy of the Fourth Gospel: A Study in Literary Design (Philadelphia: Fortress, 
1983), 217]. See also Craig Koester who, for example, includes both Greek classics and Vergil in his 
examination of Greco-Roman influences on the meaning of  [Symbolism in the Fourth Gospel: 
Meaning, Mystery, Community (Minneapolis: Fortress, 1995), 16-17]. Jo-Ann Brant also uses the term to cover 
both Roman and Greek cultures and includes examples from each [John, ed. Mikeal C. Parsons and Charles H. 
Talbert, Paideia: Commentaries on the New Testament (Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2011), e.g., 6-9]. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
empire, typically focusing on issues of power.9 This thesis enters this conversation, however, 
via the Romans language and argues that Greek contact with Latin in the Eastern 
Mediterranean amounts to an intersection of language and culture that provides important 
data for understanding the text of the Fourth Gospel, especially John 18:2819:22. Thus, 
recent studies on language in John will be addressed and the proposal that the Fourth Gospel 
is written in an antilanguage will be critiqued. This chapter will suggest that the concept of 
a hidden transcript is more relevant to the Fourth Gospel, and discuss a connection between 
hidden transcripts and social identity theory, before giving an overview of the rest of the 
thesis. 
1.1. Empire Studies 
Some contributions to empire studies explicitly use the anti-imperialism they find in ancient 
texts to combat imperialism today. For example, the Union Theological Seminary 
conference held in 2004 was convened at a time where empire had re-emerged as one of the 
most dangerous and frightening phenomena of our time and addressed directly the ways 
the New Testament today can help shape ways of resisting and negotiating the realities of 
arrogant American power.10 Interpreters who offer anti-imperial readings are often similarly 
explicit about the applications of their results to the modern world. Warren Carter, for 
example, suggests that his work, The Roman Empire and the New Testament, provid[es] 
something of  an agenda for ecclesial communities to pursue in forming alternative 
9 For the earliest manuscript evidence connecting the name of John with this Gospel, see the discussion 
of Udo Schnelle. Note, however, that he rightly emphasizes that es handelt sich um das eine Evangelium, so 
wie es Johannes erzhlt [Das Evangelium nach Johannes, ed. Jens Herzer and Udo Schnelle, THKNT 4 
(Leipzig: Evangelische Verlagsanstalt, 1998), 346]. It is his function as a re-teller of the story that will be 
emphasized in this thesis, and the name John will be retained for convenience. 
10 Hal Taussig, Prologue: A Door Thrown Open, USQR 59.3-4 (2005): 1-5 (1). Others that take this 
perspective (with at least one representative example of their work) include Richard A. Horsley, Hearing the 
Whole Story: The Politics of Plot in Mark's Gospel (Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2001); see also his 
specific explanations in Richard A. Horsley, Jesus and Empire, USQR 59.3-4 (2005): 44-74; Warren Carter, 
The Roman Empire and the New Testament: An Essential Guide (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 2006); Elisabeth 
Schssler Fiorenza, The Power of the Word: Scripture and the Rhetoric of Empire (Minneapolis: Fortress, 
2007); John Dominic Crossan, God and Empire: Jesus against Rome, Then and Now (San Francisco: 
HarperSanFrancisco, 2007). Crossan sees the move away from non-violence occurring as early as the first 
successors of Paul. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
worldviews and communities that embody alternative, anti-imperial practices.11 This 
passion for changing oppressive systems in todays world is valuable and necessary. 
However, in reading these authors, one often feels that one is reading exegesis written with 
one eye in each world.12 My methodology, grounded in Peirces semiotics and detailed in 
the next chapter, is designed to keep both eyes as much as possible in binoculars that point 
backwards.13 
Scholars such as those mentioned above, that is, those explicitly critical of modern 
imperialism, have sometimes been accused of having overt contemporary biases.14 Yet all 
analyses can lead to this-century applications.15 Christopher Bryan, for example, does not 
find in the biblical text any interest in critiquing specific power structures by proposing 
their replacement.16 He does not see Jesus as apolitical, yet he asserts that Jesus does not 
question authority, neither that of Romes client Herod, nor that of Romes collaborators 
the Sadducean high-priests, nor that of the scribes, nor that of pagan Caesar within the 
spheres that God has allotted to him.17 His conclusions are extended to the present day in 
his unscientific postscript. 
[T]he biblical tradition subverts human order not by attempting to dismantle 
it or replace it with other structures but by consistently confronting its 
representatives with the truth about its origin and its purpose. Its origin is that 
God wills it, and its purpose is to serve Gods glory by promoting Gods 
11 Carter, Roman, 143. For further descriptions and analyses of these approaches, see Stephen D. 
Moore, Empire and Apocalypse: Postcolonialism and the New Testament, ed. J. Cheryl Exum, Jorunn kland, 
and Stephen D. Moore, The Bible in the Modern World 12 (Sheffield: Sheffield Phoenix Press, 2006), 3-23. 
12 This is not necessarily a criticism. Such an analysis is sometime purposeful, such as with new 
historicist approaches [Peter Barry, Beginning Theory: An Introduction to Literary and Cultural Theory 
(Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2009), loc 3145]. 
13 This does not negate the impossibility of doing this completely; see further below. 
14 McKnight and Modica, for example, note that at times empire criticism sounds too much like ones 
personal progressive, left-wing, neo-Marxist, or whatever, politics [Introduction, in Jesus Is Lord, Caesar 
Is Not: Evaluating Empire in New Testament Studies, ed. Scot McKnight and Joseph B. Modica (Downers 
Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2013), 15-21 (19)].  
15 In discussion, Brian Walsh pointed out, for example, that all analyses have political implications 
[Research Group: Ancient Historiography and the New Testament (review panel of McKnight and Modica, 
Jesus, presented at the annual meeting of the Institute for Biblical Research, Baltimore, MD, 22 November, 
2013)]. 
16 Christopher Bryan, Render to Caesar: Jesus, the Early Church, and the Roman Superpower 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), 9. 
17 Bryan, Render, 50-51. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
peace and Gods justice for all. Powers and superpowers are allowed to exist, 
and may even be approved, but they are always on notice.18  
Thus, although he claims that political power structures are not threatened with replacement, 
he offers standards by which they are judged and an implicit threat for their downfall. 
My purpose is to steer carefully between this Scylla and Charybdis, to offer a reading 
of the Johannine trial narrative that takes into account the ubiquity of the Roman empire but 
allows it to inform that reading only in so far as it is warranted by the text. However, the 
texts that biblical scholars analyse continue to have constitutive effects on the identity of 
many communities. Furthermore, as much as I may attempt to keep my eyes on the 
binoculars reaching back across the centuries, there is no way to see without using my own 
contemporary eyes. Thus, the challenge for me is to limit the degree to which desired 
present-day applications map my interpretations, while at the same time recognizing that 
they inevitably undergird them. Furthermore, I have a responsibility to think soberly about 
the ways that the discussions and conclusions from within the guild might affect the practices 
of future Christian communities and those who interact with them. Therefore, in Chapter 7, 
I shall allow some of those concerns to come into dialogue with my interpretation of John 
18:2819:22. 
The chronological tension between current empire studies and the ancient texts that 
they address can perhaps be illustrated by the encounter in Monty Python and the Holy Grail 
between King Arthur and two peasants from an Anarcho-Syndicalist Commune.19 When 
the king announces that he is King of the Britons, the woman responds, Who are the 
Britons?, a question familiar to anyone who has asked about ethnicity in antiquity.20 On the 
18 His first-century conclusions are similar: the general biblical understanding of pagan empire  
sees empire as having the potential either to be supportive of Gods people or else to be self-absolutizing and 
therefore the enemy of Gods people (Bryan, Render, 110-11, 125). For the divorce between the religious 
and the political, see Section 1.2.1. 
19 Terry Gilliam, and Terry Jones, Monty Python and the Holy Grail (Burbank, CA: Columbia TriStar 
Home Entertainment, 2001). See also Darl Larsen, A Book About the Film Monty Python and the Holy Grail: 
All the References from African Swallows to Zoot (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2015), 112-49. 
20 See Section 7.1. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
topic of the right to rule, King Arthur (quite reasonably within the movie world) explains 
with an angelic choral accompaniment that he is king because the Lady of the Lake, her arm 
clad in the purest shimmering samite held aloft Excalibur from the bosom of the water. The 
peasant Dennis, in the role of postcolonial analyst, passionately argues that strange women 
lyin in ponds distributin swords is no basis for a system of government. And finally, when 
Arthur grabs Dennis and yells at him to shut up, Dennis victoriously exclaims, Ah ha Now 
we see the violence inherent in the system21 
The humour in the skit stems, of course, from mapping the standards of evaluation 
from one era onto those of another. Although contemporary categories may help to better 
describe the first-century world, conclusions about meaning have to be set in categories 
closer to those that the first century would recognize. In this thesis, I shall attempt as much 
as possible to understand the language of the text in the ways that it could have been 
understood in the first and second century CE. However, since I am neither a Roman soldier 
nor a Jewish proselyte living in the Mediterranean region in those years, but a twenty-first 
century interpreter looking back at the past, my analysis is inevitably apprehended through 
different eyes.22  
1.2. Three Questions Raised by Empire Studies 
Although empire studies have received some criticism, the questions they raise have 
certainly led to fruitful discussion. Three topics are particularly relevant for this study. First, 
empire studies have demonstrated that the separation of politics and religion is a modern 
construct unhelpful for first-century analyses. Secondly, the various contemporary uses of 
empire studies raise questions about where interpretation is located. And thirdly, they have 
21 See Section 7.2.2. 
22 This is by no means a novel remark. See, for example, James Aageson who wrote, biblical 
hermeneutics is carried out between the twin poles of biblical context on the one hand and interpretive context 
on the other [Written Also for Our Sake: Paul and the Art of Biblical Interpretation (Louisville: Westminster 
John Knox, 1993), 7]. For more on the role of the author in the creation of interpretation as well as the power 
that interpretations exert in the world, see Mary Ann Tolbert, Writing History, Writing Culture, Writing 
Ourselves, in Soundings in Cultural Criticism: Perspectives and Methods in Culture, Power, and Identity in 
the New Testament, ed. Francisco Lozada, Jr. and Greg Carey (Minneapolis: Fortress, 2013), 17-30. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
drawn scholars attention to the pervasiveness of the Roman empire in the Mediterranean 
world of the early centuries of our era.  
1.2.1. Politics and religion 
Empire studies have critiqued the modern dichotomy between politics and religion, 
between the spiritual and what might be called the economic, especially as they are used 
to analyse the past.23 An ancient practice such as sacrificing for good harvests, which today 
one might want to categorize as a Hail Mary (an expression that in itself reveals todays 
conception of the place of the religious), would have fit into the same category as tilling the 
soil in ancient times.24 The problem can be illustrated by various authors conclusions on 
John 18:36 (My rule is not from this world, author translation).25 When Raymond Brown 
concludes that this statement allows Pilate to relax: Jesus kingship presents no danger to 
the genuine political interests of Rome, a dichotomy between the political and the religious 
is presumed that does not reflect first-century conceptions.26 Lance Richey both recognizes 
23 For an overview of recent work on the Fourth Gospel that recognizes this dichotomy and addresses 
the geopolitical, see Fernando F. Segovia, Johannine Studies and the Geopolitical: Reflections Upon 
Absence and Irruption, in What We Have Heard from the Beginning: The Past, Present, and Future of 
Johannine Studies, ed. Tom Thatcher (Waco, TX: Baylor University Press, 2007), 281-306. See, similarly, 
Carter, John, 20-22. A related issue, the categorization of the human and the divine, is elucidated in Steven 
J. Friesen, Twice Neokoros: Ephesus, Asia, and the Cult of the Flavian Imperial Family, ed. R. Van den Broek, 
H. J. W. Drijvers, and H. S. Versnel, RGRW 116 (Leiden: Brill, 1993), 146-52. The complex relationship of 
the discourse of John 18:2819:22 to the Roman empire and to empire in general will be more particularly 
discussed in Sections 7.1.2 and 7.2.1. 
24 Philip Harland discusses the way the rejection of a political-religious dichotomy affects discussions 
of the cults of the emperor [Honours and Worship: Emperors, Imperial Cults and Associations at Ephesus 
(First to Third Centuries C.E.), SR 25.3 (1996): 319-334 (322-23)]. 
25 I am translating  as rule for now (, BDAG 168, 1a), although in Section 4.2 I 
will argue for empire as a suitable translation in this context. 
26 Raymond E. Brown, The Gospel According to John, ed. William Albright and David Noel 
Freedman, AB 29 (New York: Doubleday, 1966; 1970), 2.869. Others who also support this dichotomy include 
R. H. Lightfoot, St. John's Gospel: A Commentary, ed. C. F. Evans (London: Oxford University Press, 1956), 
e.g., 311; C. H. Dodd, Historical Tradition in the Fourth Gospel (London: Cambridge University Press, 1965), 
e.g., 115; Heinrich Schlier, The Relevance of the New Testament, trans. W. J. O'Hara (New York: Herder and 
Herder, 1968), 216-17; C. F. Evans, Explorations in Theology 2 (London: SCM, 1977), 60; Rudolf 
Schnackenburg, The Gospel According to St John, trans. Cecily Hastings et al., vol. 2: Commentary on 
Chapters 512 (New York: Seabury, 1980), e.g., 374-76. 
While this thesis will interact with a variety of commentaries on issues of relevance, I have found the 
following to be the most useful on issues of language in general and of Roman language and culture 
specifically: Brown, John; C. K. Barrett, The Gospel According to St. John: An Introduction with Commentary 
and Notes on the Greek Text, 2nd ed. (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1978); Craig S. Keener, The Gospel of John: 
A Commentary (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 2003); Andrew T. Lincoln, The Gospel According to Saint John, 
ed. Morna D. Hooker, BNTC (Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2005); Brant, John.  
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
that the two belong together in the ancient world and yet often separates them in his 
analysis.27 A better approach is exemplified by Horsleys assertion that defining religion 
as sui generis may simply stand in the way of recognizing the various ways in which what 
may appear as religious expressions are inseparably related to other aspects of life.28  
Particularly is this true of the origins and basis for rule, yet on this topic as well 
interpreters are not always clear.29 Per Jarle Bekken, for example, argues that the presence 
of the large contingent of Roman soldiers at Jesus arrest (18:3) demonstrates that they may 
have seen him as a nationalistic warrior king.30 He states, however, that Jesus kingship 
is not an ordinary earthly, military, and political one, and that Peter (18:11) is 
commissioned for a higher cause than a military battle of a worldly order, one where Jesus 
conducts messianic and peaceful warfare in the framework of Jewish apocalyptic 
ideas.31 This statement is quite clear as to what this kingdom is not, but vague as to what it 
is. However, rule in the Mediterranean, particularly Roman imperium, was connected with 
authority given by the gods. Augustus Res gestae divi Augusti can even be called the 
Evangelium des Augustus.32 Thus, there seems to be no warrant for consigning the 
 constructed for Jesus to a realm separate from the authorities in existence at the 
27 He notes the ambiguity of those terms for emperor worship on the top of p. 37, 39 and joins them 
together on p. 57 (not as a private decision but as a public and political act of rebellion) and p. 67 (religious 
and political life). Yet he draws conclusions based on their separation, such as on p. 78 where he contrasts 
scribes with a political figure. See also a similar assumption of the separation of meaning because of the 
separation of political/secular and religious spheres on pp. 79-80. See, further, p. 85 where he suggests that 
the scarcity of this term [] in the NT is not very surprising. An examination of its range of meanings in 
the first century reveals that it did not have a singularly religious, much less messianic, sense. And on p. 157, 
he concludes that [t]he setting of this saying is manifestly political [Lance Byron Richey, Roman Imperial 
Ideology and the Gospel of John (Washington, DC: Catholic Biblical Association of America, 2007)]. 
28 Richard A. Horsley, Religion and Empire: People, Power, and the Life of the Spirit (Minneapolis: 
Fortress, 2003), 129. 
29 On John 19:11, see Section 6.2.2.2. 
30 Per Jarle Bekken, The Lawsuit Motif in John's Gospel from New Perspectives: Jesus Christ, 
Crucified Criminal and Emperor of the World, ed. M. M. Mitchell and D. P. Moessner, NovTSup 158 (Leiden: 
Brill, 2015), 248. 
31 Bekken, Lawsuit, 248-49. Bekken offers some further precision in his subsequent discussion, which 
will be addressed in Section 2.1.3. 
32 Dieter Georgi, Aeneas und Abraham: Paulus unter dem Aspekt der Latinitt?, Zeitschrift fr Neues 
Testament 10 (2002): 37-43 (38). 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
time. The fact that other rulers besides Jesus were authorized from above will provide a basis 
for discussing Roman authority throughout this thesis.33 
Andrew Lincolns work suggests a further answer: Religious and political 
dimensions of the kingdom are inextricably interwoven, since, for both the Jews and 
Pilate, acknowledgement of Jesus kingship is shown to clash with loyalty to Caesars 
rule.34 This thesis proposes to answer in what sense this is and is not the case. There is 
clearly some sort of comparison being made between Jesus and Caesar in Johns depiction 
of Jesus trial before Pilate (e.g., 19:2-5, 12, 15).35 Yet it is equally clear that Jesus disciples 
are not encouraged to rebel against Caesars rule (18:10-11, 36). The solution to this 
dilemma proposed in this thesis is a recategorization of loyalties that orders loyalty to Jesus 
above loyalty to Caesar.36 Thus, although the issue of power is subordinated to that of truth, 
Roman conceptions of power are nevertheless addressed.37 
1.2.2. Interpretation 
Besides questions of conceptual categories, empire studies have also questioned how 
one can know where meaning is situated. Where should interpretation happen? Richard 
Horsley draws his analysis of the historical Jesus in a fuller and more adequate historical 
context than he believes is usually done.38 In contrast Elisabeth Schssler Fiorenza 
highlights the importance of interpreting by carefully analysing and reframing the workings 
of power, in the imperial discourses of the past and those of the present, as well as by 
constructing an imaginative space for articulating an alternative radical egalitarian 
33 Religious and political authority also cannot be separated in the case of the Jewish lite [Helen K. 
Bond, Political Authorities: The Herods, Caiaphas, and Pontius Pilate, in Jesus among Friends and Enemies: 
A Historical and Literary Introduction to Jesus in the Gospels, ed. Chris Keith and Larry W. Hurtado (Grand 
Rapids: Baker Academic, 2011), 219-47 (226)]. 
34 Andrew T. Lincoln, Truth on Trial: The Lawsuit Motif in the Fourth Gospel (Peabody, MA: 
Hendrickson, 2000), 127. 
35 This will be a main focus of the discussion in Chapters 4, 5 and 7. 
36 See Section 7.1. 
37 See Sections 6.1 and 7.2; Lincoln, Truth, 128. On truth, see the discussion of hidden transcripts 
in Sections 1.3.2 and 5.1.4. 
38 Richard A. Horsley, Jesus and Empire: The Kingdom of God and the New World Disorder 
(Minneapolis: Fortress, 2003), 13.  
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
discourse.39 I shall be focusing the binoculars on the space between these two, not 
attempting to push through the text to a historical Jesus but neither looking at current 
practices stemming from contemporary interpretations of the texts. I am interested, instead, 
in the way the matrix of languages in the first century (see below and in Chapter 3) affected 
communication, and the way an awareness of these intersectionsespecially with Latin
might illuminate the Gospel of John. For this reason, the locations usually associated with 
its composition and redaction (specifically Ephesus, Antioch, and Alexandria) will figure 
more prominently in this thesis than Galilee and Judaea.40 
In order to pursue the question just raised, I shall use methodology developed by 
Umberto Eco and Stefan Alkier. Based on Charles Sanders Peirces categorical semiotics, it 
describes the process of meaning-production and analyses both the context of production 
and the context of interpretation (past and present), recognizing the inherent limitations of 
each individual analysis.41 The three elements in Peirces semiotic triad are Sign, 
interpretant, object where a Sign is something which stands to somebody for something in 
some respect or capacity.42 The thing it stands for (the something) is the object, and the 
39 Schssler Fiorenza, Power, 28. For other studies that highlight the Roman empire but that focus 
primarily on the historical Jesus, see Richard A. Horsley, and Tom Thatcher, John, Jesus, and the Renewal of 
Israel (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2013); Bryan, Render. The definition of discourse used in this thesis is 
provided by Chandler: A discourse is a system of representation consisting of a set of representational codes 
(including a distinctive interpretive repertoire of concepts, tropes and myths) for constructing and maintaining 
particular forms of reality within the ontological domain (or topic) defined as relevant to its concerns. 
Representational codes thus reflect relational principles underlying the symbolic order of the discursive field 
[Semiotics: The Basics (London: Routledge, 2007), 249]. (For a definition of code, see Section 2.1.2.) 
Discourse is often used in literary studies to distinguish words spoken by characters from narration [e.g., 
David A. Lamb, Text, Context and the Johannine Community: A Sociolinguistic Analysis of the Johannine 
Writings (London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark, 2014), 146]. This thesis will use speech for those instead. 
40 For an argument for these locations in particular, see Section 3.1. 
41 The following discussion is based on Stefan Alkier, New Testament Studies on the Basis of 
Categorical Semiotics, in Reading the Bible Intertextually, ed. Richard B. Hays, Stefan Alkier, and Leroy 
Andrew Huizenga (Waco, TX: Baylor University Press, 2009), 223-48; as well as Chandler, Semiotics, 29-33. 
For a similar approach without an explicitly semiotic foundation, see Manfred Lang, The Christian and the 
Roman Self: The Lukan Paul and a Roman Reading, in Christian Body, Christian Self: Concepts of Early 
Christian Personhood, ed. Clare K. Rothschild and Trevor W. Thompson, WUNT 1.284 (Tbingen, Germany: 
Mohr Siebeck, 2011), 152-73. Although this thesis will occasionally reference Peirce, it primarily depends on 
Ecos work as it interprets and applies the theories of Peirce. For a clear and concise description of the semiotic 
triad in Peirce, see James Jakb Liszka, A General Introduction to the Semeiotic of Charles Sanders Peirce 
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1996), 18-34. 
42 Charles Sanders Peirce, Logic as Semiotic: The Theory of Signs, in Philosophical Writings of 
Peirce, ed. Justus Buchler (New York: Dover, 1955), 98-119 (99). Umberto Eco, similarly, defines a Sign to 
be everything that on the grounds of a previously established social convention, can be taken as standing for 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
interpretant is the image or concept created in the mind of someone (the somebody).43 
Although Signs are often conceived of broadly, this thesis will only focus on Signs in the 
form of written texts.44 Peirce is used in preference to Saussure because the inclusion of an 
interpretant, the primacy of the Sign, and the extensive elaboration of their connections with 
culture allow me to interpret a text that emerged from cultural intersections.45 Eco and 
something else [A Theory of Semiotics (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1976), 16]. The words Sign, 
interpretant, and object are variously capitalized or not in the literature. In this thesis I have chosen only to 
capitalize the word Sign in order to distinguish its use in semiotics (Sign) from its use in Johannine studies 
(sign). See, too, the recent explanation of these elements in Leroy A. Huizenga, The Old Testament in the 
New, Intertextuality and Allegory, JSNT 38.1 (2015): 17-35 (10). I am aware that some analyses have taken 
the Gospel of John as a sign in the Johannine sense. That is not the claim being made in this thesis. See for 
example Tom Thatchers description of Dodds approach in The Semeiotics of History: C. H. Dodd on the 
Origins and Character of the Fourth Gospel, in Engaging with C.H. Dodd on the Gospel of John: Sixty Years 
of Tradition and Interpretation, ed. Tom Thatcher and Catrin H. Williams (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2013), 1-28 (10-12). Thatcher says, In Dodds paradigm, then, the word sign describes the function 
of the Fourth Gospels total narrative rather than the specific form of any individual episode within it. 
Certainly, Dodd says this of the arrest, trial and crucifixion of Jesus Christ [C. H. Dodd, The Interpretation 
of the Fourth Gospel (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1953), 438-39]. Note that an error in Thatcher 
mistakenly places this passage in Dodd, Tradition (Thatcher, Semeiotics, 12). 
43 The interpretant, although sometimes described as the idea that arises in the mind of the addressee, 
must, in Ecos determination, be a public understanding separated from mere mental experience [Kant and 
the Platypus: Essays on Language and Cognition, trans. Alastair McEwen (London: Secker & Warburg, 1999), 
137; see also Peirce cited in Umberto Eco, The Limits of Interpretation, ed. Thomas A. Sebeok, Advances in 
Semiotics (Bloomington, IL: Indiana University Press, 1990), 28; Eco, Theory, 68-72]. It is either a sign or an 
expression or a sequence of expressions which translate a previous expression (Umberto Eco, Semiotics and 
the Philosophy of Language (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1984), 43). David Savan suggests that 
Peirce might have more properly called it a translatant [An Introduction to C.S. Peirce's Full System of 
Semeiotic, Monograph Series of the TSC 1 (Toronto: Toronto Semiotic Circle, 1988), 41]. Neither Peirce nor 
his interpreters are always clear on this: the interpretant is the image or concept created in the mind of the 
somebody (Peirce, Logic, 99). Albert Atkin clearly identifies the way the interpretant is determined by the 
Sign-object relation but may somewhat muddy the waters by referring to ones understanding [Peirce's 
Theory of Signs, in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. Edward N. Zalta (Stanford, CA: The 
Metaphysics Research Lab: Center for the Study of Language and Information: Stanford University, 2013), 3, 
5, 6, 14-15, 18, 21-25]. However, the repeated use of the first person plural in these passages connects this 
understanding clearly to a consensus that exists outside of individual appropriation and therefore can be 
expressed. Furthermore, Eco detaches the concept of interpretant from individual mental experiences by 
reminding that [t]he interpretant is not the interpreter (even if a confusion of this type occasionally arises in 
Peirce); Eco, Theory, 68; pace Leroy A. Huizenga, New Isaac: Tradition and Intertextuality in the Gospel of 
Matthew, ed. M. M. Mitchell and D. P. Moessner, NovTSup 131 (Leiden: Brill, 2009), 32. 
44 Texts, like Signs, can be defined more broadly and thus can refer to anything which can be read 
for meaning; to some theorists, the world is social text. Although the term appears to privilege written texts 
(it seems graphocentric and logocentric), to most semioticians a text is a systems of signs (in the form of 
words, images, sounds and/or gestures). The term is often used to refer to recorded (e.g., written) texts which 
are independent of their users (used in this sense the term excludes unrecorded speech) (Chandler, Semiotics, 
263). It is in this last sense that the word text will be used in this thesis, to refer to written systems of Signs, 
with particular reference to their role in conveying meaning. 
45 Dermot Nestor, Cognitive Perspectives on Israelite Identity (New York: T&T Clark, 2010), 112-
25. The object, in Peirce, relates to the condition of secondness. It is not existence nor even simple perception. 
It is the effect of perception on ones conceptions. Peirce discusses the change in the pitch of a train whistle as 
it goes by an observer (C.P. 1.335). One perceives first one note, then another. Experience, though, which is 
secondness, consists in the recognition that the note changes; it therefore pushes back against the firstness of 
ones mind. 
Farzad Sharifian is not clear on this. He emphasizes conceptualisation as primary, but then grounds 
conceptualization in experience [Cultural Conceptualisations and Language: Theoretical Framework and 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
Alkiers elaborations of Peirce are used in preference to Bourdieu, because Bourdieus focus 
on habitus, the regulative system of habitual actions and responses of individuals in their 
social worlds, takes analysis beyond the text into discussions of behaviour.46 While I touch 
briefly on ethics and ethos in Chapter 7, my main focus will be on language and culture, 
topics which Eco and Alkier helpfully discuss. 
As an example of Peirces triad of Sign, object and interpretant, this thesis can be 
described, in the language of Peirce, as follows:  
The Gospel of John is a Sign that arose on the basis of the needs and experiences of 
its creator(s). It is not a clear and transparent window into that reality (the dynamic object), 
but a Sign determined by the immediate object, or Johns particular view of the life of 
Jesus.47 The Sign-object relation produces an interpretant, which may be immediate (initial 
and unformed, like my first reading of the Gospel), dynamic (a scholars magnum opus), or 
final (a comprehensive interpretant that hopefully mirrors the immediate object, produced 
by a community over time).48 However, in writing this thesis, I have taken my interpretant 
Applications, ed. Ning Yu and Farzad Sharifian, CLSCC (Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 2011), 3, 19-20, 25-
26]. On the one hand, he says, people view various aspects of the environment as cognitive anchors for their 
conceptualisations, which seems to put experience first, but he immediately goes on to say that Aboriginal 
Australians have conceptually associated their totemic and cultural stories with aspects of their environment. 
This has often acted as a basis for considering various aspects of the environment, such as a rock, as sacred. 
Then, [w]e tend to categorise every single entity around us (Cultural, 38-39). So whether Sharifian agrees or 
disagrees with Peirce is unclear. 
46 Nestor, Cognitive, 114. 
47 An example of a dynamic object would be a //dog// as it exists, in all of its aspects including the 
chemical composition of its saliva. An example of an immediate object is the idea of a dog that only includes 
certain aspects (such as its loyalty, bark, furriness) that British culture emphasizes as the salient elements of 
dog-ness, and that English speakers represent with the Sign /dog/. (For the conventions used for representing 
Signs and their contents, see Eco, Theory, xi). Note that from the point of view of the object, the sign is 
passive, determined by the object. From the point of view of sign production, on the other hand, [t]he 
production of a sign is the causal result of the interaction between a dynamic object and the sign medium of 
some sign-interpreting agency (Liszka, General, 23). 
48 Another word frequently used to describe the final interpretant is habit [e.g., Eco, Theory, 70; 
Umberto Eco, The Role of the Reader: Explorations in the Semiotics of Texts (London: Hutchinson, 1981), 
192]. Note as well that the interpretant is intentionally separated from any empirical interpreter: The 
interpretant is that which guarantees the validity of the sign, even in the absence of the interpreter (Eco, 
Theory, 68). For the forms that interpretants can take, see Eco, Theory, 69-71. The word community will be 
used throughout this study to describe people who share at least one encyclopaedia. Cf. Linda Hutcheon, Irony's 
Edge: The Theory and Politics of Irony (Florence, KY: Routledge, 1994), 85-96. When discussing a Johannine 
community, I would add to this cognitive component the evaluative and emotional components that together 
define a group for social identity theorists [Philip F. Esler, An Outline of Social Identity Theory, in T&T 
Clark Handbook to Social Identity in the New Testament, ed. J. Brian Tucker and Coleman A. Baker (London: 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
of the Sign produced by John (my understanding of the text of the Gospel) and turned it into 
an object.49 This object, pared down according to certain grounds (primarily Roman culture 
in the East), has prompted the creation of this new text, a new Sign that requires an 
interpretantfrom each and all of my readers.  
The previous paragraph describes this thesis using the Peircian triad to demonstrate 
the theoretical basis for an analysis that allows for multiple approaches to the Gospel without 
excluding authorial intent.50 Alkier explains: 
Peirce is revealed here as a representative of a version of the correspondence 
theory of truth. The semiotic point of Peirces theory is to learn to think about 
the plurality of interpretations as stations on the way to truth, without favoring 
an absolute arbitrariness. In the short run, however, no interpretation can 
claim to be the absolute interpretation. It cannot show itself to be suitable for 
the dynamic object. Only in the long run can an interpretive community 
achieve an approach to the final interpretant.51 
This helps with concerns raised by Stanley Porter.52 When Richard Hays discusses 
the creation of meaning, he notes that what he calls the hermeneutical event could happen 
either in Pauls mind, in the original readers of the letter, in the text itself, in my act of 
reading, or in a community of interpretation.53 And Hays determines that since he is 
neither prepared to embrace the doctrines of any of the hermeneutical schools represented 
 nor inclined to jettison any of the elements of interpretation to which they draw attention, 
he planned his work as an attempt to hold them all together in creative tension.54 Stanley 
Porter responds by pointing out that it is not at all apparent how one can hold all five of 
Bloomsbury, 2014), 13-39 (17)]. Also, see, Rogers Brubaker, Mara Loveman, and Peter Stamatov, Ethnicity 
as Cognition, Theory and Society 33 (2004): 31-64.  
49 This wording recognizes my activity and contributions in the process. I have tried to underscore 
the crucial active, creative nature of interpretation by referring to writers of interpretations instead of the more 
passive-sounding readers of texts. The process of interpreting the Bible (or actually any other script) is an [sic] 
dynamic process of writing a new text into existence, whether oral (for example, a sermon) or physically 
written (Tolbert, Writing, 21). On this see further Section 2.1.2.  
50 The triad is presented in this section and elaborated further in Section 2.1, as well as applied in the 
rest of the thesis. Alkiers approach is summarized by Huizenga in Old, 9-14. 
51 Alkier, Studies, 229. One might think that 2000 years is enough of a long run, and yet 
interpretation goes on For more on Alkiers concerns for ethical interpretation, see Ethik. 
52 These concerns are raised in the context of intertextuality which will be discussed in Section 2.3. 
53 Richard B. Hays, Echoes of Scripture in the Letters of Paul (New Haven: Yale University Press, 
1989), 26. 
54 Hays, Echoes, 27. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
these positions together in tension, unless the rules of contradiction and exclusion are 
suspended.55 Porter specifically points out the impossibility of conducting an analysis that 
grounds meaning in what the author intended to say, what early readers understood, what 
todays readers think early readers understood, what the text implies the author meant and 
the readers were supposed to understand, what I think the text means, and what scholars 
together (if there is such a thing) think the text means, all at the same time.56 
A semiotic analysis divides and conquers the problem. Peirces semiosis grounds 
communication in a three-fold process, thus legitimizing analyses of each of its three parts. 
One studies the Sign in its relationship to the culture that produced it; one studies the 
historical realities that impacted Sign production, and one studies the way the text has been 
and is now understood.57 Furthermore, semiotics recognizes that an interpretation, too, is a 
new object that prompts the interpreter to create a new Sign to communicate itan article, 
a thesis or a commentary. This new Sign then requires interpretation, the immediate 
interpretant developing into a dynamic interpretant and, ultimately, into a final interpretant 
of the thesis of the student of the Gospel of Johnwhich, then, may become an object that 
prompts your response.  
What is important for this project is the way this three-fold process of semiosis 
provides a theoretical basis for examining the text of the Gospel itself as well as interpreters 
and interpretations, ancient and contemporary. Even experimental intertextuality, which 
opens up study to an infinite variety of initially implausible connections between written 
55 Stanley E. Porter, Allusions and Echoes, in As It Is Written: Studying Paul's Use of Scripture, ed. 
Stanley E. Porter and Christopher D. Stanley, SBL Symposium Series 50 (Atlanta: SBL Press, 2008), 29-40 
(37). Thomas Hatina raises similar concerns; see Intertextuality and Historical Criticism in New Testament 
Studies: Is There a Relationship?, BibInt 7.1 (1999): 28-43. 
56 Porter, Allusions, 37-38. 
57 Alkiers full proposal will not be detailed in this thesis. Briefly, it includes three aspects, what he 
calls intratextuality, intertextuality and extratextuality. Intratextuality covers syntax, semantics, and 
pragmatics; intertextuality covers production-oriented intertextuality (using intertextuality in the limited sense 
as a search for sources), reception-oriented intertextuality (either limited with real, historically verified readers 
or unlimited with historically plausible readers), and experimental intertextuality (with unlimited connections 
to other texts). Finally, extratextuality looks at the construction and reconstruction of the text itself, at the 
information that the text gives about the world in which it was created, and at the way the text can be understood 
and can provide understanding for archaeological research (Alkier, Studies, 240-47). 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
works, may prove illuminating. The question becomes not where is meaning located? but 
which part of the meaning-making process do I want to investigate in order to offer more 
precision for the dynamic interpretant of the Gospel of John current in scholarship today? 
Most importantly, Alkier offers this model not as a plea for arbitrariness but rather [as] the 
sign-theoretical motivation for collaboration on the basis of an intersubjectively defensible 
and qualified pluralism.58 Beethovens fifth symphony, Steve Moyise rightly notes, can be 
played with infinite variety, but it will never become Beethovens sixth.59 
Semiotic theory, then, provides a methodological underpinning for proposing to 
study the Gospel of John from a Latin and Roman perspective despite its undoubtedly Jewish 
background.60 This theory will be further discussed and defined in the next chapter. This 
study also recognizes that this is only one view of the Gospel and must be integrated into, 
rather than set against, other interpretations. (There will likely be areas of incompatibility, 
but the expectation is that these can be resolved through nuancing and only occasionally by 
the complete abandonment of one position or another.) More specifically, this methodology 
provides a structure that connects Sign, object, and interpretant. Thus, this thesis will discuss 
the text of John 18:2819:22 and its connections with a Roman cultural encyclopaedia.61 It 
will also include examinations of possible objectshistorical events, literary texts, and 
material culture that contributed to the realities that prompted the creation of the Gospel of 
John.62 And on the basis of the extension of the Latin language and Roman culture into 
certain social strata and geographical areas of the eastern Mediterranean of the first two 
58 Alkier, Studies, 228. 
59 Steve Moyise, Evoking Scripture: Seeing the Old Testament in the New (London: T&T Clark, 2008), 
138-39. 
60 Some who note the connections between the Fourth Gospel and the Hebrew or Greek Bible include 
Lincoln, Truth, e.g., 37; Manfred Lang, Johanneische Abschiedsreden und Senecas Konsolationsliteratur: Wie 
konnte ein Rmer Joh 13,31-17,26 zu lesen?, in Kontexte des Johannesevangeliums: Das vierte Evangelium 
in religions- und traditionsgeschichtlicher Perspektive, ed. Jrg Frey and Udo Schnelle, WUNT 175 
(Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2004), 365-412 (366); Peter M. Phillips, The Prologue of the Fourth Gospel 
(London: T&T Clark, 2006), 225. Lang and Phillips in particular note the Jewish influences on the text despite 
the broader (Phillips) or other (Lang) primary focus of their own work. 
61 Chapters 4-6. 
62 Especially Chapter 3, but also throughout. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
centuries CE, it suggests that some of Johns first auditors lived in close enough proximity 
to Romans to have access to their cultural encyclopaedia, and that John crafted at least part 
of his narrative, the trial before Pilate, in a way that utilized those communicative 
resources.63 
1.2.3. Intersectionality in the Roman empire 
The third question to be addressed then is: to what extent did the Roman empire 
influence the creation of the text under consideration? Was it in the foreground, not the 
background, of late first-century daily life or was it lurking in the background of the 
narrative?64 This thesis will answer with a firm neither.  
Romans and their Latin language were present to some extent throughout the Roman 
empire.65 Some scholars, however, have tried to delineate an exact border between the Greek 
Eastern half of the empire and the Latin Western half.66 However, to divide the territories 
into such constructed divisions is to impose a heuristic device that ignores the points of 
contact between the ruled and their rulers, locals and foreigners, merchants and buyers, 
scribes, slaves, and stonecutters with their masters, patrons or employers. Halvor Moxnes 
notes the problems with such constructions, especially those of race, culture, tribe, ethnicity 
and religion. He argues that identity, what it is to be human, is not based on pre-given social 
categories but on processes of interaction between people living in complex and diversified 
situations.67 Thus, it is illegitimate to conceptualize identities in the first century that rely 
63 Chapter 3. Note that the use of the word trial for John 18:2819:22 has recently come under fire. 
For a discussion of my continued use of the word, see Section 2.1.3. 
64 Carter, John, x; Christopher W. Skinner, John's Gospel and the Roman Imperial Context: An 
Evaluation of Recent Proposals, in Jesus Is Lord, Caesar Is Not: Evaluating Empire in New Testament Studies, 
ed. Scot McKnight and Joseph B. Modica (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2013), 116-29 (122). 
65 For some examples of Roman influence in the East, see Chapter 3 as well as Simon Swain, 
Hellenism and Empire: Language, Classicism, and Power in the Greek World, AD 50-250 (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1996), 418-21. 
66 See, for example, the map showing areas of language influence in Bruno Rochette, Le latin dans le 
monde grec: Recherches sur la diffusion de la langue et des lettres latines dans les provinces hellnophones 
de l'empire romain (Brussels: Latomus, 1997), 390-91. 
67 Halvor Moxnes, Identity in Jesus Galileefrom Ethnicity to Locative Intersectionality, BibInt 
18.4-5 (2010): 390-416 (416). The construction of identity will also be important to the analysis proposed in 
this thesis. See Sections 1.3.3 and 7.1. Kathy Ehrensperger has also critiqued the concept of hybridity, 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
exclusively on religion, or to construct a Jewish/Christian binary that was not present at the 
time but that helps to define the scholar in the present. This kind of constructed identity 
subsumes all particularity under the all-defining element of religion and flattens out the wide 
variety of religious expressions that are present based on, for example, gender.68 However, 
this same critique can be raised against attempts to create maps of first-century linguistic 
territories that reflect the constructed monolingualism of the United States or the national 
territories that, in theory, separate the languages of the European Union and obscure actual 
language use. 
Moxnes proposes instead an intersectionalist approach that raises the question of 
whose interests are legitimized, whose needs are served and what power relations are 
supported.69 Power relations will be brought into this study primarily in Chapter 7. His 
approach, however, allows for the creation of a matrix in which each individual exists not 
only within his or her intersection of gender, health, place, and status but also next to 
someone at a different intersectionher husbands (John 4:16-18), his brother (1:40), her 
servants (2:5), his disciples (2:11).70 This coheres with Sin Jones who suggests that an 
analysis of a society must consider different kinds of identities; at the very least it must 
include ethnicity, class and gender. And most significantly, these should be analysed not as 
separate entities, but in their intersections, i.e. when they come together and are 
interrelated.71  
especially notions of cultural fusion in the use of the term Hellenism. That term, along with the term Greco-
Roman (see Chapter 1), has been avoided in this thesis in favour of Moxnes intersectionality [Paul at the 
Crossroads of Cultures: Theologizing in the Space-Between, ed. Mark Goodacre, LNTS 456 (London: 
Bloomsbury, 2013), 35-36]. 
68 Moxnes, Identity, 398. 
69 Moxnes, Identity, 391. 
70 Moxnes, Identity, 403, 406.  
71 Moxnes, Identity, 399; Sin Jones, The Archaeology of Ethnicity: Constructing Identities in the 
Past and Present (London: Routledge, 1997). See, similarly, Zeba A. Crook, Fictive-Friendship and the Fourth 
Gospel, HvTSt 67.3 (2011) 2/7. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
Yet language, too, intersects with other factors of identity.72 Evidence of language as 
another dimension of intersectionality can be found in inscriptions and papyri, and will be 
extensively presented in Chapter 3. Travel, commerce, the army and Roman law brought 
Latin into the East; it existed in all Latin-speakers cells but also, as a result, next to any 
other individual with whom Latin-speakers came into contact.73 Other languages also 
extended through certain locations and strata of society. Aramaic, Latin and Greek, at least, 
left their impact on Johns text (19:20). Their traces must not be mistaken for clearly Jewish, 
pagan and/or Hellenistic influences, because ethnic and cultural practices did not clearly 
separate, but intersected with language use.74 Each person functioned in her own cell in the 
matrix at a specific intersection of language knowledge, language use, and language need.75 
The languages in an area (either geographical or situational, such as a forum or an 
acclamatio) compete with each other, and speakers fill in the gaps between ideas and 
available expressions either by adding to their language (with new language knowledge, 
expanded word meanings, borrowing or inventing), by changing the mode of use (with skills 
such as rhetoric, imagery, poetry or style) or by using methods of communication besides 
oral (such as epistolary or epigraphical).76 Thus each person stands at a crossroad of these 
possibilities; his own personal language patternhis idiolect in linguistic termsis located 
in the cell where his competencies in each of these areas intersect. These competencies, then, 
may extend to several languages or simply a variety of the possible uses of just one. 
72 My own background as a third culture kid (TCK) makes identification with the intersectionality of 
language particularly vivid. For more on this see, e.g., David C. Pollock, and Ruth E. Van Reken, Third Culture 
Kids: Growing up among Worlds, 2nd ed. (Boston: Nicholas Brealey, 2009). 
73 The traces of these contacts are detailed in Section 3.1.  
74 This has not always been clearly understood. See, for example, C. K. Barrett, The Gospel of John 
and Judaism, trans. D. M. Smith (Philadelphia: Fortress, 1975), 22, 30, 31. 
75 Einar Haugen, Language Fragmentation in Scandinavia: Revolt of the Minorities, in Minority 
Languages Today: A Selection from the Papers Read at the First international Conference on Minority 
Languages Held at Glasgow University from 8 to 13 September 1980, ed. Einar Ingvald Haugen, J. Derrick 
McClure, and Derick S. Thomson (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1981), 100-19 (114). 
76 For the definition of language used in this thesis, see Section 2.2.1. For more on gaps in the text, 
see Section 2.1.2, and Umberto Eco, Lector in fabula: Le rle du lecteur ou la coopration interprtative dans 
les textes narratifs, trans. Myriem Bouzaher, ed. Jean-Paul Enthoven, Livre de Poche (Paris: Grasset, 1985), 
63-64. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
Furthermore, competencies do not simply cover language useto learn a language, 
particularly by interacting with its native speakers, is to learn cultural competence as well.77 
It is in these intersections that texts are created, and both authors and (intended) 
audience(s) affect their composition. The present analysis, then, accepts the challenge of 
empire studies to recognize the effects of the Roman empire, but it asks a different question. 
I agree with Richard Horsley when he argues that to separate religion and politics is 
anachronistic and that Gospel narratives should be read within their historical and cultural 
contexts.78 This thesis will focus only secondarily on how the authors and/or audiences of 
the New Testament negotiated the presence of imperial power.79 My primary question 
focuses on the intersection of Latin as the language of the conquerors with the people in the 
Greek East, and the way the resulting cultural contact affected the composition and reception 
of the Gospel of John. If that influence is taken into consideration, how might the text be 
understood? 
Such cultural questions about language, however, are not new to Johannine scholars. 
So proposals about Johannine antilanguage and hidden transcripts, as well as social identity 
theory as it connects with language and issues of intersectionality, must be addressed next. 
77 Kate A. Walters, and Faith P. Auton-Cuff, A Story to Tell: The Identity Development of Women 
Growing up as Third Culture Kids, Mental Health, Religion & Culture 12.7 (2009): 755-72 (756); Raquel C. 
Hoersting, and Sharon Rae Jenkins, No Place to Call Home: Cultural Homelessness, Self-Esteem and Cross-
Cultural Identities, International Journal of Intercultural Relations 35 (2011): 17-30 (18). Carol Eastman 
argues against this connection between culture and language, but her conclusions only apply to artificial 
language learning such as in a classroom, away from contact with native speakers [Language, Ethnic Identity 
and Change, in Language, Society, and Identity, ed. John Edwards (Oxford: Blackwell, 1985), 259-76 (260)]. 
Her discussion is problematic also because of her assumptions about primordiality (264). Against primordiality, 
see comments in Moxnes, Identity, 395-96; Ehrensperger, Crossroads, 40-41. 
78 Horsley, Jesus, 45-49, 49-62. 
79 Section 7.2. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
1.3. The Cultural Effects of Language Contact on the Gospel of John 
Older studies have theorized about the influence of another language (usually Aramaic) on 
the Greek of the Fourth Gospel.80 The Hebrew Bible (for Lincoln) and Philo (for Bekken) 
have provided data for analyzing the Gospel of John from a Jewish encyclopaedia.81 In 
contrast, the next two chapters will argue that the Johannine trial narrative guides its auditors 
to the cultural units of the Roman encyclopaedia.82 These will be defined in Chapter 2 as the 
various contextual meanings available to a Sign within the cultural encyclopaedia (the 
gathered possibilities for all Signs) in which it is used.83 References to a certain 
encyclopaedia, what Alkier calls Haftpunkte, are particularly concentrated in John 18:28
19:22 which constitute the bounds of the exegetical analysis in Chapter 6. Thus, while 
recognizing the importance of the Jewish encyclopaedia, this thesis seeks to explore the 
insights gleaned from a Roman interpretation.  
Recent sociolinguistic studies have also focused more on rhetoric than lexicon, 
specifically using the models of antilanguage and hidden transcripts in their analyses. I shall 
80 For an overview of older scholarship on Aramaic in John, see Schuyler Brown, From Burney to 
Black: The Fourth Gospel and the Aramaic Question, CBQ 26.3 (1964): 323-39; as well as a summary of these 
findings in Barrett, Judaism, 24-31. Maurice Casey updates this critical review and concludes, At first sight 
the argument for an Aramaic underlay to John's Gospel looks like a massive argument of cumulative weight. 
On being critically examined, however, all the work prior to that of R.A. Martin turns out to consist of 10,000 
leaky buckets, which, in the long run, hold no more water than one. All that has been shown is that some of the 
traditions used by the fourth evangelist go back ultimately to Aramaic sources [Is John's Gospel True? 
(London: Routledge, 1996), 91]. He is also appreciative but skeptical of Martins conclusions, demonstrating 
by a reverse translation process the difficulties of the Gospel as a Greek translation of an Aramaic original 
[Casey, True?, 97; Raymond A. Martin, Syntax Criticism of Johannine Literature, the Catholic Epistles, and 
the Gospel Passion Accounts (Lewiston, NY: Mellen, 1989)]. See also the overviews in Ernst Haenchen, John: 
A Commentary on the Gospel of John Chapters 1-6, ed. Robert Walter Funk and Ulrich Busse, trans. Robert 
Walter Funk, ed. Helmut Koester, Hermeneia: A Critical and Historical Commentary on the Bible, vol. 1 
(Philadelphia: Fortress, 1984), 52-66; Raymond E. Brown, An Introduction to the Gospel of John, ed. Francis 
J. Moloney, ed. David Noel Freedman, ABRL (New York: Doubleday, 2003), 279-81; D. Moody Smith, 
Johannine Christianity (London: T&T Clark, 2005), 15 n. 29; Peter G. Bolt, Aramaic and the ipsissima verba 
Jesu, in Encyclopedia of the Historical Jesus, ed. Craig A. Evans (New York: Routledge, 2008), 26-32; 
Stanley E. Porter, Language Criticism, in Encyclopedia of the Historical Jesus, ed. Craig A. Evans (New 
York: Routledge, 2008), 361-65. For a more detailed overview of methodologies, see Loren T. Stuckenbruck, 
An Approach to the New Testament through Aramaic Sources: The Recent Methodological Debate, JSP.8 
(1991): 3-29. 
81 Lincoln, Truth, e.g., 69; Bekken, Lawsuit, e.g., 118-47. 
82 References to auditors and to hearing the Gospel (rather than seeing and reading) will be used 
throughout this thesis in recognition that most of the people encountering its words would have heard it read 
rather than reading it themselves (Lucian Ind. 2, 4; Lincoln, Gospel, 30-31). 
83 Section 2.1. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
discuss these in turn, noting the problems with applying the model of antilanguage to the 
Gospel of John, the usefulness of the model of hidden transcripts, as well as some responses 
to its detractors. Language, besides being used to negotiate power (as with antilanguages and 
hidden transcripts) is also a marker of identity. Although this thesis is not primarily a social 
identity study of the Gospel, enough data will have been gathered by the last chapter to 
permit some suggestive conclusions that might provide a basis for future studies using the 
tools of social identity theory.  
1.3.1. Antilanguage 
The oft-quoted label of spiritual Gospel that Clement of Alexandria gave to the 
Fourth Gospel is one of the earliest attempts to explain its differences from the Synoptics.84 
More recently, arguments that these differences constitute an antilanguage have been 
proposed.85 
An antilanguage differs from a dialect. Whereas a dialect is recognizable as such in 
part because it contains elements that do not follow, in some way, the standard grammatical 
patterns of the dominant language, an antilanguage follows the standard patterns but replaces 
some of the vocabulary, especially in domains of importance to the community that uses it.86 
In his article introducing this phenomenon, M. A. K. Halliday describes the relationship 
between language and community as follows: The anti-language arises when the alternative 
84 Eusebius, Church History 6.14. An earlier explanation is hinted at by the Muratorian Fragment 
which claims that the Fourth Gospel was written collaboratively by John and other disciples and bishops 
(condiscipuli et episcopi) with John editing the text. On the dating of the Muratorian Fragment, see Charles E. 
Hill, The Debate over the Muratorian Fragment and the Development of the Canon, WTJ 57.2 (1995): 437-
85 N. R. Petersen, The Gospel of John and the Sociology of Light: Language and Characterization in 
the Fourth Gospel (Valley Forge, PA: Trinity Press, 1993), 89-109; Bruce Malina, and Richard Rohrbaugh, 
Social Science Commentary on the Gospel of John (Minneapolis: Fortress, 1998), 7-9, 46-48; Neyrey, John, 
13-14, 293; Carter, John, 74-75. For an example of a commentary that recognizes the arguments but does not 
adopt this perspective, see Brant, John, 10, 96. For the history of the use of the term antilanguage, see Lamb, 
Text, 116 n. 58. 
86 M. A. K. Halliday, Anti-Languages, American Anthropologist 78.3 (1976): 570-584 (571). 
Following developing practice, I do not hyphenate the word in this thesis except in quoted material (Lamb, 
Text, 115 n. 57). 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
reality is a counter-reality, set up in opposition to some established norm.87 The creation of 
this counter-reality includes the development of a language that only functions within that 
reality. 
The relexicalization that occurs in such circumstances, the substitution of new 
words for old, foregrounds the use of the language as a display, although at the same time 
it serves to establish and perpetuate the structure of the antisociety.88 An antilanguage can 
be spoken in the presence of outsiders because it remains closed and secret from the 
dominant group(s).89 It thus creates a space for discourse among those subordinated even in 
the presence of the lite.90  
This space, by its very existence, poses a threat to those who hold power in that 
society. James Scott describes the official description of feudalism, slavery, serfdom, the 
caste system, and the ubiquitous patron-client structures of leadership  [that] purport to be 
based on a network of dyadic (two-person) reciprocities always articulated vertically.91 
These assume that  there are no horizontal links among subordinates.92 An antilanguage 
resists oppression by enacting a demonstration that the vertical relationships controlled by 
the lite do not exhaust all the connections in existence; horizontal relationships exist as 
well. In this sense an antilanguage participates in the response to power. Yet it is as an action 
that it participates, not as communication per se.93  
If one accepts the evidence of the persecution of early Jesus-believers as relevant to 
the Fourth Gospel, and also posits the existence of a sectarian Johannine community, then 
87 Halliday, Anti-Languages, 576, emphasis original. 
88 Halliday, Anti-Languages, 571. 
89 Halliday, Anti-Languages, 572. 
90 James C. Scott, Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden Transcripts (New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 1990), 108-135. For more on Scotts theories, see below. 
91 Scott, Domination, 61. 
92 Scott, Domination, 62. 
93 Roman Jakobson called these the poetic and conative functions of language, i.e. the choices in 
formulation that are specifically attuned to the construction of the language itself (display) and those that focus 
particularly on the addressee(s) (the construction of the antisociety) [Linguistics and Poetics, in Style in 
Language, ed. Thomas A. Sebeok (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1960), 350-377]. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
the development of an antilanguage seems plausible.94 The proposal that the Fourth Gospel 
is, itself, an example of an antilanguage, however, presents some serious difficulties. 
To begin with, it is difficult to imagine how such a demonstration could be 
successful. An antilanguage is, by definition, not understandable to those outside the 
community.95 Yet the Greek language known to scholars is the common  which is 
reconstructed from the many first- and second-century CE documents written by people 
outside of any Johannine community. Thus, it does not seem that the Gospel of John could 
be understood at all if it were written in an antilanguage.  
Warren Carters analysis demonstrates two further problematic elements. First, he 
suggests that Johns distinctive and dualistic way of speaking  is an example of  
antilanguage.96 And secondly, contrary to analyses that understand such language to reflect 
and maintain  an antisociety in some tension with and counter to dominant values, he 
states that for John, the force and starkness of Johns antilanguage would function not to 
reinforce and explain the alienation of an existing antisociety but to create an antisociety.97 
94 On the persecution of Jesus-believers, see Section 7.2.3. The position of this thesis with regards to 
a Johannine community will be discussed briefly in Section 7.1.4. The term Jesus-believers will be used in 
this thesis to refer to those who belonged to the first and second-century communities who would have 
identified themselves as intended recipients of the works that later became the canonical New Testament. (I 
am not alone in this use; see, e.g., Carter, John, ix). The term seems especially appropriate for the recipients of 
the Gospel of John given its emphasis on believing (e.g., John 20:31). This usage is designed to (1) heighten 
awareness of the differences between those early followers of Jesus and those who identify themselves as 
Christians today; and (2) include all of those who joined this movement and brought with them various cultural 
assumptions, behaviours and, especially, languages and cultural encyclopaedias (see Chapter 2). The earliest 
published use of the term Jesus-believers in English that I can find is precisely in a multilingual context, 
among Western missionaries to East Asia, especially, in womens writing. See Edith Blair, Letters, Womans 
Work for Woman 19.8 (1904): 183-86 (185); Daniel Clarence Holtom, Influence of Example, Missions: 
American Baptist International Magazine 3 (1912): 153 (reported by a Miss Kidder); Kate W. McBurney, Star 
NotesTak Hing, West River, South China, Christian Nation: righteousness exalteth a nation", (December 
4, 1912): 7. 
95 Lamb makes this point as well in his critiques of Petersen and Neyrey: Either there is no way into 
the enclosed world of the JComm for its words, like those of Humpty Dumpty, mean whatever they choose 
them to mean, or else the author of the GJ provides a way for the intended reader to enter into this world, so 
that the metaphorical language becomes a reality [Lamb, Text, 125-27, 132, 143-44; Petersen, Light; Jerome 
H. Neyrey, An Ideology of Revolt: John's Christology in Social-Science Perspective (Philadelphia: Fortress, 
1988); Jerome H. Neyrey, The Gospel of John in Cultural and Rhetorical Perspective (Grand Rapids: 
Eerdmans, 2009); Neyrey, John]. The Humpty Dumpty language that Lamb refers to comes from a Lewis 
Carroll quote: When I use a word, Humpty Dumpty said in rather a scornful tone, it means just what I 
choose it to meanneither more nor less [Lamb, Text, 103; Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, 
through the Looking-Glass, and Other Writings (London: Collins, 1954), 209]. 
96 Carter, John, 75. 
97 Carter, John, 75. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
Carter calls this Johns rhetoric of distance.98 However, both the characterization of Johns 
language as an antilanguage and the postulation of its use to create an antisociety must be 
questioned. 
First, dualistic language is not itself evidence of antilanguage. Neyrey has suggested, 
for example, that  is part of Johns antilanguage, where Jesus death (i.e., being lifted 
up) is also his being lifted from this world to that of the Father (3:14; 8:28; 12:32). Outsiders 
 cannot imagine that glory awaits Jesus.99 However, Peter Phillips demonstrates the way 
that Johns vocabulary exhibits not relexicalization but semantic shift, and while he curiously 
retains the term antilanguage (see below), he suggests that John uses  in a way that 
makes clear to all the honour or reputation of Jesus and provides resonances of the glory 
of God for those familiar with the Septuagint.100 David Lamb argues against the designation 
of the Fourth Gospel as antilanguage but also concludes that John opens his Gospel to those 
from a wide variety of cultural backgrounds. This intentional clarity is not indicative of an 
antilanguage.101 
Furthermore, according to Halliday, an antilanguage, as a secret language, works to 
maintain distance between an antisociety and the larger society with which it is in tension; 
it emerges in order to provide a way for those within the antisociety to establish and regulate 
the alternative hierarchies within the antisociety itself.102 It arises among a group of people 
who live in resistance to the dominant cultureit is their very resistance that gives the 
impetus for the new form of communication to establish social hierarchies among 
98 Carter, John, 75. 
99 Neyrey, Cultural, 25. See, similarly, Malina, and Rohrbaugh, Commentary, 47. 
100 Other examples include terms such as  and  (John 1:5),    and    
(8:23) whose ambiguities are addressed within the Gospel text (Phillips, Prologue, 59-65, 201-203, 167-70). 
101 Lamb, Text, 141-43. For a critique of some of Lambs other proposals, see Hughson T. Ong, The 
Multilingual Jesus and the Sociolinguistic World of the New Testament, ed. Stanley E. Porter, Jess Pelez, 
and Jonathan M. Watt, Linguistic Biblical Studies 12 (Leiden: Brill, 2016), 88-90. I shall not interact further 
with Ongs study because he focuses primarily on the linguistic situation in Palestine and the text of the Gospel 
of Matthew.  
102 Halliday, Anti-Languages, 572. Note that Lamb cautions about the early stage of the research 
into antilanguages and the tentativeness of analyses and conclusions based on little evidence, both 
sociolinguistic and biblical (Text, 118, 138-40). 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
themselves.103 A leader seeking to create resistance to the dominant society would not 
achieve his aims using vocabulary that followers would have no interest in learning. An 
antilanguage would not arise among a people accommodated to the dominant culture, 
focused on establishing and maintaining their social status within that world. Furthermore, 
Lamb has looked beyond Halliday to find evidence that antilanguages are used by dominant 
groups as well as oppressed ones.104 If a marginalized group were becoming 
overaccommodated, they might adopt the antilanguage of the dominant group as easily as 
they might relinquish the antilanguage of their previous identity.  
In fact, the author of John frequently takes care to let his auditors in on the meanings 
of words they might not understand, such as  (John 1:38).105 Rather than a language 
that challenges and hides, Johns language includes and initiates. Jo-Ann Brant, for example, 
in contrast to Norman Petersen who posits an antilanguage used by an antisociety, looks at 
the way Jesus as light language works not to relegate those outside of a community to 
darkness but rather to describe emphatically the light that shines out to all.106 
Thus, John does not use an antilanguage nor does it seem possible that an 
antilanguage could be used to draw into an alternative community those who are over-
accommodated to the synagogue and the Roman empire.107 Yet this assertion highlights a 
familiar difficulty: How does one distinguish between texts that reflect identity and texts that 
103 Scott, Domination, 26-27. See, similarly, Malina, and Rohrbaugh, Commentary, 46. 
104 Lamb, Text, 140-41. This evidence, it seems, might be especially apprehended by scholars. 
105 See Gilbert Van Belle, Les parenthses dans l'vangile de Jean. Aperu historique et classification: 
Texte grec de Jean, ed. Frans Neirynck, SNTA 11 (Leuven: Leuven University Press, 1985). Others have also 
assembled lists, such as Esther Kobel, Dining with John: Communal Meals and Identity Formation in the 
Fourth Gospel and Its Historical and Cultural Context, BibInt 109 (Leiden; Boston: Brill, 2011), 24 n. 67; 
Lamb, Text, 151-59. 
106 Brant, John, 39-41. See Petersen, Light, 20-36, 89-109. 
107 This is not to say that language cannot function in this way. For a discussion of the differences 
between identity construction and construal, as well as six criteria proposed to discern identity formation in 
texts, see J. Brian Tucker, Remain in Your Calling: Paul and the Continuation of Social Identities in 1 
Corinthians (Eugene, OR: Pickwick, 2011), 33-61, especially 51-57. For other approaches to identity formation 
in John, see, e.g., Ruth Sheridan, Identity, Alterity, and the Gospel of John, BibInt 22 (2014): 188-209; Tat-
siong Benny Liew, Ambiguous Admittance: Consent and Descent in Johns Community of Upward 
Mobility, in John and Postcolonialism: Travel, Space and Power, ed. Musa W. Dube and Jeffrey L. Staley, 
The Bible and Postcolonialism 7 (London: Sheffield Academic Press, 2002), 191-224. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
seek to form it?108 An answer to this question from the field of social identity will be 
discussed in Chapter 7.109 In this chapter, I simply note the unlikelihood that an antilanguage 
would be used to remedy overaccommodation. Furthermore, the language of the Gospel, 
although dualistic and often ironic, with layers of meaning that sometimes make it opaque, 
does not lack signals for interpretation. 
1.3.2. Hidden transcripts 
Rather than an antilanguage, other proposals have suggested that Johns Gospel is a 
little tradition formed from within a hidden transcript, concepts introduced in James 
Scotts work.110 Tom Thatcher provides a helpful distinction between the two terms: If 
the form of collective responses to domination may be called a hidden transcript, 
the content of these responses may be called a little tradition or a countermemory.111 
With the aid of such communication, the oppressed community creates off-stage discourses 
that challenge the right of the lite both to receive material wealth and honour, and to create 
the metanarratives that justify their domination.112 As was noted for antilanguages, hidden 
transcripts are also used by the lite.113 When used by marginalized groups, however, they 
offer alternative explanations for the current state of affairs in terms that privilege the 
108 Edward W. Klink, III, The Sheep of the Fold: The Audience and Origin of the Gospel of John, 
SNTSMS 141 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 78. 
109 See Section 7.1.4 and Tucker, Remain, 51-57. 
110 Scott, Domination; James C. Scott, Protest and Profanation: Agrarian Revolt and the Little 
Tradition, Part I, Theory and Society 4.1 (1977): 1-38; James C. Scott, Protest and Profanation: Agrarian 
Revolt and the Little Tradition, Part II, Theory and Society 4.2 (1977): 211-246. For the use of these concepts 
with reference to John, see Tom Thatcher, Greater Than Caesar: Christology and Empire in the Fourth Gospel 
(Minneapolis: Fortress, 2009), and below.  
111 Thatcher, Greater, 33, emphasis original. For the term little tradition, see Scott, Protest I, 4. 
112 Scott, Domination, 111. 
113 Every subordinate group creates, out of its ordeal, a hidden transcript that represents a critique 
of power spoken behind the back of the dominant. The powerful, for their part, also develop a hidden transcript 
representing the practices and claims of their rule that cannot be openly avowed. A comparison of the hidden 
transcript of the weak with that of the powerful and of both hidden transcripts to the public transcript of power 
relations offers a substantially new way of understanding resistance to domination (Scott, Domination, xii). 
For a specific example of the way this can occur, see Carol Myers-Scotton, How Codeswitching as an 
Available Option Empowers Bilinguals, in Along the Routes to Power: Explorations of Empowerment 
through Language, ed. Martin Ptz, Joshua A. Fishman, and JoAnne Neff-van Aertselaer, Contributions to the 
Sociology of Language 92 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 2006), 73-84 (74). 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
subordinated and that counter the great tradition, the lite metanarrative just described.114 
This thesis will argue that John 18:2819:22 does precisely that.115 I am hesitant, however, 
to use the term little tradition because it seems to imply a more consistent, coherent and 
influential Johannine community than is agreed upon among Johannine scholars.116 I shall 
therefore use the term hidden transcript in order to focus more particularly on the 
communication that I argue emerges from the text without positing how widely it was 
accepted. 
Unlike antilanguage, these hidden transcripts, when spoken within a subordinated 
community, are not expressed in a language different from that of the lite.117 Scott specifies: 
The hidden transcript, however, never becomes a language apart. The mere fact that it is in 
constant dialoguemore accurately, in argumentwith dominant values ensures that the 
hidden and public transcripts remain mutually intelligible.118 Thus, although an 
antilanguage creates space for offstage discourse, it does not take the place of a hidden 
transcript that, expressed in mutually intelligible language, continually exerts pressure 
against the great tradition propagated by the lite.  
This pressure finds further expression in the manifold strategies by which 
subordinate groups manage to insinuate their resistance, in disguised forms, into the public 
114 Scott, Protest I, 4. However, marginalized groups may also use lite language to surround 
themselves with an aura of power (Myers-Scotton, How, 73, 75-78). 
115 Section 7.2.4. 
116 This issue will be discussed briefly in Section 7.1.4. 
117 Scott, Domination, 14. Note that Carter sometimes uses the terms antilanguage and hidden 
transcript or hidden discourse side by side, without distinguishing between the two; see, e.g., John, 77, 80. 
118 Scott, Domination, 135. Scott contradicts himself, however, when he says, The creation of a secure 
site for the hidden transcript might, however, not require any physical distance from the dominant so long as 
linguistic codes, dialects, and gesturesopaque to the masters and mistresseswere deployed (Domination, 
121). This kind of contradiction in Scotts work is, unfortunately, not rare; see Susan Gal, review of Cultural 
Anthropology, Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden Transcripts 10 (1995): 407-424 (413). One way 
of resolving this contradiction to identify an antilanguage as an offstage site for performing acts of resistance, 
that does not, however, obviate the need for a hidden transcript in a language that can respond to that of the 
lite. The definition of public, as mentioned in the rest of this section, must recognize the presence of others 
in many different types of encounters. It is therefore a space where some insiders are in the presence of 
outsiders, but since social groups overlap and intersect, these places occur in a wide variety of ways, and space 
might be private to one social category while at the same time public to another. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
transcript.119 These disguises, which will be elucidated at the end of this section, condition 
 its public expression; the hidden transcript, when produced in the presence of the lite, 
must be sufficiently indirect and garbled that it is capable of two readings, one of which is 
innocuous.120 It is this dual reading that an antilanguage cannot provide. The fact of its 
existence does communicate that the subordinated have things to say that the lite cannot 
understand, but it cannot, even ambiguously, communicate any content to them. Thus, the 
basic difference between an antilanguage and a hidden transcript is the intelligibility of the 
first only to the subordinated and the constant pressure of the second towards intelligibility 
by the lite. 
Scotts theory has not been unanimously received.121 The critiques can be grouped 
into three broad concerns. The first comes from his analysis of transcripts as a conceptual 
space that seems to be divorced from the material realm.122 Mitchell, in particular, points out 
that the distinction between mental coercion/assent and physical force used by Scott is itself 
part of the hegemonic discourse in which the scholar is embroiled.123 He goes on to show 
that to use the term transcript is to compare a practice to a text in a way that invents a 
distinct metaphysical realm of structure or meaning that stands apart from what we call 
material reality.124 Mitchell offers several examples of practices of power that Scott sets to 
one side but that should be included in any analysis of power relations. Kinship across social 
strata, to name one, certainly affects both behavior and belief.125 Physical repression, too, 
119 Scott, Domination, 136. 
120 Scott, Domination, 139, 157. 
121 Timothy Mitchell, Everyday Metaphors of Power, Theory and Society 19.5 (1990): 545-577; 
Matthew C. Gutmann, Rituals of Resistance: A Critique of the Theory of Everyday Forms of Resistance, 
Latin American Perspectives 20.2 (1993): 74-92; Gal, Language; Anathea E. Portier-Young, Apocalypse 
against Empire: Theologies of Resistance in Early Judaism (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2011), 31-43. 
122 While a full discussion of the implications of Scotts critique of Marxist understandings cannot be 
discussed at this juncture, a helpful overview of past conversation on these issues can be found in John 
Chalcraft, and Yaseen Noorani, Introduction, in Counterhegemony in the Colony and Postcolony, ed. John 
Chalcraft and Yaseen Noorani (Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007), 1-19. See also J. Blommaert, 
Language Ideology, ELL 510. 
123 Mitchell, Everyday, 545-46, 548, 560. These concerns are echoed in Portier-Young, Apocalypse, 
35, 42; Gal, Language, 407. 
124 Mitchell, Everyday, 560-61. 
125 Mitchell, Everyday, 558. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
bridges any physical/mental dichotomy since it carries with it strong elements of mental 
coercion specifically in the form of memories and future potentiality.126 
Wayne Meeks proposes the term correlations to indicate that connections between 
the material and the ideational are present but less directly causal than Marxist approaches 
would posit.127 In the use of Scotts term hidden transcripts, this thesis neither denies that 
these may have arisen at least in part from material needs and physical experiences nor does 
it, however, neglect to recognize that the beliefs that guide people as individuals and as 
groups function to influence action.128 
Closely connected to a critique of a mind/body separation, the second question raised 
with regard to Scott is the position from which a hidden discourse might emerge. Susan Gal 
has noted that Scott seems to imagine subordinated people who can critique the hegemonic 
discourse of the lite from some ideological position that is outside of that discursively 
created worldperhaps even a position that is somehow more true, real or free.129 This idea 
of truth will be important for understanding Jesus words in the trial before Pilate (John 
18:37-38) and will be connected using this model of a hidden transcript to the truth of a 
subordinated people as opposed to the truth of the lite.130 
126 Mitchell, Everyday, 559. See Section 7.2.3. 
127 Wayne A. Meeks, The First Urban Christians: The Social World of the Apostle Paul (New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 1983), 164. The critique of a separation of ideas of oppression and resistance from 
actions, mind from body, transcripts from acts, could also be brought to bear on Umberto Ecos concept of 
encyclopaedia, discussed in Section 2.1.2, and the response would be similar. See also Dale B. Martin, Patterns 
of Belief and Patterns of Life: Correlations in the First Urban Christians and Since, in After the First Urban 
Christians: The Social-Scientific Study of Pauline Christianity Twenty-Five Years Later, ed. Todd D. Still and 
David G. Horrell (London; New York: T&T Clark, 2010), 116-33 (116). 
128 Chapter 3 discusses material culture, but cultural experiences will be brought into the interpretation 
of John 18:2819:22 throughout the thesis (see, e.g., Sections 4.1, 4.3.1, 6.1). 
129 This problem is especially found in Scotts earlier work, Weapons of the Weak: Everyday Forms 
of Peasant Resistance (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985). In Domination and the Arts of Resistance, 
he specifically explains that [n]o real social site can be thought of as a realm of entirely true and free 
discourse unless, perhaps, it is the private imagination to which, by definition, we can have no access. 
Disclosure to anyone else immediately brings power relations into play, and psychoanalysis, which aims at the 
disclosure of repressed truth in a tolerant, encouraging atmosphere, is, at the same time, a highly asymmetrical 
power relationship (Scott, Domination, 26 n. 11). The relevance of psychoanalysis is not immediately 
apparent. For critiques, see Mitchell, Everyday, 561-64; Gal, Language, 411-14, 419; Portier-Young, 
Apocalypse, 36. 
130 Section 5.1.4. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
As for the source of such a critique, in settings where multiple cultures come into 
contact, such as the first- and second-century CE Mediterranean area, influences on identity 
(discussed in Section 1.3.3) will be varied. Anathea Portier-Young, for example, describes 
the way experiences of intensive cultural contact and crisis provide the resources for 
naming what was previously unnamed and thinking beyond the previously thinkable in order 
to answer hegemony with a new, resistant counter-discourse that articulates new parameters 
for thought and action.131 These various cultural transcripts enacted in multiple languages, 
as well as the contact that occurred at the intersections of identity proposed by Moxnes 
discussed in Section 1.2.3, provide sources for critiques of hegemonic discourses for John. 
This variety of cultural influences highlights  the third criticism of Scotts work, that 
he oversimplifies social relations and social discourse. He opens his work with his intention 
to base his analysis specifically on the most severe conditions of powerlessness and 
dependency where he presumes that the relationship of discourse to power would be most 
sharply etched.132 Yet, as Field notes, When the spirit moves him  he invokes the 
experience of industrial workers, subjects of authoritarian regimes, students, women, and, 
from time to time, Tamil laborers in the Caribbean, Lollards, Norwegian prisoners, and the 
participants in the celebrated carnival at Romans.133 Thus, it is not surprising that his 
description of social discourse is oversimplified. Groups and transcripts are reduced to two, 
lite and subordinate. Furthermore, the definition of what is public and what is hidden is 
more complicated than a simple dichotomy might suggest: [a]s Scott acknowledges, power 
relations, after all, occur inside subordinate groups too, when leaders exert power over 
followers or group pressure coerces members.134 This study recognizes for example the 
131 Portier-Young, Apocalypse, 12. 
132 Scott, Domination, x. 
133 Daniel Field, review of James C. Scott, Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden 
Transcripts, The American Historical Review 99 (1994): 195-96. 
134 Gal, Language, 417.  
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
power that Caesar exerts as a motivator of the Johannine Pilates behaviour as well as the 
multiple subgroup identities at play in John 18:2819:22.135 
The various intersections of power and identity thus described help to extend 
Thatchers description of an image of Christ [that] is always a photographic negative, a 
mosaic built up from thousands of tiny words, symbols, and ideas that [John] found on the 
cognitive trash heap of ancient Mediterranean culture.136 This trash heap provides 
Thatcher with a source for a hidden transcript that can speak back to the great tradition, thus 
avoiding the pitfall of supposing a neutral ideological position, the critique of Scott described 
above. However, Thatcher goes on to analyse the impact of Roman conceptions exclusively 
on Johns Christology.  
Cognitive trash heap is a helpful metaphor. John takes language and concepts from 
Rome as from other cultural encyclopaedias and uses them to entice auditors into the 
unfamiliar territory of the Johannine world, describing not only Jesus (Chapters 4-6), but 
defining Jesus empire and its ethos (Chapter 7).137 In Peter Phillips analysis, Stoics, Jews 
and Gnostics alike are invited to understand within their own cognitive categories, but also 
to question these categories.138 This important insight, however, is marred, not only by the 
anachronistic reference to Gnosticism, but also by Phillips belief that this is not 
incompatible with antilanguage despite the opposition between the sub-group and the lites 
that an antilanguage maintains.139 In order for Johannine language to qualify as an 
antilanguage, Phillips needs to alter Hallidays definition from same grammar, different 
vocabulary, to (usually) same grammar, (usually) same vocabulary, (often) specialized 
135 See Sections 6.1.3 and 7.1. 
136 Thatcher, Greater, 6. 
137 Alexander Jensen refers to a similar concept with his phrase Struggle for Language [John's 
Gospel as Witness: The Development of the Early Christian Language of Faith, Ashgate New Critical Thinking 
in Religion, Theology and Biblical Studies (Aldershot, UK: Ashgate, 2004), 13, 48]. 
138 Phillips, Prologue, 140. 
139 Phillips, Prologue, 61. For the dating of Gnosticism, see Raymond E. Brown, The Gospel of St. 
John and the Johannine Epistles (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 1952), 9. For a more detailed discussion 
of the Fourth Gospel and Gnosticism, see Charles E. Hill, The Johannine Corpus in the Early Church (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2004), 205-293. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
semantics. The problem with Johannine language is not the novelty value of its vocabulary, 
but rather the interplay of meaning within an accepted mainstream vocabulary.140  
Yet this interplay of meaning is just what one would expect not from an 
antilanguage but from a hidden transcript that speaks back to the lite metanarrative in the 
same language, changed slightly to preserve defensible ambiguity. A hidden transcript is not 
hidden with changes in vocabulary that make it unintelligible to outsiders; it is hidden, rather, 
in whispers, quiet corners, private meetings or, for the most daring, in double entendres 
communicated openly.141 It is hidden exactly because it would be perfectly intelligible to the 
lite if it were spoken in their presence.142 Thus, because a hidden transcript does not depend 
on a specifically altered lexicon, its message can be delivered using the whole variety of 
linguistic expressions available to its creator(s). This study focuses specifically on the 
Roman encyclopaedia of terms, but recognizes that this is only one of several encyclopaedias 
that John uses.143 
Johns Gospel can thus function to communicate the message of Jesus-believers to 
those from a variety of ethnicities and their intersections. Although Warren Carter argues 
that hidden transcripts work in conjunction with antilanguage to call people to less 
accommodation with rulers, this discussion has shown that they do the opposite.144 They 
provide a way for subordinated people to enact the very behaviours expected by the rulers, 
thus living in accommodation to them, while still maintaining a sense of group identity 
distinct from the one that the rulers assign to them. It is unclear, therefore, how either 
140 Phillips, Prologue, 64. 
141 On this, see the zone of constant struggle (Scott, Domination, 14-15). 
142 Thus, when spoken unambiguously, the message is often anonymous (Scott, Domination, 152). 
143 See Section 2.1.3. 
144 Carter, John, 75-77. Connections between hidden transcripts and rebellions are problematic in 
Scotts work. Portier-Young points out that for Scott, anonymity and such devices of ambiguation as double-
speak, metaphor, and allusion function precisely to prevent open rebellion; a hidden transcript as Scott 
conceives of it, is continually pressing against the limit of what is permitted on stage, much as a body of water 
might press against a dam. Behind the pressure is the desire to give unbridled expression to the sentiments 
voiced in the hidden transcript directly to the dominant.A small success is likely to encourage others to 
venture further, and the process can escalate rapidly (Portier-Young, Apocalypse, 38; Scott, Domination, 196). 
This is another topic where differences between Scotts publications complicate discussion. It is this last remark 
of Scotts that will be followed in this work. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
antilanguage or hidden transcripts could function, in the way Carter suggests, to call an over-
accommodated community to resistance. This study will uncover, instead, the ways in which 
John uses language and concepts familiar to what will be described as Roman-aware auditors 
and nuances them to produce a transcript about Jesus that is both familiar and strange.145 
Such an interpretation is important to consider, given the likelihood (discussed in Chapter 3) 
that many of the key cultural units in the Roman encyclopaedia were known from social 
intersections across the first- and second-century CE Mediterranean world. 
1.3.3. Social identity theory 
Social intersections where languages and cultures come into contact constitute 
encounters where identity is affected.146 John 18:2819:22 uses the Roman cultural 
encyclopaedia to raise important Roman identity markers. As chosen by the gods to bring 
the law to barbarians, Romans categorized themselves with traits that intersect with Jewish 
identity markers. Social identity theory provides the tools to describe the recategorization of 
identity in the Johannine trial narrative.  
When Jerome Neyrey uses the social sciences, specifically Mary Douglas's models, 
he postulates that the development of the Johannine community entails a progression from 
 initial faction formation to a program of reform of the system and finally to a revolt 
against the system.147 One concern with Neyreys work is that although he predicates a 
community that seeks the conversion of all peoplesJews, Samaritans, and Gentiles, when 
he analyses societal norms that exert pressure on the community, he looks at the relationship 
145 For a definition of Roman-aware auditors, see Section 3.1.4. 
146 For a discussion of such intersections, see Section 1.2.3. 
147 Neyrey, Ideology, 117, 149. Neyrey describes this in Douglas terms as a progression from strong 
group/low grid (stage one) to strong group/rising grid (stage two) and finally to weak group/low grid (stage 
three) In this model, the term group refers to the amount of pressure that the society outside of the community 
puts on the community itself as far as their expectations for conformity. The term grid, on the other hand, 
refers to the degree to which members of the community acquiesce to societal norms. [Mary Douglas, Natural 
Symbols: Explorations in Cosmology, 2nd ed. (London: Routledge, 1996), 57-71]. Douglas model will not be 
used in this thesis because there is so much uncertainty about the internal and external pressures Johns auditors 
were experiencing. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
of this community only to synagogue Jews.148 He does not take into account the pressures 
on both Jewish and gentile Jesus-believers from the wider society. Because of this omission, 
Neyreys conclusions are equally problematic. He determines that the mood in stage three 
is more one of revolt against discredited systems than sectarian defense from enemies.149 
Yet Douglas model would only lead to this conclusion if the Jews were the dominant 
societal influence exerting control on the Johannine community, and there is no reason to 
think that they had this much power.150 
The image of a Johannine community in revolt is intriguing for a reason not 
mentioned by Neyrey. It rings true, in one sense, because the Gospel engages in such strong 
polemic (e.g., 8:24; 9:41). This could be expressed by people who had previously worked 
hard to conform to the expectations of a local synagogue community but were now emerging 
into a situation where they expressed their distance from that group.151 Yet this does not 
address the relationship of the Johannine community to the societal pressure of interest to 
this thesisthose of the Romans. In a situation where Romans did not demand total 
conformity from their subjects and yet had crucified Jesus and sometimes Jesus-believers, a 
hidden transcript could allow the Jesus-believers some covert verbal expression.152 
In presenting his theories, Scott oversimplifies the construction of identity, assuming, 
for example, that the creation of the self is the same across time and space.153 Although 
identity is a vast topic and cannot be discussed in detail, the view adopted in this thesis is 
that it is created in hierarchically structured discourses with the social groups within which 
148 Neyrey, Ideology, 125-50, quotation on p. 125. 
149 Neyrey, Ideology, 205. 
150 Reinhartz, Gospel of John, 112. 
151 This would be weak group/high grid, pace Neyrey, to weak group/low grid. Raymond Brown, for 
example, posited that the Johannine community might have originated among followers of John the Baptist 
[The Community of the Beloved Disciple (New York: Paulist Press, 1979), 29-30]. On the existence of a 
Johannine community, see Section 7.1.4. 
152 On the persecution of Jesus-believers, see Section 7.2.3. 
153 Mitchell, Everyday, 558, 564; Gal, Language, 409, 417-18, 420-21. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
the subject finds herself.154 The various identification markers in the matrix described above 
interact with the subject, and each may become salient at different times, in different physical 
and social locations.155 Because language is one of those identifiers, the data uncovered in 
the process of examining the language of the Fourth Gospel will also shed light on identity-
forming processes set in motion by the text. Specifically, this thesis will argue that John 
18:2819:22 seeks to recategorize Roman and Jewish ethnic loyalties as subgroups, with 
Jesus-believer as the superordinate identity.156 In this new identity, obedience to the law is 
deprioritized while honour under persecution and vulnerability for the sake of the world are 
prioritized in the Johannine ethos and ethics.157 These new insights into the Fourth Gospel 
emerge from an in-depth and sustained Roman reading of the Johannine trial narrative as 
presented in this thesis. 
1.4. Conclusion and Thesis Outline 
This chapter has surveyed analyses of the Gospel of John that take into account the Roman 
empire, and it noted that they often helpfully address the present more than the past. This 
study will focus instead on the first and second centuries CE, observing, for example, that at 
the time politics and religion were not separated. It will use semiotics to address Roman 
influences on the Greek language of John 18:2819:22. The Romans and the Latin language 
intersected with life in the Eastern Mediterranean in geographical and social contexts 
relevant to the Fourth Gospel. Evidence of these intersections, some of which has not been 
noted in biblical studies before, will be presented in Chapter 3. This paves the way for a 
study that uses methodology from semiotics and multilingualism to examine the Greek of 
Johns Gospel in a new way, uncovering evidence of Latin influence and a Roman 
154 Tajfels definition of identity is foundational for social identity theories: that part of an individuals 
self-concept which derives from his [sic] knowledge of his [sic] membership of a social group (or groups) 
together with the value and emotional significance attached to that membership [Differentiation between 
Social Groups: Studies in the Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations, ed. Henri Tajfel, European 
Monographs in Social Psychology 14 (London: Academic Press, 1978), 63]. 
155 J. E. Joseph, Identity and Language, ELL 489. 
156 Section 7.1. 
157 Section 7.2. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
encyclopaedia. This study, then, sees in Johns Gospel a hidden transcript into which various 
peoples from the greater world are invited (specifically, in this thesis, Roman-aware 
auditors). While Thatcher is interested in the effects of empire on the daily lives and 
thoughts of Johannine Christians, at least to the extent that those thoughts and lifeways can 
be detected behind this text, I am interested in the effects of the presence of Latin (and by 
extension the Roman cultural encyclopaedia) in the world behind the text, and the way this 
would have impacted on Johns construction and Roman-aware auditors interpretant of John 
18:2819:22.158  
Chapter 4 will examine John 18:2819:22 in detail, showing the way that John 
changes the encyclopaedia to a Roman one, thus connecting the Fourth Gospel with several 
Roman cultural scripts not previously brought into the discussion of this narrative. Chapter 
5 will argue more specifically for a new referent in John 19:5, a citation from Vergils Aeneid 
6.791. Chapter 6 will provide a detailed exegesis of the Johannine trial narrative. Using a 
Roman cultural encyclopaedia to abduct the interpretant brings to light a Pilate who is neither 
weak nor strong, as have previously both been argued, but who is weak in the face of Caesar 
and strong in the face of the Jews. The title of this study comes from the relation it proposes 
between Jesus and Caesar, one that claims an empire for Jesus and yet does not dispossess 
Caesar of his.159 Chapter 7 will conclude that, within a hidden transcript, John provides a 
discourse that, while not innocent nor non-violent, recategorizes ethnicity to such an extent 
that followers of Christ are called to choose vulnerability when necessary for the sake of the 
world, while they evaluate each other according to honourable norms. First, however, 
Chapter 2 will describe the resources that I shall use: the semiotic theory of Umberto Eco, 
the use of code-switching for specificity from multilingual studies, the poetics of literary 
158 Thatcher, Greater, 4. 
159 Raymond Brown notes the similar formality between    (19:19) and Tiberius 
Caesar [The Death of the Messiah: From Gethsemane to the Grave: A Commentary on the Passion Narratives 
in the Four Gospels, ed. David Noel Freedman, ABRL (New York: Doubleday, 1994), 2.966]. 
1. The Romans, Their Language, and the Gospel of John   
allusions from Ziva Ben-Porat, and a new model that applies semiotics to the poetics of 
allusions.  
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication 
In order to approach the Gospel of John with the tools necessary for an analysis that takes 
into account its multicultural milieu, an understanding of semiotics and especially the way 
meaning-making relates to culture will be necessary. Charles Peirces triad of Sign, 
interpretant, and object has already been introduced.1 Umberto Ecos work, which is based 
on these concepts, will help to clarify connections between communication, culture and 
language.2 Then, bilingualism studies will explain specificity as a motive for code-switching 
and will provide the justification for a closer examination of the Greek of Johns Gospel in 
Chapter 3. Since multiple languages multiply the cultural encyclopaedias available to author 
and reader (see definition below), they allow for more wide-ranging literary allusions, which 
is the third topic of this chapter. After that, I shall return to semiotics again, because by 
applying semiotics to literary allusions, significant questions will emerge that will help guide 
the analysis in Chapters 5 and 7. This chapter thus lays the foundation for Chapter 3, which 
will fill in these theories with data from the ancient world, and which I shall then apply to 
John 18:2819:22 in Chapters 47. So, then, what is the role of culture in semiotic theory? 
2.1. An Encyclopaedia of Cultural Units 
While most people use language intuitively and suppose that at least some of their words 
refer to concrete objects in the world, semiotics has demonstrated the complexity of this 
apparently simple process. In Chapter 1, I described Peirces triad, where the Sign 
represented some significant aspect(s) of the object in the process of communication.3 The 
Sign is not equivalent to the object; rather it conjures up what Eco calls its cultural unit, the 
aspects of the object that a culture has deemed important as well as the discourses habitually 
1 See Section 1.2.2 and Gary P. Radford, On Eco, Wadsworth Philosophers Series (Australia: 
Thomson, 2003), 50-51. 
2 Farzad Sharifian, from the field of cognitive linguistics, similarly notes that discourse is a vehicle 
for the representation of cultural conceptualisations (Cultural, 12, and similarly 29). 
3 Section 1.2.2. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
connected to it.4 It is thus not concrete reality that is primary, but a cultures construction of 
it.5 Individuals are embedded in social groups that establish the elements of our world 
considered relevant to their experiences.  
2.1.1. Cultural units 
Cultural units can also be defined as pegs on which the members of a community 
hang all information that can be inferred from the interpretation of an expression against the 
backdrop of a shared encyclopedia.6 To envision the importance of culture in 
communication, one might imagine receiving a letter containing only a blank sheet of paper 
with the simple typed sentence Long live the King7 The semantic content of each 
individual word is clear, and the words are correctly arranged according to English 
grammatical conventions. The receiver might also recognize the phrase as an English idiom, 
but there are no contextual clues to help answer the questions that this string of words brings 
up: Is this a fictional king or a real king? Is this is a serious letter or a joke? Previous 
encounters with this phrase raise possible contexts: fairy tales, historical monarchies, 
rebellions, comic strips.  
Eco uses the example of such a letter to demonstrate the criterion [that] draws a 
sharp line that divides semantic (dictionary) competence and pragmatic and encyclopedic 
competence. The semantic component represents only those aspects of meaning that an ideal 
speaker/hearer would know in such an anonymous letter situation.8 Thus, semantic content 
4 For the definition of discourse used in this thesis, see Section 1.2.2 n. 39.  
5 See the discussion of firstness in Section 1.2.2. 
6 Paolo Desogus, The Encyclopedia in Umberto Eco's Semiotics, Semiotica 2012.192 (2012): 501-
521 (506, see further 511-13). 
7 The example of an anonymous letter containing just one sentence is from Jerrold J. Katz, 
Propositional Structure and Illocutionary Force: A Study of the Contribution of Sentence Meaning to Speech 
Acts (New York: Crowell, 1977), 14; it is cited in Eco, Semiotics, 78. 
8 Eco, Semiotics, 78. See, similarly, Umberto Eco, Metaphor, Dictionary, and Encyclopedia, New 
Literary History 15.2 (1984): 255-71 (255). This is also Ecos differentiation between meaning as equivalence 
and meaning as implication; it is primarily this issue that he is addressing throughout his chapter entitled 
Dictionary vs. Encyclopedia (Semiotics, 46-86). The linguistic argument over the existence of any division 
between dictionary and encyclopaedic meaning is beyond the scope of this thesis, but Ecos concerns about 
the arbitrariness of this division can also be found in this chapter. See also Desogus, Encyclopedia, 504, 518. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
is not the only aspect of word meaning that is important to understanding. Instead, the 
cultural units associated with a word raise meaning possibilities for the reader, who must 
rely on context for guidance.9  
Context guides the reader through these possibilities by blowing up or narcotizing 
various parts of the cultural units in a process called abduction.10 The term abduction is, like 
the semiotic triad, borrowed from Peirce.11 Eco defines it as the tentative and hazardous 
tracing of a system of signification rules which will allow the sign to acquire its meaning.12 
He likens it to a detective looking for clues to solve a crime.13 Thus, if the note arrived with 
a newspaper clipping announcing the release of a re-digitized collection of Elvis songs, the 
recipient could interpret Long live the King as a reference to the king of rock-and-roll, 
especially if the return address was that of a friend who loved American music. In that case, 
she might detect excitement in the tone of the note. Thus, the political cultural unit connected 
to the Sign /king/ would be narcotized and the Elvis cultural unit blown up.14 On the other 
hand, if the envelope contained a news story announcing the birth of a new heir to the British 
throne and the friend who sent the letter were English, the recipient might read patriotism 
into the phrase. He would narcotize fairy tales and blow up the cultural unit of the House of 
Windsor.15  
Abduction is this process whereby readers navigate the possibilities raised by cultural 
units with the aid of the clues provided by the text.16 These clues lead the reader on 
9 For a discussion of the connections between cultural units and individual experience, see Eco, 
Semiotics, 70-71; Desogus, Encyclopedia, 506-507. Note that the term context will be used in this thesis to 
refer to the text in which a word or phrase is embedded. The historical context of language use will be 
referenced using the term encyclopaedia. 
10 Eco, Semiotics, 80; see also Radford, On Eco, 28.  
11 Radford, On Eco, 63-64; Desogus, Encyclopedia, 517-519. On abduction in general, see Igor 
Douven, Abduction, SEP. 
12 Eco, Semiotics, 40.  
13 Eco, Semiotics, 43. 
14 For the use of slashes to designate Signs, see footnote 54 below. 
15 For a summary of Ecos process of abduction in reading, see Phillips, Prologue, 29-31, esp. 30. 
Any description of abduction presupposes that the reader seeks to read the text as a Model Reader, one who 
agrees to play the game according to the rules that the author has laid out (Radford, On Eco, 5-6, 41-43).  
16 A Sign  needs at least two correlations in order to function: it must belong to a presently 
perceptible sign complex and at the same time to a culture as the totality of its virtual sign complexes [Stefan 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
inferential walks where the topic of the passage is an abductive schema that helps the 
reader to decide which semantic properties have to be actualized.17 Eco uses the term 
isotopy, borrowed from Greimas, to specify the actual textual verification of the 
tentative hypothesis offered by the topic of the passage.18 In the process of isotopy, Eco 
suggests, a text may repeat a series of sememes belonging to the same semantic field (key 
words).19 These may either be obsessively reiterated throughout the text or rather than 
being abundantly distributed, they are strategically located.20 Thus, they form a bridge from 
the interpretation of single Signs to an analysis of the text as a whole. 
2.1.2. Encyclopaedias and universes of discourse 
In a larger segment of communication, there exist text-immanent as well as text-
external sign relations.21 Alkier provides definitions: I call [the] world of the text, in 
dependence upon Charles Sanders Peirces concept, the universe of discourse of the text. I 
call the external relationships of the text, in dependence upon Umberto Eco, its encyclopedic 
relationships. The encyclopedia is the cultural framework in which the text is situated and 
from which the gaps of the text are filled.22 The content of a cultural unit thus depends on 
the culture that creates it and, for an individual, on his history within that culture.23 Although 
not dependent on Eco or Alkier, James H. Charlesworth describes the possibilities for such 
a history. He notes that an idea can be communicated from one author to another via texts, 
Alkier, The Reality of the Resurrection: The New Testament Witness, trans. Leroy A. Huizenga (Waco, TX: 
Baylor University Press, 2013), 206. Similarly, Sharifian notes connections between speech acts, idioms, 
metaphors, discourse markers, etc. and cultural schemas (Cultural, 12, 25, 27).  
17 Eco, Role, 24-25, 31-32. See also sequential disclosure in Phillips, Prologue, 7-8. 
18 Eco, Role, 27. See Algirdas Julien Greimas, Du Sens (Paris: Seuil, 1979), 88; cited in Umberto Eco, 
Overinterpreting Texts, in Interpretation and Overinterpretation, ed. Stefan Collini (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1992), 45-66 (62). For more on isotopy, see Eco, Semiotics, 189-201; Eco, Lector, 117-29. 
19 Eco, Role, 26. 
20 Eco, Role, 26. 
21 Stefan Alkier, Intertextuality and the Semiotics of Biblical Texts, in Reading the Bible 
Intertextually, ed. Richard B. Hays, Stefan Alkier, and Leroy Andrew Huizenga (Waco, TX: Baylor University 
Press, 2009), 3-21 (8). 
22 Alkier, Intertextuality, 8; Desogus, Encyclopedia, 513, 520. See also Radford, On Eco, 10-13; 
Eco, Semiotics, 85-86. 
23 A reader brings to the text competencies, an encyclopedia of cultural knowledge and conventions, 
and past texts she has interpreted. This is the readers encyclopedia (Radford, On Eco, 5, emphasis original).  
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
personal encounters, or simply by liv[ing] in an environment (sociological or spiritual) in 
which the tradition was alive or known.24 The next chapter will present evidence for these 
kinds of encounters across the ancient eastern Mediterranean. By means of these encounters, 
Roman cultural units spread.  
Knowledge of cultural units is especially important for the interpretation of ancient 
texts where there is less direct characterization and one has to resort to the device of 
inference or gap-filling more than in modern fiction.25 This being the case, Cor Bennema 
notes that we must fill the gaps from our knowledge of the socio-historical context of the 
first-century Mediterranean world (rather than our imagination).26 Furthermore, there is not 
only one such context. Rather the first-century Mediterranean world was a network of roads 
and shipping routes by means of which people from a variety of backgrounds met each other 
and interacted.27 And it is the concatenation of all cultural units from each such culture that 
Eco calls the encyclopaedia, a network of interpretants that includes conceptually all the 
various interpretants of a Sign that have ever existed.28  
It is thus an encyclopaediaa smaller subset of the entire set of possible cultural 
unitsthat provides the codes that guide communication, both Sign production and 
interpretation, a system of prior and taken-for-granted knowledge.29 This use of the word 
code extends its meaning beyond the rigid paradigm of the equivalence p  q of 
24 James H. Charlesworth, Towards a Taxonomy of Discerning Influence(s) between Two Texts, in 
Das Gesetz im frhen Judentum und im Neuen Testament: Festschrift fr Christoph Burchard zum 75. 
Geburtstag, ed. Dieter Snger and Matthias Konradt, Novum Testamentum et Orbis Antiquus/Studien zur 
Umwelt des Neuen Testaments 57 (Gttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 2006), 41-54 (43-47). 
Charlesworths descriptions are useful despite some confusion about whether or not all texts have implied 
authors and whether it is among implied authors or real authors that ideas spread (43-45). 
25 Cornelis Bennema, A Comprehensive Approach to Understanding Character in the Gospel of 
John, in Characters and Characterization in the Gospel of John, ed. Christopher W. Skinner, Library of New 
Testament Studies 461 (London: Bloomsbury, 2013), 36-58 (39, emphasis original).  
26 Bennema, Comprehensive, 43. 
27 See Chapter 3. 
28 Eco, Semiotics, 83-84. See also Alkier, Studies, 233-37. In practice, no one person has access to 
such an encyclopaedia. This will be elaborated in Section 2.1.3. 
29 Radford, On Eco, 10.  
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
structuralism to include the inferential activity of abduction described above.30 However, 
authors are free to arrange Signs in new and creative ways to adjust those codes.31 Authors 
and speakers in this way create a universe of discourse that writes these new codes back into 
the encyclopaedia and affects all subsequent communication: all communication both 
depends on the pre-existence of an encyclopaedia but also reshapes it.32 
Thus, the encyclopaedia is both a guide to the text and affected by the text. Alkier 
explains: 
Die konventionalisierte Enzyklopdie ist eine regulative Hypothese, die 
erklren soll, was wir tun, wenn wir schreiben oder lesen. Sie geht davon aus, 
da jeder Mensch als Teilnehmer einer bestimmten Kultur ber kulturelles 
Wissen verfgt und da Texte wie alle anderen semiotischen Erzeugnisse 
dieser Enzyklopdie weitgehend verpflichtet sind. Auch wenn Texte dem 
kulturellen Wissen widersprechen oder es erweitern, bleibt esauch wenn es 
nicht genannt wirdals Bezugspunkt des Neuen von konstitutiver Bedeutung 
fr den gesamten Signifikationsproze.33 
The cultural encyclopaedia provides the cultural units for interpretation but is also 
constituted by des textes antrieurs.  Cette circularit ne doit pas dcourager une 
recherche rigoureuse: le seul problme est dtablir des procdures prcises pour rendre 
compte de cette circularit.34 In places where the universe of discourse contradicts the 
encyclopaedia, the text must be seen as a critique of the latter. This critique is always, 
30 Desogus, Encyclopedia, 518; citing Eco, Semiotics, 43. For more on Eco and codes, see Radford, 
On Eco, 62-64; Eco, Semiotics, 184, 187-88; Desogus, Encyclopedia, 502, 504-505, 513, 517. 
31 On the fluidity of topoi, see, for example, Stephen Hinds, Allusion and Intertext: Dynamics of 
Appropriation in Roman Poetry, ed. Denis Feeney and Stephen Hinds, Roman Literature and Its Contexts 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), 34-47. 
32 Desogus, Encyclopedia, 519-20. On this see further Eco, Lector, 55; Desogus, Encyclopedia, 
514, 517. For a similar discussion using different terminology, see Sharifian, Cultural, 5, and also 24, 37. Justin 
Langford, too, discusses circularity [Defending Hope: Semiotics and Intertextuality in 1 Peter (Eugene, OR: 
Wipf & Stock, 2013), 97 and 97 n. 1]. 
33 Stefan Alkier, Wunder und Wirklichkeit in den Briefen des Apostels Paulus: ein Beitrag zu einem 
Wunderverstndnis jenseits von Entmythologisierung und Rehistorisierung, ed. Martin Hengel and Otfried 
Hofius, WUNT 1.134 (Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2001), 72. Similarly, Sharifian notes, Cultural groups are 
formed not just by the physical proximity of individuals but also by relative participation of individuals in each 
others conceptual world (Cultural, 4, similarly 26). 
34 Eco, Lector, 26; cited in German translation in Alkier, Wunder, 74. This particular work of Ecos 
was only available to me in French. See further, on the circularity of analysis, Eco, Role, 126. This compte 
rendu had been proposed by Eco earlier in his discussion: he notes that the usual use of /lion/ happens in 
contexts related to the jungle, the zoo, and the circus; [t]outes les autres possibilits sont fortement 
idiosyncrasiques et se mettent donc hors la norme: quand elles se ralisent, elles lancent un dfi  
lencyclopdie et produisent des textes qui fonctionnent comme une critique mtalinguistique du code (Lector, 
17-18). 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
however, local and targeted to a specific topic of an encyclopaedia.35 In chapter 7, I shall 
argue that John 18:2819:22 critiques ethnicity, law, honour, and the use of power. 
Because of this circularity, the universe of discourse and the encyclopaedia can be 
confused. Since the universe of discourse of first-century texts is often our window into first-
century encyclopaedias, entries in and expressions of an encyclopaedia may be difficult to 
distinguish. Thus Justin Langford in his 2012 doctoral study of Isaiah quotations in 1 Peter 
refers to the Petrine encyclopedia, and it is unclear whether he means the universe of 
discourse of 1 and 2 Peter or the encyclopaedia that Peter uses.36 Since he reads the latter 
from his letters, the distinction is blurred. Thus, Langford is frequently unclear in his 
discussions of encyclopaedias.37 Furthermore, he states that [t]he encyclopedia of first-
century Christianity is the encyclopedia chosen for this analysis of the intertextual 
references, but he never explains how he has access to this except through the text.38 In any 
case, it is uncertain in what sense there was such a thing as first-century Christianity. 
Langfords study opens with an historical account of the history of Signs leading up 
to Peirce. He describes intertextuality, separating what he calls secular intertextuality 
(where he discusses Kristeva, Barthes, Bakhtin, Riffaterre and Culler) from biblical 
intertextuality (Dodd, Hays, Hatina, Moyise and Porter), and then he introduces Alkiers 
methodology by way of others who have applied semiotic theory to the biblical text. 
Problematic among these is the work of Gordon Whitney, relevant to this thesis because it 
approaches signs in the Gospel of John using semiotic theory.39 In his 1988 paper, however, 
Whitney never discusses in what way Johns  and Peirces Signs might map (or fail 
35 Desogus, Encyclopedia, 520. 
36 Justin Langford, Signs of Hope in the Midst of Suffering: A Semiotic Investigation in the Use 
of Isaiah in 1 Peter (PhD thesis, New Orleans Baptist Theological Seminary, 2012), 123-24. 
37 Langford, Defending, 49, 87, 123-24. 
38 Langford, Defending, 135. 
39 Langford, Defending, 18-19, 21. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
to map) onto each other. He uses /sign/ for both.40 Also, although Langford asserts that 
Whitneys definition of interpretant coheres with Peirces description of an interpretant, 
this is not at all clear.41 Whitneys definitions of interpretant include both a general theory 
of interpretation and within this theory a specific interpretive concept belonging uniquely to 
the triad but further the concept requiring a novel extension of prior insights about thought 
and communication as well as a specific application in a given triad of some more general 
theory, interpretive principle, or controlling paradigm.42 Thus, he ultimately lists in his table 
under the heading of interpretant the leading questions that he uses to arrive at his 
interpretations.43 This is not Peircian analysis. (I am especially concerned that Whitney 
offers no methodology for arriving at these leading questions other than the subjective 
control of the interpreter.44 Perhaps Ecos encyclopaedia would have been of help.) Finally, 
in Whitneys work the object as Peirces second element of the triad drops out of the 
picture.45 While there may be aspects of Whitneys analysis of interest to those studying Old 
Testament citations and sensus plenior, his paper does not advance discussion on Peircian 
semiotic methodologies nor on semiotic analyses of the Gospel of John. 
The analysis undertaken in this thesis, however, will focus especially on the effect 
present in texts where the universe of discourse leaves silences that must be filled.46 In such 
a text, the encyclopaedia provides the cultural units that the text either narcotizes or blows 
up to bring the reader to understanding. Yet the encyclopaedia is also constrained by the 
world in which a culture functionsthat which impinges on its members. The world serves 
40 Gordon E. Whitney, A Semiotic Approach to Old Testament Fulfillment Citations in the Fourth 
Gospel (paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Evangelical Theological Society, Wheaton, IL, 1988), 
e.g., the ambiguous reference to a single sign on p. 6. 
41 Langford, Defending, 19. 
42 Whitney, Semiotic Approach, 1, 2, 6. 
43 Whitney, Semiotic Approach, 12. 
44 Whitney, Semiotic Approach, 2. 
45 See, for example, the analysis of the seven signs and the column headed Object-Event (Referent) 
where the entries are not objects for the Signs listed, at least in a Peircian sense (Whitney, Semiotic Approach, 
6, 11). 
46 Eco, Lector, 63-64. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
to offer resistance for a process of interpretation for the process of semiosis which represents 
it.47 
Words are not receptacles, neither of simple (lexical) nor of complex (encyclopaedic) 
contents. Instead, words connect to a variety of possible semantic contents that must be 
chosen based on the readers abductive process through the dictionary entries suggested by 
the cultural units of the encyclopaedia, as constrained by the context.48 Semiotic theory that 
connects words, cultural units, and the universe of discourse of a text will help to structure 
the approach to the Johannine trial narrative taken in this thesis. The first and second century 
CE, however, add multiple cultural encyclopaedias to the task of abduction. 
2.1.3. Multiple cultures, multiple cultural units 
An encyclopaedia inevitably becomes more complex when cultures come into 
contact with each other, and such is the case for the Mediterranean Basin of the first and 
second century CE. Thus, what has so far been called the encyclopaedia, composed of every 
possible cultural unit, can be divided into smaller volumes, each related to a specific social 
group.49 Although they are technically smaller sections of the one comprehensive 
encyclopaedia, /encyclopaedia/ will be used in this thesis for these smaller units as well. 
These cultural encyclopaedias, like languages, are not completely discreet units but 
participate in the same intersectionality described with regard to other factors of identity.50 
Differences in encyclopaedias comprise one of the main difficulties in interpreting ancient 
47 Radford, On Eco, 16, 75. This same effect is described by others. Peirce defines an object as a 
single known existing thing or thing believed formerly to have existed or expected to exist, or a collection of 
such things, or a known quality or relation or fact, which single object may be a collection, or a whole of parts, 
or it may have some other mode of being, such as an act permitted whose being does not prevent its negation 
from being equally permitted, or something of a general nature desired, required, or invariably found under 
certain general circumstances. Liszka explains that it serves to offer resistance, to provide a constraint, or, in 
general, to act as a determinant for the process of semeiosis which represents it. It is this resistance that 
connects the object with Peirces concept of secondness (General, 21, citing C.P. 2.232). 
48 Radford, On Eco, 63. 
49 Alkier, Studies, 233. On the virtual nature of the encyclopaedia, see Umberto Eco, From the Tree 
to the Labyrinth: Historical Studies on the Sign and Interpretation, trans. Anthony Oldcorn (Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press, 2014), 88-89; for a similar description from the field of cognitive linguistics, see 
Sharifian, Cultural, 21-22.  
50 See below and Section 2.2. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
texts. Alkier points out die enorme Differenz zwischen der Enzyklopdie des paulinischen 
Christentums und der gegenwrtigen deutschen Enzyklopdie.51 While any attempt to 
reconstruct a discrete encyclopaedia of Pauline Christianity must be questioned, the 
encyclopaedias at the disposal of the auditors of the early biblical texts are significantly 
different from present-day encyclopaedias. 
In places where different cultures come into contact, some people become conversant 
in, or at least familiar with, more than one encyclopaedia, which are then available to the 
Model Reader for activation.52 The cultural units (CU in Figure 1) for king and world 
available in Johns first- or second-century CE context are different depending on the 
cultural encyclopaedia in which they are heard.53 
51 Alkier, Wunder, 291. For an excellent example of an analysis that takes into account the availability 
of multiple encyclopaedias, see Ben-Porats work on the cultural unit autumn [Two-Way Pragmatics: From 
World to Text and Back, in Literary Pragmatics, ed. Roger D. Sell (London: Routledge, 1991), 142-63 (esp. 
156-57). See also Sharifian, Cultural, 29-31]. For the use of guillemets, see footnote 54. 
52 A Model Reader is one who agrees to play the game according to the rules that the author 
communicates (Radford, On Eco, 5-6). Note that Ecos Model Reader is never empirical but always cultural 
(Desogus, Encyclopedia, 511, 513, 519-520). For more on Model Readers, see Section 7.1.4. 
53 See n. 55 for an explanation of the double quotes and slashes used in semiotic analyses. Jewish and 
Greek cultural units for king will be discussed only minimally in this thesis. For more on Jewish cultural 
units for king, see Beth M. Stovell, Mapping Metaphorical Discourse in the Fourth Gospel: John's Eternal 
King, ed. Stanley E. Porter, Linguistic Biblical Studies 5 (Leiden: Brill, 2012), 73-133. For more on Greek 
cultural units for king, see Ulrich Busse, Metaphorik und Rhetorik im Johannesevangelium: Das Bildfeld 
vom Knig, in Imagery in the Gospel of John: Terms, Forms, Themes, and Theology of Johannine Figurative 
Language, ed. Jrg Frey, Jan G. van der Watt, and Ruben Zimmermann, WUNT 1.200 (Tbingen: Mohr 
Siebeck, 2006), 279-317. Busse develops an especially detailed description of the cultural unit of kingship 
based on the geschichtliche wie politische Wirklichkeit der Diadochen. His inclusion of the Hirtenbild and 
its connections to John 10 are especially compelling. I appreciate, too, his insight that the Jewish horizon of 
understanding would be influenced or superimposed by more recent experiences. However, in this thesis I 
focus on the Roman horizon of understanding because of the Haftpunkte in John 18:2819:22 (Metaphorik, 
283, 282, 303). 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
Figure 1. Cultural units for king and world within some of the cultural encyclopaedias of the first and second century 
While the cultural unit of king in the Roman encyclopaedia, for example, may 
overlap with its cultural unit in the Greek encyclopaedia (the philosopher king was also a 
just king), the two will most likely not be identical.54 Therefore, a text may not make sense 
to a reader, not because the author is communicating poorly, but rather because the reader is 
using a different encyclopaedia than the author expected her to use.55  
Another layer of complexity arises when communication happens across boundaries 
not only of culture but also of language.56 Each cultural encyclopaedia is connected with the 
language of the culture in which it arises, and different cultures may or may not use the same 
languagethere is no one-to-one culture-language identity. Thus, translation is always a 
54 See Desogus, Encyclopedia, 508, where he makes the same point using the example of colours. 
For the conventions used for representing Signs and objects: Single slashes indicate something intended as an 
expression or a sign-vehicle, while guillemets indicate something intended as content. Therefore /xxxx/ means, 
expresses or refers to xxxx  Therefore, //automobile// is the object corresponding to the verbal expression 
/automobile/, and both refer to the content unit automobile (Eco, Theory, xi).  
55 Radford, On Eco, 10-13. The meaning-making provisions in the various cultural encyclopedias 
overlap with but are not identical to issues such as cultural scripts which encode expectations of language 
performance. On this see, for example, A. Wierzbicka, Intercultural Pragmatics and Communication, ELL 
735-42. Also, note that these theories of communication presuppose that comprehension is the goal of language 
exchanges, and that therefore a lack of comprehension can be used as an indication that some part of the process 
has gone awry. See, for example, the assumptions in the discussion of Eco, Lector, 15-19. 
56 See, somewhat similarly, Ehrensperger, Crossroads, 41-43, 57-59. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
shift, not between two languages, but between two culturesor two encyclopedias.57 This 
is not to argue for the strong version of the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, in which the constructs 
and constructions of ones language predetermine ones ability to think certain things or in 
certain ways.58 The process of determining meaning described so far, however, does suggest 
the weaker version that is more generally accepted, that language influences our habitual 
ways of thinking.59 This coheres with the circularity between encyclopaedia and universe 
of discourse presented above. 
In order for communication to happen, authors use a language and expect their 
readers to make use of the whole encyclopedia that the performances of that language have 
implemented, namely the cultural conventions that that language has produced and the very 
history of the previous interpretations of many texts.60 This is specifically true for texts 
written not for a single addressee but for a community of readers.61 So how does a reader 
know which encyclopaedia to open? Alkier, speaking of Pauls letters, references this 
problem: 
Die Alternative, Paulusbriefe jdisch oder hellenistisch zu lesen, wird 
vollends brchig, wenn bedacht wird, da Texte sich nicht nur der 
intertextuellen Kompetenz ihrer Verfasser und ihrer Leser, sondern einer 
allgemeinen, kulturbedingten enzyklopdischen Kompetenz verdanken. Jede 
Textherstellung und jede Textlektre mu auf eine Enzyklopdie kulturell 
konventionalisierten Wissens zurckgreifen. Die kulturellen 
Zusammengnge, in denen frhchristliche Texte und insbesondere die 
paulinischen Briefe entstanden sind, lassen sich dabei nicht in eine jdische 
und eine griechisch-rmische Kultur sezieren.62  
One text from a multicultural environment (e.g., the Gospel of John as well as the Pauline 
epistles) may not depend on only one encyclopaedia.  
57 Umberto Eco, Experiences in Translation, trans. Alastair McEwen, ed. Olga Zorzi Pugliese, 
Toronto Italian Studies: Goggio Publication Series (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2001), 17. 
58 John Edwards, Language and Identity: An Introduction, ed. Rajend Mesthrie, Key Topics in 
Sociolinguistics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), 259. 
59 Edwards, Language and Identity, 60-61, 259-60. 
60 Eco, Between, 68. 
61 Eco, Between, 67. 
62 Alkier, Wunder, 72. It is exactly a problem with encyclopaedias that Alkier posits as a problem for 
the interpretation of 1 Corinthians (180; see also 292). 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
Furthermore, encyclopaedias, like languages, are not completely impervious to one 
another. Thus, with multiple encyclopaedias available, texts must provide clues for the 
abductive process. Eco explains: un texte est un produit dont le sort interprtatif doit faire 
partie de son propre mcanisme gnratif; gnrer un texte signifie mettre en uvre une 
stratgie dont font partie les prvisions des mouvements de lautre.63 The present study 
argues that a text may envisage competence in more than one encyclopaedia, and that the 
Johannine trial narrative provides key words (see above) to indicate that the Roman 
encyclopaedia ought to be used for interpretation.64 
Yet what does it mean to open an encyclopaedia? When Langford does allow a 
cultural encyclopaedia to inform his analysis, he limits it to issues of date and authorship, 
audience, setting, tendencies in textual tradition when the NT authors cited OT 
Scripture and citation practices (where the overlap with Jewish practices is noted).65 It is 
true, as he says, that to describe the virtual encyclopedia of first-century Christianity in its 
entirety would be impossible since [t]o do so would both go beyond the scope of this [or 
indeed any] study and require an extensive examination of the other NT documents as 
well.66 However, for Langfords study it might have been illuminating to include cultural 
units of the first-century encyclopaedias that might clarify the meanings of words important 
to 1 Peter, such as  (e.g., 1 Pet. 1:3) or  (e.g., 1 Pet. 4:13). 
A better example of a study that takes into account the contact between cultural 
encyclopaedias is the recent work of Per Jarle Bekken.67 Although he does not refer to Eco 
63 Eco, Lector, 65, emphasis original. See further on this Eco, Role, 17-23; Eco, Lector, 95-106; Eco, 
Between, 68. 
64 Envisage takes a step back from any direct apprehension of an intentio auctoris. Instead, the  
notion of intentio operis, the intention of the work, plays an important role, as a source of meaning which, 
while not being reducible to the pre-textual intentio auctoris, none the less operates as a constraint upon the 
free play of the intentio lectoris [Stefan Collini, Introduction: Interpretation Terminable and Interminable, 
in Interpretation and Overinterpretation, ed. Stefan Collini (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992), 
1-21 (9)]. 
65 Langford, Defending, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93-95. 
66 Langford, Defending, 87 n. 3. Here Langford also references Alkier, Wunder, 285. 
67 Bekken, Lawsuit. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
or Alkier, his use of Philo, Roman imperial imagery and Roman legal texts demonstrates the 
ways in which Roman and Jewish encyclopaedias intersected. Bekken argues, furthermore, 
that Philos writings appropriate Roman images in his depiction of a future Messiah.68 This 
thesis approaches Jewish-Roman cultural intersections from a different angle. It notes clues 
in the Johannine trial narrative that blow up the Roman encyclopaedia available to those 
(Jew or gentile) whose lives intersected with Roman contexts.  
Bekkens work brings up two further points of importance. First, his examination of 
Roman legal papyri demonstrates that the Johannine description of Jesus trial coheres with 
other contemporary trial procedures.69 This contradicts Herzogs suggestion that the trial 
referred to in Gospel narratives ought to be called a show trial.70 On the one hand, Herzog 
is correct to demonstrate that twenty-first century assumptions about trial procedures, 
particularly the assumption of a preponderant concern for justice, are quite far from first-
century CE primary concerns.71 On the other hand, the choice of the word show to describe 
Jesus first century CE trial assumes the following practices, not all of which were a 
consistent part of Roman judicial proceedings. 
In a show trial, the guilt of the person being tried has already been 
determined. There is no effort to weigh evidence, nor is there a defense of 
the offender. Show trials are conducted under the firm control of the state; 
there is no independent judiciary. The procedure does not conform to laws 
but follows the expedient will of power elites. Some ad hoc body of accusers 
68 Bekken, Lawsuit, 230. The details of his analysis of Philo cannot be engaged with in this thesis, 
although it is to be noted that he depends on the older work of Versnel for his information on Roman triumphs 
and does not engage with Mary Beard [H. S. Versnel, Triumphus: An Inquiry into the Origin, Development 
and Meaning of the Roman Triumph (Leiden: Brill, 1970); Mary Beard, The Roman Triumph (Cambridge, MA: 
Belknap, 2007)]. Another critique of Bekkens work has come from JoAnn Brant who points out the difficulty 
of connecting Philos exegesis with John and his readers [Jo-Ann A. Brant, review of Per Jarle Bekken, The 
Lawsuit Motif in John's Gospel from New Perspectives: Jesus Christ, Crucified Criminal and Emperor of the 
World, JTS 66.2 (2015): 773-76 (775); Bekken, Lawsuit, 258]. 
69 This is an important observation, despite some problematic elements in the analysis. In Bekkens 
chapter on Jewish and Roman legal proceedings, for example, he regularly uses the term Greco-Roman to 
refer to the provincial procedures of the Greco-Roman administration, yet in what way the administration is 
Greek is not explained (Lawsuit, 71, 71-117). Furthermore, he makes no distinction between the judicial 
procedure for a Roman citizen (such as Paul) and a non-citizen such as Jesus. See, for example, the different 
wordings of P.Oxy. 1 64 and P.Oxy. 1 65 as well as the subsequent discussion (104-106). On the problematic 
use of Greco-Roman see Chapter 1; on intersectionality, see Section 1.2.3. 
70 William R. Herzog, Jesus, Justice, and the Reign of God: A Ministry of Liberation (Louisville: 
Westminster John Knox, 2000), 240-41. 
71 Herzog, Jesus, 240.  
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
stands in place of a jury, and its members belong to the same ruling class as 
the accusers. A show trial is not a legal process but a political process whose 
purpose is the public degradation and humiliation of an enemy of the state 
before his foreordained execution.72 
As will be shown in Chapter 6, some of these assumptions about trial procedures are 
relevant to the Johannine trial narrative.73 However, the sharp dichotomy between eras that 
Herzog proposes is overstated. Romans did value justice, although it was not necessarily the 
prime motivation behind a trial.74 Cicero, for example, in his discussion of moral goodness 
(honestum) puts the conservation of organized society second after the full perception and 
intelligent development of the true (Off. 1.5). And for the regulation of society, he considers 
two virtues to be necessary (1.7): justice (iustitia) and charity (beneficentia). Herzog is 
correct that there is no presumption of innocence, but Roman trials often included input from 
the public and thus there was not necessarily presumption of guilt, either.75 Trials might be 
conducted as a method of humiliation, but Herzog gives no examples, and there is no reason 
to think that public degradation was the purpose of all of them. Furthermore, to qualify 
ancient trials as not being legal but political is to impose the current cultural units of these 
words onto ancient encyclopaedias. Thus, it might occasionally be helpful, perhaps, for a 
scholar to put the word trial in quotation marks in order to remind readers that the 
procedures and assumptions of antiquity differed from those of today. I have, for similar 
reasons, chosen to use the term /Jesus-believers/ rather than /Christians/, and I use quotation 
marks (Jews) when referencing Johns use of  (see below). Yet to characterize first-
century CE judicial procedures as show trials seems to impose upon them a critique that 
stems entirely from the values of the twenty-first century. Therefore, I shall continue 
72 Herzog, Jesus, 240-41. 
73 Section 6.1. 
74 See also the differences between citizens and non-citizens in legal proceedings mentioned in Section 
6.2.2.2, as well as the distinction between natural and positive law described in Section 7.1.2. 
75 See discussions in Section 6.2.1.1 and 7.1.2. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
throughout this thesis to use the term /trial/, reminding readers of these differences at relevant 
points. 
The second concern raised by Bekkens analysis stems from occasional slippage 
between historical and narrative referents in Bekkens discussion of Pilate, Jesus and the 
Jews. For example, when Bekken suggests that the Jews perceived that Jesus kingship 
stood in opposition to the Emperor citing John 19:12, I agree to the extent that they use such 
an opposition to pressure Pilate into crucifying Jesus.76 When he goes on to conclude that 
their response to Pilate in verse 15 (     ) emphasizes how 
John perceived the tragic irony behind the entire trial: in rejecting Jesus as their Emperor 
 the Jews at the same time denied their eschatological hopes of being the people of God, 
who were meant to have the ultimate sovereignty over all nations, I understand that he is 
describing his understanding of Johns communicative purpose, and I shall want to nuance 
this evaluation.77 However, when he concludes that the implication of rejecting this 
eschatological hope is a loss of status before God and an equal subjection before Caesar, I 
am concerned about who is making this logical connection (John or Bekken) and which Jews 
are being discussed, the Jews as John characterizes them or the Jews as a historical group 
of people.78 Thus, I want to make clear that this thesis distinguishes between the 
characterization of historical people within the universe of discourse of the text, which I am 
analyzing, and the historical people themselves, which I am not, except as evidence from the 
past can clarify the cultural units available to Johns auditors. For this reason, I shall follow 
the convention often adopted by Johannine scholars of putting the Jews in quotation marks 
when it refers to the people John calls . This is a more restricted referent than Adele 
Reinhartz suggests is usual for the quotation marks.  
[T]hey convey  that the Jews as presented in the Gospel of John are a 
construct of the text itself; that they represent the state of unbelief and 
76 Bekken, Lawsuit, 247. See discussion in Section 6.2.2.3. 
77 Bekken, Lawsuit, 247. See Section 7.1. 
78 Bekken, Lawsuit, 247. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
symbolize the unbelieving world as a whole; that they are not to be identified 
with the historical Jewish nation that lived in the Greco-Roman empire in the 
first century of the common era, whom the modern-day Jewish people 
consider their historical and spiritual ancestors. Underlying these points is 
the conviction that the Gospel as such is not anti-Jewish, since it speaks not 
of real Jews but only about Jews as symbol or metaphor.79  
In this thesis, the quotation marks refer to the use of  in the Gospel of John 
as a Sign that represents certain historical Jews on the ground of their participation in the 
events surrounding the crucifixion of Jesus (see below for the meaning of /ground/ in this 
semiotic triad).80 The Sign does not, however, refer to all Jews, either ancient or 
contemporary, nor are they, in my view, a symbol or metaphor in the Fourth Gospel for 
unbelief.81 
Now that semiotic theory has been explained and the cultural unit used in this thesis 
for trial clarified, I turn to studies on bilingualism to provide further information on a 
phenomenon that occurs when languages come into contact with each other: code-switching. 
2.2. Languages in Contact 
Many of the terms used to discuss language use, especially language and bilingualism, seem 
simple to define and yet are not. It is only once these concepts have been explored that one 
can go on to look at the code-switching that happens when languages come into contact with 
each other. 
2.2.1. Definitions: language, bilingualism and domain 
When I say that I speak English, I think that means something like: Of the English 
words contained in a standard dictionary, I have some facility with a great many of them, 
and I can put them together into fairly grammatical and communicative sequences. My 
79 Adele Reinhartz, Jews and Jews in the Fourth Gospel, in Anti-Judaism and the Fourth Gospel: 
Papers of the Leuven Colloquium, 2000, ed. R. Bieringer, D. Pollefeyt, and F. Vandecasteele-Vanneuville, 
Jewish and Cristian Heritage Series 1 (Assen: Van Gorcum, 2001), 213-27 (213). 
80 For more about this kind of semiotic analysis, see Section 2.3.2. For more on the referent of the 
Jews, see Section 7.1.3. 
81 Section 7.1.3. See, also, against the translation Judaeans, Margaret Williams, Jews in a Graeco-
Roman Environment, ed. Jrg Frey, WUNT, vol. 1.312 (Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2013), 24-28. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
idiolect, however, is highly influenced by the usages of people I have read and those I have 
spoken with, as well as by the vocabulary, grammar, and idioms of other languages that I 
have learned.82 Thus, my version of English is not precisely the same language as your 
version of English, as anyone who has ever tried to communicate from Great Britain to 
Australia to the US to Canada can attest. Even among various people of the United Kingdom, 
communication can be fraught with difficulty. No dictionary or grammar can contain all the 
elements of every idiolect used by all of those considered to be English speakers, and no 
English speaker uses all of the elements contained in any dictionary or grammar. Language 
thus proves to be an imaginary construct, influenced as much by the social and political 
organization of speakers as by its actual use, and no completely satisfactory definition has 
yet been found.83  
Carol Myers-Scotton explains the two different ways of determining what counts as 
a language: according to structural (linguistic) criteria and according to socio-political 
criteria.84 More detailed discussions could be entertained.85 However, I propose, for the 
purposes of this thesis, to refer to the Greek language, and mean the language resources as 
they existed in the first century CE (focusing especially on vocabulary and grammar, but 
also recognizing the presence of other elements, such as accentuation and pronunciation) 
that spread from Greece (particularly Athens) around the Mediterranean. This language, 
Koine Greek, is sometimes thought to refer to the language of the common people (as 
opposed to some higher literary standard), but Koine to first century writers meant the 
82 Idiolect was first mentioned and briefly defined in Section 1.2.3. 
83 Dutch and Flemish, for example, are considered by some speakers to be separate languages, while 
English, whether American or Australian, is considered one.  
84 Carol Myers-Scotton, Multiple Voices: An Introduction to Bilingualism (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 
2006), 17-22; see also her discussion of Dutch, 50.  
85 Dell Hymes recognizes [t]hree criteria as important for the organization of speech patterns: the 
historical provenience of the language resources; presence or absence of mutual intelligibility; and 
specialization in use. He proposes the terms [l]anguage and dialect . . . for the first; codes for the second; 
and varieties and registers for the third [Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life, in 
Sociolinguistics: The Essential Readings, ed. Christina Bratt Paulston and G. Richard Tucker (Malden, MA: 
Blackwell, 2003), 30-47 (44)].  
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
language that all people have in common (as opposed to local languages).86 I shall also 
discuss the Latin language, by which I mean the language resources as they existed in the 
first century CE (focusing especially on vocabulary and grammar, but also recognizing the 
presence of other elements, such as accentuation and pronunciation) that spread from the 
people who ruled the Italic peninsula by the end of the first century BCE into their conquered 
territories.87 The purpose of setting out this rather detailed and somewhat pedantic definition 
is that, especially in a discussion of languages in contact, it is important to note that the 
boundaries between languages are not always clear, either to those who use the languages or 
to those who study them; words and phrases cross those boundaries frequently and often 
without fanfare. The porousness of languages is inherent in what one might otherwise reify 
as Greek and Latin.88 As Biville says, [c]e que lon appelle le grec et le latin ne 
86 Kees Versteegh, Dead or Alive? The Status of the Standard Language, in Bilingualism in Ancient 
Society: Language Contact and the Written Text, ed. James N. Adams, Mark Janse, and Simon Swain (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2002), 52-74 (70). 
87 James Clackson, and Geoffrey C. Horrocks, The Blackwell History of the Latin Language (Malden, 
MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2011), 84. 
88 Also, the concept of language must be distinguished from that of a standard language. This is not 
a linguistic concept, but rather a sociolinguistic one. In that sense, it is mostly interested in language attitudes 
[William Bright, Introduction: The Dimensions of Sociolinguistics (paper presented at Sociolinguistics : 
proceedings of the UCLA Sociolinguistics Conference, 1964, The Hague, The Netherlands, 1966, 1964) 13; 
John Edwards, Socio-Educational Issues Concerning Indigenous Minority Languages: Terminology and 
Status, in European Lesser Used Languages in Primary Education: Inventory and Proceedings of the 
Colloquy, ed. Jantsje Sikma and D. Gorter (Ljouwert: Fryske Akademy/Mercator, 1991), 207-226 (220)]. Einar 
Haugen, for example, listed [t]he four aspects of language development . . . in taking the step . . . from 
vernacular to standard as (1) selection of norm, (2) codification of form, (3) elaboration of function, and (4) 
acceptance by the community [The Ecology of Language (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1972), 
252]. Richard Hudson's sharp dichotomy between standardization and normal language development, 
however, has to be rejected because language development is too varied to posit one progression as normal 
[Sociolinguistics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 33]. Although Charles Ferguson offers a 
detailed typology for classifying language standardization, this goes beyond the level of analysis warranted for 
ancient cultures [The Language Factor in National Development, in Study of the Role of Second Languages 
in Asia, Africa, and Latin America, ed. Frank A. Rice and Center for Applied Linguistics (Washington, D.C.: 
Center of Applied Linguistics of the Modern Language Association of America, 1962), 8-14 (9-12)]. For 
another extensive discussion of the historical process of standardization, see William Downes, Language and 
Society (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), 33-44. Note also Versteeghs cautions about the 
second meaning of standard language (other than a codified variety). Versteegh also mistakenly lists 
Haugens stages as selection, codification, implementation, and elaboration (Dead or Alive, 54-56). 
Individual speakers may choose not to conform to the perceived standard, thus contributing to the 
vitality of minority varieties. Such acts of identity express solidarity and can in effect raise the language to 
the implicit position of a standard with selection, elaboration of function and acceptance. See Ellen Bouchard 
Ryan, and Howard Giles, Attitudes Towards Language Variation: Social and Applied Contexts (London: 
Arnold, 1982); John Edwards, Multilingualism (London; New York: Routlege, 1994), 100; Charlotte Hoffman, 
An Introduction to Bilingualism, Longman Linguistics Library (London: Longman, 1991), 202; Halliday, 
Anti-Languages; R. B. Le Page, and Andre Tabouret-Keller, Acts of Identity: Creole-Based Approaches to 
Language and Ethnicity (Fernelmont: Intercommunications, 2006). On the use of language standardization as 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
sont eux aussi que des abstractions, qui se ralisent  travers toutes sortes de variantes 
diatopiques et diastratiques.89 These abstractions constitute a standard language as an idea 
in the mind rather than a realitya set of abstract norms to which actual usage may conform 
to a greater or lesser extent.90 This idea affects language use. 
The fact that languages are conceived of in this way means that speakers distinguish 
between different sets of norms, different languages. Those who have the ability to 
communicate according to more than one norm are called /bilingual/.91 Yet this term is not 
as clear as might be expected. Among those who study it, bilingualism is generally used as 
a cover term for multilingualism, too.92 Furthermore, societal bilingualism can exist without 
individual bilingualism.93 In addition, Pierre Flobert mentions the distinction between 
active and passive bilingualism where a person who is actively bilingual can produce 
utterances in the second language, whereas a person passively bilingual can only understand 
(some or all) utterances produced by others.94 The existence of those who might understand 
some Latin without being able to speak it will be important for this study. 
Bilingual communication can furthermore be productively studied in terms of 
domains. Joshua Fishman, in 1965, used the term domain to designate the major clusters of 
a form of domination, see Pierre Bourdieu, Language and Symbolic Power, ed. John B. Thompson, trans. Gino 
Raymond and Matthew Adamson (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1991), 46-52. 
89 Frdrique Biville, Situations et documents bilingues dans le monde grco-romain, in Bilinguisme 
grco-latin et pigraphie: Actes du colloque organis  l'Universit Lumire-Lyon 2, Maison de l'Orient et de 
la Mditrrane-Jean Pouilloux, UMR 5189 Hisoma et JE 2409 Romanitas, les 17, 18 et 19 mai 2004, ed. 
Frdrique Biville, Jean-Claude Decourt, and Georges Rougemont, Collection de la Maison de l'Orient et de 
la Mditerrane 37, Srie pigraphique et historique 6 (Lyon: Maison de l'Orient et de la Mditerrane-Jean 
Pouilloux, 2008), 35-53 (36). 
90 James Milroy, and Lesley Milroy, Authority in Language: Investigating Standard English (London: 
Routledge, 1999), 19. 
91 For a broad overview of important concepts from the field of bilingualism, see Jonathan M. Watt, 
Some Implications of Bilingualism for New Testament Exegesis, in The Language of the New Testament: 
Context, History, and Development, ed. Stanley E. Porter and Andrew W. Pitts, Linguistic Biblical Studies 6 
(Leiden: Brill, 2013), 9-27 (11-19). 
92 Myers-Scotton, Multiple, 2; see also discussions of fluency requirements, 38-45. For the 
development of the term bilingual in academic use, see Watt, Implications, 10-11. 
93 Li Wei, Bilingualism, ELL 1. 
94 Pierre Flobert, Latin-Frankish Bilingualism in Sixth-Century Gaul: The Latin of Clovis, in 
Bilingualism in Ancient Society: Language Contact and the Written Text, ed. James N. Adams, Mark Janse, 
and Simon Swain (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 419-430 (421 n. 9); Myers-Scotton, Multiple, 44.  
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
interaction situations that occur in particular multilingual settings.95 Language decisions 
in these situations are based on something more complex than topic. Instead, they tend to 
group themselves according to human institutions or intersections of activity. Because these 
groupings are culture-dependent, there is no invariant set of domains applicable to all 
bilingual settings. Thus, domains of analysis cannot be chosen a priori but must be 
extrapolated from the interactions existing in the times and places under investigation.  
The twin applications of Fishmans discussion, that the concept of language domain 
emerges from societal patterns as opposed to individual use, and that specific domains 
should not be imposed on the evidence but instead should emerge from it, provide a 
theoretical basis for Chapter 3s examination of Latin and Greek use in the first and second 
century CE along with the societal patterns in which they are expressed.96 Latin use in the 
Eastern Mediterranean is primarily found in certain domains: the army, the administration, 
and commerce. Latin intersects in these domains with other, local languages as well as with 
Greek. Each piece of written evidence is located at an intersection of the matrix of language 
use.97 And from the pressures at these intersections, code-switching emerges.98 
95 Joshua A. Fishman, The Relationship between Micro- and Macro-Sociolinguistics in the Study of 
Who Speaks What Language to Whom and When, in Sociolinguistics: Selected Readings, ed. J. B. Pride and 
Janet Holmes (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1972), 15-32 (19, emphasis original). 
96 This discussion of domains is related to Uriel Weinreichs concepts of co-ordinate and compound 
bilingualism. The first refers to a type of bilingualism where each language occupies its own conceptual space 
and has its own system of references; the second obtains when both languages are learned simultaneously and 
both have the same reference world. Thus, these two different types of bilingualism could arise from separate 
or overlapping language domains respectively, although also, as Edwards points out, from subsequent rather 
than simultaneous language learning. This distinction is only relevant for individual bilingualism, however, 
and therefore will not be brought into the flow of the current discussion [Languages in Contact, Findings and 
Problems (New York: Linguistic Circle of New York, 1953), 9-10; Edwards, Multilingualism, 71]. 
97 Moxnes, Identity, 391.  
98 For a more detailed description of the terminology used in bilingual studies in a volume that 
addresses multilingualism in the ancient world, see Alex Mullen, Introduction: Multiple Languages, Multiple 
Identities, in Multilingualism in the Graeco-Roman Worlds, ed. Alex Mullen and Patrick James (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2012), 1-35 (15-21). 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
2.2.2. Code-switching for specificity 
Although the term code has its roots in structuralism which posits a rigid, one-to-one 
correspondence between terms and their meanings, Ronald Wardhaugh specifies that it is a 
neutral term . . . used to refer to any kind of system that two or more people employ for 
communication.99 Hymes uses it to emphasize the communicative aspect of language. 
Code-switching happens when one system of communication is used in the midst of 
another.100 These systems can be different languages, different styles of speech, different 
registers. Edwards defines the term broadly: all ordinary speakers have a range of 
possibilities in their linguistic repertoire, from which they pick and choose according to their 
sense of the occasion. This is code-switching.101 Thus, for example, at a wedding dinner 
among a group of mainly English speakers, a bilingual diner might turn to her sister, and 
ask, Cest pas dgueulasse? In this example, the code-switch is not only from English to 
French but also from a formal register to a very informal one. However, when one parent 
says to another, Shall we take the kids to the Z-O-O?, this also constitutes a switch from 
one code (in this case standard English) to another (in this case, spelling).102 It is important 
99 Ronald Wardhaugh, An Introduction to Sociolinguistics, 6th ed. (Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, 
2010), 84. For more on the use of the word code, see Eco, Semiotics, 187-88; Radford, On Eco, 62-64; 
Desogus, Encyclopedia, 502, 504-505, 517-18. 
100 Eco uses the term code-switch in a different sense. For Eco it means to read a given text in the 
light of aberrant codes (where aberrant means only different from the ones envisaged by the sender) (Role, 
22). For a history of the research on code-switching, see Rodolfo Jacobson, Conveying a Broader Message 
through Bilingual Discourse: An Attempt at Contrastive Codeswitching Research, in Codeswitching 
Worldwide, ed. Rodolfo Jacobson, Trends in Linguistics: Studies and Monographs 106 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 
1998), 51-76. 
101 Edwards, Multilingualism, 80-81. 
102 In both of these examples, the code-switch brought two people closer together and excluded 
everyone else in order to achieve a specific purpose (the exchange of private opinions which in the first case 
might embarrass the hosts and in the second might prematurely excite the children and lead to their 
disappointment). Carol Myers-Scotton and William Ury discuss these functions under the rubric of redefining 
social arenas [Bilingual Strategies: The Social Functions of Code- Switching, International Journal of the 
Sociology of Language 13 (1977): 5-20]. Note that when Robin Osborne asks among the many who are 
multilingual, is there anyone who is multilingual?, she mixes the unity of one persons idiolect with the 
awareness of the various languages (possibly reflected in societal bilingualism) that compose it [Cultures as 
Languages and Languages as Cultures, in Multilingualism in the Graeco-Roman Worlds, ed. Alex Mullen and 
Patrick James (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012), 317-34 (318, 329, 333)]. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
at the outset to recognize that this phenomenon occurs both among bilinguals and 
monolinguals, so that bilingualism is not a necessary precondition for its use.103 
Code-switching exists on a continuum with borrowing, which happens when a 
resource of one system is appropriated by the users of another and becomes integrated into 
the new language.104 Resources can be borrowed and then eventually used by monolinguals 
without reference to or knowledge of their origins.105 Code-switching, however, demands at 
least an implicit awareness of the original context. Penelope Gardner-Chloros points out that 
loans are more likely to be brief  linguistically integrated into the receiving language 
[and] filling a semantic gap in the language.106 She memorably concludes, a loan is a code-
switch with a full-time job.107 Yet distinctions between the two are not clear-cut. 
The sense of speakers on the status of a word could provide another data point, but 
Erica McClure has not found consensus on the matter even within a single speech 
103 As Edwards describes it: all ordinary speakers have a range of possibilities in their linguistic 
repertoire, from which they pick and choose according to their sense of the occasion. This is code-switching, 
and its ubiquity and frequency are worth noting, not only because they illustrate a powerful and virtually 
automatic grasp of linguistic and sociolinguistic subtleties, but also because they link monolingual 
performances to the more apparent juggling of the bilingual (Language and Identity, 30). Code-switching can 
be inter- or intra-sentential, but the Fourth Gospel only evidences the second, that within sentences. 
Furthermore, no distinction will be made between code-switching and code mixing, and the latter term will be 
avoided since it can have negative connotations (S. Mahootian, Code Switching and Mixing, ELL 512). The 
word loanword is also often used for words that have been borrowed and integrated into a new language, but 
this will be referred to as borrowing in this thesis. 
104 Mahootian, Code Switching, 513.  
105 Robert Cavenaile provides a superb overview with examples of Latin into Greek code-switching 
and borrowing in his first three introductory pages. His further description of progressive integration of 
domains and word forms has been disputed and revised by subsequent research [Influence latine sur le 
vocabulaire grec d'gypte, CdE 26.51 (1951): 391-404 (393-95)].  
106 Penelope Gardner-Chloros, Code-Switching in Relation to Language Contact and Convergence, 
in Devenir bilingue-parler bilingue: Acts du 2e colloque sur le bilinguisme, Universit de Neuchtel, 20-22 
septembre 1984, ed. Georges Ldi, Linguistische Arbeiten 169 (Tbingen: Niemeyer, 1987), 99-111 (102); see 
also Simon Swain, Bilingualism in Cicero? The Evidence of Code-Switching, in Bilingualism in Ancient 
Society: Language Contact and the Written Text, ed. James N. Adams, Mark Janse, and Simon Swain (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2002), 128-67 (esp 157 and 157 n. 90). Whether or not switches of one word can be 
counted as code-switching has been disputed. See discussion in Erica McClure, The Relationship between 
Form and Function in Written National Language-English Codeswitching: Evidence from Mexico, Spain, and 
Bulgaria, in Codeswitching Worldwide, ed. Rodolfo Jacobson, Trends in Linguistics: Studies and Monographs 
106 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1998), 125-50 (129-30). This study will focus exclusively on such switches, however, 
using the concept of specificity as justification. 
107 Gardner-Chloros, Code-Switching, 102. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
community.108 Furthermore, since there is, as yet, no independent theoretical framework 
for analyzing code-switching in written texts, caution is required.109 It is true that in Chapter 
3, I shall be assembling information which is not the product of social scientific research in 
the current sensei.e., a procedure involving formal data collection, appropriate selection of 
samples and control groups, theory formation, etc.110 However, written evidence does 
emerge from an oral milieu.111 Because of this, I shall assume that evidence of language 
contact in written records reflects language contact in the oral sphere, but that it does not 
necessarily do so by mirroring it exactly.112 
Both oral and written code-switching can arise from a variety of motivations, but 
only two are relevant to the present analysis. First, language switches can occur because of 
a change in topic. As early as 1964, Susan Ervin-Tripp noted that where codeswitching and 
interpenetration or borrowing are permissible, they become available to mark role and topic 
shifts within a setting.113 This will become relevant for the discussion of Haftpunkte in John 
18:2819:22 below. 
Even more relevant is Ad Backus study proposing the Specificity Hypothesis: 
Embedded language elements in codeswitching have a high degree of semantic 
specificity.114 Semantic specificity relates not only to lexical but especially to 
108 McClure, Relationship, 131; Erica McClure, Oral and Written Assyrian-English 
Codeswitching, in Codeswitching Worldwide II, ed. Rodolfo Jacobson, Trends in Linguistics: Studies and 
Monographs 126 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 2001), 157-91 (161). 
109 Mark Sebba, Researching and Theorising Multilingual Texts, in Language Mixing and Code-
Switching in Writing: Approaches to Mixed-Language Written Discourse, ed. Mark Sebba, Shahrzad 
Mahootian, and Carla Jonsson, Routledge Critical Studies in Multilingualism 2 (New York: Routledge, 2012), 
1-26 (1); see, similarly, Cecilia Montes-Alcal, Written Codeswitching: Powerful Bilingual Images, in 
Codeswitching Worldwide II, ed. Rodolfo Jacobson, Trends in Linguistics: Studies and Monographs 126 
(Berlin: de Gruyter, 2001), 193-219 (194). 
110 Edwards, Issues, 209. 
111 Watt, Implications, 22; for a more detailed discussion of written and spoken languages and the 
ways that they influence each other, see Vt Bubenk, Hellenistic and Roman Greece as a Sociolinguistic Area 
(Amsterdam; Philadelphia: Benjamins, 1989), 23-27.  
112 Edwards, Issues, 209. 
113 Susan Ervin-Tripp, An Analysis of the Interaction of Language, Topic, and Listener, American 
Anthropologist 66.6 (1964): 86-102 (91). 
114 Ad Backus, The Role of Semantic Specificity in Insertional Codeswitching: Evidence from Dutch-
Turkish, in Codeswitching Worldwide II, ed. Rodolfo Jacobson, Trends in Linguistics: Studies and 
Monographs 126 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 2001), 125-54 (128).  
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
encyclopedic meaning.115 Specificity is the importation of the language resources from 
another language to express a very specific concept for which the language in use does not 
have an exactly equivalent term.116 
Backus gives the example of the differences between an American high school and 
a Dutch middelbare school as they are experienced in each country. He suggests that a 
Dutch immigrant in the United States is likely to decide to refer to an American highschool 
as high school in his Dutch, based on these cultural differences.117 Shana Poplack has 
described a very similar phenomenon called emblematic code-switches. As with code-
switches for specificity, emblematic code-switches are often heavily loaded in ethnic 
content and would be placed low on a scale of translatability.118 Interestingly, she notes that 
these occur more frequently in non-fluent bilingualsjust the population that will be 
discussed in Chapter 3 as among the auditors of the Gospel of John.119 And in John 18:28, 
33 and 19:9,  is similarly specific in its relationship to the embedded language 
world, that of the Romans.120 
Furthermore, although the difference between code-switching and borrowing has 
been noted above, when the switch occurs for specificity it retains its culturally significant 
connections even when it is eventually conventionalized as a loanword.121 Thus, a strict 
delineation between code-switching and borrowing is neither possible nor necessary to 
discussions of specificity.122 
115 Backus, Role, 131.  
116 Backus, Role, 132. 
117 Backus, Role, 129. 
118 Shana Poplack, Sometimes I'll Start a Sentence in Spanish y termino en espaol: Toward a 
Typology of Code-Switching, Linguistics 18 (1980): 581-618 (589). 
119 Poplack, Sometimes, 613. 
120 Backus, Role, 152-53.  
121 Backus, Role, 129. See, similarly, Carol Myers-Scotton, The Matrix Language Frame Model: 
Developments and Responses, in Codeswitching Worldwide II, ed. Rodolfo Jacobson, Trends in Linguistics: 
Studies and Monographs 126 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 2001), 23-58 (40); pace McClure, Oral, 162, 186-87. 
122 See, for example, Miriam Ben-Rafael who includes borrowings within the broader category of 
code-switching [Codeswitching in the Language of Immigrants: The Case of Franbreu, in Codeswitching 
Worldwide II, ed. Rodolfo Jacobson, Trends in Linguistics: Studies and Monographs 126 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 
2001), 251-307 (253)]. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
Code-switching for specificity occurs in written work as well. Montes-Alcal studied 
her own written code-switches and concludes, The underlying reasons for codeswitching 
are not lack of language proficiency or inability to render a term in the other language.123 
This points to a helpful distinction between user ability and language resources. In her 
discussion of lexical need she points out that there is a lexical need in each and every 
switch in principle, but this should not be interpreted as inability to translate a word or a 
sentence, but rather as the lack of an exact equivalent in the other language.124 Code-
switching for specificity does not require complete lexical gaps but only the lack of an exact 
equivalent that Montes-Alcal notes. 
Furthermore, it is just specificity that seems to have motivated the borrowing that 
occurred when Latin and Greek came into contact. From the beginning (first century BCE), 
Greeks borrowed Latin words to denote objects, titles, and customs that would have been 
unfamiliar to Greeks [e.g.,  (centurio),  (legio),  (patronus)], and 
by the fourth century AD Latin words were not infrequently used even in cases where a 
Greek word already existed.125 Latin words were used, for example, in the Roman army in 
Egypt, where Greek speakers needed to describe elements of a Roman encyclopaedia. 
Nel nostro caso specifico, la diffusa ignoranza della struttura dellesercito 
romano impediva in un certo qual modo di servirsi di termini greci che 
implicassero listituzione di un rischioso parallelismo con la realt delle 
truppe tolemaiche; daltra parte, per introdurre ed utilizzare prestiti era 
sufficiente affidarsi ad un processo di mimesi, per il buon esito del quale non 
era indispensabile comprendere esattamente che cosa una determinata parola 
latina significasse.126 
123 Montes-Alcal, Written, 218. 
124 Montes-Alcal, Written, 209-210; Erica McClure, Formal and Functional Aspects of the Code-
Switched Discourse of Bilingual Children, in Latino Language and Communicative Behavior, ed. Richard 
Durn (Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1981), 69-92 (86).  
125 Eleanor Dickey, Latin Influence on the Greek of Documentary Papyri: An Analysis of Its 
Chronological Distribution, ZPE 145 (2003): 249-257 (257).  
126 E. Ghiretti, Note sul bilinguismo greco-latino dellEgitto romano, Aevum Antiquum 9 (1996): 
275-98 (278-281). See, similarly, Claude Brixhe, The Greek of the Roman Texts, in A History of Ancient 
Greek: From the Beginnings to Late Antiquity, ed. Anastassios-Fivos Christidis (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2007), 903-910 (905). 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
First-century evidence for this kind of code-switching will be discussed further in Chapter 
Code-switches can be used, as noted above, to shift the topic of communication. 
Furthermore, the importance of key words to communicate the isotopy of a text and guide 
the reader in the process of abduction has been discussed.127 Alkier calls such key words 
Haftpunkte, adhesive points that attach a text to a particular encyclopaedia:  
Bei der Vielfalt mglicher intertextueller Beziehungen sollte aber eine 
Lektre, die daran interessiert ist, Texte mit der Arbeitshypothese einer ihnen 
kulturell und historisch gemen Enzyklopdie zu lesen, unterscheiden 
zwischen intertextuellen Verweisen, die einen signifikanten Haftpunkt im 
auszulegenden Text aufweisen und solchen intertextuellen Beziehungen, die 
ohne solche aufweisbaren Haftpunkte vom Leser hergestellt werden.128  
If an author wished to signal a shift in cultural encyclopaedia, she could do so by means of 
a series of Haftpunkte that connect the text to an encyclopaedia different from that of a 
previous narrative unit. By blowing up a cultural unit from another encyclopaedia, code-
switching may have an effect on the universe of discourse of the whole text, which then 
affects the encyclopaedia that it references. 
This thesis proposes that the word  is just such a Haftpunkt, and that this 
word for a specifically Roman location, used as it is strategically and repeatedly in the 
Johannine trial narrative, blows up its cultural unit in the Roman encyclopaedia and signals 
hearers of the text by means of further Haftpunkte, such as  (John 19:12, 15), to access 
that encyclopaedia throughout the trial narrative (Figure 2).129 In this case, even Greek words 
such as , ,  and the phrase    could, through the process 
of abduction, reference Roman cultural units such as rex, tribunal, imperium, and hic 
vir, hic est (Vergil, Aeneid 6.791).  
127 Section 2.1.1. 
128 Alkier, Wunder, 71; for specific examples, see 301, 304. 
129 This contrasts with other sections of the Fourth Gospel. John 1:24-25, for example, seems to 
reference primarily cultural units from a Jewish encyclopaedia. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
Figure 2. The opening of the Roman encyclopaedia in John 18:28--19:22 
I shall argue in Chapter 5 that the cultural encyclopaedia within which   
 must be understood is a Roman one and that the phrase is a specific literary allusion 
to hic vir, hic est (Vergil, Aeneid 6.791). So the last topic that needs to be elucidated in this 
chapter is the method I shall use, Ziva Ben-Porats poetics of allusion.130 
2.3. Literary Allusions in Semiotic Analysis131 
The history of scholarly definitions proposed for the term intertextuality has been 
summarized frequently enough that it does not need to be repeated.132 Well-known, 
probably, to most biblical scholars is the appropriation of the term intertextuality (designed 
130 Ziva Ben-Porat, The Poetics of Literary Allusion, PTL: A Journal for Descriptive Poetics and 
Theory of Literature 1 (1976): 105-128. 
131 Much of the material in this section was presented in condensed form in Laura Hunt, Ecce homo 
or hic vir? Translation and Allusion in John 19:5 (paper presented at SBL Annual Meeting, San Diego, CA, 
22 November, 2014). 
132 For an excellent review that places theorists within their schools of thought, see Joseph Pucci, The 
Full-Knowing Reader: Allusion and the Power of the Reader in the Western Literary Tradition (New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 1998), 3-26. For more conversation between scholars on the use of intertextuality with 
or without poststructuralist presuppositions, see William Scott Green, Doing the Text's Work for It: Richard 
Hays on Paul's Use of Scripture, in Paul and the Scriptures of Israel, ed. Craig A. Evans and James A. Sanders, 
Studies in Scripture in Early Judaism and Christianity 1; JSNTSup 83 (Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1993), 58-63; 
and the response in the same volume: Richard B. Hays, On the Rebound: A Response to Critiques of Echoes 
of Scripture in the Letters of Paul, in Paul and the Scriptures of Israel, ed. Craig A. Evans and James A. 
Sanders, Studies in Scripture in Early Judaism and Christianity 1; JSNTSup 83 (Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1993), 
70-96 (particularly 79-84). 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
to refer to the infinite and irreducible connections between texts that go beyond the textual) 
by authors who use it to mean what it sounds likeexaminable relationships between written 
texts.133 Basic to this discussion, too, are the different definitions for the word /text/. For 
Kristeva, text is precisely nothing other than a relational mass. It maintains relationships to 
other texts and to the one general text, which Kristeva designates as culture.134 Chandlers 
definition, cited in Chapter 1, references this broad definition of texts as a system of signs, 
noting the restricted use followed in this thesis: a written system of Signs, with particular 
reference to their role in conveying meaning.135 
Joseph Pucci brings out the lack of focus in some previous discussions on the work 
of the reader. Especially insightful is his suggestion that interpretive control is more firmly 
in the authors power in nonallusive moments as opposed to the allusions themselves 
which, nevertheless, must fit into the overall work.136 This thesis integrates the work of both 
author and auditor within the semiotic triad. Puccis insight, furthermore, highlights the 
importance of the references to the Roman encyclopaedia located throughout John 18:28
19:22.137 These serve to guide the auditor closely through abduction. 
Richard B. Hays, in Echoes of Scripture in the Letters of Paul, brought the term 
/intertextuality/ into biblical studies, recognizing that [a] criticism interested in 
intertextuality  seeks to explore the intertextual space by taking inventory of the cultural 
codes within which the text operates and of which it is a manifestation, but he, himself, 
propose[d] instead to discuss the phenomenon of intertextuality in Pauls letters in a more 
133 Alkier, Intertextuality, 4-7; Huizenga, Old, 24-25. The term intertextualit, coined by 
Kristeva, first appeared in Julia Kristeva, Bakhtine, le mot, le dialogue et le roman, Critique 23.236 (1967): 
438-65 (441). 
134 Alkier, Intertextuality, 4.  
135 For Chandlers full definition, see Section 1.2.2 n. 44 and his Semiotics, 263. Alkier also 
emphasizes text as a sign complex, which coheres with the second part of Chandlers definition, that used in 
this thesis (Intertextuality, 7-8). See further Hatina, Intertextuality, 33-35. 
136 Pucci, Full-Knowing, 45. For further distinctions between theoretical positions, see the helpful 
survey in Huizenga, Isaac, 21-65. 
137 See, too, Sternbergs emphasis on frames discussed in Section 5.2.5. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
limited sense, focusing on his actual citations of and allusion to specific texts.138 (Thus 
much of the subsequent discussion among biblical scholars arose in the context of Hebrew 
Bible/LXX citations particularly in the Pauline corpus.) The multiple cultural units for 
/intertextuality/ lead me to follow David Carrs suggestion and avoid the term.139 Instead, 
with Ben-Porat, I shall call specific references to other texts /literary allusions/.140 Still, I do 
recognize the validity of arguments for intertextuality as far as they highlight the 
unrecoverable milieu in which all thought and therefore writing swims. Yet I reject the 
reduction of all communication to imitative intertextuality, along with the expansion of the 
notion of text to a concept that seems to me to fit better under Eco's term, /encyclopedia/.141  
As was discussed in the last section and will be exemplified in the next chapter, the 
various cultures in the first-century CE environment brought different encyclopaedia entries 
into contact with each other. This multicultural milieu expands the possibilities for meaning. 
If more than one encyclopaedia is opened by a text, this multiplies the cultural units available 
for each word or phrase, allowing for cross-cultural literary allusions. In order to be able to 
discuss this phenomenon in John 19:5, the mechanics of literary allusions themselves must 
138 Hays, Echoes, 15. For the reception of Hays proposals, see David A. Shaw, Converted 
Imaginations? The Reception of Richard Hays's Intertextual Method, CurBR 11.2 (2013): 234-45. The 
circularity with cultural codes that Hays references is discussed, following Eco and Alkier, in Section 2.1.2. 
139 For an exceptionally clear chart of the different uses of the term, see David M. Carr, The Many 
Uses of Intertextuality in Biblical Studies: Actual and Potential, in Congress Volume Helsinki 2010, ed. Martti 
Nissinen, VTSup 148 (Leiden: Brill, 2012), 505-535 (516).  
140 Ben-Porat, Poetics, 107-109. Carrs further suggestion that biblical scholars would be well 
served to be ever more cognizant of  the way in which biblical texts were shaped in complex (for example, 
conscious and unconscious, often highly partial) ways by intersecting networks of oral and oral-written 
discourse, only some of which (for example, the Bible and various non-biblical texts that were preserved) we 
have any access to is addressed in this thesis by incorporating Ecos cultural encyclopaedias into my analysis 
(Many, 531). For more details on the history of these terms, see Alkier, Intertextuality, 4-7. 
141 For Jonathan Culler this is the discursive space of a culture [The Pursuit of Signs: Semiotics, 
Literature, Deconstruction. An Augmented Edition with a New Preface by the Author, 2nd ed. (Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press, 2001), 103]. This concept of discursive space appears in many discussions of allusions under 
various names. Craig Evans, for example, refers to the interpretive context of Scriptural allusions [Listening 
for Echoes of Interpreted Scripture, in Paul and the Scriptures of Israel, ed. Craig A. Evans and James A. 
Sanders, Studies in Scripture in Early Judaism and Christianity 1; JSNTSup 83 (Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1993), 
47-51 (51)]. Although John Barton says that [f]or non-historical, synchronic, completely non-intentional links 
between texts  there is really no other term available, this concept approximates the realm that Eco 
designates encyclopedia [Dj lu: Intertextuality, Method or Theory?, in Reading Job Intertextually, ed. 
Katharine Dell and William Kynes, Library of Hebrew Bible/Old Testament Studies 574 (New York: 
Bloomsbury, 2013), 1-16 (5)].  
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
be described, first as proposed by Ben-Porat and, secondly, as related to the semiotic 
elements already introduced.142 
2.3.1. Literary allusions 
Much of the discussion about allusions has focused on criteria for their presence and 
classification.143 Stanley Porter, for example, in his way forward, lists and defines the 
following: formulaic quotation, direct quotation, paraphrase, allusion and echo.144 
Such definitions, however, are implicitly constructed from a pre-determined list of passages 
that are understood to reference other texts.145 It is on this basis, for example, that Porter can 
critique Christopher Stanleys criteria, which, in his opinion, are too restrictive: a number 
of passages that others would consider direct quotations must be excluded.146 A pre-defined 
body of allusions is intuited that must be analysed to develop criteria that are then used to 
more strictly compile allusions. 
This inherent circularity is a major critique by narrative functionalists of the Tel Aviv 
school, who begin by recognizing the effect of the text: readers notice allusions.147 This, 
however, does not solve debates about what is or is not a literary allusion. For that purpose, 
142 Ben-Porat, Poetics, 109-114. 
143 This is not, however, true of Hays who focuses much of his discussion on Pauls dialectical 
dialogue with Scripture [Echoes, e.g., 158; Richard B. Hays, Echoes of Scripture in the Letters of Paul: 
Abstract, in Paul and the Scriptures of Israel, ed. Craig A. Evans and James A. Sanders, Studies in Scripture 
in Early Judaism and Christianity 1; JSNTSup 83 (Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1993), 42-46 (43, 46); Shaw, 
Converted, 235]. Yet his conclusions about interpretation emerge specifically from his analysis of Paul, 
whereas Ben-Porats steps provide for a more generally applicable and in-depth analysis. 
144 Stanley E. Porter, Further Comments on the Use of the Old Testament in the New Testament, in 
The Intertextuality of the Epistles: Explorations of Theory and Practice, ed. Thomas L. Brodie, Dennis R. 
MacDonald, and Stanley E. Porter, New Testament Monographs 16 (Sheffield: Sheffield Phoenix Press, 2006), 
98-110 (106-109). See also Marko Jauhiainen who points out that while all the works surveyed  are focusing 
on identifying allusions, most of them do not even define the nature of the objects they are trying to investigate 
[The Use of Zechariah in Revelation (Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2005), 28]. While he then goes on to define 
allusions (using Ben-Porat) and to propose criteria for detecting and classifying them, he does not discuss the 
way they function to create meaning in the alluding text (Zechariah, 29-36).  
145 Furthermore, the task of regulating what does or does not count as an allusion ignores the grades 
of allusiveness and cultural memes that are part of cultural encyclopaedias (Hinds, Allusion, 20). 
146 Stanley E. Porter, The Use of the Old Testament in the New Testament: A Brief Comment on 
Method and Terminology, in Early Christian Interpretation of the Scriptures of Israel: Investigations and 
Proposals, ed. Craig A. Evans and James A. Sanders, JSNTSup 148 (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 
1997), 79-96; Porter cites Stanley, Paul, 37. 
147 For the Tel Aviv school of thought, see Brian McHale, and Moshe Ron, Tel Aviv School of 
Narrative Poetics, in Routledge Encyclopedia of Narrative Theory, ed. David Herman, Manfred Jahn, and 
Marie-Laure Ryan (London: Routledge, 2010), 582-84. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
perhaps the Peircian triad might suggest dividing proposed allusions according to (a) 
evidence for authorial intentions, (b) evidence in the text, and (c) evidence from reception 
(past and present). Various criteria such as Porters five or Hays seven (availability, 
volume, recurrence, thematic coherence, historical plausibility, history of interpretation, and 
satisfaction) could helpfully shed light on these three aspects of the meaning-making 
process. Recurrence, for example, speaks to author intentionality while satisfaction relates 
to reception. Ultimately, however, allusions are discerned by relying on something like what 
Steiner, although referring to translation, called not a science, but an exact art148 
Alkiers suggestion for this art can be subsumed under his discussion of what 
constitutes an ethically grounded interpretation:  
(1) Criterion of Reality: An interpretation is good when it strives to describe 
the object of interpretation as a truly given other, an entity different in many 
ways from the interpreter, and confronts this other with respect. (2) Criterion 
of Partnership: An interpretation is good when it understands itself to be a 
contribution to a common search for truth and when it respects other 
interpretations as contributions to this search for truth (motivated by the 
dynamic object) even if they do not agree in terms of content. (3) Criterion 
of Contextuality: An interpretation is good when it lays open its cultural and 
therefore also its political orientation and presents itself as a contribution to 
the communicative comprehension of the world.149 
Any interpretation, including the discernment of allusions, ought to meet these criteria, 
which Alkier bases in semiotics.150 My proposals, both for an interpretant rooted in the 
Roman encylopaedia for John 18:2819:22 and for a literary allusion in John 19:5, are 
offered in this spirit. 
148 George Steiner, After Babel: Aspects of Language and Translation (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1975), 311. For a critical yet appreciative review of this work, see Edward Ullendorff, George Steiner's 
After Babel, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London 39.2 (1976): 403-
149 Alkier, Studies, 252-53 n. 27; he is citing (and translating) himself from Alkier, Ethik, 32. 
150 Alkier, Ethik, 26-32. I am constantly reminded in these discussions of the Wesleyan 
Quadrilateral, where reason, experience, tradition and the text itself serve as boundaries for the theologizing 
process that results not in certainty nor in strictly formulated propositional truth but in a general area of 
agreement with room for debate, difference and development [Albert C. Outler, The Wesleyan Quadrilateral 
in Wesley, Wesleyan Theological Journal 20.1 (1985): 7-18 (especially the paragraph spanning 9-10)]. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
Rather than categorizing this allusion, this thesis will examine it according to the 
way allusions work.151 When Ziva Ben-Porat describes her four steps in the process of 
actualizing a literary allusion, she is less interested in the forms that mark the allusion than 
in the process of actualization. Her steps (Figure 3) may be summarized as (1) noticing a 
marker in the alluding text that signals the allusion, (2) remembering the marked element 
and the local interpretation in the evoked text that the marker points to, (3) re-interpreting 
the local interpretation of the marker in the alluding text based on the intertextual pattern 
thus activated, and (4, which is optional) noting further intertextual patterns that prompt the 
re-interpretation of various new markers in the alluding text based on the effect of new 
marked elements in the evoked text.152 The double arrow in the figure below signifies the 
possibility of both comparisons and contrasts with the evoked text.153 
Figure 3. Ben-Porat's 4 steps in activating a literary allusion  
Note: For the original diagram, see Ben-Porat, Poetics, 112.  
151 Meir Sternberg, for example, proposed the Proteus principle, the many-to-many 
correspondences between linguistic form and representational function, thus focusing analysis on effects 
[Proteus in Quotation-Land: Mimesis and the Forms of Reported Discourse, Poetics Today 3.2 (1982): 107-
156 (112, 148, 152)]. For a summary, see Christopher D. Stanley, The Rhetoric of Quotations: An Essay on 
Method, in Early Christian Interpretation of the Scriptures of Israel: Investigations and Proposals, ed. Craig 
A. Evans and James A. Sanders, JSNTSup 148 (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1997), 44-58 (51-52). 
152 Ben-Porat, Poetics, 110-115. Note that Ben-Porat carefully distinguishes literary allusions from 
the more general understanding of an allusion as an indirect reference. It is only in this context of general 
allusions that she lists possible reasons for using the less transparent  representation of an indirect reference. 
Thus Roy Ciampa is incorrect, not only when he misgenders her but also when he references her reasons 
allusion is employed rather than citation since the footnote he is citing does not refer to literary allusions at all 
but to general allusions [The Presence and Function of Scripture in Galatians 1 and 2 (Tbingen: Mohr 
Siebeck, 1998), 272 n. 1; Ben-Porat, Poetics, 109 n. 7].  
153 Although allusions inevitably lead to new interpretations of the evoked text, that aspect of influence 
will not be covered in this analysis. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
Once the allusion is activated, the alluding text can use the evoked text throughout 
the work. This brings clarity to competing or confusing definitions of allusions and echoes. 
Benjamin Sommer, for example, defines echo as a reference where only the first two 
stages of Ben-Porats scheme are at play, where the meaning of the marked sign in the 
source has little effect on the reading of the sign with the marker in the alluding text.154 
Sommers definition, as well as Jauhiainens which is quite similar, are very different from 
Porters (see below).155 They omit knowledge of the original text and thus cohere with 
general (non-literary) allusions.156 These may exist simply as cultural memesminimal 
units of cultural memory disconnected from their original context.157 They are not, 
however, literary allusions. 
In a literary allusion, the two texts are brought into dialogue with each other, 
enabling various connections to be made beyond the initial marker. The fourth step, the 
optional activation of independent elements from both AT [the alluding text] and RT [the 
referent-text, or the evoked text], fits well with Stanley Porters description of an echo, 
the invocation by means of thematically related language of some more general notion or 
concept.158 Porters first example of an echo in particular illustrates Ben-Porats step 4, 
since it connects to an evoked text already activated: in Romans 2:24, Paul cites Isaiah 52:5, 
The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you, and then in Rom. 
3.8  Paul echoes the language of Isaiah regarding God being blasphemed.159 Ben-Porat 
and Porter do differ, however, in the relationship to the initial connection that they require 
154 Benjamin D. Sommer, A Prophet Reads Scripture: Allusion in Isaiah 40-66, ed. Daniel Boyarin 
and Chana Kronfeld, Contraversions: Jews and Other Differences (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 
1998), 16.  
155 Jauhiainen, Zechariah, 32. 
156 Ben-Porat, Poetics, 105, 108-109. See, also, her application of this distinction in Ziva Ben-Porat, 
Allusive Inter-Textuality in Computer Games, Literary and Linguistic Computing 27.3 (2012): 261-71. While 
I do not extensively engage with orality and memory in this thesis, I do recognize their importance in literacy 
in the ancient world. See Section 1.3 n. 82, Section 5.2.1, and Jocelyn Penny Small, Wax Tablets of the Mind: 
Cognitive Studies of Memory and Literacy in Classical Antiquity (London; New York: Routledge, 1997), xiv. 
157 On this see Ben-Porat, Allusive, 270. For examples from Roman literature, see Hinds, Allusion, 
158 Ben-Porat, Poetics, 112; Porter, Allusions, 39. 
159 Porter, Further, 109. The same definition of echo is taken up again in Porter, Allusions, 39.  
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
for this step 4/echo. Ben-Porat explicitly denies the need for continuum between the initial 
intertextual pattern (which triggered the action) and any of the elements participating in 
stage 4, while Porter requires thematically related language.160 I shall steer a middle 
ground in this case. Although I remain open to Ben-Porats possibilities for more unlimited 
marker activation, I shall specifically highlight in this thesis the markers that, while not 
necessarily directly related to the theme of imperator (that of the proposed literary allusion 
in John 19:5), are nevertheless thematically connected to important rhetorical topics in the 
Roman encyclopaedia. Ben-Porat, though, provides terminology to discuss the poetics of 
literary allusions in general, the markers that activate them, and the echoes that emerge once 
the evoked text is made salient in the hierarchically ordered entries in the hearers 
encyclopaedia.161 This process can be further illuminated by a new application of semiotic 
theory. 
2.3.2. The semiotics of allusions 
It will be remembered that the Sign is, in an analysis of Johns Gospel, the word that 
he has written. That word existed as a part of the authors vocabulary before he (in this case) 
used it in his text. Yet at some point, an objecta dynamic object, which is not specifically 
what one might think of as an object in the real world, but rather is some experience of reality 
that impinged on the author in a way that invited communicationmotivated him to use that 
particular Sign.162 However, it is not possible that the Sign could represent the dynamic 
object completely. And so the author chose grounds on which to represent the object. 
Eco describes the ground not as chosen voluntarily but as simply the aspect of the 
dynamic object initially apprehended. Thus, in a first encounter with an object (in a semiotic 
160 Ben-Porat, Poetics, 112; Porter, Allusions, 39. 
161 For more on the provisional hierarchies that certain segments of discourse create in an 
encyclopaedia, see Eco, Tree, 50. 
162 See the discussion of the way objects constrain the process of communication in Section 1.2.2 and 
in the rest of this section. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
sense), one is only aware of the immediate object.163 Yet earlier, Eco described the ground 
also in terms of the aspect(s) chosen to be communicated.164 It seems that both would 
operate, since one has an immediate apprehension of ones experience, but also chooses to 
communicate it in a certain, partial way. The ability to communicate is limited by both 
constraints. 
In Figure 4, adapted from Eco, the ground, meaning and interpretant are separated, 
yet Eco points out that they are in fact the same, since it is impossible to define the ground 
if not as meaning, and it is impossible to define any meaning if not as a series of 
interpretants.165 So why separate them? This is because the process of semiosis begins to 
get complicated as one tries to separate logically the elements of communication that belong 
to the author from the elements of communication that belong to the hearer, especially 
because the authors aim is to produce an interpretant in the hearer that is the same as the 
immediate object that prompted her act of communication to begin with. The ground, then, 
is what separates the dynamic object from the immediate object, and the interpretant results 
from the Sign-immediate object connection.166 
Figure 4. Sign-object-interpretant relationships according to Eco 
Note: For the original diagram, see Eco, Role, 183. 
This thesis will suggest that the dynamic object, for John, was his experience of the 
trial of Jesus before Pilate, whether this stemmed from personal encounter, reported story, 
received preaching or community history. It will argue that the ground on which he told this 
163 Eco, Kant, 60; Eco, Tree, 511.  
164 Eco, Limits, 28, 32; and especially Eco, Role, 182. See also Alkier, Studies, 227.  
165 Eco, Role, 184. 
166 Eco, Role, 184. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
story, and thus represented an immediate object for his auditors, was its Romanness, 
conveying not only a Roman trial scene but a particularly Roman Jesus, an imperator.167 
Furthermore, this thesis will look specifically at John 19:5 and suggest that    
is a literary allusion to Vergils Aeneid. It will conclude that it is this interpretant that auditors 
with the resources to access the Roman encyclopaedia would understand from this passage, 
and that within the broader narrative, this portrayal of Jesus offers a nuanced comparison 
between him and Caesar that ultimately creates a new identity category for Jesus-believers. 
When Justin Langford did his semiotic analysis of the Isaiah allusions in 1 Peter, he 
determined that the Sign was any reference to Isaiah as it appears in 1 Peter; the immediate 
object was the particular portion of the book of Isaiah from which the sign comes, and the 
dynamic object was the book of Isaiah and all its motifs and meanings located therein.168 
He identifies interpretants for each of the quotations that he examines and concludes that the 
overall interpretant is hope in suffering.169 Thus, for him, the passages from Isaiah are 
chosen on the grounds of hope. It seems to me, however, that this analysis occludes several 
pieces of the process by focusing only on the writing activity of Peter. It omits attention to 
possible differences between the interpretant that Peter formed from the Book of Isaiah and 
the Sign that he produced, 1 Peter. It also omits attention to the semiotic triad in which 
Langford himself is contributing.  
Instead, the first triad (Figure 5) in a literary analysis has to go back to the dynamic 
object that initially motivated the author of the first text, in this case a vision (Is 1:1).170 On 
the grounds of his prophetic impulse, that author chose the aspects to be communicated as 
the word of the Lord (Is 1:10, 20) and produced a Sign, in this case the Book of Isaiah. The 
167 For a discussion of the term /Romanness/, see Section 7.1.2 n. 53. 
168 Langford, Defending, 97-98. 
169 Langford, Defending, 125-26. 
170 This does not negate the firstness of the Sign; see Section 1.2.2. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
interpretant of Isaiah, at least the interpretant relevant to the literary allusions that Langford 
is examining, is the meaning Peter gave to this prophecy.  
Figure 5. Sign-object-interpretant relationships in the production of Isaiah 
This problematizes Langfords several references to Isaiah quotations as the 
immediate object, since in the semiotic act that produced 1 Peter the immediate object is 
not a portion of the Book of Isaiah but the aspects of Isaiah important to the author of 1 Peter 
to communicate.171 It seems odd that Langford misidentifies these given his excellent 
definition of them: The immediate object is the particular aspect of the object that is chosen 
to communicate its qualities, while the dynamic object is the object that motivates the 
generation of a sign and of which the immediate object represents only some particular 
aspect.172 The meaning of Isaiah important for the literary allusion would be the interpretant 
produced by Peter upon reading or hearing that text. 
What kind of interpretant would that be? In Chapter 1 distinctions were made 
between the immediate, dynamic and final interpretants, where the immediate interpretant is 
the undetermined, vague connection between two relata, which determines these as a sign 
and an object so that, in general, a process of semiosis is set in motion, the dynamic 
interpretant is the specific conclusion reached in a specific instance of Sign use, and the final 
interpretant is the regulative idea of a true interpretation in the most comprehensive sense 
of the word.173 
171 Langford, Defending, e.g., 99-100. 
172 Langford, Defending, 98. 
173 Alkier, Studies, 228. See Section 1.2.2. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
At this point, two important questions must be addressed before moving on to the 
semiotic diagram of the second phase of the literary allusion: What kind of interpretant did 
the second author access? And what was its role in the creation of the second text?  
In Langfords analysis, for example, although he mentions Huizengas concern that 
the allusions in the New Testament are created from the Old Testament as it was being 
interpreted at the time and not as it is interpreted today, he proceeds with his analysis without 
taking that fact into account.174 Yet it is exactly that concern over the first interpretant that a 
semiotic analysis raises. In Langfords analysis, it would have been important to discuss 
whether Peter had simply an immediate impression of Isaiah, a dynamic interpretant based 
on a specific use of Isaiah that he had experienced, or something much closer to a final 
interpretant, provided by the Jewish community of which he was a part. Instead, Langford 
only provides his own dynamic interpretant of Isaiah, grounded in a final interpretant 
evolving in twentieth and twenty-first century scholarship.175 A robust understanding of the 
two triads in operation explicitly makes room for these issues and distinguishes the first 
interpretant from the second object. 
Furthermore, the relationship between these two is just the question that must next 
be addressed. There are two possibilities, and in order to make them explicit, I turn to 
triangular drawings of Sign-object-interpretant relations. In Figure 6, the literary allusion in 
174 After bringing up Huizenga's concerns with the OT as it was understood in the first century rather 
than as a pure ideal and saying that they warrant reflection, Langford then makes them point to the 
evangelical debate about whether first-century Jewish interpretive methods are normative for Christians or not 
[Defending, 87; citing Leroy A. Huizenga, The Matthean Jesus and the Isaac of the Early Jewish 
Encyclopedia, in Reading the Bible Intertextually, ed. Richard B. Hays, Stefan Alkier, and Leroy Andrew 
Huizenga (Waco, TX: Baylor University Press, 2009), 63-81 (65)]. This seems to me to sidestep important 
questions. When NT authors cited the OT they did not have a twenty-first century interpretation of the OT in 
mind, so this issue must be addressed. If Langford is implying that as inspired writers, they had God's 
interpretation in mind, one wonders how Langford might have access to that. The NT authors were embedded 
in their communities, and while some today may take their writings to be prescriptive for them, if a 
hermeneutical method is to be at all grounded historically, it has to recognize that they understood the OT using 
the encyclopaedia of their day. Whether that is normative or not seems to be another discussion entirely. If one 
uses inspiration to avoid the Jewish encyclopaedia (not that Langford does this explicitly, but that seems to be 
the implication of his remarks on normativity), then one must either come up with a method to distinguish 
between the ways in which the authors of Scripture wrote as people of their day and ways in which they wrote 
under inspiration, or give up the historical enterprise altogether. 
175 Langford, Defending, e.g., 101-102. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
the second text is the authors interpretant of the first. Thus, the interpretant of the first text 
becomes a new Signa condition which Peirce expects; this is the first step of what is often 
called unlimited semiosis.176 Each interpretant becomes a new Sign which, in combination 
with the same object, gives rise to a new interpretant: the first author and the interpretant of 
the second, the second author and the interpretant of his hearers, and then possibly more, as 
they write or speak their own interpretants/Signs. Tied to the same object (which controls 
against drift), these interpretants continue to provide more information about the object, and 
can thus be connected with Ecos cultural unit, offering more possibilities for the Sign-object 
relation in the same or other encyclopaedias.177 
Figure 6. Unlimited semiosis motivated by the same object 
However, in written communication, the initial object, that which prompted the first 
authors act of communication, may not be available in the production of later interpretants 
(Figure 7). Thus, Langfords thesis, his interpretation of 1 Peters use of Isaiah might better 
be diagrammed with dotted lines to represent the lack of direct connection with the initial 
object, which instead must be remembered or reconstructed. 
176 For Ecos concerns about limiting this process, see Limits, especially the section titled Unlimited 
Semiosis and Drift: Pragmatisicism vs. Pragmatism, 23-43; for its Peircean origins, 213-214. See also 
Alkier, Studies, 228; Eco, Role, 193-98; Eco, Theory, 71-72. Note that semiosis can be unlimited in a very 
different sense when a dynamic object motivates infinite Signs, as different grounds bring out different aspects, 
and thus different immediate objects (Alkier, Studies, 227; Eco, Limits, 32; Eco, Theory, 68, 121-25). See 
also Desogus, Encyclopedia, 510.  
177 Alkier, Ethik, 30. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
Figure 7. Semiotics of allusion motivated by the same object 
As semiosis goes on, the connection with the initial object weakens, and interpreters must 
build analyses from the combination of the text and ones best reconstruction of that initial 
event. It is this object that is imagined when readers construct the motives of an implied 
author who communicates to them in their reading of the text.178 
There is a second possibility, however (Figure 8). The second text may not be simply 
an interpretant of the first. It may, instead, be a Sign for a new object, of which the initial 
text is only a part. The new text is not an interpretant, but a new Sign. 
Figure 8. Semiotics of allusion motivated by different objects 
In Figure 8, the author of the second text is not simply writing down his interpretant 
of the first but is instead motivated by a new object, and different relations obtain. The 
interpretant, whether final (that of the community) or dynamic (that of the second author) 
178 On this see, for example, Hinds, Allusion, 49-50; Lincoln, Gospel, 2-3.  
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
then enters into the second act of communication, but this time as part of a new object that 
motivates this new act.179 Perhaps in hearing or reading the first text, the second author 
discovered a new way to understand his current experience and was motivated to 
communicate that to his (or another) community. Perhaps in the midst of her experiences, 
the second author was reminded of anothers words that seemed to provide the best Sign for 
communicating them. In either case, the interpretant in the second triad, your commentary 
or my thesis, must arise from the connection of the second text with what one knows (if 
anything) of the object that motivated its production. And that second text, the one that 
contains the literary allusion, is not exactly the same as the interpretant of the first, evoked 
text, but is the Sign created by the second author on the basis of the desire to communicate 
the way that interpretant related to her experience. 
How does one determine whether an allusion is part of a completely new act of 
semiosis? As the diagrams demonstrate, it is the presence or absence of the original object 
that most obviously distinguishes the two semiotic processes. Figure 8 illustrates why the 
world of present-day interpreters inevitably impinges on their interpretations of ancient texts. 
In order to recover as much as possible of that original object, the next chapter will set forth 
the evidence for the presence of Latin in the Eastern Mediterranean in the first and second 
centuries CE. However, it will be important to discuss in Chapter 5 the presence or absence 
of the object of the evoked text, and for Vergils Aeneid 6.791 this would be Augustus 
Caesar. Although he was no longer alive at the time the Fourth Gospel was finished, the 
Roman empire was still present and his memory remained. Yet the Roman empire does not 
seem to be the major motivating force behind the Gospel of John. Instead, the Romanness 
179 Whether or not this happens in the presence of the initial object or not depends on the specific 
example. In many cases, the first triangle ought to have a dotted line on its right side as well, since the first 
interpretant comes almost (or completely) without the presence of its object. The lack of connection with that 
first object is likely to bring variety into the initial and dynamic interpretants that arise, as each person and 
community makes assumptions about what that might have looked like. The possibilities are important to note, 
but cannot be explored further. 
2. The Semiotics of Multilingual Communication   
of Jesus trial was the grounds (Fig. 4) that allowed the author to use Aen. 6.791 in his own 
Sign creation. The object that motivated communication was Johns experience of Jesus. I 
shall analyse this triad further in Chapter 5, but the differences between the object that 
motivated Vergils communicative act and that which motivated Johns suggest that the two 
triads are related as in Figure 8. 
2.4. Conclusion 
Ecos cultural units become more complex in a multicultural, multilingual environment. Yet 
despite its complexity, his semiotic theory provides clear conceptual categories for analyzing 
culture. Furthermore, the topic and key words of the Johannine trial narrative will help to 
negotiate the process of abduction in this thesis.  
Codeswitching, another important term for this thesis, is not yet theoretically well-
defined. There are differences among linguists as to how to categorize it, and I am applying 
it to ancient texts rather than oral performances. However, it illuminates the cultural unit of 
 in a way that has previously been overlooked. It is true that my application of 
semiotics to literary allusions is my own, and so is open to criticism because it has not been 
tested, and I am neither a linguist nor a literary critic. Still, it allows me to distinguish 
carefully between the various steps in operation when one cites another text, and I think is 
justified on that basis. Therefore, codeswitching and a literary allusion will help establish 
the encyclopaedia to be used in the abduction of the text on the way to an interpretant. First, 
however, the specific evidence for the availability of a Roman encyclopaedia for those 
hearing John 18:2819:22 must be detailed.
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John 
Chapter 2 explained the process of abduction in which Haftpunkte provide clues about the 
encyclopaedia to use in connecting Signs to cultural units in a multilingual, multicultural 
environment. This chapter will provide specific data from the first- and second-century CE 
Eastern Mediterranean world to show that intersections between Greek and Latin speakers 
(whether fluent or not) occurred in the locations traditionally connected with the production 
of the Gospel of John: Ephesus, Antioch and Alexandria.1 The second half of this chapter 
will then discuss the Latinisms that occur in the Fourth Gospel. These, along with references 
to specific Romans and to Latin (, , and ), are concentrated in John 
18:2819:22. This will constitute the boundaries of the narrative unit which is the focus of 
this thesis. The concentration of Roman Haftpunkte also provides the justification for using 
the Roman encyclopaedia in the interpretant developed in Chapters 47.  
3.1. Latin and the Cities Connected with the Composition of Johns Gospel 
Although the use of Latin was restricted in the East, its presence and influence can 
nevertheless be found there, and its use was even briefly encouraged under Diocletian and 
Constantine (late third to early fourth centuries CE).2 Thus, although from the twenty-first 
century CE, it seems obvious that Latin would never eclipse Greek in the Eastern 
Mediterranean and that, indeed, Latin use would eventually disappear, this would not have 
1 For an overview of Latin in the East that also mentions the contested areas that will be the focus of 
this chapter, see Clackson, and Horrocks, Latin, 87-88. For a more long-range view that goes all the way to 
Byzantine times, see Vera Binder, Sprachkontakt und Diglossie: Lateinische Wrter im Griechischen als 
Quellen fr die lateinische Sprachgeschichte und das Vulgrlatein, ed. Johannes Kramer and Hans-Josef 
Niederehe, Romanistik in Geschichte und Gegenwart 3 (Hamburg: Buske, 2000), 32-48 with concern 
mentioned in note 3 below. 
2 Luca Lorenzetti, Greek/Latin Bilingualism, EAGLL; Michel Dubuisson, Vtraqve lingva, 
Antiquit classique 50 (1981): 274-286 (279-80); Rochette, Latin, 335, 338; Paolo Radiciotti, Virgilio: le fonti 
di interesse papirologico esaminate da un paleografo, Scripta: An International Journal of Codicology and 
Palaeography 3 (2010): 89-96 (95). For an overview of the increase in Latin use and the associated debates, 
see Bruno Rochette, Language Policies in the Roman Republic and Empire, in A Companion to the Latin 
Language, ed. James Clackson (Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2011), 549-63. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
been evident in the first and second century CE.3 The intersections of Latin with Greek 
occurred principally in the domains of army, administration and law, as well as in 
commerce.4 Yet the effect of the Latin used in these domains is often dismissed. For 
example, Christina Kreinecker, in a brief encyclopaedia article, claims that Latin played a 
role at official level [sic], but was largely irrelevant to everyday life.5 This begs the question: 
whose life? The evidence assembled in this section will suggest that the use of Latin even in 
these restricted domains was not without impact.6  
3 Local languages also remained in use [Agns Brenger-Badel, Formation et comptences des 
gouverneurs de province dans l'Empire romain, Dialogues d'histoire ancienne 30.2 (2004): 35-56 (49-50); 
Biville, Situations, 37-39]. Note that Brenger-Badels conclusion that local languages were not used in 
official transactions may be correct, but is too broad a conclusion to draw from the one example she cites (50). 
On Aramaic in northern Syria, e.g., see Fergus Millar, The Roman Near East, 31 B.C.-A.D. 337 (Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press, 1993), 503-504; Nigel Pollard, Soldiers, Cities, and Civilians in Roman Syria (Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2000), 11; Werner Eck, The Presence, Role and Significance of Latin 
in the Epigraphy and Culture of the Roman Near East, in From Hellenism to Islam: Cultural and Linguistic 
Change in the Roman Near East, ed. Hannah M. Cotton et al. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), 
15-42 (18). For other local languages, see Francisco Rodrguez Adrados, A History of the Greek Language: 
From Its Origins to the Present (Leiden: Brill, 2005), 176. Although belied by his title, Bubenik, too, provides 
a historical overview of the languages in contact throughout the Mediterranean (Hellenistic, e.g., 54-58 for the 
spread of Greek under Alexander; 257-59 for Egypt; 264-76 for Greek in contact with Phoenician, Aramaic 
and Arabic; 270-72 for languages in Palmyra; 273-76 for Palestine, and 276-80 for Asia Minor). Also see 
Binder, Sprachkontakt, 33-34. Note that her reference to Egeria (47.3) does not support her contention that 
Latin was not widely spoken in late antiquity in Palestine since Egeria goes on in the very next section (47.4): 
Sane quicumque hic latini sunt, id est qui nec siriste nec grece nouerunt, ne contristentur, et ipsis exponitur 
eis, quia sunt alii fratres et sorores grecolatini, qui latine exponent eis Of course there are also people here 
who speak neither Greek nor Syriac, but Latin. But there is no need for them to be discouraged, since some of 
the brothers or sisters who speak Latin as well as Greek will explain things to them [Egeria's Travels, trans. 
John Wilkinson, 3rd ed. (Warminster: Aris & Phillips Ltd., 2002), 163]. Local languages and cultures are 
sometimes involved, even when not immediately evident from the inscription; see, for example, Mullen, 
Introduction, 3. 
4 For more mentions of Latin use in these domains, see Robert E. Gaebel, The Greek Word Lists to 
Vergil and Cicero, Bulletin of the John Rylands Library 52.2 (1970): 284-325 (289-96); Jorma Kaimio, The 
Romans and the Greek Language (Helsinki: Societas Scientiarum Fennica, 1979), 35; Rdiger Schmitt, Die 
Sprachverhltnisse in den stlichen Provinzen des rmischen Reiches, in ANRW 29.2: 554-86 (562-63); 
Adrados, History, 187; Bruno Rochette, Greek and Latin Bilingualism, in A Companion to the Ancient Greek 
Language, ed. Egbert J. Bakker, Blackwell Companions to the Ancient World (Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 
2010), 281-93 (289, 292). Commerce is often left off of these lists, as in Kreinecker, Latin language, Roman 
Empire (east), EAH 3919-20; Elizabeth A. Fisher, Greek Translations of Latin Literature in the Fourth 
Century A.D., in Yale Classical Studies, ed. John J. Winkler and Gordon Williams 27: Later Greek Literature 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982), 173-215 (175); Biville, Situations, 41; Benjamin Isaac, 
Latin in Cities of the Roman Near East, in From Hellenism to Islam: Cultural and Linguistic Change in the 
Roman Near East, ed. Hannah M. Cotton et al. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), 43-72 (46). 
5 Christina M. Kreinecker, Latin language, Roman Empire (east), EAH 3919. See, similarly, David 
G. K. Taylor, Bilingualism and Diglossia in Late Antique Syria and Mesopotamia, in Bilingualism in Ancient 
Society: Language Contact and the Written Text, ed. James N. Adams, Mark Janse, and Simon Swain (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2002), 298-331 (317); Watt, Brief, 238.  
6 Fergus Millar, Latin in the Epigraphy of the Roman Near East, in Acta colloquii epigraphici Latini: 
Helsingiae 3.-6. sept. 1991 habiti, ed. Heikki Solin, Olli Salomies, and Uta-Maria Liertz (Helsinki: Societas 
Scientiarum Fennica, 1995), 403-419 (419); Rochette, Bilingualism, 292-93. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
Epigraphical and literary evidence of multiple language use is not transparent 
evidence for the language of speech: Il est bien vident que la prsence dun document en 
langue grecque sur le sol de lItalie antique (ou dun document latin en pays grec) ne prjuge 
en rien de la pratique effective de la langue. Cette prsence tmoigne en tout cas dchanges 
conomiques et culturels, propices et indispensables  lmergence dindividus, de 
situations, et de documents bilingues.7 Such changes occurred in the places that have 
been connected with the production of the Gospel of John. Although some patristic writers 
such as Irenaeus name John as the writer of the Gospel and place him in Ephesus (Irenaeus, 
Haer. 3.1.1; 3.3.4); others, such as Ignatius, do not mention John in references to that city.8 
Furthermore, affinities between the Gospel and some of the early writings from Antioch lead 
to suppositions that it originated there.9 Finally, possible parallels with the works of Philo as 
well as the location of the earliest Johannine papyri and the use of the Gospel by some 
Egyptian gnostic groups point towards an Alexandrian origin.10 Some scholars have taken 
several of these suggestions into account, positing a Johannine tradition that was carried 
from Jerusalem, through Syria, to Ephesus.11 This thesis will not attempt to solve this issue: 
Romes army, law, and merchants, and thus the Latin language, were present in all three of 
these cities.12  
7 Biville, Situations, 41. 
8 Barrett, Gospel, 100-105. 
9 Literary connections have been suggested between 1 John and Matthew, and between the Fourth 
Gospel and Ignatius and/or the Odes of Solomon. Finally, the earliest extant non-gnostic commentary was 
written by Theophilus of Antioch (Barrett, Gospel, 130). 
10 J. N. Sanders, The Fourth Gospel in the Early Church: Its Origin and Influence on Christian 
Theology up to Irenaeus (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1943), e.g., 86. Other proposals are varied. 
For some of the suggestions see Brown, John, CIII; Barrett, Gospel, 129; Keener, John, 1.143.  
11 Rudolf Schnackenburg, The Gospel According to St John, trans. Kevin Smyth, ed. Serafn de Ausejo 
et al., HThKNT, vol. 1: Introduction and Commentary on Chapters 14 (London: Burns & Oates, 1968), 152; 
John A. T. Robinson, The Priority of John, ed. J. F. Coakley (London: SCM Press, 1985), 47-48. 
12 As Lincoln concludes: The most likely place of origin remains an urban centre outside Palestine 
and one in which there was a sizeable Jewish population, and on this basis Ephesus remains one of the possible 
and more plausible candidates. Yet, as has been noted, wherever it emerged, the Gospel was written with a 
wide circulation in view (Gospel, 89). For a discussion of views, see Keener, John, 142-49. Note, too, that 
this thesis assumes that the text of the Gospel would be influenced by the place where it was first or finally 
written or edited and does not engage with oral culture studies that focus on elements of the setting in Palestine 
and the degree to which that milieu remained a consistently influential factor. As Helmut Koester notes, the 
Holy Land of Israel is but a memory of first beginnings; Asia Minor and Greece quickly became the centers of 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
3.1.1. Ephesus 
The relationship between Ephesus and Rome was not a smooth one. In 89-88 BCE, 
the Ephesians turned against Rome and killed all the local Roman citizens.13 Yet in 29 BCE, 
by the decree of Augustus, an association in Ephesus for Roman citizens was begun, thus 
welcoming Roman citizens who lived there during the first and second centuries CE.14 
Ephesus re-established its loyalty to Rome in other ways as well. Two bilingual inscriptions 
(IEph 459, 1522) honour Augustus for beneficence towards Artemis in terms that attempt to 
position him as her patron.15 This makes sense in the context of the emperors important 
role of theos, of a god in the province, one that was not static but where questions of local, 
regional, and imperial relationships could be negotiated, shaped, and proclaimed.16 IEph 
2.599 demonstrates this negotiation as well:  ,     , 
which Taeuber translates as Rom, du Allesbeherrscherin, mge deine Macht niemals 
untergehen.17 Furthermore, statues, among which were one likeness of Trajan, one of 
the new religious movement [Ephesos, Metropolis of Asia: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Its Archaeology, 
Religion, and Culture, HTS (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1995), xviii]. 
13 Peter Scherrer, Ephesus, PC.  
14 Mary Beard, John North, and Simon Price, Religions of Rome, vol. 1: A History (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1998), 352-53. The authors reference among others IEph 3019, an honorary 
inscription in Latin for Claudius by conventus of Roman negotiatores from 43/44 CE. On the emperors 
presence in Ephesus, see further Sjef van Tilborg, Reading John in Ephesus, ed. A. J. Malherbe and D. P. 
Moessner, NovTSup 83 (Leiden: Brill, 1996), 174-212; Paul Trebilco, The Early Christians in Ephesus from 
Paul to Ignatius (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2004), 30-37. For some estimates of the numbers of Romans in the 
East, see Kaimio, Romans, 35-40. 
15 Dieter Knibbe, Via Sacra Ephesiaca: New Aspects of the Cult of Artemis Ephesia, in Ephesos, 
Metropolis of Asia: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Its Archaeology, Religion, and Culture, ed. Helmut 
Koester, HTS 41 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1995), 141-55 (146). These Latin-Greek bilingual 
inscriptions are listed as 148-50 in Rosalinde Kearsley, ed. Greeks and Romans in Imperial Asia: Mixed 
Language Inscriptions and Linguistic Evidence for Cultural Interaction until the End of AD III, Inschriften 
Griechischer Stdte aus Kleinasien (Bonn: Habelt, 2001), 122-24. See the similar attempt by the Greek cities 
of Asia Minor to position themselves as benefactors of Ephesus [Steven J. Friesen, The Cult of the Roman 
Emperors in Ephesos: Temple Wardens, City Titles, and the Interpretation of the Revelation of John, in 
Ephesos, Metropolis of Asia: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Its Archaeology, Religion, and Culture, ed. 
Helmut Koester, HTS 41 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1995), 229-50 (234)]. 
16 Friesen, Cult, 241, 244. See also Rick Strelan, Paul, Artemis, and the Jews in Ephesus, ed. Erich 
Grer, BZNW 80 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1996), 104. Strelan goes on to mention the images of the emperor in 
private homes and the entrance fees  for sacrifices to Roma and the emperor of the [g]uilds which enacts 
his status as their patron (104 n. 173). 
17 Hans Taeuber, Einblicke in die Privatsphre: Die Evidenz der Graffiti aus dem Hanghaus 2 in 
Ephesos, in ffentlichkeit-Monument-Text: XIV Congressus Internationalis Epigraphiae Graecae et Latinae 
27.-31. Augusti MMXII: Akten, ed. Werner Eck and Peter Funke, CIL n.s. 4 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 2014), 487-89 
(289). 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
Plotina, one of the Roman Senate, one of the equestrian order, one of the people of Rome 
were paraded around the city, perhaps as often as every two weeks.18 
The emperors status, and thus his authority, was also enacted in the city by his 
representatives. Ephesus, indeed, became the governors point of entry into Asia, his seat 
for part of the year, an assize centre, a focus of the tax system.19 By the second century CE, 
one legate was appointed legatus dioeceseos Ephesiacae and entrusted with the judicial 
administration of a conventus more permanently.20 He was located in Ephesus with the 
governor and the members of his staff, the quaestor and the legates.21  
This information has been preserved mainly in inscriptions.22 Rosalinde Kearsley has 
studied inscriptions in Asia Minor where Latin and Greek are both represented, in parallel 
18 Guy MacLean Rogers, The Sacred Identity of Ephesos: Foundation Myths of a Roman City 
(London: Routledge, 1991), 83, 91-95. Note that Mary Walbank points out that, based on Salutariss name, he 
was likely to be Italian rather than Ephesian. This brings into question some of Rogerss conclusions [review 
of Guy MacLean Rogers, The Sacred Identity of Ephesos: Foundation Myths of a Roman City, Phoenix 48 
(1994): 89-91 (90)]. However, names provide a poor basis for establishing ethnicity. See, for example, the 
Syrian father who gave his sons Greek, Latin, and Semitic names respectively [Jean-Paul Rey-Coquais, 
Onomastique et histoire de la Syrie grco-romaine, in Actes du VIIe congrs international d'pigraphie 
grecque et latine, Constantza, 9-15 septembre 1977, ed. D. M. Pippidi (Constanza, Dominican Republic: 
Socit d'dition Les belles lettres, 1977), 171-183 (177)]. 
19 Barbara Levick, The Latin Inscriptions of Asia Minor, in Acta colloquii epigraphici Latini: 
Helsingiae 3.-6. sept. 1991 habiti, ed. Heikki Solin, Olli Salomies, and Uta-Maria Liertz (Helsinki: Societas 
Scientiarum Fennica, 1995), 393-402 (394).  
20 Bengt E. Thomasson, The Eastern Roman Provinces Till Diocletian: A Rapid Survey, in The 
Greek East in the Roman Context: Proceedings of a Colloquium Organised by the Finnish Institute at Athens, 
May 21 and 22, 1999, ed. Olli Salomies (Helsinki: Vammalan Kirjapaino Oy, 2001), 1-9 (5-6). On the 
tendency, especially in Ephesus, for local cases to be taken before Roman courts, see Julien Fournier, Entre 
tutelle romaine et autonomie civique: l'administration judiciaire dans les provinces hellnophones de l'empire 
romain, 129 av. J.-C-235 ap. J. C (Athnes: Ecole franaise d'Athnes, 2010), 376, 380-82. 
21 Thomasson, Eastern, 2. 
22 I recognize the value of analyzing inscriptions in conjunction with their physical character and 
location. Andrew Wilson, for example, points out that even semantically equivalent, idiomatic bi-versions 
may be visually unequal, and priority or dominance or impact of individual languages in a bilingual inscription 
may be determined by other means than linguistic treatment [Neo-Punic and Latin Inscriptions in Roman 
North Africa, in Multilingualism in the Graeco-Roman Worlds, ed. Alex Mullen and Patrick James 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012), 265-316 (313)]. Such physical characteristics will 
occasionally be mentioned. However, that kind of analysis is too extensive for the purposes of this thesis, where 
only evidence of language contact is needed [Olli Salomies, Honorific Inscriptions for Roman Senators in the 
Greek East During the Empire: Some Aspects (with Special Reference to Cursus Inscriptions), in The Greek 
East in the Roman Context: Proceedings of a Colloquium Organised by the Finnish Institute at Athens, May 
21 and 22, 1999, ed. Olli Salomies, Papers and Monographs of the Finnish Institute at Athens (Helsinki: 
Vammalan Kirjapaino Oy, 2001), 141-87 (141)]. For another look at the Ephesian inscriptions that focus 
particularly on immigrant origins, see L. Michael White, Urban Development and Social Change in Imperial 
Ephesos, in Ephesos, Metropolis of Asia: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Its Archaeology, Religion, and 
Culture, ed. Helmut Koester, HTS 41 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1995), 27-79 (57-79). For further 
discussion of Latin and Latin-Greek inscriptions in Asia Minor, see Kaimio, Romans, 82-86; Cdric Brlaz, 
Le recours au latin dans les documents officiels mis par les cits d'Asie Mineure, in Bilinguisme grco-latin 
et pigraphie: Actes du colloque organis  l'Universit Lumire-Lyon 2, Maison de l'Orient et de la 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
or in series, or in single words borrowed from one language to the other. She notes that 
among the places where these inscriptions are found, Ephesos is easily the most frequently 
represented.23 This can be represented visually by a snapshot (Figure 9) from the end of 
2014 of the inscriptions entered in the Epigraphic Database Heidelberg (EDH), which 
continues to be updated with Latin and Latin-Greek inscriptions.24 The dots represent these 
inscriptions and their spread shows the extent of Latin evidence throughout the Eastern 
Mediterranean. 
Figure 9: Latin and Latin-Greek Inscriptions in EDH in 2014 
Simply within the IEph collection, I count almost 100 Latin and Latin-Greek 
inscriptions of various kinds dated between the late first century BCE and the early second 
Mditrrane-Jean Pouilloux, UMR 5189 Hisoma et JE 2409 Romanitas, les 17, 18 et 19 mai 2004, ed. 
Frdrique Biville, Jean-Claude Decourt, and Georges Rougemont, Collection de la Maison de l'Orient et de 
la Mditerrane 37, srie pigraphique et historique 6 (Lyon: Maison de l'Orient et de la Mditerrane-Jean 
Pouilloux, 2008), 169-94. And an excellent look at the monuments that should be read with the texts can be 
found in Barbara Burrell, Reading, Hearing, and Looking at Ephesos, in Ancient Literacies: The Culture of 
Reading in Greece and Rome, ed. William A. Johnson and Holt N. Parker (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2009), 69-95. 
23 Kearsley, Greeks, 147. Salomies finds latin and bilingual inscriptions in cities that are either 
Roman coloniae or capitals of provinces which are prone to produce Latin inscriptions because [of] the 
presence of a Roman bureaucracy (Honorific, 158). See also Levick, Asia Minor, 393-94; Eck, Presence, 
20, 23-29. 
24 Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenshaften, Epigraphic Database Heidelberg, http://edh-
www.adw.uni-heidelberg.de/home. Latin inscriptions in the database from Ephesus dated between 50 BCE and 
150 CE include HD000805, HD000808, HD000876, HD016451, HD026368, HD049167 and HD049169. The 
database continues to be updated and while the current map is much more interactive, it is much less suitable 
for a static illustration. Latin and Greek should not be taken to be the only languages present in Ephesus. 
Although he does not mention Latin, Casey notes that there may have been a significant number of people in 
Ephesus who were bilingual in Aramaic and Greek, and fluent readers of Hebrew (True?, 93).  
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
century CE as well as 45 more Latin inscriptions with uncertain or Roman or Imperial 
dates more generally.25 Of the dated ones, those only in Latin (ca. 40) are mostly dedications 
and epitaphs, among them 5 referencing negatiores (e.g., IEph 3025) and 9 military men 
(e.g., IEph 715).26 Furthermore, IEph 572-73 and IEph 2900 are pieces of clay pots with 
stamps denoting type, potter or area of origin and these are in both Latin and Greek.27 This 
evidence of Latin use in Ephesus within the domains of commerce and the army add to the 
further evidence of language contact that comes from Latin-Greek inscriptions.  
Kearsleys study brings out the variety of ways that the two languages are usedin 
some inscriptions a single word from one language is used in the other. Some include the 
same information in two, often wooden, translations; others integrate the two languages 
more fluidly and each language gives more or less distinct information.28 A few examples 
will demonstrate this variety.  
In IEph 3501, from the late first century BCE, the information in Latin is simply 
repeated in Greek with the appropriate switch from Diana to Artemis: Imp Caesar Augustus 
fines Dianae restituit      .29 
Bilingual inscriptions such as these are often evidence of two monolingual communities 
rather than one bilingual one.30 Brlaz believes that, in Asia Minor at least, Latin as an 
25 Dates are approximate and suggested by the Packhum database: The Packard Humanities Institute, 
Searchable Greek Inscriptions: A Scholarly Tool in Progress, epigraphy.packhum.org. For some concerns 
about pseudo-inscriptions (but not dating) in this database, see James K. Aitken, No Stone Unturned: Greek 
Inscriptions and Septuagint Vocabulary, ed. Anselm C. Hagedorn, Nathan MacDonald, and Stuart Weeks, 
Critical Studies in the Hebrew Bible 5 (Winona Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns, 2014), 44. 
26 Additionally IEph 1826, though fragmentary, mentions frumen[tarius thus connecting Latin with 
the domain of commerce. On the mobility of negatiores, see Rochette, Bilingualism, 283. 
27 Susanne Zabehlicky-Scheffenegger, Subsidiary Factories of Italian Sigillate Potters: The Ephesian 
Evidence, in Ephesos, Metropolis of Asia: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Its Archaeology, Religion, and 
Culture, ed. Helmut Koester, HTS 41 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1995), 217-228 (224, 227). 
28 Kearsley, Greeks, 147. The evidence reported is mainly from the first two centuries CE. 
29 Kearsley, Greeks, 122-23. I find it interesting that Latin and Greek come together several times in 
inscriptions that reference both Diana and Caesar (IEph 1209; 1914.3). For an example of a Greek text that 
seems based on a Latin original, see Naphtali Lewis, Three Textual Notes on the New Monumentum 
Ephesenum, ZPE 107 (1995): 248 (notes on line 59).  
30 Lorenzetti, Greek/Latin Bilingualism, EAGLL; Ian Rutherford, Interference or Translationese? 
Some Patterns in Lycian-Greek Bilingualism, in Bilingualism in Ancient Society: Language Contact and the 
Written Text, ed. James N. Adams, Mark Janse, and Simon Swain (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 
197-219 (203). 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
addition to or replacement for Greek was always a choice, never a requirement.31 Yet some 
inscriptions demonstrate a relationship between the two languages that, while not negating 
Brlaz, expresses a more complex relationship. 
IEph 3092, from 4-14 CE, is an inscription on an aqueduct detailing the generosity 
of Gaius Sextilius Pollio (with his wife, son, and the rest of their children). While the Latin 
and Greek texts are functionally identical, the Greek translates C Sextilius P f Vot Pollio as 
     , thus using the Latin form of filiation rather 
than what would be more usual in Greek, the simple genitive and, additionally, spelling out 
words usually abbreviated in Latin.32 Indeed, none of the Ephesian inscriptions listed by 
Kearsley uses the Greek genitive for filiation, which leads to the supposition (which would, 
however, require further research) that at least during this time period in Ephesus the Latin 
form had become the usual one.  
Furthermore, the Latin abbreviation C is spelled out as  in Greek. Although 
progression cannot be definitively proven from the small number of inscriptions, in 105 CE, 
IEph 30, a bilingual inscription on the base of a statue not covered in Kearsleys study reads 
    for the Latin [C V]ibius C f.33 Thus the Latin system of abbreviations has 
been partially adopted in Greek. Furthermore, although traditionally honorands would be 
31 Brlaz, Recours, 190. 
32 James Adams notes the same Latin interference in Delos [Bilingualism at Delos, in Bilingualism 
in Ancient Society: Language Contact and the Written Text, ed. James N. Adams, Mark Janse, and Simon 
Swain (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 103-27. See also Adrados, History, 188]. For further evidence 
of Latin-Greek interference in Ephesus, see IEph 852 and 1540 [Kearsley, Greeks, 92-94; James N. Adams, 
Romanitas and the Latin Language, ClQ 53.1 (2003): 184-205 (204)]. While Adams suggests this was 
sometimes done in order rhetorically to position a Roman as not as Greek as the Greeks, it seems that this 
kind of Greek was also common in administrative milieux (Romanitas, 203). Although Adams describes the 
Roman indifference to the sensibilities of their subjects in their Greek translations, Cooley notes the places in 
the Res Gestae where the translator softens its imperialist tone. It seems that, like so much of the evidence, 
translation concerns must be evaluated on a case by case basis [James N. Adams, Bilingualism and the Latin 
Language (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008), 471; Alison E. Cooley, Res gestae Divi Augusti: 
Text, Translation, and Commentary (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), 30 and examples at 26 
and 28]. Paul Viereck also mentions this phenomenon [Sermo graecus quo senatus populusque Romanus 
magistratusque populi Romani usque ad Tiberii Caesaris aetatem in scriptis publicis usi sunt examinatur 
(Gttingen: Vandenhoeck, 1888), 62]. 
33 See similarly IEph 31, 33, 34, 35, as well as IEph 620, 857 and possibly 734. (These last three are 
included in Kearsley.) 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
listed in dative in Latin and in accusative in Greek, the inscriptions in Ephesus alternate 
between following these two conventions separately or putting honorands in the dative case 
in both languages.34 Sometimes, as in IEph 620, accusative and dative are used in Greek 
within the same inscription.35 
Differences between the Latin and Greek in bilingual inscriptions can be more 
extensive as well. In IEph 718, in the midst of a Latin honorific inscription from the second 
century CE, when the civitates Ephesiorum are mentioned (l. 2-3), the Latin breaks 
incontinently into Greek for the resounding, well rehearsed, and hardly translatable titles 
of the city of Ephesus:            
, after which it switches back to Latin to name the honorand and his honours.36 
Kaimio mentions this inscription as well: it is a Latin inscription in which only the honorary 
epithet of the city is expressed in Greek. These are not bilingual texts assuming the 
understanding of both Greek and Latin speakers; they could also be interpreted as expressing 
some kind of dialogue between different ambitions, a dialogue which causes the elements of 
different origin to be written in their respective languages; but at the same time, one becomes 
aware of the careless disregard for the claims of linguistic unity within a text.37 I would 
suggest, however, that this dialogue is between encyclopaedias of different languages, and 
the unity, rather than somehow being broken in a text using two different languages, resides 
instead in the idiolect of the author and, if the intention is to communicate, in that of the 
addressee(s). In such a case, it is difficult to understand in what sense IEph 718 is not a 
34 Kearsley, Greeks, 152. On the case used for the name of the honorand, see Salomies, Honorific, 
144-47. 
35 Kearsley, Greeks, 88-89. 
36 Kearsley, Greeks, 106-107. Levick, Asia Minor, 400. Brlaz believes this is done in the context 
of competition between Ephesus and other provincial cities (Recours, 181-83).  
Other examples of code-switching related to domain include IEph 1543 (which is similar to IEph 
718), IEph 858 and IEph 857 (each of which adds a phrase in Greek referring to the secretary, ) 
and IEph 680 where the Latin and Greek honours for a prefect are followed by the names of (members of) his 
praetorium in Latin (Kearsley, Greeks, 96). 
37 Kaimio, Romans, 81. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
bilingual text since knowledge of both languages would be required to follow the dialogue 
Kaimio posits. 
In IEph 4123, in the mid-first century CE, there is a complex admixture of the two 
languages. The epitaph of Gaius Stertinius Orpex, a freedman, is in Latin (Figure 10). This 
is followed by an enumeration of the funds donated subsequent to his death, detailed in Greek 
but structured according to the Roman rather than the local calendar.38 It is relevant that 
Orpex had been a scriba librarius, and was thus literate.39 That his tombstone is inscribed 
with both Latin and Greek may indicate his own working knowledge of Greek, of the legal 
forms of Latin, and of the dating procedures of Rome.  
38 Kearsley, Greeks, 21. 
39 There seems to be some disagreement over the meaning of /scriba librarius/. Adolf Berger describes 
a scriba as [a] clerk in a court or in an office, a secretary and notes that [a] scriba is to be distinguished from 
a librarius who was simply a copyist. When a scriba performed the tasks of a librarius, his title was scriba 
librarius [Encyclopedic Dictionary of Roman Law, Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 43.2 
(Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society, 1953), 692]. Gordon, Reynolds, Beard and Rouech, however, 
put the scriba librarius in the ranks of clerks, for example to a tribune [Roman Inscriptions 1991-95, JRS 87 
(1997): 203-240 (207)]. Margaret Laird, in the context of Imperial Italy, sets down a scriba librarius as a clerk 
to the decurions [Private Memory and Public Interest: Municipal Identity in Imperial Italy, in The Art of 
Citizens, Soldiers and Freedmen in the Roman World, ed. Eve D'Ambra and Guy P. R. Mtraux 1526 (Oxford, 
UK: Archaeopress, 2006), 31-57 (34)]. All three refer to retainers working in the domains addressed in this 
chapter. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
Figure 10: Text of Epitaph of Gaius Stertinius Orpex  
Note: The Packard Humanities Institute, Ephesos 2618, http://epigraphy.packhum.org/ 
Levick points out that freedmen and slaves  identified themselves with the Roman citizen 
body of which they became members when they were freed. They were not simply 
acclimatized to using the language of their bosses and of their ultimate master the emperor, 
who is often mentioned in their titulature, but probably also acquired status through using 
the language that separated rulers from ruled; they show awareness of propriety in doing 
so.40 The negotiation of loyalty and status, then, called for some bilingual competence. 
Among the evidence for Latin-Greek contact, this parallel evidence for the social 
status of the people represented must not be forgotten. The inscriptions described above do 
not offer a catalogue of literati. Instead, there are freedmen in administrative roles, along 
with merchants and legionnaires. A customs house dedicated by those involved in the fishing 
40 Levick, Asia Minor, 398-99. In general, Levick argues for propriety as a social factor influencing 
language choice in the East. For the need for documents in Latin for Roman citizens, see Kaimio, Romans, 
123, 148-50. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
industry demonstrates a representative 2:1 ratio of Roman citizens.41 Especially the funerary 
inscriptions, Kearsley points out, show the great extent to which those of sub-equestrian, 
freed, and servile statuses used both Latin and Greek.42 The evidence discussed so far can 
be placed in a matrix (Figure 11), showing examples of inscriptions in all three domains in 
Ephesus.  
 Army Administration/law Commerce 
Ephesus Military 
dedications and 
epitaphs 
Gaius Stertinius 
Orpex 
Negatiores 
dedications and 
epitaphs 
Antioch    
Alexandria    
Figure 11: Examples of Latin Intersections in Ephesus 
This evidence argues against the position of Brlaz that les cits anatoliennes ne 
sont gure confrontes au latin dans leur vie quotidienne officielle et administrative.43 In 
Ephesus at least, Latin held an important place in the life of the city. However, what about 
the next city in the developing matrix, Antioch? 
3.1.2. Antioch 
Antioch was the place of residence of the Roman governor, the commander of the 
legions in Syria.44 The city was the recipient of multiple imperial visits and construction 
projects, as well.45 On the one hand, visiting dignitaries gave speeches in Greek (Tacitus, 
41 G. H. R. Horsley, A Fishing Cartel in First-Century Ephesos, NewDocs 5: Linguistic Essays 
(1989): 95-114 (109-110). 
42 Kearsley, Greeks, 155. 
43 Brlaz, Recours, 172. 
44 Pollard, Soldiers, 277.  
45 David Kennedy, Syria, in CAH, ed. Alan K. Bowman, Edward Champlin, and Andrew Lintott 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 703-36 (714); Benjamin Isaac, The Limits of Empire: The 
Roman Army in the East (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990), 35-36; Miriam Griffin, Nerva to 
Hadrian, in CAH, ed. Alan K. Bowman, Peter Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2000), 84-131 (124, 124 n. 246, 125); Pollard, Soldiers, 278. Christine Kondoleon gives a 
summary time-line of imperial visits and building projects that includes Julius Caesars visit in 47 BCE, 
Augustuss visits in 31-30 and 20 BCE, Tiberiuss participation (with Herod) in the Great Colonnaded Street 
(37 BCE-37 CE), Trajans presence in Antioch during the earthquake of 115-116 CE and Hadrians 
improvements from 117-38 CE [Antioch: The Lost Ancient City (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
2000), xii-xiii]. Warren Carter discusses Roman building projects and concludes, Likely inscriptions on such 
rebuilt or new buildings attested Roman beneficence and proclaimed Roman presence and control [Matthew 
and Empire: Initial Explorations (Harrisburg, PA: Trinity Press International, 2001), 43]. For an example of 
building projects, see the description of the building of the palace and the circus in 67 BCE in Kennedy, Syria, 
717-718; see further Maurice Sartre, Syria and Arabia, in CAH, ed. Alan K. Bowman, Peter Garnsey, and 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
Hist. 2.80).46 However, [b]y the end of the first century Antioch was sending men to the 
Senate at Rome where they needed at least some Latin ability.47 
While he was in Antioch, the emperor might hear legal cases. A transcript from May 
216 CE has the words of Caracalla and the advocates in Greek, introduced each time with a 
Latin formula such as Lollianus d(ixit).48 Further evidence for Latin contact in the legal 
domain in Antioch comes from the term used for the early followers of Christ mentioned in 
Acts 11:26 (         ). The 
suffix of  implies the word was coined by speakers of Latin. The Greek-
speaking synagogues in Rome used the Greek suffix -esioi in their names instead of -.49 
Formed like other terms for partisans of certain leaders such as ,  
(Appian, Bell. civ. 3.11.82; 3.13.91), and Augustiani (Tacitus, Ann. 14:15), the term 
 suggests encounters with the Roman authorities and various charges or 
Dominic Rathbone (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 635-63 (653, 655). John Malalas sixth-
century CE description of Antioch with Roman triumphs, building projects including a Captiolium, and even 
what is now called the Macellum above which was a statue of a she-wolf suckling Romus and Remus, so 
that it should be recognized that the building was Roman is difficult to fully rely on in the absence of 
corroborating archaeology (Chron. 9.14; 10.10, 45, 40-50; 11.9). 
46 Millar, Roman, 74. 
47 Michael Maas, People and Identity in Roman Antioch, in Antioch: The Lost Ancient City, ed. 
Christine Kondoleon (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000), 13-21 (17). On the need for Latin in 
the Roman Senate, see Rochette, Latin, 17-18; Werner Eck, The Language of Power: Latin in the Inscriptions 
of Iudaea/Syria Palaestina, in Semitic Papyrology in Context: A Climate of Creativity. Papers from a New 
York University Conference Marking the Retirement of Baruch A. Levine, ed. Lawrence H. Schiffman, Culture 
and History of the Ancient near East 14 (Leiden; Boston: Brill, 2003), 123-44 (140); Michel Gayraud, 
L'apprentissage du grec et du latin dans l'Empire Romain d'aprs un manuscrit de la Bibliothque Universitaire 
de Montpellier, Bulletin de lAcadmie des Sciences et Lettres de Montpellier 41 (2010): 35-44 (42-43). Millar 
notes that the Antioch mint produced coins mainly with Greek legends, but some Latin [Roman, 19 n. 22; 
Kaimio, Romans, 93; T. E. J. Wiedemann, From Nero to Vespasian, in CAH, ed. Alan K. Bowman, Edward 
Champlin, and Andrew Lintott (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 256-82 (269 n. 7)]. Further 
language contact might occur through the professional athletes and actors whose circuits included Antioch, 
but Millar mentions no primary evidence for this (Roman, 259).  
48 Fernand de Visscher, and Pierre Roussel, Inscriptions du Temple de Dmeir, Syria: revue d'art 
oriental et d'archologie (1942): 173-200 (178); Fergus Millar, The Emperor in the Roman World (31 BC-AD 
337) (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1977), 535; Bruno Rochette, Lenseignement du latin comme L 
dans la Pars Orientis de lEmpire romain: les Hermeneumata Pseudodositheana, in Aspetti della scuola nel 
mondo romano: atti del covegno (Pisa, 5-6 dicembre 2006), ed. Franco Ballandi and Rolando Ferri, 
Supplementi di Lexis 51 (Amsterdam: Hakkert, 2008), 81-109 (99 n. 118); Adams, Bilingualism and Latin, 
306-308, 383. Similar papyri with other provenances exist, such as P. Ross. Georg. 5.18 and P. Oxy. 2.244. 
49 E. A. Judge, Judaism and the Rise of Christianity: A Roman Perspective, TynBul 45.2 (1994): 
355-68 (363). Note that his reference on this page to Tacitus, Ann. 15.14 (for the term Augustiani) should 
instead be Tacitus, Ann. 14:15. See also Adrados, History, 189. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
punishments (Tacitus, Ann. 15.44; Pliny, Ep. 10.96-97; Suetonius, Nero 16.2).50 Although 
some have argued that the active use of the word  rather than  in Acts 11:26 
makes this a self-designation, both Mattingly and Taylor have refuted this view.51 Since, 
indeed,  is at least sometimes used in official and juridical domains, the origin 
of  in Latin-speaking or Latin-influenced circles suggests that not only was 
contact with Latin happening in Antioch, but that it may have occurred in legal domains as 
people became aware of the Jesus-believers.52 Judge suggests that [o]ne must think of 
members of the Roman administration, army or business community who were strong in the 
Syrian capital.53 
The presence of the Roman army, indeed, provides the main evidence for Latin-
Greek intersections in this city, although Latin inscriptions are much rarer in Antioch than 
in Ephesus.54 A Roman legion was stationed at Cyrrhus, about 100 km NE of Antioch and 
halfway to Zeugma on the Euphrates, at least from 17 CE onwards and they left one of the 
very rare Latin honorific inscriptions from Syria there, dated to the early second century 
CE.55 In the opposite direction, in 56 CE a road was built (and marked with Latin milestones) 
50 Justin Taylor, Why Were the Disciples First Called Christians at Antioch? (Acts 11, 26), RB 
101.1 (1994): 75-94 (80, 94); Pollard, Soldiers, 556 n. 15. 
51 Harold B. Mattingly, The Origin of the Name Christiani, JTS 9.1 (1958): 26-37 (28 n. 3); Taylor, 
Why, 81-83. 
52 Taylor, Why, 80; 80 n. 19; John H. Elliott, First Peter: A New Translation with Introduction and 
Commentary, ed. David Noel Freedman, AB, vol. 37B (New York: Doubleday, 2000), 790. 
53 Judge, Judaism, 363. 
54 For an overview of the more general history of Antioch that includes Roman elements without, 
however, mentioning languages, see Carter, Matthew, 37-52, especially 38-41; Magnus Zetterholm, The 
Formation of Christianity in Antioch: A Social-Scientific Approach to the Separation between Judaism and 
Christianity (London: Routledge, 2003), 18-31. Both however rely heavily on Downey. See Millars concerns 
about Downeys reliance on Malalas (Roman, 260 n. 11).  
55 Denis van Berchem, Le port de Slucie de Pirie et l'infrastructure logistique des guerres 
parthiques, Bonner Jahrbcher des Rheinischen Landesmuseums in Bonn im Landschaftsverbund Rheinland 
und des Vereins von Altertumsfreunden im Rheinlande 185 (1985): 47-87 (65-66 and map 2); Hannah M. 
Cotton, Joseph Geiger, and J. David Thomas, Masada II: The Yigael Yadin Excavations 1963-1965: Final 
Reports. The Latin and Greek Documents by Hannah M. Cotton and Joseph Geiger and with a Contribution 
by J. David Thomas (Jerusalem: Israel Exploration Society, 1989), 14 n. 42. For more information about Roman 
soldiers stationed in Syria, and specifically Antioch, see Isaac, Limits, 105-103, 270-71, 76-77. On the 
inscription, see Millar, Roman, 104. For further Latin inscriptions in the area, see three from the late first 
century BCE, one found in Daphne-Harbie and two in Seleucia [Glanville Downey, Greek and Latin 
Inscriptions, in Antioch on-the-Orontes Vol. III the Excavations 1937-1939, ed. Richard Stillwell (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1941), 83-115 (170, 178-79)]. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
from Antioch to Ptolemais, a veteran colony established in 53 CE.56 This road goes through 
the very Latin colony of Berytus, with its prevalent Latin inscriptions.57 In Ptolemais the 
Greek population seems to have been more immediately integrated with the Roman veterans 
and their families than in Berytus, but sometime in the mid-second century CE, Ptolemais 
sent one senator (Flavius Bothus) to Rome.58  
Soldiers were involved locally, within Antioch, at least for the collection of taxes and 
possibly they were billeted and provisioned there as well.59 A Latin tombstone (IGLS 3.1, 
837) of an adiutor (assistant) to the procurator Augusti has been found that can be dated 
between 14 and 68 CE.60 Where the soldiers were stationed and how much they interacted 
with civilians, however, continues to be debated.61 Pollard analyses Tacituss reference 
56 Isaac, Limits, 34, 110, 322 n. 67; Millar, Roman, 268; Kennedy, Syria, 718; Pollard, Soldiers, 62. 
See Pliny the Elder, Nat. 5.17 76. 
57 R. G. Goodchild, The Coast Road of Phoenicia and Its Roman Milestones, Berytus 9.2 (1949): 
91-127 (especially 112). Goodchild emphasizes that this road seems to be a Roman creation rather than 
anything that existed in any defined sense previously. On the varied integration of Roman colonies into the 
local population, see Kaimio, Romans, 39-40. 
58 Shimon Applebaum, Judaea in Hellenistic and Roman Times: Historical and Archaeological 
Essays, ed. Jacob Neusner, Studies in Judaism in Late Antiquity 40 (Leiden: Brill, 1989), 70-96 and 
inscriptional evidence listed at 70 n. 1, 2; Isaac, Limits, 344; Millar, Roman, 116, 188-89; Rochette, Latin, 209-
210; Aharon Oppenheimer, Between Rome and Babylon: Studies in Jewish Leadership and Society, ed. Martin 
Hengel and Peter Schfer, Texts and Studies in Ancient Judaism 108 (Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2005), 90. 
This is pace Kaimio, Romans, 103-108. For Latin inscriptions in Ptolemais, see Joyce Reynolds, and J. A. 
Lloyd, Cyrene, in CAH, ed. Alan K. Bowman, Edward Champlin, and Andrew Lintott (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996), 619-640 (631). 
59 Pollard, Soldiers, 100, 277. On soldiers provisioning themselves from civilians, see Roy William 
Davies, The Daily Life of the Roman Soldier under the Principate, ANRW 1: 299-338 (316). Note further that 
literary evidence for the army in Antioch goes back to 51 and 43 BCE (Pollard, Soldiers, 39 n. 11, citing Cicero, 
Att. 5.18.1; Fam. 12.15.7). The complicating factor in these interactions is that, as noted above, it is impossible 
to tell how often exchanges between soldiers and civilians used any Latin at all. While soldiers might primarily 
speak Greek, they were also coming into contact with Roman ideas for which their language might need to 
expand (Maas, People, 15, 17). So, although it is true, as Millar, e.g., argues, that there is nothing to suggest 
that outside Berytus and Heliopolis Latin ever became a, let alone the, normal language of daily speech. Nor 
did it ever supplant Greek as the literary language of the Near East, nevertheless, some Latin was known and 
used and thus language contact occurred (Millar, Roman, 527; Bubenk, Hellenistic, 63; Maas, People, 15; 
Pollard, Soldiers, 160). See, for example, Apuleius, Metam. 39 and discussion in Brlaz, Recours, 171. See 
similar discussion in Adams, Romanitas, 199. Note that Rochette uses this story to illustrate the opposite 
point, that locals did not speak Latin (Latin, 329 n. 13). See also the conclusion reached by Adams on his study 
of Egypt, where Greek was often used, and yet Latin was the language of power (Bilingualism and Latin, 
608). 
60 Pollard, Soldiers, 277-78. 
61 Isaac, Limits, 294, 296, 299; Kennedy, Syria, 716; Mark Hassall, The Army, in CAH, ed. Alan 
K. Bowman, Peter Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 320-43 
(322); Pollard, Soldiers, 59-60; and an excellent summary of troop movements and responsibilities in Maurice 
Sartre, D'Alexandre  Znobie: Histoire du Levant antique, IVe sicle avant J.-C.-IIIe sicle aprs J.-C (Paris: 
Fayard, 2001), 480-97. Pollard believes that the soldiers would have camped outside rather than within the city 
(Soldiers, 66). 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
(Tacitus 2.80.3) to an announcement in the late 60s CE that the troops (in or near Antioch) 
would be switching places with others, located at the time on the frontier in Germany.62 
While the sense of loss that Tacitus imagines the local people would feel is probably 
exaggerated, it is possible that the evil they were familiar with (and perhaps had to some 
degree tamed or at least adjusted to) would be better than an influx of brand new soldiers 
fresh from battle.63  
Soldiers also had business to conduct. In 166 CE, while stationed in Seleucia Pieria, 
Antiochs port city, one naval officer sold seven-year old Abbas (a slave boy renamed 
Eutyches) to another (P.Lond. 2.229). The bill of sale is in Latin. The Latin subscription of 
the seller is the painful performance of a very unready writer, the witnesses subscriptions 
in Latin are fairly well written and the final dating (that follows Syrian practice) and the 
subscription at the end are in Greek.64 Military and trade domains were thus not impervious 
to each other, and Latin contact occurred in both.65 
Linguistic variety in military-civilian exchanges can be exemplified in Antioch by 
two canals built in 74 and 75 CE.66 The first, the canal of the fullers, was built by the people 
of Antioch, who also maintained it. The stela (AE 1986, 694) commemorating and enacting 
the maintenance agreement is in Greek. However, on the stela is written  
  .67 The work was thus authorized or somehow supervised by 
Marcus Ulpius Traianus, then governor of Syria (legatus Augusti pro praetore), future father 
62 Pollard, Soldiers, 2-4. 
63 For a discussion of the hardship caused by the presence of the soldiers, see Isaac, Limits, 276-77. 
Carter describes this quite dramatically (Carter, Matthew, 41-42). 
64 Edward Maunde Thompson, On a Latin Deed of Sale of a Slave: 24th May, A.D. 166, 
Archaeologia 54 (1895): 433-38 (438); Pollard, Soldiers, 280-81. For a German translation of all but the 
subscriptions, see Werner Eck, Sklaven und Freigelassene von Rmern in Iudaea und den angrenzenden 
Provinzen, NovT 55 (2013): 1-21 (15-16). 
65 Mullen, Introduction, 2. 
66 Millar, Roman, 86-87; Pollard, Soldiers, 23, 245-46. 
67 Denis Feissel, Deux listes de quartiers d'Antioche astreints au creusement d'un canal (73-74 aprs 
J.-C.), Syria: revue d'art oriental et d'archologie 62 (1985): 77-103. The majority (20/24) of the names of 
the blocks responsible for the maintenance of the canal are Greek; none are Latin (96-97). However, see the 
concerns about using names for ethnicity in Section 3.1.1 n. 18. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
of the Emperor Trajan. The second canal, built the next year above Antioch, on his 
instructions as well, was completed along with the necessary bridges by four legions, twenty 
cohorts, along with a militia from Antioch.68 A milestone (AE 1983, 927), that van Berchem 
suggests was placed along the canal, is in Latin.69 
It is difficult to detail specifically what language encounters these projects would 
have generated. Plinys correspondence with Trajan (Pliny Ep. 10.42, 61, 62) demonstrates 
that the authorization of such a construction might include the provision of skilled labourers, 
such as surveyors or architects.70 Depending on where these came from, this could provide 
further opportunities for language contact between Greek speakers and Roman retainers. 
Although not much will be said about evidence of Latin in trade, the importance of 
Antioch in Mediterranean commerce should at least be mentioned. One piece of evidence of 
language contact in this domain (besides the bill of sale for the child mentioned above), is 
found in the production of pottery, where markings were adopted in imitation of Western 
customs.71 Vorderstrasse notes that the earliest stamps were Latin names written in 
Greek.72 
What can be concluded about Latin use in Antioch then? Simply that, while there is 
little to no clear evidence of Latin-Greek bilingualism, Latin has left traces in all three 
domains (Figure 12). 
 Army Administration/law Commerce 
Ephesus Military 
dedications and 
epitaphs 
Gaius Stertinius 
Orpex 
Negatiores 
dedications and 
epitaphs 
68 Van Berchem, Port, 86; Sartre, Syria, 658. 
69 Van Berchem, Port, 85-87. 
70 Stephen Mitchell, Imperial Building in the Eastern Roman Provinces, HSCP 91 (1987): 333-65 
(338). 
71 Zabehlicky-Scheffenegger, Factories, 224; William V. Harris, Trade, in CAH, ed. Alan K. 
Bowman, Peter Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 710-740 
(712); Sartre, Syria, 656-57; Malcolm A. R. Colledge, Art and Architecture, in CAH, ed. Alan K. Bowman, 
Peter Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 966-83 (974). 
72 Tasha Vorderstrasse, The Romanization and Christianization of the Antiochene Region: The 
Material Evidence from Three Sites, in Culture and Society in Later Roman Antioch: Papers from a 
Colloquium London, 15th December 2001, ed. Isabella Sandwell and Janet Huskinson (Oxford, UK: Oxbow, 
2004), 86-101 (90). 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
Antioch Canals Imperial visits, 
 
Sale of slave, 
pottery 
Alexandria    
Figure 12: Examples of Latin Intersections in Ephesus and Antioch 
3.1.3. Alexandria 
In Alexandria, language use also intersected with Latin.73 Intriguing evidence, 
possibly from the Roman army, comes from the forty fragments of a marble wall ready to 
be turned into lime for use in fourth-century CE construction.74 Nine pieces have been found 
with variations of the word Caesar painted in red.75 The hand is a version of an official or 
literary hand of the Augustan period and, although certainty is impossible, a probable 
reason for the appearance of such dipinti might be the commemoration of an arrival of a 
Caesar by the accompanying soldiers.76 Thus, from quite early in the first century CE, 
someone with some knowledge of Latin was present in Alexandria.  
Roman legions had a significant (although decreasing) presence in Alexandria in the 
reign of Augustus, and then in nearby Nicopolis from early in the first century CE until the 
early second century.77 Although the legions were sometimes called on for battle, they more 
frequently were employed in guarding local commercial enterprises, in internal order-
73 Alan K. Bowman, Egypt, in CAH, ed. Alan K. Bowman, Edward Champlin, and Andrew Lintott 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 676-702 (696-98). There is evidence of several Alexandrians 
who left the city and subsequently produced works in Latin from their new residence in Rome, but this does 
not advance the questions pursued in this thesis. Philoxinus, for example, in the first century BCE and Appian 
in the second CE started their lives in Alexandria but produced their works in Rome. Philoxinus believed that 
Latin was a dialect of Greek, and Appians Greek shows evidence of Latinisms [Rochette, Latin, 225; Johannes 
Hering, Lateinisches bei Appian (PhD thesis, Leipzig, 1935)]. Strabo and his friend, Roman prefect Aelius 
Gallus, visited Alexandria in the mid-first century BCE (Strabo 17.1.6-10; Bowman, Egypt, 699). So Latin 
and Greek speakers were coming to and from Alexandria, but left no concrete evidence.  
Alexandria sent men to the Senate though, first Greeks, then, in the late second century, a native 
Egyptian [Dio Cassius, History 77.5.5; Mason Hammond, Composition of the Senate, A.D. 68-235, JRS 
47.1/2 (1957): 74-81 (79 and 17 n. 18)]. In general, however, Alexandrian lites grounded their learning in 
Greek [Tim Whitmarsh, Greek Literature and the Roman Empire: The Politics of Imitation (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2001), 8-9].  
74 Adam ukaszewicz, Caesar in Alexandria: Fragmentary Latin Dipinti Discovered at Kom El-
Dikka, JJP 41 (2011): 79-92 (90). 
75 ukaszewicz, Caesar, 90. 
76 ukaszewicz, Caesar, 90. 
77 Bowman, Egypt, 686-89; Erich W. Gruen, The Expansion of the Empire under Augustus, in 
CAH, ed. Alan K. Bowman, Edward Champlin, and Andrew Lintott (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1996), 147-97 (189-190); Hassall, Army, 321-23. For a detailed study of the movements of various legions 
and auxiliaries in Egypt, see Jean Lesquier, L'arme romaine d'gypte d'Auguste  Diocltien (Le Caire: 
Imprimerie de l'Institut, 1918). 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
keeping, and in construction.78 Furthermore, the soldiers work details along with the 
increase in local recruitment, the tendency for sons to follow fathers into service and the 
generally greater visibility and importance of veterans highlight the Latin-Greek encounters 
that occurred in Alexandria as a result of the army presence there.79 The Acta 
Alexandrinorum also suggest that Romans responded to the bitterly hostile attitude of 
Alexandrians, and those exchanges provided further opportunities for language contact.80  
Since the soldiers were sometimes appointed to keep roads safe for trade, their 
presence intersected with those who worked in commerce.81 ILS 2483, for example, lists in 
Latin details of a force of legionary and auxiliary soldiers brought together  for the 
construction of water tanks at four named sites in the Eastern Desert and the reconstruction 
of the castrum at Coptus.82 Although not specific to Alexandria, this inscription illustrates 
the intersection of Latin with the armys presence in civilian enterprises. Indeed, during the 
first and second centuries CE, Alexandria was a major crossroad for trade.83 Merchants 
stopped at Alexandria on their way to and from the Red Sea, the interior of Egypt, and across 
the Mediterranean.84 At least one fleet of ships carrying grain from Egypt to Rome sailed 
from Alexandria to Ostia each year.85  
78 Lesquier, L'arme, 15. For Syria, see, similarly, Isaac, Limits, 68-69. The army was called on, for 
example, to put a stop to Jewish uprisings. On the role of the army against the Alexandrian Jews, see Isaac, 
Limits, 277; Bowman, Egypt, 701; Martin Goodman, Judaea, in CAH, ed. Alan K. Bowman, Edward 
Champlin, and Andrew Lintott (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 737-81 (778-79). Note that 
all of the evidence gathered for Alexandrian Jews in C. Pap. Jud. II is in Greek.  
79 Bowman, Egypt, 688. 
80 Isaac, Limits, 278; J. A. Crook, Augustus: Power, Authority, Achievement, in CAH, ed. Alan K. 
Bowman, Edward Champlin, and Andrew Lintott (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 113-146 
(140). 
81 Bowman, Egypt, 676-77, 688, 699; Harris, Trade, 711-12. 
82 David Kennedy, The Composition of a Military Work Party in Roman Egypt (ILS 2483: Coptos), 
JEA 71 (1985): 156-160 (156). 
83 On mobility in general during the Roman empire, see Catherine Hezser, Travel and Mobility, in 
The Oxford Handbook of Jewish Daily Life in Roman Palestine, ed. Catherine Hezser (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2010), 210-26. 
84 Karl Jansen-Winkeln, Alexandria, PC.  
85 Lionel Casson, The Isis and Her Voyage, Transactions and Proceedings of the American 
Philological Association 81 (1950): 43-56 (43); G. E. Rickman, The Grain Trade under the Roman Empire, 
Memoirs of the American Academy in Rome 36 (1980): 261-75 (266). 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
Language contact occurred on the Mediterranean Sea as well. The term for the wind 
in Acts 27:14, , combines the Greek  (the East wind) and the Latin aquilo 
(the North wind).86 Another similar combination in the domain of trade is , 
donkey-seller (from Greek , donkey, and Latin mango, trader).87 The same kind of 
contact between Latin and Greek that produced these terms would have occurred in the 
Alexandrian port office at Ostia, near Rome.88 Also the records in Latin of the sales of two 
slaves from the second century CE are among the documents and letters brought into Egypt 
from places outside and quite far away.89 Although written outside of Alexandria, the fact 
that they were brought there shows again that there were people in Alexandria whose lives 
intersected with Latin. 
One Latin inscription from Alexandria is now kept in the Metropolitan Museum of 
Art in New York City. The inscription is found on the claw (Latin inside, Greek outside) of 
one of the four crabs that originally held up the obelisk in the temple of Augustus. Both 
versions state that the Roman prefect Barbarus and the architect Pontius re-erected the 
obelisk in Alexandria during the eighteenth year of an emperor, probably Augustus, and the 
use of Latin particularly on this monument has a strong symbolic connotation.90 However, 
when one takes into account the huge obelisk covered with Egyptian hieroglyphics, both the 
86 , BDAG 411. See further Brian M. Rapske, Acts, Travel and Shipwreck, in The Book 
of Acts in Its Graeco-Roman Setting, ed. David W. J. Gill and Conrad H. Gempf (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 
1994), 1-47 (38-39). 
87 Panagiotis Filos, Latin Loanwords in Greek, EAGLL sec. 2. The Latin inscription referring to the 
traders of purple, found in Philippi, might constitute another piece of evidence, but since it can only be dated 
vaguely to the first 300 years CE it is not particularly helpful [CIL III.664; Peter Pilhofer, Philippi: Katalog 
der Inschriften von Philippi, 2nd ed., WUNT 1.119, vol. 2 (Tbingen: J.C.B. Mohr, 1995), 650]. 
88 Harris, Trade, 736. For a list of the various posts, see Werner Eck, The Growth of Administrative 
Posts, in CAH, ed. Alan K. Bowman, Peter Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2000), 238-65 (242-44). 
89 E. G. Turner, Greek Papyri: An Introduction (Oxford: Clarendon, 1968), 50, 186 nn. 15-16; Sergio 
Daris, I papiri e gli ostraca latini d'egitto, Aevum 74.1 (2000): 105-175 (111, 133). 
90 Lorenzetti, Greek/Latin Bilingualism, EAGLL. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
Greek and the Latin on the claws are reduced to insignificance, and the Latin especially, on 
the inside of the claw, practically disappears. This, too, might be considered symbolic91 
Some evidence also exists for the use of Latin in law and administration.92 Already 
in 1925 Jouguet was pointing out that Greek was used in imperial circles in Egypt to preserve 
continuity between the emperor and the pharaohs.93 Yet, even that early, there is evidence 
of Greek-Latin intersections. A Greek inscription (CIL 3 Suppl. 6583) from lower Egypt 
dated to 47-30 BCE ends with the phrase, regina et rex iusser(un)t.94 It continued an earlier 
grant of inviolability to a synagogue.95 Alexandria also sent men to the Senate, first Greeks, 
then, in the late second century, a native Egyptian (Dio Cassius, History 77.5.5).96 Two 
inscriptions from Cyrenaica suggest that even in Eastern provinces, furthermore, prayers for 
the emperor were both made and recorded in Latin.97 In general, however, Alexandrian 
lites grounded their learning in Greek.98 
Alexandria was the administrative hub of Egypt, and the Roman prefect was 
regularly and officially described as prefect of Alexandria and all Egypt (Dio of 
91 For the obelisk as well as a more detailed discussion of Alexandria in history and architecture, see 
Judith McKenzie, The Architecture of Alexandria and Egypt, c. 300 B.C. to A.D. 700, ed. Nikolaus Pevsner, 
Pelican History of Art (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007), 75-79, 173-220. 
92 Bowman, Egypt, 691-93. See also the later evidence of Christian martyrs and the record of their 
North African trial in Latin [H. A. G. Houghton, The Latin New Testament: A Guide to Its Early History, Texts, 
and Manuscripts (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016), 4-5]. Education in Latin would have been necessary 
for retainers in these posts. M. Hamdy Ibrahim assembles an interesting assortment of evidence for a Latin 
curriculum, but his evidence spans three to four centuries and therefore is quite speculative [Education of 
Latin in Roman Egypt in the Light of Papyri, in Roma e l'Egitto nell'antichit classica: Cairo, 6-9 febbraio 
1989. Atti del I congresso internazionale italo-egiziano, ed. Giovanni Pugliese Carratelli (Rome: Libreria dello 
Stato, 1992), 219-226]. 
93 P. Jouguet, Les papyrus latins d'gypte, Revue des tudes latines 3.1 (1925): 35-50 (41-42, see 
also 39). For an overview of the use of Greek and Latin in official correspondence, see Kaimio, Romans, 76-
80. Note that the word /official/ is best used for items related to the Roman administration and not as a synonym 
for /sanctioned/ (Adams, Bilingualism and Latin, 600). 
94 Jean Bingen, L'asylie pour une synagogue: CIL III Suppl. 6583 = CII 1449, in Studia Paulo Naster 
Oblata, ed. Jan Quaegebeur, OLA 13 (Leuven: Peeters, 1982), 11-16 (11, 12, 15). 
95 Bingen, L'asylie, 12. 
96 Hammond, Composition, 79 and 17 n. 18. 
97 J. M. Reynolds, Vota pro salute principis, Papers of the British School at Rome 30 (1962): 33-36 
(33); Clifford Ando, Imperial Ideology and Provincial Loyalty in the Roman Empire (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 2000), 361. 
98 Whitmarsh, Literature, 8-9. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
Prusa, Or. 32.36).99 From the second century CE onwards, the term // was used 
for the governors buildings there.100 And while Latin did not become common in legal 
documents until after Diocletian, even before that scribes needed Latin terms and phrases to 
produce the documents required for Roman citizens.101 There are, for example, Latin birth 
records on wax tablets from 62 and 103 CE.102 Thus, while public inscriptions used Latin in 
a way that minimized Rome symbolically, [t]he requirement that birth certificates should 
be in Latin  provides an explicit example of the symbolic use of Latin in matters to do 
with the citizenship.103 Furthermore, and most importantly for the theory that a group of 
retainers had regular contact with Latin, this suggests, as Daris concludes, that Non c 
dubbio che una categoria di impiegati bilingui, con sicuro possesso del latino, occupavano 
una posizione di attivo rilievo nellambito della burocrazia prefettizia e degli uffici 
collaterali, dai quali prendeva forma ed avvio ogni pratica amministrativa.104 So even in a 
place with little obvious evidence of Latin use, it is present among Roman retainers. 
99 Alan K. Bowman, Egypt after the Pharaohs 332 BCAD 642: From Alexander to the Arab Conquest 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986), 205. 
100 Bernhard Meinersmann, Die lateinischen Wrter und Namen in den griechischen Papyri, ed. 
Friedrich Bilabel, Studien zur Epigraphik und Papyruskunde 1 (Leipzig: Dieterich, 1927), 48. 
101 Jouguet, Papyrus, 41; P. A. Brunt, Roman Imperial Themes (Oxford: Clarendon, 1990), 232-35, 
241-43. See also Plinys letters to and from Trajan about giving an Egyptian his freedom in Alexandria before 
requesting it in Rome (Pliny, Ep. 10.5-7, 10). Trajan requested more information so that he might send Pliny a 
letter for Pompeius Planta, the governor of Egypt. Pliny and Trajan wrote to each other in Latin. Pompeius 
Planta was of the equestrian order, procurator of Lycia and Pamphilia, and later governor of Egypt (97-99 CE). 
What language the letter to P. Planta would be written in and how the manumission of Harpocras would be 
recorded is a matter of speculation, but the circumstance provides another intersection where Latin contact 
might occur [Raymond Henry Lacey, The Equestrian Officials of Trajan and Hadrian: Their Careers (PhD 
thesis, Princeton University, 1917), 1, with epigraphical data].  
102 CPL 148 and BGU 7.1691. Rochette lists PSI 2.1185 as a birth record, but he is mistaken [Sur le 
bilinguisme dans l'gypte grco-romaine, CdE 71 (1996): 153-68 (160 n. 3)]. 
103 Adams, Romanitas, 186, with further examples at 187-88. 
104 Sergio Daris, Latino ed Egitto romano, in Il bilinguismo degli antich: XVIII Giornate filologiche 
genovesi, ed. dipartimento di archeologia filologia classica e loro tradizioni, Pubblicazioni dell dipartimento di 
archeologia filologia classica e loro tradizioni 135, n. s. (Genova: Universit di Genova, Facolt di lettere, 
1991), 47-81 (49). 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
3.1.4. Conclusion 
The matrix has now been filled in from the available evidence (Figure 13). While 
there is no support for wholesale bilingualism, in all three cities there is some evidence that 
points towards Greek and Latin in contact, specifically in the army, among those serving the 
Roman administration and in commerce.105 
 Army Administration/law Commerce 
Ephesus Military 
dedications and 
epitaphs 
Gaius Stertinius 
Orpex 
Negatiores 
dedications and 
epitaphs 
Antioch Canals Imperial visits, 
 
Sale of slave, 
pottery 
Alexandria Construction, 
safety 
Birth records Ostia office 
Figure 13: Examples of Latin Intersections in Ephesus, Antioch and Alexandria 
While an exact correspondence between Latin use in the Fourth Gospel (discussed 
below) and only one of these cities might clarify the Gospels provenance, the evidence is 
not strong enough to support such an endeavour. The more numerous inscriptions found in 
Ephesus could suggest that more Latin was used there, but their survival may also simply be 
chance, or perhaps evidence that Latin use was more tied to public expressions of status than 
in Antioch or Alexandria.106 Because of the earlier rebellion of Ephesus against Rome, it is 
possible, too, that the numerous Latin inscriptions there sought to express avec insistence 
la loyaut de la cite mettrice envers les autorits romaines.107 Of relevance to this thesis, 
however, is the way in which the matrix of locations and domains intersects with another 
axis, that of social group.108  
105 See Werner Eck for a nuanced discussion, although his conclusion that the administrative Latin 
did not affect the city and citizens of Ephesus  in the least seems to go beyond the evidence (Presence, 
27-29). See, similarly, Kaimio, Romans, 38-39. 
106 For the use of Latin in expressions of status and power, see Catherine Hezser, Jewish Literacy in 
Roman Palestine (Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2001), 363; Isaac, Latin, 66. For some conjectures about varied 
Latin use in inscriptions, see Kaimio, Romans, 65. Note that Kaimio is especially helpful in gathering evidence; 
his conclusions are sometimes overly speculative, such as when he suggests that in Pisidian Antioch the Greek 
translation of the Res Gestae was discarded or that language use in the Roman Senate was no longer discussed 
in the official records after the reign of Trajan because it was no longer of any consequence (Romans, 76, 108). 
107 Brlaz, Recours, 180. See, for example, the large inscription to Augustus and other imperial 
patrons on the Mazaeus and Mithridates gate (Eck, Presence, 25). 
108 Note that because Latin was primarily used in the army, administration and commerce, language 
diffusion in the East happened mostly by the process described by Adams as hierarchical diffusion, whereby 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
Ekkehard and Wolfgang Stegemann have argued for a significant  presence of 
retainers from the upper stratum among the early Christ movement.109 The term /retainer/ 
is helpful to identify the members of Longeneckers middling groups whom he describes 
as closely and directly serving the lite.110 This is also the group that has left behind the 
evidence listed above, apparitores such as scribes, Augustales (freedmen serving in cities 
under the patronage of decurions), and other upwardly mobile people, as well as veterans 
and traders, who might constitute 17% of a citys population.111 And their contact with 
Roman lites, especially in the circumstances just listed which had some possibility of 
upward mobility, would motivate them to converge their language towards that of those with 
higher status.112 This middling group is sometimes ignored in more binary, rich/poor 
features leap . . . from an influential urban centre across rural space to a lesser town or towns [The Regional 
Diversification of Latin, 200 BC-AD 600 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 18]. This process, 
also called parachuting, happens as influential members of society are in contact with each other either 
through travel or through common texts, despite the geographical separation between them. Their language use 
would, in turn, have an influence on the people in their immediate environs, influence which would not 
necessarily be reflected in the intervening geographical area. 
109 Ekkehard W. Stegemann, and Wolfgang Stegemann, The Jesus Movement: A Social History of Its 
First Century, trans. O. C. Dean, Jr. (T&T Clark: Edinburgh, 1999), 316; see also 69-70, 312-314. See, for 
example, the model for social stratification in the Roman empire that is adapted by Dennis Duling for use in 
the Gospel of Matthew [Empire: Theories, Methods, Models, in The Gospel of Matthew in Its Roman Imperial 
Context, ed. John Riches and David C. Sim, Early Christianity in Context Published under JSNTSup 276 
(London: T&T Clark, 2005), 49-74 (53-55, 65)]. In this model, [t]he highest social stratum consists of rulers; 
beneath them are other governing strata and their retainers, this is, those who serve them. Still lower are 
merchants, peasants and artisans (54, 55, 65). See, too, the reminder that the production of inscriptions required 
the collaboration of several people who are not represented in the final product (Mullen, Introduction, 12). 
110 Bruce W. Longenecker, Exposing the Economic Middle: A Revised Economy Scale for the Study 
of Early Urban Christianity, JSNT 31.3 (2009): 243278 (268-69). Note Longeneckers concerns about the 
term /class/ which will be avoided because of its more modern cultural unit (268). 
111 Longenecker, Economic Middle, 263-67. Also, although Nicholas Purcell points out that 
apparitores are rarely mentioned in the provinces, he includes evidence of men in the provinces fulfilling 
similar functions [The Apparitores: A Study in Social Mobility, Papers of the British School at Rome 51 
(1983): 125-173 (131, 134, 139, 150, 154, 159, 160)]. The figure of 17% is pace Carter who follows Lenski in 
estimating this group at 5% [Warren Carter, Pontius Pilate: Portraits of a Roman Governor, ed. Barbara Green, 
Interfaces (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 2003), 38]. Yet Lenskis figure is not meant to be anything more 
than an approximation, a minimum based on reports from the last days of the Chinese Empire and nineteenth-
century Russia [Power and Privilege: A Theory of Social Stratification (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966), 245 
and 245 n. 5].  
112 Louise Revell mentions that freedmen are frequently the subject of inscriptions, perhaps because 
it was one of the few resources available to them to establish a position within one of the dominant hierarchies 
[Roman Imperialism and Local Identities (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), 183]. On some 
limited upward mobility, see Millar, Roman, 528-29. On convergence in upwardly mobile groups, see Edwards, 
Multilingualism, 82; Howard Giles, Ethnicity Markers in Speech, in Social Markers in Speech, ed. Klaus R. 
Scherer and Howard Giles (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979), 251-89; John C. Turner, and Roger 
Brown, Social Status, Cognitive Alternatives and Intergroup Relations, in Differentiation between Social 
Groups: Studies in the Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations, ed. Henri Tajfel, European Monographs in 
Social Psychology 14 (London: Academic Press, 1978), 201-34; Richard N. Lalonde, and Randy A. Silverman, 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
constructions of first-century CE social strata.113 Yet, as the evidence reflects, even groups 
of different statuses were not bounded groups with isolated material lives and their contact 
with Romans is reflected in the evidence that they left behind.114 Such retainers are 
particularly relevant for this thesis as a group who might have constituted some of the 
auditors of the Gospel of John.115 The presence of Latin in the legal domain, furthermore, 
connects retainers in that domain with the Fourth Gospels frequent use of legal terms.116 
And it is important to note that, along with and in addition to language contact, cultural 
activities such as festivals and processions, emperor worship, and gladiatorial combats 
and wild beast shows, spread Roman culture in the East, even to non-educated Greeks.117 
Such retainers are also represented in the Johannine text, as Warren Carter has 
demonstrated (John 1:19; 2:14, 16; 7:32, 45, 46; 18:3, 6, 10, 12, 18, 22, 26, 36; 19:2, 6, 23, 
24, 32, 34).118 Out of these twenty references, eight mention specifically Roman retainers 
(18:3, 6, 12; 19:2, 23, 24, 32, 34). And some of the disciples might have been part of a middle 
economic group, too, as Van Tilborg shows (e.g., 6:16, 22).119 That they are represented in 
the text does not constitute proof that retainers were among Johns audience. Nevertheless, 
the evidence adduced so far in the chapter shows that people who had some contact with 
Latin were both in the environs of the composition of the Fourth Gospel (Ecos object) and 
within the text itself (Ecos Sign). Chapters 4-7 of this thesis will propose an interpretant for 
Johns Gospel, particularly John 18:2819:22, that takes into account the awareness of 
Roman culture that such people would develop. 
Behavioral Preferences in Response to Social Injustice: The Effects of Group Permeability and Social Identity 
Salience, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 66.1 (1994): 78-85. 
113 For example, Carter, John, 54. While Carter describes the retainer class (54, 66) he does not 
engage significantly with their presence. For arguments against the division of ancient society into rich-poor 
alone, see Longenecker, Economic Middle, 247-49, 268-69. 
114 Revell, Roman, 153.  
115 The higher and more mobile the group, the greater the possibility for developing a trans-local group 
identity [John Breuilly, Introduction, in Nations and Nationalism, Ernest Gellner (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 2006), xiii-liii (xxiii-xxiv)]. 
116 Lincoln, Truth, 29-33. 
117 Swain, Hellenism, 418-21. 
118 Carter, John, 66, 68. 
119 Tilborg, Reading, 82-83. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
This proposal, however, does not negate previous interpretants of the Fourth Gospel 
grounded in a Jewish encyclopaedia. Chapter 2 has shown that people living in multiple 
cultures have access to more than one encyclopaedia.120 And the first and second century CE 
provide examples of Jews living in some of the same intersections as those described 
above.121 In the second century CE, for example, a few Jews were using Latin in their 
epitaphs in the Appian catacombs.122 There is even evidence of a Jewish baker supplying the 
Roman army at Masada.123 Philos nephew, Tiberius Alexander, rose through the ranks of 
the Roman army and helped Vespasian become emperor (Josephus, Ant. 20.5.2 100-102; 
J.W. 2.18.7-8 487-98; 5.1.6 43-46; 6.4.3 237-38).124 Jews were also present in Ephesus, 
Antioch and Alexandria and interacted with both local and imperial rulers.125 Inscriptional 
evidence shows that they were among the merchants, in administration, and even in the army, 
120 Section 2.1.3; cf. Ehrensperger, Crossroads, 57-59. 
121 L. Michael White, Capitalizing on the Imperial Cult: Some Jewish Perspectives, in Rome and 
Religion: A Cross-Disciplinary Dialogue on the Imperial Cult, ed. Jeffrey Brodd and Jonathan L. Reed, SBL 
WGRWSup 5 (Atlanta: SBL Press, 2011), 173-214. There is also the inscription warning against gentiles 
entering the temple that Josephus reports was written in Latin and Greek, but it is somewhat uncertain, since 
only Greek copies have so far been found (J.W. 5.5.2 194; Hezser, Literacy, 413-14). 
122 Williams, Jews, 181, 185. 
123 Hezser, Literacy, 416.  
124 Gottfried Schimanowski, Die jdische Integration in die Oberschicht Alexandriens und die 
angebliche Apostasie des Tiberius Julius Alexander, in Jewish Identity in the Greco-Roman World: Jdische 
Identitt in der griechisch-rmischen Welt, ed. Jrg Frey, Daniel R. Schwartz, and Stephanie Gripentrog, 
AGJU 71 (Leiden: Brill, 2007), 111-35 (123-33); White, Capitalizing, 174. 
125 Tilborg, Reading, 38. Hezser suggests that Jews may have learned Latin to attend the law school 
at Beirut where Roman legal traditions were taught; her study covers a longer time span than is of interest to 
this thesis and evidence for Beiruts law school dates to the third century CE (Hezser, Literacy, 103; Rochette, 
Latin, 167). For Jews in Ephesus, see Trebilco, Early, 37-52; Irina Levinskaya, The Traces of Jewish Life in 
Asia Minor, in Neues Testament und hellenistisch-jdische Alltagskultur: Wechselseitige Wahrnehmungen. 
III. Internationales Symposium zum Corpus Judaeo-Hellenisticum Novi Testamenti, 21.-24. Mai 2009, Leipzig, 
ed. Roland Deines, Jens Herzer, and Karl-Wilhelm Niebuhr, WUNT 1.274 (Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2011), 
347-57 (350). For Jews in Antioch, see Irina Levinskaya, The Book of Acts in Its Diaspora Setting, ed. Bruce 
W. Winter, The Book of Acts in Its First Century Setting 5 (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1996), 130-34; 
Bernadette J. Brooten, The Jews of Ancient Antioch, in Antioch: The Lost Ancient City, ed. Christine 
Kondoleon (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000), 29-37. For Jews in Alexandria, see Josephus, 
J.W. 2.18.7 488; 7.10.1 407-419; Philo, Flacc. 8.55, and also Shaye J. D. Cohen, Those Who Say They 
Are Jews and Are Not: How Do You Know a Jew in Antiquity When You See One?, in Diasporas in 
Antiquity, ed. Shaye J. D. Cohen and Ernest S. Frerichs (Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1993), 1-45 (28-29); 
Christopher Haas, Alexandria in Late Antiquity: Topography and Social Conflict, Ancient Society and History 
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997), 92-109; Sylvie Honigman, Politeumata and Ethnicity in 
Ptolemaic and Roman Egypt, Ancient Society 33 (2003): 61-102.  
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
and held Roman citizenship.126 As Gruen points out, the intersections occurred in the other 
direction as well, since some Jewish proselytes were among the Roman lite.127 
I want to avoid calling these people simply /Romans/, because they were not 
necessarily citizens nor were they Latin speakers.128 Instead, to emphasize the cultural 
competence that is important for this thesis, I shall call them Roman-aware auditors and 
propose that they were among the audience of the Gospel of John. Whether they were a 
cohesive group or not, and whether they constituted the whole of Johns auditors, will be 
explored briefly in Chapter 7.129 At this point in the analysis, it is sufficient to note their 
presence in the first and second century CE Eastern Mediterranean, and to posit their 
presence among the auditors of the Fourth Gospel. 
3.2. Latinisms and the Text of Johns Gospel 
The Greek that resulted from the intersections discussed in the first half of this chapter 
differed in certain specific ways from the Greek used for literary compositions.130 This is 
especially evident in Greek texts translated from Latin, which included transliterated or 
calqued Latin, morphological or syntactic oddities based on Latin, and a shift in meaning for 
126 Laurence H. Kant, Jewish Inscriptions in Greek and Latin, ANRW 20.2: 671-713 (690-91); Haas, 
Alexandria, 96, 107; Hezser, Literacy, 313-14; Tessa Rajak, The Jewish Dialogue with Greece and Rome: 
Studies in Cultural and Social Interaction (Boston: Brill Academic Publishers, 2002), 320, 384-85, 437; Joseph 
Geiger, Language, Culture and Identity in Ancient Palestine, in Greek Romans and Roman Greeks: Studies 
in Cultural Interaction, ed. Erik Nis Ostenfeld, Karin Blomqvist, and Lisa Nevett, Aarhus Studies in 
Mediterranean Antiquity 3 (Aarhus: Aarhus University Press, 2002), 233-46 (235, 239-40); Levinskaya, 
Traces, 354-55. For Jews with Roman citizenship, see Acts 16:37, but also Erich S. Gruen, Romans and 
Jews, in A Companion to Ethnicity in the Ancient Mediterranean, ed. Jeremy McInerney (Chichester: Wiley-
Blackwell, 2014), 423-36 (433). See also evidence for Jews or Godfearers in Stobi, a Latin-speaking town in 
Macedonia (Rajak, Dialogue, 356-57). There is some evidence of Latin intersections in the tombstones of Beth 
She-arim, but these are from the second to fourth century CE and thus may be significantly late from the 
perspective of this thesis (Rajak, Dialogue, 481, 481 n. 4). 
127 Gruen, Romans, 432. 
128 See, for example, Hezsers cautions about the lack of Latin learning among Jews in Palestine 
(Literacy, 235-36).  
129 Section 7.1.4. 
130 Sebastian Brock, Translation in Antiquity, in A History of Ancient Greek: From the Beginnings 
to Late Antiquity, ed. Anastassios-Fivos Christidis (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 873-86; 
Geoffrey C. Horrocks, Greek: A History of the Language and Its Speakers (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010), 
124-31. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
some older Greek words as they began to be used with specifically Roman referents.131 These 
characteristics of translated Greek provide helpful categories for examining the Greek of the 
Fourth Gospel.132 I am not arguing that the Gospel of John is a translated text.133 Yet the 
same three characteristics, namely code-switches, syntactical Latinisms, and calques and 
language shift, are evidence of Latin-influenced Greek and are present in the Greek of this 
Gospel, concentrated particularly in the Johannine trial narrative.134 These elements provide 
the Haftpunkte that mark the boundaries of John 18:2819:22 and suggest the relevance of 
an interpretant of this narrative unit that uses a Roman encyclopaedia, a task that will engage 
the remaining chapters of this thesis.135 
3.2.1. Code-switches 
A code-switch is, as discussed in Chapter 2, a foreign word simply transliterated 
into Greek characters  introduced directly into the Greek text, in the grammatical case 
required by the Greek sentence.136 Brixhe calls this rare, and it may be so in translated texts, 
but not among the Greek of Roman retainers, as the evidence discussed in this section will 
demonstrate.137 In such Greek texts, there were three reasons why Latin words were 
borrowed. First, they were used for Roman concepts or items for which no Greek term 
existed.138 This was described as specificity in Chapter 2.139 Secondly, there appears to have 
been a marked preference in the army and the lower echelons of government bureaucracy 
131 Brixhe, Greek. Note that LXX Greek is another example of translation Greek. The examples 
that follow are specifically chosen because they reflect contact with Latin as opposed to Hebrew or Aramaic. 
For a balanced view of LXX Greek and its influence on Greek use among Jews, see G. H. R. Horsley, The 
Fiction of Jewish Greek, NewDocs 5: Linguistic Essays (1989): 5-40. 
132 See the example (ILS 9238) of a bilingual inscription by a Greek, a freedman of a Roman, whose 
Greek had become, at least in the inscription, very Latinised (Adams, Bilingualism and Latin, 37-38). 
133 I am not arguing that the Fourth Gospels author(s) did not know Greek well; that thesis goes 
beyond what the assembled evidence supports.  
134 Brixhe, Greek, 903. 
135 This does not mean that the narrative is unintelligible for those without access to a Roman 
encyclopaedia. Furthermore, I shall argue that some of the Roman content is communicated in a hidden 
transcript and therefore comprises only one of several layers of meaning. See Section 5.1.4. 
136 Brixhe, Greek, 905-906. 
137 Brixhe, Greek, 906. 
138 Brixhe, Greek, 905. For Greek awareness of borrowed words, in this case from Egyptian and 
Sanskrit, see Athenaeus, Deipn. 2.66f. 
139 Section 2.2.2. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
for more Latin expressions.140 This phenomenon existed, say Adams and Swain, among 
retainers: enough [Latin] was spoken by soldiers, colonists, and traders  for many words 
to enter the Greek language.141 While Greek literary writers were sufficiently resourced 
from Attic Greek to eschew Latin (and began to promote a return to the older Greek forms), 
Latin penetrated deeply into [the] everyday.142 Thirdly, loans would occur in domains 
where the loaning language is culturally superior.143 Administration and army, as the 
principal extensions of Roman power and the expression of their claim to cultural superiority 
(Vergil, Aen. 6.851-53), can be seen as special instances of this principle.  
The word  is a case in point.144 It can only be found very rarely before its 
attestation in the New Testament, and then it is used to refer not to a location but to the 
Praetorian Guard.145 When it refers to a governors residence, its earliest uses outside of the 
New Testament are in a military letter, in an ostraca demanding the tax levy of bricks for 
building a , and in a Latin-Greek bilingual record of legal proceedings, all from 
Egypt in the early to mid-second century CE.146  
140 Hugh J. Mason, Greek Terms for Roman Institutions: A Lexicon and Analysis (Toronto: Hakkert, 
1974), 7. 
141 James N. Adams, and Simon Swain, Introduction, in Bilingualism in Ancient Society: Language 
Contact and the Written Text, ed. James N. Adams, Mark Janse, and Simon Swain (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2002), 1-20 (17; see further 16-19). See also on this Lucian, How to Write History 15. 
142 Mason, Greek Terms, 8. Aulus Gellius, Noct. att. 19.9 is sometimes cited as evidence of lite Greek 
knowledge of Latin and Latin literature, but this does not seem to have been common practice. Furthermore, it 
is such a neat anecdote of a Roman getting the better of Greeks on their own turf (love poetry) that it is easy to 
suppose that the story grew in the telling [Barry Baldwin, Bi-Culturalism and Bi-Lingualism in the Roman 
Empire, in Proceedings of the Pacific North-West Conference on Foreign Languages, ed. Walter C. Kraft 
25.1 (Corvallis: Oregon State University, 1974), 65-68 (66); Rochette, Latin, 267-69; Adams, Bilingualism 
and Latin, 16]. 
143 Mason, Greek Terms, 7. 
144 For the identification of the praetorium in Jerusalem as Herods palace, see Jean-Pierre Lmonon, 
Ponce Pilate, 2nd ed. (Ivry-sur-Seine: L'Atelier, 2007), 113-120. However, most important for this thesis is 
the lack of references to a praetorium in Jerusalem outside of the Gospels. See above for a praetorium in 
Alexandria (Section 3.1.3). I have found none for Ephesus. And while there exist references to a praetorium 
in Antioch, they are late [John Moschus, Pratum spirituale 72; John Malalas, Chron. 13.30; Luke Lavan, The 
Praetoria of Civil Governors in Late Antiquity, in Recent Research in Late-Antique Urbanism, ed. Luke 
Lavan, JRA, Supplementary Series 42 (Portsmouth, RI: Thomson-Shore, 2001), 39-56 (41 n. 7)].  
145 See, for example, SEG 6.597. The use in Phil 1:13 is generally taken to refer to people, possibly 
the Praetorian Guard [Peter T. O'Brien, The Epistle to the Philippians: A Commentary on the Greek Text, ed. 
I. Howard Marshall and W. Ward Gasque, NIGTC (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1991), 93; Peter Oakes, 
Philippians: From People to Letter, ed. Richard Bauckham, SNTSMS 110 (Cambridge: University of 
Cambridge, 2001), 66 n. 18]. 
146 These are P. Oxy. 58.3917; O. Bodl. 2.745and P. Wisc. 2.48. On O. Bodl. 2.745, see Allard Wijnand 
Mees, Organisationsformen rmischer Tpfer-Manufakturen am Beispiel von Arezzo und Rheinzabern: unter 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
Earlier than the Gospel of John is the Gospel of Mark, where  is used in 
15:16:   ,   , (into the , that is the praetorium).147 Arguing 
for or against Johns dependence on Mark lies outside the scope of this study, but it is 
interesting that  is used in Mark as a specification, explanation or translation of 
; the author apparently assumed that neither  nor  was sufficiently 
communicative alone.148 This would make sense if  was not yet thoroughly 
assimilated into Greek use. It is to the point that neither Philo nor, surprisingly given the 
Roman topics he discusses, Josephus ever use the word. Josephus, for example, uses 
Berucksichtigung von Papyri, Inschriften und Rechtsquellen, Monographien / Rmisch-Germanisches 
Zentralmuseum. Forschungsinstitut fr Vor- und Frhgeschichte 52, vol. 1 (Mainz: Verlag des Rmisch-
Germanischen Zentralmuseums, 2002), 381. In P. Wisc. 2.48, the Greek in line 26 is  [correction: 
]   [; they [or I] went in the praetorium, author translation). The Latin phrase of this 
bilingual papyrus is in the last two lines: Liberalis op. id tale feceris profanabat. ibo in patr (Free [?] 
you will have made so what he desecrated. I shall go into [my] country, author translation). 
There is one inscription using the word  that is possibly earlier. One of two bronze votive 
tablets from Eburacum is dedicated by a Demetrius to []    . the household 
gods of the governors residence [E. C. Clark, The Romano-Greek Inscriptions in England, Archaeological 
Journal 42 (1885): 424-34 (426)]. The dating of this tablet in the reign of Domitian is dependent on the 
identification of this Demetrius with the Demetrius who participates in Plutarchs discussion on The 
Obsolescence of Oracles. C. W. King, who made the connection in 1882, recognizes that the sole grounds for 
identification are the names of the two persons, their personal characters, their employment under the same 
government, and the coincidence of the time of their visit to Britain [The Votive Tablets of the Scriba 
Demetrius at York, Archaeological Journal 39 (1882): 23-37 (37)]. And although he finds himself convinced 
by the data, he also admits the irresistible temptation to magnify mere trifles, favourable to ones cause, and 
to tempt the mind to soar above the regions of dull fact upon the wings of fancy (37). In any case, whether it 
is early or not, the evidence of in der zwar griechisch geschriebenen, aber rmisch gedachten Weihung an die 
Gtter des Praetoriums Demetrius, this use of  supports its categorization as a word borrowed from 
Latin for its Roman specificity [H. Dessau, Ein Freund Plutarchs in England, Hermes 46 (1911): 156-160 
(159)]. This is somewhat pace Clark who says [a] Greek was obviously the author, but there is no necessary 
paradox in a Greek thinking in Latin (Romano-Greek, 426). Although inscriptions from Ephesus are 
sometimes cited for the use of the word in that city, e.g., Thiessen, these are dated to the third (IEph 3.737) and 
the fifth century CE (IEph 4.1345, dated according to the mention of the Prefect Arcadius) [Christen in 
Ephesus: die historische und theologische Situation in vorpaulinischer und paulinischer Zeit und zur Zeit der 
Apostelgeschichte und der Pastoralbriefe, ed. Klaus Berger et al., Texte und Arbeiten zum Neutestamentlichen 
Zeitalter 12 (Tbingen: Francke, 1995), 119 n. 170].  
147 The word also appears in Matt 27:27; Acts 23:35 and Phil 1:13. On the Philippians reference, see 
footnote 145 above. Whether the use of  in Matt 27:27 occurred through contact with Mark or 
independently will not be debated in this thesis. Luke does not use the term in his account of the trial, but does 
when he describes Pauls trial in Caesarea [Craig S. Keener, Acts: An Exegetical Commentary, vol. Volume 3: 
15:123:35 (Grand Rapids: Baker, 2014), 3346]. Both cases constitute, then, two more of the few known 
instances of the word used for the building earlier than the Fourth Gospel. 
148 Joel Marcus recognizes that in the present texts the words are used synonymously, but suggests 
that originally  was in the genitive, specifying where the courtyard was and therefore translates: 
into the courtyardthat is, of the praetorium [Mark 8-16: A New Translation with Introduction and 
Commentary, ed. John J. Collins, AB 27A (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2009), 1038-39, see also 31-
32]. The variations in the manuscript evidence also seem to point towards a code-switch with Greek endings 
not yet well integrated. On this, see Section 2.2.2, although as noted above Greek tended to integrate borrowed 
words quickly. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
 to denote a mobile praetorium on a campaign (J.W. 3.5.2 82), and he simply 
refers to the Antonia Fortress as   (J.W. 5.5.8 238-47).149 Like referring to a town 
square using the word /piazza/, the cultural unit of  probably included not just a 
reference to a location, but to a particular cultural use of that location. 
Besides  (John 18:28, 33; 19:9), the Greek of the Gospel of John includes 
other words with Latin etymologies:  (11:44, 20:7),  (13:4-5),  
(2:15),  (19:12, 15),  (19:19-20) and  (12:3; 19:39; this word will be 
discussed separately below).150 One more Greek word borrowed from Latin is  (John 
6:7; 12:5; Latin dnrus). It is used in all three of the Gospels as well as Revelation, but 
since BDAG takes this back to the second century BCE, it can be considered to have been 
thoroughly assimilated into Greek by the time of the final editing of Johns Gospel.151 As a 
transliteration for Caesar,  goes back at least to Philo (e.g., Embassy 145). Both of 
these words, a  with its Roman images and  with its imperial referent, could 
be used for their Roman specificity, but their etymology will not be further considered.  
149 The Antonia Fortress has been suggested as the referent for the  in John 18:2819:22 
(see above, n. 144). 
150 To this list, Lamb adds  (2:8-9), noting that we have no prior documentary evidence 
of these new words with the exception of  (Text, 142).  is particularly helpful as an 
example of the way Latin-Greek borrowing could be bi-directional. The prefix is Greek, and the stem, 
trclnium, at first glance seems to be Latin, but further research reveals that it is, in fact, borrowed from Greek, 
but used much more often in Latin. Menander uses it 4 times. Polybius once (Histories 30.26.3), and it is also 
found several times each in the T. Ab. (11) and Plutarch (3). In Latin, however, it is used by Vitruvius Pollio 
26 times, and by Cicero 11 times. Pliny the Elder uses it 10 times, Pliny the Younger 11 times, Petronius 25 
times, and Suetonius 20 times. The Greek etymology is pace David Sick although his references are very 
helpful [The Architriklinos at Cana, JBL 130.3 (2011): 513-526 (515, 520-21)]. Somewhat ironically, then, 
this originally Greek word has been transmitted as a designation for a particularly Roman dining area. It is 
impossible to tell from this evidence whether  would have sounded Greek or Roman to Johns 
audience.  
 poses a problem as well. Brown (2.882) cites The Pavement, a contribution by John 
Aulay Steele who sees a contrast between Jesus and Jupiter because the tessellated tiles were likely to have 
images of Roman gods on them [Brown, John, 2.882; John Aulay Steele, The Pavement, ExpTim 34.12 
(1923): 562-63 (562-63)]. However, whether tessellated pavements discovered in England have any necessary 
connection with those mentioned in John 19:13 is quite uncertain. The term is used, furthermore, in LXX 2 
Chr 7:3 (Brown, John, 2.882), and it is also in Esth 1:6 and Song 3:10. The Latin lithostrotus is used in the 
sixth-seventh century Latin Codex Monacensis, but its etymology is Greek to Latin rather than Latin to Greek 
(lithostrtus, OLD 1139). 
151  is used in Matt 18:28; 20:2, 9-10, 13; 22:19; Mark 6:37; 12:15; 14:5; Luke 7:41; 10:35; 
20:24; John 6:7; 12:5; Rev 6:6. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
Each of the other Latin words used by John follows the regular patterns of Greek 
assimilation of Latin words and is integrated into the sentence with a Greek ending.152 
 (from praetrum) transcribes [ae] as [], [] as [], and as a neuter noun ending 
in um, or ium, it is brought into Greek as a neuter noun of the second Greek declension 
ending in .153 It has no previous attestation outside the New Testament in its use for a 
building, as noted above.154  (from sdrum) transcribes [] as [] and [] as [] 
with the same declension shift.155 It is not attested before the New Testament, either; it occurs 
twice in John (11:44; 20:7) and twice in Luke-Acts (Luke 19:20; Acts 19:12).156  
(from lintum) is likely a case of metathesis, where the [i] and the [e] have changed places.157 
 only has a few early attestations, the first in Vitae Aesopi G61.13, from the first 
152 For an earlier look at the morphological changes in Latin loanwords, on which Garca Domingo 
builds, see Meinersmann, Lateinischen, 104-119. Both supersede the brief notes by Jannaris who approaches 
the topic by first eliminating what he calls blunders, literal transcriptions, hybrid forms, and 
transliterations (by which he means translations) without criteria other than that they are obviou[s] [Latin 
Influence on Greek Orthography, Classical Review 21.3 (1907): 67-72 (68)]. 
153 Enrique Garca Domingo, Latinismos en la koin (en los documentos epigrficos desde el 212 a. 
J. C. hasta el 14 d. J. C.): Gramtica y lxico griego-latino, latino-griego (Burgos: Aldecoa, 1979), 65, 55-56, 
154 Lamb does not include  since it is previously attested, but the only previous attestations 
with the same meaning are in the other Gospels (Text, 142). Alan Millard looks at these words as well but he 
concentrates on evidence in Palestine. Especially helpful is his discussion of the Latin evidence from the Cave 
of Letters [Reading and Writing in the Time of Jesus (New York: New York University Press, 2000), 152]. 
Note, however, Louis Feldmans comments on the registers in which this did and did not occur; remarkably 
few actually entered the rabbis legal vocabulary [Jew and Gentile in the Ancient World: Attitudes and 
Interactions from Alexander to Justinian (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993), 35]. Furthermore, 
Millard omits  from his list of Latinisms unattested before the first century, although it, too, is minimally 
attested, and he omits John from the list of New Testament texts that use . Finally, he supposes that 
the presence of Latin words in the Gospels reflects the linguistic picture of Palestine in the first century AD, 
but it seems more reasonable that the language of the Gospels would reflect the languages of author, redactor(s) 
and audience (Reading, 125-31; 148-53). 
155 The [] as [] transcription was one response to the lack of /u/ in Greek. This change, in particular, 
is from the first century BCE to the first century CE (Garca Domingo, Latinismos, 58-60; 45-46; Kearsley, 
Greeks, 3). The [] to [] transcription is el procedimiento de transcripcin ms frecuente for this vowel sound 
(Garca Domingo, Latinismos, 52). 
156 Paul Trebilco, Asia, in The Book of Acts in Its Graeco-Roman Setting, ed. David W. J. Gill and 
Conrad H. Gempf (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1994), 291-362 (313). See also Meinersmann who does not find 
the word attested before CPR 1.27, dated to 190 CE (Lateinischen, 59).  
157 Garca Domingo, Latinismos, 64. Johannes Kramer instead points to the practice dass das frhere 
lateinische  durch griechisches  wiedergegeben ist [Die Papyrologie als Erkenntnisquelle fr die 
Romanistik, in Von der Papyrologie zur Romanistik, ed. Johannes Kramer, Archiv fr Papyrusforschung und 
verwandte Gebiete 30 (Berlin: De Gruyter, 2011), 27-38 (31)]. Binder suggests that  was meant and that 
 was a scribal error which war also durch den Sprachgebrauch des Evangelisten legitimiert. She is thus 
forced to regard the occurrence in Vita Aesopi as a Rtsel (G61.13, first century CE). Metathesis seems to me 
a simpler solution (Sprachkontakt, 122-23, 122 n. 11). 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
century CE, and there is also an inscription from the time of Hadrian.158  occurs 
as , transcribing flagellum with an iota added.159 The change from [] to [] is 
probably an example of anticipatory dissimilation. This occurs when, in a word such as 
, with two [l] sounds, the first [l] changes to be clearly distinct from the second.160 
With its consonant change, it is found more often in the second century CE.161 It has not yet 
become thoroughly integrated even then, however, since it occurs in line 11 of an Egyptian 
papyrus from 103-117 CE as  (P. Lond. 19).  (from ttlus) transcribes [] 
as [] and may have experienced the syncope that Garca Domingo describes as entre 
oclusiva y /l/ or may have been imported from vulgar Latin where Dieterich describes a 
Schwund  des u zwischen c-l, p-l, t-l..162 The declension shift is simply from second 
Latin to second Greek.163 As far as its usage goes, Hatch claims that the word is not 
uncommon in the Hellenistic period.164 He only refers to Hahn, who simply notes: Der 
juristischen Sprache gehrt noch das auch spter fter gebrauchte  an, without 
158 Mauro Pesce, and Adriana Destro, La lavanda dei piedi di Gv 13,1-20, il Romanzo di Esopo e i 
Saturnalia di Macrobio, Bib 80.2 (1999): 240-49 (242); Keener, John, 908 n. 109. The inscription is 
IMagnMai 116, 34, cited in , BDAG 592. Note that although BDAG lists Arrian, Peripl. 4, I have not 
been able to locate the word in that text. There is also O. Wilck. 2.1611, but its dating (1-399 CE) is too vague 
to be determinative. 
159 For example, P. Lond. 191. I have not been able to find an explanation for the addition of the iota. 
160 Karl Dieterich, Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der griechischen Sprache von der hellenistischen 
Zeit bis zum 10. Jahrhundert n. Chr, ed. Karl Krumbacher, Byzantinisches Archiv als Ergnzung der 
Byzantinischen Zeitschrift 1 (Leipzig: Teubner, 1898), 123. Binder agrees, calling this a case of 
Liquidendissimilation ohne Nasaleinschub. She also points out that the Appendix Probi from the third or 
fourth century CE includes the rule, flagellum, non fragellum, showing that this dissimulation was entering 
Latin usage as well (Sprachkontakt, 252). This is pace Otto Immisch who suggests that the change came about 
in connection with a play on words between flagellum and frangere, which, it is to be noted, would only work 
in Latin [De Glossis Lexici Hesychiani Italicis, Leipziger Studien zur classischen Philologie 8 (1885): 265-
378 (373-74)]. Hahn follows Immisch [Rom und Romanismus im griechisch-rmischen Osten: Mit besonderer 
Bercksichtigung der Sprache: Bis auf die Zeit Hadrians (Leipzig: Dietrich, 1906), 265]. 
161 , BDAG 1064; T. 12 Patr. 12.2.3; Robert Cavenaile, Quelques aspects de l'apport 
linguistique du grec au latin d'gypte, Aegyptus 32 (1952): 191-203 (196). 
162 Garca Domingo, Latinismos, 52, 63; Dieterich, Untersuchungen, 39. Agreeing with Dieterich is 
Hahn, Rom, 265. For examples of later uses, see Meinersmann, Lateinischen, 61. 
163 Garca Domingo, Latinismos, 91-92. 
164 William Henry Paine Hatch, Some Illustrations of New Testament Usage from Greek Inscriptions 
of Asia Minor, JBL 27.2 (1908): 134-146 (143). 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
including further references.165 I have not been able to locate anything earlier than the second 
century CE. 
These are all regular shifts that occurred when writing Latin words in Greek. On this 
Eleanor Dickey notes, some types of integration are standard in Greek even for Latin words 
clearly marked as foreign rather than loanwords. For example, Latin nouns and adjectives 
almost always appear in Greek not with Latin endings, but with the endings appropriate to 
the equivalent declension in Greek: -us becomes , -um becomes , -am becomes , 
etc.166 She concludes from her study that Greek seems in general to have had a very low 
tolerance for unintegrated foreign words.167 Thus, the integration of the Latin words into 
the Greek of the Gospel reveals very little about how recently the words were imported. 
More telling is the rarity of these words in other evidence from the past.168 Mullen notes that 
the distribution of the item in the extant literature may give an idea of whether it had 
generally been accepted into the recipient language (borrowing), or whether its attestation 
was ad hoc (code-switching or interference).169  
The rarity of these words in ancient texts is mirrored, for the most part, in the New 
Testament canon, and none is used in the LXX. Three of these words,  , , 
and  are only found in John. Nevertheless, comparisons can be instructive.170 
Although  is used in John only for a grave-cloth placed over the face, Luke uses 
the same word to describe a small cloth carrying coins (Luke 19:20) and cloths that, having 
165 Hahn, Rom, 122. 
166 Eleanor Dickey, Latin Loanwords in Greek: A Preliminary Analysis, in Variation and Change in 
Greek and Latin, ed. Martti Leiwo, Hilla Halla-aho, and Marja Vierros, Papers and Monographs of the Finnish 
Institute at Athens 17 (Helsinki: Suomen Ateenan-Instituutin sti, 2012), 57-70 (61).  
167 Dickey, Loanwords, 61 n. 20. 
168 This discussion necessarily builds on the proposed date of the Gospel, taken to be the late first or 
early second century CE. See Section 7.2.3. 
169 Mullen, Introduction, 20. Furthermore, Chantraine did not include , ,  
or  in his Dictionnaire, and he lists nothing earlier that what I have found for  or 
 (, DELG 1224; , DELG 1122). 
170 Analysis and claims of equivalency in the following two paragraphs are based on entries in L&N.  
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
touched Paul, then brought about healings (Acts 19:12).171 While the  is small and 
used on the face, the  is for drying. Only John tells the footwashing episode, so it 
makes sense that he alone uses , but John is also the only one to use , since 
Mark and Luke use the Greek equivalent,  (Mark 15:26; Luke 23:38), and Matthew 
does not name the board that the  is written on (Matt 27:37). In all of these cases, John 
uses more Latin words for items also mentioned in other Gospels. However, the evidence 
does not all point in one direction. Although the whip that Jesus makes to clear the temple 
is a  (flagellum, a hapax legomenon, John 2:15), when it comes to the flogging 
ordered by Pilate, John describes it using the verb , whereas it is Matthew and Mark 
who use the equivalent verb borrowed from Latin,  (Matt 27:26; Mark 15:15).172 
I shall suggest in Chapter 6 that John is minimizing the focus on the whipping in general and 
the Roman element of the whipping in particular, because it is the  of the soldiers that 
he wants to highlight.173 
Out of the six Latin loanwords under examination, then, in two cases, that of  
and , John uses a Latin loanword where another word was available 
( and ). In one case () John does the reverse and uses a Greek word 
where he seems to have known at least a variation of the Latin one, based on his use of 
 in John 2:15. In the case of  there does not seem to be another word 
(besides ) used for small cloths from the first century CE onwards.174 Furthermore, 
171 There is also  for the large sheet in Acts 10:11 and 11:5. 
172 Both Gospel authors knew , using it in Matt 10:27; 20:19; 23:34; Mark 10:34. On the way 
Mark uses Latinisms in the trial scene, see Lochlan Shelfer, The Legal Precision of the Term 
'Parakltos', JSNT 32, no. 2 (2009): 131-150 (135 n. 19); Brown, Death, 1.850. Although these focus on the 
physical blows, Luke uses  (Luke 23:16, 22) a verb that references a punishment for the purpose of 
improved behavior (; , , L&N 489). There is no whip in the other Gospel accounts of the 
temple event. 
173 Section 7.2.2. 
174 Although neither is attested earlier than the New Testament texts, afterwards they are used much 
more frequently than their nearest equivalents,  and . Another possible synonym is ; 
it is used much more frequently, but it has multiple meanings (, LSJ 513).  
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
these words all come from the domains discussed above: ,  and  
from the intersection of army and legal domains as the soldiers enforced legal decisions, and 
 and  from commerce or simply as items familiar to retainers in Roman 
households.175 They likely came into Koine Greek from the intersections discussed in the 
first half of this chapter. Furthermore, since they are poorly attested earlier than the second 
century CE, they likely carry Roman specificity in their use in the Fourth Gospel. I shall 
include all five of these words among the Latinisms that I posit in John. 
3.2.2. Syntactical Latinisms 
The Gospel of John offers many examples of Greek syntax that have been connected 
with Latin influence. I want to present seven such cases in this section: one article omission, 
two case changes, filiation formulas, periphrastic verbs,  clauses, and a unit of measure. 
Only the first seems to me to have a clear enough connection to Latin to argue for it as a 
Haftpunkt. 
The omission of articles is difficult to discuss because Greek does not require an 
article for every noun. I only want to bring attention to one specific example that can be 
connected to the possibility of Latin influence. In John 19:7, the Jews point out that Jesus 
has made himself, in the usual translation, the Son of God.176 Yet the Greek phrase has no 
articles:  . It is true that the phrase is used in this sentence as the complement in an 
object-complement construction, and such a complement is often marked by the lack of an 
175 Note that  in John 18:28 is sometimes assumed to have a Roman referent (Brown, John, 844; 
Barrett, Gospel, 531). This may be the case, but the word would only acquire that interpretant from abduction 
using a Roman encyclopaedia, since it is used throughout the LXX without a Roman cultural unit. Thus, it is 
not listed in this chapter among the Haftpunkte for the use of a Roman encyclopaedia in John 18:2819:22. 
176 For a nuanced discussion of the absence of articles as Latinisms, see Adams, Bilingualism and 
Latin, 516. See also Moule who, although he does not mention this verse, points to a Greek version of a Roman 
history where there is an instance of omission of articles due to Latin influence [An Idiom-Book of New 
Testament Greek, 2nd ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1959), 177, emphasis original; citing 
Ludwig Radermacher, Neutestamentliche Grammatik: Das Griechisch des Neuen Testaments im 
Zusammenhang mit der Volkssprache, 2nd ed. (Tbingen: Mohr, 1925), 16-17]. Radermacher points back to 
Meuweses discussion of articles where in twelve out of twenty cases the Greek of the Res Gestae omits all 
articles in translating the Latin [De rerum gestarum divi Augusti versione Graeca (PhD thesis, Amsterdam, 
1920), 39-42]. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
article.177 However, this lack cannot be attributed solely to that construction for two reasons. 
First, [i]f one of the two is a pronoun, it will be the object, and here the object is .178 
Therefore the lack of article is not required to designate   as the complement. 
Furthermore, the text might read      , and the lack of an article 
for  would be sufficient to mark    as the complement. In John 10:36, for 
example, where (as in 19:7) there is no confusion between subject and predicate,  
nevertheless lacks the article likely because of the phrases function as a predicate, yet  
retains its genitive article.179 The cultural unit of   will be discussed in Chapter 4, but 
the lack of both articles provides an example of a construction common in Greek influenced 
by the lack of articles in the Latin language.180 This instance seems particularly relevant as 
a Latin-influenced omission since the phrase itself has a Roman cultural unit. It is not 
certainly a Latinism, because in John 1:23; 12:13, 38, , another word with a Roman 
cultural unit among its possible meanings, is used without an article.181 Yet in all three 
instances, the Roman cultural unit is not blown up, since the Gospel is citing the Septuagint 
which also has no article (Isa 40:3; LXX Ps 117:26; Isa 53:1). My argument in Chapter 6, 
however, will be that the Roman context of 19:7 along with the lack of articles blows up the 
Roman cultural unit of this phrase. 
Case uses different from that usual in Greek also occur in the Fourth Gospel. 
Normally, Greek uses accusative for duration of time (John 5:6; 7:33; 12:35), but it 
177 Daniel B. Wallace, Greek Grammar Beyond the Basics: An Exegetical Syntax of the New Testament 
(Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1996), 182-89. See, e.g., John 4:46; 5:11; 5:18; 15:15. 
178 Wallace, Greek, 184. 
179 Marianne Meye Thompson, for example, translates the phrase as I am the Son of God, despite 
the anarthrous  [John: A Commentary, ed. C. Clifton Black, M. Eugene Boring, and John T. Carroll, NTL 
(Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2015), 230]. Robinson argues for Latin influence in the     
of 10:36, but there the phrase has one article so that instance will not be taken as a Latinism in this thesis [His 
Witness Is True; a Test of the Johannine Claim, in Jesus and the Politics of His Day, ed. Ernst Bammel and 
C. F. D. Moule (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984), 453-76 (473 n. 67)]. 
180 See n. 176. 
181 , BDAG 578, 2b. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
sometimes, as in John 14:9 borrowed the dative in imitation of the Latin ablative.182 Ward 
notes that the dative of duration has also been identified as an Aramaicism, citing articles 
by Jean Bernardi and Jordi Redondo.183 Yet Redondo merely references Bernardi, and 
Bernardi claims only that this construction pourrait correspondre  lemploi de la 
prformante l- en hbreu.184 Furthermore, although Bernardi finds this construction in 
Josephus (J.W. 5.9.4 389, 397), he supposes that it comes from Hebrew influence based on 
three LXX attestations: Dan 9:2; 3 Kgdms 3:1; 7:1. Yet the first-time reference in Dan 9:2 
is not to duration (  ) and the second in the same verse, while expressing 
duration, is in the accusative case ( ). The reference to 3 Kgdms 3:1 seems 
to be in error; perhaps 1 Kgdms 3:1; 2 Kgdms 3:1 or 4 Kgdms 3:1 is meant.185 However, in 
the first two, the expressions of time use prepositions and, in the last, the duration of time is 
in the accusative case. 3 Kgdms 7:1 (or better because of an inversion of verses in the LXX, 
3 Kgdms 7:38) does have a reference to time expressed in the dative:  . 
This phrase is better understood as limitative, however.186  
Coulter George lists instead 2 Chr 7:8; Isa 48:7 and 3 Macc 6:38 as possible examples 
of the dative used for duration.187 However none of these corresponds to a Hebrew  as 
Bernardis proposal would require. In the first example, there is no lamed. In the second, the 
lamed is part of a longer prepositional expression (   ) and the phrase could, in any 
case, be taken as limitative. And 3 Maccabees does not have a Hebrew Vorlage. These points 
do not completely preclude Hebrew influence on this construction, since the MT does not 
182 Adams, Bilingualism and Latin, 80, 506-508. See also a brief mention in BDR, 201.  
183 J. S. Ward, Roman Greek: Latinisms in the Greek of Flavius Josephus, ClQ 57.2 (2007): 632-
649 (641-42; the n. 11 in both references seems to be a typo). 
184 Jordi Redondo, The Greek Literary Language of the Hebrew Historian Josephus, Hermes 128.4 
(2000): 420-34 (431); Jean Bernardi, De quelques smitismes de Flavius Josphe, REG 100 (1987): 18-29 
(26, emphasis mine). 
185 Thanks to Olivier Munnich for help with these references. 
186 Coulter H. George, Expressions of Time in Ancient Greek, ed. R. L. Hunter et al., Cambridge 
Classical Studies (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014), 260. 
187 George, Expressions, 260. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
necessarily reflect the text behind the LXX and 3 Maccabees could be influenced by Hebrew 
even without an early Hebrew edition.188 Still, the dative had begun to be used more 
generally in Greek for durationit is not present in Thucydides or Xenophon (fifth-fourth 
century BCE), but appears occasionally in Epictetus (early second century CE).189 
Furthermore, this structure also appears elsewhere in the New Testament: Luke 1:74-75; 
Acts 8:11; and some manuscripts of Luke 8:27.190 Thus, it is better to take this simply as a 
development of the Greek language possibly under Latin influence. In the example under 
review, John 14:9, manuscript evidence is uneven, and quite a few early witnesses, even 
early papyri such as 66and 75, have the phrase in the accusative. Although both UBS5 and 
NA28 take the dative as their primary reading, possibly because it is the more difficult one, 
the influence of later Latin speakers may have altered the text in transmission instead of 
Latin having affected its initial composition.191 Therefore, no firm conclusion can be drawn 
about the reason for the dative of time in this verse. 
Another case switch occurs in John 13:13 and 19:3, which use the nominative where 
vocative would be expected. These exemplars have been explained in a variety of ways. J. 
H. Moule claimed that, with the article, the use of the nominative signalled 
descriptiveness.192 He translated 19:5 as Hail, you King, and suggested that Marks use 
of the vocative (15:18) is merely a note of the writers imperfect sensibility to the more 
delicate shades of Greek idiom.193  
188 George, Expressions, 263-64 and nn. 46-47; T. M. Law, When God Spoke Greek: The Septuagint 
and the Making of the Christian Bible (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), e.g., 20, 66-67. 
189 George, Expressions, 78, 154, 228. 
190 George, Expressions, 264-65, 269-70. 
191 George, Expressions, 269-70. 
192 James Hope Moule, A Grammar of New Testament Greek, 3rd ed., vol. 1: Prolegomena 
(Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 1908), 70. 
193 Moule, Grammar, 70-71. Barnabas Lindars follows him, translating instead: the so-called King 
[The Gospel of John, ed. Matthew Black, NCB Commentary (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1972), 565]. Robertson 
calls this overrefinement, a favourite term by the way [A Grammar of the Greek New Testament in the Light 
of Historical Research, 3rd ed. (London: Hodder & Stoughton, 1919), 465, but see also 531, 579, 754, 768, 
806, 835, 937, 1042, 1127, 1140, 1151, 1204]. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
Blass, Debrunner, and Rehkopf suggest that the construction arises in the New 
Testament and the LXX when sie den determinierten semit. Vok. durch den Nom. mit 
Artikel wiedergeben.194 J. Svennung, like BDR, more carefully examines the LXX and 
concludes that the use of the nominative (with an article) for the vocative in LXX Greek is 
eine natrliche Erscheinung due to the influence of the Hebrew text.195 Of the examples 
offered, Joel 1:13 and Ps 5:3 are especially instructive. In Joel, the LXX has   
,  , ,  , two nominatives for vocatives, both with 
articles. The Hebrew, however, is 
        
In this verse,  has an article, but the participle  does not. Thus, this one verse 
demonstrates the use of articles in the Greek nominatives with and without articles in the 
Hebrew. LXX Ps 5:3 is another example of the use of an article in a Greek nominative where 
one might expect a vocative without an article because of the Hebrew. I note it because, 
unlike the previous examples but like John 19:3, it is in the singular:      
 . The Septuagint uses nominative for vocative, then, with or without an article in 
Hebrew. 
Although Svenning proposes that nominative for vocative in the LXX is a Semitism, 
in the New Testament he prefers the explanation that the nominative is appositive, zum im 
Verbum liegenden Subjekt der 2. Personen.196 Yet perhaps no explanation from another 
language is needed at all. In Greek poetry, the vocative was used for the nominative in 
194 BDR, 147 (2). See also BDR, 143; J. B. Hofmann, and Anton Szantyr, Lateinische Syntax und 
Stilistik, ed. Iwan Mller, Walter Otto, and Hermann Bengtson, 2nd ed., Handbuch der Altertumswissenschaft 
2.2.2 (Munich: Beck, 1972),  39; Eleanor Dickey, Forms of Address and Markers of Status, in A Companion 
to the Ancient Greek Language, ed. Egbert J. Bakker, Blackwell Companions to the Ancient World (Malden, 
MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010), 327-37 (333-34).  
195 J. Svennung, Anredeformen: Vergleichende Forschungen zur indirekten Anrede in der dritten 
Person und zum Nominativ fr den Vokativ, Acta Societatis Litterarum Humaniorum Regiae Upsaliensis 42 
(Uppsala: Almqvist & Wiksell, 1958), 224. 
196 Svennung, Anredeformen, 225. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
imitation of Homer and in Latin poetry, [d]ie griechischen Vorbilder sind klar.197 Calboli 
looks at Greek influence on Latin and says that the use of the nominative instead of the 
vocative is a Graecism, basing this conclusion on the 1895 work of Joseph Brenous.198 
This, however, is a misreading of Brenous who argues that this is a Latin construction.199 
Indeed, in Greek, the vocative in  never disappeared, whereas in Latin colloquial speech 
of the time of the Emperors the vocative in e shows signs of disappearing and of being 
replaced by the nominative.200  
Rather than being a Semitism, the use of the nominative for the vocative could be 
another Latinism. However, influence from the Septuagint with or without articles in the 
Hebrew provides the most obvious explanation.201 Since the phrase is in the vocative in 
Matthew and Mark (Matt 27:29; Mark 15:18), John was either following a different tradition 
or under one of the above-mentioned influences that required the change. And since 66 has 
 it seems evident that the use was in flux.202 Although the supposition that it was 
used in 19:3 to heighten the mock Roman solemnity is quite tempting, the possible influences 
are too varied to draw such a conclusion. The nominatives in 13:13 and 19:3 will not be 
highlighted as Latinisms in my analysis. 
Another example of the way Greek was influenced by Latin occurs in filiation 
formulas. Greek inscriptions in Ephesus used  in imitation of the Latin filius, and this 
197 Svennung, Anredeformen, 463, 267; see also 464. For examples in Latin, see Vergil, Aen. 8.77; 
10.325. 
198 Gualtiero Calboli, Latin Syntax and Greek, in New Perspectives on Historical Latin Syntax, ed. 
Philip Baldi and Pierluigi Cuzzolin (Berlin: de Gruyter, 2009), 65-193 (77-78). 
199 Joseph Brenous, tude sur les hellnismes dans la syntaxe latine (Paris: Klincksieck, 1895), 83-
89, esp. 84, 89. 
200 Svennung, Anredeformen, 463-64. (This quote is from the English summary at the end of the book.) 
201 Maarten J. J. Menken, Old Testament Quotations in the Fourth Gospel: Studies in Textual Form, 
ed. Tj. Baarda, A. van der Kooij, and A. S. van der Woude, CBET 15 (Kampen: Kok Pharos, 1996), 14-18. 
202 Barrett, Gospel, 540. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
filiation occurs in Johns Gospel. The difficulty, however, is that this is at least as likely to 
occur from Hebrew influence (especially through LXX Greek) as from Latin.203  
Two further constructions in Greek that were growing in frequency during the koine 
period may have been influenced by Latin. Periphrastic verb forms are more prevalent in the 
Fourth Gospel and in Luke than in Matthew and Mark, and while these forms cannot 
unilaterally be attributed to contact with Latin, that contact seems to have been one of the 
impetuses for their spread.204  
Also, the use of  or  clauses rather than the infinitive, more common in John 
than elsewhere in the New Testament, may be linked to Latin influence.205 Although they 
have sometimes been classified as mistranslations from Aramaic, these constructions were 
a historical development of Koine Greek.206 Caragounis asserts that this was not as a result 
of foreign influence, but that leaves the discrepancy between the usages in the New 
Testament corpus unexplained.207 While a detailed analysis of which subordinate clauses 
might more classically be expressed with infinitives will not be attempted, a simple count 
shows the preference of John for these conjunctions (Figures 14 and 15).208  
203 Luke 3:23-38 exemplifies the usual Greek construction, e.g.,       . 
Hebrew, e.g., in Zech 1:7 is     ;Yet John has seven Greek forms (6:71; 13:2, 26; 21:2 . 
21:15-17) plus three that use  and thus are are either influenced by Hebrew, Latin, or the pressure of both 
(1:42, 45; 6:42). 
204 Brixhe, Greek, 906; Horrocks, Greek, 176-78; Garca Domingo, Latinismos, 252-53, 256-58. 
Note that this kind of change would have been resisted in lite registers. (Thanks to Colin Cousino for this 
comment.) The specific references for periphrastic verb forms are as follows. Mark: 1:6, 33; 6:52; 15:7, 26 and 
3:1; 8:17. Matt: 9:36; 10:26, 30; 16:19; 18:18, 20; 26:43. Luke: 1:7; 2:26; 4:16, 17; 5:1, 17, 18; 6:40; 8:2; 9:32, 
45; 12:2, 6, 35, 52; 14:8; 15:24; 18:34; 20:6; 23:15, 51, 55; 24:38 and 13:6; 14:18, 19. John: 1:24; 2:17; 3:21, 
24, 27, 28; 6:31, 45, 65; 10:34; 12:14, 16; 13:5; 16:24; 17:19, 23; 18:18, 25; 19:11, 19, 20, 41; 20:30 and 17:13. 
These verb forms are also found regularly in the LXX, which might account, with the changes in Koine Greek, 
for all of these instances. Yet their special frequency in Luke and John allows for the possibility that contact 
with Latin increased their use. 
205 BDR,  388.2.  
206 For Aramaic influence, see, e.g., Barrett, Gospel, 9. For an argument against Aramaic influence, 
see Casey, True?, 89-90. For historical development, see Chrys C. Caragounis, The Development of Greek and 
the New Testament: Morphology, Syntax, Phonology, and Textual Transmission (Grand Rapids: Baker 
Academic, 2006), 116. 
207 Caragounis, Development, 116 n. 92. 
208 Exported from Logos Bible Software, 4:37 PM March 20, 2014. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
Figure 14:  in the Gospels 
Figure 15:  in the Gospels 
However, since the connection to Latin influence cannot be established with any degree of 
probability, these subordinate constructions will not be included among my proposed 
Latinisms. 
Greek also sometimes borrowed the Romans dating practices.209 While there are no 
certain examples of this in John (where dating references are debated), the use of  (12:3; 
19:39) might be an example of the adoption not of Roman dating but measuring units.210 
However, Koine Greek was adopting foreign elements to adapt to the necessities of its 
speakers, as all languages do, so not all borrowed words are necessarily significant.211 The 
use of , for example, predates the first century CE.212 And while John is the only Gospel 
to use , the lexicon of units of measure across the New Testament shows a variety of 
intersecting practices (Figure 16).213 Thus, while the Fourth Gospel does use a word for a 
209 Brixhe, Greek, 907. 
210 On the Jewish feasts, see, e.g., Lincoln, Gospel, 8-9. Johns references to hours (tenth, 1:39; sixth, 
4:6; seventh 4:52; sixth, 19:14) are too disputed to be used as evidence (e.g., Keener, John, 1.591). Pliny the 
Elders comment is cited to support both positions: The actual period of a day has been differently kept by 
different people: the Babylonians count the period between two sunrises, the Athenians that between two 
sunsets, the Umbrians from midday to midday, the common people everywhere from dawn to dark, the Roman 
priests and the authorities who fixed the official day, and also the Egyptians and Hipparchus, the period from 
midnight to midnight (Pliny the Elder, Nat. 2.79). I might incline towards a Roman reckoning, but that would 
only be on the basis of the other Haftpunkte listed in this chapter. Therefore, the references cannot be used as 
Haftpunkte themselves. For Roman reckoning, see Culpepper, Anatomy, 219. For Jewish, see, e.g., Keener, 
John, 1.591-92.  
211 On the congruence of NT Greek with Koine Greek in general, see James W. Voelz, The Greek of 
the New Testament: Its Place within the Context of Hellenistic Greek, in Greek: A Language in Evolution: 
Essays in Honour of Antonios N. Jannaris, ed. Chrys C. Caragounis (Hildesheim: Olms, 2010), 177-195. 
212 , BDAG 597. 
213 Etymology is taken from corresponding entries in BDAG and DELG. Note that for , BDAG 
references a 4th-3rd BCE use (Dinarchus, Against Demonsthenes 43) with a footnote mentioning Gibbon 
(, BDAG 656). This refers to Edward Gibbon, The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman 
Empire, ed. David Womerlsey, vol. 2 (London: Penguin, 1995), 625 n. 10. There Gibbon offers a correction to 
a translation of Dinarchus who does not actually use  but instead . This reference can thus be 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
Latin unit of measurement, it does not seem particularly distinctive either as a clearly Roman 
word or as a unique practice, when it is compared with the provenance of the terms for 
measures in the New Testament.214 All the Gospel authors used Roman measures and 
Matthew and Luke used words derived from Hebrew as well as Latin. This is most likely to 
reflect the movement of people groups around the Mediterranean area but not Latin/Roman 
influence in particular. 
 Matt Mark Luke-Acts John 1 Cor Rev 
Hebrew    
  ,
Greek , 
 
 , 
, 
 
, 
, 
 
 
, 
, 
,  
 
Latin modius, 
mille  
modius, 
sextarius? 
modius  
libra 
Figure 16: Measurements in the NT According to Language Origin 
Although the evidence assembled in the category of syntactical Latinisms is more 
possible than certain, there are examples in the Gospel of John of the omission of articles, 
case changes,  and  clauses, and even one example of a unit of measurement that 
originated with the Romans. Yet only the phrase   in 19:7 has a strong enough basis 
in Latin to posit any rhetorical effect such as a Haftpunkt would require. The evidence is 
stronger, however, in the category of calques and language shift.  
ignored,  being a perfectly respectable Greek word going back to Herodotus in the fifth century BCE 
(, LSJ 1089). See discussion in F. P. Lock, The Rhetoric of Numbers in Gibbon's History (Newark: 
University of Delaware Press, 2012), 107.  
214 References for the words in the table:  (; Matt 13:33; Luke 13:21),  ( ; Luke 16:7), 
 (; Luke 16:6),  (Matt 6:27; Luke 12:25; John 21:8; Rev 21:17),  (Matt 14:24; Luke 24:13; 
John 6:10; 11:18; 1 Cor 9:24; Rev 14:20; 21:16),  (Acts 27:28),  (John 2:6),  (Rev 
16:21),  (Rev 6:6),  (modius; Matt 5:15; Mark 4:21; Luke 11:33),  (mille; Matt 5:41),  
(sextarius; Mark 7:4),  (libra; John 12:3; 19:39). 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
3.2.3. Calques and language shift 
Somewhat similar to code-switches, calques and language shift are also among the 
characteristics of translated Greek that Brixhe discusses.215 Again, these elements find 
expression in Johns text. Language shift can be illustrated by  (18:3, 12). This Greek 
word was used as early as Homer, in Odyssey 4.245, for a garment wound around the 
shoulders. Yet by the time of the New Testament its principal meaning was for a Latin cohors 
or sometimes a manipulus.216 In the same way  (John 18:12), attested in Greek since 
the fifth century BCE, became the designation for a Roman tribunus militum.217 Shelfer, 
furthermore, has argued that  (John 14:16, 26: 15:26; 16:7) should be understood 
as a calque of advocatus, and when taken as part of the legal language that permeates John, 
this seems likely.218 Indeed, many of Johns most frequently used word groups, such as 
 and  (47 times),  and  (30 times), and - words (55 times) 
may have multiple meanings, but one area of commonality: the legal domain.219 
Furthermore, a couple of specifically legal words are used occasionally:  (3 times, 
including once in John 8:6),  (3 times).220 Several other perhaps less obvious words 
215 Brixhe, Greek, 907-909. 
216 , LSJ 1625; , BDAG 936. 
217 , BDAG 1084. Pace, e.g., Blinzler who argues against these terms as references to 
Romans in the Gospel of John [The Trial of Jesus: The Jewish and Roman Proceedings against Jesus Christ 
Described and Assessed from the Oldest Accounts, trans. Isabel and Florence McHugh (Westminster, MD: 
Newman, 1959), 63-70]. 
218 Shelfer, Parakltos. For a different explanation that connects the Latin word advocatus with the 
Jewish Scriptures, see Lincoln, Gospel, 393-94. 
219 For other connections between the Gospel of John and the legal domain, see, for example, Beth M. 
Sheppard, The Gospel of John: A Roman Legal and Rhetorical Perspective (PhD thesis, University of 
Sheffield, 1999), 200-204; George L. Parsenios, Rhetoric and Drama in the Johannine Lawsuit Motif, WUNT 
1.258 (Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2010), 34, 39, 87-128. Parsenioss argument that , too, functions in such 
a capacity is strengthened abductively when it is connected with quaerere, whose usages include [t]o hold a 
judicial inquiry into, to hear a criminal charge or civil claim in a court of law and to examine (a person) by 
questioning (quaerere, OLD 1533, meaning 10; Parsenios, Rhetoric, 42-43, 49-86). However, although 
 is a Greek word that predates Latin influence, its legal meaning is not attested in BDAG before the 
second century CE with the exception of Xenophon, Cyr. 8.5.13. The sentence is    ,  
,       and so if Cyrus wanted one of his officers, they did not 
have to search for him but would run to him by the shortest waynot a legal use at all (Millar, LCL). Further 
research is necessary for a more definitive conclusion. 
220 Note that Parsenios mistakenly lists  at Rhetoric, 34. See, BDAG 533 
and, BDAG 315. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
could be added to the list as well. A  (19:19-20) displayed a condemned mans crime 
(Suetonius, Cal. 32.2).221 John frequently uses  in the sense of trusting (or not 
trusting) the witness or words of a person (John 1:7; 2:22; 3;12; 4:21, 39, 41, 42, 50, 53; 
5:24, 46-47; 8:30, 45-46; 10:25; 11:42; 12:38; 14:10; 17:8, 20; 19:35; 20:31) or trusting (or 
not trusting) because of a sign (1:50; 2:11, 23; 3:15; 6:30; 7:31; 10:37-38; 11:45, 48; 12:11, 
37; 14:11; 20:8, 25, 29). A sign () also in combination with others  is taken as a 
piece of evidence (Quintilian, Inst. 5.9.9-11).222 It has also been argued that   
 (John 6:31; 12:14) comes from the legal domain.223 Thus, John does not only 
borrow Latin words, but his Greek vocabulary, too, overlaps with a domain in which Latin 
was used. 
The expression in John 19:18,   , is sometimes called a Semitism 
and compared to Num 22:24.224 However, it does not quite match the Hebrew Bible nor the 
LXX, which both repeat the noun twice along with the adverb (   
 ).225 Yet Vergil uses hinc atque hinc throughout the Aeneid to mean on 
each side (1.162; 1.500; 4.447; 8.387; 9.380; 12.431).226 The expression seems uncommon 
in Greek. The earliest use appears to go back only to Alexander of Aphrodisias (Comm. 
Metaph. 26; De an. 38) in ca. 200 CE. I suggest then that    is a calque 
of hinc atque hinc.227 
221 For the connection between titulus and , see Section 3.2.1. 
222 Sheppard, Gospel of John, 120-21; A. E. Harvey, Jesus on Trial: A Study in the Fourth Gospel 
(London: SPCK, 1976), 95-100. For a discussion of the difference that Quintilian describes between  
and , see Sheppard, Gospel of John, 73-75. See also Aristotle, Rhet. 1.2.14-17.  
223 Brock, Aspects, 72. Brock argues that by the 2nd century BCE, Jews had begun to view Scripture 
as a legal rather than a literary document, and therefore quoted it as such. See, e.g., 2 Esdras 6:2; 16:6. 
224 , BDAG 339. 
225 Num 22:24; see also Exod 17:12; Num 11:31; Josh 8:22; 2 Kgdms 2:13. 
226 See also Martial, Epigrams 4.14; 7.95; 10.83 who uses hinc et hinc to mean hither and thither or 
here and yon (Shackleton Bailey, LCL). 
227 Other examples of Latinisms in John are possible but will not be argued in this thesis. For example, 
Keener connects   in John 1:13 to the Latin quo sanguine (404) and Mihescu suggests that  
      in John 14:27 could come from a military context (Non vos turbatis) 
[Keener, John, 404; Haralambie Mihescu, Les termes de commandement militaires latins dans le Strategicon 
de Maurice, Revue Roumaine de Linguistique 14.3 (1969): 261-72 (270)]. This last, however, seems like a 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
Mark is generally described as the most Latin of the canonical Gospels.228 Yet 
Marks ten words with Latin etymologies are used a total of thirteen times, whereas John 
uses his seven words fifteen times (or five words eleven times, when the list is restricted to 
those taken to be code-switches). In either case, Johns usage warrants attention. 
Furthermore, in the Gospel of Mark, the words and phrases most likely to be connected to 
the Roman encyclopaedia, as well as words referencing Romans and Pilate, are clustered in 
several smaller passages (Figure 17).229 When highlighted in the Greek text and reduced in 
size so that the whole Gospel can be seen at a glance, they are grouped mainly in three 
passages addressing Roman topics: paying taxes to Caesar (Mark 12:13-17), Jesus before 
Pilate (15:1-18), and the request for Jesus body (15:43-45). 
case of parallelomaniaone could add innumerable situations in which a leader would urge his or her 
followers not to be afraid and none would have any necessary connection with the Gospel of John [Samuel 
Sandmel, Parallelomania, JBL 81.1 (1962): 1-13].  
The Sea of Galilee, too, is specified to be the Sea of Tiberias (John 6:1) and later simply called by the 
name of the Roman Emperor alone (John 21:1). This is in contrast to the other gospels that either simply 
mention the sea () or call it the Sea of Galilee. However, although there is a Roman connection there 
it seems hard to see a purpose in it.  
Another possible grammatical Latinism is the position of  in 21:8b [Edwin A. Abbott, Johannine 
Grammar (London: Black, 1906), 227]. 
228 For arguments (pro and con) about whether Mark was written in Rome or not, see Marcus, Mark 
8-16, 30-37. 
229 Latinisms in Mark are discussed in William L. Lane, The Gospel According to Mark: The English 
Text with Introduction, Exposition, and Notes, ed. Gordon D. Fee, NICNT (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1974), 
24-25, 184, 243, 246, 422; Robert H. Gundry, Mark: A Commentary on His Apology for the Cross (Grand 
Rapids: Eerdmans, 1993), 1044. Included in the image, in order of occurrence, are   (2:23);  
(3:6; 12:13);   (3:6);  (4:21);  (5:9, 15);  (6:27);  (6:37; 
12:15; 14:5);    (6:48);  (7:4);  (12:14);  (12:14, 16, 17);  
(12:42);    (14:65);    (15:15);  (15:15);  (15:16); 
   (15:19);  (15:39, 44, 45). Even though Lane correctly points out that  was 
not newly borrowed from Latin, I include it because of its specificity (184). Possible Latinisms not included 
are references to time less clearly Roman than in 6:48 (13.35; 14.17, 41, 72; 15.1);  (7.3, see , 
BDAG 896 for references to debate) and items from Gundry that were not supported in Lane including  
(4:28);  (5:33 v.l.);   (3:17; 7:11, 34; 12:42; 15:16, 42);   (5:23);    
 (5:43);  (9:10);    (10:33);  ...  (11:32);  
 (15:1);  (15:21) and  clauses. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
Figure 17: Spread of Latinisms in Mark 
Of the Latinisms in John discussed above, I have marked in the figure below the 
words recently borrowed:  (18:28, 33; 19:9),  (11:44; 20:7),  
(13:4-5),  (2:15),  (19:19, 20), as well as   (19:7),  (18:3, 12), 
 (18:12), the calques  (14:16, 26; 15:26; 16:7), and    
(19:18) to which I have added obvious references to Romans and Latin:  (6:7; 12:5), 
 (11:48),    (19:12),  (19:12, 15), and  (19:20).230 
These, it seems to me, are the most defensible Haftpunkte, words that connect with the 
Roman encyclopaedia and are likely to signal to the auditors that the Roman cultural units 
of the Signs ought to be part of the abductive process.231 They are spread throughout the 
Gospel, but as can be seen in the snapshot below (Figure 18), they are concentrated 
particularly in John 18:2819:22. This narrative unit, then, will become the focus of this 
thesis.  
230 On the inclusion of , see Section 3.2.1. On   , see Section 6.2.2.3. 
231 See Section 2.2.2. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
Figure 18: Latin Spread in John  
3.3. Conclusion 
The use of Latin in Greek cities in the East is restricted. There is no widespread evidence for 
fluent Latin-Greek bilingualism except, perhaps, among the lites, especially Romans 
serving in administrative posts in the East or Easterners desiring to follow a Roman 
cursus.232 There is, however, evidence for many small points of contact between the two 
languages among retainers. Latin words crossed into Greek in the army; the Roman 
administration used them in their legal documents, and merchants and other travellers needed 
them to conduct business. Evidence for this contact with Latin can be found in the cities 
connected with the development of Johns Gospel: Ephesus, Antioch and Alexandria. 
Furthermore, the influence of Latin in the Mediterranean world is also visible in the text of 
the Fourth Gospel, most obviously in words that are etymologically Latin and unattested 
232 Walton already noted in 1929 that one cannot simply infer balanced bilingualism from inscriptional 
evidence [Oriental Senators in the Service of Rome: A Study of Imperial Policy Down to the Death of Marcus 
Aurelius, JRS 19 (1929): 38-66 (40)]. For similar concerns, see Suzanne Romaine, Socio-Historical 
Linguistics: Its Status and Methodology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982), 8; Taylor, 
Bilingualism, 299-300; Penelope Fewster, Bilingualism in Roman Egypt, in Bilingualism in Ancient 
Society: Language Contact and the Written Text, ed. James N. Adams, Mark Janse, and Simon Swain (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2002), 220-45 (226-28). This thesis does not attempt to reconstruct the spoken 
environment except to posit Latin-Greek contact. However, on the ways written texts can be used in such an 
endeavour, see Mullen, Introduction, 13-14. 
3. Latin Intersections in the Eastern Roman Empire and in the Gospel of John  
previously, but also in various syntactical and morphological constructions. While this 
evidence does not lead to certainty, it is suggestive enough to allow for this study to proceed. 
Based on the evidence of language contact examined in this chapter, I am proposing that (1) 
an author or editor of the Fourth Gospel had, within his idiolect, language influenced by 
contact with Latin and that (2) he used those resources particularly in the Johannine trial 
narrative to activate a Roman encyclopaedia for his auditors. Once activated, the Roman 
encyclopaedia blows up (in Ecos sense) the Roman cultural units of the Signs of the 
narrative.233 In Chapters 47, then, I shall offer an interpretant of John 18:1819:22 using 
the Roman encyclopaedia.  
233 See Sections 2.1.1 and 2.2.2. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John 
In Chapter 3, I presented evidence for a group in the Eastern Mediterranean that intersected 
with Jews, Samaritans, and Gentiles: retainers who served, or served with, the Romans and 
thus came into contact with Latin as well as with the Roman cultural encyclopaedia.1 As 
Craig Koester notes, in such an environment, although some misreadings are excluded, 
[t]he message of the text is multidimensional and can be approached at different levels by 
different types of readers, so that layers of readings are not mutually exclusive.2 The reading 
presented in this thesis will focus on the encyclopaedia of the people who were more or less 
embedded in Roman contexts, those I have called Roman-aware auditors.3 What I shall argue 
in this chapter is that interpreting the trial narrative with the Roman encyclopaedia adds 
another layer to Johns presentation of Jesus for a group of auditors whose cultural resources 
are not usually recognized. In the interpretant thus developed, the Roman cultural unit of 
 that references the emperor is activated so that Jesus is presented not just as a 
Jewish king but as a Caesar. Once this identification is highlighted, a Roman-aware auditor 
could recognize other Roman requirements for a good emperor: a recusatio, the consensus 
of the gods/God, and the consensus of the people. Furthermore, as the trial narrative 
progresses, two more elements of a Roman ruler are attributed to Jesus: the title Son of God 
and , the Greek translation of imperium. In these various ways, Jesus is introduced as 
Caesar. The discussion starts with the ambiguity in the cultural units of .4 
1 For others who propose a heterogeneous readership, see Craig R. Koester, The Spectrum of 
Johannine Readers, in What Is John? Readers and Readings of the Fourth Gospel, ed. Fernando F. Segovia, 
SBL Symposium Series 3 (Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1996), 5-19 (9-10); Lincoln, Truth, 180. Brown proposed 
seven groups addressed or referenced in the Fourth Gospel: three who are not Jesus-believers (the world, the 
Jews, followers of John the Baptist), two with inadequate faith (Jewish Jesus-believers who have remained in 
the synagogues and Jewish Jesus-believers who have separated themselves from the synagogues but who have 
a low Christology) and two groups of faithful Jesus-believers (other apostolic communities and the Johannine 
community itself) (Community, 59-88). I am not interested in attempting to reconstruct the development of the 
community, so the other groups will not be discussed, but nothing in this reading precludes their existenceI 
am simply adding information that intersects with these other proposed groups. 
2 Koester, Spectrum, 16. See, similarly, Tilborg, Reading, 53. 
3 See Section 3.1.4. 
4 Some sections of this chapter were presented in Laura Hunt,    : Are You an Emperor, 
or a King? (paper presented at Conference of the British New Testament Society, Manchester, UK, 5 
September, 2014). 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
4.1. Imperator or Rex 
The English word /king/ might seem to have a cultural unit identical with those of rex and 
. Similarly, /emperor/ might seem equivalent to imperator and to . 
However, the cultural units for these seemingly corresponding words turn out to vary with 
each language.5 Generally, /king/ is chosen as the most obvious gloss for translating  
into English. However occasionally, as in 1 Peter 2:13, 17 or Josephus, J.W. 5.2.2 58, 
/emperor/ turns out to fit the context better.6 
Both  and imperator were broadly used during the Republic for a 
magistrate with a command, an imperium, outside of Rome. As late as Neros reign, 
Petronius mentions an imperator provinciae (Satyricon 111), who might have been an 
administrative or military leader, depending on whether he is referring to a senatorial or 
imperial province.7 Also, after a particularly great victory, a general might be hailed by his 
troops as imperator or .8 However, as early as Augustus, emperors began to resist 
the use of these terms for others, and from Vespasian onwards, imperator () 
became a fixed component of the rulers name.9 In fact, as Hugh Mason notes, The 
5 As this discussion progresses, Signs will be chosen to refer to the correct cultural units. Thus, /rex/ 
and /imperator/ refer to the Roman cultural units for these Latin words; // and // refer to 
the broadly Mediterranean cultural units for these Greek words, and /king/ and /emperor/ refer either to 
contemporary cultural units for these English words or are used when an ancient cultural unit is not in view. 
On cultural units, see Section 2.1.1. 
6 In Josephus in particular, Titus as he prepares to attack Jerusalem is called both  (J.W. 5.2.2 
58) and  (5.2.2 63). See, too, Whistons note on  in J.W. 5.2.2 58 [The Works of Josephus: 
Complete and Unabridged, trans. William Whiston (Peabody: Hendrickson, 1987)]. Barrett also notes that [i]n 
the Greek-speaking world the Emperor was often referred to as  (Gospel, 543; see also Brown, John, 
2.880; Carter, John, 302). Van Tilborg also offers some evidence for this, although he omits a discussion of 
 in his section on the titles of the emperor (Reading, 38-48, 196). 
7 Loretana de Libero, Imperator, PC. 
8 Arnaldo Momigliano and Tim J. Cornell, Imperator (), PC; Mason, Greek Terms, 118-
119. For a specific example, see the Senatus Consultum de Tabenis (#17) from 81-80 BCE where Sulla is called 
 (l. 10) [Robert K. Sherk, Roman Documents from the Greek East: Senatus Consulta and Epistulae 
to the Age of Augustus (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1969), 101]. 
9 This resistance is not universal, however. See Josephuss description of the troops hailing Titus as 
 after the fall of Jerusalem (J.W. 7.5.3-6 122-57; Section 5.1.1); Momigliano and Cornell, 
Imperator (), PC; Jean Branger, Recherches sur l'aspect idologique du principat, ed. Bernhard 
Wyss, Schweizerische Beitrge zur Altertumswissenschaft 6 (Basel: Reinhardt, 1953), 52-53. Note that the 
Branger book contains an extensively reworked version of an earlier essay. It adds, for example, a discussion 
of the Roman practice of adoption, and is published in a chapter entitled Le refus du pouvoir. It is also 
reprinted as Jean Branger, Le refus du pouvoir, in Principatus: tudes de notions et d'histoire politiques 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
equation of  with imperator was an exact one, which extended to nearly all the 
uses of the Latin word.10 This means that imperator can always be translated into the Greek 
. It does not, however, preclude the concurrent use of  to designate the 
Roman emperor as well. Mason again: By the second century A.D.,  as a general 
word for emperor came under challenge, especially in literary works, from .11 In 
fact, for Harry Sidebottom,  is the normal Greek description of the emperor, which 
is either a neutral term of designation or, in some contexts, a term of approbation.12 The use 
of these terms depended in part on the genre of the writing. Although  was not used 
for the emperor in formal, official language, it was used in verse (in the time of Augustus), 
in prose (in the second century), and eventually even in inscriptions (by the time of Hadrian), 
and words formed from the - stem were used from the time of Vespasian onwards.13 
Indeed, the gradually increasing use of  may have been related to the availability of 
adjectives and verbs formed from its root, since these were not derivable from .14  
Although the Greek  could, by the end of the first century CE, refer either to 
an emperor or a king, Latin differentiates between imperator and rex.15 Livy, for example, 
recounts that after the last king, Tarquin, had raped Lucretia, Brutus banished him and 
obliged [the people] to swear an oath that they would suffer no man to be king (regnare) in 
dans l'Antiquit grco-romaine, ed. Franois Paschoud and Pierre Ducrey, Universit de Lausanne: 
Publications de la facult des lettres 20 (Genve: Droz, 1973), 165-207. The earlier essay is also quite valuable: 
Jean Branger, Le refus du pouvoir (Recherches sur l'aspect idologique du principat), MH 5 (1948): 178-96. 
10 Mason, Greek Terms, 117. 
11 Mason, Greek Terms, 119-120. 
12 Harry Sidebottom, Roman Imperialism: The Changed Outward Trajectory of the Roman Empire, 
Historia 54.3 (2005): 315-330 (328 and, for examples, 328 n. 87). 
13 Branger, Recherches, 54; Mason, Greek Terms, 120; Anthony Kaldellis, Hellenism in Byzantium: 
The Transformations of Greek Identity and the Reception of the Classical Tradition, ed. Susan E. Alcock, Ja 
Elsner, and Simon Goldhill, Greek Culture in the Roman World (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2007), 66. 
14 Mason, Greek Terms, 120. 
15 See also Cicero, Rep. 2.30.52; Sabine Grebe, Augustus Divine Authority and Vergil's Aeneid, 
Vergilius 50 (2004): 35-62 (39-40); Francis Cairns, Virgil's Augustan Epic (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1989), 4-8. Cairns emphasizes that rex was not always inherently negative. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
Rome (Livy Histories 2.1.9 [Moore, LCL]).16 Ovid, too, notes that that day was the last of 
kingly rule (regnum) (Fasti 2.852 [Frazer, LCL]). Also Scipio, as described by Livy twenty-
five books later, turns down the offer of the Spanish troops to make him king (rex) because, 
for him, his highest title was that of imperator and the title of a king (regium nomen), 
elsewhere in high honour, was not to be endured at Rome (27.19.3-4).17  
The use, during the Roman empire, of titles such as princeps, imperator and Augustus 
as well as Caesar, were designed to avoid the negative associations of kingship that were 
primarily relevant for Romans in Rome.18 Still, some Greek writers outside of Rome were 
also aware of the Roman distaste for kings: [T]he very name of monarchy () was 
odious to the people (Plutarch, Publ. 1.4 [Perrin, LCL]).  
In fact, authors writing in Greek show differing awareness of these distinctions, and 
 is sometimes used as a simple synonym for imperator and sometimes as the 
translation of rex. Josephus describes Antipater warning that if the people of Judaea put 
faith in the vain expectations raised by persons who for personal profit desired revolution, 
they would find in himself a master () instead of a protector (), in Hyrcanus 
a tyrant () instead of a king (), in the Romans and Caesar enemies () 
instead of rulers () and friends () (J.W. 1.10.4 202 [Henderson, LCL]). Thus, 
for Josephus, a  is not inherently a , unlike in the Roman cultural unit of 
rex. Furthermore, although for the most part he uses  to designate a local king, he 
twice employs  to describe would-be emperors (J.W. 1.2 5; 4.9.9 546), and he 
16 For the full story, see Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Ant. rom. 4.67.2; 4.70.4-5. See also Ciceros 
thoughts on this episode and its effect on terminology (Rep. 2.26-27). Later in the fourth century BCE, the 
Romans would throw Marcus Manlius Capitolinus from the Tarpeian Rock, accusing him of aspiring to 
kingship (Livy, History of Rome 6.20.4-5, 12; Plutarch, Camillus 36.2-7). Luke 4:29 provides an interesting 
parallel, but it is likely that death by cliff was not restricted to these two instances. 
17 Livy goes on: As for his having the spirit of a king, if they thought that was the noblest thing in the 
nature of man, let it be their silent verdict; from the use of the word let them refrain (27.19.5) and the same 
story told in Greek by Polybius in Histories 10.40.  
18 Greg Woolf, Inventing Empire in Ancient Rome, in Empires: Perspectives from Archaeology and 
History, ed. Susan E. Alcock et al. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 311-322 (313). 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
also speaks of the  of Vespasian (5.9.4 409).19 While Josephus saw himself 
writing for a Roman audience, he does not distinguish between rex and imperator.20  
Appian, on the other hand, writing from Alexandria in the early second century CE, 
describes the Romans justification for killing Julius Caesar: a desire to restore the republic 
of their fathers; for they feared (and in this they knew their man) that if he should conquer 
these nations also he would indeed be indisputably king (). On mature 
consideration, I conclude that they did actually find an excuse for the conspiracy in the 
prospect of this additional title, though the difference it could make to them turned on a mere 
quibble, since in plain fact dictator () is exactly the same as king () 
(Appian, Bell. civ. 2.111 [White, LCL]). Appian is thus aware of the Romans distaste for 
this title: From this example the Romans now pay like honours to each emperor () at his 
death if he has not reigned in a tyrannical manner or made himself odious, although at first 
they could not bear to call them kings () even while alive (Bell. civ. 2.148; see also 
1.5, 98-99, 101, 103; 2.110). Appian does not find the distinction meaningful, but he 
demonstrates that he is aware of it. 
Other authors show various patterns of use. Cassius Dio only calls the Roman 
emperor ; others such as Philostratus, Aristides, Dio Chrysostom, Galen, 
Herodian and Lucian use  as well.21 And although  never entirely replaces 
, its use continues to increase through the third century.22 While the Greek 
 (in combination with  or alone) could refer to an emperor with no 
implication of tyranny, for a Roman the term rex would designate either a foreign, local ruler 
or a tyrant and, when making this distinction in Greek, a writer such as Appian uses  
19 Mason, Greek Terms, 120. 
20 Minucius Felix similarly saw Josephus and his writing as in some way foreign [Ag. Ap. 1.2; 
Minucius Felix, Oct. 33.4; pace James Carleton Paget, Some Observations on Josephus and Christianity, JTS 
52.2 (2001): 539-624 (540 n. 7)]. 
21 Mason, Greek Terms, 120. See, for example, Philostratus, Vit. Apoll. 5.37. 
22 Mason, Greek Terms, 121. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
for rex. This creates multiple choices for the cultural unit of  in John 18:2819:22. 
In such a text, a Roman-aware auditor needs to determine whether the reference is to the 
princeps, a local ruler or a tyrant.23  
4.2.  in John 18:33-37 
Helen Bond points out that, as opposed to the rest of the Gospel, [w]ithin the Roman trial 
narrative the issue of Jesus kingship suddenly becomes prominent; the word king occurs 
seven times. The impression is that John wants to focus on the title and to describe exactly 
in what sense Jesus really was a king.24 In this section of the chapter, I want to lead an 
inferential walk, an abductive journey into the first five verses, looking at the way the text 
deals with the ambiguity caused by the multiple cultural units of .25  
After his first conversation with the Jews (18:33), Pilate enters the , calls 
Jesus and asks him,      ; At this point in the abductive process, 
there is no reason to read  as anything other than a local king of the Jews, even if 
one knows the Roman encyclopaedia.26 Pilate calls Jesus a king, and Johns auditors believe 
him to be one.27  
23 Note that to separate the religious from the political is anachronistic; see Section 1.2.1. Pace, e.g., 
Barrett who says, Jesus admits that he is a king, but proceeds at once with such a definition of his kingship as 
removes it from the sphere of sedition and rebellion (Gospel, 536. See also his comments on v. 38, p. 538). 
24 Helen K. Bond, Pontius Pilate in History and Interpretation, ed. Richard Bauckham, SNTSMS 100 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), 171. That kingship is the theological motif that dominates 
the episodes of the trial has been noted by many [Josef Blank, Die Verhandlung vor Pilatus Joh 18:28-19:16 
im Lichte johanneischer Theologie, BZ 3 (1959): 60-81 (62); Ignace de la Potterie, Jsus roi et juge d'aprs 
Jn 19, 13,   , Bib 41 (1960): 217-47 (239-40); Brown, John, 2.863; Ignace de la Potterie, 
La vrit dans Saint Jean, AnBib 73 (Rome: Biblical Institute Press, 1977), 107-108; Barrett, Gospel, 540; 
David Hill, My Kingdom Is Not of This World (John 18.36): Conflict and Christian Existence in the World 
According to the Fourth Gospel, IBS 9 (1987): 54-62 (55)]. The kingdom motif was foreshadowed at the 
beginning of the Gospel in the encounters with Nathanael and Nicodemus [Craig R. Koester, Theological 
Complexity and the Characterization of Nicodemus in John's Gospel, in Characters and Characterization in 
the Gospel of John, ed. Christopher W. Skinner, Library of New Testament Studies 461 (London: Bloomsbury, 
2013), 165-81 (173)]. 
25 Eco, Role, 31-32. 
26 In the narrative world, this might point to the hated Herod, but whether hearers outside of Judaea 
would have made this connection is uncertain (Goodman, Judaea, 747). There is no reason, as Bernard claims, 
to expect a negative response, at least as far as the Greek grammar is concerned [J. H. Bernard, A Critical and 
Exegetical Commentary on the Gospel According to St. John, ICC (Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 1928), 2.609]. 
27 Jane Heath, You Say That I Am a King (John 18.37), JSNT 34.3 (2012): 232-53 (244); Meeks, 
Prophet-King, 63. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
Roman referents for this conversation start to become evident as the exchange 
progresses. Jesus tells Pilate (v. 36),          . In 
the Roman encyclopaedia, a  can be an empire.28 Furthermore, this verse describes 
a  not of this world, and a Roman imperator also rules an empire whose origins do 
not come from this world. Heavenly origin legitimates rule, both in the Gospel of John (e.g., 
1:49) and in the Aeneid (e.g., 1.257-82).29 According to Vergil, under the auspices of 
Romulus (Aeneid 6.781), that great city of Rome shall match her role to the globe itself 
(imperium terries) and her spirit to the skies. In that vision, Augustus is the offspring of 
the deified (divi genus); he will establish again the Age of Gold in Latium, once ruled over 
by Saturn, and shall extend Romes rule over Garamantes and Indians. Our lands shall lie 
beyond the zodiac, beyond the paths of the sun and the year, where heaven-bearing Atlas 
spins upon his shoulder the heavens axis, studded with blazing stars (777-797).30 Thus, to 
declare that Jesus rule is not from this world does not distinguish his empire from that of 
the Romans.31 Instead, from the point of view of the Roman encyclopaedia, claiming that 
Jesus empire is not from this world is an implicit assertion that Jesus is imperator.32 
Therefore, the term  in John 18:36 can be translated into English as /empire/.33  
This analysis contradicts several previous interpretations. Jane Heath, for example, 
notes that King and kingdom are  significant categories, but ones that are not to be 
28 On  as empire, see above (Josephus, J.W. 5.9.4 409; Mason, Greek Terms, 120). Note that 
 in John 3:3, 5 is found in a passage that clearly refers to a Jewish encyclopedia and therefore must be 
interpreted based on those cultural units. 
29 Musa W. Dube, Savior of the World but Not of This World: A Postcolonial Reading of Spatial 
Construction in John, in The Postcolonial Bible, ed. R. S. Sugirtharajah, The Bible and Postcolonialism 1 
(Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1998), 118-135 (123). 
30 Nicholas Horsfall, Virgil, Aeneid 6: A Commentary, vol. 1: Introduction, Text and Translation 
(Berlin: De Gruyter, 2013), 55. 
31 Philip Hardie, Virgil's Aeneid: Cosmos and Imperium (Oxford: Clarendon, 1986), 331. 
32 This would be clear to anyone familiar with Romes coins, monuments, and the various forms of 
emperor worship. On Augustus use of the sidus Iulium to promulgate his title divi filius as well as his 
comparison to Aeneas, also the son of a god, see Paul Zanker, The Power of Images in the Age of Augustus, 
trans. Alan Shapiro, Jerome Lectures 16 (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1988), 34-36, 201-210. 
On the ways that subsequent rulers appropriated the myth, see Zanker, Power, 215-238.  
33 Dale B. Martin, Jesus in Jerusalem: Armed and Not Dangerous, JSNT 37.1 (2014): 3-24 (14). 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
understood in worldly ways.34 Without a definition of worldly, this remark is difficult to 
evaluate.35 Perhaps it is meant to stem from her references to made by human handsthe 
type of human-created sovereignty that Jesus rejects, as also does Yahweh with regard to 
idols.36 This line of argument, however, causes Heath to conclude that Jesus is king, but  
this is not a title or role that is readily understood in the usual political or religious 
categories.37 Others also propose that Jesus rejected a political kingship.38 However, the 
political cannot be divorced from the religious, and in these analyses it is unclear what sense 
this leaves for Jesus kingdom. 
Sometimes, Jesus claim to rule a kingdom not from this world is interpreted as one 
designed to render it innocuous to Pilate and the Romans, who do rule this world. However, 
the Roman Johannine Pilate, as well as Johns hearers, are negotiating their position as 
subjects of an imperium that is also given from above. The phrase would, on the contrary, 
34 Heath, You Say, 241. See, similarly, Rudolf Bultmann, The Gospel of John: A Commentary, trans. 
G. R. Beasley-Murray, R. W. N. Hoare, and J. K. Riches (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1971), 214; 
Schnackenburg, John, 2.20; Dirk F. Gniesmer, In den Proze verwickelt: Erzhlanalytische und 
textpragmatische Erwgungen zur Erzhlung vom Proze Jesu vor Pilatus (Joh 18,28-19,16a.b) (Frankfurt am 
Main: Lang, 2000), 286; James D. G. Dunn, Neither Jew nor Greek: A Contested Identity, Christianity in the 
Making 3 (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2015), 341. Fernando Segovia also characterizes John 6:15 as a rejection 
of an offer of worldly kingship; however, he does spend significant amounts of time distinguishing the 
this-world from the other-world and one presumes that he refers to the this-world [The Gospel of John, 
in A Postcolonial Commentary on the New Testament Writings, ed. Fernando F. Segovia and R. S. 
Sugirtharajah, The Bible and Postcolonialism 13 (London: T & T Clark, 2007), 156-93 (180, 165-74)]. 
35 Heath also uses the term this-worldly (e.g., You Say, 244) so perhaps the distinction is between 
the physical and the spiritual. This division, however, would be similar to that between politics and religion, 
and equally anachronistic (see Section 1.2.1). 
36 Heath, You Say, 241-42. 
37 Heath, You Say, 242. 
38 Bernard, St. John, 1.183; Blinzler, Trial, 191; Severino Pancaro, The Law in the Fourth Gospel: 
The Torah and the Gospel, Moses and Jesus, Judaism and Christianity According to John, ed. W. C. van Unnik, 
NovTSup 42 (Leiden: Brill, 1975), 315-16; Sheppard, Gospel of John, 166-68; Craig R. Koester, Why Was 
the Messiah Crucified? A Study of God, Jesus, Satan, and Human Agency in Johannine Theology, in The 
Death of Jesus in the Fourth Gospel, ed. G. Van Belle, BETL 200 (Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2007), 
163-80 (166); Sean Adams, and Daniel Smith, A Review Panel of Joseph Modica and Scot McKnight, eds., 
Jesus Is Lord, Caesar Is Not: Evaluating Empire in New Testament Studies (Intervarsity Press, 2013) 
(presented at Ancient Historiography and the New Testament in the Institute for Biblical Research, SBL 
Annual Meeting, Baltimore, MD, 22 November, 2013), Scott McKnight's remarks; Dunn, Neither, 341. Note 
that, in contrast to my argument, for Sheppard, both Jesus and Pilate correctly separate kingship of this world 
and otherworldly kingship whereas the Jews incorrectly do not. Those who note the political implications of 
Jesus words include David Rensberger, Overcoming the World: Politics and Community in the Gospel of John 
(London: SPCK, 1989), 90; Jennifer Glancy, Torture: Flesh, Truth, and the Fourth Gospel, BibInt 13.2 
(2005): 107-136 (125); Segovia, Gospel, e.g., 157; Carter, John, 7, 9-10; Stovell, Mapping, 161. For a 
nuanced discussion that subsumes the political under the spiritual, see Thomas Sding, Die Macht der 
Wahrheit und das Reich der Freiheit: Zur johanneischen Deutung des Pilatus-Prozesses (Joh 18,28 - 19,16), 
ZTK 93 (1996): 35-58. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
have represented a heightening of the danger to Rome. Brown suggests not a 
political/spiritual division, but a Spirit-flesh dichotomy, but this is also not sustainable.39 
Roman gods interacted frequently with mortals (see, e.g., Apollos interaction with Atia, 
Augustus mother, discussed in the last section of this chapter; Suetonius, Aug. 994.4). If 
there is any reassurance for Pilate, it is ambiguous, and contained in the next sentence: my 
officers would have been fighting (v. 36).40 Jesus, as ruler, does not enforce his power with 
violence, yet the very theme of judgement of the world mentioned elsewhere in the Gospel 
(e.g., 9:39-41) seems to argue that Jesus kingdom has a violence of its own.41  
Any assumption that  means rex is further destabilized as the conversation 
progresses. Pilate comes back to the point,    ; (v. 37). Pancaro notes the 
absence of   in this verse and concludes that [i]n the Passion narrative the Jews 
as a nation are considered enemies of Jesus. Consequently, those who are of the truth, 
the subjects of Jesus, are not Jews, and it is of these that Jesus is king. Jesus is not the King 
of the Jews, he is the King of Israel.42 In Chapter 7, I shall discuss the problems inherent 
in equating the Jews as a nation with those who reject Jesus.43 In the inferential walk of 
this section, where the text continues to create resonances with the Roman empire, I note 
that in this verse where  is not tied to any  it can signify imperator even more 
easily.44 Jesus answers in the same vein:   or perhaps even   .45 
39 Pace Brown, John, 2.869. 
40 The  are taken to be Jesus followers, not, as suggested by Bernard, the twelve legions of 
angels from Matt. 26:53 (St. John, 2.610-11). Bernard only slightly overstates the case, however, when he 
notes that this term always means the minister or officer of a king (, BDAG 1035; Bernard, St. 
John, 2.610). 
41 See Section 7.2.2. 
42 Pancaro, Law, 298. Brown also credits the enmity of the Jews as a cause for the absence of  
 (John, 2.853). 
43 Section 7.1.3. 
44 Lindars notes that  is a hapex legomenon. It is often used ironically, and expects a positive 
response (John, 559). 
45 Heath, You Say. Heaths proposal takes into account the repetition of   and it brings out 
the parallel syntax of Pilates question and Jesus response. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
To raise awareness of the imperial allusions in this passage I translate the exchange 
with the aid of English words that brings out those allusions:46  
 Pilate: Are you the King of the Jews?  
 Jesus: Do you say this of your own accord, or did others say it to you about me? 
 Pilate: Am I a Jew? Your own people and the chief priests have delivered you over to 
me. What have you done? 
 Jesus: My empire is not of this world. If my empire were of this world, my officers would 
have been fighting, that I might not be delivered over to the Jews. But my empire is not 
from here. 
 Pilate (who serves an empire not from this world): So you are an emperor?  
 Jesus: You say that I am an emperor. 
The meaning of  is thus determined through the abductive process in which 
[t]he reader plays an active role in textual interpretation because signs are structured 
according to an inferential model (p  q, and not p  q). Text interpretation is possible 
because even linguistic signs are not ruled by sheer equivalence (synonymy and 
The text creates a world in which the reader is invited to participate: berzeugend wirken 
sie [religise Texte und deren Inhalt] nmlich besonders dann, wenn sie mit einprgsamen 
Bildern und mit rhetorischem Geschick auf den Rezipienten einwirken und ihn mit allem 
Respekt ntigen, sich in die Erzhlhandlung mit seinen Erfahrungen und seiner eigenen 
Sprachwelt einzubringen.48 So far, the Roman encyclopaedia has suggested the image of 
Jesus as a Roman emperor with an empire. Yet once this possibility is raised, descriptions 
of Jesus from earlier in the Gospel may confirm or expand that possibility. 
46 Ben-Porat calls these allusion[s] in general in contrast to literary allusions (Poetics, 108). 
47 Umberto Eco, The Theory of Signs and the Role of the Reader, The Bulletin of the Midwest 
Modern Language Association 14.1 (1981): 35-45 (44). 
48 Busse, Metaphorik, 279; see also 303. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
This is possible because abduction is a repetitive, circular process where new 
information from the text allows for revisions and expansions of previous understandings. 
Interpreters start the process with the results unfolding before their eyes or ears. They know 
the laws that generally govern words and sentences and the cultural units usually associated 
with them. They put these laws and cultural units together in order to acquire understanding. 
However, further reading (or hearing) provides further results which must then also be 
filtered through their knowledge of the laws of the language and the cultural encyclopaedia 
in order to come to further conclusions about the meaning of the words, phrases and 
sentences in one specific passage (Figure 19). 
Figure 19: The Abductive Cycle  
Note: Image adapted from Eco, Theory, 45. 
Consequently, when hearing this narrative unit which, starting at John 18:28, opens 
a Roman encyclopaedia and addresses the topic of rule, Johns earlier descriptions of Jesus 
become relevant in a way that differs from their previous contextualized readings because, 
in addition to those interpretants, they describe practices associated with Roman rule. It is to 
the relevance of some earlier narratives (John 6:15, a variety of references to Gods approval 
of Jesus, as well as 12:12-19) that I now turn. Within a Roman encyclopaedia, these features 
elaborate on Jesus fitness to rule because of his modesty, the consensus of the gods/God, 
and the consensus of the people. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
4.3. Jesus Legitimation as Caesar 
While masculinity is not a major topic of this thesis, the connections between imperial 
leadership, masculinity and virtue made from the time of Augustus onwards, bring the topic 
into my discussion at this point.49 Colleen Conway describes masculinity as that which was 
enacted by those who are (1) born with male genitalia, as they become (2) penetrators and 
generators, and (3) possessors of virtue, the most important of which was self-control.50 As 
this self-control is displayed in Augustus, at least in his public characterization, it includes 
on the one hand his conquest of the world and, at the same time, his enduring modesty and 
humility.51  
The importance of modesty for Johns portrayal of Jesus will be discussed below 
with respect to the Roman recusatio. Other Johannine descriptions of Jesus that cohere with 
various entries in the Roman cultural encyclopaedia can only be mentioned but not fully 
explored. Conway emphasizes the willingness necessary for a virtuous Roman death that 
Jesus also exhibits.52 In John 8:22, the Jews wonder if Jesus is going to kill himself, and 
this verse might be compared with the Roman practice of honourable suicide (Livy, Histories 
1.58.8).53 In the Roman encyclopaedia even criminals who died bravely were worth 
49 Colleen M. Conway, Behold the Man: Jesus and Greco-Roman Masculinity (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2008), 24. 
50 Conway, Behold, 16, 21, 23. Other evidences of masculinity include bravery in battle, courageous 
suicide, stoicism in pain, self-mastery that allows one to master others, restraint in bodily movements and self-
mastery to the point of lack of sexual interest (Behold, 29-30, 33, 38). 
51 Conway, Behold, 45-46. For several examples of humility expressed as modesty, see the rest of 
Valerius Maximus, Memorable Doings and Sayings 4.5. Note especially 4.5.6 which, after stories of the 
modesty of public figures as they refuse to exalt themselves, tells of Caesars physical modesty that is then 
connected with his divinity. The Roman mandate to conquer the world will be discussed in Section 7.1.2. 
52 Conway, Behold, 73; see, similarly, Grace M. Jantzen, Foundations of Violence, Death and the 
Displacement of Beauty 1 (London: Routledge, 2004), 279; Jason J. Ripley, Behold the Man? Subverting 
Imperial Masculinity in the Gospel of John, Journal of the Bible and its Reception 2.2 (2015): 219-39 (230-
31); and in general on Jesus as in control of his own death, see Dodd, Interpretation, 426; Godfrey C. 
Nicholson, Death as Departure: The Johannine Descent-Ascent Schema (Chico, CA: Scholars Press, 1983), 
164-65; Lincoln, Truth, 126; Keener, John, 870. Pace Nijay Guptas view of Johns Jesus as humbled and 
lowly in the Passion narrative [Gloria in Profundis: Comparing the Glory of Moses in Sirach to Jesus in the 
Fourth Gospel, HBT 36.1 (2014): 60-78 (76; see also the abstract, where Jesus is described as frail, weak, 
shamed and defeated, 60)]. 
53 Grace Jantzen shows the way Cicero connected Catos suicide with Socratess. Thus, despite the 
very real differences between the two events (and even Socratess admonitions against suicide) he developed 
the Roman concept of virtuous, manly suicide seemingly connected with the Greek past (Foundations, 271). 
Jason Ripley has connected these events with the Gospel of John [Glorious Death, Imperial Rome, and the 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
discussion (Dio Cassius, Roman History 61.4), and a noble death was celebrated (Seneca, 
Ep. 24).54 The pamphlets written after Cato the Youngers suicide popularized the notion of 
suicide as noble and manly.55 If He wont kill himself, will he? (John 8:22) is understood 
to have two answers, the yes of Jesus voluntary death (10:18) connects with this Roman 
virtue of noble suicide.56 
Two more connections between the Gospel of John and the Roman encyclopaedia 
can be mentioned: Jesus care for his mother in John 19:25-27 echoes Euryalus, who 
similarly put his mother in the care of Ascanius (Vergil, Aeneid 9.280-302).57 And John 2:21, 
where the temple is equated with Jesus body, might be compared to the epithet augustus 
which, among other significations, expresses a belief that Octavian himself was the temple 
of the worship of his Genius.58 However, I shall confine my inquiries to those related to the 
ambiguity of  in John 18:33-37. If Jesus is a ruler, is he a just ruler or a tyrant? As 
it turns out, this question has already been answered in previous passages in John that show 
Jesus with the necessary prerequisites for a just Roman ruler: humility, the consensus of 
Gospel of John (paper presented at Annual Meeting of the Society of Biblical Literature, November 17, 
2012)]. Ernst Haenchen in fact connects the manner in which Jesus goes to his death with a provocation of 
death (at least as the Evangelist sees it), which amounts to the same thing as suicide [John: A Commentary on 
the Gospel of John Chapters 7-21, ed. Robert Walter Funk and Ulrich Busse, trans. Robert Walter Funk, ed. 
Helmut Koester, Hermeneia: A Critical and Historical Commentary on the Bible, vol. 2 (Philadelphia: Fortress, 
1984), 27]. Herman Ridderbos, however, explicitly denies this: his self-offering is something other than 
suicide [The Gospel According to John: A Theological Commentary, trans. John Vriend (Grand Rapids: 
Eerdmans, 1997), 300]. Other references to honourable suicide can be found in Paul D. Duke, Irony in the 
Fourth Gospel (Atlanta: John Knox Press, 1985), 86; Thomas L. Brodie, The Gospel According to John: A 
Literary and Theological Commentary (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993), 326; Keener, John, 1.743 
n. 378; Warren Carter, John: Storyteller, Interpreter, Evangelist (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 2006), 120; 
Conway, Behold, 29. Neyrey characterizes suicide as an unholy act and misses the Roman (and Greek) 
cultural units for this concept (Cultural, 231). 
54 For other examples of descriptions of noble deaths, see David Seeley, The Noble Death: Graeco-
Roman Martyrology and Paul's Concept of Salvation, ed. David Hill, JSNTSup 28 (Sheffield: JSOT Press, 
1990), 113-41; Jan Willem van Henten, and Friedrich Avemarie, Martyrdom and Noble Death: Selected Texts 
from Graeco-Roman, Jewish, and Christian Antiquity (London: Routledge, 2002), 9-41. 
55 Plutarch, Cat. Min. 67-70; Jantzen, Foundations, 273-74. 
56 Ripley, Behold, 224. On the double entendre of this verse, see Section 7.1.4. 
57 This connection is also made in Keener, John, 2.1144. For discussions about the variety of historical 
and theological interpretations given to this event, see Rudolf Schnackenburg, The Gospel According to St 
John, trans. David Smith and G. A. Kon, ed. Serafin de Ausejo et al., HThKNT, vol. 3: Commentary on 
Chapters 1321 (New York: Crossroad, 1982), 3.277-82; Ridderbos, Gospel, 610-15. 
58 Edwin S. Ramage, The Nature and Purpose of Augustus Res gestae, ed. Heinz Heinen, Hildegard 
Temporini, and Gerold Walser, Historia 54 (Stuttgart: Steiner, 1987), 102. See also Barrett, Gospel, 201. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
God, and the consensus of the people. Each of these will be described first within Roman 
culture and then within the Gospel.  
4.3.1. The Roman recusatio 
This first practice, the recusatiothe refusal of an office or an honouris one 
element within the larger Roman discourse on fitness to rule.59 By the time of the early 
second century CE, Andrew Wallace-Hadrill explains, the restraint of power valued by the 
Greeks and the friendly treatment of inferiors valued by Romans under the Republic come 
together  to form something new, a social etiquette that demonstrates respect for the 
past while at the same time repackaging it under a new term, civilitas.60 Cicero, for example, 
notes that unlike his predecessors, he will not gather taxes from the lands in Asia under his 
jurisdiction, nor allow honours such as statues or temples for himself, and even proffers 
an apology for bragging about his own clemency (Ad Atticus 114.7 [Bailey, LCL]).  
Adam Winn claims that the recusatio was cleverly used by Octavian to balance his 
absolute power with his public humility.61 Winn defines recusatio as a cover term for the six 
different areas discussed by Wallace-Hadrill in which emperors enacted civilitas. These 
include (1) the refusal of public offices and titles; (2) the refusal of public honors; (3) 
respect for the Roman Senate and populus; (4) respect for lex and libertas; (5) modesty 
in public appearance and private residence; and finally (6) generous actions and identity 
as benefactors.62 Civilitas, with its emphasis on restraint and modesty was, as Wallace-
Hadrill notes, an invention of the Principate.63 Yet it should not be seen only as the result of 
59 Note that term recusatio is also used for the practice of authors who position their choice of writing 
in a lower literary genre as a modest refusal to write in a higher genre. It was adopted by Romans first as 
a literary practice of social positioning and then as an aspect of modesty (Philip R. Hardie and Richard Hunter, 
Literary genre, PC). 
60 Andrew Wallace-Hadrill, Civilis Princeps: Between Citizen and King, JRS 72 (1982): 32-48 (42). 
Note that these practices are frequently mentioned without reference to the term; see, e.g., Grebe, Authority, 
61 Adam Winn, Tyrant or Servant? Roman Political Ideology and Mark 10.42-45, JSNT 36.4 (2014): 
325-52 (330). 
62 Winn, Tyrant, 331; Wallace-Hadrill, Civilis, 36-40. 
63 Wallace-Hadrill, Civilis, 43. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
Octavians cleverness.64 This ignores the influences of the culture on Octavian himself.65 
Instead, Wallace-Hadrill proposes that it served to articulate certain deeper truths that, for 
a period, mattered to the society over which these emperors ruled: the continuity with the 
republican past; the dependence of the emperor on the consent of the upper orders; but above 
all the use of the social structure of a city-state to organize and unify the disparate peoples 
of the empire.66  
Furthermore, while the six behaviours that Winn lists do cohere in Roman civilitas, 
the recusatio is more specifically a refusal of an office or a title.67 Pliny the Younger offers 
a particularly good description, which does not necessarily report Trajans behaviour or 
motives transparently but demonstrates the way that the refusal of honours was seen as the 
proper practice of rulers. 
Although your many outstanding merits surely called for you to assume some 
new title and honour, you refused the title of Father of your country (tu etiam 
patris patriae recusabas), and it was only after a prolonged struggle between 
us and your modesty that in the end you were persuaded. Others accepted 
that title from the start along with that of Emperor (imperator) and Caesar 
(Caesar), on the first day of their principate (principatus), but you waved it 
away until even in your own grudging estimate of your services, you had to 
admit it was your due. Thus you alone have been Father of the country in fact 
before you were in name. In our hearts, in our minds we knew you as this; 
the title made no difference to the devotion of your people, except for our 
feeling of ingratitude if we addressed you only as Emperor (imperator) and 
Caesar (Caesar) when we felt we had a Father (pater) in you. And now that 
you bear the name, how kind and considerate you show yourself, living with 
your subjects as a father with his children You left us as an ordinary citizen, 
you return as emperor (imperator), knowing your subjects as you are known 
to them; in your thoughts we have not changed, nor in ours have you; you are 
one among us all, the greatest of us simply because you are the best (Pliny 
the Younger, Pan. 21 [Radice, LCL]).68 
64 Winn, Tyrant, 330. 
65 Grebe, similarly, accuses Augustus of designs and pretenses (Authority, 41-42). 
66 Wallace-Hadrill, Civilis, 48. 
67 Wallace-Hadrill, Civilis, 44. 
68 See also Valerius Maximus, Memorable Deeds and Sayings 4.5.2 and Pliny the Younger, 
Panegyricus 59.1-2: To refuse it too often can be misinterpreted, or give the impression that you value it too 
little. In fact, of course, you refused because you value it so highly, but you will convince no one of this unless 
one day you accept. These references are cited by Jesper Madsen, who also offers an overview of various 
writers evaluations of the emperors [Patriotism and Ambitions: Intellectual Response to Roman Rule in the 
High Empire, in Roman Rule in Greek and Latin Writing: Double Vision, ed. Jesper Majbom Madsen and 
Roger Rees, Impact of Empire: Roman Empire, c. 200 BC-AD 476 18 (Leiden: Brill, 2014), 16-38]. Note that 
Joseph Fantin discusses the terms dominus,  and  without seeming to be aware of the recusatio 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
Jean Branger has shown that the recusatio was a real practice and neither simply a 
construction of panegyrists nor an empty gesture by the intended recipient of the honour, 
since sometimes the offer of the title or office was never repeated.69 More narrowly than 
Wallace-Hadrill, he defines the purpose of a recusatio as making the choice of emperor 
dependent on the consensus of the gods and of those ruled (the army, the Senate, and/or the 
populus).70 Without this, the emperor is understood to devolve into a tyrant.71 The goal, then, 
is persuader les citoyens quils avaient le chef de leur choix, non le complice dune 
faction.72 
Augustus himself referred to his recusatio in Res gest. divi Aug. 5.1-6.1: I did not 
accept absolute power that was offered to me, and Suetonius offers this dramatic 
description: When the people did their best to force the dictatorship upon him, he knelt 
down, threw off his toga from his shoulders and with bare breast begged them not to insist 
(Suetonius, Augustus 52 [Rolfe, LCL]).73  
On the other hand, the lack of recusatio can be an occasion of reproach. Tacitus 
criticizes Tiberius because he nowhere manifested the least hesitation (Tac. Ann. 1.7. 
[Moore, Jackson, LCL]). Later, when he does evidence hesitation, Tacitus calls it 
hypocritical, cunctatione ficta (Tac. Ann. 1.46).74 Whether evaluated positively (because 
[Lord of the Entire World: Lord Jesus, a Challenge to Lord Caesar?, ed. Stanley E. Porter, New Testament 
Monographs 31 (Sheffield: Sheffield Phoenix Press, 2011), 180-82; see similarly 213-15]. 
69 Branger, Refus, 178, 184. 
70 Branger, Refus, 185, 188-91; Branger, Recherches, 154. For the way this developed into late 
antiquity, see Sabine G. MacCormack, Art and Ceremony in Late Antiquity (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1981), 168-73. For other ways in which Jesus character coheres with the conception of an ideal ruler, 
see, e.g., Alicia D. Myers, Characterizing Jesus: A Rhetorical Analysis on the Fourth Gospel's Use of Scripture 
in Its Presentation of Jesus, ed. Mark Goodacre, LNTS 458 (London: T & T Clark, 2012), 158 with primary 
references in n. 69. 
71 Branger, Refus, 195. 
72 Branger, Recherches, 157. See also Polybius Histories 6.2.4 (Branger, Recherches, 152-53). 
Clement of Alexandria connects Jesus with this concept of empire when he calls him a ,  one who 
rules according to the laws, who has the skill to rule the consenting (my translation, my emphasis, Strom. 
1.24). 
73 Cooley, Res gestae, 63, 128; J. Albert Harrill, Paul and Empire: Studying Roman Identity after the 
Cultural Turn, Early Christianity 2.3 (2011): 281-311 (300-301). See also Res gest. divi Aug. 10.  
74 See similarly Suetonius, Aug. 58; Tib. 24, 26-27; Nero 8, as well as Brunts comments on some of 
these passages [Lex de Imperio Vespasiani, JRS 67 (1977): 95-116 (97-98)]. Tacitus, too, describes the 
moderatus of various emperors (Histories 1.17). 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
they enact them) or negatively (because they do not), narratives of a recusatio exist for nine 
of the fifteen emperors from Augustus to Antoninus Pius.75 Thus, the refusal of autocracy, 
as Wallace-Hadrill points out, was the means by which [t]he Principate itself was ritually 
perpetuated from reign to reign.76 
A recusatio by foreign would-be rulers is described by Josephus, enacted in front of 
the Romans (rather than by them) in a dispute over local rule. When Antipater and Archelaus 
argued for their respective fitness to rule before Caesar, Nicolaus spoke on behalf of 
Archelaus, the heir that Herod had provisionally designated. He said that because Herod 
chose Caesar as surety for the succession, he had by this means proven his sanity: [O]ne 
who was sane enough to cede his authority to the master of the world was surely not mistaken 
in his selection of an heir. The sagacity shown in his choice of the donor was a guarantee of 
his sanity in the choice of the recipient (Josephus, J.W. 2.2.6 35-36).77 While not refusing 
a title, Herod has, in his will, refused to exercise his right to designate his heir, thus 
demonstrating the humility of a recusatio in a Judean dispute before Rome.  
4.3.2. John 6:15 through Roman eyes 
Jesus recusatio occurs in John 6:15, in a context where the Jewish encyclopaedia of 
the narrative would narcotize its Roman cultural unit. Indeed, Jesus exodus to the mountain 
75 Branger, Recherches, 139-40. His ancient references are correct through Antoninus Pius with the 
exception of Plutarch, Galba 4.3-7, which describes Galba seeking council upon being asked to take the 
imperial honours. This is not a recusatio. (I did not check Eusebius-Jerome and Zonaras since those were 
written much later than the period of interest to this study.) Those not included in Brangers list are Caligula, 
Claudius, Nero, Titus, Domitian and Hadrian. Branger believes that the need for a recusatio was inversely 
proportional to the hereditary charism of the emperor (Recherches, 141-42). However, Caligula can be added 
to the list based on Alexander Jakobson, and Hannah M. Cotton, Caligula's recusatio imperii, Historia 34.4 
(1985): 497-503. 
76 Wallace-Hadrill, Civilis, 36-37. 
77 Bond, Authorities, 222. Josephus also depicts Archelaus himself in a recusatio when, after the 
mourning period, he spoke to the multitude. He thanked them for the zeal which they had displayed over his 
fathers funeral and for the marks of homage shown to himself, as to a king whose claim to the throne was 
already confirmed. He would, however, for the present abstain not only from the exercise of the authority, but 
even from the assumption of the titles, of royalty, until his right to the succession had been ratified by Caesar, 
to whose ruling everything had been submitted under the terms of the will. Even when, as he reminded them, 
the army at Jericho had desired to place the diadem on his head, he had declined it (J.W. 2.1.1 2-3 [Thackeray, 
LCL]). It seems somewhat ironic, though, that this speech was delivered with Archelaus in white raiment and 
from a golden throne on a raised platform, hardly the accoutrements of humility (2.1.1 2). Josephus also 
describes Florus refusing acclamations (J.W. 2.14.7 297). 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
(Then Jesus, because he knew that they were about to come and seize him to make him a 
king, withdrew again to the mountains alone by himself, author translation) has been 
interpreted in terms of Moses and the Sinai event.78 Susan Hylen notes that repeated 
references to the mountain setting (vv. 3, 15) enhance the other connections  made 
between Jesus and Moses.79 The way Hylen sets the text of Chapter 6 within the Jewish 
encyclopaedia brings out a figural reading that, rather than dichotomizing the literal and 
the figurative, relates the two in such a way that it holds physical and spiritual together.80 
Hylens figural rather than figurative reading coheres with the approach offered in this 
thesis.81 She brings previous tropes into dialogue with the current text and both appropriates 
and adds to them. This is similar to the way I have described the cultural encyclopaedia that 
informs but is also changed by the universe of discourse of a text.82 However, Hylen does 
not discuss Jesus refusal of the kingship, except to note that [t]he crowds attempt to make 
Jesus king on their own initiative is not misguided in terms of the understanding it portrays 
of who Jesus is but in how Jesus kingship will be enacted.83 While Hylens insights are 
quite convincing when the passage is read in context, once the Roman encyclopaedia is 
brought up in John 18, the topic of  would bring John 6:15 to mind in a new light. 
The trial narrative, indeed, will elaborate on the enactment of Jesus rule by comparison and 
contrast with the emperor. 
Jerome Neyrey describes the ascription of royalty to Jesus without addressing his 
refusal of it. He does, however, include the way the honours accrued to Jesus in this Gospel 
are not Jesus vainglorious self-extension but rather are ascribed to him by God  and 
78 E.g., Schnackenburg, John, 1.20. Note that the use of  in this verse is hard to reconcile with 
Pancaros emphasis on a progressive aspect to the semantic meaning of this word: the very nature of the verb 
 implies the gradual discovery or acquisition of knowledge (Law, 149-50). 
79 Susan Hylen, Allusion and Meaning in John 6, ed. James D. G. Dunn et al., BZNW 137 (Berlin: de 
Gruyter, 2005), 123. 
80 Hylen, Allusion, 182. 
81 Hylen, Allusion, 159-62. 
82 Section 2.1 and Chapter 7. 
83 Hylen, Allusion, 147. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
acknowledged by others.84 Yet Neyrey, while demonstrating that the charge levelled against 
Jesus that he made himself the Son of God (19:7) is false, and that he is this by Gods 
decree and public recognition, does not explain why in 6:15 Jesus would refuse an honour 
so deserved and ascribed.85 Peder Borgen suggests that with his behaviour Jesus made clear 
that they had misunderstood the significance of his actions, but this conclusion contradicts 
the emphasis on Jesus as  in the Johannine trial narrative.86 For Paul Duke, Jesus 
rejection of a kingship that will be highlighted in John 18-19 is simply ironic.87 For Tom 
Thatcher, the Johannine Jesus  has no interest in political aspirations and immediately 
withdraws to a mountain until the Jews nationalistic fervour cools off, a move that seems 
calculated to correct any notion that his ministry would disrupt the status quo.88 However, 
when this incident is interpreted through the lens of a Roman encyclopaedia, the offer and 
refusal of this office highlight the support of the people and the virtus of Jesusa very 
political move indeed. 
84 Neyrey, Cultural, 179, 428.  
85 Neyrey, Cultural, 427-28. 
86 Peder Borgen, Early Christianity and Hellenistic Judaism (Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 1998), 208. This 
conclusion about the meaning of Jesus refusal to be made king is widespread among scholars. See, e.g., 
Schnackenburg, John, 1.20 (assuming an implied King of the Jews where the only acceptable title would 
be king of Israel; J. Terence Forestell, The Word of the Cross: Salvation as Revelation in the Fourth Gospel, 
AnBib 57 (Rome: Biblical Institute, 1974), 106; Francis J. Moloney, The Johannine Son of Man, Biblioteca di 
Scienze Religiose 14 (Rome: Libreria Ateneo Salesiano, 1976), 172; Harvey, Jesus, 88; Barrett, Gospel, 278 
(connected by Barrett to the Q temptation narrative); Haenchen, John, 272; Robinson, Priority, 208, 260; 
Martin Hengel, The Johannine Question, trans. John Bowden (London: SCM, 1989), 156 n. 112; Richard J. 
Cassidy, John's Gospel in New Perspective: Christology and the Realities of Roman Power (Maryknoll, NY: 
Orbis, 1992), 51-52; Koester, Symbolism, 27; John Painter, Inclined to God: The Quest for Eternal Life
Bultmannian Hermeneutics and the Theology of the Fourth Gospel, in Exploring the Gospel of John: in Honor 
of D. Moody Smith, ed. R. Alan Culpepper and C. Clifton Black (Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 1996), 
346-68 (361); Ridderbos, Gospel, 85, 91, 216; Malina, and Rohrbaugh, Commentary, 126; Bekken, Lawsuit, 
240. Bultmann especially notes the apparent contradiction within the text, since Jesus is again standing before 
the people ten verses later (John, 214). For Bultmann, this demonstrates the symbolic character of the scene 
but rather than contrasting a symbolic scene with a historical one, I want to bring out the symbolic character 
of the gesture within Roman conceptions of ruleto refuse the crown is to demonstrate humility, a primary 
requirement for a good ruler. Anton Dauer adds that this refusal makes the charge in 18:33 absurd, since 
Jesus hat sich ... selbst gegen jede Politisierung seines Auftrages gewandt [Die Passionsgeschichte im 
Johannesevangelium: Eine traditionsgeschichtliche und theologische Untersuchung zu Joh 18,1-19,30, ed. 
Vinzenz Hamp and Josef Schmid, Studien zum Alten und Neuen Testament 30 (Munich: Ksel, 1972), 253]. 
Meeks, however, does not see a dichotomy nor does Carter (Meeks, Prophet-King, 64; Carter, John, 303). 
87 Duke, Irony, 136. 
88 Thatcher, Greater, 21. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
Busse suggests that Jesus rejects the peoples offer because he saw that it was 
motivated by his euergetism in providing them with food (John 6:1-14), just the sort of 
behaviour that one would expect from a king.89 This is an important insight into the crowds 
response to Jesus actions. It does not necessarily shed light on Jesus own refusal of their 
offer, except perhaps that John may intend to underline the inadequacy of what is often called 
signs-faith.90 Yet when the Roman practice of recusatio is taken into consideration, Jesus 
rejection of the offer of kingship takes on added meaning. 
I would like to suggest, then, that while it is clear that the cultural encyclopaedia 
within which the abduction of John 6 would first occur is a Jewish one, thus leading to an 
interpretation such as the one suggested by Hylen, when John 18 opens with Pilate and the 
repetition of  and , Jesus refusal to be made king (6:15) would resurface 
in the abductive process as an example of an imperial recusatio, thus proving Jesus fitness 
to rule. Romans further demanded that the rule of an emperor rest on the consent of the gods 
and that of the governed.91 That Jesus had the consent of the godsor in this case Godis 
amply demonstrated by signs (both Jesus own and those from above). 
4.3.3. The consensus of the gods: Prophecies, wonders and signs 
While a full analysis of the use of  in the Gospel of John goes beyond the needs 
of this argument, it is important to note the significance of signs to the Romans. Andrew 
Riggsby describes their import.  
The Romans had a variety of devices for communicating with the gods
watching birds or lightening, observing the entrails of sacrificial animals, and 
occasionally reacting to random prodigies like the birth of a two-headed 
animal or a rain of stones. This communication was rarely aimed at prophecy 
in the sense of discovering the future. Rather, the goal was to discover divine 
judgment of a past or present action. Most of the time what was sought was 
89 Busse, Metaphorik, 303, 316. See also Koester, Why, 167 n. 12. 
90 See, for example, Keener, John, 1.276-77; Lincoln, Gospel, 149. 
91 Branger, Recherches, 152. Karl Schefold attributes the presence of the gods in profectio 
Cancelleria Relief as proof of the will of the gods without which the emperor would not take power [Orient, 
Hellas und Rom in der archologischen Forschung seit 1939, ed. Karl Hnn, Wissenschaftliche 
Forschungsberichte: Geisteswissenschaftliche Reihe 15 (Bern: Francke, 1949), 235-36; cf. Branger, 
Recherches, 139]. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
a simple yes-or-no answer: did the gods approve of some government 
action?92 
The gods approval was sought, in particular, in omina imperii to legitimate a ruler.93 
Prophecies and portents previous to the accession of Vespasian, for example, predicted that 
the new ruler would come from the East (Suetonius, Vespasian 4.5).94 These include: a 
strong new branch on a sacred tree; mud heaped into Vespasians toga (representing his 
protection of the empire); a dog carrying a human hand (and another time an ox) presenting 
itself to him; a miraculously uprooted and replaced cypress tree; dreams and oracles, one 
given by Josephus (Vespasian 5). Two particularly point to his coming from the East: when 
Galba was on his way to the elections which gave him his second consulship, a statue of the 
Deified Julius of its own accord turned towards the East; and on the field of Betriacum, 
before the battle began, two eagles fought in the sight of all, and when one was vanquished, 
a third came from the direction of the rising sun and drove off the victor (5.7 [Rolfe, 
LCL]).95 
Similar omens are interpreted by Tacitus, in particular the gods leaving the temple 
in Jerusalem:  
Few interpreted these omens as fearful; the majority firmly believed that their 
ancient priestly writings contained the prophecy that this was the very time 
when the East should grow strong and that men starting from Judea should 
possess the world. This mysterious prophecy had in reality pointed to 
Vespasian and Titus, but the common people, as is the way of human 
ambition, interpreted these great destinies in their own favour, and could not 
be turned to the truth even by adversity (Histories 5.13 [Moore, Jackson, 
LCL]).  
Such divine authentication is similarly adduced to Jesus in the Testimonium 
Flavianum, which points out that divine prophets had prophesied not only Jesus 
92 Andrew M. Riggsby, Roman Law and the Legal World of the Romans (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2010), 208-209.  
93 J. R. Fears, The Cult of Jupiter and Roman Imperial Ideology, ANRW 17.1: 3-141 (74-75).  
94 I am grateful to George van Kooten for the references in this paragraph and the following one. 
95 Forester suggests that these predictions were known in particular in Alexandria, but offers no 
primary references for his assertion [The Lives of the Twelve Caesars by C. Suetonius Tranquillus to Which 
Are Added His Lives of the Grammarians, Rhetoricians, and Poets, Bohn's Classical Library (London: George 
Bell and Sons, 1890), 445 n. 1]. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
resurrection but also myriad other things about him (Josephus, Ant. 18.3.3 63-64). 
Whether Josephus himself or, as scholars now generally believe, later redactors wrote all or 
part of this passage, it testifies to an authors desire to communicate Gods approval as he 
legitimates Jesus authenticity.96  
This same divine legitimation of Jesus is found in several passages in the Gospel of 
John. First, Jesus is Gods Chosen One as testified by the descent of the dove/Spirit and by 
Gods seal (1:32-34; 6:27).97 Lincoln rightly notes the unique status, the oneness between 
the Father and the Son that the doves appearance prompts in John the Baptists initial 
testimony as to Gods authentication of Jesus.98 
Gods voice from heaven in John 12:27-33 is, according to Godfrey Nicholson, an 
attempt to correct (albeit unsuccessfully) the perception of Jesus that was held by the great 
crowd (12:9, 12, 17) who had given Jesus the reception due the King of Israel when he 
entered Jerusalem.99 However, the thunder does not occur in the context of Jesus entry into 
Jerusalem but of his speaking of his death, and there is no reason, in any case, to think that 
thunder is a correction. Instead, this voice provides evidence of the consensus of God. That 
a voice or a thunder from heaven would be understood as such is one of the cultural units for 
the phenomenon. Craig Keener notes three purposes for divine thunder: to strike terror into 
an enemy army, to encourage a favored mortal or to confirm his prayer.100 Brown indeed 
96 For a brief introduction to the question, see Robert E. Van Voorst, Sources, Extra-New 
Testamental, in Encyclopedia of the Historical Jesus, ed. Craig A. Evans (New York: Routledge, 2008), 602-
606 (605). For the best broad overview of the complexity of the questions, see Paget, Some Observations, 
with a variety of scholars positions listed on p. 583. 
97 Lincoln, Truth, 217, 452; Keener, John, 677-78. For an argument for   rather than   
as the preferred reading for John 1:34, see Brown, John, 1.57; Lincoln, Truth, 63. For an opposing view, see 
Keener, John, 463-65. Even if the reading   is preferred, the verse is still an expression of Gods revelation 
to John the Baptist by means of the dove that Jesus is his agent of spirit baptism (v. 33). 
98 Lincoln, Gospel, 114-15. 
99 Nicholson, Death, 57. 
100 Keener, John, 2.877 and nn. 84-87. Plutarch, in fact, notes that peals of thunder was a portent 
familiar to the Romans (Fabius Maximus 2.2 [Perrin, LCL])in this case in the face of Hannibals advancing 
army. For thunder as a portent of war, see Vergil, Aeneid 8.523-40. For thunder in response to prayers, see 
Vergil, Aeneid 7.141-42; 9.630-31. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
asks the question: does its obvious synchronization with Jesus preaching signify for the 
crowd that God approves of Jesus?101 I propose that the answer to that question is: Yes. 
Jesus effect on the soldiers who fall down when he pronounces the   (18:6) 
may also be interpreted as divine authentication. Catrin Williams has brought out four 
aspects or themes  of direct relevance to this event: (1) Jesus, like Israels God, is 
sovereign over his own fate; (2) in this scene the forces of God triumph over the forces of 
darkness and Satan; (3) more generally Jesus, like God, is victorious over anyone who 
opposes him and (4) Jesus is the agent of salvation, specifically in this passage for his 
disciples, but also ultimately as the bestower of eternal life.102 Most significant for the 
argument of this chapter is the way this congruence between the actions and purposes of 
Jesus and of Israels God and the accompanying supernatural defeat of the soldiers authorize 
Jesus.103 
The signs () that Jesus performs also testify that he has divine approval (John 
3:2; 9:33).104 This relationship of a sign to the authentication of God does not deny that, in 
John, hearers are expected to go beyond this preliminary identification of Jesus as a miracle-
worker approved by God.105 Neither does such a statement preclude readings that analyse 
Johns signs in relation to the use of  within the LXX.106 Hearers might come to the 
text with either or both encyclopaedias available to them, and interpretation must come from 
101 Brown, John, 1.477. Lincoln notes that whether the crowd experienced thunder as a confirmatory 
portent (cf., e.g., Exod. 19.19; 1 Sam. 12.17-18; Sir. 46.16-17) or thought of the noise as an angelic voice, both 
phenomena were interpreted as divine approval of Jesus words. The voice from heaven is an 
accommodation to the crowd, who still need to be convinced of his true relationship to the Father (Gospel, 
352). 
102 Catrin H. Williams, I Am He: The Interpretation of An H in Jewish and Early Christian 
Literature, ed. Martin Hengel and Otfried Hofius, WUNT 2.113 (Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2000), 293-98. 
103 See also Williams, I Am He, 303. Others who see this event as evidence of Jesus relationship to 
God include Lincoln, Truth, 200. 
104 Lincoln, Truth, 67; Brown, John, 1.377; Meeks, Prophet-King, 87-91; Keener, John, 272-75; 
Lincoln, Gospel, 131; Brant, John, 94. This is true no matter how many signs one discerns in Johns Gospel. 
For discussions about which events in the Gospel of John might be considered signs, see, e.g., Brown, John, 
1.528; Marianne Meye Thompson, The Incarnate Word: Perspectives on Jesus in the Fourth Gospel (Peabody, 
MA: Hendrickson, 1993), 56-57; Koester, Symbolism, 264 n. 15; Brant, John, 92-93.  
105 Keener, John, 1.275-77. 
106 E.g., Brown, John, 1.529-30; Keener, John, 1.277-79. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
the encyclopaedia raised in the context. As Brown has pointed out, the frequency of Exodus 
motifs makes cultural units from a Jewish encyclopaedia most likely for the term .107 
However, in this instance, the entries for the Jewish and Roman encyclopaedias are similar. 
Keener offers examples of signs as authentication from the Greek, Roman, and Jewish 
encyclopaedias.108 
Both portents in the heavens and signs performed by (apparent) human beings occur 
not only in in the Gospel of John but also in Vergils Aeneid. For example, when Dido and 
Aeneas meet in the cave Primal Earth and nuptial Juno give the sign (signum); fires flashed 
in Heaven, the witness to their bridal [sic], and on the mountain-top screamed the Nymphs 
(4.167 [Fairclough, LCL]). Later, Bero carries signs (signa) of divine beauty that reveal 
her as Venus in human disguise (5.647). Finally, a signum in the high heaven, leads the 
Rutulians to believe that the gods approve and will support them in war (12.244-58). In two 
of these three examples, however, the signs are misleading. For Dido and Aeneas, Juno and 
Venus attempt to confirm the union  with the bonds of the natural universe, but it is a 
universe functioning in the perverted mode of the storm.109 Their union is doomed. And 
about the sign shown to the Rutulians, Vergil himself comments that none was more potent 
to confound Italian minds and cheat them with its miracle (12.245-46). It is only Bero, and 
the sign of beauty that the goddess herself carries, who reveal the truth. 
The reason for this is that the progress of the epic depends on the Roman 
understanding of fate (fatum): Arms I sing and the man who first from the coasts of Troy, 
exiled by fate, came to Italy and Lavinian shores (1.1-3).110 The word /fatum/ can be 
translated as spoken, revealing the relationship of destiny to the decrees which were 
107 Brown, John, 1.529. 
108 Keener, John, 1.272-74. 
109 Hardie, Aeneid, 318; Cairns, Epic, 48-49. 
110 Cairns, Epic, 24-25, 50, 193. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
uttered long before by the gods.111 In Vergils Aeneid, for example, fate is sometimes but 
not always identical to the words of Jupiter. Dido prays to the Sun, to Juno, Hecate, the 
Furies and the gods of dying Elissa that if Joves decrees (fata) demand this, if this end is 
fixed for Aeneas to arrive safely in Italy, that at least he would meet war and heartbreak 
(4.614, author translation).112 Thus, the only portents that are valid are those that cohere with 
Jupiters words. 
What is particularly interesting is that three of the fulfilment sayings in the Gospel 
of John also focus on the spoken word. The two instances of most relevance, John 18:9 and 
18:32, occur at the arrest in the garden and at the beginning of the trial before Pilate.113 The 
similarity of the formulas for Scripture and Jesus words,      (2:22; 4:50; 
7:36; 12:38 [about Isaiahs words]; 18:9, 32), puts the two on par.114 The spokenness of 
Jesus prophetic words coheres with Roman conceptions of oracles.115 This connection 
should not be overemphasized. Daube, for example, points out that verbal nouns (such as 
fatum) do not necessarily retain the full force of the verb.116 Furthermore, spoken prophecies 
111 Stephen Benko, Virgil's Fourth Eclogue in Christian Interpretation, ANRW 31.1: 646-705 (689). 
See similarly Grebe, Authority, 60. 
112 Elizabeth Vandiver, The Aeneid of Virgil (Springfield, VA: Teaching Company), MP3, Lecture 4: 
The Opening of the Aeneid.; James J. O'Hara, True Names: Vergil and the Alexandrian Tradition of 
Etymological Wordplay (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996), 108, 121. For more on Greek ideas 
of fate from classical times through the end of the fourth century CE, see Andrew Louth, Pagans and Christians 
on Providence, in Texts and Culture in Late Antiquity: Inheritance, Authority, and Change, ed. J. H. D. 
Scourfield (Swansea: Classical Press of Wales, 2007), 279-98. 
113 The one other instance is John 12:38. In that verse, it is Isaiahs spoken word that is fulfilled ( 
       ). However, 75 does not include  . Furthermore, this 
verse is better discussed along with the other verses where John records Isaiahs speech (1:23; 12:39, 41), 
although without using the word  [Johannes Beutler, The Use of Scripture in the Gospel of John, in 
Exploring the Gospel of John: in Honor of D. Moody Smith, ed. R. Alan Culpepper and C. Clifton Black 
(Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 1996), 148-62 (148)]. However, since this verse is outside of the 
Johannine trial narrative, it will not be further examined. 
114 Keener, John, 1.530-31; 2.889, 1082. This has been most fully investigated by Francis J. Moloney, 
whose concludes that the written word that is the finished Gospel is the completion of Israels Scripture [The 
Gospel of John as Scripture, CBQ 67.3 (2005): 454-68 (461-62, 466). For an opposing view, see Beutler, 
Use, 154]. 
115 For the importance of Jesus word, see, e.g., Meeks, Prophet-King, 289-90; Lincoln, Truth, 72. 
Jesus word, indeed, is emphasized throughout the Gospel (e.g., 2:22; 3:34; 4:50; 5:24, 47; 6:63; 7:36; 8:43; 
12:48; 15:3, 20) but only in 18:9 and 32 is it said to be fulfilled. 
116 David Daube, Roman Law: Linguistic, Social and Philosophical Aspects (Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press, 1969), 3. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
are part of the Jewish tradition as well (1 Kgs 8:15, 20, 24 and Dan 4:33).117 Still, that Jesus 
words would be said to be fulfilled (18:32) just in a section of the Gospel where I have 
posited an abductive process that uses the Roman encyclopaedia suggests the possibility that 
the Gospel of John portrays Jesus wordslike those of Jupiter, king of the godsas fate, 
and therefore self-legitimating divine signs.  
Through a dove, Gods voice from heaven, the collapse of soldiers, the signs he 
performs, and the equating of Jesus words with the will of God, the Gospel of John describes 
the legitimation of Jesus by the God who sent him (3:34).118 Furthermore, in 18:37, the 
Johannine Jesus explains both his sending and his rule with reference to his role as a witness, 
thus creating coherence between these three facets of his identity; these will be explored in 
Chapter 6.119 At this juncture, the Roman perception of the consensus of the gods necessary 
for a ruler demonstrate such approval in Johns Gospel does not remove Jesus from any 
political arena but rather confirms him there. However, it is not enough for a ruler to have 
the consensus of the gods. While Carter, for example, notes passages in the Fourth Gospel 
that legitimate Jesus rule through divine approbation, the affiliated consensus of the people 
and recusatio of the ruler must not be omitted from discussion.120 
117 Keener, John, 2.1082 n. 125. See also Adele Reinhartz, Befriending the Beloved Disciple: A Jewish 
Reading of the Gospel of John (New York: Continuum, 2001), 49-50. 
118 Lincoln, Gospel, 149. 
119 See, e.g., the judicial role of a ruler discussed in Section 6.2.2.4. 
120 Carter, John, 153. That a ruler, in fact, would be expected to provide for his people as in John 6:1-
14 is mentioned above and brought out by Busse, Metaphorik, 303, 316. Carter correctly notes the implicit 
critique of Roman emperors, but misses the affirmation of Jesus as ruler in this theme of provision (John, 218-
26). Similarly, Lindars believes that the problem is that Jesus would not accept popular acclaim, but awaited 
a sign from God himself (John, 244). Koester, too, emphasizes the difference between the power that comes 
from God above and the power that relies on the favour of the masses below (Symbolism, 92). See also Carter, 
Kingship is God-given (and Rome-given) and cannot be enacted by the people (6:15) (John, 192). 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
4.3.4. The consensus of the people: Adventus and John 12:12-19 
The consensus of the people, by the fourth century CE, [] dfaut de surnaturel,  
devenait elle-mme prodige: vox populi, vox Dei.121 The approbation of the people was seen 
as confirmation of the approval of the gods. This emphasis on the support of the people was 
a particularly Roman concern from the Republic onwards. In the Res gestae divi Augusti in 
the Latin version Augustus is keen to acknowledge the importance of the plebs in supporting 
him, whereas the Greek is more dismissive of the plebs.122 The connection, in the Roman 
encyclopaedia, between the support of the people and an emperors recusatio suggests that 
the way John recounts Jesus accepting the welcome that the people give him as he enters 
Jerusalem (12:12-19) must be seen not as an anomaly, nor as a contradiction of Jesus 
recusatio. Instead, together with Gods approbation, they demonstrate not a non-political or 
non-physical reign but rather Jesus very fitness for rule.  
Public acclamations such as those described in John 12:13-15 were common practice 
in antiquity.123 However, several overlapping practices must be distinguished from each 
other, because acclamations could be spontaneous expressions of popular opinion, specific 
expressions within the Roman Senate, or the de facto official installation of an emperor by 
the army.124 Furthermore, people could be acclaimed in the context of a salutatio (the 
morning greeting of patrons by clients, also practised by the emperor and his clients), an 
adventus (a procession leading an important person into a city) or a triumphus (the 
121 Branger, Refus, 191. He cites on this Ammianus Marcellinus, History 26.1.5. See also Charlotte 
Rouech, Acclamations in the Later Roman Empire: New Evidence from Aphrodisias, JRS 74 (1984): 181-
199 (187-88). 
122 Cooley, Res Gestae, 29. See similarly David N. Wigtil, The Ideology of the Greek Res gestae, 
ANRW 30.1: 624-38 (627). 
123 Conway, Behold, 81; Rouech, Acclamations, 182. Acclamations were inscribed on milestones, 
but the earliest is from the end of the second century CE (Rouech, Acclamations, 185). 
124 Ernst Badian, acclamation, OCD; Rolf Hurschmann, acclamatio, PC; Giorgio Agamben, The 
Kingdom and the Glory: For a Theological Genealogy of Economy and Government, trans. Lorenzo Chiesa 
and Matteo Mandarini (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2011), 170. Some of my thinking on this and the 
Agamben reference were prompted by Brad Bitner, The Ephesian Artemis Incident (Acts 19:23-40) and the 
Sociology of Acclamation in Polis and Ekklesia (paper presented at SBL, Baltimore, MD, November, 2013). 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
procession of a victorious leader into the city of Rome).125 For these events, [t]here is no 
one standard word in Latinconclamatio, vox, adclamatioor in Greekphn, ekbosis, 
euphmia, among a larger range of terms. For this reason, the occasions on which 
acclamations are used have not always been recognized or understood.126 Therefore I shall 
focus not on similarity of terminology but on similarity of events. 
Although the Roman armys acclamation of an emperor will be important to John 
19:1-3, and the triumph will be discussed further in relation to John 19:16b, the acclamations 
of interest in this section are those offered to Jesus as he is welcomed into Jerusalem (John 
4:40-42; 12:12-19). These can be compared with the evidence from P. Fouad 8, which seems 
to list the acclamations given to another man whose arrival was heralded with portents and 
prophecies and who himself performed signs, Vespasian (Suetonius, Vesp. 7; Tacitus, Hist. 
4.812; Dio Cassius, Roman History 65.8.12). The papyrus lists the acclamations at his 
entrance into Alexandria:    ...  ,   ...  
    ...     ...   ...  , ...  
  ...   ...    ...   .127 
This event demonstrates that an acclamatio in its simplest formgives a man a particular 
epithet such as so-and-so is great, or good, or patriotic, philopatris.128  
125 Rolf Hurschmann, salutatio, PC; Walter Eder, triumph, triumphal procession, PC; Christian 
Gizewski, adventus, PC; Ernst Badian, triumph, OCD. The triumph will be discussed further below and in 
Section 5.1.2. 
126 Rouech, Acclamations, 181 and 181 n. 2. 
127 The upright emperor  that he be healthy, Lord Caesar  Vespasian, the one saviour and 
benefactor  the sun that rises  watch over us  Lord Augustus,  the son of Ammon  God Caesar  
God Caesar Vespasian  Lord Augustus Vespasian [author translation from text partially reconstructed in 
O. Guraud et al., eds., P. Fouad, Les Papyrus Fouad I: Nos 1-89 (Le Caire: Imprimerie de l'Institut Franais 
d'Archologie Orientale, 1939), 16 and corrected in Revel Coles, Angelo Geissen, and Ludwig Koenen, Some 
Corrections and Notes to P. Fouad, ZPE 11 (1973): 235-39 (235)]. This event is mentioned by Suetonius at 
Vesp. 7.1. See Brad Bitner on the types of pithy, rhythmic acclamations usually used [Paul's Political Strategy 
in 1 Corinthians 1-4: Constitution and Covenant, SNTSMS 163 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2015), 278]. 
128 Rouech, Acclamations, 182. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
Such an event was not uniquely Roman;  was the normal Greek expression 
used to describe the joyful reception of Hellenistic sovereigns into a city.129 However, while 
Brown adduces a second century BCE example, it is worth noting that, with the expansion 
of the Roman empire, an adventus would have more and more frequently occurred with the 
arrival of a specifically Roman dignitary. Josephus tells of similar behaviour in Antioch at 
the arrival of Titus in 70 or 71 CE (J.W. 7.5.2 102-104).130 Because these events were part 
of first- and second-century CE experience, Johns description of Jesus adventus into 
Jerusalem would resonate with his hearers.131 However, before discussing John 12 further, I 
want to dismiss one other passage that has sometimes been interpreted as an adventus. 
In John 4:40-42, after the wise woman of Sychar has been told, and then suggested 
the possibility that Jesus is the Christ (vv. 25-26, 29), the men of the town come out to 
persuade Jesus to stay with them for two days.132 Craig Koester brings out the imperial 
connotations of this scene: By going out of Sychar to meet Jesus, inviting him into their 
town, and calling him savior, the Samaritans gave Jesus a welcome similar to those granted 
129 Brown, John, 1.461-62; Schnackenburg, John, 2.374-75; Lincoln, Gospel, 343; Brant, John, 191. 
130 Zetterholm, Formation, 117-120. Josephus records that Vespasian was similarly welcomed into 
Tiberias (J.W. 3.9.8 459). For other examples of advents, see Josephus, J.W. 1.33.9 670; 4.2.5 112-113, 
117; 7.4.1 70-71. Some of these are also cited by Craig R. Koester, The Savior of the World (John 4:42), 
JBL 109.4 (1990): 665-680 (666); Keener, John, 1.627 n. 444; 2.868-69; Keener also points out the practice of 
going out to meet people without acclamations, 2.843 n. 80. Although not in the context of an adventus, 
acclamations are recorded in Alexandria and Ephesus as well. For Alexandria: P. Oxy. 25 2435; Victor 
Ehrenberg, and Arnold H. M. Jones, Documents Illustrating the Reigns of Augustus & Tiberius, 2nd ed. 
(Oxford: Clarendon, 1983), no. 320. These are translated in Robert K. Sherk, The Roman Empire: Augustus to 
Hadrian (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988), 60-61. For a discussion of the welcome of 
Germanicus, see John Garrett Winter, Life and Letters in the Papyri, The Jerome Lectures (Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press, 1933), 10-13; ric Perrin-Saminadayar, La prparation des entres royales et 
impriales dans les cits de l'orient hellnophone, d'Alexandre le Grand aux Svres, in Les entres royales et 
impriales: histoire, reprsentation et diffusion d'une crmonie publique, de l'Orient ancien  Byzance, ed. 
Agns Brenger and Eric Perrin-Saminadayar, De l'archologie  l'histoire (Paris: De Boccard, 2009), 67-90 
(81). For the procession of Roman statues in Ephesus, see Christine M. Thomas, At Home in the City of 
Artemis: Religion in Ephesos in the Literary Imagination of the Roman Period, in Ephesos, Metropolis of 
Asia: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Its Archaeology, Religion, and Culture, ed. Helmut Koester, HTS 41 
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1995), 81-117 (110); Rogers, Sacred, 158-62. 
131 For other mentions of acclamations, this time in Alexandria, see Wiedemann, Nero, 275 (in 19 
CE and again in 66). For Vespasians acclamations in Alexandria and Judaea, see Griffin, Flavians, 4, 5 n. 
18. For another description that connects architecture, Latin and an imperial acclamation, this time for Hadrian 
in Judaea, see Eck, Language, 140-43. 
132 The designation wise woman of Sychar is based on her conversation at the well where she shows 
herself to be cooperative, open-minded, perceptive, initiating, responsive and a witness [Cornelis Bennema, 
Encountering Jesus: Character Studies in the Gospel of John (Milton Keynes: Paternoster, 2009), 92]. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
to visiting rulers.133 Warren Carter also brings out the imperial connotations of this scene. 
He lists references to  in contexts related to Greek rulers and gods, Roman emperors 
and officials, Israels God and even Josephus himself, welcomed as benefactor and savior 
by the Galileans  during the 66-70 CE war against Rome (Life 259).134 Carter goes on to 
discuss five further factors that enhance this passages contrast between Jesus and the 
Roman emperor: (1) God is often called  in the LXX specifically when he, like Jesus, 
is saving Israel from colonial oppressors; (2) citing Koester, the Samaritans enact an 
adventus; (3) the oppression of both Samaritans and Jews by Rome ushers in a time when 
Jesus can become a saviour for both, thus promoting peace between two formerly 
antagonistic groups; (4) Romes oppression of Samaria means that Jesus might prove to be 
a true saviour, unlike Rome, and (5) Jesus is saviour in that his rule over the world saves 
oppressed peoples from the rule of any nation styling itself ruler, in this case Rome.135 
The problem, however, is that while connections between Jesus and the Roman 
emperor might emerge in retrospect when the Roman encyclopaedia is opened in the trial 
narrative, it is hard to see how they would appear in the context of Samaria. To call John 
4:40-42 an adventus requires the conflation of verses 40 and 42, and a collapse of the two 
intervening days. Furthermore, the text specifies that the title (   ) is not 
given to Jesus, but is said about Jesus to the woman (contra 2).136 Certainly there is a 
rapprochement between Jews and Samaritans, and Carters insight that Samaritans needed 
saving from the Jews (  ) as much as from Rome is pertinent. Yet Romes role 
133 Koester, Savior, 666. 
134 Carter, John, 188, 201 n. 47. See, similarly, Michael Labahn, Heiland der Welt: Der gesandte 
Gottessohn und der rmische Kaiserein Thema johanneischer Christologie?, in Zwischen den Reichen: Neues 
Testament und rmische Herrschaft: Vortrge auf der ersten Konferenz der European Association for Biblical 
Studies, ed. Michael Labahn and Jrgen Zangenberg, Tanz 36 (Tbingen: Francke, 2002), 147-74 (149-52, 
especially inscriptional evidence for emperors on p. 151); Richey, Roman, 82-91. Bruce Winter lists an 
Alexandrian coin from 62-63 CE where Nero is named     [Divine Honours for the 
Caesars: The First Christians Responses (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2015), 72]. 
135 Carter, John, 189-91. 
136 These remarks are also pace Keener, John, 1.627; Richey, Roman, 89. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
in this process must be inferred from history as it is not in the text (contra 3).137 Allegorizing 
Rome as the wise woman of Sychars man, who is not her husband (v. 18), supports the 
proposal that Jesus is more truly Savior than the emperor, and, grounded like the rest of 
the passage, in the Jewish encyclopaedia (2 Kings 17:24; Josephus, Ant. 9.11.1 288) 
provides a possible reading.138 However, one might expect in this case a title such as saviour 
from the world on the analogy of saviour from the Jews (contra 1 & 5). 
Many other proposals for interpreting this passage have been offered, but the element 
of interest in this section is the relation of the Roman imperial title to the Jewish context of 
the narrative.139 Michael Labahn offers a nuanced discussion. On the one hand,    
 does not depend on a Roman encyclopaedia for its meaning. On the contrary, Labahn 
points out [d]ie Bezeichnung Jesu als Retter der Welt hat folglich ihr Fundament in der 
johanneischen Christologie selbst. [D]ie johanneische Semantik hinreichend 
Sinnbildungspotentiale bereithlt.140 However, it does not follow that imperial connections 
are completely absent.141 Even though Labahn understands the phrase itself from within the 
universe of discourse of the Gospel grounded in the Jewish encyclopaedia, [g]ehren die 
rmischen Kaiser zu den  der religisen Umwelt des johanneischen Christentums 
und wird ihre universelle Bedeutung als Rettergestalt gefeiert, wofr das inschriftliche 
Material in zeitlicher Nhe zur Abfassung des vierten Evangeliums spricht, so schliet der 
137 Carter, John, 190, emphasis original. 
138 Carter, John, 190. 
139 For some other proposals, see Duke, Irony, 103. For the specific allusions to betrothal scenes, see, 
e.g., Brodie, Gospel, 217-219, 225. Others who note the importance of abiding, thus separating the invitation 
from the acclamation in a way that precludes Koesters analysis, include Sandra M. Schneiders, Written That 
You May Believe: Encountering Jesus in the Fourth Gospel, 2nd ed. (New York: Crossroad, 2003), 142-43; 
Dorothy Lee, Abiding in the Fourth Gospel: A Case Study in Feminist Biblical Theology, in A Feminist 
Companion to John, ed. Amy-Jill Levine (Cleveland: Pilgrim, 2003), 64-78 (69); Neyrey, Cultural, 66, 169. 
140 Labahn, Heiland, 155. Teresa Okure lists 3:16-17; 5:24; 12:47; 1:29; 8:12; 9:5; 12:46 and 6:33, 
51 [Teresa Okure, The Johannine Approach to Mission: A Contextual Study of John 4:1-42, WUNT 2.31 
(Tbingen: J. C. B. Mohr, 1988), 176. See, more briefly, Labahn, Heiland, 152-53]. 
141 See Brown, John, 1.175; Robinson, Priority, 67; Koester, Savior, 666; Cassidy, John's Gospel, 
35; Keener, John, 1.627-28 nn. 446-49.  
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
Titel im Johannesevangelium dieses Ansprche fr den zeitgenssischen Leser aus.142 
While I agree in general with this reasoning, I am further suggesting that the imperial 
connotations of the term     would not be fully blown up until the 
Johannine trial narrative brought the Roman encyclopaedia into view. 
The entry into Jerusalem, on the other hand, clearly echoes the Roman advents 
described above: On the next day, the great crowd that had come for the festival heard that 
Jesus was coming into Jerusalem. They took branches of palm trees and went out to receive 
him. They were shouting, Hosanna (John 12:12-13a, author translation).143 Nevertheless, 
except for the action itself, the crowds, the festival, the city, the palm branches and the shout 
are all Jewish.144 The palms in particular (v. 13) are also mentioned in 1 Macc. 13:51 in 
connection with peace and liberation from gentile rule.145 Furthermore, palm trees and palm 
fronds appeared on a long series of coins, some early ones from Palestine and others minted 
by Rome after the first and second Jewish revolts.146 Palms were also used in the processions 
142 Labahn, Heiland, 155. See also Koester, Savior, 674. Schnackenburg notes the special and 
exclusive way that John uses this title but does not believe that it is meant to be exclusionary (John, 1.458). 
Although Cassidy pays little attention to the Roman cultural units of this phrase, he also concludes that John 
presents this title as exclusive to Jesus (John's Gospel, 34-35). 
143 Gerhard van den Heever, Space, Social Space, and the Construction of Early Christian Identity in 
First Century Asia Minor, R&T 17.3/4 (2010): 205-243 (235-36). Brodie rightly notes that the cry of 
Hosanna,  a word which means Save  had taken on the means of an exclamation of praise 
(Salvation) (Gospel, 409). See also , BDAG 1106. It is also relevant, as Michael Daise points out, 
that the Hebrew is transliterated rather than translated with a word suggested by the LXX [Quotations with 
Remembrance Formulae in the Fourth Gospel, in Abiding Words: The Use of Scripture in the Gospel of 
John, ed. Alicia D. Myers and Bruce G. Schuchard, SBL Resources for Biblical Study 81 (Atlanta: SBL Press, 
2015), 75-91 (83)]. 
144 Thomas Brodie offers an excellent summary of these connections, along with the question of where 
the palm branches might have come from. He connects them with the tree of life (Gospel, 409-410). See also 
this passages connections with 2 Sam 6:18; 14:4; 2 Kings 6:26; Zech 9:9; Zeph 3:16-17 in Brown, John, 1.457, 
462. Menken adds 1 Kings (3 Kingdoms) 1 and Gen. 49:11 LXX (Quotations, 88-89, 93, 94-95). For the way 
     has already functioned as a messianic title, see Keener, John, 2.868. However, 
Keener goes too far when he asserts that the issue here is what kind of king, not whose king (2.868 n. 8). I 
shall show that it is both; see Section 7.1. Haenchen is incorrect when he states, The title for Jesus, the king 
of Israel, which plays a large role in the Johannine passion narrative, appears here for the first time (John, 
93). The only other place where Jesus is called the king of Israel is by Nathanael in John 1:49. In the passion 
narrative, he is either     or simply  (18:33, 37, 39; 19:3, 12, 14, 15, 19, 21). 
145 Lincoln rightly connects the palm branches with 1 Macc. 13:51; 2 Macc. 10:7; T. Naph. 5.4; Ps 
118:25-26; Zeph 3:15 (Gospel, 343). 
146 James F. Strange, The Art and Archaeology of Ancient Judaism, in Judaism in Late Antiquity: 
Part One: The Literary and Archaeological Sources, ed. Jacob Neusner (Boston: Brill, 2001), 64-114 (106-
107). 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
of the feasts of Tabernacles and of the Dedication.147 To Jewish Jesus-believers hearing the 
Gospel outside of Palestine, the evocation of such images would seem to connect with the 
Jewish rather than a Roman encyclopaedia.  
Several scholars adduce the context of the Zechariah quotation (John 12:15; Zech 
9:9) and, noting that the promise is that all people will come to Jerusalem (Zech 8:20-23; 
9:7), argue that this is not a specifically Jewish scene.148 However, in both the larger contexts 
of Zechariah and also Zephaniah (Zeph 3:14-16), which John 12:15 seems to cite as well, 
the scattered people being gathered are the people of Israel (Zech 9:8-16; 10:3-12, esp. 8-
10; Zeph 3:9-10, 19-20) and what is promised to gentiles is vengeance and wrath (Zech 9:1-
6, 13; 10:5, 11; Zeph 3:6, 8, 19).149 John 12:15, then, echoes passages that express the hope 
of liberation of an oppressed people. It is unclear, therefore, in what way Thomas Brodie 
might be justified in characterizing a nationalistic triumphal march as superficial.150  
Menken has suggested that the phrase   (John 12:15) comes in response to 
Jesus power as a ruler and a miracle worker, who even raises someone from the dead: the 
people are not to fear him.151 This reassurance echoes the contexts of theophanies  and 
147 Brown, John, 1.460, 327. Later church fathers had other non-Roman ideas: For Tertullian palms 
announce the triumph of martyrs over the Antichrist (Scorpiace 12.10), and Augustine takes the branches for 
songs of praise (Homily 51.2) [Mark Edwards, John, ed. John Sawyer, Christopher Rowland, and Judith 
Kovacs, Blackwell Bible Commentaries (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2004), 125].  
148 Bernard, St. John, 2.424; Brown, John, 1.462; Robinson, Priority, 232 n. 60; Menken, Quotations, 
90-91); Ruth Sheridan, Retelling Scripture: The Jews and the Scriptural Citations in John 1:19-12:50, BibInt 
110 (Leiden: Brill, 2012), 220, 224; Mary Coloe, The Identity and Significance of the Hellenes John 12:12-
43 (paper presented at Johannine Literature Section of the Annual Meeting of the SBL, Atlanta, GA, 23 
November, 2015). See also Bekkens comments regarding Gen. 49:11 and the way that he understands that 
reference to imply a connection between the choice of the donkey as a mount and Judahs rule over the gentiles 
(Lawsuit, 240). Note then that it is unclear in what way Bekken thinks the donkey corrects an excessively 
nationalistic understanding of [Jesus] kingship (240). 
149 For Yahwehs concern for Israel in the context of Zech 9:9, specifically in vv. 11-17 for the 
Israelites who have been removed from their homeland, namely, the exiles, see Carol L. Meyers, and Eric M. 
Meyers, Zechariah 9-14: A New Translation with Introduction and Commentary, ed. William Foxwell Albright 
and David Noel Freedman, AB 25C (New York: Doubleday, 1993), 162, 173-77. And for the Zephaniah 
passage, while verse 3:9 certainly portrays a universal worship of the Lord, reminiscent of, or actually going 
beyond, the idea in 2:11, the remnant (v. 13), and the restoration (v. 20), either of the captives in their land 
or more generally of Jerusalems fortunate position, are focused on Israel [Adele Berlin, Zephaniah: A New 
Translation with Introduction and Commentary, ed. William Foxwell Albright and David Noel Freedman, AB 
25A (New York: Doubleday, 1994), 133, 136, 148]. 
150 Brodie, Gospel, 409. 
151 Note that for those hearing the Gospel through Jewish lenses, the quotation might also connect 
with 3 Kingdoms 1 where Solomons legitimacy as Davids heir is affirmed by seating him on his mule. The 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
announcements of Gods reign.152 Yet, the question remains: what part does Rome play in 
such a Jewish scene?  
The reference in verse 17 to the crowds who witnessed the raising of Lazarus might 
resonate for Roman-aware auditors with the growing importance of the healing powers of 
emperors, especially Vespasians in Alexandria, in connection with his adventus.153 There is 
one record from antiquity where a Roman emperor (Severus Antoninus), donkeys (), 
palm branches (), a Roman prefect (Septimius Heraclitus) and a procession () 
to meet him are all mentioned together. This was in 215 CE when the Temple of Jupiter 
Capitolinus in Arsino, Egypt, recorded receipts for expenses incurred for a celebration 
(BGU 362). The occasion included the parading of the statues of the gods which, along with 
those in the temple, were polished and crowned. In this case, no one rode on the donkeys 
who instead carried the trees and palm branches whose use is not specified. This late 
evidence is hard to interpret. There was a Jewish community at Arsino, but this celebration 
has no recorded connection to any nationalistic hopes of theirsit celebrates both Egyptian 
and Roman gods and emperors.154 Penelope Glare argues that this procession fits into the 
logical progression of the adoption of emperor worship in Egypt.155 If this is so, it also 
demonstrates that palm branches might, by the third century CE, be used outside of Palestine 
in an adventus for a Roman official with no necessary Jewish resonances. 
Yet, this report is unique and late. While some elements of John 12:12-19 cohere 
with Roman practices, the narrative seems more grounded in Jewish nationalism. And, if 
donkey, then, for them would serve to affirm Jesus kingship, not to counter or modify it (Menken, Quotations, 
86-87, 93). 
152 Lincoln, Gospel, 344-45. 
153 Trevor S. Luke, A Healing Touch for Empire: Vespasian's Wonders in Domitianic Rome, Greece 
& Rome 57.1 (2010): 77-106 (esp. 92 and 106). 
154 For a third century BCE synagogue (possibly even more than one) in Arsino/Krokodilopolis as 
well as evidence from 115-117 CE, see Joseph Mlze Modrzejewski, The Jews of Egypt: From Rameses II to 
Emperor Hadrian, trans. Robert Cornman (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1995), 88-89. 
155 Penelope Glare, The Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus at Arsinoe and the Imperial Cult, in 
Proceedings of the 20th International Congress of Papyrologists, ed. Adam Blow-Jacobsen (Copenhagen: 
Museum Tusculanum Press, 1994), 550-54 (552, 554). 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
Jewish elements are being set within an essentially Roman practice, there might be reason 
to interpret this narrative not just as an adventus but as a Roman triumph.156 Jesus has just 
displayed his power over death and this, indeed, is what John says prompts the crowd to go 
out to meet him (12:17-18).157 The ensuing discourse makes clear that Jesus was in fact a 
warrior king, who had come to cast out the ruler of this world (John 12:31), as Koester 
correctly notes.158 There is, certainly, an implicit rejection of Rome in welcoming a Jewish 
miracle worker as the King of Israel without Romes approval. Thus, categorizing this scene 
as a Roman triumph enacted by Jerusalem seems to make sense.  
However, the distinctive elements of a triumph are missing.159 Jesus has no special 
dress, there are no spoils of war, and the only possible reference to captives is in verse 19: 
      Behold, the world has gone after him (author translation). 
This cannot refer to captives for three reasons. First, the world in John includes the people 
that Jesus came to save, not to take captive (e.g., John 3:16).160 Secondly, when  
or  are used with  and a nominal elsewhere, the expression can have the sense 
of becoming an adherent/follower (Matt 16:24; Mark 1:20; Luke 9:23; 14:27 and, 
somewhat similarly 21:8 and Jude 7), not simply coming after, for example, in time (Matt 
156 E.g., Brant, John, 189-90.  
157 Brown, John, 1.462. Others making this connection include Nonnus of Nisibis from the ninth 
century CE [Commentary on the Gospel of Saint John, trans. Robert W. Thomson, ed. James T. Robinson, 
Writings from the Islamic World 1 (Atlanta: SBL Press, 2014), 271], as well as Schnackenburg (John, 1.374). 
Bultmann sees this connection as an afterthought and distinguishes the crowd of v. 17 (from v. 9) from that of 
v. 18 (from v. 12) (John, 417, 419). 
158 Koester, Symbolism, 111. 
159 Josephus, J.W. 6.9.2 417; 7.5.4-6 126-57; Badian, triumph, OCD; Ittai Gradel, Emperor 
Worship and Roman Religion, OCM (Oxford: Clarendon, 2002), 34-35; Emma Dench, Romulus' Asylum: 
Roman Identities from the Age of Alexander to the Age of Hadrian (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), 
76-77; Kaimio, Romans, 44; Rudolf Haensch, L'entre par la mer dans l'antiquit, in Les entres royales et 
impriales: histoire, reprsentation et diffusion d'une crmonie publique, de l'Orient ancien  Byzance, ed. 
Agns Brenger and Eric Perrin-Saminadayar, De l'archologie  l'histoire (Paris: De Boccard, 2009), 91-99 
(96). For a royal entrance, it was often the dress of the crowd that was emphasized in descriptions; sacrifices 
were part of both events (Perrin-Saminadayar, Prparation, 70-72). Note however, that in Philos description 
of the mocking of Agrippa at Alexandria, it is the dress of Carabbas that is emphasized, and the usual 
installation of statues in the temple is transformed into an act of desecration in the synagogue (Flacc. 36-42). 
160 Barrett has pointed out that the world is the scene of the saving mission of Jesus, which is 
grounded in the love of God for the world (Gospel, 161). For more on this categorization of the world, see 
Lars Kierspel, The Jews and the World in the Fourth Gospel: Parallelism, Function, and Context, ed. Jrg 
Frey, WUNT 2.220 (Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2006), 155-213. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
3:11; Mark 1:7; John 1:15, 27, 30).161 Thirdly, in a Roman triumph, at least, the captives 
would parade in front of the imperator, not follow behind.162 
Jo-Ann Brant claims to follow Tertullian (Cor. 13.2) in characterizing John 12:12-
15 as a Roman triumph, despite the lack of the requisite elements described above.163 Yet 
Tertullian does not actually mention a triumph; that word is only a function of the English 
translation that Brant used. The Latin, Dominus tuus, ubi secundum scripturam Hierusalem 
ingredi uoluit, nec asinum habuit priuatum (Your Lord, when according to Scripture he 
wanted to enter Jerusalem, had no donkey of his own, author translation), does not use that 
word or even that concept. Furthermore, the use of  in John 12:18, not usually noted, 
forms an inclusio with the nominal form of the word in verse 13. Together, they characterize 
the narrative as a welcome such as an adventus, not as a military triumph.  
What is peculiar about this adventus, though, is Jesus choice of mount: a donkey. 
This is almost unparalleled in Roman history, as far as I have found, except for an 
explanation by Plutarch that women caught in adultery in Cumae were forced to ride donkeys 
(Plutarch Moralia [The Greek Questions] 291.2). Bultmann connects the donkey with 
Dionysus, but it was his companion, Silenus, who rode one (Lucian, Dionysus 2, 4; Ovid, 
Fasti 1.399; 3.735-62).164 Certainly for some ancient people, riding on a donkey would be 
shameful. Josephus tells of Mithradates who mounted a captive naked upon an ass, which 
is considered the highest disgrace by the Parthians (J.W. 18.9.6 356 [Feldman, LCL]). 
Although the disgrace probably came primarily from the involuntary nakedness, being 
forced to ride on the ass seems to add something to the humiliation or else one imagines he 
would be made to walk instead. Both Terence (after the Gospel of John) and Cicero (before) 
161 , BDAG 102; , BDAG 716. Elsewhere in John,  is used in John 1:27, 30 
in the sense of later in time and in the phrase    with the adverbial sense of back or behind. 
162 For the place of the captives in a Roman triumph, see Eder, triumph, PC and especially Beard, 
Triumph, 81.  
163 Brant, John, 190. 
164 Bultmann, John, 418 n. 5; van den Heever, Space, 236. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
use asinus as a derogatory epithet, so for Romans, as well, the animal was not highly 
regarded.165 
That the recipient of an adventus rode in on a donkey would likely create some 
cognitive dissonance for a Roman auditor. Yet, although the donkey would be unexpected, 
a Roman adventus already mixed les thmes anciens de victoire, triomphe, et paix. Elle 
soulignait les qualits martiales de l'empereur, mais il commenait aussi, avec la nouvelle 
anne, un ge de paix.166 Perhaps the choice of a donkey, which he mounts after the 
crowds acclamation, along with the enacted recusatio when the Johannine Jesus hides at 
the end of his speech (12:36), would simply emphasize Jesus modesty and thus his fitness 
to rule.167 
Cultural units from the Jewish encyclopaedia, however, do not suggest such an 
attenuation of Jesus supremacy. During the Amorite Period (2000-1600 BCE), in royal 
entrances in Mesopotamia, [l]a mule reste  lanimal royal.168 This was true for ancient 
Israel as well.169 Thus Johns depiction is not that of a nonviolent Jesus on the donkey 
unlike, for example, Luke, who makes explicit the donkeys connotations of peace 
165 Terence, Andr. 935; Eun. 595; Haut. 875; Cicero, Pis. 30. 
166 Ralph Mathisen, L'adventus consulaire pendant l'Antiquit tardive, in Les entres royales et 
impriales: histoire, reprsentation et diffusion d'une crmonie publique, de l'Orient ancien  Byzance, ed. 
Agns Brenger and Eric Perrin-Saminadayar, De l'archologie  l'histoire (Paris: De Boccard, 2009), 139-56 
(142). Note that this is a peace built on violence, which will be discussed in Section 7.1.2. 
167 Jey J. Kanagaraj, Jesus the King, Merkabah Mysticism and the Gospel of John, Tyndale Bulletin 
47.2 (1996): 349-66 (353). Although Koester thinks these refusals concern the inappropriateness of a political 
kingdom, his analysis rightly notes the retreats at the end of both passages (Why, 166-67). The second is 
usually not noted by commentators. 
168 Pascal Butterlin, Entres royales en Msopotamie: les limites d'une dmarche, in Les entres 
royales et impriales: histoire, reprsentation et diffusion d'une crmonie publique, de l'Orient ancien  
Byzance, ed. Agns Brenger and Eric Perrin-Saminadayar, De l'archologie  l'histoire (Paris: De Boccard, 
2009), 25-46 (35). 
169 Menken cites 2 Kgdms 13:29 (); 16:2 (); 3 Kgdms 1:38, 44 () (Menken, 
Quotations, 92).. Other references can be added: Judges 5:10; 10:4; 12:14; 2 Sam. 17:23; 19:26 (Bernard, St. 
John, 2.426).  
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
(19:38).170 Furthermore, Jesus actions do not seem to surprise the crowd.171 The effect 
intended for the auditors, then, might be the entrance of a Semitic king who saves by his 
power, rather than of a surprisingly humble Roman magistrate. It depends on the 
encyclopaedia most prominent in the auditors abduction. This may explain the variety of 
interpretations attached to the scene.172 Yet, the correct encyclopaedia is given in the text. 
The narrator steps in to explain: he rides on a donkey in fulfilment of prophecy (12:14-15).173 
Ultimately, I return to Michael Labahns conclusions discussed above. The context 
of John 12:12-15 is Jewish and the encyclopaedia that should inform its expressions is the 
Jewish one. Yet, once the Roman encyclopaedia is highlighted in John 18:2837, Roman-
aware auditors of the Fourth Gospel could reframe that previous narrative according to the 
claims of Jesus as a . He is welcomed as a Roman ruler should be; he is acclaimed 
by the people as a Roman ruler would be, and he responds by accepting the acclamations in 
a demonstration of humility. And it is this very humility in the face of acclamations, as has 
already been discussed with respect to John 6:15, that characterizes Jesus, when seen from 
the vantage point of a hearers abductive process through the Johannine trial narrative, as 
one virtuous enough to take up the mantle of Roman rule. In other words Jesus is finally 
depicted as a ruler in the Jewish encyclopaedia and in the Roman one.  
170 Crossan, God, 238. Ridderbos does not dichotomize between a political and some other kind of 
ruler, but notes that riding a donkey serves not as a criticism of and warning against nationalistic monarchy 
but as a message of salvation, the message that from such a king seated on a donkey the people can expect 
peace and well-being (Gospel, 423). The dual nature of Jesus kingship means that evaluations that Jesus 
intended to present himself as a king but  to define his kingship as one of peace (Keener, John, 2.868) have 
to be nuanced in view of the condemnation promised in such passages as John 3:18 [Adele Reinhartz, Love, 
Hate, and Violence in the Gospel of John, in Violence in the New Testament, ed. Shelly Matthews and E. Leigh 
Gibson (New York: T&T Clark, 2005), 109-123 (114-19)]. Keener himself notes that the connections with 
rulers and victorious generals means that the observers might not understand the entry in peaceful terms 
(John, 2.868). It is uncertain, then, why one might expect the disciples, the author(s) of John, or its hearers to 
do so. 
171 William Randolph Bynum, Quotations of Zechariah in the Fourth Gospel, in Abiding Words: The 
Use of Scripture in the Gospel of John, ed. Alicia D. Myers and Bruce G. Schuchard, SBL Resources for 
Biblical Study 81 (Atlanta: SBL Press, 2015), 47-74 (61); citing Brant, John, 191. 
172 See, for example, the short summary of views in Daise, Quotations, 82 n. 21. 
173 Sheridan, Retelling, 219. Brown, for example, notes that the phrase from Zechariah that mentions 
humility is absent from Johns quotation (John, 1.462). 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
4.4. Jesus as Caesar in John 18:3819:22 
Once Jesus has been connected with Caesar in the first ten verses of the Johannine trial 
narrative, two other terms in John 18:3819:22 will reinforce that connection:   
(19:7) and  (19:10-11). Each one has a Roman cultural unit that will be blown up by 
the Roman Haftpunkte and the continuing Roman abduction through the Johannine trial 
narrative. 
4.4.1. Jesus as divi filius 
Already in this chapter, I have noted two examples of scenes where Roman and 
Jewish titles and trappings are presented together. The Samaritans, in a passage full of 
primarily Jewish-Samaritan referents, call Jesus the Saviour of the world, a Roman title for 
Caesar.174 Jesus entry into Jerusalem can be understood as a Roman adventus in which Jesus 
is acclaimed as a King of Israel.175 Earlier in the Gospel (1:49), furthermore, Nathanael calls 
Jesus both the Son of God and the King of Israel.  
These last two titles are also joined in Ps 2:6-7.176 Schnackenburg argues that the 
reversal of their order from the Psalm (king-son) to the Gospel (son-king) speaks against any 
intended reference, and he contrasts this verse with John 11:27 where the order is Christ-son 
(taking King of Israel in the Psalm as a Messianic reference).177 I am not convinced that 
the order of the titles in 1:49 precludes an allusion. However, whether or not the Psalm 
reference is constitutive to either verse in the Fourth Gospel, the joining of these two titles 
at the beginning of the narrative sets up a son-king cultural unit in the universe of discourse 
of the Gospel that resonates within both Jewish and Roman encyclopaedias. This cultural 
unit is then repeated in the woman of Sychar narrative (Christ-saviour of the world) and 
174 Section 4.3.4. 
175 Section 4.3.4. 
176 Bernard, St. John, 64. Bultmann in fact saw Son of God as a synonymous title added by the 
Evangelist to King of Israel in the source (John, 104 n. 7; 107). 
177 Schnackenburg, John, 1.318. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
perhaps in the entry into Jerusalem (whose only Roman element, however, is the entry itself). 
Such a conjoining occurs again in the trial scene when Jesus is dressed as a Roman emperor 
but called     (19:2-5).178 
Besides containing appeals to multiple cultural units, these same verses define Jesus 
identity in terms that include references to a Knigsreichmetapher or a Knigstitel and 
also all includes a phrase such as [k]omm und sieh (1:46) in their contexts.179 Busse lists 
John 1:46 and 12:20-22, but to these John 12:15 and 19:4, 5, 14 can be added.180 So the very 
narratives that contain Signs from multiple encyclopaedias occur in passages that contain 
appeals to look at Jesus. The way this repeated multicultural appeal connects with the stated 
purpose of the Fourth Gospel (20:30-31) will be mentioned further in Chapter 6.181 In this 
section, I want to argue that the Johannine trial narrative blows up the Roman cultural unit 
of one of these titles, Son of God in 19:7.182 
Of course, the topic of Jesus as the Son of God goes far beyond the five uses of the 
phrase (1:49; 5:25; 11:27; 19:7; 20:31) and encompasses all of the references to Jesus as the 
sent Son, and to God as his sending Father.183 Furthermore, since the meaning of the Sign 
/Son of God/ has to be determined by the cultural unit blown up by the context, it does not 
necessarily refer to Caesar every time it occurs, despite the fact that he, too, was a son of a 
god.184 In fact, Keener argues that because Johns Gospel is so rooted in Jewish thought, an 
178 These verses will be the subject of Chapter 5. 
179 Busse, Metaphorik, 281-82.  
180 Busse, Metaphorik, 281-82. John 12:13 might be added as well in the sense that the people are 
going out to meet, and therefore to see, Jesus. 
181 Section 6.1.1. 
182 For other cultural units see, e.g., Keener, John, 1.291-97. 
183 Lincoln, Gospel, 65-66; Andrew T. Lincoln, A Life of Jesus as Testimony: The Divine Courtroom 
and the Gospel of John, in The Divine Courtroom in Comparative Perspective ed. Ari Mermelstein and 
Shalom E. Holtz, BibInt 132 (Leiden: Brill, 2015), 145-66 (153). There is another use possible in 1:34 but that 
will not be debated in this thesis. 
184 Andrew Chester, High ChristologyWhence, When and Why?, Early Christianity 2 (2011): 22-
50 (27). Note that in his list of titles, Pancaro classifies     purely within a Jewish setting and 
confounds this with the messianic terminology of primitive Christianity without discussing the extra-Jewish 
connections of some of the titles that John uses, and omitting discussion of     completely 
(Law, 244). Van Tilborg, on the other hand, notes that son of God, God, Lord, Saviour are all practically 
exclusively reserved for the emperors (Reading, 53). 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
originally non-Jewish Hellenistic understanding of the phrase is unlikely.185 Certainly father 
and son language is sometimes used in the Gospel to define and clarify Jesus identity, with 
references from a Jewish encyclopaedia, such as those listed by Jewett: 2 Sam 7:14; Pss 2:7; 
89:26-27; 4QFlor 1:10-11.186 And in 19:7, one might think that the phrase should be read 
with a cultural unit from the Jewish encyclopaedia, since the accusation that Jesus is Son of 
God is spoken by the Jews who argue that the claim violates their own law. 
Yet in 19:7, unlike in the four other uses of the phrase, the title has no articles:  
.187 C. H. Dodd reasoned that Johns readers in the Graeco-Roman world would 
understand that Pilate shared the superstitious regard entertained by many pagans for the 
 .188 He therefore dismissed as unlikely any connection to the divi filius used 
for the emperor in inscriptions because Pilate does not treat the claim to be   as 
another form of the claim to be  in rivalry to Caesar.189 However, Chapter 6 will 
argue that the Jews do bring up this claim to Pilate specifically for its Roman imperial 
cultural unit in order to incite him to action, and that it is, indeed, this comparison with 
Caesar that both causes fear in Pilate and references the theme of the entire trial narrative: 
loyalty.190 
185 Keener, John, 1.294. 
186 For Jewish cultural units for father-son language, see, e.g., discussions in Lincoln on John 1:51 
and 8:33-44 (Gospel, 66, 270-74, see also 121). For Robert Jewetts list, see Romans: A Commentary, ed. 
Helmut Koester, Hermeneia: A Critical and Historical Commentary on the Bible (Minneapolis: Fortress, 2007), 
104-105. Note that Jewett also cites 1QSa 2:11-12 but the text there is damaged and disputed [James H. 
Charlesworth, ed. The Dead Sea Scrolls: Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek Texts with English Translations, vol. 
1: Rule of the Community and Related Documents, ed. James H. Charlesworth, PTSDSSP (Tbingen: Mohr 
Siebeck, 1994), 117 n. 64]. For some thoughts on broader cultural contexts of Son of God, see G. B. Caird, 
The Language and Imagery of the Bible (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1980), 194-96. However, Caird does not 
seem aware of the ancient rhetoric that allows for multiple divine fathers (195). On that, see below in this 
section. For the development within ancient Judaism of the king as Son of God, see Adela Yarbro Collins, and 
John J. Collins, King and Messiah as Son of God: Divine, Human, and Angelic Messianic Figures in Biblical 
and Related Literature (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2008), 1-100.  
187 Dodd, Tradition, 114. For a discussion of the possibility that this is a Latinism, see Section 3.2.2. 
188 Dodd, Tradition, 114. 
189 Dodd, Tradition, 114 and 114 n. 4.  
190 Chapter 6, especially Section 6.2.2.3. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
There is a somewhat parallel usage that Barrett notes in John 5:27.191 In that verse, 
in response to the Jews who question him about working on the Sabbath, Jesus answers, 
within a longer speech, that God     ,    . 
The noun  might still be definite in this sentence since it comes before the copula.192 And 
Barrett suggests that the absence of the articles points both to son of Man in Dan 7:13 and 
also to a qualitative meaning emphasizing Jesus humanity, so that the anarthrous phrase 
in 19:7 has a similar qualitative sense.193 It is possible that some auditors of Johns Gospel 
would have heard the phrase   as such, as an expression of Jesus essential deity. 
However, it is the Roman cultural unit of this phrase that is relevant to my analysis. 
Adolf Deissmann noted,   is a translation of the divi filius which is  
frequent in Latin Inscriptions and it is to that cultural unit that Roman-aware auditors would 
be attuned.194 Yet this conclusion is not without problems. [S]on of god, as Thatcher 
explains, was the titular name of the first true Roman emperor, Caesar Augustus (Octavian), 
who had been proclaimed divi filius (son of the deified Julius Caesar) by the Roman senate 
in 27 BCE.195 This title was not unique to Augustus. Zeller has rightly disproved Tae Hun 
Kims assertion to that effect, and Zeller also emphasizes that the title divi filius or   
191 Barrett, Gospel, 262. 
192 In der Mehrzahl der Flle steht das Prdikatsnomen mit Artikel, wenn die Kopula voraufgeht; 
ohne Artikel steht es hufiger, wenn die Kopula folgt (BDR 273). Furthermore, the absence of an article for 
 would likely entail the absence of an article for , although Apollonius Canon does have 
exceptions [Stanley E. Porter, Idioms of the Greek New Testament, Biblical Languages: Greek 2 (Sheffield: 
Sheffield Academic Press, 1994), 111-12; Sanford D. Hull, Exceptions to Apollonius' Canon in the New 
Testament: A Grammatical Study, Trinity Journal 7.1 (1986): 3-16]. Note that Winter misunderstands the 
grammar of the article (Divine, 71). 
193 Barrett, Gospel, 262, 542. 
194 Adolf Deissmann, Bible Studies: Contributions Chiefly from Papyri and Inscriptions to the History 
of the Language, the Literature and the Religion of Hellenistic Judaism and Primitive Christianity, trans. 
Alexander Grieve (Winona Lake, IN: Alpha, 1923), 167. As Keener rightly notes, Deissmann begins his 
discussion by saying that the expression goes back to an Old Testament form, but presumably he is 
distinguishing between historical transmission and authorial composition (John, 294; citing Deissmann, Bible, 
166). 
195 Thatcher, Greater, 85. See also the excellent discussion of the Roman concept of divi filius in 
Michael Peppard, The Son of God in the Roman World: Divine Sonship in Its Social and Political Context 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011), 46-85. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
only legitimates the successor of a consecrated emperor without divinizing him.196 Only 
after apotheosis could emperors be called , thus allowing each successive emperor to 
become Son of God as well, as van Tilborg demonstrates from Ephesian inscriptions.197 
However, Mowery highlights a serious concern: only in Matthew does   occur, the 
phrase with a prepositive genitive  that exactly corresponds to word order of the Latin 
divi filius.198 
Although this observation strengthens Mowerys argument for Roman resonances in 
Matt 14:33; 27:43, 54, it does not disprove them for   in John and Marknor does 
Mowery argue that it does.199 First, ancient use was not completely uniform, and Mowery 
himself offers a rare exception: IGR 4.1173 uses the dative to dedicate the inscription to 
  ,  . In Chapter 5, furthermore, I shall discuss the way in 
which textual markers that evoke other texts do not have to be exact quotations in order to 
function as literary allusions, and that insight applies to  /divi filius as well. Also, the 
words  and  do frequently occur in that order in inscriptions, although not as 
translations of divi filius, and with  in the dative. One example is an inscription 
(IAph2007 5.207) with a dedication to Tiberius, found in Aphrodisias and dated to the early 
second century CE. It reads, in part:        
[]    (to the Emperor Caesar Trajan Hadrian Augustus, son 
of the god Trajan, grandson of the god Nerva [author translation]). The word  appears 
twice: once in the phrase    (son of the god Trajan) and once in the phrase 
196 Tae Hun Kim, The Anarthrous   in Mark 15,39 and the Roman Imperial Cult, Bib 79.2 
(1998): 221-41 (225, 230-38); Dieter Zeller, New Testament Christology in Its Hellenistic Reception, NTS 
47.3 (2001): 312-333 (332 and 332 n. 109). Robert Mowery, too, contradicts Kim [Son of God in Roman 
Imperial Titles and Matthew, Bib 83.1 (2002): 100-110 (104)]. 
197 Tilborg, Reading, 41-47. For examples of emperors called Son of God in Ephesus, see Tilborg, 
Reading, 39. 
198 Mowery, Son, 101, 109. 
199 Mowery, Son, 109. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
  [] (grandson of the god Nerva). However, because these phrases occur 
consecutively,  and  also appear adjacent to one another in that order. This is quite a 
frequent occurrence in the titles of later Roman emperors; indeed, the juxtaposition occurs 
in the nominative case as well:   (e.g., IAph2007 8.34; AE 1989, 0683; IG 7.69). The 
argument that a literate author who meant divi filius would translate it as   because 
of a misreading of inscriptions is not a strong one, and would not be mentioned in this thesis 
except that   and   occur in precisely the social stratum of Roman retainers 
(such as stonecutters) posited as auditors of the Fourth Gospel.200 And because of the Roman 
Haftpunkte in the Johannine trial narrative as well as the lack of articles in this phrase (and 
also Pilates fearful reaction), I shall blow up the Roman cultural unit for the meaning of  
 in John 19:7 when I provide an exegetical interpretant in Chapter 6. 
Warren Carter also argues that the term Son of God creates an opposition between 
Jesus and the emperor.201 However, he adds that there is also an opposition between fathers: 
one who has existed from the beginning of the world and one who was only recently 
deified.202 Since, as Carter notes, [a]ntiquity is authority, Jesus wins this agonistic 
competition.203 However, Carters argument does not take into account the constructed 
lineages of Roman emperors.204 The deified Julius Caesar was not Augustus only father, 
although he was one of them (IG 12.6.1.161).205 Horace prays, What the glorious 
descendant of Anchises and Venus asks of you with white oxen, may he obtain (Saec. 49-
200 Section 3.1.4. 
201 Carter, John, 194-95. 
202 Carter, John, 195. The distinction between deified and divine is made relevant to this term also by 
Karl Galinsky, The Cult of the Roman Emperor: Uniter or Divider?, in Rome and Religion: A Cross-
Disciplinary Dialogue on the Imperial Cult, ed. Jeffrey Brodd and Jonathan L. Reed, SBL WGRWSup 5 
(Atlanta: SBL Press, 2011), 1-21 (17). 
203 Carter, John, 195.  
204 Peppard, Son, 48. 
205 IG 12.6.1.161 is a 8-9 CE marble stele on the island of Samos that, reconstructed, in part states 
]- [] [ ][  ]. Dodd mentions this connection as well and Zanker 
shows the way Octavian was represented as divi filius on coins (Dodd, Interpretation, 250; Zanker, Power, 33-
36). See also Sabine Grebe who connects Augustus authority to his kingly forbears (Authority, 51, 60).  
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
51 [Rudd, LCL]). And Ovid, as he draws to the end of Metamorphosis, describes the 
deification of Julius Caesar in these terms: 
Scarce had he [genitor, 15.807, in other words Jupiter] spoken when 
fostering Venus took her place within the senate-house, unseen of all, caught 
up the passing soul of her Caesar from his body, and not suffering it to vanish 
into air, she bore it towards the stars of heaven. And as she bore it she felt it 
glow and burn, and released it from her bosom. Higher than the moon it 
mounted up and, leaving behind it a fiery train, gleamed as a star. And now, 
beholding the good deeds of his son [Octavius], he [Julius] confesses that 
they are greater than his own, and rejoices to be surpassed by him. And, 
though the son forbids that his own deeds be set above his fathers, still fame, 
unfettered and obedient to no ones will, exalts him spite of his desire, and in 
this one thing opposes his commands (15.843-54 [Miller & Goold, LCL]). 
This passage demonstrates the connection between Jupiter, Venus, and the deified 
Julius Caesar and Octavius. (It also brings up value of humility as was described earlier in 
this chapter.206) Furthermore, Julius Caesar is not described as a dead emperor (pace 
Carter), but as a living member of the heavenly witnesses to Octavius.207 A few lines later, 
Ovid describes the proper spheres of each: Jupiter controls the heights of heaven and the 
kingdoms of the triformed universe; but the earth is under Augustus sway. Each is both sire 
(pater) and ruler (rector) (858-60 [Miller & Goold, LCL]).208 Augustus rule is thus made 
parallel to Jupiters. 
Helen Bond notes also that Greek and Roman mythology contains numerous 
examples of gods taking on human form or begetting children.209 This extended the 
possibilities for the Son of God reference beyond ones immediate or even adopted mother 
and father. Suetonius repeats the story that Augustus mother was impregnated by Apollo 
(Aug. 994.4). In this way, Augustus could be divi filius in more senses than one, and his 
father was not only the deified Julius, but also Apollo and his mother was Venus.210 The 
206 Section 4.3.1. 
207 Carter, John, 307. 
208 See further on the connections between the emperor and the gods, Beard, North, and Price, 
Religions, 182, 185-88, 191, 196-206.  
209 Bond, Pilate, 187. 
210 See further Zanker, Power, 33-37, 49-53. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
deification of each Roman emperor, in turn, provided the rationale for the new emperors 
own connections to his divinized father and his god-ancestors.211 That Jesus is said to have 
claimed the title   does not in itself position him above Caesar. However, it does 
implicitly compare him to the emperor, strengthening the correlation begun in 18:33.212 
4.4.2. The  of Jesus 
Another word with a Roman cultural unit also strengthens this correlation. The term 
 is especially highlighted in John 19:10-11 by its use three times in two verses. 
Although each time it is part of the phrase  , its meaning cannot be reduced to 
what Barrett calls a Johannine idiom, to be able, since even Barrett interprets John 10:17 
and the textual variant in 7:1 according to that idiom, but in 19:10 as postestas and in 19:11 
as referencing (for him, in a theological-political contrast) the absolute authority of God.213 
A Johannine idiom that is only applicable in two out of four instances cannot be called 
Johannine. Furthermore, in verse 11, the  that Jesus references is not that of God, but 
(as in verse 10) that of Pilate. 
Instead, following the approach adopted in this thesis, a Roman encyclopaedia will 
be investigated to discover the way Romans conceived of . When the word is used in 
the Greek version of the Res gestae divi Augusti, it translates the Latin postestas seven times 
(4.4; 6.1, 2; 10.1; 15:2; 34.1, 3) and imperium twice (8.3, 4;   for consulari 
cum imperio).214 Lewis and Short suggest, however, that imperium and postestas are 
practically synonyms in political domains so that may explain why  translates both 
211 Hans-Josef Klauck, The Religious Context of Early Christianity: A Guide to Graeco-Roman 
Religions, trans. Brian McNeil (Minneapolis: Fortress, 2003), 293, 309, 312. 
212 See also Tilborg, Reading, 54-55. 
213 Barrett, Gospel, 310, 377, 542-43. 
214 Note that although by the late first century CE imperium could mean territorial empire,  
could not refer to a territory (Cooley, Res Gestae, 27-28; Harrill, Paul, 289). On this, see also the variety of 
translations for imperium in Vergil, Aeneid 6.782 and 795 , for which Fairclough uses empire and Williams 
prefers power and dominion [Fairclough, LCL; Virgil, The neid of Virgil, trans. Theodore Chickering 
Williams (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1910)]. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
of these terms.215 Another Latin term, auctoritas, translated as , is brought into the 
discussion by Lance Richey because Augustus makes it clear that while he rules by 
auctoritas, postestas is something different.216 Auctoritas is grounded in the personal 
attributes of the ruler that demonstrate to the Roman people ones fitness to rule, thus gaining 
the consensus of the people discussed above.217 However, potestas (and, see below, 
imperium) is delegated power.218  
With regard to its use in John 19:11, Jesus reminds Pilate that his  comes from 
above. This reference to a source for  corresponds best, then, to a cultural unit that 
emphasizes delegated power, particularly the Roman conception of imperium.219 This is one 
of the possible cultural units of the Greek encyclopaedia as well, that is, what BDAG calls 
ruling power or official power (see, for example, Josephus, J.W. 2.8.1 117 discussed 
below).220 This nuances somewhat Conways definition of Jesus power in the Fourth Gospel 
as always , absolute, ruling, authoritative powerthe kind of power reserved for 
men who have proved themselves as men.221 She does not connect this with either the Latin 
potestas or imperium nor mention delegation. Yet John characterizes Jesus as careful, 
throughout the Fourth Gospel, to ground his own authority in his sonship to, and sending by, 
God (5:27; 10:18; 17:1-3).222 And in John 19:10-11 in particular, the Gospel describes a 
scene in which Jesus and Pilate contrast their sources of authority: Caesar and God.223 
215 potestas, LD, 1408. See Mason, Greek Terms, 133-34. 
216 Cooley, Res Gestae, 271-72; Richey, Roman, 29-34.  
217 Section 4.3.4. 
218 potestas, OLD, 1559-60; Grebe, Authority, 45-46; Harrill, Paul, 289. 
219 Others who translate  as authority in John include Barrett, Gospel, 163, 542; Lincoln, 
Gospel, 468. Tolmie, too, emphasizes the delegated aspect of  in this passage [D. Francois Tolmie, Die 
vertaling van  [eksousia] in Johannes 1:12, HvTSt 68.1 (2012) 5/7]. 
220 , BDAG 353. 
221 Conway, Behold, 151. 
222 Although he uses the word power rather than authority in his discussion, Koester provides a 
similar analysis (Why, 73-74).  
223 This contrast will be discussed further in Chapter 7. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
Richeys discussion on this issue is helpful, but he goes too far when he suggests that 
the use of the word  produces an implicit contrast with authority.224 Greek, Latin 
and English cultural units are somewhat muddled in his discussion. If the contrast between 
auctoritas and potestas was in Roman political thought, if not always in texts, it is hard to 
understand how it might be implicitly evoked in the Fourth Gospel by the use of only , 
especially since he asserts that the most frequent meaning of exousia is imperium.225  
Furthermore, the Gospel of John does not always contrast virtuous influence with 
delegated power since it presents Jesus to Roman-aware auditors as one who does have some 
of the virtues that would lead to auctoritas, such as his humble willingness to give up power 
(recusatio).226 It is true, as Richey notes, that in John, Jesus  is not said to flow from 
his personal influence, but he then argues against translating  as authority on the 
basis of Johns Christology, rather than deriving Johns Christology from word use in the 
text.227 In fact, when he brings the TDNT definition into the argument to demonstrate that 
Jesus  is independent and absolute, he is committing an illegitimate totality 
transfer, the mistake of adducing word meaning by importing cultural units from all of the 
encyclopaedias in which it is used.228 He thus finds himself arguing against the Gospel text 
itself that describes Jesus  as delegated by the Father (5:26-27; 10:18; 17:1-2).229 
224 Richey, Roman, 78-79. Richey uses  as the Greek equivalent of auctoritas, but this is a 
second century development related in particular to the office of bishop (Roman, 73 n. 13). Also, Richey argues 
against authority rather than auctoritas which tends to confuse the argument because in this case it is the 
Roman concept of auctoritas that he is referring to (77 where his transferable possession should reference 
35). Finally, Richey is incorrect when he argues for the absence of this contrast in any New Testament text 
(Richey, Roman, 80-81; Harrill, Paul).  
225 Richey, Roman, 76; Mason, Greek Terms, 133. 
226 Section 4.3.2. 
227 Richey, Roman, 77.  
228 James Barr, The Semantics of Biblical Language (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1961), 218. 
229 See similarly Schnackenburg who imports the concept of conferred by God from its use in the 
LXX into the meaning of the word (John, 2.302). Instead, as in Chapter 2, this contributes only one of the 
cultural units of the word and its presence in any given text must be defended through abduction (Section 
2.1.1). 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
Finally, although  comes closest to being a precise and technical term for translating 
imperium, this Roman concept is not discussed by Richey at all.230 
Jesus words reminding Pilate of the source of his delegated authority would come 
as no surprise to Roman-aware auditors. They simply replicate the Roman encyclopaedia of 
delegated power in a conversation with one such delegate.231 The discussion is about the 
formal rank and concomitant rights granted to a person by governmental magistracies, 
social rank, or family name.232 And Jesus reminder that Pilates  is  (v. 11) 
fits well with Roman conceptions of power, since imperium was delegated power also.233 
Piper misses this possibility when he declares of Pilate, for a purported authority he lacks 
real authority.234 One can have authorityin other words delegated powerwithout having 
ultimate power. Josephus, for example, tells of Coponius who is sent to Judaea, Entrusted 
by Augustus with full powers (), including the infliction of capital punishment (J.W. 
2.8.1 2.117 [Thackeray, LCL]).235 Pilates power, like that of Coponius, is delegated to him 
from Caesar.236 Jesus power is delegated to him from God (5:26-27; 10:18; 17:1-2).237 So 
what is the relationship between the two? 
A reference to the authority given to Pilate by Caesar does not preclude a reference 
to godeither the gods who legitimated the Romans authority or the God who legitimated 
Jesus. Both are delegated power, an important element of the cultural unit of imperium. The 
230 Mason, Greek Terms, 134. See Schnackenburg: In Jn 19:10 [], has, in Pilates terms, the 
meaning first of (delegated) authority and official power, roughly in the sense of imperium (John, 3.452 n. 
81). Pace Schnackenburg, however, Jesus does not restrict Pilate to the freedom and ability to act. It is 
uncertain, in any case, how freedom and ability to act could preclude the actual exercise of power (3.452-
53 n. 81). Instead, he reminds Pilate of the source of his power, Caesar. 
231 Harrill, Paul, 297. 
232 Harrill, Paul, 296-97. 
233 Matthew L. Skinner, The Trial Narratives: Conflict, Power, and Identity in the New Testament 
(Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2010), 15-16. 
234 Ronald A. Piper, The Characterisation of Pilate and the Death of Jesus in the Fourth Gospel, in 
The Death of Jesus in the Fourth Gospel, ed. Gilbert Van Belle (Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2007), 121-
62 (159). 
235 Bultmann, John, 662 n. 1.  
236 Pace Brown who thinks that there is [o]bviously no reference here to Caesar (John, 2.878). 
237 The disciples, too, are sent with imperium (20:21-23). 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
imperium sine fine was given by Jupiter to the emperor, the princeps of the Roman people, 
and Pilate was given imperium by Caesar over the Jews.238 Thus, Lincoln is correct when 
he points out that the Roman trial is here put in cosmic perspective, although he only 
discusses the cosmic perspective rooted in the Hebrew Bible. Rome has a cosmic perspective 
as well, with prophecies and mandates from the gods, just as Israel does.239 However, 
although Roman-aware auditors would recognize Caesar and the Roman gods as referents 
for Pilates authority, this does not preclude the more usual interpretation of John 19:11 as a 
reminder that Pilates power comes from God.240  
Matthew Skinner suggests that Pilates authority limited by Jesus in verse 11 refers 
not to the authority vested in the governors office, but to Pilates particular authority over 
Jesus in this instance, authority to release or to crucify him.241 This is because [t]he neuter 
participle  in 19:11 reveals that Jesus is not talking about political authority 
(, a feminine noun) in a general sense.242 I am not convinced that the neuter participle 
has this effect. However, the word order in 19:11, where   is between  and 
, does keep the focus on authority over Jesus specifically, not authority in general.  
This nuances claims such as Jason Ripleys that Johns Jesus subverts the Roman 
imperial theology.243 John 19:11 does not set up a confrontation that revolves around the 
238 Vergil, Aeneid 1.279. Susan Braund suggests that this refers to an absence of limits of either time 
or space [4. Analysis of Aeneid Books 7-9 (January 30, 2007), in Virgil's Aeneid: Anatomy of a Classic, 
Stanford on iTunes U (2007)]. This phrase cannot be conflated with Rom 13:1 (Brown, John, 2.892-93). Pace, 
e.g., Bernard and others who sees this as a reference to the concept that all power is delegated by God such as 
is expressed in Rom 13:1 (Bernard, St. John, 2.619; Barrett, Gospel, 543; Keener, John, 2.1127; Carter, John, 
308; Meye Thompson, John, 385). Also pace Blinzler who, rather than looking to Rom 13:1, suggests this as 
a reminder not of Pilates responsibility to God but of his powerlessness before the will of God (Trial, 232). 
Note that Blinzler somehow does not exonerate the Jews in the same way but holds them to be more guilty 
that Pilate (19:11) because they are striving for the death of the Messias purely out of hate and wickedness 
(232). If this is the meaning of the text then the Gospel of John is inherently anti-Semitic, but another reading 
will be proposed in Chapter 7. On these proposals, I simply note that although Romans understand Caesar to 
be appointed by the gods, Pilate is more immediately responsible to Caesar than to the gods. Van Tilborg notes 
this as well, even though he ultimately sees a reference to Gods power over all (Reading, 172, 216). 
239 Lincoln, Truth, 132. See Chapter 7 for more on the Roman cosmic perspective. 
240 For the more usual interpretation, see, e.g., Brown, John, 2.892-93; Duke, Irony, 133-34; 
Rensberger, Overcoming, 98; Lincoln, Gospel, 468; Carter, John, 308. 
241 Skinner, Trial, 100. 
242 Skinner, Trial, 179 n. 32. 
243 Ripley, Behold, 231. 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
issue of who has authority, as Stan Harstine similarly proposes.244 To suggest that the 
central question is whether Pilate [will] accept Jesus authority as king is to raise the 
question of whether Pilate might develop faith in Jesus, a question that I shall suggest is not 
of interest in this Gospel.245 Rensberger goes farther and suggests that Jesus in the end strips 
[Pilate] of the authority he thinks is his.246 Instead, the argument in this section has 
suggested that the Johannine Jesus reminds Pilate of Caesar, while at the same time John 
reminds his hearers of God. The two are not in stark opposition to each other; the peace of 
Rome is not, as Carter claims, contrary to that from God mediated by Jesus.247 Rather 
Pilates authority can stand (19:11); it has been granted to him. God has, for his own 
purposes, authorized Caesars authorized agent.248 And at the same time, he has authorized 
Jesus as Gods. Yet in this dual authorization a difference does emerge. To be authorized by 
Caesar is, for example, to be his imperial governor. To be authorized by a god is to be the 
emperor himself. 
4.5. Conclusion 
To read the Johannine trial narrative through the lens of the Roman encyclopaedia highlights 
the ambiguity of the cultural referent of what seems to be the main question debated by 
Pilate, the Jews, and Jesus: Is Jesus a , and if so, of what kind? The cultural unit 
of the word within the Roman encyclopaedia includes the emperor, a local ruler, or a tyrant. 
And a good ruler, particularly the emperors as they sought to construct themselves as such, 
244 Stan Harstine, The Fourth Gospel's Characterization of God: A Rhetorical Perspective, in 
Characters and Characterization in the Gospel of John, ed. Christopher W. Skinner, Library of New Testament 
Studies 461 (London: Bloomsbury, 2013), 131-46 (139). 
245 Section 6.1.1; Harstine, Fourth, 139. 
246 Rensberger, Overcoming, 98. 
247 Warren Carter, Social Identities, Subgroups, and John's Gospel: Jesus the Prototype and Pontius 
Pilate (John 18.28-19.16), in T&T Clark Handbook to Social Identity in the New Testament, ed. J. Brian Tucker 
and Coleman A. Baker (London: Bloomsbury, 2014), 235-51 (244). 
248 Although van Tilborg discusses the opposition between Jesus and the emperor, he does not seem 
to see clearly the portrayal of Jesus as emperor (Reading, 172-73). See also his later discussion where he says, 
Jesus is made the king of Israel and against the background of the competition with the Roman emperor he is 
preferred (213). Note that in this statement van Tilborg does not differentiate between the titles king of Israel 
(John 1:49, 12:13) and king of the Jews (in the Johannine trial before Pilate narrative). 
4. Legitimating Jesus as Caesar in the Gospel of John  
demonstrated humility and rejected any appearance of grasping at power so that they might 
be seen to rule according to the consensus of the people and the gods. 
John 18:33-37, when particularly verses 36 and 37 are read within a Roman 
encyclopaedia, suggests that Jesus has a claim to an imperial throne. And, noting the 
difficulty of abduction, I am suggesting that the Roman cultural units of two previous 
descriptions of Jesus would be brought in to aid in an understanding of Jesus as : 
John 6:15 as a recusatio and John 12:12-19 as an adventus. This interpretation is not to be 
taken as providing the primary references of these passagesthus, previous interpretations 
grounded in the Jewish encyclopaedia still stand. However, once the Roman encyclopaedia 
is opened in John 18, Roman-aware auditors would recognize the relevance of those previous 
narratives. The recusatio in 6:15, rather than being in tension with Jesus later acceptance of 
the title of , combines with the acclamations of the people in the adventus and the 
approval of God to provide just the qualifications demanded by the Roman understanding of 
fitness to rule.249 And once Jesus has been introduced as an emperor, the imperial title Son 
of God and the authorization for his rule are referenced in the subsequent narrative.  
Although only briefly touched upon in this chapter, the differences between Jesus 
rule and that of the emperor will be explored further in Chapter 7. First, however, I shall 
provide an interpretant for John 19:5 within the context of another section of the trial before 
Pilate (John 19:2-5) that references both Jewish and Roman cultural units. In so doing, I 
hope to show that an allusion to Vergils Aeneid in John 19:5 elucidates further Johns 
depiction of Jesus as . 
249 Heath describes tension between, for example, John 6:15 and 6:20 (You Say, 241). 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5 
In Chapter 4, I argued that  has a cultural unit in the Roman encyclopaedia that 
refers to the emperor rather than to a king. This Roman cultural unit creates ambiguity in a 
narrative with Roman Haftpunkte and blows up, for Roman-aware auditors, the possibility 
that Jesus is being presented as an emperor. Once this possibility is raised, previous passages 
(notably John 6:15 and 12:12-15) could be reinterpreted to emphasize Jesus fitness to rule 
according to Roman standards, with humility, the consensus of God, and the consensus of 
the people. 
Although other scholars have likened John 19:2-5 to an enthronement, I shall argue 
that instead these verses continue to use Roman cultural references to describe Jesus, and 
that Romans did not practise enthronements.1 First, these verses mimic Roman troops who, 
by pledging their loyalty to their commander and calling him imperator, raise him as a 
contender for the office of princeps. The scene is made more vivid as well as more Roman 
by Jesus purple robe and crown of thorns that reflect the accoutrements of a Roman triumph 
which, by the second century CE, were used by emperors in a variety of settings. This Roman 
mimicry is clothed in ironic mockery, thus veiling in a hidden transcript the image of Roman 
soldiers pledging loyalty to Jesus in the same way as they would pledge loyalty to the 
emperor. This suggests that ones loyalty to the Roman empire could have been another axis 
of intersectionality among the auditors of the Gospel of John.  
The image of Jesus as Caesar is repeated in verse 5, as a Roman governor references 
the presentation of Augustus in the Aeneid to describe Jesus:   . I shall 
conclude this chapter with a semiotic analysis of this literary allusion that argues that the 
battered Jesus is not being humiliated by sarcastic comparison with the emperor, nor simply 
1 For van Tilborg, this is an enthronement which seems quite odd since there is no throne (Reading, 
214). 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
being equated with the emperor in a claim to power or status. Instead, John 19:2-5 
communicates to Roman-aware auditors that, like Caesar, Jesus is a proper object of fidelity. 
5.1. Pledging Faith: John 19:2-3 
The scene in which Jesus and the Roman soldiers interact is usually taken to begin in 19:1.2 
I shall argue for a different structure in Chapter 6, but I note at this juncture that even if verse 
1 is taken together with vv. 2-3, the beating itself is hardly discussed. It has been suggested 
on account of both the choice of words ( as opposed to ) and the position 
of the account midway through the trial that this is not as severe as the flagellation described 
by Matthew (27:26) and Mark (15:15).3 Most, however, agree that this flogging is just as 
severe.4 Furthermore, even a mild beating in the Roman world would be quite harsh.5 
Regardless, the brief mention of the event, condensed even further by the causative use of a 
verb that combines Pilates orders and the soldiers actions into one (), contrasts 
with the much more extensive description of the mocking that follows.6 This has the effect 
of minimizing a treatment fit only for a slave, which would describe Jesus neither as 
imperator nor as glorified.7 As Dauer says: Doch auch hier verweilt Johannes nicht lnger, 
2 See Section 6.2. 
3 On the meaning of , see BDAG where it is equated with Lukes use of  (23:16, 22) 
(, BDAG, 620); Dodd, Tradition, 102. Sherwin-White, however, sees Lukes term as less severe. 
On the different kinds of Roman beatings, see A. N. Sherwin-White, Roman Society and Roman Law in the 
New Testament, The Sarum Lectures 1960-1961 (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1963), 27-28. Burkill is right to note, 
however, that Sherwin-White omits any discussion of Greek translations of fustes, flagella and verbera [The 
Condemnation of Jesus: A Critique of Sherwin-White's Thesis, NovT 12.4 (1970): 321-42 (329)]. Brant (John, 
245) equates  with excoriare, which Sherwin-White does not discuss.  
The possibility that  (v. 1) and  (v. 3) echo Is 50:6 will not be discussed in this thesis 
but these connections would likely be relevant for Jewish-aware auditors. See further Brown, John, 2.874, 836; 
Pancaro, Law, 349 n. 142; Schnackenburg, John, 3.254; Ridderbos, Gospel, 599 n. 102; Bond, Pilate, 183 n. 
4 Gniesmer, Proze, 275, 275 n. 835; Schnackenburg, John, 3.254; Bond, Pilate, 182-83; Koester, 
Why, 164 n. 3. 
5 Keener, John, 2.1118-20. 
6 The causative use of verbs will be discussed in Section 6.2.2.4. This is pace Moore who both 
recognizes the causative use of the verb but still concludes that [l]anguage itself, then, thrusts the lash into the 
prefects hand (Empire, 59). Certainly, double entendres are frequent in John, but Chapter 7 will argue that 
the point of the passage is not to emphasize the violence of Rome. 
7 This minimizing becomes especially apparent when reading commentaries that describe first-century 
practices in detail. See, for example, Jerome Neyreys short but effective description of the shame of a judicial 
flogging as well as Keeners description of its physical effects (Keener, John, 2.1119-20; Neyrey, Cultural, 
426). Note that this minimization occurs in Matthew and Mark as wellin those two Gospels the flogging 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
da es fr seine Theologie ohne Belang ist; deswegen nur die kurze Notiz.8 Thus, although 
Glancy is correct to characterize the event as torture intended to extort a confession, the 
narrative highlights not the scourging but the mocking.9 Three elements of this mocking will 
be highlighted in this section: the background of the act of being acclaimed by Roman 
soldiers, Jesus triumphal attire (v. 2), and the specific words used by the soldiers (v. 3) 
which, except for the , have no Roman cultural unit, and thus function to veil the 
reference in a hidden transcript. 
5.1.1. Roman soldiers acclamations 
The fact that Jesus is being saluted by Roman soldiers must be recognized and 
highlighted from the outset.10 Even though, historically, Pilates men were not legionnaires 
but auxiliary soldiers, the Fourth Gospel describes them with details that highlight them as 
Romans.11 Even scholars who have noted the Romanness of this scene and mentioned 
connections with imperial ritual, however, have not carried this discussion all the way 
through the Johannine trial narrative.12 Anti-imperial readings of the Fourth Gospel, on the 
() is only mentioned as a preface to the crucifixion [Arthur Merrill Wright, Jr., The Governor and 
the King: Irony, Hidden Transcripts, and Negotiating Empire in the Fourth Gospel (PhD thesis, Union 
Presbyterian Seminary, 2014), 200 n. 126]. 
8 Dauer, Passionsgeschichte, 262. See also Gniesmer, Proze, 160-61, 281. 
9 Glancy, Torture, 108. See, similarly, Dodd, Tradition, 102-103; Moore, Empire, 61-63; Skinner, 
Trial, 97-98. For Moore, the central position of this passage serves to highlight Romes power (62). 
10 Davies and Allison note this facet of the Matthean trial narrative as well, citing Cyril of Jerusalem: 
Every king is proclaimed by soldiers [Catechetical Lectures 13.17; W. D. Davies, and Dale C. Allison, A 
Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Gospel According to Saint Matthew, ed. J. A. Emerton, C. E. B. 
Cranfield, and G. N. Stanton, ICC, vol. 3 (Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 1997), 598]. For the contexts within which 
acclamations could occur, see Section 4.3.4. In this chapter, I shall focus on acclamations by Roman soldiers. 
11 Millar, Roman, 44; Bond, Pilate, 13. Furthermore, [t]he emperor Claudius (41-54 C.E.) began the 
practice of granting Roman citizenship to non-Roman auxiliary soldiers when they retired, an added incentive 
to participate in imperial life. Military service inevitably resulted in greater exposure to Roman ideas and the 
spread of citizenship (Maas, People, 15). Note that scholars often mix one reference to Rome with many to 
Greek or simply general royal imagery. Craig A. Evans, for example, discerns, in John 19:1-5, aspects of the 
homage paid to Caesar, other stories of mockery, a Roman triumph as well as the attire of Hellenistic kings 
of an earlier period [Death and Burial of Jesus, in Encyclopedia of the Historical Jesus, ed. Craig A. Evans 
(New York: Routledge, 2008), 143-50 (146)]. Note that Mary Coloe suggests for this passage that [s]ymbolism 
does not require exact correspondence but does not elaborate on this comment [God Dwells with Us: Temple 
Symbolism in the Fourth Gospel (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical, 2001), 204]. Augustus as a symbol would 
provide an interesting avenue of research that, however will not be pursued in this thesis. 
12 Peder Borgen, for example, mentions the decisive involvement of the Roman authorities [Peder 
Borgen, The Gospel of John: More Light from Philo, Paul and Archaeology: The Scriptures, Tradition, 
Exposition, Settings, Meaning, ed. M. M. Mitchell and D. P. Moessner, NovTSup 154 (Leiden: Brill, 2014), 
273]. See also the references to the Roman cross, Roman courage in the face of death, the Roman trial 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
other hand, recognize the Roman context of this scene, but usually focus more on a clash of 
sovereignties, a direct and oppositional interaction between Jesus and the empire rather 
than bringing out all of the Roman cultural units of the narrative.13 Yet the Roman aspects 
of this scene are especially important since the soldiers are alone: Hier verschwindet fr 
einen Moment (19,2f) der sonst in smtlichen Szenen anwesende Pilatus, so da sich das 
Geschehen ganz auf die Handlungen der Soldaten an Jesus zuspitzt.14 And the soldiers 
mock salutes and acclamations (v. 3) parody the appellationes imperatoriae that, especially 
after 60 BCE, began to be practised as soldiers demonstrated their approbation of their 
superior officers command due to his demonstrated worthiness.15 En quelque sorte, cette 
crmonie prend le caractre dune nouvelle investiture du commandant, qui ne se rfrait 
plus au cadre lgal et juridique de la res publicale commandant avait dj reu 
limperium, mais exprimait le consensus de larme, qui le dclarait imperator non pas 
seulement en droit, mais en valeur et en mrite.16 Appian, writing at the end of the second 
century CE records that Curio in the mid-first century BCE landed at Utica and put to flight 
a body of Numidian horse in a small cavalry engagement near that place, and allowed himself 
to be saluted as Imperator by the soldiers with their arms still in their hands (Bell. civ. 2.44 
[White, LCL]). Appian explains that This title is an honour conferred upon generals by their 
soldiers, who thus testify that they consider them worthy to be their commanders. In the 
later Republic, to receive an appellatio imperatoria by ones soldiers suggested (but did not 
procedures and Roman patronage in Brant, John, 21, 247; Neyrey, Cultural, 196; Piper, Characterisation, 
13 Carter, John, 289. Cassidy and Richey contrast Roman power with Jesus; Rensburger sees a 
rejection of the sovereignty of Rome. Neither scholar engages with the details of the Roman referents of the 
trial scenes (Cassidy, John's Gospel, 40-53, esp. 49; Richey, Roman, 153-84, esp. 163-64; Rensberger, 
Overcoming, 99). The nuancing of powers will be discussed further in Section 7.2.1. 
14 Gniesmer, Proze, 161. 
15 Pierre Assenmaker, Nouvelles perspectives sur le titre d'imperator et l'appellatio imperatoria sous 
la Rpublique, RBPH 90 (2012): 111-42 (128-34). Frank Gardner Moore points out that [t]his (though not 
mentioned by Livy as such) is the earliest known instance of a commander being saluted as imperator by his 
troops (Livy, History of Rome 27.19.4 n. 1 [Moore, LCL]). However, this conclusion ignores evidence that 
Livy was influenced, in his description, by the imperial practices of his day (Assenmaker, Nouvelles 
Perspectives, 120). 
16 Assenmaker, Nouvelles Perspectives, 131. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
require) that the Senate ought to honour the commander with a ceremony of thanksgiving to 
the gods called a supplicatio, which then might also be followed by a triumph.17 Starting 
with Octavian, however, imperator became an imperial title, and for subsequent rulers, to 
receive an appellatio imperatoria by ones soldiers constituted the first step in a march 
towards being appointed emperor.18 
Vespasian, for example, received his proclamation by his soldiers as Emperor 
against his will (J.W. Preface 9; 1 24 [Thackeray, LCL]) and this combination of 
acclamation and modesty is rightly characterized by Branger as une scne authentiquement 
romaine.19 Tacitus describes the event in more detail. Vespasian is called to the imperium 
by Mucianus, governor of Syria (Hist. 2.76-77, author translation), one whose voice is 
sanctioned by evidence of the gods support (2.78).20 His election is also put into place by 
the acclamation of the troops: The whole act was carried through by the enthusiastic 
soldiery without any formal speech or regular parade of the legions.[A]s Vespasian 
stepped from his quarters, a few soldiers who were drawn up in their usual order to salute 
(saluto) him as their Legate (legatus), saluted (saluto) him as Emperor (imperator). Then the 
rest ran up and began to call him Caesar and Augustus; they heaped on him all the titles of 
an emperor (principatus) (79-80).21 This was the event that Vespasian later chose to 
celebrate as his dies imperii.22  
17 Anne Viola Siebert, Supplicatio, PC; Assenmaker, Nouvelles Perspectives, 134-38. 
18 Beard, Triumph, 243; Assenmaker, Nouvelles Perspectives, 132, 138-40. 
19 Branger, Refus, 181. 
20 See Section 4.3.3. 
21 The term principatus was also used for the princeps (principatus, OLD 1604). Note that emperors 
were acclaimed on an ongoing basis during their reigns as well; see Bitner, Paul's, 279. Acclamations by troops 
might simply promise allegiance to a ruler already appointed. Herods will named Archelaus as his successor 
and the latter was instantly hailed with acclamations and congratulations; and the troops advancing by 
companies, with the people, made promises of allegiance (Josephus, J.W. 1.33.9 670 [Thackeray, LCL]). 
Note in each case that when troops salute it is not only in joy or approval but also in a pledge of loyalty. 
22 Barbara Levick, Tiberius the Politician, 2nd ed. (London: Routledge, 1999), 81; Griffin, Flavians, 
12-13. The dies imperii was the day of assuming power, usually also the official recognition of the ruler by 
the Senate or the army. On a yearly basis, on that day, the tribunicia potestas of the ruler was renewed 
(Strothmann, Dies imperii, PG). Ando elucidates: Individuals then repeated their prayers for the emperors 
safety and renewed their oaths of loyalty on the reigning emperors dies imperii. Some cities sent annual 
embassies to congratulate the emperor on that day, no doubt mentioning their own displays of pietas loudly 
and often in their messages (Imperial, 360). 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
Acclamations such as these can occur in a variety of settings. The acclamation of 
Vespasian happened at the time of the morning salutatio, the morning greeting of clients and 
patrons.23 When Titus was acclaimed by his soldiers, it suggested that he was worthy of a 
triumph in Rome (Josephus, J.W. 6.6.1 316; 7.5.3-6 122-57). That triumph was celebrated 
in 71 CE, with an adventus for Vespasian (7.4.1 68-69), one for Titus (7.5.3 122) and a 
military acclamation for both (7.5.4 126) along the way.24 These models are difficult to 
separate clearly. First of all, dozens and dozens of triumphal ceremonies must have matched 
up to [a] standard template in only some respects.25 Yet also, as the practice developed, in 
glaring contrast to the republican pattern, aspects of triumphal dress in the Principate did 
regularly appear outside the context of the triumphal procession.26 Regalia of early Roman 
monarchs intermingled with triumphal insignia, in  various attempts to find ways of 
presenting (and dressing upliterally) one-man rule.27 The toga worn for the adventus, for 
example, was eventually replaced by the military attire of the triumph.28 Thus, while I shall 
discuss elements of the triumph, this is because significant elements of the emperors 
costume, on certain ceremonial occasions at least, were identical to those of the triumphing 
general (or they were presented as such by Roman writers).29 Symbols were re-used for a 
variety of occasions. Vespasian, for example, in Cancelleria Relief A is pictured bare-headed 
as befits an adventus, yet a personified Victory can just be seen hovering behind [him] 
holding a laurel wreath over his head.30 
23 Rolf Hurschmann, Salutatio, PC. 
24 Walter Eder, Triumph, Triumphal Procession, PC; Mathisen, L'adventus, 139. 
25 Beard, Triumph, 82. 
26 Beard, Triumph, 275. 
27 Beard, Triumph, 276. 
28 Christophe Badel, Adventus et salutatio, in Les entres royales et impriales: histoire, 
reprsentation et diffusion d'une crmonie publique, de l'Orient ancien  Byzance, ed. Agns Brenger and 
Eric Perrin-Saminadayar, De l'archologie  l'histoire (Paris: De Boccard, 2009), 157-75 (169); Mathisen, 
L'adventus, 142. 
29 Beard, Triumph, 275. 
30 Steven L. Tuck, A History of Roman Art (Chichester: Wiley, 2014), 203. This intermingling 
occurred with the funeral rites of an emperor as well (Beard, Triumph, 233-38). Thus, ladventus, le triomphe 
et le funus ne cessrent de semprunter mutuellement des lments jusqu en devenir parfois difficilement 
distinguables (Badel, Adventus, 157). 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
The scene in the Fourth Gospel also displays ambiguity, using the crown and purple 
robe of a triumph and the salutation and salute of an acclamation (see next section).31 
Therefore, the connections that I propose between John 19:2-3 and Roman practices are 
those suggested not only by Roman cultural units, but the particular Roman cultural units 
that abduction of the entire Gospel of John blows up. When Roman troops are making an 
emperor in an appellatio imperatoria, they are demonstrating, based on his character, their 
own willingness to be led by him (particularly in a triumph but also more generally), 
promising him their loyalty.32 So while, on the one hand, this scene parodies this practice, 
on the other hand, based on the overall emphasis on believing and abiding in the Gospel (1:7; 
), the affirmation of loyalty in a salutatio that the Roman soldiers mockingly display is the 
very faithfulness to which the Gospel calls its auditors. This message, which I shall argue in 
Chapter 6 is part of the hidden transcript of John 18:2819:22, is presented in this passage 
along with some images of triumph, particularly the crown and the purple robe.33 It is to 
those that I now turn. 
5.1.2. Jesus triumphal attire 
Helen Bond brings out the connection between Jesus attire and imperial practice, 
noting that [t]he presence of the purple garment, the crown, which may represent the 
imperial laurel wreath, and the greeting of the soldiers all suggest that Jesus is ridiculed here 
as a mock-Emperor.34 I shall discuss the crown and robe each in turn, noting especially the 
31 T. E. Schmidt, Mark 15.1632: The Crucifixion Narrative and the Roman Triumphal Procession, 
NTS 41.1 (1995): 1-18 (7). 
32 Assenmaker, Nouvelles Perspectives, 131. Those who term this homage include Blinzler, Trial, 
227; Blank, Verhandlung, 73. The term homage is fine as long as it is understood to include a pledge of 
loyalty and is not uniquely a gesture of respect. Neyrey, among other scholars, notes the levels of meaning in 
19:1-5, although without calling it a hidden transcript (Cultural, 427). 
33 For a similar analysis of Mark, see Schmidt, Mark. 
34 Bond, Pilate, 183-84. Bill Salier makes this connection as well, but immediately reverts back to the 
theme of kingship [Jesus, the Emperor, and the Gospel According to John, in Challenging Perspectives on 
the Gospel of John, ed. John Lierman, WUNT 2.219 (Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2006), 284-301 (297)]. See 
also Koester, Savior; Musa W. Dube, Reading for Decolonization (John 4:1-42), in John and 
Postcolonialism: Travel, Space and Power, ed. Musa W. Dube and Jeffrey L. Staley, The Bible and 
Postcolonialism 7 (London: Sheffield Academic Press, 2002), 51-75 (65-66). Although Lincoln mentions 
Johns use of the term , to array, for the dressing up of Jesus (Truth, 315), BDAG does not seem 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
Roman cultural units for these elements, which are often missing from discussions on this 
passage.35  
As an example of a laurel crown, Josephus describes Vespasian and Titus who, for 
their triumph into Rome, issued forth, crowned with laurel and clad in the traditional purple 
robes (J.W. 7.5.4 124 [Thackeray, LCL]).36 Aulus Gellius provides a list of a great many 
kinds of military crowns, made of gold, laurel, grass, oak or myrtle (Noct. att. 5.6). For a 
triumph, the crown in ancient times was of laurel, but later they began to make them of 
gold (5.6.7 [Rolfe, LCL]).37 Laurels were also used more generally for a victory in games, 
or simply for decorations during an adventus or a triumph.38 Because of the connection with 
Augustus, laurels continued afterwards to signify the imperial rank.39 It is possible, then, 
that Jesus crown of thorns was meant to parody an imperial crown of laurels, signaling 
through irony to Roman-aware auditors of the Fourth Gospel that Jesus is still victor even in 
the midst of apparent defeat.40 
to support this translation. Compare Luke 12:27, where the regal implications come from the context, to Mark 
14:51 and Matthew 25:36 where there are none (, BDAG, 799). However, the verb  used in 
verse 5 can be so translated; see Section 5.2. Pace, e.g., Schnackenburg for whom the crown is probably meant 
to represent only the crown (sign of lordship) of the Roman vassal kings. Also, there is certainly no connection 
with the crown of victory of war leaders (John, 3.451 n. 61). 
35 Some who note only images of kings and royalty in Jesus attire without mentioning the emperor 
include Keener, John, 2.1122; Lincoln, Gospel, 465.  
36 Note Revell goes too far when she asserts that these images of the emperor were so sacred that [t]o 
harm one was tantamount to harming the emperor himself (Roman, 84). This can be shown first, by the story 
she adduces in support of her thesis where Thecla was thrown to the wild beasts not because she dared to throw 
the magistrates crown to the ground (as Revell argues) but because she embarrassed him (Acts Paul 26). 
Secondly, the existence of stories where people are mocked by dressing them in these very images show that 
they were not completely off limits for such buffoonery. 
37 See also Res gest. divi Aug. 21.3 
38 During the Republic, the honoree in a triumph tenait dans ses mains  une branche de laurier 
(Mathisen, L'adventus, 139). Laurel might be used to decorate the fasces (Dio Cassius, Roman History 6.21). 
Augustus says that he deposited the laurel from my fasces in the Capitoline temple, in fulfillment of the vows 
which I had taken in each war (Res gest. divi Aug. 4.1; Cooley, Res Gestae, 62). Laurels might be sent from a 
general as an announcement of his victory (Tacitus, Hist. 3.77). Victorious soldiers might wear laurel crowns 
(Josephus, J.W. 7.5.4 126). Laurels were also held by the people during a ceremony to propitiate the gods in 
the Republic (Livy, History of Rome 40.37.3) and worn by the crowd when Augustus entered the theatre in 
Rome (Suetonius, Aug. 58.1). 
39 Cooley, Res Gestae, 264. 
40 Segovia, Gospel, 188-89. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
Another possibility exists, however. The crown of thorns might instead represent the 
crown or wreath of oak, the corona civica.41 This crown is the one, Gellius explains, which 
one citizen gives to another who has saved his life in battle, in recognition of the preservation 
of his life and safety (Noct. att. 5.6.12 [Rolfe, LCL]). It was given to Julius Caesar 
(Suetonius, Jul. 2) and refused by Tiberius (Tib. 26.2). Augustus lists a combination of 
laurels and oak among his awarded honours: my entranceway was publicly crowned with 
laurels, and the oak wreath which is given for saving fellow citizens was set up above the 
gateway of my house (Res gest. divi Aug. 34.2).42 The oak crown was not awarded to 
Augustus because he saved the life of one person in a military engagement. Instead, [t]he 
senate had bestowed the corona civica upon Augustus as the father of the Roman people, 
because Augustus had saved the collective life of the res publica in the battles of the civil 
wars.43 This association of an emperor with a crown of oak leaves carried through to 
Augustus successors, as can be deduced from various depictions.44 A portrait of Augustus 
with this crown has been found in Ephesus.45 Other emperors depicted with oak crowns 
include Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Vespasian, Domitian and Hadrian.46 Indeed, in North 
41 Pace, e.g., Craig A. Evans who, with many commentators, only mentions the laurel wreath [King 
Jesus and His Ambassadors: Empire and Luke-Acts, in Empire in the New Testament, ed. Stanley E. Porter 
and Cynthia Long Westfall, McMaster Divinity College Press New Testament Study Series 10 (Eugene, OR: 
Pickwick, 2011), 120-39 (123 n. 8)]. 
42 This is Cooleys translation from the Greek version of the Res Gestae that makes explicit the 
meaning of corona civica (Res Gestae, 26-27, 99). See also Zankers discussion, although the use of the term 
monarchical (monarchisch in the original) and the translation monarch (Alleinherrscher in the original) 
for Augustuss rule seems misplaced in light of the Roman cultural unit of rex discussed in Section 4.1 [Zanker, 
Power, 93; Paul Zanker, Augustus und die Macht der Bilder (Mnchen: C.H. Beck, 1987), 99]. 
43 Harrill, Paul, 306. See also Gradel, Emperor, 49.  
44 Zanker, Power, 216. 
45 Maria Aurenhammer, Late Hellenistic and Early Roman Imperial Portraits from Ephesos, in 
Roman Sculpture in Asia Minor: Proceedings of the International Conference to Celebrate the 50th 
Anniversary of the Italian Excavations at Hierapolis in Phrygia, Held on May 24-26, 2007, in Cavallino 
(Lecce), ed. F. D'Andria and I. Romeo, JRA Supplementary Series 80 (Portsmouth, RI: JRA, 2011), 101-115 
(105-106). See the example of the Gemma Augustea as well as an image of Augustuss heirs in Zanker, Power, 
231, 223, 359. 
46 Some of these must be reconstructed after a damnatio memoriae [Eric R. Varner, Mutilation and 
Transformation: Damnatio memoriae and Roman Imperial Portraiture, ed. H. F. Mussche, Monumenta Graeca 
et Romana 10 (Leiden: Brill, 2004), e.g., 24, 27-30, 33-35, 50, 53, 60, 63, 69, 130]. For Vespasian, see also 
Anne E. Haeckl, Fragment > < Image: The Hartwig-Kelsey Fragments Rejoined, in Images of Empire: 
Flavian Fragments in Rome and Ann Arbor Rejoined, ed. Elaine K. Gazda and Anne E. Haeckl (Rome: 
Ministero per i Beni Culturali e Ambientali, Soprintendenza Archeologica di Roma with The University of 
Michigan, Kelsey Museum of Archaeology, 1996), 26-33 (26, 28, and cat. no. 12). These portraits exist outside 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
Africa, [f]rom the time of Trajan  Roman rulers are often depicted heroically nude or 
draped like Jupiter with a heavy wreath of laurel or oak with medallions.47 Perhaps for the 
meaning of the crown of thorns it is not necessary to choose: the oak and the laurels 
meaningssaviour and victor, respectivelywere often conflated.48 
Bekken has recently suggested that the crown of thorns might  have mimicked the 
ceremony of corona graminea, which was the highest mark of honour to be awarded a 
Roman commander.49 Gellius also describes this crown: The siege crown is the one 
which those who have been delivered from a state of siege present to the general who 
delivered them. That crown is of grass (Ea corona graminea est), and custom requires that 
it be made of grass which grew in the place within which the besieged were confined (Noct. 
att. 5.6.8-9 [Rolfe, LCL]). Bekken curiously goes on to call it a laurel wreath and then 
claims, citing Versnel, that only this crown was awarded by the soldiers to their commander, 
from subordinate to officer.50 
Versnel is echoing Pliny the Elder who notes that [n]o crown indeed has been a 
higher honour than the crown of grass among the rewards for glorious deeds given by the 
sovereign people, lords of the earth.  The other crowns have been conferred by 
commanders, this alone on a commander by his soldiers (Nat. 22.4 [Jones, LCL]). Yet the 
same difficulty in determining absolute standards for varying practices discussed above with 
regard to triumphs applies to this crown as well. Pliny, in the very next section, records that 
the grass crown was given to Felix by the Senate and People of Rome (22.5).51 And he 
concludes that Augustus himself, in the consulship of Marcus Cicero junior, was on the 
of Rome as well. See for example the statue of Claudius as Jupiter from Leptis Magna in North Africa as well 
as images on coins (Zanker, Power, 318, 93). For an example with Hadrian, see next note. 
47 Franois Baratte, and Nathalie de Chaisemartin, North Africa, in The Oxford Handbook of Roman 
Sculpture, ed. Elise A. Friedland, Melanie Grunow Sobocinski, and Elaine K. Gazda (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2015), 504-521 (511). 
48 Zanker, Power, 276. Harrill discusses both oaks and laurels as well (Harrill, Paul, 305). 
49 Bekken, Lawsuit, 245. 
50 Bekken, Lawsuit, 245; Versnel, Triumphus, 376. 
51 See, similarly, Gellius, Noct. att. 5.6.10. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
13th September presented with the siege crown by the Senate; so inadequate was the civic 
crown thought to be. Nobody else at all, I find, has received this distinction (22.6). Thus, it 
seems to not only have been awarded by soldiers to their commander, and it also seems to 
have fallen out of use by the late first century CE. This crown seems unlikely, then, to be 
parodied by Jesus crown of thorns. Auditors with other encyclopaedias could make other 
decisions. If the scene was heard by those with only a Jewish encyclopaedia available, it is 
also probable, as Andrew Chester points out, that diaspora Jewish practices of honouring 
benefactors with crowns might be blown up in the abduction of the narrative.52 However, 
with the Roman Haftpunkte of the Johannine trial narrative, especially when combined with 
the theme of salvation (e.g., 3:17, 36; 4:21-23; 5:39; 10:9-10; 12:47) found throughout the 
Fourth Gospel, the crown of thorns would parody either the laurel or the oak crown, or both, 
heightening his comparison with the emperor and highlighting Jesus as one who saves his 
people (e.g., 3:15-16; 11:50) for Roman-aware auditors.53 
Turning next to the purple garment, I note that there were two Roman togas that had 
purple on them.54 The first, the toga praetexta, was for citizens; the purple was only a stripe, 
but the width of the stripe indicated the office held by its wearer. The completely purple 
toga, whether with gold embroidery (toga picta) or with a palmette design (tunica palmata), 
was, during the Roman empire, only worn by the emperor himself, although under the 
52 Andrew Chester, Jewish Inscriptions and Jewish Life, in Neues Testament und hellenistisch-
jdische Alltagskultur: Wechselseitige Wahrnehmungen. III. Internationales Symposium zum Corpus Judaeo-
Hellenisticum Novi Testamenti, 21.-24. Mai 2009, Leipzig, ed. Roland Deines, Jens Herzer, and Karl-Wilhelm 
Niebuhr, Wissenschaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament 274 (Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2011), 383-
441 (387-94). Adeline Fehribach has suggested a symbolic connection with the attire of a bridegroom as well 
[The Birthing Bridegroom: The Portrayal of Jesus in the Fourth Gospel, in A Feminist Companion to John, 
ed. Amy-Jill Levine (Cleveland: Pilgrim, 2003), 104-129 (121)]. 
53 For discussions on salvation in the Fourth Gospel, see Brown, John, 1.CXV-CXVI; Barrett, Gospel, 
78-82; Brown, An Introduction to the Gospel of John, 235-38; Keener, John, 1.281; Lincoln, Gospel, 62-64; 
Brant, John, 39-41. 
54 Polybius, The Histories 6.53.7-8; Shelley C. Stone, Toga, OEAGR; Geoffrey S. Sumi, Triumph, 
OEAGR; Rolf Hurschmann, Ceremonial Dress, PC; purpura, OLD 1676. Bekken does not distinguish 
between these two tunics in his descriptions and thus, for the connection between purple, crowns, and triumphs 
he cites Suetonius first in a description of Tiberius (Tib. 17) that only mentions the toga of citizenship and next 
in a description of Nero (Nero 25) where he is wearing the purple robe of the triumph (Lawsuit, 245 n. 74). 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
Republic it had been assumed by anyone celebrating a triumph.55 Even when worn by 
persons other than rulers, purple still referred to the emperor. In the second century CE, in 
Lycia, provision was made for a gold crown and a purple robe to be worn by the 
agonothete, the president of, in this case, a music festival in honour of the emperor and the 
gods. The gold crown would carr[y] relief portraits of the emperor Nerva Trajan Hadrian 
Caesar Augustus and our leader the ancestral god Apollo.56 Thus the purple in this case 
carried imperial connotations even though its wearer was not the emperor himself. 
Dio Cassius, on the other hand, reports that an old man in purple-bordered toga and 
vesture and with a crown upon his head is the way the senate is represented in pictures 
(Roman History 68.5.1), so it must be noted that the imagery in the Johannine trial narrative 
is far from open to only one interpretant. That said, to represent Jesus as the Senate does not 
seem to cohere in any way with the isotopy of the Gospel of John. I shall concentrate instead 
on images that do seem to be confirmed by the rest of the text. 
Purple, both in contemporary encyclopaedias and in ancient ones, is also associated 
with kings. Indeed, to dress a ruler in purple was not unique to the Romans. In the first 
century BCE, Gaius Papius got Numidians to desert from Sextus Caesars army by taking a 
son of their king, putting royal purple on him (   ), and 
displaying him to them (Appian, Bell. civ. 1.42, author translation). Purple was an indication 
of royalty that even non-Roman, non-Greek peoples recognized.57 And because of this, the 
imperial reference implicit in the purple cloak is often missed, or only mentioned briefly.58 
55 Larissa Bonfante Warren, Roman Triumphs and Etruscan Kings: The Changing Face of the 
Triumph, JRS 60 (1970): 49-66 (64). For more on the vicissitudes of purple through the Roman republic and 
empire, including its popularity as a status symbol, attempts to restrict its use, and its unique associations with 
the emperor, see Meyer Reinhold, History of Purple as a Status Symbol in Antiquity, ed. Lon Herrmann and 
Marcel Renard, Collection Latomus 116 (Bruxelles: Latomus, 1970), 37-61, esp. 56 and 59-60. For the 
connection of purple with the triumph, see also Dio Cassius, Roman History 59.17.3. 
56 Stephen Mitchell, Festivals, Games, and Civic Life in Roman Asia Minor, JRS 80 (1990): 183-93 
(185). For another similar example, see Josephus, Ant. 13.4.2 84. 
57 See, too, the Jewish example offered in Carter, John, 314 n. 34. 
58 Neyrey, Cultural, 416. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
The connection of purple with the triumph can be extended to connect with divinity.59 
Gradel mentions purple, the golden wreath, the scepter (possibly supplemented by a laurel 
branch) and a face  painted red with the image of Capitoline Jupiter.60 However, the 
association of a red face with the triumph and with the statue of Jupiter has been shown to 
rest on unfounded assumptions and precarious connections.61 Yet, this does not preclude the 
association of the triumph with divinity.  
The Roman triumph was said to have originated with Father Liber, also known as 
Bacchus or Dionysus.62 He invented the emblem of royalty (regius), [that is] the crown, and 
the triumphal procession (Pliny, Nat. 7.56.191 [Rackham, LCL]).63 Dionysus triumph was 
specifically connected with the conquest of India after the victories of Alexander the Great.64 
His popularity waned in the early first century CE but made a comeback beginning with 
Trajan in conjunction with new inspirations of conquest and world empire.65 This 
connection with Dionysus and the triumph will be brought up again in the second half of this 
chapter. At this junction, the abductive threads gathered thus far suggest that Jesus is dressed 
as a victor, worthy to rule, as the saviour of his people. So, how do the soldiers acclamations 
fit within that picture? 
59 Beard, Triumph, 233. 
60 Gradel, Emperor, 34-35; Greg Woolf, Divinity and Power in Ancient Rome, in Religion and 
Power: Divine Kingship in the Ancient World and Beyond, ed. Nicole Brisch, Oriental Institute Seminars 4 
(Chicago: Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago, 2008), 243-59 (244); Zanker, Power, 230-34. 
Additionally, Warren Carter has assembled an extensive list of evidence of emperors who took the title pater 
patriae, a title specifically associated with Jupiter. Many of these include the oak leaves representative of him 
as well [God as Father in Matthew: Imperial Intersections, in Finding a Woman's Place: Essays in Honor 
of Carolyn Osiek, R.S.C.J., ed. David L. Balch and Jason T. Lamoreaux (Eugene, OR: Pickwick, 2011), 81-
102 (89-90 with footnotes)]. See also the depiction of the triumph of Tiberius (Beard, Triumph, 48). 
61 Beard, Triumph, 231-33. 
62 Renate Schlesier, Dionysus, Religion, PC. 
63 See further discussion of the origins of this connection at Beard, Triumph, 315-318. 
64 Glen Bowersock, Dionysus as an Epic Hero, in Studies in the Dionysiaca of Nonnus, ed. Neil 
Hopkinson 17 (Cambridge: Cambridge Philoslogical Society, 1994), 156-66 (157). 
65 Bowersock, Dionysus, 159, as well as 160. On the way this influenced Roman writers, for example 
Livy, see Glen Bowersock, Augustus and the Greek World (Oxford: Clarendon, 1965), 109. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
5.1.3. The soldiers words and actions 
While I am proposing that John 19:2-3 parodies the acclamation of an emperor by 
his soldiers, it is not such an acclamation as van Tilborg suggests. He connects this scene 
with the kind of consensus discussed in Chapter 4, one where the choice of a ruler is 
dependent upon the will of some portion of the people as well as the gods. He contends that 
throughout the Johannine trial narrative, Jesus is acclaimed as king  by the soldiers, the 
people, and the Senate.66 However, although there is an acclamation by the soldiers, the 
presentation to the people produces only negative acclamations (vv. 6, 15). Since the very 
point of acclamations is to promote by approval, one would have to read the cry of the Jews 
for crucifixion in the context of the Johannine equation of the cross with glory in order to 
characterize the cries in verses 6 and 15 as acclamations. In that case, one could only 
conclude that the Johannine Jews, rather than bearing any blame, instead would carry the 
commendation for the cross.67 This seems unlikely given the use of the word  in 
verse 11.68 Furthermore, that Pilate supports Jesus claim to rule or declares that Jesus is 
innocent and recognizes Jesus as king it quite unlikely.69 His character will be explored 
further in Chapter 6, where he will be described as contemptuous and concerned about his 
loyalty to Rome.70 
One other element of a Roman triumph helps to clarify the scene. The acclamations 
of the soldiers were not always positive. The soldiers following the chariot hailed the 
triumph, wore laurels, and sang songs directed at the general, part in praise, part in 
ribaldry.71 Thus, the mocking of the one being honoured provides another connection to the 
66 Tilborg, Reading, 213. 
67 For more on the way the enemies in the Gospel of John further its narrative goals, see Section 7.1.5. 
68 See Section 6.2.2.2. The cries of the Jews for Jesus crucifixion could, however, function as 
parallels to the mocking of the soldiers in a triumph; see next paragraph. 
69 Tilborg, Reading, 213. For related concerns about Tilborg, see Keener, John, 2.1122-23. Johns 
characterization of Pilate will be discussed further in Sections 6.1.2-4.  
70 Bond, Pilate, 185.  
71 Beard, Triumph, 244-29, 245. The connections I am making between the victorious general and 
the mocked Jesus are pace Blinzler, Trial, 228 n. 26. Blinzler objects to Jesus as victor based on the title given 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
triumph itself. In the Gospel, the soldiers exclaim:     . I argue in 
Section 5.1.4 below that this title, odd as a Roman acclamation, is used in order to veil Johns 
message in a hidden transcript and, in Chapter 7, that it participates in the blurring of 
ethnicities active throughout the Johannine trial narrative. At this juncture, it provides a 
further reflection of a Roman triumph. Whereas the cries of the Jews for Jesus crucifixion 
cannot, in my view, be acclamations because they are negative, this pledge of the soldiers 
can be categorized as such because it is not overtly negative. 
The parody can be seen further in the blows () that the soldiers give Jesus, 
described in verse 3. This act may be understood as a caricature of their usual salutes.72 
Information on the specifics of this gesture are sparse, but Martin Winkler has demonstrated 
that Roman salutes should not be portrayed as the stiff-armed salutes of the Nazis.73 Yet the 
bent-armed and perhaps especially open-handed salutes that Winkler documents can be 
turned into blows to the face, parodying the salutes of the troops to their commander or their 
imperator.74  
This assessment of John 19:2-3 as parodying a salute of loyalty given to one in 
triumphal garb contradicts previous analyses that have focused their comparisons on royal 
enthronements alone, such as that provided by Josef Blank (and taken up for example by 
Duke, Stibbe and Gniesmer).75 Blank describes a four-step Knigs-Epiphanie in the 
to Jesus (to be discussed below), the nature of the wreath (which is open to multiple interpretations), and the 
lack of armed followers of Jesus. Sections 6.1.5 and 7.2.2 will discuss this last topic. 
72 This seems to be Lindars point when he says that the mock homage appears to consist of coming 
up as if to swear allegiance and suddenly hitting Jesus instead [John, 565; see similarly Donald Senior, The 
Passion of Jesus in the Gospel of John, The Passion Series 4 (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 1991), 85]. 
73 Martin M. Winkler, The Roman Salute: Cinema, History, Ideology (Columbus: Ohio State 
University Press, 2009). 
74 Note that the spitting mentioned by the Synoptic Gospels (Mark 15:19; Luke 18:32; Matthew 27:30) 
could parody the kisses regularly offered by patrons, including the emperor. Blinzler, although he does not 
mention Roman practices, says that the kiss of homage was customary in the East but it is unclear to when 
and where he is referring [Blinzler, Trial, 227; Christophe Badel, L'audience chez les snateurs, in 
L'audience: Rituels et cadres spatiaux dans l'Antiquit et le haut Moyen Age, ed. Jean-Pierre Caillet and Michel 
Sot, THEMAM (Paris: Picard, 2007), 141-64 (151, 164); Badel, Adventus, 162-64]. 
75 Duke, Irony, 132; Mark W. G. Stibbe, John, Readings: A New Biblical Commentary (Sheffield: 
JSOT Press, 1993), 191; Gniesmer, Proze, 282. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
narrative referring primarily to Eichmanns Die Kaiserkrnung im Abendland.76 Yet these 
steps imagine antiquity along the lines of modern and mediaeval Western practices. Indeed, 
Blank refers to Eichmann because [d]ie Arbeit von Eichmann zeigt brigens deutlich, da 
sich das vom Orient herkommende Knigs-Ritual mit geringfgigen Abwandlungen bis zur 
abendlande Kaiserkrnung durchgehalten hat.77 Yet Eichmann indicates that these 
particular steps come aus den Knigsbchern der Bibel and comprise particularly der Akt 
des Regierungsantritts des israelitischen Knigs.78 Furthermore, they do not quite cohere 
with the analysis of the passage in John. Especially the last step is different: while Blank 
sees in John a Knigsakklamation durch das Volk (, ), Eichmann has, 
Der Knig besteigt den Thron und ergreift so von seinem Amte Besitz.79 Since there is no 
throne (Blank does not connect this with John 19:13, as some have), it does not seem that 
Eichmann supports Blanks analysis.80 
Jerome Neyrey similarly interprets John 19:1-5 as a coronation, but relies on 
Alfldi.81 After summarizing the actions in these verses, he claims that [e]ach of these ritual 
gestures has been shown to be a characteristic element in the honoring of Persian and Roman 
rulers.82 He then lists elements of a coronation according to Alfldi: proskynsis/bending 
the knee; acclamation, especially as dominus; crown; clothing; scepter; throne.83 
76 The four steps are: (1) proclamation; (2) enthronement and investiture; (3) presentation to the people 
and (4) acclamation (Blank, Verhandlung, 62). 
77 Blank, Verhandlung, 76 n. 39. 
78 Eduard Eichmann, Die Kaiserkrnung im Abendland: Ein Beitrag zur Geistesgeschichte des 
Mittelalters: Mit besonderer Bercksichtigung des Kirchlichen Rechts, der Liturgie und der Kirchenpolitik, 
vol. 1 (Wrzburg: Echter, 1942), 11. 
79 Blank, Verhandlung, 62; Eichmann, Kaiserkrnung, 11-12. 
80 Blank, Verhandlung, 80-81. Ignace de la Potterie, for example, suggests that 19:13 is Jesus 
intronisation royale (Vrit, 1.108). For more on 19:13, see Section 6.2.2.4. 
81 Neyrey, Cultural, 427. Francis Moloney calls this instead a coronation, a clothing, and an ironic 
proclamation of the truth [The Gospel of John, ed. Daniel J. Harrington, SP 4 (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical 
Press, 1998), 495]. I agree only with the proclamation of the truth; see Section 5.1.4.  
82 Neyrey, Cultural, 426-27. 
83 Neyrey, Cultural, 427; Andreas Alfldi, Die monarchische Reprsentation im rmischen 
Kaiserreiche (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1977), 11-16, 45-70, 38-45, 209-10, 17-18, 
128-29, 263-67, 143-56, 175-84, 268-70, 156-57, 228-35, 140-41, 159-61. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
Indeed, Alfldi does mention all of these elements. However, they are (1) not for the 
most part ceremonies but images or trappings of ancient rulers, (2) nor are they connected 
as elements of a coronation and (3) they arbitrarily leave out a host of other elements 
described by Alfldi such as the kiss of greeting and the entrance of the ruler into a city.84 
The cultural unit of a coronation, furthermore, is not Roman; the reign of a Roman emperor 
started with his dies imperii.85 The Romans had a purple robe and several kinds of crowns 
but no ceremony at the beginning of an emperors reign, with an accession to a throne, such 
as a coronation impliesthat was a later development.86 So to portray Roman soldiers 
enacting such a ceremony would be profoundly anachronistic.87 Instead of a coronation, a 
comparison with Roman practices reveals Jesus as a recipient of a Roman acclamation in the 
garb of a triumph. 
Besides a coronation, John 19:1-5 is sometimes connected, in the context of the 
crucifixion, with the Roman celebration of Saturnalia.88 In 1898, Paul Wendland made this 
claim, saying, Wenn die rmischen Legionare Christus zu einem Saturnalien-Knige 
ausstaffirten [sic], so lag ihnen jedenfalls auch der Gedanken nahe, dass er das Schicksal 
dieses Knigs theilte; denn nach der Maskerade wird er sofort zur Kreuzigung abgefhrt.89 
Yet Wendland based this assertion on the then recently published Acts of Saint Dacius and 
84 Alfldi, Reprsentation, 40-42, 88-100.  
85 Griffin, Nerva, 85-86; A. R. Birley, Hadrian to the Antonines, in CAH, ed. Alan K. Bowman, 
Peter Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 132-94 (134). See 
above, footnote 22. 
86 The coronation ceremony developed only slowly from Roman to mediaeval times. It began in the 
fourth century CE in Byzantium and in the eighth-ninth century CE in the West [See Michael McCormick, 
Coronation, ODB; Joachim Ott, Coronation, in Religion Past and Present: Encyclopedia of Theology and 
Religion, ed. Hans Dieter Betz et al. (Leiden: Brill, 2007), 494-95]. Philip Alexander also notes the differences 
between early imperial practices and those that developed later [The Family of Caesar and the Family of God: 
The Image of the Emperor in the Heikhalot Literature, in Images of Empire, ed. Loveday Alexander, JSOTSup 
122 (Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1991), 276-97 (290)]. In the Hebrew Bible, the beginning of a reign was marked 
by an anointing (e.g., 1 Sam 10:1). 
87 Romans did not bow either, but since John, unlike Mark (15:19), does not mention bowing that will 
not be discussed in this thesis. 
88 Paul Winter, On the Trial of Jesus, ed. T. A. Burkill and Gza Verms, ed. E. L. Ehrlich, 2nd ed., 
SJ 1 (Berlin: De Gruyter, 1974), 147 n. 7. See also Brown, John, 2.888; Koester, Symbolism, 189. Note that 
the scratchings that Brown mentions have been shown to be later than Jesus day [Simon Goldhill, Jerusalem: 
City of Longing (Cambridge, MA: Belknap, 2008), 182]. 
89 Paul Wendland, Jesus als Saturnalien-Knig, Hermes 33.1 (1898): 175-79 (178). 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
the subsequent analysis by Lon Parmentier, when it was assumed that the Romans regularly 
killed the Saturnalian king at the end of their celebration.90 However, it is quite unlikely that 
the killing of a mock-king in the Babylonian festival of Sacaea was also practised in the 
festival of the Saturnalia as it was celebrated in the Roman army.91 Francesca Prescendi 
rightly points out that the general Roman abhorrence of human sacrifice, practised only 
rarely, should caution against such unlikely connections.92  
Another example of the mockery of a king often brought into discussions of John 
19:1-5 is that in Alexandria when a madman was dressed up as a king (Philo, Flacc. 36-39 
[Yonge, Hendrickson]).93 On this topic, Wendland correctly points out an essential 
difference between the two instances: in Alexandria, the king ridiculed is not the same person 
as the mock king who is dressed up.94 Indeed, King Agrippa is being mocked by implying 
that a madman is as good as he.95 Yet, in the Johannine trial narrative, it is not Caesar who 
is mocked, but Jesus.96 Nevertheless, the question that the Fourth Gospel asks is similaris 
one man the same as the other? 
90 Wendland, Jesus, 177 n. 2; Franz Cumont, Les Actes de S. Dacius, AnBoll 16 (1897): 5-16; Lon 
Parmentier, Le roi des Saturnales, RevPhil 21 (1897): 143-53; Francesca Prescendi, Le sacrifice humain: 
une affaire des autres A propos du martyre de saint Dasius, in Dans le laboratoire de l'historien des religions: 
mlanges offerts  Philippe Borgeaud, ed. Francesca Prescendi and Youri Volokhine, Religions en perspective 
24 (Geneva: Labor et Fides, 2011), 345-57 (347-55). Note that Haenchen simply mentions Wendland and 
Cumonts discussion as an attempt  to find a historical kernel in this scene (John, 180-81).  
J. G. Frazer carried this connection forward in The Golden Bough, particularly its second edition 
where, as Ackerman described, he uses the Persian Sacaea, the Roman Saturnalia and the Babylonian Zakmuk 
to demonstrate a stage of mental evolution where a priest-king  is sacrificed to ensure the fertility of the 
land and the health of the kingdom [Robert Ackerman, J. G. Frazer: His Life and Work (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1987), 167-68; James George Frazer, The Golden Bough: A Study in Magic and 
Religion, 2nd ed., vol. 3 (London: Macmillan, 1900), 186-200]. This allows Frazer to place both Judaism 
(through Purim) and Christianity (through Jesus) within the same stream of widespread bloody worship of the 
procreative principle (Ackerman, Frazer, 169). See also Ren Girards critique of Frazer [Des choses caches 
depuis la fondation du monde (Paris: Grasset, 1978), 190-92]. 
91 Prescendi, Sacrifice. 
92 Prescendi, Sacrifice, 345-47, 357. 
93 E.g., Evans, Death, 146; Koester, Symbolism, 189. Brown is mistaken when he says that this 
incident ended with beating the man in question; I have been unable to find any reference to such an event, 
either in Philo or in Loisy whom he quotes (John, 2.856). 
94 Wendland, Jesus, 176. 
95 Winter, Trial, 148. 
96 For the scene to mock Caesar, there would need to be some obvious antithesis between Jesus and 
him, and the Gospel has not presented Jesus as ordinary or simple or powerless or mad. Sometimes ordinary 
people were dressed up as kings for simple or more sinister amusement, without pointed mockery but because 
human beings tend to find outrageous juxtaposition amusing. For such examples, see Winter, Trial, 147-49; 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
To mock Jesus as an emperor might, to the Johannine soldiers, suggest that, even 
with purple robes and a crown, he is the antithesis of Caesar.97 However it is important to 
note that John (unlike Mark and Matthew) does not specify that this is a mockery.98 Thus, 
the scene highlights the true seriousness of what it is saying: For John, the soldiers really 
do crown and hail the King of the Jews.99 
5.1.4. Irony, hidden transcripts, and truth 
Despite the lack of explicit mention of mockery as in the Synoptic Gospels (Matt 
27:29, 31; Mark 15:20; Luke 22:63; 23:11), there is no question about the ironic intent of 
this passage. In his discussion of irony, specifically its function to heighten narrative 
claims, James Resseguie notes that [t]here is no finer example of this function of irony than 
the soldiers salute, Hail, King of the Jews (Matt. 27:29; Mark 15:18; John 19:3). With 
verbal irony they mock Jesus as a dismal failure and a pretend king, while dramatic irony 
accents the truth.100 The irony of the soldiers acclamations highlights two points that the 
narrative makes about Jesus: he is , and hearers ought to pledge him their faith 
(20:31).101  
In the verbal irony of the soldiers words, Hail, king of the Jews, a contradiction 
occurs between what is expressed and what is implied, and the Johannine soldiers are aware 
Brant, John, 246. Haenchen lists these and other such historical parallels that have been collected (John, 180-
81), but note the caution about Wendland and Cumont above. 
97 James L. Resseguie, Narrative Criticism of the New Testament: An Introduction (Grand Rapids: 
Baker Academic, 2005), 68. 
98 Meeks, Prophet-King, 69. 
99 Bart D. Ehrman, Jesus Trial before Pilate: John 18:2819:16, BTB 13.4 (1983): 124-131 (128); 
see, similarly, Dauer, Passionsgeschichte, 263; Jean Zumstein, L'evangile selon saint-Jean (13-21), CNT 4b 
(Geneve: Labor et Fides, 2007), 230. See, also, Cyril of Jerusalem, Sermon on the Paralytic 12. 
100 Resseguie, Narrative, 74. See, similarly, Trond Skard Dokka, Irony and Sectarianism in the 
Gospel of John, in New Readings in John: Literary and Theological Perspectives: Essays from the 
Scandinavian Conference on the Fourth Gospel, Arhus, 1997, ed. Johannes Nissen and Sigfred Pedersen, 
JSNTSup 182 (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic, 1999), 83-107 (95). Skinner notes that irony is a frequent 
element in trial scenes (Trial, 27-28). See below for discussion of truth. 
101 For some discussions of faith in the Fourth Gospel, see Schnackenburg, John, 1.558-75; Keener, 
John, 1.325-28; Schneiders, Written, 51-53. For the connection between faith and faithfulness, particularly the 
Roman cultural unit for fides, see Andrew T. Lincoln, Reading John: The Fourth Gospel under Modern and 
Postmodern Interrogation, in Reading the Gospels Today, ed. Stanley E. Porter, McMaster New Testament 
Studies (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2004), 127-49 (131-32); Carter, John, 264-73, 303. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
of the incongruity.102 Although Resseguie does not note the Roman connection, the words 
echo those of any soldier to the Emperor: Ave, Caesar.103 Yet the dramatic irony 
communicates something different from the narrator to the reader.104 At this level, the 
character is ignorant of the actuality of Jesus rank that is being conveyed.105  
The identity of Jesus is a particular object of irony in the Fourth Gospel, as Alan 
Culpepper has pointed out.106 While he mentions Pilate as the victim of irony in the 
Johannine trial narrative, in 19:2-3 the victims are more specifically the soldiers.107 The 
auditors of the Gospel, in contrast with the Johannine soldiers, know Jesus identity (1:49); 
they are thus invited to share the narrators perspective.108 Jesus is the ultimate sovereign to 
whom Johns hearers have given their faith.109 
Donald Senior suggests that the trappings of human sovereignty in their entirety 
are co-opted to communicate Jesus identity.110 In contrast, I have described parallels with a 
Roman imperial acclamatio. The narrative does not reject all human rule, nor even Roman 
rule, but it does use Roman imperial cultural units to describe Jesus. The sedition that Senior 
notes, however, is present, expressed as a hidden transcript.111 This sedition has sometimes 
gone unnoticed by those assessing the Gospel as an antilanguage. Malina and Rohrbaugh, 
for example, see only Challenge and Riposte within the narrative, and the ironic 
102 Resseguie, Narrative, 68. 
103 Evans, King, 123 n. 8; Bernard, St. John, 2.615; Blinzler, Trial, 227.  
104 Culpepper, Anatomy, 172. For the way this passage also subverts tragedy in comparison with the 
Bacchae, see Mark W. G. Stibbe, John as Storyteller: Narrative Criticism and the Fourth Gospel, ed. G. N. 
Stanton, SNTSMS 73 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992), 139-47. 
105 For the description of situational or dramatic irony, see Resseguie, Narrative, 68. For the references 
to Jesus as Messiah, the King of Israel that also function with a similar combination of verbal and dramatic 
irony, see Resseguie, Narrative, 69. 
106 Culpepper, Anatomy, 171. 
107 Culpepper, Anatomy, 179.  
108 Culpepper, Anatomy, 180. 
109 See, somewhat similarly, Tilborg, Reading, 214. Others who see this as a mock pledge of allegiance 
include Lincoln, Truth, 130; Gniesmer, Proze, 285. The idea that Jesus is mocked as the king that John really 
believes him to be has been stated by many including Rensberger, Overcoming, 94. 
110 Senior, Passion, 85. 
111 Senior, Passion, 85. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
demonstration that Jesus is in fact the authentic king of Israel.112 The concept of hidden 
transcripts takes the analysis farther.  
Hidden transcripts function in two specific ways of relevance at this juncture. First, 
hidden transcripts perform a labor of neutralization and negotiation.113 The truth of the 
dominant is negotiated and neutralized for those it leaves shamed, honourless or 
powerless.114 This produces a different truth, one where the power structure is reversed so 
that the powerless are seen to have true power.115 This truth is expressed not only with irony, 
but with any figure of speech that will leave room for plausible deniability.116  
Jerome Neyrey connects such language techniques as lying, deception, 
ambiguity, evasion, riddles and parables, double-meaning words, misunderstanding, 
and irony with the negotiation of secrets in the Gospel of John.117 Like a hidden transcript, 
extra-group secrecy is employed in an atmosphere of fear or distrust.118 Jesus, for example, 
lies (by omission at least) to his brothers about his visit to Jerusalem (7:1-10).119 Only in the 
Farewell Discourse does he begin [s]peaking plainly and no longer in figures (16:25-
30) to his disciples at least.120  
Neyreys use of the word espionage for these speech practices is disconcerting 
because the cultural units associated with it in English are so far from the Johannine world. 
For example, Neyrey suggests that in John 7:15 the Jews who question the source of Jesus 
learning engage in espionage to find out his secrets or to discredit him.121 Furthermore, 
espionage tends to imply organized intent, which does not seem to be present in 7:1-15 where 
112 Malina, and Rohrbaugh, Commentary, 258-59. 
113 Scott, Domination, 111. 
114 Scott, Domination, 111-14. 
115 Scott, Domination, 114-15. 
116 Scott, Domination, 152-54. See discussion of euphemisms below. 
117 Neyrey, Cultural, 260-63. 
118 Scott, Domination, 136-38; Jerome H. Neyrey, The Sociology of Secrecy and the Fourth Gospel, 
in "What Is John?" Volume II: Literary and Social Readings of the Fourth Gospel, ed. Fernando F. Segovia, 
SBL Symposium Series 7 (Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1998), 79-109 (84). 
119 Neyrey, Secrecy, 107. 
120 Neyrey, Secrecy, 102. 
121 Neyrey, Secrecy, 91. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
Jesus brothers, the crowds and the Jews all express different opinions with different 
intentions. The focus on secrecy that Neyrey highlights, however, is quite helpful as it 
gathers neglected aspects of the document and differently highlights data which have been 
regularly examined by commentators.122 In particular, the tension between the efforts of 
outsiders to learn secrets that are guarded and carefully exchanged among insiders coheres 
with the control and surveillance from both above and below that the hidden transcript, as 
a resistant truth, also demands.123 
This resistant truth can be expressed within hearing of those in power with a variety 
of techniques of disguise, one of which is Euphemisms.124 Euphemism describes what 
happens to a hidden transcript when it is expressed in a power-laden situation by an actor 
who wishes to avoid the sanctions that direct statement will bring.125 Thus, [w]hat is left in 
the public transcript is an allusion to profanity without a full accomplishment of it; a 
blasphemy with its teeth pulled.126 Scott continues: In time the original association between 
the euphemism and the blasphemy that it mimics may be lost altogether, and the euphemism 
becomes innocuous.127 This evolution may explain why the imperial references in John 
18:2819:22 no longer seem to reference the emperor but only a king.128 
In John 19:2-3, Roman-aware auditors see Roman soldiers pledging their loyalty to 
   , attired as a Roman emperor, saviour of his people.129 Yet, although 
the clothes, the crown, and the  from the soldiers create a Roman picture of the 
acclamation of the emperor, the title     remains problematic for a 
122 Neyrey, Secrecy, 105. 
123 Neyrey, Secrecy; Scott, Domination, 124-34. 
124 Scott, Domination, 152. 
125 Scott, Domination, 152. 
126 Scott, Domination, 153, emphasis original. 
127 Scott, Domination, 153. 
128 For another example of possible imperial references that were lost over time, see Alexander, 
Family, 287. 
129 A scholar such as Brown is able to minimize the contrast between Jesus and Rome only because 
he sees Pilate  as favorable to Jesus and thus concludes that [t]he malevolence of the Jews remains the 
dominant note (John, 2.863). 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
Roman interpretant. Caesar was never imperator Romanorum, much less king of the Jews.130 
Indeed, throughout the Res gestae divi Augusti, Augustus made it clear that he held his power 
not over but from the senatus populusque Romanus.131 Yet, rather than a title such as 
 or  that would unambiguously refer to the emperor, Jesus is given a title 
identical to Herods,     (Josephus, J.W. 1.3.6 282). It is with this title 
that the teeth of the blasphemy are pulled.132 With setting, characters, actions and costume, 
Jesus is proclaimed as emperor. Only the title veils the proclamation. 
The veiling of Jesus as emperor occurs even in contemporary studies despite the 
Roman clues. Why, for example, would Craig Evans discuss the contrast between king 
Jesus and king Caesar rather than the contrast between Jesus Augustus and Caesar 
Augustus?133 This unwillingness to use imperial terms throughout 18:2819:22 likely 
occurs because imperial references in the Gospel itself are usually veiled, often, as was noted 
above, by combining references to Jesus identity as a Jewish king with titles or in sections 
that present him as a Roman ruler as well (1:49; 4:4-42; 6:15).134 Yet, since the Gospel 
regularly (although almost shyly) does describe Jesus in imperial terms, it seems reasonable 
to posit a hidden transcript to explain this persistent but reticent identification, in 19:2-3, 
through irony. 
Irony, a well-known characteristic of the Gospel of John, is useful to express hidden 
transcripts, because it is capable of two readings, one of which is innocuous.135 Both are 
130 For an example of  as a greeting to the Roman emperor, in this case Claudius, see Dio Cassius, 
Roman History 61.4. The greeting, Ave, was not restricted to the emperor. It, along with vale and salve, were 
used in a variety of general circumstances (Badel, L'audience, 156 and n. 90). 
131 Cooley, Res Gestae, 39. 
132 Somewhat similarly, for Kierspel the title reveals Jesus royal office in a concealed manner (Jews, 
133 Evans, King, 123. Van den Heever, similarly, writes in detail about Jesuss trial [which] is 
presented as the installation of a Roman imperial pretender, but immediately reverts to a discussion of Romes 
dealings with its client kings (Space, 235-36). 
134 Even van Tilborg who recognizes that the emperor is involved in the story of Pilate and Jesus, 
still uses the word king more often than not (Reading, 165-219). 
135 Hutcheon, Irony's Edge, 91; Scott, Domination, 157. Art Wright comes to a similar conclusion 
(Governor, 54-56). The importance of truth in the Fourth Gospel can be assessed in part by the number of 
articles and monographs that address the topic. See, e.g., de la Potterie, Vrit; Yu Ibuki, Die Wahrheit im 
Johannesevangelium, ed. G. Johannes Botterweck and Heinrich Zimmermann, BBB 39 (Bonn: P. Hanstein, 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
used to build community; both are often meant to communicate one thing to those in the 
know and another to outsiders and authorities.136 This use of a hidden transcript implies two 
groups of listeners to Johns Gospel: first, those outsiders and authorities who understand 
the ironic behaviour and words of the soldiers as well as the dramatic irony that implies the 
Jewish kingship of Jesus but who are not aware of any opposition to Rome; secondly, those 
in the know who believe that Jesus the Jew is, for those who give him their loyalty, 
imperator and Saviour of the world.137 These two groups are not necessarily antagonists
they simply do not share the same encyclopaedia.138 It is, I believe, a sense of the different 
encyclopaedias at play in the Fourth Gospel that makes the solution of an antilanguage so 
appealing. However, as discussed in Chapter 1, if the Gospel of John were written in an 
antilanguage, that would render its language impervious to all except insiders. Hidden 
transcripts that use irony allow for cultural encyclopaedias that intersect across Johns 
hearers and his world.139 One may or may not understand Jesus to be sovereign and pledge 
him faith. Yet furthermore, one may or may not be aware and free to express his rule in terms 
usually reserved for other sovereigns, specifically Romes. Thus, auditors of the Gospel 
could be divided not only into two distinct categories: those of the truth and those not of 
the truth (18:37).140 There might also be other differences intersecting across the auditors: 
those before whom it is not safe to describe Jesus in imperial terms and those before whom 
it is.141 
1972); Dennis R. Lindsay, What Is Truth? Altheia in the Gospel of John, ResQ 35.3 (1993): 129-145, as 
well as those discussed in this section of the thesis (see, e.g., n. 144). 
136 Resseguie, Narrative, 74; Hutcheon, Irony's Edge, 85; Scott, Domination, 128-35, 184. 
137 The second group is posited by, for example, Thatcher, Greater, 4. 
138 Although not using Ecos terminology, see Hutcheon, Irony's Edge, 85, 90-91. 
139 See discussion of Moxnes in Section 1.2.3. See also Hutcheon, Irony's Edge, 96. 
140 See, e.g., Bond, Pilate, 172. 
141 While not suggesting the particular difference that I am describing, Dokka also points out the 
possibility that a lack of understanding of the irony of the Gospel might be a product of, a cause for, or a 
separation of an entirely different kind (Irony, 94, 96, 102). Hutcheon, while recognizing the possibility of 
two kinds of auditors, argues against the necessity of a group of people who do not understand (Irony's Edge, 
90). This also allows for less discrete categories with more intersectionality. For another example of an 
intersectional division, see R. Alan Culpepper, Anti-Judaism in the Fourth Gospel as a Theological Problem 
for Christian Interpreters, in Anti-Judaism and the Fourth Gospel: Papers of the Leuven Colloquium, 2000, 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
What is particularly interesting about a hidden transcript is that it expresses the 
discourse, i.e. the truth, of a community.142 It is their local encyclopaedia.143 Truth in Johns 
Gospel has been much discussed, and I do not plan to engage with the whole of that 
conversation in this thesis.144 Furthermore, most important for a semiotic analysis such as 
this is not the definition of truth but the conventions of truth in a narrative.145 And Jesus 
emphasis on and Pilates ignorance of truth (18:37-38) describe precisely the relationship 
between oppressed and oppressor that subordinated communities experience. Such a 
situation of conflict or oppression has often been posited for the community out of which 
the Gospel of John was produced.146 The Dead Sea Scrolls emphasize truth in a similar way, 
and Thiselton points out that many of their uses of the word true articulate a polemical 
claim.147 The trial motif throughout the Fourth Gospel also reveals an inherently 
confrontational viewpoint.148 And whether Johns hearers were oppressed (by Jews or 
Romans) or not, certainly the retainer Jesus-believers posited in Chapter 3 would have 
developed some sort of discourse resistant to their employers/owners.149 
ed. R. Bieringer, D. Pollefeyt, and F. Vandecasteele-Vanneuville, Jewish and Cristian Heritage Series 1 (Assen: 
Van Gorcum, 2001), 61-82 (68-69). 
142 Scott, Domination, 208. Van den Heever also notes that truth in the Gospel of John is the expression 
of the truth of a community [From the Pragmatics of Textures to a Christian Utopia: The Case of the Gospel 
of John, in Rhetorical Criticism and the Bible, ed. Stanley E. Porter and Dennis L. Stamps, JSNTSup 195 
(Sheffield: Sheffield Academic, 2002), 297-334 (309)]. 
143 Eco, Semiotics, 83-84. 
144 See, e.g., Thiselton, Truth, NIDNTT 889-94 and Ignace de la Potterie, L'arrire-fond du thme 
johannique de vrit, in Studia Evangelica: Papers Presented to the International Congress on the Four 
Gospels in 1957 Held at Christ Church, Oxford, 1957, ed. Kurt Aland et al., Texte und Untersuchungen zur 
Geschichte der Altchristlichen Literatur 73 (Berlin: Akademie, 1959), 277-94. Thiselton lays to rest the 
artificial distinction between Hebrew and Greek notions of truth (877-82, 884, 885-86, 889), and de la Potterie 
equates truth not to the opposite of falsehood but to revealed mystery. For a different approach to truth with 
quite different conclusions, see Casey, True?, 218-29. For truth as related to persuasion, see Martin Warner, 
The Fourth Gospel's Art of Rational Persuasion, in The Bible as Rhetoric: Studies in Biblical Persuasion and 
Credibility, ed. Martin Warner, Warwick Studies in Philosophy and Literature (London: Routledge, 1990), 
153-77 (177).  
145 Lincoln, Reading, 133-38. 
146 E.g., Brown, Community, 59-91; Gniesmer, Proze, 420-21; Lincoln, Gospel, 82-83; Borgen, 
Light, 273. 
147 See, similarly, his comments on the Pastorals and 1 & 2 Peter (Thiselton, Truth, NIDNTT 883, 
887, 888). 
148 This will be developed further in Chapter 7. As just one example from Lincolns work, see 
Reading, 140-43. 
149 Section 3.1.4. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
For insiders, their truth is Gods truth and they rely on it.150 Everyone on the side of 
truth listens to [Jesus] (18:37). The community understands the truth because the Spirit of 
truth (14:17; 15:26; 16:13) enlightens them.151 This truth, as Lincoln shows, is expressed 
through the trial narrative, proclaimed by Jesus and trusted by those who believe.152 It is, in 
other words, the truth of a particular group of people in a context in which others disagree 
(e.g., 3:20-21; 5:31-40).153 It is only those who have this Spirit, who can understand in what 
sense Jesus has a kingdom and is a king.154 However, given the interpretation of the hidden 
transcript posited in this thesis, I would say that they can understand in what sense Jesus has 
an empire and is an emperor. 
5.1.5. Mid-chapter conclusions 
Although Chapter 6 will challenge the chiastic structure typically proposed for the 
Johannine trial narrative, thus ousting John 19:1-5 from its usual central position, the 
mocking of Jesus is nevertheless an important moment in the development of events. Yet 
the lack of explicit reference to mockery challenges Evans assertion that the scene is set in 
the centre of the narrative unit deliberately in order to make the element of mockery 
central.155 What the analysis undertaken in this first half of Chapter 5 brings to the fore, 
however, is that John 19:2-3 highlights Jesus acclamatio as imperator where Jesus is the 
saviour of his people and Roman soldiers pledge him their loyalty. John uses the Roman 
cultural units of Caesar to portray Jesus, a technique that will continue in the next verse. 
While the tone is clearly mocking, the irony of the scene and the substitute title are part of 
150 Zumstein, L'evangile, 226-27. 
151 Thiselton, Truth, NIDNTT 892; Daise, Quotations. 
152 Lincoln, Gospel, e.g., 7, 10, 12, 38, 48, 61, 63, 90-91. 
153 Thatcher, Greater, 28-31. Adele Reinhartz also addresses this notion of truth as apprehended by a 
variety of readers with her compliant, resistant, sympathetic and engaged readings of the Gospel 
(Befriending, esp. 49-50, 158-59). See also Dunns definition of truth as significance (Dunn, Neither, 337). 
154 Brown, John, 2.869. See also Howard Clark Kee, Knowing the Truth: Epistemology and 
Community in the Fourth Gospel, in Neotestamentica et Philonica: Studies in Honor of Peder Borgen, ed. 
David E. Aune, Torrey Seland, and Jarl Henning Ulrichsen, NovTSup 106 (Leiden: Brill, 2003), 254-80. The 
concept of Jesus kingship known by the Gospels audience in some hidden sense is also brought out by 
Schnackenburg, John, 3.241, 255, 257. 
155 Evans, Explorations, 59. See also similarly Rensberger, Overcoming, 93. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
the communication of what is true for Jesus-believers in the face of some sort of 
oppositioneither unbelievers, or Roman officials, or both. 
Arguments that Jesus is portrayed as emperor usually take this characterization as 
implicitly anti-imperialistic or as a way to elucidate the Gospels Christology.156 And while 
these conclusions can be drawn, for the purpose of this study these analyses move too far 
too fast. Thus, with Brown, I shall not argue for a direct confrontation with Rome nor for 
a clash between the religious and the secular which, in any case, is a division that cannot 
be maintained.157 I want to pause instead to examine how the Fourth Gospel portrays Jesus 
as an emperor using concepts familiar to Roman-aware auditors. Jesus and Caesar are 
analogues rather than equated, as Aeneas and Augustus are in Vergils Aeneid.158 This view 
sidesteps the greater than and instead of arguments usually made; it focuses instead on 
the way the Fourth Gospel communicates the identity of Jesus to Roman-aware auditors.159  
5.2. Aeneid Allusion in John 19:5  
As the narrative moves from John 19:3 to 19:4, Pilate leads Jesus outside, and the connection 
with imperator is repeated with the reference to his robe and crown in verse 5. The image is 
emphasized by [t]he Greek verb used to speak of Jesus bearing the insignia, , that 
indicates a habitual and long-term wearing of clothes or insignia, often associated with a 
sense of pomp.160 When Pilate speaks to the Jews he begins with,  , which I shall 
156 E.g., Meeks, Prophet-King, 64; Cassidy, John's Gospel, 84-85; Bond, Pilate, 193; Glancy, 
Torture, 136; David Reed, Rethinking John's Social Setting: Hidden Transcript, Anti-Language, and the 
Negotiation of the Empire, BTB 36.3 (2006): 93-106 (103); Carter, John, 176-203; Thatcher, Greater, 4-11. 
Thatcher, however, also sees John build[ing] on imperial logic (15). For further discussion, see Sections 1.1 
and 7.2.1. 
157 Brown, John, 2.863. 
158 Cairns, Epic, 4. 
159 For the term Roman-aware auditors, see Section 3.1.4 and the beginning of Chapter 4. 
Furthermore, analyses such as Rensbergers focus on the affront to the Jews and thus interpret the royal 
epiphany only as that of a Jewish king. Neyrey rightly separates the reaction of the Jews at the narrative level 
from the understanding of the hearers of the Gospel (Rensberger, Overcoming, 93-94; Neyrey, Cultural, 426-
160 , BDAG, 1064. Francis J. Moloney, Love in the Gospel of John: An Exegetical, Theological, 
and Literary Study (Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2013), 144. Pace Bernard, St. John, 2.616. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
suggest is part of a literary allusion. Then in verse 5, the tempo slows down.161 Pilate 
announces that Jesus is coming out, but narrative time is stretched out through three long 
phrases:     ,        . 
  , before Pilate presents Jesus with a flourish:   . 
It must be noted at this juncture of the discussion that some Greek, Latin and Coptic 
textual witnesses omit      . The earliest of these is the Greek 
Papyrus Bodmer II (66), usually dated to ca. 200 CE but recently pushed back possibly to 
the fourth century CE.162 The scribe first wrote the verse without the last six words. The page 
is quite damaged, however, and Gordon Fees cryptic assertion that [i]n the margin 
somewhere the scribe has undoubtedly added the missing words becomes clear when one 
finds Comfort and Barretts footnote after  reporting that an [i]nsert mark follows.163 
Comfort and Barrett assign this correction to the second hand at work on the manuscript
the one who paginated the first hundred pages and offered the first series of corrections, 
possibly using a different exemplar to make his emendations.164 The omission made by the 
original scribe fits with the practice used by that hand throughout the manuscript of 
attempting to trim the text of whatever he perceived to be unnecessary.165 
Several Old Latin texts also omit the end of the verse.166 Burton groups Codex 
Vercellensis (fourth century CE, second half), Codex Palatinus (fifth century CE), and 
Codex Usserianus (ca. 600 CE) together as part of the first European version of John.167 
161 Gniesmer, Proze, 160, 288-89. 
162 Brent Nongbri, The Limits of Palaeographic Dating of Literary Papyri: Some Observations on the 
Date and Provenance of P.Bodmer II (P66), MH 71 (2014): 1-35. 
163 Gordon D. Fee, Papyrus Bodmer II (P66): Its Textual Relationships and Scribal Characteristics, 
ed. Jacob Geerlings, Studies and Documents 34 (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1968), 97; Philip 
W. Comfort, and David P. Barrett, The Complete Text of the Earliest New Testament Manuscripts (Grand 
Rapids: Baker, 1998), 449. 
164 Comfort, and Barrett, Complete, 376-77, 449. 
165 Comfort, and Barrett, Complete, 374. 
166 P. H. Burton et al., Vetus latina Iohannes: The Verbum Project: The Old Latin Manuscripts of 
John's Gospel, (2015), http://www.iohannes.com/vetuslatina/ (accessed 1/5/2016). 
167 Philip Burton, The Old Latin Gospels: A Study of Their Texts and Language, ed. Gillian Clark and 
Andrew Louth, Oxford Early Christian Studies (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), 17, 21, 23, 74. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
He puts Codex Corbeiensis (fifth century CE) in the second European version along with 
the Vulgate.168 Since Corbeiensis includes a correction of the lacuna, the witnesses with the 
missing phrase are all part of the same tradition.169 Other manuscripts that are part of the 
first European version, such as Codex Sarzanensis (early sixth century CE) and Codex 
Monacensis (ca. 600 CE) contain the phrase so the evidence is not univocal.170 
The other manuscript in which the end of the verse is missing is a Coptic version, 
specifically in the sub-Achmimic dialect, also known as Lycopolitan.171 There is one witness 
to this tradition, and it is dated to the second half of the fourth century CE.172 Thompson 
argues that the Achmimic remains represent the version in its earliest form.173 Although 
the sub-Akhmimic dialect stands between Achmimic and Sahidic, these dialects existed 
simultaneously in different regions, and the sub-Achmimic text seems to be an offshoot from 
the Achmimic rather than a step on the way to the Sahidic.174 Thompson believed that the 
various omissions testified to a bilingual (Latin-Coptic) or trilingual (Greek-Latin-Coptic) 
transmission, but since the omissions do not all occur in Old Latin manuscripts from the 
same version (see above) this possibility is far from supported.175  
What conclusions can be drawn from this evidence? Brown notes that these 
manuscripts form an important combination but does not elaborate further or draw any 
conclusions.176 Comfort and Barrett suggest the possibility that the first scribe of 66 took 
exception to Jesus being presented by Pilate as a mere man.177 Bart Ehrman goes further. 
168 Burton, Old Latin, 20, 74. 
169 Burton et al., Vetus; Burton, Old Latin, 20, 74. 
170 Burton et al., Vetus; Burton, Old Latin, 21, 24, 74. 
171 D. C. Parker, An Introduction to the New Testament Manuscripts and Their Texts (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2008). 
172 Herbert Thompson, The Gospel of St. John According to the Earliest Coptic Manuscript (London: 
British School of Archaeology in Egypt, 1924), XIII. 
173 Thompson, Gospel, XXI. 
174 Thompson, Gospel, XX; Rodolphe Kasser, L'vangile selon saint Jean et les versions coptes de la 
Bible, Bibliothque thologique (Neuchtel: Delachaux et Niestl, 1966), 37, 44. 
175 Thompson, Gospel, XVI; Burton, Old Latin, 74. 
176 Brown, John, 2.875. 
177 Comfort, and Barrett, Complete, 374. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
Noting the absence of an article in Vaticanus ( ), a parchment witness from the 
fourth century CE, Ehrman suggests that the resulting phrase be translated See, he is 
mortal.178 If Vaticanus represents a textual tradition that once had a wider currency, then 
Ehrman suggests the words may have been excised to prevent an expression that seems to 
reduce Jesus to a mere mortal.179 
This seems quite a broad conclusion to base on the supposition that the lack of an 
article in one manuscript, Vaticanus, represents a textual tradition known by scribes writing 
in three languages. Especially the evidence of 66 where the correcting scribe evidently 
wanted the words included seems to argue against Ehrmans reconstruction. Although it is 
possible that scribes in each of three languages omitted the phrase because of Christological 
concerns, an early textual tradition in which the phrase was missing is equally possible, 
although equally speculative. Another possibility is that already early interpreters were 
puzzled about the import of this enigmatic statement.180 What is important to note for the 
purposes of this thesis is simply that textual traditions that included      
 existed both before and after the witnesses that do not contain this phrase, and that 
reading was much more broadly spread and adopted. Thus, the versions that end the verse 
after  can be set aside as interesting but anomalous, and an analysis based on the 
majority reading pursued. 
Although Rensberger interprets John 19:2-5 as a bitter burlesque of Jewish royalty, 
this section will argue that Behold the man alludes to Vergils presentation of Augustus 
(Aeneid 6.791) and thus, once again, presents Jesus in terms that usually refer to Caesar.181 
In order to support this proposal, the steps proposed by Ben-Porat for the functioning of an 
178 Parker, Introduction, 71-72; Bart D. Ehrman, The Orthodox Corruption of Scripture: The Effect of 
Early Christological Controversies on the Text of the New Testament, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2011), 111. 
179 Ehrman, Orthodox, 111. 
180 Brown, Death, 827 n. 13. 
181 Rensberger, Overcoming, 94, emphasis mine. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
allusion, as they were presented in Chapter 2 of this study, will be followed but now 
expanded to five: (1) become aware of the presence of a marker (awareness); (2) recognize 
the text it evokes (recognition); (3) understand the context of the marked element in the 
evoked text (understanding); (4) interpret the marker in the alluding text (interpretation), and 
(5) re-interpret the greater context of the alluding text based on connections with the evoked 
text (re-interpretation).182 Adding step 3 makes explicit the analysis of the marker of the 
literary allusion in its original context, a step that Ben-Porat mentions but does not list as a 
separate step.183 Finally, the allusion will be discussed through the lens of semiotics to 
demonstrate that the literary allusion that presents Jesus in Signs usually used for Caesar is 
not a simple comparison nor an opposition, but a nuanced analogy that will require further 
analysis in Chapters 6 and 7.184 
5.2.1. Awareness 
At the outset, one becomes aware of a literary allusion based on a marker in the 
alluding text. A marker is defined by Ben-Porat as an element or pattern belonging to 
another independent text.185 The general Romanness of both the parade of heroes in Aen. 
6.788-89, which focuses on the rulers of Rome throughout history, and the Johannine trial 
narrative (with the Roman location, the Roman governor, the Roman soldiers and their 
Roman salute) point to the analogous universes of discourse of the two texts.186 A specific 
182 See Section 2.3, especially 2.3.1. 
183 Others, such as Brian Abasciano, also make this step explicit [Paul's Use of the Old Testament in 
Romans 9:1-9: An Intertextual and Theological Exegesis (London; New York: T&T Clark, 2005), 10-14]. Ben-
Porat follows these steps in her analyses as well, although in connection with her diagrams rather than in 
numbered format (Poetics, 112-116). Furthermore, Ben-Porats fourth step, the re-interpretation of the 
broader context of the alluding text, is often implicit in others analyses. Abasciano, citing Hays, Dodd and 
Hollander, suggests that the broader context of the allusion may reveal connections with the passage in which 
the allusion is found (Romans 9:1-9, 6, 7, 9, 17). This fourth step of Ben-Porats might also fruitfully be 
connected with Porters comments about thematic studies that eventually move into textual analyses (Further, 
101-102). 
184 The term Sign throughout this chapter refers to Peircian signs, not Johannine signs; see Sections 
1.2.2 and 2.1. 
185 Ben-Porat, Poetics, 108. 
186 See Section 5.1 of this chapter for the Roman referents of John 19:2-3. See Sections 5.2.4-5 in this 
chapter for a more detailed comparison and contrast of the two contexts. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
marker in the Gospel, however, is needed to activate the allusion.187 That marker, in this 
case, is a pattern, one that mirrors the same pattern in the Aeneid. Its elements consist of:  
 the specific phrase in John 19:5,    (Aen. 6.791) 
 the presentation of a ruler in a proleptic account (John 19:2-5; Aen. 6.791-807) 
 a context focused on rulers (John 18:33, 37, 38; 19:2-3, 5; Aen. 6.765, 808-810)  
 a context focused on a kingdom or empire (John 18:36; Aen. 6.770) 
 deictic words with aural similarities 
The chief marker to Vergils Aeneid are the words that the Johannine Pilate utters 
when he presents Jesus:   . This phrase points to Anchisess presentation of 
Augustus Caesar: hic vir, hic est (Aen. 6.791). Yet would not a marker for hic vir, hic est 
require a more literal  ,   to activate the allusion? That is not necessary, 
because the identification [of the marker] does not depend on formal identity. A distorted 
quotation or a unique noun in a new declension are examples of markers that are 
recognizable as belonging to a certain system in spite of a new form.188 Ancient quotations 
often exhibit just such variations, including the quotations of Scripture in the Gospel of John 
itself.189 Ancient writers quote the Aeneid in a variety of media such as graffiti and in Seneca 
the Youngers letters, and sometimes the texts emerge from the memory strangely 
confused.190 Indeed, the Satyricon describes a Jewish slave who was taught to recite the 
187 Brown, John, 2.875; Keener, John, 2.1122. Other connections could be drawn, such as both heroes 
bringing order out of chaos (e.g., John 1:1), having connections with divinity (e.g., 18:36), as well as initial 
misunderstandings of oracular pronouncements (e.g., 12:16), and the cosmic oppositions (especially the 
powers of good and evil, of light and darkness, of heaven and hell), but these seem to fit more broadly into 
the common antiquity of the two texts rather than constituting specific markers. On these elements in the 
Aeneid, see Grebe, Authority, 36, 38, 47, 49, 51, 57-60; Nicholas Horsfall, Aeneas the Colonist, Vergilius 
35 (1989): 8-27 (11); Hardie, Aeneid, 268. Finally, both Palinurus and Jesus die, unum pro multis one life for 
many (Vergil, Aen. 5. 815 [Fairclough, LCL]),       one man for the people (John 
11:50). This too cannot be explored at this juncture. For one approach to this impulse to sacrifice that includes 
a concomitant analysis of Vergils Aeneid, see Cesreo Bandera, The Sacred Game: The Role of the Sacred in 
the Genesis of Modern Literary Fiction (University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1994).  
188 Ben-Porat, Poetics, 110. 
189 See, for example, the discussions in Menken, Quotations, e.g., 71. The Romans 2:24 citation of 
Isaiah 52:5, mentioned in Section 2.3.1, is another example of an inexact quotation. 
190 Nicholas Horsfall, Aspects of Virgilian Influence in Roman Life, in Atti del Convegno mondiale 
scientifico di studi su Virgilio: Mantova, Roma, Napoli, 19-24 settembre 1981, ed. Marco Beck (Milan: 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
Aeneid, but acquitted himself of the task with many mistakes not only of declamation but 
also of memory (Petronius, 68). Although this is not to be taken as a direct reflection of 
reality, it at least suggests that slaves were taught to recite for their masters amusement, and 
the Aeneid was probably among the texts used for that purpose.191 
Furthermore, the text in this case is not only remembered but translated. The ancient 
world recognized that translation was not necessarily centred on individual words. Word-
for-word translations are only (1) probable if the original language has some prestige and (2) 
viable if there are bilinguals present who can explain the odd constructions in the translated 
texts.192 There is a psychological effect to these choices as well: In very general terms 
the sensus de sensu approach can be seen as bringing the original to the reader, whereas in 
the verbum e verbo translation . . . the reader [is brought] to the original.193 And as anyone 
who has attempted translations is aware, to tie oneself to a word-for-word methodology 
nest pas simplement se proposer une uvre impossible, cest en fait sinterdire de 
traduire.194 Thus, in the ancient world as in contemporary practice, translations varied 
according to need. In both the Greek Bible and the Res gestae divi Augusti the Greek is 
sometimes influenced by the source language but also includes alterations for the sake of the 
Greek readers.195 Additionally, one can either emphasize or de-emphasize an allusion in 
Mondadori, 1984), 47-63 (48). Note that Horsfall cites a study by Consoli on Seneca for his citations from 
memory, unverified and full of error and transposition, but the majority of the Seneca quotations that Consoli 
lists are perfectly accurate. See however Consolis discussion on interferenze mnemoniche in Section c on p. 
463-64, as well as Section e, 465 and Section V, 465-67 [Santi Consoli, Reminiscenze virgiliane nelle prose 
di L. Anneo Seneca, Rivista di filologia e di istruzione classica 49.4 (1921): 456-67]. For more examples of 
quotations, see Section 5.2.2 below.  
191 For more such examples, see Section 5.2.2. 
192 Sebastian Brock, Aspects of Translation Technique in Antiquity, Greek, Roman and Byzantine 
Studies 20.1 (1979): 69-87 (74-75).  
193 Brock, Aspects, 73. For a discussion of the Roman focus on rhetoric in translation, see Rita 
Copeland, The Fortunes of non verbum pro verbo: Or, Why Jerome Is Not a Ciceronian, in The Medieval 
Translator: The Theory and Practice of Translation in the Middle Ages. Papers Read at a Conference Held 20 
- 23 August 1987 at the University of Wales Conference Centre, Gregynog Hall, ed. Roger Ellis (Cambridge: 
Brewer, 1989), 15-35 (20). 
194 Jean-Louis Mourgues, crire en deux langues: Bilinguisme et pratique de chancellerie sous le 
Haut-Empire romain, DHA 21.2 (1995): 105-29 (124-25). 
195 David N. Wigtil, The Translator of the Greek Res gestae of Augustus, AJP 103.2 (1982): 189-
194 (192); Law, When, 170-71. On the pull towards word-for-word translations, see, e.g., Copeland, Fortunes, 
31; Tessa Rajak, Translation and Survival: The Greek Bible of the Ancient Jewish Diaspora (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2009), 127. Rajak emphasizes the development of Septuagint Greek as an expression of 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
translation.196 If John 19:5 is, as suggested above, part of a hidden transcript, then there 
might be reason to obscure the allusion.197 However,    is not a particularly 
obscure translation of hic vir, hic est. 
A second element in the marker is that in both texts the presentation of the ruler plays 
with the hearers sense of time. Jesus and Augustus are foundational figures for each 
intended audience. Their rule is foretold in these narratives set in the past, and that rule is 
understood to extend over the present of the hearers (e.g., Aen. 6.854-86; 8.675-88; John 
20:29). The Aeneid achieves much of its grandeur by looking forward  to what, for the 
original Roman reader as for us, has already happened.198 This serves to legitimate 
Augustan Roman imperialism.199 Similar prolepses occur in the Fourth Gospel, and these, 
It may even be the case that at least some of the prolepses coincide rather directly with the 
experience of the community.200 Although Reinhartz does not include the Johannine trial 
narrative in her examples, it does repeatedly present Jesus as  in the midst of his 
trial, flogging, and crucifixion.201 Thus, his future reign is proleptically invoked in John 
18:2819:22. The context of both phrases (John 19:5 and Aen. 6.791) authenticate the 
present experiences of their communities in a narrative from the past.202 
Jewish diaspora identity and in that context points to some choices that diverge from the Hebrew (Translation, 
134-35, 144, 153, 177, 190). 
196 Peter Oakes, Quelle devrait tre linfluence des chos intertextuels sur la traduction?, in 
Intertextualits: La Bible en chos, ed. Daniel Marguerat and Adrian Curtis, Le Monde de la Bible 40 (Geneva: 
Labor et Fides, 2000), 25187 (e.g., 265). 
197 Andrew Wilson, although discussing the concept of truth from a very different perspective, also 
recognizes the interplay of truth revealed as well as concealed in John 19:1-6 [Beholding the Man: Viewing 
(or Is It Marking?) John's Trial Scene Alongside Kitsch Art, BibInt 24 (2016): 245-64 (257-59)]. 
198 William Fitzgerald, How to Read a Latin Poem: If You Can't Read Latin Yet (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2013), 160. 
199 Grebe, Authority, 35. 
200 Adele Reinhartz, Jesus as Prophet: Predictive Prolepses in the Fourth Gospel, JSNT 36 (1989): 
3-16 (11). For the assumptions inherent in this conclusion, see Reinhartz, Prophet, 16 n. 34, citing Culpepper, 
Anatomy, 67-68, but see also more generally 53-70. 
201 See Chapter 4. 
202 K. W. Gransden, Virgil: The Aeneid, ed. S. J. Harrison, 2nd ed., Landmarks of World Literature 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 7. Note that this is not uniquePatrick Chura, for example, 
looks at the interplay between narrative present and authorial present in Harper Lees To Kill a Mockingbird 
and demonstrates the way the proleptic elements of the narrative contributed to its relevance at the time of 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
Both phrases also occur in passages where rulers and empires are the main focus of 
the discussion. In Book 6 of the Aeneid Anchises shows his son Aeneas a procession of the 
souls who will one day rule in Rome. The line of rulers begins with Silvius, a king and the 
father of kings (regem regumque parentem, l.765); the second king after Romulus is 
mentioned as well, Numa, the king of Rome who will first found the city on a basis of law 
(regis Romani primam qui legibus urbem, l.810). And in the central position in the cortege 
comes Augustus, culminating the future heroes of Rome.203 Such [c]entral elements of 
descriptions  are crucial in Virgil.204 The importance of Augustus is made clear as the 
narration pauses to effuse, among other things, over the expansion of the empire that he will 
bring: super et Garamantas et Indos proferet imperium (l.795).205 The presentation of Jesus 
in the Johannine trial narrative is slightly less dramatic, in part because he is the focus of the 
whole Gospel. Nevertheless, the topic of ruler (, 18:33, 37, 38) and empire 
(, 18:36) are clearly central to this narrative, and are particularly repeated in the 
verses leading up to Jesus presentation by Pilate. 
This element of presentation, the sense of voil, also permeates both John 19:5 and 
Aen. 6.791. In the Aeneid, this is true of the whole section of ll.756-886 which is punctuated 
by words of presentation such as hi (e.g., 773, 774) and ille (e.g., 836) as the kings move by 
one after another. Anchises, who is speaking, begins the presentation passage with, Nunc 
age (Now come, l.756) and then, four lines later, as the first youth appears, he announces, 
Ille, vides (See that one, l.760). Similarly, when Pilate comes out to present the flogged 
Jesus to the Jews, he starts his speech with the words,   (19:4). His words point to the 
Latin presentation words in the Aeneid, the first semantically (see), but also, for both, 
publication [Prolepsis and Anachronism: Emmet Till and the Historicity of To Kill a Mockingbird, Southern 
Literary Journal 32.2 (2000): 1-26]. 
203 Gransden, Virgil, 4. 
204 James E. G. Zetzel, Romane memento: Justice and Judgment in Aeneid 6, TAPA 119 (1989): 263-
84 (265). See further on the order of the heroes, Grebe, Authority, 50-51. 
205 Nicholas Horsfall, Virgil, History and the Roman Tradition, Prudentia 8 (1976): 73-89. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
phonetically (vides and age).206 To recognize a phonetic marker, however, would 
require more than a Roman-aware auditor. It would require the auditor to have heard the 
passage in Latin and to have understood at least the gist of the scene, in other words to be 
passively bilingual.207 This would be part of the experience of Roman retainers serving at 
table.208 However, the words are both in a different order and too common in both languages 
to assert an allusion based on the phonetic similarity alone. Yet, especially in the context of 
a Roman presentation, the deictic words are a part of the marker to the Aeneid scene. 
These deictic words have been studied as early as 1890, when Karl Sittl assembled a 
collection of words used in conjunction with hand gestures such as pointing including 
, hic homo, hic, , , ce, sic(e) and ecce.209 Two of Sittls primary references, 
both from the first century CE, are relevant to the hic vir, hic est.210 Persius notes, Its 
splendid to be pointed out and to hear people say: Thats him (hic est; Sat. 1.28 [Braund, 
LCL]). And Martial argues that although he is poor, I am much read all the world over and 
people say Its he (hic est; Epigrams 5.13.3 [Bailey, LCL]).211 This deictic use of hic 
occurs starting in Aeneid 6.789, where Anchises points out, Here is Caesar and all Iulus 
descendants, about to pass under the great vault of heaven (hic Caesar et omnis Iuli 
progenies, magnum caeli ventura sub axem; 6.789-90).212 Horsfall notes Anch[ises]s eager 
pointing finger here, as he moves from gens to Julius to Augustus which is energetically 
206 Both ago and  have to lead as their first gloss, and both were used in the imperative in the sense 
of come on In these instances,  is used in the first sense, age in the second (, , LSJ 7; emporium, 
OLD 89; ago, OLD, 24). On the importance of sound for allusions, see James F. McGrath, On Hearing 
(Rather Than Reading) Intertextual Echoes: Christology and Monotheistic Scriptures in an Oral Context, BTB 
43.2 (2013): 74-80. 
207 For a definition of passive bilingualism, see Section 2.2.1. 
208 For one way that Vergils Aeneid was brought into public and private spaces, see van den Heever, 
Space, 209-210. 
209 Karl Sittl, Die Gebrden der Griechen und Rmer (Leipzig: Teubner, 1890), 51-53. 
210 Sittl, Gebrden, 52 n. 2. 
211 See, similarly, Ovid: Oft someone points with finger to the bard as he passes, and says: He, he is 
the one fierce Love is burning up (hic, hic est; Amores 3.1.20 [Showerman and Goold, LCL]). 
212 Horsfall, Aeneid 6, 55. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
appealing.213 This same deictic use, although not mentioned by Sittl, can be found for , 
used for example by Epictetus in the early second century as a way to draw attention to the 
actions of a philosopher in public: See what the philosopher is doing (    
; Epictetus, Diatr. 4.8.5 [Oldfather, LCL]). Thus in order to create a marker for those 
immersed in a multilingual context,    could be an allusion to hic vir, hic est.214 
That this marker is intentional seems probable, both because of the several elements 
included in the pattern and because the phrase in John 19:5 has been difficult to interpret 
without noting the allusion.215 The proposals have been extensive: 
First, in the fifth century CE, Nonnus made the verse simply highlight Jesus 
innocence.216 Secondly, several contemporary scholars take Behold, the man as an 
expression of pity, a bid for sympathy, or a reminder of Jesus true humanity.217 Thirdly, and 
somewhat similar, is the suggestion that it refers to Jesus suffering, perhaps in an attempt 
to demonstrate that this man cannot be a ruler.218 Charles Panackel agrees with this as a 
primary meaning, but then derives the ultimate meaning of the phrase from a study of 
 throughout the Gospel and concludes that it constitutes an emphasis of Jesus 
213 Nicholas Horsfall, Virgil, Aeneid 6: A Commentary, vol. 2: Commentary and Appendices (Berlin: 
De Gruyter, 2013), 539. 
214 For more on the use of word-for-word translations in later years and in legal documents, see Brock, 
Aspects, 80-87. 
215 For a detailed look at interpretations of this verse before 1988, including a listing from throughout 
church history, see Charles Panackel,    (Jn 19,5b): An Exegetico-Theological Study of the Text 
in the Light of the Use of the Term  Designating Jesus in the Fourth Gospel, Analecta Gregoriana 
251 (Rome: Editrice Pontificia Universit Gregoriana, 1988), 312-25. For a somewhat similar collection of 
views, but with only one reference in the twenty-first century, see Bekken, Lawsuit, 212-16. 
216 Nonnus, Paraphrase 19.25:     , See there, with multi-
coloured back, innocent, stands a man, author translation. Blinzler similarly suggests that Pilates prime 
motive is to demonstrate the harmlessness of the alleged pretendant to the throne (Trial, 229). See also 
Bennema, Encountering, 186. Bennema also suggests that the phrase could refer to the Son of Man (186 n. 
217 Bultmann, John, 659; Bernard, St. John, 2.616; Haenchen, John, 181; Franois Genuyt, La 
comparution de Jsus devant Pilate: Analyse smiotique de Jean 18,2819,16, RSR 73.1 (1985): 133-46 
(140); Stibbe, Storyteller, 108; Cassidy, John's Gospel, 46; Kierspel, Jews, 119, 129; Zumstein, L'evangile, 
231-32. On Jesus as man, see Cyril of Alexandria, Commentary on the Gospel of John 12.4 and Koester, 
Symbolism, 187; Keener, John, 2.1123. 
218 Schnackenburg, John, 3.255-56; Panackel, , 329-38, 338; Ridderbos, Gospel, 600-601; 
Gniesmer, Proze, 291. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
humanity and the affirmation of Jesus status as Son of God.219 This suggests, fourthly, that 
the pronouncement is a disguised confession of Christ.220 Fifthly, some scholars draw 
explicitly theological conclusions, such as Sevenster who sees the man who has profoundly 
absorbed himself into the life of human sin, accomplishing with obedience a work of 
redemption in bearing the load others should bear.221 Sixthly, Skinner suggests that this 
reference to Jesus as a man raises the question of whether he is indeed Gods authorized 
agent asked in other passages calling Jesus , such as 7:46; 9:16; 10:33; 11:47.222 
However, Jesus is also called  in 7:51; 11:50; 18:14, 29 without reference to this 
question, so the connection seems unlikely. Lastly, a variety of allusions have been proposed, 
some of them explicitly eschatological: to Zech. 6:12; to 1 Sam 9:17 LXX; to Genesis 3:22 
and Vita 13:3; or to Num 24:7 LXX (with Philo, Mos. 1.290; Praem. 95).223 Ultimately, the 
question remains open.224 
After the acclamation by the soldiers, Brown mourns, this would have been the 
perfect moment to have had Pilate say, Behold the king (as in vs. 14). Instead there is the 
enigmatic Behold the man.225 Perhaps it is just this contrast between a divine emperor 
and a human man that the Johannine Pilate mocks.226 He borrows the phrase Vergil uses to 
219 Panackel, , 329-38, 338. Others come to similar conclusions, such as Frderic Manns, John 
and Jamnia: How the Break Occured between Jews and Christians: c. 80-100 A.D. (Jerusalem: Franciscan 
Printing Press, 1988), 58-60; Herman C. Waetjen, The Gospel of the Beloved Disciple: A Work in Two Editions 
(New York: T&T Clark, 2005), 389.  
220 Bond, Pilate, 186; Dodd, Interpretation, 437; Culpepper, Anatomy, 172; Duke, Irony, 106-107; 
Carter, John, 305-306. 
221 G. Sevenster, Remarks on the Humanity of Jesus in the Gospel and Letters of John, in Studies in 
John: Presented to Professor Dr. J. N. Sevenster on the Occasion of His Seventieth Birthday, ed. Karel Hanhart, 
NovTSup 24 (Leiden: Brill, 1970), 185-93 (193). 
222 Skinner, Trial, 98, 178 n. 26. 
223 Zech. 6:12: Meeks, Prophet-King, 70; Lindars, John, 566; Barrett, Gospel, 541. 1 Sam 9:17 LXX: 
Lincoln, Gospel, 466; Thompson, John, 383. Genesis 3:22 and Vita 13:3: Matthew David Litwa, Behold 
Adam: A Reading of John 19:5, HBT 32.2 (2010): 129-43 (142). Num 24:7 LXX (with Philo): Bekken, 
Lawsuit, 246-47. Note that Bekkens descriptions of the Roman imperial imagery in Philo are marred by vague 
references (e.g., to some details) and an analysis where any Roman referents disappear behind the Hebrew 
(e.g., to the lion of Judah) and the common (e.g., the qualities of a ruler) (Lawsuit, 227-33). 
224 For a brief reception history that includes Augustine, Nietzsche, Rembrandt and Drer, see 
Edwards, John, 176-77. 
225 Brown, John, 2.890. 
226 Bond, Pilate, 185. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
introduce Augustus, not so much because Augustus is a god (although that, certainly, is part 
of his characterization in the context of 6.791) but because Augustus status is so far above 
that of the beaten man standing before Pilate, despite their similarity in dress. Before further 
examining the way in which a literary allusion to the Aeneid clarifies the identity of Jesus, 
the case must be made for claiming that the evoked text is recognizable. 
5.2.2. Recognition 
The step of recognition, Ben-Porat suggests, seems to be trivial.227 Yet, certainly a 
literary allusion cannot be activated if the addressees do not know or do not recognize the 
text being alluded to. However, there is ample evidence of the popularity of the Aeneid 
throughout the Roman world.228 First, naturally, it spread among Latin speakers. Horace 
referenced it in his Ode 4.15, specifically the parade of heroes in Aeneid 6.229 Silius Italicus, 
in the first century CE, echoed Vergils hic vir, hic est with hic ille est (Punica 13.763).230 
Quintillian advised that boys be taught both Homer and Vergil (Inst. 1.8.5). While this broad 
reference to Vergil could include any of his works, to pair him with Homer suggests that he 
is thinking of the Aeneid, which, indeed, was taught in the schools of Rome from an early 
date, perhaps even during Vergils own lifetime.231 Thus, from the time of Augustus 
227 Ben-Porat, Poetics, 110. 
228 For an overview of analyses of the Aeneid through the twentieth century CE, see S. J. Harrison, 
Some Views of the Aeneid in the Twentieth Century, in Oxford Readings in Vergil's Aeneid, ed. S. J. Harrison 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990), 1-20. 
229 Brian W. Breed, Tua, Caesar, aetas: Horace Ode 4.15 and the Augustan Age, AJP 125.2 (2004): 
245-53 (246). 
230 Antony Augoustakis, Silius Italicus, a Flavian Poet, in Brill's Companion to Silius Italicus, ed. 
Antony Augoustakis (Leiden: Brill, 2010), 3-23 (6); Ben Tipping, Virtue and Narrative in Silius Italicus 
Pvnica, in Brill's Companion to Silius Italicus, ed. Antony Augoustakis (Leiden: Brill, 2010), 193-218 (215 
n. 91). 
231 Harrison, Views, 2. Vergil was used in schools even before the publication of the Aeneid [Henri-
Irne Marrou, Histoire de l'ducation dans l'antiquit, 4th ed. (Paris: Seuil, 1958), 351, 373]. For a full 
anthology covering the influence of Vergil in his day and beyond, see Jan M. Ziolkowski, and Michael C. J. 
Putnam, eds., Virgilian Tradition: The First Fifteen Hundred Years (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008). 
See also Domenico Comparetti, Vergil in the Middle Ages, trans. E. F. M. Benecke, Princeton Paperbacks 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997), 24-29. On the connections between Vergil and education, see 
further Armando Petrucci, Virgilio nella cultura scritta romana, in Virgilio e noi: None giornate filologiche 
genovesi 23-24 febbraio 1981, Pubblicazioni Dell'istituto di Filologia Classica e Medievale 74 (Genova: 
Universit di Genova, 1981), 51-72. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
onwards, un Romain cultiv est un homme qui possde son Virgile.232 It makes sense, then, 
that [i]n Latin literary survivals among papyri, far more texts of Virgil, especially the 
Aeneid, survive than of anything else.233 Although the survival of any papyrus is due to 
chance, the numerous papyri testify at least to the popularity of the Aeneid. However, Vergil 
was not only for the lite. 
The Aeneid was scribbled on the walls of Pompeii and taught in Egypt as well.234 A 
legionary at Masada copied out a very elegantly written line of Virgil, Aen. 4.9, on papyrus 
(P. Masada 721).235 And [a]s early as the second century Virgils writings may have been 
used in a form of sortilege: questions were asked of them, and the answers interpreted in 
oracular fashion, although the reliability of this date is uncertain.236 By the third century 
CE, Minucius Felix was using the Aeneid to proof-text Christianity, preparing the way for 
later centos, poems made up entirely of verses lifted, verbatim or with only slight 
modification, from Virgil, if they are Virgilian centos, or from the Iliad and Odyssey, if 
Homeric centos.237 Vergils popularity beyond Latin Roman circles is specifically tied to 
the Aeneid:  
What makes the reception of Virgil unique among roman poets is the 
pervasive quality of his influence, which is visible both at the level of popular 
culture and of official ideology. This broader effect is almost entirely linked 
to Virgils authorship of the Aeneid. Had Virgil written only the Eclogues 
and the Georgics, his place in the front rank of Latin poets would still be 
assured, but his fame would not have spread as widely as it did beyond 
232 Marrou, Histoire, 341. 
233 Teresa Morgan, Literate Education in the Hellenistic and Roman Worlds (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1998), 113 n. 89. 
234 Virgil, OCD; Ziolkowski, and Putnam, Virgilian, 42-44; Horsfall, Aspects, 51. Rochette judges 
that those who learned Latin in Egypt were de la classe moyenne but he seems to base this evaluation on the 
number of mistakes which does not seem to be a good basis on which to judge status in antiquity, since teachers 
were often slaves (Latin, 333-34). For evidence from Rome and Pompeii, see also Robert Marichal, Quelques 
apports  la tradition ancienne du texte de Virgile, Revue des tudes latines 35 (1957): 81-84 (6-7). Morgan 
rightly notes that in Pompeii, [h]alf of [the graffiti], however, quote the first line of Book One and another 
quarter the first line of Book Two, perhaps reflect[ing] habits of reading, or what was taught (Literate, 106). 
235 Cotton, Geiger, and Thomas, Masada II, 28. 
236 Ziolkowski, and Putnam, Virgilian, xxxiv, 829-30. 
237 See David S. Wiesen, Virgil, Minucius Felix and the Bible, Hermes 99.1 (1971): 70-91 (125-26 
with cautions at 176); Karl Olav Sandnes, The Gospel According to Homer and Virgil: Cento and Canon, 
NovTSup 138 (Leiden: Brill, 2011). For the definition of a cento, Sandnes continues: A cento is thus a poem 
or a poetic sequence made up of recognizable lines from one or more existing poems, usually highly valued 
literature. The literary name for this genre is taken from Latin cento, meaning a patchwork garment (107). 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
cultivated literary circles. Verses and characters from his poetry appear in 
wall-paintings and graffiti, mosaics and sarcophagi, even the occasional 
silver spoon, in locations ranging from Somerset to Halicarnassus.238 
However, despite this widespread popularity among all levels of social status as well 
as geographical diffusion, the Aeneid does not always emerge as the most popular of Vergils 
works when other evidence is counted, such as Pompeian graffiti or epigraphs.239 Book 6, 
for example, the source of the quotation of interest to this thesis, is not represented in 
Pompeii. Furthermore, artwork representing scenes that Vergil depicts in the Aeneid may 
come from narrations of these stories anterior to his.240 This means that what looks at first 
like evidence for the spread of the Aeneid could instead be evidence for the spread of smaller 
scenes from the epic, or for the spread of the stories on which the Aeneid is based. 
On the other hand, Tacitus says that Vergils poetry was recited in the theatres to 
great applause (Tacitus, Dial. 13.1-2), although this may not refer specifically to the 
Aeneid.241 Further, he notes that listeners demand that orators in general be poetic:  
The general audience, too, and the casual listeners who flock in and out, have 
come now to insist on a flowery and ornamental style of speaking; they will 
no more put up with sober, unadorned old-fashionedness in a court of law 
than if you were to try to reproduce on the stage the gestures of Roscius or 
Ambivius Turpio. Yes, and our young men, still at the malleable stage of 
their education, who hang round our public speakers in order to improve 
themselves, are eager not only to hear but also to take home with them some 
striking and memorable utterance; they pass it on from mouth to mouth, and 
often quote it in their home correspondence with country towns and 
provinces, whether it be the flash of an epigram embodying some conceit in 
pointed and terse phraseology, or the glamour of some passage of choice 
poetical beauty. For the adornment of the poet is demanded nowadays also 
in the orator, an adornment not disfigured by the mouldiness of Accius or 
Pacuvius, but fresh from the sacred shrine of a Horace, a Virgil, a Lucan 
(Dial. 20.3-6 [Hutton, Peterson, Ogilvie, Warmington and Winterbottom, 
LCL]). 
238 R. J. Tarrant, Aspects of Virgil's Reception in Antiquity, in The Cambridge Companion to Virgil, 
ed. Charles Martindale (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997), 56-72 (56-57); for the specifics of 
this evidence, see Nicholas Horsfall, The Non-Literary Evidence, in A Companion to the Study of Virgil, ed. 
Nicholas Horsfall, Mnemosyne Supplements 151 (Leiden: Brill, 1995), 249-55. 
239 Horsfall, Aspects, 49-52. 
240 Horsfall, Aspects, 52-53, 57. 
241 Horsfall, Aspects, 47. Horsfall similarly cites Petronius, Satyricon 39 citing Aen. 2.44; 68 citing 
Aen. 5.1 (49). Other ancient references, although later than the Gospel of John, include Lucian Salt. 46 (see 
below); Tertullian Praescr. 39.3-5; Augustine Conf. 1.14 (23), as well as frequently in Civ., e.g., 7.27. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
The reference to the general audience and to those who flock in and out hints at 
retainers or lower lite not among the orators primary audience. Furthermore, the pleasure 
of knowing these quotations and vignettes meant that imitations of the epics can be found 
in literature intended for more popular audiences, such as Josephus, the book of Tobit, and 
the romances.242 This kind of language convergence towards upper registers as a claim to 
status was also noted in Chapter 3.243 Such claims partially explain the appropriation of the 
Aeneid by lower status groups, although since not all lite works were similarly adopted, the 
stories themselves must also have been attractive and retold in whatever language 
intersection the storyteller spoke.244 The Aeneid was part of a largely non-literate world 
where even literary written texts were memorized (often using the help of written copies) 
and performed. They echo and interweave vast worlds of discourse, including almost 
certainly exclusively oral discourse (in a primarily non-literate society), to which we have 
limited (or no) access.245 
There is, furthermore, an example of a quotation from the Aeneid used in a public 
assembly. Suetonius reports that Augustus endeavoured also to restore the old habit and 
dress of the Romans; and upon seeing once, in an assembly of the people, a crowd in grey 
cloaks, he exclaimed with indignation, Behold them, en Romanos rerum dominos, 
gentemque togatam And he directed the aediles never again to allow anyone to appear in 
the Forum or its neighborhood except in the toga and without a cloak (Suetonius, Aug. 40 
[Rolfe, LCL]). The quotation is from Aeneid 1.282: the Romans, lords of the empire and 
people of the toga (author translation). This early quotation confirms that in Rome at least, 
Vergils line had achieved iconic status within a generation of its composition.246 It 
242 Matthew Ryan Hauge, The Biblical Tour of Hell, ed. Mark Goodacre, LNTS 485 (London: 
Bloomsbury, 2013), 54. 
243 Section 3.1.4. On language convergence towards upper registers, see Edwards, Multilingualism, 
82; Giles, Ethnicity; Turner, and Brown, Social Status; Lalonde, and Silverman, Behavioral. 
244 The story of Dido was especially popular; see Kirby Flower Smith, The Later Tradition of Vergil, 
Classical Weekly 9.23 (1916): 178-182 (179). 
245 Carr, Many, 517. 
246 Fitzgerald, How, 164. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
expresses the Roman ideal that they were to be both conquerors of the world and men of 
peace.247 Furthermore, the way in which Suetonius describes Augustuss use of the Aeneid 
to comment ironically on what he saw as poor examples of Romans, parallels the way the 
Fourth Gospel describes Pilates use of a different passage of the Aeneid to comment 
ironically on Jesus as a poor example of a . The Aeneid, then, was known and 
quoted, even ironically, in the Western Roman empire in Latin, among the lite and in the 
presence of retainers. What evidence is there, however, to suggest that the Aeneid was known 
in the East, in Greek?248 
Six Latin works are known to have been translated from Latin into Greek in antiquity, 
although the list is reduced to two when restricted to the first and second centuries CE: 
Polybius translated Vergil, and Zenobius translated Sallust.249 The evidence for Vergil 
comes from both literary texts and papyri.250 These may be anything from partial glossaries, 
through word by word lexical presentations, to more sense-driven phrases.251 I have included 
direct evidence for, or references to, either Vergil in general or the Aeneid specifically, in a 
Greek context, omitting both specific references to Vergils other works and literary 
evidence for Vergils influence on Greek authors.252 
247 Fitzgerald, How, 163. 
248 Rochettes discussions, while helpful especially for their ancient references, sometimes draw 
conclusions that go beyond the evidence, for example when he claims that luvre de Virgile, surtout lnide, 
considre trs tt par les Orientaux comme le modle de la littrature de language latine, tait diffuse dans les 
provinces de langue grecque (Latin, 269). 
249 Simon Swain, Arrian the Epic Poet, JHS 111 (1991): 211-14 (211). 
250 Although Rochette cites Diodorus 40.6.1.1 (first century BCE) as one who references Vergil in 
Greek, this is incorrect (Latin, 269). The specific quotation is:      , 
      , ,     , This Cleopatra 
is mentioned by Virgil, Lucian, Galen, along with Plutarch, and by Diodorus and George the chronicler among 
others (Walton, LCL). As might be inferred from the mention of Diodorus himself, these are not Diodoruss 
words, but a reference to him passed on by another, John Tzetzes from the twelth century (Hist. 2, 31-33). 
Tzetzes records that Diodorus mentioned Cleopatra, and parenthetically (or perhaps primarily, given the  
as well as the emphatic position of ) that Vergil also mentioned her (Aeneid 8.626-728). This citation, 
then, cannot be used to support a mention of Vergil by Diodorus. 
251 For a list of textual witnesses to the Aeneid more generally, including those only in Latin, a good 
place to start would be Armando Petrucci, Papiri, in Enciclopedia Virgiliana, ed. Francesco della Corte 
(Roma: Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana fondata da Giovanni Treccani, 1987), 964-65.  
252 For a summary of the latter, see Johannes Irmscher, Vergil in der griechischen Antike, Klio 67 
(1985): 281-85 (285). Over time, the glossaries have been listed (and often renumbered) in various 
publications, and these lists are often used as references, with some authors preferring one or another 
numbering system, depending on the time and language of publication. This makes it more and more difficult 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
Already in the first century CE (c. 43), Seneca was referring to a translation of Vergil 
into Greek made by Polybius (Polyb. 8.2; 11.5). Rochette and Reiff caution against taking 
this reference at face value both because Seneca is a Roman (Reiff) and because he is writing 
a consolatio (Reiff and Rochette).253 However, while he may be exaggerating about the 
scope of the intended audience and the implied extent of Polybius work, the references 
cannot be completely dismissed.254 Furthermore, in the multilingual environment of the 
Roman empire, it would not be unreasonable to suppose that even those doing translations 
simply for language practice (rather than for dissemination) would choose sections of 
Vergils Aeneid on which to hone their skills, since the text was widely used in education.  
Also from the first century CE, on the back of the Latin acta diurna of a Roman 
legion possibly stationed near Alexandria, are five lines in Greek and Latin usually described 
as a writing exercise (PSI 13.1307 [verso]).255 The first line is in Greek:    
   [ What do you think is common to all activity? Common to all 
human activity is time (author translation). This riddle is written in capital letters and is 
as time goes by and referencing systems multiply to determine whether or not two authors using different 
systems have identical lists. Stepping into this stream means choosing one of these systems, or creating a new 
one and taking the risk of adding to the confusion. Thus, I have listed synonymous references for each ancient 
text in the footnotes. Further bibliographical resources can be obtained from the online databases maintained 
by the Universit de Lige, and by the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven. For the two databases, see MP3, LDAB, 
and TM numbers within each entry. Articles referencing and commenting on these witnesses, with some 
additions or subtractions, include Richard Seider, Beitrge zur Geschichte und Palographie der antiken 
Vergilhandschriften, ed. Ernst Heitsch, Reinhold Merkelbach, and Clemens Zintzen, ed. Herwig Grgemanns 
and Ernst A. Schmidt, Studien zum antiken Epos 72 (Meisenheim am Glan: Anton Hain, 1976), 157-65; Bruno 
Rochette, Les traductions grecques de l'nide sur papyrus, tudes classiques 58 (1990): 333-346 (although 
on 333 n. 2, 2950 [P.Oxy. 8.1099] is incorrectly listed as 2590); Paolo Radiciotti, Manoscritti digrafici 
grecolatini e latinogreci nell'antichit, Papyrologica lupiensia 6 (1997): 107-46 (123-27); Radiciotti, 
Virgilio, 93-95; Maria Chiara Scappaticcio, Tra ecdotica e performance: per un corpus papyrorum 
Vergilianarum, APF 56.1 (2010): 130-48 (139-41). (There is a typo on p. 143 of Scappaticcio where PSI 
13.1307v is incorrectly listed as PSI 11.1307v.) Note that in general Radiciotti dates witnesses later than does 
Scappaticcio. In this list, I have chosen a middle ground, relying on MP3 especially. 
253 Arno Reiff, Interpretatio, imitatio, aemulatio: Begriff und Vorstellung literarischer Abhngigkeit 
bei den Rmern (PhD thesis, Universitt Kln, 1959), 116 n. 20; Rochette, Latin, 271 n. 53. 
254 Whether or not this was a particularly good translation is immaterial to its existence. On the 
implications of Senecas wording for the quality of the translation, see Siobhn McElduff, Roman Theories of 
Translation: Surpassing the Source, Routledge Monographs in Classical Studies 14 (New York: Routledge, 
2013), 164-65. 
255 J. F. Gilliam, Notes on PSI 1307 and 1308, CP 47.1 (1952): 29-31. On the dating, Robert Marichal 
suggests, il y a donc quelque chance pour que le texte soit un fragment des Acta diurna, non dune lgion, 
mais du camp de Nicopolis et date exactement du milieu du 1er s[icle] [Palographie Prcaroline et 
Papyrologie (1): III (1949-1954), Scriptorium 9 (1955): 127-49 (132)]. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
followed, in the second line, by a few of the letters from the first re-drawn in either capital 
or minuscule.256 The last three lines are in Latin and seem to refer to the Aeneid although 
these words are not found in this specific sequence anywhere in Vergils text: 
I]ULI 
AE]NEASDARDANIAE[ 
AE]NEASDARDANIAE[ 
Palaeographers do not specifically attribute the Greek and the Latin to the same hand, 
but variously call it un esercizio di calligrafia or una exercitatio scribendi ad opera di un 
discente alle prime armi e dal ductus fortemente incerto.257 This is not evidence for the 
Aeneid in Greek but for an Aeneid-like reference used as a writing exercise on a papyrus that 
was both connected with the army and on which Greek writing was also being practised.258  
Similar to the previous example, P. Oxy. 50.3554 shows not that the text but that the 
papyrus on which it was written travelled between Greek and Latin writers in the first century 
CE. On one side is a list of Greek names, as in a registry (P. Oxy. 50.3587), and on the other 
are lines 371-72 from Book 11 of the Aeneid, written 6 times in succession as a writing 
exercise.259  
Two passages in Sibylline Oracles from the first century CE (5.8-9; 11.144-55), 
pointed out in 1919 by Alessandro Chiappelli refer to Aeneas as well.260 In Sib. Or. 5.8-9, 
the verses simply mention the one of the race and blood of Assaracus, who came from Troy, 
256 Colin Austin classifies this under under Excerpta, florilegia, sententiae [Comicorum Graecorum 
fragmenta, in papyris reperta (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1973), 309]. 
257 Radiciotti, Virgilio, 91; Scappaticcio, Tra ecdotica, 143, emphasis original. 
258 Also listed as: CLA Suppl. 1695; CPL 61 (CPL 108 is the recto); ChLA 25.786; MP3 2749; LDAB 
4139; TM 62947. Of these, CLA usually provides an image, but this is eclipsed most of the time by images 
now available online. CPL provides a transcription, but these should be double checked for errors as, for 
instance, in this case where DARDANIAE is mistakenly transcribed as DAPDANIAE. ChLA has both image 
and transcription; the three databases do not include either but have links to online images when they exist, 
subject to the usual limitations of online sources. 
259 Also listed as: CLA Addenda 1.1833; MP3 2951.1; LDAB 4142; TM 62950.  
260 Alessandro Chiappelli, Ancora su virgilio e gli Atti degli apostoli, Atene e Roma 22 (1919): 
89-98 (91-92). Chiappelli also suggests that Sib. Or. 8:163-64 alludes to Aen. 1.94-96. However, this reference 
is not unique. Indeed, Chiappelli also mentions Homer, Od. 5.306, so a Virgilian allusion cannot be proven in 
these verses. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
who split the onslaught of fire.261 The story of Aeneas was known before the Aeneid was 
composed, however, so whether this is a Vergilian allusion is uncertain.262 Yet, it is at least 
a clear reference to the tale, from a Jewish Egyptian milieu, at the end of the first century 
CE.263  
Book 11, dated to c. 100 CE, also from Jewish Egypt, gives a more extended 
reference.264 Eleven lines tell the story, connecting Aeneas to Adam in the process: 
A famous child of heroes from the race and blood 
of Assaracus will rule, a mighty and brave man. 
He will come from Troy when it has been destroyed by a great fire, 
fleeing from his fatherland on account of the turmoil of Ares. 
Carrying on his shoulders his elderly father, 
holding his only son by the hand, he will perform 
a pious deed, glancing around, he who split the onslaught 
of the fire of blazing Troy, and pressing on through the throng. 
In fear he will cross the land and frightful sea. 
He will have a name of three syllables; for the first letter 
is not insignificant but reveals the supreme man [Adam]. 
Then he will set up the mighty city of the Latins. 
The image of Aeneas carrying his father, Anchises, out of burning Troy was quite 
popular in the early Roman empire.265 However, the image was already reproduced widely 
before Vergils epic.266 Both references in the Sibylline Oracles, therefore, simply 
demonstrate that the story of Aeneas, and possibly Vergils version of it, was known in 
Jewish Greek circles in Egypt by the first century CE. 
Lucian, a Syrian who wrote in Greek, demonstrates in a passing reference to Aeneas 
and Dido that by the second century CE the connection between Homer and Vergil, as well 
as the story of Aeneas and Dido, were known and written about in Greek (Salt., 46). Thus 
261 All translations of the Sibylline Oracles are from J. J. Collins, Sibylline Oracles: A New 
Translation and Introduction, in The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha, ed. James H. Charlesworth (Peabody, 
MA: Hendrickson, 1980), 317-472. 
262 Horsfall, Aspects, 53. This is pace Chiappelli who asserts: Il sibillista giudeo-cristiano ... 
conosce manifestamente la leggenda dEnea fondatore di Roma qual presentata nellEneide e non altrove, n 
dai mitografi greci n dagli annalisti romani (Ancora, 92). 
263 Collins, Sibylline, 390. 
264 Collins, Sibylline, 432. 
265 Zanker, Power, 201-210. 
266 Horsfall, Aspects, 50. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
the storiesalthough not necessarily the textof the Aeneid moved between the two 
languages. Finally, to show the continued trajectory of the tale in Greek, Cassius Dio early 
in the third century CE puts Vergil in the mouth of a Roman tribune under Severus (Roman 
History 76.10.2; Aen. 11.371-73). Because Dio wrote in Greek, it is unclear whether the 
soldier referencing Vergil is meant to have done so in Greek, or whether Dio means to record 
the Latin conversation in his own language. Nevertheless the Latin words of Vergil, the same 
copied in P. Oxy. 50.3554 above, have been loosely translated into Greek at some point in 
the transmission of the story. 
Although the evidence is not overwhelming, the trajectory, which continues through 
the 4th through 6th centuries CE, shows that the legends, the stories, and at least some of the 
lines of Vergils Aeneid spread into Greek-speaking milieux.267 Therefore, hic vir, hic est 
could be recognizable in    in the Fourth Gospel where it would heighten the 
imperial image of Jesus portrayed in John 18:2819:22.268 Once the Aeneid is recognized 
as the source of the marker, the marked phrase must next be understood in its original 
context. 
5.2.3. Understanding 
The marked phrase, hic vir, hic est comes from Book 6 of the Aeneid. Aeneas has 
gone to the underworld, and his father, Anchises, is showing him the rulers of Rome who 
are in their future, which is Vergils past and present.269  
267 Irmscher, Vergil, 285. 
268 That the phrase might also go back to the words of a Roman governor is possible, but will not be 
argued in this thesis since there are many difficulties of transmission. David Flusser, for example, recognizes 
this phrase as mockery by Pilate but believes that this provides an example of early anti-Pilate sentiment that 
the later Jewish-Christian source tried to soften with Pilates declarations of Jesus innocence [What Was 
the Original Meaning of ecce homo?, in Judaism and the Origins of Christianity, ed. David Flusser (Jerusalem: 
Magnes Press, 1988), 593-603 (599-600)]. 
269 Nicholas Horsfall, ed. A Companion to the Study of Virgil, ed. Nicholas Horsfall, Mnemosyne 
(Leiden: Brill, 1995), 144. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
As Augustus arrives, he is announced thus:  
This section exalts Augustus to a point that it has been called Messianic.270 It describes a 
boy-child of divine origin who shall rule over a world to which peace and justice shall 
return, and restore the golden age.271 He is portrayed as a god, a hero, and the ruler of an 
empire whose boundaries extend beyond the world.272 While the parade also includes those 
whose lives were marred by the flaws pertaining to mortal existence so that the entire scene 
is not unambiguous, it is clear nevertheless that the list is an exhortation to greatness.273 It 
is this image of Augustus as a future hero of Rome that would be activated for the auditors 
of John 19:5; this is the image that those familiar with Aen. 6.791-807 would have floating 
before their minds. 
270 Gransden, Virgil, 5. 
271 Gransden, Virgil, 5; Salier, Jesus, 288-89. 
272 Hardie, Aeneid, 257. 
273 Zetzel, Romane, 282. See, too, Horsfalls comments on the limits of the moral ambiguities of the 
parade (Aeneid, 148-49). 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
5.2.4. Interpretation 
This powerful image of Augustus contrasts with the figure of Jesus, beaten by the 
soldiers but attired as an emperor (John 19:5). This contrast increases the tension inherent in 
the irony of John 19:2-3, discussed in the first half of this chapter, that between the scourged 
Jesus and a , between the soldiers mockery and the addressees faith (present or 
anticipated). The parody of the acclamation demonstrates the pledge of loyalty to which 
Jesus-believers are called by this Gospel.  
John 19:5 then restates the same ironic message with the help of the Aeneid reference. 
By alluding to the powerful image of Augustus in Aen. 791-807, the irony contrasts Augustus 
Caesar, Divi genus and the beaten, mocked man who stands before Pilate. This has the effect 
of overlaying the actions of the scene that seem to describe a poor, condemned provincial 
with a very different Jesusone who is imperial, masculine, victorious: the Jesus who was 
crucified by the Roman authorities, the Jesus whose masculinity was stripped bare by the 
nature of his demise, was already in the New Testament being clothed in Roman masculine 
garb.274 This clothing is that of he, so often promised you, Augustus Caesar, of race divine 
(Aen. 6.791-92). 
For David Flusser, Behold the Man is a phrase of acclamation and he concludes 
that Pilate intended, by the use of that particular phrase, to mockingly acclaim Jesus king 
of the Jews.275 However, he comes to this conclusion by conflating Behold the Man 
(19:5) and Here is your King (19:14).276 The argument in this second half of Chapter 5 is 
that Behold the Man is not only an acclamation by a Roman military man of high rank, 
but also a literary reference.    fits the irony of the passage. The Johannine 
Pilate with his words (like the soldiers with their actions) ironically proclaims Jesus to be 
274 Conway, Behold, 182; see also 147-48. The masculinity of Jesus will be nuanced in Chapter 7 with 
the footwashing episode, which Conway does not discuss. See, similarly, Bond, Authorities, 245. 
275 Flusser, Ecce Homo, 601. 
276 Flusser, Ecce Homo, 603. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
what he manifestly is not: Caesar. And Roman-aware auditors are invited to take a step 
further and to recognize the hidden transcript that declares Jesus to be just thatthe emperor, 
worthy of primary allegiance.277 
5.2.5. Re-interpretation of the greater context 
If this reading is correct, if, by means of a literary allusion to the Aeneid, the Gospel 
of John uses the Roman concept of imperator to describe Jesus, what happens in the final 
step of re-interpretation? What echoes from a literary allusion in John 19:5 resound into 
18:2819:22? This will be the focus of Chapters 6 and 7. Before providing an exegetical 
reading of the trial narrative (Chapter 6) and looking at the way this reading addresses issues 
of ethnicity and power (Chapter 7), I need to answer three questions that will help to clarify 
the subsequent analysis: 
1. What is the difference between metaphoric and metonymic allusions? 
2. What is the object in the semiotic triad of the allusion in John 19:5? 
3. Is the allusion to Aen. 6.791 metaphoric or metonymic?  
These questions will be addressed in turn in this last section of the chapter. 
Ben-Porat distinguishes between metaphorically and metonymically related texts.278 
Metaphorically linked texts do not, at the outset, seem to be related. Thus, the marker in the 
alluding text must be very similar to the marked element to which it refers, otherwise there 
would be no reason for the evoked text to come to mind. Once it is evoked, however, its 
themes are added to the themes of the alluding text, deepening them by joining to them 
277 The contrast between Jesus as a beaten provincial and Jesus as an emperor does not necessarily 
communicate a conflict over sovereignty and rule (Carter, John, 305; see, similarly, 307, 310, 311). A 
nuanced comparison between Jesus and Caesar will be proposed in Section 7.2.1. 
278 Chana Kronfeld does not find these distinctions meaningful; however, they will prove their 
fruitfulness in developing answers to the third question addressed in this section [Allusion: An Israeli 
Perspective, Prooftexts: A Journal of Jewish Literary History 5.2 (1985): 137-63 (156)]. Others, also, argue 
that metonyms ultimately reduce to metaphors. However, my analysis will maintain the traditional distinctions. 
For some discussion on these distinctions, see Culler, Pursuit, 188-209. Note that Harold Bloom in particular 
relates the dialectical relationships between precursor and successor texts with standard figures of speech 
such as irony [e.g., The Anxiety of Influence: A Theory of Poetry (New York: Oxford University Press, 1973), 
14-16; cited in Robert L. Brawley, Evocative Allusions in Matthew: Matthew 5:5 as a Test Case, HvTSt 59.3 
(2003): 597-619 (604)].  
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
similar themes from a very different context.279 The evoked text, in other words, adds another 
example to the message of the alluding text. 
I can provide a metaphorical allusion of my own for this discussion by referring to 
the practice of code-switching discussed in Chapter 2. A code-switch, in the Rational Choice 
Model, is an attempt by the speaker to optimize communicative outcomes. Speakers are 
aware of the social messages carried by one linguistic choice rather than another and they 
see these social meanings AS A RESOURCE for making choices, not as a determinant of 
choices.280 A child, in one example, switches languages briefly in order to get away with 
expressing sarcasm to his mother.281 I have argued that the Gospel of John, in 19:5, switches 
into the code of the Aeneid in order to bring its social messages in a hidden transcript into 
the trial narrative.  
In contrast, in metonymically related works the texts are initially quite similar in 
theme or setting. Thus the marker can be the alluding text itself, which would easily bring 
the evoked text to mind. If a more specific marker is used, it can be less exact. The alluding 
text then becomes an extension of the evoked text, but often, in that extension, differences 
emerge. To use Alkiers terminology, the alluding text enters the universe of discourse of 
the evoked text, but then transforms it for its own purposes.282 This transformation is effected 
by means of the frame of the allusion.283 
The importance of recognizing that a literary allusion can refute or refine the evoked 
passage as well as reiterating it cannot be overstated, because it brings both elements of 
connection but also of contrast into the discussion.284 When Jauhiainen analyses connections 
279 Ben-Porat, Poetics, 119. 
280 Carol Myers-Scotton, and Agnes Bolonyai, Calculating Speakers: Codeswitching in a Rational 
Choice Model, Language in Society 30.1 (2001): 1-28 (5, 23). 
281 Myers-Scotton, and Bolonyai, Calculating, 17. 
282 Alkier, Intertextuality, 8, emphasis original.  
283 On the priority of the frame over what Sternberg calls the inset, see Proteus. See also 
Christopher Stanleys discussion in Arguing with Scripture: The Rhetoric of Quotations in the Letters of Paul 
(New York: T&T Clark International, 2004), 27-29. 
284 Bloom offers six revisionary ratios with which a later poet can interact with previous works. I 
shall not use Blooms terminology, however, which is obscure, and I shall restrict my discussion to 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
between Zechariah and Revelation, he starts with Ben-Porats steps but then omits attention 
to her distinction between metaphors and metonyms. This omission hampers his analysis 
because he determines the presence or absence of allusions only by looking at similarities 
between the texts.285 Therefore, he does not explore the way a metonymically related text 
could highlight elements in the alluding text by providing a contrast.286 Yet Ben-Porat 
demonstrates that once the literary allusion has provided for the simultaneous activation 
of two independent texts, alluding texts make use of the activated elements for their 
different purposes. These include: to enhance and clarify thematic patterns, to provide 
missing links, to establish an analogy or to supply a fictional world.287 Therefore, the 
importance of differentiating between metaphorical and metonymical uses of allusions 
requires the attention to frames that drives the third question to be addressed in this section. 
First, however, the question raised in Chapter 2 about the object that motivates the creation 
of a Sign must be answered for John 19:5. 
Chapter 2 described the way one object can generate multiple interpretants as each 
interpreter creates a new Sign to communicate her view of the object (Figure 20). In that 
chapter, I pointed out that Aen. 6.791 and John 19:5 are motivated by different objects, and 
that, therefore,    is unlikely to be simply an interpretant of hic vir, hic est 
metaphorical restatement (reiteration) and metonymic restatement (refinement) which are applicable in John 
19:5 (Anxiety, 14-16). 
285 The search for similarity is often a stumbling block in interpreting allusion. Michael Thompson 
demonstrates the difficulty in his discussion of an alleged allusion to or echo of a saying in Gospel G by the 
author of an Epistle E. His second criteria is that of [c]onceptual agreement: Sayings in G and E can exhibit 
extensive verbal agreement and yet have different meanings and origins; conceptual agreement is also a 
prerequisite, although it would be possible for an author deliberately to use the same language in a different 
sense (i.e. an antithetical or contrastive allusion). He thus nuances his own requirement to allow for elaboration 
and even rejection [Clothed with Christ: The Example and Teaching of Jesus in Romans 12.1-15.13, ed. David 
Hill, JSNTSup 59 (Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1991), 30, 32]. This relates to the tension between the inset and 
the frame as discussed in Sternberg, Proteus, 121, 125. Thompson recognizes something similar when he 
says, as some sayings apparently circulated in isolation, Gospel context must remain secondary consideration. 
On the other hand, Pauls context is primary (Clothed, 32). It is unclear, furthermore, whether success in 
interpretation can be used to validate the presence of an allusion or whether this criterion is, instead, circular. 
See Porter, Use, 83. 
286 Jauhiainen, Zechariah, e.g., 65. 
287 Ben-Porat, Poetics, 127. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
(Figure 8). However, describing what such a semiotic process would entail is instructive for 
analyzing other scholars work. 
Figure 20. Unlimited semiosis motivated by the same object 
Figure 21 might represent the Johannine trial narrative if Johns communicative act 
were motivated by the expansion of the Roman and especially the figure of Augustus, visible 
in monuments and inscriptions around him.288 He might then interpret that object, along with 
the presentation of Augustus in Aen. 6.791 (Sign), as a prophecy that was fulfilled by Jesus 
in the Johannine trial narrative. This interpretation would become a new Sign as he wrote 
his Gospel, and his allusion in 19:5 would express his understanding of the meaning of 
Roman rule: It is Jesus, not Augustus, who fulfils the Roman promise. 
Figure 21: Unlimited semiosis in John 18:28--19:22 
288 E.g., Zanker, Power, 75, 99, 124-25, 128, 163, 190, 301, 318. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
Such an analysis may seem at first to cohere with the studies of Bonz (on Luke-Acts 
and Vergils Aeneid) and MacDonald (on Acts, Mark and Homer) that proceed on the basis 
of cultural genres and overall similarities.289 Called mimesis criticism, this approach can be 
described as highlighting the biblical texts as an interpretant of the Sign-object combination 
of the ancient Mediterranean world (object) and the classical texts that interpreted that world 
(Sign). MacDonald, for example, asserts that early Christian authors... created stories after 
pagan literary models, sometimes without Jewish or Christian traditions to inform them. That 
is, they wrote as they had been taught in school: through  or imitatio.290 Marianne 
Palmer Bonz argues that Luke-Acts appears to have drawn inspiration from heroic epic in 
the manner in which it creates its story as the fulfillment of divine prophecy and the 
accomplishment of a divine plan.291 While I struggle to see in the Bible a prose epic, given 
that the epic form is specifically marked with verse, some of the insights provided by 
mimesis criticism do cohere with literary allusions and semiotic analysis, specifically the 
subtle linguistic and symbolic clues which create hyperlinks with alternative cultural 
scripts.292 These clues may also be called markers to a different text, or Haftpunkte to a 
different encyclopaedia. 
However, one of the reasons why such approaches have not garnered more 
agreement among biblical scholars may be the sense that canonical texts do not seem to be 
289 Marianne Palmer Bonz, The Past as Legacy: Luke-Acts and Ancient Epic (Minneapolis: Fortress, 
2000); Dennis R. MacDonald, The Homeric Epics and the Gospel of Mark (New Haven: Yale University Press, 
2000); Dennis R. MacDonald, Does the New Testament Imitate Homer? Four Cases from the Acts of the 
Apostles (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2003). For an earlier argument for connections between 
Luke-Acts and Vergils Aeneid, see Alessandro Chiappelli whom, however, Bonz does not cite (Virgilio nel 
Nuovo Testamento, Atene e Roma 22 (1919): 1-14; cf. Chiappelli, Ancora). See particularly the issues 
discussed as criteria for allusions in MacDonald, Does, 2-7. However, see also Kristian Larssons critique of 
MacDonald as well as other references to the discussion [Intertextual Density, Quantifying Imitation, JBL 
133.2 (2014): 309-331]. 
290 MacDonald, Does, 2. 
291 Bonz, Past, 191. 
292 Bonz, Past, 56; Loveday Alexander, Acts in Its Ancient Literary Context: A Classicist Looks at the 
Acts of the Apostles, ed. John M. G. Barclay and Mark Goodacre, Early Christianity in Context; LNTS 298 
(New York: T&T Clark, 2005), 173, 181; see also 165-82; see, further, Sandnes, Gospel, 14-22. For the three 
elements of epic, literary form (verse narrative); scale and scope (length; complexity; a certain grandeur); 
and values (heroic), see Alexander, Acts, 167. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
primarily new interpretants for past experiences and texts, but rather new interpretants 
motivated by new experiences. The dynamic object, for John, was more likely to have been 
his experience of the trial of Jesus before Pilate than his experience of the Roman empire 
(Figure 22).293  
Figure 22: Sign-object-interpretant relationships in John 18:2819:22  
Note: For the original diagram, see Eco, Role, 183. 
The Roman empire is involved in the triad, but as one of the grounds by which John 
chose to communicate. In this case, the second text is not simply an interpretant of the first. 
It is, instead, a Sign for a new object, of which the initial text is only a part (Figure 23).  
Figure 23. Semiotics of allusion motivated by different objects 
The new text is not an interpretant, then, but a new Sign. And the new Sign-object 
relation will generate another new interpretantfor example, this thesis. It is that Sign-
object relation that must be analysed in three different frames so that the metaphoric and 
metonymic uses of the allusion can emerge. Such an analysis will describe the nuanced 
293 As a motivator for Sign-production, it is irrelevant whether his experience stemmed from personal 
encounter, reported story, received preaching or community history. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
relationship that the Gospel of John presents between Jesus and Caesar by addressing the 
way changes in frames also change the coherence between the alluding text and the evoked 
text. John 19:5 will be examined first with 19:2-5 as a frame, next with 18:2819:22 as a 
frame, and thirdly with a brief discussion of the interpretant that emerges when the whole 
Fourth Gospel is taken as the frame.  
Another semiotic diagram, this one created by John Robertson and brought into print 
by Alan Manning, offers a shorthand way to conceptualize these three Sign-object relations 
in different frames. It uses a coordinate-system approach to diagram the semiotic triad 
(Figure 24).294 
Figure 24: Robertson-Manning diagram  
Note: For the original diagram, see Manning, Common, 128. 
The upper left point starts with the Sign. The Sign is connected to the dynamic object 
(at the lowest point of the triangle) by the immediate object. Signs, it must be noted, are not 
a deficient means of access to some unreachable Ding an sich. Rather, they are the way in 
which the phenomena of perception appear.295 These phenomena of perception are the 
294 Alan Manning, A Common Semiotic Framework for Literary and Linguistic Styles (paper 
presented at Deseret Language and Linguistic Society Symposium, Provo, UT, March, 1995), 128. Note that 
although the multiple diagrams used in this chapter (as well as in Chapter 2) might seem to confuse the analysis, 
they are actually clarifying because each one allows discussion to focus on the complexity of one aspect of the 
semiotic analysis of communication without becoming cluttered or overwhelming with all of the aspects at 
once. 
295 Alkier, Reality, 204. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
objects that motivate communication, and Signs are both the elements of the encyclopaedia 
that organize perception and also the texts (for the purposes of this thesis) that communicate 
them.296 Thus, the immediate object is some aspect(s) of the dynamic object, as it is 
experienced on certain ground(s). It is the basis for the production of a Sign.297 Moving back 
up to the top, the immediate interpretant is the original sense produced in the one receiving 
the communication by the combination of the Sign and the immediate object. Below and to 
the right, the dynamic interpretant is the understanding that one person eventually produces 
in a given instance of a Sign. Finally, at the top right, the final interpretant is a habit both 
of behaviour and of signification resulting from the Sign-object relationship.298 This can 
helpfully be understood as a cultural unit of the Sign. 
So, as a first step (Figure 25), the Sign is the phrase    and its frame is 
verses 2-5: the soldiers have dressed up a flogged Jesus as a Roman emperor (v. 2) and have 
mocked him by pledging their loyalty to him as     while slapping him 
instead of saluting him (v. 3). Pilate announces that there is no basis for the charge against 
him (v. 4) and presents him to the crowd, still dressed like Caesar, with an allusion to the 
presentation of Augustus in the parade of heroes in Vergils Aeneid (v. 5).  
Figure 25: Robertson-Manning diagram in John 19:2-5 frame 
296 See Section 1.2.2, especially n. 47. 
297 As noted in Chapter 2, ground, meaning, and interpretant are in fact the same, since it is impossible 
to define the ground if not as meaning, and it is impossible to define any meaning if not as a series of 
interpretants (Eco, Role, 184). 
298 Eco, Role, 192. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
The dynamic object is the authors experience of Jesus mocking. His description of 
the events is motivated by some knowledge of them, and he describes the characters in the 
narrative and their actions. His use of the allusion to hic vir, hic est shows that he perceived 
the mocking words and actions of Pilate and the soldiers as a humorous depiction of Jesus 
as emperor, and this imperial image brought Aen. 6.791 to mind as a Sign with which to 
express the mockery. When the verse is interpreted with a Roman encyclopaedia, the 
dissimilarities between the two scenes are immediately apparent; this is a metaphorical 
interpretant. The dynamic interpretant, then, connects the similarity of the imperial images 
with the dissimilarity between the men being depicted and concludes that, when a beaten 
Jesus is called by a phrase used for Augustus, it heightens and deepens the mockery. Thus, 
the final interpretant for the allusion in this frame is that Jesus is the antithesis of Caesar. 
However, in the second frame, John 18:2819:22 (Figure 26), it is Johns 
experience of Jesus as ruler and victor despite the cross that is the dynamic object motivating 
the Sign production. This conclusion stems from the similarities between Vergils depiction 
of Augustus and Johns depiction of Jesus. In the trial narrative, Jesus is  (18:33
19:2), the ruler of a  (18:36). He has officers (; 18:36), and he is, himself, 
the regent of the one who authorizes Roman power (18:36; 19:11).  
Figure 26: Robertson-Manning diagram in John 18:2819:22 frame 
Augustus, particularly as he is described in Aen. 6.791-807, is also ruler of an empire 
(l.792-97, 806-807) and regent of the gods (l.792). An abductive hearing of the Johannine 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
trial narrative with a Roman encyclopaedia highlights all the elements that connect Jesus 
with Caesar: the purple robe, the crown, and the tribunal; the immediate interpretant 
understands the allusion metonymically.299 The dynamic interpretant is that it is Jesus and 
not Augustus to whom Vergils references and the Roman expectations allude.300 And the 
final interpretant, therefore, is that Jesus is the true promised Roman ruler. 
The metonymy between Jesus and Augustus is underlined by another similarity 
between the two texts. Already in the second century CE, Origen [was] drawing attention 
to the parallels between the arrest of Jesus in John 18 and Euripides story of Dionysus in 
the Bacchae (Origen, Cels. 2.34).301 Origens contrast between Dionysus and Jesus death 
will not be addressed in this thesis. For a Roman interpretant of the trial narrative, Euripides 
story is less relevant than the Roman adaptation of Dionysus.302 Indeed, Pliny references 
Dionysus as one persecuted by those who refused to recognize his divinity, but overcame 
them and extended his conquests far into Asia and into India (Nat. 4.10.39; 6.21.60; 7.26.95-
96).303 Furthermore, Alexanders conquest of India was naturally understood as analogous 
to the exploits of Dionysus.304 And it is this story of conquest that Seneca references in three 
offhand allusions to the Roman Bacchus, or Liber Pater.305 
The most pertinent example comes from On Benefits 1.13.2, where a Corinthian 
ambassador speaks to Alexander the Great: 
To no one besides Hercules and yourself have we ever given the right of 
citizenship. Alexander gladly accepted so marked an honour, and bestowed 
hospitality and other courtesy upon the ambassadors, reflecting, not who they 
were who had given him the privilege of citizenship, but to whom they had 
299 For more on the tribunal, see Section 6.2.2.4. 
300 This is clearly not Vergils semiotic triad, but Johns.  
301 Stibbe, Storyteller, 131; see also Hengel, Question, 191 n. 86. See also, for overall similarities, 
Stibbe, Storyteller, 134-35; and, for a nuanced comparision, Peter Wick, Jesus gegen Dionysos? Ein Beitrag 
zur Kontextualisierung des Johannesevangeliums, Bib 85.2 (2004): 179-98 (esp. 272-308).  
302 Leighton Durham Reynolds, Miriam T. Griffin and Elaine Fantham, Annaeus Seneca (2), Lucius, 
303 Dion'sus, OCCL.  
304 Courtney Jade Friesen, Reading Dionysus: Euripides Bacchae among Jews and Christians in the 
Greco-Roman World (PhD thesis, University of Minnesota, 2013), 139. 
305 Both were identified with Dionysus (J. A. North, Liber Pater, OCD; Albert Henrichs, Dionysus, 
OCD). 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
given it; and, slave as he was to glory, of which he knew neither the true 
nature nor the limitations, following the footsteps of Hercules and of Bacchus 
(Liber), and not even halting his course where they ceased, he turned his eyes 
from the givers of the honour to his partner in it, just as if heaven, to which 
in supreme vanity he aspired, were now his because he was put on a level 
with Hercules (Basore, LCL). 
Liber is brought into the narrative in conjunction with Alexander the Great and 
Hercules, and although these last are the focus of the discourse, in which Seneca contrasts 
the good conqueror Hercules with the greedy conqueror Alexander, Liber is joined to them 
as another who has conquered the East.306 In De vita beata 25.4-8, moreover, Seneca 
describes Socratess equanimity in the face of triumph as well as defeat. In his description 
of the triumph, he puts these words in Socratess mouth: Make me victor over the nations 
of the world, let the voluptuous car of Bacchus (Liber) convey me in triumph from the rising 
of the sun all the way to Thebes, let the kings of the nations seek laws from me; when from 
every side I shall be greeted as a god, I shall then most of all remember that I am a man 
(Basore, LCL). These same motifs of victor, ruler, triumph over the nations are part of the 
hidden transcript of the Gospel of John.307 The cultural unit that pairs Dionysus with triumph 
is particularly relevant for the Fourth Gospel since associations between emperors and the 
triumph of Dionysus emerge in both Ephesus and Alexandria. In Ephesus, Mark Anthony 
was hailed as Dionysus (Plutarch, Ant. 24.3-4) and Hadrian was commemorated with 
Dionysus in both inscription and statuary (e.g., IEph 2.275).308 In Alexandria, 
lidentification de Trajan comme Nos Dionysos est atteste par les monnaies.309 
306 Hercules and Liber are again connected to Alexander and his greed in Epistles 94.62-63. 
307 For the theme of triumph over the nations, see Section 7.1 on superordinate identity. The man-god 
connection is relevant to the Gospel of John as well, but that has been investigated by others, for example, 
Friesen, Reading. 
308 Robert Turcan, Les sarcophages romains  reprsentations dionysiaques: essai de chronologie et 
d'histoire religieuse, Bibliothque des coles franaises d'Athnes et de Rome 210 (Paris: de Boccard, 1966), 
374-85, 378; Harland, Honours and Worship: Emperors, Imperial Cults and Associations at Ephesus (First to 
Third Centuries C.E.), 325, 329, 331; Tilborg, Reading, 95-98, 211-12; Gerhard van den Heever, Finding 
Data in Unexpected Places (Or: From Text Linguistics to Socio-Rhetoric): Towards a Socio-Rhetorical 
Reading of John's Gospel, Neot 33.2 (1999): 343-364 (357). Van Tilborg also connects the worship of 
Dionysus with an unusual number of Latin names (Reading, 23). This could support the presence of Latin-
aware auditors in Ephesus, although see the cautions for using onomastics to determine language use in Section 
3.1.1 n. 18, especially Rey-Coquais, Onomastique. 
309 Turcan, Sarcophages, 375. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
The motif of triumph is also found in the passage from Vergils Aeneid alluded to in 
John 19:5. Not only is Augustus presented as the promised one, the one who will bring back 
the golden age, but he will extend Romes rule (proferet imperium) all the way to India, 
beyond the lands that Heracles conquered (l.801), and also beyond Libers conquests (l.804-
805).310 And then the poet steps in, speaking in the first person plural for the Roman people: 
Do we still hesitate to extend our might by means of our courage, or does fear prevent us 
from settling in the land of Ausonia? (l.806-807). In this way, the poet uses a revelation of 
future greatness set in the past as a direct inspiration to present action.311 While Aeneas 
only has to settle Ausonia, in other words Latium, the Romans of Vergils day are thereby 
encouraged to extend their imperium to India and beyond.  
These images of conquest are associated with the Johannine trial narrative through 
the allusion in John 19:5. However, in this case, the metonymy also contrasts somewhat as 
it is extended. While Dionysus is clearly a conqueror, Jesus and his followers do not fight 
(18:36). The image of Jesus as a victor is somewhat nuanced in this frame, and this nuance 
will be explored in Chapter 7. The interpretantJesus is emperorthat emerges from the 
analysis in this frame is the same as that which was suggested as the interpretant for the 
unlimited semiotic process described above (Figure 21). However, in that analysis, the 
interpretant could not be nuanced by the allusions interpretants in other frames, as brought 
out in this section, because the object would always be located in Johns experience of the 
Roman empire rather than in his experience of Jesus.  
Moving out one last level, the Gospel of John as a whole can be viewed as the frame 
for the allusion in John 19:5 (Figure 27). The dynamic object, then, would be Johns 
experience of Jesus as the object of his own fidelity. John interprets this as similar to the 
demands of Augustus and the Romans for fidelity.312 Despite this similarity, this is a 
310 Grebe, Authority, 40, 52-53. 
311 Horsfall, Aeneid, 144. 
312 For the importance of fidelity in the Roman encyclopaedia, see Section 6.1.3. 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
metaphorical use of the analogy, because the Gospel of John presents many images of Jesus 
and this is only one of them. The dynamic interpretant is that Jesus is an object of fidelity, 
among other elements of his characterization in this Gospel. (To this could also be added the 
element of salvation, which is part of the identity of Augustus as well as of Jesus.)313 
Figure 27: Robertson-Manning diagram in Gospel of John frame 
The immediate interpretant of the allusion is again a metaphor. And while a full 
description of the dynamic interpretant will be provided in Chapters 6 and 7, it will include 
the thesis that the Roman-aware auditors were among those to whom the Gospel is addressed 
(e.g., John 1:12). The final interpretant, then, would be that John is revealing Jesus as the 
proper object of fidelity for all people.  
5.3. Conclusion 
When discussing allusions, it is important to distinguish what an allusion expresses from 
why an author used that allusion, or why she used an allusion at all.314 The answers to these 
why questions are not recoverable, and the references to motivating objects in this chapter 
should not be understood to suggest otherwise. Objects in the semiotic process are the forces 
(such as experiences and perceptions) that motivate communication, not the explanations for 
why they do so. This chapter has emphasized the expressions of loyalty to the emperor that 
313 John 3:17; 4:42; 5:34; 19:9; 12:47 and Gransden, Virgil, 5. 
314 Stephen Fowl, The Use of Scripture in Philippians, in Paul and Scripture: Extending the 
Conversation, ed. Christopher D. Stanley, Early Christianity and Its Literature 9 (Atlanta: SBL Press, 2012), 
163-84 (166-67). 
5. Presenting Jesus as Caesar in John 19:2-5  
are mocked in John 19:2-3. A semiotic analysis of the proposed allusion to Aen. 6.791 in 
John 19:5 has brought out a nuanced expression of both metaphorical and metonymical 
elements in a comparison between Jesus and Caesar Augustus. That Jesus ought to be an 
object of fidelity, however, was shown to be part of the content of Johns communication. 
Fidelity, fides, was an extremely important part of Roman rule. It will also prove to be an 
important unifying theme in the exegetical analysis of 18:2819:22 of Chapter 6.  
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22 
Chapter 4 of this thesis listed Roman Haftpunkte in John 18:2819:22. These Haftpunkte, 
I argued, support an analysis of the Johannine trial narrative which blows up the Roman 
cultural units of the words and phrases found within it. A view to Roman cultural units 
highlights the ambiguity of  as a reference to either a client king or the Roman 
emperor and suggests that a hidden transcript connects Jesus and Caesar. This same 
connection will emerge again in this chapters discussion of 19:12-15, this time in a more 
specific contrast between loyalty to Caesar and loyalty to Jesus. Chapter 4 next demonstrated 
how the cultural unit of  as a Roman emperor can support an interpretant that raises 
the question of Jesus comparison with Caesar from the beginning of the account. Chapter 5 
argued that, in John 19:1-5, the hidden transcript translates Jesus scourging into his 
acclamation as an emperor through the actions of the soldiers and a literary reference to 
Augustus Caesar (Vergil, Aeneid 6.791). 
The present chapter will begin by exploring the cultural unit of a Roman governor 
and Roman law on treason. Next, it will proceed through the trial narrative in an abductive 
process, what Umberto Eco calls an inferential walk, developing a reading for John 
18:2819:22 that blows up the cultural units of the Roman encyclopaedia.1 What emerges 
in this process is a two-part interpretant (with four scenes in each part) that emphasizes the 
testing of loyaltiesnot, principally, Jesus questioning Pilates choice of loyalties, as is 
often argued, but Pilate testing the loyalty of the Jews: first, their possible loyalty to Jesus; 
and, secondly, their loyalty to Caesar. Pilates motives at the narrative level emerge not only 
from the Roman cultural unit of a Roman governor, but also from the observation that it is 
Pilate who repeatedly calls Jesus .2 Because he tests the responses of both Jesus and 
the Jews, Pilates exchanges with them would resonate with Roman-aware auditors who 
1 Section 2.1.1; Eco, Role, 24-25, 31-32. See also sequential disclosure in Phillips, Prologue, 7-8. 
2 Piper, Characterisation, 152. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
are themselves negotiating challenges to their own loyalty to Rome, as I shall argue in 
Chapter 7. 
6.1. Filling in the Gaps 
In Chapter 2 it was proposed that the cultural encyclopaedia provides the source for filling 
textual gaps as part of the circular process of abduction through a narrative.3 The use of a 
Roman encyclopaedia and a description of the cultural unit of a Roman governor is 
especially important for John 18:2819:22 since, [d]epending on the way in which such a 
gap is filled, different pictures of Pilate may result.4 Therefore, to approach Pilate by 
developing a paradigm of traits created by information provided in the text only highlights 
the open spaces that admit to a variety of interpretations.5 Indeed, in two essays in the same 
volume, Tuckett repeatedly characterizes Pilate as taunting while de Boers preferred term 
is reluctant.6 Thus, it is pertinent to describe aspects of the Roman cultural unit for 
/governor/, such as dedication to peace-keeping and loyalty to Caesar, and also the power 
that provincials had, especially the local lite. First, however, a more general comment is in 
order about the previous knowledge that Johns auditors likely had about the narrative. 
6.1.1. The auditors previous knowledge of Jesus 
Those hearing the text of Johns Gospel already knew that Jesus was crucified by the 
Romans.7 This conclusion rests on the premise that many of the other events of the Gospel 
3 Section 2.1.2. 
4 D. Francois Tolmie, Pontius Pilate: Failing in More Ways Than One, in Character Studies in the 
Fourth Gospel: Narrative Approaches to Seventy Figures in John, ed. Steven A. Hunt, D. Francois Tolmie, 
and Ruben Zimmermann, WUNT 2.314 (Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2013), 578-97 (582). See, similarly, 
Bennema, Comprehensive, 39. 
5 Tolmie, Pontius, 581-83, 597. 
6 Christopher M. Tuckett, Pilate in John 18-19: A Narrative-Critical Approach, in Narrativity in 
Biblical and Related Texts: La narrativit dans la bible et les textes apparents, ed. George J. Brooke and Jean-
Daniel Kaestli, BETL 149 (Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2000), 131-40 (135-39); Martinus C. de Boer, 
The Narrative Function of Pilate in John, in Narrativity in Biblical and Related Texts: La narrativit dans la 
bible et les textes apparents, ed. George J. Brooke and Jean-Daniel Kaestli, BETL 149 (Leuven: Leuven 
University Press, 2000), 141-58 (142-44, 146, 156-57). 
7 The ambiguity of John 19:16 will be discussed in Section 7.1.4. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
story were also familiar to them.8 Indeed, it was typical of ancient drama for the plot to focus 
not on what would happen (which would already be common knowledge) but on how it 
would happen.9 Furthermore, anyone engaging with ancient texts would be expected to 
engage in [l]acquisition de la connaissance ncessaire pour comprendre ces textes.10 
This is not to argue that the Fourth Gospel was intended for an educated audience, but only 
to assert that anyone engaging with texts, whether reading or being read to, would be aware 
of the expectations about texts in the ancient world. When John repeatedly makes allusions 
to people and events that require information from outside the Fourth Gospel (e.g., Jesus 
birthplace in 7:42, and Barabbas in 18:40), his auditors would hear those references as 
requests for them to acquire that information elsewhere.11 Since John takes the time to give 
explanations when they are important to him, it is clear that he is not averse to doing so when 
it suits his purposes. Therefore, it seems that he intended his hearers to have or to acquire 
previous knowledge of at least some of these people and events.  
Auditors who know the story of Jesus, then, already know that his death will occur. 
This knowledge is given earlier in the text, as well. The Gospel has alerted its hearers that 
Jesus will be lifted up in his death (3:14; 12:32-33).12 In 18:32, it reminds them that Jesus 
death will come about through the Romans.13 Like Mark (15:1) but unlike Matthew (27:2), 
John does not pause to identify Pilate as the governor, nor to give his full Latin name, thereby 
again suggesting previous knowledge of him and his role in Jesus death (see, e.g., Acts 3:13; 
8 Lincoln, Truth, 145, 167.  
9 Ancient drama frequently focused not on outcome but on the way that outcome was achieved. See 
Susanna Braund, 5. Analysis of Aeneid Books 10-12 and Conclusion (February 6, 2007), in Virgil's Aeneid: 
Anatomy of a Classic, Stanford on iTunes U (2007); Genuyt, Comparution, 135; Horsley, and Thatcher, John, 
10 Loveday Alexander, L'intertextualit et la question des lecteurs: Rflexions sur l'usage de la Bible 
dans les Actes des Aptres, in Intertextualits: La Bible en chos, ed. Daniel Marguerat and Adrian Curtis, Le 
Monde de la Bible 40 (Geneva: Labor et Fides, 2000), 201-214 (207). In the New Testament, the shared 
knowledge is that required to understand the stories of Jesus and the subsequent history of his followers. 
11 Barrett, Gospel, 539; David Rensberger, The Politics of John: The Trial of Jesus in the Fourth 
Gospel, JBL 103.3 (1984): 395-411 (401); Lincoln, Gospel, 464-65.  
12 Lincoln, Truth, 193. 
13 Nicholson, Death, 138; Lincoln, Gospel, 461. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
4:27; 13:28).14 At the very least, auditors know that Pilate is the one in charge at the 
 (18:28-29), the governors official residence.15 Thus, like other ancient texts, 
the Gospel of John expects its audience to know the outcome of the trial, and focuses instead 
on the manner in which it progressed.16 
That auditors are expected to know some of Jesus story suggests the possibility that 
a significant proportion of the Gospels audience is composed of those with some interest in 
Jesus.17 The present subjunctive form  in 20:31, likely on text-critical grounds, 
does not preclude people who are not convinced of Jesus identity, but it does demand 
auditors with an interest in the question of who the Messiah, the Son of God might be.18 
Furthermore, the ironies already noted in the Johannine text presuppose some auditors who 
are willing to enter into second-level assumptions, that Jesus, for example, is not just a king 
but an emperor.19 Also, and despite being outside the purview of this thesis, the amount of 
space that the narrative in John 13-17 gives to addressing explicitly the concerns of Jesus 
followers, the issues about Jesus identity that figure in the disputes in the public ministry, 
and the ending of the narrative that tells the stories of ongoing witnessing beyond Jesus 
resurrectionall of these seem to provide arguments for and reassurance to people who 
already identify themselves as Jesus disciples.20 Furthermore, as will be discussed in 
Chapter 7, the importance of Jesus role as witness in the climactic Roman trial narrative 
14 Luke, however, identifies him as Pontius Pilate (3:1) (Brown, John, 2.846-47; similarly Barrett, 
Gospel, 533; Tilborg, Reading, 8; Lincoln, Gospel, 459; Tolmie, Pontius, 583).  
15 , BDAG 859. 
16 De Boer, Narrative, 143 n. 10; see also 142-43, 145. 
17 For Gniesmer, the Johannine community could have filled in the necessary information, both for 
those inside and outside of the community (Gniesmer, Proze, 79). 
18 Gordon D. Fee, On the Text and Meaning of John 20:30-31 (1992), in To What End Exegesis? 
Essays Textual, Exegetical, and Theological, ed. Gordon D. Fee (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2001), 29-42; 
Donald A. Carson, Syntactical and Text-Critical Observations on John 20:30-31: One More Round on the 
Purpose of the Fourth Gospel, JBL 124.4 (2005): 693-714 (713); Brown, John, 2.1056, 1059-61; Barrett, 
Gospel, 575; Lincoln, Truth, 177; Keener, John, 2.1215-16. Note that Alicia Myers misses the fact that the 
debate extends beyond the tense of the verb [Abiding Words: An Introduction to Perspectives on Johns Use 
of Scripture, in Abiding Words: The Use of Scripture in the Gospel of John, ed. Alicia D. Myers and Bruce G. 
Schuchard, SBL Resources for Biblical Study 81 (Atlanta: SBL Press, 2015), 1-20 (2 n. 3)]. 
19 Chapter 4; Dokka, Irony, 96; Lincoln, Truth, 178. 
20 Lincoln, Truth, 178-79, 152-58, 189-90.  
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
and the significant fact that the Gospel depicts it after setting out the disciples task as 
witnesses in the Farewell Discourse mean that Jesus on trial is to be seen as a model for the 
disciples on trial.21 It is reasonable, then, to suppose that if the auditors are already Jesus-
believers, they are likely to know the story of the one in whom they believe. This does not 
necessarily mean that they are a unified, uniform group, however. That subject will be 
pursued in Chapter 7. 
That Johns auditors are likely to know the story of Jesus brings into question many 
literary analyses of Johns Gospel that focus on whether Pilate develops or has the potential 
to develop faith in Jesus.22 This question often influences more general works as well, where 
it is assumed that Pilate is faced with an unavoidable decision about the truth embodied in 
Jesus and his witness.23 The previous knowledge that the Gospel assumes of its auditors as 
well as the information given ahead of time in the text, do not leave open the possibility that 
Pilate will profess belief in Jesus. 
Furthermore, some of Johns characters are never given a scene in which they are 
offered faith. Caiaphas, for example, is an important council member who functions as a 
mouthpiece for God in John 11:49-52.24 Since Caiaphas states that Jesus death would be 
a pragmatic solution for the Sanhedrin (11:50), auditors would not expect him to oppose it 
in John 18. Both he and Annas are mentioned in the passage leading up to Jesus appearance 
before Pilate (18:13-14), but nothing is said of Jesus interrogation. The change of location 
to and from Caiaphas presence (18:24, 28) only happens in the background, while the 
narration focuses on Peter and his denial of Jesus (18:25-27). Thus, Caiaphas and Annas can 
be considered minor players whose knowledge of and attitudes towards Jesus are not of 
21 Lincoln, Truth, 181. 
22 Culpepper, Anatomy, 142; Duke, Irony, 127, 129; Lincoln, Truth, 137; Tolmie, Pontius, 586-87, 
593-94.  
23 Lincoln, Truth, 137; see, similarly, Brown, John, 2.864, 868, 869, 872; Schlier, Relevance, 219; 
Moloney, John, 498; Carter, John, 304, 309; Thompson, John, 381. 
24 Adele Reinhartz, Caiaphas and Annas: The Villains of the Piece?, in Character Studies in the 
Fourth Gospel: Narrative Approaches to Seventy Figures in John, ed. Steven A. Hunt, D. Francois Tolmie, 
and Ruben Zimmermann, WUNT 2.314 (Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2013), 530-36 (532). 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
particular interest to the implied author.25 This example demonstrates that John does not 
focus on the decisions of all of his characters for or against believing in Jesus. Since in 
Pilates case, as in Caiaphas, auditors know he is not a Jesus-believer, it seems unlikely that 
Pilates response to Jesus is the crux of John 18:2819:22.  
6.1.2. The Roman cultural unit of a governor: keeping the peace 
Instead of evaluating Pilate on the basis of his response to Jesus, the auditors 
evaluation of Pilate is more likely based on the cultural unit for Roman governors during the 
late first or early second century CE.26 Cor Bennema also advocates that we should 
reconstruct the Johannine characters from the information that the text of Johns Gospel 
provides and supplement it with relevant information from other sources.27 Bennema fills 
in Johns Pilate with information from Philo, Josephus, and Mark.28 Additionally, auditors 
(especially those unaware of Philo and Josephus) would rely on their experiences of the 
cultural unit of Roman governors and the discourse of the Roman empire about them. For 
example, Pilate is trying to discover what Jesus might be hiding, as judges normally do in 
trials.29 Yet while Jerome Neyrey regards Pilate as unsuccessful because he does not learn 
the secret of Jesus true identity, it seems more likely that auditors would expect the main 
concern of a Roman governor to discover any secret threat that Jesus might pose to Roman 
peace.30  
Romans defined themselves as those who must remember their calling to rule 
imperially over the nations , to set the force of habit upon peace, to spare those who submit 
25 Reinhartz, Caiaphas, 536. 
26 See, similarly, Skinner, Trial, 14. Carter provides a list of the tasks required of a governor including 
keeping the peace, collecting revenues, administering justice (including putting people to death), commanding 
troops and constructing public buildings (John, 291-92). For a good description of Roman governors that, 
however, is quite generalized since it covers both senatorial and imperial provinces during the whole of the 
Roman empire, see Brenger-Badel, Formation. 
27 Bennema, Comprehensive, 45-46, emphasis original. 
28 Bennema, Comprehensive, 44-45. See also Skinners comments about the importance of texts for 
communicating ancient expectations (Trial, 23). 
29 Neyrey, Secrecy, 95. 
30 Neyrey, Secrecy, 95. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
and crush in war the haughty (Vergil, Aeneid 6.851-53 [Horsfall]).31 Peace is clearly a 
Roman concern in Palestine in particular. Josephus describes Herod Antipas with precisely 
this concern for maintaining the peace in the case of John the Baptist, who had such a 
following that it would be easy for him to mount a rebellion if he so desired (Ant. 18.5.2 
118).32 A Roman governor such as Pilate, then, would not be expected to care what Jesus 
thought of himself, but whether in fact, or potentially, Jesus could serve as a focal point for 
a rebellion against Rome.33 This contradicts descriptions of Johns characterization of Pilate 
that impugn his sense of justice or his competence.34 Expediency and peace would be 
prioritized before justice in a Roman decision; indeed Rome showed a callous brutality 
when dealing with provincials.35 Josephus, for example, describes Vespasians killing and 
enslaving of over 30,000 prisoners who had been promised their freedom. He exonerates 
Vespasian by blaming his friends who overcame his scruples by telling him that against 
Jews there could be no question of impiety, and that he ought to prefer expediency to 
propriety when the two were incompatible (J.W. 3.10.10 536 [Thackeray, LCL]).36 It is 
particularly relevant, then, that Johns depiction of the trial, from the beginning, calls into 
question Pilates ability to keep the peace that he owes Caesar.37 The arrival of the large 
31 The Roman law on treason will be discussed in Section 6.1.5; the Roman self-characterization as 
those who bring law to the lawless will be discussed in Section 7.1.2. 
32 Travis D. Trost, Who Should Be King in Israel? A Study on Roman Imperial Politics, the Dead Sea 
Scrolls, and the Fourth Gospel, ed. Hemchand Gossai, Studies in Biblical Literature 139 (New York: Lang, 
2010), 92. 
33 Fournier, Entre, 594. See, similarly, Carter, John, 296-98; Thatcher, Greater, 75. See, also, Cyril 
of Alexandria, Commentary on the Gospel of John 12. 
34 For examples of those who comment on Pilates injustice, lack of character or competence, see 
Brown, John, 2.864, 872, 889, 894; Rensberger, Politics, 406; Duke, Irony, 131; Colleen M. Conway, Men 
and Women in the Fourth Gospel: Gender and Johannine Characterization, ed. Mark Allan Powell, SBLDS 
167 (Atlanta: SBL Press, 1999), 158; Lincoln, Truth, 129; Gniesmer, Proze, 274; Bennema, Pilate, 253; 
Tolmie, Pontius, 589. Note, too, that a lack of concern about Jesus guilt or innocence combined with tension 
between Pilate and the Jews cannot be interpreted to result in friendliness to Jesus (Rensberger, Politics, 
402, 403).  
35 Bond, Authorities, 232. Pace, e.g., Skinner who assumes some measure of commitment to 
establishing Jesus innocence (Trial, 96-97). 
36 Similarly, see Josephus, J.W. 2.16.4-5 345-404 but also 4.2.5 119. For some examples of Roman 
concern for peace over justice, and especially in cases concerning non-citizens, see Josephus, J.W. 2.12.6 241-
44; 2.16.1 333-35. The tension between the Roman ideal of justice and the brutality of practical decisions 
such as these will be discussed in Section 7.1.2. 
37 Richard Hingley, Globalizing Roman Culture: Unity, Diversity and Empire (London: Routledge, 
2005), 64-67; Skinner, Trial, 15; Thompson, John, 375-76.  
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
contingent of Roman soldiers to arrest Jesus in the garden (18:3, 18), for example, suggests 
that they were obviously expecting resistance from either him or his followers, as Helen 
Bond rightly points out.38 
6.1.3. The Roman cultural unit of a governor: loyalty to Caesar 
Another trait expected of a Roman governorand, indeed, of all people in relation 
to the Romansis faithful loyalty. Augustus claims that many people have experienced the 
faithfulness of the Roman people (Res gest. divi Aug. 32). He is referring to the way Rome 
would loyally provide protection; the other people would be loyal to Rome.39 This loyalty 
comes under the threat of violence: Now the Mede dreads our mighty hands and the axes of 
Alba that are powerful over land and sea; now the Scythians and the Indians, who were 
recently so arrogant, ask for our decisions. Now Good Faith (fides), Peace, and Honour, 
along with old-fashioned Modesty and Virtue, who has been so long neglected, venture to 
return, and blessed Plenty with her full horn is seen by all (Horace, Saec. 54-60 [Rudd, 
LCL]).40 In submission to Roman expansion, defeated nations begin a relationship of fides, 
where the weaker party is said to give himself into or entrust himself to the fides of the 
stronger and the stronger to receive the weaker into his fides.41 In patron-client relationships 
such as that between a governor and the emperor, the Roman concept of fides can be divided 
into the fides of the patron and the fides of the client.42 These are both active forms of 
fides and both represent what is needed most by both partiesthe client needs above all the 
security offered by a patron and a patron needs above all the honour and personal high status 
38 Bond, Pilate, 167; see also Martin, Jesus. 
39 Carter, John, 266. 
40 Note that the outlook of the Aeneid, particularly the theme of empire and world-mastery, was quite 
influential on Horaces compositionand also in more popular works such as the Sibylline Oracles (Horsfall, 
Virgil, 85, 87). This concept was not unimportant within a Jewish encyclopaedia either. See, e.g., Georgi, 
Aeneas, 41, and Section 7.1.3. 
41 John Rich, Patronage and Interstate Relations in the Roman Republic, in Patronage in Ancient 
Society, ed. Andrew Wallace-Hadrill (London: Routledge, 1989), 117-135 (128-30). 
42 Zeba A. Crook, Reconceptualising Conversion: Patronage, Loyalty, and Conversion in the 
Religions of the Ancient Mediterranean, ed. James D. G. Dunn et al., BZNW 130 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 2004), 
203-204. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
offered by having clients.43 Therefore, a Roman governor would need to ensure that loyalty 
to Caesar was visible and maintained at all times. 
Such visible loyalty was required to prevent poor reports of the governor being sent 
to Rome. This was a live concern since emperors sent men to the provinces in a variety of 
capacities. Although in some cases lesser officials were appointed by and reported to 
provincial governors, the emperor might also send his own representatives.44 Plinys 
Epistulae ad Trajanum mention several men, including the procurator Virdius Gemellinus, 
Trajans freedmen Epimachus and Lycormas, and legatus Servilius Pudens, all dispatched 
to the province of Bithynia and functioning independently of, but sometimes required to 
work with, Pliny.45 Ulpian, indeed, warns proconsuls (governors of senatorial provinces) to 
stay out of matters involving the fiscus, which are properly under the jurisdiction of the 
procurator.46 Such a law makes it reasonable to assume that interference between separately 
delegated spheres did occur. 
Especially in imperial provinces [a]ssistant legati  exercised a jurisdiction of their 
own, delegated and circumscribed by the emperor, not the imperial governor.47 Roman 
patrons were also in provincial cities as well as curatores civitatis, senators or equestrians 
appointed by the emperor to keep the local administrators from foolish (and costly) 
decisions.48 Although some of these officials were somewhat outside of the administrative 
routine, they could still be conduits of information to Rome and, if their circles extended 
that far, to the emperor.49 
43 Crook, Reconceptualising, 203-204. 
44 Paul Weaver, Consilium praesidis: Advising Governors, in Thinking Like a Lawyer: Essays on 
Legal History, History and General History for John Crook on His Eightieth Birthday, ed. Paul McKechnie, 
Mnemosyne Supplements 231 (Leiden: Brill, 2002), 44-62 (49-51). 
45 The letters of importance include 10.25, 27, 28, 63, 67, 84; Weaver, Consilium, 47, 51-53. For 
more literary and inscriptional evidence, see Weaver, Consilium, 53-59. 
46 Dig. 1.16.9pr.; Weaver, Consilium, 45. 
47 Weaver, Consilium, 62. 
48 Hartmut Galsterer, Local and Provincial Institutions and Government, in CAH, ed. Alan K. 
Bowman, Peter Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 344-60 
(359); Brenger-Badel, Formation, 54. 
49 Galsterer, Local, 359. Note that Pilate, too, would have a network of spies and informers (Bond, 
Authorities, 225). See, similarly, Jason J. Ripley, The Genre of John and the Rule of Rome: Imperial Readers, 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
The approach taken in this study is to fill in the gaps of a text from the cultural 
encyclopaedia.50 This means that the usual situation in the provinces is more important than 
Pilates historical situation.51 However, as it happens, Pilate did have people around him 
who might report back to Tiberius about his behaviour.52 First, there were the nearby client 
rulers, such as Herod Antipas (Tetrarch of Galilee and Perea from 4 BCE to 39 CE) who 
founded Tiberias in 17 CE, thus demonstrating his loyalty to his patron the emperor.53 
Secondly, there were those appointed to Syria by the emperor. The imperial legate of Syria 
before 32 CE, Lucius Aelius Lamia, was kept in Rome and not allowed (or not required
the purpose of the restriction is debated) to rule from Syria (Tacitus, Ann. 6.27).54 Still, he 
would need people to implement his directives, such as the legate Pacuvius (2.79). The 
mention of freedmen in Plinys letters suggests the possibility of other envoys, although this 
is only conjecture. Suetonius (Tib. 42.1) records that the next appointed legate, Lucius 
Pomponius Flaccus (32-33 or 35 CE), was given the appointment by Tiberius because of his 
congeniality as a drinking companionnot perhaps a high recommendation by todays 
standards, but certainly evocative of the close relationship between the legate and the 
Johannine Testimony, and the Death of the Author (paper presented at Gospel of John as Genre Mosaic 
Conference, Aarhus University, Denmark, June 24, 2014). 
50 Section 2.1.2. 
51 This is in distinction from approaches such as that of David Flusser who says that he simply wanted 
to see what had really happened [Judaism and the Origins of Christianity (Jerusalem: Magnes Press, 1988), 
592]. 
52 Ernst Bammel also recognizes that this would be Pilates concern [  , 
Theologische Literaturzeitung 77.4 (1952): 205-210 (209-10)]. 
53 Pahlitzsch, Tiberias, PC; Bringmann, Herodes [4], 4, PC. Pilates own connection to Tiberius is 
similarly evident from the mention of a Tiberieum on the Caesarea inscription bearing his name. Although 
Millar and Lmonon disagree about the nature of the Tiberieum, whether it was a temple or a secular building, 
the inscription in either case demonstrates Pilates choice to honour Tiberius [Fergus Millar, The Imperial 
Cult and the Persecutions, in Le culte des souverains dans l'Empire Romain: Sept exposs suivis de 
discussions, ed. Willem den Boer, Entretiens Sur L'antiquit classique 19 (Geneva: Hardt, 1973), 143-75 (156); 
Lmonon, Ponce, 29-31]. Lmonon, despite his conclusion that the Tiberium was not a temple, summarizes: 
Ces incertitudes ne doivent pas nous faire oublier le triple intrt de cette inscription pour la connaissance de 
Pilate: elle atteste son gouvernement, son titre et sa dvotion  lempereur, au moins sous son aspect extrieur 
[Jean-Pierre Lmonon, Pilate et le gouvernement de la Jude: Textes et monuments, tudes Bibliques (Paris: 
Librairie Lecoffre, 1981), 32]. It is that third element that supports the focus on Pilates loyalty adopted in this 
chapter. 
54 Bond, Pilate, 14; Edward Dbrowa, The Governors of Roman Syria from Augustus to Septimius 
Severus, ed. Gza Alfldi and Frank Kolb, Antiquitas: Reihe 1, Abhandlungen zur alten Geschichte 45 (Bonn: 
Habelt, 1998), 35-37. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
emperor; he was an amicus, in the ancient sense of the title, and seems to have been a friend 
as well.55 Furthermore, he was chosen not only for his social qualities but also for his 
loyalty, and for his talent in diplomacy (Velleius Paterculus, Compendium of Roman 
History 2.129.2-3).56 Then, Lucius Vitellius served as the legate of Syria from 35-39 CE.57 
He played a variety of supportive roles in the intrigues of the Caesars, appearing throughout 
as a capable functionary and a slippery courtier who succeeded in serving every ruler.58 
His connection with the emperors is demonstrated by his ability to send Pilate to Rome to 
account for himself before Tiberius.59 The complexities of the chains of command will not 
be elaborated upon further, except to note the difficulty of negotiating loyalties in this 
agonistic environment.60 In another example from Judaea, Ummidius Quadratus reported 
Cumanus and Celer (Josephus, J.W. 2.12.5-6 236-44), and the emperor banished Cumanus, 
and sent Celer back in chains to Jerusalem to be dragged around the city and executed.61 
Pilate, too, as a praefectus civitatium, was not independent  but subject to a senatorial 
governor such as the legate of Syria and yet received his appointment from the emperor 
(Josephus, J.W. 2.9.2 169).62 The intentionality of the division of loyalties is demonstrated 
as well by the temporary nature of Vitellius replacement for Pilate, his friend () 
Marcellus (Josephus, Ant. 18.4.2 89). The next year, Gaius sent a more permanent (4 years) 
replacement, appointing Marullus as prefect to Judaea (18.6.10 237).63 Thus, the legate of 
55 Dbrowa, Governors, 37; Richard Saller, Personal Patronage under the Early Empire (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1982), 41-78; David Konstan, Friendship in the Classical World, ed. P. A. 
Cartledge and P. D. A. Garnsey, KTAH (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997), 135-37. See also 
Brown, Death, 1.843. 
56 Dbrowa, Governors, 37-38. For a discussion of the years of Flaccuss appointment, see Daniel R. 
Schwartz, Agrippa I: The Last King of Judaea, ed. Martin Hengel and Peter Schafer, TSAJ 23 (Tbingen: 
Mohr Siebeck, 1990), 183-84. 
57 Bond, Pilate, 14. 
58 Eck, Vitellius [2.3], PC. See also Dbrowa, Governors, 38-41. 
59 Bond, Pilate, 73. 
60 Konstan notes that friendship changed under the empire (Konstan, Friendship, 148). 
61 Horsley, and Thatcher, John, 46. 
62 Eck, Praefectus [6], PC; Bond, Pilate, 5. 
63 It is, however, possible that these two are references to the same person (Bond, Pilate, 8 n. 42). 
Nevertheless, Josephus expectation that the emperor would need to replace the legates first appointment 
demonstrates that imperial dependency was part of the cultural unit for the prefect. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
Syria did not have the power to appoint the prefect of Judaea, and yet he controlled the army 
and exercised a supervisory function over him.64 
Jerome Neyrey, indeed, interprets the dialogue in the Johannine trial narrative in such 
agonistic terms as alternating claims, challenges, and riposte[s] between Pilate, Jesus 
and the Jews.65 However, given the social ties described above, a Roman governors main 
concern was not his honour vis  vis the provincial subjects, which would be unassailable, 
but rather his honour vis  vis the emperor in Rome, especially given the prevalence of 
mutual jealousy among the Roman aristocracy.66 Such competition would be especially 
relevant among the amici Caesaris (see John 19:12). This designation will be discussed 
further below, but it certainly meant an increase, not a decrease, in Pilates need to please 
Caesar. Thus, in a gospel that emphasizes faithfulness to Jesus (see, e.g., John 11:40-48 and 
20:31), Pilates own faithfulness is called into question; his allegiance to Caesar must be 
maintained and made visible, and this will prove to be more important to him than justice.67 
Although the word  is not present in the Johannine trial narrative at all, nor is , 
which is completely absent from the Gospel, faithful loyalty is nevertheless an important 
topic within the narrative. 
Furthermore, the recognition that a governors social positioning occurred in 
competition with other Romans brings up the uneven balance of power between him and the 
provincials, even the local lite.68 Pilates final decision in the matter of the titulus in John 
19:19-22, for example, reinforces the message that Pilate is in control of not only Jesus but 
64 See the detailed description of six different governors of Syria and their interventions into Judaea 
(Lmonon, Pilate, 63-71, especially 66 n. 36). 
65 Neyrey, Cultural, 424. Note that Neyrey sometimes fills in gaps not only from the Roman 
encyclopaedia and from the rest of Johns Gospel, but also from the larger canon. See especially p. 430 where 
his discussion of power is dependent on assumptions from Romans, 1 Timothy and 1 Peter. This is problematic, 
unless connections are elucidated, which Neyrey does not do. 
66 Brunt, Laus, 305. The flogging of Jesus (John 19:1-3) also emphasizes the power of Rome over its 
subjects (Carter, John, 305). 
67 Brown, Death, 1.851. 
68 Skinner, Trial, 94. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
of Jewish Palestine and the privileges of the Jewish leadership.69 This uneven balance of 
power nuances Carters claim that the governors and the chief priests needed each other.70 
Pilate would need loyal subordinates, but anyone willing to demonstrate that loyalty would 
do. His need is not in an equal balance with the priests need to demonstrate loyalty to 
prevent being replaced. This was a real danger for them: Gratus, the prefect before Pilate, 
replaced the high priest four times in eleven years.71  
For a Roman governor such as Pilate, what is at stake is whether this man, Jesus, and 
these people, the Jews, will cause him shame before the ones who really matter: the 
emperor and Pilates Roman peers.72 While he may choose to humiliate the Jews and to 
ridicule their national hopes by means of Jesus, this could only be a secondary goal, from 
the perspective of a Roman-aware auditor.73 So when the narrative in John 18:2819:22 is 
described as a struggle for power between Pilate and the Jewish religious leaders, this is 
69 Trost, Who, 86. 
70 Carter, Pontius, 48; restated in Carter, John, 294. Carters understanding of the balance of power is 
somewhat difficult to determine from his writing. He shows the power dimensions in this relationship, as Pilate 
represents and protects Romes political, economic, military, and legal interests in an exploitative and 
oppressive relationship over those he governs, and with little accountability on his part (299). He humiliates 
(301; see also 305, 310), taunts (304; see also 305, 306, 308 where they are subjugating taunts, 309), 
continues to mock (306), asserts  control (305) and acts with scorn (302). bullying (305), intolerance 
for any resistance (305), imperial violence and intimidation (305) and superior power (306; see similarly 
310) in his tensive struggle with his Jerusalem allies (304), provoking (304) the demonstration of their own 
subservience (304), dependence (304; see also 305, 306, 308), gratefulness to him (304), subordination 
(305), status as subjects (305), as they plead with the governor to act according to their wishes (308) and 
resent the humiliation (310). However, he also describes the Jerusalem elite as they assertively and 
confrontationally get [Pilates] attention with the mention of Jesus claim to be Son of God (306) and gain 
some power over Pilate as they remind him of his loyalty to Rome as a friend of Caesar (308). Carter concludes 
that Pilate walks a fine line between working with his Jerusalem allies to remove Jesus (even showing some 
respect for their religious customs), and repeatedly taunting them about their defeated status and keeping them 
in their subservient place as a people dependent on him but then also that Pilate demonstrates apparently 
untouchable and triumphant Roman power (311). Carter, in private correspondence, summarized that he 
understands Pilates power to have been restricted, since the Syrian governor had control of the main Roman 
forces and since the provincial lite had the power to cause the governor quite a bit of trouble. Thus, his position 
today is somewhat more nuanced than it was previously (292, 298). For a brief summary of the forces in Syria, 
see Thompson, John, 375 n. 36. 
71 Bond, Pilate, 19. 
72 Brown also raises the possibility that Pilate is afraid of reports being sent to Rome about him, but 
for a different reason than that proposed in this thesis (John, 2.878). 
73 Pace Rensberger, Politics, 402.  
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
not an incorrect descriptionboth have agendas that they are attempting to bring to bear
but it obscures the unequal footing on which they stand.74  
6.1.4. The Roman cultural unit of a governor: the power of the people 
The only power that conquered people do possess is that of attacking their 
conquerors fitness to rule, specifically by claiming that these rulers have violated the norms 
by which they justify their own authority.75 So, for example, if a ruling lite claims 
exceptional impartiality in legal decisions, they are vulnerable to critiques from within the 
system if those they rule can demonstrate examples of judicial discrimination. At the same 
time, subordinated people are well aware that their overlords never live up to the rhetoric 
they claim (Josephus, J.W. 2.16.4 350-52). Even if provincials did manage to bring a 
governors misconduct to light, the downfall of that governor was in no way certain. 
Josephus reports that when the Jewish people complained about the poor rule of Florus, 
Agrippa advised that it was better to submit to injustice temporarily than to risk a war in 
which they would surely be defeated (J.W. 2.16.3-4 342-401).76 So one should not assume 
that every failure of the rulers will result in critique, nor that a lack of expressed critique 
indicates a lack of awareness of the rulers failures on the part of those ruled. 
Rapaciousness, for example, was expected of governors (Josephus, Ant. 18.6.5 175-
76).77 Yet when Carter cites by way of contrast Aristides rhapsodic claims, and 
characterizes them as an extravagant wish of the lite, he misses the importance of this 
rhetoric for the ruled: Rome sends out its governors  for the protection and care of their 
subjects, not to be their masters (Orations 26.36).78 Claims such as these provide standards 
74 Lincoln, Truth, 225-26. Colleen Conway also notes the impotence of the Jews before Pilate 
[There and Back Again: Johannine History on the Other Side of Literary Criticism, in Anatomies of Narrative 
Criticism: The Past, Present, and Futures of the Fourth Gospel as Literature, ed. Tom Thatcher and Stephen 
D. Moore (Atlanta: SBL Press, 2008), 77-91 (88 n. 8)]. 
75 Scott, Domination, 94. 
76 See, similarly, Carter, John, 298. 
77 Carter, John, 296-98. 
78 Carter, John, 295. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
that allow for provincial critique.79 And links were established, both formally and informally, 
between local lites and the emperor, so there was an avenue for such complaints.80 These 
critiques can be uttered publically because they do not constitute rebellion.81 They support 
the ideology of the rulers, at least outwardly, and only complain to the rulers for failing in 
what they, themselves, claim to perform.82 Thus, in the Johannine trial narrative, when the 
Jews question Pilates status as a friend of Caesar (19:12), they challenge not his right to 
rule, but his loyalty to his own master.83 Furthermore, given Johns overall emphasis on 
 (e.g., 1:7; 3:15; 6:29; 11:25; 17:20; 19:35; 20:31), it seems likely that loyalty is the 
main issue in this narrative unit.84  
Pilate is vulnerable before Caesarand it is with an oblique accusation aimed at that 
vulnerability that the Jews gain some leverage. Pilate is trahi par ce pouvoir qui devait 
le couvrir.85 Pilate must display his loyalty at all times, so [o]nce Pilates loyalty to Caesar 
is publicly questioned, the outcome is assured.86 Thus, the Jews in the end succeed in 
obtaining the crucifixion they have requested.87 However, this is only a defeat for Pilate if 
not crucifying Jesus was his main goal throughout the trial. When Brown suggests that the 
Jews are adversaries who have the power to destroy Pilate and that in the end he is 
vanquished and must hand Jesus over to them, and when Cassidy concludes that Pilate 
gradually loses his dominant position, these statements are only half true.88 Instead this 
79 See, similarly, Philo, Embassy 38.301-302. 
80 Revell, Roman, 99, 101. See also her discussion on social ties (9). 
81 Scott, Domination, 103-107. 
82 Scott argues, too, that whether or not a subordinated people support the lite ideology privately is 
impossible to tell (Domination, 85-103). Thus, Hingley is correct to note that [t]he adoption of Latin in Italian 
and provincial contexts does not necessarily represent any direct adoption of a Roman order of values 
(Globalizing, 102. See similarly Ehrensperger, Crossroads, 69). Nonetheless, the knowledge of those values 
would be acquired with the language and would be necessary to negotiate intercultural encounters (Sections 
1.2.3 and 2.1.3). 
83 As Carter notes, this challenge begins in verse 7 with the mention that Jesus has claimed to be Son 
of God, although I suggest that this is a challenge to Pilates loyalty, not an accusation of treason (John, 307). 
84 Section 5.1.4 n. 101. 
85 Genuyt, Comparution, 144. 
86 Piper, Characterisation, 152. 
87 Piper, Characterisation, 151. 
88 Brown, John, 2.885; Cassidy, John's Gospel, 45. Others who suggest that Pilate fails include Piper, 
Characterisation, 151; Tolmie, Pontius, 595. See also Tolmies list of ways in which Pilate can be thought 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
chapter proposes that the victory of the Jews is not Pilates defeat.89 The implied threat to 
[Pilates] own position highlighted at the end of the trial (19:4-12) is, in this analysis, 
Pilates only concern from the beginning.90 While he experiences fear and genuinely 
attempts to release Jesus at the latter end of the episode (19:8, 12), by the time of the 
crucifixion the Johannine Pilate had found a way to protect his interests, especially his 
allegiance to Caesar.91 By John 19:22, both Pilate and the Jews have achieved their aims: 
Jesus has been crucified and Pilates position before Caesar is secure.92 
6.1.5. Claims of kingship and Roman treason 
In the Gospel of John, Jesus is presented as a threat to the limited autonomy of the 
chief priests and the Pharisees (11:47-48). It is often assumed that it was Jesus claim to 
kingship that constituted this threat.93 Blinzler, for example, calls Jesus crime [h]igh 
treason, even though he starts out by rightly noting: Of the crimes which are listed in 
Justinians Digestes as constituting the crimen laesae maiestatis, there is none which 
corresponds exactly with the crime with which Jesus was charged.94 Barrett describes the 
era of suspicion at the end of the reign of Domitian, when accusations of sedition were 
common and based on very little evidence, yet he produces no example of anyone exiled or 
to have failed (597). See, similarly, Gniesmer, Proze, 269. In general, Gniesmer analyses Pilate as a 
Werkzeug der Juden (235, 207, 260). 
89 For Thatcher, for example, Pilate is one of Cerberus three heads that is ultimately crushed under 
the weight of Jesus unstoppable mission (Greater, 14). 
90 Lindars, John, 554. Many scholars see this threat at the end of the trial, specifically in 19:12, 
including Brown, John, 2.890, 893-94; Barrett, Gospel, 530; Cassidy, John's Gospel, 46; Keener, John, 2.1128-
29; Lincoln, Gospel, 471; Thompson, John, 387. For Brown, who considers Pilates friendship with Sejanus 
as historical and therefore to have influenced the tradition, his fall from grace makes this concern of Pilates 
even more likely (John, 2.894). The possible connection between Pilate and Sejanus will be discussed further 
in Section 6.2.2.3. Neyrey's conclusion that by 19:15a Pilate has lost the game, and his honor has been 
diminished only applies if his primary goal is justice and therefore Jesus release (Cultural, 431-32). 
91 This is pace Piper who proposes that Pilates fear is of Jesus and that it persists until the end 
(Characterisation, 152, 155). 
92 These aims, the Gospel of John argues, are also Gods (Section 7.1.5). 
93 E.g., Lindars, John, 554; Brown, John, 2.867; Barrett, Gospel, 530, 540, 543, 546, 549; Heath, You 
Say, 240.  
94 Blinzler, Trial, 213. The charge against the one who, being a private citizen, knowingly and with 
malicious intent acts as though holding office or magistracy will not be addressed because (1) Jesus was not 
a citizen and (2) it is from a later code (Marcians Institutes) [Theodor Mommsen, and Paul Krueger, eds., The 
Digest of Justinian, vol. 4 (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1985), 48.4.3]. Still, there is the 
possibility that the torture of Jesus might be seen as an attempt to extract his intent. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
executed for simply claiming a title.95 Furthermore, he contradicts himself by later 
explaining Pilates insistence on the title     (Jn. 19:21) on the titulus 
as an insult to the Jews because [t]o state only that the crazy fellow had claimed to be king 
would be harmless.96 His latter conclusion is accurate. Indeed, this kind of humorous 
juxtaposition of the worthy and unworthy led others to be dressed up in imperial garb as well 
(Dio Cassius, Roman History 64.5.1). In these cases, there is no necessary accusation of 
treason and no unease from the authorities, precisely because there was no danger that 
anyone would follow the men who were the object of these caricatures unless, as in the case 
of Carabbas, he might provide a focal point for the mobs insults to Agrippa, thus again 
provoking group dissension (Philo, Flaccus 40).  
Ulpians description of crimen laesae maiestatis (Digest 48.4.1) also supports a 
distinction between individual claims and group action: 
The crime of treason is that which is committed against the Roman people or 
against their safety. He is liable, by whose agency a plan is formed with 
malicious intent to kill hostages without the command of the emperor [A]; or 
that men armed with weapons or stones should be, or should assemble, within 
the city against the interests of the state, or should occupy public places or 
temples [B]; or that there should be an assembly or gathering or that men 
should be called together for seditious purposes [C]; or by whose agency a 
plan is formed with malicious intent to kill any magistrate of the Roman 
people, or anyone holding imperium or power [D]; or that anyone should bear 
arms against the state [E]; or who sends a messenger or letters to the enemies 
of the Roman people, or gives them a password, or does anything with 
malicious intent whereby the enemies of the Roman people may be helped 
with his counsel against the state [F]; or who persuades or incites troops to 
make a sedition or tumult against the state [G].97 
This list shows that the principal concern for Romans is assemblies with malicious 
intent (B, C, G), not for the claims of an individual (infraction A will be taken up below). 
95 Barrett, Gospel, 543-44; he cites M. P. Charlesworth, The Flavian Dynasty, in CAH, ed. S. A. 
Cook, F. E. Adcock, and M. P. Charlesworth (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1936), 1-45 (27-32). 
Mettius Pompusianus might be an ambiguous example, but the force of the accusations still rests on his actions 
that might be evidence of a preparation for sedition, not on his claims (Suetonius, Dom. 10.3).  
96 Barrett, Gospel, 549. 
97 Mommsen, and Krueger, Digest, 48.4.1. Letters added for the discussion below. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
The infractions of individuals (D, E, F) are also all actions rather than claims. This is true as 
well for the incidents cited by Suetoniuseven though he is criticizing the practices of 
Tiberius, no one is put to death for claiming to be emperor but only for actions thought to 
dishonour him (Suetonius, Tib. 58). Brown cites Acts 17:7 as an example where Roman 
officials would react strongly to a claim of kingship.98 Yet in the passage in question it is a 
group of men (verse 6) who are accused of claiming another to be king and the words of the 
accusation ( ) in verse 7 highlight (perhaps even exaggerate) their number. Carter 
claims that Rome regarded as sedition any other claims to kingship. They attacked and 
executed those in Judea and Galilee who set themselves up as kings in a tradition of popular 
kingship.99 All of his examples, however, are of men who gathered followers.100 In the 
case of Menahem, he and his followers even armed themselves from Herods armoury. It is 
not the claim of one man that constitutes the crime. It is Jesus followers that become a cause 
for concern for the chief priests and Pharisees (see especially John 11:48; 12:12-13, 17, 
19).101 Therefore, it is not Jesus own self-understanding that Roman-aware auditors would 
deem dangerous, but the size of his following. As Bond points out, any kingship which 
Jesus may claim to possess is no threat to the Roman state.102 
6.2. An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22 
With these cultural units in place, I can now begin an inferential walk through the 
Johannine trial narrative.103 This walk will be structured somewhat differently from the scene 
98 Brown, John, 2.894. Brown also in his discussion on that page suggests that a charge of lese 
majesty might be brought against Pilate but again it is unclear on what basis Roman-aware readers might 
expect this to be done if Jesus has no support among the Jews standing before him. 
99 Carter, John, 192; see, similarly, 195, 302. 
100 Josephus, J.W. 2.17.8-9 433-48; 4.9.4 510; 7.5.6 153-55; Ant. 17.10.5-8 271-85; 17.10.10 
295-98; Carter, John, 201 n. 64. 
101 Carter, John, 311 n. 2. For a historical focus on these followers, see Martin, Jesus; Justin J. 
Meggitt, The Madness of King Jesus: Why Was Jesus Put to Death, but His Followers Were Not?, JSNT 29.4 
(2007): 379-413; Fernando Bermejo Rubio, (Why) Was Jesus the Galilean Crucified Alone?: Solving a False 
Conundrum, JSNT 36.2 (2013): 127-54. 
102 Bond, Pilate, 185. 
103 Sections 2.1.1 and 4.4; Eco, Role, 24-25, 31-32.  
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
divisions others have proposed.104 Most scholars propose quite similar divisions until 19:3, 
but differ more substantially as the narrative unit progresses (Figure 28).105 
Figure 28: The structure of the Johannine trial narrative according to various scholars 
Many of them add (or comment that they wish to add) John 19:17-22 to their 
framework, even though from the perspective of the narrative, it is clearly part of the 
crucifixion account rather than the trial.106 Yet the analysis in Chapter 3 showed that Latin 
Haftpunkte continue through 19:22, which also supports the inclusion of those verses.107 
Furthermore, the motif of king/emperor continues through that section as well.108 Brown, for 
104 Bultmann, John, 648-66; Brown, John, 2.859; Bond, Pilate, 169, 192; Meeks, Prophet-King, 62; 
Carter, John, 299, 310; Lincoln, Truth, 124-37; Gniesmer, Proze, 153-71, 361-62, and see also Gniesmers 
chart on p. 159 n. 506; Keener, John, 2.1097; Ruben Zimmermann, Deuten heit erzhlen und bertragen: 
Narrativitt und Metaphorik als zentrale Sprachformen historischer Sinnbildung zum Tod Jesu, in Deutungen 
des Todes Jesu im Neuen Testament, ed. Jrg Frey and Jens Schrter, WUNT 1:181 (Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 
2005), 315-73 (339-42); Brant, John, 242; Bennema, Pilate, 241, 245. Brown does not ultimately include 
19:16b-18; on that see n. 106 below. Neyreys divisions are not included in my chart because he is rather 
inconsistent; divisions in his chart do not match those in his discussion (Cultural, 422; cf. with the Charges 
on 424). Carters analysis in John and Empire is quite similar in many instances to that in Pontius Pilate. I 
have mainly interacted with the former (John, 299-311; Pontius, 137-52). Schnackenburg follows essentially 
the same divisions as Meeks and Carter, but does not add 19:17-22 (John, 220).  
105 For a more detailed, but less visually appealing, chart, see Appendix. 
106 See Bond, Meeks, Carter, Gniesmer and Bennema (references in n. 104 above). Note that while 
Meeks adds 19:17-22, Carter only adds 19:19-22. Brown admits that the scene might fit with 18:2819:22 
but rejects that possibility because it would disrupt the whole arrangement of his chiasm (2.910-11). 
107 Section 3.2.3.  
108 E.g., Brown, John, 2.912-13. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
example, concludes that John has bound the crucifixion to the trial more tightly than any 
other evangelist.109 Thus, because of the continuation of the Haftpunkte and the continued 
theme, 19:17-22 will be included in the Johannine trial narrative as studied in this chapter.  
One of the difficulties in dividing John 18:2819:22 into scenes is the distribution 
of temporal adverbs through the text. Although  is often used at a change of scene (such 
as at 18:29; cf. Gniesmer, Zimmermann, Brant; at 19:8; cf. Meeks, Carter, Lincoln, 
Gniesmer, Bennema; and at 19:13; cf. Meeks, Carter, Gniesmer), the reverse is not true. 
Scholars do not generally regard every  as indicative of the beginning of a new scene. 
(See those in 18:37, 39b; 19:5, 10, 15, 20, 21.) The case is somewhat similar for . 
Although  in 19:4 (for all those listed in the chart) and in 19:9 (cf. Brown, Bond, 
Keener, Zimmermann, and Brant) are thought to start a new scene, Bultmann, Meeks, Carter, 
Lincoln, Gniesmer and Bennema all put the second scene change before verse 8. When a 
combination of two adverbs occur, this might seem to indicate a definite scene break. All 
those listed above do break the narrative just before   at 18:33 and before   
at 19:1. Furthermore, those who put the scene break before 19:8 note the   in that verse, 
and Gniesmer and Brant have a   at 19:16 for their division. Yet none of these scholars 
takes the combination of  and  to indicate a break at 18:40, nor divides the verses 
before the combination of  and  at 19:6.110 Finally, all except Gniesmer and Brant 
connect 19:16, with its  , to the previous scene. This survey of opinions highlights 
the difficulty of scene divisions in the Johannine trial narrative. More than that, it 
demonstrates that when Gniesmer suggests, Mit 19,1 ist deutlich ein neuer 
Handlungsbeginn gesetzt, was durch das   stark betont wird, perhaps things are not 
109 Brown, John, 2.916. 
110 Also, Brown, Bond, Keener, Zimmerman and Brant, who start a scene at 19:9 and therefore ignore 
the   at 19:8. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
quite so deutlich after all.111 Because of this, I have felt free to arrange the scenes somewhat 
differently from what is usually done. 
The narrative will be divided into eight scenes arranged in two cycles (see Figure 
29). The dialogue in this arrangement follows the same divisions listed in Figure 28. What 
is different in this structure is that each of the first three sections in both cycles ends with a 
comment from the narrator. However, the chiastic arrangement of these six scenes is 
disrupted by two scenes which instead close with a comment from Pilate which obliquely 
references Jesus as : Scenes X and X.112 In each cycle, Pilate has a different 
concern. 
In the first cycle, Pilates central focus is to find out whether Jesus poses any threat 
to Roman interests. Scene A (18:28-32) begins as Pilate interrogates the Jews in order to 
understand their goals for the encounter. Then, the narrator closes this scene with the 
information that Pilate will crucify Jesus (18:32).113 In Scene B (18:33-38b), Pilate 
interrogates Jesus for the first time and seeks to determine whether or not he poses a threat 
to Rome. Jesus response that his followers will not fight for him indicates, if Pilate believes 
him, that he is not a threat. Pilates departure (       
) at the end of this scene gives the question, What is truth?, its dramatic force; 
therefore I have included it in Scene B.114 In Scene C (18:38c19:1), Pilate asks questions 
of the Jews designed to determine whether they have any loyalty to Jesus. Even though 
they have requested that he be killed (18:31), he must be on guard for dissenters.115 The 
whipping (19:1) is included in Scene C because it is Pilates response to his first test of the 
111 Gniesmer, Proze, 160. 
112 The disruption of the alphabetical lettering of the scenes is intended as a reminder of this disruption. 
X and X were chosen as not particularly subtle references to Jesus suffering on the cross. However, in both 
instances, the suffering itself is briefly mentioned in the previous scene, and in both X and X Jesus is described 
in imperial imagery. I would call these scenes, then, Johns responses to Jesus suffering. 
113 Gniesmer, correctly I think, describes it as the Exposition (Proze, 158). 
114 Rensberger, Politics, 403; Lincoln, Truth, 129; Skinner, Trial, 96; Tolmie, Pontius, 586-87; 
Bennema, Pilate, 243. 
115 See more extensive discussion in Section 6.2.1.1. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
Jews and their demand for Barabbas.116 Pilate has Jesus flogged both to extract the truth 
from him and so that he can gauge any latent sympathy among the Jews. Scene X breaks 
in at this point, with the soldiers actions: Jesus is dressed and hailed as Caesar (19:2-5). In 
the last verse in each of the first three scenes, Pilates disinterest or disdain for Jesus is made 
clear by a narrative comment. This heightens the irony when Scene X ends with Pilates 
dramatic presentation of Jesus as the emperor:    (v. 5).117 
In the second cycle, Pilates main concern is to verify the loyalty of the Jews to 
Rome. The scene parallel to Scene C, namely Scene C (19:6-8), has Pilate testing the loyalty 
of the Jews again, only this time he is testing their loyalty to Caesar, since a lack of loyalty 
to Jesus does not inevitably entail loyalty to Rome. The question of a possible connection to 
Rome is raised by the accusation that Jesus has made himself son of God (19:7). By the end 
of the encounter, Pilate is afraid that these connections might cause him personal difficulty 
(v. 8). Scene B (vv. 9-12a) is the second occasion for Pilate to interrogate Jesus. At this 
point, he is trying to determine whether Jesus has any connections in Rome, and the 
discussion on authority does not reassure him. He begins to seek Jesus release (v. 12a). 
Then, in Scene A (vv. 12b-18), Pilate and the Jews test each others loyalty, and the Jews 
achieve their goal. To demonstrate his own loyalty to Rome, Pilate will crucify Jesus (vv. 
16-18). The narrators earlier assertion about Jesus death is fulfilled. In the final scene, 
namely X, Jesus is raised on the cross as king of the Jews (v. 19-22). Pilate closes the scene 
with a confirmation of that title. In this cycle as in the first, each scene ends with a remark 
by the narrator, except Scene X where the last remark belongs to Pilate.118 The following 
table outlines the narrative patterns in question: 
116 This is pace Moore who concludes that John puts 19:1-5 centrally in the narrative in order to 
critique the practices of the Roman empire (Empire, 59-63). Section 7.2.1 will argue that the Roman empire 
plays a quite different role in the narrative. 
117 See Chapter 5. 
118 Bennema notes the importance of the narrators remarks in verses 8 and 12 (Encountering, 188). 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
First Cycle John 18:28
Pilates 
Interlocutors 
Pilates Central 
Question:  
Is Jesus 
dangerous? 
Final remark 
Scene A 18:28-32 the Jews Q: Why did the 
Jews bring him to 
A: They want me 
to execute him. 
Pilate will 
crucify Jesus. 
Scene B 18:33-38b Jesus Q: Is he 
dangerous?  
A: He claims not. 
Pilate turns 
away from 
truth. 
Scene C 18:38c-19:1 the Jews Q: Does he have a 
Jewish support?  
A: No. 
Pilate has 
Jesus 
whipped 
Scene X 19:2-5  Jesus ~ 
Caesar/King 
Behold 
Second Cycle John 19:6-22 
 Pilates Central 
Question:  
Are the Jews 
loyal? 
Scene C 19:6-8 the Jews Q: Are the Jews 
loyal to Caesar?  
A: They seem to 
Pilate is 
afraid. 
Scene B 19:9-12a Jesus Q: Is this man 
connected with 
Caesar?  
A: He could be. 
Pilate seeks 
Jesus release. 
Scene A 19:12b-18 the Jews Q: Are the Jews 
loyal to Caesar or 
Jesus?  
A: Caesar. 
Pilate has 
Jesus 
crucified. 
Scene X 19:19-22  Jesus ~ 
King/Caesar 
Written 
Figure 29: Scene divisions in John 18:28--19:22 
Scenes X and X are similar in that, in both, Jesus has just been physically hurt, 
although that aspect of the tradition has been minimized in Johns narrative. Instead, in Scene 
X Pilate presents Jesus with words appropriate for an emperor, and in Scene X Pilate puts 
his seal on the title King of the Jews mounted above Jesus body on the cross:  , 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
.119 In what follows in this chapter, the focus is on how Pilates loyalty to Rome 
fuels his varied words and actions. 
This analysis will not attempt to evaluate Pilate according to a Johannine scale of 
belief. Furthermore, this thesis engages questions about the historical Pilate only insofar as 
a historical understanding of Roman practices can help to fill certain gaps within the text. 
Rather, the analysis offered proposes to describe the way that themes emerge from the text 
when heard in conjunction with the two pieces of information: (1) Pilate will crucify Jesus, 
and Johns audience knows this; (2) Pilates main concern is Rome. 
6.2.1. Cycle 1: Pilate tests the loyalty of the Jews to Jesus 
In the discussion of the Johannine trial narrative that follows, Pilatebased on the 
Roman cultural unit for a Roman governor (discussed above)is seen to participate in an 
unequal contest with the Jews. As Roman governor he must keep the peace and therefore 
taunts the Jews in order to determine whether increased Roman involvement in local 
affairs is required (11:48).120 Thus, when the Johannine Pilate insistently repeats   
or     in his dialogues both with the Jews and with Jesus, this can 
indeed be read as a stratagem to trap them.121 Certainly, one must acknowledge that (unlike 
in Mark) the same people who brought Jesus to Pilate are Pilates interlocutors throughout 
the trial.122 However, this may not preclude the possibility that they are not unified. Indeed, 
the terminology that John uses for this group is quite vague. The crowd is generally left as 
an undefined subject (e.g., 18:28-29; 19:4) or variously called   (18:31, 36, 38; 
19:7, 12, 14),        (18:35),      (19:6),  
119 While many scholars take the mocking by the soldiers to be the central scene of the trial narrative, 
that can only be sustained if Scene X is not included (Gniesmer, Proze, 277-80). Although this thesis focuses 
on the way in which these scenes use imperial imagery to describe Jesus, this does not exclude other references 
in other encyclopaedias (e.g., to a Messiah in a Jewish encyclopaedia). Also, the function of the Jews in this 
narrative unit will be discussed in Section 7.1.3. 
120 Piper, Characterisation, 147-48. 
121 Piper, Characterisation, 148.  
122 Bond, Pilate, 180-81. See, similarly for 18:39, Skinner, Trial, 97. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
 (19:15) and     (19:21). John communicates to his auditors 
the sense of an lite but variegated multitude. Furthermore, the issue is serious enough for 
auditors reasonably to conclude that Pilate must test the strength and determination (even 
among the Jewish lite) of their rejection of this .  
6.2.1.1. Scene A: John 18:28-32 
Scene A begins by noting Pilates willingness to go out of the praetorium to meet 
with the Jews.123 Tolmie suggests three possibilities for this decision: he succumbed to 
their pressure (Tolmies preference); he was avoiding antagonizing them, or it was an act 
of courtesy.124 However, I would also propose that Pilate may have wanted to engage with 
the Jews in order to evaluate the seriousness of the situation. All of these explanations must 
reach beyond the text and infer Pilates motivation, but this last motivation seems to fit best 
within the Roman cultural unit of a governor, since Roman trials were usually public and the 
audience would be quite vocal.125 Martial explains the benefits of sending his freedman 
rather than being in attendance himself: You tell some tale pleading a case, and I shall keep 
quiet; but he will roar bravo three times over. You have a lawsuit, he will shout abuse in 
a voice of thunder; good manners have forbidden me strong language (Epigrams 3.46 
[Bailey, LCL]).126 Such participation from the crowd did not necessarily, but could 
occasionally, influence the outcome of the trial.127 
123 With their refusal to enter the praetorium, the Jews are immediately portrayed as law-observant 
(Lincoln, Gospel, 460). This theme will be explored in Section 7.1.5. 
124 Tolmie, Pontius, 584. Other scholars also see Pilate accommodating the Jews in this scene; 
Brown specifically says Pilate lowered himself to go out and had to swallow his pride to do so; for Carter, 
Pilate has respected the religious commitments and practices of his governing allies (Brown, John, 2.859; 
Carter, John, 306, 311; see, similarly, Barrett, Gospel, 533).  
125 Ernst Bammel, The Trial before Pilate, in Jesus and the Politics of His Day, ed. Ernst Bammel 
and C. F. D. Moule (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984), 415-51 (431); Fournier, Entre, 251-52. 
126 See also Seneca, Controversies 9.6. Both of these references were noted by Leanne Bablitz, Actors 
and Audience in the Roman Courtroom (London: Routlege, 2007), 133. 
127 For an example, see P. Flor. 1.61 and the discussion in G. Vitelli, and D. Comparetti, Papiri Greco-
Egizii, Supplementi filologico-storici ai monumenti antichi, vol. 1: Papiri fiorentini: Documenti pubblici e 
privati dell'et romana e bizantina (Milan: Hoepli, 1906), 116. See also Suetonius, Claud. 15.2 and Bablitz, 
Actors, 140, as well as Cicero, Brutus 199-200, 290 and the cautions of Michael C. Alexander, Oratory, 
Rhetoric, and Politics in the Republic, in A Companion to Roman Rhetoric, ed. William Dominik and Jon Hall 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
Thus, although from a twenty-first century perspective one might think that the very 
fact that the Jews do not immediately agree with Pilate demonstrates disloyalty, Roman 
judges were used to hearing the wishes of the crowd.128 This may have explained to Roman-
aware auditors why Pilate would want to conduct the trial outdoors. Since the Jews would 
not come in, Pilate, should he refuse to go out, would lose the opportunity to gauge the 
response of the crowd to his conclusions about Jesus.129  
This need for such an evaluation fits with the concerns that other scholars have 
expressed about the presence of armed men in Jerusalem. If young Galilean men were 
armed in Jerusalem during Passover, that in itself would have merited, in the eyes of Roman 
rulers, arrest and execution.130 Moreover, the common practice seems to have been that not 
only would a seditious leader be killed (if caught), but his followers, or at least those 
prominent amongst them, would be executed or enslaved.131 Such Roman concerns for 
sedition would also motivate a Roman governor.132 
Pilates opening question in this scene seems merely to request the formal accusation 
against Jesus (18:29), although his words in verse 33 demonstrate his awareness of at least 
one of the complaints brought against him. Nevertheless, in response to the charge that Jesus 
is an evildoer, whether expressed impudently (Barrett and Haenchen) or not (Keener and 
Lincoln), he offers Jesus back to thema group of people not yet named in this account 
(vv. 30-31).133 This offer conveys more than disdain in a contest for honour that forces them 
(Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010), 98-108 (105). Brown discusses this issue as well, but from the 
perspective of verisimilitude (Death, 1.720-22). 
128 Elias Bickerman, Utilitas crucis: Observations sur les rcits du procs de Jsus dans les vangiles 
canoniques, Revue de l'Histoire des Religions 112 (1935): 169-241 (209 n. 2). 
129 This is not to argue that indoors was less public, as Neyrey correctly points out, pace Thatcher who 
describes inside the Praetorium as a place away from the public eye (Neyrey, Cultural, 422; Thatcher, 
Greater, 73). In this case, it would only be away from the eyes of those who refused to enter. 
130 Martin, Jesus, 9; see further 6-9. 
131 Meggitt, Madness, 382. 
132 Meggitt approaches this question with a historical interest and therefore proceeds quite differently 
from the approach taken in this thesis.  
133 Barrett, Gospel, 533; Haenchen, John, 178; Keener, John, 2.1104; Lincoln, Gospel, 460. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
to admit their  powerlessness (pace Neyrey).134 Pilate is communicating a reluctance to 
be involved in the matter at all.135 Within the narrative this reluctance may be intended to 
lessen Pilates guilt and hold the Jews responsible for Jesus death.136 Yet the presence of 
such strong official Roman interest in the arrest demonstrates no effort to absolve the 
Romans of responsibility.137 Furthermore, the usual Roman protocol of allowing provincials 
to settle their own matters provides Pilate with an ideal way to learn more about Jesus by 
testing the response to his offer of release.138 It could be as well that Pilates repeated threats 
to release Jesusthreats since it is clear from the beginning that the Jews want him 
crucifiedmight also be understood as requests for bribes (Josephus, J.W. 2.14.4-5 287, 
292). 
Some scholars note that Pilate necessarily had previous contact with the Jews on 
this matter since he supplied soldiers for the arrest.139 The text does not reveal, however, 
who told Pilate of the accusation that connected Jesus with the title,    . 
John might imply that it came from Judas, since it was he who was first designated as the 
one who would betray Jesus (6:71; 12:4); it is into Judas that Satan enters (13:2, 27), and it 
is Judas who took the lead in Jesus arrest (18:2, 3, 5). He might expect his auditors to 
conclude that it came from those unspecified people who led Jesus from Annas to Pilate (18: 
24, 28). They could assume that it was reported to him in some form from the triumph in 
John 12:12-19. It is even possible that the text implies that he chose the title as part of the 
134 Neyrey, Cultural, 422. Other motives imputed to Pilate include a lack of understanding of the 
situation, a lack of understanding of the charges, or a declaration of his inability to try Jesus without a more 
specific accusation (Brown, John, 2.848). 
135 Tolmie, Pontius, 585. See, similarly, Lincoln, Gospel, 376. 
136 Brown, John, 2.849. 
137 Rensberger, Politics, 400. However, Rensbergers comment in this section, that the omission of 
the Sanhedrin trial rests the formal responsibility for the humiliation and condemnation of Jesus squarely on 
the Roman prefect Pilate, expresses the matter somewhat too forcefully. It is unclear to what degree anything 
one might term formal responsibility is of interest to the author of the Fourth Gospel, especially in light of 
the assigning of  in John 19:11.  
138 On the Roman practice of allowing provincials to judge their own people according to their own 
laws, see Fournier, Entre, 594, 595 n. 7; Brenger-Badel, Formation, 44-45.  
139 E.g., Bennema, Pilate, 242. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
charge himself, since it is the usual Roman title for rulers of Judaea.140 However, in any of 
these cases, Pilate would not know how many of the Jewish lite might want Jesus killed 
and how many might instead hope to follow him in an uprising against Rome. A Roman 
governor would thus need to ascertain the mood of the rest of the group. By offering to 
release Jesus into the custody of the Jews, Pilate can test the possible danger that Jesus 
poses. What do the Jews want with this man? Their answer is reassuring: they want him 
killed (18:31).  
6.2.1.2. Scene B: John 18:33-38b 
In the second question-and-answer exchange, Pilate turns his attention to Jesus. In 
verse 33 he probes what Jesus thinks of himself: Does he himself claim to be a ?141 
This is not an existential question, but a question about function: Is Jesus a leader of a 
group?142 Jesus tells Pilate, My  is not of this world (v. 36). This response is 
ambiguous but auditors may be reminded of the only other use of  in this Gospel: in 
John 3:3 Jesus tells Nicodemus of a kingdom of God that one needs to be born  to 
enter into it. In 19:36 as well, Jesus kingdom, the place where he rules, is likely to refer 
to earlier repeated assertions that Jesus is from above (e.g., 3:13, 31; 6:41; 8:23; 17:11, 16), 
the world that is also the destination of the disciples (14:2-3; 17:24).143 Nevertheless, this 
does not differentiate Jesus from Caesar. The imperator, too, rules an empire whose origins 
are not from this worldAugustus is of race divine and his empire extends beyond the 
zodiac.144 This is often missed, or explicitly rejected, because of the Baptists assertion that 
140 E.g., for Herod, Josephus, Ant. 15.10.5 373; Piper, Characterisation, 147. 
141 Skinner, Trial, 95. Kierspel is correct to note that this question is probably also sarcastic (Jews, 
142 Raymond F. Collins, Speaking of the Jews: Jews in the Discourse Material of the Fourth 
Gospel, in Anti-Judaism and the Fourth Gospel, ed. R. Bieringer, D. Pollefeyt, and F. Vandecasteele-
Vanneuville (Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2001), 158-75 (170). See, similarly, Keeners comment on 
the Johannine emphasis on faith as action (John, 2.1128-29). 
143 E.g., Brown, John, 2.852, 869; Lincoln, Gospel, 462. See Section 4.2 where the meaning of 
 as empire is further discussed.  
144 Vergil, Aeneid 6.792-97; 1.257-96. See also Carter who points out that not of this world does not 
mean not political (John, 192, 303). 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
a person is not able to receive even one thing unless it is given to him from heaven (3:27).145 
However, in that context, what is received from heaven is not authority but specific teachings 
about purification (), as is demonstrated by Johns later reference to the testimony 
that Jesus has received from above (3:31-32). Furthermore, whatever referents for Jesus 
empire have been given to the auditors of John cannot be attributed to the character of Pilate. 
When a  from another world is mentioned, a Roman governor would be expected to 
think of Rome. Thomas Gillespie summarizes: And so we have these two claims. We have 
the claim of Pilate, representing Caesar, to a rightful authority over human life within his 
jurisdiction. We also have the claim of Jesus to represent in the world  the God who 
reveals himself as the Father through the Son.146 Chapter 7 will describe in what sense these 
are competing, and in what sense they are compatible claims. In any case, it is clear that any 
conflict between the two empires is not based in an opposition between an earthly-based 
empire and a heavenly-based one.147 Both claim to rule with the authority of god(s).148  
Furthermore, for Romans, it is exactly because Caesars rule is divine that Roman 
soldiers win battles.149 When Augustus took the title imperator, le jeune Csar transformait 
en qualit immanente et perptuelle le don pour la victoire que lappellatio imperatoria 
ne clbrait que de faon ponctuelle.150 Jesus, in Johns hidden transcript, is a victorious 
emperor as well.151 However, if he has officers (which the contrary-to-fact conditional makes 
uncertain), he does not call them to battle.152 Thus, it is not the origins of Jesus empire in 
another world but the fact that his empire is not fighting that would reassure a Roman 
145 Brown, John, 2.878; Piper, Characterisation, 157. 
146 Thomas W. Gillespie, The Trial of Politics and Religion: John 18:28-19:16, ExAud 2 (1986): 69-
73 (72). 
147 Rensberger, Politics, 409. 
148 Section 4.3.3. 
149 Pace Bultmann who suggests that the  (18:36) are not followers who are not fighting but 
fighters who are not there because Jesus empire is not from this world (John, 654 n. 4). The incident with 
Peter and his sword (18:10-11) make this interpretation less likely. 
150 Assenmaker, Nouvelles Perspectives, 139. 
151 Chapter 4 and Section 5.1.4. 
152 BDR 360; Brown, John, 2.852; Lincoln, Gospel, 63. Some, such as Kierspel, simply assume that 
Jesus does have servants (Jews, 70). Others (such as Gillespie) assume that he does not (Trial, 71). 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
governor.153 Jesus maintains his divine origins at the same time that he remains physically 
vulnerable. This combination of power and vulnerability will be examined further in the final 
chapter of this thesis.154  
Pilates response, What is truth? (v. 38) has been taken by Lincoln neither as 
sneeringly sarcastic nor as profoundly philosophical, but simply as an attempt to evade 
Jesus witness and a sign of his failure to hear. 155 However, his evaluation raises a 
questionat the literal level of the textabout the likely motivation behind such a question 
from the Johannine Pilate, and offers an answer, first at the literal levelevasionand 
second at the figurative levelthe author signals that Pilate does not believe.156 (An 
invitation to belief is not always at the figurative level of the textcompare John 4:26 and 
19:19-20.157) Yet, if there is an implicit invitation to belief, it is not in a form that a Roman 
governor would recognize. From within the narrative, Pilate is probably not expressing 
philosophical scepticism, though he might be expressing a scepticism of philosophers, who 
were sometimes considered dangerous to Rome.158 Within the hidden transcript, it seems 
likely that Jesus comment that everyone who is from the truth listens to my voice (v. 37) 
153 Sections 4.3.3 and 6.1.2; Gillespie, Trial, 71. 
154 Sections 7.2.4 and 7.2.5. 
155 Lincoln, Truth, 129; see further 227; see similarly Meeks, Prophet-King, 67; Rensberger, Politics, 
403 n. 33. 
156 Jan G. van der Watt, Double entendre in the Gospel According to John, in Theology and 
Christology in the Fourth Gospel: Essays by the Members of the SNTS Johannine Writings Seminar, ed. G. 
Van Belle, J. G. van der Watt, and P. Maritz, BETL 184 (Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2005), 463-81 
(473 n. 55). Brown, similarly, notes that on the theological level the evangelist uses the question to show that 
Pilate is turning away from the truth (John, 2.869, emphasis mine). See also Lincoln, Gospel, 463. 
157 In both passages, there is a declaration of Jesus identity, but in 4:26 it invites the wise woman of 
Sychar to belief whereas an invitation to belief in 19:19-20 is much more indirect and also depends on 12:32-
33 (Brown, John, 1.181; Malina, and Rohrbaugh, Commentary, 100, 268-69; Keener, John, 1.620, 2.1137). An 
interpretation of 19:19-20 as an implicit invitation to belief is pace Barrett who seems to suggest that something 
more overt is needed to support it (Gospel, 549). 
158 Those who reject philosophical scepticism also include Schlier, Relevance, 220; Rensberger, 
Politics, 403 n. 33; Skinner, Trial, 96; Tolmie, Pontius, 586. Suetonius reports that Domitian banished all 
the philosophers from the city and from Italy (Dom. 10 [Rolfe, LCL]). Dio Cassius recounts the same 
information (Roman History 67.13.3). Epictetus (Discourses 3.8.7) notes the Romans disdain for philosophers, 
and Oldfather, in a footnote on that passage, notes that Roman popular feeling about philosophy is probably 
not greatly overdrawn in the well-known advice of Ennius (frag. sc. 376 Vahlen) to taste of philosophy, but 
not to gorge oneself upon it; and the jest of Plautus (Captivi, 284), apropos of a reckless romancer, that he is 
not simply lying now, he is philosophizing. Thus, a Roman-aware auditor would not be surprised at Pilates 
dismissive stance. Furthermore, a suggestion that Jesus was philosophizing might increase Pilates concern, 
especially since philosophers were also connected with sedition (Charlesworth, Flavian, 27). 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
is not an invitation to Pilate but a side reference to Johns Roman-aware auditors, expressing 
their own solidarity in the face of Roman oppression.159 Therefore, Pilates words, in concert 
with the solidarity raised by Jesus mention of truth, echoes the question upon which hangs 
the issue of loyalty: whose truth do you believe? Those of the truth (18:37) recognize the 
irony that Pilate asks this question of the one who embodies true judgment.160 
And with that, Pilate walks out. This phrase (v. 38b), I have argued, ought to be 
counted as the ending of Scene B. It specifies not only that Pilate leaves after his question, 
but leaves in order to join the Jews. Chapter 7 will argue that this is a deliberate conjunction 
of the two for the purpose of re-framing the Gospels auditors in their primary loyalties
the same issue just mentioned.161 
6.2.1.3. Scene C: John 18:38c19:1 
The third series of questions in the first cycle of the Johannine trial narrative 
describes Pilate testing further for the possibility of sedition. Admittedly, the group of people 
before Pilate have already refused to take Jesus back because they cannot execute him 
(18:31).162 However, since the Jews only denounced Jesus because they were afraid that 
his large following would attract Roman attention (11:47-48), a small minority may still be 
hoping for his release. By offering to turn Jesus back over to the Jews, especially as their 
 (18:39), Pilate can be interpreted as testing the crowd once more.163 Would any 
among the Jewish listeners support Jesus if he were freed?  
I have argued above that Pilate is not concerned with Jesus guilt or innocence. 
However, it must be noted that guilt or innocence is not discussed in the text until Jesus 
comment in John 19:11. In this scene (v. 38c), as well as in 19:4 and 6, the Johannine Pilate 
159 For hidden transcripts, see Sections 1.3.2 and 5.1.4. For Roman oppression, see Section 7.2.3.  
160 Lincoln, Truth, 227. See, similarly, Duke, Irony, 130-31; Tolmie, Pontius, 587. 
161 Section 7.1.4. 
162 Rensberger, Politics, 403. 
163 Thatcher, Greater, 75. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
does not use any of the words available for declaring judicial innocence: ,  
or .164 Instead, he declares that he has found no basis for the charge against him 
(    ).165 It is true that this phrase might also be translated as no guilt 
in him.166 However, based on the cultural unit for a Roman governor, it seems more likely 
that auditors would understand this as a lack of charge against him rather than a lack of guilt, 
since governors were concerned to limit the number of cases they were required to hear.167 
Furthermore, the imperfect tense in 19:12 () seems best translated as an ingressive: 
Pilate started to try to release him, implying that this had not been his intent earlier.168 
Thus, Pilates offer in 18:39 is not a sincere one.169  
Nevertheless, the offer of release and the designation King of the Jews are not 
simply taunts at Jewish nationalism either.170 For the Jews to have a king would not require 
independence from Rome or eschatological fulfilmentonly for them to choose their own 
king.171 After all, Herod and Agrippa were both called   (Josephus, J.W. 
1.14.4 282; Philo, Flaccus 5.29).172 When the Roman cultural unit for  is taken 
164 L&N 1.556. See, for example,  in Matthew 27:19. 
165 De Boer, Narrative, 149, 149 n. 40; Collins, Speaking, 171. 
166 L&N 1.775-76. See also those who conclude that Pilate believes Jesus to be innocent (Blinzler, 
Trial, 229-30; Schnackenburg, John, 259; Culpepper, Anatomy, 134; Ehrman, Jesus, 127; Rensberger, 
Politics, 403; Lincoln, Gospel, 464; Neyrey, Cultural, 424; Parsenios, Rhetoric, 37; Thompson, John, 381). 
167 Brenger-Badel, Formation, 38-39. 
168 This is pace those who believe that Pilates declaration of Jesus innocence is a sincere one; see n. 
166 above. Tolmie notes the way the apparently just declaration of Jesus innocence is immediately negated 
by the choice between Jesus and Barabbas (Pontius, 587). However, in this Gospel Pilate only offers to 
release Jesus; it is in Matthew that Pilate offers the crowd a choice between the two men (27:17) and, secondly, 
it seems easier to reconcile the apparent shift from a just to an unjust Pilate by taking the offer as not serious 
from the beginning. Note that my analysis also answers the challenge of explaining why Pilate calls him the 
King of the Jews at this point in the exchange (Tolmie, Pontius, 588). Other scholars mention the difficulty 
of explaining Pilates choice of title as well, for example, Barrett, Gospel, 539. For the ingressive imperfect, 
see Section 6.2.2.2 n. 227. 
169 Lincoln, Truth, 129; Helen K. Bond, Barabbas Remembered, in Jesus and Paul: Global 
Perspectives in Honor of James D. G. Dunn for His 70th Birthday, ed. B. J. Oropeza, C. K. Robertson, and 
Douglas C. Mohrmann, LNTS 414 (London: T & T Clark, 2009), 59-71 (70); Bennema, Pilate, 243. Note 
that Pilates pronouncement in verse 38 expresses the truth of the Johannine community at the figurative level 
(Lincoln, Gospel, 472). 
170 Pace Lincoln, Gospel, 464. See, similarly, e.g., Bond, Pilate, 181-82; Conway, Men, 159 
171 Pace Moore, Empire, 66.  
172 Josephus gives David that title as well (J.W. 6.10.1 439), however, so a reference to aspirations 
for independence cannot be completely discounted. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
into consideration, the true   is none other than Caesar, or Caesars 
appointed delegate.173 The alternative between Jesus and Caesar offered to the Jews in this 
verse will be echoed back to Pilate in 19:12. Rather than offering a way for the Jews to 
save face (pace Tolmie), Pilate seems to be testing their loyalty to Rome.174 The response of 
the Jews shows Pilate that they are not interested in Jesus. They ask for Barabbas instead 
(18:40). 
This does not, however, allay Pilates suspicions. Instead, it raises a new concern. If 
the Jews are not planning a rebellion with Jesus at its head, might they be planning a 
rebellion behind Barabbas?175 Matthew Skinner has argued against construing Barabbas as 
an insurrectionist on the basis of the use of  in John 10:1-10, where it refers to a 
thief.176 However, this does not take into account both the tenor and the vehicle of the 
metaphor of that passage.177 In the vehicle, a robber (the  along with the , the 
thief) is stealing sheep (10:1). Yet in the tenor that this metaphor is designed to elucidate, 
the  is a rebel attempting to lead people away from their proper leader (10:5, 8).178  
Beth M. Stovell recognizes the contest of authority in the Good Shepherd discourse 
(John 10), but translates  only as robbers while still identifying them as opponents 
and rulers of the world.179 Indeed, authority is contested in both the tenor and the vehicle 
of the metaphor. In the vehicle, the robbers contest the authority over the entrance to the 
sheepfold. They claim the right to enter without using the gate (10:7-10). In the tenor, the 
173 Bond, Remembered, 70. 
174 Pace Tolmie, Pontius, 588. 
175 Piper, Characterisation, 154 n. 110. On the difficulties of reconstructing the historical Barabbas, 
see Bond, Pilate, 200 n. 31; Bond, Remembered. 
176 Skinner, Trial, 97, 178 n. 23. 
177 For an introduction to the discussion about whether this passage constitutes a parable or an allegory, 
see Brant, John, 160. That question will not be pursued in this thesis. A metaphor is understood to be a figure 
of speech, in which one thing, idea, or action is referred to by a word or expression normally denoting another 
thing, idea, or action, so as to suggest some common quality shared by the two. In the discussion above, I 
distinguish the primary literal term (called the tenor) from the secondary figurative term (the vehicle) 
applied to it (metaphor, ODLT). 
178 Bonds discussion is suggestive of this conclusion as well (Remembered, 70-71). 
179 Stovell, Mapping, 247, 249, 253. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
 are not otherwise identified. However, the contest of authority shows Jesus to be the 
legitimate leader of the people (represented as sheep).180 The non-authorized agents are 
attempting to convince people to listen to them (10:8) and will eventually lead those people 
to their own destruction (v. 10).181 They are therefore by definition rebels and 
insurrectionists.182 Barabbas, therefore, must be understood to be an insurrectionist.183 
Pilates concern over a possible rebellion of the Jews extends into the second cycle 
of the Johannine trial narrative. While, in the first cycle, he has determined that the Jews 
are not planning a rebellion behind Jesus, the cycle has not clearly concluded what Jesus 
thinks of himself. A flogging as part of Pilates benevolent plan for Jesus release depends 
on a Pilate who not only believes in Jesus innocence, but cares about the release (although 
not the physical protection) of the innocent.184 That this is not the case is shown by the way 
Pilate repeatedly announces that he has found no basis for a judgement against Jesus, and 
yet does not release him forthwith.185 A flogging as torture to discover Jesus own intent 
by attempting to extract any as-yet-undisclosed information from him does make sense 
historically, as well as within the story as John tells it.186 What emerges, for Roman-aware 
auditors, from the first cycle of the Johannine account of Jesus trial is a Pilate who has 
180 Stovell, Mapping, 237, 245 n. 56, 250. 
181 This is opposed to the ability to hold the sheep that belongs to the Father and the Son (Stovell, 
Mapping, 248-49). Barretts [m]essianic pretenders also fit the profile of insurrectionists in the world of the 
Fourth Gospel (Gospel, 369; cf. Thompson, John, 224). 
182 The double entendre on  (robber and rebel) must be intentionalthe word , used in 
10:1, 10 and 12:6, could have been substituted throughout the Good Shepherd passage (although that would 
have made the tenor more ambiguous). Also, Josephus uses  to refer to robbers as well as rebels, for 
example in J.W. 2.13.2-3 253-4; 2.21.1 585 (Lincoln, Gospel, 464). 
183 For further reasons to interpret Barabbas as an insurrectionist, see Koester, Why, 167 n. 13. The 
religious element that tienne Nodet perceived in Josephus comes from the context and cannot be imported 
into the Fourth Gospel [Barabbas, un brigand religieux (, Jn 18,40), RB 119.2 (2012): 288-99 (295)]. 
However, there would be no such thing as a secular rebel in antiquity, in any case, since every person, 
especially one mounting a rebellion, would have need of some gods (D.E. Aune, Religion, Greco-Roman, 
DNTB 91726; N. C. Croy, Religion, Personal, DNTB 92629, esp. 929). Collins focuses exclusively on 
violence for his interpretant of , and omits any mention of sedition (Speaking, 171-72). 
184 Brown, John, 2.886-87; Tolmie, Pontius, 590-91.  
185 For Piper, this brings into question Pilates conviction of Jesus innocence; Bond notes the 
difficulties with the view that innocence is in question at all (Piper, Characterisation, 154; Bond, Pilate, 180-
186 Section 5.1. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
determined that Jesus had no significant following among the lite Jews standing before 
the praetorium, and that although Jesus himself might have presented a danger to the empire, 
he had now been flogged and thus rendered powerless.  
6.2.1.4. Scene X: John 19:2-5 
Flogging could be a very visual display, for the benefit of a conquered people, of 
what they could expect to happen to anyone who opposed Caesar. It is unclear, however, 
how flogging someone that the Jews want crucified might be thought to humiliate 
them.187 To offer their prisoner back to them as king of the Jews seems much more 
calculated to test the seriousness and perhaps the popularity of their request. Furthermore, 
by downplaying the scourging and emphasizing the mocking (without actually naming it as 
such), John is able to highlight the Roman imagery of this scene. The crown, the purple robe, 
and the Roman soldiers slaps-for-salutes, as discussed in Chapter 5, are set out for the 
purpose of comparing Jesus with Caesar.188 Pilate himself joins in; his    (19:5) 
echoes the presentation of Augustus in Vergils Aeneid (6.791).189 
6.2.2. Cycle 2: Pilate tests the loyalty of the Jews to Caesar 
Towards the end of Scene C, in the first cycle of the Johannine trial narrative, Roman-
aware auditors would notewith the Johannine Pilatethat the Jews screamed 
() for the release of the rebel Barabbas (18:40). This is not designed to reassure a 
Roman governor, who might easily ask himself how likely they are to revolt. For those 
hearing the Gospel of John in the years after the destruction of Jerusalem (70 CE), this would 
be a reasonable concern for a Roman official. And in the second cycle of the Johannine trial 
narrative, a concern for the loyalty of the Jews accords well with Pilates words and actions. 
187 Rensberger, Politics, 404. 
188 Sections 5.1.2-3, and, also, Bond, Pilate, 183-84. 
189 This argument has been presented in Section 5.2, and in Hunt, Ecce. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
6.2.2.1. Scene C: John 19:6-8 
Jesus has been dressed and hailed as an emperor. So, what will the Jews do with 
this mock-Caesar? As Pilate again suggests Jesus release (19:4), the Jews respond in the 
manner of faithful Roman perigrini: Crucify him (19:6). The mob rejects this Emperor 
Jesusbut do they reject Rome and its authority? If Pilate refuses to crucify him, will they 
rebel and crucify a man that Rome has released? Josephus reports that Agrippa and the 
Roman procurator Albinus deposed the high priest Ananus for having James and others 
stoned (Ant. 20.9.1 197-203). To kill hostages without the command of the emperor was 
also treason (see offense A in Digest 48.4.1, as quoted above). Pilates offer in verse 6 tests 
the Jewish leaders willingness to abide by his decision.190 There is no indication (pace 
Piper) that it demonstrates for the first time a real intention on the part of the Johannine 
Pilate to release Jesus nor does Pilates offer to release Jesus for lack of grounds reflect any 
lessening of Pilates control.191 Although Carter says that Pilates comment that he finds no 
case against Jesus again can hardly be serious given his involvement in Jesus arrest, 
previous humiliation of the elite, and whipping of Jesus, this pre-supposes that justice is 
Pilates primary concern.192 Instead, for a Roman, the flogging itself would reveal whether 
there was reason for Pilate to continue his investigation or not. Furthermore (pace Tolmie), 
Pilate is not offering the Jews an option that he knows they cannot choose because he 
dislikes them, nor (pace Duke) is it simply strange that Pilate continues to mock the Jews 
while refusing to set an innocent Jesus free.193 Rather, Pilate is testing the control of the 
people before himwill they respond with an attempt at their own violence? The text 
190 Against the idea that this is another attempt to release Jesus, see Bond, Pilate, 186. But in the place 
of the mockery that Bond suggests or the frustration that Brown detects, I am arguing that Pilate is testing the 
loyalty of the Jews (Brown, John, 2.877, 892-93). Pace Blinzler, who believes that this is a strong declaration 
by Pilate that he has no intention of crucifying an innocent man (Trial, 229-30). Pace Barrett as well who 
argues that Pilate is taunting the Jews and that the Fourth Gospel describes this exchange in order, again, to 
emphasize Jewish responsibility for Jesus death (Gospel, 541). 
191 Pace Piper, Characterisation, 149. 
192 Carter, John, 305. 
193 Tolmie, Pontius, 592; Duke, Irony, 131-33; similarly, Carter, John, 306. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
answers this question in the response to Pilate: the Jews go from screaming (v. 6) to simply 
answering (v. 7). And although they still demand death, they more reasonably reference their 
law, which the Romans generally chose to respect.194 Yet they also include a new accusation: 
Jesus claims to be a Son of God ( ; 19:7).195  
The Johannine Jews might speak just these words to purposely incite this Roman 
to act (cf. 19:12). Romans valued humility in their leaders, as was demonstrated in the 
discussion of the recusatio.196 They wrote deprecatingly of anyone who took for himself a 
ruling title such as imperator (e.g., Velleius Paterculus, Compendium of Roman History 
2.24.1; Appian, Hist. rom. 12.8.52; Cicero, Har. resp 35 16; Caesar, Bell. civ. 3.31).197 
Thus, although the expression made himself ( ) in verse 7 is rightly 
contrasted with Jesus assertions throughout the Gospel that he says and does nothing on 
his own and that his identity and functions as the Son have been granted him by the Father 
(cf. e.g., 5.19, 20, 26), the charge would sound particularly odious to Roman-aware auditors 
and, they would expect, to the Johannine Pilate.198 
As previously noted, the Roman cultural unit for a Roman governor expects that 
Pilates primary concern for his honour is not vis  vis the Jews but vis  vis Caesar.199 
Thus, this analysis will bypass the Jewish connections of the title Son of God as well as 
the way it was connected to the title Messiah in John 19:22-39, and look instead at the way 
it would be heard within a Roman encyclopaedia.200 The Greek text,     
194 See n. 138 above. 
195 For more on son of god, see Sections 3.2.2 and 4.4.1. For an analysis of son of god language 
using other encyclopaedias (such as Samaritan) and more broadly within the Fourth Gospel, see John Ashton, 
Understanding the Fourth Gospel (Oxford: Clarendon, 1991), 292-329. 
196 Section 4.3.1. 
197 Assenmaker, Nouvelles Perspectives, 133 and 133 n. 110-112  
198 However, having heard the rest of Johns narrative, they know that Jesus has simply been claiming 
his true relationship to God (e.g., 5:16-30; 12:28). 
199 This would especially make sense to Roman-aware hearers if they knew the cruel reputation of 
Tiberius (Suetonius, Tib. 57-59). For discussion on this, see Blinzler, Trial, 237 n. 1. Still, perhaps all that is 
necessary is knowledge of his cruelty, not the specifics of his responses to treason. 
200 For its Jewish cultural unit, see, e.g., Keener, John, 1.294-96; Thompson, John, 54-58; and on the 
connection with John 10:22-39, see Lincoln, Gospel, 467.  
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
  , could be translated as follows: when Pilate heard this phrase. It is not so 
much their words as their reference to the emperor, divi filius, that concerns him.201 As Carter 
notes, this language  gets Pilates attention.202 This means that the charge is not, pace 
many scholars, purely religious or theological at least in the sense of relating solely to a 
Jewish charge of blasphemy.203 To learn that Jesus has claimed Caesars very title makes 
the mocking of him as an emperor suddenly too real. Pilate is afraid.204  
In a world where other emissaries from Caesar might report directly back to Rome, 
a governor cannot trust a stranger.205 The testimony given in a trial is often garbled, and a 
judge must seek to know the truth behind the words. If Jesus accusers claim that he made 
201 Perhaps, too, the character of Pilate is meant to be aware, as at least some Romans later were, that 
men starting from Judea should possess the world (see Section 4.3.3, and Josephus, J.W. 3.8.9 402). There 
is also the possibility that, rather than a connection with divine Caesar, Pilate grew afraid that Jesus was 
connected more directly with a god. For this see Schlier, Relevance, 223; Haenchen, John, 187; Rensberger, 
Politics, 405; Bond, Pilate, 187; Piper, Characterisation, 156; Tolmie, Pontius, 593; as well as other 
scholars who more reservedly suggest this possibility (Conway, Men, 160; Lincoln, Gospel, 467). I am unsure 
of the reasons Piper suggests that the Jews understand and control the realm of gods and spirits better 
than Pilate does (Characterisation, 150). For stories of divine men, see Philostratus, Life of Apollonius 4.44 
that Bultmann adduces and 1.21 brought in by Schnackenburg (Bultmann, John, 661 n. 4; Schnackenburg, 
John, 256, 260, 263, 452 n. 79). 
202 Carter, John, 307, emphasis original. 
203 Pace Blinzler, Trial, 230; Brown, John, 2.848; Lincoln, Truth, 131; Piper, Characterisation, 150. 
204 It is important to note that, for the first time, in verse 8, the narrator gives information about Pilate. 
Unlike statements put into Pilates mouth, which can be lies, unintentional truths or truths, the narrators words 
must be taken at face value. On taking the comparative as an elative, see Bond, Pilate, 187. Other scholars 
support the elative reading as well (Barrett, Gospel, 542; Lincoln, Truth, 131). However, Tolmie argues against 
this reading (Pontius, 592). He notes that in 5:18, too,  is used for the desire of the Jews to kill Jesus 
despite the fact that their desire  has not been explicitly indicated earlier in the Gospel (592). Yet, in 5:16, 
the Jews begin to persecute Jesus (, imperfect) because he healed on the Sabbath. Then, after Jesus 
indicates that he regards God as his Father (v. 17), they want to kill him even more (v. 18). Thus, the examples 
are not parallel. Harvey takes this verb to mean prosecute rather than persecute but the Appian reference in 
, LSJ 440 (Bell. civ. 4.50) is the only example he cites that is not from the fourth or fifth century BCE. 
Further work would have to be done to support that meaning in the first and second century CE (Harvey, Jesus, 
Also, since John does sometimes demonstrate at least awareness of stories of Jesus not explicitly 
narrated in his Gospel (e.g., 1:29-34), Bernards suggestion that Pilates fear stems from his wifes dream (Mt. 
27:19) is a possibility, but this will not be explored in this study. Bernard also points back to John 18:39, which 
could be taken as a reference to Pilates concern over the possibility of a Jewish rebellion (St. John, 2.613, 
618). Brown suggests that Pilate wants to release Jesus because he is worried about a rebellion forming behind 
Barabbas (John, 2.856-57, 871-72, 879). Yet, Barabbas is such a minor character in Johns narrative that this 
seems unlikely, nor is it likely that a narration could keep any sense of verisimilitude if a Roman governor 
releases someone he genuinely fears will start a rebellion.  
Ultimately, even if the comparative sense is taken to be correct, Pilates fear could be understood to 
have been continuously growing vis  vis Caesar and Pilates responsibility to keep the peace. 
205 See Section 6.1.3. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
himself the son of God, he might easily know the son of God.206 The fear, then, is that this 
particular man could have connections to the son of God in Rome.207 If Pilate has just 
flogged and mocked someone with imperial connections, his fear is quite reasonable.208 
Thus, although Pipers suggestion that Pilates fear is of supramundane powers is not ruled 
out, it is not required to make sense of Pilates emotion.209 Furthermore, although Piper 
suggests that the narrative here unusually does not pursue the theme of kingship, if 
, as has been shown in this thesis, can refer to an emperor rather than a king, then 
the theme of  is not absent from a reference to a son of God.210 Jesus as the son of 
God is a further expression of the truth-in-hidden-transcript communicated by the Fourth 
Gospela truth whose social implications will be discussed in Chapter 7.  
6.2.2.2. Scene B: John 19:9-12a 
Pilates next question to Jesus is Where are you from? (v. 9). The mention of a son 
of god has suggested that this man might have imperial connections. So although the 
soldiers in the garden verified twice that Jesus was from Nazareth (18:5-8), the reference to 
son of God has raised other possibilities. Jesus Nazarene origins are discussed in John 
only in the context of the trial and in the discussion with Nathanael, where Jesus goes from 
Jesus of Nazareth, son of Joseph to Rabbi, the Son of God, the King of Israel (1:45, 49). 
The same progression happens in this scene but in a Roman rather than a Jewish context.211  
206 Although Neyrey comments that [i]n antiquity people were constantly making themselves 
something, that is, claiming a new and higher status or role (Acts 5:36), Romans valued humility and self-
control (Section 4.3.1). In Acts 5:36, Gamaliel mentions Theudas specifically because his claim to status failed 
(Neyrey, Cultural, 428). At the narrative level, the lack of humility in this claim would be apparent. 
207 Tolmie, too, suggests that fear of Rome is one option for understanding Pilates fear, although he 
does not ultimately opt for that possibility (Pontius, 593). Meye Thompson also connects Jesus with the 
emperor through the use of   but suggests that Pilate perceived a genuine threat to Caesar from Jesus 
rather than possible connections between the two (John, 385). See, similarly, Wright, Governor, 216-19. This 
seems to put the matter too strongly. While I agree with this connection and Pilates concern with sedition, it 
does not seem likely that the Johannine Pilate thinks Jesus is an impending usurper. 
208 Cf. Neyreys list of Jesus ascriptions of honour (Cultural, 424). In question, for Pilate, is not only 
how much honour Jesus might have (428-29) but how much authority.  
209 Piper, Characterisation, 150. See other possibilities listed in nn. 204 and 207 above.  
210 Piper, Characterisation, 151. 
211 The repeated connections between the two will be discussed in Section 7.1. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
The concern for correct identification would be heightened for a man condemned to 
death, since a Roman governor would need to make sure that he was not crucifying a Roman 
citizen by mistake.212 Josephus reports that Florus, among many other injustices, crucified 
Jews who were Roman citizens (J.W. 2.14.9 308). The legate of Syria, Cestius, eventually 
sent a party of Jews to Nero to blame Florus behaviour for the start of the war (J.W. 2.20.1 
558). This story comes from the second half of the first century CE and establishes the 
kinds of concerns appropriate for a Roman provincial ruler.  
Knowledge of the defendants origin was a regular part of trial procedures (Josephus, 
J.W. 6.5.3 305-306).213 It is perhaps to this reality that Lincoln alludes when he judges that 
the phrase Jesus the Nazorean  gives the inscription a more formal and memorable 
ring.214 Not only is this part of the formal procedure, but it would be especially necessary 
given the need to distinguish between various people named Jesus. First, there is a tradition 
that takes special care to distinguish Jesus from Barabbas, who also is remembered with the 
name Jesus.215 Helen Bond notes this and suggests that, with regard to historicity, there may 
have been some confusion over which Jesus was to be brought to trial, and the prefect 
needed to seek clarification.216 John may have assumed that his readers would be familiar 
with this confusion. However, since he does not bring that out in the narrative, this cannot 
be the primary focus of his concern.217 
While it is true, as many point out, that origins are of particular interest to John and 
it is possible, as Mary Coloe argues, that in a Jewish encyclopaedia the Nazarene is a 
messianic title, within the storyline Pilate asks this question to verify once more that he has 
212 It is perfectly logical that a party sent to arrest a man would wish to identify him fully by name 
and locale (Brown, John, 2.810).  
213 Bekken, Lawsuit, 111. 
214 Lincoln, Gospel, 474. 
215 Bond, Remembered, 60, esp. n. 6. See also Brown, John, 2.856. 
216 Bond, Remembered, 61. Other men named Jesus mentioned, for example, by Josephus include 
Jesus son of Sapphias, one of the chief priests (J.W. 2.20.4 566 [Thackeray, LCL]), Jesus, son of Saphat, 
the ringleader of this band of brigands (3.9.7 450), Jesus, son of Gamalas (4.3.9 160), Jesus, son of 
Ananias (6.5.3 300), and Jesus, son of Thebuthi (6.8.3 387).  
217 Section 6.1.1. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
arrested the right man.218 He will include   on the titulus as well (19:19).219 Since 
Pilate lives with the spectre of Caesar looking over his shoulder, he must know who he 
crucifies.220 However, Jesus does not answer Pilates question. His silence may be seen as 
courage, and therefore an expression of masculinity.221 Plutarch (Mor. 88.4D), for example, 
opposes a charge of being cowardly () to daring () and manly 
(). On the contrary, however, his silence could also be interpreted as passivity in 
preparation for penetration, a feminine response.222 What the text says, however, is that Jesus 
did not give him an answer (   , v. 9). This refusal to cooperate 
seems to match the everyday forms of resistance such as evasion, foot-dragging that Scott 
has catalogued as a response to forms of material domination.223 Citing Is 53:7, Carter calls 
this a classic pose of the powerless (who accomplish Gods redeeming purposes) before the 
powerful, which Pilate interprets  as defiance.224 This well summarizes the two points 
of view represented in the exchange. In Scene B, therefore, the Johannine Pilate fails to 
achieve his objective of determining Jesus origin and fails to attempt to impress Jesus with 
his authority.225 Jesus words recall Pilate to his responsibilities and his honour before 
Caesar, reversing the judge and the judged for the auditors.226 Jesus next words continue 
218 Mary Coloe, The Nazarene King: Pilate's Title as the Key to John's Crucifixion, in The Death of 
Jesus in the Fourth Gospel, ed. G. Van Belle, BETL 200 (Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2007), 839-48 
(843-46). On origins, see, e.g., Neyrey, John, 428-29.  
219 Brown, John, 2.901. 
220 Bernard, St. John, 2.621. 
221 Conway, Behold, 23, 29-30. See, e.g., Bernard who calls it dignity (St. John, 2.619). Barrett 
somewhat amusingly explains Jesus brief silence with the following tautology: The silence of Jesus is much 
less prominent in John than in the other gospels because much more conversation is introduced into the story 
(Gospel, 542). 
222 Glancy, Torture, 130; Conway, Behold, 22, 102. 
223 Scott, Domination, 198. 
224 Carter, John, 307. 
225 Tolmie, Pontius, 594. For a discussion of  in this scene, see Section 4.4.2. 
226 Helen C. Orchard, Courting Betrayal: Jesus as Victim in the Gospel of John, ed. J. Cheryl Exum, 
JSNTSup 161. Edited by Stanley E. Porter. Gender, Culture, Theory 5 (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 
1998), 209. The reversal is noted by many scholars, for example, Josef Blinzler, Der Prozess Jesu, 4th ed. 
(Regensburg: Pustet, 1969), 351; Ashton, Understanding, 489; Lincoln, Truth, 75, 196-97, 227; Gniesmer, 
Proze, 234-35, 260, 335-36, 424-25. For the reference to  in 11a, see also Section 4.4.2. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
that reversal but decrease the pressure on Pilate. Jesus says, the one who handed me over to 
you has the greater guilt (v. 11), and Pilate attempts (again) to ask for his release (v. 12).227 
The word  is somewhat ambiguous.228 Louw and Nida categorize  
within the semantic fields of sin, being evil, and guilt.229 Furthermore, they note the 
difference between the first and last of these meanings: A number of languages make a clear 
distinction between the active event of committing sin and the resulting moral effect of 
guilt.230 , however, can mean either. Since by verse 11 the action of handing over 
has already occurred (18:30), and since actions do not have sizes that can be measured 
(, 19:11), it is the resulting guilt which best fits the meaning of this occurrence of 
.231 And since this guilt is noted before the Roman prefect, it is necessary to look 
briefly at the Roman cultural unit of guilt in military settings. 
For a Roman soldier to be found guilty was quite a serious situation. Valerius 
Maximus, in his section on military discipline, tells the story of an officer who sent his 
defeated soldiers back into battle to punish the guilt (culpa) of their former loss (Memorable 
227 The narrator steps in to relate Pilates request to release Jesus. In 18:31, 39; 19:6 Pilate asked the 
Jews if they would take Jesus, but in 19:12, he is actually sincere in his question. I have translated  using 
the conative imperfect, suggesting that Pilate tries to ask a question similar to those earlier ones, but is 
immediately rebuffed in verse 12b (BDR 326). The benefit of translating  as to ask instead of as to 
try to obtain is that it gives the Jews a question to respond to in verse 12b (, BDAG 428). The  
 also suggests that this is a new approach for Pilateit would then be temporal. Yet in a narrative, 
subsequent events are often implicitly causal, and certainly that seems to be the case in these verses. Thus, 
Jesus reference to guilt will be seen to motivate Pilates attempts to obtain the acquiescence of the Jews to 
his release. (He is still thinking of Caesar: he is not asking because he needs their permission, but because he 
needs to make sure their reaction to Jesus release will not create problems for himand, indeed, he concludes 
from their response that it will.) For   as causal, see Schnackenburg, John, 3.453 n. 87; Tolmie, 
Pontius, 594 n. 77. Note that de Boer suggests that the imperfect tense of  implies repetition or 
persistance [sic] (Narrative, 144). This iterative imperfect is a possibilityit might then suggest that Pilate 
asked several times if the Jews wanted him to release Jesus.  
228 In search of a Roman cultural unit that might be relevant, I note that  is not used in the Res 
Gestae and, by the fourth century CE when the Vulgate made its appearance, Latin ecclesial vocabulary had 
developed so that peccatum was the obvious choice (Propterea qui me tradidit tibi, majus peccatum habet). 
However, the sense of , or scelus, as deeds against the moral program of Augustus, and hence of the 
gods, could be explored in a passage more focused on deeds than 19:11 [Julien Smith, Christ the Ideal King: 
Cultural Context, Rhetorical Strategy, and the Power of Divine Monarchy in Ephesians (Tbingen: Mohr 
Siebeck, 2011), 53-55]. 
229 L&N, 2.11. 
230 L&N, 1.775. 
231 Lindars, John, 569; Barrett, Gospel, 543. This is pace, e.g., Lincoln, Gospel, 468. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
Doings and Sayings 2.7.10 [Shackleton Bailey, LCL]). Also, in his section on justice, 
Valerius describes a foreign leader whose justice was so stern and abrupt (praefringo et 
abscido) that he fell on his sword when he realized that he had broken one of his own laws, 
rather than conceal his guilt (culpa, 6.5.external 4). Valerius also praises the Celtiberians 
because they thought it a sin (nefas) to survive a battle in which the person for whose safety 
they had pledged their lives had fallen (2.6.11 [Shackleton Bailey, LCL]). This passage is 
particularly relevant in that Valerius praises the Celtiberians because they connect friendship 
(amicitia) with loyalty (fides), and consider sin (nefas) as denoting a lack of loyalty: 
Friendship demanded unwavering loyalty (Shackleton Bailey, LCL). 
If, as this evidence suggests, a Roman soldier is guilty when he does not win battles, 
does not follow orders, or does not demonstrate loyalty, the mention of guilt in John 19:11 
refers Pilate to his responsibility to Caesar, set in contrast to that of     (19:11). 
A variety of referents have been proposed for this phrase: the Jews, Judas, Caiaphas, and 
the devil.232 On the one hand, the first three seems more probable in a discussion of 
responsibility, where the responsibility of Pilate to Caesar might be contrasted with that of 
the Jews, Judas or Caiaphas to God.233 In the greater Johannine trial narrative, for example, 
the Jews act according to their responsibility to God in 18:28 when they refuse to enter the 
praetorium but deny that responsibility when they declare their sole allegiance to Caesar 
(19:16).234 On the other hand, guilt is generally assigned on the basis of the condemnation 
of ones actions, so the identity of     as the same as the ruler of this world 
who has been condemned (16:11) makes sense. 
Warren Carter has proposed, based on four factors, that this phrase refers to Pilate: 
(1) it is first used in John 12:31 in a context that refers to the crucifixion; (2) both in the rest 
232 For a variety of opinions on who     refers to, see Bond, Pilate, 188-89 (in discussion 
with Barrett); Bernard, St. John, 2.620; Piper, Characterisation, 157-58; Bennema, Pilate, 245 n. 23.  
233 Pace Brown who does not contrast responsibility but intentions (John, 2.879, 893). 
234 The irony (or blasphemy) has often been noted. See Brown, John, 2.866, 894-96; Barrett, Gospel, 
532-33, 546; Duke, Irony, 127-28; Lincoln, Truth, 124-25, 135-36. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
of the Fourth Gospel and in Ephesus,  refers to human rulers; (3) this ruler rules over 
the world, i.e. those who reject Jesus, whose ultimate rejection occurs at the cross, and 
(4) Jesus words in 19:11 are best understood in light of his words in 14:30.235 However, 
none of these factors requires a reference to Pilate or precludes a reference to Satan. First, 
Satan also participated in the crucifixion, according to John, since he entered Judas (13:27) 
and may therefore be seen as being complicit in Jesus betrayal (19:11). Furthermore, it is 
unclear in what sense Pilate has been driven out (12:31). Secondly, as has already been 
discussed, a semiotic Sign with multiple possible referents must be interpreted through the 
process of abduction. A lack of non-human referents for  elsewhere does not preclude 
a non-human meaning for it in John 12:31; 14:30 and 16:11, unless it can be shown that 
neither author nor auditors would know such a meaning. Since Mark, Luke and Matthew all 
exemplify non-human referents (Mk 3:22; Lk 11:15; Mt 9:34; 12:24), such a meaning in 
John is quite possible. Thirdly, to identify the world uniquely with that which rejects 
Jesus is to force its meaning in John 1:10 onto the rest of its uses in the Fourth Gospel, 
where contexts are much more variegated.236 Furthermore, in John 16:7-11 it is the advocate 
who condemns this ruler and exposes the worlds wrong judgement. In the Gospel of John, 
the coming of the Spirit happens soon after the resurrection (20:22), thus linking the 
crucifixion, the resurrection, the post-resurrection appearances and the giving of the Spirit 
in quick succession. And with the Spirit, Jesus empowers his disciples to forgive or retain 
sins (20:23). This suggests that Pilate, along with Judas, Caiaphas, and the Jews are those 
whose wrong judgement the resurrection has exposed, and whose sins the disciples now have 
the authority to forgive or retain. The ruler who has been condemned by the advocate seems 
235 Carter, John, 290. 
236 Kierspel, Jews, 155-213. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
more likely to be Satan, since the crucifixion he set into motion has now been reversed 
(13:27).237 Fourthly, when Carter links 19:11 to 14:30, he highlights the concept of power:  
Jesus words to Pilate that Pilate has no power over him (19:11) echo Jesus 
statement of 14:30 that the ruler of this worldhas no power over me 
(NRSV). In part, the claim of no power refers to Jesus giving himself to die 
(10:11, 17-18). But beyond this, Jesus overcomes Pilate in his resurrection: 
Roman power is exposed to be no match for Gods life-giving power.238  
However, the NRSV that Carter cites has added the word power. The Greek, 
           , simply says nothing and  
is nowhere to be seen in the context. It seems unlikely, then, that     refers 
to Pilate, but it is possible that     refers to the same non-human character, 
Satan, who has been described as the instigator of the proceedings and is therefore the one 
ultimately overcome in the resurrection. 
In 19:11, the ambiguity of   opens a conceptual space for recategorization, 
certainly at this point a Jewish space, since it is established in contrast to Pilate.239 This verse 
tends to be read as blaming the Jews instead of the Romans, because that was the direction 
the later church took.240 Yet the greater guilt given to the Jews (19:11) does not eliminate 
237 It seems to me that the ambiguity could be deliberate, a way to include all those complicit in 
betraying servants of Jesus, whether, in Johns narrative, Satan, Judas, Caiaphas or the Jews, or, in the world 
of Johns auditors, any who betray them to the Romans. Furthermore, David Rensberger has proposed that it 
is just because of [Pilates] powerlessness, his lack of competence in this matter (as in truth), that those who 
call God Father yet betray the Son [the Jews] have the greater sin (19:11) (Politics, 409). Although I have 
argued against this characterization of Pilate, Rensbergers solution points towards the issue of answerability. 
It would not be righteous for any who answer to God as Father, then or now, to betray a fugitive to an 
unrighteous judge (Is. 16:3-5). So there seems to be a reference to a guilt that is commensurate with ones 
charge. This will be mentioned again in Section 7.2.5. 
238 Carter, John, 290. 
239 For the suggestion that later Jews were reporting Christians to prevent themselves being taken as 
Christians, and some cautions against this view, see Burton L. Visotzky, Methodological Considerations in 
the Study of John's Interaction with First-Century Judaism, in Life in Abundance: Studies of John's Gospel in 
Tribute to Raymond E. Brown, S.S., ed. John R. Donahue (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 2005), 91-107; 
Adele Reinhartz, John and Judaism: A Response to Burton Visotzky, in Life in Abundance: Studies of John's 
Gospel in Tribute to Raymond E. Brown, S.S., ed. John R. Donahue (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 2005), 
108-116. 
240 For a reading that notes the proclivity of Christians to blame the Jews (see, e.g., Luke 23:25; Acts 
2:36; 3:15; 19:39) and exonerate the Romans for Jesus death, see Brown, John, 2.884. For examples of 
blaming the Jews in the later church, see, for example, John Chrysostom, Adv. Jud. 6.2.10 and Susanna Drake, 
Slandering the Jew: Sexuality and Difference in Early Christian Texts, ed. Daniel Boyarin, Virginia Burrus, 
and Krueger Derek, Divinations: Rereading Late Ancient Religion (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press, 2013), 80-81. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
(pace Reinhartz) the guilt assigned to the Roman Pilate.241 Furthermore, the ambiguity of 
the referent suggests that no single individual shoulders all the responsibility or blame for 
Jesus crucifixion.242 
Regardless of the referent, Jesus takes it upon himself to apportion guilt (v. 11) and 
in so doing claims a measure of authoritywhich raises again, at the narrative level, the 
possibility that Jesus has connections to someone in Rome. And if he is choosing not to hold 
Pilate primarily responsible for the arrest and the flogging, this is good news for Pilate. At 
this point (and perhaps for these reasons) the Johannine Pilate tries asking to release Jesus.243 
This is out of prudence, not justice (pace Tolmie).244 Whereas the previous offers of release 
were reported as Pilates words (and were therefore viewed in this study as a way to test the 
response of the Jews), Pilates desire for Jesus release in verse 12, because it is stated by 
the narrator, must be taken at face value.245 In the first cycle, Pilates conversation with 
Jesus did not allay his concerns about his seditious activities, and he responded by having 
him flogged. In this second cycle, Pilates conversation with Jesus has not allayed his 
concerns about his possible connections to Rome. Scene B ends with Pilate even more 
concerned about proving his own loyalty to Caesar.  
6.2.2.3. Scene A: John 19:12b-18 
The response of the Jews (19:12) as they scream at Pilate brings up the question of 
loyalty again. The Jews challenge Pilates adherence to the requirements of being a  
 . This language of friendship was widely used in antiquity to mask a 
241 Adele Reinhartz, The Colonizer as Colonized: Intertextual Dialogue between the Gospel of John 
and Canadian Identity, in John and Postcolonialism: Travel, Space and Power, ed. Musa W. Dube and Jeffrey 
L. Staley, The Bible and Postcolonialism 7 (London: Sheffield Academic Press, 2002), 170-92 (178). 
242 Thompson, John, 386; see, similarly, 392. 
243 Those who also regard Pilate as sincere only beginning at this juncture include Bond, Pilate, 189; 
Lincoln, Truth, 133; Bennema, Pilate, 245. 
244 Tolmie, Pontius, 594.  
245 Piper, Characterisation, 151. Pace Carter who does not note that the narrator steps into the 
account in 19:12 and continues to characterize this effort to release Jesus as insincere and part of his ongoing 
mockery of the Jerusalem leaders (John, 308). 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
relationship of dependence and to diminish the attendant stigma.246 Athenobius, an envoy 
of Antiochus VII Sidetes, is similarly called the friend of the king (   ), 
according to 1 Macc 15:32.  
For the Romans, the amici Caesaris had special access to the emperor and the favours 
he had to bestow (Tacitus, Ann. 6.39).247 Yet, although the title of friend could be 
advantageous for the recipient, the power was all on the emperors side, and his friendship 
could be renounced at his whim at any moment (Epictetus, Diatr. 4.1.41-51).248 The friends 
of the emperor in residence in Rome were expected to be in attendance on him at various 
times and places (such as the morning salutatio) and often functioned as his advisors.249 Of 
special interest for the analysis of the Johannine trial narrative is the way the friendship of 
the emperor was expected to be repaid: through loyalty.250 
To whom, exactly, the historical Pilate owed loyalty has been the subject of much 
discussion.251 One possibility is that he gained his appointment from L. Aelius Sejanus, the 
prefect of the Praetorian Guard who was quite powerful at the time of Pilates appointment. 
However, after he fell out of favour, Tiberius rewarded the legions in Syria, because they 
alone had consecrated no image of Sejanus among their standards (Suetonius, Tib. 48 
[Rolfe, LCL]), which suggests that not everyone supported him even when he was in 
favour.252 Sejanus fall from power seems to have occurred at about the time of Jesus 
246 Crook, Fictive-Friendship, 5/7. See also Craig Williams extensive engagement with the 
differences between amicitia and friendship and the difficulties of writing about the Roman cultural unit of 
amicitia without evaluating it through the lens of the present-day cultural unit of friendship [Reading Roman 
Friendship (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012), 26-54]. 
247 Saller, Patronage, 43-44; Andrew Wallace-Hadrill, The Imperial Court, in CAH, ed. Alan K. 
Bowman, Edward Champlin, and Andrew Lintott (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 283-308 
(300); Eck, Emperor, 200-201, 206-207, 212; Winter, Divine, 29-30, 69-70. For examples of  
in Ephesus, see Tilborg, Reading, 197-99; van den Heever, Space, 235 n. 100, 237. 
248 Millar, Emperor, 113. Millar gives an example of a man who committed suicide upon evidence 
that he had lost the emperors favour (Plutarch, Mor. 508 A-B). 
249 Williams, Reading, 46 n. 107. 
250 Richard Saller, Status and Patronage, in CAH, ed. Alan K. Bowman, Peter Garnsey, and Dominic 
Rathbone (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 817-54 (842). 
251 For the history of the debate, see Bond, Pilate, xiii-xvi. For arguments against a connection 
between Pilate and Sejanus based on Pilates coins, see Bond, Pilate, 21-23. 
252 Paul L. Maier, Sejanus, Pilate, and the Date of the Crucifixion, Church History 37.1 (1968): 3-
13 (8-9). 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
crucifixion (Dio Cassius, Roman History 11.5).253 Furthermore, Philo specifically calls 
Pilate the subordinate () of Tiberius, which suggests that his relations with the 
emperor were of primary concern (Embassy 38.299). Also, when the people ( ) of 
Judaea were dissatisfied with Pilate (300), it was to Tiberius that those in office (  ) 
sent their petition (303). Josephus also specifies that Pilate was sent to Judaea by Tiberius 
(J.W. 2.9.2 169). It is true that the wording of these passages could be nothing more than a 
way to recognize Tiberius ultimate authority; however, Sejanus execution may have made 
Pilates position vis  vis Tiberius particularly precarious. Certainly, the title   
 in John 19:12 was one that would refer the Johannine Pilate to Caesar and to his 
relationship of dependence on him.254 
Fergus Millar notes precisely this connection between delegation and constraint in 
the amici of the emperor: The status itself is quite frequently advertised by the emperors in 
their letters, when they refer to provincial governors or other officials involved. This may  
in certain cases be intended precisely to demonstrate the emperors confidence and lend the 
man authority in dealing with the matter at hand.255 Yet, on the other hand, this status might 
also on occasion be used to bring pressure on him to behave in certain ways.256 Indeed 
Epictetus, writing in the early second century CE, describes a   , who is 
criticized for his undignified public manner (Diatr. 3.4.2). Thus, for Pilates fictive-
friendship with Caesar to be noted in the trial narrative moves the conversation into a form 
of resistance to power that is typical of oppressed groups, one where words such as 
friendship are used as euphemisms for power, and thus can be co-opted as the basis for 
253 See also the possible connection between the fall of Sejanus and the shields Pilate set up in 
Tiberius honour (Bond, Pilate, 46). 
254 Bond, Pilate, 189-90; Crook, Fictive-Friendship, 7/7; G. H. R. Horsley, New Documents 
Illustrating Early Christianity: A Review of the Greek Inscriptions and Papyri Published in 1978 3 (Sydney: 
Macquarie University, 1983), 87-89; Richey, Roman, 169-70. 
255 Millar, Emperor, 115. 
256 Millar, Emperor, 116.  
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
appeals from below.257 By this pointed reference to his friendship with Caesar, the Jews 
pressure Pilate to remember his own loyalty. 
The tension between loyalty to Jesus and loyalty to the emperor is made even starker 
in verse 12b: The one who makes himself the emperor opposes Caesar.258 The referent 
within the passage is clearly Jesus, and the focus is on his actions. As has been discussed 
above, Jesus is not a threat to Roman occupation, pace Lincoln, simply because of this 
characterization of his claimsthe verb  points to some actions of Jesus that might be 
seen as treasonous, perhaps the triumphal entry into Jerusalem (12:12-19).259 Pilate is now 
caught between two choices, either of which might cause him to appear disloyal to Caesar. 
The Jews have raised the issue of Pilates dependence on Caesar in the context of his 
attempt to release Jesus. If Pilate acquits Jesus despite the prompting of the Jews, he would 
have to answer to Rome if Jesus later proved to be seditious.260 However, the reverse is true 
as well. If Pilate crucifies Jesus at the prompting of the Jews, he would have to answer to 
Rome if Jesus later proved to have imperial connections. Ultimately, he listen[s] to the 
words of the Jews (19:13) which, as they demand Pilates loyalty to Caesar, seem to 
imply their own.261  
6.2.2.4. Excursus: Who sits down in John 19:13? 
If Pilate next sits Jesus at the , the image of Jesus as imperator is described 
again in the narrative.262 However, the identity of the one who sits at the  in John 19:13 
257 Scott, Domination, 94. 
258 Lincoln, Gospel, 468-69; Brant, John, 249. 
259 Section 6.1.5; Lincoln, Truth, 128, 133.  
260 Bernard, St. John, 2.621. 
261 See the distinction between  with genitive versus  with accusative. Whereas in 19:8-9, 
it was the sound of the phrase   that seems to have made Pilate afraid, in 19:13 he is listening to the 
meaning of their words. See BDR 173; Brown, John, 2.880; Blinzler, Prozess, 350; Skinner, Trial, 179 n. 35. 
Also, it is these words in this verse rather than this phrase as in verse 8 because of the plural   
 rather than the    of verse 8 (, BDAG 1a). 
262 The question of whether Jesus or Pilate sits on the judgement seat is complicated and contested. 
For a summary of scholars on each (and on both) sides of the issue, see Brown, Death, 2.1389. Bekken is 
ambiguous in his reading, as he sometimes describes Pilate sitting and sometimes references Jesus being seated 
(Lawsuit, 109, 113, 206, 256, 267). 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
depends primarily on the verb , which can be used either transitively (so that Pilate 
seats Jesus) or intransitively (so that Pilate seats himself). The two other uses of this verb in 
the Fourth Gospel are intransitive: in both cases (8:2; 12:14) Jesus seats himself; in the 
second case, he seats himself specifically on a young donkey.263 The intransitive use is the 
most common among New Testament texts.264 However, transitive uses do occur, both with 
an explicit direct object (1 Cor 6:4) and without (some witnesses, such as Codex Bezae, of 
Acts 2:30).265 Ephesians 1:20 is most like the use in John 19:13, in that, in both cases, a verb 
other than  is followed by a direct object, and then  is coordinated with the first 
verb (with ) and the direct object is not repeated. In Ephesians 1:20, however, it is clear 
that after God raised Jesus, he then seated him at his right hand.266 Thus, it is possible that 
the direct object might only be omitted when the meaning of the sentence is clear from the 
context. Even then, some scribes added a direct object pronoun in Eph 1:20.267 There is no 
record of such an insertion in John 19:13.268  
This demonstrates not that the transitive reading is impossible, but that the 
intransitive is the most obvious; indeed, early interpreters do not mention a transitive reading 
as a possibility.269 Therefore, de la Potterie goes too far when he asserts that lemploi 
transitif de  en Jn 19,13 sans un pronom  qui suit, na rien qui doive tonner; 
cest mme la construction tout  fait normale.270 On the other hand, Neyreys designation 
263 Joseph Verheyden, De la Potterie on John 19,13, in The Death of Jesus in the Fourth Gospel, ed. 
G. Van Belle, BETL 200 (Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2007), 817-37 (831). As Verheyden notes, there 
is a textual variant that brings 8:2 into question. 
264 Matt 5:1; 13:48; 19:28; 20:21; 23:2; 25:31; 26:36; Mark 9:35; 10:37; 11:7; 12:41; 14:32; 16:19; 
Luke 4:20; 5:3; 14:28, 31; 16:6; 19:30; 24:49; Acts 2:3; 8:31; 12:21; 13:14; 16:13; 18:11; 25:6, 17; 1 Cor 10:7; 
2 Thess 2:4; Heb 1:3; 8:1; 10:12; 12:2; Rev 3:21; 20:4. Mark 10:40 and similarly Matt 20:23 are ambiguous; 
they could be understood either as to seat yourselves (reflexive) or to seat you (transitive, but without 
expressed direct object in Greek). 
265 De la Potterie, Jsus, 219, 225. 
266 Blinzler, Prozess, 347; Brown, Death, 2.1390; Verheyden, De la Potterie, 831-32.  
267 Blinzler, Prozess, 347; Brown, Death, 2.1390; Verheyden, De la Potterie, 832. 
268 Brown, Death, 2.1390. 
269 Verheyden, De la Potterie, 817, 819. Blinzler notes as well that no early translations understand 
 as transitive (Prozess, 349). 
270 De la Potterie, Jsus, 225; see, similarly, 233. Note, too, that, while he is correct that the direct 
object is necessary for the second of two coordinated verbs in 19:18 in order to clarify the meaning, he is 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
of the intransitive reading as the literal one seems odd, especially in light of his 
acknowledgement that [g]rammatical studies support both readings.271 
Is it possible that this verse is intentionally ambiguous? The argument against such a 
reading seems to have originated with Pre D. Mollats insight, as reported by de la Potterie:  
[Q]uand Jean emploie une expression en deux significations distinctes, il 
sagit de deux comprhensions diffrentes dune mme ralit, lune sur le 
plan matriel, sensible, lautre sur le plan symbolique, sans quil faille pour 
cela rattacher chacune delles  un sens grammaticalement diffrent dune 
mme formule. Dans lexplication propose [that of a Johannine double 
entendre], le sens matriel serait li  lemploi intransitive de , le 
sens thologique  lemploi transitif. Grammaticalement, les deux sont 
possibles, mais pas simultanment: il faut choisir.272 
Grammatical ambiguity seems to exist elsewhere, such as in John 19:1, 22, in that 
the verbs indicate that it is Pilate who scourges and writes (see also 19:19) when actually 
those tasks would have been done by his soldiers or subordinates.273 However, those usages 
are perhaps not ambiguities, but causative (also called factitive) constructions.274  
Latin and Greek sometimes used a morphological construction to express causation, 
such as, for Greek, -.275 However, in translating the Hebrew hifil in the LXX, Greek used 
a variety of constructions, including analytic causatives where a verb (such as ) is 
introduced into the phrase to express causation (e.g., Judges 16:26a).276 Such verbs could 
also be translated simply in their usual form, with the causative aspect understood. For 
incorrect to say that it is necessary in 19:40 to distinguish between Jesus and his body (225-26 n. 3). These are 
not two separate things. 
271 Neyrey, Cultural, 430-31.  
272 De la Potterie, Jsus, 218 n. 2; Moore, Empire, 56-59. Blinzler picks this up as well (Prozess, 
348). Note that de la Potterie admits a double meaning, but only in the sense that for Jesus to sit on the  
has both a historical and a symbolic religious meaning (Jsus, 242 n. 2). Keener argues against this kind of 
double meaning because Pilate is afraid of Jesus, not mocking him (John, 2.1129; cf. Barrett, Gospel, 544). 
However, Pilates fear is not said to be of Jesus and this thesis has argued that what seems to be mockery 
serves a very serious purpose in the Johannine trial narrativethat of testing loyalties. 
273 Bond, Pilate, 190 n. 105. 
274 Section 6.2.2.4; Brown, John, 2.901. Lincoln adds 21:24 as well (Lincoln, Truth, 153). This is pace 
Gniesmer who argues that in 19:1 [d]er rmische Prfekt wird so als brutaler Machtmensch gezeichnet 
(Proze, 279, cf. 275; and, similar to Gniesmer, Carter, John, 300). 
275 Mark Janse, Aspects of Bilingualism in the History of the Greek Language, in Bilingualism in 
Ancient Society: Language Contact and the Written Text, ed. James N. Adams, Mark Janse, and Simon Swain 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 332-90 (371, 373). 
276 Janse, Aspects, 375. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
example, although  is used in its usual sense of to reign to translate the qal (for 
example in 2 Kgdms 5:5), it is also used in 1 Kgdms 15:35 to translate a hifil with the 
meaning to cause to reign.277 Khner describes this usage: Sowie in anderen Sprachen, so 
wird auch im Griechischen nicht selten das transitive Aktiv gebraucht, wenn das Subjekt 
eine Handlung nicht selbst vollbringt, sondern durch Andere vollbringen lsst.278 The 
Gospel of John is un vangile qui se montre friand de ce genre de verbes, especially in 
John 18:1-19:42.279 
However, John 19:16-18 does demonstrate ambiguity. Those who take charge of 
Jesus and crucify him are the chief priests, according to the closest referent to the pronoun 
 (v. 16), and it is not until verse 23 that the text clarifies the matter by mentioning the 
soldiers.280 One might, perhaps, argue that an ambiguous pronoun is not the same kind of 
grammatical ambiguity as a choice between a transitive and intransitive use of a verb. 
However, any kind of ambiguity can act as a marker for the presence of a hidden transcript, 
and languages express ambiguity in a wide variety of ways.281 
Another argument posited against understanding John 19:13 as a Johannine double 
entendre is that it is not usual for the second meaning to be the opposite of the first.282 
Zabala lists Johns double meanings without opposition to support this argument:283 When 
277 Janse, Aspects, 375. 
278 Raphael Khner, Ausfhrliche Grammatik der griechischen Sprache, 2nd ed., vol. 2, part 1 
(Hannover: Hahn, 1870), 88 373.6. Thanks to Frdrique Biville and Jean Schneider for this reference. Latin 
also uses factitives, especially for punishments, and high-status people [Frdrique Biville, noncs factitifs 
en latin: Syntaxe et smantique, in De vsv: tudes de syntaxe latine offertes en hommage  Marius Lavency, 
ed. Dominique Longre, Bibliothque des cahiers de l'institut de linguistique de Louvain 70 (Louvain-la-
Neuve: Peeters, 1995), 31-44 (36)]. See also Jannaris who points out that such a construction is common to 
all languages, and proceeds from the desire for brevity [An Historical Greek Grammar, Chiefly of the Attic 
Dialect as Written and Spoken from Classical Antiquity Down to the Present Time, Founded Upon the Ancient 
Texts, Inscriptions, Papyri and Present Popular Greek (London: Macmillan, 1897), 359]. The middle voice 
can also sometimes function as a causative (Jannaris, Historical, 361). 
279 Luc Devillers, La croix de Jsus et les  (Jn 19,16) Crux interpretum ou cl 
sotriologique?, in The Death of Jesus in the Fourth Gospel, ed. G. Van Belle, BETL 200 (Leuven: Leuven 
University Press, 2007), 385-407 (393). He gives 19:1, 6, 10, 15, 18, 19, 21-22 as examples (394, 407). 
280 The meaning of this ambiguity will be explored further in Section 7.1.4. 
281 Sections 1.3.2 and 5.1.4. 
282 Brown, John, 2.881. 
283 Artemio M. Zabala, The Enigma of John 19:13 Reconsidered (a Survey of the Contemporary 
Discussion and a Suggestion), South East Asia Journal of Theology 22.2 (1981): 16-28 (18 n. 10). 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
Jesus declares  (John 19:30) both his mission and his life are concluded. When 
Jesus speaks of the need to be born  (3:3), he is referring to a spiritual birth that is 
both from above and subsequent in time to the first. When Jesus prophesies that the son 
of man must be lifted up/exalted (3:14),  refers to both Jesus exaltation and his lifting 
up on the cross. However, in each of these cases, Zabala has smoothed out the two meanings 
so that they complement one another. Instead, in John 19:30, the opposition rests on the 
ambiguity of the subject of . While it is possible to harmonize the end of Jesus 
life with the completion of his mission, a declaration that seems to announce the end of 
Jesus life directly contradicts Johns other statements about the life that was in Jesus and 
that he brought for others (1:4; 5:26; 11:25; 14:6 and, e.g., 3:15-16, 36). Even the life that 
he lays down, he intends to take up again (10:11, 15, 17). Jesus mission is complete, but his 
life is not ended. In Zabalas next example, Jesus introduces to Nicodemus a spiritual re-
birth that is from above, and again and from above are, indeed, not in opposition. 
However, in this case the text itself clarifies the double meaning by means of Nicodemus 
misunderstanding (3:4). The meaning of again leads Nicodemus to think of a second birth 
through ones mother, and it is that birth that is contrasted with the entrance into the kingdom 
of God which requires a birth from above, by the Spirit (3:5-8; 14:16). While again and 
from above are not opposites, flesh and spirit, the double meaning they point to, are 
contrary to each other. Finally, while glorification might be harmonized with uplifting, to be 
crucified is not to be glorified.284 Indeed, double entendres are specifically useful when 
describing something undesirable or even improper or indelicate such as a crucifixion.285 
In the Gospel of John, la croix, instrument de supplice et dinfamie pour Jsus de Nazareth, 
284 Tat-siong Benny Liew, for example, describes the harmonization between crucifixion, 
glorification and community as rather intricate. Crucifixion is glorification for both God and Jesus in John, 
because it manifests Jesuss unity with God, and this manifestation of unity will result in a community that also 
manifests the unity between God and Jesus. This double manifestation will, in turn, be a witness that leads to 
belief, and thus even greater glorification (13.31-35; 17.11, 20-23) (Ambiguous, 196 n. 10). 
285 Van der Watt, Double, 475. See also Wayne Meeks who calls this Johannine double meaning a 
jarring bit of gallows-humor [Man from Heaven in Johannine Sectarianism, JBL 91.1 (1972): 44-72 (62)]. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
devient pour le Roi-Messie un instrument de salut, de victoire.286 A contrast between the 
two possible interpretations, then, cannot be taken as proof that there is no Johannine word 
play present in 19:13, especially given other examples of contrasts and irony throughout the 
Gospel.287  
If both meanings are possible, is there any reason to discount the transitive reading? 
Some factors, namely arguments on the basis of the presence or absence of the article (the 
articular use being reserved, according to de la Potterie, for a permanent structuresee 
below) and arguments about formulaic usages, can be set aside by looking at two passages 
in Josephus and two in the canonical New Testament.288 In describing Floruss impromptu 
tribunal in Jerusalem (J.W. 2.14.8 301), Josephus says that standing a judgement seat 
before them, he sat down (    ) and all of the leading men of 
the city stood before the tribunal (author translations,   ). The context 
is clearly one of judicial inquiry, yet neither    nor   , the phrases 
that de la Potterie considers formulaic, is ever used.289 Although    occurs in 
2.14.9 308, the same concept is also conveyed by    (2.14.8 301). 
And while the platform is clearly temporary (2.14.8 301), the article is used in both of the 
phrases. De la Potteries explanation for the use of the article in this passage is questionable. 
If, as he says, le tribunal, une fois install, peut et doit tre considr comme le tribunal 
286 De la Potterie, Jsus, 242. Van der Watt similarly describes the contrast between the shame of 
the cross and the glory it brings (Double, 480). 
287 Duke provides a discussion of metaphor and irony and distinguishes them by the relationship of 
the two layers of meaning: Irony says the world of reality is other than the world of appearance. Metaphor 
says the world of reality is more than the world of appearance (Irony, 144). Furthermore, Phillips is correct in 
his caution that the decision about whether meanings are double or not must be made on the basis of Greek, 
not English semantic domains (Prologue, 67). This thesis will not attempt to analyse each occurrence of irony 
or metaphor in detail but simply notes these elements to point out that both complimentary and oppositional 
layers of meaning are present in the Fourth Gospel, so the possibility of two meanings for John 19:13 cannot 
be opposed on the basis that these meanings would be in opposition. Other examples could be adduced, such 
as Barretts description of the investigation in ch. 9, where ostensibly the blind man is examined while through 
him Jesus himself is being tried, only to turn the tables on his accusers by judging them (Barrett, Gospel, 544; 
Duke, Irony, 117-26). 
288 De la Potterie, Jsus, 227-29, 231. 
289 De la Potterie, Jsus, 227-28. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
official, it is unclear how one might subsequently distinguish between the temporary and 
the official and at which point one ought to expect the article to be used.290 In sum, at least 
in this first example, the use of the article is (as de la Potterie himself notes) anaphoric, but 
there seems to be no consistent, typical formula to refer to a tribunal, temporary or 
otherwise.291 
In the second relevant use, Josephus reports that Pilate placed his troops in position, 
while he himself came to the speakers stand (    ). This had been 
constructed in the stadium, which provided concealment for the army that lay in wait (Ant. 
18.3.1 57 [Feldman, LCL]).292 The article is used in this passage as a particular article, to 
describe the temporary , that is then particularized  by a further descriptor in the 
next sentence.293 Furthermore, since de la Potterie himself describes his rule for the article 
as une rgle  peu prs constante, it cannot be used to determine the interpretant of any 
one specific passage such as John 19:13, especially given the host of examples for an 
intransitive interpretant.294 
The sense of what today might be called convening the court is variously expressed 
as well, despite de la Potteries argument that this is a meaning of the anarthrous use of the 
phrase.295 I Corinthians 6:4 has the sense of seated for judgement although it only uses 
 and a direct object. Furthermore, in Acts 25:10 Paul is said to be standing before 
290 De la Potterie, Jsus, 229 n. 3. 
291 The Anaphorisch: Rckbeziehung () auf Erwhntes, Bekanntes oder als bekannt 
Gesetztes. Thus, [b]ei Neueinfhrung von bisher Unbekanntem ohne Zusammenfassung der Gattung steht 
daher kein Artikel (BDR 252). 
292 De la Potterie mentions this passage but does not note the presence of the article (Jsus, 229 n. 
1). The connection between a lack of article and a temporary structure is picked up by Verheyden although 
also without noting this exception (De la Potterie, 834-35). 
293 Herbert Weir Smyth, and Gordon M. Messing, Greek Grammar, 2nd ed. (Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 1956), 287 1120.d. Note that Brown mistakes some of de la Potteries argument (Death, 
2.1391). De la Potterie did not use the presence or absence of the article to distinguish between the judgment 
chair and the judicial platform but between a permanent versus a temporary tribunal (Jsus, 231). He did, 
however, discuss the possibility of other chairs placed on the platform, but this is deduced from context, not 
from the articular or anarthrous use of  (234). 
294 De la Potterie, Jsus, 227, emphasis mine. 
295 De la Potterie, Jsus, 229-31. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
Caesars court (   ), although he is actually standing before Festus 
in Caesarea. In Acts 25:6, the Greek text is    , a participial phrase with 
the general judicial meaning that is variously translated as took his seat on the tribunal 
(NJB, NRS, ESV) or took his seat in the court (CEB), or convened the court (NIV). Thus, 
while Zabala argues that   cannot have this general judicial meaning in 19:13 
because neither the Gospels author nor its auditors would know such specific terminology, 
his argument can be strengthened by noting that the consistent usage that de la Potterie posits 
does not exist.296 Therefore, a lack of an article in 19:13 does not support a transitive reading 
of . It is not the case, pace Blinzler, that the phrase cannot have such a figurative 
meaning, but neither does it necessarily have that meaning.297 It depends on whether the 
context blows up a convocation or simply a seat. 
The examples above demonstrate that these phrases were not used consistently or 
formulaically in the first century CE. The word , moreover, cannot even be rigidly 
defined aside from context since it might mean a step (Deut 2:5 LXX), a dais (Esdras A 
9:42), or, by metonymy, the judgement seat set on a dais (Josephus, Ant. 8.5.2 140).298 The 
best way to identify the interpretant in any given context is by the process of abduction that 
revises a first guess based on whether the verb that follows has a person sitting or standing 
on the  (see J.W. 2.9.3 172 and Ant. 4.8.12 209). However, if multiple persons are 
said to be sitting, or the person said to be on the  is sitting on something else (e.g., a 
chair), one would then assume that it is the platform that is meant (Ant. 13.4.2 84; 17.8.4 
201).  
In the analysis of John 19:13, then, it seems that the intransitive meaning is the most 
likely, but that intentional ambiguity is possible, and a technical use based on the absence of 
296 Zabala, Enigma, Part 1, 22; de la Potterie, Jsus, 231. 
297 Blinzler, Prozess, 356. 
298 , BDAG 175; Blinzler, Prozess, 355-56. Brown reverses the metonymy (Death, 2.1388). 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
the article is not to be found.299 The  is some sort of judgement seat, but whether 
permanent or temporary, the text does not specify. It is possible that the author expected 
those details to be known already by his auditors, or to be derived from the words 
 and/or . If so, archaeologists have not so far been able to illuminate 
these references. Furthermore, it is possible that the lack of an article has been influenced 
by the Latin sedere pro tribunali.300 However, if this phrase were a calque of Latin, one 
would expect it to be    as in Josephus Ant. 14.10.19 240, or, even better, 
  as in P. Thad. 15 or Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History 2.10.1 or 4.9.2.301 Thus, 
while Latin influence may provide a reason for the absence of an article, it is no more 
definitive than other suggestions. Even if it were accepted, it would simply provide another 
Haftpunkt reinforcing the Roman context of the narrative. It would not disambiguate the 
meaning. 
Justin, 1 Apol. 35.6 and Gos. Pet. 7 are sometimes brought into this discussion, since 
in both cases Jesus is seatedthe verb  is transitive.302 These texts are from the second 
century CE or, for the gospel, perhaps reaching back in its composition to the first, but their 
relationship to the Gospel of John is debated.303 The most that can be asserted is that they 
demonstrate that such a version of the story existed and, if anterior to the Gospel of John, 
could have influenced its composition.304 It must be noted, however, that, pace de la Potterie, 
it is not la formule     that is found in the Gos. Pet. but   
299 Therefore, de la Potteries argument that Jesus is being installed as a judge and Verheydens 
conclusion that opts for the temporary structure in John 19:13, both based on the lack of an article, can be 
dismissed (de la Potterie, Jsus, 232; Verheyden, De la Potterie, 834-35). 
300 See the argument in this thesis regarding   in 19:7 in Sections 3.2.2 and 4.4.1.  
301 On calques, see Section 3.2.3. 
302 De la Potterie, Jsus, 219, 220; Brown, Death, 2.1392. 
303 L.W. Hurtado, Christology, DLNT 182; J.B. Green, Peter, Gospel of, DLNT 928-29; Blinzler, 
Prozess, 354-55; Charles E. Hill, The Orthodox Gospel: The Reception of John in the Great Church Prior 
to Irenaeus, in Legacy of John: Second-Century Reception of the Fourth Gospel, ed. Tuomas Rasimus, 
NovTSup 132 (Leiden: Brill, 2010), 233-300 (261-62). 
304 The difficulties with the possibilities for relationship between these texts is well discussed by 
Zabala, Enigma, Part 1, 24-28. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
.305 Furthermore, in one or both cases, depending on the way one reads the Greek 
in Justins Apology, the author has provided a pronominal direct object so that there is no 
question that the verb is transitive.306 Thus, these texts do not offer definitive support for the 
transitive meaning in John 19:13. They only demonstrate possibilities.307 
Certainly, the meaning of John 19:13, if the  was to be read as transitive, might 
have been clarified by the addition of , especially as one naturally expects the judge 
not the accused to sit on the judgment seat.308 However, de la Potterie has provided 
examples in the Fourth Gospel where two transitive verbs connected with  only required 
one direct object attached to the first verb.309 These examples are helpful, but their weight is 
lessened when one notes that in all of those cases there is no ambiguity about the intended 
recipient of the action.310 Furthermore, even without ambiguity, in many of these cases there 
exist witnesses, sometimes the most ancient ones, which do include a direct object for the 
second verb (7:34; 10:12; 11:44; 12:3, 47; 14:7, 17; 18:31; 19:16).311 And although de la 
Potterie claims that la tendance de la tradition manuscrite a t dajouter un complement, 
non de le supprimer, in four or five of these examples it seems at least possible that the 
reverse has occurred.312 The transitive use for  in John 19:13, then, does not require a 
direct object, but the lack of one still leaves the possibility of the intransitive use open. Once 
again, the examples do not definitively decide the question for either side. In such a 
305 De la Potterie, Jsus, 219. The text of the Gospel of Peter is that published in Andrew E. Bernhard, 
Other Early Christian Gospels: A Critical Edition of the Surviving Greek Manuscripts, ed. Mark Goodacre, 
LNTS 315 (London: T&T Clark, 2006), 58. 
306 Verheyden, De la Potterie, 832-33. 
307 Zabala, Enigma, Part 1, 27-28. 
308 Zabala, Enigma, Part 1, 21. 
309 John 5:21; 6:11; 7:34; 10:12; 11:44; 12:3, 47; 13:5; 14:7, 17; 17:26; 18:12-13, 31; 19:6, 16, 19; 
21:13 (de la Potterie, Jsus, 219 n. 1, 223-25). 
310 Verheyden, De la Potterie, 823. 
311 Verheyden, De la Potterie, 823-25. Verheyden goes on to provide plausible explanations for the 
absence of a second direct object in most of de la Potteries other cases as well (825-30). 
312 De la Potterie, Jsus, 224 n. 9. The passages where NA28 and UBS5 suggest that the direct object 
is original are 11:44; 12:3; 14:7; 18:31. The direct object in 7:34 is marked as disputed. Verheyden provides 
plausible explanations for the absence of a second direct object in some of these, but the existence of other 
exemplars such as Mark 14:44; Luke 24:42-43 and Acts 20:11 means that the transitive reading cannot be 
completely disproved in this way (De la Potterie, 825-30). 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
discussion, even one counterexample demonstrates a possibility for interpreting John 
19:13.313 
De la Potterie further contends that the   prepositional phrase makes better 
sense of the flow of motion being depicted when it is understood to modify the first verb, 
one leads someone into a place; one does not sit into a place.314 While I would argue 
that both verbs should be taken as causativesPilate led Jesus outside likely means that 
he caused him to be led outeven with this modification, de la Potterie makes a reasonable 
point. It is countered, however, by the equally reasonable argument that John is not usually 
precise in his use of prepositions and that   can be understood in the sense of  
.315 In that case, there is no reason to disrupt the sense of the text in the order it is given.  
With the question open, the context of the passage must be brought to bear on the 
development of an interpretant for this Sign. The hidden transcript provides a basis on which 
to distinguish between what Roman-aware auditors might think likely for a Roman governor, 
and what might be communicated ambiguously in this verse. Ambiguityan important 
aspect of communication within a hidden transcriptquite clearly describes    
     as the discussion so far demonstrates. Without pretending 
to be offering a definitive solution, what follows is my sense of the interpretant, based on 
abduction through this passage using a Roman encyclopaedia. 
313 This is true especially if one admits the possibility of a double meaning. If that is precluded, then 
probability might weigh more heavily (Zabala, Enigma, Part 1, 21). 
314 De la Potterie, Jsus, 221-23. 
315 BDR 205; Brown, Death, 2.1391; see, also, Zabala, Enigma, Part 1, 19-20; Verheyden, De la 
Potterie, 822. Verheyden concludes that there is no reason to suppose that   should be thought to 
modify . Furthermore, de la Potterie discounts examples of  used with  from the LXX because it 
is from a different era (Jsus, 222 n. 2). However, this thesis has already shown the importance of the Greek 
Bible for New Testament Greek (Section 3.2). See, e.g., 1 Kdms 5:11; Is 47:1. Note that Blinzler suggests that 
the refers to a height upon which Pilate ascended to sit (Prozess, 348). That is certainly a possibility, but will 
not be debated in this thesis. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
First, I am unconvinced by the assertion that the dignity of the Roman people makes 
it unlikely or impossible that a governor would sit a criminal on a  in jest.316 Romans 
did sometimes behave inappropriately to mock others (cf. Josephus, J.W. 2.12.1 224). Pilate 
is even said to have mixed the blood of Galileans with their sacrifices (Luke 13:1), quite 
inappropriate behaviour by any standards.317 Jesus is placed on the judgement seat in other 
texts (Gospel of Peter 7; Justin, Apology 35.6), although in neither case is it a Roman who 
seats him there. The context of mockery (pace Zabala) is, indeed, present in the Johannine 
trial narrative (19:2-5) although, I shall argue, not at the .318 Additionally, standards of 
behaviour have changed over time, and it seems dangerous to evaluate probable decorum 
without explicit evidence.  
De la Potterie agrees with those who find it unreasonable to think that Pilate would 
sit a prisoner on his own curule chair, but solves the dilemma differently. He argues for the 
transitive reading but proposes to translate  as platform, thus describing Pilate seating 
Jesus on the same platform, but in a different seat.319 It is true that a  could be a platform 
used to seat more than one person (Josephus, Ant. 13.4.2 84; Plutarch, Mor. 207.3). 
However, there does not seem to be any reason to read a switch in chairs into the text except 
to relieve the interpreters discomfort with the image portrayed.320 Ultimately, the lack of 
pronominal direct object for the second verb as well as the lack of scribal evidence for its 
316 Pace Keener, John, 2.1129. De la Potterie finds it necessary to propose a different seat for Jesus in 
order to answer this argument (Jsus, 219-20, 233-34; cf. below, in this section). The argument that if Pilate 
had seated Jesus he would then have addressed himself to him rather than to the Jews seems to me to be 
equally without weight (Brown, Death, 2.1392-93). See Gniesmer, who also finds this unconvincing (Proze, 
339-40). 
317 Barrett, Gospel, 544. There was no religious-secular dichotomy in antiquity so this narrative cannot 
be dismissed on the grounds that Pilate might be irreverent in one sphere and not the other. However, whether 
his irreverence, or tales of his irreverence, towards local gods might provide a precedent for irreverence towards 
Roman institutions is less certain. The story does demonstrate, however, that the possibility cannot be 
dismissed out of hand. 
318 See below in this section; Zabala, Enigma, Part 1, 24. 
319 De la Potterie, Jsus, 233-34. Brown agrees that if one were to take  transitively, this 
translation is more probable (Death, 2.1389). As mentioned above, however, pace Brown, de la Potteries 
argument for a second seat for Jesus on the platfrom does not depend on the absence of the article but on 
historical probability (de la Potterie, Jsus, 234; Brown, Death, 2.1391). 
320 See, similarly, Artemio M. Zabala, The Enigma of John 19:13 Reconsidered (a Survey of the 
Contemporary Discussion and a Suggestion), South East Asia Journal of Theology 23.1 (1982): 1-10 (1-3). 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
insertion does suggest that Pilate seats himself at the . However, this does not preclude 
a second meaning, part of a hidden transcript that seats Jesus as judge.321  
Secondly, as part of the abductive process, the dramatic force of John 19:13 must 
also be taken into account.322 This verse has often been set in parallel with John 19:5.323 In 
each, there is a slowed pacing of the action. In both, the narrator takes time for description 
as Jesus emerges. Then, Pilate speaks and in verse 14 his words seem much clearer than they 
were in verse 5:    .324 Blinzler argues that it is nicht gut vorstellbar that 
John might propose eine plumpe, geschmacklose und noch dazu sinnlose Wiederholung der 
Ecce-homo-Szene especially after the Jews have threatened Pilate in verse 12.325 The part 
of the argument based on propriety has already been discussed. Blinzlers point that Pilate 
would not continue with mockery after he has been threatened is well taken, but the issue is 
resolved in a reading that allows for both transitive and intransitive meanings. On one level 
Pilate continues to test the loyalty of the Jews, while in the hidden transcript John has Pilate 
say more than he knows.326  
The dramatic build-up of verses 13 and 14 to Pilates second presentation of Jesus 
this time explicitly as , suggest to Lincoln that the transitive meaning of the verb 
 is an additional part of Pilates humiliation of Jesus, which he employs to mock the 
Jews.327 Thus, Lincoln puts the transitive meaning at the literal level of the text and omits 
a figurative reading (or hidden transcript). This interpretation helpfully keeps verses 13 and 
14 together, since in both Pilate mocks Jesus, first by seating him in the judgement seat and 
321 For the connection between judge and emperor, see the beginning of this section. 
322 De la Potterie, Jsus, 220, 236, 238. 
323 Barrett, Gospel, 544; de la Potterie, Jsus, 240, 240 n. 1; Lincoln, Gospel, 469.  
324 On the dramatic importance of vv. 13-15, see de la Potterie, Jsus, 235 n. 2, 243; Duke, Irony, 
135; Brown, Death, 2.1389-90. 
325 Blinzler, Prozess, 349; Verheyden, De la Potterie, 819. 
326 De la Potterie, Jsus, 240. 
327 Lincoln, Truth, 134. Zabala suggests that the Gospels main focus is to make a theological 
pronouncement about Jesus kingship, and that the transitive meaning is unnecessary for this (Enigma, Part 
2, 6-8). This is true, although I think that a double entendre is a more Johannine solution. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
then by calling him . In the two-level meaning I have proposed, however, there is 
no mockery: at the narrative level, Pilate sits at the  and tests the Jews one final time 
(vv. 14-15). At the figurative level, Jesus is judge, and he is emperor.  
The conjoining of the roles of king and judge has been considered problematic by 
some.328 Zabala, opting for the intransitive reading of , suggests that the theme of 
judgement is subordinated to that of kingship.329 However, while the importance of 
witnessing and judgement throughout the Gospel cannot be denied (cf. 3:11-21), this 
explanation is unnecessary.330 It depends on a concept of separation of powers that is taken 
for granted in many modern societies but did that not exist in antiquity.331 Herod, for 
example, is described as wearing his royal robes and sitting on the  to deliver an 
address (Acts 12:21). Although most English versions translate Herods seat as throne, the 
Greek phrase is   .332 The emperor was also represented as a judge, and he 
travelled around the provinces to dispense justice.333 In 114-115 CE, for example, Trajan 
was in Antioch. Dio Cassius points out that many soldiers and many civilians had flocked 
thither from all sides in connexion with law-suits, embassies, business or sightseeing 
328 Charles H. Talbert, Reading John: A Literary and Theological Commentary on the Fourth Gospel 
and the Johannine Epistles, 2nd ed. (Macon, GA: Smyth & Helwys, 2005), 249; Brown, Death, 2.1392. De la 
Potterie argues for their being intertwined in the Johannine trial narrative without noting that they would not 
have been considered separate themes in antiquity (Jsus, 238-42). 
329 Zabala, Enigma, Part 2, 7. Lincoln explains that king as a title has been subordinated to witness 
(cf. 18:37); however, he also notes the Hebrew Bible references that join the two, such as Is 11:1-10 (Truth, 
135). Kings (or would-be kings) of Israel were clearly expected to judge (e.g., 2 Sam 15:4; 1 Kings 7:7; Prov 
20:8). Meeks only briefly discusses the juridical aspect of Moses mission and omits any reference to Ex 
18:13 or indeed Acts 7:27, 35 (Prophet-King, 306-307). However, in the latter, Moses is explicitly called ruler 
and judge, so the role of judge was clearly a part of the Israelite tradition about him. 
330 Lincoln, Truth, 193-207. 
331 Jan G. van der Watt, Family of the King: Dynamics of Metaphor in the Gospel According to John, 
ed. R. Alan Culpepper and Rolf Rendtorff, BibInt 47 (Leiden: Brill, 2000), 409. 
332 Exceptions include the New American Bible and New American Standard, (rostrum), New English 
Translation (judgment seat), and New Revised Standard (platform). 
333 Bernard Stolte, Jurisdiction and the Representation of Power, or the Emperor on Circuit, in The 
Representation and Perception of Roman Imperial Power: Proceedings of the Third Workshop of the 
International Network Impact of Empire (Roman Empire, c. 200 B.C. - A.D. 476), Netherlands Institute in 
Rome, March 20-23, 2002, ed. Lukas de Blois et al. (Amsterdam: J.C. Gieben, 2003), 261-68 (262); Millar, 
Emperor, 528-30. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
(Roman History 68.24.1-2).334 For Roman-aware auditors such an image would be part of 
the cultural unit of  and thus was available to form part of the hidden transcript in the 
Johannine trial narrative that dresses Jesus up in the robes of an emperor. Thus, there is no 
reason why presenting Jesus as a  would not entail seating him on a .  
At the narrative level, then, Pilate sits on his judgement seat and continues to refuse 
to commit himself on a local matter. The ambiguity of the verb  allows John to express 
a second meaning, making Jesus appear as judge, a typical role for a Roman imperator.335 
As noted above, the second meaning tends to negate the first, so the point of arrival for this 
discussion is that the Gospel of John portrays in a hidden transcript that it is Jesus, not Pilate, 
who is judgea conclusion that is supported by Jesus self-control, his questioning of Pilate, 
and one that has already been endorsed by many scholars.336 The additional element brought 
in by the arguments above is that seating Jesus as a judge, since judging was part of the 
Roman cultural unit of imperator, adds another example of Jesus portrayed as the emperor, 
repeated throughout the trial.337 
6.2.2.5. Scene A: John 19:12b-18 (cont.) 
After the dramatic build-up of verses 13 and 14a, one expects two important elements 
of a trial, die Feststellung, da der Angeklagte eines bestimmten Vergehens schuldig ist, 
und die Angabe, welche Strafe er dafr erhlt.338 So the Johannine Pilates words, Behold 
your king, come as something of a surprise.339 For Blinzler, the solution is to regard this as 
334 Millar, Emperor, 38. See also Seneca, Controv. 10.14; Suetonius, Vit. 9; Josephus, J.W. 7.5.4 124-
31; Millar, Emperor, 229; see, further, 528-37.  
335 Barrett, Bond and Ashton also take this verse to be intentionally ambiguous (Barrett, Gospel, 544; 
Ashton, Understanding, 227-28; Bond, Pilate, 190 n. 105). Brant suggests this possibility as well (John, 249). 
For more on the ambiguity inherent in a hidden transcript, see Sections 1.3.2 and 5.1.4. 
336 See list above, Section 6.2.2.2 n. 226. 
337 De la Potterie concludes that this reversal of judges serves Johns purpose in presenting Jesus as 
judge pronouncing a negative judgement on the Jews who reject him as king. This judgement, according to 
de la Potterie, is brought to completion at the cross (Jsus, 240-42). Section 7.1.4 will discuss the effect of 
having the Jews pronounce the verdict and sentence against Jesus. All that is asserted for the moment is that 
John uses ambiguity in 19:13 to communicate in a hidden transcript that Jesus, like Caesar, has a judicial role. 
338 Blinzler, Prozess, 351. 
339 De la Potterie, Jsus, 234. He notes that this absence a t fort bien senti par lauteur des Actes 
de Pilate (recension B), qui ajoute au rcit vanglique une condamnation en bonne et due forme (235-36, 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
an abbreviation for [d]ieser hat sich als Knig der Juden ausgegeben, thus providing the 
declaration of guilt and the particular offense; the latter is repeated on the titulus (19:19-
22).340 However, Roman law, as has been noted, does not regard simply posing as a king to 
be an offense. Furthermore, Pilate goes on to question the Jews again:    
; (v. 15).341 Thus,   does not seem to function as a verdict.342 Perhaps, 
as Zabala suggests, to look for a verdict in a narrative not intended as historical is otiose.343 
He interprets Pilates words only on the theological level.344 Yet, although the focus of the 
Johannine trial does not seem primarily historical, it is not uniquely theological either. At 
the narrative level, Pilate has been reluctant to judge a matter without cause but has used the 
trial in service of his appraisal of Jewish loyalties. So he takes one last opportunity to see the 
reaction of the Jews to the declaration of Jesus as   and then watches as the 
Jews pronounce the sentence (v. 15a) and the chief priests affirm their own loyalty to Rome 
(v. 15b).345 
This analysis of the conversation at the narrative level brings into question Pipers 
assertion that once the Jews challenge Pilates loyalty Pilate now has no way out.346 It is 
emphasis original). This may be the case, but the uncertainty in dating this passage makes it unclear whether 
this reaction should be attributed to the second century, or a later author (Pilate, Acts of, ODCC 1295). De la 
Potterie adds that, after such a dramatic build-up, one might expect the Johannine Pilate to pronounce a verdict 
that is at least clear (237). However, I am reluctant to build arguments on unsupported expectations. Blinzler 
calls the addition in the Acts of Pilate only a clarification, not an insertion, but this seems like special pleading 
(Prozess, 350). 
340 Blinzler, Prozess, 350. Furthermore, to argue that     is the verdict because Pilate 
is seated   is to introduce circularity into the discussion (356). The phrase on the titulus will be 
discussed in Section 6.2.2.6. 
341 De la Potterie, Jsus, 235. 
342 Pace, e.g., Carter who designates 19:12-16a Pilate pronounces sentence and comments that 
Pilate condemns Jesus (John, 309). Indeed, Jesus is certainly condemned, but only implicitly in verse 16. 
343 Zabala, Enigma, Part 2, 2-3. See, similarly, Verheyden, De la Potterie, 836. 
344 Zabala, Enigma, Part 2, 3.  
345 Thus, I agree with de la Potterie that this declaration of Pilates has un tout autre sens, both, in 
my view, a continuation of Pilates test of loyalty but also, with de la Potterie, une prophtie inconsciente 
(Jsus, 235, 240). The phrase can, then, along with 18:33, 39; 19:3, 19-22, be termed irony, further supporting 
the division into two layers of meaning, one of which I have called a hidden transcript (Duke, Irony, 89). 
Blinzler, too, although he argues that     is the verdict in abbreviated form, notes that in the 
subsequent dialogue, Pilate hmmert  den Juden ins Bewutsein und Gedchtnis, da die Verurtelung ihres 
Knigs auf ihr eingenes, ausdrckliches Verlangen und damit auf ihre Verantwortung hin erfolgt (Prozess, 
350). This response of the Jews in verse 15, then, I think, can be construed as the verdict and sentence. For 
more on the way John nuances this responsibility, see Sections 7.1.5, 7.2.3 and 7.2.5. 
346 Piper, Characterisation, 152. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
true that the accusation by the Jews in verse 12b requires Pilate to publicly demonstrate his 
own loyalty, which seals Jesus fate. However, as has been argued above, Pilates primary 
way forward from the beginning has been to ascertain the loyalty of the province.347 Carter, 
on the other hand, concludes that Johns Pilate is an efficient and powerful governor who 
in crucifying Jesus protects Romes interests against this threat.348 Yet this chapter has 
argued that it is not Jesus himself but the possibility of sedition that is threatening to Rome 
and therefore to Pilates interests. When he weighs the need to portray his own loyalty to 
Caesar before Jesus or before the Jews, Jesus, who says nothing more, becomes 
expendable. Neither his fate nor his guilt is a matter of much consequence for Pilate.349 
The Jews and Pilate both achieve their objectives.  
The previous chapter of this study discussed the connection between truth and hidden 
transcripts: veiled meanings allow marginalized groups to express their truth publically.350 
The strand of the hidden transcript that dresses Jesus in the emperors clothes rises to a 
crescendo as the comparison is repeated three times in two verses:      
   ;        (v. 14-15).351 And to 
translate  as king in 19:14-15, with its overt mention of Caesar, seems particularly 
ill-advised.352 Thus, in the contest between Pilate and the Jews as it is depicted in this 
Gospel, it seems, according to his imperial portrayal, that Jesus wins.353 Indeed, Pilate is 
not really the focal figure in John 1819.354 Thus, although this chapter of the study has 
focused on Pilate, Jesus will come into view more clearly in the analysis in Chapter 7. 
347 Section 6.1.2. 
348 Carter, John, 311; see, similarly, 139, 308-309.  
349 Lincoln, Truth, 129. 
350 Section 5.1.4. 
351 Section 5.1.4. 
352 Bekken, too, on different grounds, agrees with this proposal (Lawsuit, 247). For a description of 
his proposal, see Section 2.1.3. 
353 Piper, Characterisation, 146, 159-60. 
354 Tolmie, Pontius, 597. Tolmie argues this on the basis of the large number of empty spaces in 
his characterization. While I have attempted to fill in these spaces on the basis of the Roman encyclopaedia, 
that does not preclude him from being correct. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
Admittedly, if Pilate and the Jews are the losers, at least in the hidden transcript, 
John still makes the Jews the biggest losers. For Pilate, when the Jews question his loyalty 
in 19:12, they provoke him to crucify Jesus, something he has not been particularly interested 
in doing, especially once the possibility of his connection to Rome has been raised. However, 
for the Jews, Pilates test of their loyalty provides the occasion for their dramatic 
abandonment of loyalty to their God although, as Piper notes, it does not force it.355 And 
this final pronouncement, We have no king but Caesar, seems an odd victory for them to 
have achieved.356 Rensberger, indeed, regards it as a victory for Pilate.357 This distribution 
of responsibility condemns the betrayer over the enforcer, not the Jew over the Roman.358 
This will be discussed further in Chapter 7.  
Verses 16-18 could almost form a section of their own as both v. 16b and v. 18 are 
narrative remarks expressing almost the same thing: Jesus is crucified. In between, however, 
is the walk to the cross. Only the crucifixion in John is Jesus triumph, and this imagery, 
noted by Keener but not explored, relates to Roman notions of triumph as well as the English 
cultural unit of triumph (victory) to which Keener refers.359 Indeed, the walk towards the 
crucifixion at Golgotha shows similarities to a triumphal march that would end at the 
Capitoline Hill. Allan Georgia (and T. E. Schmidt on whom the lexical connection between 
Capitoline and Golgotha depends) addresses this possibility for Mark, noting that , 
skull, translates capitolinus, an adjective related to the Latin word for head: caput, -itis.360 
Schmidt connects this (along with Golgotha) to the story of the unearthed human head that, 
according to Livy, gave the Capitolium its name (Livy 1.55.5).361 In the Gospel of John, 
355 Piper, Characterisation, 152, emphasis original. 
356 Bond, Pilate, 183, 191-92.  
357 Rensberger, Overcoming, 92. 
358 See Section 7.2.3. 
359 Keener, John, 2.1133. 
360 Allan T. Georgia, Translating the Triumph: Reading Marks Crucifixion Narrative against a 
Roman Ritual of Power, JSNT 36 (2013): 17-38 (32); Schmidt, Mark, 10-11. 
361 Schmidt admits that [t]his may be a linguistic and historical coincidence, but to an audience 
prepared by the context to look for double meanings, it would be a glaring and meaningful coincidence 
(Mark, 10-11). Certainly, the auditors of John are prepared for double meanings, but whether they would be 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
even the word order of 66 ( [] [[ ]), separating as it does  
from , supports the possibility that it is  alone that is the name: he went out 
to the place called of the Skull.362 Furthermore, the better-attested word order,   
  , does not preclude this translation. Thus, this adnominal genitive 
with the function of an adjective points nicely to the adjective capitolinus.363 A reference 
to the Capitoline Hill in the walk to the cross (19:17-18), with Jesus still dressed in the robe 
and crown of the triumph, present him in the ambiguous role of imperator and sacrifice, the 
glorified condemned.364 
The victory, the lauding of a conquering general and assertion of his (momentary) 
divinity, ... the brutal execution all find their counterparts either in the hidden transcript 
(Jesus clothes and the soldiers acclamations in 19:1-5) or the narrative (the crucifixion in 
19:18).365 Allan Georgia suggests that in Mark, the category of kingship itself is being 
maneuvered by combining Jewish and Roman referents.366 In the Johannine trial narrative, 
equally familiar with the Capitolium is less certain. However, knowledge of the Capitoline Hill was not 
restricted to those who had been to Rome. In the army, the shrine which housed the legionary standards and 
imperial and divine images was placed [i]n the centre of the camp, at the rear of the headquarters building 
and is actually called a Capitolium on one inscription [35 AE (1989) 581 (A.D. 208) from Aalen] (Beard, 
North, and Price, Religions, 326). Furthermore, Capitoline Jupiter was honoured on the Capitoline Hill by 
various cities of Asia Minor [Beard, North, and Price, Religions, 158; see also for offerings on the Capitoline 
Hill from British allies Fergus Millar, Emperors, Frontiers and Foreign Relations, 31 B.C. to A.D. 378, 
Britannia 13 (1982): 1-23 (11)]. Municipia (where local citizens had the so-called Latin right and some 
even full Roman citizenship) also built Capitolia and on more than one occasion we can see the building of 
a Capitolium as part of a claim for Roman status (rather than a boast of Roman status already acquired) (Beard, 
North, and Price, Religions, 334-35). There were Capitolia in Oxyrhynchus, Jerusalem and possibly in Syrian 
Antioch [Josephine Crawley Quinn, and Andrew Wilson, Capitolia, JRS 103 (2013): 117-173 (149)]. 
Knowledge of the Capitoline Hill in Rome might further spread through the knowledge that the Jewish tax 
after the destruction of the temple in Jerusalem was for the rebuilding of the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus in 
Rome (Beard, North, and Price, Religions, 341). Note that Alexander (Aristobulus),    , 
gifted Pompey with an inscribed golden vine that was eventually set up in the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus at 
Rome (Josephus, Ant. 14.3.1 36, [Marcus & Wikgren, LCL]). However, there is no way to determine how 
widely this was known. See also the related capitolia in Vergils Aeneid 8.653. 
362 Pace Barrett who translates the phrase as Skull-place (Gospel, 548). 
363 BDF 162. 
364 See, for example, Gniesmer who points out that [d]ie ganze weitere Erzhlung hindurch bis zur 
Kreuzigung bleibt Jesus der Dornengekrnte im Spottgewand (Proze, 280). For more on the triumph, see 
Section 5.1.2. For a discussion of previous suggestions that John refers to a historical practice of killing kings, 
see Section 5.1.3. 
365 Georgia, Translating, 22. 
366 Georgia, Translating, 22. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
this manoeuvring can be seen in the tension between the hidden transcript that dresses Jesus 
in the emperors symbols and the narrative that describes Jesus humiliation.367 John Ashton 
suggests that the Johannine trial narrative should not even be called a passionand this is 
certainly evident in this final scene.368 The act of crucifixion (v. 18), like the scourging, is 
described very briefly in only a few words.369 The Gospel quickly moves on to narrate events 
surrounding the titulus.370  
6.2.2.6. Scene X: John 19:19-22 
The jolting juxtaposition of        and the 
crucified man is perhaps obscured for modern readers of the Gospel because of its 
familiarity. However, what it emphasizes is the conjunction of the power and vulnerability 
of Jesus in his witness to God, a motif that will be explored in the next chapter of this study. 
Some have suggested that this title was forced on John since, although it was not carried 
forward in church tradition, it is a central part of all of the passion narratives (Mark 15:2, 9, 
12, 18, 26; Matt 27:11, 29, 37; Luke 23:3, 36, 38; John 18:33, 39; 19:3, 19, 21).371 So, 
although John often appears to use the tradition quite freely, perhaps he felt more constrained 
with regard to the title nailed on the cross.372 Of interest in Scene X, however, is the use 
that the Fourth Gospel makes of the title, whether it was forced on the narrative from 
historical events or not. 
367 There is even tension in 19:17, where Jesus carries his cross (humiliation), but carries it himself 
(strength). For these two views, although expressed separately, see Koester, Why, 164 n. 4; Brown, John, 
2.917; Keener, John, 2.1134; Moloney, Love, 141. Brown cites 10:18 as support. 
368 Ashton, Understanding, 489; see, similarly, 493. 
369 Brown, John, 2.900; Moloney, John, 502. 
370 Other authors have mentioned, too, the positioning of Jesus in the centre, between two others 
whose identity as  is not mentioned, thus raising the possibility that he has an entourage (Senior, Passion, 
103; Wright, Governor, 267). This is a possibility but one that must be supplied by the rest of the context 
since the verse itself (v. 18) does nothing to hinder and yet nothing to suggest that. 
371 Lincoln, Gospel, 474. For Lincoln, the possibility that it was forced on early Christian tradition 
explains why John uses it despite the fact that the title, the King of the Jews, was not one derived from Jewish 
messianic expectation. See further on this below in this section. 
372 He seems to have expanded it, at least from the Synoptics, but whether this is because he was 
following another tradition or because he felt free to expand the Synoptic tradition but not to restrict or alter it 
in this instance is beyond the scope of this study. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
The first phrase in the inscription, Jesus the Nazarene (  ), is a 
reminder of Jesus conversation with Nathanael at the beginning of the Gospel (1:43-51). 
The man from Nazareth, from whence nothing good can come (1:46), is now, as Nathanael 
saw, the Son of God and the King of Israel.373 Nevertheless, to specify that he is the Nazarene 
Jesus also fits within the Roman cultural unit of a Roman governor. Pilate has crucified the 
man that his soldiers went to arrest (18:5, 7), that is, a specific Jesus of local provenance. 
John may simply be giving us the full legal identification of Jesus.374 
Pilates motive within the narrative may be twofold: To proclaim that, as best he 
could determine, he has crucified a local man (  ) that he suspected of 
being seditious.375 Yet the second half of the inscription allows him to express his 
responsibility to Rome with a dramatic demonstration of the fate of Jesus, in case there 
remain any who want to follow him.376 This is not (pace Tolmie) simply contempt for the 
Jews.377 For de la Potterie, laffirmation publique de la royaut de Jsus par l'inscription 
fut comme une dernire avance faite aux Juifs.378 Some, such as de la Potterie, understand 
such an avance as an offer to believe in Jesus.379 However, at the narrative level, it is an 
advance against any possible remaining rebels.380 
The Jews, however, must now defend their own loyalty to Caesar and argue that 
the wording should be changed.381 They wish to distance themselves from any loyalty to 
373 See Section 4.4.1. Israel as opposed to Jews will be discussed further in Section 7.1.3. 
374 Brown, John, 2.901. 
375 Note that local provenance does not necessarily imply a lack of importance. Many people were 
known by their origins, for example Apollonius of Tyana. But local provenance in the same location does 
somewhat lessen the likelihood of Roman connections and provides plausible deniability for Pilate as he has 
simply crucified the exact person he was asked to arrest. 
376 Tom Thatcher, I Have Conquered the World: The Death of Jesus and the End of Empire in the 
Gospel of John, in Empire in the New Testament, ed. Stanley E. Porter and Cynthia Long Westfall, McMaster 
Divinity College Press New Testament Study Series 10 (Eugene, OR: Pickwick, 2011), 140-63 (152). 
377 Tolmie, Pontius, 596. 
378 De la Potterie, Jsus, 242. 
379 De la Potterie, Jsus, 242. 
380 Carter, John, 310. 
381 See Carter on the way Pilates wording challenges the loyalty of the Jews (John, 310). Brown 
(John, 2.902) thinks the imperfect in 19:21 has conative force and translates it as tried to tell whereas I see 
it more as iterativekept telling (BDR 325-326). 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
Jesus that Pilates version of the sign might impute to them.382 At the same time, by putting 
the claim to the title onto Jesus, they communicate the hubris that the Fourth Gospel has 
repeatedly shown Jesus declining (6:15; 13:4). Carter notes that the phrasing of the request 
of the Jews for the new placard ( ,    ) mirrors other 
 sayings in the Gospel (cf. John 6:35; 8:12; 10:9, 11: 11:25; 14:6; 15:1) and makes the 
Jews, like Pilate, unconsciously proclaim the truth about Jesus.383 Yet the pronoun , 
present in all the other I am statements, is missing in John 19:20.384 Furthermore, the Greek 
word order emphasizes not  but .385 Additionally, the petition of the Jews is 
denied. Pilate prevents them from enacting their will; the text sets the two wills in opposition 
to each other, and Pilate and the Jews do not become allies.386 Finally, even if their request 
had been granted, the titulus would not become an unconscious proclamation of Jesus by 
the Jews but a proclamation attributed to Jesus himself (cf. 19:7, 12). For these reasons, I 
would not count 19:21 among Johns  statements.  
Pilate then seals the declaration that Jesus is     with his last 
words to the chief priests:  , .387 There may be a parallel with 1 Macc 
13:38:     ,  (and as much as we have set up for you, it has 
been set, author translation); however, in that passage, the conciseness of an epigram is 
missing.388 In contrast, the Johannine phrase is laconic and it can easily be rendered into 
a Latin epigram worthy of an authoritarian prefect: Quod scripsi, scripsi.389 It might 
resonate in such a way for Roman-aware auditors. In any case, it certainly puts a note of 
382 Neyrey suggests that the proposed version of the titulus implies that Jesus vaingloriously assumes 
honors not rightfully his (19:7, 12) (Cultural, 432). 
383 Carter, John, 310.  
384 On the metaphor of kingship, see van der Watt, Family, 378. 
385 Cf. 6:35 and see BDR 472-73. 
386 Pace Carter, John, 310. The text does, however, recategorize their identities, but that is a different 
process (see Section 7.1.4). 
387 Schnackenburg, John, 3.272; Sheppard, Gospel of John, 172. 
388 Brown, John, 2.902. 
389 Brown, Death, 2.965. Evans suggests, somewhat similarly, that these are words sounding like 
official witness to a document (Explorations, 61). 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
finality on the scene.390 Pilate has determined that the lite Jews are loyal to Caesar, and 
the cross and its titulus allow Pilate to prove his own loyalty to Rome.  
What of the figurative level of this scene, that which has been described in this thesis 
as the hidden transcript? What would Roman-aware Jesus-believers have heard? Many 
scholars view the gospel narratives of Jesus crucifixion as projecting an image of 
enthronement (or coronation) because of the titulus that proclaims his title to the world: 
   .391 The two others (v. 18) mentioned in the previous scene are 
then taken as Jesus retinue.392 This tendency is especially strong for the Fourth Gospel 
where the crucifixion is described at various points in the narrative as Jesus lifting up (; 
3:14; 8:28; 12:32, 34) and glorification (; 12:23-34), and the titulus is inscribed in all 
three languages of the world (19:22).393 
However, while it is possible that the crucifixion scene, when heard by auditors using 
a Jewish or Greek encyclopaedia, might be interpreted as an enthronement, there is no 
evidence of such a ceremony in Rome.394 This is not to say that the image of a ruler seated 
with a wreath above his head was not known. It was.395 However, it showed the emperor as 
the victor, in a context that pointed to a Roman triumph, rather than what is normally meant 
in an English-language encyclopaedia by the verb to enthrone: to install (a monarch or 
bishop) on a throne, especially during a ceremony to mark the beginning of their rule.396 
390 Sheppard, Gospel of John, 172.  
391 Brown, John, 2.919; Zabala, Enigma, Part 1, 18; Schnackenburg, John, 3.247; Ashton, 
Understanding, 489; Schmidt, Mark, 14; Kierspel, Jews, 70; Salier, Jesus, 297; Carter, John, 310; Wright, 
Governor, 263-74. 
392 E.g., Wright, Governor, 267. Although Schmidt lists examples of Roman emperors seated 
between two other men, they seem rather haphazard (Mark, 15). Kings and emperors are usually accompanied 
by others, not only in triumphs or enthronements, and not only two. (See, for example, Augustus, who placed 
just one man beside himself in an official announcement from a  [Plutarch, Mor. 207.3], or his entrance 
into Rome at night when he was avoiding a large group of people who would surround him with petitions and 
acclamation [Dio Cassius, Roman History 54.10.4]). 
393 Ashton, Understanding, 493, 495; Catrin H. Williams, Another Look at Lifting up in the Gospel 
of John, in Conception, Reception, and the Spirit: Essays in Honor of Andrew T. Lincoln, ed. J. G. McConville 
and Lloyd Pietersen (Eugene, OR: Cascade, 2015), 58-70. Specifically on glorification, see Joel Marcus, 
Crucifixion as Parodic Exaltation, JBL 125.1 (2006): 73-87 (74-75). 
394 See Section 5.1.3. 
395 Zanker, Power, 230-33. 
396 enthrone, ODE. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
Although a Roman encyclopaedia provides no cultural unit that would allow the 
crucifixion to be interpreted as an enthronement, another Roman cultural unit might be 
blown up by the Johannine language for the cross, that of apotheosis.397 Indeed, a dream 
of crucifixion was thought to predict a turn of fortune for the better, because of the polysemy 
of .398 In its earlier uses (John 3:14; 8:28; 12:32, 34), this cultural unit connecting 
crucifixion with being raised to a place of honour was activated. The analogy is not perfect 
since the resurrection brings Jesus back to earth before his ascension to heaven.399 However, 
when Catrin Williams examines  as a double entendre in the Fourth Gospel, she 
concludes that the word, in one sense, is no more than [Jesus] physical lifting up on the 
cross, but, for those with eyes to see, it signifies his exaltation to the Fathers presence.400 
This second level, then, with a view to the vertical-spatial perspective of Johns lifting up 
imagery [means that] Jesus ascent from the earth (12:32) involves his elevation to, and 
oneness with, the Father.401 This adds to Ashtons discussion of  and  in which 
he suggests that [t]he Christian believer is not expected to see the crucifixion as a kind of 
exaltation or glorification but to see past the physical reality of Jesus death to its true 
significance: the reascent of the Son of Man to his true home in heaven.402 It is possible, 
then, that Roman-aware auditors might, in this lifting up of Jesus, hear a reference to the 
apotheosis of an emperor.  
397 Other encyclopaedias of the second century CE, such as a Jewish, Greek, Syrian or Egyptian 
encyclopaedia, might provide a cultural unit for an enthronement that would fit Johns description, but 
interpreters must be careful not to read later Roman or mediaeval ceremonies into ancient rituals. See Section 
5.1.3. 
398 Meeks, Man, 62 n. 63; Justin J. Meggitt, Artemidorus and the Johannine Crucifixion, Journal 
of Higher Criticism 5 (1998): 203-208. For an image of apotheosis from Ephesus, see Tilborg, Reading, 40-
399 Carter, John, 318. Carter also argues that the Gospel evokes apotheosis only, finally, to reject it 
because of the Fourth Gospels claims for Jesus uniqueness, and because of its rejection of any attempts to 
make oneself a god or to let oneself be made a god (5:19; 10:33). The uniqueness of Jesus will be discussed 
in the next chapter (Section 7.2.1). However, John 5:19 does not preclude Jesus deity and John 10:33 is 
immediately contradicted by Jesus response (10:34-38). Conway, on the other hand, does connect the 
resurrection with an apotheosis (Behold, 149). 
400 Williams, Another Look, 58, 70.  
401 Williams, Another Look, 69. 
402 Ashton, Understanding, 496, emphasis original. See, similarly, Udo Schnelle, Theology of the New 
Testament, trans. M. Eugene Boring (Grand Rapids: Baker, 2009), 699. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
Apotheosis (), or consecratio in Latin, came after the death of an emperor 
(unless he was remembered as a tyrant) and was instituted by resolutions of the people and 
the Senate.403 Some historians have focused on the eagle that was released from the 
emperors funeral pyre to signify that the emperors soul was carried to the heavens.404 
Whether this was actually practised in the first century CE is disputed.405 Instead, a witness 
of some spontaneous event (such as a comet or the form of the emperor himself) was needed 
to verify that the apotheosis had taken place (cf. Suetonius, Jul. 88; Aug. 100.4).406 Simon 
Price points to 112 CE as the date when Marciana, the sister of Trajan, was granted the title 
of diva before the funeral.407 He therefore takes this to be the terminus ante quem for the 
need for a witness to a sign for deification. Duncan Fishwick, on the other hand, uses the 
lack of reference to witnesses after the funeral of Drusilla in 38 CE to decide on that date as 
terminus post quem, after which a witness was not used.408 In any case, the release of the 
eagle was only done in conjunction with imperial funeral pyres, which were not important 
until the mid-second century.409 So at the time of the final composition of the Fourth Gospel, 
the focus was more on the witness to demonstrate an apotheosis than on the eagle to 
symbolize one. 
403 Elias Bickerman, Consecratio, in Le culte des souverains dans l'Empire Romain, ed. Willem den 
Boer, Entretiens Sur L'antiquit classique 19 (Geneva: Vandoeuvres, 1973); Klauck, Context, 293; Drew J. 
Strait, Proclaiming Another King Named Jesus? The Acts of the Apostles and the Roman Imperial Cult(s), 
in Jesus Is Lord, Caesar Is Not: Evaluating Empire in New Testament Studies, ed. Scot McKnight and Joseph 
B. Modica (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2013), 130-45 (135). Strait notes the importance of 
behavior to demonstrate the appropriateness of a consecratio. He also points out that in the Book of Acts, 
there is no vote. In the Gospel of John, there is no vote either. However, if one extends the witnesses in the 
narrative (see below) to the witnesses among the Jesus-believers (15:27), the vote might be the decision of the 
community. 
404 E.g., Carter, following Gradel (Carter, John, 317, 320; Gradel, Emperor, 305-320). However, 
Gradel is mistaken to take representations of an apotheosis as evidence of practice. 
405 Peter Michael Swan, Augustan Succession: An Historical Commentary on Cassius Dio's Roman 
History Books 55-56 (9 B. C.-A. D. 14), ed. Donald J. Mastronarde, Amercian Classical Studies 47 (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2004), 343-44. 
406 Klauck, Context, 293, 305. This witness was satirized by Seneca (Apol. 1). Suetonius mentions a 
comet but as a portent of Vespasians death, not as evidence of his deification (Vesp. 23.4) 
407 Simon Price, From Noble Funerals to Divine Cult: The Consecration of Roman Emperors, in 
Rituals of Royalty: Power and Ceremonial in Traditional Societies, ed. David Cannadine and Simon Price 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987), 56-105 (92). 
408 Duncan Fishwick, The Deification of Claudius, ClQ 52.1 (2002): 341-49 (348 n. 43). 
409 Price, From, 93-95. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
After Augustus, deification was increasingly practised, and not only for emperors. 
Claudius, Vespasian, Titus, Trajan and Hadrian deified the previous emperors, but also other 
relatives such as mothers and sisters.410 Lynn Cohick has, in this respect, argued that to posit 
a contest between gods, Caesar and Jesus in Pauls Letter to the Philippians is to miss 
the deification of other members of the imperial family, notably Livia, Augustus wife.411 
She proposes that it was the power, influence and benefaction of the family, not simply the 
power of the ruler, which was venerated.412 Certainly, the veneration of the imperial family 
was important, as was their influence and benefaction. However, in the Gospel of John, 
several elements must be disentangled. First, the initial comparison between Jesus and 
Caesar comes before Jesus crucifixion (starting with John 18:36-37), and so does not centre 
only on his death.413 Unlike, perhaps, in Philippians, Jesus is described in terms of his power, 
authority and rule (e.g., 4:43-54; 5:27; 18:36).414 Secondly, the deification of one person 
does not detract from the deification of another. The apotheosis of an emperor might provide 
a helpful Sign with which to communicate the crucifixion of Jesus, whether other people 
were deified or not. After all, each emperor was deified, in turn, on the model of a previous 
emperor, even though family members might be deified in between. And because Jesus was 
a man, he could more easily provide a point of comparison with male members of the 
imperial familythe emperor, specifically, in the Fourth Gospel, because of such imperial 
accoutrements as the purple robe. 
Yet did it? The Fourth Gospel describes no event that might signal such an abductive 
turn to Roman-aware hearers. Furthermore, the verb  is not used at all in the Johannine 
410 Price, From, 87; Griffin, Flavians, 47, 54, 56-58; J. H. W. G. Liebeschuetz, Religion, in CAH, 
ed. Alan K. Bowman, Peter Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 
984-1008 (987-88); Klauck, Context, 309, 312. 
411 Lynn H. Cohick, Philippians and Empire: Paul's Engagement with Imperialism and the Imperial 
Cult, in Jesus Is Lord, Caesar Is Not: Evaluating Empire in New Testament Studies, ed. Scot McKnight and 
Joseph B. Modica (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2013), 166-82 (173-74). 
412 Cohick, Philippians, 174. 
413 Section 4.2. 
414 See Sections 4.4.2 and 7.2.5. 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
description of Jesus crucifixion (19:16-30), though previous uses of  have established 
that Jesus would be lifted up like Moses lifted the snake in the wilderness (3:14), that he 
would be lifted by the Jews (8:28), and this to draw all people to [him]self (12:32). Once 
the Roman encyclopaedia is activated in the Johannine trial narrative, these previous 
statements might cause Roman-aware auditors to interpret the crucifixion as evidence of a 
consecratio, with the cross as the means of Jesus elevation.  
If so, in this interpretant, the Jews passing by become witnesses (19:20). These 
witnesses are, after all, reading the titulus as they see his elevation, combining king of the 
Jews with the languages of the world. Although as mentioned above, witnesses were not 
actually used in imperial deifications after sometime in the late first century CE, Christian 
authors continued to refer to them. Justin Martyr, for example, first compares what 
Christians say, that the Word, who is the first-birth of God, was produced without sexual 
union, and that He, Jesus Christ, our Teacher, was crucified and died, and rose again, and 
ascended into heaven to what you believe regarding those whom you esteem sons of 
Jupiter (Apology 1.21).415 He lists Mercury, Asclepius, Bacchus, Hercules, the sons of Leda, 
and Dioscuri, Perseus, Bellerophon and Ariadne. Then, he goes on, And what of the 
emperors who die among yourselves, whom you deem worthy of deification, and in whose 
behalf you produce someone who swears he has seen the burning Caesar rise to heaven from 
the funeral pyre?416 Jesus is not burned, so the reference to the cultural unit of apotheosis is 
not perfect. However, is it possible that, from a Roman-aware perspective, the Jews in John 
19:20 become witnesses to Jesus apotheosis. 
Yet what of the title given him on the titulus? For Jesus to be declared   
  is, as was discussed  propos John 19:2-5, to hide the imperator 
415 Translation from Alexander Roberts, and James Donaldson, The Ante-Nicene Fathers: 
Translations of the Writings of the Fathers Down to A. D. 325 (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1950). 
416 Translation from Roberts, and Donaldson, Ante-Nicene. Tatian and Tertullian mention these 
witnesses as well, but the one to make fun of them and the other to place them in hell (Tatian, ad Graecos 10.2; 
Tertullian, de Spectaculis 30.3; Price, From, 92 n. 70). 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
connection within a hidden transcript.417 The negation of a local, cultural unit for the title is 
especially evident in John 19:19-20 since the titulus is inscribed in all three languages of the 
Jewish first- and second-century CE linguistic world. However, a local cultural unit is not 
the same as a Jewish one. If a   , for the Romans, was a local king, God 
as king within the Jewish encyclopaedia was not local.418 As this gospel makes clear, [t]o 
honor the Son is to honor the Father (5:23); to reject the Son as King is to reject the one who 
sent him (cf. 19:15).419 And God is a great king over all the earth, king over the nations (Ps 
47:2, 7-8).420 
6.3. Conclusion 
The Roman reading presented in this chapter is not the only interpretant that can be posited 
for John 18:2819:22.421 The word , for example, in John 18:28 and 19:14 frames 
most of this narrative, and, with its mention again in 18:39, keeps the Jewish backdrop of 
the Gospel in view even in this very Roman account.422 Furthermore,  is quite a 
multivalent term and would be understood differently when heard within other 
encyclopaedias. Yet, if there is, as is often suggested, a universal significance attributed by 
John to these events, it seems to be worked out in the trial narrative in relation to a Roman 
encyclopaedia.423 Indeed, although in the rest of the narrative, John frequently explains and 
translates terms/concepts for an audience unfamiliar with Aramaic words and Jewish 
practices (cf. 1:38, 41), John 19:13 and 17 seem to do the reverseexplain Roman locations 
for Aramaic speakers.424 
417 Section 5.1.4. 
418 Thompson, John, 391. For an introduction to messianic expectation in the first century CE, see 
Keener, John, 1.284-89. 
419 Thompson, John, 391; see, also, on this God-King connection in the Hebrew Bible, van der Watt, 
Family, 379-80. 
420 Thompson, John, 391. 
421 See on ethical interpretations, Section 2.3.1. 
422 Lincoln, Truth, 203. 
423 Lincoln, Truth, 124.  
424 Pace Van Belle who categorizes them under [t]raduction des mots hbreux ou aramens 
(Parenthses, 106-107). 
6. Pilate Testing Loyalties: An Inferential Walk through John 18:2819:22  
The early auditors of the Gospel of John, especially those with some embeddedness 
in their Roman surroundings would expect that (1) Pilate would crucify Jesus and that (2) 
Pilates main concern would be to please Rome. A Roman interpretant highlights a Pilate 
who is both strong and weak, not manipulated by the Jews (strong) but concerned about 
his future in the empire (weak).425 In general, although his words and actions have previously 
been taken as mockery, they have emerged in this study as a way to test loyalties, first those 
of Jesus and then those of the Jews.  
This conclusion is quite at home within the Gospel of John that, as a whole, asks for 
the loyalty of its hearers to Jesus.426 It is consonant with the trial settings that Lincoln 
proposes for the Fourth Gospel as a whole, which become the vehicle for the exposure of 
the participants motives and ultimate allegiancesthose of Jesus and the Jews in both the 
public ministry and the Roman trial and those of Pilate in the latter.427 Not noted before, 
however, is the way that Pilate also tests motives and allegiancethose of the Jews, who 
are ultimately loyal to Caesar, and those of Jesus whose only loyalty is to the other world 
(18:36), the truth (18:37), and the one above (19:11). Beyond this, this chapter has described 
a hidden transcript of Jesus, one who fulfils the cultural unit of a Roman emperor. Thus, 
while de la Potterie connects the seating at the  with the crucifixion to form a two-part 
judgement of the world, I have proposed a three-part triumph with Jesus in the dress of 
imperator, his seating as reigning judge, and his apotheosis as a Caesar.428 The further 
implications of this hidden transcript for ethnicity and power will be the focus of discussion 
in Chapter 7.
425 This clarifies the weak and strong elements that some analyses simply juxtapose (e.g., Koester, 
Why, 168-69). 
426 On the connections between faith, faithfulness and loyalty, see, e.g., , BDAG 81820; 
Horsley, and Thatcher, John, 140-41, 154. 
427 Lincoln, Truth, 33. 
428 De la Potterie, Jsus, 246. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity 
Chapter 7 will not only gather the conclusions of earlier chapters but will do so by showing 
how the data uncovered in this thesis intersects with other analyses of the Fourth Gospel. 
These include discussions of ethnicity in antiquity, social-scientific analyses, postcolonial 
approaches, and debates about a Johannine community and about ethics. Ideas of present-
day theologians and ethicists will occasionally be brought into the discussion, but those cited 
should be seen as representative of broader topics that lie outside the focus of this work. 
First, this chapter will summarize ancient conceptions of ethnicity. Romans 
understood themselves as mandated by the gods to spread the gift of civilization. This self-
understanding coheres at many points with the references to Jesus followers in the 
Johannine trial narrative, as will be shown below. Lars Kierspels analysis of the function of 
the Jews in the Gospel will prove fruitful in analyzing how ethnicity works in John 
18:2819:22. Specifically, John describes the Jews and the Romans highlighting their 
own prioritization of law, while he recategorizes Roman and Jewish identities in order to 
prioritize loyalty to Jesus. 
These issues of loyalty and law are prominent in the hidden transcript of the Fourth 
Gospel and lead naturally to a discussion of empire in the second half of the chapter. While 
some have posited that the Fourth Gospel rejects imperial values (both those of the Roman 
empire and those of colonizing empires in general), and others that it imposes them, this 
chapter will argue that it does both. More particularly, obedience to Roman law and Jewish 
Torah is not abolished but becomes the arena in which Jesus-believers have to negotiate 
behaviour within their primary loyalty to Jesus empire, which has its own regulating agent: 
the Spirit. 
Such negotiations may have occurred in the context of persecution, and this chapter 
proposes that while extensive evidence of widespread early persecution (by Jews or Romans) 
is lacking, the stories in circulation may have been sufficient to create a sense of 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
marginalization among Johns audience. So the chapter will end by suggesting that John 
18:2819:22 provides not only the encyclopaedic resources to reframe persecution, but also 
a narrative that calls Jesus-believers with power in society to embrace vulnerability for the 
sake of Jesus empire. 
7.1. Ethnic Identity in John 18:2819:22 
Ethnicity in both its ancient and modern contexts is a powerful expression of the apparently 
pervasive human impulse toward social categorization and differentiation.1 Ethnicity 
creates a boundary in which cultural difference can develop through categorization, 
identification and comparison.2 Identity markers are used in this process.3 Thus, this 
analysis will proceed by first identifying three relevant identity markers from the Roman 
cultural encyclopaedia. Next, three Jewish markers from the first century CE will be briefly 
sketched out. The discussion will then turn to the Fourth Gospel to examine previous 
proposals on its characterization of the . These discussions will provide the 
conceptual framework for examining the trial before Pilate again, analyzing the ways in 
which this narrative divides people into groups. While Jews would divide the world into 
Jews and gentiles, and Romans would divide the world into civilized and barbarian, the trial 
scene problematizes these ethnicities. John 18:2819:22 recategorizes the labels of Roman 
and Jew. The Fourth Gospel creates a new, superordinate ethnicity for Jesus-believers. 
1 Aaron Kuecker, Ethnicity and Social Identity, in T&T Clark Handbook to Social Identity in the 
New Testament, ed. J. Brian Tucker and Coleman A. Baker (London: Bloomsbury, 2014), 59-77 (62). 
2 Kuecker, Ethnicity, 67, 69-72. These three processes could be compared to the elements of sect 
formation studies by Clark-Soles in order to extend the levels of tension continuum that she proposes, setting 
churches, sects and cults within the broader category of social groups [Scripture Cannot Be Broken: The Social 
Function of the Use of Scripture in the Fourth Gospel (Boston: Brill, 2003), 62-63]. 
3 Kuecker, Ethnicity, 67. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
7.1.1. Language and developing Roman identity 
Language has been a factor (but not a determiner) of ethnicity from at least the time 
of the Greeks.4 Indeed, the very word barbarian began as a designation that equated the 
inferiority of others with their inability to speak comprehensible Greek.5 This 
insider/outsider categorization coincides with Fishmans often cited definition of ethnicity 
in a more general sense: it is an aspect of a collectivitys self-recognition as well as an 
aspect of its recognition in the eyes of outsiders.6 Cognitively, ethnic groups exist not as 
substantial entities but as collective cultural representations, as widely shared ways of 
seeing, thinking, parsing social experience, and interpreting the social world.7 Thus, 
language especially as it reinforces the cultural encyclopaedia, is one possible marker of 
ethnicity and can be deployed effectively, especially in the absence of other markers.8 
Speakers tend to converge their speech towards addressees when they want to be 
perceived as part of their group, but diverge their speech away from addressees from whom 
they want to express distance.9 The audience that the speaker is converging towards need 
not be present in the exchange or may be a third party to the conversation or speech.10 Erica 
McClure has examined modern-day Assyrian-English code-switching and concluded that 
the main reasons for written code-switching are affirming ethnic identity and clarification.11  
4 Jonathan M. Hall, Ethnic Identity in Greek Antiquity (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1997), 177. 
5 Harald Haarmann, Ethnicity and Language in the Ancient Mediterranean, in A Companion to 
Ethnicity in the Ancient Mediterranean, ed. Jeremy McInerney (Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, 2014), 17-33 
(17). 
6 Joshua A. Fishman, Language and Ethnicity, in Language, Ethnicity, and Intergroup Relations, 
ed. Howard Giles, European Monographs in Social Psychology 13 (London: Academic Press, 1977), 15-57 
(16).  
7 Brubaker, Loveman, and Stamatov, Ethnicity, 45; see also 32, 47. See also J. Albert Harrill, 
Empire and New Testament: A Methodological Caution, Conversations with the Biblical World: Proceedings 
of the Eastern Great Lakes Biblical Society and Midwest Region Society of Biblical Literature 34 (2014): 14-
34 (33). 
8 Harald Haarmann, Language in Ethnicity: A View of Basic Ecological Relations, ed. Joshua A. 
Fishman, Contributions to the Sociology of Language 44 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1986), 38, 260-62. 
9 See Section 2.2.2. This divergence might express, for example, disapproval, or power over an 
interlocutor. 
10 Allan Bell, Back in Style: Reworking Audience Design, in Style and Sociolinguistic Variation, 
ed. Penelope Eckert and John R. Rickford (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 139-69. 
11 McClure, Oral, 186-87. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
While the use of the social sciences to describe ancient phenomena has sometimes 
been accused of anachronism, Harrill points out that specific terminology ought to be used 
when it helps to explain the evidence whether or not people in the past expressed an 
equivalent term in their language, or otherwise would have recognized the category as one 
of their own.12 The purposes described by McClure, particularly affirming ethnic identity, 
seem to have been present in antiquity as well.13 Cicero, for example, expressed his own 
views more clearly in his private correspondence, whereas in his speeches he had to 
persuade his audience and, therefore, to play on their beliefs and feelings.14 Therefore, the 
language of John 18:2819:22 that echoes the Roman encyclopaedia, as described in 
Chapters 4-6, would have the effect of strengthening identification between those at least 
partially embedded within Roman culture and the text.15 In this way, this aspect of their 
identity is made salient and available to be addressed by the text. 
Studies such as those that Keyes conducted in Thailand, suggest that [e]thnic groups, 
unlike races, are not mutually exclusive, but are structured in segmentary hierarchies with 
each more inclusive segment subsuming ethnic groups which were contrastive at another 
level.16 This hierarchical segmentation can be illustrated from the present day with 
advertisements on the London Tube in May-June 2015. Seeking to attract British visitors to 
its city, Las Vegas advertisers printed pictures of their skyline with the caption, Visit a place 
where your accent is an aphrodisiac (emphasis original). Despite the multiplicity of accents 
spoken by British citizens riding the Underground, the advertisers and the public were aware 
12 J. Albert Harrill, Ethnic Fluidity in Ephesians, NTS 60.03 (2014): 379-402 (385). 
13 The second purpose, clarification, can be seen throughout Johns Gospel as he offers an explanation 
of terminology in Greek or Aramaic (e.g., 4:25). 
14 P. A. Brunt, Laus imperii, in Roman Imperial Themes (Oxford: Clarendon, 1990), 288-323 (288-
89, emphasis added). 
15 Admittedly, everyone in the Mediterranean world would be somewhat embedded within Roman 
culture, but Chapter 3 has shown that those in the army, administration and commerce had to develop higher 
cultural competencies. 
16 Charles F. Keyes, Towards a New Formulation of the Concept of Ethnic Group, Ethnicity 3.3 
(1976): 202-213 (208). 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
that distinctions meaningful in that social arena would not be relevant in the United States. 
The higher level identity, in this case British, is called the superordinate identity. 
Herodotus (fifth century BCE) provides an early example of such nested identities. 
He writes that the Athenians reassured the Spartans that they would not make a treaty against 
them in part because of the kinship of all Greeks in blood and speech, and the shrines of 
gods and the sacrifices that we have in common, and the likeness of our way of life (8.144 
[Godley, LCL]).17 What the Athenians are referring to coheres with the present-day category 
of a superordinate identity. 
Although local identifications can remain prominent, to highlight a superordinate 
identity tends to reduce conflict between the lower-level groups when those differences are 
allowed to remain.18 This happens in a process called recategorization in which 
membership in two different groups are included within a new higher-level identity.19 The 
Gospel of John has many affinities with this process as it involves creating a boundary for 
the new superordinate identity (in this case belief in Jesus; e.g., John 16:27), establishing its 
new outgroup (in this case those who do not believe; e.g., 10:25), and communicating the 
antagonisms between the two (e.g., John 17:14).20 Recategorization does not limit or restrict 
identification with previous groups, but allows instead for a continued primary identification 
along with a recategorization of group identity under a shared ethnic umbrella. This is the 
process that the Athenians, according to Herodotus, were using to strengthen their alliance 
to the Spartans. Certainly, Athenians and Spartans differed vastly, for example, in their social 
17 Herodotus (c.490c.425 BC), OCCL; Hall, Ethnic, 44-45; Harrill, Ethnic, 392-93. 
18 The explanation in this paragraph is dependent on Esler, Outline, 29-30. Cor Bennema describes 
a similar phenomenon in his discussion of trans-national identities [Early Christian Identity Formation and Its 
Relevance for Modern India, in Indian and Christian: Changing Identities in Modern India, ed. Cornelis 
Bennema and P. Joshua Bhakiaraj (Bangalore: SAIACS Press, 2011), 59-76 (64, 69)]. 
19 Esler, Outline, 29. 
20 Coleman A. Baker, A Narrative-Identity Model for Biblical Interpretation: The Role of Memory 
and Narrative in Social Identity Formation, in T&T Clark Handbook to Social Identity in the New Testament, 
ed. J. Brian Tucker and Coleman A. Baker (London: Bloomsbury, 2014), 105-118 (109). 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
organizations and their building achievements.21 However, by appealing to a shared 
superordinate identity, they reduced the propensity for conflict between them. 
Romans as well as Greeks wrote about ethnicity. Augustus, for example, began his 
discussion of his expansion of the empire not in terms of territory, but in terms of peoples 
(gens) conquered (Res gest. divi Aug. 26). Benjamin Isaac argues that this was typical of 
Roman descriptions of their empire, but this conclusion is overstated.22 While section 26 of 
the Res gestae divi Augusti does begin with references to neighbouring peoples (in both 
Latin and Greek versions), it immediately continues, I brought under control the Gallic and 
Spanish provinces (Galliae et Hispaniae provinciae), and similarly Germany, where Ocean 
forms a boundary from Cadiz to the mouth of the River Elbe.23 As shown in Chapter 5, 
Vergil also describes the Roman empire in terms of territory (Aeneid 6.794-97).24 Thus, 
physical world was relevant for Roman identity; it represented a fixed standard against 
which achievement could be measured.25 
One effect of this expanding empire was that loyalties were complex. 
Multiple and complex identities may have been almost the rule, rather than 
the exception, in a part of the world where Hellenization, the Roman 
conquest, the return from the Babylonian exile, and the crystallization of 
Jewish and of Samaritan identity, the turning of Aramaic into a lingua franca 
not confined to political or ethnic boundaries, and the geographic instability 
of the Nabateans and the Idumaeans, among other factors, call up the image 
of the kaleidoscope rather than that of the mosaic.26  
This kaleidoscope of possibilities demonstrates why one must take into account 
[t]his question of ascribed identity, of belonging or not to some identifiable group persisting 
through time when discussing the Eastern Mediterranean of the first and second century 
21 Charles Gates, City, OEAGR, 1.3. 
22 Isaac, Limits, 395. 
23 This is translated from the Latin version. The Greek version does not switch from peoples to 
territory until the reference to Germany, but the result is the same: both peoples and territories mark the 
extension of the Roman empire. Translations from Cooley, Res Gestae, 90-91. 
24 Section 5.2.3. 
25 Woolf, Inventing, 318-19. For more on the Res Gestae and its communicative purposes in the 
East, see Benjamin B. Rubin, (Re)Presenting Empire: The Roman Imperial Cult in Asia Minor, 31 BC-AD 
68 (PhD thesis, University of Michigan, 2008), 129-39. 
26 Geiger, Language, 242. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
CE.27 This belonging was not directly tied to ones physical ancestry, but to markers such as 
status, wealth, location, employment, religion, origin, linkage by service or 
profession to imperial government (or not), whether living under civil or martial law, 
language and literacy, gender, and age.28 This range of factors would allow one to claim 
that one belongs to a particular group by highlighting a factor (or several factors) of 
importance to that group.29 However, the freedom to construct ones own identity is not 
unlimited.30 Ethnicity in particular is also subject to construction from others, and one cannot 
make salient an identity that others deny.31 
Several ancient authors exemplify the intersectionality of identity claims.32 
Dionysius lived and wrote in Rome in the first century BCE. He was a Greek from Asia 
Minor, writing in Greek to explain Roman history and culture to a Greek audience.33 He 
recategorized Romans as originally Greek so that the Roman conquest of Greece could be 
seen, paradoxically, as a victory and continuation of Greek culture. 
Plutarch tells of Sertorius who not only taught  (in this case Iberians) to 
fight using Roman tactics, but also set up schools for their sons so that he made hostages of 
them, while ostensibly he was educating them, with the assurance that when they became 
men he would give them a share in administration and authority (Sertorius 14 [Perrin, 
27 Millar, Roman, 5. 
28 D. J. Mattingly, Imperialism, Power, and Identity: Experiencing the Roman Empire, Miriam S. 
Balmuth Lectures in Ancient History and Archaeology (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2014), 217. Cf. 
Kuecker, Ethnicity, 64-69. See, somewhat similarly, Crook, Fictive-Friendship, 2/7. 
29 Mattingly, Imperialism, 217; see also, on identity, race, and ethnicity, 209-210. See, similarly, 
Revell, Roman, 8, 10-15, 150-52, 193. Brunt also describes what can be known of these tensions, although his 
references to memory would benefit from interaction with current memory research (Laus, 506-509). 
30 As Clarke and Tucker note, these factors were used to construct groups that were fairly discrete, 
such as slave/free; rich/poor; honestores/humiliores; Roman/Greek; Jew/Gentile [Social History and Social 
Theory in the Study of Social Identity, in T&T Clark Handbook to Social Identity in the New Testament, ed. 
J. Brian Tucker and Coleman A. Baker (London: Bloomsbury, 2014), 41-58 (44)]. 
31 Mattingly, Imperialism, 214-15. 
32 Mattingly notes that [w]ars of colonial expansion  often give definition and new shape to both 
sides of the imperial equation, with the state building its sense of purpose and identity on its perceived distance 
and difference from the barbarian other while indigenous societies are equally reordered in opposition to the 
colonial aggressor. Mattingly only lists opposition, but indigenous societies may respond by imitating 
colonialists as well (Imperialism, 211; see further on identity hierarchies, 214-215). 
33 Beard, North, and Price, Religions, 169-70; see also 172-73 on Dionysius. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
LCL]).34 Those previously categorized as barbarians were becoming integrated into the 
empire and their ethnicity was intersected by factors such as language and learning.35 
Marcus Cornelius Fronto, a North African born a Roman citizen in the second 
century CE and educated in Rome, used his barbarian identity to position himself among 
the lite as one who should be given grace. He wrote in Latin to Marcus Aurelius. 
I have written a letter to your motherand, such is my impudenceI have 
written in Greek. I have enclosed it in a letter I have written to you. You read 
it first; if there should be any barbarism in it, you, who are fresher in your 
Greek than I, correct it, and then pass it on to your mother. For I should not 
like your mother to condemn me as some yokel (Fronto, Ep. 1.124; see LCL, 
p. 124-25).36  
In his letter to Lucilla, written in Atticizing Greek, he asks her to look through any 
of his mistakes to find his meaning, comparing himself to Anacharsis the famous Scythian 
who did not express himself in perfect Greek and was nevertheless praised for his thought 
and his ideas (Fronto, Ep. Gr. 1.5; see LCL, pp. 134-37).37 He compares himself to 
Anacharsis, he says, not with respect to wisdom, by Zeus, but with respect to the fact that 
we are both barbarians. Foreignness could thus be an asset as well as an obstacle in the 
negotiation of identities.38 And, while Fronto belonged to the lite, he demonstrates that 
barbarian and Roman identities were neither discrete nor mutually exclusive. 
Despite the variability across the Roman empire associated with local identities, there 
was also a developing sense of a superordinate Roman identity shared by all. Louise Revells 
study focuses on the early second century CE in specific sites in the Western half of the 
Roman empire and demonstrates the inherent paradox of similarity and variability among 
34 See, similarly, Tacitus, Agr. 21.2. The barbarian was constructed less and less as a threatening 
outsider after the end of the first century CE; images of barbarians even diminished physically in size [Brent 
D. Shaw, Rebels and Outsiders, in CAH, ed. Alan K. Bowman, Peter Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 361-403 (374)]. 
35 For some of the problems inherent in this process, see Shaw, Rebels, 380-82. 
36 Frontos letters are difficult to reference because of the variety of previous editions. The translation 
used is from Daniel S. Richter, Cosmopolis: Imagining Community in Late Classical Athens and the Early 
Roman Empire (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011), 174. I have therefore reproduced his references, but 
also included page numbers from LCL.  
37 Richter, Cosmopolis, 173. 
38 For other examples of cultural negotiation, see Dio Chrysostom, Orations 36.17; Lucian, Pisc. 19; 
Philostratus, Lives of the Sophists 490; and Richter, Cosmopolis, 143, 147, 150, 152. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
all of these places.39 Some of this similarity came from the way their identification with a 
distant political force was mediated through their daily activities of going about their lives.40 
Thus, Roman imperialism bound the various peoples of the empire together. They enabled 
the reproduction of society on two levels; at a local level of face-to-face interaction, but also 
at an empire-wide level of shared experience and imagined commonality.41 This shared 
experience was delivered, as Brent Shaw points out, through the network of cities, 
citizenship, imperial cults and the payment of imperial tribute.42 It was propagated on 
statues, on architecture, on coins.43 It was enacted during the many Roman festivals in 
every city and province and army camp of the empire.44 Not everyone participated in all of 
these elements, but most, even non-lites, experienced at least one of them.  
[I]ncreasingly people shared in a common ethnic identity. This broad 
discourse of Roman-ness moves the question of an ethnic identity beyond the 
model of elite-driven Romanization and problematic non-elite emulation. For 
the people of the provinces, their Roman identity resided within their 
practical knowledge of how to act within a changing social context, and to 
enact roles appropriate for them. In part, this was learning how to respond to 
the new imperial authorities, with its [sic] administrative demands, but it was 
also learning new ways of expressing their place in the local community.45 
In this way, then, Roman discourse recategorized local identities in an attempt to 
bring intergroup peace by forming a superordinate identity while retaining subgroup 
salience.46 The language used in John 18:2819:22 brings such an identity to salience. 
Before analyzing that process, the specific ways in which Roman discourse accomplished 
recategorization for outsiders must be presented. 
39 Revell, Roman, 10. She looks at Colonia Aelia Augusta Italica (Italica), Municipium Flavium 
Muniguense (Munigua), Colonia Clunia Sulpicia (Clunia), Municipium Augusta Bilbilis (Bilbilis), Londinium 
(London), Venta Silurum, Viroconium Cornoviorum (Wroxeter), and Aquae Sulis (Bath) (27-36). Her study 
somewhat nuances any dichotomy between privileged estates or castes with some mobility and a transnational 
identity, and immobile peasant communities, by focusing on the people in between (pace Breuilly, 
Introduction, xxiii). 
40 Revell, Roman, 10. 
41 Revell, Roman, 11. 
42 Shaw, Rebels, 362. 
43 Woolf, Inventing, 320. 
44 Woolf, Inventing, 321. 
45 Revell, Roman, 192. 
46 Kuecker, Filial, 210. See further 210-23.  
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
7.1.2. Roman identity discourse 
It was noted above how Romans measured their conquests against the known 
territory of the world. However, whether or not Romans conceived of their empire with or 
without boundaries is a matter of debate. Whittaker argues that the Roman empire had no 
boundaries per se. From a cosmological perspective  there were two parts of the orbis 
terrarium imperium: first, the organized territory of Roman administration, which might be 
extended, and second, the externae gentes who were subjects but not usually worth 
annexing.47 Greatrex, who argues for frontiers, nonetheless begins and ends his discussion 
by pointing out that the emperors [a]ll believed that they had the right to cross the frontier 
into barbarian soil and to install forts there if they wished.48 Thus, the Romans conceived 
of the inhabited world as entirely within Roman responsibility if not under Roman control.49 
In Aelius Aristides panegyric To Rome in particular, it is clear that ideology in its 
various aspects was a powerful structuring principle of Roman communities.50 He covers 
three topics in his address, as outlined by Rochette: 1) Rome sest impose comme centre 
du monde; 2) les Romains sont destins par nature  commander; 3) par les qualits 
politiques dont ses dirigeants on fait preuve, Rome a engendr une re de paix et de 
prosprit pour les cits grecques, auxquelles elle laisse une relative autonomie.51 Some 
specific quotations will helpfully illustrate these assumptions. 
47 C. R. Whittaker, Frontiers of the Roman Empire: A Social and Economic Study (Baltimore: The 
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994), 17, see also 29.  
48 Geoffrey Greatrex, Roman Frontiers and Foreign Policy in the East, in Aspects of the Roman East: 
Papers in Honour of Professor Fergus Millar FBA, ed. Richard Alston and Samuel N. C. Lieu, Studia Antiqua 
Australiensia 3 (Turnhout, Belgium: Brepols, 2007), 103-173 (106, 155). See, similarly, Horsley, Jesus, 54. 
For some of Whittakers arguments against Roman conceptions of frontiers, see, e.g., Mental Maps: Seeing 
Like a Roman, in Thinking Like a Lawyer: Essays on Legal History, History and General History for John 
Crook on His Eightieth Birthday, ed. Paul McKechnie, Mnemosyne Supplements 231 (Leiden: Brill, 2002), 
81-112 (106-110). 
49 Aristides, Or. 26.10, 28-29, 84, 101-102; Brunt, Laus, 291; Brunt, Illusions, 433, 476-77; Woolf, 
Inventing, 317-18. For Ciceros similar rhetoric, see Brunt, Laus, 291-93. Note that the methods the Greeks 
used for incorporating others into their conception of the world was quite different; see Elias Bickerman, 
Origines gentium, CP 47.2 (1952): 65-81. 
50 Revell, Roman, 14. 
51 Rochette, Latin, 66. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
Aristides equates the empire () with the whole inhabited world (59) shortly 
before the section most pertinent to ethnicity.52 
[Y]ou [Rome] have caused the word Roman to belong not to a city, but to 
be the name of a sort of common race (), and this not one out of all the 
races, but a balance to all the remaining ones. You do not now divide the 
races into Greeks and barbarians. But you have divided people into 
Romans and non-Romans. many in each city are citizens of yours no less 
than of their fellow natives (63-64) 
In this description of the lite citizenry, one becomes a Roman without leaving 
behind ones previous ethnic loyalties.53 This construction of Roman identity did not 
originate under Augustus; the rejection of blood as a criterion of identity was a central 
feature of Romes foundation legend.54 Thus, the boundaries of Romanness are not 
impermeable. 
However, as Aristides goes on to describe the soldiers, he discusses how men of 
ability were found, and then when you [Rome] found them, at the same time you severed 
their ties with their own country and you gave them your city in return, so that in the future 
they were ashamed to declare their former origins (75). Albert Harrill takes this to mean 
that the ideology of a strong unit cohesion in the Roman army encouraged soldiers  to 
dispose of their native ethnicities and become Roman.55 Yet the foreign origins of the 
barbarians have not been forgotten even by Aristides because he also describes soldiers as 
those who both are partners in [the whole inhabited world] and are foreigners (85).56 
52 For the equation of empire with  see also sections 101-102. 
53 Louise Revell has noted the problems with using the term Romanitas. Humanitas might be a good 
choice, but it requires one to connect with the Roman encyclopaedia as a Roman. Therefore, the term 
/Romanness/ is used in this thesis as a way to describe Roman identity from the perspective of twenty-first-
century readers [Roman, xi; cf. Greg Woolf, Becoming Roman, Staying Greek: Culture, Identity and the 
Civilizing Process in the Roman East, The Cambridge Classical Journal 40 (1994): 116-43 (119); Hingley, 
Globalizing, 62-64; Dench, Romulus, 31-33]. 
54 Richter, Cosmopolis, 132. 
55 Harrill, Ethnic, 400. 
56 Further contradictions between the speech and what is known of second-century CE realities can 
easily be found. Aristides seems to recognize this himself when he wants to speak of those outside your 
empire (99) despite his earlier assertions that the empire extends to the whole . He solves the problem 
by qualifying his phrase: those outside your empire, if there are any (99). Furthermore, he describes the way 
other rulers colonize and tax the lands under their rule (45), yet Rome, despite Aristides, taxed their lands as 
well. Aristides claims that the wrath of Caesar prevents abuses of power (65). Josephus does describe appeals 
to Caesar, but the result is not freedom from poor rule but more oppression (J.W. 2.14.6 294-95). Finally, that 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
Furthermore, Roman soldiers frequently mentioned their places of origin in their 
inscriptions, and their units were often named after the ethnicity of the soldiers who 
originally composed them.57 The identity the soldiers acquired, then, was a superordinate 
There is tension in To Rome between the concept of Rome as generous with 
citizenship and the primacy accorded to those with the markers (such as birth as a citizen or 
education) of higher levels of Romanness.58 Praises of Rome such as Aristides delivers 
exaggerate reality and gloss over the way those born Roman might still vaunt themselves 
over others whose citizenship was acquired later (e.g., Acts 22:28).59 Ethnicity and 
citizenship were not fixed but negotiated as markers of status.60 Such Roman discourse is 
summarized by Harrill as a kind of kinship diplomacy whose celebratory rhetoric typically 
asserted a rediscovered  between previous foes that was unknown to earlier 
generations. Such diplomacy  exploited Hellenistic traditions (particularly prevalent in 
Asia Minor) that mapped Rome onto the Hellenistic East as neither Greek nor barbarian, but 
as a kind of mediating (transnational), third ethnicity.61 Yet the conception of such a reified, 
transnational identity is problematic because it has no content.62 A better term for Harrills 
soldiers who were fighting to obtain Roman citizenship would be ashamed to declare their former origins 
(75) is unlikely. See, e.g., Pollard who states that [i]ndividuals who had lost one identity on transition from 
civilian to soldier and who could never acquire a Roman identity in any real cultural sense found a new 
identity as members of an institution, namely, the Roman army (Soldiers, 8). Dench points as well to the 
assertions of the superior worth of being born a citizen as opposed to buying the citizenship (Romulus, 35). 
See, also, the way ethnicity was encoded in Roman cultic functions (Beard, North, and Price, Religions, 20). 
57 Millar, Roman, 88-89, 357-58. 
58 Dench, Romulus, 35. See also Brunt, Laus, 294; Horrocks, Greek, 132-33; Richter, Cosmopolis, 
134; Mattingly, Imperialism, 212. Adams also notes this tension: In public therefore (as in speeches) Romans 
sought to remain true to their Roman identity by using a form of Latin untainted by Greek.Greek culture 
could readily be presented as decadent, and this decadence could be implied by the contemptuous use of Greek 
terms relating to activities of which the Romans publicly disapproved as being supposedly typical of Greeks 
(Romanitas, 202-203). 
59 Dench, Romulus, 95. The Gospel of John may share a similar othering of some believers, for 
example those who turn back in John 6:60-71, but that cannot be explored in this study. 
60 See Vergil, Aen. 1.278; 11.163-81; 12.191-201; Brunt, Laus, 297-98; Kuecker, Filial, 221-23. 
Furthermore, Vergil confuses ethnic identities in a way that is meant to foreshadow the ethnic history of the 
Romans, with Trojans, Italians, and Greeks recategorized together (Aeneid 8.126-33, 313; 12.834-7, 1055-65; 
Fitzgerald, How, 169-70. See, similarly, Kuecker, Filial, 211-17). 
61 Harrill, Ethnic, 401.  
62 This is not to say that the Romans did not sometimes conceive of themselves in the terms that Harrill 
reports. A universalizing ethnicity such as what he describes can become a vehicle for normalizing the cultural 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
concept of a common identity between previous foes that allows them to live separately and 
yet in harmony is superordinate.63  
In the section of the panegyric quoted above, Aristides denies that foreign identities 
are left behind. He goes further, however, and claims that Roman citizenship is open to all 
men (60).64 This, however, was not true.65 Aristides himself qualifies this in his next 
sentence: No one is a foreigner who deserves to hold office or to be trusted (60, emphasis 
mine). This leaves the choice of the deserving in the hands of the Romans and glosses over 
the violent imposition of entry into the Roman empire.66 Crucifixion itself is an enactment 
of this truth for Rome: We have peace because we have conquered. We continue to put an 
end to anyone who would subvert our violently enforced peace (cf. Quintilian, Decl. 274).  
Aristides glosses over this reality when he asserts that Rome has never refused 
anyone (62), logically implying that anyone not chosen (violently or not) to become a 
Roman citizen is nobody. Non-Romans who attracted Roman interest either submitted and 
were (at least partially) assimilated, or they demonstrated their barbarism by their refusal to 
submit to Roman law and thus deserved their destruction (Vergil, Aeneid 6.852-53, quoted 
below).67 Romans, then, welcome outsiders into their law-governed midst, and construct 
identity of the majority, rhetorically constructing that culture as neutral or even natural. For an example of such 
a categorization, see Salier, Jesus, 292-93. 
63 Harrill seems to descry a superordinate identity in the letter to Ephesians where he sees an invitation 
to a new ethnicity, one that is above that of Jew and Gentile (Ethnic, 398). Such superordinate identities 
contradict Rochettes view that the Romans succeeded because ils ont octroy la ciuitas non pas  une cite 
() mais  un corps social () (Latin, 67). He thus opposes identities that instead ought to be nested. 
64 Richter, Cosmopolis, 133-34. 
65 An entry level summary of Roman domination can be found in Carter, Roman, 1-8. Note, however, 
that Carter does not separate out public and private transcripts nor distinguish them from actual motivations. 
On Roman domination, see also Richard Hingley, Cultural Diversity and Unity: Empire and Rome, in 
Material Culture and Social Identities in the Ancient World, ed. Shelley Hales and Tamar Hodos (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2010), 54-75 (62-63). 
66 See, for example, the Roman subjugation of foreign ethnic groups depicted in the Sebasteion of 
Aphrodisias and the Gemma Augustea [Dench, Romulus, 32; Diana Y. Ng, Asia Minor, in The Oxford 
Handbook of Roman Sculpture, ed. Elise A. Friedland, Melanie Grunow Sobocinski, and Elaine K. Gazda 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015), 538-51 (540); Marcus, Mark 8-16, 1047]. Nevertheless, some 
barbarians remained necessary for Roman self-definition [Peter Heather, The Fall of the Roman Empire: A 
New History of Rome and the Barbarians (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006), 98]. 
67 See also Vergil, Aeneid 11.163-81; 10.688-707; Kuecker, Filial, 221-22. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
those not welcomed as lawless barbarians.68 This marker of law was quite important to 
Roman identity. Anchises tells Aeneas, Remember thou, O Roman, to rule the nations with 
thy swaythese shall be thine artsto crown Peace with Law (mos), to spare the humbled, 
and to tame in war the proud (6.851-53, [Fairclough, LCL]).  
There is tension in Roman thought, however, between natural and positive law. 
Natural law was universal, rational, unwritten, eternal, unchanging, and the province 
of philosophers.69 It was connected with real-world imperialism and the mandate that the 
gods had given the Romans to spread their civilization around the world, enacting their laws 
for the benefit of the conquered peoples.70 Yet this rhetoric did not affect the practical 
application of the law.71 Positive law, in contrast, was primarily enacted for the benefit of 
the lite and for the maintenance of the empire.72 
This construction of the Roman world as chosen by the gods (election) to bring the 
law to all nations, welcoming them (with open arms or force of arms) into the Roman fold, 
has obvious parallels with a Gospel that offers a Saviour and invites all who believe to come 
into the family of God (John 1:7, 12) and yet promises wrath to those outside the family 
(3:36). These three elementselection, law, and accommodation to outsidersare factors 
in Johns Gospel as well as in Roman identity discourse. Moreover, they were also elements 
of Jewish identity discourseanother of the multiple intersecting identities constructed or 
rejected by turns.73  
68 Hingley, Globalizing, 61-67. For this construction of the Galatians into the barbarian Other, see 
Brigitte Kahl, Galatians Re-Imagined: Reading with the Eyes of the Vanquished (Minneapolis: Fortress, 2010), 
6-9, 42-75. If Ephesus is posited as the location for the final editing of the Gospel of John, this connection 
would be particularly pertinent. See also Woolf, Inventing, 319. 
69 Christine Hayes, What's Divine About Divine Law? Early Perspectives (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 2015), 92. Note that Hayes conflates Greek and Roman attitudes towards law over quite a 
long period of time (e.g., 86-87 where Hadrian, Stoicism and Plato are all referenced). 
70 Hayes, Divine, 61; Brunt, Laus, 291, 295; Brunt, Illusions, 438-40; Woolf, Inventing, 319. 
71 Hayes, Divine, 88. 
72 Brunt, Laus, 316-22; Brunt, Roman, 509; Hayes, Divine, 81-86. 
73 Section 1.2.3; Elizabeth A. Castelli, Martyrdom and Memory: Early Christian Culture Making, ed. 
Amy Hollywood, Gender, Theory, and Religion (New York: Columbia University Press, 2004), 35. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
7.1.3. Jewish identity discourse 
In antiquity, ethnic origin presupposed religious practices, so the two should not be 
divorced from each other.74 This is particularly evident when discussing Jewish ethnicity. 
Although Jewish identity is not reducible to such pillars as monotheism (Philo, Decal. 
65; Josephus, Ant. 5.1.27 112), election, covenant focussed in Torah, and land focussed 
in Temple, these do provide markers that were important in Jewish identity construction.75 
By the time the Fourth Gospel was finalized, the Temple was no longer standing. Yet 
concepts such as election remained, as Jews negotiated their identity in the Roman world. 
Election must be mentioned specifically because it intersects with Roman discourse as 
discussed above, as well as with John 18:2819:22 (discussed below). Psalms of Solomon 
9 asserts to Yahweh, You selected the seed of Abraham before all the nations and put your 
name upon us, Lord, and you will not rescind forever (author translation; see, similarly, 
Jub. 15.31-32). Jews responded to election by obedience to Torah. Yet using the 
transliteration of  obscures a second parallel with Roman self-identification. Torah is 
also called, in English, the law or, in the LXX,  (e.g., Deut. 30:10).76 This connection 
between Jews and the law is particularly important for the Fourth Gospel because, if the use 
of the terms  and  (e.g., 19:6) preserves a memory of the Sadducees, they 
specifically refused to accept the validity of any ancestral custom that could not be explicitly 
justified from a biblical text, thus relying on the written laws alone.77 Thus, it is possible 
74 Martin Goodman, Nerva, the Fiscus Judaicus and Jewish Identity, JRS 79 (1989): 40-44 (40). 
75 James D. G. Dunn, The Partings of the Ways: Between Christianity and Judaism and Their 
Significance for the Character of Christianity, 2nd ed. (London: SCM, 2006), 24-48; J. Brian Tucker, You 
Belong to Christ: Paul and the Formation of Social Identity in 1 Corinthians 14 (Eugene, OR: Pickwick, 
2010), 71-72. These two terms,  and , are used especially in the Johannine trial narrative: 
7:32, 42, 46; 12:10; 18:3, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 18, 19, 22, 24, 26, 35, 36; 19:6, 15, 21. 
76 Dunn rightly notes that this cannot be used to support a characterization of Judaism as legalistic 
(Partings, 33). 
77 J. Louis Martyn, History and Theology in the Fourth Gospel, ed. C. Clifton Black, John T. Carroll, 
and Beverly Roberts Gaventa, 3rd ed., NTL (Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2003), 87; Martin Goodman, 
The Place of the Sadducees in First-Century Judaism, in Judaism in the Roman World: Collected Essays, 
AGJU 66 (Leiden: Brill, 2007), 123-35 (132-33). Goodman also argues for a continuing place for the 
Sadducees after the destruction of the temple (134-35). That argument will not be pursued in this thesis except 
to note that, if valid, it too could provide data for Johns characterization of the Jews. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
that at least some of the Johannine Jewish leaders were intended to refer to the group who 
was most particularly identified with the law.  
Both peoples, then, Romans and Jews, identified themselves as chosen by god(s) and 
as people of law. And in obedience to this law and to halakhic discussions based thereupon, 
Jewish markers became visible to others, markers such as circumcision, Sabbath (and 
festival) observance, and food laws.78 The visibility of these markers has also been preserved 
in ancient sources. Juvenal, for example, describes Jewish behaviour in his 14th Satire:  
Some happen to have been dealt a father who respects the sabbath. They 
worship nothing except the clouds and spirit of the sky. They think there is 
no difference between pork, which their fathers abstained from, and human 
flesh. In time, they get rid of their foreskins. And with their habit of despising 
the laws of Rome, they study, observe, and revere the Judaic code, as handed 
down by Moses in his mystic scroll, which tells them not to show the way to 
anyone except a fellow worshipper and if asked, to take only the circumcised 
to the fountain. But its their fathers who are to blame, taking every seventh 
day as a day of laziness and separate from ordinary life (96-106).79 
In this passage, Juvenal specifically contrasts the Jewish response to Roman versus Jewish 
Juvenals polemic also serves as a reminder of polemical passages in the Fourth 
Gospel, such as John 8:12-59. Such contentiousness is typical of that found among rival 
claimants to a philosophical tradition and is found as widely among Jews as among other 
Hellenists.80 It is also found in various polemics in the Hebrew Bible against Jewish 
unfaithfulness.81 The prophets judged behaviour on the basis of the covenant, and exposed 
78 Dunn, Partings, 39-42; Judith Lieu, Christian Identity in the Jewish and Graeco-Roman World 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004), 151; Markus Bockmuehl, Jewish Law in Gentile Churches: 
Halakhah and the Beginning of Christian Public Ethics (Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 2000), 4; Hannah E. Hashkes, 
Rabbinic Discourse as a System of Knowledge: The Study of Torah Is Equal to Them All, ed. Jerome Gellman, 
Philosophy of Relgion: World Religions 5 (Leiden: Brill, 2015), 26, 110, 142-43, 259. 
79 See, similarly, Plutarch, Mor. 169C; Juvenal, Sat. 6.159. The negative characterization of Jews by 
the Roman Juvenal is evident in this text. And after 96 CE, the acceptance of the burden of the fiscus iudaicus 
could also serve to identify those who self-identified as Jews (Goodman, Nerva, 44). 
80 Luke T. Johnson, The New Testament's Anti-Jewish Slander and the Conventions of Ancient 
Polemic, JBL 108.3 (1989): 419-441 (429). 
81 Kee, Knowing, 257. See, similarly, Nathan Thiel, Like (Fore)Fathers Like Sons: The Wandering 
Israelites and the Johannine Jews (paper presented at 2016 Joint Regional Meeting of the Midwest Region 
Society of Biblical Literature, the Middle West Brand of the American Oriental Society and the American 
Schools of Oriental Research-Midwest, Bourbonnais, IL, 6 February, 2016). 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
unfaithfulness (e.g., Isa. 5:8-9).82 Hebrew Bible polemic is linked to obedience to the law.83 
Thus, Jews are elected by God to follow the laws that Yahweh has given them.  
Furthermore, Jews, like Romans, accepted outsiders into their midst.84 Philo 
describes the process: 
Having laid down laws for members of the same nation, he holds that the 
incomers too should be accorded every favour and consideration as their due, 
because abandoning their kinsfolk by blood, their country, their customs and 
the temples and images of their gods, and the tributes and honours paid to 
them, they have taken the journey to a better home, from idle fables to the 
clear vision of truth and the worship of the one and truly existing God. (Philo, 
Virt. 20.102).85 
Dio Cassius also notes that the term  applies  to all the rest of mankind, although 
of alien race, who affect their customs. This class exists even among the Romans (37.17.1 
[Cary and Foster, LCL]).86  
Unlike the Romans, however, Jews did not back up their welcome with force. And 
yet, Jewish discourse did include a note of triumphalism.87 In the Final Days, proclaim 
prophetic and intertestamental texts, the nations will turn from their gods, destroy idols, and 
82 Mary C. Callaway, A Hammer That Breaks Rock in Pieces: Prophetic Critique in the Hebrew 
Bible, in Anti-Semitism and Early Christianity: Issues of Polemic and Faith, ed. Craig A. Evans and Donald 
A. Hagner (Minneapolis: Fortress, 1993), 21-38 (24; see, similarly, 32).  
83 Those scholars, then, who suggest that Johannine polemic is of a piece with prophetic discourse 
must address the differing function of the law in the two (e.g., Kee, Knowing, 257; Thiel, Like). Stephen 
Motyer specifically does so, arguing that the Fourth Gospel is a refocusing of the prophetic message onto 
Christ [Your Father the Devil? A New Approach to John and the Jews, ed. I. Howard Marshall et al., 
Paternoster Biblical Monographs (Milton Keynes: Paternoster, 1997), 150; cf. 128-32, 192-95, 214]. 
84 Williams observation that  was used particularly for newcomers to the Jewish community 
highlights this practice (Jews, 25). See also Brawleys discussion of the various trajectories of Jewish inclusion 
of gentiles (Evocative, 610). 
85 Note that in this case incomers are required to abandon previous ties, yet, according to Paula 
Fredriksen, the fact that some people did occasionally reject their previous identities can only be characterized 
as weird [Paul, Practical Pluralism, and the Invention of Religious Persecution in Roman Antiquity, in 
Understanding Religious Pluralism: Perspectives from Religious Studies and Theology, ed. Peter C. Phan and 
Jonathan Ray (Eugene, OR: Pickwick, 2014), 87-113 (92-94)]. Philo discusses as well the influence that Jewish 
laws had throughout the Mediterranean (Mos. 2.17-27). See, similarly, Josephus, C. Ap. 2.40 282-84. 
86 See also Tacitus, Hist. 5.5 For these ancient references, see Gruen, Romans, 431-32. Note that 
while Gruen disavows primordialism, he seems to reject anything except a prejudice against a primordial 
construction of Jews as proof of anti-Semitism in antiquity. He can thus conclude, Ancients, on the whole, 
lost little sleep over issues of ethnicity, and, unlike moderns, did not agonize over their identity (423-24, 429-
30, 434). The discussion above demonstrates that this was not the case. 
87 For this, see Mic 4:11-13; Is 25:2-3; Zech 14:12-15; Jer 10:10. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
turn to the worship of the god of Israel.88 These people are the eschatological gentiles.89 
They worship Yahweh exclusively, but without adopting Jewish identity markers.90 
Jewish discourse therefore included election by Yahweh, adherence to a law, and the 
welcome of outsiders. I suggested above that the terms  and  could 
preserve a memory of the Sadducees. Yet something must still be said about  and 
two terms that are used somewhat equivalently in the Fourth Gospel:  and . 
In John 1:47, 49, Jesus calls Nathanael an , and Nathanael calls Jesus  
 . In 3:10, Jesus asks Nicodemus how he,    , does not 
understand what he is saying. And in 12:13, the crowd acclaims Jesus in language drawn 
from Zeph 3:15:     (  in the LXX).91 , on the 
other hand, occurs 71 times throughout the Gospel, both in very Jewish (e.g., 1:19) and non-
Jewish (e.g., 18:33) contexts.92  
The two sets of terminology have sometimes been posited as insider/outsider 
language, with  used by insiders and  used by outsiders.93 However, Maurice 
Casey has demonstrated that the evidence is too variegated to support this hypothesis.94 
Additionally, legal correspondence from the second century BCE within a Jewish politeuma 
in Herakelopolis, Egypt, shows  already being used for self-identification within a 
88 Fredriksen, Paul, 98. Verses that Fredriksen lists to support the turning of the nations to Yahweh 
include Isa 2:2-4; Mic 4; Isa 25:6; Zech 8:23; Tobit 14:5-6; Sib. Or. 3.616, 715-24, 722 (98-99 n. 35). Others 
include: Zech 14:16-21; Jer 10:6-7; Isa 37:16; Psalms, e.g., 148. 
89 Fredriksen, Paul, 103. 
90 Fredriksen, Paul, 98-99. 
91 Section 4.3.4. 
92  is the standard designation of a Jew in Greek writing and in inscriptions, incorporates a 
bundle of attributes, referring to ethnicity (membership of a people with real or fictive genealogical links) and 
to geography (originating from or belonging to Judea) as well as to membership of a religious group 
(worshipping the God who resided, or had resided, in the Jerusalem Temple) (Rajak, Translation, 8). 
93 Nathan Thiel summarizes previous proposals and then nuances them [Israel and Jew as 
Markers of Jewish Identity in Antiquity: The Problems of Insider/Outsider Classification, JSJ 45.1 (2014): 
80-99; Thiel cites, e.g., Dunn, Partings, 192; with some of the history of the debate, see also Kierspel, Jews, 
71-75]. King of the Jews, similarly, may have begun as a Roman (or a Gentile) designation (de Boer, 
Narrative, 151). However, it was also used by Josephus (e.g., 15.10.5 373). 
94 Maurice Casey, Some Anti-Semitic Assumptions in the Theological Dictionary of the New 
Testament, NovT 41.3 (1999): 280-91 (282-83). 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
Jewish group.95 And the same use also occurs in the first century CE among insiders
Josephus (Ant. 19.5.2 283 and, citing Strabo, Ant. 14.7.2 117) and Philo (Against Flaccus 
74)and outsidersan edict from Emperor Claudius referring to the Alexandrian Jews (P. 
Lond 6.1912).96 Thus, both insiders and outsiders use the term . Rather than seeking 
to explain its use in the Gospel of John, perhaps  ought to be regarded as the 
unmarked designation, especially given the likely diaspora setting of the Gospels final 
redaction.97 The few uses of  (and ), listed above, could then be explained 
by Johns desire particularly to mark continuity with Hebrew Scriptures and traditions in 
those passages. 
However, to call  the unmarked designation does not identify its referent(s).98 
Lars Kierspel has examined Johns use of this term and noted not only where it is used, but 
also quite significantly where it is not. He points out that whereas the narrator in John often 
discusses a conflict with the Jews, Jesus usually portrays the conflict with the world.99 
While others have noted these parallels, they usually conclude, as Evans does, that [t]he 
Jews in this gospel are also the world and represent it.100 In contrast, Kierspel argues that 
Jesus trial and crucifixion (instigated by the Jews) are a model of the persecution to be 
experienced by Jesus followers (instigated by the world).101 The Jewish persecutors of 
95 Thiel, Israel, 86-87. 
96 See, similarly, BGU 4.1151. All cited in Honigman, Politeumata, 7-8, 17. 
97 Pace, for example, Jane Heath who considers    to be more ethnically focused 
(You Say, 243 n. 26).  
98 For Barrett, for example, The Jews represent the world viewed from the religious point of view 
(Gospel, 172). This is the view of many scholars, e.g., Meeks, Prophet-King, 63; Lincoln, Reading, 139. Yet 
to separate out religion as a category in the ancient world has been shown to be anachronistic (Section 1.2.1). 
Kierspel, by contrast, characterizes king of Israel as nationalistic and this worldly, which is equally 
problematic (Jews, 72). 
99 Kierspel, Jews, 93, 214, 222-23. 
100 Evans, Explorations, 53. See also Lincoln, Truth, 19. 
101 Kierspel, Jews, 127. See also the argument of Lincoln already mentioned (Section 6.1.1; Truth, 
181). Raimo Hakola suggests something similar: John understood [the controversies surrounding his 
community] as imitating the original rejection of Jesus by his contemporaries [Reconsidering Johannine 
Christianity: A Social Identity Approach (New York: Routledge, 2015), 112]. For Hakola, Jesus innocence 
and the evilness of Jesus opponents (105) are heightened and contrasted to justify the actions of a community 
in the process of severing its Jewish roots. Hakolas analysis will not be extensively engaged with, but it is 
worth noting that he tends to flatten out Johns characterization of the world to a purely negative response. It 
would be interesting to compare the way the innocence of Jesus is used in other New Testament texts to see if 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
Jesus, then, do not represent the world but are the first examples of persecutors of Christians. 
They become the cypher (through the irony and ethnic re-categorization of the trial) for the 
Roman oppressors, and, as will be shown below, Pilate and the Roman soldiers are classified 
alongside the Jews in this sense. Thus, Gerry Wheaton misunderstands Kierspel when he 
ranges his work among accounts that do not connect  with any historical group of 
people.102 In fact, Kierspel proposes that John presents the historical Jews who opposed Jesus 
in a way that points to the rejection of the followers of Christ by the world. In this way, John 
rooted his narrative in memory but shaped it for his present day.103 
This section has proposed that Jewish identity discourse included markers that are in 
some ways similar to Roman identity discourse. Both groups describe themselves as elected, 
both value their law, and both have processes (although very different ones) for including 
outsiders. The next section will bring this information from Roman and Jewish 
encyclopaedias together for the purpose of analyzing John 18:2819:22. 
7.1.4. Recategorization in John 18:2819:22 
The trial narrative will now be analysed with the aid of the tools of social identity 
theory, specifically the concepts of ethnic labelling and identity markers.104 These will 
highlight the way John facilitates a recategorization of Roman and Jewish identities, thus 
acting as a leade[r] of recategorization for his addressees.105 
it is similar or different from the Gospel of John. See, e.g., 2 Cor 5:21; James 5:6; 1 Pet 2:22. See also 
Rensberger, Overcoming, 96; Reinhartz, Befriending, 50. 
102 Gerry Wheaton, The Role of Jewish Feasts in John's Gospel, ed. Paul Trebilco, SNTSMS 162 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015), 36-38. Similarly, see Yves Simoens, Un pouvoir peut en 
cacher un autre; un pch aussi: Interprtation de Jn 19,11, in Rediscovering John: Essays on the Fourth 
Gospel in Honour of Frdric Manns, ed. L. Daniel Chrupcala, Analecta Studium Biblicum Franciscanum 80 
(Milan: Edizioni Terra Santa, 2013), 531-57 (537). 
103 Brown also notes that the answers of Jesus to the Roman governor reflect the later answers of the 
Christians to the authorities of the Roman Empire (John, 2.860). Although this thesis does not always draw 
the same conclusions as Brown about the meaning of Jesus answers, it does argue in this chapter that at a 
minimum the honour that Jesus retains provides a hidden transcript in which Jesus models honour for 
persecuted Christians. 
104 For a justification of the relevance of social identity theory to the Gospel of John, see Philip F. 
Esler, and Ronald A. Piper, Lazarus, Mary and Martha: Social-Scientific Approaches to the Gospel of John 
(Minneapolis: Fortress, 2006), 27, 38-40 (with exception taken to the characterization of John's language as an 
antilanguage, 39). On antilanguage, see Section 1.3.1. 
105 Baker, Narrative-Identity, 108-109. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
J. Brian Tucker has proposed six criteria for identifying a text that seeks to form the 
hearers social identity: (1) the text offers a rival narrative; (2) the text renames the auditors; 
(3) the text relates the new markers of identity to old markers in a way that recognizes the 
non-monolithic nature of identity; (4) the text addresses the implications of the new identity 
in areas of ethics and ethos; (5) the text suggests performances that will embody the new 
identity; and (6) the text uses discursive practices from the environment to negotiate the new 
identity.106 John 18:2819:22 meets all of these criteria. First, the Johannine trial narrative 
rivals the claims of Rome (criteria 1).107 Next, Jesus-believers are called those who listen 
to Jesus because they are from the truth (18:37) (criteria 2). John 18:36 also may name 
Jesus-believers   of a  that is      .108 Thus, Jesus 
has no real subjects as would be true if his kingdom were like other kingdoms; rather he has 
followers who hear his voice as truth.109  
The third criterion will be set aside for now, but the analysis below will demonstrate 
that this passage engages aspects of Roman and Jewish identities, proposing that it does so 
in order to shape (or strengthen) the identity of Jesus-believers.110 Implications for ethics 
and ethos (criteria 4-5) of believing in Jesus are perhaps spelled out more clearly in other 
passages of the Gospel, such as the Farewell Discourse. Yet even in the trial narrative, 
hearers of the Gospel learn that Jesus-believers do not fight for Jesus freedom (18:36). 
Furthermore, Jesus himself models a man who chooses to be vulnerable for the sake of the 
106 Tucker, Remain, 51-57. Others who argue that the Gospel of John seeks to create community 
include Tat-siong Benny Liew who describes it as a site of struggle for community and Warren Carter who 
argues that the Gospels antilanguage creates a rhetoric of distance that calls for less accommodation to 
imperial society (Liew, Ambiguous, 193; Carter, John, 14-15, 81). For other Johannine narratives and 
techniques that seek to create community, see Liew, Ambiguous, 195-202. 
107 This has been argued particularly in Chapters 4-6. It could be interesting, moreover, to argue that 
Johns narrative rivals those of the other canonical gospels, seeking to form the identity of a community 
alternative to them, but that will not be attempted in this thesis. 
108 This characterization is uncertain, however, as mentioned previously, because it is expressed within 
a contrary-to-fact conditional (Section 6.2.1.2). 
109 Brown, John, 2.869. 
110 I argue below in this section that it is quite difficult to determine whether this is a new identity 
being created or an ongoing identity being strengthened, particularly in a narrative text. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
people of God despite his power to do otherwise.111 This suggests, then, both an ethical 
stance as well as its performance.112 Under the sixth criterion can be placed the elements of 
Roman and Jewish discourse presented so far in this chapter: election, law, and 
accommodation to outsiders. The first two markers will be highlighted in the analysis below, 
demonstrating the way the trial narrative includes Roman and Jewish markers to recategorize 
ethnicity for the community as John envisages it.113  
A determination of whether this was intended to strengthen an already existing 
community or to form (or re-form) a new (or disintegrating) community will not be 
attempted in this thesis. Such conclusions seem to depend on a priori assumptions about the 
historical state of Johns audience. Of the three elements required for interpretation: Sign, 
object and interpretant, the object for such a determination is missing, and cannot, in my 
view, be reconstructed from the available evidence.114 In Chapters 4-6, what can be known 
about the historical reality of the first- and second-century CE Mediterranean world (Chapter 
3) was used to provide an object against which to produce an interpretant for the Sign of the 
Johannine trial narrative. However, in order to determine the effect of the narrative on the 
auditors, one would need a more precise object with more information about the community 
than the text provides. In Figure 30 below, Johns audience is the object, the group identity 
described in the Gospel is the Sign, but the interpretant, whether the author calls for change 
or consistency, cannot be determined without knowing the object. In other words, I believe 
that Johns construction can be read from the textit is open rather than closedbut to what 
extent his audience already lives up to that construction cannot be determined from the 
narrative.115  
111 The issue of vulnerability will be addressed in the second half of this chapter. 
112 In Chapter 1, I noted that the ethics of a culture is correlated with its material existence, and thus 
may both affect and be affected by it (Section 1.3.2). 
113 Baker discusses these issues in more general terms in Narrative-Identity, 112-16, esp. 114. 
114 For the definitions of these three elements, see Section 1.2.2. 
115 Dokka, Irony, 102. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
It must be noted that many scholars miss one important aspect of open and closed 
texts.116 An open text creates its own Model Reader (Ecos term) and guides her to the 
intended meaning.117 Open texts therefore work to exclude any reader not willing or able to 
become the Model Reader. A closed text, by contrast, simply assumes its Model Reader and 
therefore, paradoxically, leaves itself open to readers who prefer to impose their own model 
on the text. The principal difference, then, is not the definiteness either of the reader or of 
the meaning, but the ability of the text to create its reader and therefore the ability of an 
analysis to discover the Model Reader from the information given in the text. A closed text 
has less information about the Model Reader, not more. The Gospel of John is, in my view, 
an open text that provides information for its Model Readers and seeks to exclude any 
unwilling to take on those requirements, but whether its earliest audiences were quite willing 
to do so or notthat information is not in the text. 
116 Open texts are often defined as those that allow for multiple meanings, as opposed to closed texts 
that only allow one (Chandler, Semiotics, 255). However, that is not the important point for Eco. While closed 
texts aim to produce only one reading, they are closed not because they are closed to other readings. Indeed, 
they are not, since they can be analysed from any number of perspectives. They are closed, however, to the 
reader, leaving her on the outside of the text. She thus must choose to take on the requirements of the Model 
Reader or not. This is the distinction between use and interpretation in which use is free whereas 
interpretations are infinite but not indefinite and must be recognized as imposed by the semiotic strategies 
displayed by the text (Eco, Theory, 35-36).  
Open texts, on the other hand, are open because they involve the reader in the process of interpretation, 
giving him the information required for understanding and leading him to draw conclusions and conjectures of 
his own. On open and closed texts, see Radford, On Eco, 39-41. 
Note that the terms open and closed seem to be suffering some semantic shift as they move from 
Eco, to Bauckham, to Lamb. While Ecos definitions focus on the texts openness to the readers participation 
in the meaning-making process, Bauckham connects closed texts to a determinate meaning and while he says 
that open texts leave their meaning more open to their real readers participation in producing meaning what 
he seems to mean by this is that meaning itself is left more open [Eco, Role, 8-10; Richard Bauckham, For 
Whom Were Gospels Written?, in The Gospels for All Christians: Rethinking the Gospel Audiences, ed. 
Richard Bauckham (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1998), 9-48 (48)]. For Lamb, the meaning-making part of the 
process has been dropped and an open text is one that can be understood by those outside of a community for 
which it was intended whereas a closed text is part of the semiotic system of a closed group (Text, 19, 143).  
117 Eco, Theory, 35-36. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
Figure 30: Sign-object-interpretant for identity construction in the Fourth Gospel 
The Sign, howeverthe group identity that John creates in the trial narrativeis 
accessible. Furthermore, the setting of the trial in Caesars court emphasizes its universal 
significance.118 For Lincoln, the cosmic trial is one whose cultural unit is found in the 
Jewish encyclopaedia of Deutero-Isaiah.119 On the other hand, for Carter, the cosmic aspects 
of the Gospel of John are in opposition to the cosmic claims of Rome.120 My analysis adds 
to Lincolns insights the Roman discourse echoed in the text. Yet rather than Carters claim 
of an opposition, it seeks to demonstrate that both Roman and Jewish ethnicities are 
recategorized in order to establish witness to the truth (John 18:37) as a superordinate 
identity.121 
118 Lincoln, Gospel, 458. On interpreting Pilates justice as Caesars court, see Acts 25:10. 
119 Although the trial motif is evident in the Fourth Gospel, its cosmic aspects were developed by 
Lincoln in relation to Deutero-Isaiah (Gospel, 12; Truth, 38-51). Sigfred Pedersen also sees a cosmological 
purpose in the Fourth Gospel, but he grounds it in the creation account in the prologue, which is then reprised 
in the universalizing claims of Jesus to the Samaritan woman (4:22-24, 42) [Anti-Judaism in John's Gospel: 
John 8, in New Readings in John: Literary and Theological Perspectives: Essays from the Scandinavian 
Conference on the Fourth Gospel, Arhus, 1997, ed. Johannes Nissen and Sigfred Pedersen, JSNTSup 182 
(Sheffield: Sheffield Academic, 1999), 172-93 (177)]. 
120 Carter, John, 155. Bryan suggests four possible responses to the empire: assent and acquiescence, 
assent with occasional confrontations, peaceable resistance, armed resistance (Render, 34-35). This thesis 
argues that the Fourth Gospel suggests the second. 
121 Witness to the truth and Jesus-believer will be used almost interchangeably in this chapter, 
witness to the truth when speaking particularly about the superordinate identity created in John 18:2819:22 
and Jesus-believer, as in the rest of the thesis, for the early followers of Jesus in general and more specifically 
those addressed by the text (Section 3.1.4). For the frequent use of  in the Gospel of John, see, e.g., 
Lincoln, Life, 146. On Zeugnis der Wahrheit, see also Gniesmer, Proze, 225, 261. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
Based on the number of soldiers in the garden (a cohort, ), the conflict starts 
out primarily between Jesus and the Romans.122 Even in that scene, however, Judas guides 
Roman soldiers and Jewish officials (      ) to Annas 
(18:3, 12). The text balances the number of Romans with the will of the Jews. Thus, the 
opposition of Pilate and the Roman soldiers to Jesus is added to the opposition of some of 
the Jews in the rest of the Gospel (e.g., 10:19-21). In this way, the two ethnic groups are 
categorized together. 
The chain of custody begins with the Jews who hand Jesus over to the Romans 
(18:30, 35, 36).123 Romans and Jews begin separated as might be expected, inside and 
outside the Roman space, the praetorium (18:28), with Pilate ambiguously travelling 
between the two places.124 However, Jesus starts on the Roman side, and while Pilate 
continually offers him to the Jews (18:31, 39; 19:6, 14), they reject him, suggesting that 
Jesus himself does not belong with the Jews, despite his self-identification with them in 
John 4:20-22.125  
A key moment occurs in 18:35, when the surface answer to Pilates question, Am I 
a Jew? is No, yet the Johannine answer is Yes.126 The Johannine Pilates question refers 
the conversation to Judaism, while John, at the same time, by the use of , implies that 
122 Moore, Empire, 53. 
123 The verb  cannot (pace Duke) be translated as betray wherever it occurs in the Fourth 
Gospel as one can hardly think that John 19:30 means that Jesus bowed his head and betrayed his spirit (Irony, 
128). In the context of a trial, the word seems best translated as to hand over custody of someone 
( 1b, BDAG 762). Issues of betrayal are related to loyalty and would be interesting to explore. 
Paul Duke, for example, notes the use of  with differing subjects (18:30; 19:16), yet concludes that 
both when the Jews betray Jesus to Pilate and when Pilate betrays Jesus to the chief priests, the Fourth 
Gospel makes the Jews responsible (Irony, 130, 136). However, from the beginning of the Gospel (John 1:10-
11), both the world in general, that Jesus is said to have made, and the Jews in particular, who are more 
specifically Jesus own, are shown to refuse to him the recognition they might reasonably be thought to owe 
him. (Phillips shows the way   ought not to be read as referring exclusively to the Jews in John 1:11 
[Prologue, 188-90].)  
124 This word in particular, repeated as it is three time in verses 28 and 33, emphasizes the Romanness 
of the space. 
125 Stibbe notes also the sense of brotherhood between Jesus and the Jews that comes from their 
shared Father (8:41; Storyteller, 135). Similarly, in 4:22 he clearly identifies with the Jews. 
126 Rensberger, Overcoming, 93; Meeks, Prophet-King, 63; Lincoln, Gospel, 461-62. Heaths 
comments on this verse are similar to Pancaros on John 18:37 discussed below (You Say, 245). 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
ethnic categories are not as stable as they might seem. Johns proclivity for double entendres 
allows for the possibility that the reader should at one level answer Yes, Pilate is a Jew.127 
Johns other two uses of  function in such a way.128 When the woman from Samaria 
asks, This isnt the Messiah, is it? (4:29) the Johannine answer is Yes. In that narrative, 
even the Samaritans recognize Jesus as Messiah ten verses later. Similarly, the Jews ask, 
He wont kill himself, will he? (8:22), and the Johannine answer, because Jesus is able to 
lay down and take up his own life (e.g., 10:18), is also Yes.129 Thus, in 18:35, Pilate joins 
the Jews (Figure 31). Furthermore, in Jesus response to Pilate, he sets himself apart from 
the Jews by using the third person.130 He is still in the praetorium, in Roman space. 
Figure 31: All Johannine characters constructed as Jewish except the Roman, Jesus 
Roman soldiers offer a Roman salute to the king of the Jews (19:2). Although the 
crown and robe turn Jesus into Caesar, the pledge of loyalty to a Jewish king aligns the 
Roman soldierss allegiance with what one might expect of Jews, although both groups, 
again together, reject Jesus in this role. At this moment in the trial, then, Jesus is alone, and 
he is repeatedly portrayed as a Roman emperor (19:2-5, 7, 12)Figure 32.  
127 See on this, e.g., Duke, Irony, 129; Bond, Pilate, 177, 179; Lincoln, Truth, 19-20, 126, 240, 399; 
Lincoln, Reading, 139; Carter, John, 302; Heath, You Say, 245. However, rather than the recategorization 
of ethnicities described below, Lincoln sees this statement as categorizing Pilate with the Jews as 
representatives of the unbelieving world. Still, he points out that people of all ethnicities exist on both sides of 
the belief/unbelief divide (Reading, 141-42). The analysis proposed in this section is pace those who see only 
the expectation of a negative answer, such as Brown, John, 2.852. 
128 Pace Barrett, as well as Bernard who also points to 21:5, but in that verse NA28 has   with no 
indication of variants (Barrett, Gospel, 536; Bernard, St. John, 1.152).  
129 Culpepper, Anatomy, 173-74, 176; Duke, Irony, 85-86; Carter, Storyteller, 120. Pace Koester who 
looks only at the immediate context for the meaning of the question (Why, 173 n. 24). 
130 Collins, Speaking, 170. 
Roman
Jesus
Jewish
Jews
Pilate
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
Figure 32: Jesus portrayed as Caesar 
As the trial progresses, however, the Jews begin to identify themselves as Romans 
by demanding crucifixion (19:6, 15).131 Pilate indeed offers to let them crucify Jesus 
themselves, repeating the connection (v. 6). Furthermore, when the Jews remind Pilate of 
his obligation as Caesars friend (v. 11), they construct themselves as loyal to Rome.132 Then 
the Jews pronounce the sentence against Jesus (v. 15), and declare their allegiance to 
Caesar (v. 15), completing their transformation into Romans (Figure 33).133 
Figure 33: Inversion of ethnicities in John 18:28--19:15 
In 19:16 the Johannine Pilate hands Jesus over, and whether he hands him back to 
the Jews or on to the Roman soldiers is ambiguous, at least temporarily until verse 23.134 
While the Roman Pilate seems to insist that Jesus is the ruler of the Jews, the Jews insist 
that he is not.135 Thus, the recategorization begins in 18:1-4, extends throughout John 
131 Although the Romans were not the only people to use this method of execution, in the first century 
CE, crucifixion was most often done by them. Chapman points out the vivid memory the post-Second Temple 
generation would have of the crucifixions surrounding the fall of Jerusalem and the Temple [David W. 
Chapman, Ancient Jewish and Christian Perceptions of Crucifixion (Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2010), 
132 Richey, Roman, 167; Carter, John, 309. 
133 See Section 6.2.2.4 n. 337 and 6.2.2.5 n. 345. 
134 See Carter who believes that the repetition of the Ioudaioi (18:31, 36, 38; 19:7, 12, 14) is done 
to underline their opposition to Jesus (John, 299). I am arguing instead that John is recategorizing them 
together with gentiles (as represented by Pilate and his soldiers) as subgroups, with witness to the truth as a 
superordinate identity. 
135 Collins, Speaking, 174. 
Jesus Caesar
Roman
Jesus Caesar
'Jews'
Jewish
Pilate
Soldiers
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
18:2819:22 and ends when the Romans mockingly align themselves with the Jews, Jesus 
looks like Caesar, and the Jews demonstrate their allegiance to Rome.136 However, the 
titulus, with its Aramaic, Latin and Greek moves Jew, Roman, and Greek side by side, all 
proclaiming the crucified/glorified Jesus to be the ruler of the Jews.137 This certainly 
suggests the ultimate triumph of Jewish eschatologyat least for those who accept Jesus as 
Lord.  
For those who see the Jews as representative of the unbelieving world, when John 
characterizes Pilate as a Jew (18:35) he is simply showing that Pilate also rejects belief in 
Jesus.138 However, if the Jews are understood to be the first example of those who will 
persecute Jesus-believers, then Pilate has been categorized as another persecutor.139 Indeed, 
the analysis above has suggested that when the Jews declare that their  is Caesar, 
the Jews and Romans are categorized together as exemplars of those of any ethnicity who 
do not ultimately choose Jesus as their Lord and their God (20:28). Those who do, Jewish 
or gentile, are recategorized under the superordinate identity of witnesses to the truth.140 
In this way, the claims of Rome as well as those of, for example, Deutero-Isaiah, are 
engaged, challenged, and re-ordered. To assert that the world rightly belongs to the one who 
has come into it from above to bring salvific judgment (John 12:31; 14:30; 16:11 and 19:11) 
136 The recategorization in John 18:2819:22 was presented in Laura Hunt, Pilate: Am I a Jew? 
Romans in the Gospel of John (paper presented at Emerging Scholarship on the NT section of the Institute for 
Biblical Research, SBL Annual Meeting, Atlanta, GA, 20 November, 2015). See also Genuyt, Comparution, 
137 Lmonon sees the ambiguity as a form of blame for the Jews, but agrees that the three languages 
on the titulus mean that Jesus death was for the world (Ponce, 172, 177; John 12:32). This conclusion was 
drawn quite early (Cyril of Alexandria, Commentary on the Gospel of John 12). Van Tilborg also sees this 
blurring of alignment although he does not suggest a reason for it or conclusions to be drawn from it (Reading, 
166). 
138 Lincoln, Truth, 19-20. 
139 Jane Heath suggests somewhat similarly that Pilate is a Jew not in the ethnic sense, but in his 
spiritual kinship to those who have offered Jesus to a Roman trial (You Say, 245). Pace Thompson who 
considers that this phrase distances him from the Jews who have brought Jesus to him (John, 379). It is this 
distinction between Pilate and his informants, along with the ethnic recategorization argued for in this chapter, 
that leads me to conclude that 19:11 evaluates the guilt of the betrayer over that of the enforcer (Section 
6.2.2.5). 
140 Rensberger similarly aligns the Jews and Pilate (Overcoming, 95). 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
appropriates both Roman and Jewish narratives.141 Rather than constructing the Jews as 
those within the family of God and gentiles as those outside, or the Romans as those given 
an empire by the promise of the gods at whose summit Caesar rules before his death and 
apotheosis, an empire separating civilized citizens from barbarian Jews, the Gospel of John 
blurs these familiar distinctions.142 Both the Romans and the Jews are instead addressed as 
part of the world to which Jesus has come; all start as outsiders (John 1:5, 11).143 John 
offers entry into an empire, also ruled by one with power from above (18:36; 19:11).144 
Romans and Jews are equally invited to believe and be self-condemned if they reject 
Jesus.145  
The rejection of Jesus that Pilate and the Jews have in common is thus extended 
into a description of all of humanity.146 Some Romans and some Jews within the narrative 
are portrayed as the first examples of citizens of the world who reject Jesus as emperor.147 
The empire of the Johannine Jesus includes and simultaneously excludes both Roman 
citizens and the Jews, admitting only those who believe.148 This re-alignment of loyalties 
is quite different from the way older evaluations of the Gospel distinguished between Pilate 
141 Lincoln, Truth, 258. 
142 Schnackenburg notes the same blurring as I do although without drawing the same conclusions: 
The contrast is intentional: The gentile is reluctant to crucify this king, the representatives of Judaism 
disavow him and proclaim instead their loyalty to the Roman colonial power which is otherwise hateful to 
them precisely on religious grounds (John, 3.265-66). See, on Johns use of , Kierspel, Jews, 120 n. 69; 
see, similarly, 177-81. 
143 For the Jews, this is an attempt to recall her leaders to fidelity to the covenant (Schneiders, 
Written, 81). See also Ruth B. Edwards, Discovering John: Content, Interpretation, Reception, Discovering 
Biblical Texts: Content, Interpretation, Reception (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2015), 142-55. 
144 Gillespie, Trial, 72. 
145 On all starting as outsiders, see Craig R. Koester, Jesus the Way, the Cross, and the World 
According to the Gospel of John, WW 21.4 (2001): 360-69 (361-62). See, similarly, Dunn, Neither, 361-62. 
146 E.g., Koester, Why, 169. 
147 Pace those, like de la Potterie, who see the Jews as those qui reprsentent concrtement le 
monde (Jsus, 247). The Jews for example, in 8:33, re-affirm their profound commitment to monotheism 
[Adele Reinhartz, The Gospel of John: How the Jews Became Part of the Plot, in Jesus, Judaism and 
Christian Anti-Judaism: Reading the New Testament after the Holocaust, ed. Paula Fredriksen and Adele 
Reinhartz (Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2002), 99-116 (107)]. Pace Carter who misses the multiple 
meanings of  that Reinhartz notes: both to be enslaved but, more importantly in this context, to 
serve. He can thus erroneously conclude that they who in 8.33 claimed never to have been slaves of anyone 
enslave themselves to Rome and recognize the emperors rule (Social Identities, 243). 
148 John 1:4-5, 7-9; 3:19-21; 8:12; 12:46; Lincoln, Truth, 240. However, see also John 5:35; 9:5; 
12:35-36 with their suggestions that the light has or will be brought by others, thus extending the empire from 
the time of Jesus life to the time of the hearers of the Gospel. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
who represents the world in need of salvation and the Jews who are simply apostate.149 
Such an analysis resulted in a reification of group identities such that being Roman, Jewish, 
or Christian emerged as mutually exclusive.150 However, when it is noted that to believe in 
Jesus creates a superordinate identity, then previous ethnic identities do not disappear. Jesus 
is not presented as without identity but as Lord of all identities, since he is both a Roman 
emperor (see Chapter 5) and King of the Jews (John 19:19, 22).  
Chapter 5 suggested that the comparison between Jesus and Caesar is not expressed 
primarily in terms of a contrast with Rome but within a negotiation, in which there are 
elements of replacement but also a description of the areas of conflict, i.e. some redefinition 
in terms of truth and honour.151 First, the Roman encyclopaedia is brought into the narrative 
metaphorically as Roman soldiers and Pilate mock Jesus as not Caesar. Then, Roman-aware 
auditors are shown that despite the lack of awareness of those Johannine characters, the 
claims of the Roman empire have been fulfilled by Jesus. Yet in the broader view, the Aeneid 
and its Roman thought world extend the trial of all nations described in the Gospel to include 
Romans. Ultimately, in facing a crucified Jesus, their encyclopaedia is rewritten so that they 
can become part of this new community such that for Roman-aware auditors honour is 
maintained because judgement is meted out according to the God of Israel.152 To self-
identify as a witness to the truth is to claim an honourable identity superordinate to that of 
149 Edwyn Clement Hoskyns, The Fourth Gospel, ed. Francis Noel Davey, 2nd ed. (London: Faber 
and Faber, 1947), 515. 
150 Hoskyns, Fourth, 521. See above on reified identity. 
151 Warren Carter describes this kind of negotiation with Rome, albeit somewhat inconsistently. See, 
for example, the list of references to a call to complete antagonism between Jesus-believers and Rome (Section 
6.1.3 n. 70). Although he combines his view of the Fourth Gospel as an antilanguage with the work of Scott 
on hidden transcripts, two approaches that have been differentiated in this thesis, he recognizes the way the 
mission of the Gospel of John collides with, contests, and repairs Romes mission, a description somewhat 
close to the negotiation described in this chapter (John, 81). 
152 Lincoln, Truth, 260. Lincolns full sentence is: the narrative presents the world as the place where 
true judgment has been and is being given, even in the midst of the victimization and violence that can 
characterize the oppositions system of justice. However, outside of the universe of discourse of Truth on 
Trial, this might be misunderstood to mean that justice exists within the Johannine community. That is not 
what Lincoln means by judgement, which he defines both in relation to Jesus and to his followers: Just as 
Jesus mission constituted a realized judgment of either salvation or condemnation, so the disciples mission 
entails a realized judgement of either the forgiveness or the retention of sins, and this reflects Gods judgment 
(31).  
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
Jew or Roman. Thus, the third of Tuckers criteria for recognizing an identity-forming text, 
that of relating new markers of identity to old markers in a way that recognizes the non-
monolithic nature of identity, is present also in John 18:2819:22. The markers of election 
and law in particular have been recategorized such that they are not the exclusive resource 
of either Roman or Jewish identity. Witness to the truth provides a superordinate identity, 
not built upon heredity or ancestry, but on choice and judgment.153 This judgement will be 
effected according to criteria different from those of Romans and Jews, so that adherence 
to either or both of these laws seems to be marginalized as a marker for Jesus-believers. 
7.1.5. Law in John 18:2819:22 
Scholars sometimes conclude that Jesus crucifixion is carried out in violation of both 
Jewish and Roman law.154 These conclusions proceed primarily from a later Christian 
perspective and a modern-day sense of justice. In Pancaros study of the meaning of  
in the Gospel of John, he notes that [t]he Law should lead to the recognition of Jesus and 
that, therefore, [t]he Law is violated by those who condemn Jesus.155 Yet regarding the 
trial narrative, Pancaro concludes that [i]n the eyes of the Jews the Law demands the death 
of Jesus because he is opposed to the Law; in the eyes of the evangelist the Law demands 
the death of Jesus because it was given by God through Moses precisely in order to find its 
fulfilment in the death of Jesus. The death of Jesus comes about as a result of the Fathers 
will.156  
Hallbck notes this as a literary feature as well:  
There is  a conflict of interpretation between Jesus and the Jews 
respecting his person, a choice between belief and disbelief. But this is a 
conflict at the cognitive level of the narrative; at the pragmatic level there is 
no opposing programme. The Jews do not represent an opposing 
153 Liew, Ambiguous, 203. 
154 For those who understand Jesus crucifixion to be in violation of Roman law, see Section 6.1.2 n. 
34. For the crucifixion as a violation of Jewish law, see Pancaro, Law, 130-57. 
155 Pancaro, Law, 508-510. 
156 Pancaro, Law, 510. Thus, pace Carter, there is no opposition between Jesus and the combined 
forces of Pilate and the Jewish leadership (Social Identities, 241-48. On this see also Carter, John, 310). 
Furthermore, Jesus does not save his followers from Roman power (pace 249).  
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
programme to the narrative assignment of Jesus. Evidently the Jews are 
behind the crucifixion of Jesus, and they themselves think of this as an 
opposing programme. But this is exactly where they are deceived, for it is in 
fact an auxiliary programme. It is the intention, the assignment, of Jesus to 
be crucified, and to that end the seemingly contradictory programme enters 
the principal narrative programme of the Gospel as an auxiliary programme. 
Jesus himself has to send off Judas during the last Supper; and when he is 
about to be arrested in Gethsemane, he almost has to insist on being caught.157  
Although Thatcher writes that the events of Jesus death were predetermined not by 
the public transcript of Roman crucifixions, but rather by the imperative that Gods word 
must be fulfilled, I suggest that from Johns perspective they are both.158 Indeed, the 
emperors Lex is an actor in the game.159 Although Jesus has not transgressed Roman natural 
law, pragmatic application of Romes power, i.e. positive law, demands that he must die.160 
The actions of Pilate happen according to the orientation of his lifes trajectory, but the 
timing is the hour chosen by God (7:32-44; 8:20-59; 10:31-39; 12:23; 18:6, 11).161 
So what happens to the laws of the Jews and the Romans in the Fourth Gospels 
superordinate identity?162 To address this question thoroughly would require a separate study 
of the function of the identity marker law-abiding within the whole Gospel.163 In the 
157 Geert Hallbck, The Gospel of John as Literature: Literary Readings of the Fourth Gospel, in 
New Readings in John: Literary and Theological Perspectives: Essays from the Scandinavian Conference on 
the Fourth Gospel, Arhus, 1997, ed. Johannes Nissen and Sigfred Pedersen, JSNTSup 182 (Sheffield: Sheffield 
Academic, 1999), 31-46 (45). Thatcher notes something similar when he describes the contrast one reads in 
the levels of meaning of various episodes in the Gospel of John in terms of the difference between their 
normal public meaning and what John thinks was actually happening, in other words, as for Hallbck, a 
cognitive contrast (Greater, 127; see, similarly, his point that the specific contents of John's Gospel may be 
viewed as a specific counter to the claims of imperial power [4]). 
158 It is possible that Thatcher is again referencing a cognitive contrast in the meaning of these events. 
However, I would argue that both meanings are still present, although contrasted (Conquered, 155, 157-58). 
159 Kasper Bro Larsen, Recognizing the Stranger (Leiden: Brill, 2012), 175. 
160 This distinction is discussed in Section 7.1.2. 
161 For the view that orientation affects choice, see Harold W. Attridge, Divine Sovereignty and 
Human Responsibility in the Fourth Gospel, in Revealed Wisdom: Studies in Apocalyptic in Honour of 
Christopher Rowland, ed. John Ashton, Ancient Judaism and Early Christianity 88 (Leiden: Brill, 2014), 183-
99 (189-90). For the reminder that John describes God having decreed the moment, see Xavier Lon-Dufour, 
Lecture de l'vangile selon Jean, vol. 4 (Paris: Parole de Dieu, 1996), 104-105; cited in Simoens, Pouvoir, 
546. (The Lon-Dufour volume itself was unavailable to me.) 
162 Although Pancaro looks at the function of the Jewish law in the Gospel of John, within the trial 
narrative he contrasts religious and political in a way that Section 1.2.1 has shown to be anachronistic (Section 
1.2.1). Furthermore, his analysis of Pilate sees him as impartial and showing sympathy towards Jesus in a 
way that is not consonant with a Roman governor (Pancaro, Law, 315, 307-26, esp. 324). Genuyt notes the two 
laws in play as well (Comparution, 135). 
163 Andrew Lincoln points out, for example, that Jesus contrasts with Moses and the law as early as 
1:17 (Truth, 14, 147). 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
Johannine trial narrative, however, only the Jews and Pilate discuss any law, as they shift 
back and forth between accusations and implications, each usually claiming to be law-
abiding themselves. When Pilate asks for the accusation (18:29), he is following Roman 
legal procedure.164 In the next verse, the Jews also present themselves as law-abiding, since 
they claim that Jesus has done something evil (v. 30).165 The law used as a standard for 
judging that evil, however, is not overtly specified. Nevertheless, since it is the Jews who 
have judged him as an evildoer ( ), they seem to have already evaluated him on 
the basis of their own law, which Pilate recognizes when he suggests that they complete the 
process by judging him according to [their] own law (v. 31, author translation).166 Thus, 
whether or not historically Jews were permitted to put people to death, the rhetorical effect 
of the phrase in verse 31, we are not permitted to kill anyone is a claim for a Jewish identity 
that abides by Roman law by bringing Jewish transgressors to Rome for execution.167 
Pilate declares a lack of , grounds for accusation against Jesus (v. 38). This is 
not, as mentioned in Chapter 6, the same as a declaration of innocence.168 Instead, Pilate is 
positioning himself as a law-abiding judge who will not try a case without reasonable 
grounds for Roman involvement.169 He then refers the Jews to their own tradition (  
 )and for Romans tradition was the basis of law (v. 39).170 Romans regularly 
deferred to local law, so Pilate is abiding by Roman law, by deferring to Jewish law.171 
I have separated legal punishment from illegal violence (according to the Roman 
encyclopaedia), and thus consider the flogging and slapping in 19:1-3 as part of the trial 
164 Bickerman, Utilitas, 198; Tolmie, Pontius, 584. 
165 Lincoln, Truth, 37; Larsen, Recognizing, 177-78. 
166 Joel C. Elowsky, ed. Commentary on the Gospel of John: Theodore of Mopsuestia, ed. Thomas C. 
Oden and Gerald Bray, L., Ancient Christian Texts (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2010), 152. 
167 For an entre into the historical debate, see Wright, Governor, 176. 
168 Section 6.2.1.3. 
169 Tolmie again suggests that Pilate is attempting to fulfill his judicial role in a just way (Pontius, 
587-89). 
170 Wilhelm Kierdorf, Mos maiorum, PC. 
171 For references to Romans allowing provincials to follow their own laws, see Section 6.2.1.1, 
especially n. 138. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
procedure, since it would be considered a normal part of the judicial process in antiquity 
(Dig. 48.10.15.41).172 And the debate about the source of authority and the assigning of 
guilt in verse 11 again leave the question of Roman or Jewish gods and laws open and 
ambiguous.  
In John 18:40, by choosing Barabbas, the Jews for the first time declare themselves 
to be rebellious to Rome by choosing a rebel over Jesus.173 This unique example becomes 
clearer when one disentangles the two-level communication. Rather than putting the 
information in the mouth of Pilate or the Jews, the narrator steps in and declares Barabbas 
to be a rebel.174 While it is true that the Jews make the choice of freeing Barabbas rather 
than Jesus, it is the narrator who characterizes this choice as treacherous. The irony, then, as 
many have perceived, is that law-abiding Jews choose to set a rebel free.175 However, in 
their role as first among many of all ethnic or religious designations, the narrator ironically 
expresses the reality that some of those most concerned about following the law may 
ultimately kill those that Jesus-believers would regard as of the truth and set free those who 
are not of the truth.176 Pilate, as will be discussed below, does the same. 
Pilate again follows Roman law by declaring a lack of cause for Jesus trial in 19:4. 
He suggests Jewish rebellion and characterizes himself as law-abiding in verse 6 when he 
offers Jesus to the Jews for crucifixion. The Jews, however, reject that characterization 
and instead declare themselves to be following their own law (v. 7).177 Indeed, it is their 
stance toward the law that defines the opponents of Jesus and that is the source of their 
determination to see him sentenced to death.178 The tables are turned in verse 12, when the 
172 Glancy, Torture, 125. 
173 Duke, Irony, 131; Carter, John, 304-305. 
174 See Section 6.2.1.3 for definition of ; Lincoln, Truth, 130. 
175 Malina, and Rohrbaugh, Commentary, 263; Koester, Why, 168; Bond, Remembered, 71. 
176 See Plinys correspondence discussed below. 
177 Barrett argues that a particular statute, namely the law of blasphemy (Lev 24:16) is meant, not 
the Torah as a whole, but either meaning is sufficient for the Jews to be describing themselves as law-abiding 
(Gospel, 541). 
178 Lincoln connects this with their behaviour throughout the Gospel (Truth, 124-25).  
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
Jews call Pilates obedience to Caesar into question. They are now appealing to his law, 
the law of the Roman Caesar.179 Whether Pilate sits himself or seats Jesus at the judgement 
seat, he abandons his brief fear of Jesus imperial connections and demonstrates loyalty to 
Caesar in the way the Jews demand (19:16).180 Thus, Jesus has now been condemned 
according to both Jewish and imperial law.181  
Bro Larsen has noted, however, that there is a third law in play, the law of the 
implied author, i.e. the value system by which Jesus is recognized in his proper divine 
roles.182 For Bro Larsen, this is what Jesus calls the truth.183 Truth in John, and its 
importance to Jesus declaration of his empire, has been discussed briefly in Chapter 6.184 
And in this thesis, the truth of Johns Gospel has been equated with the hidden transcript of 
Jesus-believers, according to which Jesus is not guilty, but dies in obedience to God (John 
18:11). Bro Larsens analysis brings up another point: the negotiation concerning which 
law is going to be the valid one in judging Jesus is a struggle for power. No law works 
without a power that substantiates it.185 For Bro Larsen, the weakness of Pilate and the 
injustice of the Jews (18:40; 19:15) together undermin[e] the legitimacy of both 
systems.186 I have argued in this thesis against a weak Pilate, and I do not conclude that the 
systems lack legitimacy. Instead, Jesus redefines Pilates power (19:11): tu es toi-mme 
sujet dune loi que tu ignores, ton pouvoir est la marque dun assujettissement  quelquun 
dAutre.187 Yet the narrative does oppose Jesus truth to the Jewish and Roman laws used 
to silence that truth.188  
179 Larsen, Recognizing, 178. 
180 Evans, Explorations, 61. 
181 Larsen, Recognizing, 178. 
182 Larsen, Recognizing, 178-79. 
183 Larsen, Recognizing, 179. 
184 Section 6.2.2.4 (e.g., n. 329); Thompson, John, 380. 
185 Larsen, Recognizing, 179. 
186 Larsen, Recognizing, 180. 
187 Genuyt, Comparution, 143. 
188 This is not to say that Roman and Christian identities were always in reality completely at odds. 
The very fact that such recategorization was necessary points to the intersectionality of Roman, Jewish and 
Christian identities in the ancient world (Castelli, Martyrdom, 35). 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
If those hearing the Gospel are called to re-prioritize their ethnic allegiances, it seems 
that they are also called to de-emphasize obedience to any law.189 Jesus is part of a different 
empire; he is of the truth. The truth, then, is a marker of the superordinate identity and as 
such overrides allegiances to Roman or Jewish law, but only in the cases where they 
conflict.190 For example, in the debates over the Sabbath (John 5 and 9), Jesus choices to 
heal are consistent with the healing brought by God through obedience in the Hebrew Bible 
(Ex. 15:26) but are inconsistent with the interpretation of this law followed by the Jews.191 
Thus, this passage does not abolish law altogether but calls followers of Jesus to stop 
considering law-abiding (in its Roman and Jewish cultural units) as the primary marker of 
ingroup categorization.192 
In this way, it seems that Scripture has to be understood in the light of the word of 
Jesus.193 Similarly, while Jesus submits to the authority of Romes representative, he also 
refuses to give Pilate clear answers. He thus demonstrates for Jesus-believers an identity that 
understands Roman law in the light of the Johannine truth.194 Jesus also brings up this point: 
For this I was born and for this I have come: so that I might bear witness to the truth (18:37, 
author translation).  
The opposition between Jesus-believers, on the one hand, and Romans and Jews, on 
the other, is not an absolute clash but a negotiation of loyaltiesplural because they are 
189 Genuyt also notes this confusion of ethnicities and laws, but not the superordinate identity 
(Comparution, 145). 
190 Richey recognizes that Jesus is supreme over Caesar, yet sets the choice for believers in terms of 
an opposition between Christ and Caesar (Roman, 163-66). Others also note the greater claim for Jesus 
power, e.g., Tilborg, Reading, 216. 
191 Carter also notes the connections between Jesus healings and the Torahs concern for justice 
(John, 162). 
192 On the function of criteria and characteristics (called markers in this thesis) in social identity, see 
Kuecker, Ethnicity, 70-72. 
193 Lincoln, Truth, 55. Lincoln continues:  which supersedes it but a discussion of supersession 
and its attendant concerns will not be engaged in at this juncture. 
194 For Jesus as a model for believers, see Sections 7.2.4 and 7.2.5. The universe of discourse of the 
Fourth Gospel, when viewed as a paradigm shift, appropriately re-uses old symbols in new ways [Dirk-Martin 
Grube, Reconstructing the Change from Judaism to Christianity as a Paradigm Shift, in Orthodoxy, 
Liberalism, and Adaptation: Essays on Ways of Worldmaking in Times of Change from Biblical, Historical 
and Systematic Perspectives, ed. Bob Becking (Leiden: Brill, 2011), 225-47 (243)]. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
nested within one another.195 Thus, later followers lived among others, up to the point at 
which their understanding of the truth of Jesus conflicted with social customs (Diogn. 5).196 
The problem with the empire and serving within it was one of idolatry, not empire itself.197  
If loyalties were being negotiated, and law-abiding was devalued in the superordinate 
identity of witness to the truth, one must ask what would replace law as a method of 
evaluation. How will the ethics and ethos of the community be judged? This is a question 
better asked of the Gospel of John as a whole and cannot be pursued at length at this juncture. 
However, a fruitful lead might be found in Andrew Lincolns insight that Jesus words serve 
as the judge, the final criterion of [the] truth (cf. 1:17).198 On this basis, the law must now 
be interpreted with the hermeneutical key provided by Jesus, specifically in his revelation 
of himself as the Son of the Father.199 Certainly, the Spirit which, as has already been noted, 
certifies truth empowers that reflection for later witnessing communities (e.g., 3:34; 4:23-
24; 14:17; 16:13; 20:22).200 Jesus words and the gift of the Spirit, then, becomes the arena 
for appropriate judgements to be made.201 
What would be the effects of such recategorization, where ethnic identity in general 
and law-abiding as a marker, is de-emphasized and allegiance to Jesus becomes primary? 
Can conclusions be drawn from such a description to elucidate discussions about violence 
in John, about the existence and composition of a possible Johannine community, and about 
the ethos of marginalization and the ethics of power? Suggestions for further discussions on 
these issues will be developed in the second half of this chapter. 
195 For the way loyalty is connected to service to the gods, see Teresa Morgan, Roman Faith and 
Christian Faith: Pistis and Fides in the Early Roman Empire and Early Churches (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2015), 137-42. 
196 Bennema, Early, 67-69. 
197 Gordon L. Heath, The Church Fathers and the Roman Empire, in Empire in the New Testament, 
ed. Stanley E. Porter and Cynthia Long Westfall, McMaster Divinity College Press New Testament Study 
Series 10 (Eugene, OR: Pickwick, 2011), 259-79 (264-65, 266, 270, 275, 279). 
198 Lincoln, Truth, 109. See also Genuyt, Comparution, 136. 
199 Lincoln, Truth, 237; see further on the relationship between Jesus and the law, 231-38. Similarly, 
for Bro Larsen, this key is the truth by which Jesus is recognized in his proper divine roles (Recognizing, 
179). 
200 Section 5.1.4 and see Lincoln, Truth, 122, 242-55, 248. 
201 Genuyt, Comparution, 137. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
7.2. A Hidden Transcript 
So far this chapter has briefly described some elements of Roman and Jewish identities as 
understood in the first century CE, emphasizing three markers that they have in common: 
election, law and accommodation to outsiders. I have pointed to some of the places in John 
18:2819:22 where John seems to be re-categorizing Roman and Jewish identities, 
marginalizing law and emphasizing witness to the truth as a superordinate identity. The 
second half of this chapter, then, will outline some salient factors modelled by the Johannine 
Jesus who functions as a prototype of this new identity. After first revisiting the topic of 
hidden transcripts, demonstrating the way the superordinate identity of witness to the truth 
intersects with issues of violence brought up by postcolonial studies, evidence will be 
gathered for the possibility that the early Jesus-believers of Johns audience constructed 
themselves as marginalized, oppressed, or persecuted Jesus-believers. I shall argue that 
Jesus, as a group prototype, models not just honour through persecution, but also 
vulnerability from a place of authority.  
7.2.1. A hidden transcript that negotiates empire 
Chapter 1 presented the concept of a hidden transcript, a term referring to the 
discourses created by oppressed people that challenge the metanarratives of the lite.202 
Unlike antilanguages, which are only intelligible to those who use them, hidden transcripts 
are only partially disguised from those they oppose.203 I have argued throughout this thesis 
that the Gospel of John produces such a transcript, one that provides a metanarrative for 
subordinated people.204 Particularly in Chapter 5, the ambiguous language of John 19:1-5 
was shown to appropriate Roman language and symbols to present Jesus as a Roman 
202 Section 1.4.2. The focus of this study is on a hidden transcript used among a marginalized group 
although, as was noted in Section 1.3.2, lite groups also develop them. 
203 Sections 1.3.1 and 1.3.2. 
204 On the function of a hidden transcript in this regard, see Section 1.3.2. For an entre into 
contemporary discussions of issues of power, see Kathy Ehrensperger, Paul and the Dynamics of Power: 
Communication and Interaction in the Early Christ-Movement (London; New York: T&T Clark, 2007), 16-
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
emperor. However, it does this without complete transparency by using the title  
  (19:3). Further ironies, ambiguities and double entendres in John 18:28
19:22 have been added as elements of a hidden transcript that expresses the truth of a 
Johannine community in a way that pushes up against other metanarratives in Johns world 
without crossing the line into an outright challenge.205 It is specifically its points of contact 
with the Roman metanarrative that have been the focus of this thesis.206 
This section will consider two relationships posited by other scholars between the 
Roman empire and the identity of the Johannine Jesus-believers: parallel (but not 
intersecting) or in complete opposition.207 The section will then elaborate the view with 
which the previous section ended, that the two groups only clash at the point(s) where 
ultimate allegiance to Jesus truth contravenes obedience to the laws of other identities. The 
trial narrative establishes a superordinate identity within which previously established 
identities (and therefore their current human rulers) are subordinated but not destroyed. 
Some have sought to sidestep these issues on the grounds that an empire not from 
this world is not political (18:36).208 It is true that Jesus distinguished those of the world 
from those of the truth (18:36, 37), but origins are not the same as presence. Furthermore, 
the Gospel of John clearly engages with human government, especially in the trial narrative 
(19:11)the very act of allowing himself to be crucified by the Roman empire (while not 
allowing himself to be stoned by the Jews) shows Jesus engagement in the world (19:18; 
8:59). This last topic will be discussed below in Section 7.2.5. At this juncture, I simply note 
205 See Sections 1.3.2 and 5.1.4. 
206 Segovia, Gospel, 158-60. Both material and textual production have been discussed already in 
Chapters 3-6 (Segovia, Gospel, 160-61). This concern for the locus of meaning, addressed in Chapter 2, is 
also present in postcolonial analyses (Segovia, Gospel, 161-63). 
207 Stanley Hauerwas, The Peaceable Kingdom: A Primer in Christian Ethics (Notre Dame: University 
of Notre Dame Press, 1983), 83-84. 
208 For Heath, for example, Jesus kingship is not a title or role that is readily understood in the usual 
political or religious categories (You Say, 242). 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
that one cannot be in the world in a way that does not acquiesce or engage with human power 
structures, so Jesus rule cannot be abstracted from political interests.209  
The second approach to the comparison of the empire of Jesus to the empire of Rome 
is that of complete opposition.210 Indeed, it would seem that to dress Jesus up in the trappings 
of Caesar would inevitably require a rejection of Rome.211 In this case, the Gospel of John 
would be a text bent on claiming and exercising powerabsolute powerin both the 
religious and political spheres at once. It invalidates and displaces all existing institutions 
and authorities, values and norms, ideals and goals, while promoting and emplacing 
alternative authorities and institutions, norms and values, goals and ideals.212 Section 7.2.2 
has shown, however, that the Gospel of John reproduces markers of identity such as election 
and accommodation to outsiders. So while this thesis has argued that Jesus is depicted in the 
language of Caesardressed up in his clothes so to speak, in order to provide a point of 
comparison, that is, language with which to understand Johns messagethis does not 
require that Jesus be in complete opposition to the Roman empire.213  
It must be noted at the outset that if the identity that John describes is intended to 
replace Roman identity and Roman power, it might also be designed to replace all identities 
and powers. And whether this is interpreted as salvation or colonialism depends in part on 
ones evaluation of these present powers. Jesus is certainly presented as unique in the Fourth 
209 Rensberger, Overcoming, 97.  
210 See, for example, Paul Middleton, Radical Martyrdom and Cosmic Conflict in Early Christianity, 
ed. Mark Goodacre, LNTS 307 (London: T & T Clark, 2006), 70; Rensberger, Politics, 406; see also 410. 
211 Section 5.2.5. For example, Carter writes that the absolute opposition between Jesus and Rome 
that he finds in the Gospel of John (e.g., Section 6.1.3 n. 70) is a call put more distance between Jesus-believers 
and the agents and agencies of the Roman empire (John, 11-15).  
212 Segovia, Gospel, 157. 
213 For some examples of those who read opposition between Jesus and Rome in the Gospel of John, 
see Rensberger, Overcoming, 97; Lincoln, Gospel, 462; Salier, Jesus, 300; Richey, Roman, 156, 175; Skinner, 
Trial, 103-104; Carter, Social Identities, 243-45; Meeks, Prophet-King, 64. Meeks adduces Acts 17:7 
(alongside John 19:15 which will be discussed below) as evidence of the conflict between church and empire 
(Prophet-King, 73). However, as has been shown in Chapter 6, the passage in Acts simply demonstrates the 
Roman concerns about the assembling of possibly treasonous people discussed in Section 6.1.5. Pipers view 
is closer to mine, although he views the synagogue as the principal opponent of Jesus-believers 
(Characterisation, 161). 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
Gospel, which may suggest he replaces Caesar (1:14, 18; 5:22, 27).214 For example, the 
 in John 4:42, suggests an exclusive claim when the Samaritans profess that Jesus is 
truly Saviour of the world.215 Yet this uniqueness seems primarily centred around Jesus 
relationship to the Father (e.g., 1:1), as well as his relative authority over all (e.g., 3:31).216 
I propose, instead of opposition, a three-part exploration of the relationship between John 
and the Roman empire: First, Jesus empireas John depicts itdoes not authorize physical 
violence against anyone. Jesus is greater than Caesar, but this does not mean Caesars defeat. 
Instead, Romes choices are absorbed into Gods life-giving purposes while Romes 
representatives remain responsible for their actions.217 Secondly, citizens of Jesus empire 
should expect violence against them. This means that his empire cannot be called peaceful 
in the sense that it is violence-free. Thirdly, citizens of Jesus empire await final vindication. 
This will be rescue and salvation for them but there is the expectation of violence against 
those who do not believe in Jesus.218 These three topics will be explored, but the thoughts 
offered in this chapter can only be considered suggestive of further research directions. 
It is clear that in the earliest readings of Johns Gospel, there was no absolute 
opposition between Jesus and Caesar. While early church fathers used military images to 
describe the Christian life, [t]hese references did not create a militaristic community that 
acted out the violent images of Revelation: the earliest Christians did not take up the sword 
when persecuted.219 They pre-empted imperial language but did not pick up imperial 
214 Lincoln, Gospel, 105. 
215 Salier, Jesus, 293, emphasis mine. See, also, Richard J. Cassidy, Christians and Roman Rule in 
the New Testament: New Perspectives (New York: Crossroad, 2001), 46. 
216 See, e.g., Williams, I Am He, 303-304; Lincoln, Gospel, 12, 42, 47-48. For an overview of the 
scholarly debates on the development of Christology with references to the place of the Gospel of John within 
that development, see Chester, High. 
217 Thompson, John, 85-86. 
218 For Jan van der Watt as well, the Johannine group must be regarded as a political entity, although 
he calls it more traditionally the Kingdom of God [Harold Attridge, Warren Carter, and Jan van der Watt, 
Are John's Ethics Apolitical?, NTS 62.3 (2016): 484-97 (495)]. 
219 Heath, Church, 163-64, quote on p. 164. They did, however, eventually take up the swordthis 
will be discussed below. On this, see, for example, Adolf Harnack, Militia Christi: The Christian Religion and 
the Military in the First Three Centuries, trans. David McInnes Gracie (Philadelphia: Fortress, 1981), 27-64. 
Martin, too, notes the inherent tension in the New Testament between declarations of non-violence and divine 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
arms.220 Instead, [t]hey live in their respective countries, but only as resident aliens; they 
participate in all things as citizens, and they endure all things as foreigners. Every foreign 
territory is a homeland for them, every homeland foreign territory (Diogn. 5.5 [Ehrman, 
LCL]).221 So opposition is not the only possible interpretation for the relationship between 
the universe of discourse of the Gospel of John and the discourse of empire in the context 
from which it emerges.  
John demonstrates that faith in Jesus does not always demand a complete rejection 
of another allegiance. Jesus calls Nathanael a true Israelite and uses the Hebrew Bible for 
their discussion (1:47, 51), affirming Nathanaels previously established identity while, as 
has been shown, presenting an alternative interpretation of the law.222 In his conversation 
with the wise woman of Sychar, the Johannine Jesus modifies Samaritan (and, indeed, 
Jewish) understanding of the place of worship, but affirms her concept of Messiah (4:21-
26).223 John shows his listeners Nicodemus who must negotiate his own identity as a Pharisee 
(John 3:1-21; 7:50-52; 19:39-40). Furthermore, Pilates authority, while subordinate, is 
affirmed. Jewish and Roman identities, then, are not incompatible with that of Jesus-
believers in the sense of not being able to exist nested one within the other. They may, on 
occasion, require choice between loyalties.224 Polycarp, for example, considered that to 
violence in the cause of God or from God or Gods agents [Response to Downing and Fredriksen, JSNT 
37.3 (2015): 334-45 (344-45)].  
220 Johannes Nissen, Community and Ethics in the Gospel of John, in New Readings in John: 
Literary and Theological Perspectives: Essays from the Scandinavian Conference on the Fourth Gospel, 
Arhus, 1997, ed. Johannes Nissen and Sigfred Pedersen, JSNTSup 182 (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic, 1999), 
194-212 (208). 
221 Cf. Heath, Church, 279. 
222 Section 6.2.2.6; Sean Freyne, Vilifying the Other and Defining the Self: Matthew's and John's 
Anti-Jewish Polemic in Focus, in To See Ourselves as Others See Us: Christians, Jews, Others in Late 
Antiquity, ed. Jacob Neusner and Ernest S. Frerichs, Scholars Press Studies in the Humanities (Chico, CA: 
Scholars Press, 1985), 117-43 (128, 135). 
223 Reinhartz and Benny Liew note the former but not the latter (Reinhartz, Colonizer, 186; Liew, 
Ambiguous, 203). 
224 For the correlations between belief and behaviour, see Section 1.3.2. Cf. Attridge, Carter, and van 
der Watt, Apolitical, 496. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
swear by the Genius of Caesar was an act that conflicted with his loyalty to Jesus (How 
can I blaspheme my King [] who saved me?).225 
The semiotic theories used in this thesis lead one to expect a universe of discourse in 
the text that seeks to edit the cultural encyclopaedias of its hearers.226 Romes power is 
shown to be inferior to Gods (and therefore to Jesus) since the most that Rome can do is 
crucify Jesus and he is able to recover from that.227 Indeed, the Johannine Jesus  is an 
envoy from a distant realm who claims the world through which he is journeying and all its 
inhabitants for the supreme power which he purports to represent.228 Clearly, a take-over 
has been effected.229 Just as Rome has client kings, Caesar is now a client king of Emperor 
Jesus, and witness to the truth is the superordinate identity.230 This means that when Jason 
Ripley writes that Jesus death  is also on behalf of the whole world, implicitly 
challenging imperial claims to lordship over all, it is not Caesars lordship that is challenged 
but his lordship specifically over all.231  
This contradicts the assumption that a takeover or invasion implies the destruction of 
previous inhabitants. Indeed, Thatcher argues that in the Fourth Gospel the normal public 
meaning of the cross is profaned in a way that makes Caesar and his agents helpless victims 
225 Mart. Pol. 9.3; translation from Michael W. Holmes, ed. The Apostolic Fathers: Greek Texts and 
English Translations, 2nd ed. (Grand Rapids: Baker Books, 1999), 235. 
226 Desogus, Encyclopedia, 520. Peter Oakes has similarly proposed that in 1 Thessalonians and 
Philippians, Paul envisions a conflict with Romeone that he addresses by redrawing the map of the 
universe. the universe is not as it appears. The Christians have a secure place close to the real central power 
[Re-Mapping the Universe: Paul and the Emperor in 1 Thessalonians and Philippians, JSNT 27.3 (2005): 
301-322 (321-22)]. 
227 Carter, John, 140; Carter, Social Identities, 247; Attridge, Carter, and van der Watt, Apolitical, 
228 Moore, Empire, 45. Cf. Thatcher, Greater, 6, see also 11. 
229 Thatcher, Conquered, 159. See, also, David R. Kirk, Heaven Opened: Intertextuality and 
Meaning in John 1:51, Tyndale Bulletin 63.2 (2012): 237-56; R. Alan Culpepper, The Weave of the Tapestry: 
Character and Theme in John, in Characters and Characterization in the Gospel of John, ed. Christopher W. 
Skinner, Library of New Testament Studies 461 (London: Bloomsbury, 2013), 18-35 (32). 
230 Cassidy, Christians, 40, 48; Salier, Jesus, 300. Thatcher goes so far as to assert that Christ is, in 
every way, greater than Caesar. Yet, is he truly greater in every single respect? (Conquered, 141; similarly 
143). Note that Thatcher specifies in his earlier work that Jesus is  always more than the most we could 
imagine in terms of power and authority, so perhaps his greater than statements are meant always to be focused 
on those aspects (Greater, 124). 
231 Ripley, Behold, 230. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
of the Christ who conquered the world (16:33).232 By calling the Romans and the Jews 
victims of Christ, Thatcher, at least, reproduces the violence of empire in his description of 
Christs rule. Yet is this true of John as well? In its claim to all of the territories of this 
world is there, as Swanson proposes, a darker side to the Johannine myth that follows from 
its mapping of the outside world?233 
In some ways, the Fourth Gospel does replicate the behaviour of Rome. Like Rome, 
Jesus Caesar does not remove subordinate rulers.234 Johannine Christianity could exist under 
Romes rule because the text maps Romes empire as a power subsumed under God 
(19:11).235 John considers that God is able to enact his will through the deeds of Rome, even 
the violent ones (such as the crucifixion of Jesus).236 Rome continues to rule with Gods 
approval (19:11), but the violence that occurs pursuant to its judgements is itself exposed 
and judged (e.g., 16:11).237  
In contrast, rather than simply imposing its own truth onto that of others, the 
Johannine text speaks the language of others, as this thesis has suggested that John does with 
the Roman cultural encyclopaedia. And to use the symbols of another to describe ones own 
truth is also to invite them into the community, bringing their symbols with them.238 For 
example, it is because of the characterization of Jesus as an imperator rather than a rex 
(Chapter 4) that Roman-aware auditors can respond to the Gospels invitation to belief 
without the concern of submitting to a tyrant. In Chapter 1, I mentioned Thatchers insight 
that Johns image of Christ is always a photographic negative, a mosaic built up from 
232 Thatcher, Conquered, 140. 
233 Tod D. Swanson, To Prepare a Place: Johannine Christianity and the Collapse of Ethnic Territory, 
in John and Postcolonialism: Travel, Space and Power, ed. Musa W. Dube and Jeffrey L. Staley, The Bible 
and Postcolonialism 7 (London: Sheffield Academic Press, 2002), 11-30 (26). Cf. Reinhartz, Colonizer, 186-
91; Dube, Savior, 123, 130.  
234 Moore, Empire, 45.  
235 Thatcher, Greater, 80-81. 
236 Hauerwas, Peaceable, 85; Ripley, Glorious, 8. For the way this hidden transcript continues 
through the description of the crucifixion, see Thatcher, Conquered. 
237 Ripley, Glorious, 10. 
238 Rensberger, Overcoming, 149. Indeed, the Gospel of John includes language from a diversity of 
backgrounds [George W. MacRae, Fourth Gospel and Religionsgeschichte, CBQ 32.1 (1970): 13-24 (15)]. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
thousands of tiny words, symbols, and ideas that he found on the cognitive trash heap of 
ancient Mediterranean culture.239 Because the Gospel of John uses Roman cultural units, 
Romans are invited to participate in Jesus empire. 
However, as Stephen Moore asks, if Jesus empire cannot dislodge Roman 
hegemony, [o]f what use it is then?240 Indeed, Roman hegemony is not dislodged, as 
Moore surmised. However, this authorization of subordinate powers does not give 
governments carte blanche, unlike in Romans 13:1-5.241 Their actions serve to reveal their 
own allegiancewhether God or the devil (8:42-47). And to reveal the terminus of evil is 
also to warn against that choice, not to abrogate individual responsibility (19:11).242 The 
script of the world is enacted but the explanation for it is subverted. The Roman empire along 
with all powers working against Jesus-believers are subsumed under Gods rule.  
7.2.2. A hidden transcript that recategorizes violence 
The empire of Jesus is often described as peaceful, or non-violent (cf. 18:11).243 In 
order to critique that characterization, three different kinds of violence have to be 
distinguished: First, there is the perpetration of violence such as that committed by Caesars 
armiesacts that physically harm another person or people, enacted by a more powerful 
aggressor. Secondly, there is suffered violenceencounters with more powerful forces of 
any kind that leave one physically harmed. Thirdly, there is non-physical violence, either 
perpetrated or suffered, in which one is required to acquiesce to anothers will, particularly 
their ideology, without any physical harm being involved.244 
239 Thatcher, Greater, 6.  
240 Moore, Empire, 51. 
241 Brown, Death, 1.842; Senior, Passion, 92; Rensberger, Overcoming, 98. Pace Moore, the power 
given to human governments is not unlimited (Empire, 72). Pace Richey, there seems to be no indication that 
John views God as dispensing different sorts of power (Roman, 184). 
242 Attridge, Divine, e.g., 184, 188. 
243 Wright, Governor, 249. See further below, n. 369.  
244 This might better be termed domination or power-over, but since I am responding in this section 
to those who equate the imposition of an ideology with violence (specifically colonization), I shall retain the 
use of that term, only adding the adjective ideological in order to distinguish it from physical and suffered 
violence. Cf. Ehrensperger, Dynamics, 16-34, esp. 22; Reinhartz, Colonizer, 181, 186. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
The first kind of violence, physical, is not a legitimate part of Jesuss empire, at least 
within the identity markers provided by Jesus as a prototype of recategorization.245 However, 
the second kind of violencesuffered violenceclearly is. Jesus-believers are called by 
Jesus example to endure violence in certain instances (see Section 7.2.4). This voluntary 
martyrdom is missing from discussions of non-violence in Jesus empire, and yet it is an 
important aspect of the Fourth Gospels engagement with violence.246 Section 7.2.3 will list 
evidence for such suffering among early Jesus-believers, and Section 7.2.5 will discuss the 
choices that Jesus as a prototype gives to Jesus-believers about how and when to acquiesce 
to suffer physically. Ultimately, the fact that Jesus empire includes suffered violence means 
that one cannot call it peaceful. 
Perhaps this aspect of Jesus empire is overlooked because the Fourth Gospel itself 
does not dwell on it. In a discussion of Jesus humanity, Thatcher suggests that John seems 
uncertain what to do with it, sometimes wallowing in the wounds of the cross (see John 
6:53-58; 19:31-35; 20:26-27).247 He is certainly correct to note that Jesus is sometimes 
vulnerable, as will be discussed further below. Yet the verses cited by Thatcher, while 
undoubtedly emphasizing the vulnerability of Jesus, do not seem to be wallowing in the 
wounds of the cross, especially when compared with other accounts of physical violence in 
circulation at the time. To take one example, Vergil, describing the encounter of a Greek 
companion of Ulysses (and thus referencing Homers Odyssey), has the Greek survivor 
describe the Cyclops: he seized in his huge hand two of our company and, lying back in the 
midst of the cave, crushed them on the rock, and the splashed courts swam with gore; I saw 
when he munched their limbs, all dripping with black blood-clots, and the warm joints 
quivered beneath his teeth.248 A crucifixion cannot have presented a less gory image, if John 
245 Schlier, Relevance, 218; Ripley, Glorious, 7; Bekken, Lawsuit, 253. 
246 See, e.g., those listed in n. 371. 
247 Thatcher, Greater, 7.  
248 Vergil, Aeneid 3.622-33. See also the frequent references to blood and brains in the battle scenes 
of the Aeneid, for example, calido sanguine (with hot blood, 9.422) and arma cruenta cerebro (weapons 
spattered with brains, 9.753). 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
had chosen to describe it in all its details. Instead, it is briefly noted, and the narrator moves 
on (e.g., 19:18).249 Other descriptions of physical violence also seem quite mild (18:31-32; 
19:1, 18, 30, 34). This choice to minimize the suffering of Jesus and his followers may be 
part of the hidden transcript, written from or to a community reticent to expose the violence 
of their overlords who have claimed to bring peace (Tacitus, Agr. 30). On the other hand, it 
is more likely that the euphemisms used for the physical violence against Jesus (e.g., John 
2:19-21) recategorize episodes of seeming shame and defeat as simple manoeuvres within 
Jesus takeover of the world (6:33). Physical harm, whether enacted by human beings or as 
part of the sickness of the world, is being taken over by Gods glory (11:4, 14, 49-52; 12:23-
33), as even the perpetrators are invited into his empire.250 
Yet, to invite others is not the same as to compel entrance. This point raises the third 
aspect of violence, ideological violence. Within the narrative of the Fourth Gospel is found 
an implied trial where those who do not believe in Jesus are accused (5:45) and may be 
condemned (3:18; 8:24; 9:41; 12:48), but still await sentencing (3:36; 5:29; 15:6).251 Many 
verses and passages express some sort of rejection of those who reject Jesus, sometimes, in 
context, the Jews, but always as the first examples of those who reject Jesus in the wider 
world: they will be condemned (3:18; 5:29; 12:48), under Gods wrath (3:36); accused 
(5:45); guilty (9:41); overcome (16:33); will die in their sins (8:24) and will metaphorically 
be cut off and burned (15:6).252 In the Fourth Gospel, if there is a positive realized 
eschatology of life, there is also a negative realized eschatology of judgment.253 Thus, in 
one sense, the Roman model of conquest is replicatedthose who refuse to submit are 
249 Brown, John, 2.900. 
250 Thomas R. Yoder Neufeld, Killing Enmity: Violence and the New Testament (Grand Rapids: Baker 
Academic, 2011), 94. 
251 Lincoln, Truth, 210. 
252 I have included the verses that carry a sense of ideological violence or doom, but omitted other 
verses (such as 8:44) that have been used to justify violence but that in themselves express antipathy but not 
physical violence. See, e.g., Kierspel, Jews, 103. 
253 Lincoln, Truth, 70; see also 72-73, 108-109, 197, 207-222. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
violently overthrown.254 And yet, there are differences. First, in Johns narrative faith in 
Jesus is not directly coerced.255 Secondly, as was the case with the episodes of violence 
against Jesus, John does not indulge in any revenge fantasy projected into the future.256 
Thatchers view of the empire instituted by God includes both loving service and 
violence. On the one hand, he points to Jesus as he washes the feet of his disciples as an 
example of contrast with the Roman empire: 
Viewed in this light, the genius of the footwashing lies in the fact that Jesus 
anticipates and precludes the emergence of anything like a new imperial 
order within his eschatological community. No one steps in to take the throne 
once the ruler of this world is cast out. In fact, there are no thrones, only 
footstools, and masters find themselves in the place of slaves, washing the 
filthy feet of the people over whom they have authority.257 
Yet this peaceful kingdom seen from the inside stands in stark contrast to its 
relationship to those outside the community:  
Within Johns little tradition, the relationship between Jesus and the Jewish 
authorities is essentially reversed in a way that makes them victims of 
Christs superior wisdom and divine agenda. Since these individuals are 
portrayed as agents of empire, their demise marks the death of one of Romes 
three powerful heads, all of which are crushed by Jesus outstretched arm.258 
To describe a Jesus who crushes Rome suggests, as Thatcher notes, the demise of 
Romes representatives. While Jesus footwashing may point to a  who resists 
enacting power over others against their will, the very theme of judgement of the world and 
the language of expulsion/exorcism (12:31) seem to argue that Jesus kingdom has an 
ideological violence of its own. The offer of eternal life to those who believe does imply 
death for those who do not.259  
254 Dube, Reading, 65. Pace Ripley, Glorious, 9. 
255 Jason J. Ripley, Killing as Piety? Exploring Ideological Contexts Shaping the Gospel of John, 
JBL 134.3 (2015): 605-635 (630). 
256 Thatcher, Greater, 134. 
257 Thatcher, Greater, 138. 
258 Thatcher, Greater, 54. Statements such as this occur throughout the book; see, e.g., [t]hese and 
other statements from the Fourth Gospel look to me like a categorical assertion that Rome has been conquered, 
judged, and doomed (135). 
259 For more on this implicit violence, see Section 7.2.1. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
This explains how Segovia perceives the Gospel of John as deeply conflicted: 
espousing, on the one hand, a radical postcolonial vision and program in the face of Rome 
and all worldly powera manifesto of expos, rejection, and resistance; yet deploying, on 
the other hand, severe imperial-colonial policies of its own vis--vis all those deemed outside 
such a vision and programa strategy of exclusion, dismissal, and condemnation.260 While 
this implicit threat of ideological and perhaps even physical violence is reserved for an 
undetermined future, it does seem to hang, like a sword of Damocles, over the whole Gospel. 
Rome, as well as the rest of the world, is the object of Gods love, and the target of critique.261 
The physical violence of the world is absorbed into Gods offer of life, and the physically 
violent themselves are invited to join Jesus empire and renounce physical violence (3:16; 
12:32). However, if it chooses not to be transformed from within, the world is destined for a 
lack of life, i.e. death (8:24).262 Caesars world is divided into those who live in loyalty to 
him and those who do not  yet. John uses this image of the emperor to re-divide the 
Jew/gentile world along similar lines, into those who proclaim their loyalty to Jesus and 
those who do not. And there is a yet as well; John points to a judgement still to come 
(12:48). 
The impending doom of the Fourth Gospel has been described as a loving, but 
perhaps still unwanted, invasion.263 If the Gospel is understood as a solution offered to a 
violent world, then Jesus is engaged in a rescue mission to save people from their 
enslavement as perpetrators and as recipients of that violence. Jesus victory, in that case, is 
260 Segovia, Johannine, 305. 
261 Moore, Empire, 73. 
262 Lincoln, Truth, 197. For Yoder Neufeld, it is confidence in the vindication of God that allows 
one to choose vulnerability (Killing, 33). For Canisius Mwandayi and Lucky Hwati, Gods violence is only 
for the purpose of restoration, a thought that deserves further development in their stimulating essay [Precursor 
to Restoration: Biblical Violence in Perspective, in The Bible and Violance in Africa: Papers Presented at the 
BiAS Meeting 2014 in Windhoek (Namibia), with Some Additional Contributions, ed. Johannes Hunter and 
Joachim Kgler, Bible in Africa Studies 20 (Bamberg: University of Bamberg Press, 2016), 171-78]. 
263 Swanson, Prepare, 27. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
a victory over evil.264 It is this offer of rescue that prevents John from being the gospel of 
the imperial status quo.265 However, this assumes that one can trust the solution on offer. 
Otherwise, a Gospel that asserts the primacy of its message, and its absolute truth, to the 
exclusion of all others will certainly be experienced as ideological violence.266 This perhaps 
further explains the presentation of Jesus as an imperator that one can trust rather than as a 
rex who will tyrannize his people (Chapter 4). Those marginalized by others could 
conceivably need such assurances. 
7.2.3. A hidden transcript for persecuted Jesus-believers 
Roman ideology asserts divine support for Roman conquest. Good citizenship 
involved maintaining the pax deorum, which included participation in various forms of 
emperor worship.267 Cities of the empire cooperated as well, competing for status (and 
therefore benefits) through their expressions of honour to Rome, Roma and Caesar.268 
Because they would not participate in these cults Christians threatened not just the carefully 
cultivated reputation of a city, but the social and perhaps even the cosmic orderthe very 
symbols of reality.269 Therefore, to refuse to sacrifice to the genius of Caesar was an act of 
treason as well as atheism.270 
264 Ottmar Fuchs, How to Deal with Violence in Biblical Texts: Some Considerations Towards 
Biblical Hermeneutics of Violence, in The Bible and Violence in Africa: Papers Presented at the BiAS Meeting 
2014 in Windhoek (Namibia), with Some Additional Contributions, ed. Johannes Hunter and Joachim Kgler, 
Bible in Africa Studies 20 (Bamberg: University of Bamberg Press, 2016), 11-34 (25-26). 
265 Moore, Empire, 74. 
266 Reinhartz, Colonizer, 172, 181, 186. See, similarly, Moore, Empire, 70; Segovia, Gospel, 158. 
267 Salier, Jesus, 287; Harrill, Empire, 21. 
268 Middleton, Radical, 48-54. 
269 Middleton, Radical, 54. Middleton notes the same appropriation of imperial symbols that I have 
noted, but concludes that the two systems were mutually incompatible, 40; see similarly 54-61. 
270 Alistair Kee, The Imperial Cult: The Unmasking of an Ideology, Scottish Journal of Religious 
Studies 6.2 (1985): 112-28 (123-24). For his claim that Judaism was a religio licita (121), see Paula Fredriksen, 
Mandatory Retirement: Ideas in the Study of Christian Origins Whose Time Has Come to Go, in Israel's God 
and Rebecca's Children: Christology and Community in Early Judaism and Christianity: Essays in Honor of 
Larry W. Hurtado and Alan F. Segal, ed. David B. Capes, April D. DeConick, Helen K. Bond, and Troy Miller 
(Waco, TX: Baylor University Press, 2007), 2538 (32-35). Note, too, Kees mistaken divorcing of religion 
from politics and ideology (125-26).  
Winter notes an inscription from Ephesus which lists forty-three who were summarily sentenced to 
death, because they violated cultic veneration and insulted official envoys from Ephesus as a precedent for 
the execution of those who refused to participate in honouring a deity (Divine, 303). The inscription, IEph 2, 
is referenced incorrectly as I. Ephesos 572. However, it is from the second half of the fourth century BCE and 
is thus too early to provide a precedent of immediate relevance (although as an inscription it could have served 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
By present-day standards, Roman response to resistance may be said to reveal the 
violent nature of the empire in contrast to its claims of peace.271 However, Romans 
themselves constructed physical violence as the appropriate response to rebellion. Indeed, 
military service was part of the cursus honorum, and crucifying local resistors was a not 
unusual part of Roman military activities (Philo, Pro Flaccus 10.83-85).272 John 16:33 could 
have been said by the Roman empire to its people with regard to Roman lite discourse: 
These things I have said to you so that you would have peace. In the world you have 
troubles, but be encouraged, I have overcome the world.273 The cross itself is an enactment 
of this truth for Rome: We have peace because we have conquered. We continue to put an 
end to anyone who would subvert our violently enforced peace.274 The question at hand, 
however, is this: did Johns auditors experience this violent enforcement of Roman peace?275  
Warren Carter argues against any persecution of the audience of Johns Gospel 
primarily because of the lack of evidence for it during the reign of Domitian, when, so it is 
argued, much of the Johannine Gospel narrative was coming together.276 It is true that 
[s]cholars now agree that there is little sign of State persecution under Domitian.277 
Nevertheless, Carter assumes but does not make the argument for assigning the composition 
as a visible reminder of the ancient practice) [Aurian Delli Pizzi, Impiety in Epigraphic Evidence, Kernos 24 
(2011): 59-76 (70); Winter, Divine, 303; Packard Humanities Institute, Searchable Greek Inscriptions]. 
271 Kee, Imperial, 126. 
272 Thatcher, Conquered, 146-47. 
273 Author translation; cf. Thatcher, Conquered, 140. 
274 Quintilian, Decl. 274; Thatcher, Conquered, 145, 147. 
275 Whether or not there existed one or many Johannine communities, whether they were sectarian or 
not, and whether the Fourth Gospel was actually intended from the beginning to circulate widely are broad 
topics much debated. For an introduction to this wide-ranging discussion, see Ruth Sheridan, Johannine 
Sectarianism: A Category Now Defunct?, in The Origins of Johns Gospel, ed. Stanley E. Porter and Hughson 
T. Ong, Johannine Studies 2 (Leiden: Brill, 2015), 142-66. 
276 Tertullian, Apology 5.4; Warren Carter, Jesus and the Romans Remembered: A Perspective from 
John's Gospel (paper presented at SBL, Atlanta, GA, 22 November, 2015). 
277 Middleton, Radical, 45; see summary of debate, 43-45. See also Kierspel, Jews, 184-86. In a more 
detailed debate about possible connections between John 20:28 and Domitians purported use of   
, 1 Clem. 64:1 must be taken into account as well (Kierspel, Jews, 198-99). 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
of the Fourth Gospel to Domitians reign.278 With the new uncertainty surrounding the dating 
of 52, a different argument is required if that date of composition is to be maintained.279  
Similarities between the letters of Ignatius and the Gospel of John, especially  
    (Phil. 7.1; cf. John 3:8), make it unlikely that the Gospel can be 
attributed a date later than Ignatius, but the dating of his letters is also disputed.280 The 
terminus post quem for the writings of Ignatius is 110 CE, and even this early date would 
allow the Fourth Gospel to be situated in the early second rather than the late first century 
CE.281 If Book 10 of Plinys letters is dated to ca. 109-12 CE, and he discusses his previous 
judicial procedures in dealing with Christians, this reference to Roman trials, sporadic and 
localized though they likely were, could be relevant for the Fourth Gospel.282 This argument 
brings into question Carters claim that the Letters to Trajan (10.96-97), testifying to 
persecution in Bithynia in the early second century CE, are too late and too far away from 
Ephesus to be relevant for the Gospel of John.283  
Regardless, whether widespread persecution existed is in some ways immaterial. 
Even if persecution was limited, stories of such events clearly circulated widely.284 Indeed, 
278 For this argument, see, for example, Dunn, Neither, 79-80. 
279 On the dating of the Gospel and the importance of 52, see, e.g., Lincoln, Gospel, 17-18. For a 
discussion of the dating of papyri for theological purposes, see Pasquale Orsini, and Willy Clarysse, Early 
New Testament Manuscripts and Their Dates: A Critique of Theological Palaeography, ETL 88.4 (2012): 443-
74; Brent Nongbri, The Use and Abuse of P52: Papyrological Pitfalls in the Dating of the Fourth Gospel, 
HTR 98.1 (2005): 23-48. 
280 Holmes, Apostolic, 131; Dunn, Neither, 115-16. 
281 For this date for Ignatius, see, for example, J. B. Lightfoot, ed. The Apostolic Fathers: Clement, 
Ignatius, and Polycarp, vol. 1, Part 2: Ignatius & Polycarp, 2nd ed. (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1889), 30. 
282 Sherwin-White dates these letters to 109-11 [The Letters of Pliny: A Historical and Social 
Commentary (Oxford: Clarendon, 1966), 80-81]. Cassidy dates them to 110 CE, incorrectly citing Sherwin-
White (John's Gospel, 98 n. 5; see also 24). Cassidy concludes on this basis that persecution during the reign 
of Domitian is probable, but that is not a necessary conclusion. It could simply be that Jesus-believers were 
being tried from the beginning of Trajans reign (98 CE) (John's Gospel, 19). Peper and DelCogliano date the 
correspondence to the fall of 111 CE [The Pliny and Trajan Correspondence, in The Historical Jesus in 
Context, ed. A.J. Levine, Dale C. Allison, Jr., and John Dominic Crossan (2006), 366-71 (366)]. Wilken dates 
it to the fall of 112 CE [The Christians as the Romans Saw Them, 2nd ed. (New Haven: Yale University Press, 
2003), 15]. See Section 6.1.3 for communication in the Roman empire. For the way another second-century 
CE writer appropriated the Gospel of John in a context of persecution, see Hill, Johannine Corpus, 83-86. 
283 Carter, John, Jesus. See, similarly, Lincoln, Truth, 303-304. 
284 Peter Oakes, A State of Tension: Rome in the New Testament, in The Gospel of Matthew in Its 
Roman Imperial Context, ed. John Riches and David C. Sim, Early Christianity in Context Published under 
JSNTSup 276 (London: T&T Clark, 2005), 75-90 (80). See, similarly, D. S. Potter, Persecution of the Early 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
rumours serve to distribute information in life-threatening situations, when events of vital 
importance to peoples interests are occurring and in which no reliable informationor only 
ambiguous informationis available.285 Furthermore, [a]s a rumour travels it is altered in 
a fashion that brings it more closely into line with the hopes, fears, and worldview of those 
who hear it and retell it.286 Thus, although Plinys letters may not reflect a standardized 
procedure, to expect standard procedure is to impose modern legal practice on the evidence; 
in any case, a lack of standardized procedure would not impact on the circulation of stories 
of martyrdom.287  
While the sporadic nature of persecution is frequently cited as evidence of 
the early Christians tendency to exaggerate the dangers that they 
experienced, the unpredictability of persecution was itself destabilizing. 
Isolated experiences of exceptional cruelty no doubt reverberated in the 
Christian unconscious long after the events themselves. In fact, one of the 
functions of early Christian martyrdom literature was to perpetuate this 
process and amplify the echoes of earlier struggles. In the absence of detailed 
Roman evidence, the Christians place in the Roman legal system is crafted 
by Christians themselves.288  
The important point is not that persecution occurred frequently, but that it occurred 
at all. Tacitus wrote ca. 115 CE of the persecution of Nero after the fire of 64 CE (Annals 
15.44). Plinys letters mention a great many individuals who are being brought to trial 
(Ep. 10.96.9), as well as anonymous lists (10.97.2).289 The anonymity of the betrayers 
parallels the anonymity of the one who handed me over to you (   ) who 
has the greater guilt (John 19:11b). There is likely no literary dependence in this case, but 
rather perhaps similar experiences of rumours and betrayals. The torture of two slave-
women, whom they call deaconesses (Pliny, Ep. 10.96.8 [Radice, LCL]) and Johns 
Church, ABD 5.231-35; Castelli, Martyrdom, 38; Schnackenburg, John, 3.250; Lincoln, Life, 159. Brown 
posits that this persecution came by Jews through denunciation to the Romans but this is not necessary for 
the arguments of this thesis (Community, 43). 
285 Scott, Domination, 144. 
286 Scott, Domination, 145. 
287 Lincoln, Truth, 304.  
288 Candida R. Moss, Ancient Christian Martyrdom: Diverse Practices, Theologies, and Traditions, 
ABRL (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2012), 12. See also Fredriksen, Paul, 105. 
289 Cassidy, John's Gospel, 26. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
prediction of Peters martyrdom at the hands of the Romans (21:18-19) provide further 
examples of stories of persecution.290  
Such stories seem to have circulated from the earliest days of the Jesus movement.291 
Experiences or expectations of persecution are present throughout the New Testament 
writings, from that of Paul (e.g., Acts 14:2-6) to 1 Peter (3:13).292 And while Middleton 
rightly points out that suffering is not the same as martyrdom, both produce stories and 
rumours.293 Indeed, Chapter 1 of this study noted that physical repression carries with it 
strong elements of mental coercion specifically in the form of memories and future 
potentiality.294 Furthermore, when power by outsiders is perceived as unjust, a sense of 
collective victimhood develops even if the unjust treatment happened in the past.295  
Indeed, the Fourth Gospel characterizes Pilate as three times proclaiming a lack of 
cause for a charge against Jesus (18:38; 19:4, 6). Scott notes that oppressed or marginalized 
groups do not confuse domination with justice.296 They curse the rulers as they curse the 
weather.297 Thus, marginalized or oppressed Jesus-believers might hear this narrative about 
a Roman governor who crucifies a man without cause as a reminder that there is no justice 
to be expected if they find themselves facing a Roman judge (15:20).298 Indeed, the entire 
trial motif in the Fourth Gospel suggests a community looking not for vengeance but for 
justice.299  
290 Cassidy, John's Gospel, 81-82; Lincoln, Truth, 299, 305-306; Moore, Empire, 60. 
291 Thompson, John, 395-96. 
292 For an initial overview, see Paul Middleton, Martyrdom: A Guide for the Perplexed (London: T & 
T Clark, 2011), 31-34. For a more detailed discussion, see Kierspel, Jews, 185-86. See also Joel Marcus, Mark 
1-8: A New Translation with Introduction and Commentary, ed. John J. Collins, AB 27 (New York: Doubleday, 
2009), 32-33. 
293 Middleton, Martyrdom, 34. For examples of some possible early charges, see doing evil in John 
18:30, as well as 1 Peter 2:12; 3:17; 4:15 and Tacitus, Ann. 15.44 (Barrett, Gospel, 533). 
294 Section 1.3.2; Mitchell, Everyday, 559. 
295 Hakola, Reconsidering, 2, 148-49. Cf. Rensberger, Overcoming, 111. 
296 Scott, Domination, 19-80. 
297 Scott, Domination, 80. 
298 See Sections 6.1.2 and 7.1.2; Schnackenburg, John, 3.253. 
299 Lincoln, Truth, 414. See also Cassidy, Christians, 40-42, 48-50; Ripley, Genre, 24-26; Dunn, 
Neither, 360. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
Some have assumed that Johns mentions of Jesus-believers being put out of 
synagogues (9:22; 12:42; 16:2) indicate that it was Jews who created the situation of 
marginalization or oppression.300 However, there is little to no evidence to support such 
assumptions.301 Others have suggested that a discourse of persecution might develop even if 
Christians themselves had chosen to leave the synagogues, in order to justify that choice.302 
This is possible, but would have little impact on the effect of the stories once they joined the 
narrative of victimhood. The Jewish war, as well as the expectation of Romes overthrow 
by God held by at least some Jews and Christians (4 Ezra, 2 Baruch and Sibylline Oracle 
4), would both have influenced the attitudes of Jews and Jesus-believers to some degree, 
constructing them as marginalized people in need of justice.303 Furthermore, the Johannine 
Jews are better understood as the first examples of persecutors rather than as perpetrators 
of any ongoing persecution.304 The stories of Pauls experiences with various Jews around 
the Mediterranean might have travelled as rumours (Acts 13:45, 50; 14:2-6, 19; 17:5-9, 13; 
18:12, 17; 21:27-32, 36; 24:1, 9; 25:7), later joined by stories of persecution by the Romans. 
The Gospel of John, indeed, promises persecution from the world (15:20) and from the 
synagogue (16:2).305 
The narrative of persecution does not, however, require that Jesus-believers be in 
conflict with the Roman empire at every point. The conflict only, but significantly, exists 
300 See, e.g., Lincoln, Reading, 140. See somewhat similarly, Lincoln, Truth, 28, 31, 34; Michele 
Murray, Playing a Jewish Game: Gentile Christian Judaizing in the First and Second Centuries CE, Studies 
in Christianity and Judaism = tudes sur le christianisme et le judasme (Waterloo, Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier 
University Press, 2004), 74-76; Jrg Frey, Das Johannesevangelium und seine Gemeinden im Kontext der 
jdischen Diaspora Kleinasiens, in Neues Testament und hellenistisch-jdische Alltagskultur: Wechselseitige 
Wahrnehmungen. III. Internationales Symposium zum Corpus Judaeo-Hellenisticum Novi Testamenti, 21.-24. 
Mai 2009, Leipzig, ed. Roland Deines, Jens Herzer, and Karl-Wilhelm Niebuhr, Wissenschaftliche 
Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament 274 (Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2011), 99-132 (130); Ripley, Killing.  
301 Reinhartz, Gospel of John, 112. 
302 Hakola, Reconsidering, 23, 106-107. 
303 Oakes, State, 78-79. Note that Oakes posits a degree of separation between Jews and Christians, 
such that the destruction of the temple was a catastrophic trauma for Jews but not, to anything like the same 
extent, for most Christians. However, this claim ignores the intersectionality of these identities. 
304 Kierspel, Jews, 153. 
305 Carter, John, 214. For the synagogue context for John 16:2 as well as arguments for intra-Jewish 
violence as a context for Johannine descriptions of persecution with a concomitant Johannine rejection of 
physical violence against either Jews or Romans, see Ripley, Killing. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
when the different evaluations of the world result in conflicting demands for action.306 It is 
too stark, then, to say (pace Rensberger) that the authority of Rome over those who adhere 
to [Jesus] is dissolved. Instead, Andy Crouchs insight found in the foreword to Jesus is 
Lord, Caesar is Not, but sadly not pursued in any of the contributions to the volume, is most 
appropriate: To say Jesus is Lord does not seem actually to entail saying Caesar is not 
[Lord]. Rather it entails not saying Caesar is Lord.307 To pledge allegiance to God, for 
Jesus-believers as for Jews, does not entail repudiating Caesar.308 While loyalty to Jesus, as 
the superordinate identity, is paramount, loyalty to synagogues and to Rome does not 
disappear. 
The characters in the Gospel of John negotiate these loyalties to Jews and Romans 
alike and struggle specifically at the point where their loyalties conflict. The parents of the 
blind man (John 9:22) are afraid of being put out of the synagogue for confessing the truth. 
An unspecified group of leaders fear the Pharisees and do not confess their faith (12:42). 
Immediately before the trial before Pilate, John pointed out Peters fear of the servants that 
kept him from confessing the truth (18:25-27). If witnessing to the truth incurs suffered 
violence from any power, John insists that fear must be overcome and faith proclaimed, even 
in the face of death.309 Thus, [t]he Fourth Gospel confronts the issue of Israels freedom in 
the late first-century Roman Empire with an alternative to both zealotry and collaboration, 
by calling for adherence to the king [I would say to the emperor] who is not of this world, 
whose servants do not fight but remain in the world bearing witness to the truth before the 
rulers of both synagogue and Empire.310 Witnessing to the truth is the superordinate identity. 
306 Nissen, Community, 205. 
307 Andy Crouch, Foreword, in Jesus Is Lord, Caesar Is Not: Evaluating Empire in New Testament 
Studies, ed. Scot McKnight and Joseph B. Modica (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2013), 7-14 (13). 
308 Brown, Death, 1.849. 
309 Cornelis Bennema, Virtue Ethics in the Gospel of John: The Johannine Characters as Moral 
Agents, in Rediscovering John: Essays on the Fourth Gospel in Honour of Frdric Manns, ed. L. Daniel 
Chrupcala, Analecta Studium Biblicum Franciscanum 80 (Milan: Edizioni Terra Santa, 2013), 167-81 (173); 
Ripley, Genre, 29. 
310 Rensberger, Overcoming, 100. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
Johns antithesis, then, is primarily between fear and truththe truth of the 
witnessing community about Jesus and about Gods evaluation of the world. This antithesis 
opposes the evaluations of those outside the Johannine community without prompting 
physical resistance to their authority.311 If Johns audience is made up of people who are or 
who expect to be persecuted, what does the hidden transcript say to them? The final two 
sections of this chapter will argue, first, that it communicates that Johannine believers are 
honourable in Gods empire even if they are shamed in Romes. And secondly, Johns 
Gospel suggests that in Gods empire the powerful are called to vulnerability for the sake of 
the invitation for outsiders to come in (12:32). 
7.2.4. A hidden transcript that creates honour for the marginalized 
The insight that John reverses the public transcript of Rome, replacing the shame of 
the cross with Jesus glorification, is not new.312 The Gospel of John addresses the question: 
Do not the death of the Messiah and the fate of his followers as recipients of the worlds 
hostility and persecution give the lie to the sovereignty of their God in history?313 The shame 
of Jesus trial and subsequent execution would appear to demonstrate to Gentiles that he 
was a powerless victim of the state and to Jews that he was cursed by God.314 Yet the Gospel 
asserts that there is another world with another truth where, despite appearances, it is Jesus 
and Jesus father who rule (18:36; 19:11).315 Such a re-ordering of evaluations is typical of 
a hidden transcript that gives honour to those dishonoured by others.316 The comparison of 
Jesus with Caesar does not completely occlude the suffering of Jesus in Johns description 
311 See Jan van der Watts contribution to the recent Quaestiones disputatae where he notes that it 
seems as if John does not develop his metaphorical ethics in terms of direct confrontation with the Roman 
Empire, but rather with an inner perspective, focusing on the well-being of the group being addressed 
(Attridge, Carter, and van der Watt, Apolitical, 494). 
312 Thatcher, Conquered, 150. See, similarly, Lincoln, Truth, 299; Segovia, Gospel, 187-89; 
Thompson, John, 393. 
313 Lincoln, Truth, 189. That a similar question has been asked of Yahweh and answered in the 
narratives of Israel is of interest to the Fourth Gospel although not to the arguments pursued in this thesis. 
314 Thatcher, Conquered, 148. See, similarly, Skinner, Trial, 98. 
315 Segovia, Gospel, 186. 
316 See Section 1.3.2. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
(19:1-3, 18).317 Yet I have suggested that it transforms it into an acclamation, a triumph and 
an apotheosis.318 Such a retelling of the story of Jesus forms the identity of the communities 
for which they were written.319 Jesus becomes, in Johns retelling, a prototype for Jesus 
followers, especially any who were also tried before a Roman judge.320  
In the Gospel of John, God is the judge who does not condemn Jesus-believers. 
Undoubtedly, to go to God for justice would make sense for those who had been formed by 
trial narratives such as what is offered by Deutero-Isaiah.321 Roman trials, by contrast, were 
arenas for the shaming of the poor.322 So why would gentile Jesus-believers expect justice 
in Yahwehs court? 
The Gospel of John answers that question by showing Jesus rejecting the shame that 
Pilate and the Jews assume is his.323 It reorders the world for the oppressed, depicting the 
leader of the oppressed as the emperor of the world. Because Jesus is obedient to God the 
Father, he receives glory from him (8:54-55).324 This glory would accrue to his followers as 
well (5:44; 12:26, 43; 17:10, 22; 21:19).325 By showing a Jesus who is shamed yet retains 
his honour, the trial narrative demonstrates for those fearful of persecution that they can 
fac[e] the threat of martyrdom themselves (16:2).326 As Jesus kept his honour when 
317 Although Brown says kingship rather than Caesar, see similarly John, 2.863. 
318 Section 6.2. On the masculinity of Jesus particularly through the mocking scene in John 19:1-5, 
see Ripley, Behold, 222-23. On the impassivity of Jesus in the Johannine trial narrative, see similarly 
Nicholson, Death, 164. 
319 Baker, Narrative-Identity, 105. 
320 Baker, Narrative-Identity, 109. Esler distinguishes between a prototype and an exemplar, but this 
distinction is primarily meaningful for current group members rather than for prototypical characters in texts 
(Outline, 33-38). See similarly Esler, and Piper, Lazarus, 34-38, esp. 36. For the way Jesus actually did 
become a model for Christian martyrs, see Candida R. Moss, The Other Christs: Imitating Jesus in Ancient 
Christian Ideologies of Martyrdom (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), 19-111. 
321 Lincoln, Truth, 288-89. Note that the Hebrew Bible, too, recognizes the uncertain justice dispensed 
in human courts (Pro 25:7-12). 
322 Neyrey, Cultural, 412. See also Lincoln, Truth, 285-89. 
323 Some elements of the trial that emphasize the view of Pilate and the Jews that Jesus is being 
shamed include:   (18:30);  ; (18:35); he is set side by side with the  (18:40); he is 
flogged, mocked and slapped (19:1-3); he is considered worthy of crucifixion (19:6, 15, 18); he is considered 
to be a lawbreaker (19:7). 
324 John uses a double entendre with the word  to reframe the shame of the cross (van der 
Watt, Double, 466-81). 
325 Lincoln, Truth, 297-300; Lincoln, Life, 160, 160 n. 19. 
326 Ripley, Behold, 231. See, similarly, Lincoln, Truth, 183, 200-203; Gniesmer, Proze, 286; 
Cassidy, Christians, 43; Lincoln, Gospel, 63. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
standing accused before Pilate, disciples can fulfil their commission, in that they are sent to 
the world as Jesus was sent by the Father (20:21).327 This common sending argues against 
Teresa Morgans assertion that John makes little of Jesus as a model for imitation.328 The 
Gospel frequently and explicitly calls people to follow Jesus (1:43; 10:4-5, 27; 12:26; 13:36-
37; 21:19, 22) and also asks disciples to imitate Jesus in his service to others (13:14), so 
Jesus is more of a model (or, in social identity terminology, a prototype) than might be 
supposed.329 The Johannine Jesus also calls his followers to testify bravely before authorities 
(15:27). 
This conclusion coheres well with Reinhart Staatss argument that the formula 
adopted in later church creeds, crucified under Pontius Pilate, can be explained not 
primarily as a historical reference, but rather that it ursprnglich einen martyrologischen 
Sinn gehabt hat, connecting the trials of the martyrs to Jesuss own trial before a Roman 
authority.330 I Timothy 6:12-14 demonstrates this same use of the memory of the trial: You 
also confessed the good confession in the presence of many witnesses. I charge you before 
God, who gives life to everything, and before Christ Jesus, who testified to the good 
confession before Pontius Pilate, that you keep this command  (author translation).331 
Jesus is the prototype of one who witnesses to the truth and is glorified in suffering and 
327 Section 6.1.1; Lincoln, Truth, 128; Cornelis Bennema, Religious Violence in the Gospel of John: 
A Response to the Hindutva Culture in Modern India, in Violence and Peace: Creating a Cultura of Peace in 
the Contemporary Context of Violence: Papers from the 15th Annual Centre for Mission Studies Consultation, 
Ubs, Pune, ed. Frampton F. Fox (Bangalore: Asian Trading Corporation, 2010), 129-67 (138); Ripley, 
Behold, 234. Reinhartz notes a lack of mission to the Gentiles (so, too, Dunn, Neither, 369). However, she 
does not take into account the recategorization discussed above that puts all those who do not believe in Jesus 
as outsiders in the world (Colonizer, 177-78). The Latin and Greek on the titulus also point to a proclamation 
that is to gentiles as well as Jews. 
328 Morgan, Faith, 436, see also 402. Morgan does note John 13:34-35 as an exception (402 n. 50).  
329 Lincoln notes that this emphasis on Jesus as a paradigm for those undergoing trials is highlighted 
by contrasting it with Peters poor performance (Truth, 28, 31, 34, 250; cf. Rensberger, Politics, 407). Note 
that this sending is problematic when followers of Jesus use it to justify imposing their ideology on others 
(Warner, Fourth, 165; Dube, Savior, 129-30; Ripley, Glorious, 12). On this see Section 7.3.5 in the present 
chapter. 
330 Reinhart Staats, Pontius Pilatus im Bekenntnis der frhen Kirche, ZTK 84.4 (1987): 493-513 
(505). See, similarly, Schlier, Relevance, 217-18; Bammel, Titulus, 354. Note that although Stephen Liberty 
helpfully lists many of the early uses of this formula, his conclusions, which are based on reading the Gospel 
of John as fully historical, and which betray an anti-Jewish bias, are not to be followed [The Importance of 
Pontius Pilate in Creed and Gospel, JTS 45 (1944): 38-56].  
331 Brown, John, 2.861; Schlier, Relevance, 217-18. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
crucifixion. Thus, Jesus-believers who have chosen fear over faithful proclamation would 
be called upon to make a bolder choice, knowing that the shaming that follows is not, among 
Gods children, one that dishonours them.  
In this way, the Johannine trial narrative operates as resistance literature combating 
marginalization.332 By downplaying the virtue of abiding by the law, the narrative would 
enable persecuted Jesus-believers to construct themselves as virtuous and honourable despite 
not abiding fully by either Roman or Jewish law. Part of the message that the hidden 
transcript conveys is that the identity of a Jesus-believer is honourable, even if Romans 
marginalize, oppress, or persecute them. Thus, those who by believing in Jesus have become 
children of God have gained the ascendancy over this world (see also 16:33), but this is a 
hidden ascendancy, not evident to outsiders.333 This is why there is no overt, direct 
confrontation between Jesus-believers and Rome.334 Furthermore, the declaration that Jesus 
is in some ways like Caesar means that the mastery of the Roman lords and emperors would 
have provided the model for the mastery of Christ by default.335 That the Fourth Gospel 
overrides this default and provides a paradigm for a different type of emperor will be the 
focus of the next section. 
7.2.5. A hidden transcript that calls for the vulnerability of the powerful 
The previous section discussed the way John 18:2819:22 might help Jesus-
believers from the first or second century CE to retain a sense of honour, despite being 
332 Skinner, Trial, 180 n. 43. For a discussion of the way the Gospel as a whole constructs such a 
vision of community, see Liew, Ambiguous, 208-10. For a discussion of the way language (such as the text 
of the Gospel of John) exercises authority, see John Edwards, The Power of Language, the Language of 
Power, in Along the Routes to Power: Explorations of Empowerment through Language, ed. Martin Ptz, 
Joshua A. Fishman, and JoAnne Neff-van Aertselaer, Contributions to the Sociology of Language 92 (Berlin: 
de Gruyter, 2006), 13-34 (15). 
333 Rensberger, Overcoming, 98. Castelli notes that the concept of status is ironically reused in 
Christian identity since it implicitly undermined the effectiveness of the system of law (Martyrdom, 41). For 
further examples of inversions of Roman realities, particularly the recategorization of those enforcing Roman 
law to the status of lawless, see 43, 47, 67. 
334 See somewhat similarly Rensberger, Politics, 410. 
335 Joerg Rieger, Christ & Empire: From Paul to Postcolonial Times (Minneapolis: Fortress, 2007), 
41. Yet cf. Thatcher, Greater, 136-39. Section 7.3.5 will have more in common with Thatchers views. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
perceived by outsiders as lawbreakers. In this last section, I would like to offer some 
suggestions for further research by outlining the way Jesus in the Johannine trial narrative is 
also a prototype for Jesus-believers who are not marginalized but who, instead, have some 
power.336 
Pilate, clearly, has power in this narrativedelegated power that I have therefore 
termed authority.337 He rightly asserts that he has the authority to kill Jesus or to set him free 
(19:10). And he is motivated in the use of that authority, as I have described it, by his own 
best interest.338 As he is reminded by Jesus (v. 11), he uses his authority in the way that will 
best show his loyalty to Caesar.339 He does not need to consider the interests of Jesus, or of 
the Jews, or even the interests of justice, except as they might impinge on his perceived 
loyalty to Caesar.340 This is power-over, used for domination.341 Pilate does not see himself 
as evil, but he is pragmatic and puts a continuation of the status quo above all (cf. 19:12, 16). 
The Jews have some power in this narrative as well. In a sense, it is negative 
powerthe power to threaten the status quo by questioning the loyalty of Pilate.342 They 
have the ability to leverage that power, to a limited extent, to obtain what they want. And 
what they want is also to maintain the status quo with regard to their own power (11:48). 
They also use their power for domination, putting their own demonstrable loyalty to Caesar 
above other concerns (18:30-31; 19:15). 
336 Nevertheless, power and powerlessness are not opposite social positions, but change for each 
person from social group to social group, from physical location to physical location, and even from day to 
day. Therefore, the previous section and this one are not relevant to different groups of people but rather to the 
same people at various times. Additionally, I must note that, as I construct an interpretant for this section most 
particularly, the object that prompts my interpretation of the Sign of John 18:2819:22 is not only the first- 
and second-century experiences of Jesus-believers as best as I can imagine them, but also some present-day 
oppressive behavior that seems to me to poorly reflect the paradigm of this narrative unit. See Lincoln, Truth, 
8-10, 414, 417, 422, 429-30, 458-59 and 495; Moore, Empire, 49. Note that Moores world-conquering 
Johannine Jesus is quite similar to Thatchers Jesus who crushes the power of Rome (John 16:33) (Thatcher, 
Greater, 54). 
337 Section 4.4.2. 
338 Sections 6.1.2-4. 
339 Section 6.1.3. 
340 Section 6.1.2. 
341 On power-over, see Ehrensperger, Dynamics, 20-22. On distinguishing between an imbalance of 
power that is dominating and one that is transformative, see 27-33. 
342 Scott, Domination, 90-96. See also Ehrensperger, Dynamics, 20-21, 30. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
What power does Jesus have? In other scenes in the Fourth Gospel, he has 
demonstrated that he does have powerthe power to heal, to raise the dead, and to escape 
harm himself (4:50; 11:43; 10:39). Jesus power from God is made clear throughout the 
Gospel (e.g., 3:35; 13:3).343 Even in his death, Jesus does not die as a victim. He is aware 
and even in control of his own destiny.344 Yet in the Johannine trial narrative, he chooses 
not to use that power, for the sake of making life available to the world (17:1-5). Like Pilate 
and the Jews, he maintains his loyalty to the one who has given him his authority, but 
unlike them, he does not harm others (e.g., 5:27).345 This, too, is power-over, but exercised 
for the purpose of transformation.346 
 In demonstrating his loyalty to the Father, Jesus not only does not harm others but 
he allows himself to be harmed for the sake of his mission (19:1; 12:27). He makes himself 
vulnerable.347 Vulnerability for Pilate and the Jews would be to risk losing their own power 
and positionsand this they do not do.348 Vulnerability for Jesus does not consist in risking 
his own physical harmhe does this repeatedly in the Gospel and although he is hurt, he is 
343 Eben Scheffler, arguing for non-violence, notes that John depicts Jesus non-violent attitude  
emphasised by the fact that he refrains from violence from a position of power [Jesus Non-Violence at His 
Arrest: The Synoptics and John's Gospel Compared, in The Death of Jesus in the Fourth Gospel, ed. G. Van 
Belle, BETL 200 (Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2007), 739-49 (743)]. See, also, Cassidy, Christians, 37-
344 Thompson, John, 377. See, similarly, Thatcher, Greater, 40, 128; Colleen M. Conway, Was Jesus 
a Manly Man? On Reading Masculinity in the New Testament, WW 36.1 (2016): 15-23 (19). 
345 I have not forgotten, however, the eschatological harm promised. One solution is that of Volf, who 
argues that the violence in the Gospels and, indeed, in other New Testament texts, is not a model for Christians 
to emulate now but the eschatological judgement of a just God [Miroslav Volf, Exclusion and Embrace: A 
Theological Exploration of Identity, Otherness, and Reconciliation (Nashville: Abingdon, 1996), 303]. As will 
be argued below (Section 7.3), whether such a solution is hoped-for or judged repulsive depends in part on 
ones current experience of injustice. In any case, it firmly removes physical or ideological violence from the 
purview of Jesus-believers. 
346 Ehrensperger, Dynamics, 27-29; John Painter, The Death of Jesus in John: A Discussion of the 
Tradition, History, and Theology of John, in The Death of Jesus in the Fourth Gospel, ed. Gilbert Van Belle 
(Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2007), 327-61 (346, 360). 
347 Vulnerability, as I understand it, is the willingness to risk an encounter with an ideological 
otherness that challenges ones own ideology, especially the aspects of ones own ideology that empower one 
to act [Hans Jochen Margull, Verwundbarkeit: Bemerkungen zum Dialog, Evangelische Theologie 34 (1974): 
410-20 (410-11)]. Vulnerability is often not a choice; see Catriona Mackenzie, Wendy Rogers, and Susan 
Dodds, Introduction: What Is Vulnerability, and Why Does It Matter for Moral Theory?, in Vulnerability: 
New Essays in Ethics and Feminist Philosophy, ed. Catriona Mackenzie, Wendy Rogers, and Susan Dodds, 
Studies in Feminist Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014), 1-29 (4-9). 
348 Orchard, Courting, 208. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
not permanently harmed (11:8; 20:14).349 Instead, the Gospel repeatedly asserts that the 
ultimate harm to Jesus is for him to be rejected (e.g., 1:10-11; 8:55).350 On the one hand, 
Jesus vulnerabilities are expressive of his humanity (Tertullian, Flesh of Christ 9).351 Yet 
for the Son of God to become human is, from the opposite perspective, an expression of 
vulnerability in itself. He is Gott , der sich nicht berhaupt, sondern in der Knechtsgestalt 
dialogisch kundtut, also in der Knechtsgestalt verwundbar wurde (ist, sein wollte?).352 
And his very coming into the world provoked a choice that demonstrated that not everyone 
would believe in him (3:17-19). For example, to include Judas among his closest disciples 
is to make himself vulnerable to a betrayal which he knows is imminent (6:64, 70-71).353  
And as a result of the choice that Jesus presence provokes, guilt is assigned. In John 
19:11, Jesus sets out the guilt of Pilate and the greater guilt of the one who betrayed him. 
Pilates guilt comes as a result of his loyalty to Caesarhe becomes the means by which 
the Jews express their hatred of Jesus (7:7). Guilt for the Jews is the same as that of the 
worldit is rejecting Jesus (5:38). The rejection of Jesus motivates the attempts to kill 
himand Pilates guilt is less because he is simply the time and place that God has chosen 
to allow that rejection to bear its fruit (5:18).354 According to the Gospel of John, Jesus dies 
in order to provide life for the world and he dies as a result of his rejection (3:15; 7:30). In 
the trial narrative, however, his death has not yet occurred. In John 18:2819:22, he has 
349 Section 7.2.1. This is pace Orchard who assumes vulnerability must be physical, although she does 
not define it and includes the footwashing as Jesus self-chosen victimal behaviour (Orchard, Courting, 17-
18, 169-70; Painter, Death, 345). 
350 Painter, Death, 343, 360; Simoens, Pouvoir, 551. Cf. Deut. 7:10. 
351 Edwards, John, 54; Lincoln, Gospel, 327; Devillers, Croix, 404-405; Neyrey, Cultural, 467. See 
also Marianne Meye Thompson who, while arguing against Ksemanns nave docetism, frequently points to 
passages in the Gospel where Jesus becomes vulnerable since humanity (as opposed to deity) is just that
vulnerable (e.g., Incarnate, 3, 113). This does not, however, mean that the humanity and divinity of Jesus can 
be seen separately in the Fourth Gospel (Thompson, John, 249). 
352 Margull, Verwundbarkeit, 420.  
353 Koester, Why, 177. There is no indication, as Orchard supposes, that Judas is not among those 
that Jesus loved (Courting, 169; John 13:1). In fact, John 1:11 suggests that reaching out to ones own does not 
guarantee they will reciprocate. See, for example, the description of Jesus actions in Bennemas 
characterization of Judas which, while not mentioning vulnerability specifically, point out Jesus love even for 
him (Encountering, 131). 
354 Section 7.1.5 n. 161. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
simply chosen not to escape, not to use his power to preserve his own status quo, but to allow 
those who reject him to express that rejection to the fullest extent (16:2-3).  
Rejection of Jesus is prompted by his witness.355 Yet to bear witness to a truth that is 
different from that of the other makes one vulnerable to the otherness of the other.356 To 
protect Christians from that other, the Fourth Gospel has become, in some times and places, 
an invitation to enact both physical and ideological violence.357 The Johannine Jesus models 
a different response to an encounter between differing truths. Although characterized as a 
powerful emperor, he models vulnerability, specifically when his bearing witness  has 
brought the violence and hatred of the world upon him.358 This is because at the trial before 
Pilate, his timethe time that God has chosenhas come (17:1).359 Pilates choice comes 
to fruition but Jesus is able to bring life to the world through Pilates choice.360 
Although Jesus chooses to be vulnerable in his trial and crucifixion, he does not make 
that same choice absolutely or universally. In John 2:23-24 the narrator communicates Jesus 
unwillingness to entrust himself to the many who believed, because he knew what was in 
them.361 His journey to Jerusalem, to the temple, at the time of Sukkot (7:1-23), is especially 
interesting because he makes himself vulnerable (vv.1, 25-26, 44), apparently for the sake 
of teaching the people (v. 14) and yet does so carefully, in a way that minimizes his risk, 
because his time is not yet here (vv. 6, 30).362 And it is because he does not make himself 
355 That witness provides everyone with the opportunity to believe in him and be transformed, but it 
does not require it (Painter, Death, 359). 
356 Volf, Exclusion, 267-68; Bennema, Religious, 146-47. Conversely, for the other to listen to 
someone elses truth is also a stance of vulnerability.  
357 Volf, Exclusion, 306; Dube, Savior, 130-33; Reinhartz, Love, e.g., 121. 
358 Orchard, Courting, 206. While the use of vulnerability as a method of discussion and confrontation 
cannot be discussed at this juncture, some thoughts are offered in Margull, Verwundbarkeit; William C. 
Placher, Narratives of a Vulnerable God: Christ, Theology, and Scripture (Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 
1994), esp. 41-45, 87-108; Volker Kster, Toward an Intercultural Theology: Paradigm Shifts in Missiology, 
Ecumenics, and Comparative Religion, in Theology and the Religions: A Dialogue, ed. Viggo Mortensen 
(Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2003), 171-84 (179-82). See too Lincoln, Reading, 143-48. 
359 See Section 7.1.5. 
360 Somewhat similarly, see Thompson, John, 372. 
361 Lincoln, Gospel, 238. (It would be interesting to explore further the fact that it is to those who 
believed that the Johannine Jesus does not choose to be vulnerable.) 
362 Brown, John, 1.318. Some commentators discuss the mounting tension between Jesus and his 
opponents without noting the parallel tension inherent between Jesus vulnerability and his power, e.g., 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
completely vulnerablebut retains the power to effect his free movementthat he is not 
apprehended (v. 30) and, indeed, can go on speaking with the Jews despite what the 
narrator relates of their violent wishes (8:20, 37, 40, 44, 59).363  
Therefore, Jesus is neither a servant who is kicked from one powerful abuser to the 
next nor is he a sword-wielding emperor. These two opposite positions are exemplified by 
Helen Orchard and John Painter. If Painter leans to the side of Jesus power, and Orchard 
leans to the side of Jesus as an active participant in his own victimization, it is only because 
both are in the text.364 It is the choice of the powerful to be vulnerable.365 What must be 
noted is that, as Painter rightly points out, Jesus power is one that allows him to go into the 
heart of darkness of the world, not to destroy it, but to transform it by the power of the light 
of the love of God, which is incarnate in him (see 3,19-21; 8,12; 9,5.39-41; 12,35-36.46).366 
The God above and the disciples in the world are, in this way, in unity with each other 
despite the apparent intrusion of the Roman empire between the two.367  
The goal of Jesusto bring people to himself knowing that not all will believe
suggests a response to Alan Culpeppers comment that There is a great deal of talk about 
love in John, but Jesus does not seem to be very loving.368 In this Gospel, Jesus love is not 
that of a lover seeking to please the beloved; it is rather the grim determination to do what 
must be done to bring the offer of life (3:15, 17; 6:51; 10:10-11, 15-18; 11:51-52; 12:23-25, 
32).369 
Moloney, Love, 97-98. He does, however, note the violence of the mounting attempt  to eliminate Jesus 
(124). 
363 Moloney, John, 247, 316-17. 
364 Warner, Fourth, 162. 
365 Painter, Death, 345; Orchard, Courting, 100, emphasis original. 
366 Painter, Death, 345. 
367 See, somewhat similarly, Catrin Williams description of Johns use of  (Williams, Another 
Look, 69-70).  
368 Culpepper, Anatomy, 111. 
369 Lincoln, Reading, 145, 149; Koester, Why, 176.  
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
7.3. Conclusion 
This chapter has shown that the Roman reading of John 18:2819:22 proposed in this study 
opens avenues for future research on a wide range of topics. The trial narrative recategorizes 
ethnicity and creates witness to the truth as a superordinate identity strengthening 
community among those who believe, both gentile and Jew. It highlights election and 
accommodation to outsiders, but relativizes obedience to both Jewish and Roman laws. It 
emphasizes witnessing as a mark of honour among Jesus-believers and expects that 
ultimately all will believe in Jesus or be cut off (15:2). However, for the present that the text 
addresses, Jesus models vulnerability to outsiders for the sake of the offer of life. 
Jesus model of vulnerability seems to have been easy to ignore when the hidden 
transcript was brought into the public discourse. Those who define themselves by their 
struggle against oppressors tend to glory in their victory once the oppressors are gone. This 
may be why [r]eaders of the Fourth Gospel often claim  absolutizing powers over 
others.370 Those who struggle, in whatever way possible may become those who take up 
this all-powerful Jesus and claim to rule in his name, justifying their power as an extension 
of his.371  
Such domination, especially backed up by physical violence, are sometimes 
countered by Jesus rejection of such tactics (18:11, 36).372 For N. T. Wright, for example, 
370 Musa W. Dube, and Jeffrey L. Staley, Descending from and Ascending into Heaven: A 
Postcolonial Analysis of Travel, Space and Power in John, in John and Postcolonialism: Travel, Space and 
Power, ed. Musa W. Dube and Jeffrey L. Staley, The Bible and Postcolonialism 7 (London: Sheffield 
Academic Press, 2002), 1-10 (10). 
371 Rensberger, Overcoming, 122, 123, 126. See also Dube, Savior, 123, 130. 
372 Many scholars describe Jesus kingdom as one of peace or non-violence; see, e.g., Hauerwas, 
Peaceable, 83; Kee, Knowing, 276; John Dominic Crossan, Roman Imperial Theology, in In the Shadow 
of Empire: Reclaiming the Bible as a History of Faithful Resistance, ed. Richard A. Horsley (Louisville: 
Westminster John Knox, 2008), 59-73 (73); Skinner, Trial, 96; Trost, Who, 123, 161; Sheridan, Retelling, 220, 
224. For Eben Scheffler, because of the temple incident (John 2:13-17), non-violence is defined as physical 
violence that can destroy human life [The Historical Jesus and (Non-)Violence: A Contemporary Challenge, 
in The Bible and Violance in Africa: Papers Presented at the BiAS Meeting 2014 in Windhoek (Namibia), with 
Some Additional Contributions, ed. Johannes Hunter and Joachim Kgler, Bible in Africa Studies 20 
(Bamberg: University of Bamberg Press, 2016), 91-115 (105)]. 
7. A Hidden Transcript That Addresses Identity         
Jesus kingdom is different in that it enacts the victory of love, and enacts Gods truth.373 
Yet his summary of the issue reveals the problem inherent in this conclusion: Bearing 
witness to the truth means telling, and enacting, Gods judgment on the untruth of the present 
world, and enabling the launch of the new one.374 What actions could not be justified in the 
name of correcting untruth? What physical and ideological violence might not be 
rationalized as an enactment of Gods judgement?  
Painter claims [t]hat the light shines in the darkness is not an act of violence. It is 
Gods way of bringing something out of nothing, good out of evil, life out of death. In it 
there is the possibility of the transformation of the world and this can only be through 
persuasion rather than force or violence.375 Yet this is just where the problem lies. Should 
an invitation to transformation, to the family of God (1:12), and to life (3:15), with a threat 
of ideological and perhaps physical violence in the end for those who refuse it (3:18, 36), be 
described as a mission of rescue or colonization? In the end, it depends on whether the other 
feels that such a rescue is welcome or not.376 
373 N. T. Wright, and J. P. Davies, John, Jesus, and the Ruler of This World: Demonic Politics in 
the Fourth Gospel?, in Conception, Reception, and the Spirit: Essays in Honor of Andrew T. Lincoln, ed. J. G. 
McConville and Lloyd Pietersen (Eugene, OR: Cascade, 2015), 71-89 (85, 86). 
374 Wright, and Davies, Conception, 86; see, also, 87. 
375 Painter, Death, 346. 
376 One way forward might be to listen to voices both from above and from below, as Klaus Wengst 
does for the pax Romana [Pax Romana and the Peace of Jesus Christ, trans. John Bowden (Philadelphia: 
Fortress, 1987), 10]. 
8. Concluding Synthesis 
In the multicultural milieu of the early Roman empire, intersecting cultures required 
intersecting cultural and linguistic competence to be able to communicate effectively. 
Umberto Ecos threefold semiotic theory based on Charles Peirces triad of Sign-object-
interpretant provides the term encyclopaedia to discuss such competencies. In addition to 
the Jewish encyclopaedia, the Gospel of John uses words and concepts of importance in the 
Roman encyclopaedia, particularly in John 18:2819:22. To analyse this narrative unit with 
the tools of semiotic analysis is, in contrast to Empire Studies, to attend to the impact of the 
Roman empire on the biblical text primarily at the level of its language, bringing in issues 
of power only secondarily as they are raised in the initial analysis. While the Gospel of John 
is too open a text to be considered an antilanguage, James Scotts term hidden transcript 
describes the way the text regularly appeals to Jesus-believers knowledge of what it calls 
the truth in what seems to be a polemical context, and yet always with an element of 
deniability (20:28).  
After Chapter 1 has set forth these introductory issues, Chapter 2 goes on to explain 
semiotic theory in more detail. In particular, the way Signs blow up or narcotize contextual 
references that are tied to culture allows for auditors with different cultural competencies to 
understand texts differently. However, interpretation is not unlimited, because texts offer 
clues and confirmations that serve as guides and checks to unconstrained interpretation. 
Ecos objectthe event or item in the world outside of the text that prompted the author to 
communicatealso serves to limit interpretation. While that world is no longer directly 
accessible to twenty-first century CE interpreters, the available information about that world 
informs and constrains the interpretation offered in this thesis (particularly in Chapter 3 and 
in Sections 4.1, 4.3-4, 5.1.1-2, 6.1.2-5, 7.1.2). 
In a multicultural environment such as existed in the Eastern provinces under the 
Roman empire, authors are able to switch from one encyclopaedia to another, accessing the 
8. Concluding Synthesis            
cultural units that they need. When these switches occur, authors signal them by embedding 
words or phrases particular to the new encyclopaedia. Once activated, the cultural units of 
the second encyclopaedia, including literary allusions, are available to the auditors as they 
interpret the text. In a literary allusion in particular, the reference may be brought in as a 
point of comparison or of contrast, and that information will be expressed in the frame in 
which it is set. These theories, explored in Chapter 2, demonstrate not only the importance 
of the cultural milieus of the Gospel of John for the interpretation of the text, but also the 
way these can be brought together in analysis. 
Chapter 3 describes some of the context in which the Fourth Gospel was produced. 
Using evidence from Ephesus, Antioch, and Alexandria, it outlines the existence of Roman 
retainers who, while not necessarily Roman citizens or Latin speakers, had to develop 
competencies in Roman culture in order to function in the army, to serve the Roman 
administration, in law, or in commerce. Such people left epigraphical and papyrological 
evidence of these linguistic competencies. Furthermore, the Gospel of John, particularly 
John 18:2819:22, contains similar words and phrases, some of which reflect the presence 
of Latin in the Eastern Mediterranean in the first and second century CE. These terms justify 
the production of an interpretant of the Johannine trial narrative that is rooted in the Roman 
encyclopaedia. 
When Chapter 4 begins such an endeavour, it first encounters the term  and 
its attendant ambiguity. Used in Greek for both kings and emperors,  is repeated 
three times in John 18:33-37, and, from the perspective of the Roman encyclopaedia, it raises 
the question of legitimation. Yet earlier episodes from the Fourth Gospel can be interpreted, 
once that question is raised, to answer it immediately. Jesus is appropriately humble about 
his aspirations to rule (John 6:15). Jesus has the consensus of God (Section 4.3.3). And Jesus 
has the consensus of the people (John 12:12-15). In the rest of the trial narrative (John 
8. Concluding Synthesis            
18:3819:22) this Roman evaluation is confirmed as Jesus is declared to be son of God 
(divi filius) and to have been given authority (imperium). 
Having broadly established some points of similarity between the Johannine Jesus 
and Caesar, Chapter 5 narrows the focus onto John 19:2-5. There, Jesus is dressed in imperial 
attire and hailed by Roman soldiers. In some ways, his robe and crown and even the mocking 
words of the soldiers mimic a Roman triumph. Such elements began to be used, after 
Augustus, in imperial contexts outside of the triumph itself, to highlight the status of the 
emperor. Then, in verse 3, Roman soldiers hail Jesus as in the acclamation of one who will 
become emperor. However, the title they use is different:    . I have 
suggested that in this way, John hides the blasphemy of calling Jesus the emperor. 
The comparison between Jesus and Caesar is raised again in verse 5 when auditors 
are reminded of Jesus imperial dress and Pilate presents Jesus to the Jews with the words, 
  . This phrase seems to echo the presentation of Augustus in Vergils Aeneid 
(6.791) where Aeneas father Anchises presents the shade of the future emperor with the 
words, hic vir, hic est. This literary allusion works differently in different frames. In the 
immediate context, it provides a contrast between imperial Augustus and the beaten Jesus 
that fits with the mockery of the soldiers. When interpreted in the frame of John 18:28
19:22, however, it joins the rest of the comparisons between Jesus and Caesar to suggest that 
the truth, which I have argued is the hidden transcript of Jesus-believers, is that Jesus fulfills 
the Roman messianic expectations and is the ruler of Caesar. This presentation then joins 
the other cultural descriptions of Jesus in the Fourth Gospel which have the capacity to range 
Romans or Roman-aware auditors among those the Gospel calls to faithful loyalty. 
Loyalty, Chapter 6 argues, is of key importance in John 18:2819:22. Approaching 
the text with a Roman encyclopaedia, Roman-aware auditors would expect that Pilates 
primary concern would be to keep the peace of Caesar and demonstrate his own loyalty to 
him. In pursuit of these goals, Pilate uses mockery to test the reaction of the Jews to find 
8. Concluding Synthesis            
out whether they are loyal to Jesus (18:2819:5). Having determined that they are not, he 
then continues his testing to find out whether they are loyal to Caesar, which is a related but 
not identical question (19:6-22). In the midst of each cycle of conversations, Pilate attempts 
to determine, first, whether Jesus is seditious and, secondly, whether he is dangerous to 
Pilates future. Once he has been assured of the loyalty of the Jews, and has become 
reasonably assured that Jesus is not a personal threat to him, crucifying Jesus is an expedient 
solution to the matter. 
The Johannine trial narrative, in the course of Pilates tests, raises questions about 
some Roman identity markers (being elected by the gods, abiding by the law, and welcoming 
foreigners). These markers are also important to Jewish identity, and the various positioning 
of the characters of the trial narrativeboth physical and verbalrecategorizes Pilate and 
the Jews together. Furthermore, the law in particular comes into question as Jews and 
Pilate negotiate whose law they will follow while Jesus stands in the midst of them and is 
categorized by both as a law-breaker, the Jews explicitly so (19:7) and Pilate by crucifying 
him (19:16). In this way, Chapter 7 argues, Jesus becomes an exemplar of a witness to the 
truth, a superordinate identity that prioritizes witnessing over law-abiding. 
The truth, for Jesus-believers, is that empires must be negotiated. While Jesus 
admonishes his followers not to commit acts of physical violence (18:11; 19:36), they also 
are to expect that such acts will be committed against them. It seems likely, or so I argue in 
Section 7.2.3, that those whom the Gospel addresses were in some way, or expected to be, 
marginalized or persecuted. In such a situation, Jesus provides the exemplar of one who is 
shamed by the world, but honoured by God, a re-ordering of the evaluations of others typical 
of hidden transcripts.  
What of the forceful imposition of ideology in which Christians have sometimes 
engaged? Jesus, portrayed as powerful in Johns Gospel, also provides an exemplar who 
does not use his power to impose his truthat least not in the narrative. He chooses to lay 
8. Concluding Synthesis            
aside his power even to escape from violence, when doing so serves to draw people to belief 
(12:23-32). It is to such vulnerable witnessing that his followers are also called (15:27
16:4). 
Bibliography 
Aageson, James W. Written Also for Our Sake: Paul and the Art of Biblical Interpretation. 
Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 1993. 
Abasciano, Brian J. Paul's Use of the Old Testament in Romans 9:1-9: An Intertextual and 
Theological Exegesis. London; New York: T&T Clark, 2005. 
Abbott, Edwin A. Johannine Grammar. London: Black, 1906. 
Ackerman, Robert. J. G. Frazer: His Life and Work. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1987. 
Adams, James N. Bilingualism and the Latin Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2008. 
________. Bilingualism at Delos. Pages 103-27 in Bilingualism in Ancient Society: 
Language Contact and the Written Text. Edited by James N. Adams, Mark Janse, 
and Simon Swain. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002. 
________. The Regional Diversification of Latin, 200 BC-AD 600. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2007. 
________. Romanitas and the Latin Language. ClQ 53.1 (2003): 184-205. 
Adams, James N., and Simon Swain. Introduction. Pages 1-20 in Bilingualism in Ancient 
Society: Language Contact and the Written Text. Edited by James N. Adams, Mark 
Janse, and Simon Swain. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002. 
Adams, Sean, and Daniel Smith. A Review Panel of Joseph Modica and Scot McKnight, 
eds., Jesus Is Lord, Caesar Is Not: Evaluating Empire in New Testament Studies 
(Intervarsity Press, 2013). Paper presented at the Ancient Historiography and the 
New Testament in the Institute for Biblical Research, SBL Annual Meeting, 
Baltimore, MD, 22 November, 2013. 
Adrados, Francisco Rodrguez. A History of the Greek Language: From Its Origins to the 
Present. Leiden: Brill, 2005. 
Agamben, Giorgio. The Kingdom and the Glory: For a Theological Genealogy of Economy 
and Government. Translated by Lorenzo Chiesa and Matteo Mandarini. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, 2011. 
Aitken, James K. No Stone Unturned: Greek Inscriptions and Septuagint Vocabulary. 
Critical Studies in the Hebrew Bible 5. Edited by Anselm C. Hagedorn, Nathan 
MacDonald, and Stuart Weeks. Winona Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns, 2014. 
Alexander, Loveday. Acts in Its Ancient Literary Context: A Classicist Looks at the Acts of 
the Apostles. Early Christianity in Context; LNTS 298. Edited by John M. G. Barclay 
and Mark Goodacre. New York: T&T Clark, 2005. 
________. L'intertextualit et la question des lecteurs: Rflexions sur l'usage de la Bible 
dans les Actes des Aptres. Pages 201-214 in Intertextualits: La Bible en chos. 
Edited by Daniel Marguerat and Adrian Curtis. Geneva: Labor et Fides, 2000. 
Alexander, Michael C. Oratory, Rhetoric, and Politics in the Republic. Pages 98-108 in A 
Companion to Roman Rhetoric. Edited by William Dominik and Jon Hall. Malden, 
MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010. 
Alexander, Philip S. The Family of Caesar and the Family of God: The Image of the 
Emperor in the Heikhalot Literature. Pages 276-97 in Images of Empire. Edited by 
Loveday Alexander. Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1991. 
Alfldi, Andreas. Die monarchische Reprsentation im rmischen Kaiserreiche. Darmstadt: 
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1977. 
Alkier, Stefan. Ethik der Interpretation. Pages 21-41 in Der eine Gott und die Welt der 
Religionen: Beitrge zu einer Theologie der Religionen und zum interreligisen 
Dialog. Edited by Markus Witte. Wrzburg: Religion & Kultur, 2003. 
Bibliography            
________. Intertextuality and the Semiotics of Biblical Texts. Pages 3-21 in Reading the 
Bible Intertextually. Edited by Richard B. Hays, Stefan Alkier, and Leroy Andrew 
Huizenga. Waco, TX: Baylor University Press, 2009. 
________. New Testament Studies on the Basis of Categorical Semiotics. Pages 223-48 in 
Reading the Bible Intertextually. Edited by Richard B. Hays, Stefan Alkier, and 
Leroy Andrew Huizenga. Waco, TX: Baylor University Press, 2009. 
________. The Reality of the Resurrection: The New Testament Witness. Translated by 
Leroy A. Huizenga. Waco, TX: Baylor University Press, 2013. 
________. Wunder und Wirklichkeit in den Briefen des Apostels Paulus: ein Beitrag zu 
einem Wunderverstndnis jenseits von Entmythologisierung und Rehistorisierung. 
WUNT 1.134. Edited by Martin Hengel and Otfried Hofius. Tbingen: Mohr 
Siebeck, 2001. 
Ando, Clifford. Imperial Ideology and Provincial Loyalty in the Roman Empire. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2000. 
Applebaum, Shimon. Judaea in Hellenistic and Roman Times: Historical and 
Archaeological Essays. Studies in Judaism in Late Antiquity 40. Edited by Jacob 
Neusner. Leiden: Brill, 1989. 
Ashton, John. Understanding the Fourth Gospel. Oxford: Clarendon, 1991. 
Assenmaker, Pierre. Nouvelles perspectives sur le titre d'imperator et l'appellatio 
imperatoria sous la Rpublique. RBPH 90 (2012): 111-42. 
Atkin, Albert. Peirce's Theory of Signs'. In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited 
by Edward N. Zalta. Stanford, CA: The Metaphysics Research Lab: Center for the 
Study of Language and Information: Stanford University, 2013. 
Attridge, Harold, Warren Carter, and Jan van der Watt. Are John's Ethics Apolitical?. NTS 
62.3 (2016): 484-97. 
Attridge, Harold W. Divine Sovereignty and Human Responsibility in the Fourth Gospel. 
Pages 183-99 in Revealed Wisdom: Studies in Apocalyptic in Honour of Christopher 
Rowland. Edited by John Ashton. Leiden: Brill, 2014. 
Augoustakis, Antony. Silius Italicus, a Flavian Poet. Pages 3-23 in Brill's Companion to 
Silius Italicus. Edited by Antony Augoustakis. Leiden: Brill, 2010. 
Aurenhammer, Maria. Late Hellenistic and Early Roman Imperial Portraits from Ephesos. 
Pages 101-115 in Roman Sculpture in Asia Minor: Proceedings of the International 
Conference to Celebrate the 50th Anniversary of the Italian Excavations at 
Hierapolis in Phrygia, Held on May 24-26, 2007, in Cavallino (Lecce). Edited by F. 
D'Andria and I. Romeo. Portsmouth, RI: JRA, 2011. 
Austin, Colin, ed. Comicorum Graecorum fragmenta, in papyris reperta. Berlin: de Gruyter, 
1973. 
Bablitz, Leanne. Actors and Audience in the Roman Courtroom. London: Routlege, 2007. 
Backus, Ad. The Role of Semantic Specificity in Insertional Codeswitching: Evidence from 
Dutch-Turkish. Pages 125-54 in Codeswitching Worldwide II. Edited by Rodolfo 
Jacobson. Berlin: de Gruyter, 2001. 
Badel, Christophe. Adventus et salutatio. Pages 157-75 in Les entres royales et 
impriales: histoire, reprsentation et diffusion d'une crmonie publique, de 
l'Orient ancien  Byzance. Edited by Agns Brenger and Eric Perrin-Saminadayar. 
Paris: De Boccard, 2009. 
________. L'audience chez les snateurs. Pages 141-64 in L'audience: Rituels et cadres 
spatiaux dans l'Antiquit et le haut Moyen Age. Edited by Jean-Pierre Caillet and 
Michel Sot. Paris: Picard, 2007. 
Baker, Coleman A. A Narrative-Identity Model for Biblical Interpretation: The Role of 
Memory and Narrative in Social Identity Formation. Pages 105-118 in T&T Clark 
Handbook to Social Identity in the New Testament. Edited by J. Brian Tucker and 
Coleman A. Baker. London: Bloomsbury, 2014. 
Bibliography            
Baldwin, Barry. Bi-Culturalism and Bi-Lingualism in the Roman Empire. Pages 65-68 in 
Proceedings of the Pacific North-West Conference on Foreign Languages. Edited by 
Walter C. Kraft. Corvallis: Oregon State University, 1974. 
Bammel, Ernst. The Titulus. Pages 353-64 in Jesus and the Politics of His Day. Edited by 
Ernst Bammel and C. F. D. Moule. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984. 
________. The Trial before Pilate. Pages 415-51 in Jesus and the Politics of His Day. 
Edited by Ernst Bammel and C. F. D. Moule. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1984. 
________.   . Theologische Literaturzeitung 77.4 (1952): 205-210. 
Bandera, Cesreo. The Sacred Game: The Role of the Sacred in the Genesis of Modern 
Literary Fiction. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1994. 
Baratte, Franois, and Nathalie de Chaisemartin. North Africa. Pages 504-521 in The 
Oxford Handbook of Roman Sculpture. Edited by Elise A. Friedland, Melanie 
Grunow Sobocinski, and Elaine K. Gazda. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015. 
Barr, James. The Semantics of Biblical Language. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1961. 
Barrett, C. K. The Gospel According to St. John: An Introduction with Commentary and 
Notes on the Greek Text. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Westminster, 1978. 
________. The Gospel of John and Judaism. Translated by D. M. Smith. Philadelphia: 
Fortress, 1975. 
Barry, Peter. Beginning Theory: An Introduction to Literary and Cultural Theory. 
Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2009. 
Barton, John. Dj lu: Intertextuality, Method or Theory?. Pages 1-16 in Reading Job 
Intertextually. Edited by Katharine Dell and William Kynes. New York: 
Bloomsbury, 2013. 
Bauckham, Richard. For Whom Were Gospels Written?. Pages 9-48 in The Gospels for All 
Christians: Rethinking the Gospel Audiences. Edited by Richard Bauckham. Grand 
Rapids: Eerdmans, 1998. 
Beard, Mary. The Roman Triumph. Cambridge, MA: Belknap, 2007. 
Beard, Mary, John North, and Simon Price. Religions of Rome. Vol. 1: A History. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998. 
Bekken, Per Jarle. The Lawsuit Motif in John's Gospel from New Perspectives: Jesus Christ, 
Crucified Criminal and Emperor of the World. NovTSup 158. Edited by M. M. 
Mitchell and D. P. Moessner. Leiden: Brill, 2015. 
Bell, Allan. Back in Style: Reworking Audience Design. Pages 139-69 in Style and 
Sociolinguistic Variation. Edited by Penelope Eckert and John R. Rickford. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001. 
Ben-Porat, Ziva. Allusive Inter-Textuality in Computer Games. Literary and Linguistic 
Computing 27.3 (2012): 261-71. 
________. The Poetics of Literary Allusion. PTL: A Journal for Descriptive Poetics and 
Theory of Literature 1 (1976): 105-128. 
________. Two-Way Pragmatics: From World to Text and Back. Pages 142-63 in Literary 
Pragmatics. Edited by Roger D. Sell. London: Routledge, 1991. 
Ben-Rafael, Miriam. Codeswitching in the Language of Immigrants: The Case of 
Franbreu. Pages 251-307 in Codeswitching Worldwide II. Edited by Rodolfo 
Jacobson. Berlin: de Gruyter, 2001. 
Benko, Stephen. Virgil's Fourth Eclogue in Christian Interpretation. ANRW 31.1: 646-705. 
Edited by Wolfgang Haase. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1980. 
Bennema, Cornelis. The Character of Pilate in the Gospel of John. Pages 240-53 in 
Characters and Characterization in the Gospel of John. Edited by Christopher W. 
Skinner. London: Bloomsbury, 2013. 
Bibliography            
________. A Comprehensive Approach to Understanding Character in the Gospel of John. 
Pages 36-58 in Characters and Characterization in the Gospel of John. Edited by 
Christopher W. Skinner. London: Bloomsbury, 2013. 
________. Early Christian Identity Formation and Its Relevance for Modern India. Pages 
59-76 in Indian and Christian: Changing Identities in Modern India. Edited by 
Cornelis Bennema and P. Joshua Bhakiaraj. Bangalore: SAIACS Press, 2011. 
________. Encountering Jesus: Character Studies in the Gospel of John. Milton Keynes: 
Paternoster, 2009. 
________. Religious Violence in the Gospel of John: A Response to the Hindutva Culture 
in Modern India. Pages 129-67 in Violence and Peace: Creating a Cultura of Peace 
in the Contemporary Context of Violence: Papers from the 15th Annual Centre for 
Mission Studies Consultation, Ubs, Pune. Edited by Frampton F. Fox. Bangalore: 
Asian Trading Corporation, 2010. 
________. Virtue Ethics in the Gospel of John: The Johannine Characters as Moral Agents. 
Pages 167-81 in Rediscovering John: Essays on the Fourth Gospel in Honour of 
Frdric Manns. Edited by L. Daniel Chrupcala. Milan: Edizioni Terra Santa, 2013. 
Branger, Jean. Le refus du pouvoir. Pages 165-207 in Principatus: tudes de notions et 
d'histoire politiques dans l'Antiquit grco-romaine. Edited by Franois Paschoud 
and Pierre Ducrey. Genve: Droz, 1973. 
________. Le refus du pouvoir (Recherches sur l'aspect idologique du principat). MH 5 
(1948): 178-96. 
________. Recherches sur l'aspect idologique du principat. Schweizerische Beitrge zur 
Altertumswissenschaft 6. Edited by Bernhard Wyss. Basel: Reinhardt, 1953. 
Brenger-Badel, Agns. Formation et comptences des gouverneurs de province dans 
l'Empire romain. Dialogues d'histoire ancienne 30.2 (2004): 35-56. 
Berger, Adolf. Encyclopedic Dictionary of Roman Law. Transactions of the American 
Philosophical Society 43.2. Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society, 1953. 
Berlin, Adele. Zephaniah: A New Translation with Introduction and Commentary. AB 25A. 
Edited by William Foxwell Albright and David Noel Freedman. New York: 
Doubleday, 1994. 
Bermejo Rubio, Fernando. (Why) Was Jesus the Galilean Crucified Alone?: Solving a False 
Conundrum. JSNT 36.2 (2013): 127-54. 
Bernard, J. H. A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Gospel According to St. John. 
2 vols. ICC. Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 1928. 
Bernardi, Jean. De quelques smitismes de Flavius Josphe. REG 100 (1987): 18-29. 
Bernhard, Andrew E. Other Early Christian Gospels: A Critical Edition of the Surviving 
Greek Manuscripts. LNTS 315. Edited by Mark Goodacre. London: T&T Clark, 
2006. 
Beutler, Johannes. The Use of Scripture in the Gospel of John. Pages 148-62 in 
Exploring the Gospel of John: in Honor of D. Moody Smith. Edited by R. Alan 
Culpepper and C. Clifton Black. Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 1996. 
Bickerman, Elias. Consecratio. Le culte des souverains dans l'Empire Romain. Edited by 
Willem den Boer. Geneva: Vandoeuvres, 1973. 
________. Origines gentium. CP 47.2 (1952): 65-81. 
________. Utilitas crucis: Observations sur les rcits du procs de Jsus dans les vangiles 
canoniques. Revue de l'Histoire des Religions 112 (1935): 169-241. 
Binder, Vera. Sprachkontakt und Diglossie: Lateinische Wrter im Griechischen als Quellen 
fr die lateinische Sprachgeschichte und das Vulgrlatein. Romanistik in Geschichte 
und Gegenwart 3. Edited by Johannes Kramer and Hans-Josef Niederehe. Hamburg: 
Buske, 2000. 
Bibliography            
Bingen, Jean. L'asylie pour une synagogue: CIL III Suppl. 6583 = CII 1449. Pages 11-16 
in Studia Paulo Naster Oblata. Edited by Jan Quaegebeur, 2: Orientalia Antiqua. 
Leuven: Peeters, 1982. 
Birley, A. R. Hadrian to the Antonines. Pages 132-94 in CAH. Edited by Alan K. Bowman, 
Peter Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone, XI: The High Empire, A.D. 70192. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
Bitner, Brad. The Ephesian Artemis Incident (Acts 19:23-40) and the Sociology of 
Acclamation in Polis and Ekklesia. Paper presented at the SBL, Baltimore, MD, 
November, 2013. 
________. Paul's Political Strategy in 1 Corinthians 1-4: Constitution and Covenant. 
SNTSMS 163. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015. 
Biville, Frdrique. noncs factitifs en latin: Syntaxe et smantique. Pages 31-44 in De 
vsv: tudes de syntaxe latine offertes en hommage  Marius Lavency. Edited by 
Dominique Longre. Louvain-la-Neuve: Peeters, 1995. 
________. Situations et documents bilingues dans le monde grco-romain. Pages 35-53 in 
Bilinguisme grco-latin et pigraphie: Actes du colloque organis  l'Universit 
Lumire-Lyon 2, Maison de l'Orient et de la Mditrrane-Jean Pouilloux, UMR 
5189 Hisoma et JE 2409 Romanitas, les 17, 18 et 19 mai 2004. Edited by Frdrique 
Biville, Jean-Claude Decourt, and Georges Rougemont. Lyon: Maison de l'Orient et 
de la Mditerrane-Jean Pouilloux, 2008. 
Blair, Edith. Letters. Womans Work for Woman 19.8 (1904): 183-86. 
Blank, Josef. Die Verhandlung vor Pilatus Joh 18:28-19:16 im Lichte johanneischer 
Theologie. BZ 3 (1959): 60-81. 
Blinzler, Josef. Der Prozess Jesu. 4th ed. Regensburg: Pustet, 1969. 
________. The Trial of Jesus: The Jewish and Roman Proceedings against Jesus Christ 
Described and Assessed from the Oldest Accounts. Translated by Isabel and Florence 
McHugh. Westminster, MD: Newman, 1959. 
Bloom, Harold. The Anxiety of Influence: A Theory of Poetry. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1973. 
Bockmuehl, Markus. Jewish Law in Gentile Churches: Halakhah and the Beginning of 
Christian Public Ethics. Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 2000. 
Bolt, Peter G. Aramaic and the ipsissima verba Jesu. Pages 26-32 in Encyclopedia of the 
Historical Jesus. Edited by Craig A. Evans. New York: Routledge, 2008. 
Bond, Helen K. Barabbas Remembered. Pages 59-71 in Jesus and Paul: Global 
Perspectives in Honor of James D. G. Dunn for His 70th Birthday. Edited by B. J. 
Oropeza, C. K. Robertson, and Douglas C. Mohrmann. London: T & T Clark, 2009. 
________. Political Authorities: The Herods, Caiaphas, and Pontius Pilate. Pages 219-47 
in Jesus among Friends and Enemies: A Historical and Literary Introduction to 
Jesus in the Gospels. Edited by Chris Keith and Larry W. Hurtado. Grand Rapids: 
Baker Academic, 2011. 
________. Pontius Pilate in History and Interpretation. SNTSMS 100. Edited by Richard 
Bauckham. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998. 
Bonz, Marianne Palmer. The Past as Legacy: Luke-Acts and Ancient Epic. Minneapolis: 
Fortress, 2000. 
Borgen, Peder. Early Christianity and Hellenistic Judaism. Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 1998. 
________. The Gospel of John: More Light from Philo, Paul and Archaeology: The 
Scriptures, Tradition, Exposition, Settings, Meaning. NovTSup 154. Edited by M. 
M. Mitchell and D. P. Moessner. Leiden: Brill, 2014. 
Bourdieu, Pierre. Language and Symbolic Power. Edited by John B. Thompson. Translated 
by Gino Raymond and Matthew Adamson. Cambridge: Polity Press, 1991. 
Bowersock, Glen. Augustus and the Greek World. Oxford: Clarendon, 1965. 
Bibliography            
________. Dionysus as an Epic Hero. Pages 156-66 in Studies in the Dionysiaca of 
Nonnus. Edited by Neil Hopkinson. Cambridge: Cambridge Philoslogical Society, 
1994. 
Bowman, Alan K. Egypt. Pages 676-702 in CAH. Edited by Alan K. Bowman, Edward 
Champlin, and Andrew Lintott, X: The Augustan Empire, 43 B.C.A.D. 69. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
________. Egypt after the Pharaohs 332 BCAD 642: From Alexander to the Arab 
Conquest. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986. 
Brant, Jo-Ann A. Review of Per Jarle Bekken, The Lawsuit Motif in John's Gospel from New 
Perspectives: Jesus Christ, Crucified Criminal and Emperor of the World. JTS 66.2 
(2015): 773-76. 
________. John. Paideia: Commentaries on the New Testament. Edited by Mikeal C. 
Parsons and Charles H. Talbert. Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2011. 
Braund, Susanna. 4. Analysis of Aeneid Books 7-9 (January 30, 2007)'. In Virgil's Aeneid: 
Anatomy of a Classic, 2007. 
________. 5. Analysis of Aeneid Books 10-12 and Conclusion (February 6, 2007)'. In 
Virgil's Aeneid: Anatomy of a Classic, 2007. 
Brawley, Robert L. Evocative Allusions in Matthew: Matthew 5:5 as a Test Case. HvTSt 
59.3 (2003): 597-619. 
Breed, Brian W. Tua, Caesar, aetas: Horace Ode 4.15 and the Augustan Age. AJP 125.2 
(2004): 245-53. 
Brlaz, Cdric. Le recours au latin dans les documents officiels mis par les cits d'Asie 
Mineure. Pages 169-94 in Bilinguisme grco-latin et pigraphie: Actes du colloque 
organis  l'Universit Lumire-Lyon 2, Maison de l'Orient et de la Mditrrane-
Jean Pouilloux, UMR 5189 Hisoma et JE 2409 Romanitas, les 17, 18 et 19 mai 2004. 
Edited by Frdrique Biville, Jean-Claude Decourt, and Georges Rougemont. Lyon: 
Maison de l'Orient et de la Mditerrane-Jean Pouilloux, 2008. 
Brenous, Joseph. tude sur les hellnismes dans la syntaxe latine. Paris: Klincksieck, 1895. 
Breuilly, John. Introduction. Pages xiii-liii in Nations and Nationalism. Ernest Gellner. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2006. 
Bright, William. Introduction: The Dimensions of Sociolinguistics. Paper presented at the 
Sociolinguistics : proceedings of the UCLA Sociolinguistics Conference, 1964, The 
Hague, The Netherlands, 1966, 1964. 
Brixhe, Claude. The Greek of the Roman Texts. Pages 903-910 in A History of Ancient 
Greek: From the Beginnings to Late Antiquity. Edited by Anastassios-Fivos 
Christidis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007. 
Brock, Sebastian. Aspects of Translation Technique in Antiquity. Greek, Roman and 
Byzantine Studies 20.1 (1979): 69-87. 
________. Translation in Antiquity. Pages 873-86 in A History of Ancient Greek: From 
the Beginnings to Late Antiquity. Edited by Anastassios-Fivos Christidis. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007. 
Brodie, Thomas L. The Gospel According to John: A Literary and Theological Commentary. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 1993. 
Brooten, Bernadette J. The Jews of Ancient Antioch. Pages 29-37 in Antioch: The Lost 
Ancient City. Edited by Christine Kondoleon. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 2000. 
Brown, Raymond E. The Community of the Beloved Disciple. New York: Paulist Press, 
1979. 
________. The Death of the Messiah: From Gethsemane to the Grave: A Commentary on 
the Passion Narratives in the Four Gospels. ABRL. Edited by David Noel Freedman. 
New York: Doubleday, 1994. 
Bibliography            
________. The Gospel According to John. 2 vols. AB 29. Edited by William Albright and 
David Noel Freedman. New York: Doubleday, 1966; 1970. 
________. The Gospel of St. John and the Johannine Epistles. Collegeville, MN: Liturgical 
Press, 1952. 
________. An Introduction to the Gospel of John. Edited by Francis J. Moloney. ABRL. 
Edited by David Noel Freedman. New York: Doubleday, 2003. 
Brown, Schuyler. From Burney to Black: The Fourth Gospel and the Aramaic Question. 
CBQ 26.3 (1964): 323-39. 
Brubaker, Rogers, Mara Loveman, and Peter Stamatov. Ethnicity as Cognition. Theory and 
Society 33 (2004): 31-64. 
Brunt, P. A. Laus imperii. Pages 288-323 in Roman Imperial Themes. Edited. Oxford: 
Clarendon, 1990. 
________. Lex de Imperio Vespasiani. JRS 67 (1977): 95-116. 
________. Roman Imperial Illusions. Pages 433-80 in Roman Imperial Themes. Edited. 
Oxford: Clarendon, 1990. 
________. Roman Imperial Themes. Oxford: Clarendon, 1990. 
Bryan, Christopher. Render to Caesar: Jesus, the Early Church, and the Roman Superpower. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005. 
Bubenk, Vt. Hellenistic and Roman Greece as a Sociolinguistic Area. Amsterdam; 
Philadelphia: Benjamins, 1989. 
Bultmann, Rudolf. The Gospel of John: A Commentary. Translated by G. R. Beasley-
Murray, R. W. N. Hoare, and J. K. Riches. Philadelphia: Westminster, 1971. 
Burkill, T. A. The Condemnation of Jesus: A Critique of Sherwin-White's Thesis. NovT 
12.4 (1970): 321-42. 
Burrell, Barbara. Reading, Hearing, and Looking at Ephesos. Pages 69-95 in Ancient 
Literacies: The Culture of Reading in Greece and Rome. Edited by William A. 
Johnson and Holt N. Parker. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009. 
Burton, P. H., J. Balserak, H. A. G. Houghton, and D. C. Parker. Vetus latina Iohannes: The 
Verbum Project: The Old Latin Manuscripts of John's Gospel. 2.0 ed., 2015. 
http://www.iohannes.com/vetuslatina/ (accessed 1/5/2016). 
Burton, Philip. The Old Latin Gospels: A Study of Their Texts and Language. Oxford Early 
Christian Studies. Edited by Gillian Clark and Andrew Louth. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2000. 
Busse, Ulrich. Metaphorik und Rhetorik im Johannesevangelium: Das Bildfeld vom 
Knig. Pages 279-317 in Imagery in the Gospel of John: Terms, Forms, Themes, 
and Theology of Johannine Figurative Language. Edited by Jrg Frey, Jan G. van 
der Watt, and Ruben Zimmermann. Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2006. 
Butterlin, Pascal. Entres royales en Msopotamie: les limites d'une dmarche. Pages 25-
46 in Les entres royales et impriales: histoire, reprsentation et diffusion d'une 
crmonie publique, de l'Orient ancien  Byzance. Edited by Agns Brenger and 
Eric Perrin-Saminadayar. Paris: De Boccard, 2009. 
Bynum, William Randolph. Quotations of Zechariah in the Fourth Gospel. Pages 47-74 in 
Abiding Words: The Use of Scripture in the Gospel of John. Edited by Alicia D. 
Myers and Bruce G. Schuchard. Atlanta: SBL Press, 2015. 
Caird, G. B. The Language and Imagery of the Bible. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1980. 
Cairns, Francis. Virgil's Augustan Epic. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989. 
Calboli, Gualtiero. Latin Syntax and Greek. Pages 65-193 in New Perspectives on 
Historical Latin Syntax. Edited by Philip Baldi and Pierluigi Cuzzolin. Berlin: de 
Gruyter, 2009. 
Callaway, Mary C. A Hammer That Breaks Rock in Pieces: Prophetic Critique in the 
Hebrew Bible. Pages 21-38 in Anti-Semitism and Early Christianity: Issues of 
Bibliography            
Polemic and Faith. Edited by Craig A. Evans and Donald A. Hagner. Minneapolis: 
Fortress, 1993. 
Caragounis, Chrys C. The Development of Greek and the New Testament: Morphology, 
Syntax, Phonology, and Textual Transmission. Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 
2006. 
Carr, David M. The Many Uses of Intertextuality in Biblical Studies: Actual and Potential. 
Pages 505-535 in Congress Volume Helsinki 2010. Edited by Martti Nissinen, 148. 
Leiden: Brill, 2012. 
Carroll, Lewis. Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, through the Looking-Glass, and Other 
Writings. London: Collins, 1954. 
Carson, Donald A. Syntactical and Text-Critical Observations on John 20:30-31: One More 
Round on the Purpose of the Fourth Gospel. JBL 124.4 (2005): 693-714. 
Carter, Warren. God as Father in Matthew: Imperial Intersections. Pages 81-102 in 
Finding a Woman's Place: Essays in Honor of Carolyn Osiek, R.S.C.J. Edited by 
David L. Balch and Jason T. Lamoreaux. Eugene, OR: Pickwick, 2011. 
________. Jesus and the Romans Remembered: A Perspective from John's Gospel. Paper 
presented at the SBL, Atlanta, GA, 22 November, 2015. 
________. John and Empire: Initial Explorations. New York: T&T Clark, 2008. 
________. John: Storyteller, Interpreter, Evangelist. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 2006. 
________. Matthew and Empire: Initial Explorations. Harrisburg, PA: Trinity Press 
International, 2001. 
________. Pontius Pilate: Portraits of a Roman Governor. Interfaces. Edited by Barbara 
Green. Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 2003. 
________. The Roman Empire and the New Testament: An Essential Guide. Nashville: 
Abingdon Press, 2006. 
________. Social Identities, Subgroups, and John's Gospel: Jesus the Prototype and Pontius 
Pilate (John 18.28-19.16). Pages 235-51 in T&T Clark Handbook to Social Identity 
in the New Testament. Edited by J. Brian Tucker and Coleman A. Baker. London: 
Bloomsbury, 2014. 
Casey, Maurice. Is John's Gospel True? London: Routledge, 1996. 
________. Some Anti-Semitic Assumptions in the Theological Dictionary of the New 
Testament. NovT 41.3 (1999): 280-91. 
Cassidy, Richard J. Christians and Roman Rule in the New Testament: New Perspectives. 
New York: Crossroad, 2001. 
________. John's Gospel in New Perspective: Christology and the Realities of Roman 
Power. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 1992. 
Casson, Lionel. The Isis and Her Voyage. Transactions and Proceedings of the American 
Philological Association 81 (1950): 43-56. 
Castelli, Elizabeth A. Martyrdom and Memory: Early Christian Culture Making. Edited by 
Amy Hollywood. Gender, Theory, and Religion. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2004. 
Cavenaile, Robert. Influence latine sur le vocabulaire grec d'gypte. CdE 26.51 (1951): 
391-404. 
________. Quelques aspects de l'apport linguistique du grec au latin d'gypte. Aegyptus 
32 (1952): 191-203. 
Chalcraft, John, and Yaseen Noorani. Introduction. Pages 1-19 in Counterhegemony in the 
Colony and Postcolony. Edited by John Chalcraft and Yaseen Noorani. Basingstoke, 
UK: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007. 
Chandler, Daniel. Semiotics: The Basics. London: Routledge, 2007. 
Chapman, David W. Ancient Jewish and Christian Perceptions of Crucifixion. Grand 
Rapids: Baker Academic, 2010. 
Bibliography            
Charlesworth, James H. Towards a Taxonomy of Discerning Influence(s) between Two 
Texts. Pages 41-54 in Das Gesetz im frhen Judentum und im Neuen Testament: 
Festschrift fr Christoph Burchard zum 75. Geburtstag. Edited by Dieter Snger and 
Matthias Konradt. Gttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 2006. 
________. ed. The Dead Sea Scrolls: Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek Texts with English 
Translations. Vol. 1: Rule of the Community and Related Documents. Edited by 
James H. Charlesworth. PTSDSSP Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1994. 
Charlesworth, M. P. The Flavian Dynasty. Pages 1-45 in CAH. Edited by S. A. Cook, F. 
E. Adcock, and M. P. Charlesworth, XI: The Imperial Peace, A.D. 70192. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1936. 
Chester, Andrew. High ChristologyWhence, When and Why?. Early Christianity 2 
(2011): 22-50. 
________. Jewish Inscriptions and Jewish Life. Pages 383-441 in Neues Testament und 
hellenistisch-jdische Alltagskultur: Wechselseitige Wahrnehmungen. III. 
Internationales Symposium zum Corpus Judaeo-Hellenisticum Novi Testamenti, 21.-
24. Mai 2009, Leipzig. Edited by Roland Deines, Jens Herzer, and Karl-Wilhelm 
Niebuhr. Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2011. 
Chiappelli, Alessandro. Ancora su virgilio e gli Atti degli apostoli. Atene e Roma 22 
(1919): 89-98. 
________. Virgilio nel Nuovo Testamento. Atene e Roma 22 (1919): 1-14. 
Chura, Patrick. Prolepsis and Anachronism: Emmet Till and the Historicity of To Kill a 
Mockingbird. Southern Literary Journal 32.2 (2000): 1-26. 
Ciampa, Roy E. The Presence and Function of Scripture in Galatians 1 and 2. Tbingen: 
Mohr Siebeck, 1998. 
Clackson, James, and Geoffrey C. Horrocks. The Blackwell History of the Latin Language. 
Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2011. 
Clark-Soles, Jaime. Scripture Cannot Be Broken: The Social Function of the Use of Scripture 
in the Fourth Gospel. Boston: Brill, 2003. 
Clark, E. C. The Romano-Greek Inscriptions in England. Archaeological Journal 42 
(1885): 424-34. 
Clarke, Andrew D., and J. Brian Tucker. Social History and Social Theory in the Study of 
Social Identity. Pages 41-58 in T&T Clark Handbook to Social Identity in the New 
Testament. Edited by J. Brian Tucker and Coleman A. Baker. London: Bloomsbury, 
2014. 
Cohen, Shaye J. D. Those Who Say They Are Jews and Are Not: How Do You Know a 
Jew in Antiquity When You See One?. Pages 1-45 in Diasporas in Antiquity. Edited 
by Shaye J. D. Cohen and Ernest S. Frerichs. Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1993. 
Cohick, Lynn H. Philippians and Empire: Paul's Engagement with Imperialism and the 
Imperial Cult. Pages 166-82 in Jesus Is Lord, Caesar Is Not: Evaluating Empire in 
New Testament Studies. Edited by Scot McKnight and Joseph B. Modica. Downers 
Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2013. 
Coles, Revel, Angelo Geissen, and Ludwig Koenen. Some Corrections and Notes to P. 
Fouad. ZPE 11 (1973): 235-39. 
Colledge, Malcolm A. R. Art and Architecture. Pages 966-83 in CAH. Edited by Alan K. 
Bowman, Peter Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone, XI: The High Empire, A.D. 70
192. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
Collini, Stefan. Introduction: Interpretation Terminable and Interminable. Pages 1-21 in 
Interpretation and Overinterpretation. Edited by Stefan Collini. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1992. 
Collins, J. J. Sibylline Oracles: A New Translation and Introduction. Pages 317-472 in The 
Old Testament Pseudepigrapha. Edited by James H. Charlesworth, 1: Apocalyptic 
Literature and Testaments. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1980. 
Bibliography            
Collins, Raymond F. Speaking of the Jews: Jews in the Discourse Material of the Fourth 
Gospel. Pages 158-75 in Anti-Judaism and the Fourth Gospel. Edited by R. 
Bieringer, D. Pollefeyt, and F. Vandecasteele-Vanneuville. Louisville: Westminster 
John Knox, 2001. 
Coloe, Mary. God Dwells with Us: Temple Symbolism in the Fourth Gospel. Collegeville, 
MN: Liturgical, 2001. 
________. The Identity and Significance of the Hellenes John 12:12-43. Paper presented 
at the Johannine Literature Section of the Annual Meeting of the SBL, Atlanta, GA, 
23 November, 2015. 
________. The Nazarene King: Pilate's Title as the Key to John's Crucifixion. Pages 839-
48 in The Death of Jesus in the Fourth Gospel. Edited by G. Van Belle. Leuven: 
Leuven University Press, 2007. 
Comfort, Philip W., and David P. Barrett. The Complete Text of the Earliest New Testament 
Manuscripts. Grand Rapids: Baker, 1998. 
Comparetti, Domenico. Vergil in the Middle Ages. Translated by E. F. M. Benecke. 
Princeton Paperbacks. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997. 
Consoli, Santi. Reminiscenze virgiliane nelle prose di L. Anneo Seneca. Rivista di filologia 
e di istruzione classica 49.4 (1921): 456-67. 
Conway, Colleen M. Behold the Man: Jesus and Greco-Roman Masculinity. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2008. 
________. Men and Women in the Fourth Gospel: Gender and Johannine Characterization. 
SBLDS 167. Edited by Mark Allan Powell. Atlanta: SBL Press, 1999. 
________. There and Back Again: Johannine History on the Other Side of Literary 
Criticism. Pages 77-91 in Anatomies of Narrative Criticism: The Past, Present, and 
Futures of the Fourth Gospel as Literature. Edited by Tom Thatcher and Stephen D. 
Moore. Atlanta: SBL Press, 2008. 
________. Was Jesus a Manly Man? On Reading Masculinity in the New Testament. WW 
36.1 (2016): 15-23. 
Cooley, Alison E. Res gestae Divi Augusti: Text, Translation, and Commentary. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2009. 
Copeland, Rita. The Fortunes of non verbum pro verbo: Or, Why Jerome Is Not a 
Ciceronian. Pages 15-35 in The Medieval Translator: The Theory and Practice of 
Translation in the Middle Ages. Papers Read at a Conference Held 20 - 23 August 
1987 at the University of Wales Conference Centre, Gregynog Hall. Edited by Roger 
Ellis, 1. Cambridge: Brewer, 1989. 
Cotton, Hannah M., Joseph Geiger, and J. David Thomas. Masada II: The Yigael Yadin 
Excavations 1963-1965: Final Reports. The Latin and Greek Documents by Hannah 
M. Cotton and Joseph Geiger and with a Contribution by J. David Thomas. 
Jerusalem: Israel Exploration Society, 1989. 
Crook, J. A. Augustus: Power, Authority, Achievement. Pages 113-146 in CAH. Edited by 
Alan K. Bowman, Edward Champlin, and Andrew Lintott, X: The Augustan Empire, 
43 B.C.A.D. 69. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
Crook, Zeba A. Fictive-Friendship and the Fourth Gospel. HvTSt 67.3 (2011). 
________. Reconceptualising Conversion: Patronage, Loyalty, and Conversion in the 
Religions of the Ancient Mediterranean. BZNW 130. Edited by James D. G. Dunn, 
et al. Berlin: de Gruyter, 2004. 
Crossan, John Dominic. God and Empire: Jesus against Rome, Then and Now. San 
Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 2007. 
________. Roman Imperial Theology. Pages 59-73 in In the Shadow of Empire: 
Reclaiming the Bible as a History of Faithful Resistance. Edited by Richard A. 
Horsley. Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2008. 
Bibliography            
Crouch, Andy. Foreword. Pages 7-14 in Jesus Is Lord, Caesar Is Not: Evaluating Empire 
in New Testament Studies. Edited by Scot McKnight and Joseph B. Modica. Downers 
Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2013. 
Culler, Jonathan. The Pursuit of Signs: Semiotics, Literature, Deconstruction. An Augmented 
Edition with a New Preface by the Author. 2nd ed. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 
2001. 
Culpepper, R. Alan. Anatomy of the Fourth Gospel: A Study in Literary Design. 
Philadelphia: Fortress, 1983. 
________. Anti-Judaism in the Fourth Gospel as a Theological Problem for Christian 
Interpreters. Pages 61-82 in Anti-Judaism and the Fourth Gospel: Papers of the 
Leuven Colloquium, 2000. Edited by R. Bieringer, D. Pollefeyt, and F. 
Vandecasteele-Vanneuville. Assen: Van Gorcum, 2001. 
________. The Weave of the Tapestry: Character and Theme in John. Pages 18-35 in 
Characters and Characterization in the Gospel of John. Edited by Christopher W. 
Skinner. London: Bloomsbury, 2013. 
Cumont, Franz. Les Actes de S. Dacius. AnBoll 16 (1897): 5-16. 
Dbrowa, Edward. The Governors of Roman Syria from Augustus to Septimius Severus. 
Antiquitas: Reihe 1, Abhandlungen zur alten Geschichte 45. Edited by Gza Alfldi 
and Frank Kolb. Bonn: Habelt, 1998. 
Daise, Michael A. Quotations with Remembrance Formulae in the Fourth Gospel. Pages 
75-91 in Abiding Words: The Use of Scripture in the Gospel of John. Edited by Alicia 
D. Myers and Bruce G. Schuchard. Atlanta: SBL Press, 2015. 
Daris, Sergio. I papiri e gli ostraca latini d'egitto. Aevum 74.1 (2000): 105-175. 
________. Latino ed Egitto romano. Pages 47-81 in Il bilinguismo degli antich: XVIII 
Giornate filologiche genovesi. Edited by dipartimento di archeologia filologia 
classica e loro tradizioni. Genova: Universit di Genova, Facolt di lettere, 1991. 
Daube, David. Roman Law: Linguistic, Social and Philosophical Aspects. Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press, 1969. 
Dauer, Anton. Die Passionsgeschichte im Johannesevangelium: Eine 
traditionsgeschichtliche und theologische Untersuchung zu Joh 18,1-19,30. Studien 
zum Alten und Neuen Testament 30. Edited by Vinzenz Hamp and Josef Schmid. 
Munich: Ksel, 1972. 
Davies, Roy William. The Daily Life of the Roman Soldier under the Principate. ANRW 1: 
299-338. Edited by Hildegard Temporini. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1974. 
Davies, W. D., and Dale C. Allison. A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Gospel 
According to Saint Matthew. Vol. 3. ICC. Edited by J. A. Emerton, C. E. B. 
Cranfield, and G. N. Stanton. Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 1997. 
de Boer, Martinus C. The Narrative Function of Pilate in John. Pages 141-58 in Narrativity 
in Biblical and Related Texts: La narrativit dans la bible et les textes apparents. 
Edited by George J. Brooke and Jean-Daniel Kaestli. Leuven: Leuven University 
Press, 2000. 
de la Potterie, Ignace. Jsus roi et juge d'aprs Jn 19, 13,   . Bib 41 
(1960): 217-47. 
________. L'arrire-fond du thme johannique de vrit. Pages 277-94 in Studia 
Evangelica: Papers Presented to the International Congress on the Four Gospels 
in 1957 Held at Christ Church, Oxford, 1957. Edited by Kurt Aland, et al. Berlin: 
Akademie, 1959. 
________. La vrit dans Saint Jean. 2 vols. AnBib 73. Rome: Biblical Institute Press, 1977. 
de Visscher, Fernand, and Pierre Roussel. Inscriptions du Temple de Dmeir. Syria: revue 
d'art oriental et d'archologie (1942): 173-200. 
Deissmann, Adolf. Bible Studies: Contributions Chiefly from Papyri and Inscriptions to the 
History of the Language, the Literature and the Religion of Hellenistic Judaism and 
Bibliography            
Primitive Christianity. Translated by Alexander Grieve. Winona Lake, IN: Alpha, 
1923. 
Delli Pizzi, Aurian. Impiety in Epigraphic Evidence. Kernos 24 (2011): 59-76. 
Dench, Emma. Romulus' Asylum: Roman Identities from the Age of Alexander to the Age of 
Hadrian. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005. 
Desogus, Paolo. The Encyclopedia in Umberto Eco's Semiotics. Semiotica 2012.192 
(2012): 501-521. 
Dessau, H. Ein Freund Plutarchs in England. Hermes 46 (1911): 156-160. 
Devillers, Luc. La croix de Jsus et les  (Jn 19,16) Crux interpretum ou cl 
sotriologique?. Pages 385-407 in The Death of Jesus in the Fourth Gospel. Edited 
by G. Van Belle. Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2007. 
Dickey, Eleanor. Forms of Address and Markers of Status. Pages 327-37 in A Companion 
to the Ancient Greek Language. Edited by Egbert J. Bakker. Malden, MA: Wiley-
Blackwell, 2010. 
________. Latin Influence on the Greek of Documentary Papyri: An Analysis of Its 
Chronological Distribution. ZPE 145 (2003): 249-257. 
________. Latin Loanwords in Greek: A Preliminary Analysis. Pages 57-70 in Variation 
and Change in Greek and Latin. Edited by Martti Leiwo, Hilla Halla-aho, and Marja 
Vierros. Helsinki: Suomen Ateenan-Instituutin sti, 2012. 
Dieterich, Karl. Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der griechischen Sprache von der 
hellenistischen Zeit bis zum 10. Jahrhundert n. Chr. Byzantinisches Archiv als 
Ergnzung der Byzantinischen Zeitschrift 1. Edited by Karl Krumbacher. Leipzig: 
Teubner, 1898. 
Dodd, C. H. Historical Tradition in the Fourth Gospel. London: Cambridge University 
Press, 1965. 
________. The Interpretation of the Fourth Gospel. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1953. 
Dokka, Trond Skard. Irony and Sectarianism in the Gospel of John. Pages 83-107 in New 
Readings in John: Literary and Theological Perspectives: Essays from the 
Scandinavian Conference on the Fourth Gospel, Arhus, 1997. Edited by Johannes 
Nissen and Sigfred Pedersen. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic, 1999. 
Douglas, Mary. Natural Symbols: Explorations in Cosmology. 2nd ed. London: Routledge, 
1996. 
Downes, William. Language and Society. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998. 
Downey, Glanville. Greek and Latin Inscriptions. Pages 83-115 in Antioch on-the-Orontes 
Vol. III the Excavations 1937-1939. Edited by Richard Stillwell. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1941. 
Drake, Susanna. Slandering the Jew: Sexuality and Difference in Early Christian Texts. 
Divinations: Rereading Late Ancient Religion. Edited by Daniel Boyarin, Virginia 
Burrus, and Krueger Derek. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2013. 
Dube, Musa W. Reading for Decolonization (John 4:1-42). Pages 51-75 in John and 
Postcolonialism: Travel, Space and Power. Edited by Musa W. Dube and Jeffrey L. 
Staley. London: Sheffield Academic Press, 2002. 
________. Savior of the World but Not of This World: A Postcolonial Reading of Spatial 
Construction in John. Pages 118-135 in The Postcolonial Bible. Edited by R. S. 
Sugirtharajah. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1998. 
Dube, Musa W., and Jeffrey L. Staley. Descending from and Ascending into Heaven: A 
Postcolonial Analysis of Travel, Space and Power in John. Pages 1-10 in John and 
Postcolonialism: Travel, Space and Power. Edited by Musa W. Dube and Jeffrey L. 
Staley. London: Sheffield Academic Press, 2002. 
Dubuisson, Michel. Vtraqve lingva. Antiquit classique 50 (1981): 274-286. 
Duke, Paul D. Irony in the Fourth Gospel. Atlanta: John Knox Press, 1985. 
Bibliography            
Duling, Dennis C. Empire: Theories, Methods, Models. Pages 49-74 in The Gospel of 
Matthew in Its Roman Imperial Context. Edited by John Riches and David C. Sim. 
London: T&T Clark, 2005. 
Dunn, James D. G. Neither Jew nor Greek: A Contested Identity. Christianity in the Making 
3. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2015. 
________. The Partings of the Ways: Between Christianity and Judaism and Their 
Significance for the Character of Christianity. 2nd ed. London: SCM, 2006. 
Eastman, Carol M. Language, Ethnic Identity and Change. Pages 259-76 in Language, 
Society, and Identity. Edited by John Edwards. Oxford: Blackwell, 1985. 
Eck, Werner. The Emperor and His Advisers. Pages 195-213 in CAH. Edited by Alan K. 
Bowman, Peter Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone, XI: The High Empire, A.D. 70
192. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
________. The Growth of Administrative Posts. Pages 238-65 in CAH. Edited by Alan K. 
Bowman, Peter Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone, XI: The High Empire, A.D. 70
192. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
________. The Language of Power: Latin in the Inscriptions of Iudaea/Syria Palaestina. 
Pages 123-44 in Semitic Papyrology in Context: A Climate of Creativity. Papers from 
a New York University Conference Marking the Retirement of Baruch A. Levine. 
Edited by Lawrence H. Schiffman. Leiden; Boston: Brill, 2003. 
________. The Presence, Role and Significance of Latin in the Epigraphy and Culture of 
the Roman Near East. Pages 15-42 in From Hellenism to Islam: Cultural and 
Linguistic Change in the Roman Near East. Edited by Hannah M. Cotton, et al. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009. 
________. Sklaven und Freigelassene von Rmern in Iudaea und den angrenzenden 
Provinzen. NovT 55 (2013): 1-21. 
Eco, Umberto. Between Author and Text. Pages 67-88 in Interpretation and 
Overinterpretation. Edited by Stefan Collini. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1992. 
________. Experiences in Translation. Translated by Alastair McEwen. Toronto Italian 
Studies: Goggio Publication Series. Edited by Olga Zorzi Pugliese. Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press, 2001. 
________. From the Tree to the Labyrinth: Historical Studies on the Sign and Interpretation. 
Translated by Anthony Oldcorn. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2014. 
________. Kant and the Platypus: Essays on Language and Cognition. Translated by 
Alastair McEwen. London: Secker & Warburg, 1999. 
________. Lector in fabula: Le rle du lecteur ou la coopration interprtative dans les 
textes narratifs. Translated by Myriem Bouzaher. Livre de Poche. Edited by Jean-
Paul Enthoven. Paris: Grasset, 1985. 
________. The Limits of Interpretation. Advances in Semiotics. Edited by Thomas A. 
Sebeok. Bloomington, IL: Indiana University Press, 1990. 
________. Metaphor, Dictionary, and Encyclopedia. New Literary History 15.2 (1984): 
255-71. 
________. Overinterpreting Texts. Pages 45-66 in Interpretation and Overinterpretation. 
Edited by Stefan Collini. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992. 
________. The Role of the Reader: Explorations in the Semiotics of Texts. London: 
Hutchinson, 1981. 
________. Semiotics and the Philosophy of Language. Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1984. 
________. A Theory of Semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1976. 
________. The Theory of Signs and the Role of the Reader. The Bulletin of the Midwest 
Modern Language Association 14.1 (1981): 35-45. 
Bibliography            
Edwards, John. Language and Identity: An Introduction. Key Topics in Sociolinguistics. 
Edited by Rajend Mesthrie. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009. 
________. Multilingualism. London; New York: Routlege, 1994. 
________. The Power of Language, the Language of Power. Pages 13-34 in Along the 
Routes to Power: Explorations of Empowerment through Language. Edited by 
Martin Ptz, Joshua A. Fishman, and JoAnne Neff-van Aertselaer. Berlin: de 
Gruyter, 2006. 
________. Socio-Educational Issues Concerning Indigenous Minority Languages: 
Terminology and Status. Pages 207-226 in European Lesser Used Languages in 
Primary Education: Inventory and Proceedings of the Colloquy. Edited by Jantsje 
Sikma and D. Gorter. Ljouwert: Fryske Akademy/Mercator, 1991. 
Edwards, Mark. John. Blackwell Bible Commentaries. Edited by John Sawyer, Christopher 
Rowland, and Judith Kovacs. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2004. 
Edwards, Ruth B. Discovering John: Content, Interpretation, Reception. Discovering 
Biblical Texts: Content, Interpretation, Reception. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2015. 
Egeria's Travels. Translated by John Wilkinson. 3rd ed. Warminster: Aris & Phillips Ltd., 
2002. 
Ehrenberg, Victor, and Arnold H. M. Jones. Documents Illustrating the Reigns of Augustus 
& Tiberius. 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon, 1983. 
Ehrensperger, Kathy. Paul and the Dynamics of Power: Communication and Interaction in 
the Early Christ-Movement. London; New York: T&T Clark, 2007. 
________. Paul at the Crossroads of Cultures: Theologizing in the Space-Between. LNTS 
456. Edited by Mark Goodacre. London: Bloomsbury, 2013. 
Ehrman, Bart D. Jesus Trial before Pilate: John 18:2819:16. BTB 13.4 (1983): 124-131. 
________. The Orthodox Corruption of Scripture: The Effect of Early Christological 
Controversies on the Text of the New Testament. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2011. 
Eichmann, Eduard. Die Kaiserkrnung im Abendland: Ein Beitrag zur Geistesgeschichte 
des Mittelalters: Mit besonderer Bercksichtigung des Kirchlichen Rechts, der 
Liturgie und der Kirchenpolitik. Vol. 1. Wrzburg: Echter, 1942. 
Elliott, John H. First Peter: A New Translation with Introduction and Commentary. Vol. 
37B. AB. Edited by David Noel Freedman. New York: Doubleday, 2000. 
Elowsky, Joel C., ed. Commentary on the Gospel of John: Theodore of Mopsuestia. Edited 
by Thomas C. Oden and Gerald Bray, L. Ancient Christian Texts Downers Grove, 
IL: IVP Academic, 2010. 
Ervin-Tripp, Susan. An Analysis of the Interaction of Language, Topic, and Listener. 
American Anthropologist 66.6 (1964): 86-102. 
Esler, Philip F. An Outline of Social Identity Theory. Pages 13-39 in T&T Clark Handbook 
to Social Identity in the New Testament. Edited by J. Brian Tucker and Coleman A. 
Baker. London: Bloomsbury, 2014. 
Esler, Philip F., and Ronald A. Piper. Lazarus, Mary and Martha: Social-Scientific 
Approaches to the Gospel of John. Minneapolis: Fortress, 2006. 
Evans, C. F. Explorations in Theology 2. London: SCM, 1977. 
Evans, Craig A. Death and Burial of Jesus. Pages 143-50 in Encyclopedia of the Historical 
Jesus. Edited by Craig A. Evans. New York: Routledge, 2008. 
________. King Jesus and His Ambassadors: Empire and Luke-Acts. Pages 120-39 in 
Empire in the New Testament. Edited by Stanley E. Porter and Cynthia Long 
Westfall. Eugene, OR: Pickwick, 2011. 
________. Listening for Echoes of Interpreted Scripture. Pages 47-51 in Paul and the 
Scriptures of Israel. Edited by Craig A. Evans and James A. Sanders. Sheffield: 
JSOT Press, 1993. 
Bibliography            
Fantin, Joseph D. Lord of the Entire World: Lord Jesus, a Challenge to Lord Caesar? New 
Testament Monographs 31. Edited by Stanley E. Porter. Sheffield: Sheffield Phoenix 
Press, 2011. 
Fears, J. R. The Cult of Jupiter and Roman Imperial Ideology. ANRW 17.1: 3-141. Edited 
by Wolfgang Haase. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1981. 
Fee, Gordon D. On the Text and Meaning of John 20:30-31 (1992). Pages 29-42 in To 
What End Exegesis? Essays Textual, Exegetical, and Theological. Edited by Gordon 
D. Fee. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2001. 
________. Papyrus Bodmer II (P66): Its Textual Relationships and Scribal Characteristics. 
Studies and Documents 34. Edited by Jacob Geerlings. Salt Lake City: University of 
Utah Press, 1968. 
Fehribach, Adeline. The Birthing Bridegroom: The Portrayal of Jesus in the Fourth 
Gospel. Pages 104-129 in A Feminist Companion to John. Edited by Amy-Jill 
Levine, 2. Cleveland: Pilgrim, 2003. 
Feissel, Denis. Deux listes de quartiers d'Antioche astreints au creusement d'un canal (73-
74 aprs J.-C.). Syria: revue d'art oriental et d'archologie 62 (1985): 77-103. 
Feldman, Louis H. Jew and Gentile in the Ancient World: Attitudes and Interactions from 
Alexander to Justinian. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993. 
Ferguson, Charles A. The Language Factor in National Development. Pages 8-14 in Study 
of the Role of Second Languages in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. Edited by Frank 
A. Rice and Center for Applied Linguistics. Washington, D.C.: Center of Applied 
Linguistics of the Modern Language Association of America, 1962. 
Fewster, Penelope. Bilingualism in Roman Egypt. Pages 220-45 in Bilingualism in Ancient 
Society: Language Contact and the Written Text. Edited by James N. Adams, Mark 
Janse, and Simon Swain. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002. 
Field, Daniel. Review of James C. Scott, Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden 
Transcripts. The American Historical Review 99 (1994): 195-96. 
Fisher, Elizabeth A. Greek Translations of Latin Literature in the Fourth Century A.D.. 
Pages 173-215 in Yale Classical Studies. Edited by John J. Winkler and Gordon 
Williams. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. 
Fishman, Joshua A. Language and Ethnicity. Pages 15-57 in Language, Ethnicity, and 
Intergroup Relations. Edited by Howard Giles. London: Academic Press, 1977. 
________. The Relationship between Micro- and Macro-Sociolinguistics in the Study of 
Who Speaks What Language to Whom and When. Pages 15-32 in Sociolinguistics: 
Selected Readings. Edited by J. B. Pride and Janet Holmes. Harmondsworth: 
Penguin, 1972. 
Fishwick, Duncan. The Deification of Claudius. ClQ 52.1 (2002): 341-49. 
Fitzgerald, William. How to Read a Latin Poem: If You Can't Read Latin Yet. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2013. 
Flobert, Pierre. Latin-Frankish Bilingualism in Sixth-Century Gaul: The Latin of Clovis. 
Pages 419-430 in Bilingualism in Ancient Society: Language Contact and the Written 
Text. Edited by James N. Adams, Mark Janse, and Simon Swain. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2002. 
Flusser, David. Judaism and the Origins of Christianity. Jerusalem: Magnes Press, 1988. 
________. What Was the Original Meaning of ecce homo?. Pages 593-603 in Judaism and 
the Origins of Christianity. Edited by David Flusser. Jerusalem: Magnes Press, 1988. 
Forestell, J. Terence. The Word of the Cross: Salvation as Revelation in the Fourth Gospel. 
AnBib 57. Rome: Biblical Institute, 1974. 
Forester, T., ed. The Lives of the Twelve Caesars by C. Suetonius Tranquillus to Which Are 
Added His Lives of the Grammarians, Rhetoricians, and Poets. Bohn's Classical 
Library London: George Bell and Sons, 1890. 
Bibliography            
Fournier, Julien. Entre tutelle romaine et autonomie civique: l'administration judiciaire dans 
les provinces hellnophones de l'empire romain, 129 av. J.-C-235 ap. J. C. Athnes: 
Ecole franaise d'Athnes, 2010. 
Fowl, Stephen. The Use of Scripture in Philippians. Pages 163-84 in Paul and Scripture: 
Extending the Conversation. Edited by Christopher D. Stanley. Atlanta: SBL Press, 
2012. 
Frazer, James George. The Golden Bough: A Study in Magic and Religion. 2nd ed. Vol. 3. 
London: Macmillan, 1900. 
Fredriksen, Paula. Mandatory Retirement: Ideas in the Study of Christian Origins Whose 
Time Has Come to Go. Pages 2538 in Israel's God and Rebecca's Children: 
Christology and Community in Early Judaism and Christianity: Essays in Honor of 
Larry W. Hurtado and Alan F. Segal. Edited by David B. Capes, April D. DeConick, 
Helen K. Bond, and Troy Miller. Waco, TX: Baylor University Press, 2007. 
________. Paul, Practical Pluralism, and the Invention of Religious Persecution in Roman 
Antiquity. Pages 87-113 in Understanding Religious Pluralism: Perspectives from 
Religious Studies and Theology. Edited by Peter C. Phan and Jonathan Ray. Eugene, 
OR: Pickwick, 2014. 
Frey, Jrg. Das Johannesevangelium und seine Gemeinden im Kontext der jdischen 
Diaspora Kleinasiens. Pages 99-132 in Neues Testament und hellenistisch-jdische 
Alltagskultur: Wechselseitige Wahrnehmungen. III. Internationales Symposium zum 
Corpus Judaeo-Hellenisticum Novi Testamenti, 21.-24. Mai 2009, Leipzig. Edited by 
Roland Deines, Jens Herzer, and Karl-Wilhelm Niebuhr. Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 
2011. 
Freyne, Sean. Vilifying the Other and Defining the Self: Matthew's and John's Anti-Jewish 
Polemic in Focus. Pages 117-43 in To See Ourselves as Others See Us: Christians, 
Jews, Others in Late Antiquity. Edited by Jacob Neusner and Ernest S. Frerichs. 
Chico, CA: Scholars Press, 1985. 
Friesen, Courtney Jade. Reading Dionysus: Euripides Bacchae among Jews and Christians 
in the Greco-Roman World. PhD thesis, University of Minnesota, 2013. 
Friesen, Steven J. The Cult of the Roman Emperors in Ephesos: Temple Wardens, City 
Titles, and the Interpretation of the Revelation of John. Pages 229-50 in Ephesos, 
Metropolis of Asia: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Its Archaeology, Religion, and 
Culture. Edited by Helmut Koester. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1995. 
________. Twice Neokoros: Ephesus, Asia, and the Cult of the Flavian Imperial Family. 
RGRW 116. Edited by R. Van den Broek, H. J. W. Drijvers, and H. S. Versnel. 
Leiden: Brill, 1993. 
Fuchs, Ottmar. How to Deal with Violence in Biblical Texts: Some Considerations Towards 
Biblical Hermeneutics of Violence. Pages 11-34 in The Bible and Violence in 
Africa: Papers Presented at the BiAS Meeting 2014 in Windhoek (Namibia), with 
Some Additional Contributions. Edited by Johannes Hunter and Joachim Kgler. 
Bamberg: University of Bamberg Press, 2016. 
Gaebel, Robert E. The Greek Word Lists to Vergil and Cicero. Bulletin of the John Rylands 
Library 52.2 (1970): 284-325. 
Gal, Susan. Review of Cultural Anthropology. Domination and the Arts of Resistance: 
Hidden Transcripts 10 (1995): 407-424. 
Galinsky, Karl. The Cult of the Roman Emperor: Uniter or Divider?. Pages 1-21 in Rome 
and Religion: A Cross-Disciplinary Dialogue on the Imperial Cult. Edited by Jeffrey 
Brodd and Jonathan L. Reed. Atlanta: SBL Press, 2011. 
Galsterer, Hartmut. Local and Provincial Institutions and Government. Pages 344-60 in 
CAH. Edited by Alan K. Bowman, Peter Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone, XI: The 
High Empire, A.D. 70192. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
Bibliography            
Garca Domingo, Enrique. Latinismos en la koin (en los documentos epigrficos desde el 
212 a. J. C. hasta el 14 d. J. C.): Gramtica y lxico griego-latino, latino-griego. 
Burgos: Aldecoa, 1979. 
Gardner-Chloros, Penelope. Code-Switching in Relation to Language Contact and 
Convergence. Pages 99-111 in Devenir bilingue-parler bilingue: Acts du 2e 
colloque sur le bilinguisme, Universit de Neuchtel, 20-22 septembre 1984. Edited 
by Georges Ldi. Tbingen: Niemeyer, 1987. 
Gayraud, Michel. L'apprentissage du grec et du latin dans l'Empire Romain d'aprs un 
manuscrit de la Bibliothque Universitaire de Montpellier. Bulletin de lAcadmie 
des Sciences et Lettres de Montpellier 41 (2010): 35-44. 
Geiger, Joseph. Language, Culture and Identity in Ancient Palestine. Pages 233-46 in 
Greek Romans and Roman Greeks: Studies in Cultural Interaction. Edited by Erik 
Nis Ostenfeld, Karin Blomqvist, and Lisa Nevett. Aarhus: Aarhus University Press, 
2002. 
Genuyt, Franois. La comparution de Jsus devant Pilate: Analyse smiotique de Jean 
18,2819,16. RSR 73.1 (1985): 133-46. 
George, Coulter H. Expressions of Time in Ancient Greek. Cambridge Classical Studies. 
Edited by R. L. Hunter, et al. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014. 
Georgi, Dieter. Aeneas und Abraham: Paulus unter dem Aspekt der Latinitt?. Zeitschrift 
fr Neues Testament 10 (2002): 37-43. 
Georgia, Allan T. Translating the Triumph: Reading Marks Crucifixion Narrative against 
a Roman Ritual of Power. JSNT 36 (2013): 17-38. 
Ghiretti, E. Note sul bilinguismo greco-latino dellEgitto romano. Aevum Antiquum 9 
(1996): 275-98. 
Gibbon, Edward. The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. Edited by David 
Womerlsey. Vol. 2. London: Penguin, 1995. 
Giles, Howard. Ethnicity Markers in Speech. Pages 251-89 in Social Markers in Speech. 
Edited by Klaus R. Scherer and Howard Giles. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1979. 
Gillespie, Thomas W. The Trial of Politics and Religion: John 18:28-19:16. ExAud 2 
(1986): 69-73. 
Gilliam, J. F. Notes on PSI 1307 and 1308. CP 47.1 (1952): 29-31. 
Gilliam, Terry, and Terry Jones. Monty Python and the Holy Grail. Burbank, CA: Columbia 
TriStar Home Entertainment, 2001. 
Girard, Ren. Des choses caches depuis la fondation du monde. Paris: Grasset, 1978. 
Glancy, Jennifer. Torture: Flesh, Truth, and the Fourth Gospel. BibInt 13.2 (2005): 107-
Glare, Penelope. The Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus at Arsinoe and the Imperial Cult. Pages 
550-54 in Proceedings of the 20th International Congress of Papyrologists. Edited 
by Adam Blow-Jacobsen. Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press, 1994. 
Gniesmer, Dirk F. In den Proze verwickelt: Erzhlanalytische und textpragmatische 
Erwgungen zur Erzhlung vom Proze Jesu vor Pilatus (Joh 18,28-19,16a.b). 
Frankfurt am Main: Lang, 2000. 
Goldhill, Simon. Jerusalem: City of Longing. Cambridge, MA: Belknap, 2008. 
Goodchild, R. G. The Coast Road of Phoenicia and Its Roman Milestones. Berytus 9.2 
(1949): 91-127. 
Goodman, Martin. Judaea. Pages 737-81 in CAH. Edited by Alan K. Bowman, Edward 
Champlin, and Andrew Lintott, X: The Augustan Empire, 43 B.C.A.D. 69. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
________. Nerva, the Fiscus Judaicus and Jewish Identity. JRS 79 (1989): 40-44. 
________. The Place of the Sadducees in First-Century Judaism. Pages 123-35 in Judaism 
in the Roman World: Collected Essays. Edited. Leiden: Brill, 2007. 
Bibliography            
Gordon, Richard, Joyce Reynolds, Mary Beard, and Charlotte Rouech. Roman Inscriptions 
1991-95. JRS 87 (1997): 203-240. 
Gradel, Ittai. Emperor Worship and Roman Religion. OCM. Oxford: Clarendon, 2002. 
Gransden, K. W. Virgil: The Aeneid. Edited by S. J. Harrison. 2nd ed. Landmarks of World 
Literature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004. 
Greatrex, Geoffrey. Roman Frontiers and Foreign Policy in the East. Pages 103-173 in 
Aspects of the Roman East: Papers in Honour of Professor Fergus Millar FBA. 
Edited by Richard Alston and Samuel N. C. Lieu. Turnhout, Belgium: Brepols, 2007. 
Grebe, Sabine. Augustus Divine Authority and Vergil's Aeneid. Vergilius 50 (2004): 35-
Green, William Scott. Doing the Text's Work for It: Richard Hays on Paul's Use of 
Scripture. Pages 58-63 in Paul and the Scriptures of Israel. Edited by Craig A. 
Evans and James A. Sanders. Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1993. 
Greimas, Algirdas Julien. Du Sens. Paris: Seuil, 1979. 
Griffin, Miriam. The Flavians. Pages 1-83 in CAH. Edited by Alan K. Bowman, Peter 
Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone, XI: The High Empire, A.D. 70192. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
________. Nerva to Hadrian. Pages 84-131 in CAH. Edited by Alan K. Bowman, Peter 
Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone, XI: The High Empire, A.D. 70192. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
Grube, Dirk-Martin. Reconstructing the Change from Judaism to Christianity as a Paradigm 
Shift. Pages 225-47 in Orthodoxy, Liberalism, and Adaptation: Essays on Ways of 
Worldmaking in Times of Change from Biblical, Historical and Systematic 
Perspectives. Edited by Bob Becking. Leiden: Brill, 2011. 
Gruen, Erich S. Romans and Jews. Pages 423-36 in A Companion to Ethnicity in the 
Ancient Mediterranean. Edited by Jeremy McInerney. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, 
2014. 
Gruen, Erich W. The Expansion of the Empire under Augustus. Pages 147-97 in CAH. 
Edited by Alan K. Bowman, Edward Champlin, and Andrew Lintott, X: The 
Augustan Empire, 43 B.C.A.D. 69. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
Guraud, O., Paul Jouguet, A. Bataille, Naphtali Lewis, H. Marrou, J. Scherer, and W. G. 
Waddell, eds. P. Fouad. Les Papyrus Fouad I: Nos 1-89 Le Caire: Imprimerie de 
l'Institut Franais d'Archologie Orientale, 1939. 
Gundry, Robert H. Mark: A Commentary on His Apology for the Cross. Grand Rapids: 
Eerdmans, 1993. 
Gupta, Nijay K. Gloria in Profundis: Comparing the Glory of Moses in Sirach to Jesus in 
the Fourth Gospel. HBT 36.1 (2014): 60-78. 
Gutmann, Matthew C. Rituals of Resistance: A Critique of the Theory of Everyday Forms 
of Resistance. Latin American Perspectives 20.2 (1993): 74-92. 
Haarmann, Harald. Ethnicity and Language in the Ancient Mediterranean. Pages 17-33 in 
A Companion to Ethnicity in the Ancient Mediterranean. Edited by Jeremy 
McInerney. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, 2014. 
________. Language in Ethnicity: A View of Basic Ecological Relations. Contributions to 
the Sociology of Language 44. Edited by Joshua A. Fishman. Berlin: de Gruyter, 
1986. 
Haas, Christopher. Alexandria in Late Antiquity: Topography and Social Conflict. Ancient 
Society and History. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997. 
Haeckl, Anne E. Fragment > < Image: The Hartwig-Kelsey Fragments Rejoined. Pages 
26-33 in Images of Empire: Flavian Fragments in Rome and Ann Arbor Rejoined. 
Edited by Elaine K. Gazda and Anne E. Haeckl. Rome: Ministero per i Beni Culturali 
e Ambientali, Soprintendenza Archeologica di Roma with The University of 
Michigan, Kelsey Museum of Archaeology, 1996. 
Bibliography            
Haenchen, Ernst. John: A Commentary on the Gospel of John Chapters 1-6. Edited by 
Robert Walter Funk and Ulrich Busse. Translated by Robert Walter Funk. Vol. 1. 
Hermeneia: A Critical and Historical Commentary on the Bible. Edited by Helmut 
Koester. Philadelphia: Fortress, 1984. 
________. John: A Commentary on the Gospel of John Chapters 7-21. Edited by Robert 
Walter Funk and Ulrich Busse. Translated by Robert Walter Funk. Vol. 2. 
Hermeneia: A Critical and Historical Commentary on the Bible. Edited by Helmut 
Koester. Philadelphia: Fortress, 1984. 
Haensch, Rudolf. L'entre par la mer dans l'antiquit. Pages 91-99 in Les entres royales 
et impriales: histoire, reprsentation et diffusion d'une crmonie publique, de 
l'Orient ancien  Byzance. Edited by Agns Brenger and Eric Perrin-Saminadayar. 
Paris: De Boccard, 2009. 
Hahn, Ludwig. Rom und Romanismus im griechisch-rmischen Osten: Mit besonderer 
Bercksichtigung der Sprache: Bis auf die Zeit Hadrians. Leipzig: Dietrich, 1906. 
Hakola, Raimo. Reconsidering Johannine Christianity: A Social Identity Approach. New 
York: Routledge, 2015. 
Hall, Jonathan M. Ethnic Identity in Greek Antiquity. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1997. 
Hallbck, Geert. The Gospel of John as Literature: Literary Readings of the Fourth Gospel. 
Pages 31-46 in New Readings in John: Literary and Theological Perspectives: 
Essays from the Scandinavian Conference on the Fourth Gospel, Arhus, 1997. Edited 
by Johannes Nissen and Sigfred Pedersen. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic, 1999. 
Halliday, M. A. K. Anti-Languages. American Anthropologist 78.3 (1976): 570-584. 
Hammond, Mason. Composition of the Senate, A.D. 68-235. JRS 47.1/2 (1957): 74-81. 
Hardie, Philip. Virgil's Aeneid: Cosmos and Imperium. Oxford: Clarendon, 1986. 
Harland, Philip A. Honours and Worship: Emperors, Imperial Cults and Associations at 
Ephesus (First to Third Centuries C.E.). SR 25.3 (1996): 319-334. 
Harnack, Adolf. Militia Christi: The Christian Religion and the Military in the First Three 
Centuries. Translated by David McInnes Gracie. Philadelphia: Fortress, 1981. 
Harrill, J. Albert. Empire and New Testament: A Methodological Caution. Conversations 
with the Biblical World: Proceedings of the Eastern Great Lakes Biblical Society 
and Midwest Region Society of Biblical Literature 34 (2014): 14-34. 
________. Ethnic Fluidity in Ephesians. NTS 60.03 (2014): 379-402. 
________. Paul and Empire: Studying Roman Identity after the Cultural Turn. Early 
Christianity 2.3 (2011): 281-311. 
Harris, William V. Trade. Pages 710-740 in CAH. Edited by Alan K. Bowman, Peter 
Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone, XI: The High Empire, A.D. 70192. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
Harrison, S. J. Some Views of the Aeneid in the Twentieth Century. Pages 1-20 in Oxford 
Readings in Vergil's Aeneid. Edited by S. J. Harrison. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1990. 
Harstine, Stan. The Fourth Gospel's Characterization of God: A Rhetorical Perspective. 
Pages 131-46 in Characters and Characterization in the Gospel of John. Edited by 
Christopher W. Skinner. London: Bloomsbury, 2013. 
Harvey, A. E. Jesus on Trial: A Study in the Fourth Gospel. London: SPCK, 1976. 
Hashkes, Hannah E. Rabbinic Discourse as a System of Knowledge: The Study of Torah Is 
Equal to Them All. Philosophy of Relgion: World Religions 5. Edited by Jerome 
Gellman. Leiden: Brill, 2015. 
Hassall, Mark. The Army. Pages 320-43 in CAH. Edited by Alan K. Bowman, Peter 
Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone, XI: The High Empire, A.D. 70192. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
Bibliography            
Hatch, William Henry Paine. Some Illustrations of New Testament Usage from Greek 
Inscriptions of Asia Minor. JBL 27.2 (1908): 134-146. 
Hatina, Thomas R. Intertextuality and Historical Criticism in New Testament Studies: Is 
There a Relationship?. BibInt 7.1 (1999): 28-43. 
Hauerwas, Stanley. The Peaceable Kingdom: A Primer in Christian Ethics. Notre Dame: 
University of Notre Dame Press, 1983. 
Hauge, Matthew Ryan. The Biblical Tour of Hell. LNTS 485. Edited by Mark Goodacre. 
London: Bloomsbury, 2013. 
Haugen, Einar. The Ecology of Language. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1972. 
________. Language Fragmentation in Scandinavia: Revolt of the Minorities. Pages 100-
19 in Minority Languages Today: A Selection from the Papers Read at the First 
international Conference on Minority Languages Held at Glasgow University from 
8 to 13 September 1980. Edited by Einar Ingvald Haugen, J. Derrick McClure, and 
Derick S. Thomson. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1981. 
Hayes, Christine. What's Divine About Divine Law? Early Perspectives. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 2015. 
Hays, Richard B. Echoes of Scripture in the Letters of Paul. New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 1989. 
________. Echoes of Scripture in the Letters of Paul: Abstract. Pages 42-46 in Paul and 
the Scriptures of Israel. Edited by Craig A. Evans and James A. Sanders. Sheffield: 
JSOT Press, 1993. 
________. On the Rebound: A Response to Critiques of Echoes of Scripture in the Letters 
of Paul. Pages 70-96 in Paul and the Scriptures of Israel. Edited by Craig A. Evans 
and James A. Sanders. Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1993. 
Heath, Gordon L. The Church Fathers and the Roman Empire. Pages 259-79 in Empire in 
the New Testament. Edited by Stanley E. Porter and Cynthia Long Westfall. Eugene, 
OR: Pickwick, 2011. 
Heath, Jane. You Say That I Am a King (John 18.37). JSNT 34.3 (2012): 232-53. 
Heather, Peter. The Fall of the Roman Empire: A New History of Rome and the Barbarians. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006. 
Hengel, Martin. The Johannine Question. Translated by John Bowden. London: SCM, 1989. 
Henten, Jan Willem van, and Friedrich Avemarie. Martyrdom and Noble Death: Selected 
Texts from Graeco-Roman, Jewish, and Christian Antiquity. London: Routledge, 
2002. 
Hering, Johannes. Lateinisches bei Appian. PhD thesis, Leipzig, 1935. 
Herzog, William R. Jesus, Justice, and the Reign of God: A Ministry of Liberation. 
Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2000. 
Hezser, Catherine. Jewish Literacy in Roman Palestine. Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2001. 
________. Travel and Mobility. Pages 210-26 in The Oxford Handbook of Jewish Daily 
Life in Roman Palestine. Edited by Catherine Hezser. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2010. 
Hill, Charles E. The Debate over the Muratorian Fragment and the Development of the 
Canon. WTJ 57.2 (1995): 437-52. 
________. The Johannine Corpus in the Early Church. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2004. 
________. The Orthodox Gospel: The Reception of John in the Great Church Prior to 
Irenaeus. Pages 233-300 in Legacy of John: Second-Century Reception of the 
Fourth Gospel. Edited by Tuomas Rasimus. Leiden: Brill, 2010. 
Hill, David. My Kingdom Is Not of This World (John 18.36): Conflict and Christian 
Existence in the World According to the Fourth Gospel. IBS 9 (1987): 54-62. 
Bibliography            
Hinds, Stephen. Allusion and Intertext: Dynamics of Appropriation in Roman Poetry. 
Roman Literature and Its Contexts. Edited by Denis Feeney and Stephen Hinds. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998. 
Hingley, Richard. Cultural Diversity and Unity: Empire and Rome. Pages 54-75 in 
Material Culture and Social Identities in the Ancient World. Edited by Shelley Hales 
and Tamar Hodos. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
________. Globalizing Roman Culture: Unity, Diversity and Empire. London: Routledge, 
2005. 
Hoersting, Raquel C., and Sharon Rae Jenkins. No Place to Call Home: Cultural 
Homelessness, Self-Esteem and Cross-Cultural Identities. International Journal of 
Intercultural Relations 35 (2011): 17-30. 
Hoffman, Charlotte. An Introduction to Bilingualism. Longman Linguistics Library. 
London: Longman, 1991. 
Hofmann, J. B., and Anton Szantyr. Lateinische Syntax und Stilistik. 2nd ed. Handbuch der 
Altertumswissenschaft 2.2.2. Edited by Iwan Mller, Walter Otto, and Hermann 
Bengtson. Munich: Beck, 1972. 
Holmes, Michael W., ed. The Apostolic Fathers: Greek Texts and English Translations. 2nd 
ed. Grand Rapids: Baker Books, 1999. 
Holtom, Daniel Clarence. Influence of Example. Missions: American Baptist International 
Magazine 3 (1912): 153. 
Honigman, Sylvie. Politeumata and Ethnicity in Ptolemaic and Roman Egypt. Ancient 
Society 33 (2003): 61-102. 
Horrocks, Geoffrey C. Greek: A History of the Language and Its Speakers. Oxford: Wiley-
Blackwell, 2010. 
Horsfall, Nicholas. Aeneas the Colonist. Vergilius 35 (1989): 8-27. 
________. Aeneid. Pages 101-216 in A Companion to the Study of Virgil. Edited by 
Nicholas Horsfall. Leiden: Brill, 1995. 
________. Aspects of Virgilian Influence in Roman Life. Pages 47-63 in Atti del Convegno 
mondiale scientifico di studi su Virgilio: Mantova, Roma, Napoli, 19-24 settembre 
1981. Edited by Marco Beck. Milan: Mondadori, 1984. 
________. The Non-Literary Evidence. Pages 249-55 in A Companion to the Study of 
Virgil. Edited by Nicholas Horsfall. Leiden: Brill, 1995. 
________. Virgil, Aeneid 6: A Commentary. Vol. 2: Commentary and Appendices. Berlin: 
De Gruyter, 2013. 
________. Virgil, Aeneid 6: A Commentary. Vol. 1: Introduction, Text and Translation. 
Berlin: De Gruyter, 2013. 
________. Virgil, History and the Roman Tradition. Prudentia 8 (1976): 73-89. 
________. ed. A Companion to the Study of Virgil. Edited by Nicholas Horsfall. Mnemosyne 
151. Leiden: Brill, 1995. 
Horsley, G. H. R. The Fiction of Jewish Greek. NewDocs 5: Linguistic Essays (1989): 
5-40. 
________. A Fishing Cartel in First-Century Ephesos. NewDocs 5: Linguistic Essays 
(1989): 95-114. 
________. New Documents Illustrating Early Christianity: A Review of the Greek 
Inscriptions and Papyri Published in 1978. 3. Sydney: Macquarie University, 1983. 
Horsley, Richard A. Hearing the Whole Story: The Politics of Plot in Mark's Gospel. 
Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2001. 
________. Jesus and Empire. USQR 59.3-4 (2005): 44-74. 
________. Jesus and Empire: The Kingdom of God and the New World Disorder. 
Minneapolis: Fortress, 2003. 
________. Religion and Empire: People, Power, and the Life of the Spirit. Minneapolis: 
Fortress, 2003. 
Bibliography            
Horsley, Richard A., and Tom Thatcher. John, Jesus, and the Renewal of Israel. Grand 
Rapids: Eerdmans, 2013. 
Hoskyns, Edwyn Clement. The Fourth Gospel. Edited by Francis Noel Davey. 2nd ed. 
London: Faber and Faber, 1947. 
Houghton, H. A. G. The Latin New Testament: A Guide to Its Early History, Texts, and 
Manuscripts. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016. 
Hudson, Richard A. Sociolinguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
Huizenga, Leroy A. The Matthean Jesus and the Isaac of the Early Jewish Encyclopedia. 
Pages 63-81 in Reading the Bible Intertextually. Edited by Richard B. Hays, Stefan 
Alkier, and Leroy Andrew Huizenga. Waco, TX: Baylor University Press, 2009. 
________. New Isaac: Tradition and Intertextuality in the Gospel of Matthew. NovTSup 
131. Edited by M. M. Mitchell and D. P. Moessner. Leiden: Brill, 2009. 
________. The Old Testament in the New, Intertextuality and Allegory. JSNT 38.1 (2015): 
17-35. 
Hull, Sanford D. Exceptions to Apollonius' Canon in the New Testament: A Grammatical 
Study. Trinity Journal 7.1 (1986): 3-16. 
Hunt, Laura. Ecce homo or hic vir? Translation and Allusion in John 19:5. Paper presented 
at the SBL Annual Meeting, San Diego, CA, 22 November, 2014. 
________. Pilate: Am I a Jew? Romans in the Gospel of John. Paper presented at the 
Emerging Scholarship on the NT section of the Institute for Biblical Research, SBL 
Annual Meeting, Atlanta, GA, 20 November, 2015. 
________.    : Are You an Emperor, or a King?. Paper presented at the 
Conference of the British New Testament Society, Manchester, UK, 5 September, 
2014. 
Hurtado, L. W. Christology. Pages 170184 in Dictionary of the Later New Testament and 
Its Developments. Edited by R. P. Martin and P. H. Davids. Downers Grove, IL: 
InterVarsity Press, 1997. 
Hutcheon, Linda. Irony's Edge: The Theory and Politics of Irony. Florence, KY: Routledge, 
1994. 
Hylen, Susan. Allusion and Meaning in John 6. BZNW 137. Edited by James D. G. Dunn, 
et al. Berlin: de Gruyter, 2005. 
Hymes, Dell H. Models of the Interaction of Language and Social Life. Pages 30-47 in 
Sociolinguistics: The Essential Readings. Edited by Christina Bratt Paulston and G. 
Richard Tucker. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2003. 
Ibrahim, M. Hamdy. Education of Latin in Roman Egypt in the Light of Papyri. Pages 219-
226 in Roma e l'Egitto nell'antichit classica: Cairo, 6-9 febbraio 1989. Atti del I 
congresso internazionale italo-egiziano. Edited by Giovanni Pugliese Carratelli. 
Rome: Libreria dello Stato, 1992. 
Ibuki, Yu. Die Wahrheit im Johannesevangelium. BBB 39. Edited by G. Johannes 
Botterweck and Heinrich Zimmermann. Bonn: P. Hanstein, 1972. 
Immisch, Otto. De Glossis Lexici Hesychiani Italicis. Leipziger Studien zur classischen 
Philologie 8 (1885): 265-378. 
Irmscher, Johannes. Vergil in der griechischen Antike. Klio 67 (1985): 281-85. 
Isaac, Benjamin. Latin in Cities of the Roman Near East. Pages 43-72 in From Hellenism 
to Islam: Cultural and Linguistic Change in the Roman Near East. Edited by Hannah 
M. Cotton, et al. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009. 
________. The Limits of Empire: The Roman Army in the East. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1990. 
Jacobson, Rodolfo. Conveying a Broader Message through Bilingual Discourse: An 
Attempt at Contrastive Codeswitching Research. Pages 51-76 in Codeswitching 
Worldwide. Edited by Rodolfo Jacobson. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1998. 
Bibliography            
Jakobson, Alexander, and Hannah M. Cotton. Caligula's recusatio imperii. Historia 34.4 
(1985): 497-503. 
Jakobson, Roman. Linguistics and Poetics. Pages 350-377 in Style in Language. Edited by 
Thomas A. Sebeok. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1960. 
Jannaris, A. N. An Historical Greek Grammar, Chiefly of the Attic Dialect as Written and 
Spoken from Classical Antiquity Down to the Present Time, Founded Upon the 
Ancient Texts, Inscriptions, Papyri and Present Popular Greek. London: Macmillan, 
1897. 
________. Latin Influence on Greek Orthography. Classical Review 21.3 (1907): 67-72. 
Janse, Mark. Aspects of Bilingualism in the History of the Greek Language. Pages 332-90 
in Bilingualism in Ancient Society: Language Contact and the Written Text. Edited 
by James N. Adams, Mark Janse, and Simon Swain. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2002. 
Jantzen, Grace M. Foundations of Violence. Death and the Displacement of Beauty 1. 
London: Routledge, 2004. 
Jauhiainen, Marko. The Use of Zechariah in Revelation. Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2005. 
Jensen, Alexander S. John's Gospel as Witness: The Development of the Early Christian 
Language of Faith. Ashgate New Critical Thinking in Religion, Theology and 
Biblical Studies. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate, 2004. 
Jewett, Robert. Romans: A Commentary. Hermeneia: A Critical and Historical Commentary 
on the Bible. Edited by Helmut Koester. Minneapolis: Fortress, 2007. 
Johnson, Luke T. The New Testament's Anti-Jewish Slander and the Conventions of 
Ancient Polemic. JBL 108.3 (1989): 419-441. 
Jones, Sin. The Archaeology of Ethnicity: Constructing Identities in the Past and Present. 
London: Routledge, 1997. 
Jouguet, P. Les papyrus latins d'gypte. Revue des tudes latines 3.1 (1925): 35-50. 
Judge, E. A. Judaism and the Rise of Christianity: A Roman Perspective. TynBul 45.2 
(1994): 355-68. 
Kahl, Brigitte. Galatians Re-Imagined: Reading with the Eyes of the Vanquished. 
Minneapolis: Fortress, 2010. 
Kaimio, Jorma. The Romans and the Greek Language. Helsinki: Societas Scientiarum 
Fennica, 1979. 
Kaldellis, Anthony. Hellenism in Byzantium: The Transformations of Greek Identity and the 
Reception of the Classical Tradition. Greek Culture in the Roman World. Edited by 
Susan E. Alcock, Ja Elsner, and Simon Goldhill. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2007. 
Kanagaraj, Jey J. Jesus the King, Merkabah Mysticism and the Gospel of John. Tyndale 
Bulletin 47.2 (1996): 349-66. 
Kant, Laurence H. Jewish Inscriptions in Greek and Latin. ANRW 20.2: 671-713. Edited 
by Wolfgang Haase. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1987. 
Kasser, Rodolphe. L'vangile selon saint Jean et les versions coptes de la Bible. 
Bibliothque thologique. Neuchtel: Delachaux et Niestl, 1966. 
Katz, Jerrold J. Propositional Structure and Illocutionary Force: A Study of the Contribution 
of Sentence Meaning to Speech Acts. New York: Crowell, 1977. 
Kearsley, Rosalinde, ed. Greeks and Romans in Imperial Asia: Mixed Language Inscriptions 
and Linguistic Evidence for Cultural Interaction until the End of AD III. Inschriften 
Griechischer Stdte aus Kleinasien 59. Bonn: Habelt, 2001. 
Kee, Alistair. The Imperial Cult: The Unmasking of an Ideology. Scottish Journal of 
Religious Studies 6.2 (1985): 112-28. 
Kee, Howard Clark. Knowing the Truth: Epistemology and Community in the Fourth 
Gospel. Pages 254-80 in Neotestamentica et Philonica: Studies in Honor of Peder 
Bibliography            
Borgen. Edited by David E. Aune, Torrey Seland, and Jarl Henning Ulrichsen. 
Leiden: Brill, 2003. 
Keener, Craig S. Acts: An Exegetical Commentary. Vol. Volume 3: 15:123:35. Grand 
Rapids: Baker, 2014. 
________. The Gospel of John: A Commentary. 2 vols. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 2003. 
Kennedy, David. The Composition of a Military Work Party in Roman Egypt (ILS 2483: 
Coptos). JEA 71 (1985): 156-160. 
________. Syria. Pages 703-36 in CAH. Edited by Alan K. Bowman, Edward Champlin, 
and Andrew Lintott, X: The Augustan Empire, 43 B.C.A.D. 69. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
Keyes, Charles F. Towards a New Formulation of the Concept of Ethnic Group. Ethnicity 
3.3 (1976): 202-213. 
Kierspel, Lars. The Jews and the World in the Fourth Gospel: Parallelism, Function, and 
Context. WUNT 2.220. Edited by Jrg Frey. Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2006. 
Kim, Tae Hun. The Anarthrous   in Mark 15,39 and the Roman Imperial Cult. Bib 
79.2 (1998): 221-41. 
King, C. W. The Votive Tablets of the Scriba Demetrius at York. Archaeological 
Journal 39 (1882): 23-37. 
Kirk, David R. Heaven Opened: Intertextuality and Meaning in John 1:51. Tyndale Bulletin 
63.2 (2012): 237-56. 
Klauck, Hans-Josef. The Religious Context of Early Christianity: A Guide to Graeco-Roman 
Religions. Translated by Brian McNeil. Minneapolis: Fortress, 2003. 
Klink, Edward W., III. The Sheep of the Fold: The Audience and Origin of the Gospel of 
John. SNTSMS 141. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
Knibbe, Dieter. Via Sacra Ephesiaca: New Aspects of the Cult of Artemis Ephesia. Pages 
141-55 in Ephesos, Metropolis of Asia: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Its 
Archaeology, Religion, and Culture. Edited by Helmut Koester. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 1995. 
Kobel, Esther. Dining with John: Communal Meals and Identity Formation in the Fourth 
Gospel and Its Historical and Cultural Context. BibInt 109. Leiden; Boston: Brill, 
2011. 
Koester, Craig R. Jesus the Way, the Cross, and the World According to the Gospel of 
John. WW 21.4 (2001): 360-69. 
________. The Savior of the World (John 4:42). JBL 109.4 (1990): 665-680. 
________. The Spectrum of Johannine Readers. Pages 5-19 in What Is John? Readers and 
Readings of the Fourth Gospel. Edited by Fernando F. Segovia. Atlanta: Scholars 
Press, 1996. 
________. Symbolism in the Fourth Gospel: Meaning, Mystery, Community. Minneapolis: 
Fortress, 1995. 
________. Theological Complexity and the Characterization of Nicodemus in John's 
Gospel. Pages 165-81 in Characters and Characterization in the Gospel of John. 
Edited by Christopher W. Skinner. London: Bloomsbury, 2013. 
________. Why Was the Messiah Crucified? A Study of God, Jesus, Satan, and Human 
Agency in Johannine Theology. Pages 163-80 in The Death of Jesus in the Fourth 
Gospel. Edited by G. Van Belle. Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2007. 
Koester, Helmut, ed. Ephesos, Metropolis of Asia: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Its 
Archaeology, Religion, and Culture. HTS 41. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 
1995. 
Kondoleon, Christine, ed. Antioch: The Lost Ancient City. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 2000. 
Konstan, David. Friendship in the Classical World. KTAH. Edited by P. A. Cartledge and 
P. D. A. Garnsey. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997. 
Bibliography            
Kramer, Johannes. Die Papyrologie als Erkenntnisquelle fr die Romanistik. Pages 27-38 
in Von der Papyrologie zur Romanistik. Edited by Johannes Kramer. Berlin: De 
Gruyter, 2011. 
Kristeva, Julia. Bakhtine, le mot, le dialogue et le roman. Critique 23.236 (1967): 438-65. 
Kronfeld, Chana. Allusion: An Israeli Perspective. Prooftexts: A Journal of Jewish 
Literary History 5.2 (1985): 137-63. 
Kuecker, Aaron. Ethnicity and Social Identity. Pages 59-77 in T&T Clark Handbook to 
Social Identity in the New Testament. Edited by J. Brian Tucker and Coleman A. 
Baker. London: Bloomsbury, 2014. 
________. Filial Piety and Violence in Luke-Acts and the Aeneid: A Comparative Analysis 
of Two Trans-Ethnic Identities. Pages 211-33 in T&T Clark Handbook to Social 
Identity in the New Testament. Edited by J. Brian Tucker and Coleman A. Baker. 
London: Bloomsbury, 2014. 
Khner, Raphael. Ausfhrliche Grammatik der griechischen Sprache. 2nd ed. Vol. 2, part 1. 
Hannover: Hahn, 1870. 
Kster, Volker. Toward an Intercultural Theology: Paradigm Shifts in Missiology, 
Ecumenics, and Comparative Religion. Pages 171-84 in Theology and the 
Religions: A Dialogue. Edited by Viggo Mortensen. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2003. 
Labahn, Michael. Heiland der Welt: Der gesandte Gottessohn und der rmische Kaiser
ein Thema johanneischer Christologie?. Pages 147-74 in Zwischen den Reichen: 
Neues Testament und rmische Herrschaft: Vortrge auf der ersten Konferenz der 
European Association for Biblical Studies. Edited by Michael Labahn and Jrgen 
Zangenberg. Tbingen: Francke, 2002. 
Lacey, Raymond Henry. The Equestrian Officials of Trajan and Hadrian: Their Careers. 
PhD thesis, Princeton University, 1917. 
Laird, Margaret L. Private Memory and Public Interest: Municipal Identity in Imperial 
Italy. Pages 31-57 in The Art of Citizens, Soldiers and Freedmen in the Roman 
World. Edited by Eve D'Ambra and Guy P. R. Mtraux. Oxford, UK: Archaeopress, 
2006. 
Lalonde, Richard N., and Randy A. Silverman. Behavioral Preferences in Response to 
Social Injustice: The Effects of Group Permeability and Social Identity Salience. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 66.1 (1994): 78-85. 
Lamb, David A. Text, Context and the Johannine Community: A Sociolinguistic Analysis of 
the Johannine Writings. London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark, 2014. 
Lane, William L. The Gospel According to Mark: The English Text with Introduction, 
Exposition, and Notes. NICNT. Edited by Gordon D. Fee. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 
1974. 
Lang, Manfred. The Christian and the Roman Self: The Lukan Paul and a Roman Reading. 
Pages 152-73 in Christian Body, Christian Self: Concepts of Early Christian 
Personhood. Edited by Clare K. Rothschild and Trevor W. Thompson. Tbingen, 
Germany: Mohr Siebeck, 2011. 
________. Johanneische Abschiedsreden und Senecas Konsolationsliteratur: Wie konnte 
ein Rmer Joh 13,31-17,26 zu lesen?. Pages 365-412 in Kontexte des 
Johannesevangeliums: Das vierte Evangelium in religions- und 
traditionsgeschichtlicher Perspektive. Edited by Jrg Frey and Udo Schnelle. 
Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2004. 
Langford, Justin. Defending Hope: Semiotics and Intertextuality in 1 Peter. Eugene, OR: 
Wipf & Stock, 2013. 
________. Signs of Hope in the Midst of Suffering: A Semiotic Investigation in the Use 
of Isaiah in 1 Peter. PhD thesis, New Orleans Baptist Theological Seminary, 2012. 
Larsen, Darl. A Book About the Film Monty Python and the Holy Grail: All the References 
from African Swallows to Zoot. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2015. 
Bibliography            
Larsen, Kasper Bro. Recognizing the Stranger. Leiden: Brill, 2012. 
Larsson, Kristian. Intertextual Density, Quantifying Imitation. JBL 133.2 (2014): 309-331. 
Lavan, Luke. The Praetoria of Civil Governors in Late Antiquity. Pages 39-56 in Recent 
Research in Late-Antique Urbanism. Edited by Luke Lavan. Portsmouth, RI: 
Thomson-Shore, 2001. 
Law, T. M. When God Spoke Greek: The Septuagint and the Making of the Christian Bible. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013. 
Le Page, R. B., and Andre Tabouret-Keller. Acts of Identity: Creole-Based Approaches to 
Language and Ethnicity. Fernelmont: Intercommunications, 2006. 
Lee, Dorothy. Abiding in the Fourth Gospel: A Case Study in Feminist Biblical Theology. 
Pages 64-78 in A Feminist Companion to John. Edited by Amy-Jill Levine, 2. 
Cleveland: Pilgrim, 2003. 
Lmonon, Jean-Pierre. Pilate et le gouvernement de la Jude: Textes et monuments. tudes 
Bibliques. Paris: Librairie Lecoffre, 1981. 
________. Ponce Pilate. 2nd ed. Ivry-sur-Seine: L'Atelier, 2007. 
Lenski, Gerhard E. Power and Privilege: A Theory of Social Stratification. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1966. 
Lon-Dufour, Xavier. Lecture de l'vangile selon Jean. Vol. 4. Paris: Parole de Dieu, 1996. 
Lesquier, Jean. L'arme romaine d'gypte d'Auguste  Diocltien. Le Caire: Imprimerie de 
l'Institut, 1918. 
Levick, Barbara. The Latin Inscriptions of Asia Minor. Pages 393-402 in Acta colloquii 
epigraphici Latini: Helsingiae 3.-6. sept. 1991 habiti. Edited by Heikki Solin, Olli 
Salomies, and Uta-Maria Liertz. Helsinki: Societas Scientiarum Fennica, 1995. 
________. Tiberius the Politician. 2nd ed. London: Routledge, 1999. 
Levinskaya, Irina. The Book of Acts in Its Diaspora Setting. The Book of Acts in Its First 
Century Setting 5. Edited by Bruce W. Winter. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1996. 
________. The Traces of Jewish Life in Asia Minor. Pages 347-57 in Neues Testament und 
hellenistisch-jdische Alltagskultur: Wechselseitige Wahrnehmungen. III. 
Internationales Symposium zum Corpus Judaeo-Hellenisticum Novi Testamenti, 21.-
24. Mai 2009, Leipzig. Edited by Roland Deines, Jens Herzer, and Karl-Wilhelm 
Niebuhr. Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2011. 
Lewis, Naphtali. Three Textual Notes on the New Monumentum Ephesenum. ZPE 107 
(1995): 248. 
Liberty, Stephen. The Importance of Pontius Pilate in Creed and Gospel. JTS 45 (1944): 
38-56. 
Liebeschuetz, J. H. W. G. Religion. Pages 984-1008 in CAH. Edited by Alan K. Bowman, 
Peter Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone, XI: The High Empire, A.D. 70192. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
Lieu, Judith. Christian Identity in the Jewish and Graeco-Roman World. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2004. 
Liew, Tat-siong Benny. Ambiguous Admittance: Consent and Descent in Johns 
Community of Upward Mobility. Pages 191-224 in John and Postcolonialism: 
Travel, Space and Power. Edited by Musa W. Dube and Jeffrey L. Staley. London: 
Sheffield Academic Press, 2002. 
Lightfoot, J. B., ed. The Apostolic Fathers: Clement, Ignatius, and Polycarp. Vol. 1, Part 2: 
Ignatius & Polycarp. 2nd ed. Grand Rapids: Baker, 1889. 
Lightfoot, R. H. St. John's Gospel: A Commentary. Edited by C. F. Evans. London: Oxford 
University Press, 1956. 
Lincoln, Andrew T. The Gospel According to Saint John. BNTC. Edited by Morna D. 
Hooker. Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2005. 
Bibliography            
________. A Life of Jesus as Testimony: The Divine Courtroom and the Gospel of John. 
Pages 145-66 in The Divine Courtroom in Comparative Perspective Edited by Ari 
Mermelstein and Shalom E. Holtz. Leiden: Brill, 2015. 
________. Reading John: The Fourth Gospel under Modern and Postmodern Interrogation. 
Pages 127-49 in Reading the Gospels Today. Edited by Stanley E. Porter. Grand 
Rapids: Eerdmans, 2004. 
________. Truth on Trial: The Lawsuit Motif in the Fourth Gospel. Peabody, MA: 
Hendrickson, 2000. 
Lindars, Barnabas. The Gospel of John. NCB Commentary. Edited by Matthew Black. Grand 
Rapids: Eerdmans, 1972. 
Lindsay, Dennis R. What Is Truth? Altheia in the Gospel of John. ResQ 35.3 (1993): 129-
Liszka, James Jakb. A General Introduction to the Semeiotic of Charles Sanders Peirce. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1996. 
Litwa, Matthew David. Behold Adam: A Reading of John 19:5. HBT 32.2 (2010): 129-43. 
Lock, F. P. The Rhetoric of Numbers in Gibbon's History. Newark: University of Delaware 
Press, 2012. 
Longenecker, Bruce W. Exposing the Economic Middle: A Revised Economy Scale for the 
Study of Early Urban Christianity. JSNT 31.3 (2009): 243278. 
Louth, Andrew. Pagans and Christians on Providence. Pages 279-98 in Texts and Culture 
in Late Antiquity: Inheritance, Authority, and Change. Edited by J. H. D. Scourfield. 
Swansea: Classical Press of Wales, 2007. 
ukaszewicz, Adam. Caesar in Alexandria: Fragmentary Latin Dipinti Discovered at Kom 
El-Dikka. JJP 41 (2011): 79-92. 
Luke, Trevor S. A Healing Touch for Empire: Vespasian's Wonders in Domitianic Rome. 
Greece & Rome 57.1 (2010): 77-106. 
Maas, Michael. People and Identity in Roman Antioch. Pages 13-21 in Antioch: The Lost 
Ancient City. Edited by Christine Kondoleon. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 2000. 
MacCormack, Sabine G. Art and Ceremony in Late Antiquity. Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1981. 
MacDonald, Dennis R. Does the New Testament Imitate Homer? Four Cases from the Acts 
of the Apostles. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2003. 
________. The Homeric Epics and the Gospel of Mark. New Haven: Yale University Press, 
2000. 
Mackenzie, Catriona, Wendy Rogers, and Susan Dodds. Introduction: What Is 
Vulnerability, and Why Does It Matter for Moral Theory?. Pages 1-29 in 
Vulnerability: New Essays in Ethics and Feminist Philosophy. Edited by Catriona 
Mackenzie, Wendy Rogers, and Susan Dodds. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2014. 
MacRae, George W. Fourth Gospel and Religionsgeschichte. CBQ 32.1 (1970): 13-24. 
Madsen, Jesper Majbom. Patriotism and Ambitions: Intellectual Response to Roman Rule 
in the High Empire. Pages 16-38 in Roman Rule in Greek and Latin Writing: Double 
Vision. Edited by Jesper Majbom Madsen and Roger Rees. Leiden: Brill, 2014. 
Maier, Paul L. Sejanus, Pilate, and the Date of the Crucifixion. Church History 37.1 
(1968): 3-13. 
Malina, Bruce, and Richard Rohrbaugh. Social Science Commentary on the Gospel of John. 
Minneapolis: Fortress, 1998. 
Manning, Alan. A Common Semiotic Framework for Literary and Linguistic Styles. Paper 
presented at the Deseret Language and Linguistic Society Symposium, Provo, UT, 
March, 1995. 
Bibliography            
Manns, Frderic. John and Jamnia: How the Break Occured between Jews and Christians: 
c. 80-100 A.D. Jerusalem: Franciscan Printing Press, 1988. 
Marcus, Joel. Crucifixion as Parodic Exaltation. JBL 125.1 (2006): 73-87. 
________. Mark 1-8: A New Translation with Introduction and Commentary. AB 27. Edited 
by John J. Collins. New York: Doubleday, 2009. 
________. Mark 8-16: A New Translation with Introduction and Commentary. AB 27A. 
Edited by John J. Collins. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2009. 
Margull, Hans Jochen. Verwundbarkeit: Bemerkungen zum Dialog. Evangelische 
Theologie 34 (1974): 410-20. 
Marichal, Robert. Palographie Prcaroline et Papyrologie (1): III (1949-1954). 
Scriptorium 9 (1955): 127-49. 
________. Quelques apports  la tradition ancienne du texte de Virgile. Revue des tudes 
latines 35 (1957): 81-84. 
Marrou, Henri-Irne. Histoire de l'ducation dans l'antiquit. 4th ed. Paris: Seuil, 1958. 
Martin, Dale B. Jesus in Jerusalem: Armed and Not Dangerous. JSNT 37.1 (2014): 3-24. 
________. Patterns of Belief and Patterns of Life: Correlations in the First Urban 
Christians and Since. Pages 116-33 in After the First Urban Christians: The Social-
Scientific Study of Pauline Christianity Twenty-Five Years Later. Edited by Todd D. 
Still and David G. Horrell. London; New York: T&T Clark, 2010. 
________. Response to Downing and Fredriksen. JSNT 37.3 (2015): 334-45. 
Martin, Raymond A. Syntax Criticism of Johannine Literature, the Catholic Epistles, and 
the Gospel Passion Accounts. Lewiston, NY: Mellen, 1989. 
Martyn, J. Louis. History and Theology in the Fourth Gospel. 3rd ed. NTL. Edited by C. 
Clifton Black, John T. Carroll, and Beverly Roberts Gaventa. Louisville: 
Westminster John Knox, 2003. 
Mason, Hugh J. Greek Terms for Roman Institutions: A Lexicon and Analysis. Toronto: 
Hakkert, 1974. 
Mathisen, Ralph. L'adventus consulaire pendant l'Antiquit tardive. Pages 139-56 in Les 
entres royales et impriales: histoire, reprsentation et diffusion d'une crmonie 
publique, de l'Orient ancien  Byzance. Edited by Agns Brenger and Eric Perrin-
Saminadayar. Paris: De Boccard, 2009. 
Mattingly, D. J. Imperialism, Power, and Identity: Experiencing the Roman Empire. Miriam 
S. Balmuth Lectures in Ancient History and Archaeology. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 2014. 
Mattingly, Harold B. The Origin of the Name Christiani. JTS 9.1 (1958): 26-37. 
McBurney, Kate W. 'Star NotesTak Hing, West River, South China'. Christian Nation: 
righteousness exalteth a nation"(December 4, 1912): 7. 
McClure, Erica. Formal and Functional Aspects of the Code-Switched Discourse of 
Bilingual Children. Pages 69-92 in Latino Language and Communicative Behavior. 
Edited by Richard Durn. Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1981. 
________. Oral and Written Assyrian-English Codeswitching. Pages 157-91 in 
Codeswitching Worldwide II. Edited by Rodolfo Jacobson. Berlin: de Gruyter, 2001. 
________. The Relationship between Form and Function in Written National Language-
English Codeswitching: Evidence from Mexico, Spain, and Bulgaria. Pages 125-50 
in Codeswitching Worldwide. Edited by Rodolfo Jacobson. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1998. 
McElduff, Siobhn. Roman Theories of Translation: Surpassing the Source. Routledge 
Monographs in Classical Studies 14. New York: Routledge, 2013. 
McGrath, James F. On Hearing (Rather Than Reading) Intertextual Echoes: Christology 
and Monotheistic Scriptures in an Oral Context. BTB 43.2 (2013): 74-80. 
McHale, Brian, and Moshe Ron. Tel Aviv School of Narrative Poetics. Pages 582-84 in 
Routledge Encyclopedia of Narrative Theory. Edited by David Herman, Manfred 
Jahn, and Marie-Laure Ryan. London: Routledge, 2010. 
Bibliography            
McKenzie, Judith. The Architecture of Alexandria and Egypt, c. 300 B.C. to A.D. 700. 
Pelican History of Art. Edited by Nikolaus Pevsner. New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 2007. 
McKnight, Scot, and Joseph B. Modica, eds. Jesus Is Lord, Caesar Is Not: Evaluating 
Empire in New Testament Studies. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2013. 
Meeks, Wayne A. The First Urban Christians: The Social World of the Apostle Paul. New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 1983. 
________. Man from Heaven in Johannine Sectarianism. JBL 91.1 (1972): 44-72. 
________. The Prophet-King: Moses Traditions and the Johannine Christology. NovTSup 
14. Edited by W. C. van Unnik. Leiden: Brill, 1967. 
Mees, Allard Wijnand. Organisationsformen rmischer Tpfer-Manufakturen am Beispiel 
von Arezzo und Rheinzabern: unter Berucksichtigung von Papyri, Inschriften und 
Rechtsquellen. Vol. 1. Monographien / Rmisch-Germanisches Zentralmuseum. 
Forschungsinstitut fr Vor- und Frhgeschichte 52. Mainz: Verlag des Rmisch-
Germanischen Zentralmuseums, 2002. 
Meggitt, Justin J. Artemidorus and the Johannine Crucifixion. Journal of Higher Criticism 
5 (1998): 203-208. 
________. The Madness of King Jesus: Why Was Jesus Put to Death, but His Followers 
Were Not?. JSNT 29.4 (2007): 379-413. 
Meinersmann, Bernhard. Die lateinischen Wrter und Namen in den griechischen Papyri. 
Studien zur Epigraphik und Papyruskunde 1. Edited by Friedrich Bilabel. Leipzig: 
Dieterich, 1927. 
Menken, Maarten J. J. Old Testament Quotations in the Fourth Gospel: Studies in Textual 
Form. CBET 15. Edited by Tj. Baarda, A. van der Kooij, and A. S. van der Woude. 
Kampen: Kok Pharos, 1996. 
Meuwese, Alphonsus Petrus Maria. De rerum gestarum divi Augusti versione Graeca. PhD 
thesis, Amsterdam, 1920. 
Meyers, Carol L., and Eric M. Meyers. Zechariah 9-14: A New Translation with Introduction 
and Commentary. AB 25C. Edited by William Foxwell Albright and David Noel 
Freedman. New York: Doubleday, 1993. 
Middleton, Paul. Martyrdom: A Guide for the Perplexed. London: T & T Clark, 2011. 
________. Radical Martyrdom and Cosmic Conflict in Early Christianity. LNTS 307. Edited 
by Mark Goodacre. London: T & T Clark, 2006. 
Mihescu, Haralambie. Les termes de commandement militaires latins dans le Strategicon 
de Maurice. Revue Roumaine de Linguistique 14.3 (1969): 261-72. 
Millar, Fergus. The Emperor in the Roman World (31 BC-AD 337). Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1977. 
________. Emperors, Frontiers and Foreign Relations, 31 B.C. to A.D. 378. Britannia 13 
(1982): 1-23. 
________. The Imperial Cult and the Persecutions. Pages 143-75 in Le culte des souverains 
dans l'Empire Romain: Sept exposs suivis de discussions. Edited by Willem den 
Boer. Geneva: Hardt, 1973. 
________. Latin in the Epigraphy of the Roman Near East. Pages 403-419 in Acta colloquii 
epigraphici Latini: Helsingiae 3.-6. sept. 1991 habiti. Edited by Heikki Solin, Olli 
Salomies, and Uta-Maria Liertz. Helsinki: Societas Scientiarum Fennica, 1995. 
________. The Roman Near East, 31 B.C.-A.D. 337. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 
1993. 
Millard, Alan. Reading and Writing in the Time of Jesus. New York: New York University 
Press, 2000. 
Milroy, James, and Lesley Milroy. Authority in Language: Investigating Standard English. 
London: Routledge, 1999. 
Bibliography            
Mitchell, Stephen. Festivals, Games, and Civic Life in Roman Asia Minor. JRS 80 (1990): 
183-93. 
________. Imperial Building in the Eastern Roman Provinces. HSCP 91 (1987): 333-65. 
Mitchell, Timothy. Everyday Metaphors of Power. Theory and Society 19.5 (1990): 545-
Modrzejewski, Joseph Mlze. The Jews of Egypt: From Rameses II to Emperor Hadrian. 
Translated by Robert Cornman. Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society, 1995. 
Moloney, Francis J. The Gospel of John. SP 4. Edited by Daniel J. Harrington. Collegeville, 
MN: Liturgical Press, 1998. 
________. The Gospel of John as Scripture. CBQ 67.3 (2005): 454-68. 
________. The Johannine Son of Man. Biblioteca di Scienze Religiose 14. Rome: Libreria 
Ateneo Salesiano, 1976. 
________. Love in the Gospel of John: An Exegetical, Theological, and Literary Study. 
Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2013. 
Mommsen, Theodor, and Paul Krueger, eds. The Digest of Justinian. Vol. 4. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1985. 
Montes-Alcal, Cecilia. Written Codeswitching: Powerful Bilingual Images. Pages 193-
219 in Codeswitching Worldwide II. Edited by Rodolfo Jacobson. Berlin: de Gruyter, 
2001. 
Moore, Stephen D. Empire and Apocalypse: Postcolonialism and the New Testament. The 
Bible in the Modern World 12. Edited by J. Cheryl Exum, Jorunn kland, and 
Stephen D. Moore. Sheffield: Sheffield Phoenix Press, 2006. 
Morgan, Teresa. Literate Education in the Hellenistic and Roman Worlds. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1998. 
________. Roman Faith and Christian Faith: Pistis and Fides in the Early Roman Empire 
and Early Churches. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015. 
Moss, Candida R. Ancient Christian Martyrdom: Diverse Practices, Theologies, and 
Traditions. ABRL. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2012. 
________. The Other Christs: Imitating Jesus in Ancient Christian Ideologies of Martyrdom. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010. 
Motyer, Stephen. Your Father the Devil? A New Approach to John and the Jews. Paternoster 
Biblical Monographs. Edited by I. Howard Marshall, et al. Milton Keynes: 
Paternoster, 1997. 
Moule, C. F. D. An Idiom-Book of New Testament Greek. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1959. 
Moule, James Hope. A Grammar of New Testament Greek. 3rd ed. Vol. 1: Prolegomena. 
Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 1908. 
Mourgues, Jean-Louis. crire en deux langues: Bilinguisme et pratique de chancellerie sous 
le Haut-Empire romain. DHA 21.2 (1995): 105-29. 
Mowery, Robert L. Son of God in Roman Imperial Titles and Matthew. Bib 83.1 (2002): 
100-110. 
Moxnes, Halvor. Identity in Jesus Galileefrom Ethnicity to Locative Intersectionality. 
BibInt 18.4-5 (2010): 390-416. 
Moyise, Steve. Evoking Scripture: Seeing the Old Testament in the New. London: T&T 
Clark, 2008. 
Mullen, Alex. Introduction: Multiple Languages, Multiple Identities. Pages 1-35 in 
Multilingualism in the Graeco-Roman Worlds. Edited by Alex Mullen and Patrick 
James. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012. 
Murray, Michele. Playing a Jewish Game: Gentile Christian Judaizing in the First and 
Second Centuries CE. Studies in Christianity and Judaism = tudes sur le 
christianisme et le judasme. Waterloo, Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 
2004. 
Bibliography            
Mwandayi, Canisius, and Lucky Hwati. Precursor to Restoration: Biblical Violence in 
Perspective. Pages 171-78 in The Bible and Violance in Africa: Papers Presented 
at the BiAS Meeting 2014 in Windhoek (Namibia), with Some Additional 
Contributions. Edited by Johannes Hunter and Joachim Kgler. Bamberg: University 
of Bamberg Press, 2016. 
Myers-Scotton, Carol. How Codeswitching as an Available Option Empowers Bilinguals. 
Pages 73-84 in Along the Routes to Power: Explorations of Empowerment through 
Language. Edited by Martin Ptz, Joshua A. Fishman, and JoAnne Neff-van 
Aertselaer. Berlin: de Gruyter, 2006. 
________. The Matrix Language Frame Model: Developments and Responses. Pages 23-
58 in Codeswitching Worldwide II. Edited by Rodolfo Jacobson. Berlin: de Gruyter, 
2001. 
________. Multiple Voices: An Introduction to Bilingualism. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2006. 
Myers-Scotton, Carol, and Agnes Bolonyai. Calculating Speakers: Codeswitching in a 
Rational Choice Model. Language in Society 30.1 (2001): 1-28. 
Myers-Scotton, Carol, and William Ury. Bilingual Strategies: The Social Functions of 
Code- Switching. International Journal of the Sociology of Language 13 (1977): 5-
Myers, Alicia D. Abiding Words: An Introduction to Perspectives on Johns Use of 
Scripture. Pages 1-20 in Abiding Words: The Use of Scripture in the Gospel of John. 
Edited by Alicia D. Myers and Bruce G. Schuchard. Atlanta: SBL Press, 2015. 
________. Characterizing Jesus: A Rhetorical Analysis on the Fourth Gospel's Use of 
Scripture in Its Presentation of Jesus. LNTS 458. Edited by Mark Goodacre. London: 
T & T Clark, 2012. 
Nestor, Dermot. Cognitive Perspectives on Israelite Identity. New York: T&T Clark, 2010. 
Neyrey, Jerome H. The Gospel of John. The New Cambridge Bible Commentary. Edited by 
Ben Witherington, III. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2007. 
________. The Gospel of John in Cultural and Rhetorical Perspective. Grand Rapids: 
Eerdmans, 2009. 
________. An Ideology of Revolt: John's Christology in Social-Science Perspective. 
Philadelphia: Fortress, 1988. 
________. The Sociology of Secrecy and the Fourth Gospel. Pages 79-109 in "What Is 
John?" Volume II: Literary and Social Readings of the Fourth Gospel. Edited by 
Fernando F. Segovia. Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1998. 
Ng, Diana Y. Asia Minor. Pages 538-51 in The Oxford Handbook of Roman Sculpture. 
Edited by Elise A. Friedland, Melanie Grunow Sobocinski, and Elaine K. Gazda. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015. 
Nicholson, Godfrey C. Death as Departure: The Johannine Descent-Ascent Schema. Chico, 
CA: Scholars Press, 1983. 
Nissen, Johannes. Community and Ethics in the Gospel of John. Pages 194-212 in New 
Readings in John: Literary and Theological Perspectives: Essays from the 
Scandinavian Conference on the Fourth Gospel, Arhus, 1997. Edited by Johannes 
Nissen and Sigfred Pedersen. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic, 1999. 
Nodet, tienne. Barabbas, un brigand religieux (, Jn 18,40). RB 119.2 (2012): 
288-99. 
Nongbri, Brent. The Limits of Palaeographic Dating of Literary Papyri: Some Observations 
on the Date and Provenance of P.Bodmer II (P66). MH 71 (2014): 1-35. 
________. The Use and Abuse of P52: Papyrological Pitfalls in the Dating of the Fourth 
Gospel. HTR 98.1 (2005): 23-48. 
Nonnus of Nisibis. Commentary on the Gospel of Saint John. Translated by Robert W. 
Thomson. Writings from the Islamic World 1. Edited by James T. Robinson. Atlanta: 
SBL Press, 2014. 
Bibliography            
O'Brien, Peter T. The Epistle to the Philippians: A Commentary on the Greek Text. NIGTC. 
Edited by I. Howard Marshall and W. Ward Gasque. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1991. 
O'Hara, James J. True Names: Vergil and the Alexandrian Tradition of Etymological 
Wordplay. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996. 
Oakes, Peter. Philippians: From People to Letter. SNTSMS 110. Edited by Richard 
Bauckham. Cambridge: University of Cambridge, 2001. 
________. Quelle devrait tre linfluence des chos intertextuels sur la traduction?. Pages 
25187 in Intertextualits: La Bible en chos. Edited by Daniel Marguerat and 
Adrian Curtis. Geneva: Labor et Fides, 2000. 
________. Re-Mapping the Universe: Paul and the Emperor in 1 Thessalonians and 
Philippians. JSNT 27.3 (2005): 301-322. 
________. A State of Tension: Rome in the New Testament. Pages 75-90 in The Gospel of 
Matthew in Its Roman Imperial Context. Edited by John Riches and David C. Sim. 
London: T&T Clark, 2005. 
Okure, Teresa. The Johannine Approach to Mission: A Contextual Study of John 4:1-42. 
WUNT 2.31. Tbingen: J. C. B. Mohr, 1988. 
Ong, Hughson T. The Multilingual Jesus and the Sociolinguistic World of the New 
Testament. Linguistic Biblical Studies 12. Edited by Stanley E. Porter, Jess Pelez, 
and Jonathan M. Watt. Leiden: Brill, 2016. 
Oppenheimer, Aharon. Between Rome and Babylon: Studies in Jewish Leadership and 
Society. Texts and Studies in Ancient Judaism 108. Edited by Martin Hengel and 
Peter Schfer. Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2005. 
Orchard, Helen C. Courting Betrayal: Jesus as Victim in the Gospel of John. JSNTSup 161. 
Edited by Stanley E. Porter. Gender, Culture, Theory 5. Edited by J. Cheryl Exum. 
Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1998. 
Orsini, Pasquale, and Willy Clarysse. Early New Testament Manuscripts and Their Dates: 
A Critique of Theological Palaeography. ETL 88.4 (2012): 443-74. 
Osborne, Robin. Cultures as Languages and Languages as Cultures. Pages 317-34 in 
Multilingualism in the Graeco-Roman Worlds. Edited by Alex Mullen and Patrick 
James. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012. 
Ott, Joachim. Coronation. Pages 494-95 in Religion Past and Present: Encyclopedia of 
Theology and Religion. Edited by Hans Dieter Betz, et al., 3. Leiden: Brill, 2007. 
Outler, Albert C. The Wesleyan Quadrilateral in Wesley. Wesleyan Theological Journal 
20.1 (1985): 7-18. 
Packard Humanities Institute. Searchable Greek Inscriptions: A Scholarly Tool in 
Progress. http://epigraphy.packhum.org/. 
Paget, James Carleton. Some Observations on Josephus and Christianity. JTS 52.2 (2001): 
539-624. 
Painter, John. The Death of Jesus in John: A Discussion of the Tradition, History, and 
Theology of John. Pages 327-61 in The Death of Jesus in the Fourth Gospel. Edited 
by Gilbert Van Belle. Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2007. 
________. Inclined to God: The Quest for Eternal LifeBultmannian Hermeneutics and 
the Theology of the Fourth Gospel. Pages 346-68 in Exploring the Gospel of John: 
in Honor of D. Moody Smith. Edited by R. Alan Culpepper and C. Clifton Black. 
Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 1996. 
Panackel, Charles.    (Jn 19,5b): An Exegetico-Theological Study of the Text 
in the Light of the Use of the Term  Designating Jesus in the Fourth Gospel. 
Analecta Gregoriana 251. Rome: Editrice Pontificia Universit Gregoriana, 1988. 
Pancaro, Severino. The Law in the Fourth Gospel: The Torah and the Gospel, Moses and 
Jesus, Judaism and Christianity According to John. NovTSup 42. Edited by W. C. 
van Unnik. Leiden: Brill, 1975. 
Bibliography            
Parker, D. C. An Introduction to the New Testament Manuscripts and Their Texts. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008. 
Parmentier, Lon. Le roi des Saturnales. RevPhil 21 (1897): 143-53. 
Parsenios, George L. Rhetoric and Drama in the Johannine Lawsuit Motif. WUNT 1.258. 
Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2010. 
Pedersen, Sigfred. Anti-Judaism in John's Gospel: John 8. Pages 172-93 in New Readings 
in John: Literary and Theological Perspectives: Essays from the Scandinavian 
Conference on the Fourth Gospel, Arhus, 1997. Edited by Johannes Nissen and 
Sigfred Pedersen. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic, 1999. 
Peirce, Charles Sanders. Logic as Semiotic: The Theory of Signs. Pages 98-119 in 
Philosophical Writings of Peirce. Edited by Justus Buchler. New York: Dover, 1955. 
Peper, Bradley M., and Mark DelCogliano. The Pliny and Trajan Correspondence. Pages 
366-71 in The Historical Jesus in Context. Edited by A.J. Levine, Dale C. Allison, 
Jr., and John Dominic Crossan. 2006. 
Peppard, Michael. The Son of God in the Roman World: Divine Sonship in Its Social and 
Political Context. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011. 
Perrin-Saminadayar, ric. La prparation des entres royales et impriales dans les cits de 
l'orient hellnophone, d'Alexandre le Grand aux Svres. Pages 67-90 in Les entres 
royales et impriales: histoire, reprsentation et diffusion d'une crmonie publique, 
de l'Orient ancien  Byzance. Edited by Agns Brenger and Eric Perrin-
Saminadayar. Paris: De Boccard, 2009. 
Pesce, Mauro, and Adriana Destro. La lavanda dei piedi di Gv 13,1-20, il Romanzo di Esopo 
e i Saturnalia di Macrobio. Bib 80.2 (1999): 240-49. 
Petersen, N. R. The Gospel of John and the Sociology of Light: Language and 
Characterization in the Fourth Gospel. Valley Forge, PA: Trinity Press, 1993. 
Petrucci, Armando. Papiri. Pages 964-65 in Enciclopedia Virgiliana. Edited by Francesco 
della Corte, 3. Roma: Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana fondata da Giovanni 
Treccani, 1987. 
________. Virgilio nella cultura scritta romana. Pages 51-72 in Virgilio e noi: None 
giornate filologiche genovesi 23-24 febbraio 1981. Edited. Genova: Universit di 
Genova, 1981. 
Phillips, Peter M. The Prologue of the Fourth Gospel. London: T&T Clark, 2006. 
Pilhofer, Peter. Philippi: Katalog der Inschriften von Philippi. 2nd ed. Vol. 2. WUNT 1.119. 
Tbingen: J.C.B. Mohr, 1995. 
Piper, Ronald A. The Characterisation of Pilate and the Death of Jesus in the Fourth 
Gospel. Pages 121-62 in The Death of Jesus in the Fourth Gospel. Edited by Gilbert 
Van Belle. Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2007. 
Placher, William C. Narratives of a Vulnerable God: Christ, Theology, and Scripture. 
Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 1994. 
Pollard, Nigel. Soldiers, Cities, and Civilians in Roman Syria. Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan Press, 2000. 
Pollock, David C., and Ruth E. Van Reken. Third Culture Kids: Growing up among Worlds. 
2nd ed. Boston: Nicholas Brealey, 2009. 
Poplack, Shana. Sometimes I'll Start a Sentence in Spanish y termino en espaol: Toward a 
Typology of Code-Switching. Linguistics 18 (1980): 581-618. 
Porter, Stanley E. Allusions and Echoes. Pages 29-40 in As It Is Written: Studying Paul's 
Use of Scripture. Edited by Stanley E. Porter and Christopher D. Stanley. Atlanta: 
SBL Press, 2008. 
________. Further Comments on the Use of the Old Testament in the New Testament. 
Pages 98-110 in The Intertextuality of the Epistles: Explorations of Theory and 
Practice. Edited by Thomas L. Brodie, Dennis R. MacDonald, and Stanley E. Porter. 
Sheffield: Sheffield Phoenix Press, 2006. 
Bibliography            
________. Idioms of the Greek New Testament. Biblical Languages: Greek 2. Sheffield: 
Sheffield Academic Press, 1994. 
________. Language Criticism. Pages 361-65 in Encyclopedia of the Historical Jesus. 
Edited by Craig A. Evans. New York: Routledge, 2008. 
________. The Use of the Old Testament in the New Testament: A Brief Comment on 
Method and Terminology. Pages 79-96 in Early Christian Interpretation of the 
Scriptures of Israel: Investigations and Proposals. Edited by Craig A. Evans and 
James A. Sanders. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1997. 
Portier-Young, Anathea E. Apocalypse against Empire: Theologies of Resistance in Early 
Judaism. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2011. 
Prescendi, Francesca. Le sacrifice humain: une affaire des autres A propos du martyre de 
saint Dasius. Pages 345-57 in Dans le laboratoire de l'historien des religions: 
mlanges offerts  Philippe Borgeaud. Edited by Francesca Prescendi and Youri 
Volokhine. Geneva: Labor et Fides, 2011. 
Price, Simon. From Noble Funerals to Divine Cult: The Consecration of Roman Emperors. 
Pages 56-105 in Rituals of Royalty: Power and Ceremonial in Traditional Societies. 
Edited by David Cannadine and Simon Price. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1987. 
Pucci, Joseph. The Full-Knowing Reader: Allusion and the Power of the Reader in the 
Western Literary Tradition. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998. 
Purcell, Nicholas. The Apparitores: A Study in Social Mobility. Papers of the British 
School at Rome 51 (1983): 125-173. 
Quinn, Josephine Crawley, and Andrew Wilson. Capitolia. JRS 103 (2013): 117-173. 
Radermacher, Ludwig. Neutestamentliche Grammatik: Das Griechisch des Neuen 
Testaments im Zusammenhang mit der Volkssprache. 2nd ed. Tbingen: Mohr, 1925. 
Radford, Gary P. On Eco. Wadsworth Philosophers Series. Australia: Thomson, 2003. 
Radiciotti, Paolo. Manoscritti digrafici grecolatini e latinogreci nell'antichit. 
Papyrologica lupiensia 6 (1997): 107-46. 
________. Virgilio: le fonti di interesse papirologico esaminate da un paleografo. Scripta: 
An International Journal of Codicology and Palaeography 3 (2010): 89-96. 
Rajak, Tessa. The Jewish Dialogue with Greece and Rome: Studies in Cultural and Social 
Interaction. Boston: Brill Academic Publishers, 2002. 
________. Translation and Survival: The Greek Bible of the Ancient Jewish Diaspora. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009. 
Ramage, Edwin S. The Nature and Purpose of Augustus Res gestae. Historia 54. Edited 
by Heinz Heinen, Hildegard Temporini, and Gerold Walser. Stuttgart: Steiner, 1987. 
Rapske, Brian M. Acts, Travel and Shipwreck. Pages 1-47 in The Book of Acts in Its 
Graeco-Roman Setting. Edited by David W. J. Gill and Conrad H. Gempf. Grand 
Rapids: Eerdmans, 1994. 
Redondo, Jordi. The Greek Literary Language of the Hebrew Historian Josephus. Hermes 
128.4 (2000): 420-34. 
Reed, David. Rethinking John's Social Setting: Hidden Transcript, Anti-Language, and the 
Negotiation of the Empire. BTB 36.3 (2006): 93-106. 
Reiff, Arno. Interpretatio, imitatio, aemulatio: Begriff und Vorstellung literarischer 
Abhngigkeit bei den Rmern. PhD thesis, Universitt Kln, 1959. 
Reinhartz, Adele. Befriending the Beloved Disciple: A Jewish Reading of the Gospel of John. 
New York: Continuum, 2001. 
________. Caiaphas and Annas: The Villains of the Piece?. Pages 530-36 in Character 
Studies in the Fourth Gospel: Narrative Approaches to Seventy Figures in John. 
Edited by Steven A. Hunt, D. Francois Tolmie, and Ruben Zimmermann. Tbingen: 
Mohr Siebeck, 2013. 
Bibliography            
________. The Colonizer as Colonized: Intertextual Dialogue between the Gospel of John 
and Canadian Identity. Pages 170-92 in John and Postcolonialism: Travel, Space 
and Power. Edited by Musa W. Dube and Jeffrey L. Staley. London: Sheffield 
Academic Press, 2002. 
________. The Gospel of John: How the Jews Became Part of the Plot. Pages 99-116 in 
Jesus, Judaism and Christian Anti-Judaism: Reading the New Testament after the 
Holocaust. Edited by Paula Fredriksen and Adele Reinhartz. Louisville: Westminster 
John Knox, 2002. 
________. Jesus as Prophet: Predictive Prolepses in the Fourth Gospel. JSNT.36 (1989): 
3-16. 
________. Jews and Jews in the Fourth Gospel. Pages 213-27 in Anti-Judaism and the 
Fourth Gospel: Papers of the Leuven Colloquium, 2000. Edited by R. Bieringer, D. 
Pollefeyt, and F. Vandecasteele-Vanneuville. Assen: Van Gorcum, 2001. 
________. John and Judaism: A Response to Burton Visotzky. Pages 108-116 in Life in 
Abundance: Studies of John's Gospel in Tribute to Raymond E. Brown, S.S. Edited 
by John R. Donahue. Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 2005. 
________. Love, Hate, and Violence in the Gospel of John. Pages 109-123 in Violence in 
the New Testament. Edited by Shelly Matthews and E. Leigh Gibson. New York: 
T&T Clark, 2005. 
Reinhold, Meyer. History of Purple as a Status Symbol in Antiquity. Collection Latomus 
116. Edited by Lon Herrmann and Marcel Renard. Bruxelles: Latomus, 1970. 
Rensberger, David. Overcoming the World: Politics and Community in the Gospel of John. 
London: SPCK, 1989. 
________. The Politics of John: The Trial of Jesus in the Fourth Gospel. JBL 103.3 (1984): 
395-411. 
Resseguie, James L. Narrative Criticism of the New Testament: An Introduction. Grand 
Rapids: Baker Academic, 2005. 
Revell, Louise. Roman Imperialism and Local Identities. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2009. 
Rey-Coquais, Jean-Paul. Onomastique et histoire de la Syrie grco-romaine. Pages 171-
183 in Actes du VIIe congrs international d'pigraphie grecque et latine, 
Constantza, 9-15 septembre 1977. Edited by D. M. Pippidi. Constanza, Dominican 
Republic: Socit d'dition Les belles lettres, 1977. 
Reynolds, J. M. Vota pro salute principis. Papers of the British School at Rome 30 (1962): 
33-36. 
Reynolds, Joyce, and J. A. Lloyd. Cyrene. Pages 619-640 in CAH. Edited by Alan K. 
Bowman, Edward Champlin, and Andrew Lintott, X: The Augustan Empire, 43 
B.C.A.D. 69. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
Rich, John. Patronage and Interstate Relations in the Roman Republic. Pages 117-135 in 
Patronage in Ancient Society. Edited by Andrew Wallace-Hadrill. London: 
Routledge, 1989. 
Richey, Lance Byron. Roman Imperial Ideology and the Gospel of John. Washington, DC: 
Catholic Biblical Association of America, 2007. 
Richter, Daniel S. Cosmopolis: Imagining Community in Late Classical Athens and the 
Early Roman Empire. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011. 
Rickman, G. E. The Grain Trade under the Roman Empire. Memoirs of the American 
Academy in Rome 36 (1980): 261-75. 
Ridderbos, Herman N. The Gospel According to John: A Theological Commentary. 
Translated by John Vriend. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1997. 
Rieger, Joerg. Christ & Empire: From Paul to Postcolonial Times. Minneapolis: Fortress, 
2007. 
Bibliography            
Riggsby, Andrew M. Roman Law and the Legal World of the Romans. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
Ripley, Jason J. Behold the Man? Subverting Imperial Masculinity in the Gospel of John. 
Journal of the Bible and its Reception 2.2 (2015): 219-39. 
________. The Genre of John and the Rule of Rome: Imperial Readers, Johannine 
Testimony, and the Death of the Author. Paper presented at the Gospel of John as 
Genre Mosaic Conference, Aarhus University, Denmark, June 24, 2014. 
________. Glorious Death, Imperial Rome, and the Gospel of John. Paper presented at the 
Annual Meeting of the Society of Biblical Literature, November 17, 2012. 
________. Killing as Piety? Exploring Ideological Contexts Shaping the Gospel of John. 
JBL 134.3 (2015): 605-635. 
Roberts, Alexander, and James Donaldson. The Ante-Nicene Fathers: Translations of the 
Writings of the Fathers Down to A. D. 325. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1950. 
Robertson, A. T. A Grammar of the Greek New Testament in the Light of Historical 
Research. 3rd ed. London: Hodder & Stoughton, 1919. 
Robinson, John A. T. His Witness Is True; a Test of the Johannine Claim. Pages 453-76 
in Jesus and the Politics of His Day. Edited by Ernst Bammel and C. F. D. Moule. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984. 
________. The Priority of John. Edited by J. F. Coakley. London: SCM Press, 1985. 
Rochette, Bruno. Greek and Latin Bilingualism. Pages 281-93 in A Companion to the 
Ancient Greek Language. Edited by Egbert J. Bakker. Malden, MA: Wiley-
Blackwell, 2010. 
________. Lenseignement du latin comme L dans la Pars Orientis de lEmpire romain: 
les Hermeneumata Pseudodositheana. Pages 81-109 in Aspetti della scuola nel 
mondo romano: atti del covegno (Pisa, 5-6 dicembre 2006). Edited by Franco 
Ballandi and Rolando Ferri. Amsterdam: Hakkert, 2008. 
________. Language Policies in the Roman Republic and Empire. Pages 549-63 in A 
Companion to the Latin Language. Edited by James Clackson. Malden, MA: Wiley-
Blackwell, 2011. 
________. Le latin dans le monde grec: Recherches sur la diffusion de la langue et des 
lettres latines dans les provinces hellnophones de l'empire romain. Brussels: 
Latomus, 1997. 
________. Les traductions grecques de l'nide sur papyrus. tudes classiques 58 (1990): 
333-346. 
________. Sur le bilinguisme dans l'gypte grco-romaine. CdE 71 (1996): 153-68. 
Rogers, Guy MacLean. The Sacred Identity of Ephesos: Foundation Myths of a Roman City. 
London: Routledge, 1991. 
Romaine, Suzanne. Socio-Historical Linguistics: Its Status and Methodology. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1982. 
Rouech, Charlotte. Acclamations in the Later Roman Empire: New Evidence from 
Aphrodisias. JRS 74 (1984): 181-199. 
Rubin, Benjamin B. (Re)Presenting Empire: The Roman Imperial Cult in Asia Minor, 31 
BC-AD 68. PhD thesis, University of Michigan, 2008. 
Rutherford, Ian. Interference or Translationese? Some Patterns in Lycian-Greek 
Bilingualism. Pages 197-219 in Bilingualism in Ancient Society: Language Contact 
and the Written Text. Edited by James N. Adams, Mark Janse, and Simon Swain. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002. 
Ryan, Ellen Bouchard, and Howard Giles. Attitudes Towards Language Variation: Social 
and Applied Contexts. London: Arnold, 1982. 
Salier, Bill. Jesus, the Emperor, and the Gospel According to John. Pages 284-301 in 
Challenging Perspectives on the Gospel of John. Edited by John Lierman. Tbingen: 
Mohr Siebeck, 2006. 
Bibliography            
Saller, Richard. Personal Patronage under the Early Empire. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1982. 
________. Status and Patronage. Pages 817-54 in CAH. Edited by Alan K. Bowman, Peter 
Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone, XI: The High Empire, A.D. 70192. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
Salomies, Olli. Honorific Inscriptions for Roman Senators in the Greek East During the 
Empire: Some Aspects (with Special Reference to Cursus Inscriptions). Pages 141-
87 in The Greek East in the Roman Context: Proceedings of a Colloquium Organised 
by the Finnish Institute at Athens, May 21 and 22, 1999. Edited by Olli Salomies, 7. 
Helsinki: Vammalan Kirjapaino Oy, 2001. 
Sanders, J. N. The Fourth Gospel in the Early Church: Its Origin and Influence on Christian 
Theology up to Irenaeus. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1943. 
Sandmel, Samuel. Parallelomania. JBL 81.1 (1962): 1-13. 
Sandnes, Karl Olav. The Gospel According to Homer and Virgil: Cento and Canon. 
NovTSup 138. Leiden: Brill, 2011. 
Sartre, Maurice. D'Alexandre  Znobie: Histoire du Levant antique, IVe sicle avant J.-C.-
IIIe sicle aprs J.-C. Paris: Fayard, 2001. 
________. Syria and Arabia. Pages 635-63 in CAH. Edited by Alan K. Bowman, Peter 
Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone, XI: The High Empire, A.D. 70192. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
Savan, David. An Introduction to C.S. Peirce's Full System of Semeiotic. Monograph Series 
of the TSC 1. Toronto: Toronto Semiotic Circle, 1988. 
Scappaticcio, Maria Chiara. Tra ecdotica e performance: per un corpus papyrorum 
Vergilianarum. APF 56.1 (2010): 130-48. 
Scheffler, Eben. The Historical Jesus and (Non-)Violence: A Contemporary Challenge. 
Pages 91-115 in The Bible and Violance in Africa: Papers Presented at the BiAS 
Meeting 2014 in Windhoek (Namibia), with Some Additional Contributions. Edited 
by Johannes Hunter and Joachim Kgler. Bamberg: University of Bamberg Press, 
2016. 
________. Jesus Non-Violence at His Arrest: The Synoptics and John's Gospel 
Compared. Pages 739-49 in The Death of Jesus in the Fourth Gospel. Edited by G. 
Van Belle. Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2007. 
Schefold, Karl. Orient, Hellas und Rom in der archologischen Forschung seit 1939. 
Wissenschaftliche Forschungsberichte: Geisteswissenschaftliche Reihe 15. Edited 
by Karl Hnn. Bern: Francke, 1949. 
Schimanowski, Gottfried. Die jdische Integration in die Oberschicht Alexandriens und die 
angebliche Apostasie des Tiberius Julius Alexander. Pages 111-35 in Jewish 
Identity in the Greco-Roman World: Jdische Identitt in der griechisch-rmischen 
Welt. Edited by Jrg Frey, Daniel R. Schwartz, and Stephanie Gripentrog. Leiden: 
Brill, 2007. 
Schlier, Heinrich. The Relevance of the New Testament. Translated by W. J. O'Hara. New 
York: Herder and Herder, 1968. 
Schmidt, T. E. Mark 15.1632: The Crucifixion Narrative and the Roman Triumphal 
Procession. NTS 41.1 (1995): 1-18. 
Schmitt, Rdiger. Die Sprachverhltnisse in den stlichen Provinzen des rmischen 
Reiches. ANRW 29.2: 554-86. Edited by Wolfgang Haase. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1983. 
Schnackenburg, Rudolf. The Gospel According to St John. Translated by Kevin Smyth. Vol. 
1: Introduction and Commentary on Chapters 14. 3 vols. HThKNT. Edited by 
Serafn de Ausejo, et al. London: Burns & Oates, 1968. 
________. The Gospel According to St John. Translated by Cecily Hastings, et al. Vol. 2: 
Commentary on Chapters 512. 3 vols. New York: Seabury, 1980. 
Bibliography            
________. The Gospel According to St John. Translated by David Smith and G. A. Kon. 
Vol. 3: Commentary on Chapters 1321. 3 vols. HThKNT. Edited by Serafin de 
Ausejo, et al. New York: Crossroad, 1982. 
Schneiders, Sandra M. Written That You May Believe: Encountering Jesus in the Fourth 
Gospel. 2nd ed. New York: Crossroad, 2003. 
Schnelle, Udo. Das Evangelium nach Johannes. THKNT 4. Edited by Jens Herzer and Udo 
Schnelle. Leipzig: Evangelische Verlagsanstalt, 1998. 
________. Theology of the New Testament. Translated by M. Eugene Boring. Grand Rapids: 
Baker, 2009. 
Schssler Fiorenza, Elisabeth. The Power of the Word: Scripture and the Rhetoric of Empire. 
Minneapolis: Fortress, 2007. 
Schwartz, Daniel R. Agrippa I: The Last King of Judaea. TSAJ 23. Edited by Martin Hengel 
and Peter Schafer. Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1990. 
Scott, James C. Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden Transcripts. New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 1990. 
________. Protest and Profanation: Agrarian Revolt and the Little Tradition, Part I. Theory 
and Society 4.1 (1977): 1-38. 
________. Protest and Profanation: Agrarian Revolt and the Little Tradition, Part II. 
Theory and Society 4.2 (1977): 211-246. 
________. Weapons of the Weak: Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance. New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 1985. 
Sebba, Mark. Researching and Theorising Multilingual Texts. Pages 1-26 in Language 
Mixing and Code-Switching in Writing: Approaches to Mixed-Language Written 
Discourse. Edited by Mark Sebba, Shahrzad Mahootian, and Carla Jonsson. New 
York: Routledge, 2012. 
Seeley, David. The Noble Death: Graeco-Roman Martyrology and Paul's Concept of 
Salvation. JSNTSup 28. Edited by David Hill. Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1990. 
Segovia, Fernando F. The Gospel of John. Pages 156-93 in A Postcolonial Commentary 
on the New Testament Writings. Edited by Fernando F. Segovia and R. S. 
Sugirtharajah. London: T & T Clark, 2007. 
________. Johannine Studies and the Geopolitical: Reflections Upon Absence and 
Irruption. Pages 281-306 in What We Have Heard from the Beginning: The Past, 
Present, and Future of Johannine Studies. Edited by Tom Thatcher. Waco, TX: 
Baylor University Press, 2007. 
Seider, Richard. Beitrge zur Geschichte und Palographie der antiken Vergilhandschriften. 
Edited by Ernst Heitsch, Reinhold Merkelbach, and Clemens Zintzen. Studien zum 
antiken Epos 72. Edited by Herwig Grgemanns and Ernst A. Schmidt. Meisenheim 
am Glan: Anton Hain, 1976. 
Senior, Donald. The Passion of Jesus in the Gospel of John. The Passion Series 4. 
Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 1991. 
Sevenster, G. Remarks on the Humanity of Jesus in the Gospel and Letters of John. Pages 
185-93 in Studies in John: Presented to Professor Dr. J. N. Sevenster on the 
Occasion of His Seventieth Birthday. Edited by Karel Hanhart. Leiden: Brill, 1970. 
Sharifian, Farzad. Cultural Conceptualisations and Language: Theoretical Framework and 
Applications. CLSCC. Edited by Ning Yu and Farzad Sharifian. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins, 2011. 
Shaw, Brent D. Rebels and Outsiders. Pages 361-403 in CAH. Edited by Alan K. Bowman, 
Peter Garnsey, and Dominic Rathbone, XI: The High Empire, A.D. 70192. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
Shaw, David A. Converted Imaginations? The Reception of Richard Hays's Intertextual 
Method. CurBR 11.2 (2013): 234-45. 
Bibliography            
Shelfer, Lochlan. The Legal Precision of the Term Parakltos. JSNT 32.2 (2009): 131-
Sheppard, Beth M. The Gospel of John: A Roman Legal and Rhetorical Perspective. PhD 
thesis, University of Sheffield, 1999. 
Sheridan, Ruth. Identity, Alterity, and the Gospel of John. BibInt 22 (2014): 188-209. 
________. Johannine Sectarianism: A Category Now Defunct?. Pages 142-66 in The 
Origins of Johns Gospel. Edited by Stanley E. Porter and Hughson T. Ong. Leiden: 
Brill, 2015. 
________. Retelling Scripture: The Jews and the Scriptural Citations in John 1:19-12:50. 
BibInt 110. Leiden: Brill, 2012. 
Sherk, Robert K. Roman Documents from the Greek East: Senatus Consulta and Epistulae 
to the Age of Augustus. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1969. 
________. The Roman Empire: Augustus to Hadrian. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1988. 
Sherwin-White, A. N. The Letters of Pliny: A Historical and Social Commentary. Oxford: 
Clarendon, 1966. 
________. Roman Society and Roman Law in the New Testament. The Sarum Lectures 1960-
1961. Grand Rapids: Baker, 1963. 
Sick, David H. The Architriklinos at Cana. JBL 130.3 (2011): 513-526. 
Sidebottom, Harry. Roman Imperialism: The Changed Outward Trajectory of the Roman 
Empire. Historia 54.3 (2005): 315-330. 
Simoens, Yves. Un pouvoir peut en cacher un autre; un pch aussi: Interprtation de Jn 
19,11. Pages 531-57 in Rediscovering John: Essays on the Fourth Gospel in Honour 
of Frdric Manns. Edited by L. Daniel Chrupcala. Milan: Edizioni Terra Santa, 
2013. 
Sittl, Karl. Die Gebrden der Griechen und Rmer. Leipzig: Teubner, 1890. 
Skinner, Christopher W. John's Gospel and the Roman Imperial Context: An Evaluation of 
Recent Proposals. Pages 116-29 in Jesus Is Lord, Caesar Is Not: Evaluating Empire 
in New Testament Studies. Edited by Scot McKnight and Joseph B. Modica. Downers 
Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2013. 
Skinner, Matthew L. The Trial Narratives: Conflict, Power, and Identity in the New 
Testament. Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2010. 
Small, Jocelyn Penny. Wax Tablets of the Mind: Cognitive Studies of Memory and Literacy 
in Classical Antiquity. London; New York: Routledge, 1997. 
Smith, D. Moody. Johannine Christianity. London: T&T Clark, 2005. 
Smith, Julien. Christ the Ideal King: Cultural Context, Rhetorical Strategy, and the Power 
of Divine Monarchy in Ephesians. Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2011. 
Smith, Kirby Flower. The Later Tradition of Vergil. Classical Weekly 9.23 (1916): 178-
Smyth, Herbert Weir, and Gordon M. Messing. Greek Grammar. 2nd ed. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press, 1956. 
Sding, Thomas. Die Macht der Wahrheit und das Reich der Freiheit: Zur johanneischen 
Deutung des Pilatus-Prozesses (Joh 18,28 - 19,16). ZTK 93 (1996): 35-58. 
Sommer, Benjamin D. A Prophet Reads Scripture: Allusion in Isaiah 40-66. Contraversions: 
Jews and Other Differences. Edited by Daniel Boyarin and Chana Kronfeld. 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1998. 
Staats, Reinhart. Pontius Pilatus im Bekenntnis der frhen Kirche. ZTK 84.4 (1987): 493-
Stanley, Christopher D. Arguing with Scripture: The Rhetoric of Quotations in the Letters of 
Paul. New York: T&T Clark International, 2004. 
________. Paul and the Language of Scripture: Citation Technique in the Pauline Epistles 
and Contemporary Literature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992. 
Bibliography            
________. The Rhetoric of Quotations: An Essay on Method. Pages 44-58 in Early 
Christian Interpretation of the Scriptures of Israel: Investigations and Proposals. 
Edited by Craig A. Evans and James A. Sanders. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic 
Press, 1997. 
Steele, John Aulay. The Pavement. ExpTim 34.12 (1923): 562-63. 
Stegemann, Ekkehard W., and Wolfgang Stegemann. The Jesus Movement: A Social History 
of Its First Century. Translated by O. C. Dean, Jr. T&T Clark: Edinburgh, 1999. 
Steiner, George. After Babel: Aspects of Language and Translation. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1975. 
Sternberg, Meir. Proteus in Quotation-Land: Mimesis and the Forms of Reported 
Discourse. Poetics Today 3.2 (1982): 107-156. 
Stibbe, Mark W. G. John. Readings: A New Biblical Commentary. Sheffield: JSOT Press, 
1993. 
________. John as Storyteller: Narrative Criticism and the Fourth Gospel. SNTSMS 73. 
Edited by G. N. Stanton. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992. 
Stolte, Bernard. Jurisdiction and the Representation of Power, or the Emperor on Circuit. 
Pages 261-68 in The Representation and Perception of Roman Imperial Power: 
Proceedings of the Third Workshop of the International Network Impact of Empire 
(Roman Empire, c. 200 B.C. - A.D. 476), Netherlands Institute in Rome, March 20-
23, 2002. Edited by Lukas de Blois, et al. Amsterdam: J.C. Gieben, 2003. 
Stovell, Beth M. Mapping Metaphorical Discourse in the Fourth Gospel: John's Eternal 
King. Linguistic Biblical Studies 5. Edited by Stanley E. Porter. Leiden: Brill, 2012. 
Strait, Drew J. Proclaiming Another King Named Jesus? The Acts of the Apostles and the 
Roman Imperial Cult(s). Pages 130-45 in Jesus Is Lord, Caesar Is Not: Evaluating 
Empire in New Testament Studies. Edited by Scot McKnight and Joseph B. Modica. 
Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2013. 
Strange, James F. The Art and Archaeology of Ancient Judaism. Pages 64-114 in Judaism 
in Late Antiquity: Part One: The Literary and Archaeological Sources. Edited by 
Jacob Neusner, 1. Boston: Brill, 2001. 
Strelan, Rick. Paul, Artemis, and the Jews in Ephesus. BZNW 80. Edited by Erich Grer. 
Berlin: de Gruyter, 1996. 
Stuckenbruck, Loren T. An Approach to the New Testament through Aramaic Sources: The 
Recent Methodological Debate. JSP.8 (1991): 3-29. 
Svennung, J. Anredeformen: Vergleichende Forschungen zur indirekten Anrede in der 
dritten Person und zum Nominativ fr den Vokativ. Acta Societatis Litterarum 
Humaniorum Regiae Upsaliensis 42. Uppsala: Almqvist & Wiksell, 1958. 
Swain, Simon. Arrian the Epic Poet. JHS 111 (1991): 211-14. 
________. Bilingualism in Cicero? The Evidence of Code-Switching. Pages 128-67 in 
Bilingualism in Ancient Society: Language Contact and the Written Text. Edited by 
James N. Adams, Mark Janse, and Simon Swain. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2002. 
________. Hellenism and Empire: Language, Classicism, and Power in the Greek World, 
AD 50-250. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996. 
Swan, Peter Michael. Augustan Succession: An Historical Commentary on Cassius Dio's 
Roman History Books 55-56 (9 B. C.-A. D. 14). Amercian Classical Studies 47. 
Edited by Donald J. Mastronarde. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004. 
Swanson, Tod D. To Prepare a Place: Johannine Christianity and the Collapse of Ethnic 
Territory. Pages 11-30 in John and Postcolonialism: Travel, Space and Power. 
Edited by Musa W. Dube and Jeffrey L. Staley. London: Sheffield Academic Press, 
2002. 
Taeuber, Hans. Einblicke in die Privatsphre: Die Evidenz der Graffiti aus dem Hanghaus 
2 in Ephesos. Pages 487-89 in ffentlichkeit-Monument-Text: XIV Congressus 
Bibliography            
Internationalis Epigraphiae Graecae et Latinae 27.-31. Augusti MMXII: Akten. 
Edited by Werner Eck and Peter Funke. Berlin: de Gruyter, 2014. 
Tajfel, Henri. Differentiation between Social Groups: Studies in the Social Psychology of 
Intergroup Relations. European Monographs in Social Psychology 14. Edited by 
Henri Tajfel. London: Academic Press, 1978. 
Talbert, Charles H. Reading John: A Literary and Theological Commentary on the Fourth 
Gospel and the Johannine Epistles. 2nd ed. Macon, GA: Smyth & Helwys, 2005. 
Tarrant, R. J. Aspects of Virgil's Reception in Antiquity. Pages 56-72 in The Cambridge 
Companion to Virgil. Edited by Charles Martindale. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1997. 
Taussig, Hal. Prologue: A Door Thrown Open. USQR 59.3-4 (2005): 1-5. 
Taylor, David G. K. Bilingualism and Diglossia in Late Antique Syria and Mesopotamia. 
Pages 298-331 in Bilingualism in Ancient Society: Language Contact and the Written 
Text. Edited by James N. Adams, Mark Janse, and Simon Swain. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2002. 
Taylor, Justin. Why Were the Disciples First Called Christians at Antioch? (Acts 11, 26). 
RB 101.1 (1994): 75-94. 
Thatcher, Tom. Greater Than Caesar: Christology and Empire in the Fourth Gospel. 
Minneapolis: Fortress, 2009. 
________. I Have Conquered the World: The Death of Jesus and the End of Empire in 
the Gospel of John. Pages 140-63 in Empire in the New Testament. Edited by 
Stanley E. Porter and Cynthia Long Westfall. Eugene, OR: Pickwick, 2011. 
________. The Semeiotics of History: C. H. Dodd on the Origins and Character of the 
Fourth Gospel. Pages 1-28 in Engaging with C.H. Dodd on the Gospel of John: Sixty 
Years of Tradition and Interpretation. Edited by Tom Thatcher and Catrin H. 
Williams. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013. 
Thiel, Nathan. Israel and Jew as Markers of Jewish Identity in Antiquity: The Problems 
of Insider/Outsider Classification. JSJ 45.1 (2014): 80-99. 
________. Like (Fore)Fathers Like Sons: The Wandering Israelites and the Johannine 
Jews. Paper presented at the 2016 Joint Regional Meeting of the Midwest Region 
Society of Biblical Literature, the Middle West Brand of the American Oriental 
Society and the American Schools of Oriental Research-Midwest, Bourbonnais, IL, 
6 February, 2016. 
Thiessen, Werner. Christen in Ephesus: die historische und theologische Situation in 
vorpaulinischer und paulinischer Zeit und zur Zeit der Apostelgeschichte und der 
Pastoralbriefe. Texte und Arbeiten zum Neutestamentlichen Zeitalter 12. Edited by 
Klaus Berger, et al. Tbingen: Francke, 1995. 
Thomas, Christine M. At Home in the City of Artemis: Religion in Ephesos in the Literary 
Imagination of the Roman Period. Pages 81-117 in Ephesos, Metropolis of Asia: An 
Interdisciplinary Approach to Its Archaeology, Religion, and Culture. Edited by 
Helmut Koester. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1995. 
Thomasson, Bengt E. The Eastern Roman Provinces Till Diocletian: A Rapid Survey. 
Pages 1-9 in The Greek East in the Roman Context: Proceedings of a Colloquium 
Organised by the Finnish Institute at Athens, May 21 and 22, 1999. Edited by Olli 
Salomies. Helsinki: Vammalan Kirjapaino Oy, 2001. 
Thompson, Edward Maunde. On a Latin Deed of Sale of a Slave: 24th May, A.D. 166. 
Archaeologia 54 (1895): 433-38. 
Thompson, Herbert. The Gospel of St. John According to the Earliest Coptic Manuscript. 
London: British School of Archaeology in Egypt, 1924. 
Thompson, Marianne Meye. The Incarnate Word: Perspectives on Jesus in the Fourth 
Gospel. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1993. 
Bibliography            
________. John: A Commentary. NTL. Edited by C. Clifton Black, M. Eugene Boring, and 
John T. Carroll. Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2015. 
Thompson, Michael. Clothed with Christ: The Example and Teaching of Jesus in Romans 
12.1-15.13. JSNTSup 59. Edited by David Hill. Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1991. 
Tilborg, Sjef van. Reading John in Ephesus. NovTSup 83. Edited by A. J. Malherbe and D. 
P. Moessner. Leiden: Brill, 1996. 
Tipping, Ben. Virtue and Narrative in Silius Italicus Pvnica. Pages 193-218 in Brill's 
Companion to Silius Italicus. Edited by Antony Augoustakis. Leiden: Brill, 2010. 
Tolbert, Mary Ann. Writing History, Writing Culture, Writing Ourselves. Pages 17-30 in 
Soundings in Cultural Criticism: Perspectives and Methods in Culture, Power, and 
Identity in the New Testament. Edited by Francisco Lozada, Jr. and Greg Carey. 
Minneapolis: Fortress, 2013. 
Tolmie, D. Francois. Die vertaling van  [eksousia] in Johannes 1:12. HvTSt 68.1 
(2012). 
________. Pontius Pilate: Failing in More Ways Than One. Pages 578-97 in Character 
Studies in the Fourth Gospel: Narrative Approaches to Seventy Figures in John. 
Edited by Steven A. Hunt, D. Francois Tolmie, and Ruben Zimmermann. Tbingen: 
Mohr Siebeck, 2013. 
Trebilco, Paul. Asia. Pages 291-362 in The Book of Acts in Its Graeco-Roman Setting. 
Edited by David W. J. Gill and Conrad H. Gempf. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1994. 
________. The Early Christians in Ephesus from Paul to Ignatius. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 
2004. 
Trost, Travis D. Who Should Be King in Israel? A Study on Roman Imperial Politics, the 
Dead Sea Scrolls, and the Fourth Gospel. Studies in Biblical Literature 139. Edited 
by Hemchand Gossai. New York: Lang, 2010. 
Tuck, Steven L. A History of Roman Art. Chichester: Wiley, 2014. 
Tucker, J. Brian. Remain in Your Calling: Paul and the Continuation of Social Identities in 
1 Corinthians. Eugene, OR: Pickwick, 2011. 
________. You Belong to Christ: Paul and the Formation of Social Identity in 1 Corinthians 
14 Eugene, OR: Pickwick, 2010. 
Tuckett, Christopher M. Pilate in John 18-19: A Narrative-Critical Approach. Pages 131-
40 in Narrativity in Biblical and Related Texts: La narrativit dans la bible et les 
textes apparents. Edited by George J. Brooke and Jean-Daniel Kaestli. Leuven: 
Leuven University Press, 2000. 
Turcan, Robert. Les sarcophages romains  reprsentations dionysiaques: essai de 
chronologie et d'histoire religieuse. Bibliothque des coles franaises d'Athnes et 
de Rome 210. Paris: de Boccard, 1966. 
Turner, E. G. Greek Papyri: An Introduction. Oxford: Clarendon, 1968. 
Turner, John C., and Roger Brown. Social Status, Cognitive Alternatives and Intergroup 
Relations. Pages 201-34 in Differentiation between Social Groups: Studies in the 
Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations. Edited by Henri Tajfel. London: 
Academic Press, 1978. 
Ullendorff, Edward. George Steiner's After Babel. Bulletin of the School of Oriental and 
African Studies, University of London 39.2 (1976): 403-420. 
Van Belle, Gilbert. Les parenthses dans l'vangile de Jean. Aperu historique et 
classification: Texte grec de Jean. SNTA 11. Edited by Frans Neirynck. Leuven: 
Leuven University Press, 1985. 
van Berchem, Denis. Le port de Slucie de Pirie et l'infrastructure logistique des guerres 
parthiques. Bonner Jahrbcher des Rheinischen Landesmuseums in Bonn im 
Landschaftsverbund Rheinland und des Vereins von Altertumsfreunden im 
Rheinlande 185 (1985): 47-87. 
Bibliography            
van den Heever, Gerhard. Finding Data in Unexpected Places (Or: From Text Linguistics 
to Socio-Rhetoric): Towards a Socio-Rhetorical Reading of John's Gospel. Neot 
33.2 (1999): 343-364. 
________. From the Pragmatics of Textures to a Christian Utopia: The Case of the Gospel 
of John. Pages 297-334 in Rhetorical Criticism and the Bible. Edited by Stanley E. 
Porter and Dennis L. Stamps. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic, 2002. 
________. Space, Social Space, and the Construction of Early Christian Identity in First 
Century Asia Minor. R&T 17.3/4 (2010): 205-243. 
van der Watt, Jan G. Double entendre in the Gospel According to John. Pages 463-81 in 
Theology and Christology in the Fourth Gospel: Essays by the Members of the SNTS 
Johannine Writings Seminar. Edited by G. Van Belle, J. G. van der Watt, and P. 
Maritz. Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2005. 
________. Family of the King: Dynamics of Metaphor in the Gospel According to John. 
BibInt 47. Edited by R. Alan Culpepper and Rolf Rendtorff. Leiden: Brill, 2000. 
Van Voorst, Robert E. Sources, Extra-New Testamental. Pages 602-606 in Encyclopedia 
of the Historical Jesus. Edited by Craig A. Evans. New York: Routledge, 2008. 
Vandiver, Elizabeth. The Aeneid of Virgil. MP3. Springfield, VA: Teaching Company, 2000. 
Varner, Eric R. Mutilation and Transformation: Damnatio memoriae and Roman Imperial 
Portraiture. Monumenta Graeca et Romana 10. Edited by H. F. Mussche. Leiden: 
Brill, 2004. 
Verheyden, Joseph. De la Potterie on John 19,13. Pages 817-37 in The Death of Jesus in 
the Fourth Gospel. Edited by G. Van Belle. Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2007. 
Versnel, H. S. Triumphus: An Inquiry into the Origin, Development and Meaning of the 
Roman Triumph. Leiden: Brill, 1970. 
Versteegh, Kees. Dead or Alive? The Status of the Standard Language. Pages 52-74 in 
Bilingualism in Ancient Society: Language Contact and the Written Text. Edited by 
James N. Adams, Mark Janse, and Simon Swain. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2002. 
Viereck, Paul. Sermo graecus quo senatus populusque Romanus magistratusque populi 
Romani usque ad Tiberii Caesaris aetatem in scriptis publicis usi sunt examinatur. 
Gttingen: Vandenhoeck, 1888. 
Virgil. The neid of Virgil. Translated by Theodore Chickering Williams. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1910. 
Visotzky, Burton L. Methodological Considerations in the Study of John's Interaction with 
First-Century Judaism. Pages 91-107 in Life in Abundance: Studies of John's Gospel 
in Tribute to Raymond E. Brown, S.S. Edited by John R. Donahue. Collegeville, MN: 
Liturgical Press, 2005. 
Vitelli, G., and D. Comparetti. Papiri Greco-Egizii. Vol. 1: Papiri fiorentini: Documenti 
pubblici e privati dell'et romana e bizantina. Supplementi filologico-storici ai 
monumenti antichi. Milan: Hoepli, 1906. 
Voelz, James W. The Greek of the New Testament: Its Place within the Context of 
Hellenistic Greek. Pages 177-195 in Greek: A Language in Evolution: Essays in 
Honour of Antonios N. Jannaris. Edited by Chrys C. Caragounis. Hildesheim: Olms, 
2010. 
Volf, Miroslav. Exclusion and Embrace: A Theological Exploration of Identity, Otherness, 
and Reconciliation. Nashville: Abingdon, 1996. 
Vorderstrasse, Tasha. The Romanization and Christianization of the Antiochene Region: 
The Material Evidence from Three Sites. Pages 86-101 in Culture and Society in 
Later Roman Antioch: Papers from a Colloquium London, 15th December 2001. 
Edited by Isabella Sandwell and Janet Huskinson. Oxford, UK: Oxbow, 2004. 
Waetjen, Herman C. The Gospel of the Beloved Disciple: A Work in Two Editions. New 
York: T&T Clark, 2005. 
Bibliography            
Walbank, Mary E. Hoskins. Review of Guy MacLean Rogers, The Sacred Identity of 
Ephesos: Foundation Myths of a Roman City. Phoenix 48 (1994): 89-91. 
Wallace, Daniel B. Greek Grammar Beyond the Basics: An Exegetical Syntax of the New 
Testament. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1996. 
Wallace-Hadrill, Andrew. Civilis Princeps: Between Citizen and King. JRS 72 (1982): 32-
________. The Imperial Court. Pages 283-308 in CAH. Edited by Alan K. Bowman, 
Edward Champlin, and Andrew Lintott, X: The Augustan Empire, 43 B.C.A.D. 69. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
Walters, Kate A., and Faith P. Auton-Cuff. A Story to Tell: The Identity Development of 
Women Growing up as Third Culture Kids. Mental Health, Religion & Culture 12.7 
(2009): 755-72. 
Walton, C. S. Oriental Senators in the Service of Rome: A Study of Imperial Policy Down 
to the Death of Marcus Aurelius. JRS 19 (1929): 38-66. 
Ward, J. S. Roman Greek: Latinisms in the Greek of Flavius Josephus. ClQ 57.2 (2007): 
632-649. 
Wardhaugh, Ronald. An Introduction to Sociolinguistics. 6th ed. Chichester: Wiley-
Blackwell, 2010. 
Warner, Martin. The Fourth Gospel's Art of Rational Persuasion. Pages 153-77 in The 
Bible as Rhetoric: Studies in Biblical Persuasion and Credibility. Edited by Martin 
Warner. London: Routledge, 1990. 
Warren, Larissa Bonfante. Roman Triumphs and Etruscan Kings: The Changing Face of 
the Triumph. JRS 60 (1970): 49-66. 
Watt, Jonathan M. A Brief History of Ancient Greek with a View to the New Testament. 
Pages 225-41 in The Language of the New Testament: Context, History, and 
Development. Edited by Stanley E. Porter and Andrew W. Pitts. Leiden: Brill, 2013. 
________. Some Implications of Bilingualism for New Testament Exegesis. Pages 9-27 in 
The Language of the New Testament: Context, History, and Development. Edited by 
Stanley E. Porter and Andrew W. Pitts. Leiden: Brill, 2013. 
Weaver, Paul. Consilium praesidis: Advising Governors. Pages 44-62 in Thinking Like a 
Lawyer: Essays on Legal History, History and General History for John Crook on 
His Eightieth Birthday. Edited by Paul McKechnie. Leiden: Brill, 2002. 
Weinreich, Uriel. Languages in Contact, Findings and Problems. New York: Linguistic 
Circle of New York, 1953. 
Wendland, Paul. Jesus als Saturnalien-Knig. Hermes 33.1 (1898): 175-79. 
Wengst, Klaus. Pax Romana and the Peace of Jesus Christ. Translated by John Bowden. 
Philadelphia: Fortress, 1987. 
Wheaton, Gerry. The Role of Jewish Feasts in John's Gospel. SNTSMS 162. Edited by Paul 
Trebilco. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015. 
White, L. Michael. Capitalizing on the Imperial Cult: Some Jewish Perspectives. Pages 
173-214 in Rome and Religion: A Cross-Disciplinary Dialogue on the Imperial Cult. 
Edited by Jeffrey Brodd and Jonathan L. Reed. Atlanta: SBL Press, 2011. 
________. Urban Development and Social Change in Imperial Ephesos. Pages 27-79 in 
Ephesos, Metropolis of Asia: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Its Archaeology, 
Religion, and Culture. Edited by Helmut Koester. Cambridge: Harvard University 
Press, 1995. 
Whitmarsh, Tim. Greek Literature and the Roman Empire: The Politics of Imitation. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2001. 
Whitney, Gordon E. A Semiotic Approach to Old Testament Fulfillment Citations in the 
Fourth Gospel. Paper presented at the the Annual Meeting of the Evangelical 
Theological Society, Wheaton, IL, 1988. 
Bibliography            
Whittaker, C. R. Frontiers of the Roman Empire: A Social and Economic Study. Baltimore: 
The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994. 
________. Mental Maps: Seeing Like a Roman. Pages 81-112 in Thinking Like a Lawyer: 
Essays on Legal History, History and General History for John Crook on His 
Eightieth Birthday. Edited by Paul McKechnie. Leiden: Brill, 2002. 
Wick, Peter. Jesus gegen Dionysos? Ein Beitrag zur Kontextualisierung des 
Johannesevangeliums. Bib 85.2 (2004): 179-98. 
Wiedemann, T. E. J. From Nero to Vespasian. Pages 256-82 in CAH. Edited by Alan K. 
Bowman, Edward Champlin, and Andrew Lintott, X: The Augustan Empire, 43 
B.C.A.D. 69. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
Wiesen, David S. Virgil, Minucius Felix and the Bible. Hermes 99.1 (1971): 70-91. 
Wigtil, David N. The Ideology of the Greek Res gestae. ANRW 30.1: 624-38. Edited by 
Wolfgang Haase. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1982. 
________. The Translator of the Greek Res gestae of Augustus. AJP 103.2 (1982): 189-
Wilken, Robert Louis. The Christians as the Romans Saw Them. 2nd ed. New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 2003. 
Williams, Catrin H. Another Look at Lifting up in the Gospel of John. Pages 58-70 in 
Conception, Reception, and the Spirit: Essays in Honor of Andrew T. Lincoln. Edited 
by J. G. McConville and Lloyd Pietersen. Eugene, OR: Cascade, 2015. 
________. I Am He: The Interpretation of An H in Jewish and Early Christian Literature. 
WUNT 2.113. Edited by Martin Hengel and Otfried Hofius. Tbingen: Mohr 
Siebeck, 2000. 
Williams, Craig A. Reading Roman Friendship. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2012. 
Williams, Margaret. Jews in a Graeco-Roman Environment. Vol. 1.312. WUNT. Edited by 
Jrg Frey. Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2013. 
Wilson, Andrew. Neo-Punic and Latin Inscriptions in Roman North Africa. Pages 265-316 
in Multilingualism in the Graeco-Roman Worlds. Edited by Alex Mullen and Patrick 
James. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012. 
Wilson, Andrew P. Beholding the Man: Viewing (or Is It Marking?) John's Trial Scene 
Alongside Kitsch Art. BibInt 24 (2016): 245-64. 
Winkler, Martin M. The Roman Salute: Cinema, History, Ideology. Columbus: Ohio State 
University Press, 2009. 
Winn, Adam. Tyrant or Servant? Roman Political Ideology and Mark 10.42-45. JSNT 36.4 
(2014): 325-52. 
Winter, Bruce W. Divine Honours for the Caesars: The First Christians Responses. Grand 
Rapids: Eerdmans, 2015. 
Winter, John Garrett. Life and Letters in the Papyri. The Jerome Lectures. Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press, 1933. 
Winter, Paul. On the Trial of Jesus. Edited by T. A. Burkill and Gza Verms. 2nd ed. SJ 1. 
Edited by E. L. Ehrlich. Berlin: De Gruyter, 1974. 
Woolf, Greg. Becoming Roman, Staying Greek: Culture, Identity and the Civilizing Process 
in the Roman East. The Cambridge Classical Journal 40 (1994): 116-43. 
________. Divinity and Power in Ancient Rome. Pages 243-59 in Religion and Power: 
Divine Kingship in the Ancient World and Beyond. Edited by Nicole Brisch. Chicago: 
Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago, 2008. 
________. Inventing Empire in Ancient Rome. Pages 311-322 in Empires: Perspectives 
from Archaeology and History. Edited by Susan E. Alcock, et al. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2001. 
The Works of Josephus: Complete and Unabridged. Translated by William Whiston. 
Peabody: Hendrickson, 1987. 
Bibliography            
Wright, Arthur Merrill, Jr. The Governor and the King: Irony, Hidden Transcripts, and 
Negotiating Empire in the Fourth Gospel. PhD thesis, Union Presbyterian Seminary, 
2014. 
Wright, N. T., and J. P. Davies. John, Jesus, and the Ruler of This World: Demonic 
Politics in the Fourth Gospel?. Pages 71-89 in Conception, Reception, and the Spirit: 
Essays in Honor of Andrew T. Lincoln. Edited by J. G. McConville and Lloyd 
Pietersen. Eugene, OR: Cascade, 2015. 
Yarbro Collins, Adela, and John J. Collins. King and Messiah as Son of God: Divine, 
Human, and Angelic Messianic Figures in Biblical and Related Literature. Grand 
Rapids: Eerdmans, 2008. 
Yoder Neufeld, Thomas R. Killing Enmity: Violence and the New Testament. Grand Rapids: 
Baker Academic, 2011. 
Zabala, Artemio M. The Enigma of John 19:13 Reconsidered (a Survey of the 
Contemporary Discussion and a Suggestion). South East Asia Journal of Theology 
23.1 (1982): 1-10. 
________. The Enigma of John 19:13 Reconsidered (a Survey of the Contemporary 
Discussion and a Suggestion). South East Asia Journal of Theology 22.2 (1981): 16-
Zabehlicky-Scheffenegger, Susanne. Subsidiary Factories of Italian Sigillate Potters: The 
Ephesian Evidence. Pages 217-228 in Ephesos, Metropolis of Asia: An 
Interdisciplinary Approach to Its Archaeology, Religion, and Culture. Edited by 
Helmut Koester. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1995. 
Zanker, Paul. Augustus und die Macht der Bilder. Mnchen: C.H. Beck, 1987. 
________. The Power of Images in the Age of Augustus. Translated by Alan Shapiro. Jerome 
Lectures 16. Augustus und die Macht der Bilder Reprint. Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan Press, 1988. 
Zeller, Dieter. New Testament Christology in Its Hellenistic Reception. NTS 47.3 (2001): 
312-333. 
Zetterholm, Magnus. The Formation of Christianity in Antioch: A Social-Scientific 
Approach to the Separation between Judaism and Christianity. London: Routledge, 
2003. 
Zetzel, James E. G. Romane memento: Justice and Judgment in Aeneid 6. TAPA 119 
(1989): 263-84. 
Zimmermann, Ruben. Deuten heit erzhlen und bertragen: Narrativitt und Metaphorik 
als zentrale Sprachformen historischer Sinnbildung zum Tod Jesu. Pages 315-73 in 
Deutungen des Todes Jesu im Neuen Testament. Edited by Jrg Frey and Jens 
Schrter. Tbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2005. 
Ziolkowski, Jan M., and Michael C. J. Putnam, eds. Virgilian Tradition: The First Fifteen 
Hundred Years. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008. 
Zumstein, Jean. L'evangile selon saint-Jean (13-21). CNT 4b. Geneve: Labor et Fides, 2007. 
Appendix 
