City, University of London Institutional Repository
Citation: Ioakim, Panagiotis (2017). A high precision accelerometer-based sensor unit for 
the acquisition of ultra low distortion seismic signals. (Unpublished Doctoral thesis, City, 
Universtiy of London) 
This is the accepted version of the paper. 
This version of the publication may differ from the final published 
version. 
Permanent repository link:  http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/19360/
Link to published version: 
Copyright and reuse: City Research Online aims to make research 
outputs of City, University of London available to a wider audience. 
Copyright and Moral Rights remain with the author(s) and/or copyright 
holders. URLs from City Research Online may be freely distributed and 
linked to.
City Research Online:            http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/            publications@city.ac.uk
City Research Online
http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/
mailto:publications@city.ac.uk
A High Precision Accelerometer-Based Sensor Unit  
For the Acquisition of Ultra Low Distortion 
 Seismic Signals 
Panagiotis Ioakim 
A thesis submitted for the degree of  
Doctor of Philosophy 
July 2017 
UNIVERSITY OF LONDON 
School of Mathematics Computer Science and Engineering 
~ 2 ~ 
Is there a more noble cause for science other than the advancement of 
our profound understanding of self and our surroundings? To this end, 
is there a more effective way to unravel the obstacles to such 
understanding, other than to seek out the very root of their existence? 
To the pillars of the past, the visionaries of the present,  
and the influencers of the future. 
~ 3 ~ 
Abstract 
Over 800,000 people worldwide lost their lives to earthquakes in the last decade and 
on average 171 people die every day due to earthquake related damage to structures 
and buildings. Precisely understanding the effects ground motion has on manmade 
structures is crucial to making them earthquake resistant. This can only be achieved 
by the precise measurement, recording, and analysis of ground displacement trends 
during a seismic event. 
Although there is a vast amount of recorded seismological data available, current 
technology and processing methods fail to represent accurate ground displacement 
over time as the considerable technological challenges have yet to be overcome.  
Raw seismic data has so far been primarily acquired with instruments utilising 
geophone or accelerometer based sensors. These instruments produce prominent 
time domain displacement errors due to the various system and sensor inaccuracies, 
and due to non-linear response. Since accelerometers provide acceleration over time 
data: whilst geophones are velocimeters, and therefore provide velocity over time 
data; in order to derive true ground displacement over time, a double, or single 
numerical integration is required respectively. During this essential numerical 
integration processes of data from such sensors, even small in magnitude errors 
accumulate to yield rather large displacement trend offsets over a typical event 
recording period of 60 to 120 seconds.  In addition, the numerical integration 
process itself poses considerable challenges due to the theoretically infinite number 
of samples and the accurate determination of initial conditions required for an exact 
mathematical result to be obtained. The latter, is currently performed by averaging 
an up to 60 second pre-event data trend stored on the instrument.  
Most post-integration data from current instruments appears to contain low 
frequency drifts amongst other noise artefacts, and generally requires baseline 
correction algorithms in an attempt to correct for these effects. Such corrections, 
although helpful, only aid to minimise the perceived effects of an assumed and 
collective source of error, and hence are largely unable to tackle the individual error 
contribution of each element within the system. Since individual element 
contribution is of a dynamic nature, the validity of these algorithms is limited by the 
~ 4 ~ 
accuracy of the initial assumptions made about a specific set of data. Faced with 
such a multivariable and uncertain dynamic behaviour, where even mathematical 
system modelling is of inadequate long term accuracy, a solution that aims to 
directly minimise these errors at source, rather than attempt to correct them post-
acquisition, is of immense importance when it comes to the recording, analysis, and 
understanding of earthquakes.  
This thesis describes the design, implementation, and evaluation of a High Precision 
Active Gyro Stabilised (HPAGS) sensor unit of exceptional performance for the 
provision of highly accurate ground displacement data. Experimental results 
demonstrated that the device described herein, was able to diminish the inherent 
non-linear and environment-dependant effects of current sensors, and thus was able 
to provide highly improved time domain displacement data. 
~ 5 ~ 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank all those who have directly and indirectly helped make this 
work possible. In particular, I would like to thank my parents for their unconditional 
and continual support, and their tireless encouragement throughout the years.  
A special thanks to my wonderful partner Jenny for her unwavering faith, support, 
and trust in me and my work, during the good, and during the difficult times. Thank 
you for being such a fantastic and positive influence in life. 
My children Sophia and Helena, who have shown great understanding of my 
frequent absence of mind; Lottie and Sally, who have grown to sympathise with the 
amount of work such an undertaking requires, and everyones kind moral support. 
My good friend and fellow engineer Mr Enyi Ogbuehi, for acting as my sounding 
board for even the most off-the-wall ideas. 
I would like to thank Dr Andrew Chanerley for introducing me to the exciting field 
of seismic instrumentation, and the numerous members of staff at the University of 
East London for their support. 
The staff at City University of London: Professor Nicholas Karcanias for his most 
welcoming attitude towards my research project, Professor Panos Liatsis for all his 
advice and research support which lead to my research fellowship at the university, 
Dr Stathis Milonidis for his support in the role as my second supervisor, and of 
course, I would like express my greatest gratitude to my exceptional supervisor and 
now friend Dr Iasonas Triantis, for his excellent moral support, his outstanding 
academic mentoring, and his extraordinary efforts beyond expectation to guide me 
to the successful completion of this work. I thank you. 
Thank you all. 
~ 6 ~ 
Table of contents 
Abstract 3 
Acknowledgements 5 
List of figures and tables 10 
Glossary of terms 15 
1. Introduction  16 
      1.1 Preface 16 
      1.2 Inherent seismic sensor limitations  23 
      1.3 The need for an improved seismic sensor 26 
      1.4 Motivation and project aims 28 
      1.5 Novelty and contribution to knowledge  29 
      1.6 Thesis organisation  30 
      1.7 List of publications  31 
2. Principles of seismic data acquisition 32 
      2.1 Introduction to Seismology 32 
         2.1.1 Seismic Waves 33 
         2.1.2 The Earths structure 36 
         2.1.3 Early seismographs 37 
      2.2 Modern seismographs 51 
         2.2.1 Geophones 52 
         2.2.2 MEMS Accelerometers  52 
         2.2.3 Signal conditioning  60 
         2.2.4 Signal conversion and storage 62 
      2.3 Post digitisation processing  65 
         2.3.1 Digital filtering 65 
         2.3.2 Numerical integration 66 
2.4 Conclusion 67 
3. Non ideal instrument functionality 70 
      3.1 Evaluation of the MEMS accelerometer sensor performance 84 
         3.1.1 MEMS Sensor noise experimental investigation 88 
             3.1.1.1 Experimental investigation of temperature effects on sensor noise 91 
             3.1.1.2 Experimental investigation of differential Bi-axial excitation for 
                         noise reduction 
             3.1.1.3 Conclusion on sensor noise investigation 96 
         3.1.2 Experimental investigation of on-demand sensor dynamic response 96 
~ 7 ~ 
             3.1.2.1 Sensor Frequency response acquisition via electrostatic 
                          frequency-sweep 
             3.1.2.2 Sensor output dithering via high frequency electrostatic excitation 98 
             3.1.2.3 Sensor dynamic response acquisition via electrostatic impulse  
                         excitation 
             3.1.2.4 Sensor phase response determination via frequency-sweep  
                         excitation 
             3.1.2.5 Sensor on-demand dynamic response determination conclusion 104 
         3.1.3 Experimental investigation of non-linear sensor response 105 
             3.1.3.1 Experimental investigation of potential sensor hysteretic 
                         behaviour    
             3.1.3.2 Experimental investigation of sensor cross-axis interference   108 
            3.1.3.3 Cross Axis interference theory development and experimental 
                         verification   
            3.1.3.4 Sensor Cross Axis interference conclusion 118 
         3.1.4 Temperature related errors  118 
            3.1.4.1 Temperature related errors conclusion 119 
         3.1.5 Investigation of fabrication based errors  119 
             3.1.5.1 Fabrication based errors conclusion 120 
      3.2 Analytical evaluation of front end electronics  121 
         3.2.1 Filter phase and attenuation investigation 121 
             3.2.1.1 Filter phase and attenuation conclusion 122 
         3.2.2 Investigation of offsets and drifts in the front end electronics 123 
             3.2.2.1 Investigation of offsets and drifts in the front end conclusion 124 
      3.3Evaluation of digitisation errors 124 
         3.3.1 The Quality Preservation Sampling (QPS) criterion 126 
      3.4 Soil dynamic effects  127 
         3.4.1 Dynamic and static tilts 127 
             3.4.1.1 Dynamic and static tilts conclusion 130 
3.5 Conclusion 132 
4.  Realisation of the HPAGS sensor 135 
      4.1 Electronic Systems 136 
      4.2 The physical layout 150 
      4.3 The electromechanical assembly 151 
         4.3.1 The gyro stabilisation system 152 
         4.3.2 The power commutation system  154 
         4.3.3 The six degree of freedom assembly 156 
~ 8 ~ 
      4.4 Control and embedded software 157 
         4.4.1 PC Host Instrument Control Software 157 
         4.4.2 Embedded Software 159 
5.   HPAGS Tests and results 161 
      5.1 Sensor calibration process 161 
      5.2 FIR Low-Pass 100Hz Filter design 165 
      5.3 Setting the assessment standards 166 
      5.4 HPAGS auto-zero bias correction assessment. 170 
         5.4.1 Results 171 
         5.4.2 Conclusion 175 
      5.5 Input re-composition by impulse de-convolution 176 
         5.5.1 Results 176 
         5.5.2 Conclusion 181 
      5.6 HPAGS gain error correction assessment  182 
         5.6.1 Results 182 
         5.6.2 Conclusion 183 
      5.7 HPAGS cross-axis sensitivity correction assessment 184 
         5.7.1 Results 184 
         5.7.2 Conclusion 186 
      5.8 HPAGS gyro stabilisation module assessment 187 
         5.8.1 Static evaluation of gyro motor noise 187 
         5.8.2 HPAGS active gyro correction assessment 189 
         5.8.3 Results 193 
         5.8.4 Conclusion 200 
6.   Conclusion 201 
7.   Future work 205 
References 206 
Appendices  
      Appendix A- Windows control software 216 
      Appendix B- Embedded software  220 
      Appendix C- Matlab function script 228 
      Appendix D- Mechanical drawings  229 
~ 9 ~ 
I hereby certify as the author, that to the best of my knowledge, the 
content of this thesis is exclusively my own work, and that any inclusions 
and references to other work have been appropriately acknowledged. 
P. Ioakim 
~ 10 ~ 
List of figures and tables 
Chapter 1 
Figure 1 Pescara del Tronto earthquake, central Italy, 2016. (Source: REUTERS/Adamo 
Di Loreto) 
Figure 1.1 Tectonic plate faults. (a) Normal fault. (b) Reverse fault. (c) Strike-slip fault 17 
Table 1 The Richter scale of earthquake magnitude 18 
Figure 1.2 Baseline spline correction example. (Source public domain) 20 
Figure 1.3 
Acceleration without rotational component (a), and with rotational 
component (b). 
Figure 1.4 Non sensor concentric rotation due to acceleration. 21 
Figure 1.5 
Frequency response of a typical GS11D geophone by Geospace 
Technologies. 
Figure 1.6 Measured frequency spectrum of unfiltered MEMS accelerometer. 24 
Figure 1.7 Exemplification of baseline error [22]. 27 
Chapter 2   
Figure 2 The propagation of a compression wave 33 
Figure 2.1 The propagation of a shear wave 34 
Figure 2.2  Ground roll motion of Rayleigh waves 35 
Figure 2.3 A typical seismograph record of one axis 35 
Figure 2.4 Earths structure 36 
Figure 2.5 Typical mass-spring arrangement 38 
Figure 2.6 Second order system response to a step function at various damping rates 41 
Figure 2.7 Natural resonance of systems 42 
Figure 2.8 Phase response of systems 43 
Figure 2.9 Velocimeter arrangement 44 
Figure 2.10 
Frequency, velocity and acceleration responses of (A) Mechanical Sensor: 
(B) Velocity Sensor: (C) Acceleration Sensor 
Figure 2.11 The Garden gate arrangement 46 
Figure 2.12 Inverted pendulum arrangement  47 
Figure 2.13 The LACoste seismometer arrangement  48 
Figure 2.14 Force balance sensor employing closed loop compensation 50 
Table 2 Earth bandwidth of interest  51 
Figure 2.15 A typical Geophone arrangement 52 
Figure 2.16 An illustrational view of a MEMS accelerometers internal structure 53 
Figure 2.17 Anti-phase excitation of differential capacitance structure 54 
Figure 2.18 Synchronous demodulator 58 
Figure 2.19 Lock-in amplifier utilising square wave modulation 59 
Figure 2.20 A typical data acquisition system 60 
Figure 2.21 Unique elaborate seismograph front end 61 
Figure 2.22 Block diagram of Sigma Delta converter 63 
~ 11 ~ 
Figure 2.23 
Acceleration trends of (a) El Centro, (b) Northridge, and (c) Llolleo 
earthquakes  
Figure 2.24 Typical system installation 68 
Figure 2.25 A typical self contained seismograph 68 
Table 2.1 Technical characteristics of a modern seismograph 69 
Chapter 3   
Figure 3 Block diagram of sensor to displacement data process 70 
Figure 3.1 The primary MEMS test platform 73 
Figure 3.2 Photocurrent to voltage convertor circuit 74 
Figure 3.3 Non-contact range finder optics arrangement 75 
Table 3 Non-contact range finder output, derivative and inverse square curve fit 75 
Figure 3.4 Voltage to distance characteristic of the non-contact range finder 76 
Figure 3.5 
Dynamic response of the non-contact rangefinder monitoring the vibration of 
a leaf spring 
Figure 3.6 Optical encoder induced rangefinder output 77 
Figure 3.7 The mechanical vibration platform 78 
Figure 3.8 First Primary MEMS platform raw vibration results 79 
Figure 3.9 Compact assembly directly bonded to the shaft  79 
Figure 3.10 Resin bonded compact assembly output with improved noise characteristics 80 
Figure 3.11 Digitised and mathematically zero-g offset corrected raw accelerometer data 81 
Figure 3.12 First integral of the raw data representing velocity over time 81 
Figure 3.13 
Second integral of the raw data representing displacement over time, 
exhibiting baseline offset error 
Figure 3.14 
Acceleration data, first and second integrals of filtered and AC coupled 
sensor 
Figure 3.15 Prominent sources of potential error identified by section 84 
Figure 3.16 Diagrammatic representation of the ADXL327 sensor 87 
Figure 3.17 Sensor noise frequency spectrum 88 
Figure 3.18 Circuit diagram of sensor noise investigation circuit 91 
Figure 3.19 Physical assembly of sensor noise investigation circuit 91 
Figure 3.20 direct sensor output at rest and at different temperatures  92 
Table 3.1 Statistical analysis of the output trends of Figure 3.20  92 
Figure 3.21 Standard deviation of sensor noise over temperature 93 
Figure 3.22 Noise range over temperature 93 
Figure 3.23 x-axis sensor output at no excitation 94 
Figure 3.24 y-axis sensor output at no excitation 94 
Figure 3.25 Differential excitation of sensor axis 95 
Figure 3.26 x and y axis output segment comparison 95 
Figure 3.27 Frequency response of sensor via electrostatic excitation utilising the test pin  98 
Figure 3.28 Mechanical vibration without dithering enabled 99 
Figure 3.29 Mechanical vibration with 6.1KHz dithering injected via the test pin 99 
~ 12 ~ 
Figure 3.30 Sensor impulse response via the use of the test pin 101 
Figure 3.31 Integral of sensor impulse response 102 
Figure 3.32 Sensor phase response derived via test pin excitation 103 
Figure 3.33 Sensor phase response magnified segment 104 
Figure 3.34 Mechanical rotational platform 105 
Figure 3.35 Sensor on rotational platform a initial position 106 
Figure 3.36 y-axis voltage output for 0 - 180 rotation and back to zero 107 
Figure 3.37 y-axis voltage output for 0 - 3600 rotation and back to zero 107 
Figure 3.38 Folded y-axis output along the 180 line 108 
Figure 3.39 Experimentally derived y-axis output with respect to g 108 
Figure 3.40 Expected calculated output of y-axis over a 0 - 360 rotation and back 109 
Figure 3.41 Calculated output of y axis with the added z-axis 1% cross-axis contribution  110 
Figure 3.42 Mathematically derived y-axis output compared with experimental results 111 
Figure 3.43 Mathematically derived y-axis output with added 2% cross-axial sensitivity 112 
Figure 3.44 Sliced MEMS IC under microscope showing corner spring structure  112 
Figure 3.45 
Sliced MEMS IC under microscope showing inertial mass suspension 
structure 
Figure 3.46 Diagrammatic arrangement of inertial mass suspension  113 
Figure 3.47 Inertial mass displacement vector due to uneven spring compression 114 
Figure 3.48 Inertial mass displacement vector due to uneven spring tension 114 
Figure 3.49 Mathematically corrected experimental y-axis output using equation 3.22 116 
Figure 3.50 Voltage output over temperature  118 
Figure 3.51 MEMS package to silicon die misalignment 120 
Figure 3.52 RC filter amplitude over frequency characteristic 122 
Figure 3.53 Sampled signal exhibiting digitisation errors 125 
Figure 3.54 
Rotation of obelisk after the 1897 Great Shillong Earthquake (Source: Report 
on the Great Earthquake of 12
 June 1897. Mem. Geol. Survey India, vol. 29. 
(from figure 1)). 
Figure 3.55 Vertically misaligned sensor 129 
Figure 3.56 Gradients around 0 of Sine and Cosine graphs 130 
Figure 3.57 Sensor near underground boundary 131 
Chapter 4   
Figure 4 Specification diagram of HPAGS sensor base on error analysis 135 
Figure 4.1 HPAGS system level diagram 136 
Figure 4.2 HPAGS circuit with only one out of the three channels depicted 140 
Figure 4.3 Detail of MEMS circuit 141 
Figure 4.4 HPAGS sensor power supply and precision reference circuit detail 142 
Figure 4.5 MEMS sensitivity drift due to supply voltage change 143 
Figure 4.6 Active filter circuit detail 144 
Figure 4.7 
Phase comparison between HPAGS active filters and current state of the art 
instrument 
~ 13 ~ 
Figure 4.8 
Amplitude comparison between HPAGS and current state of the art 
instrument filters 
Figure 4.9 Auto-zero correction feedback loop detail 147 
Figure 4.10 Action of HPAGS sensors Auto-Zero correction circuit and algorithm 148 
Figure 4.11 Impulse response of x-channel derived by electrostatic excitation 149 
Figure 4.12 HPAGS sensors electronics physical layout 150 
Figure 4.13 The Active Gyro-Stabilised electromechanical assembly 151 
Figure 4.14 Gyro assembly detail 153 
Figure 4.15 Through-bearing power commutation detail 154 
Figure 4.16 Assembled bearing and commutator detail 155 
Figure 4.17 Six degrees of freedom gimbal assembly 156 
Figure 4.18 Bespoke Windows based host instrument control software  157 
Figure 4.19 HPAGS sensor embedded software flowchart  159 
Chapter 5   
Figure 5 Spatial orientations for calibration 161 
Figure 5.1 High accuracy rotational platform 162 
Figure 5.2 Kaiser Window amplitude response (fc=100Hz, fp=102 Hz) 165 
Figure 5.3 Kaiser Window phase response (fc=100Hz, fp=102 Hz)  166 
Figure 5.4 Kaiser Window impulse response ( fc=100Hz, fp=102 Hz)  166 
Figure 5.5 
Mechanical vibration platform with HPAGS electronics affixed to the 
excitation shaft 
Figure 5.6 Unfiltered IR displacement sensor data 170 
Figure 5.7 
Auto-zero versus conventionally average-subtraction corrected acceleration 
trends 
Figure 5.8 Auto-zero, and conventionally corrected best-fit linear displacement trends 172 
Figure 5.9 Auto-zero bias correction system block diagram 172 
Figure 5.10 Voltage at ADC input 173 
Figure 5.11 
Means of Conventionally, HPAGS, and HPAGS improved bias corrected 
signals 
Figure 5.12 
Displacement best-fit lines of Conventionally, HPAGS, and HPAGS 
improved corrected signals 
Figure 5.13 Auto-zero corrected and filtered acceleration trend 176 
Figure 5.14 Electrostatically triggered Impulse response   177 
Figure 5.15 Impulse response of x-axis channel 177 
Figure 5.16 Frequency spectrum of x-axis impulse response   178 
Figure 5.17 Frequency spectrum of HPAGS x-axis output. 178 
Figure 5.18 
Frequency spectrum of the division of the acceleration and impulse response 
spectra 
Figure 5.19 mechanical input derived by the IFFT of the acceleration and impulse spectra   179 
Figure 5.20 Displacement trends of impulse derived and direct output accelerations 180 
~ 14 ~ 
Figure 5.21 Synthesised high frequency input 180 
Figure 5.22 
Evaluated output by convolution of high frequency input and Impulse 
response 
Figure 5.23 Output difference between expected and gain-corrected trends 183 
Figure 5.24 Acceleration trend of x-axis output 184 
Figure 5.25 Acceleration trend of y-axis output 185 
Figure 5.26 Comparison between x-axis raw, cross-axis corrected, and y-axis data 186 
Figure 5.27 x-axis displacement data; uncorrected, and cross-axis corrected 187 
Figure 5.28 HPAGS x-axis output with vertical gyros on. 188 
Figure 5.29 Frequency spectrum of the HPAGS x-axis output with vertical gyros on. 188 
Figure 5.30 
Spectrum comparison between unfiltered (blue) and filtered sensor outputs 
(red). 
Figure 5.31 The HPAGS sensor attached onto the CNC machine 190 
Figure 5.32 HPAGS sensor attachment to the CNC bed detail 191 
Figure 5.33 HPAGS sensor on CNC bed top view diagram 192 
Figure 5.34 HPAGS x and y-axis acceleration data of machine bed 193 
Figure 5.35 HPAGS x and y-axis velocity data of machine bed 194 
Figure 5.36 HPAGS x and y-axis displacement data of machine bed 194 
Figure 5.37 HPAGS x and y-axis acceleration data in rigid mode. 195 
Figure 5.38 HPAGS x and y-axis velocity data in rigid mode. 195 
Figure 5.39 HPAGS x and y-axis displacement data in rigid mode. 196 
Figure 5.40 HPAGS motion in rigid mode. 196 
Figure 5.41 HPAGS x and y-axis acceleration data in gyro mode. 197 
Figure 5.42 HPAGS x and y-axis velocity data in gyro mode. 198 
Figure 5.43 HPAGS x and y-axis displacement data in gyro mode. 198 
Figure 5.44 HPAGS sensors motion in gyro mode. 199 
Figure 5.45 HPAGS sensors displacement comparison between gyro and rigid modes. 199 
~ 15 ~ 
Glossary of terms 
1/f noise Noise with a  power spectral density inversely proportional to its frequency 
Accelerometer  A device that measures acceleration ( rate of change of velocity) 
Belt (seismic) 
A narrow geographic zone on the surface of the Earth along which 
earthquake activity occurs.  
Brownian motion 
Random motion of particles resulting from their collision with fast-moving atoms 
or molecules in the medium 
Brownian noise  Signal noise produced by Brownian motion, also known as thermomechanical 
Convolution A mathematical operation on two functions resulting in another function 
Critical damping 
Damping which enables the system to attain steady state at the shortest time 
without oscillations 
Cross-axis 
sensitivity 
The amount of output that is observed on the sensing axis stemming from 
accelerations on a perpendicular axis 
Damping  The reduction in amplitude of an oscillation by frictional or other resistive forces 
Damping coefficient The ratio of damping to critical damping. 
Decimation  The process of reducing the sampling rate of a signal 
De-convolution The inverse of convolution. See convolution 
Elastic propagation  The propagation of waves through solid (elastic) matter  
Epicentre 
The point on the Earth's surface that is directly above the point of origin of an 
earthquake 
Fault 
A fracture along which the blocks of Earth's crust on either side have moved 
relative to one another 
Gain Bandwidth 
product 
The product of an amplifier's bandwidth and  gain at which the bandwidth is 
measured 
Geophone  
A device that converts ground movement (velocity) into voltage utilising a 
moving magnet within a coil 
Ground tilt 
The deviation of the ground from what is accepted to be horizontal during an 
earthquake 
Homogeneous fluid 
A fluid that has the same proportions of its components throughout a given 
sample, thus uniform in composition 
HPAGS Sensor High Precision Active Gyro-Stabilised Sensor 
Hypocentre The point within the Earth where an earthquake rupture starts 
Least squares 
regression  
A statistical method used to determine a line of best fit by minimizing the sum of 
squares created by a mathematical function 
Long period 
instrument 
An instrument in which the resonant frequency is very low, usually designed for 
seismic signals  in the range 1 Hz to 10 Hz 
Mantle  The part of the Earth between the core and the  crust 
MEMS Sensors  Miniature sensors incorporating mechanical structures and electronic circuits 
Micromachining The technique for fabrication of structures on the micrometer scale 
Near-field 
Earthquake 
An earthquake which occurs close to the fault. See fault 
Piezoelectric effect 
The ability of certain materials to generate a voltage when subjected to 
mechanical stress or vibration 
Piezoresistive effect 
A change in the electrical resistivity of a material when mechanical stress is 
applied 
Polysilicon  A high purity, polycrystalline form of silicon 
RS232 A standard for serial communication transmission of data 
Short period 
instrument 
An instrument in which the resonant frequency is high, usually designed for 
seismic signals  in the range 0.01 Hz to 0.1 Hz 
Slew Rate The maximum rate at which a system can respond to an abrupt change of input 
Spline  A mathematical function defined piecewise by polynomials 
Subduction zone A point at which one tectonic plate is forced underneath another 
Tectonic plates Sub-layers of the Earth's crust that move independently over the mantle 
Zero length spring  A specially designed coil spring that would exert zero force if it had zero length 
~ 16 ~ 
Chapter 1  
 Introduction 
Earthquake: A sudden violent shaking of the ground, typically causing great 
destruction, as a result of movements within the earth's crust or volcanic action. 
(Oxford dictionary) 
1.1 Preface  
Nearly fifty thousand noticeable earthquakes occur every year on Earth, out of 
which one hundred are capable of - often devastating - damage to buildings. Over 
the recorded history of mankind, earthquakes have been responsible for the deaths of 
millions of people and the destruction of entire cities. 
Figure 1 Pescara del Tronto earthquake, central Italy, 2016. (Source: REUTERS/Adamo Di Loreto) 
Most earthquakes occur in regions termed belts, which are coincident with the 
Earths tectonic plate margins. One of the most prominent and active belts, 
responsible for nearly 80% of seismic energy, is the Circum-Pacific belt, affecting 
New Zealand, Japan, Alaska, and the coasts of North and South America.  
~ 17 ~ 
Tectonic earthquakes are the result of sudden relative movement of the Earths 
surface plates. As these plates are in continuous motion, anomalies on their 
boundaries tend to cause localised frictional resistance, resulting in a large build up 
of energy.  Stresses exceeding the natural strength of the retaining material, 
inevitably cause a sudden release of energy which manifests itself as a fracture or 
slip that can extend to several kilometres. The relative ground movement caused by 
these fractures is usually small, however on occasion tectonic movements will 
generate major earthquakes such as the 1906 San Andreas Fault event, where the 
ground was displaced horizontally by nearly 6 meters.  
Figure 1.1 Tectonic plate faults. (a) Normal fault. (b) Reverse fault. (c) Strike-slip fault 
Tectonic plate movement can manifest itself in different ways, all capable of causing 
large magnitude earthquakes: It can be vertical in nature, where one plate sinks with 
respect to the other, or rises due lateral compressive forces, or it can be horizontal, 
where the two plates slip past each other in a coplanar fashion. 
Due to the considerable variation in seismic motion over an area, the effects of a 
seismic event can be difficult to directly quantify, hence qualitative scales of 
intensity have been used since the late 19
 century. It wasnt until the development 
of seismographs that magnitude became a quantitative measure of the amplitude of 
seismic waves generated by an earthquake. In 1935 Charles F. Richter introduced 
his logarithmic Richter scale of magnitude, which was based on the amplitude 
recorded on a standard for the epoch seismometer, at a 100 Km distance from the 
(a) (b) 
~ 18 ~ 
epicentre. Table 1 depicts the effects caused by an earthquake according to the 
Richter scale magnitudes. 
Magnitude (Richter) Effect Typical ground acceleration 
Up to 2.9 Not felt by people 1.7  14 mg 
3  3.9 Felt. No damage  
4  4.9 Minor damage  
5  5.9 
Some damage to 
structures 
6  6.9 Moderate damage  
7  7.9 
Serious damage. 
Loss of life 
8 and higher 
Severe destruction. 
Loss of life 
0.65  1.24 g 
Table 1 The Richter scale of earthquake magnitude 
Seismographs are by default inertial systems and therefore their outputs are 
generally accelerometric. One exception is the geophone sensor, which converts the 
inertial motion into an electrical signal by means of a magnet within a moving coil, 
thus able to provide a direct velocimetric output. The conversion therefore of a 
signal acquired by a seismograph necessitates the single or double integration of the 
data depending on the sensor used in order to acquire a ground displacement over 
time trend. The cumulative effects of the integration process hugely exaggerate any 
errors in the data, and in combination with systematic errors, render earthquake data 
inaccurate to a degree which greatly affects our understanding of them and 
inevitably our efforts to better protect structures from their devastating effects. 
The study of early (prior to 1960s) seismic data is often thwarted by errors, as most 
is derived from unevenly sampled and manually digitised records. Some early data 
was even segmented and recombined, giving rise to various erroneous post-
integration artefacts and oscillations from abrupt changes in magnitude. Filtering 
and inappropriate decimation practices also gave rise to phase errors which 
manifested themselves as erroneous velocity and displacement phenomena. 
~ 19 ~ 
Recent technological developments such as micromachining, precision low noise 
integrated circuits, and encapsulation techniques, have vastly improved the stability 
and operation of seismometers, however, due to many inherent physical and 
electronic limitations, much improvement is still necessary if such instruments are to 
yield useful near-true to the original earthquake displacement over time data. 
A vast amount of more recent seismological data exists that has been acquired 
primarily with instruments utilising geophones and accelerometers since the 1960s. 
Since these instruments employ the aforementioned velocimetric or accelerometric 
sensors, time domain displacement data can only be acquired after one or two 
numerical integration processes respectively. The data acquired from such 
instruments inevitably contains cumulative integration errors resulting from various 
inaccuracies within the instrument, which together conspire to produce rather large 
errors in the displacement data trends, termed baseline offset.  
It is not atypical for a seismic data displacement trend to show after-event 
displacement errors in the region of several meters, whilst in reality the end ground 
displacement has indeed been zero. These inaccuracies are predominately caused by 
the instruments electronics practical limitations, but also due to internal to the 
sensor non-linearities, noise, and drifts, requiring rather involved calibration 
processes [1][2] [3] [4].  
Current data processing methodologies necessitate the use of post-digitisation 
algorithms to reverse such displacement errors once the true end displacement is 
made known, usually via the Global Positioning System (GPS). By knowing the true 
end displacement of the trend, and assuming a zero averaged initial condition, a 
spline baseline correction can be imposed as shown in figure 1. 
 Recently, more involved speculative post-acquisition correction algorithms [5] and 
various complex digital signal processing and filtering methods, have also been used 
in an attempt to recover a displacement trend resembling the original time domain 
earthquake ground motion.  
~ 20 ~ 
Figure 1.2 Baseline spline correction example. (public domain) 
Whilst these methods produce workable results, some necessitate the use of accurate 
GPS instrumentation with long term data averaging in order for precise end-
displacement values to be acquired. More importantly, most methods assume a 
progressive and mathematically predictable ground motion, where in reality the true 
ground displacement can easily be masked within the usually exponential in nature 
baseline offset. 
In addition to instrument based errors, external factors, other than temperature 
fluctuations, can also significantly interfere with the accurate acquisition of seismic 
data. Ground tilts and dynamic rotations occurring during strong near-field 
earthquakes have been shown to have a considerable effect on seismic instruments 
and therefore on the data derived by these [6], [7]. Although at first, correcting for 
such tilts and rotations may appear easily accomplishable, the fact that the centre of 
such rotations is not only unknown but also variable poses a rather difficult problem 
to solve. 
It has been suggested that multi-sensor instruments could resolve rotational and 
translational motions simply by measuring the accelerations due to tilt motion of the 
instrument. Although this is theoretically possible, most methods conveniently 
assume a body-centric model (figure 1.3). 
Time (ms) 
Spline 
Derived displacement 
Baseline Corrected trend 
~ 21 ~ 
Figure 1.3 Acceleration without rotational component (a), and with rotational component (b). 
Figure 1.3(a) depicts the current use of sensors in the field, assuming a linear 
acceleration about the centre of the sensor (z-axis only shown here for clarity, but 
this holds true for all three axis x, y, and z). Current theory suggests that by utilising 
more sensors, such as accelerometers located at the periphery of the sensing 
instrument, differential accelerations marked as    in figure 1.3(b), would be 
detectable and therefore such motion could be mathematically describable. In real 
environments however, the rotational centre locations are unknown and are not 
body-centric. Assuming a centre of rotation a short distance away from the sensor, 
as shown in figure 1.4, one could argue that the acceleration difference between the 
resulting acceleration vectors    and    could indeed be used to estimate the 
rotational centre and therefore help describe the motion of the body in question. In 
practice however, this model does not scale up since as the centre of rotation moves 
further away from the body of the instrument, the smaller the acceleration 
differential between    and    becomes, and therefore only a matter of a short 
distance before this difference is within the noise floor of the instrument. 
Figure 1.4 Non sensor-concentric rotation due to acceleration. 
The data corrupting effect of such tilts is of course due to the angular deviation of 
the sensing axis of the instrument with respect to the original frame of reference in 
(a) (b) 
~ 22 ~ 
all three dimensions. In this case, the true vertical acceleration  of the ground 
would be incorrectly measured as  due to the angular displacement of the z 
sensing axis, where    
 . Further, due to the rotational forces, radial 
accelerations will also manifest themselves as additional components on the other 
sensing axis, making the derivation of true motion a rather impossible task. 
Seismological instruments in use to date do not have adequate, if any at all, 
correction abilities to address the above sources of error. Furthermore, although the 
necessity of recording seismic signals down to DC level has been recognised for 
many decades [8], due to the difficulties involved with the double integration 
process and initial conditions determination, some seismographs employ a High-
Pass filter with a low -3dB cut off frequency of 0.1Hz or below, further adding to 
the distortion of the low frequency seismic waves [9]. 
Other effects, such as long term instrument inaccuracies due to component 
variations over time that can considerably add to the aforementioned errors, have 
also been ignored by seismic instrument manufacturers. In conclusion therefore, 
historic seismic records to date can be considered only as approximations to the 
original time domain seismic waves, since the data stored and processed is distorted 
in amplitude, phase, and sensitivity, resulting in displacement trends containing 
errors, sometimes in the order of several meters.  
The complexity and magnitude of these errors pose a serious problem to the 
worldwide seismological societies attempting to analyse and understand the 
underlying mechanisms of earthquakes, and to those attempting to construct 
earthquake resistant structures. 
The accurate acquisition of seismic data is essential to our understanding of 
earthquakes, which significantly impacts our decisions on the processes and 
materials used for the construction of safe buildings and public structures such as 
bridges. An instrument therefore capable of delivering precise seismic data could 
potentially provide for innovations in civil engineering and earthquake-proof 
structures, and even in the prediction of earthquakes, allowing for early warning 
systems for major catastrophic events such as tsunamis. 
~ 23 ~ 
1.2 Inherent seismic sensor limitations  
Modern inertial seismometers, of any physical scale, convert the motion of a point 
on the Earths surface to a usable electrical signal, usually utilising a suspended 
inertial mass. This very principle of operation limits and distorts the true ground 
motion signal since the inertial mass requires to be kept in place via mechanical or 
electromagnetic means. Such instruments inadvertently result in an output which is 
dependent not only on the amplitude but also the rate of change of the input signal, 
therefore imposing a kind of mechanical filtering to the signal of interest.  
Figure 1.5 below depicts the frequency response of a popular geophone. Geophones, 
although also based on the inescapable inertial mass-spring setup, unlike 
accelerometers, produce an output proportional to velocity rather than acceleration. 
The electromechanical arrangement is either a suspended moving coil arround a 
magnet or vice versa, resulting in a driven harmonic oscillator with an 
electromagnetically induced output voltage:   
 where x is the displacement of 
the coil with reference to the magnet. 
Figure 1.5 Frequency response of a typical GS11D geophone by Geospace Technologies. 
The output response of a typical geophone shown in figure 1.5 clearly indicates that 
although traditional geophones require a single integration in order to derive 
displacement data, even with corrective shunt resistors employed, their poor low 
frequency response deems them unusable for frequencies below 10Hz. 
Shunt Resistance 
A Open circuit 
B 47K5  
C 18K2  
Damping 
A 35% 
B 50% 
C 70% 
Frequency (Hz) 
~ 24 ~ 
Micro Electro-Mechanical Sensors (MEMS) provide considerable improvement on 
resonance and sensitivity. The imperfect capacitance characteristics and mechanical 
limitations of the frequently used differential capacitance measurement mechanism 
however, tend to distort the signal. Inevitably, the driving electronics of the 
differential capacitance mechanism require an out of phase clock to be presented to 
the capacitor plates, which although rectified and filtered, is still present in the 
output signal. In addition, due to the small scale of the micro-machined inertial mass 
and polysilicon (Polycrystalline Silicon) springs, MEMS sensors suffer not only 
from Brownian and 1/f noise, but also from thermomechanical noise due to 
molecular agitation of the micro-scale inertial mass.  
Figure 1.6 depicts the frequency spectrum of a typical unfiltered MEMS sensor 
output, showing both an 1/f characteristic and a near 50KHz internal clock feed-
through.  
Figure 1.6 Measured frequency spectrum of unfiltered MEMS accelerometer. 
The physical constraints of such sensors along with the typical properties of systems 
on silicon further affect the response of such sensors yielding output  non-linearity 
[10], temperature dependent effects on sensitivity [11], and various bias and cross-
axis sensitivity related errors [12]. Even devices employing optical and mechanical-
optical arrangements still suffer from these inherent errors due to the inescapable 
nature of the electromechanical arrangement [13] [14]. 
0 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000 70000 
Frequency (Hz) 
~ 25 ~ 
The necessary interfacing electronics are also subject to noise, drifts, and offsets, 
and the Analogue to Digital Conversion (ADC) process itself adds to the distortion 
of the original signal. 
Digital Signal Processing (DSP) offers methods to model and represent these 
sensors effectively, but in truth, the practical difficulties of obtaining accurate 
impulse system response via electromechanical means and deriving representative 
transfer functions alone, make these methods far from mathematically exact. 
Although such algorithms perform relatively well, it is understood that they only 
operate inside a rather wide tolerance range, as the accuracy of the resulting 
response, even in the short term, is always only as accurate as the apparatus 
employed to derive it. It could be argued that if the provision of highly accurate 
mathematical models derived by testing in tightly controlled environments was 
realisable, accurate data from such sensors could then be recovered by direct de-
convolution. Unfortunately however, such sensors suffer from a multitude of 
external dynamic interferences [15], internal drifts and changes, making their 
mathematical modelling very difficult if not impossible to construct with any 
accuracy. [16] 
~ 26 ~ 
1.3 The need for an improved seismic sensor 
The difficulty of precise seismic data recovery is of course due to the problem that a 
clear separation of the observer from the phenomenon observed cannot be readily 
accomplished, since the observer in this case is part of, resting on, the object of 
observation, namely the Earth. This has led to errors in the understanding of the 
behaviour of seismic waves which have in turn manifested themselves into 
instrument designs anticipating to measure such erroneous behaviour. One major 
such assumption has led to the design of only linear acceleration seismographs to 
this date, although dynamic ground tilts and rotations were observed and found to be 
of a large enough magnitude to distort the seismic data some decades ago. It is also 
becoming more evident that not only acute dynamic tilts are of importance during 
strong motion recordings, but post-event displacements and asymmetrical soil 
dynamics too can corrupt and impose hysteretic characteristics on the seismic data, 
as can very low frequency ground undulations. [17] 
Many of the above sources of error conspire to give rise to the by far the most 
prominent observable effect of data corruption in the time domain, even with 
modern instruments; the runaway effect or Baseline Error. This most frequently 
encountered error is characterised by erroneous linear velocity and exponential 
ground displacement trend offsets, derived from the original raw acceleration data 
via a numerical integration process. This baseline error completely invalidates the 
derived velocity and displacement trends, as assumptions to its nature are made in 
order to secure an artificial baseline of zero offset error. This is usually 
accomplished by the enforcement of a corrective spline to the derived data.  
Various other methods including advanced calibration and DSP techniques such as 
Wavelet transformation, filtering, and post-digitisation and integration corrections, 
have all been, and still are, employed in an attempt to reconstruct a true seismic 
displacement trend. [18] [19] [20] [21] 
The runaway, and other related phenomena have been the focus of numerous 
practical data recovery and research papers due to their prominence. It can be seen 
in figure 1.7, which is from one such paper [22] concerned with this very effect, that 
even after the first integration, the velocity data trend exhibits an unnatural but 
~ 27 ~ 
characteristic gradient, inevitably resulting in a rather large quadratic in nature 
displacement error after the second integration. 
Figure 1.7 Exemplification of baseline error [22]. 
It should be noted that the above trends are only of 3s in length, however in practical 
earthquake studies, seismic trends are normally 60s  120s in length, resulting in 
much larger cumulative displacement errors in the order of several meters. 
Although modern seismographs have much improved over that last decade, 
acceleration data derived from these is still at best difficult to work with, and at 
worst so erroneous, that its usefulness as a tool for the study and understanding of 
earthquakes can be considered at times very limited. 
Much work has been done in the development of correction algorithms, filtering, 
calibration techniques [23] [24] [25] [26], and system models to address some of the 
problems associated with this type of data acquisition, but alas none of these 
methods addresses the root of these problems which is both time-variable and 
~ 28 ~ 
dynamic in nature. Such treatment of the effects rather than the causes tends to fail 
to produce consistent long term results in the complexity of real environments. 
Further to the inherent electronic sources of error, mechanical constraints produce 
their own set of challenges when it comes to acquiring uncorrupted data, which are 
deeply rooted within the very construction of these instruments and their 
environment. Efforts to model or correct for these errors has proven of limited use 
due to the complexity of the real dynamic environment, where excitation is not only 
of linear, but also of rotational nature [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34], and the 
soil substrate is rarely a uniform and known quantity, therefore contributing its own 
asymmetrical and non-linear effects on the instrument [35]. 
Although it is essential to understand and attempt to correct the perceivable 
instrument errors [36] [37] [38] [39] [40] [41] [42], a close and in depth examination 
of the very sources of these errors is crucial in deriving robust solutions able to 
provide effective long term correction within real dynamic environments.  
It is only by addressing the root of these problems rather than alleviating the 
symptoms, that an instrument able to recover long term accurate displacement 
seismic data can be constructed. 
1.4 Motivation and project aims 
Having spent my early childhood in a country prone to seismic activity, and having 
experienced a number of earthquakes of magnitude of over 5 in the Richter scale, I 
feel that I have a very personal connection with this area of research. However, it 
was not until few years ago  and after having acquired in depth knowledge in 
instrumentation - that I discovered the extent of the problems associated with the 
derivation of accurate seismic displacement trends from even the latest state-of-art 
seismometers. Many spurious artefacts in the derived displacement trends were 
associated with possible hysteretic instrument behaviour while others were linked to 
ground tilts, especially during large magnitude earthquakes. With the latter receiving 
much of the focus, this research originally intended to provide innovative solutions 
to the problems associated with dynamic and static tilts of seismic sensors in the 
near-field,  however, during the initial research and experimental phase of this work,  
~ 29 ~ 
it became obvious that resolving the tilt problems alone would not yield any 
substantial improvement on the resulting data: The very significant contribution of 
the many overseen sensor and instrumentation error sources had to be predominantly 
addressed. 
The objective of this work therefore is to research the multiple sources of error, 
internal to the instrument and external, and derive realisable solutions with the aim 
to create a High Precision Active Gyro-Stabilised (HPAGS) seismic sensor. The 
resulting six-degree-of-freedom MEMS-based seismic sensor should conceptually 
and experimentally prove beyond doubt, that the acquisition of highly accurate 
ground displacement data from accelerometric sensors is indeed a realisable 
possibility.  
1.5 Novelty and contribution to knowledge  
The majority of the content in Chapter 3 predominantly presents original theory and 
empirical evaluation of several novel methods and algorithms concerned with the 
correction or minimization of errors in current seismic sensing instruments. In 
particular: the method for the derivation of the dynamic response of a MEMS 
sensor, the direct generation of sensor signal dithering, the quality preservation 
sampling criterion, and the cross-axis sensitivity correction formulae, are all  to  the 
authors knowledge  both novel and a positive contribution to existing knowledge. 
The realisation and experimental evaluation of the first six degree of freedom 
seismic sensor unit in Chapters 4 and 5, able to addresses the majority of the known 
and newly discovered via this research issues, also presents novel work which aims 
to inform the scientific society. Further, the auto-zero bias correction, and the auto 
gain correction circuits, along with their corresponding embedded algorithms, offer 
novel applications to classical feedback control and circuit theory.  
Although literature which identifies some of the issues examined herein exists, there 
is no current literature that offers any effective solutions to these well defined 
problems, or indeed any literature which encompasses a unified sensor solution like 
the one presented in this thesis. 
~ 30 ~ 
1.6 Thesis organisation  
The rest of the work presented herein is organised as follows: 
Chapter 2 presents an introduction to seismology and seismic waves along with the 
structure of the Earth in order to facilitate a basic understanding of the object of 
interest. It then continues with a review of seismic sensors starting with the early 
innovations of the recent past and onto the modern day accelerometers, analysing 
and discussing each with respect to their features and limitations. Sections on data 
acquisition, digitisation, and post-processing are also included in this chapter in 
order to give the reader a wider view of the current methods and technology 
employed in the acquisition of seismic data, from the sensor in the field, to the 
familiar trends on the computer screen. 
Chapter 3 is partly dedicated to the description of a primary study which aims to 
experimentally demonstrate the magnitude of the problem regarding the baseline 
offset effect, and then proceeds with attempts to eliminate each of the primary 
sources of this error, by experimentally testing novel correction hypotheses and 
methodologies. The work in this chapter is presented in a logical signal progression 
manner: from the sensor, via the front-end electronics, to the digitising circuits. 
Chapter 4 presents the physical design of the unified sensor electronics and 
mechanical components, and discusses the methods used to overcome the many 
difficulties encountered during the realisation of this type of instrument.  
Chapter 5 presents experimental results which are used to substantiate conclusions 
on the effectiveness of the unified sensor employing the earlier conceived in this 
work novel hypotheses.  
Chapters 6 and 7 consolidate the findings of chapters 3 to 5 into a general 
conclusion and propose future work to researchers wishing to continue to build upon 
the knowledge presented within this thesis. 
~ 31 ~ 
~ 32 ~ 
Chapter 2 
Principles of seismic data acquisition 
2.1 Introduction to Seismology 
Seismology is a rather recent science which has mainly been scientifically 
developed in the last century or so. Every day more than fifty earthquakes occur 
which are strong enough to be felt near their epicentres, and every month, some are 
large enough in magnitude to damage permanent structures. Several daily 
earthquakes occur which are not strong enough to be felt, but are able to be recorded 
by modern seismic instruments. 
As a seismic event occurs, waves propagate from its epicentre and travel through 
and on the surface of the Earth. The study of the propagation of these waves has 
aided our understanding of the Earths structure and has helped us identify the 
mechanisms of earthquake generation. 
A good understanding of the nature of earthquakes is not only essential in 
geophysics and Earth sciences, but also in civil and structural engineering where the 
challenge to build earthquake-proof structures is all but too real in certain areas of 
the world. 
Early treatment of earthquakes was understandably not very scientific and 
observations of volcanoes erupting whilst vibrations of the Earth were felt led to an 
incorrect connection between explosions and earthquakes. It wasnt until 1800 that 
Rayleigh, Poisson and others evolved the theory of elastic propagation which in turn 
determined the types of wave expected from seismic events. Compression and shear 
waves, termed body waves, are those that travel directly through the solid matter, 
where surface waves are those that travel on the surface of solids. Since compression 
waves travel faster than shear waves, they are usually referred to as Primary or P-
Waves, whilst the slower shear waves are commonly referred to as Secondary or S-
Waves. 
The first noted attempt at observational seismology was in 1857, soon after a large 
earthquake just outside Naples attracted Irish engineer Robert Mallet to rush to Italy 
to record the destruction caused. He proposed that earthquakes radiate from a focal 
~ 33 ~ 
point, now termed the hypocentre, and that flowing this radial wave expansion 
backward one could calculate the exact geographical point of a seismic event. Mallet 
went on to conduct experiments using explosions to calculate wave velocities 
through the ground and suggested stations be constructed to monitor seismic 
activity. 
 2.1.1 Seismic Waves 
Seismic waves can be broadly divided into categories in accordance with their 
propagation properties, namely Body waves, which travel through solid matter, and 
Surface waves, which travel on body surfaces. 
Body waves can then be subdivided into two further categories: compression waves, 
and shear waves. Figure 2 shows the propagation of a compression wave, where 
high compression regions travel through an elastic medium with areas of rarefaction 
(low compression regions) between them: a propagation model very analogous to 
sound waves in air. Compression waves are the fastest of the seismic waves and are 
therefore termed P-Waves or Primary Waves, since they are the first to be recorded 
on a seismogram and the first to be felt. 
Figure 2 The propagation of a compression wave 
A Shear wave, being slower than the compression wave, oscillates perpendicularly 
to the direction of propagation, and due to its later arrival it is termed the S-Wave or 
Secondary Wave. Figure 2.1 shows the characteristic propagation of such a body 
Compression Rarefaction 
Wavelength 
~ 34 ~ 
wave. Although S-Waves are slower to propagate, they are usually larger in 
magnitude than P-Waves. 
Figure 2.1 The propagation of a shear wave 
Surface waves can also be subdivided into different types of wave: Love waves, 
named after A. Love, a British mathematician who derived the mathematical model 
for this kind of wave in 1911, and Rayleigh waves, named after Lord Rayleigh who 
predicted their existence in 1885. Surface waves are in general larger in amplitude 
than body waves and in strong earthquakes can produce displacements of several 
centimetres. 
Love waves are the fastest surface wave and move the ground from side-to-side, 
perpendicular to wave propagation, much like shear waves but confined on the 
surface, hence producing only horizontal motion. These transverse waves are 
typically the largest of all other seismic waves and although they quickly decay with 
depth, on the surface, they can travel vast distances as their amplitude decays only 
proportionally to 
 where r is the distance travelled. Due to this slow decay and 
large amplitude, Love waves are very destructive outside the immediate epicentre 
zone. 
Rayleigh waves, unlike Love waves, include both longitudinal and transverse 
motions that decrease exponentially in amplitude as distance from the surface 
increases. Their decay on the surface is governed by the same physical laws as for 
the Love waves and therefore their slow decay and rolling motion also make them 
very destructive. Their nature makes them one of the most important waves in 
seismology and structural testing, as they tend to force surface particles into 
Wave propagation 
~ 35 ~ 
elliptical motion which is parallel to the direction of travel of the wave, but also with 
the major axis normal to the surface. Not only they displace in all directions, but 
they also roll and tilt the structures on the earths surface, as shown in figure 2.2, 
and hence are termed ground roll in seismology. 
                  Figure 2.2 Ground roll motion of Rayleigh waves 
Figure 2.3 shows a typical seismic recording in which the comparatively different 
time of arrival and magnitudes of the above waves can be clearly distinguished. P-
Waves arrive first, followed by similar magnitude S-Waves, and then the rather 
larger in magnitude Surface Waves arrive, composed of both Love and Rayleigh 
Waves. It should be noted that in the accelerograph of figure 2.3, time proceeds 
from left to right. Also, the Love and Rayleigh waves form different comparative 
amplitude waveforms in the Surface wave region of the response depending on the 
axis examined. 
Figure 2.3 A typical seismograph record of one axis 
Propagation 
Ground roll 
P-Wave 
S-Wave 
Surface Waves 
~ 36 ~ 
2.1.2 The Earths structure 
A cross-section of the Earth is shown in figure 2.4 which can be broadly divided into 
the crust, the mantle, the outer core and the inner core. The thickness of the crust 
varies from 6 Km under the oceans, to 50 
Km on the continents.  
The mantle is a solid mass which constitutes 
nearly 84% of the Earths volume. Seismic 
waves travelling through the mantle increase 
in velocity gradually with depth and in line 
with general expectation due to changes in 
temperature and pressure. This typical 
uniform substrate behaviour is generally 
observed within the mantle, with the 
exception of a region on the upper mantle 
termed the transition zone, located between 300 and 700 Km depth. Waves from the 
crust passing through this region experience a rather rapid velocity increase before 
entering the more uniform bulk of the mantle. 
The outer core, which is liquid, encloses the solid inner core which is believed to be 
mainly composed of iron. P-Waves moving from the mantle to the outer core 
experience a sudden decrease in their velocity, before a steady increase occurs once 
again with increase of depth at a rate consistent of a homogeneous fluid. S-Wave 
velocity however, reduces to zero within the outer core as shear waves cannot 
propagate in liquids. It should be noted that seismic waves propagating through the 
Earth which is a medium of variable density and composition, exhibit typical wave 
behaviour such as refraction and reflection off the boundaries. This yields a much 
more complex seismic trend as multiple instances of the same wave can appear at 
different times depending on the length of the path travelled. This in combination 
with surface bound waves can indeed produce rather dynamic and unpredictable 
excitation stimuli to the seismic sensors on the crust. 
Figure 2.4 Earths structure 
6378 Km 
~ 37 ~ 
2.1.3 Early seismographs 
Early seismographs were predominantly based on undamped pendulums unable to 
record time and unable to provide valid data for the length of the Earthquake. The 
first instrument able to record time was built by Filippo Cecchi in 1875, and soon 
after, many more improved versions made their appearance in Japan, including 
horizontal pendulums.  
The first North American seismograph was installed in California near San Jose in 
1897, which also recorded the 1906 San Francisco earthquake. 
Due to the completely undamped nature of the pendulous sensors, early instruments 
would acquire resonance and distort the data shortly after the very few seconds of 
the event. It wasnt until 1898 when E. Wiechert introduced the first seismometer 
utilising viscous damping and therefore able to provide better quality data for the 
duration of the Earthquake. 
It was not until the 1900s that B. Galitzen developed the first seismograph utilising 
electromagnetic induction via the pendulum arrangement, in order to produce a 
current in a coil proportional to the velocity component of the seismic event. Based 
on this revolutionary in its time approach, many seismographs were constructed and 
installed forming some of the first seismograph networks round the world. It was 
this sudden availability of seismograms that boosted experimental seismology with 
which by 1909 the identification of P and S waves, the presence of the Earths core, 
and the existence of the transition zone were established. Continuous study of 
seismograms and earthquake locations lead to the discovery of plate tectonics in the 
19060s and therefore the realisation of the primary mechanism of earthquake 
generation. The motion of the plates is of course what has and still is forming our 
planet, with the plates moving apart in the mid oceanic ridges causing continental 
drift, and being recycled back into the mantle in the subduction zones. In areas of 
shear faults, such as the San Andreas fault, the plate movement is transverse and a 
sudden release of built up pressure across the length of such a boundary can result in 
earthquakes of catastrophic magnitude. 
A surge in funding for seismology followed the detection of a Russian nuclear bomb 
explosion by seismographs in 1949, and by 1961 the Worldwide Standardised 
~ 38 ~ 
Seismograph Network (WWSSN) was in place comprising long and short period 
seismometers. 
The 1960 great Chilean earthquake provided data able to establish for the first time 
the Earths natural resonance frequencies. It was found that the Earth can resonate 
for several days after a large magnitude earthquake. By 1972 the Apollo missions 
had placed seismometers on the lunar surface and the first moonquakes were 
recorded, whilst in 1976, Viking 2 placed a seismometer on Mars. 
Various technologies have been employed to acquire both linear [43] [44] [45], and 
rotational [46] [47] [48] [49] [50] [51] [52] [53] [54] [55] [56] [57] seismic data, and 
even with the advent of newer technologies such as the Global Positioning System 
(GPS) [58], with the exception of very few [59], all are primarily based on the 
original inertial mass principle. Unlike some modern integrated sensors however, 
which due to their small size have also found other commercial applications [60] 
[61], early seismometers were large by comparison instruments. A typical mass 
spring inertial arrangement is shown in figure 2.5 below. 
Figure 2.5 Typical mass-spring arrangement 
Ground motion 
Damping 
~ 39 ~ 
If just enough damping is provided by the damper in order to stop the mass 
oscillating excessively near its resonant frequency, then logically it can be deduced 
that the ground motion of the Earth u(t) can be described as a function of the motion 
of the mass     . With the system initially at rest, a rapid upward movement of the 
Earth would result in the momentary extension of the spring, due to the mass 
inertia, shortly followed by the acceleration and movement of the mass in the 
direction of the Earths motion. With reference to the frame (which is the same as 
the ground) the mass initially appears to move downwards as the Earth moves 
upwards and therefore a phase difference must exist between the two. Extending this 
notion further, a high frequency sinusoidal ground motion would result in a 
stationery mass in space, achieving an opposite and proportional in amplitude 
movement to that of the Earth, in which case the seismometer would be recording 
true ground displacement with reference to the frame, and with a phase difference of 
This is not however the case with low frequency ground motion, as the mass would 
be able to follow the motion of the ground closely resulting in very small relative 
mass movement and very little phase difference.  
At a ground motion equal to the natural frequency of the system, maximum mass 
displacement would result and uncontrolled resonance if no damping was present. A 
critically damped system would therefore produce no resonant overshoot and near 
linear phase over the frequencies of interest. 
If      is the displacement of the mass m with respect to the Earth, and      is the 
vertical Earth displacement, the absolute displacement of the mass is therefore: 
The spring will exert an opposing force    to the mass displacement in accordance to 
Hooks law: 
where k is the spring constant, while the viscous dumper will exert a force    
proportional to the velocity of the mass: 
~ 40 ~ 
where D is the dumping constant. Equating the forces using      we obtain; 
Rearranging: 
where the natural frequency of the undamped system (D=0) is     
 , and the 
damping is described by   
Examination of equation 2.4 confirms that for frequencies much higher than   , 
acceleration is high and therefore the term    dominates the left hand side, therefore 
       and so the sensor responds to displacement. For frequencies lower than   , 
the term   
   dominates and therefore the sensor responds to acceleration, as   
Based on the above mathematical relationships, equipping the mass with a simple 
stylus in a very low natural frequency system yields a simple seismograph, whilst a 
system with high natural frequency and means of measuring relative mass 
displacement yields an accelerometer. A moving coil attached to the mass over a 
stationery magnet on the other hand results in a velocity sensor. The characteristic of 
the sensor of course is also dependant on damping coefficient. Figure 2.6 depicts the 
response of such a second order system to a unity step input at different damping 
values varying from 0 to 1.4 in incremental steps of 0.2. 
~ 41 ~ 
Figure 2.6 Second order system response to a step function at various damping rates (public domain) 
Since an arbitrary signal can be resolved into a sum of harmonics according to 
Fourier, we can generally assume a harmonic input ground motion signal      
     , where  is the angular frequency, and assuming that the sensor is a linear 
system, the output should also be harmonic in the form               . 
It then follows: 
Therefore: 
where      is the complex instrument response to a ground motion       which 
can be written in terms of amplitude and phase as follows: 
~ 42 ~ 
where  
Figure 2.7 below shows graphically that resonance occurs as the frequency of the 
ground motion   approaches the natural frequency of the system    resulting in 
high amplitude response if the damping is sufficiently lower than critical. 
Figure 2.7 Natural resonance of systems (public domain) 
For frequencies much greater than the natural frequency     , the amplitude 
        , and the phase       , as seen in figure 2.8 below. The seismometer 
therefore responds to ground displacement, but with a phase shift of . 
For frequencies much less than the natural frequency,     , the amplitude 
  , and the phase       , thus the seismometer responds to ground 
h= 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.707, 1, 2 
~ 43 ~ 
acceleration with zero phase. As mentioned earlier, the shape of the response 
depends on the damping coefficient represented by h, where   
Evidently, both    and h must be appropriately considered in order to create a 
useful instrument. So a purely mechanical seismometer utilising a stylus to record 
ground displacement requires a very low natural frequency, or in terms of actual 
construction, a very large mass needs to be suspended by very soft springs, which 
clearly presents huge practical limitations when considering low seismic frequencies 
in the order of 0.01Hz.  
Figure 2.8 Phase response of systems (public domain) 
Similarly, a velocity meter constructed from a mechanical seismometer but with a 
moving coil round a stationary magnet, or vice versa, produces a voltage output 
proportional to the velocity of the inertial mass, and also suffers from the same 
practical limitations when considering the lower frequency seismic spectrum.  
A diagrammatic velocity transducer arrangement is shown in figure 2.9 below. 
~ 44 ~ 
Figure 2.9 Velocimeter arrangement 
In such a transducer, damping can be simply achieved by loading the coil with a 
shunt resistor R in order to produce the desired response. Responses to different 
values of shunt resistance were shown in figure 1.3 for a typical geophone, which is 
of course a velocity sensor. 
A true broadband sensor then can only be achieved by a high natural frequency 
accelerometer where     .  
The concluded responses of a mechanical sensor with       , a mechanical 
sensor with velocity transducer also with       , and an acceleration sensor with 
        , are shown in figure 2.10 for clarity. 
Spring 
Casing 
Magnet Shunt resistor 
~ 45 ~ 
Figure 2.10 Frequency, velocity and acceleration responses of (A) Mechanical Sensor: (B) Velocity 
Sensor: (C) Acceleration Sensor (public domain) 
Since the practical difficulties of producing low natural frequency sensors using a 
mass-spring arrangement were insurmountable, several designs focusing on 
pendulums and pendulums with springs evolved. When considering a pendulum, the 
natural frequency given by: 
~ 46 ~ 
where g is the acceleration due to gravity, and l is the pendulum length. Whilst 
increasing the length would result in a smaller natural frequency, huge lengths 
would be required for achieving the lower frequencies of interest in seismology. 
However, reducing g, or more precisely, reducing the effect of g on the system, 
would also achieve a reduction of   . One such mechanical arrangement the 
garden gate for a horizontal seismometer is depicted in figure 2.11. In this 
arrangement the restoring force exerted on the near horizontal pendulum is   
      and therefore the natural frequency of the system is described by: 
Figure 2.11 The Garden gate arrangement 
Garden gate seismometers have obtained in practice natural frequencies down to 
0.05 Hz, however, as expected, these sensors are very susceptible to even the 
smallest changes of instrument tilt. Several of these very early type seismometers 
are still in use round the world. 
~ 47 ~ 
Another early design was the inverted pendulum arrangement in which an 
inverted pendulum was held vertical by two opposing springs as depicted in figure 
2.12 thus reducing the effect of g on the mass when off centre and resulting in a 
much smaller restoring force. Some very large scale instruments based on this 
design were built, with large masses as big as 1 ton and achieving natural 
frequencies down to 0.1 Hz. 
Figure 2.12 Inverted pendulum arrangement 
Inverted pendulum seismometers are reportedly the longest serving designs and 
many of these instruments are still in use worldwide to date. 
In an effort to produce a low natural frequency sensor but for vertical motion, 
LaCoste invented the LaCoste seismometer in 1934 which in theory achieves an 
infinite natural period, in other words, the restoring force is zero at every point of its 
motion. The mechanical arrangement utilising a zero length spring is shown in 
figure 2.13. 
Pivot 
Motion 
Springs 
~ 48 ~ 
Figure 2.13 The LACoste seismometer arrangement  
The zero length spring is simply constructed as a normal spring but pre-tensioned 
such that in its un-stretched state, where the finite thicknesses of the spring wire 
loops touch each other thus not allowing the spring to contract any more, the tension 
is the same as if the spring was originally of zero length and was stretched to this 
physical length. In other words, if the spring was allowed to theoretically compress 
regardless of the thickness of the coils touching each other making this physically 
impossible, it would attain a zero length at zero tension. A zero length spring 
therefore has a tension proportional to its actual length. 
Resolving the forces acting on the mass M, the torque due to gravity can be 
expressed as: 
and the torque due to the spring extended from its zero length to a length L can be 
found by: 
~ 49 ~ 
For mass stability at any angle       and therefore: 
For a known mass M and spring constant K, as long as the relationship of the 
distances satisfies: 
the net force exerted on the pendulum will be zero, theoretically resulting in an 
infinite period. Much like the garden gate, this system does not work to the 
theoretical absolutes and inclining the vertical axis is necessary to provide stability 
and a non-infinite natural period. It is also extremely sensitive to small changes of 
inclination. A version of the LaCoste seismometer, utilising astatic leaf spring 
suspension, was also created as it was simpler to manufacture using a leaf spring to 
counterbalance the forces acting on the mass. Unfortunately this design suffers from 
similar drawbacks and it is in addition very sensitive to external disturbances. 
Force Balance sensors, depicted in figure 2.14, evolved to compensate for some of 
the limitations of these purely mechanical sensors, were a closed loop electronic 
system generated a force via the means of a restoration coil on the mass equal to the 
force of the acceleration, in an attempt to keep the mass at a steady state. It is 
obvious that an error is required in the first place if a control system is to generate a 
restoring control effort, and therefore in practice the mass did indeed oscillate with 
small amplitudes. The measure of effort by the control system to keep the mass in 
steady state would be proportional to the acceleration sensed, usually a measure of 
current through the electromagnet actuator. 
~ 50 ~ 
Figure 2.14 Force balance sensor employing closed loop compensation 
Such instruments have been, and still are widely used, with few manufacturers 
endlessly attempting to produce sensors with higher gains and higher natural 
frequencies, yet stable and sensitive enough to measure low level seismic tremors. 
These directly conflicting requirements have yielded numerous models, each 
suitable to specific bandwidths and with specific sensitivities. 
Due to the impracticalities of direct displacement sensors, the other branch of 
evolution of seismometers, other than the Force Balance accelerometers, focussed 
on the moving coil velocity sensors yielding the much used over the years, 
geophone. 
It should be noted that the words seismograph and seismometer have been and 
are still used interchangeably, however, many manufacturers, in order to avoid 
confusion, have categorised their products: sensors, transducers, or simply 
Instruments, meaning force feedback (balance), MEMS accelerometers, and 
Geophone type sensors; digitizers, or data acquisition modules, meaning 
digitization, filtering and general data acquisition modules able to accept inputs from 
such sensors. 
To further add to the confusion, combined instruments with embedded sensors and 
data acquisition circuitry, are also marketed under the name seismographs.  
All of the aforementioned instruments require direct or remote computer 
connectivity in order to further process and visually present the acquired data. 
Permanent magnet 
Permanent magnet 
Displacement 
error sensors 
Electromagnetic actuator 
(Restoration coil) 
Spring 
~ 51 ~ 
2.2 Modern seismographs 
Although generally based on the early inertial mass-spring arm with stylus 
arrangement, modern seismometers utilise a variety of electronic sensors and can be 
categorised by the type of sensor used, their bandwidth capability, and their 
magnitude capability. Categorisation by sensor broadly results in velocimeters and 
accelerometers, the former utilising a geophone while the latter utilising an 
accelerometer as a sensor element. The bandwidth capability categorisation, which 
also depends on the type of sensor, results in Long Period (LP), Short Period (SP), 
Broadband (BB), and Very Broadband (VBB) seismometers, whilst their magnitude 
capability defines them as strong motion or otherwise. 
By far good quality broadband instruments are currently the most utilised in local 
and global studies and these are the focus of this work. The challenge in designing 
these seismometers with good accuracy, linearity and low noise lies in the nature of 
the seismic signals which demand a sensor capable of large dynamic range 
capability. Table 2 below depicts the typical Earth bandwidth of interest according 
to source. 
Frequency Source 
0.00001  0.0001 Hz Earth tides 
0.0001  0.001 Hz Earth free oscillation  
0.001  0.1 Hz Seismic surface, P and S waves, of large magnitude 
earthquakes M> 6 
0.1  1000 Hz Seismic surface, P and S waves small magnitude 
earthquakes M< 2 
Table 2 Earth bandwidth of interest 
It can be seen that the frequency range of Earth signals is very large ranging from 10 
Hz to 1 KHz thus making great demands on the frequency response of the sensors, 
whilst an equally challenging amplitude range from 0.1nm to over 10m is also to be 
considered. These values are of course absolute extremes, and it is generally 
accepted that the frequency bandwidth of interest is from 0.01 to 100 Hz with good 
ground motion sensitivity in the order of nm. Although it is reasonably easy to band-
limit the signal to 100 Hz in hardware, achieving the lower frequency cut off of 0.01 
Hz or below without distorting the low frequency content of the seismic signal or 
losing it altogether in noise, is a an extremely challenging task. 
~ 52 ~ 
2.2.1 Geophones 
Geophones are included in this section as they are still manufactured and used 
widely, and although they have been in existence for a very long time, modern 
geophones are the result of continuous improvement of the original mechanical 
seismometer with a coil sensor arrangement. A typical geophone is depicted in 
figure 2.15. 
Figure 2.15 A typical Geophone arrangement 
Flat springs attached to the casing and the magnet allow for movement mostly in a 
single direction, whilst two stationary coils fixed to the inner casing are coupled 
differentially, in order to reduce noise. As seen earlier, these sensors suffer from 
poor low frequency performance and a limited movement range. Several attempts 
have been made to correct or improve the response of these instruments either by 
direct design or in the digital domain, however, the search for best performance has 
lead to theories of MEMS geophones constructed from MEMS accelerometer 
sensors [62]. Very few studies in existence propose the possibility of geophones 
performing better that accelerometers in strong motion events [63]. 
2.2.2 MEMS Accelerometers  
MEMS accelerometers are readily available in various specifications and 
technologies and can be broadly subdivided into several prominent types: thermal 
mass, piezoelectric, Piezoresistive, and capacitive accelerometers.  
Connector Moving magnet 
Coils fixed to inner casing 
Inner casing 
Flat springs 
Outer casing 
~ 53 ~ 
The Piezo group of accelerometers, which rely on the piezoresistive or 
piezoelectric effect, although high performing and rugged in construction, they 
simply do not operate efficiently at the lower frequencies required for seismology, 
typically failing to perform at frequencies below 1 to 2 Hz. Thermal mass 
accelerometers which utilise a heated gas as their inertial mass, perform very 
reliably down to DC level, but suffer from high noise floor. Most importantly 
however, they fail to perform reliably at higher frequencies, limiting their linear 
operation to only a few Hz. 
Whilst each of the aforementioned accelerometers is unique in the principle of 
operation and provides certain characteristics desirable in certain situations, 
capacitive accelerometers possess wide bandwidth of operation down to DC, lowest 
noise floor, and in general they outperform all other types in almost every attribute, 
making them the focus of this work. The basic anatomy of a single axis capacitive 
MEMS accelerometer is shown in figure 2.16.  
Figure 2.16 An illustrational view of a MEMS accelerometers internal structure 
Within the integrated circuit (IC), the inertial mass is suspended by polycrystalline 
silicon (polysilicon) springs such that the fingers protruding from it are central to 
the adjacent fixed plates at equal distances    and   , thus creating capacitors     
and    . It should be noted that as with most configurations already discussed, this 
Inertial 
Spring 
Spring 
Fixed plates 
Moving plates 
mo plates 
~ 54 ~ 
indeed is a miniaturised mass-spring system. With this in mind, it can be easily 
envisaged that any acceleration along the axis of sensitivity would result in 
displacement of the mass and an inevitable imbalance in the distances    and   . As 
one distance increases, the other decreases in proportion, and since the resulting 
force due to the acceleration is proportional to the mass displacement, measuring 
the displacement with high enough accuracy is all that is required to derive an output 
proportional to the acceleration experienced. This is normally achieved by an anti-
phase excitation of the differential capacitive structure, as depicted in figure 2.17. 
Figure 2.17 Anti-phase excitation of differential capacitance structure 
From elementary physics, the parallel plate model for a capacitor dictates that a 
capacitors capacitance is proportional to the overlap area of the plates A, and 
inversely proportional to the distance d between them, as follows: 
where       ,    is the permeability of free space, and    is the relative 
permeability of the dielectric. Also, the relation between the accumulated charge Q, 
and the capacitors capacitance C when a voltage V is applied across it, is described 
Assuming that the inertial mass is at rest and the voltages V1 and V2 are equal and 
opposite and of value     and     respectively; then capacitances    and    which 
are in series, would have a voltage of     across them, and would each accumulate a 
charge equal to the total charge    of the circuit, such that: 
Buffer 
plates 
DeMod 
plates 
mo plates 
~ 55 ~ 
where    and   are the charges accumulated in capacitors    and    respectively. 
Since the total charge must be equal to the total capacitance times the voltage across 
the system, as dictated by equation 2.24: 
where        and    
. It then follows that the total charge must be equal 
The voltages     and     across each of the capacitors can therefore be describe by 
the following equations. 
The voltage output    from the differential capacitor arrangement and into the buffer 
can then be described as 
but it can also be described as 
Substituting for      into equation 2.29: 
~ 56 ~ 
It can therefore be seen that the voltage output is directly proportional to the 
difference of the capacitance value of the capacitors. Since the capacitance of each 
capacitor is inversely proportional to the distance between its plates, as shown in 
equation 2.23, and the capacitors of identical size exist within the same 
environment, it then follows: 
From the resulting equation 2.35, it can be seen that the net voltage output of the 
circuit is zero when the mass is at rest directly equidistant from the two adjacent 
fixed plates which form the differential capacitor pair    and   . Any movement of 
the mass will also result in a differential change in the values of    and   , which in 
turn will result in a positive or negative output depending on the direction of 
imbalance. 
As explained earlier, a mass-spring system is governed by the physical equations: 
Where d is the displacement, k is the spring constant, and F is the force acting upon 
the mass m, resulting in an acceleration a. 
From the equations it is evident that in order to be able to detect small displacements 
with a small mass, a very flexible structure is required, since a smaller mass also 
dictates a smaller displacement. Likewise, in order for the bandwidth of interest to 
be in the flat section of the second order response of such a system, a high resonant 
~ 57 ~ 
frequency    is required, which dictates smaller displacements as a result of an 
acceleration acting upon the system.  
The advancement of micromachined devices equipped with differential capacitance 
structures able to measure incredibly small changes in displacement, has made 
possible the fabrication of sensors with small inertial masses. The small mass 
attached with very flexible micro-springs is able to attain reasonably high resonant 
frequencies.  
The excellent frequency response down to DC of the capacitive MEMS 
accelerometers has made them the sensor of preference for most modern 
seismographs. Able to match if not outperform their much more expensive and 
much larger macro equivalents [64], MEMS devices can also be altered on silicon to 
achieve more desirable characteristics for seismic and other specialist applications 
[65] [66] [67]. This rather expensive process however, requires the backing from a 
large commercial market sector in order to be thought attainable for niche sectors 
such as seismology.  
As mentioned earlier, commercially available devices are rather adaptable and the 
technology can be easily integrated in to a variety of products allowing the 
exploration of different markets [68] [69] [70], albeit with some careful 
considerations on calibration [71] [72], noise, and the many aforementioned 
potential sources of error [73] [74] [75] [76]. 
In most MEMS accelerometers, measuring the displacement of the mass by 
measuring the difference in capacitance across the differential capacitor arrangement 
is typically achieved by a synchronous demodulation circuit as very 
diagrammatically depicted as part of figure 2.17. This technique is very effective in 
extracting low level signals buried within the noise floor whilst able to diminish any 
low frequency disturbances and close to DC effects. By effectively moving the 
measurement away from the low frequency, or other near in frequency sources, this 
technique improves the signal to noise ratio, making the sensing of weak signals 
possible. The modulation of the sensor signal to a higher frequency and its 
subsequent multiplication with an in-phase signal of the same frequency, results in 
the movement of the signal of interest back to DC, and the filtering of any other 
~ 58 ~ 
signals that are not synchronised with it. Assuming a modulating signal   , such 
that:  
where A is the amplitude and f the frequency of the modulation signal; A subsequent 
multiplication of this modulating signal with another in-phase sinusoidal signal of 
the same frequency would result in a signal at DC, and another at twice the original 
frequency as shown in equation 2.39 below. 
All other frequency noise and interference components would also be moved to 
other non-DC frequencies. A more detailed diagram of such a demodulator is shown 
in figure 2.18 below. The low pass filter removes all but the DC and bandwidth of 
interest, thus excluding any noise artefacts. With typical internal modulation 
frequencies in the range of 50KHz to 1MHz, and therefore comfortably outside of 
the bandwidth of interest, it is evident why these sensors by far outperform all other 
comparative technologies. 
Figure 2.18 Synchronous demodulator 
Due to the simplicity of the circuit required, square waves are commonly used rather 
that sine waves for the modulation signals, and although adequate for the purpose, 
their noise rejection performance is by far inferior to systems utilising sine waves.  
Since square waves can be thought to be constructed by the summation of their 
fundamental frequency and an infinite amount of odd harmonic sinusoids; 
multiplication of two square waves of the same frequency results in the 
Inverter 
Modulation 
signal 
Differential 
capacitor stage 
Amplifier 
Low pass filter 
Synchronous 
demodulator 
~ 59 ~ 
multiplication of each sine component of the reference with each sine component of 
the modulated signal, in turn resulting in a DC component containing energy from 
each harmonic of the square wave. Filtering will thus be unable to filter out these 
higher frequency energy artefacts superimposed onto the DC signal, but depending 
on the harmonic, they will be rather small in magnitude. Modulation frequencies for 
such systems are therefore selected to be high and for their harmonics not to 
coincide with any known sources of noise, such as mains hum. 
Careful selection of modulating frequency and the utilisation of a low noise 
amplifier layout tends to yield very simple circuits with very adequate performance, 
far superior to circuits attempting to directly measure DC voltages. Such a circuit 
with a lock-in amplifier for demodulation is depicted in figure 2.19 
Figure 2.19 Lock-in amplifier utilising square wave modulation 
The modulating signal excites the sensor but also controls the switch to the non-
inverting input of the amplifier. When the signal is positive, the switch sets the 
amplifier for a gain of +1. When the signal is negative, the switch sets the amplifier 
for gain of -1 resulting in a multiplication of the modulated sensor signal with the 
modulating reference square wave. The RC low pass filter on the output simply 
removes the unwanted higher frequency components. 
Such a topology is easy to manufacture on-chip, and although any offsets, noise and 
 characteristics are indeed diminished by this methodology, the noise and offsets of 
the end amplifier and filter are not. In addition, an output amplifier is also included 
with an internal in series resistor for short circuit protection, and to also allow for a 
Sensor 
Amplifier 
AC coupling 
~ 60 ~ 
single external capacitor to form a low pass filter without any other additional 
components. 
2.2.3 Signal conditioning  
Once outside the MEMS, the sensors raw analogue signal requires filtering, 
buffering, and usually amplification before digitisation. Typically a data acquisition 
system consists of the front end electronics, which their primary purpose is to 
interface the sensor to the digitising circuit by conditioning the raw signal 
appropriately. Such a typical system is shown in figure 2.20. 
Figure 2.20 A typical data acquisition system 
Since the output of a MEMS accelerometer is DC biased even when no acceleration 
is taking place to a voltage level termed    , any changes due to temperature, tilts, 
or ageing on this bias would also result in erroneous initial conditions and 
subsequent measurements. In order to eliminate this rather intricate problem, some 
seismograph manufacturers have opted for the low-tech approach of de-coupling the 
sensor signal with the aid of a large in-series capacitor, therefore eliminating any DC 
component and long term drifts of the baseline. This decoupling of course 
irreversibly distorts the signals below 1Hz which are of great interest in seismology 
[77] [78]. 
An additional issue caused by the large in value and high in tolerance internal to the 
sensor output resistor. With resistances typically in the region of 30K, the internal 
resistor immediately classifies a MEMS sensor as a high impedance source. Any 
coupling to this source therefore, capacitive or resistive, requires careful 
consideration across the frequency spectrum of interest.  
An amplification stage within the instrument may or may not be employed 
depending on the sensor, the system topology, and the manufacturer, whilst the 
Sensor 
Buffer/ 
Amplifier 
Filter ADC 
Front End stage 
~ 61 ~ 
filtering stage is most often constructed using a simple RC filter stage in a low pass 
filter arrangement. Rarely, an additional switch capacitor filter is also employed to 
further ensure that frequencies above the Nyquist point are not present in the signal 
prior to digitisation, and to improve the overall amplitude and phase characteristics 
of the instrument. 
In recent years, seismograph manufacturers have almost exclusively opted for the 
use of 24 bit    analogue to digital converters, or compensators [79], in an attempt 
to provide high resolution seismic data. At these rather ambitious resolutions, 
extreme low noise design and very elaborate supply de-coupling is imperative if one 
is to attempt to capture acceleration data without flooding several least significant 
bits (LSbs) of the ADC with noise. Few, if any instruments, utilise multi-stage active 
filters in the front end electronics, as this initial front end filtering only viewed as 
means to narrow the bandwidth in preparation for digitisation. Further extensive 
filtering and processing is always performed after the digitisation of the analogue 
signal, in the digital domain. 
Some more recent and rather unique seismographs, employ the averaging and active 
filtering of several sensor channels in order to minimise the noise content of the 
signal prior to final filtering and digitisation. Such a configuration is shown in figure 
2.21 below. 
Figure 2.21 Unique elaborate seismograph front end 
Two or more axially aligned sensors are first band-limited by a low pass RC filter 
constructed by utilising the internal to the sensors resistors and external capacitors. 
Sensor1 
Sensor2 
Internal 
buffer 
Internal 
resistor 
RC filter  
Summing 
junction  
Active 
filter  
SW Cap 
filter  
RC filter  
Low Pass 
filters  
~ 62 ~ 
These filters have a rather high frequency cut-off as not to degrade the signal, and 
serve only as higher frequency noise reduction stages prior to the summing junction. 
In theory, the summation of two nearly identical signals containing random in nature 
noise would result in an output twice the signal magnitude with a much reduced in 
amplitude noise. 
An active filter stage aids to provide a sharp cut-off and exclude the natural 
resonance frequency of the sensor from the signal, while a further Switched 
Capacitor (SW Cap) filter band limits the signal to within half the sampling rate of 
the ADC. The additional RC filter prior to the ADC is necessary in order to 
attenuate the inherent clock feed-through of the SW Cap filter.  
It should be noted that this is a rather unique arrangement and typically only a 
simple RC filter is utilised for band limiting the sensor signal before digitisation in 
most instruments. 
 2.2.4 Signal conversion and storage 
Digitisation of the sensor signal is almost always accomplished by a 16 bit 
successive approximation, or more recently a 24 bit Sigma Delta (  ) analogue to 
digital converter (ADC). The sampling frequency can be selected by the user and 
rarely exceeds 40 KHz even in high performance models: higher sampling 
frequencies inevitably reduce the length of the data captured due to the finite amount 
of onboard memory. 
The popularity of    converters is due to a combination of low cost, high resolution, 
and high enough sampling frequencies to be able to digitise most seismic 
bandwidths of interest. The very nature of the converter, as suggested by its name, 
delta modulates the incoming signal to a much higher frequency resulting in the 
spreading of the quantisation noise via a technique known as oversampling. 
Although oversampling can clearly be achieved with any ADC, provided it is fast 
enough; a sigma delta converter also employs noise shaping which further moves the 
noise energy into the higher frequencies, which are in the end excluded by a low-
pass filter. The current availability and technologies used within these converters 
clearly plays a crucial role to designing any sensor whose data is to be digitised and 
further processed in the digital domain.  
~ 63 ~ 
From the block diagram of figure 2.22, a signal entering a sigma delta converter is 
first fed to a difference amplifier, hence the Delta in the name, before being 
integrated, or averaged over time in the Sigma part of its function. The Digital to 
Analogue Converter (DAC) on the feedback, is simply a switch that connects the 
inverting input of the ADC to either a positive or a negative reference voltage. The 
effect of the integrator is to average the error thus providing an averaging filtering 
effect to the signal whilst pushing the quantisation noise into higher frequencies. 
The overall effect on the signal once low-pass filtered and decimated is that of a 
high signal to noise ratio. 
Figure 2.22 Block diagram of Sigma Delta converter (Public domain) 
Achieving high signal to noise ratios with more conventional ADCs also can be 
achieved by oversampling techniques and by the increase of the number of bits. 
Although in most seismic instruments the digitising circuit is continuously active in 
order to constantly acquire pre-event data for a zero reference, a user adjustable 
vibration threshold (trigger level) above which an earthquake is deemed to be taking 
place is normally employed to trigger the instrument into digitising and storing 
seismic data. Such a trigger requires to be set to a comfortable margin above the 
noise level of the instrument and the background vibration noise of the particular 
location.  
~ 64 ~ 
Figure 2.23 Acceleration trends of (a) El Centro, (b) Northridge, and (c) Llolleo earthquakes  
(public domain) 
Most earthquake accelerograms tend to follow recognised patterns in terms of 
primary and secondary wave arrivals, however each one does contain unique 
features when examined closely, as one would expect. Figure 2.23 depicts three 
different earthquake accelerograms from which the random nature of earthquakes 
can be clearly seen in the overall shape of each signal. The seismic trend from El 
Centro appears to have a steep but incremental onset, and also appears to contain 
some ringing before it finally subsides. The seismic trend from Northridge also 
shows a similar rapid and progressive onset, but tapers off smoothly after 10 seconds 
without any ringing artefacts. The seismic signal from Llolleo, which is plotted on a 
much longer timescale, exhibits a rather smoother onset and tail off and most 
interestingly at least one pre-main event artefact, which may or may not activate the 
triggering mechanism in this example. Such artefacts, especially low frequency 
adulations and low level tremors occurring many seconds before the main seismic 
event, could be missed thus yielding unrepresentative seismic data. 
Trigger threshold level arbitrarily selected at approximately 0.08g  
Pre-main event artefact 
~ 65 ~ 
Once triggered, the instrument starts recording the seismic data for usually up to 120 
seconds on its onboard memory, which is typically a of non-volatile type. Flash 
disks or cards of several Giga Bytes are usually employed. 
2.3 Post-digitisation processing  
Additional processing of the seismic data in the digital domain is essential in order 
to correct for inherent errors, further filter the digitised signal, and mathematically 
manipulate the data to yield a satisfactory displacement over time trend. Provided 
the data is derived using a modern instrument, it can be assumed that the sampling 
intervals are correct and the samples are of reasonable resolution. Since seismic 
instruments are event driven, the value of the trigger threshold must be of a value 
grater that the underline environmental and instrument noise. A value of 0.01g is 
usually attainable, however, pre-event data is typically lost within the averaging 
section of the accelerograph in an effort to determine a zero reference baseline. 
Since the baseline is mathematically transitioned in an attempt to provide a zero 
integral of the acceleration curve, errors are inevitably introduced, requiring the 
application of more precise baseline correction and de-trending methods, such as 
spline-fitting, and least squares regression trend subtraction from the accelerogram. 
A seismograph, as a complete instrument, possesses its own dynamic response and 
therefore imparts an alteration to the signal recorded. The transfer function of the 
instrument, when known, is used in an attempt to reverse this distorting effect via 
de-convolution and derive more accurate seismic data. 
Other more recent and involved methods use adaptive techniques and extract power 
spectra for the acquisition of a more complete picture of particular seismic events. 
 2.3.1 Digital filtering 
Although the acceleration data has already been band-limited by low-pass filtering 
onboard the instrument, further more aggressive filtering is always required in order 
to totally exclude higher frequency artefacts from inherent noise sources whilst 
retaining the accuracy of the data within the bandwidth of interest. Such digital filter 
invariably takes the form of an Infinite Impulse Response (IIR) filter, or a Finite 
Impulse Response (FIR). While FIR filters can be easily constructed to exhibit linear 
~ 66 ~ 
phase characteristics, FIR filters which are sometimes modelled on classical 
analogue counterparts such as Butterworth, Chebyshev and Elliptical, do not exhibit 
phase linearity and further digital manipulation is required to attain a zero phase 
output. As with other shape-critical data, the accuracy of the phase information in 
seismic trends needs to be retained without distortion, since it determines the 
location of peaks and other significant features within the trend. 
Recently, more convoluted methods including least-squares adaptive techniques 
have been employed in an attempt to further improve the quality of the data [80] 
[81] [82] [83] [84] [85] [86]. 
2.3.2 Numerical integration 
Numerical integration is of course required to obtain seismic displacement trends 
from acceleration data, since displacement over time is indeed the second integral of 
acceleration over time. In principle, the initial conditions of velocity       and 
displacement       must be known in order for displacement over time to be derived 
by the double integration process. For example, deriving the velocity trend      by 
integrating the accelerogram       
inevitably requires knowledge of the initial velocity term, which of course is not 
known. The only way to eliminate this difficulty is to assume both the initial 
velocity and initial displacement terms to be zero, which of course requires a very 
accurate estimation of the baseline of the accelerograph. A careful examination and 
estimation of the zero level instrument response is conducted almost exclusively via 
the use of pre event data capture. The averaging of this pre event data, which usually 
contains some noise and drifts, serves as the zero initial conditions for the 
integration process. As the trapezoid rule is most often utilised for the numerical 
integration for its computational simplicity, the accuracy of the integrals also depend 
on the sampling frequency and the resolution of the digitising ADC. 
 Despite the aforementioned assumptions and corrections, displacement data 
recovery from real signals is fraught with errors, and more intricate baseline 
~ 67 ~ 
correction [87] [88] [89] and de-trending and integration algorithms [90] [91] [92] 
[93] [94] [95] [96], still prove to be essential in the processing of seismic data. 
It should be noted once more that geophones, unlike accelerometers, are 
velocimeters, and their output is proportional to the velocity, not the acceleration of 
the excitation signal, and hence require only a single integration for the derivation of 
displacement over time data. This could be viewed as a big advantage since a single 
integration would produce results with significantly reduced errors, however, their 
poor dynamic response, as seen earlier, prohibits their use where wide bandwidth 
accurate measurements are required. 
2.4 Conclusion 
Modern seismographs are evolving to take advantage of new and emerging sensing 
technologies in the quest to reproduce accurate displacement over time data. The use 
of MEMS silicon and servo accelerometers has been gaining momentum, and 
digitisation and post-digitisation techniques are constantly evolving in order to 
improve the quality of the resulting data. 
Most modern seismographic instruments are compound units, comprising separate 
sensor and digitiser modules. The digitiser, being the central part of the device, can 
have inbuilt sensors, or it can typically provide multi-channel connectivity to several 
geophones and/or accelerometric sensors, as shown in figure 2.24 below. This type 
of setup is generally used for reflection seismometry, where the interest is in 
imaging what lies beneath the surface.  
Clusters of seismic sensors are sometimes also used for specialist earthquake 
studies, however, earthquake monitoring typically requires sensors that are 
adequately geographically distributed at key locations several kilometres from each 
other. 
~ 68 ~ 
Figure 2.24 Typical system installation 
Other self-contained systems are neatly integrated into a single casing, utilising an 
onboard sensor, and are used for seismic motion monitoring rather than reflection 
imaging applications, like the one depicted in figure 2.25 below. 
Figure 2.25 A typical self contained seismograph 
In order to appreciate the composition and performance of these modern 
instruments, a simplified list of technical characteristics of a modern and rather 
unique high performance state-of-the-art seismograph, is detailed in table 2.1 below 
Sensor 
Type Tri-axial MEMs silicon accelerometers 
Range Type  5g (vertical axis 1 g offset) 
Dynamic range 91 dB 0.1-20 Hz  
85 dB 0.1-80 Hz 
Offset error < 1 % over operating temperature range 
Linearity < 0.5% 
PC with bespoke software for data 
post processing and visualisation 
Battery 
Seismograph, 
Digitiser 
Sensor 
(Geophone) 
Data and 
power cable 
Power 
Basic user interface 
PC connectivity 
Rugged mounting bolts 
~ 69 ~ 
Gain error < 1 % over operating temperature range 
A/D conversion  
Sampling  Zero skew autonomous sampling 1ppm time-
base (0-60C) 
Anti-Alias 1-pole RC filter (fc = 10kHz) 
Input 3 channels 
Sensor data output rate 50Hz, 100Hz, 200Hz. (500Hz factory option on 
request) 
A/D type 24-bit - A/D 
Integral non-linearity < 0.0006% (full range) 
Resolution 24 bits 
SNR 101 dB (200Hz) 104dB (100Hz) 107dB (50Hz) 
Signal Processing 
Filtering  FIR digital anti-alias filter/decimator Linear 
phase 
Measurement bandwidth DC to 20, 40 or 80Hz 
Recorded dynamic range 130dB (80 Hz BW)  
133dB (40 Hz BW)  
136dB (20 Hz BW) 
Triggering 
Pre-trigger filter options  0.1 Hz high-pass  
1 Hz high-pass  
5 Hz low-pass  
10 Hz low-pass  
0.1  5 Hz band-pass  
0.1  10 Hz band-pass  
1  5 Hz band-pass  
1  10 Hz band-pass 
Absolute level  Independent thresholds on each channel 
Selectable AND or OR triggering on each channel 
Level from 0.1mg to 3 g in 0.1mg steps 
Pre-event length  10 to 120 seconds in 1-second steps 
Post event length  10 to 120 seconds in 1-second steps 
Storage  
Storage time  16 GB Flash disc (other options are available): 
Time stamping 
Type  Low power GPS (standard) 
Accuracy  Better than 10us of UTC with GPS lock 
Table 2.1 Technical characteristics of a modern seismograph 
This type of instrument has been used in the most demanding situations over the last 
decade due to its superior performance. It is not surprising that this calibre of 
instrument utilises triaxial MEMS sensor technology in order to benefit in size, 
performance, and cost. The now wide use of GPS technology enables seismographs 
to report not only exact location but also exact timing of events: a very important 
feature in the study of earthquakes and the propagation of seismic waves through the 
Earth. 
~ 70 ~ 
Chapter 3  
Non ideal instrument functionality 
A block diagram of the processes involved from sensor through to the derivation of 
a displacement seismic trend is depicted in figure 3 below. In order to assess the 
possible sources of error, careful and methodical examination of each section of the 
signal path is essential. 
Figure 3 Block diagram of sensor to displacement data process 
Using the instrument specifications detailed in table 2.1 as a reference example of 
the current state-of-the-art, one can start to analytically conceive possible sources of 
error within the instrument itself. 
 A brief but more critical examination of the sensor section quickly reveals a 
potential for rather large offset and gain errors. For a typical sensor operating from a 
3V supply, a 1% offset error is a substantial 30mV offset in magnitude. Similarly, a 
1% gain error is more than adequate to irreversibly distort any precision 
measurement over the temperature range. It should be noted that although these 
offsets are specified over the temperature range, and some instruments also offer a 
temperature measurement for potential correction, they are not just affected by 
temperature alone. Ageing of components and other non-temperature related long 
term drifts, also significantly contribute to these sources of error. 
In the A/D conversion section of the table, the actual sampling rate is not specified, 
but it could be assumed to be at least 20 KHz since the anti alias filter is specified to 
have a cut off frequency (  ) of 10 KHz. For the given measurement bandwidth of 
Sensor 
Front 
Threshold 
Trigger 
Mem FIR 
proces
Instrument 
~ 71 ~ 
80 Hz, once reduced by the subsequent use of the FIR filter, a simple RC filter with 
an    of 10 KHz will introduce nearly -0.5 of phase shift whilst maintaining a non 
attenuated signal throughout the bandwidth. It should be noted that since this phase 
shift originates from the anti-aliasing filter, the linear phase attributes of the digital 
FIR filter are not capable of recovering this phase shift. Further, should this RC filter 
be constructed utilising the internal to the MEMS output filter resistor as per 
manufacturers recommendation, the rather large 15% tolerance of this resistor 
would certainly produce unexpected dynamic performance between instruments and 
between channels on the same instrument. 
Recalling the noise frequency spectrum of figure 1.4 of a typical MEMS sensor, a 
noise component of -90dB is evident at the sampling frequency of 20 KHz, and -
82dB at 10 KHz, whilst the peak-to-peak unfiltered noise amplitude of such a sensor 
is minimum 6 mV.  
Considering a noise component of -85dB at the aliasing frequency of 15 KHz; once 
through the RC filter, the noise signal will be further attenuated by -5dB, a total of -
90dB. The 24 bit ADC utilised in this instrument has a Least Significant bit (LSb) 
representative value of -144.5dB, and even after the noise shaping effect of the  
architecture, data and noise will still be aliased and phase shifted for frequencies 
greater than 10 KHz, creating error artefacts in the resulting sampled data which are 
irreversible by subsequent filtering or other digital processing techniques.  
A much more detailed investigation of this instrument, representative of the latest 
manufacturing practices utilising MEMS technology, revealed the use of multiple 
sensors for each sensing axis in an attempt to diminish sensor noise by averaging 
several acceleration signal paths. Although in theory these signals could be averaged 
for noise reduction with the assumption that they are identical in nature, this is not 
the case in practice, and any precision factory calibration will not alleviate the fact 
that acquiring a signal in this manner can only result in signal smoothing. This 
averaging technique achieves a reduction in noise at the expense of signal quality, 
since the output is simply the amalgamation of several different signals, of different 
amplitudes and phases. The notable manufacturers design efforts however, 
highlight the importance of noise within seismic instruments [97]. 
~ 72 ~ 
Such pre-set techniques assume that there are no dynamic response differences 
between sensors and that all sensors will drift and age in a similar manner, making 
any possibility of reconstructing the original signal with any accuracy in the long 
term impossible. A component level evaluation of the circuit, conducted under a 
Non Disclosure Agreement (NDA), and therefore its details not reproduced in this 
work, showed phase errors in excess of over 11 over the 100Hz bandwidth in the 
primary filter stages, and a further 5 error in the secondary pre-Analogue to Digital 
Convertor (ADC) sections. Further, examination of the physical instrument 
assembly showed lack of adequate mechanical internal support, thus allowing the 
instrument to induce its own resonant interference onto the seismic signals. 
The above assessment was conducted on an instrument deemed to be 
technologically advanced in order to reveal the sources of error commonly shared 
with many of the several types of seismograph in use to date. Although most other 
instruments do not employ multiple channel averaging techniques, further research 
revealed that simple RC filtering for sensor noise suppression is indeed very 
common if not standard practice.  
Further errors can be reasonably expected to stem from cross-axis sensitivity, poor 
estimation of initial conditions, dynamic tilts, instrument long term drifts, gain 
errors, instrument dynamic response changes, and also integration errors, all leading 
to much altered and unrepresentative acquired seismic data. 
 Before embarking into detailed experimental investigation on the sources and 
effects of these errors, a primary experimental study of MEMS sensors typically 
used in seismological devices, was conducted in order to quantify the challenges of 
deriving displacement data from MEMS accelerometric sensors. 
The primary electronic platform depicted in figure 3.1 was designed and fabricated 
to allow the experimental assessment of the sensor and the pre-amplification stages, 
both jointly and separately. 
~ 73 ~ 
Figure 3.1 The primary MEMS test platform 
0.1% 1K
R14 1
ADXL320
0.1% 1K
J13 S_GND
0.1% 1K
TBD/DNF
TBD/DNF
BAT54SW
IRLML2502
COG/TBD
0.1% 1K
S_XOUT
AD8651
BAT54SW
IRLML2502
C10 0.1uF
0.1% 1K
J15 S_ZERO-XY
R10 1
J10 S_YOUT
J11 S_TEST
Green Power LED
AD8651
C12 0.1uF
IRLML2502
0.1% 1K
J12 S_Vcc
C13 0.1uF
Red ZERO-XY LED
~ 74 ~ 
Frequency response results of the amplifier stage provided amplitude and phase 
distortion frequency figures in excess of 2MHz and 200KHz respectively, indicating 
that zero signal distortion within the 100Hz Bandwidth of interest could easily be 
accomplished with these or similar grade amplifiers. 
To accurately study the response of MEMS sensors during the initial stages, a 
mechanical oscillator capable of pure sinusoidal excitation had to be constructed. It 
was deemed necessary for this mechanical oscillator to also be equipped with a 
sensor able to directly measure displacement over time with sub-millimetre 
resolution, and therefore serve as an electronic reference of the actuating mechanical 
excitation signal. 
A non-contact sensor was thus designed and constructed able to meet the criteria set 
for the purpose of this primary study. A precision photocurrent-to-voltage convertor 
shown in figure 3.2, was fabricated with both amplifier and photodiode specifically 
selected for high speed operation. The Photodiodes specification of rise and fall 
photocurrent times of 5ns, along with amplifiers 63MHz Gain Bandwidth, and 
17V/s Slew Rate, were thought more than adequate for the intended purpose. 
Figure 3.2 Photocurrent to voltage convertor circuit 
A second amplifier stage was also constructed to simply facilitate offset trimming of 
the output signal. 
OP32GP
OP32GP
10K _LIN
Key = S 
SFH485 SFH213FA
10uF-POL
~ 75 ~ 
The physical assembly of the IR non-contact high speed range-finder is shown in 
figure 3.3. An opaque screen between the IR source and the sensing photodiode, 
helped prevent direct optical cross-coupling.  
IR Mask
The distance d to the moving reflector was measured with the PCBs front face as a 
distance reference. The results of the sensors output versus distance are shown in 
table 3, alongside the resultant curves first differential  
 , and a curve fit of the 
inverse square law such a system should theoretically obey.  
Distance d 
Sensor output 
3 3  3.483333333 
3.5 2.7 0.6 2.598979592 
4 2.2 1 2.025 
4.5 1.75 0.9 1.631481481 
5 1.4 0.7 1.35 
6 1.04 0.36 0.983333333 
7 0.8 0.24 0.762244898 
8 0.65 0.15 0.61875 
9 0.5 0.15 0.52037037 
10 0.38 0.12 0.45 
11 0.33 0.05 0.397933884 
Table 3 Non-contact range finder output, derivative and inverse square curve fit 
 Examination of the graphical representation of the results in figure 3.4 revealed that 
the non-contact range-finder did indeed follow the  
 law, and therefore 
linearization of the output was necessary when the range of distances measured was 
greater than few millimetres. 
Figure 3.3 Non-contact range finder optics arrangement 
Screen 
~ 76 ~ 
Figure 3.4 Voltage to distance characteristic of the non-contact range finder 
It was evident from the 
 curve of figure 3.4 that the highest sensitivity of 
100mV/mm was achieved at distances between 4 and 4.5cm, rendering this sensor 
suitable for this purpose in terms of both sensitivity and sub-millimetre resolution. It 
should be noted that the sigmoid appearance of the recorded voltage curve below 
3.5cm was due to the screening of the receiver creating a shadow over the 
photodiode when the reflector was in very close proximity. 
Evaluating the dynamic response of the sensor, took the form of imaging a reflector 
mounted on a leaf spring undergoing damped simple harmonic motion, as confirmed 
by the sensor results depicted in figure 3.5 below.  
Figure 3.5 Dynamic response of the non-contact rangefinder monitoring the vibration of a leaf spring 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Distance (cm) 
Sensor output 
Time (100ms/div) 
~ 77 ~ 
Figure 3.5 confirmed a good low noise dynamic performance in the lower 
frequencies in the order of 10Hz. Derivation of the dynamic capability of the sensor 
over the full 100Hz bandwidth, necessitated the use of a motorised optical chopper 
positioned between the reflector and the sensor. The high frequency pulse results are 
shown in figure 3.6 below. 
Figure 3.6 Optical encoder induced rangefinder output 
It should be noted that the trapezoidal appearance of the pulses in Fig 3.6 was not 
due to slew rate limitations, but due to the encoders edges, creating a sharp but 
progressive non-binary change in reflectance, whilst the sharp spikes appearing 
below and above the cursor lines were due motor induced noise, as the supply was 
shared between the device and the driving DC motor. A period measurement 
revealed a response frequency of 294 Hz, which was almost three times the 
bandwidth of interest. 
With the non-contact displacement sensor completed, a vibration platform able to 
provide sinusoidal excitation was constructed from aluminium machined to tight 
tolerances as diagrammatically depicted in figure 3.7. A cam-shaft arrangement was 
utilised to guarantee a pure sinusoidal mechanical actuation signal to the Device 
Under Test (DUT). A precision-machined steel shaft guided by two Teflon bearings 
served as means of communicating the cam-shafts motion to the DUT. Amplitude 
of oscillation adjustment was accomplished by the use of an offset adjustable 
spindle, connecting the DC motor to the shaft. The platform was able to accomplish 
a full 100Hz operation at small amplitudes of oscillation. 
3.4 ms 
Time (1.8ms/div) 
~ 78 ~ 
Insulated Terminals
BNC DUT
Signal Out
BNC IR
Signal Out
Guide Rail
Teflon Runner
with threaded supportsEpoxied 
Eyelet
Spherical 
Rod-end Bearings
Steel Shaft
Teflon Bearings
Extruded Square
Aluminium section
Adjustable Aluminium
Reflector Assembly
IR Offset Adjust
Potentiometer
IR Power in Socket
IR Sensor
 circuit
Cam-shaft with 
Adjustable amplitudeMotor Mount
Anti-Rotation
Assembly
Support
Pillars
Plinth
DUT Support
Figure 3.7 The mechanical vibration platform 
Using the vibration platform to excite the primary MEMS assembly shown in figure 
3.1, without the output filtering sections populated, the first raw low frequency 
actuation results were obtained as shown in Figure 3.8 below. 
~ 79 ~ 
Figure 3.8 First Primary MEMS platform raw vibration results 
Although the rangefinder confirmed a pure mechanical sinusoidal motion, from the 
results of figure 3.8 it could be seen that the total absence of a band limiting 
capacitor on the output signal of the accelerometer, allowed for a rather large 
amount of noise to be present, making the sinusoidal function only just decipherable.  
In order to investigate the effects of inter-structural resonance, an additional 
compact test-platform was constructed and attached directly to the lower section of 
the actuation shaft.  
Time (50ms/div) 
Figure 3.9 Compact assembly directly bonded to the shaft  
Substrate 
Sensor 
Retainers 
Actuation 
Shaft 
~ 80 ~ 
A MEMS accelerometer and an output filter capacitor were attached with resin to a 
Balsa substrate, and ultra-thin wires soldered directly to the pads of the MEMS IC as 
shown in figure 3.9.  
Re-actuation of the compact assembly at an almost identical frequency showed a 
considerable improvement in the noise content of the signal, as depicted in figure 
3.10, thus providing concrete evidence for the need of careful physical instrument 
assembly if inter-instrument resonance and structural vibration was to be avoided.  
Figure 3.10 Resin bonded compact assembly output with improved noise characteristics 
Digitisation of the compact assemblys raw and unfiltered data was digitised and an 
offset adjustment was mathematically applied in order to eliminate the zero-g 
baseline offset of the accelerometers DC-coupled output, as shown in figure 3.11 
below. It should be noted that the units are irrelevant in figure 3.11, figure 3.12 and 
figure 3.13, as the axes values simply represent quantised and scaled output data 
with reference to scaled sample times.  
Time (50ms/div) 
~ 81 ~ 
Figure 3.11 Digitised and mathematically zero-g offset corrected raw accelerometer data 
Numerical integration of the zero-g corrected accelerometer data yielded a 
representative velocity over time curve as shown in figure 3.12, where the effects of 
the cumulative nature of the integration process could already be seen. Various 
underlying sources of error, such as noise, non-linearities, and zero-g baseline 
misinterpretation, resulted in the magnification of errors yielding a rather 
unconvincing velocity trend. 
Figure 3.12 First integral of the raw data representing velocity over time 
Finally, deriving the second integral representing displacement over time is shown 
in figure 3.13, with the characteristic baseline offset that is most frequently observed 
in seismic data sourced from current seismographs, was experimentally and 
conclusively repeated. 
-2.20E+00
-2.15E+00
-2.10E+00
-2.05E+00
-2.00E+00
-1.95E+00
-1.90E+00
-1.85E+00
-5.00E-01 0.00E+00 5.00E-01 1.00E+00 1.50E+00 2.00E+00
Int1(1)
-4.00E-03
-3.00E-03
-2.00E-03
-1.00E-03
0.00E+00
1.00E-03
2.00E-03
-5.00E-01 0.00E+00 5.00E-01 1.00E+00 1.50E+00 2.00E+00
Int1(1)
~ 82 ~ 
Figure 3.13 Second integral of the raw data representing displacement over time with baseline error 
Further tests showed that the baseline runaway phenomenon was reasonably 
consistent across all test vibration frequencies, with only mild improvement at the 
higher frequencies. 
Duplicating the practices of the seismic instrument manufacturers, the output of the 
resin bonded test platform was AC-coupled and subsequently filtered with the aid of 
low pass RC filter with a 100Hz cut-off frequency. The much improved 
performance with regard to the baseline runaway is shown in figure 3.14, where the 
raw data and both the first and second integrals are depicted. Although this type of 
approach employed by few seismograph manufacturers to date appears to 
dramatically improve matters, it only bypasses the issue as it severely distorts the 
output across the bandwidth of interest, both in amplitude and phase. Such 
distortions, especially in the lower frequencies, result in the loss of valuable seismic 
data and produce various distortion artefacts in the higher frequencies.  
Although heavily filtered and mathematically baseline offset corrected to six 
decimal places, the AC-coupled data with a length of only a few seconds, exhibited 
undulations in the displacement trend, proving an early departure from the ideal pure 
sinusoid expected.  
The findings in this preliminary study which are fully in line with existing literature, 
provided clear evidence that current techniques, algorithms, and calibration models, 
operate within many constraints since they try to reverse effects of various errors 
with very limited quantitative access to their attributes. Although these correction 
techniques which often require several presumptions to be employed offer some aid 
Int1(2)
-3.50E-03
-3.00E-03
-2.50E-03
-2.00E-03
-1.50E-03
-1.00E-03
-5.00E-04
0.00E+00
-5.00E-01 0.00E+00 5.00E-01 1.00E+00 1.50E+00 2.00E+00
Int1(2)
~ 83 ~ 
towards the recovery of better seismic displacement data, an altogether new type of 
sensor arrangement able to target the very source of these errors is clearly required. 
Figure 3.14 Acceleration data, first and second integrals of filtered and AC coupled sensor 
Further, long term instrument drifts, alterations in sensor response, and the dynamic 
environment presented by the very surface of the Earth, pose serious challenges to 
the acquisition of uncorrupted data, an issue this far completely unresolved by 
seismic instruments. An ideal sensor should therefore not only rely on preset factory 
calibration, mathematical correction and predictive schemes, but should be able to 
dynamically adapt to changes in order to respond to both internal and external 
interference in such a manner as to deliver long term undistorted data throughout its 
operational lifetime, and under all real environment conditions. 
Both existing literature and the results of the primary experimental study suggest 
that the creation of an instrument capable of delivering long term near-uncorrupted 
and repeatable data should aim to rectify the effects of key error contributing 
sources as close as possible to their source, utilising quantitative techniques rather 
than exclusively relying in stochastic, pre-determined, or speculative post-
processing methods. To this effect, the objective of this work is to identify, analyse, 
and provide novel solutions to these sources of error, with the aim to design, build, 
and experimentally evaluate a benchmark sensor arrangement. 
The system diagram of figure 3 is repeated below in figure 3.15 with some of the 
most prominent sources of potential error identified. 
-8.00E-02
-6.00E-02
-4.00E-02
-2.00E-02
0.00E+00
2.00E-02
4.00E-02
6.00E-02
-2.00E-01 0.00E+00 2.00E-01 4.00E-01 6.00E-01 8.00E-01 1.00E+00
Data+offset
1st Integral*gain
2nd Integral*gain
Filtered and offset corrected acceleration trend 
First 
integral 
Second 
integral 
~ 84 ~ 
Figure 3.15 Prominent sources of potential error identified by section 
Since the intent of this work is to attempt the resolution of errors from their root, 
special attention is given to the investigation of the internal to the sensor potential 
sources of error, and the effects of the sensor to the original seismic signal in 
general. 
3.1 Evaluation of the MEMS accelerometer sensor performance 
Most research in the seismological arena has focussed on external to the MEMS 
issues whilst MEMS manufacturers understandably focus on commercially lucrative 
markets, which seismology unfortunately is not one of them. The need to understand 
how the current MEMS technology impacts seismic instruments is therefore rarely 
addressed as most researchers do not have the means to directly access or alter the 
internal micro structures within the MEMS devices. 
Since the accelerometer data is the only means available in this case for deriving 
displacement over time trends, careful consideration should be given to the errors 
Sensor 
Noise 
Sensor large internal 
resistor with high 
tolerance  
Sensors long term dynamic 
response stability 
Temperature dependent 
characteristics 
Long term 
drifts 
Non-linearity 
Supply sensitivity 
Front 
ADC Mem FIR 
process 
Quantisation and 
sampling rate errors 
Trigger threshold and 
initial conditions 
Zero-g 
Phase and amplitude distortion 
Initial conditions estimation 
~ 85 ~ 
inherent to such a device, especially when the necessary double integration 
inevitably produces cumulative and exponential exaggeration of even the smallest of 
errors over time. 
In an ideal system, the position (x) of a moving object at any time (t) can be 
calculated from its acceleration as follows; 
where     is the acceleration,    is the initial velocity and    is the initial position of 
the object. The acceleration in terms of voltage output      from the sensor can be 
simplified to; 
where   is the sensitivity,    is the general sensitivity error incorporating 
temperature, cross-axial excitation, and ratiometric contributions.     is the zero-g 
voltage bias of the sensor and      is the general voltage bias error, also 
incorporating contributions from temperature, misalignment and ratiometric 
artefacts. The derived acceleration      by direct measurement of the sensor 
voltage output      is therefore: 
Since the sensor voltage output contains errors as modelled above in equation 3.1, 
For zero initial conditions,        , the derived position of an object by 
measurement can be represented as; 
~ 86 ~ 
From equation (3.4) it can be seen that a small error on the zero-g bias voltage can 
result in a rather large error, especially when several seconds of data is to be 
integrated. Since both the sensitivity and the zero-g bias level are ratiometric, they 
are also both influenced by any irregularities or noise on the supply rails.  
The ADXL325 and ADXL327 MEMS accelerometer sensors have a typical zero-g 
bias level of 1.5V when the supply voltage is 3V, however, the newer ADXL327 
offers superior performance in sensitivity and signal to noise ratio (SNR) and is 
therefore most suitable for this work. Although most appropriate for this study, an 
examination of the ADXL327 devices electrical characteristics revealed some of its 
more obvious inherent limitations.  
According to the manufacturer, the package alignment error, that is the alignment 
error between the package and the sensing axis, and the cross-axis sensitivity are 
both specified to be at 1. While the package alignment error is of no consequence 
as it remains constant and can therefore easily be calibrated out, the cross-axis 
sensitivity, although also constant, would require a rather involved correction 
process if it was to be corrected for operation in a real three dimensional 
environment. 
It should also be noted from the manufacturers data, that both the sensitivity and the 
zero-g offset, that is the voltage output when no acceleration input is present, are 
temperature dependent. With a temperature effect on the zero-g bias voltage 
specified at 1mg/C, a temperature difference of just 10C would result in a bias 
voltage error of 10mg, which in turn would result in an error contribution to the 
displacement trend of nearly 5cm in just one second of data. While temperature 
tends to alter slowly, and such changes in the zero-g bias could be taken into account 
during the zero bias derivation by pre-event data averaging; any change in the 
sensors sensitivity due to change in temperature would irrecoverably contribute to 
~ 87 ~ 
erroneous measurements, unless an output temperature compensation scheme was 
employed. 
Although both the ADXL325 and the ADXL327 sensors are indeed tri-axial, due to 
package limitations their z-axis is only able to achieve nearly half the bandwidth of 
the other two orthogonal sensing axes. A high performance tri-axial seismic 
instrument would therefore necessitate the utilisation of a separate MEMS sensor IC 
for the z-axis acceleration measurement in order to work around the rather poor 
inherent z-axis performance. 
The internal to the sensors 32K output resistors, conceived by the manufacturer to 
offer short circuit protection and external filter design simplicity, could also present 
another potential source of error. The inclusion of these rather high in value resistors 
provides a rather inconvenient high impedance output with any benefit on filter 
design simplicity readily negated by their rather large 15% tolerance. Figure 3.16 
below shows a block diagram representation of the ADXL327 sensor. 
Figure 3.16 Diagrammatic representation of the ADXL327 sensor (source: ADXL 327 datasheet) 
Although the internal resistors may be beneficial in many non-precision applications 
such as smart phones, in seismic vibration sensing, coupling to the front end 
electronics requires their careful consideration. 
~ 88 ~ 
Many other internal to the sensor sources of error required a rather deeper and 
experimental investigation in order to gain an adequate in-depth understanding of 
their nature and arrive at suitable correction methods.  
3.1.1 MEMS Sensor noise experimental investigation 
Sensor noise is by far the most obvious and prominent source of error directly 
arising from the sensors physical electromechanical properties. 
A direct and unfiltered measurement of a MEMS ADXL327 sensor output, shown in 
figure 3.17, exhibited a typical 1/f characteristic and a rather prominent peak at just 
under 50 KHz matching the ICs internal clock frequency. This peak in the 
frequency however is both out of the 100Hz seismic bandwidth of interest, and at -
72dB, of no real concern after low-pass filtering of the raw signal has taken place. 
Figure 3.17 Sensor noise frequency spectrum 
The miniaturization of mechanical structures within these MEMS devices makes 
their moving parts very susceptible to mechanical noise resulting from molecular 
agitation. One, if not the main source of such noise, is Brownian motion where 
molecules of the surrounding mater and gas collide with the micro-structures to 
produce a random motion. Unlike traditional larger scale sensors where the noise 
floor is chiefly dictated by the amplification stage and the front end electronics, in 
MEMS accelerometers thermo-mechanical noise can be very prominent and in most 
cases the limiting factor in the resolution attainable. 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Frequency (KHz) 
~ 89 ~ 
Since many environmental factors within the device can be considered constant, 
such as the molecular densities of gas and silicon structures, the mechanical noise 
due to the agitation of molecules can be estimated by considering the effects of 
temperature on the mobility of the molecules. 
As seen earlier, the arrangement of the moving parts within the accelerometer can be 
thought of as a mass (m) on a spring of constant (k) system, with mechanical 
damping (R). A fluctuating force      would therefore result in a motion with 
displacement (z) as shown in equation (3.6) below. 
The resistive force (R) on the system dictates that any motion of the mass will decay 
in time, but also necessitates that any movement of the surrounding structures or 
gases will also result in some motion of the sensors inertial mass. 
Considering the Equipartition theorem, the average kinetic energy of an atom at 
thermal equilibrium is equal to 
   , where (T) is the absolute temperature and (KB 
) is the Boltzmann constant. Newtonian physics however, dictates that the kinetic 
energy of a mass (m) and velocity (v) is given by: 
where          are the orthogonal velocity components, and each component must 
therefore contribute to the average kinetic energy by 
From the potential energy of a mass-spring then, the mean square displacement 
resulting from thermal molecular agitation can be expressed as: 
where      represents the average spectral density of    across all frequencies. 
~ 90 ~ 
For any mechanical resistance, the spectral density of a fluctuating force, in 
accordance with Nyquists Relation, can be shown to be: 
which is equivalent to the Johnson noise of a resistance created by the thermo-
mechanical vibration of the medium interacting with the free electrons within the 
medium. 
For the mass-spring system representation of the accelerometer, mathematical 
analysis of equation (3.8) yields a relationship between thermo-mechanical noise 
density (NDth), resonant frequency (), mass (m), damping (Q) and temperature (T) 
of the sensor as follows: 
Where   
It can be seen then from the above analysis that in a MEMS accelerometer sensor, 
most terms are pre-set by the fabrication process and the only variable available with 
regard to noise density contribution is temperature. Theoretically then, as the 
temperature approaches absolute zero the noise density should also tend towards 
zero in a non-linear fashion. 
It is worth noting that a larger mass would then result in lower noise, pointing to the 
fact that bulk machined accelerometers have better noise characteristics than their 
surface machined counterparts. Altering other factors in order to increase Q would 
also benefit the signal to noise ratio at the expense of increased ringing at the 
resonant frequency. 
~ 91 ~ 
3.1.1.1 Experimental investigation of temperature effects on sensor noise 
As the MEMS sensor noise is not only of thermomechanical origin, but also 
comprises Johnson noise, shot noise etc in the internal signal conditioning and 
sensing circuits, it cannot exclusively be defined by equation 3.9 alone. In order to 
experimentally asses the noise characteristics of the complete MEMS sensor over 
temperature, a test circuit was designed and fabricated as depicted in figures 3.18 
and 3.19 below. 
Figure 3.18 Circuit diagram of sensor noise investigation circuit 
Figure 3.19 Physical assembly of sensor noise investigation circuit 
A quiet battery supply and a large amplification on the amplifier stage was thought 
essential in order for small variances in signal amplitude to be observable, however, 
exposure of the circuit to even unexceptional temperatures down to 5C revealed 
rapid and exponential decrease in noise, albeit not readily evident by direct voltage 
output examination, as depicted in figure 3.20 below. 
Y-OUT
AD8421
ADXL MODULE
S/W SMT 3MM
~ 92 ~ 
Figure 3.20 direct sensor output at rest and at different temperatures  
Statistical analysis however of the three voltage output trends of figure 3.20, yielded 
remarkable differences in the noise content of the signals over the three different 
temperatures. 
Statistical info Vout 5C Vout 17C Vout 19C 
Standard Deviation 0.0012389 0.001241625 0.001294403 
Range 0.0070588 0.007215686 0.008235294 
Sample Variance 1.535E-06 1.54163E-06 1.67548E-06 
Table 3.1 Statistical analysis of the output trends of Figure 3.20  
Table 3.1 contains the results of the statistical analysis conducted on the voltage 
trends depicted in figure 3.20. The study revealed a standard deviation increase of 
16.7%, which is representative of noise power; an increase of 9.2% in sample 
variance, and a 1.2mV pk-pk increase in the range of the signal, as the sensor 
temperature increased in temperature from 5C to a 19C ambient. Furthermore, the 
increase of both noise power and noise peak to peak voltage over temperature, 
exhibited a rather sharp exponential trend as shown in figures 3.21 and 3.22 
respectively. 
-0.004 
-0.002 
0.002 
0.004 
0.006 
0 0.002 0.004 0.006 0.008 0.01 
time (s) 
Vout 5C 
Vout 17C 
Vout 19 C 
~ 93 ~ 
Figure 3.21 Standard deviation of sensor noise over temperature 
Figure 3.22 Noise range over temperature 
In instrumentation terms, if the sensor output was to be amplified and digitised by a 
16 bit ADC over the range of 10V, the noise increase in operation at 19C by 
comparison to operation at 5C, would be equivalent to sacrificing the 3 least 
significant bits (LSBs) to noise. 
Operation at very low temperatures could therefore be an effective way of reducing 
the noise content of the signal directly from its source. 
1.23E-03 
1.24E-03 
1.25E-03 
1.26E-03 
1.27E-03 
1.28E-03 
1.29E-03 
1.30E-03 
0 5 10 15 20 
Temperature (C) 
6.80E-03 
7.00E-03 
7.20E-03 
7.40E-03 
7.60E-03 
7.80E-03 
8.00E-03 
8.20E-03 
8.40E-03 
0 5 10 15 20 
Temperature (C) 
~ 94 ~ 
3.1.1.2 Experimental investigation of differential Bi-axial excitation for noise 
reduction.  
In an attempt to explore alternative additional methods of reducing noise at the 
output of the sensor, further experimental investigation and analysis of any potential 
relationship between the x and y outputs was conducted. Figures 3.23 and 3.24 show 
the unfiltered and simultaneously sampled x and y outputs of the sensor at rest, or 
zero acceleration input.  
Figure 3.23 x-axis sensor output at no excitation 
Figure 3.24 y-axis sensor output at no excitation 
The assumption behind this investigative approach presupposed that since the sensor 
benefited from a single wafer construction and the electronics of each channel were 
therefore in very close proximity, at least some proportion of the total noise, other 
than thermomechanical, should exhibit common mode characteristics. It should then 
follow that the utilisation of two channels at 45 to the direction of the acceleration 
vector should have resulted in a pseudo differential voltage output proportional to 
the acceleration, with the noise in common mode, as shown in figure 3.25 below. 
-0.005 
1E-17 
0.005 
0 0.005 0.01 0.015 0.02 
time (s) 
x axis sensor output  (V) 
-0.005 
-1E-17 
0.005 
0 0.005 0.01 0.015 0.02 
time (s) 
y axis sensor output (V) 
~ 95 ~ 
Figure 3.25 Differential excitation of sensor axis 
Standard differential signal handling should have therefore resulted in an amplified 
signal with much reduced noise content.  
Although one sensor IC would have to be used for each instrument axis (2 sensor 
channels per instrument axis), the advantage of noise reduction at the source would 
by far outweigh the additional overhead in cost and complexity. 
Some sections of the acquired sensor output signals are depicted in figures 3.23 and 
3.24 did indeed appear very similar, especially when closely examined in segments, 
as depicted in figure 3.26. Casual assumptions of patterns, phase shifts and 
inversions observed could be easily made as follows; 
Figure 3.26 x and y axis output segment comparison 
-0.004 
-0.003 
-0.002 
-0.001 
0.001 
0.002 
0.003 
0.004 
0.005 
-0.001 1.1E-17 0.001 0.002 0.003 0.004 0.005 
time (s) 
x axis Vout  (V) 
x sensing axis 
y sensing axis 
Sensor 
Sensor tilted 45 to the 
acceleration vector 
A B C 
~ 96 ~ 
Segment A could be interpreted as two signals with anti-phase low frequency 
content, but phase shifted high frequency common mode noise content, whilst 
segment B could indeed be interpreted as two signals where one is inverted and 
phase shifted, also implying common mode content. Segment C could be seen as 
two in-phase signals with much common mode content. Although all of the three 
aforementioned observations were frequently encountered within the output signals, 
there was no single effect dominance, necessitating the inevitable conclusion that 
there was not any notable common mode content found between the x and y noise 
output signals of the sensor. In addition, mathematical assessment via correlation of 
the two signals revealed a rather low consistent figure of -0.165 or below, further 
supporting the noise independence of the two signals and the little usefulness of the 
differential bi-axial excitation approach. 
3.1.1.3 Conclusion on sensor noise investigation 
As noise can be one of the main limiting factors of sensor performance, any methods 
employed to minimise the effects of noise on the signal are crucial. The 
experimental evaluation of sensor noise in this chapter has shown an exponential 
increase of noise with increase in ambient temperature, and a characteristic 1/f 
frequency response. Further, a peak at the internal clock frequency also became 
evident, albeit outside the bandwidth of interest.  
Noise coupling from the power supply to the sensor can also produce a significant 
detrimental effect on the sensor signal, as the supply noise rejection of the MEMS 
sensors is rather limited by comparison to amplifier standards. Effective de-coupling 
of the supply rails and a quiet and stable power source are of extreme importance 
since the sensor output is ratiometric and therefore the accuracy of any acceleration 
measurement can be directly affected by any supply voltage irregularities. 
3.1.2 Experimental investigation of on- demand sensor dynamic response 
Any sensor or system employed to measure a physical property will be default 
impart some alteration to the original due to its inherent non-perfect response. 
Knowing the relationship between the input and the output of such a sensor or 
system is therefore essential if the original signal measured is to be correctly 
defined. Although the static or steady state performance of a system is incredibly 
~ 97 ~ 
important for accuracy and long term performance, when dealing with fast changing 
signals as is the case with seismic waves, the dynamic response of the system is also 
of vital importance to the quality of the data acquired with such a sensor. 
The manufacturers technical data offers very few clues as to the dynamic response 
of the MEMS sensors, but alludes to a flat frequency response from DC to 1.6KHz 
without the use of an external filter. It further states that this useful bandwidth can 
be reduced with an external capacitor to ground, forming a low-pass filter with the 
internal resistor, in order to benefit from the increased signal to noise ratio of the 
more restricted bandwidths. Acquisition of a sensors dynamic response 
characteristics is typically conducted on a vibration platform able to sweep across 
frequencies in the bandwidth of interest, making the acquisition of this information 
by these means from a sensor in the field and on demand impossible. 
3.1.2.1 Sensor Frequency response acquisition via electrostatic frequency-sweep 
excitation 
Most MEMS accelerometers are equipped with a test pin which upon the application 
of a voltage, an electrostatic force is exerted onto the internal inertial mass, forcing it 
to deflect in a certain direction, thus producing a voltage output on all sensing axes. 
This test pin was experimentally found to be internally buffered with a comparator 
of threshold voltage a little below 2V, presumably to deliver a predictable response 
and avoid interference due to external spurious noise. It was empirically discovered 
however, that it was possible to excite the inertial mass via this pin, by applying a 
square wave of incremental frequencies, in order to attain a frequency response of 
the inertial mass-spring system. The resulting frequency response followed a typical 
mass-spring characteristic curve, as shown in figure 3.27, with the addition of an 
atypical dip between frequencies 1.5 KHz and 3 KHz. The otherwise perfect 
frequency response acquired by the excitation of the self test pin confirmed the fact 
that the internal interfacing electronics of the test pin did not limit the frequency of 
the input signal within the bandwidth of interest. 
~ 98 ~ 
Figure 3.27 Frequency response of sensor via electrostatic excitation utilising the test pin  
From the experimental results of figure 3.27, a flat response from DC to 1.5 KHz 
was evident, followed by a characteristic resonant peak at 3.9 KHz. These findings, 
although very close to the manufacturers claims of a useful unfiltered bandwidth 
from DC to 1.6 KHz, were neither uniform nor non-attenuated to 1.6KHz. In 
addition to the rather unexpected lower frequency response, a peak resonance was 
observed at 4.9 KHz, which was rather lower than the 5.5 KHz specified in the 
datasheet. Confronted with the above findings, the manufacturer has since confirmed 
that the internal conditioning electronics produce filtering of the output with a -3db 
at 1.6 KHz low pass characteristic, thus validating both the uncharacteristic dip 
observation and the shift of the resonance peak to a lower frequency.  
It is conclusive from the above results that this input can be effectively utilised for 
the derivation of the frequency response of the sensor, and the wider electronic 
system, without the aid of a mechanical vibrator, in the field and on demand. The 
ability to acquire the systems frequency response means that in part at least, the 
validity of the instrument data can be guaranteed over long term. 
3.1.2.2 Sensor output dithering via high frequency electrostatic excitation 
Further frequency response experiments showed that forcing the mass to oscillate at 
frequencies higher than 4.5 KHz resulted in regions of unstable behaviour, but still 
within the typical characteristic as depicted in fig 3.27. However, at a frequency of 
6.1 KHz, the mass appeared to regain stability and the output exhibited a sinusoidal 
voltage of amplitude 54 mV peak to peak, with a mean DC offset of -86mV from the 
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 
Excitation Frequency (Hz) 
~ 99 ~ 
nominal no excitation zero g. While powered from a 3V supply and at a position 
orthogonal to the gravitational field, direct measurement of the sensors zero g 
voltage output confirmed a value of 1.526V, which was within tolerance of the 
typical half the supply voltage level. A mean DC level of 1.44V was witnessed upon 
the subsequent application of a 6.1 KHz input signal to the test pin.  
Since any mechanical excitation of the sensor can be thought of as a superimposition 
on the electrostatically induced 6.1 KHz signal, the 6.1 KHz signal could be 
successfully utilised as a form of dithering. However, since the typical sensor 
sensitivity of the ADXL325 is 175mV/g, the change in zero-g offset by -86mV due 
to the dithering signal equates to a loss of 0.49g in dynamic range. The 
superimposing effect of the electrostatically induced dithering on a mechanical 
vibration signal can be seen in figures 3.28 and 3.29 below, depicting a vibration 
signal with and without the dithering signal enabled respectively. 
Figure 3.28 Mechanical vibration without dithering enabled 
Figure 3.29 Mechanical vibration with 6.1KHz dithering injected via the test pin 
0 0.005 0.01 0.015 0.02 
Time (s) 
0 0.005 0.01 0.015 0.02 
Time (s) 
~ 100 ~ 
Such means of dithering can provide substantial benefits provided that the loss of 
dynamic range is acceptable for the intended application. Although the amplitude of 
the resulting dithering signal is larger than normal, it could be of benefit to the 
acquisition of seismic trends, especially in the capturing of the very low frequency, 
low amplitude adulations, sometimes present in seismic signals. 
3.1.2.3 Sensor dynamic response acquisition via electrostatic impulse excitation 
It was envisaged, that an impulse response representing the characteristic behaviour 
of the device could be derived, if excitation of the test pin was achieved by a narrow 
enough pulse, approximating an impulse with respect to the system. Such a 
characteristic response should be similar to one acquired if the sensor was 
mechanically actuated.  
Whilst a mechanically actuated response would suffer from various errors and 
inconsistencies, an electrically derived impulse response could provide a much more 
precise and stable characteristic. In addition, such direct derivation of the systems 
response could provide an on-demand system dynamic response characteristic in the 
field, without the need of any specialist laboratory equipment. 
It is widely accepted that any linear system such as this, when within the linear 
range of operation, can be thought of as having an output y(n) which is the 
convolution of its input x(n) and its impulse response h(n) such that; 
where           ; and           where           are the lengths 
of the sequences              respectively. 
The ability to derive an on-demand the impulse response h(k) of the instrument, 
having acquired the devices output y(k) due to an unknown earthquake input signal 
x(k), could lead to a numerical derivation of the original earthquake signal x(k), 
containing minimal instrument distortion. The requirement of de-convolution of 
course presents a mathematical challenge which is better dealt with in the frequency 
domain. Representing both the instruments impulse response h(k) and its output 
data y(k)  in the frequency domain via the application of the Fast Fourier Transform 
~ 101 ~ 
(FFT), de-convolution could then be performed by the direct division of 
 in the 
frequency domain: constituting de-convolution in the time domain. Subsequent 
application of the inverse FFT on the quotient should in theory result in an 
undistorted earthquake input signal x(k).  
Extensive experimentation determined that a pulse of 3V, with a pulse-width of 
20s on the test pin, was optimum for the pulse to be assumed as an impulse by the 
sensor. The sensor output resulting from the application of such an impulse on the 
test pin, resulted in a typical impulse response characteristic as depicted in figure 
3.30 below. 
Figure 3.30 Sensor impulse response via the use of the test pin 
The successful and accurate in situ, and on demand derivation of the impulse 
response of the sensor and the wider system, is indeed incredibly valuable for the 
long term acquisition of undistorted data, especially from remote systems with 
potentially changing characteristics over time.  
Further, the impulse response characteristic can be utilised to more accurately 
ascertain the resonant frequency of the sensor or system, as shown in figure 3.30. 
Direct calculation of the resonance period from the impulse response, 252s in this 
case, resulted in a much more accurate figure of resonant frequency of 3.97 KHz.  
-1.50E-02 
-1.00E-02 
-5.00E-03 
0.00E+00 
5.00E-03 
1.00E-02 
1.50E-02 
2.00E-02 
2.50E-02 
3.00E-02 
3.50E-02 
0 0.0002 0.0004 0.0006 0.0008 0.001 0.0012 0.0014 0.0016 0.0018 
time (s) 
252s 
~ 102 ~ 
In addition, further system evaluation or confirmation could be obtained from the 
sensor or system if required, by the acquisition of the step response derived by the 
integration of the impulse response, as depicted in figure 3.31. 
Further, a frequency response could also be derived from the impulse response by 
acquiring its FFT, already depicted in figure 3.27, without the need to provide 
frequency sweep features within the instrument. 
Fig 3.31 Integral of sensor impulse response 
It should be noted, that due to the unknown unit impulse function, which is 
proportional to the actual force exerted by the electronics onto the inertial mass 
within the IC, the step response could be used as a steady state reference to aid 
scaling.  
3.1.2.4 Sensor phase response determination via frequency-sweep excitation 
Dynamic representation of any system also requires knowledge of its phase 
response, which is particularly important in seismic data as it eventually determines 
the location of important features on the seismogram. Fortunately, this can also be 
acquired via the electrostatic frequency-sweeping of the sensors test pin, and by 
measuring the comparative time delay between the input excitation signal and the 
sensor output.  
Conversion of this delay to angle for every incremental frequency experimentally 
measured, yielded a logarithmic scale phase characteristic as depicted in figure 3.32 
0 0.0005 0.001 0.0015 0.002 0.0025 
time (s) 
252s 
~ 103 ~ 
below. The most interesting aspect of the phase response characteristic acquired is 
of course the phase distortion within the 100Hz seismic bandwidth of interest. It is 
evident that any signal frequencies nearing the 100Hz point would incur a phase 
shift of as much as 1.58. The fact that this phase characteristic is by no means linear 
is of no surprise, since the impulse response of the system derived earlier does not 
obey a left-right symmetry. However, a closer study of the phase shift within the 
seismic 100Hz bandwidth, figure 3.33, revealed a rather linear phase to frequency 
response within the bandwidth of interest, with the exception of a small anomaly 
possibly due to measurement tolerance. 
Figure 3.32 Sensor phase response derived via test pin excitation 
The discovery of the apparent phase linearity within the bandwidth of interest is of 
course of tremendous importance, since the only difference between a zero phase 
and a linear phase response is proportionality in delay. In terms of real data 
reconstruction therefore, the relative phase relationship within the signal, and 
therefore its shape and relevant time delays, are still accurately preserved.  
1 10 100 1000 10000 
Frequency (Hz) 
~ 104 ~ 
Figure 3.33 Sensor phase response magnified segment 
3.1.2.5 Sensor on demand dynamic response determination conclusion 
It has been shown that specific actuation of the sensors self test pin, intended only 
for binary verification of operation by the manufacturer, can yield frequency sensor 
characteristics typical of a mass-spring system. It can therefore be assumed that this 
response is purely due to the internal mechanical structure of the sensor when 
operated within the 100Hz bandwidth, and partly due to the low-pass behaviour of 
the interfacing electronics that contribute to a flat response from DC to 1.5 KHz. 
The sensors response at frequencies higher than this appears to be strongly 
dominated by the mechanical structures but also the internal electronics which 
further impart strong attenuation and phase effects to the sensors output.  
While high frequency excitation has proven to produce a suitable dithering effect on 
the sensor signal, albeit at the expense of dynamic range, impulse excitation has 
demonstrated that relatively accurate impulse and step responses could be obtained 
on demand. The latter of course is of great benefit since the sensors and wider 
instruments dynamic response can be accurately acquired, in situ and on-demand, 
in order to be used for the de-convolution of the acquired data, and therefore aid the 
reversal of any inevitable and undesirable effects imparted by the instrument on the 
original seismic signal. 
0 20 40 60 80 100 
Frequency (Hz) 
Ideal linear phase approximation  
Sensor phase response 
~ 105 ~ 
3.1.3 Experimental investigation of non linear sensor response 
Other than the manufacturer specified non linear response, several other factors can 
influence the apparent linearity of the sensor, some stemming from manufacturing 
configurations whilst others can be dependent on environmental factors. In 
seismographic applications where accelerometers are used to acquire motion data, 
such small linearity errors or interferences can become rather prominent after the 
necessary double integration process, and usually manifest themselves as sizeable 
displacement offset errors. 
3.1.3.1 Experimental investigation of potential sensor hysteretic behaviour   
Any high accuracy sensor would not only possess phase linearity over frequency, 
but also inherent directional sensing linearity, as not to contaminate the pureness of 
the sensed signal with hysteretic or other non-linear behaviour. Testing for such 
behavioural attributes took the form of a high accuracy mechanical platform able to 
rotate the sensor noise investigation platform about an orthogonal to gravitation axis 
a full 360 as depicted in figure 3.34. 
Figure 3.34 Mechanical rotational platform 
Accurate control over rotation was accomplished with a gear assembly with an input 
to output ratio of 1:250. Coincidental arrangement of the sensors x axis with the 
axis of mechanical rotation, ensured minimal direct gravitational interference with 
Axis of 
rotation x sensing 
y sensing 
~ 106 ~ 
the x axis output. Orthogonally to this, and in a rotational plane parallel to the 
gravitational field, the sensors y and z axes served as the measurands over different 
angles of rotation. 
Figure 3.16 below shows a diagrammatic representation of the sensor platform with 
the y axis at initial position of  = 0. Rotation around the horizontal to the ground x-
axis as indicated by the arrow is termed positive. It should be noted that in this 
configuration, since the x axis remained perpendicular to the gravitation vector, its 
output also remained at zero. Only the z and y axis were variably influenced by 
gravity depending on the angle of rotation. At the initial position therefore, both x 
and z axes were at zero g, while the y axis output was +1g. 
Figure 3.35 Sensor on rotational platform a initial position 
Rotating the platform such that the sensing y-axis spanned from 0 to 180 with 
reference to the gravitation vector caused the y-axis to experience an acceleration of 
+1g at the 0 position, and -1g at the 180 position. The graph in figure 3.17 below 
depicts the y-axis voltage output for a Clockwise (CW) rotation from 0 to 180 and 
the Counter Clockwise (CCW) rotation from 180 back to 0. Whilst difficult to 
observe, the line in the following graph is not straight but bows towards the ends, 
hence exhibiting a non-linearity. This non-linear phenomenon however cannot be 
termed hysteretic since both the clockwise and counter clockwise resulting outputs 
are coincident. 
~ 107 ~ 
Figure 3.36 y-axis voltage output for 0 - 180 rotation and back to zero 
Repeating the experiment for a full 360 rotation first clockwise and then counter 
clockwise, yielded a y output sinusoidal in nature. The results of the y axis voltage 
output, for both CW and CCW directions, are shown in figure 3.18 below. 
Expectedly, a non hysteretic response can again be observed since both CW and 
CCW trends follow near identical paths.  
Figure 3.37 y-axis voltage output for 0 - 3600 rotation and back to zero 
-1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 
Acceleration g 
Dvm CW 
Dvm CCW 
0 30 60 90 120 150 180 210 240 270 300 330 360 
Angle (Degrees) 
Vout (mV) CW 
Vout (mV) CCW 
~ 108 ~ 
3.1.3.2 Experimental investigation of sensor cross-axis interference   
Curiously however, there appears to be a lack of symmetry between the parts of the 
curve 0 to 180 and 180 to 360. This can be best seen by folding the curve along 
an imaginary vertical line at the 180 point, as shown in figure 3.19 below. The 
resulting sigmoid is evidently not due to hysteresis. 
Figure 3.38 Folded y-axis output along the 180 line 
Further exemplification of this effect can be seen in figure 3.20 below where the y-
axis voltage output is mapped across the acceleration due to gravity. 
Figure 3.39 Experimentally derived y-axis output with respect to g 
0 30 60 90 120 150 180 
Mirrored Angle (deg) 
Vout (mV) CW 
Vout (mV) CCW 
-1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 
Acceleration (g) 
Vout (mV) CW 
Vout (mV) CCW 
~ 109 ~ 
The curve in figure 3.20 exhibits a consistent symmetric elliptical characteristic 
mostly exaggerated at y = 0 g. At these points of course, z = 1 g depending on 
whether  is 90 or 270. Since the MEMS sensors considered in this work are 
fabricated using a single polysilicon micromachined structure, and the fact that 
manufacturers data specifies the presence of cross-axis sensitivity even in single 
axis MEMS devices, the evidence strongly suggests that any cross-axis coupling 
would be chiefly mechanical in nature.  
If the ideal y output was to be mathematically plotted over the 360 rotation and 
back, using the sensitivity derived from the experimental data, it would result in a 
straight line as shown figure 3.21 below. 
Figure 3.40 Expected calculated output of y-axis over a 0 - 360 rotation and back 
The manufacturers datasheet states that the cross-axis sensitivity of the particular 
device is 1%. Calculating the 1% contribution of the z axis, which is 90 out of 
phase with y, over the same 360 and back rotation, and simply adding it to the ideal 
curve of figure 3.21, results in a curve depicted in figure 3.22. It is evident that the 
derived curve of figure 3.22 bears a distinct similarity to the experimentally derived 
curve of figure 3.20, albeit less elliptical in shape. 
-1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 
Acceleration (g) 
~ 110 ~ 
Figure 3.41 Calculated output of y axis with the added z-axis 1% cross-axis contribution  
Following the original concept however, that the cross-axis interference occurs at 
the seismic mass level, affecting the primary electronic interface circuitry within the 
MEMS IC, any output, z and y in this case, can be expressed as; 
Where S is sensitivity in mV/g,    is the zero g bias voltage and  is the deviation 
angle from the gravitational axis. The output at y with an added 1% contribution 
from z, can then be expressed as; 
It should be noted that only the y-axis sensitivity    is considered, as the cross-axial 
coupling of z to y is considered to be purely mechanical. This mechanical coupling 
results in a displacement in the y axis, which in turn is added to the actual y axis 
displacement, and subsequently interpreted by the y axis electronics which employ 
the y axis sensitivity. 
-1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 
Acceleration (g) 
~ 111 ~ 
It then follows that only the zero g bias voltage occurring at the y-axis output stage 
should be considered.  
Figure 3.42 Mathematically derived y-axis output compared with experimental results 
The resulting graph of the mathematically derived y output utilising equation 3.14 is 
shown in figure 3.23 in dotted red, whilst for comparison, the actual experimental y 
output data is shown in solid blue. It can be observed that although the 
mathematically derived data is of appropriate shape, it yields a graph of narrower 
characteristic than the experimental data suggests. Increasing the cross-axis 
sensitivity of the theoretical model to 2% yields a graph which closely matches the 
experimental data, as depicted in figure 3.24 below. 
It can therefore be concluded that the MEMS sensors considered for this work do 
not exhibit hysteretic or other classical non-linear behaviours, however they do 
appear to possess a cross-axial interference which manifests itself as a non-linear 
characteristic in a real three dimensional sensing environment. It is believed that the 
most likely cause for this phenomenon is small variations in the spring constants of 
the springs supporting the inertial mass into place as a result of the tolerances of the 
manufacturing process. 
-1 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 
Acceleration (g) 
~ 112 ~ 
Figure 3.43 Mathematically derived y-axis output with added 2% cross-axial sensitivity 
3.1.3.3 Cross Axis interference theory development and experimental verification 
As depicted in figures 3.25 and 3.26 below, the MEMS springs are flat springs 
manufactured from polysilicon and therefore can produce both tensile and 
compressive forces during extension and compression respectively. Small 
differences in their spring constant will affect the motion of the inertial mass not 
only along the force axis, but also to a smaller extent laterally also. 
Figure 3.44 Sliced MEMS IC under microscope showing corner spring structure  
-1 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 
Acceleration (g) 
~ 113 ~ 
Figure 3.45 Sliced MEMS IC under microscope showing inertial mass suspension structure 
Figure 3.27 shows a typical simplified diagrammatical arrangement of a seismic 
mass M being suspended by four corner springs. The moving mass is able to create 
differential capacitor circuits with the fixed plates Cx, Cx, and Cy, Cy in the x and 
y axis respectively. The orthogonal X, Y arrows indicate the direction of positive 
output with respect to linear displacement along that axis. 
Figure 3.46 Diagrammatic arrangement of inertial mass suspension  
Assuming that due to etching a small inconsistency exists between the stiffness of 
the springs and therefore one of the springs, depicted with bold lines, is marginally 
stiffer than the other three. A force (a) applied in the direction of (y) would then not 
~ 114 ~ 
only correctly produce a movement in the (y) direction, but also a lateral 
displacement due to the opposition of the stiffer spring, thus resulting in a composite 
displacement along the vector (r) as shown in figure 3.28. 
Figure 3.47 Inertial mass displacement vector due to uneven spring compression 
This lateral movement will inevitably manifest itself as a positive output on the x 
axis. Similarly, if the direction of the force (a) is reversed, the cross-coupling 
contribution due to the stiffer tension of the spring will produce an opposite lateral 
movement, and yield a phantom negative x axis output as shown in figure 3.29 
below. 
Figure 3.48 Inertial mass displacement vector due to uneven spring tension 
It is evident therefore that any random mismatch in the constants of the suspension 
springs will always result in a lateral movement of the seismic mass, and therefore 
~ 115 ~ 
cross-axis sensitivity will always exist in all current real non-ideal sensors, 
regardless of how many axis they are capable of measuring. 
Since the output of any axis is proportional to the acceleration acting upon that axis 
and shows no hysteretic behaviour, calibrating out this effect should then be possible 
by simply evaluating the amount of cross-axial coupling and the sensitivity for each 
axis. The voltage output of the x and y axis can therefore be represented as follows: 
Where        are the sensitivities of x and y axis respectively in mV/g, and       
are the actual accelerations experienced by the sensing axis x and y respectively in 
g. The terms           are the zero acceleration bias voltages on the x and y 
outputs, and the letter C denotes Cross-Axial Contribution constant with the first 
subscript letter defining the contributing axis whilst the second the affected axis. For 
example     is the contribution that z has on y; a value of 2% or 0.02 in the case of 
the graph in figure 3.24. The simultaneous equations 3.15 and 3.16 can then be 
simply solved in order to obtain actual acceleration values on each axis based on the 
voltage outputs measured. For example, the acceleration along the x-axis can be 
derived as follows; 
In a real seismic wave acquisition application however, one would of course need to 
consider the effect on all three dimensional components. Describing each output in 
terms of the other two yields three interdependent equations describing the voltage 
outputs of each axis as follows; 
~ 116 ~ 
Since the earlier experimental arrangement isolated the x-axis in a plane 
perpendicular to the gravitational vector,    can only acquire the value of zero. 
Furthermore, acceleration    can be readily calculated from the known deviation 
angle of the z-axis to the gravitational vector and its sensitivity for every equivalent 
measurement of y. It then follows that that equation 3.19 expressing    can be 
simplified to yield; 
The corrected output     of   , with any cross-axis coupling removed, should then 
be the measured    output minus the calculated cross axial interference term of the z 
axis         imposed on the y axis, as follows: 
Applying equation 3.22 to every point of measurement of the earlier experimentally 
derived y-axis output data    (figure 3.20), the calculated z axis acceleration   , and 
setting     to an accurately measured value of 1.8, yields a y axis corrected voltage 
output     exhibiting an excellent linear response as shown in figure 3.30 below. 
Figure 3.49 Mathematically corrected experimental y-axis output using equation 3.22 
Having derived a mathematical model representing the voltage outputs of each axis, 
and having proven by experiment that the model can indeed be used to reverse the 
cross axial interference on each output, acquiring the true acceleration experienced 
by the y axis in this case, could then simply be done by rearranging equation 3.21 as 
follows: 
-1 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 
Acceleration (g) 
~ 117 ~ 
Examination of equation 3.23 reveals that the true acceleration    experienced by 
the sensor in the y direction, can easily be derived as all the terms on the right hand 
side can be known.     ,   , and     can all be readily measured, whilst    can be 
derived from the measured    data. It should be stressed that although the equation 
for    contains the term    and hence the very acceleration to be derived, cross-
axial interference is primarily mechanical in nature and therefore it is only the force 
created by the external acceleration that creates the cross axis interference 
phenomenon in all axis; therefore the acceleration on each axis is only a result of 
this external force. In other words, the acceleration experienced by each axis has as a 
common source the external acceleration, and therefore the acceleration experienced 
by each axis does not endlessly cross-couple with the other two axis thus creating 
more inertial mass displacements in an infinite ever increasing loop. This very fact 
deems the simultaneous equations solvable and valid by experiment. 
Extending this idea to a three dimensional space, expressions for acceleration 
experienced by each of the three axes can then be derived by simply rewriting the 
three initial equations 3.18, 3.19 and 3.20 as follows: 
where     
It follows then that the acceleration acting on each axis   ,    and    can be 
calculated by the derived linear correction formulae 3.27, 3.28 and 3.29 below. 
~ 118 ~ 
3.1.3.4 Sensor Cross Axis interference conclusion 
Experimental investigation into the sensors linearity has shown substantial evidence 
to support that the cross-axis interference is indeed the chief source of non-linearity. 
Unlike previous research [98], the results presented herein demonstrate no evidence 
of any hysteretic or otherwise classical non-linear behaviour exhibited by the sensor.  
Due to the ability to directly measure the axes sensitivities and their equivalent 
cross-axis sensitivities, the mathematical correction formulae derived are of 
significant importance when attempting to reconstruct true acceleration data trends 
from sensor measurements acquired in a real three dimensional environment, where 
cross axial coupling to strong orthogonal components is prevalent.  
3.1.4 Temperature related errors  
In addition to having a direct effect on sensor noise as described earlier, temperature 
variation contributes adversely to other crucial characteristics of sensor performance 
[99] [100], such as the zero g bias voltage output of the sensor, when no acceleration 
forces are acting upon it. As shown in figure 3.32 extracted from the manufacturers 
datasheet, the zero bias voltage of the x axis significantly decreases with an increase 
in temperature. 
Figure 3.50 Voltage output over temperature (source: ADXL 327 datasheet) 
~ 119 ~ 
Typically, within the range of 0 C to 50 C, a 7 mV decrease of     is evident over 
the eight devices tested and their outputs depicted in figure 3.32 above. It should be 
noted that the y axis zero g bias voltage     , exhibits an inverse characteristic to 
that of the x axis, showing an equivalent increase in voltage with increase in 
temperature. 
Pre-event trend averaging and AC coupling employed by some seismographs, tend 
to eradicate this issue, especially as temperature changes are slow to occur, however, 
other temperature related errors are much harder to manage, in particular sensor 
sensitivity changes. The manufacturer states a change in sensitivity of 0.01 % per 
C, therefore a feasible 50 C temperature change in the operating environment of a 
seismic instrument, equates to a 0.5 % change. The sensitivity of a typical sensor 
could therefore change as much as nearly 1 mV/g over the modest 50 C operating 
temperature range considered, potentially resulting in significantly erroneous data. 
3.1.4.1 Temperature related errors conclusion 
Although zero g bias drifts tend to be crudely alleviated by some seismic instrument 
manufactures via the utilisation of AC coupling and therefore the creation of 
unreliability of low frequency data, others employ a 60 second averaging of pre-
event data to derive a bias reference. The latter of course also diminishes any low 
frequency adulations often present in seismic signals, or small immediate pre-event 
seismic artefacts below the trigger threshold, which inevitably get averaged to 
produce an erroneous zero bias reference. Any deviation from the true zero bias 
reference would of course result in an exponential error due to the double numerical 
integration necessary to derive displacement over time data. 
Temperature compensation could be utilised, but the unknown and unpredictable 
true nature of the effect of temperature on the bias and the sensitivity of the sensor, 
would make this inappropriate for high accuracy measurements in the field. 
3.1.5 Investigation of Fabrication based errors  
Package misalignment, that is the alignment error between the IC package and the 
sensitive axis on the silicon die, is quoted by the manufacturer to be in the region of 
1. Small as this might appear, this inherent to the fabrication process 
~ 120 ~ 
misalignment can produce significant errors in measurement due to the resultant 
dynamic coupling between the axis, which cannot be readily resolved by simple 
instrument calibration. 
Figure 3.51 MEMS package to silicon die misalignment 
Figure 3.33 depicts such a misalignment in a single plane, with the angle of 
misalignment  exaggerated for clarity. An acceleration vector  in parallel with the 
packages y axis, will result in a voltage on the y output of the sensor proportional to 
     , and similarly, an x voltage output proportional to         Such an 
inconsistency could be thought to be easily resolved by calibration, given a simple 
coplanar model such as this, however, extrapolation of this model to three 
dimensions, and consideration of the complex nature of seismic waves, exhibiting 
both linear and rotational motion, would indeed result in a mathematical 
impossibility, since linear and rotational components cannot be mathematically 
separated. In addition, other cross-axis effects, such as the cross axial interference 
reviewed earlier, would further add to the complexity of any model rendering any 
attempt on cross-axis coupling calibration simply not feasible.  
3.1.5.1 Fabrication based errors conclusion 
Consideration of a complex motion containing both linear and rotational 
components even in two dimensions should very quickly indicate that since a 
rotational motion can generate parasitic linear motion artefacts, as discussed in the 
introduction of this work, distinction between true linear and linear artefacts caused 
by rotations proves impossible. The addition of multiple sensors, or even the 
Package y axis 
Package x axis 
Silicon y axis 
Silicon x axis 
~ 121 ~ 
addition of rotational sensors such as MEMS gyros, would be of limited use as a 
correction methodology. The rather small distance between sensors within the 
instrument would by comparison to the potential distance of the instrument form the 
centre of rotation be far too small to produce results of any practical use. Minimising 
this effect from the outset is therefore crucial for the acquisition of accurate seismic 
measurements. 
3.2 Analytical evaluation of front end electronics  
 3.2.1 Filter phase and attenuation investigation 
As briefly discussed in the beginning of this section, the necessity of an anti-aliasing 
filter prior to the digitization of the sensor signal could present hidden artefacts in 
the digital data if not thought out carefully. Classical electronics theory dictates a 
minimum sampling frequency of twice the maximum frequency content of the signal 
of interest, however this Nyquist point, is a minimum. 
As most, if not all seismic instruments, utilise a simple RC filter for anti-aliasing 
purposes, the rather slow roll-off of the skirt presents an issue with the low 
attenuation of the unwanted frequencies. More so, the use of this type of filter tends 
to push the -3dB cut off frequency    to several times the bandwidth of interest in an 
attempt to minimise the adverse effects of phase distortion within the 100Hz 
bandwidth. Although a filter can be easily designed by defining a minimal distortion 
in the attenuation of the signal over the 100Hz bandwidth, satisfying the low phase 
distortion requirement is much harder.  
A low-pass RC filter with a cut-off frequency of 100Hz attenuates the signal by -
3dB by design, however it imparts an impressive -45 phase shift to the signal. The 
design of the front end filter therefore should be predominantly governed by phase 
and sampling rate criteria.  
Figure 3.34 shows that in order for the filter to exhibit a good phase characteristic of 
just -0.5 in the 100Hz bandwidth, it requires a cut off frequency of 10KHz, as 
utilised by the exceptional seismic instrument detailed in section 2.4. 
~ 122 ~ 
Figure 3.52 RC filter phase over frequency characteristic 
Although such a cut off frequency is perfectly reasonable, digitisation of the sensor 
signal using a 24 bit ADC, would require noise frequency clearance down to an LSb 
of -144dB. 
However, the RC filters amplitude roll-off attains a value of -140 dB at 100 GHz. 
This of course does not directly necessitate a sampling frequency of 200 GHz, as it 
would assume very high frequency noise of full scale to be present in the signal, but 
serves as a good indication that a considerably higher sampling frequency than the 
one dictated by Nyquist would be required when digitising signals from sensors such 
as MEMS accelerometers, which inherently exhibit a white Gaussian noise 
characteristic, contributing equally to all frequencies. 
3.2.1.1 Filter phase and attenuation conclusion 
The simplicity of an RC filter as means of band-limiting the sensor signal may 
indeed appeal to many instrument manufacturers, however the limitations of such 
filters when solely employed for bandwidth limitation prior to digitisation make 
them inadequate for the acquisition of high quality, high resolution seismic data.  
Although many modern instruments boast 24 bit resolution and wide frequency 
bandwidths, the employment of RC filtering at the first stages of the front end 
electronics aids to only corrupt the sensor signal irreversibly, rendering any 
subsequent active and digital filtering ineffective for the provision of high quality 
undistorted seismic data. 
100 Hz 
-0.5 
~ 123 ~ 
3.2.2 Investigation of offsets and drifts in the front end electronics 
Voltage offsets in the amplifier stages of seismic instruments, be it for active 
filtering or simply for buffering the signal to the ADC, are largely dealt with by 
seismograph manufacturers via the utilisation of highest precision components. 
While this is indeed a significant step towards the acquisition of accurate and long 
term stable data, the limitations of even the highest precision amplifiers prove to be 
simply inadequate for the high resolution data required by seismic instrumentation. 
Typically, precision amplifiers have an input offset voltage in the region of 25 to 
500V. Special zero drift devices with internal chopper architectures boast offset 
voltages down to 1V. 
Whilst this is a superbly low offset for an amplifier, consideration of the 
requirements of a typical seismic instrument could prove challenging. 
Assuming the use of a MEMS sensor powered by a 3V stable source, without any 
requirement for amplification; an ADC resolution of 24 bits would dictate a Least 
Significant bit (LSb) of 0.18V, a figure nearly a tenth of the best offset achievable 
by any amplifier. Assuming a reasonable amplification of the signal in order to 
provide an input of 10V maximum to the ADC, would increase the LSb of the ADC 
to a 0.6V, and still below the best offset provided by specialist amplifiers. 
Similarly, a boost of the sensor signal to 20V, which is very much the limit of 24 bit 
ADCs, would imply an LSb of just over 1V. Although the latter might initially 
appear as a rather appropriate solution, in order for the signal to be amplified from a 
3V to a 20V useful range, an amplification of at least six times would be required. 
As this amplification can only be provided by an amplifier, a six-fold increase of the 
amplifiers offset voltage would also be present on its output, resulting in an offset 
of at least 6V at the ADC, which of course is six times larger than the ADCs LSb. 
Further, ageing effects of the amplifiers and the passive components utilised can 
produce long term drift effects in the range of several tens of micro Volts in the 
useful lifetime of the instrument. In addition, temperature changes would also impart 
drifts in the values of the analogue components, making any attempt to zero the 
offsets by calibration inadequate in the long term.  
~ 124 ~ 
Any gains within the analogue front end will also be affected by drifts and changes 
of the passive components, a feature which would directly affect measurement 
precision. 
3.2.2.1 Investigation of offsets and drifts in the front end conclusion 
An analysis of the requirements and challenges presented by modern seismological 
instruments has revealed that simply relying on best components and practices in 
order to achieve high resolution and long term stable measurements is indeed of 
limited use. Even though instrument calibration could help minimise offsets in the 
front end, the continuous alterations that take place due to ageing and due to 
environmental factors such as temperature and humidity, make the suppression of 
these sources of error by calibration alone unattainable. 
3.3  Evaluation of digitisation errors 
Quantisation and aliasing errors although important and should be carefully 
considered in any digital system design, are indeed very well documented and 
extensively considered by instrument designers. As detailed earlier, most 
seismographic digitisers almost always employ a 24 bit ADC. Similarly, sampling 
frequencies are normally chosen to be several times the Nyquist criterion, with 
typically five times to be an accepted standard for good quality signal reproduction 
in the digital domain. A sinusoidal signal therefore, sampled seven times its own 
frequency, as shown in fig 3.34, would be expected to be adequately reproduced in 
the digital domain. 
Although true according to Nyquist in terms of shape retention and absence of 
aliasing, a periodic pattern however is evident on the amplitudes of the peaks of the 
sampled sinusoid.  
The graph in figure 3.34 is arranged such that the minor grid lines on the y-axis 
represent the quantisation level of the ADC, while the minor lines on the x-axis 
represent the sampling period, in this case 250 Hz. Since the signal depicted here is 
a real sinusoid of frequency 34.7 Hz, its period of 0.02881 is marked by vertical 
dashed lines in red. Red circles on some of the peaks indicate the highest sampled 
~ 125 ~ 
values, which appear to occur every fifth cycle. The amplitude difference between 
the highest and the lowest peaks is many orders of magnitude greater than the 
quantisation level, therefore this phenomenon cannot be related to ADC resolution. 
Figure 3.53 Sampled signal exhibiting digitisation errors 
Considering the relation between the signals period of 0.02881s and the sampling 
period of 0.004s; the signal period is 7.2 times greater than that of the sampling 
clock. Although this dictates that no aliasing should be present, it also dictates that if 
both the sampling clock and the signal were coincident, such that at time zero the 
sampled data was that of the absolute peak of the signal, the next peak of the signal 
would not be sampled at its maximum value as it would occur 0.2x0.004s after its 
nearest sample. Similarly, the following peak would occur 0.4x0.004s after its 
nearest sample and so forth, until near coincidence would be achieved on the 5
peak of the signal. Since both the signal and the sampling clock are periodic, the 
resulting phenomenon is also periodic, producing peaks in the sampled data every 
 cycle. 
Although this occurrence is clearly demonstrated by the digitisation of a single 
frequency sinusoidal, a complex signal would almost certainly mask its existence. It 
is evident from the above, that a seismic accelerograph, sampled several times its 
maximum frequency in order to satisfy the Nyquist criterion, could still undergo 
sampling distortions, which depending on the start and end points of digitization, 
would most certainly produce exponential errors in the resulting displacement trend. 
~ 126 ~ 
3.3.1 The Quality Preservation Sampling (QPS) criterion 
Considering a perfect sinusoid of the form 
where A is the signal amplitude and f is the frequency. Utilising an ADC of N bits 
resolution, with voltage reference span of      volts to digitise this signal, would 
dictate an LSb of the ADC as follows 
The differential of the signal would of course yield a cosine with a maximum at t=0, 
indicating a maximum rate of change of the signal at t=0. At the point therefore that 
the signals amplitude transverses the LSb level: 
yielding a minimum Quality Preservation Sampling criterion time of 
It can then be concluded, that in order for a signal to retain its absolute fidelity, the 
sampling frequency must be at minimum 
Application of the QPS criterion requires only an estimate of the highest frequency 
and amplitude of the signal, since the ADC resolution and voltage references are 
usually pre-defined or constrained by design and availability. 
The signal of figure 3.34 which was sampled with an 8 bit ADC over a voltage 
reference range of 10V, would therefore require a sampling frequency in excess of 
14 KHz in accordance with the QPS criterion for its characteristics to be preserved. 
~ 127 ~ 
3.4 Soil dynamic effects  
Up to recently, seismology was concerned with the effects of linear motion along the 
three orthogonal components, x or East-West, y or North-South, and z or Up and 
Down. Soil however is not a uniform medium nor is it constant. Its properties of 
elasticity for example depend on moisture, and its dynamic response to vibration 
depends on consistency and frequency of vibration.  
Liquefaction is such one extreme dynamic characteristic of saturated soil, where 
under certain circumstances it behaves like a liquid during an earthquake, thus 
allowing any structures upon it to rapidly sink into it. 
3.4.1 Dynamic and static tilts 
Since surface waves can be of large amplitude with wavelengths spanning to several 
tens of meters or more, it is only logical to accept that the very surface of the Earth 
not only undergoes linear displacements due to seismic wave propagation through it, 
but also experiences tilts between the troughs and peaks of the resonance. In high 
magnitude earthquakes, near field instruments can be significantly affected by these 
dynamic tilts to produce rather inaccurate seismic data [101] [102]. Furthermore, 
local after-event tilts could be permanent due to the actual displacement of soil mass 
in the area where the instrument is located, thus causing a permanent misalignment 
of the instrument. 
Since surface waves tend to mainly cause rotations on the surface of the soil, very 
much like water waves do on water, it is assumed that the z axis of the instrument 
therefore would be most affected. Evidence however suggests that relatively large 
rotations can also be experienced on the plane parallel to the ground, as shown in 
figure 3.35 below. 
~ 128 ~ 
Figure 3.54 Rotation of obelisk after the 1897 Great Shillong Earthquake (Source: Report on the 
Great Earthquake of 12
 June 1897. Mem. Geol. Survey India, vol. 29. (from figure 1)). 
Although one might correctly assume that rotations round the z axis are no different 
to rotations around the x or y axis coplanar to the ground; with respect to the sensor, 
these can indeed be perceived rather differently. 
Figure 3.36 below depicts a sensor with two sensing axis x and z at rest at an angle 
of  to the vertical z reference.  
~ 129 ~ 
Figure 3.55 Vertically misaligned sensor 
An acceleration  applied along the vertical reference would be interpreted by the sensing 
axis of the sensor as two orthogonal components    and    which from basic trigonometry 
equate to: 
The obvious result bears no surprises, however it dictates that tilts on the z axis are 
by far less corruptive to the z sensing axis signal than they are to the x or the y axis 
signals. In order to quickly and visually quantify this, fig 3.37 below depicts the 
standard sine and cosine graphs. A sensor at rest and in perfect alignment with the 
vertical reference would therefore be experiencing a zero degree tilt. Any tilt 
causing deviation from the zero axis of reference would as discussed cause an 
alteration to the sensing sensitivity of the axis. 
It can be seen from the graphs below, that any small deviation about the zero angle 
of reference produces dramatically different changes to the sensitivity between the 
X reference 
Z sensor axis 
X sensor axis 
~ 130 ~ 
sin(x) and cos(x) dependent axes, which clearly indicates that the z axis is rather 
tolerant, while the x and y axes are considerably sensitive to even small tilts. 
Figure 3.56 Gradients around 0 of Sine and Cosine graphs 
3.4.1.1 Dynamic and static tilts conclusion 
As reviewed earlier in this work, there are no means of calculating and excluding the 
effect of tilts in order to derive pure linear tri-axial seismic data. The complexity of 
motion alongside the restrictions of the instruments does not allow for the resolution 
between linear and rotational components. 
Another factor to be considered is the asymmetrical behaviour of the ground. Since 
soil is a non-uniform mixture, seismic waves travelling across underground rock 
formations or sand deposits will behave differently to when travelling across a more 
uniform clay substrate [103] [104]. Sensors therefore positioned near underground 
boundaries could in theory experience an asymmetric oscillation dependant on the 
direction of the waves with respect to the position of the sensor and the boundary. 
Considering for simplicity a vertical oscillation of a sensor near an underground 
boundary, as shown in figure 3.38 below: 
~ 131 ~ 
Figure 3.57 Sensor near underground boundary 
With a seismic wave propagating from sandy to rocky soil, a change in the shape of 
the wave would be expected amongst other artefacts such as reflections etc. Very 
much like a water wave reaching the shallows, an increase in amplitude over the 
rocky subsoil would create a non uniform vertical motion for the sensor. On the 
arrival of the wave-front, the sensor would be accelerated upwards and tilted by the 
smaller in amplitude surface wave describing a motion represented by vector   . 
Once the wave-front is over the rocky substrate, its increase in amplitude would 
create a sharper wave edge on the downward motion thus creating a larger tilt during 
the negative acceleration part of the sensors motion, as represented by vector   . 
The above phenomenon would inevitably introduce a non-linearity in the form of 
mechanical hysteresis as it would consistently generate larger upward than 
downward acceleration readings, leading to sizeable offsets in the velocity and 
displacement trends post numerical integration. 
In conclusion, tilts can and do play an important role in seismic error generation in 
more ways than originally anticipated. Their measurement and consequent 
corruption of seismic data has been known for over a decade, however, no methods 
exist to date enabling their isolation or their useful integration into the seismic data. 
Vertical reference 
Sand Rock 
Wave propagation 
~ 132 ~ 
3.5 Conclusion 
The identified possible sources of error were both mathematically and 
experimentally examined in this chapter. With the utilisation of the primary MEMS 
circuit and the precision sinusoidal vibration platform, it was confirmed that the 
direct use of a MEMS acceleration sensor for the measurement of seismic data, with 
or without primary filtering, inevitably results in erroneous displacement data after 
the necessary double numerical integration. 
A detailed examination of the sensor itself identified numerous sources of error able 
to corrupt the seismic signal before it even exits the MEMS IC. 
Sensor noise is by far one of the most obvious causes of error and sensor resolution 
limitations. It exhibits a Brownian noise characteristic spanning the entire spectrum 
and contains some artefacts from the internal clock albeit significantly attenuated 
and at frequencies beyond the bandwidth of interest. Sensor noise dependency to 
temperature, although widely documented and mathematically evaluated herein, did 
not reveal the true magnitude of this dependency until experimental investigation 
revealed a sharp exponential increase of sensor noise relating to increase in 
temperature. 
An attempt to attenuate the sensor noise by utilising common mode rejection in the 
form of bi-axial differential excitation proved that although some noise should be 
common due to the shared wafer between the channel electronics, the non-common 
mode micromechanical noise by far exceeds any common mode noise content that 
might be present. 
The test pin, present on most MEMS accelerometer sensors for the binary 
confirmation of their operation, was successfully utilised to gain vital sensor 
dynamic response information, enabling the in-situ and on-demand acquisition of 
the frequency, impulse, step, and even phase response of not only the sensor, but the 
wider instrument. Such information of course can be used to reverse the effects of 
the instruments electromechanical dynamic characteristics on the measured signal 
by means of de-convolution in the frequency domain. 
~ 133 ~ 
Further use of the test pin also showed the ability to dither the output signal with 
some loss of dynamic range, should it be necessary to monitor very low frequency 
and amplitude adulations which may cause errors in the zero g bias voltage 
evaluation. 
Experimental investigation on the sensors linearity did not show any signs of 
hysteretic behaviour, however, it revealed a non-linear effect stemming from cross-
axis sensitivity due to mechanical coupling between the channels. The extensive 
mathematical evaluation and the subsequent derivation of formulae for the 
correction of this phenomenon were experimentally proven in their ability to derive 
true and uncorrupted by this effect acceleration data from each channel. 
Further, sensor limitations were investigated, such as the effects of temperature 
fluctuations on sensitivity and zero g bias voltage. It was shown that the zero g bias 
was quite susceptible to variations in temperature in a non-linear fashion and in 
different polarities between channels, making its removal by calibration rather 
inefficient. The sensitivity change due to a variation in temperature could be one of 
the several key sources of hidden error as it directly impacts the precision of the 
acceleration measurements. 
Finally, sensor die to package misalignment was examined to reveal that correct 
sensor to instrument alignment from the outset is vital to acquiring uncorrupted data. 
The front-end electronics also contribute to potential errors in the form of amplifier 
offset errors, component ageing, and thermal drifts. An examination of these sources 
of error revealed that current common practice and the utilisation of best available 
components is simply not adequate for the attainment of error-free seismic data. 
Environmental factors other than temperature and humidity also influence the 
accuracy of data, and the much discussed issue of dynamic and static ground tilts 
during a seismic event was investigated to show that not only it affects the direct 
accuracy of the readings, but it also affects different channels in different ways, 
depending on their orientation. It was further shown that non-uniformity in soil 
composition could produce a hysteretic behaviour due to the alteration of the shape 
of the surface waves across underground boundaries. Such non-linear effects of 
~ 134 ~ 
course contribute to asymmetrical data, which in turn results in exponential 
displacement trend errors due to the cumulative effect of the integration process. 
In conclusion, manufacturers have been attempting to produce 24-bit resolution, 
high accuracy seismic instruments, by solely depending on the quality of the 
components used and the refinement of data by subsequent linear FIR filtering, 
whist completely ignoring the very prominent sources of error stemming from 
within the sensor itself.  
Although few seismic instrument manufacturers have employed more effective 
front-end electronic solutions, such as active filtering and even multi channel 
averaging, the latter only aid to smooth over the fundamental sources of error, 
which left uncorrected from the source, cannot be corrected by any means further 
down the dada acquisition line. This study clearly identifies the rather prominent 
shortcomings of current seismic instruments and proposes methods for the 
improvement of acquisition of seismic data.  
To this effect, this study serves as a guideline of specifications demanded of a novel 
benchmark seismic instrument, with the ability to acquire precise and repeatable 
data in a real environment, and over very long operating periods. 
~ 135 ~ 
Chapter 4  
Realisation of the HPAGS sensor 
In the previous section of this work, an in-depth investigation of the challenges 
encountered by the accurate measurement of ground acceleration data and its 
subsequent processing to precision ground displacement over time, highlighted 
several sources of error currently not tackled by current seismic sensor technology.  
It was shown that these range from internal to the MEMS package drifts, 
misalignments and non-linearity, to the challenges of the front-end electronics in 
terms of noise reduction, filtering, signal preservation, and long term stability. 
Figure 4 Specification diagram of HPAGS sensor base on error analysis 
Front 
end ADC 
MEM FIR 
proces
Knowledge of up to date Sensors / instruments dynamic response, required for the de-
convolution of the instruments response from the acquired data. Method for the 
correction of non linear response also required for signal preservation. 
Appropriate filtering and up to date Knowledge and/or correction of offsets and 
drifts in the front end electronics required for long term acquisition of accurate 
data.  
High resolution, high frequency sampling of data without decimation, 
required for the avoidance of integration errors and the exclusion of low 
level noise 
Elimination of the elevated threshold requirement due to drifts required for 
accurate zero g bias level acquisition. 
Elimination of the averaging based zero g bias calculation 
required for the accurate evaluation of initial conditions 
Elimination of the recommended RC filter required for the retention of the signals 
phase and amplitude characteristics. 
Elimination of the effects of the high tolerance, high value internal resistor 
required for correct interfacing of the sensor. 
~ 136 ~ 
A careful re-evaluation of these errors served as an accurate specification model for 
a high precision instrument, for which a system level diagram is shown in figure 4. 
In addition to the error sources depicted in the requirements system diagram above, 
environmental factors such as temperature and soil dynamics had to also be 
considered in the design of a high precision instrument. 
4.1 Electronic Systems 
The HPAGS sensor is intended to be a smart and active seismic sensor unit able to 
interface with a variety of digitisers for the acquisition of undistorted seismic data. 
To this effect, the device considered herein, does not encompass circuits and 
methods for the digitisation of the signal, however, as seen earlier, novel correction 
algorithms and linear FIR filtering of the data is provided for the correction, 
derivation, and evaluation of accurate displacement trends. 
Figure 4.1 HPAGS system level diagram 
~ 137 ~ 
A top level system diagram of the HPAGS sensor electronics is presented in figure 
4.1, believed to present a set of realisable novel solutions to the challenging 
problems identified in this work. 
All control signals between the micro-controller and appropriate peripheral devices 
such multiplexers, DACs, sensor electrostatic excitation, and interfacing electronics, 
have been omitted for clarity. 
With the sources of error identified throughout this work in mind, this novel sensor 
topology aimed to systematically address them all in the hope of acquiring superior 
quality seismic data. 
HPAGS sensor electronics comprised two MEMS accelerometers, one for the x and 
y sensing axes, and a separate one for the z-axis. Although the ADXL327 is a tri-
axial device, the manufacturing constraints and consequently the inferior 
performance of the z-axis of the MEMS sensor, made the use of an additional sensor 
essential. Vertical mounting of the additional MEMS allowed for its x or y sensing 
axis to be used for z-axis acceleration measurement. 
The front end electronics were arranged as to eliminate the use of an external 
capacitor in conjunction with the internal to the MEMS resistor, by providing a very 
high impedance interface. This served to neutralise the effects of a high impedance 
source and also allowed the instrument to be unaffected by any changes in the high 
tolerance source resistor. Instead, a two-stage bespoke Bessel-Thompson active 
filter circuit aided to attenuate high frequency noise whilst accurately retained the 
signals amplitude and phase characteristics. 
As the front end electronics were inevitably going to be subject to component 
changes due to ageing and environmental variation, closed loop correction and 
evaluation systems were devised in order to ascertain the instruments accuracy over 
its lifetime. 
For any electronic circuit comprising active components which introduce gain, the 
knowledge of the precise value of gain and offset at the time of the acquisition of 
data is essential. Simply measuring the output of a channel as means of deriving 
offset might appear a sensible approach, and indeed most manufacturers do just that, 
however the output of each channel is a product of both gains and offsets, and the 
~ 138 ~ 
two cannot be considered as a unified offset error. While true offsets arising from 
the active components of the instrument could simply be negated post-data 
acquisition, changes in gain in the front-end electronics directly affect the sensitivity 
of the instrument, and can lead to serious misinterpretation of data. For example, the 
ADXL with a typical sensitivity of 420mV/g coupled to a circuit with a gain of 3.3 
would yield an instrument sensitivity of 1.386V/g. With the most accurate available 
resistors of 0.01% tolerance used for the design, a gain error of 139V/g would still 
be possible from the outset, and subject to unpredictable variations over time.  
In order to put this into perspective, the digitisation of the HPAGS sensor output, 
digitised by a 24 bit Sigma-Delta convertor over a 10V output range, would have an 
LSb and therefore a resolution of nearly 60V, which is already half of the gain 
error.  Multiple gain stages within the instrument would of course add to this error 
and multiply it yielding an error in the evaluation of the seismic signal. 
The electronics of the HPAGS sensor incorporated an accurate voltage reference, 
which with the aid of a multiplexer (MUX), this reference voltage could be switched 
through the front end electronics instead of the MEMS output, thus allowing for its 
measurement and therefore the determination of the overall gain of the front-end 
electronics. A problem however can arise when one considers that even the 
precision reference itself has a voltage variation and tolerance greater than the 
required resolution of the instrument. This issue was successfully resolved by a 
further MUX on the output of the instrument, by which the voltage from the 
reference could be directly connected to the output of the instrument and therefore a 
direct comparison could be made between the actual voltage from the reference and 
the voltage resulting from the reference being fed through the front end electronics. 
In most standard instruments, the offset arising from the MEMS accelerometer and 
further exaggerated by the front end electronics, is dealt with in the digital domain. 
As reviewed in earlier sections, an average of pre-event data is collected and 
averaged for the derivation of a bias reference. This reference is then subtracted 
from the signal. This approach provides for the allowance of errors, both from any 
pre-event artefacts and from possible quantisation errors prior to a double 
integration able to exponentially exaggerate even the smallest of offsets. Further, 
allowing the true voltage bias in the analogue front-end to be offset in either positive 
~ 139 ~ 
or negative direction, significantly reduces the dynamic range of the instrument as 
saturation could be reached in either direction by a strong motion event. To this 
effect, the HPAGS sensor design incorporated a closed loop high gain system and 
offset circuitry allowing for the precise setting of the bias voltage to zero in each of 
the three channels. This allowed for maximum dynamic gain and a trigger threshold 
able to be set at very low levels, without the fear of false triggering due to drifts. 
This method had the additional major advantage of allowing for true zero bias, not 
requiring the use of pre-event data or its averaging, thus eliminating any potential 
errors associated with pre-event artefacts and erroneous initial conditions of 
integration, known to majorly contribute to the exponential errors so frequently 
encountered in seismic data trends. 
It was envisaged that the complete HPAGS sensor would in future be fabricated on 
silicon and encapsulated alongside the MEMS to provide an integrated solution on 
chip. As such, the electromechanical design could be significantly scaled down via 
the use of micro-bearings and micro-actuators, resulting in a unified novel 
electromechanical seismic sensor, complete with thermoelectric cooling for the 
significant reduction of noise and the avoidance all errors associated with 
temperature of drifts. 
On the system level, the HPAGS sensor was designed to provide three precision 
output channels of analogue acceleration data, while rejecting and eliminating 
environmental and internal sources of error via active electronic and 
electromechanical circuits. Due to the smart and active nature of the sensor, a 
requirement for communication with the data acquisition system and wider 
seismographic instrument existed, which was fulfilled by means of Infrared (IR) and 
visible optical transceivers. A full IR RS232 serial link was included for the direct 
communication to the embedded micro-controller, and a binary visible range sensor, 
for the signalling of a seismic event. The optical nature of the transmission of data 
was dictated by the restrictions posed by the mechanical structure requiring six 
degrees of freedom without the obstruction of cables. 
The circuit of the HPAGS sensor, with only one channel shown for clarity, is 
depicted in figure 4.2 below. The other two channels are identical in design. 
~ 140 ~ 
Figure 4.2 HPAGS circuit with only one out of the three channels depicted 
~ 141 ~ 
The signal channel electronics of figure 4.2 were divided in functional sections 
enclosed in dashed rectangles to aid their functionality description.  The remaining 
not enclosed circuit, comprises the micro-controller with the interfacing electronics 
to the channels, the electromechanical components, and the optical communication 
ports.  
Following the circuit in a logical order from sensor to the sensors output, the 
MEMS section of the circuit is depicted in more detail in figure 4.3. It is worth 
noting that the Self Test pin 2 of the accelerometer was made available for 
connection to the micro-controller for dynamic response evaluation of the system. 
In addition to the power decoupling capacitors C8 and C47, an in series with the 
supply resistor R13 was included in order to filter out any spurious noise that might 
be present near in frequency to the 5 KHz clock, or any of its harmonics. Since the 
output of the MEMS accelerometer is ratiometric with respect to its supply, any 
noise or variation to the power supply could cause errors to the acceleration 
measured. 
Figure 4.3 Detail of MEMS circuit 
~ 142 ~ 
The low pass RC filter created simply aided the attenuation of any frequencies 
above 1.45 KHz present in the power source. 
The MEMS device, as other critical components of the circuit, was powered by a 
very stable 3V reference source, generated by a high precision reference U8 as 
shown in figure 4.4 below. It should be noted that a 2V precision reference U9 was 
also used to provide accurate voltage references to the ADCs and to the output 
channels. Both voltage references allowed for an initial 3mV accuracy, very low 
drift, and exceptional noise characteristics. Unlike the low power requirement of the 
2V reference, the 3V reference served as a precision reference and as a power 
supply, and was therefore buffered by a unity gain stable power amplifier U25 of 
matching characteristics in precision.  
Figure 4.4 HPAGS sensor power supply and precision reference circuit detail 
Although the references initial error and the amplifiers could combine to give rise 
to a larger offset, the 3V supply only powered devices not sensitive to variations in 
supply voltage, whilst the sensitive MEMS sensors were powered directly from the 
reference source. The 3V reference voltage was made available for precise 
measurement to the wider instrument, as it could in theory drift enough to effect the 
validity of acceleration measurements. 
~ 143 ~ 
The MEMS sensors manufacturer provides three data points as to hint to the 
devices sensitivity dependency on supply voltage, which are reproduced in a 
graphical format in figure 4.5 below, verifying a true linear dependency. The 
derivative of this curve provides a value of sensitivity change due to supply voltage 
change of 131mV/g/V. This rather large alteration in sensitivity indicates how great 
data errors from current seismological instruments can be, as they do not employ 
any form of analogue level correction methods. 
Figure 4.5 MEMS sensitivity drift due to supply voltage change 
Although the ADC reference within the micro-controller was also supplied via the 
3V rail, a small change in the absolute precision of the measured analogue value due 
to any voltage alteration would not be of significance due to the exceptionally high 
amplification of the signal prior to its input to the ADC. 
The 2V reference rail could also undergo small variations in its value, and although 
it was used to supply the voltage references of the DACs, this variation was of no 
consequence since an absolute value was not required due to the closed loop nature 
of the zero-g bias voltage correction system, discussed in detail later in this section. 
Following the signal path through the channel, the output of the accelerometer was 
fed to a MUX simply serving the purpose of switching either the signal or the 2V 
reference to the input of the channel. The amplification and offset node was 
accomplished by the use of an instrumentation amplifier configured for a gain of 
3.35. It should be noted that any offsets in any of the amplifier stages through the 
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 
Supply Voltage (V) 
~ 144 ~ 
channels were simply zeroed by the zero-g bias offset closed correction loop and 
therefore of no importance. The gain of the amplifier stage was set by high precision 
0.01% resistors R8 and R7, in order to reduce gain variation in the channel. 
However, since even such small variations could impact the precision of the overall 
instrument, a gain evaluation circuit discussed later in this section, was employed to 
ascertain the absolute accuracy of the sensor. 
The 9V supply throughout the circuit was derived from a battery source ensuring 
very low noise. Any variation in the battery voltage would not cause any adverse 
effects to the instrument as long as it remained within the normal operating limits of 
the electronics. 
The design of the active filter section detailed in figure 4.6, was also of crucial 
importance since it could impart unrecoverable errors on the accelerometers signal, 
both in amplitude and phase. 
Figure 4.6 Active filter circuit detail 
The two-stage active filter constructed using ultra low noise and ultra low distortion 
dual amplifier AD8599ARZ, labelled in circuit as U19:A and U19:B in the channel 
~ 145 ~ 
in question, ensured the highest signal fidelity. The hardwired unity topology of the 
filter further aided the avoidance of any gain-based error distortion. 
In order to preserve the vital phase characteristics of the seismic signal, a Bessel-
Thomson configuration with a cut-off frequency of 6 KHz was selected.  
A direct comparison between the characteristics achieved by the RC filter utilised in 
the current state of the art instrument, and the active filter used in the HPAGS 
sensor, can be seen in figures 4.7 and 4.8 below. 
Figure 4.7 Phase comparison between HPAGS active filters and current state of the art instrument 
The phase characteristics shown in figure 4.7 are indeed very similar in both the 
active and passive RC filter cases, indicating that the design was predominantly 
governed by the phase response. However, a comparison of their resulting amplitude 
responses, as shown in figure 4.8, clearly demonstrates the advantage the HPAGS 
sensor presents in terms of noise rejection. 
HPAGS sensor 
Current state of the art 
100 Hz 
~ 146 ~ 
Figure 4.8 Amplitude comparison between HPAGS and current state of the art instrument filters 
The output MUX positioned after the last filter amplifier and buffer, enabled the 
selective connection of either the seismic signal or the 2V reference voltage to the 
output. All the switching and multiplexing devices used in the circuit were 
specifically chosen as not to impart any distortions to the signal via attenuation or 
via stray capacitance. 
It is important to note that there was an additional connection made available to the 
filtered output signal from the active filter section, which served as the feedback 
signal for the auto zero-g bias correction loop. The auto zero offset bias circuit 
adjusted the output of the HPAGS sensor to true zero voltage throughout the 
channels, representing a zero acceleration sensed by the device. The feedback loop 
comprised the micro-controller, which upon reception of an instruction via the 
optical port, acquired the voltage of an output channel through the Bias feedback 
error block, shown in figure 4.9 below. 
Current state of the art 
HPAGS sensor 
100 Hz 
~ 147 ~ 
Figure 4.9 Auto-zero correction feedback loop detail 
In this section a multiplexer U6 switched the output of the appropriate channel, 
under the control of the micro U13, through a very high gain amplifier U4, to the 
micro-controllers pin 27, which was configured as an ADC input. The high gain of 
201 of the amplifier, amplified the error of the sensors output, by comparison to 
zero, thus providing a resolution of 15V to the 10 bit ADC within the micro-
controller, which is better than half the LSb of a 24 bit ADC that may be used to 
acquire the HPAGS sensors data. 
An input protection circuit D1, coupled to an RC low-pass filter, protected the 
micro-controllers ADC input pin from over voltage whilst removing any high 
frequency content allowing for an accurate measurement. If the sensor voltage was 
not zero, and error existed and the micro increased the voltage to the offset 
adjustment node U3, in order to reduce the error in a closed loop control fashion. 
This was accomplished by the micro-controller by serially transmitting successive 
correction values to the Auto-zero DAC U5, which in turn fed a representative 
voltage to the offset adjustment amplifier U3. This operation continued until the 
output voltage of the selected channel was zero. 
Since the zero-g offset correction loop is a high gain closed loop control system, 
instability was prevented by a two-stage incremental proportional control algorithm 
within the micro-controller, which allowed adequate settling time between control 
steps before re-sampling the error. 
~ 148 ~ 
The action of the zero-g bias correction circuit and control algorithm revealed a 
rapid 0.8V/s correction rate as depicted in figure 4.10 below.  
Figure 4.10 Action of HPAGS sensors Auto-Zero correction circuit and algorithm 
The gain error measurement circuit elaborated on earlier in this section was 
implemented through the control of the input and output multiplexers of each 
channel, U5 and U16 for the channel examined here. The switching enabled a direct 
comparison between the 2V reference voltage, and the voltage output of the channel 
as a response to a 2V reference input. 
Referring to the circuit in figure 4.2, communications were served by the optical IR 
device U7, connected to the serial port of the micro-controller, while the visible light 
phototransitor, was connected to the micro-controllers high priority interrupt, 
allowing for a quick response to an event trigger from the wider instrument. 
The power control of the gyro motors and gimbal brakes were switched by 
MOSFETs Q1, Q2, and Q3. Connector CONN1 was an onboard programming port 
allowing for in-circuit reprogramming of the micro-controller as necessary. 
The dynamic response of the HPAGS sensor unit was accomplished via electrostatic 
excitation by the application of an impulse or a variable frequency square wave 
voltage to the self test pin of the sensor. Pin 11 of the micro-controller was 
connected to the pins of both MEMS accelerometer sensors self test pins, enabling 
3 4 5 6 7 8 
Time (s) 
~ 149 ~ 
simultaneous and equal excitation of all three x, y and z channels of the instrument. 
The impulse response of HPAGS sensors x channel is shown in figure 4.11. 
Figure 4.11 Impulse response of x-channel derived by electrostatic excitation 
It should be appreciated that this is the impulse response of the whole channel 
inclusive of active filters, and not just of the sensor. 
-0.0005 5E-18 0.0005 0.001 0.0015 0.002 
Time (s) 
~ 150 ~ 
4.2 The physical layout 
The physical implementation of the HPAGS sensor electronics took the form of an 
ultra thin 0.5 mm 4 layer printed circuit board (PCB) as shown in figure 4.12. 
Figure 4.12 HPAGS sensors electronics physical layout 
The highly compact design enabled for low noise interference and a small 
mechanical gimbal assembly. The thinness of the board allowed for its easy 
insertion into the inner gimbals recess, and a further reduction in the weight of the 
overall platform load. 
MEMS X and Y sensor 
X axis channel 
Y axis channel 
Z axis channel 
X axis output 
Y axis output 
Z axis output 
MEMS Z sensor module 
Gyro motor aperture 
Optical interfaces 
GND access pads 
+9V Supply 
-9V Supply 
Microcontroller 
Gyro control 
Brakes control 
Power supply 
~ 151 ~ 
4.3 The electromechanical assembly 
The custom-designed electromechanical assembly, precision machined to 0.1mm 
tolerance out of aluminium and brass, as pictured in figure 4.13, allowed the sensor 
electronics a three dimensional rotational decoupling from the measurement surface. 
The gyros oriented in a perpendicular to each other arrangement, actively stabilised 
the platform to a fixed celestial point thus allowing for the decoupling of any 
rotational seismic motion from the otherwise linear ground acceleration motion 
vectors. (Detailed mechanical diagrams of the assembly can be found in appendix 
Figure 4.13 The Active Gyro-Stabilised electromechanical assembly 
Retaining 
end plates 
motors 
Ground terminal coupled to the mechanical structure. 
+9V supply 
Brass gyro 
Bearing and 
power supply 
transmission   
housing 
Inner 
gimbal 
Retaining 
end plates 
Outer 
gimbal 
Brake pad 
-9V supply 
Middle 
gimbal 
Gimbal to 
gimbal 
connector 
compression 
screw 
~ 152 ~ 
4.3.1 The gyro stabilisation system 
Gyro stabilisation in itself is not a new concept since it has been in use for decades 
in various formats for the aid of gyroscopic navigation instruments. Unlike these 
instruments however, the gyro stabilised platform requirements for the HPAGS 
sensor makes it a rather unique undertaking. 
Gyro instruments can be broadly divided into compasses, where gravitational 
biasing forces North to South alignment by means of regression, and gyro 
stabilisers, mainly used in camera stabilisation units. Much larger gyro stabilisation 
platforms exist, as those used in ships for the damping of the wave induced rocking 
motion. 
In all of the above applications, the gyroscopic platforms characteristics other than 
its ability to reasonably quietly provide enough angular momentum are of little 
importance, provided that its size is also appropriate. In HPAGS however, its most 
important characteristic had by default to be its ability to provide reasonable short 
term stability, adequate for the duration of an earthquake, without producing any at 
all vibration interference to the ultra sensitive sensing elements onboard. Originally 
therefore, a smooth electromagnetic, liquid gyro drive was proposed for the purpose 
of stabilisation of the HPAGS sensor electronics. The proposed gyro would have 
utilised mercury as its rotating mass, and would have been driven by high current 
injectors, acting perpendicular to strong permanent magnetic fields, thus imparting a 
resultant torque onto the conductive liquid. 
The stringent health and safety regulations in UK universities and industry requiring 
rather elaborate measures to be taken for the handling of mercury, unfortunately 
prevented the construction and test of such an apparatus, therefore allowing only for 
the use of conventional motors for actuation. 
Conventional motors however, generate enough vibration during operation able to 
interfere with the very sensitive sensing electronics of the HPAGS platform. The 
solution sought therefore, was the design of a motorised gimballed platform 
employing high speed motors and light enough rotational masses, in an attempt to 
push the frequency of the inevitable motor vibration outside the 100Hz bandwidth of 
interest. Although such a construction was counter-intuitive in terms of angular 
~ 153 ~ 
momentum, and therefore at the expense of long term gyro stability, it was thought 
the only way available, adequate enough for the purpose of proof of the overall 
concept. 
The inner gimbal, encompassing the gyro assembly, is depicted in figure 4.14.  
Figure 4.14 Gyro assembly detail 
The gyro assembly was constructed in such a way as to have a centre of mass below 
its rotational axis, thus able to self acquire the vertical gravitation vector without the 
need of any active components. Further, the positive gravitational biasing would 
enable the true North alignment of the platform via the operation of the vertical 
gyros alone. 
The opposing nature of the vertical gyros enabled the cancelation of their starting 
torque, whilst it helped oppose the respective starting torque of the secondly 
energised horizontal gyro. Since the low centre of gravity aided the platforms 
vertical stabilisation passively, only a single gyro was deemed necessary to avoid 
oscillation.  
In order to gain as much mechanical advantage, the gimbal arrangement was 
constructed from lightweight aluminium, while the high speed gyro masses were 
machined out of brass. 
Motors 
Bearing 
housing 
Vertical 
Horizontal 
~ 154 ~ 
4.3.2 The power commutation system 
Resolving the mechanical problems however required a way of conveying power to 
the very centre of the gimballed platform without impeding on its free movement. 
A through bearing power transfer method was conceived and fabricated as shown in 
an exploded view in figure 4.15 below. 
Figure 4.15 Through-bearing power commutation detail 
An assembled cross-sectional view of the through-bearing power commutation 
assembly is shown in figure 4.16. 
The metal outer insert served electrically as a ground connection to the casing and 
mechanically as a brake pad holder, but more importantly as means of applying a 
compressive force on the opposing bearings in order to eliminate any vibration due 
to internal relative movement. 
The metal inner insert was used to covey power through to the small bearing, 
providing a fully flexible means of power transfer without inhibiting the rotational 
movement of the gimballed platform. The plastic inner and the plastic bearing insert 
allowed complete insulation from ground. 
Bearing 
housing Plastic 
Bearing 
insert 
Small 
bearing 
Large 
bearing  
Metal inner 
insert 
Threaded metal 
outer  insert 
Plastic insert 
spacer 
Brake pad 
~ 155 ~ 
The large bearing being in tight contact with the casing ensured a good ground 
connection, while the bearing insert was manufactured with a 1mm rim, in order to 
ascertain the electrical separation between the large and small bearings, and 
therefore between ground and power respectively. 
Figure 4.16 Assembled bearing and commutator detail 
The threaded portion of the outer insert allowed for the circular operation of the 
brake pad, actuated via means of a shape memory alloy. Tethering holes on its inner 
ring allowed for both the mechanical connection to the pad but also the electrical 
connection to ground. A small current passed through the shape memory alloy 
would increase its temperature and force it to rapidly return to its shorter in length 
original shape, thus forcing the pad to rotate and tighten against the bearing housing. 
Removal of the current would allow the alloy to relax and stretch under the tension 
of an opposing spring acting upon the pad, thus releasing the brake. 
Power 
connection 
Insulation Ground 
connection 
Ground 
connection 
to casing 
Threaded 
portion for 
brake motion 
and bearing 
compression 
~ 156 ~ 
4.3.3 The six degree of freedom assembly 
The assembled gimballed gyro system is depicted in figure 4.17. The mechanical 
arrangement allowed for the isolation of any rotational motion around the x, y, and z 
axes, whilst directly mechanically coupling of the sensing electronics, residing on 
the inner gimbal, to any acceleration stimuli along these axes, namely   ,   , and 
Figure 4.17 Six degrees of freedom gimbal assembly 
The gyroscopic force created by the gyros was indeed adequate for short periods of 
time, however, longer term drifts and mechanical biases would eventually interfere 
with the system, returning its attitude to a preferred state relative to the casing rather 
than the celestial space. This was no doubt due to the rotational mass size 
compromise made during the design phase in order to try and push the vibration 
noise of the platform to a higher frequency than that of the bandwidth of interest.  
Outer insert on 
outer gimbal 
for connection 
to the casing 
Outer 
gimbal 
Inner 
gimbal 
Middle 
gimbal 
~ 157 ~ 
Instruction 
buttons 
4.4 Control and embedded software 
The HPAGS being a micro-controlled sensor, appropriate code was required for the 
onboard micro-controller in order for the various correction and actuation algorithms 
to be implemented. Further, Windows-based control software was also required in 
order to remotely communicate with the sensor, thus allowing for the emulation of a 
complete seismographic system. 
4.4.1 PC Host Instrument Control Software 
The host software developed allowed the remote control of the sensor, as if 
incorporated into a complete seismograph solution. To this end, the control software 
was able to instruct the sensor to activate the gyros, auto-calibrate for bias error on 
all axis, activate and release brakes, and switch the references through the channels, 
and directly to the outputs, for gain verification and correction. 
Figure 4.18 Bespoke Windows based host instrument control software  
A screen-shot of the windows based control software is shown in figure 4.18.  
Gyro control 
and status 
Instruction window and 
channel status panel 
~ 158 ~ 
In addition to status indication boxes, the user interface also incorporated a full 
commented instruction response window for clarity of operation. Further, an active 
diagrammatic channel-status panel was also included, in order to provide clear 
indication of input and output MUX status and DAC programmed voltage outputs at 
any given time.  
An additional indication panel was also incorporated into the General User Interface 
(GUI), which allowed for the status of the gyros to be viewed at a glance, thus 
providing a full overall remote control system for the HPAGS sensor.  
The control software was developed to take advantage of the available USB 
connectivity by utilising a Virtual Com Port (VCP) driver for windows, thus 
creating a handle to the port hardware. The use of a USB to Serial IC enabled the 
serial communication between the Windows control software and the embedded 
microcontroller onboard the HPAGS sensor, either optically, or via a two wire 
connection.  
The instruction protocol developed was based on the ASCII character instruction set, 
where each character would correspond to an individual instruction. The symbolic 
representation of the characters was therefore easily handled by the high level 
windows software, while their numeric representation enabled the easier creation of 
an instruction decoder on the HPAGS sensors embedded microcontroller.   
The code listing for the control software, excluding objects and controls, is included 
in Appendix A. 
~ 159 ~ 
4.4.2 Embedded Software 
The embedded software was developed in assembler and in a manner that allowed 
the HPAGS sensor to function as a real-time system. A simplified flowchart of the 
code is shown in figure 4.19 below. 
Figure 4.19 HPAGS sensor embedded software flowchart  
Reset Vector 
Interrupt 
service routine  
Initialisation of 
ports, clocks, 
and peripherals 
Main loop 
Instruction 
decoder 
Functions 
Instruction 
received? 
Instruction 
valid? 
Release brakes, 
end correction 
algorithms, set 
sensor to 
acquisition 
Event interrupt 
(Opto) 
~ 160 ~ 
On reset, or power up, the initialisation routine was designed to quickly configure 
the digital input/output (I/O) ports and set up the analogue channels and their 
connections to the internal ADC. The internal clock speed was selected for fast code 
execution (4 MHz) and serial port compatibility, set to a speed of 9600 bits per 
second. The HPAGS sensor was capable of entering the ready state within the 
main loop in under 11s from reset, where it awaited for further instruction from the 
wider system. Upon a valid instruction received, verified by the Instruction Decoder 
section, the appropriate function was called and the instruction executed before 
returning to the ready state. 
Most open-loop instructions were decoded and executed within micro seconds. 
Closed-loop instructions however, such as auto-zero axis corrections necessitated  
hardware settling time allowance for stability, and therefore required few seconds to 
complete. 
The optically coupled event interrupt was designed to rapidly set the HPAGS sensor 
in a normal acquisition mode, in the very unlikely event that an earthquake occurred 
whilst the sensor was executing a correction algorithm. 
The embedded test code developed is listed in appendix B, containing the core 
functionality and function holders where necessary, as described by the flowchart in 
figure 4.19. 
~ 161 ~ 
Chapter 5    
 HPAGS tests and results 
Experimental validation of some of the new correction methods developed was 
demonstrated in chapter 3 and this chapter should therefore be viewed as an 
extension to those results. Correction methods only theoretically derived, or 
requiring the use of the full HPAGS sensor electronic hardware, embedded software, 
and post digitisation mathematical correction, are experimentally evaluated and 
presented in this chapter.  
The requirement for the following experiments to deduce the new sensors 
effectiveness in improving the accuracy of seismic data, as well as to compare with 
traditional and current state of the art instruments, could only be met by the 
methodical evaluation of the HPAGS sensors correction principles. 
5.1 Sensor calibration process 
A calibration process for the derivation of the sensors fundamental characteristics is 
of course crucial to the acquisition of any precision measurements, since it 
quantifies the sensors performance parameters, including axial and cross-axis 
sensitivity. 
Experimental derivation of these parameters required that the sensor and front-end 
electronics underwent testing in four specific spatial orientations as shown in figure 
5 below. The directions indicated by the arrows denote the sensing axes positive 
acceleration vectors. 
Figure 5 Spatial orientations for calibration 
The orientations depicted in figure 5 ensured that two out of the three sensing axes 
experienced zero acceleration, while the third axis experienced a +1g or a -1g 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
Gravity (+1g) 
~ 162 ~ 
accelerations. It should be noted that due to the perpendicular to the pages surface 
z-axis orientation, the z-axis did not experience any alteration in its zero acceleration 
state in any of the four orientations presented. 
The precise rotational positioning required by the calibration process necessitated 
the modification of the high accuracy mechanical platform of figure 3.34 in a 
manner as to accommodate the HPAGS sensors electronics in a vertical plane, as 
shown in figure 5.1 below. 
Figure 5.1 High accuracy rotational platform 
Mathematical representations for the x and y outputs for the general calibration 
setup could then be derived via the use of the earlier derived equations 3.18 and 
3.19, reproduced below for clarity. 
By elimination of the terms containing z-axis acceleration due to the z-axis 
perpendicular to the gravitation vector orientation: 
~ 163 ~ 
Whilst the above equations would have been correct for outputs derived directly 
from the sensor, the front end electronics of the HPAGS sensor introduced a -1V 
bias offset to the sensor signal at the summing junction, and subsequently, a gain 
  =3.35, thus necessitated the alteration of equations 5 and 5.1 in order to correctly 
represent the HPAGS sensor unit as follows: 
In orientation 1 of figure 5,      and       therefore the representation of the 
y-axis output in this orientation: 
Similarly, in orientation 3,      and      , and therefore the y output in 
orientation 3: 
Direct measurement of outputs    and   , revealed values of 0.140V and 2.88V 
respectively. From equations 5.4 and 5.3 therefore: 
Solving the simultaneous equations by first equating each to the common term        
and subsequently to each other: 
~ 164 ~ 
The zero-g bias voltage of the y axis      could therefore be directly calculated 
from equation 5.6: 
                                            (5.11) 
Derivation of equations for    and    for orientations 1 and 3 respectively, using 
direct measurements of the x-axis outputs, resulted in: 
since      and       
Similarly, orientations 2 and 4 yielded: 
Therefore 
Equally, direct measurement of the y output in orientations 2 and 4 provided the 
following mathematical representations of the outputs: 
Experimental determination of the sensors parameters during calibration was 
conducted at an ambient temperature of 20C, and with a supply of 9V. Since 
many of the sensors parameters are mainly affected by temperature and supply 
voltage variations, all experiments were conducted at the same temperature and at 
~ 165 ~ 
the same supply voltage. All subsequent experiments were also conducted in similar 
environments and therefore utilised the correction coefficients derived in this 
section. 
5.2 FIR Low-Pass 100Hz Filter design 
In order to retain the amplitude and phase qualities of the original signal, the 
HPAGS sensors active filters were tuned to provide a frequency cut-off at 5KHz. 
To further band-limit the acquired data, in the digital domain, to the seismic 100Hz 
bandwidth, a Finite Impulse Response Filter (FIR) was designed and implemented. 
The filter requirements of sharp 100Hz cut-off with high attenuation in the stop band 
and linear phase response were satisfied by a Kaiser window implementation. The 
amplitude response of the filter shown in Figure 5.2 below, exhibited no ripple in the 
pass-band, and attenuation in excess of -120dB in the 102Hz stop-band. 
Figure 5.2 Kaiser Window amplitude response (fc=100Hz, fp=102 Hz) 
The phase response of the filter, as depicted in figure 5.3, also demonstrated a good 
linear phase characteristic, therefore retaining the original signals characteristics 
without distortion.  
0.05 0.1 0.15
Frequency (kHz)
Magnitude Response (dB)
~ 166 ~ 
Figure 5.3 Kaiser Window phase response (fc=100Hz, fp=102 Hz)  
The impulse response of the filter characterised by its coefficients shown in figure 
5.4 below, exhibited a right-to-left symmetry, characteristic of a phase-linear 
system. 
Figure 5.4 Kaiser Window impulse response (fc=100Hz, fp=102 Hz)  
5.3 Setting the assessment standards 
Direct comparison between existing instruments and the HPAGS sensor proved to 
be rather more intricate than originally anticipated, since the comparative instrument 
references established were: 
1. Conventional instruments with RC filtering, representing over 95% of the 
instruments utilised to date. 
2. State-of-the art instruments of higher sampling frequency, RC and active 
filtering, representing a very small minority used for specialist applications. 
-0.1 -0.05 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2
Frequency (kHz)
Phase Response
1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4
~ 167 ~ 
Since the more complex HPAGS sensor, employed a much higher sampling 
frequency, active filters only, and several new correction methodologies and 
circuits, namely: 
1. Sampling at QPS criterion for undistorted digitization of data. 
2. Active zero offset calibration 
3. Active gain error correction 
4. Cross-axis interference correction 
5. Impulse de-convolution correction 
6. Active gyro tilt correction 
direct comparison of results between instruments therefore, based solely on the 
amount of drift of the baseline in their equivalent derived displacement data, was 
deemed to be an unreliable measure of instrument performance.  
It could be argued that the displacement baseline error over a specific period of time 
could be used as a direct comparative measure of quality between current 
technology and the HPAGS sensor, however, due to the multi-variable environment 
affecting the deviation of the displacement baseline, such a simplistic comparative 
method would result in inequitable comparisons.  
For example; most instruments utilise 60 seconds of pre-event data to derive the 
average bias level, and 60 seconds of event data to capture the event. A conventional 
sensor sampling at a rate of 500Hz, would acquire 30,000 samples of pre-event, and 
event data, where the HPAGS sensor sampling at 250KHz would acquire 
15,000,000 samples of respective data. Clearly therefore, if an improvement was to 
be shown in the displacement baseline offset of the HPAGS sensor results in the 60 
second period, it could not be known whether this improvement was due to the 
correction methods employed, or simply due to the higher resolution of the signal, or 
indeed due to both. Further, since integration is a cumulative mathematical process, 
the higher sampling rate would yield a superior accuracy in terms of area 
calculation, while it would also yield an exaggeration of any small remaining errors 
due to the disproportionate increase of summations for a given time.  
A comparison of equal lengths of data, in terms of number of samples, would appear 
to be a fairer comparison, since both offsets and the integration process act upon 
~ 168 ~ 
individual samples, however, the peak adulations observed in lower frequency 
sampled data were best examined over much longer trends, as the output could in 
some circumstances depend on the start and end points of the acquired data. 
While the effect of displacement baseline error is indeed an indication of overall 
error, it is not in itself an error that could be directly addressed, since its origins were 
shown to be a multitude of primary underlying errors. Baseline error is therefore the 
result of the cumulative effect of several primary errors, and consequently it is the 
correction of these primary errors that the HPAGS sensor should be addressing 
directly, and be evaluated upon thoroughly. 
It is widely accepted, and shown within this work, that conventional and state-of-
the-art technologies are undoubtedly unable to provide accurate seismic data. 
Further, the effects of sampling rates much below the QPS criterion where also 
shown to produce notable errors on higher frequency digitised data. It was therefore 
concluded that experimentation utilising typical lower sampling frequencies with 
sinusoidal mechanical stimuli in the higher end of the 100Hz bandwidth,  would 
only provide information already derived earlier in this work, and data which is 
widely accepted as inaccurate. Further, the utilisation of a higher non-distorting 
sampling rate, would allow for the use of shorter in time trends, since the envelope 
formation due to inadequate sampling would no longer be an issue. Any other 
primary error should however be clearly evident within the very first few cycles of 
an oscillation.  Reduction of the data size would also serve to speed up calculations 
in mathematical software without the loss of fidelity, since all results could be 
extrapolated to the full 60 second timeframe for comparison where necessary. 
The experimental setup used for the evaluation of the HPAGS sensors 
effectiveness, requiring a frequency variable sinusoidal input, is shown in figure 5.5.  
The vibration platform benefited from near-pure primary sinusoidal mechanical 
excitation verified by the reference displacement signal derived by the IR sensor, as 
discussed earlier in this work. Since the actual amplitude of mechanical oscillation 
was able to be determined by direct measurement on the excitation platform, and the 
phase linearity of the HPAGS sensor was already evaluated in chapter 3, the IR 
signal served only as a visual assurance of sinusoidal fidelity, and therefore deemed 
surplus to requirement in the following experimental evaluation. The HPAGS 
~ 169 ~ 
electronics were mounted on the mechanical vibration platform, with the x-axis in 
the vertical plane, and the y-axis in the horizontal plane.  
Direct comparative analysis of experimental results was conducted by the systematic 
evaluation of each of HPAGS sensors corrective algorithms and circuits. 
Figure 5.5 Mechanical vibration platform with HPAGS electronics affixed to the excitation shaft  
The unfiltered IR output of the displacement sensor, confirming the sinusoidal 
action of the mechanical vibrator, is shown in figure 5.6 below. 
HPAGS 
Electronics 
Upper 
transmission 
shaft 
Linear guide 
Linear bearing 
Optical sensor 
Spherical 
bearing 
Lower 
transmission 
shaft 
Cam shaft 
Motion 
~ 170 ~ 
Figure 5.6 Unfiltered IR displacement sensor data 
5.4 HPAGS Auto-zero bias correction assessment 
The Quality Preservation Sampling (QPS) criterion derived earlier in this work, does 
not only aid the retention of signal integrity but also the measurement accuracy of 
digitised data. According to the QPS criterion therefore, the HPAGS sensors x-axis 
output required sampling time period, was derived as follows; 
In the above calculation, the LSb figure was based on a 16 bit ADC used for the 
digitisation of the signal over a 10V reference range, and a peak signal amplitude of 
1.3V at a maximum frequency of 5KHz. The 5KHz frequency limit was of course 
imposed by the cut-off frequency of the active filters in each channel on the HPAGS 
sensor electronics. 
An indicative sampling frequency of 267KHz was therefore required in order to 
preserve the data quality of the signal, but also the measurement of the error voltage 
on the feedback loop of the auto-zero bias correction circuit onboard the HPAGS 
sensor. 
In the following experimental assessment, the Auto-zero bias circuit was remotely 
activated by the host Windows software, and served as the only means of bias offset 
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000
Sample number 
~ 171 ~ 
correction of one set of acceleration data, whilst the other set of data was corrected 
using the conventional average subtraction method. 
Both sets of data were acquired using the same sampling frequency, under the same 
conditions, resulting in the same number of samples, thus providing for a direct 
comparison between the conventional, and the advanced auto-zero method utilised 
by the HPAGS sensor. 
5.4.1 Results 
The unfiltered, auto-zero corrected acceleration data, and the conventionally 
corrected acceleration data, both sampled at a more convenient, but close to the QPS 
derived, frequency of 250KHz, is shown in figure 5.7 below. 
Figure 5.7 Auto-zero versus conventionally average-subtraction corrected acceleration trends 
The resulting error of interest is of course the distance between the mean value of 
each trend and the absolute zero reference line of the x-axis. It was observed that the 
Auto-zero method provided superior performance in terms of baseline correction of 
the acceleration data.  
Filtering of both the bias-corrected sets of data, and subsequently double-integrating 
them, resulted in expected bias-deviating displacement trends due to the initial offset 
errors. The best-fit linear lines of both the auto-zero corrected and conventional data 
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
Sample number 
Auto-zero corrected 
Conventionally corrected 
Mean of Auto-zero trend 
Mean of conventional trend 
~ 172 ~ 
sets, are shown if figure 5.8, where the considerable improvement resulting from the 
auto-zero corrected data can be clearly seen. 
It should be evident however, that due to the small error in the auto-zero corrected 
acceleration trend, the resulting displacement trend exhibited a slight baseline offset, 
albeit not very significant by comparison to that of the conventionally corrected 
data. 
Figure 5.8 Auto-zero, and conventionally corrected best-fit linear displacement trends 
A block diagram of the Auto-zero correction circuit is shown in figure 5.9, with 
circuit diagram references corresponding to the circuit of figure 4.2. 
Figure 5.9 Auto-zero bias correction system block diagram 
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
Sample number 
Auto-zero corrected best fit Conventionally corrected best fit 
10 bit ADC 
RC LP 
Filter 
G=201 
Active 
Filters 
G=3.35 
DAC 16 bit 
DAC cntrl 
DAC cntrl 
MEMS output HPAGS output 
U2:A, B U3 
~ 173 ~ 
The theoretical error of the correction loop can be calculated by analysing the 
resolution and the gains throughout the loop. 
The correction applied to the loop via the micro-controller is directly fed to the 16 
bit DAC (U5). With the DACs reference at 2V, the resolution of each corrective 
step can be shown as 
However, U3 further amplifies this corrective step by 3.35 times, resulting in a step 
of 102V at the HPAGS channel output. 
In turn, U4 amplifies the absolute value of the output by 201 times, therefore 
increasing the step voltage to 20.5mV at the ADC input. The ADC within the micro-
controller shares the 3V supply as a reference and therefore achieves a resolution 
over 10 bits of 2.9mV. 
A worst case scenario would therefore produce a correction overshoot of 20.5-
2.9=17.6mV at the ADC, equivalent to an actual maximum bias error of only 87V 
on the HPAGS sensors channel output. However, the quantised output of the mean 
resulting from the Auto-zero correction on the waveform in figure 5.7, was indeed 
many times the magnitude of the maximum calculated error. 
Direct measurement of the signal at the ADC input, after Auto-zero, revealed a high 
noise level content, as shown in figure 5.10. 
Figure 5.10 Voltage at ADC input 
The high gain of amplifier U4 resulted in noise content higher than the RC filter was 
able to attenuate efficiently, thus creating a feedback signal of undetermined and 
variable amplitude. 
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
Sample number 
~ 174 ~ 
An increase of the filter capacitor to 10F and the increase of a settling time delay in 
the micro-controller Auto-zero code, resulted in an improved HPAGS Auto-zero 
system, able to further reduce the offset error. A comparison of the means of the 
bias-corrected acceleration output signals derived are shown in figure 5.11. 
Figure 5.11 Means of Conventionally, HPAGS, and HPAGS improved bias corrected signals 
The resulting displacement best-fit lines are shown in figure 5.12 below, with the 
improved correction system producing a displacement baseline significantly closer 
to the zero x-axis level. 
Figure 5.12 Displacement best-fit lines of Conventionally, HPAGS, and HPAGS improved corrected 
signals 
Quantification of the best-fit lines revealed that for a seismic signal acquired over a 
60 second period, sampled at the HPAGS sensors QPS frequency of 250KHz, a 
conventionally bias corrected signal by average subtraction, would result in a 
displacement error of over 13 cm, where an HPAGS bias corrected signal utilising 
the improved system, would result in a displacement error of only just over 3 cm. 
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
-0.15
-0.05
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
Conventionally corrected HPAGS  HPAGS improved 
Sample number 
Sample number 
Conventionally corrected HPAGS  HPAGS improved 
~ 175 ~ 
Averaging of the feedback signal in the micro-controller as means of deriving an 
even more superior accuracy of data was not possible with the HPAGS sensor 
circuit since the ADC within the micro was unidirectional. 
From this point onwards in this work, any reference to the Auto-zero correction 
mechanism should be regarded as a reference to the improved version of the 
algorithm and circuit as detailed above, unless otherwise explicitly stated. 
5.4.2 Conclusion 
The comparative experimental assessment between Auto-zero corrected and 
traditional bias subtraction corrected data, proved that although the data in both 
experiments was acquired at an increased sampling rate of 250 KHz, much higher 
than any conventional or even state-of-the-art instruments, the resulting auto-zeroed 
displacement trends demonstrated major improvement in terms of accuracy.  
Although the Auto-zero correction mechanism still produced an offset error in the 
acceleration trends higher than the theoretical ideal, the validity of the method as 
means of significantly reducing the offset error was undoubtedly demonstrated. 
It can therefore be concluded that the novel auto-zero bias correction algorithm and 
circuit employed by the HPAGS sensor does provide for a dramatic improvement to 
the accuracy of displacement trends derived by the numerical integration of 
acceleration data. Furthermore, the action of the Auto-zeroing improves the dynamic 
range of the sensor by centring its output on the zero volt reference. 
~ 176 ~ 
5.5 HPAGS input re-composition by impulse de-convolution   
Utilisation of the MEMS accelerometers test pin to acquire the MEMS sensors and 
the wider HPAGS instruments response, as previously discussed, allowed for the 
reduction of any sensor-related variations to the original signal. According to 
classical Digital Signal Processing (DSP) theory, the acquired acceleration data from 
the sensor can be thought of as the convolution of the actual mechanical acceleration 
experienced by the sensor and its impulse response. De-convolving the impulse 
response from the output data of the sensor, should therefore in theory provide 
accurate reconstruction of the mechanical actuation signal. 
Convolution being a complex operation between data sets renders the application of 
direct de-convolution of the resulting data mathematically impossible for most real 
applications. Since however convolution in the time domain is equivalent to 
multiplication in the frequency domain, the process of de-convolution in the time 
domain simply becomes a division in the frequency domain, posing fewer, but still 
some implementation challenges. 
5.5.1 Results 
Figure 5.13 below shows auto-zeroed and FIR filtered acceleration data acquired 
from the HPAGS instrument, excited by the sinusoidal mechanical vibration 
platform. 
Figure 5.13 Auto-zero corrected and filtered acceleration trend  
An impulse remotely initiated by the host software and digitised immediately after 
the acquisition of the acceleration data is shown in figure 5.14 below. 
2 2.5 3 3.5 4
Sample number 
~ 177 ~ 
Figure 5.14 Electrostatically triggered Impulse response   
It should be noted that the horizontal positioning of the impulse peak in figure 5.14 
appears central only due to the digitizers settings. Any horizontal shift to the 
impulse response does not alter the systems characteristics other than the phase 
relationship in terms of delay between the input and the output data sets. It was 
already shown earlier in this work that the HPAGS sensor exhibited linear phase 
characteristics and therefore a shift of the impulse peak to sample zero was deemed 
appropriate if representative data was to be acquired, as shown in figure 5.15 below.  
Figure 5.15 Impulse response of x-axis channel  
The shifted representation of the impulse response of figure 5.15 is contained only 
within the first 182 samples of data. The rest of the data set comprises zero padding 
of an appropriate length for the enablement of a point by point division of the sensor 
output and impulse response frequency spectra. 
Close examination of figure 5.15 also reveals the presence of noise on the impulse 
response signal which was originally thought detrimental to the data recovered by 
de-convolution, however, experiments showed that although smoothing the impulse 
response by averaging yielded a smoother in appearance response, it created abrupt 
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600
Sample number 
Sample number 
~ 178 ~ 
changes in the magnitude of the data, which in turn generated their own frequency 
content yielding a much noisier result. 
The frequency spectrum of the impulse response is depicted in figure 5.16 below. 
Figure 5.16 Frequency spectrum of x-axis impulse response   
It should be noted that the impulse response was digitised at the same sampling 
frequency as the HPAGS output signal, allowing for best de-convolution results.  
The frequency spectrum of the HPAGS output, is shown in figure 5.17 for reference. 
It can be readily envisaged that the spectra division would yield a magnification of 
any noise artefacts in the regions where the impulse response frequency data 
approaches near zero values, thus necessitating the use of an FIR filter to recover the 
de-convoluted data. 
Figure 5.17 Frequency spectrum of HPAGS x-axis output. 
The resulting spectrum of the division of the two frequency characteristics is shown 
in figure 5.18 below, exhibiting the anticipated increase in noise in the near zero 
regions of the impulse response frequency data. 
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
Sample number 
Sample number 
~ 179 ~ 
Figure 5.18 Frequency spectrum of the division of the acceleration and impulse response spectra  
Since figure 5.18 depicts the frequency spectrum of the quotient of the HPAGS 
output and impulse response spectra, it should also mathematically represent the 
spectrum of the de-convolved mechanical input stimulus. The derivation of the 
mechanical acceleration input to the HPAGS sensor, shown in figure 5.19, was 
therefore accomplished by the application of the inverse FFT (IFFT) to the quotient 
spectra, and by subsequent FIR filtering in order to remove the residual high 
frequency noise. 
Figure 5.19 mechanical input derived by the IFFT of the acceleration and impulse spectra   
The resulting mechanical actuation trend of figure 5.19 was found to be of the 
expected form with regard to shape and phase, representing the mechanical 
acceleration input to the sensor. Since the HPAGS sensor was specifically designed 
to impart low noise, minimal phase, and minimal attenuation to signals within the 
100Hz bandwidth of interest, the resulting impulse de-convoluted acceleration input, 
as expected, did not exhibit any notable differences by comparison to the output 
sensor data of figure 5.13. In fact, other than magnitude scaling, the impulse de-
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
2 2.5 3 3.5 4
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
Sample number 
Sample number 
~ 180 ~ 
convoluted input was found to be nearly point to point identical to the output of the 
sensor. 
Derivation of displacement trends by double integration of the HPAGS output data 
and the impulse de-convolution derived data, yielded nearly identical results, thus 
further proving the transparency of the sensor to in-bandwidth data. The 
displacement trends of the direct output and the de-convolution computed input, are 
depicted in figure 5.20 below, scaled appropriately for direct comparison. 
Figure 5.20 Displacement trends of impulse derived and direct output accelerations 
In order to further confirm the transparency of the instrument and the accuracy of 
the impulse response model, a sinusoidal of frequency 1.5 KHz, and therefore  
within the HPAGS sensors 5KHz active filter bandwidth, corrupted by an out of 
band 7.5 KHz noise, was synthesised and presented as an input to the model. This 
high frequency input was constructed by the addition of two digitised sinusoids of 
different amplitudes as shown in Figure 5.21  
Figure 5.21 Synthesised high frequency input  
2 2.5 3 3.5 4
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500
Sample number 
Sample number 
Impulse derived displacement (red) Output derived displacement (blue) 
~ 181 ~ 
Convolution of the synthesised input with the sensors impulse response, yielded an 
output with the high frequency 7.5 KHz noise component lying outside the 
designed 5KHz bandwidth, highly attenuated, as shown in figure 5.22 
Figure 5.22 Evaluated output by convolution of high frequency input and Impulse response 
The results depicted in figure 5.22 provided further experimental proof of the 
validity of the impulse response acquisition and dynamic modelling of the HPAGS 
sensor via the direct impulse excitation of the MEMS self test pin. 
5.5.2 Conclusion 
The recovery of the mechanical acceleration stimulus was shown possible via the 
electrostatic excitation of the inertial mass via the self test pin on the MEMS sensor.  
The input acceleration data obtained by the de-convolution of the experimental 
HPAGS sensor impulse response from the digitised output, resulted in near identical 
data to the digitised output, thus strongly supporting of the original design claim of 
the sensors minimal distortion to in-band signals. In addition, out of band 
interference signals were also shown to be successfully attenuated as a result of their 
direct convolution with the experimentally derived impulse response, providing 
further evidence of the validity of the impulse response derivation method onboard 
the HPAGS sensor. 
The ability to acquire in-situ, direct dynamic characteristics of the sensor, was 
shown to provide good means of on-demand system response evaluation, and 
therefore long term output data correction as required. 
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500
Sample number 
~ 182 ~ 
5.6 HPAGS gain error correction assessment 
Drifts in the front-end electronics due to environmental factors and due to the ageing 
of components can impact the accuracy of the sensor in terms of offset but also in 
terms of gain. Whilst the offset was shown to be significantly rectified via the use of 
the auto-zero bias correction mechanism, gain drift would require physical 
component alteration for its correction, or direct measurement and post digitisation 
scaling of the data.  
The gain correction circuit onboard the HPAGS sensor provided for the direct 
measurement of each channels gain and therefore enabled the correction of any 
such drifts in the front-end electronics. 
5.6.1 Results 
With reference to Figure 4.2, the gain correction methodology was based around a 
direct comparison principle, which although not perfect, it was believed to offer an 
excellent accuracy to circuit complexity ratio. 
By switching the input MUX (U14) such that the input to the front-end electronics 
was provided by the 2V reference instead of the MEMS accelerometer, and with the 
DAC (U15) output set to zero; the output of the HPAGS sensor channel    attained a 
value of 6.53V 
The through-channel voltage output can be described as: 
Therefore gain: 
Where A is the channel gain,    is the channel output,      is the voltage reference 
voltage,       is the input voltage offset of the instrumentation amplifier (U3), and 
      is the input voltage offset of the filter section (U2:A and U2:B). 
~ 183 ~ 
Subsequent switching of the output MUX (U16) such that the HPAGS sensor output 
was directly coupled to the 2V reference indicated an actual reference voltage      
of 1.96V. 
Quantification of the input offset parameters of the amplifier stages, as specified by 
the manufacturers: 
confirmed a maximum gain measurement error of 0.005%, and a typical error of 
only 0.0015%; a gain accuracy improvement of 20 to 67 times respectively. 
Substitution of the typical values in equation 5.26 indicated a gain of 3.33 rather 
than the 3.35 expected by design. 
A comparison of acceleration trends obtained with and without the HPAGS sensors 
gain correction circuit utilisation is shown in figure 5.23 as a difference in data 
amplitude, representative of the gain output error. 
Figure 5.23 Output difference between expected and gain-corrected trends 
5.6.2 Conclusion 
It was shown that the gain correction circuit employed by the HPAGS sensor aided 
to significantly reduce the errors resulting from component drifts in the front-end 
electronics.  
The ability of the circuit to provide gain correction functionality on-demand and in 
situ allowed for the reduction of gain errors in acquired data without the improbable 
requirement of long term stability of components. The great benefit behind this 
correction methodology designed in the HPAGS sensor, is the acquisition of 
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
Sample number 
~ 184 ~ 
correctly dimensioned output data, as gain errors directly affect the sensitivity and 
therefore the accuracy of the instrument.  
The inclusion of the gain correction circuit on the HPAGS sensor was deemed to 
provide exceptional gain correction and a superior benefit to data accuracy by 
comparison to the increased complexity and cost of the overall instrument. 
5.7 HPAGS Cross-axis sensitivity correction assessment 
The cross-axis sensitivity assessment, conducted in section 3.1.3, and subsequent 
correction formulae, were experimentally and thoroughly proven in a sample-by-
sample steady state fashion. An experimental re-assessment utilising the mechanical 
vibration platform allowed for the application of the correction formulae to dynamic 
and more realistic data sets. 
5.7.1 Results 
After auto-zeroing, with the HPAGS sensor mounted on the vibration platform, as in 
the previous experiments (figure 5.6), with the x-axis oriented in the vertical plane 
and the y-axis in the horizontal plane; a horizontal disturbance was induced by 
means of mechanical displacement of the whole vibration platform along the y-axis. 
This y-axis induced disturbance, along with the affected x-axis vertical sinusoidal 
cycle were digitised for analysis. Sections of the x and y-axis acceleration outputs of 
the HPAGS sensor, focussing on the disturbance event, are shown in the figures 5.24 
and 5.25 respectively. 
Figure 5.24 Acceleration trend of x-axis output 
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000
Sample number 
~ 185 ~ 
Figure 5.25 Acceleration trend of y-axis output 
The single x-axis acceleration cycle affected by the horizontal disturbance is shown 
in figure 5.24, corresponding to a vertical motion of the HPAGS sensor from the 
lowest to the highest point of oscillation. 
Figure 5.26 depicts the x-axis, x-axis cross-axis sensitivity corrected, and the y-axis 
data trends.  
The general correction equations 3.27 and 3.28 were rearranged for use with the 
discrete x and y-axis acceleration data, with all z-axis terms excluded, as follows: 
where     
  , and    
 , since both channels were auto-zeroed and therefore 
the term      was deemed to be zero. Also, the cross-axis sensitivities were set to 
            ; the channel sensitivities             V/g; and the channel 
gains were set to 3.33, based on values derived experimentally. The Matlab script 
for the cross-axis sensitivity and gain correction of the x and y channels is included 
in Appendix C. 
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000
Sample number 
~ 186 ~ 
Figure 5.26 Comparison between x-axis raw, cross-axis corrected, and y-axis data 
The Dmax region in figure 5.26 denotes a region of greatest difference between the 
raw x-axis acceleration in blue, and the cross-axis sensitivity corrected acceleration 
in red, as indicated by the subtle visibility of the blue trend just above the red, 
otherwise nearly coincident and therefore invisible outside this region. This segment 
of maximum deviation coincided with the peak y-axis disturbance, as dictated by the 
correction formulae of section 3.1.3, which were based on the already proven 
steady-state experimental results. 
5.7.2 Conclusion 
The maximum difference of 0.5     between the cross-axis corrected and the 
uncorrected x-axis acceleration data observed in figure 5.28, poses little threat to the 
accuracy of accelerograms as presented in this experiment under laboratory 
controlled conditions. However, had this error been due to a more realistic, non-
uniform excitation, or a due to a permanent event-induced tilt, it could have been the 
cause of a significant baseline error of up to 0.9m over a standard seismograph 
event-recording period of 60 seconds. Figure 5.27 graphically depicts the 
displacement error of the data segment examined. 
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000
x-axis acceleration: raw (blue),   cross-axis sensitivity corrected (red) 
y-axis disturbance(green) 
Sample number 
~ 187 ~ 
Figure 5.27 x-axis displacement data; uncorrected, and cross-axis corrected. 
The general cross-axis sensitivity correction formulae derived in section 3.1.3, were 
therefore shown to provide essential correction to realistic dynamic data derived 
from the HPAGS sensor, and thus able to minimise baseline offset errors due to 
cross-axial coupling effects on seismic data trends. 
5.8 HPAGS Gyro stabilisation module assessment 
The restrictions imposed on experimentation with the intended mercury liquid 
drives, inevitably lead to the use of DC motors for the gyro stabilisation module and 
therefore the injection of vibration noise into the HPAGS signal. Due to small 
asymmetries within the DC motors inescapable by construction, some vibration 
noise will always be present in any platform utilising them for actuation. 
5.8.1 Static evaluation of gyro motor noise 
Before any experimentation could be conducted, an accurate evaluation of the noise 
interference the gyro motors induced to the sensors outputs was conducted. 
Activation of the vertical gyros, on the otherwise stationary HPAGS sensor 
platform, showed excessive high frequency vibration noise content in its outputs as 
shown in figure 5.28 below. 
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000
0.02mm Uncorrected x-axis displacement (blue) 
Corrected x-axis displacement (red) 
Sample number 
~ 188 ~ 
Figure 5.28 HPAGS x-axis output with vertical gyros on. 
While every attempt was made during the design phase to restrict the loading on the 
motors in order to achieve high speed operation, this method of forcing vibration 
noise outside the 100Hz bandwidth of interest was inevitably at the expense of 
maximum angular momentum attained. 
Frequency analysis of the resulting noisy signal output of the sensor revealed a 
spectrum with peaks at 175Hz and higher, as depicted in figure 5.29. 
Figure 5.29 Frequency spectrum of the HPAGS x-axis output with vertical gyros on. 
With the 100Hz bandwidth mainly unaffected by the gyro motor noise, as intended 
by design, the rather high amplitude noise residing just outside the pass-band 
required the re-design of the original FIR low-pass filter used this far, in order  to 
adequately attenuate this higher in magnitude noise. The effectiveness of this higher 
order FIR filter is shown in figure 5.30, where the original unfiltered signal 
spectrum is compared with the spectrum of the signal post-filtering.  
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
100 200 300 400 500 600
Frequency (Hz) 
Sample number 
~ 189 ~ 
Figure 5.30 Spectrum comparison between unfiltered (blue) and filtered sensor outputs (red). 
It can be seen from the results depicted in figure 5.30 that the motor-induced noise 
was satisfactorily attenuated by the higher order FIR filter, allowing the extraction 
of the signal of interest. 
5.8.2 HPAGS active gyro correction assessment 
As detailed earlier, the unavoidable use of DC gyro motors, and the need to force the 
inevitable vibration noise to high frequencies outside the 100HZ bandwidth, resulted 
in lower angular momentum produced by the gyros, rendering the gimballed 
platform incapable of very long term gyro stabilisation. While the platform 
responded exceptionally well to angular accelerations on all three axes, it was not 
able to retain a long term fixed celestial orientation. This unavoidable consequence 
also impacted on the platforms ability to auto-align with true north by precession. 
Although the obligatory use of DC motors for the actuation of the gyros did not 
entirely fulfil the long term requirements of the HPAGS sensor, it still enabled the 
provision of proof of concept in support of gyro-stabilisation of seismic sensors via 
alternative low-vibration technologies, such as the mercury liquid drive discussed 
earlier in this work. 
With all the correction circuits, algorithms, and formulae employed by the HPAGS 
sensor sufficiently proven throughout this work, an in-depth assessment of the 
corrective action of the active gyro stabilised platform on seismic data acquisition 
was conducted. This assessment necessitated a more involved experimental setup 
20 40 60 80 100 120
Sample number 
Filtered data Un filtered data 
~ 190 ~ 
allowing for a complex but predictable motion. A Computer Numerical Control 
(CNC) machine, with its cutting tools disabled, was used for the provision of 
accurate two dimensional displacement. 
Figure 5.31 shows the HPAGS sensor platform on the CNC machine bed with 
power, computer control, and signal cables attached. 
Figure 5.31 The HPAGS sensor attached onto the CNC machine 
In order to also induce rotation, a flat metal plate with a location hole was machined 
allowing the HPAGS sensor to both pivot and slide. The location metal plate, with a 
single locating hole, was securely fixed to on a CNC Mikron C500 machine bed, 
capable of precision two dimensional linear motion. The HPAGS sensor was placed 
onto the metal plate and pivoted off-centre via the insertion of a metal pin through 
the sensors body and into the locating hole of the metal plate below. A non-elastic 
tether, attached to the opposite end of the sensors body, allowed for its tethering to 
a fixed non-movable datum, thus enabling the generation of a complex linear and 
simultaneous rotational motion. 
HPAGS sensor 
CNC bed 
CNC casing 
CNC control 
panel 
Location plate 
~ 191 ~ 
 A detailed view of the HPAGS sensors attachment to the CNC machines movable 
bed is depicted in figure 5.32 below. 
Figure 5.32 HPAGS sensor attachment to the CNC bed detail  
The sensors body was connected via a steel pin which located into a receiving hole 
on the location plate beneath, thus creating a pivot point at point A. The location 
plate in turn was securely fastened to the CNC machines bed. A tethering point on 
the base of the sensors body, perpendicular to the Fa axis, allowed for a connection 
to a fixed datum point P on the casing of the machine (tether not shown in figure 
5.32). 
While the sensor electronics were concentric with the mechanical rotational centre 
of the gimballed assembly along axis Ca, the MEMS accelerometer itself resided 
offset from this axis on the PCB as indicated by the location axis Sa, having its 
sensing axis as indicated by the x and y arrows in figure 5.32. It should be noted for 
clarity that the CNC machines x-axis was coincident with the HPAGS sensors y-
axis, and similarly, the machines y-axis was coincident with the sensors x-axis. 
Y Pivot point 
Connection to stationary point 
Machine bed 
Sensor body 
Location plate 
~ 192 ~ 
The CNC machine was programmed to move the bed in a 45 diagonal motion, thus 
forcing the pivoting pin, and the sensor body, to move 10mm in both x and y 
direction, from position A to position B at a maximum speed determined by the 
machines control system. The tethering connected to the sensors body, as indicated 
by the intersection of location axis Fa and the sensors base, opposed this linear 
movement, thus causing a rotation of the HPAGS sensor about the pivot point. 
It is important to consider, that although the pivot point was the point of rotation 
between the locating plate and the HPAGS sensor, this was not the inertial centre of 
rotation of the HPAGS sensor with respect to the fixed reference plane containing 
point P. 
In order to exemplify the complex motion of the sensor and the attitude of the 
sensing axes within the gimballed mechanical arrangement, a top view diagram of 
the HPAGS sensor is depicted in figure 5.33 at the initial position A. The points of 
importance correspond to those of figure 5.32, with Ca denoting the body centre of 
the sensor and electronics, Fa denoting the tethering point, and Sa the MEMS 
sensors centre on the PCB. The direction of MEMS sensing axes is shown by the x 
and y arrows respectively. 
Figure 5.33 HPAGS sensor on CNC bed top view diagram 
Location plate 
Pivot point 
Connection to stationary point 
Sensor body 
Inner gimbal and electronics 
Tethering arc 
~ 193 ~ 
It is important to envisage that as the bed, and the location plate, move from point A 
to B, the pivot point on the HPAGS sensors body is forced to coincide with this 
linear motion, however, the tethering point Fa is restricted in distance by the fixed 
reference point and is therefore free to only describe a motion along a tethering arc, 
as indicated in figure 5.33. The combined effect of the beds diagonal motion and 
the enforcement of the tethering arc on point Fa, would yield a non sensor-centric 
rotational motion. 
5.8.3 Results 
In order to confirm the validity of acquired data prior to engaging in complex 
rotational and translational measurements, the HPAGS sensor was initially firmly 
clamped to the machines bed with its gimbals locked, and the sensor and machine 
axes aligned, in the x-to-y corresponding configuration as mentioned earlier. 
In this configuration, the sensor was forced to follow the beds x-y motion without 
any rotations introduced, thus enabling the acquisition of reference acceleration, 
velocity, and displacement data, used to verify the accuracy and calibration of the 
instrument before proceeding to the more complex experimental stages. 
The acceleration data for the x and y instrument axes is shown in figure 5.34 
Figure 5.34 HPAGS x and y-axis acceleration data of machine bed 
As it was hoped, both channels exhibited near-identical acceleration trends, which in 
turn corresponded to similarly-performing velocity and displacement data, as 
depicted in figures 5.35 and 5.36 respectively. 
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5
Y-axis (blue) X-axis (red) 
Time (s) 
~ 194 ~ 
Figure 5.35 HPAGS x and y-axis velocity data of machine bed 
It should be noted that the total displacement attained by the sensor and therefore the 
bed from the experimental results of figure 5.36, match the programmed 10mm 
displacement of the CNC machine. 
Figure 5.36 HPAGS x and y-axis displacement data of machine bed 
Following the very satisfactory results obtained by the machine-bed motion 
experiment, the HPAGS sensor was placed on the location plate and secure only via 
the locating metal pin, and tethered to the fixed point, as in figure 5.32, allowing it 
to rotate and translate accordingly.  In order to compare conventional rigid sensor 
performance with that of the gyro stabilised HPAGS platform, experiments were 
conducted with all the gimbal brakes on, thus emulating conventional rigid sensor 
behaviour, and then repeated in gyro-stabilised enabled mode, with the gimbal 
brakes off and gyros active.  
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5
-0.02
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5
Time (s) 
Time (s) 
Y-axis (blue) X-axis (red) 
X-axis (red) Y-axis (blue) 
~ 195 ~ 
During all the gyro evaluation experiments that focused solely on the ability of the 
HPAGS sensor to provide superior translation data when exposed to concurrent 
rotational motion in comparison to conventional rigid sensors, the sensors auto-zero 
bias, gain, and sensitivity correction systems and algorithms were enabled.  
The x and y-axis acceleration data of the HPAGS sensor, having undergone an A to 
B motion in rigid mode (all brakes locked) is shown in figure 5.37. 
Figure 5.37 HPAGS x and y-axis acceleration data in rigid mode. 
Unlike the coincident x and y-axes acceleration trends acquired by measuring the 
linear motion of the machine bed, shown in figure 5.34, the results obtained by the 
complex rotational and translational motion, shown in figure 5.37, indicated lower 
acceleration values in the x-axis, by comparison to those in the y-axis. This of 
course yielded corresponding results in the velocity and displacement data, as 
depicted in figures 5.38 and 5.39 respectively. 
Figure 5.38 HPAGS x and y-axis velocity data in rigid mode. 
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5
-0.02
Time (s) 
Time (s) 
X-axis (red) 
X-axis (red) Y-axis (blue) 
Y-axis (blue) 
~ 196 ~ 
Figure 5.39 HPAGS x and y-axis displacement data in rigid mode. 
The motion in rigid mode is depicted diagrammatically in figure 5.40, with the 
sensors initial position indicated by a black outline and a red sensor centre, and its 
final position all in blue. 
Figure 5.40 HPAGS motion in rigid mode. 
The green dashed cross indicates the position and orientation attained should the 
sensor was rigidly mounted on the machine bed. The difference in distance between 
the x-axis final position, marked in blue, and the green cross reference is markedly 
larger than that of the y-axis final position, indicating a shorter distance travelled, 
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5
Time (s) 
X-axis (red) Y-axis (blue) 
Tether 
Initial position 
Final position 
~ 197 ~ 
albeit in an arc of angle , by the x-axis. This is in line with the experimental 
measurements depicted in figures 5.37 to 5.39, showing consistent lower 
acceleration, velocity and displacement values in the x-axis respectively. The angle 
 measured on the graphical simulation model of figure 5.40, corresponded exactly 
to the angle of rotation measured on the location plate during the experiment, 
confirming the accuracy of the model. The results obtained are representative of a 
typical rigid instrument, albeit one of improved correction and sampling 
performance. 
In order to compare these typical results to those of the HPAGS sensor in active 
gyro mode, the machine bed was returned to its original starting position and the 
experiment was repeated with the sensors brakes off and the vertical gyros on. The 
resulting x and y-axis acceleration trends are shown in figure 5.41 below 
Figure 5.41 HPAGS x and y-axis acceleration data in gyro mode. 
A more substantial decline in the x-axis acceleration was noted, which was 
inevitably mirrored in the velocity, and the displacement trends, as shown in figures 
5.42 and 5.43 respectively. Examination of the diagrammatic simulation of the 
sensors motion while in gyro mode, shown in figure 5.44, confirmed that due to the 
gyro assisted alignment of the central sensing gimbal, the x-axis did indeed travel a 
much shorter distance in the x direction. Further, direct measurements on the model 
revealed near-identical end displacement values to those experimentally derived in 
gyro mode, shown in figure 5.43.  
0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45
Time (s) 
X-axis Y-axis 
~ 198 ~ 
Figure 5.42 HPAGS x and y-axis velocity data in gyro mode. 
Figure 5.43 HPAGS x and y-axis displacement data in gyro mode. 
In the model of figure 5.44, which accurately describes the HPAGS sensors motion, 
it can be observed that although the sensor body underwent the exact same change in 
attitude and location as that of the rigid mode experiment, the central gyroscopically 
aligned gimbal and sensor electronics, indicated by the blue x and y-axis, remained 
parallel to their initial orientation. This preservation of axial alignment allowed the 
complete de-coupling of the rotational motion imposed on the sensor body, thus 
allowing the acquisition of pure linear displacement with exceptional accuracy. 
0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45
-0.01
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5
Time (s) 
Time (s) 
Y-axis X-axis 
X-axis 
Y-axis 
~ 199 ~ 
Figure 5.44 HPAGS sensors motion in gyro mode. 
Exemplification of the performance attained by the gyro stabilisation can be 
graphically reviewed by direct comparison between gyro mode and rigid mode 
operation, with reference to actual displacement data, as shown in figure 5.45 below. 
Figure 5.45 HPAGS sensors displacement comparison between gyro and rigid modes. 
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5
Initial position Final position 
Tether 
No angular 
displacement in 
sensing axes 
Actual y-axis displacement 
Actual x-axis displacement  x-axis displacement gyro mode 
 x-axis displacement rigid mode 
 y-axis displacement gyro mode 
 x-axis displacement rigid mode 
Time (s) 
~ 200 ~ 
5.8.4 Conclusion 
The effectiveness of the HPAGS active gyro stabilised electromechanical module 
was experimentally tested and was shown to be able to effectively acquire true linear 
motion even when exposed to complex realistic motions containing linear and 
rotational accelerations. The inevitable gyro motor noise was efficiently removed by 
the higher order FIR low-pass filter, allowing for the acquisition of much improved 
linear acceleration trends and the subsequent derivation of more accurate velocity 
trends representative of the true motion along the original orthogonal axes of 
reference. 
The resulting displacement trends in figure 5.45, also demonstrated the difference 
between the conventional rigid, and the HPAGS active gyro-enabled instruments 
performance, clearly exemplifying the advantage of the gyro modules ability to 
maintain the sensors original attitude, and therefore its capability to directly acquire 
true to the reference axes data, by successfully de-coupling the linear from the 
rotational accelerations.  
~ 201 ~ 
Chapter 6    
 Conclusion  
The difficulty of acquiring precise seismic data was discussed in chapter 1, 
identifying the underlying cause as one of reference, due to the problem that a clear 
separation of the observer from the phenomenon observed cannot be readily 
accomplished, since the observer is directly connected to the object of interest; the 
Earth.  
The almost total dependency on inertial instruments for seismic recording and 
observation has given rise to one most prominent observable effect of data 
corruption in the time domain, regardless of instrument; the runaway effect or 
Baseline Error. This error results in erroneous linear, and exponential ground 
displacement offsets in numerically derived velocities and displacements 
respectively, invalidating the accuracy of these derived trends, as assumptions to 
their nature are made in order to secure an artificial baseline of zero offset error. 
Various methods and advanced calibration techniques have been widely employed 
in an attempt to reconstruct a true seismic velocity and displacement trends, as the 
runaway, and other related phenomena, have been the focus of much research. 
Although modern seismographs have considerably improved over that last decade, 
displacement data derived from these still exhibits baseline errors, on occasion in the 
order of several meters.  
The extensive work conducted over the years in the development of correction 
algorithms, filtering, and system models to address some of the problems associated 
with this type of data acquisition, was shown to be one of smoothing the effects 
rather one of curing the problems, and therefore unable to produce consistent long 
term results in the complexity of real environments. 
The objective of this work therefore was to research the multiple sources of error, 
internal to the instrument and external, and derive realisable solutions with the aim 
to create the High Precision Active Gyro-Stabilised (HPAGS) seismic sensor, 
capable of the acquisition of highly accurate seismic data in realistic and complex 
environments. In order to achieve this, original theory, novel methods, and 
~ 202 ~ 
algorithms concerned with the correction or minimization of errors in current 
seismic sensing instruments were developed and experimentally tested.  
Methods for the derivation of the dynamic response of MEMS sensors, direct 
generation of sensor signal dithering, quality preservation sampling criteria 
methodologies, and cross-axis sensitivity correction formulae, were developed and 
practically and methodically evaluated resulting in the development of the first six 
degree of freedom seismic sensor unit. The HPAGS sensor was found in concept 
capable of addressing the majority of the known issues, by additionally introducing 
novel correction circuits for auto-zero bias and auto-gain correction, along with their 
corresponding embedded algorithms. 
The methodical investigation of errors and their novel potential solutions was 
detailed in chapter 3. The experimental evaluation of sensor noise in this chapter 
showed an exponential increase of noise with increase in ambient temperature, and a 
characteristic 1/f frequency response. Further, a peak was evident at the internal 
clock frequency, albeit outside the bandwidth of interest. Noise coupling from the 
power supply to the sensor was also shown to produce a significant detrimental 
effect on the sensor signal, and on the accuracy of the acceleration measurements.  
It was also shown that specific actuation of the sensors self test pin, intended only 
for binary verification of operation by the manufacturer, successfully yielded 
frequency and dynamic sensor response characteristics, and was therefore 
successfully used in the resulting instrument.. 
Detailed experimental investigation into the sensors linearity demonstrated  
substantial evidence to support that cross-axis interference was the chief source of 
non-linearity in MEMS sensors and mathematical correction formulae were derived 
for the correction of this effect, enabling the reconstruction of true acceleration data 
trends from sensor measurements acquired in a real three dimensional environment.  
Consideration of a complex motion containing both linear and rotational 
components, even in two dimensions, very quickly indicated that since a rotational 
motion can generate parasitic linear motion artefacts, as discussed in the 
introduction of this work, distinction between true linear and linear artefacts caused 
by rotations was impossible. It was also shown that attempts via the addition of 
~ 203 ~ 
multiple sensors and rotational sensors such as MEMS gyros, would be of limited 
use as a correction methodology, due to several physical limitations, leading to the 
design of gyro stabilised HPAGS sensor solution. 
An analysis of the requirements and challenges presented by modern seismological 
instruments revealed that simply relying on best components and practices in order 
to achieve high resolution and long term stable measurements was indeed of limited 
use, even though instrument calibration could help to temporarily minimise some of 
these errors. Other environmental factors were also considered in this work, such as 
asymmetrical ground motion. Since soil is a non-uniform mixture, seismic waves 
propagating from sandy to rocky soil, would experience a change in shape amongst 
other artefacts such as reflections, inevitably introducing in some cases a non-
linearity in the form of mechanical hysteresis to the seismic data, further supporting 
the need for a sensor able to de-couple translational from rotational motion. 
With the utilisation of the primary MEMS circuit and the precision sinusoidal 
vibration platform, it was confirmed early on in this work that the direct use of a 
MEMS acceleration sensor for the measurement of seismic data, with or without 
primary filtering, inevitably resulted in erroneous velocity and displacement data 
after the necessary double numerical integration. The detailed aforementioned 
examination of the sensor itself identified numerous sources of error able to corrupt 
the seismic signal within the MEMS IC. Further, sensor limitations were 
investigated, such as the effects of temperature fluctuations on sensitivity and zero-g 
bias voltage. It was shown that the zero-g bias was quite susceptible to variations in 
temperature in a non-linear fashion and in different polarities between channels, 
making its removal by calibration rather inefficient.  
The specific and methodical evaluation of the correction methods developed was 
discussed in section 5. The results concluded that the new auto-zero bias correction 
algorithm and circuit employed by the HPAGS sensor was able to provide a 
dramatic improvement to the accuracy of displacement trends derived by the 
numerical integration of acceleration data, while the use of the self test pin provided 
effective corrections in the form of impulse response de-convolution of the 
instrument transfer function. Further, it was shown that the gain correction circuit 
employed by the HPAGS sensor, successfully aided the reduction of errors resulting 
~ 204 ~ 
from component drifts in the front-end electronics by typically a factor of 60 or 
more.  
The general cross-axis sensitivity correction formulae derived were practically 
shown to provide essential correction to realistic dynamic data derived from the 
HPAGS sensor, and thus were able to minimise baseline offset errors due to cross-
axial coupling effects on seismic data trends. 
The realisation of the gyro stabilisation module necessitated the use of DC motors 
resulting in motor-induced noise onto the signal. This noise, resided in the higher 
frequency bands allowing its exclusion from the signal via digital filtering. Although 
the obligatory use of DC motors for the actuation of the gyros did not entirely fulfil 
the long term requirements of the HPAGS sensor, it still enabled the provision of 
proof of concept and a strong case in support of gyro-stabilisation of seismic sensors 
via alternative low-vibration technologies, such as the mercury liquid drive also 
briefly discussed in this work. 
Finally, the effectiveness of the HPAGS active gyro stabilised electromechanical 
module was experimentally tested and was shown to be able to effectively acquire 
true linear motion even when exposed to complex realistic motions containing linear 
and rotational accelerations. The resulting data demonstrated the difference in 
performance between conventional current rigid instruments and the HPAGS active 
gyro-enabled sensor, clearly exemplifying the advantage of the gyro modules 
ability to maintain the sensors original attitude, and therefore its capability to 
directly acquire true to the reference axes data.  
In conclusion, the research, evaluation, design, implementation, and experimental 
work described herein, present a multitude of novel pragmatic solutions to the 
problem of accurate seismic data acquisition, successfully verified by theoretical, 
simulation, and empirical means, and a proof of concept benchmark seismic 
instrument. 
~ 205 ~ 
Chapter 7  
Future work 
Although experimentally proven to provide a large improvement on the accuracy of 
acceleration derived displacement trends, the HPAGS sensor is not without areas 
that could significantly benefit from improvement. 
The auto zero circuit and algorithm allowed for a small error in trend deviation 
mainly due to the noise content in the feedback signal. This correction circuit could 
benefit from the inclusion of active filtering and a bipolar feedback ADC in order to 
allow for signal averaging and therefore significant noise reduction. 
Alternative means of actuation of the gyros would also be a necessity for any future 
instruments designed to take advantage of rotational and linear motion de-coupling, 
as the noise imposed by the gyro motors was found to be difficult to filter out 
without the degradation of the signal, chiefly due to their close proximity in 
frequency and the resulting poor signal to noise ratio. 
Miniaturisation and hermetic encapsulation of the electronics would also appear to 
be the natural progression for this sensor, as it would enable the improvement of 
signal to noise ratio by the addition of thermoelectric cooling, much like the one 
employed in commercially available microbolometer sensors. 
The addition of a GPS would also aid accurate instrument positioning and time-
stamping of the data, thus enabling the evaluation of seismic data from HPAGS 
instrument clusters. 
~ 206 ~ 
References  
[1]  P. Bernard, J. F. Karczewski, M. Morand, B. Dole and B. Romanowicz, The G-
Calibration: A New Method for an Absolute In-Situ Calibration of Long-Period 
Accelerometers, Tested on the Streckeisen Instruments of the Geoscope Network, 
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 81, no. 4, pp. 1360-1372, 1991.  
[2]  P. W. Rodgers, A Note on the Nonlinear Response of the Pendulous Accelerometer, 
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 523-530, 1975.  
[3]  P. Reasenberg, Non-Linearity Test on an Accelerometer System Designed for the 
Seismic Nera-field Measurement, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 
vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 1213-1225, 1969.  
[4]  E. Wielandt and G. Streckeisen, The Leaf-Spring Seismometer: Design and 
Performance, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 72, no. 6, pp. 
2349-2367, 1982.  
[5]  G. A. McLennan, An Exact Correction for Accelerometer Error in Dynamic Seismic 
Analysis, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 705-715, 
1969.  
[6]  V. Graizer, The response to Complex ground Motions of Seismometers with 
Galperin Sensor Configuration, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 
99, no. 2B, pp. 1366-1377, 2009.  
[7]  W. H. K. Lee, A Glossary of Rotational Seismology, Bulletin of the Seismological 
Society of America, vol. 99, no. 2B, pp. 1082-1090, 2009.  
[8]  P. A. Watt, The Application of a D.C. Amplifier to Seismic Recording, Bulletin of the 
Seismological Society of America, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 471-476, 1960.  
[9]  H. K. Gupta and K. Hamada, Rayleigh and Love Wave Dispersion up to 140 Second 
Period Range in the Indonesia-Philippine Region, Bulletin of the Seismological 
Society of America, vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 507-521, 1975.  
[10]  S. C. Shen, C. J. Chen and H. J. Huang, A New Calibartion Method for MEMS Inertial 
Sensor Module, in The 11th IEEE International Workshop on Advanced Motion 
Control, Nagaoka, 2010.  
[11]  A. J. Williams, A Solid State Tilt Meter for Current Meter Attitude Determination, 
IEEE, 2004.  
~ 207 ~ 
[12]  W. T. Ang, S. Y. Khoo, P. K. Khosia and C. N. Riviere, Physical Model of a MEMS 
Accelerometer for Low-g Motion Tracking Applications, in IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation, New Orleans, 2004.  
[13]  H. L. Wong and M. D. Trifunac, Effects of Cross-Axis Sensitivity and Misalignment on 
the Response of Mechanical-Optical Accelerographs, Bulletin of the Seismological 
Society of America, vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 929-956, 1977.  
[14]  D. T. H. Lai, R. Begg, E. Charry and M. Palaniswami, Frequency Analysis of Inertial 
Sensor Data for Measuring Toe Clearence, IEEE, 2008.  
[15]  D. M. Boore, Effect of Baseline Corrections on Displacements and Response Spectra 
for Several Recordings of the 1999 Chi-Chi, Taiwan, Earthquake, Bulletin of 
Seismological Society of America, vol. 91, no. 5, pp. 1199-1211, 2001.  
[16]  H.-C. Chiu, Stable baseline Correction of Digital Strong-Motion Data, Bulletin of 
Seismological Society of America, vol. 87, no. 4, pp. 932-944, 1997.  
[17]  E. H. Javelaud, T. Ohmachi and S. Inoue, A Quantative Approach for Estimating 
Coseismic Displacements in the Near Field Strong-Motion Accelerographs, Bulletin 
of Seismological Society of America, vol. 101, no. 3, pp. 1182-1198, 2011.  
[18]  G. Xin, Y. Dong and G. Zhen-hai, Study on Errors Compensation of a Vehicular MEMS 
Accelerometer, IEEE, 2005.  
[19]  M. D. Trifunac and V. W. Lee, A Note on the Accuracy of Computed Ground 
Displacements from Strong Motion Accelerograms, Bulletin of the Seismological 
Society of America, vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1209-1219, 1974.  
[20]  Y.-M. Wu, T.-L. Lin, W.-A. Chao, H.-H. Huang, N.-C. Hsiao and C.-H. Chang, Faster 
Short-Distance Earthquake Early Warning Using Continued Monitoring of Filtered 
Vertical Displacement: A Case Study of the 2010 Jiasian, Taiwan, Earthquake, 
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 101, no. 2, pp. 701-709, 2011.  
[21]  A. A. Chanerley, N. A. Alexander, J. Berrill, H. Avery, B. Halldorsson and R. 
Sigbjornsson, Concerning Baseline Errors in the Form of Acceleration Transients 
When Recovering Displacements from Strong Motion Records Using the 
Undecimated Wavelet Transform, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 
vol. 103, no. 1, pp. 283-295, 2013.  
[22]  U.-X. Tan, K. C. Veluvolu, W. T. Latt, C. Y. Shee, C. N. Riviere and W. T. Ang, 
Estimating Displacement of Periodic Motion with Inertial Sensors, IEEE Sensors 
Journal, vol. 8, no. 8, 2008.  
[23]  D. Hu, C. Zeng and H. Liang, Autocalibration Method of MEMS Accelerometer, in 
International conference on Mechatronic Science, Jilin, 2011.  
~ 208 ~ 
[24]  L. Frosio, F. Pedersini and A. Borghese, Autocalibration of Triaxial MEMS 
Accelerometers with automatic ssensor model selection, IEEE Sensors , vol. 12, no. 
6, 2012.  
[25]  W. E. Farrell and J. Berger, Seismic System Calibration: 1. Parametric Models, 
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 251-270, 1979.  
[26]  I. Frosio, S. Stuani and N. A. Borghese, Autocalibration of MEMS Accelerometer, in 
Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Conference, Sorrento, 2006.  
[27]  H. Brander and B. Reichle, Some methods for determining acceleration and tilt by 
use of pendulums and accelerometers, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of 
America, vol. 63, 1973.  
[28]  C.-J. Lin, H.-P. Huang, C.-C. Liu and H.-C. Chiu, Application of Rotational Sensors to 
Correcting Rotation-Induced Effects on Accelerometers, Bulletin of the 
Seismological Society of America, vol. 100, no. 2, pp. 585-597, 2010.  
[29]  C.-J. Lin, C.-C. Liu and W. H. Lee, Recording Rotational and Translational Ground 
Motions of TwoTAIGER Explosions in Northeastern Taiwan on 4 March 2008, 
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 99, no. 28, pp. 1237-1250, 2009.  
[30]  S. Luczak, W. Oleksiuk and M. Bodnicki, Sensing Tilt With MEMS Accelerometers, 
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, vol. 6, no. 6, 2006.  
[31]  R. L. Nigbor, Six-Degree-of-Freedom Ground-Motion Measurement, Bulletin of the 
Seismological Society of America, vol. 84, no. 5, pp. 1665-1669, 1994.  
[32]  V. Graizer, Tilts in Strong Ground Motion, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of 
America, vol. 96, no. 6, pp. 2090-2102, 2006.  
[33]  E. H. Javelaud, T. Ohmachi and S. Inoue, Short Note, Estimating Small Permanent 
Rotation from Strong-Motion Records: What Is Comparison with External 
Measurements Telling Us?, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 
102, no. 5, pp. 2257-2263, 2012.  
[34]  R. L. Boroschek and D. Legrand, Tilt Motion Effects on the Double-Time Integration 
of Linear Accelerometers: An Experimental Approach, Bulletin of the Seismological 
Society of America, vol. 96, no. 6, pp. 2072-2089, 2006.  
[35]  T. Tobita, S. Iai and T. Iwata, Numerical Analysis of Near-Field Asymmetric Vertical 
Motion, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 100, no. 4, pp. 1456-
1469, 2010.  
[36]  R. Sleeman, A. Van Wettum and J. Trampet, Three-Channel Correlation Analysis: A 
New Technique to Measure Instrumental Noise of Digitizers and Seismic Sensors, 
~ 209 ~ 
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 96, no. 1, pp. 258-271, 2006.  
[37]  S. Akkar and D. M. Boore, On Baseline Corrections and Uncertainty in Response 
Spectra for Baseline Variations Commonly Encountered in Digital Accelerograph 
Records, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 99, no. 3, pp. 1671-
1690, 2009.  
[38]  D. M. Boore, Analog-to-Digital Conversion as a Source of Drifts in Displacements 
Derived from Digital Recordings of Ground Acceleration, Bulletin of the 
Seismological Society of America, vol. 93, no. 5, pp. 2017-2024, 2003.  
[39]  J. Zahradnik and A. Plesinger, Toward Understanding Subtle Instrumentation Effects 
Associated with Weak Seismic Events in the Near Field, Bulletin of the Seismological 
Society of America, vol. 100, no. 1, pp. 59-73, 2010.  
[40]  F. Mohd-Yasin, C. E. Korman and D. J. Nagel, Measurement of Noise Characteristics 
of MEMS Accelerometers, Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering The 
George Washington University, Washington, DC 20052, U.S.A., Washington, 
Unknown. 
[41]  M. D. Trifunac, F. E. Udwadia and A. G. Brady, ANALYSIS OF ERRORS IN DIGITIZED 
STRONG-MOTION ACCELEROGRAMS, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of 
America, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 157-187, 1973.  
[42]  Y. Bock, D. Melgar and B. Crowell, Real-Time Strong-Motion Broadband 
Displacements from Collocated GPS and Accelerometers, Bulletin of the 
Seismological Society of America, vol. 101, no. 6, pp. 2904-2925, 2011.  
[43]  H. Wood, ON A PIEZO-ELECTRICAL ACCELEROGRAPH, Bulletin of the Seismological 
Society of America, vol. 11.  
[44]  P. C. Leary, D. V. Manov and A. Y. Li, A FIBER OPTICAL BOREHOLE SEISMOMETER, 
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 80, no. 1, pp. 218-225, 1990.  
[45]  R. Wildmer-Schnidrig, What Can Superconducting Gravimeters Contribute to 
Normal-Mode Seismology?, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 93, 
no. 3, pp. 1370-1380, 2003.  
[46]  K. U. Schreiber, A. Velikoseltsev, A. J. Carr and R. Franco-Anaya, The Application of 
Fiber Optic Gyroscopes for the Measurement of Rotations in Structural Engineering, 
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 99, no. 2B, pp. 1207-1214, 2009.  
[47]  J. Liang, F. Kohsaka, X. Li, K. Kunitomo and T. Ueda, CHARACTERIZATION OF A 
QUARTZ MEMS TILT SENSOR WITH 0.001 PRECISION, in Transducers, Denver, 2009.  
[48]  N. Z. Pooya and A. Abraham, A Method for Calibrating Micro Electro Mechanical 
~ 210 ~ 
Systems Accelerometer for Use as a Tilt and Seismograph Sensor, in IEEE 12th 
International Conference on Computer Modelling and Simulation, 2010.  
[49]  T. G. Constandinou and J. Georgiou, A Micropower Tilt Processing Circuit, IEEE, 
2008.  
[50]  J. Qian, B. Fang, W. Yang and X. Luan, Accurate Tilt Sensing With Linear Model, IEEE 
SENSORS JOURNAL, vol. 11, no. 10, 2011.  
[51]  R. l. Nigbor, J. R. Evans and C. R. Hutt, Laboratory and Field Testing of Commercial 
Rotational Seismometers, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 99, 
no. 2B, pp. 1215-1227, 2009.  
[52]  A. Eisenberg and T. V. McEvilly, COMPARISON OF SOME WIDELY-USED STRONG-
MOTION EARTHQUAKE ACCELEROMETERS, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of 
America, vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 383-397, 1971.  
[53]  N.-C. Tsai and C.-Y. Sue, Design and Analysis of a Tri-Axis Gyroscope Micromachined 
by Surface Fabrication, IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, vol. 8, no. 12, 2008.  
[54]  S. Gervais-Ducouret, Next Smart Sensors Generation, IEEE, 2011.  
[55]  A. Katalin, Microcontroller Based System for Vibration Analysis, IEEE, 2008.  
[56]  DAQ Systems, Tri-Axial USB Digital Accelerometer with GPS, Seismological 
Research Letters, vol. 79, 2008.  
[57]  Z. L. Chang and J. L. Shaozhong, Development of a tilt measurement system based 
on MEMS sensor and Cortex-M3, in The Tenth International Conference on 
Electronic Measurement & Instruments, 2011.  
[58]  G. Emore, J. Haase, K. Choi, K. M. Larson and A. Yamagiwa, Recovering Seismic 
Displacements through Combined Use of 1-Hz GPS and Strong-Motion 
Accelerometers, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 97, no. 2, pp. 
357-378, 2007.  
[59]  D. M. Tralli, W. Foxall, A. Rodgers, E. Stappaerts and C. Schultz, Suborbital and 
Spaceborne Monitoring of Seismic Surface Waves, IEEEAC, 2005.  
[60]  P. Zwahlen, Y. Dong, A. M. Nguyen, F. Rudolf, P. Ullah and V. Ragot, Breakthrough in 
High Performance Inertial Navigation Grade Sigma-Delta MEMS Accelerometer, 
IEEE, 2012.  
[61]  B. Alandry, N. Dumas, L. Latorre, F. Mailly and P. Nouet, A CMOS Multi-sensor 
System for 3D Orientation Determination, in IEEE Computer Society Annual 
Symposium on VLSI, 2008.  
~ 211 ~ 
[62]  X. Zhang, X. Ke and Z. Zhang, Research on Micro-Electro-Mechanical-Systems digital 
geophone, IEEE International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and 
Computational Intelligence, 2010.  
[63]  J. F. Clinton and T. H. Heaton, Potential Advantages of a Strong-motion Velocity 
Meter over a Strong-motion Accelerometer, Seismological Research Letters, vol. 73, 
no. 3, 2002.  
[64]  P. Zwahlen, A.-M. Nguyen, Y. Domg, F. Rudolf, M. Pastre and H. Schmid, 
NAVIGATION GRADE MEMS ACCELEROMETER, in IEEE, 2010.  
[65]  A. Ya'akobovitz and S. Krylov, MEMS ACCELEROMETER WITH MECHANICAL 
AMPLIFICATION MECHANISM FOR ENHANCED SENSITIVITY, in Transducers, Denver, 
2009.  
[66]  D. J. Milligan, B. D. Homeijer and R. G. Walmsley, A Ultra-Low noise MEMS 
Accelerometer for Seismic Imaging, in IEEE, 2011.  
[67]  J. Mizuno, K. Nottmeyer, T. Kobayashi, K. Minami and M. Esashi, Silicon Bulk 
Micromachined Accelerometer with Simultaneous Linear and Angular Sensitivity, in 
IEEE international Conference on Solid-state Sensors and Actuators, Chicago, 1997.  
[68]  J.-M. Stauffer, Market Opportunities for Advanced MEMS Accelerometers and 
Overview of Actual Capabilities vs. Required Specifications, in IEEE, 2004.  
[69]  J. Laine and D. Mougenot, BENEFITS OFMEMS BASED SEISMIC ACCELEROMETERS 
FOR OIL EXPLORATION, in 14th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors, 
Actuators and Microsystems, Lyon, 2007.  
[70]  M. A. Lele and J. Gu, Evaluation of Solid State Accelerometer Sensor for Effective 
Position Estimation, in 8th World Congress on Intelligent Control and Automation, 
Taipei, 2011.  
[71]  M. Gluek, A. Buhmann and Y. Manoli, Autocalibration of MEMS accelerometers, in 
IEEE, 2012.  
[72]  Y. V. Tarbeyev, Y. P. Kristov and A. Y. Sinelnikov, A New Method for Absolute 
Calibration of High-Sensitivity Accelerometers and Other Graviinertial Devices, 
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 84, no. 2, pp. 438-443, 1994.  
[73]  F. Reverter and O. Casas, Interfacing Differential Capacitive Sensors to 
Microcontrollers: A Direct Approach, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION 
AND MEASUREMENT, vol. 59, no. 10, 2010.  
[74]  P. W. Rodgers, FREQUENCY LIMITS FOR SEISMOMETERS AS DETERMINED FROM 
SIGNAL-TO-NOISE RATIOS. PART 2. THE FEEDBACK SEISMOMETER, Bulletin of the 
~ 212 ~ 
Seismological Society of America, vol. 82, no. 2, pp. 1099-1123, 1992.  
[75]  M. A. Riedesel, R. D. Moore and J. A. Orcutt, LIMITS OF SENSITIVITY OF INERTIAL 
SEISMOMETERS WITH VELOCITY TRANSDUCERS AND ELECTRONIC AMPLIFIERS, 
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 80, no. 6, pp. 1725-1752, 1990.  
[76]  F. Mohd-Ysin, C. E. Korman, D. J. Nage and H. T. Chuan, Investigations of Spectral 
Peaks, Resonance Effect and 1/f Exponents on Noise Characteristics of MEMS 
Accelerometers, in IEEE, 2004.  
[77]  A. Strollo, S. Parolai, K. H. Jackel, S. Marzorati and D. Bindi, Suitability of Short-
Period Sensors for Retrieving Reliable H/V Peaks for Frequencies Less Than 1 Hz, 
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 98, no. 2, pp. 671-681, 2008.  
[78]  C. Collette, S. Janssens, P. Fernandez-Carmona, K. Artoos, M. Guinchard, C. Hauviller 
and A. Preumont, Review: Inertial Sensors for Low-Frequency Seismic Vibration 
Measurement, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 102, no. 4, pp. 
1289-1300, 2012.  
[79]  W. Liang, C. Yang and Q. Donghai, Design of feed-forward  interface for MEMS, 
in IEEE 4th International Congress on Image and Signal Processing, 2011.  
[80]  M. Wang, Y. Yang, R. R. Hatch and Y. Zhang, Adaptive Filter for a Miniature MEMS 
Based Attitude and Heading Reference System, in IEEE, 2004.  
[81]  C. Rithirun and P. Sooraksa, The Implementation of Fuzzy Logic Control for Attitude 
Estimation of UAVs, in 8th Electrical Engineering/ Electronics, Computer, 
Telecommunications and Information Technology (ECTI) Association of Thailand, 
Thailand, 2011.  
[82]  P. Wu, Y. Ge, S. Chen and B. Xue, De-noising Algorithm Based on Compression of 
Wavelet Coefficient for MEMS Accelerometer Signa, in Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE 
International Conference on Information and Automation, Harbin, 2010.  
[83]  J.-g. Song, C.-x. Zhao, S.-h. Lin and H.-j. Liu, Decomposition of Seismic Signal Based 
on Hilbert-Huang transform, in IEEE, 2011.  
[84]  M. D. Trifunac, A NOTE ON CORRECTION OF STRONG-MOTION ACCELEROGRAMS 
FOR INSTRUMENT RESPONSE, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 
62, no. 1, pp. 401-409, 1972.  
[85]  N. A. Alexander and A. A. Chanerley, A Review of Procedures used for the Correction 
of Seismic data, in Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Civil and 
Structural Engineering Computing,, Austria, 2011.  
~ 213 ~ 
[86]  L. Dong and K. Zhang, Sensing and Control of MEMS Accelerometers Using Kalman 
Filter, in IEEE, 2012.  
[87]  Mii-Iailo and D. Trifunac, ZERO BASELINE CORRECTION OF STRONG-MOTION 
ACCELEROGRANIS, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 61, no. 5, 
pp. 1201-1211, 1971.  
[88]  R. Wang, B. Schurr, C. Milkereit, Z. Shao and M. Jin, An Improved Automatic Scheme 
for Empirical Baseline Correction of Digital Strong-Motion Records, Bulletin of the 
Seismological Society of America, vol. 101, no. 5, pp. 2029-2044, 2011.  
[89]  J. Shoja-Taheri, A NEW ASSESSMENT OF ERRORS FROM DIGITIZATION AND 
BASELINE CORRECTIONS OF STRONG-MOTION ACCELEROGRAMS, Bulletin of the 
Seismological Society of America, vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 293-303, 1980.  
[90]  W. H. Boyce, LETTERS TO THE EDITOR. INTEGRATION OF ACCELEROGRAMS, Bulletin 
of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 261-263, 1970.  
[91]  J. Hershberger, RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN STRONG-MOTION ANALYSIS, Bulletin of 
the Seismological Society of America, 1954.  
[92]  D. Murray, Integration of Accelerometer Data: Filter Analysis and Design Using 
Riccati Solutions, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATIC CONTROL, vol. 32, no. 2, 
1987.  
[93]  F. Neumann, AN APPRAISAL OF NUMERICAL INTEGRATION METHODS AS APPLIED 
TO STRONG-MOTION DATA, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America.  
[94]  N. Ciblak, Determining the Angular Motion of a Rigid Body Using Linear 
Accelerometers Without Integration, in IEEE, 2007.  
[95]  L. P. Yaroslavski, A. Moreno and J. Campos, Frequency responses and resolving 
power of numerical integration of sampled data, Optical Society of America, vol. 13, 
no. 8, 2005.  
[96]  E. J. Walter, AN EXTENSION OF THE METHOD OF NUMERICAL INTEGRATION OF 
SEISMOGRAMS TO INCLUDE A THIRD INTEGRATION, BULLETIN OF THE 
SEISMOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF AMERICA, 1994.  
[97]  A. T. Ringler, C. R. Hutt, J. R. Evans and L. D. Sandoval, A Comparison of Seismic 
Instrument Noise Coherence Analysis Techniques, Bulletin of the Seismological 
Society of America,, vol. 101, no. 2, pp. 558-567, 2011.  
[98]  W. T. Ang, P. K. Khosla and C. N. Riviere, Nonlinear Regression Model of a Low-g 
MEMS Accelerometer, IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, vol. 7, no. 1, 2007.  
~ 214 ~ 
[99]  J. E. Vandemeer, G. L. Andrew and C. McNeil, Analysis of Thermal Hysteresis on 
Micromachined Accelerometers, IEEE, 2003.  
[100]  K. G. Hinzen, C. Fleisher and G. Schweppe, Long Term Behavior of an Accelerometer 
Station, Seismological Research Letters, vol. 83, no. 2, 2012.  
[101]  Z. Yang, H. W. Lu, Z. Wang, Z. Gui and L. Cai, Six Degree-of-freedom Strong Ground 
Motions Measurement by Using Eight Accelerometers, in International Conference 
on Computer, Mechatronics, Control and Electronic Engineering, 2010.  
[102]  V. M. Graizer, Effect of tilt on strong motion data processing, Soil Dynamics and 
Earthquake Engineering, vol. 25, 2005.  
[103]  Z. Lawrence, P. Bodin and C. A. Langston, In Situ Measurements of Nonlinear and 
Nonequilibrium Dynamics in Shallow, Unconsolidated Sediments, Bulletin of the 
Seismological Society of America, vol. 99, no. 3, pp. 1650-1670, 2009.  
[104]  P. Gueguen, M. Langlais, P. Foray, C. Rousseau and J. Maury, A Natural Seismic 
Isolating System: The Buried Mangrove Effects, Bulletin of the Seismological Society 
of America, vol. 101, no. 3, pp. 1073-1080, 2011.  
[105]  N. Maercklin, A. Zollo, A. Orefice, G. Festa, A. Emolo, R. De Matteis, B. Delouis and A. 
Bobbio, The Effectiveness of a Distant Accelerometer Array to Compute Seismic 
Source Parameters: The April 2009 LAquila Earthquake Case History, Bulletin of the 
Seismological Society of America, vol. 101, no. 1, pp. 354-365, 2009.  
[106]  F. T. Thwaites, F. B. Wooding, J. D. Ware, K. R. Peal and J. A. Collins, A Leveling 
System for an Ocean-Bottom Seismometer, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. 
[107]  J. Hershberger, RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN STRONG-MOTION ANALYSIS, Bulletin of 
the Seismological Society of America, 1954.  
[108]  D. E. Hudson and G. W. Housner, AN ANALYSIS OF STRONG-MOTION 
ACCELEROMETER DATA FROM THE SAN FRANCISCO EARTHQUAKE OF MARCH 22, 
1957, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 48, pp. 253-268, 1958.  
[109]  B. Fry, R. Benites and A. Kaiser, The Character of Accelerations in the Mw 6.2 
Christchurch Earthquake, Seismological Research Letters, vol. 82, no. 6, 2011.  
[110]  P. Gueguen, M. Langlais, P. Foray, C. Rousseau and J. Maury, A Natural Seismic 
Isolating System: The Buried Mangrove Effects, Bulletin of the Seismological Society 
of America, vol. 101, no. 3, pp. 1073-1080, 2011.  
~ 215 ~ 
[111]  C. Collette, S. Janssens, P. Fernandez-Carmona, K. Artoos, M. Guinchard, C. Hauviller 
and A. Preumont, Review: Inertial Sensors for Low-Frequency Seismic Vibration 
Measurement, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 102, no. 4, pp. 
1289-1300, 2012.  
[112]  A. Strollo, S. Parolai, K. H. Jakel, S. Marzorati and D. Bindi, Suitability of Short-Period 
Sensors for Retrieving Reliable H/V Peaks for Frequencies Less Than 1 Hz, Bulletin of 
the Seismological Society of America, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 671-681, 2008.  
~ 216 ~ 
Appendix A   
 Windows control software  
Private Sub Command1_Click() 
'Auto-Zero X Code A=65d 
MSComm1.PortOpen = True 
MSComm1.Output = "A" 
MSComm1.PortOpen = False 
Text1.Text = Text1.Text & vbNewLine & "X channel Autozero done" 
With Text1 
    .SelStart = Len(.Text) 
    .SelLength = 0 
End With 
End Sub 
Private Sub Command10_Click() 
'Horizontal Gyro ON/OFF Code I=73d 
MSComm1.PortOpen = True 
MSComm1.Output = "I" 
MSComm1.PortOpen = False 
If Check2.Value = 0 Then 
Check2.Value = 1 
Label4.Caption = "ON" 
Check2.Value = 0 
Label4.Caption = "OFF" 
End If 
Text1.Text = Text1.Text & vbNewLine & "Horizontal Gyro Power Toggled" 
With Text1 
    .SelStart = Len(.Text) 
    .SelLength = 0 
End With 
End Sub 
Private Sub Command11_Click() 
'Vertical Gyro ON/OFF J=74d 
MSComm1.PortOpen = True 
MSComm1.Output = "J" 
MSComm1.PortOpen = False 
If Check3.Value = 0 Then 
Check3.Value = 1 
Label5.Caption = "ON" 
Label6.Caption = "ON" 
Check3.Value = 0 
Label5.Caption = "OFF" 
Label6.Caption = "OFF" 
End If 
Text1.Text = Text1.Text & vbNewLine & "Vertical Gyro Power Toggled" 
With Text1 
    .SelStart = Len(.Text) 
    .SelLength = 0 
End With 
End Sub 
Private Sub Command12_Click() 
'Brakes ON/OFF K=75d 
MSComm1.PortOpen = True 
MSComm1.Output = "K" 
MSComm1.PortOpen = False 
If Check4.Value = 0 Then 
Check4.Value = 1 
Check4.Value = 0 
~ 217 ~ 
End If 
Text1.Text = Text1.Text & vbNewLine & "Brake Actuators Toggled" 
With Text1 
    .SelStart = Len(.Text) 
    .SelLength = 0 
End With 
End Sub 
Private Sub Command2_Click() 
'Auto-Zero Y Code B=66d 
MSComm1.PortOpen = True 
MSComm1.Output = "B" 
MSComm1.PortOpen = False 
Text1.Text = Text1.Text & vbNewLine & "Y channel Autozero done" 
With Text1 
    .SelStart = Len(.Text) 
    .SelLength = 0 
End With 
End Sub 
Private Sub Command3_Click() 
'Auto-Zero Z Code L=76d 
MSComm1.PortOpen = True 
MSComm1.Output = "L" 
MSComm1.PortOpen = False 
Text1.Text = Text1.Text & vbNewLine & "Z channel Autozero done" 
With Text1 
    .SelStart = Len(.Text) 
    .SelLength = 0 
End With 
End Sub 
Private Sub Command4_Click() 
'Impulses Code C=67d 
MSComm1.PortOpen = True 
MSComm1.Output = "C" 
MSComm1.PortOpen = False 
Text1.Text = Text1.Text & vbNewLine & "All Channel Impulses Generated" 
With Text1 
    .SelStart = Len(.Text) 
    .SelLength = 0 
End With 
End Sub 
Private Sub Command5_Click() 
'V Ref Directly to outputs  Code F=70d 
MSComm1.PortOpen = True 
MSComm1.Output = "F" 
MSComm1.PortOpen = False 
Text1.Text = Text1.Text & vbNewLine & "V Ref Now Connected to Outputs" 
With Text1 
    .SelStart = Len(.Text) 
    .SelLength = 0 
End With 
Line7.Visible = False 
Line9.Visible = False 
Line11.Visible = False 
Line8.Visible = True 
Line10.Visible = True 
Line12.Visible = True 
End Sub 
Private Sub Command6_Click() 
'V Ref Through Channels G=71d 
MSComm1.PortOpen = True 
MSComm1.Output = "G" 
MSComm1.PortOpen = False 
Text1.Text = Text1.Text & vbNewLine & "V Ref Now Through Channels" 
~ 218 ~ 
With Text1 
    .SelStart = Len(.Text) 
    .SelLength = 0 
End With 
Line7.Visible = True 
Line9.Visible = True 
Line11.Visible = True 
Line8.Visible = False 
Line10.Visible = False 
Line12.Visible = False 
Line1.Visible = False 
Line2.Visible = False 
Line3.Visible = False 
Line4.Visible = True 
Line5.Visible = True 
Line6.Visible = True 
Label1.Caption = "V=ZERO" 
Label2.Caption = "V=ZERO" 
Label3.Caption = "V=ZERO" 
End Sub 
Private Sub Command7_Click() 
'Freq Sweep Code D=68d 
MSComm1.PortOpen = True 
MSComm1.Output = "D" 
MSComm1.PortOpen = False 
Text1.Text = Text1.Text & vbNewLine & "Frequency Sweep Activated" 
With Text1 
    .SelStart = Len(.Text) 
    .SelLength = 0 
End With 
End Sub 
Private Sub Command8_Click() 
'Dithering ON/OFF E=69d 
MSComm1.PortOpen = True 
MSComm1.Output = "E" 
MSComm1.PortOpen = False 
If Check1.Value = 0 Then 
Check1.Value = 1 
Check1.Value = 0 
End If 
Text1.Text = Text1.Text & vbNewLine & "Dithering Mode Toggled" 
With Text1 
    .SelStart = Len(.Text) 
    .SelLength = 0 
End With 
End Sub 
Private Sub Command9_Click() 
'V Ref Disabled Code H=72d 
MSComm1.PortOpen = True 
MSComm1.Output = "H" 
MSComm1.PortOpen = False 
Text1.Text = Text1.Text & vbNewLine & "V Ref Diasabled. Now In Normal Mode Operation" 
With Text1 
    .SelStart = Len(.Text) 
    .SelLength = 0 
End With 
Line7.Visible = True 
Line9.Visible = True 
Line11.Visible = True 
Line8.Visible = False 
Line10.Visible = False 
Line12.Visible = False 
Line1.Visible = True 
Line2.Visible = True 
~ 219 ~ 
Line3.Visible = True 
Line4.Visible = False 
Line5.Visible = False 
Line6.Visible = False 
Label1.Caption = "V=0.5 V REF" 
Label2.Caption = "V=0.5 V REF" 
Label3.Caption = "V=0.5 V REF" 
End Sub 
~ 220 ~ 
Appendix B   
 Embedded software  
     ;CODE VERSION 1 16/02/14 Seism 
  org 0x00  ; RESET VECTOR 
  goto INIT  ;GOTO INIT, SKIP INTERUPT VECTORS 
;>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> HIGH PRIORITY INT SERVICE ROUTINE INT0 >>>>>>>>>>>>>> 
  org 0x08;  HIGH PRIORITY INT VECTOR ADDRESS 
 ; bcf 0xFD5,7;  DISABLE TMR0 IN T0CON,7 
 ; bcf 0xFF2,2;  CLEAR TMR0 INTERUPT FLAG IN INTCON 
;OUT  bsf 0xFD5,7;  ENABLE TMR0 IN T0CON,7 
  retfie 
;""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""" 
;>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> INIT <<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<< 
INIT org  0x90 
;  movlw 0x0F;  ADCON1 BUG FIX   
;  movwf 0xFC1;  ENABLE FOR SIMULATION ONLY 
  movlw 0x72;  SET INTERNAL CLOCK TO 16MHZ 
  movwf 0xFD3;  OSCCON = 0X72 
  movlw 0x01; 
  movff 0xFE8,0xF38; MAKE RA0 ANALOG...REST OF PORTA DIGITAL. ANSELA=1 
  movlw 0x01 
  movwf 0xF92;  TRISA=1, RAO AS INPUT, ALL OTHER AS OUTPUTS 
  clrf 0xF80;  CLEAR PORTA DATA 
  movlw 0x00; 
  movff 0xFE8,0xF39; MAKE PORTB DIGITAL. ANSELB=0 
  movlw 0x01 
  movwf 0xF93;  SET TRISB, PORT B RB0 AS INPUT, REST OUTPUTS [RBO 
AS INT0] 
  clrf 0xF81;  CLEAR PORT B DATA 
  clrf 0xF61;  DISABLE PORTB INTERNAL PULL UPS, WPUB=0 
  movlw 0x00; 
  movff 0xFE8,0xF3A; MAKE PORT C DIGITAL. ANSELC=0 
  movlw 0x80; 
  movwf 0xF94;  TRISC, RC7 INPUT ALL OTHER PORTC OUTPUTS  
  clrf 0xF82;  CLEAR PORT C DATA 
~ 221 ~ 
; POWER UP NORMAL CONFIG 
  bsf 0xF80,3;  SETTING SYNC Z,Y,X RESP TO HIGH...DACS TO NORM 
  bsf 0xF80,4; 
  bsf 0xF80,5; 
  bcf 0xF82,5;  I/P REF SW TO ZERO RC5=0  
  bcf 0xF81,1;  O/P REF SW TO ZERO RB1=0  
; ADC CONFIG AN0 
  bsf 0xFC2,0;  ENABLE ADC MODULE IN ADCON0 BIT 0 
  bsf 0xFC0,0;  CONFIGURE ADC CLOCK TO 600KHZ INTERNAL IN 
ADCON2 
  bsf 0xFC0,1; 
  bsf 0xFC0,3;  CONFIGURE ADC ACQ TIME TO 20TAD 
  bsf 0xFC0,4; 
  bsf 0xFC0,5; 
 ; movlw 0x10;  SET VALUE FOR INT0 ENABLE 
 ; movwf 0xFF2;  INT0 BIT ENABLED IN INTCON REG 
  movlw 0x19;   25d into SPBRG1 - BAUD RATE 9600 FROM 16MHz FOSC. 
  movff 0xFE8, 0XFAF; 
  bcf 0xFAC,4;   CLEAR SYNC BIT IN TXSTA1- SET ASYNCHRONOUS MODE 
  bsf 0xFAB,7;   SET SPEN BIT IN RCSTA1 TO ENABLE SERIAL PORT 
  bsf 0xFAB,4;   SET CREN BIT IN RCSTA1 TO ENABLE RX HARDWARE 
  bsf 0xF81,3;  SET FEEDBACK SWITCH TO X CHANNEL 
  movlw 0x80;  SET DAC VAR TO 1.008V 
  movwf 0x5;  
;"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""" 
;>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> MAIN <<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<< 
  btfsc 0xF9E,5;   TEST EUSART RECIEVE FLAG, SKIP IF NO RX 
  call EUSART;  CALL INSTRUCTION DECODER FUNCTION 
  goto MAIN 
;""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""" 
~ 222 ~ 
;>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> FUNCTIONS <<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<< 
DELAY  
  movlw 0xFF  ;200us Approx  
  movwf 0x01 
LO  decfsz 0x01 
  goto LO 
  return 
DELAY3  movlw 0x7F  ;25ms Approx  
  movwf 0x01 
dly3  movlw 0xFF 
  movwf 0x00 
L3  decfsz 0x00 
  goto L3 
  decfsz 0x01 
  goto dly3 
  return 
EUSART;    INSTRUCTION DECODER AND EXECUTION FUNCTION 
IMP  movlw 0x43;   CHECK FOR IMPULSE INSTRUCTION ASCII 0X43 
  movwf 0x02;   MOVE 0x43 TO LOCATION 02 FOR COMPARISON 
  movff 0xFAE,0xFE8; LOAD EUSART RECIEVE REGISTER RCREG1 DATA INTO W 
  cpfseq  0x02;  COMPARE W WITH VALUE ASCII 0X43, SKIP IF EQUAL 
  goto VREF 
  call IMPULSE; IMPULSE INSTRUCTION, CALL IMPULSE FUNCTION 
VREF  movlw 0x46;   CHECK FOR V REF DIRECTLY TO OUTPUTS INSTRUCTION  
  movwf 0x02;   MOVE 0x46 TO LOCATION 02 FOR COMPARISON 
  movff 0xFAE,0xFE8; LOAD EUSART RECIEVE REGISTER RCREG1 DATA INTO W 
  cpfseq  0x02;  COMPARE W WITH VALUE ASCII 0X46, SKIP IF EQUAL 
  goto DISREF 
  call VREFOUT;  CALL V REF TO OUTPUTS INSTRUCTION 
DISREF  movlw 0x48;   CHECK FOR V REF DISABLE INSTRUCTION ASCII 0X48 
  movwf 0x02;   MOVE 0x48 TO LOCATION 02 FOR COMPARISON 
  movff 0xFAE,0xFE8; LOAD EUSART RECIEVE REGISTER RCREG1 DATA INTO W 
  cpfseq  0x02;  COMPARE W WITH VALUE ASCII 0X48, SKIP IF EQUAL 
  goto VRIN 
  call NOVREF;  CALL NO V REF MODES INSTRUCTION 
VRIN  movlw 0x47;   CHECK FOR V REF THROUGH CHANNELS INSTRUCTION  
  movwf 0x02;   MOVE 0x47 TO LOCATION 02 FOR COMPARISON 
  movff 0xFAE,0xFE8; LOAD EUSART RECIEVE REGISTER RCREG1 DATA INTO W 
  cpfseq  0x02;  COMPARE W WITH VALUE ASCII 0X47, SKIP IF EQUAL 
  goto AUTOZX 
  call VREFIN;   CALL V REF THROUGH CHANNELS INSTRUCTION 
AUTOZX  movlw 0x41;   CHECK FOR AUTO ZERO X INSTRUCTION ASCII 0X41 
  movwf 0x02; MOVE 0x41  TO LOCATION 02 FOR COMPARISON 
  movff 0xFAE,0xFE8; LOAD EUSART RECIEVE REGISTER RCREG1 DATA INTO W 
  cpfseq  0x02;  COMPARE W WITH VALUE ASCII 0X41, SKIP IF EQUAL 
  return 
  call AZX;   CALL THE AUTO ZERO X INSTRUCTION 
  return 
~ 223 ~ 
IMPULSE;     IMPULSE EXCITATION ALL CHANNELS 200us 
  bsf 0xF82,3;   SET RC3 EST PIN TO HIGH FOR 200us DELAY 
  call  DELAY 
  bcf 0xF82,3;   RESET RC3 TO ZERO 
 return 
  bsf 0xF81,1;  O/P REF SW SET RB1=1 TO ALLOW V REF TO OUTPUTS 
  return 
NOVREF;     NO V REF MODES ON ALL CHANNELS  
  bcf 0xF81,1;  O/P REF SW CLEAR RB1=0 TO ALLOW DATA TO OUTPUTS 
  bcf 0xF82,5;  I/P REF SW TO ZERO - ALLOW OUTPUTS INTO CHANNELS 
  call SRDAC;  SOFT RESET ALL DACS TO HALF WAY LEVEL 
  return 
VREFIN;     VREF THROUGH ALL CHANNEL INPUTS 
  bsf 0xF82,5;  I/P REF SW SET RC5=1 - ALLOW V REF INTO CHANNELS 
  bcf 0xF81,1;  O/P REF SW CLEAR RB1=0 TO ALLOW DATA TO OUTPUTS 
  call ZDACS;  SET ALL  CHANNEL DACS TO ZERO    
  return 
ZDACS; SET ALL DACS TO ZERO 
  bcf 0xF80,5;  CLEAR SYNCX TO ENTER WRITE MODE 
  bcf 0xF80,4;  CLEAR SYNCY TO ENTER WRITE MODE 
  bcf 0xF80,3;  CLEAR SYNCZ TO ENTER WRITE MODE 
  bcf 0xF80,7;  CLEAR DATA TO PROVIDE ALL ZEROS 
  bsf 0xF80,6;  SET CLK TO HIGH  
; PULSE CLK 24 TIMES-WRITE DATA ON FALLING EDGES 
  bcf 0xF80,6;1  
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;2 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;3 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;4 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;5 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;6 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;7 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;8 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;9 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;10 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;11 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;12 
  bsf 0xF80,6;  
  bcf 0xF80,6;13 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;14 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;15 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;16 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;17 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;18 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;19 
~ 224 ~ 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;20 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;21 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;22 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;23 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;24 
  bsf 0xF80,5;  SET SYNCX TO ENTER IDLE MODE 
  bsf 0xF80,4;  SET SYNCY TO ENTER IDLE MODE 
  bsf 0xF80,3;  SET SYNCZ TO ENTER IDLE MODE 
  return 
SRDAC;      SOFT RESET ALL DACS TO HALF V OUT 
  bcf 0xF80,5;  CLEAR SYNCX TO ENTER WRITE MODE 
  bcf 0xF80,4;  CLEAR SYNCY TO ENTER WRITE MODE 
  bcf 0xF80,3;  CLEAR SYNCZ TO ENTER WRITE MODE 
  bsf 0xF80,7;  SET DATA TO PROVIDE ALL ONES - SOFTWARE RESET  
  bsf 0xF80,6;  SET CLK TO HIGH  
;PULSE CLK 24 TIMES-WRITE DATA ON FALLING EDGE 
  bcf 0xF80,6;1  
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;2 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;3 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;4 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;5 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;6 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;7 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;8 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;9 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;10 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;11 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;12 
  bsf 0xF80,6;  
  bcf 0xF80,6;13 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;14 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;15 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;16 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;17 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;18 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;19 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;20 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;21 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;22 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;23 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;24 
~ 225 ~ 
  bsf 0xF80,5;  SET SYNCX TO ENTER IDLE MODE 
  bsf 0xF80,4;  SET SYNCY TO ENTER IDLE MODE 
  bsf 0xF80,3;  SET SYNCZ TO ENTER IDLE MODE 
  return 
  movlw 0x80;  SET DAC VAR TO 1.008V 
  movwf 0x5;  DAC MSB VAR 
  bsf 0xF81,3;  SET FEEDBACK SWITCH TO X CHANNEL 
  clrf 0x6;  DAC LSB VAR 
;  clrf 0x5;  CLEAR DAC MSB VAR 
 ; goto INC;  
AQ  bsf 0xFC2,1;  START ADC CONVERSION BY SETTING GO/DONE BIT IN 
ADCON0 
ADF  btfsc 0xFC2,1;  TEST GO/DONE BIT FOR END OF ADC CONVERSION. SKIP 
IF READY 
  goto ADF;  ADC RESULT NOT READY. TEST AGAIN 
  tstfsz 0xFC4;  TEST ADC RESULT H-BYTE. SKIP NEXT IF ZERO 
  goto INC 
  return    
INC  incf 0x6;  ADC NOT ZERO...INCREMENT LSB DAC VAR 
;INCREASE NEG FEEDBACK VOLTAGE 
  btfsc 0xFD8,0;   TEST CARRY FLAG FOR OVERFLOW, SKIP IF NO  
  incf 0x5;  OVERFLOW. INC 0x5 DAC MSB VAR 
;     FIRST 8 CONFIG DAC BITS 
  bcf 0xF80,5;  CLEAR SYNCX TO ENTER WRITE MODE 
  bcf 0xF80,7;  CLEAR DATA TO PROVIDE ALL ZEROS 
  bsf 0xF80,6;  SET CLK TO HIGH  
;PULSE; CLK 8 TIMES - WRITE CONFIG ON FALLING EDGES 
  bcf 0xF80,6;1  
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;2 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;3 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;4 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;5 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;6 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;7 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;8 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
;     NEXT 8 MSB VARIABLE BITS STROBED TO DAC  
  movlw  0x9;  SET REPEAT VARIABLE TO STROBE 8 BITS 
  movwf 0x4; 
L1  decfsz 0x4; 
  goto STROBE 
    goto B2 
STROBE  btfss 0x5,7;   TEST VAR MSB 
  goto ZSTR;   GOTO STROBE ZERO 
  bsf 0xF80,7;  SET DATA TO 1 TO STROBE 1  
  bcf 0xF80,6;  STROBE PULSE CLK  
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  rlncf 0x5;  ROTATE VAR LEFT FOR NEXT BIT TO STROBE 
  goto L1 
ZSTR  bcf 0xF80,7;  CLEAR DATA TO STROBE ZERO 
~ 226 ~ 
  bcf 0xF80,6;  STROBE PULSE CLK  
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  rlncf 0x5;  ROTATE VAR LEFT FOR NEXT BIT TO STROBE 
  goto L1 
;     LAST 8 LSB VARIABLE BITS STROBED TO DAC   
B2  movlw  0x9;  SET REPEAT VARIABLE TO STROBE 8 BITS 
  movwf 0x4; 
L2  decfsz 0x4; 
  goto STROBE2 
    goto OUT 
STROBE2 btfss 0x6,7;   TEST VAR MSB 
  goto ZSTR2;   GOTO STROBE ZERO 
  bsf 0xF80,7;  SET DATA TO 1 TO STROBE 1  
  bcf 0xF80,6;  STROBE PULSE CLK  
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  rlncf 0x6;  ROTATE VAR LEFT FOR NEXT BIT TO STROBE 
  goto L2 
ZSTR2 bcf  0xF80,7;  CLEAR DATA TO STROBE ZERO 
  bcf 0xF80,6;  STROBE PULSE CLK  
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  rlncf 0x6;  ROTATE VAR LEFT FOR NEXT BIT TO STROBE 
  goto L2 
OUT  bsf 0xF80,5;  SET SYNCX TO ENTER NORMAL MODE 
  movlw 0xC8 
  cpfsgt 0xFC4 
  call DELAY3;  ALLOW FOR FILTERS TO SETTLE AT NEW VOLTAGE. 
 ; call DELAY3;  ALLOW FOR FILTERS TO SETTLE AT NEW VOLTAGE. 
;  return;   
  goto AQ;   RE-ACQUIRE ADC RESULT TO TEST FOR ZERO. 
;""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""" 
AQ1  bsf 0xFC2,1;  START ADC CONVERSION-SET GO/DONE BIT IN ADCON0 
ADF1  btfsc 0xFC2,1;  TEST DONE BIT FOR END OF ADC CONV- SKIP IF DONE 
  goto ADF1;  ADC RESULT NOT READY. TEST AGAIN 
  tstfsz 0xFC3;  TEST ADC RESULT LOW-BYTE. SKIP NEXT IF ZERO 
  goto INC1 
  return;   ADC LOW-BYTE=0 
INC1  incf 0x6;  ADC NOT ZERO...INCREMENT LSB DAC VAR 
;INCREASE NEG FEEDBACK VOLTAGE 
  btfsc 0xFD8,0;   TEST CARRY FLAG FOR OVERFLOW, SKIP IF NO  
  incf 0x5;  OVERFLOW. INC 0x5 DAC MSB VAR 
;     FIRST 8 CONFIG DAC BITS 
  bcf 0xF80,5;  CLEAR SYNCX TO ENTER WRITE MODE 
  bcf 0xF80,7;  CLEAR DATA TO PROVIDE ALL ZEROS 
  bsf 0xF80,6;  SET CLK TO HIGH 
; PULSE; CLK 8 TIMES - CONFIG ON FALLING EDGES 
  bcf 0xF80,6;1  
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;2 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;3 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;4 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;5 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
~ 227 ~ 
  bcf 0xF80,6;6 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;7 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  bcf 0xF80,6;8 
  bsf 0xF80,6 
;     NEXT 8 MSB VARIABLE BITS STROBED TO DAC 
  movlw  0x9;  SET REPEAT VARIABLE TO STROBE 8 BITS 
  movwf 0x4; 
L11  decfsz 0x4; 
  goto STROBE1 
    goto B21 
STROBE1 btfss 0x5,7;   TEST VAR MSB 
  goto ZSTR1;   GOTO STROBE ZERO 
  bsf 0xF80,7;  SET DATA TO 1 TO STROBE 1  
  bcf 0xF80,6;  STROBE PULSE CLK  
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  rlncf 0x5;  ROTATE VAR LEFT FOR NEXT BIT TO STROBE 
  goto L11 
ZSTR1 bcf  0xF80,7;  CLEAR DATA TO STROBE ZERO 
  bcf 0xF80,6;  STROBE PULSE CLK  
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  rlncf 0x5;  ROTATE VAR LEFT FOR NEXT BIT TO STROBE 
  goto L11 
;     LAST 8 LSB VARIABLE BITS STROBED TO DAC   
B21  movlw  0x9;  SET REPEAT VARIABLE TO STROBE 8 BITS 
  movwf 0x4; 
L21  decfsz 0x4; 
  goto STROBE21 
    goto OUT1 
STROBE21 btfss 0x6,7;   TEST VAR MSB 
  goto ZSTR21;   GOTO STROBE ZERO 
  bsf 0xF80,7;  SET DATA TO 1 TO STROBE 1  
  bcf 0xF80,6;  STROBE PULSE CLK  
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  rlncf 0x6;  ROTATE VAR LEFT FOR NEXT BIT TO STROBE 
  goto L21 
ZSTR21 bcf  0xF80,7;  CLEAR DATA TO STROBE ZERO 
  bcf 0xF80,6;  STROBE PULSE CLK  
  bsf 0xF80,6 
  rlncf 0x6;  ROTATE VAR LEFT FOR NEXT BIT TO STROBE 
  goto L21 
OUT1  bsf 0xF80,5;  SET SYNCX TO ENTER NORMAL MODE 
  movlw 0xC8 
  cpfsgt 0xFC4 
  call DELAY3;  ALLOW FOR FILTERS TO SETTLE AT NEW VOLTAGE. 
  goto AQ1;   RE-ACQUIRE ADC RESULT TO TEST FOR ZERO. 
;:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: 
~ 228 ~ 
Appendix C   
 Matlab function script  
~ 229 ~ 
Appendix D   
 Mechanical drawings  
~ 231 ~ 
~ 232 ~ 
~ 233 ~ 
~ 234 ~ 
~ 235 ~ 
~ 236 ~ 
~ 237 ~ 
~ 238 ~ 
~ 239 ~ 
~ 240 ~ 
~ 241 ~ 
