Resistant starch from underutilised legumes 
as prebiotic and its effect on the growth of 
Danio rerio and Lates calcarifer 
BSc Ivan Kar Mun Chiew 
Thesis submitted to the University of Nottingham for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy, 2017 
School of Biosciences 
University of Nottingham Malaysia Campus 
Abstract 
Aquaculture is an important protein source for Malaysia. However, the susceptibility 
of fish to disease leads to heavy losses and hinders production. A potential solution is 
the supplementation of diets with prebiotics: non-digestible carbohydrates which 
improve growth and health by modulating gut microbiota to favour beneficial 
bacteria. Resistant starch (RS) is a prebiotic commonly fed to terrestrial animals, but 
little work has been performed on aquatic animals. Therefore, this study investigated 
the use of RS isolated from underutilized crops as a prebiotic in fish. Six species of 
underutilised legumes (adzuki beans, mung beans, black-eyed peas, pigeon peas, 
Bambara groundnuts and red lentils) were used for starch isolation via alkaline 
steeping, followed by processing involving enzyme or acid hydrolysis, and lastly 
gelatinisation and retrogradation to increase RS yield. Starch was isolated with yields 
of 25  40%, while enzyme hydrolysis pre-treatment was more effective and 
improved RS content up to 18.06% in most legumes. The starch and RS samples were 
then supplemented at 5% (w/v) in nutrient broth to investigate their prebiotic effect 
on fish gastrointestinal lactic acid bacteria. Enzyme pre-treatment improved the 
growth of W. cibaria, L. garvieae and E. gilvus by up to 43.9% for most legumes 
tested. Red lentil and adzuki bean enzyme-RS showed highest prebiotic potential and 
was applied in the zebrafish growth trial, while only red lentil was used in the Asian 
sea bass growth trial. Supplementation of diets with RS from legumes provided no 
significant difference in the growth and performance parameters measured in both 
zebrafish and Asian sea bass when supplemented at 2.5% and fed for five and six 
weeks respectively. Further studies involving analysis of immune parameters is 
necessary to identify prebiotic potential on targeted fish. Nevertheless, this study 
contributed to promote future work in using underutilised legumes as prebiotic 
source to improve the fish health under commercial conditions of rearing.  
Acknowledgements 
Throughout the journey of completing my PhD thesis, I am very grateful to the 
colleagues and friends whom I have met along the way.  
Firstly, I would like to thank the supervisors in my supervisor committee Dr. Lim Yin 
Sze and Prof. Andrew Salter for their continuous support of my PhD study, for their 
patience, encouragement and brilliance throughout the study. Their guidance 
throughout research and writing have been invaluable.  
For financial support, I'd like to thank Crops for the Future (CFF) for the funding of 
this project and the studentship. 
For technical support, Id like to thank Prof. Tim Parr and the technicians at the North 
Laboratory and Food Sciences at the Sutton Bonnington Campus for their assistance 
throughout my research at the UK campus. I would also like to thank Prof Ian Young, 
Kieran Magee and the technicians at the University of Liverpool for facilitating the 
zebrafish feeding trial. I would also like to thank Dr. Kumar Katya, Giva and Zufar 
from FishPLUS of CFF for their support and facilitating the Asian sea bass feeding 
trial.  Not forgetting, I would also like to thank the technicians in Block C in the 
Malaysia Campus for their technical help. I am grateful for all the support provided, 
which has been instrumental throughout my journey. 
Lastly, I would like to thank colleagues, friends and family whom have been around 
to support me throughout the PhD. I am grateful for all the pillars of support 
provided in forms of laughter, encouragement and stimulating discussions whether 
in times of ups or downs, which have certainly made the entire journey a more 
comfortable one. 
Supervisory Committee 
The thesis submitted to the University of Nottingham has been accepted as 
fulfilment of the requirement for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. The members 
of the Supervisory Committee are as follows: 
Dr Yin Sze Lim 
- School of Biosciences, Faculty of Science, University of Nottingham Malaysia 
Campus 
Professor Andrew Salter 
- Division of Nutritional Sciences, School of Biosciences, Faculty of Science, 
University of Nottingham 
Dr Sean Mayes 
- Crops For the Future  
List of conferences 
Conference proceedings 
Chiew, I.K., Lim, Y.S., Salter, A.M. and Wood, J., 2015. The effects of resistant starch 
from underutilised legumes on the growth of probiotic Weisella cibaria isolated from 
barramundi (Lates calcarifer). In Korean Society of Fisheries Science, pp.66. 
Chiew, I.K.M, Salter, A.M. Parr, T., Lim, Y.S., 2016. The effects of resistant starch from 
underutilised legumes on the growth of potential probiotic Lactococcus lactis isolated 
from barramundi (Lates calcarifer). In The Proceedings of the British Society of Animal 
Science 2016, Chester, pp. 126.  
Conferences attended 
Oral presenter at DTP 2014 CFFRC UNMC Doctoral Training Programme (DTP), Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia, 17-21 November 2014 
Oral presenter at World Aquaculture 2015, Jeju, Korea, 26-30 May 2015 
Oral presenter at DTP 2015 Doctoral Training Partnership Week 2015, Selangor, 
Malaysia, 21-25 September 2015 
Oral presenter at British Society of Animal Science Annual Conference 2016, Chester, 
UK, 6-7 April 2016 
Oral presenter at DTP 2016 Future Agriculture: crops and crop researchers for a 
changing climate, Selangor, Malaysia, 13-16 December  
Table of Contents 
2 Chapter 2: Determination and quantification of resistant starch present in 
3 Chapter 3: In vitro study on the prebiotic potential of legume resistant starch . 61 
3.3.1 Isolation and identification of potential probiotics from gastrointestinal 
4 Chapter 4: Effect of legume resistant starch on the growth performance of 
4.3.2 Effect of diets supplemented with RS and untreated starch from adzuki 
5 Chapter 5: Effect of legume resistant starch on the growth performance of Asian 
5.3.2 Effect of diets supplemented with RS from red lentils on the growth of 
6.2.3 Resistant starch as prebiotic supplemented in vivo/fish feeding trials 
.. 142 
List of Figures 
Figure 1.1 Structure of RS, where I = RS1, II = RS2, III = RS3 and IV = RS4; 
C refers to the ordered crystalline structure composed of 
double helices over a region of the chain and is interspersed 
with amorphous, enzyme degradable regions (Adapted from 
Sajilata et al.  2006) 
Figure 3.1 Identification of bacteria strains isolated from Asian sea bass 
using API 50 CHL test kit: A) LC-A; B) LC-B 
Figure 3.2 
Identification of bacteria strains isolated from zebrafish using 
API 50 CHL test kit: A) DR-A; B) DR-B 
List of Tables 
Table 1.1 Types of RS, resistance to digestion in small intestine and food 
sources (Adapted from Fuentes-Zaragoza et al,  2010)  
Table 2.1 Proximate analysis test parameters and methods used by ALS 
Technichem Sdn Bhd  
Table 2.2 The total amount of starch isolated from six underutilised 
legumes using the modified method of Wani et al. (2010).  
Table 2.3 Comparison of RS quantification methods for isolated legume 
starches  
Table 2.4 RS content of legumes starches and their respective 
treatments  
Table 2.5 Nutritional composition of mung bean flour, isolated starch 
and processed starches  
Table 3.1 Preparation of master mix for 10 reactions for PCR for 
bacteria identification 
Table 3.2 Top five identities of isolate LC-A via 16S rRNA gene sequence 
Table 3.3 Top five identities of isolate LC-B via 16S rRNA gene sequence 
Table 3.4 Top five identities of isolate DR-A via 16S rRNA gene sequence 
Table 3.5 Top five identities of isolate DR-B via 16S rRNA gene sequence 
Table 3.6 The growth of W. cibaria NM1 in medium supplemented with 
5% (w/v) of legume RS/starch samples at 0 and 24 h of 
incubation 
Table 3.7 The pH changes in medium supplemented with 5% (w/v) 
legume RS/starch samples during growth of W. cibaria NM1 
Table 3.8 The growth of L. garvieae NM2 in medium supplemented with 
5% (w/v) of legume RS/starch samples at 0 and 24 h of 
incubation 
Table 3.9 The pH changes in medium supplemented with 5% (w/v) of 
RS/starch samples during growth of L. garvieae NM2 
Table 3.10 The growth of E. gilvus V1 in medium supplemented with 5% 
(w/v) of legume enzyme-RS samples at 0 and 24 h of 
incubation 
Table 3.11 The pH changes in medium supplemented with 5% (w/v) 
legume enzyme-RS samples during growth of E. gilvus V1 
Table 4.1 Ingredients of diet formulated by the University of Liverpool 
Table 4.2 Nutritional composition of diets used in zebrafish feeding trial 
for basal diets and basal diets supplemented with 2.5% of 
samples 
Table 4.3 Growth, health and feed conversion and efficiency ratios of 
zebrafish after 6 weeks of being fed with a basal diet and diets 
with 2.5% supplement with various legumes and respective 
treatments 
Table 5.1 Ingredients of diets for Asian sea bass formulated with 
assistance from CFF 
Table 5.2 Nutritional composition of diets used in Asian sea bass feeding 
trial for basal diets and basal diets supplemented with 2.5% of 
samples 
Table 5.3 Growth, health and feed conversion and efficiency ratios of 
Asian sea bass after 6 weeks of being fed with a basal diet and 
diets with 2.5% supplement of EH-Lens 
Table 5.4 GI tract LAB and ETB count of Asian sea bass fed basal diet and 
EH-Lens diet 
Table 5.5 Crude protein, total fat and moisture content of Asian sea 
bass carcass (wet weight basis) 
Abbreviations 
Common abbreviations 
acid-RS Acid-hydrolysed resistant starch 
Adz EH Basal diet supplemented with adzuki bean enzyme-RS 
Adz ST Basal diet supplemented with adzuki bean untreated-S 
AFLP-PCR Amplified fragment length polymorphism with polymerase 
chain reaction 
AMG Amyloglucosidase 
AOAC Association of Analytical Communities 
CFU Colony forming units 
DNA Deoxyribonucleic acid 
EDTA Ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid 
EMB Eosin methylene blue 
enzyme-RS Enzyme-hydrolysed resistant starch 
ETB Enterobacteriaceae 
FCR Feed conversion ratio 
FOS Fructo-oligosaccharides 
GIT Gastrointestinal tract 
GOS Galacto-oligosaccharides 
LAB Lactic acid bacteria 
Lens EH Basal diet supplemented with red lentil enzyme-RS 
Lens ST Basal diet supplemented with red lentil untreated-S 
MOS Mannan-oligosaccharide 
MRS De Man, Rogosa and Sharpe 
PCR Polymerase chain reaction 
PCR-DGGE Polymerase chain reaction with denaturing gradient gel 
electrophoresis 
PER Protein efficiency ratio 
REP-PCR Repetitive element palindromic polymerase chain reaction 
RNA Ribonucleic acid 
rRNA Ribosomal ribonucleic acid 
RS Resistant starch 
SCFA Short-chain fatty acid 
SGR Specific growth rate 
untreated-RS Untreated isolated starch 
WG Weight gain 
WG% Weight gain percentage 
Units 
% Percent 
 Diameter 
 C  Degrees Celsius 
L Microlitre 
M Micrometer 
cm Centimetre 
g Gravity 
g Gram 
hr Hour 
kg Kilogram 
kJ Kilojoule 
M Molar 
mbar Millibar 
mg Milligram 
min Minute 
MJ Megajoule 
mL Millilitre 
mM Millimolar 
mm Millimetre 
N Normality 
ng Nanogram 
nm Nanometre 
pg Page 
psi Pound per square inch 
s Seconds 
U Units 
v/v Volume/volume 
w/v Mass/volume 
w/w Mass/mass 
1 Chapter 1: Literature review and experimental objectives 
1.1 Introduction 
Currently, seafood is one of the key protein sources, as well as the main source of 
omega-3-fatty acids essential for brain development (FAO & WHO 2011; Hibbeln et 
al. 2007). However, the reliance of capture fisheries for seafood production has 
many drawbacks such as overfishing and depletion of stocks which can affect the 
quality of the output and ultimately alter the ecosystem food chain (Smith et al. 
2010; Choi et al. 2004; Frank & Brickman 2000). Hence, aquaculture is highlighted as 
an alternative source for seafood production.  
Aquaculture is an underwater farming technique and can surpass the yield limit of 
capture fisheries (Garcia & Grainger 2005). However, various problems are also 
associated with the current practices of aquaculture such as the unsustainable 
dependency on capture fisheries for fish meal production and disease occurrences 
and outbreaks present in various farms; in addition, both problems aggravate as the 
aquaculture industry continues to intensify (Tacon & Metian 2008; Bondad-Reantaso 
et al. 2005; Naylor et al. 2000). The reliance on trash fish for the production of fish 
meal ultimately creates greater gaps for food security especially in poorer countries 
while antibiotic resistance was found to be developing in not only disease-causing 
bacteria but also possibly transferred to terrestrial bacteria as well (Alder et al. 2008; 
Sapkota et al. 2008; Defoirdt et al. 2007). Hence, different alternatives for the 
improvement of health and growth of fish can be considered, such as modification of 
gastrointestinal tract (GIT) through the inclusion of prebiotic and probiotic 
components in diet based on its effect observed in humans (Ring et al. 2010b). 
1.2 Role of microbiota in the gastrointestinal tract 
Microorganisms are present throughout the human GIT with varying distribution of 
species and populations at particular regions. However, the colon is a subject of 
particular interest due to the slower transit time of digesta as compared to the 
stomach and small intestine, which is 12-24 hr versus two to five hr respectively in 
human adults (Guerra et al. 2012). This encourages the colonisation and growth of 
microbial populations in the colon, supported by the near neutral pH and relatively 
low absorptive state of the colon (Guerra et al. 2012). Among these microbial 
populations, intestinal bacteria can play a role in the health of the host. The 
intestinal bacteria can be divided into various categories, which are based on the 
effect exerted on the host; they either provide health benefits or are harmful 
towards the host (Salminen et al. 1999). As the colon harbours a wide range of 
microbiota, the attachment and overgrowth of pathogenic bacteria usually result in 
acute diarrhoeal infections and inflammatory bowel diseases (Tlaskalov-Hogenov 
et al. 2011; Spiller & Garsed 2009; Spiller 2007). On the other hand, beneficial 
microbiota, such as the Bifidobacteria spp., are also present and contributes towards 
promoting health benefits (Licht et al. 2012). In brief, various experiments have 
presented that Bifidobacteria spp. regulates the intestinal environment not only via 
modulation of immune responses, but also by interfering with the pathogenicity of 
harmful bacteria (Hord 2008; Gibson et al. 2004). Other groups of bacteria which 
play a role also include Lactobacillus spp. and some Clostridium spp., which the latter 
are key producers of butyrate for the maintenance of a healthy epithelium (Louis & 
Flint 2009; Pryde et al. 2002). These studies promote the concept of probiotics as a 
supplement that is beneficial to host health (Oelschlaeger 2010).  
1.3 Probiotics and prebiotics 
Probiotics and prebiotics serve as a form of functional food which aims to affect 
functions in the body in a targeted way to illicit a positive effect on health 
(Roberfroid 2000). Generally, both probiotics and prebiotics function similarly to 
improve host health via manipulation of GIT microbiota populations. However, 
probiotics revolve around the supplementation of microbial cells to elicit health 
benefits in the host (Salminen et al. 1999). Meanwhile, prebiotics are non-digestible 
which survive host digestion and arrives in the colon for microbial fermentation, 
resulting in specific changes in the GIT microflora which confers benefits to host 
health (Roberfroid 2007).  
1.3.1 Probiotics: benefits and their shortcomings 
The concept of probiotics revolves around the supplementation of the GIT with 
health-promoting bacteria to increase their population and thus, promoting 
beneficial effects for the host. Probiotics compose mainly of lactic acid bacteria (LAB) 
and provide several benefits to the GIT, such as the production of inhibitory 
compounds that act antagonistically towards pathogenic bacteria, competition of 
adhesion sites that prevent pathogenic bacteria from colonising, modulation of host 
immune system as well as competition for nutrients, chemicals and available energy 
in the GIT, as well as contribute to colon health via production of health related 
bacterial metabolites (Nayak 2010; Gatesoupe 2008; Panigrahi & Azad 2007; Ring et 
al. 2010b; Roberfroid 2007; Verschuere et al. 2000). These benefits ultimately 
prevent the multiplication and entry of pathogenic bacteria via GIT and hence, 
reducing the likeliness of disease.  
Nevertheless, probiotic treatments are limited by several shortcomings. For example, 
resistance to antibiotics in probiotic bacterial strains is a critical factor. The main 
concern in this aspect is the possibility of gene transfer, in which probiotic bacteria 
often possess antibiotic genes which could be transferred to pathogenic bacteria 
(Gueimonde et al. 2013; van Reenen & Dicks 2011). In addition, the colonisation of 
bacteria on the GIT is also a critical factor to the success of the probiotic treatment 
(Ohashi & Ushida 2009; Bezkorovainy 2001). Studies conducted found that bacterial 
cells were no longer detected in faeces a few days following the cessation of 
treatment, indicating that the probiotic was not successful in colonising or adhering 
onto the GIT (Satokari et al. 2001; Tannock et al. 2000). Lastly, another key factor for 
the success of probiotic treatments is the delivery methods of the bacteria. Various 
stress factors are involved prior to the arrival at the desired site of action, such as 
highly acidic stomach environment as well as bile secretions in the small intestine 
(Gibson & Rastall, 2006). In addition, feed preparation techniques such as extrusion 
exposes feed to harsh conditions such as high temperatures  this also adversely 
affects the effectiveness of probiotics especially when used as supplements in diets 
(Ganguly et al. 2013). Therefore, prebiotics can be considered as an alternative in 
resolving some of the issues faced by probiotics. 
1.3.2 Prebiotics: concepts and benefits 
Prebiotics were introduced in 1995 as an approach to the modulation of the GIT 
microbiota (Gibson & Roberfroid 1995). By definition, prebiotics are selectively 
fermented ingredients that allow specific changes, both in the composition and/or 
activity of the GIT microbiota that confers benefits upon host well-being and health 
(Roberfroid 2007). Therefore, prebiotics are associated with several characteristics, 
such as the resistance towards host GIT activity, fermented by intestinal bacteria, as 
well as selective stimulation of growth and/or activity of intestinal bacteria 
associated with health benefits (Licht et al,  2012).  
Prior to the concept of prebiotics, fermentative substrates of dietary origin have 
already been involved in supporting the growth of microflora in the GIT. These 
fermentative substrates are composed either of non-digestible carbohydrates or 
proteins which have escaped digestion (Gibson & Rastall 2006). A large portion of 
these non-digestible carbohydrates are composed of resistant starch (RS), which are 
starches recalcitrant to the activities of human digestive enzymes. The remainder of 
the carbohydrates are composed of non-starch polysaccharides, unabsorbed sugars 
and oligosaccharides, which become targets for fermentation (Macfarlane et al. 
2006). It should also be noted that dietary fibre are not identical to prebiotics. By 
definition, dietary fibre refers to the overall components of non-digestible 
carbohydrates; apart from prebiotics such as oligosaccharides, dietary fibre includes 
lignin, pectin and other associated plant substances (Bellei & Haslberger 2012). 
However, prebiotics exclusively refers to the potential of particular carbohydrates to 
promote growth or metabolic effects of selected bacteria species in the GIT that 
contribute to health benefits, and therefore can be considered as unique dietary 
fibres (Roberfroid 2007).  
Prebiotics are usually associated with carbohydrates, as they are the preferred and 
principal substrate during fermentation. In the absence of carbohydrates, certain 
groups of microbes, such as Clostridium spp. turn to protein fermentation which can 
produce harmful nitrogenous metabolites into the lumen (Rajili-Stojanovi et al. 
2013; Davila et al. 2013). Excessive protein fermentation has been linked with 
diseases such as colon cancer, thereby highlighting the importance of carbohydrates 
in the GIT (Rajili-Stojanovi 2013; Russell et al. 2011). Nevertheless, one of the key 
products of carbohydrate fermentation in the GIT are short chain fatty acids (SCFA), 
such as acetate, propionate and butyrate (Hijova & Chmelarova 2007). The other 
products produced include electron sinks, such as lactate, pyruvate, ethanol, 
succinate, as well as gasses such as hydrogen, carbon dioxide, methane and 
hydrogen sulphide (Rajili-Stojanovi 2013; Davis & Milner 2009; Hijova & 
Chmelarova 2007). The SCFA produced are rapidly absorbed and contribute to the 
health of the host. For example, acetate is metabolised in the muscle, brain and 
heart, while butyrate is metabolised at the colon epithelium where it serves as a 
regulator of cell growth and differentiation (Gibson & Rastall, 2006).  
1.3.3 Established prebiotics and their benefits 
The understanding of the relationship between the microbiota of the GIT and the 
health of the host eventually led to the development of more prebiotics. Key factors 
in the design of prebiotics are that the compounds are not only abundant but also 
inexpensive (Gibson & Rastall, 2006). Newer compounds such as dextran and 
bacterial polysaccharides are being studied for the possibility of prebiotic effects 
(Korakli et al. 2002; Olano-martin et al. 2000). On the other hand, established 
prebiotics include fructans (includes inulin and FOS), galacto-oligosaccharides (GOS) 
and lactulose (Gibson et al. 2004). In addition, RS has also gained recognition as a 
functional ingredient (Fuentes-Zaragoza et al. 2010). While various types of 
prebiotics exist and are currently in development, this review will focus on RS as a 
growing prebiotic.  
1.3.3.1 Resistant starch (RS) 
RS is the most quantitatively important prebiotic and is included under dietary fibre 
(Englyst et al. 1996; Cummings & Macfarlane 1991). By definition, RS is the fraction 
of starch which is not hydrolyzed to Dglucose in the small intestine within 120min 
of being consumed, but which is fermented in the colon (Fuentes-Zaragoza et al. 
2011). These allows RS to exert prebiotic properties when fermented by beneficial 
microbiota (Yao et al. 2009).  
Like other forms of starch, RS are polysaccharides composed of a-D-glucopyranosyl 
units linked together with -D- (14) and/or -D-(16) linkages, and are comprised of 
two molecular types: amylose, the straight chain polyglucan comprised of 
approximately 1000, -D-(14) linked glucoses; and amylopectin, the branched 
glucan, comprised of approximately 4000 glucose units with branches occurring as -
D-(16) linkages (Haralampu 2000). In general, RS can be found in starch containing 
food, such as the starch from chloroplast storage granules in leaves, as well as in the 
amyloplast of seeds and tubers (Sajilata et al. 2006). RS from native sources can also 
be prepared, which results vary depending on a large range of factors (Perera et al. 
2010). Briefly, preparation methods influence the types of RS produced, which can 
be divided into 4 categories: RS1, RS2, RS3, and RS4, as summarised in Table 1.1.  
Generally, RS grades are based on their increasing resistance towards digestion, as 
well as methods which can reduce this resistance (Fuentes-Zaragoza et al,  2010). 
Properties of RS is summarised from the review of Sajilata et al,  (2006) and pictured 
in Figure 1.1: 
 RS1 is associated with the physical inaccessibility of enzymes towards the 
starch, such as due to the presence of grain walls 
Table 1.1: Types of resistant starch, resistance to digestion in small intestine and food 
sources (Adapted from Fuentes-Zaragoza et al. 2010)  
Type  Description Digestion in small intestine Resistance 
reduced by 
RS1 Physically inaccessible to 
digestion by entrapment in 
a non-digestible matrix 
Slow rate; partial degree. 
Totally digested If properly 
milled 
Milling, 
chewing  
RS2 Ungelatinized resistant 
granules with type B 
crystallinity, slowly 
hydrolysed by -amylase 
Very slow rate; little degree. 
Totally digested when freshly 
cooked 
processing and 
cooking 
RS3 Retrograded starch formed 
when starch- containing 
foods are cooked and 
cooled 
Slow rate; partial degree. 
Reversible digestion: 
digestibility improved by 
reheating 
Processing 
conditions 
RS4 Selected chemically-
modified RS and 
industrially processed food 
ingredients 
As a result of chemical 
modification, can resist 
hydrolysis 
susceptible to 
digestion in 
vitro 
 RS2 is associated with raw and uncooked starch, where crystallinity limits 
hydrolysis due to conformation and structure of the granule 
 RS3 is a completely hydrated starch granule produced via retrogradation. 
Amylose leaches from the starch granules into the solution as a random coil 
polymer and re-associates as double helices stabilized by hydrogen bonds 
upon cooling 
 RS4 is associated with starch obtained by chemical treatment (e.g.: di-starch 
phosphate ester) 
Figure 1.1: Structure of RS, where I = RS1, II = RS2, III = RS3 and IV = RS4; C refers to 
the ordered crystalline structure composed of double helices over a region of the 
chain and is interspersed with amorphous, enzyme degradable regions (Adapted 
from Sajilata et al. 2006) 
A key factor of RS as a potential prebiotic is due to its capability to pass through the 
small intestine, allowing it to behave as a growth substrate instead for 
microorganisms, especially probiotic types in the colon (Sajilata et al. 2006). This is 
associated with studies which have shown that the consumption of RS produces 
increased SCFA production, such as butyrate, which is commonly produced following 
bacterial fermentation of prebiotics in the colon (Topping et al. 2003; Topping & 
Clifton 2001; Cummings & Macfarlane 1991). This contributes to health benefits in 
the colon; for example, butyric acid is considered as an important energy source for 
colonocytes while also having an inhibitory effect on the growth of and proliferation 
of tumour cells in vitro via cell cycle arrest at G1 (Sharma et al. 2008; Elmstahl 2002). 
This benefit can be linked to the availability of RS as a prebiotic, resulting in the 
production of butyric acid in the colon as a result of fermentation (Brouns et al. 
2002). Apart from that, analysis of populations and RS consumption concludes that 
by doubling the uptake of dietary fibre, which includes RS, risk of colorectal cancer 
can be reduced by up to 40% (Bingham et al. 2003). This was further supported by 
studies which found that RS suppresses the growth and development of neoplastic 
lesions in the colon, highlighting its potential as a preventive agent for colon cancer 
development (Liu & Xu 2008). 
Several studies have also investigated the effect of RS as a prebiotic in livestock, such 
as pigs (Regassa & Nyachoti 2018). These studies aimed improve to survival of piglets 
during post-weaning periods, protecting them against enteric infections and 
subsequently various diseases (Zimmermann et al. 2001; Pluske et al. 1998). The 
supplementation of RS in pigs via raw potato starch (RPS) was found to increase total 
caecal SCFA concentration and improve faecal consistency in weaning piglets (Heo et 
al. 2014). In addition, feeding pigs with RPS also improved microbial composition in 
the GIT, which subsequently improved intestinal morphology and also reduced 
pathogenic microorganisms (Haenen et al. 2013; Hedemann & Knudsen 2007). Lastly, 
RS was also shown to reduce skatole in the distal colon, potentially reducing the 
piggy odour from pork (Lsel & Claus 2005). Hence, RS can be said to possess 
potential for the applications such as in aquaculture as well.  
1.4 Prebiotics from underutilised crops 
Prebiotics may originate from various sources. For example, oligosaccharides can 
originate from beet, cows milk, and also soybean (Gibson & Rastall, 2006). Other 
prebiotics include inulin and RS, which are major components in chicory roots and 
legumes respectively (Sajilata et al. 2006; Gupta et al. 2003a). Nevertheless, studies 
are focused on alternative sources for functional food apart from the major crops 
which are currently cultivated, which are defined as underutilised crops. 
Underutilised crops also include a large variety of legumes, which also contains high 
contents of RS (Hoover & Zhou 2003). Hence, underutilised crops are selected as 
targets for prebiotic extractions due to additional benefits attained apart from their 
functional food composition (Mayes et al. 2012; Bowe 2007). 
1.4.1 The concept of underutilised crops 
In general, the term underutilised crops is commonly applied to crops which 
potential has not fully been realised; however, this can also be applied to major 
crops and commodities which were abandoned or in decline, which does not 
highlight the type of crops which are in focus (Padulosi & Hoeschle-Zeledon 2004). 
Therefore, the term underutilised crops is more suitably labelled to crops which 
have not received proper research, excluding neglected cultivars of major crops 
(Padulosi et al. 2011). Padulosi & Hoeschle-Zeledon (2004) defined underutilized 
species as those non-commodity crops, which are part of a larger biodiversity 
portfolio, once more popular and today neglected by users groups for a variety of 
agronomic, genetic, economic, social and cultural factors. A common factor leading 
to the neglect of specific crops is due to the advent of major crops, which led to 
domestic species becoming no longer competitive with the demand of major crops 
such as maize (Padulosi & Hoeschle-Zeledon, 2004). However, in terms of food 
security, major crops would require additional improvements  this is where genetic 
modification may play a role but also leads to reduced genetic diversity in agriculture 
(Janick 1999). On the other hand, underutilised crops provide the other alternative 
with several advantages which had led them to be a focus of research (Mayes et al. 
2012).  
A key strength of native species and underutilised crops are their resilience in a wide 
range of conditions. This capability to resist climate change drew interest, especially 
in terms of possible traits which can be applied to major crops. The transfers of yield 
and quality traits to major crops have been beneficial previously, with contributions 
up to US$ 350 million annually (Prescott-Allen & Prescott-Allen 1996). Following the 
ongoing occurrence of climate change, a desired trait following the exploitation of 
underutilised crops is their resilience in adverse conditions. One example is the 
Bambara groundnut (Vigna subterranea), which was shown to be capable of drought 
tolerance and is cultivated on harsh climates and marginal soil throughout the sub-
Saharan Africa (Andika et al. 2008). However, Bambara groundnuts are neglected 
due to unpredictable yields and long cooking time (Mayes et al. 2009). Other drought 
tolerant crops include coarse cereals in South Asia (Padulosi et al. 2011). On the 
other hand, perennial species such as the sea buckthorn (Hippophae rhamnoides) 
and tamarind (Tamarindus indica) were found not only to be more resilient to abiotic 
stress such as drought resistance and survival on marginal lands (Van den Bilcke et al. 
2013; Hegde & Mishra 2009; Xu et al. 2009a). There are also cases where 
underutilized crops can be used as drought indicators in many cultures, such as the 
tree Dobera glabra in Ethiopia (Tsegaye et al. 2007). However, not all underutilised 
plants may survive climate changes, such as from rising sea level or reduced 
temperature in mountain regions, where the latter houses various medicinal herbs 
and aromatic plants (Heywood 2011; Tanton & Haq 2008). Various studies have been 
published regarding the effect of climate change on several plant species, in which 
some face extinction (Lira et al. 2009; Lane & Jarvis 2007). However, it should be 
noted that these findings may not be entirely conclusive due to the inclusion of a 
wide range of plants and animal species and is not specifically to underutilized 
species (Padulosi et al. 2011). Nevertheless, the reported possibility of extinction for 
certain species can serve as an indication on research priorities for species of 
underutilized crops. Therefore, underutilized crops can be a subject of study in 
determining which species are most suited for environmental resilience 
requirements for future volatile environments, such as in Africa (Padulosi et al. 
2011).  
1.4.2 Resistant starch from underutilised legumes 
Like other underutilised crops, legumes also possess several advantages which 
support their use as a suitable crop in agriculture. Legumes are recognised as the 2nd 
most valuable plant source for human and animal nutrition and have the 3rd largest 
family among flowering plants (Bhat & Karim 2009). Several types of legumes have 
been a subject of study for dietary fibre values and prebiotic contents, some of which 
are grown and consumed on a local scale only (reviewed in Bhat & Karim 2009). 
Taking into consideration the size of the legume family, other legumes can be a 
subject of further studies for potential prebiotic content. In addition, the cultivation 
of legumes can also assist in improving soil conditions  a problem faced by various 
farmers especially not only in Africa but also soil in developing nations (Graham & 
Vance 2003; Dakora & Keya 1997). 
Legumes contain a high amount of carbohydrate which is mainly abundant in the 
seed, which is between 22-45% of total weight (Hoover & Sosulski 1985). However, 
native legume starch, which is the key component of the total leguminous 
carbohydrate, is less digestible than native cereal starch (Yadav et al. 2010). This 
reduced bioavailability is associated with several characteristics of leguminous 
starch, such as high levels of amylose, high content of viscous soluble dietary fibre 
components, as well as strong interactions between amylose chains (Hoover & 
Sosulski 1985). This highlights the use of legumes for prebiotic preparation due to 
high native dietary fibre content. For example, lima beans was found to have high 
total dietary fibre content and amylose levels, which were found to be at 22.0% and 
35.2% respectively (Betancur-Ancona et al. 2003). As RS is a component of dietary 
content, legumes can be associated with high RS levels. Evidently, RS contents 
analysed in raw legumes, such as lentils and pulses were found to be higher than in 
cereals and potatoes due to their variations in their starch crystalline structures 
(Fuentes-Zaragoza et al. 2010; Yadav et al. 2010; Hoover & Zhou 2003; Tharanathan 
& Mahadevamma 2003).  
Additional benefits of legumes include the unique due to the ability to develop root 
nodules and fix nitrogen following symbiosis with compatible rhizobacteria. 
Generally, legumes release flavonoids from their roots to trigger nodulation genes in 
compatible rhizobacteria, leading to the formation of lipochitooligosaccharide 
molecules which then trigger the development of root nodules (Long 1996). The 
presence of nitrogen-fixing bacteria in the roots of legumes was found to have 
contributed significantly, fixing up to 60 million metric tons of nitrogen from 
agriculturally important plants, while legumes in natural ecosystems fix up to 5 
million metric tons (Smil 1999). As nitrogen nutrition is one of the key determinants 
of crop productivity in Africa, management of biological nitrogen fixation can greatly 
benefit as a cheap and effective tool in maintaining sustainable yields in African 
agriculture (Dakora & Keya 1997). 
1.5 Probiotics and prebiotics in aquaculture 
The benefits of certain strains of bacteria in the GIT of fish indicate an opportunity 
for the improvement of health of the fish via manipulation of the microbiota 
composition. As success was observed in terrestrial animals, fish have also become 
targets for prebiotic and probiotic treatments. Due to the importance of maintaining 
the health of the fish GIT, prebiotics and probiotics have been studied as possible 
alternatives, especially following the European Union moratorium on the banning of 
antibiotic growth promoters in animal feeds, including fish (Dimitroglou et al. 2011). 
1.5.1 Gastrointestinal tract microflora of fish 
The occurrence of a dynamic and complex microbial ecosystem in the GIT of 
organisms are an important factor for the health of the host, which plays a role in the 
pathological, physiological as well as nutritional point of view (Nayak 2010). In 
mammalians, the GIT is widely composed of both aerobic and anaerobic 
microorganisms which interact in an ecosystem (Rajili-Stojanovi 2013). However, in 
terms of aquatic organisms, such as fish, the microbiota composition in the GIT is 
believed to be much simpler; initially, studies were conducted on fish GIT microbiota 
with emphasis in terms of food spoilage, nutritional aspects, as well as changes in 
farms and antibiotic resistance (Spanggaard et al. 2001). However, as studies 
highlight several significance of the GIT in mammalians, such as in terms of health 
and nutrition and the prevention of colonisation of infectious agents, emphasis has 
been placed in studying the microbiota of fish to further relate the GIT microbes to 
their possible functional roles in fish (Nayak 2010).  
1.5.2 Importance of healthy gastrointestinal tract microflora 
There are a few benefits associated with the GIT in terms of contribution to the host, 
which were studied using organisms with a known microbiota. For fish, the absence 
of microbiota was shown to lead to the arrest of differentiation in the GIT epithelium 
 this was caused by the lack of intestinal alkaline phosphatase activity and mature 
patterns of glycan expression, which are contributed by microbiota (Bates et al. 
2006). Apart from playing a role in the formation of the intestinal structure, 
microbiota in the GIT also contribute in health management of the host in terms of 
nutrition and disease outbreak (Nayak 2010).  
The role of bacteria in the GIT towards the well-being of their hosts has been 
evidenced in many terrestrial animals. The microbiota in the GIT of fish contributes 
towards the nutrition of fish, which include the synthesis of vitamins, amino acids, 
digestive enzymes and metabolites. Several metabolites such as vitamin B12 and SCFA 
have been found in the GIT of various fish as a result of bacterial fermentation 
(Kihara & Sakata 2002; Sugita et al. 1991). In addition, the production of enzymes for 
the digestion of compounds not absorbed by the intestine could also contribute 
towards additional nutrition for the host. For example, while most fish are unable to 
utilise carbohydrate efficiently, they harbour microbial populations which aid in 
digestion of the plant materials through the production of enzymes (Saha et al. 
2006). One of these compounds is cellulose, which requires the enzyme cellulase to 
cleave -1, 4-glycosidic bonds in the polymer to release glucose units (Barr et al. 
1996). GIT bacteria in fish have been shown to be capable of degrading plant-based 
substances, such as chitin and cellulose (Saha et al. 2006). This increases nutrient 
availability to fish, such as carnivorous fish which are not capable of producing such 
enzymes (Smith 1989). Similarly, a large amount of starch degrading enzymes were 
also found to be contributed by the intestinal microflora of omnivorous fish (Sugita 
et al. 1997). This highlights the contribution of GIT microbiota which confers 
nutritional benefits towards overall health improvement. However, the exact 
nutritional contribution from the GIT can be difficult to conclude due to variation in 
the ecology of the microbiota in the GIT. 
The GIT of fish also plays a role in the occurrence of disease in the host. Generally, 
the health of the host is maintained by a balance between the endogenous 
microbiota of the host and the hosts control mechanism. However, transient 
pathogens can cause diseases if conditions become favourable for their 
multiplication (Gomez et al. 2007). Entry of pathogens via the GIT has been shown in 
several studies. For example, the oral ingestion of Streptococcus iniae at 1 x 103 
colony-forming-units (CFU) lead to acute forms of the disease in Asian sea bass (Lates 
calcarifer) (Bromage & Owens 2002). Apart from that, GFP-labelled Vibrio 
anguillarum was found to localise in the GIT of zebrafish, indicating that the GIT 
represents a site of infection for the pathogen (Toole et al. 2004). In addition to the 
penetration of the GIT, studies have also shown that pathogenic bacteria can 
damage the intestinal lining by releasing toxins and extracellular enzymes, leading to 
the establishment of lethal disease (Ruwandeepika et al. 2012). However, under 
normal circumstances, autochthonous bacteria in the GIT confer protection towards 
the host by acting as a protective barrier. This can either be in terms of nutrient 
depletion or the secretion of antimicrobial compounds, which can be observed 
through studies in vitro (Vine et al. 2004; Sugita et al. 1996). In vitro studies showed 
that the the co-culture of LAB was found to be capable of inhibiting the growth of 
Aeromonas hydrophillia under culture conditions of pH 4.5 (Rengpipat et al. 2008). In 
addition, increased populations of LAB in Asian sea bass also produced greater 
survival rates of fish in waters infected with A. hydrophila, as well as higher survival 
rates as compared to fish which are not fed with the fortified diet (Rengpipat et al. 
2008). Apart from that, the presence of Lactobacillus rhamnosus in the GIT when fed 
as a probiotic was capable of improving the immunity of fish against pathogenic 
bacteria strains (Panigrahi et al. 2011). In addition, up to 40% of the GIT microbiota 
of sole (Solea senegalensis) larvae was antagonistic towards pathogens such as V. 
anguillarum after 6 weeks of feeding (Makridis et al. 2005). It was suggested that the 
inhibition is caused by the production of lactic acid and bacteriocin compounds by 
the LAB (De Vuyst & Vandamme 1994). The production of bacteriocin is also 
observed in other bacteria, such as Carnobacterium piscicola which is a common 
member of the endogenous microbiota in the GIT in many fish (Denev et al. 2009; 
Stoffels et al. 1992). Therefore, microbiota in the GIT are key players and are related 
to disease, especially against pathogens which uses the GIT as a site of infection.  
1.5.3 The application of probiotics in aquaculture 
Essentially, probiotics refer to the stimulation of health via supplementation of 
health-promoting bacteria. However, due to variation in the GIT microbiota of fish, 
commonly used probiotics in terrestrial animals were not applicable in fish. 
Therefore, various studies were conducted in order determine suitable probiotics, 
which has been reviewed extensively (Mohapatra et al. 2013; Merrifield et al. 2010; 
Irianto & Austin 2002a). Briefly, key groups of probiotic bacteria are found to 
comprise of LAB, mainly from the Lactobacillus and Carnobacterium strains. Another 
common strain found to be probiotic in some studies are Aeromonas, although most 
strains are pathogenic (Irianto & Austin 2002b; Gibson et al. 1998). These bacteria 
are usually administered as probiotics directly via feed, though environmental 
supplementation of prebiotics was also performed (Balczar et al. 2006). This 
highlights a key difference between probiotics of terrestrial and aquatic animals, as 
the microbiota of fish GIT often contain high levels of transient bacteria as a result of 
constant ingestion of the surrounding water (Ring & Birkbeck 1999). Several general 
benefits have been associated with the supplementation of probiotics, particularly 
from LAB due to survival in stomach acid and bile salts (Marteau et al. 1997). These 
benefits include competitive exclusion of pathogenic bacteria, source of nutrients 
and enzymatic contribution to digestion, direct uptake of dissolved organic material 
mediated by the bacteria, and also enhancement of immune response towards 
pathogenic bacteria (Ring 2008; Balczar et al. 2007b; Vine et al. 2004; Gomez-gil et 
al. 2000; Moriarty 1997). Therefore, LAB are said to be an important class of 
probiotics, which can be categorised into allochthonous and autochthonous strains. 
Autochthonous strains of probiotics involve the colonisation in the GIT of fish. These 
often include LAB as candidates, as they are generally harmless while some strains 
beneficial for the health of fish. For example, several studies show that many 
Carnobacterium strains were found to be effective antagonistic towards pathogens 
when tested in vivo. Mortality of salmon and rainbow trout fed with Carnobacterium 
inhibens reduced when challenged with pathogens A. salmonicida, V. ordalii and 
Yersinia ruckeri (Robertson et al. 2000). However, the colonisation of C. inhibens was 
found to be ineffective in reducing mortality caused by V. anguillarum (Robertson et 
al. 2000). Other strains, such as C. divergens were found to be effective against V. 
anguillarum when administered on Atlantic cod. In the study of Gildberg & Mikkelsen 
(1998), it was found that reduced cumulative mortality was recorded in the fish (80-
84%) and that the bacteria could colonize the internal mucus layer of the cod fry 
pyloric caeca. Apart from Carnobacterium, other LAB such as Lactococcus sp. also 
shows positive results. For example, the application of dietary probiotic, Lactococcus 
lactis subsp. lactis I2 on olive flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus) led to 100% survival 
when challenged with S. iniae (Heo et al. 2013). This was in contrast to the control 
group, which experienced 90% mortality rates. Despite being able to colonise the GIT 
of fish, generally, probiotic bacteria are usually not detected after 3-4 weeks of 
reverting to non-probiotic feed (Balczar et al. 2007a). This was believed to be 
associated to the dominance indigenous microbiota, which usually constitute a larger 
component of the resident microbiota (Gonzlez et al. 1999). Therefore, continuous 
supply of probiotics might be necessary and can be a target of future research. 
Allochthonous strains of probiotics refer to the probiotics which are transient in 
nature and are usually not found in the GIT after 1-2 weeks of application 
(Gatesoupe 2008). However, allochthonous probiotics were shown to have beneficial 
effects not only in fish, but also terrestrial animals and humans (Gatesoupe 2008). 
While the benefits revolved around general increase in health, it was observed that 
the increase in immunity levels are one of the key benefits following probiotic 
application of allochthonous bacteria. For example, stimulation of immune system 
has been observed in many studies, such as through the application of 
Carnobacterium sp. in rainbow trout, where live bacteria were found to be more 
efficient than heat inactivated ones (Panigrahi et al. 2005). In another study, L. 
rhamnosus was used in rainbow trout to significantly reduce mortality from 
furunculosis (Nikoskelainen et al. 2003). This treatment was also verified to be 
transient, as immunity levels returned to normal after two weeks of treatment 
(Nikoskelainen et al. 2003; Panigrahi et al. 2005). Similar trends were observed when 
heat-killed cells of bacteria were used for immunostimulation despite low adhesion 
on intestinal epithelium (Salinas et al. 2005; Villamil et al. 2003). Apart from 
immunostimulation, general health improvement was also noted following the 
introduction of probiotics; the use of Lactobacillus acidophilus and other probiotics 
were found to improve improved water quality, lysozyme activity, and resistance 
against heat shock and V. anguillarum infection (Taoka et al. 2006). However, 
specific contributions of the probiotics were not taken into consideration to allow 
concluding that these benefits originated directly from the LAB. Nevertheless, these 
studies highlight the benefits of allochthonous probiotics which mainly revolves 
around immune stimulation. 
1.5.4 The application of prebiotics in aquaculture 
Apart from probiotics, prebiotics are also another form of microbiota manipulation. 
Prebiotics have several advantages over the use of probiotics, where low viability of 
bacteria after feed production is observed (Merrifield et al. 2010). Other problems 
involving probiotics include the leaching of particles in rearing water as well as low 
viability during storage (Merrifield et al. 2010; Wang et al. 2008). Similar to prebiotics 
in terrestrial animals, prebiotics for fish must also qualify for the key requirement  
to stimulate selectively the growth and/or activity of intestinal bacteria associated 
with health and well-being. However, compared to probiotics, studies on prebiotics 
on fish are limited and insufficient to conclude specific effects of their application 
(Ring et al. 2010b). Therefore, greater research effort is required to expand on 
studies on the effect of prebiotics on the benefits in fish. So far, some of the benefits 
observed in fish revolve around host growth parameters, immunity levels as well as 
effect on the microbiota of the GIT from commonly applied prebiotics in terrestrial 
animals, such as inulin and oligosaccharides (Yousefian & Amiri 2009).  
1.5.4.1 Inulin 
Inulin is a commonly used as a prebiotic in terrestrial animals with various benefits. 
Hence, despite not being as part of the natural diet of fish, inulin was also selected as 
one of the candidates of prebiotics for fish (Ring et al. 2006). Generally, inulin is 
capable of stimulating the growth of bacteria, such as LAB, which has also been 
suggested as potential probiotics of aquaculture. In addition, inulin has been found 
to be fermented by LAB extracted from the GIT of fish, such as the genus 
Carnobacterium sp. (Ring 2004). Therefore, inulin has been used in the study of 
many types of fish. 
When Artic charr were fed with inulin, variation in microbiota was observed. While 
the inclusion of inulin in diet led to an increase of probiotic strains such as Bacillus 
spp. and C. maltaromaticum, a reduction in autochtonous bacteria was observed 
(Ring et al. 2006). This was believed to be associated with the selectivity of specific 
strains and effect on enterocytes due to high inulin content of 15%. In another study, 
when Artic charr (Salvelinus alpinus L.) were fed with diets containin 15% inulin, 
intestinal cell damage was observed (Olsen et al. 2001). The destructive effect of 
inulin was mainly detected on the microvillus organisation, which were found lacking 
in some areas and less straight compared to control animals. This shows deleterious 
effects of inulin inclusion in the diet. A study conducted on red drum (Sciaenops 
ocellatus) also did not reveal any health benefits, in terms of weight gain and food 
efficiency ratios when inulin was supplemented (Burr & Gatlin III 2009). On the other 
hand, Cerezuela et al. (2008) also concluded that inulin is unsuitable as a 
immunostimulant for sea bream (Sparus aurata L.). However, in some studies, merit 
has been obtained from inulin as a prebiotic. The supplementation of 0.5% inulin in 
nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus) shows slight improvement in growth rates and 
resistance to A. hydrophila (Ibrahem et al. 2010). Apart from that, inulin also 
improved weight gain, intestinal absorption of calcium and reduced intestinal 
populations in farmed rainbow trout (Ortiz et al. 2013). As the effect of inulin varies 
in species, the effect of inulin cannot be concluded without greater coverage of 
other species which can be candidates for prebiotic-inclusion diets. 
1.5.4.2 Oligosaccharides 
Oligosaccharides are another form of prebiotic which are widely used in terrestrial 
animals, and even in various commercial products for human consumption. As 
oligosaccharides are substrates fermentable by microbiota in the GIT, they are also 
applied in aquaculture as prebiotics (Ring et al. 2010b). In aquaculture, various 
studies have been conducted regarding oligosaccharides as a prebiotics, where 
established types include MOS and FOS, which have been applied in a wide variety of 
fish (Ring et al. 2010b). 
MOS are glucomannoprotein-complexes derived from the cell wall of yeast 
(Saccharomyces cerevisiae) (Sohn et al. 2000) and have been used in terrestrial 
animals such as sheep (Klebaniuk et al. 2008). Generally, the effect of MOS was 
believed to improve immunity levels through the production of cytokines, which 
could have a role in innate immune function (Gazi & Martinez-Pomares 2009). 
Hence, the effect of MOS was evaluated in a wide range of fish. When Atlantic 
salmon was fed with MOS, benefits such as 11% lower oxygen consumption, 5% 
lower protein and 3% higher energy concentration in the whole body and 7% greater 
energy retention was observed (Grisdale-Helland et al. 2008). However, immune 
response towards pathogen was not recorded. In other studies, such as by Torrecillas 
et al. (2007), MOS improved the growth, feed utilization and immune status of 
European sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax), which could be associated with enhanced 
amino acids absorption (Iji et al. 2001). More positive results were observed in 
rainbow trout, such as enhanced growth rates and intestinal folding (Staykov et al. 
2007; Genc et al. 2007). However, many of these studies did not address immunity 
and disease susceptibility, except for the case where MOS inclusion diets reduced 
mortality of rainbow trout when challenged with V. anguillarum (Rodrigues-Estrada 
et al. 2008). However, the inclusion of MOS may also have no effect, as observed 
when fed to sturgeons (Acipenser oxyrinchus) (Pryor et al. 2003), which could be 
associated to differences in microbiota, which was not analysed in this study.  
FOS are another class of oligosaccharides which have been studied as a prebiotic in 
aquaculture. Generally, FOS are short and medium chains of -d-fructans in which 
fructosyl units are bound by -(2-1) glycosidic linkages and attached to a terminal 
glucose unit and includes all non-digestible oligosaccharides composed of fructose 
and glucose units (Swanson et al. 2002). As FOS is fermented by LAB, it might 
contribute to health benefits in some fish and therefore has been a subject of study 
(Ring et al. 2010b). In Atlantic salmons, positive effect was observed following the 
supplementation of FOS  approximately 5% higher feed efficiency and 6% energy 
retention was observed when compared to control diets. However, there was no 
improvement in the growth and nutrient digestibility. In the study of Ye et al. (2011), 
the supplementation of FOS alone in Japanese flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus) did 
not produce any benefits. However, the supplementation of FOS with Bacillus clausii 
as a synbiotic led to higher weight gain rates in the fish. This could be associated to 
the lack of microbiota capable of utilizing FOS, which was not analysed in the study. 
In another study involving hybrid tilapia, FOS did not improve growth rates (He et al. 
2003). However, FOS-inclusion in diets led to increased innate defence mechanisms 
measured by lysozyme and alternative complement activity (ACH50).  
1.5.4.3 Resistant starch 
At present, RS as a prebiotic have not been tested in aquaculture. One of the 
benefits of the use of RS as a prebiotic is the the production of SCFA following the 
fermentation. This is more common in herbivorous fish; however, it is also observed 
in carnivorous red seabream (Kihara & Sakata 1997) and European sea bass 
(Gatesoupe et al. 2014). While no beneficial effect was found apart from 
strengthening the GIT of red seabream, the increased production of SCFA, such as 
acetate, following bacteria modulation shown in the European sea bass may also 
benefit Asian sea bass (Gatesoupe et al. 2014). In addition, while carnivorous fish are 
incapable of digesting complex carbohydrates, several benefits such as higher weight 
gain, improved nutrient digestibility and survival was observed when supplemented 
with amylolytic probiotic feed which results in a more favourable microbiota in the 
fish GIT (De et al. 2015). 
1.6 Aquaculture of Asian sea bass (Lates calcarifer) 
Asian sea bass or better known as barramundi in Australia and Siakap in Malay was 
suggested as a perfect candidate as food security for aquaculture when first 
discovered in the 1980s (Greenberg 2010). With emphasis on the Asian region and 
climate, a few types of fish are commonly used in aquaculture, such as the tilapia. 
However, despite being considered sustainable, the vegetarian diets of tilapia cause 
them to have reduced amounts of omega-3 oils, which are the highlight of nutrition 
in fish (Powell 2003). In contrast, the long chain omega-3 content of farmed 
Australian barramundi was found to equal farmed salmon, at 2,960 and 2,985 mg per 
150 g wet weight respectively (Nichols et al. 2010). This could be associated with the 
diets of these fish, which are carnivorous in nature and fed with fish products in feed 
(Nichols et al. 2010). However, while salmon contains high amount of omega-3 fatty 
acids, their carnivorous nature might require up to 5 kg of wild fish to produce 1 kg 
of salmon (Covington 2004; Powell 2003). Asian sea bass are said to require less  
approximately 20% is sufficient (Greenberg 2011), while other studies contradict this, 
stating that higher protein content is more beneficial for growth (Glencross 2006). 
Nevertheless, the use of Asian sea bass for aquaculture is also supported by high 
survivability in wide variety of conditions (Bermudes et al. 2010; Katersky & Carter 
2007; Katersky & Carter 2005). 
Asian sea bass aquaculture initiated approximately in the 1960s, which experienced 
slow growth until the 1980s where aquaculture production experienced increased 
growth (FAO 2017b). Currently, aquaculture of Asian sea bass contributes to 
approximately 70,000 metric tonnes (FAO 2015). Although far from the contribution 
of salmons and carps farmed, Asian sea bass can still be considered an important 
aquaculture in several regions, such as Australia, Thailand, Indonesia and Malaysia. 
For Australian aquaculture, silver perch, Asian sea bass, eels, aquarium fish and other 
native fish make up to 14.22% of the total finfish aquaculture in 2007-2008 
(Australian Bureau of Statistics 2012). In the consecutive years of 2008-2009 and 
2009-2010, the total amount represented for the category above increased to 
15.80% and 17.64% respectively; this indicates the increasing contribution of other 
finfish, which includes Asian sea bass, towards the total aquaculture production of 
finfish (Australian Bureau of Statistics 2012). On the other hand, in Malaysia, the 
aquaculture of Asian sea bass is also significant for brackish water based aquaculture. 
In 2015, Asian sea bass is the highest cultured fish in brackish water conditions, 
comprising of 22.66% of the total weight of total cultured species (DOFM 2016). 
Other species which are highly cultured are the white shrimps and cockles which 
represent 37.56% and 13.12% of total brackish water aquaculture in terms of weight 
respectively (DOFM 2016). Effectively, wholesale value of Asian sea bass in Malaysia 
also contributes up to 18.71% of the total revenue gained from brackish water 
aquaculture (DOFM 2016). This highlights Asian sea bass as one of the key species for 
aquaculture in Malaysia.  
1.6.1 Functional food in Asian sea bass aquaculture 
Disease prevalence in Asian sea bass resulted in studies on the improvement of 
survival. Prebiotic studies have not been conducted in Asian sea bass, although 
similar studies have been conducted with a certain level of efficacy. These methods 
include probiotic-supplemented diets as well as additional ingredient in diets. 
Several studies been conducted revolving around the efficiency of probiotic-
supplemented diets. For example, Asian sea bass was provided feed supplemented 
with amylolytic bacteria isolated from the GIT. Supplementation of probiotic in the 
diet throughout a 30 day feeding trial resulted in a higher weight gain (141.42%), 
protein efficiency ratio (1.18), survival rate (91.5%) and a lower food conversion ratio 
(2.15). In addition, nutrient digestibility was also improved (De et al. 2013). In other 
studies, when LAB isolated from the GIT of mature Asian sea bass was supplemented 
as a probiotic, significantly higher survivability (80%) was conferred when exposed to 
the common aquatic pathogen Aeromonas sp. (Rengpipat et al. 2008). This highlights 
the efficiency of probiotics when applied in Asian sea bass. 
A few studies investigated the application of common prebiotics, namely inulin, MOS 
and FOS on Asian sea bass. These studies investigated the effect of the prebiotics 
supplemented at different levels in the diets of fingerlings, weighing between 7 g and 
12 g. For inulin, diets supplemented above 1% improved specific growth rates and 
feed conversion ratios while having no effect on weight gain. These were believed to 
be caused by changes in the GIT microbial community of the fish based on 
polymerase chain reaction and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (PCR-DGGE) 
(Ali et al. 2016). On the other hand, the inclusion of MOS at 1% increased weight 
gain, specific growth rate and increased blood glucose, triglyceride and cholesterol 
content while having no effect on whole body composition (Ali et al. 2017b). The 
authors suggested that these benefits was due to the improved absorptive surface 
area of the intestine from the 1% MOS supplemented. Meanwhile, the inclusion of 
1% FOS in diets improved fish survival up to 97.7% and immune parameters, such as 
lysozyme and superoxide dismutase levels at 77.4 U ml-1 and 75.2 U ml-1 respectively 
(Ali et al. 2017a). The improvements observed following the supplementation of 
these prebiotics were believed to be able to contribute to Asian sea bass in 
aquaculture.  
The concept of other added ingredients into diets was another approach which was 
applied in the improvement of feed for Asian sea bass. The inclusion of Rhodovulum 
sp. biomass as nutritional ingredient in feed was also studied throughout a 12-week 
period. It was found that at 0.3% biomass concentration, highest weight gain (419 g), 
feed conversion ratio (1.95) and survival rate (86.7%) was obtained (Shapawi et al. 
2012). This was comparable to previous study involving the supplementation of 
probiotics (De et al. 2013). In other studies, the addition of neem leaf (Azadirachta 
indica) as a supplement in diets also achieved high survival rates (80%) when 
exposed to the common pathogen V. harveyi (Talpur & Ikhwanuddin 2013). This 
could be related to the antibacterial and antifungal content of the leaves which has 
been a subject of previous studies (Girish & Shankara Bhat 2008). Hence, these 
studies indicate the responsiveness of Asian sea bass towards additional ingredients 
in their diets. 
1.7 Experimental objectives  
Currently, the beneficial effects of prebiotics have been documented in both animal 
models and terrestrial animals. Significant work has also been carried out to 
investigate the effect of established prebiotics (e.g. inulin, FOS, MOS) in aquatic 
animals. However, the effects of these prebiotics vary when fed to different species 
of fish. In addition, little work has been done on resistant starch (RS) as a prebiotic in 
particular. Hence, this study seeks to explore effective alternatives by using a natural 
prebiotic source of RS from underutilised legumes to improve the growth and health 
of Asian sea bass, which is an important commodity in Malaysia. 
Therefore, the objectives of this study were;  
1. To assess the potential of six underutilised legumes as a source for RS   
2. To compare the prebiotic effect of RS extracted from underutilised legumes 
on the growth of probiotic bacterium isolated from fish intestinal tract in an 
in vitro setting 
3. To compare the effects of selected RS on the growth and health of 
zebrafish (Danio rerio) and Asian sea bass (Lates calcarifer) in in vivo setting 
The project was separated into three studies with the first study comparing the 
amount of RS present in six underutilised legume species and the effect of acid- and 
enzyme-hydrolysis as pre-treatments in improving the RS content from the legume 
starches. The second study compared the effects of the RS produced on the in vitro 
growth and acid production of probiotic bacteria isolated from the gut of zebrafish 
and Asian sea bass. The third study compared the effect of supplementation of 
selected RS on the growth and intestinal microflora content of zebrafish and Asian 
sea bass. 
2 Chapter 2: Determination and quantification of resistant starch present in 
underutilised legumes 
2.1 Introduction 
Resistant starch (RS) refers to the fraction of starch which remains undigested until 
arriving at the colon, which is fermented by microbial populations and subsequently 
resulting in health benefits to the host (Zaman & Sarbini 2015). Currently, several 
studies have developed or modified methods used to analyse RS contents in diets, 
which is based on the quantity of indigestible starch remaining after digestion with 
amylases (McCleary et al. 2002; Englyst et al. 1996; Goi et al. 1996). However, as RS 
extraction processes and detection methods differ, the quantity of RS measured 
varied; this creates an issue of defining RS content in food while highlighting the 
issue of having no standard method to date (Perera et al. 2010). Thus, another 
challenge was to develop a reliable method to quantify the RS presents in legumes. 
The RS content in starch increased when subject to heating and cooling in the 
presence of excess water, via the processes of gelatinisation and retrogradation 
(Morales-Medina et al. 2014; Polesi & Sarmento 2011). This increment is due to the 
formation of B-type crystalline structure and annealing of starch during 
retrogradation (Fuentes-Zaragoza et al. 2010). When consumed, this B-type 
crystalline structure resists intestinal enzyme digestion which allows RS to arrive at 
the colon as substrates for the growth of beneficial microorganisms (probiotics) and 
subsequently benefiting host health (Zaman & Sarbini 2015).  
Hence, the current study investigates the RS availability in a range of underutilised 
legumes for use as sustainable prebiotic ingredients in aquafeeds.  
2.1.1 Hypothesis 
Underutilised legumes are high in RS content and the production of RS could be 
improved following optimised hydrolysis, gelatinisation and retrogradation 
processes. Based on published literature, the Megazyme Resistant Starch assay 
method should be a precise quantification method for RS (Perera et al. 2010). 
2.1.2 Aims 
The current study determines the RS availability in six underutilised legumes, namely 
adzuki beans (Vigna angularis), mung beans (Vigna radiata), black-eyed peas (Vigna 
unguiculata subsp. Unguiculata), pigeon peas (Cajanus cajan), Bambara groundnuts 
(Vigna subterranea) and red lentils (Lens culinaris).  
Specific aims:  
 To determine the amount of starch present in these underutilised legumes 
 To screen for the most reliable RS quantification and production methods for 
legumes 
 To determine the amount of RS present in underutilised legumes 
2.2 Materials and methods 
2.2.1 Experimental overview 
Six underutilised legumes were investigated in this study. The legume starches were 
isolated via alkaline steeping as reported by Wani et al. (2010) with slight 
modification. Then, two RS quantification methods were compared which were the 
modified method of McCleary et al. (2002) (McCleary method) and the Megazyme 
Resistant Starch Assay Kit (Megazyme, Ireland). Lastly, the legume RS was produced 
via hydrolysis, gelatinisation and retrogradation steps based on the study of Polesi & 
Sarmento (2011). Two methods of hydrolysis, acid and enzyme, (followed by 
identical gelatinisation and retrogradation steps) were compared.  
2.2.2 Materials 
2.2.2.1 Legumes 
The legumes selected in this study were based on the list of underutilised crops 
published by INFOODS (2012). The choices of legumes were: adzuki beans (Vigna 
angularis), mung beans (Vigna radiata), black-eyed peas (Vigna unguiculata subsp. 
Unguiculata), pigeon peas (Cajanus cajan), Bambara groundnuts (Vigna subterranea) 
and red lentils (Lens culinaris), which were purchased from a supermarket (The 
Store, Semenyih, Malaysia). Meanwhile, Bambara groundnuts were provided by 
Crops for the Future (CFF) research centre, Malaysia. 
2.2.2.2 Starch samples 
Starch samples used in this study were isolated from the legumes as based on the 
method described in Section 2.2.3.1 and are labelled as isolated starch. 
2.2.3 Methods 
2.2.3.1 Isolation of starch 
The method applied for the isolation of starch from legumes were adapted from the 
method of Wani et al. (2010). In this method, the milled legume flour was used as 
the starting material instead of soaked legumes due to higher yields obtained and 
the steps for removal of pre-soaking and seed coat removal were omitted. In 
addition, sedimentation was also included to replace the limitations of the 
centrifugation step. 
Thus, in this modified method, the legumes were milled into fine powder by using a 
miller operated on cycles of 15 s for approximately 5 min. The milled flour was sieved 
through a 1 mm sieve to ensure homogeneity in particle size. Flour that passes 
through the sieve was collected, while particles which were retained by the sieve 
were milled again for 3 min. Finally, the total flour was collected and stored at room 
temperature prior to use and is labelled as legume flour. 
A legume flour suspension was produced by mixing 100 g of legume flour in 1 L of 
distilled water. The pH of the suspension was adjusted to 10.0 using a 30% (w/v) 
sodium hydroxide solution (R&M Chemicals) and was stirred using a magnetic stirrer 
at room temperature for 1 hr. Then, the suspension was filtered through a 125 m 
mesh sieve to separate the fibre. The filtrate was then stored overnight in a 4 C 
chiller for the sedimentation of the starch. After sedimentation, the sediment was 
centrifuged at 3000 g at 10 C for 30 min. After centrifugation, the supernatant was 
discarded. The washing step proceeded with the sediment mixed with 30 mL of 50% 
(v/v) ethanol solution, followed by centrifugation at 3000 g at 10 C for 30 min. The 
supernatant was discarded and this washing step was repeated once. After that, the 
sediment was dried at 45 C in a convection oven. The upper portion consisting of 
insoluble fibre was carefully discarded and the lower white portion was retrieved as 
starch. 
2.2.3.2 Quantification of RS content 
RS is measured as the portion of starch surviving digestion to be partially or wholly 
fermented in the large intestine (Fuentes-Zaragoza et al. 2010). Quantification of RS 
was performed by simulating conditions in the human digestive tract and has been 
modified in a range of studies to replicate results obtained by healthy ileostomy 
subjects (Perera et al. 2010). While modifications in the method affects the final RS 
content quantified, fewer studies investigate sources of the enzymes used, which is 
explored in this study. 
In this study, two methods were compared, which is: a) Modified method of 
McCleary et al. (2002) and b) Method of Megazyme RS Kit, where the key 
difference is the use of fungal amylase instead of porcine pancreatic amylase in the 
methods of McCleary et al. (2002) in the first stage of the digestion of starch using 
the -amylase solution, as described in detail in Section 2.2.3.2.a.  
a. Modified method of McCleary et al. (2002) 
The method applied for the quantification of resistant starch from legumes was 
adapted from the method of McCleary et al. (2002) and will be labelled as the 
McCleary method. In this study, the pancreatic -amylase was replaced with -
amylase from Aspergillus oryzae (Sigma 10065) while the amyloglucosidase (AMG) 
solution was replaced with AMG from Aspergillus niger (Sigma 10113). Lastly, the 
glucose content was measured using the Glucose Assay Kit (GO; Sigma GAGO20). 
Instructions for the preparation of reagents were provided in the study of McCleary 
et al. (2002). In this study, the reagents were prepared with similar methods to 
reduce the possibility of variation and are as listed in Appendix A.  
The resistant starch assay can be separated into two components: i) conversion of 
resistant starch into glucose and ii) measurement of glucose content. 
i. Conversion of RS into glucose 
A total of 100 mg of sample was mixed with 4 mL -amylase solution via vortex and 
was incubated in a shaking incubator set at 37 C with 200 strokes/min for 16 hr. 
After that, an initial washing step was performed, where 4 mL of 95% (v/v) ethanol 
was added and mixed via vortex. The mixture was centrifuged at 1500 g for 15 min 
and supernatant was discarded carefully. Then, a second washing step was 
performed, where 8 mL of 50% (v/v) ethanol was added and mixed vigorously via 
vortex, followed by centrifugation at 1500 g for 15 min. The supernatant was 
discarded carefully. The second washing step was repeated once and the sediment 
was dried by placing the tubes in an inverted position on absorbent paper for 1 hr.  
After drying, the sediment was re-suspended with the addition of 2 mL of 4 M 
potassium hydroxide solution and the mixture was mixed by tapping the tubes 
gently. The samples were then shaken in ice at 200 rpm for 20 min. Then, 8 mL of 1.2 
M sodium acetate solution (1.2 M, pH 3.8) was added into the samples and mixed by 
swirling, followed by the addition of 100 L of concentrated AMG solution. The 
samples were mixed vigorously and incubated at in a water bath set at 50 C for 30 
min with intermittent mixing via vortex within approximately 5 min intervals. The 
mixture was then subjected to centrifugation at 1500 g for 15 min and the 
supernatant was collected for the measurement of glucose content via Glucose (GO) 
Assay Kit (Sigma GAGO20). 
ii. Measurement of glucose content via GO 
Glucose measurement was performed using a Glucose (GO) Assay Kit (Sigma 
GAGO20). Using this kit, glucose was oxidised to gluconic acid and hydrogen peroxide 
by glucose oxidase. Hydrogen peroxide reacted with o-dianisidine in the presence of 
peroxidase and formed a coloured product, which reacted with sulfuric acid to form 
a more stable coloured product. The intensity of the pink colour was then measured 
at 540 nm is proportional to the original glucose concentration 
An aliquot of 100 L of samples were pipetted into sterile 1.5 mL microcentrifuge 
tubes and 200 L of Assay Reagent was added to each tube after 30 s and mixed well 
via inversion of the tubes. Samples were then incubated for 30 min at 37 C. At the 
end of the incubation, the reaction was immediately terminated by the addition of 
200 L of 12 N sulfuric acid and was mixed well via inversion of the tubes. An aliquot 
of 200 L was transferred into 96-well microtiter plates for measurement of glucose 
content against the reagent blank at a wavelength of 540 nm. For sample that 
exceed absorbance reading of 2.0, a 10-fold dilution will be carried out and the 
measurement of glucose content was repeated accordingly. 
A standard curve was developed by using 0-80 g/mL of glucose as shown in 
Appendix B. The following equation generated from the glucose standard curve was 
used in the determination of glucose concentration (g/mL): 
Glucose concentration (g/mL) = (Absorbance at OD-540nm)/(0.00266) 
The glucose concentration measured was then multiplied by a factor of 0.9 to 
determine its resistant starch content (Cho et al. 1999). For samples which exceed 
10% RS content, a 10-fold dilution is performed and the measurement of glucose 
content was repeated and calculated accordingly. 
b. Method of Megazyme RS Kit 
The Megazyme Resistant Starch Assay Kit was developed by Megazyme (K-RSTAR, 
Ireland) based on the McCleary et al. (2002). This assay kit is commonly used as a 
colorimetric method for determination of resistant starch in cereal products and 
feeds. This Megazyme RS kit standardizes the RS measurements across studies and is 
accepted as the official method for RS measurement in starch by the Association of 
Official Analytical Chemists (AOAC; Method 2002.02). 
Instructions for the preparation of reagents were included in the manual provided by 
the kit and reagents were prepared as listed in Appendix C.  
The resistant starch assay can be separated into two components: i) conversion of 
resistant starch into glucose and ii) measurement of glucose content via GOPOD. 
i. Conversion of RS into glucose 
The method of a) conversion of resistant starch into glucose is identical to the 
method described in Section 2.2.3.2 (a, i). 
ii. Measurement of glucose content via GOPOD 
Glucose measurement was performed based on the protocol provided by the 
Megazyme RS kit with slight modification to suit the application in 96-well microtiter 
plates. The glucose oxidase peroxidase (GOPOD) reagents convert glucose into a 
quinonemine dye. The intensity of the pink colour was then measured at 510 nm is 
proportional to the original glucose concentration 
For sample measurement, a total 50 L of the supernatant was transferred each into 
2.0 mL microcentrifuge tubes containing 1.5 mL of GOPOD reagent and is performed 
in duplicate. For glucose standard measurements, a total 50 L aliquot of the glucose 
standard (1 mg/mL, provided by the kit) was transferred each into 2.0 mL 
microcentrifuge tubes containing 1.5 mL of GOPOD reagent and is performed in 
quadruplicate. For blank measurements, a total of 50 L aliquot of the blank sample 
was transferred into 2.0 mL microcentrifuge tubes containing 1.5 mL of GOPOD 
reagent and was performed in triplicates. All tubes were incubated at 50 C in a 
water bath for 20 min, followed by 200 L aliquot from each sample and transferred 
into a 96-well microtiter plate for measurement at a wavelength of 510 nm.  
Calculations for resistant starch content (% w/w, on a dry weight basis) of the test 
samples were performed based on the instructions provided by the kit, which are as 
shown below. In this study, the percentage of RS content measured was based on 
the isolated starch fraction. After measurement, samples which exceed 10% RS 
content was diluted via a 10-fold dilution is performed and the measurement of 
glucose content and the calculation of RS content was repeated. 
For non-diluted sample: 
Resistant Starch content (g/100 g sample; % w/w)  
= E x F x (10.3/0.1) x (1/1000) x (100/W) x (162/180) 
= E x (F/W) x 9.27  
For 10-fold diluted sample: 
Resistant Starch content (g/100 g sample; % w/w) 
= E x F x (100/0.1) x (1/1000) x (100/W) x (162/180) 
= E x (F/W) x 90  
Where:  
 E = absorbance (reaction) read against the reagent blank; 
 F = conversion from absorbance to micrograms (the absorbance obtained for 
100 g of D-glucose in the GOPOD reaction is determined and F = 100 (g of 
D-glucose) divided by the GOPOD absorbance for this 100 g of D-glucose; 
 100/0.1 = volume correction (0.1 mL taken from 100 mL 10-fold diluted 
samples); 
 1/1000 = conversion from micrograms to milligrams; 
 W = dry weight of sample analysed = as is weight x [(100-moisture 
content)/100]; 
 100/W = factor to present RS as a percentage of sample weight; 
 162/180 = factor to convert from free D-glucose, as determined, to anhydro-
D-glucose as occurs in starch; 
 10.3/0.1 = volume correction (0.1 mL taken from 10.3 mL non-diluted 
samples) for samples containing 0-10% RS where the incubation solution is 
not diluted and the final volume is approximately 10.3 mL.  
2.2.3.3 Production of RS from legumes 
The application of heat to starch in the presence of moisture was observed to have a 
positive impact on RS levels. This treatments cause gelatinisation of amylose and 
amylopectin fractions to assume a rubbery state, allowing them to interact to form 
double helices to increase the overall stability of the granule to disruption, increasing 
RS (Chung et al. 2009). In this study, the effect of two pre-treatments were 
compared (Section a and b), which aimed to increasing the apparent levels of 
amylose via debranching amylopectin molecules or via acid treatment. This was 
followed with gelatinisation and retrogradation and lyophilisation (Section c and d). 
The preparation of reagents of the methods used in this study were also as listed in 
Appendix D. 
a. Enzyme-hydrolysis method 
The enzyme-hydrolysis procedure applied in this study was adapted from the study 
of Polesi & Sarmento (2011) with no modification. Pullulanase was used for the 
hydrolysis of the 1-6 glycosidic bonds produced more free linear chains which can 
participate in crystal formation by chain elongation and folding (Vasanthan & Bhatty, 
1998). This increases crystal formation during retrogradation, increasing RS content. 
A 10% (w/v) starch suspension was produced by adding 100 g of isolated starch into 
1 L of sodium acetate buffer (0.1 M, pH 5.3). The starch in the suspension was 
gelatinised via incubation in a water bath set at 100 C for 15 min with constant 
stirring with a spatula. The starch suspension was then removed and allowed to cool 
to approximately 60 C. Then, an aliquot of 380 L of pullulanase microbial (Sigma 
E2412) was added into the suspension to produce a concentration of 40 units per g 
of starch and was mixed with a spatula. The beaker was covered with aluminium foil 
and was subjected to incubation for 10 hr in a water bath set at 60 C. The starch 
suspension was then subjected to gelatinisation and retrogradation. Isolated starch 
which were treated using this method are labelled as enzyme-RS. 
b. Acid-hydrolysis method 
The acid-hydrolysis procedure applied in this study was adapted from the study of 
Polesi & Sarmento (2011) with slight modification. Reduction of molecular weight via 
acid treatment generates a larger number of linear chains to facilitate pairing, 
consequently increasing RS content (Polesi & Sarmento 2011). In this study, an 
additional washing step with 80% (v/v) ethanol was performed based on the 
methods of Vasanthan & Bhatty (1998).  
A 20% (w/v) starch suspension was produced by adding 100 g of isolated starch in 
500 mL of 2.0 M hydrochloric acid. The beaker was covered with aluminium foil and 
was incubated in a water bath set at 45 C for 150 min. The pH was then neutralised 
to 6.0 using a 30% (w/v) sodium hydroxide solution. Then, the suspension was 
transferred into 50 mL centrifuge tubes and was subjected to centrifugation of at 
3000 g for 15 min. The supernatant was discarded and the sediment was washed by 
adding approximately 25 mL of 80% ethanol solution (v/v) and vortexed, followed by 
centrifugation of at 3000 g for 15 min. The washing step was repeated once and the 
sediment was then transferred into a beaker. Distilled water was added to produce a 
10% (w/v) starch suspension and the starch suspension was then subjected to 
gelatinisation and retrogradation Isolated starch which were treated using this 
method are labelled as acid-RS. 
c. Gelatinisation and retrogradation 
Gelatinisation was performed by subjecting samples to similar autoclave conditions 
of 121 C at 15 psi for 15 min to gelatinise the starch. After the autoclave cycle, the 
samples were stirred with a spatula and the contents were transferred into shallow 
rectangular plastic containers up to a height of approximately 1 cm. The plastic 
containers were covered and were transferred into a chiller set at 4 C for 24 hr for 
retrogradation. After the incubation retrogradation has been completed, the 
samples are subject to lyophilisation. 
d. Lyophilisation 
Prior to lyophilisation, samples were transferred into -80 C freezer and stored for 
overnight. Lyophilisation was performed using freeze dryer (Alpha 1-2 LDplus, Martin 
Christ, Germany). The freeze dryer was set at 0.12 mbar and vacuum at -40 C. The 
lyophilised samples were stored at room temperature until used. 
2.2.3.4 Proximate analysis of legume samples 
Proximate analysis of legume samples and feed samples were conducted by ALS 
Technichem Sdn. Bhd (Shah Alam, Malaysia). The principles of the methods used for 
the respective test parameters are as described in Table 2.1, meanwhile the method 
reference is listed in Appendix E as provided by the company. 
Samples were prepared and stored in plastic containers, containing 50 g of sample in 
each. Samples were delivered and analysed for the following parameters:  
Table 2.1: Proximate analysis test parameters and methods used by ALS Technichem 
Sdn Bhd 
 Test Parameter Method and Principle 
1 Energy  (by 
calculation) 
Measurement by calculation* 
2 Total fat Measurement of free lipid via direct solvent extraction 
using organic solvents 
3 Protein/ crude 
protein 
Measurement of organic nitrogen content via Kjeldahl 
procedure (N  6.25) 
4 Moisture Measurement of weight loss of water due to evaporation 
when heated with infrared via moisture analyser 
5 Ash Measurement of inorganic residue after ignition of organic 
matter at 500-550 C 
6 Total carbohydrate Measurement by calculation** 
7 Dietary fibre** Measurement of fibre remaining after enzyme digestion of  
defatted samples (-amylase, protease, amyloglucosidase) 
Notes: 
* Total energy is determined as total sum of protein, fat and carbohydrate measured 
multiplied with the following factors: protein: 16.7 kJ/g; fat: 37.4 kJ/g; carbohydrate: 
16.7 kJ/g. 
** Total carbohydrate (g/100g; % w/w) is determined by the formula below: 
= 100% - (Total fat + crude protein + moisture + ash) 
** Dietary fibre is not included within the total % (g/100g; % w/w) of parameters 1-
2.2.4 Experimental design 
2.2.4.1 Isolation of starch from underutilised legumes 
Starch was isolated from the legumes based on the modified method of Wani et al. 
(2010) based on alkaline steeping as described in detail in Section 2.2.3.1. A total of 
200 g of legume flour was used for starch isolation. The weight of the isolated starch 
obtained was measured and compared.  
2.2.4.2 Determination of quantification method for RS analysis 
The RS content of isolated starch from each legume was measured by two methods, 
namely the McCleary method and the Megazyme RS Kit. A positive control with 44% 
RS content was used in both methods and each assay was performed in triplicates 
for each legume sample. The selected method was then used for quantification of RS 
content for the rest of the study. 
2.2.4.3 Evaluation of production methods of RS from legumes 
Isolated starch samples from each legume were subjected to three treatments to 
improve RS content as highlighted in Section 2.2.3.3: a) acid-RS; b) enzyme-RS, and c) 
untreated-S (isolated starch with no further processing steps). Samples produced by 
acid-hydrolysis and enzyme-hydrolysis were further subjected to gelatinisation and 
retrogradation steps and samples were then lyophilised prior to assay. Treatments 
applied to each legume were conducted in single batches and were performed as 
described in Section 2.3. RS content of all samples was measured in triplicate as 
using the Megazyme RS kit as described in Section 2.2.3.2. 
2.2.4.4 Proximate analysis of mung bean samples 
Proximate analysis was performed on mung bean due to preliminary prebiotic 
properties observed when supplemented in bacteria broth cultures. The mung bean 
samples analysed comprised of 1) milled flour, 2) isolated starch (untreated-S), 3) 
mung bean enzyme-hydrolysis treated starch (enzyme-RS) and 4) mung bean acid-
hydrolysis treated starch (acid-RS), which were all produced as highlighted in Section 
2.2.3.3. These samples were obtained from the same batch of mung beans used in 
the assays listed above. The milled flour was produced by direct milling of mung 
beans without additional processing steps. These four samples were then submitted 
to ALS Technichem Sdn. Bhd. for the analysis of proximate parameters as stated in 
Section 2.2.3.4.  
2.2.5 Statistical analysis 
All values reported are means  standard deviation, unless otherwise stated. As all 
samples came from a single batch of each legume, replicates represent technical 
rather than biological variability.  Statistical analysis was performed using Genstat 
18th Edition. Normality of data was determined using the Shapiro-Wilk test and 
statistical comparisons of non-normal data were performed using the Kruskal-Wallis 
H test. Statistical comparisons of normal data were performed using ANOVA 
between samples and statistical significance is indicated via labels of different 
letters.  
2.3 Results 
2.3.1 Isolation and quantification of starch from underutilised legumes 
The quantity of starch isolated from the six underutilised legumes is shown in Table 
2.2. The results suggest that Bambara groundnuts, red lentils and pigeon peas have 
significantly higher amounts of starch (p < 0.05) than the other legumes. Pigeon pea 
had 10.53  14.53% more starch than the adzuki bean, black-eyed pea and mung 
bean.  
Table 2.2: The total amount of starch isolated from six underutilised legumes using 
the modified method of Wani et al. (2010). 
Legume Total amount of starch (% w/w)  
Adzuki bean 25.80  4.23 b 
Bambara groundnut 35.30  1.42 a 
Black-eyed pea 27.83  1.91 b 
Mung bean 29.80  2.46 b 
Red lentil 35.67  1.55 a 
Pigeon pea 40.33  4.67 a 
Notes: 
- Values reported are means  standard deviation; n=3. 
- a,b Different superscripts in a column are significantly different at p < 0.05. 
2.3.2 Comparison of RS quantification methods 
The RS content of the isolated starch from six underutilised legumes, determined 
using the McCleary method and a commercial test kit  Megazyme RS Assay kit 
(Megazyme, Ireland) are presented in Table 2.3. A control sample, with known 44% 
(w/w) RS was used to compare the accuracy of both methods. The RS content 
determined by the Megazyme RS kit was found to be closer to the control than the 
McCleary method which overestimated the RS content of the control by 
approximately 26%.  
Table 2.3: Comparison of RS quantification methods for isolated legume starches 
Legume RS content (% w/w) 
Megazyme RS Kit McCleary method 
Adzuki bean 11.86  0.74 a 45.56  8.58 b 
Bambara groundnut 6.10  0.07 b 53.49  0.55 ab 
Black-eyed pea 3.93  0.55 c 62.03  2.78 a 
Mung bean 6.82  1.74 b 59.77  1.60 a 
Red lentil 11.61  0.95 a 62.93  2.41 a 
Pigeon pea 7.3  1.15 b 55.71  6.60 ab 
Control 37.25 70.18 
Notes: 
- Values reported are means  standard deviation; n=3. 
- a, b, c Different superscripts in a column are significantly different at p < 0.05 
- Control is provided by the Megazyme RS kit that contained 44% w/w RS; n=1. 
Overall, the McCleary method produced significantly higher RS content as compared 
to the Megazyme RS kit (p < 0.05). The highest difference was observed in black-eyed 
peas, where the RS content measured via the McCleary method is approximately 15-
fold higher than the Megazyme RS kit. Meanwhile, the smallest difference was 
observed in adzuki beans, where the RS content measured via the McCleary method 
is approximately 4-fold higher than the Megazyme RS kit.  
The two different methods also appear to perform differently depending on the 
nature of the legume. The McCleary method indicated that adzuki bean had the 
lowest RS content among the tested legumes, but this is the highest when quantified 
using the Megazyme RS kit. Similar observations were found for black-eyed pea, 
which had the highest RS content via the McCleary method but was the lowest of all 
the legumes when quantified using the Megazyme RS kit.  
Based on the McCleary method the ranking of RS content found in the tested 
legumes is as follows: red lentil > black-eyed pea > mung bean > pigeon pea > 
Bambara groundnut > adzuki bean. Whereas based on the Megazyme RS kit, the 
ranking of RS content found in tested legumes is as follows: adzuki bean > red lentil > 
pigeon pea > mung bean > Bambara groundnut > black eyed pea. 
2.3.3 Comparison of RS production methods of RS from legumes 
Isolated starch from all legumes were treated via hydrolysis, gelatinisation and 
retrogradation and lyophillisation based on the study of Polesi & Sarmento (2011). 
Acid- and enzyme-hydrolysis methods were compared in this study with the 
untreated starch being used as a control. Based on the results obtained in Section 
2.3.2, the Megazyme RS kit was selected to be used to quantify the RS content in 
samples, as shown in Table 2.4. 
The method of hydrolysis had significant effect on the production of RS from tested 
legumes. The RS produced by acid-hydrolysis treatment (acid-RS) of Bambara 
groundnuts and pigeon pea were significantly higher than the untreated starches 
(untreated-S), while adzuki bean and red lentil acid-RS were lower than the 
untreated-S (p < 0.05). The highest RS content of the acid-RS was found in Bambara 
groundnut and the lowest in adzuki bean. The ranking of acid-RS is as follows: 
Bambara groundnut > pigeon pea > mung bean > red lentil > black-eyed pea > adzuki 
bean.  
Table 2.4: RS content of legumes starches and their respective treatments 
Legume RS content and treatments (% w/w) 
Acid-RS Enzyme-RS Untreated-S  
Adzuki bean 2.83  0.82 a; A 17.73  0.84 c; C 11.86  0.74 c; B 
Bambara groundnut 20.42  0.35 d; C 18.06  0.40 c; B 6.10  0.07 ab; A 
Black-eyed pea 2.88  0.41 a; A 16.99  0.82 c; B 3.93  0.55 a; A 
Mung bean 7.62  0.36 b; A 15.15  0.27 b; B 6.82  1.74 b; A 
Red lentil 4.83  1.93 a; A 12.83  0.44 a; B 11.61  0.95 c; B 
Pigeon pea 13.20  1.75 c; B 12.40  0.43 a; B 7.34  1.15 b; A 
Notes: 
- Values reported are means  standard deviation; n=3. 
- a-d Within a column, values with different superscripts are significantly different 
at P < 0.05.  
- A-C Within a row, values with different superscripts are significantly different at P 
< 0.05. 
The RS produced by enzyme-hydrolysis treatment (enzyme-RS) were significantly 
higher than the untreated starches (untreated-S), for all legumes except red lentil. 
The highest RS content was observed in Bambara groundnut which was 45.65% 
higher than pigeon pea (which had the lowest enzyme-RS content). The enzyme-RS 
can be ranked as follows: Bambara groundnut > adzuki bean > black-eyed pea > 
mung bean > red lentil > pigeon pea.  
For both acid-RS and enzyme-RS, Bambara groundnut was highly ranked, in contrast 
to untreated Bambara groundnut which was ranked 5th. On the other hand, adzuki 
bean enzyme-RS was ranked 2nd versus adzuki bean acid-RS, which was ranked 
lowest.  
2.3.4 Nutritional composition of legume after processing 
The changes in the nutritional composition of the legume after different RS 
processing steps (milled flour, untreated-S, acid-RS and enzyme-RS) were 
investigated using mung bean as the targeted legume (Table 2.5).  
Table 2.5: Nutritional composition of mung bean flour, isolated starch and processed 
starches  
Nutritional composition Mung bean samples 
Legume flour Untreated-S Acid-RS Enzyme-RS 
Energy content (kJ/100g) 1336 1433 1483 1323 
Total fat (%) 1.9 0.4 0.4 0.5 
Total crude protein (%) 23.7 0.3 0.2 0.4 
Moisture (%) 9.7 8.4 11.8 10.8 
Ash (%) 3.3 1.5 0.2 4.2 
Total carbohydrate (%) 61.4 89.4 87.4 84.1 
Dietary fibre (%) 19.7 10.6 0.4 13.8 
Notes:  
- Values reported in % (g/100g; % w/w) except for Energy content (kJ/100g); n=1. 
In terms of energy content, enzyme-RS was the lowest and acid-RS the highest 
though the difference was only 12%. The total carbohydrate content of all samples 
was higher than raw bean flour. The dietary fibre content varies between the RS 
processes and was considerably lower than in the milled flour. The most dramatic 
difference was in acid-RS where the fibre content was reduced to negligible levels. 
In comparison, total crude protein and lipid content of the processed samples were 
lower than raw bean flour, suggesting that these RS extraction processes had 
successfully removed most of the nutrients.   
2.4 Discussion 
This study depicts a sequential processing method in which the RS from six 
underutilised legumes could be produced for applications including as a sustainable 
prebiotic ingredient in aquafeeds.  
The first part of the study involved the isolation of starch from legumes via the 
alkaline steeping method. The alkali steeping method revolves around the exposure 
of starch to an alkali solution to promote the dispersal of the matrix protein, 
solubilizing and thereby removing the proteins.  
Based on the finding in Table 2.5, 98.7% of protein in mung bean flour was 
successfully removed after alkali steeping step, confirming that at high pH most 
legume proteins can be solubilized (Boye et al. 2010; Lee et al. 2007; Baldwin 2001). 
The alkali steeping method has also been found to be highly effective in isolating 
starch granules from the protein matrices from various types of grains and legumes 
(Villarreal et al. 2013; Lee et al. 2007; Han & Hamaker 2002). 
The alkali steeping method of Wani et al. (2010) was used in this study as it was 
developed by use on a legume, kidney bean. In this method, the alkaline steeping 
was performed prior to filtration, which varies slightly from the published method by 
Hoover & Sosulski (1985). However, the changes in the filtration sequence do not 
appear to affect the amount of starch isolated. The method of Hoover & Sosulski 
(1985) yielded approximately 35.75% (w/w) of starch from red lentil (Hoover & 
Ratnayake 2002), which is close to the 35.67% starch yield from the same legume in 
this study (Table 2.2).  
When starch yields from the current study (Table 2.2) were compared with other 
published studies, the yield from adzuki bean starch was higher than that reported 
by Yoshimoto et al. (2001). However, the additional defatting of starch, via dimethyl 
sulfoxide and precipitation with ethanol may have reduced the yield obtained in the 
study by Yoshimoto et al. (2001). The yield of legume starch in this study were 
comparable to the published literatures by Hoover et al. (2010 and 1997), except for 
black-eyed peas. However, the starch yield for red lentil was slightly lower when 
compared to the findings of Lee et al. (2007), which were ranging from 42-50% (w/w) 
but close to the yield obtained in the study of Wang et al. (2009) which was 35% 
(w/w).  
The starch content of the most of the other legumes, including Bambara groundnut, 
pigeon pea, red lentil and mung bean, all fall within the expected range of 20-40% as 
reported by published studies (Oyeyinka et al. 2015; Liu & Shen 2007; Hoover et al. 
1993). On the other hand, the cowpea starch yield in this study was lower than those 
reported by Huang et al. (2007) who noted that cowpea starches are difficult to 
isolate due to the presence of fine fibre, which co-settles with starch to give a light 
and loose deposit. This results in larger amounts of starch being excluded in order to 
maintain its purity.  
Current findings suggested that a certain percentage of loss in starch content could 
have been attributed to the washing steps applied, or the effectiveness of the 
alkaline steeping method applied in removing starch granule-based proteins (Boye et 
al. 2010; AACC International. 1999; Mistry et al. 1992). Starch granule-based proteins 
may also be the cause of yield loss due to starch adhering to insoluble-fibre which 
may require repeated resuspension in water and filtration to separate fully (Hsieh et 
al. 1999). The yield of the starch isolated from a wide range of legumes has been 
reviewed by Hoover et al. (2010) and suggested that the discrepancy in starch yields 
may vary due to botanical origin, which also affect the structure and size of granules 
(Themeier et al. 2005).  
In this study, the modified method of McCleary et al. (2002) and the Megazyme RS 
Kit were used to quantify the RS found in legumes. The key advantage of these two 
methods are the consistency in results when tested across various laboratories on 
samples such as native potato starch and regular maize starch (Moongngarm 2013; 
Themeier et al. 2005; Champ et al. 2003; McCleary et al. 2002). 
Based on the control used (44% RS) for optimisation of RS quantification method, the 
RS content measured using Megazyme RS kit was closer to control. Whereas the RS 
content measured with the McCleary method was at least 1.5-fold higher than the 
control (Table 2.3). Similar trends were observed in the RS contents of the isolated 
legume starches tested, where analysis using the McCleary method were several 
folds higher than those presented by other studies (Hoover et al. 2010). The 
difference in the RS content measured in both methods could potentially due to the 
-amylase solution used to remove all digestible starches within the 16 hr incubation 
period. In the case of the McCleary method, the removal of digestible starch may not 
be complete and the residues remained may have caused an over-estimation of RS 
content. In contrast, the -amylase provided by Megazyme RS kit may remove the 
digestible starch effectively, resulting in a more accurate result.  
Furthermore, in the McCleary method, the -amylase from Aspergillus oryzae was 
used, instead of porcine pancreatic amylase. Fungal amylases are widely used in 
industry and have not been suggested to be inferior to porcine pancreatic amylase 
(Souza & Magalhes 2010). However, in this study, the enzyme showed lower 
efficiency when compared to porcine -amylase which is similar to the observation 
reported by Sandstedt & Gates (1954).  
Although no recent study has been published on the efficiency of fungal and porcine 
amylases, several studies on the efficiency of -amylase from different sources was 
reviewed by Gupta et al. (2003b). A key observation between -amylases from 
different sources was differences in their optimum temperatures and pH, which are 
usually associated to the optimum growth conditions of the host (Saranraj & Stella 
2013; Gupta et al. 2003b).  
According to the manufacturers product specification, the incubation temperature 
for -amylase of Aspergillus oryzae was at 25 C, and amyloglucosidase was at 60 C 
as opposed to the incubation of temperature of 37 C used in the McCleary method. 
This variation in incubation temperature may have contributed to reduce enzyme 
activity. However, a study by Su et al. (2005) suggested that -amylase activity from 
Aspergillus oryzae increases with temperature. Hence current incubation at 37 C 
might have been expected to enhance the -amylase activity. Nevertheless, such an 
increment was not observed in this study.  
In contrast, the incubation temperature of both -amylase and amyloglucosidase 
provided by the Megazyme RS kit was 40C and hence very closed to the 37 C 
recommended by the kit. The current findings suggest that further optimization is 
required to enhance the efficiency of enzymes used in the McCleary method. 
Based on the findings described above, the Megazyme RS kit was used for 
quantification of RS content in this study. The RS content measured in the six legume 
starches were found to vary between 3% in black-eyed peas to 11% in red lentils 
(Table 2.4). Variations in the RS content measured across different legumes could be 
related to the granule sizes (Abia et al. 1993; Svihus et al. 2005). Legumes with 
smaller starch granules were found to be more resistant to enzymatic degradation; 
this occurs possibly due to the presence of lipid:starch complexes, which reduces 
contact between enzyme and substrate and may be more severe when the starch 
granules exhibits greater surface to volume ratio (Svihus et al. 2005). Similar findings 
were observed in this study, as adzuki beans have a larger granule size as compared 
to black-eyed peas, lentils and mung beans, resulting in higher enzymatic 
degradation and hence, lower RS content (Hoover et al. 2010).  
Generally, starch from legumes contain high amounts of RS due to the types of 
crystalline formations, which tend to favour C-type starch (Hoover et al. 2010). These 
crystalline structures restrict enzyme activity, especially when paired with smooth 
surfaces present on the granule of native starch (Boi et al. 2017; Hoover et al. 
2010). The combination of these factors result in an overall higher amount of RS 
measured as compared to a granule with pores or with a crystallinity more accessible 
by enzyme attack (Boi et al. 2017; Abia et al. 1993).  
In this study, the efficiency of acid- and enzyme-hydrolysis methods in the 
production of RS were compared. The hydrolysis step reduces the molecular weight 
of starch chains to facilitate retrogradation (Thompson 2000). This can be done 
through the application of debranching enzymes, such as pullulanase, or through 
acid treatment.  
The enzyme-hydrolysis treatment applied in this study produced significantly higher 
amount of RS than the acid-hydrolysis method (Table 3.3). Enzyme-hydrolysis 
produces polymer molecules with approximately 100-300 units of glucose, 
facilitating the production of double helix formation and contributes to higher levels 
of RS produced (Polesi & Sarmento 2011). Similar to current study, the application of 
enzyme-hydrolysis treatment has been found to increase RS content of legumes such 
as chickpeas, lentils and field peas in several published studies (Morales-Medina et 
al. 2014; Polesi & Sarmento 2011; Vasanthan & Bhatty 1998).  
In this study, enzyme-hydrolysis treatment was found to be more effective than acid-
hydrolysis for most legumes. The highest RS increment in black-eyed-pea, of 
approximately 4-fold, could be attributed to the crystalline structure of its starch, 
ensuring stability throughout freezing and maintaining high RS content (Huang et al. 
2007). Meanwhile, no significant changes in RS were observed in red lentils. It is 
possible that both red lentil untreated-S and enzyme-RS share relatively similar 
crystalline structure following gelatinisation and retrogradation, producing a similar 
highly ordered molecular structure which produces similar amylase resistance 
(Morales-Medina et al. 2014). In another study, the crystallinity of lentils was 
reduced following treatment, which was attributed to the possible formation of 
granular porosity (Chung et al. 2010). This was caused by the interruption of double 
helixes forming starch crystallites, ultimately increasing the susceptibility of the 
starch towards enzymes (Chung et al. 2010). These factors may have contributed 
towards the lack of any significant increment of RS content of red lentils following 
treatment, as a wide range of potential changes that occur following gelatinisation 
and retrogradation (Zavareze & Dias 2011).  
Acid-hydrolysis reduces the molecular weight of starch molecules by the hydrolysis 
of -1,4 glucosidic bonds to promote efficient crystal formation during 
retrogradation. From this study, RS contents reduced in most legume starches 
following the acid-hydrolysis treatment (Table 2.4). Several factors could be 
contributing to this effect including reduction in molecular weight of amylose and 
the plasticisation of starch.  
Firstly, the extreme processing of starch in the presence of acid could reduce 
amylose molecular weight to an extent which inhibited reformation during 
retrogradation to produce RS (Htoon et al. 2010; Vasanthan & Bhatty 1998). 
However, this was not found to be the case for pigeon pea and Bambara groundnut, 
which could be attributed to their higher amylose content which may be sufficient 
overcome this effect (Sandhu & Lim 2008; Hoover et al. 2010).  
Secondly, the neutralisation performed during the acid-hydrolysis process in this 
study could have affected the starch. It is possible that during the process of 
neutralisation of the acid-starch suspension, plasticisation occurs due to high 
temperatures and salts produced. This could lead to gelatinisation and plasticisation, 
reducing the crystallinity of the structure as has been shown in several studies 
(Zhang & Han 2010; Liu et al. 2009; Srichuwong et al. 2005; Chiotelli et al. 2002).  
Overall, the results obtained suggest the acid-hydrolysis pre-treatment applied in this 
study could be further optimised to prevent the negative effects listed above. 
Alternatively, other pre-treatment methods could be selected to enhance the 
resistant starch content of the starches. 
 Key factors contributing to the RS content are amylose and amylopectin content, 
where higher levels of amylose corresponds with higher RS produced (Morales-
Medina et al. 2014; Hallstrom et al. 2011; Thompson 2000; Eerlingen et al. 1993). 
Based on the review of Hoover et al. (2010) and the study of Oyeyinka et al. (2015), 
the ranking of the legumes tested based on the amylose content of their starch 
(w/w) was as follows: mung beans (39.0%) > pigeon pea (36.7%) > black-eyed pea 
(29.4%) > red lentils (27.9%) > Bambara groundnut (27.5%) > adzuki beans (26.3%). 
However, in current study, the amylose content of the legume starch was not 
determined and hence a direct comparison is not feasible. 
2.5 Summary 
In summary, this study investigated the RS availability in six underutilised legumes, 
namely adzuki beans, mung beans, black-eyed peas, pigeon peas, Bambara 
groundnuts and red lentils for application as sustainable prebiotic ingredients in 
aquafeeds. The alkaline steeping method applied was effective in the isolation of 
starch, obtaining a yield of 25-40% depending on the species. RS quantification using 
the Megazyme RS Assay kit was also found to be the more effective. Enzyme-
hydrolysis was shown to be more effective in maximizing RS content producing 
significantly higher levels than untreated-S or acid-RS. RS content alone is insufficient 
to determine its efficiency as a prebiotic. Hence, Chapter 3 describes how the 
samples produced were used for in vitro analysis with bacteria to determine their 
prebiotic efficiencies.  
3 Chapter 3: In vitro study on the prebiotic potential of legume resistant starch  
3.1 Introduction 
As the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) is a key site for pathogenesis, modification of the 
intestinal microflora has been suggested as a method to improve fish health. 
Nutritional benefits may include synthesis of functional compounds by the 
microbiota, while disease mitigation revolves around the maintenance of the balance 
between endogenous microbiota of the host and the hosts control mechanism 
(Merrifield et al. 2010). Nevertheless, the studies of microbiota improvement in fish 
are limited due to difficulty in conclusively elucidating benefits to the host, compared 
to terrestrial animals and humans, where specific genera of bacteria are 
acknowledged to confer benefits to the host.  
Recently, several researchers have taken the approach of investigating the 
relationship between prebiotics and the growth of fish. The prebiotics applied in 
aquatic animals were based on those commonly applied in terrestrial animals such as 
inulin, fructo-oligosaccharides (FOS) and galacto-oligosaccharides (Ring et al. 2010b; 
Barclay et al. 2010; Torres et al. 2010). Ring et al. (2010b) reported that 
supplementation of inulin in diets improved intestinal growth in Atlantic salmon 
(Salmo salar) and increased growth rates in turbot larvae (Scophthalmus maximus). 
Meanwhile, FOS was also effective in hybrid tilapia (Oreochromis sp.), improving 
survival and growth rates.  
On the other hand, while resistant starch (RS) is commonly fed to terrestrial animals, 
such studies are less common in aquatic animals. When included as a prebiotic, RS 
improved short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) production in the intestinal tract in European 
sea bass (Gatesoupe et al. 2014). These metabolites produced by intestinal 
microflora were utilised by enterocytes as an energy source (Ohashi & Ushida 2009). 
While maize represents one of the most commonly studied sources of RS in the form 
of high amylose maize, underutilised legumes have also been shown to be a 
potentially important source of RS, which can be improved further via processing as 
demonstrated in the previous chapter. To our knowledge no studies have yet 
compared the effect of this novel RS source on indigenous potential probiotic 
bacteria from fish intestines. Such studies could provide preliminary evidence of the 
benefits of using RS towards potential probiotic bacteria, which may then confer 
health benefits to the host (Kihara & Sakata 2002). 
Hence, using the novel approach of producing prebiotic RS from sustainable legume 
sources, the effects of RS on indigenous probiotics from fish intestines were 
investigated. Using an in vitro study, the preliminary effects of legume RS on the 
growth of these indigenous probiotics were investigated, which may potentially 
contribute towards fish health. In this study, the RS of interest was selected for 
further studies as supplement in fish feed. 
3.1.1 Hypothesis 
RS extracted from six underutilised legumes could improve the growth and acid 
production of probiotics isolated from Asian sea bass (Lates calcarifer) and zebrafish 
(Danio rerio).  
3.1.2 Aims 
The current study aims to investigate the prebiotic effect of RS extracted from six 
underutilised legumes on the growth of probiotic bacterium isolated from fish 
intestinal tract in an in vitro setting. The outcomes of this study will provide 
important insights on the suitability of these sources of RS to be used as prebiotic 
ingredients in aquafeed.  
Specific aims: 
 To isolate and identify potential probiotic lactic acid bacteria (LAB) from Asian 
sea bass fish and zebrafish 
 To determine the effects of legume RS on the growth and acid production of  
probiotic LAB 
3.2 Materials and methods 
3.2.1 Experimental overview 
A total of two potential probiotic bacteria were isolated from each fish of interest, 
namely zebrafish and Asian sea bass and identified using biochemical and molecular 
methods. The prebiotic potential of six legume RS (as reported in Chapter 2) in 
promoting the growth of these probiotics in in vitro setting were investigated. 
Experiments conducted for the zebrafish and Asian sea bass were conducted at the 
U.K. and Malaysia respectively. 
3.2.2 Materials 
3.2.2.1 Preparation of medium  
Bacteria medium were prepared based on the manufacturers instructions provided 
for each medium and was sterilised on the day of preparation via autoclave 
conditions of 121 C at 15 psi for 15 min. Bacteria agar plates were prepared by 
allowing the medium to cool to approximately 60 C before being poured into 75-
mm petri dishes using aseptic techniques. Bacteria broth and agar media were stored 
either at room temperature or at 4 C, depending on the requirements of the 
manufacturer.  
3.2.2.2 Prebiotic samples and cultures 
The 18 prebiotic samples used in this study are: the untreated-starch (untreated-S), 
acid-hydrolysed resistant starch (acid-RS) and enzyme-hydrolysed resistant starch 
(enzyme-RS) of the six underutilised legumes listed in the previous chapter. The 
preparation procedures of these samples are described in detail in Section 2.2.3.1 
and 2.2.3.3.  
To prepare the RS/starch broth for bacteria culture, 1 g of sample was transferred into 
a universal bottle, followed by 20 mL of freshly prepared nutrient broth, to produce a 
5% (w/v) resistant starch broth. The mixture was sterilized via autoclave (121 C at 15 
psi for 15 min). After autoclave, the mixture was cooled down to room temperature 
before use. 
3.2.2.3 Fish samples 
A healthy adult Asian sea bass, approximately 500 g in weight and 30 cm in length, 
was procured from Asealot Aquaculture in Selangor, Malaysia. 
Adult zebrafish, approximately 200 mg in weight and 20 mm in length, were 
obtained from the Institute of Integrative Biology aquarium facility at the University 
of Liverpool.  
3.2.3 Methods 
3.2.3.1 Bacteria culture and maintenance 
Two types of bacteria are used mainly, namely lactic acid bacteria (LAB) and 
Enterobacteriaceae. LAB are cultured using De Man, Rogosa and Sharpe (MRS) 
medium for up to 48 hr at 37 C. Enterobacteriaceae were cultured using Eosin 
methylene blue (EMB) agar and MacConkey broth and incubated for up to 48 hr at 
37 C. Glycerol stocks were prepared from 24-hr old broth cultures by adding 700 L 
of broth cultures into 300 L of glycerol. Glycerol stocks were stored in -20 C 
freezers to be used within 6 months and in -80 C freezers for long term storage. 
3.2.3.2  Isolation of bacteria from fish intestine 
Fish used for bacteria isolation from fish intestine were procured as detailed in 
Section 3.2.2.3. For intestinal samples from smaller fish (approximately below 15 cm 
in length), the intestine collected in 1.5 mL centrifuge tubes were mixed with 
buffered peptone water equivalent to 9 mL per 100 mg of intestine sample. The 
intestine was disrupted using a pellet pestle followed by vigorous vortex for 1 min. 
For intestinal samples from larger fish (above 15 cm in length), intestines collected in 
50 mL centrifuge tubes were removed and cut into small segments of 0.5 cm each 
with a sterile scissor. The segments were weighed and mixed with buffered peptone 
water equivalent to 9 mL per 100 mg of intestine sample. The mixture was then 
vortexed vigorously for 1 min.  
From the mixture, a series of 10-fold dilutions of the sample was performed by 
transferring 100 L of the sample into 900 L of peptone buffer water (Oxoid 
CM1049). A ten-fold serial dilution of 101 till 105 was carried out. Then, 100 L of 
diluted samples were plated on agar plates and incubated at 37 C for 72 hr under 
anaerobic conditions in a 2.5 L Anaerobic Jar with a sachet of 2.5 L Anaerogen for 
anaerobic atmosphere generation (Thermo Scientific). 
Colonies with different appearance were sub-cultured and subsequently identified 
using API 50 CHL and 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequencing as biochemical and 
molecular methods of identification respectively, as described in Section 3.2.3.3 and 
Section 3.2.3.4. The bacteria isolated in this study were then used for subsequent 
experiments.  
3.2.3.3  Phenotypic identification of lactic acid bacteria isolates 
a. Carbohydrate fermentation patterns 
The selected LAB isolated from fish intestine were identified using the API 50 CHL 
identification kit (bioMrieux). The API 50 CHL identification kit is based on the 
carbohydrate fermentation pattern of the LAB. Prior to performing the API test, the 
cell morphology of LAB isolates, such as Gram reaction, cell shape and catalase test 
were determined.  
The API test was prepared and conducted based on the manufacturers protocol and 
is as listed in Appendix F. The data was then analysed with the ApiwebTM database. 
3.2.3.4 Molecular identification of lactic acid bacteria 
The selected LAB isolates were further identified using 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) 
gene sequencing by using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and primers which 
specifically target the 16S rRNA genes of the bacteria genome. Prior to PCR and DNA 
sequencing, DNA extraction from samples was performed and is described below: 
a. DNA extraction from samples 
Prior to DNA extraction, the lytic enzyme solution was prepared by adding 50 mg of 
lysozyme (Sigma L6876) into 5 ml of 50 mM EDTA (pH 8.0) and mixed thoroughly via 
inverting. The lytic enzyme solution was used on the day of preparation.  
DNA extraction from bacteria and intestinal samples was performed using the 
Wizard Genomic DNA Purification kit (Promega). 
i)  For bacterium culture, a 1 mL aliquot of broth culture was transferred into a 
sterile 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes and were subjected to centrifugation at 
13000 g for 2 min to pellet the cells. The supernatant was discarded and the 
pellet was resuspended with 480 L of 50 mM EDTA (pH 8.0). A total of 120 L of 
lytic enzyme solution was added to the sample and was incubated at 37 C in a 
water bath for 60 min. Then, the sample was centrifuged at 13000 g for 2 min 
and the pellets were collected.  
ii)  For intestinal samples, the whole intestine of approximately 100 mg was 
transferred into a sterile 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube and was mixed with 480 L 
of 50 mM EDTA (pH 8.0). The sample is disrupted using pellet pestles gently 
(Sigma Z359947). Then, 120 L of lytic enzyme solution was added to the sample 
and the mixture as vortexed vigorously. The mixture was then incubated at 37 C 
in a water bath for 60 min, followed by vigorous vortexing before removing the 
intestines with a tweezer. The mixture was then centrifuged at 13000 g for 2 min 
and the pellets were collected.  
The pellets collected were added with 600 L of Nuclei Lysis Solution (Promega) and 
mixed well via gentle pipetting. The solution was incubated at 80 C in a water bath 
for 5 min for cell lysis, followed by cooling down to room temperature. Then, 3 L of 
RNase Solution (Promega) was added to the cell lysate and the tube was inverted 
gently for mixing. The mixture was incubated at 37 C in a water bath for 30 min. 
After cooling the mixture to room temperature, 200 L of Protein Precipitation 
Solution (Promega) was added to the cell lysate and was subjected to vigorous vortex 
for 20 s. The mixture was then incubated on ice for 5 min, followed by centrifugation 
at 13000 g for 3 min.  
A total of 600 L of the supernatant was added into 600 L of isopropanol and was 
gently mixed via inversion until thread-like DNA strands form a visible mass. The tube 
was then centrifuged at 13000 g for 2 min. The supernatant was removed carefully 
via pipetting and excess isopropanol was drained using clean absorbent paper. Then, 
600 L of 70% (v/v) ethanol was added and the tube was gently inverted to wash the 
DNA pellet, followed by centrifugation at 13000 g for 2 min. The supernatant was 
removed carefully via pipette and the tube was drained on clean absorbent paper. 
The pellet was air-dried for 15 min, followed by the addition of 50 L of DNA 
Rehydration Solution (provided by the kit) and was incubated at 65 C in a water bath 
for 1 hr. The DNA was stored at 4 C for use within the week and stored at -20 C for 
long term storage. DNA quantity and purity was measured using a 
spectrophotometer (Epoch, BioTek), followed by dilution of the DNA samples to the 
concentration of 100 ng/L using the DNA Rehydration Solution.  
b. Polymerase chain reaction amplification and sequencing of bacteria 16S 
rRNA gene 
PCR amplification and sequencing of bacteria 16S rRNA gene can be separated into 
two components: a) amplification of the 16S rRNA gene using PCR and b) sequencing 
of the PCR product via services from 1st BASE DNA Sequencing services (Selangor, 
Malaysia) and Source BioScience (Nottingham, United Kingdom).  
The universal primers sets applied in this study are according to James (2010) and 
Balczar et al. (2007c):  
I. 8F forward primer: 5'-AGA GTT TGA TCC TGG CTC AG-3' and U1492 reverse 
primer: 5'-GGT TAC CTT GTT ACG ACT T-3 (James 2010) 
II. plb16 forward primer: 5'-AGA GTT TGA TCC TGG CTC AG-3' and mlb16 
reverse primer: 5- GGC TGC TGG CAC GTA GTT AG-3 (Balczar et al. 2007c) 
The PCR master mix preparation was performed using the DreamTaq DNA 
Polymerase kit (Thermo Scientific). The PCR master mix for 10 reactions was 
prepared based on Table 3.1, by adding the reagents into the sterile distilled water in 
a descending order in a sterile 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube while kept on ice. A total 
of 19 L aliquots of the master mix is distributed into 200 L PCR tubes and 1 L of 
sample with a concentration of 100 ng/L is added into each except for one tube, 
where 1 L of distilled water is used instead as the PCR no-template control.  
The 200 L PCR tubes were then transferred into a thermal cycler with settings as 
follows: a) 1 cycle of initial denaturation at 95 C for 5 min; b) 35 cycles of 
denaturation at 95 C for 15 s, annealing at 60 C for 30 s and extension at 72 C for 
30 s; c) 1 cycle of final extension at 72 C for 5 min and, d) storage at 10 C till used. 
Table 3.1: Preparation of master mix for 10 reactions for PCR for bacteria 
identification 
Reagent 
Stock 
concentration Volume (L) 
Final 
concentration 
DreamTaq Polymerase Buffer 10x 20 1x 
DNTP Mix 2 mM 16 0.16 mM 
Forward primer 10 mM 6 0.3 mM 
Reverse primer 10 mM 6 0.3 mM 
DreamTaq Polymerase 5 U/L 2 1 U/L 
Sterile distilled water n/a 140 n/a 
The PCR products obtained from was subjected to DNA sequencing by 1st BASE DNA 
Sequencing services (Selangor, Malaysia) and Source BioScience (Nottingham, United 
Kingdom) which includes PCR clean-up. Hence, PCR samples were submitted without 
further purification.  
3.2.3.5  Viable cell count of lactic acid bacteria 
The viable cell count of LAB determined using conventional plate count method as 
reported by Miles and Misra (1938) and was expressed in terms of colony forming 
units (CFU). The sample (either pure culture or intestinal sample) was mixed well 
with vortex to ensure homogeneity. Then, 10-fold serial dilution of the sample from 
101 till 108 was performed by transferring 100 L of the sample into 900 L of 
peptone buffer water. Then, 5 aliquots of 10 L of diluted sample were plated on 
MRS agar plate and incubated at 37 C for 24 hr under anaerobic condition. All assays 
were carried out in triplicate.  
After incubation, the viable cell count (CFU/mL) of the bacteria in the sample was 
enumerated based on the following formula: 
Viable cell count (CFU/mL)= 
D  V
 Where: 
 C = number of colonies counted 
 D = dilution factor 
 V = volume of sample plated (mL) 
3.2.3.6  pH measurement of bacteria broth culture 
The pH of the broth culture was measured using a pH meter (Sartorius PB-11-P10.1). 
Calibration was performed using buffer solutions of pH 4, 7 and 10 (Eutech 
Instruments; ECPHBUFKITC). 
3.2.4 Experimental design 
An aliquot of 4% (v/v) of bacteria cultures of W. cibaria NM1 and L. garvieae NM2 
from glycerol stock was added to the prebiotic cultures, including a negative control 
of nutrient broth without RS/starch supplement. All cultures were incubated at 37C. 
At 0 hr and 24 hr intervals, 1 mL of sample was withdrawn for measurement of viable 
cell count (see Section 3.2.3.5) and pH (see Section 3.2.3.6). All assays were carried 
out in triplicate.  
Following the results obtained using the bacteria isolated from Asian sea bass, the 
prebiotic RS samples were narrowed down to using each legume sample from 
enzyme-RS. The procedure was repeated as described above using the bacteria 
culture of E. gilvus V1 isolated from zebrafish. 
3.2.5 Statistical analysis 
All values reported are means  standard deviation. Statistical analysis was 
performed using Genstat 18th Edition. Normality of data was determined using the 
Shapiro-Wilk test, where statistical comparisons of non-normal data were performed 
using the Kruskal-Wallis H test. Statistical comparisons of normal data were 
performed using ANOVA between samples and statistical significance is indicated via 
labels of different letters. All assays were carried out in triplicate. 
3.3 Results 
3.3.1 Isolation and identification of potential probiotics from gastrointestinal 
tract of fish 
A total of two LAB isolates, LC-A and LC-B were isolated from the gastrointestinal 
tract of Asian sea bass fish by using De Man, Rogosa and Sharpe (MRS) selective 
medium. These LC-A and LC-B isolates were Gram-positive, coccus- (LC-A) and rod-
shaped (LC-B), respectively.  
A total of two LAB isolates, DR-A and DR-B were isolated from the gastrointestinal 
tract of zebrafish by using MRS selective medium. These DR-A and DR-B isolates were 
Gram-positive and coccus shaped. 
All isolates were then identified using a carbohydrate fermentation pattern API 50 
CHL test kit and 16S rRNA gene sequencing and the results are shown in Section 
3.3.1.1 and 3.3.1.2. 
3.3.1.1 Carbohydrate fermentation pattern of LAB from Asian sea bass 
API 50 CHL carbohydrate fermentation patterns of isolates LC-A and LC-B are shown 
in Figure 3.1 and further detailed in the Appendix G. The isolate LC-A showed 99.2% 
similar identity to Weissella confusa. On the other hand, the isolate LC-B showed 
98.6% similar identity to Lactococcus lactis ssp lactis 1. 
Figure 3.1: Identification of bacteria strains isolated from Asian sea bass using API 50 
CHL test kit: A) LC-A; B) LC-B 
3.3.1.2 Carbohydrate fermentation pattern of LAB from zebrafish 
API 50 CHL carbohydrate fermentation patterns of isolates DR-A and DR-B are as 
shown in Figure 3.2 and further detailed in the Appendix H. The isolate DR-A showed 
84.9% similar identity to Bronchothrix thermosphacta. On the other hand, the isolate 
DR-B showed 92.8% similar identity to Lactobaccillus paracasei ssp paracasei 1. 
Figure 3.2: Identification of bacteria strains isolated from zebrafish using API 50 CHL 
test kit: A) DR-A; B) DR-B 
3.3.1.3 Identification of Asian sea bass LAB via 16S rRNA gene sequencing 
The isolates LC-A and LC-B were further identified via 16S rRNA gene sequencing 
(Appendix I). The top five hits for LC-A and LC-B using both primer sets (plb16 and 
ml16; U8F and U1492R) showed E-values of approximately 0 (Table 3.2 and 3.3).  
The results showed that LC-A had 98% and 99% similarity to Weissella cibaria strain 
CH2 when analysed using plb16 & ml16 and U8F and U1492R primers, respectively. 
Plb16 and ml16 primers resulted 96% similarity to Weissella oryzae and Weissella 
paramesenteroides, whereas only 94% and 93% similarity was found to Weissella ceti 
and Weissella minor strain, respectively, when analysed using U8F and U1492R 
primers. With this, LC-A was identified as W. cibaria and is designated as W. cibaria 
NM1 in this study.  
LC-B shared 98% similarity with Lactococcus garvieae LG2 when amplified by primer 
sets of plb16 & ml16 and U8F & U1492R. About 88% similarity was recorded with 
Lactococcus piscium and Bacillus azotoformans when analysed using plb16 & ml16 
primers, whereas 95% and 93% similarity was recorded with Lactococcus lactis and 
Lactococcus piscium, respectively, when analysed using U8F and U1492R primers. 
Taken together, LC-B was identified as L. garvieae and is designated as L. garvieae 
NM2 in this study 
Table 3.2: Top five identities of isolate LC-A via 16S rRNA gene sequence 
Primer Sets and Sequence Alignments  
Query 
cover E-value Identity Accession 
plb16 & mlb16 
Lactococcus garvieae Lg2 DNA, complete genome 0.97 0 98% NC_017490.1 
Lactococcus piscium MKFS47 genome assembly L_piscium, chromosome : I 0.97 2E-166 88% NZ_LN774769.1 
Bacillus azotoformans LMG 9581 contig81, whole genome shotgun sequence 0.97 2E-160 88% NZ_AJLR01000081.1 
Streptococcus henryi DSM 19005 F601DRAFT_scaffold00033.33_C, whole genome shotgun 
sequence 0.97 2E-155 87% NZ_AQYA01000005.1 
Streptococcus sanguinis SK36 chromosome, complete genome 0.97 2E-151 87% NC_009009.1 
U8F & 1492R 
Lactococcus garvieae Lg2 DNA, complete genome 0.98 0 98% NC_017490.1 
Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis Il1403 chromosome, complete genome 0.98 0 95% NC_002662.1 
Lactococcus piscium MKFS47 genome assembly L_piscium, chromosome : I 0.94 0 93% NZ_LN774769.1 
Streptococcus criceti HS-6 Contig1217313612, whole genome shotgun sequence 0.95 0 92% NZ_AEUV02000002.1 
Streptococcus equi subsp. zooepidemicus H70, complete genome 0.95 0 92% NC_012470.1 
Table 3.3: Top five identities of isolate LC-B via 16S rRNA gene sequence 
Primer Sets and Sequence Alignments 
Query 
cover E-value Identity Accession 
plb16 & mlb16 
Weissella cibaria strain CH2, complete genome 0.99 0 98% NZ_CP012873.1 
Weissella oryzae SG25 DNA, scaffold: sequence37, whole genome shotgun sequence 0.99 0 96% NZ_DF820520.1 
Weissella paramesenteroides ATCC 33313 genomic scaffold SCAFFOLD4, whole genome 
shotgun sequence 0.99 0 96% NZ_GG697131.1 
Weissella kandleri strain DSM 20593 Scaffold13, whole genome shotgun sequence 0.99 0 95% NZ_JQBP01000013.1 
Weissella viridescens strain DSM 20410 Scaffold6, whole genome shotgun sequence 0.99 0 95% NZ_JQBM01000006.1 
U8F & 1492R 
Weissella cibaria strain CH2, complete genome 0.96 0 99% NZ_CP012873.1 
Weissella ceti strain WS105, complete genome 0.97 0 94% NZ_CP009224.1 
Weissella minor strain DSM 20014 NODE_15, whole genome shotgun sequence 0.96 0 93% NZ_JQCD01000006.1 
Weissella koreensis KACC 15510, complete genome 0.96 0 93% NC_015759.1 
Weissella kandleri strain DSM 20593 Scaffold13, whole genome shotgun sequence 0.96 0 93% NZ_JQBP01000013.1 
3.3.1.4 Identification of zebrafish LAB via 16S rRNA gene sequencing 
The isolates DR-A and DR-B were further identified via 16S rRNA gene sequencing 
(Appendix J). The top five hits for DR-A and DR-B using both primer sets (plb16 and 
ml16; U8F and U1492R) showed E-values of approximately 0 (Table 3.4 and 3.5).  
The results show that DR-A had 98% and 99% similarity to Enteroccocus gilvus when 
analysed using plb16 & ml16 and U8F and U1492R primers, respectively. The plb16 
and mlb16 primers resulted in 97% similarity to Enterococcus avium, whereas 
resulting in 98% similarity to both Enterococcus avium and Enterococcus casseliflavus 
when analysed using U8F and U1492R primers. Identification of DR-A using both 
primer sets suggest DR-A to be E. gilvus and is designated as E. gilvus V1. 
Using the plb16 & mlb16 primers, DR-B was identified as Enterococcus faecalis with 
an identity similarity of 99%. This was followed by Enterococcus haemoperoxidus and 
Enterococcus faecium, with an identity similarity of 94% and 92% respectively. Using 
the U8F and U1492R primers, the identity of DR-B was identified as Enterococcus 
faecalis with an identity similarity of 99%. This was followed by Enterococcus 
haemoperoxidus, Enterococcus durans and Enterococcus faecium, with the former 
having an identity similarity of 96% while the latter two sharing an identity similarity 
of 95%. Identification of DR-B using both primer sets suggest DR-B to be E. faecalis 
and is designated as E. faecalis V1.
Table 3.4: Top five identities of isolate DR-A via 16S rRNA gene sequence 
Primer Sets and Sequence Alignments  
Query 
cover 
value Identity Accension 
plb16 & mlb16 
Enterococcus gilvus ATCC BAA-350 acOtF-supercont2.1, whole genome shotgun sequence 0.95 0 98% NZ_ASWH01000001.1 
Enterococcus avium ATCC 14025 genomic scaffold acyDI-supercont2.5, whole genome shotgun 
sequence 
0.95 0 97% NZ_KE136507.1 
Enterococcus avium ATCC 14025 genomic scaffold acyDI-supercont2.1, whole genome shotgun 
sequence 
0.95 0 97% NZ_KE136500.1 
Enterococcus casseliflavus EC20, complete genome 0.95 0 96% NC_020995.1 
Enterococcus phoeniculicola ATCC BAA-412 acOtz-supercont2.2, whole genome shotgun sequence 0.95 0 96% NZ_ASWE01000002.1 
U8F & 1492R 
Enterococcus gilvus ATCC BAA-350 acOtF-supercont2.1, whole genome shotgun sequence 0.96 0 99% NZ_ASWH01000001.1 
Enterococcus avium ATCC 14025 genomic scaffold acyDI-supercont2.5, whole genome shotgun 
sequence 0.96 0 
98% NZ_KE136507.1 
Enterococcus casseliflavus EC20, complete genome 0.96 0 98% NC_020995.1 
Enterococcus phoeniculicola ATCC BAA-412 acOtz-supercont2.2, whole genome shotgun sequence 0.96 0 97% NZ_ASWE01000002.1 
Enterococcus faecium DO chromosome, complete genome 0.96 0 97% NC_017960.1 
Table 3.5: Top five identities of isolate DR-B via 16S rRNA gene sequence 
Primer Sets and Sequence Alignments 
Query 
cover 
value Identity Accension 
plb16 & mlb16 
Enterococcus faecalis V583 chromosome, complete genome 0.93 0 99% NC_004668.1 
Enterococcus haemoperoxidus ATCC BAA-382 genomic scaffold acOSg-supercont2.2, whole genome 
shotgun sequence 
0.93 0 94% NZ_KE136480.1 
Enterococcus haemoperoxidus ATCC BAA-382 genomic scaffold acOSg-supercont2.1, whole genome 
shotgun sequence 
0.93 0 94% NZ_KE136479.1 
Enterococcus faecium DO chromosome, complete genome 0.93 0 92% NC_017960.1 
Enterococcus phoeniculicola ATCC BAA-412 acOtz-supercont2.6, whole genome shotgun sequence 0.93 0 92% NZ_ASWE01000006.1 
U8F & 1492R 
Enterococcus faecalis V583 chromosome, complete genome 0.73 0 99% NC_004668.1 
Enterococcus haemoperoxidus ATCC BAA-382 genomic scaffold acOSg-supercont2.2, whole genome 
shotgun sequence 
96% NZ_KE136480.1 
Enterococcus haemoperoxidus ATCC BAA-382 genomic scaffold acOSg-supercont2.1, whole genome 
shotgun sequence 
96% NZ_KE136479.1 
Enterococcus faecium DO chromosome, complete genome 0.73 0 95% NC_017960.1 
Enterococcus durans strain KLDS 6.0930, complete genome 0.73 0 95% NZ_CP012384.1 
3.3.2 In vitro prebiotic potential of legume RS  
In this section, the LAB isolated from Asian sea bass intestines, W. cibaria NM1 and L. 
garvieae NM2 were then used as the indicator bacteria to evaluate the prebiotic 
effect of acid-RS, enzyme-RS and untreated-S extracted from six underutilised 
legumes (as reported in Chapter 2). The reduction of pH indicates production of 
organic acid following the fermentation of carbohydrates by these bacteria for 
growth (Fusco et al. 2015; Vendrell et al. 2006). Overall, the supplementation of 5% 
(w/v) acid-RS, enzyme-RS and untreated-S in nutrient broth enhanced the growth of 
both indicator bacteria (Table 3.6 and 3.8). While both RS and starch enhanced the 
acid production of L. garvieae NM2 (Table 3.9), only enzyme-RS has enhanced the 
acid production of W. cibaria NM1 (Table 3.7).  
Following the results obtained using LAB isolates from Asian sea bass intestines, the 
LAB isolated from zebrafish intestines, E. gilvus V1 was then used as an indicator 
bacteria to evaluate the prebiotic effect of enzyme-RS. The prebiotic effects of 
enzyme-RS of six underutilised legumes on the growth and acid production of the 
potential probiotic LAB E. gilvus V1 isolated from zebrafish are shown in Table 3.10 
and Table 3.11 respectively.  
In summary, the current findings further suggest enzyme-RS is a good prebiotic 
source in enhancing the growth and acid production of L. garvieae NM2, W. cibaria 
NM1 and E. gilvus V1. Among the bacteria tested, L. garvieae NM2 was also a better 
acid producer than both W. cibaria NM1 and E. gilvus V1. 
3.3.2.1 Effect of legume RS on the growth and acid production of Weissella 
cibaria NM1 
Table 3.6 and 3.7 show the effect of RS and starch supplementation on the growth 
and acid production of W. cibaria NM1. Enzyme-RS produced higher growth than 
untreated-S Bambara groundnut, pigeon pea and red lentil and acid-RS Bambara 
groundnut and pigeon pea. Only the adzuki bean untreated-S showed significantly 
higher growth increment than acid-RS and enzyme-RS. No difference in growth 
increment was observed for black eyed pea and mung bean. Based on the increased 
growth of W. cibaria NM1, enzyme-RS appears to be more suitable than the other 
two treatments as a prebiotic supplement. Overall the prebiotic effect of enzyme-RS 
to enhance the growth of W. cibaria NM1 could be ranked as following: red lentil > 
pigeon pea > mung beans > black eyed pea > negative control > adzuki bean > 
Bambara groundnut. 
Similar to the observation in growth of W. cibaria NM1, the pH of the nutrient broth 
supplemented with enzyme-RS was found to be significantly lower than acid-RS, 
untreated-S, and the negative control. Similarly, reduction of pH was also observed 
in untreated-S, except for Bambara groundnut and pigeon pea, in which increment of 
pH were observed. In contrast, increment of pH was found in nutrient broth 
supplemented with acid-RS, except Bambara groundnut. This result shows that the 
growth enhancement of W. cibaria NM1 by enzyme-RS was also evidenced by 
significant reduction in pH of the growth medium, and thus indicating a good 
production of end product  organic acid. 
Table 3.6: The growth of W. cibaria NM1 in medium supplemented with 5% (w/v) of legume RS/starch samples at 0 and 24 hr of incubation 
Legume Viable cell count of W. cibaria NM1 in medium supplemented with 5% (w/v) legume RS/starch samples (Log10 CFU/ml) 
Untreated-S Acid-RS Enzyme-RS 
0 hr 24 hr Growth 
increment 
0 hr 24 hr Growth 
increment 
0 hr 24 hr Growth 
increment 
Adzuki 
5.89  0.03 7.99  0.05 2.10  0.09 ab; C 5.91  0.02 7.61  0.07 1.70  0.07 c; A 5.87  0.02 7.77  0.09 1.90  0.10 c; B 
Bambara 
Groundnut 
5.90  0.03 7.63  0.03 1.73  0.03 cd; A 5.96  0.03 7.68  0.03 1.72  0.04 c; A 5.92  0.05 7.80  0.04 1.88  0.11 c; B 
Black Eyed 
5.96  0.09 8.00  0.01 2.04  0.12 ab; A 5.96 0.06 7.91  0.06 1.95  0.07 b; A 5.83  0.11 7.90  0.01 2.06  0.14 abc; A 
Mung Bean 5.67 0.01 7.95 0.01 2.25 0.01 a; A 5.78 0.04 7.85 0.07 2.08  0.09 b; A 5.73 0.09 7.91 0.04 2.18  0.16 ab; A 
Pigeon Pea 5.84  0.03 7.95  0.05 2.12  0.03 ab; A 5.85  0.03 7.94  0.03 2.09  0.06 b; A 5.77  0.05 7.98  0.02 2.21  0.03 ab; B 
Red Lentil 5.49  0.06 7.06  0.19 1.57  0.27 d; A 5.53  0.02 7.83  0.04 2.31  0.03 a; B 5.48  0.08 7.74  0.04 2.26  0.14 a; B 
Negative 
Control* 
5.66  0.04 7.62  0.21 1.97  0.19 bc 5.66  0.04 7.62  0.21 1.97  0.19 b 5.66  0.04 7.62  0.21 1.97  0.19 bc 
Notes: 
Values reported are means  standard deviation; n=3. 
*Negative control refers to broth culture without supplementation of RS/starch. 
a-d Within a column, values with different superscripts are significantly different at P < 0.05.  
A-C Within a row, values with different superscripts are significantly different at P < 0.05. 
Table 3.7: The pH changes in medium supplemented with 5% (w/v) legume RS/starch samples during growth of W. cibaria NM1 
Legume 
pH of medium supplemented with 5% (w/v) of RS/starch samples during growth of W. cibaria NM1 
Untreated-S Acid-RS Enzyme-RS 
0 hr 24 hr pH change 0 hr 24 hr pH change 0 hr 24 hr pH change 
Adzuki 
5.78  0.05 5.56  0.00 -0.22  0.06 a; B 5.18  0.04 5.24  0.03 0.06  0.02 c; C 5.85  0.00 5.35  0.02 -0.50  0.03 a; A 
Bambara 
Groundnut 
5.45  0.01 5.85  0.00 0.40  0.02 e; C 4.28  0.02 4.12  0.01 -0.16  0.03 a; B 5.54  0.01 5.30  0.01 -0.24  0.03 d; A 
Black Eyed 
5.80  0.02 5.59  0.04 -0.21  0.04 a; B 5.36  0.00 5.38  0.01 0.00  0.01 b; C 5.85  0.02 5.41  0.01 -0.44  0.03 b; A 
Mung Bean 5.78  0.05 5.56  0.00 -0.22  0.06 a; B 5.81  0.04 5.24  0.03 0.06  0.02 c; C 5.85  0.00 5.35  0.02 -0.50  0.03 a; A 
Pigeon Pea 5.59  0.02 5.64  0.05 0.05  0.04 c; B 5.28  0.07 5.46  0.08 0.18  0.03 e; C 5.76  0.01 5.40  0.03 -0.36  0.03 c; A 
Red Lentil 5.55  0.00 5.50  0.02 -0.05  0.03 b; B 5.31  0.02 5.41  0.04 0.10  0.04 cd; C 5.73  0.02 5.36  0.00 -0.37  0.03 c; A 
Negative 
Control* 
5.53  0.02 5.67  0.00 0.14  0.02 d 5.53  0.02 5.67  0.00 0.14  0.02 de 5.53  0.02 5.67  0.00 0.14  0.02 e 
Notes: 
Values reported are means  standard deviation; n=3. 
*Negative control refers to broth culture without supplementation of RS/starch. 
a-d Within a column, values with different superscripts are significantly different at P < 0.05.  
A-C Within a row, values with different superscripts are significantly different at P < 0.05. 
3.3.2.2 Effect of legume RS on the growth and acid production of Lactococcus 
garvieae NM2 
Table 3.8 and 3.9 show the effect of RS and starch supplementation on the growth 
and acid production of L. garvieae NM2. When comparing between the treatments, 
the growth increment caused by supplementation of enzyme-RS was higher than 
acid-RS, except for Bambara groundnut where no significant difference was 
observed. Enzyme-RS also produced a higher growth increment than adzuki bean, 
Bambara groundnut and red lentil of untreated-RS, but no difference when 
compared to black eyed pea, mung bean and pigeon pea. Overall the prebiotic effect 
of enzyme-RS to enhance the growth of L. garvieae NM2 could be ranked as 
following: red lentil > adzuki bean > mung bean > Bambara groundnut > pigeon pea > 
black eyed pea > negative control. 
As with the growth of L. garvieae NM2, the pH of the nutrient broth supplemented 
with enzyme-RS was found to be significantly lower than acid-RS, untreated-S and 
negative control, except for black eyed pea. The pH of black eyed pea of untreated-S 
was lower than enzyme-RS. While not all legumes and treatments follow similar 
trends of high growth accompanied by high acid production, highest growth and acid 
production were found in enzyme-RS, further suggesting that enzyme-RS as the best 
prebiotic source to enhance the growth and acid production of L. garvieae NM2.  
Table 3.8: The growth of L. garvieae NM2 in medium supplemented with 5% (w/v) of legume RS/starch samples at 0 and 24 hr of incubation 
Legume Viable cell count of L. garvieae NM2 in medium supplemented with 5% (w/v) legume RS/starch samples (Log10 CFU/ml) 
Untreated-S  Acid-RS  Enzyme-RS 
0 hr 24 hr Growth 0 hr 24 hr Growth 0 hr 24 hr Growth 
Adzuki 
6.40  0.03 8.18  0.00 1.79  0.03 bc; B 6.36  0.01 7.58  0.04 1.22  0.03 c; A 6.23  0.15 8.35  0.03 2.13  0.17 ab; C 
Bambara 
Groundnut 
6.29  0.03 7.64  0.07 1.35  0.10 d; A 6.33  0.03 8.08  0.06 1.76  0.07 a; B 6.32  0.05 8.25  0.04 1.93  0.02 b; B 
Black Eyed 
6.27  0.01 8.14  0.07 1.87  0.08 b; B 6.21  0.04 7.60  0.10 1.39  0.13 bc; A 6.36  0.03 8.13  0.07 1.77  0.04 b; B 
Mung Bean 6.30  0.02  8.33  0.02 2.02  0.04 a; B 6.30  0.02  7.86  0.10 1.56  0.09 ab; A 6.40  0.04 8.34  0.02 1.95  0.06 ab; B 
Pigeon Pea 6.28  0.04 8.09  0.01 1.81  0.04 bc; B 6.32  0.02 7.72  0.09 1.41  0.07 bc; A 6.23  0.08 8.06  0.07 1.83  0.14 b; B 
Red Lentil 6.30  0.02 7.94  0.14 1.64  0.16 c; A 6.30  0.04 7.83  0.04 1.53  0.06 b; A 6.09  0.33 8.39  0.02 2.30  0.34 a; B 
Negative 
Control* 
6.38  0.02 7.23  0.21 0.84  0.21 e 6.38  0.02 7.23  0.21 0.84  0.21 d 6.38  0.02 7.23  0.21 0.84  0.21 c 
Notes: 
Values reported are means  standard deviation; n=3. 
*Negative control refers to broth culture without supplementation of RS/starch. 
a-d Within a column, values with different superscripts are significantly different at P < 0.05.  
A-C Within a row, values with different superscripts are significantly different at P < 0.05. 
Table 3.9: The pH changes in medium supplemented with 5% (w/v) of RS/starch samples during growth of L. garvieae NM2 
Legume pH of medium supplemented with 5% (w/v) legume RS/starch samples during growth of L. garvieae NM2 
Untreated-S Acid-RS Enzyme-RS 
0 hr 24 hr pH change 0 hr 24 hr pH change 0 hr 24 hr pH change 
Adzuki 
6.40  0.07 4.77  0.05 -1.63  0.11 a; B 6.53  0.00 5.17  0.05 - 1.36  0.05 a; C 6.50  0.01 4.56  0.01 -1.94  0.02 a; A 
Bambara 
Groundnut 
6.53  0.00 6.21  0.02 -0.32  0.02 d; C 5.67  0.10 4.54  0.04 - 1.14  0.08 b; B 5.85  0.04 4.41  0.01 -1.44  0.03 d; A 
Black Eyed 
5.77  0.06 4.74  0.03 -1.03  0.03 c; A 5.95  0.04 5.37  0.08 - 0.58  0.04 d; C 5.47  0.02 4.63  0.01 -0.84  0.02 e; B 
Mung Bean 5.96  0.02 4.69  0.01 -1.27  0.01 bc; A 6.13  0.06 5.33  0.11 - 0.80  0.15 c; B 5.80  0.01 4.43  0.04 -1.37  0.05 d; A 
Pigeon Pea 6.40  0.02 4.87  0.03 -1.53  0.04 ab; AB 6.57  0.00 5.15  0.06 - 1.42  0.06 a; B 6.28  0.04 4.67  0.01 -1.61  0.04 c; A 
Red Lentil 6.44  0.07 5.23  0.30 -1.21  0.28 c; B 6.46  0.01 5.15  0.02 - 1.31  0.02 a; B 6.39  0.05 4.61  0.00 -1.78  0.05 b; A 
Negative 
Control* 
6.22  0.01 4.87  0.01 -1.34  0.00 bc 6.22  0.01 4.87  0.01 -1.34  0.00 a  6.22  0.01 4.87  0.01 -1.34  0.00 e  
Notes: 
Values reported are means  standard deviation; n=3. 
*Negative control refers to broth culture without supplementation of RS/starch. 
a-d Within a column, values with different superscripts are significantly different at P < 0.05.  
A-C Within a row, values with different superscripts are significantly different at P < 0.05. 
3.3.2.3 Effect of legume RS on the growth and acid production of Enterococcus 
gilvus V1 
Table 3.10 and 3.11 show the effect of enzyme-RS supplementation on the growth 
and acid production of E. gilvus V1. Supplementation with legume enzyme-RS 
increased bacteria growth for all legumes except for black-eyed pea and mung 
beans. Among bacteria cultures with legume enzyme-RS, cultures supplemented 
with red lentil enzyme-RS showed the highest growth, which was significantly higher 
than cultures of black-eye pea and mung bean enzyme-RS while being statistically 
similar to the other three legumes. Overall the prebiotic effect of enzyme-RS to 
enhance the growth of E. gilvus V1 could be ranked as following: red lentil > Bambara 
groundnut > pigeon pea > adzuki bean > black eyed pea > mung bean. 
Unlike with the observation in growth of E. gilvus V1, the pH change of the control 
nutrient broth was found to be significantly lower than enzyme-RS cultures. For 
enzyme-RS, the highest acid production was observed in black-eyed pea, which was 
significantly higher than all other legume enzyme-RS supplements. This was followed 
by cultures supplemented with red lentil enzyme-RS.  
Table 3.10: The growth of E. gilvus V1 in medium supplemented with 5% (w/v) of 
legume enzyme-RS samples at 0 and 24 hr of incubation 
Legume Viable cell count of E. gilvus V1 in medium 
supplemented with 5% (w/v) legume enzyme-RS 
samples (Log10 CFU/ml) 
0 hr 24 hr Growth 
Adzuki Bean 6.91  0.06 7.96  0.25 1.05  0.22 ab  
Bambara Groundnut 6.77  0.06 8.00  0.15 1.23  0.16 ab 
Black Eyed Pea 6.76  0.09 7.63  0.07 0.87  0.06 bc 
Mung Bean 6.56  0.30  7.42 0.13 0.85  0.35 bc 
Pigeon Pea 6.86  0.15 8.04  0.05 1.18  0.20 ab 
Red Lentil 7.00  0.00 8.29  0.05 1.29  0.05 a 
Negative control 6.62  0.16 7.14  0.07 0.52  0.21 c 
Notes: 
Values reported are means  standard deviation; n=3. 
*Negative control refers to broth culture without supplementation of enzyme-RS 
 a-c Within a row, values with different superscripts are significantly different at P < 
0.05. 
Table 3.11: The pH changes in medium supplemented with 5% (w/v) legume enzyme-
RS samples during growth of E. gilvus V1 
Legume pH of medium supplemented with 5% (w/v) legume 
enzyme-RS samples during growth of E. gilvus V1 
0 hr 24 hr pH change 
Adzuki Bean 5.80  0.04 5.07  0.00 -0.72  0.04 d 
Bambara Groundnut 5.82  0.03 5.10  0.01 -0.72  0.01 d 
Black Eyed Pea 6.19  0.01 5.14  0.00 -1.05  0.13 b 
Mung Bean 5.75  0.04  5.03  0.10 -0.72  0.04 d 
Pigeon Pea 5.72  0.05 5.06  0.01 -0.66  0.04 e 
Red Lentil 5.92  0.01 5.14  0.01 -0.78  0.01 c 
Negative control* 6.39  0.02 4.44  0.01 -1.94  0.01 a 
Notes: 
Values reported are means  standard deviation; n=3. 
*Negative control refers to broth culture without supplementation of enzyme-RS. 
 a-d Within a row, values with different superscripts are significantly different at P < 
0.05. 
3.4 Discussion 
The current study was aimed to investigate the prebiotic effect of RS and starch 
extracted via acid- and enzyme-hydrolysis methods from six underutilised legumes 
on the growth of probiotic bacterium isolated from fish intestinal tract. In this study, 
two Gram positive isolates, LC-A and LC-B, were isolated from the intestinal tract of 
Asian sea bass to be used as probiotic indicators. These bacteria were identified 
using API 50 CHL test kit as a biochemical identification and 16S rRNA gene 
sequencing as a molecular identification.  
The API 50 CHL carbohydrate fermentation patterns of LC-A and LC-B suggested that 
these isolates were highly similar to Weissella confusa and Lactococcus lactis. 
However, the results from 16S rRNA gene sequencing suggested that LC-A and LC-B 
were highly similar to Weissella cibaria and Lactococcus garvieae, which contradicts 
the findings obtained via API 50 CHL. Similarly, the API 50 CHL carbohydrate 
fermentation patterns of DR-A and DR-B were also contradictory.  
The API 50 CHL kit tests the ability of bacterium to utilise 49 types of carbohydrates 
and hence produce a pattern that is unique to the bacterium. However the APIWEB 
database used has limitations, that mean a large variety of bacteria found exclusively 
in aquatic conditions may be excluded and misidentified (Janda & Abbott 2002). 
Hence, sequencing on the highly conserved 16S rRNA gene region of bacteria is a 
more accurate alternative (Wilson 1995). The use of 16S rRNA gene sequencing 
alleviates the limitations of commercial phenotypic methods; the number of 16S 
rRNA gene sequences published in the GenBank has increased vastly over the years 
(Rapp & Giovannoni 2003).  
W. cibaria share extremely similar characteristics to W. confusa (Bjrckroth et al. 
2002; Fusco et al. 2015). Fortunately, phenotypic analysis from the API kit used in 
this study revealed LC-A to be capable of L-arabinose fermentation and acid 
production. Based on the study of Bjrckroth et al. (2002), this was a key phenotypic 
difference between W. cibaria and W. confusa. Hence, the identity of LC-A is 
suggested to be W. cibaria instead of W. confusa. A few studies have identified W. 
cibaria as a potential probiotic for aquaculture (Maji et al. 2016; Muoz-Atienza et al. 
2014; Muoz-Atienza et al. 2013; Mourio et al. 2012), through in vitro investigation 
of the antimicrobial properties, as well as in application as a probiotic or symbiotic in 
fish feeding trials.  
The identification of LC-B is contradictory based on the molecular and biochemical 
methods applied. Upon comparison to the published literatures (Itoi et al. 2008; 
Evans et al. 2006; Chang et al. 2002), it was suggested that the identity of LC-B is 
identical to L. garvieae. This is because the lactose utilisation ability is absent in L. 
garveiae but present in L. lactis (Itoi et al. 2008; Evans et al. 2006; Chang et al. 2002). 
It has been reported that L. garvieae is a common LAB in sturgeons and has also 
been selected as a potential probiotic (Hoseinifar et al. 2014). On the other hand, 
only one study found beneficial effects of L. garvieae as a probiotic (Zhang et al. 
2016), while most other studies suggested that L. garvieae is a common aquatic 
pathogen which causes disease in a wide range of aquatic species (Vendrell et al. 
2006; Cheng et al. 2002). However, it has not been reported to be found in Lates 
calcarifer and may be a probiotic of interest due to potential antimicrobial 
capabilities (Dodamani & Kaliwal 2014). 
Two bacteria species from the Enterococcus genus were found to be the most 
common type of bacteria isolated from the intestinal tract of zebrafish housed at the 
University of Liverpool. Based on the carbohydrate fermentation profiles alone, it is 
suggested that both identifications are inaccurate, possibly due to limitations of the 
database; the kit failed to accurately identify the genus of both bacteria to be 
Enterococcus, which was suggested by the presence of acid production from glycerol 
fermentation (Bergey & Holt 1994). However, as Enterococcus spp. have been 
reported to have highly similar 16S rRNA gene sequences, up to 99%, additional 
biochemical tests become a necessity for accurate identification (Lebreton et al. 
2014). 
In the case of DR-A, identification, using 16S rRNA gene sequencing suggested the 
identity of the bacteria to be Enterococcus gilvus, which is a relatively new species of 
bacteria, having been discovered within the past 20 years (Tyrrell et al. 2002). 
Compared to the study of Tyrrell et al. (2002), acid production profiles were similar 
for all compounds compared, except for melibiose, raffinose, sorbitol and sorbose, 
for which a negative reaction was obtained in this study.  
Many studies comparing Enterococcus have not included E. gilvus due to the species 
being relatively new, resulting in difficulty in comparing carbohydrate fermentation 
profiles. However, E. gilvus has been reported to display atypical phenotypic threads, 
suggesting that various strains may exist (Scheidegger et al. 2009). While E. gilvus has 
been isolated as a pathogenic Enterococcus in humans, and from dairy products, 
there have been no reports of E. gilvus being isolated from marine environments. 
This may be potentially due to E. gilvus being relatively new and only recently 
included in databases, or that the bacteria originated from human waste (Oprea & 
Zervos 2007). Due to its novelty, E. gilvus V1 was selected for in vitro testing for the 
prebiotics in this study.  
In the case of DR-B, identification using 16S rRNA gene sequencing suggested the 
identity of the bacteria to be Enterococcus faecalis. The carbohydrate fermentation 
profile obtained from DR-B was also identical to E. faecalis, apart from the negative 
reaction of lactose fermentation obtained in this study (Bergey & Holt 1994). Studies 
comparing identification methods revealed high levels of accuracy in the 
identification of E. faecalis by comparing 16S rRNA gene sequences with GeneBank, 
which supports the method and result obtained in this study (Moore et al. 2006). 
Nevertheless, other methods such as repetitive element sequence PCR (REP-PCR) 
and amplified fragment length polymorphism PCR (AFLP-PCR) can be used to 
improve the accuracy of the identification (Pangallo et al. 2008; Domig et al. 2003).  
E. faecalis is frequently found in food and was also detected in the aquatic 
environment, thereby resulting in its presence in aquatic animals as well (Lebreton et 
al. 2014). E. faecalis has also been reported to produce enterocins, potential factors 
associated with its use as a probiotic, and has been used as a prebiotic in humans, 
poultry and pigs (Franz et al. 2011; Foulqui-Moreno et al. 2006). While not 
commonly used in studies involving aquatic animals as compared to E. faecium, E. 
faecalis was found to provide increments to the growth and immune responses of 
rainbow trout (Rodriguez-Estrada et al. 2009).  
In this study, it was found that the supplementation of both RS and starch from 
legumes improved growth of potential probiotic LAB isolated of aquatic origin, in 
vitro. Similar studies involving prebiotics have been performed in the past, with 
emphasis on microbial communities from faecal samples of healthy individuals and 
probiotic bacteria used in terrestrial animals (Patel & Goyal 2012; Pylkas et al. 2005). 
However, a literature search suggested that studies involving prebiotics from 
legumes are relatively less common than other prebiotics, such as inulin. A few 
studies have investigated the effects of two types of prebiotics from legumes, 
namely raffinose and RS (Zhou et al. 2013; Fernando et al. 2010). Overall, these 
studies found that the supplementation of both raffinose and RS in vitro led to 
prebiotic benefits in LAB, such as improving the growth of LAB, but not to other 
pathogenic bacteria. However, the bacteria applied in this study vary in origin and 
differ from the studies reported, leading to interest in the prebiotic effect of the RS 
derived from legumes which were treated to enhance RS contents. 
The supplementation of both RS and starch significantly improved the growth of 
bacteria in this study. These results compliment the effect found in studies of in vitro 
cultures supplemented with raffinose, where the viable cell counts of Lactobacillus 
acidophillus and Bifidobacteria bifidum increased significantly when compared to the 
controls (Bednarczyk et al. 2011). On the other hand, the results of this study also 
compliment studies investigating the in vitro prebiotic potential of RS, where studies 
reported improved the growth of butyrate-producing bacteria (Scott et al. 2014) and 
Bifidobacteria spp. (Beards et al. 2010). This suggests that the samples applied in this 
study possess comparable prebiotic properties to improve the growth of bacteria. In 
addition, variation in the type of RS were also found to affect microbiota 
compositions (Martinez et al. 2010). Hence, for the application of the RS as 
prebiotics in aquatic animals, it may be useful to investigate its properties in vitro 
using bacteria isolated from such conditions (Jonathan et al. 2012).  
The various treatments on the legume starch resulted in varying effects on the 
growth and acid production of all three bacteria tested. A key difference between 
the untreated starch and treated starches could be their granular structures, where 
smooth granular surfaces are usually less accessible to bacteria mainly due to 
reduced sites for adhesion (Topping et al. 2003; Abia et al. 1993). On the other hand, 
treatment may have resulted in structural changes, such as shown in studies by 
Wronkowska et al. (2006), where smooth irregular shaped granules native starch 
granules are transformed into fibrous bunches which form a three-dimensional 
matrix containing occasional globular units (Wronkowska et al. 2006). The author 
also suggested that the adhesion of bacteria to the modified starch, after disruption 
of the granule, may have contributed to increased growth and acid production, such 
as observed in this study (Wang et al. 1999). In this study, these structural changes 
may have improved bacteria accessibility to starch granules following treatment. 
Overall, all starches were suitable as prebiotics whether untreated or not. Slight 
variations between samples could be attributed to variation in starch granules 
properties, potentially influenced by their genetic or botanical differences (Ma et al. 
2017; Hoover et al. 2010). 
In this study, the in vitro experiments suggest enzyme-RS to be the most effective 
supplement, with overall higher growth and acid production following 
supplementation. Several factors may play a role in affecting the activity of enzyme-
RS. While previous chapters highlight higher RS content as a feature of enzyme-RS, 
this property may not contribute to improved bacterial utilisation. Studies suggest 
that higher RS is associated with decreased enzyme accessibility and therefore 
reduced bacteria utilisation (Abia et al. 1993). In contrast, a study also suggested that 
highly organised structures of RS may promote SCFA production (Zhou et al. 2013). 
However, both trends were not observed in this study. Instead, the RS contents of 
supplements did not correlate with the growth of the bacteria in this study. This was 
also observed in other studies which compared growth and the amount of SCFA 
produced following the fermentation of different RS (Giuberti et al. 2013; Siew-Wai 
et al. 2010). Further studies may be required to further elucidate the relationship 
between RS and its fermentation by bacteria. Nevertheless, high RS content is still a 
desirable trait as they can be associated with increased amounts of starches 
surviving host digestion to be used as nutrients for microbiota in the intestines 
(Regmi et al. 2011).  
A possible factor for the improved growth following the supplementation of enzyme-
RS could be the increased ash content, observed from the nutritional analysis of 
mung bean starch following all treatments. The ash content in nutritional analysis is 
comprised of minerals, which could compliment the growth of LAB which have 
complex nutrient requirements. Studies show that LAB require metal ions such as 
iron and manganese for growth and metabolic activities (Hayek & Ibrahim 2013; 
Hbert et al. 2004; Elli et al. 2000). While complex media, such as MRS, include 
additional minerals for supporting the growth of LAB, the basal medium used in this 
study does not contain these additional minerals (de Man et al. 1960). Hence, the 
increased ash content of enzyme-RS supplements may have contributed to metal ion 
requirements (Korkeala et al. 1992), improving growth and acid production of the 
bacteria. 
The results from this study suggest that the enzyme-RS may possess prebiotic 
properties, which could have health benefits to the host. While in vivo studies may 
be more appropriate for investigating the prebiotic effect of RS, preliminary studies 
in vitro reduce the costs and ethical issues involved in, in vivo, high throughput 
screening (Papadimitriou et al. 2015). Based on the growth and acid production of 
the LAB tested in this study, red lentil enzyme-RS appear to be most effective in the 
improvement of growth. Various factors may have played a role, such as red lentils 
relatively smaller granule sizes, granule structure after treatment, and granule 
surface architecture which could have contributed to improving bacteria utilisation 
(Morales-Medina et al. 2014; Chung et al. 2010; Hoover et al. 2010). Following red 
lentils, adzuki beans also displayed high growth and acid production. Hence, red 
lentils and adzuki beans were selected from this study to be applied for further in 
vivo studies. 
3.5 Summary 
In summary, this study investigated the prebiotic effect of RS/starch supplements to 
improve the growth of LAB isolated from fish intestine via in vitro setting. The 
legume RS prepared via enzyme-hydrolysis method were the most effective in terms 
of growth and acid production, especially red lentil and adzuki beans. Hence, in 
subsequent studies, the red lentil and adzuki bean enzyme-RS were used in fish 
feeding trials to assess in vivo prebiotic potential.  
4 Chapter 4: Effect of legume resistant starch on the growth performance of 
zebrafish (Danio rerio)  
4.1 Introduction 
The importance of the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) microbiota of fish was first 
demonstrated when 212 genes were significantly affected in a conventionally raised 
fish as opposed to a microbe-free fish (Rawls et al. 2004). The relationship between 
GIT microbiota and the fish differs from mammals; GIT microbiota in fish are 
transitory according to its environment and diet and are not associated for the entire 
lifespan (Sullam et al. 2012). This has prompted various studies to investigate the 
relationship between GIT microbiota and fish. 
While many studies on prebiotics have been directed towards improving human 
health, relatively few studies have specifically investigated the use of prebiotics in 
fish (Ring et al. 2010b). Several prebiotics such as inulin, oligosaccharides and 
mannan-oligosaccharides have been applied in aquaculture studies and have 
resulted in improvement of growth rate, innate immune responses (e.g. lysozyme, 
complement system, etc.) and survival of the fish (Merrifield et al. 2010; Yousefian & 
Amiri 2009). On the other hand, despite health benefits observed in terrestrial 
animals and humans, little has been performed relating to the application of legume 
resistant starch (RS) as prebiotic in fish. Hence, this study aimed to investigate the 
effect of RS in fish.  
Zebrafish (Danio rerio) were selected for current in vivo study as an established fish 
model, with lots of benefits such as ease in handling for breeding and 
experimentation, as well as the ability to consume of a wide variety of food (Ulloa et 
al. 2014). To date, only a handful of studies related to probiotics have been reported 
in zebrafish, including supplementation of the combination of probiotics and 
prebiotics which resulted in increased growth and survival rates. The application of 
probiotics also improved innate immunity and hepatic stress tolerance (Gioacchini et 
al. 2014; Nekoubin et al. 2012). In addition, the supplementation of the dietary 
probiotic, Bacillus coagulans, also improved survival rates of zebrafish against Vibrio 
vulnificus infection by enhancing the expression of immune-related genes (Pan et al. 
2013). However, studies on the supplementation of prebiotics such as RS is scarce.  
Hence this chapter aims to investigate the effect of legume RS, namely from adzuki 
bean (Vigna angularis) and red lentil (Lens culinaris), on the growth performance of 
zebrafish. The outcome of this study will provide useful insights and knowledge for 
future studies on Asian sea bass.  
4.1.1 Hypothesis 
Legume RS and starch samples could enhance the growth performance of zebrafish 
through beneficial effects of the microbiome.  
4.1.2 Aims 
This study aims to investigate the effect of RS and starch from adzuki bean and red 
lentil on the growth performance of zebrafish. 
 To investigate the effect of RS on the growth performance of zebrafish as 
measured by weight gain 
4.2 Material and methods 
4.2.1 Experimental overview 
Zebrafish housed in the University of Liverpool were used in this study. Diets 
consisting of four samples of legume RS samples, namely adzuki bean enzyme-RS, 
adzuki bean untreated-S, red lentil enzyme-RS and red lentil untreated-S were 
prepared by the University of Liverpool and analysed in the University of 
Nottingham. Fish were fed for six weeks and fish growth was assessed at the end of 
the feeding trial. 
4.2.2 Materials 
4.2.2.1 Preparation of RS samples 
Adzuki bean and red lentil enzyme-RS and untreated-S were prepared from legumes 
according to the methods described in Section 2.2.3.1 and 2.2.3.3 and are labelled as 
RS samples. 
4.2.2.2 Preparation of zebrafish experimental diets 
A total of five zebrafish diets, comprising of the enzyme-RS diet and untreated-S diet 
for adzuki bean and red lentils, and basal diet were formulated by Mr Kieran Magee 
at the University of Liverpool using an in-house formulation method. The diet 
formulations are shown in Table 4.1. Diets supplemented with red lentil untreated-S 
and enzyme-RS are labelled Lens ST and Lens EH respectively, while diets 
supplemented with adzuki bean untreated-S and enzyme-RS are labelled as Adz ST 
and Adz EH respectively. Initial diets aimed at inclusion levels ranging between 1.0% 
and 5.0%. However, due to limitations where several inclusion levels could not be 
tested, 2.5% was selected as midpoint in range.  
After formulation, the ingredients required were mixed thoroughly using a Hobart 
food mixer. Water was added until the mixture achieved dough like consistency. The 
dough mixture was then spread out on trays and dried for 24 hr at 50 C using a nine 
shelf Parallexx Excalibur food dehydrator. Once dried, the diet was crushed and 
processed through a series of sieves with apertures of 425 m and 850 m. The desired 
pellet size should within this range. All diets were stored at 4 C till used.  
Table 4.1: Ingredients of diet formulated by the University of Liverpool 
Ingredient RS/starch diet (% w/w) Basal diet (% w/w) 
Fish Meal 36.54 38.74 
Rapeseed Oil 4.39 4.37 
Vitamins 0.31 0.31 
Minerals 0.41 0.42 
Wheat Gluten 26.46 22.91 
Corn Starch 27.82 31.82 
Binder 0.51 0.52 
RS samples 2.51 0.00 
Lysine 1.01 0.90 
Arginine 0.05 0.00 
Total 100.00 100.00 
4.2.3 Methods 
4.2.3.1 Nutritional analysis of diets  
Nutritional analysis of diets were conducted in the University of Nottingham. These 
samples included the Lens EH, Lens ST, Adz EH, Adz ST and the basal diets. The 
analysis conducted included energy, crude protein, lipid, crude fibre, moisture 
content and ash content and carbohydrates.  Principles of analysis conducted are as 
listed below while details on the procedures are as listed in Appendix K. 
a. Energy content analysis 
Energy content analysis was performed using a bomb calorimeter (6400 Automatic 
Isoperibol Calorimeter, Parr Instrument Company), where the gross energy is 
measured in terms of heat produced when a sample is completely combusted 
completely into carbon dioxide and water.  
b. Crude protein analysis 
Protein analysis was performed via the Dumas method, which revolves around the 
conversion of all nitrogen forms into nitrogen oxides through combustion at 800-
1000 C, reduction of these forms to nitrogen gas and subsequent measurement by 
use of a thermal conductivity device (Jung et al. 2003) 
c.  Lipid analysis 
Lipid analysis was performed by lipid extraction using a Sohxlet extractor based on 
the AOAC method 991.36, followed by gravimetric measurement of extracted 
sample. 
d. Crude fibre analysis 
Crude fibre content analysis was performed using the fibrebag (Gerhardt) method 
(Method no. AN-04-203), where starch and glucose were removed via digestion in 
acid and proteins were removed via digestion in alkali, with crude fibre left as the 
remaining residue.  
e.  Moisture content analysis 
Moisture content of a samples were measured based on the AOAC method 935.29 
based on the weight lost due to evaporation of water..  
f. Ash content analysis 
Ash analysis was performed based on the AOAC method 942.05 based on the 
inorganic residue remaining after the organic matter has been burnt away. 
4.2.3.2 Maintenance of zebrafish housing conditions  
Fish were housed in groups of 15 individuals in 15 identical 3 L zebrafish tanks. Five 
replicate tanks were given the same experimental diet with a total of five diets (as 
mentioned in Section 5.2.2) 
The fish tanks were made by Aquatic Habitats, each measuring 25 cm x 10 cm x 15 
cm (L x W x H). The tanks were connected to a central system which was maintained 
by a sump filtration system with 50% weekly water changes. Due to the small size of 
the fish, tanks were fitted with a 400 m fry mesh baffle; cleaning was conducted 
weekly during the weighing of the fish to prevent further disturbances. Water quality 
was subsequently kept stable with the following parameters, Ammonia (NH4); 0 
mg/L, Nitrite (NO2); 0 mg/L, Nitrate (NO3); <50 mg/L and pH; 7.0. Fish were 
maintained at 281 C and exposed to a 12:12 hr light cycle. 
4.2.3.3 Measurement of zebrafish weight  
Zebrafish were weighed once a week using a laboratory balance (Kern 770). In brief, 
all zebrafish from the tank was retrieved via net and transferred into a tarred 
container on the laboratory balance. Absorbent paper was used to remove excess 
water from the zebrafish while in net before being weighed.  
4.2.4 Experimental design 
All fish were bred in house and maintained at The Institute of Integrative Biology 
aquarium facility at the University of Liverpool. A total of 225 juvenile zebrafish (AB 
wild type strain), of approximately 70 mg in weight, were used in this trial and were 
approximately 2 months old at trial start. These zebrafish were allocated into five 
treatment groups with three tanks for each treatment (n=15) and an average fish 
weight of 70 mg. The tanks were arranged in a completely randomised design. 
Treatment groups were fed diets containing 2.5% supplements of untreated-S, or 
enzyme-RS, or the basal diet. Diets were fed for the 6-week period, excluding the 
acclimatisation period prior to the feeding trial.  
The zebrafish were fed once daily. At the start of each week, each tank of fish was 
weighed and one weeks worth of daily feed was pre-measured up to four decimal 
places at 4% body weight per day using a laboratory balance (Kern 770). This was 
repeated weekly to maintain a 4% body weight feed regime throughout the 6-week 
trial for maximum growth and health. On the days when fish were weighed, feed was 
given after they were weighed, while on all other days feed was given in the 
morning.  
4.2.4.1 Calculations 
During the trial, the following feed efficiency and growth performance indicators 
were assessed: Feed conversion ratio (FCR), protein efficiency ratio (PER), weight 
gain (WG), increment (WG %), and specific growth rate (SGR). Calculations are based 
on Halver & Hardy (2002) and are as shown below: 
i. Weight gain (WG): 
WG = WF  W0  
Where: 
 WF = weight of fish at the end of the feeding trial 
 W0 = weight of fish at the start of the feeding trial 
ii. Increment (WG %): 
WG % =
WF  W0
Where: 
 WF = weight of fish at the end of the feeding trial 
 W0 = weight of fish at the start of the feeding trial 
iii. Specific growth rate (SGR): 
SGR =
ln WF - ln W0
Where: 
 WF = weight of fish at the end of the feeding trial 
 W0 = weight of fish at the start of the feeding trial 
 T = feeding trial duration in days 
iv. Feed conversion ratio (FCR): 
FCR = 
total weight of feed  (g; dry weight basis)
 weight gain of fish (g; wet weight basis)
v. Protein efficiency ratio (PER): 
weight gain (g)
 protein fed (g; dry weight basis)
4.2.5 Ethical issues 
It was anticipated that the welfare standards of the subject fish would not be 
affected; they were being housed using standard methods and fed on balanced diets 
formulated to meet nutritional requirements. The fish were also bred at the 
University of Liverpool zebrafish facility and so endured minimal transport or housing 
stress prior to this experiment starting. However, welfare was monitored 
independently, if any individual fish exhibiting adverse reactions was removed from 
the trial.  
4.2.6 Statistical analysis 
All values reported are means  standard deviation, unless otherwise stated. 
Statistical analysis was performed using Genstat 18th Edition. Normality of data was 
determined using the Shapiro-Wilk test, where statistical comparisons of non-normal 
data were performed using the Kruskal-Wallis H test. Statistical comparisons of 
normal data were performed using ANOVA between samples and statistical 
significance is indicated via labels of different letters.  
4.3 Results 
The zebrafish feeding trial was conducted to investigate the effect of RS on the 
growth performance of zebrafish. Diets were prepared with a 2.5% replacement of 
test diets with the prebiotics of interest, which were red lentil untreated-S, red lentil 
enzyme-RS, adzuki bean untreated-S and adzuki bean enzyme-RS. Proximate analysis 
was performed to determine the nutritional qualities of the diet, followed by a 6-
week feeding trial using the diets mentioned above. 
4.3.1 Nutritional analysis of the experimental diets of zebrafish 
Replacement of basal diets with 2.5% legumes resulted in some changes in the 
nutritional qualities as shown in Table 4.2. Compared to the basal diets, Lens EH had 
significantly higher energy content (<2% higher). In terms of fat content, Adz EH and 
Lens ST had significantly lower fat as compared to the basal diet. In terms of protein 
content, all test diets contained significantly higher crude protein, with Lens ST being 
the highest. Lastly, as expected, crude fibre in test diets was significantly higher than 
the basal diet. However, Adz EH contained unexpectedly low crude fibre content
Table 4.2: Nutritional composition of diets used in zebrafish feeding trial for basal diets and basal diets supplemented with 2.5% of samples 
 Analysis 1 
Calories 
(kJ/100g) Fat, total (%) 
Protein/ crude 
protein (%) Crude fibre (%) Moisture (%) Ash (%) NFE (%) 2 
Basal diet 2081  40 b 7.57  0.02 a 50.66  0.24 c 0.00  0.00 d 3.23  0.14 c 7.06  0.01 a 31.49 
Lens EH 2118  13 a 7.56  0.18 
a 58.69  1.82 b 0.45  0.13 b 2.97  0.13 c 6.50  0.04 c 23.83 
Adz EH 2093  5 ab 6.43  0.01 c 55.62  1.49 b 0.05  0.06 c 3.91  0.23 b 6.64  0.08 bc 27.35 
Lens ST 2101  7 ab 6.99  0.08 b 62.78  2.56 a 0.50  0.04 b 3.75  0.08 b 6.50  0.09 c 19.49 
Adz ST 2076  15 b 7.48  0.23 a 55.60  0.53 b 0.53  0.03 a 4.37  0.02 a 6.69  0.05 b 25.33 
Notes: 
1 Values reported are means  standard deviation; n=3. 
2 Nitrogen-free-extract (NFE) was calculated by subtracting all values from 100% 
a-d Within a column, values with different superscripts are significantly different at P < 0.05. 
4.3.2 Effect of diets supplemented with RS and untreated starch from adzuki 
beans and red lentils on the growth of zebrafish 
The results of the feeding trial are described in 2 categories: 1) growth and health 
parameters, and 2) feed conversion and efficiency ratios and are as shown in Table 
The growth and health measurements of the fish includes its total weight gain (WG), 
the growth increment in terms of percentage (WG %) and specific growth rate (SGR). 
No significant effect of diet was seen on any of these parameters. 
In comparing FCR across all diets, significant differences were observed in fish fed 
with different diets (p < 0.05). The lowest FCR was observed in fish fed with Lens ST 
at 1.76, followed by fish fed with Lens EH and Adz ST with both at 1.83, all of which 
was significantly lower than the fish fed with basal diet of 2.01.  
In terms of PER, there was no significant differences in fish fed with the different 
diets (p > 0.05).  
Overall, no differences in growth were observed in zebrafish when fed with diets 
supplemented with RS regardless of legume and treatment applied. However, higher 
FCR was observed when fed with untreated-S from red lentils which suggest that 
these supplements could be beneficial to zebrafish health. Meanwhile, the 
supplementation of RS did not appear to have a negative effect in the zebrafish in 
terms of growth.
Table 4.3: Growth and feed conversion and efficiency ratios of zebrafish after 6 weeks of being fed with a basal diet and diets with 2.5% supplement with 
various legumes and respective treatments 
 Growth and health measurement 1,2  Feed conversion and efficiency ratios 1,2 
 Diet Weight gain (mg) Increment (%) 
Specific growth 
rate (%) Survival (%) 
Feed conversion ratio Protein efficiency ratio 
Basal diet 85.11  12.55 221.20  10.26 1.93  0.11 100  2.01  0.12 b 0.99  0.05 
Lens EH 90.67  6.77 237.27  10.70 2.11  0.11 100  1.83  0.09 ab 0.93  0.04 
Adz EH 98.89  25.87 224.78  15.28 1.97  0.17 100  1.98  0.13 b 0.91  0.06 
Lens ST 97.33  6.43 242.13  7.12 2.16  0.07 100  1.76  0.07 a 0.90  0.04 
Adz ST 108.22  33.15 240.75  7.78 2.14  0.08 100  1.83  0.09 ab 0.99  0.05 
Notes:  
Values reported are means  standard deviation; n=3. 
a-d Within a column, values with different superscripts are significantly different at P < 0.05. 
4.4 Discussion 
Although the use of prebiotics in fish is much more poorly studied than in mammals , 
several studies have shown beneficial prebiotic effects in aquatic animals (Ganguly et 
al. 2013). These benefits include improved live body weight gain, improved immune 
responses, increased feed efficiency and improved GIT microbial populations. (Lv et 
al. 2007; Mahious et al. 2006; Li & Gatlin III 2004). These reports suggest that the 
inclusion of prebiotics could play a role to improve the overall effectiveness of fish 
feed.  
In this study, the 2.5% inclusion of adzuki bean and red lentil RS and starch did not 
significantly affect the growth of zebrafish. Meanwhile, inclusion of other prebiotics, 
such as MOS was found to increase growth of zebrafish when fed for six weeks 
(Forsatkar et al. 2017). A possible cause for the lack of growth observed in this study 
could be reduced growth rates observed as the fish approaches sexual maturity, or 
approximately 60 days post fertilization (Gmez-Requeni et al. 2010). Due to lower 
growth rates, the effect of different diets on the growth may be less obvious, 
resulting in no significant difference following statistical analysis. For the same 
reason, most studies investigate the effect on diets on zebrafish in the larvae stage 
and this can be put into consideration for future feeding trials (Nekoubin et al. 2012; 
Kaushik et al. 2011). As this study aimed to investigate the microbiota in the GIT of 
zebrafish, fish were required to be of sufficient size for ease of dissection and may 
have indirectly resulted in less obvious growth observations, in addition to the time 
constraints faced when the trial was carried out. 
Another factor to consider is a possible lack of beneficial bacteria overall in the 
rearing waters or intestines of the zebrafish in this study. In such cases, several 
studies find that the re-establishment of the balance between beneficial and 
pathogenic bacteria via probiotics may be effective (Wang et al. 2008). To overcome 
the limitations of probiotics, several studies have combined both probiotics with 
prebiotics as synbiotics to be supplemented in feed (Nayak 2010). In a study 
comparing the effect of the supplementation of the synbiotic Biomar on zebrafish 
larvae, significant improvements were observed in growth, SGR and FCR when diets 
were supplemented with up to 1.5 g/kg of the synbiotic (Nekoubin et al. 2012). It 
was suggested that the combination of both probiotics and prebiotics in the diet, 
which was not specified by the author, may have contributed to extracellular enzyme 
production which assisted in increased nutrient utilisation, resulting in the improved 
growth (Nekoubin et al. 2012). Hence, the application of synbiotics may be another 
strategy to be considered for future studies.  
In this study, improved FCR were observed in zebrafish following supplementation of 
RS and starch from red lentils and adzuki beans in diets. However, the FCR measured 
in this study may not be conclusive due to the nutritional content variation found in 
the diets fed. As a key nutrient contributing to growth, the variation of protein 
content in diets may have influenced fish growth: in this study, fish fed diets with 
approximately 4% protein was found to have higher weight increment as well as 
specific growth rates, which may have affect FCR values. Similar results can also be 
seen in other studies where fish grow better and possess reduced FCR when fed with 
more protein (Sissener et al. 2010; Jauncey 1982). Meanwhile, while feeding to 
satiation was the preferred method for FCR analysis due to accuracy in measured 
feed intake (Robaina & Izquierdo 2000), the 4% body weight feeding was based on 
optimisation and was found to be most effective for zebrafish growth while having 
little variation when compared to feeding to satiation (K Magee 2016, pers. comm. 
12 Feb). Nevertheless, future studies should incorporate measurement of feed intake 
to reduce potential inaccuracies in FCR measurements.  
While prebiotics applied in other studies have ranged from 1  75 g/kg 
supplementation of feed (Ring et al. 2010b), it is possible that further benefits may 
be observed with higher levels of RS and starch supplementations. However, higher 
growth was observed in studies with reduced levels of starch (7.7% vs 12.80%) 
(Siccardi III et al. 2009). This suggests that zebrafish may have a specific tolerance 
level of starch content in diets, which may be useful for consideration in future 
studies. While Siccardi III et al. (2009) did not elaborate on the effect of different 
level of starches, the author suggested that trace minerals and ingredient sources 
may play a role in physiological, cellular or molecular processes which contribute to 
differences in growth rates. In addition, the author also highlighted the importance 
of Fulton's condition factor as an indicator of fish health in selecting a diet (Siccardi III 
et al. 2009). In the current study, none of the diets appeared to have any detrimental 
effect on the fish health. 
Based on the parameters of this study, it is suggested that RS supplementation did 
not affect growth. Meanwhile, it is inconclusive whether RS and starch improved 
FCR. In addition, the enzyme-hydrolysis treatment did not appear to improve the 
benefits provided by the legume starch. It could be that the higher crude protein in 
Lens ST eventually resulted in higher growth for the zebrafish as a primary source of 
growth (Ulloa et al. 2014). In addition, as untreated-S is less resistant towards 
digestion versus enzyme-RS, it may have been utilised by the zebrafish as a nutrient 
as zebrafish are capable of carbohydrate utilisation (Robison et al. 2008). If that is 
the case, enzyme-RS may be a better candidate as prebiotic in terms of surviving 
host digestion and improving bacteria growth, as shown in the previous chapter 
(Zaman & Sarbini 2015). Lastly, it was undetermined whether the RS 
supplementation provided health benefits to the zebrafish, such as through 
improved complement activity or respiratory bursts and should be included in future 
studies based on effects shown from other prebiotics (Guerreiro et al. 2017b). 
While zebrafish may serve as a candidate animal model, further studies are required 
on other species as well. A key factor is that the effect of prebiotic supplementation 
often varies between species (Ganguly et al. 2013; Ring et al. 2010b). In addition, 
not many studies on RS in aquaculture have been reported. As the feeding trial on 
zebrafish showed no detrimental effects on health, the RS and starch applied in this 
study could be further applied in other species. Asian sea bass are one of the main 
aquaculture species reared in Malaysia and any improvements in growth efficiency 
could have significant economic and environmental benefits. In addition, the role of 
microbes in such carnivorous fish is less studied (Gatesoupe 2005). Hence, the 
studied described in the next chapter investigates the effect of red lentil enzyme-RS 
on the health and growth of this commercial aquaculture species. 
4.5 Summary 
In summary, the inclusion of adzuki beans and red lentil untreated-S and enzyme-RS 
did not affect the growth but may have an effect on the feed conversion ratios of 
zebrafish during a 6-week feeding trial. Inclusion of RS and starch had no apparent 
adverse effects on the growth and health of the fish. It was therefore decided to 
extend the investigation the effect of red lentil enzyme-RS on the health and growth 
benefits in a commercial aquaculture species, Asian sea bass. 
5 Chapter 5: Effect of legume resistant starch on the growth performance of 
Asian sea bass (Lates calcarifer) 
5.1 Introduction 
The introduction of aquaculture as an alternative source of protein has reduced the 
reliance of ocean capture for seafood. However, the intensification of the industry 
has resulted in several issues, such as increased demand of ocean by-catch as food 
for aquaculture species, as well as pollution and the development of antibiotic-
resistant strains of bacteria due to intensification. Studies have begun to investigate 
the alternative diets for aquaculture species involving lesser known crops to replace 
the reliance on fishmeal. Furthermore, the use of prebiotic and probiotics as 
alternatives to the application of antibiotic in farms has gained increasing interest 
(Glencross et al. 2016; Ibrahem et al. 2010; Burr et al. 2008; Gatesoupe 2005; 
Panigrahi et al. 2005). As aquaculture represents an important and growing industry 
in Malaysia, such studies are important for the sustainability and growth of the 
sector. 
Asian sea bass (Lates calcarifer) is commonly farmed in the Southeast Asia and is 
mainly produced in Indonesia, Malaysia and China. In 2010, up to 66,694 tonnes 
were produced with approximately 20,000 tonnes from Malaysia (FAO 2017; DOFM 
2013). Farmed Asian sea bass were marketed at approximately 500 g to 900 g and is 
commonly consumed locally (FAO 2017c). While these fish were commonly fed 
fishmeal-based diets, some studies investigate potential replacement of fishmeal as 
alternative protein sources (Glencross et al. 2016; Boonyaratpalin et al. 1998). In 
addition, the use of several novel types of feed additives to improve growth and 
health were also investigated. The application of edible mushroom (Schizophyllum 
commune) at 1% inclusion rates improved serum antibody levels and reduced 
mortality rates when challenged with Vibrio harveyi via intraperitoneal injection 
(Chong et al. 2016). On the other hand, the supplementation of neem leaves 
(Azadirachta indica) at 0.5% improved growth as well as immune parameters, such 
as serum lysozyme and bactericidal activity (Talpur & Ikhwanuddin 2013). These 
studies suggest that these feed supplements can potentially be used for the benefit 
of Asian sea bass in aquaculture farms. 
As mentioned previously, studies on the use of resistant starch (RS) as a prebiotic on 
aquaculture species is limited and, to our knowledge, no such studies in Asian sea 
bass have been published. RS has been shown to be an effective prebiotic in 
terrestrial animals, via modulations of gastrointestinal tract (GIT) microbiota in rats 
and humans (Rodrguez-cabezas et al. 2010; Lesmes et al. 2008; Queiroz-monici et al. 
2005). It has also been shown to improve acetate production in seabass 
(Dicentrarchus labrax) (Gatesoupe et al. 2014). The studies described in Chapters 3 
and 4 showed that enzyme-RS produced from red lentils (Lens culinaris), as a 
prebiotic, was more effective than other legumes in improving bacteria growth while 
also potentially improving feed conversion ratios in zebrafish (Danio rerio). Hence, 
the current study aimed to investigate the effect of red lentil enzyme-RS as a 
sustainable prebiotic ingredient for aquafeed for Asian sea bass. Furthermore, 
bacteria from the GIT in the fish was also measured using conventional methods. 
5.1.1 Hypothesis  
Legume resistant starch samples improve the growth of GIT probiotic lactic acid 
bacteria (LAB), reduce the growth of bacteria from Enterobacteriaceae (ETB) family 
and thus enhance the growth performance of Asian sea bass. 
5.1.2 Aims 
This study aims to investigate the effect of RS from red lentil on the growth 
performance and intestinal health of Asian sea bass.  
Specific aims: 
 To investigate the effect of RS on the growth performance of Asian sea bass as 
measured by weight gain 
 To investigate the effect of RS on the GIT microbial population 
5.2 Materials and methods 
5.2.1 Experimental overview 
Asian sea bass housed in the CFF field site were used in this study. Both basal and 
EH-Lens diets were also prepared in the CFF field site. Fish were fed for five weeks 
and fish and growth and GIT bacterial populations were assessed at the end of the 
feeding trial. 
5.2.2 Materials 
5.2.2.1 Preparation of RS samples 
Red lentil enzyme-RS and untreated-S were prepared from legumes according to the 
methods described in Section 2.2.3.1 and 2.2.3.3 and are labelled as RS samples. 
5.2.2.2 Preparation of Asian sea bass experimental diets 
A total of two Asian sea bass diets, namely red lentil enzyme-RS diet and basal diet 
were formulated in the Crops for the Future (CFF) field site with the assistance of Dr. 
Kumar Katya which were described to be adequate for sea bass growth in 
experimental feeds (Glencross 2006). Diet formulations are shown in Table 5.1. Diets 
supplemented with red lentil enzyme-RS were labelled as EH-Lens. 
After formulation, the ingredients were combined in an industrial mixer to form a 
paste and mixed until homogenous. The homogenous feed paste was then passed 
through a meat mincer to produce noodle-like strands (3 mm ) and were collected 
in large plastic trays. These strands were then broken down to short pellet lengths of 
approximately 5 - 10 mm carefully and was subsequently dried in an oven set at 45 
C for approximately 3 days. Twice a day, the trays were removed from the oven for 
the pellets to be turned over to allow drying on both sides. Dried feeds were 
collected in re-sealable plastic bags and stored at 4 C until use.  
Table 5.1: Ingredients of diets for Asian sea bass formulated with assistance from CFF 
Ingredient EH-Lens (% w/w) Basal diet (% w/w) 
Fish meal 54.795 56.200 
Starch samples 2.500 0.000 
Dextrin 14.430 14.800 
Soybean meal 11.310 11.600 
Corn meal 6.240 6.400 
Fish oil 5.850 6.000 
Vitamin premix 2.925 3.000 
Mineral premix 1.950 2.000 
Total 100.000 100.000 
5.2.3 Methods 
5.2.3.1 Nutritional analysis of diets  
Nutritional analysis of diets were performed by ALS Technichem Sdn. Bhd, which 
included energy, fat, protein, moisture, ash, carbohydrate and dietary fibre. The 
analysis conducted and their respective principles are as listed in Section 2.2.3.4. 
Resistant starch content was measured using the Megazyme method as detailed in 
Section 2.2.3.2. b. 
5.2.3.2 Maintenance of Asian sea bass housing condition 
Glass aquariums of 120 L were used in this study and were separated into two halves 
of 60 L each. Two diets were prepared and were fed in triplicate to groups of four 
fish, for a total of six groups. The six groups of fish were then randomly allocated to 
half a tank each. The experimental design is further elaborated in Section 5.2.4. 
A 10-hr light and 14-hr dark cycle was used, while water temperature was 
unregulated and kept at ambient room temperature of approximately 27 C. Oxygen 
was provided by gentle aeration via fountain using a submersible aquarium air ball. 
Water quality was maintained by constant water exchange via recirculation system, 
which included sponge filtration of water. The siphoning of faecal debris was also 
performed daily, while uneaten feed was siphoned after feeding. Several conditions 
were not regulated, including the temperature and ammonia and nitrogen content of 
the water in the holding tank. 
5.2.3.3 Measurement of Asian sea bass weight 
Asian sea bass were weighed once a week using a laboratory balance (Sartorius 
ENTRIS 2202-1S Digital Scale). In brief, each fish was retrieved via net and transferred 
into a tarred container on the laboratory balance. Absorbent paper was used to 
remove excess water from the fish before it was weighed. 
5.2.3.4 Animal euthanasia  
Asian sea bass were euthanized humanely via anaesthesia with benzocaine, followed 
by destruction of the brain, as per Schedule 1 of the UK Animals (Scientific 
Procedures) Act 1986. The procedure is as described in Section 5.2.2.1 with dark blue 
pails (approximately 30 cm ) containing 5 L of benzocaine solution (0.35% v/v) 
being used to accommodate the difference in fish size. 
5.2.3.5 Measurement of bacteria composition of fish 
Intestines were extracted from Asian sea bass from each treatment. Samples were 
used in the isolation of bacteria, which were spread onto M17 and Eosin methylene 
blue (EMB) agar as detailed in Section 2.4.3 (n=6). All intestine samples from each 
treatment were subject to identical procedures.  
Measurement of bacteria composition of fish was performed using conventional 
spread plate. Bacteria spread onto M17 agar and EMB agar were quantified as LAB 
and ETB respectively. M17 agar was used instead of MRS due to higher efficiency of 
isolating LAB from Asian sea bass.  
5.2.3.6 Nutritional analysis of fish carcass  
Nutritional analysis of diets were performed in the University of Nottingham 
Malaysia Campus. The analysis conducted and their respective principles are as listed 
below while details on the procedures are as listed in Appendix K. 
a. Crude protein analysis 
Protein analysis was performed via the Kjeldahl method (Buchi K-360 Distillation 
Unit), supplemented with a digester (Buchi KjelDigester K-446) based on the AOAC 
method 976.06-1977 for the analysis of crude protein in animal feed.  
b. Crude lipid analysis 
Lipid analysis was performed by lipid extraction using a Sohxlet extractor based on 
the AOAC method 991.36, followed by gravimetric measurement of extracted 
sample. 
c.  Moisture content analysis 
Moisture content of a samples were measured based on the AOAC method 935.29 
based on the weight lost due to evaporation of water content. 
5.2.4 Experimental design 
Asian sea bass were purchased from BD Aquaculture Sdn. Bhd, Johor, Malaysia. A 
total of 24 fingerlings which were approximately 2.5 inches in length and 10 g in 
weight at the start of the trial were used. The Asian sea bass were allocated to two 
treatment groups (basal diet and diets supplemented with red lentil enzyme-RS) with 
three tanks for each treatment (n=4) and an average fish weight of 10 g. The tanks 
were arranged in a completely randomised design. Diets were fed for a 5-week 
period, excluding the acclimatisation period prior to the feeding trial.  
The Asian sea bass were fed twice daily. After each tank of fish had been weighed, 
one weeks worth of daily feeds was premeasured using a laboratory balance 
(Sartorius ENTRIS 2202-1S Digital Scale) up to two decimal places at 4% body weight 
per day. This was repeated weekly to maintain a 4% body weight feed regime 
throughout the 5-week trial for maximum growth and health. On the days when fish 
were weighed, feed was given after fish had been weighed and in the evening, while 
on all other days feed was given in the morning and evening.  
At the end of the trial, the fish were sacrificed according to the procedure in Section 
5.2.3.4. Upon dissection, viscera were removed from the fish. The entire GIT was 
separated from the viscera and the intestines were snipped from the end stomach to 
the anus of the fish and was transferred into weighed sterile 1.5 mL centrifuge tubes 
and stored on ice. Then, the entire fish was measured (Appendix L) transferred into a 
sterile 50 mL centrifuge tube and stored on ice. All samples were stored on ice no 
longer than 2 hr before being processed for measurement of bacterial composition 
of fish as described in Section 5.2.3.5.  
Fish carcass from each treatment were pooled together and were selected at 
random for nutritional analysis of fish carcass, which was performed as described in 
Section 5.2.3.6. A total of three fish were used for the measurement of moisture 
content while the remaining fish were lyophilized and milled for analysis of crude 
protein and crude lipid content of fish carcass. 
5.2.4.1 Calculations 
During the trial, the following feed efficiency and growth performance indicators were 
assessed: feed conversion ratio (FCR), protein efficiency ratio (PER), weight gain (WG), 
increment (WG %), and specific growth rate (SGR) (Halver & Hardy 2002). Details of 
the calculations are as shown in Section 4.2.4.1. 
5.2.5 Ethical issues 
The Asian sea bass feeding trial was conducted under the approval (Ref. No. UNMC8) 
of the Animal Welfare and Ethical Review Body of the University of Nottingham 
5.2.6 Statistical analysis 
All values reported are means  standard deviation, unless stated otherwise. 
Statistical analysis was performed using Genstat 18th Edition. Normality of data was 
determined using the Shapiro-Wilk test, where statistical comparisons of non-normal 
data were performed using the Kruskal-Wallis H test. Statistical comparisons of 
normal data were performed using ANOVA between samples and statistical 
significance is indicated via labels of different letters.  
5.3 Results 
5.3.1 Nutritional analysis of the experimental diets of Asian sea bass 
Diets formulated for the Asian sea bass feeding trial were not designed to be 
identical in nutritional qualities due to the replacement supplementation of the test 
diet. However, the diets did not vary in nutritional quality as shown in Table 5.2.  
As the analysis of nutritional composition of both diets was done without replicates, 
significant differences were not measured. Notable differences were observed in 
carbohydrate and dietary fibre content, with EH-Lens diets containing 6.87% and 
8.54% higher content respectively. Also, RS content in the EH-Lens diet was 
significantly higher, at 0.23% versus the basal diet.  
Table 5.2: Nutritional composition of diets used in Asian sea bass feeding trial for 
basal diets and basal diets supplemented with 2.5% of samples 
Analysis 1 
Basal diet EH-Lens 
Energy (by calculation, kcal/100g) 398 396 
Energy (by calculation, kJ/100g) 1672 1665 
Fat, total (%) 13.6 13.3 
Protein/ crude protein (%) 47.2 45.9 
Carbohydrate, total (by calculation, %) 21.7 23.3 
Dietary fibre (%) 7.5 8.2 
Moisture (%) 8.7 8.5 
Ash (%) 8.8 9.0 
RS content (%) 0.10  0.02 a 0.33  0.05 b 
Notes:  
1 Analysis of samples except resistant starch content (%) was performed by ALS 
Technichem Sdn Bhd without replicates (n=1). Values of RS content are means  
standard deviation; n=3. 
a-b Within a column, values with different superscripts are significantly different at P < 
5.3.2 Effect of diets supplemented with RS from red lentils on the growth of 
Asian sea bass 
The data collected from the Asian sea bass feeding trial can be categorised into the 
following categories: 1) fish growth measurements and feed conversion ratios, 2) 
bacteria composition of fish and, 3) nutritional analysis of fish carcass. 
5.3.2.1 Fish growth measurements and feed conversion ratio 
A feeding trial on Asian sea bass was conducted using 2 types of diet, as shown in 
Table 5.3. The results are categorised into 2 categories: 1) growth and health 
parameters, and 2) feed conversion and efficiency ratios and are as shown in Table 
The growth and health measurements of the fish include total weight gain (WG), the 
growth increment in terms of percentage (WG %) and specific growth rate (SGR). No 
significant differences were observed in any of the growth parameters measured. 
Slight contradiction exist between weight gain and specific growth rates, which could 
be attributed to variation in starting weight of the fish. In addition, fish health 
appeared to be similar with Fulton condition factors of 2.14 and 2.01 for Asian sea 
bass fed with EH-Lens and the basal diet respectively.  
The measurements of feed conversion and efficiency ratios includes feed conversion 
ratio (FCR) and protein efficiency ratio (PER). No significant differences were also 
observed in all conversion ratios measured. 
Overall, the growth and health of Asian sea bass fed with diets supplemented by red 
lentil enzyme-RS were similar with basal diet.  
Table 5.3: Growth, health and feed conversion and efficiency ratios of Asian sea bass after 6 weeks of being fed with a basal diet and diets with 2.5% 
supplement of EH-Lens 
 Growth and health measurement 1,2  Feed conversion and efficiency ratios 1,2 
 Diet Weight gain (g) Increment (%) 
Specific growth 
rate (%) Survival (%) 
Feed conversion ratio Protein efficiency ratio 
Basal diet 8.45  1.70 192.10  20.82 2.24  0.36 100  2.15  0.37 1.01  0.18 
Lens EH 8.82  2.40 186.55  17.17 2.14  0.31 100  2.33  0.42 0.96  0.18 
Notes:  
Values reported are means  standard deviation; n=3. 
a-d Within a column, values with different superscripts are significantly different at P < 0.05. 
5.3.2.2 Measurement of bacterial composition of fish 
Bacteria from the intestines of Asian sea bass fed with different diets were isolated 
and spread on M17 agar for LAB and EMB for bacteria in the family of ETB (such as E. 
coli, Salmonella etc.) and are as shown in Table 5.4.  
Based on the measurements obtained via conventional spread plate, fish fed with 
EH-Lens showed no significant effects from diet based on the bacteria count. 
Table 5.4: GIT LAB and ETB count of Asian sea bass fed basal diet and EH-Lens diet 
Analysis 1 
LAB (log10 CFU/ml) ETB (log10 CFU/ml) 
Basal diet 5.15  1.43 5.30  0.61 
EH-Lens 5.30  1.10 5.02  1.33 
Notes:  
1 Values reported are means  standard deviation; n=3. 
5.3.2.3 Nutritional analysis of fish carcass 
Nutritional analysis of the fish carcass was performed and the results are presented 
based on the wet weight of the sample (Table 5.5) 
Table 5.5: Crude protein, total fat and moisture content of Asian sea bass carcass (wet 
weight basis) 
Diet 3 
Analysis 1 
Protein/ crude 
protein (%) 
Fat, total (%) Moisture (%) 
Basal diet 15.91  0.25 2.73  0.10 a 75.46  1.65 
EH-Lens 16.16  0.46 4.75  0.20 b 74.92  0.18 
Notes:  
1 Values reported are means  standard deviation; n=3. 
a-b Within a column, values with different superscripts are significantly different at P 
< 0.05. 
Overall, no significant differences were observed in protein content or moisture 
content of Asian sea bass when fed different diets. However, the total fat content (% 
w/w) of the carcass was found to be significantly higher for Asian sea bass fed EH-
Lens, which was 2.03% higher than Asian sea bass fed the basal diet.  
5.4 Discussion 
In this study, the effect of RS supplementation in fish feed was investigated in a fish 
feeding trial involving the aquaculture species Asian sea bass. Reported benefits of 
supplementation with prebiotics improved growth, immune parameters and overall 
survival rates (Ring et al. 2010b).  
One of the desired traits for fish in aquaculture is increment in growth. Prebiotic 
supplementation has been suggested to improve growth, via the improvement of 
nutrient digestibility via increments in populations of beneficial microbes. This 
results in microbial metabolism of substrates and allowing these products to be 
accessible as nutrients for the host, and thus improving nutrient digestibility (Burr et 
al. 2005). Such effects have been exhibited in studies involving supplementation with 
galacto-oligosaccharides (GOS) and mannan-oligosaccharides (MOS) into the diets of 
red drum (Sciaenops ocellatus). This was shown to improve nutrient digestibility 
either via the mitigation of anti-nutritional factor or through a microbial-mediated 
pathway (Burr et al. 2008). On the other hand, other studies which involved the 
inclusion of stachyose and raffinose as a prebiotic in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar), 
showed no effect on nutrient digestibility (Srensen et al. 2011). In addition, 
contrasting information has been presented on whether prebiotics induce increased 
enzyme production in the intestines (Anguiano et al. 2013; Xu et al. 2009b). Hence, it 
can be said that further understanding on the relationship between a prebiotic and 
the host may be necessary to understand its potential for improving nutrient 
digestibility.  
In this study, it was found that the supplementation of RS in diets as a prebiotic did 
not significantly affect the growth of Asian sea bass. Previous studies on the 
supplementation of inulin showed significant improvement of growth, which was 
suggested to be due to the improvement of nutrient digestion and absorption (Ali et 
al. 2016). On the other hand, studies on other prebiotics including fructo-
oligosaccharides (FOS) failed to show any improved growth of the fish (Ali et al. 
2017a). Meanwhile, other studies report FCR content between 1.47 to 1.80, which 
was significantly lower than the 2.15 reported in this study (Ali et al. 2017a; Ali et al. 
2016). This may be caused by improper feeding practices which led to feed wastage, 
which was incorrectly measured as feed consumed. Hence, it is highlighted that the 
estimation of nutritional requirements, including FCR requires fish to be fed to 
satiation instead of providing fixed feeding regimes (Robaina & Izquierdo 2000). 
Nevertheless, the overall lack of effect were attributed to other possible factors, 
such as variation dependent on fish species, feeding duration the type of prebiotics 
(Taati et al. 2011).   
The lack of improvement in growth of Asian sea bass could be due to insufficient 
change of the microbiota population, as no significant changes were detected in the 
populations of LAB in this study. A contributing factor to the increment of growth 
following the supplementation of prebiotics has been attributed microbial 
metabolism of indigestible substrates to be accessible as nutrients for the hosts. A 
few studies have demonstrated the effect of probiotic-inclusion in feeds, in which 
the modification of microbiota populations led to significant increment in weight 
gain and other growth parameters measured (Mohapatra et al. 2013; Son et al. 2009; 
Yanbo & Zirong 2006). These studies suggest that the improvement of microbiota in 
the GIT can improve growth of fish. However, the alternative strategy introduced in 
this study of using prebiotics to stimulate beneficial bacteria growth did not produce 
similar results, suggesting that there are other factors which may have to be 
addressed. 
Another possible factor influencing the lack of effect following RS supplementation in 
diets may be the lack of LAB present in the GIT of the Asian sea bass used in this 
study. LAB are often associated with beneficial effects to the host, such as such as 
antagonising pathogenic bacteria as well as general improvement in health which has 
been exhibited in several studies (Ring et al. 2010a; Gatesoupe 2008; Balczar et al. 
2007b). While LAB are usually present in the GITs of aquatic animals at low 
population levels, the actual relationship between the bacteria, its host and the 
environment are poorly understood (Gatesoupe 2008). In addition, studies have 
shown that only specific species of LAB stimulate beneficial effects in Asian sea bass 
(Rengpipat et al. 2008). Furthermore, due to variations in microbiota populations in 
rearing waters, it may also be possible that beneficial species of LAB may be lacking 
in the GIT of the Asian sea bass used in this study. Hence, while it is unclear which 
species of LAB may be beneficial to Asian sea bass, further studies should be 
performed, using next-generation-sequencing, to verify the presence and identity of 
LAB associated with improved health and growth of the fish (Ghanbari et al. 2015). 
Once the beneficial bacteria have been positively identified, further studies 
investigating the role of probiotics in enhancing their growth could be performed. 
In this study, the populations of LAB and ETB were enumerated as indicators of 
potential probiotic bacteria and potential pathogenic bacteria. The use of culture-
dependent methods in earlier parts of the study allowed isolation of potential 
probiotic bacteria and hence, the method was applied again in this study to estimate 
the populations of potential probiotic bacteria.  
The supplementation of diets with EH-Lens resulted in no significant shift in bacterial 
populations. The current results differ from a previous study which demonstrated 
significant effects of slowly-digestible-starch on microbial composition of European 
sea bass significantly when compared to the basal diet (Gatesoupe et al. 2014). 
Different levels of inclusion may have resulted in the shift in intestinal microbial 
composition, which could be considered in future studies. In addition, several other 
studies have shown that the microflora in Asian sea bass are susceptible to changes 
based on the diets consumed. In the study of Ali et al. (2016), the supplementation 
of inulin led to an increment in bacteria not previously detected in Asian sea bass. In 
another study, the replacement of fishmeal with plant proteins also led to an 
increment of LAB in Asian sea bass (Apper et al. 2016). These studies suggest that the 
microflora of Asian sea bass can be modulated, contradicting results from this study.  
The 2.5% inclusion rate of RS used in this study may have been insufficient to initiate 
an effect. Previous work has shown that, supplementation with FOS does not elicit a 
prebiotic effect in Asian sea bass until increased to 1% (Ali et al. 2017a). While FOS 
required only 1% to elicit an effect, this level of RS required may differ due to 
differing nature of prebiotics, as well as other factors as well (Taati et al. 2011). 
Hence, future studies at increased inclusion levels of RS may demonstrate specific 
effects in Asian sea bass. In the case of Asian sea bass, studies by Glencross found 
that diets could have a starch content of up to 30% without significantly affecting 
protein digestibility of the fish (Glencross et al. 2012). However, it has been 
suggested that the levels of RS supplemented in feed may require regulation to 
prevent unwanted stimulation of opportunistic bacteria (Gatesoupe et al. 2014). 
Fish represent an important protein source for many consumers. Whole body 
composition of the fish is often used as an indicator of quality of the fish as a food 
product and as a function of nutritional properties (Mumba & Jose 2005). A key 
nutritional quality attributed to fish is the protein content. In this study, analysis of 
Asian sea bass carcass showed no changes in crude protein content following the 
supplementation with RS. Similar results were obtained for Asian sea bass fed with 
diets supplemented with up to 1% MOS (Ali et al. 2017b). On the other hand, other 
studies which supplemented with inulin and FOS in diets resulted in significant 
increment in crude protein content for both prebiotics (Ali et al. 2017; Ali et al. 
2016). It is generally accepted that fish whole body protein content is controlled 
within narrow limits based on their weight and life cycle stages (Shearer 1994). 
Nevertheless, as no changes were observed in protein efficiency ratios, the Asian sea 
bass fed with RS in this study did not appear to convert feed into protein more 
effectively, hence resulting in no changes in carcass protein content. 
In this study, total fat content of fish carcass fed with the RS-supplemented diet was 
significantly higher compared to fish fed the basal diet. While similar results were 
observed when sea bass were fed 0.5% FOS, the results appear to deviate from 
general proximate composition of fish carcass, where protein and ash contents can 
be predicted accurately according to regression models while water and lipid 
contents vary (Ali et al. 2017a; Shearer 1994). Meanwhile, sea bass fed diets with  
inulin did not result in changes in lipid and ash content (Ali et al. 2016). In most 
studies, differences in fat content of fish muscle are often attributed to variations in 
dietary lipid and/or energy content (Grigorakis 2007; Alasalvar et al. 2002; Shearer 
1994). However, in the present study both diets had similar fat and energy contents. 
It appears unlikely that the effect is due to dietary fibre which has been reported not 
to influence on the fat content of fish carcass (Shearer 1994). Hence, due to the 
unusual trend of lipid content increment, further work is encouraged to verify the 
effect of RS on the composition changes of fish carcass or possible analytical errors. 
Studies on the application on other prebiotics in other fish species resulted in both 
increase and decreases on fat content in carcass. Many studies performed on 
prebiotics resulted in no significant changes for fat content in fish carcass. It was 
suggested that the supplementation of polysaccharides entrapped bile salts, 
reducing lipid solubilisation and hence preventing lipid accumulation (Sinha et al. 
2014). However, the supplementation of 0.2% MOS in giant sturgeon (Huso huso) 
increased crude lipid carcass, which has been attributed to improved lipid utilisation 
(Mansour et al. 2011). This may have been the case resulting in the increased crude 
lipid content of the carcass. Nevertheless, as lipid content is a significant contributor 
to meat composition and quality, and therefore taste and texture, further studies 
should be conducted to investigate the effect of increased crude lipid content in 
Asian sea bass carcass (Grigorakis 2007). Investigation into the composition of these 
lipids may also reveal potential accumulation of omega-3 long-chain polyunsaturated 
fatty acids, a desired trait from marine fish consumption in general. 
5.5 Summary 
In summary, the supplementation of the diets of Asian sea bass with EH-Lens did not 
result in significant improvements of growth after a 5-week feeding trial. Microbial 
composition of the GIT was not significantly altered as well. Lastly, it is inconclusive if 
the lipid content of the Asian sea bass carcass was affected, while protein and 
moisture content remain unchanged.  
6 Chapter 6: General discussion and conclusion 
6.1 Introduction 
In the Southeast Asia region, Asian sea bass (Lates calcarifer) is an important 
aquaculture species produced in Malaysia, Thailand, and Indonesia (FAO 2017a). As a 
growing industry, fish aquaculture faces the issue of disease susceptibility because of 
intensification, resulting in reduced growth rates and high mortality (Naylor et al. 
2000). A potential solution to optimise production, via eco-friendly methods without 
the use of antibiotics, is potentially through the use of functional food ingredients, 
including probiotics and prebiotics (Merrifield et al. 2010).  
Prebiotics are non-nutritional food components which confer health benefits on the 
host via modulation of the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) microbiota. Motivation for the 
use of prebiotics in fish feed originated from the beneficial effects observed when 
terrestrial animals are fed with prebiotics. Thus, prebiotics such as inulin and fructo-
oligosaccharides have been studied extensively across a wide range of farmed fish, 
including salmonids and carp (Merrifield et al. 2010; Ring et al. 2010b; Guerreiro et 
al. 2017b). However, while resistant starch (RS) is commonly fed to terrestrial 
animals, less emphasis has been placed on this prebiotic for fish. Hence, RS was 
selected as the prebiotic of interest in this study. 
The properties of RS as a prebiotic have been investigated through several studies, 
ranging from in vitro fermentation studies to in vivo studies conducted on both 
terrestrial animals and aquatic animals (Ring et al. 2010b; Barclay et al. 2010; Torres 
et al. 2010). Overall, in vitro and in vivo studies show that RS leads to increments in 
the beneficial populations of bacteria and increments in short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) 
production both in terrestrial animals and their faecal bacteria (Giuberti et al. 2013; 
Haenen et al. 2013; Zhou et al. 2013). Furthermore RS was found to improve SCFA 
production in fish (Gatesoupe et al. 2014) to a level comparable to other commonly 
used prebiotics, such as inulin, suggesting that RS may be potentially effective for use 
in aquaculture.  
Several studies have also shown that different properties of RS may influence its 
prebiotic properties (Zhou et al. 2013; Wronkowska et al. 2006). Apart from high-
amylose maize, which represents one of the most commonly studied sources of RS, 
legumes were suggested as an important source of RS due to the type of starch 
accumulated (Hoover & Zhou 2003). While several studies have investigated RS 
content across various types of legumes, little information is available on the in vitro 
fermentation of legume RS as a prebiotic. It was therefore decided to focus on 
legumes as an underutilised crop and an effective source of RS for both in vitro and 
in vivo studies. 
Hence, this study aimed to investigate the use of leguminous RS as prebiotic to 
improve the growth and health of the Asian sea bass as a Malaysian aquaculture 
farmed fish. It involved the screening of legume starches and further processing to 
improve the RS contents, followed by an in vitro investigation of their prebiotic 
properties based on potential probiotic lactic acid bacteria (LAB) isolated from the 
intestines of the fish of interest. Finally, the effect of RS from legumes were 
investigated in vivo in fish feeding trials.  
6.2 General discussion 
6.2.1 Extraction of RS from underutilised legumes 
In this section, underutilised legumes were screened as potential sources of resistant 
starch. Starch was isolated from several types of legumes via alkaline steeping, 
followed by the analysis of their RS content via Megazyme RS kit. Then, the legume 
starches were processed via hydrolysis, gelatinisation and retrogradation to increase 
their RS content. 
Legumes were shown to be an effective source of starch, with content ranging from 
35.30% to 40.33% (w/w) from red lentils, Bambara groundnuts and pigeon peas via 
alkaline steeping. These starch amounts were within the expected range of studies 
reported in a review (Hoover & Zhou 2003). Other starch isolation methods exist, 
which differ depending on the types of plant sources and the end use of the starch, 
potentially resulting in changes in properties, such as granule structure (Singh et al. 
1997). For example, while the application of bisulphite for protein removal resulted 
in higher starch yields from potato (56.1% vs 38.9%), the kinetic parameters of the 
starch isolated via alkaline steeping showed greater resistance towards enzyme 
attack, suggesting alkaline steeping to be favourable for RS production (Djabali et al. 
2009). 
Apart from alkaline steeping, enzymatic removal of proteins via protease were also 
shown to be effective with no difference in starch yields, which ranged between 
79.9% to 88.5% for chestnut and acorn flours respectively (Correia et al. 2012). 
However, the use of enzymes is costly compared to the other methods, especially for 
starch which is generally cheap (Correia & Beirao-Da-Costa 2010). Many studies also 
show that alkaline steeping was effective in reducing protein levels, reducing protein 
contents of approximately 20% to the range of 1% to 0.3% in Bambara groundnuts 
and barley (Adebowale et al. 2002; Andersson et al. 2001). Similar results were 
shown in this study, with mung bean protein being reduced from 23.7% to 0.3% in 
mung bean flour. Hence, legume starch isolated via alkaline steeping was shown, not 
only to be superior in purity, but also cost and had higher RS content (Correia et al. 
2012; Djabali et al. 2009), reducing the need for further optimisation.  
Following starch isolation the processing of starches via hydrolysis, gelatinisation and 
retrogradation was also found to improve RS content. Between the two methods 
applied in this study, enzyme-hydrolysis was shown to be more effective than acid-
hydrolysis as a pre-treatment prior to gelatinisation and retrogradation. The RS 
content of the legumes screened in this study ranged from 3.93% to 11.86% (Table 
2.4). The RS content reported was significantly higher than those from cereals (0.2% 
to 0.7% w/w), except for high-amylose maize (65.8% to 66.5% w/w), due to the 
enzyme-susceptibility of the A-type starch crystalline structure found in cereals 
(Alsaffar 2011). However, while high-amylose maize possesses high RS content, 
further processing did not improve RS content further (Htoon et al. 2009). In 
addition, as maize is one of the major crops and was already commonly studied, it 
was not included in this study. Comparing between these two crop categories, 
legumes appear to be more suitable due to their relatively higher RS contents. 
6.2.2 In vitro prebiotic potential of leguminous RS 
In the previous section, the RS from six underutilised legumes were successfully 
produced via the enzyme-hydrolysis method. These legumes contained substantial 
amounts of RS, ranging from 12.40 to 18.06 % (w/w) (Table 2.4). In this section, the 
prebiotic potential of these leguminous RS was investigated on the viability of three 
LAB isolated from the intestines of zebrafish (Danio rerio) and Asian sea bass.  
The bacteria showed improved growth and acid production when cultured in 
nutrient broth supplemented with 5% (w/v) of leguminous starch and RS prepared in 
the previous chapters. Bacterial growth and acid production of Weissella cibaria 
NM1 and Lactococcus garvieae NM2 improved significantly for three of the 
leguminous enzyme-RS following treatment, with growth increments ranging from 
4.24% to 43.9%. This contrasts with acid-RS, where the growth and acid production 
of the two bacteria increased with only two legumes after treatment and were 
generally reduced by approximately 21.81%. In addition, screening of RS from 
different legumes in vitro via Enterococcus gilvus V1 indicated differences in prebiotic 
potential, where red lentil was shown to be more effective than the other legumes. 
In this study, the supplementation of 5% (w/v) red lentil enzyme-RS led to bacteria 
viable count increment of 2.3 log10 CFU/ml and an end point viable count of 8.39 
log10 CFU/ml after 24 hr of culture (Table 4.7). Meanwhile, the pH change and end 
point pH after 24 hr of culture was observed to be -1.78 and 4.61 respectively. The 
growth and acid production of the bacteria in this study were similar to studies using 
other prebiotics, such as RS and fructo-oligosaccharide (FOS) (Siew-Wai et al. 2010; 
Wronkowska et al. 2006). Processed starches showed improved growth of 
approximately 1.0 log10 CFU/ml when Bifidobacteria pseudolongum were cultured 
with 1% processed wheat, potato and pea starches when compared to their native 
starch counterparts. However, only processed pea starches showed lower end point 
pH of 5.5 as compared to the native pea starch end point pH of 6.1 (Wronkowska et 
al. 2006). On the other hand, cultivation of Lactobacillus casei on 0.75% sago RS was 
shown to be more effective than 0.5% FOS, with end point viable counts of 8.8 log10 
CFU/ml and pH of 5.40 versus 7.69 log10 CFU/ml and pH of 5.91 respectively (Siew-
Wai et al. 2010).  
While it is uncertain if the concentrations of prebiotics applied in this in vitro study 
may have affected the growth and acid production, the carbohydrate is usually not 
consumed completely in 24 hr of culture and could be analysed in future studies due 
to its potential correlation with growth (Siew-Wai et al. 2010). The pH reductions 
observed in this study also suggested that SCFA were produced (Zhou et al. 2013). 
While studies suggest that the fermentation of RS mainly results in acetate and 
butyrate production (Zaman & Sarbini 2015; Zhou et al. 2013; Brouns et al. 2002), it 
may still be useful to investigate the types of SCFA produced via gas-
chromatography, as fermentation of modified starches have been reported to 
produce different SCFA profiles (Wronkowska et al. 2006). Hence, the data suggest 
that leguminous enzyme-RS exhibits prebiotic properties in vitro similar to other 
more recognised prebiotics.  
While RS content differs between each of the samples supplemented in culture, its 
role in bacterial growth and acid production is still not fully understood. While the 
application of the treatments in Chapter 2 resulted in higher RS content as a 
desirable trait as a prebiotic (Regmi et al. 2011), the increased RS content measured 
in some leguminous RS after treatment this study was not reflective of the bacteria 
growth and acid production measured. For example, although mung bean enzyme-RS 
showed a 178.52% RS increase following treatment, their growth in vitro did not 
differ (Table 3.3, Table 4.7). The results in this study do not agree with studies which 
suggest that higher RS content reduces bacteria utilisation and therefore growth 
(Abia et al. 1993). This creates a need for future studies to investigate other factors 
to elucidate the mechanism of starch utilisation of bacteria.  
Several studies have suggested potential factors that may influence bacterial 
utilisation of starch. Some studies highlight properties of the starch granule as a key 
factor, where a smooth granule surface prevents adhesion and bacteria accessibility, 
while pores present on the surface allows endogenous fermentation (Wronkowska et 
al. 2006; Sotomayor et al. 1999; Abia et al. 1993). However, this was not the case 
shown in another study, where amorphous and completely disrupted legume starch 
granules maintained resistance towards degradation, suggesting this to be an 
inherent property (Wyatt & Horn 1988). In addition, utilisation of starch as a 
substrate may also revolve around the capability of bacteria to utilise cell surface 
proteins for adhesion, which improves substrate hydrolysis and provides an 
advantage due to close physical proximity (Crittenden et al. 2001). Lastly, as fructan 
chain lengths were shown to influence its fermentability by bacteria (Scott et al. 
2014), varying amylopectin chain lengths and its interactions in the starch chains may 
also play a role in bacteria utilisation due to its effect on enzyme degradation 
(Sandhu & Lim 2008; Zhou et al. 2004). Nevertheless, while the specific mechanisms 
whereby treatment improved bacteria utilisation are uncertain, enzyme-RS produced 
from red lentil starch was selected to be used in fish feeding trials based on the 
prebiotic properties displayed in the in vitro study performed. 
6.2.3 Resistant starch as prebiotic supplemented in vivo/fish feeding trials 
In the previous section, three types of RS and starch from six different underutilised 
legumes were screened for the prebiotic properties of increasing LAB growth and 
acid production. As these prebiotic properties were higher for red lentils and adzuki 
bean enzyme-RS supplements, these two RS were selected to be included as 
supplements in fish feed to investigate the prebiotic effects in vivo.  
The fish used in this study were zebrafish (a freshwater species commonly used in 
academic research) and a Malaysian aquaculture fish, the Asian sea bass. While 
zebrafish have the potential to be used in nutritional studies, it is important to 
recognise that the conditions under which they were routinely bred and housed 
were strictly controlled and, as such caution should be shown in extrapolating the 
results to other fish species farmed under commercial conditions (Ulloa et al. 2014). 
However, there relatively small size, rapid growth rate and extensive knowledge of 
their genome, together with the ability to carefully control environmental conditions, 
make them a useful model for testing specific effects of nutrients. 
For fish feeds, growth of the fish and feed efficiencies are key traits desired by 
farmers. In this study, feeding both zebrafish and Asian sea bass with diets 
supplemented with leguminous starch at 2.5% did not lead to any adverse effects on 
its health. Meanwhile, while growth did not differ when fed different diets, zebrafish 
fed with RS had decreased food conversion ratios from 2.01 to 1.76. Similarly, 
fishmeal conversion ratio was also lower at 0.64 versus the basal diet at 0.78. On the 
other hand, no difference was observed in growth and feed conversion ratios in 
Asian sea bass fed with leguminous RS.  
While studies on RS as a prebiotic in fish feed are scant, many studies have been 
conducted on other prebiotics. Several studies highlight similar results as shown in 
this study, where the supplementation with prebiotics such as mannan-
oligosaccharides (MOS) (Torrecillas et al. 2011; Dimitroglou et al. 2010), short chain 
FOS (Guerreiro et al. 2015), xylo-oligosaccharides (XOS) and galacto-oligosaccharides 
(Guerreiro et al. 2017a) did not result in increased growth. The dosage applied in the 
studies above ranged from 0.2% to 1.0% and may have been a factor resulting in no 
differences in growth. Nevertheless, despite the higher dosage of 2.5% applied in this 
study, no differences were also observed. 
Various factors may influence growth and feed conversion efficiencies following 
prebiotic supplementation, such as changes in gut morphology or changes in 
digestive enzyme activity (Guerreiro et al. 2017b). Digestive enzyme activity may 
improve following the production of bacterial digestive enzymes, increasing the 
amounts of nutrients absorbed by the host (Wu et al. 2013; Soleimani et al. 2012). 
Meanwhile, the absorption of SCFA production by microbiota improves GIT structure 
in terms of microvilli density, height villi structure complexity and absorptive area, 
overall improving nutrient absorption for the host (Anguiano et al. 2013). As these 
observations were not performed on zebrafish in this study due to time constraints 
and logistic limitations, the potential of RS in promoting these factors is not 
conclusive despite reduced feed conversion ratios. Hence, future studies including 
the analysis of GIT morphology could be useful in elucidating whether a prebiotic has 
an effect or not in vivo.  
When Asian sea bass were fed with RS from red lentils, no changes were observed in 
population counts of bacteria of Enterobacteriacieae family or LAB. (Table 6.4). 
Several other studies also highlight the lack of microbiota changes following 
supplementation of prebiotics, such as the use of inulin (Cerezuela et al. 2013), MOS 
(Dimitroglou et al. 2010) or XOS (Guerreiro et al. 2017a) in other fish species .On the 
other hand, the GIT microbial community of the Asian sea bass has been shown to 
change following the supplementation with 2% (w/w) inulin, which resulted in 
increments in microbial species which may have benefited the host, via assistance in 
digestion of the complex protein-rich feed through their ability to degrade complex 
organic compounds and release of other extracellular enzymes, antibiotics and exo-
polysaccharides (Ali et al. 2016).  
Changes in fish GIT microbial communities are also influenced by variations in 
aqueous environments, such as temperature, salinity and surrounding bacterial 
populations (Merrifield & Rodiles 2015). Various studies compare microbial 
communities using PCR-DGGE, which may not be sensitive enough to detect changes 
in microbial populations (Zhou et al. 2014). Similarly, the conventional culture-
dependent method applied in this study also faces this limitation. Future studies 
should implement more sensitive techniques, such as next-generation sequencing to 
improve coverage of microbiota changes which is one of the key aspects of a 
prebiotic (Zhou et al. 2014).  
The nutritional content of the fish carcass may serve as an indicator of the nutritional 
content of the edible fish flesh (Mumba & Jose 2005). In this study, one of the 
potential changes in the nutritional content of the Asian sea bass carcass following 
feeding with RS from red lentils was the increment of fat content from 11% to 18%. 
Although the result from this study is inconclusive, the inclusion of prebiotics in 
other studies have observed increments in carcass fat content. Asian sea bass were 
fed FOS led to carcass fat content increasing from 2.75% to 4.17% (% wet weight), 
although the mechanism was not elucidated (Ali et al. 2017b). Meanwhile, increase 
of carcass fat content from 3.26% to 3.53% (% wet weight) in giant sturgeon (Huso 
huso) juveniles fed with MOS were associated with increased fatty acid utilisation 
(Mansour et al. 2011). These results contradict other studies where fish fed 
prebiotics such as inulin (Ali et al. 2016), and MOS (Ali et al. 2017a) showed no 
change in carcass fat content. Apart from increased fatty acid utilisation, lipid 
accumulation has been attributed to excess energy storage in fish, as well as high 
protein content in feed causing proteins to be used as an energy source (Grigorakis 
2007; Shearer 1994). As the factors influencing lipid accumulation in this study are 
undetermined, further investigation is warranted to confirm mechanisms associated 
with increased fat accumulation in Asian sea bass fed RS-supplemented diets. 
Investigation of the impact of RS-supplemented diets on the fatty acid composition, 
especially in terms of omega-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids of Asian sea 
bass, would also be of interest in terms of fish quality. However, as Asian sea bass 
have been found to be unable to convert dietary alpha-linolenic acid into omega-3 
long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, the accumulation of lipids in the carcass may 
represent a negative effect of RS supplementation which could be investigated and 
potentially applied in other aquaculture species as well (Tu et al. 2013). 
6.3 Conclusion 
From the results presented in this thesis, it can be concluded that RS derived from 
legumes may be processed to be an effective prebiotic in vitro, while further studies 
are required to investigate its application as a prebiotic in vivo. Starch was effectively 
isolated from underutilised legume and was effectively processed to prepare RS. 
These RS were shown to possess prebiotic properties on potential probiotic LAB 
(isolated from fish) when cultured in vitro, with enzyme-hydrolysed red lentils 
promoting better growth and acid production. Results obtained in vivo were not 
conclusive with little evidence of benefits in both zebrafish and Asian sea bass. 
Overall, while several questions remained unanswered, this study demonstrates the 
potential use of RS as a prebiotic in commercial fish species, but highlights the need 
for further in vivo trials, preferably within an environment that reflects commercial 
production as well as variation in prebiotic dosage. Furthermore, studies should also 
address the impact of such RS in fish challenged with pathogenic bacteria or if innate 
immune responses are enhanced. 
References 
AACC International., 1999. Method 76-13.01. Total Starch Assay Procedure 
(Megazyme Amyloglucosidase/alpha-Amylase Method) Approved November 3, 
1999. In Approved Methods of Analysis, 11th Ed. St. Paul, MN, U.S.A.: AACC 
International. 
Abia, R., Buchanan, C.J. & Eastwood, M.A., 1993. Structural changes during the 
retrogradation of legume starches modify the in vitro fermentation. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 41, pp.18561863. 
Adebowale, K.O., Adeniyi Afolabi, T. & Lawal, O.S., 2002. Isolation, chemical 
modification and physicochemical characterisation of Bambarra groundnut 
(Voandzeia subterranean) starch and flour. Food Chemistry, 78(3), pp.305311. 
Alasalvar, C. et al., 2002. Differentiation of cultured and wild sea bass (Dicentrarchus 
labrax): total lipid content, fatty acid and trace mineral composition. Food 
Chemistry, 79, pp.145150. 
Alder, J. et al., 2008. Forage fish: From ecosystems to markets. Annual Review of 
Environment and Resources, 33, pp.153166. 
Ali, S.S.R. et al., 2017a. Effect of dietary fructooligosaccharide supplementation on 
growth, body composition, hematological and immunological parameters of 
Asian seabass (Lates calcarifer). Aquaculture International, 25, pp.837848. 
Ali, S.S.R. et al., 2017b. Effect of dietary mannan oligosaccharide on growth, body 
composition, haematology and biochemical parameters of Asian seabass (Lates 
calcarifer). Aquaculture Research, 48, pp.899908. 
Ali, S.S.R. et al., 2016. Effect of dietary prebiotic inulin on growth, body composition 
and gut microbiota of Asian seabass (Lates calcarifer). Animal Feed Science and 
Technology, 217, pp.8794. 
Alsaffar, A.A., 2011. Effect of food processing on the resistant starch content of cereals 
and cereal products - a review. International Journal of Food Science and 
Technology, 46, pp.455462. 
Andersson, A.A.M., Andersson, R. & Aman, P., 2001. Starch and by-products from a 
laboratory-scale barley starch isolation procedure. Cereal Chemistry, 78, pp.507
Andika, D.O., Onyango, M.O.A. & Onyago, J.C., 2008. Role of Bambara groundnuts 
(Vigna subterranea) in cropping systems in Western Kenya. In J. Smartt & N. Haq, 
eds. International Symposium on New Crops and Uses: Their role in a rapidly 
changing world. Southampton: Centre of Underutilised Crops, University of 
Southampton, pp. 204212. 
Anguiano, M. et al., 2013. The effects of prebiotics on the digestive enzymes and gut 
histomorphology of red drum (Sciaenops ocellatus) and hybrid striped bass 
(Morone chrysops x M . saxatilis). British Journal of Nutrition, 109, pp.623629. 
Apper, E. et al., 2016. Hydrolysed wheat gluten as part of a diet based on animal and 
plant proteins supports good growth performance of Asian seabass (Lates 
calcarifer), without impairing intestinal morphology or microbiota. Aquaculture, 
453, pp.4048. 
Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2012. Fishing production and trade, Australian Bureau 
of Statistics. Available at: http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/by 
Subject/1301.0~2012~Main Features~Fishing~182. 
Balczar, J.L. et al., 2007a. Changes in intestinal microbiota and humoral immune 
response following probiotic administration in brown trout (Salmo trutta). The 
British Journal of Nutrition, 97, pp.522527. 
Balczar, J.L. et al., 2007b. Enhancement of the immune response and protection 
induced by probiotic lactic acid bacteria against furunculosis in rainbow trout 
(Oncorhynchus mykiss). FEMS Immunology and Medical Microbiology, 51, 
pp.185193. 
Balczar, J.L. et al., 2007c. Sequencing of variable regions of the 16S rRNA gene for 
identification of lactic acid bacteria isolated from the intestinal microbiota of 
healthy salmonids. Comparative Immunology, Microbiology and Infectious 
Diseases, 30, pp.111118. 
Balczar, J.L. et al., 2006. The role of probiotics in aquaculture. Veterinary 
Microbiology, 114, pp.173186. 
Baldwin, P.M., 2001. Starch granule-associated proteins and polypeptides: A review. 
Starch - Strke, 53, p.475. 
Barclay, T. et al., 2010. Inulin - a versatile polysaccharide with multiple pharmaceutical 
and food chemical uses. Journal of Excipients and Food Chemicals, 1, pp.2750. 
Barr, B.K. et al., 1996. Identification of two functionally different classes of 
exocellulases. Biochemistry, 35, pp.586592. 
Bates, J.M. et al., 2006. Distinct signals from the microbiota promote different aspects 
of zebrafish gut differentiation. Developmental Biology, 297, pp.374386. 
Beards, E., Tuohy, K. & Gibson, G., 2010. Bacterial, SCFA and gas profiles of a range of 
food ingredients following in vitro fermentation by human colonic microbiota. 
Anaerobe, 16, pp.420425. 
Bednarczyk, M. et al., 2011. Field and in vitro study on prebiotic effect of raffinose 
family oligosaccharides in chickens. Bull Vet Inst Pulawy, 55, pp.465469. 
Bellei, G. & Haslberger, A., 2012. Dietary fibre and prebiotics. Journal fr 
Ernhrungsmedizin, 14, pp.1215. 
Bergey, D.H. (David H. & Holt, J.G., 1994. Bergeys manual of determinative 
bacteriology, Williams & Wilkins. 
Bermudes, M. et al., 2010. The effects of temperature and size on the growth, energy 
budget and waste outputs of barramundi (Lates calcarifer). Aquaculture, 306, 
pp.160166. 
Betancur-Ancona, D., Lpez-Luna, J. & Chel-Guerrero, L., 2003. Comparison of the 
chemical composition and functional properties of Phaseolus lunatus prime and 
tailing starches. Food Chemistry, 82, pp.217225. 
Bezkorovainy, A., 2001. Probiotics: determinants of survival and growth in the gut. The 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 73, p.399S405S. 
Bhat, R. & Karim, A.A., 2009. Exploring the nutritional potential of wild and 
underutilized legumes. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 
8, pp.305331. 
Van den Bilcke, N., Simbo, D.J. & Samson, R., 2013. Water relations and drought 
tolerance of young African tamarind (Tamarindus indica L.) trees. South African 
Journal of Botany, 88, pp.352360. 
Bingham, S.A. et al., 2003. Dietary fibre in food and protection against colorectal 
cancer in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition 
(EPIC): an observational study. The Lancet, 361, pp.14961501. 
Bjrkroth, K.J. et al., 2002. Taxonomic study of Weissella confusa and description of 
Weissella cibaria sp. nov., detected in food and clinical samples. International 
Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology, 52, pp.141148. 
Bondad-Reantaso, M.G. et al., 2005. Disease and health management in Asian 
aquaculture. Veterinary Parasitology, 132, pp.249272. 
Boonyaratpalin, M., Suraneiranat, P. & Tunpibal, T., 1998. Replacement of fish meal 
with various types of soybean products in diets for the Asian seabass, Lates 
calcarifer. Aquaculture, 161, pp.6778. 
Bowe, C., 2007. Potential answers to the adaptation to and mitigation of climage 
change through the adoption of underutilised crops. Tropical Agricultural 
Association Newsletter, pp.912. 
Boye, J., Zare, F. & Pletch, A., 2010. Pulse proteins: Processing, characterization, 
functional properties and applications in food and feed. Food Research 
International, 43, pp.414431. 
Boi, N. et al., 2017. Raw starch degrading -amylases: an unsolved riddle. Amylase, 
1, pp.1225. 
Bromage, E.S. & Owens, L., 2002. Infection of barramundi Lates calcarifer with 
Streptococcus iniae: Effects of different routes of exposure. Diseases of Aquatic 
Organisms, 52, pp.199205. 
Brouns, F., Kettlitz, B. & Arrigoni, E., 2002. Resistant starch and "the butyrate 
revolution. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 13, pp.251261. 
Burr, G. et al., 2008. Effects of prebiotics on nutrient digestibility of a soybean-meal-
based diet by red drum Sciaenops ocellatus (Linnaeus). Aquaculture Research, 
39, pp.16801686. 
Burr, G., Gatlin, D. & Ricke, S., 2005. Microbial ecology of the gastrointestinal tract of 
fish and the potential application of prebiotics and probiotics in Finnish 
aquaculture. Journal of the World Aquaculture Society, 36, pp.425435. 
Burr, G. & Gatlin III, D.M., 2009. Effects of the prebiotics GroBiotic-A and inulin on 
the intestinal microbiota of red drum, Sciaenops ocellatus. Journal of the World 
Aquaculture Society, 40, pp.440449. 
Cerezuela, R. et al., 2013. Changes in intestinal morphology and microbiota caused by 
dietary administration of inulin and Bacillus subtilis in gilthead sea bream (Sparus 
aurata L.) specimens. Fish and Shellfish Immunology, 34, pp.10631070. 
Cerezuela, R. et al., 2008. Effects of inulin on gilthead seabream (Sparus aurata L.) 
innate immune parameters. Fish & Shellfish Immunology, 24, pp.663668. 
Champ, M. et al., 2003. Advances in dietary fibre characterisation. Definition of dietary 
fibre, physiological relevance, health benefits and analytical aspects. Nutrition 
Research Reviews, 16, pp.7182. 
Chang, P.H., Lin, C.W. & Lee, Y.C., 2002. Lactococcus garvieae infection of cultured 
rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss, in Taiwan and associated biophysical 
characteristics and histopathology. Bulletin of the European Association of Fish 
Pathologists, 22, pp.319327. 
Cheng, W., Liu, C.H. & Chen, J.C., 2002. Effect of nitrite on interaction between the 
giant freshwater prawn Macrobrachium rosenbergii and its pathogen 
Lactococcus garvieae. Diseases of Aquatic Organisms, 50, pp.189197. 
Chiotelli, E., Pilosio, G. & Le Meste, M., 2002. Effect of sodium chloride on the 
gelatinization of starch: A multimeasurement study. Biopolymers, 63, pp.4158. 
Cho, S.S., Prosky, L. & Dreher, M., 1999. Complex Carbohydrates in Foods, 
Choi, J.S. et al., 2004. Transition to an alternate state in a continental shelf ecosystem. 
Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 61, pp.505510. 
Chong, V., Al-Azad, S. & Shapawi, R., 2016. Comparison of two edible mushroom 
extract as aquaculture feed additive to enhance immune response of Asian 
Seabass. Transactions on Science and Technology, 3, pp.427432. 
Chung, H.-J., Liu, Q. & Hoover, R., 2009. Impact of annealing and heat-moisture 
treatment on rapidly digestible, slowly digestible and resistant starch levels in 
native and gelatinized corn, pea and lentil starches. Carbohydrate Polymers, 75, 
pp.436447. 
Chung, H.J., Liu, Q. & Hoover, R., 2010. Effect of single and dual hydrothermal 
treatments on the crystalline structure, thermal properties, and nutritional 
fractions of pea, lentil, and navy bean starches. Food Research International, 43, 
pp.501508. 
Correia, P.R. et al., 2012. Starch isolation from chestnut and acorn flours through 
alkaline and enzymatic methods. Food and Bioproducts Processing, 90, pp.309
Correia, P.R. & Beirao-Da-Costa, M.L., 2010. Chestnut and acorn starch properties 
affected by isolation methods. Starch/Staerke, 62, pp.421428. 
Covington, M.B., 2004. Omega-3 fatty acids. American Family Physician, 70, pp.133
Crittenden, R. et al., 2001. Adhesion of Bifidobacteria to granular starch and its 
implications in probiotic technologies. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 
67, pp.34693475. 
Cummings, J.H. & Macfarlane, G.T., 1991. The control and consequences of bacterial 
fermentation in the human colon. Journal of Applied Bacteriology, 70, pp.443
Dakora, F.D. & Keya, S.O., 1997. Contribution of legume nitrogen fixation to 
sustainable agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 29, 
pp.809817. 
Davila, A.M. et al., 2013. Re-print of intestinal luminal nitrogen metabolism: Role of 
the gut microbiota and consequences for the host. Pharmacological Research, 
69, pp.114126. 
Davis, C.D. & Milner, J.A., 2009. Gastrointestinal microflora, food components and 
colon cancer prevention. The Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry, 20, pp.743
De, D. et al., 2015. Growth performance, nutrient digestibility and digestive enzyme 
activity in Asian seabass, Lates calcarifer juveniles fed diets supplemented with 
cellulolytic and amylolytic gut bacteria isolated from brackishwater fish. 
Aquaculture Research, 46, pp.16881698. 
Defoirdt, T. et al., 2007. Alternatives to antibiotics to control bacterial infections: 
Luminescent vibriosis in aquaculture as an example. Trends in Biotechnology, 25, 
pp.472479. 
Denev, S. et al., 2009. Microbial ecology of the gastrointestinal tract of fish and the 
potential application of probiotics and prebiotics in finfish aquaculture. 
International Aquatic Research, 1, pp.129. 
Dimitroglou, A. et al., 2010. Effects of mannan oligosaccharide (MOS) 
supplementation on growth performance, feed utilisation, intestinal histology 
and gut microbiota of gilthead sea bream (Sparus aurata). Aquaculture, 300, 
pp.182188. 
Dimitroglou, A. et al., 2011. Microbial manipulations to improve fish health and 
production  A Mediterranean perspective. Fish & Shellfish Immunology, 30, 
pp.116. 
Djabali, D. et al., 2009. Relationship between potato starch isolation methods and 
kinetic parameters of hydrolysis by free and immobilised a-amylase on alginate 
(from Laminaria digitata algae). Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 22, 
pp.563570. 
Dodamani, S. & Kaliwal, B., 2014. Production of bacteriocin by Lactococcus garvieae 
and influence of various supplements on its antimicrobial activity. Indo American 
Journal of Pharmaceutical Research, 4, p.2. 
DOFM, 2016. Annual Fisheries Statistics 2015, Putrajaya. Available at: 
http://www.dof.gov.my/dof2/resources/Perangkaan/Perangkaan 
2015/13.1_.2015_(11_files_merged)_.pdf. 
Domig, K.J., Mayer, H.K. & Kneifel, W., 2003. Methods used for the isolation, 
enumeration, characterisation and identification of Enterococcus spp. 2. Pheno-
and genotypic criteria. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 88, pp.165
Eerlingen, R.C., Deceuninck, M. & Delcour, J., 1993. Enzyme-resistant starch. II. 
Influence of amylose chain length on resistant starch formation. Cereal Chem, 
70, pp.345350. 
Elli, M. et al., 2000. Iron requirement of Lactobacillus spp. in completely chemically 
defined growth media. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 88, pp.695703. 
Elmstahl, H.L., 2002. Resistant starch content in a selection of starchy foods on the 
Swedish market. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 56, pp.500505. 
Englyst, H.N. et al., 1996. Measurement of resistant starch in vitro and in vivo. British 
Journal of Nutrition, 75, pp.749755. 
Evans, J.J. et al., 2006. First report of Streptococcus agalactiae and Lactococcus 
garvieae From a wild bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncatus). Journal of Wildlife 
Diseases, 42, pp.561569.  
FAO, 2017a. FAO Fisheries &amp; Aquaculture - Cultured Aquatic Species Information 
Programme - Lates calcarifer (Block, 1790). Available at: 
http://www.fao.org/fishery/culturedspecies/Lates_calcarifer/en 
FAO, 2017b. Global Aquaculture Production 1950-2015.  Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations Fisheries Statistics - Aquaculture. Available at: 
http://www.fao.org/fishery/statistics/global-aquaculture-production/query/en. 
FAO, 2017c. Lates calcarifer (Bloch, 1790). Available at: 
http://www.fao.org/fishery/species/3068/en 
FAO, 2015. Species Fact Sheets - Lates calcarifer (Bloch, 1790). FAO Fisheries & 
Aquaculture. Available at: http://www.fao.org/fishery/species/3068/en  
FAO & WHO, 2011. Report of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on the Risks and 
Benefits of Fish Consumption, Rome; Geneva. Available at: 
http://www.fao.org/docrep/014/ba0136e/ba0136e00.pdf. 
Fernando, W.M.U. et al., 2010. Diets supplemented with chickpea or its main 
oligosaccharide component raffinose modify faecal microbial composition in 
healthy adults. Beneficial Microbes, 1, pp.197207. 
Forsatkar, M.N. et al., 2017. Effects of prebiotic mannan oligosaccharide on the 
growth, survival, and anxiety-like behaviors of zebrafish (Danio rerio). Journal of 
Applied Aquaculture, 29, pp.183196. 
Foulqui-Moreno, M.R. et al., 2006. The role and application of enterococci in food 
and health. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 106, pp.124. 
Frank, K.T. & Brickman, D., 2000. Allee effects and compensatory population dynamics 
within a stock complex. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 57, 
pp.513517. 
Franz, C.M.A.P. et al., 2011. Enterococci as probiotics and their implications in food 
safety. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 151, pp.125140. 
Fuentes-Zaragoza, E. et al., 2010. Resistant starch as functional ingredient: A review. 
Food Research International, 43, pp.931942. 
Fuentes-Zaragoza, E. et al., 2011. Resistant starch as prebiotic: A review. Starch - 
Strke, 63(7), pp.406415.]. 
Fusco, V. et al., 2015. The genus Weissella: Taxonomy, ecology and biotechnological 
potential. Frontiers in Microbiology, 6, p.155. 
Ganguly, S. et al., 2013. Supplementation of prebiotics in fish feed: A review. Reviews 
in Fish Biology and Fisheries, 23, pp.195199. 
Garcia, S.M. & Grainger, R.J.R., 2005. Gloom and doom? The future of marine capture 
fisheries. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological 
Sciences, 360, pp.2146. 
Gatesoupe, F., 2005. Probiotics and prebiotics for fish culture , at the parting of the 
ways. Aqua Feeds: Formulation & Beyond, 2, pp.35. 
Gatesoupe, F., 2008. Updating the importance of lactic acid bacteria in fish farming: 
Natural occurrence and probiotic treatments. Journal of Molecular Microbiology 
and Biotechnology, 14, pp.107114. 
Gatesoupe, F.J. et al., 2014. The effects of dietary carbohydrate sources and forms on 
metabolic response and intestinal microbiota in sea bass juveniles (Dicentrarchus 
labrax). Aquaculture, 422423, pp.4753. 
Gazi, U. & Martinez-Pomares, L., 2009. Influence of the mannose receptor in host 
immune responses. Immunobiology, 214, pp.554561. 
Genc, M.A. et al., 2007. Effects of dietary mannan oligosaccharides (MOS) on growth 
,body composition, and intestine and liver histology of the hybrid tilapia 
(Oreochromis niloticus x O . aureus). The Israeli Journal of Aquaculture - 
Bamidgeh, 59, pp.1016. 
Ghanbari, M., Kneifel, W. & Domig, K.J., 2015. A new view of the fish gut microbiome: 
Advances from next-generation sequencing. Aquaculture, 448, pp.464475. 
Gibson, G. & Roberfroid, M.B., 1995. Dietary modulation of the human colonic 
microbiota: introducing the concept of prebiotics. The Journal of Nutrition, 125, 
pp.14011412. 
Gibson, G.R. et al., 2004. Dietary modulation of the human colonic microbiota: 
updating the concept of prebiotics. Nutrition Research Reviews, 17, pp.259275. 
Gibson, L.., Woodworth, J. & George, A.., 1998. Probiotic activity of Aeromonas media 
on the Pacific oyster, Crassostrea gigas, when challenged with Vibrio tubiashii. 
Aquaculture, 169, pp.111120. 
Gildberg, A. & Mikkelsen, H., 1998. Effects of supplementing the feed to Atlantic cod 
(Gadus morhua) fry with lactic acid bacteria and immuno-stimulating peptides 
during a challenge trial with Vibrio anguillarum. Aquaculture, 167, pp.103113. 
Gioacchini, G. et al., 2014. The Influence of probiotics on zebrafish Danio rerio innate 
immunity and hepatic stress. Zebrafish, 11, pp.98106. 
Giuberti, G. et al., 2013. In vitro production of short-chain fatty acids from resistant 
starch by pig faecal inoculum. Animal, 7, pp.14461453. 
Glencross, B. et al., 2012. An assessment of cereal grains and other starch sources in 
diets for barramundi (Lates calcarifer)  implications for nutritional and 
functional qualities of extruded feeds. Aquaculture Nutrition, 18, pp.388399. 
Glencross, B. et al., 2016. An evaluation of the complete replacement of both fishmeal 
and fish oil in diets for juvenile Asian seabass, Lates calcarifer. Aquaculture, 451, 
pp.298309. 
Glencross, B., 2006. The nutritional management of barramundi, Lates calcarifer  a 
review. Aquaculture Nutrition, 12, pp.291309. 
Gomez-gil, B., Roque, A. & Turnbull, J.F., 2000. The use and selection of probiotic 
bacteria for use in the culture of larval aquatic organisms. Aquaculture, 191, 
pp.259270. 
Gmez-Requeni, P. et al., 2010. A reference growth curve for nutritional experiments 
in zebrafish (Danio rerio) and changes in whole body proteome during 
development. Fish Physiology and Biochemistry, 36, pp.11991215. 
Gomez, R.G.D., Balcazar, J.L. & Shen, M.A., 2007. Probiotics as control agents in 
aquaculture. Journal of Ocean University of China, 6, pp.7679. 
Goi, I. et al., 1996. Analysis of resistant starch: a method for foods and food products. 
Food Chemistry, 56(4), pp.445449. 
Gonzlez, C.-J. et al., 1999. Bacterial microflora of wild brown trout (Salmo trutta), wild 
pike (Esox lucius), and aquacultured rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). 
Journal of Food Protection, 62, pp.12701277. 
Graham, P.H. & Vance, C.P., 2003. Legumes: Importance and constraints to greater 
use. Plant Physiology, 131, pp.872877. 
Greenberg, P., 2010. Four Fish: the future of the last wild food, New York: Penguin 
Books. 
Grigorakis, K., 2007. Compositional and organoleptic quality of farmed and wild 
gilthead sea bream (Sparus aurata) and sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax) and 
factors affecting it: A review. Aquaculture, 272, pp.5575. 
Grisdale-Helland, B., Helland, S.J. & Gatlin, D.M., 2008. The effects of dietary 
supplementation with mannanoligosaccharide, fructooligosaccharide or 
galactooligosaccharide on the growth and feed utilization of Atlantic salmon 
(Salmo salar). Aquaculture, 283, pp.163167. 
Gueimonde, M. et al., 2013. Antibiotic resistance in probiotic bacteria. Frontiers in 
Microbiology, 4, pp.16. 
Guerra, A. et al., 2012. Relevance and challenges in modeling human gastric and small 
intestinal digestion. Trends in Biotechnology, 30, pp.591600. 
Guerreiro, I. et al., 2017a. Prebiotics effect on growth performance, hepatic 
intermediary metabolism, gut microbiota and digestive enzymes of white sea 
bream (Diplodus sargus). Aquaculture Nutrition, pp.111. 
Guerreiro, I., Enes, P. & Oliva-Teles, A., 2015. Effects of short-chain 
fructooligosaccharides (scFOS) and rearing temperature on growth performance 
and hepatic intermediary metabolism in gilthead sea bream (Sparus aurata) 
juveniles. Fish Physiology and Biochemistry, 41, pp.13331344. 
Guerreiro, I., Oliva-Teles, A. & Enes, P., 2017b. Prebiotics as functional ingredients: 
Focus on Mediterranean fish aquaculture. Reviews in Aquaculture, 0, pp.133. 
Gupta, A.K., Kaur, N. & Kaur, N., 2003. Preparation of inulin from chicory roots. Journal 
of Scientific and Industrial Research, 62, pp.916920. 
Gupta, R. et al., 2003. Microbial a-amylases: A biotechnological perspective. Process 
Biochemistry, 38, pp.15991616. 
Haenen, D. et al., 2013. A diet high in resistant starch modulates microbiota 
composition, SCFA concentrations, and gene expression in pig intestine. The 
Journal of Nutrition, 143, pp.274283. 
Hallstrom, E. et al., 2011. A novel wheat variety with elevated content of amylose 
increases resistant starch formation and may beneficially influence glycaemia in 
healthy subjects. Food and Nutrition Research, 55, pp.18. 
Halver, J.E. (John E. & Hardy, R.W., 2002. Fish nutrition 3rd ed. J. E. (John E. Halver & 
R. W. Hardy, eds., Amsterdam: Elsevier. 
Han, X.Z. & Hamaker, B.R., 2002. Partial leaching of granule-associated proteins from 
rice starch during alkaline extraction and subsequent gelatinization. 
Starch/Starke, 54, pp.454460. 
Haralampu, S.G., 2000. Resistant starch  a review of the physical properties and 
biological impact of RS3. Carbohydrate Polymers, 41, pp.285292. 
Hayek, S.A. & Ibrahim, S.A., 2013. Current limitations and challenges with lactic acid 
bacteria: A review. Food and Nutrition Science, 4, pp.7387. 
He, S. et al., 2003. Effects of IMO and FOS on the growth performance and non-specific 
immunity in hybrid tilapia. Chinese Feed, 23, pp.1415. 
Hbert, E.M., Raya, R.R. & De Giori, G.S., 2004. Nutritional requirements of 
Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. lactis in a chemically defined medium. Current 
Microbiology, 49, pp.341345. 
Hedemann, M.S. & Knudsen, K.E.B., 2007. Resistant starch for weaning pigs  Effect 
on concentration of short chain fatty acids in digesta and intestinal morphology. 
Livestock Science, 108, pp.175177. 
Hegde, V.S. & Mishra, S.K., 2009. Landraces of cowpea, Vigna unguiculata (L.) Walp., 
as potential sources of genes for unique characters in breeding. Genetic 
Resources and Crop Evolution, 56, pp.615627. 
Heo, J.M. et al., 2014. Feeding a diet containing resistant potato starch influences 
gastrointestinal tract traits and growth performance of weaned pigs 1. Journal of 
Animal Science, 92, pp.39063913. 
Heo, W. et al., 2013. Effects of dietary probiotic, Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis I2, 
supplementation on the growth and immune response of olive flounder 
(Paralichthys olivaceus). Aquaculture, 376379, pp.2024. 
Heywood, V.H., 2011. Ethnopharmacology, food production, nutrition and biodiversity 
conservation: Towards a sustainable future for indigenous peoples. Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology, 137, pp.115. 
Hibbeln, J.R. et al., 2007. Maternal seafood consumption in pregnancy and 
neurodevelopmental outcomes in childhood (ALSPAC study): an observational 
cohort study. The Lancet, 369, pp.578585. 
Hijova, E. & Chmelarova, A., 2007. Short chain fatty acids and colonic health. 
Bratislavske lekarske listy, 108, pp.3548. 
Hoover, B.R. & Sosulski, F., 1985. Studies on the functional characteristics and 
digestibility of starches from Phaseolus vulgaris biotypes. Starch/Strke, 6, 
pp.181191. 
Hoover, R. et al., 2010. Composition, molecular structure, properties, and modification 
of pulse starches: A review. Food Research International, 43, pp.399413. 
Hoover, R. et al., 1997. Physicochemical characterization of mung bean starch. Food 
Hydrocolloids, 11, pp.401408. 
Hoover, R. & Ratnayake, W.S., 2002. Starch characteristics of black bean, chick pea, 
lentil, navy bean and pinto bean cultivars grown in Canada. Food Chemistry, 78, 
pp.489498. 
Hoover, R., Swamidas, G. & Vasanthan, T., 1993. Studies on the physicochemical 
properties of native, defatted, and heat-moisture treated pigeon pea (Cajanus 
cajan L) starch. Carbohydrate Research, 246, pp.185203. 
Hoover, R. & Zhou, Y., 2003. In vitro and in vivo hydrolysis of legume starches by -
amylase and resistant starch formation in legumes  A review. Carbohydrate 
Polymers, 54, pp.401417. 
Hord, N.G., 2008. Eukaryotic-microbiota crosstalk: Potential mechanisms for health 
benefits of prebiotics and probiotics. Annual Review of Nutrition, 28, pp.215
Hoseinifar, S.H. et al., 2014. Probiotic, prebiotic and synbiotic supplements in sturgeon 
aquaculture: A review. Reviews in Aquaculture, 8, pp.89102. 
Hsieh, H.M., Swanson, B.G. & Lumpkin, T.A., 1999. Starch gelatinization and 
microstructure of Azuki An granules prepared from whole, abraded, or ground 
beans. LWT - Food Science and Technology, 32, pp.469480. 
Htoon, A. et al., 2009. Effects of processing high amylose maize starches under 
controlled conditions on structural organisation and amylase digestibility. 
Carbohydrate Polymers, 75, pp.236245. 
Htoon, A.K. et al., 2010. The effect of acid dextrinisation on enzyme-resistant starch 
content in extruded maize starch. Food Chemistry, 120, pp.140149. 
Huang, J. et al., 2007. Characterization of differently sized granule fractions of yellow 
pea, cowpea and chickpea starches after modification with acetic anhydride and 
vinyl acetate. Carbohydrate Polymers, 67, pp.1120. 
Ibrahem, M.D. et al., 2010. Effect of dietary supplementation of inulin and vitamin C 
on the growth, hematology, innate immunity, and resistance of Nile tilapia 
(Oreochromis niloticus). Fish and Shellfish Immunology, 29, pp.241246. 
Iji, P.A., Saki, A.A. & Tivey, D.R., 2001. Intestinal structure and function of broiler 
chickens on diets supplemented with a mannan oligosaccharide. Journal of the 
Science of Food and Agriculture, 81, pp.11861192. 
Irianto, A. & Austin, B., 2002a. Probiotics in aquaculture. Journal of Fish Diseases, 25, 
pp.110. 
Irianto, A. & Austin, B., 2002b. Use of probiotics to control furunculosis in rainbow 
trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum). Journal of Fish Diseases, 25, pp.333
Itoi, S. et al., 2008. Isolation of halotolerant Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis from 
intestinal tract of coastal fish. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 121, 
pp.116121. 
James, G., 2010. Universal Bacterial Identification by PCR and DNA Sequencing of 16S 
rRNA Gene. In PCR for Clinical Microbiology. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 
pp. 209214. 
Janda, J.M. & Abbott, S.L., 2002. Bacterial identification for publication: When is 
enough enough? Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 40, pp.18871891. 
Janick, J., 1999. New Crops and the Search for New Food Resources. In Perspectives on 
New Crops and New Uses. Alexandria: ASHS Press, pp. 104110. 
Jauncey, K., 1982. The effects of varying dietary protein level on the growth, food 
conversion, protein utilization and body composition of juvenile tilapias 
(Sarotherodon mossambicus). Aquaculture, 27(1), pp.4354. 
Jonathan, M.C. et al., 2012. In vitro fermentation of 12 dietary fibres by faecal 
inoculum from pigs and humans. Food Chemistry, 133, pp.889897. 
Jung, S. et al., 2003. Comparison of Kjeldahl and Dumas methods for determining 
protein contents of soybean products. Journal of the American Oil Chemists 
Society, 80, p.1169. 
Katersky, R.S. & Carter, C.G., 2005. Growth efficiency of juvenile barramundi, Lates 
calcarifer, at high temperatures. Aquaculture, 250, pp.775780. 
Katersky, R.S. & Carter, C.G., 2007. High growth efficiency occurs over a wide 
temperature range for juvenile barramundi Lates calcarifer fed a balanced diet. 
Aquaculture, 272, pp.444450. 
Kaushik, S., Georga, I. & Koumoundouros, G., 2011. Growth and body composition of 
zebrafish (Danio rerio) larvae fed a aompound feed from first feeding onward: 
Toward implications on nutrient requirements. Zebrafish, 8, pp.8795. 
Kihara, M. & Sakata, T., 1997. Fermentation of dietary carbohydrates to short-chain 
fatty acids by gut microbes and its influence on intestinal morphology of a 
detritivorous teleost tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus). Comparative Biochemistry 
and Physiology - A Physiology, 118, pp.12011207. 
Kihara, M. & Sakata, T., 2002. Production of short-chain fatty acids and gas from 
various oligosaccharides by gut microbes of carp (Cyprinus carpio L.) in micro-
scale batch culture. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology Part A, 132, 
pp.333340. 
Klebaniuk, R. et al., 2008. Effectiveness of BIO-MOS in sheep nutrition. Annals of 
Animal Science, 8, pp.369380. 
Korakli, M., Ganzle, M.G. & Vogel, R.F., 2002. Metabolism by bifidobacteria and lactic 
acid bacteria of polysaccharides from wheat and rye, and exopolysaccharides 
produced by Lactobacillus sanfranciscensis. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 92, 
pp.958965. 
Korkeala, H., Alanko, T. & Tiusanen, T., 1992. Effect of sodium nitrite and sodium 
chloride on growth of lactic acid bacteria. Acta veterinaria Scandinavica, 33, 
pp.2732. 
Lane, A. & Jarvis, A., 2007. Changes in climate will modify the geography of crop 
suitability: Agricultural biodiversity can help with adaptation. Journal of Semi-
Arid Tropical Agricultural Research, 4, pp.112. 
Lebreton, F., Willems, R.J.L. & Gilmore, M.S., 2014. Enterococcus Diversity, Origins in 
Nature, and Gut Colonization, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary. Available at: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24649513. 
Lee, H.C., Htoon, A.K. & Paterson, J.L., 2007. Alkaline extraction of starch from 
Australian lentil cultivars Matilda and Digger optimised for starch yield and starch 
and protein quality. Food Chemistry, 102, pp.551559. 
Lesmes, U. et al., 2008. Effects of resistant starch type III polymorphs on human colon 
microbiota and short chain fatty acids in human gut models. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 56, pp.54155421. 
Li, P. & Gatlin III, D.M., 2004. Dietary brewers yeast and the prebiotic Grobiotic AE 
influence growth performance, immune responses and resistance of hybrid 
striped bass (Morone chrysops x M . saxatilis) to Streptococcus iniae infection. 
Aquaculture, 231, pp.445456. 
Licht, T.R., Ebersbach, T. & Frkir, H., 2012. Prebiotics for prevention of gut 
infections. Trends in Food Science and Technology, 23, pp.7082. 
Lira, R., Tllez, O. & Dvila, P., 2009. The effects of climate change on the geographic 
distribution of Mexican wild relatives of domesticated Cucurbitaceae. Genetic 
Resources and Crop Evolution, 56, pp.691703. 
Liu, H. et al., 2009. Thermal processing of starch-based polymers. Progress in Polymer 
Science, 34, pp.13481368. 
Liu, R. & Xu, G., 2008. Effects of resistant starch on colonic preneoplastic aberrant 
crypt foci in rats. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 46, pp.26722679. 
Liu, W. & Shen, Q., 2007. Structure analysis of mung bean starch from sour liquid 
processing and centrifugation. Journal of Food Engineering, 79, pp.13101314. 
Long, S.R., 1996. Rhizobium symbiosis: Nod factors in perspective. The Plant Cell, 8, 
pp.18851898. 
Lsel, D. & Claus, R., 2005. Dose-dependent effects of resistant potato starch in the 
diet on intestinal skatole formation and adipose tissue accumulation in the pig. 
Journal of Veterinary Medicine Series A: Physiology Pathology Clinical Medicine, 
52, pp.209212. 
Louis, P. & Flint, H.J., 2009. Diversity, metabolism and microbial ecology of butyrate-
producing bacteria from the human large intestine. FEMS Microbiology Letters, 
294, pp.18. 
Lv, H. et al., 2007. Effects of dietary short chain fructo-oligosaccharides on intestinal 
microflora , mortality and growth performance of Oreochromis aureus   O . 
niloticus . Chinese Journal of Animal Nutrition, 19, pp.691697. 
Ma, M. et al., 2017. Physicochemical properties and in vitro digestibility of legume 
starches. Food Hydrocolloids, 63, pp.249255. 
Macfarlane, S., Macfarlane, G.T. & Cummings, J.H., 2006. Review article: Prebiotics in 
the gastrointestinal tract. Alimentary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 24, 
pp.701714. 
Mahious, A.S. et al., 2006. Effect of dietary inulin and oligosaccharides as prebiotics 
for weaning turbot, Psetta maxima (Linnaeus, C. 1758). Aquaculture 
International, 14, pp.219229. 
Maji, U.J. et al., 2016. Diversity and probiotic potentials of putative lactic acid bacteria 
for application in freshwater aquaculture. Turkish Journal of Fisheries and 
Aquatic Sciences, 16, pp.805818. 
Makridis, P. et al., 2005. Evaluation of candidate probiotic strains for gilthead sea 
bream larvae (Sparus aurata) using an in vivo approach. Letters in Applied 
Microbiology, 40, pp.274277. 
de Man, J.D., Rogosa, M. & Sharpe, M.E., 1960. A medium for the cultivation of 
Lactobacilli. Journal of Applied Bacteriology, 23, pp.130135. 
Mansour, M.R. et al., 2011. Effect of dietary mannan oligosaccharide (MOS) on growth 
performance, survival, body composition, and some hematological parameters 
in giant sturgeon juvenile (Huso huso Linnaeus, 1754). Fish physiology and 
biochemistry, 38, pp.829835. 
Marteau, P. et al., 1997. Survival of lactic acid bacteria in a dynamic model of the 
stomach and small intestine: Validation and the effects of bile. Journal of Dairy 
Science, 80, pp.10311037. 
Martinez, I. et al., 2010. Resistant starches types 2 and 4 have differential effects on 
the composition of the fecal microbiota in human subjects. PLoS ONE, 5(11), 
p.e15046. 
Mayes, S. et al., 2009. BAMLINK - a cross disciplinary programme to enhance the role 
of Bambara groundnut (Vigna subterranea l. Verdc.) for food security in Africa 
and India. Acta Horticulturae, 806, pp.137150. 
Mayes, S. et al., 2012. The potential for underutilized crops to improve security of food 
production. Journal of Experimental Botany, 63, pp.10751079. 
McCleary, B. V. et al., 2002. Measurement of resistant starch by enzymatic digestion 
in starch and selected plant materials: Collaborative study. Journal of AOAC 
International, 85, pp.11031111. 
Merrifield, D.L. et al., 2010. The current status and future focus of probiotic and 
prebiotic applications for salmonids. Aquaculture, 302, pp.118. 
Merrifield, D.L. & Rodiles, A., 2015. The fish microbiome and its interactions with 
mucosal tissues. In B. H. Beck & E. Peatman, eds. Mucosal Health in Aquaculture. 
Cambridge, MA: Academic Press, pp. 273295. 
Mistry, A.H. et al., 1992. Alkali extraction of starch from corn flour. Starch/Strke, 44, 
pp.284288. 
Mohapatra, S. et al., 2013. Aquaculture and stress management: A review of probiotic 
intervention. Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition, 97, pp.405430. 
Moongngarm, A., 2013. Chemical compositions and resistant starch content in starchy 
foods. American Journal of Agricultural and Biological Sciences, 8, pp.107113. 
Moore, D.F. et al., 2006. Comparison of 16S rRNA sequencing with conventional and 
commercial phenotypic techniques for identification of enterococci from the 
marine environment. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 100, pp.12721281. 
Morales-Medina, R. et al., 2014. Production of resistant starch by enzymatic 
debranching in legume flours. Carbohydrate Polymers, 101, pp.11761183. 
Moriarty, D.J.W., 1997. The role of microorganisms in aquaculture ponds. Aquaculture, 
151, pp.333349. 
Mourio, J.L.P. et al., 2012. Effect of dietary supplementation of inulin and W. cibaria 
on haemato-immunological parameters of hybrid surubim (Pseudoplatystoma 
sp). Aquaculture Nutrition, 18, pp.7380. 
Mumba, P.P. & Jose, M., 2005. Nutrient composition of selected fresh and processed 
fish species from lake Malawi: A nutritional possibility for people living with 
HIV/AIDS. International Journal of Consumer Studies, 29, pp.7277. 
Muoz-Atienza, E. et al., 2013. Antimicrobial activity, antibiotic susceptibility and 
virulence factors of lactic acid bacteria of aquatic origin intended for use as 
probiotics in aquaculture. BMC microbiology, 13, p.15. 
Muoz-Atienza, E. et al., 2014. In vitro and in vivo evaluation of lactic acid bacteria of 
aquatic origin as probiotics for turbot (Scophthalmus maximus L.) farming. Fish 
and Shellfish Immunology, 41, pp.570580. 
Nayak, S.K., 2010. Role of gastrointestinal microbiota in fish. Aquaculture Research, 
41, pp.15531573. 
Naylor, R.L. et al., 2000. Effect of aquaculture on world fish supplies. Nature, 405, 
pp.10171024. 
Nekoubin, H. et al., 2012. The influence of synbiotic (Biomin imbo) on growth factors 
and survival rate of Zebrafish (Danio rerio) larvae via supplementation with 
biomar. Global Veterinaria, 8, pp.503506. 
Nichols, P.D., Petrie, J. & Singh, S., 2010. Long-chain omega-3 oils  An update on 
sustainable sources. Nutrients, 2, pp.572585. 
Nikoskelainen, S. et al., 2003. Immune enhancement in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus 
mykiss) by potential probiotic bacteria (Lactobacillus rhamnosus). Fish & Shellfish 
Immunology, 15, pp.443452. 
Oelschlaeger, T.A., 2010. Mechanisms of probiotic actions  A review. International 
Journal of Medical Microbiology, 300, pp.5762. 
Ohashi, Y. & Ushida, K., 2009. Health-beneficial effects of probiotics: Its mode of 
action. Animal Science Journal, 80, pp.361371. 
Olano-martin, E. et al., 2000. In vitro fermentability of dextran, oligodextran and 
maltodextrin by human gut bacteria. British Journal of Nutrition, 83, pp.247255. 
Olsen, R.E. et al., 2001. Damaging effect of dietary inulin on intestinal enterocytes in 
Arctic charr (Salvelinus alpinus L.). Aquaculture Research, 32, pp.931934. 
Oprea, S.F. & Zervos, M.J., 2007. Enterococcus and its Association with Foodborne 
Illness. In Infectious Disease: Foodborne Diseases. Totowa, New Jersey: Humana 
Press, pp. 157174. 
Ortiz, L.T. et al., 2013. Effects of inulin and fructooligosaccharides on growth 
performance, body chemical composition and intestinal microbiota of farmed 
rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). Aquaculture Nutrition, 19, pp.475482. 
Oyeyinka, S., Adebola, P. & Gerrano, A.S., 2015. Physicochemical properties of 
starches with variable amylose contents extracted from bambara groundnut 
genotypes. Carbohydrate Polymers, 133, pp.171178. 
Padulosi, S. et al., 2011. Underutilized species and climate change: Current status and 
outlook. In Crop Adaptation to Climate Change. New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, 
pp. 507521. 
Padulosi, S. & Hoeschle-Zeledon, I., 2004. Underutilized plant species: What are they? 
Leisa Magazine, pp.56. 
Pan, C.Y., Wang, Y.D. & Chen, J.Y., 2013. Immunomodulatory effects of dietary Bacillus 
coagulans in grouper (Epinephelus coioides) and zebrafish (Danio rerio) infected 
with Vibrio vulnificus. Aquaculture International, 21, pp.11551168. 
Pangallo, D. et al., 2008. Evaluation of different PCR-based approaches for the 
identification and typing of environmental enterococci. Antonie van 
Leeuwenhoek, 93, pp.193203. 
Panigrahi, A. et al., 2005. The viability of probiotic bacteria as a factor influencing the 
immune response in rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss. Aquaculture, 243, 
pp.241254. 
Panigrahi, A. & Azad, I.S., 2007. Microbial intervention for better fish health in 
aquaculture: the Indian scenario. Fish Physiology and Biochemistry, 33, pp.429
Panigrahi, A., Viswanath, K. & Satoh, S., 2011. Real-time quantification of the immune 
gene expression in rainbow trout fed different forms of probiotic bacteria 
Lactobacillus rhamnosus. Aquaculture Researc, 42, pp.906917. 
Papadimitriou, K. et al., 2015. Discovering probiotic microorganisms: In vitro, in vivo, 
genetic and omics approaches. Frontiers in Microbiology, 6, pp.128. 
Patel, S. & Goyal, A., 2012. The current trends and future perspectives of prebiotics 
research: A review. 3 Biotech, 2, pp.115125. 
Perera, A., Meda, V. & Tyler, R.T., 2010. Resistant starch: A review of analytical 
protocols for determining resistant starch and of factors affecting the resistant 
starch content of foods. Food Research International, 43, pp.19591974. 
Pluske, J.R. et al., 1998. Confirmation of the role of rapidly fermentable carbohydrates 
in the expression of swine dysentery in pigs after experimental infection. The 
Journal of Nutrition, 128(10), pp.17371744. 
Polesi, L.F. & Sarmento, S.B.S., 2011. Structural and physicochemical characterization 
of RS prepared using hydrolysis and heat treatments of chickpea starch. 
Starch/Staerke, 63, pp.226235. 
Powell, K., 2003. Eat your veg. Nature, 426, pp.378379. 
Prescott-Allen, R. & Prescott-Allen, C., 1996. Assessing the Sustainability of Uses of 
Wild Species: Case Studies and Initial Assessment Procedure, Gland, Switzerland 
and Cambridge, UK. 
Pryde, S.E. et al., 2002. The microbiology of butyrate formation in the human colon. 
FEMS Microbiology Letters, 217, pp.133139. 
Pryor, G.S. et al., 2003. Mannanoligosaccharides in fish nutrition: Effects of dietary 
supplementation on growth and gastrointestinal villi structure in Gulf of Mexico 
sturgeon. North American Journal of Aquaculture, 65, pp.106111. 
Pylkas, A.M., Juneja, L.R. & Slavin, J.L., 2005. Comparison of different fibers for in vitro 
production of short chain fatty acids by intestinal microflora. Journal of Medicinal 
Food, 8, pp.113116. 
Queiroz-monici, K.S. et al., 2005. Bifidogenic effect of dietary fiber and resistant starch 
from leguminous on the intestinal microbiota of rats. Nutrition, 21, pp.602608. 
Rajili-Stojanovi, M., 2013. Function of the microbiota. Best Practice and Research: 
Clinical Gastroenterology, 27, pp.516. 
Rajili-Stojanovi, M. et al., 2013. Long-term monitoring of the human intestinal 
microbiota composition. Environmental Microbiology, 15, pp.11461159. 
Rapp, M.S. & Giovannoni, S.J., 2003. The uncultured microbial majority. Annual 
Review of Microbiology, 57, pp.369394. 
Rawls, J.F., Samuel, B.S. & Gordon, J.I., 2004. Gnotobiotic zebrafish reveal 
evolutionarily conserved responses to the gut microbiota. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 101, pp.4596
4601. 
van Reenen, C.A. & Dicks, L.M.T., 2011. Horizontal gene transfer amongst probiotic 
lactic acid bacteria and other intestinal microbiota: What are the possibilities? A 
review. Archives of Microbiology, 193, pp.157168. 
Regassa, A. & Nyachoti, C.M., 2018. Application of resistant starch in swine and poultry 
diets with particular reference to gut health and function. Animal Nutrition.  
Regmi, P.R. et al., 2011. Starch with high amylose content and low in vitro digestibility 
increases intestinal nutrient flow and microbial fermentation and selectively 
promotes bifidobacteria in pigs. The Journal of Nutrition, 141, pp.12731280. 
Rengpipat, S., Rueangruklikhit, T. & Piyatiratitivorakul, S., 2008. Evaluations of lactic 
acid bacteria as probiotics for juvenile seabass Lates calcarifer. Aquaculture 
Research, 39, pp.134143. 
Ring, E., 2004. Lactic Acid Bacteria in Fish and Fish Farming. In Lactic Acid Bacteria: 
Microbiological and Functional Aspects. Madison Avenue, New York: Mcarcel 
Dekker, pp. 581610. 
Ring, E., Lvmo, L., et al., 2010a. Lactic acid bacteria vs. pathogens in the 
gastrointestinal tract of fish: A review. Aquaculture Research, 41, pp.451467. 
Ring, E., Olsen, R.E., et al., 2010b. Prebiotics in aquaculture: A review. Aquaculture 
Nutrition, 16, pp.117136. 
Ring, E., 2008. The ability of carnobacteria isolated from fish intestine to inhibit 
growth of fish pathogenic bacteria: a screening study. Aquaculture Research, 39, 
pp.171180. 
Ring, E. et al., 2006. The effect of dietary inulin on aerobic bacteria associated with 
hindgut of Arctic charr (Salvelinus alpinus L.). Aquaculture Research, 37, pp.891
Ring, E. & Birkbeck, T.H., 1999. Intestinal microflora of fish larvae and fry. Aquaculture 
Research, 30, pp.7393. 
Robaina, L. & Izquierdo, M., 2000. Methodological strategies for the determination of 
nutrient requirements in finfish. In Cahiers Options Mditerranennes . Zaragoza: 
Centre International des Hautes Etudes Agronomiques Mediterraneennes, pp. 
2541. 
Roberfroid, M., 2007. Prebiotics: The concept revisited. The Journal of Nutrition, 137, 
p.830S837S. 
Roberfroid, M., 2000. Prebiotics and probiotics: Are they functional foods? American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 71, pp.16821687. 
Robertson, P.A.W. et al., 2000. Use of Carnobacterium sp. as a probiotic for Atlantic 
salmon (Salmo salar L.) and rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss, Walbaum). 
Aquaculture, 185, pp.235243. 
Robison, B.D. et al., 2008. Sexual dimorphism in hepatic gene expression and the 
response to dietary carbohydrate manipulation in the zebrafish (Danio rerio). 
Comparative Biochemistry & Physiology, 3, pp.141154. 
Rodrigues-Estrada, U. et al., 2008. Studies of the effects of mannan-oligosaccharides, 
Enterococcus faecalis, and poly hydrobutyric acid as immune stimulant and 
growth promoting. In 5th World Fisheries Congress. Yokohama, Japan, p. 158. 
Rodrguez-cabezas, M.E. et al., 2010. The combination of fructooligosaccharides and 
resistant starch shows prebiotic additive effects in rats. Clinical Nutrition, 29, 
pp.832839. 
Rodriguez-Estrada, U. et al., 2009. Effects of single and combined supplementation of 
Enterococcus faecalis, mannan oligosaccharide and polyhydroxybutyrate acid on 
growth performance and immune response of rainbow trout Oncorhynchus 
mykiss. Aquaculture Science, 57, pp.609617. 
Russell, W.R. et al., 2011. High-protein, reduced-carbohydrate weight-loss diets 
promote metabolite profiles likely to be detrimental to colonic health. American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 93, pp.10621072. 
Ruwandeepika, A.H.D. et al., 2012. Pathogenesis, virulence factors and virulence 
regulation of vibrios belonging to the Harveyi clade. Reviews in Aquaculture, 4, 
pp.5974. 
Saha, S. et al., 2006. Characterization of cellulase-producing bacteria from the 
digestive tract of tilapia, Oreochromis mossambica (Peters) and grass carp, 
Ctenopharyngodon idella. Aquaculture Research, 37, pp.380388. 
Sajilata, M.G., Singhal, R.S. & Kulkarni, P.R., 2006. Resistant starch  a review. 
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 5, pp.117. 
Salinas, I. et al., 2005. Dietary administration of Lactobacillus delbrueckii and Bacillus 
subtilis, single or combined, on gilthead seabream cellular innate immune 
responses. Fish and Shellfish Immunology, 19, pp.6777. 
Salminen, S. et al., 1999. Probiotics: How should they be defined? Trends in Food 
Science and Technology, 10, pp.107110. 
Sandhu, K.S. & Lim, S.T., 2008. Digestibility of legume starches as influenced by their 
physical and structural properties. Carbohydrate Polymers, 71, pp.245252. 
Sandstedt, R.M. & Gates, R.L., 1954. Raw starch digestion: a comparison of the raw 
starch digesting capabilities of the amylase systems from four alpha-amylase 
sources. Journal of Food Scienceod, 19, pp.190199. 
Sapkota, A. et al., 2008. Aquaculture practices and potential human health risks: 
Current knowledge and future priorities. Environment International, 34, 
pp.12151226. 
Saranraj, P. & Stella, D., 2013. Fungal amylase - A review. International Journal of 
Microbiological Research, 4, pp.203211. 
Satokari, R.M. et al., 2001. Polymerase chain reaction and denaturing gradient gel 
electrophoresis monitoring of fecal bifidobacterium populations in a prebiotic 
and probiotic feeding trial. Systemic and Applied Microbiology, 24, pp.227231. 
Scheidegger, E.M.D. et al., 2009. RFLP analysis of a PCR-amplified fragment of the 16S 
rRNA gene as a tool to identify Enterococcus strains. Memorias do Instituto 
Oswaldo Cruz, 104, pp.10031008. 
Scott, K.P. et al., 2014. Prebiotic stimulation of human colonic butyrate-producing 
bacteria and bifidobacteria, in vitro. FEMS Microbiology Ecology, 87, pp.3040. 
Sharma, A., Yadav, B.S. & Ritika, 2008. Resistant starch: Physiological roles and food 
applications. Food Reviews International, 24, pp.193234. 
Shearer, K.D., 1994. Factors affecting the proximate composition of cultured fishes 
with emphasis on salmonids. Aquaculture, 119, pp.6388. 
Siccardi III, A.J. et al., 2009. Growth and survival of zebrafish (Danio rerio) fed different 
commercial and laboratory diets. Zebrafish, 6, pp.275280. 
Siew-Wai, L. et al., 2010. Fermentation of Metroxylon sagu resistant starch type III by 
Lactobacillus sp. and Bifidobacterium bifidum. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry, 58, pp.22742278. 
Singh, S.K. et al., 1997. Comparison of laboratory and pilot-plant corn wet-milling 
procedures. Cereal Chemistry Journal, 74, pp.4048. 
Sinha, A.K. et al., 2014. Non-starch polysaccharides and their role in fish nutrition  A 
review. Food Chemistry, 127, pp.14091426. 
Sissener, N.H. et al., 2010. Zebrafish (Danio rerio) as a model for investigating the 
safety of GM feed ingredients (soya and maize); performance, stress response 
and uptake of dietary DNA sequences. British Journal of Nutrition, 103, pp.315.  
Smil, V., 1999. Nitrogen in crop production: An account of global flows adds recycled 
in organic up by harvested and quantification of N losses from crop to 26-60. 
Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 13, pp.647662. 
Smith, L.S., 1989. Digestive functions in teleost fishes. In J. Halver, ed. Fish Nutrition. 
San Diego, pp. 331421. 
Smith, M.D. et al., 2010. Sustainability and Global Seafood. Science, 327, pp.784786. 
Sohn, K.S. et al., 2000. The role of immunostimulants in monogastric animal and fish - 
review. Asian-Australasian Journal of Animal Sciences, 13, pp.11781187. 
Soleimani, N. et al., 2012. Dietary supplementation of fructooligosaccharide (FOS) 
improves the innate immune response, stress resistance, digestive enzyme 
activities and growth performance of Caspian roach (Rutilus rutilus) fry. Fish & 
Shellfish Immunology, 32, pp.316321. 
Son, V.M. et al., 2009. Dietary administration of the probiotic, Lactobacillus plantarum, 
enhanced the growth, innate immune responses, and disease resistance of the 
grouper Epinephelus coioides. Fish and Shellfish Immunology, 26, pp.691698. 
Srensen, M. et al., 2011. Effect of stachyose, raffinose and soya-saponins 
supplementation on nutrient digestibility, digestive enzymes, gut morphology 
and growth performance in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar, L). Aquaculture, 314, 
pp.145152. 
Sotomayor, C. et al., 1999. Lentil starch content and its microscopical structure as 
influenced by natural fermentation. Starch, 51, pp.152156. 
Souza, P.M. de & Magalhes, P. de O., 2010. Application of microbial -amylase in 
industry - a review. Brazilian Journal of Microbiology, 41, pp.850861. 
Spanggaard, B. et al., 2001. The probiotic potential against vibriosis of the indigenous 
microflora of rainbow trout. Environmental Microbiology, 3, pp.755756. 
Spiller, R. & Garsed, K., 2009. Infection, inflammation, and the irritable bowel 
syndrome. Digestive and Liver Disease, 41, pp.844849. 
Spiller, R.C., 2007. Role of infection in irritable bowel syndrome. Journal of 
Gastroenterology, 42, pp.4147. 
Srichuwong, S. et al., 2005. Structure of lintnerized starch is related to X-ray diffraction 
pattern and susceptibility to acid and enzyme hydrolysis of starch granules. 
International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 37, pp.115121. 
Staykov, Y. et al., 2007. Effect of mannan oligosaccharide on the growth performance 
and immune status of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). Aquaculture 
International, 15, pp.153161. 
Stoffels, G., Nes, I.F. & Gubmundsdottlr, A., 1992. Isolation and properties of a 
bacteriocin-producing Carnobacterium piscicola isolated from fish. Journal of 
Applied Bacteriology, 73, pp.309316. 
Su, N.W. et al., 2005. Effects of temperature and sodium chloride concentration on 
the activities of proteases and amylases in soy sauce koji. Journal of Agricultural 
and Food Chemistry, 53, pp.15211525. 
Sugita, H. et al., 1996. Antibacterial abilities of intestinal bacteria in freshwater 
cultured fish. Aquaculture, 145, pp.195203. 
Sugita, H., Kawasaki, J. & Deguchi, Y., 1997. Production of amylase by the intestinal 
microflora in cultured freshwater fish. Letters in Applied Microbiology, 24, 
pp.105108. 
Sugita, H., Miyajima, C. & Deguchi, Y., 1991. The vitamin B12-producing ability of the 
intestinal microflora of freshwater fish. Aquaculture, 92, pp.267276. 
Sullam, K.E. et al., 2012. Environmental and ecological factors that shape the gut 2 
bacterial communities of fish: A meta-analysis - Supplementary. Molecular 
Ecology, 21, pp.116. 
Svihus, B., Uhlen, A.K. & Harstad, O.M., 2005. Effect of starch granule structure, 
associated components and processing on nutritive value of cereal starch: A 
review. Animal Feed Science and Technology, 122, pp.303320. 
Swanson, K.S. et al., 2002. Fructooligosaccharides and Lactobacillus acidophilus 
modify gut microbial populations, total tract nutrient digestibilities and fecal 
protein catabolite concentrations in healthy adult dogs. The Journal of Nutrition, 
132, pp.37213731. 
Taati, R. et al., 2011. Growth performance, carcass composition, and 
immunophysiological indices in juvenile great sturgeon (Huso huso) fed on 
commercial prebiotic, Immunoster. Iranian Journal of Fisheries Sciences, 10, 
pp.324335. 
Tacon, A.G.J. & Metian, M., 2008. Aquaculture feed and food safety: The role of the 
Food and Agriculture Organization and the Codex Alimentarius. Annals of the 
New York Academy of Sciences, 59, pp.5059. 
Talpur, A.D. & Ikhwanuddin, M., 2013. Azadirachta indica (neem) leaf dietary effects 
on the immunity response and disease resistance of Asian seabass, Lates 
calcarifer challenged with Vibrio harveyi. Fish & Shellfish Immunology, 34, 
pp.254264. 
Tannock, G.W. et al., 2000. Analysis of the fecal microflora of human subjects 
consuming a probiotic product containing Lactobacillus rhamnosus DR20. 
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 66, pp.25782588. 
Tanton, T. & Haq, N., 2008. Climate change: an exciting challenge for new and 
underutilised crops. In J. Smartt & N. Haq, eds. International Symposium on New 
Crops and Uses: Their role in a rapidly changing world . Southampton: Centre of 
Underutilised Crops, University of Southampton, pp. 1522. 
Taoka, Y. et al., 2006. Growth, stress tolerance and non-specific immune response of 
Japanese flounder Paralichthys olivaceus to probiotics in a closed recirculating 
system. Fisheries Science, 72, pp.310321. 
Tharanathan, R.N. & Mahadevamma, S., 2003. Grain legumes  a boon to human 
nutrition. Trends in Food Science and Technology, 14, pp.507518. 
Themeier, H. et al., 2005. Structural and morphological factors influencing the 
quantification of resistant starch II in starches of different botanical origin. 
Carbohydrate Polymers, 61, pp.7279. 
Thompson, D.B., 2000. Strategies for the manufacture of resistant starch. Trends in 
Food Science and Technology, 11, pp.245253. 
Tlaskalov-Hogenov, H. et al., 2011. The role of gut microbiota (commensal bacteria) 
and the mucosal barrier in the pathogenesis of inflammatory and autoimmune 
diseases and cancer: contribution of germ-free and gnotobiotic animal models of 
human diseases. Cellular & molecular immunology, 8, pp.11020. 
Toole, R.O. et al., 2004. Visualisation of Zebrafish infection by GFP-labelled Vibrio 
anguillarum. Microbial Pathogenesis, 37, pp.4146. 
Topping, D.L. & Clifton, P.M., 2001. Short-chain fatty acids and human colonic 
function: roles of resistant starch and nonstarch polysaccharides. Physiological 
Reviews, 81, pp.10311064. 
Topping, D.L., Fukushima, M. & Bird, A.R., 2003. Resistant starch as a prebiotic and 
synbiotic: state of the art. In The Proceedings of the Nutrition Society 62. 
Edinburgh, pp. 171176. 
Torrecillas, S. et al., 2007. Immune stimulation and improved infection resistance in 
European sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax) fed mannan oligosaccharides. Fish and 
Shellfish Immunology, 23, pp.969981. 
Torrecillas, S. et al., 2011. Improved feed utilization, intestinal mucus production and 
immune parameters in sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax) fed mannan 
oligosaccharides (MOS). Aquaculture Nutrition, 17, pp.223233. 
Torres, P.M.D. et al., 2010. Galacto-oligosaccharides: production, properties, 
applications, and significance as prebiotics. Comprehensive Reviews in Food 
Science and Food Safety, 9, pp.438454. 
Tsegaye, D. et al., 2007. The role of Garsa (Dobera glabra) for household food security 
at times of food shortage in Aba`ala Wereda, North Afar: Ecological adaptation 
and socio-economic value. Available at: 
https://www.zef.de/uploads/tx_zefportal/Publications/8cfe_Report%2049.pdf 
Tu, W. et al., 2013. Dietary alpha-linolenic acid does not enhance accumulation of 
omega-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids in barramundi ( Lates calcarifer 
). Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology B- Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, 164, pp.2937. 
Tyrrell, G.J. et al., 2002. Enterococcus gilvus sp. nov. and Enterococcus pallens sp. nov. 
isolate from human clinical specimens. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 40(4), 
pp.11401145. 
Ulloa, P.E., Medrano, J.F. & Feijo, C.G., 2014. Zebrafish as animal model for 
aquaculture nutrition research. Frontiers in Genetics, 5, pp.16. 
Vasanthan, T. & Bhatty, R.S., 1998. Enhancement of resistant starch (RS3) in 
amylomaize, barley, field pea and lentil starches. Starch - Strke, 50, pp.286291. 
Vendrell, D. et al., 2006. Lactococcus garvieae in fish: A review. Comparative 
Immunology, Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, 29, pp.177198. 
Verschuere, L. et al., 2000. Probiotic bacteria as biological control agents in 
aquaculture. Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews, 64, pp.655671. 
Villamil, L. et al., 2003. Control of Vibrio alginolyticus in Artemia culture by treatment 
with bacterial probiotics. Aquaculture, 219, pp.4356. 
Villarreal, M.E., Ribotta, P.D. & Iturriaga, L.B., 2013. Comparing methods for extracting 
amaranthus starch and the properties of the isolated starches. LWT - Food 
Science and Technology, 51, pp.441447. 
Vine, N.G. et al., 2004. Competition for attachment of aquaculture candidate probiotic 
and pathogenic bacteria on fish intestinal mucus. Journal of Fish Diseases, 27, 
pp.319326. 
De Vuyst, L. & Vandamme, E.J., 1994. Antimicrobial potential of lactic acid bacteria. In 
Bacteriocins of Lactic Acid Bacteria. Boston, MA: Springer US, pp. 91142. 
Wang, N. et al., 2009. Influence of cooking and dehulling on nutritional composition 
of several varieties of lentils (Lens culinaris). LWT - Food Science and Technology, 
42, pp.842848. 
Wang, X.I.N. et al., 1999. In vitro utilization of amylopectin and high-amylose maize 
(amylomaize) starch granules by human colonic bacteria. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 65, pp.48484854. 
Wang, Y., Li, J. & Lin, J., 2008. Probiotics in aquaculture: Challenges and outlook. 
Aquaculture, 281, pp.14. 
Wani, I.A. et al., 2010. Physico-chemical properties of starches from Indian kidney 
bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) cultivars. International Journal of Food Science and 
Technology, 45, pp.21762185. 
Wilson, K.H., 1995. Molecular biology as a tool for Taxonomy. Clinical Infectious 
Diseases, 20, pp.S117S121. 
Wronkowska, M. et al., 2006. In vitro fermentation of new modified starch 
preparations-changes of microstructure and bacterial end-products. Enzyme and 
Microbial Technology, 40, pp.9399. 
Wu, Y. et al., 2013. Effects of dietary supplementation of fructooligosaccharide on 
growth performance, body composition, intestinal enzymes activities and 
histology of blunt snout bream (Megalobrama amblycephala) fingerlings. 
Aquaculture Nutrition, 19, pp.886894. 
Wyatt, G.M. & Horn, N., 1988. Fermentation of resistant food starches by human and 
rat intestinal bacteria. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 44, pp.281
Xu, B. et al., 2009. Effect of prebiotic xylooligosaccharides on growth performances 
and digestive enzyme activities of allogynogenetic crucian carp (Carassius 
auratus gibelio). Fish Physiology and Biochemistry, 35, pp.351357. 
Xu, G., Li, C. & Yao, Y., 2009. Proteomics analysis of drought stress-responsive proteins 
in Hippophae rhamnoides L. Plant Molecular Biology Reporter, 27, pp.153161. 
Yadav, B.S., Sharma, A. & Yadav, R.B., 2010. Resistant starch content of conventionally 
boiled and pressure-cooked cereals, legumes and tubers. Journal of Food Science 
and Technology, 47, pp.8488. 
Yanbo, W. & Zirong, X., 2006. Effect of probiotics for common carp (Cyprinus carpio) 
based on growth performance and digestive enzyme activities. Animal Feed 
Science and Technology, 127, pp.283292. 
Yao, N., Paez, A. V. & White, P.J., 2009. Structure and function of starch and resistant 
starch from corn with different doses of mutant amylose-extender and floury-1 
alleles. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 57, pp.20402048.  
Ye, J.D. et al., 2011. Single or combined effects of fructo- and mannan oligosaccharide 
supplements and Bacillus clausii on the growth, feed utilization, body 
composition, digestive enzyme activity, innate immune response and lipid 
metabolism of the Japanese flounder Paralichth. Aquaculture Nutrition, 17, 
pp.e902e911. 
Yoshimoto, Y. et al., 2001. Molecular structure and pasting properties of legume 
starches. Journal of Applied Glycoscience, 48, pp.317324. 
Yousefian, M. & Amiri, M.S., 2009. A review of the use of prebiotic in aquaculture for 
fish and shrimp. African Journal of Biotechnology, 8, pp.73137318. 
Zaman, S.A. & Sarbini, S.R., 2015. The potential of resistant starch as a prebiotic. 
Critical Reviews in Biotechnology, 0, pp.17. 
Zavareze, E.D.R. & Dias, A.R.G., 2011. Impact of heat-moisture treatment and 
annealing in starches: A review. Carbohydrate Polymers, 83, pp.317328. 
Zhang, T. et al., 2016. Effect of a potential probiotics Lactococcus garvieae B301 on the 
growth performance, immune parameters and caecum microflora of broiler 
chickens. Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition, 100, pp.413421. 
Zhang, Y. & Han, J.H., 2010. Crystallization of high-amylose starch by the addition of 
plasticizers at low and intermediate concentrations. Journal of Food Science, 75, 
pp.N8N16. 
Zhou, Y., Hoover, R. & Liu, Q., 2004. Relationship between -amylase degradation and 
the structure and physicochemical properties of legume starches. Carbohydrate 
Polymers, 57, pp.299317. 
Zhou, Z. et al., 2014. Methodological approaches used to assess fish gastrointestinal 
communities. In D. L. Merrifield & E. Ring, eds. Aquaculture Nutrition. 
Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, pp. 101127. 
Zhou, Z., Cao, X. & Zhou, J.Y.H., 2013. Effect of resistant starch structure on short-chain 
fatty acids production by human gut microbiota fermentation in vitro. 
Starch/Starke, 65, pp.509516. 
Zimmermann, B., Bauer, E. & Mosenthin, R., 2001. Pro- and prebiotics in pig nutrition 
- potential modulators of gut health? Journal of Animal and Feed Sciences, 10, 
pp.4756.  
Appendix A 
Preparation of reagents for Modified method of McCleary et al. (2002) 
Sodium maleate buffer (0.1 M, pH 6.0) was prepared by dissolving 23.2 g of maleic 
acid (Sigma M0375) in 1600 mL of distilled water and the pH was adjusted to 6.0 
using 4 M sodium hydroxide. A total of 1.47 g of calcium chloride dihydrate 
(CaCl2.2H2O, Merck Millipore 102382) and 0.4 g of sodium azide (R&M Chemicals) 
was added and dissolved in the solution. The volume was then adjusted to 2 L and 
stored at 4 C for up to 12 months.  
Sodium acetate buffer (1.2 M, pH 3.8) was prepared by adding a total of 69.6 mL of 
glacial acetic acid (1.05 g/mL, Sigma A6283) into 800 mL of distilled water. Then, the 
pH was adjusted to 3.8 using 4 M sodium hydroxide and the volume of the solution 
was adjusted to 2 L using distilled water. The solution was stored at room 
temperature. 
Potassium hydroxide solution (2 M) was prepared by dissolving a total of 112.2 g of 
potassium hydroxide granules (R&M Chemicals) in 900 mL of distilled water. The 
volume was adjusted to 1 L and was stored at room temperature.  
Aqueous ethanol (50%) was prepared by adding 500 mL of 95% (v/v) ethanol (R&M 
Chemicals) into 500 mL of distilled water and stored in a well-sealed bottle at room 
temperature.  
The concentrated AMG solution (3300 U/mL) and dilute AMG (300 U/mL) solution 
were prepared separately. For the concentrated AMG solution, 110 mg of AMG 
powder from Aspergillus niger (Sigma 10113, Lot # BCBF3497V) was weighed and 
added into 4 mL of distilled water. The contents were mixed via inversion and used 
as the concentrated AMG solution. The dilute AMG solution was prepared by 
transferring an aliquot of 1 mL of the concentrated AMG solution into 11 mL of 
sodium maleate buffer (0.1 M, pH 6.0) and mixed via inversion. The solution was 
used as the dilute AMG solution. Both AMG solutions were used on the day of 
preparation and stored at 4 C until use. 
The -amylase solution was prepared fresh accordingly using -amylase from 
Aspergillus oryzae (Sigma 10065, Lot # BCBL0370V), instead of pancreatic -amylase. 
In brief, a total of 1 g of -amylase from Aspergillus oryzae was dissolved in 100 mL 
of sodium maleate buffer (0.1 M, pH 6.0) and stirred for 5 min. Then, 1 mL of the 
dilute AMG solution was added and mixed well and followed by centrifugation at 
1500 g for 10 min. The supernatant was carefully decanted and used as the -
amylase solution on the day of preparation. 
Appendix B 
Standard curve of glucose concentrations and wavelengths of 540 nm 
y = 2.66  10-3 x
R = 0.9937
0 20 40 60 80 100
Glucose concentration (g/ml) 
Appendix C 
Preparation of reagent for method of Megazyme RS Kit 
Sodium maleate buffer (0.1 M, pH 6.0), sodium acetate buffer (1.2 M, pH 3.8), 
potassium hydroxide solution (2 M) and aqueous ethanol (50%) was prepared as 
described in Appendix A. 
Glucose determination (GOPOD) reagent was prepared based on the protocol 
provided by the kit. In brief, the contents of GOPOD reagent buffer from bottle 3 
(Megazyme RS kit) added and diluted with distilled water into a total of 1 L. A total of 
20 mL of GOPOD reagent buffer was aliquot and added into bottle 4 (Megazyme RS 
kit) and mixed. Then, the contents of bottle 4 were transferred into the GOPOD 
reagent buffer enclosed in aluminium foil to protect from light. The solution was 
mixed and separated into aliquots of 30 mL in foil-wrapped 50 mL centrifuge tubes 
and was stored at -20 C. 
Dilute AMG solution was prepared based on the protocol provided by the kit. In 
brief, a total of 2 mL of concentrated AMG solution was aliquot from bottle 1 
(Megazyme RS kit) and added to 22 mL of 0.1 M sodium maleate buffer (0.1 M, pH 
6.0). The solution was mixed via vortex and separated into 5 mL aliquots in 15 mL 
centrifuge tubes and stored at -20 C. 
The -amylase solution was prepared fresh based on the protocol provided by the 
kit. In brief, a total of 1 g of pancreatic -amylase from bottle 2 (Megazyme RS kit) 
was dissolved in 100 mL of 0.1 M sodium maleate buffer (0.1 M, pH 6.0) and stirred 
for 5 min. Then, 1 mL of dilute AMG solution was added and mixed well and followed 
by centrifugation at 1500 g for 10 min. The supernatant was collected and used as 
the -amylase solution on the day of preparation. 
Appendix D 
Preparation of reagent for Production of RS from legumes 
Prior to the production of resistant starch, two reagents  sodium maleate buffer 
and 2 M hydrochloric acid were prepared as detailed below: (i) Sodium maleate 
buffer (0.1 M, pH 5.3) was prepared by dissolving 23.2 g of maleic acid in 1600 mL of 
distilled water and the pH was adjusted to 5.3 using 4 M sodium hydroxide. The 
volume was then adjusted to 2 L and stored at 4 C for up to 12 months. (ii) 2.0 M 
hydrochloric acid was prepared by adding a total of 328.47 mL of concentrated 
hydrochloric acid (37%, Sigma 320331) into 500 mL of deionized water. Then, the 
total volume was adjusted to 2 L and stored at room temperature for up to 1 month.  
Appendix E 
Method reference for proximate analysis of legume samples used by ALS 
Technichem Sdn. Bhd. 
 Test Parameter Method Reference 
1 Calories (by 
calculation) 
Method of Analysis for Nutrition Labeling (1993)* pg. 5 & 
2 Total fat In-House Method QWI-OF/17-10 based on Method of 
Analysis for Nutrition Labeling (1993) Chapter 18 and 
Pearson's (1991)** pg. 24 
3 Protein/ crude 
protein 
In-House Method QWI-OF/17-6 based on Method of 
Analysis for Nutrition Labeling (1993) Chapter 28 and 
Pearson's (1991) pg. 106 
4 Moisture In House Method QWI-OF/17-38 Moisture Analyser 
5 Ash Method of Analysis for Nutrition Labeling (1993) Chapter 
6 Total carbohydrate, 
(by calculation) 
Method of Analysis for Nutrition Labeling (1993) pg. 
106*** 
7 Dietary fibre In-House Method QWI-OF/17-14 based on Methods AOAC 
985.29**** 
Notes: 
* Sullivan, D.M. and Carpenter, D.E., 1993. Methods of Analysis for Nutrition 
Labeling. Association of Official Analytical Chemists Inc. (AOAC). 
** Kirk, S. and Sawyer, R., 1991. Pearson's composition and analysis of foods (No. 
Ed. 9). Longman Group Ltd. 
*** Total carbohydrate (g/100g; % w/w) is determined by the formula below: 
= 100% - (Total fat + crude protein + moisture + ash) 
**** Dietary fibre is not included within the total % (g/100g; % w/w) of parameters 
Appendix F 
Preparation of API test kit for phenotypic identification of LAB isolates 
The API test was prepared based on the manufacturers protocol. In brief, the wells 
on the plastic tray were filled with sterile distilled water. The API 50 CHL test strips 
were placed in the tray according to their number sequence. Then, 200 L of the 24 
hr LAB culture was transferred into a 15-mL centrifuge tube and added with 5 mL of 
API CHL medium. The medium was mixed well and approximately 150 L were 
transferred onto each capsule on the API CH50 trays. The capsules were then sealed 
with two drops of sterile mineral oil (BioMrieux) and covered with the plastic lid 
provided with the kit. The test kit was incubated at 37 C for 48 hr and colour change 
from purple to yellow was recorded at 24 hr and 48 hr of incubation. The data was 
then analysed with the ApiwebTM database. 
Appendix G 
Carbohydrate fermentation pattern of LC-A & LC-B via API CHL 50 
Carbohydrate test Bacteria 
 LC-A LC-B 
Glycerol - - 
Erythritol - - 
D-arabinose - - 
L-arabinose + - 
D-ribose - + 
D-xylose + - 
L-xylose - - 
D-adonitol - - 
Methyl-bd-xylopyranoside - - 
D-galactose - + 
d-glucose + + 
Fructose + + 
D-mannose + + 
L-sorbose - - 
L-rhamnose - - 
Dulcitol - - 
Inositol - - 
D-mannitol - + 
D-sorbitol - - 
metyhl-ad-mannopyranoside - - 
Methyl-ad-glucopyranoside - - 
n-acetyl-glucosamine + + 
amygdalin + + 
arbutin + + 
esculin + + 
salicin + + 
d-cellobiose + + 
d-maltose + + 
d-lactose - - 
d-melibiose - - 
d-sucrose + - 
d-trehalose - + 
inulin - - 
d-lmelezitose - - 
d-rafinose - - 
starch - + 
glycogen - - 
xylitol - - 
gentibiose + + 
d-turanose - - 
d-lyxose - - 
d-tagatose - - 
d-fucose - - 
l-fucose - - 
d-arabitol - - 
l-arabitol - - 
gluconate + + 
2-ketogluconate - - 
5-ketogluconate - - 
Notes: 
Analysis of bacteria biochemical profile performed without replicates; n=1 
+ refers to a positive result; - refers to a negative result 
Appendix H 
Carbohydrate fermentation pattern of DR-A & DR-B via API CHL 50 
Carbohydrate test Bacteria 
 LC-A LC-B 
Glycerol + + 
Erythritol - - 
D-arabinose - - 
L-arabinose - - 
D-ribose + + 
D-xylose - - 
L-xylose - - 
D-adonitol - - 
Methyl-bd-xylopyranoside - - 
D-galactose + + 
d-glucose + + 
Fructose + + 
D-mannose + + 
L-sorbose - - 
L-rhamnose - - 
Dulcitol - - 
Inositol - - 
D-mannitol + + 
D-sorbitol - + 
metyhl-ad-mannopyranoside - - 
Methyl-ad-glucopyranoside - - 
n-acetyl-glucosamine + + 
amygdalin + + 
arbutin + + 
esculin + + 
salicin + + 
d-cellobiose + + 
d-maltose - + 
d-lactose - - 
d-melibiose - - 
d-sucrose - + 
d-trehalose + + 
inulin - - 
d-lmelezitose - + 
d-rafinose - - 
starch - - 
glycogen - - 
xylitol - - 
gentibiose + + 
d-turanose - - 
d-lyxose - - 
d-tagatose - + 
d-fucose - - 
l-fucose - - 
d-arabitol - - 
l-arabitol - - 
gluconate - + 
2-ketogluconate - - 
5-ketogluconate - - 
Notes: 
Analysis of bacteria biochemical profile performed without replicates; n=1 
+ refers to a positive result; - refers to a negative result 
Appendix I 
Identification of LC-A & LC-B via 16S rRNA gene sequencing 
a) 16S rRNA gene sequence of LC-A using primer sets plb16 & mlb16 
NNNAAGGGGGGGCTATAATGCAGTCGAACGCTTTGTGGTTCAACTGATTTGAAGAGCTTGC
TCAGATATGACGATGGACATTGCAAAGAGTGGCGAACGGGTGAGTAACACGTGGGAAACC
TACCTCTTAGCAGGGGATAACATTTGGAAACAGATGCTAATACCGTATAACAATAGCAACCG
CATGGTTGCTACTTAAAAGATGGTTCTGCTATCACTAAGAGATGGTCCCGCGGTGCATTAGT
TAGTTGGTGAGGTAATGGCTCACCAAGACGATGATGCATAGCCGAGTTGAGAGACTGATCG
GCCACAATGGGACTGAGACACGGCCCATACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGTAGGGAATCTTCC
ACAATGGGCGAAAGCCTGATGGAGCAACGCCGCGTGTGTGATGAAGGGTTTCGGCTCGTA
AAACACTGTTGTAAGAGAAGAATGACATTGAGAGTAACTGTTCAATGTGTGACGGTATCTT
ACCAGAAAGGAACGGCTAACTACTGCCCAGCCAGCCAAAA 
b) 16S rRNA gene sequence of LC-A using primer sets U8F & U1492R 
NNCANTCTGTTCACCGTTAGACGGCTGGCTCCCGAAGGTTACCCCACCGGCTTTGGGTGTTA
CAAACTCTCATGGTGTGACGGGCGGTGTGTACAAGACCCGGGAACGTATTCACCGCGGCGT
GCTGATCCGCGATTACTAGCGATTCCGACTTCATGTAGGCGAGTTGCAGCCTACAATCCGAA
CTGAGACGTACTTTAAGAGATTAGCTCACCCTCGCGGGTTGGCAACTCGTTGTATACGCCAT
TGTAGCACGTGTGTAGCCCAGGTCATAAGGGGCATGATGATTTGACGTCATCCCCACCTTCC
TCCGGTTTGTCACCGGCAGTCTCACTAGAGTGCCCAACTAAATGCTGGCAACTAGTAATAAG
GGTTGCGCTCGTTGCGGGACTTAACCCAACATCTCACGACACGAGCTGACGACAACCATGC
ACCACCTGTCACCTTGTCCCCGAAGGGAACGCTCCATCTCTGGAGTTGTCAAGGGATGTCAA
GACCTGGTAAGGTTCTTCGCGTTGCTTCGAATTAAACCACATGCTCCACCGCTTGTGCGGGT
CCCCGTCAATTCCTTTGAGTTTCAACCTTGCGGTCGTACTCCCCAGGCGGAGTGCTTAATGCG
TTAGCTGCGGCACTTAAGGGCGGAAACCCTCAAACACCTAGCACTCATCGTTTACGGTGTGG
ACTACCAGGGTATCTAATCCTGTTTGCTACCCACACTTTCGAGCCTCAACGTCAGTTACAGTC
CAGAAAGCCGCCTTCGCCACTGGTGTTCTTCCATATATCTACGCATTTCACCGCTACACATGG
AGTTCCACTTTCCTCTACTGCACTCAAGTCATCCAGTTTCCAAAGCAATTCCTCAGTTGAGCT
GAGGGCTTTCACTTCAGACTTAAATAACCGTCTGCGCTCGCTTTACGCCCAATAAATCCGGA
TAACGCTTGGAACATACGTATTACCGCGGCTGCTGGCACGTATTTAGCCGTTCCTTTCTGGTA
AGATACCGTCACACATTGAACAGTTACTCTCAATGTCATTCTTCTCTTACAACAGTGTTTTAC
GAGCCGAAACCCTTCATCACACACGCGGCGTTGCTCCATCAGGCTTTCGCCCATTGTGGAAG
ATTCCCTACTGGTGCCTCCCGTAAGAATATGGGCNCGGGTCTCAGTTCCCATTGTGGGCCGA
ACAAGTCTCTCAACTCCGGCTATGGAACCATCGGCCTTGGTGGAGCCCTTTCNCTCACCAAC
TTACCTAATGGC 
c) 16S rRNA gene sequence of LC-B using primer sets plb16 & mlb16 
NNNAGNGGCGGCGTGCTATAATGCAGTCGAGCGATGATTGAAGATAGCTTGCTATTTTCAT
GAAGAGCGGCGAACGGGTGAGTAACGCGTGGGAAATCTGCCGAGTAGCGGGGGACAACG
TTTGGAAACGAACGCTAATACCGCATAACAATGAGAATCGCATGATTCTTATTTGAAAGAAG
CAATTGCTTCACTACTTGATGATCCCGCGTTGTATTAGCTAGTTGGTAGTGTAAAGGACTACC
AAGGCGATGATACATAGCCGACCTGAGAGGGTGATCGGCCACACTGGGACTGAGACACGG
CCCAGACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGTAGGGAATCTTCGGCAATGGGGGCAACCCTGACCG
AGCAACGCCGCGTGAGTGAAGAAGGTTTTCGGATCGTAAAACTCTGTTGTTAGAGAAGAAC
GTTAAGTAGAGTGGAAAATTACTTAAGTGACGGTATCTAACCAGAAAGGGACGGCTAACTA
CGTGCCAAGCAGCCAAAANN 
d) 16S rRNA gene sequence of LC-B using primer sets U8F & U1492R 
NNNCCANCGGGTGTACTTAGGAGCGCCTCCTTGCGGTTAGGCAACCTACTTTGGGTACTCC
CAACTTCCGTGGTGTGACGGGCGGTGTGTACAAGGCCCGGGAACGTATTCACCGCGGCGTG
CTGATCCGCGATTACTAGCGATTCCGACTTCATGCAGGCGAGTTGCAGCCTGCAATCCGAAC
TGAGAATGGTTTTAAGAGATTAGCGCACCCTCGCGGGTTGGCGACTCGTTGTACCATCCATT
GTAGCACGTGTGTAGCCCAGGTCATAAGGGGCATGATGATTTGACGTCATCCCCACCTTCCT
CCGGTTTATCACCGGCAGTCTCACTAGAGTGCCCAACTTAATGATGGCAACTAGTAATAAGG
GTTGCGCTCGTTGCGGGACTTAACCCAACATCTCACGACACGAGCTGACGACAACCATGCAC
CACCTGTATCCCGTGTCCCGAAGGAACTCCTTATCTCTAAGGATAGCACGAGTATGTCAAGA
CCTGGTAAGGTTCTTCGCGTTGCTTCGAATTAAACCACATGCTCCACCGCTTGTGCGGGCCC
CCGTCAATTCCTTTGAGTTTCAACCTTGCGGTCGTACTCCCCAGGCGGAGTGCTTAATGCGTT
AGCTGCGCTACAGAGAACTTATAGCTCCCTACAGCTAGCACTCATCGTTTACGGCGTGGACT
ACCAGGGTATCTAATCCTGTTTGCTCCCCACGCTTTCGAGCCTCAGTGTCAGTTACAGGCCA
GAGAGCCGCTTTCGCCTCCGGTGTTCCTCCATATATCTACGCATTTCACCGCTACACATGGAA
TTCCACTCTCCTCTCCTGCACTCAAGTCTCCCAGTTTCCAATGCACACAATGGTTGAGCCACT
GCCTTTTACATCAGACTTAAGAAACCACCTGCGCTCGCTTTACGCCCAATAAATCCGGACAA
CGCTTGGGACCTACGTATTACCGCGGCTGCTGGCACGTAGTTAGCCGTCCCTTTCTGGTTAG
ATACCGTCACTTAAGTAATTTTCCACTCTACTTAACGTTCTTCTCTAACAACAGAGTTTTACGA
TCCGAAAACCTTCTTCATTCACGCGGCGTTGCTCGGTCAGGGTTGCCCCCATTGCCGAAGAT
TCCCTACTGCTGCCTCCCGTAGGAATCTGGGGCCGGGTCTCAGTCCCAAGTGGGGCCGATTC
ACCCTCCCAGGGCGGCTATGGATCAACGGCCTTGGGAGGCCCTTTANCCTACCCAATTNG 
Appendix J 
Identification of DR-A & DR-B via 16S rDNA sequencing 
a) 16S rDNA sequence of DR-A using primer sets plb16 & mlb16 
NNNNNNNNNNNNNNCNANACNTGCANGTCGANGCTTTTTCTTTCACCGGAGCTTGCTCCA
CCGAAAGAAAAAGAGTGGCGAACGGGTGAGTAACACGTGGGTAACCTGCCCATCAGAAGG
GGATAACACTTGGAAACAGGTGCTAATACCGTATAACAAGTAAAACCGCATGGTTTTACTTT
GAAAGGCGCTTTTGCGTCACTGATGGATGGACCCGCGGTGCATTAGCTAGTTGGTGAGGTA
ACGGCTCACCAAGGCAACGATGCATAGCCGACCTGAGAGGGTGATCGGCCACATTGGGAC
TGAGACACGGCCCAAACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGTAGGGAATCTTCGGCAATGGACGAA
AGTCTGACCGAGCAACGCCGCGTGAGTGAAGAAGGTTTTCGGATCGTAAAACTCTGTTGTT
AGAGAAGAACAAGGATGAGAGTAAAATGTTCATCCCTTGACGGTATCTAACCAGAAAGCCA
CGGCTAACTACGTGNNCAGCAGNNNN 
b) 16S rDNA sequence of DR-A using primer sets U8F & U1492R 
NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNCNNNANNTGCAGTCGAACGCTTTTTCTTTCNCCGGAGCTTGCTC
CACCGAAAGAAAAAGAGTGGCGAACGGGTGAGTAACACGTGGGTAACCTGCCCATCAGAA
GGGGATAACACTTGGAAACAGGTGCTAATACCGTATAACAAGTAAAACCGCATGGTTTTAC
TTTGAAAGGCGCTTTTGCGTCACTGATGGATGGACCCGCGGTGCATTAGCTAGTTGGTGAG
GTAACGGCTCACCAAGGCAACGATGCATAGCCGACCTGAGAGGGTGATCGGCCACATTGG
GACTGAGACACGGCCCAAACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGTAGGGAATCTTCGGCAATGGAC
GAAAGTCTGACCGAGCAACGCCGCGTGAGTGAAGAAGGTTTTCGGATCGTAAAACTCTGTT
GTTAGAGAAGAACAAGGATGAGAGTAAAATGTTCATCCCTTGACGGTATCTAACCAGAAAG
CCACGGCTAACTACGTGCCAGCAGCCGCGGTAATACGTAGGTGGCAAGCGTTGTCCGGATT
TATTGGGCGTAAAGCGAGCGCAGGCGGTTTCTTAAGTCTGATGTGAAAGCCCCCGGCTCAA
CCGGGGAGGGTCATTGGAAACTGGGAAACTTGAGTGCAGAAGAGGAGAGTGGAATTCCAT
GTGTAGCGGTGAAATGCGTAGATATATGGAGGAACACCAGTGGCGAANGCGGCTCTCTGG
TCTGTAACTGACGCTGANGCTCGAAAGCGTGGGGGAGCAAACAGGATTAGATACCCTGGT
AGTCCACGCCGTAAACGATGAGTGCTAAGTGTTGGANGGTTTCCGCCCTTCAGTGCTGCAG
CTAACGCATTAAGCACTCCGCCTGGGGAGTACGANCGCAAGGTTGAAACTCAAAGGAATTG
ACGGGGGCCCGCACAAGCGGTGGAGCATGTGGGTTTAATTCGAAGCAACGCGAAGAACCT
TACCAGGTCTTGACATCCTTTGACCACTCTAGAGATAGAGCTTCCCNTTCGGGGGCAAGTGA
CNNNNNNNNCATNNNNNCGTCAGCTCNNGNCNNGANATNNNGNNNAGTCCCCGNANN
ANCGCNNCNNNNNNNNNNCNTCNTTNNNNNNNACNNNNNCNNNACNNNNNNNNAAN
CGNANNNNNNNGNNNNNNGTNNNTCNNCNNNNNNNNGANNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNC
NACNANNGGNNNNTNNNNCNNNNNNNNNNN 
c) 16S rDNA sequence of DR-B using primer sets plb16 & mlb16 
NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNACNTGCAGTCGAACGCTTCTTTCCTCCCGAGTGCTTGCACTCA
ATTGGAAAGAGGAGTGGCGGACGGGTGAGTAACACGTGGGTAACCTACCCATCAGAGGG
GGATAACACTTGGAAACAGGTGCTAATACCGCATAACAGTTTATGCCGCATGGCATAAGAG
TGAAAGGCGCTTTCGGGTGTCGCTGATGGATGGACCCGCGGTGCATTAGCTAGTTGGTGAG
GTAACGGCTCACCAAGGCCACGATGCATAGCCGACCTGAGAGGGTGATCGGCCACACTGG
GACTGAGACACGGCCCAGACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGTAGGGAATCTTCGGCAATGGAC
GAAAGTCTGACCGAGCAACGCCGCGTGAGTGAAGAAGGTTTTCGGATCGTAAAACTCTGTT
GTTAGAGAAGAACAAGGACGTTAGTAACTGAACGTCCCCTGACGGTATCTAACCAGAAAGC
CACGGCTAACTANNNNNNNNANCAGNN 
d) 16S rDNA sequence of DR-B using primer sets U8F & U1492R 
NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNCNNNNNTGCAGTCGACGCTTCTTTCCTCCCGAGTGCTTGCACTC
AATTGGAAAGAGGAGTGGCGGACGGGTGAGTAACACGTGGGTAACCTACCCATCAGAGGG
GGATAACACTTGGAAACAGGTGCTAATACCGCATAACAGTTTATGCCGCATGGCATAAGAG
TGAAAGGCGCTTTCGGGTGTCGCTGATGGATGGACCCGCGGTGCATTAGCTAGTTGGTGAG
GTAACGGCTCACCAAGGCCACGATGCATAGCCGACCTGAGAGGGTGATCGGCCACACTGG
GACTGAGACACGGCCCAGACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGTAGGGAATCTTCGGCAATGGAC
GAAAGTCTGACCGAGCAACGCCGCGTGAGTGAAGAAGGTTTTCGGATCGTAAAACTCTGTT
GTTAGAGAAGAACAAGGACGTTAGTAACTGAACGTCCCCTGACGGTATCTAACCAGAAAGC
CACGGCTAACTACGTGCCAGCAGCCGCGGTAATACGTAGGTGGCAAGCGTTGTCCGGATTT
ATTGGGCGTAAAGCGAGCGCAGGCGGTTTCTTAAGTCTGATGTGAAAGCCCCCGGCTCAAC
CGGGGAGGGTCATTGGAAACTGGGAGACTTGAGTGCAGAAGAGGAGAGTGGAATTCCAT
GTGTAGCGGTGAAATGCGTANATATATGGAGGAACACCAGTGGCGAANGCGGCTCTCTGG
TCTGTAACTGACGCTGAGGCTCGAAAGCGTGGGGAGCAAACAGGATTANATACCCTGGTA
GTCCACGCCGTANACGATGAGTGCTAAGTGTTGGAGGGTTTCCGCCCTTCAGTGCTGCAGC
ANCGCATTAAGCACTCCGCCTGGGGGAGTACNACCGCAAGGTTGAAACTCAAANGAATTG
ACGGGGGCCCGCACAAGCNGTGGAGCATGTGGTTTANNTCNNANCAACGCNNNAANCTT
ACNNNGTCNGACNTCCTTGACCACTCNNNNNNNANANCTTTCCNTTCNNNNCNAANTGAC
NNGNGNNGCANGCTTGTCGTCAGCNCNNNNNNNNNNANGNNNGGGATTNNNNCNNNN
ANCNANCNNCNNNCCNTNANTNNNNANTTNNNCATNCNNTNNNNNNNNNNNNCTNCN
ANNNNGNNCTGNCNNNNNNNNNCNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNANNNNNNNNNNN
ANNNCNNNNNNNNNNGNNTANNNNNNNNNNNNNNCNNNNNNNNNNNTNNNNNN 
Appendix K 
Nutritional analysis of diets  
I. Energy content analysis 
Energy content analysis was performed using a bomb calorimeter (6400 Automatic 
Isoperibol Calorimeter, Parr Instrument Company), where the gross energy is 
measured in terms of heat produced when a sample is completely combusted 
completely into carbon dioxide and water.  
Prior to measurement of energy content of samples, the water re-circulating system 
and oxygen valves were switched on and set at 400 psi respectively. The 
calorimeters pre-test was performed to ensure that the machine was functioning 
properly, followed by the measurement of benzoic acid as a standard, which should 
give 26.454 MJ/kg gross energy. 
Approximately 1 g of sample was weighed into crucibles up to 4 decimal places and 
was compressed with the compressing tool. The crucible was placed into the holder 
and ignition thread was tied to connect the heating wire to the sample. The bomb 
head was inserted into the calorimeter and locked. The identity and weight of the 
sample was input into the calorimeter and the machine was set to start. After 
approximately 20 s, the run was completed and the bomb head was removed. The 
energy measurement obtained was recorded while the underside of the bomb head 
and the heating wire was dried thoroughly before proceeding with the next sample. 
Energy measurement provided by the bomb calorimeter is expressed as kJ/100 g in 
this study. 
II. Protein content analysis 
Protein analysis was performed via the Kjeldahl method (Buchi K-360 Distillation 
Unit), supplemented with a digester (Buchi KjelDigester K-446) based on the AOAC 
method 976.06-1977 for the analysis of crude protein in animal feed. The method 
can be separated into 3 components: a) preparation and digestion of samples, b) 
distillation and, c) titration and calculations 
a. Preparation and digestion of samples  
Briefly, a total of 100 mg of sample was weighed and transferred into each sample 
tube. The weight of each sample was recorded up to 3 decimal places. Then, two 
Titanium micro tablets (Buchi) was added into each sample tube, followed by the 
addition of 15 mL of concentrated sulfuric acid. The tubes were transferred to the 
digester and heated to a final temperature of 380 C for digestion for 1 hr and 30 
min. Then the tubes were removed and allowed to cool down for approximately 15 
min before proceeding with distillation.  
b. Distillation 
Distillation was performed on the distillation unit with the following settings: 
Parameter Settings 
32% NaOH 63 mL 
4% boric acid (pH 4.65) 60 mL 
dH2O 60 mL 
Reaction time 5 s 
Steam power 100% 
Distillation time 4 min 
Aspirate samples Yes 
The sample tubes were transferred to the distillation unit and the process was 
initiated on the machine. A 250-mL glass conical flask was used to collect the 
solution, which was then used for titration when distillation was completed. 
c. Titration and calculation 
A burette containing 0.1 N sulfuric acid and a pH meter was prepared prior to the 
titration process. Prior to titration, the pH of the sample was measured continuously 
while the sample was being stirred. The pH of the sample solution was then adjusted 
to pH 4.65 via titration of 0.1 N sulfuric acid. The total volume of 0.1 N sulfuric acid 
used was recorded. 
The protein content % (w/w) of the sample was measured based on the formula 
below:  
Protein content (%) =
(VS  V0)  N  1.4
  FP  100 
Where: 
Vs = volume of sulfuric acid used in titration of sample;  
V0 = volume of sulfuric acid used in titration of blank;  
N = normality of sulfuric acid used; 
W = weight of the sample; 
FP = protein factor, applied in this study as 6.25 
III. Lipid analysis 
Lipid analysis was performed using a Sohxlet extractor based on the AOAC method 
991.36 for the analysis of crude fat in meat and meat products. The method can be 
separated into three components: a) sample preparation and setup, b) sample 
extraction, and c) calculation of crude lipid content 
a. Sample preparation and setup 
Approximately 1 g of sample was weighed up to three decimal places and transferred 
onto an 11-cm qualitative grade filter paper (Whatman), which was loosely folded to 
fit into the bottom of a thimble. The sample was labelled and was transferred into a 
labelled thimble, which was covered with a plug of cotton wool. The thimble was 
then transferred into a Sohxlet extractor. Meanwhile, a 500-mL round-bottom flask 
was also labelled and weighed. Then, an aliquot of 250 mL of petroleum ether was 
transferred into the round bottom flask and the setup was set up in a fume hood on 
heating blocks with running water for the reflux condenser. 
b. Sample extraction 
The flask was heated continuously under the highest heat setting until the petroleum 
ether was observed to be boiling. Sample extraction was run for 6 hr and was 
monitored constantly to ensure that sufficient petroleum ether was present for lipid 
extraction from the samples. After 6 hr, the setup was dismantled and the round 
bottom flasks were transferred onto the heating blocks to evaporate the remaining 
petroleum ether from samples. When the petroleum ether was completely removed, 
the flasks were then weighed.  
c. Calculation of lipid content 
The crude lipid content of samples was measured based on the formula below: 
Crude lipid content (%) =
WF  W0
  100 
Where: 
WF = weight of flask after extraction was performed 
W0 = weight of empty flask  
WS = weight of sample inserted into filter paper 
IV. Crude fibre content analysis 
Crude fibre content analysis was performed using the fibrebag (Gerhardt) method 
(Method no. AN-04-203), where starch and glucose were removed via digestion in 
acid and proteins were removed via digestion in alkali, with crude fibre left as the 
remaining residue. The method can be separated into three components: a) sample 
preparation, b) sample digestion, and c) calculation of crude fibre content 
a. Sample digestion 
Prior to use, fibrebags were dried in an oven set at 105 C for 4 hr and then 
transferred into a desiccator to cool for 5 min. Fibrebags were weighed and labelled 
with a waterproof marker. Then, approximately 1 g of de-fatted samples were 
weighed up to three decimal places and inserted into the fibrebag. The fibrebags 
were then ready for sample digestion and stored in a desiccator until use. 
b. Sample digestion 
A spacer was added into each fibrebag and was transferred into the carousel. 
Meanwhile, a total of 360 mL of sulfuric acid (0.128 M) was added into the extraction 
beaker. Using the handling tool, the carousel was lowered into the extraction beaker 
and rotated gently to mix for approximately 1 min. The handling tool was removed 
and the extraction beaker was transferred to a cold hotplate. The condenser was 
attached to the apparatus and the extraction beaker was set to boil via the hotplate. 
The heating was reduced when boiling was achieved to produce a simmer in the 
extraction beaker solution. After 30 min of boiling, the extraction beaker was 
removed from the hotplate and the hotplate was turned off. Then, the carousel was 
removed from the extraction beaker and the contents of the extraction beaker were 
discarded.  
Approximately 300 mL of boiling distilled water was added into the extraction beaker 
and the carousel was gently lowered into the extraction beaker. The carousel and the 
contents were washed by vigorous rotation of the carousel, followed by the removal 
of the carousel. The extraction beaker was emptied and then filled with 
approximately 300 mL of boiling distilled water. The washing was repeated and the 
pH of the water measured using a pH paper. If the pH was not neutral, the washing 
was repeated until a neutral pH was obtained. Then, the carousel was removed and 
the contents of the extraction beaker was discarded.  
Then, a total of 360 mL of hot sodium hydroxide (0.313 M) was added into the 
extraction beaker and the carousel was lowered slowly into the extraction beaker. 
The extraction beaker was then transferred onto the hotplate and the condenser 
was reattached to the apparatus. The extraction beaker was then set to boil via the 
hotplate. The heating was reduced when boiling was achieved to produce a simmer 
in the extraction beaker solution. After 30 min of boiling, the extraction beaker was 
removed from the hotplate and the hotplate was turned off. The washing process 
was performed using hot distilled water once, followed by the same volume of 0.1 M 
of hydrochloric acid, and lastly with twice with hot distilled water.  
Fibrebags were then removed from the carousel and the spacers were removed from 
fibrebags under a stream of water for rinsing. Fibrebags were then placed on 
absorbent paper for a few minutes, followed by drying in an oven set at 105 C for 4 
hr. The fibrebags were then desiccated for 15 min, cooled and weighed as fibrebag 
with residue. Then, ash content of the fibrebags and samples were measured using 
the method described in Section 2.5.6. However, weight of the crucible without 
samples was measured after ash content was brushed off. 
c. Calculation of crude fibre content 
Crude fibre content was calculated based on the formula below: 
Crude fibre content (%)= 
(WB1  WB0) (WA1  WA0)
  100 
Where: 
WB1 = weight of fibrebag with residue 
WB0 = weight of empty fibrebag 
WA1 = weight of crucible after heating overnight with samples 
W0 = weight of crucibles without samples 
WS = weight of samples 
V. Moisture content analysis 
Moisture content of a samples were measured based on the AOAC method 935.29 
and is separated into two components: a) sample preparation and drying, and b) 
calculation of moisture content. 
a. Sample preparation and drying 
Prior to use, glass pots were dried in an oven set at 105 C for 3 hr to remove 
moisture and subsequently stored in a desiccator. Then, the glass pots were labelled 
and weighed with their lids to three decimal places. A total of 3 g of sample were 
also weighed to three decimal places and was transferred into a glass pot. The glass 
pots were then transferred into an oven set at 105 C and was dried for 3 hr. After 
drying, the glass pots were removed and transferred into a desiccator before being 
weighed again. 
b. Calculation of moisture content  
Ash content was calculated based on the following formula, where weight after = 
weight of crucible after heating overnight with samples; weight before = weight of 
crucibles without samples: 
Moisture content (%) = 
W0  WF
  100 
Where: 
W0 = weight of glass pot before drying 
WF = weight of glass pot after drying 
WS = weight of sample 
VI. Ash content analysis 
Ash analysis was performed based on the AOAC method 942.05. The method can be 
separated into two components: a) sample preparation and heating, and b) 
calculation of ash content 
a. Sample preparation and heating 
Prior to use, crucibles were heated in a furnace set at 550 C overnight to remove 
impurities and subsequently stored in a desiccator. Then, crucibles were labelled and 
weighed to three decimal places. A total of 2.5 g of sample were also weighed to 
three decimal places and was transferred into a crucible. The crucibles were then 
transferred into a furnace set at 550 C and was heated overnight. Then, crucibles 
were removed and allowed to cool down in a desiccator before being weighed again.  
b. Calculation of ash content  
Ash content was calculated based on the following formula, where weight after = 
weight of crucible after heating overnight with samples; weight before = weight of 
crucibles without samples: 
Ash content (%) =
WF  W0
  100 
Where: 
WF = weight of crucible after heating overnight with samples 
W0 = weight of crucibles without samples 
WS = weight of sample 
Appendix L 
Measurement of length of Asian sea bass (Lates calcarifer) 
