At its greatest extent, the Roman empire represented one of the 
largest continuous areas of land to have been ruled by a single central administration in 
the classical period. While the extent of the empire may be determined from both the 
extensive body of literary evidence from the Roman world, and also from the physi-
cal remains of great public works stretching from Britain to Arabia, the processes by 
which the Romans were able to apprehend larger spaces remain infrequently studied 
in modern scholarship. It is often assumed that Roman spatial awareness came from 
cartographic representations and that the imperial Roman administration must have 
possessed detailed scale maps of both individual regions and of the empire as a whole.
In the first part of the present study, it is demonstrated that Roman spatial 
understanding may not have relied very extensively on cartography, and that any maps 
produced in the Roman world were designed to serve very different purposes from 
those that we might associate with maps today. Instead, it is argued that the extensive 
construction projects that defined the character of the imperial world would have pro-
vided a means by which the larger physical spaces of the empire could be understood.
However, as transformations began to occur within the built environment 
between the late-third and late-sixth centuries, spatial processes would have necessarily 
started to change. In the second part of the present study, it is suggested that attitudes 
toward the built environment would have led to changes in the physical arrangement 
of rural and urban spaces in late antiquity; furthermore the eventual dissolution of 
the constructed landscape that defined the Roman empire would have resulted in new 
approaches to the apprehension of larger spaces, approaches in which cartographic 
expression may have played a more central role.
I m ag e s  o f  t h e  B u i lt  L a n d s c a p e
i n  t h e  L at e r  Ro m a n  Wo r l d
Jesse Simon   university college
A thesis submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy
I m ag e s  o f  t h e  B u i lt  L a n d s c a p e
i n  t h e  L at e r  Ro m a n  Wo r l d
Jesse Simon   university college
A thesis submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy
Lo n g  A b st r ac t
The Roman empire reached its greatest extent in the first decades 
of the second century AD; at that time, the empire stretched from Britain in the west 
to Arabia in the east, and represented one of the largest continuous areas to have been 
ruled by a single central administration in recorded history to that point. The limits and 
content of the empire are well known, both from the literary sources that record the 
achievements of the Roman state, and from the abundance of material remains that may 
still be seen throughout Europe, Africa and the Near East. However, for all that we may 
know about the Roman empire, we are still unclear about the processes by which the 
Romans were able to assess and apprehend the extent of the world in which they lived.
The act of perceiving spaces larger than those which may be taken in at a single 
glance necessarily involves a process of abstraction. In order to understand the limits of 
an empire, or even a particular region, the observer must create an image of the area in 
question; that image may take any number of forms, including a textual description or 
a pictorial representation. In the western world, since the fifteenth century, scale cartog-
raphy has become the most commonly accepted means of apprehending larger spaces; 
thus, the idea that an advanced civilisation must be able to express itself through carto-
graphic displays has, in much modern scholarship, been somewhat carelessly applied to 
the Roman world. In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, it was often simply assumed 
that Roman spatial awareness was informed primarily by cartography, and that in order 
to control an area as large as the empire, the imperial administration must have possessed 
accurate and detailed scale maps both of individual regions and the empire as a whole.
long abstract  2
In the present study, we have attempted to argue that this may not have been the 
case. While the Romans did inherit an advanced geographic and cartographic tradition 
from the Greek world, and while they may also have produced cartographic displays 
of some description, their ability to conceive of larger spaces within the empire may, 
in fact, have been closely bound to the extensive construction projects that came to 
define the physical character of the imperial world. Along with the spread of urban-
ism, the Romans of the imperial period were responsible for a series of public works 
 notably the implementation of consistent land surveys and the establishment of an 
extensive road network  that were specifically designed to make sense of the spaces 
that, together, formed the Roman world. While cartographic representations may 
have existed in the imperial period, they may not have been designed to serve anything 
close to the function that we might associate with the maps of today. Instead, it was the 
physical presence of the built environment that created a system through which larger 
spaces could be easily understood.
From the third to the sixth centuries, however, the nature of the Roman built envi-
ronment started to change. Transformations in the attitudes and ideals that had once 
governed construction in the Roman world led to changes in the physical arrangement 
of rural and urban spaces. The dissolution of the imperial built environment would 
not necessarily have led to the disappearance of large-scale spatial awareness. Instead, 
we find that the mechanisms for spatial perception may have adapted themselves to the 
new physical realities of late antiquity; in the absence of a strong imperially-defined 
built environment, cartographic representations may, in fact, have started to play a 
more active role in the apprehension of the larger world.
The present study is thus divided into two parts. In the first part we discuss the 
emergence of the Roman built environment during the imperial period  that is, the 
period lasting from the beginning of the reign of Augustus in 31 BC, to the end of 
the Severan dynasty in AD 235  and the ways in which that built environment may 
have contributed to awareness of Roman space. After a brief discussion of the types 
of building activity that occurred during the imperial period  focussing specifically 
on the city, the orthogonal land survey and the paved road  the study opens with an 
extensive assessment of cartographic traditions in the Roman world.
We may identify two strands of Roman cartography, which do not seen to have 
been interrelated in any way. On the one hand there were the local-area formae of 
long abstract  3
the land surveyors: in the process of dividing land by means of limites, or baselines, 
the surveyors of the imperial period may have created cartographic records of land 
allocations. In the present work it is argued that these surveyors formae  for which 
no detailed contemporary definition exists  were, in fact, the intermediate stage in 
a process that sought to represent the geographical arrangement of local or regional 
areas in a purely textual form.
Our other major strand of cartography  a tradition of images that sought to 
represent the oikoumene, that is, the whole of the inhabited world  is slightly more 
problematic. Through careful reassessment of primary source material that deals with 
the creation of world maps in antiquity, it will be argued that the Romans had little 
use for the tradition of scale cartography that had developed in the Greek world, and 
that representations of the inhabited world derived their sense of accuracy from their 
ability to catalogue the worlds contents rather than express the worlds shape. It is fur-
ther noted that the cartography of the imperial period was concerned primarily with 
natural topography, and that the built environment, in fact, played a relatively minor 
role in images of the oikoumene.
While the built environment may have contributed little to the pictorial represen-
tations of the Roman world, it would have nonetheless created a physical framework 
for the assessment of larger spaces. Although we may find hints of this in the land 
surveys that shaped the rural spaces of particular regions, perhaps the most notable 
example of the relationship between construction and perception may be found in the 
Roman road network. The paved roads of the imperial period not only provided the 
surface on which travel could take place, but also allowed for the creation of itinerar-
ies, textual records that could guide the traveller to his destination. It is argued that, 
between the itineraries and the literary descriptions of the world which would have 
formed a part of Roman education, movement through the Roman world would have 
required nothing in the way of a cartographic aid. The first part of the study concludes 
with an examination of several texts that describe the act of travelling, and a discussion 
of how the built environment defined the travellers perceptions of the world through 
which they moved.
In the second part of our study, we examine the fate of the built environment 
in late antiquity  that is, the period lasting from the end of the third to the end 
of the sixth centuries  and the new approaches to spatial awareness that may have 
long abstract  4
subsequently emerged. Because it was the imperial city that had very much acted as 
the source for the urban forms that defined the Roman landscape, out investigation 
necessarily begins with an assessment of the city in late antiquity. The urban spaces of 
the fourth century onward were still, to some extent, governed by the ideals that had 
informed the imperial cities of earlier centuries. While those ideals may have continued 
to survive in the legal prescriptions of the state, they may have no longer been shared 
by either the urban populations or the individuals responsible for maintaining urban 
order. We may note how the forms that had defined the classical cities  specifically the 
straight street and the orthogonal grid  were being ignored, and that private building 
projects were beginning to encroach upon urban public spaces.
Changes in the city may well have been echoed by transformations in those aspects 
of the built environment that defined the rural landscape. In the time of Augustus, the 
state had taken an active role in the structuring and arrangement of physical space. 
From as early as the third century, however, reforms to the system of taxation instituted 
by Diocletian may have resulted in changes to the ways in which land was assessed and 
recorded. Where the imperial surveys had imposed an artificial structure that allowed 
larger rural areas to be perceived within a single system, the evidence from legal codes, 
tax records and the writings of later surveyors suggests that landholdings in the later 
Roman world were starting to revert to a more organic state. Instead of square plots 
defined in relation to central baselines, the land became a series of individual forms, 
defined by natural topography and arcane boundaries, and ultimately unconnected to 
any system that allowed for the apprehension of a regional landscape.
The road network was perhaps the one aspect of the built environment that 
continued to be maintained by the state until the very end of antiquity. Although 
epigraphic records for road repairs disappear after the fourth century, a variety of tex-
tual sources suggest that the road network received continual imperial attention, both 
in times of peace and times of crisis. With the emergence of Christianity, however, 
and with the development of a highly defined catalogue of Christian holy places, the 
Roman road network may no longer have reflected the topographic interests of the 
late antique population.
Our study thus concludes with an examination of how geographical and topo-
graphical information was compiled in late antiquity and how those compilations of 
geographical knowledge may have been translated into cartographic images. It is argued 
long abstract  5
that an increasingly abstract approach to the collection of topographic information  
an approach that valued the preservation of place names over the establishment of 
geographical relationships between them  would have resulted in schematised visions 
of the world that were completely divorced from the representational cartography that 
had once been espoused by Ptolemy. It is suggested, however, that this new approach, 
which would gain prominence in the Medieval world, was firmly rooted in the choro-
graphical representations that had become popular during the imperial period and 
that, indeed, it was the Roman rather than the Ptolemaic tradition that was best able 
to express the geographical beliefs of late antique society.
By examining the ways in which the imperial built environment contributed to 
spatial awareness  and the ways that changes in the built environment in late antiq-
uity would have affected the perceptions of space  our goal in the present study is 
to clarify an issue that has received insufficient scholarly attention and has thus been 
clouded by assumption for far too long. Through the careful assessment of classical 
and late antique evidence, we may arrive at a better understanding of the different ways 
that the Roman world was able to conceive of its own extent; in doing so, we may hope 
to contribute to a greater understanding of the larger intellectual transformations that 
defined the transition between classical antiquity and the Medieval period. 
Jesse Simon
Submitted to the
University of Oxford
to fulfil the requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
university college
Landscape
World
Images
of the
Built
in the
Later
Roman
Text copyright  2012 Jesse Simon
With the exception of citations for academic purposes, the present work may not be repro-
duced or transmitted electronically without the express written consent of the author.
All rights reserved.
C o n t e n t s
List of Illustrations iv
Acknowledgements v
List of Abbreviations vi
Preface vii
Introduction 1
Part One
Chapter one: translating the landscape 19
regional cartography: the formae of the agrimensores 24
large-scale cartography I: chorographia and the emergence of a roman tradition 36
large-scale cartography II: agrippas monument 49
large-scale cartography III: world chorography and the tabula peutingeriana 63
Chapter two: apprehending the landscape 77
the mechanics of navigation I: itineraries 79
the mechanics of navigation II: a picture of the world 92
interpreting the built landscape: three travellers 99
Part Two
Chapter three: changes in the urban landscape 125
regulating the urban ideal 127
new foundations 142
urban realities in late antiquity 159
Chapter Four: the imagined landscape 175
the shape of rural life 177
passages through the late antique landscape 202
a new geography for a new audience 214
Conclusion 241
Bibliography 249
L i st  o f  I l lu st r at i o n s
Frontispiece The Tabula Peutingeriana on display, May 2011
Fig. 1 St. Jerome in the Desert 3
Fig. 2 The Hunters in the Snow by Pieter Bruegel 4
Fig. 3 Parc des Buttes Chaumont, Paris 6
Fig. 4 Barcelona as seen from above 13
Fig. 1.1 The Lacimurga Fragment 32
Fig. 1.2 Cadastre B, III J 34
Fig. 1.3 The oikoumene, as described by Strabo 37
Fig. 1.4 Ptolemys second projection 41
Figs 1.5 and 1.6  Two reconstructions of Agrippas monument 58
Fig. 1.7 The Tabula Peutingeriana (detail) 65
Fig. 2.1 Itinerary from Cadiz to Rome 89
Figs 3.1 and 3.2 Vasis proposed reconstruction of Justiniana Prima 157
Fig. 3.3 Sauvagets transformation from the colonnaded street into the souq 162
Fig. 3.4 Plan of Shivta 168
Fig. 3.5 Brd (Kaprobarada) 170
Fig. 3.6 El Bra (Kapropera) 171
Fig. 4.1 The island mosaic in Ammaedara 230
Fig. 4.2 The Madaba mosaic 231
ac k n ow l e d g e m e n t s
Once a work progresses beyond a certain size, it can no longer claim to be the prod-
uct of a single individual. In various ways, the following people have  through their 
support, encouragement and assistance  helped the present work to assume its final 
shape: James Ambrose, Kristin Anderson, Veronica della Dora, Stephen Ewashkiw, Erin 
Finger, Milena Grabacic, Ian Forrest, Catherine Holmes, Adam Izdebski, Lisa Kallet, 
Marc Lauxtermann, Keith Lilley, Rebecca McGann, Andrew Merrills, Nick Millea, 
Herman Miller, Jane Mountain, Maria Nowak, Michael OBrien, Prerona Prasad, 
Kirin Rogers, Sam Sanjabi, Ida Toth, Patrick Wadden, Naomi Walker, Rich Walker, 
Bryan Ward-Perkins, Chris Wickham, Sarah Wilson and Karolina Wisniewska. None 
of these people, however, are responsible for any shortcomings or errors, which remain 
solely the fault of the author.
The final version of the present study was examined by Ja Elsner and Andrew 
Wallace-Hadrill; the author is very grateful for their insightful comments on the work 
itself and for their valuable suggestions about how the research presented here might 
be expanded and developed in the course of future projects.  
Much of the present work was written thanks to the financial support of a joint 
scholarship offered by University College and the History Faculty at Oxford; the 
author would like to extend his gratitude to the staff of both institutions, and especially 
to Tamara Parsons-Baker, Verity Pavitt and Jane Vicat at Univ. Special thanks must also 
be given to Sir Ivor Crewe and the trustees of the Roger Short Memorial Fund, who 
provided the author with a unique opportunity to visit many important late antique 
sites in Turkey; additionally the Old Members Trust at Univ made it possible to travel 
to various conferences, where elements from the present work were presented.
It was James Howard-Johnston who initially saw potential in the unfocused 
thoughts of a Masters student, and who started that student on the path that led to 
the present work. In the five years between those first meetings and the completion 
of this study, he has been a constant source of inspiration, encouragement and sound 
advice. A graduate student simply could not have hoped for a better supervisor and, 
without his guidance, the process of writing this work would have been infinitely less 
enjoyable.
Finally, without the support and encouragement of Alf and Zora Simon, the fol-
lowing work would simply not exist. No expression of gratitude could be great enough, 
and so it is to them that this work is dedicated.
L i st  o f  a b b r e v i at i o n s
AJA  American Journal of 
Archaeology
AJP  The American Journal of 
Philology
ANRW  Aufstieg und Niedergang der 
Rmischen Welt
BASOR  Bulletin of the American 
Schools of Oriental Research
BMGS  Byzantine and Modern Greek 
Studies
BSNAF  Bulletin de la Socit Nationale 
des Antiquaires de France
CAR  Corpus agrimensorum 
Romanorum (see bibliography 
for different editions).
CCSL  Corpus Christianorum Series 
Latina
CIL  Corpus inscriptionum 
Latinarum
CP  Classical Philology
CRAI  Comptes-rendus des sances de 
lAcadmie des Inscriptions et 
Belles-Lettres
CTh  Codex Theodosianus
DOP  Dumbarton Oaks Papers
EHR  The English Historical Review
GGM1  Geographi Graeci Minores Vol. 1
GGM2  Geographi Graeci Minores Vol. 2
GJ  The Geographical Journal
GLM  Geographi Latini Minores
GRBS  Greek, Roman and Byzantine 
Studies
HoC 1  Harley and Woodward, History 
of Cartography Vol. 1
HSCP  Harvard Studies in Classical 
Philology
IEJ  Israel Exploration Journal
IM  Imago Mundi
JECS  Journal of Early Christian 
Studies
JHS  The Journal of Hellenic Studies
JNES  Journal of Near Eastern Studies
JRS  The Journal of Roman Studies
JSAH  Journal of the Society of 
Architectural Historians
MAAR  Memoirs of the American 
Academy in Rome
MEFR  Mlanges de lcole franaise de 
MSNAF  Mmoires de la Socit 
Nationale des Antiquaires de 
France
PBSR  Papers of the British School at 
PRIA  Proceedings of the Royal Irish 
Academy
REA  Revue des tudes Anciennes
SEG  Supplementum Epigraphicum 
Graecum
TPR  Town Planning Review
TPAPA  Transactions and Proceedings 
of the American Philological 
Association
ZPE  Zeitschrift fr Papyrologie und 
Epigraphik
P r e fac e
The following study draws upon a variety of written sources, largely composed between 
the first century BC and the sixth century AD. Many of these sources  for example, 
Vitruvius, Strabo and Ptolemy  have long-established conventions for citation; while 
the present work has not abbreviated the names of classical authors (Vitruvius appears 
instead of Vitr.), it has followed as closely as possible the standard shortened forms of 
individual texts as given in the Oxford Classical Dictionary (Third Edition).
There is, however, one important source  the Corpus agrimensorum Romanorum 
 for which there is no standardised system of citation. Over the past century and a 
half, the contents of the Corpus have appeared in several different configurations, and 
it has become common practice to provide page-and-line references to a particular edi-
tion (i.e. Lachmann or Thulin) rather than to a particular author or text. This practice 
has the unfortunate side-effect of making the Corpus seem less like a compendium of 
treatises by individual authors and more like a single monolithic tome.
The recent Bud edition, prepared by J.-Y. Guillaumin  the second volume of 
which appeared in 2010  has broken each treatise into sections, making it possible to 
refer to a paragraph within the text rather than a page within an edition. While it is 
hoped that this system of referencing will take hold in future scholarship, it remains 
the case that Lachmann and Thulins editions are still the most widely available; 
indeed, full versions of both volumes may be downloaded from the internet as PDFs. 
Campbells edition  which confuses matters further by demanding its own page-and-
line reference system  was out of print when work on the present study commenced, 
although it has since been reprinted and was, as of 2010, available from the publisher.
The existence and, indeed, the varying availability of so many editions has made it 
difficult to arrive at a coherent strategy for citation. While it would have been desirable 
to cite merely the author and their treatise, in the end it seemed necessary to provide 
references to the editions of Lachmann and Thulin, simply because they are the most 
widely available; references to Campbells edition have also been included in order that 
the reader have recourse to a convenient English translation. Citations have thus been 
given in the following manner: author and treatise, followed by page and line equivalents 
for Lachmann, Thulin and Campbell (where applicable). The page and line equivalents 
refer to the first line of the paragraph where the relevant text appears. In those instances 
where no line number is given, it should be understood that the reference is found in the 
first paragraph on that page, or that references to the subject discussed appear through-
out the page. While this system has resulted in one or two cumbersome footnotes, it 
will nonetheless ensure that the present work remains useful to anyone wishing to make 
a further exploration of the writings of the agrimensores.
For the sake of clarity, the present work has opted for familiar versions of personal 
and place names wherever possible; thus, in the following pages you will read about 
Ptolemy and Procopius, Antioch and Jerusalem. Any attempt to impose a completely 
consistent system of transliteration would be to the ultimate detriment of the reader. 
Towns that are less well-known are referred to by their classical name, although modern 
equivalents have been included in parentheses, where relevant. Finally, all of the Latin 
translations in the present work have been prepared by the author; translations from 
the Greek are by the author unless otherwise indicated.
Jesse Simon
summertown, north oxford
january 2012
Images of the
Built Landscape
in the Later Roman
World
I n t ro d u c t i o n
Landscape, the word, was introduced into the English language in 
the early seventeenth century, and spent the next three hundred years leading a quiet 
life as a technical term in painting and, later, in garden design; only in the twenti-
eth century would it become attached to larger ideas about physical spaces and our 
ability to perceive them. Ever since the English word was effectively introduced into 
the geographers lexicon in 1925, the idea of landscape has accumulated so many pos-
sible meanings, and been subjected to so many theoretical approaches, that the word 
itself has become almost impossible to define1. Indeed, the most recent edition of the 
Dictionary of Human Geography offered only a summary of the arguments that had 
emerged during the past century, rather than a concise definition of the word itself; 
while landscape was considered a cardinal term of human geography and a central 
object of investigation, organizing principle and interpretive lens for geographical 
analysis, its precise meaning remained elusive2.
The idea of landscape as a unit of spatial perception is essential to our present study: 
in the following chapters we shall investigate the question of how larger spaces were 
understood and expressed in the Roman world during the imperial period, and how that 
spatial awareness may have started to change between the fourth and sixth centuries, 
the period now commonly referred to as late antiquity. Specifically, the present study 
hopes to argue that spatial perception in the Roman world relied far less on cartographic 
1 One of the earliest uses in a geographical context is C.O. Sauers article The Morphology 
of Landscape, reprinted in Land and Life: A selection from the writings of Carl Ortwin Sauer ed. J. 
Leighly (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1963) 31550.
2 D. Gregory et al. (eds) The Dictionary of Human Geography. Fifth Edition (Oxford, 2009), s.v. 
landscape.
introduction 2
representations than has previously been thought, and that the Romans of the imperial 
period were able to apprehend larger geographical areas primarily through a variety of 
building activities that were designed to take an active role in the shaping of the land.
For the purposes of our study, landscape is a convenient shorthand to describe 
the variety of spaces that the Romans were attempting to assess and understand. 
However because the word has come to be used so frequently  some might say care-
lessly  in modern scholarship, and because its range of possible meanings is so varied, 
we cannot hope to employ landscape consistently unless we first discover the essence 
of the word, and discuss how this relatively modern concept may help us to under-
stand the spatial processes of an ancient civilisation. Once we have clarified the nature 
of landscape, we may return to the principal argument of our study and expand upon 
the work that is to follow.
The etymological origins of landscape are easy enough to trace: lantscaf, an Old 
High German word roughly equivalent to the Latin regio or prouincia, evolved into 
the Medieval landschaft, an administrative term denoting a particular territory3; in 
Germany, landschaft would continue to be used in this administrative sense into the 
twentieth century. From as early as the fifteenth century, however, landschaft had also 
come to refer to the scenery that appeared in the background of a painting; in fact, the 
use of the word in this sense may have coincided with the emergence of the natural 
world as a subject worthy of the painters attention.
While the natural world had not been excluded from Medieval art, it had often 
been simplified to a series of iconographic elements designed to complement the prin-
cipal subject; a few rocks or a group of trees would suffice to situate the subject in 
nature, just as a chair and a few columns might suggest an interior setting. In the Ghent 
altarpiece of Jan and Hubert van Eyck, however, we begin to see a more naturalistic 
approach to the arrangement and rendering of the background scenery; less than a 
century later, we may observe in the works of Joachim Patinir how the background 
became more than mere setting and began to challenge the nominal subject as the 
focus of the painting4.
3 Etymological discussions in Sauer, Morphology, 31550; J.B. Jackson Discovering the 
Vernacular Landscape (New Haven and London, 1984), 38; K.R. Olwig Recovering the Substantive 
Nature of Landscape, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, Vol. 86, No. 4 (December, 
1996), 63053.
4 On the emergence of landscape painting, see K. Clark, Landscape into Painting (London, 
1949), 115; M.J. Friedlnder Early Netherlandish Painting: From Van Eyck to Bruegel (London, 
introduction 3
Patinir, who was referred to by Drer as the good landscape painter (der gut 
landschafft mahler), placed his subjects within a vast arrangement of jagged moun-
tains and serene river valleys5; the elevated vantage points and high horizon lines of 
his paintings allow the observer to apprehend the receding details of a finite expanse 
of land6. The genre of landscape grew in popularity during the Renaissance, both in 
Italy  where it offered an ideal subject for the demonstration of the new technique of 
perspective7  and in the low countries, where it reached a new level of formal refine-
ment under Pieter Bruegel.
However, while the landscapes of Bruegel and Patinir offered a naturalistic 
representation of individual elements, the landscapes themselves were meticulously 
constructed compositions made from disparate elements that could not originally 
have appeared together in nature; we would not, for instance, expect the distant alpine 
peaks in Bruegels Hunters in the Snow (1565) to rise so suddenly from a lowland plain. 
Even in the more thematically naturalistic pastoral scenes of later painters  such as 
Constable or Millet  we may discover in the compositions a careful structuring of 
1965), 7684; E.H. Gombrich The Renaissance Theory of Art and the Rise of Landscape repr. in 
Norm and Form: Studies in the art of the Renaissance I (London, 1985), 10721.
5 R.A. Koch Joachim Patinir (Princeton, N.J., 1968), 3.
6 Koch, Patinir, 15.
7 See Clark, Landscape into Painting, 2021 and D. Cosgrove Prospect, Perspective and the 
Evolution of the Landscape Idea, Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, Vol. 10, No. 1 
(1985), 4562.
Fig. 1 St. Jerome in the Desert (the Louvre Jerome, ca. 1515/19).
I m ag e  r e m ov e d  f ro m  d i g i ta l  v e r s i o n
d u e  to  p ot e n t i a l  c o p y r i g h t  i s s u e s .
introduction 4
space; the job of the landscape painter was to define, enclose and display both the 
limits and contents of a perceived area.
The painted landscape was artificial insofar as it gathered together elements from 
nature and arranged them in such a way as to convey a sense of continuous space; it was 
a not a depiction of nature so much as a reinterpretation. However, while landscape 
painters would have set out to capture an ideal vision of nature, their paintings in turn 
may have started to influence the perception of land itself. The word landscape thus 
came to refer not only to a painting but also to a large natural space that could be taken 
in from a single vantage point; where landscape had once been the construction of the 
painter, it could now equally be considered the construction of an actual observer.
Since the fifteenth century, painters had sought to impose order upon nature 
through composition; however, in the eighteenth century, there emerged a desire to 
fashion the land itself into landscapes that corresponded more closely to the compo-
sitional ideals found in painting8. While many of the famous gardens of continental 
Europe  for example, Versailles, or the villa dEste near Rome  had ignored the 
8 G. and S. Jellicoe The Landscape of Man (London, 1975), 23347 and B. Colvin Land and 
Landscape. Second edition (London, 1970), 5673.
Fig. 2 The Hunters in the Snow by Pieter Bruegel (1965)
I m ag e  r e m ov e d  f ro m  d i g i ta l  v e r s i o n
d u e  to  p ot e n t i a l  c o p y r i g h t  i s s u e s .
introduction 5
organic forms of nature in favour of ornate and highly artificial arrangements, we may 
perceive in the work of English garden designer William Kent a desire to construct an 
ordered physical space that would convey the spontaneity of the natural world9.
The idea that it was possible to transform the world into a more idealised ver-
sion of itself was taken up in the second half of the eighteenth century by Lancelot 
Capability Brown, whose landscape designs offered a more formal conception of 
the natural world than Kents10. Richard Payne Knight, who was critical of Browns 
tendency toward minimalism, nonetheless acknowledged that a certain amount of 
artifice was necessary to create a version of nature that was more pleasing to the eye 
than nature itself11. This attitude is reflected in the opening lines of Knights The land-
scape, a didactic poem: 
How best to bid the verdant landscape rise,
To please the fancy, and delight the eyes;
Its various parts in harmony to join
With art clandestine, and conceald design;
Tadorn, arrange;  to seprate and select
With secret skill and counterfeit neglect12.
By the nineteenth century, the creation of landscapes had become a practice 
unto itself. In Paris, Jean-Charles Alphand acknowledged a debt to French landscape 
painters of the previous centuries by situating manufactured Greek temples within 
the contrived spaces of the Bois de Vincennes and the Parc de Buttes Chaumont. In 
America, Frederick Law Olmstead and Calvert Vaux  designers of Central Park in 
Manhattan and Prospect Park in Brooklyn  became the first practitioners to describe 
themselves as landscape architects; intriguingly, the idea of landscape architecture 
had first been used to discuss compositional techniques in painting13.
At the beginning of the twentieth century, landscape was still primarily a unit 
of subjective spatial perception. Its uses as a term in painting, in garden design and, 
9 M.I. Wilson William Kent: Architect, Designer, Painter, Gardener, 16851748 (London, 1984), 
183222.
10 See D. Stroud Capability Brown. New edition (London, 1975) 16476 and 20610; Jellicoe 
and Jellicoe, Landscape of Man, 245; Colvin, Land and Landscape, 6465.
11 On Knight and his aesthetics, see N. Pevsner Richard Payne Knight, The Art Bulletin, Vol. 31, 
No. 4 (December, 1949), 293320.
12 R.P. Knight The landscape, a didactic poem. In Three Books. Addressed to Uvedale Price, Esq. 
(London, 1794), I.16.
13 In the study by G.L. Meason On the landscape architecture of the great painters of Italy (London, 
1828).
introduction 6
for that matter, in the act of seeing, were all complementary: landscape referred to 
a view onto a constructed space whose limits lay at the edge of the canvas or at the 
natural boundaries of human sight. By the end of the nineteenth century, however, the 
German landschaft had entered the vocabulary of the geographer, where it referred to 
both a bounded land and the appearance of a particular area14. The desire to create a 
more empirical basis for geographical study resulted in an increased attempt to define 
landscape as an objective unit of physical space15.
One of the twentieth-century geographers to address the question of landscape, 
Richard Hartshorne, suggested that the traditional meaning of the word  which 
he defined as the view of an area as seen in perspective  was of little use to the 
geographer16; however, despite his attempts to arrive at a series of objective criteria 
by which landscape could be assessed, he was unable to separate the word from the 
inherently subjective act of human perception. Nonetheless, the desire to break a 
landscape down into a series of component parts that could be defined and enumer-
ated found parallels in twentieth century philosophy and linguistic theory. On the 
14 R. Hartshorne The Nature of Geography: A critical survey of current thought in the light of the 
past (Lancaster, PA., 1939), 14974.
15 Sauer, Morphology, 321.
16 Hartshorne, Nature of Geography, 160.
Fig. 3 Parc des Buttes Chaumont, Paris (photograph by the author).
introduction 7
one hand, there were attempts to treat landscape as a language whose smallest units 
could be assembled into larger structures of meaning17; on the other, the emerging 
school of phenomenology provided a useful framework for understanding the per-
ceptual essence of landscape18.
In the twentieth century, geographers also addressed the question of whether or 
not landscape was essentially the result of human intervention within the order of 
nature. Of course, human life had always been an undercurrent in the idea of landscape: 
we may note the tiny villages in Patinir and Bruegel, the ruined temples in Claude 
Lorrain, and the distant churches in Constable; the garden designers of the eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries had used nature itself as the building blocks for an artificial 
environment. While nature had been the focus of these earlier landscapes, many of 
them had been defined by the imprint of human activity. In the second half of the 
twentieth century, landscape increasingly came to be defined not merely as a fixed unit 
of perceptual space, but also as a space that had been brought into being through the 
activities of a particular culture within a particular area19. In fact, the idea of a purely 
natural landscape  that is, a landscape free of human presence  is best understood as 
an ideal that can never be achieved20.
Thus, in the twentieth century, landscape came to be defined as a space that came 
into being at the intersection of nature and human endeavour. For the landscape theo-
rist J.B. Jackson, any larger space that bore the imprint of human activity  from a series 
of rural field systems to an agglomeration of buildings along a highway  could be 
considered a landscape21. Furthermore, by attempting to understand landscape not as 
a visual unit but rather as a composition of spaces  or a synthetic space, a man-made 
system of spaces imposed on the face of the land22  Jackson was able to remove the 
idea of the single vista from the definition of landscape, while leaving intact the notion 
of landscape as an essentially perceptual construction.
17 Sauer, Morphology, p. 326344; see also A.W. Spirn The Language of Landscape (New Haven 
and London, 1998).
18 For an example of such an approach, see J. Appleton The Experience of Landscape (London, 
1975).
19 See, for instance, C.O. Sauer The Agency of Man on the Earth in W.L. Thomas (ed.) Mans 
Role In Changing the Face of the Earth (Chicago, 1956), 4969; W.G. Hoskins The Making of the 
English Landscape (London, 1955).
20 Hartshorne, Nature of Geography, 17072.
21 Studies of different landscapes are collected in J.B. Jackson Landscape in Sight: Looking at 
America ed. H.L. Horowitz (New Haven, 1997).
22 Jackson, Vernacular Landscape, 78.
introduction 8
With all of this in mind, let us try to arrive at a working definition of the word 
landscape. The constant that has informed our various approaches to the word has 
been the idea of perception: thus, as a starting point, we may suggest that landscape 
is a unit of perceptual experience. This notion of a perceptual unit, however, should 
not necessarily imply a space that must be contained within a single field of human 
vision; while the idea of a vista or a prospect was important to the practice of painting 
  and, by extension, to garden design  if we look within the paintings themselves, 
we most often find a composite vision of nature in which various elements have been 
arranged to create an illusion of unity. Landscape should thus be understood as a series 
of spaces which, taken together, make up an area of fixed extent whose boundaries are 
understood even if they cannot be perceived within a single glance. If we remove the 
idea of landscape from the idea of vista, we may use the word to refer to a variety of 
areas ranging in size from a single region to a whole empire.
Landscape should, in fact, be understood as an area whose boundaries remain out-
side the limits of first-hand experience; because the physical space cannot be contained by 
our eyes alone, our ability to conceive of landscape relies upon our willingness to express 
its limits and its contents through various processes of abstraction. Thus, in order to be 
perceived, a landscape must be translated into an image of some kind; that image may 
take the form of a painting, a map or even a textual description. In our present age of scale 
cartography and satellite photographs, the images that we create tend to be graphical rep-
resentations that act as a surrogate for first-hand knowledge of a physical area. Because the 
process of creating a cartographic image is so integral to our own spatial awareness  and 
has been for the last several centuries  we have a tendency to assume that previous civilisa-
tions must have employed similar images in order to come to terms with larger spaces.
Although the natural world provides some topographic indicators that allow us 
to translate spaces into a perceptual awareness, the forms of nature are often vague and 
open to interpretation; one river, one mountain, even one tree may look remarkably 
similar to the next. There is a natural tendency to search for unique identifiers that will 
help us to come terms with a particular landscape; where such identifiers do not exist, 
however, our process of assessment may begin with the placement of human artefacts 
within the natural world. By placing these markers, which contain the reassuring stamp 
of human endeavour, we are creating the foundation for a system by which land may be 
translated into landscape.
introduction 9
The present study is an attempt to demonstrate that this process of construction 
 that is, the creation of a world in which the imprint of human activity is a constant 
presence  played a considerable role in the Roman ability to conceive of physical 
space; indeed, it was through the imposition of a coherent built environment that 
the Romans were able to maintain effective control over the landscapes that, together, 
constituted their empire. While the Romans may have possessed considerable geo-
graphical knowledge  and, indeed, the ability to translate that knowledge into 
cartographic abstractions of the inhabited world  they may have preferred to express 
the limits and content of Roman space through the medium of text; it was only with 
the eventual dissolution of the imperial built environment, during the centuries of late 
antiquity, that the textual expressions of the world were gradually superseded by the 
abstract medium of pictorial images.
The Roman world, specifically, provides us with a unique opportunity to study 
how human intervention within the natural world would have created a framework 
for spatial perception. Not only do we possess extensive surviving material evidence 
for large-scale building projects over a wide geographical area, but we also possess a 
considerable body of textual evidence that allows us to extrapolate meaning from the 
material record. From the texts we may determine the processes and ideals that guided 
the creation of a large built environment; from the material remains, we may observe 
how those ideals may or may not have been put into practice.
The following work is thus divided into two parts. In the first we will examine the 
creation of the built environment during the Roman imperial period, which is here 
defined as lasting from the unification of the empire following the battle of Actium in 
31 BC to the end of the Severan dynasty in AD 235. Although constructed spaces had 
been a presence in the Mediterranean world in the centuries leading up to the imperial 
period, it was not until the time of Augustus that the processes of construction became 
widely exported; only from the end of the first century BC can we identify a consistent 
built environment spread out over a large geographic area. Our study will, therefore, 
begin with a brief account of the various types of construction undertaken during the 
early imperial period  with a specific focus on cities, field systems and paved roads  
and an examination of the ideals that may have governed their implementation.
Once we have assessed the nature of the built environment we may look more 
closely at how it may have influenced spatial perception in the Roman world. We 
introduction 10
will first examine evidence for small- and large-scale cartographic expression and the 
role that the constructed landscape may have played in the collection of geographical 
knowledge and the representation of space. From there we will examine how elements 
from the built environment would have helped to define the rural spaces that existed 
between cities, and how that landscape of rural and urban spaces was perceived in the 
writings of contemporary travellers.
In the second part, we will examine how the built environment began to change 
during late antiquity  the period lasting roughly from the end of the third century 
to the end of the sixth century  and how those changes may have resulted in new 
approaches to spatial awareness. We will begin with an examination of how urban 
forms started to change as a result of new attitudes toward civic space; the transforma-
tions in the city, as we will see, were mirrored by changes in the constructed elements 
that defined the rural landscape. With the dissolution of the imperial built environ-
ment, the mechanisms for spatial perception would have necessarily started to adapt 
themselves to a new physical reality: our study will, therefore, conclude with an exami-
nation of how a new understanding of landscape may have resulted in new forms of 
abstraction that relied specifically on pictorial elements.
It is important to remember that the idea of landscape belongs to us and not to 
the ancient world; there is no word in Greek or Latin that corresponds precisely with 
our own definition of landscape, although the Greek  and the Latin pagus may 
come close. The problem of perceiving larger spaces by means of intellectual abstrac-
tion, however, is hardly unique to our own time. In examining the methods by which 
landscapes were perceived in the Roman world and the way that those methods began 
to change during late antiquity, the present study hopes to address an aspect of Roman 
life that is still poorly understood and, in doing so, to contribute to a greater under-
standing of the intellectual transformation that occurred between classical antiquity 
and the beginning of the Medieval period.
Before we can discuss the effects of the Roman built environment on contempo-
rary spatial awareness, it is first necessary to understand both the extent of imperial 
construction activities and the ways in which the processes of Roman construction 
introduction 11
may have distinguished themselves from the processes that had developed in the 
Mediterranean world over the previous centuries23. From the end of the first century 
BC, we may detect the emergence of a distinctly Roman built environment; however, 
very few of its constituent elements were unique to the Roman world. The planned city 
had been in existence for hundreds of years and had been refined during the centuries 
of Hellenistic expansion24. Similarly, neither the orthogonal survey nor the permanent 
road were Roman inventions: the survey was already ancient in the time of Herodotus 
 who credited it to the Egyptians25  and complex road networks had existed in Asia 
Minor and the Levant from as early as the second millennium BC26.
The Roman achievement lay not in invention but in implementation. In order to 
govern an area as large as the Roman empire, there needed to be consistent systems for 
land management and tax collection, as well as for effective communication between 
the capital and the provinces. These systems, in turn, would have required the support 
of a consistent built environment that could carry out the functions required by a cen-
tralised administration. More importantly, the systems and the corresponding physical 
structures would have needed to be simple enough that they could be implemented in 
any part of the empire.
The aims of the built environment are most clearly expressed in three types of 
construction that appeared throughout the Roman world of the imperial period: the 
city, the land survey and the paved road. If we look at these three elements individually, 
we may see how each offered a particularly effective set of solutions to the problems 
of large-scale administration; more importantly, we may see how the components of 
the built environment often seem to have been conceived as a means of apprehending 
larger spaces. The establishment of cities allowed for the administration of numerous 
23 The following section is a heavily abbreviated version of a much longer investigation into the 
Roman built environment and its underlying ideals; the original version was intended to be the first 
chapter of the present study, however it has been removed due to considerations of space.
24 Overviews of pre-Roman urbanism in: P. Lampl Cities and Planning in the Ancient Near East 
(London, 1968). Key works on classical planning include P. Lavedan and J. Hugueney Histoire de 
lUrbanisme: Antiquit. Second edition. (Paris, 1966); F. Castagnoli Orthogonal Town Planning in 
Antiquity (Cambridge, MA., 1971); J.B. Ward-Perkins Cities of Ancient Greece and Italy: Planning in 
Classical Antiquity (London, 1974).
25 Herodotus II.109. The Egyptian origin is also recounted by Heron of Alexandria; see chapter 
four, 198.
26 J. Garstang Hittite Military Roads in Asia Minor: A Study in Imperial Strategy with a Map 
AJA, Vol. 47, No. 1 (1943), 3562; D. French Pre- and Early-Roman Roads of Asia Minor. The 
Persian Royal Road, Iran, Vol. 36 (1998), 15 43; D.A. Dorsey Shechem and the Road Network of 
Central Samaria, BASOR, No. 268 (November, 1987), 5770.
introduction 12
geographically diverse regions; the implementation of orthogonal field systems cre-
ated a structure for understanding regional rural spaces; finally, the road network 
connected the furthest extremities of the empire to a conceptual and physical centre.
Urbanism was crucial to the processes of imperial expansion. In order for the 
various regions of the empire to function as a part of the administrative machinery it 
was necessary to establish centres in which the core institutions of civic life might be 
contained. The Roman city began with a wall that would define the extent of the urban 
space27; once the limits of the city had been defined, a series of streets were established 
and the centre was adorned with temples, porticos, a forum, a theatre, baths and all 
of the other structures which were understood to be a part of civic life28. The city was 
essentially conceived as a nucleus, around which an urban population might gather: 
the institutions established by the state would ensure the city could function properly 
within the imperial systems, while the street layout would create a framework for regu-
lated urban growth.
The idea that a city could be completely planned and established in a foreign loca-
tion was something of a revolution in the history of urbanism29; while the earliest cities 
had been the result of populations coalescing around a spiritual or economic node, the 
increasing complexity of social and economic structures would have resulted in the 
emergence of more strongly defined urban forms30. Eventually the organic processes of 
urbanism would be superseded by the completely planned city. Predetermined urban 
plans were employed by Greek colonists as early as the fifth century BC and, in the final 
centuries of republican Rome, colonies were established throughout Italy as a means 
of maintaining political control31. In the early days of the empire, however, the form of 
the planned city would be further refined.
27 Vitruvius I.56
28 Vitruvius V.112.
29 Lavedan and Hugueney, Urbanisme, 8, differentiates between the ville cre and the ville spon-
tane; see also S. Kostof The City Shaped: Urban Patterns and Meanings Through History (London, 
1991), 4345.
30 H. Frankfort Town Planning in Ancient Mesopotamia, TPR, Vol. 21, No. 2 ( July, 1950), 
99115.
31 On the emergence of Greek urban planning, see F. Haverfield Ancient Town-planning (Oxford, 
1913), 1956; R.E. Wycherley Hippodamus and Rhodes, Historia, Vol. 13, No. 2 (April, 1964), 135
139; Lavedan and Hugueney, Histoire de lUrbanisme, 98103; Castagnoli, Orthogonal Town Planning, 
6672; Ward-Perkins, Cities, 1417; A. Burns Hippodamus and the Planned City, Historia, Vol. 25, 
No. 4 (1976), 414-28. On early Roman towns, see J.B. Ward-Perkins Early Roman Towns in Italy, 
TPR, Vol. 26, No. 3 (October, 1955), 12654; A. Bothius The Golden House of Nero: Some Aspects of 
Roman Architecture (Ann Arbor, 1960), 2693; Castagnoli, Orthogonal Town Planning, 5154.
introduction 13
Perhaps the most important urban form in the Roman city was the axial through-
way32. The orthogonal intersection of two throughways, in turn, provided the baselines 
for the establishment of a grid, one of the other important urban forms to emerge 
from the city33. The straight line and the grid would be used in the Roman world not 
merely as organising principles of urban space, but also as a means of apprehending 
the rural landscape. The orthogonal grid, for example, was employed as a means of 
regulating the agricultural rural spaces that surrounded the cities. By establishing an 
intersection of principal baselines, the surveyors created a system in which equal areas 
of land could be divided, allocated and recorded34. Although land surveys that used 
a system of baselines  or limites  are attested from the end of the second century 
BC35, much of the land was still held according to inconsistent boundary markers and 
ancient local customs36. There is, however, some evidence to suggest that a large-scale 
32 W. MacDonald The Architecture of the Roman Empire II: An Urban Appraisal (New Haven 
and London, 1986), 5 31.
33 On the emergence of the grid, see Castagnoli, Orthogonal Town Planning.
34 The establishment of limites and orthogonal field systems are discussed in the treatises of Julius 
Frontinus and Hyginus Gromaticus, collected in the Corpus Agrimensorum.
35 One of the earliest surveys for which there is both literary and epigraphic evidence was under-
taken by Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus in 133 BC. See Plutarch Ti. Grac. XIII.1; Appian Civil 
Wars I.1.13; see also A.H. Bernstein Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus: Tradition and Apostasy (Ithaca 
and London, 1978), 12359; D. Stockton The Gracchi (Oxford, 1979), 4060; J.S. Richardson 
The Ownership of Roman Land: Tiberius Gracchus and the Italians, JRS, Vol. 70 (1980), 111; 
D.J. Gargola Lands, Laws, & Gods: Magistrates & Ceremony in the Regulation of Public Lands in 
Republican Rome (Chapel Hill, 1995), 14774.
36 On ager arcifinius, see Frontinus De Agr. Qual. L 1 = T 1.3 = C 2.3; Siculus Flaccus De Cond. 
Agr. L 138.18ff = T102.16ff = C 104.34ff.
Fig. 4 Barcelona as seen from above (from G00gle Maps). A meeting of the ville cre and the ville 
spontane.
I m ag e  r e m ov e d  f ro m  d i g i ta l  v e r s i o n
d u e  to  p ot e n t i a l  c o p y r i g h t  i s s u e s .
introduction 14
land assessment programme was undertaken in the time of Augustus, during which 
standard limites and boundary markers were imposed throughout the empire37; the 
imperial administration was not merely interested in the measurement and assessment 
of land, but in a complete and systematic reorganisation of rural space.
In the road network that connected the various cities of the empire, we may 
perceive an attempt to use the forms of the urban built environment as a means 
of apprehending the larger spaces of the empire. While roads had existed in the 
Mediterranean world for centuries, the Roman roads distinguished themselves through 
their monumentality38; the use of the paving slab was not merely a means of ensuring 
permanence, but also a means of bringing the iconography of urban space into the wil-
derness. Furthermore, the establishment of inscribed milestones and the development 
of a service infrastructure along the routes created a system where long distances could 
be easily apprehended and difficult journeys could be undertaken without recourse to 
cartographic guides or imprecise local knowledge39.
In the time of Augustus, the physical space of the Roman world became more vast 
than it had ever been. Accordingly, roads needed to extend further, new lands needed 
to be divided and new urban centres were required to oversee the administration of 
each new region. In order to handle all of this new construction effectively, it became 
necessary to examine the processes, to discover their essence, and to create a system 
whereby those processes could be repeated wherever the need for building arose. The 
need for simplicity, itself, was practical: by reducing the foundation of a city, or the 
establishment of a land survey, to a simple process  ideally one which did not rely 
on scientific or mathematical knowledge  it became easier for those processes to be 
carried out accurately by an unskilled or untrained workforce.
Thus, the standards for building and surveying that emerged in the time of 
Augustus were not so much imperial directives as simplified guidelines for good prac-
tice. In fact, if we look at the surviving evidence we notice that the roads are not all 
straight, that the field systems are not always regular and that the cities are not always 
37 Liber Coloniarum L 239 = C 188.2.
38 On the emergence of the Roman road network, see R.J. Forbes Studies in Ancient Technology 
Vol. II. (Leiden, 1965), 14551; F.T. Hinrichs Der rmische Straenbau zur Zeit der Gracchen, 
Historia, Vol. 16, No. 2 (1967), 16276; T.P. Wiseman Roman Republican Road-Building, PBSR, 
Vol. 38 (1970), 12252; R. Laurence The Roads of Roman Italy: Mobility and Cultural Change 
(London, 1999), 1126.
39 The use of the road network as a navigational tool will be discussed in chapter two, 7992.
introduction 15
as rigorously orthogonal as we might imagine them to be. The ideal of Roman building 
was the perfectly straight line and the perfectly even grid; the reality, however, may 
have fallen somewhat short of that mark. What is perhaps most impressive about the 
Roman built environment is how close they often came to achieving the ideals they set 
out for themselves.
Part  One
C h a p t e r  o n e
translating the landscape
The Romans of the imperial period were able to construct a world 
in which the imprint of human activity was a constant presence; however, while the 
built environment may have facilitated movement through the space of the empire, 
there is less evidence to suggest that it formed the basis for the creation of large-scale 
cartographic documents. In fact, the assumption that an advanced civilisation must 
have possessed detailed cartographic representations of their world is based more on 
our own preconceptions than on anything that we may adduce from classical sources; 
nonetheless, the idea that the Romans created reasonably accurate scale maps seems 
to have infiltrated modern scholarship1. The fact that almost no cartographic docu-
ments have survived from antiquity has not prevented the development of a consensus 
that, not only did the Romans possess maps, but that those maps must not have been 
entirely dissimilar to something that the modern individual might recognise as a carto-
graphic document.
In order to discuss ancient traditions of cartographic expression, we must first 
attempt to distance ourselves from the idea that Roman cartographers would have 
possessed either the ability or the desire to create scale representations of the world in 
which they lived. Indeed, the use of the word map to describe ancient artefacts has 
1 L. Bagrow History of Cartography. Second Ed. rev. R.A. Skelton (Chicago, 1985), 38, claims that 
doubtless Roman civilisation must have possessed good maps. See also Dilke in HoC 1, 20111; criti-
cisms of Dilke in R.J.A. Talbert Greek and Roman Mapping: Twenty-first Century Perspectives in 
Talbert and Unger, Cartography in Antiquity, 927 and Brodersen The Presentation of Geographical 
Knowledge for Travel and Transport in the Roman World in Adams and Laurence, Travel and 
Geography, 721.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 20
almost certainly contributed to modern misconceptions about Roman cartography: 
while recent definitions have attempted to make the idea of maps more inclusive 
 the History of Cartography project, for instance, defines them as graphic representa-
tions that facilitate a spatial understanding of things, concepts, conditions, processes, 
or events in the human world2  the word nonetheless carries with it unavoidable 
associations with a certain type of modern artefact3.
Cartography is, indeed, a process by which information about physical space 
is transformed into a graphical representation; a cartographic artefact is deemed to 
be accurate if the spatial relationships within the artefact are able to convey a visual 
sense of what is perceived to exist within the physical world. Objective cartography, 
however, cannot exist: in order to create a representation of anything at reduced scale, 
certain editorial decisions need to be made which, in a sense, preserve the illusion of 
accuracy4. Thus, a cartographic document is a reflection of the culture that created 
it: if the document does not correspond to what is already believed to exist, it will be 
judged inaccurate5.
The problem with many modern treatments of Roman cartography is that they 
tend to judge the cartography of the past against the standards of the present. Over 
the past five centuries, the practice of cartography has been dominated by the idea 
that it is possible to create a representation that might faithfully convey the world as 
seen from a great enough distance6. For this reason, the maps proposed by Ptolemy in 
the second century AD appeal to the modern scholar because of their empirical basis 
and their attempt at objective accuracy; we are generally willing to forgive any minor 
errors arising from insufficient information7. Examples from medieval cartography, 
on the other hand, are often dismissed as defective on account of their distortions 
and subjectivity.
2 HoC 1, xvi.
3 See discussions by Cosgrove in Cosgrove (ed.) Mappings (London, 1999), 123 and C. Jacob The 
Sovereign Map: Theoretical Approaches in Cartography Throughout History (Chicago, 2006), 11101.
4 C. Jacob Toward a Cultural History of Cartography, IM, Vol. 48 (1996), 19198.
5 For a recent example of this phenomenon, we may look at reactions to the Peters projection. 
The projection, which appeared in A. Peters Peters Atlas of the World (Harlow, 1989); methodology 
described in A. Peters Die Neue Kartographie trans. W. Kaiser et al. (New York, 1983), was highly 
controversial; see reviews by H.A.G. Lewis in GJ, Vol. 154, No. 2 (1988), 29899 and N. Pye in GJ, 
Vol. 155, No. 2 (1989), 29597; GJ, Vol. 157, No. 1 (1991), 9596.
6 D. Cosgrove Apollos Eye: A Cartographic Geneology of the Earth in the Western Imagination 
(Baltimore, 2001), 10238.
7 See, for instance, J.J. Tierney Ptolemys Map of Scotland, JHS, Vol. 79 (1959), 13248.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 21
Along with our willingness to interpret ancient cartography according to modern 
standards of form, there is also a tendency to impose our own ideas of function. In 
the modern world, maps serve a variety of purposes: they can be educational tools, 
like the Mercator projections that hang in many classrooms; they can be catalogues 
of topographical features, like the Ordnance survey maps; or they can be navigational 
aids like a road atlas or the London A-Z. The creation of cartographic documents in 
the imperial Roman world, however, may have been undertaken with a completely 
different set of aims. Thus, if we are to assemble an accurate picture of Roman carto-
graphic traditions, we must leave behind our preconceptions and focus only on the 
contemporary evidence.
Unfortunately, as we have already mentioned, there are almost no surviving car-
tographic artefacts from classical antiquity. Indeed we may enumerate, in only a few 
paragraphs, the material evidence that has survived. The most recent artefact that 
has come to light is a drawing found on the reverse of a papyrus containing a section 
from the geographical text of Artemidorus8. Scholarly access to the papyrus was first 
granted in 1997 and since then, there has been continued debate as to the authenticity 
of the document; while some are willing to concede the antique origins of the papy-
rus, others have argued that it is most probably a nineteenth-century forgery, perhaps 
perpetuated by the shadowy Constantine Simonides9. The drawing on the reverse  a 
series of waterways dotted with iconographic settlements  has been identified with 
Spain and, if genuine, would be one of the earliest known cartographic documents 
from antiquity10.
Perhaps the most well-known cartographic artefact is the Forma urbis Romae, 
a monumental plan of the city of Rome that was carved into marble and displayed 
on the side of the Templum Pacis after it was restored by Septimus Severus sometime 
8 The recently published editio princeps is C. Gallazzi, B. Kramer and S. Settis et al. (eds) Il papiro 
di Artemidoro (P. Artemid.) (Milan, 2008).
9 The most ardent opponent of the papyrus has been Luciano Canfora; see L. Canfora The 
True History of the So-called Artemidorus Papyrus (Bari, 2007) and the review article R. Janko The 
Artemidorus Papyrus, The Classical Review, Vol. 59, No. 2 (2009), 40310 where Canforas claims are 
largely supported. A conference at St. Johns College, Oxford (13 June 2008), examined the papyrus 
from art-historical, papyrological and philological perspectives and was broadly in favour of the arte-
fact being genuine; the proceedings of that conference have been published in K. Brodersen and J. 
Elsner Images and Texts in the Artemidorus Papyrus: Working Papers on P.Artemid. (Stuttgart, 2009).
10 On the map specifically, see B. Kramer The Earliest Known Map of Spain (?) and the 
Geography of Artemidorus of Ephesus on Papyrus, IM, Vol. 53 (2001), 115120, and R. Talbert 
P.Artemid.: The Map in Brodersen and Elsner, Images and Texts, 5764. The present author believes 
the map and text to be unrelated, and that the map is a depiction of the nile delta.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 22
between AD 203 and 21111. The plan is notable for its level of detail and also for its fairly 
remarkable adherence to a consistent scale. However, because of its localised scope  it 
encompasses only the city  the plan does not allow us to draw any conclusions about 
how larger spaces were expressed using cartographic means. Our remaining pieces of 
evidence  all of which will be discussed at greater length either in the present chap-
ter or chapter four  consist of: two fragmentary floor mosaics, one discovered in 
Ammaedara (Tunisia), the other in Madaba ( Jordan)12; a collection of marble frag-
ments  found in and near Orange  from what may have been a public record of a 
large land survey; a small fragment of bronze from Spain that may also have been part 
of a surveyors record13; and, finally, the Tabula Peutingeriana, a parchment copy of a 
cartographic document that is thought to have originated in late antiquity14.
Because the corpus of available material amounts to so little, it is necessary to base 
the majority of our investigation on descriptions from textual sources. However, even 
this approach is not without its problems. Neither Greek nor Latin has one specific 
word that refers only to a cartographic document15. Many Greek authors  including 
Herodotus, Strabo and Diogenes Laertius  use , which simply means a tablet or 
panel, but often implies a flat surface for writing or painting; the equivalent in Latin 
is tabula, which, like , merely suggests the surface rather than the artefact16. In 
Latin, however, the term most frequently used is forma, which, among several possible 
meanings, may refer to a shape, an outline or a graphical representation. Furthermore, 
there are several Latin sources in which the artefacts are mentioned obliquely, and we 
are left to infer their cartographic nature.
The fact that our sources for cartography in antiquity amount to little more than 
a handful of artefacts and a selection of reasonably vague literary descriptions has con-
tributed to an unbalanced understanding of how cartographic representations were 
created and used in the Roman world. Some scholars, for instance, have attempted to 
11 A reconstruction of the extant fragments has been published by E. Rodrguez Almeida Forma 
urbis marmorea: aggiornamento generale 1980 in 2 vols. (Rome, 1981). A reconstruction with a searcha-
ble database of fragments and extensive bibliography may be found online at  formaurbis.stanford.edu.
12 See chapter four, 22934.
13 See below, 3335.
14 See below, 6375.
15 A partial list of Greek and Latin words with cartographic meanings may be found in Dilke, 
Greek and Roman Maps, 19697.
16 In Medieval Latin, however, tabula would come to refer to a series of parchment sheets which 
had been sewn or glued together; see Bischoff, Latin Palaeography, 34.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 23
fit all of the sources and artefacts into a unified model of cartographic consciousness17. 
At the other end of the spectrum, it has been proposed that none of the surviving 
literary or material evidence can be used to support claims for a Roman culture of 
cartography18. Neither of these approaches offer an ideal solution; however, if we start 
by re-examining the textual evidence, we may at least arrive at a more plausible model 
into which the surviving material evidence may be placed.
For the purposes of the present study we may propose the existence of two 
principal traditions, both of which yielded two very different types of cartographic 
document. The first is a local- or regional-scale cartography based on the records created 
by the agrimensores during the course of land-division and allocation. These formae, 
designed specifically for a local public records office (tabularium), contained a heavily 
annotated representation of a local area, and may have been written on parchment, 
engraved onto bronze tablets or carved into stone. The treatises of the land surveyors, 
combined with a small quantity of material evidence, allow us to suggest reconstruc-
tions for both the formae themselves, as well as the record-keeping process of which 
they were an integral part.
The second tradition  and perhaps the more contentious of the two  involved 
the representation of larger areas, ranging in size from a single region or province to 
the whole of the inhabited world. These artefacts may have primarily taken the form of 
wall paintings, and they would have been created as a means of illustrating geographical 
information collected from literary sources and ground-level assessment. This second 
species of cartographic creation seems to have been primarily decorative in nature and 
may not have presented a picture of the world that the modern viewer would recognise 
as accurate; for the Roman viewer, however, the accuracy of a representation may have 
come not from the presence of familiar shapes, but rather from the comprehensive 
presentation of places and place-names.
Of these two traditions, one was primarily administrative  more a record of 
land allocation than a pictorial representation  and the other was mostly decora-
tive, albeit with a potential undercurrent of propaganda. We may note that neither 
of these traditions were concerned with navigation or orientation. As we will see in 
17 See, for example, Dilkes chapters in Harley and Woodward, HoC 1, 177279.
18 For instance, K. Brodersen Terra cognita: Studien zur rmischen Raumerfassung (Hildesheim, 
1995).
Chapter one: translating the landscape 24
the next chapter, the Roman approach to movement through the space of the empire 
required only text and roads rather than cartographic diagrams. If the cartographic 
traditions of the Roman world do not conform to our current ideas of functional 
mapping, it is perhaps because the cartography produced in antiquity was intended 
for very different purposes.
regional cartography:
the formae of the agrimensores
In the writings of the agrimensores, there is evidence to suggest that the act of creating 
records was an integral part of the survey and, moreover, that some of the records 
may have taken the form of cartographic documents. Frontinus, Hyginus and Hyginus 
Gromaticus all discuss the forma, a document that may, as we shall see, have repre-
sented an intermediate stage in the process whereby surveyed land was translated into 
a completely textual form; in Siculus Flaccus and Agennius Urbicus, we find examples 
of how formae were used in the arbitration of land disputes, and also how they may 
have fit into the imperial record-keeping process.
The exact nature of these formae is uncertain, and our attempts to reconstruct 
their appearance must be based largely on what we may infer from textual sources. 
There is, of course, a tradition of illustrations accompanying the treatises, which dates 
to the earliest extant manuscript, the Codex Arcerianus A19; illustrations from an alter-
native tradition may also be found in the ninth-century Vatican manuscript (Pal. lat. 
1564)20. Among these illustrations, several are distinctly cartographic in nature, insofar 
as they attempt to place topographic features  cities and rivers, for instance  into 
the context of a centuriated landscape. It was initially thought that the manuscript 
19 See F. Castagnoli Le formae delle colonie romane e le miniature dei codici dei gromatici, 
Atti della Reale Accademia dItalia, Series 7, Vol. 4/4 (1943), 83118; O.A.W. Dilke Maps in the 
Treatises of Roman Land Surveyors, GJ, Vol. 127, No. 4 (1961), 417426; id. Illustrations from 
Roman Surveyors Manuals, IM, Vol. 21 (1967), 929; Carder, Art Historical Problems, 135.
20 Illustrations from both Arcerianus A and the Vatican manuscripts are reprinted in Thulins 
edition of the Corpus Agrimensorum; they are described and classified in Dilke, Illustrations, 929.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 25
illustrations may have descended from the formae of the agrimensores21, although it 
has more recently been demonstrated that the illustrations probably represent later 
interpretations of the practices discussed in the text22.
We are not, however, completely lacking in material evidence for survey-related 
cartography. In the nineteenth century, a series of incised stone fragments attracted some 
scholarly attention for their possible relationship to the agrarian systems described in 
the Corpus Agrimensorum23; the fragments were thought to be part of a large publically-
displayed stone plan depicting the centuriated areas around Roman Arausio (Orange)24. 
Additional fragments continued to appear during the first half of the twentieth century 
 including a sizable group discovered in 194925  and reconstructions of the stone plans 
were finally published in 196226. Not long after the publication, a part of the Muse 
dOrange collapsed and a number of the fragments were lost. More recently, a small 
fragment of bronze containing several squares from what appears to be a centuriation 
grid was unearthed in Spain27. The fragment is thought to be a small part of a forma 
illustrating the division of lands near the colony of Lacimurga28.
Unlike the manuscript illustrations, the material evidence  fragmentary as it is 
 can be dated to the imperial period and may therefore be considered roughly con-
temporary with the practices described by the surveyors. However, if we are to arrive 
at some idea of how these apparently cartographic fragments fit into the processes 
of surveying and record-keeping, we must first examine the treatises and attempt to 
determine the role that formae may have played in the world of the agrimensores.
The forma probably began with a representation of the centuriation grid. Not only 
did the limites create the fixed units of land that made up the survey but, according to 
21 The argument was initially put forward in A. Schulten Rmische Flurkarten, Hermes, Vol. 33, 
No. 4 (1898), 53465.
22 See Castagnoli, Le formae, 83118; Dilke, Maps, 41726; Carder, Arcerianus A, 2435.
23 For a bibliographical overview of the early scholarship, see A. Piganiol Les Documents 
Cadastraux de la Colonie Romain dOrange (Paris, 1962), 1116.
24 For a brief introduction to the stones, see A. Chastagnol Les cadastres de la colonie romaine 
dOrange, Annales. conomies, Socits, Civilisations, Vol. 20, No. 1 (1965), 152159.
25 See A. Piganiol and J. Sautel  Inscriptions cadastrales dOrange, Gallia, Vol. 13, No. 1 (1955), 
539.
26 In Piganiol, Documents.
27 Originally published in P. Sez Fernndez Estudio sobre una inscripcion catastral colindante 
con Lacimurga, Habis, Vol. 21 (1990), 205227, with a photo in Habis, Vol. 22 (1991), 437.
28 See J.-G. Gorges Nouvelle lecture du fragment de Forma dun territoire voisin de Lacimurga, 
Mlanges de la Casa de Velzquez, Vol. 29, No. 1 (1993), 723.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 26
Frontinus, they also provided a system by which the disposition of land could be rep-
resented graphically: without measurable lines, he tells us, the truth of locations and 
their extent cannot be expressed29. Frontinus was not referring merely to the physical 
expression of particular areas, but specifically to their representation within a docu-
ment. In the same passage he describes a method of rationalising irregular boundaries 
precisely so that they may be more easily transferred to the forma; after writing down 
the boundaries of the space itself , he says, we render the true nature of the location30.
Hyginus Gromaticus confirms that the formae contained a representation of the 
centuriation grid. When discussing the merits of using limites as a means of dividing 
land, he comments not only on the utility of the enterprise, but also on the poten-
tial visual qualities: the formae possess beauty, and moreover the disposition of the 
fields themselves is impressive31. While the orthogonal properties may not have been 
immediately apparent from ground level, it may, in some cases, have been possible to 
command a view over the centuriated landscape; when displayed on a forma, however, 
the pleasing grid pattern of the land could be easily apprehended.
Not only did the forma contain a representation of the limites, but it may also 
have preserved the hierarchical distinction between the lesser linearii or subrunciui and 
the principal baselines  the quintarii and the kardo and decumanus maximus  which 
were prescribed, by law, to be of greater width32. According to Hyginus Gromaticus, this 
distinction was represented in the forma itself: when discussing the law providing for a 
wider quintarius, he tells us, certainly the interpretation of this law would be doubtful, 
had the formae of the time not had a sixth limes of greater width33.
One may detect, in the writings of the surveyors, a curious relationship between the 
limites and their subsequent representation in the forma. In the world of the surveyors, 
the limites were not static axes beginning from a single point, but were rather described 
in terms of their movement across the land. Frontinus, for instance, tells us that the 
29 exprimi enim locorum aut modi ueritas sine rationalibus lineis non potest. Frontinus De Arte 
Mensoria IV.1 = L 31.12 = T 15.6 = C 12.3.
30 et adscriptis spatio suo finibus ipsam loci reddimus ueritatem. Frontinus De Arte Mensoria IV.1 
= L 31.12 = T 15.6 = C 12.3.
31 formarum pulcher habitus, ipsorum etiam agrorum speciosa designatio. Hyginus Gromaticus 
Constitutio I.2 = L 166 = T 131 = C 134.
32 See Hyginus De Limitibus L = 111.9 = T 71 = C 76 and Hyginus Gromaticus Constitutio L 
194.9 = T 157.9 = C 152.22.
33 erat sane interpretatio legis huius ambigua, nisi eorum temporum formae sextum quemque lim-
item latiorem haberent. Hyginus Gromaticus Constitutio III.6 = L 174 = T 139 = C 140.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 27
decumanus goes from the east to the west and the kardo from the south to the north34. 
Hyginus Gromaticus tells us that systems of limites sometimes face east or west, but in 
accordance with the orientation of temples, they should be established to face east35.
The notion of facing was central to the surveyors conception of the land: the iden-
tification of centuria  using a perceptual system of right and left (dextra and sinestra), 
this side and that side (citra and ultra)  implied the presence of an observer within the 
surveyed space. We may wish to suggest that this perceptual system was preserved in the 
formae: the top of the empty page perhaps represented the viewpoint of the surveyor, 
while the movement and direction implied by the descriptions of limites also described 
how those limites were drawn; the movement of the limes through the landscape would 
correspond to the movement of the surveyors stylus on the page.
Regardless of how the forma was oriented, the centuriation grid would have offered 
the surveyor a rational framework by which amorphous spaces could be represented, 
and into which topographical features could be situated. Unlike the irregularities of 
unsurveyed land, the grid would not have been difficult to translate onto the writing 
surface. Indeed, it would have been possible for a surveyor to create an approximate 
representation of the surveyed land without actually seeing the land itself; he would 
have only needed to know how many lines to draw in any one direction. Indeed, in 
some of the later manuscript illustrations, the grid is often used simply as an icono-
graphic indicator of surveyed land36.
The centuriation grid would have provided an easy means of translating larger surveyed 
areas onto the page; it may also have acted as a cartographic foundation for the depiction 
of unsurveyed land and ager arcifinius. Frontinus, for instance, mentions that both meas-
ured private land and land that has been excepted from the survey should be included 
in the forma in the same way as centuriated land37. The practice is confirmed by Hyginus 
Gromaticus, who offers several passages detailing how different types of land should be 
34 [...] decumani ab oriente in occidentem diriguntur, kardines a meridiano in septentrionem. 
Frontinus De Limitibus L 31 = T 14.11 = C 10.27. 
35 quare non omnis agrorum mensura in orientem potius quam in occidentem spectat. in orientem 
sicut aedes sacrae [...] sic et limites in orientem constituuntur. Hyginus Gromaticus Constitutio L 170 = 
T 134.15 = C 136.13.
36 See, for instance, T figs. 35 and 37 (= L figs. 36 and 38).
37 [...] in formam in modum limitati condiderunt. Frontinus De Agr. Qual. L 5 = T 2 = C 2.12.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 28
entered in the forma38. He tells us that boundaries of areas that have been granted or 
excepted  that is to say, private lands not subject to regional administration  must 
be marked out in the forma, and the status must be written down39; public lands, such 
as forests and pastures, that exist within the surveyed area should also be included40. 
Furthermore, Hyginus Gromaticus instructs us that we should fill the space with writ-
ing, so that the width of the area is represented in the forma by the wide disposition of 
the letters41. It is clear from this instruction that the words themselves were being used to 
represent physical characteristics within the cartographic space of the formae42.
Although text was clearly essential to the translation of surveyed land, there would 
have also been room for non-textual or iconographic representation in the forma. Both 
Hyginus and Agennius Urbicus mention the presence of rivers, although it is unclear 
how they would have been represented. Agennius Urbicus mentions, only in passing, 
that certain formae demonstrate how no width was granted for rivers43; the reference 
suggests that the rivers were iconographic, even if they were of insufficient width to 
accurately represent the space occupied by the river.
The passage in Hyginus, on the other hand, suggests a more textual approach; he 
tells us how, in some centuriae, the space occupied by the river has been excluded from 
the total area. This exclusion took the form of a note, possibly on the forma, reading 
FLVMINI TANTVM and the width of the bed44. We cannot be sure if this note was intended 
to accompany an iconographic depiction of the river, or if it was merely included as 
text in the record of allocation. In general, it would seem that textual representation 
was preferable. Hyginus Gromaticus lists several of the other features which should be 
entered into the forma  he mentions groves, sacred places and temples or shrines  but 
his idea of inclusion seems to consist of merely writing down their names45.
38 Hyginus Gromaticus Constitutio L 196.15 = T 159.18 = C 154.17 et seq.
39 eadem ratione terminabimus fundos exceptos siue concessos, et in forma sicut loca publica inscrip-
tionibus demonstrabimus. Hyginus Gromaticus Constitutio L 196.[?] = T 159.[?] = C 154. 23.
40 [...] in forma ita erit ostendemus, SILVAS siue PASCVA PVBLICA siue utrumque. Hyginus 
Gromaticus Constitutio L 196.15 = T 159.18 = C 154.17.
41 quatenus erit, inscriptione replibimus, ut et in forma loci latitudinem rarior litterarum dispositio 
demonstret. Hyginus Gromaticus Constitutio L 196.15 = T 159.18 = C 154.17.
42 This principle is illustrated in T fig. 123 (= L fig. 181).
43 nam et deductarum coloniarum formae indicant, ut multis fluminibus nulla latitdo sit relicta. 
Agennius Urbicis De Controv. L 83.9 = T 43.12 = C 40.9.
44 Fluminium autem modus in aliquibus regionibus intra centurias exceptus est, id est adscriptum 
FLVMINI TANTVM, quod alueus occuparet. Hyginus De Cond. Agr. L = T 83.7 = C 86.30
45 Aeque lucus aut loca sacra aut aedes quibus locis fuerint, mensura conprehendemus, et locorum 
uocabula inscribemus. Hyginus Gromaticus Constitutio L = T 161.8 = C 156.6.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 29
In fact, apart from the grid itself, it is difficult to determine whether or not our 
formae contained anything in the way of iconographic representation. Indeed, from 
the evidence in the treatises, we would be forced to conclude that in translating the 
centuriation grid onto the page, the surveyors were merely creating a cartographical 
frame into which textual information about each centuria could then be placed. If this 
was the case, then we might suspect that the formae described by the surveyors were 
not cartographic documents at all, but were something more like notes for a permanent 
land record that would be constructed once the whole survey had been completed.
It is necessary, at this point, to say a few words about the surfaces onto which the formae 
were drawn. The widely-held assumption is that they were inscribed onto bronze46; 
we can certainly find evidence of this in Siculus Flaccus, who mentions that some 
have carved formae in bronze, that is to say they wrote them onto a bronze tablet47. 
Hyginus, likewise informs us of a surveyor who, when called upon to divide some land 
in Pannonia, marked the limites in bronze, that is, in the formae48. Bronze, as we know, 
was not an uncommon medium on which to record information in the Roman world, 
and there are numerous descriptions of official or legal texts being inscribed in bronze 
for public display49. However, because bronze may be melted down and refashioned, 
surviving artefacts from the Roman world are scarce. Despite what the surveyors may 
tell us, the Lacimurga fragment is, as of thus far, the only evidence we have to confirm 
that bronze was used as a surface for the formae. 
While it certainly would have been possible for a forma to be inscribed onto 
bronze, such a practice may have been an exception. It seems more probable that infor-
mation gathered in the field during the survey itself would have been recorded onto 
a less demanding surface. The most widely available writing surfaces of the imperial 
era would have been papyrus, wax tablets, thin pieces of uncoated wood and  with 
46 For instance: These maps were normally on bronze, Dilke, Roman Land Surveyors, 112; 
Maps and some other records were generally carved in bronze, in Campbell, Shaping, 88; Their 
survey maps were also exhibited in bronze, in Talbert Greek and Roman Mapping, 9.
47 quidam formas [...] in aere scalpserunt, id est, in aereis tabulis scripserunt. Siculus Flaccus De 
Cond. Agr. L 154.13 = T 118.16 = C 120.22.
48 in aere, id est in formis. Hyginus De Cond. Agr. L 121.7 = T 84.8 = C 88.10.
49 On the use of bronze as a medium for record-keeping, see M.W. Frederiksen The Republican 
Municipal Laws: Errors and Drafts, JRS, Vol. 55, No. 1/2 (1965), 18398; C. Williamson Monuments 
of Bronze: Roman Legal Documents on Bronze Tablets, Classical Antiquity, Vol. 6, No. 1 (1987), 160
83, and A.W. Lintott Judicial Reform and Land Reform in the Roman Republic (Oxford, 1992) .
Chapter one: translating the landscape 30
greater frequency from the second century AD onward  parchment50. These surfaces 
would have required a stylus or brush and would thus have allowed information to 
be recorded quickly and efficiently51. According to Siculus Flaccus, formae could be 
drawn onto wooden tablets, bronze or parchment52.
Matters are confused somewhat by the presence of another form of surveyors 
record known simply as the bronze (aes) or bronze tablet (tabula aeris). Although it 
has been assumed that the tabula aeris is simply another name for the forma, numerous 
passages in the Corpus agrimensorum suggest that the two items were, in fact, differ-
ent. Siculus Flaccus, discussing the difficulties of dealing with ager arcifinius, informs 
us that there is no bronze record, no forma, which provides official evidence for the 
owners53. Agennius Urbicus, likewise, describes a scenario where a survey is under-
taken according to the demands of the bronze and the forma54. The distinction is also 
preserved in Hyginus, who discusses information contained both in the bronze and in 
the written (or drawn) forma55. Finally, Hyginus Gromaticus tells us that we should 
indicate lands of different status both in the forma and in the tabula aeris56. These 
passages all suggest that the forma and the tabula aeris represent two distinct elements 
of the surveyors record.
If the forma made at least some attempt to preserve the arrangement of the land 
within a cartographic framework, the tabula aeris, from what we can tell, appears to have 
been primarily textual. Once again, it is Hyginus Gromaticus who provides us with our 
best evidence: he informs us that the land allocations  which are initially noted down 
on wax tablets  should be inscribed onto the bronze record in the following manner:
50 For an introduction to the writing surfaces of antiquity, see E. Maunde Thompson An 
Introduction to Greek and Latin Palaeography (Oxford, 1912), 2138; Bischoff, Latin Palaeography, 
716; A.K. Bowman and J.D. Thomas Vindolanda: The Latin Writing Tablets. Britannia Monograph 
Series No. 4 (London, 1983), 3234; and, L.D. Reynolds and N.G. Wilson Scribes and Scholars: A 
guide to the transmission of Greek and Latin literature. Third Edition. (Oxford, 1991), 34.
51 On the writing implements see, Maunde Thompson, Greek and Latin Palaeography, 3943 
and Bischoff, Latin Palaeography, 1819.
52 quidam in arboreis tabulis, alii in aenis, alii in membranis scripserunt. Siculus Flaccus De. Cond. 
Agr. L 154.13 = T 118.16 = C 120.22.
53 horum ergo agrorum nullum <est> aes, nulla forma, quae publicae fidei possessoribus testimo-
nium reddat. Siculus Flaccus De. Cond. Agr. L 138.11 = T 102.9 = C 104.29.
54 in his agris exigetur fere mensure secundum postulationem aeris formarumque. Agennius Urbicis 
De Controv. L 83.9 = T 43.12 = C 40.9.
55 [...] qui aere et in scriptura formae continetur. Hyginus De Gen. Controv. L 131.14 = T 94.20 
= C. 96.28.
56 omnes aeris significationes et formis et tabulis aeris inscribemus. Hyginus Gromaticus Constitutio 
L 202.11 = T 164 = C 158.26.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 31
D.D. XXXV V.K. XLVII L. TERENTIO L. FILIO POLLIA IVGERA LXVI57.
We can see here how the centuriation grid would have provided the record-keeping 
process with a system of land identification that essentially rendered cartographic rep-
resentation unnecessary.
Was the forma, then, simply a rough draft for the more permanent, and more tex-
tual tabula aeris? There is definitely a sense that the tabula aeris was viewed as having 
greater authority: Siculus Flaccus, for instance, advises us that what appears in the 
tabula aeris may be seen as the truth58. However, it is apparent that both documents 
were kept as part of the official records. Hyginus Gromaticus informs us that both the 
bronze records (libri aeris) and a plan of measurements of the whole area as drawn 
with lines should be placed in the imperial tabularium59; furthermore, signed copies 
of anything pertaining to the surveyors documents should be held not only by the 
colony, but also in the tabularium60.
A similar arrangement is discussed by Siculus Flaccus: the imperial sanctuarium, 
he tells us, contains formae of all the lands, divisions and allocations, along with textual 
records (commentarii) of those divisions and allocations61. It has been suggested that 
the commentarii of Siculus Flaccus and the libri aeris of Hyginus Gromaticus  both 
kept in the imperial tabularium  were not, themselves, inscribed onto bronze, but 
rather were copies on papyrus or parchment of the information from the tabulae aeris, 
which would have been kept in the local tabularium62.
We may see, in any case, how the process of land allocation involved the creation 
and storage of two distinct records: a cartographic forma and a textual tabula existed 
in duplicate, one kept on site at the colony, and one stored in a central record-office. 
Although it is possible that records for all colonies were stored in the tabularium at 
Rome, it is equally possible that the records were sent to the tabularia in the regional 
57 Hyginus Gromaticus Constitutio L 200 = T 163 = C 158.
58 illa tantum fides uideatur, quae aereis tabulis manifestata est. Siculus Flaccus De. Cond. Agr. L 
154.13 = T 118.16 = C 120.22.
59 libros aeris et typum perticae totius lineis descriptum secundum suas determinationes adscrip-
tis adfinibus tabulario Caesaris inferemus. Hyginus Gromaticus Constitutio L 202.11 = T 164 = C 
158.26.
60 et quidquid aliud ad instrumentum mensorum pertinebit, non solum colonia sed et tabularium 
Caesaris. Hyginus Gromaticus Constitutio L 202.11 = T 164 = C 158.26.
61 omnium enim agrorum et diuisiorum et assignatorum formas, sed et diuisionum et assignationum 
commentarios, et principatus in sanctuario habet. Siculus Flaccus De. Cond. Agr. L 154.13 = T 118.16 
= C 120.22.
62 See Dilke, Greek and Roman Maps, 97 and Nicolet, Space, Geography and Politics, 153.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 32
capitals63. Either way, it seems that both forma and tabula were essential to the admin-
istration of the land.
If the bronze record was seen as more reliable and authoritative, why was it so 
important to preserve the forma? We have discussed how the forma was essentially 
an intermediate stage between the survey itself and the creation of a purely textual 
record; when land disputes arose, however, the forma allowed the surveyor to translate 
the information from the bronze record back into an image of the physical landscape. 
Both Hyginus and Agennius Urbicus describe situations where an individual is in 
possession of the same quantity of land that he was allocated, even though the land 
itself does not necessarily occupy the original area of his allocation. How, therefore, 
can the bronze record be used, if it agrees with the holdings of the two parties in 
dispute? asks Hyginus64.
In cases of legal dispute, Agennius Urbicus tells us, the land must be made to 
conform to the image presented in the forma; the measurement of the land may cor-
respond to the written record, but the surveyor must ensure that the disposition of the 
land reflects the way in which it was initially allocated65. Thus, despite the rudimentary 
63 On which, see Platner and Ashby, Topographical Dictionary, 506508 and L. Richardson A 
New Topographical Dictionary of Ancient Rome (Baltimore, 1992), 3767. Dilke, Greek and Roman 
Maps, 97, implies that all records were kept centrally.
64 ergo ad aes quomodo perueniri potest. Hyginus De Gen. Controv. L 132 = T 95 = C 96.28.
65 Agennius Urbicus De Controv. Agr. L 78 = T 38 = C 34.12f
Fig. 1.1 The Lacimurga Fragment (from  Habis, Vol. 22 (1991), 437).
I m ag e  r e m ov e d  f ro m  d i g i ta l  v e r s i o n
d u e  to  p ot e n t i a l  c o p y r i g h t  i s s u e s .
Chapter one: translating the landscape 33
character of the formae that we have been able to determine from the sources, we must 
conclude that these documents were essential to the record-keeping process precisely 
because of their cartographic nature. The textual record may have been more desir-
able as a permanent record, but the forma was necessary to translate back and forth 
between the text and the land.
The two surviving pieces of material evidence associated with Roman land surveying 
practices  the Lacimurga fragment and the cadastral stones from Orange  are both 
inscribed onto durable materials, in this case, bronze and stone. Although it is possible 
to suggest that they were designed as permanent records, their appearance is more 
consistent with the cartographic documents created during the survey itself; they are 
both, it may be argued, examples of formae rather than tabulae.
The Lacimurga fragment preserves one partial and two full centuriae; each one 
is marked CCLXXV, indicating presumably that each of the squares represents 275 
iugera66. The centuriae, however, are not labelled in terms of their distance from the kardo 
or decumanus maximus, nor is there any indication that the land has been allocated. If we 
accept the suggestion that the fragment represents the edge of a surveyed area (bordering 
the region of Lacimurga), it may be that the centuriae represented had been surveyed, 
but were simply unoccupied67. We may also suggest that the fragment is part of a bronze 
forma created during the initial survey but before the allocation stage. Until further frag-
ments are discovered, it remains difficult for us to draw any firm conclusions.
We may, however, note several interesting iconographic details. Firstly, there is 
a representation of the river Ana cutting through the partial centuria68. Although the 
river is named, it is not annotated in any way and is represented merely as a single line; 
it would seem to indicate only that a river passed through the centuria in question. 
Secondly, the two complete centuriae, although nominally representing areas of equal 
size, do not, in fact, occupy the same cartographic space. From this, we may suggest 
that the representation was not meant to convey an accurate image of the land, so 
much as provide a semblance of the grid that could later be populated with text. 
66 Centuria of larger than 200 iugera were not uncommon in the provinces; see, Frontinus De 
Limitibus L 30.5 = T 14 = C 10.16; Siculus Flaccus De Cond. Agr. L 159.9 = T 123.19 = C 126.6; 
Hyginus Gromaticus Constitutio L 170.17 = T 135.15 = C 136.28.
67 For suggestions concerning what the fragment represents, see Gorges, Lacimurga, 1522.
68 Sez, Lacimurga, 206; Gorges, Lacimurga, 12.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 34
In the cadastral stones from Orange we find similar iconographic elements. The 
central graphic presence in the cadasters is the centuriation grid, which appears as a 
series of largely undifferentiated lines; only the kardo and the decumanus maximus 
are rendered as a double line, thus granting them a greater width. Rivers are also a 
frequent presence: unlike in the Lacimurga fragment, they are identified within the 
cartographic space as two wavy lines69; the varying width of the rivers could suggest 
69 See, especially, Cadaster B, III J (Piganiol, facing 229) and Cadaster C Insulae Furianae sec-
tion (Piganiol, facing 295).
Fig. 1.2 Cadastre B, III J 
(from Piganiol, Documents 
Cadastraux, facing 229)
I m ag e  r e m ov e d  f ro m  d i g i ta l  v e r s i o n
d u e  to  p ot e n t i a l  c o p y r i g h t  i s s u e s .
Chapter one: translating the landscape 35
some attempt to convey topographic reality, and might therefore correspond to the 
descriptions in Hyginus.
The most prominent feature of the cadasters, however, is text. The centuriation 
grid merely divides the stones into discreet units that may then be filled with a location 
 given in terms of the distance from kardo and decumanus maximus  information 
about the type of land, the number of iugera and, in some cases, the names of the 
land-holders. The presentation of such information suggests that the cadasters were 
inscribed after the allocation process; from this, one may wish to argue that they are an 
example of the more permanent records kept in the tabularium, like a tabula aeris, but 
carved in stone instead of bronze.
However, for all that the cadasters may resemble a record of landholding, their 
immense size  it has been suggested that Cadaster B was nearly twenty roman feet in 
height70  would imply that they were intended for public display, perhaps on the outer 
wall of the local tabularium71. The arrangement of the surveyors forma may, thus, have 
provided the foundation for what is, essentially, just a monumental inscription. Given 
the importance of monumental writing within the Roman built environment, it does 
not seem unreasonable to suggest that, despite whatever cartographic characteristics 
the cadastral stones may have possessed, it was the presentation of text that had the 
greatest resonance for the audience in Arausio72.
The grid of limites established by the Roman land surveyors may have enabled the 
easy translation of the landscape into a cartographic representation; however it does 
not appear that the surveyors went much further than the grid in what they chose to 
represent. Although the grid seems to have had the cartographic side-effect of offering 
a framework for plotting the courses of rivers, its real advantage was that it provided a 
series of empty squares that could be filled with text. In the end, the textual presentation 
70 Piganiol, Documents Cadastraux, 136, proposes a height of 5.90 metres, which he translates as 
twenty Roman feet.
71 On the presentation of the stones, see J.H. Oliver North, South, East, West at Arausio and 
elsewhere in R. Chevallier (ed.) Mlanges darchologie et dhistoire offerts  A. Piganiol Vol. 2 (Paris, 
1966), 107579 and F. Salviat Orientation, extension et chronologie des plans cadastraux dOrange 
in Revue Archologique de Narbonnaise Vol. 10 (1977), 107-18.
72 On the presence and uses of monumental inscriptions in the Roman world, see R. MacMullen 
The Epigraphic Habit in the Roman Empire, AJP, Vol. 103, No. 3 (1982), 23346; E.A. Meyer 
Explaining the Epigraphic Habit in the Roman Empire: The Evidence of Epitaphs, JRS, Vol. 80 
(1990), 7496; and G. Woolf Monumental Writing and the Expansion of Roman Society in the 
Early Empire, JRS, Vol. 86 (1996), 2239.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 36
of land was of greater importance to the Roman surveyor  and, perhaps, the Roman 
viewer  than any kind cartographic display.
The cartographic stage of the process, however, was a necessary mid-point 
between the land itself and its subsequent textual representation; it was through 
the forma that surveyed land could be allocated, and it was the forma that allowed 
the textual records of allocation to be compared to what existed on the ground. 
Although the cartographic stage could, in some cases, result in a monumental dis-
play, the value of such a display would not have been the graphical representation 
of spatial relationships within the landscape, so much as the textual evidence for 
landholding.
From the treatises of the agrimensores and the few pieces of surviving material 
evidence, we are forced to conclude that regional cartography in the Roman world was 
not necessarily a goal unto itself, but was rather the by-product of a desire to create 
efficient records of larger areas of land. The formae that resulted from the survey may 
not have offered anything close to a scale representation of the topographical features 
within a particular area, but they were very much an illustration of the construction 
processes that allowed them to exist.
large-scale cartography I:
chorographia and the emergence of a roman tradition
In the Greek tradition, geography and cartography were inseparable; if we struggle 
to find a word that refers specifically to the creation of a cartographic document, it is 
simply because  would have sufficed73. According to Strabo and his prede-
cessor Hipparchus, it was the poetic descriptions of Homer that provided the classical 
world with its first comprehensive body of geographical knowledge74; in the centu-
ries that followed, Homers vision continued to be refined and expanded. As Greek 
geographers developed a more precise understanding of worlds limits and contents, it 
73 See, for instance, Strabo II.1 and Ptolemy Geog. I.12.
74      . Strabo I.1.2. For an overview of Homers 
geographical understanding, see Strabo I.i.210.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 37
would have become possible to transform that geographical knowledge into a pictorial 
representation of increasing accuracy.
By the fourth century BC  and perhaps much earlier  there would have been 
a reasonably well defined understanding of the inhabited world and its place within 
the larger cosmological order. The world itself was a sphere divided into five zones: the 
northern- and southernmost zones were uninhabitable due to extreme cold, while the 
central zone was too hot to permit human existence. Only the two temperate zones 
offered a suitable climate in which life could flourish75. In the northern temperate zone, 
there was an island  the oikoumene  which represented the whole of the inhabited 
world. The oikoumene itself was understood to be an elliptical land mass, roughly twice 
as long as it was high, and divided into three continents  Europe, Asia and Libya (or 
Africa)  that surrounded a central sea. The tripartite model of the oikoumene would 
go largely unchallenged until the end of the Medieval period.
Using this arrangement as a starting point, classical geographers sought to refine 
both the shapes and the measurements associated with geographical know ledge. One of 
the most celebrated geographers of the classical world, Eratosthenes of Cyrene  writ-
ing in the third century BC  had little time for the geographical descriptions of poets, 
claiming that they were prone to fabrication and exaggeration76; instead, Eratosthenes 
sought a mathematical basis for understanding the world. Not only did he arrive at a 
75 A summary of the different theories about the arrangement of the world may be found in 
Strabo II.iiiv. However a similar model is attested, centuries earlier, in Aristotle Meteor. II.5.
76 Strabo I.2.3, 7, 12 and 17.
Fig. 1.3 The oikoumene, as described by Strabo (from H.L. Jones, Strabo).
I m ag e  r e m ov e d  f ro m  d i g i ta l  v e r s i o n
d u e  to  p ot e n t i a l  c o p y r i g h t  i s s u e s .
Chapter one: translating the landscape 38
remarkably accurate calculation of the earths circumference, but he also composed a 
three volume work which  although it has not survived  would act as the foundation 
for geographical knowledge throughout classical antiquity77.
Over the centuries to follow, geographers such as Hipparchus, Poseidonius, 
Polybius and Artemidorus would challenge, dismiss or refine the image of the world 
proposed by Eratosthenes78. Indeed, by the time Strabo was composing his own geo-
graphical work, at the end of the first century BC, both the broad outline and the 
internal topographical features of the oikoumene would have been well established79; 
however, in Strabos Geography there is a sense that information obtained during the 
recent wave of Roman military expansion had contributed greatly to the geographers 
understanding of the world. As Strabo himself acknowledges:
the spread of the empires of the Romans and of the Parthians has presented to 
geographers of today a considerable addition to our empirical knowledge of geog-
raphy, just as did the campaign of Alexander to the geographers of earlier times80.
While classical geographers may have been primarily interested in the empirical 
knowledge that came from astronomical observations and calculations of distance, 
many of them would have also included extensive descriptions of the inhabited 
world alongside the more explicitly mathematical passages of their treatises. While 
Eratosthenes and his successors are considered representatives of the Greek mathe-
matical tradition, we should not imagine that their works consisted only of arguments 
about numbers. There was, however, a tradition of geography that was purely literary; 
these works  often in verse  ignored the mathematical aspect entirely, and sought 
only to describe the arrangement of places within the oikoumene.
77 On the life and achievements of Eratosthenes, see E.H. Bunbury A History of Ancient Geography 
in 2 vols. (London, 1879), I, 61560. While his text has not survived, attempts have been made to 
collect and edit the various fragments which have been preserved in other classical texts: see Die 
Geographischen Fragmente des Eratosthenes ed. H. Berger (Leipzig, 1880) and the more recent english 
translation in D.W. Roller Eratosthenes Geography (Princeton, 2010).
78 The lives and theories of these geographers are preserved primarily in Strabo, especially books 
I and II. See also, Bunbury, Ancient Geography I, 1101; J.O. Thomson History of Ancient Geography 
(Cambridge, 1948) 152168; see also C. Nicolet Space, Geography and Politcs in the Early Roman 
Empire (Ann Arbor, 1991) 5774 and Dilke, Greek and Roman Maps, 2138.
79 On the life of Strabo, see D. Dueck Strabo of Amasia: a Greek man of letters in Augustan Rome 
(London, 2000). On his contributions to geography, see  For an overview Strabos conception of the 
world, see C. van Paassen The Classical Tradition of Geography (Groningen, 1957), 131 and G. Aujac 
Greek Cartography in the Early Roman World in HoC 1, 16176 (at 17375). A reconstruction of 
Strabos oikoumene may be found in the second volume of Bunbury, Ancient Geography II, facing 238. 
The dating of Strabos text is discussed below, 56.
80                 
,     . Strabo I.2.1 (trans. H.L. Jones).
Chapter one: translating the landscape 39
From Cicero and Strabo we learn of a poem in three parts  one part for each 
continent  composed by Alexander of Ephesus, perhaps at the beginning of the first 
century BC81. Although Alexanders poem has not survived, it appears to have been 
well-known in the century after its initial appearance; it is thought to have inspired 
the Latin poet Varro Atacinus to write a descriptive geographical work of his own82, 
and was also used as source by Cicero, who contemplated  but soon abandoned  the 
idea of writing a literary geography83. While Cicero may not have been up to the task, 
the idea of the literary geography appears to have remained popular during the early 
imperial centuries: the two best surviving examples  Pomponius Melas prose descrip-
tion of the world and the verse description of Dionysius Periegetes  will be discussed 
in the following chapter84.
Sources from antiquity suggest that, from the outset, pictorial representations of 
the world were produced alongside textual geographies85. The first cartographical image 
of the oikoumene is thought to have been created by Anaximander of Miletus, who lived 
during the sixth century BC: Strabo, quoting Eratosthenes, claims that Anaximander 
produced the first geographical panel86, while Diogenes Laertius, writing in the third 
century AD, informs us that he was the first to draw the world and the sea and also the 
first to construct a globe87. From a handful of references in ancient literature  nota-
bly two passages in Herodotus  we may suggest that cartographic representations of 
some description continued to be produced in the following centuries88.
Cartographic practices may have undergone something of a revolution in the 
third century. Eratosthenes, in the third book of his geographical treatise, is said 
to have provided instructions for the creation of an image of the world; while such 
81 Strabo XIV.i.25. Cicero Ad Atticum II.22.7 claimed that Alexander was no great poet, but 
valued the poem for its geographical information.
82 Varros poem has survived only in fragments, which are collected in A.S. Hollis Fragments of 
Roman Poetry c.60 BCAD 20 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007).
83 Cicero Ad Atticum II.4.3 and II.7.1, writes of immersing himself in geographical source mate-
rial  including Eratosthenes  in preparation; he later pronounced himself ill-suited to the task (Ad 
Atticum II.6.1).
84 See chapter two, 9498.
85 On the earliest classical cartography, see G. Aujac The Foundations of Theoretical Cartography 
in Archaic and Ancient Greece in HoC 1, 13047.
86       . Strabo I.i.11. Agathemerus Geographiae 
Informatio I.i (GGM II, 471), also credits Anaximander with drawing a panel of the inhabited world 
(    ). The significance of the word  is discussed below, 48.
87        [...]    . Diogenes 
Laertius Vit. Phil. II.i.
88 Herodotus IV.36 and V.49.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 40
images had existed previously, the older versions apparently possessed numerous 
errors and were in need of extensive revision89. As a way of correcting these inac-
curacies, Eratosthenes may have proposed a completely new method for creating a 
cartographic representation, one that involved projecting locations onto a grid of 
meridians. The system may not have been perfect in its original form; Hipparchus 
apparently devoted much of his own treatise to criticising and correcting the base-
lines proposed by Eratosthenes90. However, the basic idea of projected cartography 
became widely adopted among classical geographers.
At the beginning of the imperial period, the cartographic methods employed by 
Strabo may not have differed much from those proposed by Eratosthenes; just over a 
century after Strabo, the geographer Marinos of Tyre is reported to have used a similar 
projection91. The central problem with this projection, however, is that it attempted to 
transpose a segment from a sphere onto a flat rectangular surface. For Strabo this was a 
minor concern: while the geographer should ideally project his image of the oikoumene 
onto a globe, it was equally possible  and in some cases more desirable  to project 
it onto a flat panel using a system of orthogonal meridians; according to Strabo, the 
distortion resulting from such a projection would be negligible92.
Ptolemy, however, was not of the same opinion: in his famous geographical trea-
tise  composed around the middle of the second century AD he proposed two new 
projections that took into account the curvature of the earth and allowed the oikou-
mene to be represented more accurately on a flat surface93. Ptolemys Geography was a 
further refinement of the Greek tradition that had started with Eratosthenes; however 
it was also a reaction to the unscientific practices that were starting to compromise the 
standards of that tradition, and an attempt to re-assert the primacy of mathematical 
geography. Throughout his introduction Ptolemy remains sceptical of any information 
that was gathered from road distances, descriptive texts or, essentially, any source that 
was not an astronomical sighting; in the body of his text we find that any potentially 
89 Strabo II.1.12.
90 See, especially, Strabo II.1.22 and 27.
91 The work of Marinos  who lived and wrote in the time of Trajan  is known only through 
fragments preserved in Ptolemys Geography; on the projection used by Marinos, see Ptolemy Geog. 
I.22. See also Bunbury, Ancient Geography, 51945 and Dilke, Green and Roman Maps, 7879.
92 Strabo II.5.10.
93 On the Ptolemaic projections, see Berggren and Jones, Ptolemys Geography, 3141; Dilke, 
Green and Roman Maps, 7879.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 41
misleading descriptions have been removed, and in their place we find only lists of 
locations and their coordinates.
While Ptolemy may have been creating new standards of accuracy for carto-
graphic representation, it seems probable that his work did not reflect the cartographic 
practices that had become prevalent in the imperial Roman world. The existence of 
Ptolemys treatise has led many nineteenth- and twentieth-century scholars to assume 
that Ptolemaic cartography  that is to say, images of the world that were accurate and 
roughly to scale  was the dominant form of cartographic expression in the imperial 
period. In fact, Ptolemys geographic ideals may have been too abstract and theoretical 
to meet the cartographic aims of the Roman world.
If the existence of a Roman cartographic tradition remains obscure, it is not nec-
essarily because we lack the evidence, but rather because the assumption that imperial 
Rome simply adopted the Greek mathematical tradition has caused us to misinterpret 
the evidence that survives. In fact, from the time of Augustus onward, we can trace the 
emergence and development of a uniquely Roman tradition of cartographic display. 
This alternative tradition  which we shall investigate presently reflected the imperial 
desire for enumeration and monumental presentation; while the Greek mathematical 
tradition continued to be refined by specialists such as Marinos and Ptolemy, it may 
Fig. 1.4  
Ptolemys second projection 
(from HoC 1, 187)
I m ag e  r e m ov e d  f ro m  d i g i ta l  v e r s i o n
d u e  to  p ot e n t i a l  c o p y r i g h t  i s s u e s .
Chapter one: translating the landscape 42
have been largely eclipsed by a mode of expression that was better able to convey the 
oikoumene as it was understood in the Roman world.
We may begin our search for this alternative tradition by examining the literary evi-
dence for cartography in pre-Augustan Rome. There are, in particular, four passages 
worth mentioning. The first is a description from Livy of a tablet set up by Tiberius 
Sempronius Gracchus in 174 BC; on this tablet was inscribed the shape (forma) of 
Sardinia, along with paintings of battles that had taken place there94. Although Livy is 
probably not using forma in a strictly cartographic sense, the attempt to situate depic-
tions of historical events within the spatial framework of a recognisable shape should, 
at very least, suggest some cartographic ambitions.
A further example can be found in Varros agricultural manual De Re Rustica: 
near the beginning, the author arrives at a temple to find some acquaintances looking 
at a painting of Italy on the wall95. Again, the nature of the artefact is uncertain: the 
painting could easily be something along the lines of a landscape. However, the sub-
sequent conversation, which discusses the place of Italy within the larger world  and 
which, interestingly, makes specific reference to Eratosthenes  allows us to consider 
the possibility that the painting had some kind of cartographical function.
We may also briefly mention an elegy of Propertius in which Arethusa, writing 
to her husband who is away on campaign, describes how she is compelled to study a 
tabula containing images of the various parts of the world96. Although none of our 
examples employ a single word which refers unquestionably to a cartographic docu-
ment, it is curious to notice the presence of variations on picta, a word which can 
simply refer to drawing or embroidery, but is often used in the sense of painting. Our 
examples, therefore, consist of a painted image of Sardinia, a painting of Italy and a 
panel painted with images of the various nations; each of the three seem to imply that 
the artefact in question was intended for public display.
The possible connection between wall paintings and representations of geographi-
cal knowledge is further strengthened by a passage from Vitruvius. In the eighth book 
 which deals primarily with water  there is some discussion of the theory that rivers 
94 Sardiniae insulae forma erat, atque in ea simulacra pugnarum picta. Livy XLI.28.10. 
95 [...] spectantes in pariete pictam Italiam. Varro De Re Rust. I.2.1.
96 Cogor et e tabula pictos ediscere mundos. Propertius Eleg. IV.3.37.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 43
travel underground; in order to back up his argument, Vitruvius informs us that evi-
dence of this may be found in the sources of rivers as they are depicted and described 
in chorographies of the world97. The chorographies in question would certainly appear 
to be cartographical in nature: even from this brief description we may surmise that 
they contained a pictorial representation, possibly painted, of the whole world98.
Chorography, of course, is problematic, both as a word and a concept. 
Etymologically, it is a simple compound of the verb   to write, or draw  and 
either  or 99. Both are spatial words:  often refers to land or country in 
an indefinite, non-political sense, while  refers to a piece of finite or bounded 
land, neither as large and encompassing as  or , but less specific than ; 
as with our definition of landscape,  may suggest a unit of land whose existence 
depends on the apprehension or experience of an observer100. In modern scholarship, 
chorography  when discussed at all  tends to be treated as an imprecise mid-point 
between topography, the description of a particular place, and geography, an examina-
tion of the whole world; it is understood as a geography of regions101.
Perhaps the greatest problem with chorography is that we lack a nuanced under-
standing of the words classical usage. Although Greek and Roman forms appear in the 
literary and epigraphic records, our only contemporary definition comes from Ptolemy. 
Indeed, Ptolemys treatise opens with a chapter that distinguishes between the prac-
tices of geography and chorography: geography, he tells us, is a drawn representation 
encompassing all parts of the world as a single continuous whole102; geography is very 
much a mathematical science and, therefore, a geographical representation would be 
one in which the accurate shape of the world had been determined through sightings 
and celestial observations.
97 Haec autem sic fieri testimonio possunt esse capita fluminum, quae orbe terrarum chorographiis 
picta itemque scripta... Vitruvius VIII.ii.6
98 The formulation orbis terrarum can refer both to the whole world, but can also refer to the 
circle of lands (i.e. Europe, Asia, Africa) which make up the oikoumene.
99 Both  and , when combined with , would result in the same compound; I am 
indebted to Prof. B. Bravo for this observation.
100 The definition of  and its connection with modern landscape is discussed in K. Olwig, 
Has geography always been modern?: choros, (non)representation, performance, and the landscape, 
Environment and Planning, Vol. 40 (2008) 184361.
101 See, for instance, the definition in Johnson et. al, Dictionary of Human Geography 4th. ed., 
79-80. A recent translation of Ptolemys Geography has rendered the greek  as regional 
cartography; see Berggren and Jones, Ptolemys Geography, 57 et seq.
102                 
 . Ptolemy Geog. I.1.1.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 44
Chorography, on the other hand, deals with the particular contents of a region  
Ptolemy lists towns, harbours and tributaries  and is generally restricted to a smaller 
area; it is characterised by Ptolemy as being decidedly unscientific, a task best under-
taken by someone with skills in drawing or painting103. Ptolemys assertion is that 
chorography may contain more in the way of local topographic detail, but that it lacks 
the scientific basis and representational accuracy of geography; the analogy he gives is 
that chorography is like a drawing of an eye or an ear, while geography is the rendering 
of the entire head104. The localised nature of chorography would seem to make it an 
unsuitable means of displaying the world as a whole. Nonetheless, both geography and 
chorography are essentially cartographic practices; what differentiates them would 
appear to be the scope of the artefact and the skill of the craftsman.
It is Ptolemys definition that has come to dominate modern understanding of 
chorography. When Ptolemys treatises were rediscovered by Western humanists at the 
beginning of the fifteenth century, so too did chorography experience its own brief 
renaissance: for cartographers of the fifteenth through the seventeenth centuries, 
chorographies were a reasonably common way of representing, in pictorial form, the 
extent and content of smaller areas105. These early-modern chorographies could take 
the form of a birds-eye view of a larger region  the most spectacular example may 
be the sixteenth century galleria delle carte geografiche, a long gallery in the Vatican 
decorated with regional maps of Italy106  but they would more often take the form 
of views, drawings or paintings of the land that existed at the halfway point between 
plan and elevation and which focused heavily on local topographical features107.
103     ,     ,    . Ptolemy 
Geog. I.1.5.
104 Ptolemy Geog. I.1.2
105 On the use of chorography in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Britain see R. Helgerson The 
Land Speaks: Cartography, Chorography, and Subversion in Renaissance England, Representations, 
No. 16 (Autumn, 1986), 5085; S. Mendyk Early British Chorography, The Sixteenth Century 
Journal, Vol. 17, No. 4 (Winter, 1986), 45981.
106 A complete reproduction of the maps in the galleria has been published as L. Gambi and A. 
Pinelli et. al. La Galleria delle carte geografiche in Vaticano 3 vols. (Modena, 1994); see also F. Fiorani 
Post-Tridentine Geographia Sacra: The Galleria delle Carte Geografiche in the Vatican Palace, IM, 
Vol. 48 (1996), 12448 and W. Goffart Christian Pessimism on the Walls of the Vatican Galleria 
delle carte geografiche, Renaissance Quarterly, Vol. 51, No. 3 (1998), 788 827.
107 For a discussion of chorography in the renaissance, see T. Frangenberg Chorographies of 
Florence: The Use of City Views and City Plans in the Sixteenth Century Imago Mundi, Vol. 46 (1994), 
4164; the words chorography and topography, he points out, could be used interchangably, 59 n.2.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 45
Early-modern definitions of chorography were very much indebted to Ptolemy108, 
and the notion of chorographic representation as a form of local area cartography has 
persisted even to the present day. Perhaps for this reason, chorography is rarely con-
sidered within the context of large-scale geographic enquiry in the classical world109. 
However, we have already seen  in the quotation from Vitruvius  that chorography 
could, indeed, refer to a representation of the entire world. If we wish to investigate the 
possibility of an alternative cartographic tradition in the Roman world, it is certainly 
worth examining the practice of chorography outside the context of Ptolemy.
The earliest attested usage of the word is found in a long inscription from Magnesia on 
the Maeander, which may be reliably dated to 139 BC; here  is used to refer 
to the plan of a particular area, perhaps one which may be taken in at a single glance110. 
The epigraphic record also provides us with several examples of individuals who were 
responsible for the creation of chorographic documents, often in a military capacity111: a 
soldier who worked as a chorographer is attested in an inscription from Pselcis in Egypt 
(AD 35)112; in a funerary inscription from Verona, we find a soldier listed as chorogra-
pher and engraver (chorographiarum item caelatori)113; a third inscription, this one from 
Carthage, mentions a soldier with the occupation of chorograpus (sic)114.
We should not suppose that the role of the chorographer would have been unique 
to the Roman army: a passage in Diogenes Laertius makes reference to one Archelaus, 
108 See, for instance, the claim of Egnatio Danti (15361586): chorography can [...] be prac-
ticed by a simple painter, whereas geography can be apprehended only by a geometer, quoted in 
Frangenberg, Chorographies of Florence, 5556.
109 There are some notable exceptions: C. Nicolet De Vrone au Champ de Mars: Chorographia 
et Carte dAgrippa, MEFR, Vol. 100, No. 1 (1988), 127138 examines non-Ptolemaic evidence for 
the role of the chorographer in the imperial Roman world; J.F. Moffitt Medieval Mappaemundi, and 
The Palestrina Mosaic with a Nile Scene: Philostratus and Ekphrasis; Ptolemy and Chorographia, 
Zeitschrift fr Kunstgeschichte, Vol. 60, No. 2 (1997), 22747 both examine chorography as a precur-
sor to Medieval cartography.
110 Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum, Third Edition. ed. W. Dittenberger (Leipzig, 1917), 685.71.
111 On the role of geographical assessment in the military, see R.K. Sherk Roman Geographical 
Exploration and Military Maps in ANRW II.1 (Berlin, 1974), 534562.
112    |    |   |   
  || [],   |  [] | [] . Inscriptiones Graecae 
ad Res Romanas pertinentes ed. R. Cagnat (Paris, 1911), I.1365.
113 [.. T]ENATIO | L(uci) F(ilio) | [P]RIMIONI | [MI]LITI PRAETOR(iano) | CHORT(is) IIII | 
[CH]OROGRAPHIAR(um) | [ITE]M CAELATORI | [FIL]IO PIISSIMO MATER. Epigraphica, Vol. VII 
(1945), 3538. For a discussion and reconstruction of this inscription, see Nicolet, De Vrone au 
Champ de Mars.
114 [dm]S|SAVGCHO| [rog]RAPUSPIVS|VIXITANNISLXVI|CONIVNX
CONIVGI|BENEDESEMERENTI|FECITHSE. CIL VIII, 12914.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 46
a chorographer who described the lands crossed by Alexander115. Admittedly, Laertius 
was writing in the third century AD and may have been using a designation more 
common to his own time; however, there is no reason to suppose that Archelaus would 
not have been referred to as a chorographer in the time of Alexander. Nor should 
we imagine that the role of chorographer would have been limited to the military: 
chorographers are also attested in fragmentary tax records preserved on ostraca from 
Egypt in the second century AD116. The suggestion from these fragments is that the 
chorographer may have been someone  much like the agrimensor  whose job was to 
be familiar with the disposition of the land.
Perhaps the most illuminating instances of chorography appear in Strabo. 
While Strabo does not define the word  nor, indeed, is he entirely consistent 
in his usage  it is clear that he regarded both chorographies and chorographers 
as being components of the broader cartographic tradition. Strabo refers to the 
history of chorography and mentions an account given by Polybius of the chorog-
raphers of Europe117, suggesting that the practice had been in existence for some 
time. He even puts the word into the mouth of Polybius, in what appears to be a 
direct quotation from one of that earlier authors lost geographical chapters: but 
I Polybius says, shall show the facts as they now are, as regards both the position 
of places and the distances between them; for this is the most appropriate function 
of chorography118.
The above passage provides us with something close to an historical definition. 
Chorography, according to Polybius, is concerned with arrangement of features 
within a larger area of land. Chorographical assessments would not have been 
based upon astronomical observation, but there is no evidence to suggest that they 
would have necessarily been restricted to a local area. Furthermore, while choro-
graphic documents may not have been scientific, accuracy would have remained 
important. Strabo is, for instance, critical of a description in Apollodorus, saying 
it is ignorance and not knowledge of chorography to call such a four sided figure 
115 Diogenes Laertius Vit. Phil. II.17. This Archelaus is mentioned only so that we do not con-
fuse him with the fifth-century BC philosopher of the same name.
116 Greek Ostraca in the Bodleian Library at Oxford. Vol. II ed. J. G. Tait and C. Praux (London, 
1955), nos. 1725, 1738 and 1759.
117     Strabo VIII.1.1. and   , Strabo II.4.1.
118  , ,          ;    
 . Strabo X.3.5 (trans. H.L. Jones).
Chapter one: translating the landscape 47
triangular. Yet he published a chorography in comic metre called A Description of 
the Earth119.
Chorography is also very much a part of Strabos contemporary vocabulary. In 
books five and six, Strabo cites a source known as the chorographer ( ) 
as an authority for distances in Italy and Sicily120; in one instance a measurement is 
taken directly from the chorographers document ( )121. It is difficult to 
determine precisely what kind of document Strabo is referring to: it has been assumed 
that the chorographer in question is Agrippa and that the chorography refers to his car-
tographic presentation in the porticus Vipsania. However depending on when Strabo 
was writing  and indeed, when Agrippas monument was completed  it is possible 
that Strabo would not have had access to this particular source122; his figures may, thus, 
have come from Agrippas notes or from a different chorographical source altogether.
Many of Strabos references to chorographers and chorographies suggest a literary, 
rather than a cartographic source; at one point Strabo even refers to his own work as 
a chorography123. For a Greek audience of the first century BC, the word chorography 
may simply have referred to a text that sought to describe the shape and contents of the 
world in a systematic fashion, while dispensing with the mathematical and astronomi-
cal information associated with theoretical geography. For Strabo, however, science and 
description were not so easily separated: whoever undertakes to make a chorography 
he tells us must first establish many of the physical and mathematical principles124. 
Even in its most literary form, chorography may have still required a great degree of 
learning, despite what Ptolemys later definition would have us believe. 
While much of the evidence in Strabo suggests that chorography was a literary under-
taking, there is one crucial passage which demonstrates that not only could chorography 
be translated into pictorial form, but that Strabos conception of chorography may be 
entirely compatible with the tradition of painted wall-maps suggested by Vitruvius and 
Varro. For Strabo, as with Ptolemy, the ultimate goal of geography was the creation of a 
119 [...]       ,  .    
       . Strabo XIV.5.22 (trans H.L. Jones).
120 Strabo V.2.8, VI.1.11, VI.2.11 and VI.3.10.
121 Strabo VI.2.1.
122 The dating and content of Agrippas monument  and its possible use by Strabo  is discussed 
below, 53 and 56.
123 Strabo VIII.3.17.
124             
. Strabo II.5.1.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 48
cartographic document; while such a document should ideally be drawn onto a spheri-
cal surface ( )  thus demonstrating the position of the oikoumene 
within the world as a whole  it was not often possible to create a globe large enough to 
accommodate a detailed representation of the inhabited world. It was therefore permis-
sible to project the oikoumene alone onto a panel () of at least seven feet125.
Strabo proceeds to describe the shape of the oikoumene which should be drawn 
within this surface. He tells us how it is the sea most of all, but also the rivers and 
mountains that define the distinctive shape of the oikoumene:
It is through such natural features that that we gain a clear conception of the 
continents, nations, favourable positions of cities and all the other diversified 
details with which our chorographical panel (  ) is filled126.
The word , as we have mentioned, had a specifically cartographical 
association: it appears in Herodotus to describe a bronze tablet onto which a carto-
graphic representation was engraved127; Diogenes Laertius, discussing the will left by 
Theophrastus, mentions a series of panels () containing images of the explored 
world ( ), which were to be displayed in a portico128. Strabo himself uses it 
to refer to cartographic artefacts from the past, including the geographical panel of 
Anaximander, or the panel of the oikoumene (   ) created by 
Eratosthenes which was, itself, a revision of an earlier geographical panel (  
 )129.
For Strabo, there may have been few differences between a chorographical and a 
geographical . Chorographers may have been responsible for describing the lands, 
while geographers were responsible for calculations and observations; both, however, 
would have been necessary for the creation of a cartographic artefact. The work of 
Eratosthenes was both geography and chorography, in that it provided a mathemati-
cal basis for creating a cartographic document, as well as a detailed description of the 
various regions and their topographic contents with which the geographic outline 
125 Strabo II.5.10.
126                
,      . Strabo II.5.17. Translation adapted from H.L. 
Jones, who has somewhat misleadingly rendered the final words of the sentence as geographical 
map. 
127 Herodotus V.49.
128     ,       ,    . Diogenes 
Laertius Vit. Phil. V.51.
129 Strabo II.1.1 and II.1.2.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 49
would be populated. Strabos treatise, similarly engages with both the descriptive and 
mathematical elements of the geographical science. If the practice of chorography was 
perceived as a lesser science  as Ptolemy would later suggest  these negative connota-
tions are not immediately apparent in Strabo.
As a textual practice, chorography dealt with the collection of topographic information 
and the description of physical features that defined a particular region; such informa-
tion may have initially been gathered by military forces as they explored new lands, 
however it would have been the job of a geographer to compile and arrange that infor-
mation into longer, mathematically informed descriptions of the oikoumene. Strabo, as 
we have seen, was attempting to create a composite picture of the world based on the 
most current information available. In questioning the measurements of his predeces-
sors, he was refining the basic known shapes that defined the world; by incorporating 
chorographical information, he was also able to refine the content of those shapes.
As a cartographic practice, chorography may have simply referred to an image of 
the world  possibly one painted onto a large panel, or the wall of a building  that 
included representations of the topographical features enumerated in descriptive or 
chorographical sources. The shape of the world, as determined by the mathematical 
geographers, would have provided a cartographic space into which topographic features 
such as rivers, mountains, cities and harbours could be situated. In fact, at the beginning 
of the imperial period, chorography and geography may well have been components of 
the same basic cartographic process; however, as the cartographic aims of the Roman 
world became more fully developed, the two practices may have started to diverge. 
large-scale cartography II: imperial presentation
and the problem of agrippas monument
Although we may be reasonably certain that chorography represented a process of 
collecting topographical information about the world, and that the information col-
lected could then be translated into a cartographic image, the nature and form of these 
images remains largely unknown. From the evidence in Strabo, it is not unreasonable 
Chapter one: translating the landscape 50
to assume that a chorographic representation would have consisted of the basic estab-
lished shape of the oikoumene  that is, a large island, surrounded by ocean, consisting 
of the three continents arranged around a central sea  and within that shape would be 
rivers, mountains, cities and other known features of the world. These chorographical 
images would have struck a balance between geographical accuracy  Ptolemys imita-
tion by means of drawing  and the presentation of useful topographic information.
Geography and chorography may thus be understood as two distinct layers of a 
cartographic document: geography was the foundation onto which chorographical 
information could be superimposed. At the beginning of the imperial period, however, 
there may have been a subtle shift in this cartographic model. The collection and estab-
lishment of information about the content of the world may have come to dominate 
imperial cartographic presentation; and while the shape of the world continued to be 
refined by geographers such as Marinos and Ptolemy, such theoretical accuracy may 
have simply been less valuable to the Roman viewer than facts about the world that 
had been established by exploration and ground-level observation.
We may perhaps discern the beginnings of a collection-based geographical 
approach by examining evidence for a project thought to have been undertaken in 
the time of Julius Caesar130. A text known as the Cosmographia Iulii Caesaris  itself 
thought to be based on a geographical work by Julius Honorius, dating from the fourth 
or fifth century131  informs us that:
In the consulship of Julius Caesar and Mark Antony, the whole world was trav-
elled by four chosen men of great wisdom: Nicodemus to the East, Didymus 
to the West, Theodotus to the North and Polyclitus to the South132.
Caesars four geographers each worked for some twenty to thirty years and eventu-
ally enumerated 28 seas, 74 islands, 35 mountains, 70 provinces, 264 towns, 52 rivers and 
130 See, in the first instance, C. Nicolet and P. Gautier Dalch Les quatre sages de Jules Csar 
et la mesure du monde selon Julius Honorius: ralit antique et tradition mdivale, Journal des 
savants (1986), 157-218 and T.P. Wiseman Julius Caesar and the Hereford World Map, History 
Today, Vol. 37, No. 11 (1987), 5357; the two articles reach very different conclusions about the 
existence of Caesars project. See also Dilke, Greek and Roman Maps, 4041.
131 The figure of Honorius cannot be dated with any certainty, however it has been suggested that 
his initial text may have been composed sometime before AD 376; see Nicolet and Gautier Dalch, 
Quatre Sages, 16162. On the text and transmission of Honorius, see Thomson, Ancient Geography, 
381 and Lozovsky, The Earth is Our Book, 1617. We will be return to this text in chapter four.
132 Iulio Caesare et Marco Antonino consilibus omis orbis peragratus est par sapientissimos et electos 
viros quattuor: Nicodemo orientis, Didymo occidentalis, Theudoto septemtrionalis, Polyclito meridiani. 
Cosmographia Jul. Caes. 1 (GLM, 21).
Chapter one: translating the landscape 51
129 races133. A related text, the Excerpta eius sphaerae  the source of which is also thought 
to be Julius Honorius134  provides greater elaboration: for each of the regions (i.e. the 
cardinal points), we are given a detailed list of the seas, islands, mountains, provinces and 
towns found therein. The bulk of the text, however, is devoted to rivers. The name of each 
river is given, followed by its source, its destination and its distance in miles.
The topographical information preserved in the texts is not dissimilar to the choro-
graphic elements mentioned in our literary sources. The dominance of rivers, especially, 
should call to mind the passage in Vitruvius where he refers to the content of world 
chorographies135. The other elements listed  the cities and various natural features  
would also seem to conform to the description of the chorographical panel described by 
Strabo136. In this project, what is intriguing is not only the type of information collected, 
but the way in which the collection was undertaken: the work of the four geographers 
appears to be neither a survey nor a gathering of astronomical figures. Rather, it is an 
enumeration of features that might be used to populate a geographical representation.
If the project was actually started in the consulship of Caesar and Mark Antony 
 that is, 44 BC  Caesar would not have lived to see the results137. Nonetheless, the 
information collected by the four geographers may well have been translated into an 
image of the world somewhere in Rome; this would certainly explain the references 
to cartographic artefacts that we find in Vitruvius, in Propertius and perhaps even in 
Strabo138. It has even been proposed that the artefact was located in the portico of the 
Saepta Iulia139.
Unfortunately, the evidence for Caesars project is problematic for a number of 
reasons. Firstly, the idea that Caesar would commission four geographers (one for each 
cardinal point) rather than three (one for each of the continents) seems anachronistic; 
133 The text mentions precisely how long each geographer worked, although the figures are prob-
ably incorrect: see Nicolet and Gautier Dalch, Quatre Sages, 16669 and Dilke, Greek and Roman 
Maps, 40.
134 The surviving text of the Excerpta admits to being copied from Honorius: Haec omnia in 
describtione recta orthographiae transtulit publicae rei consulens Iulius Honorius magister peritus atque 
sine aliqua dubitatione doctissimus. Excerpta 50 (GLM, 56). See also Nicolet and Gautier Dalch, 
Quatre Sages, 161 and the discussion in chapter five.
135 See above, n. 97.
136 See above, n. 126.
137 Wiseman Caesar and Hereford, 56, argues that the project was actually initiated ten years 
earlier, in 54 BC.
138 See C. Rodriguez The Porticus Vipsania and Contemporary Poetry, Latomus, Vol. 51 
(1992), 7993.
139 Wiseman Caesar and Hereford, 567; Rodriguez Porticus Vipsania, 9193.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 52
there is almost nothing in the classical sources to suggest that the oikoumene was com-
monly divided into quadrants140. Secondly, while the the story of Caesars four wise men 
continued to be recounted throughout the Medieval period  it appears, for instance, 
in the eighth-century Cosmography of pseudo-Aethicus and in the early ninth century 
Liber de mensura of Dicuil141  the exact details were subject to change: an illustration 
in the lower left corner of the Hereford mappamundi, for instance, features Augustus 
(not Caesar) commissioning three (not four) geographers142. While we should not dis-
count the possibility that the tradition of Caesars project contains a kernel of truth, it 
is equally possible that the story represents a piece of late antique myth-making  or 
misunderstanding  rather than any kind of early-Imperial reality.
While there may be little in the way of convincing evidence to support Caesars 
project, we do, however, possess contemporary evidence for geographical assessment 
undertaken by Marcus Agrippa, that may have formed the basis for a cartographic 
monument in Rome. During his long career in the service of the state, Agrippa would 
have had ample opportunity to travel through many parts of the world which had 
newly come under Roman control143. He was the governor of Gallia Narbonensis in 
39 BC and spent the final seven years of his life using Syria as a base from which to 
travel the eastern provinces. When not engaged in military activity  his famous cam-
paigns included a foray across the Rhine and a decisive role in the battle at Actium144 
 Agrippa engaged in a tremendous amount of building work, including numerous 
aqueducts and several roads in Gaul145. The nature of his activities would have placed 
him in an ideal position to collect geographical information about the expanding 
Roman world.
140 Although, see the division of geographical labour proposed in Wiseman, Caesar and 
Hereford, 55.
141 Pseudo-Aethicus (= Cosmographia in GLM, 71103); Dicuil 6.20. On these texts, see P. 
Gautier Dalch Du nouveau sur Aethicus Ister?  propos dune thorie rcente, Journal des savants 
(1984), 175 186 and J.J. Tierney Dicuili liber de mensura orbis terrae (Dublin, 1967).
142 Both A. Hiatt The Cartographic Imagination of Thomas Elmham, Speculum, Vol. 75, No. 4 
(2000), 859886 and Wiseman Caesar and Hereford, 534 argue that the appearance of Augustus 
may be due to a particular reading of Luke 2.1 and that the taxation (i.e. census) of Augustus and the 
geographical project of Caesar may have been conflated.
143 On the life and activities of Agrippa, see M. Reinhold Marcus Agrippa: A Biography (Geneva, 
NY, 1933) and J.-M. Roddaz Marcus Agrippa (Rome, 1984).
144 On the German campaign, see Dio XLVIII.49.3; on Actium, see Dio LIII.1113.
145 The aqueducts are mentioned in Frontinus De Aquis I.9 and 25; the road building is men-
tioned in Strabo IV.6.11; see also Reinhold, Agrippa, 8990 and Roddaz, Agrippa, 38992.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 53
After Agrippas death in 12 BC, a monument, said to be based on his geographical 
notes, was erected in Rome146; despite the fact that the artefact itself has not survived, 
the evidence for its existence has received a good deal of scholarly attention over the 
past century and a half147. In fact, the bulk of our reliable contemporary evidence con-
sists of only a few lines in one of the geographical books of Plinys Natural History. 
Agrippa, who is often cited as a source by Pliny, is mentioned specifically in book three, 
when one of his measurements turns out to inaccurate. Plinys surprise at the inac-
curacy leads to this remark:
Indeed, Agrippa was, in many ways, a scrupulous man and devoted great atten-
tion to his work. Thus, when he was about to display the whole world for Rome 
to see, who would believe that both he and the deified Augustus made a mis-
take? For it was Augustus who completed the portico which had been started 
by Agrippas sister from the specification and notes of Agrippa himself148.
The portico in question is almost certainly the porticus Vipsania, which is thought 
to have been located along the east side of the Via del Corso, across from the Piazza 
Colonna149. Dio informs us that a portico built by Agrippas sister Vipsania Polla was 
still unfinished in 7 BC, although he does not specifically mention how the portico was 
decorated150; while there are no sources that mention the completion of this monu-
146 See Roddaz, Agrippa, 57391. It is unclear what form Agrippas notes might have taken, 
although various reconstructions have been proposed; see below, 5759.
147 A considerable body of Geman scholarship on the Weltkarte, started to appear at the end of 
the nineteenth century; the major contributions are: K. Mllenhoff ber die Rmische Weltkarte, 
Hermes, Vol. 9, No. 2 (1875), 18295; E. Schweder Ueber die Weltkarte und Chorographie des 
Kaisers Augustus, Part I (Philologus, Vol. LIV (1895), 31944), Part II (Philologus, Vol. LIV (1895), 
52859) and Part II (continued) (Philologus, Vol. LVI (1897), 13062); D. Detlefsen Ursprung, 
Einrichtung und Bedeutung der Erdkarte Agrippas (Berlin, 1906); and, P. Schnabel Die Weltkarte 
des Agrippa als wissenschaftliches Mittelglied zwischen Hipparch und Ptolemaeus, Philologus, Vol. 
XC (1935), 40540. Much of the German scholarship is summarised (and sometimes refuted) in J.J. 
Tierney The Map of Agrippa, PRIA, Vol. 63 (1963), 151166. The best modern treatment is prob-
ably Nicolet, Space, Geography and Politics, 95122; but see also: Dilke, Greek and Roman Maps, 
3954; Dilke in HoC 1, 207209; P. Trousset La carte dAgrippa: nouvelle proposition de lecture, 
Dialogues dhistoire ancienne, Vol. 19, No. 2 (1993), 13757; Brodersen, Terra Cognita, 26887.
148 Agrippam quidem in tanta viri diligentia praeterque in hoc opere cura, cum orbem terrarum 
urbi spectandum propositurus esset, errasse quis credat et cum eo divum Augustum? is namque conplexam 
eam porticum ex destinatione et commentariis M Agrippae a sorore eius inchoatam peregit. Pliny Hist. 
Nat. III.1.17
149 Platner and Ashby, Topographical Dictionary, 430 and Richardson New Topographical 
Dictionary, 31920. See also the topographical discussions in Roddaz, Agrippa, 29193 and 
Rodriguez, Porticus Vipsania, 8385.
150 Dio LV.8.4. Rodriguez, Porticus Vipsania, 7993, argues that the cartographic part may have 
been completed as early as 1917 BC, and that Polla and Augustus merely built the portico to sur-
round it.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 54
ment, it has been suggested that the portico may have been finished by 2 BC151. Based 
on the possibility that the portico had similar dimensions to an adjacent portico, one 
writer has suggested that the porticus Vipsania may have been up to 200 feet wide and 
1,500 feet long152.
While we are able to make vague assumptions about the size and shape of the 
portico, we have no evidence that would allow us to suggest how it was decorated. 
Certainly the idea of having a cartographic display in a portico is not unattested in 
the classical world. We have already discussed the passage in Diogenes Laertius where 
the will of Theophrastus requested that panels with cartographic information be dis-
played in the portico next to the museum153. A later panegyric given by the orator 
Eumenius, and dated to the end of the third century, discusses how the schoolchildren 
of Augustodunum (Autun) should be able to look at images of all the lands and seas 
in the local porticos154.
Unfortunately, these brief descriptions offer few hints as to how the oikoumene 
may have appeared within the portico. One writer has proposed that the image of 
the world was round and therefore would have taken up a comparatively small sec-
tion of the portico as a whole155. Others have argued that it would have conformed 
more closely to the proportions of the oikoumene as established by Eratosthenes and 
described by Strabo; thus, the cartographic representation would have been a roughly 
elliptical shape set within a rectangle approximately twice as long as it was high156. 
While several authors have proposed exact dimensions  one has offered thirty feet by 
sixty feet  the size and shape of Agrippas cartographic monument remain essentially 
unknowable157.
151 Nicolet, Space, Geography and Politics, 99, suggests that it would have been complete in time 
for the dedication of the temple of Mars Ultor.
152 Tierney, Map of Agrippa, 151.
153 Diogenes Laertius V.51; see n. 128, above.
154 Videat praeterea in illis porticibus iuuentus et cotidie spectet omnes terras et cuncta maria... 
Eumenius Pro Inst. Schol. 20 in XII Panegyrici Latini ed. R.A.B. Mynors (Oxford, 1964), 242. We 
will return to this passage.
155 K. Miller Mappaemundi: Die ltesten Weltkarten. Vol 6 (Stuttgart, 1898), 14547.
156 There can be no reasonable doubt that the map was a rectangular one,Tierney, Map of 
Agrippa, 152; Agrippas oikoumene is clearly a rectangular shape, Nicolet, Space, Geography and 
Politics, 104; [The map] must have been rectangular, Dilke in HoC 1, 208. Dilkes further assertion 
(n. 34), that a circular map would have been unsuited to a long portico, could easily be applied to his 
own proposed rectangular arrangement which, as Tierney points out, would only have covered one-
third of the shortest side.
157 The measurement is suggested in Tierney, Map of Agrippa, 152. Tierney may be follow-
ing Mllenhoff, Rmische Weltkarte, 194, who suggests forty feet by sixty feet. Dilke in Harley 
Chapter one: translating the landscape 55
Although many writers clearly imagine that the artefact would have resembled 
the projected cartography of the Greek tradition, they are equally convinced that the 
monuments principal Roman development was the extensive use of measurements 
based on the road network. This assumption has persisted over the past century. These 
[measurements] were doubtless derived from the itineraries, wherever such existed, 
wrote one scholar in 1879158. Fifty years later, another writer reports that: Agrippa 
was par excellence a practical man, and the map probably served practical rather than 
scientific ends. Its measuring rods were no doubt the milestones of the roman roads 
rather than latitude and longitude159. Finally, in 1987, we read that: Agrippas world 
map represented a new work of a practical Roman type, which must often have been 
based on data from the extensive network of Roman roads160.
This idea of Agrippas monument as an oversized road-map  perhaps more 
crudely rendered than a Greek geographical work, but making up for it with an abun-
dance of practical information  has remained popular despite the lack of supporting 
evidence. At the other extreme, it has been convincingly argued that the porticus 
Vipsania was home to little more than a monumental inscription, in which the names 
of regions and relevant distances had been written out in a manner not dissimilar to 
the Res Gestae of Augustus161. 
Despite these claims, nearly every issue surrounding the monument is open to 
debate. We do not know if it was painted, like the chorographies of Vitruvius, or if it 
was engraved onto marble like the Forma urbis Romae162; we do not know if the meas-
urements were based on itineraries or on celestial observation; we do not know if the 
measurements were inscribed on the walls of the portico, or recorded in an accompa-
nying text; we do not know if the topographic features were projected using a system 
of meridians; indeed, we cannot even be sure that the representation in the portico 
conformed to the Eratosthenean image of the oikoumene.
and Woodward, HoC 1, 208, suggests a more modest height of between two and three meters (i.e. 
between six and ten feet). Nicolet, Space, Geography and Politics, 108, reminds us that all of these 
figures are merely guesses.
158 Bunbury, Ancient Geography II, 177.
159 F.W. Shipley Agrippas Building Activities in Rome (St. Louis, 1933), 77.
160 Dilke in HoC 1, 209.
161 The argument is put forth in Brodersen, Terra Cognita, 28586. See also S. Carey Plinys 
Catalogue of Culture: Art and Empire in the Natural History (Oxford, 2003), 6174, which supports 
Brodersens assessment.
162 Tierney, Map of Agrippa, 152, opts for marble. 
Chapter one: translating the landscape 56
Perhaps the central problem in discussing Agrippas cartographic monument is that the 
very brief passage in Pliny, quoted above, constitutes our only source of information 
about its visual appearance. Plinys description, alas, does not refer to the artefact in the 
portico as a forma or a tabula, or even, for that matter, a chorographia; it is simply the 
orbis terrarum, displayed for the people of Rome to see163. Other writers who mention 
the porticus Vipsania  Dio, Tacitus, Martial and Plutarch164  neglect to comment 
on its decoration.
It is tempting, in the first instance, to turn to Strabo for further illumination. 
As we have already mentioned, Strabo makes extensive use of the chorographer and 
a chorography in books five and six of his treatise, and it has been assumed that the 
source in question is Agrippas monument165; the argument can be made based on 
a rough correspondence to figures that also appear in Pliny, and the fact that when 
Strabo cites the chorographer the distances are given in miles rather than stades. Our 
ability to use Strabo, however, depends on exactly when we believe he was composing 
his treatise; this is, itself, a subject of some debate. It has been argued that the bulk of 
Strabos Geography must have been composed before 7 BC; although he does refer to 
events that occurred as late as AD 23, it has been argued that these are minor revisions 
to a text that had already been largely established166.
One may, of course, argue for a post-Augustan dating, in which case Strabo 
 known to have been living in Rome  would certainly have had access to the car-
tographic monument in the porticus Vipsania167. However, we also know from the 
evidence in Vitruvius  who had certainly composed his work well before the construc-
tion of the portico  that there was already a tradition of painted wall chorographies 
163 Brodersen, Terra Cognita, 27778, argues that Pliny elsewhere uses spectandum specifically 
to mean reading a text, rather than observing an artefact.
164 Tacitus Hist. I.31 and Plutarch Galba XXV both mention an Illyrian legion camped in the 
porticus Vipsania. Martial Epig. I.108, suggests that his upper floor may have looked out onto the 
portico, but mentions only that laurels grow there.
165 The connection, which appears in Bunbury, Ancient Geography, 177 n.1, was most exten-
sively argued by Detlefsen, Erdkarte Agrippas; the theory has met with broad acceptance (see Tierney, 
Map of Agrippa, 152). However, Dilke, Greek and Roman Maps, 434, suggests that Strabo may have 
been using an earlier source.
166 See, for instance, E. Pais Ancient Italy (Chicago, 1908), 384ff. and R. Syme Anatolica: Studies 
in Strabo (Oxford, 1995) 35667. Both find it implausible that Strabo, by then in his eighties, would 
have composed such an extensive work in the final year of his life.
167 The argument for a later dating is made, most persuasively, in D. Dueck The Date and 
Method of Composition of Strabos Geography in Hermes, Vol. 127, No. 4 (1999), 46778.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 57
in the Roman world. Thus, while Strabo may indeed have been using a cartographic 
source  a source of Roman origin, which gave distances in miles  there is insufficient 
evidence to claim, with any certainty, that the source was Agrippas monument.
If we are unable to use Strabo reliably, we must then turn to other sources which 
appear to have drawn upon the monument in the porticus Vipsania. Agrippas figures, 
as we have mentioned, are cited extensively in the geographical books of Pliny; in addi-
tion, the figures given by Pliny are strikingly similar to those preserved in the Divisio 
orbis terrarum and the Dimensuratio prouinciarum, two texts that can be roughly dated 
to the fourth or fifth century168. Despite the later dating, the connection between these 
two texts and Agrippas monument  or at very least, to the source used by Pliny169  has 
been reasonably well established and the figures have been used to propose reconstruc-
tions of Agrippas commentarii170. 
Both the Divisio and the Dimensuratio are presented in a similar format: for each 
region, the topographical boundaries are listed by cardinal point  usually in the order 
east, west, north and south; the length and breadth (longitudo and latitudo) of the 
region are then given in miles (milia passus)171. Thus, a sample entry reads:
Narbonne Province. It is bounded in the east by the Alps; in the west by a 
mountain pass through the Pyrenees; in the north by the territory of Vienne 
and the Cevenne mountains; and in the south by the Gallic sea. It is 334 miles 
in length and 189 miles in breadth172.
Of the two texts, the Divisio is especially interesting because it makes an explicit 
connection between its own measurements and a chorographical work. It begins:
The world is divided into three sections: Europe, Asia and Libya, or Africa. It 
was the divine Augustus who first displayed this by means of chorography173.
168 The texts appear in Riese, GLM, 914 (Dimensuratio) and 1520 (Divisio), and were re-
edited by Schnabel, Weltkarte, 42540; an alternative edition of the Divisio appears in L. Bieler The 
Text Tradition of Dicuils Liber de mensura orbis terrae, PRIA, Sec. C, Vol. 64 (1965/1966), pp. 131. 
On the dating, see Riese, GLM, xvii-xix.
169 See Tierney, Map of Agrippa, 15254 and Nicolet, Space, Geography and Politics, 119, n. 27.
170 The most extensive is A. Klotz Die geographischen commentarii des Agrippa und ihre 
berreste, Klio, Vol. 24 (1931), 386466, which also incorporates figures from Strabo and Orosius.
171 The words longitudo and latitudo refer simply to length and breadth and do not, therefore, 
imply cartographic projection. On their use as technical terms, see Tierney, Map of Agrippa, 16263 
and Nicolet, Space, Geography and Politics, 102.
172 Prouincia Narbonensis. Finitur ab oriente Alpibus, ab occidente saltu Pyrenaeo, a septen-
trione finibus Viennensium et montibus Cebennicis, a meridie mari Gallico. Longitudo milia passus 
CCCXXXIIII, latitudo CLXXXVIIII. Divisio 8 (GLM, 16).
173 Orbis dividitur tribus nominibus: Europa, Asia, Libya uel Africa. Quem divus Augustus primus 
omnium per chorographiam ostendit. Divisio 1 (GLM, 15).
Chapter one: translating the landscape 58
Given that the figures in the Divisio are so closely related to Pliny, we may cautiously 
suggest that this opening line is a direct reference to Agrippas monument; further-
more, we may conclude and that the chorography in question, which displayed the 
disposition of the inhabited world, was indeed a pictorial artefact. Augustus, of course, 
was not the first to display the tripartite structure of the world but, by the fifth-century, 
Agrippas monument may have been remembered as something like an official stand-
ard, against which subsequent Roman geographical endeavours were measured. Alas 
there is no way of knowing if Agrippas monument still existed at the time the Divisio 
was composed, or whether it had survived only as a series of measurements.
Nonetheless, the reconstructed commentarii give us a reasonable idea of the 
geographical information that would have been amassed by Agrippa, and these 
Figs 1.5 and 1.6  Two reconstructions of Agrippas monument, based on figures from the Divisio and 
the Dimensuratio (top: K. Sallmann, Die Geographie des lteren Plinius, facing 208; below: R. Moynihan 
Geographical Mythology, fig. 6).
I m ag e s  r e m ov e d  f ro m  d i g i ta l  v e r s i o n
d u e  to  p ot e n t i a l  c o p y r i g h t  i s s u e s .
Chapter one: translating the landscape 59
reconstructions have, in turn, been used to reconstruct the physical appearance of the 
monument174. The problem with this approach, however, is that we are largely unclear 
on the relationship of the commentarii to the monument itself. It has been suggested 
that the commentarii may have been published separately, that they may have been 
inscribed in the portico  either nearby or as an integral part of the cartographic com-
position175  and, indeed, that the portico contained little more than a monumental 
inscription, meaning that the artefact and the commentarii were one and the same176.
What, then, can we say about the appearance of Agrippas monument? It is frequently 
assumed that the cartographic element of the monument corresponded to some-
thing like the elongated oikoumene of Eratosthenes  that is, the kind of oikoumene 
that would fit inside a rectangle twice as wide as it was tall. Our reconstructions of 
Agrippas commentarii offer both topographical information and hard data about the 
regions themselves, but offer little clue as to how the regions may have fit together into 
a continuous whole. Thus, it is not unreasonable to suggest that the information was 
designed to be incorporated into an established image of the world.
It is, however, worth considering other possible configurations. It has been sug-
gested  although the suggestion has never caught on in modern scholarship  that 
the cartographic representation may, in fact, have stretched out to fill the entire length 
of a portico wall. Such a mode of presentation may be seen as not only representing 
a decisive break from the Greek tradition, but also potentially acting as an archetype 
for later Roman cartographical works, of which the Tabula Peutingeriana is our only 
surviving example177. More recently, it has been suggested that the monument may 
have been divided into three separate cartographic representations, one continent for 
each wall of the portico178.
174 See K.G. Sallmann Die Geographie des lteren Plinius in ihrem Verhltnis zu Varro (Berlin, 
1971), facing 208; and R. Moynihan Geographical Mythology and Roman Imperial Ideology in R. 
Winkes (ed.) Age of Augustus (Louvain-la-neuve, 1985), 149162, fig. 6. 
175 The theory that the commentarii formed a part of the monument is argued in Detlefsen, 
Erdkarte Agrippas, but disputed by Tierney, Map of Agrippa, 152.
176 Brodersen, Terra Cognita, 286, following the Divisio, provides a reconstruction of how the 
inscription may have read.
177 The connection between the Tabula Peutingeriana and Agrippas portico is criticised by 
Nicolet, Space, Geography and Politics, 1023, as arbitrary. The Tabula Peutingeriana is discussed at 
greater length below, 6375.
178 See Trousset La carte dAgrippa, 13757, whose suggestion is indebted to the reconstruction 
of the cadastral tabulae proposed in Salviat, Orientation, extension et chronologie.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 60
Given what we know about geographic and chorographic presentation, it would 
not be too much of a stretch to propose that Agrippas cartographic monument could 
have consisted not merely of a single image of the oikoumene, but rather  in the style 
of the Vaticans Galleria delle carte geografiche  a series of cartographic images, one for 
each region, arranged along the length of the portico. In accordance with the surviving 
textual evidence, each image may have contained the name of the region (or regions) 
depicted, along with an indication of their length and breadth, and their topographi-
cal boundaries; each region may have also included chorographic details. Such an 
arrangement would, indeed, conform to Plinys description of the whole world for 
Rome to see; it would also explain why texts such as the Divisio and Dimensuratio 
have preserved the information from the monument in such an episodic fashion: the 
text of the Divisio may actually be a region-by-region walk around the portico179.
Although we are unsure about the arrangement of the oikoumene in Agrippas 
monument, we are at least able to suggest some of the elements contained within it. 
Strabo, as we recall, suggested that the chorographical panel should contain an idea 
of the shape of the earth as created by the meeting of land and sea; within that shape 
would be found rivers and mountains, in addition to the position of cities and the 
names of nations180. We find a similar list of contents in the portico-based cartographic 
display described in the panegyric of Eumenius.
The panegyric, probably given at the very end of the third century, describes an 
image of the world in which the names of all places and the distances between them 
are displayed, along with the sources and destinations of the rivers, and the shape of 
the coastline as determined by the ocean181. Although he may have been writing three 
centuries later, the features listed by Eumenius are not dissimilar from those enumer-
ated by Strabo. In the context of the panegyric, however, we may suggest that the 
chorographical features within the portico may have served an educational function; 
it is, after all, features such as rivers and cities that act as the most common topographic 
indicators in history and literature.
179 A connection between the structure of Divisio and the Dimensuratio and the physical arrange-
ment of Agrippas monument was recently proposed by the present author in a paper presented to the 
Oxford Seminars in Cartography series, 17 November 2011.
180 See above, n. 126.
181 [...] omnium cum nominibus suis locorum situs spatia intervalla descripta sunt, quidquid ubique 
fluminum oritur et conditur, quacumque se litorum sinus flectunt, qua vel ambitu congit orbem uel 
impetu inrumpit Oceanus. Eumenius Pro Inst. Schol. 20.2.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 61
Eumenius also suggests that such a cartographic display could have a more propa-
gandistic function: he mentions specifically that the audience of the display should 
look upon the cities, peoples and nations which the invincible emperors have restored 
out of piety, subdued by virtue or subjugated by fear182. Eumenius is not, of course, 
describing Agrippas monument, however the cartography he describes may have had 
a similar agenda: one cannot claim to have conquered the world if they are not able 
demonstrate what they have conquered183. From the age of Augustus onward, the 
chorographical image may have been the most effective means of displaying the real-
ised ambitions of the imperial Roman world.
Agrippas cartographical monument was almost certainly not the first of its kind. It may 
have been the largest and perhaps even the most accurate of its time, but it was probably 
part of an established tradition of world cartography that had been adapted, without major 
modifications, to the Roman world of the first century BC. Textual evidence drawn from 
Livy, Varro, Vitruvius and Propertius suggests the presence of various painted cartographic 
monuments dating from before the completion of the porticus Vipsania: Strabo may well 
have seen Agrippas monument, but Vitruvius could not have. Even if we remain sceptical 
about the reality of Julius Caesars geographical project, we may still be reasonably certain 
that large-scale world cartography was a feature of the pre-Augustan Roman world.
As attractive as the large inscription theory may be, we have no reason to 
believe that that the monument did not contain at least some cartographic element. 
Furthermore, we may suggest that the cartographic representation was painted onto 
the wall of the portico rather than inscribed. However, it is difficult to say what the 
oikoumene itself would have looked like. If there is, in fact, a direct correlation between 
the artefact and the surviving textual evidence  that is, Pliny, the Divisio and the 
Dimensuratio  it allows us only to make very tentative statements about what the 
artefact did not contain. There is, for instance, no evidence to suggest that it contained 
a depiction of the road network; neither is there reason to suspect that the cartographic 
elements were projected according to a system of coordinates.
182 [...] inuictissimi principes urbium gentium nationum aut pietate restituunt aut uirtute deuin-
cunt aut deuinciunt. Eumenius Pro Inst. Schol. 20.2.
183 On the political implications of Eumenius, see Nicolet, Space, Geography and Politics, 11113 
and N. Lozovsky, Maps and Panegyrics: Roman Geo-Ethnographical Rhetoric in Late Antiquity 
and the Middle Ages in Talbert and Unger, Cartography, 16988.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 62
We may, however, question whether or not there was a close relationship 
between the physical appearance of the monument and the information on which 
it was based. It seems possible that the pictorial elements of the monument may 
have been something close to the chorographical  described by Strabo, that is, 
a geographical rendering of the oikoumene, projected onto a flat surface and overlaid 
with chorographic details. If the cartographic representation was designed to be 
accompanied by text  either inscribed in the monument or written in a separate 
volume  the cartography would not have had to mirror the text exactly, rather it 
would have only needed to provide a plausible arrangement of relevant topographic 
reference points.
While such chorographic representations may not have presented a math-
ematically accurate image of the world, they may nonetheless have appealed to 
the imperial spirit of the age. The administration may have wished to demonstrate 
control over the known world precisely by displaying a familiarity with the worlds 
contents. Instead of presenting a theoretical world, as determined by mathematical 
knowledge, a chorographical presentation would demonstrate that the lands had 
been experienced first-hand, that their features had been enumerated, and that they 
were all, in a sense, within reach of Rome. Theoretical geography displayed a world 
that may not have existed. Chorography, on the other hand, presented only what 
was known to be true.
Agrippas monument in the porticus Vipsania may thus represent the point 
where the geographical and chorographical approaches to cartographic represen-
tation began to diverge. We need not suggest that the monument in the portico 
deviated in any serious way from the Eratosthenean model; however, a subtle shift in 
perceptual desire had undoubtedly occurred, and the importance of topographical 
knowledge was dictating a new standard for cartographic expression in the Roman 
world. In the centuries to come, it may have been precisely the desire for choro-
graphic accuracy that caused the geographic shape of the oikoumene to become 
increasingly distorted.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 63
large-scale cartography III: 
world chorography and the tabula peutingeriana
In its attempt to present chorographical information to the people of Rome, Agrippas 
monument may not have deviated too seriously from the accepted image of the oikou-
mene. However, subsequent cartographic endeavours in the Roman world may not 
have been quite so rigorous. Less than two centuries after the completion of the por-
ticus Vipsania, Ptolemy found ample reason to be critical of contemporary practices 
that he viewed as unscientific. When we return to the opening passages of his treatise 
with a more advanced understanding of chorography, we get a sense that the pursuit of 
chorographical depiction may have been corrupting the geographical foundations of 
the cartographers science.
We have already discussed how Ptolemy opened his treatise by asserting the 
mathematical basis of geography and reminding us that the purpose of geography is to 
create an image that is faithful to the proportions of the real oikoumene184. In order to 
create such an image, one required data drawn primarily from astronomical observa-
tion: he was critical of the unrefined nature of surveying, and elsewhere informs us 
that we should not use data derived from accounts of travel185.
Perhaps the most revealing passage in Ptolemy is found in book eight. Here, 
Ptolemy discusses the need to create smaller regional cartographic representations, so 
that the chorographical information (in this case, , or information that had 
been collected through exploration) may be displayed at a more legible scale. When 
one is dealing with a representation of the oikoumene, he explains, topographical infor-
mation about a well-known area will be crowded together, whereas in more distant 
areas about which less is known, there will be an overabundance of empty space186. He 
then informs us that:
184 Ptolemy Geog. I.1.4 and I.2.1.
185 Ptolemy Geog. I.2.1 and I.4.
186        ,         
   ,        ,    
  . Ptolemy Geog. VIII.1.2.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 64
To get around this, a great many are often compelled, on account of the panels 
themselves, to distort the measurements and the shapes of the lands187.
Ptolemy then goes on to cite a few examples, mentioning geographers who have 
made Europe larger than Asia or Libya, simply because there was more information about 
Europe that needed to be incorporated into the representation. Ptolemy is essentially 
describing a scenario in which the chorographic information was beginning to supersede 
geographical accuracy and, indeed, had started to play an active role in the determination 
of the shape of the land. We may infer, from Ptolemys examples, that such distortions 
may not have been uncommon within the cartographic culture of the Roman world.
If chorographic information was changing the shape of the oikoumene from the 
inside, it may well have been the portico that provided a frame into which the oikoumene 
could expand. In the previous  section, we discussed evidence which suggested that the 
portico may well have been the preferred venue for large-scale cartographic representa-
tion; it does not seem unreasonable to suggest that the long and narrow dimensions of 
these spaces may also have started to have an effect on the presentation of the world.
One of the few surviving pieces of material evidence for cartography in antiquity 
 the Tabula Peutingeriana188  may offer some clues as to how the chorographic and 
geographic traditions had started to diverge. The surviving document  a series of eleven 
parchment sheets designed to run together as a continuous whole  presents an image of 
the oikoumene that is some twenty-two feet long, but only around one foot high. Such 
an oddly compressed and elongated shape would certainly be consistent with the dimen-
sions of a portico; however, the Tabula is sufficiently problematic that we can not use it 
as evidence in our investigation, before first arguing for its origins in antiquity.
The Tabula Peutingeriana, as it exists today, represents a copy of a lost archetype. 
The eleven pieces of parchment that make up the document were probably produced 
187              
     . Ptolemy Geog. VIII.1.2.
188 Initially published as the Tabula Peutingeriana  tabula, in this case, referring simply to 
connected sheets of parchment  the document was traditionally referred to in English-language 
scholarship as the Peutinger Table. Dilke, Greek and Roman Maps, 11320, uses this designation; 
however two years later, in Harley and Woodward, HoC 1, the same author suggested that it should 
be known as a map to avoid confusion with other possible meanings of the word table (238 n. 
25). In the last quarter century, map has become the accepted desgination; however, in the interest 
of avoiding the word map, as stated in the introduction of this chapter, the Latin name has been 
retained for the present study.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 65
around AD 1200, perhaps at Reichenau or somewhere in Alsace189. The document was 
acquired by Konrad Celtes around 1500, and was subsequently bequeathed to Konrad 
Peutinger in 1508; its whereabouts during the previous centuries, however, remain a 
mystery190. The distinctly Roman qualities of the document have been noted at least 
since the time of Peutinger, and the published versions that have appeared over the 
centuries have attracted no shortage of hypotheses concerning its origin191.
However, if the problem with Agrippas monument is the fact that it has not 
survived, the problem with the Tabula is that it has survived without any obvious his-
torical context. It is a completely unique document, and one that does not appear to 
have originated from within any known geographical tradition. While palaeographic 
evidence can offer some clues about the surviving folios  and may even offer hints 
about their direct antecedents  the more distant origins of the archetype itself are 
virtually impossible to trace. Thus, if we are to use the surviving document as a window 
onto possible geographic traditions from antiquity, we must do so with caution.
189 The dating, on palaeographic grounds, was proposed by B. Bischoff in Weber, Tabula 
Peutingeriana, 11; a similar conclusion has been reached by M. Steinmann in Talbert Romes World, 
8384. The place of production cannot be known, but the evidence for Reichenau is presented in E. 
Albu Rethinking the Peutinger Map in Talbert and Unger, Cartography, 11119. P. Gautier Dalch 
La trasmissione medievale e rinascimentale della Tabula Peutingeriana in F. Prontera (ed.) Tabula 
Peutingeriana. Le Antiche Vie Del Mondo (Florence, 2003), 4352, argues that the document is not 
the mappamundi copied by a monk at Colmar in AD 1265.
190 See P. Gautier Dalch Du nouveau sur la transmission et la dcouverte de la Tabula 
Peutingeriana: la Cosmographia vetustissima de Pellegrino Prisciani (1518), Geographia 
Antiqua, Vol. 13 (2004), 7181; on the discovery of the map, see Gautier Dalch, La trasmissione, 
4852 and Talbert, Romes World, 1013.
191 On the publication history and scholarship since the sixteenth century, see Talbert, Romes 
World, 1472.
Fig. 1.7 The Tabula Peutingeriana (detail from Folio III).
I m ag e  r e m ov e d  f ro m  d i g i ta l  v e r s i o n
d u e  to  p ot e n t i a l  c o p y r i g h t  i s s u e s .
Chapter one: translating the landscape 66
We should, perhaps, begin by describing the document that survives192. Taken as 
a whole  and we do have evidence to suggest that the individual folios were bound 
together to form a single unbroken surface193  the Tabula Peutingeriana presents an 
image of the oikoumene. The image, of course, is subject to immense horizontal distor-
tion; where the Eratosthenean oikoumene would have fit in a space with proportions of 
2:1, the proportions of the Tabula Peutingeriana are roughly 25:1. The image of a land 
mass, surrounded on all sides by water and arranged around a central sea is nonethe-
less recognisable194. The document, however, is incomplete: the folios containing the 
westernmost part of the oikoumene  Spain, Ireland and most of Britain  have not 
survived, although it has been proposed that these regions may have added an addi-
tional three folios to the total length195. Even without the extra folios, it is interesting 
to note how the European land mass occupies substantially more of the document 
than either Libya  which consists of a narrow band in the lower third of the Tabula  
or Asia, which occupies only the final three folios.
Within this elongated oikoumene, we find a number of the chorographic features 
that, according to Strabo, Vitruvius and even Ptolemy, may be associated with classical 
cartography. Rivers and tributaries appear throughout the land-masses, as do mountain 
ranges and lakes; forests also appear, although with much less frequency196. In addition 
to these natural features, elements from the built environment appear as iconographic 
depictions. Major towns are identified with a small and reasonably consistent double-
192 The surviving document has appeared several times and in several forms over the past hundred 
and fifty years; for a detailed publication history, see Talbert, Romes World, 6268. Prior to Webers 
edition of 1976, the most frequently reproduced was Konrad Millers 1888 lithograph, which has 
been reissued numerous times, most recently (in colour) in Prontera, Tabula Peutingeriana. In 1916, 
Miller divided each folio (including his own reconstructed segment) into five vertical parts, effec-
tively creating an apparatus for citation. This system was updated in Weber, Tabula Peutingeriana, 
with the addition of horizontal division, and subsequently adopted, with further alterations, in the 
digital version prepared by the Ancient World Mapping Center at UNC Chapel Hill, under the 
direction of R.J.A. Talbert. The present study will provide references to the digital edition, which 
may be accessed at: www.cambridge.org/us/talbert/index.html.
193 Weber, Tabula Peutingeriana, 20; Steinmann in Talbert, Romes World, 734.
194 cf. Strabo I.1.3 and I.1.8.
195 Palaeographic evidence suggests that the exemplar from which the surviving document was 
copied was also incomplete. K. Miller Die Peutingersche Tafel oder Weltkarte des Castorius (Stuttgart, 
1916), proposed a reconstruction of what he thought to be a single missing folio; however, R.J.A. 
Talbert Konrad Miller, Roman Cartography, and the Lost Western End of the Peutinger Map in U. 
Fellmeth, P Guyot and H. Sonnabend Historische Geographie der Alten Welt: Grundlagen, Ertrge, 
Perspektiven (Hildesheim, 2007), 35366 has argued for three missing folios.
196 The appearance of the Black Forest (silva Marciana at M III.5 = T 2A5) and the Vosges 
Forest (silva Vosagus at TP 2B2) are iconographically unique and may be Medieval additions; see 
Talbert, Romes World, 124. There are, however, trees around Daphne, outside of Antioch (TP 9B4).
Chapter one: translating the landscape 67
house icon, and spas or watering places (aquae) appear as slightly larger buildings 
surrounding a courtyard197. Other topographic features from Antiquity  the light-
house at Alexandria or the harbour at Ostia  are also illustrated, and the three major 
cities of Rome, Constantinople and Antioch appear as personifications.
The document also preserves a considerable amount of text. Most of the towns 
and natural features are labelled, as are the provinces and regions. While much of the 
text serves only to identify a particular location, as one moves further east, more fanci-
ful additions begin to appear. The Nile, for instance, bears the inscription the river 
Nile, which divides Asia and Libya198. Further east are empty spaces marked: plains 
empty and inhospitable due to lack of water199; even further east, a location is marked 
in this place, elephants are born200.
Perhaps the most surprising feature of the Tabula Peutingeriana  and one which has 
dominated a great deal of scholarship201  is the presence of an extensive road network, 
seemingly emanating from Rome and stretching out to the very ends of the world. Along 
these routes  which are represented as simple lines  appear the names and distances of 
stations and towns; however, rather than receiving any kind of iconographic representa-
tion, the towns along the routes are indicated only with a crook in the line. This linear 
presentation of places and distances  combined with the fact that many of the names 
along the routes are written in oblique cases202  should immediately call to mind the 
itineraria, those lists of places and distances used for travel in the Roman world203.
Although the orientation of the Tabula nominally places north at the top and 
runs from west to east, there is a considerable eastern bias throughout, as if the display 
of certain areas had been rotated slightly to conform to a perceptual norm. In Rome, 
for instance, the northbound Via Flaminia leaves Rome to the left and the Via Appia 
leaves to the right. Greece and the Peloponnese, likewise, appear rotated, and the west 
coasts of both Gaul and Asia minor stretch out along the horizontal axis. We may 
attribute some of this to the vertical distortion of the document, but we should not 
197 The iconographic elements of the Tabula are elaborated most fully in A. and M. Levi 
Itineraria Picta: Contributo allo studio della Tabula Peutingeriana (Rome, 1967).
198 Fl. Nilus qui diuidit asiam (et) libiam (TP 8C1).
199 Campi Deserti et in habitabiles propter aqu(a)e inopiam (TP 10B2).
200 In his locis elephanti nascuntur (TP 11C4).
201 The most exhaustive treatment is K. Miller Itineraria Romana: Rmische Reisewege an der 
Hand der Tabula Peutingeriana dargestellt (Stuttgart, 1916).
202 See Salway, Travel, Itineraria and Tabellaria, 26 28.
203 Itineraria and their function are discussed in the following chapter, 7992.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 68
discount the possibility that this bias reflects a cartographic culture where East was the 
principal cardinal point204.
There can be little doubt that the surviving document incorporates a great deal of 
genuine material from antiquity. The problems arise when one attempts to analyse 
that material in order to discover the nature of the archetype. Many of the attempts 
at dating have focused on named features which, themselves, can be securely dated205; 
thus, the presence of Constantinople, for instance, might suggest that the archetype 
dates from sometime after AD 330. Other scholars have pointed to various features 
within the document  the inclusion of the province of Dacia, incorporated into the 
empire after AD 106206; the appearance of Aquae Labodes in Sicily, probably completed 
in AD 352207  to suggest possible terminal dates; and yet, if the topography tends 
toward a fourth-century dating, how do we explain the presence of Pompeii, famously 
buried by the eruption of Vesuvius in AD 79?208
Because so much of the material on the map is suggestive of itineraries, it has been 
proposed that the archetype was, in fact, a representation of data from the Itineraria 
Antonini, or from an otherwise lost record of the cursus publicus209. One may note 
similarities between the place-names in the document and those preserved in the text 
of an anonymous cosmographer from Ravenna, probably writing around AD 700210. 
One of the sources used by the cosmographer is an otherwise unattested treatise by 
Castorius, and it has been noted that the places and distances attributed to Castorius 
often correspond to the information preserved in the Tabula211. While we cannot, alas, 
204 East was an important cardinal point in the Roman world, and its cartographic significance 
survived in Medieval mappaemundi, many of which placed east at the top; see Woodward Medieval 
mappaemundi in HoC 1, 286370.
205 See discussions in P. Arnaud Lorigine, la date de rdaction et la diffusion de larchetype de la 
Table de Peutinger, BSNAF (1988), 302321 and Salway, Nature and Genesis, 123127.
206 Salway, Nature and Genesis, 124; Talbert, Romes World, 134.
207 Dilke, Greek and Roman Maps, 115.
208 Dilke, Greek and Roman Maps, 210 n. 10, suggests that the site of Pompeii had been resettled 
by the late antique period.
209 See, especially, Levi, Itineraria Picta, 97. The Antonine Itineraries and the cursus publicus are 
both discussed in chapter two.
210 The text has been published as Ravennatis Anonymi Cosmographia, in J. Schnetz (ed.) 
Itineraria Romana 2. The most extensive commentary on the text is L. Dillemann La Cosmographie 
du Ravennate (Brussels, 1997).
211 K. Miller attributed the Tabula Peutingeriana directly to Castorius, although the attribution 
has never been widely accepted. See discussions in Dillemann, Cosmographie, 5253; Gautier Dalch, 
La trasmissione, 4344; Talbert, Romes World, 13334.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 69
make any claims for the existence of Castorius, the evidence may at least suggest that 
the Ravenna cosmographer was using a textual source based on the archetype or the 
pictorial artefact itself. From this we may conclude that the archetype itself was in 
existence sometime before the eighth century.
It has also been argued, however, that the archetype of the Tabula Peutingeriana 
is Carolingian in origin and can only be dated as far back as the ninth century212. The 
hypothesis is not unattractive: if we envisage the surviving document as a pastiche of 
Roman imperial authority, assembled from sources available in the time of Charlemagne, 
we may explain more easily the temporal inconsistencies of the topographic material. 
While such a dating would coincide with a period of renewed interest in Roman geo-
graphical traditions213  and while it has been conjectured that a version of the document 
was known in the Carolingian world214  the evidence for such a proposal is ultimately 
no stronger than the evidence that places the origin of the archetype firmly in antiquity.
Even if we leave aside the confusing mix of topographical information and focus 
on the iconographic presentation of the document, a clear dating continues to elude 
us. We may, perhaps, note iconographic similarities in the display of towns and rivers 
between our document and the cartographic sketch on the reverse of the Artemidorus 
Papyrus, thought to date as early as the first century BC215; iconographic similarities 
with the Forma urbis Romae, dated to the early third century AD, have also been 
noted216. To these observations, we may add that the delineation of the central seas by 
means of wavy lines, bears some similarity to the depiction of rivers in the cadastral 
stones from Orange217. None of these features, however, provide us with a firm basis 
from which to suggest a date.
If it is difficult to make any clear pronouncements about the dating, it is virtually 
impossible to ascertain how the archetype was presented or what functions it may 
have served. The shape of the document combined with the information about road 
212 The theory is proposed in Albu, Imperial Geography, 13648.
213 See, for instance, N. Lozovsky Roman Geography and Ethnography in the Carolingian 
Empire, Speculum, Vol. 81 (2006), 32564.
214 Gautier Dalch, La trasmissione, 47.
215 See Kramer, Map of Spain, 11520 (esp. fig. 1, 117) and Brodersen and Elsner, Artemidorus 
Papyrus, 158.
216 See R.J.A. Talbert Romes Marble Plan and Peutingers Map: Continuity in Cartographic 
Design in F. Beutler and W. Hameter (eds) Festschrift Ekkehard Weber (Vienna, 2005), 62734.
217 Note, especially, the rivers in the Insulae Furianae section of Cadastre C (Piganiol, Documents, 
295307).
Chapter one: translating the landscape 70
networks has led some scholars to believe that the original document may have existed 
as a scroll and was designed as something like a road atlas for travellers218. Although 
the document does not appear to have any military function, it has been suggested that 
the presentation of the archetype may reflect what Vegetius referred to in his military 
handbook as itineraries of the provinces, not only annotated but also illustrated219. 
Even if we accept that the surviving copy faithfully represents the dimensions of the 
original, the widely spaced arrangement of features in the Tabula may not have been as 
useful for a traveller as a simple written itinerary.
It seems more probable that the archetype was intended not for personal use but 
rather for public display. The most recent of these suggestions has placed the original in 
an apse behind the throne of Diocletian, a decorative statement of peace restored to the 
world under the tetrarchy220; however, if the archetype was displayed as part of a larger 
apse decoration, the topographic information would not have been easily viewable and 
the oikoumene would have thus been reduced to an abstract shape. On the other hand, 
the proportions of the Tabula would not have been incompatible with dimensions of a 
portico; in such a setting, the topographic information could be experienced episodi-
cally, and the extreme distortion of the oikoumene would not have been as apparent.
We have examined some of the problems associated with the Tabula Peutingeriana and 
its elusive archetype; it is now time to examine where this problematic document may fit 
within the Roman tradition of large-scale cartography that we have assembled over the 
course of the present chapter. This will involve making three assertions about the arche-
type: firstly, that the archetype had reached a terminal stage by the mid-fourth century 
 possibly in the era of Julian  after which it continued to be copied, largely without 
topographic additions; secondly, that the archetype  as it existed in the fourth century 
 did not contain a representation of the road network; and finally, that the archetype 
was based on a chorographic image of the oikoumene, originally displayed in a portico.
Perhaps the single most persuasive argument for an imperial or late antique dating 
of the archetype is the nearly-complete absence of Christian topographical features. 
218 The scroll theory is discussed in Dilke, Greek and Roman Maps, 114; Salway Nature and 
Genesis 122.
219 itineraria prouinciarium [...] non tantum adnotata sed etiam picta. Vegetius III.6. On the civil-
ian nature of the document, see Dilke, Greek and Roman Maps, 115.
220 Talbert, Romes World, 14357.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 71
In the whole of the surviving document we find numerous temples  identified by 
a fairly consistent temple symbol  and four altars, two of which are located at the 
easternmost end of the oikoumene221. There is, however, a distinct lack of churches and 
Christian holy sites. Jerusalem appears as Helyacapitolina, although above the town 
name is written Formerly called Herusalem222; the town itself is not celebrated icono-
graphically, and appears as the standard town symbol. Nearby, in the desert of the Sinai 
peninsula, we find the annotation the desert where, for forty years, the children of 
Israel wandered, led by Moses and beneath, closer to Mount Sinai itself, we read here, 
on Mount Sinai, they received the law223. These legends, however, are probably later 
additions, and reflect a medieval rather than Roman tradition224.
The only identifiable Christian feature is a building outside of Rome labelled AD 
S(AN)C(TU)M PETRUM225. The building, although it appears to be several miles out of 
the city, appears as a standard temple symbol and may be reasonably identified as the 
original basilica of St Peter, built by Constantine. The symbol, however, must certainly 
be a later addition; whereas all but two of the building symbols are angled up and to the 
right, the building marked as St Peters is angled to the left; furthermore, the building 
is raised on a small hill, an iconographic feature which suggests St. Peters, but which is 
not found elsewhere226. In a document that is otherwise consistent in its iconography, 
the basilica stands out immediately as a careless imitation of the documents style.
If we accept that the basilica is probably a later addition, we are left with a document 
that contains no traces of Christian topography. While this striking characteristic may not 
allow us to conclude that the archetype pre-dated the adoption of Christianity in the early 
fourth century  the craftsmen in charge of cartography may not have been immediately 
affected by a change of state religion  the absence of crosses, churches and emphasis on the 
holy land should, at least, rule out the possibility of a Carolingian dating. It seems doubtful 
that any Carolingian scribe would have been able to ignore Christianity so consistently.
221 At TP 7C2 and 11B4.
222 The whole indication thus reads: Antea dicta Herusalem, m(odo) helyacapitolina (TP 9C1).
223 Desertum u(bi) quadraginta annis erraver(un)t filii isrl(is) ducente Moyse (TP 8C5) and Hic 
legem acceperunt i(n) monte Syna (TP 8C4).
224 On which, see Gautier Dalch, La trasmissione, 44 and Talbert, Romes World, 16566, both 
of whom note similarities to a map which accompanied the Commentary on the Apocalypse by Beatus 
of Libana, written in AD 776.
225 TP 4B4.
226 The other two buildings represented by symbols with inconsistent perspective are a temple 
marked Templ(um) Augusti (TP 11C5) in the south-easternmost corner of the oikoumene, and the 
temple of Apollo at Daphne (TP 9B4), disucssed below.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 72
Furthermore, we may suggest that the archetype predates any large-scale Christian 
building and restoration projects, such as those undertaken by Justinian in the sixth 
century. Indeed, the rigour with which Christianity is ignored should lead us to the con-
clusion that the archetype was either the product of a pre-Christian empire or at very 
least that it was made before the acceptance of Christianity had had any serious effect 
on the built environment. It is also possible that the Tabula was designed as a specifically 
anti-Christian vision of the oikoumene. This latter option, combined with the presence 
of topographical features from mid-fourth century might point us in the direction of the 
emperor Julian. A Julianic dating for the archetype would also explain the prominence of 
Antioch, which is the largest and most detailed of the three personified cities.
Certainly, Julian is known to have spent time in Antioch in AD 362; moreover, 
because of his military ambitions in the East, Julian envisaged Antioch as a poten-
tial imperial capital227. The personification of Antioch, as it appears in the document, 
contains echoes from an episode in Ammianus Marcellinus: during Julians sojourn, 
he decided to re-open a spring near the temple of Apollo at Daphne which had been 
covered over since the time of Hadrian228; shortly afterward, however, the temple of 
Apollo caught fire and burned to the ground229. In the representation of Antioch we 
find, immediately to the left of the city, a unique temple symbol surrounded by trees 
and featuring a spring which flows into an aqueduct that surrounds the city. There 
were, of course, other springs known at Daphne  Libanius, in his famous oration of 
AD 360, mentions the waters of a nymphaeum230  but the presence of the temple may 
at least allow us to place the representation before AD 362.
Like the church of St. Peter, however, the symbol representing the temple does not 
conform to either the look or perspective of any other building in the Tabula; furthermore, 
the presence of trees  which, as we have mentioned, appear infrequently in the surviv-
ing document  might allow us to suggest that the entirety of Antioch is, in fact, a later 
addition. We may, in this case, suggest that the archetype  that is, the version which was 
227 For an overview of Julians time at Antioch, see G. Downey Julian the Apostate at Antioch, 
Church History, Vol. 8, No. 4 (1939), 30315.
228 Ammianus Marcellinus XXII.12.8; see also, S.N.C. Lieu (ed) The Emperor Julian: panegyric 
and polemic. Second edition. (Liverpool, 1989), 4754. 
229 Ammianus Marcellinus XXII.13.1; see also Libanius Monody on the Daphnean Temple of 
Apollo in J. Duncombe Select Works of the Emperor Julian Vol. II (London, 1784), 24351.
230 Libanius Or. XI.240. Commentary and English translation may be found in G. Downey 
Libanius Oration in Praise of Antioch (Oration XI), Proceedings of the American Philosophical 
Society, Vol. 103, No. 5 (1959), 65286.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 73
copied, with only minor changes, throughout the Medieval period  represents a Julianic 
update of an extant cartographic model, a sketch, perhaps, for some never-completed car-
tographic project destined for an Antiochene portico. We would certainly be justified in 
viewing the archetype as being representative of later Roman monumental cartography. 
The topographic points may have accumulated over the course of several phases, but both 
the types of information and the basic format seem consistent with the notion of the 
chorographic image that we have been able to assemble from our various sources.
The only feature of the Tabula that is not attested in the literary sources is the road 
network. In describing what the image of the oikoumene should contain, Vitruvius 
mentions rivers, Strabo mentions oceans, rivers, mountains, nations and cities, Ptolemy 
mentions harbours, towns and tributaries and Eumenius  perhaps the closest contem-
porary of the archetype  mentions named locations, rivers and the ocean as well as 
cities, nations and peoples. The road network  a conspicuous feature of the Roman 
world  is conspicuous in our cartographic descriptions only by its absence.
Even if we discount the dating problems arising from information preserved 
in the route network, the roads do not sit well within the geographic space of the 
tabula. There does not appear to be much consistency in the way that the roads con-
nect together the various iconographically depicted features. It is strange also that 
no roads lead to the imperial capital of Constantinople. We may, however, start to 
make some sense of the road network if we are willing to imagine that the surviving 
document contains two distinct layers: the first layer is a drawing of a fourth-century 
chorographical display; the second layer consists of information compiled from earlier 
itineraries, but added to the document at a later stage, possibly several centuries after 
the first layer of the archetype had assumed its final form.
We have already seen that information about the fourth-century road network 
was still available to the Ravenna cosmographer at the beginning of the eighth cen-
tury. It is certainly not beyond the realm of possibility to suggest that a Carolingian 
scribe, realising the Roman character of the original, would have sought to improve 
upon it by copying information from antique itineraries into the geographical space 
of the archetype. This, as much as anything else, would explain both the archaic place 
names and the reason we are unable to use the locations to arrive at a secure dating: this 
hypothetical later scribe may well have been using a variety of source materials from 
different eras, with little care for chronology.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 74
If we are willing to strip away the road network from the archetype, we are left 
with an entirely plausible image of what a Roman chorographical display may have 
looked like: it is the shape of the oikoumene, elongated to fill the space in which it 
is displayed, and distorted to favour the areas for which the most information was 
available. The shape itself is defined by oceans and seas, and within it are found the 
positions of important cities, the sources and destinations of rivers, the locations of 
mountain ranges, and other topographical details that might have been known from 
historical and geographical texts.
As a navigational aid, the Tabula Peutingeriana would have been useless. A travel-
ler, as we will see in the next chapter, would have relied more on the linear format of the 
itinerary for navigation, and would have had little use for a document that attempted 
to situate the viewer within the context of the oikoumene. As a document intended for 
public display, however, the Tabula would have provided an adequate  if not, strictly 
speaking, accurate  collection of locations known from history and literature, along 
with their disposition within the known world. By presenting chorographical informa-
tion within a cartographic space, it would have fulfilled the needs for an educational 
tool as outlined by Eumenius; and in reducing the size of the areas about which less 
information had been gathered, it would have also served as a statement of imperial 
control over the oikoumene. For Eumenius, Roman-ness was an especially reassuring 
element of cartographic expression: it is a pleasure, he says, to look upon an image of 
the world, for in it we see nothing foreign231.
The unwieldy dimensions of the Tabula make it virtually impossible for the viewer 
to see everything in a single glance; to appreciate the details, a more sequential mode 
of viewing would have been necessary. If the archetype was, in fact, displayed in an 
apse, it may have been possible to get a sense of the whole from a single vantage point, 
but such a display would also remove any educational utility it may have had, reducing 
the whole thing to a kind of abstract decoration. In order to read the topographical 
indications within the document, it would have been necessary to display it in such a 
way that the viewer could be reasonably close.
It is possible that the archetype was designed as decoration for a room or private space. 
We know that a similar document  possibly an earlier version, now lost  was displayed 
231 Nunc enim, nunc demum iuuat orbem spectare depictum, cum in illo nihil uidemus alienum. 
Eumenius Pro Inst. Schol. 21.3.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 75
in the antechamber of the bishop of Padua in the mid-fifteenth century; alas, this later 
usage hardly offers any clues as to the original display of the archetype232. However, given 
the evidence for a tradition of portico-based world chorographies, we may reasonably sug-
gest that a portico seems the most probable location for such a cartographic display. Even 
if the archetype only represents a sketch for a project that was never completed, we may 
perhaps understand the Tabula Peutingeriana as an example of how Roman cartography 
had evolved since the time of Augustus, and had come to take on a form that, as much 
as Ptolemy might have protested its inaccuracies, provided a more accurate reflection of 
how the Roman world understood its own extent. By focussing on the presentation of 
gathered information and retaining only a nominal sense of the geographic framework 
in which those locations existed, chorography offered a means of cartographic expression 
where perceived reality was favoured over mathematical abstraction.
If cartography is the translation of a larger space into a representation that allows the 
space to be more readily apprehended, then there can be little doubt that cartogra-
phy existed in the Roman world. However, the cartographic artefacts that we have 
been able to identify hardly constitute a tradition of scale cartography. The regional 
formae of the agrimensores can be described as representational only insofar as they 
drew upon the artificial structures imposed by centuriation in order to create a largely 
textual record of land-holdings. The large-scale chorographic documents, on the other 
hand, were essentially public displays of topographic knowledge, and the cartographic 
frame was ultimately less important than the information contained within it.
Of the two traditions, the processes of construction that shaped the Roman world 
had far more effect on the regional cartography of the surveyors. The regional formae were 
a direct result of the land survey and, as such, preserved the imposed framework of the 
grid, while simultaneously attempting to transform the topographic realities of the site 
into text. Our larger chorographies, on the other hand are notable precisely for their focus 
on natural topography  rivers, specifically, but also mountains  and their failure, as far 
as we can tell, to represent significant human additions to the landscape. Cities, harbours 
232 On the fifteenth century copy, see Gautier Dalch, La trasmissione, 48; Salway, Nature and 
Genesis, 122; Talbert, Romes World, 16 670.
Chapter one: translating the landscape 76
and aquae were the only elements from the built environment translated into the carto-
graphic space and even then  if the Tabula Peutingeriana is any indication  it was not a 
complete record of urban centres, but rather a selection of the more important ones.
We may characterise the formae of the surveyors as practical cartographic docu-
ments, but based on the textual and material evidence available to us, we should not 
think of them as being anything like a scale representation of the local-area landscape. 
The imposition of the centuriation grid onto the ground created a textual system that 
rendered cartographic representation largely unnecessary; situations involving ager 
arcifinius were problematic for the surveyors not so much because of the lack of car-
tographic representation, but because there was no textual record against which to 
compare the findings from the land. In the case of the cadastral stones from Orange 
 where the forma acted as the basis for a public display  the cartographic elements of 
the presentation were reduced to a level of pure decoration.
Decoration was certainly one of the guiding principles behind the large-scale 
chorographic displays. Based on what we know, the portico chorographies can be 
characterised as cartographic in the sense that they employed a received idea of the 
worlds shape as a vessel in which to display the collected topographic knowledge of 
the empire. However, the accurate representation of the oikoumene  a cartographic 
ideal espoused by Ptolemy  may have been eclipsed by the desire to create a more 
comprehensive catalogue of the worlds known contents. There is, indeed, a sense that 
the cartographic space was treated more as an abstract frame  an idea of the oikou-
mene rather than a representation of it  and that the real value of the chorographic 
display was the textual evidence of an explored world.
We must, therefore, conclude that the extensive building which defined the physi-
cal space of the Roman world affected the way that local areas were perceived, but did 
not provide the conceptual foundation for pictorial representation of the larger world. 
Indeed, pictorial representation may have played a fairly small role in the apprehension 
of larger spaces. Chorographic displays provided an impression of the oikoumenes extent 
 and, by extension, the extent of the Roman presence within it  but, as we shall see in 
the coming chapter, it was the built environment that would provide a means for the 
individual to move through, and situate himself within, the space of the known world.
C h a p t e r  t wo
apprehending the landscape
The cartographic creations from antiquity that we discussed in 
the previous chapter do not ultimately represent any kind of engagement with the 
land; instead, they were an attempt to render a particular geographical understanding 
of the oikoumene into pictorial form. The understanding itself was the result of a long 
tradition of mathematical investigation combined with an ever-increasing knowledge 
of the natural topographical features that made up the inhabited world. While cartog-
raphy may have offered a convenient means of displaying chorographical information 
in a public setting, it would not have provided the Roman citizen with a means of 
apprehending the space of the empire  or, indeed, the world  in any practical way.
For the purposes of our present study, we should consider apprehension of the 
landscape as consisting of two distinct  albeit interrelated  halves. First there is the 
concept of navigation, which we use here not in its original maritime sense, but rather 
to denote the act of situating oneself within a given space and, subsequently, of find-
ing the way from one location to another. Secondly, there is interpretation, which is 
essentially the act of perceiving features within the landscape through the filter of ones 
own historical, mythological or geographical knowledge. Both processes involve an 
assessment of the land and a translation of physical space into spatial understanding.
Natural topography may have provided the structure for large-scale conceptions 
of the world, and it may have even served to define the boundaries between regions; 
however, it was the built environment that provided a physical index for practical appre-
hension of the Roman world. The extensive network of roads allowed navigational 
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 78
instructions to be recorded as simple, linear text, thus making it possible to traverse the 
long distances of a large empire. Furthermore, the presence of constructed elements 
within the landscape  not merely roads and cities, but also the temples, statues, altars 
and other man-made objects placed within the natural world  provided a topographic 
structure through which an understanding of the land could develop.
By examining our source material in light of what we know about the road net-
work itself, we may propose a reasonably convincing reconstruction of how it was 
possible to traverse the geographical space of Roman land, and how it was possible to 
conceive of a journey from one part of the empire to another. As we noted in the pre-
vious chapter, textual information was viewed as highly authoritative: the permanent 
textual record was more highly regarded than the surveyors forma when it came to 
questions of land division; textual chorographies were always the foundation on which 
pictorial ones could be constructed. In the process of navigation, text was equally 
important: the act of successfully travelling from one place to another depended on 
an ability to convey the complexity of movement through a multi-directional space 
as simply and sequentially as possible. As we shall see, it was the built environment 
that made this possible.
The question of interpretation is slightly more difficult to address. It is, of course, 
impossible for the modern writer to position himself within the perceptual space of 
the Roman traveller. Our ability to discuss how the landscape was experienced by the 
contemporary viewer is, therefore, limited to what we can discern from those accounts 
of travel that bother to engage with the world around them. Even with reliable texts it 
can be difficult to draw conclusions about matters as vague as perception and interpre-
tation. Nonetheless, by examining three different texts from three different centuries 
 each containing a different approach to the idea of moving through the landscape 
 we may note the recurrence of similar themes. Specifically, we may be able to detect 
a sense of the way that features from the built environment acted as a locus around 
which cultural notions of history, mythology and memory could coalesce. As we shall 
demonstrate, it is this collected memory, a memory preserved largely in the built envi-
ronment, that provided the most consistent means of apprehending the landscape.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 79
the mechanics of navigation I: itineraries
The construction and maintenance of paved roads had been an integral part of Roman 
expansions since at least the third century BC. By the time of Augustus, many of the 
roads leading directly out of Rome had been in existence long enough to require repair, 
and new road-building projects were being undertaken throughout the provinces1. 
However, as extensive as the road network may have been, it appears to have had little 
effect on Roman geographical perceptions of the larger world: roads are notably absent 
from the brief world-descriptions of Pomponius Mela and Dionysius Periegetes2, as 
well as from the more detailed topographic catalogues of Strabo and Pliny.
Roads also appear to have been absent from cartographic representations. Even 
if there was a tradition of scale cartography in antiquity, the suggestion that Roman 
travellers would have relied on any kind of road maps for navigation presupposes a 
level of cartographic literacy for which there is simply no evidence. Our failure, in the 
previous chapter, to locate a mapping tradition that included the road network might 
suggest that movement through the landscape  and thus, perception of the landscape 
 did not rely on any kind of cartographic assistance.
In recent years it has been proposed that spatial perception in the Roman world 
was fundamentally linear, and that an understanding of geographical space was dictated 
almost exclusively by the road network3. According to this theory  which we may refer 
to as the hodological approach4  the entirety of the world was essentially understood 
as a series of straight lines leading from one location to another. The locations, however, 
1 On the road repairs commissioned by Augustus see, Dio LIII.22.1 and LIV.8; on road building 
in Gallia Narbonensis, see Strabo IV.6.11.
2 Pomponius Mela and Dionysius Periegetes are discussed below, 9498.
3 The pioneering work is P. Janni La mappa e il periplo: cartografia antica e spazio odologico 
(Rome, 1984); see also C.R. Whittaker Mental Maps: Seeing Like a Roman in P. McKechnie (ed.) 
Thinking Like a Lawyer: essays on legal history and general history for John Crook on his eightieth birth-
day (Leiden, 2002), 81112.
4 The term  from the greek   was initially used in behavioral psychology; see K. Lewin 
Field Theory and Experiment in Social Psychology: Concepts and Methods, American Journal of 
Sociology, Vol. 44, No. 6 (1939), 86896 (at 891). Janni, La mappa e il periplo, 13 has applied Lewins 
concept to the ancient world. The idea has also been repurposed for landscape studies   without any 
apparent reference to Lewin  in Jackson, Vernacular Landscape, 21.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 80
existed only in relation to the paths and were not perceived within anything that we 
might recognise as a relational or multi-directional space. In short, the network of roads 
would have rendered cartographic perception of the world completely unnecessary.
While such a theory is perhaps overly restrictive  navigation, as we shall demon-
strate, probably relied on a combination of hodological and relational understanding 
 we cannot deny that roads played a role of vital importance in the process of moving 
through the space of the Roman world. Like the centuriation grid, the roads acted as a 
physical presence within the land that allowed for both standardised assessment, and the 
creation of simplified textual records. The road network and its attendant infrastructure 
did not merely provide the physical surface for movement, it also provided the concep-
tual framework that allowed the mechanics of travel to be codified and communicated.
The primary means of communicating the information necessary to get from one 
place to another seems to have been the itinerary. We should, perhaps, mention from 
the beginning that the itinerary is not as a particular type of document, but rather a 
format of textual presentation: itineraries were, of course, written down on papyrus 
and parchment, but it would have been equally possible to find similar information in 
monumental inscriptions, or preserved on small, portable artefacts. While the modes 
of presentation may have varied, the format of the textual information remained fairly 
consistent. The two major textual examples that have survived from antiquity are the 
Antonine Itineraries and the Bordeaux Itinerary5. The latter, which we shall return to 
at the end of this chapter, is a reasonably brief document offering instructions for a 
single journey, in this case from Bordeaux to Jerusalem; the Antonine Itineraries, on 
the other hand, offer a more complex  and in some ways, more problematic  vision 
of travel within the imperial world6.
5 Although the two works are not related  except by genre  they have traditionally been 
published together: in Vetera Romanorum Itineraria, siue Antonini Itinerarium ed. P. Wesseling 
(Amsterdam, 1735), in Itinerarium Antonini Augusti et Hierosolymitanum ed. G. Parthey and M. 
Pinder (Berlin, 1848), and in Itineraria Romana vol. 1 ed. O. Cuntz (Leipzig, 1929), which is now 
the standard edition. The two latter editions have preserved Wesselings apparatus for citation.
6 Some of the major treatments of the Antonine Itineraries include: D. van Berchem LAnnone 
Militaire dans LEmpire Romain au IIIe Sicle, MSNAF, Vol. 24 (1937), 117202; A.L.F. Rivet and 
K. Jackson The British Section of the Antonine Itinerary, Britannia, Vol. 1 (1970), 3482; N. Reed 
Pattern and Purpose in the Antonine Itinerary, AJP, Vol. 99, No. 2 (1978), 228254; P. Arnaud 
LItinraire dAntonin: un tmoin de la littrature itinraire du Bas-Empire, Geographia Antiqua, 
Vol. 2 (1993), 3349; Salway, Travel, Itineraria and Tabellaria, 2266; R.J.A. Talbert Author, 
Audience and the Roman Empire in the Antonine Itinerary in R. Haensch and J. Heinrichs (eds) 
Herrschen und Verwalten: Der Alltag der rmischen Administration in der Hohen Kaiserzeit (Kln, 
2007), 25670. See also Thomson, Ancient Geography, 37678; Chevallier, Roman Roads, 3437; 
Dilke, Greek and Roman Maps, 12528.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 81
The published text of the Antonine Itineraries has been divided into two sections: 
the second, and shorter of the two, describes a series of maritime journeys and offers 
a list of islands7; the first, and by far more substantial section contains a series of land 
journeys (itinera) covering much of the empire, although often in no particular order8. 
When taken together, the journeys of the Antonine Itineraries seem to represent an 
attempt to convey the multi-directional complexities of the road network in a textual 
format that is necessarily linear and sequential.
The format of each journey is fairly simple: itineraries are little more than lists, 
where each item consists of a place name followed by a distance in Roman miles. A 
sample itinerary, this one from Neapolis (in Palestine) to Ascalon, reads:
Item a Neapoli Ascalona mp LXIIII sic
Aelia   mp XXX
Eleutheropoli  mp XX
Ascalona  mp XXIIII9
It is a remarkably efficient method of presentation: in no more than four lines of text, 
we are given the total distance from Neapolis to Ascalon, followed by a breakdown 
of the journey into stages, and the distances travelled on each day. Everything non-
essential has been stripped away. The use of oblique cases means that, even without 
prepositions, each journey can be read as a simple sentence10. Furthermore, the intro-
ductory item, which introduces many of the itineraries in a particular group or area, 
suggests that the journeys were designed to be read, if not in sequence, then at very 
least with a sense of regional continuity.
It is the names of cities, towns and established stopping-points that dominate the 
textual information and, indeed, these are often all we are given. However in certain of 
7 Maritime itineraries: Itin. Ant. 487.1508.2. Islands: Itin. Ant. 508.3529.6.
8 On the structure of the land itineraries, see van Berchem, LAnnone Militaire, 16681; Reed, 
Pattern and Purpose, 23543; and Salway Travel, Itineraria and Tabellaria 3943. Most modern 
scholarship  following the published heading Itinerarium Prouinciarum  renders the title in the 
singular. The present study has adopted the plural (thus, Antonine Itineraries) simply because, as we 
shall demonstrate, there is no evidence to suggest that the individual journeys should be read together 
as a single corpus.
9 Itin. Ant. 200.13.
10 See Chevallier, Roman Roads, 534 and Salway, Travel, Itineraria and Tabellaria, 27; the use 
of oblique cases is discussed most extensively in C. Pallu de Lessert  Syntaxe des routiers Romains 
et les dformations des noms de lieux dans lAfrique Romain, MSNAF, Series 7, Vol. 5 (19045), 
11538 and J. Heurgon La fixation des noms de lieux en latin daprs les itinraires routiers, Revue de 
philologie, de littrature et dhistoire anciennes, Series 3, Vol. 26 (1952) 16978.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 82
the itineraries  mostly those in Italy, but also in several of those in Africa  the nature 
of the stopping point is also specified. Thus, the places in the itinerary are sometimes 
designated as ciuitas, vicus11, colonia12 or municipium13. Occasionally other topographic 
designations will appear: there are examples of bridges (pontes), forts (castella) fortified 
encampments (castra) and villas scattered throughout the various journeys14.
A further designation  which appears infrequently in the Antonine Itineraries 
but much more so in the Bordeaux Itinerary  is the mansio, which refers, specifically, 
to a non-urban stopping-point along the route15. Unlike the various cities and towns, 
the mansiones  which were a part of the built infrastructure maintained by the cursus 
publicus16  appear to be the one feature that existed solely for the convenience of the 
traveller; for this reason, they may serve as a reminder that the itineraries were practical 
documents, not merely records of distances. We should note, however, that these des-
ignations do not appear in all, or even in the majority of the journeys: in the interest of 
presenting the information as efficiently as possible, we are most often presented with 
little more than a place name.
While the itineraries feature numerous words denoting constructed locations  
from as large as a city to as small as a single building  we may note the absence of those 
natural topographic features that were so integral to the literary geographies and their 
cartographic representations. Only a handful of mountains appear over the course of 
the various journeys17; rivers, likewise do not appear with great frequency, and when 
they do, it is presumably to alert the traveller that there is no bridge to cross18. Unlike the 
11 Vicus, meaning literally a row of houses rather than any kind of established urban centre, 
appears notably in the journey from Trier to Agrippina (372.3373.5) where all of the stopping-
points are listed as vicus.
12 Coloniae, as discussed in chapter two, were settlements founded by the state, often to house 
veterans. In the itineraries, the majority of the coloniae appear in the African section (Itin. Ant. 2.1
78.3). See, Arnaud, LItinraire dAntonin, 35 and Salway, Travel, Itineraria and Tabellaria 41.
13 Municipium refers to a town under Roman rule, but governed by its own laws. Like the colo-
niae, the municipia appears almost exclusively in the African itineraries, with the exception of one 
stopping-point in Pannonia, which is simply listed as Municipio (Itin. Ant. 134.1).
14 While the villas are concentrated around Itin. Ant. 59.463.2, the other items appear with 
greater regularity.
15 Arnaud, LItinraire dAntonin, 36 has demonstrated that mansio and vicus may have been 
used synonymously.
16 Jones, LRE, 8312; Kolb in Adams and Laurence, Travel and Geography, 97.
17 The mountains mentioned are Aureus (132.23, 243.6), Brisiacus (239.1, 252.3, 350.1), Celius 
(250.7), Seleucus (357.8) and Mariorum (432.4).
18 Rivers in the Italian section are designated fluuius (cf. Itin. Ant. 103.1, 105.5 (=110.7), 106.1,), 
whereas in Africa and Hispania, they are referred to as flumen (cf. 11.6, 12.4, 13.3 in Africa; 418.2, 
446.10 in Hispania). The Nile (164.1) is sufficently well known to require no designation other than 
its name.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 83
literary accounts of Strabo or Pliny, the Antonine Itineraries offer a vision of the world 
where the constructed elements are the only reference points worth mentioning.
There is, of course, one element from the constructed world that is not mentioned 
anywhere in the itineraries, but which provides the greatest reference point of all; that 
is, the road network itself19. Even if we cannot precisely reconcile all of the journeys 
to known roads, we must nonetheless concede that it is the idea of the fixed path that 
provides the necessary connection between the places listed in the itineraries and the 
physical spaces being traversed. The efficient presentation of the itineraries depends 
completely on the guidance of the roads. Not only did the roads provide a physical 
reference for travel, but they also provided a foundation for the distances given in the 
itineraries. For the most part, distances are presented in milia passuum  abbreviated in 
the manuscripts as mp or mpm20  which is, of course, the standard Roman mile. In fact, 
the word passus refers to a stride  that is, two full steps (gradi) or five feet (pedes)21  and 
thus milia passuum is simply one thousand strides. Although the units of measurement 
contain etymological echoes of their pedestrian origins, by the time of the itineraries, 
both the pes and the milia passuum would, in fact, have represented a fixed distance22.
Miles, however, are not the only unit used in the itineraries. In a few of the jour-
neys through Gallia or Germania, the distances are given in leagues (leugae), which 
were an officially recognised unit of measurement equal to roughly one-and-a-half 
Roman miles23. Where distances are given in leagues, they often appear in tandem 
19 There are numerous regional studies which attempt to map the itineraries to the surviving 
material evidence; see, for instance: W.B. Harris The Roman Roads of Morocco, GJ, Vol. 10, No. 
3 (1897), 300303; R. D. Oldham The Antonine Itinerary of the Aurelian Road between Aix and 
Arles, GJ, Vol. 72, No. 1 (1928), 5860; Rivet and Jackson, British Section, 3967; N.G.L. Hammond 
The Western Part of the via Egnatia, JRS, Vol. 64 (1974), 18594; W. Rodwell Milestones, Civic 
Territories and the Antonine Itinerary, Britannia, Vol. 6 (1975), 76101. For a more extensive bibli-
ography, see Chevallier, Roman Roads, 23233.
20 In the edition of Parthey and Pinder  the standard edition for some eighty years  mpm 
is expanded to milia plus minus suggesting that the distances given are somehow imprecise; this 
reading is adopted in Oldham, Aurelian Road, 58, who claims that the interpretation is generally 
accepted. It is apparent, however, that this reading  which does appear in some of the manuscripts  
represents a misunderstanding of the itinerary format on the part of a much later copyist.
21 For a contemporary account of Roman units of measurement, see Balbus Expositio (in CAR: 
L 94 = C 206.11).
22 The standard Roman foot is thought to have been 11.65 inches, thus 5,000 Roman feet (i.e. 
one Roman mile) would be equivalent to 4,854 feet; see the opening paragraphs of R.P. Duncan-
Jones Length-Units in Roman Town Planning: The Pes Monetalis and the Pes Drusianus, Britannia, 
Vol. 11 (1980), 12733.
23 Confirming the later assertion of Isidore that our road distances are given in miles [...] those 
in Gallia are given in leagues (mensurum viarum nos miliaria dicimus [...] Galli leugas). Etymologiae 
XV.16.1. The league is defined by Isidore as 1,500 passus (leuga finitur passibus mille quingentis. 
Etymologiae XV.16.1); see also the definition given by Ammianus: to the barbarian camp it was 
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 84
with their equivalent distances in milia passuum24; however, in two of the journeys  
both involving Trier  the distances are given in leagues only25. There is evidence to 
suggest that in some parts of Gallia, there were milestones that gave distances only 
in leagues26; thus, the information preserved in the itineraries probably reflects the 
distances as taken from the roads themselves.
However, the itineraries cannot be seen as merely an impartial record of the road 
network; the utility of a travellers document is encoded even into the names and dis-
tances that make up each journey. It is rare, for instance, to find distances of fewer 
than twelve miles and, equally, one rarely encounters distances of more than thirty-
two miles; the reason for this is that each line represents a single days travel27. Each 
itinerary is, therefore, not an account of every station along the road, but rather an 
enumeration of the places where the traveller might be able to spend the night.
In the itineraries we find a method of presentation that is both economical and 
practical; by starting from the roads themselves and drawing upon the resources of 
road-related infrastructure  both the milestones, as well as the mansiones of the cursus 
publicus  the itineraries were able to reduce travel instructions to their simplest form. 
There are no potentially confusing topographic markers and no needless descriptions; 
if one simply followed the path, with the itinerary as their guide, one could move 
effortlessly throughout the Roman world.
Although we have a number of examples of the itinerary format from the classical 
world  as well as later texts, like the Ravenna cosmography, which may have been 
based on earlier compilations  there is still no clear idea of how the itineraries were 
put into practical use. In particular, the form and content of the Antonine Itineraries 
have raised numerous questions about how and when the information was compiled, 
how it may have been used, and how it was subsequently transmitted.
fourteen leagues, that is twenty one miles (ad usque vallum barbaricum quarta leuga signabatur et 
decima id est unum et viginti milia passuum. XVI.12.8).
24 For example, the journey from Gunzburg to Strasbourg (Itin. Ant. 250.6252.5) and Lyon to 
Reims (356.1358.4).
25 Reims to Trier (Itin. Ant. 365.7366.4) and Trier to Agrippina (372.3373.5).
26 For instance, Lanne epigraphique (1968) 313, 106.
27 On the speed of road-travel in the Roman world, see L.W. Hunter Ciceros Journey to His 
Province of Cilicia in 51 BC, JRS, Vol. 3, Part 1 (1913), 7397; A.M. Ramsay The Speed of the 
Roman Imperial Post, JRS, Vol. 15 (1925), 6074; C.W.J. Eliot New Evidence for the Speed of the 
Roman Imperial Post, Phoenix, Vol. 9, No. 2 (1955), 7680.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 85
Early in the twentieth century, it was proposed that the itineraries were, in fact, 
copied from a map28; this theory, which has never gained wide acceptance29, is based 
on the assumption that ancient cartography would have featured a depiction of the 
road network, a proposition which  from the evidence discussed in the previous 
chapter  seems less than probable. Even if we accept that the road network in Tabula 
Peutingeriana is contemporary with the pictorial elements, the various textual prob-
lems and temporal discrepancies in the itinerary information suggest that they were 
based upon pre-existing sources.
A more commonly accepted theory is that the Antonine Itineraries represent 
something like an official state record of the road network; there has, however, been 
little agreement as to what kind of record the itineraries may represent. It has been 
suggested, for instance, that the information may be related in some way to the cursus 
publicus, although this is not widely accepted30; it has also been argued that the itiner-
aries were not designed specifically for travel, but rather were records of tax collection 
linked to Diocletians reforms of the annona31.
On the other hand, the itineraries may simply represent records of, or plans for 
imperial travel. There is certainly some literary evidence to suggest that arrangements 
for imperial travel would have been prepared and announced in advance; specifically 
there is a passage in the Historia Augusta  from the Life of Severus Alexander  
where the author discusses how the emperor would issue an edict two months before 
his campaigns, in which the various stopping points and provisioning stations were 
listed in order32. The edict, which was displayed publicly, sounds not dissimilar to 
an itinerary.
Further connections to imperial travel may be found in a close examination of the 
itineraries themselves. One of the longer itineraries  describing a journey from Rome 
to Egypt33  has been convincingly linked to actual travels undertaken by Caracalla 
28 The theory was proposed by W. Kubitschek in Realencylopdie Vol. IX (s.v. Itinerarien).
29 See, for instance, G.H. Wheeler Textual Errors in the Itinerary of Antoninus, EHR, Vol. 35, 
No. 139 (1920), 37782 and Rivet and Jackson, British Section, 37.
30 Rivet and Jackson, British Section, 36, and Salway, Travel, Itineraria and Tabellaria, 36.
31 See van Berchem, LAnnone Militaire, 16681; Reed, Pattern and Purpose, 24447.
32 itinerum autem dies publice proponebantur, ita ut edictum penderet ante menses duos [...] deinde 
per ordinem mansiones, deinde stativae, deinde ubi annona esset accipienda, et id quidem eo usque qua-
mdiu ad fines barbaricos veniretur. HA Sev. Alex. 45.2
33 Itin. Ant. 123.8162.4.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 86
at the beginning of the third century AD34. However, the presence of a single imperial 
journey within the collection should not necessarily lead us to the conclusion that 
the collection itself was assembled for a single emperor35. Indeed, if we attempt to 
date the itineraries on internal evidence we quickly find that the temporal inconsist-
encies between various journeys make it very difficult to establish consistent dating 
for the compilation as a whole. Caracallas journey from Rome to Egypt would have 
taken place in AD 21415; however, some of the earliest material  collected in the 
maritime section of itineraries36  may predate Caracallas journey by over a century37. 
Furthermore, the appearance of Diocletianopolis in one itinerary would suggest that 
some of the material originated after AD 28638.
The nature of the manuscript tradition is unable to shed further light on the 
origins of the compilation. Although the itineraries exist in numerous manuscript 
copies, all of them seem to derive from a single exemplar in the Codex Spirensis, a 
now-lost ninth-century manuscript that contained, among other works, the Notitia 
Dignitatum, the cosmography of Aethicus, and Dicuils Liber de Mensura39. While we 
should not doubt that the material itself is of classical origin, we cannot say with any 
certainty that the arrangement is a reflection of how the material would have existed 
in the Roman world.
Even though the information in the Antonine Itineraries is presented with rea-
sonable consistency, there is, as we have already seen, ample evidence to suggest that 
the individual journeys represent material collated from various sources. The consist-
ent use of flumen for river in some itineraries, and fluuius in others, might imply the 
34 See van Berchem, LAnnone Militaire, 17275; additional evidence is presented and discussed 
in R. Mouterde Une ddicace dApame de Syrie  lapproche de Caracalla et lltinerarium Antonini, 
CRAI, Vol. 96, No. 3 (1952), 355363, and D. van Berchem Litinraire Antonin et le voyage en 
Orient de Caracalla (214-215), CRAI, Vol. 117, No. 1 (1973), 12326.
35 Reed, Pattern and Purpose, 23132, points out the dangers of reading too much into the 
imperial title of the collection.
36 Specifically, the maritime journey from Rome to Arles, Itin. Ant. 497.9508.2.
37 On the dating of this section, see R. Lugand Note sur litinraire maritime de Rome  Arles, 
Mlanges darchologie et dhistoire, Vol. 43 (1926). 12439.
38 At Itin. Ant. 330.6. See Rivet and Jackson, British Section, 37 and Arnaud, LItinraire 
dAntonin, 41.
39 The manuscripts are enumerated in Parthey and Pinder, xxiixxxiv. On the Codex Spirensis, 
see E.A. Thompson A Roman Reformer and Inventor (Oxford, 1952), 617. On the later copies of 
the Spirensis, see O. Seeck Zur Kritik der Notitia Dignitatum, Hermes, Vol. 9, No. 2 (1875), 217
242; E.T. Merrill The Bodleian MS of the Notitia, CP, Vol. 3, No. 2 (1908), 190195; Bieler, Text 
Tradition of Dicuil, 59.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 87
hand of different authors or editors40. Likewise, the fact that some itineraries preserve 
administrative distinctions between civitas, vicus and municipium, while others do not, 
might also suggest the presence of a diverse and unconnected pool of source material.
We must, therefore, view the Antonine Itineraries as a compilation of disparate 
journeys drawn from equally disparate records; any consistency in the overall presenta-
tion should be understood as evidence not for a common source, but rather for the 
normalising hand of an editor. Furthermore, while we may propose the end of the 
third century as the earliest possible date for the compilation, we should not discount 
the possibility that the itineraries were ordered into a single work in the first half of the 
fourth century, or perhaps even later41. 
If the source material for the Antonine Itineraries was not originally intended as 
part of a single coherent work, we may start to question whether or not they constitute 
any kind of official record or, indeed, if they are even as imperial as the title would lead 
us to believe42. While certain of the individual journeys may represent plans for imperial 
travel, or routes used by the cursus publicus, the surviving text is most probably neither an 
official route-book, nor a record of all possible travel on the road network. Rather, the 
text that has come down to us with the title Itinerarium Antonini may, in fact, be little 
more than a series of unrelated journeys assembled from publicly available sources.
It is not, then, the Antonine Itineraries themselves, but rather their hypothetical 
sources that are of most interest to us. Specifically we need to determine if the written 
itineraries gathered by our compiler actually began life as written documents, or if they 
were drawn from some other source. If we can arrive at an idea of how the surviving 
itineraries took shape  and on what sources they may have been based  we may, in 
turn, be able to reach some conclusions about how the road network in particular  
and the built environment in general  influenced the Roman perception of space.
We should perhaps begin by proposing that most of the itineraries, in their initial 
form, were not records of actual travel. They would almost certainly have been used 
for travel, and some of the entries in the Antonine Itineraries can be read as travellers 
40 On the appearance of rivers, see above, n. 18.
41 For suggestions about dates and the process of compilation, see Arnaud, LItinraire dAntonin, 
3349.
42 P. Arnaud  propos dun prtendu itinraire de Caracalla dans lItinraire dAntonin: les 
sources tardives de lItineraire de Rome  Hierasycaminos, BSNAF (1992), 37480; Salway, Travel, 
Itineraria and Tabellaria, 47.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 88
annotations. There is, however, enough evidence to suggest that the information was 
probably copied from pre-existing source material. The use of place designations  such 
as civitas, vicus and municipium  in some of the African itineraries might imply an offi-
cial record; we can hardly expect the traveller to have been aware of the political status 
of every town he passed through. Similarly, the presence of mansiones in stretches where 
there are no towns, seems like precisely the kind of information that the traveller would 
want to be aware of in advance. Finally, although there were certainly milestones along 
the roads, the distances in the itineraries probably represent official distances recorded 
during the building process, rather than the tabulation of a traveller.
Where, then, did the itineraries come from? The earliest surviving example of 
the Roman itinerary format comes not from a written document, but rather from the 
material record: a series of four silver goblets  known as the Vicarello goblets  were 
found near the site of Aquae Apollinares on Lake Bracciano, about twenty-five miles 
north-west of Rome43. The goblets are notable not only for their resemblance to a mile-
stone, but also for the fact that, inscribed onto the sides there is an itinerary detailing 
the journey from Cadiz to Rome44.
Although the four goblets cover the same basic journey, there are enough important 
textual differences between them to suggest that they represent different stages in the 
both the evolution of the road network and the development of imperial urban centres. 
For instance, the presence of Augusta Taurinorum in Goblet IV  replacing Taurini in 
the earlier goblets  suggests that the final goblet was updated to reflect the new colo-
nial status conferred upon the town during the reign of Augustus45. Furthermore, the 
line IN ALPE COTTIA in the fourth goblet has been linked to the construction of a road 
through the mountains, built during the latter years of the Augustan period46.
We may also note that the itinerary in the fourth goblet  unlike the previous three 
 is broken into smaller segments. Instead of a simple journey from Cadiz to Rome, we 
are presented with the distances from Cadiz to Seville, Seville to Cordoba, Cordoba to 
43 On the goblets see J. Heurgon La Date des Gobelets de Vicarello, REA, Vol. 54 (1952), 3950; 
see also Chevallier, Roman Roads, 4750.
44 The itineraries themselves have been published as CIL XI 32814; a reproduction of 
Goblet I and a drawing of Goblet IV may be found in Heurgon, Gobelets, facing 42 and facing 44, 
respectively.
45 Goblet IV = CIL XI 3284. Augusta Taurinorum at Col. 3.23. See Heurgon, Gobelets, 44.
46 Heurgon, Gobelets, 45. The construction of the road is described in Ammianus Marcellinus 
XV.10.2.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 89
Tarragona, Tarragona to Narbonne, Narbonne to Turin, and finally onward to Rome. 
Although these breaks do not change the essential nature of the journey, they certainly 
serve to highlight the major regional centres; Cordoba, Tarragona and Narbonne 
would have been provincial capitals during the time of Augustus.
The goblets may, thus, be considered artefacts from the early days of the impe-
rial road network: the first three are the earliest, probably dating from the beginning 
of Augustuss reign, while the fourth can be dated to the final years of Augustus or 
the first years of Tiberius47. The changes to the itinerary text over the span of around 
fifty years may be seen to reflect the dynamic nature of imperial organisation and the 
continual improvements being made to the built infrastructure of the Roman world. 
These changes also suggest a definite connection between the itinerary format and 
the road network that it sought to represent: in order to remain useful, the itinerary 
needed to be updated so that it would reflect the reality on the ground.
47 Heurgon, Gobelets 445; Chevallier, Roman Roads, 49.
Fig. 2.1 Itinerary from Cadiz to Rome (CIL XI 3282)
I m ag e  r e m ov e d  f ro m  d i g i ta l  v e r s i o n
d u e  to  p ot e n t i a l  c o p y r i g h t  i s s u e s .
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 90
Certainly, the goblets provide an intriguing model of how itineraries may have 
been used in the process of travel. Instead of the potential traveller having to copy 
down the itinerary, the information would have been incorporated into a practical 
and portable artefact. However, the fact that we have several different versions of the 
artefact reflecting different stages in the development of the journey might suggest 
that that the itinerary itself was based on a more publicly visible source.
It has been suggested, for instance that the Vicarello goblets may have been based 
on an actual monument located in Cadiz, perhaps a regional variant of the miliarium 
aureum in Rome48; if the monument was altered to reflect changes in the route to 
Rome, these alterations might thus be reproduced in the goblets. It has been suggested, 
more generally, that we look to the epigraphic record for the source of the itineraries49. 
However, apart from the goblets, as well as a few isolated inscriptions from Gaul, we 
have not yet uncovered enough examples of epigraphic itineraries to demonstrate that 
they were a widespread phenomenon.
A series of three stone fragments discovered in Autun have been used to suggest 
the existence of an itinerary monument50. The monument itself is thought to have 
been rectangular and around ten feet in height; on each side there would have been a 
list of names and distances in milia passuum51. One of the fragments seems to describe 
a route north-west toward Auxerre; however, one face of the monument is claimed to 
have contained distances between Bologna and Parma along the Via Aemilia52. Given 
the proposed size of the monument, it is not impossible that one face of the itinerary 
would  like the Vicarello goblets  have described the route to Rome.
More recently, the discovery of a monument from Patara, on the Lycian coast, 
has strengthened the argument for epigraphic itineraries53. The monument  which 
was some eighteen feet in height and which is thought to have formed the base for an 
equestrian statue  dates to the reign of Claudius, and features itinerary descriptions 
48 Chevallier, Roman Roads, 48; Salway, Travel, Itineraria and Tabellaria, 55. On the miliarium 
aureum see Dio LIV.8.4, Plutartch Galba XXIV.4; Platner and Ashby, Topographical Dictionary, 342.
49 The argument is put forward, most persuasively, in Salway, Travel, Itineraria and Tabellaria, 
4860.
50 CIL XIII 2681ac.
51 On the monument, see E. Thvenot Les Voies Romaines de la Cit des duens (Brussels, 1969), 59.
52 The inscription itself (CIL XIII 2681a) was described in a letter of 1706, but is now lost. For a 
reconstruction based on other itineraries, see Thvenot, Voies Romaines, 6062.
53 Patara. The stadiasmos provinciae Lyciae, SEG 44, 1205. The monument has been published, 
in full, in F. Isik (et al.) Miliarium Lyciae: Das Wegweisermonument von Patara (2001), although it 
has, thus far, not been possible to consult this volume.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 91
for three roads leading out of Patara54. The format is instantly recognisable, although 
unlike our other itineraries, the place names appear in Greek, and the measurements 
are given in stades; from this we may suggest that the information was probably based 
on extant roads and local sources, and are not a record of any new Roman construction 
projects55. Furthermore, the itineraries themselves are relatively localised, with none 
of the journeys extending very far beyond the Lycian boundaries. It has even been 
suggested that the itineraries are merely an incidental feature of a monument whose 
primary aim is to celebrate the emperor Claudius56.
Nonetheless, the idea of public monuments as the source for itineraries is attrac-
tive, if somewhat problematic. We may, perhaps, explain their absence from the 
material record in the same way that we explain the lack of surveyors formae: because 
the information presented was subject to frequent change, the displays themselves 
may have been viewed as highly disposable. Once the information on a stone itinerary 
became obsolete, it may  as in the case of the Autun and Patara monuments  have 
found itself put to new use as building material. It is also possible  even though we 
have no surviving examples  that stone itineraries were a rarity and that they were 
more commonly displayed on tablets of bronze; as we have discussed in the previous 
chapter, bronze seems to have been an ideal material for the preservation of semi-
permanent records57.
The problem with epigraphic itineraries is not, however, their scarcity within the 
material record, but rather the scope of their possible coverage. In over three thousand 
lines of text, the Antonine Itineraries are still unable to provide a complete picture of the 
extant road network; thus, we could not realistically expect local itinerary inscriptions 
to contain information about anything beyond the surrounding region or province. A 
group of itineraries in one provincial capital might contain information on how to get 
to notable towns in the region, to the capitals of neighbouring provinces, and perhaps 
even all the way to Rome; however it seems improbable that a monument in Autun 
would have contained instructions on how to get to Caesarea in Palestine.
54 On the text of the monument, see Salway, Travel, Itineraria and Tabellaria, 568, and C.P 
Jones The Claudian Monument at Patara, ZPE, Vol. 137 (2001), 16168, who focuses primarily on 
the non-itinerary text of the inscription.
55 Salway, Travel, Itineraria and Tabellaria, 58.
56 Jones, Claudian Monument, 168.
57 See the discussion of tabulae aeris in chapter one, 2933.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 92
It may be that major administrative centres would have contained monuments 
 like our hypothetical Cadiz monument  which gave the directions to Rome. Such 
monuments, however, may not have been strictly necessary. If one could get from 
Cadiz to Cordoba on the strength of regional information displayed in Cadiz, they 
would then be able to obtain the necessary information for their onward journey by 
consulting inscriptions in Cordoba. Epigraphic itineraries would, thus, have provided 
a public record for the traveller which would allow them to piece together their jour-
ney one stage at a time. Of course, the problem with this modular approach to travel 
is that it raises the question of how the traveller was able to determine where he was 
going within the larger space of the empire.
the mechanics of navigation II: a picture of the world
So long as there is a path to follow, the act of travelling does not necessarily require 
a mental image of the world: one would not, for instance, have needed to know the 
shape of Italy in order to travel from Rome to Ravenna. The presence of a road net-
work and the availability of an itinerary would have made it possible to get from place 
to place with relative ease. If, however, the available itineraries were reasonably local in 
scope, we may wonder how the Roman traveller would have known which sequence of 
roads and towns would lead him to more distant destinations.
In the past it has been assumed that the Roman traveller would have had access 
to some form of road map  perhaps not unlike the Tabula Peutingeriana  that 
would guide them from place to place; more recently, proponents of the hodological 
approach have suggested that all navigation was based entirely upon route books like 
the Antonine Itineraries. However, if the cartographic displays of the time did not 
feature roads and the individual itineraries were not, for the most part, collected into 
a single volume, we are still faced with the problem of explaining long-distance naviga-
tion in the Roman world.
There is, perhaps, a solution that is neither dependent on cartography nor as 
extreme as the hodological approach: essentially we should not suppose that the path-
based system of navigation would have precluded a rough geographical understanding 
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 93
of the larger world. Indeed, we should imagine that there was a common foundation 
of geographic knowledge  that is, a reasonably detailed mental picture of the peoples, 
lands and cities that, together, formed the inhabited world  which would have made 
it easy to travel from place to place using only localised itineraries.
This notion of the oikoumene as a geographical space would have come prima-
rily from literary works; the literature, in turn, would have formed the basis for a 
commonly held cultural knowledge. Vitruvius, for instance, was able to discuss how 
peoples physical and mental characteristics were, to some extent, determined by the 
climate in which they lived. According to Vitruvius, the damp air and cold tempera-
tures in the north made the people who lived there larger of build and deeper of voice; 
the cold also had a dulling effect on their intellect but, on the plus side, tended to make 
them braver in battle58. The people who lived in the south, on the other hand, were 
smaller, darker, had higher voices and were generally more quick-witted, although they 
were also more cowardly in battle59. His conclusion, unsurprisingly, is that the people 
of Italy, by virtue of their placement within the centre of this spectrum, struck an ideal 
balance between the two extremes60.
While this view was undoubtedly informed by no small amount of proto-
Imperial propaganda  Vitruvius was, after all, writing in the thirties BC  there is 
also a definite geographic awareness: Vitruvius is able to demonstrate a knowledge 
of Romes position within the vertical space of the world. He may have had his sus-
picions confirmed by consulting one of the painted chorographic displays discussed 
in the previous chapter, but the knowledge itself would have probably come from a 
tradition of geographic literature.
It is difficult to determine the nature and extent of geographical education in the 
Roman world at the beginning of the imperial period61. Certainly geography was not 
considered an essential component of an orators education: Cicero does not mention 
58 Vitruvius VI.1.3 and 9.
59 Vitruvius VI.1.4.
60 cum ergo haec ita sint ab natura rerum in mundo conlocata et omnes nationes inmoderatis 
mixtionibus disparatae,verosnamquetemperatissimae ad utramque partem et corporum membris ani-
morumque vigoribus pro fortitudine stin Italiagentes. Vitruvius VI.1.1011.
61 For an overview of early imperial education, see: J.B. Poynton Roman Education, Greece & 
Rome, Vol. 4, No. 10 (1934), 1 12; H.I. Marrou A History of Education in Antiquity (London, 1956), 
26591; J.J. Eyre Roman Education in the Late Republic and Early Empire, Greece & Rome, Vol. 10, 
No. 1 (1963), 47 59.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 94
geography anywhere in his De Oratore, and Quintilian, in his survey of disciplines to 
be studied alongside literature, directs his attention to geometry and music62. Rather, 
geography appears to have been more important to the historian: Strabo  whom, we 
should remember, was an historian himself63  tells us that both Polybius and Ephorus 
wrote geographical chapters as part of their historical works64. Several hundred years 
later, Ammianus Marcellinus considered geography to be an essential part of the histori-
cal narrative, as we can tell from the number of geographical digressions in his work65.
We should not imagine that the Roman citizen of average education would have 
studied geographers like Eratosthenes or Strabo, at least not directly; indeed, while 
the basic teachings of Eratosthenes appears to have been known in the Latin world66, 
there is little evidence that Strabo was widely read in the centuries following his death. 
However, even if geography was not taught as a subject unto itself, the student would 
have nonetheless acquired a certain amount of geographical knowledge in the course 
of his education.
The primary source of this knowledge may well have been Homer; according to 
Quintilian, it was a common (and commendable) practice to start children on Homer 
and Virgil67. Certainly Homers geographic world-view is well attested in Strabo, and 
 in the following section of this chapter  we will see how the poet may have influ-
enced the geographic perceptions of Pausanias and Philostratus. It is also possible that 
a literary education would have involved, among other things, the study of specifically 
geographic poems: there were, as we noted in the previous chapter, a number of verse 
descriptions of the world available in the first century BC, including those of Alexander 
of Ephesus and Varro Atacinus68.
While neither of those poems have survived, we do possess two literary works 
that may have been associated with geographical education. The first  in fact, a prose 
62 Quintilian Inst. Or. I.10.
63 Strabo I.1.2223; his historical volumes have not survived.
64 Strabo VIII.1.1.
65 On the geographic knowledge of Ammianus, see L. Dillemann Ammien Marcellin et les 
pays de lEuphrate et du Tigre, Syria, Vol. 38, Fasc. 1/2 (1961), 87158; G.A. Sundwall Ammianus 
Geographicus, AJP, Vol. 117, No. 4 (1996), 619643; J.W. Drijvers Ammianus Marcellinus on the 
Geography of the Pontus Euxinus, Histos, Vol. 2 (1998), 26878.
66 Eratosthenes, as we have seen, is mentioned in Varro De Re Rust. I.2, and was also named as a 
source by Pliny (esp. Hist. Nat. Books V and VI).
67 Ideoque optime institutum est ut ab Homero atque Vergilio lectio inciperet. Quintilian Inst. Or. 
I.8.5.
68 See chapter one, 39.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 95
work  is the three volume De Chorographia of Pomponius Mela69. We know virtually 
nothing about the author, save for the few hints provided by the text itself: we know 
that he was from Tingentera in Hispania Baetica, and that he lived in the first half of 
the first century AD70. The treatise itself was probably composed during the reign of 
Claudius; the date most commonly proposed is AD 4471.
Compared to the seventeen volumes of Strabo, or even to the extensive geo-
graphical sections of Plinys Natural History, Melas work is notable for its brevity. The 
three books  which do not, incidentally, correspond to the three continents  take us 
on what is, by the authors own admission, a fairly superficial tour of the oikoumene72. 
Staring from the pillars of Hercules, he moves anti-clockwise around the provinces of 
the Mediterranean and then, arriving back at the pillars, he proceeds to take us on a 
clockwise journey around the outside edge of the inhabited world73.
Pomponius Mela begins his work with a brief description of the structure of the 
world and the way in which the various lands fit together to form the oikoumene; he then 
goes through a second time and gives a more detailed description of each region. Unlike 
Strabo or Pliny, Melas text is completely free of the mathematical debates that had been 
simmering since the time of Eratosthenes74. Instead, Melas descriptions focus on the 
contents of the region itself; apart from the occasional historical or ethnographic note, 
the text is limited to such obvious topographic features as rivers, mountains and cities.
Melas descriptions are notable not only for their brevity but also for their coastal 
focus: almost all of the cities and towns listed by Mela are near the sea or located along a 
river75. Indeed, there are few attempts to define the boundaries of any given region with 
69 There have been several editions in recent years, including those of P. Parroni (Pomponii melae 
de chorographia libri tres (Rome, 1984)) and the Bud edition of A. Silberman (Chorographie (Paris, 
1988)) with translation and commentary. An english translation (without the Latin text) has been 
published in F.E. Romer Pomponius Melas Description of the World (Ann Arbor, 1998). We cannot be 
completely certain of the title: De Chorographia appears in the earliest MS (Vat. Lat. 4929); see C.W. 
Barlow Codex Vaticanus Latinus 4929, MAAR, Vol. 15 (1938), 87124. The title, however, appears 
corrupted (as cosmographia) in later MSS; see Silberman, xiv. The work was entited The Cosmography 
when first published in English in 1591, however by the eighteenth century, many editions referred 
to it as De Situ Orbis.
70 Mela Choro. II.96. On Melas life, see R. Batty Melas Phoenician Geography, JRS, Vol. 90 
(2000), 7094.
71 On the dating of the text, see Silberman, Chorographie, ixxiii.
72 Mela Choro I.1
73 Mela Choro I.2.
74 See A. Silberman Le premier ouvrage latin de gographie: la Chorographie de Pomponius 
Mla et ses sources grecques, Klio, Vol. 71 No. 2 (1989), 57181.
75 Silberman Le premier ouvrage, 57475, has been suggested that a Greek periplus (maritime 
itinerary) may have been one of Melas principal sources.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 96
reference to topographic features and, in fact, Mela rarely bothers to take us inland at 
all. As a geographical text which aims to describe the complexity of the inhabited world, 
De Chorographia is undeniably deficient; however, as a reduction of the oikoumene into 
a sequential and rigorously linear form, it can only be described as a success.
Pomponius Mela has not received especially kind treatment in the twentieth 
century: even his editors and translators tend to disparage his work, claiming that his 
geographical knowledge is poor and that his text represents the usual fate of Greek 
learning in Latin hands76. Such criticisms, however, are only valid if we believe that 
Mela was writing a scholarly geography in the mould of Eratosthenes. However, there 
is little to indicate that this was Melas aim: indeed, the elements in his text which are 
often cited as shortcomings  the failure to include distances or to name his sources  
may be taken as evidence that Mela was not attempting to work within the established 
parameters of the geographical genre.
Instead, we should consider the possibility that Melas text was designed as an edu-
cational device77. The structure of the work  which goes through everything once, then 
retraces its steps in greater detail  seems designed for easy memorisation. Mela even 
hints at the educational tedium of learning geography in his opening line: he describes 
it as a difficult task, and one which offers little room for eloquence, for it is composed, 
for the most part, of the names of peoples and places, and also of their complex arrange-
ment78. There would, indeed, have been no place for extraneous distances or ancient 
metrological disputes in a simplified work that was designed to be committed to 
memory. Instead, Melas text proceeds through the names and arrangements of places in 
order to build, in the mind of a young student, a mental image of the worlds contents.
Unfortunately we have no real idea of how Melas text may have been used at the 
time it was written, or who his audience may have been. However, we do know that 
Mela  along with the even more abbreviated geographical work of Julius Solinus  was 
used for educational purposes throughout the Medieval period; indeed Melas Latin 
text, with updated maps, could even still be found in use as a geographical textbook in 
76 It is bad work, concerned only to show how cleverly he can write up an unreadable subject 
says Thomson, Ancient Geography, 226; for Silberman, Le premier ouvrage, 57172, Melas text is 
proof of Strabos famous criticism that the Romans were imitators of the Greeks who added little to 
the learning (Strabo III.4.19).
77 See Silberman, Chorographie, xxvii, although see also the criticism of this view in Batty, Melas 
Phoenician Geography, 89.
78 [...] impeditum opus et facundiae minime capax, constat enim fere gentium locorumque nomini-
bus et eorum perplexo satis ordine. Mela Choro. I.1.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 97
the late eighteenth century79. It would not be unreasonable to suggest that Melas work 
could have been put to educational use not long after its composition.
Our other surviving geographical text from the imperial period that may have been 
put to educational use is the Orbis descriptio of Dionysius Periegetes80. The text, con-
sisting of just under 1,200 lines of hexameter, was composed in Alexandria in the time 
of Hadrian, probably before AD 13081. In recent times, Dionysius has been criticised 
for his poor command of geographical knowledge82; however, much like Pomponius 
Mela, the goal of Dionysius was not the creation of a geographical work, but rather a 
literary work whose subject happened to be the disposition of the oikoumene83.
The structure of the Orbis descriptio is similar to that of Melas Chorographia: 
Dionysius begins with a description of the three continents, followed by a more 
detailed description of the inner circle of the Mediterranean and the outer circle of the 
ocean. Once he has established the basic layout, he provides us with more detail about 
the lands that make up the various continents, starting with Africa, moving to Europe 
and concluding with a long, and perhaps somewhat fanciful section on Asia.
Like Mela, Dionysius also makes explicit the aim of his work: however, while 
Melas focus is on presenting the names of peoples and places in a way that is not 
wholly uninteresting, Dionysius is drawing upon the traditions of epic poetry in order 
to construct an image of the world in the mind of his audience: after taking us on the 
preliminary tour of the oikoumene, he tells us that he will describe the shape of the 
land, so that even though we have not seen it, we will have a clear conception84.
79 No fewer than five editions of Pomponius Mela were produced at Eton between 1761 and 
1797; its use as a geographical text is attested in H.C.M. Lyte A History of Eton College 14401875 
(London, 1875), 317.
80 The stardard edition is still Mllers in GGM2, 104176; there are also two more recent, if 
less widely available editions:    .   ed. I.O. 
Tsavari (Ioannina, 1990); and Dionysios von Alexandria: Das Lied von der Welt ed. K. Brodersen 
(Hildesheim, 1994). A translation has been published in C. Jacob La Description de la terre habite de 
Denys dAlexandrie, ou, la leon de gographie (Paris, 1990).
81 Pharos appears in an acrostic at lines 112134 and Hadrian appears at lines 513532; for 
a brief discussion of the dating, see E.L. Bowie Denys dAlexandrie: un pote Grec dans lempire 
Romain, REA, Vol. 106, No. 1 (2004), 17785.
82 Thomson, Ancient Geography, 22829, describes the work as excruciating pseudo-epic verse 
with little value; M.L. West Notes on Dionysius Periegetes, CQ, Vol. 42, No. 2 (1992), 56869, 
describes the poet as a rotten geographer but a competent versifier.
83 On the poetic lineage of Dionysius, see R. Hunter The Periegesis of Dionysius and the 
Traditions of Hellenistic Poetry, REA, Vol. 106, No. 1 (2004), 21731.
84       ,       . 
Orb. Descr. 1701.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 98
We cannot be sure of Dionysiuss contemporary audience, although it is often 
assumed that he was writing for the classroom85. It is clear, however, that in the cen-
turies immediately following its composition, the poem found favour in the Roman 
world as an educational work: there are two surviving Latin translations from antiq-
uity, one by Rufus Festus Avienus from the fourth century, and another by Priscian 
from the sixth86. The work also appears to have flourished in the Byzantine world: 
even as late as the twelfth century it was sufficiently well known to form the basis for 
an exhaustive commentary by Eustathius of Thessalonica87.
Neither Pomponius Mela nor Dionysius Periegetes have written works rigorous 
enough to be considered geographies in the tradition of Eratosthenes; however, there 
is also no evidence to suggest that this was their intent and we should not, therefore, 
judge them according to geographical standards. Instead we should understand these 
texts as systematic presentations of the countries, cities and peoples that made up the 
inhabited world, simplified to facilitate memorisation. Furthermore, we may suggest 
that these essentially literary texts would have served to elaborate on the image of the 
world found in more traditional works, like Homer. The student in antiquity may  as 
Eumenius suggests88  have been able to consult a chorographical panel depicting the 
various nations and cities; this image, however, would have been largely meaningless 
without the mental image and knowledge of place names that had already been created 
from a thorough study of literature.
The process of land navigation in the Roman world may thus be broken down into two 
distinct layers of understanding. First, there was a knowledge of the larger oikoumene, 
which would have come primarily from literature; secondly, there was a knowledge of 
the path. A mental image of the oikoumene would have made it possible for the travel-
ler to determine roughly where he needed to go, but the information on the ground 
would have made it possible for him to choose the right road.
This mental image of the world would have come not from geographical texts  
which would have certainly been too elaborate for the purposes of standard education 
85 Bunbury, Ancient Geography II, 48090; Thomsen, Ancient Geography, 22829; Dilke, Greek 
and Roman Maps, 14344;
86 Both appear in GGM2; see xxixxxxii.
87 Published in GGM2, 201407.
88 See chapter one, 6061.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 99
 nor even necessarily from cartographic displays; rather it would have come from poetic 
descriptions in literary works, and also from works specifically composed to present the 
world in its most simplified and easily accessible shape. The image created from these 
works would have formed the basis of a common geographical understanding.
Using this received knowledge of the inhabited world as a starting point, the 
Roman traveller would have been able to rely upon the built infrastructure of the 
empire to get from place to place. The roads themselves would have acted as the path 
to follow, a path so fixed and unmistakable that it would have rendered topographic 
directions wholly unnecessary. Rather than having to worry about the vagaries of the 
landscape, the traveller would have moved through the wilderness in the reassuringly 
urban company of the paving stone.
However it was not merely the road and its attendant milestones which provided 
the basis for navigation in the Roman world. Information about the routes to various 
places may have been displayed in urban centres along the road network, making it 
easy for the traveller to choose his path and also to determine how long it would take 
to get from one place to another. The traveller may have copied down this information 
and carried it with him, but he may also have been able to purchase practical artefacts 
onto which the information had been inscribed.
Thus we have a system of moving through and apprehending the world that is 
both hodological and geographical, but where navigation does not rely on any kind of 
cartographic intermediary. It was, in the first instance, the built environment which 
provided the physical reference that, subsequently, allowed the multi-dimensional 
space of the world to be presented in a textual format. By transposing the text of the 
itineraries back onto the roads and milestones, it became possible to situate oneself 
within the larger space of the Roman world.
interpreting the built landscape: three travellers
The itineraries give us some idea of how it would have been possible to move through 
the Roman landscape, but they tell us little about how the landscape was perceived. 
Although there can be little doubt that the road network was used extensively for both 
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 100
personal travel and state transportation, the land itself is rarely a presence in classical 
literature and, for that reason, may be easily overlooked. There have, of course, been 
studies of travel in the ancient world, but they tend to focus on process rather than 
perception89; investigations of trade, on the other hand, will often dwell on the high 
cost of land transportation and the general superiority of maritime logistics.
Our sources for land travel can be curiously silent on the issue of apprehension: 
the surviving itineraries and the laws in the Theodosian code relating to the cursus 
publicus can allow us to reconstruct the systems and conventions that made movement 
through the land possible, but they do not offer much insight into how the land was 
perceived. In the more literary accounts of travel within the Roman world, the process 
is often pushed to the background, or rendered completely transparent; characters are 
able to move from location to location without ever needing to explain the mechanics 
of the journey.
The exception to this may be found in a Satire of Horace which describes a road 
journey from Rome to Brindisi90. Here, Horace places the process of travel at the fore-
front of his description, usually to highlight the tedium or difficulties that face the 
traveller. He mentions the long days on the road and the different stopping-places that 
may have been written down in his itinerary. Although he is more concerned with the 
stomach problems, the bad bread, the drunken sailors and anything else of potential 
comic value, the experience does not come across as wholly negative; on several occa-
sions he mentions the delights of travelling in good company.
Horaces description, however, is unusual; most literary accounts of travel con-
centrate primarily on describing the places visited and do not pay much attention to 
the mundane concerns of moving between them. However, the experience of place 
would still have been determined by constructed elements within the environment. 
Livy, for instance, recounts a tour of Greece undertaken by Aemilius Paulus in 167 BC 
so that he could see for himself sites which were more celebrated than actually seen91; 
from the oracle at Delphi to the Acropolis at Athens, his journey is largely defined by 
the constructed world.
89 On classical travel, see L. Casson Travel in the Ancient World (London, 1974) and J.-M Andr 
and M.-F. Baslez Voyager dans lAntiquit (Paris, 1993).
90 Horace Satires I.5
91 cuius temporis initio ad circumeundam Graeciam visendaque, quae nobilitata fama maiora auri-
bus accepta sunt, quam oculis noscuntur, uti statuit. Livy XLV.27.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 101
Indeed we may mention more briefly the two elements of his journey that are 
not specifically tied to the built environment: there is the Isthmus at Corinth  well 
known from literary texts and easy to appreciate as a natural wonder  and there is 
the city of Sparta which is described as having nothing much to see, but nonetheless 
notable for its institutions and education92. The inclusion of Sparta in Paulus journey 
is curious, for it is the one destination where there is nothing specific to see: the allure 
is, perhaps, the sense of being in a place where great things once happened. For the 
most part, however, the landscape of the past would have been more easily accessible 
through its obvious monuments.
If we examine the accounts of three travellers composed between the second 
and fourth centuries AD, we may start to see more clearly how interpretation of the 
landscape was defined, to a great extent, by the built environment. Our three authors  
Pausanias, Philostratus and an anonymous traveller from Bordeaux  have left us three 
texts with very different aims: Pausanias has written a description of places he visited 
during various tours through Greece, Philostratus has written about the fantastic 
travels undertaken by the itinerant philosopher Apollonius of Tyana, and the anony-
mous traveller has merely kept a record of his journey from Bordeaux to Palestine. 
Despite the marked contrasts of genre and style, there are similarities to be found in 
the approaches to apprehension described by each of our authors. 
At the beginning of the imperial period  which, as we have noted in chapter 
two, was a period of widespread construction  the Mediterranean world would have 
possessed an extensive material record corresponding to places that had grown famous 
through their celebration in literature, or their role in a particular historical event. 
The traveller of antiquity may not have perceived any great distinction between the 
topography of historical events and the topography of poetry and mythology; so long 
as they were able to align the events from their cultural knowledge with a physical 
location, the place could be deemed real.
In all three of our travellers there is an attraction to the past and, specifically, an 
attraction to places in which the past may be clearly perceived. Indeed, our authors 
will often attempt to push the contemporary landscape completely aside, choosing 
instead to evoke a parallel landscape constructed from history and memory. However, 
92 inde Lacedaemonem adit, non operum magnificentia, sed disciplina institutisque memorabilem. 
Livy XLV.28.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 102
as much as they may try to ignore the present in favour of an imagined past, it is ulti-
mately the contemporary built environment that provides the topographic structure 
for their experience of the landscape.
In the second half of the second century AD, an author named Pausanias wrote an 
account of his travels throughout Greece93. His Periegesis, in ten books, not only pro-
vides us with a detailed picture of what existed at the time, but also serves as a literary 
monument to the different layers of memory, mythology and history that may be 
discovered in the built environment94. Indeed, Pausanias does not set out merely to 
describe what he sees, but rather to reveal the wealth of possible narratives hiding in 
the constructed world.
The ten books of the Periegesis were written over a period of several years  the first 
book was probably written after AD 155 while the last may have been composed between 
AD 176 and 18095  but the approach of Pausanias remains consistent throughout; 
although his work may be viewed as a straightforward travellers account, it can also be 
understood as an historical work in which topography, rather than chronology, provides 
the underlying structure. For this reason, a good deal of modern scholarship has tended to 
describe the Periegesis as something like the classical version of a tourists guidebook96.
This assessment is fair only up to a point: Pausanias is certainly interested in dem-
onstrating to his audience why certain locations are worth seeing, and he does so by 
giving continual precedence to the historical details which may not be immediately 
apparent to the casual viewer. However, while many guidebooks present the landscape 
of the past within the context of the present, Pausanias, for the most part, seems intent 
on isolating and describing a topographical layer that exists independently of any 
93 On the various authors named Pausanias and their possible relationship to one another, see A. 
Diller The Authors Named Pausanias, TPAPA, Vol. 86 (1955), 268 79.
94 The standard greek text is Pausaniae Graeciae descriptio in 3 vols. ed. F. Spiro (Leipzig, 
1903); two notable English translations are J.G. Frazer Pausaniass Description of Greece in 6 vols. 
(London, 1898) and Pausanias Description of Greece in 5 vols. trans. W.H.S. Jones (Cambridge, MA., 
19181935).
95 On the dating, see Frazer, Pausaniass Description I, xvxix; C. Habicht Pausanias Guide to 
Ancient Greece (Berkeley, 1985), 812; E.L. Bowie Inspiration and Aspiration: Date, Genre and 
Readership in Alcock et al. (eds) Pausanias: Travel and Memory in Roman Greece (Oxford, 2001), 
2132.
96 See, for instance, Frazer, Pausaniass Description I, xxiv; Casson Travel in the Ancient World, 
292299, whose chapter on Pausanias is entitled Baedeker of the Ancient World; C. Habicht 
An Ancient Baedeker and His Critics: Pausanias Guide to Greece, Proceedings of the American 
Philosophical Society, Vol. 129, No. 2 (1985), 22024; for a critique of this approach, see J. Elsner 
Pausanias: A Greek Pilgrim in the Roman World, Past & Present, No. 135 (1992), 329.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 103
contemporary reality97. His interests lie not in the Roman Greece of his own day, but 
in the Greek Greece of an ancient and unrecoverable era98; fortunately for Pausanias, 
the history of that era has been preserved in the stones, walls, statue bases, temples and 
ruins that, together, form the contemporary built environment.
For Pausanias, the features of the built environment act as the nodes around 
which history and memory are gathered. Every artefact within the visible landscape 
has the potential to trigger at least one narrative aside; the most prominent artefacts 
or places may lead to several pages worth of historical digression. However, while there 
are numerous historical passages of considerable length to be found throughout the 
books of Pausanias, it is rare that he bothers to narrate a story that does not ultimately 
contribute to our ability to interpret the landscape of objects99. Even in his extensive 
history of the Messenians (in book four), he continually refers back to monuments 
and structures that illustrate the narrative.
Chronological history, however, is not the aim of the Periegesis. Instead, Pausanias 
uses the structure of the built environment as a point of departure for his extensive 
knowledge of the Greek past. Thus, the narratives and descriptions that may arise as 
Pausanias works his way down an Athenian street move freely from century to century 
and from historical to mythological. Any definite place within the landscape can act 
as a source: Pausanias is equally able to expand upon a magnificent temple, a statue, or 
sometimes even a simple rock100.
Despite what we may characterise as a preference for the past, the travels of 
Pausanias necessarily take place within the landscape of his own time101. Thus, Pausanias 
is able draw our attention not merely to the great antiquities that define the Greek 
world, but also to more recent additions to the built environment. In his description of 
the sanctuary of Olympian Zeus at Athens, he describes two statues of Hadrian, as well 
97 Pausanias attitude to the past has been much discussed: see K.W. Arafat Pausanias Attitude 
to Antiquities, The Annual of the British School at Athens, Vol. 87 (1992), 387 409; E.L. Bowie Past 
and Present in Pausanias in D. Musti and J. Bingen Pausanias historien: huit exposs suivis de dis-
cussions (Geneva, 1996), 20730; H. Sidebottom Pausanias: Past, Present, and Closure, CQ, New 
Series. Vol. 52, No. 2 (2002), 49499.
98 On Pausanias willful exclusion of the contemporary world, see Habicht Pausanias Guide, 
117140 and Elsner, A Greek Pilgrim, 1720; however, see also the study by K.A. Arafat Pausanias 
Greece: Ancient artists and Roman rulers (Cambridge, 1996), which elaborates on Pausanias attitude 
to the Romans.
99 On Pausanias as historian, see Habicht Pausanias Guide, 95116.
100 See, for instance, his description of the bed of Actaeon, a stone near a spring in IX.2.3.
101 Indeed, Pausanias often uses the phrase in my time; see Habicht Pausanias Guide, 17680.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 104
as several buildings which that emperor built for the city102; elsewhere he talks about 
recent buildings erected by the senator Antoninus103. If he has less to say about these 
monuments, it may simply be that the artefacts themselves have not yet had enough 
time to acquire the historical value of their more ancient counterparts.
The fact that the Periegesis is set within the landscape of the second century AD  
rather than the more distant past that Pausanias so often strives to evoke  means that 
among the surviving artefacts, there is also a considerable amount of neglect, decay and 
absence. In the city of Tegea, in Arcadia, Pausanias draws our attention to pedestals 
where bronze statues no longer stand104; the bases are the only thing left to remind 
us of their existence. Ruins are also a consistent presence105: throughout the various 
regions, there are numerous temples and sanctuaries that Pausanias is able to identify 
and explain, despite their state of disrepair.
Sometimes whole cities have fallen to ruin: Onchestus in Boeotia consisted of 
only a temple, while in Zarax there was nothing save for a temple and a statue holding 
a lyre106. However, even when there is nothing left of a place, Pausanias is still able to 
assign a topographic value to the absence: on his way to Olympia, Pausanias men-
tions his inability to identify the ruins of Arene, telling us that no Messenian and 
no Elean could point them out to me with certainty107; later, he mentions the city 
of Parapotamii for which there remained no ruins, nor even a memory of where it 
stood108. For Pausanias, even the remembered built environment provided a means of 
engaging with the past.
What we rarely find in Pausanias are descriptions of the land itself. The natural 
topographic features that were so important to chorographical understanding  moun-
tains and rivers, primarily  certainly appear in the Periegesis, however they are often 
relegated to a minor role. Pausanias most frequently employs rivers  and, to a lesser 
extent, mountains  as a means of situating elements from the built environment. He 
mentions, for example, that the river Larisus acts as the boundary between Achaia and 
102 Pausanias I.18.69.
103 Pausanias II.27.78. The Antoninus in question is probably not Antoninus Pius, but rather a 
later senator; see Habicht, Pausanias Guide, 10, for a summary of the arguments.
104 Pausanias VIII.49.1.
105 On the use of ruins, see J.I. Porter Ideals and Ruins: Pausanias, Longinus, and the Second 
Sophistic in Alcock et al., Pausanias, 6392.
106 Pausanias IX.26.5 (Onchestus); III.24.1 (Zarax).
107 Pausanias V.6.2.
108 Pausanias X.33.8.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 105
Elis; however, the river appears mostly as a topographic reference point for a temple of 
Larisaean Athena109. In a later chapter, the river Peirus is useful only in that it allows 
Pausanias to situate the city of Olenus, which no longer exists110. Even when a river 
is described in its own right  as in the description of the Alpheius111  it quickly 
becomes the source of a mythological digression.
For the most part, however, the natural world remains absent from the Periegesis. 
Even when Pausanias finds himself at the uninhabited edges of the various regions, he 
presents them in terms of whatever constructed features he is able to find. When he 
is describing the boundary land between Arcadia and Elis, for instance, he identifies 
a ruined sanctuary of Heracles and a ruined temple of Asclepius112. The impression 
we get from Pausanias is that land on its own constitutes a featureless mass and that, 
without the presence of buildings, ruins or some form of human presence, it would 
remain unworthy of comment.
Perhaps for this reason, Pausanias pushes the act of travel as far into the back-
ground as possible. His journeys from place to place are described, if at all, by brief 
notices along the lines of from Oetylus to Thalamae the road is eighty stades long113. 
Unless there is something along the road specifically worth mentioning, the journey 
itself is passed over without comment. However, Pausanias is not able to exclude travel 
entirely. Incidental references throughout the text suggest that his travels through 
Greece were very much dictated by the network of roads, a fact which is emphasised 
by his continual references to distances in stades114. 
Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that Pausanias was reasonably systematic 
in his approach to each region, moving from the capital or central node of a region 
out toward the boundaries along each available road115. This method of structuring 
his travels may, of course, be a literary construction  that is, a means of presenting 
the topographic information from his multi-directional journeys in such a way as to 
109 Pausanias VII.17.5.
110 Pausanias VII.18.1.
111 Pausanias V.7.1.
112 Pausanias VI.21.36.
113 Pausanias III.26.1.
114 On the modes of travel in Pausanias, see M. Pretzler Turning Travel into Text: Pausanias at 
Work, Greece & Rome, Vol. 51, No. 2 (2004), 199216 (esp. 2024).
115 The system of movement adopted by Pausanias is suggested in Frazer, Pausaniass Description 
I, xxiiixxiv, although see also the extensive discussion in W. Hutton Describing Greece: Landscape 
and literature in the Periegesis of Pausanias (Cambridge, 2005), 83126.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 106
include everything  rather than an actual record of his progress116. Nonetheless, the 
road still plays an important part in his organisation of physical space: as much as he 
may downplay it within his text, the cities, monuments and ruins that make up the 
world of Pausanias are all organised according to the principle of the path.
The travels of Pausanias are an attempt to read the landscape as if it were a text. 
Every temple, every sanctuary and every statue  in short, every piece of evidence for 
human activity within the land  contains a story that may be revealed by the learned 
observer. Pausanias is, of course, reading selectively: he is most interested in revealing 
those glories of the past that lie dormant in the landscape of the present. However, his 
ability to interpret the world around him is informed almost exclusively by the built 
environment: it is both beneath his feet, dictating the form of his journey, and within 
his field of vision, bearing witness to the past. For Pausanias, construction is essential; 
everything else is invisible.
Our second traveller is slightly more problematic insofar as he is fictional. Apollonius 
of Tyana, a widely renowned philosopher who lived during the first century AD, is said 
to have spent the majority of his life travelling from place to place, spreading wisdom 
and performing the occasional miracle. However, while Apollonius was almost cer-
tainly a real person, our only detailed source for his life is the fanciful account written 
by Philostratus in the first half of the third century, which is to say more than a century 
after Apollonius is said to have died117.
The question of how much historical truth can be gleaned from the text 
of Philostratus  a subject of some scholarly debate  is not easily resolved118. 
Philostratus, himself, claimed to be using the notes of Damis, a disciple who accom-
panied Apollonius on the majority of his travels119; however, for the sceptical reader, 
the notes of Damis may sound suspiciously like a literary attempt to create an illusion 
116 Frazer, Pausaniass Description I, xxiv.
117 Philostratus The Life of Apollonius of Tyana in 2 vols. ed. and trans. C.P. Jones (Cambridge, 
MA., 2005). Apollonius is said to have died during the reign of Nerva (AD 9698); the Life of 
Apollonius was probably written sometime after AD 217, perhaps in the 220s; see Jones 23.
118 See, for instance, B.F. Harris Apollonius of Tyana: Fact and Fiction, Journal of Religious 
History, Vol. 5 (1969), 189199; E.L. Bowie Apollonius of Tyana: Tradition and Reality in ANRW 
II 16.2 (1978), 16521699; M. Dzielska Apollonius of Tyana in legend and history (Rome, 1986); 
J.A. Francis Truthful Fiction: New Questions to Old Answers on Philostratus Life of Apollonius, 
AJP, Vol. 119, No. 3 (1998), 419441.
119 The notes of Damis are first mentioned at Philostratus VA I.3. Damis joins Apollonius at 
I.19.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 107
of authenticity. The fact that Damis is often invoked to overrule other accounts of 
Apollonius  and perhaps also to distinguish the work of Philostratus from an earlier 
biography written by a certain Moeragenes120  suggest that Damis may have sprung 
from the biographers imagination121.
Even if Philostratus was primarily engaged in creating a work of fiction, we need 
not go so far as to say that the Life of Apollonius is completely devoid of truth about its 
subject; however, when we approach the more literary elements of the text  and the 
accounts of travel are most certainly literary constructions  we must assume that they 
reflect the era of the author, far more than that of the titular character122. The Life of 
Apollonius may, therefore, have little to tell us about Apollonius, but is able to tell us a 
great deal about geographical understanding in the third century AD.
While the specific details of Apollonius journeys may be fictional, he is very 
much travelling within an established geographical space that we might recognise 
from Pomponius Mela, Dionysius Periegetes and, perhaps also, from our chorographi-
cal panels. Many of his travels focus on the extremities of the oikoumene: the most 
substantial journey  occupying the greater parts of books two and three  follows 
Apollonius and Damis to India, where they encounter an assortment of wise men. 
Later they travel to Cadiz (book five) and Ethiopia (book six), places which, in the 
third century, would have been recognised as the limits of the world123.
Mountains and rivers provide the principal topographic reference points for the 
journey to India. The Caucasus, in particular, act as a point of departure for geographi-
cal and mythological digressions: at one point Philostratus informs us that the Caucasus 
are part of the Taurus mountains, familiar to residents of Asia Minor124; elsewhere 
he informs us that the locals in the Caucasus tell a story similar to the Greeks about 
Prometheus being bound to the mountain125. The mountains also act as a convenient 
120 On the biography of Moeragenes and its possible attitudes toward Apollonius, see Bowie, 
Apollonius of Tyana, 167379 and D.H. Raynor Moeragenes and Philostratus: Two Views of 
Apollonius of Tyana, CQ, Vol. 34, No. 1 (1984), 22226.
121 For opposing views on the existence of Damis, see Bowie, Apollonius of Tyana, 167379 
and G. Anderson Philostratus: Biography and belles lettres in the third century AD (London, 1986), 
15573.
122 On the literary character of Apollonius travels, see J. Elsner Hagiographic Geography: 
Travel and Allegory in the Life of Apollonius of Tyana, JHS, Vol. 117 (1997), 2237.
123 Philostratus admits as much:           
       . VA II.18 (I know that god has made 
Ethiopia and India the limits of the earth (trans. C.P. Jones)).
124 Philostratus VA II.2.
125 Philostratus VA II.3.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 108
boundary: once on the other side, the travellers begin to see such exotic sites as black 
people and elephants126.
Rivers, however, are what give structure to the distant lands. Apollonius and 
Damis seem to be constantly crossing rivers in the course of their Indian journey, 
starting from the familiar Tigris and Euphrates and moving on to the more exotic 
Indus, Hyphasis and Ganges. The rivers afford Philostratus ample opportunities for 
geographical asides: book three opens with a description of the Hyphasis which is said 
to be as wide as the Danube, itself the largest known river in Europe127. The Indus, 
crossed in book two, is described as being forty stades (nearly four miles) at the point 
of crossing128.
The fact that all river descriptions mention the source  the Tigris and Euphrates 
originate in the foothills of the Taurus; the Indus emerges from the Caucasus; the 
Hyphasis begins in a flat plain  may perhaps call to mind the chorographical descrip-
tions and panels from the previous chapter which, we are told, should contain the 
source and destination of all major rivers. Indeed, when discussing the Euphrates, 
Philostratus mentions the theory that the river travels underground and emerges in 
Egypt, a description which is reminiscent of the passage in Vitruvius where the under-
ground journeys of rivers are discussed129.
While Philostratus draws upon the information about rivers and mountains 
that may have been available from chorographic sources, his geographical knowledge 
also owes a debt to legends of Alexander, perhaps the most celebrated figure to have 
ventured into the eastern lands130. Evidence of Alexander is scattered throughout the 
journey to India: in the city of Taxila, Philostratus describes statues and pictures com-
memorating Alexander and King Porus, whom Alexander fought131; later, Apollonius 
and Damis travel through the plain where the battle itself took place132. At the end of 
126 Elephants are mentioned frequently by Philostratus, perhaps to remind his readers of the 
exotic setting. See, especially, VA II.1115. We may also be reminded of the inscription in his locis 
elephanti nascuntur from the Tabula Peutingeriana (11C4).
127 Philostratus VA III.1.
128 Philostratus VA II.18.
129 Philostratus VA I.20; cf. Vitruvius VIII.2.
130 We may recall Strabos assertion (I.2.1) that Alexanders passage added considerably to the 
geographers knowledge; see chapter one, 38. On the literary significance of Alexanders presence see 
Elsner, Hagiographic Geography, 30 n. 49, and C.P. Jones Apollonius of Tyanas Passage to India, 
GRBS, Vol. 42 (2001), 18599.
131 Philostratus VA II.20.
132 Philostratus VA II.42.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 109
book two, they reach the altars where Alexander is said to have turned back, a place 
which, we may note, constitutes one of the few topographic features recorded on the 
eastern edge of the Tabula Peutingeriana133.
The knowledge of India displayed by Philostratus appears to have been influenced 
by a tradition of literary preconceptions, but, perhaps more importantly, it seems to 
draw upon the type of material that would have found its way into chorographical 
descriptions or representations. Thus, it is not surprising to find that the topographic 
reference points used to form the geographical foundation of the Indian journey are 
primarily rivers and mountains, supplemented in only a few instances by specific fea-
tures from the constructed world. Only when Apollonius and Damis return to the 
familiar setting of the Mediterranean does the built environment reassert itself as a 
means through which the landscape may be interpreted.
In the fourth book, we follow Apollonius through several cities in Asia Minor 
 notably Ephesus, Smyrna and the remains of Troy  then onward to Greece, Crete 
and finally Rome. By taking us on a journey from the edge of the world (India) back 
to the centre (the Mediterranean), Philostratus carries us from a land of rivers and 
mountains to a land of statues, temples, shrines and other recognisable landmarks. We 
return also to a land where  for the educated biographer of the third century AD  the 
topographical landscape was very much defined by history, mythology and, of course, 
the ever-present geographical shadow of Homer.
From the beginning, Apollonius and his followers  he has, by this point, gath-
ered an entourage of disciples  display a penchant for tourism. Many of the sites they 
choose to visit can be said to have a connection to the spiritual life: at Pergamon they 
visit the Asclepion, and in Greece they are said to have visited all the sanctuaries134. 
Some of the tourism, however, is simply inspired by mythological events; for instance, 
when Apollonius has a dream that he should go to Crete, his companions visit the 
labyrinth135. In a curious parenthetical aside, Philostratus adds: I believe it once con-
tained the Minotaur136. Apollonius himself, who has no interest in the labyrinth, goes 
to nearby Gortyn to visit the sacred sites.
133 The altars are described in VA II.43; cf. Hic Alexander responsum accepit: usque quo Alexander. 
TP 11B4.
134 Philostratus VA IV.11 (Asclepion), IV.24 (sanctuaries).
135 Philostratus VA IV.34.
136  , ,   . Philostratus VA IV.34.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 110
It is not difficult to find evidence of Homer in Philostratuss geographical concep-
tion of Asia Minor and Greece. There is, however one episode of specifically Homeric 
tourism: when Apollonius and his disciples arrive at the site of Troy, Apollonius 
announces his plan to spend the night on the mound where Achilles was buried137. 
Later, while the company is sailing to Greece, Apollonius recounts how he was able to 
ask the dead hero about certain events in the Trojan war and how they corresponded 
to Homers version138.
On one level, the episode may be little more than a crafty excuse for some light 
Homeric criticism. However, we may also see in this section a fairly obvious metaphor 
for why it is desirable to visit the sites of historical events: for Apollonius, the visit to 
Troy brings the narrative of Homer to life in a very literal sense; more importantly, in 
seeing the remains of Troy, Apollonius is able to align his knowledge of a famous text 
with the reality of the landscape. He is able not only to converse with history, but to 
inhabit temporarily that historical layer which, as we saw in the previous section, was 
so appealing to Pausanias.
Philostratus demonstrates a fairly advanced awareness not only of the value of 
historical topography, but more specifically of the role that the built environment can 
play in lending authenticity to historical events. This awareness is perhaps nowhere 
more apparent than in an episode where Apollonius banishes the plague from Ephesus. 
Philostratus begins by recounting how Apollonius brought the Ephesians to a statue of 
Heracles, which he initially refers to only as , the averter of evil. At the statue, 
Apollonius encourages the citizens to stone an old beggar who, it is revealed, was actually 
a demon in disguise. The episode ends with a reminder that the statue of the averter of 
evil  that is, Heracles  stands next to the place where the monster was stoned139.
Although the statue undoubtedly serves a literary purpose  the fact that 
Philostratus refers to it as  is perhaps meant to echo the evil which has 
been averted by our hero140  what is interesting to us is the way that it is used to 
bookend the story and to situate it, unmistakably, in a particular location. Within the 
137 Philostratus VA IV.11.
138 Philostratus VA IV.16.
139      ,   ,    ,     . 
Philostratus VA IV.10.
140 The description of the demon as being the size of the largest lion (     
) may also be a reference to the Nemean lion, famously killed by Heracles.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 111
narrative, the statue  which, we can only imagine, would have been a well-known 
landmark in Ephesus141  acts not merely as the setting of the event, but also serves as a 
permanent reminder of where the event took place. Philostratus is essentially creating 
his own topography for Apollonius. In the same way that Apollonius himself wanted 
to visit the famous sites of the Homeric past, so perhaps did Philostratus intend that 
sophists of the future would wish to visit the sites made famous by Apollonius.
It would be easy enough to conclude that Philostratus merely used topography as 
a literary device to lend authenticity to what was, essentially, a work of fiction. Indeed, 
we may even suggest that his topographical descriptions are an adequate reflection 
of contemporary geographical knowledge; readers of Philostratus might have known 
the names of a few rivers and mountains in India, but would have demanded greater 
exactitude for those parts of the world that had long been known in detail. However, 
Philostratus also demonstrates a remarkably nuanced understanding of what we might 
term the allure of place; it is an allure that not even Apollonius himself can resist.
Philostratus may also be attempting to manufacture a topography of his own. In 
the same way that Apollonius was able to communicate with Achilles by visiting the 
ancient site of the Trojan war, there is perhaps a sense that the reader will be able to 
bring Apollonius to life by visiting those locations where episodes from his life took 
place. Topography is, therefore, not merely employed to create confidence in the claims 
of the narrator or to create a plausible setting for the narrative; it is being used to trans-
pose the fictional Apollonius onto the built environment, that place where history 
and memory are preserved, as it were, in stone. Had more of a cult developed around 
Apollonius, perhaps the locations described by Philostratus would still be visited to 
this day. Instead, it would be the sites associated with a different historical figure that 
would, in the following century, come to redefine the topographical interests of the 
Mediterranean world.
Our final traveller lived in the fourth century and undertook his travels roughly 
a hundred years after Philostratus was composing the life of Apollonius. We do 
not, alas, know the travellers name or the purpose of his journey142. What we do 
141 There is a relief of Heracles in Ephesus dating from the second century AD, although this may 
not be the statue referred to by Philostratus.
142 We are not, for that matter, entirely certain about his gender, although there has been some 
debate: the possibility that the traveller was female was suggested in J.E. Taylor Christians and the 
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 112
know is that, in AD 333, he travelled from Bordeaux to Jerusalem via Milan and 
Constantinople, then back to Bordeaux via Macedonia and Rome. The journey has 
been preserved in the form of an itinerary which has received heavy annotation from 
the traveller himself143.
The presentation of the Bordeaux Itinerary is instantly recognisable: like the 
Antonine Itineraries, it is a list of places and the distances between them in milia pas-
suum, except in the very first section of the journey (Bordeaux to Toulouse) where 
distances are given in leagues144. Although the itinerary follows a single journey, it is 
broken up, like the fourth Vicarello goblet, into several smaller journeys between major 
centres; at each of the centres, the traveller stops to provide a summary of all the miles 
travelled, and the number of places where he stopped. The first segment of the itinerary 
thus consists of journeys from Bordeaux to Arles, Arles to Milan, Milan to Aquileia, 
Aquileia to Sirmium, Sirmium to Serdica and finally Serdica to Constantinople.
Between Bordeaux and Constantinople, the itinerary remains an impersonal 
record, distinguishable from its Antonine counterparts only by virtue of its com-
pleteness. The traveller has not merely noted the name and designation of every stop 
along the way (the mansiones and civitates, plus one vicus) but has also included the 
mutationes, or places where the animals were changed. Otherwise, the traveller consist-
ently notes the regional boundaries  stating either the beginning of a province, the 
boundary between two provinces or, in one case, the fact that you cross a bridge into 
a province145  and will very occasionally make a note of mountains146. Only once are 
we presented with information that is not strictly related to the journey: the city of 
Viminacium, in Moesia, is annotated where Diocletian killed Carinus147.
Holy Places: The Myth of Jewish-Christian Origins (Oxford, 1993), 313, and taken up in L. Douglass 
A New Look at the Itinerarium Burdigalense, JECS, Vol. 4, No. 3 (1996), 31333; however, see also 
S. Weingarten Was the Pilgrim from Bordeaux a Woman? A Reply to Laurie Douglass, JECS, Vol. 
7, No. 2 (1999), 29197. The traveller will be referred to as male in the present study, on the grounds 
that he was probably travelling on state business (see 113, below).
143 The Itinerarium Burdigalense (also sometimes known as the Itinerarium Hierosolymitanum) 
has traditionally been published with the Antonine Itineraries. The most current edition is that of O. 
Cuntz, which appears in his Itineraria Romana (Leipzig, 1929), and has been reprinted in Itineraria 
et Alia Geographica. CCSL 175 (Turnhout, 1965) 126. As the with Antonine Itineraries, the pagina-
tion of P. Wesseling has been preserved. The translation in A. Stewart and C.W. Wilson Itinerary from 
Bordeaux to Jerusalem (London, 1887) provides useful topographical notes.
144 It. Burd. 549.10551.2.
145 For example inde incipit Italiae (It. Burd. 556.5); fines Italiae et Norci (560.10).
146 inde ascenditur Gaura mons (It. Burd. 555.1); inde incipiunt Alpes Cottiae (555.9); inde sunt 
Alpes Iuliae (560.3).
147 ubi Diocletianus occidit Carinum (It. Burd. 564.9).
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 113
When the traveller arrives at Constantinople, after some three months on the 
road148, he stops to provide a summary of the entire journey: he enumerates the number 
of mansiones and mutationes as well as the total number of miles travelled149. The detail 
with which the stopping points  especially the mutationes  are recorded may suggest 
that the journey was undertaken using the services of the cursus publicus; this, in turn 
would suggest that the traveller was either on official business or was well-connected 
enough to have obtained an evectio by semi-legitimate means150. We need not, perhaps, 
assume the worst; the fact that our traveller treats Constantinople as a destination 
would certainly support the idea that he is simply travelling on business.
It is only after Constantinople that the Bordeaux Itinerary begins to develop into 
a more idiosyncratic record of travel151. We do not know precisely when our traveller 
arrived in the new imperial capital, or for how long he stayed; however we do know 
that on the thirtieth of May, in the consulship of Dalmatius and Zenophilus (that is, 
AD 333), the traveller set out from Chalcedon on a six month round-trip to the prov-
ince of Palestine; his use of the first person plural (ambulavimus, reversi sumus) may or 
may not imply that he was travelling either with companions or with a retinue, but at 
very least suggests a level of personal engagement with the journey152.
From the very beginning, there is a sense that the journey from Constantinople 
to Palestine might be a trip for pleasure rather than business. Although the itiner-
ary format is retained  at least until the Levant  and there is still evidence that the 
traveller is relying on the cursus publicus, we notice almost immediately that there are 
more topographical asides. Two days out of Chalcedon, in the mansio of Libissa, the 
traveller notes that Hannibal, who was king of the Africans, is buried there153; later, 
148 Assuming that the traveller stopped at every place listed as mansio, ciuitate or vicus and spent 
only one night in any place, the journey would have taken 89 days.
149 It. Burd. 571.35. The figures, which do not correspond to the number of stops listed in the 
itinerary, are probably corrupt.
150 Although abuse of cursus publicus appears as early as AD 326 (CTh 8.5.34), serious attempts 
to control the distribution of evectiones are not made until ca. 354362 (CTh 8.5.512).
151 For two approaches to the structural complexity of the itinerary, see G. Bowman Mapping 
Historys Redemption: Eschatology and Topography in the Itinerarium Burdigalense in L.I. Levine 
(ed.) Jerusalem: Its Sanctity and Centrality to Judaism, Christianity and Islam (New York, 1998), 
16387 and J. Elsner The Itinerarium Burdigalense: Politics and Salvation in the Geography of 
Constantines Empire, JRS, Vol. 90 (2000), 18195.
152 Item ambulavimus Dalmatio et Zenofilo cons. III. kal. Iun. a Calcidonia, et reversi sumus 
Constantinopolim VII. kal. Ian. Cons suprascript. (It. Burd. 571.68).
153 ibi positus est rex Annibalianus, qui fuit Afrorum (It. Burd. 572.4); in the modern Turkish 
town of Gebze, there is a monument which purports to be Hannibals grave.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 114
in Cappadocia, the traveller draws our attention to the city of Tyana, birthplace of 
Apollonius the magus154.
The topographical asides in the itinerary suggest a man of average education. He 
is aware of events from recent political history, such as Diocletian killing Carinus, but 
also seems to possess some context for appreciating places which have a connection to 
famous historical figures: apart from Hannibal and Apollonius, our traveller  on his 
way home through Macedonia  is able to point out the birthplace of Alexander and 
the final resting place of Euripides155. From these diverse references, we may infer that 
our traveller has, if nothing else, received something of an education in the classics. 
Of course, we cannot say for sure that he had read Euripides, or any of the available 
biographies of Apollonius; however, there is one text with which our traveller was 
intimately familiar. It is, as we shall soon see, a text that would act as the very definition 
for his topographic knowledge of the Levantine lands.
The bible, as we know it today, did not exist at the time when our traveller was 
making his journey; Jerome would not consolidate the various extant versions into a 
single standardised text for nearly another eighty years. However, the scriptures, in some 
form, would have certainly been in circulation and available to the reader of Latin or 
Greek. Of course we should not assume that our traveller was any great scholar of the 
Christian texts: the knowledge that he brings to the topography of the Levant seems lim-
ited mostly to episodes from the four gospels, Genesis, and the four books of Kings156.
Nonetheless, our traveller was certainly a Christian. He reveals himself as such on 
his arrival in Tarsus, when he informs us that the city happens to be the birthplace of the 
apostle Paul157. From this point forward, as the journey progresses from Cilicia to Syria to 
Palestine, the regular sequence of the itinerary format is increasingly interrupted by top-
ographical asides; by the time our traveller reaches Jerusalem, the familiar lists of names 
and distances have been almost entirely replaced by lengthy passages of description.
Unlike many later Christian visitors to the Levant  with whom the author of the 
Bordeaux itinerary is sometimes unfairly compared158  our traveller does not seem 
154 inde fuit Apollonius magus (It. Burd. 578.1).
155 ibi positus est Euripidis poeta (It. Burd. 604.7); civitas Pelli unde fuit Alexander Magnus 
Macedo (606.1).
156 That is, I and II Samuel and I and II Kings.
157 inde fuit apostolus Paulus (It. Burd. 579.4).
158 For a treatment of the Bordeaux traveller within the context of early-christian pilgrimage, see 
E.D. Hunt Holy Land Pilgrimage in the Later Roman Empire AD 312460 (Oxford, 1982) 578 and 
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 115
particularly interested in uncovering every possible piece of scriptural allusion hiding 
within the landscape. This is, perhaps, unsurprising, given that he would have been 
travelling at a time when an understanding of Christian topography was starting to 
emerge, but before the landscape of Palestine had solidified into an intractable cluster 
of sacred places159. Instead, he is drawn primarily to those places relating to the histori-
cal figures that interest him the most. Thus, while a certain amount of his descriptions 
are necessarily given over to the life of Christ, episodes from the time of King Solomon 
and the prophet Elijah also appear with great frequency.
The closer our traveller gets to Palestine, the more he finds worthy of comment. 
From Tarsus, he goes to Antioch  where he visits, without comment, the temple at 
Daphne160  then follows the coast, via Tripolis and Beirut, all the way to Caesarea. 
Outside the city of Sidon, he mentions that this is the place where Elijah begged 
a widow for food161; later, near the boundary of Syria and Palestine, he points out 
Mount Carmel, where Elijah made his sacrifice162.
Our traveller appears to be using his knowledge of scriptural narratives  and, 
especially, of the place-names within those narratives  to interpret the places he 
encounters on his journey. He may also have been relying on local knowledge for 
clarification. However, it is important to remember, that there would have been three 
centuries separating our traveller from events in the life of Christ and more than a 
millennium separating him from the time of Elijah; we cannot expect topographical 
information to have been transmitted over such a span of time without some corrup-
tions. Thus, when our traveller reaches Stradela ( Jezreel) he reports that this is the 
plain where David killed Goliath163. In fact, that episode took place in the Valley of 
Elah, some fifteen miles south-west of Jerusalem; the plain near Jezreel is actually the 
site of King Sauls defeat at the hands of the Philistines164. Either the traveller was, 
835. The rise of christian travel is discussed in chapter four, 20813.
159 On the fourth century development of the christian sacred place, see R.A. Markus How on 
Earth Could Places Become Holy? Origins of the Christian Idea of Holy Places, JECS, Vol. 2 (1994), 
25771.
160 ad Palatium Dafne (It. Burd. 581.7). We know from Libanius that it was a popular destina-
tion for visitors.
161 ibi Helias ad viduam ascendit et petiit sibi cibum. (It. Burd. 583.12). cf. I Kings 17.913; the 
town of Sarepta (Zarephath) appears in some MSS of the itinerary.
162 ibi est mons Carmelus, ibi Helias sacrificium faciebat (It Burd. 585.1); cf. I Kings 18.
163 ibi est campus ubi David Goliat occidit (It. Burd. 586.5).
164 I Samuel 17 (David kills Goliath); I Samuel 29 (defeat of Saul).
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 116
himself, confused, or his report was based on the information  in this case, incorrect 
 that he was able to extract from local sources165.
The scriptural landscape of our traveller is defined by some natural features, pri-
marily mountains: apart from Mount Carmel, there is a passage on the significance of 
Mount Gerizim outside Neapolis, and a description of the sites that may be seen on 
Mount Zion, outside Jerusalem166. For the most part, however, it is the built environ-
ment that gives structure to the travellers journey; and, as in Pausanias, it is the material 
remains of the constructed world that allow the narrative to become untethered from 
the constraints of chronology.
We should note, however, that our traveller was not interested in the scriptural 
landscape to the exclusion of everything else. While his descriptions of Jerusalem may 
be focussed primarily on isolating places of scriptural relevance, his discoveries must 
necessarily took place within the context of the contemporary Roman city. Thus, he 
will occasionally mention places or artefacts that do not have any particular scriptural 
significance, like the two statues of Hadrian or the cisterns that provide water to the 
citys pools167. Christianity may be our travellers most obvious defining characteristic, 
but we should not forget that he was also a Roman and may, thus, have had some inter-
est in the citys more recent past.
Nonetheless, it is the landscape of the scriptures that provides the greatest attrac-
tion for our traveller. However, while his appreciation of Jerusalem is clearly informed 
by a knowledge of the sacred texts, the extensive annotations in his itinerary may owe 
something to the presence of tour guides and other forms of received local knowledge. 
Although certain features would have been obvious  and, indeed, some locations, 
like the tomb of Christ and the mount of Olives, were already being celebrated with 
Constantinian buildings168  we cannot expect our traveller to have accurately identi-
fied the house of Pontius Pilate, or the chamber where Solomon wrote the book of 
Wisdom, without some external guidance169.
165 The later itinerary, De situ terrae sanctae, composed by archdeacon Theodosius in the sixth cen-
tury (see chapter four, 21213) offers the correct location of the fight between David and Goliath.
166 It. Burd. 587.3588.9 (Gerizim); 591.11592.12 (Zion).
167 sunt ibi et statuae duae Adriani (It. Burd. 591.5); sunt ibi et excepturia magna aquae subter-
raneae et piscinae magno opere aedificatae (590.10).
168 At the tomb: ibidem modo iusso Constantini imperatoris basilica facta est (It. Burd. 594.3); at 
the mount of olives: ibi facta est basilica iusso Constanini (595.9).
169 ibi etiam constat cubiculus in quo sedit et Sapientiam descripsit (It. Burd. 590.8); ubi domus fuit 
siue Pontii Pilati (593.3).
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 117
Similarly, one suspects that, if left to his own devices, he may not have concluded 
that certain marks in the pavement of the temple enclosure were, in fact, impressions 
of nails from the shoes of the soldiers who killed Zacharias170. In addition, the trav-
eller also mentions certain places  for example, the crypt where Solomon tortured 
demons171  which are simply not attested elsewhere and are, perhaps the fabrication 
of an imaginative guide. From these examples we may wish to suggest that the notes 
kept by our traveller do not represent a personal topographical vision so much as a 
record of interesting things that other people had pointed out to him.
Using Jerusalem as a base, our traveller makes several smaller excursions, one to 
Jericho, the Dead Sea and the river Jordan, and another to Bethlehem and Hebron. 
After approximately three months of sight-seeing, he returns to Caesarea, via a dif-
ferent road. The fact that he does not include any further details about his return 
journey from Caesarea to Constantinople suggests that he probably retraced the route 
described in the earlier part of the itinerary172.
Indeed, when the traveller reappears it is in Heraclea, in Thrace: rather than 
repeating the entire journey back to Bordeaux, he seems to have passed through 
Macedonia and Epirus, crossed to Italy by boat, and made his way via Rome to Milan 
where the itinerary concludes. In this final section of the journey, there are only three 
topographic asides, all in Macedonia. Although he pauses in Rome to count his miles 
and mansiones, he has nothing to say about the great city itself.
What, then, can we conclude about the traveller and his itinerary? About the 
man, we can say little with certainty: only that he was a Christian who had read, at 
very least, the gospels and the books of Kings, and that he had received enough educa-
tion to be aware of Alexander, Euripides and Apollonius. He may have been of high 
enough rank to have access to the cursus publicus and he may, indeed, have been no 
stranger to road travel in Gaul and Italy; we can, if nothing else, excuse his silence on 
the topography of these regions by suggesting that they would have been so familiar as 
to be unworthy of comment.
Although it goes against the general trends of modern scholarship, we should per-
haps be cautious about characterising our traveller as an early pilgrim; even those who 
170 etiam parent vestigia clauorum militum qui eum occiderunt (It. Burd. 591.3).
171 est ibi et cripta ubi Salomon daemones torquebat (It. Burd. 589.16).
172 On the lack of return journeys in the itinerary, see Elsner, The Itinerarium Burdigalense, 183.
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 118
include him within the pilgrimage tradition tend to fault him for his lack of interest in 
theological matters, and compare him unfavourably with the more rapturous accounts 
of sacred places  like that of the nun Egeria  left behind by later visitors to the East173. 
Based on the account our traveller has left us, it is perhaps easier to envisage him as an 
enthusiastic, if somewhat credulous tourist, approaching the Levant in the same way 
that a casual reader of Homer might approach the western coast of Asia Minor.
We may thus propose the following scenario: at the beginning of AD 333, our trav-
eller was called to the newly consecrated imperial capital on business. Using the services 
of the cursus publicus, he set out on a three month journey to Constantinople, roughly 
twice as long as it would have taken to get to Rome. He was, of course, a Christian 
living in an age when Christianity was no longer something that needed to be hidden. 
Thus, given that he was already travelling much further East than he had ever been 
before, he decided to take the opportunity to add a side trip to Palestine in order to see 
some of the places that he knew only as names from his Christian upbringing.
The text which bears witness to his journey is, therefore, very much a work of two 
distinct layers. At the foundation we have the simple itinerary, which may, itself, have 
been a compilation of shorter itineraries copied down in regional centres along the 
way. On top of that we have the annotations of a traveller, initially limited to obvious 
points of general historical interest, but growing more detailed as the topographic con-
nections became more obscure. The point of the itinerary would have been to present 
the journey as efficiently as possible; the point of the annotations would have been to 
reveal the relationship between the physical landscape of the Roman world and the 
topographical landscape of the scriptures.
The sole appearance of the first person plural allows us to confirm that the itiner-
ary is a genuine record of an actual journey; however, the scattered use of second person 
singular throughout the text, suggests that our traveller may have been conscious of 
his itinerarys future utility174. While it is true that the majority of his text consists 
of impersonal descriptions, his occasional lapses into a more instructive mode allow 
173 On lack of theological interest, see R. Wilken The Land Called Holy: Palestine in Christian 
history and thought (New Haven and London, 1992), 10910; for unfavourable comparisons to 
Egeria, see Hunt, Holy Land Pilgrimage, 58 and 86, although see also the discussion in Bowman. We 
shall return to Egeria in chapter four.
174 The second person is found in the itinerary itself  eg. transis pontem, intras Pannoniam infe-
riorem (It. Burd. 561.5); a Constantinopoli transis Pontum, venis Calcedoniam, ambulas prouintiam 
Bithiniam (571.9)  but is also scattered throughout the passages describing his journeys around 
jerusalem: eg. item exeuntibus in Hierusalem ut ascendas Sion (591.11).
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 119
for the possibility that he later transcribed his itinerary and his notes into a single 
document specifically for an audience of fellow Christians who would be interested in 
recreating some of his travels.
At the time our traveller was annotating his itinerary, the Levant would have 
been a trove of neglected religious topography waiting to be rediscovered. However, 
because of that neglect it was not always easy to align the stories from the scriptures 
with the reality on the ground. Unlike the Mediterranean world of Homer, which 
had been established for centuries, the Levant was a topographic puzzle waiting to be 
reassembled. Over the next thousand years, geographical thought would increasingly 
come to be dominated by the invention of a new and official Christian topography.
Beneath the descriptions of the built environment left behind by our travellers, one 
may perceive a distinct unease about the idea of the natural world. It is, perhaps, most 
pronounced in the writings of Pausanias, who manages to cover a large portion of 
Greece while rarely describing a natural landscape or commenting on a natural fea-
ture; however, we may see it also in the Mediterranean journeys of Apollonius  which 
move from one identifiable location to another without ever engaging with the world 
around it  and in the Bordeaux itinerary, where the natural world must be read into 
the spaces between the names and distances.
We cannot know if the natural world was terrifying or merely tedious for the Roman 
traveller; we can, however, suggest that it was best ignored. In the city, one was constantly 
surrounded by the evidence of human endeavour and the presence of history. In the 
country, one could at least take some consolation in the ploughed fields and boundary 
markers that attested the normalising presence of the agrimensores. Beyond that, how-
ever, there was nothing but empty space to which no memory could be attached.
For this reason, the road network was especially important in defining the space 
of the empire. Of course, the network of roads that expanded with the empire in the 
first imperial centuries were essentially a practical undertaking; their unique engineering 
feature  the paved surface  allowed for efficient vehicle transport, rapid movement of 
military forces and effective lines of communication. As a side effect, however, they also 
provided a conspicuous presence within the landscape. Pausanias may not discuss the 
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 120
road in his Periegesis, but in those long journeys between sites, where there are no remains 
of human civilisation left to describe, the road becomes the last reminder of the built 
environment, the only thing separating the traveller from the formless chaos of nature.
The road network essentially transformed the Roman world into a navigable space 
by removing the uncertainty from navigation. If travel occurred on a fixed path leading 
from one place to another, there would have been no need for elaborate topographical 
directions or references to unreliable features from the natural world; one would only 
need to know that they were on the right road and going in the right direction. The 
itinerary format, which may have been developed alongside the road network, offers 
us a vision of travel where everything that is not directly related to the journey itself 
has effectively been written out.
A system of navigation based entirely on the built environment would have made 
long-distance travel relatively straightforward. It would not necessarily have been easy  
and, as we can see from the Bordeaux itinerary, it still would have taken a long time  but 
the basic process would have been largely free of uncertainty. In the few accounts of travel 
that have survived, we rarely get the sense that the characters or authors do not know 
where theyre going; if the act of travelling appears transparent in literary sources, it is 
perhaps only because the mechanics of navigation were too commonplace to mention. 
In the accounts of our travellers, the road is just one of many features that defines 
the landscape. The natural topographic features which were so essential to chorographic 
presentation are not wholly absent, but their presence is reduced. In the fictional India 
of Philostratus, the names of distant rivers are used  along with elephants and men-
tions of Alexander  primarily to create a sense of the exotic. In Pausanias and the 
Bordeaux Itinerary, rivers and mountains are useful only insofar as they may help us 
situate an historical event.
Ultimately, it is the topography of the built environment that most fascinates 
our travellers; the history, memory, mythology and poetry of their world and culture 
was written into the monuments and buildings that surrounded them. When they 
wrote about features from the built environment, they were not describing what they 
saw, so much as informing us what it was possible to see. Of course, Pausanias and 
Philostratus were essentially describing a world whose histories and mythologies  and 
the topographic markers that preserved them  had been well established for centuries. 
The traveller from Bordeaux, on the other hand, was interested in a different world. 
Chapter t wo: apprehending the landscape 121
Although his travels took place within the same built environment  and within the 
geographical frame of the Roman itinerary  the specific sites that interested him 
existed, for the most part, outside of the established historical landscape. However, by 
the time the traveller from Bordeaux undertook his journey to the East, the established 
landscape was already starting to change.
Part  Two
C h a p t e r  t h r e e
changes in the urban landscape
During the imperial centuries, a new standard of urbanism spread 
throughout the Roman world: in those parts of the empire where cities had not 
previously been a major part of life  primarily the western provinces  new urban 
centres were constructed as a means of incorporating those regions into the systems 
of Roman administration. In the eastern Mediterranean, where cities had existed for 
centuries before the arrival of Roman rule, older centres were renamed, refounded 
and rebuilt so that they might correspond more closely to the Roman ideals of urban 
form and urban function.
Because the city had increasingly come to act as a tool for imperial expansion, 
it would have been necessary for the empire to possess a clear understanding of how 
urban centres functioned, and the role they played within the administrative frame-
work; moreover, the empire would have required a coherent strategy for translating 
that understanding of function into a physical nucleus around which an urban society 
might coalesce. Such was the success of Roman urbanism that, even if we did not pos-
sess the urban guidelines set out in the text of Vitruvius, we would still be able to 
detect a governing ideal in the plans of ancient cities.
Imperial cities thrived, to some extent, because they formed part of a larger net-
work that was connected to a well-defined centre. From as early as the third century, 
however, a series of events and transformations occurred within the Roman would that 
would eventually bring about an end to the imperial urban order. This is not to say 
that the city itself disappeared: although there was a broad decline in urban life in the 
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 126
western provinces, the cities of the east continued to flourish until at least the seventh 
century. What had changed was the meaning of the city within the structure of the 
Roman state, and the ideals that had once presided over urban form.
If we are to understand the wider transformations that occurred in the built envi-
ronment, we must first consider the degree to which urban ideals from the imperial 
period continued to inform the physical space of the late antique city. Certainly, it 
would be easy to attribute the major transformations in urban form to the disappear-
ance of a centralised urban strategy, or to a more general decline in attitudes toward 
civic institutions. A review of surviving textual sources, however, may reveal that the 
urban ideals of the imperial period remained largely intact well into the sixth century; 
what had changed was the ability of the state to enforce those ideal forms through 
legislation. In fact, the fate of urbanism in late antiquity may be best understood as a 
process whereby the physical state of the cities grew further and further from the ideals 
that had once governed their construction.
We possess no single work that discusses the ideal urban form of late antiquity; 
while Vitruvius may have remained in use, later authors valued his text primarily as 
a source for matters relating to rural private dwellings. We may, however refer to a 
number of legal and technical works that deal with the management and maintenance 
of civic space: in the Codex Theodosianus we are given a series of laws that attempt to 
regulate construction in the public sphere, while in a sixth-century treatise ascribed 
to Julian of Ascalon we can see how order was maintained among private building 
projects in the long-established urban centres of the East. Finally, in the Buildings of 
Procopius, we have a valuable record of imperial involvement with late antique urban 
spaces. By examining these sources, we may arrive at a better understanding of how 
the later Roman city was perceived by its audience, and how that perception may have 
differed from the urban ideals of the classical past.
There are, specifically, two transformations that may have had a considerable effect 
on the urban forms of late antiquity. Firstly, we may note a deterioration in the divide 
between public and private space. During the imperial period, the planned city had 
essentially taken the form of a series of public structures that would act as a focal point 
for an urbanised population; in late antiquity, however, a lack of organised public con-
struction combined with a rise in large privately-funded building projects may have 
started to undermine the urban forms that had once been so carefully maintained.  
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 127
Secondly, there is the problem of new foundations. The idea of bringing an urban 
administrative centre into being had been an integral part of early imperial expansion 
programmes. While the idea of the new urban foundation would continue to survive 
into late antiquity  and would be attempted most notably by the emperor Justinian  
the state found itself increasingly unable to dictate the form of a lasting urban centre. 
Even though the city was still an important part of social and political life in the later 
Roman world, the imperial ideals that informed the construction of a city no longer 
reflected the needs or desires of the urban population.
The supposed end of classical urbanism has become a popular and widely discussed 
topic over past several years. However, while there were any number of major catastro-
phes in the late sixth and early seventh centuries that may have posed a serious threat 
to the urban foundations of the eastern Roman world  the most frequently cited are: 
a long war against Sasanian Persia, a series of earthquakes, outbreaks of plague and, 
finally, the Islamic conquests  we shall soon see that the fundamental idea of the city 
had started to change much earlier, perhaps as early as the fourth century; with those 
changes in the urban ideal, transformations in urban form would inevitably follow.
regulating the urban ideal
For Vitruvius, the city was essentially a public entity; although he acknowledged 
the existence of private life in the sixth book of his treatise  in which he discusses 
individual houses and their decoration  he was concerned primarily with the estab-
lishment of an urban centre that would embody all the functions expected of a city. 
The hypothetical city described by Vitruvius contained theatres, places of business, 
temples and administrative offices, all surrounded by a strong defensive wall; it was a 
complete venue in which political, spiritual and cultural life could flourish.
There can be little doubt that the text of Vitruvius survived into the later Roman 
world and even into the Medieval period: manuscripts of the ten books were not 
uncommon in Western Europe from the ninth century onward1. His treatise, however, 
1 See the catalogue in C.H. Krinsky Seventy-Eight Vitruvius Manuscripts in Journal of the 
Warburg and Courtauld Institutes, Vol. 30 (1967), 3670.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 128
may have had little influence on either architecture or urban planning. By as early 
as the third or fourth century, the content of the ten books may have been deemed 
overly obscure by those whose job it was to construct buildings. For this reason, an 
author named M. Cetius Faventinus compiled a manual in which relevant sections of 
Vitruvius were extracted and rendered into a simplified contemporary Latin2.
The figure of Faventinus is obscure: the authors name only came to light at the 
end of the nineteenth century, and the manual itself is essentially undatable3. Although 
the concepts and sentences have been substantially re-ordered and, in many cases, 
rephrased, the concepts remain remarkably close to those in Vitruvius; Faventinus 
reveals nothing about himself, and gives us nothing in the way of helpful interjections 
that might allow us to date the manual securely. Our only certainty is that it was writ-
ten after Vitruvius, probably by several centuries. The fact that the abridgement of 
Faventinus was used as a source by the agricultural writer Palladius  who may have 
flourished in the second half of the fifth century4  gives us a fairly broad window in 
which to place the composition5. It has been suggested, however, that Faventinus was 
most probably active during the third century6.
Because Faventinus appears to add little to Vitruvius, his manual has been largely 
ignored in modern scholarship. At best it is cited as evidence for the transmission of 
Vitruvius, or for the state of building technology in the later Roman world7; at worst, 
its omissions are taken to signal a decline in classical knowledge. If, however, we are 
willing to undertake a more thorough examination of the editorial decisions made by 
2 The text appears as an appendix in Vitruvius De architectura libri decem ed. V. Rose (Leipzig, 
1867 and 1899) and Vitruvius De architectura libri decem ed. F. Krohn (Leipzig, 1912). An english 
translation of Roses earlier text appears H. Plommer Vitruvius and Later Roman Building Manuals 
(Cambridge, 1973). The most recent edition, with translation and commentary is M.-T. Cam Cetius 
Faventinus Abrg dArchitecture Prive (Paris, 2001).
3 The name of Faventinus appears in two manuscripts discovered in the late 1860s. See Plommer, 
Manuals, 2; Cam, Faventinus, viix.
4 On the dating of Palladius see R. Martin Palladius: Trait dagriculture. Tome 1 (Paris, 1976), 
viixx. Martin cautiously suggests a date of between AD 460480 although he has been placed as 
much as a century earlier.
5 The fact that Palladius was using Faventinus, rather than Vitruvius, as a source, was estab-
lished by H. Nohl Palladius und Fauentinus in ihrem Verhltniss zu einander und zu Vitruuius in 
Commentationes Philologae in Honorem Theodori Mommseni (Berlin, 1877), 6474. See also Martin, 
Palladius, xxxiixxxix.
6 Cam, Faventinus, xiiixvii suggests the first part of the third century; Plommer, Manuals, 33 
tentatively dates the treatise to AD 300.
7 See, for instance, the brief appearances in N. Pevsner Terms of Architectural Planning in the 
Middle Ages, Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes, Vol. 5 (1942), 23237 and T.N. Howe 
Vitruvian Critical Eclecticism and Roman Innovation, MAAR, Vol. 50 (2005), 4165. For a discus-
sion of building technology, see Plommer, Manuals, 333.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 129
Faventinus, we soon realise that his treatise was not conceived as a manual for archi-
tects, and that it has much to tell us about the building culture of his age.
The manual of Faventinus  the full title of which may be rendered as A book on 
the art of architecture, abbreviated for personal use8  makes its intentions clear from the 
outset. In the preface, Faventinus writes:
Vitruvius and other learned authors have written about the practical knowl-
edge of architecture. However, lest the length and eloquence of these writers 
alienate people of a lesser capacity, one may extract from them a few passages 
relating to private use and render them in common speech9.
In this opening passage, Faventinus identifies both his aims and his source material, 
although given his nearly complete reliance on Vitruvius, we may question the exist-
ence of the other learned authors. It is not impossible that the texts of the other authors 
are, in fact, earlier epitomes of the ten books. The preface continues with a brief list 
of the types of information that will be covered in the treatise, including how to keep 
out noxious breezes, how to orient ones building, and how to identify a good water 
supply10. We may note that the items listed by Faventinus are not specifically related to 
the physical building; indeed, they represent what we might term para-architectural 
elements, those parts of the process which, while not related to construction itself, are 
nonetheless necessary for the success of the building.
The manual of Faventinus is, indeed, brief  it occupies a mere twenty-two printed 
pages in Krohns edition  and is also highly selective: there are no Corinthian orders, no 
public buildings and the theoretical digressions favoured by Vitruvius are kept to a mini-
mum. Faventinus, however, neither restricted himself to the passages in Vitruvius that deal 
specifically with private buildings, nor did he merely extract relevant passages in their origi-
nal order; through careful editing and meticulous restructuring, Faventinus managed to 
create an entirely unique work that would serve a very different purpose than its source.
The treatise opens with a condensed version of the Vitruvian components of 
architecture and it is one of the few sections where Faventinus does not display a 
8 The title Artis architectonicae privatus usibus adbreviatus liber appears in the earliest manuscript, 
the ninth century Par. lat. 10277; see Cam, Cetius Faventinus, xxxixxl. It has also appeared as De diversis 
fabricis architectonicae  notably in Roses 1867 edition  although this title is probably not correct.
9 de artis architectonicae peritia multa oratione Vitruuius Polio aliique auctores scientissime scripsere. 
uerum ne longa eorum disertaque facundia humilioribus ingeniis alienum faceret studium, pauca ex his 
mediocri licet sermone priuatis usibus ornare fuit consilium. Faventinus pf.
10 Faventinus pf.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 130
great understanding of his source11; where Vitruvius divides and subdivides concepts, 
Faventinus simply lists eight parts  in this case order, arrangement, beauty, measure-
ment, distribution, construction, situation and mechanics12  which seem carelessly 
assembled from various unrelated passages in the first book of Vitruvius. Faventinus is 
far more comfortable with the practical material that comprises the bulk of the treatise.
Roughly the first half of his manual is devoted to issues that need to be addressed 
before any structure is actually built. He begins with a section about the winds which fol-
lows Vitruvius closely  even going so far as to include the references to Eratosthenes and 
to the octagonal tower of Andronicus Cyrrhestes  but which identifies twelve winds, 
rather than eight13. We may recall that for Vitruvius, the direction of the winds dictated 
nothing less than the orientation of the city; for Faventinus, however, the winds appear 
to inform little more than the placement of windows and doors in a single building14.
The fairly brief section on the winds is followed by a slightly more substantial sec-
tion on water, drawn mostly from the eighth book of Vitruvius. Here we begin to see 
the editorial hand of Faventinus at work: the section begins with a description of how 
to find water, then follows with a passage on the digging of wells; these, in turn, are 
followed by passages on the quality of water, and on the different methods by which 
it may be conveyed15. Faventinus, however, has not merely followed Vitruvius, but has 
arranged the passages from different chapters in such a way as to guide us through the 
process of creating a private water supply. The exclusions are also revealing: Faventinus 
has not only removed the scientific digressions, but has also isolated the notion of the 
water supply from its original urban context. After the section on water, Faventinus 
returns to the second book of Vitruvius for a discussion of building materials. Once 
again, the rearrangement of information is intriguing: where Vitruvius begins with 
bricks then moves on to sand and lime  the ingredients of concrete  Faventinus 
places his recipe for concrete first, perhaps suggesting that it had surpassed bricks in 
11 Faventinus 1; cf. Vitruvius I.2.
12 nam architecturae partes sunt octo, quae sunt ordinatio, dispositio, uenustas, mensura, distributio, 
aedificatio, conlocatio, machinatio. Faventinus 1. Ordinatio and dispositio are two of the three parts of 
architecture listed in Vitruvius I.2.1; distributio is a sub-component of the third part. Venustas is part of 
the famous trio strength, utility and beauty describing the qualities of an individual building (Vitruvius 
I.3.2), while aedificatio and machinatio are different disciplines of architecture (Vitruvius I.3.1).
13 Faventinus 2; cf. Vitruvius I.6.46.
14 observabis ergo ne ianuas aut fenestras contra nocivos flatus facias. Faventinus 2.
15 Faventinus 37; the passages correspond to Vitruvius VIII.1, 7, 5 and 7 again.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 131
common construction16. The section concludes, like the second book of Vitruvius, 
with a discussion of various types of timber and their properties17.
From here, the focus of the text shifts to domestic architecture: Faventinus ven-
tures into the middle of the sixth book of Vitruvius to extract information about how 
to situate ones villa, then goes back a few chapters to discuss practical matters relat-
ing to house construction18. It is here that one may begin to perceive more clearly the 
subtlety and focus of Faventinus editorial decisions. In Vitruvius, the section on house 
construction precedes the section on villas and refers specifically to houses in the city; 
by placing the section on villa situation first, Faventinus has created a new context for 
the information that is to follow.
Vitruvius, in his discussion of villas, tells us that if we wish to create a more dis-
tinguished and more elegant villa, we should follow the proportions for city houses, 
already specified in an earlier chapter19. While Faventinus uses a similar formulation 
to introduce his own section on domestic architecture20, he has completely altered 
the context: through careful structuring, the Vitruvian description of urban architec-
ture has been transformed into instructions on how to construct a villa. Suddenly the 
intentions of Faventinus become clear: everything that he has included in his manual, 
from the location of a water supply to the properties of building materials, are passages 
relevant to the situation of a private residence in the country.
Faventinus continues with passages on the situation and vaulting of baths (from 
book five of Vitruvius), on the creation of paved floors, on finishing walls, and on the 
various colours (all from book seven), and on the creation of a sun-dial (book nine)21. 
Regardless of their original placement in the text of Vitruvius, the passages chosen by 
Faventinus may all be read in the context of private rural building. We may also note 
that the subjects addressed by Faventinus are predominantly ones related to either the 
situation or decoration of a building rather than to the process of construction itself.
16 Faventinus 89 (sand and lime), 10 (bricks); Vitruvius II.3 (bricks), 45 (sand and lime). 
Plommer, Manuals, 3437 suggests that Faventinus had a more advanced understanding of concrete 
than Vitruvius.
17 Faventinus 12; cf. Vitruvius II.910.
18 Faventinus 1314; cf. Vitruvius VI.6 and 4.
19 si quid delicatus in uillis faciundum fuerit, ex symmetriis quae in urbanis supra scripta sunt con-
stituta, ita struantur, uti sine inpeditione rusticae utilitatis aedificentur. Vitruvius VI.6.5.
20 si quid uero melius et nitidius facere uolueris, exempla de urbanis fabirics sumes. Faventinus 13.
21 For an analysis of the sun-dials and the differences introduced by Faventinus, see P. Pattenden 
Sundials in Cetius Faventinus, CQ, Vol. 29, No. 1 (1979), 203212.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 132
We may, therefore, suggest that Faventinus was writing either for an audience 
of builders  that is to say, people who knew how to construct a building, but who 
did not necessarily possess any architectural training  or land-owners who had hired 
local builders. Certainly there is evidence for a sharp increase in villa construction 
starting around the end of the third century and perhaps corresponding to the res-
toration of peace under the tetrarchy22. If these new villas were privately constructed 
without the input of a trained architect, it may have been necessary for the owner or 
the builders to refer to a manual that discussed water supply, building materials and 
other practical matters.
The shadow of Vitruvius has perhaps obscured the rural objectives of Faventinus; 
we may note, however, that Palladius  author of a thirteen volume agricultural manual 
 was easily able to adapt Faventinus for the first book of his Opus agriculturae, which 
deals with rural building23. Where Faventinus was concerned with the construction 
of rural dwellings for what may still have been an urbanised population, Palladius has 
provided us only what was necessary for the practical establishment of a farm. Thus 
Palladius reduced the text even further, omitting and restructuring as necessary; how-
ever, the fact that Palladius was able to incorporate so much of his source suggests that 
the text of Faventinus had already, to some extent, been tailored to a rural audience. 
Despite his efforts at simplification, Faventinus cannot ultimately be viewed as 
an example of intellectual decline, nor as direct evidence for the abandonment of 
urban culture. In fact, Faventinus has succeeded in his task of transforming Vitruvian 
knowledge into practical manual for a definite audience of rural landholders wishing 
to construct private dwellings. We should not, therefore, be surprised to find that the 
urban focus of Vitruvius has not survived in the manual Faventinus; in the country 
there would have been no need for street layouts, temples or public buildings. The city, 
however, is not entirely absent from Faventinus: it is still able to provide an example of 
elegance to which rural constructions may aspire.
22 On villas generally, see J.T. Smith Roman Villas: A Study in Social Structure (London, 1997). 
For an introduction to the rise of late antique villas in the West, with extensive bibliography, see J.-P. 
Sodini Habitat de lAntiquit Tardive, Topoi Orient-Occident, Vol. 5, No. 1 (1995), 151218; see 
also A. Chavarra and T. Lewit Archaeological Research on the Late Antique Countryside: A biblio-
graphic essay in Bowden et al. (eds) Late Antique Countryside, 354 (esp. 2630).
23 The most widely available modern edition of the whole text is Opus agriculturae ed. R.H. 
Rodgers (Leipzig, 1975); Martins edition (see above, n. 4) only contains the first two books. For a 
history of the text, see R.H. Rodgers An Introduction to Palladius (London, 1975), 313; on the use 
of Faventinus, rather than Vitruvius, as a source, see Martin, viixxxix.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 133
We have, in this book, arranged as much as is necessary for private use says Faventinus 
as he brings his treatise to an end. However, we leave civic institutions and other things 
to be recounted by someone of superior knowledge24. If, indeed, there were other 
authors from the era of Faventinus who undertook to write about civic architecture, 
their work has not survived. Indeed, after Vitruvius, there are remarkably few texts 
that address the urban built environment, and certainly nothing that approaches the 
city with such a clearly prescriptive ideology. The one major text from late anti quity 
that offers a prescriptive approach to urbanism is the sixth-century treatise ascribed to 
Julian of Ascalon25; however, unlike Vitruvius, Julian is not concerned with the ideal 
form of a city, but rather with regulating the urban spaces that already exist.
As an historical figure, Julian of Ascalon is somewhat obscure. From the evi-
dence in his text, we may suggest that he was a practicing architect, and that he was 
indeed based in the Palestinian city of Ascalon26; although the treatise is difficult to 
date reliably, it is generally accepted that Julian flourished during the early part of 
Justinians reign, or perhaps slightly earlier27. Unfortunately, his treatise has only sur-
vived as a series of extracts from a lost longer work, a fact that is made clear in the title 
which appears in several of the manuscripts: From the treatise of the architect Julian of 
Ascalon, drawn from the laws and customs of Palestine28. From the title, we might also 
infer that the treatise was not, in itself, a legal text, but rather a collection of official 
statutes and local knowledge compiled by an architect who had been called upon to 
enforce the building codes.
It has been suggested that the laws and customs preserved in Julians treatise are 
related to the legal compilations of Justinian, and also to the laws of the Talmud which 
were still observed in Palestine29; one scholar has found  alas, in a passage which is 
24 quantum ergo ad priuatum usum spectat, necessaria huic libello ordinavimus. ciuitatum sane et 
ceterarum rerum institutiones praestanti sapientiae memorandas reliquimus. Faventinus 29.
25 The text of Julians treatise appears in C. Saliou Le trait durbanisme de Julien dAscalon: droit 
et architecture en Palestine au VIe sicle (Paris, 1996), 3277.
26 In Jul. Asc. 35.2 the author momentarily shifts to the first person when describing a particular 
custom of Ascalon.
27 On the dating, see J. Geiger Julian of Ascalon, JHS, Vol. 112 (1992), 3143 and C. Saliou, 
Julien dAscalon, 2729.
28               . 
On the manuscript tradition, see Geiger, Julian, 3133 and Saliou, Julien dAscalon, 921.
29 On the legal sources for Julian, see H.J. Scheltema The nomoi of Iulianus of Ascalon in M. 
David et al. (eds) Symbolae ad jus et historiam antiquitatis pertinentes Julio Christiano Van Oven 
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 134
probably a later interpolation  a reference to a law of the emperor Zeno30. However, 
while much of the text was written in a prescriptive voice  and many of the passages 
have a precision that suggests practical experience  the wisdom preserved in the trea-
tise more often suggests local knowledge than official legislation31.
Julians text was not composed as a manual for all the cities of the empire, but 
rather is focussed only on the cities of Palestine. However, the fact that his text has sur-
vived in the fourteenth century Hexabiblos  and that it was preserved in manuscript 
alongside the Book of the Eparch  might suggest that his prescriptions had become 
more widespread and taken on a greater legal force in the centuries that followed32. 
Even if the scope of the original treatise was limited only to the city of Ascalon, Julians 
text nonetheless provides us with one of our best pieces of written evidence for the life 
of a functioning city in the late antique east.
Julian opens with an intriguing nod to the natural sciences: he tells us that there 
are four elements  fire, air, water and earth  and that these elements are the source of 
conflicts between men33; for this reason the treatise is divided into four books, each of 
which deal with problems that may arise on account of a different element. The struc-
ture, however, is somewhat tenuous: the section on fire does deal mostly with artisans 
in the city who would have required some kind of kiln or oven, and the section on air 
deals with windows and doors; however in the same section, we also find information 
about wall repairs and drainpipes. Additionally there is a section on views that does not 
appear to fit with Julians structure and may, in fact, be the work of a different author.
The majority of Julians treatise focuses on the world of private building. Indeed, 
the few references to public space are almost incidental: at one point we learn that it is 
forbidden to build animal troughs beneath a public portico or on a major thorough-
fare (platea) because of the inconvenience to passers-by34; elsewhere we find that tavern 
dedicatae (Leiden, 1946), 34960 and Saliou, Julien dAscalon, 8491; on the possible connection see 
S. Lieberman A Few Words on the Book by Julian of Ascalon The Laws of Palestine and its Customs, 
Tarbiz, Vol. 40 (1971), 40617 (in Hebrew, with an English summary).
30 Scheltema Nomoi, 353; Geiger, Julian, 4041.
31 For a detailed analysis of Julians text in the context of urban planning, see B.S. Hakim Julian 
of Ascalons Treatise of Construction and Design Rules from Sixth-Century Palestine, JSAH, Vol. 
60, No. 1 (2001), 425 and id. Mediterranean urban and building codes: origins, content, impact, 
and lessons Urban Design International, Vol. 13 (2008), 2140.
32 Scheltema Nomoi, 35960; Saliou, Julien dAscalon, 921.
33    , , , , ,      
 . Jul. Asc. 1.
34 Jul. Asc. 20.4.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 135
owners should not be allowed to install an awning or outdoor seating and that drinks 
should not be served to customers on the street35. There are also a handful of references 
to matters of urban repair: in one section we find that the residents of a particular 
block are responsible for the maintenance of the sewer system up to the point where 
it joins the public sewer36; the treatise also specifies that shop owners are responsible 
for maintaining the roofs of porticos but that if anything happens to the columns it is 
the responsibility of the city37. From these examples, we get a sense that, in the city of 
the sixth century, the division between private and civic responsibility was fairly well-
defined. Such examples, however, are infrequent: the bulk of the treatise is devoted to 
regulations which will ensure that the building activity of one private individual will 
not inconvenience his neighbours.
Julians city is dominated by industry: in the opening section, he enumerates 
bakers, potters, glassmakers, blacksmiths, inn-keepers, launderers and cheese makers, 
all of which rely on the presence of an oven or a kiln38. Because these industries are 
located within a crowded city, where buildings of two or more storeys are not uncom-
mon, the fires of these various businesses must be positioned so as not to damage 
surrounding buildings, nor to fill residences with smoke, harmful fumes or noxious 
odours. A bread oven, for instance, need only be placed six cubits away from a one 
storey building, but as much as twenty cubits from a taller building39. Facilities for 
glassmaking, on the other hand, should be located in less populous neighbourhoods 
on account of their dangerous fumes40; cheese-makers, which apparently produced the 
most noxious fumes of all, should be placed outside the city by at least three stades41.
The laws concerning ovens and kilns are often expressed as a relationship between 
the oven and the nearby building. In later sections of the treatise, however, prescrip-
tions deal more specifically with the relationship between neighbouring individuals. If, 
for instance one person wants to build a roof terrace adjacent to another roof terrace, 
35 Jul. Asc. 17.3.
36 Jul. Asc. 45.
37 Jul. Asc. 37.23
38 Jul. Asc. 414.
39 Jul. Asc. 4.1; 5.12. If the oven is located to the south or east of the building, it need only be 
placed twelve cubits away; twenty cubits if located to the north or west.
40 Jul. Asc. 11.1
41 Jul. Asc. 14.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 136
he must construct a wall of at least three cubits in height to separate them42. If the 
owner of one property wants to place a window in the wall of the building, he is only 
allowed to do so if the facing property is at least twenty feet away43.
In Julians city, relations between neighbours are not limited to adjacent build-
ings, but to individuals living within the same structure. Indeed, if Julians treatise is 
an accurate reflection of urban space, we may determine that residential buildings of 
at least three storeys  perhaps with a shop or workshop on the ground floor  were 
fairly common. The idea of vertical ownership and vertical responsibility would have 
been something of a grey area and Julian must therefore provide a series of specific 
guidelines for where one floor ends and the next begins44.
If an exterior wall of a building needs to be repaired, each resident is responsible 
for a percentage of the total cost proportional to vertical space; thus, if the height of 
one storey, from floor to ceiling, is ten cubits and the total height of the building is 
thirty cubits, the owner of that storey will be liable for one third of the cost45. If the 
owners of a particular building want to extend their building, perhaps to occupy an 
adjacent vacant lot, the owner of each floor is responsible for paying one third of his 
own floor and two thirds of his own ceiling46. In this way, a sense of agreement and 
joint responsibility is created among the owners.
While Julian is concerned with neighbourly accord and with the situation of vari-
ous constructed elements  what we might today call zoning laws  he rarely addresses 
the issue of building. There are a few passages  notably those concerning the placement 
of windows in blind walls  where he discusses technical matters relating to a particu-
lar structure; for the most part, however, his prescriptions are para-architectural. As in 
the manual of Faventinus, both the design and the construction of buildings appear to 
have occurred without the guiding presence of an architect.
It is perhaps worth saying a few words about the nature of the architectural pro-
fession and how it may have changed in late antiquity47. The Greek  referred 
42 Jul. Asc. 31.1.
43 Jul. Asc. 26.2. The use of feet instead of cubits may suggest a different source for this particular law.
44 See, for instance, Jul. Asc. 33.4.
45 Jul. Asc. 33.2; the example presented here has been simplified.
46 Jul. Asc. 35.2.
47 On the role of the architect in late antiquity, see G. Downey Byzantine Architects: Their 
Training and Methods, Byzantion, Vol. 18 (194648), 99118; N. Schibille The Profession of the 
Architect in Late Antique Byzantium, Byzantion, Vol. 79 (2009), 36079.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 137
to the director of a building project, and it is this sense that is preserved in Vitruvius. 
Indeed, the very first chapter of the his first book informs us that the practice of archi-
tecture required a mastery of several disciplines, including a knowledge of materials 
and design, situation and construction, mathematics and history48; for Vitruvius, the 
architect was responsible for overseeing the construction of a building, from the initial 
design to the final decoration49.
In Faventinus the architect appears to have disappeared completely; the manual 
may open with a description of the parts of architecture, but the process of construction 
may have been commissioned by a private individual and carried out by builders who 
were perhaps working from, or modifying, a previous plan. Procopius  who wrote about 
building in the sixth century and to whom we shall return in the next section  uses the 
designation  only once, to refer to Apollodorus, who had constructed build-
ings in the time of Trajan and Hadrian50. The contemporary builders Anthemius and 
Isidore, responsible for the construction of Hagia Sophia, are referred to as  
or 51. For large scale civic projects, at any rate, the master-builder of ancient 
days had been replaced by something closer to a structural engineer.
The treatise of Julian of Ascalon allows us to suggest what the role of the architect 
may have been within an urban environment where building was directed and funded 
by private individuals and constructed by local builders. The architect would not have 
been responsible for the design of the building, nor for overseeing the construction; 
instead he would have been called upon when a private individual wished to modify or 
expand his property in some way, or in the event of a building-related dispute. Although 
the architect may not have had any specific legal powers, his knowledge of laws and 
customs would have made him qualified to ensure that the urban building activity 
undertaken by private individuals occurred within certain accepted standards.
The city that appears in Julians treatise is nothing like the formal urban space described 
by Vitruvius: where Vitruvius imagined a rational arrangement of public institutions, 
48 Architecti est scientia pluribus disciplinis et variis eruditionibus ornata, quae ab ceteris artibus 
perficiuntur. Vitruvius I.1.1; on the various disciplines, see I.1.15. The idea of the specialist requiring 
a great deal of varied education must have been a literary topos, as we find a very similar assessment 
of geographers in the opening of Strabo.
49 Vitruvius describes his own role in the construction of a basilica at V.1.6.
50 Procopius De aed. IV.6.13. Apollodorus also appears in HA Hadrian 19 and Dio LXIX.4.
51 Procopius De aed. I.1.24.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 138
Julians city is a complex and slightly chaotic agglomeration of private buildings, 
regulated by a series of laws and customs designed to prevent disagreements between 
neighbours. Public space, insofar as it appears in Julians treatise, is largely relegated to 
the background and rarely intrudes into the world of private construction; the reason 
for this omission may be that the nature and appearance of public spaces were still 
largely dictated by the laws of the state.
In the two great law codes of late antiquity  the Codex Theodosianus, compiled 
in the fifth century and the Corpus Iuris Civilis, compiled in the sixth52  there are, a 
number of constitutions pertaining to the functions and appearance of the city. The 
Codex Theodosianus, especially, preserves a series of laws from an extended period  
lasting from the mid-fourth to the early-fifth century  during which unregulated 
private building and misuse of public money were beginning to challenge the formal 
order of urban life. While the ideals of the imperial period are still apparent in the laws 
designed to govern public space, they may have no longer reflected the attitudes of the 
individuals responsible for maintaining order in the city.
In terms of civic institutions, the city of the fourth and fifth centuries may not have 
differed considerably from its classical predecessor. The Codex Theodosianus reveals that 
urban spaces still contained a forum, a governors residence, porticos, theatres, storehouses 
and public baths, all surrounded by a publicly maintained circuit wall53. Furthermore, 
the language of the Codex suggests that the city was still perceived as a venue for human 
existence that embodied both practical and monumental characteristics; more than one 
constitution is justified using the language of civic beauty (pulchritudine ciuitatis)54.
However, even from the beginning of the fourth century, we find evidence that the 
boundaries between public and private space were being challenged by the urban popu-
lation. The Codex contains several examples of private structures built either too close 
to public buildings or, in some cases, right up against them. A constitution from AD 326 
specifies that private structures should not be built within 100 feet of a state storehouse, 
lest the private building catch fire and take the storehouse with it55. Although the reason 
52 The standard text of the Codex Theodosianus is still Theodosiani Libri XVI ed. T. Mommsen 
and P.M. Meyer (Berlin, 1905); new laws introduced by Justinian are collected in Corpus Iuris Civilis 
Vol. 3: Novellae ed. R. Schoell. Sixth edition (Berlin, 1954).
53 CTh 15.1.4, 8, 12, 22, 35 and 50; additionally, unspecified aedificia publica appear throughout 
CTh 15.1.
54 See especially CTh 15.1.25, 45 and 50.
55 CTh 15.1.4.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 139
for this constitution may have been largely pragmatic  the wording suggests that such 
a fire had recently occurred  laws from the end of the fourth century imply that private 
buildings in public spaces had started to degrade the appearance of the city. Another 
constitution, this one from AD 389, describes it as shameful that public buildings should 
be corrupted by the addition of private ones, and grants power to the Prefect of the city 
to have private structures removed at his discretion56.
The continual reiteration of these laws suggests that they may have been largely 
ignored in practice. A constitution of AD 383 orders the demolition of any private 
structures built in the forum of any city57; a pair of constitutions from AD 398 enforce 
the removal of both buildings around the storehouse and semi-permanent structures 
 known as aedificia parapetasia  built onto side of public buildings58. In AD 406, it is 
specified that there should be a space of at least fifteen feet between public and private 
structures, and that any private structures that do not comply with this rule are liable 
to be destroyed59. Finally, a law from three years later states that no private buildings 
may be built within the grounds of the imperial palace60.
Although the appearance of unwanted private structures within public urban 
spaces would have been an annoyance, a far greater problem facing the city of the 
fourth and fifth centuries may have been the inability  or an unwillingness  of the 
urban administration to maintain ancient public structures; instead, governors were 
devoting public money to new buildings while older buildings fell to ruin. Thus, in AD 
365, we find a constitution calling for a halt to new construction until older structures 
had been repaired61. The substance of this law is reiterated three more times in the 
same year, then again in 376, twice in 380, twice in 390 and yet again in 39462.
Governors were expected to use a certain proportion of the municipal fund  
that is, the annual collection of taxes within a particular region  for public building 
56 Turpe est publici splendoris ornatum privatarum aedium adiectione conrumpi et ea. CTh 15.1.25. 
The law is addressed to the Prefect of Constantinople.
57 adque ideo diruenda sunt omnia, quae per diuersas urbes uel in foro uel in quocumque publico 
loco ciuitatis extructa noscuntur. CTh 15.1.22.
58 CTh 15.1.38 and 39.
59 CTh 15.1.46. See also CTh 4.24.1, sadly undated.
60 CTh 15.1.47.
61 praesertim cum neque nouam constitui fabricam iusserimus, antequam uetera reformentur. CTh 
15.1.14. A similar constitution  but directed only at the city of Rome  appeared in the previous 
year; cf. CTh 15.1.11.
62 cf. CTh 15.1.15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 26 and 27.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 140
and essential restoration projects63; only if there were still funds left over would the 
governor be allowed to commission new urban buildings64. During a time of peace 
and prosperity, there may have been enough in the municipal fund to cover both 
repairs and new monumental projects. It is possible that economic conditions in the 
fourth century would have resulted in diminished municipal funds65; however, it may 
have been that the governors of the fourth century were simply more concerned with 
projects of personal interest than with civic maintenance.
To make matters worse, governors were starting work on public buildings and fail-
ing to complete them; subsequent governors, not wishing to complete the unfinished 
works of their predecessors, appear to have simply undertaken new projects, leaving 
the city with a loose collection of uncompleted structures66. For this reason, it became 
necessary to regulate municipal expenditure on building; a law of AD 376  directed 
only at the city of Rome  specifies that anyone wishing to undertake a new building, 
had to do so with their own funds and could neither destroy any earlier foundations, 
nor use material from other buildings to construct their own67. The only exceptions to 
this law were stables and public storehouses, which could be constructed from new, 
without imperial permission68.
While earlier constitutions merely stated the rules for public building, subsequent 
laws began to specify penalties. A constitution from AD 390 states that any governor who 
attempted to use municipal funds for new building projects would not only be compelled 
to complete the building at his own expense, but would also be subject to a fine of ten 
pounds of gold69. Four years later, the law was restated with the important addition that 
anyone who placed their own name on a completed public work would be guilty of trea-
63 CTh 15.1.18 (AD 365) specifies that one-third of the total taxes should go toward public works 
(including new buildings); CTh 15.1.32 (AD 395) specifies that one-third of taxes go toward the res-
toration of public works.
64 Iudex, qui ad prouinciam fuerit destinatus, duas partes uel incuria uel uetustate collapsas ad 
statum pristinum nitoris adducat adque tertiam construat nouitatis, si tamen famae et propriis cupit 
laudibus prouidere. CTh 15.1.20.
65 Taxation and the rural economy in the fourth century will be discussed in the next chapter, 
178187.
66 CTh 15.1.2 and 21.
67 Nouum quodque opus qui uolet in urbe moliri, sua pecunia, suis operibus absoluat, non contractis 
ueteribus emolumentis, non effossis nobilium operum substructionibus, non rediuiuis de publico saxis, 
non marmorum frustis spoliatarum aedium deformatione conuulsis. CTh 15.1.19.
68 CTh 15.1.17 and 37.
69 CTh 15.1.28.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 141
son70. According to the constitution itself, such measures were taken specifically so that 
no governor should make their reputation from the construction of new buildings71.
From the evidence of the Codex Theodosianus, we can hardly conclude that the 
cities of the fourth and fifth centuries had fallen into decline due to a lack of public 
funds or building activity. While the governors may still have been able to collect 
the resources necessary to maintain an imperial city, they may not, ultimately, have 
directed those resources toward state-approved works of public construction. Instead, 
governors used urban maintenance funds to construct  or, in some cases, partially 
construct  buildings that were not directly relevant to the public functions of the city. 
Although the state may have attempted to enforce imperial urban ideals through the 
medium of the law, the laws themselves demonstrate how the desires of the state and 
the desires of the urban authorities had started to diverge.
The urban ideal of the imperial era imagined the city as a series of planned public spaces 
around which private life could develop. In order for those public spaces to survive, it 
would not have been necessary for the residents of the city to possess a shared belief 
in civic institutions, so long as the legal prescriptions dictating urban order remained 
strictly enforced. In late antiquity, however, we can sense the beginning of dissatisfac-
tion with the imperial model preserved in the legal codes. The types of building and 
maintenance required by the state were no longer to the taste of the governors who 
oversaw the civic budget; once the governors themselves had started to ignore the will 
of the state, there would have been little to stop other urban notables who possessed 
both the money and the desire to build.
Without the enforcement of an urban ideal, the city would have been dictated 
by the competing interests of individual builders. Private building, as illustrated in 
Faventinus and Julian of Ascalon, may not have been undertaken by people who 
possessed the requisite architectural training, and the resulting structures may not 
have given due consideration either to their immediate surroundings or to their place 
within the formal arrangement of the city. While private building may have been con-
tained, to some extent, by the existing urban layout, the examples of encroachment 
70 Si qui iudices perfecto operi suum potius nomen quam nostrae perennitatis scripserint, maiestatis 
teneantur obnoxii. CTh 15.1.31.
71 ut nemini iudicum liceat novis molitionibus industriae captare famam. CTh 15.1.31.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 142
in Julian of Ascalon and the Codex Theodosianus demonstrate that private individu-
als would not have been above pushing their constructions into public space if they 
thought they could get away with it. The failure of the urban administration to regu-
late public space combined with the willingness of individuals to undertake privately 
funded construction may have contributed to an increased lack of coherence in the 
established urban order.
However the ideals that once governed the city had not disappeared completely. 
In late antiquity, the city still acted as the focus of culture and administration in the 
Roman world and, as we shall discuss later in this chapter, many of the institutions 
that defined urban life continued to exist, in some form, even in the cities of the sixth 
and seventh centuries. What had started to change was the idea of the city as a space 
defined by its public functions. As much as the prescriptions of the state may have tried 
to dictate an ideal for civic life, the laws may not ultimately have been strong enough to 
regulate the activities of the private builder.
new foundations
The continued presence of an urban ideal in late antiquity may be discernible in the 
attempts of the state to regulate the cities that already existed; the existence of that 
ideal, however, may become more apparent if we investigate how the state approached 
the establishment of new urban foundations. During the imperial period, the construc-
tion of cities had allowed for the effective administration of a large area by a central 
authority. However, in the reduced space of the Eastern Roman world  an empire 
that, by the fifth century, consisted primarily of those lands that had been urbanised 
since the time of Alexander  the need for new urban foundations may have been 
largely unnecessary. Certainly the majority of our surviving textual sources from late 
antiquity are concerned primarily with the maintenance of old urban spaces rather 
than the construction of new ones.
While new foundations may have been relatively infrequent in late antiquity, 
they were not completely unknown; indeed, the idea of building a city from new 
is addressed as late as the mid-sixth century in an anonymous treatise on military 
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 143
strategy72. Unfortunately we know nothing about the author  neither his name nor 
the title of his treatise has survived  although the work itself has been dated to later in 
the reign of Justinian73. As we would expect from a treatise on strategy, the majority of 
the text is devoted to military matters; at the beginning of the work, however, we find 
several brief chapters devoted to the built environment.
A chapter on the construction of forts is followed by three chapters on the planning 
and construction of a city. In the space of a few paragraphs, the author takes us through 
a series of pragmatic prescriptions that sound distantly reminiscent of Vitruvius. He 
opens by telling us that anyone intending to found a city must first examine the site74: 
this involves checking the water supply to see that it is both healthy and plentiful, 
making sure that there is local stone available and also making sure that the area will 
produce enough food75. Although Vitruvius demonstrates some concern for security, 
our anonymous author makes it a point of absolute necessity: if it is not possible for the 
city to survive an enemy siege, it is best to abandon the town altogether.
As with the classical city, the wall represents the first stage of urban space; once 
a suitable site has been found  preferably one on high ground or surrounded by 
rivers  a wall may be constructed. Indeed, our author seems concerned only with 
the wall, devoting several fairly technical paragraphs to the ways that they should be 
constructed, and the ways that enemy attackers may seek to overcome them76. On the 
subject of the city itself, our author has only this to say:
I am not unaware that many people look to the present prosperity and believe 
it increasing in every way. When they start to found large cities, they give no 
less weight to nice appearance than to security. They have built a number of 
such cities on level ground and beautified them with gardens, parks, and lawns. 
But the way I look as it is that the outcome of what is happening these days in 
uncertain. Security, I think, is more important than a pleasing appearance77.
72 Anonymi Byzantini Peri Strategikes ed. G. Dennis in Three Byzantine Military Treatises. CFHB 
25 (Washington, D.C., 1985), 9135.
73 On the dating, see Dennis, Military Treatises, 24.
74          . Anon. Byz. 10.3. (trans G. 
Dennis). cf. Vitruvius I.4.
75 Anon. Byz. 10.620.
76 Anon. Byz. 1113.
77               
,     ,        , 
            .  
              
     . Anon. Byz. 11.25 (trans. G. Dennis).
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 144
The passage appears to be suggesting that not only were there new urban founda-
tions at the time our author was writing, but that there may even have been planned 
cities in the classical style. Of course, it is possible that the author was basing his mate-
rial on earlier sources: the manual of Aeneas Tacticus78  written in the fourth century 
BC, but well-known throughout the classical period and into late antiquity79  focuses 
specifically on the defence of the city and withstanding sieges; in the treatise of Aeneas, 
however, the cities are established urban centres rather than new foundations. In later 
military treatises, such as those of Arrian and Aelian, the city is barely mentioned80.
While it is also possible that our anonymous author was drawing upon lost or 
non-military sources for his sections on urban planning, the very fact that he chose to 
include such information in his treatise  and the fact that he appears to have repur-
posed the material to address specifically military concerns  would suggest that new 
urban foundations were still a reality for the sixth-century audience. However, despite 
the allusion to prosperity giving rise to cities, our authors pragmatic approach to strat-
egy appears to predict the kastron, or fortified-stronghold model for urbanism that 
may have characterised the Byzantine world of the seventh and eighth centuries81.
Although our author suggests that new foundations may not have been uncommon, 
it is difficult to identify examples of completely new cities founded in late-antiquity. 
The colonial urbanisation that characterised the era of Julius Caesar and Augustus 
had effectively ended in the first century AD. Even the great builder-emperors of the 
second and third centuries  Trajan, Hadrian, Septimus Severus and Diocletian  seems 
to have focussed mostly on the improvement of extant urban centres. In the time of 
Constantine, however, we find evidence for at least one large-scale urban foundation.
Although the town of Byzantium appears in numerous classical sources, we know 
reasonably little about its pre-Constantinian appearance82: it was founded in the sev-
enth century on a site that was acknowledged to be superior to the land on the other side 
78 Aeneas Tacticus ed. and trans. W.A. Oldfather et al. (Cambridge, MA., 1923).
79 On the transmission of Aeneas, see J.V. Tejada Warfare, History and Literature in the Archaic 
and Classical Periods: The Development of Greek Military Treatises, Historia, Vol. 53, No. 2 (2004), 
12946 (at 14143); the article suggests that Aeneas may have been a source for our author.
80 On these authors, see P.A. Stadter The Ars Tactica of Arrian: Tradition and Originality, CP, 
Vol. 73, No. 2 (1978), 11728 and A.M. Devine Aelians Manual of Hellenistic Military Tactics: A 
New Translation from the Greek with an Introduction, The Ancient World, Vol. 19 (1989), 3164.
81 On which, see C. Mango Byzantium: The Empire of New Rome (London, 1980), pp. 6087.
82 On the earlier city, see C. Mango Le dveloppement urbain de Constantinople (IVeVIIe sicles) 
(Paris, 1990), 1321; S. Bassett The Urban Image of Late Antique Constantinople (Cambridge, 2004), 
1822.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 145
of the Bosporus and, by the third century BC, it had become a town of some stature83. 
A description in Polybius suggests a major centre with numerous strategic advantages, 
although the later description in Strabo implies a town of no real significance84. By the 
end of the second century AD, Byzantium possessed enough defensive capabilities to 
hold out against a three year siege mounted by the forces of Septimus Severus85. When 
the Roman forces finally took the city in AD 196 Septimus Severus ordered that the 
land walls be destroyed; the same emperor, however, may have subsequently restored 
parts of the city in the early third century86.
In terms of its layout and amenities, Byzantium may not have been substantially 
different from other eastern imperial cities of the early fourth century87. According 
to the accepted narrative, Constantine began work on his new monumental capital 
shortly after his victory over Licinius in AD 324; some six years later, in 330, the com-
pletely new city of Constantinople was formally dedicated88. Given that much of the 
potential archaeological evidence is now inaccessible, it is impossible to determine 
how much of the older city was integrated into the new plan. 
Constantine extended the area of the urban space and adorned it with monuments 
and monumental buildings  he may even have established a new street layout in parts of 
the city that had been outside the original boundary89  but he probably did not bring a 
fully-formed city into being in the space of six years. The great achievement of Constantine 
was not the creation of a city, but rather the creation of an urban framework that would 
support an increasing population. The original Byzantium had not been a large city; the 
fact that Constantinople was able, over the following century, to develop into one of the 
most populous urban centres in the Mediterranean world  rivalled only by Antioch and 
Rome  is perhaps the greatest evidence for the presence of an ambitious urban plan90.
Constantinople, however, may be the last example of a city effectively brought 
into being by the will of the state. In subsequent centuries, we find evidence for imperial 
83 Herodotus 4.144.
84 Polybius Histories 4.4344; Strabo 7.6.2.
85 Dio 74.1014; the event is alluded to in HA Caracalla 1.
86 Severan constructions are discussed in Malalas XII.20.
87 See the study by A. Berger Streets and Public Spaces in Constantinople, DOP, Vol. 54 (2000), 
16172, for possible reconstruction of the pre-Constantinian street plan.
88 Mango, Dveloppement, 2336; for an assessment of literary and numismatic sources, see A. 
Alfldi On the Foundation of Constantinople: A Few Notes, JRS, Vol. 37, (1947), 1016.
89 Berger, Streets and Public Spaces, 16172.
90 On the urban achievements of Constantine, see Mango, Dveloppement Urbain, 2336.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 146
building and for cities being renamed in honour of particular emperors  there were at 
least two cities refounded as Theodosiopolis in the fifth century91  but there are few if 
any examples of whole cities being constructed from new. Indeed, the idea of the new 
imperial foundation would not return until the reign of Justinian; however, as we shall 
soon see, the monumental ideals that informed the urban projects of Justinian may 
have been ill-suited to the political and economic realities of the sixth century.
At some point between AD 550 and 560, the historian Procopius of Caesarea composed 
the Buildings, a singular work that sought to record all of the new construction and 
restoration projects undertaken during the reign of Justinian. The text may certainly 
be read as a straightforward panegyric designed to cast Justinian as the great master 
builder of his age; however, if we consider it in light of the authors more critical works 
 specifically the Anecdota  the unrestrained glorification of the Buildings becomes 
puzzling. The Buildings is most certainly a valuable source for the state of the built 
environment in the sixth century and for the imperial ideals that may have shaped it; 
however, before we take Procopius at his word, we must first evaluate both the motives 
and methods behind the text.
The biographical details of Procopius are reasonably well known: he was born and 
educated in Caesarea in the late fifth or early sixth century, and in AD 527 he became an 
advisor to the general Belisarius92; he travelled with Belisarius from eastern Asia Minor 
to Carthage and finally to Italy before returning to Constantinople in 54093. He would 
spend the next decade composing seven books detailing the three major wars for which 
he had been an eye-witness; the books appeared together in 55194. The final years of his 
life would be devoted to a continuation of the Wars, as well as the composition of his 
two most thematically disparate works, the Anecdota and the Buildings.
Although there are several passages in the Buildings that might allow us to date 
the text exactly, there are also enough inconsistencies to preclude a consensus among 
91 Procopius De aed. II.5.1 and III.1.1.
92 Procopius Wars I.12.24.
93 For an overview of the life of Procopius, see E. Stein Histoire du bas-empire II (Paris, 1949), 
70923; J.A.S. Evans Justinian and the Historian Procopius, Greece & Rome, Second Series, Vol. 17, 
No. 2 (1970), 21823 and A. Cameron Procopius and the Sixth Century (London, 1985), 518.
94 Evans, Justinian and Procopius, 221.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 147
modern scholars95. In book five, Procopius mentions a bridge over the Sangarius river 
that Justinian had started but not yet completed96; the construction of the bridge is 
attested in Theophanes  who suggests that work began in 559  and its completion is 
mentioned in a poem of Paul the Silentiary dating from 56297. On this evidence, the 
Buildings may be dated to around 558/998. There are, however, numerous events that 
Procopius fails to mention  the most notable being the collapse of the dome of Hagia 
Sophia in AD 558  that have been used to suggest an earlier dating. It has also been 
argued that Procopius may have died at some point between 553 and 555, which would 
place the Buildings in the earlier half of that decade99.
The more intriguing question is why Procopius would have composed such a 
work. Procopius expresses frustration with Belisarius during his account of the Gothic 
campaigns and is increasingly critical of Justinian in the eighth book of the Wars; 
the criticisms turn to vitriol in the Anecdota, which sets out to portray Belisarius as 
weak-willed and Justinian as nothing less than a demon in human form who, in the 
space of thirty-two years, managed to single-handedly destroy the greatness of the 
Roman world. Among Justinians numerous and unforgivable sins, Procopius lists  
although does not dwell upon  the fact that the emperor ruined the appearance of 
Constantinople and all of the other cities100.
Regardless of their factual accuracy, the outpourings of the Anecdota are so clearly 
genuine  they are the work of a man who has been unable, in his official writings, to 
express what he believes to be the absolute truth  that one must approach the straight-
forward panegyric of the Buildings with a certain amount of scepticism. Certainly the 
95 There have, however, been many suggestions: see G. Downey The Composition of Procopius, 
De Aedificiis, TPAPA, Vol. 78 (1947), 171183; Stein, Histoire II, 72223; J.A.S. Evans The Dates 
of the Anecdota and the de Aedificiis of Procopius, CP, Vol. 64, No. 1 (1969), 2930; Cameron, 
Procopius, 912 ; M. Whitby Justinians Bridge over the Sangarius and the Date of Procopius de 
Aedificiis, JHS, Vol. 105 (1985), 12948; R. Scott Justinians Coinage and Easter Reforms and the 
date of the Secret History, BMGS, Vol. 11 (1987), 21521; G. Greatrex The dates of Procopius 
works, BMGS, Vol. 18 (1994), 10114; J.D. Howard-Johnston The Education and Expertise of 
Procopius, Antiquit Tardive, Vol. 8 (2001), 1930.
96 Procopius De aed. V.3.810.
97 Whitby Justinians Bridge, 13637.
98 A later dating is proposed by Downey, Composition, 18182; Evans, Dates, 30; Whitby 
Justinians Bridge, 14147; and Scott, Justinians Coinage, 221.
99 Additional arguments for an earlier dating may be found in Greatrex Dates, 107114, who 
places the composition in 554. Cameron, Procopius, 12, who also proposes a date of 554, suggests 
that Procopius may have died shortly thereafter. Stein, Histoire II, 723, places the death in 555, while 
Howard-Johnston, Education, 2122 proposes 553.
100 Procopius Anecdota XXVI.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 148
image of Justinian as benevolent ruler and architectural savant who, through his building 
activities, restored the empire to a state of glory could not be more different from the 
demonic figure of the Anecdota who destroyed the beauty of the cities.
Those who favour a later date for the composition of the Buildings have suggested 
that Procopius may have changed his attitude toward Justinian in the final years of his 
life101. It is perhaps more plausible that the Buildings was commissioned by Justinian 
shortly after the initial appearance of the Wars, and that Procopius suddenly found 
himself on the receiving end of imperial favour102. However, while the commission 
may have made Procopius more favourably disposed toward his benefactor, it was not 
entirely able to erase the contempt that had accrued over the previous decade; there are 
a few instances where one may detect an undercurrent of sarcasm beneath the praise. 
It is here that an exact date of composition would help to clarify the intentions of the 
author; if, for instance, the work was composed after 558, the association of Justinians 
architectural intervention with the very part of Hagia Sophia that caused the dome to 
collapse transforms a passage of unreserved praise into a cleverly veiled criticism.
It is not certain that the Buildings was commissioned by the emperor, although 
there are numerous reasons why Justinian would have wanted such a work to exist. 
Procopius  who was aware of the public works of Trajan, and may have also known 
the Res Gestae of Augustus103  suggests that the panegyric was composed so that 
future generations would not refuse to believe that so much building was the work of 
one man104. It has also been suggested that Justinian used the Buildings to take credit 
for projects  most notably circuit walls and fortifications  that had been started in 
the time of Anastasius105. However, several explanations have been put forth as to why 
Procopius may have undertaken the work of his own accord106.
Even if the Buildings was not a direct imperial commission, we may at very least 
suggest that Procopius was given extensive access to imperial records. A constitution 
on public works from the Codex Theodosianus  which we have mentioned in the 
previous section  requests that completed public works be reported to the office of 
101 See, especially, Whitby, Justinians Bridge, 14647.
102 Procopius De aed. I.1.4 suggests that money can buy praise. 
103 Procopius De aed. III.4.17 and IV.6.13 (Trajan). Augustus is not mentioned in the Buildings, 
but there are faint echoes of the Res Gestae in the enumeration of restored churches.
104 Procopius De aed. I.1.17.
105 B. Croke and J. Crow Procopius and Dara, JRS, Vol. 73 (1983), 14359.
106 See Downey, Composition, 18182; Howard-Johnston, Education, 2426.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 149
the emperor107; the passages in the Buildings where prose gives way to lists might give 
us some idea of what those imperial records would have looked like108. It has, indeed, 
been suggested that Procopius copied out the lists but abandoned the project  or died 
 before getting the chance to render them into prose. This reliance on imperial infor-
mation may also explain why Italy  which would not have been under decisive Roman 
control until the victories of Narses in the early 550s  is excluded from the Buildings.
If Procopius composed the Buildings near the end of his life, it does not seem 
likely that he would have travelled extensively to confirm his sources; we may, there-
fore, suggest that records of some description must have formed the foundation of 
the work. These records  which may have consisted of little more than lists  were 
then expanded into a literary text by Procopius, who drew upon his rhetorical skills, 
his knowledge of history and his memories of certain places. In order to write con-
vincing descriptions of those places he had not visited, he may have also drawn upon 
geographical source material109; we may certainly note how rivers and mountains 
 common features of literary geographies  are used frequently as topographic refer-
ences throughout the text.
The monotonous nature of the source material may perhaps be detected in the 
way that Procopius is continually forced to recycle his own descriptions. Numerous 
cities are described as having been prosperous in ancient times, but having suffered 
either as a result of neglect or barbarian invasions; it is rare to find a rebuilt circuit 
wall in the Buildings where the city is not described as being stronger than it had been 
previously110. Procopius also employs an arsenal of rhetorical devices to disguise the 
fact that he has not seen a particular place: the fortifications of Palmyra, for instance, 
are described as being impossible to put into words111. However, while Procopius can 
be unimaginatively generic when he is unable to augment the official records with his 
own knowledge, his descriptions often display a reasonable command of local topogra-
phy when he has occasion to discuss a place that he has personally visited112.
107 CTh 15.1.2.
108 Procopius De aed. IV.4, IV.11 and V.9
109 The availability of geographical material in the sixth century is discussed in the next chapter, 
21524.
110 For example, Procopius De aed. II.11.2, IV.2.23, IV.10.11.
111 Procopius De aed. II.11.12.
112 See, for instance, P.A. Mackay Procopius De Aedificiis and the Topography of Thermopylae, 
AJA, Vol. 67, No. 3 (1963), 24155. Procopius description of Dara was questioned Croke and Crow 
Procopius and Dara, 14359, although the accuracy of Procopius has been asserted in M. Whitby 
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 150
Procopius possessed extensive first-hand experience of the lands of the empire, an 
historians knowledge of geography, and access to an extensive, if not complete, record 
of state building projects undertaken from at least the beginning of the sixth century. 
More importantly, he had an appreciation of how to measure imperial achievements: 
his description of Hagia Sophia conveys a sense of monumentality and his enumera-
tion of repaired churches contains an echo, perhaps unintentional, of the Res Gestae. 
For all that Procopius may have been no great supporter of Justinian, and for all that 
he may have invented certain details about the projects he describes, the Buildings may 
nonetheless be seen to reflect a late antique ideal for imperial involvement with the 
creation and maintenance of the built environment.
In the six books of the Buildings, Procopius describes construction projects of every 
type and from nearly every part of the Roman world. The projects ranged in scale from 
simple repairs to magnificent new structures such as the new Hagia Sophia, built in 
the aftermath of the Nika riots, or the church of St John at Ephesus. The major projects 
are, unsurprisingly, outnumbered by the forts, churches, circuit walls and bridges that 
occur throughout the text. Justinian also carried out several road-repair projects, to 
which we will return in the next chapter113.
Among the descriptions of urban building, there are three episodes of par-
ticular interest; the first concerns the city of Antioch, in Syria. While Antioch had 
experienced a period of growth in the mid-fourth century and may have continued 
to flourish in the fifth, its fortunes changed in the time of Justinian114; two earth-
quakes  a major one in AD 526 followed by a second in 528  are said to have 
destroyed most of the buildings and killed a large number of people115. Then, in 540, 
the Sasanian king Khusro attacked the city, captured the residents and set most of 
the buildings on fire116.
Procopius Description of Dara in P. Freeman and D. Kennedy The Defense of the Roman and Byzantine 
East (Oxford, 1986), 73783. Procopius descriptions of the Danube region are discussed in A. Poulter 
The Transition to Late Antiquity in Poulter (ed.) The Transition to Late Antiquity, 150 (at 811).
113 See chapter four, 2068.
114 On the fortunes of Antioch from the time of Julian to the time of Justinian, see G. Downey, 
A History of Antioch in Syria from Seleucus to the Arab Conquest (Princeton, 1961), chs. 1318.
115 Malalas Chronographia, 17.16, suggests that 250,000 died in the earthquake. Procopius, who 
mentions the earthquakes in Wars II.14.67 and Anecdota XVIII places the casualties at 300,000; 
both figures are, perhaps, unrealistically high.
116 Procopius Wars II.89.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 151
According to Procopius, Justinian rebuilt Antioch, making it stronger and more 
beautiful than it had previously been117. The description, however, is oddly struc-
tured: Procopius begins with a lengthy description of the new circuit wall and an even 
lengthier description of how Justinian altered the course of the Orontes so that waters 
from the mountains would no longer flood parts of the city118. Only after all of this 
does Procopius mention that Justinian also rebuilt the entirety of Antioch after its 
destruction by Khusro119.
We may, perhaps, explain the odd balance in the description by suggesting that 
Procopius was basing his account on a series of chronological records, each concerning 
a specific location; if this was the case, it is entirely possible that the new circuit wall 
was a much earlier project, perhaps undertaken after the earthquakes but before the 
agreement of endless peace in 532120. Procopius was either intrigued by the diversion 
of the river, or at very least aware of the literary value of having his subject successfully 
alter the course of nature. However, it was necessary for him to include the new circuit 
wall with the later reconstruction of Antioch, because if he had not, it would have 
implied that the new wall was insufficient to keep out the Sasanian forces.
It is in the description of the reconstruction that we find echoes of the imperial 
urban ideals. In the aftermath of the Sasanian attack, according to Procopius, there 
were no longer any colonnades, stoas or agoras, and, perhaps most importantly, the 
city was no longer divided by streets121. Justinians task was, therefore, to clear the 
ground of rubble, to cover the area of the city with large paving stones, to construct the 
necessary public buildings and to divide the residential areas with streets122. Once this 
had been accomplished, he constructed baths, theatres and all of the other buildings 
necessary for a city123.
Procopius is probably not describing the actual reconstruction of Antioch, but 
rather, an idealised version based on his own understanding of classical urban form. 
Indeed, his description is wholly impractical: one would not cover the whole area of 
the city with paving stones before establishing the sewers. Nonetheless it is intriguing 
117 Procopius De aed. II.10.2.
118 Procopius De aed. II.10.318.
119 Procopius De aed. II.10.19.
120 On the endless peace, see Procopius Wars I.22.17.
121 Procopius De aed. II.10.20.
122 Procopius De aed. II.10.21.
123 Procopius De aed. II.10.22.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 152
that Procopius would have chosen pavement as the symbolic division between vacant 
land and urban space. The other essential features of the city listed by Procopius are 
similar to the public buildings specified by Vitruvius six centuries earlier; the only 
major difference is that the temple has been replaced by the church.
Procopius does not describe the reconstruction of Antioch so much as provide an 
outline of what a city should have. In fact, the reality of the reconstruction may have been 
somewhat different124. Excavations have revealed that there was a major colonnaded thor-
oughfare built after 540 and that it appears to have been constructed to the same scale 
as the previous street125. Other parts of the city may not have been quite so meticulously 
restored. Indeed, it has been suggested that, despite the claims of Procopius, the city may 
never have fully recovered from the setbacks of the sixth century126.
While, the failure of Justinian to revive the original urban plan does not imply 
an end to the city itself  indeed, the city appears to have survived, albeit on a much 
reduced scale, into the Islamic period127  the nature of the urban forms may have 
changed. Excavations have revealed that the open space of the colonnaded street were 
used as the foundation for newly constructed private buildings128; although it was 
initially thought that this development came after the Islamic conquest, it has been 
more recently suggested that the incursion of private dwellings onto this most public 
of spaces may have occurred not long after Justinians reconstruction129.
Only two years after the departure of Khusro  who took with him a great number 
of captured citizens  Antioch was struck by an outbreak of plague130. In a city that pos-
sessed a much reduced population and an incomplete urban infrastructure, it is certainly 
124 The fate of Antioch after 540 is discussed in Downey, Antioch, 54659; Kennedy, Polis to 
Madina, 56; H. Kennedy and J.H.W.G. Liebeschuetz Antioch and the Villages of Northern Syria 
in the Fifth and Sixth Centuries AD: Trends and Problems, Nottingham Medieval Studies, Vol. 32 
(1988), 6590; C. Foss Syria in Transition, AD 550750: An Archaeological Approach, DOP, Vol. 
51 (1997), 189269 (at 19097).
125 J. Lassus Antioch on-the-Orontes V: Les Portiques dAntioche (Princeton, 1972), passim; 
Kennedy and Liebeschuetz Antioch, 6566; Foss Syria in Transition, 193.
126 Downey, Antioch, 559 claims that the real greatness of the city must have come to an end in 
AD 540.
127 Downey, Antioch, 57778 claims that the Islamic forces regarded the conquest of Antioch 
as important; Foss, Syria in Transition, 197, however, suggests that the Islamic armies would have 
found Antioch largely abandoned.
128 Lassus, Antioch V, 14850.
129 For the later dating, see Lassus, Antioch V, 150 and Foss, Syria in Transition, 194; for the 
earlier date, see H. Kennedy The last century of Byzantine Syria: a reinterpretation, Byzantinische 
Forschungen, Vol. 10 (1985), 141183.
130 Downey, Antioch, 553.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 153
possible that construction would have reverted to a less regulated state. The reduced city 
may simply have had no need for a monumental colonnaded street, and the private con-
structions  which the legal prescriptions attempted to keep separate from public space 
 may have used the solid pavements of the street to their advantage. These constructions, 
however, would have brought an effective end to the ceremonial thoroughfare, arguably 
Antiochs last remaining connection to the urban plan of an earlier age.
We may note, however, that the destruction of Antioch did result in at least one 
successful building project: when Khusro returned to Persia he built a city to the south 
of Ctesiphon to house the Roman citizens he had taken captive. The city  known 
as Veh Antiok Khusro, or The Better-than-Antioch of Khusro  is said to have been 
equipped with baths and a hippodrome131. Although the new city would undoubtedly 
have been different in appearance from its namesake, Khusro at least appears to have 
had an appreciation of the urban features that were essential to the Roman city.
The reconstruction of Antioch may not have involved any extensive replanning. 
However there are instances in the Buildings where it is suggested that entire cities 
were brought into being under Justinian. Once such passage concerns the fortress of 
Mocesus in Cappadocia. Almost nothing is known about the actual town of Mocesus; 
apart from one appearance in Polybius  which is almost certainly incorrect132  the 
name does not appear until the sixth century, when it is mentioned by Procopius and 
Stephanus of Byzantium133. Even the location is uncertain: while it was formerly asso-
ciated with the modern town of Krehir, recent archaeological research has identified 
Viranehir  located some sixty miles south of Krehir, near Yenipnar in Aksaray 
province  as a more probable site134. 
Although it is listed as a polis of Cappadocia Secunda in Stephanus of Byzantium, 
Procopius describes it as little more than a fort or fortified watch-tower () 
131 Procopius Wars II.14.12. See also R.N. Frye The Political History of Iran Under the 
Sasanians in E. Yarshater (ed.) The Cambridge History of Iran III: The Seleucid, Parthian and Sasanian 
Periods (Cambridge, 2000), 11680.
132 P. Beagon A Note on Polybius 24.14.8-9, CQ, New Series, Vol. 45, No. 1 (1995), 24548.
133 Procopius De aed. V.4.15 uses the spelling , while Stephanus Ethnica (457), uses 
.
134 A. Berger Viranehir (Mokisos), eine byzantinische Stadt in Kappadokien, Istanbuler 
Mitteilungen, Vol. 48 (1998), 349429. For the identification with Krehir, see W.M. Ramsay The 
Historical Geography of Asia Minor (London, 1890), 300; see also Beagon Note on Polybius, 247.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 154
on the verge of collapse135. According to the Buildings, Justinian had the structure 
demolished and had a complete city built from new on a site nearby. Procopius tells 
us that the city was raised to the status of metropolis, although he fails to mention 
that it was renamed Justinianopolis or that it became the capital of the newly created 
province of Cappadocia Tertia136.
While the description is brief  perhaps overly brief for a site that would become 
a regional capital  we may nonetheless identify an approach not dissimilar to the 
classical urban model: after removing the remains of the fortress, Justinians first action 
is reported to have been the construction of a wall on a more defensible site137. Only 
after the extent of the city had been thus defined could it be filled with holy buildings, 
guest-houses and baths, along with the other buildings that constitute a city138. The 
order of construction might not have seemed foreign to Vitruvius.
As with his description of Antioch, however, Procopius is vague about the other 
buildings that make up a city; indeed, we may wish to suggest that the other buildings 
are a literary device designed to convince the reader that a real urban space had been 
created. Procopius implies that Justinian was able to accomplish the feat of Alexander 
and Augustus, that is, the act of creating a populous and fully functional city. While 
the churches discovered in the vicinity of Viranehir indicate that a certain amount of 
urban construction occurred during the time of Justinian, it is difficult to determine 
the extent to which urban life would have flourished in this new settlement. However, 
given the absence of Mocesus in classical literature, and given its subsequent appear-
ance in church records from the seventh century onward, we may at least concede the 
possibility that Justinian was able to create the foundation for a new settlement that 
would survive well into the Byzantine period139.
Of all the instances of urban construction in the Buildings, the passage concerning 
the construction of Justiniana Prima is perhaps the most intriguing; despite using 
many words to describe the emperors new city, Procopius manages to tell us almost 
135   . Stephanus Ethnica (457); Procopius De aed. V.4.15.
136 Procopius De aed. V.4.17. The name Justinianopolis is associated with Mocesus in records of 
the Ecumenical Council of 681. 
137 Procopius De aed. V.4.16.
138 Procopius De aed. V.4.18.
139  appears in numerous official records from the seventh century onward. The sur-
vival of a metropolitan bishop, however, does not necessarily imply the survival of a town.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 155
nothing. Justiniana Prima is doubly fascinating because, unlike Antioch, the site does 
not appear to have been occupied previously, and it seems to have been abandoned by 
the seventh century; thus, not only are the archaeological remains easily accessible, but 
they also give us considerable insight into what was arguably the final monumental 
urban building project of antiquity140.
Justiniana Prima might initially seem like a vanity project: unlike all of the other 
Justinianas and Justinianopoleis founded in the sixth century  of which Procopius 
lists at least three, not counting Mocesus141  Justiniana Prima was located near the 
birthplace of the emperor. The emperors actual birthplace  an extremely small settle-
ment called Taurisium142  was improved, according to Procopius, with a square wall 
and four towers. On a more defensible site not far away, Justinian set about building, 
in the words of Procopius, a most illustrious city143.
From the description that follows, we may wish to suggest that Procopius probably 
never visited Justiniana Prima. He mentions the construction of an aqueduct, which 
may have been something of a rarity for a new foundation of the sixth century, or which 
may have been listed separately in the building records144. This is followed by a list of 
familiar urban features that might convey the idea of a fully formed city. However, it is 
not the features themselves that arouse suspicion, but the way they are presented:
To enumerate the churches is not easy, and it is impossible to tell in words of 
the official lodgings, the great stoas, the fine marketplaces, the fountains, the 
streets, the baths and the shops145.
Procopius may have been attempting to amplify the scale of Justinians creation 
while simultaneously confessing  as he does elsewhere  that he had never actually 
seen the place. It is also possible that Procopius found it impossible to describe the 
grandeur of Justiniana Prima because the grandeur did not exist. Excavations over the 
140 The best introduction to the site is B. Bavant Cariin Grad and the Changes in the Nature 
of Urbanism in the Central Balkans in the Sixth Century in Poulter (ed.) The Transition to Late 
Antiquity, 337374; see also C.A. Ralegh Radford Justiniana Prima (Tsaritsin Grad): a 6th cent. 
City in Southern Serbia, Antiquity, Vol. 28, No. 109 (1954), 1518 and B. Bavant and V. Ivanievi  
Iustiniana Prima / Cariin Grad (Belgrade, 2003).
141 Adrianopolis was renamed Justinianopolis (De aed. IV.1.36); there is a fortress Justinianopolis 
on the Ister (De aed. IV.11); Justinian builds a town near the deserted Diocletianopolis which he 
names after himself (De aed. IV.3.4).
142 Procopius De aed. IV.1.17 classifies Taurisium as a .
143  . Procopius De aed. IV.1.19.
144 Procopius De aed. IV.1.21.
145     ,      , 
,  ,  ,  , ,   Procopius De aed. IV.1.23.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 156
course of the twentieth century have revealed an urban centre with walls, churches, 
lodgings, streets and, indeed, an aqueduct, but which is otherwise lacking in the coher-
ence that we might associate with a classical city. Justiniana Prima appears to have been 
conceived not as a framework for civilisation, but rather as a fortified ecclesiastical 
centre around which urban life was expected to coalesce.
In keeping with his silence on matters of dating, Procopius does not inform us 
precisely when construction began on Justiniana Prima; it may have been shortly after 
Justinian became emperor in 527, or possibly even at some point during the previous 
decade. By the time the city first appears in the literary record  in a novel dated to 
535  it was well-enough established to act as the seat of the archbishop of Illyricum146. 
The presence of an archbishop, however, does not necessarily imply a thriving urban 
centre; indeed, by the time Procopius was writing the Buildings, Justinians manufac-
tured regional centre may have already started down the path of decline. 
Reconstructions of Justiniana Prima reveal only the most distant echoes of an 
imperial city plan. There is a central intersection, but it is not strictly orthogonal, 
nor does it mark the cultural centre of the city; that centre  no longer the forum, 
but a basilica complex  is located away from the central intersection in a separately 
fortified acropolis area. It has recently been proposed that the main thoroughfare 
of the acropolis, along which the basilica was located, formed the decumanus of an 
orthogonal plan that was subsequently abandoned: the space where the major streets 
should have intersected was needed for the fortification of the acropolis, and the cen-
tral intersection was shifted east, resulting in the oddly angled main streets that have 
been discovered on the site147.
This proposal allows us to consider the possibility that Justiniana Prima was, in 
fact, planned according to a classical model; the failure of the builders to see the design 
through to its completion may be attributed to the topography of the site or the need 
for a fortified acropolis. However, while the city appears to be organised around a cardo 
and decumanus  and while those streets appear to have been suitably colonnaded  
there is little evidence to suggest that the intersection was used as the starting point for 
any kind of street plan. It may be that the iconography of the monumental street and 
146 Justinian Nov. XI; cf. Procopius De aed. IV.1.25.
147 On the urban plan, see . Vasi Le plan durbanism de la ville haute: essai de reconstruction, 
in B. Bavant, V. Kondi and J.-M. Spieser (eds) Cariin Grad II: Le quartier sud-ouest de la ville haute 
(Belgrade, 1990), 30715; Bavant, Cariin Grad, 34752.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 157
the central intersection survived into the urban consciousness of late antiquity, but 
that they had become detached from any strong idea of their original function.
Perhaps the most conspicuous feature of Justiniana Prima  and perhaps the 
reason for its ultimate failure  is its singularity of purpose. Unlike the classical cities, 
which were founded as centres of trade and culture as well as administration, there is 
a sense that Justiniana Prima was conceived as little more than a monumental setting 
for an archiepiscopal seat and a small military presence. Instead of having blocks of 
commercial and residential space emanating from a formal centre, in Justiniana Prima 
the functional centre of the city, that is the basilica complex, was placed at the highest 
and most inaccessible point.
Indeed, the separation of official and residential buildings in Justiniana Prima 
correspond roughly to their relative elevation within the site. In the acropolis we find 
primarily buildings related to the church, and in the upper city we find administrative 
and military facilities along with official residences; only in the lower city do we find 
residential structures148. Artisanal workshops have been found outside the walls of the 
city, but there has been little to suggest the widespread presence of industry149.
148 Bavant, Cariin Grad, 36167 (official buildings), 36772 (residential buildings).
149 Bavant and Ivanievi  Iustiniana Prima, 34.
Figs 3.1 and 3.2 Vasis proposed reconstruction of Justiniana Primas planned central intersection, 
and the arrangement that was eventually built (from Bavant, Cariin Grad, 348 and 349).
I m ag e s  r e m ov e d  f ro m  d i g i ta l  v e r s i o n
d u e  to  p ot e n t i a l  c o p y r i g h t  i s s u e s .
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 158
For all the money and effort that must have gone into making Justiniana Prima a 
viable provincial capital, monumentality was not enough to sustain the city. There are no 
records of it after 602 and the latest coin discovered on the site dates from 615150. A city 
that did not even manage to last for a hundred years could not have been very populous, 
even at its peak. Justiniana Prima appears to have been furnished with monumental 
buildings, but lacking in the necessary infrastructure to maintain an urban population; 
it was an attempt to create the impression of an imperial city, yet constructed without a 
sound knowledge of what had made those ancient cities so durable.
Even if Procopius had never visited the site, he may well have received reports of 
a sparsely populated capital that had failed to become a real city. As much as he would 
have liked to convey the impression of a thriving metropolis, he was ultimately forced 
to conclude his description with the lines:
It is impossible to describe everything in detail, for since the city is the emper-
ors own, any account of it necessarily falls short of reality151.
In fact, the reality of Justiniana Prima may have fallen considerably short of any descrip-
tion that Procopius was able to write.
Even during the expansions of the imperial period, the state would not have wished 
to create complete urban units; rather, the role of the state was to encourage urban 
settlement by constructing a core of functional public spaces within an extensible 
formal plan that could accommodate further private construction. If we strip away 
the rhetorical flourishes from Procopius, we can see that Justinian was attempting to 
do roughly the same thing with his own new foundations: he selected a location, sur-
rounded it with a defensive wall and then established a series of buildings in which the 
skeletal functions of an administrative centre could be performed.
What had changed was not the approach to urbanism so much as the contents 
of the predetermined urban nucleus. The ideal cities of the imperial period had been 
provided with a diverse series of political and cultural amenities ranging from basilicas, 
treasuries and administrative offices to baths and theatres. The Justinianic foundations, 
on the other hand, may have consisted primarily of complexes to house the regional 
150 Bavant, Cariin Grad, 33738.
151       ,      
    . Procopius De aed. IV.1.27. (trans. H.B. Dewing).
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 159
ecclesiastical authority, combined with ill-conceived monumental gestures that were 
not ultimately integrated into the urban plan. The resulting spaces may have resembled 
the classical city in neither form nor function.
The church, as we shall see in the next section, had become an important part of 
urban life and had even started to act as the focal point for the development of new 
urban forms. On its own, however, an ecclesiastical presence may not have provided 
the necessary catalyst to transform a series of buildings into a thriving urban centre; 
neither were isolated monumental buildings sufficient to create a foundation for 
urban life. While it may have been possible for the sixth century writer to enumerate, 
in a brief passage, the elements that an imperial city should contain, the political and 
economic realities of late antiquity may have made it increasingly difficult to bring 
such a city into existence.
urban realities in late antiquity
In the period of late antiquity, the patterns of urbanism in the East and in the West begin 
to diverge152. In the West, broadly speaking, we find a decline in urban public building 
that was initially matched by a rise in rural private building153; from the fourth century 
onward, it appears that a villa in the country may have been preferable to life in the city154. 
Thus, between a lack of new urban constructions and a failure to maintain what had pre-
viously been built, many of the larger cities that had come to prominence in the imperial 
period would have continued to function, but on a much reduced scale; some of the cities 
with fewer connections to the administrative infrastructure were largely abandoned.
The decline of urbanism in the west may initially have come about as a reaction 
to the new political geography of the empire; by the end of the third century, Rome 
152 For an overview of urbanism in the west, see J.H.W.G. Liebeschuetz The end of the ancient 
city in Rich (ed.) The City in Late Antiquity, 149; B. Ward-Perkins Urban Continuity in Christie 
and Loseby (eds) Towns in Transition, 417; J.H.W.G. Liebeschuetz Decline and Fall of the Roman 
City (Oxford, 2001), 74103; L. Lavan and W. Bowden (eds) Recent research in late-antique urban-
ism. JRA Supplement 42 (Portsmouth, R.I., 2001).
153 On the decline of public building in Italy, see B. Ward-Perkins From Classical Antiquity to 
the Middle Ages: Urban Public Building in Northern and Central Italy AD 300850 (Oxford, 1984), 
1437.
154 See above, n. 22.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 160
had become a symbolic capital rather than a centre of true authority. When Diocletian 
restructured the empire in 286 he used Nicomedia as his principal residence, although 
he spent considerable amounts of time in Sirmium and Antioch; his co-emperor 
Maximian supervised the western empire from Milan and Aquileia155. Although 
Constantines dedication of a new imperial capital on the former site of Byzantium 
was perhaps the most definitive shift in imperial power, it was merely a reflection of the 
new Roman reality: the interests of the empire had moved east and, for the first time 
since its foundation, Rome was no longer the centre of its own world.
The lack of a strong connection to the imperial centre, combined with a popula-
tion that was already inclined toward a rural existence, may have started to undermine 
the value of civic institutions. Of course, in the fifth century, an extensive period of 
migrations and invasions would effectively sever the western provinces from the con-
trol of what was now an Eastern Roman empire156. Although Justinian would briefly 
reconquer Italy in the sixth century, the cities of the west would never again be under 
Roman control. However, while the political ramifications of the fifth century may 
have hastened the decline of Western cities, the movement away from urban life may 
have already been in a fairly advanced stage.
In the East, which remained under continuous imperial control  and where 
many of the more prominent settlements were already centuries old at the begin-
ning of the imperial period  we find that urbanism continued to thrive. Areas in 
the Balkans and Asia Minor, especially, may have benefitted from their newfound 
proximity to the imperial capital157; however, even in the more eastern provinces of 
Syria and Palestine, the fourth through the sixth centuries were a time of increased 
prosperity. Many of the cities in these regions experienced late antique phases of 
development, and in certain areas, economic conditions were conducive to the foun-
dation of entirely new urban communities158.
155 See T.D. Barnes The New Empire of Diocletian and Constantine (Cambridge, MA., 1982), 
4956 (Diocletian) and 5660 (Maximian); see also S. Corcoran Before Constantine in N.E. Lenski 
The Cambridge Companion to the Age of Constantine (Cambridge, 2006), 3558 (esp. 4344).
156 On the end of Roman rule in the west, see P. Heather The Huns and the End of the Roman 
Empire in Western Europe, EHR, Vol. 110, No. 435 (1995), 441.
157 See the recent studies by H. Vanhaverbeke The Chora of Sagalassos: the evolution of the 
settlement pattern from prehistoric until recent times (Turnhout, 2003) and D. Baird Settlement 
Expansion on the Konya Plain, Anatolia: 5th7th Centuries AD in Bowden et al. (eds) Late Antique 
Countryside, 24780.
158 Several edited volumes on late antique urbanism have appeared in the last two decades, nota-
bly: J. Rich (ed.)The City in Late Antiquity (London, 1992); N. Christie and S.T. Loseby (eds) Towns in 
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 161
Our understanding of the urban spaces that existed in the eastern empire of late 
antiquity has been growing steadily over the last half-century; this has been due in part 
to an increase in archaeological evidence and also to a willingness on the part of scholars 
to dispense with the narrative of decline that is so often applied to the west159. Our 
knowledge, however, is still limited and we are often forced to draw conclusions from a 
comparatively small body of evidence. Nonetheless, we may at least attempt to identify 
some of the major developments that demonstrate how the urban forms of late anti-
quity had started to diverge from the imperial ideals preserved in the textual sources.
The Codex Theodosianus suggests that, during the fourth and fifth centuries, the public 
spaces of the city were beginning to suffer because of financial mismanagement; the 
money that the governors should have been spending on public maintenance was 
being redirected toward private projects that may have contributed little to the urban 
environment. However, while there were almost certainly instances of public money 
being misspent, we should not interpret the evidence from the Codex as reflecting 
an empire-wide decline in civic maintenance. In Ephesus, for example, many of the 
monumental elements of the city were well tended into late antiquity; not only do 
we find evidence for the continued repair of streets and public squares, but we even 
find new monumental decoration in the form of honorific statues160; there is similar 
evidence for civic repairs and renovation in Aphrodisias161. In Sagalassos, the porticoes 
and fountains appear to have been quickly repaired following an earthquake early in 
500162, and in Caesarea in Palestine, we find evidence for new street paving activity as 
late as the mid-sixth century163.
Transition: Urban Evolution in Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages (Aldershot, 1996); L. Lavan 
and W. Bowden (eds) Recent research in late-antique urbanism. JRA Supplement 42 (Portsmouth, 
R.I., 2001); and A. Poulter (ed.) The Transition to Late Antiquity (Oxford, 2007).
159 For overviews of the archaeological contribution, see J.-P. Sodini La contribution de larchologie 
 la connaissance du monde byzantin (IVe-VIIe sicles), DOP, Vol. 47 (1993), 139184 and A. Poulter 
The Transition to Late Antiquity in Poulter (ed.) The Transition to Late Antiquity, 150.
160 Foss, Ephesus after Antiquity, 9699; S. Ladsttter and A. Plz Ephesus in the Late Roman 
and Early Byzantine Period: Changes in its Urban Character from the Third to the Seventh Century 
AD in Poulter (ed.) The Transition to Late Antiquity, 391433 (esp. 4023).
161 R.R.R. Smith Late Antique Portraits in a Public Context: Honorific Statuary at Aphrodisias 
in Caria, AD 300600, JRS, Vol. 89 (1999), 15589.
162 H. Vanhaverbeke et al. Another View on Late Antiquity: Sagalassos (SW Anatolia), its 
Suburbium and its Countryside in Late Antiquity in Poulter (ed.) The Transition to Late Antiquity, 
61148 (at 62628).
163 R.L. Vann Byzantine Street Construction at Caesarea Maritima in Hohlfelder (ed) City, 
Town and Countryside, 16581.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 162
One of the more prominent urban constructions overseen by the state would have 
been the circuit walls. There is extensive evidence for defensive wall construction in the 
fifth centuries, especially in the Balkans and the Danube region which had been subject 
to recent Hunnic invasions164; in many cases, these new walls enclosed a reduced urban 
area. However, not all of the late antique fortifications represented a direct reaction to 
an enemy threat or a reduction in urban space. In Aphrodisias, for instance, a new city 
wall was constructed in the mid-fourth century  perhaps in AD 350360  a time when 
peace and security had largely been restored in Asia Minor165. Nor did all of the new 
walls reflect a decrease in urban area: in Caesarea (Palestine), a new wall containing a 
larger area was constructed, perhaps in the fourth or fifth century166.
Circuit walls in late antiquity were still very much a state responsibility. However, 
while the trend toward reduced urban fortifications may have been a military neces-
sity  a smaller circumference would have been easier to defend  it also represents a 
change in imperial attitudes toward urban space. The wall, as we recall from Vitruvius, 
was the first stage of the classical city, the statement of definition into which the civic 
structures would be placed167. The reduced circuit walls of late antiquity would have 
not only redefined the extent of the city, but they would have created a hierarchy of 
164 On fifth century fortification generally, see A.W. Lawrence A Skeletal History of Byzantine 
Fortification, The Annual of the British School at Athens, Vol. 78 (1983), 171227. For regional stud-
ies, see: T.E. Gregory Fortification and Urban Design in Early Byzantine Greece in R.L. Hohlfelder 
(ed) City, Town and Countryside in the Early Byzantine Era (New York, 1982), 4361 and J.-P. Sodini 
The Transformation of Cities in Late Antiquity within the Provinces of Macedonia and Epirus in 
Poulter (ed.) The Transition to Late Antiquity, 31136 (esp. 31820).
165 P.D. De Staebler The city wall and the making of a late-antique provincial capital in 
R.R.R. Smith and C.J. Ratt Aphrodisias Papers 4: New research on the city and its monuments. JRA 
Supplement 70 (Portsmouth, R.I., 2008), 285318.
166 Holum, King Herods Dream, 16465.
167 Vitruvius I.5.
Fig. 3.3 The transformation from the colonnaded street into the souq 
(from Sauvaget, Laodice-sur-Mer, 100)
I m ag e  r e m ov e d  f ro m  d i g i ta l  v e r s i o n
d u e  to  p ot e n t i a l  c o p y r i g h t  i s s u e s .
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 163
urban institutions: notably the reduced circuit wall may have protected religious and 
administrative buildings but excluded much of the urban population168.
Even in cities that had not been forcibly redefined by the contraction of a circuit 
wall, the forces of private construction may have been starting to play a more active 
role in the determination of urban form. There is a now famous drawing which theo-
rises the gradual transition from colonnaded Roman street to the narrow seemingly 
unplanned passages which characterise the Arab souq169. Although this development 
was initially thought to have occurred after the Islamic conquests  and would, there-
fore, have been the result of a different building culture imposing its presence onto the 
remains of the Roman city  it seems more plausible that this transition had already 
started in late antiquity170.
In his oration about the city of Antioch, Libanius describes a city that is both 
well-situated and prosperous; for this reason, he tells us, construction was a constant 
presence. Everywhere there were old structures coming down and new structures 
going up; areas that had once been vegetable gardens, he tells us, were now the sites of 
buildings171. Libanius also discusses the encroachment of private buildings into public 
space: in praising the economic prosperity of the town, Libanius mentions that, in 
the porticos of Antioch, the people have turned the spaces between the columns into 
shops172. If a man can find even the smallest piece of land, he will build on it; people 
cling to these places says Libanius, as they would to ropes173.
Throughout the empire, monumental public spaces were gradually being over-
taken by private constructions. In Scythopolis, the colonnade was transformed into 
shops in the fifth or early sixth century174. In Ephesus, Sardis and Sagalassos there is 
evidence to suggest that the navigable space of the major streets was narrowed by the 
168 This phenomenon has been especially noted in the Danube region; see A. Poulter Urbanism 
in the Danubian provinces in Rich (ed.)The City in Late Antiquity, 99132.
169 J. Sauvaget Le plan de Laodice-sur-Mer, Bulletin dtudes Orientales, Vol. 4 (1934), 81114 
(map at 100).
170 H. Kennedy From Polis to Madina: Urban Change in Late Antique and Early Islamic Syria, 
Past & Present, No. 106 (1985), 327.
171 Libanius Or. 11.227.
172 Libanius Or. 11.254.
173 Libanius Or. 11.254. The translation is that of G. Downey.
174 On Scythopolis see Y. Tsafrir and G. Foerster From Scythopolis to Baysan  Changing 
Concepts of Urbanism in King and Cameron (eds) The Byzantine and Early Islamic Near East II, 
95116 and Urbanism at Scythopolis-Bet Shean in the Fourth to Seventh Centuries, DOP, Vol. 51, 
(1997) 85146.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 164
encroachment of shops, and that the porticos and colonnaded streets became filled 
with private dwellings175. In Antioch, as we discussed in the previous section, the col-
onnaded central street may have been filled in with private buildings not long after its 
reconstruction in the sixth century176.
The portico shops, and the small crudely constructed buildings of wood that 
appear in Libanius sound not unlike the descriptions in the Codex Theodosianus of 
structures leaning against public buildings, or the houses and shops that were built 
into porticos177; they illustrate the same principle as the tavern-keepers in Julian of 
Ascalon who caused inconvenience to pedestrians by extending their businesses into 
the street178. As much as the state may have wished to legislate urban public spaces, 
unregulated private building had become an unavoidable reality of the late antique city. 
Urban growth was no longer occurring according to a predetermined plan; instead the 
city was expanding to fill the available space.
Although the patterns of urban form may have been eroded by smaller private con-
structions, it was a large private construction that may have had the most profound 
effect on the physical appearance of the late antique city. In the Codex Theodosianus 
we find laws relating to the forum, to public baths, theatres, storehouses and many of 
the public institutions that had come to define the urban environment of antiquity. 
However, in the descriptions of Procopius, we can see how the church  an urban 
institution that had not been present in the age of Augustus  had come to hold a place 
of paramount importance within the city.
Temples had been an integral part of the classical urban structure; for Vitruvius 
 who devotes two of his ten books to the construction and decoration of temples179 
 they were second only to the defensive wall in order of construction, and their 
place within the urban plan would have been as predetermined as the street layout180. 
Furthermore, temples had been a construction of the state and their maintenance 
would have been considered a legitimate public expense. However, after the acceptance 
175 Foss, Ephesus after Antiquity, 97; J.S. Crawford The Byzantine Shops at Sardis (Cambridge, 
MA., 1990), 10725; H. Vanhaverbeke et al. Another View on Late Antiquity, 62728.
176 See above, 15053.
177 CTh 15.1.38, 39 and 52.
178 Jul. Asc. 17.3 and 20.4.
179 Vitruvius III and IV.
180 Vitruvius I.7.12.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 165
of Christianity as the state religion in the fourth century, the age of temples came to 
a sudden and decisive end; over the course of the next hundred years, the structures 
would be destroyed as a means of bringing an end to paganism, and the raw materials 
would be used for road and bridge repairs181.
During fourth and fifth centuries, churches became an increasingly important 
centre of urban cultural life and a correspondingly ubiquitous presence within the 
built environment of the city182. While Christian communities had existed in Roman 
cities since the first century AD, the earliest meeting houses had been modest struc-
tures designed to accommodate reasonably small congregations183. During the reign 
of Constantine, however, the scale of ecclesiastical construction changed dramatically, 
as did the role of the church within the physical space of the city; by the middle of the 
fourth century, a considerable amount of financial resources and architectural crafts-
manship were being directed toward venues for Christian prayer.
Some of the resources for church building were coming directly from the personal 
wealth of emperors: Constantine himself devoted much time and expense during the 
latter part of his life to the construction of great churches throughout the empire184. 
Most subsequent emperors  with the exception of Julian, who encouraged the 
construction of temples185  would have wanted their name associated with church-
building186; by the time of Justinian, the foundation of large and extravagant churches 
had become the standard means by which an emperor could simultaneously display 
his devotion to Christianity and leave a physical record of his achievements within the 
built environment187. However, despite the involvement of emperors in high-profile 
181 CTh 15.1.36; CTh 16.10.16 and 25.
182 See J.-M. Spieser La christianisation de la ville dans lAntiquit tardive, Ktema, Vol. 11 
(1986), 4955.
183 On Christian architecture before Constantine, see R. Krautheimer Early Christian and 
Byzantine Architecture (Harmondsworth, 1965), 115; L.M. White Building Gods House in the 
Roman World (Baltimore, 1990), 10239.
184 On Constantines use of private funds, see Eusebius Vita Constantini I.42; Eusebius describes 
other Constantinian foundations throughout Book III; see also J.W. Crowfoot Early Churches in 
Palestine (London, 1941), 936; Krautheimer, Architecture, 1744; id. The Constantinian Basilica, 
DOP, Vol. 21 (1967), 11540; J. Wilkinson Constantinian Churches in Palestine in Y. Tsafrir (ed.) 
Ancient Churches Revealed ( Jerusalem, 1993), 2327.
185 CTh 15.1.3.
186 For foundations between the fourth and sixth century, see especially Krautheimer, 
Architecture, 67147; see also, Crowfoot, Early Churches, 37101; T.F. Mathews The Early Churches 
of Constantinople: Architecture and Liturgy (University Park, PA, 1971), 1141.
187 Accounts of Justinianic church building may be found in Malalas XVIII and throughout 
Book I of Procopius Buildings. See also Krautheimer, Architecture, 14998, and Mathews, Early 
Churches, 42102.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 166
foundations, the construction of a church remained an essentially private act and could 
therefore be undertaken by any individual  or, indeed, any group of individuals  in 
possession of suitable wealth and piety188.
In the time of Constantine, the church adopted the formal structure of the basil-
ica, a venerable institution of the classical Roman city189. However, while the classical 
city might have contained only one basilica, it was not uncommon for the population 
centres of late antiquity to possess dozens of churches; even the smallest urban settle-
ments would have possessed at least two or three. Churches of every size and shape 
began to dominate the urban environment; the number of churches within a given city 
was limited only by the amount of available space and the number of individuals who 
were willing to build.
The construction of a church would not only have been a display of personal 
piety, but also an act that would appeal directly to the Christian population. Thus, 
when we read in the Codex Theodosianus that governors had been using public funds 
to build private structures, we may perhaps infer that the structures in question were 
churches. It is possible that the especially pious governors would have attempted to 
make a name for themselves by using public funds for church construction, rather than 
for maintaining the citys more outmoded institutions; it is equally possible that the 
urban population would not have objected to the appearance of new churches at the 
expense of other public structures.
Because churches were private constructions, the laws governing public urban 
spaces have little to say about them; the constitutions in the Codex Theodosianus, as 
we have seen, were interested in the traditional institutions relating to the function 
of the city within the framework of imperial administration, and not ultimately with 
the spiritual or cultural aspects of the urban built environment. The church, however, 
would have been a grey area in the divide between public and private institutions; 
while there may have been no serious decrease in the resources available to the city 
in late antiquity, it may be that those resources were increasingly directed toward the 
construction of those private structures that had become the focus of public life. 
188 On patterns of church building in Italy, see Ward-Perkins, From Classical Antiquity to the 
Middle Ages, 5184.
189 On the adaptation of the basilica, see Krautheimer, Architecture, 2023; White, Building 
Gods House, 1125.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 167
The lack of interest in public space, the rise of the individual as a predominant force 
in determining urban form and the role of the church as a civic nucleus are illustrated 
most clearly in the new urban settlements that emerged in late antiquity. From the 
fourth century onward, we may note an increase in unplanned enclaves of private 
structures in the Negev desert in southern Palestine, and in the areas to the east of 
Antioch in northern Syria 190. These settlements emerged, for the most part, as a reac-
tion to the economic conditions in a particular region, and therefore existed outside 
of the imperial administrative infrastructure. However, in these unplanned towns we 
find a model for urbanism that, in many ways, represents a decisive break from the 
planned cities of antiquity.
The arid Negev desert is not necessarily a place where one would expect to find a 
permanent human population, let alone settlements based on agriculture. However, from 
around the fourth or fifth century onward, we begin to find evidence for an increase in 
agricultural activity191. With the appearance of cultivation came the emergence of urban 
centres; although the town of Elusa may have been classified as a polis  and may indeed 
have been the capital of Palestina Tertia192  the other towns had no specifically imperial 
function and, in some cases, were not close to trade routes. They seem to have coalesced 
as a direct consequence of an increase in agricultural exploitation193.
It has been proposed that the sudden appearance of agricultural activity in such an 
unpromising area may have been the result of imperial intervention, perhaps an attempt 
to create a permanent population along a frontier area194. The towns themselves, how-
ever, appear to have been the result of organic development195. While the sections of 
190 For an introduction to late antique village urbanism in various regions, see P.-L. Gatier 
Villages du Proche-Orient protobyzantin (4me7me s.). tude rgionale in King and Cameron, 
Byzantine and Early Islamic Near East II, 1748.
191 On the evidence for agriculture, see P. Mayerson Ancient Agricultural Remains in the 
Central Negeb: The Teleilt el-Anab, BASOR, No. 153 (1959), 1932.
192 Y. Dan Palaestina Salutaris (Tertia) and its Capital, IEJ, Vol. 32 (1982), 13437.
193 For an introduction to the urbanisation of the Negev, see J. Shereshevski Byzantine Urban 
Settlements in the Negev Desert. Beer-Sheva V (Beer-Sheva, 1991); see also R. Rubin Settlement and 
Agriculture on an Ancient Desert Frontier, Geographical Review, Vol. 81, No. 2 (1991), 197205; 
M. Haiman Agriculture and Nomad-State Relations in the Negev Desert in the Byzantine and Early 
Islamic Periods BASOR, No. 297 (1995), 2953. For an account of the region in literary sources, see 
P. Mayerson The Desert of Southern Palestine According to Byzantine Sources, Proceedings of the 
American Philosophical Society, Vol. 107, No. 2 (1963), 160172. On the archaeology of the region, 
see Y. Hirschfeld Farms and Villages in Byzantine Palestine, DOP, Vol. 51 (1997), 3371.
194 Haiman Agriculture, 4547.
195 Hirschfeld Farms and Villages, 60.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 168
arable land were necessarily spread over a wider area, the towns are reasonably compact, 
with a high population density; in fact, the populations of some of the towns may have 
rivalled the populations of more formally established urban centres196.
Of all the settlements in the region, Elusa may have been the largest and most 
important197. While there is evidence to suggest that the site was occupied from as 
early as the second century BC, the town appears to have been largely insignificant 
until the fourth century, when it underwent a considerable phase of development. 
Our best evidence for the prominence of the town, however, is literary rather than 
material198; the remains of the town have not been well preserved. Excavations have 
revealed a wall, a small first century theatre and several fifth century churches, but little 
196 On the possible population of the various villages, see M. Broshi The Population of Western 
Palestine in the Roman-Byzantine Period BASOR, No. 236 (1979), 110. The figures proposed by 
Broshi, 3, are compared with (and are considerably lower than) those provided by M. Avi-Yonah in 
an article from 1964, which it has not been possible to consult.
197 For an overview of the site, see Shereshevski Byzantine Urban Settlements, 8290.
198 P. Mayerson The City of Elusa in the Literary Sources of the FourthSixth Centuries, IEJ, 
Vol. 33 (1983), 24753.
Fig. 3.4 Plan of Shivta 
(from Segal, Shivta, 320)
I m ag e  r e m ov e d  f ro m  d i g i ta l  v e r s i o n
d u e  to  p ot e n t i a l  c o p y r i g h t  i s s u e s .
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 169
else that would allow us to draw conclusions about the urban character of the place199. 
If Elusa did, indeed, become a provincial capital in the fourth century, its urban plan 
may well have received some state intervention.
A more revealing  and certainly better preserved  example of a late antique 
Negev town may be found in the remains of Shivta200. While there may have been 
an earlier settlement on the site  perhaps from the first or second century AD  the 
majority of the town seems to have come into being during the fourth and fifth cen-
turies. Maps and aerial photographs reveal nothing that could be considered evidence 
of a planning mentality201. Although there are three churches and an open central area 
with two pools there is no formal public centre. The streets are uneven in width and 
rarely straight; we may also note the lack of pavement, one of the most characteristic 
features of the imperial urban street202. Shivta is very much an example of building 
determining the course of the thoroughfare rather than the other way around.
Apart from the three churches, most of the buildings in Shivta have been identi-
fied as private; we do not find forums, theatres, baths or any of the traditional venues 
for Roman public life; we do not, for that matter, find the defining presence of a cir-
cuit wall, although the walls of residential buildings would have formed a continuous 
perimeter denoting the edges of the village. Only the churches possess any claim to 
architectural distinction; the rest of the buildings are practical constructions, lacking 
in both monumentality and formal consideration for their surroundings203. Given the 
lack of other public structures, it must be supposed that the churches provided the 
initial focal point around which an otherwise rural population might have gathered.
We may notice a very similar pattern of urbanisation in the town of Rehovot 
(Ruheibeh)204. While there may have been a presence on the site during the first cen-
tury, the period of prosperity and expansion occured from the fourth century onward. 
199 See A. Negev Survey and Trial Excavations at Haluza (Elusa), 1973, IEJ, Vol. 26, (1976), 
8995; id. The Cathedral at Haluza (Elusa) in Tsafrir (ed.) Ancient Churches, 28693.
200 For an introduction to the site, see A. Segal Shivta  A Byzantine Town in the Negev Desert, 
JSAH, Vol. XLIV, No. 4 (December, 1985) 31728 and Shereshevski Byzantine Urban Settlements, 
6182; a full report of the excavations may be found in A. Segal The Byzantine city of Shivta (Esbeita) 
(Oxford, 1983). On the agriculture of the region Y. Kedar Ancient Agriculture at Shivtah in the 
Negev, IEJ, Vol. 7 (1957), 17889.
201 B. Brimer Shivta  An Aerial Photographic Interpretation, IEJ, Vol. 31 (1981), 22729.
202 Segal, Shivta, 32526.
203 Segal, Shivta, 326.
204 Shereshevski Byzantine Urban Settlements, 94102. See also, Y. Tsafrir and K.G. Holum 
Rehovot-in-the-Negev: Preliminary Report, 1986, IEJ, Vol. 38 (1988), 117127.
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 170
It may, again, have been a central church  in this case, from the mid-fourth century 
 that acted as the catalyst for urban development; new construction, however, did 
not proceed according to an urban plan and the resulting streets were irregular and 
unpaved. As with Shivta, there were few public buildings apart from churches, and 
there were no circuit walls.
Agricultural and economic conditions in northern Syria during the fourth and 
fifth centuries also resulted in the appearance of large unplanned towns. Although 
the largest of the towns may have been based around earlier settlements from the first 
and second centuries AD, the period of greatest growth in the region appears to have 
started in the late fourth century. The prosperity of these towns  some of which may 
have rivalled imperial centres in population  is reflected in the high quality of cer-
emonial architecture found throughout the region205.
205 The standard work is still G. Tchalenko Villages antiques de la Syrie du Nord in 3 vols 
(Paris, 19531958); however some of Tchalenkos conclusions have been challenged in G. Tate Les 
Campagnes de la Syrie du Nord du IIe au VIIe Sicle (Paris, 1992).
Fig. 3.5 Brd (Kaprobarada) (from Tchalenko, Villages antiques, pl. cxxxiii)
I m ag e  r e m ov e d  f ro m  d i g i ta l  v e r s i o n
d u e  to  p ot e n t i a l  c o p y r i g h t  i s s u e s .
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 171
As with the towns of the Negev, none of the Syrian towns demonstrate evidence 
of an urban plan. The town of Brd (Kaprobarada)  which went through an initial 
phase of development in the second or third centuries  may have found its greatest 
urban focus in the large church built around 400 on the site of a former temple206. The 
presence of a central node, however, did not translate into a larger urban plan. The 
streets that have been identified have no common orientation, no fixed width and are 
rarely straight; once again, we may note the lack of a circuit wall.
The idea of the defined centre and a defined urban boundary is even less apparent 
in other towns: in El Bra (Kapropera) and Dhes  both of which appear to have 
flourished during the fourth century  there is no obvious urban focus; both towns 
are merely an agglomeration of buildings that were constructed wherever there was 
available space207. In Deir Simn  which may have flourished not merely as a result of 
agriculture but also because of its proximity to the monastery of St Simeon the Stylite 
 the urban focus was, in fact, up a hill half a mile out of town.
With the exception of the churches, most of the buildings in the towns would 
have been constructed for domestic or industrial use. Unlike in the towns of the 
206 Tchalenko, Villages, 38891.
207 On El Bra, see Tchalenko, Villages, 38788. On Dhes, see J.-P. Sodini et al. Dhs (Syrie 
du nord) Campagnes I-III (1976-1978): recherches sur lhabitat rural, Syria, Vol. 57, No. 1 (1980), 
1304.
Fig. 3.6 El Bra (Kapropera) 
(from from Tchalenko, Villages 
antiques, pl. cxxxix)
I m ag e  r e m ov e d  f ro m  d i g i ta l  v e r s i o n
d u e  to  p ot e n t i a l  c o p y r i g h t  i s s u e s .
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 172
Negev, however, the functional nature of the buildings did not necessarily result in 
an undistinguished and utilitarian architectural style. Although greatest evidence of 
architectural invention may be found in the churches, many of the residential buildings 
also featured decorative elements such as arches, carved lintels and other ornamental 
stonework; indeed some of the individual buildings are of a suitably high quality that 
they would not have seemed out of place in an urban setting. However, the formal 
urban plan of straight streets arranged around public spaces is completely absent.
As with the towns in the Negev, the towns of northern Syria were not part of 
any larger imperial system and their fate was, therefore, largely untethered to that of 
the empire. While the Persian invasions and the subsequent Islamic conquests may 
have had a substantial effect on the major cities, many of the towns in both Syria and 
the Negev appear to have survived for as long as they were able to produce and sell 
commodities. Although many of the towns were eventually abandoned, their decline 
may be attributed more to agricultural conditions and local economic failures than to 
larger political transformations.
Although there was undoubtedly a degree of continuity between the physical spaces of 
classical and late antique cities, it seems clear that, by as early as the mid-fourth century, 
the idea of the city had changed considerably; while the notion of the city as a com-
munal space that encouraged civic virtues may never have been anything more than an 
ideal, it was an ideal that had been carefully governed by the imperial administration. 
The form of the classical city, however, could not ultimately dictate the desires of the 
population. In the absence of strong central regulations presiding over urban space, 
the city may have reverted to a more natural mode of development; urbanism in late 
antiquity became increasingly organic and unchecked, formed largely by the opposing 
forces of individuals who did not regard the city as an inherently public institution.
The fact that the urban centres of late antiquity no longer reflected the needs 
of the population is perhaps illustrated most elegantly by the rise of the unplanned 
towns. The towns of Syria and the Negev represented a return to the most basic form 
of urbanism; they possessed no discernible street plan, there were no administrative 
buildings or official residences and there was very little that one might classify as public 
space. Unlike the cities of the empire, which had been brought into being to serve a 
particular administrative function, the towns were collections of structures that had 
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 173
developed out of circumstance and necessity, rather than diverse buildings arranged 
for a common purpose; they were, like the earliest urban settlements, the result of a 
population coalescing around an economic or spiritual centre.
The towns, however, were not complex urban entities. They did not develop the 
plurality of function that we would associate with a city, nor did they develop the 
public monumentality that had characterised imperial urbanism; where monumental-
ity appears at all, it is largely limited to individual structures. Because the existence 
of the towns was the result of economic circumstance, it is not surprising to find that 
many of them ceased to exist as soon as the economic conditions changed. However, 
as a model for urban development, the unplanned towns would come far closer to 
predicting the urban reality of the centuries to come.
The creation of a consistent built environment during the imperial period had not 
been the result of a single force. Even the most determined builder-emperor  some-
one like Augustus or Hadrian  could not have dictated the form of an entire empire 
on their own; instead, it would have been necessary to develop a governing ideal for 
urban construction that could be adopted in any part of the empire, by any emperor, 
governor or wealthy private citizen. The ideals of urban form that emerged during the 
imperial period may have been successful precisely because they had developed as a 
response to the necessities of urban function; in order to establish a consistent frame-
work of administrative centres over a large geographical area, it would have first been 
necessary to reduce the city to its most basic and most exportable essence.
In the absence of state-directed programmes of urbanisation, the imperial urban 
ideals may have started to vanish. Many of the changes described in the textual sources 
and illustrated in the material record suggest that the imperial urban model  which 
understood the city as a series of public spaces surrounded by an urban population  
was being ignored; instead of being governed by the state, the shape of the urban built 
environment may increasingly have been determined by a series of individual who had 
little regard for the institutions of the classical city. The rise of villas in the west and 
the appearance of unplanned towns in the east may both be understood as evidence 
of an individualist approach; neither a villa nor an unplanned town would have been 
Chapter Three: changes in the urban landscape 174
subject to the restrictions of an established urban plan, and in neither setting would it 
have been necessary to consider the relationship between ones own construction and 
the various structures around it.
Although the unplanned and unregulated approach to construction is most appar-
ent in the new towns and rural spaces of the empire, by late antiquity it had also found 
its way into long-established urban settlements; private structures began to assert their 
dominance over the public spaces that had once defined the classical city. The fine balance 
between civic pride and individual freedom may have shifted; where the classical city had 
offered a unified commercial and cultural centre, the city of late antiquity may have been 
perceived as nothing greater than the sum of its private structures. The increased presence 
of individual building activity may not, on its own, have been sufficient to change the 
dominant forms of the city. However, the rise of private construction may have coincided 
with a decline in the ability of the state to regulate urban space. With no great authority 
governing the division between public and private space, the form of the city would have 
been dictated only by the competing interests of different individual builders.
Justinians failure to build new cities in the imperial mould represents a terminal 
point in the story of classical urbanism. The idea that it was possible to create a city by 
finding a suitable site, building a wall and populating the space inside the wall  what we 
characterised earlier as the outside-in model of urbanism  had been a cornerstone of 
large-scale rule in the Mediterranean since at least the time of Alexander, and had been 
employed effectively in the earliest days of the Roman empire. The cities of the impe-
rial period had provided a functional core where monumental form and administrative 
function were inseparable; while Justinian may have still been able to impose the visual 
characteristics of an imperial city onto his new foundations, his builders may no longer 
have been able to create the institutions that would attract an urban population.
In short, the cities of late antiquity were reverting to a more organic state. 
Settlements that had started as extensions of an imperial administrative system were 
becoming simple nodes of population gathered around spiritual or economic centres. 
While many cities had inherited the forms of the imperial past, urban function was 
being dictated less by the state and more by the various social, political and economic 
realities faced by the urban population. Without imperial intervention, form began to 
follow function; the processes of urbanism no longer lay in the hands of the state, but 
rather in the hands of the people.
C h a p t e r  F o u r
the imagined landscape
The rural built environment of the imperial period derived its visual 
character from the forms of the city: the straight street, the orthogonal grid, the paving 
stone and the textual monument were all used as a means of defining the spaces that 
existed between urban centres. In late antiquity, however, the appearance of the city 
had started to change; the monumentality that had once brought unity to the diverse 
centres of the empire was being challenged by a series of individual approaches to 
urban construction. An increasing lack of formal coherence in the cities may well have 
been matched by a decline in the physical structures that had once brought order to 
the rural landscape.
The individual elements that, together, made up the rural built environment had 
developed as a result of imperial programmes designed to assess and apprehend the 
larger spaces of the empire. The imposition of the centuriation grid, as we have seen, 
allowed for particular regions to be measured and recorded; while the ultimate goal of 
centuriation may have been the creation of tax records, the limites and their associated 
boundary markers imposed onto the land a series of physical artefacts that united the 
vatious individual landholdings within a geographically ordered system. Similarly, the 
extensive network of roads may have started life as a practical means of ensuring com-
munication and transport between Rome and the various outlying cities; however, the 
physical form of the roads themselves would have helped to create an index for large-
scale spatial perception, and would have also established the visual presence of Roman 
civilisation within the natural world.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 176
During late antiquity, however, the physical form of the rural built environment 
began to change. As with the urban transformations that we discussed in the previous 
chapter, changes in the rural world were set in motion by a fundamental transforma-
tion in the attitudes that governed the assessment and arrangement of physical space. 
While the limites and boundary markers established during the Augustan survey may 
have continued to exist within the rural landscape, they may no longer have reflected 
the land assessment practices of the state; instead, new approaches to surveying would 
eventually have led to a new awareness of rural space.
While the road network was the one element of the built environment that con-
tinued to be well-maintained by the state into the sixth century, it was not immune 
to the changes of attitude that had more generally affected the later Roman world. 
So long as there was an imperial presence, the roads themselves were not allowed to 
fall into disrepair; however, with the emergence of Christianity    and the gradual 
establishment of a definitive christian topography during the centuries of late antiq-
uity  the paths of the road may no longer have been able to guide travellers to the 
places that they desired to go.
Although the built environment had, to a large extent, allowed for the appre-
hension of the empires larger spaces, the transformations that occurred within the 
constructed landscape would not necessarily have led to a decline in spatial aware-
ness. The geographical knowledge of antiquity would have remained available in the 
fourth, fifth and sixth centuries, and there is even evidence for new geographical texts 
produced during this period; these texts, however, may have become increasingly 
removed from the physical world that they were attempting to describe. Geographies 
that were mere catalogues  and which possessed little information about the 
relationship between places  could nonetheless act as the basis for cartographic 
representations; indeed, the chorographical tradition that had developed during the 
imperial Roman period may have provided the world of late antiquity with an ideal 
means of displaying a topography that had become both detached from physical real-
ity and defined increasingly by belief.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 177
the shape of rural life
The imperial Roman land survey was governed by a series of ideals similar to those that 
informed the creation of urban spaces. While the manuals of Hyginus Gromaticus 
and Julius Frontinus suggest that the ideals were not always realised, the evidence 
for centuriated landscapes throughout the empire may, at very least, allow us to infer 
that there was a common goal to which the surveyors aspired. Yet, while the manu-
als themselves survived into late antiquity and beyond, the fundamental practice of 
centuriation appears to have fallen out of general use.
During the imperial period, the surveyor performed a dual role: on the one hand, 
he was responsible for defining the physical disposition of the landscape through the 
measurement of land, the placement of boundary stones and the creation of official 
records; on the other, he was responsible for examining the surveyed land against offi-
cial records in the event of a boundary dispute. In order to illustrate this division of 
the surveyors function, we need only compare the treatises of Hyginus Gromaticus 
and Siculus Flaccus: where the former is focused primarily on the imposition of new 
limites, the latter deals almost exclusively with disputes that may arise in lands that 
have already been surveyed.
On the strength of the surviving evidence, it is difficult to determine precisely 
when the orthogonal grid and the establishment of limites ceased to be the focus of 
the surveyors profession. Centuriation was employed under Augustus as a means of 
standardising the various field systems that had come into existence since the time 
of the Gracchi, and evidence from the Liber coloniarum suggests that similar systems 
were used by subsequent emperors who sought to establish colonies; however, while 
there are limites and boundary stones associated with the Gracchi, Sulla, Julius Caesar 
and most of the emperors of the first century AD, there is little evidence for centuria-
tion after the time of Hadrian1.
1 For limites and boundary stones between the Gracchi and Vespasian, see Liber coloniarum 
(CAR L 209202 = C 164202 passim). A fragment attributed to Balbus and perhaps associated 
with the Liber coloniarum (Ex libro Balbi nomina lapidum finalium CAR L 249251 = C 244246) 
includes a reference to land surveyed under Hadrian.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 178
In the time of Hadrian, much of the Roman empire would have either been divided 
by limites or otherwise held according to a system of ancient boundary markers. Even 
though the surveyors had refined the art of centuriation to the point where they could 
write about it, there may have been a diminishing need for large scale land division from 
the second century onward. We should not forget that centuriation, as employed by 
Augustus, was essentially a solution to the problem of how to settle hundreds of thou-
sands of soldiers efficiently and economically. In a time of relative peace and stability, and 
without the driving force of large-scale imperial resettlement programmes, the establish-
ment of new orthogonal field systems would have been largely unnecessary.
Even in a stable environment, the patterns of landholding would not have been 
static. Landholdings would have been divided between brothers on the death of a 
father, or changed hands as part of a marriage agreement2. There is, however, no reason 
to suggest that these changes would have altered the basic structure of the land. The 
internal boundaries of a particular centuria may have changed, but the arrangement of 
limites that divided private land from public rights of way within a particular region 
may have remained reasonably consistent during the imperial centuries.
From the time of Diocletian onward, however, there appear to have been great 
transformations in the arrangement of rural space: not only had the practice of cen-
turiation vanished from the Roman world, but the physical traces of orthogonal field 
systems themselves may have started to disappear. Instead, new imperial attitudes toward 
landholding and land exploitation may have resulted in patterns of rural settlement that 
were indifferent to the order of the past. By examining the economic and administrative 
forces that contributed to changes within the physical landscape, and by making an 
assessment of evidence for later Roman and early Medieval surveying practices, it may 
be possible to arrive at some idea of how the rural spaces of late anti quity abandoned the 
organising principle of the grid and returned to a more organic state of being.
The beginnings of late antiquity are sometimes characterised as a reaction to the fifty 
year period of foreign threats and internal political instability that occurred immedi-
ately following the end of the Severan dynasty in AD 2353: the upheaval of the third 
2 On land ownership and transfer during the imperial centuries, see J.A. Crook Law and life of 
Rome (London, 1967), 13978.
3 For overviews of the third-century crisis, see R. Rmondon La Crise de LEmpire Romain de 
Marc-Aurle a Anastase (Paris, 1964), 97115; J.-M. Carri and A. Rousselle LEmpire Romain en 
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 179
century was effectively brought to an end by Diocletian, who was able to repair some 
of the damage from the previous decades by instituting a series of wide-ranging admin-
istrative and economic reforms4. Like Augustus before him, Diocletian was able to 
perceive the vast mechanics of the Roman empire as a system that could be made more 
effective through careful management; however, while some of Diocletians reforms 
may have been no less ambitious than those of Augustus, they were born of very dif-
ferent circumstances. If Augustus had set out to construct a new empire, Diocletian 
merely set out to fix what was already there.
Because we possess a reasonable amount of documentary evidence for both the 
reforms of Diocletian and for the state of the imperial administration in the centuries to 
follow, the end of the third century has, in modern scholarship, come to be understood 
as a pivotal period in Roman economic history5; indeed, the effects of Diocletians tax 
reforms, in particular, can be traced through the legal codes all the way into the sixth 
century. While there are disagreements on the exact nature of the reforms  on their 
originality, their implementation and their eventual consequences  there can be little 
doubt that they represented a very different approach to the administration of land6.
While Diocletians economic reforms may initially have reversed the damage of the 
third century, it has been argued that they set a precedent of higher tax burdens that, 
in subsequent centuries, led to an eventual collapse of the agrarian economy7. However, 
despite such assured claims as it is generally agreed that there was a decline in agricul-
ture in the later Roman empire8, recent studies have revealed a more complex picture 
of late antique rural life. There may, indeed, have been ruralisation, depopulation and 
mutation: des Svres  Constantin 192337, (Paris, 1999), 89144.
4 Barnes, New Empire, 195237; Corcoran, Empire of the Tetrarchs, 170203; id. Before 
Constantine in Lenski (ed.) Age of Constantine, 3558.
5 See, for instance, R. Duncan-Jones Economic Change and the Transition to Late Antiquity in 
S. Swain and M. Edwards (eds) Approaching Late Antiquity: The Transformation from Early to Late 
Empire (Oxford, 2004), 2052.
6 Numerous studies have attempted to place the reforms of Diocletian in the larger context of 
Roman economic history; see A.H.M. Jones Over-Taxation and the Decline of the Roman Empire, 
Antiquity, Vol. 33 (1959), 3943; M. Hendy Mint and Fiscal Administration under Diocletian, 
His Colleagues, and His Successors A.D. 30524, JRS, Vol. 62 (1972), 75-82; W. Goffart Caput 
and Colonate: Towards a History of Late Roman Taxation (Toronto, 1974); K. Hopkins Taxes and 
Trade in the Roman Empire (200 B.C.-A.D. 400), JRS, Vol. 70 (1980), 10125; R. Duncan-Jones 
Structure and Scale in the Roman Economy (Cambridge, 1990), 199210; J.-M. Carri Diocletien et 
la Fiscalit, Antiquit Tardive, Vol. 2 (1994), 3364.
7 See Jones Over-Taxation, 3943; for an assessment of this theory in light of modern scholar-
ship, see B. Ward-Perkins Jones and the Late Roman Economy in D.M. Gwynn (ed.)  A.H.M. Jones 
and the Later Roman Empire (Leiden, 2008), 193211.
8 Jones, LRE, 812.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 180
decline in some areas, but in others  notably Asia Minor, Syria and Palestine  we find 
evidence for economic growth throughout the fourth, fifth and sixth centuries9.
Questions of taxation and imperial land management are of especial interest to 
our present study because they may help us to understand the physical disposition of 
the rural landscape and how it may have started to change in late antiquity. However, 
the extensive and sometimes contradictory evidence for rural administration from the 
time of Diocletian onward can make it difficult to assemble a consistent picture of 
agrarian life10. In order to determine how patterns of landholding may have changed in 
late antiquity, we must first examine how land was held, how it was assessed, and how 
it may have fit into a larger imperial system.
The Codex Theodosianus suggests that, in theory, the rural space of the empire 
was presided over by the fisc. In republican times, fiscus simply referred to the private 
wealth of an individual; however, during the imperial period it came to denote either 
the private holdings of the emperor or an administrative body that oversaw the public 
holdings of the state11. By late antiquity, the fisc appears to have represented the total 
public assets of the empire and the body to which non-private land automatically 
belonged12. If land was abandoned  or if an individual was deprived of his property 
as part of some punishment13  it would revert to the fisc for redistribution. Because 
the Roman economy was so heavily dependent on income from land taxes, it was in 
the best interests of the fisc to make sure that as much of the land as possible remained 
occupied and cultivated.
In the period of late antiquity, there appear to have been a number of ways by 
which land could be held. It was possible to hold an emphyteutic or perpetual ten-
ancy, whereby an individual was granted the right to work the land without owning 
9 For an overview of recent scholarship, see Chavarra and Lewit, Archaeological Research on 
the Late Antique Countryside in Bowden et al. (eds) Late Antique Countryside, 354.
10 On agrarian issues from the fourth century onward see: Jones, LRE, 767823; J.L. Teall The 
Age of Constantine Change and Continuity in Administration and Economy, DOP, Vol. 21 (1967), 
1136; P. Lemerle The agrarian history of Byzantium from the origins to the twelfth century: the sources 
and problems (Galway, 1979), 126; C. Morrison and J.-P. Sodini The Sixth-Century Economy, in 
A.E. Laiou (ed) The Economic History of Byzantium: From the seventh through the fifteenth century 
(Washington, D.C., 2002), 171220 (esp. 18184).
11 There is some debate about the imperial-era meaning: see H. Last The Fiscvs: A Note, JRS, 
Vol. 34 (1944), 5159; C.H.V. Sutherland Aerarium and Fiscus during the Early Empire, AJP, Vol. 
66, No. 2 (1945), 151170; A.H.M. Jones The Aerarium and the Fiscus, JRS, Vol. 40 (1950), 2229; 
F. Millar The Fiscus in the First Two Centuries, JRS, Vol. 53 (1963), 2942; P.A. Brunt The Fiscus 
and Its Development, JRS, Vol. 56 (1966), 7591.
12 On the different types of public and private land, see Duncan-Jones Structure and Scale, 12142.
13 CTh 9.42 deals extensively with confiscatio.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 181
it; emphyteutic tenants enjoyed similar rights to landowners, despite not holding title 
to the land in question14. It was also possible to purchase land directly from the fisc, at 
which point the purchaser acquired possession of the land and could legally transmit it 
to his heirs15. As in imperial times, land could also be granted, most notably to veterans 
who had served in the Roman army16.
While a certain portion of the available lands were held by a mixture of emphy-
teutic tenants and small working landholders  including peasant freeholders and 
veterans  it has been suggested that, in late antiquity, much of the land would have 
increasingly come into the possession of large-scale land holders17. Indeed, it was once 
thought that these large estates  which were commonly exploited by a work-force of 
coloni, or labourers who were tied to the land18  represented the dominant form of 
land ownership in the fourth and fifth centuries; more recent studies, however, have 
suggested that large estates and small landholdings continued to coexist19.
Even if there had been an increase in large estates after the fourth century, the 
existence of these estates would not necessarily have affected the physical disposition 
of rural space. While estates in the western provinces may occasionally have taken the 
form of large aggregations of land, much of the evidence from the east suggests that, 
while the lands of a particular estate were all held by the same owner, the estates them-
selves did not consist of geographically contiguous areas; instead, they appear to have 
been fragmented collections of smaller fields that had, perhaps, been acquired over 
time20. There is no immediate evidence that the consolidation of wealth in late anti-
quity resulted in a consolidation of physical space.
14 CTh 5.12.3. On this particular term, see W.R. Johnston Emphyteusis: A Roman Perpetual 
Tenure, The University of Toronto Law Journal, Vol. 3, No. 2 (1940), 323347.
15 Universi cognoscant has possessiones, quas de fisco nostro comparasse noscuntur, nullo a nobis iure 
retrahi: sed propria firmitate possessas etiam ad posteros suos dominii perpetis durabilitate demitti. CTh 
5.13.1.
16 Allocations to veterans are discussed in CTh 7.20.
17 Two recent studies of large estates are J. Banaji Agrarian Change in Late Antiquity: Gold, 
Labour, and Aristocratic Dominance (Oxford, 2001) and P. Sarris Economy and Society in the Age of 
Justinian (Cambridge, 2006); the latter provides a useful survey of twentieth century scholarship on 
large estates in late antiquity (131148).
18 The coloni, themselves, have received considerable attention: see A.H.M. Jones The Roman 
Colonate, Past & Present, No. 13 (1958), 113; id., LRE, 795803; Goffart, Caput and Colonate, 6690; 
J.-M. Carri Le Colonat du Bas-Empire: un mythe historiographique?, Opus, Vol. 1 (1982), 351370; 
D.P. Kehoe Law and the Rural Economy in the Roman Empire (Ann Arbor, 2007), 163191.
19 Lemerle, Agrarian History, 15; J.-M. Carri Un Roman des Origines: Les Geneologies du 
Colonat du Bas-Empire, Opus, Vol. 2 (1983), 20551.
20 Jones, LRE, 78188; Lemerle, Agrarian History, 25. 
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 182
In order to locate potential sources of physical change in the late antique rural 
landscape, we may turn, in the first instance, toward evidence for imperial land 
allocation strategies. One of the problems suggested by the Codex Theodosianus  a 
problem that has received a considerable, and perhaps unwarranted, amount of schol-
arly attention  is the fact that certain areas of the empire had been abandoned or were 
otherwise vacant21. Although the phenomenon of agri deserti was once interpreted as 
a sure indicator of economic decline, it is impossible to assess the scale of the problem 
from the legal evidence alone; in fact, evidence for economic growth in late antiquity 
has suggested that the problem of agri deserti was not, perhaps, as widespread as was 
previously assumed22.
The problem was, however, notable enough to enjoy some legislative attention 
from the middle of the fourth century to the middle of the fifth. Many of the laws 
are essentially incentives and tax breaks designed to encourage resettlement and cul-
tivation: a constitution of 365, for instance, allows a tax exemption of three years for 
anyone willing to claim lands that had been left vacant23; another constitution, this one 
from 386, specifies that individuals who claimed vacant lands would not be responsible 
for previous taxes owing, and would enjoy the rights of ownership in perpetuity24.
The laws relating to agri deserti do not suggest widespread abandonment of land 
so much as an effort on the part of the state to make sure that the arable lands of the 
empire remained productive. We find similar laws, for instance, relating to waste land 
(fundus defectus): anyone willing to cultivate waste land was entitled to claim the land 
as their own, although unlike in cases involving agri deserti, they became responsible 
for the full tax liability25. Indeed, it has been suggested that many of the land laws 
from the fourth century were devised as a safeguard against a tax shortfall26: when 
incentives failed to work, the state introduced laws that reassigned the tax burden for 
21 Jones, LRE, 81223; but see also C.R. Whittaker Agri deserti in M.I. Finlay (ed.) Studies in 
Roman Property (Cambridge, 1976), 13765 and P. Jaillette Les dispositions du Code Thodosien 
sur les terres abandonnes in J.-L. Fiches (ed.) Le IIIe Sicle en Gaule Narbonnaise: Donnes rgionales 
sur la crise de lEmpire (Sophia Antipolis, 1996), 333404.
22 For an economic reassessment of agri deserti, see Duncan-Jones, Economic Change in Swain 
and Edwards (eds) Approaching Late Antiquity, 2326.
23 Quicumque possidere loca ex desertis uoluerint, triennii immunitate potiantur. CTh 5.11.9.
24 quicumque se sponte optulerit, non obligandus de onere praeterito pro portione hoc modo possessionis 
in futurum annonarii canonis uectigal expendat, de iure dominii et perpetuitate securus. CTh 5.11.11.
25 CTh 5.14.30.
26 See, for instance, the claim that the imperial government was evidently more concerned that 
the taxes should be paid than that the land should be cultivated, in Jones, LRE, 813.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 183
vacant lands to nearby landholders27. Although these laws cannot have been popular, 
the idea of land tax as a communal responsibility would  in the Byzantine east, at any 
rate  remain in force for centuries.
Laws relating to veteran allocations, however, suggest that the administration had 
a genuine interest in making sure that arable land remained occupied, even if it was not 
contributing directly to the sum of annual taxes. Veterans, of course, had been entitled 
to land in exchange for military service since at least the first century BC; the practice 
had survived into the time of Constantine, who specified that the land of veterans 
should be exempt from any tax obligation28. However, we may note that in 370, there 
is a constitution that specifically encourages veterans to claim and cultivate lands that 
had been abandoned by their previous owners29; the existence of such a law might 
suggest that imperial policy toward vacant lands was governed by something more 
complex than a simple desire for tax revenue.
The imperial attitude toward veteran allocations, itself, deserves further examina-
tion. We know that Augustus used mass resettlements as a strategy for maintaining order 
throughout the empire, and the idea of strategic resettlement was later practiced to some 
extent by Diocletian, who is credited with giving military stability to the empire through 
the establishment of extensive border fortifications; in addition to the active garrisons sta-
tioned along the borders, there is some evidence to suggest that members of frontier tribes 
enjoyed certain settlement rights throughout the fourth and into the fifth century30.
By the second half of the fourth century, there is little evidence to support the 
idea that veterans were settled strategically. Not only were they exempt from taxes, 
but a constitution from 364 specifies that they were offered the right to choose their 
place of legal residence (patriam); furthermore, rather than being allocated a particu-
lar area of land, the veterans were able to claim any vacant lands or lands which had 
reverted to the fisc31. Some six years later, as we have already mentioned, veterans were 
being encouraged to cultivate lands that had fallen into disuse. Furthermore, in the 
27 CTh 5.11.9.
28 Veterani iuxta nostrum praeceptum uacantes terras accipiant easque perpetuo habeant immunes. 
CTh 7.20.3. See also CTh 7.20.2.
29 CTh 7.20.11.
30 On Diocletians frontier reforms, see Isaac, Limits of Empire, 161218. Regulations pertaining 
to the ancient rights of gentiles occupying liminal territory are discussed in CTh 7.15 and 7.16.
31 Omnibus benemeritis veteranis quam volunt patriam damus et inmunitatem perpetuam pollice-
mur. Habeant ex uacantibus sive ex diversis... CTh 7.20.8.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 184
Codex Theodosianus, there is no prescribed area to which a single veteran was entitled. 
Hyginus Gromaticus informs us that, in his own day, it was common to allocate 66 
iugera  that is, one third of a standard centuria  to a veteran soldier32; in the mid 
fourth century, however, we are merely informed that veterans were entitled to a pair 
of oxen and fifty measures of each type of grain33. The fact that the allocations came to 
be made in terms of agricultural resources rather than in terms of physical space may, 
in fact, signal a change in the way that land was understood.
While we do not need to claim that the middle of the fourth century experienced 
crippling depopulation or mass abandonments, the evidence should at least suggest 
that the rural landscape was in a state of flux: lands were being abandoned and revert-
ing to the fisc, but they were also being reclaimed, either by veterans or by anyone 
who was willing to keep the fields productive. Given a choice of land, however, these 
prospective landholders may not necessarily have chosen areas corresponding to the 
surveyed lands of previous centuries. While some landholdings may have followed the 
baselines of the past, it is equally possible that natural topography would have reas-
serted itself as a means of delineating newly claimed properties, and that landholders 
would have established their own crude boundary markers of marked trees and stone 
piles to define their claims. Lands that had once been defined by centuriation may, in 
late antiquity, have increasingly come to resemble ager arcifinius, the land which had 
been enclosed by obscure boundaries since ancient times.
The absence of organised field systems does not necessarily imply the lack of 
imperial record keeping. Indeed, the Codex Theodosianus informs us that, in the early 
part of the fourth century, veterans were allowed to write their landholdings either in 
ink onto a surface of white lead or onto tabulae34; a different constitution in the Codex 
even mentions an encautarium, a public records office not unlike the tabularium of the 
agrimensores35. However, the nature of those records  and the process by which they 
were compiled  may have been considerably different from the system of formae and 
tabulae aeris proposed in chapter one36. 
32 Hyginus Gromaticus Constitutio L 200 = T 163 = C 158.
33 singula paria boum et quinquaginta modios utriusque frugis accipiant. CTh 7.20.8. Former 
members of the imperial bodyguard were entitled to twice this amount.
34 quae scribendi tabulis vel encauto et cerussa conscribere detur eis licentia. CTh 7.20.1.
35 CTh 13.10.8 is, in fact, the only attested usage of encautarium.
36 See chapter one, 2933.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 185
There is some evidence to suggest that a large-scale land assessment project  per-
haps comparable in scope to the survey of Augustus  was instigated by Diocletian at 
the end of the third century. However, where the Augustan survey had been nothing less 
than a complete restructuring of the physical landscape  a normalising survey in which 
the land received new limites and new boundary stones  Diocletians project was carried 
out within the context of larger reforms to the taxation policy, and took the form of a 
census that sought to create a complete record of the empires taxable assets37.
Diocletian was less interested in assessing the physical space of the empire, than 
with expressing the worth of the Roman world as a series of taxable units based on the 
combined value of arable land and manpower38. Thus, the censitores who were sent out 
to assess the land cannot be compared directly with the agrimensores of the imperial 
era. A contemporary account by Lactantius informs us that the land was measured 
piece by piece, trees and vines were enumerated, animals of all types were written 
down and a record of every man was made39. While there are some boundary mark-
ers in Syria associated with the census, we should not imagine that the censitores were 
trained surveyors, nor that they themselves engaged in large-scale measurement40. It 
is not unreasonable to suggest that, wherever possible, they would have based their 
land assessments on extant records; only in cases where the records were questionable 
would they have resorted to the expertise of a surveyor.
In some parts of the empire, the regional findings of the census were recorded in 
large inscriptions41. We are fortunate to possess several examples of these census regis-
ters, the majority of which pertain to areas in western Asia Minor and may be dated 
to the early fourth century42. The registers reveal a landscape in which everything has 
37 On the census of Diocletian, see. However, Goffart, Caput and Colonate, 445, suggests that 
there is no evidence to link the census activities with Diocletian.
38 On the goals of Diocletians assessment, see A.H.M. Jones Capitatio and Iugatio, JRS, Vol. 
47, No. 1/2 (1957), 8894; Goffart, Caput and Colonate, 3140; Duncan-Jones Structure and Scale, 
199210; Carri Diocletien et la Fiscalit, Antiquit Tardive, Vol. 2 (1994), 3743.
39 Agri glebatim metiebantur, vites et arbores numerabantur, animalia omnis generis scribebantur, 
hominum capita notabantur. Lactantius De mort. pers. XXIII.
40 For examples, see M. Sartre Nouvelles bornes cadastrales du Hauran sous la Ttrarchie, Ktema, 
Vol. 17 (1992), 11131.
41 A.H.M. Jones Census Records of the Later Roman Empire, JRS, Vol. 43 (1953), 4964; P. 
Thonemann Estates and the Land in Late Roman Asia Minor, Chiron, Vol. 37 (2007), 43578; K. 
Harper The Greek Census Inscriptions of Late Antiquity, JRS, Vol. 98 (2008), 83119.
42 Jones, Census Records, 49 claims that they were probably engraved in the late third or early 
fourth century AD and Thonemann, Estates and the Land, 4389 suggests around AD 310. Harper, 
Greek Census Inscriptions, 8590, on the other hand, argues for a date of AD 371.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 186
been reduced to numbers: the inscription from the Aegean island of Thera expresses each 
property () in terms of the total area of arable land and vineyard (in iugera), the 
total number of olive trees, and an enumeration of the different animals43. In the register 
of Tralles (modern Aydn, in the Maeander valley), there is still further reduction, as the 
area and resources of the property are expressed in iuga  the combined value of the land 
 and capita, the combined forces of men and animals associated with the property44.
Insofar as the census registers were an attempt to express the space of the empire 
as text, they may not have been wholly dissimilar from the property records created 
during the imperial era. The registers of the fourth century, however, are notable 
for their complete absence of geographical content. Even the wholly textual bronze 
tabulae were able to connect landholdings to a particular physical location by defin-
ing the relationship of the land to the kardo and decumanus. The landholdings of the 
census registers, on the other hand, were recorded either alphabetically by the name 
of the property or arranged so that the properties of a particular owner would remain 
together45; they do not appear to have made any attempt to convey the geographical 
structure of the rural space.
After the tax reforms of Diocletian, there may have been a fundamental shift in 
the way that land was perceived by the state. Instead of imagining properties as existing 
within a larger system of long-established limites, each individual property would have 
been treated in isolation, as a series of boundaries that served not to delimit an entire 
landscape, but rather a single area of taxable space. From the evidence of the census 
registers, there was no attempt to record how the various properties fit together; the 
only thing that mattered to the censitores was the ability to express numerically the 
taxable worth of a region.
The removal of a geographic element from the land assessment process may have 
made it easier for abandoned land to be reallocated: a new landholder would not have 
been responsible for establishing the location of his property, only for stating its taxable 
value and for making sure that the annual tax corresponded to the recorded liability. In 
the absence of a clearly defined system of land delineation, the nature of the surveyors 
job would have necessarily changed. Instead of creating and recording a rural built 
43 IG XII.3 343. Discussed in Jones, Census Records, 4950.
44 The inscription has been most recently published, with commentary, in Thonemann, Estates 
and the Land, 44351.
45 Thonemann, Estates and the Land, 44142.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 187
environment, they would instead, have been employed to interpret the evidence of a 
built landscape that was no longer within their control.
A law from 405, that mentions the chief of the surveyors (primicerius mensorum), 
might allow us to infer that the profession of surveying was still represented within the 
imperial administration46. However, the days of taking auspices, placing the groma and 
establishing the principal limites would have been long over; from the fourth century 
onward, the surveyors would have been concerned primarily with area calculations 
and dispute resolution. Activities relating to the latter would have required not only 
an ability to interpret the records from surveys that had been undertaken in the past, 
but the ability to identify a variety of boundary markers that had not necessarily been 
established according to any centrally recognised system. Due to the highly specialised 
nature of this knowledge, the surveyor of late antiquity may have been granted a small 
amount of legal authority.
We may turn, once again, to the Codex Theodosianus, which offers a glimpse of 
the surveyor at work. A series of constitutions from the fourth century differentiate 
between disputes relating to the possession of land and those concerning the boundary. 
According to a constitution of AD 330, the question of possession must first be set-
tled  presumably with reference to land titles and official records  before a surveyor 
is despatched to investigate the land47; if, however, the possession of a piece of land 
cannot be established, a surveyor will be sent out to gather facts about the property48.
The job of the surveyor, in this instance, was not to establish boundaries, but 
rather to compare what existed in the records with what existed within the land itself; 
his knowledge of surveying practice would have allowed him to collect and assess 
information on behalf of the governor. The surveyor is also shown to have some legal 
powers of his own: any disputes relating specifically to the quinque pedum  the five-
foot strip of boundary land that separated two adjoining fields49  could be settled 
by an arbiter, that is, a surveyor who had been appointed by the state. However, cases 
46 CTh 6.34.1.
47 prius super possessione quaestio finiatur et tunc agrimensor ire praecipiatur ad loca. CTh 2.26.1
48 electus agrimensor dirigatur ad loca, ut, si fidelis inspectio tenentis locum esse probaverit. CTh 
2.26.1.
49 Quinque pedum  meaning, simply, five feet  is a legal boundary designation which may date 
back as far as the Twelve Tables; see CTh 2.26.5.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 188
involving pieces of land greater than five feet in width were judged to be disputes of 
possession and needed to be settled by a higher provincial authority50.
We find further evidence for this division between types of land dispute in 
Agennius Urbicus, who may have been writing in the late fourth or early fifth cen-
tury and whose practical prescriptions may therefore reflect the laws of the Codex 
Theodosianus51. According to his treatise, all disputes relate to either area (locus) or 
boundaries (finis); of the two, the surveyor was concerned primarily with the latter. 
As Agennius Urbicus describes it, landholders who were unaware that there is a 
system governing the establishment of boundaries would move stones freely in an 
attempt to take more land for themselves; the surveyor with his knowledge of the 
boundary systems, could easily identify those places where the stones did not cor-
respond to the records52.
It would not, however, be possible for a surveyor to settle a dispute that involved 
an area of land. Agennius Urbicus, describing an area for which there is no forma, tells 
us that any legal disagreements that may arise must be treated as land, rather than 
boundary, disputes; if a surveyor is brought in to act as an arbiter for a land dispute, 
his decision may be ruled invalid by a higher judge53. This passage, in particular, bears 
similarities to the sections in the Codex Theodosianus, and would seem to confirm that 
the knowledge of the surveyor gave him some legal authority; his field of expertise, 
however, had become largely restricted to the identification of boundaries.
Boundary disputes, themselves, appear to have been divided into two further 
categories: there were discrepancies relating to land that had been divided according 
to a system of limites, and then there were cases involving ager arcifinius, or land that 
had not otherwise received a normalising survey54. Disputes involving centuriated 
land were, obviously, the more straightforward of the two, insofar as the surveyor had 
recourse to official records: as Agennius Urbicus tells us, allocated land was examined 
according to what was preserved in the forma55.
50 CTh 2.26.3.
51 The text, however, is essentially undatable. See Campbell, CAR, xxxixxxii for discussion.
52 Agennius Urbicus De controv. agr. L 71.25 = T 30.22 = C 28.3.
53 Agennius Urbicus De controv. agr. L 74.16 = T 33.14 = C 30.14.
54 The differentiation is present in Siculus Flaccus and Agennius Urbicus; see, especially, De con-
trov. agr. L 74.16 = T 33.14 = C 28.16.
55 in adsignato agro secundum formam modus spectetur. Agennius Urbicus De controv. agr. L 76.2 
= T 35.11 = C 32.13.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 189
In cases involving land divided by limites, the job of the surveyor was to make sure 
that the realities of the land corresponded to the information in the forma: according 
to Agennius Urbicus, it was a easy enough to identify discrepancies in either the area 
(modus) or shape (species) of the land. The surveyor would simply follow the bound-
ary markers and make an assessment of the perimeter; this assessment may have taken 
the form of a rudimentary cartographic drawing56. From this, he would then be able 
to calculate the area and compare it with the information preserved in the records57. 
Disputes involving ager arcifinius, or any land that had been held since ancient times 
were, understandably, more difficult. In the absence of official public records, it would 
have been necessary for the surveyor to assemble various pieces of testimonial evidence, 
and to identify a variety of non-standard boundary markers58.
Of course, the ability to interpret markers within the rural landscape had always 
been an important skill for the surveyor, even in Augustan times. Julius Frontinus, 
Siculus Flaccus and Hyginus all make some mention, in their treatises, about the types 
of natural marker that were used in the days before Augustan stones59. However, in the 
Corpus Agrimensorum, there are numerous fragments that deal only with the various 
elements that might potentially act as a boundary marker. The fragments, which are first 
collected in one of the ninth-century manuscripts  Wolfenbttel Gud. lat. 105 (G), 
itself a copy of a copy of the Vatican manuscript (P)  appear to have been compiled 
from a variety of sources dating between the first century BC and the fifth century AD.
The name of Arcadius Augustus appears twice in the section titles, once on his 
own and once with an author named Vitalis60. There is another fragment credited to 
Gaius and Theodosius61, and it is certainly not impossible that these titles refer to the 
chief surveyor and the emperor under whom they were employed62. If this is the case, 
56 On the use of drawings in later surveying, see below, 199200.
57 Agennius Urbicus De controv. agr. L 76.27 = T 36.9 = C 32.30; see also the discussion of 
Byzantine surveying, below, 199200.
58 Agennius Urbicus De controv. agr. L 86.8 = T 47 = C 44.
59 cf. Frontinus De Agr. Qual. L 5.6 = T 2.8 = C 2.18; Hyginus De. Cond. Agr. L 281.4ff = T 75ff 
= C 78.35ff; Siculus Flaccus L 12729 = T 9092 = C 9294.
60 CAR L 343.20 = C 248.29 (Arcadius and Vitalis); L 351.13 = C 258.11 (Arcadius alone, with 
the following fragment, perhaps from the same work, credited to Vitalis alone). The fragment cred-
ited to Arcadius Augusus Auctor is entitled On boundaries and boundary markers in the East (De 
terminibus et de lineis partium orientalium) and contains a reference to Constantinople; both would 
suggest a positive identification with the emperor Arcadius.
61 CAR L 345.23 = C 252. See also L 358.9, a fragment credited to Theodosius and Neuterius.
62 See Campbell, CAR, 445 n. 4.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 190
several of the boundary fragments may be dated between 379 and 450. However some 
of the texts, like the Prophecy of Vegoia, may be substantially earlier, while others 
Latinus and Mysrontius, for instance, along with most of the anonymous fragments 
 simply cannot be dated with any certainty63.
Despite the uncertainties in dating, the boundary fragments are fascinating 
because of their intensely practical nature. Where the treatises of Frontinus and 
Hyginus Gromaticus may be described as practical works built upon a theoretical 
foundation, the boundary fragments appear to deal solely with the reality of the land; 
in the few instances where theoretical concepts are introduced  usually from earlier 
surveying manuals  they are presented in such a way as to suggest that the author is 
not entirely certain about the meaning of his source material. More importantly, the 
fragments offer a picture of surveying in which the establishment of limites no longer 
plays a major role.
Some of the passages are little more than lists. The Expositio terminorum, for 
instance, presents a line-by-line enumeration of elements within the landscape that 
may act as a boundary64. Other fragments  like the Expositio limitum uel termi-
norum, or the fragment attributed to Vitalis and Arcadius65  discuss the different 
shapes of boundary stone and the various symbols that may be found inscribed upon 
them. The fragments suggest that it was the surveyors job to reveal the obscure 
meaning of the objects, letters and signs which, taken together, constituted a non-
urban version of the built environment. Just as Pausanias could read the history of 
the cities of Greece through their statues, temples and ruins, so was the surveyor 
able to read the rural landscape through the elements that had been established to 
designate boundaries.
One of the more intriguing fragments  dating, perhaps, from the late fourth or 
early fifth century  presents an alphabetical list of letters that may be found on boundary 
stones, prefaced with some general remarks on the nature of boundaries66. The anony-
mous author has obviously read some of the earlier Roman surveying texts, because he 
states that the earth is located beneath the axis of heaven, a mangled interpretation of the 
63 On the Prophesy of Vegoia, see Heurgon, Vegoias Prophesy, 4145.
64 CAR L 361.1 = C 262.14.
65 CAR L 359.14 = C 260.12
66 CAR L 362.11 = C 264.9. On the difficulties with this passage, see the commentary in 
Campbells edition, 4478 n. 36.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 191
etymology of kardo given by Frontinus and Hyginus Gromaticus67; however the author 
then goes on to suggest that Christ, the son of God, was responsible for the sanctity 
of the boundary stone and the division of land by means of limites68. While the author 
may have a poor understanding of the older practices, the passage at least suggests that 
the idea of the boundary stone as a sacred object  a physical manifestation of the god 
Terminus69  was being adapted to the new belief systems of late antiquity.
When the author lists the various letters associated with boundary stones, he 
remarks that stones with a K inscribed on the side  that is, stones associated with a kardo 
 are elegant and well-crafted70. The author, in this case, may be referring to the Augustan 
stones described by Hyginus Gromaticus71; the text, however, does not suggest that these 
particular stones belong to a different class of field system. Indeed, by late antiquity, there 
may have been no real difference between boundaries associated with ager arcifinius and 
those associated with centuriation; both had become ancient and obscure, and in order 
to be understood, both required the interpretive skills of a trained surveyor.
The idea that boundary identification had become central to the surveyors prac-
tice is made clear in a letter of Cassiodorus, dating from the first decade of the sixth 
century72. The letter concerns a boundary dispute that had escalated into violence; the 
situation, in turn, provides a convenient pretext for Cassiodorus to display his knowl-
edge of land surveying in the Mediterranean world. Following Heron of Alexandria 
 Heron is cited by name a few lines later  Cassiodorus briefly recounts the story of 
how the survey had its origins in the regions surrounding the Nile73. He also informs 
us that, in the time of Augustus, the Roman world was divided and recorded so that 
there would be no confusion about landholdings74.
67 quia sub axae caeli determinata est terra. CAR L 362.11 = C 264.9. cf. Frontinus De Limitibus 
L 28.11 = T 11.15 = C 8.34 and Hyginus Gromaticus Constitutio L 167.3 = T 132.6 = C 134.15.
68 Christus filius dei, per quem et pax terminationis in terra processit, et praecepit limitibus con-
tinere. CAR L 362.11 = C 264.9. The author cites the gospels of Matthew, Peter, Paul, John and 
Laurence as authorities.
69 On the figure of Terminus and the ritual of the boundary stone, see Ovid Fasti II.640 ff and 
Plutarch Numa XVI; Siculus Flaccus De Cond. Agr. L 140.11 = T 104.14 = C 106.22.
70 K si in termino inueneris, kardinem ostendit, quod terminum subtilissimum et speciosum inu-
enies, hoc est formonsum. CAR L 363.19 = C 264.37.
71 Hyginus Gromaticus Constitutio L 171.14 = T 136.11 = C 138.
72 Cassiodorus Variae III.52; discussed in Campbell, CAR, lii, and summarised (with little analy-
sis) in Dilke, Roman Land Surveyors, 456. I am grateful to M.H. Edney for sharing his thoughts on 
this passage during an informal discussion at the Language of Maps colloquium, Oxford, June 2011.
73 Var. III.52.2, 4; see below, 198.
74 Augusti siquidem temporibus orbis Romanus agris divisus censuque descriptus est, ut possessio sua 
nulli haberetur incerta. Var. III.52.6.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 192
The surveyor is presented by Cassiodorus as a man possessing arcane knowledge; 
he meanders through fields according to some secret logic, identifying markers that 
would not have seemed significant to the average observer:
You might believe him to be crazy as you watch him walk his twisted path, 
searching for evidence among the rough forests and groves. He does not walk 
in an ordinary fashion; the road is his narrative: he makes clear what he says 
and demonstrates the truth of what he has learned. His footsteps uncover the 
truth of land disputes and, in the manner of a large river, he removes land from 
some and distributes it to others75.
Cassiodorus illustrates how the science of the surveyor was intensely practical, by 
setting it against the traditional quadrivium of mathematics, Euclidean geometry, 
astronomy and music; lectures on arithmetic, he claims, are delivered to empty rooms, 
while astronomy and music are learned only for the sake of learning76. Furthermore, 
the letter suggests that the surveyor may still have possessed some powers of legal arbi-
tration. The surveyor, he tells us, was employed to put an end to disputes that might 
arise as the result of a boundary-related lawsuit77; however, while Cassiodorus implies 
legal authority through his choice of words  the surveyor is referred to as a judge of 
his own method, and the empty fields are his forum78  it can be difficult to determine 
where the facts end and the rhetoric begins.
Perhaps the most intriguing part of the letter is the mere fact that Cassiodorus 
needed to suggest the employment of a surveyor to settle a land dispute. In earlier cen-
turies, trained surveyors would have operated as part of the imperial administration, 
and it would have simply been a matter of procedure for a governor to send out a mensor 
to investigate the situation. In the absence of an imperial presence, however, the office 
of the surveyor may have started to vanish in the Latin west. Surveyors themselves did 
not disappear  certainly, there must have been a few in the time of Cassiodorus  but 
without a clear association to an administrative authority, the nature of their profes-
sion would have started to change.
75 fanaticum credis, quem tortuosis semitibus ambulare conspexeris. indicia siquidem rerum inter 
silvas asperas et dumeta perquirit, non ambulat iure communi, via illi est lectio sua, ostendit quod dicit, 
probat quod didicit, gressibus suis concertantium iura discernit et more vastissimi fluminis aliis spatia 
tollit, aliis rura concedit Var. III.52.8.
76 arithmeticam indicas, auditoriis vacat. [...] astronomia et musica discuntur ad scientiam solam. 
Var. III.52.7
77 Agrimensori vero finium lis orta committitur, ut contentionum protervitas abscidatur. Var. III.52.8
78 iudex est utique artis suae, forum ipsius agri deserti sunt. Var. III.52.8.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 193
Even before changes in the administrative structure, it is clear that the role of the sur-
veyor in late antiquity was fundamentally different from what it would have been in the 
imperial period. The letter of Cassiodorus only confirms what we have already observed 
in the Codex Theodosianus and in the writings of Agennius Urbicus: the surveyor of late 
antiquity was concerned more with interpreting the landscape than with creating it. He 
was no longer responsible for defining large rural spaces through the imposition of a built 
infrastructure; instead, his job was to identify only the limits of a particular piece of land, 
and in doing so, to make sense of a rural built environment left behind by a previous age.
In order to arbitrate in disputes, the surveyor of late antiquity would have required 
a working knowledge of boundary conventions, both ancient and contemporary; in 
order to measure the land contained within those boundaries and render it as a taxable 
figure, the surveyor would have also needed to know the basic principles of geometry. 
Of course, surveying and geometry had always been conceptually and etymologically 
related: the Greek  simply means the measurement of the world. However, 
while geometrical knowledge may have been less essential when a system of limites cre-
ated areas of equal size, the treatment of property as a series of individual spaces in late 
antiquity may have caused the surveyors profession to become increasingly dominated 
by area calculations of complex shapes.
In the classical world it was widely understood that geometry originated in ancient 
Egypt as a practical system for measuring land when the flood waters of the Nile washed 
the boundary markers away; at some point, however, geometry became a purely theo-
retical pursuit. In the Elements of Euclid  probably written near the beginning of the 
third century BC  geometrical proofs and demonstrations exist entirely as intellectual 
exercises, and make no reference to their possible application in the real world. In the 
first century AD, Quintilian viewed geometry as being essential to the education of an 
orator, simply because the logical development learned in geometry was similar to that 
practiced in rhetoric79. Although he acknowledged the practical side of the subject  
linear reckoning, he tells us, was often required in legal cases relating to boundaries and 
measurements80  he was primarily interested in the theoretical ramifications.
79 Quintilian Inst. Or. I.10.3437.
80 Illa vero linearis ratio et ipsa quidem cadit frequenter in causas (nam de terminis mensurisque 
sunt lites). Quintilian Inst. Or. I.10.36.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 194
During the medieval period, the word geometry appears to have become synony-
mous with surveying in both the Latin and Greek traditions81. In the Latin west there 
was a tradition of geometrical texts that were, in fact, written as manuals for surveyors; 
furthermore, in some manuscripts, extracts from the treatises of the agrimensores were 
referred to as geometries, despite the fact that the texts contained nothing in the way 
of Euclidean proofs82. Similarly, in the Byzantine east, there are numerous surviving 
treatises on the practicalities of surveying that fall under the heading of geometry. 
Although Cassiodorus informs us in the Institutiones that geometry is, in fact, 
the measurement of the earth, he appears to acknowledge a distinction between 
theoretical geometry and the process of land surveying83; in his letter on surveying, he 
suggests that the geometry studied as part of a students scientific education was dif-
ferent from that which might be practiced in the field. In his more lengthy treatment 
of the quadrivium in the Institutiones, he directs his readers toward Greek writers such 
as Euclid, Apollonius and Archimedes and, especially, toward the Latin translation of 
Euclids Elements prepared by Boethius84. On the subject of land surveying, however, 
the only author that Cassiodorus mentions by name is Heron metricus  presumably 
Heron of Alexandria  who, he tells us, wrote down the essential elements of surveying 
so that they could be studied85. It is possible that Cassiodorus did not have access to 
the writings of the agrimensores; however, even if he had read the centuriation-based 
treatises of Julius Frontinus or Hyginus Gromaticus, it is possible that he did not see 
them as being especially relevant to contemporary practices.
It is difficult to assess the extent to which imperial Roman surveying would have 
relied on geometrical knowledge; indeed, the role of geometry in Roman land sur-
veying has been downplayed in modern scholarship. The treatises that deal primarily 
81 On the relationship between surveying and geometry in the Medieval west, see E.A. Zaitsev 
The Meaning of Early Medieval Geometry: From Euclid and Surveyors Manuals to Christian 
Philosophy in Isis, Vol. 90, No. 3 (1999), 522-553 and G.R. Evans The Sub-Euclidean Geometry 
of the Earlier Middle Ages up to the Mid-Twelfth Century in Archive for History of Exact Sciences 
Vol. 15, No. 2 (1976), 10518.
82 Frontinus, for instance, appears under the title Julius Frontinus de geometria in one tenth cen-
tury manuscript; see Zaitsev, Meaning of Early Medieval Geometry, 52728.
83 Geometria latine dicitur terrae dimensio. Cassiodorus Inst. 2.6.1. A lost work of Varro is cited 
as an authority for this definition.
84 Cuius disciplinae apud Graecos Euclides, Apollonius, Archimedes necnon et alii scriptores proba-
biles extiterunt, ex quibus Euclidem translatum Romanae linguae idem uir magnificus Boethius edidit. 
Inst. 2.6.3
85 Hoc auctor Heron metricus redegit ad dogma conscriptum, quatenus studiosus legendo possit 
agnoscere. Var. III.52.7.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 195
with the unique system of centuriation have, perhaps unsurprisingly, received more 
attention than the simplified Latin versions of Euclidean geometry86. While the land 
may have been divided by limites since the time of the Gracchan land reforms  or even 
earlier if we believe the assertions of Frontinus and Varro that limites were Etruscan in 
origin  the study of geometry may have also been an important element in mensorial 
training87; although the surveyor may not have needed to calculate the volume of a 
complex three dimensional shape, a basic understanding of measurements and area 
calculation would have been essential for the creation of accurate tax records.
Of course, one of the advantages of centuriation was the fact that it did not rely 
on any calculations; if the surveyor simply measured and marked out their grid, spaces 
of fixed area would eventually emerge. In cases involving ager arcifinius, however, 
some geometrical knowledge would have been necessary. In the earliest versions of the 
Corpus agrimensorum, a number of imperial-era geometrical treatises were collected 
alongside those writings that focused primarily on centuriation: the Expositio for-
marum of Balbus  probably written in the late first or early second century88  takes a 
geometrical approach to land surveying and may have been based, in part, on Heron of 
Alexandria89. The fragmentary Podismus attributed to Marcus Junius Nipsus  which is 
found at the beginning of the manuscript in the Codex Arcerianus A, before Frontinus 
 cannot be dated with certainty90.
In addition to these treatises, there appear to have been a number of Latin 
geometrical texts written during the late antique period, which were excerpted and 
collected in later manuscripts along with excerpts from the centuriation-based survey-
ing treatises: in various manuscripts related to the Corpus agrimensorum we find the 
anonymous Pauca de Mensuris91; a Latin translation of Euclid attributed to Boethius92; 
86 While the geometrical fragments were published in Lachmanns 1848 edition, they have been 
largely excluded from subsequent editions.
87 See Dilke, Roman Land Surveyors, 5156.
88 A reference in the text to victories in Dacia has been used to suggest that Balbus was writing in 
the time of Domitian or Trajan. See Corpus Agrimensorum Romanorum II: Balbus ed. and trans. J.-Y. 
Guillaumin (Napoli, 1993), 35 and Campbell, CAR, xxxix-xl.
89 On the possible connection to Heron, see J.-Y. Guillaumin La signification des termes con-
templatio et observatio chez Balbus et linfluence hronienne sur la trait in J.-Y. Guillaumin (ed.) 
Mathematiques dans lantiquit (St.-Etienne, 1992), 20514 and Guillaumin, Balbus, 910.
90 Corpus Agrimensorum Romanorum III: Podismus et textes connexes ed. and trans. J.-Y. 
Guillaumin (Napoli, 1993), 9394, questions the attribution to Nipsus.
91 CAR L 37176. The treatise, which is collected in the ninth-century Wolfenbttel Gud. lat. 
105, and which mentions Isidore, was probably composed in the seventh or eighth centuries.
92 CAR L 37792.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 196
the Ex demonstratione artis geometricae excerpta commonly attributed to Pseudo-
Boethius93; and two extracts listed as being from the Geometry of Boethius94.
While Boethius did write on the subject of geometry, the surviving texts probably 
represent the work of later editors95. Boethius translation of Euclid, for instance, has 
survived only as a series of fragments, and there is, indeed, some doubt as to whether 
the original text of Boethius was a direct translation of Euclid or, itself, a simplified 
version96. Nonetheless, the geometrical texts associated with the Corpus agrimenso-
rum demonstrate how surveying and geometry had become inseparable during the 
Medieval period. The text entitled Euclidis Liber Primus is no mere translation of the 
Elements, but rather a retelling of basic Euclidean concepts with additional references 
to boundaries and measurements; these additions serve to situate a very theoretical 
subject within a practical frame.
Perhaps the most intriguing of these later works is the Ex demonstratione artis geo-
metricae excerpta, which is part of the larger medieval tradition of texts attributed to 
Pseudo-Boethius97. The text, which appears in several manuscripts from the eleventh to 
the thirteenth centuries, is a compilation of fragments from classical and late antique 
sources on surveying, boundaries, measurement and geometry. It begins with the defi-
nition of geometry given by Cassiodorus in his Institutiones, although it incorporates 
a more elaborate version of the Egyptian origin story98; this, in turn is followed by an 
explanation, almost Vitruvian in tone, of why geometry is such an important science99.
The Ex demonstratione also borrows from Hyginus Gromaticus  notably the pas-
sages which trace the origins of Roman surveying back to the days of Julius Caesar and 
Augustus100  as well as from Julius Frontinus, Siculus Flaccus and Agennius Urbicus; 
the text features a section on land disputes and a list of various types of boundary 
93 CAR L 393412.
94 CAR L 41316.
95 W.W. Rouse-Ball A Short Account of the History of Mathematics Third Ed. (London, 1901), 
13740. On the presence of Boethius in Medieval education, see A. White Boethius in the Medieval 
Quadrivium in M. Gibson (ed.) Boethius: His Life, Thought and Influence (Oxford, 1981), 162205.
96 On the relationship between Euclid and Boethius, see D. Pingree Boethius Geometry and 
Astronomy in M. Gibson (ed.) Boethius: His Life, Thought and Influence (Oxford, 1981), 155161 
and Zaitsev, Meaning of Early Medieval Geometry, 52326.
97 Evans Sub-Euclidean Geometry, 10518; M. Folkerts The Importance of the Pseudo-Boethian 
Geometria During the Middle Age in M. Masi (ed) Boethius and the liberal arts: a collection of essays 
(Berne and Las Vegas, 1981), 187209; Zaitsev, Meaning of Early Medieval Geometry, 524.
98 CAR L 393.1. cf. Cassiodorus Inst. 2.6.14.
99 CAR L 393.18.
100 CAR L 395.15 and 395.20. cf. Hyginus Gromaticus Constitutio L 176 = T 140.16 = C 140.20.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 197
stone, as well as a curious list of famous surveyors and the emperors for whom they 
worked101. When the text finally reaches the subject of measurement and calculation, 
much of the instruction appears to be based on the treatise of Balbus102.
Although the text is not about geometry in the Euclidean sense  it does not 
begin with the definitions of points and lines  it does provide a simple and practi-
cal guide to some of the issues that the Medieval surveyor may have faced. What is 
interesting about the Ex demonstratione is that, despite its reliance on the writings of 
the agrimensores, the practice of centuriation  fundamental to the activities of the 
imperial Roman surveyor  has been almost entirely removed. As with Faventinus, 
who employed his classical source material for a very different purpose, the editor of 
the Ex demonstratione seems to have mined the agrimensores for information relevant 
to his own time, and discarded everything else.
The Pseudo-Boethian tradition appears to have dominated geometrical knowledge 
throughout the Medieval west. However, in the Byzantine east  where the practice 
of land-surveying seems to have had a similar reliance on theoretical geometry  it is 
Heron of Alexandria whose writings were a primary influence on the measurement 
and assessment of land. There are, indeed, several texts of uncertain date  collected in 
a variety of manuscripts from the eleventh to the fifteenth centuries103  that display 
the direct influence of Heronian learning104.
Very little is known about Heron himself105; on the basis of limited evidence it 
was initially argued that he lived and wrote during the middle of the third century AD, 
although more recent scholarship has tended to place him in the latter half of the first 
century106. Herons writings  a surprising number of which have survived  include 
numerous treatises on mechanical inventions, steam powered devices, automated 
puppet shows, military equipment and other devices that exploit the laws of physics. 
101 CAR L 4046 (boundary stones) and 4034 (names of surveyors).
102 CAR L 40712.
103 The texts have been collected in E. Schilbach Byzantinische metrologische Quellen (Dsseldorf, 
1970) and J. Lefort et. al. Gomtries du fisc Byzantin (Paris, 1991). For a list of Byzantine manuscripts 
containing geometrical writings, Lefort et al. Gomtries, 3133.
104 On the transmission of Heron in the Byzantine world, see Lefort et al. Gomtries, 2731.
105 The best treatment of Herons life and work is still Heath, Greek Mathematics II, 298354. 
See also A.G. Drachmann in C.C. Gillispie (ed.) Dictionary of Scientific Biography in 16 vols. (New 
York, 197080), s.v. Hero of Alexandria.
106 For an overview of the evidence, see Heath, Greek Mathematics II, 298307, who places him 
in the third century. Heron, however, makes reference to a lunar eclipse at Alexandria, which has 
been identified as having taken place in AD 62.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 198
The focus on mechanical curiosities has led some modern scholars to portray Heron 
not as an heir to the Greek scientific tradition, but as a practicing technician at best 
and an enthusiastic amateur at worst107.
Heron also wrote on the subject of geometry. However, unlike Euclid  whose 
Elements make little concession to the practical applications of the subject  Herons 
Metrica may have been written, at least in part, as a practical manual for land measure-
ment108; he certainly makes explicit the connection between geometry and the physical 
world by opening his treatise with the familiar story of how the need for surveying 
first arose when the floodwaters of the Nile washed away the markers that divided 
properties. Herons Definitions, a collection of terms from Euclidean geometry and 
their meanings, was more purely theoretical109.
As with Boethius in the west, Herons work achieved great popularity during the 
Medieval centuries, but not in its original form; the Metrica and Definitions were trans-
mitted primarily as extracts or simplified reworkings. Perhaps the most widespread of 
these pseudo-Heronian texts was the Geometrica, a work which is ascribed to Heron, 
but generally acknowledged to represent the efforts of a later editor110. Extracts from 
the Geometrica, supplemented with material from the Definitions and examples from 
contemporary surveying practice, would form the basis for many of the Byzantine sur-
veying manuals from the eleventh and twelfth centuries111.
We may, perhaps, get some idea of how Heronian geometrical knowledge was put 
to practical use from the surveying instructions given in a poem attributed to Michael 
Psellos112. Although the poem cannot be dated to any earlier than the second half of the 
eleventh century113  the description contains both evidence of the Heronian method 
107 For a brief overview on scholarly opinions, see Drachmann, 310.
108 Published in Heronis Alexandrini opera quae supersunt omnia Vol. III ed. H. Schne (Leipzig, 
1903). The Metrica, which is attested in other works, was presumed lost; it was only discovered in 
1896, in a manuscript from Constantinople; see Heath, Greek Mathematics II, 31618.
109 Published in Heronis Alexandrini opera quae supersunt omnia Vol. IV ed. J.L. Heiberg 
(Leipzig, 1912); for a discussion of the text, see Heath, Greek Mathematics II, 31416.
110 The text appears in Heronis Alexandrini IV; see also Heath, Greek Mathematics II, 31819.
111 Notably the anonymous    (Lefort, Gomtries, 3847) and   
   (Lefort, Gomtries, 4859), as well as the Geodesia of George the Geometer 
(Lefort, Gomtries, 13653).
112 A geometry in verse by the most learned Psellos (    ) 
in Michaelis Pselli poemata ed. L.G. Westerink, poem 58 = Schilbach, Quellen II, 116125 = Lefort, 
Gomtries, 184201. Although he includes it in his edition, Westerink suggests that the ascription 
to Psellos is doubtful.
113 The poems definition of the orgyia (ll. 1011), a unit of length, refers to a tax reform associ-
ated with an emperor Michael; Schilbach, Quellen, 25, has tentatively identified this with Michael 
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 199
and echoes of the surveyor described by Cassiodorus. The poem may not be a witness 
to surveying practices of late antiquity, but it may at least represent the continuation of 
a tradition that emerged in the centuries after the imperial period114.
Psellos begins his poem with instructions on how to create a measuring rope (the 
schoinion) of the correct length115. The surveyor is then advised to walk through the 
land writing down the boundary markers and any changes of directions116; a different 
section of the poem lists some of the different types of boundary marker that the sur-
veyor may discover in his journey around the perimeter, including trees, items marked 
with a cross  for a cross, he tells us, has signified a boundary marker since ancient 
times  and large stones set firmly in the ground117.
Psellos is essentially describing the creation of a rudimentary cartographic arte-
fact. The surveyor must first create a drawing of the shape of the land, so that he may use 
the correct geometrical formula to discover the area. While Euclidean geometry  and 
even Heronian geometry in its original form  was concerned with suggesting elabo-
rate methods for calculating the area of various complex shapes, the pseudo-Heronian 
tradition of the Byzantine period was essentially concerned with simplification. The 
calculations demonstrated by Psellos are little more than techniques for reducing the 
shape of the land to a series of rectangles whose area may be determined by simple 
multiplication118.
The activities of the Byzantine surveyor may thus be summarised as follows: in 
order to assess a property, the surveyor would first have made a tour of the perim-
eter, identifying and recording any boundary markers; this initial assessment would 
ideally result in a drawing of the propertys basic shape. The surveyor and his team 
would then make another tour of the perimeter, this time with the measuring rope, 
annotating the drawing with the distances between each marker. From the annotated 
drawing, the surveyor would then be able to compare the shape with geometrical 
IV, which would place the composition sometime after 1041. If the poem was not in fact written by 
Psellos, it may have been written sometime shortly after his lifetime.
114 A study of this poem, the Heronian tradition and the activities of the Byzantine surveyor 
was presented by the present author at the Language of Maps colloquium at the Bodleian Library, 
Oxford, on 25 June 2011. A version of the paper is expected to appear in an edited volume based on 
the proceedings of the colloquium.
115 Psellos Geometry 2 (ll. 813); the passage may incorporate material from Herons 
Geometrica.
116 Psellos Geometry 4 (ll. 2231).
117 Psellos Geometry 16 (ll. 106146).
118 Psellos Geometry 512 (ll. 3385).
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 200
examples learned from Heronian treatises, and determine the best way to calculate 
the area of the land.
The goal of the surveyor was to arrive at a value of the land in modioi. The modios, 
like the iugerum before it, was technically a fixed area of rectangular shape correspond-
ing to the space contained within two square schoinia; in various Byzantine manuals, 
however, we learn that the length of the schoinion could vary depending on the quality 
of the land. Thus, the modios was primarily a unit of tax assessment, a figure that was 
fixed in its relationship to monetary value rather than to physical space.
We cannot, in the end, propose a direct connection between the surveying prac-
tices of late antiquity and those of the eleventh century. In many ways, however, the 
processes described by Psellos can be seen as a logical continuation of changes that 
we noted even as early as the time of Diocletian. The surveyor was employed not to 
create a space but to assess it. His knowledge consisted of an ability to identify ancient 
boundary markers, to take accurate measurements, and to turn those measurements 
into a single figure that could then be entered into a tax record. While the last vis-
ible traces of centuriation may have disappeared by the time Psellos was writing  or 
may, at least, have been subsumed into other types of field system  the attitudes that 
informed Roman surveying may have started to vanish not long after the agrimensores 
first set down in writing the practical aspects of their craft.
The process of dividing land by implementing a series of evenly spaced baselines may 
well have been ancient by the second century BC when evidence for it begins to appear 
in the epigraphic record; it was certainly a common practice by the time Augustus 
refined the basic standards and sent out his surveyors to implement orthogonal field 
systems throughout the empire. Centuriation succeeded because it provided a single 
solution for two key problems: not only did it allow for a system of orderly records to 
be kept, but it also provided a convenient rural framework for the mass resettlement 
of veteran soldiers.
The scale of the Augustan survey could not have failed to make a mark on the 
physical landscape of the Roman world. However, once the land had been divided and 
settled according to a consistent system of boundaries, the need for further surveying 
would have diminished considerably. New orthogonal field systems may have been 
introduced as late as the second century AD, but once the initial activity had been 
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 201
undertaken, the patterns of landholding would have evolved according to the activities 
of the people within the land. As land was divided, or otherwise changed hands, these 
changes would have been recorded in the records of the local tabularium.
When Diocletian introduced his tax reforms at the end of the third century, the 
records of landholding would have contained a figure of the total land area, from which 
a taxable value could be calculated. Diocletians major contribution to the system of 
taxation may have been the incorporation of people and livestock into a tax structure 
that had previously been based on land alone. The old land records may thus have 
been sufficient for the censitores, whose primary job was the enumeration of resources. 
Certain properties may have needed re-measuring, but there is little to suggest that 
Diocletians land assessment programme would have caused any major reconfigura-
tions of the physical landscape. However, in focussing on the property as a single unit 
 in this case, the sum of land area and animate resources  Diocletians tax reforms 
may have caused a subtle shift in the way that rural space was apprehended; rather than 
being part of a larger system of land division, properties may increasingly have come to 
be seen as units of land existing in isolation.
We cannot be entirely sure if there was an agrarian crisis in the middle of the 
fourth century; the series of laws from the 360s to the 380s encouraging resettlement 
of abandoned land represent the imperial response to a problem whose scale is impos-
sible to assess. We may, however, perceive a change in the imperial attitude toward 
land distribution: in its attempts to encourage the occupation and cultivation of rural 
space, the state may have allowed the responsibility for defining the terms of a property 
to fall into the hands of the individual. 
In the previous chapter we examined how the physical nature of urban spaces 
began to change when state control gave way to private interests. In the case of the 
cities, a failure to maintain public spaces combined with a rise in poorly-regulated pri-
vate construction may have led to a breakdown of the urban plans on which the city 
had developed. Where there had been no previous occupation  specifically, the towns 
of Syria and the Negev  the absence of an imperial presence resulted in towns whose 
arrangement was the result of unregulated, independent construction. Just as those 
towns offered no suggestion of a formal order, it is possible that the land claimed from 
the end of the fourth century onward would not necessarily have corresponded to the 
systems of limites established centuries before.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 202
In this new rural landscape, the services of the trained surveyor would still have 
been essential. Even in the imperial centuries, the surveyor was called upon to recog-
nise the ancient boundary markers associated with ager arcifinius and to interpret the 
evidence of the land in those situations where no formal records existed; the surveyor 
would have also been expected to know some geometry, even if the system of centuria-
tion would have rendered area calculations largely redundant. With the disappearance 
of the centuriated landscape, however, the surveyors profession would have relied 
increasingly on boundary identification, measurement and calculation.
In late antiquity, surveying was no longer employed as a means of constructing 
space. The professionals described by Cassiodorus and the Codex Theodosianus, by 
Agennius Urbicus and Michael Psellos, were concerned more with locating ancient 
markers in the landscape than with the establishment of new ones; instead of under-
standing landholdings as part of a larger system, the surveyors treated each one as a 
linear boundary, describing a simple shape that existed in geographical isolation. 
Indeed, the perception of individual properties may increasingly have been informed 
by the diagrams found in the pages of geometrical treatises.
Where large areas of land had once been divided, smaller areas of land were 
now merely contained: topographical features and arcane markers had started to 
reassert themselves as the means by which the limits of a property were established. 
Centuriation had once provided a system for centralised land management by getting 
rid of the local conventions and regional variations associated with ager arcifinius; in 
late antiquity, however, the disappearance of that larger system may have returned a 
measure of uncertainty and disorder to the rural landscape.
passages through the late antique landscape
There would have come a time in the life of the empire when the construction of new 
roads became less important than the maintenance of those which already existed. 
Once the disparate corners of the Roman world had been connected by a series of 
paved roads, emperors were faced with a choice of either making small additions to the 
network  for instance, the Via Domitiana or the Via Traiana, both of which offered 
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 203
alternative routes to places already served by paved roads  or of making sure that the 
existing roads remained passable. The epigraphic record suggests that many emperors 
opted for the latter.
The epigraphic record also suggests that road maintenance remained reasonably 
consistent from time of Augustus to the time of Constantine. We might reasonably 
expect to find evidence for road maintenance under those emperors such as Trajan, 
Hadrian or Septimus Severus, who were known to have taken an extensive interest in 
the built environment; however, even in the turmoil of the third century we find no 
lack of milestones associated with emperors such as Gordian III, Philip or Aurelian119. 
The military importance of the road network may have ensured that, even in a time of 
great instability, it did not suffer from imperial neglect.
Thus, while Diocletian is often characterised as having inherited an empire on the 
verge of collapse, the road network may have survived the third century in a reason-
able state of repair. Although road maintenance was undoubtedly carried out under 
the tetrarchy  there are milestones associated with tetrarchic repairs from Spain and 
Africa in the west to Asia Minor and Arabia in the east120  the level of activity does 
not appear to be dramatically higher than it was in the time of Aurelian. We know that 
Diocletian was especially concerned with the frontier roads of the east, and we know 
that his tetrarchic colleagues were responsible for necessary repairs on the major impe-
rial throughways, but there is little evidence to suggest that an empire-wide restoration 
programme would have been necessary.
Indeed, there is even some evidence for the construction of new roads in the time 
of the tetrarchy. The via Herculia in Italy  for which the only surviving evidence is a 
series of inscriptions  was probably established under Diocletian and Maximian at the 
end of the third century121. However, while the via Herculia was equipped with bridges 
and milestones, it appears to have remained unpaved; even though the establishment 
of the path would have involved a certain amount of manpower and engineering, the 
road shows signs of having been constructed as economically as possible. Although 
it was designed for state rather than local transportation, it was nonetheless a more 
functional artefact than the imperial roads of the past.
119 An index of miliaria, grouped by emperor, may be found CIL XVII.2, 265274.
120 van Sickle, Roads in Spain, 823; id. The Public Works of Africa in the Reign of Diocletian, 
CP, Vol. 25, No. 2 (1930), 17379.
121 R.J. Buck The Via Herculia, PBSR, Vol. 39 (1971), 6687.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 204
The lack of paving on one road should not suggest that the state had given up 
on the maintenance of the network. The work carried out by Diocletian and his col-
leagues appears to have been matched in the time of Constantine. After Constantine, 
however, there is a sudden and dramatic decrease in the number of imperial milestones: 
in the Latin west, they disappear almost entirely by the end of the fourth century122. We 
should not, of course, interpret the lack of milestones as clear evidence for a decline in 
the road network itself: in fact, the disappearance of milestones corresponds roughly 
with a general decrease in the number of inscriptions produced in the Roman world123.
If we look beyond the epigraphic evidence, we find that road maintenance 
remained an important issue for the state well into the sixth century. From at least 
the time of Constantine, the repair and construction of roads had been considered a 
compulsory public service, which meant that anyone liable for tax payments was also 
liable for contributions to the road network124. Public services were divided into two 
main classes: the services classified as menial (munera sordida) included bread making, 
the burning of lime, supplying post-horses, repairing public buildings and, in the early 
fourth century, the maintenance of roads125; it should be noted that these services did 
not involve physical labour on the part of the individual, but rather a contribution to 
the state, calculated on the basis of an individuals taxable value. Men of the highest 
rank, however, could claim exemption from menial services, on the grounds that they 
were liable for extraordinary services (munera extraordinaria) which were, themselves, 
another form of monetary contribution.
Within this division of responsibility, road maintenance represented something 
of a grey area. It was classified as menial throughout most of the fourth century and 
was included in the list of menial services specified in a law from 382126. While a 
constitution from 387 states that no one should be exempt from road repairs, road 
maintenance is included, three years later, in a reiteration of the menial services from 
122 There are fewer than twenty Latin milestone inscriptions from the century between 
Constans and Theodosius II. On the use of milestones as evidence, see R. Laurence Milestones, 
Communications, and Political Stability in L. Ellis and F.L. Kidner (eds) Travel, Communication 
and Geography in Late Antiquity (Aldershot, 2004), 4158.
123 On the decrease in inscriptions after the third century, see chapter one, 35 n. 72.
124 CTh 15.3.1. On Roman public service, see F. Millar Empire and City, Augustus to Julian: 
Obligations, Excuses and Status, JRS, Vol. 73 (1983), 7696.
125 CTh 11.15.15 and 18.
126 CTh 11.16.15.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 205
which certain high-ranking individuals may claim immunity127. In 399, however, a new 
constitution informs us that, while people had been able to claim exemption in the 
past, it was now necessary for everyone to contribute to the cost of repair, on account 
of the immeasurable devastation of the road network128. While it is difficult to assess 
the gravity of the situation from the legal evidence alone, the presence of such legisla-
tion might allow us to infer that contributions of menial services were not providing 
the funds necessary to maintain the road network.
Paved roads, as we discussed in chapter two, required constant attention: the roads 
constructed in Italy at the end of the second century BC, had already fallen into disrepair 
a century later when Augustus sought to restore them129. Furthermore, the restoration 
of paved roads had never been a popular expenditure among the higher classes: we may 
recall how the senators in the time of Augustus had been unwilling to pay for road main-
tenance in Italy. Thus, if men of high rank had found a way out of paying for repairs, and 
if contributions to menial service had failed to cover the cost of maintenance for even half 
a century, it is entirely possible that the road network would have started to deteriorate. 
Certainly the problem was great enough for the state to intervene: in 423, the 
construction of roads and bridges was reclassified as a non-menial service and no 
man, regardless of rank, could claim exemption from contributions130. The designa-
tion remained in force into the sixth century: the law preventing exemptions from 
road building appears twice in the Codex Justinianus131, and road and bridge repairs 
are omitted from that codes list of menial public services, which has otherwise been 
copied directly from the Codex Theodosianus132.
Despite the suggestions of the Codex Theodosianus and the sudden lack of epi-
graphic evidence, we do not need to suggest that the road network fell to ruin during 
the late fourth century. While some of the roads may have fallen into disrepair, the 
state appears to have made the necessary adjustments to ensure that funds were avail-
able for proper maintenance.  During the fifth century, many of the roads in the west 
127 A viarum munitione nullus habeatur inmunis. CTh 15.3.3. cf. CTh 11.16.18.
128 Verum propter inmensas vastitates viarum certatim studia cunctorum ad reparationem publici 
aggeris conducibili devotione volumus festinare. CTh 15.3.4.
129 Dio LIII.22.1.
130 Igitur ad instructiones reparationesque itinerum pontiumque nullum genus hominum nul-
liusque dignitatis ac venerationis meritis cessare oportet. CTh 15.3.6.
131 At CJ 1.2.7 and 11.75.4.
132 cf. CTh 11.16.18 and CJ 10.48.12.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 206
would have been cut off from imperial control and would have deteriorated naturally; 
in a few cases, roads may have been actively destroyed by invading forces, although 
such instances were rare. In the eastern empire, however, roads were still very much a 
part of life in the sixth century when Procopius was compiling his Buildings.
In fact, roads play a remarkably small role in the building projects of Justinian. 
With the exception of one major project  the repaving of the via Egnatia  instances 
of road repair are limited to a handful of minor projects in Asia Minor. Procopius 
describes how a section of road going from Bithynia toward Phrygia  a section that 
was susceptible to flooding  was paved with large stones by Justinian and Theodora133. 
The road is described as being paved for a half-days journey, which may have been a 
distance of around ten or twelve Roman miles; certainly the passage does not suggest 
that the project was, in any way, unusual.
Elsewhere Procopius discusses the establishment of wagon-roads ( ) 
through areas that had previously been difficult to traverse134. Although the nature of the 
wagon-road is not entirely clear, they may have differed from major imperial thorough-
fares both in the width of the carriageway and in the quality of the construction. The 
designation of wagon-road might suggest that it had been constructed to accommodate 
a single wagon, as opposed to the major imperial roads which are described by Procopius 
as being wide enough for two carriages to pass one another135. Furthermore, both of the 
descriptions focus on the clearing and levelling of mountainous land and contain no 
mention of paving stones; like the via Herculia described above, the wagon-roads may 
have been economically constructed paths, whose surfaces were a combination of com-
pressed gravel and carved mountain rock. We may thus suggest that the wagon-roads 
were single track passages built for the residents of a particular area, rather than fully 
adorned imperial thoroughfares designed for long-distance travel.
The only major road project mentioned in the Buildings is the repaving of the via 
Egnatia from Constantinople to Rhegium. Procopius  who, curiously, does not call the 
road by its classical name, but refers to it simply as the road to Rhegium  informs us 
that the road had been in a very poor state of repair before the time of Justinian: the sur-
face was uneven and the road become a marsh whenever it rained136. Justinian, however, 
133 Procopius De aed. V.3.1215.
134 Procopius De aed. V.2.3 and V.5.3.
135 This may, as discussed below, be a rhetorical description rather than a real indication of width.
136 Procopius De aed. IV.8.5.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 207
had the road paved with stone for its entire length. Although the via Egnatia is thought 
to have been paved perhaps even as early as the late second century BC, the description of 
Procopius suggests that its former greatness had all but vanished by late antiquity.
However, while the passage might initially appear to be little more than a 
straightforward description of road improvements, the rhetorical devices employed by 
Procopius might give us cause to doubt the truth of his claims. We may, for instance, 
note that his description of the paving slabs as being large enough to load a wagon 
( ) echoes his assessment of the stones used to repave Antioch137. He 
employs the image once again in his description of the building of the Nea church in 
Jerusalem, where larger wagons are said to have been constructed to accommodate a 
single paving slab138. In fact, the recurrence of the wagon-sized paving slabs may be 
little more than a rhetorical embellishment borrowed from Xenophon, who uses the 
same formulation to describe the stone blocks that were placed on the approach to 
Piraeus in order to prevent the passage of siege engines139.
Procopius goes on to describe the finished via Egnatia as being wide enough 
for two wagons to pass, and marvels at how the paving stones were joined together 
so perfectly that they appeared to be organic rather than the work of men140. Both 
of these descriptions are, in fact, recycled from a passage in the Gothic Wars: as 
Belisarius made his way toward Rome on the via Latina, Procopius interrupts the 
narrative to give an account of the nearby via Appia, which is also described as being 
wide enough for two wagons and has stones that appear to have grown together141. 
Procopius believes the road, in its present state, to be nine hundred years old and 
is therefore impressed to find it in such good condition; it is, therefore, entirely 
possible that Procopius was attempting to draw an explicit connection between 
Justinians repairs and the most venerable of all Roman roads. However it is also 
possible that his description of the via Egnatia was little more than an unwitting 
paraphrase of his own rhetorical flourish.
Procopius often valued the classical turn of phrase over the mundane realities of 
the buildings he was describing. In the previous chapter, we saw how he was able to 
137 cf. Procopius De aed. II.10.21 and IV.8.5.
138 Procopius De aed. V.6.12.
139 Xenophon Hell. II.4.27.
140 Procopius De aed. IV.8.7 and 9.
141 Procopius Wars V.14.7.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 208
present Justiniana Prima as a model of the imperial urban ideal, despite the obvious 
shortcomings of the city itself. In his description of the road to Rhegium, with its clas-
sical references to paving stones and its oblique connection to his own impressions of 
the via Appia, Procopius may have been drawing upon a similar ancient ideal. In fact, 
if we strip away the rhetoric, there is little to suggest that Justinians work on the via 
Egnatia was anything more than a standard imperial repaving project.
The road was an important presence in the landscape of the imperial Roman world, 
even if it was infrequently mentioned. In chapter four we saw how roads provided a 
structure for Pausanias descriptions of Greece, even as the physical roads themselves 
remained in the background of the text. Indeed the historical topography reported 
by Pausanias was inseparable from the road network: the two had developed together 
over a long period of time. Significant places were connected by roads and the road, in 
turn, came to define a narrative of movement through the built landscape.
The network of Roman roads that existed at the beginning of the fourth century 
would have connected together a vast and diverse group of topographical features that 
were significant to Roman culture. Within that same physical space, however, there 
would have been a dormant layer of half-forgotten locations, the existence of which were 
attested solely in the books of the old testament. The traveller from Bordeaux, whom we 
discussed in chapter four, used a Roman itinerary, a familiarity with the scriptures and, 
we may assume, a certain amount of local knowledge in order to discover the layer of 
Christian topography that lay beneath the surface of the Roman built environment.
The road network of the Levant and its accompanying itineraries would have 
offered an imperfect match with the topography of the scriptures. Many of the scenes 
from the old testament would have occurred more than a thousand years earlier; some 
may never have occurred at all. Nonetheless, the road network would have offered an 
initial foundation for identifying ancient names and locations; however as the topogra-
phy of the scriptures became more important and more defined, the built environment 
that had developed around the needs of the Roman traveller may have been replaced 
by a new network of Christian paths. 
An interest in rediscovering the scriptural world of the Levant emerged almost 
immediately after Christianity became the new religion of the Roman state. The travel-
ler from Bordeaux, as we noted, made his journey in 333. Three years earlier, the church 
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 209
historian Eusebius of Caesarea set about compiling a list of scriptural place names 
and their modern equivalents142. The Onomasticon of Eusebius, composed around AD 
330 was a systematic attempt to situate scriptural locations within the physical space 
of contemporary Palestine. The text as a whole is arranged alphabetically, although 
within each heading, there are subheadings corresponding to the individual books 
from which the names had been collected; Eusebius draws primarily on Genesis 
through Kings, plus the Gospels. Within these subheadings, the individual names are 
presented roughly in order of their appearance within the scriptural text.
The attempts of Eusebius to map scriptural places onto contemporary locations 
are often indebted to the road network. The town of Keeila, mentioned in the book 
of Joshua, is described as corresponding to the village of Kela, which is located east of 
Eleutheropolis at the eighth milestone going toward Hebron143. In some cases, how-
ever, the relationship to the existing road is less exact: the town of Bethel, for instance, 
is listed as being to the right of the road at the twelfth milestone going from Aelia to 
Neapolis144; the town of Aser is said to be near the fifteenth milestone on the road from 
Scythopolis to Neapolis145. While Eusebius is clearly attempting to base his work pri-
marily on scriptural and local knowledge, the references to milestones  and, indeed, 
the use of Aelia by an author who would otherwise use Jerusalem  might suggest that 
Roman itineraries were used as a source for the Onomasticon.
When Eusebius was writing, the scriptural topography of the Levant was in its early 
stages of development. In 390, some sixty years after the Onomasticon was initially com-
piled, Jerome produced a Latin version that was both a translation and an update146. As 
he informs us in his introduction, his Latin version was not the first; the earlier translator, 
however, appears to have possessed both a poor understanding of Levantine topography 
and, if Jerome is to be believed, a limited grasp of the Latin language.
By the time of Jeromes translation, however, an understanding of the scriptural 
landscape would have been reasonably widespread among Christians. While the 
142 Eusebius Werke III.1: Das Onomasticon der Biblischen Ortsnamen ed. E. Klostermann (Leipzig, 
1904). On the dating and composition, see C.U. Wolf Eusebius of Caesarea and the Onomasticon, 
The Biblical Archaeologist, Vol. 27, No. 3 (1964), 6596.
143            ,    
. Onom. 114.
144            . Onom. 40
145       . Onom. 26
146 See Wolf, Onomasticon, 80.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 210
author of the Bordeaux itinerary may have been little more than a Roman tourist with 
Christian interests, the idea of making a pilgrimage to the various loca sancta of the 
East appears to have taken hold in the decades immediately following the acceptance 
of Christianity147. Contemporary perceptions of the developing scriptural landscape 
are well illustrated in an account written near the end of the fourth century by a pil-
grim known as Egeria148. Although we cannot be certain about the details of Egerias 
life   even her name has been called into question149  she was probably of Gallic 
origin, and is thought to have undertaken her extensive travels throughout Egypt and 
Palestine between 381 and 384150.
Like Pausanias before her, Egeria was not especially interested in the present. We 
first encounter her on the approach to Mount Sinai, where she is busy attempting to 
match the surrounding topography to the book of Exodus. In one place, she points out 
a place where Moses dwelled151; in another, she is able to identify the valley where the 
children of Israel worshipped the golden calf, informing us that a stone that now stands 
on the spot152. Although Egerias associations were based largely on physical remains, 
her appreciation of scriptural topography did not necessarily require a counterpart in 
the real world: later in her travels she points out the place where a pillar of salt once 
stood, despite the fact that the pillar itself is no longer there153.
What is perhaps most intriguing about Egerias text  at least, in terms of our 
present investigation  is the way in which the contemporary Roman landscape 
is almost completely ignored. Egerias travels take her from Sinai to Jerusalem, and 
from Jerusalem overland to Constantinople, via Tarsus; however, as these long and 
147 On the earliest pilgrimages, see Hunt, Holy Land Pilgrimage, 83106.
148 The text appears in Silviae uel potius Aetheriae peregrinatio ad loca sancta ed. W. Heraeus 
(Heidelberg, 1908) and Itinerarium Egeriae ed. A Franceschini and R. Weber, in CCSL 175, 2790. 
An english translation with valuable commentary appears in J. Wilkinson Egerias Travels to the Holy 
Land. Revised edition ( Jerusalem, 1981).
149 Earlier editions of the text were credited to S. Silvia or Aetheria; see J.F. Mountford Silvia, 
Aetheria, or Egeria?, CQ, Vol. 17, No. 1 (1923), 4041 and Wilkinson, Egerias Travels, 23536. 
150 On the dating, see P. Davos La Date du Voyage dgrie, Analecta Bollandiana, Vol. 85, 
No. 1 (1967), 16594 and Wilkinson, Egerias Travels, 23739. The question of her origin is less 
certain: in the text she compares the Euphrates to the Rhne (18.1), which might suggest a home in 
southern Gaul. For some possibilities, see H. Sivan Who Was Egeria? Piety and Pilgrimage in the 
Age of Gratian, The Harvard Theological Review, Vol. 81, No. 1 (1988), 5972 and C. Weber Egerias 
Norman Homeland, HSCP, Vol. 92 (1989), 43756.
151 ubi fuit sanctus Moyses. Egeria 3.5.
152 haec est autem uallis, in qua factus est uitulus [...] nam lapis grandis ibi fixus stat in ipso loco. 
Egeria 2.2.
153 sed mihi credite, domine uenerabiles, quia columna ipsa iam non paret, locus autem ipse tantum 
ostenditur. Egeria 12.7.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 211
presumably arduous journeys contain little of scriptural interest, they are passed over 
in the space of a few lines. Her interest in the landscape of the scriptures consumes her 
descriptions, and the contemporary world often only appears as a means by which the 
past may be identified.
Egerias travels, however, were still very much tied to the infrastructure of the 
Roman road network. In her journey from Clysma to the city called Arabia, she 
describes the distance as being four mansiones154; the mansiones are also described as 
forts (castra) where soldiers are stationed. As she passes through the desert, members 
of her party point out various scriptural sites some to the left of the road and some to 
the right, some close to the road and others far away155. While Egeria was certainly 
following the Roman road, and may perhaps have been guided by an itinerary, we can 
see how the path of the road did not necessarily correspond to the landscape of places 
made newly significant by their association with the scriptures.
Indeed, much of the scriptural topography experienced by Egeria appears to no 
longer exist in the physical world and must therefore be constructed around more 
contemporary indicators. Egerias description of the city of Rameses demonstrates 
her willingness to imagine what is no longer physically extant: the city is described as 
being a level plain without even a single house156. Although it once contained many 
buildings, the only thing left, she informs us, is a giant Theban stone157; the monu-
ment, however, is enough to conjure up the image of an entire city. Later, when Egeria 
is pointing out the site of the aforementioned pillar of salt, it is an artefact from the 
Roman built environment that is able to act as the topographical marker; the pillar, 
she reports, used to stand by the sixth milestone from Segor158.
When there were no points of scriptural interest to identify, Egerias travels may 
not have been different from those of any Roman traveller. Unlike the traveller from 
Bordeaux, however, she has preserved only those parts of the journey that relate specifi-
cally to the identification of scriptural places; when she returns to Jerusalem after her 
time in Egypt, she summarises the trip by saying taking the road we had already taken 
154 sunt ergo a Clesma [...] usque ad Arabiam ciuitatem mansiones quattuor. Egeria 7.2.
155 nam alia in sinistro, alia in dextro de itinere nobis erant, alia etiam longius de uia, alia in 
proximo. Egeria 7.2.
156 Ramessen ciuitas nunc campus est, ita ut nec unam habitationem habeat. Egeria 8.1.
157 nunc autem ibi nihil aliud est nisi tantum unus lapis ingens Thebeus. Egeria 8.2
158 nam de Segor forsitan sexto miliario ipse locus est, ubi stetit columna illa. Egeria 12.7.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 212
through each of the Egyptian mansiones, I came to the border of Palestine. And from 
there, I returned to Aelia, that is Jerusalem, stopping again at several mansiones159.
Egerias travels from Jerusalem to Constantinople demonstrate that her desire to 
inhabit a completely Christian landscape extended far beyond the boundaries of Egypt 
and Palestine. In Cilicia she visits Tarsus and, from there, devotes several paragraphs 
to describing a side journey to the martyrium of Thecla; her journey from Tarsus to 
Chalcedon, by contrast, is reduced to a single sentence. Egerias adherence to the road 
and her reckoning of distance in mansiones suggests that her mode of travel may not have 
been dissimilar to that experienced by the author of the Bordeaux itinerary. However, 
while that earlier traveller was at least somewhat attuned to the Greek and Roman past, 
for Egeria, the road existed only to carry her between places of religious significance.
There is evidence to suggest that the road network was still acting as a founda-
tion for the identification of scriptural topography in the sixth century. Indeed, the 
presence of the road may be detected throughout the De Situ Terrae Sanctae, a guide 
to the sacred sites of the Levant compiled by the archdeacon Theodosius between 518 
and 530160. The work has clearly been assembled from a variety of different sources: it 
opens with a series of journeys that start in Jerusalem and pass through various sites of 
scriptural significance; these are followed by a description of sites in Jerusalem itself 
which is, in turn, followed by a miscellany of information pertaining to notable sites 
both in Palestine and in other provinces161.
The journeys themselves are not dissimilar from Roman itineraries: they often 
begin from a particular gate of Jerusalem and list a series of places followed by the 
distance in miles162. The second journey guides the reader from location to location, 
making sure to add a line about why the particular place is worth seeing; in one line, for 
example, we learn that from Samaria to Sebaste it is six miles, and it is here that John was 
159 et inde proficiscens denuo, faciens iter per singulas mansiones Egypti, per quas habueramus, 
perueni ad fines Palestinae. et inde [...] faciens denuo mansiones aliquod per Palestina regressa sum in 
Helia, id est in Ierusolimam. Egeria 9.7.
160 The text appears in Itinera Hierosolymitana Saec. IIIIVIII ed. P. Geyer CSEL 38 (Vienna, 
1898), 13550; Geyers text is reprinted in CCSL 175, 11325; trans. J.H. Bernard Theodosius 
(London, 1893). On the dating, see J. Wilkinson Jerusalem Pilgrims Before the Crusades (Warminster, 
1977), 185.
161 For an anaylsis of the text and its sources, see Wilkinson Jerusalem Pilgrims, 18485.
162 De situ 16. For a summary of the various journeys, see Y. Tsafrir The Maps Used by 
Theodosius: On the Pilgrim Maps of the Holy Land and Jerusalem in the Sixth Century C.E., DOP, 
Vol. 40 (1986), 129145.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 213
beheaded163. The third journey, however, makes fewer additions to the original source 
itinerary: after the first two stages  Mount Buzana, where David and Goliath fought, 
and Eleutheropolis, resting place of Zacharias  the journey goes to Ascalon, Gaza and 
a handful of smaller towns; instead of brief descriptions, we are given only distances164.
Apart from these initial journeys, the text offers little geographical coherence. 
A later section, which appears also to have been copied from an itinerary, gives the 
distances between Jerusalem and Mount Sinai not in miles, but in mansiones.165 Other 
sections dispense with the guiding principle of the road entirely and present merely a 
list of places: one section in particular lists the cities in Arabia destroyed by Joshua; the 
following section, which may have been extracted from a geographical text, gives an 
incomplete list of the provinces surrounding Palestine166.
There is a sense that Theodosius was interested primarily in names that could be 
related to the scriptures, and less about their context. The lack of structure in the De 
Situ suggests that Theodosius may have simply extracted from his sources anything 
that seemed relevant to the landscape of Christian topography. Although itineraries 
and perhaps other geographical descriptions may have acted as his source material, the 
text he has assembled is not comprehensive enough to act as an itinerary on its own; it 
is not a work designed to help an individual move through the landscape, so much as a 
poorly assembled compendium of significant names.
The travels of Egeria were still very much dictated by the paths of the road net-
work and by the daily rhythm of the mansiones; her interests may have been Christian, 
but her mode of travel was recognisably Roman. In Theodosius, we find only echoes 
of Roman travel connecting the various points of scriptural interest. Where Eusebius 
and Egeria had been able to employ the roads of the present as an index to situate the 
important locations of a distant past, the De Situ leaves the reader with the sense that 
the topography of Christian faith was in the process of becoming separated from the 
infrastructure of the Roman world.
163 de Samaria usque in Sebastea milia VI, ubi domnus Iohannes decollatus est. De Situ 2.
164 De situ 3.
165 De situ 27.
166 De situ 2425.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 214
a new geography for a new audience
Ancient geography had been primarily a textual undertaking: the classical image of the 
oikoumene came first from the descriptions of Homer and was subsequently refined in 
the writings of Eratosthenes and his successors. Where the Roman and Greek tradi-
tions diverged was in the type of text that was used as a source for the creation of a 
cartographic image. For Ptolemy, the goal of geography was the creation of a pictorial 
representation that conveyed the true shape of the inhabited world. The contents of 
the land were less important than their accurate position within a grid of meridians, 
and Ptolemys treatise, therefore, presented only the information and instructions nec-
essary to create an accurate cartographic rendering.
In the Roman tradition, however, the contents were far more important than 
the shape. The perceived accuracy of a cartographic image was determined, to a 
great extent, by its ability to situate a large number of well-known names and places 
within a roughly defined framework of the oikoumene. The cities, peoples, moun-
tains and rivers that defined imperial cartography  what we referred to in chapter 
one as chorographical representation  had been gathered from a variety of sources, 
including literary histories, accounts of travel and official records; the information 
was subsequently presented in texts that arranged the information according to a 
geographic organising principle.
From what we can tell, it was the latter tradition that came to dominate carto-
graphic expression during the imperial period. While Ptolemys treatise continued to 
circulate in the centuries following its composition  and appears to have remained 
highly regarded as a geographical source  for the late antique audience it may have 
been valued more for its extensive catalogue of place names than for its insistence on 
representational accuracy. As cartography became more concerned with the arrange-
ment of items within a schematised oikoumene and less interested in the physical shape 
of the world, geographical texts may have required less in the way of spatial context; 
indeed, it may have been possible to create a reasonable representation of the world 
using merely a catalogue of place names.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 215
Thus, our assessment of cartography in late antiquity must necessarily focus on 
the relationship between text and image. As with the chorographical displays that may 
have characterised the imperial period, late antique cartography was still, essentially, 
the translation of a textual description into a pictorial representation that situated 
various names and places within a broadly geographical context. What changed in late 
antiquity was not necessarily the technical knowledge required to translate a text into 
an image, but rather the types of text that were viewed as geographical authorities.
Although we possess almost nothing in the way of material evidence for late 
antique cartography  save for the surviving fragments of a floor mosaic in Madaba, 
Jordan  there are a number of geographical texts written between the fourth and the 
sixth century, some of which contain references to cartographic artefacts. In addition 
to these, from the ninth century onward, we begin to find cartographic manuscript 
illustrations that may be part of a tradition extending back to the very end of antiquity. 
While we cannot demonstrate a direct connection, we may at least identify traces of 
late antique geographical thought in the cartographic traditions that became promi-
nent in the medieval period167.
Indeed, the emergence of medieval cartography may be best understood as a 
logical development of the Roman chorographic tradition. In the previous section, we 
discussed how the rise of Christianity led to the creation of a completely new regional 
topography in the Levant; as we shall see, attempts to create an image of the world 
based on the authority of the scriptures may also have resulted in a completely new 
understanding of the oikoumene, of the earth and even of the cosmos. The cartographic 
tradition that emerged from imperial Rome had succeeded because it was able to 
present an image of the world that corresponded to widely-held beliefs; as those beliefs 
began to change, the Roman cartographic tradition  with its ability to transform 
descriptive text into plausible images  would have been easily able to adapt itself to 
the demands of a new geographical vision.
Geographical works of a descriptive nature were no less popular in late antiquity than 
they had been in the previous centuries. Although there may, increasingly, have been a 
167 There have been reasonably few attempts to trace the origins of Medieval geography back 
into the classical world. See, J.F. Moffitt Medieval Mappaemundi and Ptolemys Chorographia, 
Gesta, Vol. 32, No. 1 (1993), 5968.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 216
linguistic divide between the Latin west and the Greek east, we may notice similarities 
in the types of geographical text being produced in each language. We find, in both 
languages, works that seek to describe the shape of the world, as well as texts that have 
reduced the contents of the world to a simple list. While some of the surviving texts 
contain measurements and distances, almost none of them follow the Ptolemaic exam-
ple of providing only the necessary data for pure geography. Indeed, the majority of 
the geographical texts that emerged in late antiquity are what we described in chapter 
one as chorographical, that is to say, texts that sought to catalogue  either through 
description or enumeration  the contents of the inhabited world.  
For Greek authors,  could refer to either a textual description of the 
land and its topographic features, or a pictorial representation of those features. In 
Latin, however, chorographia was used infrequently before the end of the fourth century, 
and seems to have been reserved primarily for pictorial artefacts. Vitruvius, as we recall, 
used the word to describe a cartographic wall-painting168; in addition, chorographers 
are attested in the epigraphic record of the first and second centuries AD, where they 
appear to have been associated with surveying and the creation of pictorial records169.
Other early instances of chorographia cannot be dated with any certainty: the 
poem of Varro Atacinus and the abandoned geographical work of Cicero  both from 
the first century BC  as well as the prose description of Pomponius Mela from the 
first century AD, were all, at some point, known under the title De Chorographia. This 
title, however, may reflect the preferred terminology of later editors or scribes; the 
titles of Varros and Ciceros works cannot be traced any earlier than the sixth century, 
and the title of Pomponius Melas first appears in the ninth170. We may also note that 
in Pomponius Mela  the only text of the three to survive  the word chorographia is 
nowhere to be found.
In the fifth century, chorographia could still be used to describe a pictorial arte-
fact: the opening line of the Divisio orbis terrarum reminds us that it was Augustus 
who first displayed the extent of the world by means of chorography. However, from 
the end of the fourth century onward, the Latin word may have moved closer to the 
Greek usage in its ability to refer to a descriptive text concerning the arrangement of 
168 Vitruvius VIII.2.6; see also chapter one, 4243.
169 On chorography in the epigraphic record, see chapter one, 45.
170 Priscian III.25 (Varro) and VI.82 (Cicero). On Pomponius Mela, see chapter two, 9497.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 217
the world. One of our earliest examples of this usage is found in Jeromes translation 
of the Onomasticon of Eusebius, prepared around AD 390171. In the preface, Jerome 
remarks that Eusebius was the author of a number of works including a chorography 
of the land of Judaea and the lots of the different tribes172.
Descriptive texts known as chorographies were also employed by two late antique 
Latin grammarians in order to explain geographical references in more ancient works 
of literature. Lactantius Placidus  who may have been writing in the late fourth or 
early fifth century  refers once to a chorography in his commentary on the Thebaid of 
Statius173. In the commentary on Vergil written by Servius in the first decade of the fifth 
century, we find several references of a more varied nature174. In two instances, Servius 
turns to chorographies to clarify questions of a geographical nature: he explains one 
reference to a place in Italy by informing his reader chorographers say that this place 
is the centre of Italy175; a line about the particular sea in which Crete was located is 
accompanied by the validation as we read in the chorographers176.
Servius also employs a chorographical work to clarify an historical point: in 
response to a line referring to the Barceans, he says according to the chorography of 
Titianus, they once overcame the Phoenicians in a naval battle177. The chorography 
of Titianus is otherwise unknown, although there is one reference in Ptolemy to a 
traveller named Maes, known also as Titianus (   ), a merchant of 
Macedonian origin who travelled to the land of the Seres178. Maes  who lived either 
in the time of Augustus or the time of Hadrian179  is said to have recorded his trav-
els; however, Marinos of Tyre  on whom Ptolemys account is based  was sceptical 
of Maes account, and Ptolemy himself does not appear to have consulted the text 
directly. It is certainly possible that Servius would have had access to the text of Maes, 
171 See above, n. 143.
172 chorografiam terrae Iudaeae et distinctas tribuum sortes. Onom. pf.
173 Lactantius Placidus In Statii Thebaida II.34.
174 On the dating of Servius, see C.E. Murgia The Dating of Servius Revisited, CP, Vol. 98, No. 
1 ( January 2003), 4569. On the life and work of Servius, see R.A. Kaster Guardians of Language: 
the grammarian and society in late antiquity (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1988), 16998.
175 hunc locum umbilicum Italiae chorographi dicunt. Servius Ad Aen. VII.563.
176 nam apud chorographos legimus, quae insula in quo sit mari. Servius Ad Aen. III.104.
177 hi secundum Titianum in chorographia Phoenicen navali quondam superavere certamine. 
Servius Ad Aen. IV.42.
178 Ptolemy Geog. I.11.
179 Maes has traditionally been seen as a contemporary of Marinos of Tyre (early second century 
AD); however, M. Cary Mas, Qui et Titianus, CQ, New Series, Vol. 6, No. 3/4 (1956), 130134, 
argues that Maes may have undertaken his travels in the time of Augustus.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 218
but it is equally possible that the chorography of Titianus was a completely different 
work by a completely different author.
Elsewhere, Servius makes a reference to the chorographers and geometers who 
say that the world is  (spherical)180; the passage is curious for its inclu-
sion of the Greek word instead of the Latin. We may, perhaps, suggest that Servius 
uses  precisely because, for an educated Latin audience of the early fifth 
century, the idea of the chorographer may still have been associated with a particular 
genre of Greek literature. Servius, for the most part, has a tendency to name his 
Latin sources: Sallust, Seneca and even Pomponius Mela are employed as geographi-
cal authorities in the course of his commentary181. However, with the exception 
of Titianus, Servius references to chorographers and chorographies are vague. 
Servius may be withholding the names of his chorographic sources simply because 
they refer to a body of Greek texts that his audience may have known about, but 
would not necessarily have read.
The use of chorographia to designate a particular type of descriptive geographi-
cal work may thus have been primarily a Greek phenomenon, and one which only 
started to gain currency in the Latin-speaking world in the late-fourth century. The 
Latin world, however, was certainly not without works of descriptive geography. From 
Servius, we learn that Pomponius Melas work had survived into late antiquity; Mela, 
along with Pliny, also served as a primary source for the Collectanea rerum memora-
bilium, a geographical, ethnographical and historical compilation assembled by Julius 
Solinus, perhaps in the third century182.
The description of Dionysius Periegetes also enjoyed a certain popularity in the 
Latin world of late antiquity: we have already mentioned that his poem was trans-
lated into Latin on two separate occasions, once in the fourth century by Rufus Festus 
Avianus and again in the sixth century by the grammarian Priscian183; a recommenda-
180 chorographos et geometras, qui dicunt terram  esse. Servius Ad Aen. VI.532.
181 Seneca and Mela are used to clarify the position of the Ganges; Servius Ad Aen. IX.30. Sallust 
appears in the passage discussed above, Ad Aen. III.104.
182 Julius Solinus Collectanea rerum memorabilium ed. T. Mommsen (Berlin, 1864). Solinus was 
largely dismissed in the late nineteenth century and has been largely ignored in the twentieth: see 
Bunbury, Ancient Geography II, 67579; C.R. Beazley The Dawn of Modern Geography: A history of 
exploration and geographical science in 3 vols. Vol. 1: From the conversion of the Roman empire to AD 
900 (London, 1897), 24373.
183 See chapter two, 98.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 219
tion for the work also appears in the Institutiones of Cassiodorus184. Dionysius, Solinus 
and Mela  both in their original and abridged forms  would all go on to have a 
profound influence on geographical understanding in the Medieval west.
In addition to these descriptive treatises that sought to present a brief sketch of 
the oikoumene, the Latin world appears also to have produced geographical works of a 
more technical nature. In the same section of the Institutiones that we have just men-
tioned, Cassiodorus advises his audience to make a careful study of the small volume 
by Julius Orator which, in its four parts, includes the seas, islands, notable mountains, 
provinces, cities, rivers and peoples185. Julius Orator has been identified with Julius 
Honorius, the fifth century author whose text was acknowledged as the source for the 
Cosmographia Iulii Caesaris and the accompanying Excerpta eius sphaerae186.
The brief description in Cassiodorus would seem to agree with what survives of 
Honorius; the Excerpta eius sphaerae  the longer and more detailed of the two texts  
makes no attempt at rhetoric, but is rather an organised list of the various topographic 
features that could be found within the inhabited world. There is some attempt to 
situate the various provinces and features within a geographical framework; the work 
is divided, very broadly, into four sections corresponding to quadrants defined by the 
cardinal points. The text, however, is lacking in distances, save for the lengths of the 
various rivers, which are listed in Roman miles. Nonetheless Honorius may have quali-
fied as a work of great scholarship simply for the comprehensive quality of the lists and 
the lack of obfuscating description.
The final geographical author recommended by Cassiodorus is Ptolemy; it is a 
curious recommendation primarily because the text described in the Institutiones 
sounds nothing like the Geographia. According to Cassiodorus, Ptolemy portrays each 
region so vividly that you might imagine him to have lived nearly everywhere187; how-
ever, as we have already seen, Ptolemys text is notable for its mathematical precision 
and its absence of descriptive prose. Although there are no known Latin translations 
of Ptolemy until around the fifteenth century188, it is entirely possible that Cassiodorus 
184 Cassiodorus Inst. I.25.2.
185 qui maria, insulas, montes famosos, prouincias, ciuitates, flumina, gentes ita quadrifaria distinc-
tione complexus est. Cassiodorus Inst. I.25.1
186 See chapter one, 5051.
187 qui sic omnia loca euidenter expressit, ut eum cunctarum regionum paene incolam fuisse iudi-
cetis. Cassiodorus Inst. I.25.2.
188 Courcelle, Late Latin Writers, 354 n. 95. Latin
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 220
was basing his assessment on a later version in which Ptolemaic figures were preserved 
alongside material of a more descriptive nature189.
In the Greek Chorography of the World ( ), written in the 
late-third or early-fourth century by the mathematician Pappos of Alexandria, we have 
a possible model of what such a text may have looked like. The title of Pappos treatise 
may not be original  it is attested only in the tenth century Lexicon of Suidas190  and 
the text itself has survived only as a series of fragments that were incorporated into a 
later Armenian geographical work; that text, the Axarhacoyc  probably compiled in 
the seventh century and now attributed to Ananias of irak191  also contains extracts 
from Ptolemy and the otherwise unknown Constantine of Antioch192.
It would be impossible to reconstruct a full version of Pappos text based on 
the Axarhacoyc. Although Pappos is cited within the text as a primary source, the 
Armenian author may have only had access to an abridged version, and would have 
almost certainly made cuts himself. Furthermore, we can not be sure whether some of 
the more theoretical passages in the introduction were taken directly from Ptolemy by 
the Armenian compiler or if they were already a part of Pappos treatise193. Nonetheless, 
an attempt has been made to reconstruct an outline of Pappos by isolating those frag-
ments which are neither Ptolemaic nor Armenian in origin194. 
The fragments of Pappos present a sequential description of the world: the text 
is broken up into three main parts  one for each continent  and, within those sec-
tions, it moves in order from province to province. The author enumerates the rivers 
and mountains in each province, although they are often left unnamed; we learn, for 
instance, that Macedonia contains six mountains and six rivers, however only two 
of the mountains  Citarius and Olympus  are explicitly mentioned. Although the 
189 On the possibility of Latin versions of Ptolemy in the Medieval west, see Gautier Dalch, La 
Gographie de Ptolme, 87142 (the versions available to Cassiodorus are discussed at 8892).
190 Suidae Lexicon IV, 26.
191 An english translation of the work, with commentary, has been published in The Geography 
of Ananias of irak trans. R.H. Hewsen (Wiesbaden, 1992); the Armenian text, which was initially 
attributed to Moses of Khoren, was published as Gographie de Mose de Corne daprs Ptolme ed. 
and trans. A. Soukry (Venice, 1881). A reprint of that text (with a new English introduction) appears 
in Ananias Shirakatsi Ashkharhatsoyts (Axarhacoyc) (Delmar, N.Y., 1994).
192 Constantine of Antioch has been identified as Cosmas Indicopleustes, who will be discussed 
later in this section. 
193 Hewsen, Ananias of irak, 2832, suggests that the Armenian compiler would not have had 
separate access to Ptolemy and that all of the Ptolemaic material comes from Pappos.
194 R.H. Hewsen The Geography of Pappus of Alexandria: A Translation of the Armenian 
Fragments, Isis, Vol. 62, No. 2 (1971), 186207.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 221
descriptions for each country are similarly structured, there is some room for ethno-
graphic asides and notices of curious natural phenomena.
For all that the fragments of Pappos are primarily descriptive, the text also 
contains distances and some Ptolemaic coordinates. The figures are not nearly as com-
prehensive as those in Ptolemy, but their appearance within the text is striking. While 
Ptolemys arrangement of the world is reflected in later geographical texts, the fixed 
grid references are most often ignored: for instance, in the Periplus of the External 
Sea  written by Marianus of Heraclea perhaps at the beginning of the fifth century195 
 a Ptolemaic structure is accompanied by distances that have been converted into 
stades196. Although the treatise of Pappos is ultimately too fragmentary to allow for 
any firm conclusions, the presence of coordinates within an otherwise chorographi-
cal work may, at very least, provide us a model for the way in which description and 
geographical data could have coexisted within a single work.
The treatise of Pappos, however, may have been unique among late antique texts. 
In the Latin works discussed above, we noted a division between two major strands of 
geographical approach: on the one hand, there were purely descriptive works  such as 
those of Mela and Solinus, or the translations of Dionysius  which sought to create a 
general picture of the worlds arrangement; on the other, were the purely enumerative 
works, such as Julius Honorius or the Divisio orbis terrarum, which compiled the con-
tents of the known world, with or without distances. There are, however, no surviving 
texts that preserve the absolute coordinates of Ptolemaic geography.
Similarly, among the Greek geographical texts from late antiquity, we possess 
examples of descriptive and enumerative works, but little to suggest a continuation of 
the Ptolemaic tradition. Although Greek authors continued to draw upon the famous 
works of their classical predecessors, they may increasingly have mined their source 
material for names and numbers, while dispensing with the descriptive material that 
held the texts together. Agathemerus, whose work cannot be conclusively dated, wrote 
a brief description of the world that preserves information about the size of the oikou-
mene from a variety classical sources  including Eratosthenes and Artemidorus  but 
which offers little in the way of description197.
195 GGM1, 51562.
196 On this text, see Bunbury, Ancient Geography II, 66063.
197 A. Diller Agathemerus, Sketch of Geography, GRBS, Vol. 16, No. 1 (1975), 5976 offers an 
edition, translation and commentary on this text; although the text has traditionally been placed in 
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 222
From the sixth century, we possess a number of works in which the tendency toward 
pure enumeration becomes even more pronounced. A work known as the Synecdemus  
assembled near the beginning of Justinians reign by the otherwise unknown Hierocles 
the Grammarian198  professes, in its single sentence of introduction, to be a collection 
of all the provinces and cities of the Roman empire of Constantinople, some 64 prov-
inces and 935 cities in total199. The author proceeds to give the name of each province, 
followed by a list of the cities found therein. There are no descriptions, nor much in the 
way of connective prose; although the provinces are arranged in a roughly geographical 
sequence, the ordering principles of the text are uncertain200.
It has been suggested that the Synecdemus represents the continuation of an 
official document from the time of Theodosius II201. However, the title of the work 
  means travelling companion, and carries the sense of a portable artefact 
 has led some to suggest that the surviving text is merely a list of names extracted from 
a longer and more descriptive text202. While the work, in its extant form would have 
had limited value as a navigational aid and suggests an official document far more than 
an itinerary, the Synecdemus is intriguing for its willingness to dispense with descrip-
tion in its presentation of geographical data.
In the Ethnica of Stephanus Byzantinus  compiled in the first part of the sixth 
century by a grammarian at the imperial school in Constantinople203  we find geo-
graphical knowledge forming the basis of a decidedly ungeographic work. The Ethnica 
was a monumental undertaking; although the text has not come down to us in its origi-
nal form204, the surviving epitome runs for more than seven hundred printed pages, and 
the third or fourth century, Diller, 59, suggests first or second century AD.
198 On the dating, see W.M. Ramsay Phrygian Orthdox and Heretics, 400800 AD, Byzantion, 
Vol. 6 (1931), 135 (at 31); Le synekdmos dHirokls et Lopuscule gographique de Georges de Chypre: 
texte, introduction, commentaire et cartes ed. E. Honigmann (Brussels, 1939), 36 and A.H.M. Jones 
The Cities of the Eastern Roman Provinces. Second edition (Oxford, 1971), 51421.
199                
 ,  ,  . Synec. 631.3. The surviving text lists only 923 cities; see 
Ramsay, Historical Geography, 9296 and Honigmann, Synekdmos, 78.
200 Ramsay, Phrygian Orthdox and Heretics, 32 n. 1, has noted that the cities in some provinces 
appear to be arranged along river valleys.
201 Jones, Cities, 515.
202 Ramsay, Historical Geography, 92; see, however Ramsay, Phrygian Orthdox and Heretics, 
2732.
203 The standard edition is still that of A. Meineke (Berlin, 1849), however the first volume (cov-
ering ) of a new edition under the editorship of M. Billerbeck appeared in 2006.
204 On the history of the text, see A. Diller The Tradition of Stephanus Byzantius TPAPA, Vol. 
69 (1938), 33348
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 223
represents nothing less than an attempt to catalogue every city and village, every island 
and every race in the known world, often with reference to classical sources.
The Ethnica, however, makes no attempt to convey spatial relationships through 
the arrangement of text; the individual entries have been stripped of their geographic 
context and arranged alphabetically. We may also note the relative lack of natural fea-
tures: rivers are rarely given an entry to themselves and mountains appear infrequently. 
It is, nonetheless, an important work insofar as it is able to illuminate the variety of 
geographical material still available in the sixth century. Not only does Stephanus cite 
a number of texts that have not survived  he is, for instance, our only source for the 
Isaurica of Capito of Lycia205  but he also appears to have been one of the earlier 
scholars to employ the works of Strabo and Pausanias, which were little-used in clas-
sical antiquity206.
Both the Ethnica and the Synecdemus are fascinating because they illustrate how 
the geographical material of previous centuries was being distilled to its essence. One 
could, of course, argue that Ptolemys Geography was also a work of distillation: without 
the introductory material, it is little more than a list of places and coordinates. However, 
in Hierocles and Stephanus  and, from the Latin world, Julius Honorius  we find that 
works of enumeration were increasingly alienated from any kind of geographical context. 
Honorius and Hierocles presented a picture of the world where the spatial relationship 
between places was implied rather than stated; in a very different way, Stephanus reduced 
the sum of geographical knowledge to a series of unconnected names.
While these texts would have had some practical value on their own, they would 
all have presupposed a certain amount of geographical awareness on the part of their 
audience. In chapter two we discussed how a basic understanding of the world may 
have come from brief descriptive texts such as those of Pomponius Mela or Dionysius 
Periegetes; the fact that these texts survived into late antiquity  and, moreover, 
appear to have been augmented by other primarily descriptive works  might suggest 
that geographical perceptions in the fourth, fifth and sixth centuries would not have 
been unrecognisable to a citizen of the earlier imperial age. Where the geographical 
understanding of late antiquity may ultimately have started to diverge from its clas-
sical precedent is in the relationship between the available textual sources and the 
205 There are some twenty references to the Isaurica in the Ethnica.
206 On the appearance of Strabo and Pausanias in the Ethnica, see Diller, Pausanias, 27476.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 224
subsequent cartographic representations: the increased abstraction in geographical 
texts may have resulted in a cartographic approach that owed more to the imagination 
of the cartographer than to the physical arrangement of the world.
Among serious practitioners of the geographical science, there was a longstanding bias 
against textual material. We have already mentioned how Eratosthenes was critical of 
leaving geography in the hands of poets, who were notoriously prone to exaggeration 
and invention. Centuries later, Ptolemy would attempt to define more precisely the 
types of material that should be employed by a geographer; however, his claim that 
astronomical observation was the only acceptable source for a cartographic representa-
tion was almost certainly a reaction to practices that had become widespread in his 
time. The cartography that emerged from the imperial period was not an attempt to 
convey the accurate shape of the world, but rather to arrange the contents of the world 
within a vaguely geographical frame, using the written word as its source.
As we discussed in chapter one, once the process of creating a cartographic rep-
resentation had been removed from its mathematical foundation it became possible 
for any text to act as a source for an image of the world. As Ptolemy informs us in his 
introduction, it takes a skilled mathematician to translate a collection of sightings and 
coordinates into cartographical form, but it requires only the imagination of a painter 
to create a pictorial rendering from a descriptive or chorographical text. Our evidence, 
however, suggests that by late antiquity, the majority of potential source texts would 
have been works of either description or enumeration, precisely the types of text that 
would have led to inaccurate cartography.
There is no reason to doubt that Ptolemys text survived into late antiquity; we 
have already seen how it was used as a source by Pappos of Alexandria and Marcianus 
of Heraclea, and how it was viewed by Cassiodorus as the ultimate specialist work on 
the subject of geography. The text, however, may have been valued more for its breadth 
of knowledge than for its cartographic methodology. There is, little evidence to suggest 
that Ptolemy was used as a cartographic source: Cassiodorus, as we may recall, praised 
only the accuracy of Ptolemys descriptions; if Cassiodorus copy of Ptolemy was accom-
panied by cartographic illustrations, he has certainly not bothered to mention them.
In fact it is Dionysius Periegetes and not Ptolemy who holds the visual associa-
tion for Cassiodorus: after discussing the work of Julius Honorius, he informs us that 
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 225
next, you should consult the concise Penacem of Dionysius, so that you may nearly 
see with your eyes, everything you heard with your ears from the abovementioned 
book207. The title Penacem  perhaps a latinisation of the Greek   combined 
with the reference to seeing with your eyes has led some to believe that the article 
in question was either, itself, a large map based on the Periegesis of Dionysius or an 
illustrated copy of one of the Latin translations208. We should note, however, that 
Cassiodorus talks not of seeing, but of nearly seeing, and we must not, therefore, 
discount the possibility that Cassiodorus was merely praising the descriptive powers 
of the ancient poet.
However, it is not unreasonable to suggest that geographical works would have 
been accompanied by some form of illustration; indeed, a work like that of Julius 
Honorius may have been of limited value without its pictorial counterpart. The stu-
dent of Honorius  who reveals himself in the final lines of the Excerpta eius sphaerae 
 advises us that this book should not be separated from its accompanying globe 
(sphaera)209. Although we cannot be sure what this sphaera would have looked like, we 
may suggest that it illustrated the physical arrangement of the information contained 
within the text. In fact, the presence of the sphaera raises the possibility that the sur-
viving text of the Excerpta was copied not from the text of Honorius itself, but rather 
from an intermediate cartographic artefact, in this case, a globe that had been created 
from the information provided by Honorius.
From the ninth or tenth century onward, we begin to find cartographic drawings 
accompanying texts in manuscripts. In the west, we find images of the world in manu-
scripts of the Etymologies of Isidore and the Commentary on the Apocalypse by Beatus 
of Libana210; in the east, as we shall discuss later in this chapter, it was the Christian 
Topography of Cosmas Indicopleustes that would preserve cartographic illustrations 
of the inhabited world. The images of the oikoumene from the Cosmas manuscripts 
are remarkably consistent and it has been suggested that the image was based upon 
207 Deinde Penacem Dionisii discite breuiter comprehensum, ut quod auribus in supradicto libro 
percipitis, paene oculis intuentibus uidere possitis. Cassiodorus Inst. I.25.2.
208 See, for instance, Courcelle, Late Latin Writers, 354 who claims that Cassiodorus possessed 
a large map by Dionysius Periegetes; J.W. Halporns English translation of the Institutiones, 157, 
renders the work as Dionysius briefly sketched Map. Lozovsky, The Earth is Our Book, 18, is more 
cautious in her translation, but suggests that a map probably accompanied the description.
209 hic liber exceptorum ab sphaera ne separetur. Riese, GLM, 55.
210 J. Williams Isidore, Orosius and the Beatus Map, IM, Vol. 49 (1997), 732.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 226
an archetype perhaps dating back to Cosmas himself211. There are, however, enough 
differences between illustrations in the Beatus manuscripts to suggest that the text 
received different cartographic interpretations from different scribes.
The reasonably consistent vision of the world presented in the manuscripts  and 
in the later mappaemundi that emerged in the Latin west212  suggests that carto-
graphic documents had essentially become texts of their own: although the accepted 
image of the world had initially been based on textual material, the cartographic 
documents had been refined to the point where they could be copied, updated and 
transmitted without the aid of an intermediate textual version. Although we do not 
possess enough material evidence to make a similar claim about the earlier centuries, 
it is possible that the cartographic understanding of late antiquity was shaped not 
merely by descriptions from texts, but was also informed by a parallel tradition of 
pictorial representations.
Text, as we discussed in chapter one, would have played a significant part in the crea-
tion of the imperial cartographical image. From what we can tell, the cartographic 
monument in the porticus Vipsania was based not on sightings and meridians, but 
rather on information that had been gathered by Agrippa in the course of his travels; 
the later description of Eumenius  combined with the Divisio orbis terrarum and the 
Dimensuratio prouinciarum, both of which may have been based on Agrippas commen-
tarii  suggest that the goal of Roman imperial cartography was the pictorial display of 
rivers, mountains, cities, peoples and any other feature that may have been relevant to 
an understanding of world history213.
While Agrippas monument in the porticus Vipsania was almost certainly not 
the only artefact of its type in the Roman world  there was, at very least, one other 
in Autun214  we do not possess extensive evidence for similar projects. Indeed, if we 
discount the Tabula Peutingeriana  which may have been based upon an imperial 
portico painting, but whose origins and purpose cannot ultimately be determined  
we know of only one other cartographic undertaking that can be explicitly linked to 
211 See below, 23738.
212 On which, see D. Woodward Medieval Mappaemundi in HoC 1, 286370; E. Edson 
Mapping Time and Space: How Medieval mapmakers viewed their world (London, 1997), 97131.
213 On Agrippas monument and the tradition of portico cartography, see chapter one, 4962.
214 According to Eumenius; see chapter one, 60.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 227
the state: at the end of the Divisio orbis terrarum we find twelve lines of verse describ-
ing a monument commissioned by the emperor Theodosius215. The verses read:
This exceptional work, in which the whole of the world is represented, in 
which the surface of the seas, mountains, rivers, harbours, straits and cities 
are marked, displayed so that everyone may know the location of everything, 
was commissioned by the venerable emperor Theodosius, of noble birth and 
lineage, of constant piety, whom the world itself can barely contain, and com-
pleted by his decree, at the beginning of his fifteenth consulship.
These humble servants, one writing, the other painting, have, in only a few 
months, followed the old monument and prepared a better work, a work 
which has removed the errors of our predecessors and, in short, embraced the 
whole of the world. However it was your wisdom, Emperor, that taught us to 
do this216.
The passage has traditionally been associated with Theodosius II, which would 
place the commission in the year 435217. There is, however no conclusive evidence to 
support this association  beyond the fact that the creation of a cartographic monu-
ment seems closer to the character and interests of Theodosius II  and it is equally 
possible, although less often stated, that the verses refer to Theodosius I218; this would 
place the commission in the final decades of the fourth century. Even if it is not ulti-
mately possible to choose between the two dates, the description allows us to place the 
project within the context of imperial cartographic practices.
Firstly, the project almost certainly took the form of a monumental wall- painting, 
which would suggest a connection to the tradition of wall cartography mentioned by 
Vitruvius and, later, Eumenius. There are, admittedly, a number of different ways of 
translating the description of the two artesans: it is possible that one was writing text 
 that is, annotating (scribit)  while the other painted (pingit); it is also possible that 
215 On which W. Wolska-Conus Deux contributions  lhistoire de la gographie II: La carte 
de Thodose II: sa destination?, Travaux et Mmoires, Vol. 5 (1973), 27479; Dilke in HoC 1, 258
59; P. Gautier Dalch Notes sur la carte de Thodose II et sur la mappemonde de Thodulf 
dOrleans, Geographia Antiqua, Vol. 3 (1994), 91106; Lozovsky, Maps and Panegyrics, 17274.
216 Hoc opus egregium, quo mundi summa tenetur |aequora quo, montes, fluuii, portus, freta et 
urbes |signantur, cunctis ut sit cognoscere promptum |quicquid ubique latet, clemens, genus inclita proles 
|ac per saecla pius, totus quem uix capit orbis |theodosius princeps uenerando iussit ab ore |confici, ter 
quinis aperit cum fascibus annum. |supplices hoc famuli, dum scribit pingit et alter |mensibus exiguis, 
veterum monimenta secuti |in melius reparamus opus culpamque priorem |tollimus ac totem breviter 
comprendimus orbem. |sed tamen hoc tua nos docuit sapientia, princeps. Riese, GLM, 1920.
217 Wolska-Conus, Deux contributions II, 276.
218 For a brief bibliography of people who have suggested Theodosius I, see Lozovsky, Maps and 
Panegyrics, 173, n. 13.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 228
one drew an outline (scribit) while the other filled it with colours (pingit). Given what 
we have been able to determine about Roman cartographic practices, we may suggest 
that the painting would have contained a combination of written text and iconic repre-
sentations of cities, mountain ranges and rivers. While we cannot say whether the final 
product would have represented the oblong oikoumene of the Greek mathematicians 
or the long, sequential world of the Tabula Peutingeriana, there can be little doubt 
that the work was pictorial in nature.
The list of topographical features displayed within the painting  mountains, 
rivers, seas and cities  is wholly consistent with our understanding of Roman carto-
graphic aims and may, indeed, remind us both of Strabos chorographical panel and 
also the portico painting of Eumenius. As with the monument of Agrippa, the value 
of the work may have been its systematic presentation of the worlds contents rather 
than its accurate reproduction of the worlds shape. Even though the accompanying 
text of the Divisio orbis terrarum contains figures of distance, it does not contain the 
information necessary to create a Ptolemaic projection of the oikoumene.
Finally, the verses make clear that the project was based, at least in part, on another 
similar cartographic work. However, while the verses mention an old monument whose 
inaccurate figures had been improved by the two artesans, there is nothing to suggest that 
the monument in the porticus Vipsania was used as a direct source. Indeed, we might 
reasonably expect the Theodosian project to have been displayed in Constantinople, 
the principal residence of its commissioning emperor219; if Agrippas monument did 
still exist, it would have been more than four hundred years old and, moreover, it would 
have been located in a portico more than a thousand miles from the imperial capital; if 
the two artesans were able to complete their project within only a few months, we may 
wish to suggest that the old monument mentioned in the verses was a more recent and 
more easily accessible cartographical work located in Constantinople.
The project of Theodosius was not a completely new work, but rather a continu-
ation of an imperial cartographic tradition which could, perhaps, be dated back to the 
time of Augustus and Agrippa, but which would have evolved over the course of several 
centuries and numerous versions. As we have no surviving evidence for either project, 
we cannot say how much the shape or contents of the world had changed between the 
219 Wolska-Conus, Deux contributions, 276, has connected the project with the foundation of 
the university in Constantinople in 425.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 229
first century BC and the fifth century AD. We may, however, detect a similar approach 
behind the two artefacts: both were attempting to create an accurate record of the 
contemporary Roman world.
One of the only pieces of cartographic material evidence that can be securely dated 
to late antiquity is the floor mosaic discovered in a church at Madaba ( Jordan) at the 
end of the nineteenth century220. The complete mosaic  which would have occupied 
an area of roughly 78 feet by 20 feet221  has not survived intact, but there are enough 
sections to give us a sense of what this artefact may have contained; in its original 
state, the mosaic would have presented a heavily annotated cartographic representa-
tion of the Levant, complete with cities, rivers, seas and mountains. Along with the 
Tabula Peutingeriana, it represents our best pictorial evidence for the chorographical 
approach in late antique cartography.
Before we discuss the artefact from Madaba, it is perhaps worth noting that the 
idea of a cartographic mosaic is not without precedent in the Roman world: another 
mosaic with cartographic characteristics  of which about half is fully intact  was dis-
covered on the floor of a villa in Ammaedara (Tunisia)222. The mosaic  which has been 
tentatively dated to the end of the third or beginning of the fourth century223  offers 
a representation of islands in the Aegean and eastern Mediterranean, each of which is 
identified with a textual label; on each island there is an iconographic representation of 
a town, harbour or fortification224. While the mosaic is certainly not a geographically 
accurate rendering of the islands themselves, or of their relationship to one another, it 
220 The mosaic was published (with photographic plates) not long after its discovery in E. Germer-
Durand La carte mosaque de Madaba: dcouverte importante, 1897 (Paris, 1897); a new version, with 
colour plates, appeared in M. Avi-Yonah The Madaba Mosaic Map ( Jerusalem, 1954); a reduced-size 
fold-out colour map may be found in H. Donner The Mosaic Map of Madaba: An Introductory Guide 
(Kampen, 1992). For accounts of the discovery, see also C.R. Gregory The Mdaba Map, The Biblical 
World, Vol. 12, No. 4 (1898), 244250; C.R. Beazley Madaba Map, GJ, Vol. 17, No. 5 (1901), 516
520; V.R. Gold The Mosaic Map of Madeba, The Biblical Archaeologist, Vol. 21, No. 3 (1958), 4971 
and, most recently, Y. Meimaris The Discovery of the Madaba Mosaic Map: Mythology and Reality 
in M. Piccirillo and E. Alliata (eds) The Madaba Map Centenary 18971997: Travelling through the 
Byzantine Umayyad Period ( Jerusalem, 1998), 2536.
221 This is the figure proposed in Avi-Yonah, Madaba, 15.
222 F. Bejaoui les et villes de la Mditerrane sur une mosaque dAmmaedara (Hadra en 
Tunisie), CRAI, Vol 141, No. 3 (1997) 82558.
223 Bejaoui, les et villes, 85558.
224 We should, perhaps, note the iconographic similarities between the harbours on the Island 
Mosaic and the harbour of Ostia on the Tabula Peutingeriana, both of which are rendered as a semicircle 
of buildings. We may also recall the description in Josephus of Caesareas harbour: In acircle round the 
harbour there was a continuous line of dwellings constructedof the most polishedstone Ant. xv.339.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 230
may be considered a chorographical artefact insofar as it attempts to present an anno-
tated pictorial catalogue of the major islands and their topographic features.
Although the remains of the Roman world have, as yet, yielded no further examples 
of cartographic mosaics, both the Ammaedara mosaic and the Madaba mosaic should 
be understood as being a part of the same broad tradition of Roman chorographic rep-
resentation. Where the Madaba mosaic diverges most significantly from the traditions 
of the Roman past is in its source material and in the landscape it seeks to illustrate; in 
the Madaba mosaic we see neither the Greek oikoumene nor the Roman empire, but 
rather an image of a world defined by the topography of the Christian faith.
The Madaba mosaic was probably constructed in the mid-sixth century, perhaps 
between 560 and 565, and in its complete state it would have covered the entire tran-
sept of a church floor225. The original mosaic contained a cartographic representation 
of the Levant, stretching from Syria at one end, to the Nile delta at the other, although 
only the parts around Jerusalem, the Dead Sea and southwestern Palestine have 
survived. The mosaic is oriented with East at the top which, as we have mentioned, 
would not have been an uncommon orientation in Roman cartography. The centre 
and focal point of the mosaic would have been a detailed, if schematic, representation 
of the city of Jerusalem.
225 On the size, Avi-Yonah, Madaba, 1016; on the dating, ibid. 1618.
Fig. 4.1 The island mosaic in Ammaedara (from Bejaoui les et villes, 830).
I m ag e  r e m ov e d  f ro m  d i g i ta l  v e r s i o n
d u e  to  p ot e n t i a l  c o p y r i g h t  i s s u e s .
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 231
Fortunately, enough of the mosaic has survived that we are able to get a reason-
able sense of its cartographic contents226. The natural features that appear so frequently 
in chorographic descriptions  mountains, rivers and seas  are all represented. While 
the patterns of blue and white tesserae do an adequate job of conveying the sense of 
running water, the rivers are nonetheless ornamented with fish, and the seas with 
boats. The desert landscape of Palestine is punctuated with illustrations of vegetation, 
although it is difficult to determine if these are fanciful additions, like the fish, or if 
they were intended to denote a particular type of commodity227.
The mosaic also contains a variety of icons representing urban spaces. These range 
from small, unlabelled buildings  not dissimilar from the standard double-tower city 
icon in the Tabula Peutingeriana  to fairly complex renderings of larger urban cen-
tres. Apart from Jerusalem, the cities of Gaza and Ascalon both possess representations 
of colonnaded streets and individual buildings that may have been easily identifiable to 
the audience of the time: in Gaza there is a semi-circular building, perhaps a theatre, 
and in Ascalon there is a pool amidst the colonnades228.
226 Commentary on the individual icons may be found in Avi-Yonah, Madaba, 3577, Donner, 
Mosaic Map, 3694 and, most recently E. Alliata The Legends of the Madaba Map in Piccirillo and 
Alliata (eds) The Madaba Map Centenary, 47101.
227 For a discussion of the vegetation, see F.N. Hepper and J.E. Taylor Date Palms and Opobalsam 
in Madaba Mosaic Map, Palestine Exploration Quarterly, Vol. 136, No. 1 (2004), 3544.
228 Ascalon: Avi-Yonah 94, Donner 91, Alliata 103. Gaza: Avi-Yonah 116, Donner 118, 
Alliata 123.
Fig. 4.2  The Madaba mosaic 
(from Avi-Yonah, Madaba, pl. a)
I m ag e  r e m ov e d  f ro m  d i g i ta l  v e r s i o n
d u e  to  p ot e n t i a l  c o p y r i g h t  i s s u e s .
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 232
Finally, the mosaic contains text. Most of the iconographic cities are labelled 
either with a simple place name or with the current and former names: Nicopolis, 
for instance, is simply accompanied by the word Nicopolis, while Lydda receives the 
legend Lod also Lydea also Diaspolis229. In addition to the names, the mosaic features 
an assortment of topographical notices and clarifications: while some of these are cer-
tainly scriptural  the town of Rama is accompanied with the line a voice was heard in 
Rama230  others, like the notice of the border between Palestine and Egypt, suggest 
the contemporary landscape of eastern Roman rule231. In the area around Jerusalem, 
the textual notices grow more frequent.
It has often been claimed that the Madaba mosaic was based on some kind of 
road map232; however, while the claim has been stated with such certainty that it has 
taken on an air of fact, there is, as we discussed in chapter three, little evidence to sug-
gest that roads played any part in Roman cartographic practices. Although the Tabula 
Peutingeriana is often cited as evidence for a tradition of road-maps in late antiquity, 
if we accept that the roads in the Tabula represent a later  perhaps Carolingian  
addition, the body of evidence for a road-based precursor to the Madaba mosaic is 
essentially reduced to zero233.
The road network, as we have discussed previously, would have acted as an organ-
ising principle for itineraries and topographical descriptions, both in Palestine and 
elsewhere. We should not, therefore, be surprised to find that the places within the 
mosaic are arranged according to their position along the road network; indeed, in 
the vicinity of Jerusalem we also find indications of the IV and IX milestones, which 
might further suggest a relationship between the mosaic and an itinerary. The mosaic, 
however, contains no iconographic representations of roads: the urban icons of Gaza, 
Ascalon and Jerusalem all possess colonnaded streets, but outside of the cities, there is 
229 Nicopolis: Avi-Yonah 74, Donner 73, Alliata 69. Lydda: Avi-Yonah 62, Donner 60, 
Alliata 86.
230    . Avi-Yonah 77, Donner 76, Alliata 73. The reference is to Matthew 
2.18.
231   () . Avi-Yonah 121, Donner 124, Alliata 129.
232 Avi-Yonah, Madaba, 28, claims that the initial layer of the mosaic was made on the basis of a 
road-map; Donner, Mosaic Map, 25, tells us that certainly, the mosaic artist used Byzantine road-maps; 
see also I. Roll The Roads in Roman-Byzantine Palestina and Arabia in Piccirillo and Alliata (eds) The 
Madaba Map Centenary, 10913. Y. Tsafrir The Maps Used by Theodosius: On the Pilgrim Maps of 
the Holy Land and Jerusalem in the Sixth Century C.E., DOP, Vol. 40 (1986), 12945 suggests that the 
mosaic and the De situ of Theodosius may have shared a common cartographic source.
233 On the lack of roads in the archetype of the Tabula Peutingeriana, see chapter one, 7374.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 233
nothing that might indicate a permanent path234. All of the cities and topographical 
features are essentially suspended in the desert and any linear geographic relationship 
between them can only be assumed.
Furthermore, there are areas in the Mosaic where the arrangement of places does 
not correspond either to geographical reality or to the path of a road. If we imag-
ine that the mosaic was based upon a road map, then we would have to regard these 
instances of transposition or odd spacing as cartographical mistakes235. However, it 
seems more plausible that the designer of the mosaic was working primarily from tex-
tual sources  these may have included road itineraries, brief descriptive texts like the 
De situ of Theodosius, or even undifferentiated lists like the Synecdemus of Hierocles. 
The mosaicist would have been less concerned with geographical accuracy than with 
making sure that he included everything that was known about the region, so that the 
mosaic would not be perceived as inaccurate by its viewers. 
There are a number of textual sources that may have contributed to the mosaic. Much 
of the descriptive text has been linked to the Onomasticon of Eusebius, a work whose 
attempts to impose scriptural significance onto the Levantine landscape are not dissimilar 
from the aims of the mosaic236. It has been suggested, however, that there may have been 
an intermediate source  perhaps a pilgrimage guide  which contained information not 
only from sources like Eusebius, but also from practical documents such as itineraries237; 
we have already seen one example of such a text in the De Situ of Theodosius. 
Of course, we should not rule out the possibility that the mosaicist would have 
been able to consult a chorographic depiction  either of the oikoumene or, specifically, 
of the Levant  in order to get a pictorial sense of the area: we have already discussed 
the possibility of cartography acting as a source for further cartography. There is, how-
ever, nothing in the presentation of the mosaic to suggest the influence of a road-map; 
it is far more plausible to suggest that the arrangement and layout of items within the 
space of the mosaic reflect both the vagaries of the text and the cartographic imagina-
tion of the mosaicist. 
234 Donner, Mosaic Map, 25, has identified the white line extending north from Jerusalem as a 
road, although this does not seem entirely in keeping with the rest of the mosaic.
235 See, for instance, Avi-Yonah, Madaba, 2830, who frames some of the mosaics geographical 
oddities in terms of the ignorance and carelessness of the mosaicist.
236 Avi-Yonah, Madaba, 3031.
237 L. di Segni The Onomasticon of Eusebius and the Madaba Map, in Piccirillo and Alliata 
(eds) The Madaba Map Centenary, 115120.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 234
In its reliance on textual sources and in its goal of achieving accuracy through 
the representation and identification of topographical features, the Madaba mosaic 
may certainly be viewed as being part of the Roman chorographic tradition. However 
where Roman cartography may have attempted to create an image of the world based 
on a combination of official records, collected observations and a commonly held 
mythology about the more distant corners of the oikoumene, the Madaba mosaic was 
an attempt to present a section of the world in which the mythology of the past had 
been superseded by the unassailable topography of the scriptures. As such we may view 
the Madaba mosaic as a transitional artefact: it is both the last cartographic representa-
tion of antiquity and the first surviving image of a landscape in which Jerusalem, and 
not Rome, had become the centre of the world.
If text had become the principal source on which cartographic expression was based, it fol-
lows that any text, regardless of its relationship to the traditions of descriptive geography, 
could have been translated into a picture of the world. As we just noted, the Madaba mosaic 
was a combination of received knowledge about the shape and arrangement of the Levant, 
and topographical details drawn primarily from Christianity. The success of chorography, 
as we have noted, was its ability to present an image of the oikoumene that was consistent 
with the image suggested by the available literary sources; chorographical representations 
corresponded less to the actual shape of the world, than to commonly held beliefs about 
the worlds contents. The accuracy of a cartographic representation may have been judged 
solely on the degree to which it presented a plausible rendering of a particular text.
If chorography was essentially a cartography of belief, we should not be surprised 
to find that the nature of chorographic representations would have evolved to reflect 
the prevailing world-view of the time. The classical image of the world as a sphere  
and of the oikoumene as an island within that sphere  may have continued to offer 
a starting point for the cartographic images of late antiquity; that vision, however, 
may increasingly have found itself at odds with the scriptures. Although the Armenian 
geographer Ananias of irak found little of use in scriptural texts and was forced to 
turn to the land and sea voyages of pagan authors, his opinion may not have been 
widely shared238. Indeed, from the sixth century onward, geography was characterised 
238 In Holy Scripture we have found nothing definite about geography and are thus obliged 
to consult pagan authors who have developed geography by land and sea voyages, and have also 
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 235
by attempts to make the accumulated knowledge of antiquity compatible with the 
word of the scriptures.
In the mappaemundi that emerged during the Medieval period, the tripartite 
structure of the classical world was often preserved; although the shape of the world 
had become decidedly more circular and the focal point had shifted from Rome to 
Jerusalem, the arrangement of topographic features may not have been wholly dissimilar 
from a Roman chorographic display. The Roman observer, however, might be puzzled 
by the addition of a circular island at the easternmost point of the oikoumene. Yet, for 
the Christian audience, the cartographic representation would not have been considered 
complete if it did not contain a representation of the terrestrial paradise, cut off from the 
oikoumene, but continuing to supply water to the great rivers of the world239.
Attempts to reconcile geographical knowledge with the scriptures would have 
certainly had an effect on cartographical representations of the oikoumene; in the most 
extreme cases, however, scriptural faith would have been able to mount a challenge to the 
very foundations of classical cosmological understanding. In the Christian Topography of 
Cosmas Indicopleustes, we have a late antique example of a work in which the long-estab-
lished relationship between the oikoumene, the earth and the cosmos were completely 
revised in order that they might conform to the authority of scriptural texts240.
There are few certainties about the author of the Christian Topography: his name, 
location and credentials have all, at various times, been called into question241. We may 
recall that Ananias of irak cited a Christian Topography attributed to Constantine 
of Antioch as one of his sources242. For the most part, however, the text appears to 
have been transmitted simply as the work of an anonymous Christian243; only in the 
confirmed it through geometry Ananias Geog. L.1.1 (trans. R.H. Hewsen, 42).
239 On the appearance of paradise in mappaemundi, see Woodward Medieval Mappaemundi in 
HoC 1, 30242 passim; Edson, Mapping Time and Space, 14563. On renderings of paradise in maps 
associated with Cosmas Indicopleustes, see M. Kominko New Perspectives on Paradise: The levels of 
reality in Byzantine and Latin Medieval Maps in Talbert and Unger (eds) Cartography in Antiquity 
and the Middle Ages, 13953.
240 Cosmas Indicopleusts Topographie Chrtienne in 3 vols. ed. and trans. W. Wolska-Conus 
(Paris, 196873).
241 On the uncertainties surrounding the figure of Cosmas, see E.O. Windstedt The Christian 
Topography of Cosmas Indicopleustes (Cambridge, 1909), 15; M.V. Anastos The Alexandrian Origin 
of the Christian Topography of Cosmas Indicopleustes, DOP, Vol. 3 (1946), 7380; Wolska-Conus, 
Topographie Chrtienne I, 1519.
242 On the association of Cosmas with Constantine, see Hewsen, Ananias of irak, 2930.
243 Wolska-Conus, Topographie Chrtienne I, 61 and 116 points out that Photius referred to the 
work as The Book of the Christian ( ).
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 236
tenth or eleventh centuries do we begin to find it associated with an author named 
Cosmas244. The author is referred to in various manuscripts as Cosmas the Monk 
( ) and Cosmas who sailed to India ( ), and it is 
this latter designation that has become most widely accepted. While the designation 
of monk has also persisted, there is, in fact, little evidence in the text to suggest that 
Cosmas led a monastic life245; we can, however, say with some certainty that he lived 
in Alexandria, and that his work was composed in the middle of the sixth century, 
perhaps between 547 and 549246.
As a merchant, Cosmas had almost certainly travelled to some of the foreign 
places he describes in his text; as a geographer, however, he may have been something 
of an enthusiastic amateur, armed with little more than a detailed knowledge of the 
scriptures and an absolute faith that everything contained within them was true. His 
vision of the world, however, is a striking break from the previous millennium of cos-
mological thought247. Instead of imagining the earth as a sphere within a spherical 
cosmos, the Christian Topography suggests that the cosmos was, in fact, a giant chest 
with two levels: on the floor of the chest lay the surface of the earth, an island sur-
rounded by seas; on the second level, with its vaulted ceiling was the firmament248.
While the cosmological conception of the Christian Topography was not wholly 
unique  there had, in the previous two centuries, been several similar attempts to situ-
ate the world within a scriptural framework249 it may have been the most thoroughly 
argued. According to Cosmas, the arrangement and proportions of the world were 
determined by a passage from Exodus, in which Moses was commanded to build the 
tabernacle250. The proportions of the surface of the earth were derived from a table, 
which is described as being two cubits by one cubit251; the design and the arrangement 
244 Wolska-Conus, Topographie Chrtienne I, 5961. The similarity between author (Cosmas) 
and subject (cosmos) has led some to believe that the name is a later fabrication; however, Windstedt, 
Christian Topography, 2, reminds us that Cosmas was a common Egyptian name.
245 Anastos, Alexandrian Origin, 77.
246 Anastos, Alexandrian Origin, 7577; Wolska-Conus, Topographie Chrtienne I, 16. The 
exact dating comes from references within the text to two eclipses.
247 On the world-view of Cosmas, see the extensive study by W. Wolska-Conus La Topographie 
chrtienne de Cosmas Indicopleusts. Thologie et science au VIe sicle (Paris, 1962). See also Beazley, 
Modern Geography I, 273303.
248 Cosmas CT IV.2.
249 For earlier examples, see Wolska-Conus, Thologie et science, 3761.
250 Cosmas CT II.2 describes the tabernacle as an impression and an outline of the whole 
cosmos (       ).
251 cf. Exodus 25.23 and Cosmas CT II.19.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 237
of items on the table are systematically revealed by Cosmas to parallel the actual struc-
ture of the inhabited world. For Cosmas, the word of the scriptures became a kind of 
extended metaphor through which the shape of the world could be understood.
Despite his single-mindedness of vision, however, Cosmas was not entirely able to 
escape from the image of the oikoumene that had been developed and refined over the 
course of the previous centuries. We may note that the proportions of the inhabited world 
proposed by Cosmas  a rectangle twice as long as it was high  are similar to those that 
appear in Strabo and his predecessors252. Moreover, the notion of the oikoumene as an 
island surrounded on all sides by ocean, and broken into three distinct continents, would 
not have seemed unfamiliar to Homer, Anaximander, Eratosthenes or Ptolemy253. For all 
that Cosmas may have wished to follow the scriptures, he was nonetheless compelled to 
remain within the bounds of what could be proven by observation.
Cosmas appears to have understood the power of the pictorial image as a means 
of conceptualising space. From the text of the Christian Topography we may infer that 
images were intended to be an integral part of the treatise254. Indeed, many of the man-
uscripts contain illustrations of the basic principles described by Cosmas255, and it has 
been proposed that the earliest extant illustrations  from the ninth century Vatican 
manuscript (Vat. Gr. 699)  were copied from an archetype that was, in turn, based 
on drawings by the author himself256. Although we cannot be certain how much the 
illustrations would have been altered and distorted in transmission between the sixth 
and ninth centuries, there seems little doubt that images of some description formed a 
part of the original treatise.
In the fourth book, we find a plan of the oikoumene based on the description of 
the inhabited world that appeared in book two257. The plan appears in all three of the 
earliest manuscripts, and the three illustrations are so consistent as to suggest that they 
were all based upon an earlier archetype. Although the outline of the world has been 
rendered as a rectangle, and the land-mass of paradise has been included beyond the 
252 See chapter one, 36.
253 Cosmas CT II.28, 29.
254 In Cosmas CT Prol.3, the fourth book is described as containing illustrations of the cosmos 
according to the scriptures (        ).
255 On the illustrations, see Wolska-Conus, Topographie Chrtienne I, 124185; L. Brubaker 
The Relationship of Text and Image in the Byzantine MSS. of Cosmas Indicopleustes, Byzantinische 
Zeitschrift, Vol. 70 (1971), 4257; Kominko New Perspectives on Paradise, 139153.
256 Wolska-Conus, Topographie Chrtienne I, 17476; stemma on 185.
257 Cosmas CT IV.7. cf. CT II.2833 and II.4750.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 238
eastern ocean, the diagram presents an image that may have been reasonably familiar 
to a late antique audience. The oikoumene, with its central sea, gulfs and major rivers 
has survived more or less intact, even if it has been transposed from a segment of the 
globe onto the bottom of a chest.
The goal of the Christian Topography was to describe the inhabited world, and 
its place within a larger order, in a way that would agree with the word of the scrip-
tures. However, while Cosmas went out of his way to dispute the accepted image of 
the spherical earth  and to replace it with his model of a flat surface at the bottom 
of a chest  he leaves the oikoumene itself reasonably untouched. For all that Cosmas 
may have wished to create a new textual framework on which pictorial representations 
could be based, his vision of the inhabited world may well have been informed by a 
tradition of textual descriptions and cartographic displays that were an unquestion-
able part of late antique consciousness.
In the end, it is difficult to determine the extent to which the Christian Topography 
influenced perceptions of the world. While the mappaemundi that emerged in the 
west presented an increasingly schematised and scriptural vision of the earth, they 
nonetheless retained a connection to the geographical understanding of the classical 
past. There is, alas, less in the way of evidence from the Byzantine east. We know that 
the writings and images of Cosmas Indicopleustes survived into the tenth century 
and beyond; however, from the scholarly commentaries written by Eustathius of 
Thessalonica in the twelfth century, we may also suggest that Dionysius Periegetes 
was still in circulation and that Ptolemy could still be counted on as a geographical 
authority. Although we possess no images to accompany these texts, we should not 
discount the possibility that they may have continued to act as a source for pictorial 
representations of the world.
The goal of Ptolemaic geography had been the creation an image of the world based 
on astronomical observations; text was necessary in order to convey cartographical 
instructions and to record the various figures that would allow the cartographer to 
plot the different shapes. The resulting representation was an objective imitation of 
the oikoumene as it might be seen from the heavens; it was an image that existed inde-
pendently of verbal description and was, therefore, largely free of the inaccuracies that 
might arise from unreliable narratives, mythology and belief.
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 239
The cartographic tradition that developed in the Roman world, on the other 
hand, was precisely an attempt to render an impression of the world as it was described 
in textual sources. The images of the world that had been produced and refined by 
Greek mathematical geographers since at least the time of Eratosthenes may have 
provided the initial framework into which that textual knowledge could be placed. 
In the Roman world, however, textual material  based, as it was, on observation 
and first-hand experience   may have been understood to be more reliable than the 
numbers proposed by the Greeks; the shape of the world in cartographic representa-
tions may have started to conform increasingly to the image of the world preserved 
in the texts.
Cartography had long been a fine balance between observation and belief: the 
mathematically derived vision of the world espoused by Eratosthenes and Ptolemy had 
its foundations in the geographical conception of Homer. Similarly, the chorographic 
approach to world cartography that became popular during the imperial Roman 
period, may have been anchored in a conception of the world that came from sight-
ings and meridians. Chorography, however, may have favoured the authority of belief. 
Faith in the accuracy of the textual source would have allowed for increasingly sche-
matic visions of the world: where the world had once been fixed as an elliptical island, 
it could now be rendered as a simple circle, or as a area of land stretched out along the 
entire length of a portico, without any loss of perceived accuracy.
The Roman chorographic approach had been informed by a particular type of 
textual source that sought to enumerate places of significance, both real and imag-
ined; as those textual descriptions became increasingly filtered through the lens of 
Christianity, that vision would have been reflected in new chorographic images of 
the world. We do not, of course, wish to suggest that the topography of the scrip-
tures would have eclipsed the image that had developed over the preceding centuries. 
Rather, the new layer of Christian mythology would have been gradually incorporated 
into the accumulated body of Greek and Roman textual material that, together, had 
helped to create the accepted image of the world.
By the end of antiquity, belief had finally won a decisive victory over observation. 
The question of whether Ptolemy disappeared or survived in the Medieval or Byzantine 
periods is irrelevant; if his treatise failed to correspond to the prevailing understanding 
of the world, it would have been viewed as inaccurate. Ptolemaic cartography may have 
Chapter Four : the imagined landscape 240
seemed as baffling to the Medieval observer as a mappamundi can be to someone who 
has grown up with the Mercator projection. Cartography, as we discussed in chapter 
three, is ultimately the creation of an image that conforms to our expectations. In the 
traditions of Roman chorography, the Medieval world would have found the ideal 
approach for mapping a continually shifting landscape of belief.
C o n c lu s i o n
The consolidation of various lands into a unified empire may have 
been an essentially political act; however in order to claim control over those different 
regions, it would have first been necessary to understand the limits and content of the 
newly enlarged imperial space. In the two centuries prior to the reign of Augustus, 
the city of Rome had expressed its control over Italy by imposing a series of physi-
cal structures onto the land: the Romans constructed colonies to oversee regional 
administration, created regular field systems around those colonies, and built roads 
that would connect the colonies back to their capital. At the beginning of the imperial 
period, those same basic strategies for building would be used to impose the presence 
of Roman rule throughout a much larger geographical space.
The formation of the empire was, therefore, also an act of physical construc-
tion. However, few of the individual components in the Roman built environment 
were recent innovations. Cities had been in existence for thousands of years and, over 
the previous six centuries, the planned city had been developed and refined in the 
Hellenistic world; the idea of the permanent road had also been a feature of earlier 
civilisations and had been employed most effectively by Romes closest neighbours, the 
Etruscans. Yet for all its debts to the past, the Roman built environment distinguished 
itself from its immediate classical predecessors by the degree to which it integrated the 
processes of construction into larger systems that facilitated centralised control over a 
vast area. The extensive public works and construction projects that occurred during 
the beginning of the imperial period were the result of a desire to impose order on 
the world; only through the establishment of order could the space of the empire be 
apprehended, measured, and recorded.
Conclusion 242
In the imperial era, the victory of human ingenuity over the natural world was 
expressed most clearly in the planned city. Where the earliest human settlements had 
been the organic result of co-habitation, the planned city represented the rational 
achievement of an urbanised civilisation, a perfect marriage of monumental form 
and predetermined function. The walls offered security, the streets excluded noxious 
winds, and the public spaces were arranged to create a focal point for civic life. The city 
was the opposite of wild and ungovernable rural space; in the city, one remained in 
constant contact with the presence of a rationally imposed order.
It is, therefore, not surprising to find that the city would provide both the 
iconography and the organising principles necessary to make sense of the rural land-
scape. The orthogonal grid that divided the planned city into a series of equal insulae 
would be reproduced on a larger scale in the extensive land-surveys that occurred 
throughout the imperial period. Where land had once been bounded according to 
ancient customs and localised conventions, the Roman survey attempted to impose 
a consistent order of centuriated field systems and standardised boundary mark-
ers. Evidence of urban iconography may be found in the paving slabs and inscribed 
stones that defined the road network; as the traveller made his way through the 
wilderness, he would at least have been able to take some consolation in the visual 
reminders of urban order.
What is intriguing about the built environment that emerged during the imperial 
period is not its novelty or innovation, but rather the fact that it was able to achieve 
such a remarkable unity and consistency over such a large geographical area. This con-
sistency was achieved by reducing the processes and systems that defined the built 
environment to their essence. Instead of formal processes, there was a set of govern-
ing ideals that, in a reasonably short time, would spread throughout the empire and 
remain widely held for several centuries.
Thus, there was no one city plan concocted by Rome and exported to the vari-
ous corners of the empire; rather, there was an established ideal of what a city should 
contain, how it should be arranged, and how it should function within the larger 
framework of Roman administration. While individual cities could deviate from the 
ideal, the ideal would at least guarantee a series of broadly consistent urban centres that 
would be able to serve the necessary civic functions. We may say the same thing about 
the field systems and roads: the fact that the processes of construction were rooted in a 
Conclusion 243
strong imperial ideal would ensure a reasonably consistent implementation in any part 
of the Roman world.
The imperial ideals that governed the built environment would have taken hold, 
in part, because they were integrated into the larger processes of central administration. 
A city was not just a city; it was part of a larger urban hierarchy that culminated in the 
city of Rome. The centuriated field systems did not merely arise as a means of land 
allocation, but was, rather, a system that broke the land down into regular segments 
that could be recorded and administered by an urban authority. The fact that most of 
these systems were reasonably simple  and that their implementation rarely required 
any great technical skill  meant that every part of the empire could be apprehended 
and managed according to the same basic principles.
While the general goal of the built environment was to impose order upon the 
spaces of the Roman world, the specific aim of construction within the rural landscape 
was the establishment of a series of physical markers that would allow the vagaries of 
the landscape to be conveyed through the less arbitrary medium of text. The orthogonal 
baselines and the inscribed boundary stones that defined the Roman land survey created 
a physical presence within the landscape, but also allowed the reality of that landscape to 
be expressed either as a rudimentary cartographic artefact or as a purely textual record. 
Similarly, the extensive network of paved roads and their attendant milestones allowed 
for long journeys through large spaces to be presented in the form of a simple list.
Although the built environment was created, in part, as a means of understanding 
the larger spaces of the empire, there is little evidence to suggest that the constructed 
elements within the rural landscape were used as a source for cartographic representa-
tions of the inhabited world. In fact, the tradition of cartography that emerged during 
the imperial period may be viewed as another manifestation of the Roman desire for 
simplification. The shape of the world would have been largely irrelevant to the Roman 
audience who would, essentially, have wished to see names of places, accompanied 
perhaps by iconographic representations. In fact, the more schematic the shape of the 
world became, the more it would have corresponded to the vague descriptions of the 
oikoumene and its arrangement, as it was known from textual sources. Cartography in 
the Roman world was not an attempt to make sense of the land on a large scale. but 
rather another strategy for reducing the world to the point where it could be adequately 
expressed in the form of text.
Conclusion 244
The systems that developed during the imperial centuries were ingenious, but they 
were also unsustainable. Ultimately we should not be surprised that the ideals behind 
the Roman built environment eventually disappeared, but rather than they survived 
as long as they did. In fact, the imperial period may represent something of an oddity: 
it was a brief period in the history of human existence where a belief in civic ideals 
allowed man to claim some dominance over the natural world; it was a temporary vic-
tory of rational predetermination over the naturally more chaotic state of human life. 
In the remains of the imperial Roman built environment, we may see ample evidence 
of this victory. However, it was not to last.
There are any number of events that could have triggered a large-scale change 
in the Roman world: it has been suggested, for instance, that the political instability 
of the third century set in motion a series of events that brought about an end to the 
systems that defined classical antiquity; the replacement of unfocussed paganism with 
a strongly defined monotheistic religion has also been cited as a cause for larger trans-
formations within the empire; it could even be argued that the establishment of a new 
capital in Constantinople would have disrupted the balance of imperial life. Those 
looking for external causes might point to the various migrations, resettlements, inva-
sions and conquests that started to occur with greater frequency from the beginning of 
the fifth century. While all of these events would have undoubtedly left their mark on 
the physical world, the changes that occurred in late antiquity may also have been due 
to a substantial transformation in the ideals that governed the built environment.
Our evidence suggests that the ideals which had informed the creation of impe-
rial urban spaces were still present in both the law and literature of late antiquity. Even 
in the sixth century it was possible for an author such as Procopius to identify the 
public institutions that should be contained within the space of a city. The imperial 
urban ideal, however, may no longer have been as widely held by the people who were 
responsible for dictating the terms of the citys physical form. While the state contin-
ued to view the urban environment as a series of public spaces that formed a core of 
civic life, in the long-established centres of late antiquity, the urban population may 
have pursued their construction activities with an increasing disregard for ancient 
institutions and their corresponding civic values.
Within the physical space of the classical city there had been a fine balance 
between public and private interests. So long as the public urban institutions remained 
Conclusion 245
important to the population and well regulated by the imperial authority, the balance 
would be maintained and the classical order would continue to exist. In the established 
cities of late antiquity, however, the encroachment of private structures into public 
spaces illustrates how the formal order of the city may have become less important to 
the urban population. This attitude of indifference toward public spaces and institu-
tions is perhaps more clearly observed in the new towns and villages that emerged 
during the fourth and fifth centuries, where the urban environment consists primarily 
of unregulated private structures.
The divide between public and private space in the late antique city may have 
been complicated by the introduction of the church. Although the church was a public 
institution, insofar as it provided a spiritual focus for the urban population, the physi-
cal building remained a private construction. However, the dominance of the church 
within civic life resulted in the physical structures playing a more active role in the 
determination of urban form. While the laws of late antiquity may have wished to 
regulate the traditional public institutions of the classical city, legal prescriptions were 
ultimately unable to compete with the desires of the urban population.
Although the ideals governing the form of the city may have changed to reflect 
the evolving desires of the urban population, we may also suggest that attitudes toward 
urban space had changed simply because the city was no longer being employed as a 
tool for urban expansion. In the reduced space of the later Roman empire, the systems 
of imperial administration may not have relied as heavily on the presence of a wide-
spread urban network; in the absence of a unified urban function, it would not have 
been necessary for individual cities to adhere quite as strictly to the forms that had 
become prominent during the early days of the imperial period.
The transformation of imperial practices were also responsible for changes in the 
rural built environment. The systems for land apprehension that emerged during the 
era of Augustus had sought to impose an artificial structure on the otherwise ungov-
ernable expanses of rural space in order to express both the value and the physical 
location of individual landholdings. In the time of Diocletian  when it become neces-
sary to extract further resources from the land  the imposition of a new tax system 
may have altered the way in which land was perceived by the state. Where the system 
of centuriation had made it possible to express rural space as text, Diocletian sought 
to reduce the land even further; however, the desire to express rural spaces as a series 
Conclusion 246
of taxable units effectively removed the geographical element from both the process of 
land assessment and the system of records through which land was administered. The 
state was interested in what it could extract from the land, but was no longer willing to 
take an active role in the organisation of rural space.
A failure to maintain the systems that had dictated the form of the rural landscape 
may have caused the rural spaces of the empire to revert to a more organic state. Human 
nature, as we have mentioned, has never been inclined toward arbitrary structures: it 
favours the natural topography of the land over artificially imposed straight lines, and 
the natural direction of human movement over the rigidity of the orthogonal intersec-
tion. Where the orthogonal field systems had once allowed for the apprehension of 
larger areas, and for smaller units of land to be understood in terms of their relation-
ship to the larger area, by late antiquity, each individual piece of land may have been 
perceived as existing in isolation. Without the guidelines of a field system, the shape of 
the individual properties may have started to realign themselves with the boundaries 
dictated by the natural world.
The one feature of the imperial built environment that may have continued to 
function unchanged was the road network. Because the roads provided an essential 
infrastructure for communication and military movement, the state continued to take 
an active role in their maintenance, even during times of crisis. Thus, we find little 
evidence for a decline in the road network either during the instability of the third 
century, or during the possible economic troubles at the end of the fourth century. 
However, while the road network would have continued to act as the principal index 
for land navigation, the paths of the ancient routes may increasingly have found them-
selves at odds with the topographical consciousness of a Christianised population; 
although the roads would have remained a physical presence in the Mediterranean 
world, they may no longer have played so great a role in the perception of a landscape 
that had come to be dominated by belief.
The absence of a strongly defined built environment would not necessarily have 
resulted in the disappearance of large-scale spatial awareness; a well-established body 
of geographical knowledge would have continued to inform perceptions of the larger 
oikoumene into the sixth century and beyond. In fact, in terms of a governing ideal, 
imperial cartography may not have been wholly dissimilar to the cartographic docu-
ments of the later Roman world: what had changed was the information. Imperial 
Conclusion 247
cartography had been an attempt to convey the Romanness of the world through an 
enumeration of places and names; once the imperial agenda had been removed from 
cartographic displays, the shape and contents of the world would have naturally started 
to gravitate toward the dominant beliefs of the people for whom the displays were 
intended. However without the imperial goal of expressing a world where everything 
was Roman, there may have been less interest in the distant extremities of the oikou-
mene. While the basic arrangement of lands may have remained consistent throughout 
late antiquity, the space of the world had started to be reduced to a core of knowledge 
surrounded by a wilderness of mythology. 
In order to create an empire, it was first necessary to determine what that empire con-
tained. Military conquest was only the beginning: the reason that the Roman state 
was able to effectively govern such a large area is because they were able to take that 
conquered land and impose upon it a physical framework that allowed for assessment 
and administration. Through the imposition of a consistent built environment they 
arrived at a means of expressing imperial space through the reliable medium of text 
rather than the unreliable medium of images. It was an achievement that would not be 
replicated for many centuries to come.
Because the built environment was, essentially a consequence of imperial ideals 
and systems, the eventual dissolution of those systems between the fourth and sixth 
centuries would have caused the formal qualities of the constructed landscape to 
change. In the absence of effective imperial control over the processes of construction, 
the influence of the individual may have once again asserted itself; the rigours of a 
planned world may have given way to the return of organic development. However, 
because the Roman built environment had been so closely tied to the processes that 
had once allowed the empire to be contained and defined, the dissolution of imperial 
order may also have caused fundamental transformations in the way that the space of 
the world was perceived at the end of antiquity.
B i b l i o g r a p h y
primary sources
Agathemerus Geographiae informatio in C. Mller, GGM2,  47187.
Ammianus Marcellinus Res Gestae in 3 vols. trans. J.C Rolfe (Cambridge, MA., 1971
1972).
Ananias of irak The Geography of Ananias of irak trans. R.H. Hewsen (Wiesbaden, 
1992); Gographie de Mose de Corne daprs Ptolme ed. and trans. A. Soukry (Venice, 
1881).
Anonymi Byzantini Peri Strategikes ed. and trans. G. Dennis in Three Byzantine Military 
Treatises. CFHB 25 (Washington, D.C., 1985),  9135.
Appian Roman History in 4 vols. trans. H. White (Cambridge, MA., 19121913).
Byzantinische metrologische Quellen ed. E. Schilbach (Dsseldorf, 1970).
Byzantinische metrologische Quellen II ed. E. Schilbach (Thessalonica, 1982).
Cassiodorus Institutiones divinarum et saecularium litterarum ed. R.A.B. Mynors 
(Oxford, 1937); trans. J.W. Halporn Cassiodorus Institutions of Divine and Secular 
Learning and On the Soul (Liverpool, 2004).
 Variae ed. T. Mommsen (Berlin, 1894); trans S.J.B. Barnish Selected Variae of 
Magnus Aurelius Cassiodorus Senator (Liverpool, 1992).
Cicero Ad Atticum in 7 vols. ed. and trans. D.R. Shackleton Bailey (Cambridge, 1965
1970).
Codex Theodosianus Theodosiani Libri XVI ed. T. Mommsen and P.M. Meyer (Berlin, 
1905), trans. C. Pharr et. al. The Theodosian Code and Novels and the Sirmondian 
Constitutions (Princeton, 1952).
Corpus agrimensorum Romanorum:
(L) Die Schriften der Rmischen Feldmesser ed. K. Lachmann (Berlin, 1848).
(T) Corpus agrimensorum Romanorum Vol. 1, Fasc. 1. ed. C. Thulin (Leipzig, 1913).
(C) The Writings of the Roman Land Surveyors ed. and trans. B. Campbell (London, 
2000).
(G) Les Arpenteurs Romains. Tome 1: Hygin le gromatique  Frontin. ed. and trans. J.-Y. 
Guillaumin (Paris, 2005)
bibliogr aphy 250
   Tome 2: Hygin  Siculus Flaccus ed. and trans. J.-Y. Guillaumin (Paris, 2010).
 Corpus Agrimensorum Romanorum II: Balbus / III: Podismus (in one vol.) ed. and 
trans. J.-Y. Guillaumin (Napoli, 1993).
Corpus Iuris Civilis Vol. 3: Novellae ed. R. Schoell. Sixth edition (Berlin, 1954).
Cosmas Indicopleustes Topographie Chrtienne in 3 vols. ed. and trans. W. Wolska-
Conus (Paris, 196873); trans. J.W. McCrindle The Christian Topography of Cosmas, an 
Egyptian Monk (London, 1897).
Dicuil Liber de mensura orbis terrae ed. and trans. J.J. Tierney (Dublin, 1967).
Cassius Dio Roman History in 9 vols. trans. E. Cary (Cambridge, MA., 19141927).
Diodorus Siculus Bibliotheca historica in 12 vols. trans. C.H. Oldfather et al. 
(Cambridge, MA., 19331967).
Diogenes Laertius Vitae philosophorum ed. H.S. Long (Oxford, 1964), trans. R.D. 
Hicks Lives of Eminent Philosophers in 2 vols. (Cambridge, MA., 1970).
Dionysius of Halicarnassus The Roman Antiquities in 7 vols. trans. E. Cary 
(Cambridge, MA., 19371950).
Dionysius Periegetes Orbis descriptio in C. Mller, GGM2,  10476.
Divisio orbis terrarum ed. A. Riese, GLM,  1520; ed. P. Schnabel, Philologus, Vol. 90 (1935)  
432 40; ed. L. Bieler, PRIA, Vol. 64 (1965),  131.
Egeria Silviae uel potius Aetheriae peregrinatio ad loca sancta ed. W. Heraeus (Heidelberg, 
1908); Itinerarium Egeriae ed. A Franceschini and R. Weber, in CCSL 175,  2790; trans. 
J. Wilkinson Egerias Travels to the Holy Land. Revised edition (Jerusalem, 1981).
Eratosthenes Die Geographischen Fragmente des Eratosthenes ed. H. Berger (Leipzig, 
1880); ed. and trans. D.W. Roller Eratosthenes Geography (Princeton, 2010).
Eumenius Pro Instaurandis Scholis 20 in XII Panegyrici Latini ed. R.A.B. Mynors 
(Oxford, 1964).
Eusebius Onomasticon in Eusebius Werke III.1: Das Onomasticon der Biblischen 
Ortsnamen ed. E. Klostermann (Leipzig, 1904).
Faventinus Artis architectonae priuatis usibus adbreuiatus liber, ed. and trans. M.-T. 
Cam Cetius Faventinus Abrg dArchitecture Prive (Paris, 2001). An english translation 
appears in Plommer (see Secondary Literature, below).
Frontinus De aquaeductu urbis Romae ed. and trans. P. Grimal Les Aqueducs de la Ville 
de Rome (Paris, 1944); trans. C.E. Bennett The Aqueducts of Rome (Cambridge, MA., 
1925).
Aulus Gellius The Attic Nights of Aulus Gellius in 3 vols. trans. J.C. Rolfe (Cambridge, 
MA., 19481954).
Geographi Graeci Minores Vol. 1 ed. C. Mller (Paris, 1855).
Geographi Graeci Minores Vol. 2 ed. C. Mller (Paris, 1861).
Geographi Latini Minores ed. A. Riese (Heilbronn, 1878).
Gomtries du fisc Byzantin eds J. Lefort et. al. (Paris, 1991).
Greek Ostraca in the Bodleian Library at Oxford. Vol. II ed. J. G. Tait and C. Praux 
(London, 1955).
Heron of Alexandria Metrica in Heronis Alexandrini opera quae supersunt omnia Vol. 
III ed. H. Schne (Leipzig, 1903).
bibliogr aphy 251
 Definitions and Geometrica in Heronis Alexandrini opera quae supersunt omnia Vol. 
IV ed. J.L. Heiberg (Leipzig, 1912).
Hierocles Grammaticus Synecdemus ed. E. Honigmann Le synekdmos dHirokls et 
Lopuscule gographique de Georges de Chypre: texte, introduction, commentaire et cartes 
(Brussels, 1939).
Historia Augusta in 3 vols. trans. D. Magie (Cambridge, MA., 19211932).
Inscriptiones Graecae ad Res Romanas pertinentes ed. R. Cagnat (Paris, 1911).
Itineraria Romana vol. 1 ed. O. Cuntz (Leipzig, 1929).
Itineraria Romana vol. 2 ed. J. Schnetz (Leipzig, 1940).
Itinerarium Burdigalense ed. P. Geyer and O. Cuntz, reprinted in Itineraria et Alia 
Geographica. CCSL 175 (Turnhout, 1965)  126.
Josephus Flavii Iosephi opera in 7 vols. ed. B. Niese (Berlin, 18851895), trans. H.St.J. 
Thackeray et al. (Cambridge, MA., 19261965).
Julian of Ascalon ed. and trans. C. Saliou Le trait durbanisme de Julien dAscalon: 
droit et architecture en Palestine au VIe sicle (Paris, 1996).
Lactantius Placidus In Statii Thebaida commentum ed. R.D. Sweeney (Stuttgart, 
1997).
Libanius Oration 11 trans. G. Downey Libanius Oration in Praise of Antioch (Oration 
XI), Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 103, No. 5 (1959),  65286.
Livy Ab urbe condita in 14 vols. trans B.O. Foster et al. (Cambridge, MA., 19191959).
John Malalas Chronographia ed. H. Thurn (Berlin, 2000); trans. E. Jeffreys, M. Jeffreys 
and R. Scott The Chronicle of John Malalas (Melbourne, 1986).
Pomponius Mela De Chorographia libri tres ed. P. Parroni (Rome, 1984); ed. and trans. 
A. Silberman Pomponius Mela: Chorographie (Paris, 1988).
Palladius Opus agriculturae. (Book 1 only) ed. and trans. R. Martin Palladius: Trait 
dagriculture. Tome 1 (Paris, 1976).
Pausanias Graeciae descriptio in 3 vols. ed. F. Spiro (Leipzig, 1903); trans. W.H.S. Jones 
Description of Greece in 5 vols. (Cambridge 19181935); see also J.G. Frazer in Secondary 
Literature, below.
Philostratus The Life of Apollonius of Tyana in 2 vols. ed. and trans. C.P. Jones 
(Cambridge, MA., 2005).
Pliny Natural History in 10 vols. trans. H. Rackham et. al. (Cambridge, MA., 19381963).
Plutarch Lives in 11 vols. trans. B. Perrin (Cambridge, MA., 19141926).
Polybius The Histories in 6 vols. trans. W.R. Paton (Cambridge, MA., 19221927).
Priscian Institutiones grammaticae in Grammatici Latini vol. II ed. H. Keil (Leipzig, 
18551880).
Procopius History of the Wars, Anecdota and the Buildings in 7 vols. trans. H.B. Dewing 
(Cambridge, MA., 19141940).
Propertius Elegies trans. C.P. Goold (Cambridge, MA., 1990).
Ptolemy Geographia ed. K. Nobbe (Hildesheim, 1966). A translation of the first chapters 
appears in Berggren and Jones (see Secondary Literature, below).
Quintilian Institutio oratoria in 4 vols. trans. H.E. Butler (Cambridge, MA., 19201922).
Ravennatis Anonymi Cosmographia, in J. Schnetz, Itineraria Romana 2.
bibliogr aphy 252
Res gestae divi Augusti trans. P.A. Brunt and J.M. Moore (Oxford, 1967).
Servius Servii Gramatici qui fenuntur in Vergilii carmina commentarii ed. G. Thilo and 
H. Hagen (Leipzig, 18811902).
Strabo Geographica in 3 vols. ed. A. Meineke (Leipzig, 1877), trans. H.L. Jones Geography 
in 8 vols. (Cambridge, MA., 19171932).
Suetonius Lives of the Caesars in 2 vols. trans. J.C. Rolfe (Cambridge, MA., 19131914).
Stephanus of Byzantium Ethnica ed. A. Meineke (Berlin,1849).
Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum. Third edition. ed. W. Dittenberger (Leipzig, 1917).
Tacitus Annales ab excessu divi Augusti ed. C.D. Fisher (Oxford, 1906), trans. J. Jackson 
The Annals (Cambridge, MA., 19251937).
Theodosius De Situ Terrae Sanctae in Itinera Hierosolymitana Saec. IIIIVIII ed. P. 
Geyer CSEL 38 (Vienna, 1898),  13550; reprinted in CCSL 175,  11325; trans. J.H. 
Bernard Theodosius (London, 1893).
Varro De Lingua Latina in 2 vols. trans. R.G. Kent (Cambridge, MA., 19771979).
 De Re Rustica trans. W.D. Hooper (Cambridge, MA., 1935).
Vegetius Epitoma rei militaris ed. C. Lang (Leipzig, 1885), trans. N.P. Milner Epitome of 
Military Science (Liverpool, 1993).
Vitruvius  De architectura libri decem ed. V. Rose (Leipzig, 1899), ed. and trans. F. 
Granger On Architecture in 2 vols. (Cambridge, MA., 1931).
secondary literature
Adams, C. and R. Laurence (eds) Travel and Geography in the Roman Empire (London, 
2001).
Albu, E. Imperial Geography and the Medieval Peutinger Map, Imago Mundi, Vol. 57 
No. 2 (2005),  13648.
Alcock, S.F., J.F. Cherry and J. Elsner (eds) Pausanias: Travel and Memory in Roman 
Greece (Oxford, 2001).
Alfldi, A. On the Foundation of Constantinople: A Few Notes, JRS, Vol. 37, (1947),  
1016.
Anastos, M.V. The Alexandrian Origin of the Christian Topography of Cosmas 
Indicopleustes, DOP, Vol. 3 (1946),  7380.
Anderson, G. Philostratus: Biography and belles lettres in the third century AD (London, 
1986).
Anderson, J.C. Jr The Date of the Thermae Traiani and the Topography of the Oppius 
Mons, American Journal of Archaeology, Vol. 89, No. 3 (1985),  499509.
Antaya, R. The Etymology of Pomerium, The American Journal of Philology, Vol. 101, 
No. 2 (1980),  18489.
Appleton, J. The Experience of Landscape (London, 1975).
bibliogr aphy 253
Arafat, K.W. Pausanias Attitude to Antiquities, The Annual of the British School at 
Athens, Vol. 87 (1992),  387 409.
 Pausanias Greece: Ancient artists and Roman rulers (Cambridge, 1996).
Arnaud, P. Lorigine, la date de rdaction et la diffusion de larchetype de la Table de 
Peutinger, Bulletin de la Socit Nationale des Antiquaires de France (1988),  30221.
 Pouvoir des mots et limites de la cartographie dans la gographie grecque et romaine, 
Dialogues dhistoire ancienne Vol. 15, No. 1 (1989),  929.
  propos dun prtendu itinraire de Caracalla dans lItinraire dAntonin: les sources 
tardives de lItineraire de Rome  Hierasycaminos, Bulletin de la Socit Nationale des 
Antiquaires de France (1992),  37480.
 LItinraire dAntonin: un tmoin de la littrature itinraire du Bas-Empire, 
Geographia Antiqua, Vol. 2 (1993),  3349.
Ashby, T. and R. Gardner The Via Traiana, PBSR, Vol. 8 (1916),  10471.
Ashby, T. and R.A.L. Fell The Via Flaminia, JRS, Vol. 11 (1921),  12590.
Avi-Yonah, M. The Development of the Roman Road System in Palestine, IEJ, Vol. 1 
(1951),  5460. 
 The Foundation of Tiberias, IEJ, Vol. 1 (1951),  16069.
 The Madaba Mosaic Map ( Jerusalem, 1954)
Bachelard, G. The Poetics of Space trans. M. Jolas (Boston, MA., 1994).
Bagrow, L. History of Cartography. Second Ed. rev. R.A. Skelton (Chicago, 1985).
Ball, W. Rome in the East: The transformation of an empire (London, 2000).
Ballu, A. Les Ruines de Timgad (Antique Thamugadi) (Paris, 1897).
Banaji, J. Agrarian Change in Late Antiquity: Gold, Labour, and Aristocratic Dominance 
(Oxford, 2001).
Barlow, C.W. Codex Vaticanus Latinus 4929, Memoirs of the American Academy in 
Rome, Vol. 15 (1938),  87124.
Barnes, T.D. The New Empire of Diocletian and Constantine (Cambridge, MA., 1982).
Bassett, S. The Urban Image of Late Antique Constantinople (Cambridge, 2004
Batty, R. Melas Phoenician Geography, JRS, Vol. 90 (2000),  7094.
Bavant, B. Cariin Grad and the Changes in the Nature of Urbanism in the Central 
Balkans in the Sixth Century in Poulter (ed.) Transition to Late Antiquity,  33774.
Bavant, B., V. Kondi and J.-M. Spieser (eds) Cariin Grad II: Le quartier sud-ouest de 
la ville haute (Belgrade, 1990).
Bavant, B. and V. Ivanievi Iustiniana Prima / Cariin Grad (Belgrade, 2003).
Beagon, P. A Note on Polybius 24.14.8-9, Classical Quarterly, New Series, Vol. 45, No. 
1 (1995),  24548.
Beard, M., J. North and S. Price Religions of Rome Vol. 1 (Cambridge, 1998).
Beazley, C.R. The Dawn of Modern Geography: A history of exploration and geographical 
science. Vol. 1: From the conversion of the Roman empire to AD 900 (London, 1897).
 Madaba Map, The Geographical Journal, Vol. 17, No. 5 (1901),  51620.
Becker, J.A., M. Mogetta and N. Terrenato A New Plan for an Ancient Italian 
City: Gabii Revealed, AJA, Vol. 113, No. 4 (2009),  62942.
bibliogr aphy 254
Bedon, R., R. Chevallier and P. Pinon Architecture et Urbanisme en Gaule romaine in 
2 vols. (Paris, 1988).
Beeson, C.H. The Archetype of the Roman Agrimensores, Classical Philology, Vol. 23, 
No. 1 ( January, 1928),  114.
Behrends, O. and L.C. Colognesi (eds) Die rmische Feldmekunst (Gttingen, 1992).
Bejaoui, F. les et villes de la Mditerrane sur une mosaque dAmmaedara (Hadra en 
Tunisie), Comptes-rendus des sances de lAcadmie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres, Vol 
141, No. 3 (1997)  82558.
Berchem, D. van LAnnone Militaire dans LEmpire Romain au IIIe Sicle, Mmoires 
de la Socit Nationale des Antiquaires de France, Vol. 24 (1937),  117202.
 Litinraire Antonin et le voyage en Orient de Caracalla (214-215) Comptes-rendus des 
sances de lAcadmie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres, Vol. 117, No. 1 (1973),  12326.
Berger, A. Viranehir (Mokisos), eine byzantinische Stadt in Kappadokien, Istanbuler 
Mitteilungen, Vol. 48 (1998), 349429.
 Streets and Public Spaces in Constantinople, DOP, Vol. 54 (2000),  16172.
Berggren, J. L. and A. Jones Ptolemys Geography: an annotated translation of the 
theoretical chapters (Princeton, 2000).
Bernstein, A.H. Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus: Tradition and Apostasy (Ithaca and 
London, 1978).
Bieler, L. The Text Tradition of Dicuils Liber de mensura orbis terrae, PRIA, Sec. C, 
Vol. 64 (1965/1966),  131.
Bischoff, B. Latin Palaeography: Antiquity and the Middle Ages (Cambridge, 1990).
Boatwright, M.T. Tacitus on Claudius and the Pomerium, Annals 12.23.2-24 The 
Classical Journal, Vol. 80, No. 1 (1984),  36 44.
 The Pomerial Extension of Augustus, Historia, Vol. 35, No. 1 (1986),  1327.
Bothius, A. The Golden House of Nero: Some Aspects of Roman Architecture (Ann Arbor, 
1960).
 Etruscan and Early Roman Architecture (New Haven and London, 1978).
Bosanquet, R.C. Greek and Roman Towns I: Streets, TPR, Vol. 5, No. 4 (1915),  28693.
Bouras, C. City and Village: Urban Design and Architecture in XVI Internationaler 
Byzantinistenkongress: Akten (Vienna, 1981),  61153.
Bowden, W., L. Lavan and C. Machado (eds) Recent Research on the Late Antique 
Countryside (Leiden, 2004).
Bowie, E.L. Apollonius of Tyana: Tradition and Reality in ANRW II 16.2 (1978),  1652
 Past and Present in Pausanias in D. Musti and J. Bingen Pausanias historien: huit 
exposs suivis de discussions (Geneva, 1996),  20730.
 Denys dAlexandrie: un pote Grec dans lempire Romain, Revue des Etudes 
Anciennes, Vol. 106, No. 1 (2004),  17785.
Bowman, A.K. and J.D. Thomas Vindolanda: The Latin Writing Tablets. Britannia 
Monograph Series No. 4 (London, 1983).
Bowman, G. Mapping Historys Redemption: Eschatology and Topography in the 
Itinerarium Burdigalense in L.I. Levine (ed.) Jerusalem: Its Sanctity and Centrality to 
Judaism, Christianity and Islam (New York, 1998),  16387.
bibliogr aphy 255
Brimer, B. Shivta  An Aerial Photographic Interpretation, IEJ, Vol. 31 (1981),  22729.
Brodersen, K. Terra cognita: Studien zur rmischen Raumerfassung (Hildesheim, 1995).
 Review: Mapping (In) the Ancient World, JRS, Vol. 94 (2004),  183 90.
Brodersen, K. and J. Elsner Images and Texts in the Artemidorus Papyrus: Working 
Papers on P.Artemid. (Stuttgart, 2009).
Broshi, M. The Population of Western Palestine in the Roman-Byzantine Period 
BASOR, No. 236 (1979),  110.
Brown, F.E. Cosa I: History and Topography, Memoirs of the American Academy in 
Rome, Vol. 20 (1951),  5113.
 Roman Architecture (New York, 1961).
Brubaker, L. The Relationship of Text and Image in the Byzantine MSS. of Cosmas 
Indicopleustes, Byzantinische Zeitschrift, Vol. 70 (1971),  4257.
Brunt, P.A. The Fiscus and Its Development, JRS, Vol. 56 (1966),  7591.
 Lex de Imperio Vespasiani, JRS, Vol. 67 (1977),  95 116.
 Free Labour and Public Works at Rome, JRS, Vol. 70 (1980),  81100.
Buck, R.J. The Via Herculia, PBSR, Vol. 39 (1971),  6687.
Bunbury, E.H. A History of Ancient Geography in 2 vols. (London, 1879).
Burney, C.A. Urartian Fortresses and Towns in the Van Region, Anatolian Studies, Vol. 
7 (1957),  3753.
Burney, C.A. and G.R.J. Lawson Measured Plans of Urartian Fortresses, 
Anatolian Studies, Vol. 10 (1960),  17796.
Burns, A. Hippodamus and the Planned City, Historia, Vol. 25, No. 4 (1976),  414-28.
Butzmann, H. (ed.) Corpus agrimensorum Romanorum. Codex arcerianus A der Herzog-
August-Bibliothek zu Wolfenbttel (Cod. Guelf. 36.23A) (Leiden, 1970).
Caillemer, A. and R. Chevallier Les centuriations romaines de Tunisie, 
Annales. conomies, Socits, Civilisations. Vol. 12, No. 2 (1957),  27586.
Campbell, B. Sharing out Land: Two Passages in the Corpus Agrimensorum 
Romanorum, The Classical Quarterly, New Series, Vol. 45, No. 2 (1995),  54046.
 Shaping the Rural Environment: Surveyors in Ancient Rome, JRS, Vol. 86 (1996),  
7499.
Canfora, L. The True History of the So-called Artemidorus Papyrus (Bari, 2007).
Carder, J.N. Art Historical Problems of a Roman Land Surveying Manuscript: The Codex 
Arcerianus A, Wolfenbttel (New York, 1978)
Carey, S. Plinys Catalogue of Culture: Art and Empire in the Natural History (Oxford, 
2003)
Carri, J.-M. Le Colonat du Bas-Empire: un mythe historiographique?, Opus, Vol. 1 
(1982),  35170.
 Un Roman des Origines: Les Geneologies du Colonat du Bas-Empire, Opus, Vol. 
2 (1983), 20551.
 Diocletien et la Fiscalit, Antiquit Tardive, Vol. 2 (1994),  3364.
Cary, M. Direction-Posts on Roman Roads?, The Classical Review, Vol. 50, No. 5 (1936),  
166 67.
bibliogr aphy 256
Casson, L. Travel in the Ancient World (London, 1974).
Castagnoli, F. Le formae delle colonie romane e le miniature dei codici dei gromatici, 
Atti della Reale Accademia dItalia, Series 7, Vol. 4/4 (1943),  83118.
 Le richerche sui resti della centuriazione (Rome, 1958).
 Orthogonal Town Planning in Antiquity (Cambridge, MA., 1971).
Chastagnol, A. Les cadastres de la colonie romaine dOrange, Annales. conomies, 
Socits, Civilisations, Vol. 20, No. 1 (1965),  15259.
Chevallier, R. Essai de chronologie des centuriations romaines de Tunisie, Mlanges 
darchologie et dhistoire, Vol. 70, (1958),  61128.
 Cit et territoire. Solutions romaines aux problmes de lorganisation de lespace. 
Problematique 19481973, in ANRW II.1 (1974),  649784.
 Roman Roads trans. N.H. Field (London, 1976).
Childe, V.G. The Urban Revolution, TPR, Vol. 21, No. 1 (April, 1950),  317.
Christie, N. and S.T. Loseby (eds) Towns in Transition: Urban Evolution in Late 
Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages (Aldershot, 1996).
Clark, K. Landscape Into Art (London, 1949).
Clavel-Lvque, M. Casastres et Espaces Rural: Approches et Ralits Antiques (Paris, 
1983).
Colvin, B. Land and Landscape: Evolution, Design and Control. Second edition 
(London, 1970).
Corcoran, S. The Empire of the Tetrarchs: Imperial pronouncements and government AD 
284324. Revised edition (Oxford, 2000).
Cosgrove, D. Prospect, Perspective and the Evolution of the Landscape Idea, 
Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, Vol. 10, No. 1 (1985),  4562.
 (ed.) Mappings (London, 1999).
 Apollos Eye: A Cartographic Geneology of the Earth in the Western Imagination 
(Baltimore, 2001).
Courcelle, P. Late Latin Writers and their Greek Sources (Cambridge, MA., 1969).
Courtois, C. Timgad: Antique Thamugadi (Algiers, 1951).
Crawford, J.S. The Byzantine Shops at Sardis (Cambridge, MA., 1990).
Croke, B. and J. Crow Procopius and Dara, JRS, Vol. 73 (1983),  14359.
Crook, J.A. Law and life of Rome (London, 1967).
Crowfoot, J.W. Early Churches in Palestine (London, 1941).
Crowfoot, J.W., K.M. Kenyon and E.L. Sukenik The Buildings at Samaria (London, 
1942).
Dan, Y. Palaestina Salutaris (Tertia) and its Capital, IEJ, Vol. 32 (1982),  13437.
Davies, H.E.H. Designing Roman Roads, Britannia, Vol. 29 (1998),  1-16.
Davies, W. and P. Fouracre (eds) The Settlement of Disputes in Early Medieval Europe 
(Cambridge, 1986).
Davos, P. La Date du Voyage dgrie, Analecta Bollandiana, Vol. 85, No. 1 (1967),  165
bibliogr aphy 257
Detlefsen, D. Ursprung, Einrichtung und Bedeutung der Erdkarte Agrippas (Berlin, 
1906).
Devine, A.M. Aelians Manual of Hellenistic Military Tactics: A New Translation from 
the Greek with an Introduction, The Ancient World, Vol. 19 (1989),  3164.
Dilke, O.A.W. The Roman Surveyors, Greece and Rome, Vol. 9, No. 2 (1960),  17080.
 Maps in the Treatises of Roman Land Surveyors, The Geographical Journal, Vol. 127, 
No. 4 (1961),  41726.
 Illustrations from Roman Surveyors Manuals, Imago Mundi, Vol. 21 (1967),  929.
 The Roman Land Surveyors (Newton Abbot, 1971).
 Archaeological and Epigraphic Evidence of Roman Land Surveys in ANRW II.1, 
(Berlin, 1974),  564592.
 Greek and Roman Maps (London, 1985).
Dillemann, L. Ammien Marcellin et les pays de lEuphrate et du Tigre, Syria, Vol. 38, 
Fasc. 1/2 (1961),  87158.
 La Cosmographie du Ravennate (Brussels, 1997).
Diller, A. The Tradition of Stephanus Byzantius Transactions and Proceedings of the 
American Philological Association, Vol. 69 (1938),  33348.
 Julian of Ascalon on Strabo and the Stade, Classical Philology, Vol. 45, No. 1 (1950),  
2225.
 The Tradition of the Minor Greek Geographers (Lancaster, PA, 1952).
 The Authors Named Pausanias, Transactions and Proceedings of the American 
Philological Association, Vol. 86 (1955),  268 79.
 Agathemerus, Sketch of Geography, GRBS, Vol. 16, No. 1 (1975),  5976.
Donner, H. The Mosaic Map of Madaba: An Introductory Guide (Kampen, 1992).
della Dora, V. Topia: Landscape before Linear Perspective in Annals of the Association 
of American Geographers (forthcoming).
Dorsey, D.A. Shechem and the Road Network of Central Samaria, Bulletin of the 
American Schools of Oriental Research, No. 268 (November, 1987),  5770.
Douglass, L. A New Look at the Itinerarium Burdigalense, Journal of Early Christian 
Studies, Vol. 4, No. 3 (1996),  31333.
Downey, G. Julian the Apostate at Antioch, Church History, Vol. 8, No. 4 (1939),  30315.
 Byzantine Architects: Their Training and Methods, Byzantion, Vol. 18 (194648), 
99118.
 The Composition of Procopius, De Aedificiis, Transactions and Proceedings of the 
American Philological Association, Vol. 78 (1947),  17183.
 Libanius Oration in Praise of Antioch (Oration XI), Proceedings of the American 
Philosophical Society, Vol. 103, No. 5 (1959),  65286.
 A History of Antioch in Syria from Seleucus to the Arab Conquest (Princeton, 1961).
Drijvers, J.W. Ammianus Marcellinus on the Geography of the Pontus Euxinus, Histos, 
Vol. 2 (1998),  26878.
Dueck, D. The Date and Method of Composition of Strabos Geography in Hermes, Vol. 
127, No. 4 (1999),  46778.
bibliogr aphy 258
 Strabo of Amasia: A Greek man of letters in Augustan Rome (London, 2000)
Duncan-Jones, R. Length-Units in Roman Town Planning: The Pes Monetalis and the 
Pes Drusianus, Britannia, Vol. 11 (1980),  12733.
 Structure and Scale in the Roman Economy (Cambridge, 1990).
Dzielska, M. Apollonius of Tyana in legend and history (Rome, 1986).
Edson, E. Mapping Time and Space: How Medieval mapmakers viewed their world 
(London, 1997).
Eliot, C.W.J. New Evidence for the Speed of the Roman Imperial Post, Phoenix, Vol. 9, 
No. 2 (1955),  7680.
Elsner, J. Pausanias: A Greek Pilgrim in the Roman World, Past & Present, No. 135 
(1992),  329.
 Hagiographic Geography: Travel and Allegory in the Life of Apollonius of Tyana, 
JHS, Vol. 117 (1997),  2237.
 The Itinerarium Burdigalense: Politics and Salvation in the Geography of 
Constantines Empire, JRS, Vol. 90 (2000),  18195.
Esprandieu, . Concession de terres  des colons dOrange, Comptes-rendus des sances 
de lAcadmie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres, Vol. 45, No. 5, (1904),  497502.
Evans, G.R. The Sub-Euclidean Geometry of the Earlier Middle Ages up to the Mid-
Twelfth Century in Archive for History of Exact Sciences Vol. 15, No. 2 (1976),  10518
Evans, H.B. Agrippas Water Plan, American Journal of Archaeology, Vol. 86, No. 3 (1982),  
40111.
Evans, J.A.S. The Dates of the Anecdota and the de Aedificiis of Procopius, Classical 
Philology, Vol. 64, No. 1 (1969),  2930.
Eyre, J.J. Roman Education in the Late Republic and Early Empire, Greece & Rome, Vol. 
10, No. 1 (1963),  47 59.
Fairman, H.W. Town Planning in Pharaonic Egypt, TPR, Vol. 20, No. 1 (1949),  3352.
Favro, D. Pater urbis: Augustus as City Father of Rome, Journal of the Society of 
Architectural Historians, Vol. 51, No. 1 (1992),  61 84.
 The Urban Image of Augustan Rome (Cambridge, 1996).
Fentress, E. (ed.) Romanization and the City: Creation, Transformations, and Failures. 
JRA Supplementary Series 38 (Portsmouth, RI., 2000).
Finlay, M.I. (ed.) Studies in Roman Property (Cambridge, 1976).
Fiorani, F. Post-Tridentine Geographia Sacra: The Galleria delle Carte Geografiche in 
the Vatican Palace, Imago Mundi, Vol. 48 (1996),  12448.
Foerster, G. The Early History of Caesarea, Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental 
Research. Supplementary Studies, No. 19: The Joint Expedition to Caesarea Maritima. 
Volume I. Studies in the History of Caesarea Maritima (1975),  922.
Folkerts, M. The Importance of the Pseudo-Boethian Geometria During the Middle 
Age in M. Masi (ed.) Boethius and the liberal arts: a collection of essays (Berne and Las 
Vegas, 1981),  187209.
Forbes, R.J. Notes on the History of Ancient Roads and their Construction. Archaeologisch-
historische Bijdragen III (Amsterdam, 1934).
 Studies in Ancient Technology Vol. II. (Leiden, 1965).
bibliogr aphy 259
Foss, C. The Persians in Asia Minor and the End of Antiquity, EHR, Vol. 90, No. 357 
(1975),  72147.
 Archaeology and the Twenty Cities of Byzantine Asia, AJA, Vol. 81, No. 4 (1977),  
46986.
 Ephesus after Antiquity: A late antique, Byzantine and Turkish City (Cambridge, 
1979).
 Syria in Transition, AD 550750: An Archaeological Approach, DOP, Vol. 51 
(1997),  189269.
Francis, J.A. Truthful Fiction: New Questions to Old Answers on Philostratus Life of 
Apollonius, The American Journal of Philology, Vol. 119, No. 3 (1998),  41941.
Frangenberg, T. Chorographies of Florence: The Use of City Views and City Plans in 
the Sixteenth Century Imago Mundi, Vol. 46 (1994),  4164.
Frankfort, H. Town Planning in Ancient Mesopotamia, TPR, Vol. 21, No. 2 ( July, 
1950),  99115.
Frazer, J.G. Pausaniass Description of Greece in 6 vols. (London, 1898).
Frederiksen, M.W. The Republican Municipal Laws: Errors and Drafts, JRS, Vol. 55, 
No. 1/2 (1965),  18398.
Frederiksen, M.W. and J.B. Ward-Perkins The Ancient Road Systems of the Central 
and Northern Ager Faliscus (Notes on Southern Etruria, 2), PBSR, Vol. 25 (1957),  
67203.
French, D. Pre- and Early-Roman Roads of Asia Minor. The Persian Royal Road, Iran, 
Vol. 36 (1998),  15 43.
Friedlnder, M.J. Early Netherlandish Painting: From Van Eyck to Bruegel. Revised 
edition. trans. M. Kay (London, 1965).
Frye, R.N. The Political History of Iran Under the Sasanians in E. Yarshater (ed.) The 
Cambridge History of Iran III: The Seleucid, Parthian and Sasanian Periods (Cambridge, 
2000),  11680.
Gallazzi, C., B. Kramer and S. Settis et al. (eds) Il papiro di Artemidoro (P. Artemid.) 
(Milan, 2008).
Gambi, L. and A. Pinelli, et al. La Galleria delle carte geografiche in Vaticano 3 vols. 
(Modena, 1994)
Gargola, D.J. Lands, Laws, & Gods: Magistrates & Ceremony in the Regulation of Public 
Lands in Republican Rome (Chapel Hill, 1995).
Garland, K. Mr Becks Underground Map (London, 1994).
Garstang, J. Hittite Military Roads in Asia Minor: A Study in Imperial Strategy with a 
Map American Journal of Archaeology, Vol. 47, No. 1 (1943),  3562.
Gatier, P.-L. Villages du Proche-Orient protobyzantin (4me7me s.). tude rgionale 
in G.R.D. King and A. Cameron (eds) The Byzantine and Early Islamic Near East II: 
Land Use and Settlement Patterns (Princeton, 1994),  1748.
Gautier Dalch, P. Du nouveau sur Aethicus Ister?  propos dune thorie rcente, 
Journal des savants (1984),  175 186.
 Notes sur la carte de Thodose II et sur la mappemonde de Thodulf 
dOrleans, Geographia Antiqua, Vol. 3 (1994),  91106.
 La trasmissione medievale e rinascimentale della Tabula Peutingeriana in Prontera 
(ed.), Tabula Peutingeriana,  4352.
bibliogr aphy 260
 Du nouveau sur la transmission et la dcouverte de la Tabula Peutingeriana: la 
Cosmographia vetustissima de Pellegrino Prisciani (1518), Geographia Antiqua, 
Vol. 13 (2004),  7181.
 La Gographie de Ptolme en Occident (IVeXVIe sicle). Terrarum Orbis 9 
(Turnhout, 2009).
Geiger, J. Julian of Ascalon, JHS, Vol. 112 (1992),  3143.
Gelb, I.J., P. Steinkeller and R.M. Whiting Earliest Land Tenure Systems in the Near 
East: Ancient Kudurrus. Oriental Institute Publications Vol. 104 (Chicago, 1991).
Gerkan, A. von Griechische Stdteanlagen: Untersuchungen sur Entwicklung des 
Stdtebaues im Altertum (Berlin, 1924).
Germer-Durand, E. La carte mosaque de Madaba: dcouverte importante, 1897 (Paris, 
1897).
Gibson, J.J. The Perception of the Visual World (Cambridge, MA., 1950).
Gibson, M. (ed.) Boethius: His Life, Thought and Influence (Oxford, 1981).
Goffart, W. Caput and Colonate: Towards a History of Late Roman Taxation (Toronto, 
1974).
 Christian Pessimism on the Walls of the Vatican Galleria delle carte geografiche, 
Renaissance Quarterly, Vol. 51, No. 3 (1998),  788 827.
Gold, V.R. The Mosaic Map of Madeba, The Biblical Archaeologist, Vol. 21, No. 3 (1958),  
4971.
Gombrich, E.H. Art and Illusion: A study in the psychology of pictorial representation. 
Second edition (London, 1962).
 The What and the How: Perspective Representation and the Phenomenal 
World in Rudner and Scheffler, Logic and Art: essays in honor of Nelson Goodman 
(Indianapolis, 1972)  12949.
 Norm and Form: Studies in the art of the Renaissance I. Fourth edition. (Oxford 1985).
Gorges, J.-G. Nouvelle lecture du fragment de Forma dun territoire voisin de Lacimurga, 
Mlanges de la Casa de Velzquez, Vol. 29, No. 1 (1993),  723.
Greatrex, G. The dates of Procopius works, BMGS, Vol. 18 (1994),  10114.
Gregory, C.R. The Mdaba Map, The Biblical World, Vol. 12, No. 4 (1898), 24450.
Gregory, D. et al. (eds) The Dictionary of Human Geography. Fifth edition (Oxford, 
2009).
Grenier, A. Manuel dArcheologie Gallo-Romaine. Troisime Partie. (Paris, 1958)
Grimal, P. Roman Cities trans. G.M. Woloch (Madison, 1983)
Guillaumin, J.-Y. La signification des termes contemplatio et observatio chez Balbus 
et linfluence hronienne sur la trait in J.-Y. Guillaumin (ed.) Mathematiques dans 
lantiquit (St.-Etienne, 1992),  20514.
Gwynn, D.M. (ed.) A.H.M. Jones and the Later Roman Empire (Leiden, 2008).
Habicht, C. An Ancient Baedeker and His Critics: Pausanias Guide to Greece, 
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 129, No. 2 (1985),  22024.
 Pausanias Guide to Ancient Greece (Berkeley, 1985).
Haiman, M. Agriculture and Nomad-State Relations in the Negev Desert in the 
Byzantine and Early Islamic Periods BASOR, No. 297 (1995),  2953.
bibliogr aphy 261
Hakim, B.S. Julian of Ascalons Treatise of Construction and Design Rules from Sixth-
Century Palestine, Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians, Vol. 60, No. 1 
(2001),  425.
 Mediterranean urban and building codes: origins, content, impact, and lessons 
Urban Design International, Vol. 13 (2008),  2140.
Hall, P. Cities in Civilization: culture, innovation and urban order (London, 1998).
Hamilton, R.W. Guide to the Historical Site of Sebastieh ( Jerusalem, 1936).
Hammond, M. The City in the Ancient World (Cambridge, Mass., 1972).
Hammond, N.G.L. The Western Part of the via Egnatia, JRS, Vol. 64 (1974),  18594.
Harley, J.B. and D. Woodward (eds) The History of Cartography. Volume 1 (Chicago, 
1987).
Harries, J. and I. Wood (eds) The Theodosian Code: Studies in the Imperial Law of Late 
Antiquity (London, 1993)
Harris, W.B. The Roman Roads of Morocco, The Geographical Journal, Vol. 10, No. 3 
(1897),  30003.
Harris, B.F. Apollonius of Tyana: Fact and Fiction, Journal of Religious History, Vol. 5 
(1969),  18999.
Hartshorne, R. The Nature of Geography: A critical survey of current thought in the light 
of the past (Lancaster, PA., 1939).
Haselberger, L. Urbem Adornare: Romes Urban Metamorphosis Under Augustus. JRA 
Supplementary Series 64 (Portsmouth, RI., 2007).
Haverfield, F. Ancient Town-planning (Oxford, 1913).
 Centuriation in Roman Britain, The English Historical Review, Vol. 33, No. 131 
(1918),  28996.
Heath, T. A History of Greek Mathematics Vol. II (Oxford, 1921).
Heather, P. The Huns and the End of the Roman Empire in Western Europe, EHR, 
Vol. 110, No. 435 (1995),  441.
Heidegger, M. Poetry, Language, Thought (New York, 1971).
Helgerson, R. The Land Speaks: Cartography, Chorography, and Subversion in 
Renaissance England, Representations, No. 16 (Autumn, 1986),  5085.
Hendy, M. Mint and Fiscal Administration under Diocletian, His Colleagues, and His 
Successors A.D. 30524, JRS, Vol. 62 (1972),  75-82.
Henig, M. (ed.) Architecture and Architectural Sculpture in the Roman Empire (Oxford, 
1990).
Heurgon, J. La date des gobelets de Vicarello, Revue des tudes Ancienne, Vol. 54 (1952),  
3950.
 La fixation des noms de lieux en latin daprs les itinraires routiers, Revue de 
philologie, de littrature et dhistoire anciennes, Series 3, Vol. 26 (1952)  16978.
 The Date of Vegoias Prophecy, JRS, Vol. 49 (1959),  4145.
Hiatt, A. The Cartographic Imagination of Thomas Elmham, Speculum, Vol. 75, No. 4 
(2000),  85986.
Hinrichs, F.T. Der rmische Straenbau zur Zeit der Gracchen, Historia, Vol. 16, No. 
2 (1967),  16276.
bibliogr aphy 262
Hirschfeld, Y. Farms and Villages in Byzantine Palestine, DOP, Vol. 51 (1997),  3371.
Hohlfelder, R.L. et al. Sebastos: Herods Harbor at Caesarea Maritima, The Biblical 
Archaeologist, Vol. 46, No. 3 (1983),  13343.
Hohlfelder, R.L. Beyond Coincidence? Marcus Agrippa and King Herods Harbor, 
Journal of Near Eastern Studies, Vol. 59, No. 4 (2000),  24153.
Hollis, A.S. Fragments of Roman Poetry c.60 BCAD 20 (Oxford, 2007).
Holum, K.G. et al. (eds) King Herods Dream: Caesarea on the Sea (New York, 1988).
Hopkins, K. Taxes and Trade in the Roman Empire (200 B.C.-A.D. 400), JRS, Vol. 70 
(1980),  10125.
Hoskins, W.G. The Making of the English Landscape (London, 1955).
Howard-Johnston, J.D. The Education and Expertise of Procopius, Antiquit Tardive, 
Vol. 8 (2001),  1930.
Howe, T.N. Vitruvian Critical Eclecticism and Roman Innovation, Memoirs of the 
American Academy in Rome, Vol. 50 (2005),  4165.
Hunt, E.D. Holy Land Pilgrimage in the Later Roman Empire AD 312460 (Oxford, 
1982).
Hunter, L.W. Ciceros Journey to His Province of Cilicia in 51 BC, JRS, Vol. 3, Part 1 
(1913),  7397.
Hunter, R. The Periegesis of Dionysius and the Traditions of Hellenistic Poetry, Revue 
des Etudes Anciennes, Vol. 106, No. 1 (2004),  21731.
Hutton, W. Describing Greece: Landscape and literature in the Periegesis of Pausanias 
(Cambridge, 2005).
Isaac, B.H. The Limits of Empire: the Roman army in the East (Oxford, 1990).
Jackson, J.B. Discovering the Vernacular Landscape (New Haven and London, 1984).
 Landscape in Sight: Looking at America ed. H.L. Horowitz (New Haven and 
London, 1997).
Jacob, C. The Greek Travelers Areas of Knowledge: Myths and Other Discourses in 
Pausanias Description of Greece, Yale French Studies, No. 59 (1980),  65 85.
 La Description de la terre habite de Denys dAlexandrie, ou, la leon de gographie 
(Paris, 1990).
 Toward a Cultural History of Cartography, Imago Mundi, Vol. 48 (1996),  19198.
 The Sovereign Map: Theoretical Approaches in Cartography Throughout History 
(Chicago, 2006).
Jaillette, P. Les dispositions du Code Thodosien sur les terres abandonnes in J.-
L. Fiches (ed.) Le IIIe Sicle en Gaule Narbonnaise: Donnes rgionales sur la crise de 
lEmpire (Sophia Antipolis, 1996),  333404.
Janko, R. The Artemidorus Papyrus, The Classical Review, Vol. 59, No. 2 (2009),  40310.
Janni, P. La mappa e il periplo: cartografia antica e spazio odologico (Rome, 1984).
Jellicoe, G. and S. Jellicoe The Landscape of Man (London, 1975).
Johnson, R.J. et al. (eds) The Dictionary of Human Geography. First through fourth 
editions (Oxford, 1981, 1986, 1994 and 2000).
Johnston, W.R. Emphyteusis: A Roman Perpetual Tenure, The University of Toronto 
Law Journal, Vol. 3, No. 2 (1940),  32347.
bibliogr aphy 263
Jones, A.H.M. The Aerarium and the Fiscus, JRS, Vol. 40 (1950),  2229.
 Capitatio and Iugatio, JRS, Vol. 47, No. 1/2 (1957),  8894.
 The Roman Colonate, Past & Present, No. 13 (1958),  113.
 Over-Taxation and the Decline of the Roman Empire, Antiquity, Vol. 33 (1959),  
3943.
 The Later Roman Empire 284602: a social, economic and administrative survey in 3 
vols. (Oxford, 1964).
 The Cities of the Eastern Roman Provinces. Second edition (Oxford, 1971).
Jones, C.P. The Claudian Monument at Patara, Zeitschrift fr Papyrologie und Epigraphik, 
Vol. 137 (2001),  16168.
 Apollonius of Tyanas Passage to India, GRBS, Vol. 42 (2001), 18599.
Kallet-Marx, R.  Hegemony to Empire: The Development of the Roman Imperium in the 
East from 148 to 62 BC (Berkeley, 1995).
Kaster, R.A. Guardians of Language: the grammarian and society in late antiquity 
(Berkeley, 1988).
Kazhdan, A. and A. Cutler Continuity and Discontinuity in Byzantine History, 
Byzantion, Vol. 52 (1982),  42978.
Kedar, Y. Ancient Agriculture at Shivtah in the Negev, IEJ, Vol. 7 (1957),  17889.
Kehoe, D.P. Law and the Rural Economy in the Roman Empire (Ann Arbor, 2007).
Kennedy, H. From Polis to Madina: Urban Change in Late Antique and Early Islamic 
Syria, Past & Present, No. 106 (1985),  327.
 The last century of Byzantine Syria: a reinterpretation, Byzantine Forschungen, Vol. 
10 (1985),  14183.
Kennedy, H. and J.H.W.G. Liebeschuetz Antioch and the Villages of Northern Syria 
in the Fifth and Sixth Centuries AD: Trends and Problems, Nottingham Medieval 
Studies, Vol. 32 (1988),  6590.
Kent, R.G. The Etymological Meaning of Pomerium, Transactions and Proceedings of the 
American Philological Association, Vol. 44 (1913),  1924.
King, G.R.D. and A. Cameron (eds) The Byzantine and Early Islamic Near East II: 
Land Use and Settlement Patterns (Princeton, 1994).
Klotz, A. Die geographischen commentarii des Agrippa und ihre berreste in Klio 24 
(1931),  386466.
Knight, R.P. The landscape, a didactic poem. In Three Books. Addressed to Uvedale Price, 
Esq. (London, 1794).
Koch, R.A. Joachim Patinir (Princeton, N.J., 1968).
Kostof, S. The City Shaped: Urban Patterns and Meanings Through History (London, 
1991).
Kotkin, J. The City (London, 2005).
Kramer, B. The Earliest Known Map of Spain (?) and the Geography of Artemidorus of 
Ephesus on Papyrus, Imago Mundi, Vol. 53 (2001),  11520.
Krautheimer, R. Early Christian and Byzantine Architecture (Harmondsworth, 1965).
 The Constantinian Basilica, DOP, Vol. 21 (1967), 11540.
bibliogr aphy 264
Krinsky, C.H. Seventy-Eight Vitruvius Manuscripts in Journal of the Warburg and 
Courtauld Institutes, Vol. 30 (1967),  3670.
Labrousse, M. Le pomerium de la Rome impriale, Mlanges darchologie et dhistoire, 
Vol. 54 (1937),  16599.
Laing, G.J. Roman Milestones and the Capita Viarum, Transactions and Proceedings of 
the American Philological Association, Vol. 39 (1908),  1534.
Laiou, A.E. (ed.) The Economic History of Byzantium: From the seventh through the 
fifteenth century (Washington, D.C., 2002).
Lampl, P. Cities and Planning the Ancient Near East (London, 1968).
Lancaster, L.C. Building Trajans Markets, American Journal of Archaeology, Vol. 102, 
No. 2 (1998),  283308.
  Building Trajans Markets 2: The Construction Process, American Journal of 
Archaeology, Vol. 104, No. 4 (2000),  75585.
 Concrete Vaulted Construction in Imperial Rome: Innovations in Context (Cambridge, 
2005).
Lassus, J. Antioch on-the-Orontes V: Les Portiques dAntioche (Princeton, 1972).
Last, H. The Fiscvs: A Note, JRS, Vol. 34 (1944),  5159.
Laurence, R. The Roads of Roman Italy: Mobility and Cultural Change (London, 
1999).
 Milestones, Communications, and Political Stability in L. Ellis and F.L. Kidner (eds) 
Travel, Communication and Geography in Late Antiquity (Aldershot, 2004),  4158.
Lavan, L. and W. Bowden (eds) Recent research in late-antique urbanism. JRA 
Supplement 42 (Portsmouth, R.I., 2001).
Lavedan, P. and J. Hugueney Histoire de lUrbanisme: Antiquit. Second edition. 
(Paris, 1966).
Lee, A.D. Information and Frontiers (Cambridge, 1993).
Lemerle, P. The agrarian history of Byzantium from the origins to the twelfth century: the 
sources and problems (Galway, 1979).
Lenski, N.E. The Cambridge Companion to the Age of Constantine (Cambridge, 2006).
Levi, A. and M. Levi Itineraria Picta: Contributo allo studio della Tabula Peutingeriana 
(Rome, 1967).
Lewin, K. Field Theory and Experiment in Social Psychology: Concepts and Methods, 
American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 44, No. 6 (1939),  86896.
Lewis, H.A.G. Review of The New Cartography by A. Peters, The Geographical Journal, 
Vol. 154, No. 2 (1988),  29899.
Lewis, M.J.T. Surveying Instruments of Greece and Rome (Cambridge, 2001).
Liebeschuetz, J.H.W.G. The end of the ancient city in Rich (ed.) The City in Late 
Antiquity,  149.
 Decline and Fall of the Roman City (Oxford, 2001).
Lieu, S.N.C. (ed.) The Emperor Julian: panegyric and polemic. Second edition. (Liverpool, 
1989).
de Ligt, L. Poverty and Demography: The Case of the Gracchan Land Reforms, 
Mnemosyne, Fourth Series, Vol. 57, No. 6 (2004),  72557.
bibliogr aphy 265
Lilley, K. (ed.) Mapping Medieval Geographies (forthcoming, 2012).
Lintott, A.W. Judicial Reform and Land Reform in the Roman Republic (Oxford, 1992)
Lozovsky, N. The Earth is Our Book (Ann Arbor, 2000).
 Roman Geography and Ethnography in the Carolingian Empire, Speculum, Vol. 81 
(2006),  32564.
 Maps and Panegyrics: Roman Geo-Ethnographical Rhetoric in Late Antiquity and the 
Middle Ages in Talbert and Unger (eds) Cartography in Antiquity and the Middle Ages.
Lugand, R. Note sur litinraire maritime de Rome  Arles, Mlanges darchologie et 
dhistoire, Vol. 43 (1926).  12439.
Lynch, K. The Image of the City (Cambridge, MA., 1960).
MacDonald, W.L. The Architecture of the Roman Empire. Vol. 1 (New Haven and 
London, 1982).
 The Architecture of the Roman Empire. Vol. 2: An Urban Appraisal (New Haven and 
London, 1986).
Mackay, P.A. Procopius De Aedificiis and the Topography of Thermopylae, American 
Journal of Archaeology, Vol. 67, No. 3 (1963),  24155.
MacMullen, R. Roman Imperial Building in the Provinces, Harvard Studies in Classical 
Philology, Vol. 64 (1959),  20735.
 The Epigraphic Habit in the Roman Empire, The American Journal of Philology, 
Vol. 103, No. 3 (1982),  23346.
 Romanisation in the Time of Augustus (New Haven and London, 2000).
Macready, S. and F.H. Thompson (eds) Roman Architecture in the Greek World 
(London, 1987).
Mango, C. Byzantium: The Empire of New Rome (London, 1980).
 Le dveloppement urbain de Constantinople (IVeVIIe sicles) (Paris, 1990).
Mann, J.C. Epigraphic Consciousness JRS, Vol. 75 (1985),  20406.
Mansuelli, G.A. Marzabotto. Dix annes de fouilles et de recherches, Mlanges de 
lEcole franaise de Rome: Antiquit, Vol. 84, No. 1 (1972),  11144.
Markus, R.A. How on Earth Could Places Become Holy? Origins of the Christian Idea 
of Holy Places, Journal of Early Christian Studies, Vol. 2 (1994),  25771.
Marrou, H.I. A History of Education in Antiquity (London, 1956).
Mathews, T.F. The Early Churches of Constantinople: Architecture and Liturgy (University 
Park, PA, 1971).
Maunde Thompson, E. An Introduction to Greek and Latin Palaeography (Oxford, 
1912).
Mayerson, P. Ancient Agricultural Remains in the Central Negeb: The Teleilt el-
Anab, BASOR, No. 153 (1959),  1932.
 The Desert of Southern Palestine According to Byzantine Sources, Proceedings of 
the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 107, No. 2 (1963),  16072.
 The City of Elusa in the Literary Sources of the FourthSixth Centuries, IEJ, Vol. 
33 (1983),  24753.
McCracken, G. Tibullus, Messalla and the via Latina, The American Journal of Philology, 
Vol. 53, No. 4 (1932),  34452.
bibliogr aphy 266
McCredie, J.R. Hippodamus of Miletus in Mitten, Pedley and Scott, Studies presented 
to George M.A. Hanfmann (Mainz, 1971)  95100.
Meinig, D.W. (ed.) The Interpretation of Ordinary Landscapes (Oxford, 1979).
Merleau-Ponty, M. Phenomenology of Perception trans. C. Smith (London, 1962).
Mendyk, S. Early British Chorography, The Sixteenth Century Journal, Vol. 17, No. 4 
(Winter, 1986),  45981.
Merrill, E.T. The Bodleian MS of the Notitia, Classical Philology, Vol. 3, No. 2 (1908),  
19095.
Meyer, E.A. Explaining the Epigraphic Habit in the Roman Empire: The Evidence of 
Epitaphs, JRS, Vol. 80 (1990),  7496.
Millar, F. The Fiscus in the First Two Centuries, JRS, Vol. 53 (1963),  2942.
 Emperors, Frontiers and Foreign Relations, 31 BC to AD 378, Britannia, Vol. 13 
(1982),  123.
 Empire and City, Augustus to Julian: Obligations, Excuses and Status, JRS, Vol. 73 
(1983),  7696.
Miller, K. Mappaemundi: Die ltesten Weltkarten. in 6 vols. (Stuttgart, 18951898).
 Die Peutingersche Tafel oder Weltkarte des Castorius (Stuttgart, 1916).
 Itineraria Romana: Rmische Reisewege an der Hand der Tabula Peutingeriana 
dargestellt (Stuttgart, 1916).
Mitchell, S. Requisitioned Transport in the Roman Empire: A New Inscription from 
Pisidia, JRS, Vol. 66 (1976),  10631.
 Imperial Building in the Eastern Roman Provinces, Harvard Studies in Classical 
Philology, Vol. 91 (1987),  33365.
Moffitt, J.F. Medieval Mappaemundi and Ptolemys Chorographia, Gesta, Vol. 32, No. 
1 (1993),  5968.
 The Palestrina Mosaic with a Nile Scene: Philostratus and Ekphrasis; Ptolemy 
and Chorographia, Zeitschrift fr Kunstgeschichte, Vol. 60, No. 2 (1997),  22747.
Mommsen, T. Der Begriff des Pomerium, Hermes, Vol. 10, No. 1 (1876),  40 50.
Mountford, J.F. Silvia, Aetheria, or Egeria?, The Classical Quarterly, Vol. 17, No. 1 
(1923),  4041.
Mouterde, R. Une ddicace dApame de Syrie  lapproche de Caracalla et lltinerarium 
Antonini, Comptes-rendus des sances de lAcadmie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres, Vol. 
96, No. 3 (1952),  35563.
Moynihan, R. Geographical Mythology and Roman Imperial Ideology in R. Winkes 
(ed.) Age of Augustus (Louvain-la-neuve, 1985),  14962.
Mllenhoff, K. ber die Rmische Weltkarte, Hermes, Vol. 9, No. 2 (1875),  18295.
Mumford, L. The City in History: Its Origins, Its Transformations, and Its Prospects (New 
York, 1961).
Murgia, C.E. The Dating of Servius Revisited, Classical Philology, Vol. 98, No. 1 
( January 2003),  4569.
Nagle, D.B. The Etruscan Journey of Tiberius Gracchus, Historia, Vol. 25, No. 4 (1976),  
487 89.
Nagy, R.M. et al. (eds) Sepphoris in Galilee: Crosscurrents of Culture (Raleigh, 1996).
bibliogr aphy 267
Negev, A. Survey and Trial Excavations at Haluza (Elusa), 1973, IEJ, Vol. 26, (1976),  
8995.
Nicolet, C. De Vrone au Champ de Mars: Chorographia et Carte dAgrippa, Mlanges 
de lcole franaise de Rome, Vol. 100, No. 1 (1988), 12738.
 Space, Geography and Politcs in the Early Roman Empire (Ann Arbor, 1991).
Nicolet, C. and P. Gautier Dalch Les quatre sages de Jules Csar et la mesure 
du monde selon Julius Honorius: ralit antique et tradition mdivale, Journal des 
savants, (1986),  157-218.
Nohl, H. Palladius und Fauentinus in ihrem Verhltniss zu einander und zu Vitruuius in 
Commentationes Philologae in Honorem Theodori Mommseni (Berlin, 1877),  6474.
Norberg-Schulz, C. Genius Loci: Towards a Phenomenology of Architecture (New York, 
1980).
Oldham, R. D. The Antonine Itinerary of the Aurelian Road between Aix and Arles, 
The Geographical Journal, Vol. 72, No. 1 (1928),  5860.
Oliver, J.H. The Augustan Pomerium, Memoirs of the American Academy in Rome, Vol. 
10 (1932),  14582.
 North, South, East, West at Arausio and elsewhere in R. Chevallier (ed.) Mlanges 
darchologie et dhistoire offerts  A. Piganiol Vol. 2 (Paris, 1966),  107579.
Olmstead, A.T. History of the Persian Empire (Chicago, 1948).
Olwig, K.R. Recovering the Substantive Nature of Landscape, Annals of the Association 
of American Geographers, Vol. 86, No. 4 (December, 1996),  63053.
 Has geography always been modern?: choros, (non)representation, performance, 
and the landscape, Environment and Planning, Vol. 40 (2008)  184361.
Ostrogorsky, G. Byzantine Cities in the Early Middle Ages, DOP, Vol. 13 (1959),  
4566.
 History of the Byzantine State. Second edition (Oxford, 1968).
van Paassen, C. The Classical Tradition of Geography (Groningen, 1957).
Pais, E. Ancient Italy (Chicago, 1908).
Palet, J.M. and H.A. Orengo The Roman Centuriated Landscape: Conception, 
Genesis, and Development as Inferred from the Ager Tarraconensis Case, American 
Journal of Archaeology, Vol. 115, No. 3 (2011),  383402.
Pallu de Lessert, C. Syntaxe des routiers Romains et les dformations des noms de 
lieux dans lAfrique Romain, Mmoires de la Socit Nationale des Antiquaires de France, 
Series 7, Vol. 5 (19045),  11538.
Pattenden, P. Sundials in Cetius Faventinus, Classical Quarterly, New Series, Vol. 29, 
No. 1 (1979),  20312.
Patterson, J.R. The City of Rome: From Republic to Empire, JRS, Vol. 82 (1992),  
186215.
Peters, A. Die Neue Kartographie trans. W. Kaiser et al. (New York, 1983).
 Peters Atlas of the World (Harlow, 1989).
Pevsner, N. Terms of Architectural Planning in the Middle Ages, Journal of the Warburg 
and Courtauld Institutes, Vol. 5 (1942),  23237.
 Richard Payne Knight, The Art Bulletin, Vol. 31, No. 4 (December, 1949),  293
bibliogr aphy 268
Piccirillo, M. and E. Alliata (eds) The Madaba Map Centenary 18971997: Travelling 
through the Byzantine Umayyad Period ( Jerusalem, 1998).
Piganiol, A. Les Documents Cadastraux de la Colonie Romain dOrange. Gallia 
Supplement 16 (Paris, 1962).
Piganiol A. and J. Sautel Inscriptions cadastrales dOrange, Gallia, Vol. 13, No. 1 
(1955),  539.
Platner, S.B. The Pomerium and Roma Quadrata, The American Journal of Philology, 
Vol. 22, No. 4 (1901),  42025.
Platner, S.B. and T. Ashby A topographical dictionary of ancient Rome (Oxford, 1929).
Plommer, H. Vitruvius and Later Roman Building Manuals (Cambridge, 1973).
Poulter, A.G. (ed.) The Transition to Late Antiquity on the Danube and Beyond. 
Proceedings of the British Academy 141 (Oxford, 2007).
Poynton, J.B. Roman Education, Greece & Rome, Vol. 4, No. 10 (1934),  1 12.
Pretzler, M. Turning Travel into Text: Pausanias at Work, Greece & Rome, Vol. 51, No. 
2 (2004),  199216.
Prontera, F. (ed.) Tabula Peutingeriana. Le Antiche Vie Del Mondo (Florence, 2003).
Pye, N. Review of Peters Atlas of the World by A. Peters, The Geographical Journal, Vol. 
155, No. 2 (1989),  29597.
 Review of Map of the World: Peters Projection, The Geographical Journal, Vol. 157, 
No. 1 (1991),  9596.
Ralegh Radford, C.A. Justiniana Prima (Tsaritsin Grad): a 6th cent. City in Southern 
Serbia, Antiquity, Vol. 28, No. 109 (1954),  1518.
Ramsay, A.M. Roman Postal Service under the Republic, JRS, Vol. 10 (1920),  7986.
 The Speed of the Roman Imperial Post, JRS, Vol. 15 (1925),  6074.
Ramsay, W.M. The Historical Geography of Asia Minor (London, 1890).
 Phrygian Orthdox and Heretics, 400800 AD, Byzantion, Vol. 6 (1931),  135.
Ratti, S. and M. Clavel-Lvque Le substrat augusten dans la Constitutio limitum 
dHygin le Gromatique et la datation du trait, Dialogues dhistoire ancienne, Vol. 22 
No. 2 (1996), 22038.
Raynor, D.H. Moeragenes and Philostratus: Two Views of Apollonius of Tyana, The 
Classical Quarterly, Vol. 34, No. 1 (1984),  22226.
Reed, N. Pattern and Purpose in the Antonine Itinerary, The American Journal of 
Philology, Vol. 99, No. 2 (1978),  22854.
Reifenberg, A. Caesarea: A Study in the Decline of a Town, IEJ, Vol. 1 (1951),  2032.
Reinhold, M. Marcus Agrippa: A Biography (Geneva, N.Y., 1933).
Rmondon, R. La Crise de LEmpire Romain de Marc-Aurle a Anastase (Paris, 1964).
Reynolds, L.D. Texts and Transmission: A Survey of Latin Classics (Oxford, 1983).
Reynolds, L.D. and N.G. Wilson Scribes and Scholars: A guide to the transmission of 
Greek and Latin literature. Third edition (Oxford, 1991).
Rich, J. (ed.) The City in Late Antiquity (London, 1992).
Richardson, J.S. The Ownership of Roman Land: Tiberius Gracchus and the Italians, 
JRS, Vol. 70 (1980),  111.
bibliogr aphy 269
Richardson, L. A New Topographical Dictionary of Ancient Rome (Baltimore, 1992).
Richmond, I. A. and C. E. Stevens The Land-Register of Arausio, JRS, Vol. 32 (1942),  
6577.
Rivet, A.L.F. Viae aviariae?, Antiquity, Vol. 56 (1982),  2067.
 Gallia Narbonensis: Southern France in Roman Times (London, 1988).
Rivet A.L.F. and K. Jackson The British Section of the Antonine Itinerary, Britannia, 
Vol. 1 (1970),  3482.
Rivet, A.L.F. and C. Smith The Place-names of Roman Britain (London, 1979).
Roddaz, J.-M. Marcus Agrippa (Rome, 1984).
Rodgers, R.H. An Introduction to Palladius (London, 1975).
Rodrguez Almeida, E. Forma urbis marmorea: aggiornamento generale 1980 in 2 vols. 
(Rome, 1981).
Rodriguez, C. The Porticus Vipsania and Contemporary Poetry, Latomus, Vol. 51 
(1992),  7993.
Rodwell, W. Milestones, Civic Territories and the Antonine Itinerary, Britannia, Vol. 
6 (1975),  76101.
Romano, D.G. Roman Surveyors in Corinth, Proceedings of the American Philosophical 
Society, Vol. 150, No. 1 (2006),  6285.
Romer, F.E. Pomponius Melas Description of the World (Ann Arbor, 1998).
W.W. Rouse-Ball A Short Account of the History of Mathematics Third Ed. (London, 
1901).
Rubin, R. Settlement and Agriculture on an Ancient Desert Frontier, Geographical 
Review, Vol. 81, No. 2 (1991),  197205.
Russell, J. Transformation in Early Byzantine Urban Life: The Contribution and 
Limitations of Archaeological Evidence in The 17th International Byzantine Congress: 
Major Papers (New Rochelle, N.Y., 1986),  13754.
Sez Fernndez, P. Estudio sobre una inscripcion catastral colindante con Lacimurga, 
Habis, Vol. 21 (1990),  20527.
Saller, R.P. and B.D. Shaw Tombstones and Roman Family Relations in the Principate: 
Civilians, Soldiers and Slaves, JRS, Vol. 74 (1984),  12456.
Sallmann, K.G. Die Geographie des lteren Plinius in ihrem Verhltnis zu Varro (Berlin, 
1971).
Salviat, F. Orientation, extension et chronologie des plans cadastraux dOrange in 
Revue Archologique de Narbonnaise Vol. 10 (1977),  107 18.
Salway, B. The Nature and Genesis of the Peutinger Map, Imago Mundi, Vol. 57 No. 2 
(2005),  11935.
Sarris, P. Economy and Society in the Age of Justinian (Cambridge, 2006).
Sauer, C.O. Land and Life: A selection from the writings of Carl Ortwin Sauer ed. J. 
Leighly (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1963).
Sauvaget, J. Le plan de Laodice-sur-Mer, Bulletin dtudes Orientales, Vol. 4 (1934),  
81114.
Schama, S. Landscape and Memory (London, 1995).
Scheltema, H.J. The nomoi of Iulianus of Ascalon in M. David et al. (eds) Symbolae 
bibliogr aphy 270
ad jus et historiam antiquitatis pertinentes Julio Christiano Van Oven dedicatae (Leiden, 
1946),  34960.
Schibille, N. The Profession of the Architect in Late Antique Byzantium, Byzantion, 
Vol. 79 (2009), 36079.
Schnabel, P. Die Weltkarte des Agrippa als wissenschaftliches Mittelglied zwischen 
Hipparch und Ptolemaeus, Philologus, Vol. XC (1935),  40540.
Schulten, A. Rmische Flurkarten, Hermes, Vol. 33, No. 4 (1898),  53465.
Schweder, E. Ueber die Weltkarte und Chorographie des Kaisers Augustus I, Philologus, 
Vol. LIV (1895),  31944.
 Ueber die Weltkarte und Chorographie des Kaisers Augustus II , Philologus, Vol. 
LIV (1895),  52859 and Philologus, Vol. LVI (1897),  13062.
Scott, R. Justinians Coinage and Easter Reforms and the date of the Secret History, 
BMGS, Vol. 11 (1987),  21521.
Scullard, H.H. The Etruscan Cities and Rome (London, 1967).
Sear, F. Roman Architecture (London, 1982).
Seeck, O. Zur Kritik der Notitia Dignitatum, Hermes, Vol. 9, No. 2 (1875),  21742.
Segal, A. The Byzantine city of Shivta (Esbeita) (Oxford, 1983).
 Shivta  A Byzantine Town in the Negev Desert, Journal for the Society of 
Architectural Historians, Vol. XLIV, No. 4 (December, 1985)  31728.
Shereshevski, J. Byzantine Urban Settlements in the Negev Desert. Beer-Sheva V (Beer-
Sheva, 1991).
Sherk, R.K. Roman Geographical Exploration and Military Maps in ANRW II.1 
(Berlin, 1974),  53462.
Shipley, F.W. Chronology of the Building Operations in Rome from the Death of 
Caesar to the Death of Augustus, Memoirs of the American Academy in Rome, Vol. 9 
(1931),  760.
 Agrippas Building Activities in Rome (St. Louis, 1933).
van Sickle, C.E. The Repair of Roads in Spain under the Roman Empire, Classical 
Philology, Vol. 24, No. 1 (1929),  7788.
 The Public Works of Africa in the Reign of Diocletian, Classical Philology, Vol. 25, 
No. 2 (1930),  17379.
Sidebottom, H. Pausanias: Past, Present, and Closure, The Classical Quarterly, New 
Series. Vol. 52, No. 2 (2002),  49499.
Silberman, A. Le premier ouvrage latin de gographie: la Chorographie de Pomponius 
Mla et ses sources grecques, Klio, Vol. 71 No. 2 (1989),  57181.
Sivan, H. Who Was Egeria? Piety and Pilgrimage in the Age of Gratian, The Harvard 
Theological Review, Vol. 81, No. 1 (1988),  5972.
Sjoberg, G. The Preindustrial City (New York, 1960).
Smith, J.T. Roman Villas: A Study in Social Structure (London, 1997).
Smith, R.R.R. and C. Ratt Archaeological Research at Aphrodisias in Caria, 1995, 
American Journal of Archaeology, Vol. 101, No. 1 (1997),  122.
Sodini, J.-P. La contribution de larchologie  la connaissance du monde byzantin (IVe-
VIIe sicles), DOP, Vol. 47 (1993),  139184.
bibliogr aphy 271
 Habitat de lAntiquit Tardive, Topoi Orient-Occident, Vol. 5, No. 1 (1995),  151218.
Sodini, J.-P., G. Tate, et al. Dhs (Syrie du nord) Campagnes I-III (1976-1978): 
recherches sur lhabitat rural, Syria, Vol. 57, No. 1 (1980),  1304.
Spieser, J.-M. La christianisation de la ville dans lAntiquit tardive, Ktema, Vol. 11 
(1986), 4955.
Spirn, A.W. The Language of Landscape (New Haven and London, 1998).
Stadter, P.A. The Ars Tactica of Arrian: Tradition and Originality, Classical Philology, 
Vol. 73, No. 2 (1978),  11728.
Stein, E. Histoire du bas-empire in 2 vols (Paris, 1949).
Stewart, A. and C.W. Wilson Itinerary from Bordeaux to Jerusalem (London, 1887).
Stockton, D. The Gracchi (Oxford, 1979).
Stroud, D. Capability Brown. New edition (London, 1975).
Sundwall, G.A. Ammianus Geographicus, The American Journal of Philology, Vol. 117, 
No. 4 (1996),  61943.
Sutherland, C.H.V. Aerarium and Fiscus during the Early Empire, AJP, Vol. 66, No. 2 
(1945),  15170.
Swain, S. and M. Edwards (eds) Approaching Late Antiquity: The Transformation from 
Early to Late Empire (Oxford, 2004).
Syme, R. Military Geography at Rome, Classical Antiquity, Vol. 7, No. 2 (1988),  22751.
 Anatolica: Studies in Strabo (Oxford, 1995).
Talbert, R.J.A. Author, Audience and the Roman Empire in the Antonine Itinerary in 
R. Haensch and J. Heinrichs (eds) Herrschen und Verwalten: Der Alltag der rmischen 
Administration in der Hohen Kaiserzeit (Kln, 2007),  25670.
 Konrad Miller, Roman Cartography, and the Lost Western End of the Peutinger 
Map in U. Fellmeth, P Guyot and H. Sonnabend (eds) Historische Geographie der 
Alten Welt: Grundlagen, Ertrge, Perspektiven (Hildesheim, 2007),  35366.
 Peutingers Roman Map: the Physical Landscape Framework in M. Rathmann 
(ed.) Wahrnehmung und Erfassung geographischer Raume in der Antike (Mainz am 
Rhein, 2007),  22130.
 Romes World: The Peutinger Map Reconsidered (Cambridge, 2010).
Talbert, R.J.A. and K. Brodersen (eds) Space in the Roman World: Its Perception and 
Presentation (Mnster, 2004).
Talbert, R.J.A. and R.W. Unger (eds) Cartography in Antiquity and the Middle Ages: 
Fresh Perspectives New Methods (Leiden, 2008).
Tate, G. Les Campagnes de la Syrie du Nord du IIe au VIIe Sicle (Paris, 1992).
Taylor, J.E. Christians and the Holy Places: The Myth of Jewish-Christian Origins (Oxford, 
1993).
Tchalenko, G. Villages antiques de la Syrie du Nord in 3 vols (Paris, 19531958).
Teall, J.L. The Age of Constantine Change and Continuity in Administration and 
Economy, DOP, Vol. 21 (1967),  1136.
Tejada, J.V. Warfare, History and Literature in the Archaic and Classical Periods: The 
Development of Greek Military Treatises, Historia, Vol. 53, No. 2 (2004),  12946.
Thvenot, E. Les Voies Romaines de la Cit des duens (Brussels, 1969).
bibliogr aphy 272
Thompson, E.A. A Roman Reformer and Inventor: being a new text of the treatise De 
Rebus Bellicis (Oxford, 1952).
Thomson, J.O. History of Ancient Geography (Cambridge, 1948).
Thonemann, P. Estates and the Land in Late Roman Asia Minor, Chiron, Vol. 37 
(2007),  43578.
Thulin, C. Die Handschriften des Corpus Agrimensorum (Berlin, 1911).
Tierney, J.J. Ptolemys Map of Scotland, JHS, Vol. 79 (1959),  13248.
 The Map of Agrippa, PRIA, Vol. 63 (1963),  15166.
van Tilburg, C. Traffic and Congestion in the Roman Empire (London, 2007).
Tomlinson, R. From Mycenae to Constantinople: The evolution of the ancient city 
(London, 1992).
Toneatto, L. Tradition manuscrite et ditions modernes du Corpus agrimensorum 
Romanorum in Clavel-Lvque, Cadastres (Paris, 1983),  2150.
Trousset, P. La carte dAgrippa: nouvelle proposition de lecture, Dialogues dhistoire 
ancienne, Vol. 19, No. 2 (1993),  13757.
Tsafrir, Y. (ed.) Ancient Churches Revealed ( Jerusalem, 1993).
Tsafrir, Y. and K.G. Holum Rehovot-in-the-Negev: Preliminary Report, 1986, IEJ, 
Vol. 38 (1988),  11727.
Tsafrir, Y. and G. Foerster Urbanism at Scythopolis-Bet Shean in the Fourth to 
Seventh Centuries, Dumbarton Oaks Papers, Vol. 51, (1997)  85146.
. Vasi Le plan durbanism de la ville haute: essai de reconstruction, in B. Bavant, V. 
Kondi and J.-M. Spieser (eds) Cariin Grad II: Le quartier sud-ouest de la ville haute 
(Belgrade, 1990), 30715.
Vanhaverbeke, H. The Chora of Sagalassos: the evolution of the settlement pattern from 
prehistoric until recent times (Turnhout, 2003).
Vann, R.L. Caesarea Papers: Stratons Tower, Herods Harbour, and Roman and Byzantine 
Caesarea. Journal of Roman Archaeology Supplementary Series No. 5 (Ann Arbor, 1992).
Verbrugghe, G.P. The Elogium from Polla and the First Slave War, Classical Philology, 
Vol. 68, No. 1 (1973),  2535.
Walker, P.W.L. Holy City, Holy Places? Christian Attitudes to Jerusalem and the Holy 
Land in the Fourth Century (Oxford, 1990).
Ward-Perkins, B. From Classical Antiquity to the Middle Ages: Urban Public Building in 
Northern and Central Italy AD 300850 (Oxford, 1984).
Ward-Perkins, J.B. The Career of Sex. Julius Frontinus, The Classical Quarterly, Vol. 31, 
No. 2 (April, 1937),  10205.
 Early Roman Towns in Italy, TPR, Vol. 26, No. 3 (October, 1955),  12654.
 Etruscan and Roman Roads in Southern Etruria, JRS, Vol. 47 (1957),  13943.
 From Republic to Empire: Reflections on the Early Provincial Architecture of the 
Roman West, JRS, Vol. 60 (1970),  119.
 Cities of Ancient Greece and Italy: Planning in Classical Antiquity (London, 1974).
 Roman Imperial Architecture (New Haven and London, 1981).
Warden, P.G. The Domus Aurea Reconsidered, Journal of the Society of Architectural 
Historians, Vol. 40, No. 4 (1981),  27178.
bibliogr aphy 273
Watkins, T.H. Colonia Marciana Traiana Thamugadi: Dynasticism in Numidia, 
Phoenix, Vol. 56, No. 1/2 (2002),  84108.
Weber, C. Egerias Norman Homeland, Harvard Studies in Classical Philology, Vol. 92 
(1989),  43756.
Weber, E. (ed.) Tabula Peutingeriana: Codex Vindobonensis 324 (Graz, 1976).
Weingarten, S. Was the Pilgrim from Bordeaux a Woman? A Reply to Laurie Douglass, 
Journal of Early Christian Studies, Vol. 7, No. 2 (1999),  29197.
West, M.L. Notes on Dionysius Periegetes, The Classical Quarterly, Vol. 42, No. 2 (1992),  
56869.
Wheeler, G.H. Textual Errors in the Itinerary of Antoninus, The English Historical 
Review, Vol. 35, No. 139 (1920),  37782.
Whitby, M. Justinians Bridge over the Sangarius and the Date of Procopius de Aedificiis, 
JHS, Vol. 105 (1985),  12948.
 Procopius Description of Dara in P. Freeman and D. Kennedy The Defense of the 
Roman and Byzantine East (Oxford, 1986),  73783.
White, K.D. Roman Farming (London, 1970).
White, L.M. Building Gods House in the Roman World (Baltimore, 1990).
Whittaker, C.R. Agri deserti in M.I. Finlay (ed.) Studies in Roman Property 
(Cambridge, 1976),  13765.
 Mental Maps: Seeing Like a Roman in P. McKechnie (ed.) Thinking Like a Lawyer: 
essays on legal history and general history for John Crook on his eightieth birthday (Leiden, 
2002),  81112.
Whittow, M. Early Medieval Byzantium and the End of the Ancient World, Journal of 
Agrarian Change, Vol. 9, No. 1 (2009), 13453.
Wilken, R. The Land Called Holy: Palestine in Christian history and thought (New Haven 
and London, 1992).
Wilkes, J.J. Dalmatia (London, 1969).
Wilkinson, J. Jerusalem Pilgrims Before the Crusades (Warminster, 1977).
 Egerias Travels to the Holy Land. Revised edition (Warminster, 1981).
Williamson, C. Monuments of Bronze: Roman Legal Documents on Bronze Tablets, 
Classical Antiquity, Vol. 6, No. 1 (1987),  16083.
Wilson, M.I. William Kent: Architect, Designer, Painter, Gardener, 16851748 (London, 
1984).
Wiseman, T.P. Viae Anniae, PBSR, Vol. 32 (1964),  2147.
 Viae Anniae Again, PBSR, Vol 37 (1969),  8291.
 The Census in the First Century B.C., JRS, Vol. 59, No. 1/2 (1969),  5975.
 Roman Republican Road-Building, PBSR, Vol. 38 (1970),  12252.
 Julius Caesar and the Hereford World Map, History Today, Vol. 37, No. 11 (1987),  
5357.
Wolf, C.U. Eusebius of Caesarea and the Onomasticon, The Biblical Archaeologist, Vol. 
27, No. 3 (1964),  6596.
Wolska-Conus, W. La Topographie chrtienne de Cosmas Indicopleusts. Thologie et 
science au VIe sicle (Paris, 1962).
bibliogr aphy 274
 Deux contributions  lhistoire de la gographie I: La Diagnosis Ptolmenne: date 
et lieu de composition, Travaux et Mmoires, Vol. 5 (1973),  25973.
 Deux contributions  lhistoire de la gographie II: La carte de Thodose II: sa 
destination?, Travaux et Mmoires, Vol. 5 (1973),  27479.
Woolf, G. Monumental Writing and the Expansion of Roman Society in the Early 
Empire, JRS, Vol. 86 (1996),  2239.
Wycherley, R.E. Hippodamus and Rhodes, Historia, Vol. 13, No. 2 (April, 1964),  135
Wylie, J. Landscape (London, 2007).
Zaitsev, E.A. The Meaning of Early Medieval Geometry: From Euclid and Surveyors 
Manuals to Christian Philosophy, Isis, Vol. 90, No. 3 (1999),  52253.
Zanker, P. The Power of Images in the Age of Augustus (Ann Arbor, 1988).
