Dementia Friendly Living Environments: An 
Empirical Investigation of Design Solutions in 
Dementia Care Homes 
Louise Ritchie 
University of the West of Scotland 
PhD Thesis     Supervised by: Dr Duncan Sim 
          Dr Edward Edgerton 
Abstract 
Over the last two decades the use of the environment as a therapeutic tool in the care 
of people with dementia has become more popular. Despite this, there is a lack of 
research which includes an empirical measure of behaviour to assess the impact that 
dementia friendly interventions have on people with dementia. Much of the current 
research focuses on the perceptions of the staff and relatives on the impact the 
environment has on people with dementia. There is a small body of research which 
attempts to include an empirical measure of behaviour, however due to small sample 
sizes in this type of research it is difficult to generalise the findings to a wider 
population. An extensive literature review identified the living area of care homes as 
the area most commonly used by residents yet it is the area that has received the least 
attention in terms of creating a dementia friendly environment.  
The research carried out for this PhD thesis aims to assess the efficacy and impact of 
an intervention in the physical environment of seven different living areas of dementia 
care homes in the West of Scotland. The intervention was designed to give residents a 
choice of where to sit and options to engage in different activities (e.g., watching TV 
or looking out of the window). A behaviour mapping tool was employed as the main 
data collection method to provide an empirical measure of the range of behaviours 
occurring in the living area and also the overall usage levels. Behaviour mapping was 
used for three weeks pre and post intervention to assess the changes in usage and 
behaviour of the residents. Additional data sources were also consulted alongside the 
behaviour mapping, these included staff focus groups, relative questionnaires and a 
standardised measure of the organisational environment. 
 The results showed a significant increase in positive behaviours post 
intervention such as social interactions, engaging in activities such as watching TV 
and looking out the window. There was also a significant decrease in negative 
behaviours such as agitation and passivity post intervention in line with the research 
hypotheses.  Residents also appeared to engage more with the environment and were 
less likely to appear psychologically withdrawn and apathetic. The patterns of 
behaviour change observed across the seven environments were very similar, 
providing support for the efficacy of the principles the interventions were based on. 
This research highlights the importance of the design of living areas in dementia care 
homes and provides empirical evidence to inform the future design of these areas. The 
research highlights important issues which need to be considered in future design, 
including the impact that small cost effective environmental interventions can have on 
people with dementia as well as the need to involve staff and caregivers in research 
and the planning of interventions. Overall the current research has addressed the 
current gaps in knowledge within the field of dementia friendly environments by 
adopting a methodology to provide an empirical measure of behaviour with a larger 
sample size and also by studying areas of dementia care homes that have previously 
been neglected. 
Contents 
9.3.4 Needs - Driven Dementia  Compromised Behaviour Model (NDB model)
Chapter 1- Introduction 
This chapter is designed to provide an introduction to the main themes and issues 
surrounding the research that has been undertaken for this doctoral thesis. The chapter 
will consist of a brief introduction to dementia, the field of environmental psychology 
and linking the two to create the field of dementia friendly environments. The 
following chapters will then explore the theoretical background to the research, 
followed by examples of research that have attempted to create dementia friendly 
environments. It will then discuss the different users and behaviours of the 
environment, before going on to outline the aims and hypotheses for the main 
research study of this thesis.  
1.1 About Dementia 
Alzheimers Scotland (http://www.alzscot.org/pages/statistics.htm) estimates that 
around 70,958 people have dementia in Scotland in 2010. They anticipate this number 
to rise to around 127,000 by 2031, a 75% increase. This means that research looking 
at the causes and cures of dementia, alongside non-medical interventions that can be 
implemented to help prevent, combat or deal with the symptoms of the disease are all 
the more important. This research will examine the effects of changes in the 
environment on the behaviour and well-being of people with dementia from an 
environmental psychology perspective. However, to begin with we must have an 
understanding of the disorder of dementia and the symptoms and impairments 
associated with it.  
Dementia is a progressive disease that is caused by degeneration of the brain 
and is characterised by  
memory impairment, decline in self-care, decline in ability to manage 
personal affairs, decline in work performance, uncharacteristic behaviour, 
http://www.alzscot.org/pages/statistics.htm
social withdrawal, personality and mood change, and a variety of other 
behaviours (Phair & Good, 1998). 
There are many different causes of dementia, the two most common being 
Alzheimers disease and Multi-Infarct dementia (MID).  Alzheimers disease causes 
the cerebral hemispheres to shrink and degeneration of neuron connections leading to 
symptoms of dementia. Multi-Infarct dementia is also known as vascular dementia 
and is most commonly caused by a series of strokes which causes damage to certain 
areas of the brain. Other less common causes of dementia include Parkinsons disease, 
Korsakoffs syndrome, head injuries and infections of the brain such as HIV or CJD.  
Symptoms of dementia can become incredibly disabling for the sufferer. There are 
impairments which may occur during the process of normal ageing which have to 
be considered alongside the dementia including difficulties with hearing and vision, 
increased sensitivity to temperature, lower stamina and strength, difficulty 
maintaining balance and a poorer gait. As this is what is referred to as normal aging 
it has to be considered that the person with dementia has to deal with these disabling 
features as well as the ones associated with having a cognitively degenerative disease. 
The main impairments associated with dementia are: 
- impaired memory and recall 
- impaired learning ability 
- impaired reasoning 
- increased dependence on the senses 
- high levels of stress  (Marshall, 2005) 
The impairments associated with dementia all result in sufferers having to rely on 
their senses and external factors a lot more. However, these become diminished 
through normal aging creating more problems for the person with dementia. The 
interaction between the two factors has to be recognised in developing treatments and 
interventions for dementia sufferers in order for them to be successful. There are a 
number of issues that have to be considered by caregivers and medical professionals 
in the treatment and management of the symptoms of dementia, such as protecting 
patients dignity, maintaining their quality of life while keeping them safe and secure 
and promoting independence.  
Severity of dementia is generally characterised along three dimensions, mild, 
moderate and severe. A person with mild dementia may have problems making 
decisions and remembering to carry out day to day tasks such as putting the bin out 
and paying bills. A person at moderate stage dementia would start to develop 
problems with recognising family members and friends and need more help with 
activities of daily living such as dressing and may start to develop changes in 
behaviour. Finally a person in the severe stage of dementia would have increasing 
problems in communicating and need a high level of support for the majority of daily 
tasks, especially as the persons physical abilities worsen.  
The majority of people with a diagnosis of dementia live at home (around 
60%) with their carer (who is usually a spouse or a daughter). However as the disease 
progresses the need to move into a residential care setting increases as the support 
needs of the person increases. The majority of people living in residential care settings 
have moderate to severe stage dementia (http://www.alzscot.org/pages/info/ 
dementiafacts.htm#impact). At present there is no known cure for dementia so 
treatments are generally designed to address the associated symptoms rather than the 
underlying causes. There are two approaches to this, drug treatments and non-drug 
treatments. Drug treatments include the use of anti-depressants for depressive 
symptoms and also as a sedative while neuroleptics are used to treat symptoms such 
as aggression, agitation and delusions. Other drugs are available to treat symptoms 
http://www.alzscot.org/pages/info/%20dementiafacts.htm#impact
http://www.alzscot.org/pages/info/%20dementiafacts.htm#impact
relating to memory in Alzheimers disease known as acetyl cholinesterase inhibitors 
(better known by brand names such as Aricept). These have been shown to help slow 
down the rate of progression of the disease allowing people to maintain their 
independence for longer than originally expected (Hopker, 1999). However, as 
mentioned these drugs are not a cure for dementia, they simply help to manage the 
symptoms and may result in adverse side effects in some people such as behaviour 
changes and negative effects on bodily function such as nausea and diarrhoea 
(Hopker, 1999).  
Non drug treatments for the symptoms of dementia are now becoming more 
common. These include psychotherapy, memory training, reminiscence therapy and 
light therapy. It is a general recommendation that non-drug treatments are used 
primarily to manage dementia symptoms before drug treatments are considered 
(Howard et al., 2001). Non-drug treatments also have the benefit of being suitable for 
all types of dementia while many drug treatments are only successful in and 
developed for Alzheimers disease (Alzheimers Scotland Information Sheet 8). Non-
drug approaches should be based on identifying the reasons behind the persons 
behaviours or problems and trying to put strategies into place to address these (Burns, 
2005). In the past two decades there has been increasing focus on the impact that the 
design of the environment can have on people with dementia. It is thought that when 
environments are designed in a specific way they can help people with dementia live 
more independently for longer and can also improve their well-being and quality of 
life by designing the environment to help compensate for the symptoms of dementia. 
This is the underpinning concept of designing dementia friendly environments and 
will be the focus of this thesis.  
1.2 Environmental Psychology and Therapeutic Environments 
The field of environmental psychology studies specifically how the environment can 
affect behaviour (and vice versa).  Early definitions of environmental psychology 
include that of Proshansky (1976) who stated that environmental psychology was  
The attempt to establish empirical and theoretical relationships between the 
behaviour and experience of the person and his built environment.  (p303) 
Stokols and Altman (1988) gave a similar definition of environmental psychology 
highlighting the importance of the relationship between human behaviour and the 
socio-physical environment. Environmental psychology takes a problem driven 
approach to research and examines specifically the effects of the environment on 
behaviour and how behaviour shapes the environment. It generally takes a naturalistic 
approach which allows for the environment-behaviour relationship to be studied as a 
whole rather than separate part (Bell et al., 1996).  
Environmental psychology has played a significant part in improving well-
being and health in many different institutional environments. In particular, studies 
have shown that the design of the physical environment is important in creating a 
therapeutic or healing environment in health care settings. One of the first people to 
observe the impact of the physical environment in healthcare was Florence 
Nightingale (1893). She noted the different survival rates at hospitals and in different 
wards and attributed these to differences in design, lighting, crowding and ventilation.  
 Despite these findings, historically the design of healthcare environments has 
focused on institutional design, where care was based on the biomedical model 
(especially in psychiatric care) with the focus on using drug control of symptoms and 
conditions (McClure, 1980). The increase in drug use to control symptoms facilitated 
the design of large institutions housing a large number of patients as the drugs were 
found to calm the patients without putting them to sleep. They are particularly 
effective in quietening elderly psychotics. (Himwich, 1955, p 3).  
In environments where this was common practice the physical environment was not 
considered as the patients were rendered walking zombies (McClure, 1980 pg 165) 
in extreme cases and were not able to interact with the environment or any stimulus 
contained in it. This is why healthcare environments in the past have been constructed 
with the primary aim of a building that would last for a long time and did not consider 
the needs of the patients (McClure, 1980). However in the past three decades the idea, 
first identified by Florence Nightingale, that the treatment environment can have be 
used as a therapeutic tool has been considered in healthcare design and research has 
began to show positive effects.  
Studies have shown that certain aspects of the design of hospitals can have an 
effect on recovery rates from surgery. One famous study by Ulrich (1984) found that 
patients in a room with a view of nature had shorter post-operative stays than patients 
in a room with a view of a brick wall. In a follow up study he found that having a 
window was rated as more desirable than no window at all regardless of view (Ulrich 
1999). Other aspects of the physical environment that have been found to contribute 
to a therapeutic environment include privacy and personal space. Private one bedded 
rooms result in more communication between staff and patients, less medication 
errors, decreased infection rates and are increasingly welcoming for the family (Page, 
2004); other studies have examined lighting levels and found that depressed patients 
in a psychiatric unit recovered quicker in a room with bright light (Beauchemin & 
Hays 1996) and exposure to natural light has an impact on sleep quality at night 
(Wakamura & Tokura 2001). High levels of noise have been linked to negative health 
outcomes such as increased levels of stress, increased blood pressure and, interrupted 
sleep patterns. (Yinnon et al., 1992). Despite the research that has demonstrated the 
effect the physical environment can have in creating therapeutic environments, health 
care environments are still often designed in a way that does not take into account the 
environment-behaviour relationship. It is also important to take into account the 
specific characteristics of the patient group the environment is being designed for, as 
different patient groups have a diverse and often specific set of needs, for example 
psychiatric patients, children or post-operative patients. Recently a body of research 
has emerged that examines the effect of the environment on a specific group of users 
of health care environments namely, dementia sufferers. The following section will 
examine the design of environments for this group of patients in more detail.  
1.3 Dementia Friendly Environments 
The design of the physical environment is increasingly being recognised as a 
therapeutic aid in the everyday lives of people suffering dementia. The term 
dementia friendly environment was developed along with this emerging field. A 
dementia friendly environment can be defined as an environment which aims to 
ensure that the physical environment promotes improvement and compensates for 
individual dysfunction (Judd et al., 1998).  
There seems to be a consensus as to which features are useful with regards to 
design for dementia (Judd et al., 1998). These encompass the idea that homes are 
small and home-like in style with traditional fixtures and fittings that are relevant to 
the generation living there, rooms which have a clear purpose and are legible, the use 
of signage, landmarks and colour for orientation and good levels of lighting. Within 
the UK, the Dementia Services Development Centre at the University of Stirling 
provides guidelines for the design of homes and gardens for people with dementia and 
has provided assistance with design of dementia care homes since its creation in 1989. 
It has even developed its main office building, the Iris Murdoch Building, into a 
design showcase for what is considered dementia friendly design (Marshall, 2003).  
The main principle is that if both the buildings and carers relate to people with 
dementia as individuals, reinforce their sense of well-being and provide opportunities 
to practise their remaining skills, then the people with dementia are helped to function 
at their greatest potential (Judd et al., 1998). It is thought that how a dementia unit 
looks can affect the atmosphere of the unit, for example if it looks run down then it 
can contribute to an air of neglect in the unit (Phair & Good, 1998). This environment 
does not just affect the patients; it can also affect staff and staff morale. If morale is 
low then this also contributes to a negative atmosphere in the unit.  
Brawley (2001) points out that the knowledge and skills held by design 
professionals can be vital to design environments that can enable people with 
dementia and thus improve their quality of life. However, poor design of 
environments for people with dementia can result in an increase in the disability of the 
person with dementia (Lawton, 1979). From their review of the literature Marquardt 
and Schmieg (2009) identified five important criteria that need to be satisfied in order 
to create a therapeutic environment for people with dementia, which takes into 
account the disabilities associated with dementia and makes suggestions of how to 
compensate for these in design. These are shown in table 1.  
Table 1- Design criteria for dementia friendly environments 
Criteria Satisfied by 
Legibility Logical room layout, furnishing, fixtures 
and fittings 
Familiarity Biographical reference, small groups, 
non-institutional 
Autonomy Barrier-free, compensating, orientation 
Sensory Simulation Encouragement, avoidance of 
overstimulation, access to the outdoors 
Social interaction Privacy, belonging, communication 
There are two main strands of research in the area of design for dementia. The 
first takes a qualitative approach and generally looks at whole redesigns of dementia 
units. Research in this area has been mainly based on staff perceptions and occurs 
after the changes have been made without any comparison to what existed before 
(post-occupancy analysis) (e.g. Cioffi et al., 2007). The second strand takes a more 
quantitative approach. This is a smaller area of research on design in dementia and 
focuses on specific aspects of the environment with the goal of decreasing the 
occurrence of challenging behaviours or increasing positive behaviours (e.g., Namazi 
et al., 1989). The findings from both strands of research along with methodological 
drawbacks will be discussed in the following chapters. While there is a growing body 
of research in this field there appears to be a lack of empirical evidence for the 
efficacy of many of the design recommendations. Recommendations tend to be based 
on ad hoc observations and theory rather than empirical evidence from an 
environmental psychology research perspective. This thesis plans to address this 
deficit by carrying out an empirical investigation of the effect of environmental 
modifications in the living areas of nursing home environments for people with 
dementia. 
Chapter 2- Dementia Friendly Environments 
This chapter aims to review the existing literature on dementia friendly environments, 
identifying and evaluating design interventions and their impact. It also aims to 
inform the reader about what makes an effective dementia friendly environment. The 
literature will be critically evaluated in order to establish gaps in knowledge and 
existing methodologies used in the field in order to inform the design of the current 
research. Whilst the largest proportion of people with dementia live in their own 
homes (over 60%; http://www.alzscot.org/pages/info/dementiafacts.htm) the majority 
of the existing literature focuses on the design of care homes and institutional 
environments.  
The present research will also focus on care homes as opposed to an 
individuals own home. There are two reasons behind this, firstly from a practical 
point of view, carrying out research in an individuals own home would result in very 
low participant numbers and also raises ethical issues of privacy and access. Whilst 
this may be an issue also in institutional environments, organisations generally have 
ethical guidelines in place for research to be carried out which can aid the process for 
the researcher. The second reason for focusing on institutional environments is that 
individuals with dementia who live in care homes are generally at mid to late stage 
dementia and display more problematic symptoms related to their dementia. 
Therefore people with dementia living in a care home are more likely to benefit from 
an environmental intervention than those living in their own homes with a degree of 
independence. However, if an intervention is put in place in an institutional 
environment and has positive effects for the residents then it could also benefit people 
with dementia living in their own homes and enable them to live in their own homes 
for as long as possible.   
2.1 General Research and Guidelines  
As mentioned previously there is a general consensus as to which features are useful 
with regards to design for dementia (Judd et al., 1998). There is a wide body of 
research contributing to the knowledge on what a dementia friendly environment is. 
This can be separated into two main strands of research. The first generally examines 
the effects of whole redesigns of dementia units. Research in this area is mainly post 
hoc analyses based on the perceptions of staff and relatives using mainly a qualitative 
methodology. There are some drawbacks with this type of research in that they 
generally do not provide specific details of modifications to the units. 
Methodologically, this research also has shortcomings in that it makes assumptions 
about the quality of life of residents based on perceptions of staff and relatives rather 
than on the actual opinions or observations of the residents or behaviour. 
The second strand of research generally takes a more quantitative approach 
(e.g. counts of behaviour, standardised measures etc.). This is a smaller area of 
research on design in dementia and focuses on changing specific aspects of the 
environment with the goal of decreasing the occurrence of challenging behaviours or 
increasing positive behaviours. The main shortcomings of this area of research are 
firstly, the low numbers of participants (generally about 5-10 in a study) and 
secondly, the interventions are only put in place in one nursing/residential home.  A 
consequence of these issues could be the generalisability of results to other care 
homes. However, this may be rectified by designing modifications based on strong 
theoretical principles. Both areas of research have their own drawbacks but both have 
also identified changes in behaviour patterns (or perceived behaviour patterns) of 
dementia patients after the environmental modification. This chapter aims to identify 
and discuss them in more detail in order to inform the design of the present study.  
Day et al., (2000) identified four primary types of studies on design and 
dementia in their review of the literature in the area. The studies were grouped 
according to their main focus and their conceptualisation of the environment. The four 
types were; environmental comparison studies where two different types of 
environments are compared for effects on patients, staff and visitors; design feature 
studies which focus on the effects of specific environmental modifications; studies of 
environmental services and policies that examine organisational decisions and 
policies, for example relocating residents to new environments and finally the study 
of problem behaviours, for example the stressful aspects of bathing. These four 
different types of studies give rise to the use of a large number of different 
methodologies in design and dementia research; again these will be discussed later.  
Another review (Gitlin et al., 2003) looked at studies that have evaluated a 
broad range of environmental interventions aimed at improving the quality of life of 
people with dementia.  The vast majority of studies reviewed found that 
environmental interventions do help to improve behaviour such as wandering, exiting 
behaviours and those associated with loss of functioning, for example way-finding. 
They also state that there is a broad range of low cost interventions that can be used 
which have a breadth of potential benefits. However, they do state that the majority of 
studies evaluated do not meet the criteria for scientific rigour due to methodological 
issues, for example, the fact that they do not use control groups or randomisation, 
leaving them open to threats of internal validity. The authors also comment on the 
small sample sizes used and the lack of overlap in types of measures used. They do 
however state that the subject area is a very promising one and should be subjected to 
more in-depth and systematic research. They conclude that environments that are non-
institutional in character are associated with improved intellectual and emotional well-
being, enhanced social interaction, reduced agitation, greater preference and pleasure 
and improved functionality of older adults with dementia.  
Special Care Units (SCUs) for dementia have become popular in the past two 
decades in the USA following the interest in creating therapeutic environments for 
people with dementia. These are either self-contained or can be developed as part of a 
bigger nursing home for elderly people that has a mix of dementia and non-dementia 
patients. Calkins (2001a) carried out a review of the literature on SCUs to establish 
how far changes to the environment have developed in the last 10 years and how 
successful they have been. One of the main outcomes of the literature is that the size 
of the unit makes a difference in terms of the number of residents the unit 
accommodates. Smaller units (ideally no more than 15 residents) appear to have less 
resident agitation and depression and more socialisation and relationship forming. The 
main reasons suggested for this are that there is increased contact with staff in smaller 
units resulting in staff getting to know residents better or that smaller units mean there 
is less negative environmental stimulation for example excess noise. She also 
discusses the fact that environments described as home-like seem to be associated 
with more positive behaviour, although the term home-like is poorly defined in 
much of the literature making it difficult to understand the actual physical changes 
that are made to the environment due to the subjective nature of the phrase. Other 
findings that emerged from the literature include that noise can have a negative 
impact on patients and that increased lighting can have a positive effect on way 
finding abilities and agitation levels.  
Mary Marshall, the previous director of the Dementia Services and 
Development Centre (DSDC) in the University of Stirling has highlighted the 
importance of places outside the home being dementia friendly. She discusses the 
design of the new DSDC building- known as the Iris Murdoch building. They have 
used the same design principles when designing the layout of the building as they 
recommend people use when designing homes for people with dementia. For example 
they have glass-fronted cupboards in the kitchen and the toilet is clearly signposted 
and they use easy to understand signage. She also discussed how things are adaptable 
if unforeseen problems arise, for example, they realised the need for street signs in the 
main hall in order to direct people back out of the building. The building stands as an 
example of how public access buildings can incorporate small adaptations to make 
them less daunting and more useable by people with dementia (Marshall, 2003).  
When implementing design modifications for people with dementia it is also 
important to take into account the specific characteristics of that group of people, for 
example age and culture, and design the environment relevant to these factors. This 
would include taking into account popular culture from the younger years of the 
generation using the environment and also account for cultural differences (Day & 
Cohen 2000). It is thought that accounting for these factors in design helps to provide 
coping strategies for people with dementia by preserving their sense of identity and 
giving them a connection to the broader social environment (Valle 1989).   
 The following sections will discuss these guidelines in more detail with 
reference to previous interventions and research that has been carried out in dementia 
care homes and also discuss the effects of these.  
2.2 Full redesign studies 
There are a number of studies that examine the full redesign or renovation of units. 
These studies discuss the environment in a holistic manner and do not attempt to draw 
out the specific effects of modifications or interventions in the environment. This is 
mainly due to the fact that a full redesign would involve modifying a number of 
different aspects of the environment which would make identifying any specific 
modification as more successful than others very difficult. The positive features of 
these studies are that they focus more on the quality of life of the residents; as well as 
increasing independence; environments are designed to create more therapeutic, 
responsive and homely atmospheres for residents with dementia.  
Shwarz et al., (2004) studied a renovation of a dementia care home using staff 
focus groups and behaviour mapping. They found that changing to smaller and more 
recreational spaces resulted in them being used more than the old large room. They 
also found that disruptive outbursts in the dining room were reduced after being split 
into smaller segments. This may be explained using the behaviour constraint model 
(discussed further in chapter 4) where the smaller areas give residents a choice of 
where to sit and who to sit with which therefore gives the residents more feelings of 
control. Staff also commented that the renovation had improved staff-resident 
interaction and that privacy was increased in the new shaped rooms. One problem that 
this study did identify was that the staffing of the unit was not high enough to provide 
the type of resident-centred care that the new environment was designed for. This 
highlights the fact that an improved environment will not benefit people with 
dementia as much if there is not a strong staff team for the unit and also the 
importance of achieving a good fit between the physical environment and the 
treatment philosophy of the care home.  
 Another qualitative study examined the perceptions of staff and relatives after 
the renovation of their dementia unit using focus groups (Cioffi et al., 2007). The 
main findings were that the unit now felt more homely, it was more of a therapeutic 
environment and it was a more comfortable work environment, which enabled the 
staff to provide a better level of care. However this study did not outline the specific 
changes that were carried out in the unit, therefore making it difficult to make any 
recommendations for future design.  
Similarly, following a facilities move into a newly designed special care unit 
(SCU) staff and relatives were interviewed to find out which characteristics they 
thought were the most influential on the perceived positive changes in residents 
behaviour (Donovan & Dupuis, 2000). The unit they evaluated was a newly renovated 
28 bed unit with a circular wandering path, a garden courtyard, large windows, secure 
exits that blended into the decor and private bathrooms and bedrooms. Staff and 
family members were interviewed and asked what changes they thought were 
beneficial to residents. There were three main outcomes from the study, firstly that the 
new unit fostered feelings of personal space, secondly that it fostered feelings of 
personhood and lastly that it allowed for an unforced routine. The feelings of personal 
space were attributed to the fact that each resident now had their own bedroom 
providing them with an opportunity for both personal expression and private 
socialisation. The expression of personhood was defined as staffs understanding of 
each residents unique life history and responding to each resident as an individual 
with unique needs and preferences. It was thought that these feelings increased 
because it was a smaller unit allowing the staff to get to know residents better and can 
then help them to display personal belongings and respond to their individual needs. 
The final aspect, unforced routine, is attributed to the fact that there was a fully 
equipped kitchen area for use at any time so meal time did not need to be regimented. 
The new policies allowed residents to choose their own schedules and staff were not 
restricted to doing certain things at certain times. 
The research that has evaluated the full redesign of units has resulted in 
broadly positive outcomes in terms of perceptions of behaviour and also creating a 
more therapeutic environment. However, there are methodological issues that occur in 
the majority of research which makes it difficult to translate these findings into future 
design recommendations. Some of these issues have been discussed earlier but 
include the poor definitions of the word home-like, lack detail on the actual 
renovations being made and also that the studies are mainly post-hoc and do not have 
any comparison to the previous environments. Another issue is the mainly qualitative 
methodology, while this has produced interesting and useful findings there is no 
measure of actual changes in behaviour of the residents. This means that often the 
results are ambiguous or subjective and their relationship with residents quality of 
life is not clear. This may be a problem as the staff or relatives may emphasise 
different aspects of the environment than the residents and there may also be a halo 
effect where their perception of the modifications are influenced by aesthetic 
changes. While the staff and residents may prefer the new environment because they 
perceive it as looking better, it may be that the residents needs of an environment 
differ from their caregivers.  Finally, a broad issue with the research on dementia 
friendly environments is that the modifications that are made are not based on 
empirical research, but instead implemented on a trial and error basis or on the 
recommendation of an expert, for example an architect.  However, the research that 
has been carried out, while flawed in some ways has provided a number of positive 
perspectives and has helped to increase interest in research in this area. More work is 
needed in order to build a sound body of empirical, methodologically sound research 
that can reliably inform the future design and layout of dementia care homes.  
2.3 Specific areas and modifications 
Much of the research on design for dementia focuses on specific aspects of the 
environment with the goal of decreasing the occurrence of challenging behaviours or 
increasing positive behaviours. This section will examine some of the research in this 
area, separating it into research that has been carried out in different areas of the care 
home. Namazi and his colleagues have carried out various studies looking at adapting 
specific parts of the environment with the objective of addressing problem 
behaviours. For example they assessed the effectiveness of putting visual barriers 
across a fire door to reduce the number of exits or exit attempts made by patients. 
They tried seven different conditions including putting tape on the floor in different 
patterns, covering the door with different materials and covering the door knob with 
different materials. They compared the observation data with baseline data collected 
and concluded that covering the door knob with a piece of beige material was the 
most effective in reducing exits and exit attempts. They thought that this may be 
because people with dementia may be unable to interpret that the door is anything 
more than a dead end when the knob is concealed (Namazi et al., 1989).  
2.3.1 Bathroom 
Helping residents to locate and use the bathroom is very important in dementia care, 
not only does it allow the resident to retain their independence, it also reduces the 
demands on care staff. One study looked at how to reduce the problem of 
incontinence in people with dementia using a range of environmental interventions 
(Namazi & Johnson 1991). For people with dementia the ability to locate the toilet is 
an important part of retaining toileting skills and maintaining independence. The 
study looked at which directional aids were most effective in directing people to the 
toilets. They looked at the colour of signs, the wording used on them and the position 
of signs. After a period of observation it was found that the most effective signs for 
directing patients to the toilet were arrows and lettering on the floor. This was thought 
to be because people with dementia have a tendency to look at the floor when they are 
walking rather than looking straight ahead. They also found that the most effective 
signs were those with a yellow background and dark lettering which had specific 
wording and also a picture was effective. They conclude that people with dementia 
may need to be presented with cues at every step to accomplish a series of tasks, i.e. 
finding the toilet, entering the toilet and then using the toilet appropriately. This type 
of research could be an example of Lawtons environmental docility hypothesis, 
showing how simple modifications can help people with dementia function in the 
environment.  
2.3.2 Bedrooms 
Helping dementia patients to recognise their own bedroom in a corridor containing 
many similar looking doors is a topic that is also addressed in the literature. It is an 
important issue as many care homes report that residents entering other residents 
rooms and not being able to find their own room is a significant problem. In most care 
homes, the design of bedrooms and corridors are very similar so it is easy for a 
resident to become disorientated when trying to locate their bedroom. Namazi and his 
colleagues again carried out a study looking at this particular aspect. They compared 
orientation cues with long-term personal significance with non-significant cues on 
helping residents locate their own bedroom. They found that four out of the ten 
participants were more successful at finding their rooms with cues that were 
significant to them. The most reliable cues were those linked to the patients 
childhood. They conclude that irrespective of disease severity cueing observations can 
be helpful in maintaining the independence of dementia patients (Namazi et al., 
1991).  
In another study the use of portrait style photographs and personal 
memorabilia from early adulthood displayed in a case outside patients bedrooms was 
assessed. Researchers asked patients to show them their rooms and observed how well 
they achieved this. They also assessed the effectiveness of the cues and what cues the 
residents tended to use before and after the personal cues were put in place. There 
were only five participants included in this study. The results showed that two of the 
five consistently succeeded in finding their bedrooms using the personalised cues. The 
other three participants had more success after the personalised cues were put in place 
but did not consistently identify their bedroom. They did however on many occasions 
stop and look at the picture of themselves and look into the room but did not verbally 
or physically identify their room (Nolan et al., 2002). The authors also noted that the 
picture used before the intervention (a recent picture of the patient) caused some 
confusion with some patients, as they did not recognise themselves. One even 
commented that it was some old womans picture (p48). They therefore made the 
recommendation that it would be useful to use photographs of the person when they 
were younger and to use memorabilia from a significant period in their life when 
considering way finding cues for dementia patients. 
2.3.3 Dining Rooms 
The design of dining rooms has also been addressed. One study, which was from a 
nutritional perspective, compared the calorific intake of dementia patients in two 
different types of dining area. One was large with a cafeteria style service line and the 
television on during meal times, the other was smaller with no television and calming 
music. They found that patients spent more time in the smaller room and they had a 
larger intake of calories (although this difference was not significant). Although the 
conditions in the smaller room were not ideal, e.g., the noise level was still high and 
the lighting was not as good, this study suggests that a smaller, more homely 
environment encourages patients to eat and drink more (McDaniel et al., 2001). 
Studies similar to this are useful even though they look at the effect of the 
environment from a different perspective. Even research focusing on nutritional 
intake can indicate positive results from a psychological point of view; for instance, 
improved nutrition could have a positive impact on the quality of life of a person with 
dementia, as they may have more energy, improved sleep patterns etc. 
2.3.4 Gardens and nature 
Garden design is another area of great interest within the design for dementia 
literature. Therapeutic gardens are becoming more and more popular in healthcare 
settings (Kavanagh, 2003). The aim of therapeutic gardens is to give a safe 
environment for people to relax, reflect, socialise or maintain a gardening hobby. A 
post occupancy evaluation of one such garden showed that the therapeutic garden was 
well received by the patients, staff and visitors. However, it was noted that the 
majority of respondents did not think the garden was used enough and they thought it 
was not designed well enough for cognitively impaired residents (Heath, 2004). This 
highlights the need to base design features on empirical research so that they are 
beneficial to dementia sufferers and can be used productively.  
Recently there has been interest in the therapeutic role of nature in dementia 
care homes. Interdisciplinary research suggests that nature has a therapeutic role to 
play in dementia care (Chalfont 2007). This is also demonstrated in Attention 
Restoration Theory (Kaplan and Kaplan, 1989). Connection to nature can occur on 
many different levels including introduction of natural smells (e.g. aromatherapy 
massage), introduction of pets or plants into the environment, design of sensory 
gardens and design of internal areas (e.g. to grant visual access to outdoor areas also 
known as edge spaces). Chalfont (2007) conducted ethnographic observations of 
daily engagement with nature by residents in a dementia care home. From this he 
found that there was a particular type of space that was used to connect to nature 
which he referred to as edge spaces. These are generally next to an exterior wall of the 
building and afford simultaneous qualities of indoors and outdoors. Outdoor 
stimulation includes air, light and views of nature while indoor qualities include 
safety, comfort and privacy.  
Chalfont (2007) carried out some case studies of residents using edge spaces 
and found that edge spaces were used by residents for a number of reasons.  For 
example, to get some fresh air or to find out what the weather was like, but most 
commonly the edge spaces provided stimuli for a social interaction. In one case a 
resident who was looking at flowers outside engaged in a conversation about her late 
husband, who she used to spend a lot of time with in the garden, whilst others just 
spoke about what they saw in the present tense.  In all cases the edge space afforded a 
positive interaction. These results were echoed in a qualitative study of outdoor 
environments for people with dementia in which the authors recommended that 
window views could have a positive effect for residents with moderate to severe 
dementia as they not only gave visual access to nature but also to non-residential life, 
for example people jogging, going to work and traffic (Rappe & Topo, 2007). The 
authors state that  
By their own initiative, the residents commented on these views and talked 
about the weather they observed. Several episodes of relaxed sitting or 
standing next to the window were also observed, mainly among people with 
severe dementia. (p 242) 
Again this demonstrates the positive effect that views of outdoors may have on 
residents in dementia care homes. However, as the research in this area is mainly 
descriptive, further empirical research is needed in this area to examine the effects of 
nature views on the behaviour of people with dementia.  
Research carried out with care home environments in geriatric, psychiatric 
wards has also examined the effect of bringing nature into the hospital environment 
with positive results. Devlin (1992) found that the addition of live plants were a 
simple but effective way of improving the atmosphere of the ward environment. An 
increase in behaviours such as sleeping and watching television occurred after the 
addition in contrast to the pathological behaviours such as lying down or sitting 
staring into space that were more frequent before renovation. Another study found 
that the addition of plants to a psychiatric ward was found to result in positive 
behaviour changes (Barlow 2003). It was found that plants in addition to a 
redecoration of the ward resulted in staff perceiving a decrease in violence and 
aggressive outbursts from patients. 
 Again, from the review of the literature looking at specific environmental 
modifications, the results from the studies are largely positive. However similar to the 
literature on the full redesign of units there are also certain methodological issues with 
the majority of the research. For example, the sample size on the majority of the 
studies is very low (sometimes as low as five) (Nolan et al., 2002). This means that 
the results cannot be reliably generalised to other care homes or even other people 
with dementia. The reason the sample size is notoriously low in research on dementia 
environments may be due to the fact that care home numbers are low, for example it 
is recommended that care homes accommodate no more than 15 people per unit 
(Calkins 2001b). However, the results could be made more reliable by implementing 
the intervention in a number of different environments and assessing the changes over 
a number of different dementia residents. 
2.3.5 Living areas 
The literature review highlighted that there has been research carried out in most of 
the main areas of care home environments (e.g. bathrooms, bedrooms, corridors). 
However, there has been little research that has looked at social or communal spaces 
within care homes, for example lounges or day rooms and dining areas.  It has been 
found that whether residents stay in large care homes or in smaller units they were 
more likely to spend a large proportion (between 65% and 72%) of their time during 
the day sitting in a lounge area (Barnes, 2006). The literature that does exist on the 
design of communal areas in dementia care homes focuses mainly of the size of the 
areas. The general consensus from this is that smaller spaces are better. Shwarz et al. 
(2004) studied a renovation of a dementia care home and found that smaller 
recreational rooms were used more often than one large room. Staff also commented 
that the renovation had improved staff-resident interaction and that privacy was 
increased in the new smaller rooms.  As mentioned previously the popular SCUs for 
dementia care are smaller than traditional care homes, have smaller rooms and give 
residents a choice between communal spaces (Calkins 2001b). One of the main 
outcomes from the literature is that the size of the unit makes a difference. Smaller 
units appear to result in less resident agitation and depression as well as more 
socialisation and relationship forming. The main reasons suggested for this are that 
there is increased contact with staff resulting in staff getting to know residents better 
and there is less negative environmental stimulation e.g. noise, in the smaller rooms 
(Calkins, 2001b). However, care homes and organisations often do not have the 
resources to redesign units from one large area to more, smaller areas. If this is the 
case it is recommended that the room is reduced into smaller spaces as much as 
possible using furniture arrangement and dividers (Nazarko, 2006).  
 The idea of providing a choice of location for residents is also thought to be 
important. This again relates back to the behaviour constraint model of providing 
choice therefore giving the users more control of the environment. Barnes (2006) 
found that daytime location of residents in dementia care homes was associated with 
quality of life and states that having a choice of different spaces for residents to go to 
can have a positive impact on quality of life. Calkins (1988) recommends providing 
areas in which residents can socialise or can just observe others without participating. 
Lawton (1979) also states that it is important that residents have a range of social and 
recreational choices available to them. Having a choice of different spaces affording 
different levels of privacy increases feelings of environmental control and can 
therefore reduce the associated feelings of negative affect and helplessness. Bell 
(1996) states that in terms of furniture, recreational spaces should also be designed to 
elicit communication (sociopetal) although some areas should be designed to afford 
privacy (sociofugal). In order to elicit communication, furniture should be arranged in 
small groups perhaps around a table, while for privacy, chairs should be separated 
although positioned in a way the person has visual access to the room they are in. It 
has also been found that the opportunity to participate in everyday activities and to 
have opportunities to socialise is something that people with dementia place value 
highly (Phinney et al., 2007). It was found that being involved in such activities made 
people with dementia feel that their lives were meaningful. It is important that this is 
taken into account when designing environmental modifications in order to maximise 
these feelings of meaningfulness.  
 There is a lack of research concerning design aspects within the living area, 
e.g. furniture arrangement, on people with dementia in residential care homes 
specifically; however, there is some research that has been carried out in the day 
rooms of psychiatric, geriatric hospital wards where many of the patients suffer from 
dementia. Stahler et al. (1984) carried out an observational study in a womens 
geriatric ward where they assessed the impact of arranging the furniture in a large 
lounge area into four separate areas; one set up for watching television, one for 
reading, one for social interaction and the final one for group activities. They found 
that after these changes had been put in place there was a decrease in pathological 
behaviours such as rocking or talking to oneself and an increase in patient staff 
interactions. They did, however observe an increase in individual passive behaviour. 
Although the reason for this is not clear the authors speculate it may indicate an 
increase in patient tranquillity as patients are adjusting to their new surroundings and 
have substituted their internal stimulation (pathological behaviours) for external 
stimulation. Similarly, Devlin (1992) collected observational behaviour mapping data 
following a renovation of a psychiatric ward and day room. She found that the 
introduction of low dividers to separate the room in to smaller more private areas 
resulted in patients spending more time in the centre of the room and making use of 
the space rather than around the perimeter of the room where the highest usage was 
found  before the renovation.  
2.4 Chapter Summary 
 Chapter 2 has attempted to outline the existing research in the field of 
dementia friendly environments. It has looked at studies concerning full redesign of 
care homes and also more specific modifications and interventions in smaller areas of 
the care home. It has demonstrated the usefulness of creating dementia friendly 
environments and also critically evaluated the literature, highlighting the need for 
further research in this area. In particular, it has highlighted the lack of research in the 
living and social areas of dementia care homes and also the need for more quantitative 
research with larger sample sizes to provide a good empirical basis for demonstrating 
the efficacy of new interventions in dementia environments. The following chapter 
will explore more of the research and literature specifically looking at the behaviours 
of people with dementia. This will help to understand more about the behavioural 
symptoms of people with dementia and the processes behind them. The chapter will 
then go on to discuss the other users of the care home, in particular staff and visitors. 
This will demonstrate the need to examine the care home environment in a holistic 
manner and that the success of any intervention will depend on the impact of a 
number of factors and not solely the residents living in the care home. 
Chapter 3 - Users of the care home environment 
3.1 Behaviours of people with dementia 
There is a large body of literature that examines the types of behaviours that people 
with dementia exhibit. Although there are individual differences in people with 
dementia, the behaviours that are discussed in this section have found to be relatively 
common in the dementia population. This section will also discuss how the 
behaviours of people with dementia vary across the day.  
3.1.1 Agitation 
Agitation is a significant problem for people with dementia as well as their families 
and carers. Agitation has been shown to impair the quality of life of a person with 
dementia (Souder & OSullivan, 2003). It is estimated that between 70% and 90% of 
individuals with dementia present with agitated behavioural symptoms at some point 
throughout the course of their illness (Cohen-Mansfield & Billig, 1986). Although 
agitation is not a diagnostic term it is commonly used to describe a group of 
symptoms that may reflect an underlying disorder or disturbance. Cohen-Mansfield 
and Billig (1986) define agitation as: 
Inappropriate verbal, vocal or motor activity that is not judged by an outside 
observer to result directly from the needs or confusion of the agitated 
individual. 
Cohen-Mansfield et al. (1989) classified agitated behaviour into three categories 
following their study to describe agitation in a care home. They also found a range of 
behaviours which were less frequently occurring and could not be classified in the 
three categories which they included in a fourth category known as other agitation. 
The four categories can be found below: 
1) Aggressive behaviour- hitting, kicking, pushing, scratching, tearing things, cursing 
or verbal aggression, grabbing (biting, spitting) 
 2) Physically non-aggressive behaviour- pacing, inappropriate robing or disrobing, 
repetitious sentences or questions, trying to get to a different place, handling things 
inappropriately, general restlessness and repetitious mannerisms 
3) Verbally agitated behaviour- complaining, constant requests for attention, 
negativism, repetitious sentences or questions, screaming  
4) Other behaviours- intentional falling, eating inappropriate substances, throwing 
things, verbal sexual advances, physical sexual advances and hiding or hoarding 
objects.  
Cohen-Mansfield et al. (1989) observed agitation frequently in their study 
(58.3  83.7% of observations). In each of the three units they observed the most 
frequent types of behaviour were physical non-aggressive, followed by verbally 
agitated behaviour. Aggressive agitation and other agitation were less frequently 
observed. From the results of this study Cohen-Mansfield and his colleagues 
developed a measure to assess agitation in people with dementia. This is known as the 
Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory (CMAI), a questionnaire completed by care 
givers rating 29 behaviours on how often the resident has displayed them in the last 
fortnight.  
There have been many interventions suggested that are thought to decrease 
agitation. These range from hand massage to interventions in the physical 
environment. Hicks-Moore and Robinson (2008) conducted a study examining the 
effects of hand massage and playing favourite music on levels of agitation in people 
with dementia. They used the Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory (CMAI) to 
measure agitation before and after the treatment and then at a follow up session. They 
found that residents who received either treatment or combined treatment showed a 
significant reduction in agitation, both straight after the treatment and at the follow up 
session an hour later.  
The use of medication to decrease agitation is not favoured in dementia care, 
due to associated side effects and the amount of medication that elderly people 
already take, however it is used as a last resort, where all other interventions possible 
have been tried and failed. It is important to identify the cause of the agitation is 
removed, if possible or the person is distracted from it using a variety of techniques, 
e.g., social interaction, activity, exercise, music etc. The environment also needs to be 
designed in a way that facilitates the needs of the person with dementia and provides 
an appropriate level of stimulation, for example, is there a range of activities on offer, 
can the resident find their way around and is the level of communication appropriate 
between staff and residents (Howard et al., 2001).  
It is thought that manipulating the environment in a way that it provides a 
choice for people with dementia will have a positive effect on their well being and 
could lead to decrease in agitated behaviour. This is supported by Lawtons (1990) 
proactivity hypothesis which suggests that when an individuals competence 
corresponds with the demands of the environment it increases the type of 
environmental resources that can be used to satisfy the persons needs. Therefore, 
providing a choice in an institutional environment like a care home we are allowing 
residents to regain some control over their environment and improving the 
environment to meet residents needs more adequately.   
Matthews et al., (1996) carried out a study that examined the effect of a 
change from task orientated care, where the staff adhere to a schedule for meals, bed 
time and other activities throughout the day, to client centred care that allows 
residents to make these decisions themselves. They used the CMAI to measure 
agitation on each in the care home before and after the changes were made. The 
results showed that residents verbal agitation significantly reduced on the early shift 
where it had previously been highest but it increased significantly on the late shift. 
However, this may be due to other factors such as, different staffing levels on the late 
shift which inhibited the intervention being implemented fully and also the fact that 
the authors observed the staff on the late shift as being less open to accepting the 
changes. This demonstrates the importance of having the support of the full staff team 
when implementing an environmental manipulation. Research that has looked at the 
effect of different interventions on agitated behaviour in dementia has some 
limitations. Firstly the findings again are based on a small sample size, mainly due to 
the fact that studies are carried out in one care home and the number of residents in a 
unit is generally low. Any environmental modifications that are made are also only 
specific to the care home that they are introduced into as no care home will have the 
same physical environment and residents will also not be matched in terms of abilities 
and competencies and progression of the disease.  
3.1.2 Passive Behaviour 
A behavioural symptom of dementia that is often overlooked in sufferers is described 
in the literature as passive behaviour. Research has found that residents in dementia 
care homes spend the majority of their time not doing anything (Buettner, 1999), 
while another study observed residents in a SCU doing nothing 85% of the time 
(Logsdon, 2000). Passive behaviour has been commonly observed throughout these 
periods of doing nothing (Perrin, 1997).  
 How to define passive behaviour has been debated in the literature. It has been 
described as reduced energy, drive and initiative (Galynker et al., 1995). This 
description has been criticised as being vague and could apply to a range of 
behaviours as well as being associated with other disorders such as depression. 
Colling (1999) attempted to define passive behaviours in dementia more extensively 
and surmises that it encompasses the following: 
1) A lessening of mental processes associated with thinking and knowing 
2) A decrease in the ability to experience or respond to human emotions 
3) Fewer interactions with others and surroundings 
4) A decrease in motor activity.  
The literature widely conceptualises passive behaviour as a negative symptom of 
dementia associated with excess disability, functional decline and a decrease in 
quality of life (Mace, 1991). However persons displaying passive behaviour are often 
overlooked for a number of reasons, including the quiet withdrawn nature of the 
behaviours and staff focusing on residents who display more agitated or aggressive 
behaviour (Colling, 2004). Nevertheless residents passive behaviour has been found 
to be distressing to caregivers, even more so when residents are repeatedly passive to 
their interventions (Everett et al., 1995).  
 Haight and Warren (1991) attempted to define behaviours to help identify 
apathy (which is considered to be an underlying factor of passive behaviours) in 
people with dementia. These behaviours included flat affect, lack of motivation, 
indifference and blunting of emotions as well as a lack of energy, unassertiveness, 
listlessness and lack of involvement. Colling (2000) attempted to build on this 
description and carried out a taxonomy of passive behaviours in people with 
Alzheimers disease.  This resulted in the development of the Passivity in Dementia 
Scale, a 53 item questionnaire relating to specific behaviours which relate to five 
subscales of passive behaviour. The five subscales are listed below along with 
examples of behaviour related to them.  
1) Diminution of cognition  decrease in ability to be goal-directed, 
demonstrates less self reliance, displays diminished initiative. 
2) Diminution of psychomotor activity  sits quietly with a decrease in 
spontaneous movements, seems physically inert and does nothing, 
demonstrates under activity.  
3) Diminution of emotions  unchanging wooden and frozen facial 
expression, seems apathetic, failure to smile or laugh when prompted.  
4) Diminution of interactions with people  poor eye contact with others, 
seems disconnected from others, uninvolved with people. 
5) Diminution of interactions with the environment  seems unmoved by the 
environment, decrease in recreational activities or hobbies, lack of 
interaction with the environment.  
The reasons for passive behaviour occurring in people with dementia is 
debated in the literature, though some theorists believe it is a direct symptom of 
physiological changes in the brain which are irreversible while others relate it to 
limitations in the environment (Colling, 2004). The Need-Driven Dementia-
Compromised Behavior Model (NDB) (Algase et al., 1996) attempts to integrate 
these two perspectives in explaining the behaviour of people with dementia. Collings 
(1999) applies this model specifically to passive behaviour. Underpinning this is the 
claim that passive behaviour should be considered a disruptive behaviour similar to 
wandering, aggression or agitation.  
The NDB model views disruptive behaviours as the result of an unmet need 
which rises from the interaction between individual characteristics (such as 
personality and dementia-compromised functions) and environmental characteristics 
(such as physical or social environment and the affect of the patient). Under the NDB 
model, passive behaviours are the result of the dementia compromised functions of 
the residents interacting with, for example an environment which does not meet the 
need of the resident. This may be that the environment does not provide adequate 
stimulation or is over stimulating for the resident resulting in the resident displaying 
apathy and withdrawing socially as a protective measure. The NDB model however 
provides background information on the structure of behaviour in people with 
dementia that can be used in order to design interventions to attempt to reduce the 
amount of passive behaviour a person displays.  
There is a lack of research examining the effect of specific interventions on 
the amount of passive behaviour displayed by people with dementia.  An exploratory 
study in which care givers were interviewed on how they deal with their relatives 
passive behaviour was carried out by Colling (2004). This identified that successful 
interventions for reducing passive behaviours were giving reassurance, offering 
enjoyable activities, supporting independence and using humour and patience. The 
interventions that were found to increase passive behaviours were listed as correcting 
the person, stress or pressure and being rushed. This study focused on people with 
dementia who were living in the community. Further research is needed to examine 
the efficacy of interventions that may decrease passive behaviour on a larger scale and 
also in the care home population. The present study strives to do this by creating small 
scale, cost-effective interventions in the physical environment.  
 It should be noted however that the definition of passive behaviour discussed 
here is specific to the dementia literature. In other literature consulted in this research 
such as psychiatric hospital literature the term passive behaviour refers mainly to 
patients who are just observed as inactive (e.g. Devlin, 1992).  
3.1.3 Interactions 
The increase in passivity as a behavioural symptom of people with dementia has been 
linked to a reduction in social interactions (Collings, 2000). However, social 
interaction is thought to have great therapeutic benefit to individuals with dementia 
(Stokes, 1992). A lack of social contact has been linked to an increase in mortality 
and depression as well as a decrease in quality of life (Mitchell & Kemp, 2000; 
Rozzini et al., 1991). Kolanowski and Litaker (2006) in their study of behaviour in a 
dementia nursing home observed very minimal social interaction throughout the day 
from residents. They noted that while residents did not make many attempts to initiate 
social interactions, generally residents did not retreat or try to avoid any attempt at 
stimulation or interactions. However, research has shown that people with dementia 
are capable of maintaining and developing social relationships within care homes 
(Diaz Moore, 1999).  
The types of interactions that are commonly observed in dementia care homes 
have been described as infrequent and often of short duration (Kolanowski & 
Litaker, 2006 pg 18). This study found that increased social interaction in residents 
was associated with an increase in agitation. They point out that this pattern of 
interactions may be frustrating and confusing for residents therefore resulting in an 
increase in agitation. These findings highlight the importance of encouraging quality 
interactions for people with dementia. This may be by providing the resident with an 
environment that enables them to initiate interactions themselves or to make staff 
more aware of the importance of quality social interactions in order for them to 
initiate more interactions with residents. 
 Lawton (1987) suggests that some places are more effective than others for 
allowing social interactions to occur. He refers to these places as providing social 
affordance. Creating social affordance, according to Lawton requires a change in the 
treatment philosophy of the care home, with a move away from the medical model to 
a focus on social environment and the use of therapy over medication. This includes 
modifications in the physical environment to create a place which encourages social 
interactions. For example, it has been found that an arrangement of chairs in a small 
circle (socio-petal) increases social interactions between people, opposed to chairs in 
a row (socio-fugal). This effect is increased when a table is placed in the middle of the 
circle of chairs (Bell et al., 1996).  
This was also observed in Diaz Moores (1999) qualitative study of social 
interactions. The majority of interactions in this care home occurred in the dining 
room out with meal times. This may be due to the fact that the physical layout of the 
dining room (i.e. small groups of chairs arranged around a table) provides support for 
the social interactions that occur there. However, the author also points out that the 
open-plan aspect of this specific dining area had negative effects on social interactions 
as staff or wandering residents constantly disrupted interactions. Another study found 
that social interactions between residents almost doubled following the re-
arrangement of furniture in a day room of a geriatric ward (Sommer & Ross, 1958).  
Again these studies demonstrate the importance of providing areas to promote quality 
social interactions for people with dementia, especially as research indicates that 
social interactions may be of great therapeutic value.  
3.1.4 Effect of time of day 
The suggestion that the time of day has an effect on the behaviour of people with 
dementia is a matter of debate within the literature. The most common of these 
theories is sundown syndrome or sundowning. There is some ambiguity in 
literature as how to define sundown syndrome. It conceptualises the idea is that there 
is an increase in confusion or agitation in dementia patients around the time of sunset. 
Some researchers define this as the couple of hours around sunset in late 
afternoon/evening (Evans, 1985; Volicer et al., 2001) while others define it from 
sunset and during the night (Bliwise et al., 1995).  
There are many hypothesised explanations for sundowning; for example due 
to the changeover of staff or because the residents feel the need to leave the unit to 
go home from work. The actual existence of sundown syndrome is debated in the 
literature also. Cohen-Mansfield and his colleagues did not find a clear sundown 
syndrome in their investigation of agitated behaviours in a care home. They found that 
two residents did demonstrate a sundown syndrome; however half of the sample (4 
people) performed agitated behaviours significantly more in the morning, while the 
other two in the sample had a varied pattern of agitated behaviours throughout the day 
(Cohen-Mansfield et al., 1989). However, Volicer et al. (2001) found that sundown 
syndrome was present in 44% of their sample. From the literature it would appear that 
there is a case for taking into account the pattern of behaviours of dementia patients 
throughout the day. This might not necessarily manifest as sundown syndrome as 
there appears to be an element of individual differences on how the time of day 
affects behaviour. It may also be that the differences in the measures of behaviour and 
how sundown syndrome is defined in different studies that can explain the differences 
in findings.  
3.2 Quality of Life of people with dementia 
The concept of quality of life in dementia care is very important; given that a 
diagnosis of dementia can have a detrimental impact on a persons quality of life 
(Shin et al., 2005; Hoe et al., 2007). Given this it is important to do all that is possible 
to maintain a good quality of life for people following a diagnosis. How to define 
quality of life for people with dementia has proven difficult due to the interaction 
between the symptoms of dementia and the persons diminished ability to 
communicate their feelings and expectations. On a basic level the World Health 
Organisation defines quality of life as  
The individuals perceptions of their position in life in the context of culture 
and value system in which they live and in relationship to their goals, 
expectations and standards. (WHO-QOL, 1995).  
This definition emphasises the subjective nature of quality of life in that it may differ 
from person to person depending on the impact of their expectations, goals and 
values. This is reflected in the standardised self report measures of quality of life that 
are widely used in the general geriatric population (Lawton, 1975).  
It is widely accepted that self report measures give the most reliable 
information on a persons quality of life (Ferrans, 1996). However, within the 
dementia literature there is debate over whether people with dementia can reliably 
evaluate their own quality of life given the nature of the disabilities associated with 
dementia. Research has focused on how to measure quality of life in dementia. This 
includes a comparison of patient reported measures with caregiver reported measures 
and has found discrepancies where people with dementia tend to rate their quality of 
life higher than their caregivers rate it. This has been attributed to caregivers ratings 
being influenced by their own expectations, perceived burden and beliefs (Fuh & 
Wang, 2006; Logsdon et al., 2002) It is also associated with the quality of the patient-
caregiver relationship (Huang et al., 2008). The main outcome of this research 
however has demonstrated that people with mild to moderate dementia are capable of 
reporting their own quality of life using adapted measures such as the QOL-AD 
(Logsdon et al., 1999).  
 Quality of life in dementia has been related to a number of factors. A poorer 
perception of quality of life by people with dementia has been associated with higher 
levels of depression (Logsdon et al., 2002) and a higher frequency of negative 
caregiver interactions (Menne et al., 2009). People with dementia who retain decision 
making capabilities and have a higher frequency of pleasant events report more 
positive ratings of quality of life (Menne et al., 2009; Ettema et al., 2005). It has also 
been found that people with dementia often rate their quality of life just as good as or 
higher than a control group (Scocco, et al., 2006). The research suggests that the 
decline in insight and cognition does not have a negative effect on the persons quality 
of life as caregivers may expect due to either people with dementia adapting their 
expectations to accommodate the impairment or that they are less aware of their 
cognitive difficulties due to impaired insight (Hurt et al., 2010). Therefore it is 
important to provide environments for people with dementia that can enhance their 
quality of life by providing opportunities for positive social interactions, opportunities 
for decision making and opportunities to engage in activities.  
 3.3 Staff and other users of the environment 
It is important when examining the effects of any environment that the needs and 
expectations of all users are taken into account. In a care home environment, while it 
could be argued that the residents are the most important user group, the staff are also 
very important when considering design. This is because the staff group are in the 
environment for a large proportion of their day and are responsible for the well being 
of the residents. This may pose a problem when thinking about design as much of the 
research highlights certain differences in perceptions of the environment, between 
both staff and residents (Passini et al., 2000) and also between different types of staff 
groups (e.g. nursing and administration staff) (Shattell et al., 2008).  
It has been found that changes in a psychiatric ward produce more positive 
perceptions of the ward environment from staff (Corey et al., 1986). The changes put 
in place included furniture rearrangement, new floor coverings and a new colour 
scheme. Staff responded more positively on nine aspects of the ward environment 
rating scale including, anger and aggression, order and organisation, program clarity, 
involvement and support. This indicates that the redesign of the ward had a favourable 
impact on staff with respects to many aspects of the job. However staff do not seem to 
always respond favourably to changes in the hospital environment. Devlin (1992) 
found no significant change in staff perceptions or general morale. This may be due to 
the fact that staff were not happy with some of the improvements as they felt they 
were not suitable for some patients, for example, hard to clean upholstery and carpets 
and furniture that may cause difficulties for patients with mobility problems. Devlin 
(1992) emphasises the importance of consulting staff about renovations in order to get 
a good idea of what is suitable for certain wards depending on the patient population.  
It has been shown that staff and residents can hold similar views on aspects of 
the environment, for example, feelings of confinement in the environment and not 
having enough one on one time between the two groups were parallel themes 
emerging from both groups in a study by Shattell et al., (2008). However this also 
showed that there are areas where staff and patients can disagree or have different 
experiences of the environment, for example, how quickly they feel time passes and 
how they view the outside world. Similar results were found in a study examining the 
effects of a redesign of a corridor area in a psychiatric hospital were the staff 
perception of the redesign was in marked contrast to the way the patients perceived 
the change. Patients perceived the change more positively, with a reduction in noise 
and perceiving it as a cleaner environment following the redesign. The staff group 
however, perceived the change negatively, in particular perceiving the corridor as less 
airy and bright following the redesign (Edgerton et al., 2010). 
Finally staff morale and stress levels have been examined following redesign 
of psychiatric wards in the literature. It was thought that redesigning a ward in a study 
by Tyson et al. (2002) would reduce the stress of staff in the long run but this was not 
the case. It was found that stress levels remained more or less the same as before, 
however this was accredited to the fact that the organisational climate of the ward had 
not changed with the physical environment. Studies have found differing effects on 
staffs levels of job satisfaction following a redesign of psychiatric wards. Generally it 
would be expected that job satisfaction would increase in a new improved physical 
environment as found by Stahler et al. (1984) but other studies have found that no 
increase occurs (Devlin, 1992; Tyson et al., 2002). This has been thought to be due to 
the stress associated with making the changes and the increased levels of staff burnout 
which have been found (Tyson et al., 2002). 
There are some aspects of the environment that residents and staff have similar 
perceptions of and some which they differ on. For example, both staff and patients 
rate having a noisy environment and not having a family caregiver present as 
environmental barriers to communication in a geriatric hospital ward (Ruan & 
Lambert, 2008). However, the same study found that staff rated the presence of a 
severely ill patient as a communication barrier with other patients while patients listed 
an uncomfortable room temperature as a barrier. In addition to this another study 
compared how people with dementia find their way about their care home and how 
the staff perceived that this happened. The residents with dementia were given a way 
finding task and this was compared to interviews that were carried out with the staff. 
Both residents and staff found that reference points were very important for way 
finding for the residents however there was a discrepancy between what the staff 
thought the residents used as reference points and what was actually used. Staff 
thought that the grandfather clock was important for way finding although in the way 
finding tasks no residents used that as a reference point. This may be because the 
clock has no meaning to the residents anymore as they are no longer able to tell the 
time (Passini et al., 2000).  
The final point to make about differences in perceptions of the environment is 
that different staff groups may have different perceptions of the environment 
depending on their role in the workplace. This was evident in a qualitative study by 
Shattell et al., (2008). For example, nurses felt that they wasted a lot of time doing 
what they felt was unnecessary paperwork and looking for residents in a poorly 
designed building but that the administration and management staff were unwilling to 
do anything to remedy these problems.  
 When designing new environments it is essential that all users are considered 
in the design interventions. This is key to the design of dementia friendly 
environments due to the fact that the staff group are frequent users of the environment 
as well as the residents. It is important especially in this environment as if staff user 
needs arent met then they will not be able to implement the desire standard of care 
for the residents. All users need to be happy with the modifications put in place 
because if one group is displeased then it will hinder the efficacy of the modification.  
 From the literature review contained in the previous three chapters it can be 
concluded that there are a number of gaps in knowledge that need to be addressed. 
The first is that very little is known about the living areas of dementia care homes and 
recommendations for dementia friendly design in these areas. The second gap in 
knowledge arises from the methodological criticisms that have been raised of 
previous research in examining dementia friendly environments. Research falls into 
two categories, either research that fails to include an empirical measure of behaviour 
of people with dementia and relies solely on the perceptions of staff and relatives or 
research that does include an empirical measure of behaviour; however the low 
sample sizes used present significant problems for generalising the results. The 
following chapter will outline the aims and objectives of the current research and 
demonstrate the ways in which the research will attempt to address these gaps in 
knowledge. 
Chapter 4 - Theoretical Background 
Given the interdisciplinary nature of environmental psychology, there is no one over-
arching theory of the environment  behaviour relationship (Cassidy, 1997). This is 
due to the complex nature of the relationship and the idea that it cannot be explained 
by just one simple theory. This lack of a unifying theory has been highlighted as one 
of the most pressing issues within the field of environmental psychology (Bell et al., 
1996).  
 A number of theories within environmental psychology have been developed, 
however these theories tend to be fairly simplistic in terms of explaining the 
environment  behaviour relationship and focus on specific aspects of the 
environment rather than taking a holistic perspective (Bell et al., 1996). These 
theories focus on a range of environmental aspects including; stimulation, control of 
the environment, environmental stressors and also a range of theories that examine 
how we perceive the environment, mainly drawing on Gestalt psychology. Below are 
examples of some of the theories which are commonly used in environmental 
psychology.  
The arousal approach states that since arousal is a mediator in many types of 
behaviour, different aspects of the environment can increase or decrease arousal 
leading to different behaviours. Variables such as crowding or noise are thought to 
increase arousal as shown in prisons (Cox et al., 1984) and in workplaces (Loewen & 
Suedfeld, 1992). Within a dementia environment the arousal approach may be evident 
in communal areas which may be subject to crowding, especially if staff, residents 
and visitors are using the area. However, this theory is very general, as it is difficult to 
assess which variables in the environment increase arousal and the impact this may 
have on behaviour. It also fails to make the distinction between pleasant and 
unpleasant arousal and individual differences in reactions to increased arousal levels.  
The environmental load approach is another stimulation theory which attempts 
to build on the arousal approach. It is based on attention and information processing 
models. This approach states that humans have a limited capacity to process incoming 
stimuli and when the amount of information from the environment exceeds that, the 
individual becomes over stimulated. If the level of stimulation is below this then the 
individual becomes under stimulated. Both over and under stimulation can lead to 
adverse reactions to the environment. Over stimulation has been observed in the 
workplace as increased noise decreases productivity (Loewen & Suedfeld, 1992). The 
reaction to overstimulation is referred to as tunnel vision where attempts are made 
to ignore less relevant tasks to focus attention on the important task. This can result in 
directed attentional fatigue. Under stimulation has been observed in psychiatric 
hospitals. It is suggested that under stimulation (or sensory deprivation) can result in 
negative effects such as severe anxiety (Zubek, 1969). It has been suggested that 
environments should be complex and interesting in certain circumstances to provide 
adequate levels of stimulation (Bell et al., 1996).  Again, this theory could be applied 
to dementia environments with stimulation coming from other residents, television or 
staff in the environment. However, from the perspective of this research arousal 
theories have not been included in the design of this study due to the fact that the 
cognitive decline associated with dementia produces can result in a increased 
sensitivity to the environment (Marshall, 1998) making it difficult to determine what 
optimal stimulation levels for each person with dementia would be.  
 The environmental stress approach takes the view that many elements in the 
environment are stressors, such as crowding, noise, natural disasters and illness in 
others. It is thought that when an individual experiences a stressor they appraise 
whether or not it is threatening. If the individual thinks the stressor is threatening then 
certain responses are triggered which may be physiological or coping strategies 
(Lazarus, 1966). If the coping response is successful then adaptation to the stressor 
occurs but if not successful the individual enters a stage of exhaustion. Within 
dementia environments, this theory could be applied as there will be stressors which 
occur for residents in the environment, such as aggression from other residents. 
Again, this theory is very general and is difficult to relate to a specialised population, 
like dementia sufferers as it would be difficult to determine exact stressors in an 
environment so would not be useful to help understand the present research.  
 As mentioned previously, there is no one dominant theory of how the 
environment affects behaviour. Within environmental psychology the view is that no 
one theory is correct, rather it is important to understand each environment and try to 
evaluate which theory best fits and enhances the understanding of the behaviour  
environment relationship in that setting (Cassidy, 1997). To understand how this 
works, the environment being studied must be examined on an individual basis. For 
example, it would be difficult to use the same theories to understand behaviour in the 
work place as behaviour in prisons because the features of each environment are 
different and therefore have a different impact on users.   
It is common in environmental psychology that there may be an interaction 
between a number of factors therefore a range of theories may be used to understand 
the environment  behaviour relationship within one specific environment. There are 
a number of theories that comprise the theoretical background to the research 
conducted within this thesis. Two of these relate directly to explaining the 
environment  behaviour relationship. These theories both try to explore the 
relationship between the users of the environment and their behaviour; one takes a 
general view and the other looks at the environment with the needs of a more specific 
group, namely, people with disabilities in mind. Additional theories will also be 
examined which may help to explain more specifically how the environment may 
impact on behaviour of people with dementia. These theories will be used to inform 
the design of the research as well as the design of the intervention for the 
environments. The theories will be discussed with reference to the literature discussed 
in the previous chapters.  
4.1 Theories of Environment-Behaviour Relationship 
4.1.1 Lawtons Environmental Docility Hypothesis 
Lawton (1990) points out that the environment  behaviour relationship can change 
throughout the lifespan and in particular in later life when age associated changes in 
physical health, cognition and social and economical circumstances can occur. 
Therefore it is important to identify older people as a unique user group and in 
particular older people with dementia when thinking about the environment- 
behaviour relationship.  
Lawton's (1979) Environmental Docility Hypothesis discusses the idea of 
creating a therapeutic environment for elderly people. The term therapeutic 
environment is defined by Lawton as a physical and organisational environment that 
supports the functioning of an elderly person by counteracting the deficits that are 
associated with growing old in our society. The Environmental Docility Hypothesis 
posits that normal living environments can become increasingly disabling for a 
person with a disability, especially as that disability worsens. It also states that the 
normal environment can act as a barrier to well-being and independence. This is 
based on the idea that the environment becomes a stronger determinant of behaviour 
as personal competence decreases (Lawton, 1990). Lawton highlights that interactions 
with the environment generally occur on an unconscious basis until some factor 
changes to disturb the relationship. One factor may be a decline in cognitive function 
due to dementia. This reduces a persons competence and therefore an environment in 
which they have previously functioned and interacted well in could become 
challenging to the person.  This is true for people with dementia, who; for example, 
due to memory impairment may not remember where the toilet is in their own homes. 
This can lead to increased incidences of incontinence. In this case, the incontinence is 
not due to an inability to control the bladder, as most caregivers would assume, but 
due to the person being unable to locate the bathroom. An experience like this can be 
extremely embarrassing for both the person with dementia and for a caregiver. If the 
underlying problem is not addressed it may result in the person with dementia having 
to wear incontinence pads. This could be very frustrating for the person and impinge 
on their independence; especially because they still have the ability to use the toilet 
but there is an obstacle in the environment which is preventing them from doing so.  
On the positive side, Lawton states that very small and simple environmental 
modifications can have a disproportionate strong, positive effect on the well-being 
and independence of a person with dementia. This view uses environmental design to 
make up for losses in personal competence. Examples of this include providing 
wheelchair access, glass fronted kitchen cabinets and seating space at activity nodes 
(Lawton, 1990). To return to the example of the person not being able to find the 
toilet, simple solutions such as leaving the bathroom door open so that the toilet is 
visible to the person and provides a visual memory cue or putting in place a simple 
sign to indicate to them where the toilet is, would help the person to find the toilet and 
may reduce incidences of incontinence. Lipman and Slater (1979) have a similar idea 
to Lawton and state that changes to the physical and social environment such as 
increasing privacy, providing relevant environmental amenities to provide activities 
within residents capabilities and promoting integration can help to maintain day-to-
day levels of functioning in care home residents. 
Applications of Lawtons environmental docility hypothesis are evident in 
much of the research outlined previously in chapter 2. The studies carried out by 
Namazi and his colleagues are a good example of small interventions in the 
environment having an increasingly positive impact on the residents (e.g., Namazi et 
al., 1989). Much of this research is problem orientated where a specific issue in the 
environment is addressed, for example an area where there are problems with the 
residents interacting with the environment and various interventions are put in place 
to try to address this problem. Some examples of this are; the use of various 
interventions to conceal an emergency exit which both posed both a safety issue for 
residents and a source of frustration causing agitation, other studies focused on 
providing signage to help residents find the bathroom and personalisation of 
bedrooms to help with way finding also. In all of these studies, the intervention but in 
place was relatively simple but appeared to have disproportionate positive results as 
Lawtons environmental docility hypothesis suggests.     
In summary, Lawtons Environmental Docility Hypothesis demonstrates how 
the environment can become disabling for people with dementia. This highlights the 
unique environment  behaviour relationship that people with dementia have. Normal 
environments may be disabling for people with dementia in ways which may not be 
obvious. However, small and simple interventions may have a disproportionate 
positive effect on people with dementia. Within the current study, this theory will be 
used to underpin the development of the intervention in the physical environment. 
The study aims to develop a simple and cost-effective intervention in the living areas 
of dementia care homes to improve the well-being of the people using the space. The 
following section includes theories which aim to describe in more detail the process 
of the environment behaviour relationship for people with dementia.  
4.1.2 Behaviour Constraint Approach  
The second theory underpinning the research is the Behaviour-Constraint Approach 
(Proshanky et al., 1970). This is commonly used in Environmental Psychology 
research and focuses more on the environment-behaviour relationship in general 
rather than on a specific user group like dementia sufferers. There are three main 
stages of this theory which are outlined in figure 4.1.  
Figure 4.1- Model of behaviour constraint approach to the environment-behaviour 
relationship 
Stage 1 is the user perceiving a loss of control over the environment. The important 
point here is that it does not have to be actual loss of control; the person just has to 
perceive they have lost control of their environment or are being constrained by their 
environment in some way. This loss of control would generally result in negative 
feelings or discomfort. The initial reaction to this perceived loss of control would be 
Stage 1- Perceived loss of control 
over an aspect of the environment 
Stage 2- Reactance against loss of 
control 
Stage 3- Learned helplessness 
Repeated failed attempts  
to regain control 
to try and resolve it. This is the second stage of the model, known as reactance, and 
this is where a person tries to regain control over the situation after the first 
experience of loss of control. If attempts to regain control are repeatedly unsuccessful 
then the person would move to the final stage of the model and develop learned 
helplessness (Garber & Seligman, 1981). This may have a more pronounced impact 
on people with dementia as they are more sensitive to the environment and may have 
less understanding of the control they have of the environment (Marshall, 1998). 
Learned helplessness is essentially when the person learns that they are helpless to 
change anything about their environment following numerous failed attempts to 
regain control. This is commonly observed in institutional environments and is 
associated with depression. An example of this would be a dementia resident who felt 
that they had no control over the volume of the TV in the living room. After 
continually having their requests to turn it down ignored (over a long period of time) 
they may develop learned helplessness and that there is nothing they can do to control 
this. This would result in continual negative reactions to the loud noise which could 
then lead to residents withdrawing socially and displaying passive behaviour.  
Averill (1973) distinguished three different types of environmental control. 
These were behavioural control; where a behavioural response can change the 
environment, for example turning off the loud TV, cognitive control; which is 
thinking about the environment in a different way so that it becomes less threatening, 
for example deciding to concentrate on the television programme rather than the 
excessive noise and finally decisional control where there is a choice of other 
situations to move away from the threatening environment, for example moving away 
from the television to another area.  
Much of the previous research discussed in chapter 2 shows evidence of the 
behaviour constraint model. For example, in Shwarz et al.s (2004) study of a 
renovation of a dementia care home, the recreational space was reduced from one 
large space into a number of smaller spaces. This had a positive impact on the usage 
of the spaces and less agitation and aggression in the room. This positive impact may 
be due to the increased decisional choice that residents in have in how they use the 
space. From the research reviewed in the previous chapter, it appears that from the 
little research that has been carried out in the living area the focus has always been on 
providing a choice of smaller areas. This is why the behaviour constraint model has 
been used within the current research. It appears that control may be an important 
factor in the environment-behaviour relationship in care homes. Manipulating control 
through decisional control is also a straightforward approach to the environment-
behaviour relationship compared to manipulating stimulation, for example. The 
choice of areas are available to everyone using the space, however stimulation may be 
a more individual variable as each individual may have a differing levels of optimal 
stimulation.  
The present research aims to apply this theory by removing the perceived loss 
of decisional control in living areas of dementia care homes by providing a choice of 
areas to sit rather than the one large living area with no other options. It is thought that 
providing a choice to residents will increase their perceived feelings of control of the 
environment. It is hoped that this will remove any feelings of learned helplessness and 
have a positive effect on the behaviours displayed by the residents as well as 
improving the residents well being.  
 This theory has been included in this research over other general 
environmental psychology theories for a number of reasons. Firstly, initial visits were 
made to care homes in the early stages of this research and it was noted that the living 
areas did not provide any choice in the environment. While residents in theory may 
have had control of the environment as they could move the chairs to suit them, it was 
unlikely that they perceived having this control. Secondly, within the living areas 
there were a number of behaviours observed which can be associated with learned 
helplessness indicating that this may have developed in residents using the space. 
Finally, much of the previous research in this area has shown evidence of the 
behaviour constraint model at work, this is described above.  
4.1.3 Restorative effects of nature 
Attention Restoration Theory (ART) (Kaplan & Kaplan, 1989) discusses the positive 
effects of nature on the restoration of cognitive functioning. It begins with positing 
that the requirements of daily living use a great deal of directed attention which 
requires a lot of effort and can lead to mental fatigue. This can be manifested in a 
number of ways including poor concentration, increased irritability, increased rates of 
errors on given tasks and greater risk of stress. ART theorises that restoration from 
this mental fatigue can occur in settings that do not require a great deal of attention. 
This gives the mechanisms associated with directed attention time to recover and 
regain full capacity to direct attention. There are a number of qualities of natural 
environments that allow for restoration of cognitive functioning. Firstly, that it gives a 
sense of being away from the pressures and routines of daily life. The second 
quality is the idea that nature is fascinating. This posits that nature is aesthetically 
pleasing and encourages exploration although it does not require direct attention to 
process. This is linked to evolutionary history of being in nature. The final aspect of 
nature is that there is generally a high compatibility between what a person wants to 
do in the environment and what the environment affords.  ART does not say however 
that all natural environments possess restorative qualities or that unnatural 
environments do not have restorative qualities. The theory does however highlight 
that natural environments do have certain qualities that are restorative and are 
commonly perceived as restorative (Berto, 2005). 
 Ulrich (1993) however felt that restoration occurred more often than just in 
times of mental fatigue. For example restoration is required after exposure to a 
threatening stimulus, which can produce high levels of stress. This stems from his 
psycho-evolutionary framework which states that early humans typically used low-
risk natural environments for the purpose of restoration following an encounter with a 
predator or threat. This is still relevant today because those who combat stress most 
effectively had better survival rates. Ulrich described the benefits of restoration as 
being greater than just the ability to direct attention but also 
A shift toward more positively toned emotional state, mitigation of deleterious 
effects of physiological mobilization (e.g. reduced blood pressure, reduction in 
stress hormones) and the recharging of energy expended in the physiological 
arousal and behaviour (Ulrich, 1993 p 99). 
 Although the theories on the restorative benefits of nature are quite general, it 
is hoped that they can also be applied to people with dementia. Dementia sufferers are 
especially vulnerable to stressors and have a reduced capacity to deal with stress, 
which may manifest in agitated type behaviours. It is hoped that providing views of 
nature from the windows of the lounge areas in this study will have a restorative 
effect for the dementia sufferers in the care home which may be manifested in a 
positive change in the behaviour of the residents. The theories that have been 
discussed up until this point have dealt with ways in which the environment may 
impact on behaviour and also how the environment may impact specifically on 
someone with a disability such as dementia. However, it is also important to have an 
understanding of the theories that try to explain the behaviour of dementia sufferers 
generally in order to try to gain knowledge of the underlying process involved in the 
behaviour. 
 Chalfont (1997) developed the idea of creating edge spaces for people with 
dementia, as discussed in chapter 2. These spaces, which provide visual access to 
nature, appear to have a positive impact people with dementia. Although Chalfont has 
only conducted initial qualitative case studies looking at the impact of edge spaces, 
ART may be an explanation as to why these edge spaces appear to have a positive 
effect. This research will incorporate the idea of edge spaces into the design of the 
intervention with the theoretical underpinning that views of nature can have a 
therapeutic effect, therefore having a positive impact on the behaviour of dementia 
sufferers using the space.  
4.2 Theories of behaviour of dementia sufferers 
The previous sections have attempted to describe the environment  behaviour 
relationship for people with dementia. However, as mentioned in chapters 1 and 3, 
there are a range of behavioural symptoms which are associated with dementia, such 
as agitation and passivity. It is important to attempt to understand the factors that 
influence these behaviours as this will also have an impact on the environment  
behaviour relationship. There have been many attempts to try to explain the causes of 
the behavioural symptoms associated with dementia such as passive behaviour or 
agitation, although most of these are from a medical perspective.  
 The Needs-Driven Dementia-Compromised Behavior model (NDB) (Algase et 
al., 1996) attempts to conceptualise the disruptive behaviours of people with dementia 
as a result of the persons unmet needs. This is developed from Maslows (1954) 
hierarchy of needs which rated human needs from lower order needs such as 
physiological needs, to higher order needs such as love, self-esteem and the highest of 
all needs, self actualisation. Maslow termed the lower levels of need deficiency 
needs which need to be met before needs at the highest level can be met.  
Figure 4.2 Need-driven dementia-compromised behaviour model (reproduced from 
Kolanowski, 1999 p 8).  
The NDB model suggests that behaviour of people with dementia is a result of the 
interaction between proximal factors (i.e. basic physiological needs) and background 
factors which may be dementia compromised as shown in figure 4.2.  The model is 
based on the idea that people with dementia have specific needs; however background 
BACKGROUND FACTORS 
Dementia  Compromised functions 
 Circadian rhythm  
 Motor ability 
 Memory 
 language 
Health state demographic variables 
 Gender 
 Race and ethnicity 
 Marital status 
 Education  
 Occupation 
Psychosocial Variables 
 Personality 
 Behavioural response to 
stress 
PROXIMAL FACTORS 
Physiological need state 
 Hunger or thirst 
 Elimination 
 Pain 
 Discomfort 
 Sleep disturbance 
Psychosocial need state 
 Affect 
 Match of assistance to 
ability 
Physical environment 
 Light level 
 Sound level 
 Heat index 
Social environment 
 Staff mix 
 Staff stability  
 Ward ambiance 
 Presence of others 
BEHAVIOUR 
Physical aggression 
Wandering 
Problematic vocalizations 
factors which are dementia-comprised prevent these needs from being met. If the 
needs are not met then there are negative consequences for the person involved, 
resulting in problematic behaviour including aggression, agitation or passivity. The 
model shows how changeable proximal factors such as physiological needs or the 
physical and social environment can interact with more stable background factors e.g., 
impaired memory, language or personality changes can result in disruptive behaviours 
as a response to the needs not being met (Kolanowski, 1999). According to this model 
disruptive behaviours are the result of unmet needs rather than specific dementia 
symptoms. The need-driven dementia-compromised behaviour is thought to be a 
meaningful response to the interaction between the background and proximal factors. 
This response should be interpreted as this rather than simply a disruption in order to 
develop an intervention to improve the behaviour. For example, physical aggression 
may be the result of an emphasis of the person with dementias premorbid coping 
mechanisms for stress (background factor) and the stress may have arisen from high 
levels of noise in the environment (proximal factor) (Kolanowski, Strand & Whall, 
1997).  
From this model effective interventions can be designed to combat the 
disruptive behaviour by isolating proximal factors (for instance in the physical or 
social environment) and manipulating them in a way to prevent, reduce or eliminate 
the behaviours. The NDB model provides an understanding of the proximal and 
background factors which need to be manipulated to provide effective interventions to 
combat these problem behaviours (Colling, 2004). As shown in the NDB model the 
physical and social environments have a role to play in influencing behaviour and can 
be an important tool in developing interventions in order to improve behaviours 
viewed as disruptive or problematic in people with dementia.  
 The NDB model can also be linked to the theories discussed previously 
relating to the environment  behaviour relationship. Lawtons Environmental 
Docility hypothesis states that normal environments become increasingly disabling 
for people with dementia, especially as the dementia progresses. This may be an 
indication that people with dementias needs of the physical environment have 
changed and they are unable to function in the environment as they had previously, 
resulting in negative behaviour as the NDB model posits. Again, as Lawton and the 
NDB model points out, small interventions can have disproportionate benefits in 
addressing the problems the environment pose. Similarly, the behaviour constraint 
model discusses the impact that a loss of perceived control has on behaviour in the 
environment. This again could be related to the NDB model in that the symptoms of 
dementia have compromised the control people perceive they have over their 
environment. The cognitive decline that characterises dementia may reduce the 
awareness sufferers have of their environment and therefore are less likely to be able 
to interact and adapt their environment to suit their needs. Creating a choice of areas 
for people to use can therefore increase perceived control by providing options on 
how to use the space as well as better meeting the needs of the people with dementia, 
therefore having a positive impact on the use of the space and the behaviour displayed 
there.   
 It is hoped that the NDB model will help to explain the reasons behind the 
behaviours observed in dementia sufferers in this study and therefore help to inform 
the design of the intervention along with the other theories discussed in this section. 
For example, if the living area of the care homes does not meet the needs of the 
residents then according to the NDB model it will result in disruptive behaviours of 
the residents. If the intervention in this study is designed to make the living areas meet 
the needs of the residents more effectively it could result in a decrease in the 
disruptive behaviour observed. 
4.3 Chapter Summary 
 In summary, a number of theories have been discussed in this chapter which 
help to understand the environment  behaviour relationship from a person with 
dementias perspective. As mentioned, there is no one over-arching theory in 
environmental psychology and a number of theories are commonly used in order to 
understand the complex relationship. Overall the theories discussed in this chapter 
help us to understand the relationship between the environment and behaviour and 
more specifically the relationship between the environment and the behaviour of 
people with dementia. One thing that all four theories discussed have in common is 
that they all indicate that the environment can be used as a tool to improve behaviours 
which are perceived as problematic in people with dementia. The four theories 
discussed in this chapter will now be used to underpin and inform the design of the 
intervention, the design of the research and to consider the results of the results from 
this PhD research.  
Chapter 5 - Aims, Objectives and Hypotheses 
This PhD project aims to positively impact on the behaviour of care home residents 
with dementia by implementing an intervention in the physical environment of seven 
living areas of dementia care homes. From reviewing the literature on dementia 
friendly environments it appears that there is relatively little research examining the 
design of living areas. As residents spend a large majority of their day in the living 
areas it seems that this is an important area that has been overlooked in previous 
research. The literature tends to either focus on large scale renovations of dementia 
units or on addressing specific behaviour problems. In both of these types of research 
there has been very little focus on what behaviours occur in the lounge area and if the 
design can encourage positive behaviours and/or discourage negative behaviours 
which may positively impact on quality of life. This may be due to the nature of the 
research carried out in dementia friendly environments. Much of the research comes 
from a nursing or care background where the focus is on dealing with problematic 
behaviour (e.g., reducing wandering) and creating more efficient workplaces (e.g., 
positioning of nursing stations) rather than from an environmental psychology 
perspective.  
While these are both a very important focus of research, it appears that 
research which attempts to design interventions to increase positive behaviours has 
been neglected somewhat. Also, previous research has focused on other areas of the 
care home, out with the living areas. This may be because the living area is not 
viewed as a problematic area and while the design is not ideal it does not appear to be 
a visible source of problems. However, according to Lawtons Docility Hypothesis 
the living area may have become a source of disability to the residents using the 
space. This links to the Behaviour Constraint Model which attempts to describe a way 
in which the living environment may be hindering the environment- behaviour 
relationship for the residents. As the living areas do not have a clear purpose residents 
may feel that they do not have any control over how to use the room, or to use the 
room in the way they would like to.  
In light of this, the present research will focus on the design of the living areas 
of dementia care homes and make simple, small and cost effective modifications in 
line with Lawtons Environmental Docility Hypothesis (1979) and the behaviour 
constraint model. This is the idea that providing choice and therefore giving control of 
the environment to the residents by enabling them to make decisions themselves.  
The present research has been designed to examine the effect that specific 
changes in the environment have on people with dementia living in a residential care 
home setting on a larger scale than has previously been done using a mixed 
methodology to provide empirical evidence for the efficacy of the changes. There are 
seven specific aims of this research. The following section will discuss each aim, 
including the justification and how it will be met.  
 As discussed in chapter 2, there has been very little research carried out in the 
living areas of dementia care homes. It was for this reason that the living areas of care 
homes were chosen as the focus of the current research. The first aim of this research 
therefore was to:  
 Evaluate the current living environments of dementia care homes in the West 
of Scotland 
This aim was met in the early stages of the research where visits to a number of care 
homes in the West of Scotland were arranged. Notes were taken at each visit in order 
to help inform the research and to recruit potential participants in the research (these 
can be found in appendix 1).  
 The research will be centred on the impact of an intervention in the living 
areas of the care homes. Therefore the second aim is to: 
 Develop an intervention based on the principles and theories discussed below 
and put in place in seven environments. 
While it is acknowledged that the interventions will not be exactly the same in each 
case study due to the differences in the existing physical environments, they will be 
based on the same underlying principles. These principles have been developed based 
on previous research and theory discussed in the previous chapters. These principles 
- To create a choice of areas for residents to use by rearranging the existing 
furniture within the room.   
- To introduce edge spaces within the new layout of furniture.  
The first principle is based on previous research which has indicated that providing a 
choice of smaller areas as social or living areas in healthcare environments is more 
beneficial to residents than having one large area (Calkins, 1999). This principle is 
also linked to both of the environment- behaviour theories which are outlined in the 
previous chapter. Firstly, the design of the living room pre-intervention was 
preventing residents using it as a living area should be as described in Lawtons 
Environmental Docility hypothesis. However, the intervention consists of a simple 
modification using the furniture which is already in the environment which links to 
the second part of Lawtons Environmental Docility hypothesis that a small 
intervention can have a disproportionate positive impact on the quality of life of the 
residents living there. Secondly, it is linked to the Behaviour Constraint model as 
providing a choice of areas should increase the perceived control residents have of the 
living area, therefore improving the environment  behaviour relationship and having 
a positive impact on the residents. The intervention should provide a choice of areas 
to sit at, which in turn, will provide residents with an element of decisional control 
over their environment. This should allow them to come into the space and use it 
more effectively as the intervention aims to change the room from a large area with 
no clear function to an area which is multi-functional. The different areas will 
encompass spaces designed for watching television, for socialising, for looking out of 
the window and space for people to sit alone. Within this, other activities will also be 
possible. This allows residents to choose how they wish to use the room and have 
control over the way in which they use the room. 
 The second principle of the intervention is linked directly to the work carried 
out by Chalfont (1999). While this principle is linked to the first principle in that it is 
included in the overall intervention and the furniture arrangement will allow for edge 
spaces to be created, it has been highlighted as a separate principle due to having a 
further theoretical background. The Attention Restoration Theory (ART) states that 
views of nature can have a therapeutic effect and allow for restoration from mental 
fatigue. This is thought to relate to dementia also as high levels of agitation can be a 
cause of mental fatigue. Therefore, it is thought that by providing access to nature via 
the creation of edge spaces it may have a positive effect on residents and reduce 
agitation in the living spaces.  
However, a problem with much of the previous research is that small sample 
sizes hinder the generalisability of the research. Due to the small numbers of residents 
living in each dementia care home it is not possible to have one large sample. This is a 
methodological drawback of much of the research in dementia friendly environments 
highlighted in chapter 3. Therefore the third aim of this research is to  
 Implement the intervention in a number of environments to develop a strong 
evidence base.  
In order to address the methodological issue of small sample sizes in previous 
research which has included an empirical measure of behaviour, the present research 
will adopt a case study methodology. Yin (2003) has written extensively about the 
advantages and methodology of the case study approach to research in the social 
sciences (A full review of the case study approach can be found below in section 
6.1.1).  
A multiple case study design will be used in which seven living environments 
will be identified as the units of analysis. The case studies will examine the impact of 
the interventions in the physical environment in each study and use the contextual 
information gathered on each environment to conduct a pattern matching and cross-
case analysis to allow for generalisation of the results to the wider care home 
population. The case studies will be selected to represent a range of different care 
homes and architectural layouts in order to strengthen the generalisability of the 
results.  
From the case study perspective the selection of case studies is an important 
part of the research process and should be selected in order to represent a variety of 
different environments. It is hoped that by identifying similarities and differences 
between case studies it will strengthen the generalisability of the results. In the 
research one case study is defined as a separate living environment that is accessible 
by all residents living in the care home. Some case studies may be within the same 
care home, however will be treated as separate case studies as although they may 
share contextual information, the actual spaces will be different and have different 
qualities.  
 In the theoretical background in chapter 4, a number of theories are set out 
which underpin this research and in particular help to design the intervention. From 
each of the four theories it is clear that making small interventions in the environment 
can have a positive impact on the behaviour of residents using the space. This may be 
through increasing perceived control of the environment through choice, designing 
the environment in a way to better address the residents needs or by compensating 
for disabilities through small environmental improvements. In addition to this, a lot of 
previous research has neglected to include an objective measure of behaviour of 
residents as discussed in chapter 2, instead relying on staff and visitors perceptions of 
behaviour. It is for these reasons that the fourth aim of this research is to: 
 Assess the behaviour of residents in the living area and use in a pre/post 
comparison of the behaviour. 
This will be addressed by developing an objective measure of behaviour, using a 
behaviour mapping methodology. This will allow behaviour to be assessed for a 
period of time pre intervention and then again for the same period of time post 
intervention, to allow a comparison of the behaviours displayed in the lounge area. 
This will be discussed in the following chapter in more detail.  
 As discussed in chapter 3, the staff group are also an important user group to 
consider when designing care homes for people with dementia. Staff groups can 
spend a great deal of time in the environments as well, but however may have 
differing needs of the environment from residents using the space. Staff may also play 
an important part in the success of any intervention which is put in place in the 
environment, again as discussed in chapter 3. It is for this reason that staff views will 
be collected within this research also, and therefore the fifth aim is to: 
 Assess the perceptions of the intervention in the living area of the care home 
staff. 
This will be met by carrying out staff focus groups or interviews with staff members 
following the intervention. It is hoped that staff will be able to give their views on the 
intervention as well as their general knowledge about the impact of the environment 
in dementia care. It is also hoped that the staff focus groups and interviews will 
provide supporting information for the behaviour mapping data.  
 As mentioned previously, the intervention was developed based on two 
principles. These principles were based on the theories discussed in chapter 4 as well 
as previous research. The design of the present research is such that the principles will 
inform the intervention in seven different environments. By adopting a case study 
approach to this research it is hoped that generalisabilty of the results will be 
increased. The results of this study will then be discussed in terms of the theoretical 
background and the impact the interventions have had on behaviour of residents with 
dementia living in care home environments. It is hoped that the generalisation of the 
results of the seven case studies will inform future designs of care homes. Therefore 
the final two aims of this research are to: 
 Discuss and assess the changes in behaviour in terms of use for future 
modification of dementia environments.  
 Provide a basis of research that can reliably inform future design of dementia 
care homes. 
This research will look at the effect of the environmental modifications 
specifically on the behaviours of the residents while they are in the living area and 
will include a focus on positive and negative behaviours and social interactions.  
The main focus of the research will be on the behaviour of the residents using 
the living area. This will be assessed pre and post intervention using behaviour 
mapping. Although the aims cover a wider scope of research, the research hypotheses 
link only to the behaviour of residents. This is because the theoretical underpinning 
proposes that the intervention should have a clear impact on the behaviour of the 
residents as described previously. The main research hypothesis is that there will be a 
difference in observed behaviour of the residents pre and post modification of the 
living areas. More specifically it is hypothesised that there will be:  
a) A decrease in agitation of the residents following the modification 
b) An increase in interactions following the modification 
c) An increase in positive behaviours such as active behaviour following the 
modification  
d) A decrease in negative behaviours such as passive behaviour following the 
modification  
Implementing these small, cost effective interventions in seven living areas of 
three dementia care homes is expected to provide empirical evidence for positive 
changes in behaviour of the residents which will impact on quality of life. From there 
it is expected that the results of this study will go on to provide a basis of evidence to 
reliably inform the design of living areas in dementia care homes in the future. The 
interventions implemented in this study are based mainly on the re-arrangement of 
furniture in the living area, from the common layout of furniture pushed back around 
the walls into an area which provides residents with a choice of areas to sit in. This 
will hopefully encourage a range of activities and positive behaviours which may 
impact positively on the quality of life and independence of residents. It will also have 
an impact on staff, freeing their time to develop stronger relationships with residents 
rather than spending time dealing with problematic behaviour. Ultimately, this study 
aims to provide a simple solution for changing living areas in dementia care homes 
from large spaces without a clear purpose to multi-purpose rooms which are used in a 
positive way by residents and to the rooms full potential.  
Chapter 6 Methodology 
6.1 Design 
In order to address the research aims set out in the previous chapter this study adopted 
a mixed methodology drawing on both quantitative and qualitative measures. The 
study used a repeated measure design which involved collecting data for a predefined 
period both before and after the environmental intervention was put in place.  
The research takes a case study approach as described by Yin (2003). A 
review of this approach can be found below in section 6.1.1. The research consists of 
seven separate case studies of different living areas within dementia care homes. A 
case study is defined as a separate living environment within a care home or unit 
within a care home which all residents can access and use freely. This means that 
units with two separate lounges will be treated as different case studies. This will be 
explained further in the descriptions of each case study below.  The case study 
approach will allow the impact of the intervention to be examined in each of the 
environments individually. Further analysis of the contextual information from each 
case study will allow cross case conclusions to be made from the seven studies and 
allow generalisations of the results. The living environment(s) in each care home 
participating were modified from the existing furniture arrangement of all the 
furniture pushed against the outskirts of the room in a large circle to a furniture 
arrangement which was based on the principles outlined in the previous chapter, 
namely providing residents with a choice of areas to use and a connection to nature. 
The variables that were measured are the overall usage of the area, the different types 
of behaviours displayed by residents in the area. Behaviours were classified into three 
main categories; these were agitation, active behaviours and inactive behaviours. 
These were then divided into more specific behaviours which are described in full 
below.  Contextual information on each care home and living environment were also 
collected. This included measures of the perceptions of the environment from staff 
and relatives and measures of the quality and therapeutic environment of the care 
home.  
6.1.1 Review of the case study approach 
Yin (2003) has written extensively about the advantages and methodology of 
the case study approach to research in the social sciences. The following section will 
summarise the approach and outline the approach which will be taken in the present 
research.  
Case studies can be used to study many different types of phenomena, 
including single people, communities, organisations, cities, towns and in the case of 
the present research separate environments in dementia care homes. Case studies are a 
useful approach to research as they allow phenomena to be studied in its real-life 
context which is particularly useful as in many cases it is not easy to separate the unit 
of study from its context (Yin, 2003). This is particularly appropriate to 
environmental psychology as the majority of research takes place in natural settings 
and takes a holistic approach to studying the environment-behaviour relationship. It 
examines the context behaviour occurs in rather than identifying one particular aspect 
of the environment to study (Bell et al., 1996).  
Yin (2003) sets out a number of technical principles which help to define case 
study research. These include; that within a case study there may be many more 
variables that are of interest to the investigator rather than just the initial focus of the 
study, that case studies rely on a triangulation of sources to provide an evidence base 
and that the development of theoretical propositions is important to guide data 
collection and analysis. It should also be noted at this point, that case studies can 
include both qualitative and quantitative methods of data collection and analysis. 
Previous literature has tended to focus on qualitative research as case study approach, 
for instance referring to ethnographic research as case studies which may not always 
be the case (e.g., Denzin & Lincoln, 1994, in Yin, 2003 p 14).  The design of the 
present research will address these principles, which were described in Chapter 5.  
One common criticism of the case study approach is that case studies do not 
allow for scientific generalisation. Yin argues that this is not the case, and that case 
studies are generalisable, like experiments, due to theoretical propositions. He furthers 
this by explaining that case studies aim for analytic generalisation where the aim is 
to explain and expand on theories through the analysis. This is in contrast to 
statistical generalisation which aims to enumerate frequencies from the analysis. In 
addition to this, the generalisability of case study results can be increased if a multiple 
case study design is adopted. When using a multiple case study approach however, 
replication is key (Yin, 2003). When selecting cases for a multiple case study design it 
is important to consider the reasons for doing so. This can either be that the case study 
is a literal replication and therefore predicts the same results as the initial case study 
or that it is a theoretical replication and choosing the number of case studies in a 
multiple case study design. He posits that 6-10 case studies, as long as they are 
arranged effectively is an adequate number. This is likened to the ability to conduct 6-
10 experiments on a phenomenon where 23 of the studies would involve literal 
replication and studies 4-6 would be designed to pursue theoretical replication.  
The process of conducting multiple case study research is outlined below in 
figure 6.1. This highlights the importance of a strong theoretical basis to the research 
which influences the design of the individual case study as well as the selection of 
cases (i.e. what the unit of analysis for each case study is). Figure 5.1 also highlights 
the way that multiple case study research can be used to generalise findings, firstly by 
writing individual case study reports followed by a cross-case study report which 
highlights similarities and differences from each individual case study and allows for 
reflection on the theories used to design the study.  
Figure 6.1 Case study method (Yin, 2003 p50) 
As mentioned, one advantage of adopting a multiple case study design is that 
as well as within-case analysis, it also allows for cross-case analysis. It is important 
when analysing case study data to have a strategy for analysis from the outset in order 
to ensure efficient and consistent analysis of the data collected for each case study. 
The most popular method of data analysis in case study research is pattern matching 
logic, where the empirical results from a case study are matched to a predicted pattern 
established from the theoretical basis. This can then be continued for analysis of 
subsequent cases. This can then lead to a cross-case synthesis which treats every case 
as a separate study, creating tables which display the data from all the case studies. 
Conduct 
remaining case 
studies 
Conduct 1
study 
Conduct 2
study 
This allows for visual analysis of the data to identify patterns and differences between 
cases. From this the contextual information from each case study can be used to 
formulate conclusions and arguments which are supported by the data. At this stage, 
the analysis is based on interpretation, therefore it is important to be able to develop 
strong arguments for patterns emerging using the contextual data available and strong 
theoretical principles.  
The method of cross-case synthesis strengthens the generalisations which can 
be made from the case study findings. Pattern matching across cases allows for the 
information about the characteristics of each case to be compared to what is known 
about the characteristics of the population to which the results are generalised to. It is 
important in these cases to gather information about the heterogeneity of the cases in 
order to describe the context of the case (Foster, Gomm & Hammersley 2000). 
Selection of cases that represent a wide range of the characteristics of the population 
the research is intended to generalise to can create a sample of cases which allows 
effective generalisation (Foster et al., 2000 p 107). 
6.2 Materials  
A number of tools were used to collect data for this research.  
6.2.1 Behaviour mapping tool 
This was the main method of data collection for the study. Behavioural mapping is an 
observation technique that is commonly used in environmental psychology and in 
healthcare environments. It involves making systematic observations in a specified 
area at time intervals and classifying the behaviour of the individuals using the area 
(Bonnes & Secchiaroli, 1995). Behavioural mapping uses a pre-constructed coding 
system which is developed through a number of steps. Firstly the area that is being 
studied is defined, followed by a preliminary observation of the types of behaviours 
that occur in the area. From this, a coding form is developed which categorises 
behaviour and interactions that are specific to the area (Bell et al., 1996). The 
behaviour coding system in this case was developed based on preliminary 
observations of the areas being studied and previous research which has used 
behaviour mapping with a dementia or geriatric psychiatric population (Cohen-
Mansfield et al., 1989; Ittelson et al., 1970; and Devlin, 1992). The behaviour coding 
system that was developed had 3 main behaviour categories which were split into 3-4 
sub-categories of more specific behaviours. These are outlined in figure 6.2 along 
with the code that has been assigned to each behaviour.  
Figure 6.2- Behaviour coding categories for Care Home A 
Behaviour Category Specific Sub-Category Code 
Agitation Aggressive 
Physical non-aggressive 
Vocal 
Other 
Active Activity 
Eating/drinking 
Interaction 
Inactive behaviour Content 
Passive 
 The behaviour mapping codes were developed based on previous literature 
examining the behaviour of residents within care homes and also from preliminary 
observations to the care home along with discussions with staff and management. A 
full description of the behaviour codes can be found in appendix 2.  
The agitation behaviour category was developed based on the categories 
defined by Cohen-Mansfield and Billig (1989), while the definition of passive 
behaviour was based on the definition set by Colling (1999).  The active behaviour 
category and the specific behaviour content were developed based on preliminary 
observations of the living environments and discussions with staff members. The 
residents were most commonly observed as sitting in a chair in the living areas and 
may be engaged in a limited range of activities. As this range of activities was limited, 
during the first case study all these behaviours (watching television, reading, playing a 
game) were included in one specific behaviour category as shown in Table 1. 
However, on completion of the first case study, the behaviour coding sub-categories 
were expanded for the Active and Inactive behaviour categories in order to provide a 
more explicit description of the behaviours occurring. This would provide a more in-
depth description of the behaviours occurring in the space as it was noted that some 
activities, for example watching television occurred more often than others, like 
reading. Figure 6.3 shows the behaviour coding categories used in the subsequent 
studies of this research.  
Figure 6.3- Behaviour coding categories for Care Homes B and C 
Behaviour Category Specific Sub-category Code 
Agitation Aggressive 
Physical non-aggressive 
Vocal 
Other 
Active Watching TV 
Eating/drinking 
Walking 
Interaction 
Activity- Other 
Inactive behaviour Content 
Passive 
Sleeping 
Looking out the window 
Behaviour mapping observations occurred at five minute intervals over a two hour 
period. This would result in 25 separate observations of the environment at each 
session. Behaviour mapping sessions were held four times a week for three weeks pre 
and three weeks post intervention. These were held at different times of the week to 
cover a range of different time periods. Behaviour codes were used to count the 
number of times each behaviour was observed in the area. This was recorded by the 
observer placing a tick in the appropriate box of the recording sheet for each of the 
five minute observations (this can be found in Appendix 3).  
In order to ensure reliability of the measure, a second observer was present for 
approximately 10% of all the timed observations. The second observer was given a 
recording sheet along with the behaviour categories description sheet. They were 
given the opportunity to read over the behaviour descriptions and ask any questions. 
Before the behaviour mapping session began, the second observer was given the 
opportunity to observe the residents in the living areas to allow them to apply the 
descriptions of the behaviours to the types of behaviours which were displayed by the 
residents. The behaviour observations from the second observer and the researcher 
were analysed using the Kappa statistic for inter-rater agreement. These will be 
presented alongside the results for each case study in Chapter 7.  
6.2.2 Observation Notes 
 Notes were taken throughout the course of the behaviour mapping observations 
including what was on the television at each session, any planned activities that were 
going on in the care home and if any other event occurred that may influence the 
usage of the living areas, for example a hairdresser visiting the care home or the living 
area being used for a planned activity.  
6.2.3 Relative Questionnaire 
 Relatives are recognised as an important source of data and were consulted using a 
relatives questionnaire. A questionnaire was chosen as the most appropriate method 
for this as relatives are not always available within the care home. This is a method of 
gaining relatives perceptions which is also used by the Care Commission. The 
questionnaire was sent out along with consent forms for their relative to participate in 
the research.  The questionnaire was designed to collect data on how often the relative 
visits the care home, what areas they use when they visit, how they perceive the care 
home environment and how they feel that their relative uses the care home 
environment. The questionnaires did not identify the relative or the care home 
resident. This data was then used to form part of the contextual information for each 
care home and to support or further explain the data from the behaviour mapping 
observations. The relative questionnaire was modified for each care home to fit the 
specific environment; copies of these can be seen in appendix 4. 
6.2.3 Staff focus group/ interviews 
 From the outset it was recognised that staff were an important source of data for the 
research. Pre intervention staff were consulted informally at a staff meeting, where the 
purpose of the research was explained to them and they were asked about the general 
day to day running of the care home. Within this staff meeting the behaviour 
categories for the behaviour mapping were discussed as well as any practical issues 
that may arise with the intervention itself.  Following the intervention and the 
completion of the behaviour mapping data collection, a staff focus group was held in 
order to find out how staff perceived the intervention, in terms of how they perceived 
the residents and how it impacted on them. This was also used to discuss the impact 
of the specific interventions and any particular benefits or problems the staff observed 
with them. The discussion schedule for the focus group can be found in appendix 5. 
The focus group was recorded using a digital recorder and transcribed for analysis. 
Focus groups were then held post intervention for each of the remaining care homes 
following the same procedure and discussion schedule as the initial focus group with 
the main aim of gaining staff feedback and perceptions of the intervention. These 
were analysed using thematic analysis.  
6.2.4 Models of Care Instrument (MOCI) (Slaughter et al., 2006) 
 This questionnaire was used to establish the type of care establishment and to 
compare the treatment environment of the different care homes participating. This 
standardised measure has been developed to provide a more holistic measure of care 
environments compared to other environmental measures which tend to be developed 
for hospital environments and adapted to care environments (Slaughter et al., 2006). 
The MOCI could be completed by any person who uses the care home, management, 
care staff, visitors, relatives or residents. In each of the care homes the MOCI was 
issued to an opportunity sample of people available in the care home at the time, this 
included management, staff and visitors. It is a holistic measure to assess the care 
home environments used by people with dementia. The tool measures organisational, 
social and physical features of the environment. It contains 21 items including the 
types of activities available, staff performance evaluations and how families are 
greeted and involved. It gives an overall score which will rate care environments as 
medical, resort or home type. A medical type would be hospital like where the 
emphasis is on medical care, for example at meal times the nurses will monitor 
nutritional intake and administer medication etc, whereas the resort type is defined as 
being more like a hotel setting where for example at mealtimes the emphasis would be 
on staff serving the meal and providing entertainment for the residents. The final type 
is home type where the emphasis would be on independent living and residents doing 
thing for themselves with support from staff members. In a home type setting 
mealtimes would involve residents preparing meals and clearing up after themselves. 
The MOCI recognises that many care homes will have a mixed model of care between 
the three types and scores environments on a spectrum between 0 and 42 to indicate 
what type of environment it is. Scores close to 0 represent the medical model and 
close to 42 represent home type with scores in the middle being resort type. The 
MOCI was used to gather contextual information on each of the care homes. It was 
issued pre intervention in all three care homes to gain information on the type of care 
home it is and its therapeutic environment.   
 6.2.5. Care Commission Reports 
 The Care Commission Scotland produces periodic reports of the functioning of each 
registered care home in Scotland. These are based on a range of announced and 
unannounced visits (on average twice a year). These reports are published on their 
website (http://www.careinspectorate.com/). They rate care homes on four different 
aspects  
1) Quality of care and support- how the service meets the needs of each 
individual in its care 
2) Quality of environment- the environment within the service (for example, is 
the care home clean, is it set out well, and is it easy to access by people who 
use wheelchairs?) 
3) Quality of staffing- the quality of the care staff, including their qualifications 
and training 
4) Quality of management and leadership- how the service is managed and how it 
develops to meet the needs of the people it cares for. 
These are rated on a scale of 1-6 (6 being excellent and 1 unsatisfactory). The reports 
for each care home participating were analysed in order to draw out the similarities 
and differences between care home treatment philosophies and functioning.  
6.3 Recruitment of Participants 
The initial stages of recruitment for the research involved the researcher sending a 
letter to 20 care homes in the West of Scotland. The initial selection of care homes 
was based on the location being close to the research base. For the majority of care 
homes contact details were obtained from directory enquiries or organisation 
websites. Details of three of the care homes visited were obtained through contacts of 
the researcher; however none of these care homes participated in the main study. The 
initial letter (appendix 8) informed them of the purpose of the research and that the 
research was in the early stages and asked for permission to arrange a visit to the care 
home to evaluate the environment and discuss the research further. This letter was 
then followed up by a phone call which yielded 12 arranged meetings with care 
homes. The researcher then visited the care homes and had a preliminary informal 
meeting with the care home manager for further information on the care home, 
including number of residents, staff numbers and staff-resident ratios, willingness to 
participate in the research and previous environmental modifications that have been 
made. The meeting was also used to inform them on what would be involved in 
participating in more detail.  
The number of care homes selected was based on the multiple case study 
approach. Yin (2003) recommends that 6 - 10 case studies are an adequate number to 
allow cross-case synthesis. This should allow a number of case studies with similar 
properties and contextual information and a number of case studies which have 
different contextual information. This should strengthen the generalisability of the 
results.  The care homes were selected firstly, if the manager had expressed a 
willingness to participate in the research and secondly if the current environment 
could be modified significantly with the proposed interventions in the research. These 
care homes were contacted and informed that the research would be occurring over 
the next year and they would be contacted nearer the time to ask them to participate. 
Three care homes with a total of seven different living environments were recruited to 
participate in the research. A full description of each participating care home and 
living environment can be found in the sections below.  
6.4 Ethical Considerations 
As dementia patients living in care homes are a vulnerable patient group with a 
significant cognitive impairment it was deemed that the majority of residents included 
in this study would be unable to give informed consent to participate in the study. As 
informed consent involves having the capabilities to understand the context and 
implications of the research. It is vital however that research with people with 
dementia is carried out in order to investigate effective therapies and treatments for 
the disease. Ethical approval was obtained from the School of Social Science Ethics 
Committee at the University of the West of Scotland on the basis that informed 
consent was sought on three levels, firstly from the care home when the research 
proposal was presented to the manager. The manager then sent the proposal to the 
board of directors for approval. Once approval from the care home had been obtained 
an introductory letter (appendix 8), consent forms (appendix 10) and research 
information sheets (appendix 7) were then sent out to residents relatives along with a 
questionnaire asking their perceptions of the care home environment (appendix 4). 
Pre-paid reply envelopes (addressed to the researcher) were included with consent 
forms to encourage return.  
Lastly, assent to participant in the research rather than consent was sought 
from the residents. Assent has been defined as the agreement to participate in 
research based on less than full understanding (Keyserlingk et al., 1995, p340) and 
the initial and ongoing willingness of participants themselves to participate 
(Brodaty et al., 1999, p74). Assent from the residents in the present research was 
inferred by the residents co-operating with the researcher and the research. In this case 
they were excluded from the study if they expressed any displeasure with the presence 
of the researcher in the room.  
6.5 General Procedure 
The procedure in each case study followed the same general format which will be 
described in this section. There were some procedural differences in each care home 
which will be discussed in the sections below. Following the return of all consent 
forms pre intervention data collection began. In each care home, data collection 
occurred for three weeks pre intervention and three weeks post intervention.  During 
the 3 weeks of behaviour mapping, observation sessions occurred 4 times a week for 
2 hours. These observation sessions covered a range of different times of day; 
morning, afternoon, evening and weekend at the same time each week. The exact 
times of these sessions were decided with each care home so as not to interrupt any 
meal-times, medication times and so that the evening session was over before 
residents started to go to bed. This was to ensure that the observation sessions 
occurred at times where the residents would be primarily using the living areas rather 
than dining areas or bedrooms. Behaviour observations are taken at 5 minute intervals 
for the 2 hour period totalling 25 observations per session.  
For each observation how many residents are in the room, if the resident is 
with anyone else (Resident, staff, visitor), and what behaviour each resident in the 
room is engaged in according to the predefined behaviour category schedule, was 
recorded on the behaviour mapping recording sheet. If there were interactions 
observed in the room then the quality of these interactions was recorded as positive, 
neutral or negative as well as whom the interaction was with. A positive interaction 
was defined as an interaction where the resident appeared to be happily engaged in, 
for example chatting with a visitor or another resident. A neutral interaction was 
defined as an interaction that involved the resident being assisted with an activity of 
daily living, for example a staff member assisting the resident to walk to a chair. 
However on occasions that the staff member and the resident were talking together 
happily while the resident was being assisted this was categorised as a positive 
interaction due to the effect it has on the resident. Finally a negative interaction was 
defined as an interaction where the resident did not appear to be happily engaged in 
the interaction, for example an argument between residents or a staff member 
reprimanding a resident for an inappropriate behaviour. On the back of the behaviour 
mapping recording schedule in the notes section the researcher recorded any 
information relevant to the observation session.  
In the first week of pre intervention data collection, the Models of Care 
Instrument (MOCI) was completed by an opportunity sample of members of staff and 
relatives of the residents.  These were confidential and returned directly to the 
researcher during behaviour mapping sessions.  
The interventions were then put in place following the completion of pre 
intervention data collection. A settling in period of one week after the intervention 
was put in place was given before the same data collection procedure occurred for the 
post intervention behaviour mapping data. The staff and relatives were not asked to 
complete another MOCI as this data are not expected to change and is only used as an 
indicator of the type of treatment environment of the care home and organisation. 
Following the completion of the post intervention data collection the staff focus group 
was held in each of the care homes. All the data were then entered into SPSS or 
transcribed and analysed using a range of statistical tests and techniques.  
6.6 Care Home A 
6.6.1Description of Care Home A 
Care home A is managed by a charitable organisation. It has accommodation for a 
maximum of 15 residents with dementia in a separate unit within a newly built care 
home. The dementia unit is on the ground floor of care home A. There are two other 
units with exactly the same layout within care home A. Each resident has their own 
private bedroom and shares the communal living/ dining area. The living/dining area 
is a large open plan space which is used for serving meals, social activities and is also 
used for group recreational activities. There are four main areas in the space as can 
been seen in figure 6.4a. The furniture in the main social space (area 2) is set out 
around the outside of the space with a television at the bottom of it which is difficult 
to see from the majority of seats in the room, especially for older people who may 
have degenerating eyesight as well as dementia. The area also has large windows to 
the front and back of the building and a door giving access to the garden, although 
this is not fully used as the door is generally locked and residents can only access the 
garden when a staff member is present. The windows provide a good amount of 
natural light. The other main areas are the dining area (area 1), a row of seats against 
the back wall (area 3) which look on to the corridor (area 4). Pictures 6.1 and 6.2 
show images of the main seating area and the corridor seated area in Care Home A.  
Figure 6.4a- Care Home A pre intervention.  
Figure 6.4b- Care Home A post intervention.  
The main intervention took place in area 2 and 3. Area 1 was not included in the 
intervention as it is set up for dining and the furniture does not easily fold away or 
stack to create any more space. Staff also reported that each resident has their own 
chair in the dining area so it was felt that to move this may cause unnecessary 
confusion. Area 4 was not included in the intervention as it needs to be kept clear to 
give access to the other parts of the unit. The intervention is shown in figure 6.4b. In 
area 2 the furniture has been moved away from the edges of the space to create three 
different areas. Armchairs have been turned out, to allow residents to sit and look out 
the window, creating edge spaces and allowing visual access to nature. There has also 
been an area created with armchairs and couches organised around a table in a socio-
petal design in order to give residents somewhere to sit and socialise with others 
(residents, visitors or staff). This design should help to facilitate interactions. The 
final area within area 2 is designed around the television. The television has been 
moved slightly so that it is in a better position to view it and the furniture has moved 
around the television, creating an area that residents can comfortably watch the 
television. 
Picture 6.1 and 6.2 Care Home A pre intervention 
In area 3 the main interventions that have been made are that the chairs have been 
moved to a more socio-petal design from the socio-fugal design of them facing out 
individually to the corridor. This creates more spaces for social interactions on a 
smaller scale. Some chairs have been left as they were however in order to provide 
space for residents to sit alone and watch the room without having to engage in 
interactions. Another edge space was created near the door that leads out into the 
garden.  
6.6.2 Participants 
The mean age of residents was 82.4 years and there were 13 males and 2 females in 
the unit at the time of research. As the organisation that runs Care Home A supports 
ex service men and women this may explain the unusual male to female ratio of this 
care home. All fifteen relatives gave consent for their relatives participation. 
Throughout the data collection, all residents displayed assent to participate in the 
research, i.e., no resident reacted negatively to the presence of the researcher(s).  
6.6.3 Procedure 
The procedure for Care Home A followed the same general procedure as described 
previously. The data collection took place over the period of late January to late 
March. The times of the behaviour mapping sessions in Care Home A are shown in 
figure 6.5. 
Figure 6.5- Care Home A behaviour mapping times.  
Day  Time 
Wednesday 1.30-3.30 
Thursday 6.30-8.30 
Friday 10-12 
Sunday 1.30-3.30 
6.7 Care Home B 
6.7.1 Description of Care Home B 
Care Home B is a private care home which provides nursing care for 60 older people 
across two units. The ground floor unit is a general elderly frail unit while the unit 
based on the first floor is a dementia specific unit. The research took place in the latter 
of the two units. The care home is in an older building which was not purpose built 
and has had a two storey extension built towards the rear of the building more 
recently. It is situated in a residential area. The dementia unit has 30 beds in a range 
of single and double rooms, mostly with en suite toilets. It has two lounge areas with a 
large separate dining room as well as a small smoking room. The layout of the unit is 
more complex than Care Home A, bedrooms are arranged around corridors in two 
large squares linked by another corridor giving access to the dining room (See figure 
6.6 ) and each of these squares houses one of the lounge areas.  
Figure 6.6 - Location of lounges in Care Home B 
6.7.2 Participants 
There were 30 residents in the dementia unit of Care Home B. Relatives of 26 of the 
residents gave consent for them to participate in the research. As two of the residents 
did not have a next of kin listed, the general manager signed the consent form for 
them as they were the named person on the Adults with Incapacity Act form that the 
care home held for both residents. The two for whom consent was not obtained was 
because their illness had progressed and they were bed bound for most of the time and 
did not use either of the lounges. All of the other 28 residents had access to both 
lounge 1 and lounge 2. Of the 28 participating residents, 16 were female and 12 were 
male with an average age of 79.6 years. Two members of care staff participated in 
interviews following the intervention. Interviews were held in place of a staff focus 
group due to lower staffing levels which meant that there was not enough staff to have 
a group available at any one time.  
6.7.3 Description of Lounge 1 
The first lounge (figure 6.7a) is the smaller of the two with three large windows with 
views onto the street. It shows all the armchairs are pushed back against the wall 
facing into the middle of the room with a couple of small side tables around the room 
(although these do move position regularly depending on which resident needs them). 
The room has a television mounted on the wall in one corner and has a variety of ten 
armchairs for residents to use. There are also spaces for residents who use 
wheelchairs. Pictures 6.3 and 6.4 show the dcor and layout of lounge 1. The furniture 
is typical of care homes in that they are all individual armchairs with high backs and 
wipe-clean coverings.  The wall coverings are varied, including patterned plates and 
landscape paintings. 
Figure 6.7a Care Home B Lounge 1 pre intervention 
Figure 6.7b- Lounge 1 post intervention 
Picture 6.3 Lounge 1 pre intervention           Picture 6.4 Lounge 1 pre intervention 
The floor plan of lounge 1 post intervention is shown in figure 6.7b. The furniture was 
used to break the room into two distinct areas, the first one is a semi circle around the 
television of five chairs (with space for additional wheelchairs) and the second is a 
group of chairs arranged in a socio-petal layout around a table. This area is also 
arranged at a window so that at least two of the chairs have a view out of the window, 
therefore creating an edge space in this lounge. There was also a single chair and table 
left next to the fireplace to allow residents the choice to sit alone in the lounge 
Overall the layout of lounge 1 was changed from being one large space in 
which no chair had a good view of the television into a room where residents had a 
choice of places to sit and allowed for a range of activities. Images of lounge 1 post 
intervention can be seen in pictures 6.5 and 6.6 show. 
Picture 6.5 Lounge 1 post intervention    Picture 6.6 Lounge 1 post intervention 
6.7.4 Description of Lounge 2 
The second lounge is a large room with two small windows which face onto 
the back of the building and views to the back of the housing estate behind the home. 
Pre intervention this room had a variety of different armchairs in it as well as space 
for wheelchair users. Lounge 2 also has a traditional fireplace with a number of 
traditional style bookcases and sideboards and also has memorabilia on the walls 
relating to the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II. Figure 6.8a shows the layout of 
furniture in lounge 2 pre intervention took place. 
Figure 6.8a Care Home B Lounge 2 before 
Figure 6.8b Lounge 2 post intervention 
The armchairs all face towards the television in a random arrangement and 
there is a large area of wasted space towards the back of the room that is occasionally 
used to store moving and handling equipment. Pictures 6.7 and 6.8  show images of 
lounge 2 pre intervention, it can be seen that the chairs are similar to those that are in 
lounge 1 in style and material and that the lounge is primarily decorated in shades of 
green and cream.  
Picture 6.7 Lounge 2 pre intervention       Picture 6.8 Lounge 2 pre intervention  
Following the intervention in lounge 2, a three piece suite was introduced and 
positioned around the television to create a smaller area for watching television in the 
larger room (this is shown in figure 6.8b and picture 6.8). Another area was created by 
arranging some four chairs around a table, shown in picture 6.9 and figure 6.8b.  
This allows for a choice of spaces for residents to use in the room. The 
physical design of this room did not allow for any edge spaces to be created, mainly 
because the windows are small and are positioned high on the wall. This means it 
would not be possible for a resident to sit comfortably and look out of the window.  
Picture 6.9 Lounge 2 post intervention      Picture 6.10 Lounge 2 post intervention 
6.7.5 Procedure 
The procedure for Care Home B followed the same general procedure as outlined 
above but with the following adaptations, firstly the behaviour mapping observations 
were made in both lounges during the same session. A clip board and recording sheet 
was left in each lounge close to the door and the researcher went back and forth 
between the two lounges to record the behaviour and usage of the room. This meant 
that for example, in the morning lounge 1 would have an observation at 10am; the 
researcher would then go to lounge 2 and make an observation at 10.03 before 
returning to lounge 1 for an observation at 10.05, back to lounge 2 at 10.07 and so on. 
This was carried out at five minute intervals for the two hour period. The four weekly 
observation times for Care Home B are outlined in figure 6.9.  
 There were changes in the management of care home B following the pre 
intervention data collection. This meant that the intervention and the post intervention 
data collection was delayed for six weeks while the transition between managers was 
completed. The researcher then made contact with the new unit manager to explain 
the purpose of the research and the stage it was at. The new unit manager approved 
this and the interventions (as outlined in figures 6.7b and 6.8b) were put in place and 
the three week post intervention behaviour mapping session took place following the 
same procedure as outlined above. 
Table 6.9- Weekly observation times 
Day  Time 
Monday 10-12 
Tuesday 6.30-8.30 
Thursday 1.30-3.30 
Sunday 1.30-3.30 
Due to shift patterns and staffing levels it was not possible to recruit four members of 
staff at one time for a focus group. Two interviews were carried out in place of the 
staff focus group. The interviews followed the same format as the focus groups in the 
other care homes. This concluded the data collection for care home B.  
6.8 Care Home C 
6.8.1 Description 
Care Home C is a purpose built care home which cares for 40 people with dementia It 
is run by a charitable organisation and is situated in a hospital complex with a great 
deal of natural scenery surrounding it. The home contains four separate units.  The 
four units were each treated as separate case studies. Each unit has 10 single en suite 
bedrooms, an open plan lounge/dining area with a serving kitchen, and each also has 
access to a private, well maintained garden. A commonality across each of the units is 
that they are equipped with a large (50) LCD television. In each of the units 
described the research focused only on the living space of the open plan area, the 
dining areas were not included in the observations or the interventions. This was 
mainly because the design of the dining area was to meet the needs of the staff and 
residents, i.e. the residents had specific seats depending on the level of assistance 
needed with eating and drinking. Units are linked by a shared kitchen area (that is 
only accessible by staff), kitchens link units 1 and 2 together and units 3 and 4 
together.  
The layout and location of each unit within Care Home C is shown in figure 
6.10. Each unit is located off the main corridor which has secure entry access through 
double doors from the reception and recreational area. The recreational area is used 
for activities that involve residents from all four units, for example coffee mornings or 
concerts. 
Figure 6.10- Care Home C layout 
6.8.2 Participants  
As mentioned previously, Care Home C had 40 residents overall. Each of the separate 
units housed 10 residents each. Unit 1 housed 10 males with a mean age of 78.4 In 
unit 2 there were 2 females and 8 males with a mean age of 77.55, however at the 
beginning of the post intervention data collection stage one male in unit 2 passed 
away, reducing the number of residents to 9 for all of the post intervention data 
collection period. Unit 3 had 2 females and 8 males with a mean age of 78.1 years. 
Finally unit 4 had 6 males and 4 females with a mean age of 78.7 years.  Similar to 
Care Home A, the high male to female ratio in all the units can be explained by the 
nature of the charitable organisation as it cares for ex service men and women. 
Three members of care staff and one senior care staff member participated in 
the staff focus group. Each had experience of working in at least two of the units 
during the post intervention data collection period. 
6.8.3 Unit 1 
The layout of unit 1 pre intervention is shown in figure 6.11a. In the main living area 
the majority of the chairs are arranged around the fireplace and television.   
Figure 6.11a Unit 1 pre intervention  
There are large windows around the curved side of the room and there is a table and 
three small armchairs with their backs facing towards the window. The room is 
decorated in pale green colours with some pictures and wall decorations this can be 
seen in picture 6.11. There a variety of armchairs (with different back heights) and 
two two-seater couches in this lounge which are coloured to match the dcor, the 
material is functional also in that it is wipe clean also.  
Figure 6.11b- Unit 1 post intervention 
Picture 6.11- Unit 1 pre intervention 
Following the intervention, the furniture in unit 1 was re-arranged to create 
three separate areas within the living area. One area of chairs around the television, 
another group of chairs around the window giving views to the garden and creating 
edge spaces and finally a group of chairs arranged around a table designed as a social 
area away from the television. Figure 6.11b shows the layout of the furniture post 
intervention.  
6.8.4 Unit 2 
Unit 2 has large curved windows to the rear of the room and the armchairs are 
arranged in cinema-like rows facing towards the large television, this can be seen in 
figure 6.12a. There is little free wall space in this unit and for that reason the wall 
decorations are limited to a clock and landscape painting (as shown in picture 6.13).  
Figure 6.12a- Unit 2 pre intervention   
Picture 6.12 demonstrates the dcor in unit 2 of burgundy and peach and similar to 
unit 1 there are a variety of different types of chair and they are in the same easy to 
clean material. 
Figure 6.12b- unit 2 post intervention 
Picture 6.12 Unit 2 pre intervention 
The furniture in unit 2 was arranged to break the room up into three distinct 
areas following the intervention. In a similar way to the interventions in the other 
units these spaces included a space for watching television, a space constructed to 
encourage social interactions and finally the introduction of edge spaces in the 
arrangement of chairs to allow residents to look out of the window to the garden. 
These can be seen clearly in figure 6.12b.  Picture 6.13 shows one of the seating areas 
created post intervention.  
Picture 6.13- Unit 2 Post intervention 
6.8.5 Unit 3 
The layout of unit 3 is shown in figure 6.13a. This unit has large windows looking out 
to the garden around the curved area at the back of the living area. There are two rows 
of chairs arranged with their backs to these windows facing towards the television. To 
the left of these rows of chairs there are three other armchairs facing inwards towards 
each other.  
Figure 6.13a- Unit 3 pre intervention        
The chair which is facing the television next to the fireplace is a specially adapted 
chair only designed to fit one specific resident; this was not moved post intervention 
to prevent unnecessary confusion. On the walls there are pictures of fighter jets which 
would be relevant to the residents of this care home.  
Figure 6.13b- Unit 3 post intervention 
Picture 6.14  Unit 3 Pre intervention 
Picture 6.15 and figure 6.13b show the intervention in Unit 3. The main 
changes in the living environment of unit 3 post intervention was to give residents an 
area to sit and look out of the window, therefore creating edge spaces. 
Picture 6.15- Unit 3 post intervention 
The number of chairs facing the television was reduced and the group of 
chairs to the left of the room were re-arranged to a more socio-petal layout, to 
encourage more social interactions. This resulted in three separate areas being created 
in the living area. 
6.8.6 Unit 4 
Unit 4 is a different shape from the other three in that it does not have a curved wall 
with windows. This unit has large windows at the corner of the room, which have 
good views of the garden and beyond.  
Picture 6.15- Unit 4 pre intervention 
The chairs in the living area of this unit were arranged around the edges of the 
living area pre interventions. Again the chairs were all facing towards the television 
and fireplace and had their backs to the windows. Similar to unit 2 there are very little 
decorations on the wall although there were fresh flowers on the sideboard on most 
visits. 
The layout of unit 4 post interventions can be seen in figure 6.14b. It differs 
from the other units in that there were only two areas created. This is due to the 
difference in shape of the unit from the other three. Following the intervention the 
unit had one space for residents to watch the television and another area for residents 
to look out of the window. The chairs in the second area were also arranged in socio-
petal in order to encourage interactions in this area also 
Figure 6.14a-- Unit 4 pre intervention             
Figure 6.14b Unit 4 post intervention 
Picture 6.16- Unit 4- post intervention 
6.8.7 Procedure 
Care Home C was recruited in a slightly different manner than the other care homes. 
Care Home A and C are run by the same organisation and following the completion of 
the research in Care Home A, Care Home C expressed interest in participating in the 
research. Initial meetings were set up with management and staff to explain the 
purpose and process of the research. Following this, consent forms and relatives 
questionnaires were sent out to all the residents next of kin. 
On receipt of these the pre-intervention data collection period began, firstly in 
unit 1 and 2 and then in unit 3 and 4. All the pre intervention data collection in each 
unit was carried out before any interventions were put in place. The data collection 
times for each unit are outlined in figure 6.13. 
Figure 6.15- data collection sessions  
Unit Morning Afternoon Evening Weekend 
Unit 1 Monday  
10-12 
Tuesday  
1.30-3.30 
Wednesday 
6.30-8.30 
Sunday 
1.30-3.30 
Unit 2 Monday  
10-12 
Tuesday  
1.30-3.30 
Wednesday 
6.30-8.30 
Sunday 
1.30-3.30 
Unit 3  Tuesday 
10-12 
Monday  
1.30-3.30 
Thursday 
6.30-8.30 
Saturday 
1.30-3.30 
Unit 4 Tuesday 
10-12 
Monday  
1.30-3.30 
Thursday 
6.30-8.30 
Saturday 
1.30-3.30 
The data collection both pre and post modification followed the same procedure as 
outlined about in the general procedure section. As shown in figure 6.13, data 
collection sessions were held simultaneously for units 1 and 2 and units 3 and 4. This 
was achieved by leaving recording sheets and clip boards in each unit and recording 
the behaviour at 5 minute intervals in each room (with a time difference of 2 minutes). 
Access to each unit was obtained through the linking kitchen. As stated the research 
in Care Home C was concluded with a staff focus group, this involved staff from each 
of the units in the one session.  
6.9 Summary of Methodology 
This research is designed to evaluate the effect of modifications in the living areas of 
dementia care homes on the residents. This involved putting in place an 
environmental intervention in seven different living environments across three care 
homes. Although each environment was physically different the intervention in each 
was based on the same principles, namely of giving residents a choice of areas to sit 
in and creating a connection to nature through edge spaces. The aim of the research 
was to assess the changes in behaviour of the residents following the intervention. 
Behaviour mapping was the main tool used to do this and allowed a comparison of the 
observed behaviour in each environment pre and post intervention. Other measures 
used drew on the perceptions and experiences of the staff of the care homes and 
relatives of the residents to provide more depth to the data. The final type of tool used 
for data collection was to establish the type of physical and social environment of 
each care home. The data were analysed for each environment separately pre and post 
modification, however data about the type of care home was taken into account to 
identify similarities and differences in the results over the seven living environments. 
Chapter 7  Overview of Case Study Results 
7.1 Chapter introduction 
This chapter will give an overview of the behaviour mapping results for each of the 
seven case studies. For each case study the significant changes in behaviour will be 
presented, in relation to the behaviour mapping hypotheses set out in chapter 5.  For a 
full overview of the changes in all the 15 behaviours included in the behaviour 
mapping schedule see appendix 11.  
For each case study, three multivariate ANOVAs were carried out, one for 
each of the overall behaviour categories. Main effects for pre/post intervention and 
interaction effects for pre/post intervention x time of day will be reported (i.e., if a 
behaviour significantly changes post intervention at separate times of day). For the 
purposes of clarity, a hypothesis will be supported if:  
1) There is a main effect in the overall behaviour related to that hypothesis, e.g., 
overall agitation  
2) There is a significant change in three of the specific behaviours relating to that 
hypothesis, e.g., vocal agitation, physical agitation and aggressive agitation 
3) There are significant changes in 2 of the specific behaviours and more than two 
changes in the behaviour at different times of day, e.g., decrease in physical agitation 
post intervention in the afternoon and evening.  
7.2 Care Home A  Case Study 1 
There were a number of scheduled activities in care home A at various times 
throughout the behaviour mapping observations. This meant that there were either a 
reduced number of residents in the unit or an increase in the number of people (as 
there were residents from other units using the space). As these observations do not 
give a true representation of the usage of the space, the observations at these times 
were removed from the dataset before analysis. This resulted in 234 five minute 
observations being included pre intervention and 248 post intervention.  
7.2.1 Inter-observer agreement 
A second observer was present at 4 of the two hour observation sessions (33%). Two 
different observers covered the four sessions. Pre intervention there was a second 
observer present at a morning and an evening session, while post intervention the 
second observer was present at a morning and an afternoon session. The Kappa 
statistic was used to calculate the inter-observer reliability for each of the behaviour 
categories. Agreement within the overall behaviour categories was found to be high 
(Kappa = 0.971, p < 0.001). Agreement within the specific categories was also found 
to be high (agitation Kappa = 0.987, p < 0.001; activity Kappa = 0.939, p < 0.001 and 
inactive behaviour Kappa = 0.907, p < 0.001). Finally there was found to be 100% 
agreement in the rating of the quality of the interactions (Kappa = 1, p < 0.001).  
7.2.2 Behaviour mapping data 
Behaviour mapping data was collected in three main behaviour categories. Figure 7.1 
outlines the percentage of the three main behaviour categories observed pre and post 
intervention. As shown, inactive behaviour was the most commonly observed 
behaviour pre and post intervention, followed by active behaviour and agitation was 
the least frequently observed behaviour category pre and post intervention.  
Figure 7.1 Breakdown of observations into three main behaviour categories.  
The following sections will summarise the main behaviour mapping results relating to 
each hypothesis. A full summary of the results for all behaviours can be found in 
Appendix 11.  
Positive behaviours 
A number of behaviours were classed as positive behaviours. These were all the 
behaviours classed as active and the inactive behaviour content. There was a 
significant increase in observed active behaviour overall (F (1:474) = 3.840, p = 0.01) 
(Mean count per observation; Pre = 2.17 (Sd = 1.87), Post = 2.28 (Sd = 1.76). More 
specifically, within the main behaviour category there was a significant increase in 
behaviours classed as activities (e.g. watching TV, reading etc.) (F (1:474) = 8.553, p 
< 0.005) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.84 (Sd = 0.93, Post = 1.08 (Sd = 0.95). 
Finally, there was a significant increase in behaviours observed as content post 
intervention (F (1:474) = 25.579, p < 0.001) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 2.54 
(Sd = 1.59), Post = 3.24 (Sd = 1.58). These significant increases in positive behaviour 
post intervention in Care Home A provide support for the first hypothesis of this study 
that there would be an increase in positive behaviour post intervention.  
Social interactions  
The social interactions observed in care home A did not significantly differ between 
the two observation periods overall (p = 0.443) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 
0.54(Sd = 0.71), Post = 0.61 (Sd = 0.79). However there was a significant interaction 
effect in the ANOVA (F (3:474) = 3.598, p < 0.05) indicating that observations 
significantly increased post intervention at the separate time periods. A follow up one 
way ANOVA found that social interactions increased in the evening (F (1:149) = 
10.692, p < 0.0001). Interactions were further analysed in terms of who the interaction 
was with.  
Figure 7.2 Breakdown of interaction types observed 
Figure 7.2 shows the breakdown of these interactions pre and post interaction. As 
shown, resident- resident interactions increased post intervention, this was found to be 
significant (F (1:474) = 4.610, p < 0.05). The increase in visitor- resident interactions 
was also significant (F (1:474) = 5.443, p < 0.05). There was also a significant 
decrease in the number of staff- resident interactions post intervention (F (1:474) = 
11.902, p < 0.005). Although there was no overall increase in social interactions the 
evidence presented in this section does support the second hypothesis that there would 
be an increase in social interactions post intervention as there was an increase at one 
of the time periods and also in two of the specific types of interactions. The increase 
in the visitor- resident interactions and resident- resident interactions especially 
indicate that the environment is being used more for social interactions post 
intervention. This issue will be discussed further in subsequent chapters.  
Negative behaviours 
The negative behaviours observed in care home A included all agitated behaviours 
and passive behaviour in the inactive behaviour category. The behaviour mapping 
data provided support for hypothesis 3 that there would be a reduction in negative 
behaviour as there was a significant decrease in passive behaviour post intervention 
(F(1:474) = 42.145, p < 0.001) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 1.68 (Sd = 1.59), 
Post = 1.14 (Sd = 1.25) and also a significant decrease in agitation overall (F(1:474) = 
3.939, p < 0.01) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 1.19 (Sd = 0.92), Post = 1.01 (Sd 
= 0.89). The decrease in agitation also provides support for the 4
 hypothesis that 
there would be a reduction in agitated behaviours. When examining the specific 
behaviours within the agitation category, the mean counts of all four behaviours 
reduced post intervention, however the only significant reduction was in vocal 
agitation (F (1:474) = 6.437, p < 0.05) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.35 (Sd = 
0.58), Post = 0.23 (Sd =0.48). 
 To summarise, the behaviour mapping data from case study 1 provided 
support for all four of the hypotheses. This indicates that the intervention in the living 
area of care home A had a positive impact on the behaviour of the residents using the 
space.  
7.3 Care Home B (Lounge 1)  Case Study 2 
Similar to care home A, a number of behaviour mapping observations were removed 
from the dataset for Care Home B due to scheduled activities which resulted in a 
reduced number of residents using the space.  This resulted in 275 five minute 
observations being included pre intervention and 300 post intervention. 
7.3.1 Inter-observer agreement 
A second observer was present at 3 of the two hour observation sessions (25%). Pre 
intervention there was a second observer present at an afternoon and an evening 
session, while post intervention the second observer was present at a morning session. 
The Kappa statistic was used to calculate the inter-observer reliability for each of the 
behaviour categories. Agreement within the overall behaviour categories was found to 
be (Kappa = 0.870, p < 0.001). Agreement within the specific categories was also 
found to be high (agitation Kappa = 0.850, p < 0.001; activity Kappa = 0.825, p < 
0.001 and inactive behaviour Kappa = 0.714, p < 0.001).  
7.3.2 Behaviour mapping data 
Behaviour mapping data was collected in three main behaviour categories. Figure 7.3 
outlines the percentage of the three main behaviour categories observed pre and post 
intervention. As shown, inactive behaviour was the most frequently observed 
behaviour pre and post intervention, while agitation was the least frequently observed 
behaviour category pre and post intervention.  
Figure 7.3 Breakdown of observations into three main behaviour categories.  
The following sections will summarise the main behaviour mapping results relating to 
each hypothesis. A full summary of the results for all behaviours can be found in 
Appendix 11.  
Positive behaviours 
The positive behaviours were counted as the active behaviours and contented 
behaviour and looking out the window in the inactive behaviour category. There was 
a significant increase in observed active behaviour overall (F (1:567) = 10.627, p < 
0.001) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.61 (Sd = 1.32), Post = 1.13 (Sd = 1.523). 
There was also a significant increase in watching TV (F (1:567) = 43.055, p < 0.001) 
(Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.06 (Sd = 0.277), Post = 0.33 (Sd = 0.602). 
There was a significant increase in behaviours observed as content post intervention 
(F (1:567) = 44.997, p < 0.001) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 1.53 (Sd = 1.5), 
Post = 2.55 (Sd = 2.0). Finally, there was a significant increase in behaviours classed 
as looking out the window (F (1:567) = 33.524, p < 0.001) (Mean count per 
observation; Pre = 0.03 (Sd = 0.158), Post = 0.19 (Sd = 0.431).  These significant 
increases in positive behaviour post intervention in Lounge 1 provide support for the 
first hypothesis of this study that positive behaviours would significantly increase post 
intervention.  
Social interactions  
The number of social interactions significantly increased post intervention in lounge 1 
(F (1:567) = 4.747, p < 0.05) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.20 (Sd = 0.486), 
Post = 0.34 (Sd = 0.696). Interactions were further analysed in terms of who the 
interaction was with. Figure 7.4 shows the breakdown of these interactions pre and 
post interaction. As shown, resident- resident interactions increased post intervention, 
this was found to be significant (F (1:567) = 12.785, p < 0.001). Although visitor- 
resident interactions decreased post intervention this was not significant. There was 
however, a significant decrease in the number of staff- resident interactions post 
intervention (F (1:567) = 2.720, p < 0.05). As there was a significant increase in 
overall interactions along with a specific increase in resident- resident interactions, 
this provides support for hypothesis 2 that there would be an increase in social 
interactions post intervention. The issues surrounding the differences in staff and 
visitor interactions will be discussed in more detail in subsequent chapters.  
Figure 7.4 Breakdown of interaction types observed 
Negative behaviours 
The negative behaviours were classed as all agitated behaviours and passive 
behaviour in the inactive behaviour category. There was a significant decrease in 
passive behaviour post intervention (F (1:567) = 247.819, p < 0.001) (Mean count per 
observation; Pre = 0.85 (Sd = 0.968), Post = 0.14 (Sd = 0.393) and also a significant 
decrease in agitation overall (F (1:567) = 31.694, p < 0.001) (Mean count per 
observation; Pre = 0.48 (Sd = 0.761), Post = 0.08 (Sd = 0.277). This provides support 
for hypothesis number 3 that there would be a decrease in negative behaviour post 
intervention. The decrease in agitation also provides support for the 4
 hypothesis that 
there would be a reduction in agitated behaviours. When examining the specific 
behaviours within the agitation category, there was a significant reduction in physical 
agitation (F (1:567) = 61.027, p < 0.001) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.39 (Sd 
= 0.676), Post = 0.08 (Sd =0.272) and vocal agitation (F (1:567) = 20.678, p < 0.001) 
(Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.08 (Sd = 0.297), Post = 0.01 (Sd =0.058). 
 To summarise, the behaviour mapping data from case study 2 provided 
support for all four of the hypotheses. This indicates that the intervention in the living 
area of Lounge 1 of Care Home B had a positive impact on the behaviour of the 
residents using the space. 
7.4 Care Home B (Lounge 2)  Case Study 3 
The removed cases discussed above for case study 2 are relevant for case study 3 also. 
As a reminder, this resulted in 275 five minute observations being included pre 
intervention and 300 post intervention. 
7.4.1 Inter-observer agreement 
A second observer was present at 3 of the two hour observation sessions for lounge 2 
(25%). Pre intervention there was a second observer present at an afternoon and an 
evening session, while post intervention the second observer was present at a morning 
session. The Kappa statistic was used to calculate the inter-observer reliability for 
each of the behaviour categories. Agreement within the overall behaviour categories 
was found to be high (Kappa = 0.905, p < 0.001). Agreement within the specific 
categories was also found to be high (agitation Kappa = 0.852, p < 0.001; active 
Kappa = 0.919, p < 0.001 and inactive behaviour Kappa = 0.909, p < 0.001).  
7.4.2 Behaviour mapping data 
Behaviour mapping data was collected in three main behaviour categories. Figure 7.5 
outlines the percentage of the three main behaviour categories observed pre and post 
intervention. As shown, inactive behaviour was the most frequently observed 
behaviour pre and post intervention, while agitation was the least frequently observed 
behaviour category pre and post intervention. It should be noted however that the 
usage of lounge 2 was much lower than lounge 1 in the previous case study (mean of 
1.85 users per observation pre intervention and 2.06 users post intervention compared 
with 4.78 pre and 5.69 users per observation in lounge 1).  
Figure 7.5 Breakdown of observations into three main behaviour categories.  
The following sections will summarise the main behaviour mapping results relating to 
each hypothesis. A full summary of the results for all behaviours can be found in 
Appendix 11.  
Positive behaviours 
Although there was a slight increase in active behaviour overall, this was not found to 
be significant (p = 0.06). (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.28 (Sd = 0.532), Post 
= 0.41 (Sd = 0.751). There was no significant difference in watching TV (p = 0.713) 
(Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.14 (Sd = 0.357). Post = 0.15 (Sd = 0.36). 
However, there was a significant interaction effect for watching TV (F (3:567) = 
5.945, p < 0.005). This was identified as a significant increase in the behaviour in the 
morning sessions post intervention (F (1:147) = 15.167, p < 0.001). Finally, there was 
a significant increase in behaviours observed as content post intervention (F (1:567) = 
52.479, p < 0.001) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.51 (Sd = 0.716), Post = 0.84 
(Sd = 0.839). Although the results for case study 3 provides some evidence in support 
of hypothesis 1 that there would be an increase in positive behaviours post 
intervention, the evidence is inconsistent and therefore cannot fully support the 
hypothesis according to the conditions set out at the start of this chapter.  
Social interactions  
There were only 12 social interactions observed pre intervention and 17 post 
intervention in Lounge 2. Due to the numbers being so small it was not deemed 
appropriate to carry out inferential statistical tests on the data. Although the counts of 
social interactions in case study 3 did increase post intervention, there is not enough 
evidence to support the second hypothesis  that social interactions would increase post 
intervention.  
Negative behaviours 
The negative behaviours were classed as all agitated behaviours and passive 
behaviour in the inactive behaviour category. There was a significant decrease in 
passive behaviour post intervention (F (1:567) = 247.819, p < 0.001) (Mean count per 
observation; Pre = 0.2 (Sd = 0.409), Post = 0.19 (Sd = 0.425). There was no 
significant difference in observed agitation post intervention (p = 0.54) (Mean count 
per observation; Pre = 0.23 (Sd = 0.513), Post = 0.21 (Sd = 0.451). This means that 
there is not enough evidence in case study 3 to support the third hypothesis that there 
would be a reduction in negative behaviours post intervention. With reference to 
hypothesis 4, the only specific agitated behaviours observed in lounge 2 were physical 
and vocal agitation. Physical agitation did not change overall post intervention (p = 
0.28) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.08 (Sd = 0.295), Post = 0.05 (Sd =0.22). 
However, there was a significant interaction effect for physical agitation (F (3:567) = 
4.227, p < 0.01). Post hoc tests identified this as a significant decrease in observed 
agitation in the evening (F (1:146) = 6.345, p < 0.05). There was no significant 
differences in vocal agitation overall (p = 0.787) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 
0.14 (Sd = 0.295), Post = 0.16 (Sd =0.220), however there was a significant 
interaction effect (F (3:567) = 3.862, p < 0.01). This was identified as an increase in 
vocal agitation at the weekend (F (1:122) = 18.041, p < 0.001). As the results from 
case study 3 do not meet the requirements set out at the beginning of this chapter it is 
not possible to give support to hypothesis 4 that there would be a decrease in agitation 
post intervention.  
 To summarise, the behaviour mapping data from case study 3 did not support 
any of the four hypotheses. It is encouraging however, that in the majority of cases the 
behaviour changes that were observed did change in the same direction stated in the 
hypothesis. This must be considered along with the reduced usage of lounge 2 in 
comparison to lounge 1. These differences between the environments will be 
considered further in the following chapters.   
7.5 Care Home C (Unit 1)  Case Study 4 
As before, a number of behaviour mapping observations were removed from the 
dataset for Unit 1 in Care Home C due to scheduled activities which resulted in a 
reduced number of residents using the space.  This resulted in 277 five minute 
observations being included pre intervention and 300 post intervention. 
7.5.1 Inter-observer agreement 
A second observer was present at 3 of the two hour observation sessions (12.5%). Pre 
intervention there was a second observer present at a morning session, while post 
intervention the second observer was present at an afternoon and an evening session. 
The Kappa statistic was used to calculate the inter-observer reliability for each of the 
behaviour categories. Agreement within the overall behaviour categories was found to 
be high (Kappa = 0.980, p < 0.001). Agreement within the specific categories was 
also found to be high (agitation Kappa = 0.831, p < 0.001; active Kappa = 0.979, p < 
0.001 and passive Kappa = 0.916, p < 0.001).  
7.5.2 Behaviour mapping data 
Behaviour mapping data was collected in three main behaviour categories. Figure 7.5 
outlines the percentage of the three main behaviour categories observed pre and post 
intervention. As for previous case studies, inactive behaviour was the most frequently 
observed behaviour pre and post intervention, while agitation was the least frequently 
observed behaviour category pre and post intervention. The following sections will 
summarise the main behaviour mapping results relating to each hypothesis. A full 
summary of the results for all behaviours can be found in Appendix 11.  
Figure 7.5 Breakdown of observations into three main behaviour categories.  
Positive behaviours 
There was a significant increase in observed active behaviour overall (F (1:579) = 
14.145, p < 0.001) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.89 (Sd = 1.052), Post = 1.47 
(Sd = 1.317). There was also a significant increase in watching TV (F (1:579) = 
39.735, p < 0.001) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.23 (Sd = 0.444), Post = 0.5 
(Sd = 0.620). Within the inactive behaviours classed as positive, there was a 
significant increase in behaviours observed as content post intervention (F (1:579) = 
14.564, p < 0.001) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 1.57 (Sd = 1.129), Post = 1.93 
(Sd = 1.165). There was also a significant increase in residents observed as looking 
out the window post intervention (F (1:579) = 31.674, p < 0.001) (Mean count per 
observation; Pre = 0 (Sd = 0), Post = 0.1 (Sd = 0.301). These significant increases in 
positive behaviour post intervention in case study 4 provides support for the first 
hypothesis of the study that there would be an increase in positive behaviour post 
intervention.  
Social interactions   
The social interactions significantly increased post intervention in unit 1 (F (1:579) = 
10.28, p < 0.005) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.25 (Sd = 0.442), Post = 0.38 
(Sd = 0.604). Interactions were further analysed in terms of who the interaction was 
with. Figure 7.6 shows the breakdown of these interactions pre and post interaction. 
The increase in resident  resident interactions was found to be significant (F (1:579) 
= 14.175, p < 0.001). Figure 7.6 shows slight decreases in the percentage of 
interactions classed as staff - resident and visitor  resident interactions post 
intervention. However, as there was an increase in interactions overall, and this was 
specifically within resident  resident interactions adequate support is provided for 
hypothesis 2 in case study 4 that there was an increase in social interactions post 
intervention.  
Figure 7.6 Breakdown of interaction types observed 
Negative behaviours 
The negative behaviours were classed as all agitated behaviours and passive 
behaviour in the inactive behaviour category. There was a significant decrease in 
passive behaviour post intervention (F (1:579) = 12.303, p < 0.001) (Mean count per 
observation; Pre = 0.17 (Sd = 0.38), Post = 0.08 (Sd = 0.267) and a significant 
decrease in overall agitation (F (1:579) = 6.036, p < 0.005) (Mean count per 
observation; Pre = 0.26 (Sd = 0.458), Post = 0.14 (Sd = 0.37). This provides support 
for hypothesis number 3 that there would be a decrease in negative behaviour post 
intervention. The decrease in agitation also provides support for hypothesis 4 that 
there would be a decrease in agitation post intervention. When examining the specific 
behaviours within the agitation category, there was a significant reduction in physical 
agitation (F (1:579) = 9.091, p < 0.005) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.17 (Sd 
= 0.395), Post = 0.08 (Sd =0.3). 
 To summarise, the behaviour mapping data from case study 4 provided 
support for all four of the hypotheses. This indicates that the intervention in the living 
area of Unit 1 of Care Home C had a positive impact on the behaviour of the residents 
using the space.  
7.6 Care Home C (Unit 2)  Case Study 5 
The same number of observations were removed from the dataset for unit 2 as in unit 
1. This resulted in 277 five minute observations being included pre intervention and 
300 post intervention. 
7.6.1 Inter-observer agreement 
A second observer was present at 3 of the two hour observation sessions (12.5%). Pre 
intervention there was a second observer present at a morning session, while post 
intervention the second observer was present at an afternoon and an evening session. 
The Kappa statistic was used to calculate the inter-observer reliability for each of the 
behaviour categories. Agreement within the overall behaviour categories was found to 
be high (Kappa = 0.980, p < 0.001). Agreement within the specific categories was 
also found to be high (agitation Kappa = 0.661, p < 0.001; active Kappa = 0.976, p < 
0.001 and inactive Kappa = 0.881, p < 0.001).  
7.6.2 Behaviour mapping data 
Figure 7.7 outlines the percentage of the three main behaviour categories observed pre 
and post intervention. The breakdown of observed behaviour followed a similar 
pattern as in previous case studies. Inactive behaviour was the most frequently 
observed behaviour pre and post intervention, while agitation was the least frequently 
observed behaviour category pre and post intervention. The following sections will 
summarise the main behaviour mapping results relating to each hypothesis. A full 
summary of the results for all behaviours can be found in Appendix 11.  
Figure 7.7 Breakdown of observations into three main behaviour categories.  
Positive behaviours 
While there was a slight increase in active behaviour overall post intervention, this 
was not found to be significant (p = 0.065) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 1.2 
(Sd = 1.09), Post = 1.38 (Sd = 1.31). There was a significant increase in watching TV 
(F (1:579) = 2.735, p < 0.05) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.36 (Sd = 0.68), 
Post = 0.53 (Sd = 0.76). There was a significant increase in behaviours observed as 
content post intervention (F (1:579) = 5.564, p < 0.05) (Mean count per observation; 
Pre = 1.7 (Sd = 1.109), Post = 1.93 (Sd = 1.351). There was also a significant increase 
in residents observed as looking out the window post intervention (F (1:579) = 21.34, 
p < 0.001) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.01 (Sd = 0.083), Post = 0.09 (Sd = 
0.298). As three of the specific behaviours classed as positive increased post 
intervention there is adequate support from case study 5 for hypothesis 1 that there 
would be an increase in positive behaviours post intervention.   
Social interactions  
There was no significant difference in social interactions overall in unit 2, however it 
should be noted that interactions were high both pre and post intervention (Mean 
count per observation; Pre = 0.51 (Sd = 0.785), Post = 0.47 (Sd = 0.738). When 
interactions were further analysed in terms of who the interaction was with, it was 
found that there was a significant increase in resident  resident interactions (F(1:579) 
= 8.768, p < 0.005). Figure 7.8 shows slight decreases in the percentage of 
interactions classed as staff - resident and visitor  resident interactions post 
intervention. Whilst there was no overall support for hypothesis 2, that there would be 
an increase in social interactions post intervention in unit 2. However, the increase in 
resident - resident interactions is a positive finding and it can be said that the results 
do reflect the direction specified in the hypothesis.  
Figure 7.8 Breakdown of interaction types observed 
Negative behaviours 
The negative behaviours were classed as all agitated behaviours and passive 
behaviour in the inactive behaviour category. There was a significant decrease in 
passive behaviour post intervention (F (1:579) = 15.647, p < 0.001) (Mean count per 
observation; Pre = 0.41 (Sd = 0.636), Post = 0.23 (Sd = 0.508) and a significant 
decrease in overall agitation (F (1:579) = 8.160, p < 0.001) (Mean count per 
observation; Pre = 0.38 (Sd = 0.62), Post = 0.2 (Sd = 0.43). This provides support for 
hypothesis number 3 that there would be a decrease in negative behaviour post 
intervention. The decrease in agitation also provides support for hypothesis 4 that 
there would be a decrease in agitation post intervention. When examining the specific 
behaviours within the agitation category, there was a significant reduction in physical 
agitation (F (1:579) =8.852, p < 0.005) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.22 (Sd = 
0.438), Post = 0.12 (Sd =0.326) and vocal agitation (F (1:579) = 8.177, p < 0.005) 
(Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.16 (Sd = 0.416), Post = 0.08 (Sd =0.267). 
 To summarise, the behaviour mapping data from case study 5 provided 
support for three of the four hypotheses, it should be noted that there was some 
support for hypothesis 2; however this was not strong enough to fully support the 
hypothesis. This indicates that the intervention in the living area of Unit 2 of Care 
Home C has had a positive impact on the behaviour of the residents using the space.  
7.7 Care Home C (Unit 3)  Case Study 6 
7.7.1 Inter-observer agreement 
A second observer was present at 3 of the two hour observation sessions (12.5%). Pre 
intervention there was a second observer present at a morning session, while post 
intervention the second observer was present at an afternoon and an evening session. 
The Kappa statistic was used to calculate the inter-observer reliability for each of the 
behaviour categories. Agreement within the overall behaviour categories was found to 
be high (Kappa = 0.984, p < 0.001). Agreement within the specific categories was 
also found to be high (agitation Kappa = 1.00 p < 0.001, active Kappa = 0.970, p < 
0.001 and inactive Kappa = 0.942, p < 0.001).  
7.7.2 Behaviour mapping data 
Figure 7.9 outlines the percentage of the three main behaviour categories observed pre 
and post intervention. The breakdown of observed behaviour followed a similar 
pattern as in previous case studies. Inactive behaviour was the most frequently 
observed behaviour pre and post intervention, while agitation was the least frequently 
observed behaviour category pre and post intervention. The following sections will 
summarise the main behaviour mapping results relating to each hypothesis. A full 
summary of the results for all behaviours can be found in Appendix 11.  
Figure 7.9 Breakdown of observations into three main behaviour categories.  
Positive behaviours 
While there was a significant increase in active behaviour overall post intervention   
(F (1:578) = 11.519, p < 0.001) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 1.16 (Sd = 1.143), 
Post = 1.5 (Sd = 1.17). There was a significant increase in watching TV (F (1:578) = 
30.146, p < 0.001) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.29 (Sd = 0.488), Post = 0.55 
(Sd = 0.727). Behaviours that were classed as other active behaviours also 
significantly increased post intervention (F (1:578) = 10.558, p < 0.005) (Mean count 
per observation; Pre = 0.05 (Sd = 0.12), Post = 0.15 (Sd = 0.23). Within the inactive 
positive behaviours, there was a significant increase in looking out the window post 
intervention (F (1:592) = 40.374, p < 0.001) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.01 
(Sd = 0.82), Post = 0.08 (Sd = 0.277) and content behaviour (F (1:578) = 8.842, p < 
0.005) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 1.74 (Sd = 1.04), Post = 1.99 (Sd = 1.09). 
From the behaviour mapping data, there is sufficient support for hypothesis 1 that 
there would be an increase in positive behaviour post intervention from case study 6.  
Social interactions  
There was a significant increase in social interactions overall in unit 3 (F (1:578) = 
11.378, p < 0.005) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.31 (Sd = 0.595), Post = 0.49 
(Sd = 0.747). Figure 7.10 shows an increase in the percentage of interactions in all 
types of interaction.  The increase in staff resident interactions and resident- resident 
interactions were found to be significant (Staff: (F (1:579) = 4.743, p < 0.05; resident: 
(F1:579) = 8.698, p < 0.005). This means the data from case study 6 provides support 
for hypothesis 2 that there would be an increase in social interactions post 
intervention.  
Figure 7.10 Breakdown of interaction types observed 
Negative behaviours 
The negative behaviours were classed as all agitated behaviours and passive 
behaviour in the inactive behaviour category. There was a decrease in passive 
behaviour post intervention, however this was not found to be significant (p = 0.052). 
(Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.24 (Sd = 0.479), Post = 0.17 (Sd = 0.426) There 
was no significant decrease in overall agitation (p = 0.078) (Mean count per 
observation; Pre = 0.29 (Sd = 0.536), Post = 0.23 (Sd = 0.51). Although there was a 
reduction in each behaviour, this means that no support is provided for hypothesis 
number 3 that there would be a decrease in negative behaviour post intervention. With 
reference to hypothesis 4 that there would be a decrease in agitation post intervention, 
although there was no significant decrease in agitation post intervention there was a 
reduction in physical agitation (F(1:578) = 6.378, p< 0.001). (Mean count per 
observation; Pre = 0.19 (Sd = 0.415), Post = 0.11 (Sd =0.344) Again, this provides 
limited support for hypothesis 4. 
 To summarise, the behaviour mapping data from case study 6 provided 
support for two of the four hypotheses and limited support for hypothesis 3 and 4. 
This indicates that the intervention in the living area of Unit 3 of Care Home C has 
generally had a positive impact on the behaviour of the residents using the space.  
7.8 Care Home C (Unit 4)  Case Study 7 
7.8.1 Inter-observer agreement 
A second observer was present at 3 of the two hour observation sessions (12.5%). Pre 
intervention there was a second observer present at a morning session, while post 
intervention the second observer was present at an afternoon and an evening session. 
The Kappa statistic was used to calculate the inter-observer reliability for each of the 
behaviour categories. Agreement within the overall behaviour categories was found to 
be high (Kappa = 0.982, p < 0.001). Agreement within the specific categories was 
also found to be high (agitation Kappa = 0.828, p < 0.001; active Kappa = 0.976, p < 
0.001 and inactive Kappa = 0.717, p < 0.001).  
7.8.2 Behaviour mapping data 
Figure 7.11 outlines the percentage of the three main behaviour categories observed 
pre and post intervention. The breakdown of observed behaviour followed a similar 
pattern as in previous case studies. Inactive behaviour was the most frequently 
observed behaviour pre and post intervention, while agitation was the least frequently 
observed behaviour category pre and post intervention. The following sections will 
summarise the main behaviour mapping results relating to each hypothesis. A full 
summary of the results for all behaviours can be found in Appendix 11.  
Figure 7.11 Breakdown of observations into three main behaviour categories.  
Positive behaviours 
While there was a significant increase in active behaviour overall post intervention (F 
(1:579) = 5.783, p < 0.001) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 1.08 (Sd = 1.079), 
Post = 1.38 (Sd = 1.244). There was a significant increase in watching TV (F (1:578) 
= 11.881, p < 0.005) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.33 (Sd = 0.58), Post = 0.51 
(Sd = 0.687). Within the inactive positive behaviours, there was a significant increase 
in looking out the window post intervention (F (1:592) = 40.374, p < 0.001) (Mean 
count per observation; Pre = 0.001 (Sd = 0.058), Post = 0.12 (Sd = 0.339). From the 
behaviour mapping data, there is sufficient support for hypothesis 1, that there would 
be an increase in positive behaviour, from case study 7.  
Social interactions  
There was no significant difference in social interactions overall in unit 4 (Mean 
count per observation; Pre = 0.39 (Sd = 0.697), Post = 0.38 (Sd = 0.641). When 
interactions were further analysed in terms of who the interaction was with, figure 
7.10 shows an increase in the percentage of interactions observed as resident  
resident and visitor resident. None of these differences were found to be significant. 
This means that there is no support for hypothesis 2 that there would be an increase in 
social interactions post intervention, from case study 7.  
Figure 7.10 Breakdown of interaction types observed 
Negative behaviours 
The negative behaviours were classed as all agitated behaviours and passive 
behaviour in the inactive behaviour category. There was a decrease in passive 
behaviour post intervention, however this was not found to be significant (p = 0.064) 
(Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.28 (Sd = 0.532), Post = 0.21 (Sd = 0.495). 
There was however a significant interaction effect (F (3:578) = 7.756, p < 0.001). 
Follow up tests found that this represented a significant reduction in passive 
behaviour in the morning (F (1:147) = 18.785, p < 0.001) and in the afternoon (F 
(1:135) = 8.354, p < 0.005). There was also a significant decrease in overall agitation 
(F (1:578) = 7.26, p < 0.001) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.32 (Sd = 0.569), 
Post = 0.17 (Sd = 0.418). This provides support for hypothesis number 3 that there 
would be a decrease in negative behaviours post intervention. The decrease in 
agitation also provides support for hypothesis 4 that there would be a decrease in 
agitation post intervention. When examining the specific behaviours within the 
agitation category, there was a significant reduction in physical agitation (F (1:578) = 
13.139 p < 0.001) (Mean count per observation; Pre = 0.20 (Sd = 0.443), Post = 0.09 
(Sd =0.303). 
 To summarise, the behaviour mapping data from case study 7 provided 
support for three of the four hypotheses. This indicates that the intervention in the 
living area of Unit 4 of Care Home C has had a positive impact on the behaviour of 
the residents using the space.  
7.9 Chapter Summary 
In summary, this chapter has presented the behaviour mapping results for each of the 
seven case studies included in this research. Over the seven case studies, there was 
support for each hypothesis. Six of the seven case studies provided support for 
hypothesis number 1, four of the seven provided support for hypothesis number 2, 
with a fifth case study giving limited support. Five of the seven case studies provided 
support for hypotheses 3 and 4. The following chapter will provide an analysis of the 
contextual information collected about each case study and then use this to describe 
and explain patterns and differences in the behaviour mapping results across the case 
studies.  
Chapter 8  Results (II) Contextual Information and 
Across Case Analysis 
8.1 Chapter Introduction 
This chapter aims to present the contextual information gathered for each case study. 
It will begin by presenting the contextual information for each case study or care 
home and identify similarities and patterns from each source of information. Data 
from the staff focus groups/interviews will also be analysed. The contextual 
information will be used to assist in the understanding of the data from each of the 
care homes. It will then revisit the behaviour mapping results described in the 
previous chapter to identify patterns in the results and to understand these in terms of 
the contextual information.  
As a reminder, there were seven case studies in this research. A case study was 
defined as a separate living environment which can be accessed by all residents in the 
unit.  
Figure 8.1- case study locations 
 CARE HOME A CARE HOME B CARE HOME C 
CASE STUDY 1     
CASE STUDY 2     
CASE STUDY 3     
CASE STUDY 4     
CASE STUDY 5     
CASE STUDY 6     
CASE STUDY 7      
Of the seven case studies, one of these was situated in Care Home A, two were 
situated in Care Home B and four were situated in Care Home C. For this reason, the 
contextual information will be presented by care home rather than by case study. 
Table 8.1 outlines the case studies contained in each care home.  
8.2 Models of Care Instrument 
Nine completed Models of Care instruments (MOCI) were returned (return rate of 
36%) in Care Home A. These were completed by two members of management, one 
senior member of care staff, four members of care staff and one relative; one 
questionnaire was discarded as it had more than five missing responses. In Care Home 
B the MOCI was completed by six people (31.5% return rate), three of whom were 
care workers in the unit, two were senior care workers and the final one was 
completed by the unit manager. Finally, the MOCI was completed by eight people in 
Care Home C (31.5% return rate), four of whom were care workers in the unit, two 
were senior care workers one was completed by a relative and the final one was 
completed by the unit manager. 
Table 8.2 Mean MOCI scores across Care Homes 
 CARE HOME A CARE HOME B CARE HOME C 
MOCI 14.91  
resort/medical type 
(n = 8) 
19  resort type 
(n = 6) 
13.75  
medical/resort type 
(n = 8) 
 The mean score was calculated for each care home and is shown in table 8.2. 
It shows that Care Homes A and C had a similar rating each being classed as 
resort/medical type environments with Care Home C slightly closer to the medical 
type and Care Home A closer to the resort type. Care Home B was classed as a resort 
type. The MOCI likens a medical type environment to a hospital where the focus is on 
medical care, while the resort type environment is likened to a hotel environment 
where the focus is on serving the residents and meeting their needs. According to the 
MOCI there are no extreme differences between the care homes as all three are within 
the resort type. Care Homes A and C appear to be the most similar in terms of the 
MOCI.  
8.3 Care Commission Reports  
Three Care Commission reports were obtained and analysed for each care home. The 
reports accessed (http://www.careinspectorate.com/) were the three most recent 
reports available at the time of the research. The main part of the Care Commission 
report grades the care home based on four themes. The mean grading over the three 
reports for each care home was calculated and is displayed in table 8.3. Each theme is 
graded on a scale of 1-6, 1 = poor, 2 = weak, 3 = average, 4 = good, 5 = very good 
and 6 = excellent.  
Table 8.3 - Mean Care Commission grades (1 poor -6 excellent) 
 CARE HOME A CARE HOME B CARE HOME C 
Quality of Care and 
Support 
4.3 4.3 4.65 
Quality of 
Environment 
5 2.65 4.5 
Quality of Staffing 
4.3 4 5 
Quality of 
Management  
5 3.5 4.5 
As shown, each care home has a similar score on the theme of Quality of Care and 
Support. Quality of the Environment is a theme on which there are differences 
between the care homes. While Care Home A and C score grades classed as good or 
very good, Care Home B is graded lower, with the mean grade representing weak-
average for the quality of the environment. Again, the grades for the three care homes 
are similar on the theme of Quality of Staffing. However, Care Home B scores lower 
on Quality of Management than Care Homes A and C.  
The Care Commission report also consults residents, relatives and staff 
members as well as including comments from the assessors. The following section 
will review this information in order to understand the grades in more detail and 
increase the contextual knowledge on each care home.  
For the theme of Quality of Care and Support the  care homes were graded 
similarly, with Care Home C being slightly higher than A and B. The reports 
identified a number of strengths and weaknesses related to each theme. For example, 
the reports praised Care Home A on staff-resident communication and the choice and 
decision making support provided to residents. Although, it was suggested that this 
could be improved by offering a range of activities throughout the day rather than 
only in the morning as currently happens. The strengths of Care Home B described in 
this theme included the attempt to create person-centred care, a high level of staff 
training and a good key worker support network for residents. There were also some 
areas for development or weaknesses outlined in the reports. It was felt by the 
inspector (and also noted by some relatives) that staff do not have enough time to 
spend it one on one with residents. This is due to the higher dependency of other 
residents and the increasing demands of paperwork. It was also mentioned that the 
location of the garden means that residents are unable to access it alone, so could only 
use it when staff were available to accompany them. The final area for improvement 
that was commented on in this theme was that it should be ensured that all residents 
are offered appropriate and meaningful activities which reflect their own interests and 
needs. For Care Home C the reports highlight some of the strengths in this theme. 
These include that the service had a person centred approach to care and staff helped 
each person to live the life they wished. It was also highlighted that there was a full 
and varied activity programme. The reports give some areas for improvement under 
this theme also, however these were mainly low scale recommendations involving 
minute taking at residents meetings and risk assessment paperwork. It appears from 
the comments from the inspectors and the grades given on the theme of Quality of 
Care and Support that the three care homes are very similar in terms of the grades and 
comments they received. Each care home had slightly different areas for improvement 
listed in the reports; however none of these are significantly severe weaknesses.  
Table 8.3 shows there are differences in the grades the care homes have 
received for Quality of the Environment.  Care Homes A and C have received good or 
very good grades, while Care Home B received a weak or average grade. For Care 
Home A the strengths of the care home that were highlighted included that the 
environment promoted a positive a quality of life for residents, this included low 
resident numbers, access to outdoor space and private bedrooms. Recommendations 
were made to improve the quality of the environment including providing a separate 
space for activities away from the open plan lounge area. At present the lounge area is 
used for group activities so residents who do not want to participate in the activities 
do not have access to the area. Another recommendation was to take into account the 
findings from the audit carried out by the Dementia Services Development Centre to 
create a more dementia friendly environment. However, these findings were not made 
public with the report.  
For Care Home B the strengths of this theme outlined in the reports included; 
good use of colour to aid orientation around the unit, e.g. red bathroom doors, 
coloured handrails, etc. The environment was also found to be secure for residents 
with a keypad lock on outside doors and unit doors. However a number of reasons for 
the weak rating of Care Home B on this theme were outlined in the reports. These 
included that there were large periods of time that residents were left unsupervised in 
communal areas such as the living and dining rooms. One occasion witnessed by the 
Care Commission assessor involved one resident becoming agitated and causing 
distress for the other residents in the space. This issue was reported as having been 
addressed in the form of a dayroom observation policy. It was also highlighted that 
the residents didnt have access to a call system if required. In report C, this issue was 
raised again as residents were being left unsupervised sitting in the dining room from 
breakfast time through to lunch time without being assisted to the lounge areas. It was 
highlighted however that the staff supervision in the communal areas had improved 
although it was recommended that this was used as an opportunity for interaction with 
residents rather than purely surveillance of the areas. This theme also discussed the 
low staffing levels as a safety concern for residents as there were problems getting 
adequate staff numbers on certain shifts (e.g. the twilight shift). The final issue that 
was raised in the quality of environment theme was that there were a number of items 
of moving and handling equipment being stored in one of the lounges (this referred to 
lounge 2), it was recommended that this should be removed as it did not create a 
welcoming atmosphere.  
For Care Home C only two reports assessed the theme of Quality of the 
Environment. The strengths under this theme were highlighted and included the 
environment having a good standard of hygiene, housekeeping and homeliness. Other 
strengths were listed as they respect the privacy of residents and it was a safe 
environment offering residents a range of activities. There were areas for 
improvement that were listed, these included improvements to the environment such 
as the inclusion of a reminiscence room and a dementia friendly garden. Although 
these were included as recommendations in report C it was acknowledged that the 
development of these was in progress. To summarise, the reports appear to identify 
specific issues with the environment of Care Home B in particular, this is reflected in 
the low grade for this theme. Care Homes A and C appear to have less serious issues; 
however the reports for Care Home C do not elaborate much on positive aspects of 
the environment. 
Theme 3, Quality of Staffing was rated as good or very good in all the reports 
stating that Care Home A provided a workforce that were professional, trained and 
motivated. Whilst in Care Home B, the staff team were praised for being friendly, 
approachable and treating residents with dignity and in a caring manner. Other 
strengths included good support and supervision for staff members and recruitment 
procedures. There were very few areas for development listed in the reports, these 
mainly related to care home policy, procedure and record keeping. Care Home C 
received a grade of 5 (very good) in report A and B and it was not assessed in report 
C. The strengths outlined under this theme included, that the staff made a good effort 
to get to know each resident on a personal basis and that they treated service users 
with dignity and respect. The areas for improvement that were listed were again very 
small scale suggestions such as improving the provision of supervision for staff.  
Again, there were very few differences between the three care homes on this theme.  
For Care Home A, the final theme of Quality of Management and Leadership 
was rated as very good. The strengths included the managements interactions with 
residents and staff members. In Care Home B, the strengths were listed as the 
managements open door policy to staff, residents and relatives and the inclusion of 
the views of all users of the service in plans for developments and improvements 
within Care Home B. Whilst in Care Home C the strengths of theme Quality of 
Management and Leadership were highlighted as the management being approachable 
and accessible with a high profile throughout the home with residents, staff and 
relatives. Again the suggestions made for improvement in this theme were low scale 
including aspects such as, improving systems to involve residents and relatives in 
decisions about the care home more. For the final theme, there were slight differences 
in the grades the care homes received, however the strengths outlined in the report are 
very similar.  
In summary, the Care Commission reports identify similarities between Care 
Homes A and C on all themes of assessment. Care Home B matches this pattern on 
three of the four themes, but the reports identify issues with the Quality of 
Environment theme resulting in Care Home B receiving a lower grade than Care 
Homes A and B. While the Quality of Environment theme looks at wider aspects of 
the environment than purely the physical environment the information included in this 
theme provides interesting data and is the most relevant to the current study. These 
similarities and differences identified in these reports will be used in the following 
sections to allow for interpretation of the patterns of results across the seven case 
studies.  
8.4 Relative Questionnaires 
Relative questionnaires were returned by five relatives in Care Home A (return rate 
33.3%), twelve relatives in Care Home B (return rate 40%) and by 19 relatives in 
Care Home C (return rate 47.5%). The data from the questionnaires returned from the 
relatives of each care home is summarised in table 8.4 and 8.4b. As shown there are 
some differences as to which areas relatives report using most often when they visit. 
In Care Homes A and C the lounge is used in the majority of visits to spend time with 
their relative. This is different in Care Home B where the residents bedroom is used 
for the majority of visits with the lounge and dining room being less frequently used. 
Relatives were also asked which area they thought their relative used most often when 
they did not have visitor. The lounge was the most common answer for all three care 
homes; however in Care Home B almost a third of relatives responded that they 
thought their relative spent most of their time in the corridors, indicating that they 
spent a lot of time wandering. In Care Home C more than a third of respondents 
replied that they thought their relative spent most of their time in their bedroom.  
 Table 8.4  summary of relative questionnaires from each care home 
 CARE HOME A CARE HOME B CARE HOME C 
Areas most used 
when visiting 
Lounge (80%) Bedroom (59%) 
Lounge (25%) 
Dining Room (16%) 
Lounge (79%) 
Areas relative 
uses most 
throughout the 
Lounge (100%) Lounge (60%) 
Corridors (30%) 
Lounge (57%) 
Bedroom (39%) 
The questionnaires then asked relatives to rate different aspects of the environment 
from a scale of very satisfied (5) to unsatisfied (1) as shown in table 8.4b. In Care 
Homes A and C all the aspects were on average rated as satisfied with, however in 
Care Home B relatives were less satisfied with the decor, layout, privacy and choice 
of activities in the  care home.  
Table 8.4b  summary of ratings of the environment from relative questionnaires from 
each care home 
 Satisfied  Adequate  Not Satisfied 
Safety 
                    
Decor 
                                   
Personalisation 
                    
Way Finding  
                    
Layout 
                                               
Privacy 
                                    
Choice of 
Activities 
                    
This is reflected in some of the comments left by relatives on the final 
question of the questionnaire. Comments by relatives in all the care homes reflected 
the view that more stimulation was needed 
more visual stimulation is needed especially for residents who may be deaf 
(Care Home A) 
I think people with dementia should have more stimulation and I feel that 
more could be done to stimulate the residents rather than sitting having a 
balloon thrown backwards and forwards at them (Care Home B) 
Same films played repeatedly and Television is on for too long during the 
day. (Care Home C). 
Some of the comments also help to explain the differences in the areas people use 
when they are visiting the care home.  
I know space is limited but sometimes I find it difficult to get a seat (Care 
Home B) 
No privacy in lounge when visiting relatives. (Care Home C)  
This indicates that relatives at times do not feel comfortable in the living areas or 
lounges and therefore are more likely to use other areas in these care homes. This is 
more evident in Care Home B where the lounges have a set number of chairs (around 
10 per room) and 30 residents, so they can be filled up very quickly. Overall, the 
relatives appear quite positive about the care homes and the staff in particular with a 
few commenting:  
The staff are very nice with the residents and I can talk to them and ask how 
my Mum is getting on. (Care Home B) 
I am delighted that my mother is always supervised in the lounge area by at 
least two members of staff at all times. It is a very modern, clean and bright 
area with good decor. Also the room is very secure as a fob is required for 
anyone to leave, as my mother tends to wander. (Care Home C) 
While in general the relatives are very positive about the care homes and the care their 
relative receives, there are a few subtle differences in some of the answers between 
the care homes which appear to indicate Care Home B is different from Care Homes 
A and C on a number of aspects such as, the areas relatives use when they visit and 
their level of satisfaction with the layout of the care home. This reflects what was 
found from the Care Commission report analysis previously.  
8.5 Notes on behaviour mapping 
The notes from each behaviour mapping session were also analysed. These include 
the stimulation available in each living area (e.g. television, radio etc), any staff 
issues, any further resident observations and any other relevant notes.  
 In each case study, the television was on for the majority of the time during 
the pre and post observation periods. In the majority of cases the television showed 
daytime TV programmes and would be on BBC 1 or ITV 1. On a few occasions old 
films or musicals were shown. This did not vary over the pre/post data collection or 
between case studies.  
 An important note from case study 1 was that on two occasions after the initial 
intervention, the furniture had been moved back to the original arrangement and had 
to be re-arranged to the new layout. The first time this had happened was in the 
morning session of the first week and the reason for this was that the management had 
not informed the nightshift care staff that the furniture was to be kept in that 
arrangement. Part of the nightshift duties is to clean the lounge area thoroughly and 
when they had done this they had re-arranged the furniture back to the original layout. 
Following this the management gave the nightshift the required information. The 
second occasion was in the afternoon session on the second week of data collection. 
This occurred because an activity group was held in the lounge in the morning which 
required the chairs to be arranged in a circle to involve all the residents and they had 
not been moved back as the residents had gone straight to lunch. The furniture was 
then put back in the layout described and data collection carried on as normal. 
Within Care Home B it was noted throughout the observations that very few 
visitors would use the lounge in their visits, however it was noted that visitors would 
use two seating areas in the corridors to spend time with their relatives. This was 
observed on 5 occasions pre intervention and 7 occasions post intervention. 
Throughout the observations it was also noted that the usage of both lounges was low 
in all of the morning sessions and the weekend sessions. In the morning sessions it 
was observed that the residents tended to be in the dining room for much of the 
morning after they had had breakfast. In the weekend sessions residents were 
observed to be in the dining room after lunch for a longer period of time than in the 
weekday afternoon sessions, it was also observed that residents were assisted to their 
rooms after lunch at the weekends more often than throughout the week.  
 It was also noted that the majority of the users in lounge 1 were female, while 
it was mainly males who used lounge 2. This was reinforced by a female resident in 
lounge 1 who commented the men do not come in here, we like to just be all ladies 
together after a male resident had came into the room and walked out again. Notes 
were also taken on the fact that there were a high number of residents displaying 
agitated behaviour in the corridors. In each observation session both pre and post 
intervention there were between 3 and 8 residents observed in the corridors displaying 
agitated behaviour (although this was not coded it appeared to be mainly physical, 
non aggressive type agitation, e.g. wandering).  
Within Care Home C there were a number of occasions that there were other 
activities in place for residents in a space in the corridor, these included games such as 
table tennis or cards or story telling sessions. This was noted on 6 occasions (2 times 
in the morning and 4 times in the afternoon). These sessions however were not 
removed from the behaviour mapping data set as they only involved 1 or 2 residents 
at a time and was observed an equal number of times pre and post intervention.  
 Finally, notes were taken regarding the observations made evening sessions in 
all units of Care Home C. As the post intervention data collection sessions occurred in 
November/December, the sun had already set and the curtains were either shut at the 
time of the evening data collection session or within half an hour of the start. This 
meant that the edge spaces that were created for residents to look out the windows in 
the intervention were very infrequently used in the evening sessions.  
8.6 Staff focus groups/ Interviews 
Following the completion of the post intervention data collection, focus groups were 
carried out with four members of staff in Care Homes A and C and interviews were 
carried out with two members of staff in Care Home B. It was not possible to carry 
out a focus group in Care Home B as there was not an adequate hand over period 
between shifts where there were extra staff in the unit. The aims of the focus groups 
and interviews were to  
1) Gain an understanding of  care home staffs knowledge of the environment  
behaviour relationship 
2) Understand staff members perceptions and feedback on the intervention  
The data from both focus groups and both interviews will be analysed below in two 
main themes which relate directly to the main aims. Data will further be thematically 
analysed within the theme to help to identify differences and similarities between the 
three different staff groups.  
Theme 1: Understanding of the behaviour environment relationship 
The majority of care home staff had at least a basic understanding of the importance 
of the environment -behaviour relationship. This was demonstrated in each of the care 
homes by the following quotes from staff members 
We have plenty of space that people can walk about; you know plenty of room 
so they can move about so they are not in each others faces basically. Emm 
you know it is fantastic. (Care Home A) 
Yeah weve tried the coloured toilet seats and it seems to help. The wall 
hangings we made try to give people who are wandering around the corridors 
something to look at and touch (Care Home B) 
Compared to other Care Homes that Ive worked in, I feel it is quite a relaxing 
place for them, if the staff are relaxed then theyre relaxed. Most of the time 
the staff are quite calm.(Care Home C). 
While all the staff demonstrated a basic understanding of the importance of the 
environment some staff groups appeared to have a deeper understanding than others. 
For instance, staff in Care Home A freely gave examples of how the environment 
influences behaviour of people with dementia, both in a positive and negative way. 
Positive examples they gave included:  
Generally yeah, they just walk about the house, youve seen it yourself they go 
where they please, sit where they please 
Weve got the reminiscence room now so if we want we can take them in there 
and theres stuff there that they can do and touch and feel. 
Negative examples included:  
I would like it to be brighter, a lot brighter, even this morning at breakfast I 
noticed that the lights were off and I thought it is a bit dull Ill put the lights 
on, but it was just as dull. Especially for dementia patients when they are 
trying to eat a meal and they cannot see it properly at the best of times they do 
not really know what to do with it anyway and if the lights not great it does not 
help either. 
The only one thing I do not like is the kind of carpets they are using, theyve 
got wee dots that they try to pick at and it annoys them when they cannot pick 
it up. 
The big mirrors in the bathroom, I do not think theres any need for that. 
Mirrors upset people with dementia. 
They get confused, because when you take someone into the bathroom, they do 
not know themselves. 
Similarly, staff from Care Home B showed a good understanding of the 
environment-behaviour relationship, again being able to give examples of where the 
environment has an impact on behaviour of residents. For example, as well as the 
quote given above, the staff explained some of the small scale interventions that have 
been put in place in the care home by staff and management. Another example of this 
is shown in this quote:  
We try to give them lots of things to look at and using the colour coding to 
help them find their way 
In contrast, staff in Care Home C did not appear to have as strong an 
understanding of the environment  behaviour relationship as the other two care 
homes staff. This was evident as they struggled to come up with any concrete 
examples of how the environment can impact on behaviour. While the staff agreed the 
environment was important, they seemed to focus mainly on staffing issues and the 
social environment rather than aspects of the physical environment.  
Compared to other  care homes that Ive worked in, I feel it is quite a relaxing 
place for them, if the staff are relaxed then theyre relaxed. Most of the time 
the staff are quite calm. 
There are only 10 with 2 staff, sometimes 10 to 3 staff in some houses which is 
good. 
The staff did point out that they thought one of the big differences in Care Home C 
was that the small group numbers (10 residents per unit) was very important in 
comparison to other  care homes that they have worked in and that they felt this had a 
positive impact on the behaviour of residents.  
Theres a big difference from there to here, because theres a smaller group as 
well. Theres not as much agitation and stuff. 
In conclusion, for theme 1 the focus groups and interviews have shown that staff have 
a basic understanding of the environment  behaviour relationship. However, it 
appears that the three staff groups differ on how much they consider the environment 
in their daily practice. It could be argued that in Care Homes A and B, staff are more 
aware of the environment in day to day practice whilst staff in Care Home C focus 
more on staffing issues and the social environment.  
Theme 2: Feedback on Intervention 
Staff members from all of the care homes were asked for feedback on their 
perceptions of the intervention that was put in place in the living area(s) of their care 
home. Staff had both positive and negative feedback on the intervention in the three 
care homes. Positive feedback included:  
I think the open window idea, you know that you introduced yourself, people 
are using the chairs more, even one resident in particular who sits in their 
room a lot always enjoys coming along and sitting there, definitely. (Care 
Home A) 
You can see how some residents really enjoyed the changes you made. I do not 
think we realise how much of an effect it can have on them. (Care Home B) 
I thought they were really good, especially the window seats (Care Home B) 
During the day a few of them liked sitting looking out of the window.(Care 
Home C) 
I think it looked better as well, rather than having all the chairs sitting in a 
line, with everyone facing the television. Sometimes they get a bit agitated just 
sitting in front of the telly all day. (Care Home C) 
Staff in Care Homes B and C went further and described accounts of how they saw 
residents using or interacting with the environment on specific occasions.  
Like one lady who normally only speaks to other residents if shes shouting at 
them, she was sitting in the group of chairs at the window chatting away 
nicely to other ladies. She seemed to be having a great time.(Care Home B) 
Like the two-seater over at the wall with the table and other chairs, two 
residents sat there for ages and we gave them tea and cakes and stuff and I 
think they felt as if they were out somewhere. They liked that. It was different 
rather than them just sitting all separate.(Care Home C) 
These are examples of staff identifying positive uses of the environment post 
intervention by residents. However, staff did have some more negative feedback on 
the interventions. This mainly was that the new layout of the living areas caused 
problems for the staff carrying out their tasks efficiently. In all care homes staff found 
that the new arrangement of furniture prevented them from using moving and 
handling equipment easily to assist residents with mobility problems. Examples of 
this are:  
When youre using hoists and stand aids for some of the residents youve not 
got enough room to move about. You know you do not need to keep asking 
people to move or change where they are comfortable, sort of thing. You can 
just get in and out without upsetting everybody else. (Care Home A) 
it was a bit difficult to get residents in and out the room so we had to move 
chairs occasionally but we always tried to put them back in the right place. 
(Care Home B)  
The changes in Unit 4 I thought were a bit cramped, you could not get the 
equipment that we use through, wheelchairs, stand aids, hoists, and we had to 
move a chair. (Care Home C) 
Staff in Care Home C only found that this was an issue in Unit 4, rather than in the 
other three units. This may be because unit 4 was a different shape and size to the 
other units.   
I think Unit 4 as well as it is a lot smaller than the rest so it was harder. 
Due to the time of year that the data collection occurred, it was dark by the 
time of the evening data collection sessions. The staff in Care Home C noted this as a 
problem with the intervention.  
When it came to night time when the curtains were closed, it was not ideal; 
you know the two chairs that were facing the window. A few residents wanting 
the chairs turned round and we didnt know whether to turn it or leave it. 
Staff in Care Home B seemed to be the least critical of the intervention and 
most willing to accept the changes in the environment. This is demonstrated in the 
quote above where the staff member talks about altering the furniture to allow moving 
and handling equipment into the space but always moving it back to the arrangement. 
This contrasts with staff from Care Home A, where there appeared to be more 
criticism of the intervention and had a resistance to changes to the environment in 
general. One more specific criticism of the intervention was that staff felt that the 
intervention caused health and safety issues for the residents as the furniture provided 
a fall hazard. It should be noted though that no incident reports relating to this were 
completed over the data collection period.  
They wander, they used to just wander round the room but now they wander 
round the chairs. We try to put the chairs as close to the wall as possible you 
know but at an angle so they cannot get past. It means that nobodys getting 
disturbed and no-ones falling over them, its practical. 
Staff members also expressed opinions that residents would react badly to any change 
in the environment.  
Dementias an illness and once theyre used to their environment to change 
that environment actually does not help them. They get used to their way about 
and ups and downs. 
their mind pattern and it can change their behaviour. 
This contrasts with the previous theme as it appears that the resistance to change 
comes from a view that the changes will only upset residents and result in challenging 
or problematic behaviour. This contrast may be explained however by the idea that 
staff feel that management or experts who implement changes in the environment are 
not taking into account or are not aware of all aspects of daily care involved when 
caring for people with dementia which is explained by the following quote.  
Obviously I understand that people are trying to improve the quality of life for 
dementia patients without looking at the whole thing; they think automatically 
oh Ill give them this but they are not looking right into it. The more you put in 
front of someone with dementia the more confused they become and that does 
not help. It might not sound right but basic living makes it a lot easier for 
them. It makes it more complicated by trying to put things in place, it just 
complicates it more. 
Additional Relevant Contextual Information 
In Care Home B, it was noticed that lounge 1 was used much more frequently than 
lounge 2. This issue was explored in the interviews with staff of Care Home B. 
During the interviews both staff members seemed to only refer to lounge 1 in their 
answers, so the issue of why lounge 2 was not frequently used was explored. One 
staff member confirmed this by saying 
Lounge 2 isnt used as much. There are always just the same 2 or 3 men who 
like to sit in there. 
This staff member tried to explain this in that  
Lounge 1 just feels more homely, lounge 2 is quite dark and does not have the 
same feel to it, and I think residents pick up on this too 
The other staff member also tried to explain why she thought that there was a low 
usage of lounge 2 by talking about the company residents get in lounge 1 and the lack 
of natural light in lounge 2 making it feel dull.  
I think just a lot of residents prefer to be in Lounge 1, you know its just easier 
for them to get there and they get a lot more company in there, same faces you 
know. Lounge 2 is really dull as well and we can only get those energy saving 
bulbs now which makes it duller. 
To summarise, it seems that the staff interviewed in Care Home B had a good 
awareness of the effect of the environment on residents, they highlighted this in their 
positivity about the interventions made in this study, recounting stories of how they 
observed the residents to react to them and in their description of other modifications 
that had been made in the care home. 
In summary, the focus groups and interviews found that staff from all care 
homes had a basic understanding of the environment  behaviour relationship and its 
impact on dementia care. Within this however, there were some subtle differences in 
how the staff from different care homes incorporate this into their practice. Care 
Home C staff seem to consider this the least while staff in Care Homes A and B 
appear to have a deeper understanding of the impact of the environment. Within the 
second theme of the focus groups and interviews, there was a variety of positive and 
negative feedback about the intervention. Positive feedback was more common from 
Care Homes B and C, while staff in Care Home A seemed to have more resistance to 
the changes in the environment, both in reference to the present intervention and also 
to changes in the environment in general.  
8.7 Behaviour Mapping Results 
8.7.1 Between Case Studies 
Table 8.7 summarises the behaviour mapping results from chapter 7. It indicates 
whether the results from each case study support each of the experimental hypotheses.  
Table 8.7  overview of behaviour mapping results from Chapter 7 
 Hypothesis 1 
Increase in 
positive 
behaviour 
Hypothesis 2 
Increase in 
social 
interactions 
Hypothesis 
Reduction 
in negative 
behaviour  
Hypothesis 4 
Reduction in 
agitation 
CASE STUDY 1         
CASE STUDY 2         
CASE STUDY 3         
CASE STUDY 4         
CASE STUDY 5    *    
CASE STUDY 6       
CASE STUDY 7        
*limited support 
The following section will examine the results for each hypothesis across the seven 
case studies using the contextual information summarised previously in order to 
explain differences and highlight similarities between the case studies. This 
information will then be used as a basis to generalise results.  
8.7.2 Hypothesis 1 - there will be an increase in positive behaviour post 
intervention  
There was support for hypothesis 1 from six of the seven case studies. Case study 3 
did not provide support for this hypothesis. From the contextual information presented 
previously, there are a number of reasons why this may be the case. Case study 3 
appears to be unique from the other six studies as it has not provided support for any 
of the research hypotheses. This will be discussed in more detail below in section 
8.7.6.1 with reference to all four hypotheses.  
 A significant increase has been observed in each of the six other case studies. 
This indicates that behaviours classed as active, including watching TV, walking and 
other types of active behaviours have increased following the intervention. The 
contextual information for each of the case studies highlights a number of differences 
between the different care homes. Firstly, one of the main differences between the 
three care homes is the quality of the existing environment. Care Home B was not a 
purpose built dementia care home and was rated weak on the quality of the 
environment by the Care Commission. This contrasts with Care Homes A and C 
which were built for purpose and relatively new and rated as good or very good by the 
Care Commission on the quality of the environment. There were also architectural 
differences between the different living areas. The living areas in Care Homes A and 
C were open plan areas while, Care Home B had closed rooms as the living area. 
Finally, there were differences in the staff members views of the intervention and 
how well they accepted the intervention. All these differences between the care homes 
help to demonstrate the efficacy of the principles on which the intervention was 
based. Hypothesis 1 can be accepted overall as it has been demonstrated that the 
intervention was successful in increasing positive behaviours in a variety of different 
environments.  
8.7.3 Hypothesis 2  there will be an increase in interactions post intervention 
There was support from four of the seven case studies for hypothesis 2 with additional 
limited support from a fifth case study. As mentioned previously there was no support 
from case study 3 for this hypothesis, the potential reasons for this will be discussed 
in section 8.7.6.1. Case studies 5 and 7 did not provide support for the increase in 
social interactions hypothesis. Both of these case studies are in Care Home C. Case 
study 5 did provide positive outcomes in relation to this hypothesis; however this was 
not sufficient to support the hypothesis fully. From analysis of the mean counts of 
interactions observed pre intervention it can be seen that in case study 5 there was 
initially a higher number of interactions observed compared to other units. As the 
residents in case study 5 were more likely to be engaged in social interactions pre 
intervention than residents in other units, it may be that there is another difference 
with this unit that was not picked up from the contextual information. This may relate 
to the social environment or the demographics of the residents or staff. However, 
there was an increase in resident-resident interactions in this unit, while staff-resident 
and visitor-resident interactions reduced post intervention. This may be perceived as a 
positive change as the types of interactions have changed. This was observed in a 
number of the other case studies and will be discussed in more detail in section 9.2 
 Case study 7 appeared to be unique within Care Home C. This may reflect the 
fact that the intervention did not successfully increase interactions. Firstly, unit 4 of 
Care Home C was different from the other three units architecturally (see plans in 
chapter 6). While units 1, 2 and 3 had a large curved area of windows which provided 
a great deal of natural light and space in the living area, unit 4 had windows which 
were shaped around the corner of the room. This resulted in less natural light and 
floor space than in other units. The staff in the focus group also criticised the 
intervention in unit 4, stating that it was cramped and did not allow enough space to 
use moving and handling equipment in the living area without disrupting residents. 
Secondly, the age range of residents in unit 4 was much larger than in any of the other 
6 case studies. This may have an impact on the interactions between residents in the 
unit, as the residents may not see themselves as similar to other residents and 
therefore less likely to interact with each other.  
 For the case studies which did find a significant increase in interactions post 
intervention it can be summarised from the contextual information presented that the 
intervention in these environments were successful despite there being a number of 
differences between the care homes. Increases in social interactions were observed in 
units within each of the three care homes. The changes in the types of social 
interactions observed also followed the same pattern across the case studies. In five of 
the seven case studies there was an increase in resident- resident interactions post 
intervention. There was also a decrease in staff resident interactions in three of the 
case studies while visitor resident interactions increased post intervention in two of 
the case studies. This means that the intervention was successful in a variety of 
different environments at increasing interactions. As there was not support from all 
the case studies for this hypothesis, it may be that there are other factors that need to 
be considered when designing interventions for living environments to increase social 
interactions. This will be discussed further in section 9.2  
8.7.4 Hypothesis 3  there will be a decrease in negative behaviours post 
intervention and 8.7.5 Hypothesis 4  there will be a decrease in agitation post 
intervention 
Hypotheses 3 and 4 were supported by five of the seven case studies. As mentioned 
previously, case study 3 did not support the hypotheses and this will be discussed 
below in section 8.7.6.1. The other case study which did not support the hypotheses 
relating to negative behaviour was case study 6. It should be noted however,  that the 
levels of negative behaviours, and in particular agitation, observed in all four case  
studies of Care Home C was a lot lower than in Care Homes A and B. This may be a 
reflection of the higher quality environment of Care Home C as identified by the Care 
Commission. It may also be due to the higher staff to resident ratio in Care Home C 
compared to Care Homes A and B. This was mentioned in the staff focus groups as 
well as in the Care Commission reports, as well as Care Home C having the lowest 
number of residents per unit of the three care homes. Nevertheless, three out of the 
four case studies in Care Home C did find a significant reduction in negative 
behaviours and in agitation specifically. Case study 6 was the only unit which did not 
have appropriate support for hypotheses 3 and 4; however there was a significant 
reduction in physical agitation. On inspection of the mean counts of behaviours per 
observation in table 8.8, it is shown that in case study 6 there was a reduction in 
passive behaviour and agitation, however this was not significant. It is also noted that 
the post intervention count of agitation in case study 6 is at a similar level to the 
agitation observed post intervention in the other three case studies of Care Home C. 
Another issue which may have affected the impact of the intervention in Care Home 
C is that the data collection occurred in the winter months, meaning that it was dark 
outside for the evening data collections. This meant that the intervention did not have 
the benefit of edge spaces post intervention as the curtains were closed from around 
6pm. This may have had an impact on the success of the intervention in Care Home 
Table 8.8 Mean count per five minute observation of main behaviour categories 
 Agitation 
PRE          POST 
Active 
PRE           POST 
Inactive 
PRE            POST 
CASE STUDY 1 1.19            1.01 2.17              2.28 4.22             4.75 
CASE STUDY 2 0.48            0.08 0.61              1.13 3.77             4.24 
CASE STUDY 3 0.23            0.21 0.28              0.41        1.16             1.64 
CASE STUDY 4 0.26            0.14 0.89              1.47 3.67              3.55 
CASE STUDY 5 0.38            0.20 1.20              1.38 3.84              3.74 
CASE STUDY 6 0.29            0.23 1.16              1.50 3.66              3.94 
CASE STUDY 7  0.32            0.17 1.08              1.38 3.85              3.75 
Overall from all the case studies, there was strong support for hypotheses 3 
and 4. This is demonstrated by the decrease in negative behaviours and agitation in 
case studies from the three care homes. The differences in the quality of the 
environment of the three care homes demonstrated in the Care Commission reports 
shows that the intervention has been successful in decreasing negative behaviours and 
agitation in environments of different qualities.  It appears that the intervention in 
environment of lower quality may have a stronger impact in terms of the changes in 
behaviour (mean counts in table 8.8). The seven units were all different architecturally 
and with the exception of case study 3, it demonstrates that the principles on which 
the intervention was based are successful in a range of different living areas. 
8.7.5 Within Care Homes 
This section will examine any issues arising from the data within Care Homes B and 
C which both contained more than one case study. In particular, this section will 
address the issues surrounding case study 3, lounge 2 of Care Home B.  
8.7.5.1 Care Home B  Lounge 2 
There were a number of issues within Care Home B regarding the usage of the two 
lounges. Firstly, the behaviour mapping data revealed that fewer numbers of residents 
use lounge 2 than lounge 1 (see behaviour counts in table 8.8).  While all 30 residents 
in the unit had access to both lounges, the observed behaviour counts for each 
category and usage were much lower for lounge 2 than for lounge 1. This may be 
explained by a number of factors. Firstly, as stated in the Care Commission reports 
lounge 2 was commonly used as a store for equipment. The storage of equipment in 
this room may have given an unclear message of the usage of the room; hence 
residents tend to use the other lounge more often. Another explanation is based on the 
researchers subjective experience of way finding within the care home. The natural 
layout of the unit was found to be quite disorientating and confusing when trying to 
locate lounge 2. Residents may have a similar or increased experience of this, making 
it difficult to find lounge 2 and also may help to explain the increased amount of 
agitation noted in the corridor in the qualitative notes section.  
This issue was also raised in the staff interviews; when staff were talking 
about the lounges they mainly referred to lounge 1. This may reflect a staff preference 
for lounge 1 in which they encourage residents to use lounge 1 more than lounge 2. 
One staff member described lounge 1 as more homely, while lounge 2 was 
described as dull. This therefore impacted on the success of the intervention in 
lounge 2. As shown in figure 8.7 the intervention was successful in lounge 1 (case 
study 2) as the behaviour mapping data provided support for all four research 
hypotheses. This is contrasted in lounge 2 (case study 3) where there was not 
sufficient support for any of the hypotheses. Again, this may be due to the reduced 
usage of the room and the interaction between the physical and social environments, 
in that there were less people using the space so it was less inviting or that residents 
were unlikely to break the habit of using lounge 1 where they enjoyed company and 
felt comfortable (this will be discussed further in section 9). There were also fewer 
windows in lounge 2 which made the area appear very dull and meant that there were 
no opportunities to introduce edge spaces into the lounge. This may also have an 
impact on the usage of the room and therefore the reduced impact of the intervention 
on residents.  
8.7.6 Between Care Homes  
This section will analyse the data between the three care homes, it aims to identify 
differences in the observed behaviours and frequencies of behaviours across the three 
care homes. This includes differences in levels of agitation and differences in the 
existing quality of the environment. 
Firstly it was noted that agitation was much more frequently observed in the 
living areas of Care Home A than it was in Care Home B. While this is partly due to 
the living areas accommodating different numbers of people (Care Home A had chairs 
for 15 residents plus visitors while Care Home B lounge 1 only had seating for 11 
residents).  Another main difference between these two care homes was that Care 
Home A had a large open plan living area, while Care Home B had two smaller 
enclosed living areas. The difference in agitation observed between the cares homes 
within this study possibly will be a result of the design of the care homes.  
The open plan living area in Care Home A may result in more agitation being 
displayed because the layout may encourage wandering from residents as the open 
plan areas provides access to the bedrooms, kitchen and the main unit door. This 
increase in wandering may then have a negative impact of the behaviours of other 
residents as they are disturbed and frustrated by the increase in people walking past. 
Conversely, Care Home B had two smaller rooms as living spaces which did not have 
a walk way through them. However as noted in the observation notes for Care Home 
B there appeared to be more agitation displayed in the corridors of the unit. Further 
research in this area is needed to attempt to establish the benefits of each type of 
design. In Care Home C there were also very low levels of agitation observed in the 
four units. This may be due to the existing quality of the environment in Care Home C 
in that it was the newest, and/or that the residents were housed in groups of 10, the 
smallest group of resident numbers in the three care homes. This issue will be 
discussed further in sections 9.4.2.1 and 9.4.2.2.  
8.8 Results summary 
To summarise, there was support from the behaviour mapping data for all four of the 
research hypotheses. This demonstrates that the intervention has been successful in 
having an impact of the behaviour of the residents in six of the seven case studies. 
The case study, in which the intervention was not successful, has been discussed in 
terms of the contextual information available. There were a number of other issues 
concerning case study 3 (Lounge 2- Care Home B) which may explain why the 
intervention was not successful. Of the six case studies which had positive outcomes 
from the intervention, there were a number of contextual similarities and differences 
within the care homes in which they were based. These, according to Yin (2003) give 
the results a generalisability as it has been demonstrated that the principles behind the 
intervention have been successful in a number of environments which are similar to 
each other (e.g., case studies 4-7) and also in environments which have stark 
differences to each other (e.g., case studies, 1, 2 and 4). The results of the staff focus 
groups and interviews also raised a number of interesting issues, both in gaining staff 
perceptions of the intervention and the environment- behaviour relationship and as 
contextual evidence to support the behaviour mapping data. The following chapter 
will discuss the issues and evidence presented in the previous two chapters in terms of 
theoretical background and previous research.  
Chapter 9 - Discussion  
This chapter will discuss the results outlined in the three previous chapters for each of 
the seven environments. It will begin by describing the behaviours observed in each 
of the care homes before discussing the effect of the intervention on these behaviours. 
It will discuss each environment separately in terms of issues specific to that care 
home and also look at the results as a whole over the seven environments. It will then 
discuss the results in terms of previous research and theory. To begin with the 
discussion will look at the results from each environment in terms of the four research 
hypotheses set out in chapter 5. These were: 
1) There will be a decrease in the observed agitation of the residents following 
the modification 
2) There will be an increase in interactions following the modification 
3) There will be an increase in positive behaviours following the modification  
4) There will be a decrease in negative behaviours following the modification. 
The chapter will then look at the methodological strengths of the research in terms of 
how well it addresses the issues that were discussed in chapter 3. The first of these 
was that previous research has not included an empirical measure of behaviour, 
instead focusing on the perceptions of staff and relatives of the effects of interventions 
on residents. The second issue was that research which did include an empirical 
measure of behaviour generally involved very low participant numbers which made it 
difficult to generalise the results of these studies. The present research was designed 
to address these issues by using an empirical measure of behaviour and also by 
carrying out the study in seven different environments which helped to build a larger 
evidence base for the success of these interventions. The final sections of this chapter 
will discuss the practical applications of this research and future directions for the 
research.  
9.1 Description of Observed Behaviours 
The present research attempted to provide an objective measure of the behaviours 
displayed by residents with dementia in the living areas of the care home in line with 
research aim number two; to assess the types and prevalence of common behaviours 
of residents with dementia in the living areas. Residents were observed in seven 
separate case studies which aimed to describe the behaviours displayed in the living 
areas pre and post an environmental intervention to assess the effect of the 
intervention. To the researchers knowledge this is the first study which focuses on 
the range of behaviours displayed in the living area of care homes and the changes in 
behaviour following the environmental intervention. Previous studies have described 
prevalence rates of certain behaviours displayed by residents with dementia and this 
can be used as a comparison with the rates observed in this study. This section will 
focus on describing the behaviours observed in the seven case studies and comparing 
them to rates found in previous studies.  
In each of the seven case studies carried out, residents were most frequently 
observed as being engaged in inactive behaviour (between 55.6% and 77.6% of 
observed behaviours pre intervention and between 57.1% and 76.7% of the 
behaviours post intervention). This reflects rates of behaviours observed in previous 
studies that have found that residents in dementia care homes spent the majority of the 
time not doing anything (Buettner, 1999), while Logsdon (2000) observed residents 
in a Special Care Unit (SCU) doing nothing 85% of the time. The present study 
attempts to examine the doing nothing category in more detail in order to provide a 
better understanding and definition of the behaviours and their effect on residents. In 
order to do this the study defined four specific behaviour categories, sleeping, 
contented, looking out the window and passive behaviour as defined in the literature 
i.e., appearing withdrawn and apathetic (Colling, 1999). Previous research has shown 
that dementia residents commonly display passive behaviour throughout these periods 
of doing nothing (Perrin, 1997). However, across the seven case studies in this 
research the rates of observed passive behaviour (as defined as a withdrawn, negative 
behaviour) were one of the least commonly observed behaviours within the general 
category of inactive behaviour, pre and post intervention. Most commonly residents 
were observed as contented or sleeping within the inactive behaviour category both 
pre and post intervention. This indicates that although residents are frequently 
observed as inactive it does not necessarily mean that this is a negative behaviour. 
 Agitation was the least frequently observed main behaviour category in all of 
the seven case studies carried out (5.5% - 15.8% of all behaviour pre intervention and 
1.5% - 13.2% of all behaviour post intervention). This rate is much lower than found 
previously in a study by Cohen-Mansfield et al. (1989) which observed agitation in 
58.3  83.7% of their observations. This difference may be due to differences in the 
population of the care homes, for example, the two residents in the different care 
homes may be at different stages of dementia. Another reason may be due to 
differences in the treatment philosophy or physical environment of the care homes 
being observed. For example, Care Home A and C had open plan living areas whilst 
Care Home B had enclosed rooms for the living areas. This along with the possible 
effect on behaviour will be discussed below in section 9.5.1. Finally, this may be due 
to methodological differences in how agitation was measured. The present study 
observed the agitation in a space at five minute intervals while Cohen-Mansfield et al. 
(1989) measured all the agitation displayed in one hour. The aim of the Cohen-
Mansfield et al. study was to solely describe agitation in a general care home setting 
while the present study had the aim of reducing baseline measures of agitation solely 
in the living areas of the care home. However, there were similarities between the 
results found by the present study and the Cohen-Mansfield et al. study. The most 
common types of agitation observed in the seven case studies of this study were 
physical and vocal agitation, whilst aggressive agitation and other agitation were very 
rarely observed. 
 The third behaviour category was active behaviour, which was observed to 
occur in between 12.5% and 28.6% of the observed pre intervention behaviour and 
19.3% and 29.1% of post intervention behaviour in the seven studies. To the 
researchers knowledge this is the first study to provide prevalence rates for the 
amount of observed active behaviours people with dementia were observed to engage 
in within the living area. There have however been studies examining the amount of 
social interactions residents were engaged in within dementia care homes. In this 
study social interaction was included in the overall active behaviour category. This 
study aimed to explicitly measure the number of social interactions residents engaged 
in, along with who the interaction was with and the quality of that interaction. 
Previous research has observed very minimal social interaction between residents 
with dementia (Kolanowski & Litaker, 2006). This was also mirrored in the seven 
case studies of the present research. Social interactions only accounted for between 
2.3% and 9.3% of all observed behaviours pre intervention and between 2.9% and 
8.9% post intervention across the seven case studies. 
 Comparing the rates of observed behaviour in this study to those observed in 
previous studies allows for the present studies to be put in context with previous 
research. One of the issues of research in this area is the heterogeneity of people with 
dementia i.e. the symptoms manifest themselves differently in all sufferers along with 
the different, more specific symptoms that are associated with different types of 
dementias. This section has compared the rates of behaviours observed in this study 
with that of other studies. This has allowed us to gain an understanding of the most 
common negative behaviours displayed by people with dementia. It has also helped us 
to understand the positive behaviours displayed which could possibly be encouraged 
with well planned and organised interventions. The following sections will discuss the 
main findings of the seven case studies in relation to each of the research hypotheses. 
It will then attempt to summarise the findings and relate them to previous 
environmental research and theory.  
9.2 Summary of Results  
Hypothesis 1: there will be an increase in positive behaviour post intervention.  
Hypothesis 1 was supported in six of the seven case studies. The only case study 
which did not have a significant increase in positive behaviours was case study 3, 
which has been identified as a unique case from the seven other cases and will be 
discussed in more detail in section 9.4.3.1. From the other six case studies however, 
there was considerable support for hypothesis 1. This indicates that the intervention in 
each of the case studies was success in encouraging positive behaviours such as 
watching TV, looking out the window, social interactions, content behaviour and 
other behaviours such as reading, playing games or purposefully walking.  
This was an aim of the interventions, in that it was designed to enable 
residents to engage in more activities (such as watching TV). It has been found that 
residents with dementia place great importance on being able to engage in everyday 
activities (Phinney, Chaudbury & OConnor 2007). These results are similar to that 
found by Devlin (1992) where the introduction of low dividers into a psychiatric day 
room resulted in more positive use of the space. It may also reflect an increase in the 
perceived control of the environment as residents have an option of where to sit and 
can move to avoid stressors in the environment. 
The increase in positive behaviours within the inactive behaviour category 
e.g.,  contentedness and looking out the window also reflect the findings of Stahler, 
Frazer and Rappaport (1984) who carried out a similar study in a psychiatric ward. 
They found an increase in individual passive behaviour following the redesign of a 
large day room into four separate areas. It should be noted that the definition of 
passive behaviour used by Stahler et al. is not the same as used in this study or in 
previous studies (e.g. Colling, 2006); in this case the passive behaviour is similar to 
the inactive behaviour category in the present research. Stahler et al. (1984) suggested 
that the increase in passive behaviour was due to an increase in patient tranquillity. 
However as there was not a measure of different types of inactive behaviour it is 
unclear whether this is the case, as from the present research it is clear that doing 
nothing may have positive and negative aspects to it and not always be an indication 
of tranquillity. The present study did attempt to identify different types of inactive 
behaviour and as noted found a shift from residents observed as being passive to 
being more contented in a number of the seven case studies. This would provide 
support for the idea of an increase in resident tranquillity following the intervention, 
perhaps indicating that residents are happier with the new layout and are quite content 
to sit in the living area and observe what is happening without psychologically 
withdrawing from the environment.  
Hypothesis 2: There will be an increase in social interactions post intervention.  
There was full support for hypothesis 2 from four of the seven case studies. Again, 
case study 3 did not provide support for this hypothesis, nor did case study seven. 
Case study 5 provided limited support for this hypothesis as there was a significant 
increase in resident resident interactions, however there was not an increase in 
overall interactions or in any other specific type of interaction. It could be argued that 
an in increase in resident  resident interactions is the most important outcome 
relating to this hypothesis. This may show an increase in independence of the 
residents as they are taking the initiative to interact with one another. This is why case 
study 5 has been included in the support for this hypothesis. Again, there is 
considerable support for hypothesis 2, indicating that the intervention was successful 
in increasing interactions in the living space.  
The intervention was designed to have a sociopetal layout of furniture post 
intervention in each study. This layout has been found to increase and encourage 
social interactions as opposed to a socio-fugal layout (Bell et al., 1996). It could be 
said that the post intervention furniture layout created areas with social affordance 
(Layton, 1979). This means that the furniture arrangement has created a situation 
where people are in more social situations therefore other residents perceive the 
people using the space as available to talk to. The idea of affordances and social 
affordance will be discussed in more detail below.  The increase in social interactions 
reflects early research findings by Sommer and Ross (1958) who found an increase of 
almost double in social interactions following the re-arrangement of furniture in a 
geriatric ward day room.  
One encouraging finding from the studies was the observed increase in 
resident-resident interactions in five of the seven case studies. This indicates that 
residents are more likely to take the initiative to converse with other residents 
following the intervention. Previously it has been found that residents with dementia 
are not likely to take the initiative to initiate conversations (Kolanowski & Litaker, 
2006). Therefore the findings from this research highlight that simple environmental 
interventions can encourage more social interactions between residents and provides 
support for Diaz Moores (1999) finding that people with dementia are capable of 
developing relationships in care homes.  
The results for staff-resident interactions are less consistent over the seven 
case studies; two studies found a decrease in staff-resident interactions while another 
two found an increase. As these findings are inconsistent, they may be better 
understood in terms of the treatment philosophy of the care home which was 
discussed in Chapter 7.  
There were very few visitor-resident interactions observed in the seven case 
studies and with the exception of Care Home A and there were no differences 
observed post intervention. The low numbers of visitor interactions indicates that 
there were few visitors using the living areas at the times of the observations. A 
reason for the low number of visitors in the living areas may be that the number of 
chairs in the room reflect the number of residents in the unit (with the exception of 
Care Home A) and that visitors do not feel that there is space for them especially 
when there are many residents in the living area. This was an issue that was raised by 
a relative in the relative questionnaire in Care Home B.  
 Overall the increase in interactions is an extremely positive outcome of the 
research, it has been suggested that an increase in social interactions may have a 
therapeutic effect on people with dementia (Stokes, 1992). 
Hypothesis 3: There will be a reduction in negative behaviour post intervention. 
Five of the seven case studies provided support for hypothesis number 3.  As 
before, case study three did not provide support for this hypothesis. Case study 6 also 
did not provide support for this hypothesis. However, as the majority of the case 
studies supported this hypothesis, it can be concluded that the intervention was 
successful in reducing the amount of negative behaviours displayed in the area, 
including passive behaviour and agitation.  
According to Colling (2000) passive behaviour can be understood within the 
context of the NDB model. Passive behaviour is conceptualised as a disruptive 
behaviour which manifests due to the needs of the dementia sufferer not being met. In 
this case it may be that the environment did not meet the needs of the users as it did 
not provide a choice of area to sit in the room and also that the rooms did not have a 
clear function. This may have confused residents as they were unsure how to behave 
or use the living areas adequately resulting in them being apathetic, withdrawing 
psychologically and therefore displaying passive behaviour. Postintervention, it was 
observed that passive behaviour decreased and it could therefore be suggested that the 
new layout of furniture in the room served to meet the needs of the residents better. 
For example, the new layout of furniture may decrease boredom by providing 
opportunities for residents to engage in different behaviours or simply by allowing 
them to watch what is going on in the rest of the room or outside.  
 The decrease in passive behaviour could also be understood in terms of the 
changes in other behaviours observed in the living areas. For example, the increase in 
social interactions and activities may have a more lasting positive impact on the 
behaviour of residents resulting in them appearing more content in the living area 
even when they are inactive. Another example is the increase in residents looking out 
the window, this visual access to nature or outside life for residents has been found to 
have a positive impact on residents (Kaplan & Kaplan 1992; Rappe & Topo, 2007). 
Overall there has been very little research on interventions which attempt to decrease 
passive behaviour in people with dementia. Although the rates of passive behaviour 
that have been observed in these seven case studies are lower than those found in 
previous research, the present research has succeeded in designing an intervention that 
has significantly reduced the amount of observed passive behaviour in living areas of 
dementia care homes.  
Hypothesis 4: There will be a reduction in agitated behaviour post intervention.  
Similar to hypothesis 3, there was support for hypothesis 4 from five of the 
seven case studies. Again, the support for hypothesis 4 came from case studies, 1, 2, 
4, 5 and 7. This provides strong support for the fourth hypothesis and indicates that 
the intervention was successful in reducing agitated behaviour post intervention. This 
may reflect the finding from Calkins (2001) that agitation in people with dementia is 
reduced in smaller units and smaller group numbers. Although this research did not 
architecturally reduce the size of the living area, it did create smaller areas out of one 
large area. This highlights the fact that simple changes can be made to existing 
environments and yield positive changes in residents behaviours. This supports the 
recommendation from Nazarko (2006) that it is important to do all that can be done to 
break up large living spaces into smaller areas. The decrease in agitation found in this 
study reflects the findings from geriatric psychiatric hospital literature where 
separating a large day room into smaller areas resulted in a reduction in observed 
pathological behaviours of patients (Stahler et al., 1984).  
9.3 Theoretical Implications 
 Overall, the results from the behaviour mapping provide strong evidence for 
the efficacy of the interventions in the living areas of the care homes. Although the 
interventions were not exactly the same in each environment, they were based on the 
same underlying principles. These principles were developed based on the theoretical 
background to the research along with previous research that has been carried out in 
the area. The following section will revisit each of the theories outlined in chapter 4 
and consider the implications of them with the results from the study.  
9.3.1 Lawtons Environmental Docility hypothesis 
Lawtons Environmental Docility hypothesis was the main theory which 
describes how the environment can impact on the behaviour of people with dementia 
specifically. It highlights how disabling normal environments can be to people with 
dementia, but how small scale interventions can have disproportionately positive 
effects on the well-being and independence of people with dementia. This theory was 
the basis for the design of the intervention in that it highlighted how spaces can pose 
problems for people with dementia. These problems may not be easily identifiable 
however. The behaviour mapping results show residents are using the living areas in 
much more productive ways post intervention. This is indicated by the changes from 
more common negative behaviours such as agitation to more positive behaviours 
which involve residents interacting positively with the environment in some way, 
such as watching television, interacting or looking out of the window.  
 These results support Lawtons Environmental Docility Hypothesis in two 
ways. Firstly, given that following the intervention significantly more positive 
behaviours were observed in the living areas, this indicates that the design of the 
living area pre intervention may have been preventing these behaviours in some way, 
highlighting that the environment may become disabling to people with dementia. 
Noticeably, living areas have not been the focus of much research within dementia 
friendly environments. As mentioned previously, this may be because research has 
focused on areas where problem behaviours occur, or areas where more activities of 
daily living occur (such as dining rooms, bathrooms etc.). This means that living areas 
are often overlooked, as there does not appear to be any significant problems with this 
area. However, this research has indicated that even though the design is not having a 
visibly negative impact on behaviour, it is hindering the residents ability to use the 
area in a productive way. The layout of the furniture in all the areas pre intervention 
had a mostly socio-fugal design, which has been found to promote individualistic 
activities and reduce social interactions. This design coupled with the reduced 
capabilities of people with dementia may have resulted in the environment playing a 
role in disabling the residents to use the living areas in a productive manner as 
Lawtons Environmental Docility Hypothesis states.  
 Secondly, the research supports the second part of the hypothesis, that small 
and simple changes can have a disproportionate positive impact on the residents using 
the space. As the intervention was designed in line with Lawtons theory, the 
interventions were kept as simple and small scale as possible. This meant that in the 
majority of cases, the same furniture was used to create a new layout in the room. As 
the intervention had a positive impact on behaviour with an increase in social 
interactions and positive behaviours this indicates that the small and simple 
intervention has had a disproportionate positive impact on the residents well being 
and quality of life. The impact that the behaviour changes may have on the quality of 
life and well being of residents will be discussed further in section 9.5.1.   
9.3.2 Behaviour Constraint Model 
The Behaviour Constraint Model attempted to describe the environment  
behaviour relationship in more detail. This theory factors perceived control of the 
environment as an important determinant of behaviour. The theory states that a loss of 
perceived control can result in a negative behavioural reaction and can ultimately 
result in learned helplessness. This may have been evident in the living areas pre 
intervention as the furniture arrangement did not allow a choice of how to use the 
room, therefore the residents did not have any decisional control over the 
environment. Pre intervention in all seven case studies, more negative behaviours 
were commonly observed, such as agitation and passive behaviour. Passive behaviour 
especially may indicate learned helplessness. Residents who appeared passive may 
have become so after having repeatedly failed at their attempts to regain control of the 
environment and therefore have socially and emotionally withdrawn from the 
environment as a coping mechanism.   
The intervention in this study was designed in a way to increase perceived 
control of the environment by increasing decisional control, i.e. by creating a choice 
of areas. This involved changing the environments from large areas with no clear 
purpose to a number of smaller areas (depending on the space available in each case 
study) which had a clear function. This provided residents with a choice of which 
areas they would like to use in the living spaces and which (if any) activities they 
engaged in. It is thought this choice of how to use the area would then increase the 
perceived control over the environment therefore having a positive impact on the 
behaviour of residents using the space. From the results of the case studies, this 
appears to be the case. There were significant increases in behaviours classed as 
positive, along with decreases in the negative behaviours. This indicates that the 
residents are using the room more productively, and are displaying less agitated or 
passive behaviours which may be a result of learned helplessness.  
9.3.3 Attention Restoration Theory 
The Attention Restoration Theory (ART) linked directly to the edge spaces 
which were created as part of the interventions. This theory stated that views of nature 
and being in nature can have a restorative effect on processing. In people with 
dementia, problem behaviours such as agitation and passivity may be the result of 
stress encountered throughout the day, for example in a living area which does not 
meet the needs of the resident. The attention restoration theory influenced the design 
of the intervention in this study as the edge spaces allowed visual access to nature, 
although with the comfort and safety of being in doors. As the behaviour mapping 
results showed a positive change in the behaviours displayed in all of the case studies 
where an edge space was included, it may be that this has had a positive effect on 
restoring the deficits caused by excess stress on people with dementia.  
 However, it has not been possible to directly test this theory with this research 
as the design of the intervention involved other factors as well as the edge spaces. The 
behaviour mapping methodology only counted the number of people engaged in each 
behaviour at each observation, it did not allow for a follow up on the behaviours of 
people who had been observed looking out the window. The present research 
highlights that ART may be relevant to apply to people with dementia, however 
further research would need to be carried out in order to establish the links between 
ART and its impact on people with dementia.  
9.3.4 Needs - Driven Dementia  Compromised Behaviour Model (NDB model) 
The NDB model was the final theory which was used to inform the design of 
the present research.  This theory was used to understand more about the behaviour of 
people with dementia. The theory describes how behaviour is a result of a range of 
proximal factors (for example basic physiological and psychological needs and also 
relevant to this research, needs from the physical and social environment) interacting 
with background factors (for example, the diminished cognitive functioning of 
dementia sufferers). Due to the dementia compromised part of the model, when a 
persons basic needs are not met, the person has less capability to adapt and change 
their situation to address this problem. It is when this occurs that negative behavioural 
reactions can occur.  
 As mentioned one of these basic needs of people with dementia is a physical 
environment which supports and promotes residents well being (Marquardt & 
Schmieg, 2009). From the perspective of designing dementia friendly environments it 
is important that environments have a clear function and are easy to understand 
(Marquardt & Schmieg, 2009). Pre intervention in this study, the design of the 
environment did not provide a clear message of the purpose of the room. For example, 
the chairs were all pushed back against the wall and faced the centre of the room; this 
layout did not clearly demonstrate any purpose of the room, other than sitting and 
looking into the centre of the room. From this perspective the living area did not meet 
any of the needs of the residents using it and therefore may have been contributing to 
the negative behaviour observed there.  
 Post intervention however, the choice of areas to use may have helped to meet 
the needs of the users more effectively. These smaller areas had a clearer purpose, for 
example chairs arranged facing the television or chairs arranged around a coffee table. 
This may have met the needs of the residents more effectively as it creates a clearer 
message on how the environment should be used. Having a choice of areas to use may 
also meet the needs of the residents more effectively, as it may be that having control 
over how to use the environment (Behaviour Constraint Model) is another important 
need of the users. Again, while this theory has informed the design of the study and 
the intervention however there are a number of factors involved in this theory which 
havent been accounted for in this study, for example, the stage of dementia and 
individual differences in cognitive deficits of the users, along with the views of what 
people with dementia perceive as their needs from the environment. Future research 
should attempt to address this issue further in order to demonstrate the impact of the 
environment within the NDB model.  
9.4 Alternative Interpretations of Results 
9.4.1 Theory of Affordances 
          An alternative theoretical explanation as to why the intervention had a positive 
impact on the residents of the care home could come from Gibsons theory of 
affordances (Gibson, 1979). Gibsons theory developed from the field of ecological 
psychology and posits that individuals perceive the affordance of environments. 
Affordances are explained by Gibson (1979) as the affordances of the environment 
are what it offers the animal, what it provides or furnishes, either for good or ill. 
(p127). From this definition it is assumed that affordances are meaningful to those 
who perceive them, in that in each environment the affordances provide opportunities 
for certain behaviours. The theory of affordances assumes that the behaviour-
environment relationship is the interaction between the physical environment, how it 
is perceived and the behaviours that are afforded by that environment. It is important 
to note also that affordances are automatic, there is no learning process involved in 
the affordances people perceive from an object or situation. While Gibson says that 
affordances can be physical for example a window provides light, visual access to 
outdoors and fresh air, affordances can also be social, for example the presence of 
people is thought of as an affordance, affording social interaction, comfort and 
conflict. This highlights the relationship between the physical and social environment 
and their impact on the users of the environment. For example one study attempted to 
examine the affordance of a town centre square that had became popular with 
skateboarders. They found examples of both physical and social types of affordances, 
firstly, physical affordances which provided opportunities for skateboarders to 
perform tricks such as steps and handrails, and secondly, social affordances in that a 
large number of skateboarders used the square so that at any given time there were 
opportunities for positive social interactions and also for getting advice and feedback 
on their skateboarding (Woolley & Johns, 2001).  
 In the case of the present studies the theory of affordances could be 
interpreted as the existing environments pre intervention only provided affordances 
for a limited set of behaviours. The rooms did not have any clear purpose with the 
furniture arranged around the edges of the room, unlike any living space that the 
residents would be used to. The residents perhaps perceived few affordances of the 
room as it only allowed them the opportunity to sit and look into the centre of the 
room which is reflected in pre intervention behaviour mapping data. This is contrasted 
with the post intervention data where more positive behaviours were observed in the 
room and specifically an increase in social interactions was observed. As affordances 
are automatic, the change in the furniture arrangement would result in residents seeing 
more opportunities for behaviours automatically without having to learn what the new 
arrangement meant. Using the theory of affordances this could be explained in that the 
redesign of the furniture resulted in the residents perceiving increased affordances of 
the room and an increase in the opportunities for positive behaviours such as social 
interactions and watching television. From this perspective the intervention in the 
physical environment has increased the affordances of the environment in that 
residents can see different uses for the space.  
The results could also be understood in terms of an interaction between the 
social and physical environment. Although the overall usage of the room did not 
change post intervention, it may be that the change in behaviour of the residents using 
the room also increased the affordances of the space. Pre intervention negative 
behaviours such as passive behaviour and agitation were more common. A person 
perceiving another resident displaying this behaviour would not afford this as an 
opportunity for social interaction. However post intervention positive behaviours such 
as contented and activities were more frequently observed, perhaps increasing the 
affordance for the users for social interaction.  Overall, it could be argued that the 
physical intervention that was put in place in each environment has resulted in an 
increase in the affordances of the environment both from a physical and a social point 
of view. Ultimately, the increase in the affordances means that the users of the 
environment perceive an increased in opportunities for different behaviours in the 
room post intervention.  
Adopting this perspective could also link to the previous theories discussed in 
terms of the effect of the intervention on observed behaviour. Firstly, the increase in 
affordances of the living areas resulted in the residents perceiving more opportunities 
for different behaviours. This therefore increases the choice that residents have which 
can increase feelings of control in the environment as outlined in the behaviour 
constraint model. The increase in affordances of the environments could also 
represent the environment meeting the needs of the residents more effectively, as it 
has resulted in them affording opportunities for social interaction and to partake in 
various other activities, such as watching television. According to the Needs Driven 
Dementia Compromised Behaviour model if the needs of people with dementia are 
met more effectively it will result in fewer instances of negative behaviour displayed 
by residents.   
9.4.2 Between Care Home Observations of data 
9.4.2.1 Differences in architectural design 
From analysis of the behaviour mapping data there were some issues that arose in the 
frequency and types of behaviours displayed across the different care homes that were 
not expected from the data. However, due to the nature of the data from each case 
study (i.e., differences in resident numbers in units, differences in staff numbers and 
unit policies etc.) it is not possible to carry out statistical tests examining whether the 
difference that were observed are significant. The differences observed could form the 
basis of future research in this area.  
Firstly it was noted that agitation was much more frequently observed in Care 
Home A than it was in Care Home B. One main difference between these two care 
homes was that care home A had a large open plan living area, while care home B had 
two smaller enclosed living areas. Open plan living has been recommended as a 
positive feature of dementia friendly design (Judd et al., 1998) as it increases visual 
access which helps to aid memory and way finding. However, research has also 
shown that aggressive outbursts and incidences of agitation are more commonly 
observed in large open plan areas (Schwarz et al., 2004; Diaz-Moore, 1999). The 
difference in agitation observed between the care homes within this study possibly 
will be a result of the design of the care homes.  
The open plan living area in Care Home A may result in more agitation being 
displayed because the layout may encourage wandering from residents as the main 
pathway to access the bedrooms, kitchen and the main unit door passes through the 
open plan area. This increase in wandering may then have a negative impact of the 
behaviours of other residents as they are disturbed and frustrated by the increase in 
people walking past. Conversely, care home B had two smaller rooms as living spaces 
which did not have a walk way through them. This may provide more support for the 
recommendation that smaller recreation spaces are linked to lower levels of agitation 
(Schwarz et al., 2004). However as noted in the observation notes for care home B 
there appeared to be more agitation displayed in the corridors of the unit. Further 
research in this area is needed to attempt to establish the benefits of each type of 
design. In Care Home C there were also very low levels of agitation observed in the 
four units. This may be due to the existing quality of the environment in Care Home C 
in that it was the newest, and/or that the residents were housed in groups of 10, the 
smallest group of resident numbers in the three care homes. Literature suggests that 
smaller groups of residents are more beneficial in long term dementia care and 
smaller group numbers can result in less agitation (Calkins, 2001: Judd et al., 1998). 
These changes could also be related to the stage of dementia and the abilities and 
function of the residents in each home. More research is needed in this area to 
determine the impact of the environment on behaviours such as agitation, for example 
open plan compared with closed rooms for living areas and the optimal group size for 
residential care.  
9.4.2.2 Impact of the quality of the existing environments 
  Another finding that emerged when looking at the data from the three care 
homes together was that the interventions appear to have had a greater impact in care 
home B and a lesser impact in care home C. As mentioned previously the results from 
each separate case study appeared to follow the same pattern and provided support for 
each research hypothesis. However, the differences in the means and significance 
levels of each study demonstrate that there was a stronger effect in care home B 
(specifically lounge 1) and to a lesser extent in care home A. From the analysis of the 
Care Commission reports, care home B has received a lot of criticism under the theme 
of Quality of Environment which may indicate that the physical environment of 
care home B is poorer than that of care homes A and C. Similarly, care home A was 
criticised under the same theme for not having a separate activity space and an audit 
from the Dementia Services Development Centre at the University of Stirling was 
recommended to improve the environment. Care home C however scored highly on 
the quality of environment theme in the reports and did not have any 
recommendations relating to the physical environment.  
The idea that the interventions had the least impact in the units of care home C 
may reflect these differences between the care homes. Care home C could be 
perceived as having the higher quality physical environment of the three care homes 
while care home B may be perceived as being the poorest environment. It may be that 
in environments which are lacking, the changes made to the environment have a 
more positive effect. This may be because it appears to make a greater impact on the 
quality of the environment which results in users perceiving the changes as more 
positive than users of an environment who already perceive the quality as positive. 
This could result in the intervention in the environment having less of an impact on 
the users of the higher quality environments. However it is important to note that 
there was a significant change in behaviour in all the case studies, although the 
interventions appeared to have more impact in environments which had an existing 
poorer quality.  
9.4.2.3 Staff  
 There were also differences observed between the staff groups of the three 
care homes. The staff focus groups and interviews that were held following the 
intervention showed that staff had differing views on how important the environment 
is for dementia care. In the interviews with staff from care home B they appeared to 
be very positive about the changes that were put in place in the intervention while in 
the other two care homes the staff were not as positive. This may reflect that the staff 
feel the environment in care home B is lacking and welcome any moves to adapt the 
environment. Staff in care home C appeared to have the least awareness of the impact 
the environment has on people with dementia. In the focus group they found it 
difficult to think of any examples of the impact the environment has on the behaviour 
of residents or on their ability to provide a good standard of care. This might indicate 
that the staff of care home C take for granted the quality of the environment and 
therefore are not aware of the effect it has on the residents. On the other hand the staff 
in care home A were quite resistant to the intervention put in place. Although they 
seemed to have a good understanding of the impact the environment has in dementia 
care, it may be that there have been a number of changes made in the environment 
that they have not been consulted about. This highlights the importance of getting the 
staffs support and ensuring they have an understanding of the expected outcomes and 
benefits of the intervention.  
Having support from the staff team is crucial in the success of any 
environmental intervention. This has been emphasised in previous studies (Petterson 
& Arnetz, 1998; Devlin, 1992) where interventions have not been well accepted by 
staff when they have not been consulted or informed. This also applies on an 
organisational level when it is important that policies and procedures complement the 
intervention, for instance in this study the use of the living area in Care Home A for 
structured activity sessions and the lounge 2 in Care Home B being used as a store for 
equipment may have had an impact on the efficacy of the interventions. This has been 
noted in other studies also where the intervention made has been compromised by 
staffing levels in the care home either by not having enough staff on shift to support 
the intervention (Shwarz et al., 2004) or not having consistency between staff on 
different shift patterns (Matthews et al., 1996).  
Whilst the previous sections have focused on describing and trying to explain 
the changes in behaviour observed as a result of the intervention, the following 
section will attempt to discuss the impact that these changes will have on the care 
homes. It will do this by examining the impact that the behaviour changes may have 
on all of the user groups, including the residents, staff and visitors.  
9.4.3 Within Care Home Differences 
9.4.3.1 Care Home B 
The behaviour mapping data from lounge 2 revealed that fewer numbers of 
residents use the room than lounge 1. The observed behaviour counts for each 
category were much lower than that of lounge 1. This may be explained by a number 
of factors. Firstly, as stated in the Care Commission reports lounge 2 was commonly 
used as a store for equipment. Research has found that in dementia friendly 
environments it is important to ensure that the purpose of the room is clear from the 
design and layout of the room in order for residents to know what to use the room for 
(Marquardt & Schmieg, 2009). The storage of equipment in this room may have given 
an unclear message of the usage of the room; hence residents tend to use the other 
lounge more often.  
Another explanation is based on the researchers subjective experience of way 
finding within the care home. The natural layout of the unit was found to be quite 
disorientating and confusing when trying to locate lounge 2. Residents may have a 
similar or increased experience of this, making it difficult to find lounge 2 and also 
may help to explain the increased amount of agitation noted in the corridor by the 
researcher in the qualitative notes section. This agitation may be a result of frustration 
of not being able to navigate easily around the environment. This relates the NDB 
model, as the environment does not meet the needs of the residents, i.e., it is not 
meeting the residents need for a legible and easy to navigate environment which 
results in a negative behaviour response such as agitation.  
This issue of the differences in usage was also raised in the staff interviews. It 
was noted when staff were talking about the lounges they mainly referred to lounge 1. 
This may reflect a staff preference for lounge 1 in which they encourage residents to 
use lounge 1 more than lounge 2. The interviews tried to establish why staff felt that 
lounge 1 was used more than lounge 2. One staff member described lounge 1 as 
more homely, while lounge 2 was described as dull and difficult to get to. Staff 
members may play a greater part in encouraging users to use a space than they realise. 
If staff have a preference for one space over another, they may encourage residents to 
go to that space, especially with residents who require assistance with mobility.  
This issue may also be explained in terms of social affordances of the space 
(Lawton, 1987). As there are more people using this room, this may encourage people 
to use the room. The people in the room provide cues for social interaction and 
behaviours for how the room should be used. Therefore encouraging people to use the 
room as opposed to a room with very few users and therefore limited social 
affordance.  
Overall, there may be a number of reasons for the differences in usage in the 
lounges in Care Home B. It is evident though that lounge 2 (case study 3) was unique 
from all the seven case studies as the intervention was not successful in only this case 
study. It may be that the low numbers of users was the most important factor in this 
room. Other environmental interventions are required to change perceptions of this 
room and to encourage residents to use the room more often before the intervention 
can be successful.  
9.5 Impact of behaviour changes 
9.5.1 A quality of life issue for residents 
As mentioned the behaviour changes that were observed in each of the seven 
case studies are very positive in terms of how each behaviour is conceptualised in this 
study (i.e., agitation and passivity as negative behaviours and interactions and 
activities as positive behaviours). Objectively, increases in positive behaviours and 
decreases in negative behaviours of residents can be perceived as positive for the 
residents as well all other user groups. This section will look at the impact these 
behaviour changes have on all three groups.  
First of all, as discussed in chapter 3, the concept of quality of life in dementia 
has been hard to measure. This is due to the issues of the reliability of the person with 
dementias ability to answer accurately and also the incongruence of the caregivers 
perception of quality of life with the person with dementias perception. However 
quality of life is an important issue for people with dementia and this researcher 
believes that it is important to attempt to link the findings of the present study to the 
existing literature on quality of life in order to assess the overall impact of the 
behaviour changes observed in the present studies.  
Higher ratings of quality of life in dementia have been linked to having social 
contacts (Burgener & Twigg, 2002), remaining socially active (Murray & Boyd 
2008), the frequency of pleasant events and the capabilities to adapt (Ettema et al., 
2005). Lower ratings of quality of life have been associated with a higher frequency 
of behavioural and psychological symptoms in dementia sufferers (Hurt et al., 2010). 
Based on these findings it could be surmised that the behaviour changes found in the 
seven case studies could have a positive impact on the quality of life of the residents 
of the care homes. A common finding in the case studies was an increase in the 
amount of social interactions between residents, indicating an increase in social 
contact for the residents. When we consider that this was accompanied with an 
increase in engaging activities and a decrease in agitation and passive behaviour, the 
findings from this study could be viewed as contributing to an increase in the 
residents quality of life post intervention.  
 It has recently been stated that the unmet needs of a person with dementia can 
also have a negative impact on their quality of life (Scholzel-Dorenbos et al., 2010). 
This has been linked to Maslows Hierarchy of Needs (1943) and also to the Need 
Driven, Dementia-Compromised Behaviour model. This viewpoint highlights the 
importance of meeting the needs of people with dementia and the impact it can have 
on their quality of life. The findings from the present studies indicate that the 
residents are using the living areas for more active behaviours than before the 
intervention and also they appear more content to be in the room following the 
intervention. This may indicate that the living areas in each study are designed in a 
way that serves to meet the needs of the residents more efficiently. For example, they 
have space to engage in activities and also space in which they can socialise with 
other residents which may have a positive impact on their quality of life.   
 Finally, decision making has been identified as another important predictor of 
quality of life (Menne et al., 2009). The intervention was designed to enable residents 
to have a choice of where to sit and who to sit with in the living room. This meant that 
if residents did not want to watch the television they had another option and could sit 
in a different area. The intervention therefore gave residents the ability to make a 
decision about where they sit in the room and who and what they engaged with which 
may also have a positive impact on quality of life. It has been recommended that 
interventions are designed in way that promotes and enables decision making for 
people with dementia in a straightforward and simple way (Menne et al., 2009) which 
the intervention in this study was designed to do.  
9.5.2 Impact on staff 
 Given the positive impact of the findings of this study on the behaviour and 
therefore quality of life of residents it can be assumed that this will have a positive 
impact on the staff of the care home and the relatives of the residents as it will result 
in less pressure on caregivers due to residents appearing more independent and 
content. Firstly if the residents are more content, engaged in more active behaviour 
and less negative behaviours there will be less need for staff to intervene in incidents 
of agitation or aggressive behaviour. In the focus groups, staff members discussed the 
positive changes they had noticed in specific residents and the positive effect it has 
had, for example less agitation and aggression being displayed. Another issue that has 
been mentioned previously is that there would be less pressure on staff to stimulate 
residents as following the intervention they were more likely to initiate conversations 
themselves. This could have a positive impact on staff as these issues provide staff 
with more time to carry out other tasks and perhaps spend time with residents who are 
not as demanding of times as perhaps more agitated or vocal residents are.  
As mentioned previously, it is important when consulting staff to consider the 
different needs that the staff have of the environment to residents. Residents need the 
living area to be a comfortable and homely environment which enables them to have a 
choice of areas and activities to engage whilst being kept safe and secure. Staff view 
the environment as work space which needs to be designed in a certain way to help 
them achieve their work related tasks efficiently. The literature linking job satisfaction 
and the physical environment indicates that poorer work environments can have a 
negative impact on job satisfaction (Spreckelmeyer, 1993). The dichotomy between 
the needs of the residents and the needs of the staff was also highlighted in the staff 
focus groups. Staff in all three care homes discussed the interventions in terms of 
causing problems with daily tasks. They all mentioned that furniture arrangement post 
intervention caused problems for them when trying to use moving and handling 
equipment in the room. The staff in care home A also noted that the arrangement of 
furniture in the intervention increased the time it took them to observe the residents in 
the room. Pre intervention the staff member could see everyone from one point in the 
room; however this task was made more difficult post intervention when the chairs 
were facing different ways. This meant the staff member had to walk around the room 
in order to check on the residents. Given the pressure that is put on staff to complete 
all their daily tasks and keep up to date paperwork, it is understandable that they may 
view a simple task taking longer than before negatively. However it is important that 
the care home management recognise this and put in place appropriate policies in 
order to combat this, such as increasing staff to patient ratios or providing staff with 
dedicated time to complete paperwork.  
Previous studies have also found instances of staff members not responding 
favourably to interventions made in their workplace. Devlin (1992) reported that staff 
did not like the changes made as they felt that the materials and furniture used in the 
intervention was not suitable for the patient group (in this case geriatric psychiatric 
patients). One example of this was that staff felt that the upholstery was not easy to 
clean which could be a problem for patients who are incontinent. Again this could be 
perceived by staff as the intervention making it more difficult for them to carry out 
daily work tasks.  
While it is important to consider the needs of all user groups when designing 
an environmental interventions it is perhaps more important to realise that the success 
of the intervention depends on finding a balance that satisfies both sets of needs while 
considering the organisational policies and procedures. This research attempted to do 
this by consulting the staff in the process of designing the intervention. This was done 
both formally in staff meetings and informally through talking with staff in the pre 
intervention data collection stage and on the day that the intervention was put in 
place. However, as noted there were some issues with staff accepting and keeping the 
intervention in place (especially in Care Home A). It may be that in this case staff did 
not realise the benefits of the intervention, firstly for the residents and secondly the 
indirect benefit for staff on their workload. It is recommended that a more formal 
education process for staff would be useful in cases like this where the researcher 
outlines the theoretical background to the design of the intervention and the 
hypothesised changes in behaviour.  
9.5.3 Impact on relatives  
 For visitors it could be assumed that the positive effect of the intervention on 
the residents would have a positive impact on the relatives visiting them also. This is 
simply assumed to be due to the fact that relatives will be happier to see that their 
relative is more content and happy in their environment. The new layout of the living 
area is such that the smaller areas provide more privacy which may encourage 
relatives to use the area more when they are visiting, however this may only be the 
case if there is enough space in the living area, for instance if there are enough chairs 
for visitors. For example, in care home C each living area was equipped with 10 seats, 
one for each resident in the unit. This may not be welcoming for visitors to the unit as 
they feel they are not welcome in this area, and they may be more likely to use the 
privacy of their relatives room. It is important to consider the needs of visitors in the 
design of care homes. Visitors can play a major part in the therapeutic process as they 
can attend more to the needs of the residents on a personal basis (Zimring et al., 
1991). However visitors can often feel vulnerable due to the unfamiliar setting and 
feeling worried about the resident. Changes such as signs (to aid way finding), 
increasing the physical comfort of visitors and providing some privacy and personal 
space can help to make the visitor more relaxed (Zimring et al., 1991). 
9.6 Methodological considerations 
9.6.1 Methodological Evaluation  
The present research is, to the researchers knowledge the first study to produce 
quantitative data measuring the behaviour of people with dementia in response to an 
environmental intervention in the living areas of care homes. The research was 
designed to address the gaps in knowledge in two ways. The first gap related to the 
lack of knowledge about how best to design the living areas of dementia care homes. 
It achieved this by designing an intervention for living areas based on existing 
theories, examining literature from psychiatric environments and exploratory research 
giving recommendations for good design in dementia.  
The second gap in knowledge relates more to the methodology of the study. 
The literature review found that the research carried out in dementia friendly 
environments fell into one of two groups. The first were studies examining the 
redesign of an area or care home which used qualitative data to analyse the effect it 
had, for example interviews or focus groups with staff and relatives. These studies 
examined the perceptions of the staff and relatives of the effect the new environment 
had on residents however failed to include any objective measure of behaviour. The 
second category of research analysed focused on small scale environmental 
interventions and their effect on a particular behaviour, for example a residents 
ability to locate their bedroom or the bathroom or problematic behaviour such as 
wandering. This type of research generally did use an objective measure of behaviour 
such as measuring whether residents could locate the bathroom or counts of people 
wandering in a specific space, however the main drawback of this type of research 
was the low participant numbers and the focus on a single environment which makes 
it hard to draw any conclusions of the effect of the interventions on people with 
dementia. The present research aimed to bridge the gap in these two strands of 
research by designing a methodology for this study that addressed the methodological 
issues with previous research whilst keeping the positive aspects from each of the two 
different bodies of research.  
 First of all the methodology of this study aimed to provide empirical data on 
the behaviour of people with dementia both before and after the environmental 
intervention was put in place. This was done using the behaviour mapping 
methodology for three weeks before the intervention to gain a baseline of the 
frequency of each behaviour in the living areas and then for three weeks following the 
intervention. This allowed the behaviours to be compared pre and post intervention in 
order to discover whether there were significant differences overall in the any of the 
behaviours. The nature of the behaviour mapping tool and the planned times of data 
collection was also useful as it allowed the data to be examined in more depth, for 
example looking for changes in behaviours at only specific times of day or examining 
specific behaviours within the general behaviour categories.  
 The behaviour mapping tool took an objective measurement of all the different 
behaviours displayed in the living area, not just focused on one target behaviour. As 
noted above, the changes that were observed in the behaviours were very positive 
changes and all may have a differing impact on each other and also the quality of life 
of the resident. This would not have been possible to achieve by just focusing on a 
specific behaviour. The range of behaviours measured in the behaviour mapping tool 
also serves to give a general understanding of the types and frequencies of different 
behaviours displayed in the living areas of the care homes; something that would not 
have been possible using another methodology such as specific rating scales, e.g. the 
Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory or only using qualitative data.  
 Another strength of the research is the case study approach and the replication 
of the study in seven different environments. As noted, previous studies using 
quantitative measures of behaviour have had very small sample sizes. This is to be 
expected given that care homes are increasingly taking into account the 
recommendation that dementia care homes are more homely and dementia friendly 
when group numbers of residents are kept low.  
The previous studies also may have had issues gaining consent from relatives 
as they involved residents carrying out a specific task which may impact on the 
numbers of residents participating in this study. The present research was designed to 
maximise consent from relatives, first by only observing the naturalistic behaviour of 
the residents i.e., it was stressed to family members that their relative would not need 
to have any contact with the researcher; this was also supported by the care home 
managers and staff which seemed to have a positive effect on gaining consent. 
Although it is not possible to view the data in this research as one large sample mainly 
due to the differences in the existing physical environments of the care homes leading 
to slight differences in the modifications of the living areas, the positive results from 
each individual case study give convincing support for the efficacy of the principles 
that each modification was based on which would not be clear from a single case 
study.  
The similarities and differences identified between case studies allow for cross 
case generalisation providing support for the hypotheses and interventions of this 
study. As small sample sizes are and will be a common problem in all environment-
behaviour research in dementia care homes a recommendation would be that future 
research should be implemented in a number of environments in order to provide 
adequate supporting data for the intervention in question.  
The final strength of the research to be discussed was the supporting 
qualitative evidence that was obtained from a number of sources. This data were 
either obtained from secondary sources, such as the Care Commission reports for each 
care home or from primary sources such as staff focus groups, relative questionnaires 
and qualitative notes. The researcher identified the perceptions of staff and relatives 
as important sources of data that should not be ignored in research of this type. The 
inclusion of this data served two purposes; firstly the data helped support the 
behaviour mapping data and at times put the behaviour mapping findings in context. 
For example there were occasions where staff discussed the effects of the changes on 
the behaviour in specific residents which was echoed overall in the quantitative data.  
Secondly, involving staff and relatives in the research helped them to 
understand the purpose of the research and may have increased support from both 
groups. Previous research has identified the support of the staff group as integral for 
success in the setting up of any intervention as all these factors have to integrate to 
provide good quality care. However, as noted in previous chapters there was an issue 
of the staff in Care Home A adhering to the intervention. If staff had been involved 
more formally from the beginning of the research in order to inform them more fully 
of the purpose of the research, the expected outcomes and allow the staff to have an 
input in the design of the intervention. This may have avoided any issues that the staff 
had with the intervention, as the focus groups highlighted. The staff in care home A 
particularly seemed to be resistant to the idea of outsiders coming in to make 
changes in the care home. Allowing staff to have an input and a say in the 
intervention may have prevented the problems found in this research.  
 Initially the research made an attempt to include data collected by the care 
home in the reports. This included medication records and incident reports that are 
completed as a matter of course following any incident in the care home. An attempt 
was made to obtain these from Care Home A, however these reports tended to be 
filled in quite sporadically, only documenting incidents where someone was injured. 
There were similar findings for the records documenting the administration of 
medication prescribed to deal with problem behaviours (as and when required or PRN 
medication). As these records did not provide much data and only dealt with extreme 
behaviours it was decided that it was not beneficial to include these in this research. It 
may, however, have been useful to have obtained data on the medication that 
residents were on and if there had been any changes in medication throughout the 
period of data collection in each care home. Medication may have had an effect on 
some of the residents behaviour, for example making them more withdrawn and 
passive; this may also have been heightened or reduced if the dosage of the 
medication changed throughout the data collection period.  
Future research may make better use of the data collected day to day in care 
homes. This source of data should be easily obtained as it is collected as part of the 
day to day running of the care home and also may give an interesting insight to 
behaviours or possible reasons for behaviour of residents. Some examples may 
include, as noted medication records, daily diaries that are kept for residents, the 
number of incontinence aids used or dietary records. 
 Although the study did include an objective measure of behaviour in the 
behaviour mapping methodology, it is noted that an important source of data which 
was not included in this study is the views of the residents themselves. There were a 
number of restrictions within this study which prevented the inclusion of residents 
perceptions of the environment and interventions. These included gaining ethical 
approval and consent to interview residents, along with time constrictions on data 
collection.  
Within the research examining dementia friendly environments, the views of 
residents have been neglected in the majority of cases. A small number of studies 
have highlighted the importance of including the views of people with dementia 
within research. Including the views of the residents may have strengthened this 
research as it could inform more on how residents perceive the living areas and what 
they use it for. This may have helped to inform the intervention as residents would be 
able to give their views on what they like about the room and what it was used for. 
One approach to this would involve talking to residents while they were using the 
living area. The advantage of this would be that residents can talk about what they are 
doing presently, if they like the area and any other information without having to rely 
on memory of the room or experiencing stress of being in a formal interview 
situation.  
Another approach would be to have selected a small number of residents 
within each care home to include a number of user case studies. This would allow the 
research to examine their behaviours and perceptions in more detail with the hope of 
gaining a more in-depth understanding of the relationship between people with 
dementia and their environments. This approach may have complemented the data 
collected from the behaviour mapping. For example, if a resident is observed looking 
out the window, this data could have helped to understand what the impact of that is. 
This would help to understand the value of these behaviours for residents, for 
example, whether the person finds looking out the window a restorative process or if 
it is more of a stimulus for conversation or reminiscence. Thus, providing a better 
understanding of the results in terms of the theories highlighted previously, in 
particular the Needs-Driven Dementia-Compromised Behaviour model or the 
Attention Restoration Theory.  
 While the behaviour mapping methodology is considered an appropriate 
measure for the research aims of this study, it is noted that there may have been an 
issue with a number of the behaviour categories used in the behaviour mapping. One 
example of this is the behaviour watching TV in the active behaviour category and 
the behaviour looking out of the window in the inactive behaviour category. 
Physically, these behaviours could appear the same, the only physical difference 
being where the resident is looking. However, they have been separated as different 
behaviours in different overall categories due to the underlying processes involved 
with the behaviour. Watching TV involves a number of mental processes, 
concentration and directed attention, while looking out the window is thought to have 
a restorative process, which does not required directed attention, in line with the 
Attention Restoration Theory. Another issue with the watching TV behaviour 
category is that there is no way of knowing for sure if the person was actually 
engaged with what was on the television or if they were simply staring in that 
direction, similar to the content behaviour category. The behaviour category 
descriptions (appendix 3) attempt to define these behaviours to prevent confusion 
between the behaviour categories.  
 Another drawback of the behaviour mapping methodology is that it was not 
possible to track individual residents and how they used the room. While the 
behaviour mapping gave an objective overview of the behaviour in the living areas 
pre and post intervention, it was not possible to identify whether the same people 
were using the living area or if the intervention had a positive impact on any specific 
resident or if any residents were using the living areas more positively than others. 
Again, this may have been assisted by including a number of residents in each unit as 
case studies of behaviour, as discussed above.  
 The final issue with the present research concerns the design of the 
intervention. As the intervention involved the redesign of the full living space, it is 
difficult to identify if any aspect of the redesign was more effective than others. For 
example, whether the edge spaces had a bigger impact on behaviour or if it was the 
idea of choice. Again as the methodology did not allow for individuals to be tracked 
or to determine if any one of the smaller spaces were used more frequently than other, 
it was not possible to determine if any aspects were more successful than others in the 
intervention. However, it may be that the change in the environment is only effective 
as a whole and that small changes in the environment would not have the same 
impact.  
9.6.2 Internal Validity 
 A drawback of this research was there was no measure to examine whether the 
effects found after the initial environmental intervention were lasting or if the changes 
in behaviour were a result of a reaction to the change and once the novelty of change 
had worn off the residents behaviours went back to baseline level. The researcher has 
visited the participating care homes since the end of the research period and found 
that the intervention has not been fully kept in place in any of the care homes. The 
care home managers have been provided with the results of each relevant study in 
order to disseminate to staff. On the follow up visits to care homes staff in a number 
of the units did mention that they still turned a couple of chairs around to let the 
residents look out the window if it was a nice day. However this would not be enough 
of the intervention to conclude that the intervention had been kept in place as this is 
only based on one principle of the intervention. As mentioned previously a more 
structured staff education programme could be beneficial and increase the duration of 
the intervention which would have allowed a follow up measure to be included in the 
study to measure the durability of the effects observed in the post intervention stage. 
Future research could be improved by factoring in a follow up measure to examine the 
longevity of the effect.  
One criticism that may be raised of the data is the concept of the Hawthorne 
effect. This is a commonly used term by researchers to explain the effects (normally 
unexpected effects) of a study. The Hawthorne effect refers to the idea that 
participants are aware that they are included in a study and therefore react in a way 
that would not be expected in a natural setting (Merret, 2006). The Hawthorne effect 
was based on a series of studies carried out in factories between 1927 and 1932. 
Details of the studies were published in 1939 by Roesthlisberger and Dickson. A 
number of studies were carried out in the Hawthorne factory in which a range of 
interventions were put in place to examine their effect on productivity. These 
interventions included; introduction of rest pauses, differing hours of working, wage 
incentives and altering lighting levels.  
In the lighting studies the experimental group worked in an environment 
where the lighting was constantly altered while the control group worked in an 
environment with a constant level of illumination. The results showed that 
productivity had increased in both groups. Follow up studies showed that productivity 
remained high and also that staff constantly expressed how happy they were with the 
new levels of illumination (even in the condition where no change had been made). 
This gives the impression that behaviour of the workers has changed for reasons other 
than the environmental intervention. French (1953) defined the Hawthorne effect as 
the idea that productivity had increased due to the social aspects of the studies rather 
than the physical interventions.  In other words in his view, the productivity of the 
workers increased because the interventions resulted in them receiving more attention 
and they valued that someone was attempting to improve their working environment. 
 In previous literature there are a number of different definitions for the 
Hawthorne effect which were documented in Chiesa and Hobbs (2008) review of the 
use of the phrase in academic text. These include the idea that participants having an 
awareness of being in a study would influence their behaviour and therefore result in a 
positive outcome of the research (Davis & Shackleton, 1975). Another definition 
states that the novelty of a change is enough to provide a positive outcome and no 
matter what the change in the environment is, it initially can have a positive outcome 
(Woolfolk & McCune-Nicolich, 1984). Both of these definitions differ slightly from 
the original use of the term by French (1953). All three definitions are commonly 
used and it is not uncommon to see contrasting definitions appear within the same text 
(Cheisa & Hobbs, 2008).  
The Hawthorne effect has also been referred to in previous studies in the 
dementia population. Similarly, when these studies refer to the Hawthorne effect, it 
attributes the results to different definitions of the term. One study examined the 
effect of multidisciplinary interventions on challenging behaviour and attributed the 
decrease in challenging behaviour in all groups to staffs positive expectations of the 
efforts of the study (Opie et al., 2002). Whilst another study reported that the increase 
in agitated behaviour of residents was a result of behaviour changing due to the 
reaction to that behaviour being observed (Sival et al., 2000). It is clear that there are 
a number of problems and issues surrounding the concept of the Hawthorne effect. It 
will be argued now that it would be difficult to attribute the results of the present 
studies to any definition of the Hawthorne effect. 
 Firstly it is argued that because the Hawthorne effect originates from 
organisational psychology literature it is difficult to apply to the present study due to 
the different population involved. The first definition exists on the basis that the 
participants perceived that the researcher was taking an interest in their well being and 
therefore reacted to this positively despite the changes that were made in their 
working environment. This is difficult to apply to the present study as the majority of 
residents were not aware that they were involved in a formal study. Although they 
may have been aware of being observed this was not deemed to be different from the 
observation that goes on a day to day basis in the care home. It was decided from the 
outset that informed consent would be sought from residents relatives and assent to 
participate was sought from residents. This meant that if any resident displayed 
displeasure at being observed they would not be included in the study.  
The second definition stated above would imply that the change in behaviour 
observed in this study could be observed with any change in the arrangement of the 
furniture. However, the important aspect to note is the fact that the pattern of 
behaviour change over the seven environments was consistent i.e. the same positive 
behaviours increased and the same negative behaviours decreased following the 
interventions. If any environmental change elicited a change in behaviour, it is 
unlikely that the same changes in the pattern of behaviour would be observed in each 
environment.  The pattern of behaviour observed in the present studies is what was 
expected to occur based on the previous research and theoretical basis of the 
interventions. One way to address this would have been to have a control study were 
the furniture was randomly arranged in the room and comparing the effects it had. 
The author feels that it would be unethical to fully investigate the claim that any 
change of the furniture would elicit a change in behaviour of the residents. The 
interventions that were put in place in the seven environments were based on previous 
research and theory and were hypothesised to have a positive impact based on this. If 
the researcher was to implement a control group in which the furniture was arranged 
randomly then it would risk causing unnecessary confusion to the user group, this 
could have an even more negative effect given the vulnerability and sensitivity of 
people with dementia.  
 It may have been useful to perform follow up data collection as noted above in 
the seven environments to assess whether the changes in behaviour were lasting 
following the post intervention data collection. Although a settling in period was 
allowed in each environment to eliminate the effect of novelty of the change it was 
not possible to carry out follow up observations as the interventions were not kept in 
place following the post intervention data collection period. Possible reasons for staff 
not accepting the interventions were discussed previously. Future studies should 
examine the longitudinal effect of the interventions on the behaviour of the people 
with dementia using the room. They should also examine in more depth the reasons 
behind staff not adhering to the changes made in the room despite knowing the 
positive effects it can have on residents.  
9.7 Practical implications of research 
9.7.1 Scotlands National Dementia Strategy 
In June 2010 the Scottish Government launched its National Dementia Strategy which 
set out a number of aims to improve dementia care in Scotland 
(http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Health/health/mentalhealth/servicespolicy/Strate
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Health/health/mentalhealth/servicespolicy/Strategy
gy). The strategy is designed to show the Scottish Governments commitment to 
delivering world class dementia services in Scotland. It covers a wide range of 
services for people with dementia alongside aims to improve public services, such as 
hospitals for people with dementia. This section of chapter 10 will not describe the 
aims of the strategy completely, rather it will focus on highlighting the areas of the 
strategy which the researcher feels are most relevant to the current research project 
and ways in which the outcome of the research could influence and help to meet the 
aims of the National Dementia Strategy.  
9.7.1.2 Better response to behaviours that staff and carers find challenging  
The first aim of the National Dementia Strategy is to ensure a better response to 
behaviours from people with dementia that staff and carers find challenging. 
Specifically this aim is  
We will ensure that people receiving care in all settings get access to 
treatment and support that is appropriate, with a particular focus on reducing 
the inappropriate use of psychoactive medication.(p45) 
As part of the strategy, a working group was commissioned to focus on this aim 
and they produced a separate report outlining the possible reasons behind challenging 
behaviour of people with dementia and recommendations for improving practice in 
this area (Workstream 1 Report and Recommendations). The report begins by 
acknowledging the fact that all behaviour is multi-causal. From this perspective it is 
important to look at the behaviour in a holistic manner, taking into account the 
environment, both physical and social and the responses to the behaviour rather than 
only focusing on the problematic behaviour. As mentioned in the quote above, the 
main aim of providing a better response when dealing with challenging behaviour was 
to reduce the use of psychoactive medication in people with dementia. The report 
outlines a tiered model of response which may be useful for staff and carers to 
consider when dealing with challenging behaviour. It is a four tiered model of 
response which initially attempts to deal with challenging behaviour by equipping 
staff with the skills to manage the behaviour by identifying the potential triggers in 
order to prevent it or deal with it quickly when it occurs. If this is not successful then 
the model progresses to more specific help from outside agencies in tier 2 and 3 
before finally resorting to the use of psychoactive medication if all else has failed at 
dealing with the behaviour. 
 The research carried out in this thesis links with the aim of providing better 
responses to challenging behaviour in that the research demonstrated the impact that 
small scale interventions such as rearranging the furniture can have on the behaviour 
of people with dementia. This is an example of environmental factors that can be 
improved in order to prevent the occurrence of challenging behaviour and also 
eliminate triggers that may exist in the environment. This type of simple and basic 
intervention would correspond to tier 1 on the model of response to challenging 
behaviour.  
 In a more specific way the research also relates to the workstreams report 
outlining long and short term ways of meeting the strategic goals within the aim of 
improving how carers respond to challenging behaviour. The first of these is the 
promotion of positive care to prevent behavioural issues arising or reaching crisis 
point. The first way of meeting this goal is to provide access to a range of positive 
activities and outlets. The current research also aimed to do this by providing a choice 
of different areas to sit in which could lead to different activities and different levels 
of stimulation. The long term action for this goal is stated as creating a dementia 
aware and friendly environment. It is hoped that the intervention created in the 
present study and the positive results found could be used to help create more 
dementia aware and friendly environments in the living areas of care home 
environments. The literature review of this thesis (Chapter 3) outlines the current 
research on creating dementia friendly environments which could also help to 
influence the creation of dementia friendly environments to help to reduce the triggers 
and instances of challenging behaviour.  
 Another strategic goal was to ensure that interventions are the least disruptive 
and least intrusive as possible. Again this could relate to the present research as the 
interventions were designed not to drastically change the environment of the living 
areas but rather to alter the environment in a way that it was hypothesised would 
benefit the residents living there. Throughout the data collection there were no 
indications that the intervention had caused any disruption or was intrusive for 
residents. It is important that interventions do follow this recommendation in order to 
comply with ethical codes and also to respect the privacy and rights of the residents in 
the care home.  
 Finally, as mentioned one main aim of the National Dementia Strategy is to 
reduce the amount of psychoactive medication prescribed for people with dementia, 
either on a day-to-day basis or on a PRN basis. The results of the present research 
show a reduction in agitation and passive behaviour both of which could be classified 
as challenging behaviour. From this it could be assumed that this could help to reduce 
the amount of psychoactive medication given to people with dementia to help to 
reduce challenging behaviour.  
 Overall there are many ways that the research carried out for this thesis can 
link into the aim of improving the response to behaviour that carers or staff find 
challenging. These include helping to reduce the instances and triggers for behaviour 
and providing non-disruptive and unobtrusive interventions which have been found to 
have a positive effect on the behaviour of people with dementia, reducing the need for 
psychoactive medication. Another area of the National Dementia Strategy that is 
relevant to the present research is the need to provide better training and education for 
staff working in the dementia field. This is something that has been identified within 
this thesis also and will be discussed in more detail in the following section.  
9.7.1.3 Staff education/ Improving staff skills 
Another of the aims of the National Dementia Strategy is to develop a skills and 
knowledge framework for dementia. A main goal of this is to improve staff skills 
and knowledge in both health and social care settings.(p39)  This acknowledges the 
fact that staff working with people with dementia need to be given training and 
development opportunities in order to develop the specialist skills required to provide 
high quality care for people with dementia. Underlying this is the need for staff and 
carers to understand the best way to support people with dementia and the reasons 
behind the types of behaviour displayed by someone with dementia. The strategy 
highlights that there are many factors which influence the behaviour of people with 
dementia including, the behaviour of other people, pain, boredom and the 
environment. It highlights that it is important for carers and staff to recognise this to 
provide the best standard of care possible.  
 This was an issue that has been highlighted as a result of the current research 
as well. There were problems with the staff accepting the intervention in many of the 
care homes which may have been a result of them not having the knowledge or 
understanding of the impact of the environment on behaviour. It may also be a 
reflection on the fact that staff feel they are not consulted in changes made to the care 
environment and therefore react adversely against them.  If staff had received further 
in depth training on dementia in addition to the standard care staff training then it may 
be that they would have been more accepting and understanding of the interventions 
made in the present research.  
 The National Dementia Strategy also suggests that there should be a 
dementia champion (although they suggest that there may be a better term than this) 
in each care home. The person in this role would ensure the quality of dementia 
specific care was high and would receive national level training. The dementia 
champion would be the person within the care home that would then provide the 
training for the other staff and be involved implementing interventions in order to 
improve the environment and standard of care. This would have been a useful contact 
in the present research as they may have been able to provide training for staff on the 
theory and research behind the intervention and also the predicted effect on the 
residents. This role would be useful to have in dementia care homes as it could help to 
facilitate further research on issues surrounding dementia. The continued support of 
dementia research is the last aim of the National Dementia Strategy relevant to the 
current research. This will be discussed in more detail in the following section.   
9.7.1.3 Continued action to support dementia research 
The National Dementia Strategy also pledges to provide continuing support for 
dementia research; in particular it aims to continue to support world class research 
into both medical treatments for dementia and the delivery of care for people with 
dementia.(p49) This recognises that it is important to continue to research the 
medical side of the disease with the aim of finding a cure for dementia but it is also 
important to research areas out with the medical domain. This includes areas such as 
the environment of the care home and also different therapies and strategies to help to 
manage symptoms or problem behaviours. It is important that research of this manner 
continues and is well supported in order to provide empirical evidence of the efficacy 
of specific interventions. In the long run this will reduce disruption in care homes as it 
will reduce the number of unsuccessful interventions that are put in place. If the care 
home has access to research then they can easily make a decision on the best place 
intervention to help improve the quality of care and the environment.  
 The strategy also highlights that it is important to involve people with 
dementia and their carers in research, as they are recognised as experts on the 
condition. Again this is something that this research has attempted to do, however 
may have benefitted from a further qualitative input from residents themselves.  
 In conclusion, the National Dementia Strategy has highlighted the importance 
of providing good quality dementia care to the Scottish Government. The report sets 
out a number of aims which the present research relates to. First of all the main 
research aim was to focus on reducing agitation and what could be referred to as 
challenging behaviour. This is a direct practical implication of this research and 
relates directly to the strategy. Specifically the pledge to reduce the use of 
psychoactive drugs to deal with challenging behaviour in favour of nonmedical 
interventions, such as the one used in the present research. The research also 
highlighted a need for further staff training on dementia and how best to support 
people with the disorder. Again, this is also recognised in the strategy and aims to 
improve the training provided for staff. Finally, the present research could be viewed 
as an example of good research examining the efficacy of a specific modification, the 
type of research that the Scottish Government will continue to support as an aim of 
this strategy. The strategy and also this research highlight the need and importance of 
good quality dementia research in Scottish society.  
9.7.2 Economic Costs of Dementia 
In September 2010 Alzheimers Disease International published their annual World 
Alzheimer report, titled The Global Economic Impact of Dementia 
(www.alz.co.uk/worldreport). The aim of the report was to highlight the financial 
costs of dementia along with the personal, emotional, and social costs that are 
generally highlighted. The report considered informal care from family members as 
well as medical and social care in their calculation of total costs.  
 The report found that the total worldwide estimated costs of dementia are $604 
billion in 2010. This amount of money is put into perspective as being equivalent to 
the 18
 largest economy in the world. Of these costs 42% accounts for informal care, 
another 42% accounts for social care costs and 16% accounts for medical care. The 
need to develop cost-effective packages of social and medical care is highlighted in 
the report. It is advised that meeting the needs of people with dementia and their 
caregivers can only be done by implementing evidence-based prevention strategies 
and cost-effective approaches to social care.  
 The present research is a good example of how there are many changes that 
can be made which have very little or no economic impact but have a very positive 
impact on the residents in the care home. Research examining dementia friendly 
environments is important as many of the interventions that have been recommended 
are similar to this, in that they have very low financial costs but increasingly positive 
effects on the residents. As has been discussed in this chapter the present research has 
provided a strong basis of empirical evidence to support the principles the 
intervention was based on. In order to address the high and increasing costs of 
dementia, more research in this area would be useful. Although the research and 
interventions are on a small scale and do not have a financial outlay, the impact of the 
behaviour changes as a result of them could have further impact at reducing related 
costs. For example, as mentioned in the previous section, less need to prescribe 
psychoactive medication for treatment of challenging behaviour and less need to 
contact outside agencies for help with dealing with challenging behaviour. The 
following section will explore further research suggestions following from this 
present research which could also serve to reduce the costs of dementia.  
9.8 Future Directions 
9.8.1 Future research 
In the previous section the need for continuing research in dementia was highlighted. 
This section will discuss possible suggestions for future research and ways in which 
the area can be moved forward. Some suggestions that could be considered in future 
research have been discussed previously in light of methodological issues arising 
from the current research. This section will address some issues as to how the 
research could be developed in the future. 
Firstly the present research aimed to provide a basis of empirical research in 
order to reliably inform the design of living areas of dementia care homes in the 
future. In this aim the research has succeeded, however it is important to investigate 
further the impact of other aspects of the living environments on people with 
dementia. For instance, this research did not control for noise in the areas, e.g. 
whether the television was on, the volume level of the television, noise of any other 
equipment, e.g. cleaning or medical equipment. One suggestion for future research 
would be to investigate the impact of unwanted noise on the behaviour of people with 
dementia, in particular behaviour that would be construed as a negative reaction to the 
stimulus, such as agitation or passive behaviour. Similarly, other environmental 
aspects such as temperature and lighting were not controlled for in this study and 
could be investigated in more detail.  
 As mentioned previously this study looked in more depth at the behaviours 
associated with residents inactive behaviour in the care home. This was the most 
frequently observed behaviour and supports previous research. However, more 
research is needed to examine the different types of inactive behaviours and their 
impact on the quality of life of the resident. It is important to have an understanding 
of the processes and meanings behind the behaviours of people with dementia in order 
to design environments and activities that are appropriate and that have a positive 
impact.  
 This research focused on the living areas of dementia care homes; however it 
is important to have an understanding of the usage of other areas of the care home 
especially other areas that are accessible for all, e.g. dining areas, corridors and 
activity rooms. This would allow for a better understanding of how to design care 
homes in future to provide a rich and understandable environment for residents which 
can positively impact on their quality of life. A better understanding of the impact of 
the environment around the care home would allow for environments to be designed 
in a way that allows residents to make better use of them. This could result in staff 
being able to provide a better quality of care to residents.  
 On a similar level, it would be useful in the future to conduct a study 
examining the impact and success of staff education schemes. This is something that 
was identified in this study and in the National Dementia Strategy as being necessary 
in order to improve the efficacy of interventions and the standard of care provided for 
people with dementia. Perhaps a study that examined the effects of dementia-specific 
staff education schemes might inform policy and help to make dementia-specific 
training mandatory for all staff working with people with dementia.  
 The final suggestion for future research concerns the finding of this study that 
interactions increased between the residents following the intervention. It is necessary 
to know more about the impact an increase in social interactions has on people with 
dementia. For example, does the persons self perception influence who they interact 
with, what impact does the age of the person with dementia have on their social 
interactions, how does the stage of dementia influence social interactions and how 
valuable do people with dementia view the opportunities for social interactions? 
 The research suggestions given here are just a number of the possible 
suggestions for future research which arise directly from this research. The scope for 
research within the field of dementia friendly environments and beyond is much 
wider. What must be taken from this section is that it is important that research does 
continue within the field in order to develop interventions and understanding about 
how the lives of people with dementia can be improved.  
9.9 Conclusion 
There are currently 70,958 people in Scotland living with dementia 
(http://www.alzscot.org/pages/statistics.htm). This number is expected to rise to 
127,000 by 2031. This increase is primarily due to advances in medical and social 
care which has resulted in people living longer. As discussed in chapter 1, a diagnosis 
of dementia can have a significant impact on the life of the sufferer and also the lives 
http://www.alzscot.org/pages/statistics.htm
of their family and friends. As the persons dementia progresses, the burden of care 
often becomes too great and the carers then have to make the difficult decision of 
putting their relative into residential care. It is at this point that the current research 
findings become relevant. 
An extensive literature review was carried out in the field of dementia-friendly 
environments and identified three main gaps in the literature. The first was there was 
a lack of research looking at design aspects of the living areas of dementia care homes 
and the impact that this has on the behaviour of residents using the space. The second 
and third gaps in the literature related to the methodology used in previous studies. 
The first of these was that there was very little research which examined the actual 
behaviour of people with dementia.  The majority of studies used a qualitative 
methodology and consulted staff and relatives for their perceptions of the effect of 
interventions on the residents; these studies failed to include an empirical measure of 
behaviour. There are a small number of studies which did include an empirical 
measure of behaviour; however these studies suffered from a small sample size. This 
is the second methodological drawback of the research, as small sample sizes make it 
difficult to generalise the results of the studies with any confidence.  
 The current research was designed to address these gaps in knowledge. The 
research had seven main aims. These were to: 
 Evaluate the current living environments of dementia care homes in the West 
of Scotland 
 Develop an intervention on the principles and theories discussed earlier and 
put in place in seven environments 
 Implement the intervention in a number of environments to develop a strong 
evidence base.  
 Assess the behaviour of residents in the living area and use in a pre/post 
comparison of the behaviour 
 Assess the perceptions of the intervention in the living area by the care home 
staff 
 Discuss and assess the changes in behaviour in terms of use for future 
modification of dementia environments.  
 Provide a basis of research that can reliably inform future design of dementia 
care homes. 
The first aim was met in the early stages of the research by visiting a number of 
dementia care homes within the West of Scotland. At this stage it was realised that the 
design of living areas in care homes was similar in all homes visited. Despite the 
architectural design of the rooms, the furniture was generally arranged in a large circle 
around the edge of the room, or creating an edge of the space if the area was open-
plan. On this basis, an intervention was designed based on the theoretical background 
discussed in chapter 4 and the previous research and guidelines that exist. These 
principles were to provide residents with a choice of areas to sit within the living 
room and to create an edge space in the room where residents could sit and look out 
of the window in line with the theoretical background. The interventions that were put 
in place in each of the seven environments were all slightly different depending on the 
existing physical layout of the room but they were all based on the same underlying 
principles derived from previous research and the theoretical background of the 
research.  
 The case study approach this research took helped to address some of the 
methodological problems identified in previous research of small sample sizes. The 
fact that the intervention was put in place in seven different living areas across three 
different care homes helped increase the generalisabilty of this study. It was thought 
that demonstrating the efficacy of the intervention in a number of different 
environments would increase the reliability of the results and allow for them to be 
generalised across other environments.  
 The behaviour mapping methodology was used to address the fourth aim of 
the thesis. This allowed for a quantitative measure of behaviour that allowed for a 
comparison from a baseline level (pre intervention) to post intervention. Behaviour 
mapping was the main data collection method of this thesis and is the basis of the 
claim that the interventions were effective in terms of the changes in residents 
behaviour. The behaviour mapping data showed an increase in positive behaviours 
such as active and contented behaviour along with a decrease in negative behaviours 
such as agitation and passive behaviour. The behaviour mapping data were 
strengthened by the supporting data that was gathered in each environment from care 
home staff, relatives and the Care Commission.  
 The fifth aim of the research was met by holding staff focus groups and 
interviews following the intervention in each care home. This not only provided data 
to meet this aim of the research but it also provided interesting  and unexpected data 
on  differences between the care home staff perceptions of the intervention and the 
role of the environment in dementia care which could not have been predicted at the 
beginning of the study.  
 Overall, the present research has provided considerable empirical evidence for 
the efficacy of the intervention which was put in place in these seven case studies. 
This research is an important starting point for the increase of high quality, empirical 
research within the field of dementia-friendly environments and environmental 
psychology. As dementia becomes more prevalent it is important that research similar 
to this is continued for the following reasons. Firstly, to create dementia friendly 
environments that enable and support people with dementia whilst helping family 
members and care staff to provide a good standard of care. Secondly, upon 
dissemination of this research and research like this it raises awareness and increases 
understanding of the disorder and the disabling nature of its symptoms.  
References 
Algase, D., Beck, C., Kolanowski, A., Whall, A., Berent, S. & Richards, K. (1996). 
Need-driven dementia-compromised behaviour: An alternative view of disruptive 
behaviour. American Journal of Alzheimers Disease, 11(6), 10-19.  
Averill, J.R. (1973). Personal control over aversive stimuli its relationship to stress. 
Psychological Bulletin, 80, 286-303.  
Barlow, T (2003). What colour is aggression? Mental Health Practice, 7(4), 32-33. 
Barnes, S. (2006). Space, choice and control, and quality of life in care settings for 
older people. Environment and Behavior, 38, 589-604. 
Beauchemin, K.M. & Hays, P. (1996). Sunny hospital rooms expedite recovery from 
severe and refractory depressions. Journal of Affective Disorders, 40, 49-51.  
Bell, P.A., Greene, T.C., Fisher, J.D. & Baum, A (1996). Environmental Psychology. 
Harecourt Brace and Company: Florida. 
Berto, R. (2005). Exposure to restorative environments helps restore attentional 
capacity. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 25(3), 249-259.  
Bliwise, D.L., Watts, R.L., Watts, N., Rye, D.B., Irbe, D. & Hughes, M. (1995). 
Disruptive nocturnal behaviour in Parkinsons disease and Alzheimers disease. 
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology, 8(2), 107-110.  
Bonnes, M. & Secchiaroli, G. (1995). Environmental Psychology: A psycho-social 
introduction. Sage Publications: London.  
Brawley, E.C. (2001). Environmental design for Alzheimers disease: A quality of life 
issue. Aging and Mental Health, 5(1), S79-S83.  
Brodaty, H., Dresser, R., Eisner, M., Erkunjuntti, T., Gauthier, S., Nori, G.,Jonker, C., 
Sachs, G. & Whitehouse, P. (1999). Alzheimers disease international and 
international working group for harmonization of dementia drug guidelines for 
research involving human subjects with dementia. Alzheimers Disease and 
Associated Disorders, 13(2), 71-79.  
Buettner (1999). Simple pleasures: A multilevel sensorimotor intervention for nursing 
home residents with dementia. American Journal of Alzheimers Diseases and Other 
Dementias, 14, 41-52.  
Burgener, S. & Twigg, P. (2002). Relationships among caregivers factors and quality 
of life in care recipients with irreversible dementia. Alzheimers Disease and 
Associated Disorders, 16(2), 88-102.  
Calkins, M.P. (1988). Design for Dementia: Planning environments for the elderly 
and confused. Owings Mills: National Health Publishing.  
Calkins, M.P. (2001). Special care units and the environment: Advances of the past 
decade. Alzheimers Care Quarterly, 2(3), 41-48.  
Calkins, M.P. (2001). The physical and social environment of the person with 
Alzheimers disease. Aging and Mental Health, 5(1), S74-S78.  
Chalfont, G.E. & Rodiek, S. (2005). Building Edge: An ecological approach to 
research and design of environments for people with dementia. Alzheimers Care 
Quarterly, 6(4), 341-348.  
Chalfont, G.E. (2007). Wholistic design in dementia care: Connection to nature with 
PLANET. Journal of Housing for the Elderly, 21(1/2), 153-177.  
Chiesa, M. & Hobbs, S. (2006). Making sense of social research: how useful is the 
Hawthorne effect? European Journal of Social Psychology, 38(1), 67-74.  
Cioffi, J.M, Fleming, A., Wilkes, L., Sinfield, M. & LeMiere, J. (2007). The effect of 
environmental change on residents with dementia: The perceptions of relatives and 
staff. Dementia, 6(1,) 215-231. 
Clark, C. & Uzzell, D.L. (2002). The affordances of the home, neighbourhood, school 
and town centre for adolescents. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 22, 95-108.  
Cohen-Mansfield, J. & Billig, N. (1986). Agitated behaviours in the elderly: I. A 
conceptual review. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 34(10), 711-721.  
Cohen-Mansfield, J., Werner, M.A. & Marx, M.S. (1989). An observational study of 
agitation in agitated nursing home residents. International Psychogeriatrics, 1(2), 
153-165. 
Cohen-Mansfield, J., Watson, V., Meade, W., Gordon, M., Leatherman, J. & Emor, C. 
(1989). Does sundowning occur in residents of an Alzheimers unit? International 
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 4, 293-298. 
Colling, K.B. (1999). Passive behaviours in dementia: clinical application of the need-
driven dementia-compromised behaviour model. Journal of Gerontological Nursing, 
25(9), 27-32. 
Colling, K.B. (2000). A taxonomy of passive behaviours in people with Alzheimers 
disease.  Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 32(3), 239-244.  
Colling, K.B. (2004). Caregiver interventions for passive behaviours in dementia: 
links to the NDB model. Aging Mental Health, 8(2), 117-125.  
Corey, L.J., Wallace, M.A., Harris, S.H. & Casey, B. (1986). Psychiatric Ward 
Atmosphere. Journal of Psychosocial Nursing, 24(10), 10-16.  
Davis, D.R. & Shackleton, V.I. (1975). Psychology and work. London: Methuen 
Day, K., Carreon, D & Stump, C. (2000). The therapeutic design of environments for 
people with dementia: A review of the empirical research. The Gerontologist, 40(4), 
397-416.  
Day, K. & Cohen, U. (2000). The role of culture in designing environments for people 
with dementia. A study of Russian Jewish immigrants. Environment and Behaviour, 
32(3), 361-399. 
Devlin, A.S. (1992). Psychiatric ward renovation: Staff perceptions and patient 
behaviour. Environment and Behaviour, 24, 66-84.  
Diaz-Moore, K. (1999). Dissonance in the dining room: A study of social interaction 
in a special care unit. Qualitative Health Research, 9(1), 133-155. 
Donovan, C. & Dupuis, M. (2000). Specialized Care Unit: Family and staff 
perceptions of significant elements. Geriatric Nursing, 21(1), 30-33. 
Edgerton, E., Ritchie, L. & McKechnie, J. (2010). Objective and subjective evaluation 
of a redesigned corridor environment in a psychiatric hospital. Issues in Mental 
Health Nursing, 31(5), 306-314.  
Ettema, T.P, Droes, R-M., De Lange, J., Mellenbergh, G.J. & Ribbe, M.W. (2005). 
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 22(5), 424-430.  
Evans, L.K. (1985). Sundown syndrome in the elderly: A phenomenon in search of 
exploration. Centre for the Study of Aging Newsletter, 7(3), 7-9. 
Evansy, S., Freary, T., Means, R. & Vallelly, S. (2007). Supporting independence for 
people with dementia in extra care housing. Dementia, 6(1), 144-150.  
Everett, D.E., Fields, D.R., Soumerai, S.S. & Avorn, J. (1991). Resident behaviour 
and staff distress in the nursing home. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 
39(8), 792-798.  
Ferrans, C.E. (1996). Development of a conceptual model of quality of life. Research 
and Theory for Nursing Practice, 10(3), 293-304.  
Foster, P., Gomm, R. & Hammersley, M (2000). Case Studies as Spurious 
Evaluations: The Example of Research on Educational Inequalities. British Journal of 
Educational Studies, 48 (3), 215 - 230. 
French, J.R.P. (1953). Experiments in field settings. In L. Festinger & D. Katz (Eds.), 
Research Methods in the Behavioural Sciences. (pp. 98-135) New York: Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston.  
Fuh, J-L. & Wang, S-J. (2006). Assessing quality of life in Taiwanese patients with 
Alzheimers disease. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 21(2), 103-107.  
http://philpapers.org/s/Martyn%20Hammersley
Galynker, I.I., Roane, D.M., Miner, C.R., Feinberg, T.E. & Watts, P. (1995). Negative 
symptoms of patients with Alzheimers disease. American Journal of Geriatric 
Psychiatry, 3(1), 52-59.  
Garber, J. & Seligman, M.E.P. (Eds)(1981). Human Helplessness: theory and 
applications. New York: Academic Press.  
Gibson, J.J. (1979). In Chemero, A. (2003). An outline of a theory of affordances. 
Ecological Psychology, 15(2), 181-195. 
Gitlin, L.N., Corcoran, M., Winter, L., Boyce, A. & Hauck, W.W. (2001). A 
randomised, controlled trial of a home environmental intervention: Effect on efficacy 
and upset in caregivers and on daily function of persons with dementia. The 
Gerontologist, 41(1), 4-15.  
Haight, B.K. & Warren, J. (1991). Apathy: development of a nursing disgnosis. 
Applied Nursing Research, 4(4), 186-188.  
Heath, Y. (2004). Evaluating the effect of therapeutic gardens. American Journal of 
Alzheimers Disease and Other Dementias, 19(4), 239-242. 
Hickes-Moore, S.L. & Robinson, B.A. (2008). Favourite music and hand massage: 
Two interventions to decrease agitation in residents with dementia. Dementia, 7(1), 
95-108. 
Himwich, H.E. (1955). In Krasner, L. (Ed) (1980). Environmental Design and Human 
Behaviour Oxford: Pergamon Press Ltd.  
Hoe, J., Katona, C., Orrell, M. & Livingston, G. (2007). Quality of life in dementia: 
care recipient and caregiver perceptions of quality of life in dementia: the LASER-AD 
study. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 22(10), 1031-1036.  
Hopker, S. (1999). Drug treatments and Dementia. Jessica Kingsley Publishers: 
London. 
Howard, R., Ballard, C., OBrien, J. & Burns, A. (2001). Guidelines for the 
management of agitation in dementia. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 
16(7), 714-717.  
Hurt, C.S., Banerjee, S., Tunnard, C., Whitehead, D.L., Tsolaki, M., Mecocci, P., 
Kloszewska, I., Soininen, H., Vellas, B. & Lovestone, S. (2010). Insight, cognition 
and quality of life in Alzheimers disease. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and 
Psychiatry, 81, 331-336.  
Huang, H-L., Chang, M.Y., Tang, J.S-H, Chiu, Y-C. & Weng, L-C. (2008). 
Determinants of the discrepancy in patient and caregiver- rated quality of life for 
persons with dementia. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 18, 3107-3117.  
Ittleson, W.H., Proshanky, H.M. & Rivlin, L.G. (1970). A study of bedroom use on 
two psychiatric wards. Hospital and Community Psychiatry, 21, 25-28.  
Judd, S., Marshall, M. & Phippen, P. (1998). Design for Dementia. London: Journal 
of Dementia Care, Hawker Publications. 
Kaplan, R & Kaplan, S. (1989). The experience of nature: A psychological 
perspective. Cambridge University Press: New York.  
Kavanagh J. (2003). Outdoor space and adaptive gardening: Design, techniques and 
tools. In Simson SP, Straus MC (eds): Horticulture as therapy: Principles and 
practice. New York: The Food Products Press. 
 Keyserlingk, E.W., Glass, K., Kogan, S. & Gauthier, S. (1995). Proposed guidelines 
for the participation of persons with dementia as research subjects. Perspectives in 
Biology and Medicine, 38(2), 319-361.  
Kolanowski, A.M. (1999). An overview of the need-driven dementia-compromised 
behaviour model. Journal of Gerontological Nursing, 25(9), 7-9. 
Kolanowski, A & Litaker, M. (2006). Social interaction, premorbid personality and 
agitation in nursing home residents with dementia. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 
20(1), 12-20.  
Kono, T. (2009). Social affordances and the possibility of ecological linguistics. 
Integrative Psychological and Behavioural Science, 43(4), 356-373.  
Lawton, M.P. (1975). Competence, environmental press and the adaptation of older 
people. In P.G. Windley & G. Ernst (Eds.), Psychology and the built environment. 
(pp132-138) New York: Wiley.  
Lawton, P. (1979). Therapeutic environments for the aged. In D. Canter & S. Canter 
(Eds.), Designing for therapeutic environments: A review of research. London: John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd 
Lawton, M.P. (2001). The physical environment of the person with Alzheimers 
disease. Aging and Mental Health, 5(1), S56-S64.  
Lipman, A. & Slater, R. (1979). Homes for old people: toward a positive 
environment. In Canter, D & Canter, S. (Eds) Designing for therapeutic 
environments: A review of research (pp 277-308). Chichester, England: Wiley.  
Loew, C.A. & Silverstone, B.M. (1971). A program of intensified stimulation and 
response facilitation for the senile aged. The Gerontologist, 11(4), 341-347.  
Logsdon, R. (2000). Behavioural outcomes of dementia special care units: Results 
from four of the NIA collaborative studies. 53
 Annual Scientific Meeting of the 
Gerontological Society of America, vol 40, p 133.  
Logsdon, R.G., Gibbons, L.E., McCurry, S.M. & Teri, L. (2002) Assessing quality of 
life in older adults with cognitive impairment. Psychosomatic Medicine, 64, 510-519.  
Low, L.F., Draper, B. & Brodaty, H. (2004). The relationship between self-destructive 
behaviour and nursing home environment. Aging and Mental Health, 8(1), 29-33.  
Mace, N.L. (1991). Principles of activity therapy for people with dementia. In Sloane, 
P.D. and Mathew, L.J. (eds) Dementia Units in Long-term Care (p201-213) John 
Hopkins University Press: Baltimore.  
Maslow, A. (1954). Motivation and Personality. New York: Harper 
Matthews, E.A., Farrell, G.A. & Blackmore, A.M. (1996). Effects of an 
environmental manipulation emphasizing client centred care on agitation and sleep in 
dementia sufferers in a nursing home. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 24(3), 439-447.  
Marquardt, G. & Schmeig, P. (2009). Dementia-friendly architecture: Environments 
that facilitate wayfinding in nursing homes. American journal of Alzheimers Disease 
and Other Dementias, 24(4), 333-340.  
Marshall, M. (2003). The Iris Murdoch building at Stirling. Alzheimers Care 
Quarterly, 4(3), 167-171.  
Marshall, M. (Ed) (2005). Perspectives on Rehabilitation and Dementia. London: 
Jessica Kingsley Publishers.  
McClure, G (1980). Environmental design in Closed institutions. In Krasner, L. (Ed) 
(1980). Environment and Behaviour. Pergamon Press: Oxford. 
McDaniel, J.H., Hunt, A., Hackes, B. & Pope, J.F. (2001). Impact of dining room 
environment on nutritional intake of Alzheimers residents: A case study. American 
Journal of Alzheimers disease and related disorders, 16(5), 297-302. 
Menne, H.L., Judge, K.S. & Whitlatch, C.J. (2009). Predictors of quality of life for 
individuals with dementia: Implications for intervention. Dementia, 8(4), 543-560. 
Merrett, F. (2006). Reflections on the Hawthorne Effect. Educational Psychology, 26 
(1), 143146. 
Mitchell, J.M. & Kemp, B.J. (2000). Quality of life in assisted living homes: A 
multidimensional analysis. The Journals of Gerontology, 55(2), 117-127.  
Murray, L.M. & Boyd, S. (2008). Protecting personhood and achieving quality of life 
for older adults with dementia in the U.S. health care system. Journal of Aging and 
Health, 21(2), 350-373.  
Namazi, K. & Johnston, B.D (1991). Physical environment cues to reduce the 
problems of incontinence in Alzheimers disease units. American Journal of 
Alzheimers disease and related disorders, 10(2), 22-28.  
Namazi, K.H, Rosner, T.T & Calkins, M.P. (1989). Visual barriers to prevent 
ambulatory Alzheimers patients from exiting through an emergency door. The 
Gerontologist, 29(5), 699-702.  
Namazi, K., Rosner, T.T. & Rechlin, L. (1991). Long term memory cueing to reduce 
visuo-spatial disorientation in Alzheimers disease patients in a special care unit. 
American Journal of Alzheimers disease and related disorders, 10(2), 10-15.  
Nazarko, L. (2006). Creating the ideal home for people with dementia. Nursing and 
Residential Care, 8(5), 221-223. 
Nightingale, F. (1893). Sick nursing and health nursing. Summary.  Chicago: The 
International Congress of Charities.  
Nolan, B.A.D., Mathews, R.M., Truesdell-Todd, G. & VanDorp, A. (2002). 
Evaluation of the effect of orientation cues on wayfinding in persons with dementia. 
Alzheimers Care Quarterly, 3(1), 46-49.  
Norieka, J., Kujoth, J. & Torgrude, S. (2002). Using postoccupancy evaluation to 
guide bathroom design in a dementia-specific assisted living facility. Alzheimers 
Care Quarterly, 3(1,) 32-37.  
Opie, J., Doyle, C. & O'Connor, D.W (2002). Challenging behaviours in nursing 
home residents with dementia: a randomized controlled trial of multidisciplinary 
interventions. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 17, 613. 
Page, A. (2004). Keeping Patients Safe: Transforming the Work Environment of 
Nurses. Washington: National Academy of Sciences.  
Passini, R., Pigot, H., Rainville, C., & Tetreault, M.H. (2000). Wayfinding in a 
nursing home for advanced dementia of the Alzheimers type. Environment and 
Behavior, 32(5), 684-710.  
Perrin, T. (1997). Occupational need in severe dementia. Journal of Advanced 
Nursing, 25, 934941. 
Petterson, I., & Arnetz, B. (1998). Psychosocial stressors and well-being in health 
care workers. The impact of an intervention program. Social Science & Medicine, 
47(11), 1763-1772.  
Phair, L. & Good, V. (1998). Dementia: a positive approach. London: Whurr 
Publishers 
Phinney, A., Chaudbury, H. & OConnor, D.L. (2007). Doing as much as I can do: 
The meaning of activity for people with dementia. Aging and Mental Health, 11(4), 
384-393.  
Proshanky, H.M., Ittleson, W.H. & Rivlin, L.G. (Eds) (1970). Environmental 
Psychology: man and his physical setting. New York: Rineheart and Winston.  
Rappe, E. & Topo, P. (2007). Contact with outdoor greenery can support competence 
among people with dementia. Journal of Housing for the Elderly, 21(3/4), 229-248.  
Roethlisberger, F.J. & Dickson, W.J. (1939). Management and the Worker 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
Rozzini, R., Bianchettu, A., Franzoni, S., Zanetti, O. & Trabucchi, M. (1991). Social, 
functional and health status influences on mortality: consideration of a 
multidimensional inquiry in a large elderly population. Journal of Cross Cultural 
Gerontology, 3, 89-90.  
Ruan, J. & Lambert, V.A. (2008). Differences in perceived communication barriers 
among nurses and elderly patients in China. Nursing Health Science, 10, 110116. 
Scholzel-Dorenbos, C.J.M., Meeuwsen, E.J. & Rikkert, M.G.M (2010). Integrating 
unmet needs into dementia health-related quality of life research and care: 
Introduction of the hierarchy model of needs in dementia. Aging and Mental Health, 
14(1), 113-119.  
Schwarz, B., Chaudbury, H. & Brent Tofle, R. (2004). Effect of interventions on a 
dementia care setting. American Journal of Alzheimers Disease and Other 
Dementias, 19, 172-176.  
Scocco, P., Fantoni, G. & Caon, F. (2006). Role of depressive and cognitive status in 
self-reported evaluation of quality of life in older people: comparing proxy and 
physician perspectives. Age and Ageing, 35(2), 166-171.  
Shatell, M.M., Andes, M. & Thomas, S.P. (2008). How patients and nurses 
experience the acute care psychiatric environment. Nursing Enquiry, 15(3), 242-250.  
Sheehan, B., Burton, E. & Mitchell, L. (2006). Outdoor wayfinding in dementia. 
Dementia, 5(2), 271-281.  
Shin, I., Carter, M., Masterman, D., Fairbanks, L. & Cummings, J.L. (2005). 
Neuropsychiatric symptoms and quality of life in Alzheimers disease. American 
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 13(6), 469-474.  
Sival, R., Albronda, T., Haffmans, P., Saltet, M., & Schellekens, C. (2000). Is 
aggressive behaviour influenced by the use of a behaviour rating scale in patients in a 
psychogeriatric nursing home? International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 15(2), 
108-111 
Slaughter, S., Calkins, M., Eliasziw, M. & Reimer, M. (2006). Measuring physical 
and social environments in nursing homes for people with middle- to  late stage 
dementia. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 54(9), 1436-1441.  
Souder, E. & OSullivan, P. (2003). Disruptive behaviours of older adults in an 
institutional setting: Staff time required to manage disruptions. Journal of 
Gerontological Nursing, 29(8), 31-36. 
Sommer, R. & Ross, H. (1958). Social interaction on a geriatrics ward. International 
journal of Social Psychiatry, 4, 128-133. 
Spreckelmeyer, K.F. (1993). Office relocation and environmental change: A case 
study. Environment and behaviour, 25, 181-204. 
Stahler, G.J., Frazer, D. & Rapport, H. (1984). The Evaluation of and Environmental 
Remodelling Program on a Psychiatric Geriatric Ward. The Journal of Social 
Psychology, 123, 101-113. 
Stokes, G. (1992). Growing old: The psychology of latter life. London: Falmer. 
Stokols, D. & Altman, I. (Eds) (1987). Handbook of Environmental Psychology (Vol 
1). New York: Wiley.  
Thompson, S.C. (1981). Will it hurt less if I can control it? A complex answer to a 
simple question. Psychological Bulletin, 90, 89-101.  
Tyson, G.A., Lambert, G. & Beattie, L. (2002). The impact of ward design on the 
behaviour, occupational satisfaction and well-being of psychiatric nurses. 
International Journal of Mental Health Nursing, 11(2), 94-102.  
Ulrich, R.S. (1984). View through a window may influence recovery from surgery. 
Science, 224, 420-421.  
Ulrich, R.S. (1993). Biophilia and the conservation ethic. In Kellert, S.R. and Wilson, 
E.O. (eds) The Biophilia hypothesis (pp73-137). Washington: Island Press 
Valle R., (1989).  Cultural and ethnic issues in Alzheimer's disease family research. In 
E. Light & B. D. Leibowitz (Eds.), Alzheimer's disease and family stress: Directions 
for research. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 
Volicer, L., Harper, D.G., Manning, B.C., Goldstein, R. & Satlin, A. (2001). 
Sundowning and circadian rhythms in Alzheimers disease. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 158(5), 704-711.  
Wakamura, T. & Tokura, H. (2001). Influence of Bright Light during Daytime on 
Sleep Parameters in Hospitalized Elderly Patients. Journal of Physiological 
Anthropology and Applied Human Science, 20, 345-351. 
WHOQOL Group (1994). Development of the WHOQOL: rationale and current 
status. International Journal of Mental Health, 23, 24-56. 
Woolfolk, A. E., & McCune-Nicolich, L. (1984). Educational Psychology for 
Teachers (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Woolley, H. & Johns, R. (2001). Skateboarding: the city as a playground. Journal of 
Urban Design, 6, 211-230.  
Yinnon, A.M., Ilan, Y., Tadmor, B., Altarescu, G. & Hershko, C. (1992). Quality of 
sleep in the medical department. Journal of Clinical Practice 46(2) 88-91. 
Zimring, C., Carpman, J.R. & Michelso, W. (1991). Design for Special Populations: 
Mentally Retarded Persons, Children and Hospital Visitors. In Stokols, D. & Altman, 
I. (Eds) Handbook of Environmental Psychology: Volume 2 (pp919-949). Krieger 
Publishing Company: Florida. 
WEBSITES 
Statistics: Number of people with dementia in Scotland 2010 
http://www.alzscot.org/pages/statistics.htm (accessed 5/9/10)  
Dementia factsheet - some facts and figures 
http://www.alzscot.org/pages/info/dementiafacts.htm#impact (accessed 5/9/10) 
Drugs used during dementia  
http://www.alzscot.org/pages/info/drugs.htm (accessed 5/9/10) 
Care Commission Reports Care Home A 
http://www.carecommission.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=31
2&Itemid=198&bereNextPageId=ReportDataDetails_action.php&action=displayRep
ort&repId=CS2007145414 (accessed 01/10/09) 
Care Commission Reports Care Home B 
http://www.carecommission.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=31
2&Itemid=198&bereNextPageId=ReportDataDetails_action.php&action=displayRep
ort&repId=CS2003010214 (accessed 08/10/09) 
Care Commission Reports Care Home C 
http://www.carecommission.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=31
2&Itemid=198&bereNextPageId=ReportDataDetails_action.php&action=displayRep
ort&repId=CS2006118939  (accessed 14/10/09) 
The Scottish Government, Edinburgh (2010) Scotlands National Dementia Strategy 
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Resource/Doc/324377/0104420.pdf (accessed 15/09/10) 
Alzheimers Disease International (2010) World Alzheimer Report 2010: The Global 
Economic Impact of Dementia 
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Resource/Doc/324377/0104420.pdf (accessed 22/09/10)  
http://www.alzscot.org/pages/statistics.htm
http://www.alzscot.org/pages/info/dementiafacts.htm#impact
http://www.alzscot.org/pages/info/drugs.htm
http://www.carecommission.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=312&Itemid=198&bereNextPageId=ReportDataDetails_action.php&action=displayReport&repId=CS2007145414
http://www.carecommission.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=312&Itemid=198&bereNextPageId=ReportDataDetails_action.php&action=displayReport&repId=CS2007145414
http://www.carecommission.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=312&Itemid=198&bereNextPageId=ReportDataDetails_action.php&action=displayReport&repId=CS2007145414
http://www.carecommission.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=312&Itemid=198&bereNextPageId=ReportDataDetails_action.php&action=displayReport&repId=CS2003010214
http://www.carecommission.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=312&Itemid=198&bereNextPageId=ReportDataDetails_action.php&action=displayReport&repId=CS2003010214
http://www.carecommission.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=312&Itemid=198&bereNextPageId=ReportDataDetails_action.php&action=displayReport&repId=CS2003010214
http://www.carecommission.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=312&Itemid=198&bereNextPageId=ReportDataDetails_action.php&action=displayReport&repId=CS2006118939
http://www.carecommission.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=312&Itemid=198&bereNextPageId=ReportDataDetails_action.php&action=displayReport&repId=CS2006118939
http://www.carecommission.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=312&Itemid=198&bereNextPageId=ReportDataDetails_action.php&action=displayReport&repId=CS2006118939
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Resource/Doc/324377/0104420.pdf
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Resource/Doc/324377/0104420.pdf
Appendices 
Appendices Contents 
defined. 
Appendix 5: Staff Focus Group/Interview Discussion Schedule Error Bookmark not 
defined. 
Appendix 9: Research Information Sheet for relatives Error Bookmark not defined. 
defined. 
Appendix 1: Notes from initial care home visits 
Care Home A 
This care home has three separate units, on three floors. Its dementia unit is on the 
ground floor and houses 15 residents. The home is not long opened (official opening 
was 19
 Feb). The unit is designed in accordance with Erskines design guidelines. It 
has quite a confusing layout with a dining and lounge area at the middle, and three 
branches coming off it with the bedrooms on it. The dining and lounge areas are 
clearly separated with furniture layout although it is an open plan area. The chairs in 
the living space are arranged around the outskirts of the space, all facing into the 
centre of the room. There is a television in this space also; however it is difficult to 
see from the majority of chairs. There is access to the garden areas from here also. 
The carpet is continuous throughout and is red. The dcor in the unit is mostly red and 
cream. It has cream walls with wooden handrails and cream doors and doorframes. 
There is a blue strip at the bottom of the wall where the carpet meets. There are some 
pictures on the walls with poppys and service relevant items, which are relevant to the 
residents as they are all ex-service men.  
There is very little use of signs in the unit. Bedroom doors have a room number and a 
coloured sign with the persons name on it. The residents are able to choose their own 
colour. Other signage is all in line with Erskine standards and is royal blue with White 
writing. No pictures are used in any of the signs and every door looks the same 
whether it is kitchen, bathroom or office. In the bedrooms the layout is the same and 
the furniture is the same and each has an en suite bathroom although it is hard to see 
as the door is painted the same colour as the walls.  
The manager is keen to put some signs in place as they have some problems with 
residents going into other peoples bedrooms and not finding their own. He also 
informs me that the organisation are currently looking at the design of their units for 
dementia residents in order to get a uniformed design put in place across all units.  
Care Home i  not participating 
This care home is a large nursing centre comprising of two dementia units and two 
frail elderly units. The first dementia unit I visited was plainly decorated with cream 
walls, doorframes and handrails along the wall. It had a purple/blue slightly pattern 
carpet that was very worn in places. At the end of a very long monotonous corridor 
there was a large multipurpose room, used as a day room, lounge and dining room. In 
this area the chairs were arranged around the edge of the room facing the centre. On 
turning right at this room I was on another long corridor decorated the same. Off this 
corridor was a conservatory that leads out on to the courtyard/garden area. This area 
does not seem to be used at all. It is reported as being too cold in winter and too warm 
in summer. Bedrooms have numbers on the doors and very small name plaques. 
Toilets have toilet signs in brass and very small, as do laundry and other rooms such 
as office. The corridor leads out to the secure exit at the other side of the unit. 
The second unit I visited had the same sort of layout as the first although it was 
decorated in a blue and cream scheme with a cream handrail running along. 
Doorframes were painted also and had the same very small brass signs on them as the 
other unit. The day room in unit 2 seemed to have a better layout and had separate 
dining, lounge and relaxation areas with chairs arranged in small clusters. The 
corridors in the second unit were similar to the first long and monotonous with poor 
lighting (energy saving bulbs in uplighters on the walls) and no pictures on 
decorations on the wall. The second unit also had a calm room used for aromatherapy 
and rieki for the residents. Some bedrooms also had child gates on the door to prevent 
people exiting and entering rooms.  
On speaking with the manager it appears that they have a lot of trouble with 
challenging behaviour in the units- more so in the first unit and have a lot of residents 
who wander and a lot who enter other peoples rooms. The whole home is due for a 
refurbishment due to start on 25
 February although it appears that this has to be in 
line with the organisation design guide and is being done by a interior designer 
described to me as a flowery interior design type. Some staff appear to have their own 
ideas on dcor though that might be more suitable to the residents for example old 
pictures of Glasgow and having a bus stop in the corridor. The renovation may cause 
quite a bit of disruption, as it will involve residents moving into other units and 
closing areas off meaning that the residents will have to be based in the conservatory 
area for dining etc when the multipurpose area is being refurbished. 
Care Home ii  not participating 
This nursing home has 4 separate units in it housed in four separate buildings each 
looking out onto the quadrant in the middle. The dementia unit has 30 residents. The 
unit manager who was not there at the time of visiting has done some research for the 
organisation on dementia friendly design. The unit has the same carpets as all other 
units in the organisation. On entering the unit there is an office to the right hand side 
and a quiet reminiscence room to the left hand side. Walking further down the 
entrance hall the unit splits into two corridors each lined with bedrooms. Each of 
these corridors has been given street names, and then each resident has a sign on their 
door with the number street name, their name and picture of them when they were 
younger. At the end of the corridors there is a bend leading to more bedrooms. On that 
bend is a set of traffic lights. All around the unit are pieces of art work made by a 
local colleges art department and are designed to be touched giving different 
sensations. Some of the pictures also light up or sing when touched. The lounge/ 
dining room is located off the main entrance hall way and well segregated for 
different uses. The dining area is set out like an old style tea room with check table 
cloths and small tables. The lounge area is set out smaller areas, with groups of 4 or 5 
soft chairs arranged in groups. This appears to be beneficial design. There is a small 
garden area with access from the dining area that is enclosed and has some sensory 
activities in it. The toilets all have red doors with pictorial signs on them and red toilet 
seats inside. The walls in the units are all painted neutrally and have yellow or blue 
handrails on them depending on what street you are on. Residents bedrooms are all 
personalised and they all have memory boxes positioned on the wall outside their 
doors. One resident is bed bound and they have put a beaded curtain over her 
bedroom door to stop other residents entering her room which seems to have worked.  
On the whole the design of this unit was good and the atmosphere of the unit seemed 
quite positive. The residents all appeared to be more mobile and moving about the 
unit and were quite willing to interact with others.  
Care homes iii & iv 
Both these projects are small dementia units housing around 8 residents in their own 
rooms with own toilet and washbasin. The project iii consists of a long corridor lined 
with bedrooms that has a communal dining/ living area in the middle. This area seems 
to be divided into separate uses by a change of flooring. The carpet is continuous 
throughout the unit and is a dark green colour but changes to laminate flooring in the 
dining area. The dcor is cream walls with oak coloured handrails and doorframes and 
skirting boards. The residents bedrooms have names on the door, some with a picture 
of something relevant to them (make up, tennis ball etc) although the signs are quite 
small and high up on the door. The toilets have a written toilet sign on them in quite 
big letters and an A4 picture of a toilet on them. Although project iv has a slightly 
different layout the dcor is similar and the same signs are used. The project seemed 
to have a good atmosphere and staff were interacting well with residents who were 
getting their hair done in the communal area at the time of my visit. The depute 
manager who I spoke to told me that the pictures on the bedroom doors seem to work 
as you see the residents looking at the pictures before they enter and she seemed 
confident that they all knew their own rooms although they still enter other peoples 
rooms. The bathrooms were all tiled white and had white bathroom suites. Residents 
bedrooms had a little personalisation in them.  
Care Home B 
This care home has a 30-bed dementia unit on the first floor. The layout is square 
shaped with two big squares coming off the main corridor. The unit manager seems 
very interested in environmental design and has started to put simple modifications in 
place such as bedroom signs with numbers and name in large writing with a picture of 
a bed on it. Staff observed that residents tend to remember their room number then 
when they see the number they recognise the name. Although there is still a problem 
with entering other peoples rooms as the furniture is all the same. Again an attempt 
has been made to combat this by the use of memory boxes on the walls in bedrooms 
for family members to fill with personal memorabilia. This has worked well in some 
rooms but not others. The corridors of the unit have cream walls with white skirting 
and have red painted handrails. The toilet doors are also painted red although the 
doorframes are still white. The toilets also have clear signs with pictures as do the 
shower rooms, bathroom and dining room. Both sitting areas are designed with the 
chairs all pushed back against the walls. There are home-made sensory boards on the 
walls in the corridors for residents to touch and pick at- a low cost solution.  
The main design problems with this unit are the carpet and flooring. The majority of 
carpets have a very busy design- this causes problems for one resident in particular 
with Lewy body who is constantly trying to pick things off it. The carpets in the 
lounge and dining rooms have a bordered edge to them causing perception problems 
as residents try to step over them.  
Care Home v 
This care home is a newly (about a year old) built dementia and Alcohol-related brain 
damage care home (ABRD). It is an L shaped building with three separate units, the 
two downstairs are dementia specific and the upstairs one is ARBD. The dementia 
units are very similar in layout. They have a long corridor with bedrooms lining it, a 
residents kitchen, and a communal dining/living area which is separated out. The 
living area has a large group of chairs arranged around the edge of the space, with a 
television at the corner. The tables and chairs in the dining room are the same colour 
as the floor though which may cause problems. The corridor has a slight bend at the 
end of it so you cannot see the end of it- which, the manager told me, makes residents 
want to walk round to see whats there when it is only the fire escape. The dcor of 
the units are all in Magnolia, the carpets are cream and the woodwork is cream. As it 
is a new building they are going through snagging with the architect and they cannot 
decorate or change anything until all the problems are solved. Due to this there is very 
limited dementia friendly design in the unit, although the manager is aware of the 
recommendations, having worked at DSDC previously. There are name signs on the 
bedroom doors which have been personalized with relevant pictures but these are 
quite small. 
Care  Home C 
Care home C is four dementia units which each accommodate 10 residents with a 
primary diagnosis of dementia. Each unit is self contained; with shared kitchen 
facilities (these are only accessible by staff). There is also a large recreational space 
which is used at different times throughout the week for a range of activities including 
a relatives coffee morning. Within each unit, there is an open plan living/dining space 
which is separated by furniture. The living areas in each of the units have a big 50 
television on the wall. The chairs are all arranged in a large circle around the edge of 
the room with the majority of them facing the television, apart from one unit where 
the chairs are arranged in two rows like a cinema. The decor in each of the units is 
similar with similar colours and appropriate pictures and decorations which may be 
relevant to the residents living there. There does not appear to be a great deal of 
signage used in any of the units. The management are very keen to improve the 
environment and the staff appear to be interested in this also.  
Care Home vi  
On entering the care home you arrive in a large reception area with offices off of it. It 
is a large 2 floor building with a U shape design. The dementia unit is off to the left 
hand side of reception. It is a 30 bed unit. When you enter there is a large atrium 
space which has a residents kitchen off to the right hand side of it the nursing station 
off the far left hand and corridors with bedrooms on them going down to the left and 
right. The Atrium itself has a park bench and other seating in it and seemed to be used 
quite a bit. Walls have just been stripped of wallpaper and painted cream; they also 
have yellow handrails and a blue carpet (organisation designed pattern). The plan for 
the atrium is to turn it into a town square setting with a cafe (incorporating the 
residents' kitchen) a post office and an information centre. The idea is to encourage 
residents to keep life skills such as handwriting reading socialising, making snacks 
etc. The bathrooms in the units have pictorial signs and red doors and red toilet seats. 
The bedroom doors are all painted a different colour along the hall (although the 
colours start to repeat themselves.) The bedroom doors have memory boxes placed 
next to them as well although how well these are stocked varies depending on family 
input. The unit also has a room that is currently being converted into a cinema with a 
projector showing old films and old movie posters up. It also has a sign outside the 
door and a traditional box giving the times of the next showings. Next to the cinema is 
another eating room which is designed in a bistro style. The unit also has two 
traditionally decorated quiet rooms for residents. Like other units the main problem is 
the patterned and bordered carpets. 
Care Home vii 
This care home has a 30-bed dementia unit on its first floor. It has two different areas 
each housing 15 residents in individual rooms. Each residents bedroom door is 
painted a different colour and is designed to look like a traditional front door with 
door knockers and name plates. There are one larger and one smaller living area. In 
both of these areas the furniture was arranged around the outside wall facing the 
centre of the room with a television in the corner. The flooring was continuous 
throughout and there was a use of signs on toilet doors and dining room areas with 
pictures and words. Corridors were long but well lit and have a memory boards on the 
walls at places for residents to look at and touch.  
Appendix 2: Behaviour Mapping Description 
ACTIVE 
BEHAVIOUR 
CATEGORIES  
 Within this category, residents are engaged 
in a specific behaviour.  
TV Watching TV Resident is looking towards the TV and appears 
to be engaged with what is on, i.e., the resident 
appears to be using directed attention while 
looking at the television.  
I Interaction Resident is talking to or listening to someone 
else. (See below for further classifications) 
E Eating/drinking Resident is actively eating or drinking and not 
engaged in any other behaviour.  
W Walking 
Purposefully 
Resident is walking to a set destination (i.e. to 
get to a chair, to leave the area).  
O Other Activity This category can be used for less common 
active behaviours observed which do not fall 
into any of the above categories. These could 
include, reading, playing a game, doing a 
puzzle etc.  
INACTIVE 
BEHAVIOUR 
CATEGORIES  
 Within this category, residents will not 
appear to be engaged in any specific 
behaviour.  
C Contented Resident does not appear to be engaged in any 
behaviour but appears aware of the surrounding 
environment (e.g. eyes follow movements in the 
room or they respond to noises or their name 
being called) and appears happy and not 
distressed.  
L Looking out 
window 
Resident is not engaged in any behaviour but 
appears to be looking out the window and 
engaging with the stimulus available.  
Pa Passive Resident is not engaged in any behaviour and 
does not appear to be aware of stimuli in the 
surrounding environment. Eyes may be glazed, 
appear withdrawn or head may be facing 
downwards.  
reduced energy, drive and initiative 
encompasses the following: 
5) a lessening of mental processes 
associated with thinking and 
knowing 
6) a decrease in the ability or 
experience to respond to human 
emotions 
7) fewer interactions with others and 
surroundings 
8) a decrease in motor activity.  
Sl Sleeping  Resident is sleeping.  
AGITATED 
BEHAVIOUR 
CATEGORIES 
 Agitation can be defined as Inappropriate 
verbal, vocal or motor activity that is not 
judged by an outside observer to result 
directly from the needs or confusion of the 
agitated individual. 
Ph Physical 
agitation 
pacing, inappropriate robing or disrobing, 
repetitious sentences or questions, trying to get 
to a different place, handling things 
inappropriately, general restlessness and 
repetitious mannerisms 
A Aggressive 
agitation 
hitting, kicking, pushing, scratching, tearing 
things, cursing or verbal aggression, grabbing 
(biting, spitting) 
V Vocal agitation complaining, constant requests for attention, 
negativism, repetitious sentences or questions, 
screaming  
Oag Other agitation intentional falling, eating inappropriate 
substances, throwing things, verbal sexual 
advances, and physical sexual advances and 
hiding or hoarding objects or any other 
behaviour cannot be classified in the 3 
categories above.  
Who Interaction is with  
R (Number) Resident  Resident is with another resident. Please state 
the number of residents involved in the 
interaction. 
S Staff Resident is with staff. Staff will be identifiable 
by uniforms.  
V Visitor Resident is with a visitor. Visitors are classed as 
any other person within the care home who is 
not identifiable as staff or residents.  
QUALITY 
+ Positive Interaction appears to have positive effect on 
resident. Resident will seem happy to engage 
with the person. The people involved in the 
interaction may be smiling or laughing.  
- Negative Interaction appears to have negative effect on 
resident. This type of interaction may involve a 
confrontation of sorts e.g. staff member telling a 
resident off, or residents arguing between each 
other.  
Nu Neutral Interaction appears to have neutral effect on 
resident. This type of interaction may involve a 
staff member assisting a resident with an 
activity of daily living, e.g., assisting with 
walking, or with eating or drinking. Although 
there is an interaction going on, it does not 
appear to be having an impact on the resident 
(i.e. it appears as if both parties are going 
through the motions). An interaction where a 
staff member or visitor is helping a resident 
could also be classed as positive or negative if 
the conditions above apply. In this case the 
interaction should be classed as positive or 
negative.  
Appendix 3: Behaviour Mapping Recording Form 
BEHAVIOUR MAPPING FORM 
Appendix 4: Relative Questionnaire 
Dementia Friendly Living Environments 
Relative Questionnaire 
This questionnaire is designed to get opinions and perceptions of the 
living environments of ______________care home. Relative views on 
this are very valuable as you are using this environment regularly. I 
would be grateful if you could take 10-15 minutes to complete this short 
questionnaire. If you have any questions please do not hesitate to ask.  
The answers to these questions will be used as part of the research project 
that is being undertaken in ____________Dementia Unit. The aim of the 
research is to redesign the living areas in order to create a room that gives 
residents a choice of areas to sit in, which will allow for a range of 
activities and interactions.  
Your answers to these questions will be confidential and anonymous. No 
personal information is required and only the researcher will have access 
to the completed questionnaires.  
1) How often do you visit the care home?  
Once a week  
More than once a week   
Once a fortnight  
Once a month  
Less than once a month  
2) When you visit where do you spend most of your time? 
Relatives bedroom  
Lounge  
Nurses station/ staff room  
Dining room . 
Garden  . 
Other area   
 Please specify . 
3) What areas of the unit do you think your relative uses most often?  
Bedroom  
Lounge      
Dining area  
Corridor  
Other area (conservatory, quiet room etc)  
Please specify. 
4) Does your relative have trouble with or display any of the following?  
Aggressive behaviour  
Wandering  
Incontinence    
Passive behaviour  
Gets upset easily  
Other  
Please specify .. 
5)  Have you expressed any preferences to staff about where your relative 
spends their time through the day?  
Yes   
No  
If yes please state where  
6) How satisfied are you with the following aspects of the care home 
environment? (please circle) 
     Unsatisfied                   Neutral                                 Very satisfied         
   1        2              3       4     5  
Safety                             1             2               3                4                   5   
Dcor                             1              2               3               4                   5    
Personalisation             1              2               3                4                  5 
Ease of way finding      1              2               3                4                  5      
Layout of rooms           1              2               3                4                  5         
Privacy                          1              2               3                4                  5         
Choice of activities      1               2               3               4                  5         
Overall satisfaction       1               2               3               4                  5       
7) Do you have any suggestions about how the social areas of the care home 
could be improved?  
 Appendix 5: Staff Focus Group/Interview Discussion Schedule 
Staff Focus Group Question Schedule 
1) How important do you feel the physical environment of the nursing 
home is for : 
i. Residents 
ii. Staff 
1. Examples 
2. Positive/Negative impact 
EXPLAIN RATIONALE FOR INTERVENTION 
2) What do you think about the rationale for the intervention 
i. Agree/disagree 
ii. Reasons 
3) Were there any problems/issues with these?  
4) Are there any other changes in the environment that you think 
could be beneficial?  
Appendix 6: Letter to Care Homes 
          Room J223    
          Department of Social Sciences  
          University of the West of Scotland 
          High Street,  
          Paisley 
          PA1 9EE 
Dear Sir/ Madam,  
I am currently carrying out a PhD in research in the psychology department of 
the University of the West of Scotland. My research interest is design for dementia; 
mainly how design modifications in home environments can promote independence 
and improve the quality of life for people suffering dementia.  I have previously been 
in contact with your care home but I am aware that over the last few months there 
may have been changes in management structures etc.  
 I have now formulated a research proposal which I am including with this 
letter. I feel that the design modifications that I propose are simple and inexpensive to 
put in place but will be of great benefit for residents with dementia.  
I'm confident that your establishment could make a significant input to the 
study. If you are still interested in taking part with the research I would appreciate it if 
you could contact me on email or by the numbers below. I would also like to take this 
opportunity to thank you in advance for any assistance you can provide in this study.  
Yours sincerely 
Louise Ritchie 
louise.ritchie@uws.ac.uk 
0141 848 3147 
Appendix 7: Information Sheet for Care Homes 
Title of PhD Programme: Care home design for people with dementia: an empirical 
investigation of design solutions 
Supervisors:  
Dr Duncan Sim  
Dr Edward Edgerton 
For people with dementia the design of the building they live in is of high importance. 
There are many different design modifications that have been made to pre-existing 
homes of people with dementia and to those newly built. Lawton (1979) describes his 
environmental docility hypothesis that states that as a person becomes less able their 
environment becomes increasingly more disabling to them. On the other side of this 
hypothesis Lawton states that even the smallest environmental modification can have 
a great effect on the well-being and independence of a person being disabled by their 
environment. Research suggests this is true for people with dementia. There seems to 
be a consensus as to which features are useful with regards to design for dementia 
(Judd, Marshall and Phippen, 1997). These encompass the idea that homes are small 
and home-like in style with traditional fixtures and fittings, the use of signage, 
landmarks and colour for orientation and way-finding with high levels of lighting.  
The main objective of this research is to assess how effective specific design 
modifications are in enabling people with dementia to make better use of their 
environments. It is hoped that a specific design modification will be chosen that is not 
already used in the majority of care homes, this may be linked to the bathroom, dining 
room or way-finding for example. The modification will be low cost and easy to put 
in place. The design modification will then be put in place in a number care homes 
and behavioural changes will be assessed. An observational methodology will be used 
in this research, adopting a behavioural mapping approach. Observations will be 
carried out for a set period before and after the modification at each location.  
References: 
Judd, S., Marshall, M. and Phippen, P (1998) Design for dementia London: The 
Journal of Dementia Care.   
Lawton, M.P. (1979) Therapeutic environments for the aged. In Canter, D and Canter, 
S (eds) Designing for therapeutic environments. London: John Wiley & sons Ltd. 
mailto:louise.ritchie@uws.ac.uk
Appendix 8: Letter to Relatives 
                Room J223    
          Department of Social Sciences  
          University of the West of Scotland 
          High Street,  
          Paisley 
          PA1 9EE 
Dear Sir/ Madam,  
I am currently carrying out a PhD in research in the School of Social Sciences 
at the University of the West of Scotland. My research interest is environmental 
design for people with dementia.  More specifically, I am interested in how design 
modifications in care home environments can improve the quality of life for people 
suffering from dementia.  I have had my research proposal approved by 
I am now writing to you to ask for your consent for your relative to participate in the 
research. I have included a research information sheet with this letter for you to read 
before giving consent on behalf of your relative.   
I am also interested in what you think of the care home environment that your relative 
is in and I have therefore enclosed a short questionnaire to get your views on the 
current environment and what changes you think might be beneficial.  
I would be very grateful if you would return the signed consent form and completed 
questionnaire to the care home, who will pass it on to me. If you have any questions 
regarding the research please do not hesitate to contact me on the numbers below.  
Yours sincerely 
Louise Ritchie 
louise.ritchie@uws.ac.uk 
0141 848 3147 
07734824822 
Appendix 9: Research Information Sheet for relatives 
Dementia Friendly Environments: improving the design of care home 
environments for people with dementia 
Research Information Sheet 
Your relative is being invited to take part in a research study. Before you 
decide whether to give your consent for your relative to take part it is 
important for you to understand why the research is being done, and what 
it will involve.  Please take time to read the following information 
carefully before making your decision.  
What is the purpose of the study? 
The main objective of this research is to assess how making changes to 
communal areas of the care home can improve the well-being of 
residents. Changes that will be made will be based on previous research 
and information collected from each care home.  
Who is organising and conducting the research? 
The research is being organised and conducted by Louise Ritchie, a 
postgraduate in the School of Social Science.  The study is part of her 
doctorate research (PhD), which is supervised by Dr Duncan Sim and Dr 
Edward Edgerton. All three are in the School of Social Science at the 
University of the West of Scotland.  
Why have I been chosen? 
Your relative has been chosen as they are resident in the care home which 
has consented to this research taking part. A condition of the consent 
from the care homes is that consent is obtained by relatives of all the 
residents, who are judged as unable to provide consent themselves.  
Do I have to take part? 
No  it is completely up to you to decide whether or not you want your 
relative to take part.  If you do decide to take part, you will be given this 
information sheet to keep and will be asked to sign a consent form. If you 
decide you want your relative to take part you are still free to withdraw 
your consent at any time and without giving a reason.  
What will be involved? 
mailto:louise.ritchie@uws.ac.uk
Your relative will not have any formal contact with the researcher the 
main aim of the study is to observe the behaviours that are naturally 
occurring in the environment. The research will be carried out in different 
phases, each consisting of observations over a 3 week period. Data will 
be collected before and after the changes are made in order to allow a 
comparison of behaviours.  
Will participation be kept confidential? 
Yes- names of residents will not be identified within the research. The 
research will also not identify any names of specific care homes 
participating either.  
How will the data collected be used? 
 The data collected will be analysed and written up as part of a PhD 
thesis. Findings may also be presented in journal articles and at 
conferences. However, the data will always be anonymous and so will not 
be able to be traced back to your relative or care home.  
Any questions? 
If you have any questions, or would like further information, please do 
not hesitate to contact us, either by email at louise.ritchie@uws.ac.uk, or 
by telephone: 0141 848 3174 (weekdays and daytime only). 
Thank you very much for your time 
mailto:louise.ritchie@uws.ac.uk
Appendix 10: Consent form for relatives 
CONSENT FORM 
Title of Project: Dementia Friendly Environments: the effects of environmental 
modifications in communal social spaces. 
Name of Researcher: Louise Ritchie 
       Please initial box 
1. I confirm that I have read and understand the information sheet for the above 
study and have had the opportunity to ask questions 
2. I understand that my relatives participation is voluntary and that I am free to 
withdraw them at any time, without giving any reason 
3. I agree to take part in the above study. 
________________________ ________________              ___________________ 
Name of Resident Date Signature 
_________________________ ________________          ___________________ 
Name of Relative Date Signature 
_________________________ ________________          ___________________ 
Researcher Date Signature 
 Appendix 11  Summary of behaviour mapping results 
Case Study 1  Care Home A 
Variable Main 
Effect for 
Pre/Post 
F value/ 
significance level 
Interaction 
Effect 
pre/post x 
time of day 
F value/ 
significance 
level 
Post hoc 
Agitation 
overall 
Yes - 
reduction 
F(1:474)= 3.939, 
p< 0.01 
Active overall Yes - 
increase 
F(1:474) = 3.84, 
p< 0.01 
Inactive overall No  Yes F(3:474)= 
11.539, p< 
0.001 
Morning- increase 
Aggressive 
Agitation 
N/A  N/A   
Physical 
Agitation 
No  No   
Vocal Agitation Yes - 
reduction 
F(1:474) = 6.347, 
p <0.05 
Other Agitation N/A  N/A   
Active Activity Yes  
increase 
F(1:474) = 8.553, 
p<0.005 
Active 
Eating/drinking 
No  No   
Active 
Interaction 
No  Yes  F(3:474) = 
3.598, p < 0.05 
Evening - increase 
Inactive 
Content 
Yes - 
increase 
F (1:474)= 
25.579 p < 0.001 
Yes F(3:474) = 
3.788 p < 0.05 
Weekend/ afternoon - 
increase 
 Inactive 
Passive  
Yes F(1:474) = 
42.145, p < 0.001 
Yes F(3:474) = 
21.690 p 
<0.001 
Weekend/ 
Afternoon- decrease 
Case study 2  Care Home B Lounge 1 
Variable Main 
Effect 
Pre/Post 
F value/ 
significance 
level 
Interaction 
Effect 
pre/post x 
time of day 
F value/ 
significance 
level 
Post hoc 
Agitation 
overall 
Yes F(1:567)= 
31.694, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:567) = 
13.90, p< 
0.001 
Weekend/afternoon/evening  
decrease 
Morning - increase 
Active overall Yes F(1:567) = 
10.627, p < 
0.001 
Inactive overall No  Yes F(3:567) = 
24.726,  p< 
0.001 
Morning/ afternoon - increase 
Aggressive 
Agitation 
N/A  N/A   
Physical 
Agitation 
Yes F(1:567) = 
61.10, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:567) = 
28.083, p< 
0.001 
Weekend/afternoon/evening  
decrease 
Morning - increase 
Vocal Agitation Yes F(1:567) = 
7.068, p < 
Yes F(3:567) = 
6.558, p< 
0.001 
Afternoon/ evening - decrease 
Other Agitation N/A  N/A   
Active 
Watching TV 
Yes F(1:567) = 
43.055, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:567)= 
2.567 p< 0.01 
Weekend/afternoon/ morning- 
increase  
Active 
Eating/drinking 
No  No   
Active 
Interaction 
Yes F(1:567) = 
4.747, p < 
Yes F(3:567) = 
3.005, p< 0.05 
Morning- increase 
Active Other Yes F(1:567) = 
5.34, p < 0.05 
Active Walking  No  No   
Inactive 
Content 
Yes F(1:567) = 
44.997, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:567) = 
5.382, p < 
0.001 
Morning/ evening - increase 
Inactive passive  Yes F(1:567) = 
247.819, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:567)=59.7
85, p < 0.001 
Weekend/ 
Evening /Afternoon- decrease 
Inactive 
Sleeping 
No  Yes F(3:567) = 
42.246, p < 
0.001 
Morning  increase  
Inactive 
looking out of 
the window 
Yes F(1:567) = 
33.524, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:567) = 
4.246, p < 0.01 
Morning/ evening/ weekend  
increase 
Case Study 3  Care Home B  Lounge 2.  
Variable Main 
Effect for 
Pre/Post 
F value/ 
significance 
level 
Interaction 
Effect 
pre/post x 
time of day 
F value/ 
significance level 
Post hoc 
Agitation 
overall 
No  Yes F(3:567) = 2.736, 
p < 0.005 
Evening  decrease, 
increase - weekend 
Active overall No  Yes F(3:567) = 3.167, 
p < 0.001 
Weekend increase 
Inactive overall Yes  
increase 
F(1:567) = 
36.823, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:567) = 23.997, 
p < 0.001 
Morning/weekend- 
increase 
Evenings - decrease 
Aggressive 
Agitation 
N/A  N/A   
Physical 
Agitation 
No  Yes F(3:567) = 4.227, 
p < 0.01 
Evening -decrease 
Vocal Agitation No  No   
Other Agitation N/A  N/A   
Active 
Watching TV 
No  Yes F(3:567) = 5.945, 
p < 0.005 
Morning  increase 
Active 
Eating/drinking 
No  Yes F(3:567) = 3.890, 
p < 0.01 
Morning - decrease 
Active 
Interaction 
No  No   
Active Other N/A  N/A   
Active Walking  N/A  N/A   
Inactive 
Content 
Yes  
increase 
F(1:567) = 
52.479, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:567) = 31.454, 
p < 0.001 
Morning/ weekend  
increase 
Inactive passive  No   Yes F(3:567) = 23.666, 
p < 0.001 
Evening /Afternoon- 
decrease 
Weekend / morning 
- increase 
Inactive 
Sleeping 
Yes  
increase 
F(1:567) = 
9.76, p <0.01 
Yes F(3:567) = 8.599, 
p < 0.001 
Morning/ weekend - 
increase 
Inactive looking 
out of the 
window 
N/A  N/A   
Case Study 4  Care Home C Unit 1 
Variable Main Effect 
for Pre/Post 
F value/ 
significance 
level 
Interaction 
Effect 
pre/post x 
time of day 
F value/ 
significance 
level 
Post hoc 
Agitation 
overall 
Yes F(1:579) = 
6.036, p< 
0.005 
Active overall Yes  increase F(1:579) = 
14.145, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:579) = 
4.094, p < 
0.001 
Morning 
/afternoon  
increase 
Inactive 
overall 
No  Yes F(3:579) = 
3.876, p < 
0.001 
Evening  
increase 
Weekend - 
decrease 
Aggressive 
Agitation 
N/A  N/A   
Physical 
Agitation 
Yes - decrease F(1:579) = 
9.091, p < 
0.005 
Yes F(3:579)  = 
4.178, p< 0.01 
Evening  
decrease 
Vocal 
Agitation 
No  No   
Other 
Agitation 
N/A  N/A   
Active 
Watching TV 
Yes  increase F(1:579) = 
39.735, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:579) = 
5.672, p < 
0.005 
Morning/ 
afternoon- 
increase  
Active 
Eating/drinki
No  Yes F(3:579) = 
3.547, p < 0.01 
Morning / 
weekend  
increase 
Active 
Interaction 
Yes - increase F(1:579) = 
10.280, p < 
0.005 
Active Other N/A  N/A   
Active 
Walking  
No  No   
Inactive 
Content 
Yes  increase F(1:579) = 
14.564, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:579) = 
5.429, p < 
0.005 
Morning/ 
evening - 
increase 
Inactive 
passive  
Yes- decrease F(1:579) = 
12.303, p < 
0.001 
Inactive 
Sleeping 
Yes  decrease (F1:579) = 
22.548, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:579) = 
8.262, p < 
0.001 
Afternoon/ 
Weekend  
decrease 
Inactive 
looking out of 
the window 
Yes  increase F(1:579) = 
14.564, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:579) = 
5.429, p < 
0.005 
Morning/ 
Evening - 
increase 
Case Study 5- Care Home C Unit 2 
Variable Main Effect 
for Pre/Post 
F value/ 
significance 
level 
Interaction 
Effect 
pre/post x 
time of day 
F value/ 
significance 
level 
Post hoc 
Agitation 
overall 
Yes- decrease F(1:578) = 
8.160, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:578) = 
2.559, p < 
0.018 
Evening  
Decrease 
Active overall No  No   
Inactive 
overall 
No  Yes F(3:578) = 
11.767, p < 
0.001 
Weekend  
decrease 
Evening - 
increase 
Aggressive 
Agitation 
N/A  N/A   
Physical 
Agitation 
Yes  decrease F(1:578) = 
8.852, p < 
0.005 
Yes F(3:578) = 
3.035, p < 0.05 
Afternoon/ 
evening  
decrease 
Vocal 
Agitation 
Yes  decrease F(1:578) = 
8.177, p < 
0.005 
Other 
Agitation 
N/A  N/A   
Active 
Watching TV 
Yes  increase F(1:578) = 
2.735, p < 0.05 
Yes F(3:578) = 
2.735, p < 0.05 
Morning/ 
afternoon - 
increase 
Active 
Eating/drinki
No  No   
Active 
Interaction 
No  No   
Active Other N/A  N/A   
Active 
Walking  
N/A  N/A   
Inactive 
Content 
Yes  increase F(1:578) = 
5.564, p < 0.05 
Yes F(3:578) = 
4.524, p < 
0.005 
Morning/ 
Afternoon  
increase 
Inactive 
passive  
Yes  decrease F(1:578) = 
15.647, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:578 ) = 
2.922, p < 0.05 
Morning/ 
Afternoon  
decrease 
Inactive 
Sleeping 
Yes  decrease F(1:578) = 
7.348, p < 
0.005 
Yes F(3:578) = 
18.882, p < 
0.001 
Afternoon/ 
weekend  
decrease 
Evening  
increase 
Inactive 
looking out of 
the window 
Yes increase F(1:578) = 
21.340, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:578) = 
6.593, p < 
0.001 
Morning/ 
afternoon  
increase.  
Case study 6  Care Home C Unit 3 
Variable Main Effect 
for Pre/Post 
F value/ 
significance 
level 
Interaction 
Effect 
pre/post x 
time of day 
F value/ 
significance 
level 
Post hoc 
Agitation 
overall 
No  No   
Active overall Yes  increase F(1:592) = 
11.519, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:592) = 
4.401, p < 
0.001 
Morning  
increase 
Inactive 
overall 
Yes  increase F(1:592) = 
8.596, P < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:592) = 
4.120, p < 
0.001 
Afternoon/ 
evening - 
increase 
Aggressive 
Agitation 
N/A  N/A   
Physical 
Agitation 
Yes  decrease F(1:592) = 
6.378, p < 0.01 
Vocal 
Agitation 
No  No   
Other 
Agitation 
N/A  N/A   
Active 
Watching TV 
Yes  increase F(1:592) = 
30.146, p< 
0.001 
Yes F(3:592) = 
9.860, p < 
0.001 
Morning/ 
afternoon/ 
evening - 
increase 
Active 
Eating/drinki
No  Yes F(3:592) = 
3.822, p < 0.01 
Morning  
increase 
Weekend - 
decrease 
Active 
Interaction 
Yes - increase F(1:592) = 
11.378, p < 
0.005 
Active Other Yes  increase F(1:592) = 
10.558, p < 
0.005 
Yes F(3:592) = 
4.935, p < 
0.005 
Morning - 
increase 
Active 
Walking  
N/A  N/A   
Inactive 
Content 
Yes  - increase F(1:592) = 
8.842, p < 
0.005 
Yes F(3:592) = 
3.188, p < 0.05 
Afternoon/ 
morning- 
increase 
Inactive 
passive  
No  No   
Inactive 
Sleeping 
No  Yes F(3:592) = 
8.719, p < 
0.001 
Morning  
decrease 
Evening  
increase 
Inactive 
looking out of 
the window 
Yes  increase F(1:592) = 
22.067, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:592) = 
4.602, p < 
0.005 
Morning/ 
afternoon - 
increase 
Case Study 7  Care Home C Unit 4 
Variable Main Effect 
for Pre/Post 
F value/ 
significance 
level 
Interaction 
Effect pre/post 
x time of day 
F value/ 
significance 
level 
Post hoc 
Agitation 
overall 
Yes  decrease F(1:592) = 
7.620, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:592) = 
4.69, p < 0.001 
Evening - 
decrease 
Active overall Yes  increase F(1:592) = 
5.783, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:592) = 
4.979, p < 
0.001 
Afternoon - 
increase 
Inactive 
overall 
No  Yes F(3:592) = 
16.142, p < 
Morning/ 
afternoon  - 
decrease 
Evening - 
increase 
Aggressive 
Agitation 
N/A  N/A   
Physical 
Agitation 
Yes  decrease F(1:592) = 
13.139, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:592) = 
6.009, p < 
0.001 
Evening - 
decrease 
Vocal 
Agitation 
No  Yes F(3:592) = 
3.351, p < 0.01 
Evening - 
decrease 
Other 
Agitation 
N/A  N/A   
Active 
Watching TV 
Yes -increase F(1:592) = 
11.881, p < 
0.005 
Yes F(3:592) = 
3.742, p M 0.01 
Afternoon  
increase 
Active 
Eating/drinkin
Yes  increase F(1: 592) = 
6.138, p < 0.01 
Yes F(3:592) = 
8.34, p < 0.001 
Morning/ 
Afternoon  
increase 
Weekend  
decrease 
Active 
Interaction 
No  No   
Active Other No   yes F(3:592) = 
7.893, p < 
0.005 
Morning/ 
evening  
decrease 
Afternoon - 
increase 
Active 
Walking  
Yes  decrease F(1:592) = 
7.893, p < 
0.005 
Inactive 
Content 
No  No    
Inactive 
passive  
No  Yes F(3:592) = 
7.756, p < 
0.001 
Morning/ 
afternoon  
decrease 
Inactive 
Sleeping 
Yes  decrease F(1:592) = 
5.205, p < 0.05 
Yes F(3:592) = 
21.100, p < 
0.001 
Morning/ 
afternoon  
decrease 
Evening - 
increase 
Inactive 
looking out of 
the window 
Yes  increase F(1:592) = 
40.374, p < 
0.001 
Yes F(3:592) = 
10.717, p < 
0.001 
Morning/ 
afternoon - 
increase 
